 Interictal epileptiform discharges induce hippocampal-cortical 
coupling in temporal lobe epilepsy
Jennifer N. Gelinas1, Dion Khodagholy1, Thomas Thesen2, Orrin Devinsky2, and György 
Buzsáki1,3,*
1The Neuroscience Institute, New York University, School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA
2Department of Neurology, Comprehensive Epilepsy Center, New York University, School of 
Medicine, New York, NY, USA
3Center for Neural Science, New York University, School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA
Abstract
Interactions between the hippocampus and cortex are critical for memory. Interictal epileptiform 
discharges (IEDs) identify epileptic brain regions and can impair memory, but how they interact 
with physiological patterns of network activity is mostly undefined. We show in a rat model of 
temporal lobe epilepsy that spontaneous hippocampal IEDs correlate with impaired memory 
consolidation and are precisely coordinated with spindle oscillations in the prefrontal cortex 
during NREM sleep. This coordination surpasses the normal physiological ripple-spindle coupling 
and is accompanied by decreased ripple occurrence. IEDs also induce spindles during REM sleep 
and wakefulness, behavioral states that do not naturally express these oscillations, by generating a 
cortical ‘DOWN’ state. We confirm a similar correlation of temporofrontal IEDs with spindles 
over anatomically restricted cortical regions in a pilot clinical examination of four subjects with 
focal epilepsy. These findings imply that IEDs may impair memory via misappropriation of 
physiological mechanisms for hippocampal-cortical coupling, suggesting a target to treat memory 
impairment in epilepsy.
 Introduction
Impairment of cognitive function, especially memory, is a common and disabling problem in 
individuals with temporal lobe epilepsy1. Clinical and experimental evidence demonstrate 
that pathological network activity occurring between seizures, the most prominent of which 
is interictal epileptiform discharges (IEDs), contribute to this dysfunction2–8. The specific 
cognitive consequences of IEDs are entangled with numerous pathological phenomena and 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Correspondence should be addressed to G.B. gyorgy.buzsaki@nyumc.org. 
Competing Financial Interests
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Author contributions
J.N.G. and G.B. conceived the project. J.N.G. and D.K. did the rodent in vivo experiments. J.N.G. and D.K. analyzed rat and human 
neural data. T.T. and O.D. supervised the human epilepsy recordings and IRB. J.N.G., D.K., and G.B. wrote the paper with input from 
the other authors.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 25.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Med. 2016 June ; 22(6): 641–648. doi:10.1038/nm.4084.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 medication effects in these individuals. IEDs have been implicated in the development of 
cognitive deficits7 and various aspects of memory8–10. Yet, how hippocampal IEDs 
communicate with the neocortex and affect computation in target structures remains 
unexplored.
Effective hippocampal-cortical communication is required for efficient memory 
function11–13. Three patterns of network activity and their physiological coupling are critical 
for memory consolidation: hippocampal ripples, neocortical slow oscillations, and 
neocortical sleep spindles11. Hippocampal ripples are brief, high-frequency (100–200 Hz) 
oscillations that coordinate and replay sequences of ordered neural firing related to 
experience14,15. Selective elimination of ripples severely impairs memory performance in 
rodents,16,17 establishing their causal role in memory. Sleep spindles of non-rapid eye 
movement sleep (NREM) are lower frequency (9–16 Hz) oscillations generated within 
thalamocortical networks18 that are also associated with sequential replay of neural firing19. 
During NREM sleep, ripples temporally correlate with sleep spindles via the slow oscillation 
in the neocortex.20–23
The medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) is a key structure in hippocampal-dependent memory 
processes24–26 that receives direct projections from the hippocampus via a pathway with 
bidirectional synaptic plasticity27–30. Co-activation of these structures, via temporal 
coupling of hippocampal ripples, neocortical slow oscillations, and spindles, is hypothesized 
to be essential for the consolidation of memory31.
Given the precise synchronization of oscillations and neural firing between the hippocampus 
and mPFC during NREM sleep31, introducing abnormal signals into this network could 
impair its function. Like physiological ripples, IEDs are enhanced in NREM sleep relative to 
wakefulness and REM (rapid eye movement) sleep32, with specific facilitating effects 
attributed to the slow oscillation and/or epochs of spindling activity33–35. We hypothesized 
that hippocampal IEDs compete with physiological ripples and disrupt communication 
between hippocampus and mPFC, thereby impairing memory consolidation. To test this 
hypothesis, we used a kindling model of epilepsy to analyze the effects of hippocampal 
IEDs on spatial navigation memory and coordination of hippocampal and mPFC oscillations 
in the freely behaving rat. We demonstrate that hippocampal IEDs reliably induce spindles 
in the mPFC, and that IED frequency and coupling with mPFC spindles are both correlated 
with the degree of memory impairment. This pathological hippocampal-cortical coupling is 
more robust than physiological ripple-spindle coupling, and is mediated by the consistent 
initiation of a cortical ‘DOWN’ state that occurs regardless of behavioral state. We found 
similar IED-spindle coordination in subjects with epilepsy, providing a possible mechanism 
by which IEDs disrupt physiological memory networks.
 Results
 Evolution of hippocampal-cortical coupling in a rodent kindling model of epilepsy
We performed daily neurophysiological recordings in male and female adult Long-Evans 
rats implanted with intracranial depth electrodes in the hippocampus and mPFC over the 
course of hippocampal commissure kindling. Induction of repeated, electrically-induced 
Gelinas et al.
Page 2
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 seizures (‘kindling’) is an established model of epilepsy that recapitulates numerous features 
of temporal lobe epilepsy, including chronic hyperexcitability of temporal lobe neurons, 
seizure semiology, associated comorbidities, and responsiveness to pharmacotherapy36. 
Kindling resulted in behavioral limbic seizures that became generalized over three weeks, 
with similar progression through Racine stages across animals (line plot; Fig. 1a). Rats also 
developed spontaneous hippocampal IEDs after a minimum of five days of kindling 
(Supplementary Fig. 1), with greater IED frequency in NREM sleep than REM sleep and 
waking (bar graph; Fig. 1a).
Since hippocampal-cortical coupling occurs during NREM sleep and IEDs are more 
frequent during this state, we identified characteristic NREM oscillations in the local field 
potential (LFP) of hippocampus and neocortex. Hippocampal ripples were detected in the 
pyramidal cell layer of the CA1 (cornu Ammonis 1) region37, and spindles were detected in 
the deep layers of the mPFC. In agreement with previous research22,23, we found that 
hippocampal ripples tend to precede mPFC spindles (Fig. 1b). Notably, IEDs in CA1 
established strong temporal coupling with mPFC spindles (Fig. 1c).
Spindle occurrence in the mPFC remained relatively constant over the 18 d course of 
kindling, whereas hippocampal ripples decreased significantly (P = 5 × 10−9) in all animals 
over this same period. An increase in IED occurrence paralleled the timeline of decreased 
ripple occurrence, although the incidence was lower than that of ripples and did not fully 
compensate the ripple decrease (Fig. 1d). Kindling also modified characteristics of ripple 
oscillations, with a shift toward inclusion of both lower and higher frequency components 
(Supplementary Fig. 2).
 Hippocampal IEDs impair memory
To determine whether these kindling-associated changes in the hippocampus-mPFC network 
have functional implications, we assessed performance of rats on the cheeseboard maze 
(Supplementary Video 1). This task requires reward-based planning that involves prefrontal 
connections38 for which ripple-related replay of neuronal activity in the post-training 
consolidation period is essential for recall of learned reward configuration39.
Over the course of 35 trials in each training session, rats accurately and consistently 
navigated to the location of three hidden rewards before returning to the starting box. 
Memory was assessed in a five trial test session performed the following day in the same 
spatial configuration as the previous day’s training session, followed by learning a new 
configuration. Because the reward locations were changed in each session, the rats were 
required to encode, consolidate, and subsequently retrieve a different memory for each 
session.
Each rat (n = 6) was tested across four phases: baseline, kindling, recovery, and artificial 
IEDs (Fig. 2a). These phases were aimed at disentangling the effects of seizures and 
interictal activity on behavioral performance. In the baseline phase, all rats learned the 
schema (Fig. 2b, left), and executed high levels of reward retrieval after an overnight 
consolidation period (Fig. 2b, right). Rats were then kindled, using an alternate day protocol 
to minimize the effect of seizures on behavioral performance (Fig. 2a). Task performance 
Gelinas et al.
Page 3
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 decreased over the course of kindling in all rats, despite intact learning during the training 
session (Fig. 2c). This memory deficit was paralleled by increased IED and decreased ripple 
occurrence (Supplementary Fig. 3). To investigate potential long-lasting effects of seizures, 
we continued behavioral training and testing after kindling was completed. Performance 
improved across animals in this ‘recovery’ phase (Fig. 2d), along with increased ripple 
occurrence, low residual IED rate, and no seizures. Subsequently, to simulate the effect of 
IEDs without inducing further seizure activity, we induced artificial IEDs (a-IED) by 
delivering single electric pulses to the hippocampal commissure40. During this a-IED phase, 
performance again decreased in all animals (Fig. 2d). Memory performance in the kindled 
and a-IED phases was significantly lower than during the baseline and recovery phases (P = 
9.8 × 10−4).
To specifically assess the impact of IEDs, we performed multivariate correlation of IED rate, 
IED-spindle coupling rate, ripple rate, and cumulative number of seizures with memory 
performance during the behavioral protocol (Fig. 2e). As expected, ripple rate was positively 
correlated with performance39. IED rate and IED-spindle coupling rate were strongly 
negatively correlated with performance, while cumulative seizure number yielded a more 
variable negative correlation. Together, these results demonstrate that IEDs impair cognition 
and that IEDs during the consolidation period adversely affect memory.
 Hippocampal IEDs induce mPFC spindles
Since hippocampal IED-mPFC spindle coupling has a strong negative correlation with 
memory performance, we next aimed to quantify and characterize this interaction. During 
NREM sleep, hippocampal IEDs and mPFC spindles at their peak occurrence times were 
correlated within a narrow time window (average time offset from IED to spindle start = 410 
± 31 ms, across all animals; Supplementary Fig. 4), with IEDs consistently preceding the 
spindle oscillations. This temporal relationship was similar to the ripple-spindle timing, but 
much larger in magnitude and less variable across events (Fig. 3a). Variability was quantified 
across trials of IED occurrence using a Fano factor, with IEDs inducing a significantly 
greater decrease compared to ripples (Supplementary Fig. 5a–b; P = 0.004). 
Correspondingly, spindles followed IEDs at a significantly higher probability than ripples 
(Supplementary Fig. 5c; P = 2 × 10−4). The strong IED-spindle coupling was also reflected 
in the substantial increase in trigger-averaged spindle-band power after IEDs versus the 
moderate increase in spindle-band power after ripples (Fig. 3b). This power difference was 
quantified by comparing the mean change in mPFC power spectrum at spindle band before 
and after an IED or a ripple (Supplementary Fig. 5e; P = 3 × 10−5). The interval between 
ripple and spindle occurrence decreased in the kindled compared to unkindled state, though 
ripple-spindle coupling strength was similar (Supplementary Fig. 5d–f). These data suggest 
that hippocampal IEDs and ripples induce similar patterns of mPFC activity in NREM sleep, 
but IEDs are more potent.
We examined whether the IED-evoked mPFC spindles exhibited different oscillation 
characteristics than physiological spindles in normal rats, or spontaneous spindles in kindled 
rats. The average filtered spindle waveform was indistinguishable between the three 
conditions (Fig. 3c), and small differences in the duration and peak frequency of the 
Gelinas et al.
Page 4
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 oscillations were not physiologically relevant (Fig. 3d–e). Thus, the fundamental temporal 
and morphological characteristics of IED-evoked spindles are the same as physiological 
spindles. Further, mPFC neurons that displayed significant phase synchrony to spindle 
oscillations maintained similar phase preference regardless of whether the spindle oscillation 
was spontaneous or IED-evoked (Fig. 3f).
 Hippocampal IEDs evoke spindle oscillations across behavioral states
Physiological spindles are restricted to NREM sleep. Because IEDs occurred during all brain 
states, albeit at lower rates, we studied IED effects on mPFC during REM sleep and waking. 
Unexpectedly, hippocampal IEDs in REM and waking also induced spindle-like oscillations 
in the mPFC (Fig. 4a). To characterize these spindle-like oscillations, we normalized mPFC 
spectrograms using a baseline spectrum from each state, and calculated a trigger-averaged 
spectrogram based on occurrence of hippocampal IEDs. Hippocampal IEDs induced strong, 
precisely timed increases in the mPFC spindle band power regardless of behavioral state. 
Comparison of the mPFC power spectrum before and after IED occurrence confirmed 
marked increases in the spindle band during each state (Fig. 4b). Mean spindle-band power 
increased more in REM and waking states compared to NREM, largely due to the absence of 
spontaneous spindle activity in REM and waking states in the intact brain. The probability of 
spindle-like oscillations in the first second following an IED was significantly higher during 
REM than NREM (Fig. 4c; P = 0.03).
We next compared the characteristics of the spindle-like oscillations generated across 
behavioral states. The median duration of spindles was shorter in NREM relative to REM, 
with waking oscillations having intermediate values; however inter-animal variability was 
evident (Fig. 4d inset). The median peak frequency of spindle-like oscillations was 
significantly lower in REM than waking, a trend that was seen across animals, but the 
absolute difference was physiologically negligible (Fig. 4e; NREM = 13.3 Hz, REM = 12.6 
Hz, Wake = 13.4 Hz; P = 0.01). These data suggest that hippocampal IEDs elicit similar 
cortical spindle responses in all brain states, with subtle differences in the oscillation 
features that vary in magnitude across animals.
 Hippocampal IEDs evoke mPFC spindles via induction of a cortical ‘DOWN’ state
We examined mPFC LFP and spiking activity during the time window between hippocampal 
IED and mPFC spindle to elucidate the mechanisms of this interaction. Averaging deep layer 
mPFC LFP traces revealed a prominent positive delta wave within 400 ms after IED 
occurrence in all behavioral states (Fig. 5a–b). The spontaneous occurrence of delta waves 
during NREM elevated the baseline delta power above that in REM and waking as expected, 
but did not change the maximal delta power after IED occurrence. Hippocampal IED 
occurrence was associated with a consistent pattern of delta phase changes, as determined by 
deriving the continuous phase in this frequency band (2–5 Hz), and this pattern was similar 
in all states (Fig. 5c).
Deep layer positive cortical delta waves are characteristic of cortical ‘DOWN’ states, which 
are associated with neuronal hyperpolarization and decreased spiking during NREM sleep 
and anesthesia41,42. We constructed peristimulus time histograms from the average spiking 
Gelinas et al.
Page 5
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 of clustered putative mPFC pyramidal cells and interneurons, with the hippocampal IEDs as 
stimuli. In all states and for both cell types, hippocampal IEDs induced a marked decrease in 
neuronal firing within 200 ms, consistent with the LFP delta wave, followed by an increased 
discharge of the putative interneurons (Fig. 5d). These results support the hypothesis that the 
synchronous hippocampal output generated by an IED can reset the mPFC slow oscillation 
phase, forcing a cortical ‘DOWN’ state characterized by an LFP delta wave and decreased 
neuronal firing. Recovery from this ‘DOWN’ state induces thalamocortical spindles18. 
Consistent with this notion, IEDs produce more profound changes in mPFC neural firing 
rates and gamma frequency (20–50 Hz) power than ripples (Supplementary Fig. 6).
We tested the hypothesis that synchronous hippocampal output can trigger the mPFC 
response by inducing a-IEDs40. In unkindled naïve rats, these a-IEDs consistently induced 
mPFC spindles only during NREM at high current intensity. In contrast, when similarly 
efficacious a-IEDs were applied in kindled rats increased spindle-band power was observed 
during NREM, and spindles were also generated in REM and waking (Supplementary Fig. 
7). Thus, network changes associated with kindling modify mPFC circuits; one 
manifestation is facilitated expression of mPFC spindling in response to synchronous 
hippocampal output.
 Temporofrontal lobe IEDs trigger cortical spindles in subjects with epilepsy
Although the kindling model mimics many features of temporal lobe epilepsy36, not all 
pathological observations in kindled rats translate to humans. We analyzed sleep recordings 
from subjects with epilepsy implanted with subdural grid and strip, and depth electrodes for 
electrocorticography (ECoG) during surgical evaluation to assess possible temporal coupling 
between IEDs and cortical spindles. For each subject, an electrode with maximal IED 
amplitude was selected for IED detection. In three subjects, the IED electrode was located in 
the mesial temporal lobe structures, and in the fourth subject it was located in the frontal 
lobe (Supplementary Table 1). Despite variability in the number and location of electrodes 
exhibiting IEDs across subjects, in each case the detected IEDs were associated with sleep 
spindles on a restricted region of the cortical surface. Further, electrodes with high IED-
spindle correlation did not exhibit IEDs, indicating that spindle generation occurred 
remotely and was synaptically driven.
The IED-spindle correlation in humans was demonstrated by three methods: (i) detection of 
oscillations in the cortical LFP fulfilling criteria for spindles after IED occurrence (Fig. 6a); 
(ii) spindle-band power increase after IED occurrence (Fig. 6b); (iii) significant cross-
correlation between IEDs and spindles. A correlation value was derived for each electrode 
based on the significance of its IED-spindle cross-correlation, and these values were plotted 
as a heat map across the pial surface to localize the correlated brain regions (Fig. 6c). The 
location of correlated brain regions remained consistent across different days of recording in 
each subject. In all subjects, IEDs coupled with spindles in the superior, middle, and inferior 
frontal gyri (Supplementary Table 1). Although the frontal lobe contained a substantial 
percentage of correlation in all subjects, the anatomical distribution of correlation differed 
between subjects (Supplementary Table 2). Similar to our observations in kindled rats, in 
subjects with epilepsy, IEDs were associated with a subsequent increase in delta power and 
Gelinas et al.
Page 6
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 resetting of the delta phase in cortical electrodes that exhibited high IED-spindle correlation 
(Fig. 6d).
Overall, the coupling of IEDs with spindles via a cortical ‘DOWN’ state appears to be a 
common manifestation of a temporofrontal epileptic network in rodents and humans.
 Discussion
We demonstrate that spontaneous hippocampal IEDs establish strong, precisely timed 
coupling between the hippocampus and mPFC by consistently interrupting ongoing network 
activity with an induced cortical ‘DOWN’ state and spindle oscillation in sleeping and 
waking subjects. IED-spindle interactions represent a generalizable feature of 
temporofrontal epileptic networks in rodents and humans. Further, hippocampal IEDs and 
their downstream coupling to spindles are correlated with impairment of spatial memory 
consolidation in rats. This pathological hippocampal-cortical coupling may impair cognition 
in individuals with temporal lobe epilepsy.
We found that kindled rats had impaired memory consolidation on a hippocampus-
dependent reward-based planning task. The experimental design was tailored to assay the 
effects of IEDs on memory performance. We conclude that IEDs contributed to the 
consolidation deficit because: i) during kindling, memory for spatial information acquired 
the previous day was dramatically reduced, even though learning and recall were carried out 
~24 hours after any seizure activity; ii) post-kindling and without seizures, performance 
recovered in parallel with decreased incidence of IEDs, refuting a permanent residual effect 
of seizures; iii) induction of a-IEDs during the consolidation period, without any seizure 
activity, reinstated a memory deficit; iv) memory performance errors correlated most 
strongly with IED frequency and IED-spindle coupling. These results extend previous 
findings that IEDs occurring during waking behavior can affect sensory processing43, and 
maintenance10 and retrieval9 of a short-term memory task.
Although previous experiments have reported correlations between IEDs and cognitive 
effects6,7,44, their role in memory consolidation has not been previously established. Animal 
models of temporal lobe epilepsy exhibit changes in hippocampal physiology, including 
lower coherence of place cells despite intact cell sequence reactivation45, altered phase 
precession46, and deficits in theta oscillations47. Our focus on hippocampal-cortical 
interactions revealed that IEDs provide a means by which such pathological activity can be 
communicated to downstream brain regions across behavioral states. Because hippocampal 
ripple-cortical spindle coupling is implicated in memory consolidation11, it is reasonable to 
hypothesize that IED-spindle coupling disrupts this process. This notion is supported by the 
significant correlation of IED-spindle coupling with poor long-term memory performance in 
our rats. However, causes of memory impairment in brain disorders are likely multifactorial, 
and determining the specific contribution of hippocampal-prefrontal coupling will require 
temporally-restricted manipulation of the neural network.
Our results suggest that IEDs interfere with both local hippocampal networks and 
synaptically connected cortical networks. In the hippocampus, ripples in the pyramidal layer 
Gelinas et al.
Page 7
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 of area CA1 are triggered by synchronous bursts in area CA3, and these high frequency 
excitatory oscillations sequence neural firing,48 allowing for efficient transfer of 
hippocampal information to the neocortex for memory formation14,15. In contrast, IEDs 
synchronize neural firing over a short temporal window (< 10 ms49), likely emerge from 
pathologically interacting neuronal clusters,50 and interfere with physiological sequencing of 
neural firing. Although ripples and IEDs compete for the same anatomical substrates14,51,52, 
they fundamentally differ in their spike pattern and content. These properties may explain 
the observed inverse relationship between ripple and IED occurrence during kindling.
Furthermore, we observed that IEDs exerted synaptically-driven effects on the mPFC, in 
support of previous observations that kindling can affect cortical circuits53,54. IEDs induced 
strong, synchronized patterns of mPFC neural firing associated with expression of delta 
waves and spindles, regardless of brain state. Thus, IEDs facilitate expression of cortical 
oscillations in brain states that do not naturally exhibit these oscillations, like REM and 
waking. This pathological coupling may be of diagnostic value because spindles can be 
visualized in electrocencephalogram (EEG) recordings. Therefore, the appearance of 
spindles in the cortical EEG during waking or REM could suggest IEDs in mesial temporal 
areas, the occurrence of which is difficult to detect non-invasively.
Hippocampal IEDs are most frequent during NREM sleep32,51 and their occurrence 
correlates with the slow oscillation and/or epochs of increased spindle band power34,35,55. 
Similarly, IEDs generated by focal application of penicillin in the hippocampus of urethane-
anesthetized rats correlate with the phase of local slow oscillations33. Such correlations 
indicate that periods of high synchronization favor IED occurrence. By contrast, our findings 
in rats and humans demonstrate that IEDs can reset the phase of slow oscillations and induce 
spindles.
In the intact brain, focal cortical electrical or magnetic stimulation during NREM sleep can 
induce a delta wave, often followed by a spindle56,57, similar to the physiological K-
complexes of slow oscillations that induce thalamocortical spindles18. Thus, the simplest 
interpretation of our findings is that synchronous hippocampal output during IEDs mimics 
the ‘stimulus’ that evokes a cortical ‘DOWN’ state which is followed by a spindle; the 
stronger the hippocampal output, the higher the probability of spindle induction. 
Hippocampal IEDs likely mobilize an existing physiological process in neocortex via 
interaction with thalamocortical networks mediating sleep oscillations. The close 
resemblance of IED-induced spindles in kindled rats to spontaneously occurring spindles in 
normal rats supports this notion.
All of our human subjects with epilepsy exhibited temporal coupling between IEDs and 
spindles similar to rats, and the frontal lobe consistently demonstrated preferential coupling. 
The precise localization and strength of IED-spindle coupling varied across subjects, and our 
correlation measures were limited to regions where electrodes were placed for clinical 
purposes. This variability may result from the heterogeneous nature of our population in 
regards to location and number of seizure foci, and anatomical distribution of interictal 
activity across limbic and cortical structures. Further investigation in subjects with varied 
seizure foci and other variables can clarify whether IED-spindle coupling is characteristic of 
Gelinas et al.
Page 8
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 temporofrontal networks or a more general effect. The IED-induced cortical ‘DOWN’ state 
and coupled spindle activity supports observations showing alterations in the default mode 
network, including mPFC, during epileptic discharges58.
Long-term memory requires a prolonged consolidation period, believe to be mediated by 
three prominent network patterns: hippocampal ripples, neocortical slow oscillations and 
thalamocortical sleep spindles11. Our results show that in the epileptic hippocampus, the 
incidence of ripples is decreased, while IEDs are frequent. Thus, the coordinated spiking 
organized by ripples needed for memory consolidation is replaced by IEDs that may 
broadcast ‘nonsense’ information as highly synchronized population activity to the mPFC. 
The cortex responds to this potent stimulus by generating a ‘DOWN’ state and subsequent 
spindle, recruiting mPFC neurons into events that carry no learning-related information and 
thereby may compete with true informational events. All three hypothesized pillars of 
memory consolidation59 are therefore misused in the epileptic brain. Because IED-evoked 
spindles occur at a well-defined latency after an IED, this time window presents an 
opportunity for closed-loop investigations and therapeutics60.
 Online Methods
 Animal surgical procedure
All animal experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee 
at New York University Langone Medical Center (NYULMC). Thirteen male and female 
Long Evans rats (200–350 g, 8–15 wks of age) were used for intracranial implantation. 
Sample size was estimated based on anticipated inter-animal neurophysiological variability, 
effect size of kindling on behavioral performance in previous studies, and low expected 
animal attrition. No rats were excluded from analysis. As each animal was tracked from 
baseline to kindled state, no randomization or blinding was utilized. Rats were kept on a 
regular 12h–12h light dark cycle and housed in pairs prior to implantation, but separated 
afterward. No prior experimentation had been performed on these rats. The animals were 
initially anaesthetized with 2% isoflurane and maintained under anesthesia with 0.75–1% 
isoflurane during the surgery. Silicon probes or tetrodes were implanted into right 
hippocampus (–3.5 AP, 3.0 ML) and right mPFC (+3.5 AP, 0.5–1.5 ML). Two tungsten 
wires with 50 μm diameter and 500 μm dorsoventral tip separation were attached together 
and implanted into the hippocampal commissure (–0.5 AP, 0.8 ML, –4.2 DV) for 
commissural electrical stimulation. Screws in the skull, overlying cerebellum, served as 
ground electrodes. The craniotomies were covered by Gelfoam and sealed using a 10:1 
mixture of paraffin and mineral oil. Rats recovered for 4–5 days prior to initiation of 
experimentation. The hippocampal probe was then lowered to span layers of dorsal CA1 
based on observation of key LFP features (e.g. ripples in the pyramidal cell layer). The 
mPFC tetrodes or probes were lowered to a depth of –3.5 DV, and correct placement was 
verified by observation of an extracellular postsynaptic potential (ePSP) in the mPFC 
recording following a population spike in the hippocampus elicited by delivery of a single 
pulse (0.1 ms pulse width, 25–100 μA) to the hippocampal commissure.
Gelinas et al.
Page 9
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
  Neurophysiology data acquisition and processing
Seven of thirteen rats were used exclusively for neurophysiological recordings. These 
recording sessions started at a fixed time each morning. During the recording sessions, rats 
were exposed to an enriched environment (large enclosure containing a wheel) for 20 min 
and then returned to their homecage for baseline sleep recording. A subset of animals 
underwent delivery of test pulses to the hippocampal commissure (a-IEDs). This stimulation 
consisted of 0.1 ms duration square pulses delivered once per minute for 20–30 min. Current 
was titrated in steps with at least 30 min of no stimulation separating each session of pulse 
delivery. Rats were then started on the kindling procedure. After exposure to the enriched 
environment, 1 hr of pre-kindling data was obtained. Kindling stimulation consisted of 2 s 
duration bipolar current pulses (60 Hz, 1 ms pulse width). Amount of current used was 
determined on the initial kindling day by titrating current in 25 μA increments starting at 25 
μA (1 min separation interval between stimulations) until a hippocampal seizure greater than 
10 s duration was generated. This current setting was used for the remainder of kindling. 
Kindling stimulation was delivered twice per day. 3–6 hr of post-kindling data was then 
collected. Rats that underwent a-IED induction in the pre-kindled state were then subjected 
to the same stimulation protocol in the kindled state, using a range of current intensities. 
Neurophysiological signals were amplified, digitized continuously at 20 kHz using a head-
stage directly attached to the probe (RHD2000 Intan technology), and stored for off-line 
analysis with 16-bit format. Data were analyzed using MATLAB (MathWorks) and 
visualized using Neuroscope.
 Behavioral protocol
 Animals—Six of the thirteen implanted rats were used for behavioral experiments in 
addition to neurophysiological recordings. These animals were placed on a water deprivation 
schedule for 3–5 days prior to intracranial implantation for familiarization with obtaining 
water via a hand-held syringe administered by the experimenter. Rats were weighed daily 
during water deprivation to ensure that body weight did not decrease to < 85% of pre-
deprivation measurements. After the post-operative recovery period, rats were placed back 
on the water deprivation schedule for further behavioral training. Once consistent 
performance was attained, rats were sequentially advanced through 4 phases of the 
behavioral protocol: i) baseline – 4–6 paired training/testing sessions; ii) kindling – 14–18 d 
of kindling stimulation alternated with paired training/testing sessions; iii) rest/retraining/
recovery – 10 d of rest (water ad libitum and no behavioral sessions) followed by 5 d of 
retraining on the behavioral task without recording, and subsequently 3 paired training/
testing sessions without stimulation; iv) artificial IEDs – 2–4 paired training/testing sessions 
where a-IEDs were induced between training and testing. One animal was unable to 
complete the full protocol due to failure of the hippocampal probe during the recovery 
phase.
 Apparatus—Behavior was tested on a cheeseboard maze, consisting of a 1.5 m diameter 
open circular arena that was painted a uniform green and stood 70 cm above the floor. A 
total of 177 water wells (7 mm in diameter, 3 mm in depth) were drilled 8 cm apart in the 
maze surface, forming evenly distributed, parallel columns and rows. One wall of the 
Gelinas et al.
Page 10
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 starting box (23 cm wide × 30 cm long × 48 cm high) functioned as a drawbridge that could 
be raised and lowered to control the rat’s access to the maze (Supplementary Video 1).
 General task training—Water-deprived rats were first familiarized with exploring the 
maze environment to obtain water. Initially, the rat was placed in the center of the maze and 
allowed to explore and retrieve multiple (~25) randomly placed hidden water rewards. Over 
the next 3 d, the number of available water rewards on the maze was gradually reduced, and 
a trial structure introduced such that the rat received a food reward (0.5–1 Froot Loop) after 
successful retrieval of all water rewards. The rat was then trained to return to the starting box 
to obtain its food reward. After 2–4 d of this repeated procedure, the rat would consistently 
explore the maze to obtain three hidden water rewards and then return to the starting box to 
obtain its food reward. To prevent use of odor-mediated searching, the maze was wiped with 
a towel soaked in 70% ethanol and rotated by random degrees relative to the starting box 
between all trials. This phase of general training ended when the rat could complete 35 
trials/d, with efficient retrieval of three rewards after the first 5–10 learning trials.
 Paired training/testing sessions—After acquiring the scheme of the task, rats were 
started on the behavioral protocol, consisting of paired training/testing sessions each 
spanning 2 d. On the first of the two days, the rats learned the location of three hidden water 
rewards placed in randomly selected water wells over the course of ~35 trials (25 trial 
session, then ~1 h homecage rest, then 10 trial session). On the second of the two days, the 
rat was given a 5 trial probe test with water rewards located in the same location as the first 
day to assess memory for the spatial configuration of the reward locations. This test structure 
was chosen for two main reasons: i) it takes advantage of the rat’s natural foraging behavior 
(efficient return to remembered reward locations, followed by exploration of other areas if 
rewards are not found at remembered locations, or reward locations are not remembered); 
and ii) rats require > five trials to learn three new reward locations. The training for the next 
training/testing session was then initiated (> 4 h after the testing session) with three different 
water reward locations. Training and testing sessions were monitored by an overhead video 
camera (10 frames/s), and tracking of the rat’s location was facilitated by blue and red LEDs 
attached to its cap.
 Protocol phases—During all phases, rats had neurophysiological recording in their 
home cage between training sessions (~1 h), after the last training session (~2 h), and after 
testing (~2 h). In the baseline and recovery phases, no additional interventions were 
introduced. During the kindling phase, seizures were induced and recorded in the homecage. 
Rats were kindled using an alternate day protocol (one seizure on the first day, followed by 
3–4 seizures every alternate day), such that behavioral training occurred on a day when no 
seizure activity was induced. Testing for this training session was performed the next day, 
and kindling stimulation was administered after the test session. In this way, behavioral 
training and testing occurred 24 h after seizure induction. Previous work has indicated that 
most seizure-induced changes in hippocampal physiology reverse within 24 h61–63. In this 
design, deficits seen on behavioral testing would therefore more likely reflect interictal 
(IEDs) rather than ictal processes. No neurophysiological recordings were performed in the 
rest and retraining phase. In the a-IEDs phase, repetitive stimulation was delivered to the 
Gelinas et al.
Page 11
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 hippocampal commissure (0.5 Hz, 500 μs pulse width) for the duration of the 
neurophysiological recording session between and after training sessions. Current was 
titrated to generate a hippocampal population spike in each animal.
 Behavioral analysis—Behavioral performance was assayed using the animal’s position 
in the tracking data. Learning performance was assessed by repeated, successful retrieval of 
all three rewards in < 30 s in a given trial during the training session. Memory performance 
score was assessed in the test session by the number of rewards obtained in < 30 s.
 Rat LFP and spiking data processing
Recordings were classified into wake, REM, and NREM epochs based on theta/delta ratio 
calculated from the power spectrogram in concert with a movement vector extracted from 
synchronized onboard accelerometer. Spindle detection was initiated by filtering a channel 
recorded from deep layers of mPFC between 10–20 Hz, rectifying, and normalizing the 
signal. Spindle events were identified when the envelope was at least two standard 
deviations (SD) above the baseline (for a minimum of 400 ms and a maximum of 3 s) and 
the peak envelope was at least 3 SD above the baseline. For ripple detection, the 
hippocampal LFP from the CA1 pyramidal layer was band-pass filtered in the ripple 
frequency range (100–250 Hz). The signal was then rectified and normalized. Ripple events 
were identified when the envelope was at least 3 SD above the baseline (for a minimum of 
20 ms and a maximum of 100 ms) and the peak envelope was at least 6 SD above the 
baseline. IEDs were detected as follows: (i) band-pass filtering at 60–80 Hz and signal 
rectification; (ii) detection of events where the filtered envelope was > 3 times above 
baseline; (iii) elimination of events with unfiltered envelope was < 3 times above baseline. 
Filter frequency for IEDs was selected empirically, based on the strong power of the IEDs in 
this band combined with a lack of overlap with ripples or other large amplitude 
physiological events co-existing in this band. Because sharp transients (including IEDs) can 
produce oscillations after high frequency filtering that could be detected as ripples, all 
detected IEDs were cross-referenced with detected ripples, and any events detected as both 
an IED and ripple were classified as IED events only. Detected IEDs had waveforms 
consistent with characteristic IED events51,52 (Supplementary Fig. 1a). All detections were 
visually inspected for accuracy for each recording session. Occurrence rates of all the above 
events were calculated based on the daily pre-kindling recording to prevent any influence of 
the transient post-ictal state induced by kindling.
Extracellular spikes were identified by amplitude thresholding after high-pass filtering (> 
300 Hz). The first three normalized principal components of the spike waveforms were input 
into KlustaKwik clustering program to generate putative single units. The clustering 
classification was manually inspected and refined using Klusters. Units were classified as 
pyramidal cells or interneurons based on waveform symmetry and mean wideband spike 
width64.
 Histology
Rats were euthanized with sodium pentobarbital and perfused via the heart with 0.9% saline 
followed by 10% formalin. Whole brains were extracted and sectioned using a vibratome 
Gelinas et al.
Page 12
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (Leica) to create 70 μm coronal slices. Slices were mounted on gelatin-coated glass slides, 
stained using a modified hematoxylin-eosin staining protocol, and cover-slipped. A light 
transmission microscope (Zeiss) was used to visualize and photograph the slices. Tetrode or 
probe location was reconstructed from adjacent slices.
 Subjects with epilepsy LFP data processing
Analysis of clinical subdural ECoG recordings was approved by the Institutional Review 
Board at New York University Langone Medical Center (NYULMC). Informed written 
consent was obtained from all subjects. Sleep ECoG recordings (three sessions per subject) 
were obtained from four male and female subjects implanted with subdural grid electrodes 
and depth electrodes as part of the work-up for epilepsy surgery. Sample size required 
(number of subjects and recording sessions) was extrapolated from results of animal studies. 
Subjects with multiple days of continuous high quality ECoG recordings that included 
temporal and frontal regions were pre-established to be eligible for the study. Subjects with 
diffuse cortical lesions were excluded. Four subjects meeting these criteria with readily 
available data were randomly selected for further analysis. As no experimental manipulation 
was performed, there was no blinding or randomization employed. Epochs of seizure 
activity were excluded from analysis. Crude determination of sleep epochs was performed 
by extraction of a motion vector from video files in concert with delta/gamma ratio from the 
power spectrogram. ECoG data was imported into Matlab and resampled from 512 to 1250 
Hz for analysis. Spindle detection was performed on each channel as in the rat, although SD 
thresholds were increased to accommodate the noisier recording quality (3 SD start; 4 SD 
peak). Electrodes chosen for IED detection were clinically verified to contain IEDs, and 
demonstrated maximal amplitude among neighboring electrodes. IED detection was also 
performed as in the rat, with modifications: (i) band-pass filtering was performed at 25–80 
Hz to account for the wider waveforms of IEDs observed; (ii) thresholds were adjusted to 
two times above baseline; (iii) IEDs occurring within 1 s of another IED were excluded to 
prevent over-correlation due to a run of IEDs. Detected IEDs had waveforms consistent with 
typical interictal spikes and/or sharp waves (Supplementary Fig. 1b). All detections were 
visually inspected for accuracy for each recording session. Localization of grid and depth 
electrodes was performed based on reconstruction of subject specific pial surfaces, co-
registration of pre- and post-implant MRI images, a combination of manual and automatic 
localization of electrodes, and subsequent co-registration to a standard template brain65. The 
gyral location of electrodes was determined based on cortical parcellation using the 
Desikan-Killiany atlas66.
 Statistics
Statistical analysis was performed using a combination of freely available, online Matlab 
toolboxes (Freely Moving Animal Toolbox; http://fmatoolbox.sourceforge.net), and custom 
Matlab code. Spectrograms were generated using wavelet transformation (Gabor) and power 
spectrums were calculated as mean ± standard error of the mean (s.e.m.) over trials. The 
instantaneous LFP phase was extracted by Hilbert transform. Significant changes in event 
occurrence over time were tested using a non-parametric monotonic trend test (Man-Kendall 
tau with Sen’s method). Significance of cross-correlograms was calculated using a modified 
convolution method67. IED or ripple times were taken as cross-correlogram reference. Units 
Gelinas et al.
Page 13
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 were deemed to have phase-locking to spindle oscillations when α < 0.05 and κ > 0.1 on 
Rayleigh is test of non-uniformity. Probability distributions were compared using two-
sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests with correction for multiple comparisons. Differences 
between groups were calculated using non-parametric ranksum (Wilcoxon) or ANOVA 
(Kruskal-Wallis with Bonferroni correction) depending on the nature of the data analyzed. 
Correlations were calculated using a correlation coefficient matrix based on the covariance 
of input variables. Error bars represent s.e.m. Significance level was P < 0.05.
 Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
 Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Institute of Health Grants (NS074015, MH54671, MH102840; G.B.), the 
National Science Foundation (G.B.), the Mathers Foundation (G.B.), and the James S. McDonnell Foundation 
(G.B.). J.N.G. is a fellow of the Pediatric Scientist Development Program, and this project was supported through 
the March of Dimes Foundation. D.K. is supported through the Simons Foundation (junior fellow). We thank A. 
Peyrache for fruitful discussion, J. Long for use of the cheeseboard maze and advice on behavioral protocol, and Z. 
Zhao for technical support. We thank K. Berry, A. Boomhaur and P. del Prato for providing access to the sleep 
ECoG epilepsy data. Thanks also to H.X. Wang for providing the MRI-based electrode localizations for this data.
References
1. Hermann BP, Seidenberg M, Dow C, et al. Cognitive prognosis in chronic temporal lobe epilepsy. 
Ann Neurol. 2006; 60(1):80–87. [PubMed: 16802302] 
2. Ebus S, Arends J, Hendriksen J, et al. Cognitive effects of interictal epileptiform discharges in 
children. European journal of paediatric neurology : EJPN : official journal of the European 
Paediatric Neurology Society. 2012; 16(6):697–706. [PubMed: 22750349] 
3. Lv Y, Wang Z, Cui L, Ma D, Meng H. Cognitive correlates of interictal epileptiform discharges in 
adult patients with epilepsy in China. Epilepsy Behav. 2013; 29(1):205–210. [PubMed: 23994830] 
4. Binnie CD. Cognitive impairment during epileptiform discharges: is it ever justifiable to treat the 
EEG? The Lancet. Neurology. 2003; 2(12):725–730. [PubMed: 14636777] 
5. Brinciotti M, Matricardi M, Paolella A, Porro G, Benedetti P. Neuropsychological correlates of 
subclinical paroxysmal EEG activity in children with epilepsy. 1: Qualitative features (generalized 
and focal abnormalities). Functional neurology. 1989; 4(3):235–239. [PubMed: 2792857] 
6. Holmes GL, Lenck-Santini PP. Role of interictal epileptiform abnormalities in cognitive 
impairment. Epilepsy Behav. 2006; 8(3):504–515. [PubMed: 16540376] 
7. Khan OI, Zhao Q, Miller F, Holmes GL. Interictal spikes in developing rats cause long-standing 
cognitive deficits. Neurobiol Dis. 2010; 39(3):362–371. [PubMed: 20452427] 
8. Krauss GL, Summerfield M, Brandt J, Breiter S, Ruchkin D. Mesial temporal spikes interfere with 
working memory. Neurology. 1997; 49(4):975–980. [PubMed: 9339676] 
9. Kleen JK, Scott RC, Holmes GL, Lenck-Santini PP. Hippocampal interictal spikes disrupt cognition 
in rats. Ann Neurol. 2010; 67(2):250–257. [PubMed: 20225290] 
10. Kleen JK, Scott RC, Holmes GL, et al. Hippocampal interictal epileptiform activity disrupts 
cognition in humans. Neurology. 2013; 81(1):18–24. [PubMed: 23685931] 
11. Diekelmann S, Born J. The memory function of sleep. Nature reviews. Neuroscience. 2010; 11(2):
114–126. [PubMed: 20046194] 
12. Maviel T, Durkin TP, Menzaghi F, Bontempi B. Sites of neocortical reorganization critical for 
remote spatial memory. Science (New York, NY ). 2004; 305(5680):96–99.
13. Remondes M, Schuman EM. Role for a cortical input to hippocampal area CA1 in the 
consolidation of a long-term memory. Nature. 2004; 431(7009):699–703. [PubMed: 15470431] 
Gelinas et al.
Page 14
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 14. Buzsaki G. Two-stage model of memory trace formation: a role for “noisy” brain states. 
Neuroscience. 1989; 31(3):551–570. [PubMed: 2687720] 
15. Wilson MA, McNaughton BL. Reactivation of hippocampal ensemble memories during sleep. 
Science (New York, NY ). 1994; 265(5172):676–679.
16. Girardeau G, Benchenane K, Wiener SI, Buzsaki G, Zugaro MB. Selective suppression of 
hippocampal ripples impairs spatial memory. Nat Neurosci. 2009; 12(10):1222–1223. [PubMed: 
19749750] 
17. Jadhav SP, Kemere C, German PW, Frank LM. Awake hippocampal sharp-wave ripples support 
spatial memory. Science (New York, NY ). 2012; 336(6087):1454–1458.
18. Steriade M, McCormick DA, Sejnowski TJ. Thalamocortical oscillations in the sleeping and 
aroused brain. Science (New York, NY ). 1993; 262(5134):679–685.
19. Johnson LA, Euston DR, Tatsuno M, McNaughton BL. Stored-trace reactivation in rat prefrontal 
cortex is correlated with down-to-up state fluctuation density. J Neurosci. 2010; 30(7):2650–2661. 
[PubMed: 20164349] 
20. Battaglia FP, Benchenane K, Sirota A, Pennartz CM, Wiener SI. The hippocampus: hub of brain 
network communication for memory. Trends in cognitive sciences. 2011; 15(7):310–318. 
[PubMed: 21696996] 
21. Molle M, Yeshenko O, Marshall L, Sara SJ, Born J. Hippocampal sharp wave-ripples linked to 
slow oscillations in rat slow-wave sleep. J Neurophysiol. 2006; 96(1):62–70. [PubMed: 16611848] 
22. Peyrache A, Battaglia FP, Destexhe A. Inhibition recruitment in prefrontal cortex during sleep 
spindles and gating of hippocampal inputs. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of 
the United States of America. 2011; 108(41):17207–17212. [PubMed: 21949372] 
23. Siapas AG, Wilson MA. Coordinated interactions between hippocampal ripples and cortical 
spindles during slow-wave sleep. Neuron. 1998; 21(5):1123–1128. [PubMed: 9856467] 
24. Churchwell JC, Morris AM, Musso ND, Kesner RP. Prefrontal and hippocampal contributions to 
encoding and retrieval of spatial memory. Neurobiology of learning and memory. 2010; 93(3):
415–421. [PubMed: 20074655] 
25. Gais S, Albouy G, Boly M, et al. Sleep transforms the cerebral trace of declarative memories. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2007; 104(47):
18778–18783. [PubMed: 18000060] 
26. Jones MW, Wilson MA. Theta rhythms coordinate hippocampal-prefrontal interactions in a spatial 
memory task. PLoS biology. 2005; 3(12):e402. [PubMed: 16279838] 
27. Jay TM, Burette F, Laroche S. NMDA receptor-dependent long-term potentiation in the 
hippocampal afferent fibre system to the prefrontal cortex in the rat. Eur J Neurosci. 1995; 7(2):
247–250. [PubMed: 7757261] 
28. Jay TM, Witter MP. Distribution of hippocampal CA1 and subicular efferents in the prefrontal 
cortex of the rat studied by means of anterograde transport of Phaseolus vulgaris-leucoagglutinin. 
The Journal of comparative neurology. 1991; 313(4):574–586. [PubMed: 1783682] 
29. Takita M, Izaki Y, Jay TM, Kaneko H, Suzuki SS. Induction of stable long-term depression in vivo 
in the hippocampal-prefrontal cortex pathway. Eur J Neurosci. 1999; 11(11):4145–4148. [PubMed: 
10583503] 
30. Varela C, Kumar S, Yang JY, Wilson MA. Anatomical substrates for direct interactions between 
hippocampus, medial prefrontal cortex, and the thalamic nucleus reuniens. Brain structure & 
function. 2014; 219(3):911–929. [PubMed: 23571778] 
31. Colgin LL. Oscillations and hippocampal-prefrontal synchrony. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2011; 21(3):
467–474. [PubMed: 21571522] 
32. Malow BA, Lin X, Kushwaha R, Aldrich MS. Interictal spiking increases with sleep depth in 
temporal lobe epilepsy. Epilepsia. 1998; 39(12):1309–1316. [PubMed: 9860066] 
33. de Guzman PH, Nazer F, Dickson CT. Short-duration epileptic discharges show a distinct phase 
preference during ongoing hippocampal slow oscillations. J Neurophysiol. 2010; 104(4):2194–
2202. [PubMed: 20719925] 
34. Ferrillo F, Beelke M, De Carli F, et al. Sleep-EEG modulation of interictal epileptiform discharges 
in adult partial epilepsy: a spectral analysis study. Clin Neurophysiol. 2000; 111(5):916–923. 
[PubMed: 10802464] 
Gelinas et al.
Page 15
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 35. Nobili L, Ferrillo F, Baglietto MG, et al. Relationship of sleep interictal epileptiform discharges to 
sigma activity (12–16 Hz) in benign epilepsy of childhood with rolandic spikes. Clin 
Neurophysiol. 1999; 110(1):39–46. [PubMed: 10348319] 
36. Morimoto K, Fahnestock M, Racine RJ. Kindling and status epilepticus models of epilepsy: 
rewiring the brain. Prog Neurobiol. 2004; 73(1):1–60. [PubMed: 15193778] 
37. Buzsaki G, Horvath Z, Urioste R, Hetke J, Wise K. High-frequency network oscillation in the 
hippocampus. Science (New York, NY ). 1992; 256(5059):1025–1027.
38. Chersi F, Burgess N. The Cognitive Architecture of Spatial Navigation: Hippocampal and Striatal 
Contributions. Neuron. 2015; 88(1):64–77. [PubMed: 26447573] 
39. Dupret D, O'Neill J, Pleydell-Bouverie B, Csicsvari J. The reorganization and reactivation of 
hippocampal maps predict spatial memory performance. Nat Neurosci. 2010; 13(8):995–1002. 
[PubMed: 20639874] 
40. Shatskikh TN, Raghavendra M, Zhao Q, Cui Z, Holmes GL. Electrical induction of spikes in the 
hippocampus impairs recognition capacity and spatial memory in rats. Epilepsy Behav. 2006; 9(4):
549–556. [PubMed: 17027341] 
41. Buzsaki G, Bickford RG, Ponomareff G, Thal LJ, Mandel R, Gage FH. Nucleus basalis and 
thalamic control of neocortical activity in the freely moving rat. J Neurosci. 1988; 8(11):4007–
4026. [PubMed: 3183710] 
42. Steriade M, Nunez A, Amzica F. Intracellular analysis of relations between the slow (< 1 Hz) 
neocortical oscillation and other sleep rhythms of the electroencephalogram. J Neurosci. 1993; 
13(8):3266–3283. [PubMed: 8340807] 
43. Shewmon DA, Erwin RJ. The effect of focal interictal spikes on perception and reaction time. I. 
General considerations. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol. 1988; 69(4):319–337. [PubMed: 
2450731] 
44. Holmes GL. EEG abnormalities as a biomarker for cognitive comorbidities in pharmacoresistant 
epilepsy. Epilepsia. 2013; 54(Suppl 2):60–62. [PubMed: 23646973] 
45. Titiz AS, Mahoney JM, Testorf ME, Holmes GL, Scott RC. Cognitive impairment in temporal lobe 
epilepsy: role of online and offline processing of single cell information. Hippocampus. 2014; 
24(9):1129–1145. [PubMed: 24799359] 
46. Lenck-Santini PP, Holmes GL. Altered phase precession and compression of temporal sequences 
by place cells in epileptic rats. J Neurosci. 2008; 28(19):5053–5062. [PubMed: 18463258] 
47. Marcelin B, Chauviere L, Becker A, Migliore M, Esclapez M, Bernard C. h channel-dependent 
deficit of theta oscillation resonance and phase shift in temporal lobe epilepsy. Neurobiol Dis. 
2009; 33(3):436–447. [PubMed: 19135151] 
48. Nadasdy Z, Hirase H, Czurko A, Csicsvari J, Buzsaki G. Replay and time compression of recurring 
spike sequences in the hippocampus. J Neurosci. 1999; 19(21):9497–9507. [PubMed: 10531452] 
49. Bragin A, Engel J Jr, Wilson CL, Fried I, Mathern GW. Hippocampal and entorhinal cortex high-
frequency oscillations (100--500 Hz) in human epileptic brain and in kainic acid--treated rats with 
chronic seizures. Epilepsia. 1999; 40(2):127–137. [PubMed: 9952257] 
50. Bragin A, Wilson CL, Engel J Jr. Chronic epileptogenesis requires development of a network of 
pathologically interconnected neuron clusters: a hypothesis. Epilepsia. 2000; 41(Suppl 6):S144–
152. [PubMed: 10999536] 
51. Buzsaki G, Hsu M, Slamka C, Gage FH, Horvath Z. Emergence and propagation of interictal 
spikes in the subcortically denervated hippocampus. Hippocampus. 1991; 1(2):163–180. [PubMed: 
1669291] 
52. Wadman WJ, Da Silva FH, Leung LW. Two types of interictal transients of reversed polarity in rat 
hippocampus during kindling. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol. 1983; 55(3):314–319. 
[PubMed: 6186463] 
53. Bernhardt BC, Worsley KJ, Kim H, Evans AC, Bernasconi A, Bernasconi N. Longitudinal and 
cross-sectional analysis of atrophy in pharmacoresistant temporal lobe epilepsy. Neurology. 2009; 
72(20):1747–1754. [PubMed: 19246420] 
54. Kleen JK, Wu EX, Holmes GL, Scott RC, Lenck-Santini PP. Enhanced oscillatory activity in the 
hippocampal-prefrontal network is related to short-term memory function after early-life seizures. 
J Neurosci. 2011; 31(43):15397–15406. [PubMed: 22031886] 
Gelinas et al.
Page 16
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 55. Frauscher B, von Ellenrieder N, Ferrari-Marinho T, Avoli M, Dubeau F, Gotman J. Facilitation of 
epileptic activity during sleep is mediated by high amplitude slow waves. Brain. 2015; 138(Pt 6):
1629–1641. [PubMed: 25792528] 
56. Massimini M, Ferrarelli F, Esser SK, et al. Triggering sleep slow waves by transcranial magnetic 
stimulation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 
2007; 104(20):8496–8501. [PubMed: 17483481] 
57. Vyazovskiy VV, Faraguna U, Cirelli C, Tononi G. Triggering slow waves during NREM sleep in 
the rat by intracortical electrical stimulation: effects of sleep/wake history and background activity. 
J Neurophysiol. 2009; 101(4):1921–1931. [PubMed: 19164101] 
58. Fahoum F, Zelmann R, Tyvaert L, Dubeau F, Gotman J. Epileptic discharges affect the default 
mode network--FMRI and intracerebral EEG evidence. PloS one. 2013; 8(6):e68038. [PubMed: 
23840805] 
59. Inostroza M, Born J. Sleep for preserving and transforming episodic memory. Annual review of 
neuroscience. 2013; 36:79–102.
60. Krook-Magnuson E, Gelinas JN, Soltesz I, Buzsaki G. Neuroelectronics and Biooptics: Closed-
Loop Technologies in Neurological Disorders. JAMA neurology. 2015
61. Peele DB, Gilbert ME. Functional dissociation of acute and persistent cognitive deficits 
accompanying amygdala-kindled seizures. Behavioural brain research. 1992; 48(1):65–76. 
[PubMed: 1622555] 
62. Liu X, Muller RU, Huang LT, et al. Seizure-induced changes in place cell physiology: relationship 
to spatial memory. J Neurosci. 2003; 23(37):11505–11515. [PubMed: 14684854] 
63. Boukhezra O, Riviello P, Fu DD, et al. Effect of the postictal state on visual-spatial memory in 
immature rats. Epilepsy Res. 2003; 55(3):165–175. [PubMed: 12972171] 
64. Stark E, Eichler R, Roux L, Fujisawa S, Rotstein HG, Buzsaki G. Inhibition-induced theta 
resonance in cortical circuits. Neuron. 2013; 80(5):1263–1276. [PubMed: 24314731] 
65. Yang AI, Wang X, Doyle WK, et al. Localization of dense intracranial electrode arrays using 
magnetic resonance imaging. Neuroimage. 2012; 63(1):157–165. [PubMed: 22759995] 
66. Desikan RS, Segonne F, Fischl B, et al. An automated labeling system for subdividing the human 
cerebral cortex on MRI scans into gyral based regions of interest. Neuroimage. 2006; 31(3):968–
980. [PubMed: 16530430] 
67. Stark E, Abeles M. Unbiased estimation of precise temporal correlations between spike trains. J 
Neurosci Methods. 2009; 179(1):90–100. [PubMed: 19167428] 
Gelinas et al.
Page 17
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
Occurrence, detection, and coupling of hippocampal and mPFC oscillations during kindling. 
(a) Occurrence of IEDs in NREM, REM and Wake (bars) and increase in Racine stage (line) 
during kindling. Error bars = Mean ± s.e.m.; n = 4 rats. (b) Raster plot of mPFC spindles 
(blue) and hippocampal ripples (purple; scale bar = 10 s). Sample recorded ripple (black; Or 
= stratum oriens, Pyr = stratum pyramidale, Rad = stratum radiatum; scale bar = 30 ms). 
Raw LFP of detected ripple (purple; scale bar = 100 μV, 50 ms) with filtered (100–250 Hz), 
rectified version (bottom left; s.d. = standard deviation). Raw LFP of detected mPFC spindle 
associated with ripple (blue; scale bar = 100 μV, 500 ms) alongside filtered (10–20 Hz), 
rectified version (bottom right). (c) Raster plot of mPFC spindles (blue) and hippocampal 
IEDs (orange) after 14 d of kindling (scale bar = 10 s). Averaged spectrogram of 
hippocampal IED (scale bar = 500 ms). Raw LFP of detected IED (orange; scale bar = 200 
μV, 100 ms) with filtered (60–80 Hz), rectified version. Detected mPFC spindle evoked by 
IED (blue; scale bar = 100 μV, 500 ms). (d) Occurrence of ripples, spindles, and IEDs in 
NREM sleep over 18 d of kindling. Error bars = Mean ± s.e.m.; n = 4 rats. Occurrence of 
spindles has a non-significant trend toward decrease over time (Mann Kendall tau (τ) = –
0.16; P = 0.065; Z-test) whereas ripples decrease significantly (τ = –0.52; P = 5 × 10−9) and 
IEDs increase (τ = 0.65; P = 5 × 10−12).
Gelinas et al.
Page 18
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. 
Hippocampal IEDs impair memory. (a) Schematic of behavioral protocol (b = baseline, k = 
kindling, r = recovery; a = artificial IED). (b) Sample baseline behavioral performance. Five 
overlaid rat trajectories (red) and consummatory periods (blue) for the last five trials of a 
training session on the cheeseboard maze (left) and the five trials of the corresponding test 
session 24 h later (right). (c) Sample behavioral performance at the end of kindling; 
conventions as in (b). (d) Memory performance score on test sessions across the behavioral 
protocol. Different colors represent scores of individual rats (n = 6 for baseline, kindle; n = 5 
for recovery, a-IEDs). One rat was unable to complete the recovery and a-IEDs phases due 
to breakage of the hippocampal probe (Kruskal-Wallis ANOVA P = 3.6 × 10−10; Bonferroni 
correction; baseline/recovery vs. kindle P = 3.7 × 10−10; baseline/recovery vs. a-IED P = 9.8 
× 10−4; kindle vs. a-IED P = 0.4). (e) Multivariate correlation of IED rate, IED-spindle 
coupling rate, ripple rate, (all in events/s) and cumulative number of seizures with memory 
performance score. Different colors represent correlations for individual rats (n = 5; one 
animal was eliminated from this statistical analysis due to inability to detect ripples 
throughout behavioral phases).
Gelinas et al.
Page 19
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. 
Correlation of hippocampal IEDs and ripples with mPFC spindles. (a) Cross-correlation of 
IEDs and spindles (left; n = 47 sessions from four rats; 15,441 IEDs, 37,835 spindles). 
Cross-correlation of ripples and spindles (right; n = 11 sessions from four rats; 19,109 
ripples, 5,919 spindles; red lines = 95% confidence intervals). (b) Averaged mPFC 
spectrogram following hippocampal IED (top left) or ripple (top right; same power scale; 
scale bar = 200 ms). Averaged power spectrum (bottom; mean ± s.e.m.) before (blue) and 
after (green) IED or ripple. (c) Average filtered spindle waveform in unkindled rats 
(baseline, B, blue), spontaneous spindle in kindled rats (spontaneous, S, red), and IED-
evoked spindle in kindled rats (evoked, E, green; scale bar = 100 μV, 200 ms; n = 500 
spindles for each group from four rats). (d) Probability distribution of duration across 
spindle types. Inset: changes in mean (open circle) and median (open square) spindle 
duration in each rat (separate color) across spindle type (box plot tails = 25th and 75th 
percentiles; Kruskal-Wallis P = 1.0 × 10−7; B vs. S P = 6.4 × 10−8; S vs. E P = 0.002 
(Bonferroni correction); n = 1,074 baseline spindles, 1,236 spontaneous spindles, 1,071 
evoked spindles from four rats). (e) Probability distribution of frequency for spindle type 
with changes for each rat (inset). Conventions and n are as in (d); P = 0.04; S vs. E P = 0.04. 
(f) Scatterplot of significantly phase-locked putative mPFC single units to IED-evoked 
spindles (E) vs. spontaneous spindles (S; Spearman’s rho = 0.52; P (Fisher R to Z) = 3 × 
10−6; n = 74 units from four rats).
Gelinas et al.
Page 20
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. 
Hippocampal IEDs trigger mPFC spindles in all behavioral states. (a) mPFC (red) and 
hippocampal (blue) LFP with accelerometer trace (black) demonstrating an IED-evoked 
spindle in each behavioral state (scale bar = 500 μV, 1 s; traces from two rats). (b) Average 
normalized spectrogram in mPFC following hippocampal IED. Averaged mPFC power 
spectrum before (blue) and after (green) IED (inset; mean ± s.e.m.). (c) Change in mPFC z-
scored spindle power before vs. after hippocampal IED (dark colored bars; Kruskal-Wallis P 
= 7.2 × 10−7; NREM vs. REM P = 4.3 × 10−5; NREM vs. Wake P = 6.1 × 10−6; (Bonferroni 
correction); n = 17 NREM, 14 REM, and 14 Wake sessions from four rats). Probability of 
mPFC spindle following hippocampal IED across states (light colored bars; Kruskal-Wallis 
P = 0.04; NREM vs. REM P = 0.03; (Bonferroni correction); n = 67 NREM, 98 REM, and 
53 Wake sessions from four rats; * = P < 0.05). (d) Probability distribution of IED-evoked 
spindle duration in NREM (blue), REM (green), Wake (magenta). Changes in mean (open 
circle) and median (open square) spindle duration in each rat (inset; separate colors) across 
states (box plot tails = 25th and 75th percentiles; Kruskal-Wallis P = 2.0 × 10−4; NREM vs. 
REM P = 1.1 × 10−4; (Bonferroni correction); n = 220 NREM spindles, 193 REM spindles, 
207 Wake spindles from four rats). (e) Probability distribution of IED-evoked spindle 
frequency in each behavioral state (Conventions and n are as in (d); P = 0.01; REM vs. Wake 
P = 0.01).
Gelinas et al.
Page 21
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. 
Hippocampal IEDs trigger cortical ‘DOWN’ states in the mPFC. (a) Averaged raw mPFC 
LFP in time window bordering hippocampal IED (dashed line) in each behavioral state (blue 
= NREM, green = REM, magenta = Wake; scale bar = 400 μV, 1 s; n = 40 traces from each 
state in one rat; similar findings in all other rats). (b) Average mPFC delta power (mean ± 
s.e.m.) in each behavioral state (time window, colors, n as in (a)). Delta power in REM prior 
to IED was used as adjusted baseline. (c) Stacked mPFC delta phases (2–5 Hz) in time 
window bordering individual hippocampal IEDs (rows) across states (blue = –pi, red = pi; 
scale bar = 50 trials, 500 ms; n = 259 NREM, 268 REM, 236 Wake IED trials from one rat; 
similar findings in all other rats). (d) Average peri-event firing rate histograms of 
representative putative mPFC pyramidal cells (left) and interneurons (right) in the time 
window bordering hippocampal IED (time zero; colors as in (a); n = 405 pyramidal cells and 
22 interneurons from sample rat).
Gelinas et al.
Page 22
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. 
IEDs in subjects with epilepsy trigger cortical spindles. (a) LFP from IED electrode (upper; 
depth electrode in parahippocampal gyrus) demonstrating typical IED and subdural cortical 
electrode (lower; grid electrode in frontal cortex) demonstrating time-locked spindle. Grid 
shows z-scored spindle band power across cortical ECoG array triggered on above IED 
(occurrence time indicated by dashed line). White channels are nonfunctional (scale bar = 
100 μV, 200 ms; duration of each grid LFP trace = 1.6 s). (b) Average spectrograms 
triggered on IED occurrence (orange box) for IED electrode (upper panel; sample IED LFP 
in orange), and a representative cortical grid electrode (lower panel; red box = time of 
spindle; scale bar = 1 s; n = 798 IED trials from one subject; similar results for all other 
subjects). (c) Schematic of ECoG grid and strip placement (each square = one recording 
electrode) on the projected pial surface of four subjects with epilepsy (high IED-spindle 
correlation = warm colors; low correlation = cool colors; Corr = normalized correlation). 
Cross-correlograms for high, intermediate, and low correlation electrodes from a sample 
subject on the right (three sessions for each of four subjects; total of 3,969, 2,077, 1,035, and 
1,240 IEDs). Red ‘*’ shows location of IED electrode. (d) Stacked trials of delta power (left) 
and delta phase (right) in a cortical electrode centered on IED occurrence (blue = –pi, red = 
pi; scale bar = 25 trials, 500 ms; arrowhead = time of IED; n = 477 IED trials from one 
subject; similar results for all other subjects).
Gelinas et al.
Page 23
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 October 25.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
