 Convergent Science Physical Oncology
PAPER
Multiplex protein detection on circulating tumor
cells from liquid biopsies using imaging mass
cytometry
To cite this article: Erik Gerdtsson et al 2018 Converg. Sci. Phys. Oncol. 4 015002
 
View the article online for updates and enhancements.
Recent citations
Clonal diversity revealed by
morphoproteomic and copy number
profiles of single prostate cancer cells at
diagnosis
Paymaneh D Malihi et al
-
This content was downloaded from IP address 77.173.35.219 on 03/06/2019 at 17:08
 © 2018 IOP Publishing Ltd
Introduction
Enabling precision medicine in cancer care requires the 
ability to both deconvolute heterogeneity in the primary 
and metastatic tissues, and to characterize the liquid phase 
of the disease. In settings of chemotherapy, molecularly 
targeted and immune-system engaging treatment 
approaches, the high-resolution characterization of 
the disease along its evolutionary path at the time of 
the decision making is a primary challenge that can 
be addressed by the integration of quantitative single 
cell technologies within the solid and liquid biopsy 
workflows. The recognition of the complex interactions 
between the cancer and the immune system are 
particularly important drivers for the detailed analysis at 
the cellular, proteome and genome levels to both establish 
a treatment strategy and monitor its efficacy.
Since its commercial introduction in 2011, cytom-
etry by time-of-flight (CyTOF) mass spectrometry 
using metal-labeled antibodies, has rapidly entered 
the basic and clinical research laboratory settings 
[1–3]. Its main distinction with respect to standard
fluorescence-based cytometry is the capacity to assay 
the binding of 35 or more specific antibodies on each 
cell simultaneously. Bodenmiller and Günther et al 
have developed methods for coupling laser ablation 
Multiplex protein detection on circulating tumor cells from liquid 
biopsies using imaging mass cytometry
Erik Gerdtsson1, Milind Pore1, Jana-Aletta Thiele2, Anna Sandström Gerdtsson1 , Paymaneh D Malihi1, 
Rafael Nevarez1, Anand Kolatkar1, Carmen Ruiz Velasco1 , Sophia Wix1, Mohan Singh5, Anders Carlsson1, 
Amado J Zurita3, Christopher Logothetis3, Akil A Merchant5, James Hicks1,4 and Peter Kuhn1,4,6,7,8
1 Bridge@USC, USC David and Dana Dornsife College of Letters, Arts, and Sciences, 3430 S Vermont Ave, TRF 114, MC3303,  
Los Angeles, CA, 90089-3303, United States of America
2 Faculty of Medicine in Pilsen, Biomedical Center, Charles University in Prague, alej Svobody 76, 323 00 Pilsen, Czechia
3 Department of Genitourinary Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd,  
Unit 207, Houston, TX, United States of America
4 Biological Sciences, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, United States of America
5 Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, USC Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine,  
University of Southern California, 1450 Biggy Street, Los Angeles, CA, United States of America
6 Aerospace and Mechanical Engineering, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, United States of America
7 Biomedical Engineering, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, United States of America
8 Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, United States of America
E-mail: gerdtsso@usc.edu, pore@usc.edu, agerdtss@usc.edu, pmalihi@usc.edu, rnevarez@usc.edu, kolatkar@usc.edu,  
ruizvela@usc.edu, swix@usc.edu, ncarlsso@usc.edu, jameshic@usc.edu, pkuhn@usc.edu, Jana.A.Thiele@lfp.cuni.cz,  
azurita@mdanderson.org, clogothe@mdanderson.org, mohansin@usc.edu and akilmerc@usc.edu
Keywords: single cell analysis, imaging mass cytometry, CyTOF, protein biomarkers, HD-SCA, circulating tumor cells
Supplementary material for this article is available online
Abstract
Molecular analysis of circulating and disseminated tumor cells (CTCs/DTCs) has great potential as 
a means for continuous evaluation of prognosis and treatment efficacy in near-real time through 
minimally invasive liquid biopsies. To realize this potential, however, methods for molecular 
analysis of these rare cells must be developed and validated. Here, we describe the integration of 
imaging mass cytometry (IMC) using metal-labeled antibodies as implemented on the Fluidigm 
Hyperion Imaging System into the workflow of the previously established high definition single 
cell analysis (HD-SCA) assay for liquid biopsies, along with methods for image analysis and signal 
normalization. Using liquid biopsies from a metastatic prostate cancer case, we demonstrate that 
IMC can extend the reach of CTC characterization to include dozens of protein biomarkers, with 
the potential to understand a range of biological properties that could affect therapeutic response, 
metastasis and immune surveillance when coupled with simultaneous phenotyping of thousands of 
leukocytes.
PAPER
RECEIVED 
24 September 2017
REVISED  
22 November 2017
ACCEPTED FOR PUBLICATION  
8 December 2017
PUBLISHED 
16 January 2018
https://doi.org/10.1088/2057-1739/aaa013
Converg. Sci. Phys. Oncol. 4 (2018) 015002
 2
E Gerdtsson et al
with CyTOF technology, enabling multiplexed image-
based proteomic analysis of formalin-fixed paraffin- 
embedded (FFPE) tissue sections or cultured cells 
mounted on glass slides [4, 5]. The technology is now 
commercially available from Fluidigm Corporation 
(South San Francisco) as the Hyperion Imaging Sys-
tem for imaging mass cytometry, or IMC. In the IMC 
process, the target tissue or cell preparation is treated 
with a cocktail of antibodies, each labeled with a spe-
cific rare earth isotope. Regions of interest (ROI) on the 
slides are scanned in situ with a highly focused, pulsed 
laser, such that each pulse vaporizes a 1 µm2 bloc of the 
sample and the resulting ions are introduced into the 
inductively coupled plasma time-of-flight mass spec-
trometer (ICP-TOF-MS) with helium as a carrier gas. 
The ion counts for each pulse can then be assembled 
into a protein expression image with a resolution of 1 
µm2 across the ROI allowing for limited characteriza-
tion of sub-cellular localization.
In this report, we describe the integration of 
imaging mass cytometry (IMC) using the Hyperion 
instrument into the previously validated high defini-
tion single cell analysis (HD-SCA) workflow [6], with 
the goal to incorporate morphology, proteomics and 
genomics of rare single cells in a single streamlined 
process. The HD-SCA method was designed to iden-
tify and characterize ultra-rare (<0.0001%) cancer 
cells in liquid biopsies from blood and bone marrow 
aspirates, or high-complexity samples such as tis-
sue ‘touch preparations’ on glass slides. In contrast 
to other CTC technologies, the HD-SCA workflow 
uses a direct analysis, ‘no cell left behind’ strategy in 
which the entire population of nucleated cells from a 
blood draw is spread on glass slides at 3 million cells 
per slide, stained, and imaged in situ. Fresh samples 
must be fractionated within 48 h following blood 
collection, which enables simple shipping from clini-
cal sites. Candidate tumor cells are identified among 
the millions of leukocytes using immunofluorescent 
markers. In addition to the morphometric informa-
tion obtained by imaging, the candidate circulating 
tumor cells (CTC) from blood or disseminated tumor 
cells (DTC) from bone marrow, or other cells of 
interest can subsequently be relocated and physically 
isolated for single cell genomic analysis [7–9]. The 
data derived from the HD-SCA workflow has been 
demonstrated to generate clinically actionable infor-
mation [10]. Further, due to their minimally invasive 
nature, liquid biopsies can be repeated frequently 
during treatment to assess response and provide early 
indications of changes that could lead to disease pro-
gression. Despite its high sensitivity, the phenotyping 
of cells detected by HD-SCA has been largely limited 
to morphometry and four fluorescent markers. Tar-
geted single cell proteomic analysis can complement 
genomic and whole plasma characterization to assign 
functional relevance to the molecular observations 
as part of an integrated signature. The longitudinal 
characterization of the disease using cancer cells from 
blood and bone marrow liquid biopsies provides 
insight into the evolution of the tumor, and the sig-
nificance of sub-populations of circulating tumor 
cells present in specific environments.
Here, we present experimental procedures along 
with data analysis methods, specifically adapted for 
the HD-SCA workflow to incorporate multiplex tar-
geted proteomic analysis on intact single cells using 
the Hyperion instrument. The functionality and per-
formance of the workflow is demonstrated, including 
methods for validating metal conjugated antibodies 
for use specifically in the combined HD-SCA/IMC 
workflow. In addition, the robustness of the method 
allows for immunophenotyping of the leukocyte 
populations that are simultaneously imaged along 
with the CTCs, which is demonstrated here by gating 
the multi-parametric data from the HD-SCA/IMC 
workflow in a manner similar to cytometric sorting 
methods, yielding well separated sub-populations. 
Finally, we present combined proteo-genomic results 
relating the HD-SCA/IMC to the HD-SCA/genomics 
from the analysis of liquid biopsies from a metastatic 
prostate cancer patient, showing the distribution and 
subcellular location of characteristic prostate cancer 
protein markers in a clonally related population of 
CTCs and DTCs.
Methods
HD-SCA specimen preparation
Whole blood samples from primary and metastatic 
cancer patients were collected in cell-free DNA blood 
collection tubes (Streck, Omaha, USA) and shipped to 
the Kuhn laboratory at USC in temperature stabilized 
shippers (Standard 71, LLC, Los Angeles). Samples 
were processed within 24 h of collection using the 
HD-SCA protocol [6] and archived at  −80 °C. The 
sample MDA-42109 was collected from a patient with 
metastatic prostate cancer in 2013 with informed 
consent and under IRB approval as previously 
described [8]. Normal control donor blood samples 
were obtained from The Scripps Research Institute, La 
Jolla, California, USA. All specimen collections were 
performed under IRB approval.
Cell lines spiked in blood
Cell lines were obtained from the American Type of 
Culture Collection, (ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA). 
Prostate cancer line LNCaP was cultured in RPMI-
1640 medium and breast cancer line MDA-MB-231 
was cultured in DMEM/F12 medium (Corning, 
Manassas, VA, USA). Cells were harvested using 
Versene solution (Gibco) and washed in PBS. For 
validation of the metal-labeled antibodies in the 
combined workflow, cultured cells were added at a 
ratio 1:10 000 to whole blood from normal blood 
donors and processed according to the standard 
 
HD-SCA protocol [6], including storage at  −80 °C for 
a minimum of 24 h.
Converg. Sci. Phys. Oncol. 4 (2018) 015002
 3
E Gerdtsson et al
HD-SCA fluorescent labelling, imaging and cell 
identification
To complete the HD-SCA procedure, slides were 
thawed, stained with DAPI (nuclear stain) and 
fluorescent antibodies against CD45 (leukocyte 
marker) and pan-cytokeratin (CK, epithelial marker), 
and imaged in three colors using a high-speed 
automated microscope scanner. As part of the normal 
HD-SCA image analysis, the candidate CK positive 
cells were identified and coordinates registered. 
High resolution 40×  images of candidate cells were 
captured using a Nikon 80i microscope. Prior to 
staining with the metal-labeled antibody cocktail 
for IMC analysis, the slides were stored at 4 °C for 
several days to parallel normal operation of the HD-
SCA protocol. Finally, cover slips were removed in 
PBS with minimal disruption of the cell layer. Slides 
were then washed with PBS to dissolve the imaging 
media in preparation for the metal-labeled antibody 
incubation. For the HD-SCA/Genomics workflow 
results presented in figure 3, samples were stained with 
4-colors, adding AR to the DAPI, CD45 and CK panel 
described above.
MaxPar metal-labeled antibody staining
Metal-labeled antibodies were provided by Fluidigm, 
either from the standard CyTOF catalog (http://
maxpar.fluidigm.com/product-catalog-metal.php) or 
as custom conjugates (supplementary table 1 (stacks.
iop.org/CSPO/2/015002/mmedia)). 
Metal-labeled 
antibody cocktails were prepared in 0.1% Tween-20, 
1% BSA in PBS as per the dilution scheme presented 
in supplementary table 1. All samples, prepared as 
described above, were first blocked with 1% BSA 
and 0.2 mg ml−1 mouse IgG Fc fragment (Thermo 
Scientific) in PBS for 30 min and then incubated with 
antibody cocktail for 1.5 h at RT, followed by washing 
with PBS and staining with DNA intercalator Ir-193 
(Fluidigm) and cell membrane counter-stain In-115 
(Fluidigm) for 30 min. Slides were again washed with 
PBS and rinsed with ddH20 for 5 s and dried overnight 
at room temperature prior to IMC analysis.
Statistical considerations and data analysis
Cell boundaries were determined by the segmentation 
method described in the results section, using the 
Bioconductor package EBImage in R [11]. The 
standard deviation over the mean (SDOM) per cell 
for each channel was defined as the difference between 
the average ion count for the cell and the mean signal 
for all the cells divided by the standard deviation of 
all cells within each ROI (400  ×  400 µm). The noise 
level, used as a denominator for the S/N ratio was 
approximated as 1.5  ×  IQR (inter-quartile range) 
outside the upper quartile of all cells. When applicable, 
the limit of detection (LOD) for each marker was set 
as to mean  +  3.3  ×  standard deviation (one sided 
95% * 2) or S/N  =  3 [12]. For figure 5, the dataset was 
exported in a FCS format using the FlowCore package 
in R and the gating viSNE plots were generated with 
the CYT graphical software package [13] in MATLAB.
Results
The HD-SCA/IMC integrated workflow
Both the HD-SCA and the IMC were designed to 
operate on standard glass microscope slides in keeping 
with general procedures in the clinical pathology 
laboratory setting. The common slide format 
facilitated the integration of the two technologies 
into a single workflow viable for both basic and 
clinical research applications. The workflow, shown in 
figure 1(a), begins with processing the blood sample 
and spreading all nucleated cells on slides, followed by 
3- or 4-color immunofluorescent staining and high-
speed digital scanning to identify and image cells of 
Figure 1. Schematic workflow for protein profiling of rare cells identified with the HD-SCA workflow. (a) Sample processing and 
fluorescent imaging; (b) IMC staining and data acquisition; (c) data processing.
Converg. Sci. Phys. Oncol. 4 (2018) 015002
 4
E Gerdtsson et al
interest. The coordinates of each candidate cell are 
recorded and re-imaged at 40×  for morphometric 
measurements, as previously reported [6, 8]. In 
preparation for the IMC (figure 1(b)), slides are re-
incubated with MaxPar™ metal-labeled antibodies. 
The slide is placed in the IMC instrument and candidate 
cells are relocated using a previously determined 
offset between coordinates from the 40×  imaging 
microscope and the IMC stage. A 400  ×  400 µm ROI 
around the cell of interest undergoes laser ablation 
aerosolizing a 1 µm2 area/pulse (200 Hz), followed 
by ionization and quantification in the CyTOF Helios 
instrument. Ion mass data is collected for each pulse 
and processed to render images for each individual 
channel at 1 µm resolution, where the intensity of 
each pixel corresponds to the ion count value. The 
images are analyzed using an in-house developed 
software application in R. Raw data and processed 
results are stored in a PostgreSQL database enabling 
export of datasets and integration with HD-SCA assay 
parameters (figure 1(c)).
Although the basic formats of the two assays are 
similar, adapting the IMC technology to the HD-SCA 
workflow required the development and validation of 
staining and analysis methods consistent with the pre-
viously validated HD-SCA protocols. The antibody 
preparation and staining steps were initially devel-
oped and optimized using cell lines spiked into normal 
donor blood samples (Methods).
For this study, a panel of metal-labeled antibod-
ies was designed to include targets relevant to pros-
tate cancer. The panel included PSA, PSMA and 
two epitopes for AR, along with epithelial markers 
EpCAM, E-cadherin, cancer stem cell marker CD44, 
EMT marker B-catenin, as well as a subset of mark-
ers for leukocyte characterization [14–16]. HLA-DR 
and CD14 were selected for monocytes identification 
along with CD3, CD8, CD4, CD45RA and CD38 to 
further characterize the T cell population [17]. CD66 
was selected to identify mainly the neutrophil popu-
lation, however, CD66 or CEA (carcinoembryonic 
antigen) is also expressed in in tumor cells and is 
known to have a tumor suppressive role in prostate 
cancer [18]. All catalog antibodies had been previ-
ously validated by Fluidigm for use in the CyTOF/
Helios systems, but had not been validated in the 
IMC modality nor tested in the context of the HD-
SCA workflow.
Each metal-labeled antibody was first tested for 
specificity and sensitivity against the prostate cancer 
line LNCaP, and metastatic breast cancer line MDA-
MB231 (Materials and Methods and supplemental fig-
ure S1), using the leukocyte populations surrounding 
the candidate cells as an additional control. The unique 
challenge of determining the presence of the various 
antigens on the single candidate cell within each ROI 
in comparison to flow-based methods required the 
development of routines for quantification and scor-
ing as described below.
Cell segmentation and statistical analysis
As the pulsed laser sequentially ablates subcellular 
areas across the candidate cell along with all of the ~300 
leukocytes present in the defined ROI, an ion count 
value is reported for each isotope at each of the 160 000 
acquired pulses. The resulting data matrix is stored in a 
text file from which false color 1 µm resolution images 
are generated from each array of ion count values. The 
range of ion count values is internally normalized 
within each image, usually so that the brightest pixel 
represents the 98th percentile of the cumulative ion 
count signal.
Figure 2 shows an example of the images obtained 
from the IMC analysis of the two spiked cell lines. In 
the top row, an aggregate of LNCaP cells is seen in the 
center of each frame. A single LNCaP cell is also cap-
tured within the ROI. The different localized signal 
for PSA (membrane, figure 2(e)), E-cadherin (cell 
junctions, figure 2(f)), and androgen receptor (AR) 
(translocated to nuclei upon activation, figure 2(g)), 
can clearly be seen. For segmentation, the DNA inter-
calator data (figure 2(d)) is used to identify the objects 
in each frame. Adaptive thresholding [11] is utilized 
to generate a binary image, and then applying a water-
shed algorithm [19] to separate objects that are touch-
ing. Finally, the membrane counterstain is used for 
Voronoi propagation [20]to define the cell boundaries 
of each object with the primary mask acting as seeds 
(figure 2(c)). The mask is used to quantify the signals 
associated with each cell for each channel, by apply-
ing the mask on the raw data array of ion count val-
ues, rather than the normalized image. The ion count 
signals within the boundaries of each segmented cell 
in the ablation field are used to generate biaxial plots 
showing the average signal per cell for each marker 
relative to a chosen leukocyte marker, typically CD45 
(figures 2(m)–(o)). This quantitation leads to a heuris-
tic scoring system for each marker as described below.
Design of a scoring system for marker classification
In practice, the quantitation of different markers is 
hampered by (i) subjectivity in adjusting the gain for 
normalization of images, (ii) a wide dynamic range of 
protein expression, (iii) inherent differences in detector 
sensitivity for the metal ions [21], (iv) experimental 
variation due to instrument fluctuation [22] and 
differences between staining batches etc, and (v) the 
difficulty of separating low abundant protein signals 
from background noise. As alluded to above, these 
challenges exacerbated in the setting of evaluating rare 
single cells, as compared to the common application of 
cytometry where larger populations are characterized.
Classification based on ion count alone was 
deemed unfeasible due to vast differences in dynamic 
range for each antibody-analyte pair, impeding nor-
malization of the signals and their interpretation 
in heat maps. Thus, to establish an objective, semi- 
automated means for evaluating signals, a four level 
scoring system was created, with 0 being below the 
Converg. Sci. Phys. Oncol. 4 (2018) 015002
 5
E Gerdtsson et al
LOD, 1 exceeding LOD, and levels 2 to 3 set to discrimi-
nate the highest signal levels. The scoring system is 
based both on SDOM, and signal to noise (S/N) of the 
ion count value for the candidate cell to the surround-
ing leukocyte population, providing a relative meas-
urement that is less sensitive to experimental variation 
than ion count alone. The LOD for each marker was set 
as equal to S/N  =  3 or SDOM  =  3.3 [17]. Cells exceed-
ing the LOD were scored as 1+, signals with S/N of 7-20 
or SDOM  >  6 were scored 2+, and finally score 3+  was 
assigned to signals of S/N  >  20 or SDOM  >  12. In 
figures 2(m)–(p), the scores are marked in the plots 
along with the estimated LOD based on either S/N  =  3 
(dashed lines) or SDOM  =  3.3.
Some of the markers tested, including CD44, CD66, 
and vimentin, are also present on subpopulations of 
leukocytes. As seen in figures 2(i)–(k), most of the cells 
in the ROI express either CD44 or CD66, comprising 
two mutually exclusive subpopulations. In such cases, 
manual or automated gating can be readily applied to 
score the cell of interest, as demonstrated for a spiked 
MDA-MB-231 cell shown in figure 2(p). In this case, 
the CD44 signal was above the gated CD44+  leuko-
cyte population, and was given a score of 3. Additional 
scoring of the different markers for LNCaP and MDA-
MB-231 are presented in supplemental figure 1.
Analysis of a liquid biopsy sample from a prostate 
cancer patient
To test the integration of IMC with the HD-SCA 
workflow and to demonstrate the added information 
provided by IMC over 4-color immunofluorescence, 
the combined HD-SCA/IMC workflow was performed 
on matched blood and bone marrow aspirate samples 
from a patient with metastatic castrate resistant 
prostate cancer (MDA-42109) collected as part of 
a larger study [8]. In the initial HD-SCA assay of 
MDA-42109 conducted in 2013, 9 CTCs ml−1 from 
blood and 207 DTCs ml−1 in bone marrow were 
identified, with 48% of the CTCs and 78% of the DTCs 
also scoring positive for AR expression [23]. High 
resolution (40×) images had been collected for all the 
CTCs and a subset of DTCs to verify the AR positivity 
and subcellular localization prior to isolating the 
cells for whole genome amplification using the 
 
HD-SCA genomics workflow [7]. The results showed 
that 41/42 of the successfully amplified cells yielded 
highly rearranged and closely related copy number 
profiles with common elements typical of metastatic 
prostate cancer, indicating a single cancer lineage with 
four distinct sub clones as shown in the heat map and 
representative profiles (figure 3(a)). The high degree of 
clonality in the CNV profiled cells provided assurance 
that the candidate CTCs and DTCs selected for 
subsequent IMC analysis were highly likely to be bona 
fide cancer cells from the same lineage. However, we 
note that despite sharing the same genotype, individual 
cells exhibit significant phenotypic variability in AR 
expression and subcellular location, consistent with 
previous results [7]. In most cases, amplification of the 
AR gene on chromosome X corresponds to a strong 
nuclear AR signal in the corresponding fluorescent 
Figure 2. Illustrations of segmentation and scoring of individual cells and aggregates. (a) HD-SCA composite image of LNCaP 
cells spiked in normal blood containing a cluster of cells in the center of the frame along with a single cell to the right. (b) Colored 
segmented cells in the IMC ROI. (c) Zoomed in LNCaP cluster of cells segmented using the DNA-Intercalator signal (blue) to 
outline the nuclei (yellow) as primary masks acting as seeds for propagation onto the membrane image to identify the outer cell 
boundaries (red). (d)–(g) Images showing the signal for individual IMC channels as labeled. (h) HD-SCA composite image of 
a single MDA-MB-231 cell spiked in normal blood. (i) Composite image, showing CD66 (red), CD44 (green) and DNA (blue), 
demonstrating the mutually exclusive populations of leukocytes (j) and (k). (l) Enlarged image of the MDA-MB-231 cell stained 
with CD44. (m)–(o) Biaxial plots of the segmented cells from ROI in figure (b) with channels specified on the y-axis and CD45 on 
x-axis. The LNCaP cells are highlighted as green triangles (part of the cluster) or blue squares (single cell), with the associated score. 
The lines represents the estimated LOD based on either S/N (dashed), SDOM for all cells (solid) or SDOM based on the leukocytes 
only (dotted). (p) Biaxial plots of CD66 versus CD44 on a log2 scale of the cells present in the ROI in I along with gating lines in blue. 
The MDA-MB-231 cell is shown as a blue triangle, scored as a 3.
Converg. Sci. Phys. Oncol. 4 (2018) 015002
 6
E Gerdtsson et al
image (figure 3(b), panels 3, 4, 5 and 7). In other cases, 
the gene encoding AR was amplified even though the 
protein could not be detected by fluorescence (figure 
3(b), panels 1, 2 and 6). Notably, there is also a genomic 
subclone comprising cases where AR amplification is 
not observed in the CNV profile (figure 3(b), panels 
9–12) but AR is still detected in some of the fluorescent 
images (figure 3(b), panels 11 and 12). Morphological 
traits, such as cell and nuclear size and CK staining also 
varied among individual cells as is evident from the 
fluorescent images.
To evaluate the performance of the combined 
HD-SCA/IMC analysis in relation to the results from 
the HD-SCA fluorescent assay alone, we retrieved one 
unstained slide each from blood and bone marrow of 
MD42109 from the  −80 °C archive where they had 
been stored for three years. The slides were stained and 
scanned using the standard HD-SCA 3-color protocol 
(DAPI, CD45 and pan-CK) to identify candidate cancer 
cells (figure 1). A total of 21 candidate DTCs and three 
CTCs were identified and their positions located on the 
respective slides. The stained slides were then stained 
with metal-labeled antibodies in preparation for imag-
ing on the Hyperion instrument. The combined results 
of the HD-SCA immunofluorescence and IMC analy-
sis of these cells are presented in figures 4 and 5.
Figures 4(a) and (b) show a selection of images 
generated in the IMC analysis of two representative 
cells, DTC #1271 from the bone marrow aspirate and 
CTC #1290 from blood, along with separate images 
of the markers being tested in the two modalities. The 
images from the fluorescence analysis of the repre-
sentative cells (top panel) show that both cells were 
strongly CK positive and CD45 negative. The CD45 
expression in leukocytes seen in the full ROI compos-
ite image generated by the IMC, show a high degree 
of correlation of CD45 expression ranging from low 
to high with the same cells in the corresponding ROI 
captured in the HD-SCA fluorescence assay image 
(figure 4(a), supplementary data, figure 1). The com-
posite fluorescence images (figure 4(c)), demonstrate 
a phenotypic heterogeneity of both the morphology 
(size) and the variation in the CK signal among the 
cancer cells.
The heat map (figure 4(d)) provides a summary 
of the IMC signals in each channel for all 24 cells ana-
lyzed. The signal intensity for CK 8/18 varies even 
among the positive cells, and some of the cells that 
were positive for CK in the HD-SCA analysis were 
below the LOD in the IMC for CK 8/18, likely due to 
the fact that more CK epitopes are measured with the 
pan-CK antibody cocktail used in HD-SCA staining. 
Figure 3. Genomic profiles of cells found in the blood and bone marrow from the prostate cancer patient. (a) Genomic heat map 
displays the CNV profiles (chromosomal deletions in blue and amplification in red) for the CTC/DTC analyzed from the prostate 
cancer patient. (b) Representative CNV profiles of a CTC (left) and DTC (center, right) including 40×  immunofluorescent 
composite images (DAPI, blue; CK, red; CD45, green; and AR white). The AR loci on X chromosome is highlighted ((b), panel 1).
Converg. Sci. Phys. Oncol. 4 (2018) 015002
 7
E Gerdtsson et al
Fifty percent (12/24) of the cells showed AR positivity 
in the IMC, in agreement with the parallel HD-SCA 
assay. Of the AR N-terminal positive cells, the major-
ity were also positive for the C-terminal specific anti-
body, indicating that the full-length receptor is pre-
sent in these cells. The rendered images from the IMC 
show a clear nuclear localization of AR, which follows 
upon activation of the receptor [24] (figures 4(a) and 
(b)). A majority of the cells (18/24) were positive for 
the epithelial marker EpCAM and 6 cells were also 
positive for E-cadherin, including the cell clusters 
1277 and 1285 (figures 4(c) and (d)). Importantly, all 
of the cells were PSMA positive and a majority were 
also PSA positive, providing independent evidence 
for the prostate origin of the cells (figures 4(a), (b) 
and (d)). Thus, the IMC analysis confirmed and com-
plimented the fluorescent HD-SCA and genomic sig-
natures by providing additional markers for pheno-
typic profiling. Further, these results demonstrate the 
feasibility of using archived samples for IMC analysis, 
allowing us to revisit and further characterize long 
stored and previously analyzed samples in the HD-
SCA biobank.
Characterization of leukocyte populations
The HD-SCA assay is unique among the current 
CTC isolation methods in that it also assays and 
displays the full complement of leukocytes along with 
candidate CTC, enabling the analysis of a significant 
number of immune cells for multiple markers while 
analyzing CTCs. To demonstrate the feasibility of 
such an application, the surrounding leukocytes 
from the prostate cancer samples presented above 
were characterized by combining data aggregated 
from multiple ROIs on the slide into one dataset for 
each of the blood and bone marrow samples. To 
establish a reproducible analytical workflow, the first 
step was to remove all poorly segmented cells by size 
selection. Next, by gating the data (2089 cells) based 
on the average ion counts for each leukocyte on 
biaxial plots, the ratio compared to all nucleated cells 
of neutrophils (CD66+/CD44low, 67%) monocytes 
(HLA-DR+/CD14+, 7%) and T-cells (CD3+/HLA-
DR–, 9%) could be determined (figure 5(a)). The ratio 
correlated well with the manual differential count 
performed by a trained clinical lab technician (69% 
neutrophils, 14% lymphocytes, 8% eosinophils, 8% 
Figure 4. Combined IMC and HD-SCA characterization of circulating tumor cells from prostate cancer blood and bone marrow. 
(a) DTC (#1271) from a prostate cancer patient centered in the full frame ROI (400  ×  400) together with cropped/zoomed in 
fluorescent images (top panel) and the IMC rendered images (bottom panels) as comparison for channel DAPI/Intercalator 
(blue), CK (red), CD45 (green) and as a 3 color composite image. The IMC generated results for EpCAM, AR-N, CD66, PSA, 
PSMA, E-cadherin and a lipid membrane counterstain are presented in green below. (b) Images of the CTC (#1290) with a similar 
expression profile from the same patient as in A. (c) 40×  fluorescent images DAPI (blue), CD45 (green), and CK (red) of all the cells 
found and analyzed in the blood and bone marrow sample taken with optimal exposure for each cell. (d) Heat map of CTCs (green 
banner) and DTCs (blue banner) analyzed from the same patient colored according to the four step scoring scale; below detection 
(gray) detectable (yellow), strong (orange) and very strong (red) depending on the detected protein.
Converg. Sci. Phys. Oncol. 4 (2018) 015002
 8
E Gerdtsson et al
monocytes, 1% basophils). Furthermore, the T-helper 
CD4+ cells (2%) and cytotoxic CD8+ (5%) were also 
identified within the T-cell population. Amongst each 
of the T-helper and cytotoxic T-cell populations, we 
also detected small populations of activated (CD38+, 
<1%) and naïve/effector cells (CD45RA+/CD4+, 
1% and CD45RA+/CD8+, 3.8%). In figure 5(b), the 
signal intensity for different populations are shown 
overlaid in a 2D-viSNE map [13]. Similar data analysis 
for the bone marrow sample (2267 cells, figure 5(c)) 
demonstrated slightly lower ratio of neutrophils 
(55%), monocytes (4%) and lymphocytes (10%) 
compared to the blood. Thus, despite lacking markers 
for precursor cells in this particular analysis, the 
current results still indicate higher levels of immature 
cells present in the bone marrow compared to the 
blood, as expected [25].
In summary, we have developed an integrated 
approach of CTC and DTC characterization based on 
the HD-SCA workflow with the subsequent down-
stream multiplex proteomic analysis using IMC. The 
method was demonstrated using CTCs, DTCs as well 
as surrounding leukocytes in samples from a bone 
metastatic prostate cancer patient, showing added 
Figure 5. Immune cell phenotyping. Identification of subpopulations of leukocytes within the ROIs analyzed for sample MDA-
42109 showing (a) conventional biaxial gating of cells (after initial size exclusion of non-single cells) to identify neutrophils 
(CD66+), cytotoxic T-cells (CD3+, CD8+), T-helper cells (CD3+, CD4+) and monocyte populations (HLA-DR+, CD14+). (b) 
viSNE plots (SNE1 versus SNE2) of around 2000 cells captured with IMC in blood and (C) bone marrow, respectively. The larger 
image shows the same populations as gated above, overlaid by color. The smaller images show the individual markers with the 
expression represented as a gradient from low (blue) to high (red).
Converg. Sci. Phys. Oncol. 4 (2018) 015002
 9
E Gerdtsson et al
value to the data generated by the HD-SCA assay alone. 
Results were compared to genomic profiling of match-
ing cells from the same samples, showing a higher 
degree of heterogeneity on a protein level than on the 
genomic level.
Discussion
The results presented here provide proof of concept 
for the application of the combined HD-SCA/IMC 
workflow for targeted proteomics analysis on rare 
cancer cells and cell aggregates, as well as associated 
leukocyte populations, using blood and bone marrow 
aspirate from a metastatic prostate cancer patient. 
To achieve these results, we have coupled IMC, using 
the Fluidigm Hyperion instrument, with the existing 
HD-SCA method for CTC/DTC identification, 
morphometrics and single cell genomics. Significantly, 
this additional downstream high-content analysis 
was integrated without the need to modify any of 
the previously validated upstream processes of the 
 
HD-SCA. This continuous workflow enables a 
strategy of deep proteo-genomic analysis applicable 
for translational science studies within clinical trials. 
While the technology is currently applied as a discovery 
tool for markers or new combinations of markers, it 
has the potential for clinical validity either as a broader 
pathology platform, or during the development phase 
of a specific test. Typically, after discovery of a potential 
biomarker using such a high dimensional technology, 
a less complex, more focused assay based on a 
limited number of reagents and suitable for routine 
clinical implementation would likely be created, as 
demonstrated by Scher and colleagues [10].
The opportunity to utilize targeted proteomics for 
research on ultra-rare cells such as CTCs from liquid 
biopsies lies in the high level of multiplexing avail-
able to create ‘smart panels’ with a wide, purposeful 
spectrum of targets such as tissue specific markers and 
known markers of therapeutic importance, but also 
markers of discovery, such as mechanism of immune 
surveillance and escape [26] and markers for tumor 
cell states, including, dormancy, EMT, vascular mim-
icry and stemness. In practice, unique panels would be 
constructed for specific clinical studies. In this demon-
stration study, for example, we included markers for 
characterization of the surrounding leukocyte popu-
lation. Patient specific immune signatures in addition 
to the cancer cells could potentially provide insight for 
classification and monitoring of cancer for precision 
medicine purposes [27, 28], and the possibility to do 
so simultaneously is a unique feature of the HD-SCA 
assay compared to other CTC technologies. The cur-
rent panel contained four prostate specific markers, 
six epithelial and cell signaling or cancer-associated 
 
markers, and nine common leukocyte markers, plus 
a direct conjugated DNA intercalator and membrane 
counterstain. This combination of markers allowed us 
to both confirm the tissue of origin for the candidate 
prostate cancer cells and identify specific populations 
in the surrounding leukocytes, and further, to test the 
expression of additional proteins in the candidate cells.
In classifying rare cells it is important to establish 
normalization and quantification methods to enable 
cell to cell comparisons as well as comparisons between 
experiments. This is especially true for those proteins 
where expression approaches the LOD. Each individ-
ual antibody assay has to be evaluated in order to esti-
mate the detection limit and linear range. Quanti 
tative 
scoring of protein expression in individual candidate 
cells is an ongoing process. The scoring method pre-
sented in this study is rooted in that developed for the 
fluorescent measurements in the HD-SCA, wherein 
the signals from the surrounding white blood cells are 
used to establish a negative control baseline for most 
epithelial tissue markers and a means for normal-
izing signals from candidate cells. The SDOM meas-
ure as applied in the conventional HD-SCA assay is 
a straightforward means for establishing the back-
ground level based on the surrounding leukocytes. 
SDOM is however sensitive to outliers and is poorly 
suited for skewed populations, in particular for signals 
close to zero. SDOM is also limited in the case of CTC 
clusters, where multiple cells of interest contribute to 
the overall mean and standard deviation, as illustrated 
in figures 2(m)–(o) where the LOD (mean  +  3.3σ) 
is estimated by excluding the seven cluster cells from 
the overall calculation (dotted lines) in comparison to 
estimate based on all cells (solid lines). The S/N meas-
ure based on the inter-quartile range was introduced 
because it is less sensitive to outliers, but on the other 
hand it gives only a rough estimate based on the back-
ground signal. Hence, both measures are currently 
taken into account to provide an objective score.
It should not be overlooked that each type of prep-
aration, whether fresh frozen tissue, FFPE sections or 
the HD-SCA, requires separate validation of the anti-
body repertoire [29, 30]. In the process of integrating 
the two platforms, we noted that up to half of the anti-
body conjugates previously validated for suspension 
CyTOF did not work well or at all on the glass substrate 
HD-SCA preparations. We have therefore developed a 
standardized assay development process for the HD-
SCA/IMC workflow using cell lines spiked into normal 
blood samples. Optimization of sensitivity and speci-
ficity for some problematic markers often required 
iterative testing of multiple antibody clones and metal-
conjugate combinations. Expanding the repertoire of 
validated conjugates in the HD-SCA/IMC setting is a 
work in progress.
Rare cells from liquid biopsies show great potential 
for assessing the effectiveness of cancer therapy and 
detecting resistance or progression in near-real time 
through a minimally invasive procedure that can be 
repeated on a time scale of days or weeks, rather than 
months or years. New technologies such as cell free 
Converg. Sci. Phys. Oncol. 4 (2018) 015002
 10
E Gerdtsson et al
DNA and single cell sequencing add volumes of new 
information to what was once limited to enumerat-
ing cancer cells in the blood. The HD-SCA workflow 
is a direct analysis platform that provides the oppor-
tunity for a complete characterization of the blood 
sample without enrichment and that accommodates 
multiple assay modes including both morphometric 
and molecular level analysis. The integration of the 
HD-SCA workflow with single cell targeted protein 
analysis creates a true multiplex technology for liquid 
biopsies that is accessible for both basic and transla-
tional clinical studies.
Conclusion
This study provides proof of concept that IMC analysis 
adds another dimension to the established HD-SCA 
workflow, enabling multiplex proteomic profiling in 
addition to morphometric and genomic characterization 
of ultra-rare circulating tumor cells. Importantly, this 
study provides evidence that samples stored for several 
years can be revisited and analyzed de novo as new 
protein targets are identified. With a multiplexing level 
of (currently) 40 proteins, highly informative biomarker 
panels can be readily tailored for the scientific question 
at hand, which gives the HD-SCA/IMC technology 
immense potential for deriving predictive and prognostic 
biomarkers from the liquid phase of cancer.
Acknowledgments
This work was based wholly or partially on research 
supported by Breast Cancer Research Foundation 
004698-00003; National Cancer Institute and Leidos 
Biomedical Research, Inc HHSN261200800001E; 
Prostate Cancer Foundation 16CHAL04; Vassiliadis 
Research Fellowship, Polak Research Fellowship, the 
Vicky Joseph Research Fellowship, and the Charles 
University Research Fund (Progres Q39). USC is an 
early access partner of Fluidigm for the evaluation 
of the Hyperion System and Fluidigm provided both 
expertise and reagents to support this work. The 
content is solely the responsibility of the authors and 
does not necessarily represent the official views of 
these funding agencies and foundations. Competing 
Financial Interests are PK: Advisor to Epic Sciences, 
royalty recipient from Epic Sciences, shareholder at 
Epic Sciences; JBH: On the Clinical Advisory Boards 
of Epic Sciences, Inc., La Jolla, CA and CelMatix, Inc. 
of NY, NY.
ORCID iDs
Anna Sandström Gerdtsson  https://orcid.org/0000-
0003-1932-0365
Carmen Ruiz Velasco  https://orcid.org/0000-0003-
2370-3000
Peter Kuhn  https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2629-4505
References
 [1] Baca Q, Cosma A, Nolan G and Gaudilliere B 2017 The road 
ahead: implementing mass cytometry in clinical studies, one 
cell at a time Cytometry B 92 10–1
 [2] Spitzer M H and Nolan G P 2016 Mass cytometry: single cells, 
many features Cell 165 780–91
 [3] Bandura D R, Baranov V I, Ornatsky O I, Antonov A, Kinach R, 
Lou X, Pavlov S, Vorobiev S, Dick J E and Tanner S D 2009 
Mass cytometry: technique for real time single cell multitarget 
immunoassay based on inductively coupled plasma time-of-
flight mass spectrometry Anal. Chem. 81 6813–22
 [4] Wang H A, Grolimund D, Giesen C, Borca C N, Shaw-
Stewart J R, Bodenmiller B and Günther D 2013 Fast chemical 
imaging at high spatial resolution by laser ablation inductively 
coupled plasma mass spectrometry Anal. Chem. 85 10107–16
 [5] Giesen C et al 2014 Highly multiplexed imaging of tumor 
tissues with subcellular resolution by mass cytometry Nat. 
Methods 11 417–22
 [6] Marrinucci D et al 2012 Fluid biopsy in patients with 
metastatic prostate, pancreatic and breast cancers Phys. Biol. 
9 016003
 [7] Dago A E et al 2014 Rapid phenotypic and genomic change in 
response to therapeutic pressure in prostate cancer inferred by 
high content analysis of single circulating tumor cells PloS One 
9 e101777
 [8] Carlsson A, Kuhn P, Luttgen M S, Dizon K K, Troncoso P, 
Corn P G, Kolatkar A, Hicks J B, Logothetis C J and Zurita A J 
2017 Paired high-content analysis of prostate cancer cells in 
bone marrow and blood characterizes increased androgen 
receptor expression in tumor cell clusters Clin. Cancer Res. 
23 1722–32
 [9] Malihi P D et al 2017 Clonal diversity revealed by 
morphoproteomic and copy number profiles of single prostate 
cancer cells at diagnosis Converg. Sci. Phys. Oncol. 4 015003
 [10] Scher H I et al 2016 Association of AR-V7 on circulating tumor 
cells as a treatment-specific biomarker with outcomes and 
survival in castration-resistant prostate cancer JAMA Oncol. 
2 1441–9
 [11] Pau G, Fuchs F, Sklyar O, Boutros M and Huber W 2010 
EBImage—an R package for image processing with 
applications to cellular phenotypes Bioinformatics 26 979–81
 [12] International Council for Harmonisation of Technical 
Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH) 1997 
Validation of Analytical Procedures: Methodology Q2B Fed. 
Reg. 62 27463–7 (www.ich.org/products/guidelines/quality/
quality-single/article/validation-of-analytical-procedures-
text-and-methodology.html)
 [13] Amir E A D, Davis K L, Tadmor M D, Simonds E F, Levine J H, 
Bendall S C, Shenfeld D K, Krishnaswamy S, Nolan G P and 
Pe’er D 2013 viSNE enables visualization of high dimensional 
single-cell data and reveals phenotypic heterogeneity of 
leukemia Nat. Biotechnol. 31 545–52
 [14] Ghosh A and Heston W D 2004 Tumor target prostate specific 
membrane antigen (PSMA) and its regulation in prostate 
cancer J. Cell. Biochem. 91 528–39
 [15] Jiang Y G, Luo Y, He D L, Li X, Zhang L L, Peng T, Li M C and 
Lin Y H 2007 Role of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway in 
epithelial-mesenchymal transition of human prostate cancer 
induced by hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha Int. J. Urol. 
14 1034–9
 [16] Hurt E M, Kawasaki B T, Klarmann G J, Thomas S B and 
Farrar W L 2008 CD44  +  CD24(-) prostate cells are early 
cancer progenitor/stem cells that provide a model for patients 
with poor prognosis Br. J. Cancer 98 756–65
 [17] Zola H et al 2005 CD molecules 2005: human cell 
differentiation molecules Blood 106 3123–6
 [18] Luo W, Tapolsky M, Earley K, Wood C G, Wilson D R, 
Logothetis C J and Lin S H 1999 Tumor-suppressive activity of 
CD66a in prostate cancer Cancer Gene Ther. 6 313–21
 [19] Beucher S 1994 Watershed, hierarchical segmentation 
and waterfall algorithm Mathematical Morphology and Its 
Converg. Sci. Phys. Oncol. 4 (2018) 015002
 11
E Gerdtsson et al
Applications to Image Processing (Computational Imaging and 
Vision vol 2) ed J Serra and P Soille (Dordrecht: Springer)
 [20] Jones T R, Carpenter A and Golland P 2005 Voronoi-based 
segmentation of cells on image manifolds Lect. Notes Comput. 
Sci. 3765 535–43
 [21] Tricot S et al 2015 Evaluating the efficiency of isotope 
transmission for improved panel design and a comparison 
of the detection sensitivities of mass cytometer instruments 
Cytometry A 87 357–68
 [22] Finck R, Simonds E F, Jager A, Krishnaswamy S, Sachs K, 
Fantl W, Pe’er D, Nolan G P and Bendall S C 2013 
Normalization of mass cytometry data with bead standards 
Cytometry A 83 483–94
 [23] Lazar D C, Cho E H, Luttgen M S, Metzner T J, Uson M L, 
Torrey M, Gross M E and Kuhn P 2012 Cytometric 
comparisons between circulating tumor cells from prostate 
cancer patients and the prostate-tumor-derived LNCaP cell 
line Phys. Biol. 9 016002
 [24] Heinlein C A and Chang C 2004 Androgen receptor in prostate 
cancer Endocr. Rev. 25 276–308
 [25] Brooimans R A, Kraan J, van Putten W, Cornelissen J J, 
Lowenberg B and Gratama J W 2009 Flow cytometric 
differential of leukocyte populations in normal bone marrow: 
influence of peripheral blood contamination Cytometry B 
76 18–26
 [26] Mohme M, Riethdorf S and Pantel K 2017 Circulating 
and disseminated tumour cells—mechanisms of immune 
surveillance and escape Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol. 14 155–67
 [27] Gruber I, Landenberger N, Staebler A, Hahn M, Wallwiener D 
and Fehm T 2013 Relationship between circulating tumor cells 
and peripheral T-cells in patients with primary breast cancer 
Anticancer Res. 33 2233–8
 [28] Wistuba-Hamprecht K et al 2017 Establishing high 
dimensional immune signatures from peripheral blood via 
mass cytometry in a discovery cohort of stage IV melanoma 
patients J. Immunol. 198 927–36
 [29] Howat W J, Lewis A, Jones P
, Kampf C, Ponten F, van der Loos C M, 
Gray N, Womack C and Warford A 2014 Antibody validation of 
immunohistochemistry for biomarker discovery:  
recommendations of a consortium of academic and  
pharma 
ceutical based histopathology researchers Methods 
70 34–8
 [30] Uhlen M et al 2016 A proposal for validation of antibodies Nat. 
Methods 13 823–7
Converg. Sci. Phys. Oncol. 4 (2018) 015002
