 Precision oncology for acute myeloid leukemia using a 
knowledge bank approach
Moritz Gerstung1,2,*, Elli Papaemmanuil1,3,*, Inigo Martincorena1, Lars Bullinger4, Verena I 
Gaidzik4, Peter Paschka4, Michael Heuser5, Felicitas Thol5, Niccolo Bolli1,6, Peter Ganly7, 
Arnold Ganser5, Ultan McDermott1, Konstanze Döhner4, Richard F Schlenk4, Hartmut 
Döhner4,§, and Peter J Campbell1,8,§
1Cancer Genome Project, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, UK 2European Bioinformatics 
Institute EMBL-EBI, Hinxton, UK 3Computational Oncology, Epidemiology and Biostatistics 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Institute 4Department of Internal Medicine III, Ulm University, 
Ulm, Germany 5Department of Hematology, Hemostasis, Oncology, and Stem Cell 
Transplantation, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany 6Division of Hematology, 
Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, University of Milano, Italy 7Department of 
Pathology (UOC), University of Otago, Christchurch, New Zealand 8Department of Haematology, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
Abstract
Causative mutations in a patient’s cancer drive its biology and, by extension, its clinical features 
and treatment response, a concept underpinning the vision of precision medicine. However, 
considerable between-patient heterogeneity in driver mutations complicates evidence-based 
personalization of cancer care. Here, re-analysing 1,540 patients with acute myeloid leukemia 
(AML), we explore how large knowledge banks of matched genomic-clinical data can support 
clinical decision-making. Inclusive, multistage statistical models accurately predicted likelihoods 
of remission, relapse and mortality, validated on independent TCGA patients. Comparison of long-
term survival probabilities under different treatments enables therapeutic decision support, 
Addresses for correspondence: Dr Peter J Campbell, Cancer Genome Project, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton CB10 1SA, 
Cambridgeshire, UK. pc8@sanger.ac.uk, Dr Hartmut Döhner, Department of Internal Medicine III, Ulm University, Ulm, Germany. 
Hartmut.Doehner@uniklinik-ulm.de.
*Joint first authors
§Joint corresponding authors
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
Sequencing data that support the findings of this study have been deposited in the European Genome-Phenome Archive (http://
www.ebi.ac.uk/ega) under accession number EGAS00001000275. The clinical data and summarized driver mutation calls are available 
in a github repository (http://www.github.com/gerstung-lab/aml-multistage), together with all code used to generate the figures and 
conclusions of the manuscript.
URLs
The exploratory web application to visualize and explore the data is found at: http://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/aml-multistage. The git 
repository containing all clinical data, summarized mutation calls and code is available at: http://www.github.com/gerstung-lab/aml-
multistage.
Author contributions: MG developed the statistical methods, analyzed data and wrote the manuscript and supporting information, 
with input from EP and PJC. EP prepared and curated genetic and clinical data. IM analyzed TCGA data. RS, HD, KD, LB, VIG, PP, 
MH, FT, AG alongside all contributing institutions to the study group (AMLSG) recruited patients in this study, collated and 
contributed clinical data. NB, PG and UM provided input into analyses and interpretation of results. EP, KD, HD, RFS and PJC 
initiated the study. PJC and HD wrote the manuscript, and are joint corresponding authors.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Genet. 2017 March ; 49(3): 332–340. doi:10.1038/ng.3756.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 available in exploratory form online. Personally tailored management decisions could reduce the 
number of hematopoietic cell transplants in AML by 20–25%, while maintaining overall survival 
rates. Power calculations show that databases require thousands of patients for accurate decision 
support. Knowledge banks facilitate personally tailored therapeutic decisions, but require 
sustainable updating, inclusive cohorts and large sample sizes.
INTRODUCTION
Led by a small number of high-profile successes, there has been considerable enthusiasm for 
the concept of personally tailoring cancer management based on individual genomic 
profiles1,2. Mutations in cancer genes fundamentally drive the tumor’s growth, giving strong 
rationale for the belief that therapeutic choices made on the basis of these causative events 
will be biologically sound. Applications of genomics in cancer medicine include enhanced 
diagnostic accuracy through molecular characterization, personalized forecasts of a patient’s 
prognosis and support for choosing among different therapeutic options3,4. There are, 
however, complications to this narrative: surprisingly few cancer genes are straightforward 
therapeutic targets; many cancer genes are only rarely mutated in a given tumor type; each 
patient’s tumor typically has several driver mutations. Above all other complications, 
though, is the challenge that, for most tumor types, there are hundreds to thousands of 
different combinations of driver mutations observed across patients5–7.
The promise of precision medicine has triggered considerable funding commitments, such as 
the Precision Medicine Initiative in USA, Genomics England in UK and similar efforts in 
several other countries8,9. Amongst other aims, these initiatives will build large banks of 
patients’ genomic data matched to clinical variables, treatments and outcomes. Despite these 
investments reaching hundreds of millions of dollars in scale, there has been little formal 
evaluation of the potential utility of knowledge banks. In particular, it is unclear whether 
accurate predictions about cancer outcomes can be made from a large genomic-clinical 
database; what improvements in survival at the population level might be achieved from 
personally tailored therapeutic choices; and what sample sizes knowledge banks need to 
accrue before predictions are sufficiently accurate to underpin decision support for the 
individual patient. Precision medicine requires therapeutic decisions fine-tuned to the unique 
genome of an individual cancer; evidence-based medicine requires therapeutic decisions 
grounded on documented, verified data.
Here, we explore these questions by re-analyzing genetic data from 111 cancer genes, 
cytogenetic profiles, and clinical data from 1,540 patients with acute myeloid leukemia 
(AML) undergoing intensive treatment10, validated on an independent AML cohort from the 
TCGA11. In our previous study10, we identified 11 genomic subcategories of AML, each 
with distinctive constellations of clinical features. However, even within individual 
molecular subgroups, there remains considerable patient-to-patient variability in treatment 
response and clinical outcomes, partially explained by co-operating driver mutations and 
other diagnostic clinical variables. At the population level, then, we can make strong 
statements about overall patterns of long-term survival from such data. At the level of a 
patient in the clinic faced with a difficult therapeutic decision, however, it is not at all clear 
Gerstung et al.
Page 2
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 how such genomic complexity impacts on the accuracy or relevance of predictions about 
potential clinical outcomes for that patient.
AML presents an interesting exemplar for evaluating the potential of precision medicine 
because of a real, current therapeutic dilemma – who should be offered an allogeneic 
hematopoietic cell transplant (allograft) in first complete remission (CR1)12,13? The 
equations are not straightforward. Allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplants in first complete 
remission undoubtedly decrease relapse rates for most patients, but this comes at the cost of 
higher treatment-related mortality, as high as 20–25% at 3 months14, with a further 30% risk 
of debilitating chronic morbidity15. Furthermore, even though more patients relapse after 
chemotherapy in first remission, up to a fifth can then be successfully salvaged with 
allografts or more intensive chemotherapy16,17. We use this particular therapeutic dilemma 
to illustrate how a knowledge bank approach can inform therapeutic decisions tuned to the 
specifics of an individual patient, a concept that could be extended to other cancers, other 
treatments, other clinical conundrums.
RESULTS
Predicting complex patient outcomes from genomic and clinical variables
We recently sequenced10 all coding exons of 111 myeloid cancer genes in diagnostic 
leukemia samples from 1,540 AML patients undergoing intensive treatment within three 
prospective clinical trials of the German-Austrian AML Study Group (AMLSG). We 
identified driver point mutations and combined these data with the clinical trials database to 
generate a comprehensive knowledge bank. Here, we focus on evaluating the utility of the 
knowledge bank for generating predictions personally tailored to the individual patient, and 
how this can be used to compare likelihoods of various clinical outcomes under different 
treatment strategies. The full knowledge bank, together with all analysis code used here, is 
documented in the Supplementary Note and is available as a git repository (see URLs 
section below).
Throughout, we use overall survival as the primary end-point of these analyses since the aim 
of intensive therapy in the young AML patient is cure. The full dataset consists of 231 
predictor variables, spanning the seven broad categories of fusion genes, copy number 
alterations, point mutations, gene-gene interactions, demographic features, clinical risk 
factors and treatment received, across 1540 patients. To assess the accuracy of our 
predictions we use the following validation strategies: (1) random cross-validation on this 
dataset, (2) building models from any two clinical trials here and testing on the third; and (3) 
testing the model built from all three AMLSG trials on an independent AML cohort from 
USA (TCGA)11. All predictions for individual patients reported here were made using 
models excluding that patient.
We tested a range of regularized regression methods for predicting survival and also 
implemented more novel approaches, based on random effects and multistage statistical 
models, for deriving detailed associations between genomic and clinical endpoints (Figure 
1a; Supplementary Note sections 2–3). Using a variety of accuracy measures, the random 
effects models and multistage models typically scored best in predicting overall survival, 
Gerstung et al.
Page 3
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 roughly doubling the amount of explained variance compared to current prognostic criteria13 
(Figure 1b–c; Supplementary Note section 4). A key aspect of these approaches is that they 
include all available variables in the model, but shrink their estimated effects if there is only 
weak support in the data in order to control overfitting. In contrast, conventional methods 
typically chose reduced subsets of 5–20 variables, seemingly at the cost of discarding 
prognostically relevant information (for more discussion, see Supplementary Note section 
4).
Reassuringly, we found strong ‘out-of-cohort’ validation for our models, either when models 
built on this cohort were tested on the TCGA cohort, or when models using two of the three 
trials in the knowledge bank were tested on the third trial (Figure 1a). Of particular note is 
the observation that the concordance decreased only moderately for predictions from a 
model trained on younger patients (AMLHD98A and AMLSG0704: age range, 18–65 years) 
evaluated on a trial of older patients (AMLHD98B: range, 58–84 years). This implies that 
many of the differences between age groups in AML outcomes are captured in clinical and 
genetic variables and can therefore be learnt from the knowledge bank.
The multistage model offers the advantage of separating long-term outcomes into individual 
constituents – death without complete remission, non-relapse death (mostly treatment-
related) and death after relapse; as well as survival in induction, first remission (CR1) and 
after relapse (Figure 2a–c). As we shall see, understanding which of these constituent 
outcomes is especially likely for a patient considerably enhances therapeutic decision-
making. The added detail does not come at the cost of overfitting, since the combined 
prediction of overall survival in the multistage model yields the same accuracy as predicting 
overall survival directly (Figure 1a).
Personally tailored prognosis
The models for predicting outcome developed here are considerably more complex than 
those currently used in clinical practice. In AML, the current standard is the European 
LeukemiaNet (ELN) genetic scoring system13, which defines four categories of disease risk 
based on 6 fusion genes, 3 point mutated genes and cytogenetic abnormalities. We explored 
how much more informative our more complex prognostic models are than the ELN system.
We find that individual risk in this AML cohort was continuous, with no obvious cut-points 
for stratification, suggesting that grouping patients on the basis of few predictor variables 
discards much prognostic information (Figure 2d). Our more detailed survival estimates 
confirm the broad trends of known ELN risk groups, but a third of patients have survival 
predictions deviating more than 20% from their ELN stratum (Figure 2e).
From the multistage model, we can quantify how much the various classes of predictor 
variables contribute to explaining patient-to-patient variation in each possible endpoint of 
treatment (Figure 2f, Supplementary Tables 1–6). We find that clinical and demographic 
factors, such as patient age, performance status and blood counts, exerted most influence on 
early death rates, including death in remission (mostly due to treatment-related mortality). 
Genomic features, be they copy number changes, fusion genes or driver point mutations, 
most strongly influenced the dynamics of disease remission and relapse.
Gerstung et al.
Page 4
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 These estimates represent the contributions of the various categories of predictors to 
outcomes of treatment at the population level. At the individual level, we can score each 
patient for his or her risk along these dimensions of predictor variables. What emerges is the 
considerable heterogeneity in personal risk profiles across the cohort (Supplementary Figure 
1). The heterogeneity of risk profiles and the variable impact they have on the different 
AML outcomes combine to generate a kaleidoscope of predictions for patients’ journeys 
through therapy (Figure 3). Thus, there are distinct groups of patients for whom we can 
confidently predict long-term survival in first remission, or death after relapse, or death 
without achieving remission, manifesting as swathes of purple, green or pink respectively in 
Figure 3. Reassuringly, these predictions square well with what actually happened to the 
patients (status lines and circles in Figure 3). It is these patients for whom the personally 
tailored predictions have much confidence. There are, however, some patients for whom 
there is genuine uncertainty about outcomes even with the full model. These patients have 
predicted survival curves that deviate little from the population average.
Personally tailored therapeutic decision support
The preceding sections show that a knowledge bank can provide meaningful information 
about a patient’s prognosis. The goal of precision medicine is more ambitious than this, 
however, in seeking to inform the choice of therapy for an individual patient. In AML, a 
major therapeutic dilemma is deciding which patients should be offered allogeneic 
hematopoietic cell transplants (allografts), and whether this should be in first complete 
remission or after relapse12,13. With 20–25% transplant-associated mortality and substantial 
rates of chronic graft-versus-host disease, allografts tend to be reserved for high-risk 
patients. We now explore how a knowledge bank can inform the decision on allograft versus 
chemotherapy in first remission for the individual patient with AML.
Our calculations have shown that using a knowledge bank to model patient outcomes 
reclassifies the risk estimates of a substantial fraction of patients (Figure 2e). A given 
patient’s risk prediction represents an aggregation across multiple facets of the disease. 
Thus, two patients can both have an overall intermediate probability of death but arrive at 
this through different risk contributions: one might be older and more frail but have a 
leukemia with generally favorable genomic features; the other might be young and fit but 
with a leukemia carrying adverse driver mutations. Intuitively, a clinician will favor the more 
intensive allogeneic transplant in the latter, fitter patient while preferring standard 
chemotherapy in the older patient at higher risk of treatment-related mortality.
We illustrate these calculations using two patients from the cohort (Figure 4; other 
representative patients illustrated in Supplementary Figure 2). The first was a 29-year 
woman with t(8;21) and no other driver mutations: favorable risk by ELN criteria13. Under a 
strategy of chemotherapy in CR1 with salvage allograft after relapse, we predict her chance 
of 3-year survival to be 86% (CI95%: 78–91%) (Figure 4a). In contrast, with allograft in 
CR1, we estimate her overall cure rate to be 88% (79–93%) (Figure 4b), with the decrease in 
probability of relapse matched by the increase in non-relapse mortality with transplant. 
Hence there is no indication for an up-front allograft for this patient, with only 2 percentage 
points difference in predicted survival (CI95%: −3 to 7). For this patient, the treatment 
Gerstung et al.
Page 5
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 recommendation under current clinical standards13 is unchanged under a knowledge bank 
approach.
The second patient was a 49-year old male with mutations in NPM1, DNMT3A, IDH1 and 
normal karyotype. Under ELN criteria, his risk also classifies as favorable, and he would not 
currently be recommended for allograft in first CR. With standard chemotherapy as first-line 
therapy, we estimate his 3-year survival probability at 55% (41–67%), compared to 68% 
(55–77%) for allograft in CR1 (Figure 4c–d). Thus, his disease is not especially favorable 
risk when all predictive information is considered. Furthermore, the absolute risk reduction 
associated with an up-front allograft is estimated at 13 percentage points (3–24%). This is 
equivalent to curing 1 additional patient for every 7 (4–26) treated with allograft instead of 
standard chemotherapy in first remission.
Treatment choices from knowledge banks versus current practice
The cases shown in Figure 4 illustrate that some, but not all, patients would have had their 
treatments changed using a knowledge bank compared to current recommendations. It is 
therefore natural to assess how many patients would have had their treatment altered under 
such an approach, and whether the predictions accurately reflect what actually happened to 
the patients.
On average, we find that patients who are predicted to have poor prognosis, more than 60–
70% chance of mortality at 3 years, are most likely to benefit from allogeneic transplantation 
in first remission (Figure 5a), a finding captured in current clinical recommendations. 
However, there is considerable spread of patient estimates around the population average. 
This variance around the average is critically important for precision medicine because it 
suggests that population-based criteria for treatment choices only poorly capture the 
predictive information available for the individual patient.
Overall, we estimate that 12% (124/995) of patients in CR1 aged 18–60 years would gain 
more than 10 percentage points improvement in survival at 3 years with an allograft in CR1 
compared to standard chemotherapy (number needed to treat <10; Figure 5b). Only 29 of 
these 124 patients are identified as adverse risk by current criteria, with most being 
intermediate and some even favorable risk. Furthermore, 57% (302/534) patients classified 
as adverse or intermediate risk by ELN criteria, and therefore strongly considered for 
allograft in CR1 under current clinical recommendations13, are predicted to derive <5 
percentage points improvement in survival from up-front allografts. Similarly, 15% (58/386) 
ELN favorable patients are predicted to benefit >5% from a bone marrow transplant in CR1. 
Clearly, then, a knowledge bank approach might change management in up to 1/3 of patients 
compared to current practice recommendations.
We next compared the therapeutic predictions made by our model with what actually 
happened to the patients under the two different treatment strategies (Figure 5c; 
Supplementary Figure 3). We split the cohort into two groups depending on whether they 
were predicted to derive more or less than 10 percentage points improvement in survival 
with allograft in CR1 compared to chemotherapy in CR1, allograft after relapse. If our 
model were correctly identifying those patients most likely to benefit from transplant, then 
Gerstung et al.
Page 6
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the survival curves in this group should show distinctly better outcomes for allograft in first 
remission than for chemotherapy. This is indeed what we observe (blue lines, Figure 5c). For 
the patients our model predicts minimal or no benefit from an up-front transplant strategy, 
we do indeed find that there was little meaningful difference in the survival curves between 
those receiving transplant and those receiving chemotherapy in first remission (grey lines, 
Figure 5c).
Taken together, then, these data demonstrate that up to a third of patients would have their 
treatment altered using a knowledge bank approach compared to current practice 
recommendations13. Furthermore, predictions made from the knowledge bank match well 
with the actual outcomes observed under the two different treatment philosophies, 
confirming the accuracy of the decision support.
Population impact of a knowledge bank approach
Knowledge banks would be costly to build and maintain, and it is therefore important to 
evaluate whether the overall impact of improved treatment choices at the population level 
would justify this outlay. The impact in AML could be expressed as either the improvement 
in expected survival for a fixed number of allografts in CR1 or the reduction in the number 
of allografts in CR1 needed to achieve the same overall survival (Figure 5d). In USA, ~30% 
of patients with AML receive an allograft18. If the 30% to receive an allograft in CR1 were 
chosen using an optimal knowledge bank rather than current recommendations, we estimate 
survival rates across the cohort would increase ~1.3 percentage points (60% to 61.3%).
Alternatively, personally tailored management decisions could reduce the number of 
hematopoietic cell transplants in AML by 20–25%, while maintaining overall survival rates. 
Under current practice, 44% young adult patients would receive a transplant, broken down 
as 30% in CR1 plus 14% post-relapse. In contrast, using a knowledge bank approach to 
choose when and whom to transplant, 35% patients overall would receive an allograft, as 
16% in CR1 plus 19% post-relapse, achieving the same overall survival rate of 60%. Similar 
overall gains from a knowledge bank approach were found across a range of assumptions for 
risks and benefits of transplant (Supplementary Figure 4).
We can express the impact of a knowledge bank at the population level in terms of quality-
adjusted life years (QALYs). Health utilities for AML survival with and without stem cell 
transplants have previously been estimated as 0.74 and 0.83, respectively19, and the cost of 
an allograft as US$100,000–200,00020. Thus an increase of 1.3 percentage points in long-
term survival while maintaining a 30% allograft rate in CR1 corresponds to ~0.1 QALYs 
gained per patient over ten years. Alternatively, reducing the number of allografts by better 
resource allocation, while maintaining overall survival rates, would gain ~0.05 QALYs per 
patient over ten years as well as saving approximately US$10,000 per patient.
Portals for exploring decision support predictions
The preceding sections demonstrate that the complex and multifactorial inter-relationships 
among genomic variables, clinical predictors and cancer outcomes can be learnt with a 
sufficiently comprehensive knowledge bank. Since the underlying survival models are 
Gerstung et al.
Page 7
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 complex, diagnostic laboratories may need to provide personalized portals into a given 
patient’s cancer genome.
Our dataset is not appropriate for direct clinical use, as the algorithm has not yet been 
prospectively validated and sequencing was performed using a research pipeline. 
Nonetheless, as a research tool, we have created a prototype portal within our website21 (see 
URLs section below) that allows outcome predictions to be generated based on this dataset 
for user-defined constellations of genomic features, clinical variables and treatment 
strategies (Supplementary Figure 5). The underlying algorithm is capable of imputing 
missing variables and computes confidence intervals for each prediction.
The knowledge bank
We explored how both the breadth of genomic profiling and the sample size of the 
knowledge bank impact on the accuracy of outcome predictions for individual patients. The 
explained risk grows linearly with the average number of driver mutations present in each 
patient (Supplementary Figure 6a), a relationship underpinned by theoretical arguments 
(Supplementary Note S5.3.2). Some genes, by virtue of their frequency and/or the 
magnitude of their prognostic effect, are more informative than others. We have ranked 
AML genes by their predictive utility (Supplementary Figure 6b) to address the question of 
how much improvement in prognostic information comes from increasing the number of 
genes interrogated. The effects of missing mutation data on confidence intervals of patient 
prediction can be explored in the web portal.
The other critical factor to accurate risk profiling is the sample size of the knowledge bank. 
Using subsampling analyses and simulations from the AML data, we found that prognostic 
accuracy steadily increases with larger sample sizes, albeit following a law of diminishing 
returns (Figure 6a). As a rule of thumb, to detect a moderate-sized prognostic effect of a 
given cancer gene, say an increase of 50% in relative risk, the knowledge bank needs ~50–
100 patients with that mutation (Figure 6b; Supplementary Figure 7a). Thus, for a gene 
mutated in 10% of patients, a training set of 500–1000 patients would suffice, but for a 1% 
gene, a cohort of 5,000–10,000 would be needed. These simulations match theoretical 
expectations22,23 (Supplementary Note S5.4.2; Supplementary Figure 7b).
The standard error of individual survival predictions 3 years after CR is about 6%. When 
using predictions for supporting therapeutic decisions about a specific patient, this 
uncertainty limits the ability to confidently discriminate small differences in survival. With 
1,000 cases, we could achieve an average absolute prediction error for an individual patient 
of approximately 5 percentage points, which could be brought down to 2 percentage points 
with 10,000 cases (Figure 6c).
DISCUSSION
Here, we have evaluated the promise of precision medicine, building statistical models that 
can generate personally tailored clinical decision support from all available prognostic 
information in a knowledge bank. From a database of 1540 patients, we can make 
considerably more informative and more accurate statements about an individual’s likely 
Gerstung et al.
Page 8
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 journey through AML therapy than the current standards in clinical practice. Our approach 
enables us to compare the likelihood of favorable outcomes under different treatment 
scenarios, providing information that can support genuinely personalized decision-making.
While we have focused on AML in this analysis, we believe that the same logic applies to 
knowledge banks from other cancer types, which will be generated as genomics enters 
healthcare and healthcare becomes digitized. Most cancer types are lethal, and most 
currently available treatment options are either invasive or toxic, burdening the patient with 
severe side-effects. Therefore a quantitative risk assessment is important in any cancer type 
in order to reserve the most aggressive treatments for the patients at the highest risk of dying 
from the disease. All cancers are caused by genetic changes, with considerable heterogeneity 
among patients, and it is therefore likely that these genetic differences also correlate with 
differences in outcome, although the details of the logic and strength of association may vary 
among cancer types. Once knowledge banks are established and ideally populated with 
information about different treatment options, whether these be chemotherapy, targeted 
inhibitors or immunotherapies, one can apply the logic outlined here to assess the benefit of 
these treatments, contrasted with the patient’s baseline risk.
Building and maintaining clinical-genomic knowledge banks is a formidable challenge, 
especially for solid tumors where the genome can be considerably more complex than AML. 
Initially, knowledge banks could be seeded from clinical trials cohorts, as we did here, since 
these will have high quality clinical data and state-of-the-art therapies. Our power 
calculations suggest, however, that most clinical trials would not be powered to detect gene-
drug interactions involving genes mutated in <20% patients. Additionally, knowledge banks 
will need to include patients who are representative of the wider cancer population to enable 
meaningful extrapolation to real-world clinical practice. This suggests that building systems 
to incorporate data from patients undergoing routine clinical care into the knowledge bank 
will be important.
Whether the returns justify this investment will be contentious. Here, we have illustrated that 
a reallocation of allografts could increase survival by 1.3 percentage points. We should not 
be surprised at how modest the gain is – for the bulk of patients, we predict only small 
improvements in survival with early allografts (Figure 5b). What may be more important is 
the more accurate use of a precious resource, since we can potentially reduce the number of 
allografts performed in AML by 20–25% while maintaining the same overall survival as for 
current treatment recommendations. Hence a knowledge bank would not only increase the 
quality of life by reducing morbidity from chronic graft-versus-host disease; at US
$100,000–200,000 per allograft20, the potential monetary savings would far outstrip the 
costs of the genomic screens. Moreover, the utility of a knowledge bank likely goes beyond 
this, informing potential drug targets, identifying patients not benefitting from current 
treatments and providing insights into the relationships between genetic and clinical 
features.
There is a tension between maintaining the precepts of evidence-based medicine while 
sharpening the focus on the individual with precision medicine24. Here, we have 
demonstrated how knowledge banks can resolve this tension, using the evidence base of 
Gerstung et al.
Page 9
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 thousands of patients to inform outcomes for the individual. The therapeutic choice we 
exemplified is binary: transplant versus chemotherapy in AML. The success of FLT3 
inhibitors25 potentially squares the number of available treatment options, and other novel 
agents will add further complexity. Knowledge banks could be a useful tool for clinicians 
navigating this complexity, but must remain evergreen as the therapeutic armamentarium 
expands and as our molecular understanding of cancer deepens. The logistic and regulatory 
hurdles, the scale needed and the costs of such an undertaking are daunting but not 
insurmountable.
ONLINE METHODS
Patient cohort
Here we reanalyze data first reported and described in detail in Ref.10. Briefly, we performed 
targeted gene sequencing of 111 myeloid cancer genes11,26–28 on DNA from leukemic cells 
in a cohort of 1,540 adults with AML who were treated with intensive therapies in three 
clinical trials run by the German-Austrian AML Study Group29–31. In AML-HD98A, 
patients aged 18–61 years received induction chemotherapy with idarubicin, cytarabine and 
etoposide (ICE), followed by allogeneic transplants for intermediate-risk patients with 
matched related donor and high-risk patients; intensive consolidation chemotherapy for the 
remainder. Treatments were similar in AMLSG-07-04 but included randomization for all-
trans retinoic acid therapy (ATRA) or not in induction. In AML-HD98B, patients ≥61 years 
received ICE±ATRA, with further therapy dictated by response. Median follow-up was 5.94 
years. All patients gave written informed consent for enrolment in the multicentre trials, 
which were approved by the local research ethics committees in participating sites 
(ClinicalTrials.gov number: NCT00146120).
Statistical Methods
We explored a range of statistical methods to build models of overall survival32,33, including 
random survival forest regression; stepwise Cox proportional hazards model selection with 
either AIC or BIC penalty; complementary pairs stability selection based on LASSO 
penalized Cox proportional hazards models; random effects models with Gaussian random 
effects/ridge penalties; and random effects multistage models (Supplementary Methods S2–
4). We found little prognostic significance to whether mutations were subclonal or clonal 
(Figure S8), and therefore do not consider this information in the multivariate models. All 
predictions shown are based on a leave-one-out basis; it is therefore informative to compare 
each prediction with the observed outcome in a given patient. All predictions for individual 
patients reported here were made using models excluding that patient.
For estimating the population-level impact of the knowledge bank approach, we divide 
patients into two groups based on whether they are expected to derive more or less than 10 
percentage points improvement in survival with allograft in CR1 compared to chemotherapy 
in CR1, allograft at relapse. In each group, the observed outcomes are then determined 
separately for those who actually received an allograft in CR1 and those who proceeded with 
standard chemotherapy in CR1. In the ideal knowledge bank, the treatments used would be 
randomized, since this ensures they are not confounded with the predictor variables we use. 
Gerstung et al.
Page 10
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Here, 711/1540 (46%) patients received an allograft, with the decision to perform a 
transplant in intermediate-risk patients based on whether a matched related donor was 
available31. This introduces a quasi-randomization, since HLA-matching between siblings 
derives from Mendelian assortment of parental alleles, but this cannot substitute for 
prospective validation of the decision support tools we develop.
All predictions for individual patients reported here were made using models excluding that 
patient. To maximize reproducibility, details of statistical methods and all analysis code used 
are provided in Supplementary Methods and as a git repository online.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank Chris Holmes for stimulating discussions. This work was supported by grants from the Wellcome Trust 
(077012/Z/05/Z), the Bloodwise charity and the Leukemia-Lymphoma Society. PJC has a Wellcome Trust Senior 
Clinical Research Fellowship (WT088340MA). EP is supported by an EHA early career fellowship. Supported in 
part by grants 01GI9981 and 01KG0605 from the German Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung (BMBF), 
grant 109675 from the Deutsche Krebshilfe, and by project B3 and B4, Sonderforschungsbereich (SFB) 1074 
funded the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft; HD is coordinating investigator of SFB 1074; LB is a Heisenberg 
Professor of the DFG (BU 1339/3-1). We gratefully acknowledge Daniela Weber for clinical data managing, 
Veronica Teleanu for assistance in cytogenetics data classification, and Dr. Sabine Kayser for assistance in 
morphologic evaluation. We are grateful to all members of the German-Austrian AML Study Group (AMLSG) for 
their participation in this study and providing patient samples; a list of participating institutions and investigators 
appears in the Appendix to the companion paper. AMLSG treatment trials were in part supported by Amgen and 
DKH Grant: 109675.
References
1. Van Allen EM, et al. Whole-exome sequencing and clinical interpretation of formalin-fixed, 
paraffin-embedded tumor samples to guide precision cancer medicine. Nat. Med. 2014; 20:682–8. 
[PubMed: 24836576] 
2. Mardis ER. Genome sequencing and cancer. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 2012; 22:245–50. [PubMed: 
22534183] 
3. Garraway LA, Lander ES. Lessons from the cancer genome. Cell. 2013; 153:17–37. [PubMed: 
23540688] 
4. McDermott U, Downing JR, Stratton MR. Genomics and the continuum of cancer care. N Engl J 
Med. 2011; 364:340–350. [PubMed: 21268726] 
5. Papaemmanuil E, et al. Clinical and biological implications of driver mutations in myelodysplastic 
syndromes. Blood. 2013; 122:3616–3627. [PubMed: 24030381] 
6. The Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network. Comprehensive molecular portraits of human breast 
tumours. Nature. 2012; 490:61–70. [PubMed: 23000897] 
7. Imielinski M, et al. Mapping the hallmarks of lung adenocarcinoma with massively parallel 
sequencing. Cell. 2012; 150:1107–1120. [PubMed: 22980975] 
8. Manolio TA, et al. Global implementation of genomic medicine : We are not alone. Sci. Transl. 
Med. 2015; 7:1–8.
9. Collins FS, Varmus H. A New Initiative on Precision Medicine. N Engl J Med. 2015; 372:793–795. 
[PubMed: 25635347] 
10. Papaemmanuil E, et al. Genomic Classification and Prognosis in Acute Myeloid Leukemia. N. 
Engl. J. Med. 2016; 374:2209–2221. [PubMed: 27276561] 
11. The Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network. Genomic and epigenomic landscapes of adult de 
novo acute myeloid leukemia. N Engl J Med. 2013; 368:2059–2074. [PubMed: 23634996] 
Gerstung et al.
Page 11
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 12. Gale RP, Wiernik PH, Lazarus HM. Should persons with acute myeloid leukemia have a transplant 
in first remission? Leukemia. 2014; 28:1949–52. [PubMed: 24727674] 
13. Döhner H, et al. Diagnosis and management of acute myeloid leukemia in adults: 
recommendations from an international expert panel, on behalf of the European LeukemiaNet. 
Blood. 2010; 115:453–74. [PubMed: 19880497] 
14. Koreth J, et al. Allogeneic stem cell transplantation for acute myeloid leukemia in first complete 
remission: systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective clinical trials. JAMA. 2009; 
301:2349–61. [PubMed: 19509382] 
15. Flowers MED, Martin PJ. How I treat chronic graft-versus-host disease. Blood. 2015; 125:606–
615. [PubMed: 25398933] 
16. Burnett AK, et al. Curability of patients with acute myeloid leukemia who did not undergo 
transplantation in first remission. J. Clin. Oncol. 2013; 31:1293–301. [PubMed: 23439754] 
17. Schlenk RF, et al. The value of allogeneic and autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation 
in prognostically favorable acute myeloid leukemia with double mutant CEBPA. Blood. 2013; 
122:1576–82. [PubMed: 23863898] 
18. Doria-Rose VP, Harlan LC, Stevens J, Little RF. Treatment of de novo acute myeloid leukemia in 
the United States: a report from the Patterns of Care program. Leuk. Lymphoma. 2014; 55:2549–
2555. [PubMed: 24467221] 
19. Cressman S, et al. Economic impact of genomic diagnostics for intermediate-risk acute myeloid 
leukaemia. Br. J. Haematol. 2016; 174:526–35. [PubMed: 27098559] 
20. Khera N, Zeliadt SB, Lee SJ. Economics of hematopoietic cell transplantation. Blood. 2012; 
120:1545–1551. [PubMed: 22700725] 
21. Forbes SA, et al. COSMIC: exploring the world’s knowledge of somatic mutations in human 
cancer. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014; 43:D805–11. [PubMed: 25355519] 
22. Schoenfeld DA. Sample-size formula for the proportional-hazards regression model. Biometrics. 
1983; 39:499–503. [PubMed: 6354290] 
23. Schmoor C, Sauerbrei W, Schumacher M. Sample size considerations for the evaluation of 
prognostic factors in survival analysis. Stat. Med. 2000; 19:441–52. [PubMed: 10694729] 
24. Jameson JL, Longo DL. Precision medicine--personalized, problematic, and promising. N. Engl. J. 
Med. 2015; 372:2229–34. [PubMed: 26014593] 
25. Stone RM, et al. The Multi-Kinase Inhibitor Midostaurin (M) Prolongs Survival Compared with 
Placebo (P) in Combination with Daunorubicin (D)/Cytarabine (C) Induction (ind), High-Dose C 
Consolidation (consol), and As Maintenance (maint) Therapy in Newly Diagnosed Acute Mye. 
Am. Soc. Hematol. Annu. Meet. 2015:A6.
26. Ley TJ, et al. DNMT3A mutations in acute myeloid leukemia. N Engl J Med. 2010; 363:2424–
2433. [PubMed: 21067377] 
27. Welch JS, et al. The origin and evolution of mutations in acute myeloid leukemia. Cell. 2012; 
150:264–278. [PubMed: 22817890] 
28. Delhommeau F, et al. Mutation in TET2 in myeloid cancers. N Engl J Med. 2009; 360:2289–2301. 
[PubMed: 19474426] 
29. Schlenk RF, et al. All-trans retinoic acid improves outcome in younger adult patients with 
nucleophosmin-1 mutated acute myeloid leukemia – results of the AMLSG 07-04 randomized 
treatment trial [abstract]. Blood. 2011; 118 Abstract 80. 
30. Schlenk RF, et al. Phase III study of all-trans retinoic acid in previously untreated patients 61 years 
or older with acute myeloid leukemia. Leukemia. 2004; 18:1798–803. [PubMed: 15385923] 
31. Schlenk RF, et al. Prospective evaluation of allogeneic hematopoietic stem-cell transplantation 
from matched related and matched unrelated donors in younger adults with high-risk acute 
myeloid leukemia: German-Austrian trial AMLHD98A. J. Clin. Oncol. 2010; 28:4642–4648. 
[PubMed: 20805454] 
32. Therneau TM, Grambsch PM, Pankratz VS. Penalized Survival Models and Frailty. J. Comput. 
Graph. Stat. 2003; 12:156–175.
33. Shah RD, Samworth RJ. Variable selection with error control: Another look at stability selection. J. 
R. Stat. Soc. Ser. B Stat. Methodol. 2013; 75:55–80.
Gerstung et al.
Page 12
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Systematic model comparison
a. Top panel: Concordance C of different model predictions for overall survival. For cross-
validation analyses (grey), we generated 100 training and test sets by randomly splitting the 
full dataset. The distribution of concordance values across the 100 random sets is shown as a 
box-and-whisker plot. Also shown are point estimates with error bars for predictions 
evaluated on pre-specified splits of the dataset, where the training set represented 2 of the 3 
trials in the study and the test set was the third trial (red, blue, green) or where the training 
set was the full AMLSG dataset with the test set being the TCGA cohort (purple). 
Predictions for the multistage model are evaluated 3yrs after diagnosis.
Lower panel: Using the 100 random cross-validation splits, each of the 10 classes of 
predictive model was built on the training set and evaluated on the test set. The 10 models 
were ranked based on their relative performance on the test set and the ranks across the 100 
cross-validation splits aggregated, indicating how often each model scored best (1st) to worst 
(10th). Time-dependent models include allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplants, 
which is treated as a time-dependent covariate to avoid bias.
b. Coefficient of determination R2 for leave-one-out predictions using time-dependent 
random effects and multistage predictions of the AMLSG cohort, evaluated at each time (x-
axis).
c. Same as b, evaluated on TCGA data.
Gerstung et al.
Page 13
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Multistage modeling of patient fate
a. Multistage model of patient trajectories. The six colored boxes indicate different stages 
during treatment, with five possible transitions indicated by solid arrows. Numbers in each 
box indicate the total number of patients that have entered a given stage in during follow-up.
b. Sediment plot showing the fraction of patients in a given stage at a given time after 
diagnosis. The thick black line denotes overall survival, which is the sum of the deaths 
without complete remission (red), non-relapse mortality (blue) and mortality after relapse 
(green).
Gerstung et al.
Page 14
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 c. Schematic overview of multistage regression. The model estimates the log-additive effect 
of each of 231 prognostic variables on the transition rates for all 5 possible time-dependent 
transitions shown in (a). Rate changes are modelled by Cox proportional hazards models 
with random effects.
d. Concordance, C, indicates the survival times at 3 years after diagnosis were correctly 
ranked by the model. Similarly, at three years after diagnosis only 28% of patients were 
incorrectly predicted to be alive or dead.
e. Mosaic plot of predicted 3-year survival across ELN categories. The height of each bar 
denotes the fraction of patients in each quarter of survival for each ELN group, and the 
width of each bar is proportional to the percentage of patients in each ELN group.
f. Relative importance of risk factors for different transitions. The concordance C, is shown 
as percentages across the top of the bar chart.
Gerstung et al.
Page 15
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Multistage outcome predictions for 1024 patients
Cross-validated risk predictions and observed statuses for 1024 patients, arranged along a 
Hilbert curve. This has the property that patients with similar AML subtype and risk 
constellation are grouped together in the 2-dimensional space (compare Supplementary 
Figure 1 for constellations of risk factors). For each individual patient, the survival curves 
predicted by the multistage model are shown, with the competing outcomes colored as in the 
legend and Figure 2b. What actually happened to the patient is shown as a line across the 
base of the graph, with a filled circle indicating the patient died, its color indicating the 
mode of death. Note that there are many patients for whom one color dominates the 
Gerstung et al.
Page 16
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 diagram, indicating that the probability that a particular event occurs is very high. 
Reassuringly, for such patients the observed outcomes are highly concordant with the cross-
validated predictions and occur at frequencies matching the predicted probabilities.
Gerstung et al.
Page 17
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Individualized risk exemplified for 2 patients
a. Sediment plot showing predicted multistage probability after remission for patient 
PD11104a under a management strategy of standard chemotherapy in CR1 with intended 
allograft after relapse. Predictions shown are based on models where the given patients were 
excluded for training; the bar at the bottom denotes the observed outcome (as for Figure 3). 
The patient was alive at the last follow-up 3.5 years after achieving first complete remission. 
Numbers at the bottom indicate the probabilities of non-relapse death (NRD), post-relapse 
death (PRD) and being alive after relapse (AAR) at years 1 to 5 from achieving complete 
remission.
b. Multistage probability for PD11104a in the scenario of an allograft in first complete 
remission.
c. Same as a for patient PD8314a. The patient relapsed after 1.2 years and died soon after.
Gerstung et al.
Page 18
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 d. Same as b for patient PD8314a.
Details of these calculations are presented in Supplementary Note, section 3.5.5.8; additional 
patients shown in Supplementary Figure S2.
Gerstung et al.
Page 19
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Benefit of allograft in CR1 vs after relapse
a. Predicted three-year absolute mortality reduction by allografts in CR1 over standard 
chemotherapy in CR1 and allograft after relapse (y-axis). Calculations are based on patients 
<60yr in CR1 (n=995), who would be eligible for allogeneic transplants. The black curve 
represents the population average, with 95% confidence intervals in grey. Points denote 
individual patients in the cohort, colored by ELN risk category.
b. Mosaic plot of absolute survival benefit at 3 years by an allograft in CR1 over standard 
chemotherapy after CR1 versus ELN risk category. The predicted benefit was discretized 
into four groups, indicated by colors, with intervals of 5%.
c. Kaplan-Meier curves for patients with high (>10%, blue) and low (<10%, grey) predicted 
benefit of early allograft (cross-validated), each with and without allograft in CR1. Patients 
with favorable ELN risk were excluded.
d. Predicted overall survival at 3yrs as a function of total number of allografts (in CR1 + 
after relapse). Patients are first ranked from those most likely to benefit from transplant to 
those least likely to benefit, as judged by current guidelines (solid blue line) or our current 
knowledge bank (solid red line). The curves show expected survival if allografts in CR1 
increased from 0% to 100%, starting with the patient with the greatest and ending with the 
lowest predicted benefit. The x-axis starts at ~0.25, since about half of patients will relapse 
Gerstung et al.
Page 20
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 without an allograft in CR1, with a further half managing to undergo post-relapse 
transplantation.
Gerstung et al.
Page 21
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Extrapolations and power calculations
a. Subsampling the number of patients reveals a steady, but saturating increase in prognostic 
concordance C for a random effects model for overall survival. Error bars show the 95% 
confidence intervals for the concordance obtained from multiple independent subsamples of 
the dataset.
b. Graph relating the effect size (hazard ratio) of a prognostic variable to the absolute 
number of patients with the given factor required to reach significance in a random effects 
model for overall survival (solid line: P < 0.05; dotted P < 0.001).
c. Average prediction error between simulated and estimated survival a random effects 
model for overall survival as a function of survival time (x-axis) and training cohort size (y-
axis).
Gerstung et al.
Page 22
Nat Genet. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 March 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
