 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / May 5, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 17 
457
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Addressing a Yellow Fever Vaccine Shortage — United States, 2016–2017
Mark D. Gershman, MD1; Kristina M. Angelo, DO1; Julian Ritchey, MBA2; David P
. Greenberg, MD2; Riyadh D. Muhammad, MD2; 
Gary Brunette, MD1; Martin S. Cetron, MD1; Mark J. Sotir, PhD1
On April 28, 2017, this report was posted as an MMWR Early 
Release on the MMWR website (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr). 
Recent manufacturing problems resulted in a shortage of 
the only U.S.-licensed yellow fever vaccine. This shortage 
is expected to lead to a complete depletion of yellow fever 
vaccine available for the immunization of U.S. travelers by 
mid-2017. CDC, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 
and Sanofi Pasteur are collaborating to ensure a continuous 
yellow fever vaccine supply in the United States. As part of 
this collaboration, Sanofi Pasteur submitted an expanded 
access investigational new drug (eIND) application to FDA 
in September 2016 to allow for the importation and use of an 
alternative yellow fever vaccine manufactured by Sanofi Pasteur 
France, with safety and efficacy comparable to the U.S.-licensed 
vaccine; the eIND was accepted by FDA in October 2016. The 
implementation of this eIND protocol included developing a 
systematic process for selecting a limited number of clinic sites 
to provide the vaccine. CDC and Sanofi Pasteur will continue 
to communicate with the public and other stakeholders, and 
CDC will provide a list of locations that will be administering 
the replacement vaccine at a later date.
Yellow fever is an acute viral disease caused by infection 
with the yellow fever virus, a flavivirus primarily transmit-
ted to humans through the bite of an infected mosquito and 
endemic to sub-Saharan Africa and tropical South America 
(1). Most infected persons are asymptomatic (1). However, 
the case-fatality ratio is 20%–50% among the approximately 
15% of infected persons who develop severe disease (2). In 
recent years, multiple yellow fever outbreaks in Angola, the 
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and, most recently, Brazil, 
have underscored the ongoing and substantial global burden 
of this disease (3–5).
Yellow fever disease can be prevented by a live-attenuated 
virus vaccine that produces neutralizing antibodies in 80%–
100% of vaccinees by 10 days after vaccination (2). For most 
travelers, only one lifetime dose is necessary (1). Vaccination 
is recommended for international travelers visiting areas with 
endemic or epidemic yellow fever virus transmission. In addition, 
proof-of-vaccination is required for entry into certain countries 
as permitted by the International Health Regulations 2015 (1,6). 
To provide proof of vaccination, practitioners at yellow fever 
vaccination clinics must validate a traveler’s vaccine record using 
a proof-of-vaccination stamp. CDC has regulatory authority 
over the designation of U.S. yellow fever vaccination clinics. 
For nonfederal yellow fever vaccination clinics, this authority to 
designate is generally delegated and overseen through a collabora-
tion between CDC and state and territorial health departments. 
CDC maintains the online U.S. Yellow Fever Vaccination Center 
Registry of these designated clinics.
In 2015, approximately eight million U.S. residents traveled 
to 42 countries with endemic yellow fever virus transmis-
sion (1) (Data In, Intelligence Out [https://www.diio.net], 
unpublished data, 2016). Yellow fever virus can be exported by 
unimmunized travelers returning to countries where the virus 
is not endemic. Reports of yellow fever in at least 10 unim-
munized returning U.S. and European travelers were recorded 
during 1970–2013 (1). Most recently, yellow fever virus was 
exported from Angola during the 2016 outbreak to three 
countries, with resulting local transmission in the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo (4). The Angola outbreak caused 965 
confirmed cases from 2015 to 2017 (4). The ongoing outbreak 
in Brazil has resulted in 681 confirmed yellow fever cases from 
December 2016 through April 25, 2017 (7).
In the United States, only one yellow fever vaccine is licensed 
for use (YF-VAX; Sanofi Pasteur, Swiftwater, PA, 2017); 
approximately 500,000 doses are distributed annually to vac-
cinate military and civilian travelers. Approximately two thirds 
of these doses are distributed among approximately 4,000 
civilian clinical sites (Sanofi Pasteur, unpublished data, 2017).
The current YF-VAX supply depletion began in 
November 2015 (8). Sanofi Pasteur was transitioning 
YF-VAX production from an older to a newer facility set to 
open in 2018, but a manufacturing complication resulted in 
the loss of a large number of doses. In response, Sanofi Pasteur 
instituted YF-VAX ordering restrictions to extend the existing 
supply while assessing options. In spring 2016, Sanofi Pasteur 
notified CDC of a probable complete depletion of YF-VAX later 
in the year. Sanofi Pasteur succeeded in producing additional 
doses of YF-VAX in late 2016; this additional supply has delayed 
the anticipated complete depletion until mid-2017 but remains 
insufficient to cover anticipated demand during the interval 
between permanent closure of the old facility and the 2018 
opening of the new YF-VAX vaccine manufacturing facility.
Concerns about maintaining a continuous U.S. yellow fever 
vaccine supply, in conjunction with the large yellow fever out-
break that began in Angola, led to discussions among CDC, 
Sanofi Pasteur, FDA, and the U.S. Department of Defense in 
spring 2016. Although fractional yellow fever vaccine dosing 
Please note: An erratum has been published for this issue. To view the erratum, please click here.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
458 
MMWR / May 5, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 17
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
was discussed, it was deemed a nonviable option based on 
limited efficacy data. Sanofi Pasteur submitted an eIND 
application for U.S. importation and civilian use of Stamaril, 
a yellow fever vaccine manufactured by Sanofi Pasteur France 
that is not licensed in the United States; the Department of 
Defense submitted its own eIND application. Stamaril uses 
the same vaccine substrain 17D-204 as YF-VAX, and has 
comparable safety and efficacy (9). Stamaril has been licensed 
and distributed in approximately 70 countries worldwide since 
1986. Sanofi Pasteur France manufactures both multidose vials 
for use in global yellow fever outbreak responses and single-
dose vials reserved for vaccination of international travelers 
living outside the United States. Sanofi Pasteur projects that 
importing Stamaril single-dose vials into the United States 
under the eIND application will not substantially affect the 
Stamaril supply intended for global use.
FDA accepted Sanofi Pasteur’s eIND application in 
October 2016. Implementation of the eIND protocol included 
a systematic process to select sites where Stamaril will be dis-
tributed; this process was important to manage the logistics 
involved in outreach and training of providers regarding adher-
ence to the eIND protocol and FDA guidance. Sanofi Pasteur, 
in consultation with CDC, developed a two-tiered scheme for 
the selection of U.S. clinic sites to be invited to participate in 
the eIND protocol (Table). The primary goal was to recruit 
large-volume sites with adequate geographic range. Tier 1 sites 
were those that ordered at least 250 doses of yellow fever vaccine 
in 2016. Additional, smaller-volume sites were added to this 
tier to ensure access to Stamaril in all 50 states, the District of 
Columbia, and the three U.S. territories (Guam, Puerto Rico, 
and the U.S. Virgin Islands) with yellow fever vaccination cen-
ters. Sites were also added to guarantee vaccine access for civilian 
U.S. government employees needing yellow fever vaccination 
for official work-related travel, including critical public health 
response work. Tier 2 sites included multisite clinical organiza-
tions in which the aggregate number of doses ordered from their 
affiliated sites met the threshold of at least 250 doses in 2016. 
In these cases, the organization was invited to select one of its 
clinic sites to participate as a tier 2 site in implementing the 
Stamaril protocol. As of April 2017, approximately 250 clinics 
were targeted for inclusion. This is a sizable reduction from the 
estimated 4,000 civilian clinics currently providing YF-VAX.
The eIND protocol rollout began in April 2017. Sanofi 
Pasteur and CDC are collaborating to develop an effective 
communication plan. Sanofi Pasteur is recruiting and com-
municating with selected sites and will train personnel at 
participating sites by webinar in April and May 2017.
TABLE. Systematic tiered distribution plan for Stamaril yellow fever 
vaccine — United States, 2016
Tier
Characteristic
No. of 
proposed sites
1
Individual sites that ordered at least 250 doses in 2016
193
Smaller sites to ensure coverage of all 50 states, DC, and 
U.S. territories
Sites that serve non-military U.S. government employees
2
Sites that are part of a multisite clinical organization 
whose aggregate number of orders was at least 250 
doses in 2016
59
Total
252
Abbreviation: DC = District of Columbia.
Discussion
CDC and Sanofi Pasteur have worked to assure a continu-
ous yellow fever vaccine supply in the United States after the 
anticipated complete depletion of YF-VAX in mid-2017. As 
the eIND protocol rollout begins in April, Sanofi Pasteur will 
coordinate site recruitment and training, and CDC will help 
to resolve any problems that arise. Although the systematic 
site selection process for the distribution of Stamaril took 
into account site volume (giving preference to larger sites) and 
adequate geographic reach, accessibility difficulties for some 
international travelers might occur, because of the decrease 
in the number of clinics nationwide that provide yellow fever 
vaccination from 4,000 to 250. CDC and Sanofi Pasteur will 
monitor for critical gaps in vaccine access and collaborate to 
address any issues, including considering the possibility of 
recruiting additional clinics to participate as necessary.
CDC will notify state and territorial health department immu-
nization programs about the Stamaril protocol. Information 
about which clinics will be eligible to receive Stamaril will be 
available to the public and other stakeholders, and discussed with 
the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices. CDC and 
Sanofi Pasteur continue to monitor the domestic yellow fever 
vaccine supply and will provide updates to health care providers 
and the public as new information becomes available.
Updates regarding yellow fever vaccine and the anticipated 
complete depletion of vaccine stock will be available on CDC’s 
Travelers’ Health website at https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/ and 
Sanofi Pasteur’s website at http://www.sanofipasteur.us/vaccines/
yellowfevervaccine. Once available, CDC will provide a complete 
list of clinics where travelers can receive Stamaril at https://wwwnc.
cdc.gov/travel/yellow-fever-vaccination-clinics/search.
Acknowledgments
J. Erin Staples, Division of Vector-Borne Diseases, CDC, Fort 
Collins, Colorado; Pamela Diaz, Division of Global Migration and 
Quarantine, CDC.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / May 5, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 17 
459
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Conflict of Interest
J.R., D.P
.G., and R.M. are full-time employees and stock-
holders of Sanofi Pasteur. No other conflicts of interest 
 
were reported.
 1Division of Global Migration and Quarantine, CDC; 2Sanofi Pasteur Inc., 
Swiftwater, Pennsylvania.
Corresponding author: Kristina M. Angelo, kangelo@cdc.gov, 404-639-7023.
References
1. Gershman MD, Staples JE. Yellow fever. In: Brunette GW; CDC, eds. 
CDC health information for international travel 2016. New York, NY: 
Oxford University Press; 2016.
2. Staples JE, Gershman M, Fischer M. Yellow fever vaccine: recommendations 
of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 
Recomm Rep 2010;59(No. RR-7):1–27.
3. World Health Organization. Emergency preparedness, response: 
yellow fever. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2017. 
http://www.who.int/csr/don/archive/disease/yellow_fever/en/
4. World Health Organization. Yellow fever outbreak Angola, Democratic 
Republic of the Congo and Uganda 2016–2017. Geneva, Switzerland: 
World Health Organization; 2017. http://www.who.int/emergencies/
yellow-fever/en/
5. World Health Organization. Brazil works to control yellow fever 
outbreak, with PAHO/WHO support. Geneva, Switzerland: World 
Health Organization; 2017. http://www2.paho.org/hq/index.
php?option=com_content&view=article&id=13098%3Abrazil-
control-yellow-fever-outbreak-paho-support&catid=740%3Apress-
releases&Itemid=1926&lang=en
6. World Health Organization. International health regulations, 2005. 
Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2008. http://apps.
who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/43883/1/9789241580410_eng.pdf
7. Pan American Health Organization. Epidemiological update yellow fever. 
Washington, DC: Pan American Health Organization; 2017. http://
www2.paho.org/hq/index.php?option=com_docman&task=doc_view
&Itemid=270&gid=39639&lang=en
8. CDC. Announcement: yellow fever vaccine shortage. Atlanta, GA: US 
Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2016. https://wwwnc.
cdc.gov/travel/news-announcements/yellow-fever-vaccine-shortage-2016
9. Plotkin S, Orenstein WA, Offit PA, eds. Vaccines. 6th ed. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier Saunders; 2013.
Summary
What is already known about this topic?
Effective and safe yellow fever vaccines are available to prevent 
yellow fever disease among persons traveling to countries with 
yellow fever virus transmission and to comply with individual 
country yellow fever vaccination entry requirements; only one 
yellow fever vaccine (YF-VAX) is currently licensed for use in the 
United States. Periodic, temporary yellow fever vaccine 
shortages have occurred in the United States as a result of 
manufacturing problems, including a manufacturing complica-
tion in 2016 that resulted in the loss of a large number of 
U.S.-licensed yellow fever vaccine doses.
What is added by this report?
To avoid a lapse in yellow fever vaccine availability to persons in 
the U.S. population for whom yellow fever vaccination is 
indicated, public health officials and private partners collaborated 
in pursuing an expanded access investigational new drug (eIND) 
application for the importation of Stamaril yellow fever vaccine 
into the United States. Stamaril is produced by Sanofi Pasteur, the 
manufacturer of the U.S.-licensed YF-VAX, and it uses the same 
vaccine substrain. A systematic, tiered process was developed to 
select clinics to participate in the eIND protocol, with the goal of 
reasonable accessibility to yellow fever vaccination for all U.S. 
residents, while assuring that clinic personnel could be ade-
quately trained to participate in the protocol.
What are the implications for public health practice?
Providers need to be aware that there is a yellow fever vaccine 
shortage and there is a plan for providing safe vaccine at a 
limited number of clinics until the supply is replenished. 
Domestic production of yellow fever vaccine in the United 
States should resume in 2018, and as the eIND protocol is 
implemented, CDC and Sanofi Pasteur will need to continue to 
collaborate throughout site recruitment and training, partner to 
resolve issues that arise, and maintain communication with 
health care providers and the general public.
