 APRIL 2016 
STATUS REPORT
 
Artemisinin and artemisinin-based 
combination therapy resistance 
KEY MESSAGES
1. 
Artemisinin resistance1 is defined as delayed parasite clearance 
following treatment with an artesunate monotherapy or with an 
artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT). This represents 
partial resistance.
2. Delayed parasite clearance will not necessarily lead to treatment 
failure. In the Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS), high treatment 
failure rates following treatment with an ACT have mostly (but not 
always) been observed where concomitant resistance to the partner 
drug exists. Outside the GMS, treatment failure with ACTs (AL, ASAQ, 
ASSP) occur in the absence of artemisinin resistance and are mainly 
due to partner drug resistance.
3. A molecular marker for artemisinin resistance has recently been 
identified and will help to improve the global surveillance of 
artemisinin resistance.
4. There is no evidence for recent emergence of higher levels of 
artemisinin resistance (full resistance). However, artemisinin (partial) 
resistance could facilitate the selection of partner drug resistance.
5. Piperaquine resistance has emerged in Western Cambodia and has 
in just a few years’ time expanded considerably in proportion of 
strains affected as well as in geographical area. 
6. Emergence of multidrug resistance including artemisinin and 
partner drug resistance causing ACT failures, and independent 
emergence of artemisinin resistance in the GMS have led to the WHO 
recommendation of elimination malaria in this region.
Global Malaria Programme
WHO/HTM/GMP/2016.5
 2
BACKGROUND ON ARTEMISININ RESISTANCE
Artemisinin resistance is defined as delayed parasite clearance, which represents 
a partial resistance affecting thus far only ring stage parasites. Delayed parasite 
clearance after treatment with an ACT is of paramount concern to WHO. Nevertheless, 
the majority of patients who have delayed parasite clearance following treatment with 
an ACT still clear their infections, except in the presence of concomitant resistance to 
the partner drugs. Further research is needed to evaluate the exact role of artemisinin 
resistance in the development or selection of drug resistance to partner drugs. 
Recently, a molecular marker of artemisinin resistance was identified. Mutations 
in the Kelch 13 (K13)-propeller domain were shown to be associated with delayed 
parasite clearance in vitro and in vivo. The identification of the K13 mutations as a 
marker for artemisinin resistance has allowed for a more refined definition, inclusive of 
information on the genotype. However, the list of mutations associated with artemisinin 
resistance is still evolving, and as a result the definition of artemisinin resistance will 
also evolve, based on new findings. The current definition of artemisinin resistance 
is divided into suspected artemisinin resistance (defined as a high prevalence of 
the delayed parasite clearance phenotype or high prevalence of K13 mutants) and 
confirmed artemisinin resistance (defined as a combination of both delayed parasite 
clearance and K13 resistance-validated mutations for the same patient) (see annex). 
Confounding factors in these definitions include the effect of partner drugs, immunity, 
insufficient levels of drug in the blood, and non-validated K13 mutations. 
A total of 186 K13 alleles, including 108 non-synonymous mutations were reported so 
far. In South-East Asia, distinct alleles originating from multiple independent events 
of emergence were observed. In the eastern Greater Mekong Subregion (Cambodia, 
Lao PDR and Viet Nam), C580Y, 
R539T, Y493H, I543T mutations were 
frequent. In the western Greater 
Mekong Subregion (China, Myanmar 
and Thailand) F446L, N458Y, P574L 
and R561H mutations were common. 
In Africa, non-synonymous mutations 
are still rare and highly diverse. Non-
synonymous K13 mutations have 
been reported in Cameroon, Central 
African Republic, Chad, Comoros, 
Democratic Republic of the Congo, 
Gabon, Gambia, Kenya, Madagascar, 
Malawi, Mali, Rwanda, Togo, Uganda 
and Zambia. The most frequent allele 
observed in Africa is A578S.
Not all non-synonymous propeller 
region K13 mutants reported are 
necessarily indicating emerging 
artemisinin resistance, as these can 
represent ‘passer-by’ genotypes when 
there is no evidence of selection of 
the mutant K13 genotype. In addition, 
different K13 mutations have varying 
effects on the clearance phenotype. 
Validation of the K13 mutant as 
resistance marker will require a 
correlation with slow clearance in 
TABLE 1
Canditate and validated K13 resistance 
mutations*
K13 MUTATION
CLASSIFICATION
E252Q
Not associated
P441L
Candidate
F446I
Candidate
G449A
Candidate
N458Y
Candidate
Y493H
Validated
R539T
Validated
I543T
Validated
P553L
Candidate
R561H
Validated
V568G
Candidate
P574L
Candidate
A578S
Not associated
C580Y
Validated
A675V
Candidate
*Other less frequent variants were reported 
associated with in vivo or in vitro tests, or both: 
M476I; C469Y; A481V; S522C; N537I; N537D; G538V; 
M579I; D584V; H719N
 3
clinical studies, reduced drug sensitivity in ex-vivo assays or in vitro assays (e.g. ring-
stage assay - RSA0-3h), or transfection studies where insertion of the mutant K13 results 
in reduced in vitro sensitivity (see annex). A current list (which will have to be updated 
regularly) of candidate (correlated with delayed parasite clearance) and validated K13 
propeller mutations (by in vivo and in vitro data) can be found in Table 1.
MONITORING THERAPEUTIC EFFICACY OF ACTS
Routine monitoring of the therapeutic efficacy of ACTs is essential for timely changes 
in treatment policy and can help to detect early changes in P. falciparum susceptibility 
to antimalarial drugs. WHO currently recommends monitoring the efficacy of first-line 
and second-line ACTs every two years in all falciparum endemic countries. The results 
of the therapeutic efficacy studies (TES) allow for the determination of:
• 
the proportion of patients who are parasitemic on day 3, which is currently 
the indicator of choice for routine monitoring to identify suspected artemisinin 
resistance in P. falciparum;
• 
the proportion of treatment failure by 28- or 42-day follow-up (depending on 
the partner drug half-life in the specific ACT). A treatment failure rate equal 
to or exceeding 10% should prompt a change in the national antimalarial 
treatment policy. 
The flow chart (Figure 1) outlines the recommended steps required for the decision 
making process for the interpretation and response relative to TES findings.
FIGURE 1
Decision-making process based on TES results
Day 3:
% patients
parasitemic
Day 28 or 42:
% treatment
failures
Interpretation
Response
< 10%
< 10%
≥ 10%
< 10%
≥ 10%
≥ 10%
or
< 10% but 
increasing
over time
No evidence of 
resistance to 
artemisinin
Partner drug is 
efective
No evidence of 
resistance to
artemisinin
Partner drug is 
failing
Suspected
resistance to
artemisinin
Partner drug is 
efective
Suspected
resistance to
artemisinin
Partner drug is
failing 
No change in
treatment policy
required
Change ACT
Confirm resistance
to artemisinin
No change in
treatment policy
required
Confirm resistance
to artemisinin
Change ACT or
discuss alternative 
non-ACT treatment 
options
 4
If artemisinin resistance is suspected by the observation of slow clearance in a clinical 
trial or TES, K13 marker analysis should be prioritized, e.g. from filter paper blood 
spots. If suspected resistance is observed through a survey with molecular data only, 
resistance should be confirmed by studies obtaining information on both the clinical 
phenotype (delayed parasite clearance) and the K13 genotype from the same parasite 
strain.
Possible implications of delayed parasite clearance
Artemisinin is used in combination with other medicines to quickly reduce the parasite 
biomass. Consequences of partial resistance could include: 1) development of total 
artemisinin resistance; 2) failure to rapidly clear parasites could compromise the use of 
artemisinin for the treatment of severe malaria; 3) slow parasite clearance in patients 
treated with an ACT causes more parasites to be exposed to the partner medicine 
alone after the artemisinin component is rapidly cleared after the three-day treatment 
course, increasing the risk of de novo resistance to the partner drug in particular in 
patients with high parasitaemia at admission.
There is no evidence for recent emergence of higher levels of artemisinin resistance 
(full resistance). However, artemisinin (partial) resistance could facilitate the selection 
of partner drug resistance.
Further selection of partner drug resistance is correlated with its half-life. In case of 
resistance to partner drugs, treatment failures are likely to increase. Currently the 
majority of patients with a delayed parasite clearance response are still cured by ACTs, 
provided that the partner drug remains effective.
RESPONSE TO ARTEMISININ RESISTANCE  
AND ELIMINATING MALARIA IN THE GMS
Emergency response to artemisinin resistance in the GMS
In April 2013, WHO launched the Emergency response to artemisinin resistance 
in the Greater Mekng subregion. Regional framework for action 2013-2015.2 The 
framework urges malaria partners to work in a coordinated manner to provide 
malaria interventions to all at-risk risk groups; to achieve tighter coordination 
and management of field operations; to obtain better information for artemisinin 
resistance containment; and to strengthen regional oversight and support. 
WHO has received support from the Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and 
Trade and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation to strengthen the coordination and 
technical support for artemisinin resistance containment activities in the GSM. The 
project is implemented by the WHO Global Malaria Programme, the WHO Regional 
Office for South-East Asia, the WHO Regional office for the Western Pacific and WHO 
country offices. A regional hub has been established in Phnom Penh, Cambodia to 
support and help coordination of activities.
In line with the call to action and recommendations contained in the ERAR, the Global 
Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria has allocated US$ 100 million to a 
regional artemisinin initiative, funding activities to contain and eliminate artemisinin 
 5
resistance in Cambodia, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Myanmar, Thailand, and 
Viet Nam. The regional artemisinin initiative includes a regional component to support 
cross border activities.
Malaria elimination in the GMS
The incidence of malaria has been greatly reduced over the last 10-20 years. However, 
there is concern that falciparum malaria in the GMS is becoming increasingly resistant 
to antimalarial medicines; at the border between Cambodia and Thailand, it could 
become untreatable within a few years. In addition, molecular studies have confirmed 
that artemsinin resistance has emerged independently in many areas of the GMS. On 
this background, the Malaria Policy Advisory Committee of WHO recommended in 
September 2014 the adoption of the goal of elimination of P. falciparum in the GMS 
by 2030. Subsequently, at the World Health Assembly in May 2015, WHO launched a 
Strategy for Malaria Elimination in the GMS (2015-2030),3 which was endorsed by all 
the GMS countries.
COUNTRY UPDATES ON ACT EFFICACY4
South-East Asia
Cambodia
Background
• 
Artemisinin resistance was first identified in clinical studies in 2006; however 
retrospective analysis of molecular markers indicates that artemisinin 
resistance likely emerged in 2001, before the widespread deployment of ACTs 
in Cambodia.
• 
Due to high failure rates with artesunate-mefloquine, the first-line treatment 
for the treatment of uncomplicated falciparum malaria was changed from co-
blistered artesunate-mefloquine to fixed-dose dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine 
in Pailin in 2008 and then nationwide in 2010.
• 
After the implementation of this new treatment policy, an increase in 
treatment failures was quickly identified in therapeutic efficacy studies (TES) 
using dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine in Pailin. Between 2008 and 2015 
similar trends were observed in seven provinces mainly in the western and 
northern part of the country. The high treatment failure rates observed with 
dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine is related to the presence of piperaquine 
resistance which is geographically spreading from western to north-eastern 
Cambodia.
• 
A consensus meeting held in November 2011 recommended the use of 
atovaquone-proguanil delivered as directly-observed therapy for Pailin 
province as a short-term interim solution, with stringent follow-up for 
monitoring resistance. Atovaquone-resistance conferring mutations were 
observed less than a year after the implementation of the drug as first-line 
therapy, which was reason to change the recommendation.
Update
• 
A consensus meeting on the national treatment policy for P. falciparum was 
held in January 2014. Artesunate-mefloquine was re-introduced as first-line 
 6
treatment, since the proportion of falciparum strains with multiple Pfmdr1 copy 
numbers (which confer mefloquine resistance) is currently minimal in the area. 
Quinine plus doxycycline over seven days has been adopted as rescue therapy.
• 
Studies with artesunate-mefloquine conducted in 2015 reported 100% efficacy.
Lao PDR
Update
• 
In 2013, a trial conducted in Champasack province found that 22.2% of the 
patients treated with artemether-lumefantrine were still parasitemic on day 3 
after treatment and 10% treatment failures; conversely in Saravanh province 
the positivity rate at day 3 was 2% with an overall treatment failure rate of 2.4%.
• 
The emergence of artemisinin resistance in Southern Lao PDR is supported by 
the recent (2013) identification of the presence of K13 mutants (mainly C580Y 
and R539T) in the circulating parasite populations.
• 
Containment activities started in 2014.
• 
The therapeutic efficacy of artemether-lumefantrine starts to be affected 
though cure rates have remained high since 2005; TES were conducted in 
2015 in Atteupeu, Sekong and Champasack provinces. Positivity rate at day 
3 ranged between 9.7 and 20% whereas and treatment failure rates range 
between 0% and 14%. In 2016 other ACT will be monitored for potential use in 
the country.
Myanmar
Background
• 
Artemisinin resistance likely emerged at the border between Thailand and 
Myanmar in 2001, but was clearly recognized in 2008.
• 
Since 2009, available data show consistently delayed parasite clearance times 
among a significant proportion of patients treated with ACTs, and observed in 
all the three first-line ACTs (artemether-lumefantrine, artesunate-mefloquine 
and dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine).
• 
The results showing delayed parasite clearance rates in several parts of 
the country led to the initiation of the Myanmar Artemisinin Resistance 
Containment (MARC) framework, in-line with the recommendations described 
in the Global Plan for Artemisinin Resistance Containment (GPARC).5
• 
The three first-line ACTs used in the country are still effective with high cure 
rates.
Update
• 
Studies evaluating the presence of K13 mutants have shown that the 
predominant K13 mutant found in Myanmar does not appear to have spread 
from Cambodia but likely arose independently.
• 
A new K13 propeller polymorphism (F446I) was significantly associated with 
delayed parasite clearance. Preliminary results indicate a high prevalence of 
the K13 F446I mutation along the China-Myanmar border and along the India-
Myanmar border. Additional research is ongoing to validate the role of this 
 7
new mutant in artemisinin resistance which appears to be associated with an 
intermediate rate of delayed clearance.
• 
ACT efficacy remains high on both side of the border between India and 
Myanmar.
Thailand
Background
• 
Containment activities on the Thailand side of the border between Cambodia 
and Thailand began simultaneously with Cambodia in 2008.
• 
Thailand used a regimen of two-day artesunate-mefloquine as first-line 
treatment. Despite the change to a three-day regimen in 2009, treatment 
failures with artesunate-mefloquine increased in Kanchanaburi, Ranong, Tak, 
and Ubonratchathani, reaching treatment failure ≥ 10%.
• 
High treatment failures observed in Thailand after treatment with artesunate-
mefloquine could be explained by the presence of mefloquine resistance 
(which has been confirmed countrywide) in addition to artemisinin resistance. 
Mefloquine drug pressure has been considerable over the last decades, since 
Thailand has been using different regimens of mefloquine (15 to 25 mg/kg) as 
monotherapy or in combination with artesunate.
Update
• 
The efficacy of artemether-lumefantrine was evaluated in two provinces in 
2012 but the treatment failure rate was close to or exceeded 10%.
• 
During a consensus meeting held in 2015, dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine 
became the first-line treatment and its efficacy is currently being evaluated.
• 
Efficacy of dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine monitored in 2014-2015 in 
Kanchanaburi province was 94%.
Viet Nam
Background
• 
Delayed parasite clearance was first detected after treatment with 
dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine in Bu Dang district of Binh Phuoc province in 
2009.
• 
Routine monitoring with dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine also detected other 
foci of delayed parasite clearance in Gia Lai province (2010), in Dak Nong 
province (2011) and Quang Nam province (2012), Khanh Hoa provinces (2014) 
and Ninh Thuan (2015).
• 
In mid-2011, Viet Nam began containment activities following GPARC 
recommendations with the support from WHO Western Pacific Regional Office 
and the WHO country office.
Update
• 
TES conducted since 2010 using dihydroartemisinin-piperaquine confirmed 
treatment efficacy > 95% despite a day 3 positivity rate of up to 36%.
• 
A recent study in Binh Phuoc province reported high treatment failure (> 10%). 
Investigation is ongoing to confirm emergence of piperaquine resistance.
 8
FIGURE 2
Situation of ACT failures in the Greater Mekong subregion
 
Africa
• 
The efficacy of ACTs is being monitored in most malaria endemic countries. 
There have been some reports of delayed parasite clearance during routine 
TES of ACTs conducted in Africa, however these reports have not been 
consistent over time;
• 
To date, the K13 mutations observed have not been associated with slow 
parasite clearance. At this moment, Africa appears free of resistance-
associated Asian alleles;
• 
TES show that in general ACTs remain efficacious.
South America
Suriname
• 
Routine surveillance of ACT efficacy between 2005-2006 and 2011 in gold 
miners, reported an increase of day-3 positivity rate (from 2% to more than 
20%) with a high cure rate at day 28. In 2013-2014, a study using artesunate and 
There are currently five ACTs recommended by WHO: artemether-lumefantrine, artesunate-amodiaquine, 
artesunate-mefloquine, artesunate-sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine (ASSP) and dihydroartemisinin-
piperaquine. A sixth ACT, artesunate-pyronaridine, was given a positive scientific opinion by the European 
Medicines Agency (EMA) under article 58 and is being considered for recommendation by WHO. By 
default, ASSP is considered having a high failure rate in the region as quadruple and quintuple dhfr and 
dhps mutations are fixed. 
 9
mefloquine did not confirm the high positivity rate at day 3 and sequencing of 
K13 of strains collected during this study revealed only wild type K13.
Guyana
• 
A retrospective analysis of blood sample collected in 2010 for a HRP2 
surveillance study, detected C580Y. All five C580Y mutant samples detected 
had nearly identical haplotype suggesting their common origin which 
was distinct from the South-East Asian C580Y haplotype. A survey for K13 
sequencing is currently ongoing in the region where five of the earlier cases 
originated.
• 
The last TES study evaluating artemether-lumefantrine was conducted from 
May 2011 to July 2012 during which a total of 92 patients were enrolled, with 68 
completing the 28 day follow-up. A total of 70.8% of day 3 slides were reported 
to be positive, but after quality control review, this result was considered to be 
flawed. A new clinical study evaluating 7-day artesunate for uncomplicated 
falciparum malaria was started in 2014. Efficacy of artesunate was 100% at day 
28 whereas only 2% of the patients had persistent parasitaemia at day 3 after 
treatment. The 47 strains collected all showed K13 wild type.
French Guyana
• 
Between 2009 and 2013, the day-3 positivity rate among patients treated in 
Cayenne hospital after treatment with artemether-lumefantrine was 7.5%, but 
the treatment was not systematically supervised. So far no K13 mutant parasite 
strains have been reported from French Guyana.
CONCLUSION
Despite the delayed response to artemisinin in some areas of the GMS, ACTs remain 
the most effective treatment for uncomplicated falciparum malaria. Most patients with 
delayed parasite clearance are cured as long as the partner drug remains effective. 
Routine monitoring must continue to ensure that the recommended ACTs are effective, 
that timely changes in national treatment policies can be implemented, and that 
artemisinin resistance can be detected early. Assessment of Kelch-13 propeller region 
mutants will greatly facilitate the tracking of artemisinin resistance as it emerges. In 
the context of multidrug resistance including ACT resistance in the GMS, elimination 
of falciparum malaria has become a high priority. The role played by artemisinin 
resistance in the development or selection of partner drug resistance needs to be 
further evaluated.
Further information 
For more information, please contact:
Dr Pascal Ringwald 
Drug Efficacy and Response, Global Malaria Programme  
World Health Organization
Tel: +41 (0) 22 791 3469 
Email: ringwaldp@who.int
Please also visit the following WHO website for additional information and data:
http:/
/www.who.int/malaria/areas/drug_resistance/en/index.html
 10
Notes
1. 
Artemisinin refers to artemisinin and its derivatives.
2. 
WHO (2013). Emergency response to artemisinin resistance in the Greater Mekong Subregion.
3. 
http:/
/apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/79940/1/9789241505321_eng.pdf
4. 
WHO (2015). Strategy for malaria elimination in the Greater Mekong Subregion (2015-2030).
5. 
http:/
/www.who.int/malaria/areas/greater_mekong/en/
6. 
WHO (2011). Global report on antimalarial efficacy and drug resistance: 2000-2010.
7. 
http:/
/whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2010/9789241500470_eng.pdf 
8. 
WHO (2011). Global Plan for Artemisinin Resistance Containment (GPARC). http:/
/www.who.int/malaria/
publications/atoz/artemisinin_resistance_containment_2011.pdf
 11
ANNEX
Definition of artemisinin resistance
Definitions of candidate and validated K13 mutations are required. as following: 
• 
a statistically significant association (P < 0.05) between a K13 mutation and 
either a half-life of the parasite clearance slope of ≥ 5 hours or positive 
parasitaemia at 72 hours (± 2 hours) via a chi-squared test or appropriate 
multivariable regression model on a sample of at least 20 clinical cases; or
• 
> 1% survival using the RSA0–3h (or > 2 standard deviations above the mean 
value for K13 wild-type parasites from the same area) in at least five individual 
isolates with a given mutation; or a statistically significant difference (P < 0.05) 
in the RSA0–3h assay between culture-adapted recombinant isogenic parasite 
lines, produced using transfection and gene-editing techniques, which express 
a variant allele of K13 as compared to the wild-type allele. 
• 
A K13 mutation is validated when both of these requirements are met, and 
candidate when only one of these requirements is met. However, the RSA0–3h 
and thresholds for in vivo tests are currently only validated for South-East Asian 
parasites and patients.
The definition of partial artemisinin resistance has not been amended from TEG 2014 
except for the specification of day 3 being 72 hours (±2 hours) after the start of a full 
artemisinin-based treatment course. 
Suspected endemic artemisinin resistance is defined as:
• 
≥ 5% of patients carrying K13 resistance-confirmed mutations; or 
• 
≥ 10% of patients with persistent parasitaemia by microscopy at 72 hours  
(± 2 hours; i.e. day 3) after treatment with ACT or artesunate monotherapy; or 
• 
≥ 10% of patients with a half-life of the parasite clearance slope ≥ 5 hours after 
treatment with ACT or artesunate monotherapy.
Confirmed endemic artemisinin resistance is defined as:
• 
≥ 5% of patients carrying K13 resistance-confirmed mutations, all of whom 
have been found, after treatment with ACT or artesunate monotherapy, to have 
either persistent parasitaemia by microscopy on day 3, or a half-life of the 
parasite clearance slope ≥ 5 hours.
The detection of artemisinin resistance signifies an epidemiological threat, but does not 
necessarily signify reduced ACT efficacy as a manifest public health problem. 
 12
What does this icon represent? Learn more about the Global Malaria Programme’s new visual refresh at: 
http:/
/www.who.int/malaria/visual-refresh/en 
© 2016 World Health Organization 
All rights reserved. Publications of the World Health Organization are available on the WHO website (http:/
/www.who.int) or can be 
purchased from WHO Press, World Health Organization, 20 Avenue Appia, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland (tel.: +41 22 791 3264; fax: +41 
22 791 4857; email: bookorders@who.int). 
Requests for permission to reproduce or translate WHO publications – whether for sale or for non-commercial distribution – should 
be addressed to WHO Press through the WHO website (http:/
/www.who.int/about/licensing/copyright_form/en/index.html).  
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion 
whatsoever on the part of the World Health Organization concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its 
authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Dotted and dashed lines on maps represent approximate 
border lines for which there may not yet be full agreement.
The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers’ products does not imply that they are endorsed or recommended by 
the World Health Organization in preference to others of a similar nature that are not mentioned. Errors and omissions excepted, the 
names of proprietary products are distinguished by initial capital letters.
All reasonable precautions have been taken by the World Health Organization to verify the information contained in this publication. 
However, the published material is being distributed without warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied. The responsibility for 
the interpretation and use of the material lies with the reader. In no event shall the World Health Organization be liable for damages 
arising from its use.  
