 Commentary
Ultra-processed foods in human health: a critical appraisal
Michael J Gibney,1 Ciar´
an G Forde,2,3 Deirdre Mullally,1 and Eileen R Gibney1
1UCD Institute of Food and Health, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland; 2Clinical Nutrition Research Centre, A*STAR Singapore Institute for Clinical
Sciences, and 3National University Health System, Centre for Translational Medicine, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of Singapore,
Singapore
ABSTRACT
The NOVA classification of foods proposes 4 categories: unpro-
cessed or minimally processed foods, processed culinary ingredients,
processed foods, and ultra-processed foods and drinks (UPFDs). It is
argued that the latter relies heavily on modifications to foods, result-
ing in enhanced amounts of salt, added sugar, and fat as well as the
use of additives in an attempt to make this food category highly palat-
able. It further argues that controlling food processing, rather than
examining nutrients, should be foremost in shaping nutrition policy.
This commentary challenges many of the basic arguments of using
the NOVA food classification system to examine the link between
food and health. We believe that there is no evidence to uphold
the view that UPFDs give rise to hyperpalatable foods associated
with a quasi-addictive effect and that the prevailing European Union
and US data fail to uphold the assertion that UPFDs, which dominate
energy intake, give rise to dietary patterns that are low in micronu-
trients. With regard to the use of the NOVA food classification in the
development of food-based dietary guidelines, we show that the very
broad definition of UPFDs makes this impossible. Finally, the avail-
able evidence does not support the view that the globalization of food
is the driver of increased intakes of UPFDs in low- to middle-income
countries but rather that this is driven by small indigenous compa-
nies. On balance, therefore, there seems to be little advantage from
the use of the NOVA classification compared with the current epide-
miologic approach, which relies on the linkage of nutrient intakes
to chronic disease with subsequent identification of foods that
merit consideration in public health nutrition strategies.
Am J
Clin Nutr 2017;106:717–24.
Keywords:
ultra-processed, food, health, NOVA classification,
food classification, food-based dietary guidelines
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, the concept of introducing a food classification
and coding system based on the degree of processing has been
strongly advocated (1). One such classification system, known as
“NOVA,” has grown in influence in the last few years. The 4 food
categories outlined in this system are as follows: unprocessed
or minimally processed foods, processed culinary ingredients,
processed foods (PFs), and ultra-processed foods and drinks
(UPFDs). This food classification approach has been incorpo-
rated into major international reports on diet and health (2) and
has also been adopted by national governments within their
policies on food-based dietary guidelines (3). In most such re-
ports, the advice has been that 1) UPFDs should be avoided and
2) the intake of PFs should be minimized. In addition, advocates
of the NOVA food classification are critical of existing food
categorizations, claiming that they are outdated and that their
use in nutritional epidemiology focuses unnecessarily on nutri-
ents and ignores the putative major impact of food processing,
including the use of food additives on health and well-being.
This marks a major departure from conventional approaches to
the study of diet and chronic disease, and thus a critical review
of the arguments that promote a focus on food processing as a
major element in the diet and health equation would seem to be
justified. The present commentary sets out to provide a critical
appraisal on this approach.
NOVA FOOD CODING AND CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM
The NOVA classification of foods requires that users interpret
the proposed definition of UPFDs to determine which foods
belong to each of the 4 classes of the NOVA system. UPFDs are
defined as follows: “Formulations of several ingredients which,
besides salt, sugar, oils, and fats, include food substances not
used in culinary preparations, in particular, flavours, colours,
sweeteners, emulsifiers and other additives used to imitate sen-
sorial qualities of unprocessed or minimally processed foods and
their culinary preparations or to disguise undesirable qualities of
the final product” (4). This linguistic definition poses problems
This work was solely funded by University College Dublin and The Na-
tional University of Singapore.
Address correspondence to ERG (e-mail: eileen.gibney@ucd.ie).
Abbreviations used: EU, European Union; PCA, principal components
analysis; PF, processed food; UPFD, ultra-processed food and drink.
Received May 15, 2017. Accepted for publication July 12, 2017.
First published online August 9, 2017; doi: https://doi.org/10.3945/ajcn.
117.160440.
Am J Clin Nutr 2017;106:717–24. Printed in USA. � 2017 American Society for Nutrition
717
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajcn/article-abstract/106/3/717/4822399 by guest on 04 June 2019
 for defining foods according to the NOVA classification. The
term “formulations” is open to many interpretations. The ref-
erence to salt, sugar, and fat lacks cutoffs per gram, per portion
size, or per unit of energy; and the reference to food additives
poses particular difficulty, because food additives may be legally
permitted in foods but may, or may not, be present. Moreover,
the user must be able to extrapolate from the presence of an
additive to its use in imitating “sensorial qualities of un-
processed or minimally processed foods and their culinary
preparations or to disguise undesirable qualities of the final
product.” In response to such queries, the NOVA classification
has published lists of food types that might be included in each
of its 4 categories (5). However, neither the terms used to define
UPFDs nor the list of typical foods in each category of the
NOVA system meet the normal standards set in established food
classification. The NOVA classification system is in contrast to
the very thorough food-coding methodologies that have been
developed by other agencies to categorize foods and that do so
to make it possible to eliminate confusion due to simple lin-
guistic definitions, as suggested by the NOVA system. The Eu-
ropean Food Safety Authority has developed a system (Foodex)
to define foods in a way that suits all users of food-intake data
from food chemical exposure to food intake for dietary purposes
(6). The EPIC (European Prospective Investigation into Cancer
and Nutrition) consortium has also developed a system for the
direct coding of individual foods and meal components, based
on their degree of food processing, and has applied this across a
wide variety of cultures that are diverse in both gastronomic
traditions and languages (7). The most sophisticated of the food-
coding systems is that of LanguaL, which embraces a large
number of descriptors for different aspects of food processing
(8). The European consortium on food-composition data, Eu-
rofir, has adapted this very sophisticated system (9). Thus, the
NOVA classification is, by comparison, a rather simple and
crude system of classifying foods into categories on the basis of
their degree of processing and is in stark contrast to many ex-
isting food-classification systems.
THE NOVA SYSTEM AND PUBLIC HEALTH
NUTRITION STRATEGIES
Public health nutrition has been well served over the past half
century by the identification of potential dietary contributors to
noncommunicable chronic disease through epidemiologic re-
search, supported by subsequent validation in human intervention
studies and also by the emergence of food-based dietary
guidelines that shape public health nutrition policies. The ad-
vocates of the NOVA classification system argue that the failure
to shape our public health nutrition focus around the degree of
food processing, as opposed to the nutritional dimension, is a
major limiting factor in the area of epidemiology and related
public health nutrition policies. This is articulated by Monteiro
et al. (10), who stated that “the significance of industrial processing—
and in particular methods and ingredients developed or created by
modern food science and technology—on the nature of food and
on the state of human health, is so far understated.”
Although such statements have been made and published, to
our knowledge no arguments have been offered as to how, or if,
food processing in any way constitutes a risk to consumer health
through adverse nutrient intake or chemical or microbiological
hazards. The one concrete example put forward is the use of trans
fats in PFs (11). However, not only have the adverse effects of
trans fats been observed through standard nutritional research
involving both epidemiology and dietary intervention studies,
such findings and remedial action predate the concept of UPFDs
by decades (12).
NUTRITIONAL EPIDEMIOLOGY
Clearly, the application of the NOVA classification to nutri-
tional epidemiology is secondary to any initial analysis of
population food and nutrient intakes that use conventional dietary
assessment methods and food-classification techniques. The post
hoc grouping of foods into the NOVA classification group, subject
to the coding challenges previously outlined, is the starting point
to examining the impact of food consumption with the use of this
classification system and its link to health. To date, this system
has been primarily linked to 2 public health nutrition issues:
obesity and the metabolic syndrome and its complications (13–
17). However, there are clear indications that the application of
this system in these areas is not without substantial research
challenges and contradictory findings. For example, in contrast
to the several data sets that support an association of obesity and
intake of UPFDs (13–17), an analysis of the UK National Diet
and Nutrition Survey shows no such role, when such analysis
was corrected for known confounders of obesity (18). Because
the definition of UPFDs is based on the macronutrient contents
of foods, it is challenging to see how this classification could
contribute to the study of dietary links to diseases that are not
strongly related to overall energy intake, such as neural tube
defects, cognitive growth and decline, age-related macular de-
generation, sarcopenia, stunting, goiter, anemia, food allergies
and intolerances, osteoporosis, nonalcoholic steatohepatitis,
dental caries, microbiome-related conditions such as irritable
bowel syndrome and constipation, and numerous micronutrient
deficiencies and insufficiencies. For these conditions, very spe-
cific nutrients are implicated, such as folic acid, long-chain n–3
PUFAs, protein, soluble fiber, and frequency of sugar intakes,
iodine, iron, and many micronutrients. In both the epidemiologic
study of the role of diet in such conditions and in the subsequent
application of the findings to food-based dietary guidelines, the
NOVA classification is simply of no value because it cannot
offer specificity at an individual nutrient level.
The NOVA system lacks in its ability to contribute to the
research into overall adequacy of dietary patterns. Such over-
views are currently achieved by using models such as the Healthy
Eating Index or the Alternative Healthy Eating Index (19). In
addition, a number of more complex statistical approaches to data
analyses are used, which give greater insight into the identifi-
cation of dietary patterns. These include principal components
analysis (PCA), cluster analysis, data-mining techniques such a
decision tree analysis or neural network analysis, fuzzy logic,
optimized mixed diets, and meal pattern analysis (20–24). All of
these approaches use food-intake data coded at as high a level of
exactitude as is possible to understand food- and meal-intake
patterns and how these may be linked to chronic disease or risk
factors thereof. Such analyses are simply outside the scope of a
broad classification system approach such as NOVA. To date,
only one study to our knowledge has examined the existing
NHANES databases by using PCA, in which nutrient intakes
718
GIBNEY ET AL.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajcn/article-abstract/106/3/717/4822399 by guest on 04 June 2019
 were used in the statistical construct and the PCA data were
linked to the percentage share of UPFDs to energy intake (25).
In this analysis, an inverse relation was seen between the per-
centage energy share of UPFDs and the PCA-derived dietary
quality score.
FOOD-BASED DIETARY GUIDELINES
Definitive recommendations on the development of food-
based dietary guidelines are contained in the report of the
WHO and FAO on this topic (26). The schema proposed in this
report is presented in Figure 1. Beginning with the identifi-
cation of the specific public health issue in question, and the
exclusion of nondietary confounding factors, the pathway to
the development of food-based dietary guidelines involves the
identification of foods that are discriminatory for the nutrient in
question, and then gives consideration to food availability,
cultural norms, and price. The report recognizes the great va-
riety that exists in the quality of data available to elucidate
such a set of dietary guidelines for any given public health
nutrition issue. At the higher end of data quality, the report
advocates the use of population intakes of target foods, the
percentage of consumers of these foods, and the intakes of such
among consumers of the target foods. This well-established
and respected approach adopted in many countries worldwide
and incorporated into standard international textbooks on
public health nutrition (27) is simply not possible with the use
of the NOVA classification, because it is simply too broad and
too rigid and is based primarily on processing as opposed to
nutritional issues. All in all, the present approach to nutritional
epidemiology and the development of food-based dietary
guidelines has little or nothing to benefit from the use of the
NOVA classification.
INTAKES OF PFs AND NUTRITIONAL ADEQUACY
To date, most of the studies that used the NOVA classification
have been limited to quantifying the contribution of UPFDs to
intakes of added sugar or energy or to variations in micronutrient
intakes (4, 28). That the intake of UPFDs correlates highly with
added sugar intake should not be surprising because the term
“added sugars” is a major defining element of the UPFD clas-
sification system. Equally, studies that track the contribution of
UPFDs to energy intake should also track the food categories
included or excluded in the definition of UPFDs, as has been
observed. However, when the same data examine nutrient in-
take, increasing contributions of UPFDs to energy intake do not
always track the nutrients, which might be expected to correlate
with UPFD intake. For example, in one study (25), across
quintiles of UPFD intake (percentage of contribution to energy
intake), the percentage of energy from total fat increased from
31.4% to 32.5% of energy across the lowest to the highest
quintile of UPFD intake. Equally, the data for intakes of SFAs
(10.1% compared with 10.9% of energy) and sodium (1.74
compared with 1.63 mg/1000 kcal) also showed marginal changes.
Although these differences were significant, they are marginal
in terms of impact on public health nutrition targets. These
data thus show that UPFDs may track individual foods within
that category, but they do not strongly discriminate intakes of
fat and salt.
When micronutrient intakes are examined across NOVA food
classifications, UPFDs are seen to be less micronutrient dense
than minimally processed foods (4). However, studies that ex-
amined the sources of micronutrient intake in the United States
showed that the foods that are enriched or fortified play as
important a role in micronutrient intake as that of intakes of
micronutrients that naturally occur in foods and that variation in
PF intake does not create nutritional imbalances (29, 30). Of
FIGURE 1
Schematic representation of the FAO/WHO recommendations for the development of food-based dietary guidelines. FBDG, food-based
dietary guidelines.
ULTRA-PROCESSED FOODS AND HEALTH
719
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajcn/article-abstract/106/3/717/4822399 by guest on 04 June 2019
 considerable importance in this context are the findings of the
EPIC study of the nutritional adequacy of diets and the role of
food processing (7). This study examined the diets of 36,000
adults aged 35–75 y by using a 24-h recall method specifically
designed to incorporate data on food processing for all in-
dividual foods and meal components applied to the point of
collection and recording of each individual’s data. The results
showed that all “highly processed foods” accounted for ap-
proximately two-thirds of energy intake and most micronutrient
intakes.
Finally, this issue has also been looked at from a different
perspective in which the capacities of nonprocessed foods to meet
nutritional requirements have been examined. In this instance, the
optimal erythrocyte concentrations of folic acid commensurate
with a reduced risk of a neural tube defect birth could not be
achieved by using unprocessed foods and were achieved only
when folic acid–fortified foods or food supplements were used
(31). This finding has subsequently been supported by dietary
survey data analysis looking at erythrocyte folic acid and intakes
of nonfortified foods and tertiles of folic acid–fortified foods and
of food supplements (32). Thus, the balance of data does not
support the assertion of the advocates of the NOVA food clas-
sification that UPFD intakes lead to inadequate micronutrient
intakes.
UPFDs IN THE REGULATION OF FOOD INTAKE
The literature on UPFDs proposes that such foods may be
hyperpalatable, promote food addiction, and have a lower ca-
pacity to induce satiety (33). For example, the Pan American
Health Organization, in its recent report, stated the following:
“Ultra-processed products are designed to satiate food cravings,
they are often hyper-palatable and habit forming, and sometimes
even quasi-addictive. Certain characteristics (tastes, properties,
etc.) engineered into these types of products through food sci-
ence and other technologies can skew mechanisms in the di-
gestive system and brain that signal satiety and control appetite,
and cause overconsumption” (2). However, the evidence in
support of the claim that UPFDs are less satiating is sparse and
inconclusive, with the only comparison to date based on a crude
satiety index compiled for a limited number of foods for their
2-h satiating effect (33, 34). To date, there are no studies to our
knowledge that have compared the satiating efficiency of min-
imally processed and ultra-processed versions of the same food
material (commodity) on a calorie-for-calorie basis for estab-
lished markers of appetite and satiety. Higher energy-dense
foods are less satiating calorie for calorie than are lower
energy-dense foods (35), and certain aspects of food processing
often lead to increases in energy density through techniques
such as adding sugar or deep frying, and increased energy
density has been shown to promote passive overconsumption
and increased body weight (36). However, food processing and
reformulation are also widely applied to reduce energy density,
as evidenced in semi-skimmed milk, low-fat spreads, pre-
portioned calorie-controlled meals, or zero-energy beverages.
Comprehensive meta-analyses have concluded that when used to
replace sugar-sweetened beverages, nonnutritive sweeteners can
significantly contribute to a reduction in energy intake and body
weight (37). Covert manipulation of a food’s energy density has
been shown to both increase and decrease acute energy intakes
(38, 39). Food reformulation and processing has given rise to a
wide variety of products that vary in energy density and provides
options for consumers to select the calorie content of the
products they choose to consume. Data from the United King-
dom show that across 80 types of chocolate chip cookies there
is a variation in energy density ranging from 2.63 to 5.21 kcal/g,
whereas across 70 versions of pepperoni pizza, energy density
ranges from 500 to 2000 kcal/serving (40). Food processing and
reformulation can support dietary energy density reduction by
giving consumers calorie options within a category, and calorie-
controlled products such as prepared meals have been shown to
be beneficial in supporting consumers to lose and maintain
weight loss (41). By contrast, it has also been suggested that
dietary variability may impair the predictive accuracy of visual
and sensory cues to signal the energy content of specific foods,
although the extent to which this variability affects energy intake
remains unclear (42).
The term “food processing” encompasses a very broad range
of approaches to manipulating raw ingredients in the manufac-
ture of consumer goods. Processes such as mixing, extrusion, or
heating can destroy a food’s natural cell wall structures and, in
many cases, processing produces softly textured foods that are
eaten quickly and promote energy intake (43). Equally, food
processes can be used to increase food texture by adding crunch,
chewiness, and firmness, which encourages chewing and a slow
eating rate and supports decreased energy intake (44, 45). Un-
derstanding how food processing influences food structure and
texture can aid in the development of foods with increased sa-
tiation and satiety per calorie consumed (46).
The term “hyperpalatability” has been used to describe sen-
sory combinations of UPFDs that override the body’s and
brain’s natural satiation mechanisms to promote excess con-
sumption (47). Combinations of fat, salt, and sugar that are to-
day described as hyperpalatable are not new phenomena,
because today’s PFs are designed to take advantage of the same
adaptive food preferences that have evolved over many centuries
to ensure a ready supply of essential energy, protein, or elec-
trolytes needed for survival. These are not new “appetites,”
because even preindustrial food production catered to these food
preferences from the production of bread from wheat to the
desire to consume the earliest pizza. There is little evidence to
suggest that hyperpalatability is a distinct phenomenon from
“palatability,” and in this regard, hyperpalatability is an unlikely
candidate to explain the relatively recent increase in obesity or
the proposal that modern foods and food preferences promote
addictive eating behaviors. Much of the evidence presented to
support claims on hyperpalatability and addiction has been
based on rodent feeding models, with little consideration for the
complexity of the human food system or the social and cognitive
factors that influence everyday eating behaviors. The likelihood
that PFs act as addictive substances is further challenged when
we compare differences in food and drug addiction (48). Al-
though both can activate similar reward pathways in the brain,
when drugs and food are compared there remain distinct dif-
ferences in both the potency and effect of the associated drug
and food stimuli. Food addiction is unsupported by existing
neurobiological evidence (49), and “addiction” is an in-
appropriate term to universally describe the eating behavior of
millions of overweight and obese people worldwide, with the
exception perhaps of a specific overeating phenomenon that is
720
GIBNEY ET AL.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajcn/article-abstract/106/3/717/4822399 by guest on 04 June 2019
 best described as binge eating (50). The European Union (EU)
NeuroFAST Consortium, which seeks to investigate the neuro-
biological drivers of eating behavior, addiction, and stress, in its
consensus opinion states that “the current evidence does not
suggest a single food via a single neurobiological mechanism
that can account for the fact that people overeat and develop
obesity. With the exception of caffeine and alcohol, no food or
beverage can cause a substance based type of addiction” [cited
from (51)]. Importantly, food addiction may harm efforts to
reduce overconsumption by endorsing the concept that a person
is free to view his or her behavior as that of an addict where they
have little control over the impulse to eat or effect a dietary
change. A recent study showed that simply endorsing that food
addiction is true can encourage people to self-diagnose as food
addicts and justify maladaptive eating behaviors accordingly
(52). Describing excess habitual energy intakes as food addic-
tion contributes little to a basic understanding of the mecha-
nisms and etiology of obesity and offers little guidance in terms
of effective strategies to reduce it. The balance of evidence does
not support the proposal that UPFDs induce passive over-
consumption of energy by skewing of “mechanisms in the di-
gestive system and brain that signal satiety and control appetite,
and cause overconsumption” [cited from (47)]. Rather than at-
tributing energy intake solely to the degree of food processing, a
more likely feature of modern diets that promotes increased
energy intakes is the combination of increased food portion size
and energy density, in which evidence from human and rodent
studies clearly supports a role for both in promoting energy
consumption (53). In this regard, the NOVA classification sys-
tem neglects the potential for food processing and reformulation
to be applied to increase or decrease energy and nutrient con-
tents of modern foods.
UPFDs AND GLOBAL FOOD SYSTEMS
The ubiquitous spread of PFs and the decline of traditional
gastronomic practices have raised the concern that an in-
creasingly palatable, convenient, and cheap food supply will
inevitably undermine optimal dietary habits. The globalization of
the food chain is almost always associated with large trans-
national food corporations. This raises the issue of the capacity to
curb the economic forces of such corporations by those advo-
cating the NOVA approach to food classification: “The scale and
power of the corporations whose profits depend on these prod-
ucts is colossal. Realistic policies and actions to check or reduce
their consumption will go beyond education and information
programmes and will be centred on fiscal and other statutory
measures” (54). However, the available data, while recognizing
the contribution of the multinational food corporations to the
changing food supply, also show that the dominant suppliers of
packaged, and thus mainly processed, foods are, in fact, small-
to medium-sized enterprises (52). The global market for PFs is
valued at $3.2 trillion, accounting for three-quarters of the
global food market. Nonetheless, only 10% of processed pack-
aged food sales are considered “traded products,” that is, traded
internationally. In effect, 90% of PFs are part of the indigenous
food economy. Of the 10% that are traded internationally, the
United States, the EU, and the rest of the world each account for
one-third of such trade (55). Studies have shown that large
multinational companies, while sustaining a high profile and
attracting considerable mass and social media attention, actually
make a minor contribution globally to food intake. One study
concluded the following: “Although the top 10 soft drink
companies account for half of global sales, the top 10 packaged
food companies account for only a small proportion of market
share with most individual companies contributing less than
3.3% each. Major multinational companies need to be joined by
the myriad of small- and medium-sized enterprises in de-
veloping and implementing programs to improve the health of
the public, globally” (56). Thus, the popular concept of trans-
national food corporations dominating the global food supply is
open to question, as is the overall impact of globalization on
diet-related public health issues. Although globalization is
generally seen as a commercial and economic activity, the field
recognizes that there are 2 other major drivers of globalization.
One is the globalization of communication through social me-
dia, which allows consumers in one part of the world to be in-
formed of policy decisions elsewhere in the world. This
communications route can have a major impact on local political
and consumer activity. The second is governmental globaliza-
tion, which in the case of food and health involves the UN
agencies such as WHO, UNICEF, Codex Alimentarius, and the
like but also nongovernmental organizations such as the World
Obesity Federation or the World Cancer Research Fund. Such
agencies drive nutrition policy over and above what might be
driven at a national or local level.
Globalization and its relation to mean adult BMI were
examined in one study that used data from 127 countries.
Regression analyses showed that the global increase in BMI
over time was positively correlated with economic global-
ization. This study also showed that global BMI variation was
equally associated with measures of economic inequality
between countries (57). A second study examined globaliza-
tion and its role in obesity in #887,000 women aged 15–49 y
living in 56 countries between 1991 and 2009. The results
showed that obesity was influenced by globalization, but the
impact of economic globalization was far less than that of
political and social globalization (58). Finally, the most recent
study looked at globalization in relation to obesity in children
aged 2–19 y. This particular study showed that all indicators
of economic globalization were, in fact, negatively correlated
with childhood obesity, leading the authors to conclude that
“local level factors possibly matter much more than do
global-level factors for explaining why some people remain
thin and others put on weight” (59). Together, these data on
globalization and on the relative roles of indigenous small- to
medium-sized
enterprises
and
transnational
corporations
simply serve to illustrate the complexity of modern food
systems and that what often seems intuitively obvious is not
necessarily so. UPFDs are thus not primarily confined to
global trade but to a greater extent are attributable to local
economic forces. This does not in any way diminish the need
to explore how industrially prepared foods might be re-
formulated to enhance their nutritional qualities and their
capacity to contribute to healthy eating.
CONCLUDING THOUGHTS
The advocates of NOVA intend to have their system adopted at
the highest level of international focus and seek that the
ULTRA-PROCESSED FOODS AND HEALTH
721
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajcn/article-abstract/106/3/717/4822399 by guest on 04 June 2019
 production and consumption of these products (UPFDs) be
confronted, checked, and reversed as part of the work of the UN
Sustainable Development Goals and the UN Decade of Nutri-
tion (60). They cite 5 reasons why their case is valid. The first
focuses on their assumption that existing food-coding systems
are inadequate, and they argue that the community that collects
dietary data codes such data in a way that foods with different
health effects are combined. They argue, for example, that
“cereals and cereal products” often group whole grains to-
gether with sugared breakfast cereals and cookies (biscuits).
This is not true for the vast majority of known databases, which
define food intake at its basic level according to tables of food
composition. For the USDA, entering the term “breakfast ce-
real” yields 10 options each with a unique nutrient composi-
tion to allow the end user to make further definitions such
as high-fiber, low-salt, or low-sugar cereals. Entering the
term “wholegrain breakfast cereal” elicits 15 items, whereas
“wholegrain breakfast bar” elicits 29 items. This is typical of
modern food-composition databases, and much of the credit
globally for the development of this essential tool in public
health nutrition must go to the FAO international initiative,
INFOODS. To perpetuate the myth that the modern approach
to food classification is both static and outdated is both untrue
and irresponsible. NOVA food classification would benefit
from a more detailed analysis of patterns of intake of foods that
make up the various categories proposed by this system. It
would be informative to know what percentage of the pop-
ulation consume each of the foods within the UPFD food
category and the actual intake of foods among consumers only
as advocated by global agencies. It would also be valuable to
explore similar data for various combinations of foods to
allow a greater understanding of meal-pattern analysis. Such
subclassification would also allow some degree of research into
appetite and satiety aspects of different PFs. At present, there
are far more pressing doubts about the basis of the NOVA food
classification system than hard data to better understand the
role of such a system in public health nutrition.
The second justification of the NOVA system, as raised in
the request for inclusion in the UN Decade of Nutrition, relates
to food processing, and the example the authors give is the use
of hydrogenated fats in the human diet. These are industrial
products known through human nutrition experimentation to
increase LDL cholesterol and lower HDL cholesterol. Such
information first came to light in 1990 and in 1994; EU
companies began a successful campaign to eliminate trans fats
completely from their products. In 2015, the United States
decided to do likewise, but sweeping reductions in the use of
trans fats had already been made (61). Thus, this one effect of
processing is no longer regarded as a threat to human car-
diovascular health (62). That the NOVA advocates did not
mention one example of more recent food additives speaks
volumes of the absence of any adverse data on human health
from food additives. In doing so, they also missed the op-
portunity to highlight how fat and oil technologies gave rise
to margarines, spreads, vinaigrettes, dressings, and creams
with varying fat contents and fatty acid compositions to
aid consumers in optimizing their food choice, and health
benefits.
Their remaining 3 criticisms of the modern food supply are
built around the role of transnational corporations in reshaping
traditional diets with the advent of global trade and the growth of
modern supermarket. These have been challenged in this critique,
and the proponents of NOVA must acknowledge the dominant
contribution that the local, indigenous food industry makes to the
food chain across the globe.
Finally, the proponents of NOVA, in advocating the
avoidance of UPFDs and the reduction in PF intake, must
recognize that they have a duty to verify that such a move is
within the resources of ordinary families in order to address
issues of nutritional security. Given the observed significance
of the contribution of PFs to macro- and micronutrient intake,
it would seem unwise to endorse the NOVA recommendation
that the intake of UPFDs should be avoided and that the intake
of PFs should be minimized. To date, to our knowledge, no
data have been presented with regard to the positive or neg-
ative outcomes of such a strategy among free-living subjects.
To our knowledge, no data exist with regard to the average
consumer’s ability in terms of income, culinary skills,
available culinary facilities, and time or food availability to
uphold the case that the abandonment of UPFDs would sig-
nificantly alter nutritional well-being. Without such data,
there may be some ethical issues that would need to be
considered before the mass abandonment of UPFD intake is
recommended.
The authors’ responsibilities were as follows—MJG, CGF, DM, and ERG:
wrote the manuscript; MJG and ERG: had primary responsibility for the final
content; and all authors read and approved the final manuscript. MJG serves
on scientific committees for Nestl´
e and Cereal Partners Worldwide. The
remaining authors had no conflicts of interest to declare.
REFERENCES
1. Monteiro CA, Levy RB, Claro RM, Castro IR, Cannon G. A new
classification of foods based on the extent and purpose of their pro-
cessing. Cad Saude Publica 2010;26:2039–49.
2. Pan American Health Organization. Ultra-processed food and drink
products in Latin America: trends, impact on obesity, policy im-
plications. Washington (DC): Pan American Health Organization;
2015.
3. Oliveira MS, Silva-Amparo L. Food-based dietary guidelines:
a comparative analysis between the Dietary Guidelines for the
Brazilian Population 2006 and 2014. Public Health Nutr 2017 Mar
30 (Epub ahead of print; DOI: 10.1017/S1368980017000428).
4. Mart´
ınez Steele E, Baraldi LG, da Costa Louzada ML, Moubarac J-C,
Mozaffarian D, Monteiro CA. Ultra-processed foods and added sugars
in the US diet: evidence from a nationally representative cross-
sectional study. BMJ Open 2016;6:e009892.
5. Moubarac J-C, Parra DC, Cannon G, Monteiro CA. Food classification
systems based on food processing: significance and implications for
policies and actions: a systematic literature review and assessment.
Curr Obes Rep 2014;3:256–72.
6. European Food Safety Authority. The food classification and de-
scription system FoodEx2. Revision 2. 2015. EFSA Supporting Pub-
lication No.: 2015:EN-804.
7. Slimani N, Deharveng G, Southgate DA, Biessy C, Chajes V, van
Bakel MM, Boutron-Ruault MC, McTaggart A, Grioni S, Verkaik-
Kloosterman J, et al. Contribution of highly industrially processed
foods to the nutrient intakes and patterns of middle-aged pop-
ulations in the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and
Nutrition study. Eur J Clin Nutr 2009;63(Suppl 4):S206–25.
8. Ireland JD, Moller A. LanguaL food description: a learning process.
Eur J Clin Nutr 2010;64(Suppl 3):S44–8.
9. Becker W, Møller A, Ireland J, Roe M, Unwin I, Pakkala H.
Proposal for structure and detail of a EuroFIR standard on food
composition data. II: Technical annex. Danish Food Information;
2008.
722
GIBNEY ET AL.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajcn/article-abstract/106/3/717/4822399 by guest on 04 June 2019
 10. Monteiro CA, Cannon C, Levy R, Moubarac J-C, Jaime P, Martins AP,
Canella D, Louzada M, Parra D. NOVA. The star shines bright. World
Nutr 2016;7:1–3.
11. Silveira BM, Gonzalez-Chica DA, da Costa Proenc
¸a RP. Reporting of
trans-fat on labels of Brazilian food products. Public Health Nutr 2013;
16:2146–53.
12. Mensink RP, Zock PL, Katan MB, Hornstra G. Effect of dietary cis and
trans fatty acids on serum lipoprotein [a] levels in humans. J Lipid Res
1992;33:1493–501.
13. Cannon G, Levy R, Moubarac J-C, Jaime P, Martins AP, Canella D,
Louzada MDP, Ricardo C, Calixto G, et al. Food classification.
Public health—NOVA. The star shines bright. World Nutr 2016;7:
28–38.
14. Louzada ML, Baraldi LG, Steele EM, Martins AP, Canella DS,
Moubarac JC, Levy RB, Cannon G, Afshin A, Imamura F, et al.
Consumption of ultra-processed foods and obesity in Brazilian ado-
lescents and adults. Prev Med 2015;81:9–15.
15. Tavares LF, Fonseca SC, Rosa MLG, Yokoo EM. Relationship between
ultra-processed foods and metabolic syndrome in adolescents from a
Brazilian Family Doctor Program. Public Health Nutr 2012;15:82–7.
16. Rauber F, Campagnolo P, Hoffman D, Vitolo M. Consumption of ultra-
processed food products and its effects on children’s lipid profiles:
a longitudinal study. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis 2015;25:116–22.
17. Boss LP, Toole MJ, Yip R. Assessments of mortality, morbidity and
nutritional status in Somalia during the 1991-1993 famine. JAMA
1994;272:371–6.
18. Adams J, White M. Characterisation of UK diets according to degree
of food processing and associations with socio-demographics and
obesity: cross-sectional analysis of UK National Diet and Nutrition
Survey (2008-12). Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act 2015;12:160.
19. Onvani S, Haghighatdoost F, Surkan PJ, Larijani B, Azadbakht L.
Adherence to the Healthy Eating Index and Alternative Healthy Eating
Index dietary patterns and mortality from all causes, cardiovascular
disease and cancer: a meta-analysis of observational studies. J Hum
Nutr Diet 2017;30(2):216–26.
20. Hearty AP, Gibney MJ. Analysis of meal patterns with the use of su-
pervised data mining techniques—artificial neural networks and de-
cision trees. Am J Clin Nutr 2008;88:1632–42.
21. Hearty AP, Gibney MJ. Comparison of cluster and principal component
analysis techniques to derive dietary patterns in Irish adults. Br J Nutr
2009;101:598–608.
22. Woolhead C, Gibney MJ, Walsh MC, Brennan L, Gibney ER. A ge-
neric coding approach for the examination of meal patterns. Am J Clin
Nutr 2015;102:316–23.
23. Kersting M, Alexy U, Clausen K. Using the concept of food based
dietary guidelines to develop an optimized mixed diet (OMD) for
German children and adolescents. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 2005;
40:301–8.
24. Asghari G, Ejtahed HS, Sarsharzadeh MM, Nazeri P, Mirmiran P.
Designing fuzzy algorithms to develop healthy dietary pattern. Int J
Endocrinol Metab 2013;11:154–61.
25. Mart´
ınez Steele E, Popkin BM, Swinburn B, Monteiro CA. The share
of ultra-processed foods and the overall nutritional quality of diets in
the US: evidence from a nationally representative cross-sectional study.
Popul Health Metr 2017;15:6.
26. Joint FAO/WHO Consultation. Preparation and use of food-based di-
etary guidelines: report of a joint FAO/WHO consultation. Geneva
(Switzerland): WHO. 1996.
27. Gibney MJ, Wolmarans P. Dietary guidelines. In: Gibney MM, BM
Kearney JM Arab, L, editors. Public health nutrition. Oxford (United
Kingdom): Blackwell Publishing; 2004. p. 133–43.
28. Louzada ML, Martins AP, Canella DS, Baraldi LG, Levy RB,
Claro RM, Moubarac JC, Cannon G, Monteiro CA. Impact of ultra-
processed foods on micronutrient content in the Brazilian diet. Rev
Saude Publica 2015;49:45.
29. Weaver CM, Dwyer J, Fulgoni VL III, King JC, Leveille GA,
MacDonald RS, Ordovas J, Schnakenberg D. Processed foods: con-
tributions to nutrition. Am J Clin Nutr 2014;99:1525–42.
30. Eicher-Miller HA, Fulgoni VL III, Keast DR. Contributions of pro-
cessed foods to dietary intake in the US from 2003-2008: a report of
the Food and Nutrition Science Solutions Joint Task Force of the
Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics, American Society for Nutrition,
Institute of Food Technologists, and International Food Information
Council. J Nutr 2012;142(Suppl):2065S–72S.
31. Cuskelly GJ, McNulty H, Scott JM. Effect of increasing dietary folate
on red-cell folate: implications for prevention of neural tube defects.
Lancet 1996;347:657–9.
32. Hopkins SM, Gibney MJ, Nugent AP, McNulty H, Molloy AM,
Scott JM, Flynn A, Strain JJ, Ward M, Walton J, et al. Impact of
voluntary fortification and supplement use on dietary intakes and
biomarker status of folate and vitamin B-12 in Irish adults. Am J Clin
Nutr 2015;101:1163–72.
33. Fardet A. Minimally processed foods are more satiating and less hy-
perglycemic than ultra-processed foods: a preliminary study with 98
ready-to-eat foods. Food Funct 2016;7:2338–46.
34. Holt SH, Miller J, Petocz P, Farmakalidis E. A satiety index of com-
mon foods. Eur J Clin Nutr 1995;49:675–90.
35. Rogers PJ, Brunstrom JM. Appetite and energy balancing. Physiol
Behav 2016;164(Pt B):465–71.
36. Ledikwe JH, Blanck HM, Khan LK, Serdula MK, Seymour JD,
Tohill BC, Rolls BJ. Dietary energy density is associated with en-
ergy intake and weight status in US adults. Am J Clin Nutr 2006;83:
1362–8.
37. Rogers PJ, Hogenkamp PS, De Graaf C, Higgs S, Lluch A, Ness AR,
Penfold C, Perry R, Putz P, Yeomans M. Does low-energy sweetener
consumption affect energy intake and body weight? A systematic re-
view, including meta-analyses, of the evidence from human and animal
studies. (2005) Int J Obes (Lond) 2016;40:381–94.
38. Stubbs RJ, Ritz P, Coward WA, Prentice AM. Covert manipulation of
the ratio of dietary fat to carbohydrate and energy density: effect on
food intake and energy balance in free-living men eating ad libitum.
Am J Clin Nutr 1995;62:330–7.
39. Tey SL, Chia EME, Forde CG. Impact of dose-response calorie re-
duction or supplementation of a covertly manipulated lunchtime meal
on energy compensation. Physiol Behav 2016;165:15–21.
40. Hardman CA, Ferriday D, Kyle L, Rogers PJ, Brunstrom JM. So many
brands and varieties to choose from: does this compromise the control
of food intake in humans? PLoS One 2015;10:e0125869.
41. Rock
CL,
Flatt
SW,
Sherwood
NE,
Karanja
N,
Pakiz
B,
Thomson CA. Effect of a free prepared meal and incentivized
weight loss program on weight loss and weight loss maintenance in
obese and overweight women: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA
2010;304:1803–10.
42. Martin AA. Why can’t we control our food intake? The downside of
dietary variety on learned satiety responses. Physiol Behav 2016;162:
120–9.
43. de Graaf C. Texture and satiation: the role of oro-sensory exposure
time. Physiol Behav 2012;107:496–501.
44. Bolhuis DP, Forde CG, Cheng Y, Xu H, Martin N, de Graaf C. Slow
food: sustained impact of harder foods on the reduction in energy in-
take over the course of the day. PLoS One 2014;9:e93370.
45. Forde CG, Leong C, Chia-Ming E, McCrickerd K. Fast or slow-foods?
Describing natural variations in oral processing characteristics across a
wide range of Asian foods. Food Funct 2017;8:595–606.
46. Campbell CL, Wagoner TB, Foegeding EA. Designing foods for sati-
ety: the roles of food structure and oral processing in satiation and
satiety. Food Structure; 2016 (Epub ahead of print; DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.foostr.2016.08.002).
47. Ludwig DS. Technology, diet, and the burden of chronic disease. JA-
MA 2011;305:1352–3.
48. Rogers PJ. Rogers, PJ. Food and drug addictions: similarities and
differences. In: Pharmacology biochemistry and behavior, Vol. 153.
Amsterdam: Elsevier; 2017. p. 182–90.
49. Ziauddeen H, Farooqi IS, Fletcher PC. Obesity and the brain: how
convincing is the addiction model? Nat Rev Neurosci 2012;13:279–86.
50. Pedram P, Wadden D, Amini P, Gulliver W, Randell E, Cahill F,
Vasdev S, Goodridge A, Carter JC, Zhai G. Food addiction: its prev-
alence and significant association with obesity in the general pop-
ulation. PLoS One 2013;8:e74832.
51. Blundell J, Coe S, Hooper B. Food addiction—what is the evidence?
Nutr Bull 2014;39:218–22.
52. Hardman CA, Rogers PJ, Dallas R, Scott J, Ruddock HK, Robinson E.
“Food addiction is real”: the effects of exposure to this message on
self-diagnosed food addiction and eating behaviour. Appetite 2015;91:
179–84.
53. Ello-Martin JA, Ledikwe JH, Rolls BJ. The influence of food portion
size and energy density on energy intake: implications for weight
management. Am J Clin Nutr 2005;82(Suppl):236S–41S.
ULTRA-PROCESSED FOODS AND HEALTH
723
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajcn/article-abstract/106/3/717/4822399 by guest on 04 June 2019
 54. Monteiro CA, Moubarac JC, Cannon G, Ng SW, Popkin B. Ultra-
processed products are becoming dominant in the global food sys-
tem. Obes Rev 2013;14(Suppl 2):21–8.
55. Regmi A, Gehlhar MJ. New directions in global food markets.
Washington (DC): USDA; 2005.
56. Alexander E, Yach D, Mensah GA. Major multinational food and bev-
erage companies and informal sector contributions to global food con-
sumption: implications for nutrition policy. Global Health 2011;7:26.
57. Vogli RD, Kouvonen A, Elovainio M, Marmot M. Economic global-
ization, inequality and body mass index: a cross-national analysis of
127 countries. Crit Public Health 2014;24:7–21.
58. Goryakin Y, Lobstein T, James WP, Suhrcke M. The impact of eco-
nomic, political and social globalization on overweight and obesity in
the 56 low and middle income countries. Soc Sci Med 2015;133:67–76.
59. de Soysa I, de Soysa AK. Do globalization & free markets drive
obesity among children and youth? An empirical analysis, 1990-2013.
Int Interactions. In press.
60. Monteiro CA, Cannon G, Moubarac J-C, Levy RB, Louzada MLC,
Jaime PC. The UN Decade of Nutrition, the NOVA food classification
and the trouble with ultra-processing. Public Health Nutr (Epub ahead
of print; DOI: 10.1017/S1368980017000234).
61. USDA. 2015–2020 Dietary guidelines for Americans. 8th ed. Wash-
ington (DC): USDA; 2015.
62. European Food Safety Authority. Opinion of the Scientific Panel on
Dietetic Products, Nutrition and Allergies on a request from the
Commission related to the presence of trans fatty acids in foods and the
effect on human health of the consumption of trans fatty acids. EFSA J
2004;81:1–49.
724
GIBNEY ET AL.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ajcn/article-abstract/106/3/717/4822399 by guest on 04 June 2019
