 WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION
Division of Emerging and Other Communicable
Diseases Surveillance and Control
Guidelines for
the Safe Transport of
Infectious Substances
and Diagnostic Specimens
WHO/EMC/97.3
Distr.: General
Orig.: English
  World Health Organization, 1997
This document is not a formal publication of the
World Health Organization (WHO), and all rights are reserved
by the Organization. The document may, however, be freely reviewed,
abstracted, reproduced and translated, in part or in whole,
but not for sale nor for use in conjunction with commercial purposes.
This document was prepared by the Directors
of WHO Collaborating Centres for Biosafety and other advisers.
 Table of Contents
Introduction ....................................................................................................1
Definitions ......................................................................................................2
Infectious Substances..................................................................................... 2
Diagnostic Specimens .................................................................................... 2
Packaging, Labelling and Documentation for Transport........................3
Basic Triple Packaging System .................................................................... 3
Requirements for Infectious Substances .................................................... 5
Requirements for Diagnostic Specimens.................................................... 9
Requirements for Air Mail ......................................................................... 10
Refrigerants ................................................................................................... 10
Local Surface Transport ..............................................................................11
Transport Planning .....................................................................................12
i
 1
WHO/EMC/97.3
Safe Transport of  Infectious Substances
Introduction
These guidelines are applicable to the transport of infectious substances and
diagnostic specimens both nationally and internationally. They provide
information for identifying and classifying the material to be transported and
for its safe packaging and transport. The guidelines stress the importance of
developing a working relationship between the groups involved – the sender,
the carrier and the receiver – in order to provide for the safe and expeditious
transport of this material.
Postal, airline and other transport industry personnel hold concerns about the
possibility of their becoming infected as the result of exposure to infectious
microorganisms that may escape from broken, leaking or improperly packaged
material. The packaging of infectious materials for transport must therefore
address these concerns and be designed to minimise the potential for damage
during transport. In addition, the packaging will serve to ensure the integrity of
the materials and timely processing of specimens.
There are no recorded cases of illness attributable to the release of specimens
during transport, although there are reported incidents of damage to the outer
packaging of properly packaged materials. The shipment of unmarked and
unidentified infectious materials, improperly packaged, obviously increases the
overall potential for exposure to all persons.
The international regulations for the transport of infectious materials by any
mode of transport are based upon the Recommendations of the United Nations
Committee of Experts on the Transport of Dangerous Goods (UN). The Universal
Postal Union (UPU) reflects these recommendations in its regulations,
particularly for packaging. The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO)
and the International Air Transport Association (IATA) have also incorporated
the UN Recommendations in their respective regulations, as have other
international transport organizations. The World Health Organization serves
in an advisory capacity to these bodies. This document provides practical
guidance to facilitate compliance with current international regulations. If, at a
future date, any modification is made in the section of the UN Recommendations
on the Transport of Dangerous Goods dealing with infectious substances and
diagnostic specimens, these guidelines will be updated accordingly.
 WHO/EMC/97.3
Safe Transport of  Infectious Substances
2
Definitions
For the purpose of describing transport safety measures the terms “infectious
substances” and “infectious materials” are considered synonymous. The term
“infectious substances” will be used in this document.
Infectious substances
An infectious substance is defined as a substance containing a viable
microorganism, such as a bacterium, virus, rickettsia, parasite or fungus, that is
known or reasonably believed to cause disease in humans or animals*.
With respect to packaging and transport situations, infectious substances include:
1. all cultures containing or suspected of containing an agent which may cause
infection;
2. human or animal samples that contain such an agent in quantities sufficient
to cause infection, should an exposure to them occur due to a transport
mishap;
3. sample(s) from a patient with a serious disease of unknown cause;
4. other specimens not included above and designated as infectious by a
qualified person, e.g. a physician, scientist, nurse, etc.
*
This definition is taken from the current UN Recommendations on the
Transport of Dangerous Goods. Prions are not included in this definition
although they are considered to be infectious agents.
Diagnostic specimens
A diagnostic specimen is defined as any human or animal material including,
but not limited to, excreta, blood and its components, tissue and tissue fluids
collected for the purposes of diagnosis, but excluding live infected animals.
Diagnostic specimens resulting from medical practice and research are  considered a
negligible threat to the public health.
 3
WHO/EMC/97.3
Safe Transport of  Infectious Substances
Diagnostic specimens obtained from patients with suspected infectious diseases
may contain limited quantities of an infectious agent. There are very few agents
which may be the source of an infection as a result of a transport mishap. If
exposure to the specimen due to transport mishap could result in an infection, the
diagnostic specimen must be packaged, labelled and transported as an infectious
substance. 
Diagnostic specimens collected during an investigation of an outbreak
of a serious disease of unknown cause must be handled as infectious substances.
Packaging, Labelling and
Documentation for Transport
Because of the distinction of risks between infectious substances and diagnostic
specimens, there are variations to the packaging, labelling and documentation
requirements. The packaging requirements are determined by the UN and are
contained in ICAO and IATA regulations in the form of Packaging Instructions
(PI) 602 and 650. The requirements are subject to change and upgrade by these
organisations. The current packaging requirements are described below. UN-
approved packaging systems are available commercially.
Basic triple packaging system
The system consists of three layers as follows.
1. Primary receptacle. A labelled primary watertight, leak-proof receptacle
containing the specimen. The receptacle is wrapped in enough absorbent
material to absorb all fluid in case of breakage.
2. Secondary receptacle. A second durable, watertight, leak-proof receptacle
to enclose and protect the primary receptacle(s). Several wrapped primary
receptacles may be placed in one secondary receptacle. Sufficient additional
absorbent material must be used to cushion multiple primary receptacles.
3. Outer shipping package. The secondary receptacle is placed in an outer
shipping package which protects it and its contents from outside influences
such as physical damage and water while in transit.
Specimen data forms, letters and other types of information that identify or
describe the specimen and also identify the shipper and receiver should be taped
to the outside of the secondary receptacle.
 WHO/EMC/97.3
Safe Transport of  Infectious Substances
4
Figure 1
Triple packaging system
 5
WHO/EMC/97.3
Safe Transport of  Infectious Substances
example:
4H”/Class 6.2/94
GB/2470
The packaging marking consists of:
(
the United Nations packaging symbol
(
type of packing
(
the text “Class 6.2”
(
the last two digits of the year of manufacture of the
packaging
(
State authority
(
manufacturer’s code.
Requirements for infectious substances
The basic triple packaging system is used with the following additional
specifications and labelling and documentation requirements.
Infectious substances may only be transported in packaging which meets the
UN class 6.2 specifications and packaging instruction (PI)602. This ensures that
strict performance tests which include a nine metre drop test and a puncture
test have been met. The outer shipping package must bear the UN Packaging
Specification Marking (Figure 2). UN-approved packaging supplier listings may
be obtained from carriers or from the appropriate national ministry or
department, e.g. the Ministry of Transport, etc.
Figure 2
Packaging Specification Marking
 WHO/EMC/97.3
Safe Transport of  Infectious Substances
6
Hand carriage of infectious substances is strictly prohibited by international air
carriers, as is the use of diplomatic pouches for that purpose.
The maximum net quantity of infectious substances which can be contained in
an outer shipping package is 50 mL or 50g if transport is by passenger aircraft.
Otherwise, the limit per package is 4L-4Kg for transport by cargo aircraft or
other carriers. Primary receptacles exceeding 50 mL in combination packing
must be oriented so the closures are upward, and labels (arrows) indicating the
“UP” direction must be placed on two opposite sides of the package. The
passenger aircraft quantify limits do not apply to blood or blood products for
which there is no reason to believe they contain infectious substances, when in
receptacles of not more than 500 mL each and with a total volume of not more
than 4L in the outer package.
Hazard labels for dangerous goods
For all dangerous goods to be shipped by airfreight, specific hazard label(s)
must be affixed to the outside of each package. The following hazards labels are
of importance for culture collections or other institutions shipping biological
substances.
Hazard labels for infectious substances and for
genetically modified microorganisms which meet
the IATA definition of an infectious substance:
Name:
Infectious Substance
Minimum dimensions:
100 x 100 mm
For small packages:
50 x 50 mm (black and
white)
Figure 3
 7
WHO/EMC/97.3
Safe Transport of  Infectious Substances
Hazard label for noninfectious genetically modified
microorganisms and for carbon dioxide, solid (dry ice):
Name:
Miscellaneous
Minimum dimensions:
100 x 100 mm
For small packages:
50 x 50 mm (black and
white)
Hazard label for liquid nitrogen:
Name:
Non-flammable gas
Minimum dimensions:
100 x 100 mm
For small packages:
50 x 50 mm
(green and white)
Packages containing liquid cultures of infectious organisms and genetically
modified microorganisms must be packed so that the closure(s) of the inner
packaging(s) are upward; the upright position of the packaging must be indicated
by two “Package Orientation” labels (black or red arrows). The labels must be
affixed on opposite sides of the packaging. A label “THIS SIDE UP” or “THIS
END UP” may also be displayed on the top cover of the package:
Name:
Package Orientation
Minimum dimensions:
74 x 105 mm
(black or  red and white)
For small packages of infectious substances
dimensions may be halved.
In case shipments include only freeze-dried cultures the quantity should be
given in g or mg. not in ml. The “PACKAGE ORIENTATION” labels should be
affixed to avoid any delay.
 WHO/EMC/97.3
Safe Transport of  Infectious Substances
8
Labelling of the outer package for shipment of infectious substances must include
the elements listed hereafter.
1. The International Infectious Substance Label.
2. An address label with the following information:
• the receiver’s (consignee) name, address and telephone number
• the shipper’s (consignor) name, address and telephone number
• the UN shipping name (Infectious Substances Affecting Humans or
Animals as the case may be) followed by the scientific name of the
substance
• the UN Number (Humans – UN2814, Animals UN2900)
• temperature storage requirements (optional).
If the outer package is further packed in an overpack (with dry ice for instance)
both outerpack and overpack must carry the above information, and the
overpack must have a label stating “INNER PACKAGES COMPLY WITH
PRESCRIBED SPECIFICATIONS”.
3. Required shipping documents – these are obtained from the carrier and are
fixed to the outer package:
• the shipper’s Declaration of Dangerous Goods (Figure 4 is one example)
• a packing list/proforma invoice which includes the receiver’s address,
the number of packages, detail of contents, weight, value (note: state that
there is “no commercial value” as the items are supplied free of charge)
• An airwaybill if shipping by air.
4. An import and/or export permit and/or declaration if required.
5. If the outer package contains primary receptacles exceeding 50 mL in
combination at least two “Orientation Labels” (arrows) must be placed on
opposite sides of the package showing correct orientation of the package.
 9
WHO/EMC/97.3
Safe Transport of  Infectious Substances
Requirements for diagnostic specimens
The basic triple packaging system is used with the following specifications and
labelling requirements.
Diagnostic specimens may be transported in packaging which meets the
packaging instruction (PI)650. The UN specification marking is not required.
Primary receptacles may contain up to 500 mL each, the total volume in the
outer package not to exceed 4L.
Labelling of the outer package for the shipment of diagnostic specimens must
include the following.
1. An address label with the following information:
•
the receiver’s (consignee) name, address and telephone number
•
the shipper’s (consignor) name, address and telephone number
•
the statement “Diagnostic Specimen, Not Restricted, Packed in
Compliance with Packing Instruction 650”.
2. Required shipping documents – these are obtained from the carrier and are
fixed to the outer package:
•
a packing list/proforma invoice which includes the receiver’s address,
the number of packages, detail of contents, weight, value (note: state that
there is “no commercial value” as the items are supplied free of charge)
•
an airwaybill if shipping by air.
3. An import and/or export permit and/or declaration (if required).
Note: The infectious substance label and the shipper’s declaration of dangerous
goods are not required for diagnostic specimens.
 WHO/EMC/97.3
Safe Transport of  Infectious Substances
10
Requirements for Air Mail
Infectious substances and diagnostic specimens may be shipped by registered
air mail. The basic triple packaging system is used with the same requirements
as for other means of conveyance.
The address label must display the word “LETTRE” and the green Customs
Declaration Label for Postal Mail is required for international mailing. Diagnostic
specimens are to be identified with the violet UPU “PERISHABLE BIOLOGICAL
SUBSTANCES” label. Infectious substances are to be identified with the
International Infectious Substance label (see Figure 3). Infectious substances must
also be accompanied with a shipper’s Declaration of Dangerous Goods form
(see Figure 4 at the end of the document).
Because of local/international restrictions, prior contact should be made with
the local post office to ascertain whether the packaged material will be accepted
by the postal service.
Refrigerants
Ice or dry ice when used in a shipment must be placed outside the secondary
receptacle. If wet ice is used it should be in a leak-proof container and the outer
package must also be leak-proof.
The secondary receptacle must be secured within the outer package to prevent
damage after the refrigerant has melted or dissipated. Dry ice must 
not be placed
inside the primary or secondary receptacle because of the risk of explosions. An
overpack (a specially designed insulated outer package) may be used to contain
dry ice. The outer package must permit the release of carbon dioxide gas if dry
ice is used. UN Packing Instruction 904 must be observed.
If dry ice is used for infections substances, the details must appear on the
shipper’s Declaration for Dangerous Goods. 
In particular, the outer most packing
must carry the “MISCELLANEOUS” hazard label for dry ice (see Figure 3).
If liquid nitrogen is used as a refrigerant, special arrangements must be made
in advance with the carrier. Primary receptacles must be capable of withstanding
extremely low temperatures and appropriate packaging requirement of the
carrier must be observed.  In particular, the outer most packing must carry the
“NON-FLAMMABLE GAS” label for liquid nitrogen (see Figure 3).
 11
WHO/EMC/97.3
Safe Transport of  Infectious Substances
Local Surface Transport
Examples include transport of specimens from a doctor’s office/surgery to a
laboratory, from a hospital to a diagnostic laboratory or from one laboratory to
another. Such courier services may be operated by a hospital, a laboratory, a
health service or other approved agency or organisation.
The principle of safe transport by this means is the same as for air or international
transport – the material should not have any possibility of escaping from the
package under normal conditions of transport.
The following practices should be observed:
1. specimen containers should be watertight and leak-proof;
2. if the specimen container is a tube, it must be tightly capped and placed in a
rack to maintain it in an upright position;
3. specimen containers and racks should be placed in robust, leak-proof plastic
or metal transport boxes with secure, tight fitting covers;
4. the transport box should be secured in the transport vehicle;
5. each transport box should be labelled appropriately consistent with its
contents;
6. specimen data forms and identification data should accompany each
transport box;
7. a spill kit containing absorbent material, a chlorine disinfectant, a leak-proof
waste disposal container and heavy duty reusable gloves should be kept in
the transport vehicle.
Note: The practices 1 – 7 described above are not intended to supersede local
or national requirements.
 WHO/EMC/97.3
Safe Transport of  Infectious Substances
12
Transport Planning
It is the responsibility of the sender to ensure the correct designation, packaging,
labelling and documentation of all infectious substances and diagnostic
specimens.
The efficient transport and transfer of infectious materials requires good
coordination between the sender, the carrier and the receiver (receiving
laboratory), to ensure that the material is transported safely and arrives on time
and in good condition. Such coordination depends upon well-established
communication and a partner relationship between the three parties.
All have specific responsibilities to carry out in the transport effort.
The sender
1. makes advance arrangements with the receiver of the specimens including
investigating the need for an import permit;
2. makes advance arrangements with the carrier to ensure:
• that the shipment will be accepted for appropriate transport
• that the shipment (direct transport if possible) is undertaken by the most
direct routing, avoiding arrival at weekends;
3. prepares necessary documentation including permits, dispatch and shipping
documents;
4. notifies the receiver of transportation arrangements once these have been
made, well in advance of expected arrival time.
The carrier
1. provides the sender with the necessary shipping documents and instructions
for their completion;
 13
WHO/EMC/97.3
Safe Transport of  Infectious Substances
2. provides advice to the sender about correct packaging;
3. assists the sender in arranging the most direct routing and then confirms the
routing;
4. maintains and archives the documentation for shipment and transport;
5. monitors required holding conditions of the shipment while in transit;
6. notifies the sender of any anticipated (or actual) delays in transit.
The receiver
1. obtains the necessary authorisation(s) from national authorities for the
importation of the material;
2. provides the sender with the required import permit(s), letter(s) of
authorisation, or other document(s) required by the national authorities;
3. arranges for the most timely and efficient collection on arrival;
4. immediately acknowledges receipt to the sender.
Shipments should not be dispatched until:
•
advance arrangements have been made between the sender, carrier and
receiver
•
the receiver has confirmed with the national authorities that the material
may be legally imported
•
the receiver has confirmed that there will be no delay incurred in the
delivery of the package to its destination.
Detailed information on response and emergency safety measures in transport-
associated accidents can be found in Laboratory Biosafety Manual, Second edition
(1993). Geneva: World Health Organization: (pp. 52 – 54).
 WHO/EMC/97.3
Safe Transport of  Infectious Substances
14
Figure 4A. Standard shipment of infectious substances
 15
WHO/EMC/97.3
Safe Transport of  Infectious Substances
Figure 4B. Shipment of infectious substances using dry ice
