 Scientific Article
Implementation and utilization of
hypofractionation for breast cancer
Philip Gilbo MD, Louis Potters MD, Lucille Lee MD *
Department of Radiation Medicine, Northwell Health, Hofstra Northwell School of Medicine, Lake Success,
New York
Received 29 November 2017; received in revised form 28 March 2018; accepted 1 April 2018
Abstract
Purpose: Hypofractionation (HF) of whole breast irradiation has become a standard treatment regimen
because randomized trials continue to demonstrate equivalence in survival and local control com-
pared with conventional fractionation. In 2011, theAmerican Society for Radiation Oncology (ASTRO)
adopted clinical guidelines on the proper selection of HF. Nevertheless, utilization remains lower
than predicted. We evaluate the effects of clinical directives that serve as default treatment deci-
sions and prospective contouring rounds on the implementation of HF in a large, multicenter radiation
oncology department.
Methods and materials: In 2010, we implemented consensus-driven and evidence-based clinical
directives to guide treatment decisions. Five directives were available for adjuvant breast cancer
treatment, including conventional fractionation and HF approaches, and were selected on the basis
of disease specifics and clinical judgment. In 2012, we instituted prospective contouring rounds
wherein the treating physicians presented their directive selection and patient contours for peer-
review and consensus opinion. For this study, charts for patients with early stage breast cancer were
reviewed. A total of 1043 cases of breast cancer were identified. Patients receiving HF were ana-
lyzed on the basis of the ASTRO 2011 guidelines and adherence to our more inclusive clinical
directives.
Results: For the ASTRO-endorsed group (n = 685), 49% of patients received HF in 2011, and 80%
received HF in 2015. For the directives-endorsed group (n = 1042), 47% of patients received HF
in 2011, and 73% received HF in 2015.
Conclusions: HF is underutilized despite equivalent local control, superior toxicity profile, and
noninferior late effects. Our study demonstrates the possibility of achieving high levels of utiliza-
tion in a large, multisite, outpatient setting. Factors responsible may include default rules established
through the development of consensus-based treatment directives, peer review by faculty, and strong
financial leadership to implement HF when indicated. To our knowledge, this is the first example
Conflicts of interest: None.
Sources of support: No authors received a grant or financial support for this research.
Meeting information: Presented in part at the 58th Annual Meeting of the American Society for Radiation Oncology, September 25-28, 2016 in Boston,
Massachusetts.
* Corresponding author. Department of Radiation Medicine, Northwell Health, 450 Lakeville Road, Lake Success, NY 11042.
E-mail address: llee3@northwell.edu (L. Lee).
Advances in Radiation Oncology (2018) 3, 265–270
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.adro.2018.04.001
2452-1094/© 2018 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of the American Society for Radiation Oncology. This is an open access article
under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
 of combining both consensus-based treatment directives and prospective contouring rounds in an
attempt to change practice patterns.
© 2018 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of the American Society for
Radiation Oncology. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Introduction
Until recently, hypofractionated radiation therapy in
women with breast cancer was considered a harmful prac-
tice, potentially resulting in significant injury from late
toxicity, such as soft-tissue necrosis and fibrosis.1,2 In hind-
sight, this concern was perhaps due to a limited
understanding of the radiobiology of breast cancer. This limi-
tation resulted in an inadequate decrease in total radiation
dose in conjunction with the associated increase in dose
per fraction.3 However, prospective randomized trials have
demonstrated that dose-adjusted hypofractionated regi-
mens not only result in equivalent survival and local control4-8
but also have comparable, if not better, acute toxicity
profiles.9,10 With the release of 10-year data supporting
hypofractionation (HF) and with endorsement by the Ameri-
can Society for Radiation Oncology (ASTRO) clinical
guidelines since 2011, HF has become the new standard
of care for women with early stage breast cancer.11
Despite the strength of available data, recent studies
suggest that hypofractionated whole breast irradiation
remains significantly underutilized in the United States.12,13
A paper by Bekelman et al. showed a utilization of HF in
the United States of 34% in 2013 for those matching the
characteristics delineated by the ASTRO guidelines.12 In
contrast, approximately 70% of patients in Ontario, Canada,
receiving whole breast irradiation (without regional lymph
node irradiation) received hypofractionated treatment in
2008. In the United Kingdom, most patients with early stage
breast cancer have received hypofractionated treatment since
2009.
Factors influencing this discrepancy have previously been
examined, suggesting that although patient factors play a
role, the greater influence likely comes from the indi-
vidual practitioners’ preferences and the institutional bias
of their training.14 Our department has instituted the use
of clinical directives for all radiation therapy treatments to
standardize the practice of multiple physicians from diverse
backgrounds. In addition, we have added the requirement
of consensus opinion on the choice of clinical directives
during our daily peer review contouring rounds. Herein, we
review how these changes increased our utilization rates
of hypofractionated radiation therapy for early stage breast
cancer to levels that are comparable to those in Canada and
the United Kingdom.
Methods and materials
Within our academic and community department of ra-
diation medicine, we implemented a default process for care
in 2010 that included a series of consensus-driven and
evidence-based clinical directives to guide decisions on
patient care.15 A working committee that consisted of phy-
sicians, dosimetrists, nurses, and physics and therapy staff
was given the task of reviewing available data for the support
of each directive, specifying patient selection criteria, and
providing prescription, dosimetry, simulation instruc-
tions, and imaging choices. These directives were
incorporated into the electronic treatment-information system
where they could be applied to any patient receiving
treatment.
For the adjuvant treatment of breast cancer, 5 treat-
ment directives were developed and available for our
physicians to select, based upon inclusion criteria and in
combination with their clinical judgment (Table 1). Each
directive contained a default prescription with accompa-
nying simulation instructions, dosimetry constraints, and
supporting data from the literature. For HF, the main support
came from the Canadian and UK Standardisation of Breast
Radiotherapy (START) trials, with the ASTRO guide-
lines serving to provide precautions in choosing HF for
specific subgroups that were not studied in sufficient
numbers to garner full support (eg, patients <50 years
old).4,6-8,11
The choice of fraction size for HF and boost was taken
from the Canadian and START trials. Although the Cana-
Table 1
Available directive choices with defaulted doses
Clinical directive
Prescription dose
Hypofractionation whole breast
4240 cGy/16 fx + 1000 cGy/5 fx (optional)
Standard fractionation whole breast
5000/25 fx + 1000 cGy/5 fx (optional)
Standard fractionation, whole breast and regional nodal irradiation
5000/25 fx + 1000 cGy/ 5fx (optional)
Standard fractionation, postmastectomy with regional nodal irradiation
5000/25 fx + 1000 cGy/5 fx (optional)
Accelerated partial breast irradiation
3400 cGy/10 fx (brachytherapy)
fx, fractions.
Advances in Radiation Oncology: July/September 2018
266
P. Gilbo et al.
 dian trial did not use a boost, the START trials did at the
physician’s discretion.4,6,7 Our physicians generally ex-
trapolated from the boost criteria in Radiation Therapy
Oncology Group Study 1005 when deciding whether to
boost the tumor bed.16 Along with this, our department in-
stituted peer-reviewed prospective contouring rounds, during
which the chosen directive was reviewed for a consensus
opinion. When there was a disagreement, the treating phy-
sician was expected to defend his or her choice of a specific
directive to guide management or change that choice to
match the consensus opinion.17
The patient cohort was defined as patients undergoing
adjuvant radiation therapy for breast cancer with curative
intent between 2011 and 2015. Patients undergoing partial
breast irradiation or treatment involving regional nodal ir-
radiation were excluded. The hypofractionated patient cohort
was defined as patients receiving >200 cGy per fraction.
A total of 1043 cases of breast cancer were identified in a
total of 1021 patients. There were 22 patients with cancer
of the contralateral breast (either synchronously or
metachronously) during this period.
The patient cohort receiving HF was divided into 2
groups based on those whose treatment was reflective of
the selection criteria that followed the ASTRO 2011
guidelines11 versus our clinical directives, which were more
inclusive (Table 2). Our clinical directives were more liberal
in those patients with ductal carcinoma in situ and those
who had received prior chemotherapy. Both could be treated
with HF on the basis of available retrospective data showing
equivalence and no detriment compared with conven-
tional fractionation.
We also treated patients with left-sided disease, pro-
vided that the heart was sufficiently avoided, and patients
with large separations of >25 cm as long as the hot spots
were <107% on the basis of planning criteria outlined in
Radiation Therapy Oncology Group Study 1005, which was
open at that time.16,18
Results
For the ASTRO-endorsed group (n = 685), 49% of pa-
tients received hypofractionated therapy in 2011, and an
upward
trend
was
noted
with
80%
receiving
hypofractionated therapy in 2015. For the directives-
endorsed group (n = 1042), 47% of patients received
hypofractionated therapy in 2011; again, an upward trend
was noted with 73% of patients receiving hypofractionated
therapy in 2015 (Fig 1).
Discussion
The use of breast HF and its relative underutilization in
the United States has come into focus within the past several
Table 2
Subgroup characteristics of patients who received
hypofractionation
ASTRO-endorsed
cohort
Directive-endorsed
cohort
T stage
T1-T2
Tis-T2
N stage
N0
N0-Nmi
Age
≥50
No limit
Prior chemotherapy
No
No
ASTRO, American Society for Radiation Oncology.
Figure 1
Utilization of breast hypofractionation for both American Society for Radiation Oncology- and directive-endorsed cohorts
(2011-2015).
Advances in Radiation Oncology: July/September 2018
Hypofractionation and breast cancer
267
 years.12-14,19,20 As clinical data on long-term local control
accrue, so do data with regard to favorable acute toxici-
ties and long-term cosmetic outcomes supporting HF.6,9,10
HF has become the clear choice over conventional frac-
tionation on the basis of clinical outcomes and patient
preference. The lag in adopting HF is likely multifacto-
rial but based mostly on physician preference. Our utilization
of hypofractionated therapy for breast cancer matches that
already seen in Canada and the United Kingdom.21 We
believe that the implementation of clinical directives and
peer-reviewed rounds lead to this high level of utilization.
The combination of evidence-based medicine coupled
with faculty consensus to develop department-wide treat-
ment directives served as the foundation for how patients
were treated. A limited set of breast treatment directives
was designed to apply to the majority of clinical sce-
narios. Having a set of directives to choose from eliminated
the need for the physician to develop a treatment plan for
each patient and resort to ad hoc therapy. Certain aspects
of the radiation prescription were defaulted to streamline
this choice toward best practice, such as conventional frac-
tionation to 5000 cGy in 25 fractions and HF to 4240 cGy
in 16 fractions.
However, given the relative complexity of breast cancer
presentations, no attempt was made to create a one-size-
fits-all choice of therapy. Additionally, there were no barriers
to making changes to the directives for special clinical sce-
narios deemed warranted by the physician. The choice of
directive and any alterations were subject to peer-review
rounds for a consensus opinion. We observed that the dose
heterogeneity for breast cancer essentially disappeared from
our practice. Our data show that the vast majority of breast
treatments during the study period (97%) were based on
a standard unmodified directive.15
This combination of directive selection and peer review
can be likened to that of default rules. Default rules have
previously been shown to increase consumers’ use of green
energy,22 organ-donor status,23 and enrollment in pension
plans.24,25 For example, Johnson and Goldstein performed
an analysis examining countries’ consent to organ dona-
tion by whether they had an opt-in (default nondonor) versus
an opt-out (default donor) system of consent. They dem-
onstrated a large disparity between the organ donor status
of countries with opt-in versus opt-out systems (eg, Ger-
many’s opt-in policy nets approximately 12% donors vs
Austria’s 99% with opt-out).23 Default pathways in medi-
cine work similarly and may steer physicians in a particular
direction (ie, preferred practice) while maintaining the au-
tonomy of choice.25
Although there was a department-wide expectation that
the directives would be followed, no punitive measures were
taken against a physician for changing a directive to suit
an individual patient’s needs. Also, even though there was
no direct incentive to use a particular directive, physi-
cians were encouraged to choose the most appropriate
directive for each patient. When a nonhypofractionated di-
rective was selected for a patient who appeared to meet the
criteria for HF, the treating physician was expected to defend
that decision in a peer-review environment. As such, an im-
portant component of directive compliance is daily, peer-
reviewed, prospective contouring rounds by all available
faculty and residents.
This interaction commonly invites discussions on areas
of radiation medicine that have experienced states of fluc-
tuation, such as fractionation schedules for breast cancer,
and allows for cultural changes to happen more effec-
tively in our multisite institution.17 In this way,
recommendations are also routinely forwarded to a working
committee to update a given directive. Ultimately, changes
occurred in a minority of cases, and most changes were
based on anatomy and setup details, not dose or
fractionation.15 Plans were later finalized by the indi-
vidual physician.17
In 2013, we observed a decrease in the utilization of
hypofractionated therapy. The reasons are unclear, but this
may have been due to a small cluster of patients treated
with hypofractionated therapy who developed symptom-
atic subacute morphea-type changes within 6 to 12 months
after treatment, leading to investigations by the breast cancer
treatment teams. These complications generally resolved
with supportive care. Nevertheless, in advance of the 10-
year START trial publication later in 2013, these anecdotal
cases likely led to more caution with hypofractionated
therapy.4,7 This example helps illustrate the impact that an-
ecdotal experience can exert on physician decision making
in advance of evidence.
Although there was encouragement from leadership to
apply the most appropriate directive to each patient, there
was simultaneously a lack of discouragement toward the
use of any particular directive. An expectation that utili-
zation of HF would increase with time was taken into
account when estimating a future budget. Given the current
reimbursement models in the United States, a forward-
looking financial infrastructure must also be in place for
these changes to occur. Konski et al.26 demonstrated that,
for a predicted HF utilization of 40% within a hospital-
based radiation oncology practice, there would be
approximately a $500,000 decrease in yearly global revenue
on the basis of current Medicare and Medicaid service re-
imbursement with increased HF to patients with breast
cancer, lung cancer, prostate cancer, and palliative care.
The current reimbursement trends in the United States
are likely designed to reward long episodes of care and
would not support utilization of hypofractionated therapy
as a reason for the underutilization of hypofractionated
therapy in the United States compared with other coun-
tries. For example, given the prevalence of breast cancer
treatments at most centers, adopting a call for greater HF
and changing from a 5-week to a 3-week regimen results
in significant financial losses. This gap is likely to widen
as investigations into even more abbreviated regimens (eg,
UK FAST trial, comparing 5 versus 25 fractions)
Advances in Radiation Oncology: July/September 2018
268
P. Gilbo et al.
 continue.27,28 Minding this gap requires forward-thinking
financial planning and leadership.
Moreover, the trend for shorter treatment regimens can
be contrasted with the relatively rapid adoption of inten-
sity modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) for breast cancer.
When Jagsi et al. performed a Surveillance, Epidemiol-
ogy, and End Results analysis to determine the use of
hypofractionated whole breast irradiation in the United
States, they found that its use for invasive disease had in-
creased from 3.9% to 9.5% between 2004 and 2008.
However, in that same period, IMRT use for invasive disease
increased from 9.8% to 20%. Although no formal analy-
sis was performed to compare the reasons for the uptake
in either modality, the higher absolute increase in IMRT
(despite weaker evidence) was postulated to suggest that
providers are more likely to utilize treatment modifica-
tions that increase, rather than decrease, reimbursement.13
Hypofractionated therapy fits well with the changes in re-
imbursement considered by the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services Innovation Center, which is currently
testing bundled payment models for oncologic care.29 Given
that hypofractionated breast regimens appear to not only
be clinically equivalent and match patient preferences21 but
also to lower costs,19,30 one would expect a significant in-
crease in hypofractionated therapy as financial incentives
align with best clinical practice.
Although we focus on just one aspect of implementing
both a clinical directive system with defaulted choices and
prospective peer-review rounds, namely the impact on breast
HF, making the changes required ultimately reshapes an
entire department. The committee that created and manages
the directives involved elements from all clinical staff to
ensure the continued buy-in and usefulness of these treat-
ment approaches. Early on, there was acculturation of
clinicians to the system as they exposed their contours and
prescriptions not only to peer scrutiny but possibly the scru-
tiny of nonphysician staff who were present. As jarring as
this may be at first, we believe it was essential to devel-
oping the culture necessary to make these changes quickly.
As a bonus, it created an atmosphere in which the staff was
encouraged to address issues and conflicts in the open, which
we believe will ultimately decrease rates of medical errors.
This study’s limitations are that it is a retrospective review
with incomplete data available for full clinicopathologic
analysis.As such, the study makes it difficult to define causal
relationships between the increase in HF and use of clini-
cal directives with default rules and peer-reviewed prospective
contouring rounds. For example, a small but significant pro-
portion of patients continued to receive conventional
fractionation. At this time, the reasons for this are not clear.
Previously, Jagsi et al. examined potential drivers within
this patient population, and their analysis suggested that
nonpathologic factors (eg, age, treatment year, education,
and geography) were more likely to be implicated in the
decision to give HF.13 Boero et al. expanded on this analy-
sis and confirmed that the significant predictors of receiving
HF were much higher if a woman was treated during a later
treatment year (after 2005), was of an older age, or was
treated by a female physician. Interestingly, pathologic factors
such as grade, size, and laterality did not appear to con-
tribute significantly to the choice of therapy.
Again, geographic considerations appeared to have a
moderate impact, but individual radiation oncologists ap-
peared to contribute a considerable amount of heterogeneity
to treatment choices. For example, if a patient in this popu-
lation study were to see 2 different radiation oncologists
at random within the same geographic area, there could be
up to a 3 × difference in her odds of receiving HF on the
basis of provider heterogeneity alone.31 These provider-
level differences present opportunities for interventions such
as ours that attempt to decrease provider heterogeneity
through treatment standardization.
Additionally, the impact of outside variables, such as the
ASTRO guidelines, long-term results of trials, and enti-
ties such as the Choosing Wisely campaign,32 is not well
defined and may only be inferred. Nevertheless, we believe
that our institutional factors played a role in changing the
culture in our department and adopting hypofractionated
therapy. With this and the support of future payment models
favoring shorter courses of therapy, we predict continued
increases in hypofractionated therapy utilization.
Conclusions
HF is underutilized despite equivalent local control, su-
perior toxicity profile, and noninferior late effects compared
with conventional fractionation. Our study demonstrates the
possibility of achieving high levels of utilization in a large,
multisite, outpatient setting. Factors likely to be respon-
sible include the development of consensus-based treatment
directives with default choices on the basis of physician con-
sensus, peer review by faculty of all cases, a forward-
looking financial structure, and a supportive environment
for feedback to implement HF when indicated. To our
knowledge, this is the first example of combining both
consensus-based treatment directives and prospective con-
touring rounds in an attempt to change practice patterns.
References
1. Fletcher GH. Hypofractionation: Lessons from complications.
Radiother Oncol. 1991;20:10-15.
2. Friberg S, Rudén BI. Hypofractionation in radiotherapy. An inves-
tigation of injured Swedish women, treated for cancer of the breast.
Acta Oncol. 2009;48:822-831.
3. Yarnold J, Bentzen SM, Coles C, Haviland J. Hypofractionated whole-
breast radiotherapy for women with early breast cancer: Myths and
realities. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2011;79:1-9.
4. Bentzen SM, Agrawal RK, Aird EG, et al. The UK Standardisation
of Breast Radiotherapy (START) Trial B of radiotherapy
hypofractionation for treatment of early breast cancer: A randomised
trial. Lancet. 2008;371:1098-1107.
Advances in Radiation Oncology: July/September 2018
Hypofractionation and breast cancer
269
 5. Owen JR, Ashton A, Bliss JM, et al. Effect of radiotherapy fraction
size on tumour control in patients with early-stage breast cancer after
local tumour excision: Long-term results of a randomised trial. Lancet
Oncol. 2006;7:467-471.
6. Whelan TJ, Pignol JP, Levine MN, et al. Long-term results of
hypofractionated radiation therapy for breast cancer. N Engl J Med.
2010;362:513-520.
7. Bentzen SM, Agrawal RK, Aird EG, et al. The UK Standardisation
of Breast Radiotherapy (START) Trial A of radiotherapy
hypofractionation for treatment of early breast cancer: A randomised
trial. Lancet Oncol. 2008;9:331-341.
8. Haviland JS, Owen JR, Dewar JA, et al. The UK Standardisation of
Breast Radiotherapy (START) trials of radiotherapy hypofractionation
for treatment of early breast cancer: 10-year follow-up results of two
randomised controlled trials. Lancet Oncol. 2013;14:1086-1094.
9. Jagsi R, Griffith KA, Boike TP, et al. Differences in the acute toxic
effects of breast radiotherapy by fractionation schedule: Compara-
tive analysis of physician-assessed and patient-reported outcomes in
a large multicenter cohort. JAMA Oncol. 2015;1:918-930.
10. Shaitelman SF, Schlembach PJ, Arzu I, et al. Acute and short-term
toxic effects of conventionally fractionated vs hypofractionated whole-
breast irradiation: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA Oncol.
2015;1:931-941.
11. Smith BD, Bentzen SM, Correa CR, et al. Fractionation for whole
breast irradiation: An American Society for Radiation Oncology
(ASTRO) evidence-based guideline. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2011;81:59-68.
12. Bekelman JE, Sylwestrzak G, Barron J, et al. Uptake and costs of
hypofractionated vs conventional whole breast irradiation after breast
conserving surgery in the United States, 2008-2013. JAMA.
2014;312:2542-2550.
13. Jagsi R, Falchook AD, Hendrix LH, Curry H, Chen RC. Adoption
of hypofractionated radiation therapy for breast cancer after publi-
cation of randomized trials. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2014;90:1001-1009.
14. Jagsi R, Griffith KA, Heimburger D, et al. Choosing wisely? Pat-
terns and correlates of the use of hypofractionated whole-breast
radiation therapy in the state of Michigan. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys. 2014;90:1010-1016.
15. Potters L, Raince J, Chou H, et al. Development, implementation,
and compliance of treatment pathways in radiation medicine. Front
Oncol. 2013;3:105.
16. Freedman GM, White JR, Arthur DW, Allen Li X, Vicini FA. Ac-
celerated fractionation with a concurrent boost for early stage breast
cancer. Radiother Oncol. 2013;106:15-20.
17. Cox BW, Kapur A, Sharma A, et al. Prospective contouring rounds:
A novel, high-impact tool for optimizing quality assurance. Pract
Radiat Oncol. 2015;5:e431-e436.
18. Williamson D, Dinniwell R, Fung S, Pintilie M, Done SJ, Fyles AW.
Local control with conventional and hypofractionated adjuvant ra-
diotherapy after breast-conserving surgery for ductal carcinoma in-
situ. Radiother Oncol. 2010;95:317-320.
19. Rajagopalan MS, Flickinger JC, Heron DE, Beriwal S. Changing prac-
tice patterns for breast cancer radiation therapy with clinical pathways:
An analysis of hypofractionation in a large, integrated cancer center
network. Pract Radiat Oncol. 2015;5:63-69.
20. Dwyer P, Hickey B, Burmeister E, Burmeister B. Hypofractionated
whole-breast radiotherapy: Impact on departmental waiting times and
cost. J Med Imaging Radiat Oncol. 2010;54:229-234.
21. Hoopes DJ, Kaziska D, Chapin P, et al. Patient preferences and phy-
sician practice patterns regarding breast radiotherapy. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys. 2012;82:674-681.
22. Sunstein CR, Reisch LA. Automatically green: Behavioral econom-
ics and environmental protection. Harvard Environ Law Rev.
2014;38:127-158.
23. Johnson EJ, Goldstein DG. Defaults and donation decisions. Trans-
plantation. 2004;78:1713-1716.
24. Chetty R, Friedman JN, Leth-Petersen S, Nielsen T, Olsen T. Active
vs. passive decisions and crowdout in retirement savings accounts:
Evidence from Denmark. In: Working Paper 18565: National Bureau
of Economic Research; 2013.
25. Sunstein CR. Deciding by default. Univ PA Law Rev. 2013;162:1-
57.
26. Konski A, Yu JB, Freedman G, Harrison LB, Johnstone PA. Radia-
tion oncology practice: Adjusting to a new reimbursement model. J
Oncol Pract. 2016;12:e576-e583.
27. Agrawal RK, Alhasso A, Barrett-Lee PJ, et al. First results of the
randomised UK FAST Trial of radiotherapy hypofractionation for treat-
ment of early breast cancer (CRUKE/04/015). Radiother Oncol.
2011;100:93-100.
28. Brunt AM, Wheatley D, Yarnold J, et al. Acute skin toxicity asso-
ciated with a 1-week schedule of whole breast radiotherapy compared
with a standard 3-week regimen delivered in the UK FAST-Forward
Trial. Radiother Oncol. 2016;120:114-118.
29. Press MJ, Rajkumar R, Conway PH. Medicare’s new bundled pay-
ments: Design, strategy, and evolution. JAMA. 2016;315:131-
132.
30. Lievens Y. Hypofractionated breast radiotherapy: Financial and eco-
nomic consequences. Breast. 2010;19:192-197.
31. Boero IJ, Gillespie EF, Hou J, et al. The impact of radiation oncolo-
gists on the early adoption of hypofractionated radiation therapy for
early-stage breast cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2017;97:571-
580.
32. Hahn C, Kavanagh B, Bhatnagar A, et al. Choosing wisely: TheAmeri-
can Society for Radiation Oncology’s top 5 list. Pract Radiat Oncol.
2014;4:349-355.
Advances in Radiation Oncology: July/September 2018
270
P. Gilbo et al.
