 Thermoneutral housing exacerbates non-alcoholic fatty liver 
disease in mice and allows for sex-independent disease 
modeling
Daniel A Giles1,2, Maria E Moreno-Fernandez1, Traci E Stankiewicz1, Simon Graspeuntner3, 
Monica Cappelletti1, David Wu4, Rajib Mukherjee1, Calvin C Chan1,2, Matthew J Lawson1, 
Jared Klarquist1,2, Annika Sünderhauf5, Samir Softic6, C Ronald Kahn6, Kerstin Stemmer7, 
Yoichiro Iwakura8, Bruce J Aronow9, Rebekah Karns10, Kris A Steinbrecher10, Christopher 
L Karp11, Rachel Sheridan12, Shiva K Shanmukhappa12, Damien Reynaud13, David B 
Haslam14, Christian Sina5, Jan Rupp3, Simon P Hogan4, and Senad Divanovic1
1Department of Pediatrics, Division of Immunobiology, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Research 
Foundation and the University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA
2Immunology Graduate Program, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center and the University 
of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH USA
3Department of Infectious Diseases and Microbiology, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany
4Division of Allergy and Immunology, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Research Foundation and the 
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA
5Institute of Nutritional Medicine, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Lübeck, 
Germany
6Section on Integrative Physiology and Metabolism, Joslin Diabetes Center, Boston, MA, USA
7Institute for Diabetes and Obesity, Helmholtz Diabetes Center & German Center for Diabetes 
Research (DZD), Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany
8Research Institute for Biomedical Sciences, Tokyo University of Science, Noda, Chiba, Japan
9Division of Biomedical Informatics, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Research Foundation and the 
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA
10Division of Gastroenterology Hepatology and Nutrition, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Research 
Foundation and the University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
*Correspondence: Senad Divanovic, Division of Immunobiology, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Research Foundation, TCHRF - 
Location S, Room #S.5.409, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039, U.S.A., Phone: 513-636-0286, Fax: 513-636-5355, 
senad.divanovic@cchmc.org. 
Competing financial interests
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Authors contributions
DAG, MEM-F, TES, SG, MC, DW, RM, CCC, MJL, JK, AS and DR participated in data generation. DAG, MEM-F, SG, DR, RK, 
SKS, RS, KAS, DBH, JR, SPH and SD participated in data analysis and interpretation. SS, KS, YI, CRK, BJA, CS and CLK provided 
materials and technical support and participated in critical review of the manuscript. DAG and SD participated in the conception and 
design of the study, obtained the funding and wrote the manuscript.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 12.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Med. 2017 July ; 23(7): 829–838. doi:10.1038/nm.4346.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 11Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Seattle, WA, USA
12Division of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Research 
Foundation and the University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA
13Division of Experimental Hematology and Cancer Biology, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital 
Research Foundation and the University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA
14Division of Infectious Diseases, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Research Foundation and the 
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA
Abstract
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), a common prelude to cirrhosis and hepatocellular 
carcinoma, is the most common chronic liver disease worldwide. Defining the molecular 
mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of NAFLD has been hampered by a lack of animal 
models that closely recapitulate the severe end of the human disease spectrum, including bridging 
hepatic fibrosis. Here, we demonstrate that a novel experimental model employing thermoneutral 
housing, as opposed to standard housing, resulted in lower stress-driven production of 
corticosterone, augmented mouse proinflammatory immune responses and markedly exacerbated 
high fat diet (HFD)-induced NAFLD pathogenesis. Disease exacerbation at thermoneutrality was 
conserved across multiple mouse strains and was associated with augmented intestinal 
permeability, an altered microbiome and activation of inflammatory pathways associated with 
human disease. Depletion of Gram-negative microbiota, hematopoietic cell deletion of Toll-like 
receptor 4 (TLR4) and inactivation of the interleukin-17 (IL-17) axis resulted in altered immune 
responsiveness and protection from thermoneutral housing-driven NAFLD amplification. Finally, 
female mice, typically resistant to HFD-induced obesity and NAFLD, develop full-blown disease 
at thermoneutrality. Thus, thermoneutral housing provides a sex-independent model of 
exacerbated NAFLD in mice and represents a novel approach for interrogation of the cellular and 
molecular mechanisms underlying disease pathogenesis.
Introduction
NAFLD, a leading precursor of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and liver transplantation1,2, 
encompasses a disease spectrum ranging from benign steatosis to nonalcoholic 
steatohepatitis (NASH) to cirrhosis3. Despite the clinical and public health significance, few 
effective therapies exist. Experimental and clinical evidence4 suggests a complex interplay 
of multiple biological processes in disease development, including obesity, dysbiosis of the 
intestinal microbiome5,6, heightened intestinal barrier permeability7, metabolic endotoxemia 
and various inflammatory processes5. Notably, the combination of HFD feeding, intestinal 
microbiome dysbiosis, augmented intestinal permeability and metabolic endotoxemia/
bacterial endotoxin (lipopolysaccharide; LPS) recognition all contribute to activation of both 
innate and adaptive immune responses central to the pathogenesis of NAFLD5.
TLR4 polymorphisms and elevated hepatic TLR4 expression have been associated with 
human NAFLD8,9. In addition to innate immune system activation, TLR4 signaling also 
modulates multiple adaptive immune effector functions, including IL-17 axis activation10. 
Giles et al.
Page 2
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Notably, IL-17 levels correlate with obesity and NAFLD progression in mouse models11, 
and the transition from steatosis to NASH in humans is associated with hepatic infiltration of 
IL-17 producing cells12. Inactivation of the IL-17 axis inhibits progression from steatosis to 
NASH in mouse models11. However, while existing mouse NAFLD models employing both 
genetic (leptin deficiency) and dietary interventions (high fat, carbohydrate and/or 
cholesterol diets) have proven informative, a closer recapitulation of parameters relevant to 
human disease is still desired. Specifically, mouse NAFLD models are associated with a sex 
bias and limited progression to bridging hepatic fibrosis—something not observed in human 
NAFLD. These limitations, and the overall lack of representative animal models for 
preclinical testing, may be contributing to the paucity of therapeutic approaches for 
NAFLD13.
The temperature at which mice are typically housed in research laboratories is associated 
with chronic cold stress that dramatically alters mouse physiology and immune responses14. 
The thermoneutral zone (TN), or temperature of metabolic homeostasis, for Mus musculus is 
30–32°C15. However, the standard temperature (TS) range that mice are usually housed is 
between 20–23°C, a range chosen primarily for human comfort14. Housing mice at TS, as 
opposed to TN, conditions leads to remarkable physiological changes, including a heart rate 
increase of over 200 beats per minute, a 30% increase in mean arterial blood pressure16, an 
overall increase in energy expenditure (50–60%)16,17 and sustained upregulation of 
catecholamine and corticosteroid production18. Alleviating cold stress, through TN housing, 
alters immune function in a variety of mouse models, including basal cytokine production19, 
responses to bacterial20 and viral21,22 infection and tumor immunity14,23. Further, mice 
housed at TS fail to develop fever after LPS challenge, while TN housing promotes febrile 
responses following LPS challenge20. In context of metabolic diseases, TN housing is 
required for modeling obesity in nude mice17, exacerbates adipose tissue inflammation24 
and induces atherosclerosis in C57BL/6 WT mice19. Importantly atherosclerosis, the number 
one cause of mortality in NAFLD patients25, is a disease poorly modeled in WT mice.
The relevance of TN housing to the modeling of human disease is emerging. The majority of 
people in developed nations, where obesity is classified as a disease, tend to spend most of 
their day within their thermoneutral zone via utility of climate control inside their dwellings. 
Further, exposure to non-thermoneutral conditions, profoundly impacts both immune 
response and metabolic disease in humans. Specifically, exposure to sustained cold stress 
leads to a dampened immune responsiveness to LPS challenge26, and improves glucose 
tolerance in type 2 diabetics27. Thus, given its role in both metabolism and inflammation, we 
hypothesized that TN housing would allow for development of an improved, exacerbated and 
more “human-like” mouse model of NAFLD.
TN housing alters BAT function and immune responsiveness
Adaptation to cold stress involves, among other things, heightened brown adipose tissue 
(BAT) activity, energy expenditure and glucocorticoid production28. Compared to the mild 
cold stress associated with TS (22°C) housing, wild-type (WT) C57BL/6 mice at TN (30°C) 
resulted in lower total body energy expenditure29 and expression of genes central to BAT 
activity, including glucocorticoid receptor (GR; N3cr1), beta 3 adrenergic receptor (β3AR; 
Giles et al.
Page 3
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Adrb3; catecholamine receptor), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma 
coactivator 1 alpha (Ppargc1a) and uncoupling protein 1 (Ucp1) (Fig. 1a). Further, compared 
to TS housing, TN housing resulted in lower serum concentrations of corticosterone (an 
immunosuppressive glucocorticoid30) and splenic expression of genes known to inhibit 
inflammatory responses including, GR, beta 2 adrenergic receptor (β2AR; Adrb2; 
catecholamine receptor), Ppargc1a, and uncoupling protein 2 (Ucp2)31 (Fig. 1b,c). Notably, 
immune cells deficient in GR, β2AR or UCP-2 exhibit exacerbated proinflammatory 
cytokine production following LPS stimulation32–34. These effects were not unique to 
splenic cells, as an unbiased approach employing RNA sequencing of peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) revealed that TS housing, compared to TN, resulted in greater 
levels of gene expression in pathways known to negatively regulate the immune responses, 
including pathways responsible for decreased inflammatory responses, increased 
susceptibility to infection, and decreased acute inflammation (Fig. 1d and Supplementary 
Table 1a).
We next examined the functional relevance of altered immune gene expression observed 
with differences in housing temperature on proinflammatory cytokine production. In vivo 
analysis revealed that TN, compared to TS, housing exacerbated systemic TNF and IL-6 
levels at baseline and after LPS challenge (Fig. 1e). These effects persisted ex vivo, as LPS 
stimulation of splenocytes and bone marrow-derived dendritic cells (BMDCs) from TN-
housed, as compared to TS-housed, mice resulted in heightened TNF and IL-6 production 
(Fig. 1f). Changes observed at TN, compared to TS, were found to be independent of 
alterations in bone marrow, PBMC, spleen and thymus cellularity and composition 
(Supplementary Fig. 1a–d). These findings indicate TN housing reverses the inhibition of 
immune responsiveness seen under standard housing conditions.
The anti-inflammatory effects of glucocorticoids and corticosterone are well established. We 
thus examined the relevance of the corticosterone axis on immune responsiveness at TN. 
Administration of corticosterone to TN-housed mice was sufficient to reverse the 
exacerbated proinflammatory cytokine production associated with TN, as compared to TS, 
housing (Fig. 1g), suggesting that the corticosterone axis is functional at TN and plays a role 
in regulation of inflammatory vigor. Conserved effects were observed in humans following 
stimulation of human PBMCs with LPS in the presence of GR and β2AR agonists (data not 
shown)35. In sum, these results suggest that ambient temperature profoundly alters BAT 
function, glucocorticoid production and the host innate immune responses in male C57BL/6 
mice, and are congruent with reports indicating that TN housing promotes a more “human-
like” immune response20.
TN housing exacerbates HFD-driven NAFLD pathogenesis
As the immune system plays a central role in the pathogenesis of obesity-associated 
sequelae, we hypothesized that TN housing, compared to TS housing, would exacerbate such 
effects in male, C57BL/6 WT mice. TN housing combined with HFD feeding initially 
accelerated weight gain compared to TS-housed HFD-fed animals, however prolonged 
dietary exposure nullified differences in weight gain, body lean or fat mass (Fig. 2a,b). 
Similar weight gain occurred despite a lower extent of food intake at TN (Fig. 2c), likely due 
Giles et al.
Page 4
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 to lower energy expenditure at TN16,17. However, despite similar body weight and adiposity, 
at the time of harvest, TN-housed mice displayed heightened visceral adipose tissue immune 
cell infiltration and adipose tissue macrophage activation, compared to TS-housed, HFD-fed 
mice (Supplementary Fig. 2a–c)—in agreement with a previous report24.
Given the role of obesity and adipose tissue inflammation in glucose dysmetabolism36 we 
next evaluated the impact of TN housing on glucose homeostasis. TN housing, compared to 
TS, exacerbated glucose intolerance only when differences in body weights existed 
(Supplementary Fig. 2d). These differences in glucose tolerance diminished once body 
weights were normalized (Supplementary Fig. 2e). Further, with similar weight gain, both 
TN and TS mice displayed similar insulin sensitivity (Supplementary Fig. 2f) which 
correlated with similar islet sizes and hepatic levels of AKT phosphorylation (data not 
shown). These data agree with previous reports describing the role of TN housing in 
modulation of glucose metabolism and insulin resistance in obesity24.
The impact of TN housing on NAFLD development and progression was examined next. 
Despite similar serum triglyceride and serum and hepatic cholesterol levels (Supplementary 
Fig. 2g–i), TN-housed, compared to TS-housed, obese mice had exacerbated liver weight and 
hepatic steatosis as quantified by hepatic triglyceride levels, Oil Red O staining and NAFLD 
activity score37 (Fig. 2d–h). Histological analysis, used to quantify NAFLD activity score, 
suggested that hepatocytes from TN-housed, as compared to TS-housed, obese mice 
exhibited elevated steatosis, and hepatocyte ballooning characterized by cellular swelling, 
rarefaction of the hepatocytic cytoplasm and clumped strands of intermediate filaments (Fig. 
2g). These findings also correlated with lower gene expression of key lipid mediators known 
to be reduced during NASH (Fig. 2i)38,39.
Progression to, and the severity of, NASH under TN housing was examined next. Modest 
changes in expression of genes related to lipid handling, chemokine production and fibrosis 
were observed in mice fed a chow diet (Supplementary Fig. 3a–c). In the context of HFD 
feeding, however, TN-housed mice exhibited robust exacerbation of hepatic chemokine 
expression (Fig. 2j)3, macrophage infiltration (Fig. 2k), and bacterial translocation to the 
liver, compared to TS-housed mice (Fig. 2l). Further, TN-housed, as compared to TS-housed, 
obese mice, also displayed elevated expression of genes associated with hepatic fibrosis 
induction (Fig. 2m) and a 3-fold induction in hepatocellular damage as measured by serum 
alanine transaminase (ALT) levels (Fig. 2n). However, despite such robust changes, the 
induction of overt bridging hepatic fibrosis was not observed in WT C57BL/6 mice 
(Supplementary Fig. 3d).
To begin to examine the effect of TN housing on hepatic gene expression in the presence or 
absence of dietary modulation, an unbiased approach utilizing RNASeq analysis of liver 
tissue was performed. Although TN, compared to TS housing, altered hepatic gene 
expression in chow fed mice, exposure to HFD exacerbated differential gene expression 
(Supplementary Fig. 3e). In chow fed mice, analysis of differential gene expression revealed 
alterations in liver metabolism, including elevated expression of gene pathways associated 
with lipid metabolism and fatty acid oxidation (Supplementary Fig. 3e,f and Supplementary 
Table 1b). In contrast, analysis of differential gene expression in HFD-fed mice revealed 
Giles et al.
Page 5
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 heightened expression of genes and gene pathways associated with collagen formation, 
apoptosis and HCC induction (Fig. 2o and Supplementary Table 1c). Further, comparison of 
hepatic gene expression changes induced by TN versus TS housing on HFD to known gene 
expression changes induced by human NASH40, revealed that TN drove similar changes in 
expression of genes associated with a variety of NAFLD-related pathways (e.g., 
Inflammatory response, Response to reactive oxygen species and Leukocyte activation; 
Supplementary Fig. 3g).
Next, we compared whether changes in HFD-induced hepatic gene expression at TN or TS 
are more likely to predict gene expression patterns induced by human NASH40. Utility of 
support vector machine analysis41 determined that the gene expression differences induced 
by HFD feeding at TN allowed for an improved prediction of human NASH, over TS 
housing and HFD (Fig. 2p). These findings verify markedly exacerbated HFD-driven 
NAFLD pathogenesis and hepatocellular damage at TN and suggest an improved model for 
human disease.
Although most commonly used for obesity and NAFLD modeling, the C57BL/6 mouse 
strain is highly resistant to induction of hepatic fibrosis. Thus, we next determined if the lack 
of overt hepatic fibrosis observed in C57BL/6 mice was strain specific. Notably, the AKR 
strain of mice develop robust obesity and NAFLD when fed a HFD42. When housed at TN, 
as opposed to TS, and fed a HFD, AKR mice gained more weight but maintained similar 
visceral and subcutaneous adiposity (Supplementary Fig. 4a,b). TN-housed, obese AKR 
mice exhibited greater liver weight, hepatic steatosis, and NAFLD activity scores compared 
to TS-housed AKR controls (Supplementary Fig. 4c–f). The lower NAFLD activity scores 
observed in AKR mice, compared to C57BL/6 mice, may be mouse strain dependent and/or 
due to shortened HFD exposure. The NAFLD activity score in AKR mice was associated 
with greater lobular inflammation and steatosis at TN, but limited hepatocyte ballooning was 
observed in either group at this time. This correlated with higher hepatic chemokine gene 
expression, macrophage infiltration, and hepatocellular damage (Supplementary Fig. 4g–i) 
in TN-housed, compared to TS-housed, AKR mice. Importantly, unlike in C57BL/6 mice, 
HFD feeding under conditions of TN housing, but not TS housing, was sufficient to induce 
fibrosis in AKR mice, as quantified by hepatic gene expression and Trichrome staining 
(Supplementary Fig. 4j–k). Together, these data indicate that the effects of TN housing on 
NAFLD pathogenesis are conserved across different mouse strains, and suggest that the use 
of obese AKR mice at TN may provide a novel and accelerated model for mechanistic 
interrogation of NAFLD-induced hepatic fibrosis.
Adrenal glands are a central production site of circulating corticosterone and 
catecholamines. Immune responsiveness under cold stress is, in part, modulated by 
corticosterone and catecholamine levels. C57BL/6 adrenalectomized male mice fed a HFD 
exhibited similar weight gain and visceral and subcutaneous adiposity at either housing 
temperature (Supplementary Fig. 5a–d). Unlike C57BL/6 mice with intact adrenal glands, 
adrenalectomized C57BL/6 mice housed at TN or TS exhibited similar liver weights, hepatic 
steatosis, lipid handling and chemokine gene expression, macrophage infiltration, expression 
of genes associated with induction of fibrosis and hepatocellular damage (Supplementary 
Fig. 5e–l). Notably, the lack of adrenal glands at TS housing, in combination with HFD, 
Giles et al.
Page 6
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 exacerbated hepatocellular damage compared to non-adrenalectomized mice at TS and 
resulted in levels similar to those observed in TN-housed mice (Supplementary Fig. 5m). 
These data suggest that mediators produced by the adrenal glands play an important role in 
suppressing NAFLD progression during cold stress.
Intestinal permeability and microbiome in TN-driven NAFLD
Augmented intestinal permeability7 and dysbiosis of the intestinal microbiome6 contribute 
to human and mouse NAFLD progression4–6. Although, histological analysis of the small 
intestine revealed no housing temperature or diet driven differences in immune cell 
infiltration (Supplementary Fig. 6a), TN housing, compared to TS, exacerbated para-cellular 
intestinal permeability, as evidenced by translocation of FITC-dextran across the epithelium, 
and lowered trans-epithelial resistance on both chow and HFD (Fig. 3a and Supplementary 
Fig. 6b). Further, TN housing, compared to TS housing, changed intestinal microbiome in as 
little as 2 weeks, prior to being placed on HFD (Supplementary Fig. 6c,d). Extended 
exposure (12 weeks) of randomly separated WT C57BL/6 mice to differential ambient 
temperatures or HFD further exacerbated these differences, with obvious differences 
observed in every phyla analyzed after 24 weeks of exposure (Fig. 3b and Supplementary 
Figs. 6e–k). Notably, TN housing enriched the representation of Bacteroidetes, while TS 
housing preferentially enriched for Firmicutes. Linear discriminant analysis effect size 
(LEfSe) analysis, which was employed to analyze data with specificity to the genus level, 
revealed congruent differences beyond the phylum level (Supplementary Fig. 7).
While the microbiome plays a role in NAFLD in both humans and mice, the two species 
display an inherently different microbial composition. Nevertheless, we examined whether 
the mouse microbiome at TN correlated more closely with microbiomes reported in NASH 
patients6. Comparison of 16S rRNA sequences demonstrated that TN housing of mice on a 
HFD led to greater similarity of their gut microbiome to that observed in patients with 
NASH6. Notably, this was seen in both phyla level alterations (Fig. 3c) and principle 
component analysis (Fig. 3d), where an upward shift (PC2) corresponds with a more NASH-
like metagenome.
TN housing in combination with HFD stress promoted expansion of Gram-negative 
Bacteriodetes (Fig. 3b). Antibiotic-mediated depletion of the Gram-negative microbiome in 
HFD-fed mice housed at TS and TN, did not alter total body weight gain, visceral and 
subcutaneous adiposity, hepatic weight or hepatic triglyceride accumulation, although TS-
housed, antibiotic-treated mice displayed elevated glucose intolerance (Supplementary Fig. 
8a–g). However, antibiotic treatment obviated the greater intestinal permeability observed in 
HFD fed mice housed at TN, compared to Ts (Fig. 3e), lowered NAFLD activity 
inflammation score (Fig. 3f,g), and protected from hepatocellular damage only at TN (Fig. 
3h). Of note, these protective effects in NAFLD were specific to obese TN-housed mice and 
were not observed in obese, antibiotic-treated, TS-housed mice (Fig. 3f–h and 
Supplementary Fig. 8g). These data indicate that changes in intestinal microbiome 
composition are associated with TN-driven amplification of NAFLD.
Giles et al.
Page 7
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Hematopoietic TLR4 and IL-17 axis in TN-driven NAFLD
LPS from Gram-negative bacteria activates TLR4. Our data indicate that TLR4 
responsiveness is elevated at thermoneutrality (Fig. 1e,f). Additionally, TLR4 
polymorphisms and TLR4 expression have been correlated with the progression of human 
NAFLD9. Whether TN-driven modulation of innate immune responses is maintained on 
HFD has not been examined. RNASeq analysis of PBMCs from WT, C57BL/6 mice 
challenged with HFD, revealed greater levels of gene expression in pathways associated with 
cytokine production and TLR responsiveness (Fig. 4a and Supplementary Table 1d). To 
determine the functional relevance of differential immune cell TLR4 expression, TLR4fl/fl 
mice were utilized. Congruent with a previous report43, Vav1-Cre-driven hematopoietic cell 
deletion of TLR4 in TS-housed mice did not hinder the progression of HFD-induced 
NAFLD (Fig. 4b–d). However, under TN housing, such deletion was sufficient to protect 
from HFD-driven increases in weight gain, visceral and subcutaneous adiposity, glucose 
intolerance, liver weight, histologically identifiable steatosis, hepatocyte ballooning and 
lobular inflammation and hepatocellular damage (Fig. 4b–d and Supplementary Fig. 9). 
These data indicate that TLR4 signaling is fundamentally modulated by ambient temperature 
in the context of HFD feeding, and that removing suppression of TLR4 signaling through TN 
housing can contribute to NAFLD pathogenesis.
Induction of IL-6, IL-1β and IL-23 production is associated with Th17 cell polarization and 
IL-17 axis activation10. Hepatic IL-6 expression is elevated in human NAFLD, and serum 
concentrations of IL-1β levels are higher in patients with metabolic syndrome44,45. RNAseq 
analysis of PBMCs from WT C57BL/6 mice provided initial suggestions that TN housing, 
compared to TS housing, coupled with HFD resulted in greater expression of genes related 
to IL-17 production (Fig. 5a and Supplementary Table 1d). We next examined whether TN 
housing altered TLR4 signaling-driven induction of mediators associated with activation of 
the IL-17 axis. LPS stimulation of BMDCs from TN-housed, compared to TS-housed, obese 
mice resulted in greater IL-6, IL-1β production and Il23a gene expression (Supplementary 
Fig. 10a–c). Elevated production of these mediators correlated with exacerbated hepatic 
infiltration of CD4+ T cells capable of both single IL-17+ and dual IL-17+/TNF+ production, 
in TN-housed, obese mice (Fig. 5b,c). Notably, dual IL-17+/TNF+ producing CD4+ T cells 
exacerbate pathogenesis in mouse experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis models46 
and have been associated with higher severity of Crohn’s disease in humans46,47. Hence, the 
contribution of IL-17 axis activation to TN-driven NAFLD pathogenesis was examined. 
Despite similar weight gain, visceral and subcutaneous adiposity, hepatic steatosis, and 
NAFLD activity score analysis (Fig. 5d,e and Supplementary Fig. 10d–h), TN-housed, 
obese, IL-17 axis-deficient mice (IL-17RA−/− and IL-17A−/−) were protected from glucose 
intolerance, exacerbated liver weight and hepatocellular damage, compared to TN-housed 
WT controls (Fig. 5f and Supplementary Fig. 10i,j). These findings suggest that IL-17 axis is 
a relevant factor in regulation of NAFLD pathogenesis and that, unlike TLR4 signaling, a 
role for IL-17 axis in NAFLD is conserved across housing temperatures.
Serum amyloid A (SAA), an acute phase protein produced largely in the liver, is known to 
both activate TLR4 and promote Th17 cell differentiation via antigen presenting cells48. TN-
housed, obese mice exhibited greater hepatic SAA 1 and 2 expression, compared to TS-
Giles et al.
Page 8
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 housed mice (Supplementary Fig. 11a), while deletion of IL-17RA, IL-17A or 
hematopoietic TLR4 was associated with lower hepatic expression of SAA1 (Supplementary 
Fig. 11b,c). These data suggest that TN-mediated modulation of SAA production might 
represent a link between the activation of the TLR4 and IL-17 axes.
TN housing allows for disease modeling in female mice
Human NAFLD equally affects men and women49. However, protection from severe HFD-
induced obesity and NAFLD in C57BL/6 female mice precludes the interrogation of disease 
pathogenesis in a sex-independent manner. Hence we asked whether TN housing would 
allow for the induction of obesity and NAFLD in C57BL/6 female mice. As expected, TS-
housed female mice fed HFD, as compared to chow, displayed mild weight gain over time 
(Fig. 6a). However, TN-housed female mice fed HFD, as compared to chow, exhibited robust 
obesity and total body adiposity (Fig. 6a,b)—to the levels observed in TN-housed male mice 
(Fig. 2). Further, in agreement with data in male mice, under conditions of robust weight 
gain, obese, TN-housed female mice displayed exacerbated glucose intolerance 
(Supplementary Fig. 12a).
Similarly, TN-housed, obese female mice exhibited greater liver weight, hepatic steatosis, 
hepatic chemokine expression3, macrophage infiltration, and hepatic infiltration of both 
single IL-17+ and dual IL-17+/TNF+ producing Th17 cells, compared to TS-housed, HFD-
fed mice (Fig. 6c–i). Further, as in WT C57BL/6 male mice, these physiological changes in 
the liver correlated with greater expression of fibrosis-associated genes (Acta2, Col1a1 and 
Col1a2) and a greater degree of hepatocellular damage (Fig. 6j,k) but did not induce overt 
bridging hepatic fibrosis (Supplementary Fig. 12b) in obese TN-housed compared to 
TS-housed female mice. Notably, TN-housed, compared to TS-housed, obese WT female 
mice exhibited greater SAA1 gene expression (Supplementary Fig. 12c). Thus, TN housing 
allows for development of robust obesity and NAFLD in WT C57BL/6 female mice and, 
importantly, removes the sex bias typically associated with experimental modeling of mouse 
obesity and NAFLD. In sum, these findings demonstrate that TN housing-driven NAFLD 
pathogenesis represents a novel disease model associated with altered corticosterone levels, 
immune responses, metabolism, intestinal barrier integrity and intestinal microbiome (Fig. 
6l).
Discussion
NAFLD research often involves the use of mouse models housed at a suboptimal, cold 
stress-inducing, ambient temperature (typically 22°C) that fails to comprehensively 
recapitulate human disease. In the case of NAFLD, current models in mice include a 
fundamental sex bias, unlike in humans; an inability to study the interplay between 
atherosclerosis and NAFLD; limited induction of pathways associated with development of 
hepatic fibrosis and hepatocellular carcinoma; and altered immune responsiveness compared 
to humans with this condition. While previous reports have demonstrated that housing mice 
at a thermoneutral temperature (TN; 30°C) affects the pathogenesis of multiple infectious 
and metabolic complications, whether TN housing allows for an improved mouse NAFLD 
model has not been previously interrogated.
Giles et al.
Page 9
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Here, we demonstrate, in accordance with previous reports, that the cold stress associated 
with standard mouse housing procedures inhibits immune responses14. Housing mice at TN 
upregulated immune responsiveness both in vivo and ex vivo, something suppressed by 
exogenous administration of corticosterone. Further, TN housing exacerbates cellular 
responsiveness to inflammatory ligands, without alteration of the cell type composition or 
numbers. Additional studies, however, are required to functionally examine the pathways 
central to altered immune cell responsiveness at TN. As such changes are sustained ex vivo, 
TN-driven modulation of cellular metabolism and epigenetics are likely to play a role and 
warrant further investigation.
Robust exacerbation of NAFLD pathogenesis in context of TN housing and HFD-stress 
correlated with heightened hepatic steatosis, hepatic immune cell infiltration, elevated 
expression of genes associated with hepatic fibrosis and HCC, and hepatocellular damage. 
Therefore, TN-driven amplification of disease-propagating processes may allow for in-depth 
interrogation and improved definition of mechanisms central to NAFLD pathogenesis, 
including critical sites of inflammation, cell type(s), and immune mediators, using a 
genetically unbiased approach. However, despite robust disease exacerbation hepatic fibrosis 
was not observed in male or female WT C57BL/6 mice. Thus, additional examination of 
hepatic fibrosis development in C57BL/6 mice, using TN housing in combination with 
dietary challenges known to promote fibrosis (e.g., methionine choline deficient diets, high 
fat plus high cholesterol and high fat plus high fructose diets)50 might offer a clear 
advantage over existing experimental NAFLD models for evaluating novel therapeutics. 
Notably, the induction of measureable hepatic fibrosis by HFD at TN is possible, as 
demonstrated in AKR mice. Employing these mice in future studies may provide a novel 
model for mechanistic interrogation of NAFLD-induced hepatic fibrosis. Lastly, TN housing 
appears to hold relevance to human disease and improve upon existing NAFLD models, 
even in C57BL/6 mice, as hepatic gene expression in this model provides improved 
prediction of human NASH.
Interactions between the microbiome and the immune system are thought to play a key role 
in NAFLD. Augmented intestinal permeability also correlates with NASH severity7. 
Notably, TN housing and HFD feeding resulted in heightened intestinal permeability and 
intestinal microbiome dysbiosis, which mirrors that observed with human obesity- and 
NASH-driven dysbiosis6. Intestinal microbiome changes are certainly one of the many 
factors in the causal nexus that allow pronounced expression of the NAFLD phenotype in 
mice housed at thermoneutrality. However, given the consistency in the impact of TN 
housing in modulation of immune responses and metabolism among multiple research 
institutions, it is unlikely that a unique “microbiome mix”, specific to a single institution, is 
driving observed differences independent of temperature effects. Notably, our data evoke 
several interesting questions and areas of future study, including: What are the bidirectional 
interactions between altered microbiome and altered immune responsiveness under TN 
housing? Does TN housing alter the immune response in gnotobiotic mice? Can protection 
from HFD-driven obesity in germ-free mice51 be reversed utilizing TN housing? Are levels 
of specific microbial byproducts or microbial species thought to play a role in obesity-
associated inflammation and NAFLD altered at TN11,52?
Giles et al.
Page 10
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Our data suggest that TLR4 signaling, presumably via Gram-negative microbiome dysbiosis, 
plays a role in TN-driven NAFLD pathogenesis. Additionally, we demonstrate that this 
pathogenic role for Vav1-driven deletion of TLR4 expression is important only when mice 
are housed at TN. Of note, Vav1-cre can be activated in different cells, and the necessary 
hematopoietic and/or endothelial cell type should be evaluated53. Also, whether TLR4’s role 
is dependent on LPS or on induction of various endogenous TLR4 ligands (e.g., HMGB1, 
fibronectin, fibrinogen and resistin) that have been associated with NAFLD 
progression43,54–56 is unknown.
Our findings also highlight the functional effector relevance of the IL-17 axis in TN-housing 
driven NAFLD. The cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying IL-17 mediated effects 
in NAFLD are not well defined. IL-17-driven induction of chemokines (e.g., CXCL1 and 
CCL2) is associated with both macrophage and neutrophil hepatic infiltration and 
activation57. Further, IL-17 has been demonstrated to play a significant role in liver 
fibrosis58. Notably, both Cxcl1 and Ccl2 hepatic expression and markers of fibrosis are 
elevated in TN-housed, HFD-fed livers. Thus, definition of the critical IL-17RA-expressing 
cell type(s) within the liver (e.g., hepatocytes, stellate cells, Kupffer cells, etc.) deserves 
examination. Similarly, definition of the critical IL-17 producing cell type(s) requires 
additional characterization. Notably, while CD4+ T cells are primary IL-17 producers, a 
variety of other cells, including CD8+ T cells and innate lymphoid cells, have been shown to 
produce IL-17 within the liver59.
Corticosterone levels are higher in mice housed at TS. Our findings demonstrated that 
exogenous administration of corticosterone in TN mice is sufficient to prevent augmented 
immune responsiveness. In contrast, adrenalectomy removes the inhibition of NAFLD 
pathogenesis associated with TS, as compared to TN, housing. These data suggest that 
specific signaling mediators released via the adrenal glands may play a suppressive role in 
NAFLD pathogenesis. Of note, chemical inhibition of β-adrenergic receptor signaling 
exacerbates NAFLD progression in mice60. However, β-adrenergic receptors also play a 
homeostatic role in intestinal, liver and immune cells. Thus, future studies employing the use 
of β2AR, β3AR and/or GR cell type specific knockouts are required to better define 
contribution of these pathways to NAFLD pathogenesis.
Human obesity and NAFLD are equally represented in males and females49. The ability of 
TN housing to promote development of robust obesity and NAFLD in female mice further 
supports the relevance of TN housing to human physiology and allows for the realization of 
novel pathways associated with protection from HFD-driven obesity in female mice. 
Importantly, TN housing may allow for improved modeling of the contribution of maternal 
obesity on disease pathogenesis over generations of offspring. In addition, atherosclerosis, 
the most common cause of mortality in NAFLD patients25, is another metabolic disease that 
lacks an appropriate mouse model that is similarly sex restrained. Importantly housing WT 
mice at TN in combination with a “western” diet allows for atherosclerosis induction in male 
C57BL/6 mice19 and hence might provide for interrogation of pathways critical for the 
interplay of these two diseases as well as for removing sex bias in modeling atherosclerosis.
Giles et al.
Page 11
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Thus, housing temperature is an overlooked and very important variable in the modeling of 
human disease. Close attention to this variable has promise for discovery of novel 
mechanisms underlying disease pathogenesis and for improved modeling of the non-
communicable metabolic diseases that are causing an increasing burden of morbidity and 
mortality worldwide.
Methods
Mice
With the exception of AKR mice (Jackson), all male and female mice used were on a 
C57BL/6 background. WT, TLR4fl/fl 61, IL-17RA−/− (Amgen)11, and IL-17A−/− 62 mice 
were bred at Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center (CCHMC) in a specific 
pathogen-free (spf) facility maintained at 22°C, with free access to autoclaved food (LAB 
Diet #5010; calories provided by carbohydrates [58%], fat [13%] and protein [29%]) and 
water. 6 week old adrenalectomized mice, on a C57BL/6 background, were obtained from 
Jackson. For experimental purposes, mice were randomly allocated to groups and housed in 
separate spf units contained within the same animal barrier but maintained at either 22°C or 
at 30–33°C. All care was provided in accordance with the Guide for the Care and Use of 
Laboratory Animals. All studies were approved by the CCHMC IACUC.
Corticosterone Levels
Serum corticosterone levels were detected by ELISA according to manufacturer’s 
instructions (Arbor Assays).
qRT-PCR
Tissue samples were homogenized in TRIzol (Invitrogen), RNA was extracted, reverse 
transcribed to cDNA (Verso cDNA Synthesis Kit; Thermo Scientific) and subjected to qPCR 
analysis (Light Cycler 480 II; Roche) – all according to manufacturer’s instruction as 
previously described63. The following primers pairs were used: Nr3c1 For 
CCATAATGGCATACCGAAGC Rev AGGCCGCTCAGTGTTTTCTA – Adbr2 For 
TAGCGATCCACTGCAATCAC Rev ATTTTGGCAACTTCTGGTGC – Ppargc1a For 
CTGCTAGCAAGTTTGCCTCA Rev AGTGGTGCAGTGACCAATCA – Ucp1 For 
TCAGCTGTTCAAAGCACACA Rev GTACCAAGCTGTGCGATGTC – Ucp2 For 
TCCTGCTACCTCCCAGAAGA Rev CTGAGACCTCAAAGCAGCCT – Srebp1c For 
CTGTCTCACCCCCAGCATAG Rev GATGTGCGAACTGGACACAG – Ppara For 
CATGGGGAGAGAGGACAGA Rev AGTTCGGGAACAAGACGTTG – Col1a1 For 
GGTTTCCACGTCTCACCATT Rev ACATGTTCAGCTTTGTGGACC – Col1a2 For 
AGCAGGTCCTTGGAAACCTT Rev AAGGAGTTTCATCTGGCCCT – Ccl2 For 
AGATGCAGTTAACGCCCCAC Rev TGTCTGGACCCATTCCTTCTTG – Ccl3 For 
ACCATGACACTCTGCAACCAAG Rev TTGGAGTCAGCGCAGATCTG – Cxcl1 For 
ACCCAAACCGAAGTCATAGC Rev TCTCCGTTACTTGGGGACAC; Il23a For 
AGGCTCCCCTTTGAAGATGT Rev TTGTGACCCACAAGGACTCA – Saa1 For 
CATTTGTTCACGAGGCTTTCC Rev GTTTTTCCAGTTAGCTTCCTTCATGT – Saa2 For 
TGTGTATCCCACAAGGTTTCAGA Rev TTATTACCCTCTCCTCCTCAAGCA –Beta-
actin (Actb) For GGCCCAGAGCAAGAGAGGTA Rev GGTTGGCCTTAGGTTTCAGG. 
Giles et al.
Page 12
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mRNA expression of each gene was compared to Beta-actin expression (endogenous house-
keeping gene control).
RNA sequencing and gene expression quantification
PBMCs were collected from mice fed a chow or HFD for 8 weeks. Liver samples were 
collected from mice fed a chow or HFD for 24 weeks. Gene expression was determined by 
running 50 base pair single-end reads (~20 million reads per sample). All transcriptomic 
analyses were performed in StrandNGS. Following the removal of barcodes and primers, 
raw reads were aligned to the mm10 genome using annotations provided by UCSC with the 
following parameters: (1) minimum percent identify = 90; (2) maximum percent gaps = 5; 
(3) minimum aligned read length = 25; (4) number of matched to output per read = 1; and 
(5) ignore reads with more than 5 matches. The proprietary aligner (COBWeb) is based on 
the Burrow Wheeler Transform method. Aligned reads were used to compute reads per 
kilobase per million (RPKM) using the Expectation-Maximization algorithm for the 
maximum likelihood estimation of expression. Further, RPKM were thresholded at 1 and 
normalized using the DESeq algorithm, which computes a normalization factor (NF) for 
each sample. Within each sample, each transcript is divided by that transcript’s geometric 
mean across samples. The within-sample median of these values is that sample’s NF. To 
obtain normalized counts, a sample’s raw RPKM are divided by that sample’s NF. Finally, 
normalized per-transcript RPKM were baselined to the median of all samples. Reasonably 
expressed transcripts (raw RPKM >3 in 100% of samples in at least one condition) were 
included for differential analysis. Differential expression was determined through 2-Way 
ANOVAs with an FDR-corrected p-value cutoff of 0.05 and a fold change requirement of 
>2. Raw data can be accessed at GSE80976. For pathway analysis, the database at 
toppgene.cchmc.org was employed, which amasses ontological data from over 30 individual 
repositories64.
We performed candidate gene prioritization on differentially regaled genes between TN and 
TS animals on HFD. Using the Toppgene Suite Candidate Prioritization tool, we ranked 
genes based on their functional similarity to NASH-related genes (extracted from the 
NASH-profiler; healthy obese v NASH at FDR-p-value<0.05 and FC>2). The top 20 ranked 
genes were submitted to ToppCluster and Cytoscape for ontological assessment and 
visualization (data depicted in Supplementary Fig. 3g).
Further, using a human NASH cohort, we assessed the ability of genes differentially 
regulated under HFD conditions compared to chow in TS and TN housing conditions to 
discriminate between healthy obese controls and individuals with NASH. Using Support 
Vector Machine (SVM), we quantified the discriminative capabilities of the following gene 
sets: 1) differentially regulated between HFD and Chow in TN; 2) differentially regulated 
between HFD and Chow in TS; and 3) differentially regulated genes between healthy obese 
controls and NASH identified through the NASH-profiler40. Model accuracy was compared 
between the three gene sets (data depicted in Fig. 2p).
Giles et al.
Page 13
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Cytokine Production
Cytokines were detected employing biotinylated capture antibodies, detection antibodies and 
recombinant protein mouse standards. For in vivo production, in vivo cytokine capture 
assays were employed as previously described11,65,66. Briefly, cytokines were detected using 
IVCCA employing biotinylated capture antibodies [IL-6 (MP5-32C11), TNFα (TN3-19)] 
detection antibodies and recombinant protein mouse standards, all from eBioscience. 
Biotinylated capture antibodies were injected via tail vein or intraperitoneally and terminal 
serum collection was performed 24 hours later. For in vitro production, ELISAs were 
employed as previously described11,65. For mice, cytokine levels of TNF and IL-6 were 
determined according to manufacturer’s protocol (BD OptEIA).
Cell culture and in vitro cytokine production
Mouse BMDCs were differentiated as previously described67. Mouse splenocytes and 
BMDCs were stimulated with ultrapure LPS (100 ng/mL; Invivogen) for 4 hours or with 
1μM norepinephrine or dexamethasone as noted.
Obesity and NAFLD Model
At 6 weeks of age mice were randomly separated into TS or TN housing facilities. After 2 
weeks of acclimation, mice were fed either an irradiated high fat diet (HFD; Research Diets 
#D12492; 60% of calories from fat) or a chow diet (LAB Diet #5010; calories provided by 
carbohydrates [58%], fat [13%] and protein [29%])). All food was replaced weekly to avoid 
contamination. All mice were fasted overnight prior to, glucose metabolism testing, insulin 
tolerance testing, or terminal harvest (completed between 7–10am). Glucose and insulin 
tolerance tests were done as previously described11. Briefly, following an overnight fast, 
glucose tolerance levels were determined by injecting mice with 10μL of a 10% dextrose 
solution per gram of body weight and glucose levels were quantified kinetically at the times 
shown. For insulin tolerance testing, mice were given 10μL of a 0.15 units/mL solution of 
insulin (Novolin) per gram of body weight. Hepatic triglyceride deposition, and serum 
alanine transaminase levels were quantified as previously described11. NAFLD activity score 
(NAS) was determined from H&E staining by a certified pathologist according to standard 
practice37. Total body fat, lean and water mass were determined by nuclear magnetic 
resonance (Whole Body Composition Analyzer; Echo MRI)68.
Histology
Oil red O were performed on 5 μm flash frozen tissue sections. Masson’s Trichrome and 
hematoxylin and eosin staining were performed paraffin-embedded tissue blocks. Fibrosis 
quantification employed the use of an Aperio AT2 Slide Scanner, ImageScope (v. 
12.3.1.5011), Color Deconvolution (v9) and Positive Pixel Count (v9; all Leica). Color 
deconvolution was used to identify the value of the positive stain. This value (0.622712) was 
subsequently identified in the slides using positive pixel count and percent positive area, 
which took into account the total number of pixels identified, was quantified.
Giles et al.
Page 14
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Flow Cytometry
Single cell suspensions were derived from hepatic homogenate and stained with directly 
conjugated monoclonal antibodies or isotype controls. Staining for cytokine expression was 
completed after 4 hours of stimulation with 50 ng/mL Phorbol 12-Myristate 13-acetate 
(PMA; Promega), 1 μg/mL Ionomycin (Calbiochem) and 10μg/mL Brefeldin A (Gold Bio). 
Data collection and analysis were done as previously described11,63. Briefly, cells were 
stained with Live/Dead stain (Zombie UV Dye: Biolegend) and with directly-conjugated 
monoclonal antibodies to CD45-AF700 (104), CD11b-PE (M1/70), F4/80-APCef780 
(BM8), Ly6C-Percp (HK1.4), Gr1-FITC (RB6-8C5), NK1.1-PECy7 (PK136), TCRβ-PE 
(H57-597), CD4-APCef780 (GK1.5), CD8-ef450 (53-6.7), TNF-BV650 (MP6-XT22), 
IL-17A-Percp (17B7) and IL-17F-PE (18F10) [all antibodies from e-Bioscience]. Flow 
cytometry data were then collected using a LSR Fortessa (BD) flow cytometer and analyzed 
using FlowJo X software (vX0.7).
Bacterial Translocation
Liver tissue was homogenized in enriched thioglycollate medium, and subsequently cultured 
on TSA II/5% sheep blood plates (BD Bioscience).
Intestinal Permeability
1 cm of freshly isolated jejunum was mounted in a U2500 dual Ussing chamber (Warner 
Instruments). The trans-epithelial resistance and FITC-dextran flux was determined as 
previously described69.
Microbiome Analysis
Bacterial DNA was isolated from fecal material when mice arrived at the facility (-2 weeks), 
before they were placed on diet (0 weeks), and at 12 and 24 weeks after either diet was 
introduced. Partial 16S rRNA gene sequences were amplified targeting the hypervariable 
regions v1/v2 using primers 27f (AGAGTTTGATCCTGGCTCAG) and 338r 
(TGCTGCCTCCCGTAGGAGT). Equimolar amounts of all samples were subjected to 
sequencing using a MiSeq sequencer from Illumina. Data were then processed using mothur 
software70 to determine phylotypes and operational taxonomic units (OTUs) and subjected 
to statistical analysis. LEfSe analysis was performed using the online tool at https://
huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/galaxy/71. For comparison to the human microbiome, 
individual reads were assigned to taxonomy using the QIIME package72. Similarly, raw 
human 16S sequencing data published by Zhu et al6 were downloaded from http://
metagenomics.anl.gov/linkin.cgi?project=1195 and analyzed using the same QIIME 
assignment method and analytic pipeline as the mouse 16S read data. Taxonomic data was 
first analyzed using Mothur software to determine significantly different operational taxa 
units (OTUs). Similarly, GraphPad Prism (ver 6.07) was used to plot relative species 
abundance and compare between groups. The Mann-Whitney test was applied to the data to 
determine statistical significance of observed differences. Between-class principal 
component analysis was performed using the ade4 package (ver 5.12) in R, something 
available upon request from corresponding author. Mouse microbiome raw 16S rRNA can 
be accessed at http://metagenomics.anl.gov/linkin.cgi?project=mgp18319.
Giles et al.
Page 15
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Microbiome Manipulation
For antibiotic mediated depletion of Gram-negative bacteria, a cocktail of neomycin and 
polymixin B sulfate (0.5 and 0.125 mg/mL, respectively) was added to the drinking water 
after 8 weeks of HFD feeding.
Statistical Analysis
Sample sizes were determined based on preliminary data, which with respect to obesity and 
NAFLD modeling included weight gain, hepatic triglyceride deposition, immune cell 
infiltration and hepatocellular damage. Statistical tests were employed for all data sets with 
similar variance. The test used was dependent on both the number of groups being compared 
and whether the data were normally distributed. For normally distributed data, Student’s t-
test was used when the comparison was two groups, while a one way ANOVA was 
employed for 3 or more groups, with Tukey’s post hoc test to assess differences between 
specific groups. For non-parametric data sets the Mann-Whitney test was employed. 
Statistical analysis was completed using Prism 5a (GraphPad Software, Inc.). All values are 
represented as means + s.e.m. No animals were excluded from analysis. Studies were not 
blinded unless otherwise noted above.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by a NIH R01DK099222 and R01DK099222-S1 (to SD), R01DK033201 (to 
CRK), K12-HD000850 (to SS), NIEHS Grant P30 ES006096 University of Cincinnati Center for Environmental 
Genomics (associated with DAG), PHS Grant P30 DK078392 Pathology of the Digestive Disease Research Core 
Center at CCHMC (associated with SD), and German Research Foundation IRTG 1911 (projects A6 and B8 to CS 
and JR). We would also like to acknowledge Dr. Claire Chougnet (CCHMC, Division of Immunobiology) for 
providing access to human PBMC samples and Christopher Woods (CCHMC, Division of Pathology and 
Laboratory Medicine) for technical assistance.
References
1. Ma C, et al. NAFLD causes selective CD4(+) T lymphocyte loss and promotes 
hepatocarcinogenesis. Nature. 2016; 531:253–257. [PubMed: 26934227] 
2. Rinella ME. Will the increased prevalence of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) in the age of 
better hepatitis C virus therapy make NASH the deadlier disease? Hepatology. 2011; 54:1118–1120. 
[PubMed: 21956705] 
3. Tiniakos DG, Vos MB, Brunt EM. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: pathology and pathogenesis. 
Annual review of pathology. 2010; 5:145–171.
4. Rahman K, et al. Loss of Junctional Adhesion Molecule A Promotes Severe Steatohepatitis in Mice 
on a Diet High in Saturated Fat, Fructose, and Cholesterol. Gastroenterology. 2016; 151:733–746. 
e712. [PubMed: 27342212] 
5. Mehal WZ. The Gordian Knot of dysbiosis, obesity and NAFLD. Nature reviews. Gastroenterology 
& hepatology. 2013; 10:637–644. [PubMed: 23958600] 
6. Zhu L, et al. Characterization of gut microbiomes in nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) patients: a 
connection between endogenous alcohol and NASH. Hepatology. 2013; 57:601–609. [PubMed: 
23055155] 
7. Miele L, et al. Increased intestinal permeability and tight junction alterations in nonalcoholic fatty 
liver disease. Hepatology. 2009; 49:1877–1887. [PubMed: 19291785] 
Giles et al.
Page 16
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 8. Vespasiani-Gentilucci U, et al. Hepatic toll-like receptor 4 expression is associated with portal 
inflammation and fibrosis in patients with NAFLD. Liver Int. 2015; 35:569–581. [PubMed: 
24649857] 
9. Kiziltas S, et al. TLR4 gene polymorphism in patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in 
comparison to healthy controls. Metab Syndr Relat Disord. 2014; 12:165–170. [PubMed: 
24443993] 
10. Mills KH. TLR-dependent T cell activation in autoimmunity. Nat Rev Immunol. 2011; 11:807–
822. [PubMed: 22094985] 
11. Harley IT, et al. IL-17 signaling accelerates the progression of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in 
mice. Hepatology. 2014; 59:1830–1839. [PubMed: 24115079] 
12. Rau M, et al. Progression from Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver to Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis Is Marked 
by a Higher Frequency of Th17 Cells in the Liver and an Increased Th17/Resting Regulatory T 
Cell Ratio in Peripheral Blood and in the Liver. J Immunol. 2016; 196:97–105. [PubMed: 
26621860] 
13. Hebbard L, George J. Animal models of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Nature reviews. 
Gastroenterology & hepatology. 2011; 8:35–44. [PubMed: 21119613] 
14. Karp CL. Unstressing intemperate models: how cold stress undermines mouse modeling. J Exp 
Med. 2012; 209:1069–1074. [PubMed: 22665703] 
15. Gordon, CJ. Temperature regulation in laboratory rodents. Cambridge University Press; Cambridge 
England; New York, NY, USA: 1993. 
16. Maloney SK, Fuller A, Mitchell D, Gordon C, Overton JM. Translating animal model research: 
does it matter that our rodents are cold? Physiology (Bethesda). 2014; 29:413–420. [PubMed: 
25362635] 
17. Stemmer K, et al. Thermoneutral housing is a critical factor for immune function and diet-induced 
obesity in C57BL/6 nude mice. Int J Obes (Lond). 2015; 39:791–797. [PubMed: 25349057] 
18. Bowers SL, Bilbo SD, Dhabhar FS, Nelson RJ. Stressor-specific alterations in corticosterone and 
immune responses in mice. Brain Behav Immun. 2008; 22:105–113. [PubMed: 17890050] 
19. Giles DA, et al. Modulation of ambient temperature promotes inflammation and initiates 
atherosclerosis in wild type C57BL/6 mice. Mol Metab. 2016; 5:1121–1130. [PubMed: 27818938] 
20. Rudaya AY, Steiner AA, Robbins JR, Dragic AS, Romanovsky AA. Thermoregulatory responses to 
lipopolysaccharide in the mouse: dependence on the dose and ambient temperature. Am J Physiol 
Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2005; 289:R1244–1252. [PubMed: 16081879] 
21. Moragues V, Pinkerton H. Variation in Morbidity and Mortality of Murine Typhus Infection in 
Mice with Changes in the Environmental Temperature. J Exp Med. 1944; 79:41–43. [PubMed: 
19871351] 
22. Foxman EF, et al. Temperature-dependent innate defense against the common cold virus limits 
viral replication at warm temperature in mouse airway cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015; 
112:827–832. [PubMed: 25561542] 
23. Eng JW, et al. Housing temperature-induced stress drives therapeutic resistance in murine tumour 
models through beta2-adrenergic receptor activation. Nat Commun. 2015; 6:6426. [PubMed: 
25756236] 
24. Tian XY, et al. Thermoneutral Housing Accelerates Metabolic Inflammation to Potentiate 
Atherosclerosis but Not Insulin Resistance. Cell Metab. 2016; 23:165–178. [PubMed: 26549485] 
25. Athyros VG, et al. Cardiovascular risk across the histological spectrum and the clinical 
manifestations of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: An update. World J Gastroenterol. 2015; 
21:6820–6834. [PubMed: 26078558] 
26. Kox M, et al. Voluntary activation of the sympathetic nervous system and attenuation of the innate 
immune response in humans. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014; 111:7379–7384. [PubMed: 
24799686] 
27. Hanssen MJ, et al. Short-term cold acclimation improves insulin sensitivity in patients with type 2 
diabetes mellitus. Nat Med. 2015; 21:863–865. [PubMed: 26147760] 
28. Overton JM. Phenotyping small animals as models for the human metabolic syndrome: 
thermoneutrality matters. Int J Obes (Lond). 2010; 34(Suppl 2):S53–58. [PubMed: 21151148] 
Giles et al.
Page 17
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 29. Stemmer K, et al. Thermoneutral housing is a critical factor for immune function and diet-induced 
obesity in C57BL/6 nude mice. Int J Obes (Lond). 2014
30. Swoap SJ, et al. Vagal tone dominates autonomic control of mouse heart rate at thermoneutrality. 
American journal of physiology. Heart and circulatory physiology. 2008; 294:H1581–1588. 
[PubMed: 18245567] 
31. Emre Y, Nubel T. Uncoupling protein UCP2: when mitochondrial activity meets immunity. FEBS 
Lett. 2010; 584:1437–1442. [PubMed: 20227410] 
32. Bhattacharyya S, Brown DE, Brewer JA, Vogt SK, Muglia LJ. Macrophage glucocorticoid 
receptors regulate Toll-like receptor 4-mediated inflammatory responses by selective inhibition of 
p38 MAP kinase. Blood. 2007; 109:4313–4319. [PubMed: 17255352] 
33. Izeboud CA, Mocking JA, Monshouwer M, van Miert AS, Witkamp RF. Participation of beta-
adrenergic receptors on macrophages in modulation of LPS-induced cytokine release. J Recept 
Signal Transduct Res. 1999; 19:191–202. [PubMed: 10071758] 
34. Emre Y, et al. Mitochondria contribute to LPS-induced MAPK activation via uncoupling protein 
UCP2 in macrophages. Biochem J. 2007; 402:271–278. [PubMed: 17073824] 
35. Wahle M, et al. Beta2-adrenergic receptors mediate the differential effects of catecholamines on 
cytokine production of PBMC. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2005; 25:384–394. [PubMed: 
16022583] 
36. Xu H, et al. Chronic inflammation in fat plays a crucial role in the development of obesity-related 
insulin resistance. J Clin Invest. 2003; 112:1821–1830. [PubMed: 14679177] 
37. Brunt EM, et al. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) activity score and the histopathologic 
diagnosis in NAFLD: distinct clinicopathologic meanings. Hepatology. 2011; 53:810–820. 
[PubMed: 21319198] 
38. Nagaya T, et al. Down-regulation of SREBP-1c is associated with the development of burned-out 
NASH. J Hepatol. 2010; 53:724–731. [PubMed: 20655124] 
39. Rizki G, et al. Mice fed a lipogenic methionine-choline-deficient diet develop hypermetabolism 
coincident with hepatic suppression of SCD-1. J Lipid Res. 2006; 47:2280–2290. [PubMed: 
16829692] 
40. Teufel A, et al. Comparison of Gene Expression Patterns Between Mouse Models of Nonalcoholic 
Fatty Liver Disease and Liver Tissues From Patients. Gastroenterology. 2016; 151:513–525. e510. 
[PubMed: 27318147] 
41. Brown MP, et al. Knowledge-based analysis of microarray gene expression data by using support 
vector machines. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000; 97:262–267. [PubMed: 10618406] 
42. Alexander J, Chang GQ, Dourmashkin JT, Leibowitz SF. Distinct phenotypes of obesity-prone 
AKR/J, DBA2J and C57BL/6J mice compared to control strains. Int J Obes (Lond). 2006; 30:50–
59. [PubMed: 16231032] 
43. Li L, Chen L, Hu L. Nuclear Factor High-mobility Group Box1 Mediating the Activation of Toll-
like Receptor 4 Signaling in Hepatocytes in the Early Stage of Non-alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease 
in Mice. J Clin Exp Hepatol. 2011; 1:123–124. [PubMed: 25755327] 
44. Wieckowska A, et al. Increased hepatic and circulating interleukin-6 levels in human nonalcoholic 
steatohepatitis. The American journal of gastroenterology. 2008; 103:1372–1379. [PubMed: 
18510618] 
45. Vandanmagsar B, et al. The NLRP3 inflammasome instigates obesity-induced inflammation and 
insulin resistance. Nature medicine. 2011; 17:179–188.
46. Langrish CL, et al. IL-23 drives a pathogenic T cell population that induces autoimmune 
inflammation. J Exp Med. 2005; 201:233–240. [PubMed: 15657292] 
47. Ramesh R, et al. Pro-inflammatory human Th17 cells selectively express P-glycoprotein and are 
refractory to glucocorticoids. J Exp Med. 2014; 211:89–104. [PubMed: 24395888] 
48. Sano T, et al. An IL-23R/IL-22 Circuit Regulates Epithelial Serum Amyloid A to Promote Local 
Effector Th17 Responses. Cell. 2015; 163:381–393. [PubMed: 26411290] 
49. Pan JJ, Fallon MB. Gender and racial differences in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. World J 
Hepatol. 2014; 6:274–283. [PubMed: 24868321] 
50. Kanuri G, Bergheim I. In vitro and in vivo models of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). 
Int J Mol Sci. 2013; 14:11963–11980. [PubMed: 23739675] 
Giles et al.
Page 18
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 51. Backhed F, Manchester JK, Semenkovich CF, Gordon JI. Mechanisms underlying the resistance to 
diet-induced obesity in germ-free mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007; 104:979–984. [PubMed: 
17210919] 
52. Puddu A, Sanguineti R, Montecucco F, Viviani GL. Evidence for the gut microbiota short-chain 
fatty acids as key pathophysiological molecules improving diabetes. Mediators Inflamm. 2014; 
2014:162021. [PubMed: 25214711] 
53. Inra CN, et al. A perisinusoidal niche for extramedullary haematopoiesis in the spleen. Nature. 
2015; 527:466–471. [PubMed: 26570997] 
54. Alisi A, et al. Plasma high mobility group box 1 protein reflects fibrosis in pediatric nonalcoholic 
fatty liver disease. Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 2014; 14:763–771. [PubMed: 24927058] 
55. do Nascimento JH, Epifanio M, Soder RB, Baldisserotto M. MRI-diagnosed nonalcoholic fatty 
liver disease is correlated to insulin resistance in adolescents. Acad Radiol. 2013; 20:1436–1442. 
[PubMed: 24119357] 
56. Sorrentino P, et al. Predicting fibrosis worsening in obese patients with NASH through 
parenchymal fibronectin, HOMA-IR, and hypertension. Am J Gastroenterol. 2010; 105:336–344. 
[PubMed: 19861959] 
57. Jin W, Dong C. IL-17 cytokines in immunity and inflammation. Emerg Microbes Infect. 2013; 
2:e60. [PubMed: 26038490] 
58. Meng F, et al. Interleukin-17 signaling in inflammatory, Kupffer cells, and hepatic stellate cells 
exacerbates liver fibrosis in mice. Gastroenterology. 2012; 143:765–776. e761–763. [PubMed: 
22687286] 
59. Giles DA, Moreno-Fernandez ME, Divanovic S. IL-17 Axis Driven Inflammation in Non-
Alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease Progression. Curr Drug Targets. 2015; 16:1315–1323. [PubMed: 
26028039] 
60. McKee C, et al. Propranolol, a beta-adrenoceptor antagonist, worsens liver injury in a model of 
non-alcoholic steatohepatitis. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013; 437:597–602. [PubMed: 
23850676] 
61. McAlees JW, et al. Distinct Tlr4-expressing cell compartments control neutrophilic and 
eosinophilic airway inflammation. Mucosal Immunol. 2015; 8:863–873. [PubMed: 25465099] 
62. Komiyama Y, et al. IL-17 plays an important role in the development of experimental autoimmune 
encephalomyelitis. J Immunol. 2006; 177:566–573. [PubMed: 16785554] 
63. Giles DA, et al. Regulation of Inflammation by IL-17A and IL-17F Modulates Non-Alcoholic 
Fatty Liver Disease Pathogenesis. PLoS One. 2016; 11:e0149783. [PubMed: 26895034] 
64. Chen J, Bardes EE, Aronow BJ, Jegga AG. ToppGene Suite for gene list enrichment analysis and 
candidate gene prioritization. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009; 37:W305–311. [PubMed: 19465376] 
65. Divanovic S, Trompette A, Ashworth JI, Rao MB, Karp CL. Therapeutic enhancement of 
protective immunity during experimental leishmaniasis. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2011; 5:e1316. 
[PubMed: 21909452] 
66. Finkelman, F., Morris, S., Orekhova, T., Sehy, D. The in vivo cytokine capture assay for 
measurement of cytokine production in the mouse. In: Coligan …, John E., et al., editors. Current 
protocols in immunology. Vol. Chapter 6. 2003. p. 28
67. Divanovic S, et al. Negative regulation of Toll-like receptor 4 signaling by the Toll-like receptor 
homolog RP105. Nat Immunol. 2005; 6:571–578. [PubMed: 15852007] 
68. Castaneda TR, et al. Metabolic control by S6 kinases depends on dietary lipids. PLoS One. 2012; 
7:e32631. [PubMed: 22412899] 
69. Wu D, et al. Interleukin-13 (IL-13)/IL-13 receptor alpha1 (IL-13Ralpha1) signaling regulates 
intestinal epithelial cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator channel-dependent Cl- 
secretion. The Journal of biological chemistry. 2011; 286:13357–13369. [PubMed: 21303908] 
70. Schloss PD, et al. Introducing mothur: open-source, platform-independent, community-supported 
software for describing and comparing microbial communities. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2009; 
75:7537–7541. [PubMed: 19801464] 
71. Segata N, et al. Metagenomic biomarker discovery and explanation. Genome Biol. 2011; 12:R60. 
[PubMed: 21702898] 
Giles et al.
Page 19
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 72. Caporaso JG, et al. QIIME allows analysis of high-throughput community sequencing data. Nature 
methods. 2010; 7:335–336. [PubMed: 20383131] 
Giles et al.
Page 20
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
Thermoneutral housing relieves stress and augments inflammation. (a–f) 6 week-old WT 
C57BL/6 male mice were housed at either standard (TS; 22°C) or thermoneutral (TN; 30°C) 
conditions for a minimum of 3 weeks. (a) Expression of the indicated genes in brown 
adipose tissue (n = 5 per group). (b) Serum corticosterone levels (n = 7 per group). (c) 
Expression of the indicated genes in the spleen (n = 3 per group). (d) Upregulated gene 
expression pathways in PBMCs and genes within pathways, determined by RNASeq 
analysis (n = 2 per group). (e) Serum TNF and IL-6 level fold change of unstimulated. 
Giles et al.
Page 21
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 TN-housed (n = 29 per group) mice; LPS-stimulated, TS housed (n = 4 per group); and 
TN-housed (n = 3 per group) mice compared to unstimulated, TS-housed (n = 31 per group) 
mice. (f) Fold change in splenocyte or BMDC supernatants derived from TS- or TN-housed 
mice for TNF (n = 3 per group) and IL-6 (n = 5 per group). (g) Serum fold change for TNF 
in LPS-treated, TN-housed (n = 3 per group) and TN-housed mice also treated with 100mg/L 
corticosterone in drinking water (n = 4 per group) compared to LPS-treated, TS-housed mice 
(n = 4 per group). For bar graphs, data represents mean + s.e.m. (a–c and g) A single 
experiment. (e) Samples represent combined data of 4 individual experiments. (f) A 
representative of 2 individual experiments. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, ****P < 
0.0001. (a–c and e–f) Student’s t-test. (g) One way ANOVA with post hoc Tukey’s test.
Giles et al.
Page 22
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. 
Thermoneutral housing exacerbates HFD-driven NAFLD pathogenesis. (a–o) 6 week-old 
WT C57BL/6 male mice were housed at TS (22°C) or TN (30°C) for 24 weeks and fed a 
chow or HFD. (a) Weight gain. (b) Total body lean and fat mass. (c) Daily caloric intake. (d) 
Liver weight. (e) Hepatic triglyceride levels (a-e; n = 8 per group). (f) Oil red O staining, 
percent area positive for lipid accumulation. (g) Representative liver histology (n = 4 per 
group) by H&E staining at 20x and 40x magnification. Scale bars, 100μm (left and middle) 
and 50μm (right). (h) NAFLD activity score. (i) Expression of the indicated lipid mediator 
genes in the liver. (j) Expression of the indicated chemokine genes in the liver. (k) Percent of 
hepatic CD11b+F4/80+ immune cells. (l) Colony forming units (CFU) of aerobic bacteria 
cultured from liver homogenate. (m) Expression of the indicated fibrosis marker genes in the 
liver (f–m; n = 4 per group). (n) Serum alanine transaminase (ALT) levels (n = 8 per group). 
Giles et al.
Page 23
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (o) Upregulated gene expression pathways, and genes within pathways, determined by 
RNASeq analysis of livers from HFD-fed mice (n = 2 per group). (p) Predictability of 
human NASH based on simple machine vector learning technique. Blue denotes TS (22°C); 
Red denotes TN (30°C). Data represents mean + s.e.m. (a–n) A representative of 5 
individual experiments. (o and p) A single experiment. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, 
****P < 0.0001. (a–f, h, k, l and n) One way ANOVA with post hoc Tukey’s test. (i, j and 
m) Student’s t-test.
Giles et al.
Page 24
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. 
Thermoneutral housing is associated with augmented intestinal permeability and dysbiosis 
of the microbiome. (a–c) 6 week-old WT C57BL/6 male mice were housed at TS (22°C) or 
TN (30°C) for 24 weeks and fed a chow or HFD. (a) Flow of FITC labelled dextran through 
the intestine (n = 4 per group). (b) Phyla level differences of TS and TN mice after 24 weeks 
HFD (n = 8 per group). (c,d) Relative phyla abundance and principle coordinate analysis in 
mice housed at TS (n = 8 per group) or TN (n = 8 per group) and either healthy, lean humans 
(n = 16 per group) or NASH patients (n = 22 per group) described previously. (e–h) 6 week-
old WT C57BL/6 male mice were housed at TS (22°C) or TN (30°C) and fed a HFD. After 8 
weeks of HFD, mice were mock-treated (Ctrl) or treated with antibiotics (Tx) supplied in 
drinking water in addition to HFD exposure for additional 16 weeks. (e) Flow of FITC 
labelled dextran through the intestine of control 22°C chow, HFD and 30°C HFD (n = 4 per 
group) and treated 22°C and 30°C HFD (n = 3 per group) fed mice. (f) Representative liver 
histology (n = 4 per group) by H&E staining. Scale bars, 50μm. (g) Inflammation score per 
NAS criteria (n = 4 per group). (h) Serum ALT levels (n = 8 per group). For bar graphs, data 
represents mean + s.e.m. (a) A representative of 2 individual experiments. (b–h) A single 
experiment. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, ****P < 0.0001. (a, e, g and h) One way 
ANOVA with post hoc Tukey’s test. (c) Mann-Whitney test.
Giles et al.
Page 25
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. 
Thermoneutral housing-driven modulation of hematopoietic TLR4 signaling regulates 
NAFLD progression. (a) 6 week-old WT C57BL/6 male mice were housed at TS (22°C) or 
TN (30°C) conditions for 2 weeks prior to initiation of 8 weeks of HFD. Upregulated gene 
expression pathways, and genes within pathways, determined by RNASeq analysis (n = 2 
per group). (b–d) 6 week-old TLR4fl/flVav1-Cre+ and control TLR4fl/flVav1-Cre− mice on a 
C57BL/6 background were housed at TS (22°C) or TN (30°C) for 24 weeks and fed a chow 
or HFD. (b) Representative liver histology by H&E staining at 40x magnification of 
TLR4fl/flVav1-Cre− mice housed at 22°C (n = 3 per group) and 30°C (n = 5 per group) 
compared to TLR4fl/flVav1-Cre+ mice housed at 22°C (n = 4 per group) and 30°C (n = 4 per 
group). Scale bars, 50μm. (c) NAFLD activity score as determined by histology. (d) Serum 
ALT levels of TLR4fl/flVav1-Cre− mice housed at 22°C (n = 9 per group) and 30°C (n = 8 
per group) compared to TLR4fl/flVav1-Cre+ mice housed at 22°C (n = 7 per group) and 30°C 
(n = 5 per group). Blue denotes TS (22°C); Red denotes TN (30°C). (a) A single experiment. 
(c–d) A representative of 2 independent experiments. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, 
****P < 0.0001. (c–d) One way ANOVA with post hoc Tukey’s test.
Giles et al.
Page 26
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. 
Thermoneutral housing is associated with pathogenic upregulation of the IL-17 axis. (a) 6 
week-old WT C57BL/6 male mice were housed at TS (22°C) or TN (30°C) conditions for 2 
weeks prior to initiation of 8 weeks of HFD feeding. Upregulated gene expression pathway, 
and genes within pathway, determined by RNASeq analysis (n = 2 per group). (b–c) 6 week-
old WT C57BL/6 male mice housed at TS (22°C; n = 3 per group) or TN (30°C; n = 4 per 
group) for 24 weeks and fed a HFD. (b) Percent of TCRβ+CD4+IL-17A+ hepatic infiltrating 
immune cells. (c) Percent of TCRβ+CD4+IL-17A+TNF+ hepatic infiltrating immune cells. 
(d–f) 6 week-old WT (n = 5 per group), IL-17RA−/− (n = 4 per group) and IL-17A−/− (n = 6 
per group) male mice, all on C57BL/6 background, were housed at TN (30°C) conditions for 
2 weeks prior to initiation of 24 weeks of HFD feeding. (d) Representative liver histology of 
WT (n = 5 per group), IL-17RA−/− (n = 4 per group) and IL-17A−/− (n = 6 per group) mice, 
by H&E staining at 20x and 40x magnification. Scale bars, 100μm (top) and 50μm (bottom). 
(e) NAFLD activity score. (f) serum ALT levels. (a) A single experiment. (b–f) A 
Giles et al.
Page 27
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 representative of 3 individual experiments. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, ****P < 
0.0001. (b–c) Student’s t-test. (e–f) One way ANOVA with post hoc Tukey’s test.
Giles et al.
Page 28
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. 
Thermoneutral housing removes the barrier to modeling obesity and NAFLD in female 
mice. (a–k) 6 week-old WT C57BL/6 female mice housed at TS (22°C) fed chow (n = 4 per 
group) or HFD (n = 6 per group) or housed at TN (30°C) and fed chow (n = 4 per group) or 
HFD (n = 6 per group) for 24 weeks. (a) Weight gain. (b) Total body fat mass and lean mass. 
(c) Liver weight. (d) Hepatic triglyceride levels. (e) Representative liver histology (n = 4 per 
group) by H&E staining at 20x and 40x magnification. Scale bars, 100μm (left and middle) 
and 50μm (right). (f) Expression of the indicated chemokine genes in the liver of HFD fed 
Giles et al.
Page 29
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mice. (g) Percent of hepatic infiltrating CD11b+GR-1− immune cells in HFD fed mice. (h) 
Percent of hepatic infiltrating Th17 cells in total hepatic immune cell infiltrate in HFD fed 
mice. (i) Percent of hepatic infiltrating Th17 cells also producing TNF in total hepatic 
immune cell infiltrate in HFD fed mice. (j) Expression of the indicated fibrosis marker genes 
in the liver in HFD fed mice. (k) Serum ALT levels in chow and HFD fed mice. (l) 
Schematic diagram depicting the role of TN housing in promoting exacerbated NAFLD 
pathogenesis during HFD feeding where red lines represent factors associated with 
exacerbated NAFLD at TN (APC – Antigen presenting cells; NAFL – Nonalcoholic Fatty 
Liver). This schematic, in part, is composed by available artwork (http://www.servier.com/
Powerpoint-image-bank), per licensing agreement (https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/3.0/legalcode). For bar graphs, data represents mean + s.e.m. (a–k) A 
representative of 3 individual experiments. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, ****P < 
0.0001. (a–d and k) one way ANOVA with post hoc Tukey’s test. (f–j) Student’s t-test.
Giles et al.
Page 30
Nat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 December 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
