  
 
 
 
 
Edinburgh Research Explorer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Effect of day of the week on short- and long-term mortality after
emergency general surgery
Citation for published version:
Gillies, MA, Lone, NI, Pearse, RM, Haddow, C, Smyth, L, Parks, RW, Walsh, TS & Harrison, EM 2017,
'Effect of day of the week on short- and long-term mortality after emergency general surgery' British Journal
of Surgery, vol. 104, no. 77. DOI: 10.1002/bjs.10507
Digital Object Identifier (DOI):
10.1002/bjs.10507
Link:
Link to publication record in Edinburgh Research Explorer
Document Version:
Peer reviewed version
Published In:
British Journal of Surgery
General rights
Copyright for the publications made accessible via the Edinburgh Research Explorer is retained by the author(s)
and / or other copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing these publications that users recognise and
abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
Take down policy
The University of Edinburgh has made every reasonable effort to ensure that Edinburgh Research Explorer
content complies with UK legislation. If you believe that the public display of this file breaches copyright please
contact openaccess@ed.ac.uk providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately and
investigate your claim.
Download date: 02. Jun. 2019
 The   effect   of   day   of   the   week   on   short-­‐   and   long-­‐term   mortality   for   emergency   general   
surgery:   a   population-­‐based   cohort   study   
*M.A.   Gillies1,2,   N.   Lone3,   R.M.   Pearse4,   C.   Haddow5,   L   Smyth5,   R.W.   Parks6,   T.S   Walsh1,   E.M.   
Harrison2,6.   
1Department   of   Anaesthesia,   Critical   Care   and   Pain   Medicine,   Royal   Infirmary   of   Edinburgh,   
Edinburgh,   UK.   
2   Surgical   and   Perioperative   Health   Research   (SPHeRe),   University   of   Edinburgh,   Edinburgh,   
UK.   
3Centre   for   Population   and   Health   Sciences,   University   of   Edinburgh,   Edinburgh,   UK.   
4Faculty   of   Medicine   and   Dentistry,   Queen   Mary   University   London,   UK.   
5Information   Services   Division,   NHS   Services   Scotland,   South   Gyle,   Edinburgh,   UK.   
6Clinical   Surgery,   University   of   Edinburgh,   Royal   Infirmary   of   Edinburgh,   Edinburgh,   UK.   
*Corresponding   Author:      
Dr   Michael   Gillies,   Department   of   Anaesthesia,   Critical   Care   and   Pain   Medicine,   Royal   
Infirmary   of   Edinburgh,   Little   France   Crescent,   Edinburgh,   UK   EH16   4SA.   
Telephone:   0131   242   3193      Email:   michael.gillies@ed.ac.uk      
Word   count:                     Abstract:   247                           Manuscript   (Excluding   Tables   and   Figures):   2845   
Key   Words:   Epidemiology,   Surgery,   Elective   Surgical   Procedures/mortality*,   Hospital   
Mortality*,   Humans,   Retrospective   Studies,   Time   Factors,   Outcomes.   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
    
ABSTRACT   
Background:   The   effect   of   day   of   the   week   on   outcome   after   hospital   admission   and   elective   
surgery   is   the   subject   of   debate.   We   sought   to   determine   if   day   of   the   week   of   emergency   
general   surgery   alters   short-­‐   and   long-­‐term   mortality.   
Methods:   Observational   study   of   all   patients   undergoing   emergency   general   surgery   in   
Scotland   between   1   January   2005   and   31   December   2007,   followed   to   2012.   Multilevel   
logistic   and   Cox   proportional   hazards   regression   were   used   to   assess   the   effect   of   day   of   the   
week   of   surgery   on   outcome   after   adjustment   for   case-­‐mix   and   risk   factors.   Primary   
outcome   was   perioperative   mortality;   secondary   outcome   was   overall   survival.      
Results:   We   identified   50   844   patients,   of   whom   31   499   had   an   emergency   procedure   on   
Monday   to   Thursday   and   19   345   on   Friday   to   Sunday.   Patients   undergoing   surgery   at   the   
weekend   were   younger   (47.5   vs.   45.9   years;   p<0.001)   and   had   fewer   comorbidities,   but   
underwent   riskier/more   complex   procedures   (p<0.001).   Patients   operated   on   at   the   
weekend   were   more   likely   to   have   been   operated   on   sooner   compared   with   weekday   
surgery   (1.2   vs.   1.6   days;   p<0.001).   No   difference   in   perioperative   mortality   (odds   Ratio   [OR]   
1.00;   95%   confidence   interval   [CI]   0.89−1.13;   p=0.989)   or   in   overall   survival   (hazard   ratio   
[HR]   1.01;   95%   CI   0.97-­‐1.06,   p=0.583)   was   observed   if   surgery   was   performed   at   the   
weekend.   No   difference   in   overall   survival   was   associated   with   any   particular   day   of   surgery   
when   compared   to   Wednesday,   although   a   borderline   lower   perioperative   mortality   was   
seen   on   a   Tuesday.   
Conclusion:   We   did   not   demonstrate   any   significant   difference   in   short-­‐   or   long-­‐term   
mortality   following   emergency   general   surgery   at   the   weekend   when   compared   to   mid-­‐
week.   
   
 INTRODUCTION   
Over   310   million   surgical   procedures   are   carried   out   worldwide   each   year   (1)   and   this   figure   
has   increased   rapidly   over   the   last   decade.(2)   Estimates   of   overall   perioperative   mortality   
are   low   and   estimated   to   be   around   0.8%   in   the   developed   world.(3)   However   this   is   not   the   
case   in   emergency   general   surgery   where   for   certain   procedures   such   as   emergency   
laparotomy,   higher   mortality   rates   have   been   reported.   Over   a   third   of   all   surgical   
procedures   carried   out   in   the   UK   are   classified   as   emergencies   and   mortality   is   increased   8-­‐
fold   when   compared   to   elective   surgery.(4)   Many   more   patients   suffer   complications   which   
increase   long-­‐term   mortality   and   costs.(5)   Evidence   exists   of   variation   in   surgical   outcome   
between   healthcare   facilities   (4,6)   and   organisational   factors   are   implicated   in   the   reasons   
for   this.   In   particular,   day   of   surgery   or   hospital   admission   has   been   associated   with   a   worse   
outcome   and   remains   a   subject   of   intense   debate.      
North   American   and   UK   studies   have   demonstrated   an   association   with   mortality   in   patients   
undergoing   elective   surgery   on   Friday   versus   Monday,   Tuesday   or   Wednesday.(7,8)   An   
Australasian   study   showed   increased   mortality   in   patients   admitted   to   the   Intensive   Care   
Unit   (ICU)   at   the   weekend   compared   with   weekdays.(9)   Similar   effects   have   been   described   
in   other   areas   of   healthcare   including   in-­‐hospital   cardiac   arrest,(10)   obstetrics,(11)   and   
stroke.(12)   In   addition   there   is   evidence   suggesting   increased   mortality   following   emergency   
surgery   associated   with   staffing   levels   and   number   of   critical   care   beds,   relative   to   provider   
size,   which   might   be   reduced   at   the   weekend.(13)   
For   a   “weekend   effect”   to   exist   in   observational   studies,   patients   presenting   to   hospital   at   
weekends   must   either   be   sicker,   care   must   be   worse,   or   inadequate   adjustment   for   
confounding   must   exist.   Organisational   factors   such   as   processes   of   care   cannot   be   easily   
studied   in   clinical   trials   and   observational   studies   must   be   relied   upon.   Moreover,   the   
consequences   of   poor   care   at   weekends   might   not   be   limited   to   short-­‐term   survival.   Post-­‐
operative   complications   have   been   associated   with   poorer   long-­‐term   survival.   (4)      
The   aim   of   this   study   was   to   extend   the   current   debate   by   addressing   the   following   
hypothesis:   if   patient   care   at   the   weekend   were   poor,   this   would   be   reflected   in   higher   early   
mortality   after   emergency   surgery   together   with   poorer   long-­‐term   survival   resulting   from   
increased   morbidity.   This   is   explored   using   high   quality   linked   data   including   case-­‐mix   
adjustment   and   access   to   reliable   long-­‐term   outcomes.   
   
   
   
 METHODS   
Ethics,   Sponsorship   and   Indemnity   
The   Chairs   of   South   East   Scotland   Research   Ethics   Committees   01   and   02   reviewed   the   study   
protocol   and   waived   the   need   for   a   full   ethics   submission.   The   study   underwent   review   by   
Information   Services   Division’s   Privacy   Advisory   Committee,   which   undertakes   the   role   of   
Caldicott   guardianship   (Reference   PAC   58/11).   NHS   Lothian   acted   as   the   study   sponsor.   
Patient   Involvement   
Patients   were   not   involved   directly   with   the   design   or   conduct   of   this   study,   however   a   
recent   joint   National   Institute   of   Academic   Anaesthesia   and   James   Lind   Alliance   research   
priority   setting   exercise   identified   improvement   of   emergency   surgical   care   as   one   of   the   
top   ten   research   priorities.(14)   
Study   Population   and   Data   Sources      
We   used   a   cohort   study   design   with   data   held   by   Information   Services   Division   (ISD)   
Scotland.   We   extracted   a   complete   record   of   surgical   inpatient   cases   managed   in   Scotland   
between   1st   Jan   2005   and   31st   Dec   2007   from   the   ISD   Scottish   Morbidity   Record   (SMR01)   
database,   with   follow-­‐up   data   until   30th   September   2012.   All   adult   patients   undergoing   
inpatient   general   surgery   were   eligible   for   inclusion   in   this   study.   The   Operating   Procedure   
Coding   System-­‐4.2   (OPCS)   (15)   was   used   to   identify   general   surgical   procedures.   For   patients   
with   more   than   one   admission   with   an   included   surgical   procedure   during   the   three-­‐year   
study   period,   we   used   only   the   first   admission.   The   study   was   performed   in   accordance   with   
the   Strengthening   the   reporting   of   observational   studies   in   epidemiology   (STROBE)   
guidelines.(16)   
The   ISD   database   was   internally   consistent.   We   have   previously   validated   these   data   (17)   
and   on-­‐going   audit   of   diagnosis   and   operation   codes   performed   centrally   shows   high   
accuracy.(18)   We   determined   patient   death   with   direct   matching   between   patient   episode   
data   and   records   from   the   Registrar   General   of   Scotland.      
Factors   and   co-­‐variables   
For   each   patient   a   full   data   extract   was   requested   including   age,   sex,   deprivation   status   
(measured   using   quintiles   of   the   Scottish   Index   of   Multiple   Deprivation),(19)   surgical   OPCS   
code,   surgical   status   (elective   vs.   emergency   classification),   ICD10   (international   
classification   of   diseases,   10th   revisions)   diagnosis   code,   date   of   surgery,   date   of   admission,   
and   number   of   hospital   admissions   in   the   5   years   before   the   index   hospital   admission.      
ICD10   codes   were   used   to   define   diagnosis   (malignant,   trauma/injury,   other).   Models   of   co-­‐
morbidity   scoring   were   explored   using   disease   codes   from   ICD10.   No   single   method   resulted   
in   better   model   performance.   In   final   models,   we   used   a   count   of   co-­‐morbidities   that   
 constitute   the   Charlson   comorbidity   index.(20)   Operative   complexity   was   defined      as   per   the   
BUPA   Schedule   of   Procedures.(21)      
A   mortality   risk   associated   with   each   specific   operation   was   determined   and   applied   using   
data   from   Hospital   Episode   Statistics   (HES).   HES   data   are   summary,   population   level   data   
available   from   NHS   administrative   records   in   England.   From   this   aggregate   data,   a   summary   
of   mortality   rates   by   procedure   during   2009   to   2010   was   obtained   as   the   most   recent   
available,   procedure   level   data.   Procedures   included   in   the   study   were   identified   and   
classified   according   to   their   30-­‐day   mortality   rate   into   pre-­‐defined   strata   of   low   (<1%),   
moderate   (1   to   9.9%)   and   high   (>10%)   risk   groups.   Season   was   defined   by   admission   date   
(December   to   February,   March   to   May,   June   to   August,   and   September   to   November).   Time   
to   surgery   was   defined   in   whole   days   by   procedure   date   minus   admission   date.      
Day   of   week   of   procedure   or   admission   was   defined   both   for   individual   days   (reference   
Wednesday)   and   as   a   binary   variable   (Monday-­‐Thursday   versus   Friday-­‐Sunday),   as   
previously   reported.      
Outcomes   measures   
The   primary   outcome   measure   was   perioperative   mortality,   defined   as   death   occurring   
within   30   days   of   the   index   procedure   or   after   30   days   but   before   hospital   discharge.   Time   
from   surgery   until   death   from   any   cause   was   termed   overall   survival.   
Sensitivity   Analysis   
Two   sets   of   sensitivity   analyses   were   performed.   In   the   first,   we   examined   short-­‐   and   long-­‐
term   outcomes   by   day   of   the   week   of   admission   in   patients   having   emergency   general   
surgery.   In   the   second,   we   examined   day   of   the   week   of   procedure   for   patients   having   any   
emergency   surgical   procedure   (expanded   emergency   surgery   cohort   included   procedures   
performed   in   orthopaedics,   ear/nose/throat   (ENT),   gynaecology,   ophthalmology,   thoracic   
surgery   and   spinal   surgery,   while   excluding   cardiac   surgery,   neurosurgery,   transplantation   
and   the   surgical   management   of   burns).   
Statistical   Analysis   
We   examined   initial   univariable   associations   for   categorical   and   continuous   predictors   
respectively.   Fixed   effect   binary   logistic   regression   models   were   explored   using   variables   
determined   to   be   statistically   and   clinically   important.   Variable   selection   methods   
incorporated   likelihood   ratio   methods   and   overall   model   fit   as   determined   by   the   Akaike   
Information   Criterion   (AIC).   Health   board   of   treatment   was   included   as   a   random   effect   
(random   intercept)   to   account   for   patient   clustering   in   final   multilevel   models.   Predictive   
performance   was   quantified   by   the   area   under   the   receiver   operator   characteristic   curve   (c   
statistic).   Bootstrap   methods   were   used   to   derive   confidence   intervals   in   multilevel   models   
unless   otherwise   indicated.      
 Cox   proportional   hazards   regression   was   used   to   model   overall   survival.   Health   board   was   
included   as   a   random   effect   (frailty).   The   underlying   hazard   function   was   assessed   
graphically   and   seen   to   be   constant,   and   no   time   dependent   variables   were   specified.   We   
assessed   all   two-­‐way   interactions   which   were   included   in   final   models   if   significant.      
   
Normally   distributed   data   was   reported   as   mean   (standard   deviation   [SD])   and   non-­‐normally   
distributed   data   as   median   (interquartile   range   [IQR]).   All   p-­‐values   were   two-­‐tailed   and   
significance   was   set   at   p<0.05.   All   analyses   were   undertaken   using   STATA   13   (STATACorp,   
College   Station,   TX,   USA)   and   R   (R   Foundation,   Vienna,   Austria).      
   
 RESULTS      
Cohort   
The   initial   study   cohort   consisted   of   1   014   796   patients   who   had   undergone   a   surgical   
procedure   during   the   study   period   (Figure   1).   This   initial   cohort   excluded   obstetrics,   cardiac   
surgery,   neurosurgery,   transplantation   and   the   surgical   management   of   burns.   Following   
exclusion   of   records   relating   to   second   or   subsequent   admissions,   patients   aged   under   the   
age   of   16   years,   patients   with   non-­‐surgical   or   diagnostic   procedural   codes,   patients   with   
discordant   operative   or   death   dates   and   patients   undergoing   elective   surgery,   104   416   
patients   remained.   Following   further   restriction   to   patients   having   “general”   surgical   
procedures   i.e.   abdominal   or   gastrointestinal   procedures,   or   procedures   on   breast,   
endocrine   or   soft   tissue,   50   844   patients   remained   in   the   final   cohort.   Records   and   dates   of   
death   ranged   from   the   3rd   January   2005   to   the   30th   September   2012.   Four-­‐year   follow   up   
was   available   for   all   patients.   1468   (2.9%)   patients   died   prior   to   hospital   discharge   and   5755   
(11.3%)   patients   died   before   the   end   of   the   4-­‐year   follow-­‐up   period.      
Demographics   and   outcome   
Patients   undergoing   surgery   at   the   weekend   were   more   likely   to   be   male   (11828   [61.1%]   vs   
18613   [59.1%];   p<0.001)   to   be   younger   (45.9   vs.   47.5   years;   p<0.001)   and   have   fewer   
comorbidities   (Table   1).   There   were   also   differences   in   the   type   and   complexity   of   surgery   
carried   out,   with   more   high-­‐risk   and   complex   surgery   taking   place   at   the   weekend.   Patients   
admitted   at   the   weekend   we   more   likely   to   be   operated   on   sooner   compared   with   weekday   
admission   (1.2   vs.   1.6   days;   p<0.001).   
Mortality   and   survival   analyses   
In   univariable   analyses   of   the   whole   cohort,   an   association   was   seen   between   perioperative   
mortality   and   each   of   increasing   age,   female   sex,   Charlson   co-­‐morbidity   score,   deprivation,   
prior   elective   or   emergency   admission,   diagnosis   of   cancer,   operative   risk,   operative   
complexity,   and   season   of   admission   (December   to   February)   (Supplementary   Table   2).   
Multilevel   models   confirmed   that   age,   sex,   comorbidity,   deprivation,   diagnosis,   and   
operative   risk/complexity   were   the   most   strongly   associated   with   mortality.      
In   either   univariable   or   multilevel   models,   no   association   was   seen   between   weekend   
surgery   and   perioperative   mortality   (odds   Ratio   [OR]   1.00;   95%   confidence   interval   [CI]   
0.89−1.13;   p=0.989)   (Figure   2,   Supplementary   Table   2)   or   overall   survival   (hazard   ratio   [HR]   
1.00;   95%   CI   0.96-­‐1.04,   p=0.950)   (Figure   2,   Supplementary   Figure   1,   Supplementary   Table   3).   
Similarly,   when   comparing   each   day   of   the   week   of   surgery   to   Wednesday,   no   association   
was   seen   between   weekend   days   and   perioperative   mortality   or   overall   survival   (Figure   2,   
supplementary   tables   4   and   5).   A   borderline   effect   was   seen   with   an   apparent   lower   
perioperative   mortality   on   a   Tuesday   compared   with   Wednesday   (supplementary   table   4);   
the   significance   of   this   is   not   clear.      
 Sensitivity   analysis      
We   repeated   the   above   analysis   for   day   of   week   of   hospital   admission.   Admission   on   a   
weekend   was   associated   with   a   numerically   higher   perioperative   mortality   (581/19   370   
[3.0%]   vs   887/31   474   [2.8%]),   however   this   was   not   significant   in   univariable   or   multilevel   
models   (OR   1.14;   95%   CI   0.98-­‐1.30;   p=0.130)   (Figure   2,   Supplementary   Table   6)   or   overall   
survival   (HR   1.01;   95%   CI   0.97-­‐1.06;   p=0.583)   (Figure   3,   Supplementary   Table   7).      
Perioperative   mortality   was   lower   in   patients   admitted   on   Tuesday   (OR   0.80   95%   CI   0.65-­‐
0.99;   p=0.044)   compared   with   Wednesday,   however   again   no   pattern   through   the   week   was   
observed   (Figure   2,   Supplementary   table   8).   No   association   was   seen   between   overall   
survival   and   any   particular   day   of   admission   compared   to   Wednesday   (Figure   3,   
Supplementary   Figure   2,   Supplementary   Table   9).   
In   a   second   set   of   sensitivity   analyses,   we   repeated   this   investigation   on   all   emergency   
surgical   procedures,   i.e.   including   other   surgical   specialties   such   as   orthopaedics   and   
gynaecology.   No   difference   in   perioperative   mortality   or   overall   survival   was   demonstrated   
between   procedures   carried   out   at   weekends   or   during   the   week   (Supplementary   Tables   10-­‐
13).   
   
   
 DISCUSSION      
In   a   cohort   of   over   50   000   patients   undergoing   emergency   general   surgery,   no   association   
was   seen   between   day   of   the   week   of   surgery   and   short-­‐   or   long-­‐term   mortality   in   well-­‐
performing   case-­‐mix   adjusted   models.   In   our   study,   patients   admitted   at   weekends   were   
more   likely   to   be   operated   on   sooner   than   those   admitted   during   the   week.   No   patterns   of   
association   were   seen   between   perioperative   mortality   or   overall   survival   through   the   week   
for   surgery   or   admission   to   hospital;   a   borderline   lower   perioperative   mortality   for   surgery   
performed   on   a   Tuesday   may   be   spurious.   In   further   sensitivity   analyses   in   an   expanded   
cohort   of   104   016   patients   undergoing   emergency   surgery,   no   association   between   day   or   
surgery   or   admission   and   death   was   could   be   found.      
The   so-­‐called   “weekend   effect”   of   increased   mortality   and   complications   associated   with   
inpatient   care   on   Saturday   and   Sunday   has   been   reported   in   observational   studies   of   
emergency   hospital   admission,(22,23)   surgery,(8,13,24)   obstetrics,(11)   and   ICU   admission   
(9)   and   our   study   challenges   this   belief.   Commentators   suggest   that   the   availability   of   
expertise   and   resources   at   the   weekend,   in   particular   access   senior   medical   staff,   may   
explain   this   phenomenon.   However,   it   is   important   to   consider   not   only   the   day   of   surgical   
procedure,   but   also   the   day   of   admission   and   the   days   on   which   postoperative   care   are   
delivered.   A   study   of   emergency   general   surgical   admission   UK   hospitals   suggested   that   
increased   mortality   at   the   weekend   persisted   after   adjustment   for   hospital   structure   and   
care   process.   More   recently   published   research   from   the   field   of   stroke   medicine   has   
suggested   that   the   entire   concept   of   “weekend   effect”   may   be   an   oversimplification   of   
complex   patterns   of   variation   in   the   quality   of   care   which   are   spread   over   the   entire   
week.(25)   
The   possibility   of   systematic   bias   or   unmeasured   confounding   in   observational   studies   of   
administrative   data   remains.(26)   The   former   can   be   due   issues   with   the   quality   of   data   
collection,   such   as   coding   issues   with   Hospital   Episodes   Statistics   data   in   the   UK,   or   in   
exclusive   use   of   data   pertaining   to   certain   subgroups   of   patients,   such   as   Medicare,   Non-­‐
Federal   Acute   Care,   or   Veterans   Affairs   databases,   in   the   United   States.   Data   completeness,   
quality,   and   the   availability   of   data   linkage   for   robust   long-­‐term   outcomes   are   clearly   also   
important.   Study   heterogeneity   exists   in   approaches   to   aggregating   data,   for   instance,   
whether   Friday   should   be   considered   within   the   weekend   group   and   different   studies   have   
used   different   definitions.   Unmeasured   confounding   may   arise   from   patient   factors   for   
which   investigators   are   unable   to   adjust   for   using   statistical   modelling   techniques.   Particular   
issues,   which   have   been   raised   in   this   setting,   are   patient   selection   and   the   possibility   that   
patients   undergoing   surgery   at   the   weekend   have   increased   severity   of   illness   than   those   
presenting   on   weekdays.   In   emergency   surgery   the   absence   of   diagnostic   and   physiological   
case-­‐mix   adjustment,   which   is   routinely   carried   to   benchmark   cardiac   surgery(27)   and   
intensive   care(28)   outcomes,   means   this   possibility   cannot   be   excluded.      
The   results   of   our   study   contrast   with   two   recent   studies   of   surgical   care   surgery   where   the   
odds   ratios   of   death   were   significantly   higher   if   surgery   was   undertaken   at   the   
 weekend.(8,13)   Aylin   and   colleagues   attribute   the   increased   mortality   associated   with   
elective   operating   at   weekends   to   reduced   availability   of   staffing   and   other   resources.   The   
majority   of   small   amount   of   elective   surgery   taking   place   at   weekends   in   NHS   hospitals   is   
“waiting   list   initiative”   surgery,   which   is   usually   highly   selected   to   be   low   risk   and   
undertaken   exclusively   by   consultants.   Emergency   procedures   performed   at   weekends   may   
be   miscoded   as   elective,   and   care   must   be   taken   to   examine   the   procedures   associated   with   
death   to   ensure   they   were   indeed   scheduled.   Anomalous   surgical   procedures   performed   at   
weekends   can   be   coded   as   “elective”,   such   as   “insertion   of   tracheostomy”   in   very   unwell   
patients   in   ICU.   It   would   be   expected   that   these   “elective”   procedures   would   be   associated   
with   higher   mortality.      
Emergency   surgery   is   undertaken   at   any   time,   on   any   day   of   the   week,   by   both   junior   and   
consultant   staff,   for   patients   at   high   risk   of   death   or   complications.   It   would   be   expected   
therefore   that   any   structural   effect   resulting   from   reduced   availability   of   staff   or   resources   
would   be   more   apparent   in   these   procedures   than   in   elective   surgery.   Yet   no   effect   was   
seen   in   this   study.      
It   is   possible   that   emergency   care   pathways   are   now   well   developed   and   consistent   
throughout   the   week   in   most   hospitals   resulting   in   less   variation   in   care.   Patients   
undergoing   complex   elective   surgery   on   Friday   may   suffer   from   reduced   levels   of   care   at   the   
weekend   and   it   may   be   postoperative   care   at   the   weekend   rather   than   day   of   admission   or   
surgery   which   are   responsible   for   the   weekend   effect   phenomenon   in   this   setting.   However,   
in   our   emergency   surgery   cohort,   no   effect   of   postoperative   care   on   short-­‐   and   long-­‐term   
outcomes   was   seen.      
A   more   recent   study   of   mortality   after   emergency   general   surgical   admission   investigated   
the   effect   of   hospital   structure   and   processes,   including   the   day   of   the   week   of   admission   in   
156   NHS   Trusts   in   England.(13)   This   study   found   increased   mortality   following   admission   on   
Saturday   and   Sunday   which   persisted   after   correction   for   staffing   levels   and   other   hospital   
processes.   Our   study   differs   from   this   in   two   key   areas.   Firstly,   we   included   all   patients   
having   emergency   general   surgery   procedures,   rather   than   emergency   admissions   for   
general   surgery   conditions,   which   includes   high-­‐risk   conditions   not   typically   requiring   
surgery   such   as   pancreatitis.   Secondly,   in   our   study   patients   undergoing   surgery   at   the   
weekend   had   a   shorter   time   from   admission   to   surgery,   suggesting   that   they   were   sicker   
and   required   more   urgent   intervention.   Although   we   saw   a   numerically   higher   perioperative   
mortality   for   patients   admitted   on   Friday   to   Sunday,   this   was   not   significant   in   either   
univariable   or   multilevel   models.      
Strengths   of   our   study   are   that   we   used   complete,   linked,   national   level   data   with   low   
incidence   of   missing   or   incomplete   data   and   used   robust   methodology   to   adjust   for   case-­‐mix   
and   surgical   factors.   To   our   knowledge   complete   data   at   a   national   level,   examining   the   
association   between   day   of   the   week   of   emergency   surgery   and   long-­‐term   outcome   has   not   
previously   been   reported.      
 A   weakness   of   this   study   is   that   it   is   smaller   cohort   than   other   recently   published   work   
examining   day   of   the   week   on   surgical   care   in   the   UK,   increasing   the   risk   that   the   study   was   
underpowered.   Other   limitations   are   common   to   other   epidemiological   studies   using   large   
administrative   databases:   our   findings   may   be   subject   to   bias   and   unmeasured   confounding.   
Only   first   admissions   in   the   3-­‐year   period   were   included   to   allow   long-­‐term   follow-­‐up.   As   
readmissions   are   often   sicker   and   have   more   comorbidities,   this   may   have   introduced   
selection   bias. In   the   case   of   weekend   surgical   admissions,   many   factors   may   be   in-­‐play   
including   the   availability   of   beds   (in   particular   critical   care   beds)   access   to   imaging,   and   
increased   risk   necessitating   weekend   surgery   identified   by   the   treating   clinician.   These   have   
previously   been   associated   with   poorer   outcomes   after   emergency   surgery(4)   and   are   not   
reliably   captured   in   baseline   demographic   data   such   as   ours.      
In   summary,   we   were   unable   to   identify   a   “weekend   effect”   associated   with   day   of   surgery   
for   emergency   surgery   either   for   perioperative   or   long-­‐term   mortality.   Time   to   surgery   was   
shorter   for   those   undergoing   surgery   at   the   weekend   and   this   may   reflect   increased   severity   
of   illness   of   those   presenting   at   the   weekend   or   simply   reduced   competition   with   elective   
cases   for   theatre   time.   The   cost   and   practicalities   of   undertaking   prospective   studies   in   
organisational   aspects   of   healthcare   delivery   mean   that   large   observational   studies   and   
meta-­‐data   can   offer   a   useful   alternative.   Such   studies   often   include   large   numbers   of   
patients   and   have   high   statistical   power.   However,   in   common   with   other   aspects   of   surgical   
care,   for   example   routine   ICU   admission   following   surgery,   (29–31)   data   from   large   
epidemiological   studies   can   be   conflicting.   Large   prospective   cohort   studies   using   
sophisticated   techniques   such   as   instrumental   variable   analysis   may   be   able   to   answer   these   
questions   more   accurately   in   the   future.   
CONCLUSION   
In   a   national   data-­‐linkage   cohort   study   of   patients   undergoing   emergency   surgery   in   
Scotland,   we   are   unable   to   demonstrate   an   association   with   day   of   the   week   of   surgery   and   
postoperative   mortality.      
   
   
   
   
   
   
 Declaration   of   Interests:   We   declare   the   following   interests:   This   work   was   supported   by   a   
grant   from   the   Chief   Scientist’s   Office   (CSO),   Scotland   (Ref   CHZ/4/821).   MAG   is   a   CSO   NHS   
Research   Scheme   Clinician.   RMP   lectures   and   performed   consultancy   work   for   Nestle   Health   
Sciences,   Medtronic,   Edwards   Lifesciences,   and   Massimo   Inc.   All   other   authors   report   no   
conflict   of   interest.   
Declaration:   All   authors   contributed   to   the   conception,   data   analysis,   interpretation   of   
results   and   preparation   of   the   manuscript.   MAG,   EMH   and   NIL   take   responsibility   for   the   
integrity   of   the   data   and   the   presentation   of   results.   They   affirm   that   that   the   manuscript   is   
an   honest,   accurate,   and   transparent   account   of   the   study   being   reported   and   that   no   
important   aspects   of   the   study   have   been   omitted.   
Data   sharing:   We   will   consider   data   access   requests   from   bona   fide   researchers   providing   
they   seek   permission   from   and   comply   with   Information   Services   Division   (ISD)   NHS   
Scotland   data   governance   policies.   
   
   
   
 REFERENCES   
1.      
Weiser   TG,   Haynes   AB,   Molina   G,   Lipsitz   SR,   Esquivel   MM,   Uribe-­‐Leitz   T,   et   al.   
Estimate   of   the   global   volume   of   surgery   in   2012:   an   assessment   supporting   improved   
health   outcomes.   Lancet      2015;   385   Suppl   :S11–6736(15)60806–6.   
2.      
Weiser   TG,   Regenbogen   SE,   Thompson   KD,   Haynes   AB,   Lipsitz   SR,   Berry   WR,   et   al.   An   
estimation   of   the   global   volume   of   surgery:   a   modelling   strategy   based   on   available   
data.   Lancet.   2008;   372:139–44..      
3.      
Pearse   RM,   Moreno   RP,   Bauer   P,   Pelosi   P,   Metnitz   P,   Spies   C,   et   al.   Mortality   after   
surgery   in   Europe:   a   7   day   cohort   study.   Lancet.   2012;   380:1059–65.   
4.      
Symons   NR,   Moorthy   K,   Almoudaris   AM,   Bottle   A,   Aylin   P,   Vincent   CA,   et   al.   Mortality   
in   high-­‐risk   emergency   general   surgical   admissions.   Br   J   Surg.   2013;   100:1318–25.   
Sons   Ltd;   2013   Sep;100(10):1318–25.      
5.      
Khuri   SF,   Henderson   WG,   DePalma   RG,   Mosca   C,   Healey   NA,   Kumbhani   DJ,   et   al.   
Determinants   of   long-­‐term   survival   after   major   surgery   and   the   adverse   effect   of   
postoperative   complications.   Ann   Surg.   2005;   242:323–6.      
6.      
Ghaferi   AA,   Birkmeyer   JD,   Dimick   JB.   Variation   in   Hospital   Mortality   Associated   with   
Inpatient   Surgery.   Determinants   of   long-­‐term   survival   after   major   surgery   and   the   
adverse   effect   of   postoperative   complications.   Ann   Surg.   2005;   242:323–6.      
7.      
Zare   MM,   Itani   KMF,   Schifftner   TL,   Henderson   WG,   Khuri   SF.   Mortality   after   
nonemergent   major   surgery   performed   on   Friday   versus   Monday   through   
Wednesday.   Ann   Surg.   2007;   246:   866–74.      
8.      
Aylin   P,   Alexandrescu   R,   Jen   MH,   Mayer   EK,   Bottle   A.   Day   of   week   of   procedure   and   
30   day   mortality   for   elective   surgery:   retrospective   analysis   of   hospital   episode   
statistics.   BMJ.   2013;   346.   :f2424   
9.      
Bhonagiri   D,   Pilcher   D   V,   Bailey   MJ.   Increased   mortality   associated   with   after-­‐hours   
and   weekend   admission   to   the   intensive   care   unit:   a   retrospective   analysis.   Med   J   
Aust.   2011   21;194:287–92.         
10.      
Robinson   EJ,   Smith   GB,   Power   GS,   Harrison   DA,   Nolan   J,   Soar   J,   et   al.   Risk-­‐adjusted   
survival   for   adults   following   in-­‐hospital   cardiac   arrest   by   day   of   week   and   time   of   day:   
observational   cohort   study.   BMJ   Qual   Saf.   2015;   0:1–10.   doi:10.1136/bmjqs-­‐2015-­‐
004223   
11.      
Palmer   WL,   Bottle   A,   Aylin   P.   Association   between   day   of   delivery   and   obstetric   
outcomes:   observational   study.   BMJ.   2015   24;351:h5774.   
12.      
Turner   M,   Barber   M,   Dodds   H,   Dennis   M,   Langhorne   P,   Macleod   M-­‐J.   Stroke   patients   
admitted   within   normal   working   hours   are   more   likely   to   achieve   process   standards   
and   to   have   better   outcomes.   J   Neurol   Neurosurg   Psychiatry.   2016;   87:138–43..      
13.      
Ozdemir   BA,   Sinha   S,   Karthikesalingam   A,   Poloniecki   JD,   Pearse   RM,   Grocott   MPW,   et   
al.   Mortality   of   emergency   general   surgical   patients   and   associations   with   hospital   
structures   and   processes.   Br   J   Anaesth.   2016;   116:   54–62.      
 14.      
Boney   O,   Bell   M,   Bell   N,   Conquest   A,   Cumbers   M,   Drake   S,   et   al.   Identifying   research   
priorities   in   anaesthesia   and   perioperative   care:   final   report   of   the   joint   National   
Institute   of   Academic   Anaesthesia/James   Lind   Alliance   Research   Priority   Setting   
Partnership.   BMJ   Open;   5(12):e010006.         
15.      
Health   and   Social   Care   Information   System.   OPCS   Classification   of   Interventions   and   
Procedures      [Internet].   [cited22nd   Feb   2016]   Available   from   :   
http://www.datadictionary.nhs.uk/web_site_content/supporting_information/clinical
_coding/opcs_classification_of_interventions_and_procedures.asp      
16.      
von   Elm   E,   Altman   DG,   Egger   M,   Pocock   SJ,   Gøtzsche   PC,   Vandenbroucke   JP.   The   
Strengthening   the   Reporting   of   Observational   Studies   in   Epidemiology   (STROBE)   
Statement:   guidelines   for   reporting   observational   studies.   Int   J   Surg.   2014;12:1495–9.      
17.      
Harrison   EM,   O’Neill   S,   Meurs   TS,   Wong   PL,   Duxbury   M,   Paterson-­‐Brown   S,   et   al.   
Hospital   volume   and   patient   outcomes   after   cholecystectomy   in   Scotland:   
retrospective,   national   population   based   study.   BMJ.   2012;344:e3330.         
18.      
Information   Service   Division.   National   Statistics.   Scottish   Index   of   Multiple      
Deprivation:   2009   General   Report.   Edinburgh:   Scottish   Government   National   Statistics   
Publications;   2009.   
19.      
Information   Service   Division.   National   Statistics.   Scottish   Index   of   Multiple      
Deprivation:   2009   General   Report.   Edinburgh:   Scottish   Government   National   Statistics   
Publications;   2009.   
20.      
Charlson   ME,   Pompei   P,   Ales   KL,   MacKenzie   CR.   A   new   method   of   classifying   
prognostic   comorbidity   in   longitudinal   studies:   development   and   validation.   J   Chronic   
Dis.;   1987;40:373–83.   
21.      
BUPA   Limited.   BUPA   Schedule   of   Procedures   [Internet].   [cited   Jan   2016]      
Available   from:   http://codes.bupa.co.uk/home      
22.      
Freemantle   N,   Richardson   M,   Wood   J,   Ray   D,   Khosla   S,   Shahian   D,   et   al.   Weekend   
hospitalization   and   additional   risk   of   death:   an   analysis   of   inpatient   data.   J   R   Soc   Med.   
2012;105(2):74–84.   
23.      
Freemantle   N,   Ray   D,   McNulty   D,   Rosser   D,   Bennett   S,   Keogh   BE,   et   al.   Increased   
mortality   associated   with   weekend   hospital   admission:   a   case   for   expanded   seven   day   
services?   BMJ.   2015   Jan   5;351(sep04_6):h4596.   
24.      
Worni   M,   Østbye   T,   Gandhi   M,   Rajgor   D,   Shah   J,   Shah   A,   et   al.   Laparoscopic   
appendectomy   outcomes   on   the   weekend   and   during   the   week   are   no   different:   a   
national   study   of   151,774   patients.   World   J   Surg.   2012   36:1527–33.      
25.      
Bray   BD,   Cloud   GC,   James   MA,   Hemingway   H,   Paley   L,   Stewart   K,   et   al.   Weekly   
variation   in   health-­‐care   quality   by   day   and   time   of   admission:   a   nationwide,   registry-­‐
based,   prospective   cohort   study   of   acute   stroke   care.   Lancet.   2016;6736:1–8.      
26.      
Day   of   week   of   procedure   and   30   day   mortality   for   elective   surgery:   retrospective   
analysis   of   hospital   episode   statistics   [Internet].   [cited   2016   Apr   25].   Available   from:   
http://www.bmj.com/content/346/bmj.f2424/rapid-­‐responses   
 27.      
Nashef   SA,   Roques   F,   Michel   P,   Gauducheau   E,   Lemeshow   S,   Salamon   R.   European   
system   for   cardiac   operative   risk   evaluation   (EuroSCORE).   Eur   J   Cardiothorac   Surg.   
1999;16:9–13.         
28.      
Rowan   KM,   Kerr   JH,   Major   E,   McPherson   K,   Short   A,   Vessey   MP.   Intensive   Care   
Society’s   APACHE   II   study   in   Britain   and   Ireland-­‐-­‐II:   Outcome   comparisons   of   intensive   
care   units   after   adjustment   for   case-­‐mix   by   the   American   APACHE   II   method.   BMJ.   
1993   16;307:   977–81.         
29.      
Wunsch   H,   Gershengorn   H,   Cooke   CR,   Guerra   C,   Angus   DC,   Rowe   JW,   et   al.   Use   of   
intensive   care   services   for   medicare   benificiaries   undergoing   major   surgical   
procedures.   Anesthesiology.   2016;   124:899-­‐907      
30.      
Gillies   MA,   Power   GS,   Harrison   DA,   Fleming   A,   Cook   B,   Walsh   TS,   et   al.   Regional   
variation   in   critical   care   provision   and   outcome   after   high-­‐risk   surgery.   Intensive   Care   
Med.   2015;   41:   1809-­‐16   
31.      
Gillies,   M   A.   PR.   Intensive   care   following   high-­‐risk   surgery…   What’s   in   a   name?   
Anesthesiology.   2016;   124:   761-­‐2.   
   
   
