 Science and society  
Alcohol: taking a population perspective 
William Gilmore1, Tanya Chikritzhs1, Tim Stockwell2, David Jernigan3, Timothy Naimi4, Ian 
Gilmore5 
1 National Drug Research Institute, Faculty of Health Sciences, Curtin University, GPO Box 
U1987, Perth, 6845, Australia. 
2 Centre for Addictions Research of British Columbia and Department of Psychology, 
University of Victoria, PO Box 1700 STN CSC, Victoria, British Columbia, V8W 2Y2, 
Canada. 
3 Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University, 615 North 
Wolfe Street, Baltimore, Maryland, 21205, USA. 
4 Section of General Internal Medicine, Boston University Medical Center, Boston 
University, 801 Massachusetts Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts, 02118, USA. 
5 University of Liverpool, iC2, Liverpool Science Park, 131 Mount Pleasant, Liverpool L3 
5TF, UK. 
Abstract Alcohol consumption is a global phenomenon, as is the resultant health, social
and economic harm. The nature of these harms varies with different drinking patterns and 
with the societal and political responses to the burden of harm, nevertheless alcohol-related 
chronic diseases have a major effect on health. Strong evidence exists for the effectiveness of 
different strategies to minimise this damage and those policies that target price, availability 
and marketing of alcohol come out best, whereas those using education and information are 
much less effective. However, these policies can be portrayed as anti-libertarian and so 
viewing them in the context of alcohol-related harm to those other than the drinker, such as 
the most vulnerable in society, is important. When this strategy is successful, such as in 
Scotland, it has been possible to pass strong and effective legislation such as for a minimum 
unit price for alcohol.  
 
Gilmore, W. and Chikritzhs, T. and Stockwell, T. and Jernigan, D. and Naimi, T. and Gilmore, I. 2016.  
Alcohol: taking a population perspective. Nature Reviews Gastroenterology and Hepatology. 13: pp. 426-434. 
http://doi.org/10.1038/nrgastro.2016.70 
 2 
 
This Perspective article may seem an unlikely topic for a clinical journal, but the wider harms 
of alcohol to health are increasingly being dealt with by gastroenterology and hepatology 
physicians. They need to know not just how to treat the individual’s disease (and sometimes 
the underlying dependence), but also how to contribute to reducing the huge global burden of 
alcohol-related harm on individuals, those around them and society in general. We will show 
that the answers do not always lie in better healthcare, but in better health. It is telling that the 
UK is consistently rated top of the league of a range of developed countries for its healthcare 
(effectiveness, accessibility etcetera), but bottom of the league for its population’s health.1 
This paradox arises because major threats to public health like alcohol need concerted policy 
action, often at a national level, to tackle issues quite independent of healthcare delivery like 
price, marketing and availability. Our governments are either insufficiently bold or too 
influenced by the alcohol industry to follow the evidence on these key issues. The public 
health approach also serves to emphasise that alcohol harm is not just about the small 
minority of dependent drinkers. The cumulative harm in those not considered ‘problem 
drinkers’, whether it be in cancers, heart disease or other illness, is huge and will be missed 
without a population perspective. Clinicians need to become advocates for the populations 
they serve as well as for their patients.  
 
This Perspective will outline the scale of the global alcohol problem, the wide ranging effects 
of alcohol, and the most effective evidence-based strategies to effect a population level 
reduction in harm. We will also highlight how clinicians can be good public health advocates 
and what downstream strategies there are while we wait for governments to take the 
necessary action.  
 
[H1] The scale of the problem 
[H2] Global alcohol consumption 
The quantity and pattern of alcohol use varies enormously between drinkers, between 
countries and within countries. National consumption level estimates are typically presented 
as the volume of pure alcohol consumed per adult per year, and the source of these data tends 
to be official statistics related to the sale of alcohol (for example, taxation records, customs 
data, surveys of producers and distributors). However, not all alcohol that is available for 
consumption is recorded in official statistics owing to varying levels of unregulated 
 3 
 
production, which tends to be particularly high in developing countries, and also unregulated 
importation.2  
 
The most recent global data are the 2010 estimates published by the WHO (World Health 
Organization), which take into account recorded alcohol and an estimate of the unrecorded 
alcohol based on country specific intelligence. The highest levels of per capita consumption 
are seen across Eastern Europe and Russia and the lowest levels across the predominantly 
Islamic countries of North Africa, the Middle East and Southeast Asia (Figure 1). Annual per 
capita consumption is 11.6 litres in the UK, 12.2 litres in Australia, 10.2 litres in Canada and 
9.2 litres in the USA. Over the past 50 years the UK has seen a substantial increase in 
consumption from relatively low levels compared with some of its neighbouring European 
countries, such as France and Italy, which have seen substantial decreases from very high 
levels (Figure 2).3 
 
Data collected through population level surveys have been found to vastly underestimate 
levels of alcohol use, and are not sufficient to monitor national consumption levels, but they 
are crucial in informing governments about differing patterns of consumption.2 When 
national consumption figures are adjusted to account for numbers of nondrinkers (derived 
from population surveys), it is generally observed that countries with low levels of adult per 
capita consumption have relatively high levels of consumption per drinker.3 Comprehensive 
reviews of the literature4,5 highlight that studies drawing on survey data have shown that a 
high proportion of the alcohol consumed in a country is consumed by a relatively small 
number of heavy drinkers (Box 1), and that as a country’s total consumption increases so 
does the level of heavy drinking. Even among people with moderate levels of consumption, a 
high proportion of alcohol is consumed during binge drinking occasions. These reviews4,5 
have also shown how alcohol consumption varies by age, gender and socio-economic status 
in the developed world. Although the gender gap is narrowing, more males drink alcohol than 
females and among those that do drink, males consume larger quantities and more frequently 
than females.4,5  Younger people are more likely to engage in binge drinking, and older 
people are more likely to drink daily.4,5  Those in higher socioeconomic strata are more likely 
to drink and tend to drink more frequently compared with lower socioeconomic groups.4,5  It 
is important that clinicians stay abreast of which populations are most at risk helping 
maximise the effect of the preventative approach by targeting high risk groups as well as 
entire populations. 
 4 
 
[H2] Global burden of alcohol consumption  
Alcohol is associated with a large range of health conditions and ranks as the fifth leading 
risk factor for disease and injury worldwide. Among 15–49 year olds alcohol consumption is 
the leading risk factor for premature death and disability.7 Furthermore, in developed nations 
alcohol causes similar or greater harm to others than harm to users themselves.8 
 
The WHO estimates that in 2012, 139 million disability-adjusted life years (DALYs), years 
of healthy life lost through disability and premature mortality, were attributable to alcohol use 
globally (5.1% of all DALYs). Injuries (intentional and unintentional) were the top 
contributor followed by neuropsychiatric disorders, cardiovascular diseases and 
gastrointestinal diseases.3 Similar to levels of alcohol use, the associated burden of disease 
and injury differs by region of the world, broadly following the global distribution of per 
capita consumption (Figure 1). The highest burden is seen across Eastern Europe and Russia 
and the lowest across North Africa, the Middle East and Southeast Asia.3 The burden of 
disease attributable to alcohol is above the global estimate of 5.1% in the UK, Canada and the 
USA, but below that in Australia.3 In keeping with the trend in alcohol consumption in the 
UK (Figure 2), morbidity and mortality from liver disease and other alcohol-related disorders 
are also on the increase.9 
 
Not only is alcohol use associated with health outcomes but there are wide ranging social and 
economic consequences. The annual financial burden of alcohol on society, through 
healthcare, policing, absenteeism and other social problems is difficult to quantify but has 
been estimated at around CA$14.5 billion in Canada (~$463 per capita),10 GB£21 billion in 
the UK (~£40 per capita),11 AU$35 billion in Australia (~ $1,743 per capita)12 and US$249 
billion in the USA (~$807 per capita).13 
 
[H1] The effects of alcohol  
The magnitude of health, social and economic consequences experienced by drinkers 
themselves, other individuals and society at large is influenced not only by the quantity of 
alcohol, but also the way in which it is consumed (Figure 3). Individual and societal factors, 
including alcohol policies and regulations, also have a large influence on the type and 
magnitude of problems associated with alcohol.3 
 
 5 
 
The relationship between alcohol consumption, disease and injury is complex. The literature 
on the health effects of alcohol consumption is dominated by observational rather than 
experimental studies, and meta-analyses of observational studies make up the bulk of the 
evidence-base showing a consistent dose-response relationship that has then led to causation 
being established through the process of comparative risk assessment.14,15 It is usual practice 
to have credible evidence, ideally from experimental studies, of a plausible biological 
mechanism to underlie causal associations between alcohol use and disease or injury.16,17 
Experimental ‘feeder’ studies (where alcohol is administered) have mainly focused on short-
term outcomes, such as serum biomarkers for coronary heart disease or cognitive and 
psychomotor effects that increase the risk of injury. There have been no long-term 
randomised controlled trials (RCTs) examining risk of death due to alcohol exposure in this 
field.  
 
For many of the observed social and economic effects associated with alcohol consumption, 
such as domestic or work-life problems and societal costs, it is only correlation not causation 
that has been established.4 
 
 
[H2] Health effects  
Alcohol use is associated with a range of health conditions, either directly or as a component 
cause. These include conditions that arise in the short-term from acute alcohol intoxication or 
in the long-term from cumulative exposure to alcohol. However, some conditions do not fit 
neatly into these categories. For example, alcoholic gastritis is an acute presentation, but is 
more common among regular heavy drinkers. Evidence exists for both causative and 
protective effects of alcohol on health outcomes.  
 
[H3] Short-term effects  
[H4] Intoxication and poisoning. The short-term intoxicating effect of alcohol has been 
experienced for as long as it has been consumed. Increased blood alcohol concentration, 
when the rate of consumption has exceeded the rate at which the liver processes ethanol, 
causes both mental and physical impairment even at low levels. At high levels the 
intoxicating effect can directly culminate in coma or death.19  
 
 6 
 
[H4] Injuries to self and others. The mental and physical impairment caused by alcohol 
intoxication in the short-term has been causally related to an increased risk of unintentional 
and intentional injury. A dose-response relationship has consistently been observed for 
injuries from road traffic crashes, falls, fires, drowning, work-related accidents, violence and 
self-harm.17,20 
 
[H3] Long-term effects 
[H4] Gastrointestinal and hepatic diseases. Alcohol use has consistently been causally 
associated with alcoholic gastritis, gastro-oesophageal haemorrhage, both acute and chronic 
pancreatitis, and the development and progression of liver disease (from fatty liver disease 
through to advanced cirrhosis and associated complications such as oesophageal varices).16 
The relationship between increasing average daily consumption and the incidence of and 
mortality from cirrhosis and pancreatitis is exponential.21,22 The rise in cirrhosis mortality has 
been so striking in the UK over the past 20 years that it is likely that the effects of alcohol and 
obesity (also on the rise) combine to produce a ‘double hit’ on the liver.9 A protective effect 
of alcohol use on cholelithiasis has been suggested.23 
 
[H4] Neuropsychiatric conditions. A range of neuropsychiatric conditions directly 
attributable to heavy alcohol use have been identified including alcohol dependence 
syndrome, alcohol withdrawal state, alcoholic myopathy16 and alcohol-related brain 
damage.24 Meta-analyses of observational studies have also confirmed a dose-response 
relationship between alcohol use and risk of epilepsy,17 including unprovoked epileptic 
seizures independent of seizures related to alcohol withdrawal.25 Another neuropsychiatric 
condition considered to have a partially attributable causal relationship with alcohol use is 
unipolar depressive disorder; however, it is generally not included in burden of disease 
estimates associated with alcohol due to confounding factors.17,26  
 
[H4] Cardiovascular diseases. Alcohol use has been well established as a component cause 
in cardiac arrhythmias, hypertensive disease, coronary heart disease and stroke, with 
increased risk generally seen for high levels of consumption.17,27 At low to moderate levels of 
consumption the evidence is mixed. Meta-analyses of short-term experimental and 
observational studies conclude that low to moderate levels of alcohol consumption are 
protective against hypertensive disease in women (but not men),28,29 coronary heart 
disease,30,31,32 ischaemic stroke, and haemorrhagic stroke in women.33 However, binge 
 7 
 
drinking occasions once a month or more have been shown to negate any protective effect 
from low level drinking on coronary heart disease,34 and a RCT published in 2015 reported 
that regular low levels of alcohol consumption increases the risk of hypertension among 
women.35 In addition, Mendelian randomisation studies that more closely replicate RCTs 
than traditional observational studies have brought into question the veracity of the apparent 
protective effects of alcohol against cardiovascular disease, as well as several key 
hypothesised causal mechanisms.36,37  
 
[H4] Cancers. The International Agency for Research on Cancer classifies alcohol as a group 
1 carcinogen (carcinogenic to humans), and considers alcohol to be causally related to 
cancers of the oral cavity, pharynx, larynx, oesophagus, liver, colon, rectum and female 
breast. Of these, colorectal and female breast cancers were the most recent to be judged 
causally related to alcohol in 2007.38 The relative risk of developing these cancers increases 
with any and with increasing average daily alcohol consumption. Other cancers for which a 
significant association with alcohol use has been found, but currently insufficient evidence 
for causality exists, include gastric, pancreatic, lung and prostate cancer.39,40 In the case of 
prostate cancer, new evidence assembled in the past several years is likely to lead to a 
consensus on causality in the near future.41,42 
 
[H4] Diabetes. Another condition that moderate average alcohol consumption has been 
associated with protection against in both experimental and observational studies is type 2 
diabetes mellitus. Similar to coronary heart disease, meta-analyses of studies have displayed a 
j-shaped curve with an increased risk of type 2 diabetes only at higher doses.43,44 Uncertainty 
surrounds the observed protective effect, with healthy lifestyle choices among moderate 
drinkers possibly confounding the results.17,27,45  
 
[H4] Perinatal conditions. Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder is a prime example of harm 
experienced by an individual other than the drinker.19 High levels of alcohol consumption 
during pregnancy (particularly the first trimester) have also been linked to spontaneous 
miscarriage,23 preterm birth and conditions related to preterm birth such as low birth 
weight.17,46 Epigenetic mechanisms whereby parental exposure to alcohol can alter 
subsequent gene expression in their offspring are also emerging.47 
 
 8 
 
[H4] Infectious diseases. In 2008, international experts met in Cape Town to review the 
evidence regarding the association between alcohol and two infectious diseases, HIV and 
tuberculosis. They concluded that sufficient evidence exists for a causal association between 
high levels of alcohol consumption and the incidence of tuberculosis, and the progression of 
existing tuberculosis and HIV.48 Meta-analyses and systematic reviews conducted since have 
confirmed the relationship between alcohol and tuberculosis49 and HIV,50 and added 
community-acquired pneumonia to the infectious diseases that alcohol is considered causally 
related to.17,51 
 
[H2] Social and economic effects  
In addition to the health effects that alcohol is known to have on the individual drinker, a 
wide range of harms are inflicted on others and the burden on society at large needs to be 
considered.8 A bystander, friend, colleague or family member could be injured through 
violence or an accident,20 or an unborn child harmed by its mother’s drinking during 
pregnancy.19 Families might be affected financially or through neglect, workplaces by 
decreased productivity and absenteeism, and whole communities by crime, disorder and the 
public money spent on alcohol-related healthcare and policing.12,52 The epidemiological 
evidence base surrounding the social and economic effects of alcohol consumption is quite 
weak,4 but the direct and indirect effects are likely to be wide ranging. Consideration of them 
is needed if policy makers are to understand the full scale of the effects of alcohol use on 
society. 
 
[H1] An evolving field of study 
Unfortunately, the scientific study of the effects of long-term exposure to alcohol suffers 
from a number of uncertainties, and current burden-of-disease estimates are likely to be an 
underestimation. This underestimate is particularly true for effects of low levels of alcohol 
consumption, in which outcomes might have long latency periods, be influenced by multiple 
risk factors, and have low relative risk estimates compared with other risk factors. The 
possible confounding effects of other risk factors associated with alcohol consumption that 
have independent associations with disease risks can lead to underestimating the disease risks 
from alcohol use, for example when moderate drinking is associated with a generally 
moderate lifestyle.53  
 
 9 
 
Although confounding factors could also result in overestimation, many other uncertainties 
exist that result in an underestimation of disease risks and, by corollary, an overestimation of 
the potential health benefits of alcohol. Systematic bias can operate in longitudinal studies in 
several ways that lead towards alcohol consumers looking healthy in comparison with 
abstainers. The definition of the all-important comparison group, ‘abstainers’, differs widely 
from study to study and might include people who are only known to have recently abstained, 
who usually abstain or who are former drinkers. Individuals who greatly reduce their drinking 
or stop completely often do so for health reasons.54,55 These issues mean that with passing 
time, the comparison group of ‘abstainers’ increasingly fills with less healthy people while 
drinker groups (particularly low and moderate drinkers) are increasingly made up of 
relatively healthy survivors. A further complication is that even young adults who become 
complete abstainers often have poorer health than their peers who become drinkers.56 There is 
now greater awareness of the need to control for these kinds of methodological problems in 
longitudinal studies of possible health protective effects of low dose alcohol,54,57,58 but it has 
been argued that the bulk of epidemiological literature on alcohol remains affected by bias 
and confounding factors,59 the effect of which has not been fully quantified.  
 
In addition to causing substantial underestimation of the burden of disease from alcohol, the 
methodological problems described above pose difficulties for the formulation of national 
low risk drinking guidelines. In some countries such as Canada, these have been set at a level 
where the relative risk of all-cause mortality for alcohol consumers equals that of abstainers 
(135g of ethanol per week for women and 202g for men).60 The potential risks and benefits of 
alcohol use below this level are thought to cancel each other out or are a net positive. The 
approach in Australia was to use absolute risk estimates and discount potential benefits of 
low-volume alcohol consumption.19,61 Others have suggested setting limits at the level of 
drinking at which mortality risk begins to increase, regardless of whether there may be net 
benefits at this level.62 As research in this complex area evolves it can be confidently 
concluded that recommendations for acceptable ‘low risk’ consumption will become more 
conservative. For example, the UK alcohol guidelines released in early 2016 recommend that 
both women and men do not regularly exceed 112g of ethanol per week and have several 
drink-free days each week.63 The Joint Action on Reducing Alcohol Related Harm (RARHA) 
across European Union member states is the most coordinated international effort to discuss 
low risk guidelines to date.64 
 
 10 
 
Based on the current state of the evidence, any published guidelines relating to alcohol use 
should discourage drinking alcohol for health benefits, and clinicians should not recommend 
alcohol consumption to their patients as a means of reducing cardiovascular or other disease 
risk.59 
 
[H1] Reducing alcohol-related harm  
As alcohol is an addictive substance and because the negative consequences of alcohol 
consumption are often second-hand, with the costs borne by societies as a whole, government 
regulation is required to discourage problematic consumption and associated behaviour and 
to protect others from harms caused by drinkers.  
 
Babor et al.4 describe how authority over and possibilities for regulating alcohol exist at 
multiple levels of government. Alcohol policy tends to be decentralised, with responsibilities 
for different aspects of policy spread among what are sometimes competing government 
interests, such as health ministries and revenue or finance agencies. Government control over 
alcohol can extend to the production, export, and import of alcoholic beverages; wholesaling 
and/or retail sale of alcohol; establishment of minimum legal purchase ages for alcohol; 
measures to reduce drink-driving; restrictions on alcohol marketing; and support for and 
standards for prevention and treatment services and activities. Although the locus of control 
over alcohol policy-making in many countries lies at the national level, opportunities for 
regulation at the local level (for example, as is the case in England where local authorities 
have control of alcohol licensing) are also possible. A divergence of policy within the 
constituent UK countries provides the chance to compare the impact of different policies.65 In 
federal systems, such as the USA, Canada and Australia, control can be divided between 
national and state or provincial authorities. Natural experiments in the privatisation of 
government monopolies over retail alcohol sales in the USA, Canada, Finland and Sweden 
have illustrated the health and safety benefits of government regulation: in general, 
privatisation has led to greater consumption and alcohol-related problems, whereas 
renationalisation has reduced harms.66,67 
 
Alcohol sales worldwide total approximately US$ 1trillion annually,68 and for beer and spirits 
in particular, a small number of companies dominate global markets.69 These companies are 
known to play an active role in alcohol policy formation, and have generally been found to 
 11 
 
support policies with the weakest evidence of effect, and oppose those likely to have greater 
effect on reducing consumption and harms.70,71  
 
The most effective means of reducing excessive alcohol use and related problems at the 
population level is through policies that reduce the affordability and/or availability of alcohol 
and restrict alcohol marketing.4,72 Educational efforts alone that seek to change individuals’ 
drinking behaviour have been largely unsuccessful, and although treatment of alcohol 
dependence is important, clinical addiction treatment has not been shown to result in 
population level reductions in harm.4 
 
[H2] Reducing alcohol affordability  
Evidence supports the effectiveness of reducing the affordability of alcohol as the single 
strongest intervention to have been evaluated for the reduction of population levels of alcohol 
related harm. This is the conclusion of multiple comprehensive reviews4,73,74 and is confirmed 
by several meta-analyses and natural experiments. For example, Wagenaar et al.75 identified 
112 higher quality international studies incorporating >200 years of data and generating 1003 
estimates of the relationship between alcohol prices and consumption levels. They concluded 
that a 10% increase in price led to an average 4.4% reduction in total population 
consumption. Other studies also suggest that price increases specifically for cheap alcohol 
will result in greater reductions in the consumption of heavy drinkers than low or moderate 
drinkers.76,77  
 
Unfortunately, in contrast to education and persuasion strategies, across-the-board alcohol 
pricing and tax increases are among the most unpopular policy options with the general 
public78 and are more unpopular in heavier drinking populations.79 In other words, greater 
need for effective pricing policies can render them more politically dangerous for decision-
makers. In response to this dilemma, we highlight some more targeted approaches to alcohol 
pricing, such as minimum unit pricing,76 which might be more palatable to the general public 
and decision-makers.  
 
The two most common arguments against pricing strategies are first, that the heaviest and 
dependent drinkers will be unaffected and second, if affected these drinkers might turn to 
more dangerous forms of non-beverage alcohol. Neither argument stands up to scientific 
 12 
 
scrutiny and is contradicted by the evidence summarised below. If price increases were 
leading drinkers simply to substitute beverage alcohol for non-beverage alcohol, it would not 
be possible to observe the kinds of reductions in alcohol-related mortality and morbidity 
shown to be associated with tax increases.80,81  
 
Pricing and taxation strategies need to be the first priority of any comprehensive response to 
alcohol-related problems. In combination they can produce increased revenues for 
government and industry, while reducing consumption and harms. The challenge is finding 
the balance where governments and industry can agree. Societies that allow unfettered access 
to very cheap alcohol will undermine the effectiveness of other prevention and treatment 
strategies. However, pricing and taxation strategies rely on control of the unregulated market 
for their effectiveness, which is not always the case particularly in low-income and middle-
income countries. 
 
[H3] Linking alcohol prices to the cost of living  
Mechanisms to periodically adjust taxes and prices to keep up with the cost of living are 
important to ensure the preventive power of alcohol pricing is not eroded, particularly where 
alcohol taxes are tied to the volume of the beverage, as they are in many jurisdictions. A lack 
of adjustment has been a substantial problem in the USA, where the federal tax on beer has 
been raised just once in >50 years.82 In Canada raising alcohol excise duty requires the 
consent of Parliament and has only been done twice in 25 years.83 The UK Government 
introduced an alcohol duty escalator in 2008, to keep the excise rate 2% above the rate of 
inflation, only to abolish it in 2014.84 By contrast, in Australia alcohol excise taxes are raised 
every six months with the cost of living so that their real values are maintained.85 Failure to 
maintain prices and tax levels allows downward pressure on the price of alcohol and hence 
upward pressure on population levels of consumption and related harm. 
 
[H3] Minimum pricing  
Minimum pricing refers to a set price below which alcoholic beverages cannot be legally sold 
in the retail market. The 10 Canadian provinces are among a handful of jurisdictions that set 
minimum prices for the sale of alcohol. Usually, these are set independently of alcohol 
content and do not keep pace with inflation, which guarantees at least a small number of very 
cheap high strength products remain, for example, 8% alcohol by volume beer, 22% fortified 
wine and 75% spirits.86 Nonetheless, Canadian researchers have estimated the associations 
 13 
 
between changes in minimum alcohol prices, consumption and related harms. In these studies 
it is estimated that a 10% increase in minimum alcohol prices is associated with a 9% 
reduction in alcohol-related hospital admissions,87 a 32% reduction in wholly alcohol caused 
deaths,88 and a 9% reduction in violent crime.89  
 
[H3] Pricing on alcohol content 
Ethanol is the ingredient in beverage alcohol that, in a dose-response manner, causes serious 
health and safety problems. The provincial health officer of British Columbia, Canada has 
recommended ethanol-based pricing within each main category of alcoholic beverage,90 and 
an increasing number of Canadian provinces including Saskatchewan, Ontario, Quebec and 
Manitoba are now following this recommendation.91 A marked increase in the minimum 
prices charged for higher strength beers in Saskatchewan was shown to trigger a shift from 
high to low strength wines and beers and an overall reduction in per capita consumption.92  
 
[H3] Minimum unit pricing 
A public health ideal, combining both the previous two objectives, would be to have a single 
set of taxation rates based entirely upon ethanol content and with set minima (that is, 
minimum unit prices), which would remove the myriad different rates of tax typically applied 
to alcoholic drinks.93 The UK proposals11 passed into law in Scotland but not yet 
implemented,94 link the minimum price directly to the alcohol content. UK modelling studies 
have suggested that raising minimum alcohol prices to only 45 pence per unit/standard drink 
would substantially reduce alcohol-related deaths and healthcare costs.76,95 
 
[H3] Earmarked alcohol taxes 
The unpopularity of raising the price of alcohol via taxation to reduce problems can be offset 
if the rationale provided involves raising revenue to pay for treatment and prevention 
programs.93 Such earmarked or ‘hypothecated’ taxes have been introduced in a number of 
countries variously for alcohol, tobacco and gambling. Such special taxes have the twin 
virtues of reducing harm while generating extra revenues.96 As demand for alcohol is 
relatively ‘inelastic’, increased taxes will almost invariably result in increased revenues for 
government.97  
 
 
 
 14 
 
[H3] Combining taxation  
Thailand has adopted an approach to alcohol taxation that calculates the tax on various types 
of alcoholic beverages both by alcohol content and as a fixed percentage of the price and then 
applies the higher of the two as the actual tax. This method results in higher taxes both on the 
beverages most popular with heavier drinkers (high alcohol content, but lower price per 
drink) and those attractive to young and inexperienced drinkers (lower alcohol content, but 
higher price per drink), leading to lower consumption overall.98,99 
 
[H3] Restricting discounts 
Restrictions on discounts can include bans on ‘happy hours’ in on-premise outlets (pubs and 
bars) and ‘buy one get one free’ promotions in off-premise outlets (supermarkets, off-
licences, liquor stores). Evidence of effectiveness in this area is relatively limited, with the 
majority of studies from the USA, but it is a growing area of interest.100,101 Scotland 
introduced a total ban on alcoholic beverage discounts in on-premise outlets in 2009,102 and 
on multi-buy discounts in off-premise outlets in 2011.103 Modelling by Meng et al.104 
estimated that a total ban on off-premise discounts in Scotland would reduce overall alcohol 
consumption by 3%. Two evaluations of the off-premise multi-buy promotion ban have 
shown contradicting results. One that the ban had no impact on off-premise alcohol 
purchases105 and the other that the ban was associated with a 2.6%  reduction in off-premise 
alcohol sales in Scotland.106  
 
[H2] Reducing physical availability  
Reducing the physical availability of alcohol relates to increasing the ‘convenience’ cost of 
alcohol by regulating the times, places and contexts in which it can be obtained.107 This 
approach can range from total or partial prohibition through to secondary supply laws that 
prevent adults supplying alcohol to underage drinkers. The areas for which most evidence 
exists for reducing population level harm are restricting trading hours, limiting outlet density 
and having older minimum purchasing age laws.4  
 
[H3] Restricting trading hours  
Strong evidence shows that large changes (for example, adding or subtracting a whole day) in 
the trading hours of on-premise outlets can influence rates of consumption and harm.4 The 
literature on the effects of increasing or reducing trading hours at first appears conflicting. 
 15 
 
However, a comprehensive review assessed 49 studies on two key criteria: whether a control 
area was used for comparison and whether baseline data were collected.108 The majority of 
studies meeting these criteria found increased hours resulted in increased harms, such as 
assaults and drink driving offences. A review by Hahn et al.109 concluded that restricting 
hours of sale by two hours or more was likely to reduce alcohol-related harms, and since then 
three additional high-quality studies have demonstrated reductions in violent incidents 
following small reductions in trading hours.110,111,112 
 
[H3] Limiting outlet density 
The evidence linking the density of different kinds of alcohol outlets (for example, number of 
outlets per 10,000 residents or per km2) with rates of both alcohol consumption and alcohol-
related harm is somewhat mixed. Two systematic reviews assessing studies published prior to 
2009113,114 concluded that limiting alcohol outlet density was an effective measure in 
reducing alcohol consumption and related harms. Evidence appears to be more developed and 
strongest for outlets that sell alcohol for on-premise consumption versus off-premise 
consumption. A 2015 systematic review focusing on literature from 2009 to 2014,115 although 
still concluding that restricting outlet density might reduce alcohol-related harms, has been 
critical of methods used in outlet density studies and of the conclusions drawn in the earlier 
reviews. This review is somewhat contentious and has been the topic of commentary by other 
experts in the field.116 
 
[H3] Purchasing age laws 
Convincing evidence from studies of the impact of both increases and decreases in legal 
drinking ages show that higher legal drinking ages are associated with fewer road traffic 
crashes involving young people than lower ages.4,117 Studies have also demonstrated the 
effectiveness of enforcement strategies that restrict the access of underage drinkers to 
alcohol.118 Both the legal age of purchase and the extent to which this law is enforced will 
limit access by underage drinkers and potentially reduce harm to this specific group who are 
at a very high risk for a range of alcohol-related problems.119,120  
 
[H2] Restricting alcohol marketing  
Alcoholic beverages are promoted extensively around the world. In the USA alone, 14 
alcohol companies spent US$3.4 billion on marketing in 2011121 and alcohol companies are 
 16 
 
among the ten leading advertisers in numerous low-income and middle-income 
countries.122 Beyond traditional advertising, contemporary alcohol marketing encompasses 
point-of-sale advertising, sponsorship of sporting and other events and celebrities, 
promotional allowances and other incentives to retailers, internet advertising and social 
media, product placement, and social responsibility programs and messages. Particular 
products or marketing campaigns might be perceived to target women or vulnerable 
populations such as young people or lower socioeconomic groups.123,124  
 
A substantial and growing body of research literature has found that youth exposure to 
alcohol marketing is associated with greater likelihood of initiation of drinking, and with 
increased alcohol consumption among young people who have already begun to drink. 
Published systematic reviews have identified 13 longitudinal studies,125,126 and subsequent 
literature searches have identified at least eight others, all of which have found the 
association described above,127 however, the effect sizes are modest. All the longitudinal 
studies to date have examined associations between alcohol marketing exposure and 
consumption of alcohol in general or consumption by alcohol type. In recognition of the 
branded nature of alcohol marketing and consumption, some cross-sectional work has 
focused on exposure and consumption by alcohol brand, finding much stronger 
associations.128 
 
In comparison with other interventions to reduce alcohol-related harm, advertising and 
marketing restrictions have consistently been found to be highly cost-effective.73,129,130 
Although no studies to date, of which we are aware, have examined the effectiveness of 
specific policy initiatives to reduce alcohol marketing, multiple studies have used modelling 
to assess the effect of such reductions in alcohol marketing on health outcomes at the 
population level.129,131 
 
[H3] Self-regulation  
The most common form of regulation of alcohol marketing worldwide is alcohol industry 
self-regulation;3 however, numerous studies from multiple countries have shown this form of 
regulation to be ineffective either in protecting young people from disproportionate exposure 
to alcohol marketing132,133 or in restricting objectionable advertising content.134,135  
 
 
 17 
 
[H3] Total or partial bans 
The most effective and cost-effective approach to reducing alcohol marketing exposure 
among populations is a total ban on alcohol marketing, which is relatively easy to implement, 
except when it comes to digital media that cross national borders.129 The Loi Évin4,136 law in 
France, passed in 1991 and named after health minister Claude Évin, offers a model for 
partial bans by prohibiting all marketing activities and then writing exceptions to that 
prohibition, thereby requiring that all new marketing innovations be approved by Parliament. 
Partial bans might include restrictions on content, such as limitations on lifestyle advertising 
or restricting marketing communications solely to product qualities; time-specific bans such 
as time watersheds permitting alcohol advertising at certain times of day; audience-specific 
bans such as restrictions on marketing in youth venues or in media more likely to be attended 
to by young people than adults; other specific bans relating to the type of beverage, the 
advertising medium and television channels, such as no advertising of distilled spirits on 
national free-to-air television, or on channels popular with young people such as MTV© 
(Viacom International Media Networks Europe); and bans specific to geographical location 
and events, for instance restricting alcohol advertising in proximity to schools or playgrounds 
or at sporting events. 
 
Implementation of anything short of a total ban requires the creation of a monitoring 
function. Commercial data sources might be useful in assessing the degree to which standards 
to prevent disproportionate exposure of young people are being followed; however, these 
data sources can be expensive and require specialised expertise if they are to be properly 
employed.137 France provides a model for incentivising public monitoring and enforcement of 
its ban, through a provision that permits nongovernmental organisations to bring legal action 
in the courts and be awarded resulting fines when they can show the law is being violated.138  
 
[H3] Counter-advertising 
Finally, counter-advertising is an alternative or addition to the regulation of alcohol 
marketing. Although mandated government counter-advertising has been shown to be 
effective in reducing youth smoking,139 this approach remains largely untested in the case of 
alcohol marketing. 
 
 
 18 
 
[H1] So, what does the future hold? 
Clearly, alcohol causes a huge preventable burden on global health, the biggest single 
preventable factor in premature death and disability in adults aged 15–49,7 and we have 
evidence-based strategies to reduce this burden. Whether governments have an appetite for 
the regulatory measures that work is less clear, and with the increasing influence of global 
alcohol producers there is need for international action comparable to the WHO Framework 
Convention on Tobacco Control.140 Implementing such a framework will require shifting 
public opinion to allow such action, and here the recognition of alcohol as a major harm to 
innocent bystanders, particularly children, is key. The emerging data on alcohol as a cause of 
common cancers will also be important to influence public opinion. Indeed, information and 
education might be more effective in creating support for effective public health policy rather 
than directly changing individual behaviour.141 Scientists and clinicians are most likely to 
have a role in these areas to rebalance our troubled relationship with society’s favourite drug.  
 
As we wait for our public health advocacy to be heard and for governments to take the 
necessary action what can clinicians do? As well as continuing to advocate for policy action, 
they should remember that identification and treatment of individuals is effective across the 
spectrum of problem drinking, from early identification and brief advice through to treatment 
services for established dependence.4 
 
Acknowledgements  
The National Drug Research Institute is supported by funding from the Australian 
Government under the Substance Misuse Prevention and Service Improvements Grants Fund. 
 
Author contributions 
All authors contributed equally to all aspects of this manuscript.  
 
Competing interests 
The authors declare no competing interests. 
 
Correspondence to 
Ian Gilmore  
i.gilmore@liverpool.ac.uk  
 19 
 
References  
1. 
Davis, K. et al. Mirror, mirror on the wall: how the performance of the U.S. health 
care system compares internationally. New York: The Commonwealth Fund (2014). 
2. 
World Health Organization. International guide for monitoring alcohol consumption 
and related harm. (World Health Organization, Geneva, 2000). 
3. 
World Health Organization. Global status report on alcohol and health. (World Health 
Organization, Geneva, 2014). 
4. 
Babor, T. et al. Alcohol: No ordinary commodity. Research and public policy. Second 
Edition. (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2010). 
5. 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. Tackling Harmful 
Alcohol Use: Economics and Public Health Policy. (OECD Publishing, Paris, 2015). 
6. 
World Health Organization. Global Information System on Alcohol and Health 
[online], http://apps.who.int/gho/data/node.main.GISAH?lang=en.  
7. 
Lim, S. et al. A comparative risk assessment of burden of disease and injury 
attributable to 67 risk factors and risk factor clusters in 21 regions, 1990-2010: a 
systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. Lancet 380, 2224-
60 (2012). 
8. 
Nutt, D., King, L. & Phillips, L. Drug harms in the UK: a multicriteria decision 
analysis. Lancet 376, 1558–65 (2010). 
9. 
Williams, R. et al. Addressing liver disease in the UK: a blueprint for attaining 
excellence in health care and reducing premature mortality from lifestyle issues of 
excess consumption of alcohol, obesity, and viral hepatitis. Lancet 384, 1953–97 
(2014). 
10. 
Rehm, J. et al. The costs of substance abuse in Canada 2002. (Canadian Centre on 
Substance Abuse, Ottawa, 2006). 
11. 
HM Government. The Government’s Alcohol Strategy. (HM Government, London, 
2012). 
12. 
Laslett, A-M. et al. The Range and Magnitude of Alcohol’s Harm to Others. (AER 
Centre for Alcohol Policy Research, Turning Point Alcohol and Drug Centre, Eastern 
Health, Melbourne, 2010). 
13. 
Sacks, J. et al. 2010 National and State Costs of Excessive Alcohol Consumption. 
American Journal of Preventive Medicine 49, e73-e79 (2015). 
 20 
 
14. 
Rehm, J. et al. The relationship of average volume of alcohol consumption and 
patterns of drinking to burden of disease − an overview. Addiction 98, 1209−28 
(2003). 
15. 
Hill, A. The Environment and Disease: Association or Causation? Proceedings of the 
Royal Society of Medicine 58, 295–300 (1965) 
16. 
English, D. & Holman, D. The quantification of drug caused morbidity and mortality 
in Australia. (Department of Community Services and Health, Australian Govt. Pub. 
Service, Canberra, 1995). 
17. 
Rehm, J. et al. The relation between different dimensions of alcohol consumption and 
burden of disease − an overview. Addiction 105, 817−43 (2010). 
18. 
Blas, E. & Kurup, A. Equity, social determinants and public health programmes. 
(World Health Organization, Geneva, 2010). 
19. 
National Health and Medical Research Council. Australian guidelines to reduce health 
risks from drinking alcohol. (National Health and Medical Research Council, 
Canberra, 2009). 
20. 
Taylor, B. et al. The more you drink, the harder you fall: A systematic review and 
meta-analysis of how acute alcohol consumption and injury or collision risk increase 
together. Drug and Alcohol Dependence 110, 108-116 (2010). 
21. 
Rehm, J. et al. Alcohol as a risk factor for liver cirrhosis – a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Drug Alcohol Rev , 437–45 (2010). 
22. 
Irving, H., Samokhvalov, A. & Rehm J. Alcohol as a risk factor for pancreatitis. A 
systematic review and meta-analysis. JOP 4, 387–92 (2009). 
23. 
Gutjahr, E., Gmel, G. & Rehm J. Relation between Average Alcohol Consumption 
and Disease: An Overview. European Addiction Research 7, 117–127 (2001). 
24. 
The Royal College of Psychiatrists and The Royal College of General Practitioners. 
Alcohol and brain damage in adults, with reference to high risk groups. (RCPsych & 
RCGP, London, 2014). 
25. 
Samokhvalov, A, Irving H, Mohapatra S, Rehm J. Alcohol consumption, unprovoked 
seizures, and epilepsy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Epilepsia 51, 1177-84 
(2010). 
26. 
Rehm, J. et al. in Comparative Quantification of Health Risks: Global and Regional 
Burden of Disease Attributable to Selected Major Risk Factors, vol. 1. (ed. Ezzati, M., 
Lopez, A., Rodgers, A. & Murray, C.) 959-1108 (World Health Organization, 
Geneva, 2004). 
 21 
 
27. 
Roerecke, M. & Rehm, J. Alcohol intake revisited: risks and benefits. Curr 
Atheroscler Rep 14, 556−62 (2012). 
28. 
Taylor, B. et al. Alcohol and hypertension: gender differences in dose–response 
relationships determined through systematic review and meta-analysis. Addiction 104, 
1981–90 (2009). 
29. 
Briasoulis, A., Agarwal, V. & Messerli F. Alcohol consumption and the risk of 
hypertension in men and women: a systematic review and metaanalysis. J Clin 
Hypertens 14, 792–798 (2012). 
30. 
Brien, S. et al. Effect of alcohol consumption on biological markers associated with 
risk of coronary heart disease: systematic review and meta-analysis of interventional 
studies. BMJ 342, d636 (2011). 
31. 
Ronksley, P. et al. Association of alcohol consumption with selected cardiovascular 
disease outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ 342, d671 (2011). 
32. 
Roerecke, M. & Rehm, J. The cardioprotective association of average alcohol 
consumption and ischaemic heart disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Addiction 7, 1246–60 (2012). 
33. 
Patra, J. et al. Alcohol consumption and the risk of morbidity and mortality from 
different stroke types – a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Public Health 1, 
258 (2010). 
34. 
Roerecke, M. & Rehm, J.  Irregular Heavy Drinking Occasions and Risk of Ischemic 
Heart Disease: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. American Journal of 
Epidemiology 171, 633-44 (2010). 
35. 
Mori, T. et al. Randomized Controlled Intervention of the Effects of Alcohol on 
Blood Pressure in Premenopausal Women. Hypertension 66, 517-523 (2015). 
36. 
Holmes, M. et al. Association between alcohol and cardiovascular disease: Mendelian 
randomisation analysis based on individual participant data. BMJ 349: g4164 (2014). 
37. 
Chikritzhs, T., Naimi, T., Stockwell, T. & Liang W. Mendelian randomisation meta-
analysis sheds doubt on protective associations between 'moderate' alcohol 
consumption and coronary heart disease. Evid Based Med 20, 38 (2015). 
38. 
Baan, R. et al. Carcinogenicity of alcoholic beverages. Lancet Oncology 8, 292–93 
(2007). 
39. 
International Agency for Research on Cancer. IARC monographs on the evaluation of 
carcinogenic risks to humans: alcohol consumption and ethyl carbamate. (IARC, 
Lyon, 2010). 
 22 
 
40. 
International Agency for Research on Cancer. IARC monographs on the evaluation of 
carcinogenic risks to humans: personal habits and indoor combustions. (IARC, Lyon, 
2012). 
41. 
Fillmore, K., Chikritzhs, T., Stockwell, T., Bostrom, A. & Pascal R. Alcohol use and 
prostate cancer: A meta-analysis. Mol Nutr Food Res 53, 240-55 (2009).  
42. 
Rota, M., et al. Alcohol consumption and prostate cancer risk: a meta-analysis of the 
dose-risk relation. Eur J Cancer Prev 21, 350-9 (2012). 
43. 
Baliunas, D. et al. Alcohol as a risk factor for type 2 diabetes - a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Diabetes Care 11, 2123–32 (2009). 
44. 
Pietraszek, A., Gregersen, S. & Hermansen, K. Alcohol and type 2 diabetes. A 
review. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis 5, 366–75 (2010). 
45. 
Shield, K., Parry, C. & Rehm J. Chronic diseases and conditions related to alcohol 
use. Alcohol Research Current Reviews 35, 155–171 (2013). 
46. 
Patra, J. et al. Dose-response relationship between alcohol consumption before and 
during pregnancy and the risks of low birthweight, preterm birth and small for 
gestational age - a systematic review and meta-analyses. BJOG 118, 1411-21 (2011). 
47. 
Shukla, S. & Zakhari, S. (Eds). Epigenetics - New Frontier for Alcohol Research. 
Alcohol Research: Current Reviews. 35, 1-116 (2013). 
48. 
Parry, C. et al. Alcohol and infectious diseases: an overlooked causal linkage? 
Addiction 104, 331-2 (2009). 
49. 
Rehm, J., et al. The association between alcohol use, alcohol use disorders and 
tuberculosis (TB). A systematic review. BMC Public Health 9, 450 (2009). 
50. 
Shuper, P. et al. Causal considerations on alcohol and HIV/AIDS - a systematic 
review. Alcohol Alcohol 2, 159–66 (2010). 
51. 
Samokhvalov, A., Irving, H. & Rehm, J. Alcohol consumption as a risk factor for 
pneumonia: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Epidemiology and Infection 138, 
1789-95 (2010). 
52. 
Gell, L. et al. Alcohol's harm to others. (Institute of Alcohol Studies, London, 2015). 
53. 
Naimi, T. et al. Cardiovascular risk factors and confounders among nondrinking and 
moderate-drinking US adults. Am J Prev Med 28, 369-73 (2005). 
54. 
Fillmore, K. et al. Moderate alcohol use and reduced mortality risk: Systematic error 
in prospective studies. Addict Res Theory 14, 101-32 (2006). 
 23 
 
55. 
Kerr, W., Fillmore, K. & Bostrom, A. Stability of alcohol consumption over time: 
evidence from three longitudinal surveys from the United States. J Stud Alcohol 
Drugs, 63, 325 (2002). 
56. 
Ng Fat, L. & Shelton, N. Associations between self‐reported illness and non‐drinking 
in young adults. Addiction 107, 1612-20 (2012). 
57. 
Bergmann, M. et al. The association of pattern of lifetime alcohol use and cause of 
death in the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC) 
study. International Journal of Epidemiology 42, 1772-90 (2013). 
58. 
Chikritzhs, T. et al. Has the leaning tower of presumed health benefits from moderate 
alcohol use finally collapsed? Addiction 110, 726-7 (2015). 
59. 
Stockwell, T. et al. How good is the science? BMJ 344, e2276 (2012). 
60. 
Stockwell, T. et al. The basis for Canada's new low-risk drinking guidelines: a relative 
risk approach to estimating hazardous levels and patterns of alcohol use. Drug 
Alcohol Rev 31, 126-34 (2012). 
61. 
Room, R. & Rehm, J. Clear criteria based on absolute risk: reforming the basis of 
guidelines on low-risk drinking. Drug Alcohol Rev 31, 135-40 (2012). 
62. 
Naimi, T. et al. Confounding and studies of ‘moderate’ alcohol consumption: the case 
of drinking frequency and implications for low-risk drinking guidelines. Addiction 
108, 1534-43 (2013). 
63. 
Department of Health. UK Chief Medical Officers’ Alcohol Guidelines Review 
Summary of the proposed new guidelines. (Department of Health, London, 2015).  
64. 
Scafato, E., Silvia, G., Lucia, G. & Claudia, G. The implementation in Europe (EU) of 
the low risk drinking guidelines: results from the RARHA survey. Addiction Science 
& Clinical Practice 10(Suppl 2), 17 (2015). 
65. 
Fitzgerald, N. & Angus, C. Four Nations: How Evidence-based are Alcohol Policies 
and Programmes across the UK? (Alliance for Useful Evidence/Alcohol Health 
Alliance, London, 2015). 
66. 
Hahn, R. et al. Effects of alcohol retail privatization on excessive alcohol 
consumption and related harms: a community guide systematic review. Am J Prev 
Med 42, 418-427 (2012). 
67. 
Room, R. (Ed). The Effects of Nordic Alcohol Policies: What Happens to Drinking 
when Alcohol Controls Change? (Nordic Council for Alcohol and Drug Research, 
Helsinki, 2002). 
 24 
 
68. 
Jernigan, D. Global alcohol producers, science, and policy: The case of the 
International Center for Alcohol Policies. American Journal of Public Health 102, 80-
8 9 (2012). 
69. 
Jernigan, D. The global alcohol industry: an overview. Addiction 104, 6-12 (2009). 
70. 
Babor, T. & Robaina, K. Public health, academic medicine, and the alcohol industry's 
corporate social responsibility activities. American Journal of Public Health 103, 206-
214 (2013). 
71. 
Babor, T. et al. The influence of industry actions to increase availability of alcoholic 
beverages in the African Region. Addiction 110, 561-71 (2015). 
72. 
Stockwell, T. Alcohol Supply, Demand, and Harm Reductions: What is the Strongest 
Cocktail? International Journal of Drug Policy 17, 269–77 (2006). 
73. 
Anderson, P., Chisholm, D. & Fuhr, D. Effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of 
policies and programmes to reduce the harm caused by alcohol. The Lancet 373, 
2234-2246 (2009). 
74. 
Nelson, T. et al. Efficacy and the strength of evidence of U.S. alcohol control policies. 
Am J Prev Med 45, 19-28 (2013). 
75. 
Wagenaar, A., Salois, M. & Komro, K. Effects of beverage alcohol price and tax 
levels on drinking: A meta-analysis of 1003 estimates from 112 studies. Addiction 
104, 179-190 (2009). 
76. 
Holmes, J. et al. Effects of minimum unit pricing for alcohol on different income and 
socioeconomic groups: a modelling study. The Lancet 383, 1655-64 (2014). 
77. 
Gruenewald, P. et al. Alcohol prices, beverage quality, and the demand for alcohol: 
quality substitutions and price elasticities. Alcoholism: clinical experimental research 
30, 96-105 (2006). 
78. 
Room, R.. et al. Trends in public opinion about alcohol policy initiatives in Ontario 
and the US 1989-91. Drug and Alcohol Review 14, 35-47 (1995). 
79. 
MacDonald, S., Stockwell, T. & Luo, J. The relationship between alcohol problems, 
perceived risks and attitudes toward alcohol policy in Canada. Drug and Alcohol 
Review 30, 652-8 (2010). 
80. 
Chikritzhs, T., Stockwell, T. & Pascal, R. The Impact of the Northern Territory’s 
Living with Alcohol Program, 1992-2002: Revisiting the Evaluation. Addiction 100, 
1625-1636 (2005).  
 25 
 
81. 
Wagenaar, A., Tobler, A. & Komro, K. Effects of alcohol tax and price policies on 
morbidity and mortality: A systematic review. American Journal of Public Health 
100, 2270-8 (2010). 
82. 
Center for Science in the Public Interest. Why Raise Alcohol Taxes? (2015). 
http://www.cspinet.org/alcohol/taxes.html. 
83. 
Beer Canada. Case for a reduction in the excise tax on beer. Pre-budget submission to 
the House of Commons Standing Committee on Finance. (Beer Canada, Ottawa, 
2014). 
84. 
Institute of Alcohol Studies. The Impact of Abolishing the Alcohol Duty Escalator: 
Can society afford for cheap drink to get cheaper? (Institute of Alcohol Studies, 
London, 2014).  
85. 
Australian Tax Office. Excise rates. (2015). https://www.ato.gov.au/Business/Excise-
and-excise-equivalent-goods/Excise/Excise-rates/ 
86. 
Stockwell, T. et al. The price of getting high, stoned and drunk in BC: A comparison 
of minimum prices for alcohol and other psychoactive substances. CARBC Statistical 
Bulletin 7. (University of Victoria, Victoria, 2010). 
87. 
Stockwell, T. et al. Minimum Alcohol Prices and Outlet Densities in British 
Columbia, Canada: Estimated Impacts on Alcohol-Attributable Hospital Admissions. 
Am J Public Health 103, 2014–2020 (2013). 
88. 
Zhao, J. et al. The relationship between minimum alcohol prices, outlet densities and 
alcohol-attributable deaths in British Columbia, 2002-09. Addiction 108, 1059-69 
(2013). 
89. 
Stockwell, T. et al. Relationships Between Minimum Alcohol Pricing and Crime 
During the Partial Privatization of a Canadian Government Alcohol Monopoly. 
Journal of Studies on Alcohol and Drugs 76, 628–634 (2015). 
90. 
Kendall, P. Public Health Approach to Alcohol Policy an Updated Report from The 
Provincial Health Officer. (Office of the Provincial Health Officer Ministry of 
Healthy Living and Sport, Victoria, 2008). 
91. 
Giesbrecht, N. et al. Strategies to Reduce Alcohol-Related Harms and Costs in 
Canada: A Comparison of Provincial Policies. (Centre for Addiction and Mental 
Health, Toronto, 2013). 
92. 
Stockwell, T. et al. The raising of minimum alcohol prices in Saskatchewan, Canada: 
impacts on consumption and implications for public health. Am J Public Health 102, 
e103-10 (2012). 
 26 
 
93. 
Stockwell, T., Leng, J. & Sturge, J. Alcohol pricing and public health in Canada: 
issues and opportunities. CARBC Technical report. (University of Victoria, Victoria, 
2006). 
94. 
Scottish Parliament. Alcohol Act (Scotland) 2012. (Scottish Parliament, Edinburgh, 
2012). 
95. 
Purshouse, P. et al. Estimated effect of alcohol pricing policies on health and health 
economic outcomes in England: an epidemiological model. The Lancet 375, 1355-
1364 (2010). 
96. 
Thomas, G. Price policies to reduce alcohol-related harms in Canada: Current context 
and recommendations for targeted policies. (Canadian Centre on Substance Abuse, 
Ottawa, 2012). 
97. 
Gallet, C. The Demand for Alcohol: A Meta-analysis of Elasticities, Australian 
Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics 51, 121-135 (2007). 
98. 
Sornpaisarn, B., Shield, K. & Rehm, J. Alcohol taxation policy in Thailand: 
Implications for other low- to middle-income countries. Addiction 107, 1372-1384 
(2012). 
99. 
Sornpaisarn, B. et al. Can pricing deter adolescents and young adults from starting to 
drink: An analysis of the effect of alcohol taxation on drinking initiation among Thai 
adolescents and young adults. Journal of Epidemiology and Global Health doi: 
10.1016/j.jegh.2015.05.004. [Epub ahead of print] (2015). 
100. 
Hughes, K. et al. Environmental factors in drinking venues and alcohol-related harm: 
the evidence base for European intervention. Addiction 106, 37– 46 (2011). 
101. 
Jones, S. et al. The influence of price-related point-of-sale promotions on bottle shop 
purchases of young adults. Drug and Alcohol Review 34, 170–176 (2015). 
102. 
Scottish Parliament. Alcohol Act (Scotland) 2005. (Scottish Parliament, Edinburgh, 
2005). 
103. 
Scottish Parliament. Alcohol Act (Scotland) 2010. (Scottish Parliament, Edinburgh, 
2010). 
104. 
Meng, Y. et al. Model-based appraisal of alcohol minimum pricing and off-licensed 
trade discount bans in Scotland using the Sheffield Alcohol Policy Model (v.2): 
Second update based on newly available data. (University of Sheffield, Sheffield, 
2012). 
105. 
Nakamura, R., Suhrcke, M., Pechey, R., Morciano, M., Roland, M. & Marteau, T. 
Impact on alcohol purchasing of a ban on multi-buy promotions: a quasi-experimental 
 27 
 
evaluation comparing Scotland with England and Wales. Addiction 109, 558–67 
(2014). 
106. 
Robinson, M. et al. Evaluating the impact of the alcohol act on off-trade alcohol sales: 
a natural experiment in Scotland. Addiction 109, 2035–2043 (2014). 
107. 
Gruenewald, P. The spatial ecology of alcohol problems: niche theory and assortative 
drinking. Addiction 102, 870–878 (2007). 
108. 
Stockwell, T. & Chikritzhs, T. Do Relaxed Trading Hours for Bars and Clubs Mean 
More Relaxed Drinking? A Review of International Research on the Impacts of 
Changes to Permitted Hours of Drinking. Crime Prevention and Community Safety 
11, 153-170 (2009). 
109. 
Hahn, R. et al. Effectiveness of policies restricting hours of alcohol sales in 
preventing excessive alcohol consumption and related harms. Am J Prev Med 39, 
590-604 (2010).  
110. 
Kypri, K., Jones, C., McElduff, P. & Barker, D. Effects of restricting pub closing 
times on night-time assaults in an Australian city. Addiction 106, 303-10 (2011). 
111. 
Kypri, K., McElduff, P. & Miller, P. Restrictions in pub closing times and lockouts in 
Newcastle Australia 5 years on. Drug & Alcohol Review 33, 323-6 (2014). 
112. 
Rossow, I. & Norstrom, T. The impact of small changes in bar closing hours on 
violence. The Norwegian experience from 18 cities. Addiction 107, 530-7 (2012). 
113. 
Campbell, C. et al. The effectiveness of limiting alcohol outlet density as a means of 
reducing excessive alcohol consumption and alcohol-related harms. Am J Prev Med 
37, 556–69 (2009). 
114. 
Popova, S. et al. Hours and days of sale and density of alcohol outlets: impacts on 
alcohol consumption and damage: a systematic review. Alcohol Alcohol 44, 500–16 
(2009). 
115. 
Gmel, G., Holmes, J. & Studer, J. Are alcohol outlet densities strongly associated with 
alcohol-related outcomes? A critical review of recent evidence. Drug Alcohol Rev 
doi: 10.1111/dar.12304. [Epub ahead of print] (2015). 
116. 
Morrison, C. et al. Commentary on Gmel et al. (2015): Are alcohol outlet densities 
strongly associated with alcohol-related outcomes? A critical review of recent 
evidence Drug Alcohol Rev doi: 10.1111/dar.12340. [Epub ahead of print] (2015). 
117. 
Callaghan, R. et al. Impacts of drinking-age laws on mortality in Canada, 1980–2009. 
Drug and Alcohol Dependence 138, 137–145 (2014). 
 28 
 
118. 
Grube, J. Preventing sales of alcohol to minors: results from a community trial. 
Addiction 92, S251–S260 (1997).  
119. 
Elder, R. et al. Enhanced enforcement of laws prohibiting sale of alcohol to minors: 
systematic review of effectiveness for reducing sales and underage drinking. 
Transportation Research E-Circular 123,181-188 (2007). 
120. 
Stewart, D. et al. Adolescent substance Use and Related Harms in British Columbia. 
CARBC Statistical Bulletin 5. (University of Victoria, Victoria, 2009). 
121. 
Federal Trade Commission. Self-Regulation in the Alcohol Industry. (Federal Trade 
Commission, Washington, D.C., 2014). 
122. 
Advertising Age. Global Marketers in 2011. (2012). 
http://adage.com/datacenter/globalmarketers2012 
123. 
Hastings, G. & Sheron, N. Alcohol marketing: grooming the next generation: children 
are more exposed than adults and need much stronger protection. BMJ 346, f1227 
(2013). 
124. 
Kwate, N. & Meyer, I. Association between residential exposure to outdoor alcohol 
advertising and problem drinking among African American women in New York 
City. American Journal of Public Health 99, 228-230 (2009). 
125. 
Anderson, P. et al. Impact of alcohol advertising and media exposure on adolescent 
alcohol use: a systematic review of longitudinal studies. Alcohol and Alcoholism 44, 
229-243 (2009). 
126. 
Smith, L. & Foxcroft, D. The effect of alcohol advertising, marketing and portrayal on 
drinking behaviour in young people: systematic review of prospective cohort studies. 
BMC Public Health 9, 1-11 (2009). 
127. 
Lobstein, T. et al. The association between alcohol marketing and youth alcohol 
consumption: A systematic review for Public Health England. Unpublished (2015). 
128. 
Ross, C. et al. The relationship between brand-specific alcohol advertising on 
television and brand-specific consumption among underage youth. Alcoholism: 
Clinical and Experimental Research 38, 2234-2242 (2014). 
129. 
Hollingworth, W. et al. Prevention of deaths from harmful drinking in the United 
States: the potential effects of tax increases and advertising bans on young drinkers. 
Journal of Studies on Alcohol 67, 300-308 (2006). 
130. 
Chisholm, D. et al. Reducing the global burden of hazardous alcohol use: a 
comparative cost-effectiveness analysis. Journal of Studies on Alcohol 65, 782-793 
(2004). 
 29 
 
131. 
Saffer, H. & Dave, D. Alcohol advertising and alcohol consumption by adolescents. 
Health Econ 15, 617-37 (2006). 
132. 
Jernigan, D. et al. Alcohol advertising and youth: A measured approach. Journal of 
Public Health Policy 26, 312-325 (2005). 
133. 
Ross, C. et al. Exposure to magazine advertising for alcohol brands most commonly 
consumed by youth: Evidence of directed marketing. Journal of Studies on Alcohol 
and Drugs 75, 615-622 (2014). 
134. 
Babor, T. et al. An empirical evaluation of the US Beer Institute's self-regulation code 
governing the content of beer advertising. American Journal of Public Health 103, 
e45-51 (2013). 
135. 
Vendrame, A. et al. Assessment of self-regulatory code violations in Brazilian 
television beer advertisements. Journal of Studies on Alcohol and Drugs 71, 445-451 
(2010). 
136. 
Rigaud, A. & Craplet, M. The 'Loi Evin': A French exception. The Globe 1/2, 33-4 
(2004). 
137. 
Jernigan, D. & Ross, C. Monitoring youth exposure to advertising on television: the 
devil is in the details. Journal of Public Affairs 10, 36-49 (2010). 
138. 
Beguinot, E. France: key role of NGOs in enforcement. Tobacco Control 15, 421-422 
(2006). 
139. 
Wakefield, M. et al. Effects of anti-smoking advertising on youth smoking: A review. 
Journal of Health Communication 8, 229-247 (2003). 
140. 
World Health Organization. WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control. 
(World Health Organization, Geneva, 2003). 
141. 
Giesbrecht, N. Reducing alcohol‐related damage in populations: rethinking the roles 
of education and persuasion interventions. Addiction 102, 1345-9 (2007). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 30 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Litres of pure alcohol (recorded and unrecorded) consumed per person aged 15 
years and over, 2010. World Health Organization, 2014.3 
 
 
Figure 2. Litres of pure alcohol (recorded) consumed per person aged 15 years and over in 
the UK (1961-2012), France (1961-2014) and Italy (1961-2010). World Health Organization, 
Global Information System on Alcohol and Health.6 
 31 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Conceptual causal model of alcohol consumption and health outcomes. World 
Health Organization, 2014 (based on Rehm et al., 2010 and Blas et al., 2010).3,15,18 
 
 
 
Box 1. Alcohol consumption levels defined? 
Definitions and terminology regarding different levels and patterns of alcohol consumption 
vary substantially between countries, between studies, and over time.  
Broadly speaking, country definitions align with the existing national drinking guidelines 
with ‘low’ or ‘moderate’ levels referring to consumption within the limits set for low risk 
drinking and ‘heavy’ levels referring to consumption exceeding those limits. In the UK this 
limit is currently set at 112 grams of pure alcohol per week for both men and women.63  
A ‘binge’ drinking occasion refers to a pattern of consumption over a relatively short 
period of time that results in impairment. The WHO refers to this as heavy episodic 
drinking, defined as drinking in excess of 60 grams of pure alcohol on a single occasion.3 
 
Box 1. Alcohol consumption levels defined? 
 
 
 
 
 
