 JOURNAL OF CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
S P E C I A L
A R T I C L E
Role of Genetic Testing for Inherited Prostate Cancer Risk:
Philadelphia Prostate Cancer Consensus Conference 2017
Veda N. Giri, Karen E. Knudsen, William K. Kelly, Wassim Abida, Gerald L. Andriole, Chris H. Bangma, Justin E.
Bekelman, Mitchell C. Benson, Amie Blanco, Arthur Burnett, William J. Catalona, Kathleen A. Cooney, Matthew
Cooperberg, David E. Crawford, Robert B. Den, Adam P. Dicker, Scott Eggener, Neil Fleshner, Matthew L.
Freedman, Freddie C. Hamdy, Jean Hoffman-Censits, Mark D. Hurwitz, Colette Hyatt, William B. Isaacs,
Christopher J. Kane, Philip Kantoff, R. Jeffrey Karnes, Lawrence I. Karsh, Eric A. Klein, Daniel W. Lin, Kevin R.
Loughlin, Grace Lu-Yao, S. Bruce Malkowicz, Mark J. Mann, James R. Mark, Peter A. McCue, Martin M. Miner,
Todd Morgan, Judd W. Moul, Ronald E. Myers, Sarah M. Nielsen, Elias Obeid, Christian P. Pavlovich, Stephen C.
Peiper, David F. Penson, Daniel Petrylak, Curtis A. Pettaway, Robert Pilarski, Peter A. Pinto, Wendy Poage, Ganesh V.
Raj, Timothy R. Rebbeck, Mark E. Robson, Matt T. Rosenberg, Howard Sandler, Oliver Sartor, Edward Schaeffer,
Gordon F. Schwartz, Mark S. Shahin, Neal D. Shore, Brian Shuch, Howard R. Soule, Scott A. Tomlins, Edouard J.
Trabulsi, Robert Uzzo, Donald J. Vander Griend, Patrick C. Walsh, Carol J. Weil, Richard Wender, and Leonard G.
Gomella
A
B
S
T
R
A
C
T
Purpose
Guidelines are limited for genetic testing for prostate cancer (PCA). The goal of this conference was
to develop an expert consensus-driven working framework for comprehensive genetic evaluation of
inherited PCA in the multigene testing era addressing genetic counseling, testing, and genetically
informed management.
Methods
An expert consensus conference was convened including key stakeholders to address genetic
counseling and testing, PCA screening, and management informed by evidence review.
Results
Consensus was strong that patients should engage in shared decision making for genetic testing.
There was strong consensus to test HOXB13 for suspected hereditary PCA, BRCA1/2 for
suspected hereditary breast and ovarian cancer, and DNA mismatch repair genes for suspected
Lynch syndrome. There was strong consensus to factor BRCA2 mutations into PCA screening
discussions. BRCA2 achieved moderate consensus for factoring into early-stage management
discussion, with stronger consensus in high-risk/advanced and metastatic setting. Agreement
was moderate to test all men with metastatic castration-resistant PCA, regardless of family
history, with stronger agreement to test BRCA1/2 and moderate agreement to test ATM to inform
prognosis and targeted therapy.
Conclusion
To our knowledge, this is the first comprehensive, multidisciplinary consensus statement to address
a genetic evaluation framework for inherited PCA in the multigene testing era. Future research
should focus on developing a working definition of familial PCA for clinical genetic testing, expanding
understanding of genetic contribution to aggressive PCA, exploring clinical use of genetic testing for
PCA management, genetic testing of African American males, and addressing the value framework
of genetic evaluation and testing men at risk for PCA—a clinically heterogeneous disease.
J Clin Oncol 36:414-424. © 2017 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
INTRODUCTION
Prostate cancer (PCA) is the third leading cause of
cancer-related death in US men, accounting for
26,730 deaths in 2017.1 There is increasing evidence
that PCA has substantial inherited predisposition,2,3
with higher risks conferred by BRCA2 and BRCA1
(associated with hereditary breast and ovarian
cancer [HBOC] syndrome), and HOXB13 (asso-
ciated with hereditary prostate cancer [HPC]).4-24
Furthermore, BRCA2 mutations have been asso-
ciated with poor PCA-specific outcomes.9-13 There
is also emerging evidence of the link between PCA
Author affiliations and support information
(if applicable) appear at the end of this
article.
Published at jco.org on December 13,
2017.
Corresponding author: Veda N. Giri, MD,
Department of Medical Oncology, Sidney
Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, 1025 Walnut St, Suite 1015,
Philadelphia, PA 19107; e-mail: veda.giri@
jefferson.edu.
Reprint requests: Leonard G. Gomella,
MD, Department of Urology, Thomas
Jefferson University, 1025 Walnut St,
Suite 1102, Philadelphia, PA 19107;
e-mail: leonard.gomella@jefferson.edu
© 2017 by American Society of Clinical
Oncology
0732-183X/18/3604w-414w/$20.00
ASSOCIATED CONTENT
Appendix
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.
2017.74.1173
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2017.
74.1173
414
© 2017 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
VOLUME
36
•
NUMBER
4
•
FEBRUARY
1,
2018
Downloaded from ascopubs.org by Erasmus MC - Medische Bibliotheek on February 12, 2018 from 145.005.087.233
Copyright © 2018 American Society of Clinical Oncology. All rights reserved.
 and DNA mismatch repair (MMR) gene mutations (accounting for
Lynch syndrome [LS]).25-30 Furthermore, inherited genetic muta-
tions are being uncovered in up to 12% of men with metastatic PCA,
primarily in DNA repair genes such as BRCA1, BRCA2, and
ATM,31,32 with improved clinical outcomes by specific targeted
agents.33,34 Identifying genetic mutations of inherited PCA, there-
fore, has implications for cancer risk assessment for men and their
families,35,36 for precision treatment of metastatic disease,33,34 and is
being incorporated into guidelines for individualized PCA screening
strategies specifically for male BRCA1/2 mutation carriers.35,37
However, no centralized guidelines exist regarding genetic
counseling and genetic testing for PCA or optimal use and in-
terpretation of multiple genes now available on commercial PCA
gene panels (Table 1).38 At least three commercial laboratories have
PCA multigene panels available that include BRCA1, BRCA2,
HOXB13, DNA MMR genes, and multiple additional genes (such
as ATM, CHEK2, and NBN; Table 1). Some of these genes provide
actionable PCA risk information, whereas data for PCA risk is
limited for other genes on these panels. Therefore, testing ca-
pability has created a dilemma regarding optimal application of
genetic tests for counseling and evaluation of inherited PCA.
Genetic counseling is a dynamic process in which trained
cancer genetic counseling professionals perform detailed intake of
personal history and family cancer history, discuss genetic in-
heritance of cancer and genetic test options, address implications
of genetic test results with patients and their families, and clarify
patient preferences regarding genetic testing to make an informed
decision for proceeding with testing.39,40 However, guidelines are
limited regarding genetic counseling and genetic testing for
PCA (Table 2) and focus only on BRCA1/2 testing. Current
National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) Genetic/Familial
High-Risk Assessment: Breast and Ovarian (Version 2.2017) guide-
lines address BRCA1/2 testing for men with a personal history of PCA
limited to Gleason $ 7 and specific family history (FH) features.35 An
additional criterion for germline genetic testing is BRCA1/2 mutation
detected on somatic tumor testing.35 Although these expert panel
guidelines begin to address BRCA1/2 testing for PCA, they exclude
addressing other genes now available through multigene panels,
several of which are implicated in PCA predisposition (Table 1).
Genetic testing has potential to inform PCA screening and
targeted treatment, as exemplified in other cancers.35,36,41 NCCN
guidelines (Genetic/Familial High-Risk Assessment: Breast and
Ovarian) state that PCA screening should begin at age 45 years for
male BRCA2 mutation carriers and to consider this recommen-
dation for BRCA1 carriers.35 Current NCCN Prostate Cancer Early
Detection Panel (Version 2.2016) agreed that men should be asked
about the presence of known BRCA1/2 mutations in their fami-
lies.37 The group added consideration of FH of BRCA1/2 mutations
to the baseline discussion of risks and benefits of PCA screening
but believed that data are insufficient to change screening and
biopsy recommendations.37 Given increasing knowledge of genetic
contribution to PCA (such as from HOXB13 and DNA MMR
genes) and expanding availability of commercial multigene panels
(Table 1), there is a need for enhanced guidance on how multigene
testing may be incorporated in PCA screening discussions.
Finally, precision medicine is catapulting the need for ge-
netic testing to inform cancer treatment, particularly in the
advanced-stage setting. Emerging studies report clinical activity
of polyadenosine diphosphate-ribose polyermerase (PARP) in-
hibitors in metastatic PCA, particularly for men with DNA repair
mutations.33,34 Recent accelerated US Food and Drug Admin-
istration approval of immune checkpoint inhibitors for microsatellite
instability-high and MMR-deficient cancers further highlights the
increasing role of genetic testing in cancer treatment,42 with im-
plications for PCA. Thus, comprehensive guidance for multigene
testing for inherited PCA is now critical for cancer risk, screening,
and treatment implications.
Because multigene testing capability for PCA is now a reality,
a consensus conference was convened to address the clinical genetic
evaluation spectrum for inherited PCA. The Philadelphia Prostate
Cancer Consensus 2017 was held in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania on
March 3 and 4, 2017 and focused on the role of genetic testing for
inherited PCA risk as well as genetic counseling, screening, and
management on the basis of genetic findings. The conference was
attended by stakeholders involved in PCA early detection, treatment,
research, and patient advocacy. This was the first centralized, mul-
tidisciplinary conference, to our knowledge, focused on addressing
and developing a working framework for the comprehensive genetic
evaluation of inherited PCA in the multigene testing era.
METHODS
Panel Members
The panel included 71 experts from the United States, Canada,
England, and the Netherlands. Panel selection criteria included consid-
eration of stakeholders with expertise in PCA early detection, treatment,
genetic counseling, clinical cancer genetics, research, bioethics, and ad-
vocacy, along with patient advocates (Appendix Table A1, online only).
Table 1. Current Genes on PCA Multigene Panels, Evidence Summary for PCA
Risk, and Guidelines Available
Gene
Syndrome
Evidence Summary for
Association to PCA Risk*
Guidelines for PCA
Screening†
BRCA1
HBOC
A
x
BRCA2
HBOC
A‡
x
DNA MMR
genes
LS
B
HOXB13
HPC
A
TP53
LFS
D
ATM
C
CHEK2
D
PALB2
D
NBN
C
RAD51D
D
NOTE. Adapted from Giri et al38 to include consensus panel review. Detailed
evidence review provided in Appendix Tables A2-A6.
Abbreviations: HBOC, hereditary breast and ovarian cancer; HPC, hereditary
prostate cancer; LFS, Li-Fraumeni syndrome; LS, Lynch syndrome; MMR,
mismatch repair; PCA, prostate cancer.
*Grade of evidence for PCA is summarized as follows: (A) High-grade evidence:
At least one prospectively designed study or three or more large validation
studies or three or more descriptive studies; (B) Moderate-grade evidence: two
cohort or case-control studies; (C) Emerging data: increasing data in support of
association to PCA, but not yet moderate-grade evidence; (D) Low/insufficient:
limited data or not studied in the context of PCA.
†National Comprehensive Cancer Network High-Risk Assessment: Genetic/
Familial Breast and Ovarian (Version 2.2017).35
‡High-grade evidence for association to lethal/aggressive PCA.
jco.org
© 2017 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
415
Genetic Testing for Prostate Cancer
Downloaded from ascopubs.org by Erasmus MC - Medische Bibliotheek on February 12, 2018 from 145.005.087.233
Copyright © 2018 American Society of Clinical Oncology. All rights reserved.
 Table 2. Gaps in Genetic Evaluation of Inherited PCA Addressed by Consensus Criteria
Question
Current NCCN Guidelines
Consensus Criteria
Gaps Addressed by Consensus Criteria
Which men should be considered for genetic
counseling and genetic testing?*
NCCN Genetic/Familial High-Risk Assessment:
Breast and Ovarian (2.2017). An individual with
a personal and/or family history of three or more
of the following: breast, pancreatic, PCA
(Gleason $ 7), melanoma, sarcoma,
adrenocortical carcinoma, brain tumors,
leukemia, diffuse gastric cancer, colon cancer,
endometrial cancer, thyroid cancer, kidney
cancer, dermatologic manifestations,
macrocephaly, hamartomatous polyps of GI tract
• Patients should engage in shared decision making
for genetic testing for PCA (Consensus: 77%)
• Consideration of features of familial and
hereditary PCA
• All men with PCA from families meeting
established testing or syndromic criteria for the
following should be considered for genetic
counseling and testing:
• Consideration of cancers in HBOC/LS spectrum
– HBOC (Consensus: 93%)
• Consideration of tumor sequencing results for
referral
– HPG (Consensus: 95%)
• FH information can be limited; therefore, criteria
eliminated need to have Gleason information in
relatives.
– LS (Consensus: 88%)
• Lowered threshold of number of relatives with
cancers to consider genetic testing
• Men with PCA with two or more close blood
relatives on the same side of the family with
a cancer in the following syndromes (broader FH)
should be considered for genetic counseling and
testing
• Considered mCRPC†
–Postconsensus discussion included
consideration of age cutoff for this criterion. A
specific age cutoff will require further data, and
age at diagnosis is important to inquire in the
genetic counseling session with patients.
– HBOC (Consensus: 93%)
– HPC (Consensus: 86%)
– LS (Consensus: 86%)
• All men with mCRPC should consider genetic
testing (Consensus: 67%).
–Postconsensus discussion also included
consideration of testing men with metastatic,
hormone-sensitive PCA to identify germline
mutations to inform potential future treatment
options and cascade testing in families.
• Men with tumor sequencing showing mutations
in cancer-risk genes should be recommended for
germline testing, particularly after factoring in
additional personal and family history
(Consensus 77%).
(continued on following page)
416
© 2017 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
JOURNAL OF CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Giri et al
Downloaded from ascopubs.org by Erasmus MC - Medische Bibliotheek on February 12, 2018 from 145.005.087.233
Copyright © 2018 American Society of Clinical Oncology. All rights reserved.
 Table 2. Gaps in Genetic Evaluation of Inherited PCA Addressed by Consensus Criteria (continued)
Question
Current NCCN Guidelines
Consensus Criteria
Gaps Addressed by Consensus Criteria
Which genes should be tested based on clinical
and/or familial scenarios?
NCCN Genetic/Familial High-Risk Assessment:
Breast and Ovarian (2.2017)
• The following genes should be tested in males with
PCA meeting criteria for the corresponding
syndrome:
• Considered testing for genes beyond BRCA1/2
• Personal history of PCA (Gleason $ 7) at any age
with one or more close blood relatives with
ovarian carcinoma at any age or breast cancer #
50 years or two relatives with breast, pancreatic,
or PCA (Gleason $ 7) at any age
–HOXB13 (Syndrome: HPC) (Consensus: 95%)
• Considered confirmatory germline testing for
tumor sequencing results revealing mutations in
PCA risk genes beyond BRCA1/2
• BRCA1/2 mutation detected by tumor profiling in
the absence of germline mutation analysis
–BRCA1/BRCA2 (Syndrome: HBOC) (Consensus:
97%)
• Addressed genetic testing for mCRPC†
–DNA MMR genes (Syndrome: LS) (Consensus:
73%)
• The following genes may be tested in men with
PCA with two or more close blood relatives on
the same side of the family with a cancer in the
following hereditary cancer syndrome spectra
(broader FH):
–Postconsensus discussion included
consideration of age cutoff for this criterion. A
specific age cutoff will require further data, and
age at diagnosis is important to inquire in the
genetic counseling session with patients.
–BRCA1/BRCA2 (HBOC cancer spectrum: breast,
ovarian, pancreatic, prostate cancers, and
melanoma) (Consensus: 98%)
–DNA MMR genes (LS cancer spectrum:
colorectal, endometrial, upper GI tract, ovarian,
pancreatic, prostate, and upper urinary
tract cancers, along with sebaceous
adenocarcinomas) (Consensus: 97%).
–Postconsensus discussion included the
moderate nature of evidence of DNA MMR
genes and PCA risk, with suggestions to institute
IHC testing of prostate tumors for LS to select
men with greater chance of carrying a germline
DNA MMR mutation.
• Men with prostate tumor sequencing showing
mutations in the following cancer-risk genes
should have confirmatory germline genetic
testing for PCA predisposition: BRCA1/BRCA2
(Consensus:89%), DNA MMR genes
(Consensus: 88%), HOXB13 (68%), ATM (61%)
• If men with mCRPC undergo genetic testing for
treatment determination, the following genes
should be tested: BRCA1/2 (Consensus: 88%),
ATM (Consensus: 62%)
(continued on following page)
jco.org
© 2017 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
417
Genetic Testing for Prostate Cancer
Downloaded from ascopubs.org by Erasmus MC - Medische Bibliotheek on February 12, 2018 from 145.005.087.233
Copyright © 2018 American Society of Clinical Oncology. All rights reserved.
 Table 2. Gaps in Genetic Evaluation of Inherited PCA Addressed by Consensus Criteria (continued)
Question
Current NCCN Guidelines
Consensus Criteria
Gaps Addressed by Consensus Criteria
How should genetic test results inform prostate
career screening?
NCCN Genetic/Familial High-Risk Assessment:
Breast and Ovarian (2.2017)
• BRCA2 mutation status should be factored into
PCA screening discussions (Consensus: 80%).
• Expanded consideration of HOXB13 status in
PCA screening.
• Starting at age 45 years for male BRCA mutation
carriers:
– Screening strategy:
• Proposed baseline PSA that factors in age at
diagnosis of PCA in the family
– Recommend PCA screening for BRCA2 carriers
■ Baseline PSA at age 40 years or 10 years prior to
youngest PCA diagnosed in family (Consensus:
56%)
• Proposed interval of PSA screening
– Consider PCA screening for BRCA1 carriers
■ Interval of screening yearly or determined by
baseline PSA (Consensus:76%)
NCCN Prostate Cancer Early Detection Panel
(2.2016)
• HOXB13 mutation status should be factored into
PCA screening discussions (Consensus: 53%).
• Insufficient data to support a change in PSA
screening and biopsy recommendations for men
with germline BRCA1/2 mutations.
– Screening strategy:
• Information about BRCA1/2 mutation status
should be used as part of the discussion about
PCA screening.
■ Baseline PSA at age 40 years or 10 years prior
to youngest PCA diagnosed in family
(Consensus: 52%)
■ Interval of screening yearly or determined by
baseline PSA (Consensus:75%)
• For unaffected males at high risk for PCA based
on FH of cancer or suspicion for hereditary
cancer syndrome who test negative for
mutations, PCA screening should follow NCCN
PCA Early Detection Guidelines (Consensus:
84%)
Should genetic test results inform management of
early- stage/localized PCA, advanced/high-risk
PCA, or mCRPC?
Not addressed
• Of all genes on PCA multigene panels, the
following should be factored into management
discussion of early- stage/localized PCA: BRCA2
(Consensus: 64%)
• Genetic testing to inform management
discussions in localized PCA and advanced PCA.
• Of all genes on PCA multigene panels, the
following should be factored into management
discussion of high- risk/advanced PCA: BRCA2
(Consensus: 97%), ATM (Consensus: 59%)
• Genetic testing for treatment decisions in
mCRPC†
• The following genes should be factored into
discussions of treatment of mCRPC: BRCA1
(Consensus: 83%), BRCA2 (Consensus: 88%),
ATM (Consensus: 56%)
Abbreviations: FDR, first-degree relative; FH, family history; HBOC, hereditary breast and ovarian cancer; HPC, hereditary PCA; IHC, immunohistochemistry; LS, Lynch syndrome; mCRPC, metastatic, castration-
resistant PCA; MMR, mismatch repair; NCCN, National Comprehensive Cancer Network; PCA, prostate cancer; PSA, prostate-specific antigen.
*Suggested genetic counseling referral criteria: Male with PCA with any one of the following: having an FDR diagnosed with PCA at age # 55 years; a personal diagnosis of PCA at age # 55 years and an FDR diagnosed
with PCA at any age; having an FDR who died as a result of PCA at age younger than 60 years; having family history suggestive of HBOC, HPC, or LS; tumor sequencing showing mutations in hereditary cancer genes;
metastatic, castration-resistant PCA. Unaffected males may be referred for genetic counseling on the basis of family history criteria above.
†NCCN Genetic/Familial High-Risk Assessment: Breast and Ovarian now includes metastatic PCA in BRCA1 and 2 testing criteria.
418
© 2017 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
JOURNAL OF CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Giri et al
Downloaded from ascopubs.org by Erasmus MC - Medische Bibliotheek on February 12, 2018 from 145.005.087.233
Copyright © 2018 American Society of Clinical Oncology. All rights reserved.
 Consensus Model and Evidence Review
An expert opinion consensus model was used to address gaps in
evidence-based guidelines for multigene testing for PCA. A modified
Delphi model was followed, which incorporated elements of the Delphi
process and prior expert opinion consensus conferences relevant to cancer
risk and screening (Appendix Fig A1, online only).43,44 Literature was
provided to panel members ahead of the meeting, with initial presentations
focused on evidence review by experts. Grade of evidence was summarized
as follows, with grade designations adapted from prior literature and
consensus models44,45: (A) High-grade evidence: at least one prospectively-
designed study, or three or more large validation studies, or three or more
descriptive studies; (B) Moderate-grade evidence: two cohort or case-
control studies; (C) Emerging data: increasing data in support of asso-
ciation to PCA but not yet moderate-grade evidence; (D) Low/Insufficient:
limited data or not studied in the context of PCA (Table 1; Appendix Tables
A2-A6, online only).
Development of Genetic Evaluation Framework
A conceptual framework was developed to address elements of ge-
netic evaluation, including genetic counseling and genetic testing criteria,
genes to test, and screening/management (Fig 1). FH criteria for genetic
testing focused on established hereditary cancer syndromes in which PCA
has been implicated, as well as broader FH to account for limitations in
obtaining detailed FH information.46,47 Genetic testing consensus dis-
cussions focused on genes currently included on commercially available
multigene panels (Table 1).
A series of questions were posed to address the genetic evaluation
framework (Fig 1). The following overarching questions were addressed:
(1)Which men should undergo genetic counseling and genetic testing
for PCA (Fig 1A)? Principles and elements of genetic counseling were
presented to panelists, including discussion of cancer genetics,
benefits and limitations of genetic testing, financial considerations,
implications for the patients and families, and genetic discrimination
laws.39,40 Ethical considerations of genetic testing and the need to
clarify patient preferences were also reviewed.48,49 Genetic testing
criteria were based on various personal cancer and FH features. FH
considerations included meeting established criteria for HBOC/LS/
HPC. Furthermore, considering limitations of obtaining accurate FH
information,46,47 these criteria included FH where at least two close
blood relatives have cancers in the HBOC/LS/HPC spectrum as per the
NCCN model.35,36 Finally, metastatic PCA and tumor sequencing were
specifically addressed.31,32 This consensus statement also developed
suggested genetic counseling referral criteria following the NCCN
model35,36 (Table 2).
(2)Which genes should be tested based on clinical and/or familial scenarios
(Fig 1B)? These questions focused on genes present on current PCA
multigene panels (Table 1; Appendix Tables A2-A6). Considerations
regarding personal history of PCA included Gleason score, stage, and
tumor sequencing results. FH considerations included meeting estab-
lished criteria for HBOC/LS/HPC or having at least two close blood
relatives with cancers in the HBOC/LS/HPC spectrum to address FH
limitations. Tumor sequencing results were also considered.
(3)How should genetic test results inform PCA screening (Fig 1C)? This
set of criteria focused on genes that inform PCA risk and may be
considered in PCA screening discussions. Risk for PCA was reviewed
as well as association to aggressive PCA (Appendix Tables A2-A6).
Baseline age to check prostate-specific antigen (PSA) and interval to
screen based on genetic test results were adapted from other NCCN
guidelines.35,37 PCA screening guidelines by various professional
organizations were also reviewed.37,50-53 Finally, ongoing PCA
screening studies incorporating genetic status were summarized.54
Genetic Evaluation and Management
A
C
Elements of Criteria
      Meeting criteria for
         hereditary cancer
         syndromes
      Age at diagnosis
      Family history
      Metastatic disease
      Tumor sequencing
Which men
should undergo
genetic counseling
and genetic testing
for prostate cancer?
Which genes should be
tested based on
clinical/familial
scenarios?
Lab #1
Lab #2
Lab #3
ATM
BRCA1
MLH1
TP53
RAD51D
PMS2
NBN
PALB2
MSH6
MSH2
HOXB13
EPCAM
CHEK2
BRCA2
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Prostate cancer panels
B
How should genetic
test results inform
prostate cancer
screening?
Should genetic test
results inform
management of early-
stage/localized,
advanced/high-risk, or
metastatic castration-
resistant PCA?
D
Fig 1. Framework for genetic evaluation of
inherited prostate cancer (PCA).
jco.org
© 2017 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
419
Genetic Testing for Prostate Cancer
Downloaded from ascopubs.org by Erasmus MC - Medische Bibliotheek on February 12, 2018 from 145.005.087.233
Copyright © 2018 American Society of Clinical Oncology. All rights reserved.
 (4)Should genetic test results inform management of early-stage/localized,
advanced/high-risk, or metastatic, castration-resistant PCA (mCRPC;
Fig 1D)? These questions overall focused on genes on current PCA
multigene panels (Table 1) and if they should be factored into
management discussions with patients in the setting of early-stage/
localized disease, advanced/high-risk disease, or mCRPC. Evidence
for PCA aggressiveness was of primary consideration, which was
high grade for BRCA2, emerging for ATM, and limited for other
genes on multigene panels (Appendix Tables A2-A6). Genetically
informed treatments, such as PARP inhibition and immune
checkpoint inhibition, were also considered.33,34,42
Strength of Consensus
Votes were cast anonymously using an electronic audience response
system. Postconsensus refinement process included readministering select
questions where there was debate among panelists. Strength of expert
opinion consensus was determined by percentage of agreement with an
answer choice: $ 75% for strong consensus, 50% to 74% for moderate
consensus, and , 50% for lack of consensus. Table 2 provides a com-
parison of current NCCN guidelines to consensus criteria and identifies
the gaps in practice addressed by this consensus statement.
RESULTS
Evidence Review
Various studies were considered in review of evidence for
specific genes on multigene panels and PCA risk, including tumor
sequencing studies (Table 1; Appendix Tables A2-A6). Current
evidence linking BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations to PCA risk was
considered high grade, with stronger association for BRCA2.
Furthermore, BRCA2 mutations are associated with poor PCA-
specific outcomes as well as poorer survival. Evidence linking
HOXB13 mutations to PCAwas considered high grade. Evidence of
DNA MMR gene mutations to PCA risk was considered moderate
grade. Data regarding ATM and NBN mutations and PCA risk are
emerging in favor of association to PCA but are not yet at the level
of moderate grade at this time. Other genes on panels have low/
insufficient data for PCA risk (Appendix Tables A2-A6).
Consensus Responses
Responses are summarized by overarching questions addressing
the genetic evaluation framework, focused on criteria that
garnered strong to moderate consensus supported by high- to
moderate-grade evidence (Table 2; Appendix Tables A2-A6).
Additional considerations are provided to add context to the
various criteria, to provide more details regarding discussion that
did not make the cutoff for consensus, and to add considerations
raised by panel members regarding need for additional discussion or
research.
(1) Which men should undergo genetic counseling and genetic
testing for prostate cancer (Fig 1A)?
Criteria. Men meeting any one of the following suggested
criteria should undergo genetic counseling and genetic testing:
• All men with PCA from families meeting established testing or
syndromic criteria for the following:
s HBOC (Consensus: 93%)
s HPC (Consensus: 95%)
s LS (Consensus: 88%)
• Men with PCA with two or more close blood relatives on the
same side of the family with a cancer in the following syn-
dromes (broader FH):
s Postconsensus discussion included consideration of age
cutoff for this criterion. A specific age cutoff will require
additional data, and age at diagnosis is important to inquire
in the genetic counseling session with patients.
n HBOC (Consensus: 93%)
n HPC (Consensus: 86%)
n LS (Consensus: 86%)
• All men with mCRPC should consider genetic testing (Con-
sensus: 67%). Postconsensus discussion also included con-
sideration of testing men with metastatic, hormone-sensitive
PCA to identify germline mutations to inform potential future
treatment options and cascade testing in families.
• Men with tumor sequencing showing mutations in cancer-
risk genes should be recommended for germline testing,
particularly after factoring in additional personal history and
FH (Consensus: 77%).
Additional considerations. The consensus panel had strong
agreement that patients should engage in shared decision making
for genetic testing for PCA (Consensus: 77%). Suggested criteria to
refer men for genetic counseling included young age at PCA di-
agnosis (# 55 years) in the patient or a first-degree relative, death
as a result of PCA in a first-degree relative younger than 60 years, or
having FH suggestive of HBOC, HPC, or LS (Table 2). Additional
suggested referral criteria include tumor sequencing showing mu-
tations in hereditary cancer genes or metastatic disease (Table 2). The
panel achieved strong consensus that African American males should
follow the same criteria as males of other race groups until additional
genetic data in African American males are available (Consensus:
75%). For males unaffected with PCA and no affected male relatives to
test, FH criteria similar to men with PCA would apply.
(2) Which genes should be tested based on clinical and/or familial
scenarios (Fig 1B)?
Criteria. Criteria with highest consensus are as follows:
• The following genes should be tested in males with PCA
meeting criteria for the corresponding syndrome:
s HOXB13 (Syndrome: HPC) (Consensus: 95%)
s BRCA1/BRCA2 (Syndrome: HBOC) (Consensus: 97%)
s DNA MMR genes (Syndrome: LS) (Consensus: 73%)
• The following genes may be tested in men with PCA with two
or more close blood relatives on the same side of the family
with a cancer in the following hereditary cancer syndrome
spectra (broader FH):
s Postconsensus discussion included consideration of age
cutoff for this criterion. A specific age cutoff will require
further data, and age at diagnosis is important to inquire in
the genetic counseling session with patients.
n BRCA1/BRCA2 (HBOC cancer spectrum: breast, ovar-
ian,
pancreatic,
prostate
cancers
and
melanoma)
(Consensus: 98%)
n DNA MMR genes (LS cancer spectrum: colorectal, en-
dometrial, upper GI tract, ovarian, pancreatic, and upper
420
© 2017 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
JOURNAL OF CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Giri et al
Downloaded from ascopubs.org by Erasmus MC - Medische Bibliotheek on February 12, 2018 from 145.005.087.233
Copyright © 2018 American Society of Clinical Oncology. All rights reserved.
 urinary tract cancers along with sebaceous adenocarci-
nomas) (Consensus: 97%). Postconsensus discussion
included the moderate nature of evidence of DNA MMR
genes and PCA risk, with suggestions to institute im-
munohistochemistry testing of prostate tumors for LS to
select men with greater chance of carrying a germline
DNA MMR mutation.
• Men with prostate tumor sequencing showing mutations in
the following cancer-risk genes should have confirmatory
germline genetic testing for PCA predisposition: BRCA1/
BRCA2 (Consensus: 89%), DNA MMR genes (Consensus:
88%), HOXB13 (68%), ATM (61%).
• If men with mCRPC undergo genetic testing for treatment
determination, the following genes should be tested: BRCA1/2
(Consensus: 88%), ATM (Consensus: 62%).
(3) How should genetic test results inform PCA screening
(Fig 1C)?
Criteria. Criteria with highest consensus are as follows:
• BRCA2 mutation status should be factored into PCA
screening discussions (Consensus: 80%).
s Screening strategy:
n Baseline PSA at age 40 years or 10 years prior to youngest
PCA diagnosed in family (Consensus: 56%)
n Interval of screening yearly or determined by baseline PSA
(Consensus: 76%)
• HOXB13 mutation status should be factored into PCA
screening discussions (Consensus: 53%).
s Screening strategy:
n Baseline PSA at age 40 years or 10 years prior to youngest
PCA diagnosed in family (Consensus: 52%)
n Interval of screening yearly or determined by baseline PSA
(Consensus: 75%)
Additional considerations. Postconsensus opinion was to
consider a lower age limit to begin PSA screening, perhaps no
younger than 35 years. There was strong agreement to perform PSA
testing yearly or as dictated by the baseline PSA. This consensus aligns
with NCCN Breast and Ovarian guidelines35 but also expands on the
guideline to factor in age at diagnosis of an affected male with PCA in
the family for screening initiation as is modeled in colorectal cancer
guidelines.36 BRCA1 mutation status is part of the NCCN Breast
and Ovarian guidelines regarding consideration of baseline PSA
at age 45 years.35
(4) Should genetic test results inform management of early-
stage/localized PCA, advanced/high-risk PCA, and mCRPC (Fig
1D)?
Criteria. Criteria with highest consensus are as follows:
• BRCA2 mutation status should be factored into man-
agement discussion of early-stage/localized PCA: (Con-
sensus: 64%).
• BRCA2 (Consensus: 97%) and ATM (Consensus: 59%)
mutation status should be factored into management dis-
cussion of high-risk/advanced PCA.
• BRCA1 (Consensus: 83%), BRCA2 (Consensus: 88%), ATM
(Consensus: 56%) mutation status should be factored into
mCRPC treatment discussions.
DISCUSSION
To our knowledge, the Philadelphia Prostate Cancer Consensus 2017
was the first attempt to garner expert opinion consensus on key areas
in the genetic evaluation continuum for inherited PCA. Increasing
scientific insights into the genetic predisposition to inherited PCA,
growing multigene testing capabilities, and limited guidelines ne-
cessitated expert consensus to address genetic counseling and
genetic testing, PCA screening, and management. This confer-
ence brought together key stakeholders in PCA treatment, ge-
netic counseling, research, and advocacy to consider the evidence
and develop a working framework for genetic counseling, genetic
testing, and management of inherited PCA in the multigene
testing era. Of particular note was the strong urologic repre-
sentation at this consensus.
The conference addressed critical gaps in guidelines relevant
to genetic evaluation for PCA. These gaps include consideration of
FH in cancer syndromes relevant to PCA, consideration of met-
astatic disease in multigene testing, tumor sequencing, and review
of genes on multigene panels for application of genetic testing to
PCA. Our conference focused on inherited PCA, which com-
plements a recent consensus conference that addressed germline
testing for advanced PCA as part of the overall proceedings.55
There was agreement in our consensus conference that men with
FH meeting strict criteria for HBOC, HPC, or LS and men having
FH of cancers in the spectrum of these cancer syndromes while not
meeting strict syndromic criteria (broader FH) can be considered
for genetic testing. This is an expansion on current NCCN High-
Risk Assessment: Breast and Ovarian guidelines,35 reflects the
growing evidence of genetic contribution to PCA beyond BRCA1
and BRCA2, and takes into account limitations of obtaining de-
tailed FH information that could affect meeting criteria for he-
reditary cancer syndromes.46,47
Genetic counseling for PCA will need focused development.
Overall, the genetic counseling model should include shared de-
cision making between provider and patient regarding genetic
testing. The discussion should clarify patient values and prefer-
ences related to screening, risk assessment, and treatment choice.
Counseling elements of genetic education; discussion of benefits,
risks, and limitations of genetic testing for patients and families;
financial implications; and genetic discrimination laws are also
important to discuss. Optimal delivery of pretest genetic coun-
seling to patients in the multigene testing era, particularly for
genetic testing for advanced/metastatic cancers for targetable
mutations, is an area under development. ASCO policy statement
2015 recognized the need for more research on delivery of pretest
counseling, particularly in the settings of multigene testing and
tumor sequencing, and emphasized the importance of patients to
receive genetic education and clarify patient preferences.56 Fur-
thermore, PCA germline multigene testing studies will help inform
counseling discussions of potential results from genetic testing.38 A
closer working relationship between PCA care providers, primary
care providers, and cancer genetics specialists will need to be
developed to address treatment and management needs while
providing patients with optimal genetic education and counseling.
Incorporating a genetic counseling and evaluation process into
a multidisciplinary PCA clinic setting is one approach.57
jco.org
© 2017 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
421
Genetic Testing for Prostate Cancer
Downloaded from ascopubs.org by Erasmus MC - Medische Bibliotheek on February 12, 2018 from 145.005.087.233
Copyright © 2018 American Society of Clinical Oncology. All rights reserved.
 The mCRPC setting is a unique area that will likely drive
a significant proportion of genetic testing for PCA. With
emerging insights into targeted therapy for PCA33,34 and the
promise of immunotherapy in MMR-deficient tumors,42,58
a greater percentage of patients with mCRPC will likely un-
dergo tumor sequencing to uncover targetable mutations,
which can have germline implications. The panel had moderate
agreement to test all men with mCRPC, which may be strengthened
pending future data of germline mutations and targeted agents in
mCRPC. Furthermore, some panelists raised questions on testing all
men with metastatic PCA and not limiting testing to the castration-
resistance setting. Because most of the current data on germline
mutations are in the castration-resistant setting,31-34 proposed
criteria were focused on mCRPC, which may change over time.
Postconsensus discussion also included the potential for broader
scope of genetic testing criteria in the treatment setting versus the
risk-assessment setting, which can be considered in future consensus
updates. Greater information from this population regarding FH,
age at diagnosis, and germline mutation spectrum will be crucial
to advance and refine the understanding of genetic predisposition
to lethal PCA.
Cost effectiveness of genetic testing for inherited PCA is an
important consideration. Our consensus statement outlines tar-
geted testing for selected individuals (in contrast to population-
based screening) and is consistent with strategies for hereditary
breast cancer testing of BRCA1/2. Research has shown that such
targeted hereditary testing for a prevalent disease like breast cancer
is cost effective under several different economic scenarios when
directed at those at highest risk of carrying a mutation.59-62 For
PCA, there is a need to build on the findings of these studies and
model survival and quality-adjusted life-years for patients who are
at high risk versus those at population risk for PCA. Thus, as we
define who should undergo genetic counseling and testing for
inherited PCA, we also call for renewed emphasis on the economic
evaluation of different strategies to promote patient-centric, high-
value genetic evaluation and cancer care.
There are some limitations to consider. Grading of evi-
dence was based on prior consensus conferences, with a noted
need for a greater evidence base to inform future criteria de-
velopment. Our objective was to address the application of
multigene testing for PCA through consensus review of existing
literature and develop a genetic evaluation framework that can
be modified in the future. Another consideration is that the
panel consisted of experts and stakeholders engaged in PCA
genetics, research, treatment, and advocacy, which may have
affected agreement due to breadth of expertise. However,
a strength of the consensus was the broad input from thought
leaders in various disciplines engaged with PCA, which pro-
vided balanced views toward criteria development. The con-
sensus highlighted key areas in need of research, including
developing a working definition of HPC in a clinical setting,
expanding insights into genetic contribution to aggressive/lethal
PCA, developing genetic counseling and referral strategies that
engage urologists and primary care providers, addressing the
urgent need for focused studies of genetic testing for African
American males, evaluating clinical use of genetic testing in PCA
screening and management, and expanding health services re-
search for optimized delivery of genetic education to broader
populations.
Overall, this consensus conference was a first step to un-
derstand the issues confronting application of genetic testing to
PCA and develop a meaningful framework using the best ev-
idence available. The need to revise and optimize consensus
criteria is noted, based on the dynamic nature of knowledge
and progress in this field. Several consensus panel members
are also members of NCCN guidelines panels, which may lead
to consideration of consensus review and criteria for in-
corporation into respective NCCN guidelines regarding ge-
netic testing for inherited PCA. NCCN Prostate Cancer Early
Detection guidelines will likely include stronger consideration
of BRCA mutation status in PCA screening discussions and
may consider this consensus statement in future guideline
updates.
AUTHORS’ DISCLOSURES OF POTENTIAL CONFLICTS
OF INTEREST
Disclosures provided by the authors are available with this article at
jco.org.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conception and design: Veda N. Giri, Karen E. Knudsen, William K. Kelly,
Leonard G. Gomella
Collection and assembly of data: Veda N. Giri, Leonard G. Gomella
Data analysis and interpretation: Veda N. Giri, Karen E. Knudsen,
William K. Kelly, Wassim Abida, Gerald L. Andriole, Chris H. Bangma,
Justin E. Bekelman, Mitchell C. Benson, Amie Blanco, Arthur Burnett,
William J. Catalona, Kathleen A. Cooney, Matthew Cooperberg, David E.
Crawford, Robert B. Den, Adam P. Dicker, Scott Eggener, Neil Fleshner,
Matthew L. Freedman, Freddie C. Hamdy, Jean Hoffman-Censits, Mark D.
Hurwitz, Colette Hyatt,William B. Isaacs, Christopher J. Kane, Philip
Kantoff, R. Jeffrey Karnes, Lawrence I. Karsh, Eric A. Klein, Daniel W. Lin,
Kevin R. Loughlin, Grace Lu-Yao, S. Bruce Malkowicz, Mark J. Mann,
James R. Mark, Peter A. McCue, Martin M. Miner, Todd Morgan, Judd W.
Moul, Ronald E. Myers, Sarah M. Nielsen, Elias Obeid, Christian P.
Pavlovich, Stephen C. Peiper, David F. Penson, Daniel Petrylak, Curtis A.
Pettaway, Robert Pilarski, Peter A. Pinto, Wendy Poage, Ganesh V. Raj,
Timothy R. Rebbeck, Mark E. Robson, Matt T. Rosenberg, Howard
Sandler, Oliver Sartor, Edward Schaeffer, Gordon F. Schwartz, Mark S.
Shahin, Neal D. Shore, Brian Shuch, Howard R. Soule, Scott A. Tomlins,
Edouard J. Trabulsi, Robert Uzzo, Donald J. Vander Griend, Patrick C.
Walsh, Carol J. Weil, Richard Wender, and Leonard G. Gomella
Manuscript writing: All authors
Final approval of manuscript: All authors
Accountable for all aspects of the work: All authors
422
© 2017 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
JOURNAL OF CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Giri et al
Downloaded from ascopubs.org by Erasmus MC - Medische Bibliotheek on February 12, 2018 from 145.005.087.233
Copyright © 2018 American Society of Clinical Oncology. All rights reserved.
 REFERENCES
1. American Cancer Society: Cancer Facts &
Figures
2017.
https://www.cancer.org/research/
cancer-facts-statistics/all-cancer-facts-figures/cancer-facts-
figures-2017.html
2. National Cancer Institute: Genetics of Prostate
Cancer (PDQ): Health Professional Version. https://
www.cancer.gov/types/prostate/hp/prostate-genetics-pdq
3. Hjelmborg JB, Scheike T, Holst K, et al: The
heritability of prostate cancer in the Nordic Twin
Study of Cancer. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev
23:2303-2310, 2014
4. Breast Cancer Linkage Consortium: Cancer
risks in BRCA2 mutation carriers. J Natl Cancer Inst
91:1310-1316, 1999
5. Thompson D, Easton D, Breast Cancer Link-
age Consortium: Variation in cancer risks, by muta-
tion position, in BRCA2 mutation carriers. Am J Hum
Genet 68:410-419, 2001
6. Leongamornlert D, Mahmud N, Tymrakiewicz M,
et al: Germline BRCA1 mutations increase prostate
cancer risk. Br J Cancer 106:1697-1701, 2012
7. Mersch J, Jackson MA, Park M, et al: Cancers
associated with BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations other
than breast and ovarian. Cancer 121:269-275, 2015
8. Agalliu I, Karlins E, Kwon EM, et al: Rare
germline mutations in the BRCA2 gene are associ-
ated with early-onset prostate cancer. Br J Cancer 97:
826-831, 2007
9. Akbari MR, Wallis CJ, Toi A, et al: The impact
of a BRCA2 mutation on mortality from screen-
detected
prostate
cancer.
Br
J
Cancer
111:
1238-1240, 2014
10. Agalliu I, Gern R, Leanza S, et al: Associations
of high-grade prostate cancer with BRCA1 and
BRCA2 founder mutations. Clin Cancer Res 15:
1112-1120, 2009
11. Edwards SM, Evans DG, Hope Q, et al:
Prostate cancer in BRCA2 germline mutation carriers
is associated with poorer prognosis. Br J Cancer 103:
918-924, 2010
12. Thorne H, Willems AJ, Niedermayr E, et al:
Decreased prostate cancer-specific survival of men
with BRCA2 mutations from multiple breast cancer
families. Cancer Prev Res (Phila) 4:1002-1010, 2011
13. Castro E, Goh C, Olmos D, et al: Germline
BRCA mutations are associated with higher risk of
nodal involvement, distant metastasis, and poor
survival outcomes in prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 31:
1748-1757, 2013
14. Carter BS, Bova GS, Beaty TH, et al: Hereditary
prostate cancer: Epidemiologic and clinical features.
J Urol 150:797-802, 1993
15. Ewing CM, Ray AM, Lange EM, et al: Germ-
line mutat ions in HOXB13 and prostate-cancer risk.
N Engl J Med 366:141-149, 2012
16. Xu J, Lange EM, Lu L, et al: HOXB13 is
a susceptibility gene for prostate cancer: Results
from the International Consortium for Prostate Can-
cer Genetics (ICPCG). Hum Genet 132:5-14, 2013
17. Akbari MR, Trachtenberg J, Lee J, et al: As-
sociation between germline HOXB13 G84E mutation
and risk of prostate cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst 104:
1260-1262, 2012
18. Breyer JP, Avritt TG, McReynolds KM, et al:
Confirmation of the HOXB13 G84E germline muta-
tion in familial prostate cancer. Cancer Epidemiol
Biomarkers Prev 21:1348-1353, 2012
19. Karlsson R, Aly M, Clements M, et al: A
population-based assessment of germline HOXB13
G84E mutation and prostate cancer risk. Eur Urol 65:
169-176, 2014
20. Klu´
zniak W, Wokołorczyk D, Kashyap A, et al:
The G84E mutation in the HOXB13 gene is associ-
ated with an increased risk of prostate cancer in
Poland. Prostate 73:542-548, 2013
21. Laitinen VH, Wahlfors T, Saaristo L, et al:
HOXB13 G84E mutation in Finland: Population-based
analysis of prostate, breast, and colorectal cancer
risk. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 22:452-460,
2013
22. Stott-Miller M, Karyadi DM, Smith T, et al:
HOXB13 mutations in a population-based, case-
control study of
prostate cancer. Prostate 73:
634-641, 2013
23. Gudmundsson J, Sulem P, Gudbjartsson DF,
et al: A study based on whole-genome sequencing
yields a rare variant at 8q24 associated with prostate
cancer. Nat Genet 44:1326-1329, 2012
24. Witte JS, Mefford J, Plummer SJ, et al:
HOXB13 mutation and prostate cancer: Studies of
siblings and aggressive disease. Cancer Epidemiol
Biomarkers Prev 22:675-680, 2013
25. Grindedal EM, Møller P, Eeles R, et al: Germ-
line mutations in mismatch repair genes associated
with prostate cancer. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers
Prev 18:2460-2467, 2009
26. Haraldsdottir S, Hampel H, Wei L, et al:
Prostate cancer incidence in males with Lynch syn-
drome. Genet Med 16:553-557, 2014
27. Bauer CM, Ray AM, Halstead-Nussloch BA,
et al: Hereditary prostate cancer as a feature of Lynch
syndrome. Fam Cancer 10:37-42, 2011
28. Raymond VM, Mukherjee B, Wang F, et al:
Elevated risk of prostate cancer among men with
Lynch syndrome. J Clin Oncol 31:1713-1718, 2013
29. Ryan S, Jenkins MA, Win AK: Risk of prostate
cancer in Lynch syndrome: A systematic review and
meta-analysis. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev
23:437-449, 2014
30. Rosty C, Walsh MD, Lindor NM, et al: High
prevalence of mismatch repair deficiency in prostate
cancers diagnosed in mismatch repair gene mutation
carriers from the colon cancer family registry. Fam
Cancer 13:573-582, 2014
31. Schrader KA, Cheng DT, Joseph V, et al:
Germline variants in targeted tumor sequencing us-
ing matched normal DNA. JAMA Oncol 2:104-111,
2016
32. Pritchard CC, Mateo J, Walsh MF, et al:
Inherited DNA-repair gene mutations in men with
metastatic prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 375:
443-453, 2016
33. Sandhu SK, Omlin A, Hylands L, et al: Poly
(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitors for the
treatment of advanced germline BRCA2 mutant
prostate cancer. Ann Oncol 24:1416-1418, 2013
34. Mateo J, Carreira S, Sandhu S, et al: DNA-
repair defects and olaparib in metastatic prostate
cancer. N Engl J Med 373:1697-1708, 2015
35. Daly MB, Pilarski R, Berry, M, et al: NCCN
Guidelines Insights: Genetic Familial High-Risk As-
sessment: Breast and Ovarian (Version 2.2017). J Natl
Compr Cancer Network 15(1):9-20, 2017
36. Provenzale D, Gupta S, Annen J, et al: Genetic/
Familial High-Risk Assessment: Colorectal (Version
1.2016): NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncol-
ogy. J Natl Compr Cancer Network 14(8):1010-1030,
2016
37. Carroll PR, Parsons JK, Adriole G, et al: NCCN
Guidelines Insights: Prostate Cancer Early Detection
(Version 2.2016). J Natl Compr Cancer Network 14(5):
509-519, 2016
38. Giri VN, Obeid E, Gross L, et al: Inherited
mutations in males undergoing multigene panel
testing for prostate cancer: emerging implications for
personalized prostate cancer genetic evaluation. JCO
Precis Oncol 10.1200/PO.16.00039 [epub ahead of
print on May 4, 2017]
39. National Cancer Institute: Cancer Genetics
Overview (PDQ): Health Professional Version. https://
www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/causes-prevention/
genetics/overview-pdq#section/_10
40. National Society of Genetic Counselors’ Def-
inition Task Force, Resta R, Biesecker BB, et al: A
new definition of genetic counseling: National Soci-
ety of Genetic Counselors’ Task Force report.
J Genet Couns 15:77-83, 2006
41. National
Comprehensive
Cancer
Network:
NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology (NCCN
Guidelines): ColorectalCancerScreening(Version 2.2016).
http://www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/
pdf/colorectoral_screening.pdf
42. Le DT, Durham JN, Smith KN, et al: Mismatch
repair deficiency predicts response of solid tumors to
PD-1 blockade. Science 28;357:409-413, 2017
43. Hsu C, Sanford B: The Delphi technique:
Making sense of consensus. Practical Assessment,
Research & Evaluation 12:1-9, 2007
44. CantoMI,HarinckF,HrubanRH,etal:International
Cancer of the Pancreas Screening (CAPS) Consortium
summit on the management of patients with increased
risk for familial pancreatic cancer. Gut 62:339-347, 2013
[Errata: Gut 63:1978, 2014; and Gut 63:178, 2014]
45. Atkins D, Best D, Briss PA, et al: Grading
quality of evidence and strength of recommenda-
tions. BMJ 328:1490-1494, 2004
46. Sijmons RH, Boonstra AE, Reefhuis J, et al:
Accuracy of family history of cancer: Clinical genetic
implications. Eur J Hum Genet 8:181-186, 2000
47. Douglas FS, O’Dair LC, Robinson M, et al: The
accuracy of diagnoses as reported in families with
cancer: A retrospective study. J Med Genet 36:
309-312, 1999
48. Institute
of
Medicine:
Assessing
Genetic
Risks: Implications for Health and Social Policy.
Washington, DC, National Academies Press, 1994
49. Fulda KG, Lykens K: Ethical issues in pre-
dictive genetic testing: A public health perspective.
J Med Ethics 32:143-147, 2006
50. American Cancer Society: American Cancer
Society Recommendations for Prostate Cancer Early
Detection. https://www.cancer.org/cancer/prostate-
cancer/early-detection/acs-recommendations.html
51. American Urological Association:
Early
De-
tection of Prostate Cancer: AUA Guideline. https://
www.auanet.org/education/guidelines/prostate-cancer-
detection.cfm
52. American College of Physicians: Screening for
Prostate Cancer: A Guidance Statement from the
American College of Physicians. https://www.acponline.
org/clinical-information/guidelines
53. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force: Draft
Evidence Review for Prostate Cancer: Screening.
https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/
Document/draft-evidence-review/prostate-cancer-
screening1
54. Bancroft EK, Page EC, Castro E, et al: Targeted
prostate cancer screening in BRCA1 and BRCA2
mutation carriers: Results from the initial screening
round of the IMPACT study. Eur Urol 66:489-499,
2014 [Erratum: Eur Urol 67:e126, 2015]
55. Gillessen S, Attard G, Beer TM, et al: Man-
agement of patients with advanced prostate can-
cer: The report of the advanced prostate cancer
consensus conference APCCC 2017. Eur Urol
jco.org
© 2017 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
423
Genetic Testing for Prostate Cancer
Downloaded from ascopubs.org by Erasmus MC - Medische Bibliotheek on February 12, 2018 from 145.005.087.233
Copyright © 2018 American Society of Clinical Oncology. All rights reserved.
 10.1016/j.eururo.2017.06.002 [epub ahead of print
on June 24, 2017]
56. Robson ME, Bradbury AR, Arun B, et al:
American Society of Clinical Oncology policy state-
ment update: Genetic and genomic testing for cancer
susceptibility. J Clin Oncol 33:3660-3667, 2015
57. Giri VN, Gross L, Gomella LG, et al: How I do it:
Genetic counseling and genetic testing for inherited
prostate cancer. Can J Urol 23:8247-8253, 2016
58. Le DT, Uram JN, Wang H, et al: PD-1 blockade
in tumors with mismatch-repair deficiency. N Engl J
Med 372:2509-2520, 2015
59. Holland
ML,
Huston
A,
Noyes
K:
Cost-
effectiveness of testing for breast cancer suscepti-
bility genes. Value Health 12:207-216, 2009
60. Griffith GL, Edwards RT, Gray J: Cancer ge-
netics services: A systematic review of the economic
evidence and issues. Br J Cancer 90:1697-1703, 2004
61. D’Andrea E, Marzuillo C, Pelone F, et al: Ge-
netic testing and economic evaluations: A systematic
review of the literature. Epidemiol Prev 39:45-50,
2015
62. Manchanda R, Legood R, Burnell M, et al:
Cost-effectiveness of population screening for BRCA
mutations in Ashkenazi Jewish women compared
with family history-based testing. J Natl Cancer Inst
107:380, 2014
Affiliations
Veda N. Giri, Karen E. Knudsen, William K. Kelly, Robert B. Den, Adam P. Dicker, Jean Hoffman-Censits, Mark D. Hurwitz,
Colette Hyatt, Grace Lu-Yao, Mark J. Mann, James R. Mark, Peter A. McCue, Ronald E. Myers, Stephen C. Peiper, Edouard J. Trabulsi,
and Leonard G. Gomella, Jefferson Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center; Justin E. Bekelman, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of
Medicine; S. Bruce Malkowicz, University of Pennsylvania; Elias Obeid and Robert Uzzo, Fox Chase Cancer Center; Gordon F. Schwartz,
Foundation for Breast and Prostate Health, Philadelphia; Mark S. Shahin, Hanjani Institute for Gynecologic Oncology, Abington Hospital-
Jefferson Health, Abington, PA; Wassim Abida, Philip Kantoff, and Mark E. Robson, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center; Mitchell C.
Benson, Columbia University, New York, NY; Gerald L. Andriole, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO; Chris H.
Bangma, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands; Amie Blanco, and Matthew Cooperberg, University of California, San
Francisco Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, San Francisco; Christopher J. Kane, University of California San Diego, San
Diego; Howard Sandler, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles; Howard R. Soule, Prostate Cancer Foundation, Santa Monica, CA;
Arthur Burnett, William B. Isaacs, Christian P. Pavlovich, and Patrick C. Walsh, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore; Peter A.
Pinto and Carol J. Weil, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD; William J. Catalona and Edward Schaeffer, Northwestern University
Feinberg School of Medicine; Scott Eggener, Sarah M. Nielsen, and Donald J. Vander Griend, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL;
Kathleen A. Cooney, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT; David E. Crawford, University of Colorado, Aurora;
Lawrence I. Karsh, The Urology Center of Colorado, Denver; Wendy Poage, Prostate Conditions Education Council, Elizabeth, CO; Neil
Fleshner, University of Toronto Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Matthew L. Freedman, Kevin R. Loughlin,
and Timothy R. Rebbeck, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, and Harvard TH Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA; Freddie C. Hamdy,
University of Oxford, Oxford, England; R. Jeffrey Karnes, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN; Eric A. Klein, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland; Robert
Pilarski, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH; Daniel W. Lin, University of Washington, Seattle, WA; Martin M. Miner, Brown
University, Providence, RI; Todd Morgan and Scott A. Tomlins, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor; Matt T. Rosenberg, Mid-Michigan
Health Center, Jackson, MI; Judd W. Moul, Duke University, Duke Cancer Institute, Durham, NC; David F. Penson, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center, Nashville, TN; Daniel Petrylak and Brian Shuch, Yale University, New Haven, CT; Curtis A. Pettaway, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston; Ganesh V. Raj, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas,
Dallas, TX; Oliver Sartor, Tulane University Medical School, New Orleans, LA; Neal D. Shore, Atlantic Urology Clinics/Carolina Urologic
Research Center, Myrtle Beach, SC; and Richard Wender, American Cancer Society, Atlanta, GA.
Support
Supported by Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Astellas/Medivation/Pfizer, Bayer Pharmaceuticals, Ferring Pharmaceuticals, MDxHealth,
Myriad Genetics, Roche Diagnostics, Ambry Genetics, GenomeDX, Genomic Health, Invitae, OncLive, and American HIFU.
n n n
424
© 2017 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
JOURNAL OF CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Giri et al
Downloaded from ascopubs.org by Erasmus MC - Medische Bibliotheek on February 12, 2018 from 145.005.087.233
Copyright © 2018 American Society of Clinical Oncology. All rights reserved.
 AUTHORS’ DISCLOSURES OF POTENTIAL CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
Role of Genetic Testing for Inherited Prostate Cancer Risk: Philadelphia Prostate Cancer Consensus Conference 2017
The following represents disclosure information provided by authors of this manuscript. All relationships are considered compensated. Relationships are
self-held unless noted. I = Immediate Family Member, Inst = My Institution. Relationships may not relate to the subject matter of this manuscript. For more
information about ASCO’s conflict of interest policy, please refer to www.asco.org/rwc or ascopubs.org/jco/site/ifc.
Veda N. Giri
Stock or Other Ownership: Novopyxis (I)
Research Funding: Myriad Genetics
Karen E. Knudsen
Honoraria: Celgene
Consulting or Advisory Role: Sanofi
Research Funding: Celgene, Sanofi
Travel, Accommodations, Expenses: Sanofi
William K. Kelly
Consulting or Advisory Role: Sanofi, Janssen Pharmaceuticals
Research Funding: Sanofi (Inst), Novartis (Inst), Janssen Oncology (Inst)
Wassim Abida
Honoraria: CARET
Consulting or Advisory Role: Clovis Oncology
Research Funding: AstraZeneca, Zenith Epigenetics, Clovis Oncology
Travel, Accommodations, Expenses: GlaxoSmithKline
Gerald L. Andriole
Consulting or Advisory Role: Algeta/Bayer, 3D Biopsy, Augmenix
Chris H. Bangma
No relationship to disclose
Justin E. Bekelman
Consulting or Advisory Role: GLG
Mitchell C. Benson
Speakers’ Bureau: Janssen
Amie Blanco
Employment: Genentech (I)
Stock or Other Ownership: Genentech (I)
Arthur Burnett
No relationship to disclose
William J. Catalona
Consulting or Advisory Role: Beckman Coulter, OHMX
Research Funding: deCODE Genetics, provides free genotyping and DNA
extraction
Patents, Royalties, Other Intellectual Property: OHMX
Kathleen A. Cooney
Patents, Royalties, Other Intellectual Property: Patent on discovery of
HOXB13 as prostate cancer susceptibility gene (Inst)
Matthew Cooperberg
Honoraria: Takeda Pharmaceuticals
Consulting or Advisory Role: Myriad Pharmaceuticals, Bayer, Astellas
Pharma, Dendreon, Janssen, MDxHealth
Research Funding: Myriad Pharmaceuticals (Inst), Genomic Health
(Inst), GenomeDx (Inst)
David E. Crawford
Employment: Dendreon (I)
Honoraria: Ferring Pharmaceuticals, Janssen, Astellas Pharma,
MDxHealth
Speakers’ Bureau: Ferring Pharmaceuticals, Janssen
Research Funding: Janssen (Inst)
Travel, Accommodations, Expenses: Ferring Pharmaceuticals (I)
Robert B. Den
Consulting or Advisory Role: GenomeDx
Speakers’ Bureau: Bayer
Research Funding: Medivation/Astellas Pharma, GenomeDx
Travel, Accommodations, Expenses: GenomeDx
Adam P. Dicker
Honoraria: Merck KGaA, RedHill Biopharma
Consulting or Advisory Role: EMD Serono, Ferring Pharmaceuticals
Travel, Accommodations, Expenses: Merck KGaA, Ferring
Pharmaceuticals
Other Relationship: NRG Oncology, Department of Defense Prostate
Cancer Research Program
Scott Eggener
Consulting or Advisory Role: Janssen, MDxHealth, Profound Medical,
InSightec
Speakers’ Bureau: OPKO Diagnostics
Research Funding: OPKO Diagnostics
Neil Fleshner
Leadership: Hybridyne Imaging Technologies
Honoraria: Amgen, AbbVie, Astellas Pharma, Bayer, Ferring
Pharmaceuticals, Janssen, Sanofi, Hybridyne Imaging Technologies
Consulting or Advisory Role: AbbVie, Amgen, Astellas Pharma, Bayer,
Ferring Pharmaceuticals, Janssen, Sanofi, Hybridyne Imaging Technologies
Research Funding: Ferring Pharmaceuticals (Inst), Astellas Pharma (Inst),
Bavarian Nordic (Inst), Bayer (Inst), Janssen (Inst), Medivation (Inst),
Nucleix (Inst), Progenics Pharmaceuticals (Inst), Sanofi (Inst), Spectracure
(Inst)
Matthew L. Freedman
No relationship to disclose
Freddie C. Hamdy
Honoraria: Ferring Pharmaceuticals
Travel, Accommodations, Expenses: Ferring Pharmaceuticals
Jean Hoffman-Censits
Honoraria: Genentech
Consulting or Advisory Role: Genentech, Clovis Oncology, Foundation
Medicine
Research Funding: Sanofi
Travel, Accommodations, Expenses: Genentech
Mark D. Hurwitz
Consulting or Advisory Role: NeoTherma Oncology
Speakers’ Bureau: Pyrexar Medical
Travel, Accommodations, Expenses: NeoTherma Oncology
Other Relationship: NeoTherma Oncology
Colette Hyatt
No relationship to disclose
William B. Isaacs
Research Funding: Tokai Pharmaceuticals
Patents, Royalties, Other Intellectual Property: DiagnoCure, MDxHealth
jco.org
© 2017 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
Genetic Testing for Prostate Cancer
Downloaded from ascopubs.org by Erasmus MC - Medische Bibliotheek on February 12, 2018 from 145.005.087.233
Copyright © 2018 American Society of Clinical Oncology. All rights reserved.
 Christopher J. Kane
Stock or Other Ownership: SNP Bio
Honoraria: Janssen Pharmaceutical Products, SNP Bio
Consulting or Advisory Role: SNP Bio, National Comprehensive Cancer
Network
Speakers’ Bureau: Janssen Pharmaceutical Products
Research Funding: PCF
Travel, Accommodations, Expenses: MDxHealth
Philip Kantoff
Stock or Other Ownership: Bellicum Pharmaceuticals, Metamark
Genetics, Placon, Druggability Technologies, Tarveda Therapeutics
Consulting or Advisory Role: Bavarian Nordic, Janssen, Millennium
Pharmaceuticals, MorphoSys, Pfizer, Astellas Pharma, Bellicum
Pharmaceuticals, BIND Biosciences, Endocyte, Metamark Genetics,
Medivation, Merck, MTG Therapeutics, OncoCell MDX, Oncogenex,
Sotio, Sanofi, Tokai Pharmaceuticals, Bayer, Genentech, Cristal
Therapeutics, Ipsen, Omnitura Therapeutics, MorphoSys, GTx, Tarveda
Therapeutics, Druggability Technologies, Progenity
Research Funding: Medivation (Inst), Sanofi (Inst), Oncogenex (Inst),
Aragon Pharmaceuticals (Inst), Amgen (Inst), Astellas Pharma (Inst),
Bayer (Inst), Bavarian Nordic (Inst), Dendreon (Inst), Exelixis (Inst),
Janssen (Inst)
Patents, Royalties, Other Intellectual Property: Method for predicting
the risk of prostate cancer morbidity and mortality, predicting and treating
prostate cancer, methods for predicting likelihood of responding to
treatment, chromosome copy number gain as a biomarker of urothelial
carcinoma lethality, drug combinations to treat cancer, somatic ERCC2
mutations correlate with cisplatin sensitivity in muscle-invasive urothelial
carcinoma (patent), Up-to-Date royalties, Wolters Kluwer royalties
Expert Testimony: Sanofi, Janssen
Travel, Accommodations, Expenses: Sanofi, Janssen, BIND Biosciences,
Bavarian Nordic, Millennium Pharmaceuticals
R. Jeffrey Karnes
Consulting or Advisory Role: Genomic Health
Research Funding: GenomeDx, GenomeDx (Inst)
Patents, Royalties, Other Intellectual Property: GenomeDx, GenomeDx
(Inst)
Lawrence I. Karsh
Stock or Other Ownership: Swan Valley Medical
Honoraria: Astellas Pharma, Bayer, Dendreon, Janssen, Medivation/
Astellas
Consulting or Advisory Role: Astellas Pharma, Bayer, Dendreon, Janssen,
Medivation/Astellas Pharma
Speakers’ Bureau: Astellas Pharma, Bayer, Dendreon, Janssen,
Medivation, Amgen
Research Funding: Astellas Pharma (Inst), Bayer (Inst), Dendreon (Inst),
Janssen (Inst), Medivation/Astellas (Inst), Spectrum Pharmaceuticals
Travel, Accommodations, Expenses: Astellas Pharma, Bayer, Dendreon,
Janssen, Medivation/Astellas, Spectrum Pharmaceuticals
Eric A. Klein
Consulting or Advisory Role: GenomeDx, Genomic Health
Speakers’ Bureau: Genomic Health
Daniel W. Lin
Consulting or Advisory Role: Astellas Pharma, Bayer, Myriad Genetics
Research Funding: Genomic Health (Inst), GenomeDx (Inst),
MDxHealth (Inst)
Kevin R. Loughlin
Research Funding: Astellas Pharma
Grace Lu-Yao
Employment: Sun Pharmaceutical Industries (I)
Leadership: Sun Pharmaceutical Industries (I)
Stock or Other Ownership: Merck (I)
S. Bruce Malkowicz
Consulting or Advisory Role: Pacific Edge
Mark J. Mann
No relationship to disclose
James R. Mark
No relationship to disclose
Peter A. McCue
No relationship to disclose
Martin M. Miner
Expert Testimony: AbbVie
Todd Morgan
Consulting or Advisory Role: Myriad Genetics
Research Funding: Myriad Genetics (Inst), MDxHealth (Inst), GenomeDx
(Inst)
Judd W. Moul
Stock or Other Ownership: Pfizer, Johnson & Johnson, Bavarian Nordic,
Eli Lilly, Procter & Gamble, Walgreens, AstraZeneca, Novartis, Theralogix
Honoraria: AbbVie, Bayer, Ferring Pharmaceuticals, Dendreon, Janssen,
Astellas Pharma, Sanofi, Genomic Health, GenomeDx, Pfizer
Consulting or Advisory Role: AbbVie, Bayer, Theralogix, Tolmar, Blue
Earth Diagnostics
Speakers’ Bureau: Bayer, Ferring Pharmaceuticals, Dendreon, Janssen,
Sanofi, Genomic Health, GenomeDx
Research Funding: Astellas Pharma (Inst), Pfizer (Inst)
Ronald E. Myers
No relationship to disclose
Sarah M. Nielsen
No relationship to disclose
Elias Obeid
Honoraria: Guidepoint Global
Consulting or Advisory Role: Merck Sharp & Dohme
Research Funding: Merck, Genentech, Myriad Genetics
Christian P. Pavlovich
Stock or Other Ownership: Intuitive Surgical, Pfizer, Amgen, Celgene,
United Therapeutics, Aimmune Therapeutics, DaVita, Gilead Sciences,
Prometic Life Sciences
Honoraria: Genomic Health, Spectrum Pharmaceuticals, Hospira,
Apotex, Exact Imaging (formerly Imagistx), Hybridyne Imaging
Technologies
Research Funding: Exact Imaging (formerly Imagistx) (Inst)
Expert Testimony: Intuitive Surgical (through Skadden, Arps & Meagher
attorneys at law)
Other Relationship: Da Vita dialysis centers (I)
Stephen C. Peiper
Patents, Royalties, Other Intellectual Property: St Jude Children’s
Research Hospital
Travel, Accommodations, Expenses: Roche Diagnostics
David F. Penson
Consulting or Advisory Role: Astellas, Medivation, Dendreon, Janssen
Pharmaceuticals
© 2017 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
JOURNAL OF CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Giri et al
Downloaded from ascopubs.org by Erasmus MC - Medische Bibliotheek on February 12, 2018 from 145.005.087.233
Copyright © 2018 American Society of Clinical Oncology. All rights reserved.
 Daniel Petrylak
Stock or Other Ownership: Bellicum Pharmaceuticals, Tyme Technologies
Honoraria: Bayer, Bellicum Pharmaceuticals, Sanofi, Johnson & Johnson,
Exelixis, Ferring Pharmaceuticals, Medivation, Pfizer, Genentech, Astellas
Pharma, Progenics, Merck Serono, AstraZeneca/MedImmune, Pfizer
Consulting or Advisory Role: Bayer, Bellicum Pharmaceuticals,
Dendreon, Sanofi, Johnson & Johnson, Exelixis, Ferring Pharmaceuticals,
Millennium, Medivation, Pfizer, Tyme Technologies
Research Funding: Oncogenex, Progenics, Johnson & Johnson,
Millennium, Dendreon, Sanofi, Endocyte, Genentech, Merck, Astellas,
Medivation, Novartis, Eli Lilly/ImClone, Merck, Pfizer, Agenysis
Expert Testimony: Celgene, Sanofi
Travel, Accommodations, Expenses: Bayer, Bellicum Pharmaceuticals,
Dendreon, Sanofi, Exelixis, Ferring Pharmaceuticals, Medivation, Pfizer,
Oncogenex, Progenics, Johnson & Johnson, Millennium, Celgene, Eli Lilly
Curtis A. Pettaway
Consulting or Advisory Role: Wolters Kluwer
Research Funding: Beckman Coulter
Travel, Accommodations, Expenses: Myriad Genetics
Robert Pilarski
No relationship to disclose
Peter A. Pinto
Patents, Royalties, Other Intellectual Property: Philips Healthcare and
National Institutes of Health have licensing agreement for medical imaging
that may result in royalties
Wendy Poage
Employment: Shire
Stock or Other Ownership: 3D Biopsy, Maximum Medical Solutions
Honoraria: Janssen
Consulting or Advisory Role: MDxHealth
Travel, Accommodations, Expenses: Janssen, Astellas Pharma, Sanofi,
MDxHealth
Ganesh V. Raj
Leadership: Gaudium Rx, C-Diagnostics, EtiraRx
Honoraria: Bayer, Sanofi, Medivation, Astellas Pharma, Janssen
Consulting or Advisory Role: Janssen, Bayer
Speakers’ Bureau: Bayer, Medivation, Sanofi, Astellas Pharma, Janssen
Research Funding: Bayer
Patents, Royalties, Other Intellectual Property: Gaudium Rx,
C-Diagnostics, EtiraRx
Timothy R. Rebbeck
No relationship to disclose
Mark E. Robson
Honoraria: AstraZeneca
Consulting or Advisory Role: McKesson, AstraZeneca
Research Funding: AstraZeneca (Inst), AbbVie (Inst), BioMarin
Pharmaceutical (Inst), Medivation (Inst)
Travel, Accommodations, Expenses: AstraZeneca
Matt T. Rosenberg
Stock or Other Ownership: OPKO Diagnostics
Honoraria: OPKO Diagnostics, Astellas Pharma
Consulting or Advisory Role: OPKO Diagnostics, Astellas Pharma
Speakers’ Bureau: OPKO Diagnostics, Astellas Pharma
Travel, Accommodations, Expenses: OPKO Diagnostics, Astellas Pharma
Howard Sandler
Stock or Other Ownership: Advanced Medical Isotope
Consulting or Advisory Role: Janssen, Blue Earth Diagnostics, Ferring
Pharmaceuticals, Dendreon
Other Relationship: Caribou Publishing
Oliver Sartor
Consulting or Advisory Role: Bayer, Bellicum Pharmaceuticals, Johnson
& Johnson, Medivation, Oncogenex, Sanofi, Tokai Pharmaceuticals,
AstraZeneca (Inst), Progenics (Inst), Dendreon
Research Funding: Bayer (Inst), Johnson & Johnson (Inst), Sanofi (Inst),
Dendreon (Inst), Endocyte (Inst), Innocrin Pharmaceuticals (Inst),
Progenics (Inst), InVitae (Inst)
Travel, Accommodations, Expenses: Bayer, Bellicum Pharmaceuticals,
Johnson & Johnson, Medivation, Oncogenex, Sanofi, Tokai
Pharmaceuticals, AstraZeneca, Progenics
Edward Schaeffer
Consulting or Advisory Role: OPKO Diagnostics, AbbVie
Gordon F. Schwartz
No relationship to disclose
Mark S. Shahin
Honoraria: AstraZeneca, Clovis Oncology, Tesaro, Merck
Consulting or Advisory Role: AstraZeneca, Clovis Oncology, Tesaro,
Merck
Speakers’ Bureau: AstraZeneca, Clovis Oncology, Tesaro, Merck
Neal D. Shore
Consulting or Advisory Role: Bayer, Janssen Scientific Affairs, Dendreon,
Sanofi, Takeda, Tolmar, Ferring Pharmaceuticals, Medivation/Astellas
Brian Shuch
No relationship to disclose
Howard R. Soule
Leadership: WindMIL Therapeutics
Consulting or Advisory Role: Compugen
Travel, Accommodations, Expenses: Compugen, Sanofi
Scott A. Tomlins
Leadership: Strata Oncology
Honoraria: Astellas Medivation, Almac Diagnostics, Sanofi, Janssen
Consulting or Advisory Role: Strata Oncology
Research Funding: GenomeDx (Inst), Astellas Medivation (Inst)
Patents, Royalties, Other Intellectual Property: I am a coauthor on
a patent issued to the University of Michigan on ETS gene fusions in
prostate cancer. The diagnostic field of use has been licensed to Hologic/
Gen-Probe, who has sublicensed some rights to Ventana Medical Systems/
Roche.
Travel, Accommodations, Expenses: Thermo Fisher Scientific, Strata
Oncology
Edouard J. Trabulsi
Consulting or Advisory Role: GenomeDx
Robert Uzzo
Consulting or Advisory Role: Johnson & Johnson, Myriad Genetics,
Pfizer, Novartis, Genentech
Speakers’ Bureau: Janssen Oncology
Research Funding: Novartis
Donald J. Vander Griend
No relationship to disclose
Patrick C. Walsh
No relationship to disclose
jco.org
© 2017 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
Genetic Testing for Prostate Cancer
Downloaded from ascopubs.org by Erasmus MC - Medische Bibliotheek on February 12, 2018 from 145.005.087.233
Copyright © 2018 American Society of Clinical Oncology. All rights reserved.
 Carol J. Weil
No relationship to disclose
Richard Wender
No relationship to disclose
Leonard G. Gomella
Consulting or Advisory Role: Astellas Pharma, Bayer, MDxHealth,
Janssen, Pfizer
Patents, Royalties, Other Intellectual Property: Thomas Jefferson
University (Inst)
© 2017 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
JOURNAL OF CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Giri et al
Downloaded from ascopubs.org by Erasmus MC - Medische Bibliotheek on February 12, 2018 from 145.005.087.233
Copyright © 2018 American Society of Clinical Oncology. All rights reserved.
 Acknowledgment
We thank the Foundation for Breast and Prostate Health for collaborating with the Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center at Jefferson on this
consensus effort. We also thank our patient advocates and their family members who contributed their time and personal experiences to
this consensus conference: John Buehler, Robin Cole, and Peter Kaye, Sr.
Appendix
Define important areas and needs to address
Solicit questions to address
Revise and finalize questions
Submit final manuscript for peer review
Disseminate consensus guidelines at national meetings
and website (2017-2018)
Draft and circulate manuscript to all panel members
Manuscript revisions and final agreement from all panel members
Circulate literature and questions to panel members
Philadelphia Prostate Cancer Consensus Conference
(March 3-4, 2017) Voted on questions
to generate level of consensus 
Panel selection: experts in urology,
medical oncology, radiation oncology, clinical cancer genetics,
 genetic counseling, molecular pathology, bioethics, 
gynecologic oncology, cancer biology, cancer epidemiology
 (n = 71 panel members)
Fig A1. Overall consensus model.
jco.org
© 2017 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
Genetic Testing for Prostate Cancer
Downloaded from ascopubs.org by Erasmus MC - Medische Bibliotheek on February 12, 2018 from 145.005.087.233
Copyright © 2018 American Society of Clinical Oncology. All rights reserved.
 Table A1. Consensus Conference Panel Members
Panel Member
Institution
Specialty
Wassim Abida, MD, PhD
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center
Medical Oncology
Chris H. Bangma, MD, PhD
Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands
Urology
Mitchell C. Benson, MD
Columbia University
Urology
Amie Blanco, MS, LCGC
UCSF Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center
Genetic Counseling
John Buehler
N/A
Patient Advocate
Arthur “Bud” Burnett, MD, MBA
Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions
Urology
William J. Catalona, MD
Northwestern University, Feinberg School of Medicine; R.H.
Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center
Urology
Robin Cole
N/A
Patient Advocate
Kathleen A. Cooney, MD
University of Utah School of Medicine
Medical Oncology/Genetics
Matthew Cooperberg, MD, MPH
UCSF Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center
Urology
E. David Crawford, MD
University of Colorado, Denver
Urology
Robert B. Den, MD
Jefferson Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center
Radiation Oncology
Adam P. Dicker, MD, PhD
Jefferson Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center
Radiation Oncology
Scott Eggener, MD
University of Chicago
Urology
Neil Fleshner, MD
University of Toronto, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre
Urology
Matthew L. Freedman, MD
Harvard Medical School/Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
Medical Oncology/Genetics
Veda N. Giri, MD
Jefferson Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center
Medical Oncology/Clinical Cancer Genetics
Leonard G. Gomella, MD
Jefferson Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center
Urology
Freddie C. Hamdy, FRCS, FMedSci
University of Oxford, Oxford England
Urology
Jean Hoffman-Censits, MD
Jefferson Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center
Medical Oncology
Mark D. Hurwitz, MD
Jefferson Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center
Radiation Oncology
Colette Hyatt, MS, LCGC
Jefferson Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center
Genetic Counseling
William B. Isaacs, PhD
Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions
Genetics Research
Christopher J. Kane, MD
University of California San Diego
Urology
Philip Kantoff, MD
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center
Medical Oncology
R. Jeffrey Karnes, MD
Mayo Clinic, Rochester
Urology
Lawrence I. Karsh, MD
The Urology Center of Colorado
Urology
Peter Kaye, Sr
N/A
Patient Advocate
Wm. Kevin Kelly, DO
Jefferson Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center
Medical Oncology
Eric A. Klein, MD
Cleveland Clinic
Urology
Karen E. Knudsen, PhD
Jefferson Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center
Oncology Research
Daniel W. Lin, MD
University of Washington
Urology
Kevin R. Loughlin, MD, MBA
Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School
Urology
Grace Lu-Yao, PhD
Jefferson Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center
Population Science
S. Bruce Malkowicz, MD
University of Pennsylvania
Urology
Mark J. Mann, MD
Jefferson Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center
Urology
J. Ryan Mark, MD
Jefferson Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center
Urology
Peter A. McCue, MD
Jefferson Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center
Pathology
Martin M. Miner, MD
Brown University
Primary Care
Todd Morgan, MD
University of Michigan
Urology
Judd W. Moul, MD
Duke University, Duke Cancer Institute
Urology
Ronald E. Myers, PhD
Jefferson Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center
Medical Decision Making
Research/Population Science
Sarah M. Nielsen, MS, CGC
The University of Chicago
Genetic Counseling
Elias Obeid, MD, MPH
Fox Chase Cancer Center
Medical Oncology/Genetics
Christian P. Pavlovich, MD
Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions
Urology
Stephen C. Peiper, MD
Jefferson Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center
Pathology
David F. Penson, MD, MPH
Vanderbilt University Medical Center
Urology
Daniel Petrylak, MD
Yale University
Medical Oncology
Curtis A. Pettaway, MD
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center
Urology
Robert Pilarski, MS, LGC, MSW
The Ohio State University
Genetic Counseling
Peter A. Pinto, MD
National Cancer Institute
Urology
Wendy Poage, MHA
Prostate Conditions Education Council
Prostate Cancer Education/Advocacy
Ganesh V. Raj, MD, PhD
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas
Urology
Timothy R. Rebbeck, PhD
Dana Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard TH Chan School of
Public Health
Genetics Research
Mark E. Robson, MD
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center
Breast Oncology/Genetics
Matt T. Rosenberg, MD
Mid-Michigan Health Center
Primary Care
Howard Sandler, MD, MS
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center
Radiation Oncology
Oliver Sartor, MD
Tulane University Medical School
Medical Oncology
Edward “Ted” Schaeffer, MD, PhD
Northwestern University, Feinberg School of Medicine; R.H.
Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center
Urology
Gordon F. Schwartz, MD
Foundation for Breast and Prostate Health
Breast Surgery
(continued on following page)
© 2017 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
JOURNAL OF CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Giri et al
Downloaded from ascopubs.org by Erasmus MC - Medische Bibliotheek on February 12, 2018 from 145.005.087.233
Copyright © 2018 American Society of Clinical Oncology. All rights reserved.
 The following series of tables highlight the studies referenced by the consensus panel concerning grade of evidence for prostate
cancer (PCA) risk by genes on PCA multigene panels. Grade of evidence is provided in the titles of Tables A2-A6. (A) High-grade
evidence: At least one prospectively designed study or three or more large validation studies or three or more descriptive studies;
(B) Moderate-grade evidence: two cohort or case-control studies; (C) Emerging data: increasing data in support of association to
PCA, but not yet moderate-grade evidence; (D) Low/insufficient: limited data or not studied in the context of PCA.
Table A2. Case Series of BRCA1 and BRCA2 and PCA Risk [BRCA1 and BRCA2 (Evidence: A)]
First Author
Population
PCA Risk (BRCA1)
PCA Risk (BRCA2)
Comments
BCLC1
BCLC included 173 BRCA2- linked or
mutation-positive families (3,728
individuals and 333 cancers*)
Not assessed
Overall: RR, 4.65 (95% CI,
3.48 to 6.22)
Men younger than 65 years: RR, 7.33; 95%
CI, 4.66 to 11.52
Thompson2
BCLC family set that included 7,106
women and 4,741 men, among whom
2,245 were carriers of BRCA1
mutations, 1,106 were tested
noncarriers, and 8,496 were not tested
Overall: RR, 1.07 (95% CI,
0.75 to 1.54)
Not assessed
Men younger than 65 years: RR, 1.82; 95%
CI, 1.01 to 3.29
Mersch3
Clinical genetics population at a single
institution from 1997-2013. Compared
cancer incidence to US Statistics Report
by CDC for general population cancer
incidence
SIR, 3.809 (95% CI, 0.766
to 11.13)
SIR, 4.89 (95% CI, 1.959 to
10.075)
Agalliu4
290 men (white, n = 257; African
American, n = 33) diagnosed with PCA
at younger than 55 years and
unselected for family history
Not assessed
RR, 7.8 (95% CI, 1.8 to 9.4)
Kote-Jarai5
1,832 men diagnosed with PCA between
age 36 and 88 years who participated in
the UK Genetic Prostate Cancer Study
Not assessed
RR, 8.6 (95% CI, 5.1 to
12.6)
MLPA was not used; therefore, the
mutation frequency may be an
underestimate, given the inability to
detect large genomic rearrangements.
Leongamornlert6
913 men with PCA who participated in the
UK Genetic Prostate Cancer Study;
included 821 cases diagnosed between
age 36 and 65 years, regardless of
family history, and 92 cases diagnosed
at older than 65 years with a family
history of PCA
RR, 3.75 (95% CI, 1.02 to
9.6)
Not assessed
NOTE. Adapted from the National Cancer Institute PDQ Genetics of Prostate Cancer Summary.7
Abbreviations: BCLC, Breast Cancer Linkage Consortium; CDC, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; MLPA, multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification;
PCA, prostate cancer; RR, relative risk; SIR, standardized incidence ratio.
*Includes all cancers except breast, ovarian, and nonmelanoma skin cancers.
Table A1. Consensus Conference Panel Members (continued)
Panel Member
Institution
Specialty
Mark S. Shahin, MD
Hanjani Institute for Gynecologic Oncology; Abington Hospital-
Jefferson Health
Gynecologic Oncology
Neal D. Shore, MD
Atlantic Urology Clinics/Carolina Urologic Research Center
Urology
Brian Shuch, MD
Yale University
Urology
Howard R. Soule, PhD
Prostate Cancer Foundation
Basic and Clinical Research
Scott A. Tomlins, MD, PhD
University of Michigan Medical School
Pathology
Edouard J. Trabulsi, MD
Jefferson Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center
Urology
Robert Uzzo, MD
Fox Chase Cancer Center
Urology
Donald J. Vander Griend, PhD
The University of Chicago
Basic and Clinical Research
Patrick C. Walsh, MD
Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions
Urology
Carol J. Weil, JD
National Cancer Institute
Bioethics
Richard Wender, MD
American Cancer Society
Family and Community Medicine
NOTE. Additional manuscript contributors: Gerald L. Andriole, MD (Washington University School of Medicine; Urology); Justin E. Bekelman, MD (University of
Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine; Radiation Oncology and Medical Ethics and Health Policy).
jco.org
© 2017 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
Genetic Testing for Prostate Cancer
Downloaded from ascopubs.org by Erasmus MC - Medische Bibliotheek on February 12, 2018 from 145.005.087.233
Copyright © 2018 American Society of Clinical Oncology. All rights reserved.
 Table A3. Case-Control Studies of BRCA1 and BRCA2 and Survival Outcomes (Evidence: A for BRCA2)
First Author
Cases
Controls
PCA-Specific Survival
Overall Survival
Comments
Tryggvad´
ottir8
30 men diagnosed with
PCA who were carriers
of BRCA2 999del5
founder mutation
(Icelandic population)
59 men with PCA matched
by birth and diagnosis
year and confirmed not
to carry the BRCA2
999del5 mutation
BRCA2 999del5 mutation
was associated with
a higher risk of death from
PCA (HR, 3.42; 95% CI,
2.12 to 5.51), which
remained after adjustment
for tumor stage and grade
(HR, 2.35; 95% CI, 1.08 to
5.11).
Not assessed
Edwards9
21 men diagnosed with
PCA who harbored
a BRCA2 mutation: six
with early-onset disease
(# 55 years) from
a United Kingdom PCA
study and 15 unselected
for age at diagnosis from
a United Kingdom clinical
series
1,587 age- and stage-
matched men with PCA
Not assessed
Overall survival was lower in
carriers of BRCA2
mutations (4.8 years) than
in noncarriers (8.5 years);
HR, 2.14 (95% CI, 1.28 to
3.56; P = .003).
Gallagher10
832 AJ men diagnosed
with localized PCA
between 1988 and 2007,
of whom there were six
carriers of BRCA1
mutations and 20
carriers of BRCA2
mutations
454 AJ men with no history
of cancer
After adjusting for stage,
PSA, Gleason score, and
therapy received:
Not assessed
The BRCA1 5382insC
founder pathogenic
variant was not tested in
this series.
– Carriers of BRCA1
185delAG mutation had
a greater risk of death as
a result of PCA (HR, 5.16;
95% CI, 1.09 to 24.53;
P = .001).
–Carriers of BRCA2
6174delT mutation had
a greater risk of death as
a result of PCA (HR, 5.48;
95% CI, 2.03 to 14.79;
P = .001).
Thorne11
40 men diagnosed with
PCA who were carriers
of BRCA2 mutations
from 30 familial breast
cancer families from
Australia and New
Zealand
97 men from 89 familial
breast cancer families
from Australia and New
Zealand with PCA and no
BRCA mutation found in
the family
BRCA2 carriers had
increased risk of PCA-
specific mortality (HR, 4.5;
95% CI, 2.12 to 9.52; P ,
.001), compared with
noncarrier
BRCA2 had increased risk of
death (HR, 3.12; 95% CI,
1.64 to 6.14; P , .001),
compared with noncarriers
There were too few BRCA1
carriers available to
include in the analysis.
Castro12
2,019 men diagnosed with
PCA from the United
Kingdom, of whom 18
were carriers of BRCA1
mutations and 61 were
carriers of BRCA2
mutations
1,940 men who were
BRCA1/2 noncarriers
PCA-specific survival at 5
years:
Overall survival at 5 years:
For localized PCA,
metastasis-free survival
was also higher in
controls than in mutation
carriers (93% v 77%;
HR, 2.7).
– BRCA1: 80.8% (95% CI,
56.9% to 100%)
– BRCA1: 82.5% (95% CI,
60.4% to 100%)
– BRCA2: 67.9% (95% CI
,53.4% to 82.4%; P ,
.001)
– BRCA2: 57.9% (95% CI,
43.4% to 72.4%; P ,
.001)
– Controls: 90.6% (95% CI,
88.8% to 92.4%; P , .001)
– Controls: 86.4% (95% CI,
84.4% to 88.4%; P ,
.001)
Castro13
1,302 men from the United
Kingdom with local or
locally advanced PCA,
including 67 carriers of
BRCA1/2 mutations
1,235 men who were
BRCA1/2 noncarriers
PCA-specific survival:
Not assessed
Multivariate analysis
confirmed BRCA
mutations as an
independent prognostic
factor for cause-specific
survival: (HR, 2.17; 95%
CI, 1.16 to 4.07; P = .016)
– BRCA1/2: 61% at 10
years
– Noncarriers: 85% at 10
years
NOTES. Adapted from the National Cancer Institute PDQ Genetics of Prostate Cancer Summary.7 Rates of BRCA1/BRCA2 mutations in metastatic PCA described in the paper.
Abbreviations: AJ, Ashkenazi Jewish; HR, hazard ratio; PCA, prostate cancer; PSA, prostate-specific antigen.
© 2017 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
JOURNAL OF CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Giri et al
Downloaded from ascopubs.org by Erasmus MC - Medische Bibliotheek on February 12, 2018 from 145.005.087.233
Copyright © 2018 American Society of Clinical Oncology. All rights reserved.
 Table A4. HOXB13 (G84E) and Association to PCA Risk (Evidence: A)
First Author
Cases
Controls
OR of PCA Risk
Ewing14
94 unrelated patients from hereditary PCA
families; four probands carried G84E
mutation. Confirmation: 5,083 PCA cases
(combination of hereditary, familial, early-
onset, or localized PCA cases)
1,401 screened controls
Men with a positive family history of PCA: 2.2%
v negative: 0.8% (OR, 2.8; 95% CI, 1.6 to 5.1;
P , .001)
Men younger than 55 years at diagnosis: 2.2%
v older than 55 years: 0.8% (OR, 2.7; 95% CI,
1.6 to 4.7; P , .001)
Men with a positive family history of PCA and
younger than 55 years at diagnosis: 3.1% v
a negative family history of PCA and age at
diagnosis older than 55 years: 0.6% (OR, 5.1;
95% CI, 2.4 to 12.2; P , .001)
Control subjects: 0.1%-0.2%
Xu15
2,443 PCA families from ICPCG. Among carrier
families, cases included 382 men with PCA.
2,443 PCA families from ICPCG; among carrier
families, controls included 137 men without
PCA
OR, 4.42; 95% CI, 2.56 to 7.64
Akbari16
1,843 cases with PCA
2,225 control men without PCA
5.8; 95% CI, 1.3 to 26.5; P = .01
Breyer17
928 familial PCA probands
930 controls without personal or family history
of PCA
7.9; 95% CI, 1.8 to 34.5; P = .0062; carrier rate
was 1.9% among all familial case probands
and 2.7% among probands of pedigrees with
three or more affected with PCA.
Karlsson18
5,003 population-based cases in Sweden
(CAPS and Stockholm-1 studies)
4,693 population-based controls in Sweden
(CAPS and Stockholm-1 studies)
CAPS: OR, 3.4; 95% CI, 2.2 to 5.4;
Stockholm-1: OR, 3.5; 95% CI, 2.4 to 5.2
Young-onset: OR, 8.6; 95% CI, 5.1 to 14.0
Hereditary PCA: OR, 6.6; 95% CI, 3.3 to 12.0
Kluzniak19
3,515 patients with PCA in Poland
2,604 controls in Poland
OR, 5.0; 95% CI, 1.5 to 16.7; P = .008
Familial PCA: OR, 8.4; 95% CI, 1.9 to 37.7;
P = .005
Laitinen20
4,000 PCA cases in Finland
5,000 controls in Finland
All cases and controls: OR, 7.1; 95% CI, 5.5 to
9.3
Hereditary PCA: OR, 8.8; 95% CI, 4.9 to 15.7
Stott-Miller21
1,310 population-based PCA cases from Seattle
region
1,259 age-matched controls
Overall: OR, 3.3; 95% CI, 1.21 to 8.96
Gudmundsson22
9,988 PCA cases in Iceland, Chicago, Spain,
Netherlands, Romania, United Kingdom
61,994 controls in Iceland, Chicago, Spain,
Netherlands, Romania, United Kingdom
OR, 7.1; 95% CI, 4.62 to 10.78; Pcomb , .001
Witte23
Family-based PCA study (647 cases);
aggressive incident PCA (998 cases)
Family-based PCA study (477 controls);
aggressiveness study (542 controls)
OR, 4.8; P = .01
Abbreviations: CAPS, Cancer of the Prostate in Sweden; ICPCG, International Consortium of Prostate Cancer Genetics; OR: odds ratio; PCA, prostate cancer; P_comb,
combined P value.
jco.org
© 2017 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
Genetic Testing for Prostate Cancer
Downloaded from ascopubs.org by Erasmus MC - Medische Bibliotheek on February 12, 2018 from 145.005.087.233
Copyright © 2018 American Society of Clinical Oncology. All rights reserved.
 Table A5. DNA MMR Genes, PCA Risk, and Molecular Data (Evidence: B)
First Author
Population
Results
Comments
Grindedal24
106 male DNA MMR mutation carriers from
Norwegian Cancer Registry
Expected number of PCAs was 1.52 compared
with nine observed (P , .01).
Loss of MMR gene expression was found in
seven of eight tumors.
Mean age of onset of PCA was 60.4 years
compared with 66.6 expected (P = .006).
No. of men with Gleason score between 8 and
10 was significantly higher than expected
(P , .001).
Haraldsdottir25
Compared rates of PCA from Lynch syndrome
families at academic institution to general
population rates of PCA in SEER
PCA was observed in 11 of 188 males with Lynch
syndrome.
Impaired MMR expression and microsatellite
instability were seen in one out of two PCA
specimens available for testing.
SIR, 4.87; 95% CI, 2.43 to 8.71
Bauer26
95 individuals were identified as members of
potential Lynch syndrome families from
a hereditary PCA study; underwent radical
prostatectomy and 35 tumors from 31
families underwent MSI analysis.
Two of 35 prostate tumors were MSI high,
suggestive of germline DNA MMR mutation.
One patient had IHC loss that correlated with
germline MMR mutation.
Raymond27
Two family cancer registries for total of 198
Lynch syndrome families
Cumulative lifetime risk of PCA (to age 80 years)
was 30.0% in carriers of MMR gene mutations
(95% CI, 16.54 to 41.30; P = .07), compared
with 17.84% in the general population;
PCA incidence in Lynch syndrome families was
compared with SEER data
HR (to age 80 years) for PCA in carriers of MMR
gene mutations in the combined data set was
1.99 (95% CI, 1.31 to 3.03; P = .0013).
HR, 2.48 (95% CI, 1.34 to 4.59; P = .0038)
among men age 20 to 59 years
Ryan28
Systematic review and meta-analysis that
included 23 studies (six studies with
molecular characterization and 18 risk
studies, of which 12 studies quantified risk
for PCA)
RR of PCA in carriers of MMR gene pathogenic
variants was estimated to be 3.67 (95% CI,
2.32 to 6.67).
In the six molecular studies, 73% (95% CI, 57%
to 85%) of PCAs in carriers of germline MMR
mutations were MMR deficient.
Rosty29
32 PCA cases with germline MMR gene
mutations from Colon Cancer Family Registry
RR of PCA was highest in carriers of MSH2
mutations (RR, 5.8; 95% CI, 2.6 to 20.9)
Loss of MMR protein expression by IHC was
observed in 22 tumors (69%); the pattern of
loss of protein expression was 100%
concordant with the germline mutation.
RR of PCA in MLH1 mutation carriers: 1.7; 95%
CI, 1.1 to 6.7
RR of PCA in MSH6 mutation carriers: 1.3; 95%
CI, 1.1 to 5.3
Abbreviations: HR, hazard ratio; IHC: immunohistochemistry; MMR, mismatch repair; MSI, microsatellite instability; PCA, prostate cancer; RR, relative risk; SIR,
standardized incidence ratio.
© 2017 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
JOURNAL OF CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Giri et al
Downloaded from ascopubs.org by Erasmus MC - Medische Bibliotheek on February 12, 2018 from 145.005.087.233
Copyright © 2018 American Society of Clinical Oncology. All rights reserved.
 Appendix References
1. Breast Cancer Linkage Consortium: Cancer risks in BRCA2 mutation carriers. J Natl Cancer Inst 91:1310-1316, 1999
2. Thompson D, Easton DF, Breast Cancer Linkage Consortium: Cancer incidence in BRCA1 mutation carriers. J Natl Cancer
Inst 94:1358-1365, 2002
3. Mersch J, Jackson MA, Park M, et al: Cancers associated with BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations other than breast and ovarian.
Cancer 121:269-275, 2015
4. Agalliu I, Karlins E, Kwon EM, et al: Rare germline mutations in the BRCA2 gene are associated with early-onset prostate
cancer. Br J Cancer 97:826-831, 2007
5. Kote-Jarai Z, Leongamornlert D, Saunders E, et al: BRCA2 is a moderate penetrance gene contributing to young-onset
prostate cancer: Implications for genetic testing in prostate cancer patients. Br J Cancer 105:1230-1234, 2011
6. Leongamornlert D, Mahmud N, Tymrakiewicz M, et al: Germline BRCA1 mutations increase prostate cancer risk. Br J
Cancer 106:1697-1701, 2012
7. National Cancer Institute: Genetics of Prostate Cancer (PDQ): Health Professional Version. https://www.cancer.gov/types/
prostate/hp/prostate-genetics-pdq
8. Tryggvad´
ottir L, Vidarsd´
ottir L, Thorgeirsson T, et al: Prostate cancer progression and survival in BRCA2 mutation carriers.
J Natl Cancer Inst 99:929-935, 2007
9. Edwards SM, Evans DG, Hope Q, et al: Prostate cancer in BRCA2 germline mutation carriers is associated with poorer
prognosis. Br J Cancer 103:918-924, 2010
10. Gallagher DJ, Gaudet MM, Pal P, et al: Germline BRCA mutations denote a clinicopathologic subset of prostate cancer. Clin
Cancer Res 16:2115-2121, 2010
11. Thorne H, Willems AJ, Niedermayr E, et al: Decreased prostate cancer-specific survival of men with BRCA2 mutations
from multiple breast cancer families. Cancer Prev Res (Phila) 4:1002-1010, 2011
12. Castro E, Goh C, Olmos D, et al: Germline BRCA mutations are associated with higher risk of nodal involvement, distant
metastasis, and poor survival outcomes in prostate cancer. J Clin Oncol 31:1748-1757, 2013
Table A6. Additional Genes on Multigene Panels and Association to PCA
Gene
Grade of
Evidence
First
Author
Population
Results
CHEK2
D
Cybulski30
3,750 Polish men with PCA v 3,956 Polish men with no
history of cancer
Any CHEK2 mutation: OR, 1.9; 95% CI, 1.6 to 2.2; P , .001
PCA diagnosed younger than 60 years: OR, 2.3; 95% CI, 1.8
to 3.1; P , .001
Familial PCA: OR, 2.7; 95% CI, 2.0 to 3.7; P , .001
Pritchard31
Metastatic PCA unselected for family history
10 of 534 metastatic PCAs had CHEK2 germline mutation
(1.87%)
ATM
C
Pritchard31
Metastatic PCA unselected for family history
11 of 692 (1.6%) metastatic PCAs had ATM germline
mutation
Na32
313 lethal PCA v 486 low-risk/localized PCA
ATM + BRCA1 + BRCA2 associated with lethal PCA
(P = .0007) and shorter survival
ATM alone borderline association to lethal PCA (P = .06)
Mateo33
49 men with mCRPC; phase II trial of treatment with
olaparib
Three of 49 (6.1%) had germline ATM mutations
NBN
C
Cybulski34
Poland:
NBN founder mutation 657del5 presence:
Familial PCA = 56
Familial PCA: five of 56 (9%; OR, 16; P , .001)
Nonfamilial PCA = 305
Nonfamilial PCA: seven of 305 (OR, 3.9; P = .01)
Controls = 1,500
Controls: nine of 1,500 (0.6%)
Cybulski30
Cases = 3,750, Controls = 3,956
PCA: OR, 2.5; 95% CI, 1.5 to 4.0
Age diagnosis younger than 60 years; OR, 3.1; 95% CI,
1.5 to 6.4
Familial PCA: OR, 4.3; 95% CI, 2.0 to 9.0
Pritchard31
Metastatic PCA unselected for family history
Two of 692 (0.29%) metastatic PCAs had NBN germline
mutation
PALB2
D
Pritchard31
Metastatic PCA unselected for family history
Three of 692 (0.43%) metastatic PCAs had PALB2 germline
mutation
RAD51D
D
Pritchard31
Metastatic PCA unselected for family history
Three of 692 (0.43%) metastatic PCAs had RAD51D
germline mutation
TP53
D
—
—
—
Abbreviations: OR, odds ratio; PCA, prostate cancer.
jco.org
© 2017 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
Genetic Testing for Prostate Cancer
Downloaded from ascopubs.org by Erasmus MC - Medische Bibliotheek on February 12, 2018 from 145.005.087.233
Copyright © 2018 American Society of Clinical Oncology. All rights reserved.
 13. Castro E, Goh C, Leongamornlert D, et al: Effect of BRCA mutations on metastatic relapse and cause-specific survival after
radical treatment for localised prostate cancer. Eur Urol 68:186-193, 2015
14. Ewing CM, Ray AM, Lange EM, et al: Germline mutations in HOXB13 and prostate-cancer risk. N Engl J Med 366:141-149,
2012
15. Xu J, Lange EM, Lu L, et al: HOXB13 is a susceptibility gene for prostate cancer: Results from the International Consortium
for Prostate Cancer Genetics (ICPCG). Hum Genet 132:5-14, 2013
16. Akbari MR, Trachtenberg J, Lee J, et al: Association between germline HOXB13 G84E mutation and risk of prostate cancer.
J Natl Cancer Inst 104:1260-1262, 2012
17. Breyer JP, Avritt TG, McReynolds KM, et al: Confirmation of the HOXB13 G84E germline mutation in familial prostate
cancer. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 21:1348-1353, 2012
18. Karlsson R, Aly M, Clements M, et al: A population-based assessment of germline HOXB13 G84E mutation and prostate
cancer risk. Eur Urol 65:169-176, 2014
19. Klu´
zniak W, Wokołorczyk D, Kashyap A, et al: The G84E mutation in the HOXB13 gene is associated with an increased risk
of prostate cancer in Poland. Prostate 73:542-548, 2013
20. Laitinen VH, Wahlfors T, Saaristo L, et al: HOXB13 G84E mutation in Finland: Population-based analysis of prostate,
breast, and colorectal cancer risk. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 22:452-460, 2013
21. Stott-Miller M, Karyadi DM, Smith T, et al: HOXB13 mutations in a population-based, case-control study of prostate
cancer. Prostate 73:634-641, 2013
22. Gudmundsson J, Sulem P, Gudbjartsson DF, et al: A study based on whole-genome sequencing yields a rare variant at 8q24
associated with prostate cancer. Nat Genet 44:1326-1329, 2012
23. Witte JS, Mefford J, Plummer SJ, et al: HOXB13 mutation and prostate cancer: Studies of siblings and aggressive disease.
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 22:675-680, 2013
24. Grindedal EM, Møller P, Eeles R, et al: Germ-line mutations in mismatch repair genes associated with prostate cancer.
Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 18:2460-2467, 2009
25. Haraldsdottir S, Hampel H, Wei L, et al: Prostate cancer incidence in males with Lynch syndrome. Genet Med 16:553-557,
2014
26. Bauer CM, Ray AM, Halstead-Nussloch BA, et al: Hereditary prostate cancer as a feature of Lynch syndrome. Fam Cancer
10:37-42, 2011
27. Raymond VM, Mukherjee B, Wang F, et al: Elevated risk of prostate cancer among men with Lynch syndrome. J Clin Oncol
31:1713-1718, 2013
28. Ryan S, Jenkins MA, Win AK: Risk of prostate cancer in Lynch syndrome: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Cancer
Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 23:437-449, 2014
29. Rosty C, Walsh MD, Lindor NM, et al: High prevalence of mismatch repair deficiency in prostate cancers diagnosed in
mismatch repair gene mutation carriers from the colon cancer family registry. Fam Cancer 13:573-582, 2014
30. Cybulski C, Wokołorczyk D, Klu´
zniak W, et al: An inherited NBN mutation is associated with poor prognosis prostate
cancer. Br J Cancer 108:461-468, 2013
31. Pritchard CC, Mateo J, Walsh MF, et al: Inherited DNA-repair gene mutations in men with metastatic prostate cancer. N
Engl J Med 375:443-453, 2016
32. Na R, Zheng SL, Han M, et al: Germline mutations in ATM and BRCA1/2 distinguish risk for lethal and indolent prostate
cancer and are associated with early age at death. Eur Urol 71:740-747, 2017
33. Mateo J, Carreira S, Sandhu S, et al: DNA-repair defects and olaparib in metastatic prostate cancer. N Engl J Med 373:1697-
1708, 2015
34. Cybulski C, G´
orski B, Debniak T, et al: NBS1 is a prostate cancer susceptibility gene. Cancer Res 64:1215-1219, 2004
© 2017 by American Society of Clinical Oncology
JOURNAL OF CLINICAL ONCOLOGY
Giri et al
Downloaded from ascopubs.org by Erasmus MC - Medische Bibliotheek on February 12, 2018 from 145.005.087.233
Copyright © 2018 American Society of Clinical Oncology. All rights reserved.
