 1
Scientific RepoRts | 7:45141 | DOI: 10.1038/srep45141
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Characterisation of mental health 
conditions in social media using 
Informed Deep Learning
George Gkotsis1, Anika Oellrich1, Sumithra Velupillai1,2, Maria Liakata3, Tim J. P. Hubbard4, 
Richard J. B. Dobson1,5 & Rina Dutta1
The number of people affected by mental illness is on the increase and with it the burden on health and 
social care use, as well as the loss of both productivity and quality-adjusted life-years. Natural language 
processing of electronic health records is increasingly used to study mental health conditions and risk 
behaviours on a large scale. However, narrative notes written by clinicians do not capture first-hand 
the patients’ own experiences, and only record cross-sectional, professional impressions at the point 
of care. Social media platforms have become a source of ‘in the moment’ daily exchange, with topics 
including well-being and mental health. In this study, we analysed posts from the social media platform 
Reddit and developed classifiers to recognise and classify posts related to mental illness according 
to 11 disorder themes. Using a neural network and deep learning approach, we could automatically 
recognise mental illness-related posts in our balenced dataset with an accuracy of 91.08% and select 
the correct theme with a weighted average accuracy of 71.37%. We believe that these results are a first 
step in developing methods to characterise large amounts of user-generated content that could support 
content curation and targeted interventions.
Mental and substance use disorders are the leading cause of years lived with disability worldwide and in 2010 
accounted for 7.4% of years of productive life lost due to disability1. Natural language processing of electronic 
health records (EHRs) is increasingly being used to study mental illness2 and risk behaviours in much closer 
detail than previously3. However, narrative notes are written by clinicians who record those positive findings 
and relevant negatives that guide their subsequent diagnosis and treatment plan for the patient4. Although EHRs 
allow clinicians to synthesise disparate facts making them interpretable by other clinicians, they do not “paint a 
full picture” of the patient experience of a mental health problem, particularly as patients may answer interview 
questions in a manner that they perceive will be viewed favourably by their clinician. Moreover, as patient records 
are only written based on meetings with their healthcare provider, critical changes in patient behaviour and well-
being may not be recognised either immediately or at all due to a time delay in reporting, thus preventing certain 
real time interventions.
Social media is changing the way people self-identify as suffering from a disorder and how they communicate 
with others with similar experiences, often asking about side effects from treatments, or sharing coping skills, and 
thereby feeling less isolation or stigma. Studying popular social media platforms such as Twitter and Reddit5,6 
holds the key to understanding what concerns patients (rather than clinicians) most. Furthermore, this type of 
large-scale user-generated content offers the opportunity to understand mechanisms underlying mental health 
conditions at an unprecedented level. For instance, studies of children and adolescents have already shown that 
high daily use of social networking sites may be independently associated with poor self-rating of mental health 
and experiences of higher levels of psychological distress and suicidal ideation7.
Following on from our initial study8, here we present the second phase of our research on classifying 
user-generated content from Reddit that is related to different types of mental health conditions. We aimed to 
study the most epidemiologically prevalent and clinically burdensome mental health conditions: depression, 
bipolar disorder, anxiety disorders, schizophrenia, as described in the study by Whiteford et al.1. As in this most 
1King’s College London, IoPPN, London, SE5 8AF, UK. 2School of Computer Science and Communication, 
KTH, Stockholm. 3Department of Computer Science, University of Warwick, Coventry. 4King’s College London, 
Department of Medical & Molecular Genetics, London, SE1 9RT. 5Farr Institute of Health Informatics Research, UCL 
Institute of Health Informatics, University College London, London, WC1E 6BT, UK. Correspondence and requests for 
materials should be addressed to G.G. (email: george.gkotsis@kcl.ac.uk)
Received: 22 December 2016
Accepted: 15 February 2017
Published: 22 March 2017
OPEN
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
2
Scientific RepoRts | 7:45141 | DOI: 10.1038/srep45141
recent global clinical study, we also studied drug use disorders: general addiction, opiate addiction and alcohol-
ism separately. With as many as 80% of suicide deaths attributable to mental and substance use disorders it was 
also relevant to study both suicide and self-harm behaviour. We captured pervasive developmental disorders by 
studying autism and regarded it as important to also include borderline personality disorder as an important 
example of a group for whom sparse global epidemiological data is available1 but who form a large, and active, 
online community.
In this paper, we address the problem of automated classification of mental health-related content on a social 
media platform. Our long-term goal is to not only aid clinical researchers, epidemiologists and policy makers in 
understanding and addressing communications on social media, but also to provide support for people suffer-
ing from mental illness. Here, we propose an approach to automatically identify Reddit posts related to mental 
health (binary classification) and then classify mental health-related posts according to theme-based subred-
dit groupings (multiclass classification) using deep learning techniques. Accompanied with manual content and 
topic analysis, we employ a theme-based approach to this problem, and compare results with alternative machine 
learning baselines. With Reddit providing monitoring and support through volunteers, being able to classify posts 
according to themes could enable alerting moderators by reposting posts to relevant communication threads if 
they have not been posted there yet. We also believe that the results and the methodology presented here is useful 
to gain a deeper understanding and to characterise language and content in these types of forums, and could be 
the first step in the development of targeted interventions using social media.
Results
The basis of this study relies on the analysis of data extracted from Reddit. Reddit is a social media platform 
with over 234 million users (https://about.reddit.com/advertise/, accessed November 2016) that communicate 
in topic-specific communities, called subreddits. A report issued by PewResearchCenter showed that 6% of adult 
internet users frequently visit Reddit, and men are twice as likely than women to access Reddit contents9. Posts 
are not character-limited and users can freely express their thoughts in as many words and in as much detail as 
they wish. Subreddits can be created by users and there is no restriction on this, even when a similar subreddit 
already exists. As a consequence, there may be several subreddits discussing a specific mental health condition.
In order to assess whether or not posts are relevant to one mental health condition, and which health condi-
tion a relevant post belongs to, we developed an approach that combines manual assessment steps with automated 
topic detection and the application of deep learning classification of Reddit data.
The general steps in our study are illustrated in Fig. 1 and further explained in the methods section. The first 
step includes the storage and indexing of the complete Reddit dataset (1). From this set, a semi-supervised dis-
covery of relevant, mental health-related subreddits is applied (2). These subreddits are further analysed through 
a manual assessment step and the final list of subreddits is selected (3). The fourth step includes the grouping 
of subreddits that share the same mental health-related theme (4). The preparation of a control dataset is then 
performed (5), to be used for the binary classification task of posts as containing mental health-related content or 
not. The final steps include topic detection applied on our themes for confirmation of relevant content (6) and the 
two tasks of content (binary and multiclass) classification (7).
Manual analysis and characterisation of subreddits. 
A manual content analysis was performed inde-
pendently by two researchers. The aim was to reach a conclusion as to whether the post content reflects the mental 
health condition it relates to, i.e. the name of the subreddit. Ten random samples from each of the 16 subreddits 
(see methods section about the selection of the subreddits) were extracted, resulting in a set (gold standard) of 
mental health-related themes.
This manual analysis revealed that the post content in the majority of the subreddits was relevant to the men-
tal health condition its title suggests. Most commonly, the posts were introduced by a descriptive section where 
the author of the post gave some context to the reason for writing, followed by a request for advice or help. The 
descriptive section typically contained highly relevant terms and condition-specific content.
One subreddit related to neurodevelopmental disorders (Aspergers) was deemed to be mainly distantly related 
to the condition itself, as a large proportion of posts (6/10) were not directly condition-related (e.g. requesting 
advice about recently diagnosed family members without details about the condition). Therefore, this was the 
Figure 1. Overall workflow of our approach. 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
3
Scientific RepoRts | 7:45141 | DOI: 10.1038/srep45141
only subreddit where the assumption that a subreddit post content is characteristic of its mental health condition 
did not hold, and it was excluded from the gold standard.
For the remaining 15 subreddits, the conclusion was that the post content was indeed characteristic of the 
intended mental health condition. Seven of these could be grouped into three mental health condition themes, 
resulting in a total of 11 themes (see Table 1).
The language in each of the resulting mental illness themes often contained specific references related to 
symptoms, treatments or experiences. The depression subreddit (by far the largest in terms of size: 42% of the total 
mental health related posts) was most disparate. For instance, it was common to find descriptions of situations 
and events experienced by post authors who were not necessarily diagnosed with depression, but where the user 
was saddened or negatively affected by some circumstance and used the word depressed colloquially rather than 
in a medical sense.
The themes related to self harming and suicide (selfharm and SuicideWatch) often contained explicit references 
to actions and thoughts, highly relevant to the condition. The drug use disorder themes (opiates, cripplingalcoholism 
 
and addiction) typically contained mentions of specific substances, medications and drugs, in combination with 
requests for help or advise (e.g. experiences with changing or trying specific drugs). Posts in the cripplingalco-
holism subreddit were often more implicit, with a language use more indicative of being under the influence, 
rather than explicitly listing condition-related content. The only other subreddit related to neurodevelopmen-
tal disorders (autism) did, unlike the content in the Aspergers subreddit, predominantly contain disease-related 
descriptions about family members or close relatives along with questions about others’ experiences or requests 
for help related to the condition.
Topic detection on mental health-related themes. 
As the manual characterisation was conducted 
only on a small set of posts for each of the subreddits, we added an additional assessment step of the generated 
themes using topic modelling. Topic modelling approaches use probability distributions of words to determine 
the topics that are represented in a collection of textual data. In this context, a topic is a collection of words that 
are assumed to be semantically related. This means that if we are able to extract topics that are closely related to 
the themes that we were hoping to represent, it is likely that the grouping of the themes is correct. Furthermore, 
the topics in themselves can provide some insights into what it is that patients and/or carers are most concerned 
about when facing a mental health condition.
The topic models we obtained for the 11 themes described in the previous section showed high relevance 
between the content of the posts and the particular mental health condition theme they had been assigned to, 
in line with the conclusions of the manual assessment. The entire list of topic models can be found in our sup-
plement. Looking across the topic models of all the themes, we can see that there are various aspects of mental 
illnesses covered: symptoms, medications, potential side effects, treatment alternatives and impacts/consequences 
on life. For example, one of the topics formed for the anxiety theme (see topic 9, supplement) contains words such 
as ‘panic’
, ‘attack’
, ‘feel’
, ‘like’
, and ‘heart’
. Anxiety sufferers in particular often see their general practitioner (GP) 
because they assume they have had a heart attack rather than suffering from anxiety. Furthermore, palpitations 
are a common symptom of anxiety, especially when panic attacks are present10. Similarly, one of the topics related 
to the bipolar theme (see topic 4, supplement) contains words like ‘lamictal’
, ‘seroquel’
, ‘lithium’
, ‘take’
, ‘meds’ and 
‘taking’
. In addition to words indicating the existence of a prescription for the medication, all the medications 
mentioned are used as mood stabilisers in the treatment of bipolar disorder.
In our manual analysis, two of the themes were highlighted as being less homogenous (depression) or diverg-
ing from the rest of the themes (cripplingalcoholism). However, in the topic analysis, we can still see clusters form-
ing that are relevant to both conditions and the nature of the subreddit. For example, one of the clusters (see topic 
5, supplement) for depression includes the words ‘don’t’
, ‘job’
, ‘money’
, ‘pay’
, ‘live’ and ‘life’
, which could allude to 
the fact that people suffering from depression have difficulties keeping up with the responsibilities of a job, which 
may result in loss of income and the creation of obstacles in life11. The cripplingalcoholism theme has e.g. a cluster 
 
(see topic 2, supplement) containing words such as ‘like’
, ‘cheers’
, ‘drinking’
, ‘day’
, ‘happy’ and ’drink’
, which sug-
gests a glorifying aspect to being alcohol-dependent. In fact, the subreddit itself tries to involve not only those 
who want to defeat their addiction but also those who are content with possessing this addiction. The aforemen-
tioned cluster clearly shows evidence for the latter group of posters.
Classification of mental health content. 
The process of automatically classifying Reddit posts was sepa-
rated into two individual tasks. The first task was to classify the posts as being either mental health related or not 
(binary classification). The second task focussed on the classification of the manually defined and automatically 
evaluated themes, to determine which mental health theme the post belongs to (multiclass (n = 
 11) classification). 
Results presented below predominantly concern the output of the Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) based 
approach, since this consistently yielded the best prediction. For the training and evaluation of all classifiers, we 
used identical, randomly extracted, 80–20 training-test split across the entire dataset, and we report on the results 
concerning the test dataset. Further details about the classifiers and settings are presented in the Methods section.
Binary classification of mental from non-mental health related content. The best approach (CNN) yields an accu-
racy of 91.08% for an almost balanced dataset: 52% of the overall posts are related to mental health (see Tables 2 
and 3). The other classifiers’ results were lower, with the Feed Forward (FF) being marginally worse (90.79%). The 
text was preprocessed identically for all four classifiers. A linear classifier achieves 85.84% accuracy whereas an 
SVM-based classifier achieves 86% accuracy.
Multiclass classification of mental health themes. The second set of results relate to the task of classifying men-
tal health-related posts into one of the 11 themes. Figure 2 shows the resulting confusion matrix using a CNN 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
4
Scientific RepoRts | 7:45141 | DOI: 10.1038/srep45141
approach. The figure shows that the left-to-right diagonal holds high values, and in the majority of the cases, the 
Reddit posts are classified correctly.
Table 4 presents the evaluation metrics (precision, recall and F-Measure) for each individual theme as well as 
the weighted average when using the CNN-based approach. The table shows that all results remain high, result-
ing in an overall weighted average of 0.72 precision, 0.72 recall and 0.72 F-Measure (FM). Results for individual 
themes vary, ranging from 0.52 FM (addiction) to 0.80 (Opiates). Precision is in general higher (> 
0.70) than 
recall, except for Opiates, depression and cripplingalcoholism.
Finally, Table 5 illustrates the overall accuracy for all four different classifiers. The Mean Reciprocal Rank 
(MRR) measure weighs in the probability distribution for each prediction and takes into account the position 
 
(in ranked order) of the true class in comparison to the actual prediction. More details on this measure are pro-
vided in the Methods section. As expected, MRR is consistently higher than accuracy for all classifiers and also 
shows that posts can transcend multiple themes (see Discussion section).
Discussion
In our study, we addressed the problem of characterising and automatically classifying user-generated content on 
the social media platform Reddit for the case of mental health conditions. We manually investigated data orig-
inating from several subreddits to group the posts into overarching themes. The derived grouping of posts into 
themes was further evaluated by applying topic detection algorithms and results suggested that the theme-based 
grouping was valid. We then applied two classification strategies, a binary classification to determine whether 
or not a post contains mental health related content, and multiclass classification to identify the mental health 
condition (theme) a post is referring to. Our results show that by applying a CNN approach in the binary classi-
fication task, we achieve an accuracy of 91.08% in distinguising the mental health related posts from unrelated 
posts. Further to that, we can identify Reddit posts as belonging to one of the 11 defined themes with an overall 
weighted precision of 0.72 and a recall of 0.71 (0.72 FM). Taken in conjunction, these results suggest that we can 
Theme
#Posts
Description
BPD
11,880
Forum to discuss aspects of Borderline Personality 
Disorder either as a sufferer, someone closely related 
to a sufferer, or someone interested in this disorder
bipolar (BipolarSOs, BipolarReddit, bipolar)
41,636
Communities to discuss issues surrounding Bipolar 
Disorder; while bipolar and BipolarReddit focus 
on sufferers and their support, BipolarSOs invites 
contributions from people that are in a relationship 
with someone suffering from Bipolar Disorder
schizophrenia
4,963
Subreddit to discuss schizophrenia-type disorders 
and schizophrenia-related issues such as psychosis
Anxiety
57,523
Forum for anything that is related to an anxiety 
disorder; does not distinguish between sufferer or 
someone related to a sufferer
depression
197,436
A community for helping anyone struggling with 
depression; posters are not limited to those who 
have received a diagnosis by their GP/hospital 
doctor and the emphasis is on supporting others in 
their struggle with depression
selfharm (selfharm, StopSelfHarm)
17,102
Forums to discuss aspects of people self-harming; 
while selfharm aims to build a community of 
sufferers, StopSelfHarm focusses on supporting 
anyone wanting to stop self-harming even if 
through a related person
SuicideWatch
90,518
Forum to support individuals thinking about 
suicide or people thinking of someone else being at 
risk of suicide
addiction
4,360
Community to discuss any physical or psychological 
dependence, e.g. drugs or video games; encourages 
self post, but does not exclude non-sufferers
cripplingalcoholism
38,241
Community for alcohol-dependent people, with an 
emphasis on the acceptance of the condition, also 
stretching to embracing their condition
Opiates (OpiatesRecovery, opiates)
65,143
Forums to discuss opiate addiction; while 
opiates addresses all aspects of the addiction, 
OpiatesRecovery focusses strongly on supporting 
everyone wanting to withdraw from opiates; Posting 
to opiates is restricted to people aged over 18 years
autism
9,470
Forum for anything related to an Autism Spectrum 
Disorder; provides information and support to 
anyone facing a diagnosis whether for themselves or 
someone else
Non-mental health
476,388
Control dataset generated using posts from users 
on subreddits outlined above, who have posted on 
other subreddits that are not mental health related
Table 1.  Summary and description of the mental health condition themes and their originating subreddits 
used in this study. Where appropriate, multiple subreddits participating in one theme are presented in brackets.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
5
Scientific RepoRts | 7:45141 | DOI: 10.1038/srep45141
reliably identify mental health content and determine the mental health theme that is further referred to in the 
post, assuming that there is sufficient data for disorders to train the model on.
In our approach, we assessed posts from several subreddits that were grouped into themes. Despite the man-
ual and automated verification of the generated themes, there is an intrinsic overlap of post content across the 
themes due to the relatedness of mental health conditions. For example, as can be seen from the confusion matrix 
in Fig 2, a large number of Opiates posts are misclassified as cripplingalcoholism and vice versa. Both themes 
refer to a substance addiction, indicating shared language features to a larger degree than with other subreddits. 
Furthermore, it is worth noting that both subreddits contain strong language that is not as clearly represented 
in any of the other subreddits, and both subreddits allow for posts that embrace addiction. Similarly, a high rate 
of posts are misclassified between the selfharm and SuicideWatch subreddits, both of which feature behaviours 
associated with mental and emotional distress.
FF
CNN
Linear
SVM
Precision
92.05%
91.76%
87.31%
88.50%
Recall
88.83%
89.83%
83.57%
81.75%
FM
0.90
0.91
0.85
0.85
Accuracy
90.78%
91.08%
86.01%
85.87%
Table 2.  Evaluation results for the binary classification of mental health posts using all classifiers. 
FF = Feed Forward, CNN = Convolutional Neural Network, SVM = Support Vector Machine. FM = F-measure 
(harmonic mean of precision and recall).
Non-mental
Mental
Non-mental
87821
7361
Mental
9277
81986
Table 3.  Confusion matrix for the binary classification of mental from non-mental health content using a 
Convolutional Neural Network classifier. Results concern the test dataset (20% posts held out from training). 
Rows = actual labels, Columns = predicted labels.
Figure 2. Multiclass classification confusion matrix using a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) 
classifier. 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
6
Scientific RepoRts | 7:45141 | DOI: 10.1038/srep45141
We chose to use topic modelling as a means of automatically obtaining key characteristic words and phrases 
from the posts, as it has been applied successfully in similar settings in other studies (e.g. Schwartz et al. 201612). 
The topic models (shown in supplement; each topic is using the 10 most descriptive keywords) align with the 
manually created themes, and an extension of this work could be to further optimise the validation approach by 
scaling the number of topics retrieved with the number of available posts in the theme.
The control group built for the first task (see section “Control dataset generation” in Methods for more details) 
utilises the author information of users who post on mental health-related subreddits. We opted for this approach 
due to the long computation times required for calculating age and gender estimates for individual posts and 
the number of posts that need to be matched. In general, age and gender matching is desired to avoid influences 
originating from gender or age differences in language use. While we used all users posting on mental health 
subreddits, only a subset of authors appears in the control dataset (around 9% of the users; 32,280 appear in the 
non mental health subreddits and 348,040 appear in the mental health subreddits). Moreover, this intersection of 
32,280 users/authors is responsible for 62,513 posts in the mental health subreddits, which corresponds to only 
13.6% of the mental health posts (see Supplement, Figure S1 for more details). This may be partially explained by 
users not wanting to be recognised by other Reddit users or peers and therefore disguising their identity by using 
so called throwaway accounts13. Hence, the results presented here concern cases where authors between the two 
classes are largely different.
Our study does not focus on such cases, where authors post simultaneously under both classes. It has been 
demonstrated in the past that characteristic linguistic features are apparent in those suffering from mental 
illness12,14–16. This means that our dataset could have limitations in being applicable to assess linguistic differences 
between mental health and non-mental health related posts, as linguistic features are likely to be present in both 
the mental health and control posts. With regards to our results, this is likely to increase the difficulty of our 
classification task, as we are aiming to use the content to determine mental health and non-mental health posts. 
On the contrary, if we were to create a control group that is entirely unrelated, it is possible that our performance 
measures (currently best-performing: 91.08% accuracy for CNN) might increase.
Concerning the classification tasks and the deep learning approaches presented, we experimented with differ-
ent settings and thresholds. We considered pre-trained word vectors as input to the classifiers (e.g. using Glove’s 
Common Crawl containing 840 Billion tokens17), but the results did not improve. We attribute this to the size of 
our dataset which is adequate for representing the language within the corpus. Furthermore, we experimented 
with increasing the complexity of our networks in different parts, such as the dimensions of the input vectors 
(16), the overall topology of the network, as well as different activation and objective functions. In all the config-
urations experimented with, the accuracy of the classification did not improve, which is why we kept the simplest 
configuration.
Our results for the multiclass classification are satisfactory, and provide some interesting insights. There is 
some variability in class-level results, for instance, for Opiates, FM is as high as 0.80, while for addiction results 
are lower (0.52). When studying the confusion matrix (Fig. 2), the most common misclassification is depression, 
for which there are two main explanations. The first reason is that depression is the most populous class, so the 
training of the classifier may have resulted in a bias favouring this class. The second reason is that depression  
is often a secondary symptom of other mental health problems and shows considerable comorbidity with 
other mental health disorders18. This is also confirmed through our manual survey of the content of the posts 
 
(see section “Manual characterisation of subreddits”), where it was found that posts from different themes may 
Theme
Precision
Recall
FM
BPD
0.88
0.46
0.60
bipolar
0.77
0.60
0.67
schizophrenia
0.75
0.48
0.58
Anxiety
0.83
0.75
0.79
depression
0.70
0.77
0.73
selfharm
0.70
0.58
0.64
suicidewatch
0.62
0.59
0.61
addiction
0.72
0.41
0.52
cripplingalcoholism
0.68
0.76
0.72
Opiates
0.76
0.86
0.80
autism
0.84
0.71
0.77
Weighted average
0.72
0.71
0.72
Table 4.  Multiclass classification evaluation metrics using a Convolutional Neural Network.
FF
CNN
Linear
SVM
Accuracy
70.82%
71.37%
58.72%
64.02%
MRR
0.82
0.83
0.74
0.78
Table 5.  Overall evaluation results for four different classification approaches. FF = Feed Forward, 
CNN = Convolutional Neural Network, SVM = Support Vector Machine. MRR = Mean Reciprocal Rank.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
7
Scientific RepoRts | 7:45141 | DOI: 10.1038/srep45141
also concern depression, and where posts in the depression subreddit may be related to more than just depression. 
To further support the above, we conducted an experiment whereby we removed the most prevalent class-theme 
(depression, which accounts for 42% of the posts) and repeated the same multiclass classification task. Contrary 
to the typical behaviour in such settings, the removal of the most prevalent class resulted in an increase in the 
accuracy. More specifically, all classifiers improved and CNN performs the best with 79,8% accuracy (more than 
8% improvement). This finding further supports the notion that the classes in our problem are neither orthogonal 
nor mutually exclusive in nature.
When considering a less strict evaluation metric (i.e. instead of True/False as in classification tasks) such 
as Mean Reciprocal Rank (i.e. the position at which a theme ranked compared to the actual class), the results 
improve significantly (more than 12% across all 4 classifiers). This finding also highlights the fact that some of 
the themes are highly inter-related and not always distinguishable as separate and exclusive classes. For example, 
a common symptom of depression is suicidal ideation, which in consequence means that a person posting on 
depression may express suicidal thoughts, which are the content of communications on SuicideWatch.
Concerning the binary classification task, we notice that the simple FF network achieves similar performance 
to the more sophisticated CNN (less than 0.3% drop in accuracy), concluding that the binary classification prob-
lem is captured sufficiently using a more simple neural network.
One limitation of our approach is the number of mental health themes that are used in the multiclass classifi-
cation task. In order to cover more themes, our model built for the multiclass classification would require addi-
tional data. However, the way the approach is implemented, more themes can be added over time and the only 
cost is that the prediction model needs to be retrained and performance re-assessed.
In conclusion, our suggested method is applicable to the identification of posts relevant to a mental health 
subreddit as well as the identification of the actual mental health theme they relate to. Being able to classify posts 
in this manner is the first step in the direction of targeted interventions, e.g. by redirecting posts that seem in need 
of urgent moderator attention. In future work, we aim to further improve the classification into mental health 
themes (multiclass classification), address inter-related themes e.g. by employing hierarchical structures, increase 
the coverage of mental health themes and devise an “urgency scheme” to come closer to the aforementioned noti-
fication system in the frame of real-time, personalised interventions.
Methods
Storage and indexing of complete collection of Reddit posts. 
For the purpose of this study, we 
downloaded a dataset from https://redd.it/3mg812 that contained all the posts made to Reddit (independent from 
subreddits) from 01.01.2006 to 31.08.2015. This dataset is publicly available and was generated by a Reddit user 
through accessing the Reddit Application Programming Interface (https://www.reddit.com/dev/api). In order to 
discover the relevant subreddits, we used the Elasticsearch (https://www.elastic.co/) search engine to index the 
complete dataset. Our analysis reports on aggregated data only, which adheres to Reddit’s published terms and 
conditions.
Discovery of subreddits. 
As of November 2016, there are over 900,000 subreddits (http://redditmetrics.
com/history). Each subreddit invites users to participate in a discussion concentrated around a specific topic. The 
topics can vary, from a general to a very specific topic. For instance, e.g. the subreddit Ask Me Anything (AMA) is 
about a single person answering questions posed by the public and has around 140,000 subscribers. Similarly, the 
subreddit Playstation invites users around the popular game console and has 36,000 subscribers. In order to iden-
tify the subreddits that are related to mental health, we adopted a semi-supervised approach. The first step was 
to leverage on a pre-existing keyword list curated by domain experts, for the purpose of identifying social media 
content linked to mental health19. From the obtained candidate list of subreddits, we assessed the subreddits with 
a high number of posts and manually selected those that corresponded to the conditions of interest for this study. 
All relevant subreddits and their descriptions are provided in the Supplementary material.
Manual assessment and selection of subreddits. 
To gain a deeper understanding of the nature of 
posts on these subreddits, we conducted a manual characterisation of posts contained in the selected subreddits. 
For this purpose,10 random posts (including their title) were collected from each of the subreddits. Two of the 
authors of this manuscript (AO, SV) independently read through these posts and collected notes as to whether 
the post was relevant to the condition the subreddit was selected from, the post concerned the poster or some-
one else and what the type of the post was (request for help, engaging, sharing story, etc.). A joint discussion 
was held to finalise the set of subreddits and themes to use for classification and identify potential differences in 
interpretation.
Control dataset generation. 
In order to identify Reddit posts concerning mental health, we generated 
a control dataset that is non-mental health related. The first step included the collection of all authors from our 
mental health dataset together with the date of their first (index) posting in any one of the mental health subred-
dits. For each author-date pair, we retrieved all of their posts across any other subreddit and defined these as 
non-mental health related. In order to avoid time overlap in the generation of the control dataset, we only kept 
non-mental health posts by authors that were at least 180 days older than their index post in a mental health 
subreddit. The 180 day window was chosen both to ensure a time clinically distant from the mental state at the 
index post of the mental health subreddit, and to result in a balanced dataset.
Topic detection. 
As the manual characterisation only covered a very small proportion of posts, we aimed 
to verify the grouping of the posts by building topic models across the themes. Topic models identify groups of 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
8
Scientific RepoRts | 7:45141 | DOI: 10.1038/srep45141
words that are related to each other and therefore constitute a topic, presented in textual data. Here, we used the 
Latent Dirichlet Allocation implementation as provided by the Python package gensim20 while setting the number 
of topics to 10 (n = 
 10) and rest of the parameters to default. Data from each of the relevant themes was handled 
and processed individually. For this purpose, if a theme contained more than one subreddit, all the posts of the 
relevant subreddits were merged together before processing. We removed English language stop words as indi-
cated in NLTK21 (frequently used words, such as “and” and “the”
, that are expected to carry little characterising 
information; see supplement for more information) from all the posts before determining topics.
The underlying assumption when using topic models in this case is that a grouping of subreddits in cohesive 
groups will result in topic models that are relevant to aspects of the corresponding theme (e.g. symptoms or 
treatments). While topic modelling can be used for validating the grouping of subreddits, it possesses the added 
benefit of providing insights into the contents discussed on the subreddits investigated.
Evaluation metrics. 
In our evaluation, we used the following metrics:
∩
=
precision
{relevant documents}
{retrieved documents}
{retrieved documents}
∩
=
recall
{relevant documents}
{retrieved documents}
{relevant documents}
=
⋅
⋅
+
FM
2
precision
recall
precision
recall
∑
=
=
P
MRR
1
1
rank
i
P
i
1
where P is the set of classified posts and ranki refers to the rank position of the relevant theme for the i-th post.
Classification of Reddit posts. 
We considered two different classification problems. The first concerns the 
binary classification of posts as being relevant to mental health or not. The second classification problem deals 
with the multiclass classification of the 11 mental health themes resulting from the manual and topic assessment 
steps. For both tasks, we applied the same methodology and evaluation approach, which includes training four 
different classifiers (FF, CNN, Linear regression, SVM, explained below).
The first step towards classifying the Reddit posts was to preprocess the corpus. This step included the con-
catenation of the post title with the body of the post. We then transformed all text into lower case. Afterwards, 
we prepared the text to be represented as Word Embeddings22 within the Neural Network. This was achieved by 
creating a word dictionary from the corpus itself, for which we kept the 5,000 most frequent words (including 
stopwords, which accounts for 99.999% of the total number words). The last step was to replace all words with 
their indices, so as to represent each post as an array of integers. For the words that were not frequent enough 
(lower than 0.001% of the total number of words), a single, unique integer was assigned. Finally, we only kept the 
first 300 words/integers for each post.
The first two classifiers are based on a Neural Network (NN) architecture. Both include the same number of 
layers and are trained with a similar approach. The first classifier is a Feed Forward NN (see Fig. 3a). The second 
classifier implements a Convolutional NN, with a filter window of 3 (see Fig. 3b). The first layer takes as input 
Figure 3. Architecture for the Feed Forward (a) and Convolutional Neural Network (b) deep learning 
approaches.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
9
Scientific RepoRts | 7:45141 | DOI: 10.1038/srep45141
the array of integers representing the content and implements an Embedding layer where each word vector has 
a dimension of 16. The intermediate layer is implemented using a dense structure with 64 (FF) and 256 (CNN) 
neurons that are used to represent the feature space. The final layer contains the number of output nodes needed 
for the classification task (i.e. 2 for the binary and 11 for the multiclass classification).
As shown in Fig. 3, the first layer in both networks is an Embedding layer that turns an array of integers into a 
vector of size 16 (word embeddings). For the CNN, we added an extra, convolutional layer with a 5-length filter 
and max pooling with length 2. For the FF, the equivalent was a flattened layer. The next step for both networks is 
a dropout filter of value 0.25 (to avoid overfitting) and a dense layer of 64 and 256 neurons for the FF and CNN, 
respectively. We used rectified linear unit (ReLU) as activation function and the objective function was categorical 
cross entropy. For the training process, we set a maximum of 100 epochs with a stopping criterion of 5 epochs for 
no increase in the objective function. For both networks and classification problems, training stopped before 25 
epochs had been reached.
We also considered two more classification approaches as a baseline. Both use the same input as the NNs 
described above but implement a linear regression and an SVM-based classification approach. We consider 
these to be our baselines. The details for these approaches are provided in the supplement. All four classification 
approaches were trained using the same training-test split (80/20) on the dataset and the same preprocessing 
steps.
References
1. Whiteford, H. A. et al. Global burden of disease attributable to mental and substance use disorders: findings from the global burden 
of disease study 2010. The Lancet 382, 1575–1586 (2013).
2. Perera, G. et al. Cohort profile of the south london and maudsley nhs foundation trust biomedical research centre (slam brc) case 
register: current status and recent enhancement of an electronic mental health record-derived data resource. BMJ open 6, e008721 
(2016).
3. Barak-Corren, Y. et al. Predicting suicidal behavior from longitudinal electronic health records. American journal of psychiatry appi-
ajp (2016).
4. Shapiro, J. S. et al. Document ontology: supporting narrative documents in electronic health records. In AMIA (2005).
5. Coppersmith, G., Dredze, M., Harman, C. & Hollingshead, K. From adhd to sad: Analyzing the language of mental health on twitter 
through self-reported diagnoses. In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Computational Linguistics and Clinical Psychology: From 
Linguistic Signal to Clinical Reality 1–10 (2015).
6. De Choudhury, M. & De, S. Mental health discourse on reddit: Self-disclosure, social support, and anonymity. In Eighth International 
AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media (2014).
7. Sampasa-Kanyinga, H. & Lewis, R. F. Frequent use of social networking sites is associated with poor psychological functioning 
among children and adolescents. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking 18, 380–385 (2015).
8. Gkotsis, G. et al. The language of mental health problems in social media. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Computational 
Linguistics and Clinical Psychology: From Linguistic Signal to Clinical Reality 63–73 (2016).
9. Duggan, M. & Smith, A. 6% of online adults are reddit users. Pew Internet & American Life Project 3 (2013).
10. Clark, D. M. A cognitive approach to panic. Behaviour research and therapy 24, 461–470 (1986).
11. Lerner, D. & Henke, R. M. What does research tell us about depression, job performance, and work productivity? Journal of 
Occupational and Environmental Medicine 50, 401–410 (2008).
12. Schwartz, H. A. et al. Towards assessing changes in degree of depression through facebook. In Proceedings of the Workshop on 
Computational Linguistics and Clinical Psychology: From Linguistic Signal to Clinical Reality 118–125 (Citeseer, 2014).
13. Pavalanathan, U. & De Choudhury, M. Identity management and mental health discourse in social media. In Proceedings of the 24th 
International Conference on World Wide Web 315–321 (ACM, 2015).
14. Freyberg, R. et al. The write stuff: Relationships between narrative content and psychiatric illness. Narrative Inquiry 24, 28–39 
(2014).
15. Ramirez-Esparza, N., Chung, C. K., Kacewicz, E. & Pennebaker, J. W. The psychology of word use in depression forums in english 
and in spanish: Texting two text analytic approaches. In ICWSM (2008).
16. Pennebaker, J. W., Mehl, M. R. & Niederhoffer, K. G. Psychological aspects of natural language use: Our words, our selves. Annual 
review of psychology 54, 547–577 (2003).
17. Glove. http://nlp.stanford.edu/projects/glove/ (Last accessed 2016-12-01).
18. Blazer, D. G., Kessler, R. C., McGonagle, K. A. et al. The prevalence and distribution of major depression in a national community 
sample: the national comorbidity survey. The American Journal of Psychiatry 15, 24–7 (1994).
19. Kolliakou, A. et al. D7.2.2.2 - annotated corpus - final version public deliverable, pheme project (fp7-ict-611233) (2015).
20. Řehůřek, R. & Sojka, P. Software Framework for Topic Modelling with Large Corpora. In Proceedings of the LREC 2010 Workshop on 
New Challenges for NLP Frameworks, 45–50 (ELRA, Valletta, Malta, 2010) http://is.muni.cz/publication/884893/en.
21. Bird, S., Klein, E. & Loper, E. Natural language processing with Python: analyzing text with the natural language toolkit (“O’Reilly 
Media, Inc.”
, 2009).
22. Mikolov, T., Sutskever, I., Chen, K., Corrado, G. S. & Dean, J. Distributed representations of words and phrases and their 
compositionality. In Advances in neural information processing systems 3111–3119 (2013).
Acknowledgements
RD is supported by a Clinician Scientist Fellowship from the Health Foundation in partnership with the Academy 
of Medical Sciences and RD and GG are funded by the e-HOST-IT research programme. AO and RJBD would 
like to acknowledge NIHR Biomedical Research Centre for Mental Health, the Biomedical Research Unit for 
Dementia at the South London, the Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust and Kings College London. RJBD’s work is 
also supported by researchers at the National Institute for Health Research University College London Hospitals 
Biomedical Research Centre, and awards to establish the Farr Institute of Health Informatics Research, London, 
from the Medical Research Council, Arthritis Research UK, British Heart Foundation, Cancer Research UK, 
Chief Scientist Office, Economic and Social Research Council, Engineering and Physical Sciences Research 
Council, National Institute for Health Research, National Institute for Social Care and Health Research, and 
Wellcome Trust (grant MR/K006584/1). TJPH would like to acknowledge King’s College London and the NIHR 
Biomedical Research Centre at Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust and the NIHR Biomedical Research 
Centre for Mental Health. SV is supported by the Swedish Research Council (2015-00359), Marie Sklodowska 
Curie Actions, Cofund, Project INCA 600398. The authors acknowledge infrastructure support from the National 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
10
Scientific RepoRts | 7:45141 | DOI: 10.1038/srep45141
Institute for Health Research (NIHR). The views expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those of 
the NHS, the NIHR or the Department of Health.
Author Contributions
G.G. designed the study and conducted the experiments. S.V., A.O. and R.D. helped with the manual 
characterisation of the subreddits and the interpretation of the results. M.L. helped with the design of the 
experiments. G.G., A.O., S.V., M.L., T.H., R.J.D. and R.D. reviewed and contributed to the final version of the 
manuscript.
Additional Information
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at http://www.nature.com/srep
Competing Interests: The authors declare no competing financial interests.
How to cite this article: Gkotsis, G. et al. Characterisation of mental health conditions in social media using 
Informed Deep Learning. Sci. Rep. 7, 45141; doi: 10.1038/srep45141 (2017).
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. The images 
or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, 
unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons license, 
users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this 
license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
 
© The Author(s) 2017
 1
Scientific RepoRts | 7:46813 | DOI: 10.1038/srep46813
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Corrigendum: Characterisation 
of mental health conditions in 
social media using Informed Deep 
Learning
George Gkotsis, Anika Oellrich, Sumithra Velupillai, Maria Liakata, Tim J. P. Hubbard, 
Richard J. B. Dobson & Rina Dutta
Scientific Reports 7:45141; doi: 10.1038/srep45141; published online 22 March 2017; updated on 16 May 2017
One of the Supplementary Information files that accompany this study was inadvertently omitted in the original 
version of this Article. The link to this Supplementary Information file has now been added to the HTML version 
of the Article.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. The images 
or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, 
unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons license, 
users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this 
license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
 
© The Author(s) 2017
OPEN
