 48
The following organizations have endorsed this guideline: 
Epilepsy Foundation 
Child Neurology Society 
American College of Emergency Physicians 
Association of Child Neurology Nurses 
American Association of Neuroscience Nurses 
 
Epilepsy Currents, Vol. 16, No. 1 (January/February)  2016 pp. 48–61 
© American Epilepsy Society
American Epilepsy Society Guideline
 
Evidence-Based Guideline: Treatment of Convulsive Status 
Epilepticus in Children and Adults: Report of the Guideline 
Committee of the American Epilepsy Society
Tracy Glauser, MD,1 Shlomo Shinnar, MD, PhD,2 David Gloss, MD,3 Brian Alldredge, PharmD,4 Ravindra Arya, 
MD, DM,1 Jacquelyn Bainbridge, PharmD,5 Mary Bare, MSPH, RN1, Thomas Bleck, MD,6 W. Edwin Dodson, MD,7 
Lisa Garrity, PharmD,8 Andy Jagoda, MD,9 Daniel Lowenstein, MD,10 John Pellock, MD,11 James Riviello, MD,12 
Edward Sloan, MD, MPH,13 David M. Treiman, MD14
1Division of Neurology, Comprehensive Epilepsy Center, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center and University of Cincinnati College of 
Medicine, Cincinnati, OH
2Departments of Neurology, Pediatrics, and Epidemiology and Population Health, and the Comprehensive Epilepsy Management Center, Monte-
fiore Medical Center, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY
3CAMC Neurology Group, Charleston, WV
4School of Pharmacy, University of California, San Francisco, CA
5Department of Clinical Pharmacy, University of Colorado, Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Aurora, CO
6Departments of Neurological Sciences, Neurosurgery, Medicine, and Anesthesiology, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL
7Departments of Neurology and Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO
8Division of Pharmacy, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH
9Department of Emergency Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY
10Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, CA
11Division of Pediatric Neurology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA
12NYU Comprehensive Epilepsy Center, New York, NY
13Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL
14Division of Neurology, Barrow Neurological Institute, Phoenix, AZ
Address correspondence to Tracy Glauser, MD, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Division of Neurology, MLC 2015, 3333 Burnet Ave., 
Cincinnati, OH 45229-3026.
E-mail: tracy.glauser@cchmc.org
CONTEXT: The optimal pharmacologic treatment for early convulsive status epilepticus is unclear. OBJECTIVE: To analyze ef-
ficacy, tolerability and safety data for anticonvulsant treatment of children and adults with convulsive status epilepticus and use 
this analysis to develop an evidence-based treatment algorithm. DATA SOURCES: Structured literature review using MEDLINE, 
Embase, Current Contents, and Cochrane library supplemented with article reference lists. STUDY SELECTION: Randomized 
controlled trials of anticonvulsant treatment for seizures lasting longer than 5 minutes. DATA EXTRACTION: Individual studies 
were rated using predefined criteria and these results were used to form recommendations, conclusions, and an evidence-based 
treatment algorithm. RESULTS: A total of 38 randomized controlled trials were identified, rated and contributed to the assess-
ment. Only four trials were considered to have class I evidence of efficacy. Two studies were rated as class II and the remaining 
32 were judged to have class III evidence. In adults with convulsive status epilepticus, intramuscular midazolam, intravenous 
lorazepam, intravenous diazepam and intravenous phenobarbital are established as efficacious as initial therapy (Level A). Intra-
muscular midazolam has superior effectiveness compared to intravenous lorazepam in adults with convulsive status epilepticus 
without established intravenous access (Level A). In children, intravenous lorazepam and intravenous diazepam are established 
as efficacious at stopping seizures lasting at least 5 minutes (Level A) while rectal diazepam, intramuscular midazolam, intranasal 
midazolam, and buccal midazolam are probably effective (Level B). No significant difference in effectiveness has been demon-
strated between intravenous lorazepam and intravenous diazepam in adults or children with convulsive status epilepticus (Level 
A). Respiratory and cardiac symptoms are the most commonly encountered treatment-emergent adverse events associated 
with intravenous anticonvulsant drug administration in adults with convulsive status epilepticus (Level A). The rate of respiratory 
depression in patients with convulsive status epilepticus treated with benzodiazepines is lower than in patients with convul-
 49
Convulsive Status Epilepticus Guideline
Background
Traditionally, brief seizures are defined as lasting less than 5 
minutes, while prolonged seizures last between 5 and 30 min-
utes; status epilepticus is defined as more than 30 minutes of 
either 1) continuous seizure activity or 2) two or more sequen-
tial seizures without full recovery of consciousness between 
seizures (1). The 30-minute definition is based on the duration 
of convulsive status epilepticus that may lead to permanent 
neuronal injury by itself (2). Since the majority of seizures are 
brief, and once a seizure lasts more than 5 minutes it is likely 
to be prolonged (3), status treatment protocols have used 
a 5-minute definition to minimize both the risk of seizures 
reaching 30 minutes and the adverse outcomes associated 
with needlessly intervening on brief, self-limited seizures (2, 
4). This guideline follows this convention and, for purposes of 
treatment, uses the term status epilepticus to represent stud-
ies involving both prolonged seizures and traditionally defined 
status epilepticus.
Status epilepticus presents in several forms: 1) convulsive 
status epilepticus consisting of repeated generalized tonic–
clonic (GTC) seizures with persistent postictal depression of 
neurologic function between seizures; 2) nonconvulsive status 
epilepticus where seizures produce a continuous or fluctuat-
ing “epileptic twilight” state; and 3) repeated partial seizures 
manifested as focal motor signs, focal sensory symptoms, or 
focal impairment of function (e.g., aphasia) not associated with 
altered awareness (epilepsia partialis continua).
Between 50,000 and 150,000 Americans each year have 
status epilepticus (5–7), with mortality estimated at less than 
3% in children but up to 30% in adults (5, 6, 8). The goal of 
therapy is the rapid termination of both clinical and electrical 
seizure activity, since appropriate and timely therapy of status 
epilepticus reduces the associated mortality and morbidity (9). 
Ultimately, the prognosis is most strongly related to the etiol-
ogy, duration of status epilepticus, and the age of the patient 
(10–12). Basic critical care and emergency principles of therapy 
such as supporting respiration, maintaining blood pressure, 
gaining intravenous (IV) access, and identifying and treating 
the underlying cause have achieved widespread acceptance 
and are routinely implemented by both neurologists and non-
neurologists. Despite this recognition of the need to address 
status epilepticus as a critical care emergency, the goals of 
therapy and approaches to the pharmacologic treatment of 
status epilepticus continue to vary dramatically. Unfortunately, 
patients still receive inadequate treatment for a variety of rea-
sons including, but not limited to, therapy aimed at reduction 
instead of termination of seizures, use of inefficient therapies 
such as sedatives and paralytics, and administration of insuf-
ficient anticonvulsant doses.
In 1993, the Epilepsy Foundation of America asked its 
professional advisory board to convene a working group of ex-
perts to develop a treatment protocol and related educational 
materials depicting the best current medical management 
of convulsive status epilepticus. The subsequent consensus 
guideline provided physicians with a consistent, rational ap-
proach (2). Over the past 2 decades, new medical therapies 
and new clinical trial data have emerged relating directly 
to the treatment of this most feared type of seizure activity. 
Coupled with the acceptance of evidence-based rather than 
consensus-based guidelines, the Epilepsy Foundation in 2004 
and the American Epilepsy Society in 2012 began the process 
of reevaluating the existing medical literature and develop-
ing a new guideline. This writing team started their activity on 
behalf of the Epilepsy Foundation and completed their task 
with the support of the American Epilepsy Society.
Purpose of This Guideline and Definition of Terms
The goal of this current guideline is to provide evidence-based 
answers to efficacy, safety, and tolerability questions regarding 
the treatment of convulsive status epilepticus and to synthe-
size these answers into a treatment algorithm. This guideline 
focuses on convulsive status epilepticus because it is both the 
most common type of status epilepticus and is associated with 
substantial morbidity and mortality. Anticonvulsant “efficacy” 
is the ability of the drug to stop convulsive status epilepticus, 
“tolerability” involves the “incidence, severity and impact” of 
anticonvulsant related adverse effects (13, 14), “effectiveness” 
encompasses both anticonvulsant efficacy and tolerability, 
and “safety” refers to life-threatening adverse events.
The guideline’s recommendations aim to help clinicians 
worldwide understand the relevant existing evidence for 
treatment of patients with status epilepticus. The guideline 
is intended for use by individual clinicians, hospitals, health 
authorities, and providers. We recognize that this guideline 
sive status epilepticus treated with placebo indicating that respiratory problems are an important consequence of untreated 
convulsive status epilepticus (Level A). When both are available, fosphenytoin is preferred over phenytoin based on tolerability 
but phenytoin is an acceptable alternative (Level A). In adults, compared to the first therapy, the second therapy is less effective 
while the third therapy is substantially less effective (Level A). In children, the second therapy appears less effective and there are 
no data about third therapy efficacy (Level C). The evidence was synthesized into a treatment algorithm. CONCLUSIONS: Despite 
the paucity of well-designed randomized controlled trials, practical conclusions and an integrated treatment algorithm for the 
treatment of convulsive status epilepticus across the age spectrum (infants through adults) can be constructed. Multicenter, mul-
tinational efforts are needed to design, conduct and analyze additional randomized controlled trials that can answer the many 
outstanding clinically relevant questions identified in this guideline.
 50
Convulsive Status Epilepticus Guideline
will need local scrutiny and adjustment in order to make it 
relevant to the social and economic environments in which it 
will be used. This process should lead to a sense of ownership 
of any adjusted guideline, which will be essential for effective 
implementation and will lead to improvement in healthcare 
outcomes for people with convulsive status epilepticus.
Scope of This Guideline
This guideline will address the evidence regarding the treat-
ment of convulsive status epilepticus. For the purposes of this 
guideline, only studies that enrolled subjects having a seizure 
duration of at least 5 minutes were considered. The guideline’s 
analysis is presented by subject age (adult studies, pediatric 
studies), since studies arbitrarily focused on either adult or 
pediatric subjects. The guideline’s treatment algorithm is not 
age specific since 1) the disease pathophysiology of prolonged 
seizures and status epilepticus and 2) anticonvulsant drug ef-
fects on neuronal receptors are the same from infants through 
adults, permitting a unified approach for all patients older 
than neonates. The following issues are not examined in this 
guideline: merits of various definitions of status epilepticus, 
treatment of refractory status epilepticus, treatment of neo-
natal status epilepticus, subsequent chronic anticonvulsant 
therapy, etiology-specific therapy (e.g., for cerebral malaria), 
the role of different diagnostic tests (e.g., EEG, CT, MRI) for 
patients with status epilepticus, the role of epilepsy surgery, 
neurostimulation, or the ketogenic diet in the treatment of 
patients with status epilepticus. There is an American Academy 
of Neurology practice parameter on the diagnostic evaluation 
of the child with status epilepticus (15).
The variability in anticonvulsant costs makes it difficult 
for this guideline to address or incorporate issues of cost-
effectiveness and related economic analyses. However, it is 
recognized that cost and formulary availability are practical 
parameters modifying the selection of initial anticonvulsant 
therapy. This guideline should not be construed as rigid. 
Rather, therapy choice ultimately must include consideration 
of the individual patient’s clinical data along with the local 
availability and cost feasibility of different treatment options.
Methods
The methodology used to construct the evidence-based 
portion of this guideline was based on elements of guideline 
development used by the American Academy of Neurology 
(http://www.aan.com/Guidelines/) and the International 
League Against Epilepsy. The methodology was specified 
before the searches were conducted. A literature search 
was performed, including MEDLINE and Current Contents, 
for relevant articles published between January 1940 and 
September 2014 (inclusive). In addition, the Cochrane Library 
(Database of Systematic Reviews, Central Register of Con-
trolled Trials, Methodology Register, Database of Abstracts of 
Reviews of Effects, Health Technology Assessment Database, 
and NHS Economic Evaluation Database) was serially searched 
(last in April 2015). Studies were considered potentially rel-
evant if they included the term “status epilepticus,” examined 
anticonvulsant efficacy, safety, tolerability, or mode of use, and 
were a randomized controlled trial (RCT), cohort study, case 
control study, observational study, case series, meta-analysis, 
or systematic review. All languages were included. No sex or 
age limits were imposed, but searches were limited to human 
subjects. No studies published only as abstracts were included. 
Articles were excluded from further analysis if they related 
to nonepilepsy uses of anticonvulsants or focused on basic 
anticonvulsant mechanisms.
Each potentially relevant study found through this search 
methodology was abstracted for specific data, which were 
placed in evidence tables for further analysis. The review 
panel consisted of a group of neurologists, neurology nurses, 
emergency medicine physicians, clinical pharmacists, meth-
odologists, and neurocritical care physicians with experience 
in status epilepticus and anticonvulsants. Potentially relevant 
studies were evaluated for their class of evidence using 
criteria detailed in Table 1. The guideline’s conclusions and 
recommendations were based on criteria detailed in Table 2. 
These tables integrate the United States Agency for Health 
Care and Policy Research (16) and the American Academy of 
Neurology scoring system (17). However, two major modifica-
tions to the scoring system were made owing to the ethi-
cal and logistic difficulties in conducting convulsive status 
epilepticus trials:
1) A 10% noninferiority margin between test drug and com-
parator drug was considered to be clinically appropriate 
for noninferiority analyses and failed superiority studies 
(Table 1).
2) Fewer class I or II studies were needed to reach a Level A or 
B recommendation than for other neurologic conditions 
because of the challenges in conducting randomized, con-
trolled, double-blind, status epilepticus studies (Table 2).
The analysis addressed five questions involving adults/chil-
dren with seizures lasting more than 5 minutes:
Q1. Which anticonvulsants are efficacious as initial and subse-
quent therapy?
Q2. What adverse events are associated with anticonvulsant 
administration?
Q3. Which is the most effective benzodiazepine?
Q4. Is IV fosphenytoin more effective than IV phenytoin?
Q5. When does anticonvulsant efficacy drop significantly (i.e., 
after how many different anticonvulsants does status epi-
lepticus become refractory)?
The completed evidence-based guidelines and algorithm 
were reviewed and approved by the American Epilepsy Society 
Guidelines Committee (members of which were not part of the 
writing group). It was also reviewed and commented on by the 
Council on Clinical Activities, whose comments were incorpo-
rated and subsequently approved. Following committee and 
council approval, it was submitted to the American Epilepsy 
Society Board; and after review, comments, and revisions, the 
guideline was approved prior to submission for publication.
 51
Convulsive Status Epilepticus Guideline
TABLE 2. Translation of Article Ratings to Conclusions and Recommendations 
Translation of Evidence to Recommendation
Conclusion and Recommendation
Level A rating:
 One or more class I studies or two or more 
consistent class II studies
Conclusion, level A:
 Established as effective, ineffective, or harmful for the given condition in 
the specified population
Recommendation:
 Should be done or should not be done
Level B rating: 
 One or more class II studies or three or more 
consistent class III studies
Conclusion, level B:
 Probably effective, ineffective, or harmful for the given condition in the 
specified population
Recommendation:
 Should be considered or should not be considered
Level C rating: 
 Two or more consistent class III studies
Conclusion, level C:
 Possibly effective, ineffective, or harmful for the given condition in the 
specified population
Recommendation:
 May be considered or may not be considered
Level U:
 Lack of studies meeting level A, B, or C 
designation
Conclusion, level U:
 Data inadequate or insufficient. Given current knowledge, treatment is 
unproven.
Recommendation:
 None
TABLE 1. Rating of Articles 
Class I: Prospective, randomized, controlled clinical trial with masked outcome assessment in a representative population. The 
following are also required:
 a. No more than two primary outcomes specified 
 b. Concealed allocation
 c. Exclusion/inclusion criteria clearly defined
 d. Relevant baseline characteristics presented and substantially equivalent between treatment groups, or appropriate  
statistical adjustment for differences
 e. Adequate accounting for dropouts (with at least 80% of enrolled subjects completing the study) with numbers sufficiently 
low to have minimal potential for bias
 
f. Demonstration of superiority in a superiority study design or demonstration of noninferiority using a 10% margin in a  
noninferiority design
Class II: A prospective, randomized, controlled clinical trial with masked outcome assessment that lacks one or two criteria a–e 
(see class I) or a prospective matched group cohort study in a representative population with masked outcome assessment 
that meets criteria a–e 
Class III: All other controlled trials in a representative population, where outcome is independently assessed, or independently 
derived by objective outcome measurements
Class IV: Evidence from uncontrolled studies, case series, case reports, or expert opinion
 52
Convulsive Status Epilepticus Guideline
Results
Article and Meta-Analysis/Systematic Review Identification
Four search strategies yielded the following results (all 
searches were performed for the time frame of January 1, 
1940 through September 30, 2014). For Pubmed, the following 
terms were used:
1) Search—status epilepticus, Limits—humans (n = 6,953 
articles);
2) Search—status epilepticus, Limits—humans, clinical trial, 
randomized controlled trial (n = 210 articles);
3) Search—status epilepticus AND ((clinical [Title/Abstract] 
AND trial[Title/Abstract]) OR clinical trials[MeSH Terms] 
OR clinical trial[Publication Type] OR random*[Title/Ab-
stract] OR random allocation[MeSH Terms] OR therapeu-
tic use[MeSH Subheading]); Limits—humans (n = 3,101 
articles);
4) Search—status epilepticus and systematic[sb]; Limits—hu-
mans (n = 159 articles).
Similar searches were performed on the other databases.
These computerized searches were last performed on 
October 9, 2014. The resulting studies were reviewed for rele-
vance. The reference lists of all included studies were reviewed 
to identify any additional relevant studies not identified by 
the above searches. In total, 38 relevant RCTs were identi-
fied. A search of the Cochrane Library yielded four additional 
completed and relevant published meta-analyses (18–21). 
Pharmaceutical companies provided requested additional 
information on three RCTs.
Q1. Which Anticonvulsants Are Efficacious as Initial and 
Subsequent Therapy?
Adult Studies
Nine RCTs (three class I [22–24], one class II [25], and five 
class III [26–30]) addressed the efficacy of initial therapy. The 
1998 Veteran’s Affairs status epilepticus study was a multi-
center randomized comparison of four different IV treatments: 
lorazepam (0.1 mg/kg), diazepam (0.15 mg/kg) followed by 
phenytoin (18 mg/kg), phenobarbital (18 mg/kg), and phe-
nytoin alone (18 mg/kg) in adults with either overt or subtle 
status epilepticus (22). Overt status epilepticus was defined as 
a continuous GTC seizure lasting 10 minutes or longer, or two 
or more GTC seizures without full recovery of consciousness. 
A treatment was successful if the status epilepticus stopped 
within 20 minutes after infusion started with no recurrence 
prior to 60 minutes. Overall, 570 patients were randomized to 
either lorazepam (n = 146), diazepam plus phenytoin (n = 146), 
phenobarbital (n = 133), or phenytoin (n = 145). Differential 
anticonvulsant efficacy was found in overt status epilepticus 
where the four treatment arms had an overall difference 
(p = 0.02) for the primary outcome variable. Only one head-to-
head comparison met the prespecified statistical significance 
difference: lorazepam was superior to phenytoin (p = 0.001). 
There was no difference on the intent to treat (ITT) analysis 
(22).
A second class I study in adults (older than 18 years) 
with status epilepticus was initiated outside the hospital by 
paramedics (23). In this 2001 study, patients were random-
ized to receive 2 mg IV lorazepam or 5 mg IV diazepam or 
IV placebo in the ambulance. The protocol allowed a repeat 
dose if the seizure continued after 4 minutes (for a maxi-
mum lorazepam dose of 4 mg and diazepam dose of 10 mg). 
For this study, status epilepticus was defined as continu-
ous or repeated seizure for >5 minutes without recovery 
of consciousness. Overall, 205 patients were randomized 
(lorazepam, n = 66; diazepam, n = 68; placebo, n = 71). The 
treatment was deemed successful if the status epilepticus 
had terminated at the time of arrival in the emergency 
department. Both lorazepam and diazepam were superior to 
placebo: lorazepam (59.1%) > placebo (21.1%) (OR, 4.8; 95% 
CI: 1.9–13.0) and diazepam (42.6%) > placebo (21.1%) (OR, 
2.3; 95% CI: 1.0–5.9) (23).
A third class I study, the 2012 RAMPART trial, was a multi-
center, double-blind randomized noninferiority comparison 
of intramuscular (IM) midazolam (test drug) to IV lorazepam 
(comparator) in adults and children with status epilepticus 
(24). Dosing was standardized to 10 mg (5 mg in children 
weighing 13–40 kg) IM midazolam or 4 mg (2 mg in children 
weighing 13–40 kg) IV lorazepam. Status epilepticus was 
defined as convulsions persisting for longer than 5 minutes 
that were still occurring after paramedic arrival. Treatment 
success was defined as absence of seizures without addi-
tional rescue therapy at time of arrival in the emergency de-
partment, with a prespecified noninferiority margin of 10%. 
A total of 893 subjects (n = 748; aged 21 years or older) were 
randomized to either IM midazolam (n = 448) or IV loraz-
epam (n = 445). The primary efficacy endpoint was achieved 
in 73% of subjects in the IM midazolam group compared 
with 63% in the IV lorazepam group, resulting in an absolute 
difference between groups of 10% (95% CI: 4.0–16.1), not 
only meeting the prespecified noninferiority requirement 
but also demonstrating superiority of midazolam for both 
the per protocol and ITT analyses in patients without estab-
lished IV access (24).
A 1983 class II study compared IV lorazepam 4 mg and IV 
diazepam 10 mg in adults with convulsive status epilepticus 
(defined as ≥3 GTC seizures in 1 hour or ≥2 in rapid succes-
sion), absence status epilepticus, or complex partial status 
epilepticus (25). The patients could receive a second dose of 
medication if the seizures continued after 10 minutes. For 
all patients, phenytoin was given after 30 minutes. A total of 
70 patients were randomized to either lorazepam (n = 37) or 
diazepam (n = 33) (25). Lorazepam was successful for 78% of 
subjects after one dose and 89% after two doses; diazepam 
was successful for 58% of subjects after one dose and 76% 
after two doses. The study found no statistically significant dif-
ference between lorazepam and diazepam in seizure cessation 
after one or two medication administrations.
The five open-label class III initial therapy RCTs examined 
the efficacy of IV valproic acid (n = 2) (26, 27), IV phenytoin 
(n = 2) (26, 27), IV phenobarbital (n = 1) (29), IV diazepam 
plus phenytoin (n = 1) (29), IV levetiracetam (n = 1) (30), 
rectal diazepam (n = 1) (28), and IV lorazepam (n = 1) (30) 
in cohorts ranging from 9 to 41 patients. Valproic acid had 
 53
Convulsive Status Epilepticus Guideline
higher efficacy than phenytoin in one study (valproic acid, 
66%, vs phenytoin, 42%; p = 0.046) (27) and was similar to 
phenytoin in the other (valproic acid, 87.8%, vs phenytoin, 
88%) (26).
Two RCTs, both class III (31, 32), addressed second-ther-
apy efficacy in adults after failure of initial benzodiazepine 
therapy. Intravenous valproic acid’s efficacy was similar to 
IV phenytoin (88% vs 84%) in one study (31) and similar to 
continuous IV diazepam (56% vs 50%) in the second study 
(32).
Each arm of the Veterans Affairs status epilepticus 
study had a second blinded treatment if initial therapy was 
unsuccessful (22). Specifically, initial lorazepam therapy 
was followed by IV phenytoin; phenobarbital was followed 
by phenytoin; phenytoin was followed by lorazepam; and 
diazepam plus phenytoin was followed by lorazepam (22). 
There was no difference in efficacy between the four treat-
ment arms when initial and second therapies together were 
examined (33).
The following conclusions were drawn. In adults, IM 
midazolam, IV lorazepam, IV diazepam (with or without 
phenytoin), and IV phenobarbital are established as effica-
cious at stopping seizures lasting at least 5 minutes (level 
A). Intramuscular midazolam has superior effectiveness 
compared with IV lorazepam in adults with convulsive status 
epilepticus without established IV access (level A). Intra-
venous lorazepam is more effective than IV phenytoin in 
stopping seizures lasting at least 10 minutes (level A). There 
is no difference in efficacy between IV lorazepam followed 
by IV phenytoin, IV diazepam plus phenytoin followed by IV 
lorazepam, and IV phenobarbital followed by IV phenytoin 
(level A). Intravenous valproic acid has similar efficacy to IV 
phenytoin or continuous IV diazepam as second therapy after 
failure of a benzodiazepine (level C). Insufficient data exist in 
adults about the efficacy of levetiracetam as either initial or 
second therapy (level U).
Pediatric Studies
Overall, 26 RCTs (two class I [24, 34] and 24 class III [27, 
30, 35–56]) examined efficacy of initial therapy. In 25 of 
these RCTs, benzodiazepines were one or both of the study 
medications (two class I studies and 23 class III studies). In 
one class I trial (34), 273 children (aged 3 months to 18 years) 
were enrolled and randomized to either diazepam 0.2 mg/
kg (maximum dose 8 mg) or lorazepam 0.1 mg/kg (maximum 
dose 4 mg). If seizures continued after 5 more minutes, then 
half of the initial study drug dose could be repeated. If seizures 
continued another 7 more minutes, then fosphenytoin was 
given. There was no difference between IV diazepam (101/140, 
72.1%) and IV lorazepam (97/133, 72.9%) in the primary effica-
cy outcome of termination of status epilepticus by 10 minutes 
without reappearance within 30 minutes (absolute difference 
of 0.8%, 95% CI: −11.4–9.8%). The study concluded that there 
was no evidence to support the hypothesis that lorazepam 
was superior to diazepam as initial therapy for pediatric status 
epilepticus.
A second class I study, the RAMPART trial (24), included 120 
children randomized to IM midazolam (n = 60) or IV lorazepam 
(n = 60). No statistical difference in efficacy was found between 
the IM midazolam (68.3%) and IV lorazepam (71.7%), but the 
relatively few children studied results in wide confidence inter-
vals preventing any firm conclusions (57).
The class III benzodiazepine RCTs involved diazepam 
(n = 20), midazolam (n = 16), and lorazepam (n = 6). The differ-
ent routes of administration included IV (n = 13), rectal (n = 10), 
intranasal (n = 9), buccal (n = 6), IM (n = 3), and sublingual 
(n = 1). The size of the studies ranged from 24 patients to 436 
patients. Although all studies were prospective and random-
ized, they were class III because treating physicians were 
either not blinded to treatment allocation or lacked outcome 
masking (meaning the outcome assessors were not blinded to 
treatment allocation).
One class III study compared lorazepam (0.05–0.1 mg/kg) 
to diazepam (0.3–0.4 mg/kg) administered either IV or rectally 
for children presenting to the emergency department with 
ongoing convulsions. There was no difference between the 
treatments either in the time for the initial (presenting) seizure 
to stop after anticonvulsant administration or in the total 
number of seizures in first 24 hours of admission. However, 
fewer lorazepam patients required multiple doses to stop the 
seizures (lorazepam 8/33 vs diazepam 25/53; p < 0.05) or ad-
ditional anticonvulsants to terminate the seizure (lorazepam 
1/33 vs diazepam 17/53; p < 0.01) (35).
One class III study compared IV lorazepam (0.1 mg/kg) to 
a combination of IV diazepam (0.2 mg/kg) and IV phenytoin 
(18 mg/kg) in 178 children presenting with convulsive status 
epilepticus to an emergency department. Efficacy in stopping 
seizure activity within 10 minutes with no recurrence during 
an 18-hour period after seizure control was 100% for both 
groups. No significant difference was demonstrated between 
treatment groups either in the time to seizure cessation or the 
need for additional doses of study medication to terminate 
convulsive status epilepticus (49).
Intranasal lorazepam was examined in two studies. A 
study of 6- to 14-year-old children with ongoing seizures in 
the emergency department compared IV lorazepam with 
intranasal lorazepam (both 0.1 mg/kg/dose, maximum dose 
4 mg) (52). No difference was detected between IV lorazepam 
(56/70, 80%) and intranasal lorazepam (59/71, 83.1%) based 
on clinical seizure remission within 10 minutes of study 
drug administration. The authors concluded that intranasal 
lorazepam was not inferior to IV lorazepam (52). Another 
class III study compared intranasal lorazepam (0.1 mg/kg) to 
IM paraldehyde (0.2 mL/kg) in 160 pediatric patients present-
ing to an emergency department with convulsive status 
epilepticus. No statistically significant difference was found 
between intranasal lorazepam and IM paraldehyde for the 
primary outcome of efficacy in stopping seizure activity 10 
minutes after administration (intranasal lorazepam, 75%; IM 
paraldehyde, 61%; p = 0.06) or in time to seizure cessation or 
seizure recurrence within 24 hours after administration. The 
study did find that subjects treated with paraldehyde were 
more likely to require two or more additional anticonvulsant 
doses (intranasal lorazepam, 10%; IM paraldehyde, 26%; 
p = 0.007) (44).
Sublingual lorazepam (0.1 mg/kg) was compared with 
rectal diazepam (0.5 mg/kg) in children 5 months to 10 years 
old with convulsions lasting more than 5 minutes (54). This 
 54
Convulsive Status Epilepticus Guideline
class III RCT was conducted across nine hospitals in Sub-
Saharan Africa and involved 436 children. The efficacy of 
sublingual lorazepam (131/234, 56%) was significantly lower 
than that for rectal diazepam (160/202, 79%; p < 0.001) for 
terminating seizures within 10 minutes of study drug admin-
istration (54).
Sixteen class III studies compared midazolam with diaz-
epam. In five studies, buccal midazolam was compared with 
rectal diazepam (40–42, 47, 50). In one study, in 177 children 
experiencing 219 separate seizures, buccal midazolam was 
more effective than rectal diazepam in stopping seizures 
whether all seizures were considered (56% vs 27%) or just ini-
tial episodes (42). The largest study of 330 children in Uganda 
found a lower rate of treatment failure (seizures lasting longer 
than 10 minutes after medication administration or seizure 
recurrence within 1 hour) for buccal midazolam compared 
with rectal diazepam (30.3% vs 43%; p = 0.016). This superior-
ity was limited to a subgroup of patients without malaria, with 
buccal midazolam superior to rectal diazepam with respect 
to treatment failure (26.2% vs 55.9%; p = 0.002) (47). In an RCT 
of 98 children (aged 3 months to 12 years), buccal midazolam 
was superior to rectal diazepam for control of seizures within 
5 minutes of administration (49/49, 100%, vs 40/49, 82%; p < 
0.001), treatment initiation time (median 2 vs 3 minutes; p < 
0.001), and drug effect time (median 4 vs 5 minutes; p < 0.001) 
(50). In the two smaller studies (n = 79 and n = 43), there was 
no difference in efficacy between buccal midazolam and rectal 
diazepam (40, 41).
Intranasal midazolam was compared with IV diazepam 
in four class III pediatric studies (38, 39, 46, 53). In one study 
involving children with prolonged febrile seizures, time to 
drug administration of intranasal midazolam was faster (p < 
0.001) but the time period between drug administration and 
seizure cessation was shorter for IV diazepam (p < 0.001) (38). 
The second study found that the mean time to achieve seizure 
control was faster for IV diazepam compared with intranasal 
midazolam (p < 0.007) (39). A third study found intranasal mid-
azolam was significantly faster to administer than IV diazepam, 
with a slower mean time to seizure cessation after medication 
administration for intranasal midazolam compared with IV 
diazepam, but a faster time to seizure cessation after hospital 
arrival with intranasal midazolam (p < 0.001 for all compari-
sons) (46). Lastly, an RCT of 60 children (aged 2 months to 15 
years), equally divided between intranasal midazolam (0.2 mg/
kg) and IV diazepam (0.3 mg/kg), found the time to control 
seizures was shorter using intranasal midazolam compared 
with IV diazepam (3.16 ± 1.24 minutes vs 6.42 ± 2.59 minutes; 
p < 0.001) when the time needed to establish IV access was 
included (53).
Three trials examined the efficacy of intranasal midazolam 
compared with rectal diazepam (37, 45, 51). Intranasal mid-
azolam (0.2 mg/kg, maximum dose, 10 mg) was compared 
with rectal diazepam (0.3 to 0.5 mg/kg, maximum dose, 20 
mg) for prehospital seizures lasting longer than 5 minutes. 
Overall, 92 children received study medication, and no dif-
ference in total seizure time after medication administration 
between therapies was identified (51). Another trial involving 
46 children experiencing 188 seizures compared the efficacy 
of intranasal midazolam 0.3 mg/kg (92 episodes) to rectal diaz-
epam 0.2 mg/kg (96 episodes) for terminating seizures within 
10 minutes of drug administration. The time to seizure cessa-
tion was significantly faster for intranasal midazolam (116.7 
± 126.9 seconds vs 178.6 ± 179.5 seconds; p = 0.005), with a 
trend toward a higher success rate with intranasal midazolam 
(89/92, 96.7%) compared with rectal diazepam (85/96, 88.5%; 
p = 0.060) (45). A third smaller trial (n = 45) found intranasal 
midazolam was more effective than rectal diazepam (87% vs 
60%; p < 0.05) (37).
Intramuscular midazolam was compared with IV diazepam 
in three class III studies (36, 43, 55). In all three studies, IM mid-
azolam had a shorter interval to seizure cessation, but there 
was no significant difference in overall efficacy for termination 
of seizures (36, 43, 55).
One study compared buccal midazolam 0.2 mg/kg with 
IV diazepam 0.3 mg/kg, with no significant difference found 
in overall efficacy (defined as complete cessation of seizures 
5 minutes after administration of study treatment) (48). 
Time to seizure cessation from identification of the seizure 
in the emergency department was significantly shorter 
for buccal midazolam compared with IV diazepam (2.39 
minutes vs 2.98 minutes, respectively), with most of the dif-
ference driven by more rapid time to initiation of treatment 
(48).
Intravenous lorazepam (0.1 mg/kg over 2–4 minutes) was 
compared with IV levetiracetam (20 mg/kg over 15 minutes) 
in a class III RCT involving children with either convulsive 
or subtle convulsive status epilepticus (30). As first therapy, 
lorazepam success rate (29/38, 76.3%) was similar to that for 
levetiracetam (31/41, 75.6%) (30).
In one RCT, children with convulsive seizures at time of 
presentation received either IV valproic acid (20 mg/kg) with 
diazepam (0.3 mg/kg) (n = 16) or IV phenytoin (20 mg/kg) with 
diazepam (0.3 mg/kg) (n = 17) (56). There was no difference in 
efficacy outcomes between these two arms (56).
The only class III pediatric RCT not involving a benzo-
diazepine compared IV phenytoin (n = 33) and IV valproic 
acid (n = 35). Overall, valproic acid had higher efficacy than 
phenytoin (valproic acid, 66%, vs phenytoin, 42%; p = 0.046), 
but only 23% and 12% of the cohorts were 15 years old or 
younger, with no statistical adjustment for these dissimilar 
proportions (27).
Two RCTs (one class II [58] and one class III [31]) ad-
dressed second-therapy efficacy in children after failure of 
initial benzodiazepine therapy. The class II study compared 
IV valproic acid (20 mg/kg, n = 30) with IV phenobarbital (20 
mg/kg, n = 30) in children 3 to 16 years old whose seizures did 
not respond to IV diazepam (0.2 mg/kg) within 5 minutes. No 
significant difference was noted in efficacy between valproic 
acid and phenobarbital (27/30, 90%, vs 23/30, 77%; p = 0.189) 
for terminating seizures within 20 minutes, but the valproic 
acid group experienced significantly fewer clinically significant 
adverse effects (24% vs 74%; p < 0.001) (58). The second study 
involved both adults and children and found that the efficacy 
of IV valproic acid was similar to that of IV phenytoin (88% vs 
84%) in patients whose seizures did not respond to 0.2 mg/kg 
of IV diazepam (31).
The following conclusions were drawn. In children, IV 
lorazepam and IV diazepam are established as efficacious 
 55
Convulsive Status Epilepticus Guideline
at stopping seizures lasting at least 5 minutes (level A). 
Rectal diazepam, IM midazolam, intranasal midazolam, 
and buccal midazolam are probably effective at stopping 
seizures lasting at least 5 minutes (level B). Insufficient data 
exist in children about the efficacy of intranasal lorazepam, 
sublingual lorazepam, rectal lorazepam, valproic acid, leve-
tiracetam, phenobarbital, and phenytoin as initial therapy 
(level U). Intravenous valproic acid has similar efficacy but 
better tolerability than IV phenobarbital (level B) as second 
therapy after failure of a benzodiazepine. Insufficient data 
exist in children regarding the efficacy of phenytoin or 
levetiracetam as second therapy after failure of a benzodi-
azepine (level U).
Q2. What Adverse Events Are Associated With Anticonvulsant 
Administration?
Adult Studies
Three class I studies (22–24) and one class II study (25) 
present the best evidence about treatment-emergent adverse 
events associated with IV lorazepam and diazepam therapy. 
In the 1998 class I Veterans Affairs status epilepticus study, 
there were no significant differences in adverse-event rates 
between lorazepam, diazepam, phenobarbital, and phenytoin 
(22). The treatment-emergent adverse events associated with 
lorazepam administration in 97 patients with overt status epi-
lepticus were hypoventilation, 10.3%; hypotension, 25.8%; and 
cardiac rhythm disturbance, 7.2%. This is similar to the adverse 
events seen with IV diazepam therapy in 95 patients with overt 
status epilepticus: hypoventilation, 16.8%; hypotension, 31.6%; 
and cardiac rhythm disturbance, 2.1%. A similar spectrum of 
cardiorespiratory complications was seen in both the phe-
nobarbital arm (hypoventilation, 13.2%; hypotension, 34.1%; 
cardiac rhythm disturbance, 3.3%) and the phenytoin arm 
(hypoventilation, 9.9%; hypotension, 27.0%; cardiac rhythm 
disturbance, 6.9%) (22).
In the 2001 prehospital status epilepticus RCT, 10.6% 
of patients receiving IV lorazepam experienced treatment-
emergent adverse events (hypotension, cardiac dysrhythmia, 
respiratory intervention). Similarly, 10.3% of patients receiving 
IV diazepam experienced hypotension, cardiac dysrhythmia, or 
the need for respiratory intervention. Both of these rates were 
lower (p = 0.08) than the 22.5% treatment-emergent adverse-
event rate seen in patients with status epilepticus receiving IV 
placebo (23).
In the 2012 class I RAMPART trial comparing IM midazolam 
and IV lorazepam (24), treatment-emergent adverse events 
were identified in 26.7% of subjects in the IM midazolam 
group compared with 30.6% of subjects in the IV lorazepam 
group. Most common treatment-emergent adverse events 
were decreased level of consciousness (IM midazolam, 9.5%, vs 
IV lorazepam, 8.8%) and respiratory depression (IM midazolam, 
6.4%, vs IV lorazepam, 10%), while hypotension only occurred 
in 1.2% of subjects overall (24).
The 1983 class II study compared lorazepam 4 mg and 
diazepam 10 mg in adults with convulsive status epilepticus 
(defined as ≥3 GTC seizures in 1 hour or ≥2 in rapid succes-
sion), absence status epilepticus, or complex partial status 
epilepticus (25). Patients were permitted to receive a second 
dose of medication if the seizures continued after 10 minutes. 
For all patients, phenytoin was given after 30 minutes. A total 
of 70 patients were randomized to either lorazepam (n = 37) 
or diazepam (n = 33). In this comparative trial, 12% of loraz-
epam patients and 13% of diazepam patients experienced 
treatment-emergent adverse events including respiratory 
depression, respiratory arrest, hypotension, and sedation; the 
first three of these only occurred in people with significant 
medical problems (25).
The following conclusions were drawn. Respiratory 
and cardiac symptoms are the most common encountered 
treatment-emergent adverse events associated with IV an-
ticonvulsant administration in adults with status epilepticus 
(level A). The rate of respiratory depression in patients with 
status epilepticus treated with benzodiazepines is lower than 
in patients with status epilepticus treated with placebo (level 
A), indicating that respiratory problems are an important 
consequence of untreated status epilepticus. No substantial 
difference exists between benzodiazepines and phenobarbital 
in the occurrence of cardiorespiratory adverse events in adults 
with status epilepticus (level A).
Pediatric Studies
The single class I purely pediatric study (34) provides the 
best adverse-event evidence about IV lorazepam and IV diaz-
epam use in children with convulsive status epilepticus. There 
were no differences between the two arms in the rate of as-
sisted ventilation (lorazepam, 17.6%, versus diazepam, 16.0%; 
absolute risk difference, 1.6%; 95% CI: −9.9–6.8%) or aspiration 
pneumonia (two subjects in each group). The incidence of 
sedation was higher in the lorazepam cohort (99/148, 66.9%) 
compared with the diazepam cohort (81/162, 50%; absolute 
risk difference, 16.9%; 95% CI: 6.1–27.7%) (34).
Class III trials identified similar rates of respiratory de-
pression with IV benzodiazepine use (35, 49, 55). One class 
III trial reported 21% of patients receiving IV diazepam and 
4% of patients receiving IV lorazepam were reported to have 
respiratory depression defined as poor respiratory effort, 
reduced rate of breathing, or requiring oxygen administra-
tion via face mask (35). In another class III study, respiratory 
depression was reported in 4.4% of children receiving IV 
lorazepam and 5.6% of children receiving IV diazepam and 
phenytoin, but no subject in either group required mechani-
cal ventilation (49).
Respiratory depression after rectal administration of 
diazepam in children was reported in five class III trials, 
ranging from 1.2 percent to 6.4 percent (35, 41, 42, 45, 
47), while two class III trials (37, 40) and two class I trials in 
acute repetitive seizures (59, 60) reported no incidence of 
respiratory depression with rectal diazepam use in children. 
No respiratory depression was reported in one study of six 
children treated with rectal lorazepam (35). As noted above, 
drowsiness was the most common adverse effect reported 
in two class I trials of rectal diazepam in a mixed adult and 
pediatric study (59, 60).
Two class III studies reported respiratory depression with 
use of buccal midazolam in children (42, 47), in contrast to two 
class III studies, which reported no respiratory depression asso-
ciated with use of buccal midazolam in the pediatric popula-
tion (40, 41). Respiratory depression, defined as having a need 
 56
Convulsive Status Epilepticus Guideline
for assisted ventilation because of a drop in oxygen saturation 
or a reduction in respiratory rate or effort, was reported in 
1.2% and 4.6% of patients in these studies (42, 47). Two of the 
class III IM or intranasal midazolam studies reported significant 
respiratory depression (36–39, 43, 45, 46, 53). Single children 
in each study (6.25% and 2%) in the IM midazolam group 
experienced respiratory failure resulting in artificial ventilation 
(51, 55).
Two class III studies involved intranasal lorazepam. In 
one study of 80 children, a drop of ≥5 mm Hg in systolic 
and diastolic blood pressure was noted in 15 (18.8%) and 12 
(15%) children, respectively, while only two (2.5%) had a fall 
in oxygen saturation below 92% (44). In a second study of 71 
children, none developed significant hypotension and only 
one (1.4%) required assisted ventilation (52).
The following conclusions were drawn. Respira-
tory depression is the most common clinically significant 
treatment-emergent adverse event associated with anti-
convulsant drug treatment in status epilepticus in children 
(level A). No substantial difference probably exists between 
midazolam, lorazepam, and diazepam administration by 
any route in children with respect to rates of respiratory 
depression (level B). Adverse events, including respiratory 
depression, with benzodiazepine administration for status 
epilepticus have been reported less frequently in children 
than in adults (level B).
Q3. Which Is the Most Effective Benzodiazepine?
Adult Studies
In a class I prehospital status epilepticus study (23), the 
percentage of patients’ status epilepticus stopped by loraz-
epam was higher but not significantly different than with 
diazepam (odds ratio [OR], 1.9; 95% CI: 0.8–4.4). However, 
the study’s sample size was selected to be able to detect 
a difference between the active drugs and placebo, not to 
detect a difference between the two active drugs (23). In a 
class II lorazepam–diazepam comparative trial (25), there was 
no difference between the two arms in the percentage of 
patients having control of seizures after either one injection 
(lorazepam, 78%; diazepam, 58%; not significant [NS]) or two 
injections (lorazepam, 89%; diazepam, 76%; NS). There was 
no significant difference between the two arms in the latency 
of action (lorazepam median, 3 minutes; diazepam median, 2 
minutes; NS) (25).
The class I RAMPART trial (24) reported seizures were ab-
sent in 73% of subjects in the IM midazolam group compared 
with 63% in the IV lorazepam group, resulting in an absolute 
difference of 10% (95% CI: 4.0–16.1; p < 0.001) that met the 
prespecified noninferiority requirements plus additional su-
periority for both per protocol and ITT analyses. Median time 
from active treatment to cessation of convulsions was shorter 
for IV lorazepam (1.6 minutes) compared with IM midazolam 
(3.3 minutes), which was offset by more rapid IM midazolam 
administration (IV lorazepam, 4.8 minutes, vs intranasal mid-
azolam, 1.2 minutes) (24).
There is no difference in the treatment-emergent adverse-
event profiles between lorazepam and diazepam in the three 
adult class I and class II status epilepticus studies (22, 23, 25). 
No differences in treatment-emergent adverse-event profiles 
were found between IM midazolam and IV lorazepam (24). 
There is pharmacokinetic evidence to suggest a longer dura-
tion of action (but not longer half-life) for lorazepam com-
pared with diazepam (61).
The following conclusions were drawn. In adults with 
status epilepticus without established IV access, IM midazolam 
is established as more effective compared with IV lorazepam 
(level A). No significant difference in effectiveness has been 
demonstrated between lorazepam and diazepam in adults 
with status epilepticus (level A).
Pediatric Studies
As described in detail in Question 1, one class I trial 
enrolled and randomized 273 children to either IV diazepam 
or IV lorazepam (34). Efficacy was similar between IV diaz-
epam (101/140, 72.1%) and IV lorazepam (97/133, 72.9%). As 
described in detail in Question 2, side-effect profiles of the two 
treatments were similar (34).
A meta-analysis of six class III pediatric studies (36, 
38–40, 42, 47) found non-IV midazolam (IM/intranasal/
buccal) was more effective than diazepam (IV/rectal) at 
achieving seizure cessation (relative risk [RR] =1.52, 95% CI: 
1.27–1.82) with similar respiratory complications (RR = 1.49; 
95% CI: 0.25–8.72) (62). Time to seizure cessation was shorter 
for intranasal midazolam compared with IV diazepam in 
two studies (38, 46) and longer in one study (39). Compar-
ing intranasal midazolam and rectal diazepam, intranasal 
midazolam was more effective in terminating seizures (37) 
and demonstrated a shorter time to seizure termination (45). 
Comparing IM midazolam to IV diazepam, a shorter interval 
to seizure cessation was found for IM midazolam in both 
studies (36, 43). Only one study found a significantly shorter 
time to seizure cessation for buccal midazolam compared 
with rectal diazepam (42).
One study comparing lorazepam to diazepam found no 
difference between the treatments in the time for the initial 
(presenting) seizure to stop after anticonvulsant administra-
tion but did find fewer lorazepam patients required multiple 
doses (lorazepam, 8/33, vs diazepam, 25/53; p < 0.05) or ad-
ditional anticonvulsants (lorazepam, 1/33, vs diazepam, 17/53; 
p < 0.01) for seizure cessation (35).
The following conclusions were drawn. In children with 
status epilepticus, no significant difference in effectiveness 
has been established between IV lorazepam and IV diazepam 
(level A). In children with status epilepticus, non-IV midazolam 
(IM/intranasal/buccal) is probably more effective than diaz-
epam (IV/rectal) (level B).
Q4. Is IV Fosphenytoin More Effective Than IV Phenytoin?
Three class III RCTs examined the comparative tolerability of 
IV fosphenytoin and IV phenytoin (63). A single-dose, random-
ized, double-blind, class III tolerability study in patients need-
ing infusion of phenytoin compared fosphenytoin (n = 39, 
12.7 mg/kg, 82 mg phenytoin equivalent [PE]/min [range, 
40–103 mg PE/min]) to phenytoin (n = 13, 11.3 mg/kg, 42.4 
mg/min). In contrast to phenytoin, there were no fosphe-
nytoin-related significant cardiac arrhythmias, change in 
heart rate, respiration or blood pressure (63). A second study 
involved patients requiring a phenytoin loading dose and 
 57
Convulsive Status Epilepticus Guideline
then 3 to 14 days of maintenance therapy. This randomized, 
double-blind, class III tolerability study in patients needing 
infusion and maintenance of phenytoin compared fospheny-
toin (n = 88, 15.3 mg/kg, 37 mg PE/min) to phenytoin (n = 28, 
15.0 mg/kg, 33 mg/min) and found pain at the infusion site 
was greater for phenytoin than fosphenytoin (17% vs 2%) (63). 
A third study was a single-dose, randomized, double-blind, 
class III tolerability study of fosphenytoin at 150 mg PE/min 
(n = 90) vs phenytoin at 50 mg/min (n = 22) (63). The infusion 
was slowed or discontinued more often with IV phenytoin 
compared with IV fosphenytoin; 63.6% of phenytoin patients 
experienced pain at site of infusion; 48.6% of fosphenytoin 
patients encountered pruritus; and the average blood pres-
sure decrease with fosphenytoin was 13.7 mm Hg compared 
with 5.9 mm Hg with phenytoin.
The following conclusions were drawn. Insufficient data 
exist about the comparative efficacy of phenytoin and fosphe-
nytoin (level U). Fosphenytoin is better tolerated compared 
with phenytoin (level B). When both are available, fosphe-
nytoin is preferred based on tolerability, but phenytoin is an 
acceptable alternative (level B).
Q5. When Does Anticonvulsant Efficacy Drop Significantly 
(i.e., After How Many Different Anticonvulsants Does Status 
Epilepticus Become Refractory)?
Only one class I RCT (the Veterans Affairs status epilepticus 
trial) (22) provides clear data to address this question. Treat-
ment success was defined as status epilepticus stopping 
within 20 minutes after infusion started with no recurrence 
prior to 60 minutes after the start of the infusion. In this 
four-arm double-blind RCT, in order to maintain the blinding, 
if the first administered anticonvulsant was not successful, 
then the patient was randomized to another treatment arm; 
if the second anticonvulsant was not successful, then the 
patient was randomized to another treatment arm. In adults 
with overt status epilepticus, the overall success rate of the 
first administered therapy was 55.5%. If the first study drug 
did not succeed, the second study drug was able to stop the 
status epilepticus for an additional 7.0% of the total popula-
tion; the third drug helped only an additional 2.3% of pa-
tients. It took intensive “non-study” therapy to stop the status 
epilepticus in 23.2% of the initial patient population, and no 
drug was successful within 12 hours in 11.7%. In this study, if 
the patient did not respond to lorazepam or phenytoin, the 
response rate to phenobarbital was 2.1% (D. Treiman, verbal 
communication).
Three other RCTs (31, 32, 58), detailed earlier, reported 
higher rates of second-therapy efficacy in adults and children 
after failure of initial benzodiazepine therapy. However, in 
each of these studies, initial therapy was not part of an RCT nor 
was it blinded. For second therapy, the class II RCTs reported 
success ranging from 77 percent to 90 percent, while the two 
class III RCTs reported success ranging from 50 percent to 88 
percent.
The following conclusions were drawn. In adults, the 
second anticonvulsant administered is less effective than the 
first “standard” anticonvulsant, while the third anticonvulsant 
administered is substantially less effective than the first “stan-
dard” anticonvulsant (level A). In children, the second anticon-
vulsant appears less effective, and there are no data about 
third anticonvulsant efficacy (level C).
Recommendations and Algorithm
Based on the evidence-based answers to the above questions, 
a treatment algorithm is proposed for convulsive status epilep-
ticus (Figure 1). As stated earlier, clinical trials have arbitrarily 
focused on either adults or children, and only three trials (24, 
27, 30) included both. The guideline’s treatment algorithm 
is not age specific because the disease pathophysiology of 
prolonged seizures/status epilepticus and anticonvulsant 
drug effects on neuronal receptors are the same from infants 
through adults, permitting a unified approach for all patients 
older than neonates.
The algorithm starts with a stabilization phase (0–5 min-
utes), which includes standard initial first aid for seizures. The 
initial therapy phase should begin when the seizure duration 
reaches 5 minutes and should conclude by the 20-minute 
mark when response (or lack of response) to initial therapy 
should be apparent. A benzodiazepine (specifically IM mid-
azolam, IV lorazepam, or IV diazepam) is recommended as 
the initial therapy of choice, given their demonstrated effica-
cy, safety, and tolerability (level A, four class I RCTs). Although 
IV phenobarbital is established as efficacious and well toler-
ated as initial therapy (level A, 1 class I RCT), its slower rate 
of administration, compared with the three recommended 
benzodiazepines above, positions it as an alternative initial 
therapy rather than a drug of first choice. For prehospital 
settings or where the three first-line benzodiazepine options 
are not available, rectal diazepam, intranasal midazolam, and 
buccal midazolam are reasonable initial therapy alterna-
tives (level B). Initial therapy should be administered as an 
adequate single full dose rather than broken into multiple 
smaller doses. Initial therapies should not be given twice 
except for IV lorazepam and diazepam that can be repeated 
at full doses once (level A, two class I, one class II RCT). Doses 
listed in the initial therapy phase are those used in class I tri-
als. Note that some consensus guidelines list slightly different 
dosages; for example, phenobarbital is often recommended 
at 20 mg/kg (2).
The second-therapy phase should begin when the 
seizure duration reaches 20 minutes and should conclude by 
the 40-minute mark when response (or lack of response) to 
the second therapy should be apparent. Reasonable options 
include fosphenytoin (level U), valproic acid (level B, one 
class II study) and levetiracetam (level U). There is no clear 
evidence that any one of these options is better than the 
others. The ongoing Established Status Epilepticus Treat-
ment Trial (ESETT) should provide the answer in the next 
few years (64). Because of adverse events, IV phenobarbital 
is a reasonable second-therapy alternative (level B, one class 
II study) if none of the three recommended therapies are 
available.
The third therapy phase should begin when the seizure 
duration reaches 40 minutes. There is no clear evidence to 
guide therapy in this phase (level U). Compared with initial 
therapy, second therapy is often less effective (adults—level 
A, one class I RCT; children—level C, two class III RCTs), and 
the third therapy is substantially less effective (adults—level 
 58
Convulsive Status Epilepticus Guideline
A, one class I RCT; children—level U) than initial therapy. 
Thus, if second therapy fails to stop the seizures, treat-
ment considerations should include repeating second-line 
therapy or anesthetic doses of either thiopental, midazolam, 
pentobarbital, or propofol (all with continuous EEG monitor-
ing). Depending on the etiology or severity of the seizure, 
patients may go through the phases faster or even skip the 
second phase and move rapidly to the third phase, espe-
cially in sick or intensive care unit patients. The evidence-
based treatment of refractory status epilepticus is beyond 
the scope of this guideline, though others have addressed 
the issue (65).
Future Directions
Additional evidence to further define the role of other 
IV-administered anticonvulsants is crucial to future treat-
ment of convulsive status epilepticus. Class III trials support 
efficacy and safety of valproic acid as first-line therapy (26, 
27), second-line therapy (31, 32), and refractory therapy 
(66). Evidence for use of levetiracetam and lacosamide is 
limited to retrospective studies (67–72). Given the favorable 
pharmacokinetic characteristics and adverse-effect profiles 
for these medications compared with fosphenytoin and 
phenobarbital, comparative trials of these medications as 
second-line therapy will provide vital evidence to improve 
future treatment of convulsive status epilepticus. The cur-
rent National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke 
funded ESETT trial compares IV fosphenytoin, levetiracetam, 
and valproate in children and adults with status epilepticus 
who did not respond to initial benzodiazepine therapy. 
ESETT is designed to be a class I RCT that will identify the 
optimal second therapy for benzodiazepine-resistant status 
epilepticus (64).
Disclosures
Drs. Glauser, Alldredge, Arya, Bleck, Dodson, Garrity, Riviello, 
Sloan, and Treiman, along with Ms. Bare, have nothing to 
disclose relevant to this guideline. Dr. Shinnar serves on 
FIGURE 1. Proposed treatment algorithm for status epilepticus.
Disclaimer: This clinical algorithm/guideline is designed to assist clinicians by providing an analytical framework for evaluating and treating patients with status epilepticus.  It is 
not intended to establish a community standard of care, replace a clinician’s medical judgment, or establish a protocol for all patients.  The clinical conditions contemplated by this 
algorithm/guideline will not fit or work with all patients.  Approaches not covered in this algorithm/guideline may be appropriate.
 59
Convulsive Status Epilepticus Guideline
a Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) for a UCB Pharma 
clinical trial of a non–epilepsy-related drug. Dr. Gloss is an 
evidence-based methodologist of the American Academy of 
Neurology, a level-of-evidence associate editor of Neurol-
ogy, and has no disclosures relevant to this guideline. Dr. 
Bainbridge receives grant funding from UCB Pharma for a 
study in the elderly. Dr. Lowenstein is a principal investigator 
of the Human Epilepsy Project (HEP), which is supported by 
unrestricted grants to the Epilepsy Study Consortium from 
UCB Pharma, Finding A Cure for Epilepsy and Seizures, Pfizer, 
Eisai, Lundbeck, and The Andrews Foundation. The funding 
is for a study unrelated to status epilepticus. Dr. Pellock is 
a paid consultant for two companies (Pfizer and UCB). All 
grants, research support, consultant fees, and honoraria are 
paid to Virginia Commonwealth University or the physician 
practice plan (MCV Physicians). Dr. Pellock has no equity, 
stock, or any other ownership interest in either of these 
companies. Dr. Jagoda is a paid consultant for Pfizer, TEVA, 
and The Medicines Company for diseases unrelated to status 
epilepticus.
Added during proofs: While the AES guideline was developed 
prior to the ILAE’s revised definition of status epilepticus (Trinka 
et al., Epilepsia 2015;56:1515–1523), the 5 minute definition used 
in this guideline is fully consistent with the operational 5 minute 
time point (t1) for treatment initiation for convulsive status epilep-
ticus proposed in that document.
References
1. Glauser TA. Designing practical evidence-based treatment plans for 
children with prolonged seizures and status epilepticus. J Child Neurol 
2007;22(suppl 5):38S–46S.
2. Treatment of convulsive status epilepticus. Recommendations of the 
Epilepsy Foundation of America’s Working Group on Status Epilepti-
cus. JAMA 1993;270:854–859.
3. Shinnar S, Berg AT, Moshe SL, Shinnar R. How long do new-onset 
seizures in children last? Ann Neurol 2001;49:659–664.
4. Raspall-Chaure M, Chin RF, Neville BG, Bedford H, Scott RC. The epide-
miology of convulsive status epilepticus in children: A critical review. 
Epilepsia 2007;48:1652–1663.
5. DeLorenzo RJ, Hauser WA, Towne AR, Boggs JG, Pellock JM, Penberthy 
L, Garnett L, Fortner CA, Ko D. A prospective, population-based 
epidemiologic study of status epilepticus in Richmond, Virginia. 
Neurology 1996;46:1029–1035.
6. Wu YW, Shek DW, Garcia PA, Zhao S, Johnston SC. Incidence and 
mortality of generalized convulsive status epilepticus in California. 
Neurology 2002;58:1070–1076.
7. Hauser WA. Status epilepticus: Epidemiologic considerations. Neurol-
ogy 1990;40:9–13.
8. Maytal J, Shinnar S, Moshe SL, Alvarez LA. Low morbidity and mortal-
ity of status epilepticus in children. Pediatrics 1989;83:323–331.
9. Jagoda A, Riggio S. Refractory status epilepticus in adults. Ann Emerg 
Med 1993;22:1337–1348.
10. Logroscino G, Hesdorffer DC, Cascino GD, Annegers JF, Bagiella E, 
Hauser WA. Long-term mortality after a first episode of status epilep-
ticus. Neurology 2002;58:537–541.
11. DeLorenzo RJ, Towne AR, Pellock JM, Ko D. Status epilepticus in chil-
dren, adults, and the elderly. Epilepsia 1992;33(suppl 4):S15–S25.
12. Neligan A, Shorvon SD. Prognostic factors, morbidity and mortality in 
tonic-clonic status epilepticus: A review. Epilepsy Res 2011;93:1–10.
13. Considerations on designing clinical trials to evaluate the place of 
new antiepileptic drugs in the treatment of newly diagnosed and 
chronic patients with epilepsy. Epilepsia 1998;39:799–803.
14. Chadwick D. Monotherapy clinical trials of new antiepileptic drugs: 
Design, indications, and controversies. Epilepsia 1997;38(suppl 
9):S16–S20.
15. Riviello JJ Jr, Ashwal S, Hirtz D, Glauser T, Ballaban-Gil K, Kelley K, Mor-
ton LD, Phillips S, Sloan E, Shinnar S; American Academy of Neurology 
Subcommittee; Practice Committee of the Child Neurology Society. 
Practice parameter: Diagnostic assessment of the child with status 
epilepticus (an evidence-based review): Report of the Quality Stan-
dards Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology and 
the Practice Committee of the Child Neurology Society. Neurology 
2006;67:1542–1550.
16. Agency for Healthcare Policy and Research UDoHaHS. Acute pain 
management: Operative or medical procedures and trauma. In: Clini-
cal Practice Guideline No 1. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Policy 
and Research, 1993:107.
17. Edlund W, Gronseth G, So Y, Franklin G; for the Quality Standards 
Subcommittee (QSS) and the Therapeutics and Technology Assess-
ment Subcommittee (TTA). American Academy of Neurology Clinical 
Practice Guideline Process Manual. St. Paul, MN: American Academy of 
Neurology, 2004.
18. Prasad M, Krishnan PR, Sequeira R, Al-Roomi K. Anticonvul-
sant therapy for status epilepticus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2014;9:CD003723. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD003723.pub3.
19. Appleton R, Macleod S, Martland T. Drug management for acute 
tonic-clonic convulsions including convulsive status epilepti-
cus in children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2008;3:CD001905. 
doi:10.1002/14651858.CD001905.pub2.
20. Prasad K, Al-Roomi K, Krishnan PR, Sequeira R. Anticonvulsant 
therapy for status epilepticus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2005;Oct 
19;(4):CD003723 PMID:16235337.
21. Appleton R, Martland T, Phillips B. Drug management for acute 
tonic-clonic convulsions including convulsive status epilepti-
cus in children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2002;(4):CD001905. 
PMID:12519562
22. Treiman DM, Meyers PD, Walton NY, Collins JF, Colling C, Rowan AJ, 
Handforth A, Faught E, Calabrese VP, Uthman BM, Ramsay RE, Mam-
dani MB. A comparison of four treatments for generalized convulsive 
status epilepticus. Veterans Affairs Status Epilepticus Cooperative 
Study Group. N Engl J Med 1998;339:792–798.
23. Alldredge BK, Gelb AM, Isaacs SM, Corry MD, Allen F, Ulrich S, 
Gottwald MD, O’Neil N, Neuhaus JM, Segal MR, Lowenstein DH. 
A comparison of lorazepam, diazepam, and placebo for the 
treatment of out-of-hospital status epilepticus. N Engl J Med 
2001;345:631–637.
24. Silbergleit R, Durkalski V, Lowenstein D, Conwit R, Pancioli A, Palesch 
Y, Barsan W; NETT Investigators. Intramuscular versus intravenous 
therapy for prehospital status epilepticus. N Engl J Med 2012;366:591–
600.
25. Leppik IE, Derivan AT, Homan RW, Walker J, Ramsay RE, Patrick B. 
Double-blind study of lorazepam and diazepam in status epilepticus. 
JAMA 1983;249:1452–1454.
26. Gilad R, Izkovitz N, Dabby R, Rapoport A, Sadeh M, Weller B, Lampl Y. 
Treatment of status epilepticus and acute repetitive seizures with i.v. 
valproic acid vs phenytoin. Acta Neurol Scand 2008;118:296–300.
27. Misra UK, Kalita J, Patel R. Sodium valproate vs phenytoin in status 
epilepticus: A pilot study. Neurology 2006;67:340–342.
 60
Convulsive Status Epilepticus Guideline
28. Remy C, Jourdil N, Villemain D, Favel P, Genton P. Intrarectal diazepam 
in epileptic adults. Epilepsia 1992;33:353–358.
29. Shaner DM, McCurdy SA, Herring MO, Gabor AJ. Treatment of 
status epilepticus: A prospective comparison of diazepam and 
phenytoin versus phenobarbital and optional phenytoin. Neurology 
1988;38:202–207.
30. Misra UK, Kalita J, Maurya PK. Levetiracetam versus lorazepam in 
status epilepticus: A randomized, open labeled pilot study. J Neurol 
2012;259:645–648.
31. Agarwal P, Kumar N, Chandra R, Gupta G, Antony AR, Garg N. 
Randomized study of intravenous valproate and phenytoin in status 
epilepticus. Seizure 2007;16:527–532.
32. Chen WB, Gao R, Su YY, Zhao JW, Zhang YZ, Wang L, Ren Y, Fan CQ. 
Valproate versus diazepam for generalized convulsive status epilepti-
cus: A pilot study. Eur J Neurol 2011;18:1391–1396.
33. Treiman DM, Walton N, Collins JF, Point P. Treatment of status epilepti-
cus if first drug fails. Epilepsia 1999;40:153–156.
34. Chamberlain JM, Okada P, Holsti M, Mahajan P, Brown KM, Vance C, 
Gonzalez V, Lichenstein R, Stanley R, Brousseau DC, Grubenhoff J, 
Zemek R, Johnson DW, Clemons TE, Baren J; Pediatric Emergency 
Care Applied Research Network (PECARN). Lorazepam vs diazepam 
for pediatric status epilepticus: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA 
2014;311:1652–1660.
35. Appleton R, Sweeney A, Choonara I, Robson J, Molyneux E. Loraz-
epam versus diazepam in the acute treatment of epileptic seizures 
and status epilepticus. Dev Med Child Neurol 1995;37:682–688.
36. Chamberlain JM, Altieri MA, Futterman C, Young GM, Ochsenschlager 
DW, Waisman Y. A prospective, randomized study comparing intra-
muscular midazolam with intravenous diazepam for the treatment of 
seizures in children. Pediatr Emerg Care 1997;13:92–94.
37. Fisgin T, Gurer Y, Tezic T, Senbil N, Zorlu P
, Okuyaz C, Akgün D. Effects 
of intranasal midazolam and rectal diazepam on acute convulsions in 
children: Prospective randomized study. J Child Neurol 2002;17:123–126.
38. Lahat E, Goldman M, Barr J, Bistritzer T, Berkovitch M. Comparison of 
intranasal midazolam with intravenous diazepam for treating febrile 
seizures in children: Prospective randomised study. BMJ 2000;321:83–
86.
39. Mahmoudian T, Zadeh MM. Comparison of intranasal midazolam 
with intravenous diazepam for treating acute seizures in children. 
Epilepsy Behav 2004;5:253–255.
40. Scott RC, Besag FM, Neville BG. Buccal midazolam and rectal 
diazepam for treatment of prolonged seizures in childhood and 
adolescence: A randomised trial. Lancet 1999;353:623–626.
41. Baysun S, Aydin OF, Atmaca E, Gurer YK. A comparison of buccal 
midazolam and rectal diazepam for the acute treatment of seizures. 
Clin Pediatr (Phila) 2005;44:771–776.
42. McIntyre J, Robertson S, Norris E, Appleton R, Whitehouse WP, Phil-
lips B, Martland T, Berry K, Collier J, Smith S, Choonara I. Safety and 
efficacy of buccal midazolam versus rectal diazepam for emergency 
treatment of seizures in children: A randomised controlled trial. 
Lancet 2005;366:205–210.
43. Shah I, Deshmukh CT. Intramuscular midazolam vs intravenous diaz-
epam for acute seizures. Indian J Pediatr 2005;72:667–670.
44. Ahmad S, Ellis JC, Kamwendo H, Molyneux E. Efficacy and safety 
of intranasal lorazepam versus intramuscular paraldehyde for 
protracted convulsions in children: An open randomised trial. Lancet 
2006;367:1591–1597.
45. Bhattacharyya M, Kalra V, Gulati S. Intranasal midazolam vs rectal diaz-
epam in acute childhood seizures. Pediatr Neurol 2006;34:355–359.
46. Mittal P, Manohar R, Rawat AK. Comparative study of intranasal 
midazolam and intravenous diazepam sedation for procedures and 
seizures. Indian J Pediatr 2006;73:975–978.
47. Mpimbaza A, Ndeezi G, Staedke S, Rosenthal PJ, Byarugaba J. Com-
parison of buccal midazolam with rectal diazepam in the treatment 
of prolonged seizures in Ugandan children: A randomized clinical 
trial. Pediatrics 2008;121:e58–64. doi:10.1542/peds.2007-0930.
48. Talukdar B, Chakrabarty B. Efficacy of buccal midazolam compared 
to intravenous diazepam in controlling convulsions in children: A 
randomized controlled trial. Brain Dev 2009;31:744–749.
49. Sreenath TG, Gupta P, Sharma KK, Krishnamurthy S. Lorazepam versus 
diazepam-phenytoin combination in the treatment of convulsive 
status epilepticus in children: A randomized controlled trial. Eur J 
Paediatr Neurol 2010;14:162–168.
50. Ashrafi MR, Khosroshahi N, Karimi P, Malamiri RA, Bavarian B, Zarch 
AV, Mirzaei M, Kompani F. Efficacy and usability of buccal midazolam 
in controlling acute prolonged convulsive seizures in children. Eur J 
Paediatr Neurol 2010;14:434–438.
51. Holsti M, Dudley N, Schunk J, Adelgais K, Greenberg R, Olsen C, Healy 
A, Firth S, Filloux F. Intranasal midazolam vs rectal diazepam for the 
home treatment of acute seizures in pediatric patients with epilepsy. 
Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 2010;164:747–753.
52. Arya R, Gulati S, Kabra M, Sahu JK, Kalra V. Intranasal versus intrave-
nous lorazepam for control of acute seizures in children: A random-
ized open-label study. Epilepsia 2011;52:788–793.
53. Javadzadeh M, Sheibani K, Hashemieh M, Saneifard H. Intranasal 
midazolam compared with intravenous diazepam in patients suffer-
ing from acute seizure: A randomized clinical trial. Iranian J Pediatr 
2012;22:1–8.
54. Malu CK, Kahamba DM, Walker TD, Mukampunga C, Musalu EM, Ko-
kolomani J, Mayamba RM, Wilmshurst JM, Dubru JM, Misson JP. Effica-
cy of sublingual lorazepam versus intrarectal diazepam for prolonged 
convulsions in Sub-Saharan Africa. J Child Neurol 2013;29:895–902.
55. Portela JL, Garcia PC, Piva JP, Barcelos A, Bruno F, Branco R, Tasker RC. 
Intramuscular midazolam versus intravenous diazepam for treatment 
of seizures in the pediatric emergency department: A randomized 
clinical trial. Med Intensiva 2014;39:160–166.
56. Rai A, Aggarwal A, Mittal H, Sharma S. Comparative efficacy and 
safety of intravenous valproate and phenytoin in children. Pediatr 
Neurol 2011;45:300–304.
57. Welch RD, Nicholas K, Durkalski-Mauldin VL, Lowenstein DH, Conwit 
R, Mahajan PV, Lewandowski C, Silbergleit R; Neurological Emergen-
cies Treatment Trials (NETT) Network Investigators. Intramuscular 
midazolam versus intravenous lorazepam for the prehospital 
treatment of status epilepticus in the pediatric population. Epilepsia 
2015;56:254–262.
58. Malamiri RA, Ghaempanah M, Khosroshahi N, Nikkhah A, Bavarian 
B, Ashrafi MR. Efficacy and safety of intravenous sodium valproate 
versus phenobarbital in controlling convulsive status epilepticus and 
acute prolonged convulsive seizures in children: A randomised trial. 
Eur J Paediatr Neurol 2012;16:536–541.
59. Cereghino JJ, Mitchell WG, Murphy J, Kriel RL, Rosenfeld WE, Treva-
than E. Treating repetitive seizures with a rectal diazepam formula-
tion: A randomized study. The North American Diastat Study Group. 
Neurology 1998;51:1274–1282.
60. Dreifuss FE, Rosman NP, Cloyd JC, Pellock JM, Kuzniecky RI, Lo WD, 
Matsuo F, Sharp GB, Conry JA, Bergen DC, Bell WE. A comparison of 
rectal diazepam gel and placebo for acute repetitive seizures. N Engl J 
Med 1998;338:1869–1875.
 61
Convulsive Status Epilepticus Guideline
61. Cloyd J. Pharmacologic considerations in the treatment of repetitive 
or prolonged seizures. J Child Neurol 2007;22(suppl 5):47S–52S.
62. McMullan J, Sasson C, Pancioli A, Silbergleit R. Midazolam versus di-
azepam for the treatment of status epilepticus in children and young 
adults: A meta-analysis. Acad Emerg Med 2010;17:575–582.
63. DeToledo JC, Ramsay RE. Fosphenytoin and phenytoin in patients 
with status epilepticus: Improved tolerability versus increased costs. 
Drug Saf 2000;22:459–466.
64. Bleck T, Cock H, Chamberlain J, Cloyd J, Connor J, Elm J, Fountain 
N, Jones E, Lowenstein D, Shinnar S, Silbergleit R, Treiman D, Trinka 
E, Kapur J. The established status epilepticus trial 2013. Epilepsia 
2013;54(suppl 6):89–92.
65. Brophy GM, Bell R, Claassen J, Alldredge B, Bleck TP, Glauser T, 
Laroche SM, Riviello JJ Jr, Shutter L, Sperling MR, Treiman DM, Vespa 
PM; Neurocritical Care Society Status Epilepticus Guideline Writing 
Committee. Guidelines for the evaluation and management of status 
epilepticus. Neurocrit Care 2012;17:3–23.
66. Mehta V, Singhi P, Singhi S. Intravenous sodium valproate versus 
diazepam infusion for the control of refractory status epilepticus in 
children: A randomized controlled trial. J Child Neurol 2007;22:1191–
1197.
67. Abend NS, Monk HM, Licht DJ, Dlugos DJ. Intravenous levetiracetam 
in critically ill children with status epilepticus or acute repetitive 
seizures. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2009;10:505–510.
68. Aiguabella M, Falip M, Villanueva V, de la Peña P, Molins A, 
Garcia-Morales I, Saiz RA, Pardo J, Tortosa D, Sansa G, Miró J. 
Efficacy of intravenous levetiracetam as an add-on treatment 
in status epilepticus: A multicentric observational study. Seizure 
2011;20:60–64.
69. Alvarez V, Januel JM, Burnand B, Rossetti AO. Second-line status 
epilepticus treatment: Comparison of phenytoin, valproate, and 
levetiracetam. Epilepsia 2011;52:1292–1296.
70. Goraya JS, Khurana DS, Valencia I, Melvin JJ, Cruz M, Legido A, Kothare 
SV. Intravenous levetiracetam in children with epilepsy. Pediatr Neurol 
2008;38:177–180.
71. Ruegg S, Hunziker P, Marsch S, Schindler C. Association of environ-
mental factors with the onset of status epilepticus. Epilepsy Behav 
2008;12:66–73.
72. Santamarina E, Toledo M, Sueiras M, Raspall M, Ailouti N, Lainez 
E, Porta I, De Gracia R, Quintana M, Alvarez-Sabín J, Salas-Puig J. 
Usefulness of intravenous lacosamide in status epilepticus. J Neurol 
2013;260:3122–3128.
