 REVIEW
Emerging Concepts on the Gut Microbiome
and Multiple Sclerosis
Justin D. Glenn and Ellen M. Mowry
Microbiota of the human body perform fundamental tasks that contribute to normal development, health, and
homeostasis and are intimately associated with numerous organ systems, including the gut. Microbes begin gut
inhabitance immediately following birth and promote proper gut epithelial construction and function, metab-
olism and nutrition, and immune system development. Inappropriate immune recognition of self-tissue can lead
to autoimmune disease, including conditions such as multiple sclerosis (MS), in which the immune system
recognizes and attacks central nervous system tissue. Preclinical studies have demonstrated a requirement of gut
microbiota for neuroinflammatory autoimmune disease in animal models, and a growing number of clinical
investigations are finding associations between MS status and the composition of the gut microbiota. In this
review, we examine current undertakings into better understanding the role of gut bacteria and their phages in
MS development, review associations of the gut microbiota makeup and MS, and discuss potential mechanisms
by which the gut microbiota may be manipulated for therapeutic benefit.
Introduction
T
he human body is an exquisite composition of cells
derived from every taxonomic domain. Over time, hu-
man eukaryotic cells, and those of most other higher-level
mammals, have evolved to acquire diverse structural and
functional phenotypes that are grouped into higher-level
organs and systems that work in concert to promote a stable
well-being (homeostasis) and survival of the organism.
These cell-based systems vary in anatomical space, and as
such may be relatively sessile (ie, central nervous system) or
dispersed throughout the organism (ie, the immune system).
Interspersed on and within various human cell-based sys-
tems are also collections of diverse nonhuman microbial
organisms and entities.
The total microbial collection within a specific anatomi-
cal niche is known as microbiota, while the entirety of genes
derived from the microbiota comprises its microbiome. It is
estimated that microbes of the collective microbiota out-
number human somatic and germline cells by a factor of 10
and inhabit vast stretches of human skin and mucosa, espe-
cially of the lung and genital microenvironments, though the
largest collection (*70%) resides in the gut (Savage 1977;
Backhed and others 2005). Of the different microbial do-
mains composing the microbiome, we will focus on bacteria
and viruses, as these are the most numerous and highly in-
vestigated members. Current methods to study bacteria in the
gut consist of collecting DNA from stool and using high-
throughput gene sequencing of bacterial 16S rRNA and
bioinformatics analyses (Backhed and others 2005; Jandhyala
and others 2015). Bacteriophages, which are the most abun-
dant viral entities of the gut, are studied by viral particle
concentration from stool, elimination of contaminating cells
and nucleic acids, amplifying viral sequences and metage-
nomics analyses (Dalmasso and others 2014).
The gut microbiota lies in close association with the host
immune system and both play crucial roles in regulating gut
development and immunity. Altered host immunogenetics
and environmental factors can result in disease pathogenesis
as in the case of autoimmune disease. A growing number of
studies are exploring the contributions of the gut microbiota
to the development of multiple sclerosis (MS) and suggest
this field as a potential novel target for MS therapeutics and
prevention.
The Gut Microbiome
Bacteria
The adult human intestine is populated by an astonish-
ing 100 trillion microbes, and its microbiome contains at
least 100 times the number of genes of the human genome
(Savage 1977; Backhed and others 2005). Indeed, bacteria
within this environment reach the highest cellular densities
of any ecosystem studied (Whitman and others 1998). Given
the enormity of this population, it is surprising that at the
division level, bacterial diversity diminishes. Only 8 of 55
Division of Neuroimmunology and Neurological Infections, Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland.
JOURNAL OF INTERFERON & CYTOKINE RESEARCH
Volume 36, Number 6, 2016
ª Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.
DOI: 10.1089/jir.2015.0177
347
Downloaded by 77.173.35.219 from www.liebertpub.com at 06/02/19. For personal use only. 
 known bacterial divisions have been observed in the gut
(Hugenholtz and others 1998; Eckburg and others 2005).
Those of the divisions cytophaga-flavobacterium-bacteroides
and Firmicutes reach considerably large percentages at
*30% of bacteria each, while Proteobacteria and Actino-
bacteria are observed but at low abundance; it is this bacte-
ria divisional makeup that suggests a healthy human gut
(Backhed and others 2005; Eckburg and others 2005;
Jandhyala and others 2015).
Infants are rapidly colonized by bacteria shortly after
birth from the mother and environment, and infant mode of
delivery is thought to impact bacterial colonization. Babies
born by vaginal delivery (Andersch-Bjorkman and others
2007) are exposed to maternal vaginal and intestinal mi-
crobiota, while those born via caesarian section delivery
(CS) lack these contacts (Neu and Rushing 2011). Studies
have shown that infants born by CS have delayed bacterial
colonization, which may even last for 6 months (Gronlund
and others 1999). Furthermore, delivery-based differences in
the intestinal microbial makeup has been observed in 7-year
old children, with those by vaginal delivery having signifi-
cantly higher numbers of Clostridia (Salminen and others
2004). Long term, those delivered via CS may exhibit an
abnormal development of the immune system due to ab-
normal infant GI tract colonization (Neu and Rushing 2011).
Bacteria of the gut microbiota contribute tremendously to
maintaining healthy human physiology, with many functions
that can only be achieved by bacterial intervention. These
functions largely consist of (a) complex carbohydrate me-
tabolism and nutrient extraction; (b) xenobiotic metabolism;
(c) antimicrobial protection; (d) promoting gut barrier func-
tion; and (e) contributing to shape gut immunity (Fig. 1).
Viruses
In addition to bacteria, viruses are even more bountiful in
the human gut and comprise both eukaryotic and prokary-
otic types. We will highlight prokaryotic viruses, particu-
larly the bacteriophages, as these are the most numerous
biological entities of the human gut and engage in complex
interactions with gut bacteria of the microbiome. Bacter-
iophages (phages) can be extracted from human feces at 109
virus-like particles (VLP) per gram and may inhabit up to
1014 bacterial cells in the gut (Rohwer 2003; Breitbart and
others 2008). Phages vary in the types of bacterial surface
molecules that they target for binding, and thus viral tro-
pisms exist for certain strains of bacteria for a given bac-
terial species. Generally, phages exhibit 2 lifecycles: the
lytic phase/lifecycle, in which a phage infects the bacterial
cell and kills it upon replication and viral release, and the
lysogenic phase/lifecycle, in which the phage infects the
bacterial cell and integrates its viral genome into the host
bacterial genome without inducing lysis and simultaneously
maintains its genome in a latent form (prophage) (Dalmasso
and others 2014). Under a range of stimuli, the prophage
may exit latency and enter the lytic phase.
The principle intestinal phages consist of (1) the tailed,
double-stranded DNA viruses of the order Caudovirales
(Podoviridae, Siphoviridae, and Myoviridae) and (2) the tail-
less, cubic or filamentous, single-stranded DNA viruses of
Microviridae (Ackermann 2009; Minot and others 2011; Foca
and others 2015). Phages appear in the newborn human gut as
early as 1 week after birth at 108 VLP per gram of feces and
exhibit low diversity, as in the case of bacteria (Breitbart and
others 2008).However, it is possible thatmore viral genotypes
remain to be discovered, as a large number of assembled
contigs from a recent metagenomics investigation matched no
known public sequences (Reyes and others 2010; Minot and
others 2011; Wagner and others 2013).
As these are viruses that infect bacteria, most of their
effects are manifested in changes to bacterial phenotype,
and they thus represent an extra dimension of regulation on
bacterial dynamism within the gut microenvironment. Bac-
teria may utilize a form of immunity known as CRISPR
(clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats)
to evade phage infection (Gasiunas and others 2014). Here,
the bacterial genome contains a region of short DNA repeats
that are regularly spaced and contain variable, foreign phage
DNA between them. Upon recognition of foreign nucleic
acid, the CRISPR system matches the foreign nucleic acid to
FIG. 1.
Functions of bacteria in the human intestinal tract. Gut bacteria perform a range of functions in the human gut,
including participating in metabolism of complex biopolymers, metabolism of drugs and foreign agents, promoting the
production of AMPs, and stimulating proper development of intestinal structures and parenchymal functions. AMPs,
antimicrobial molecules.
348
GLENN AND MOWRY
Downloaded by 77.173.35.219 from www.liebertpub.com at 06/02/19. For personal use only. 
 its complementary sequence saved between 2 spacers and
proceeds to cleave the intruding sequence, thus thwarting
infection. However, phages have also been shown to counter
bacterial immunity (Seed and others 2013; Villion and
Moineau 2013).
Regulation of the Gut Microbiome
Bacteria–bacteriophage interaction
Most human gutphages exhibit a temperate lifecycle in which
the phage is able to undergo lytic or lysogenic lifecycles (Dal-
masso and others 2014). When phages incorporate viral DNA
into bacterial chromosomes, they may transfer exogenous seg-
ments or whole gene clusters into the host bacterial chromosome
by gene transfer (horizontal gene transfer if exogenous bacterial
DNA is introduced), which may occur via transduction or ly-
sogenic conversion (Brussow and others 2004).
In transduction, a phage introduces DNA from previous
bacteria into a new bacterial chromosome, as exhibited in
some Streptomyces spp. (Burke and others 2001). Im-
portantly, lysogenic conversion can wield crucial power in
determining bacterial pathogenicity through the introduction
of genes that increase bacterial fitness, such as preventing
lytic infection and endowing bacteria with toxins. In some
cases, phage DNA integration may even disrupt host bacterial
genes. The outcome of phage-mediated gene transfer in
bacteria is dynamic and heavily dependent on environmental
stress. In a recent example, antibiotic treatment led to an
enrichment of phage-encoded resistance genes in gut bacteria,
which promoted host colonization and growth adaptation,
ultimately strengthening connections between the phageome
and gut bacteria (Reyes and others 2013); such an observation
may represent 1 mechanism of bacterial adaptation and po-
tential drug resistance.
Bacteriophages are also thought to exert beneficial in-
fluences on the human host outside of the bacterium, as they
are populous in the gut mucus layer and bind to mucin
glycoproteins with immunoglobulin-like domains on their
capsids (Barr and others 2013). This interaction contributes
to gut epithelial protection from bacteria.
The bacteria and their phages are in constant interaction
within the gut, and each strives to regulate the other. However, it
is possible that phages may negatively affect bacterial commu-
nities in the host by promoting dysbiosis, in which the balance of
bacterial symbionts and pathogens has been skewed, which may
ultimately translate into disease (Foca and others 2015). Though
there is scant investigation into the contribution of gut phages to
bacterial dysbiosis, several rational scenarios have been pro-
posed (De Paepe and others 2014).
In the ‘‘Kill the winner’’ mechanism, phages target and kill
only the dominant bacterial species, thus indicating viral
predation based on bacterial density. This has been explored
in a study of GF mice colonized with 15 known human
symbiotic bacteria and subsequently infected with a combi-
nation of phages (Reyes and others 2013). Changes in the
community structure were observed though transient. The
‘‘biological weapon’’ model has also been suggested in which
commensal bacteria would use its own phage to kill com-
petitive bacteria by inducing lysis (Bossi and others 2003;
Brown and others 2006). ‘‘Community shuffling’’ holds that
stressful scenarios such as antibiotic treatment, inflammation,
and oxidative stress may lead to the induction of prophages
and eventually alter the symbiont/pathobiont relationship (De
Paepe and others 2014). Evidence for this model comes from
studies in Escherichia coli (Zhang and others 2000) and
Clostridium difficile (Meessen-Pinard and others 2012). As
discussed earlier, lateral gene transfer is potentially a critical
mechanism of dysbiosis, in which viral virulent genes are
endowed to bacteria, as in the case of E. coli strain O104:H4,
in which an E. coli strain acquired Shiga-toxin via lysogenic
conversion (Muniesa and others 2012).
Host gut immunity and microbiome
Commensal bacteria and their phages perform indis-
pensable tasks for the human organism, yet their very for-
eign identity, along with their potential virulence and the
existence of pathogenic bacteria and viruses, necessitates a
fully functional immune system that continuously interacts
with this microbiome (Fig. 2). This interaction is bidirec-
tional; the gut microbiota elicits a specific immune micro-
environment in the gut for the sake of gut homeostasis and
optimal parenchymal function, while the immune system
controls the species composition of the gut microbiota for
optimal growth and nutritional benefit. Dysfunction on ei-
ther end of this transaction can lead to disease.
First, bacteria (and presumably their phages) are abso-
lutely required for the development of the intestinal immune
system, as documented by studies in axenic (GF) mice
(Smith and others 2007). Axenic mice exhibit a range of
intestinal immune structural and cellular defects, including
general reduction in lymphoid tissue size, smaller mesen-
teric lymph nodes, which contain fewer cells and no ger-
minal centers; reduction in the number and size of Peyer’s
patches; and a reduction in the number of intraepithelial
lymphocytes, all in combination with defects to aforemen-
tioned epithelial cellular defects. Interestingly, these defects
can be reversed with bacterial colonization and touts the
potential therapeutic use of commensal administration for
corrective defects in intestinal immune defects (Smith and
others 2007; Palm and others 2015).
Furthermore, bacteria can be classified into 2 distinct
categories, each of which is dependent on the response
they elicit from the immune system: immunosuppression
or proinflammation.
Extensive investigation into the proinflammatory effects
of the immune system in the gut have been done with a
limited group of bacteria. Studies using segmented fila-
mentous bacteria (SFB) have by far revealed much about
induction of inflammatory responses (Schnupf and others
2013). SFB (Candidatus Arthromatis) represent a unique
clade of commensals in mice, and perhaps in humans, that
are most related to the Type I Clostridia (Kuwahara and
others 2011). They are intimately associated with the gut
epithelium and are primarily recognized as strong drivers of
immune responses. Studies in mice mono-colonized with
SFB demonstrated that they dramatically induce the number
of intestinal IgA+ B cells and increase the concentration of
secretory IgA in the intestinal lumen (Klaasen and others
1993). Underlying this observation was a short-lived but
strong activation of germinal centers in Peyer’s patches by
SFB (Talham and others 1999). SFB also strongly expand
the number of intraepithelial lymphocytes, including gd T
cells and CD8+ T cells (Schnupf and others 2013). Of all
proinflammatory immune cells stimulated by SFB, TH17
GUT MICROBIOME AND MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
349
Downloaded by 77.173.35.219 from www.liebertpub.com at 06/02/19. For personal use only. 
 cells have garnered the most attention. Intestinal dendritic
cell presentation of SFB antigen is required for TH17 de-
velopment in the gut mucosa (Gaboriau-Routhiau and others
2009; Ivanov and others 2009). SFB colonization also pro-
tects against pathogenic infection by Citrobacter rodentium
(Ivanov and others 2009); this is a prime example of the
importance of indigenous bacterial colonization as a means of
combating pathogenic bacterial infection.
TH17 cells mainly produce the cytokines IL-17A, IL-17F,
IL-21, and IL-22, which are critical to controlling fungal and
bacterial infections and maintaining antimicrobial gut
function. Both IL-17 cytokines recruit neutrophils to the
infection site for bacterial phagocytosis and induce epithe-
lial production of the chemokine CCL20, which recruits
even more TH17 cells to the site via binding to the che-
mokine receptor CCR6 on the TH17 cell surface (Huber and
others 2012). These cytokines also increase the production
of b-defensin by epithelial cells (Liang and others 2006;
Ishigame and others 2009). In addition to the IL-17 cyto-
kines, TH17-produced IL-22 promotes epithelial layer in-
tegrity and antimicrobial homeostasis by inducing the
expression of antimicrobial molecules (AMPs) from the
epithelium, promoting epithelial cell proliferation, survival,
and tissue repair (Huber and others 2012).
In addition to SFB, the Gram-negative bacterium Heli-
cobacter hepaticus has been shown to promote TH17 re-
sponses and those of TH1 cells, which are marked by
production of the proinflammatory cytokine interferon-g
(IFNg) and are important for defense against intracellular
pathogens such as intracellular bacteria and viruses (Palm
and others 2015).
As bacteria of the microbiome do represent a foreign yet
beneficial entity to the host, their presence also elicits im-
munosuppressive immune responses to tolerate commensal
gut microbes. Mechanisms of immunosuppression include
induction of immune cell subsets that dampen immune re-
sponses and the suppression of proinflammatory immune
cells. One of the most prominent immunosuppressive cells
of the intestine is the regulatory CD4+ T cell (Treg), which
is induced by the activation of CD4+ T cells in the presence
of the immunosuppressive cytokine transforming growth
factor-b (TGF-b). These cells produce the anti-inflammatory
cytokines IL-10 and TGF-b, which potently decrease pro-
inflammatory cytokine production and cell proliferation.
GF mice colonized with a microbiota known as Altered
Schaedler’s Flora induce Treg to the intestine and are re-
quired for homeostasis and prevention of colitis (Geuking
and others 2011). Furthermore, a consortium of bacteria
from the genus Clostridium from conventionally reared
mice was shown to induce mobilization of Treg to the in-
testine (Atarashi and others 2011). A rational selection of 17
Clostridia from human fecal samples that enhance Treg
abundance in the gut was shown to attenuate mouse models
of colitis and allergic diarrhea after oral administration
FIG. 2.
Cross-regulation among bacteriophages, bacteria, and immune system in the gut. Bacteria, their phages, and the
gut epithelia and immune system engage in complex cross-regulations to maintain gut homeostasis. Bacteriophages infect
bacteria and through a largely temperate lysogeny can horizontally transfer genes or disrupt genes to affect bacterial
colonization and growth. Bacteria also limit phage infection through CRISPR immunity. Bacteria promote proper gut
lymphoid tissue development, AMP production, and induce the development of immunosuppressive and proinflammatory
immune cell types, dependent on the bacterial species. These very cell types then work together with AMPs to limit
bacterial contact to gut epithelia. Bacteriophages are known to bind mucin and also aid in limiting bacteria-epithelial
adhesion but how gut immune cells and epithelia directly affect bacteriophages remains largely unknown. As each com-
ponent is situated as an intermediary among the other 2, and all are connected, indirect regulation among the 3 components
also occurs. [, promote, Y, suppress.
350
GLENN AND MOWRY
Downloaded by 77.173.35.219 from www.liebertpub.com at 06/02/19. For personal use only. 
 (Atarashi and others 2013). Furthermore, Clostridia are
major producers of short chain fatty acids (SCFAs), which
have been demonstrated to induce Tregs (Palm and others
2015). SCFAs, especially butyrate, induce Treg formation via
epigenetic regulation in the form of increased acetylation of the
locus of Foxp3, which is the master transcription factor of
TGF-b production (Arpaia and others 2013; Furusawa and
others 2013; Smith and others 2013). In addition to bacteria of
the genus Clostridia, Bacteroides fragilis induces Treg devel-
opment by its production of capsular polysaccharide A (PSA),
which is recognized by TLR2 on Tregs (Round and Mazma-
nian 2009; Round and others 2011).
Other immune cell types that are affected by intestinal
microbiota include invariant natural killer T cells (iNKT
cells) and innate lymphoid cells (ILCs). iNKT cells are a T-
cell subset that expresses the invariant T-cell receptor
a-chain (Sommer and Backhed 2013). These cells are proin-
flammatory, as following activation they produce the cyto-
kines IFNg, IL-2, IL-17A, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)
among others, which promote TH1 and TH17 immune re-
sponses. Importantly, GF mice have increased numbers of
these cells in the intestine, which suggests that the gut mi-
crobiota serve to limit their potentially exacerbated proin-
flammatory presence (Olszak and others 2012). ILCs rapidly
respond to inflammatory cues and develop along effector
pathways parallel to those of CD4+ T cells; for instance,
Type 3 ILCs express the transcription factor retinoid-related
orphan receptor g t (RORgt, which promotes TH17 devel-
opment) and produce IL-17A and IL-22 (Jandhyala and
others 2015). Studies have shown that the bacterial metab-
olite indole-3-aldehyde stimulates ILC production of IL-22
via the aryl hydrocarbon receptor, which is expressed in
type 3 ILCs (Zelante and others 2013). Interestingly, loss of
MHC-II on ILC3 induces TH17 development independently
of SFB, which may indicate a regulatory role of ILC3 on gut
TH17 differentiation (Goto and others 2014).
The interplay of the gut bacterial microenvironment with the
gut immune system is further compounded by the crosstalk of
bacteria-bacteriophage and direct interactions of bacterio-
phages and the immune system. It is conceivable that bacte-
riophages could interact indirectly with the gut immune system
by manipulating gut bacteria via the aforementioned mecha-
nisms discussed, and bacteriophages are presumed to be strong
drivers of intestinal bacterial biodiversity. Although the phages
predominate over other microbes of the gut, how they directly
interact with the intestinal immune system is very poorly un-
derstood and understudied.
In nonimmunized humans and animal sera, a low level
of phage antibodies are detectable, and most are neutral-
izing against the phage tail (Jerne 1956; Kamme 1973;
Kucharewicz-Krukowska and Slopek 1987). Few studies
have addressed the effects of phages on T cells; Srivastava
and others (2004) reported no significant difference in phage
clearance between WT and T cell-deficient mice, thus
suggesting an insignificant T cell-mediated role in antiphage
immune responses. However, phages can exert an immu-
nosuppressive effect on T-cell function, as purified T4
phage has been shown to suppress human T-cell prolifera-
tion (Gorski and others 2006). Studies investigating bacte-
riophage treatment in tuberculous guinea pigs showed that
mycobacteriophages
suppressed
phytohemagglutinin-
induced activation of T lymphocytes in a dose-dependent
fashion (Mankiewicz and others 1974). Unpublished data
from Gorski and others suggest that phages inhibit some
dendritic cell functions and NFkB activation. Phagocytosis
and generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) are critical
functions of innate immune cells that maintain appropriate
bacterial densities in the gut, though excessive activity can
also drive pathology. Phagocytes, including neutrophils and
monocytes, preincubated with T4 and F8 (a Pseudomonas
aeruginosa phage) exhibited a reduction in phagocytosis of
E. coli (Przerwa and others 2006). However, in vivo phage-
affected neutrophil phagocytosis varied depended on pre-
treatment with bacteria. ROS can be quickly generated by
respiratory bursts in phagocytes. T4 phages can suppress
E. coli-induced respiratory burst with preincubation with the
bacteria (Przerwa and others 2006). Other reports suggest
that staphylococcal A3/R purified phage or lysates may have
no effect on phagocytic respiratory burst, thus suggesting that
this effect may be bacteriophage dependent (Borysowski and
others 2010).
In the context of cytokine production, phages display
largely mixed results, which may reflect the differential
effects of bacteriophage cell tropism and/or mode of phage
preparation. While purified Staphylococcus aureus phage
can increase IL-6 production in activated splenocytes, it
may also decrease it, along with decreasing TNFa produc-
tion (Zimecki and others 2003). The preparation staphage
lysate induced the cytokines TNFa, IL-1b, IFNg, and IL-10
in human mononuclear cultures (Gorski and others 2012).
Moreover, purified preparations of the T4 phage decrease
IL-2 and IL-6 production in these cells, but its lysate in-
creases that of IL-6 (Gorski and others 2012). These ob-
servations show the complexity of phage effects on immune
cells and the potential confounding effects phage use may
have in treatment depending on the therapeutic outcome
desired. Purified phage preparations appear to elicit more
immunosuppressive outcomes, which could depend on di-
rect phage immunomodulation or reducing the burden of
bacteria and thus driving down bacterial antigen load. On
the contrary, lytic phage infection could cause an increase in
bacterial antigen and exposure to the immune system.
The Gut Microbiome, Autoimmune Disease,
and MS
The gut microbiota is a direct product of the environment
and is situated topologically outside of the host; as such, it is
in constant contact with external environmental factors
against which it must maintain equilibrium. However, it
must also maintain normal, physiologic associations with
the host gut stroma, parenchyma, and immune system.
Numerous metagenomic investigations show that there ex-
ists
limited
physiologically
acceptable
temporo-spatial
changes in the dynamics of the gut microbiota (including
microbial composition, specific bacterial densities and ra-
tios, and phenotypes) that are compatible with overall
healthy intestinal function. On the other side, the immune
system, in concert with gut epithelia, must keep commensal
bacteria and other microbiota at acceptable distance from
the epithelium, contribute to bacterial homeostasis, and
preserve the epithelial border from insult while allowing
proper nutritional absorption. Alterations to various pa-
rameters on either side of the gut host-microbiome micro-
cosm can result in serious complications, from improper
nutrition to autoimmune disease.
GUT MICROBIOME AND MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
351
Downloaded by 77.173.35.219 from www.liebertpub.com at 06/02/19. For personal use only. 
 Multiple sclerosis
Broadly, autoimmune pathogenesis defines conditions in
which the host immune system is activated to mount in-
appropriate inflammatory immune responses against host
cells, and includes conditions such as systemic lupus er-
ythematosus, type-1 diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, and MS.
MS is a debilitating, inflammatory autoimmune disease of
the central nervous system characterized by axonal demy-
elination and neurodegeneration (Wekerle and Kurchus
2006). It is thought to be mainly a disease of the Western
world and, like most autoimmune diseases, has an increased
female: male disease ratio (Trojano and others 2012). Al-
though its etiology remains unknown, MS development is
multifactorial, involving both heritable, genetic components
and environmental components.
Epidemiological and genome-wide association studies have
identified common MS risk-associated loci, mostly immune
related, including 2 human leukocyte antigen (HLA) alleles
DRB1· 1501 and DQ6, IL2RA, IL7R, IRF8, TNFRSF1A, and
CD40 (Bush and others 2010). In addition, defects in toler-
ance mechanisms have been identified in MS (Gonsette
2012). It is possible that the associated HLA molecules may
be more apt at presenting antigen to T cells in the process of
MS development, there is change in the activation threshold
of certain components of the overall immune response asso-
ciated with certain immune susceptibility loci, and there is an
abnormal escape of self-antigen-specific T cells from the
thymus in MS. These factors in some combination could
greatly contribute to MS development.
Environmental associations with the risk of MS develop-
ment are greatly varied; those confirmed include lower vita-
min D levels, cigarette smoking, viral infection (Epstein-Barr
virus), and obesity, although this list is suspected to be in-
complete (Hedstrom and others 2012; Summerday and others
2012; Wingerchuk 2012; Pender and Burrows 2014). Since
the incidence of MS has increased in many locations
throughout the world, there is increased attention focused on
identifying other environmental risk factors for MS. Given its
association with the risk of other autoimmune diseases,
studies of the gut microbiota are critical (Ho and others 2015).
The gut microbiome and MS
The gut microbiome and models of MS.
The impact of the
gut microbiome on MS development has its roots in several
seminal preclinical investigations on the role of bacteria in
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE). EAE is
a murine model of MS induced by immunization with a
myelin
protein/peptide
in
combination
with
complete
freund’s adjuvant with/out pertussis toxin (Stromnes and
Goverman 2006). This immunization activates myelin-
reactive CD4+ T cells and leads to their differentiation into
pathogenic, encephalitogenic TH1 and TH17 cells that me-
diate neuropathology and ascending paralysis.
It was first observed that GF mice are resistant to spon-
taneous and inducible EAE and fail to generate pathogenic
T cells, especially TH17 cells (Berer and others 2011; Lee
and others 2011). This was mechanistically attributed to a
failure of gut DC activation and production of cytokines
crucial for T-cell polarization. The failure to generate
pathogenic T cells was concomitant with an increase in Treg
development. Furthermore, EAE induction could be restored
with colonization with SFB, which drove TH17 differentia-
tion in the gut and T-cell encephalitogenicity. Gut bacteria
also produce extracellular adenosine 5¢- triphosphate, which
induces CD11c+ DC in the gut lamina propria to produce the
cytokines IL-6 and IL-23, both important for TH17 differ-
entiation (Atarashi and others 2008); this mechanism of
TH17 induction is thought to also contribute to T-cell en-
cephalogenicity in EAE. Gut microbiota can also affect
blood-brain barrier permeability, as GF mice exhibit dis-
rupted tight junctions (Braniste and others 2014).
In the context of antibiotic treatment, mice also exhibit
suppression of EAE induction, which is marked by an in-
crease in Treg formation and IL-10-producing B cells
(Ochoa-Reparaz and others 2010b; Mielcarz and Kasper
2015). Specifically, it has been shown that the product PSA
by B. fragilis exerts a protective effect against EAE and
involves a decrease in IL-17 production and increase in IL-
10-producing CD4+ T cells, which was dependent on TLR2
signaling (Wang and others 2014). Treatment of EAE with
bacterial formations has also been done. Bifidobacterium
bifidum, Lactobacillus, and Streptococcus thermophiles
treatment reduces EAE severity with decreases in TH1 and
TH17 cells and Treg induction (Kwon and others 2013).
Importantly, these studies portray the immunomodulatory
effects of bacteria and speak to the necessity of gut bacterial
presence in EAE. All of these bacteria are represented in the
phyla that are most commonly observed in the healthy
mammalian gut, and these investigations hearken to the
potential outcomes for EAE induction and possibly contri-
bution to MS development when there is imbalance of
bacterial species in the gut. It would be interesting to
evaluate the outcome of EAE induction with mice harboring
similar bacterial phyla and species compositions as the hu-
man gut with controlled alterations to specific bacterial
populations within the microflora to more reflectively query
the role of bacterial dysbiosis on EAE development.
Bacteriophages have not been evaluated for association
with MS/EAE, though there has been postulation about the
association of bacteriophages and autoimmunity (Riley
2004; Dalmasso and others 2014; Ogilvie and Jones 2015).
As dysbiosis has been hypothesized as a risk factor for many
autoimmune diseases, one method of causing underlying
dysbiosis could be bacteriophage infection in which desta-
bilization of bacterial populations occurs.
To our knowledge, there has been one investigation thus
far to demonstrate a difference in bacteriophage abundance
and autoimmune disease. Crohn’s disease is an autoimmune
disease of the digestive tract. Lepage and others (2008)
showed that CD patients harbored significantly more bac-
teriophage VLP in colonic mucosa than non-CD counter-
parts, and these phages were of morphotypes consistent with
the order Caudovirales. Whether this is due to increased
bacterial burden or persistence of these phages in CD versus
non-CD persons is unknown but warrant further investiga-
tion into the role of phages on bacterial dysbiosis and au-
toimmune disease.
The gut microbiome and MS.
To date few, but highly in-
formative, studies have examined the possible link between
gut microbiota and MS. First, CS as a mode of infant de-
livery perturbs normal gut bacterial colonization dynamics
and could possibly result in abnormal immune system de-
velopment (Neu and Rushing 2011). Case-controlled studies
reveal that CS delivery may be associated with increased
352
GLENN AND MOWRY
Downloaded by 77.173.35.219 from www.liebertpub.com at 06/02/19. For personal use only. 
 risk of MS development. In the context of infant feeding,
human milk is a rich source of bacteria, including staphy-
lococci, streptococci, lactic acid bacteria, propionic bacteria,
and bifidobacteria, and mother-to-infant transfer of strains
belonging to Lactobacillus, Staphylococcus, Enterococcus,
and Bifidobacterium through breastfeeding has been shown
(Fernandez and others 2013). Breastfed bacteria are thus an
important early source of infant gut bacteria, and these
bacteria may contribute to normal immune system devel-
opment by bacterial competitive exclusion, enhancing
AMP production, and improving intestinal barrier function,
among other mechanisms. Interestingly, Pisacane and others
(1994) reported that persons with MS on average were
breastfed for significantly shorter duration than their unaf-
fected counterparts, and suggests a possible link between
breastfed bacteria and risk of MS development that merits
further inquiry. An exploratory investigation by Cantarel and
others (2015) revealed overall decreased levels of the bacte-
rial family Bacteroidaceae (phylum Bacteroidetes) and those
of the genera Faecalibacterium and Ruminococcus (both of
Firmicutes phylum) in persons with MS compared to Non-
MS Counterparts (Table 1). In this same study, some MS
patients were placed on vitamin D treatment, which led to
increases in Firmicutes phylum members Faecalibacterium
and Coprococcus. Importantly, Faecalibacterium is thought
to be immunosuppressive via production of the SCFA buty-
rate and may be protective in MS. As also mentioned pre-
viously, Bacteroides, such as B. fragilis, are also known to be
immunosuppressive, though via PSA production.
Archaea, which form a kingdom separate from prokary-
otes and eukaryotes and compose 10% on colonic anaer-
obes, were found at higher levels in the gut of MS versus
control persons, with specificity to the species Methano-
bacter smithii (Jhangi and others 2014). It is thought that the
structural components of this Archaea species make it es-
pecially immunogenic. In a very recent report, Miyake and
others (2015) investigated the gut microbiota of Japanese
MS and healthy control cohorts and found an overall dif-
ference in the gut microbiota structure and greater inter-
individual gut microbiota variability with MS versus healthy
control comparison. They noted more prevalent Actino-
bacteria and less prevalent Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes
phyla. At the genera echelon, MS subjects harbored lower
levels of Bacteroides, Faecalibacterium, Prevotella, and
Anaerostipes, though increased Bifidobacterium and Strep-
tococcus. There were great differences in the levels of 21
species, 19 of which depletion was exhibited and 14 from
the Clostridia clusters XIVa and IV, which are distinguished
as heavy producers of SCFAs. Streptococcus thermophilus
and Eggerthella lenta were more prevalent in MS versus
healthy control subjects. Thus far, it appears from the cur-
rent studies that there is gut microbial dysbiosis associated
with MS development, with common findings including
decreases in Bacteroidetes and Firmicutes phyla. These
bacterial agents are crucial for immunoregulation and SCFA
production. However, these studies have all been small and
typically involve prevalent cases, making it difficult to know
if the results are reproducible across various populations or
to know if the differences are a cause or a result of MS.
Bacterial toxins may also be associated with MS devel-
opment, according to a recent finding from Rumah and
others (2013). Here, they report identification of Clostridium
perfrigens type B from an MS patient, which was the first
reported identification of this strain from humans. This
strain produces its unique epsilon toxin, which has known
ability to cross the blood-brain barrier and bind myelin and
oligodendrocytes. Sera and cerebrospinal fluid analyses
from a well-studied MS cohort showed higher immunore-
activity to epsilon toxin than healthy controls, suggesting
prior exposure to epsilon toxin in these MS patients and the
potential of a bacterial toxin to contribute to MS patho-
genesis, especially in the absence of inflammation.
MS Gut Microbiome Manipulation
for Therapeutic Benefit
There are currently no approved treatments for MS
through manipulating the gut microbiome, though preclini-
cal studies and ongoing clinical trials show great promise for
therapeutic modulation of the gut microflora in MS. Vitamin
D supplementation has extensively been shown to amelio-
rate EAE, presumably via downregulating DC and B-cell
activation and Treg induction (Correale and Gaitan 2015).
Investigative clinical studies show association of vitamin D
treatment with MS patients and changes in the gut micro-
biota, specifically those of the phylum Firmicutes which
exhibited increased abundance (Cantarel and others 2015).
There are now several ongoing randomized controlled trials
of vitamin D supplementation for MS treatment, though
many small studies have been done. Positive outcomes in-
clude reports of fewer relapse events, decreases in the
number of Gadolinium-enhancing regions per patient, sup-
pression of T-cell proliferation, and increases in the per-
centage of peripheral IL-10+CD4+ T cells and decreases in
the ratio of the cytokines IFNg: IL-4 in T cells (Kimball and
others 2007; Burton and others 2010; Smolders and others
2010). Overall, it is conceivable that vitamin D may affect
the gut microbiome by rectifying dysbiosis and enforcing
the immunosuppressive properties exerted by the microflora.
Probiotics are classified as live microorganisms that exert
beneficial health on the host, and are heavily used in the
management of intestinal illness (Jandhyala and others
Table 1.
Completed Studies Investigating Gut Microbiota in Multiple Sclerosis Subjects
Study design
Findings
Reference
Case-controlled
Overall Y Bacteroidaceae levels; Y Faecalibacterium, Ruminococcus;
Vitamin D treatment [ Faecalibacterium and Coprococcus
Cantarel and others, 2015
Case-controlled
[ in Archaea (Methanobacter smithii)
Jhangi and others, 2014
Case-controlled
[ in Actinobacteria; Y in Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes; Y in Bacteroides,
YFaecalibacterium, Y Prevoltella, Y Anaerostipes; [ in
Bifidobacterium, [ Streptococcus
Miyake and other, 2015
[, increased; Y, decreased.
GUT MICROBIOME AND MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
353
Downloaded by 77.173.35.219 from www.liebertpub.com at 06/02/19. For personal use only. 
 2015). Their use in EAE has yielded mixed results, with
some groups showing increased TH1 responses associated
with exacerbated EAE, some showing lack of effects on
disease symptomology, and 1 showing a protective effect
(von Geldern and Mowry 2012). Specific species of bacteria
have resulted in beneficial outcomes in EAE, including oral
B. fragilis administration, which associated with IL-17 re-
duction and IL-10 induction, and Lactobacillus casei in
which the mechanism of action is thought to be strain spe-
cific and enhance IL-10 production (Maassen and others
2000; Ochoa-Reparaz and others 2010a).
To date, there are no published clinical studies of bacterial
probiotic administration for MS treatment, but several factors
must be kept in mind for future studies. It is possible that the
particular bacterial combination and amount must be patient-
tailored since inter-individual variability in the gut microbiota
may exist. Preexisting gut pathobionts may also prevent
proper colonization of administered probiotics and present a
null effect (Ventura and others 2011). Generally, any strain
that increases its numbers relative to that of other bacteria
will be eliminated by phage predation, which thus highlights
the potential importance of phages in bacterial therapeutic
intervention. As patients most likely already exhibit gut
dysbiosis, a potential testable intervention may include the
introduction of a combination of the potentially beneficial
species of Bacteriodetes and Firmicutes, along with a tailored
concoction of lysogenic phages that have specific tropism to
these bacterial species and confer a survival advantage to
these bacterial hosts. Moreover, administration of phages
with tropisms specific for certain bacterial species already in
the gut may also be considered, for instance, in conferring
survival and proliferation of potentially beneficial bacteria
and lysis of pathogenic bacteria, and may especially be im-
portant for antibiotic-resistant bacterial strains. So far there
has been one phase II clinical trial to show safety and efficacy
of phage administration for disease-Biophage-PA bacterio-
phage preparation for antibiotic-resistant P. aeruginosa in
chronic otitis patients (Wright and others 2009).
Moreover, diet is known to play a major role in gut mi-
crobiota makeup (Mielcarz and Kasper 2015). Many studies
show differences in the gut microbial composition of lean
versus obese individuals, and this is highly associated with
the adoption of the ‘‘Western diet,’’ which is based on
proteins, animal fat, large sugar intake, and refined carbo-
hydrates (Le Chatelier and others 2013; Manzel and others
2014; Cresci and Bawden 2015). This diet is associated with
an increase in proinflammatory fatty acids and increased
EAE severity (Mielcarz and Kasper 2015). Contrarily, cal-
orie restriction is associated with decreased EAE severity;
lowered inflammation, demyelination, and axon injury; in-
creased corticosterone and adiponectin; and lowered IL-6
and leptin (Piccio and others 2008). A high ratio of eubiotic
Bacteroidetes: Firmicutes is thought to be eubiotic, as Bac-
teroidetes including Prevotella heavily consume complex
glycans and produce butyrate, which again is linked to in-
creased Treg formation and proinflammatory NFkB down-
regulation (Jandhyala and others 2015). A fascinating recent
study by Haghikia and others (2015) found that dietary fatty
acids exert profound effects of T cells in the gut. Middle- and
long-chain fatty acids (LCFAs) promoted TH1 and TH17
development, while SCFAs promoted Treg differentiation.
Furthermore, LCFAs worsened EAE while SCFAs amelio-
rated this disease. This study in particular demonstrates the
fundamental importance of gut bacterial composition and
influence on EAE and possibly MS development, and sug-
gests that dietary changes that favor gut SCFA production
may have beneficial outcomes for MS therapy.
In sum, early small studies have already shown associa-
tions of gut bacterial makeup and MS, but larger, confirma-
tory studies are needed. Further, more research will need to
be undertaken to also determine the gut virome makeup in
these persons and how the overall microbiota changes with
current therapeutics. Probiotics may give only partial cover-
age as an add-on treatment to some individuals, and phage
therapy may also need to be explored. Thus, more investi-
gation should also be invested in the bacteria–bacteriophage
interaction in the gut and how that may factor into MS de-
velopment and its importance in treatment. Additionally,
changes in diet may also have beneficial effects on amelio-
rating the MS course, which may involve increasing intake of
consumables that promote SCFA production (especially bu-
tyrate) by gut bacteria and immunosuppression. Therefore,
the avenues of gut bacterial modulation and phage therapy are
open for further exploration in MS therapy.
Author Disclosure Statement
Dr. Mowry receives funding from Biogen Idec for
investigator-initiated research; she is also site PI of 2 Biogen
trials,aswellasofatrialsponsoredbySunPharma.Shereceives
free medication for a clinical trial from Teva Neuroscience.
Dr. Glenn declares no competing financial interests exist.
References
Ackermann HW. 2009. Phage classification and characteriza-
tion. Methods Mol Biol 501:127–140.
Andersch-Bjorkman Y, Thomsson KA, Holmen Larsson JM,
Ekerhovd E, Hansson GC. 2007. Large scale identification
of proteins, mucins, and their O-glycosylation in the endo-
cervical mucus during the menstrual cycle. Mol Cell Pro-
teomics 6(4):708–716.
Arpaia N, Campbell C, Fan X, Dikiy S, van der Veeken J,
deRoos P, Liu H, Cross JR, Pfeffer K, Coffer PJ, Rudensky
AY. 2013. Metabolites produced by commensal bacteria
promote peripheral regulatory T-cell generation. Nature
504(7480):451–455.
Atarashi K, Nishimura J, Shima T, Umesaki Y, Yamamoto M,
Onoue M, Yagita H, Ishii N, Evans R, Honda K, Takeda K.
2008. ATP drives lamina propria T(H)17 cell differentiation.
Nature 455(7214):808–812.
Atarashi K, Tanoue T, Oshima K, Suda W, Nagano Y, Nishikawa
H, Fukuda S, Saito T, Narushima S, Hase K, Kim S, Fritz JV,
Wilmes P, Ueha S, Matsushima K, Ohno H, Olle B, Sakaguchi
S, Taniguchi T, Morita H, Hattori M, Honda K. 2013. Treg
induction by a rationally selected mixture of Clostridia strains
from the human microbiota. Nature 500(7461):232–236.
Atarashi K, Tanoue T, Shima T, Imaoka A, Kuwahara T,
Momose Y, Cheng G, Yamasaki S, Saito T, Ohba Y, Taniguchi
T, Takeda K, Hori S, Ivanov, II, Umesaki Y, Itoh K, Honda K.
2011. Induction of colonic regulatory T cells by indigenous
Clostridium species. Science 331(6015):337–341.
Backhed F, Ley RE, Sonnenburg JL, Peterson DA, Gordon JI.
2005. Host-bacterial mutualism in the human intestine. Sci-
ence 307(5717):1915–1920.
Barr JJ, Auro R, Furlan M, Whiteson KL, Erb ML, Pogliano J,
Stotland A, Wolkowicz R, Cutting AS, Doran KS, Salamon
P, Youle M, Rohwer F. 2013. Bacteriophage adhering to
354
GLENN AND MOWRY
Downloaded by 77.173.35.219 from www.liebertpub.com at 06/02/19. For personal use only. 
 mucus provide a non-host-derived immunity. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 110(26):10771–10776.
Berer K, Mues M, Koutrolos M, Rasbi ZA, Boziki M, Johner C,
Wekerle H, Krishnamoorthy G. 2011. Commensal microbiota
and myelin autoantigen cooperate to trigger autoimmune
demyelination. Nature 479(7374):538–541.
Borysowski J, Wierzbicki P, Klosowska D, Korczak-Kowalska
G, Weber-Dabrowska B, Gorski A. 2010. The effects of T4
and A3/R phage preparations on whole-blood monocyte and
neutrophil respiratory burst. Viral Immunol 23(5):541–544.
Bossi L, Fuentes JA, Mora G, Figueroa-Bossi N. 2003.
Prophage contribution to bacterial population dynamics. J
Bacteriol 185(21):6467–6471.
Braniste V, Al-Asmakh M, Kowal C, Anuar F, Abbaspour A,
Toth M, Korecka A, Bakocevic N, Ng LG, Kundu P, Gulyas
B, Halldin C, Hultenby K, Nilsson H, Hebert H, Volpe BT,
Diamond B, Pettersson S. 2014. The gut microbiota influ-
ences blood-brain barrier permeability in mice. Sci Transl
Med 6(263):263ra158.
Breitbart M, Haynes M, Kelley S, Angly F, Edwards RA, Felts
B, Mahaffy JM, Mueller J, Nulton J, Rayhawk S, Rodriguez-
Brito B, Salamon P, Rohwer F. 2008. Viral diversity and
dynamics in an infant gut. Res Microbiol 159(5):367–373.
Brown SP, Le Chat L, De Paepe M, Taddei F. 2006. Ecology of
microbial invasions: amplification allows virus carriers to
invade more rapidly when rare. Curr Biol 16(20):2048–2052.
Brussow H, Canchaya C, Hardt WD. 2004. Phages and the
evolution of bacterial pathogens: from genomic rearrange-
ments to lysogenic conversion. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev
68(3):560–602, table of contents.
Burke J, Schneider D, Westpheling J. 2001. Generalized
transduction in Streptomyces coelicolor. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 98(11):6289–6294.
Burton JM, Kimball S, Vieth R, Bar-Or A, Dosch HM, Cheung
R, Gagne D, D’Souza C, Ursell M, O’Connor P. 2010. A
phase I/II dose-escalation trial of vitamin D3 and calcium in
multiple sclerosis. Neurology 74(23):1852–1859.
Bush WS, Sawcer SJ, de Jager PL, Oksenberg JR, McCauley
JL, Pericak-Vance MA, Haines JL. 2010. Evidence for
polygenic susceptibility to multiple sclerosis—the shape of
things to come. Am J Hum Genet 86(4):621–625.
Cantarel BL, Waubant E, Chehoud C, Kuczynski J, DeSantis
TZ, Warrington J, Venkatesan A, Fraser CM, Mowry EM.
2015. Gut microbiota in multiple sclerosis: possible influence
of immunomodulators. J Investig Med 63(5):729–734.
Correale J, Gaitan MI. 2015. Multiple sclerosis and environ-
mental factors: the role of vitamin D, parasites, and Epstein-
Barr virus infection. Acta Neurol Scand Suppl 132(199):46–55.
Cresci GA, Bawden E. 2015. Gut microbiome: what we do and
don’t know. Nutr Clin Pract 30(6):734–746.
Dalmasso M, Hill C, Ross RP. 2014. Exploiting gut bacterio-
phages for human health. Trends Microbiol 22(7):399–405.
De Paepe M, Leclerc M, Tinsley CR, Petit MA. 2014. Bacter-
iophages: an underestimated role in human and animal
health? Front Cell Infect Microbiol 4:39.
Eckburg PB, Bik EM, Bernstein CN, Purdom E, Dethlefsen L,
Sargent M, Gill SR, Nelson KE, Relman DA. 2005. Diversity
of the human intestinal microbial flora. Science 308(5728):
1635–1638.
Fernandez L, Langa S, Martin V, Maldonado A, Jimenez E, Martin
R, Rodriguez JM. 2013. The human milk microbiota: origin and
potential roles in health and disease. Pharmacol Res 69(1):1–10.
Foca A, Liberto MC, Quirino A, Marascio N, Zicca E, Pavia G.
2015. Gut inflammation and immunity: what is the role of the
human gut virome? Mediators Inflamm 2015:326032.
Furusawa Y, Obata Y, Fukuda S, Endo TA, Nakato G, Takahashi
D, Nakanishi Y, Uetake C, Kato K, Kato T, Takahashi M,
Fukuda NN, Murakami S, Miyauchi E, Hino S, Atarashi K,
Onawa S, Fujimura Y, Lockett T, Clarke JM, Topping DL,
Tomita M, Hori S, Ohara O, Morita T, Koseki H, Kikuchi J,
Honda K, Hase K, Ohno H. 2013. Commensal microbe-
derived butyrate induces the differentiation of colonic regula-
tory T cells. Nature 504(7480):446–450.
Gaboriau-Routhiau V, Rakotobe S, Lecuyer E, Mulder I, Lan A,
Bridonneau C, Rochet V, Pisi A, De Paepe M, Brandi G,
Eberl G, Snel J, Kelly D, Cerf-Bensussan N. 2009. The key
role of segmented filamentous bacteria in the coordinated
maturation of gut helper T cell responses. Immunity 31(4):
677–689.
Gasiunas G, Sinkunas T, Siksnys V. 2014. Molecular mecha-
nisms of CRISPR-mediated microbial immunity. Cell Mol
Life Sci 71(3):449–465.
Geuking MB, Cahenzli J, Lawson MA, Ng DC, Slack E,
Hapfelmeier S, McCoy KD, Macpherson AJ. 2011. Intestinal
bacterial colonization induces mutualistic regulatory T cell
responses. Immunity 34(5):794–806.
Gonsette RE. 2012. Self-tolerance in multiple sclerosis. Acta
Neurol Belg 112(2):133–140.
Gorski A, Kniotek M, Perkowska-Ptasinska A, Mroz A,
Przerwa A, Gorczyca W, Dabrowska K, Weber-Dabrowska
B, Nowaczyk M. 2006. Bacteriophages and transplantation
tolerance. Transplant Proc 38(1):331–333.
Gorski A, Miedzybrodzki R, Borysowski J, Dabrowska K,
Wierzbicki P, Ohams M, Korczak-Kowalska G, Olszowska-
Zaremba N, Lusiak-Szelachowska M, Klak M, Jonczyk E,
Kaniuga E, Golas A, Purchla S, Weber-Dabrowska B,
Letkiewicz S, Fortuna W, Szufnarowski K, Pawelczyk Z,
Rogoz P, Klosowska D. 2012. Phage as a modulator of im-
mune responses: practical implications for phage therapy.
Adv Virus Res 83:41–71.
Goto Y, Panea C, Nakato G, Cebula A, Lee C, Diez MG, Laufer
TM, Ignatowicz L, Ivanov, II. 2014. Segmented filamentous
bacteria antigens presented by intestinal dendritic cells drive
mucosal Th17 cell differentiation. Immunity 40(4):594–607.
Gronlund MM, Lehtonen OP, Eerola E, Kero P. 1999. Fecal
microflora in healthy infants born by different methods of
delivery: permanent changes in intestinal flora after cesarean
delivery. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr 28(1):19–25.
Haghikia A, Jorg S, Duscha A, Berg J, Manzel A, Waschbisch
A, Hammer A, Lee DH, May C, Wilck N, Balogh A,
Ostermann AI, Schebb NH, Akkad DA, Grohme DA,
Kleinewietfeld M, Kempa S, Thone J, Demir S, Muller DN,
Gold R, Linker RA. 2015. Dietary fatty acids directly impact
central nervous system autoimmunity via the small intestine.
Immunity 43(4):817–829.
Hedstrom AK, Olsson T, Alfredsson L. 2012. High body mass
index before age 20 is associated with increased risk for
multiple sclerosis in both men and women. Mult Scler
18(9):1334–1336.
Ho JT, Chan GC, Li JC. 2015. Systemic effects of gut micro-
biota and its relationship with disease and modulation. BMC
Immunol 16:21.
Huber S, Gagliani N, Flavell RA. 2012. Life, death, and miracles:
Th17 cells in the intestine. Eur J Immunol 42(9):2238–2245.
Hugenholtz P, Goebel BM, Pace NR. 1998. Impact of culture-
independent studies on the emerging phylogenetic view of
bacterial diversity. J Bacteriol 180(18):4765–4774.
Ishigame H, Kakuta S, Nagai T, Kadoki M, Nambu A,
Komiyama Y, Fujikado N, Tanahashi Y, Akitsu A, Kotaki H,
Sudo K, Nakae S, Sasakawa C, Iwakura Y. 2009. Differential
GUT MICROBIOME AND MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
355
Downloaded by 77.173.35.219 from www.liebertpub.com at 06/02/19. For personal use only. 
 roles of interleukin-17A and -17F in host defense against
mucoepithelial bacterial infection and allergic responses.
Immunity 30(1):108–119.
Ivanov, II, Atarashi K, Manel N, Brodie EL, Shima T, Karaoz
U, Wei D, Goldfarb KC, Santee CA, Lynch SV, Tanoue T,
Imaoka A, Itoh K, Takeda K, Umesaki Y, Honda K, Littman
DR. 2009. Induction of intestinal Th17 cells by segmented
filamentous bacteria. Cell 139(3):485–498.
Jandhyala SM, Talukdar R, Subramanyam C, Vuyyuru H,
Sasikala M, Nageshwar Reddy D. 2015. Role of the normal
gut microbiota. World J Gastroenterol 21(29):8787–8803.
Jerne NK. 1956. The presence in normal serum of specific an-
tibody against bacteriophage T4 and its increase during the
earliest stages of immunization. J Immunol 76(3):209–216.
Jhangi S, Ganghi R, Glanz B, Cook S, Nejad P, Ward D, Li N,
Gerber G, Bry L, Weiner H. 2014. Increased archaea species
and changes with therapy in gut microbiome of multiple
sclerosis subjects (S24.001). Neurology 2014: 82.
Kamme C. 1973. Antibodies against staphylococcal bacterio-
phages in human sera. I. Assay of antibodies in healthy
individuals and in patients with staphylococcal infections.
Acta Pathol Microbiol Scand B Microbiol Immunol 81(6):
741–748.
Kimball SM, Ursell MR, O’Connor P, Vieth R. 2007. Safety of
vitamin D3 in adults with multiple sclerosis. Am J Clin Nutr
86(3):645–651.
Klaasen HL, Van der Heijden PJ, Stok W, Poelma FG,
Koopman JP, Van den Brink ME, Bakker MH, Eling WM,
Beynen AC. 1993. Apathogenic, intestinal, segmented, fila-
mentous bacteria stimulate the mucosal immune system of
mice. Infect Immun 61(1):303–306.
Kucharewicz-Krukowska A, Slopek S. 1987. Immunogenic ef-
fect of bacteriophage in patients subjected to phage therapy.
Arch Immunol Ther Exp (Warsz) 35(5):553–561.
Kuwahara T, Ogura Y, Oshima K, Kurokawa K, Ooka T, Hirakawa
H, Itoh T, Nakayama-Imaohji H, Ichimura M, Itoh K, Ishifune
C, Maekawa Y, Yasutomo K, Hattori M, Hayashi T. 2011.
The lifestyle of the segmented filamentous bacterium: a non-
culturable gut-associated immunostimulating microbe inferred
by whole-genome sequencing. DNA Res 18(4):291–303.
Kwon HK, Kim GC, Kim Y, Hwang W, Jash A, Sahoo A, Kim
JE, Nam JH, Im SH. 2013. Amelioration of experimental
autoimmune encephalomyelitis by probiotic mixture is me-
diated by a shift in T helper cell immune response. Clin
Immunol 146(3):217–227.
Le Chatelier E, Nielsen T, Qin J, Prifti E, Hildebrand F, Falony
G, Almeida M, Arumugam M, Batto JM, Kennedy S, Leonard
P, Li J, Burgdorf K, Grarup N, Jorgensen T, Brandslund I,
Nielsen HB, Juncker AS, Bertalan M, Levenez F, Pons N,
Rasmussen S, Sunagawa S, Tap J, Tims S, Zoetendal EG,
Brunak S, Clement K, Dore J, Kleerebezem M, Kristiansen K,
Renault P, Sicheritz-Ponten T, de Vos WM, Zucker JD, Raes
J, Hansen T, Bork P, Wang J, Ehrlich SD, Pedersen O. 2013.
Richness of human gut microbiome correlates with metabolic
markers. Nature 500(7464):541–546.
Lee YK, Menezes JS, Umesaki Y, Mazmanian SK. 2011.
Proinflammatory T-cell responses to gut microbiota promote
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 108 Suppl 1:4615–4622.
Lepage P, Colombet J, Marteau P, Sime-Ngando T, Dore J,
Leclerc M. 2008. Dysbiosis in inflammatory bowel disease: a
role for bacteriophages? Gut 57(3):424–425.
Liang SC, Tan XY, Luxenberg DP, Karim R, Dunussi-
Joannopoulos K, Collins M, Fouser LA. 2006. Interleukin
(IL)-22 and IL-17 are coexpressed by Th17 cells and coop-
eratively enhance expression of antimicrobial peptides. J Exp
Med 203(10):2271–2279.
Maassen CB, van Holten-Neelen C, Balk F, den Bak-
Glashouwer MJ, Leer RJ, Laman JD, Boersma WJ, Claassen
E. 2000. Strain-dependent induction of cytokine profiles in
the gut by orally administered Lactobacillus strains. Vaccine
18(23):2613–2623.
Mankiewicz E, Kurti V, Adomonis H. 1974. The effect of
mycobacteriophage particles on cell-mediated immune reac-
tions. Can J Microbiol 20(9):1209–1218.
Manzel A, Muller DN, Hafler DA, Erdman SE, Linker RA, Klei-
newietfeld M. 2014. Role of ‘‘Western diet’’ in inflammatory
autoimmune diseases. Curr Allergy Asthma Rep 14(1):404.
Meessen-Pinard M, Sekulovic O, Fortier LC. 2012. Evidence of
in vivo prophage induction during Clostridium difficile in-
fection. Appl Environ Microbiol 78(21):7662–7670.
Mielcarz DW, Kasper LH. 2015. The gut microbiome in mul-
tiple sclerosis. Curr Treat Options Neurol 17(4):344.
Minot S, Sinha R, Chen J, Li H, Keilbaugh SA, Wu GD, Lewis
JD, Bushman FD. 2011. The human gut virome: inter-
individual variation and dynamic response to diet. Genome
Res 21(10):1616–1625.
Miyake S, Kim S, Suda W, Oshima K, Nakamura M, Matsuoka
T, Chihara N, Tomita A, Sato W, Kim SW, Morita H, Hattori
M, Yamamura T. 2015. Dysbiosis in the gut microbiota of
patients with multiple sclerosis, with a striking depletion of
species belonging to clostridia XIVa and IV clusters. PLoS
One 10(9):e0137429.
Muniesa M, Hammerl JA, Hertwig S, Appel B, Brussow H.
2012. Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli O104:H4: a new
challenge for microbiology. Appl Environ Microbiol 78(12):
4065–4073.
Neu J, Rushing J. 2011. Cesarean versus vaginal delivery: long-
term infant outcomes and the hygiene hypothesis. Clin
Perinatol 38(2):321–331.
Ochoa-Reparaz J, Mielcarz DW, Ditrio LE, Burroughs AR,
Begum-Haque S, Dasgupta S, Kasper DL, Kasper LH. 2010a.
Central nervous system demyelinating disease protection by
the human commensal Bacteroides fragilis depends on
polysaccharide A expression. J Immunol 185(7):4101–4108.
Ochoa-Reparaz J, Mielcarz DW, Haque-Begum S, Kasper LH.
2010b. Induction of a regulatory B cell population in ex-
perimental allergic encephalomyelitis by alteration of the gut
commensal microflora. Gut Microbes 1(2):103–108.
Ogilvie LA, Jones BV. 2015. The human gut virome: a multi-
faceted majority. Front Microbiol 6:918.
Olszak T, An D, Zeissig S, Vera MP, Richter J, Franke A,
Glickman JN, Siebert R, Baron RM, Kasper DL, Blumberg
RS. 2012. Microbial exposure during early life has persistent
effects on natural killer T cell function. Science 336(6080):
489–493.
Palm NW, de Zoete MR, Flavell RA. 2015. Immune-microbiota
interactions in health and disease. Clin Immunol 159(2):122–127.
Pender MP, Burrows SR. 2014. Epstein-Barr virus and multiple
sclerosis: potential opportunities for immunotherapy. Clin
Transl Immunology 3(10):e27.
Piccio L, Stark JL, Cross AH. 2008. Chronic calorie restriction
attenuates experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. J
Leukoc Biol 84(4):940–948.
Pisacane A, Impagliazzo N, Russo M, Valiani R, Mandarini A,
Florio C, Vivo P. 1994. Breast feeding and multiple sclerosis.
BMJ 308(6941):1411–1412.
Przerwa A, Zimecki M, Switala-Jelen K, Dabrowska K,
Krawczyk E, Luczak M, Weber-Dabrowska B, Syper D,
Miedzybrodzki R, Gorski A. 2006. Effects of bacteriophages
356
GLENN AND MOWRY
Downloaded by 77.173.35.219 from www.liebertpub.com at 06/02/19. For personal use only. 
 on free radical production and phagocytic functions. Med
Microbiol Immunol 195(3):143–150.
Reyes A, Haynes M, Hanson N, Angly FE, Heath AC, Rohwer F,
Gordon JI. 2010. Viruses in the faecal microbiota of monozy-
gotic twins and their mothers. Nature 466(7304):334–338.
Reyes A, Wu M, McNulty NP, Rohwer FL, Gordon JI. 2013.
Gnotobiotic mouse model of phage-bacterial host dynamics in
thehumangut. ProcNatl AcadSci U SA 110(50):20236–20241.
Riley PA. 2004. Bacteriophages in autoimmune disease and other
inflammatory conditions. Med Hypotheses 62(4):493–498.
Rohwer F. 2003. Global phage diversity. Cell 113(2):141.
Round JL, Lee SM, Li J, Tran G, Jabri B, Chatila TA,
Mazmanian SK. 2011. The Toll-like receptor 2 pathway es-
tablishes colonization by a commensal of the human micro-
biota. Science 332(6032):974–977.
Round JL, Mazmanian SK. 2009. The gut microbiota shapes
intestinal immune responses during health and disease. Nat
Rev Immunol 9(5):313–323.
Rumah KR, Linden J, Fischetti VA, Vartanian T.2013. Isolation of
Clostridium perfringens type B in an individual at first clinical
presentation of multiple sclerosis provides clues for environ-
mental triggers of the disease. PLoS One 8(10):e76359.
Salminen S, Gibson GR, McCartney AL, Isolauri E. 2004. In-
fluence of mode of delivery on gut microbiota composition in
seven year old children. Gut 53(9):1388–1389.
Savage DC. 1977. Microbial ecology of the gastrointestinal
tract. Annu Rev Microbiol 31:107–133.
Schnupf P, Gaboriau-Routhiau V, Cerf-Bensussan N. 2013.
Host interactions with segmented filamentous bacteria: an
unusual trade-off that drives the post-natal maturation of the
gut immune system. Semin Immunol 25(5):342–351.
Seed KD, Lazinski DW, Calderwood SB, Camilli A. 2013. A
bacteriophage encodes its own CRISPR/Cas adaptive re-
sponse to evade host innate immunity. Nature 494(7438):
489–491.
Smith K, McCoy KD, Macpherson AJ. 2007. Use of axenic ani-
mals in studying the adaptation of mammals to their commensal
intestinal microbiota. Semin Immunol 19(2):59–69.
Smith PM, Howitt MR, Panikov N, Michaud M, Gallini CA,
Bohlooly YM, Glickman JN, Garrett WS. 2013. The micro-
bial metabolites, short-chain fatty acids, regulate colonic
Treg cell homeostasis. Science 341(6145):569–573.
Smolders J, Peelen E, Thewissen M, Cohen Tervaert JW,
Menheere P, Hupperts R, Damoiseaux J. 2010. Safety and T
cell modulating effects of high dose vitamin D3 supple-
mentation in multiple sclerosis. PLoS One 5(12):e15235.
Sommer F, Backhed F. 2013. The gut microbiota—masters of
host development and physiology. Nat Rev Microbiol 11(4):
227–238.
Srivastava AS, Kaido T, Carrier E. 2004. Immunological factors
that affect the in vivo fate of T7 phage in the mouse. J Virol
Methods 115(1):99–104.
Stromnes IM, Goverman JM. 2006. Active induction of
experimental allergic encephalomyelitis. Nat Protoc 1(4):
1810–1819.
Summerday NM, Brown SJ, Allington DR, Rivey MP. 2012.
Vitamin D and multiple sclerosis: review of a possible as-
sociation. J Pharm Pract 25(1):75–84.
Talham GL, Jiang HQ, Bos NA, Cebra JJ. 1999. Segmented
filamentous bacteria are potent stimuli of a physiologically
normal state of the murine gut mucosal immune system. In-
fect Immun 67(4):1992–2000.
Trojano M, Lucchese G, Graziano G, Taylor BV, Simpson S,
Jr., Lepore V, Grand’maison F, Duquette P, Izquierdo G,
Grammond P, Amato MP, Bergamaschi R, Giuliani G, Boz C,
Hupperts R, Van Pesch V, Lechner-Scott J, Cristiano E, Fiol M,
Oreja-Guevara C,SaladinoML,Verheul F,Slee M,PaolicelliD,
Tortorella C,D’OnghiaM, IaffaldanoP,DirenzoV,Butzkueven
H. 2012. Geographical variations in sex ratio trends over time in
multiple sclerosis. PLoS One 7(10):e48078.
Ventura M, Sozzi T, Turroni F, Matteuzzi D, van Sinderen D.
2011. The impact of bacteriophages on probiotic bacteria and
gut microbiota diversity. Genes Nutr 6(3):205–207.
Villion M, Moineau S. 2013. Virology: phages hijack a host’s
defence. Nature 494(7438):433–434.
von Geldern G, Mowry EM. 2012. The influence of nutritional
factors on the prognosis of multiple sclerosis. Nat Rev Neurol
8(12):678–689.
Wagner J, Maksimovic J, Farries G, Sim WH, Bishop RF,
Cameron DJ, Catto-Smith AG, Kirkwood CD. 2013. Bac-
teriophages in gut samples from pediatric Crohn’s disease
patients: metagenomic analysis using 454 pyrosequencing.
Inflamm Bowel Dis 19(8):1598–1608.
Wang Y, Telesford KM, Ochoa-Reparaz J, Haque-Begum S,
Christy M, Kasper EJ, Wang L, Wu Y, Robson SC, Kasper
DL, Kasper LH. 2014. An intestinal commensal symbiosis
factor controls neuroinflammation via TLR2-mediated CD39
signalling. Nat Commun 5:4432.
Wekerle H, Kurchus FC. 2006. Animal models of multiple
sclerosis. Drug Discov Target Dis Models 3(4):359–367.
Whitman WB, Coleman DC, Wiebe WJ. 1998. Prokaryotes: the
unseen majority. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95(12):6578–6583.
Wingerchuk DM. 2012. Smoking: effects on multiple sclerosis
susceptibility and disease progression. Ther Adv Neurol
Disord 5(1):13–22.
Wright A, Hawkins CH, Anggard EE, Harper DR. 2009. A
controlled clinical trial of a therapeutic bacteriophage prep-
aration in chronic otitis due to antibiotic-resistant Pseudo-
monas aeruginosa; a preliminary report of efficacy. Clin
Otolaryngol 34(4):349–357.
Zelante T, Iannitti RG, Cunha C, De Luca A, Giovannini G,
Pieraccini G, Zecchi R, D’Angelo C, Massi-Benedetti C,
Fallarino F, Carvalho A, Puccetti P, Romani L. 2013. Tryp-
tophan catabolites from microbiota engage aryl hydrocarbon
receptor and balance mucosal reactivity via interleukin-22.
Immunity 39(2):372–385.
Zhang X, McDaniel AD, Wolf LE, Keusch GT, Waldor MK,
Acheson DW. 2000. Quinolone antibiotics induce Shiga
toxin-encoding bacteriophages, toxin production, and death
in mice. J Infect Dis 181(2):664–670.
Zimecki M, Weber-Dabrowska B, Lusiak-Szelachowska M,
Mulczyk M, Boratynski J, Pozniak G, Syper D, Gorski A.
2003. Bacteriophages provide regulatory signals in mitogen-
induced murine splenocyte proliferation. Cell Mol Biol Lett
8(3):699–711.
Address correspondence to:
Dr. Justin D. Glenn
Division of Neuroimmunology and Neurological Infections
Department of Neurology
Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine
Meyer Building, Room 6-138
600 North Wolfe Street
Baltimore, MD 21287
E-mail: jglenn7@jhmi.edu
Received 29 December 2015/Accepted 30 March 2016
GUT MICROBIOME AND MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS
357
Downloaded by 77.173.35.219 from www.liebertpub.com at 06/02/19. For personal use only. 
