 Article
Astroglial-Mediated Remodeling of the
Interhemispheric Midline Is Required for the
Formation of the Corpus Callosum
Graphical Abstract
Highlights
d Developmental remodeling of the midline is required for
callosal tract formation
d Maturation and intercalation of astroglia mediate
interhemispheric remodeling
d Fgf8-Nfi signaling regulates astroglial-mediated
interhemispheric remodeling
d Interhemispheric remodeling defects underlie congenital
callosal agenesis in humans
Authors
Ilan Gobius, Laura Morcom,
Rodrigo Sua
´ rez, ..., A. James Barkovich,
Elliott H. Sherr, Linda J. Richards
Correspondence
ilan.gobius@gmail.com (I.G.),
richards@uq.edu.au (L.J.R.)
In Brief
Gobius et al. describe how astroglia
remodel the telencephalic
interhemispheric fissure during mouse
and human development. Intercalation of
these astroglia forms a bridging substrate
that commissural callosal axons then use
to cross the interhemispheric midline.
Further evidence demonstrates that
defects in interhemispheric remodeling
underlie callosal agenesis in mice and
humans.
Gobius et al., 2016, Cell Reports 17, 735–747
October 11, 2016 ª 2016 The Authors.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2016.09.033
 Cell Reports
Article
Astroglial-Mediated Remodeling of the
Interhemispheric Midline Is Required
for the Formation of the Corpus Callosum
Ilan Gobius,1,* Laura Morcom,1 Rodrigo Sua
´ rez,1 Jens Bunt,1 Polina Bukshpun,3 William Reardon,4 William B. Dobyns,5,6
John L.R. Rubenstein,7 A. James Barkovich,8 Elliott H. Sherr,3 and Linda J. Richards1,2,9,*
1Queensland Brain Institute
2The School of Biomedical Sciences
The University of Queensland, St. Lucia, QLD 4072, Australia
3Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA
4National Centre for Medical Genetics, Our Lady’s Hospital for Sick Children, Crumlin, Dublin 12, Ireland
5Center for Integrative Brain Research, Seattle Children’s Research Institute
6Division of Genetic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98101, USA
7Department of Psychiatry, Neuroscience Program and Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA
8Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143-0628, USA
9Lead Contact
*Correspondence: ilan.gobius@gmail.com (I.G.), richards@uq.edu.au (L.J.R.)
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2016.09.033
SUMMARY
The corpus callosum is the major axon tract that con-
nects and integrates neural activity between the two
cerebral hemispheres. Although �1:4,000 children
are born with developmental absence of the corpus
callosum, the primary etiology of this condition re-
mains unknown. Here, we demonstrate that midline
crossing of callosal axons is dependent upon the
prior remodeling and degradation of the intervening
interhemispheric fissure. This remodeling event is
initiated by astroglia on either side of the interhemi-
spheric fissure, which intercalate with one another
and degrade the intervening leptomeninges. Callosal
axons then preferentially extend over these special-
ized astroglial cells to cross the midline. A key regu-
latory step in interhemispheric remodeling is the
differentiation of these astroglia from radial glia,
which is initiated by Fgf8 signaling to downstream
Nfi transcription factors. Crucially, our findings from
human neuroimaging studies reveal that develop-
mental defects in interhemispheric remodeling are
likely to be a primary etiology underlying human cal-
losal agenesis.
INTRODUCTION
A significant milestone in the evolution of the mammalian brain
was the emergence of the corpus callosum, which is exclusively
present in placental mammals (Sua
´ rez et al., 2014b and refer-
ences therein). This commissure forms the largest axon tract in
the human brain and is required for the integration of sensory,
motor, and associative processes between the two cerebral
hemispheres (Gazzaniga, 2005; Paul et al., 2007). In congenital
absence (or agenesis) of the corpus callosum, callosal axons
often extend toward the midline, but are unable to cross,
affecting approximately 1:4,000 live births (Hetts et al., 2006).
This results in the aberrant accumulation of axons on either
side of the interhemispheric midline into structures known as
Probst bundles (Probst, 1901). Callosal agenesis results in a
wide spectrum of neurological deficits, however the primary
causes underlying this major brain malformation remain un-
known (Edwards et al., 2014; Paul et al., 2007).
During development, callosal connections form between the
cerebral hemispheres through a midline region that is formerly
separated by a deep interhemispheric fissure (IHF; Rakic and
Yakovlev, 1968; Silver et al., 1982, 1993). This structure is pri-
marily composed of leptomeningeal fibroblasts and extracellular
matrix (Siegenthaler and Pleasure, 2011; Silver et al., 1982).
Given that the cellular composition of the IHF is distinct from
the surrounding neuroepithelial tissue, a key unanswered ques-
tion is how callosal axons navigate across this midline territory to
form a tract. Previously, it has been proposed that callosal axons
cross directly through the IHF and physically interact with the
leptomeningeal tissue during tract formation (Choe et al.,
2012). However, this scenario is not consistent with data indi-
cating that the substrate underlying the early callosal tract is
comprised of astroglial cells rather than leptomeningeal fibro-
blasts (Silver et al., 1982, 1993). These cells express the astro-
glial marker Gfap and are known as the midline zipper glia
(MZG; Shu et al., 2003b; Silver et al., 1993). The spatiotemporal
distribution of these cells suggests that, rather than using the
leptomeninges, callosal axons may instead require astroglial
cells as an underlying substrate to cross the midline. Determining
Cell Reports 17, 735–747, October 11, 2016 ª 2016 The Authors.
735
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
 how callosal axons navigate the IHF during development is key
to understanding the etiology of callosal agenesis, yet to date
no experimental investigations have been performed to resolve
this question.
Using in utero electroporation in mice, we find that pioneer
callosal axons exclusively use MZG cells as a substrate to cross
into the contralateral hemisphere, instead of crossing directly
through the interhemispheric fissure. Further, we demonstrate
that MZG cells actively remodel the interhemispheric fissure
just prior to callosal tract formation, and that the differentiation
of MZG cells from radial glia is a key regulatory step in this
remodeling process. Crucially, we find that either delayed or pre-
cocious MZG differentiation prevents interhemispheric remodel-
ing from occurring correctly, thus affecting subsequent callosal
tract formation. In vivo gain- and loss-of-function experiments
in mice further reveal that MZG differentiation is initiated by
Fgf8 signaling through the Map kinase pathway to activate
pro-astrogliogenic nuclear factor one (Nfi) transcription factors.
Moreover, our observations from human neuroimaging studies
and analysis of human NFI mutations suggest that develop-
mental defects in interhemispheric remodeling are likely to be
a primary etiology leading to human callosal agenesis. Together,
these findings reveal that remodeling of the interhemispheric
midline is an astroglial-mediated process that is crucial for
corpus callosum formation during placental brain development.
RESULTS
Pioneer Callosal Axons Do Not Cross through the IHF,
but Rather Use the MZG as a Growth Substrate to Cross
the Midline
To investigate whether callosal axons cross directly through the
IHF during development as suggested previously (Choe et al.,
2012), we labeled individual pioneer callosal axons with a mem-
brane-bound tdTomato reporter and observed their precise
growth trajectory as they cross the midline. Neurons in the
mouse cingulate cortex were electroporated at embryonic day
(E)13 and examined at E16 in combination with pan-Laminin
immunofluorescence, which labels leptomeningeal fibroblasts
and the basement membrane (Halfter et al., 2002). This revealed
that growing callosal axons always project around the basement
membrane of the IHF and do not pass directly through this struc-
ture (Figure 1). We then investigated whether, instead, callosal
axons use astroglial cells as a growth substrate, as suggested
by Silver et al. (1982, 1993). Dual labeling for the glial marker
Glast and pan-Laminin revealed that callosal axons preferentially
cross the midline through the MZG astroglial population, which is
found at the base of the IHF (Figures 1A and 1B). Together, these
observations suggest that the basement membrane and lepto-
meninges form a non-permissive barrier to callosal growth,
and that the position of astroglia along the interhemispheric
midline determines the precise site at which callosal axons cross
the interhemispheric midline.
Progressive Remodeling of the IHF Occurs
Simultaneously with Callosal Tract Formation and
Expansion
In order to further elucidate the developmental relationship be-
tween the IHF, MZG cells, and the corpus callosum, we per-
formed a spatiotemporal analysis of these structures throughout
forebrain development. In mice, the IHF forms between E9 and
E12 (Figure 2A). Following formation of the IHF at E12, the telen-
cephalic hemispheres are joined at the midline only by a small
hinge of tissue (defined here as the telencephalic hinge; Fig-
ure 2B). At this stage, the IHF can be delineated by pan-Laminin
immunohistochemistry (Figure 2B). From E12 to E15, the IHF ap-
pears to be gradually compressed by the bilateral expansion of
the septum, which culminates in fusion of the septal halves at
E15 (Figures 2B and S1). During this event, Nestin-positive glial
fibers bridge the septal midline, and the Laminin-positive IHF
Figure 1. Pioneer Callosal Axons Do Not Cross through the IHF, but Rather Use the MZG as a Growth Substrate to Cross the Midline
(A and B) Electroporation of the mouse cingulate cortex (CgCtx) at E13 with a myristoylated tdTomato reporter plasmid (white) labels pioneering callosal axons at
E16, visualized in relation to Glast-positive MZG cells (red), and the Laminin-positive IHF (green) in ventral (A) and dorsal (B) horizontal sections. The callosal axons
(white arrowheads) project around the basement membrane (BM) of the IHF (green arrowheads) and across the midline over MZG cells (red arrowheads).
(C) Schematic showing the orientation of the horizontal plane shown in (A) and (B). corpus callosum, CC.
The scale bars represent 100 mm.
736
Cell Reports 17, 735–747, October 11, 2016
 retracts rostrally. Furthermore, from E16 to E17, the amount of
glial fibers bridging the midline increases considerably, while
the IHF continues to retract further rostrally (Figure 2B), suggest-
ing that the fissure may undergo active tissue remodeling during
this period. Critically, the growth of callosal axons across the
midline coincides precisely with the formation of glial fibers
across the interhemispheric midline (Figures 2C and 2D). This
suggests that continuous expansion of the MZG population
and simultaneous retraction of the fissure along the midline
may facilitate the addition of fibers to the callosal tract. Quantifi-
cation of IHF length throughout development revealed that the
IHF is progressively eliminated from the septum along an oblique
plane, beginning from the ventro-caudal base of the septum at
E15 and ending at the dorso-rostral apex of the septum at
approximately E18 (Figure S1). Furthermore, we observed a
similar oblique progression of interhemispheric remodeling in
the developing human brain (Figure S1). This suggests that
developmental remodeling of the IHF may be evolutionarily
conserved in placental mammals and facilitate the formation of
the corpus callosum across the midline in these mammals.
The Transition of Radial MZG into Multipolar Astroglia
Initiates IHF Remodeling
Immunohistochemistry for the MZG marker Gfap in developing
human and mouse brains further revealed that, as the fissure is
eliminated, MZG cells transition from two columns of radial (or bi-
polar) cells on either side of the fissure to a single column of
tightly intercalated multipolar cells along the midline (Figure 3A).
Intercalation of multipolar MZG across the fissure may therefore
regulate the remodeling of this structure in humans and mice.
Prior to E16, we identified radial MZG cells with Glast immuno-
labeling (Mori et al., 2006), as Glast is expressed before Gfap
in these cells (Figure S2). Along the interhemispheric midline,
Glast labeling was concentrated within the telencephalic hinge
region (Figure S2), suggesting that radial MZG cells may derive
from this progenitor niche. To study the progeny of cells born
within the telencephalic hinge, we electroporated this region at
E12 with a piggyBac Glast transposase/GFP reporter system
(Chen and LoTurco, 2012). This labeled radial MZG progenitor
cells undergoing somal translocation toward the surface of the
IHF at E15, as well as intercalated multipolar MZG cells at the
midline (Figures 3B and S2). Moreover, EdU-birthdating of
Glast-positive MZG progenitors within the telencephalic hinge
(Figure 3C) also suggests that increased proliferation of radial
MZG progenitors on either side of the IHF gradually compresses
Figure 2. Developmental Remodeling of the IHF Is Associated with
Callosal Tract Formation in Mice
(A) Frontal view scanning electron microscopy photomicrographs show the
development of the mouse IHF (arrowheads).
(B)
Fluorescence
immunohistochemistry
for
Nestin-positive
radial
glia
(magenta), pan-Laminin-positive leptomeninges, and basement membrane
(BM; green) from E12 to E17. The brackets indicate the spatial extent of radial
glia and IHF. The green arrowheads denote the BM.
(C) Fluorescence immunohistochemistry for Gap43 labeling corpus callosum
(CC) and hippocampal commissure (HC) axons from E15 to E17.
(D) Schema of the midline remodeling events occurring before and during
callosal tract formation. cingulate cortex, CgCtx.
The scale bars represent 100 mm. See also Figure S1.
Cell Reports 17, 735–747, October 11, 2016
737
 Figure 3. The Transition of Radial MZG into Multipolar Astroglia Initiates IHF Remodeling and Callosal Tract Formation
(A) Embryonic human and mouse brain sections immunostained for Gfap (black and brown, respectively), counterstained with hematoxylin (blue) in mouse
sections. The Gfap-positive MZG cells (arrowheads) are schematically represented (far right image).
(B) In utero electroporation (EP) of the mouse telencephalic hinge with piggyBac Glast transposase/GFP reporter plasmids (green), co-labeled for Glast (red) and
Laminin (blue) immunohistochemistry in dorsal and ventral sections. The GFP labeling shows both MZG cells (white arrowheads) undergoing somal translocation
toward the IHF (blue arrowhead) and MZG cells undergoing intercalation.
(legend continued on next page)
738
Cell Reports 17, 735–747, October 11, 2016
 this structure and primes this region for remodeling between E12
and E15.
Next, we performed oblique horizontal sectioning to analyze
the entire remodeling interface in a single plane (Figure 3D).
Confocal optical sectioning further revealed that Glast-positive
MZG cell bodies positioned on either side of the fissure extend
multiple processes that intercalate with each other through the
leptomeninges (Figure 3E). These processes form a mesh-like
structure that partitions inclusions of the Laminin-positive lepto-
meninges away from the remainder of the fissure (Figures 3E and
3F). Furthermore, MZG cells express Matrix metalloproteinase 2
(Mmp2) mRNA (Figure S2), and we identified that proteolytic
pan-MMP activity (Bremer et al., 2001) localizes to the mem-
brane of MZG cells as they intercalate around leptomeningeal in-
clusions (Figure 3G). These findings suggest that multipolar MZG
cells actively degrade the leptomeninges as they intercalate with
one another.
Fgf8 Signaling Regulates MZG Development and IHF
Remodeling
Previously,
we
have
shown
that
the
expression
of
the
morphogen Fgf8 within the septal midline is critical for the tissue
patterning of this region (Moldrich et al., 2010; Storm et al., 2006).
We therefore investigated whether Fgf8 may also regulate later
aspects of septal midline development such as interhemispheric
midline remodeling. We found that Fgf8 protein and mRNA
expression is particularly enriched at the remodeling interface
in radial MZG progenitors undergoing somal translocation (Fig-
ures 4A, 4B, S3, and S4).
To examine the functional consequence of reducing Fgf8
expression on interhemispheric remodeling, we analyzed the
development of conditional Fgf8flox/Emx1Cre mutants, which
exhibit loss of Fgf8 in the pallium and pallial derivatives of the
septum from E10.5 (Figures 4C and S3; Moldrich et al., 2010).
Homozygous Fgf8flox/Emx1Cre-positive (Fgf8cKO) mutants
display moderate to severe midline defects compared to con-
trols. While the septum is present in moderate Fgf8cKO mutants
(14/25 analyzed), it is completely absent in severe Fgf8cKO
mutants (11/25 analyzed), resulting in semilobar holoprosence-
phaly with communicating lateral ventricles (Figures 4C and
S3; Moldrich et al., 2010). Notably, IHF remodeling failed to
occur in either moderate or severe Fgf8cKO mutants, resulting
in abnormal retention of the IHF and agenesis of the corpus cal-
losum and hippocampal commissure in both mutant types (Fig-
ures 4C and 4D). An analysis of MZG distribution revealed that, at
E15, just prior to the initiation of remodeling, there is a significant
reduction in the number of Glast-positive MZG cells that have
translocated to the pial surface of the IHF in Fgf8cKO mutants
compared to controls (p = 0.0089, Mann-Whitney test, n R 7
per condition; Figures 4E and 4F). Consistent with this observa-
tion, we found that Gfap-positive MZG cells maintain a radial
morphology and fail to intercalate with one another across the
fissure in E17 Fgf8cKO mutants (Figure 4C). Additionally, we
observed that these aberrant radial MZG cells remain confined
to the telencephalic hinge and do not migrate rostrally (Fig-
ure 4C). These observations indicate that Fgf8 signaling is
required for multiple aspects of MZG maturation, including the
somal translocation of radial MZG cells to the pial surface of
the IHF, as well as their subsequent transition into multipolar
MZG cells.
To further investigate the requirement of Fgf8 signaling in MZG
migration and maturation, we generated a gain-of-function
model by electroporating an ectopic source of Fgf8 on one
side of the midline at E12 (Figures 5A and S4). Following analysis
at E15, we observed an increase in the number of Glast-positive
MZG cells translocating to the surface of the IHF, such that Glast
fluorescence intensity is significantly increased on the electropo-
rated side compared to control (p = 0.0095, Mann-Whitney test,
n R 4 per condition; Figures 5A and 5B). This demonstrates that
Fgf8 overexpression is sufficient to elicit precocious somal trans-
location of radial MZG progenitors to the pial surface of the IHF.
Next, we overexpressed Fgf8 unilaterally either before or after
astroglial-remodeling of the fissure is initiated (E12 or E15,
respectively) and compared the effects of each manipulation at
E17, when fissure remodeling is almost complete. In both cases,
we observed a dramatic increase in Gfap expression in the elec-
troporated hemisphere (Figure 5C), demonstrating that Fgf8 is
sufficient to induce precocious expression of this astroglial pro-
tein. Interestingly, however, we observed distinct midline pheno-
types when Fgf8 was electroporated either before or after the
initiation of fissure remodeling. Following Fgf8 overexpression
at E12, we observed an increase in Gfap-positive MZG along
the IHF on the electroporated side, resulting in disrupted MZG
intercalation, abnormal retention of the IHF, and stalling of cal-
losal axons on either side of the fissure (Figure 5C, left; n = 6).
In contrast, although overexpression of Fgf8 at E15 increased
Gfap expression in the electroporated cingulate cortex, it had
no effect on MZG development, IHF remodeling, or callosal
axon crossing (Figure 5C, right; n = 5). These results suggest
that Fgf8 expression normally initiates somal translocation of
radial MZG and the subsequent transition of these cells into
multipolar Gfap-positive astroglia during the critical period of
fissure remodeling, and that after MZG cells have differentiated,
they are no longer responsive to this Fgf8-maturation signal.
(C) Glast-positive mouse MZG cells (red) were birthdated with the thymidine analog EdU (green) every 24 hr, from E12 to E15, quantified on the right. The
arrowheads show distribution of MZG progenitors within the telencephalic hinge niche (dotted lines).
(D) Schema of the oblique horizontal sectioning plane (top) and confocal maximum intensity projection of an E15 oblique horizontal section (bottom) immuno-
stained with Laminin (green) and Glast (red).
(E) Optical sectioning of the region shown in (D).
(F) Reconstruction of z-planes in (E) to resolve the XY, XZ, and YZ orthogonal views of the MZG-IHF interface, showing MZG projections (red arrowheads)
partitioning laminin-positive inclusions of the IHF (green arrowheads).
(G) Pan-matrix metalloproteinase activity labeled with MMPSense (green) is associated with Glast-positive glial membranes adjacent to Laminin-positive IHF
inclusions (blue), with schema (right). basement membrane, BM; leptomeninges, LM.
The data are represented as means ± SEM (n-values within bars). The scale bars represent 50 mm (A, left), 5 mm (A, right), 100 mm (B–D), and 10 mm (E–G). See also
Figure S2.
Cell Reports 17, 735–747, October 11, 2016
739
 To further investigate how precocious maturation of MZG cells
may affect fissure remodeling, we examined E17 brains unilater-
ally electroporated with Fgf8 at E12 in horizontal sections. We
found that unilateral overexpression of Fgf8 results in an asym-
metric distribution of the MZG, with the electroporated hemi-
sphere containing more Gfap-positive MZG cells compared to
the unelectroporated hemisphere (Figure 5D). Interestingly,
these asymmetrically distributed MZG populations fail to interca-
late with one another, such that the Laminin-positive IHF is aber-
rantly retained in this region (11.46% increase in fissure length
following unilateral Fgf8 overexpression, p = 0.0012, Mann-Whit-
ney test, n R 6 per condition; Figures 5D and 5E). Furthermore,
Gap43-positive callosal axons are prevented from crossing the
interhemispheric midline in this location (Figure 5D). Since matu-
ration of the MZG normally occurs as a bilaterally symmetrical
process, we then performed bilateral overexpression of Fgf8
on both sides of the midline at E12 to control for the potential
effects of asymmetric MZG development. Comparison of E12
unilateral versus bilateral Fgf8 electroporations at E17 revealed
that bilateral Fgf8 overexpression mirrors the effects of unilateral
Figure 4. Fgf8 Signaling Is Required for
MZG Development and Interhemispheric
Remodeling in Mice
(A) Fluorescence immunohistochemistry shows
expression of Fgf8 (red) in Glast-positive radial
MZG (green) at E15 along the IHF (arrowheads).
(B) In situ hybridization for Fgf8 mRNA.
(C) Immunohistochemistry for Gfap (green), Lam-
inin (magenta), and Gap43 (green) in E17 Fgf8
conditional knockout (cKO) mice and littermate
controls. Note thinning of the MZG progenitor ni-
che
in
moderate
phenotype
mutants
(open
arrowhead) versus complete absence of septum in
severe mutants (asterisk). The green arrowheads
indicate
Gfap-positive
MZG,
yellow
brackets
indicate the IHF, and white arrows indicate com-
plete agenesis of the corpus callosum and hip-
pocampal commissure.
(D) Quantification of IHF length in E17 Fgf8 cKO
and control brains.
(E) Immunohistochemistry for Glast (green) in E15
Fgf8cKO mutants and littermate controls, note
reduction in Glast-positive MZG adjacent to the
fissure pial surface in Fgf8cKO mutants (arrows).
(F) Quantification of the number of Glast-positive
cell bodies adjacent to the IHF in E15 Fgf8 cKO
mice and littermate control brains.
The data are represented as means ± SEM (n-
values within bars). The scale bars represent
100 mm. See also Figure S3.
overexpression, resulting in excess Gfap-
positive MZG cells on either side of the
IHF that fail to intercalate with one
another (Figure 5D). Furthermore, we
observed that aberrant retention of the
IHF is further exacerbated following bilat-
eral Fgf8 overexpression (21.83% in-
crease in fissure length following bilateral
Fgf8 overexpression compared to YFP
controls, p = 0.0007, Mann-Whitney test, n R 6 per condition;
Figures 5D and 5E). Consequently, the majority of Gap43-
positive callosal axons are unable to cross the IHF in these
brains (Figure 5D). Moreover, consistent with our previous anal-
ysis of unilateral Fgf8 overexpression at E15 (Figure 5A), we
observed a similar bilateral increase in the amount of Glast-
positive MZG reaching the pial surface of the fissure at E15
following bilateral Fgf8 overexpression at E12, compared to
YFP controls (p = 0.001, Mann-Whitney test, n R 8 per condi-
tion; Figure S4). These results suggest that precocious MZG
maturation, either unilaterally or bilaterally, prevents timely and
sequential intercalation of MZG cells at the base of the IHF.
Thus, we find that delayed MZG maturation in the absence of
Fgf8, as well as precocious MZG maturation in the presence
of excess Fgf8, both result in aberrant retention of the interhemi-
spheric fissure and callosal agenesis. Collectively, these obser-
vations indicate that the correct level of Fgf8 expression at the
midline is required at precise developmental stages in order
for MZG-mediated fissure remodeling and subsequent callosal
formation to occur.
740
Cell Reports 17, 735–747, October 11, 2016
 As the responsiveness of MZG cells to Fgf8 signaling is
crucial to subsequent midline remodeling, we investigated
the mechanisms mediating the pro-astrogliogenic effects of
Fgf8 on this cell population. We found that key downstream ef-
fectors of Fgf8 signaling have enriched expression in radial
MZG progenitors, but are not enriched in mature intercalated
MZG cells (Figure S4). These include the Fgf8 receptors,
Fgfr1 and Fgfr2, as well as MAPK-Erk signaling effectors
that transduce and modulate intracellular Fgf signaling (Mason,
2007), including phospho-Erk1/2, Spry1, and Spry2 (Figures S3
Figure 5. Fgf8 Signaling Promotes Astro-
glial Maturation of the MZG in Mice
(A) Unilateral E12/E15 in utero electroporation
(EP) of YFP alone or co-electroporation of Fgf8 +
YFP plasmids followed by fluorescence immuno-
histochemistry for YFP (green) and Glast (red). The
arrowheads indicate excess Glast-positive cell
bodies along the pial surface of the Fgf8-electro-
porated hemisphere.
(B) Quantification of Glast fluorescence intensity
in YFP versus Fgf8+YFP electroporated hemi-
spheres.
(C) E12/E17 and E15/E17 unilateral EP of YFP
alone or co-electroporation of Fgf8 + YFP plas-
mids followed by fluorescence immunohisto-
chemistry for YFP (green), Gfap (red and white),
and Gap43 (magenta) in coronal sections. The
double
red
arrowheads
indicate
precocious
Gfap expression following Fgf8 overexpression,
brackets indicate the length of the IHF and the
presence/absence of the corpus callosum (CC) in
each condition, and single red arrowheads indi-
cate the distribution of the MZG.
(D) Unilateral or bilateral E12/E17 EP of Fgf8 +
YFP
followed
by
fluorescence
immunohisto-
chemistry for YFP, Gfap, Laminin, and Gap43 in
horizontal sections. The brackets indicate the IHF
length in each condition, and the arrowheads
indicate the distribution of MZG cells. Note
dysgenesis or agenesis of the CC in Fgf8 EP
conditions.
(E) Quantification of IHF length in unilateral and
bilateral E12/E17 Fgf8 + YFP and YFP control
electroporated brains.
The data are represented as means ± SEM
(n-values within bars). The scale bars represent
100 mm (A, left, C and D), 20 mm (A, right). See also
Figure S4.
and S4). This suggests that the local ef-
fects of Fgf8 are limited to radial MZG
progenitors,
indicating
that
secreted
Fgf8 may likely act in an autocrine
fashion within this population. Further-
more, we found that Fgf8 overexpres-
sion is sufficient for significant upregula-
tion of multiple mature astroglial-specific
proteins including Gfap, Glast, S100b,
and Acsbg1, but not the radial glial
marker Nestin (Figure S4), suggesting
that Fgf8 may initiate multiple aspects of
astroglial maturation via a pro-astrogliogenic transcriptional
effector.
Nfia and Nfib Are Downstream Transcriptional Effectors
of Fgf8 and Are Required for Remodeling of the IHF and
Corpus Callosum Formation in Humans and Mice
Nfia and Nfib (collectively referred to here as Nfi) are homologous
transcription factors that regulate astrogliogenesis in the embry-
onic telencephalon (Namihira et al., 2009; Piper et al., 2009a,
2010). Co-localization analyses at E15 demonstrated that Nfi
Cell Reports 17, 735–747, October 11, 2016
741
 expression is enriched in Glast-positive radial MZG cells (Fig-
ure 6A), but is not expressed in Cxcl12-positive leptomeningeal
fibroblasts during fissure remodeling (Figure S5). Unilateral elec-
troporation of Fgf8 at E12 resulted in a significant increase of Nfi-
expressing cells at the midline by E17 (Figure S5), indicating
downstream involvement of both Nfia and Nfib in Fgf8-mediated
MZG astrogliogenesis. As MAPK-Erk signaling appears to be
activated during normal MZG somal translocation, as well as
following Fgf8 overexpression (Figures S3 and S4), we hypothe-
sized that the intracellular MAPK-Erk pathway acts as an inter-
mediate effector of Fgf8, which then activates Nfi to induce
astrogliogenesis. In line with this, disruption of the MAPK-Erk
pathway with the Mek inhibitor U0126 was sufficient to decrease
both Nfia- and Nfib-induced activation of a Gfap-luciferase re-
porter, further indicating that the Fgf8-MAPK signaling pathway
promotes Nfi transcriptional activation of the astroglial gene
Gfap (Figure 6B). To directly address whether Nfi signaling is
required for Fgf8-mediated astrogliogenesis in vivo, we then
electroporated Fgf8 into Nfia and Nfib knockout embryos at
E14 and examined their brains at E17. In wild-type littermates,
Fgf8 overexpression induced robust unilateral increases in
Gfap and Glast expression (Figures 6C and 6D). Fgf8 overex-
pression also increased radial glial expression of Glast in both
Nfia and Nfib knockouts (note comparable increase in the
mean fold change of Glast fluorescence in the electroporated
hemisphere compared to the unelectroporated hemisphere in
Nfi knockouts and wild-type littermates; Figure 6D). However,
Fgf8 overexpression did not elicit Gfap expression in either radial
glia or multipolar astroglia in Nfi knockout brains, as compared to
wild-types (Figure 6D). These findings demonstrate that Nfia and
Nfib are critical downstream effectors required for Fgf8-medi-
ated astroglial maturation.
Since human individuals with NFIA haploinsufficiency, as well
as Nfia and Nfib knockout mice, exhibit callosal malformations
(Chen et al., 2011; Lu et al., 2007; Piper et al., 2009a; Sajan
et al., 2013; Shu et al., 2003a; Steele-Perkins et al., 2005), we
sought to investigate whether Nfi transcription factors regulate
callosal development via astroglial IHF remodeling. Examination
of two cases of human NFIA and NFIB haploinsufficiency using
structural MRI revealed that these individuals display abnormal
retention of the IHF associated with callosal agenesis (Figure 6E).
Consistent with this, we found that radial MZG progenitors fail to
transition into intercalated multipolar MZG in both Nfia and Nfib
knockout mouse strains (Figures 6F and S5). Instead, they retain
an immature radial morphology along both sides of the IHF and
fail to express Gfap (Figures 6F and S5). Consequently, this MZG
maturation defect results in abnormal retention of the IHF and
callosal agenesis in these mice (Figure 6F). These observations
indicate that Nfi transcription factors crucially promote IHF re-
modeling by regulating MZG maturation and cell polarity. Taken
together, our findings elucidate Fgf8-Nfi signaling as a key astro-
gliogenic maturation program that initiates remodeling of the IHF
and corpus callosum formation in both mice and humans.
Abnormal Retention of the IHF Is Highly Correlated with
Human Congenital Agenesis of the Corpus Callosum
Our cellular analyses in developing mice and humans indicate that
remodeling and elimination of the IHF is a critical event preceding
callosal development, and that disrupting this developmental
event prevents subsequent tract formation. This suggests that de-
fects in this remodeling event could be a significant etiological fac-
tor of agenesis of the corpus callosum. In order to quantify the co-
occurrence of interhemispheric remodeling defects with callosal
agenesis, weanalyzedT1- orT2-weightedMRI froma largecohort
of individuals previously diagnosed with agenesis of the corpus
callosum. Individuals were selected for the analysis based upon
a previous diagnosis of complete agenesis of the corpus callosum
that was not associated with any other compounding brain abnor-
malities. We confirmed isolated complete callosal agenesis in 38
cases (Table S1). In 100% of these 38 cases, we identified
abnormal retention of the IHF, resulting in abnormal separation
of the septal halves in these individuals (Figures 7A and 7B). In
each of these cases, we also identified that callosal axons consis-
tently accumulated into Probst bundles, on either side of the
abnormally retained IHF (Figures 7A and 7B). These data further
suggest that the IHF is non-permissiveto callosal axons duringhu-
man brain development, and that abnormal retention of the IHF
invariably results in callosal agenesis. Thus, interhemispheric re-
modeling defects are a significant etiological factor in callosal
agenesis disorders.
DISCUSSION
The corpus callosum is the largest fiber tract in the human brain
and is particularly important for integrating processes occurring
in lateralized regions of the human neocortex. Here, we demon-
strate that a critical event required for callosal tract formation in
mice and humans is the remodeling of the interhemispheric
midline via astroglia, and that callosal tract malformations occur
if this tissue remodeling process is perturbed.
Astroglia are an essential neural cell type in the post-natal and
adult brain, however, their function during fetal brain develop-
ment is still poorly understood. In this study, we show that a
specialized population of fetal astroglia, the MZG, has a major in-
fluence on the morphology and connectivity of the adult brain.
Although the MZG were identified by early histological studies
(Silver et al., 1982, 1993), the function and molecular regulation
of this cell population has remained elusive. Here, we demon-
strate in fetal mouse and human brains that the MZG simulta-
neously remodel the IHF and provide the growth substrate for
callosal axons to cross the interhemispheric midline. Previously,
it has been hypothesized that callosal axons are developmen-
tally timed to cross directly through the intervening leptome-
ninges via the activity of Bmp7 and Wnt3 (Choe et al., 2012).
While our data do not exclude a role for Bmp7 and Wnt3 in regu-
lating the timing of callosal midline crossing, we conclusively
show that astroglia, rather than the leptomeninges, provide the
growth substrate for callosal axons as they cross the midline.
We also identify that the transition of radial MZG progenitors
into multipolar MZG cells is a key cellular event during remodel-
ing of the midline that is regulated by a molecular signaling
cascade initiated by the early morphogen Fgf8. Loss- and
gain-of-function paradigms demonstrate that the levels and
timing of Fgf8 expression at the midline are crucial for
regulating the sequential chronology of MZG maturation and
thus subsequently interhemispheric remodeling. Additionally,
742
Cell Reports 17, 735–747, October 11, 2016
 Figure 6. Nfia and Nfib Are Downstream Transcriptional Effec-
tors of Fgf8 Signaling Required for IHF Remodeling and
Corpus Callosum Formation
(A) E12/E15 in utero electroporation (EP) of the mouse telencephalic
hinge with piggyBac Glast transposase/GFP (green) reporter plasmids,
co-labeled with Glast (red), and either Nfia or Nfib (blue/white) dem-
onstrates Nfia and Nfib are both expressed by radial MZG (arrow-
heads).
(B) Luciferase activity of U251 cells co-transfected with a Gfap pro-
moter luciferase construct and either Nfia, Nfib, or GFP control
expression constructs, following addition of the Mek inhibitor U0126
(low = 5 mM; high = 20 mM), performed in triplicate. The data are rep-
resented as mean luciferase intensity ± SD, normalized to the GFP
DMSO control (dotted line), and are representative of at least two in-
dependent experiments. The significant differences were determined
with a Student’s t test.
(C) Unilateral E14/E17 EP of Fgf8 + YFP plasmids into Nfia and Nfib
knockout (Nfi KO) mice and their wild-type littermates, followed by
fluorescence immunohistochemistry for Gfap (green) and Glast (red).
Note the increase in Gfap expression in wild-types (closed green
arrowhead) and absence of Gfap expression in Nfi KO mice (open green
arrowheads).
(D) Quantification of the fold change in Glast and Gfap fluorescence
intensity. The data are represented as means ± SEM (n-values within
bars, significant differences determined with a non-parametric Mann-
Whitney test).
(E) Coronal and axial structural T1- and T2-weighted MRI images of a
normal human brain compared with NFIA- and NFIB-haploinsufficient
individuals. The brackets indicate IHF length and red arrowheads
indicate the separated septum in NFI haploinsufficient brains.
(F) Fluorescence immunohistochemistry for Glast (red), Laminin (green),
and Gap43 (white) in Nfia and Nfib KO embryos and wild-type litter-
mates at E16. The brackets indicate IHF length and white arrowheads
indicate the distribution of radial versus multipolar MZG cells. The
yellow arrowhead indicates the callosal (CC) and hippocampal
commissural (HC) tract in wild-types.
The scale bars represent 50 mm (A), 100 mm (C and F), and 1 cm (E). See
also Figure S5.
Cell Reports 17, 735–747, October 11, 2016
743
 we demonstrate that Fgf8 is a crucial ligand signaling upstream
of the MAPK pathway to induce astroglial differentiation via the
pro-astrogliogenic transcription factors Nfia and Nfib. Taken
together, our findings elucidate a key cellular mechanism that
reconciles the relationship between delayed astroglial develop-
ment and callosal agenesis and are consistent with previous ob-
servations following mouse or human mutations in either Fgf
signaling genes or Nfi genes (Barton et al., 1995; Chen et al.,
2011; Dode
´ and Hardelin, 2009; Dode
´ et al., 2003; Ji et al.,
2014; Koehler et al., 2010; Lajeunie et al., 1999; Li et al., 2012;
Lu et al., 2007; McCabe et al., 2011; Piper et al., 2009a; Rao
et al., 2014; Raybaud and Di Rocco, 2007; Sajan et al., 2013;
Shu et al., 2003a; Sivasankaran et al., 1997; Smith et al., 2006;
Steele-Perkins et al., 2005; Stewart et al., 2016; Tokumaru
et al., 1996; Wilkie et al., 1995).
Various mutant mice that lack proteins involved in either axon
guidance and/or midline guidepost cell development have been
previously identified with callosal agenesis (Bagri et al., 2002; Fo-
thergill et al., 2014; Islam et al., 2009; Keeble et al., 2006; Mag-
nani et al., 2014; Mendes et al., 2006; Niquille et al., 2009; Piper
et al., 2009b; Sa
´ nchez-Camacho et al., 2011; Smith et al., 2006).
Figure 7. Characterization of Human IHF
Phenotypes Associated with Agenesis of
the Corpus Callosum Based on Structural
MRI Studies
(A and B) Comparison of T1- or T2-weighted
structural MRI images from three individuals pre-
viously diagnosed with isolated complete agen-
esis of the corpus callosum and age-matched
controls. Note abnormal retention of the IHF and
accumulation of callosal axons into Probst bun-
dles (PB) on either side of the IHF in individuals
with callosal agenesis. The arrowheads indicate
the morphology of the septum (red arrowheads)
and corpus callosum (CC; yellow arrowheads).
anterior commissure, AC; hippocampal commis-
sure, HC. See also Table S1.
The prevailing hypothesis from these
studies has therefore been that congen-
ital callosal agenesis predominantly re-
sults from defects in axon guidance
mechanisms. Although our findings do
not preclude the possibility that callosal
axon pathfinding defects may occur inde-
pendent of interhemispheric remodeling
defects, we demonstrate that appropriate
elimination of the IHF is essential for sub-
sequent callosal pathfinding across the
midline. Furthermore, we observe that
complete agenesis of the corpus cal-
losum
is
remarkably
correlated
with
abnormal retention of the IHF in humans.
Thus, these findings suggest that the
majority of isolated callosal agenesis
cases associated with Probst bundles
are primarily due to interhemispheric re-
modeling defects and aberrant retention
of the IHF. Our observations further suggest that genetic abnor-
malities that perturb fetal astrogliogenesis may be a significant
risk factor for subsequently developing a callosal tract malforma-
tion. We have identified Fgf8-Nfi signaling as an important
pathway in this process, however, the prevalence of human
interhemispheric remodeling defects associated with callosal
agenesis suggests that multiple molecular pathways are likely
to be involved. Furthermore, whether acallosal mice deficient
for axon guidance and guidepost development proteins also
display defects in interhemispheric midline remodeling or
astrogliogenesis remains an interesting question for future
research.
In summary, our findings demonstrate the cellular and mo-
lecular mechanisms required for astroglial-mediated remod-
eling of the interhemispheric midline and show that this
process is essential for callosal tract formation. Furthermore,
clinical application of our findings may improve the future
detection and diagnostic classification of human callosal
malformations, as well as provide a crucial cellular target
for genetic studies when investigating congenital callosal
disorders.
744
Cell Reports 17, 735–747, October 11, 2016
 EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Human Tissue
Human fetal tissue was obtained from the National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development (NICHD) Brain and Tissue Bank for Developmental Dis-
orders, at the University of Maryland, Baltimore School of Medicine, under
contract N01-HD-4-3368. Collection and use of this tissue was approved by
the University of Maryland Medical School human ethics institutional review
board and The University of Queensland medical research ethics committee.
This project complies with the provisions contained in the Australian National
Statement on Ethical Conduct in Research Involving Humans and with the reg-
ulations governing experimentation on humans. Brains used for immunohisto-
chemical analyses were immersion-fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 4 weeks,
prior to sectioning and analysis.
Human MRI and Genetic Studies
Patients with disorders of the corpus callosum were enrolled in a study
approved by the University of California San Francisco Committee on Human
Research (UCSF CHR) organized by the Brain Development Research Pro-
gram (http://www.brain.ucsf.edu). Drs. Sherr, Barkovich, Dobyns, Reardon,
and colleagues obtained consent for patients and families to participate,
and clinical T1-weighted or T2-weighted brain MRI scans were obtained
and systematically reviewed. Genetic information on two individuals with
either NFIA or NFIB haploinsufficiency was obtained through both clinical
and research-based array comparative genomic hybridization studies, for
which the assembled cohort has been previously reported (Sajan et al.,
2013; identification numbers: LR01-282 and 1127-0). For the correlative anal-
ysis of IHF remodeling defects, patients with complete agenesis of the
corpus callosum, without additional cortical malformations, were selected
for evaluation. Control participants were recruited under a separate UCSF
CHR-approved protocol, the Simons Variation in Individuals Project led
by Dr. Sherr at the University of California, San Francisco. Dr. Sherr and
colleagues obtained consent for healthy volunteers to participate in a brain
imaging study, which included completion of multi-echo MPRAGE T1-
weighted and T2-weighted MRI scans. All MRI scans were systematically
reviewed by a board-certified neuroradiologist. All control scans showed
normal morphology.
Animals
Nfia (Shu et al., 2003a) and Nfib (Steele-Perkins et al., 2005) knockout mice,
Fgf8flox (Meyers et al., 1998), Emx1Cre (Iwasato et al., 2004), and ROSA26-
CAG-flox-STOP-flox-tdTomato reporter mice (Jackson Laboratory strain
B6;129S6-Gt(ROSA)26Sortm9(CAG-tdTomato)Hze/J; Madisen et al., 2010) were
all maintained on a C57BL/6J background. These strains, wild-type C57BL/
6J, and CD1 mice were bred at the University of Queensland. All breeding
and experiments were performed with approval from the University of Queens-
land Animal Ethics Committee. Timed-pregnant mouse females were obtained
by placing male and female mice together overnight, and the following morning
was designated as E0 if a vaginal plug was detected. Nfia and Nfib knockout
litters and Fgf8flox/flox-STOP-flox-tdTomato/Emx1Cre litters were genotyped
by PCR as previously described (Iwasato et al., 2004; Madisen et al., 2010;
Meyers et al., 1998; Shu et al., 2003a; Steele-Perkins et al., 2005). Control em-
bryos were wild-types for Nfia and Nfib knockout analyses and phenotypically
normal homozygous Fgf8flox/heterozygous tdTomato/Cre-negative or hetero-
zygous Fgf8flox/heterozygous tdTomato/Cre-positive animals for Fgf8 cKO
mutant analyses. A minimum of three animals were analyzed for each separate
phenotypic analysis.
In Utero Electroporation, In Vivo Procedures, and Tissue Collection
In utero electroporation was performed as previously described (Sua
´rez et al.,
2014a), with minor modifications where 0.5–1 mL of plasmid DNA was injected
either into one or both lateral ventricles and electroporated medially or into
the third ventricle and electroporated rostrally using 30–45 V, depending on
the embryonic stage. Plasmid expression constructs are described in the Sup-
plemental Experimental Procedures. Pan-matrix metalloproteinase activity was
detected by injecting 0.5 nM MMPSense 645 FAST in vivo reagent (PerkinElmer)
into the lateral ventricles at E14 and collecting brains 24 hr later to allow uptake
and cleavage of the fluorescent substrate. Mouse brains were fixed via transcar-
dial perfusion or immersion fixation with 4% paraformaldehyde.
Immunohistochemistry
Brain sections were processed for either chromogenic immunohistochemistry
or standard fluorescence immunohistochemistry as previously described
(Moldrich et al., 2010) with minor modifications. With the exception of
MMPSense-treated tissue, all sections were post-fixed in 4% paraformalde-
hyde and subjected to antigen retrieval (125�C for 4 min at 15 psi in sodium cit-
rate buffer) prior to incubation with primary antibodies. Primary and secondary
antibodies used for immunohistochemistry are described in the Supplemental
Experimental Procedures.
IHF Measurements and Fluorescence Intensity Quantification
Measurements of the IHF in horizontal sections were performed using ImageJ
software (NIH). To account for interbrain variability, this length was then
normalized to the entire rostro-caudal length of the telencephalon along the
interhemispheric midline.
For fluorescence intensity analyses, a region of interest (ROI) within each
brain hemisphere was cropped from fluorescence images using consistent
anatomical landmarks. The fluorescence intensity was then plotted and aver-
aged over the width of the ROI using ImageJ.
Statistics
For in vivo phenotypic comparisons, data were first assessed for normality with
a D’Agostino-Pearson omnibus normality test and then statistical differences
between two groups were determined either with a parametric Student’s
t test or a non-parametric Mann-Whitney test in Prism 6 software. p % 0.05
was considered significantly different. All values are presented as mean ± SEM.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes Supplemental Experimental Procedures,
five figures, and one table and can be found with this article online at http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2016.09.033.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
I.G. designed, performed, and analyzed the experiments and prepared all
display items. L.J.R. and I.G. conceived of the study and directed the project.
L.M., R.S., J.B., and J.L.R.R. helped to design, perform, or analyze animal ex-
periments and prepare display items. P.B., W.R., W.B.D., A.J.B., and E.H.S.
provided human imaging, genetic data, and analysis of these experiments.
I.G., R.S., L.M., J.B., and L.J.R. wrote the manuscript. All authors reviewed
and edited the manuscript.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful to Laura Fenlon and Rowan Tweedale for critical comments on
the manuscript. We thank Kathryn Green for assistance with scanning electron
microscopy, Nyoman Kurniawan for assistance with MR imaging, and Jona-
than Lim for assistance with luciferase assays. Microscopy was performed
in the Queensland Brain Institute’s Advanced Microscopy Facility. This work
was supported by Australian NHMRC grants 456027 and 1048849 to L.J.R.
and 631552 to L.J.R. and J.L.R.R., Australian ARC LEIF grant LE130100078,
NINDS R01 NS34661 to J.L.R.R., and NIH R01 NS058721 to E.H.S., W.B.D.,
and L.J.R. (subcontract) from the United States. I.G. was supported by a Uni-
versity of Queensland Research Scholarship, L.M. is supported by an Austra-
lian Postgraduate Award, R.S. is supported by an ARC DECRA Research
Fellowship, and L.J.R. is supported by an NHMRC Principal Research
Fellowship.
Received: April 1, 2015
Revised: August 18, 2016
Accepted: September 12, 2016
Published: October 11, 2016
Cell Reports 17, 735–747, October 11, 2016
745
 REFERENCES
Bagri, A., Marı
´n, O., Plump, A.S., Mak, J., Pleasure, S.J., Rubenstein, J.L., and
Tessier-Lavigne, M. (2002). Slit proteins prevent midline crossing and deter-
mine the dorsoventral position of major axonal pathways in the mammalian
forebrain. Neuron 33, 233–248.
Barton, J.S., O’Loughlin, J., Howell, R.T., and L’e Orme, R. (1995). Develop-
mental delay and dysmorphic features associated with a previously unde-
scribed deletion on chromosome 1. J. Med. Genet. 32, 636–637.
Bremer, C., Tung, C.H., and Weissleder, R. (2001). In vivo molecular target
assessment of matrix metalloproteinase inhibition. Nat. Med. 7, 743–748.
Chen, F., and LoTurco, J. (2012). A method for stable transgenesis of radial glia
lineage in rat neocortex by piggyBac mediated transposition. J. Neurosci.
Methods 207, 172–180.
Chen, C.P., Su, Y.N., Chen, Y.Y., Chern, S.R., Liu, Y.P., Wu, P.C., Lee, C.C.,
Chen, Y.T., and Wang, W. (2011). Chromosome 1p32-p31 deletion syndrome:
prenatal diagnosis by array comparative genomic hybridization using uncul-
tured amniocytes and association with NFIA haploinsufficiency, ventriculome-
galy, corpus callosum hypogenesis, abnormal external genitalia, and intrauter-
ine growth restriction. Taiwan. J. Obstet. Gynecol. 50, 345–352.
Choe, Y., Siegenthaler, J.A., and Pleasure, S.J. (2012). A cascade of morpho-
genic signaling initiated by the meninges controls corpus callosum formation.
Neuron 73, 698–712.
Dode
´ , C., and Hardelin, J.P. (2009). Kallmann syndrome. Eur. J. Hum. Genet.
17, 139–146.
Dode
´ , C., Levilliers, J., Dupont, J.M., De Paepe, A., Le D^
u, N., Soussi-Yanicos-
tas, N., Coimbra, R.S., Delmaghani, S., Compain-Nouaille, S., Baverel, F., et al.
(2003). Loss-of-function mutations in FGFR1 cause autosomal dominant Kall-
mann syndrome. Nat. Genet. 33, 463–465.
Edwards, T.J., Sherr, E.H., Barkovich, A.J., and Richards, L.J. (2014). Clinical,
genetic and imaging findings identify new causes for corpus callosum devel-
opment syndromes. Brain 137, 1579–1613.
Fothergill, T., Donahoo, A.L., Douglass, A., Zalucki, O., Yuan, J., Shu, T.,
Goodhill, G.J., and Richards, L.J. (2014). Netrin-DCC signaling regulates
corpus callosum formation through attraction of pioneering axons and by
modulating Slit2-mediated repulsion. Cereb. Cortex 24, 1138–1151.
Gazzaniga, M.S. (2005). Forty-five years of split-brain research and still going
strong. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 6, 653–659.
Halfter, W., Dong, S., Yip, Y.P., Willem, M., and Mayer, U. (2002). A critical func-
tion of the pial basement membrane in cortical histogenesis. J. Neurosci. 22,
6029–6040.
Hetts, S.W., Sherr, E.H., Chao, S., Gobuty, S., and Barkovich, A.J. (2006).
Anomalies of the corpus callosum: an MR analysis of the phenotypic spectrum
of associated malformations. AJR Am. J. Roentgenol. 187, 1343–1348.
Islam, S.M., Shinmyo, Y., Okafuji, T., Su, Y., Naser, I.B., Ahmed, G., Zhang, S.,
Chen, S., Ohta, K., Kiyonari, H., et al. (2009). Draxin, a repulsive guidance pro-
tein for spinal cord and forebrain commissures. Science 323, 388–393.
Iwasato, T., Nomura, R., Ando, R., Ikeda, T., Tanaka, M., and Itohara, S. (2004).
Dorsal telencephalon-specific expression of Cre recombinase in PAC trans-
genic mice. Genesis 38, 130–138.
Ji, J., Salamon, N., and Quintero-Rivera, F. (2014). Microdeletion of 1p32-p31
involving NFIA in a patient with hypoplastic corpus callosum, ventriculome-
galy, seizures and urinary tract defects. Eur. J. Med. Genet. 57, 267–268.
Keeble, T.R., Halford, M.M., Seaman, C., Kee, N., Macheda, M., Anderson,
R.B., Stacker, S.A., and Cooper, H.M. (2006). The Wnt receptor Ryk is required
for Wnt5a-mediated axon guidance on the contralateral side of the corpus cal-
losum. J. Neurosci. 26, 5840–5848.
Koehler, U., Holinski-Feder, E., Ertl-Wagner, B., Kunz, J., von Moers, A., von
Voss, H., and Schell-Apacik, C. (2010). A novel 1p31.3p32.2 deletion involving
the NFIA gene detected by array CGH in a patient with macrocephaly and
hypoplasia of the corpus callosum. Eur. J. Pediatr. 169, 463–468.
Lajeunie, E., Cameron, R., El Ghouzzi, V., de Parseval, N., Journeau, P., Gon-
zales, M., Delezoide, A.L., Bonaventure, J., Le Merrer, M., and Renier, D.
(1999). Clinical variability in patients with Apert’s syndrome. J. Neurosurg.
90, 443–447.
Li, X., Newbern, J.M., Wu, Y., Morgan-Smith, M., Zhong, J., Charron, J., and
Snider, W.D. (2012). MEK Is a key regulator of gliogenesis in the developing
brain. Neuron 75, 1035–1050.
Lu, W., Quintero-Rivera, F., Fan, Y., Alkuraya, F.S., Donovan, D.J., Xi, Q.,
Turbe-Doan, A., Li, Q.G., Campbell, C.G., Shanske, A.L., et al. (2007). NFIA
haploinsufficiency is associated with a CNS malformation syndrome and uri-
nary tract defects. PLoS Genet. 3, e80.
Madisen, L., Zwingman, T.A., Sunkin, S.M., Oh, S.W., Zariwala, H.A., Gu, H.,
Ng, L.L., Palmiter, R.D., Hawrylycz, M.J., Jones, A.R., et al. (2010). A robust
and high-throughput Cre reporting and characterization system for the whole
mouse brain. Nat. Neurosci. 13, 133–140.
Magnani, D., Hasenpusch-Theil, K., Benadiba, C., Yu, T., Basson, M.A., Price,
D.J., Lebrand, C., and Theil, T. (2014). Gli3 controls corpus callosum formation
by positioning midline guideposts during telencephalic patterning. Cereb. Cor-
tex 24, 186–198.
Mason, I. (2007). Initiation to end point: the multiple roles of fibroblast growth
factors in neural development. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 8, 583–596.
McCabe, M.J., Gaston-Massuet, C., Tziaferi, V., Gregory, L.C., Alatzoglou,
K.S., Signore, M., Puelles, E., Gerrelli, D., Farooqi, I.S., Raza, J., et al.
(2011). Novel FGF8 mutations associated with recessive holoprosencephaly,
craniofacial defects, and hypothalamo-pituitary dysfunction. J. Clin. Endocri-
nol. Metab. 96, E1709–E1718.
Mendes, S.W., Henkemeyer, M., and Liebl, D.J. (2006). Multiple Eph receptors
and B-class ephrins regulate midline crossing of corpus callosum fibers in the
developing mouse forebrain. J. Neurosci. 26, 882–892.
Meyers, E.N., Lewandoski, M., and Martin, G.R. (1998). An Fgf8 mutant allelic
series generated by Cre- and Flp-mediated recombination. Nat. Genet. 18,
136–141.
Moldrich, R.X., Gobius, I., Pollak, T., Zhang, J., Ren, T., Brown, L., Mori, S., De
Juan Romero, C., Britanova, O., Tarabykin, V., and Richards, L.J. (2010). Mo-
lecular regulation of the developing commissural plate. J. Comp. Neurol. 518,
3645–3661.
Mori, T., Tanaka, K., Buffo, A., Wurst, W., K€
uhn, R., and Go
¨ tz, M. (2006). Induc-
ible gene deletion in astroglia and radial glia–a valuable tool for functional and
lineage analysis. Glia 54, 21–34.
Namihira, M., Kohyama, J., Semi, K., Sanosaka, T., Deneen, B., Taga, T., and
Nakashima, K. (2009). Committed neuronal precursors confer astrocytic po-
tential on residual neural precursor cells. Dev. Cell 16, 245–255.
Niquille, M., Garel, S., Mann, F., Hornung, J.P., Otsmane, B., Chevalley, S.,
Parras, C., Guillemot, F., Gaspar, P., Yanagawa, Y., and Lebrand, C. (2009).
Transient neuronal populations are required to guide callosal axons: a role
for semaphorin 3C. PLoS Biol. 7, e1000230.
Paul, L.K., Brown, W.S., Adolphs, R., Tyszka, J.M., Richards, L.J., Mukherjee,
P., and Sherr, E.H. (2007). Agenesis of the corpus callosum: genetic, develop-
mental and functional aspects of connectivity. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 8, 287–299.
Piper, M., Moldrich, R.X., Lindwall, C., Little, E., Barry, G., Mason, S., Sunn, N.,
Kurniawan, N.D., Gronostajski, R.M., and Richards, L.J. (2009a). Multiple non-
cell-autonomous defects underlie neocortical callosal dysgenesis in Nfib-defi-
cient mice. Neural Dev. 4, 43.
Piper, M., Plachez, C., Zalucki, O., Fothergill, T., Goudreau, G., Erzurumlu, R.,
Gu, C., and Richards, L.J. (2009b). Neuropilin 1-Sema signaling regulates
crossing of cingulate pioneering axons during development of the corpus cal-
losum. Cereb. Cortex 19 (Suppl 1), i11–i21.
Piper, M., Barry, G., Hawkins, J., Mason, S., Lindwall, C., Little, E., Sarkar, A.,
Smith, A.G., Moldrich, R.X., Boyle, G.M., et al. (2010). NFIA controls telence-
phalic progenitor cell differentiation through repression of the Notch effector
Hes1. J. Neurosci. 30, 9127–9139.
Probst, M. (1901). U
¨ ber den Bau des balkenlosen Grobhirns, sowie €
uber mik-
rogyrie und heterotypie der grauer substanz. Arch. F. Psychiatr. 34, 709–786.
Rakic, P., and Yakovlev, P.I. (1968). Development of the corpus callosum and
cavum septi in man. J. Comp. Neurol. 132, 45–72.
746
Cell Reports 17, 735–747, October 11, 2016
 Rao, A., O’Donnell, S., Bain, N., Meldrum, C., Shorter, D., and Goel, H. (2014).
An intragenic deletion of the NFIA gene in a patient with a hypoplastic corpus
callosum, craniofacial abnormalities and urinary tract defects. Eur. J. Med.
Genet. 57, 65–70.
Raybaud, C., and Di Rocco, C. (2007). Brain malformation in syndromic cranio-
synostoses, a primary disorder of white matter: a review. Childs Nerv. Syst. 23,
1379–1388.
Sajan, S.A., Fernandez, L., Nieh, S.E., Rider, E., Bukshpun, P., Wakahiro, M.,
Christian, S.L., Rivie
` re, J.B., Sullivan, C.T., Sudi, J., et al. (2013). Both rare and
de novo copy number variants are prevalent in agenesis of the corpus cal-
losum but not in cerebellar hypoplasia or polymicrogyria. PLoS Genet. 9,
e1003823.
Sa
´ nchez-Camacho, C., Ortega, J.A., Ocan
˜ a, I., Alca
´ ntara, S., and Bovolenta,
P. (2011). Appropriate Bmp7 levels are required for the differentiation of
midline guidepost cells involved in corpus callosum formation. Dev. Neurobiol.
71, 337–350.
Shu, T., Butz, K.G., Plachez, C., Gronostajski, R.M., and Richards, L.J. (2003a).
Abnormal development of forebrain midline glia and commissural projections
in Nfia knock-out mice. J. Neurosci. 23, 203–212.
Shu, T., Puche, A.C., and Richards, L.J. (2003b). Development of midline glial
populations at the corticoseptal boundary. J. Neurobiol. 57, 81–94.
Siegenthaler, J.A., and Pleasure, S.J. (2011). We have got you ‘covered’: how
the meninges control brain development. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 21, 249–255.
Silver, J., Lorenz, S.E., Wahlsten, D., and Coughlin, J. (1982). Axonal guidance
during development of the great cerebral commissures: descriptive and exper-
imental studies, in vivo, on the role of preformed glial pathways. J. Comp. Neu-
rol. 210, 10–29.
Silver, J., Edwards, M.A., and Levitt, P. (1993). Immunocytochemical demon-
stration of early appearing astroglial structures that form boundaries and path-
ways along axon tracts in the fetal brain. J. Comp. Neurol. 328, 415–436.
Sivasankaran, S., Ho, N.K., and Knight, L. (1997). De novo interstitial deletion
of chromosome 1p with absent corpus callosum–a case report. Ann. Acad.
Med. Singapore 26, 507–509.
Smith, K.M., Ohkubo, Y., Maragnoli, M.E., Rasin, M.R., Schwartz, M.L., Se-
stan, N., and Vaccarino, F.M. (2006). Midline radial glia translocation and
corpus callosum formation require FGF signaling. Nat. Neurosci. 9, 787–797.
Steele-Perkins, G., Plachez, C., Butz, K.G., Yang, G., Bachurski, C.J.,
Kinsman, S.L., Litwack, E.D., Richards, L.J., and Gronostajski, R.M. (2005).
The transcription factor gene Nfib is essential for both lung maturation and
brain development. Mol. Cell. Biol. 25, 685–698.
Stewart, C.E., Corella, K.M., Samberg, B.D., Jones, P.T., Linscott, M.L., and
Chung, W.C.J. (2016). Perinatal midline astrocyte development is impaired
in fibroblast growth factor 8 hypomorphic mice. Brain Res. 1646, 287–296.
Storm, E.E., Garel, S., Borello, U., Hebert, J.M., Martinez, S., McConnell, S.K.,
Martin, G.R., and Rubenstein, J.L. (2006). Dose-dependent functions of Fgf8 in
regulating telencephalic patterning centers. Development 133, 1831–1844.
Sua
´ rez, R., Fenlon, L.R., Marek, R., Avitan, L., Sah, P., Goodhill, G.J., and Ri-
chards, L.J. (2014a). Balanced interhemispheric cortical activity is required for
correct targeting of the corpus callosum. Neuron 82, 1289–1298.
Sua
´ rez, R., Gobius, I., and Richards, L.J. (2014b). Evolution and development
of interhemispheric connections in the vertebrate forebrain. Front. Hum. Neu-
rosci. 8, 497.
Tokumaru, A.M., Barkovich, A.J., Ciricillo, S.F., and Edwards, M.S. (1996).
Skull base and calvarial deformities: association with intracranial changes in
craniofacial syndromes. AJNR Am. J. Neuroradiol. 17, 619–630.
Wilkie, A.O., Slaney, S.F., Oldridge, M., Poole, M.D., Ashworth, G.J., Hockley,
A.D., Hayward, R.D., David, D.J., Pulleyn, L.J., Rutland, P., et al. (1995). Apert
syndrome results from localized mutations of FGFR2 and is allelic with Crou-
zon syndrome. Nat. Genet. 9, 165–172.
Cell Reports 17, 735–747, October 11, 2016
747
