 REVIEW
published: 03 July 2018
doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2018.00127
A Comprehensive Overview on Stress
Neurobiology: Basic Concepts and
Clinical Implications
Lívea Dornela Godoy 1†, Matheus Teixeira Rossignoli 2†, Polianna Delfino-Pereira 2,
Norberto Garcia-Cairasco 1,2* and Eduardo Henrique de Lima Umeoka 2*
1Physiology Department, Ribeirão Preto School of Medicine, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Department
of Neuroscience and Behavioral Sciences, Ribeirão Preto Medical School, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil
Edited by:
Jeansok J. Kim,
University of Washington,
United States
Reviewed by:
David M. Diamond,
University of South Florida,
United States
Ja Wook Koo,
Korea Brain Research Institute,
South Korea
*Correspondence:
Norberto Garcia-Cairasco
ngcairas@usp.br
Eduardo Henrique de Lima Umeoka
eduardoumeoka@gmail.com
†These authors have contributed
equally to this work.
Received: 15 March 2018
Accepted: 06 June 2018
Published: 03 July 2018
Citation:
Godoy LD, Rossignoli MT,
Delfino-Pereira P
, Garcia-Cairasco N
and Umeoka EHL (2018) A
Comprehensive Overview on Stress
Neurobiology: Basic Concepts and
Clinical Implications.
Front. Behav. Neurosci. 12:127.
doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2018.00127
Stress is recognized as an important issue in basic and clinical neuroscience research,
based upon the founding historical studies by Walter Canon and Hans Selye in the past
century, when the concept of stress emerged in a biological and adaptive perspective.
A lot of research after that period has expanded the knowledge in the stress field. Since
then, it was discovered that the response to stressful stimuli is elaborated and triggered
by the, now known, stress system, which integrates a wide diversity of brain structures
that, collectively, are able to detect events and interpret them as real or potential
threats. However, different types of stressors engage different brain networks, requiring
a fine-tuned functional neuroanatomical processing. This integration of information
from the stressor itself may result in a rapid activation of the Sympathetic-Adreno-
Medullar (SAM) axis and the Hypothalamus-Pituitary-Adrenal (HPA) axis, the two major
components involved in the stress response. The complexity of the stress response is
not restricted to neuroanatomy or to SAM and HPA axes mediators, but also diverge
according to timing and duration of stressor exposure, as well as its short- and/or
long-term consequences. The identification of neuronal circuits of stress, as well as
their interaction with mediator molecules over time is critical, not only for understanding
the physiological stress responses, but also to understand their implications on mental
health.
Keywords: stress history, stress response, physical and psychological stressors, neuroanatomy, SAM axis, HPA
axis, HPA axis time-domain, clinical implications of stress
INTRODUCTION
Stress is recognized as an important issue in basic and clinical neuroscience research
(de Kloet et al., 2005a; McEwen et al., 2015). Although this physiological phenomenon
is fundamental to survival, it is also strongly related to several brain disorders including,
depression, anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder (Ruiz et al., 2007; Heim et al., 2008; Martin
et al., 2009; Walsh, 2011; Saveanu and Nemeroff, 2012; Nemeroff, 2016) accordingly to the
International Classification of Diseases, 10th edition (ICD-10). Research focusing on the
complexity of stress is still challenging, but several studies in animals and humans have
made substantial contributions to its progress in recent years, as reviewed by Hariri and
Holmes (2015). However, it is crucial to provide more meaningful advances in the stress
field by means of a translational approach, integrating basic knowledge and clinical practice.
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
1
July 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 127
 Godoy et al.
Neurobiology of Stress, Concepts and Implications
In this review article, we briefly describe the history of stress
research and highlight stress basic concepts, explore the complex
neuroanatomy, in fact networks, of the stress system and its
keen axes and mediators, as well as the time domains of the
stress response. Lastly, we raise clinical implications from these
concepts and discuss future research challenges on the stress
field.
HISTORY OF STRESS RESEARCH
In the beginning of the last century, the North American
physiologist
Walter
Bradfort
Cannon,
after
a
series
of
investigations, made a compilation on the visceral adaptive
responses to different stimuli. This compilation, which has
been mainly conducted in physiology laboratories at Harvard
University, described bodily changes occurring in conjunction
with nociceptive events, hunger and cold, exercise and strong
emotions. Cannon noted that functions that establish and
support the body energy reserves at rest, in face of a stressful
situation, were immediately intensified or completely interrupted
in order to mobilize great energy. This mobilization allows an
improvement of potential escape and attack and/or defense
responses. From these observations, Cannon proposed what he
called the ‘‘fighting-or-flight’’ response (Cannon, 1915).
A few years later, Cannon coined the term homeostasis
based on the idea of milieu intérieur (internal medium) of
Claude Bernard; Cannon wrote: ‘‘the blood and other fluids
surrounding cells constitute the internal environment with which
occur direct exchanges of each cell, and this, must always be
kept with parameters suitable for cell function, regardless of
changes that may be occurring in the external environment.’’
Cannon determined homeostasis as the ability of maintaining the
physiological systems in direction of a dynamic equilibrium. The
concept of homeostasis together with the fight-or-flight response
has contributed for the foundation of stress research.
Hans Selye, yet as a medical student, found that patients
suffering
from
different
diseases
often
exhibited
similar
symptoms that could constitute a single syndrome. These
evidences confronted him again when he was seeking for new
hormones, from ovarian cow extracts at the Department of
Biochemistry at McGill University in Montreal. In his study,
the effects that were primarily attributed to an ovarian hormone
were also observed after administration of various other extracts
from several organs and toxic substances. The latter, regardless
of the preparation method, induced the same changes: increased
adrenal cortex size, gastrointestinal ulcers, as well as thymus
and lymph nodes involution, therefore constituting the so-called
‘‘General Adaptation Syndrome’’ (Selye, 1936).
The General Adaptation Syndrome is characterized by
a set of non-specific responses, which according to Selye,
develops in three stages: (1) alarm phase, characterized by
acute manifestations; (2) resistance phase, when the acute
manifestations disappear; and (3) exhaustion phase, when first
stage reaction may be present again or when it may occur the
collapse of the organism (Selye, 1936).
In this context, it was designed as the basis of the stress theory
and the concept of stress was built from the physical laws of
Hooke. Selye was the first to define stress from a biological point
of view as ‘‘a nonspecific response of the body to any demand made
upon it’’ (Selye, 1950, 1976).
Scientists have discovered that the response to stressful
stimuli is elaborated and triggered by the, now known, stress
system, which integrates a wide diversity of brain structures that,
collectively, are able to detect events and interpret them as either
a real or a potential threat: stressor (Dedovic et al., 2009). Many
research after this period has been done and promoted great
knowledge to the stress field (McEwen et al., 2015).
Thus, the perception of real or potential threats leads to the
release of mediating molecules. The interaction between these
molecules with their corresponding receptors, in the periphery
and in the brain, results in the stress response, which through
physiological and behavioral mechanisms restores the body
homeostasis and promotes adaptation (de Kloet et al., 2005a;
Joëls and Baram, 2009; Figure 1).
In the last few decades, the initial concepts of stress have been
revised. Sterling and Eyer (1988) as well as others (McEwen and
Stellar, 1993; Schulkin et al., 1994) proposed the new concept of
allostasis, allostatic load and allostatic overload. These concepts
would take into account the findings of the 60s, 70s and 80s from
stress research, such as physiological variations in normal states
and the presence of anticipatory responses to stressors (Dallman,
2003; Schulkin, 2003). The latter authors highlighted that the new
concepts of allostasis, allostatic load and allostatic overload are
more biologically precise than stress, to understand a complex
system of adaptation or maladaptation. In the definition of
allostasis, the set-point to maintain a physiological equilibrium
is constantly changed, so what is ideal for baseline situations
is not necessarily ideal in stressful situations (Koolhaas et al.,
2010, 2011). Moreover, the set-point to maintain physiological
balance in allostasis does not work in a linear fashion, but it can
be regulated in several ways (McEwen and Karatsoreos, 2015).
Finally, the terms ‘‘allostatic load’’ and ‘‘allostatic overload’’
consider the cumulative effects of stressors on the body in
normal physiological and pathological situations, respectively
(McEwen and Karatsoreos, 2015). Despite the proposal of the
allostasis concept, some authors argue that the concept of
homeostasis was interpreted in a restricted manner, and the
use of the term allostasis would be just a semantic change,
since the allostatic response system remains the same biologic
system studied in homeostatic response (Dallman, 2003; Day,
2005). In fact, the proposed concepts of allostasis still offer little
help to the understanding of stress, and rather than clarifying,
brought several misunderstandings to the stress neurobiology
(Davies, 2016). At last, the necessity of the allostasis concepts is
questioned with indications that it is not necessary or desirable
at this point on stress research (Dallman, 2003). In general, the
concepts of stress, stressor and stress response are still widely
used and accepted by the scientific community, and accordingly
we adopt them in the current review.
NEUROANATOMY
The
stress
response
involves
an
efficient,
evolutionarily-
conserved and complex system, with modulation in several
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
2
July 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 127
 Godoy et al.
Neurobiology of Stress, Concepts and Implications
FIGURE 1 | The stress system. Processing and coping with stressful
situations requires the engagement of complex mechanisms that integrate
brain and body. The response to stressful stimuli is articulated by a wide
diversity of brain structures that collectively are able to detect or interpret
events as either real or potential threats (stressors). The perception of these
events as stressors involves different networks depending whether it is a
physical or psychological stressor. The identification of a stressor leads to
activation of two major constituents of the stress system and the release of its
final mediating molecules. The sympathetic-adreno-medullar (SAM) axis,
secretes noradrenaline and norepinephrine and the
hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, secretes glucocorticoids. Once
these axes are activated in response to a given stressor, they will generate a
coordinated response that starts within seconds and might last for days,
providing quick responses enabling both, an appropriated strategy, almost
immediately, and homeostasis restoration. To accomplish this, the stress
response systemically promotes energy mobilization, metabolic changes,
activation of the immune system and suppression of the digestive and
reproductive systems. More specifically in the brain, the stress response
induces short- and long-term effects through non-genomic, genomic and
epigenetic mechanisms. These central effects, combined with
proinflammatory signaling, lead to alterations in cellular excitability as well as
synaptic and neuronal plasticity. Collectively, these body-brain effects mediate
alterations in physiology and behavior that enable adaptation and survival.
levels of the central nervous system (CNS), governing learning,
memory
and
strategic
decision
(Sapolsky
and
Pulsinelli,
1985; Sapolsky et al., 1985; Pavlides et al., 1993; Sapolsky,
2000a; McEwen, 2007; Joëls and Baram, 2009; Bains et al.,
2015).
The first step in the stress response is the perception of
a stressor. When a situation is perceived as a threat, the
brain recruits several neuronal circuits to maintain physiological
integrity even in the most adverse conditions (Ulrich-Lai and
Herman, 2009). However, detection of different types of stressors
requires engagement of different networks. Psychological and
physical stressors engage different neuronal networks and
cellular activity, leaving distinct footprints within the brain.
Stimuli that produce actual disturbances of physiological status,
that overwhelm the organism, e.g., hemorrhage or infection are
considered as physical stressors. In the other hand, psychological
stressors are generally defined as stimuli that threaten the
current state and are perceived in an anticipatory condition e.g.,
aversive environmental stimuli, predator-related cues and failure
to satisfy internal drives (Dayas et al., 2001).
Therefore, physical and psychological stressors are processed
by different circuitries in the brain, which may overlap at
some instances. Regardless of the stressor processing, the
stress system will be activated in a coordinated fashion. Here,
we present up-to-date information on brain processing for
physical and psychological stressors and how they interact
(Figure 2).
Physical Stressors
Physical stressors are mainly processed by brainstem and
hypothalamic regions (Dayas et al., 2001; de Kloet et al.,
2005a; Fenoglio et al., 2006; Joëls and Baram, 2009; Ulrich-Lai
and Herman, 2009), they usually require immediate systemic
reaction, which might be considered reflexive (Ulrich-Lai and
Herman, 2009). Thus, the first phase of the stress response
(sympathetic adrenomedullar system—SAM), provides a rapid
physiological adaptation, resulting in short-lasting responses,
such as alertness, vigilance and appraisal of the situation,
enabling a strategic decision to face the challenge in the
initial phase of a stressful event (de Kloet et al., 2005a; Joëls
and Baram, 2009). Whereas, the secondary phase involves
the hormonal mechanism (Hypothalamic Pituitary adrenal
axis—HPA) considered sluggish compared to the synaptic
mechanisms that activate the SAM, but resulting in an amplified
and protracted secretory response (long-lasting responses). Both
SAM and HPA axes will be further detailed in the below sections.
Thus, when a real stressor is recognized or perceived through
signals (such as pain, inflammation and others) by the brainstem,
the
neurocircuitry
that
includes
preganglionic
autonomic
neurons and hypophysiotrophic neurons in the paraventricular
nucleus of the hypothalamus (PVN) are activated, generating
a rapid autonomic nervous system (ANS) and the HPA axis
responses (as illustrated in Figure 1; Ulrich-Lai and Herman,
2009).
In addition to several nuclei of the brainstem, medullary and
spinal cord systems (that participate in the activation of ANS
through its sympathetic and parasympathetic arms), physical
stressors induce the activation of other brain structures that
regulates autonomic stress response including PVN, nucleus of
the solitary tract (NTS) and dorsomedial hypothalamus (DMH;
Geerling et al., 2010). Such structures also have projections to
both sympathetic and parasympathetic ANS arms.
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
3
July 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 127
 Godoy et al.
Neurobiology of Stress, Concepts and Implications
FIGURE 2 | Neuroanatomy of stress. Schematic representation of primarily neuroanatomical substrates responsible for physical (pink) and psychological (blue)
stressors processing. Upper panels show that neural processing for different types of stressors detection and appraisal of the situation engage several structures,
which may overlap at some instances on human and rodent brain (A,B, respectively). Bottom panels represent how physical and psychogenic stressors require
engagement of different networks (C,D, respectively). Physical stressors mainly activate structures related to vital functions control located on brainstem and
hypothalamus. Structures such as the nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS) and locus coeruleus (LC) have an important role in the physical stress pathways. However,
prosencephalic regions also participate in physical stress processing, such as prelimbic area (PL) in pre-frontal cortex (PFC). Also, it is important to mention that the
central nucleus of the amygdala (CeA) participates in autonomic response integration. For instance, psychological stressors are perceived in an anticipatory
condition, which may heavily rely on limbic structures and can be modulated by the reward system. The PFC is critical to develop appropriate responses to
environment changes, and it is densely innervated by dopaminergic projections from the Ventral Tegmental Area (VTA) and Nucleus Accumbens (NAc). PFC
disruption is associated with anhedonia and aberrant reward-seeking behavior. Although PFC involvement is complex and integrates different stress responses in
general, PL and Infralimbic (IL) regions coordinate a top-down control. The amygdaloid complex also participates on psychological stress circuitry and with PFC
disruption its involvement becomes more prevalent, and the circuitry switches to a bottom-up control. Another important structure that stands out due to its
importance on cognitive and memory function, and that is activated in response to both physical and psychological stressors is the Hippocampus (HIPPO). The
CA1 region has important connections with the above-mentioned limbic structures and HIPPO is an important structure of the HPA axis negative feedback. The
paraventricular nucleus of hypothalamus (PVN) and LC (shown in gray) represent the main relay of the stress response triggering respectively the HPA and the SAM
axis. The cross-talk activity between those nuclei allows a cognitive processing of the stress response and enables complex behavioral responses.
The PVN contains distinct populations of neurons that
project to autonomic targets in the brainstem and spinal
cord (such as the middle cell column, the parabrachial
nucleus, the DMX and NTS) and to median eminence
sympathetic outflow therefore can be mediated by the PVN,
but not exclusively. Complementary to the PVN role, another
important hypothalamic nucleus is the DMH, which houses
anatomically segregated neuronal populations responsible for
regulating autonomic responses and also important for activating
or inhibiting HPA axis activity (Ulrich-Lai and Herman,
2009).
The Locus coeruleus (LC; Cunningham and Sawchenko,
1988) and rostral ventrolateral medulla (RVLM; Dempsey et al.,
2017) also directly innervate the intermediolateral cell column,
while the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus nerve (DMX)
and the nucleus ambiguus (NA) mediate descending outputs
for postganglionic parasympathetic nervous system (Saper and
Stornetta, 2015).
It is well known that in the brainstem the NTS has an
important role in the stress pathways. It is located in a quite
strategic position and constitutes a relay for sensory, visceral and
somatic information (Sapolsky et al., 2000; Herman et al., 2003;
Ulrich-Lai and Herman, 2009; Bains et al., 2015). Moreover, the
NTS is directly involved in the control of the cardiovascular and
respiratory functions, containing different neuronal groups that
receive distinct ascending pathways, as part of the baroreflex
and chemoreceptors regulation (Machado, 2001; Zoccal et al.,
2014) systems. The NTS also modulates the HPA axis activity
mainly through noradrenergic and adrenergic projections to
the PVN, but some studies indicate involvement of other
catecholaminergic pathways in this modulation (Herman et al.,
2003; Gaillet et al., 1991; Ritter et al., 2003).
Other important structures for triggering the stress response
are the circumventricular organs (i.e., the median preoptic
nucleus, the subfornical organ (SFO) and the organum
vasculosum
of
the
lamina
terminalis),
that
respond
to
perturbations in fluid and send projections to other integrative
brain regions. For instance, the activation of the medial
parvocellular PVN by the SFO is essential for the central blood
pressure regulation by angiotensin II and regulation of drinking
behavior (Simpson and Routtenberg, 1975; Hindmarch and
Ferguson, 2016).
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
4
July 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 127
 Godoy et al.
Neurobiology of Stress, Concepts and Implications
And finally, it has also been described that limbic forebrain
regions may contribute to physical stressors processing as
well, influencing the functions in the autonomic responses
to stress and the activation of the HPA-axis (Ulrich-Lai
and Herman, 2009). These limbic stress circuits involve the
amygdala, hippocampus and prefrontal cortex (PFC) that receive
associational information from subcortical and cortical areas
and their output converge to subcortical relay sites, making
downstream
processing
of
limbic
information
(top-down
regulation; Ulrich-Lai and Herman, 2009). Those circuitries
will be explored in the circuits overlapping section and we
have highlighted how stressors might interact with the reward
(approaching × aversion) system.
Psychological Stressors
While stressors that are predominantly physically demanding are
more likely to evoke autonomic stress responses, psychological
uncontrollable and social-evaluative threatening stressors elicit
both physical and cognitive stress responses (Skoluda et al.,
2015). Together with the prosencephalic nuclei, components
of limbic circuits such as the PFC, amygdala, hippocampus
(HIPPO), PVN, ventral tegmental area (VTA) and nucleus
accumbens (NAc) have a fundamental role in the regulation
of stress response (Ulrich-Lai and Herman, 2009; Russo and
Nestler, 2013).
The PFC is critical to develop appropriate responses
to
environment
changes,
enabling
behavioral
plasticity
(Ridderinkhof et al., 2004). However, the involvement of
PFC in stress response is complex, since different anatomic
subdivisions play different roles. Bilateral lesions of prelimbic
(PL) cortex portion increases plasma level of adenocorticotrophic
hormone (ACTH), corticosterone and PVN c-Fos expression
(Dioro et al., 1993; Figueiredo et al., 2003). However, lesions of
infralimbic (IL) cortex reduce corticosterone secretion (Sullivan
and Gratton, 1999). Moreover, studies with animal behaviors
showed that lesions in dorsal sites of PFC result in anxiogenic
effects, while lesions in ventral sites of PFC have anxiolytic
effects (Sullivan and Gratton, 2002). These data indicate that PL
and IL have opposite effects in psychological stressors response,
inhibiting PVN activity with anxiolytic effects or stimulating
PVN with anxiogenic behaviors, respectively (Radley et al., 2006;
Jones et al., 2011).
Despite
the
functional
connection
between
PFC
and
PVN, anatomical studies indicate that PFC only has indirect
projections to PVN (Herman et al., 2003). The PL innervates
several GABAergic neurons in the BST, which induces inhibition
of PVN, whereas it is suggested that IL pathway projects to
non-GABAergic in the BST to stimulate the PVN (Radley, 2012).
However, it remains to be elucidated the exact pathways between
PVN and PFC (Bains et al., 2015).
The PFC also has major projections to the amygdala,
an important structure associated with emotional processing
(Gabbott et al., 2005; LeDoux, 2007). Initially, the entire
amygdala complex appears to promote synthesis and secretion
of corticosteroids (Kawakami et al., 1968; Saito et al., 1989).
However, subsequent studies showed that amygdala subnuclei
have distinct roles in stress response (Roozendaal et al., 2009).
The amygdala complex can be divided in the basolateral nucleus
(BLA), the central nucleus of the amygdala (CeA) and the
medial nucleus (MeA). Among these, the BLA has a major
role in processing psychological stressors (Janak and Tye, 2015),
being mainly activated by anticipatory stressors (Cullinan et al.,
1995). However, BLA does not affect corticosterone release itself
(Seggie, 1987). The role of BLA in the processing of psychological
stressors seems to be more critical to the consolidation of aversive
memories (Roozendaal et al., 2009).
Intra-BLA infusions of GABAergic receptor agonists impair
aversive memory consolidation (Brioni et al., 1989). Besides,
after emotional arousal, BLA neurons show lasting increases
in the spontaneous firing rates, which could facilitate the
consolidation of emotional memories through synaptic plasticity
changes (Pelletier et al., 2005). Alterations in emotional and
associative learning (i.e., aggression and learned helplessness)
increased dendritic arborization in BLA neurons (Vyas et al.,
2004; Bennur et al., 2007; Wood et al., 2008). In specific, some
studies indicate that BLA-PFC pathway plays a major role in
memory consolidation and stress response (Laviolette and Grace,
2006; Felix-Ortiz et al., 2016; Burgos-Robles et al., 2017). The
BLA have extensive bi-directional monosynaptic glutamatergic
projections with PFC (PL and IL; Gabbott et al., 2005; Dilgen
et al., 2013; McGarry and Carter, 2016), which is crucial for
emotional learning, fear-related responses, anxiety-like behaviors
and social interactions (Laviolette and Grace, 2006; Felix-Ortiz
et al., 2016; Burgos-Robles et al., 2017). Finally, the activity of
stress response in the BLA is probably not only dependent on
interactions with PFC, but also mediated by projections between
PVN and amygdala (Prewitt and Herman, 1998).
The BLA has abundant output to the CeA and MeA, which
have multisynaptic connections to the PVN (Herman et al.,
2003). The CeA and MeA innervate brainstem structures that
directly projects to PVN, such as the bed nucleus of the
stria terminalis (BNST; Prewitt and Herman, 1998). However,
recent evidence with optogenetics approaches indicates that PVN
projections to the CeA are activated during retrieval of long-term
fear memories. In contrast, retrieval of short-term memories
is mostly dependent on PFC inputs to the BLA, indicating a
time-dependent shift in fear memories circuits (Do-Monte et al.,
2015). In turn, CeA has direct connections to periaqueductal
gray (PAG), a fundamental area that organizes the threat
response (LeDoux, 2012). Specifically, dorsal PAG is related to
unconditioned threats exposure and ventral PAG is activated in
conditioned threats, each one with distinct behavioral outputs.
While lesions in dorsal PAG increased freezing behavior, damage
to the ventral PAG decreased freezing (De Oca et al., 1998;
LeDoux, 2012).
Another important limbic structure for stress processing is
the hippocampal formation (McEwen et al., 1968; Smotherman
et al., 1981), which consists of the dentate gyrus (DG) and
Ammon’s horn/Cornus Ammonics (CA) subfields that compose
the well-known tri-synaptic circuit, first from DG granule cells
to CA3 pyramidal cells and then from CA3 to CA1 pyramidal
cells (Amaral and Witter, 1989; Andersen et al., 2000; Naber
et al., 2001). While the DG receives most of extra-hippocampal
afferents from the entorhinal cortex via the perforant path
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
5
July 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 127
 Godoy et al.
Neurobiology of Stress, Concepts and Implications
(Witter, 2007), the CA1 and subiculum pyramidal neurons are
the main HIPPO output to several areas, such as excitatory
projections to PFC (PL and IL) and indirect inhibitory
projections to PVN (Barbas and Blatt, 1995; Herman and
Mueller, 2006).
The hippocampal inhibitory control over the HPA axis acts in
a negative feedback manner inhibiting it (Jacobson and Sapolsky,
1991; Herman et al., 1996). The mainly indirect hypothalamic
input of HIPPO originates in the CA1 and subiculum that
densely innervate BNST and hypothalamic structures, except
PVN (Canteras and Swanson, 1992; Cullinan et al., 1993).
Projections from HIPPO to both the PFC and BLA present
some of the most important role in memory but especially for
the regulation of psychological stress response (Godsil et al.,
2013). HIPPO has bidirectional connections with BLA, but at
the same time allows PFC to modulate the stress system with a
top-down control (Mcdonald, 1998; Janak and Tye, 2015; Radley
et al., 2015). However, the CA1 and subiculum monosynaptic
glutamatergic efferents to PL and IL can become functionally
disrupted after intense psychological stress (Zheng and Zhang,
2015). In a strong emotional experience, HIPPO and BLA rapidly
activate memory-related mechanisms of synaptic plasticity while
PFC functioning is suppressed, promoting long-lasting flashbulb
memories (Diamond et al., 2007).
Therefore, in the presence of psychological stressors, if the
activity of the amygdala and HIPPO becomes more prevalent,
the stress system can switch to a bottom-up control (Arnsten,
2009). On top of that, prolonged psychological stress decreases
glutamatergic projection to interneurons in BLA, leading to loss
of BLA inhibition by the PFC and finally, to the hyperexcitability
of BLA, which is responsible for behavioral abnormalities related
to stress (Wei et al., 2017).
At this point, among several hypothalamic nuclei that
are directly involved in regulating HPA axis and autonomic
responses to stressors, the PVN stands out as the principal
integrator of stress signals (Herman et al., 2003; Ulrich-
Lai and Herman, 2009). In general, the medial parvocellular
neurons of the PVN receive projections of first or second
order of somatic afferent nociceptive, visceral, humoral or
sensory pathways, beyond those of the limbic and reward
system such as PFC, amygdala, HIPPO, VTA and NAc (Russo
and Nestler, 2013; Bains et al., 2015). As already mentioned
before, most limbic–PVN connections are indirect and are made
through GABAergic cell groups in the BNST and peri-PVN
regions of the hypothalamus (Crestani et al., 2013). Studies
involving activity mapping (mostly c-Fos expression) have
demonstrated an important role for BNST in the regulation
of the HPA axis (Zhu et al., 2001), while the posterior
BNST nuclei are involved in inhibition of the HPA axis, the
anteroventral nuclei are involved in its excitation (Choi et al.,
2007). In the reward system, pharmacological inhibition of
NAc increased c-Fos expression in PVN (Noh et al., 2012).
Lastly, the parvocellular neurons of the PVN are strategically
connected with several brainstem and forebrain nuclei such
as NTS, DMH, LC, VLM, DMX and NA, important to the
processing and integration of both modalities of stressors,
physical and psychological, which results in a rapid activation of
the HPA axis (Ulrich-Lai and Herman, 2009; Senst and Bains,
2014).
Overlapping Processing
Many of the above circuitry and brain areas responsible for
physical and psychological stressors may sound exclusively
related to brainstem and forebrain, respectively. However,
some structures are also engaged with different modalities of
stressor (Figure 2).
The best-characterized reward circuit in the brain is made up
of dopaminergic neurons in the VTA that project to the NAc,
a subdivision of the ventral striatum (Bath et al., 2017). The
primary brain reward centers are inter-connected in complex
ways in the brain reward circuitry, but mostly VTA and NAc
regulates limbic areas mentioned above (Heshmati and Russo,
2015).
The dopaminergic tonus of VTA is fundamental to the
recognition of rewards or punishment in the environment (Russo
and Nestler, 2013). Exciting all VTA neurons enhances/mimics
social defeat stress-induced effects on social avoidance and
anhedonia while silencing all VTA neurons (regardless of the
projection region or the cell type) promotes the opposite
effect (Krishnan et al., 2007). On the other hand, the
optogenetic stimulation of VTA dopaminergic neurons drives
to a conditioned place preference (Tsai et al., 2009), whereas
inhibition of VTA promotes conditioned placed aversion (Tan
et al., 2012).
However,
VTA
is
composed
by
different
neuronal
subpopulations, which participate in distinct circuits that
encode different motivational signature (Lammel et al., 2012,
2014). Dopaminergic neurons of VTA project to NAc, HIPPO,
BLA and PFC, however, the NAc also receives glutamatergic
innervations from ventral HIPPO, BLA and PFC (Russo and
Nestler, 2013; Lammel et al., 2014) and all these nuclei are under
the regulatory influence of dopamine. Indeed, dopaminergic
neurons that innervate the mPFC show reduced firing after social
defeat chronic stress (Chaudhury et al., 2012). Dopaminergic
neurons in VTA exhibit two patterns of spontaneous firing
activity: a slow-frequency, single-spike firing and a burst firing,
effectively regulating the activity of neurons in dopaminergic
target areas and encoding reward-related signals (Grace et al.,
2007). This mechanism of encoding and engaging specific
networks makes sense since the behavioral response to a
rewarding (approach) vs. an aversive experience (aversion) is
different and therefore involves different, perhaps overlapping,
neural circuits (Lammel et al., 2011).
Accordingly, associating this fined-tuned VTA regulation to
the stress processing, it has been proposed that a specific ventral
VTA pathway is related to painful physical stress. Several findings
showed that dopaminergic cells that specifically project to the
mPFC regulate the process of noxious stimuli (Abercrombie
et al., 1989; Mantz et al., 1989; Bassareo et al., 2002; Brischoux
et al., 2009; Matsumoto and Hikosaka, 2009; Lammel et al., 2011).
But it is important to mention that although dopamine has a
central role in processing physical stressors, in this scenario, the
NAc detains the central role in regulating the reward system
(Grace et al., 2007) which is deeply related to the processing of
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
6
July 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 127
 Godoy et al.
Neurobiology of Stress, Concepts and Implications
psychological stressors and promotion of behavioral flexibility
(Heshmati and Russo, 2015).
Essentially, HIPPO projections to NAc promote susceptibility
to psychological stress, BLA-NAc pathway increases reward
seeking behavior and PFC-NAc promotes resilience (Stuber et al.,
2011; Vialou et al., 2014; Bagot et al., 2015; Heshmati and
Russo, 2015). Increased firing of VTA dopaminergic neurons
that innervate the NAc occurs only in susceptible mice after
chronic social defeat stress, while VTA-PFC pathway reduced
firing after the same protocol (Chaudhury et al., 2012). Therefore,
we can see that while mesocortical pathways encode physical
processing, the NAc may represent an important hub in
processing psychological stress.
Not only the PFC activity corresponds to an integrative hot
point of limbic and reward circuitry, but also its contribution
to the inhibition of the HPA axis by PFC top-down control is
crucial. If the inhibitory HPA axis feedback does not function
properly, as in the case of chronic stress and neuropsychiatric
disorders, the loss of negative feedback in the PVN regulated by
the PFC and HIPPO, associated to the hyperexcitability of BLA
and silencing of NAc creates a positive feedback in the PVN that
can both overload the stress system (Duvarci and Paré, 2007;
Willner et al., 2013) and deplete the reward system (Heshmati
and Russo, 2015).
Also, regarding the PFC, interesting data have revealed that
stimulation of PL enhances hypoxia-mediated corticosterone
responses and PVN by using c-Fos activation mapping (Jones
et al., 2011). Some brainstem nuclei that regulate autonomic
response, such as DMX and NAc, receive and send information
from and to other regions of the CNS, respectively, including
IL and PL portions of PFC, the CeA and BNST (Ulrich-Lai and
Herman, 2009).
The CeA, previously mentioned as a central hub in fear
response is also considered as a key node for stress integration
(Ulrich-Lai and Herman, 2009). Moreover, NTS is also densely
innervated by afferent projections from the CeA (Smith and Vale,
2006). The NTS can be activated during conditioning paradigms,
suggesting that this pathway also plays a role in the integration of
anticipatory stress (Pezzone et al., 1993).
It is important to highlight that different modalities
of
stressors
that
activate
the
PVN
also
activate
the
LC-Norepinephrine (LC-NE) system, such as restraint, shock
(notably unpredictable), audiogenic stress, autonomic and
immunological challenges and also social stress (Wood and
Valentino, 2016). The LC is a compact pontine nucleus
adjacent to the fourth ventricle and houses the majority of the
NE-expressing neurons in the brain and innervates the entire
neuraxis (Swanson and Hartman, 1975).
Activation of the LC-NE occurs in parallel and coordinated
with PVN activation. This cross-talk between those nuclei
allows a cognitive processing of the stress response engaging
limbic and prosencephalic regions, such as the HIPPO and
cortex, which govern neuronal excitability, cognition, memory
and complex behaviors (Joëls and de Kloet, 1989; Wood and
Valentino, 2016). Recent techniques, such as chemogenetics,
optogenetics, combined with traditional retrograde tracing,
which enable selective manipulation of LC-NE system in rodents,
determined the pivotal role of the LC-NE, for example, for stress-
induced anxiety-like behavior (McCall et al., 2015). Interestingly,
Corticotrophin Release Hormone (CRH), which initially was
discovered and defined as the hormone that initiates the cascade
that ultimately leads to glucocorticoids release, seems to stand out
as the molecule that coordinates the cross-talk between the two
systems (Valentino and Van Bockstaele, 2008).
The LC-NE network is a major target of CRH (Chappell et al.,
1986; Wood and Valentino, 2016). During stress, CRH is released
into the LC, increasing neuronal firing rate and consequently
NE release in forebrain targets (Valentino et al., 1991; Jedema
and Grace, 2004). Different structures that coordinate autonomic
and limbic processing such as CeA (Van Bockstaele et al.,
1998), BNST (Van Bockstaele et al., 1999), PVN (Reyes et al.,
2005), paragigantocellularis nucleus and Barrington’s nucleus
(Valentino et al., 1992, 1996) send CRH modulatory projections
to LC. Barrington’s nucleus is one of the few nuclei that
actually sends projections directly into the core of the LC and
also has important projections to preganglionic column of the
lumbosacral spinal cord (Valentino et al., 1996).
Interestingly, CRH release within the LC is regulated by basal
levels of corticosteroids as well (Valentino and Van Bockstaele,
2008).This communication between HPA and LC-NE axis
determines the structural basis for emotional arousal, facilitates
cognition and promote flexible behavioral responses to stress
(Cole and Koob, 1988; Valentino and Van Bockstaele, 2008),
since CRH release in the LC during stress facilitates shifting of
attention between diverse stimuli (Snyder et al., 2012). Therefore,
this crosstalk enables organisms to tailor different strategies to
coping with constant changing environmental challenges.
SAM AXIS AND CATECHOLAMINES
The stress response to physical and/or psychological stressors,
organized
by
the
previously
described
brain
circuitry,
involves a rapid physiological adaptation mediated mainly
by catecholamines (de Kloet et al., 2005a; Joëls and Baram, 2009;
Tank and Lee Wong, 2015). In fact, epinephrine (E) and NE are
secreted from adrenal medulla (Cannon, 1914; de Kloet et al.,
2005a; Joëls and Baram, 2009; Kvetnansky et al., 2009; Tank and
Lee Wong, 2015) and NE from sympathetic nerves (Euler, 1946;
Kvetnansky et al., 2009; Tank and Lee Wong, 2015).
The circuitry responsible for these autonomic modulations
includes direct projections from PVN, LC and RVLM (Iversen
et al., 2000; Ulrich-Lai and Herman, 2009) to pre-ganglionic
sympathetic neurons present in dorsal intermediolateral cellular
column (IML) of the spinal cord (thoracolumbar region),
being these nuclei modulated by the NTS (Ulrich-Lai and
Herman, 2009). Each pre-ganglionic fiber connects with
many post-ganglionic neurons located in one or several
pre-spinal ganglia or sympathetic paravertebral nuclei (Boron
and Boulpaep, 2009). Although, there are many efferent
pathways of the ANS, only two neurons are necessary to transmit
impulses between the CNS to the effector tissue (Mccorry, 2007).
Other pre-ganglionic neurons, which end at the spinal cord,
do not make synapses with a post-ganglionic neuron. For
instance, they make synapses directly with chromaffin cells in
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
7
July 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 127
 Godoy et al.
Neurobiology of Stress, Concepts and Implications
the adrenal medulla (Mccorry, 2007; Boron and Boulpaep, 2009).
This glandular tissue synthesizes and secretes E and NE, being
E 80% of the catecholamine output by the adrenal medulla in
humans (Goldstein et al., 2003; Dünser and Hasibeder, 2009;
Tank and Lee Wong, 2015). Thus, these two components increase
the capacity of the sympathetic division in influencing body
visceral responses (Boron and Boulpaep, 2009). The sympathetic
system activation leads to activation of signaling pathways that
evoke changes in blood vessels, glands, visceral organs and
smooth muscles (Tank and Lee Wong, 2015).
The parasympathetic component of the ANS regulates the
action and duration of the autonomic responses, generating the
so-called ‘‘vagal tone’’ of the cardiac and respiratory systems
(Iversen et al., 2000; McEwen, 2007; Davidson and McEwen,
2012). Pre-ganglionic parasympathetic neurons originate from
craniosacral vertebral segments (brainstem and sacral spinal
cord) synapse with post-ganglionic neurons in the terminal
nodes located more peripherally, and usually on the wall of
the target organs. Post-parasympathetic ganglionic neurons
stimulate the muscarinic and nicotinic receptors present on the
membrane of the target cells by releasing acetylcholine (Boron
and Boulpaep, 2009).
The effect caused by any of these substances, acetylcholine,
norepinephrine and epinephrine, depends on the biochemical
properties of the cells and on the receptor distribution in a
determined tissue (Mccorry, 2007). In general, SAM activation is
considered to mediate short-term effects, with rapid responses,
while the HPA axis activation leads to short and long-term
effects (Joëls and Baram, 2009; Tank and Lee Wong, 2015).
As previously mentioned, interactions of these major stress
systems (SAM and HPA) occur at several levels, functioning
cooperatively and/or sequentially, acting in opposite ways in
most visceral organ targets.
Although, these sympathetic and parasympathetic systems
act independently from each other (Antunes-Rodrigues et al.,
2005; Ulrich-Lai and Herman, 2009; Tank and Lee Wong,
2015) dominance of the sympathetic system occur under
conditions such as exercise and ‘‘fight-or-flight’’ reactions, the
parasympathetic system predominates during resting conditions
(Mccorry, 2007).
E and NE interact with adrenergic receptors present
in cell membranes of smooth muscles and in numerous
organs, as well as in neurons widespread in the CNS
(Mccorry, 2007; Tank and Lee Wong, 2015). These receptors
are the G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs), which are
homologous to muscarinic receptors, i.e., are proteins embedded
in the cell membrane with seven transmembrane domains
(Mccorry, 2007; Dünser and Hasibeder, 2009). There are
two
major
types
of
adrenergic
receptors;
α-
adrenergic
and β-adrenergic receptors, with their subtypes (Langer,
1980; Guimarães and Moura, 2001; Dünser and Hasibeder,
2009).
The rise in circulating E and NE causes general physiological
changes that prepare the body for ‘‘fight-or-flight’’ reaction
(Cannon, 1915, 1929; Bowman, 1930). Their effects include:
maintaining alertness, metabolic actions (increased glucose via
glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis, lipolysis, increased oxygen
consumption and thermogenesis) and cardiovascular actions
(Aires, 2012).
The central noradrenergic system, specifically the LC is
involved in multiple neurochemical circuits, having connections
with neuroanatomical structures involved in the stress response,
such as the HIPPO, amygdala and temporal neocortex. Studies
indicate an important role of the LC in response to acute
stress (Myers et al., 2017), acting as an ‘‘alarm system,’’ in
attention, excitation and defensive responses (Cassens et al.,
1981; Valentino and Van Bockstaele, 2008). However, chronic
activation of the LC may have a potential role in the development
of pathological behaviors related to stress (Southwick et al., 1999;
Ziegler et al., 1999; Valentino et al., 2012; George et al., 2013;
Reyes et al., 2015), which will be discussed in one of the following
sections.
Thus, the release of NE has central actions, coordinates and
modulates autonomic, endocrine and neuroendocrine responses,
through extensive brain and spinal cord connections, while direct
projections from LC to medial parvocellular division of the PVN
(Cunningham and Sawchenko, 1988) allows the modulation of
the HPA axis (Armario et al., 2012). On the other hand, the
activity of LC itself may be influenced by CRH through afferent
projections from amygdala and brainstem nuclei (McCall et al.,
2015; Sun et al., 2015), facilitating the complex behavioral and
cognitive reactions to stress (Valentino and Van Bockstaele,
2008).
HPA AXIS AND GLUCOCORTICOIDS
When an organism faces a threatening stimulus, whether
it is psychological or physical, as explained in the previous
sections, many brain areas are activated in a coordinated
fashion to recruit a complex structure known as hypothalamus,
which is composed by many sub nuclei. As already discussed,
among those nuclei is the PVN, which is responsible for
eliciting the activation of the HPA axis, one of the main
components of the stress response. The PVN synthesizes
three
different
neurochemical
compounds
that
behave
either
as
neurotransmitters
or
hormones,
depending
on
where
they
are
acting.
These
compounds
are
oxytocin,
vasopressin and CRH (Vale et al., 1981; Sawchenko et al.,
1992, 1996).
The pituitary is situated caudally and above the optical
chiasm, and consists of an anterior portion (adenohypophysis),
that synthesizes and secretes hormones and of a posterior
portion (neuro-hypophysis), that stores oxytocin and vasopressin
synthesized by the parvocellular neurons in the PVN (McCann
and Brobeck, 1954; Joëls and Baram, 2009).
When CRH reaches the anterior pituitary, it stimulates the
corticotrophs to synthesize and release the ACTH (Vale et al.,
1981). ACTH is secreted through the hypophyseal portal system,
and acts on the cortex of the adrenal gland, more specifically on
the middle layer named fascicullata (Vale et al., 1978; Herman
et al., 2003), which is responsible for glucocorticoid synthesis and
secretion (Vale et al., 1978). The main glucocorticoid in humans
is cortisol, and its equivalent in rodents is corticosterone (de
Kloet, 2013).
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
8
July 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 127
 Godoy et al.
Neurobiology of Stress, Concepts and Implications
Although the HPA axis has an ultradian rhythm (Young et al.,
2004; de Kloet and Sarabdjitsingh, 2008; Lightman and Conway-
Campbell, 2010), levels of corticosteroid hormones follow a
circadian rhythm, as well as a glucocorticoid peak secretion in
humans, occurring during the early morning and in rodents in
the beginning of the evening (Reppert and Weaver, 2002). There
are many evidences indicating that the suprachiasmatic nucleus
(SCN) of the hypothalamus is the generator of the circadian
rhythm (Welsh et al., 1995; Jagota et al., 2000; Reppert and
Weaver, 2002; Engeland and Arnhold, 2005). Glucocorticoids
act on the anterior pituitary, PVN and other brain structures,
such as the HIPPO (McEwen et al., 1968), controlling the activity
of the HPA axis. This phenomenon is called short and long
negative feedback loops, respectively (de Kloet et al., 1991; Joëls
and Baram, 2009; Bains et al., 2015).
Glucocorticoids
are
steroids
and
easily
trespass
cell
membranes and since they are released in the bloodstream they
can virtually reach any cell in the body. Although peripherally
the glucocorticoids act massively in several target-organs, here
we focus on their effects on the brain. Cortisol, or corticosterone
in rodents, exerts their effects in the brain by binding to two
types of receptors, the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and the
mineralocorticoid receptor (MR; Reul and de Kloet, 1985; de
Kloet et al., 2005a,b). These receptors mediate the effects of
glucocorticoids in the brain through genomic and non-genomic
mechanisms (Verkuyl et al., 2005; de Kloet and Sarabdjitsingh,
2008; Groeneweg et al., 2012; Joëls et al., 2012) and therefore
GR and MR characteristics, such as distribution, affinity and
mechanism of action are determinant to regulate homeostasis
under basal condition or to promote adaptation through the
stress response.
The MR shows 10 times higher affinity for corticosterone
than GR (Reul and de Kloet, 1985). Such difference is translated
to receptor occupancy throughout the day, during the through
phase of the circadian cycle, when glucocorticoid levels are low,
MRs are occupied whereas the GRs are mostly free. During the
peak phase of the circadian cycle, or after high glucocorticoid
release due to the stress response, MRs are completely occupied
while GRs are partially occupied (Kitchener et al., 2004; Young
et al., 2004).
Although glucocorticoids are able to reach all neurons in the
brain, they exert effects on those neurons expressing GRs and
MRs. GRs are abundant and widely spread throughout the brain.
On the other hand, MRs are expressed in restricted areas of the
brain (Reul and de Kloet, 1986). It is also important to mention
that there are some key structures that express both receptors,
such as the PVN, HIPPO, amygdala, lateral septum, LC and
NTS, among others. Moreover, GR and MR also co-localize with
adrenoreceptors allowing the interplay between the SAM and
HPA axes (Härfstrand et al., 1986; Joëls and de Kloet, 1989; Pu
et al., 2007; Krugers et al., 2012; Zhou et al., 2012).
Upon binding to GR or MR, located in the cytosol,
receptor-ligand complex forms monomers or dimers (homo
or heterodimers) that translocate to the nucleus and bind to
promoter regions of about 1%–2% of the genome (known
as Glucocorticoid Responsive Elements), or interact with
transcriptional
factors,
usually
hampering
their
efficacy
(Morsink et al., 2006; Datson et al., 2008; Grbesa and Hakim,
2017; Weikum et al., 2017). These delayed and long-lasting
effects of GR and MR receptor activation (Joëls et al., 2012)
mediate transcription of proteins involved in immune, cognitive,
metabolic and many other physiological processes, in order to
promote changes in physiology and behavior. Moreover, it has
also been shown that not only genomic processes are triggered
by GR and MR, actually there are studies clearly showing rapid
effects of membrane-located MR and GR activation (Borski,
2000; Johnson et al., 2005; Karst et al., 2005; Olijslagers et al.,
2008; Wang and Wang, 2009; Evanson et al., 2010; Karst et al.,
2010; Roozendaal et al., 2010; Groeneweg et al., 2012; Nahar
et al., 2016).
Important to mention, it has been demonstrated that GR
levels, and consequently HPA axis function, can be modulated by
the environment, as well as life experiences (acute and chronic
stressors), through stable changes in the DNA chromatin,
which does not alter DNA sequence, a mechanism known as
epigenetics (Hunter et al., 2009; Griffiths and Hunter, 2014;
Buschdorf and Meaney, 2015). Alterations such as methylation
and acetylation of histones occur genomewide enhancing or
hampering chromatin activity, however DNA methylation can
also occur in a gene-specific fashion altering its expression
(Tsankova et al., 2006; Nestler, 2014). In fact, Weaver et al.
(2004) showed that environment factors, such as maternal
care, play a fundamental role in the programming of the
HPA axis function, morespecifically on the nuclear receptor
subfamily 3 group C member 1 (NR3C1) gene (GR), which
persists through adulthood. These authors demonstrated that
pups, which received low care (licking and grooming the pups)
from their dams, had higher hippocampal NC3R1 methylation
associated with lower GR expression, when compared to those
that received high levels of licking and grooming.
Epigenetic modulation of GR expression has also been
described in humans as highlighted by Palma-Gudiel et al.
(2015) and Smart et al. (2015) and although some studies point
out the fact that stress (early-life adversities) lead to NR3C1
hypermethylation, it is still controversial the association of these
epigenetic changes with psychopathologies such as depression
in humans (McGowan et al., 2009; Alt et al., 2010; Na et al.,
2014; Palma-Gudiel et al., 2015; Smart et al., 2015). In the other
hand, pre-clinical data have associated stress-induced epigenetic
alterations with vulnerability or resilience to psychiatry-like
conditions (Covington et al., 2009, 2011; Wilkinson et al., 2009;
Nestler, 2014).
STRESS AND THE IMMUNE SYSTEM
As mentioned previously, it is through the GR receptor that the
HPA axis modulates the immune system, which involves protein-
protein and/or DNA interactions (for further review see Liu
et al., 2014). Although, the discovery of the interplay between
the inflammatory and endocrine systems is dated as a long-time
story, it still remains as a hot topic in the field of stress research.
At the same period Hans Selye discovered his canonical findings
on stress, the prestigious Mayo Clinique developed the substance
E (Neeck, 2002; Hillier, 2007; Lupien, 2015). This substance
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
9
July 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 127
 Godoy et al.
Neurobiology of Stress, Concepts and Implications
crystalized by Dr. Kendall (Mason et al., 1936) was being used for
treating Addison’s disease (Kendall, 1953), later on recognized as
cortisol, which gave birth to a myriad of ‘‘wonder’’ drugs for a
variety of inflammatory disorders such as Rheumatoid Arthritis
(Neeck, 2002; Hillier, 2007; Lupien, 2015).
Most recently, research on the relationship between stress
hormones and immune system has unraveled many intricate
pathways that also can be explored for their clinical implications.
It has been postulated that besides preparing the body to deal
with the environment demands, stress activates the immune
system, which engages active defense against physical injury
and pathogens. Ultimately, cytokines are produced to promote
multiple kinds of inflammatory responses (Takahashi et al.,
2018). But reports stated that stress-enhanced inflammatory
activity is present in the absence of infectious pathogens,
especially in depressed patients (Audet et al., 2014).
To address whether stress or its hormones are pro or
anti-inflammatory, evidence using rodent models demonstrated
that stress itself can be both pro- and anti-inflammatory. Some
authors have proposed that the timing of immune challenges
and measurements determines the direction of glucocorticoid
actions. Those authors proposed that glucocorticoids initially
present anti-inflammatory action, but later on sensitizes the
immune response on the recovery phase (after stressor; Frank
et al., 2013).
Stress can directly influence immune signaling in two main
ways, by reducing the inhibitory effects of glucocorticoid actions,
or by directly stimulating the immune system via HPA axis and
SAM (Liu et al., 2014; Wohleb et al., 2015). But not only the
neural components of stress engage the immune system, the
immune system also affects the CNS, modulating the HPA axis
(Berkenbosch et al., 1987; Linthorst et al., 1994; Angeli et al.,
1999). Therefore, acutely, stressful experiences enhanced levels
of circulatory pro-inflammatory cytokines (Steptoe et al., 2007).
Some of these inflammatory cytokines are either locally produced
by activated microglia (Wohleb et al., 2015) or get access to the
brain through circumventricular sites (Vitkovic et al., 2000) or
are transported (Banks, 2006).
Interestingly, the sites that have increased pro-inflammatory
immune reactivity appear to be related to acute stressor
modalities.
Social
stressors
increased
expression
of
pro-inflammatory
interleukins
and
activated
microglia
in
sites such as PFC, amygdala and HIPPO (Audet et al., 2010,
2011; Tynan et al., 2010; Wohleb et al., 2011; Hinwood et al.,
2012, 2013) whereas physical stressors promoted an increase
in the hypothalamus (O’Connor et al., 2003; Deak et al., 2005;
Hueston and Deak, 2014).
TIME DOMAIN OF STRESS
The complexity of the stress response is not restricted
to neuroanatomy and mediator molecules, but also diverge
according to timing and duration of stressor exposure, as well
as its short- and/or long-term consequences (de Kloet, 2013).
Stress mediators operate in a feedback loop after HPA axis
activation, and regulate, in a positive or negative way, different
brain structures to restore homeostasis (de Kloet et al., 2005b).
When the timing of stress response is inappropriate, aberrant
HPA axis activity could lead to pathological states (Heim et al.,
2000, 2008; de Kloet et al., 2005a; Juruena, 2013; Nemeroff,
2016). We can divide basal regulation of glucocorticoids release
in ultradian and circadian cycles, and also categorize the effects
of stress response in rapid or delayed regarding their initiation,
and in short or long-term, regarding their duration, in both
scenarios they range from milliseconds to days (Joëls et al.,
2012). Moreover, stress also differs when it occurs in early-life
or adulthood of an individual, which can increase or decrease
the possibility of developing brain disorders (Lupien et al., 2009;
Juruena, 2013; Timmermans et al., 2013).
In ultradian and circadian cycles, peaks of corticosterone
release contribute to regulation of basal metabolic demand and
the responsiveness of stress (Lightman and Conway-Campbell,
2010). The origin of pulsatile corticosterone release in an
ultradian and circadian fashion is not fully elucidated, but it has
been a general assumption that the hypothalamus modulates this
phenomenon, specifically, the hypothalamic SCN has efferent
projections to neuroendocrine cells in the PVN that trigger the
HPA axis activation (Engeland and Arnhold, 2005).
Acute stress mediators start acting within seconds after
the stressor detection and provide quick responses to an
appropriated strategy, involving modulation of limbic-cortical
circuits
(Bains
et
al.,
2015).
The
PVN
in
acute
stress
is fundamental, both to drive ‘‘fight-or-flight’’ responses
through stress mediators release, or to inhibit acute response
(Dallman, 2005). After corticosterone is released, frequency of
miniature excitatory postsynaptic currents (mEPSCs) in PVN
are suppressed, which decreases glutamatergic excitability and
increases GABA inhibition (Di et al., 2005). These effects of
corticosterone in the PVN occur mainly via non-genomic GR
activity and endocannabinoid signaling (Di et al., 2003; Verkuyl
et al., 2005). However, in other structures, excitatory activity
is increased after acute stress (Joëls et al., 2012), for instance
corticosterone release enhances mEPSC frequency via MR in
CA1 pyramidal cells (Karst et al., 2005; Olijslagers et al., 2008).
Similarly, mEPSC frequency in BLA is also increased via MR after
acute corticosterone release (Karst et al., 2010). Interestingly,
firing frequency of BLA neurons remains at high levels even
after corticosterone washout, mainly modulated by GR and
cannabinoid receptor 1 (Karst et al., 2010). In cortical structures,
such as the PFC, acute stress situation increases GR-dependent
glutamate release (Musazzi et al., 2010).
Hours after stressor exposure, delayed effects start to occur in
a different way on limbic-cortical structures (Joëls et al., 2012).
Neurons of CA1 have enhanced amplitude but not frequency
of mEPSCs via GR (Karst et al., 2005; Martin et al., 2009).
The GR activity also modulates synaptic plasticity in CA1,
promoting Long-term Depression (LTD) and impairs Long-term
Potentiation (LTP; Pavlides et al., 1993; Xiong et al., 2004;
Kim et al., 2006). In opposite, corticosterone presents delayed
effects via MR by increasing the induction of LTP in CA1
(Pavlides et al., 1996). In BLA, delayed effects of corticosterone
increase excitability of neurons, maintaining excitability after
acute stress (Duvarci and Paré, 2007). Similarly, corticosterone
enhances glutamatergic transmission and reduces inhibitory
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
10
July 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 127
 Godoy et al.
Neurobiology of Stress, Concepts and Implications
post-synaptic currents (mIPSCs) in the PFC (Hill et al., 2011).
These delayed effects of stress in limbic-cortical structures
restore homeostasis, as well as retain important information to
better cope with similar situations in the future (Joëls et al.,
2013).
When there is an over-exposure to stressors, lasting from
hours to days, it is possible to observe structural changes in
limbic-cortical areas and even in the reward system (Joëls
et al., 2013; Russo and Nestler, 2013). Dendritic complexity
is progressively reduced in HIPPO and PFC, after chronic
exposure to stressors (McEwen and Magarinos, 1997; Holmes
and Wellman, 2009). By contrast, neurons in the BLA and NAc
increase dendritic density, increase excitatory tone and decrease
inhibitory tone in this context (Vyas et al., 2002; Christoffel et al.,
2011; Muhammad et al., 2012). At the cellular level, chronic stress
impairs induction of LTP in CA1 of the HIPPO and reduces
both AMPA and NMDA-mediated synaptic transmission (Joëls
et al., 2012; Yuen et al., 2012). The behavioral consequences of
these structural changes were associated with anxious behavior,
probably by hypertrophy of the amygdala (Mitra and Sapolsky,
2008) and deficits in learning, which could be explained by
impaired hippocampal and PFC structures (Joëls et al., 2012; de
Kloet, 2013) and reduced BDNF in VTA (Krishnan et al., 2007).
It is interesting to note that when chronic stress is experienced
early in life, its effects on the brain last longer than when it occurs
during adulthood (Lupien et al., 2009). When rodent pups are
exposed to prolonged maternal separation, the density of CRH
binding sites increases in HIPPO, amygdala and PFC (Anisman
et al., 1998). Activity of CRH mediates stress-related synaptic
plasticity loss in the HIPPO, anxiogenic behavior dependent
of amygdala and cognitive impairment associated with PFC
(Schulkin et al., 1998; Sánchez et al., 2001; Fenoglio et al., 2006).
CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS
At this point, in our evolutionary history, stress could be implied
in a maladaptive performance in a large proportion of the
population, considering the large number of comorbidities that
occur from dysfunction of the stress system (de Kloet et al.,
2005b). The HPA axis dysregulation and prolonged exposure to
glucocorticoids reduce the ability of neurons to resist insults,
increasing the risk for injury by other toxic events (Lupien
et al., 2009). Moreover, new researches have called attention
to adversities in early life, which are greatly associated with
higher vulnerability to disorders later in life, causing a long-term
impact in the circuitry responsible for cognitive and emotional
function (Gold et al., 1988; Heim and Nemeroff, 2002; Lippmann
et al., 2007; Chrousos, 2009; Lupien et al., 2009; Juruena, 2013;
Lucassen et al., 2013; Krugers et al., 2017).
In this sense, both basic and clinical researches have
advanced in recent years but much remains to be understood
about the subject. In general, animal models have provided
a comprehensive view of the stress effects on the brain,
abundantly on the limbic structures (Hariri and Holmes, 2015).
The amygdala is a highly conserved brain structure that is
fundamental to detect potential danger (Janak and Tye, 2015),
while HIPPO provides support to encoding environmental
information associated with the stressor (Herman et al., 2005)
and the PFC provides associations between cues and stressor
(Milad and Quirk, 2012). The identification of these highly
evolutionary conserved networks that are affected by stress,
allowed important discoveries in clinical research (Hariri and
Holmes, 2015).
Increasing data highlight that highly debilitating stress
comorbidities such as depression, anxiety disorders, PTSD and
epilepsy share pathogenic mechanisms with stress dysfunction
and between each other. These mechanisms are probably deeply
connected and the structural and functional change caused by
one disease triggers the other, despite these it is still not clear
on the relationship between them (Gold et al., 1988; de Kloet
et al., 2005a,b; Kanner, 2012). Considering this, we presented
in this review a short glimpse of how stress is related to these
CNS pathologies. For further review, we suggest to look into the
literature cited here.
A significant percentage of patients with Major Depression
(MD) have increased concentrations of cortisol in plasma,
urine and cerebrospinal fluid, exaggerated cortisol response after
ACTH hormone stimulation and hyperplasia of the pituitary
and adrenal glands (Gold et al., 1988; Juruena et al., 2004). In
addition, one of the most consistent findings in neuropsychiatry
is the reduction of hippocampal volume by 10%–15% in MD
(Sapolsky, 2000b).
Chronic stressors in early life result in permanent epigenetic,
endocrine,
neural,
immune
and
inflammatory
changes,
constituting a relevant risk factor for several neuropsychiatric
diseases in adult life (Xiong and Zhang, 2013; Zhang et al.,
2013; Berens et al., 2017). Traumatic childhood experiences
such as abuse, neglect and parental loss increase the incidence
of psychiatric disorders, such as MD that boost to 59%–75%
in adult life (Widom et al., 2007) and anxiety disorders that
are 1.9–3.6-fold more common in people who experience early
life stress (Fernandes and Osório, 2015). In epilepsy, stress
can influence in multiple ways, often as seizure-precipitating
but also increased the risk of epilepsy development (van
Campen et al., 2014). Additionally, the dysregulation of
HPA axis in stress can trigger immunological responses
that are considered as risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease
(Jeong et al., 2006; Caruso et al., 2018; Hoijemakers et al.,
2016).
However, studies indicate that infancy coincides with a
period referred as hyporesponsive period to stress (Stress
Hyporesponsive Period—SHRP), which is supposed to be a
period that is necessary for the proper development of the brain
after birth (Sapolsky and Meaney, 1986; de Kloet et al., 2005b).
It corresponds with a period of low peripheral concentration
of glucocorticoids, in which a physiological response to mild
stress (increased glucocorticoids and adrenaline, increased
cardiovascular circulation, immune system modifications) does
not occur. There is no consensus when exactly this period
starts or how long it lasts, but it is suggested that it
could last from around the 2nd to 12th postnatal day in
rodents (Sapolsky and Meaney, 1986) and up to 5 years
in humans (Gunnar and Donzella, 2002; Curley et al.,
2011).
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
11
July 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 127
 Godoy et al.
Neurobiology of Stress, Concepts and Implications
Interestingly, psychological (Sapolsky and Meaney, 1986)
and multimodal stressors (Godoy et al., 2018) can disrupt the
SHRP, turning the HPA-axis responsive to stressors earlier in
development (Cowan et al., 2016) and generating disruptions
related psychopathologies (Loi et al., 2014; Bath et al., 2017).
The effects of stress during early life (ELS) on the brain
have been deeply studied (for review see Lupien et al., 2009;
Lucassen et al., 2013; Krugers et al., 2017). ELS disrupts the
proper development and function of limbic structures, leading to
lifelong susceptibility to stress on behavior and cognition as well
as on the reward system (Peña et al., 2017). More recently it has
been demonstrated that ELS led to an early emergence of timed
developmental suppression of fear behavior that correlates to an
early maturation (Bath et al., 2016).
Depression-anxiety comorbidity is strongly associated with
impairment in health, as well as in cognitive and emotional
functions (Kroenke et al., 2007). Similarly, chronic treatment
with corticosterone not only generates depressive-like symptoms
but also induces amygdala hypertrophy and increases anxiogenic
behavioral responses (Mitra and Sapolsky, 2008). In humans,
individual differences in amygdala reactivity to threat-related
facial expressions predict vulnerability to stress, such as subjects
with hyperactivation of the amygdala are more likely to
experience depression and anxiety symptoms (Yang et al., 2008;
Swartz et al., 2015).
Also, hyperactivation of LC-NE is related to neuropsychiatric
disorders such as PTSD and MD, the activation of this
system out of proper context may lead to hyperarousal, loss
of concentration, restlessness and impaired focused attention,
which are characteristic symptoms of stress-related psychiatric
disorders (Southwick et al., 1999; Wong et al., 2000). For
instance, PTSD is associated with increased rates of anxiety
and depression (Nemeroff et al., 2006). However, some clinical
investigations reported low levels of cortisol in PTSD patients,
while individuals with anxiety disorders or depression show an
increase of cortisol response (Daskalakis et al., 2013; Zoladz and
Diamond, 2016; Zorn et al., 2017).
Actually, the literature reports alterations in the HPA axis
in PTSD patients and from the study by Mason et al. (1986),
in which low basal levels of cortisol were detected in PTSD
patients, more and more studies corroborated this finding
(Yehuda et al., 1990, 1993; Brand et al., 2006; Rohleder and
Karl, 2006; Wessa et al., 2006). However, there are studies
also showing no differences (Baker et al., 1999; Duval et al.,
2004; Yehuda et al., 2004a,b; Otte et al., 2007) as well as
increased (Bremner et al., 2003; Inslicht et al., 2006; Lindauer
et al., 2006) levels of basal cortisol in PTSD patients. Because
this topic remains controversial in the literature, more insights
such as those presented in Zoladz and Diamond (2013)
are recommended. Alterations in other compartments of the
HPA axis were also identified in PTSD patients such as
enhanced GR sensitivity and HPA axis enhanced negative
feedback (Grossman et al., 2003; Duval et al., 2004; Yehuda
et al., 2004b; Rohleder and Karl, 2006), elevated levels of
CRH in the cerebrospinal fluid (Bremner et al., 1997; Baker
et al., 1999) and reduced release of ACTH after CRH (Smith
et al., 1989) and CCK4 (Kellner et al., 2000) administration.
Animal models of PTSD can directly address these questions,
but it is known that different types of aversive exposure
in PTSD models (e.g., predator, shock, odor) or even the
controllability of stress interact in a complex neuro-gene-
environment system (Daskalakis et al., 2013; Zoladz and
Diamond, 2013; Homberg et al., 2016; Maier and Seligman,
2016).
Actually, exposure to severe stressors such as urban violence,
sexual abuse, combat in war, disasters and many others, is
believed to be associated to development of PTSD, leading
individuals to present physiological and behavioral alterations
including nightmares, hypervigilance, flashbacks of the trauma
and sleep disturbances (DSM-V, Zoladz and Diamond, 2013;
Yehuda et al., 2015). Although a positive correlation has
been reported between the severity of the trauma and PTSD
symptomatology in veteran soldiers (Snow et al., 1988; Sutker
et al., 1993), as well as in civilians (Shore et al., 1986; Pynoos et al.,
1993; Mollica et al., 1998), this is not always the case (Bas
,oglu
et al., 1994; Schnyder et al., 2001; Stevenson et al., 2001). It has
also been reported that the type of stressor seems to play a bigger
role than its severity (Kessler et al., 1995; Amir et al., 1996).
Interestingly, not everybody develops PTSD after trauma
exposure, which suggests that other factors (despite the trauma
severity and type), such as socioeconomic profile, psychiatry
disorder history, substance abuse, immune system, genetics
and epigenetics play a role on the susceptibility for PTSD.
Actually, there are evidences showing that the interplay between
environment and genetics (and epigenetics) are risk factors
for PTSD development (Mehta and Binder, 2012; Wilker and
Kolassa, 2012; DiGangi et al., 2013).
In patients with epilepsy, stress is usually reported as one of
the major seizure precipitants (Frucht et al., 2000; Spector et al.,
2000; Nakken et al., 2005; Sperling et al., 2008; van Campen
et al., 2012; Ferlisi and Shorvon, 2014). In adults, there is a
positive correlation between stress and frequency of epileptic
seizures (Swinkels et al., 1998; Moshe et al., 2008). Similarly,
children with epilepsy living close to conflict/war areas have a
higher frequency of seizures in comparison to children living
in areas without conflict (Bosnjak et al., 2002). Epileptogenesis
is a multi-stage process that can begin early in life and may
be negatively influenced by stress (Joëls, 2009), and it is now
suggested that early life stress can create permanent vulnerability
to the development of epilepsy (Huang, 2014).
Therefore, many evidences indicate that stress is relevant in
the phases of epileptogenesis, both in adults and young people.
Corticosterone plays a contributory role in the epileptogenic
process in animal models of epilepsy (Karst et al., 1999; Kumar
et al., 2007; Hemanth Kumar et al., 2012; Salzberg et al., 2007;
Koe et al., 2009; Castro et al., 2012; Jones, 2013; van Campen
et al., 2014), and there are several actions of corticosterone in the
brain that could mediate such effects. This could occur indirectly
through the genomic effects of glucocorticoids, resulting in
alterations of networks associated with seizures, or by direct
non-genomic effects of these on the excitability of the limbic
system (Joëls, 2009).
Other pathologies affect the peripheral nervous system
and many different organs. The CRH circuitry connecting
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
12
July 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 127
 Godoy et al.
Neurobiology of Stress, Concepts and Implications
LC-NE and PVN is strategically positioned so it may control
autonomic responses to visceral stimuli and may underlie
the co-morbidity of pelvic visceral and behavioral symptoms
observed in many stress-related disorders (Valentino et al.,
1999). Although most immediate responses coordinated by SAM
axis are important for survival, when levels of circulating
catecholamines
are
maintained
elevated
for
prolonged
periods of time, they can lead to different pathologies.
Those pathologies may primarily affect the cardiovascular
system (cardiac arrhythmias, angina, congestive, heart failure,
hypertension and/or cardiac hypertrophy; Antunes-Rodrigues
et al., 2005; Lundberg, 2005; McEwen, 2007; Dünser and
Hasibeder, 2009; Zhang and Anderson, 2014; Carter and
Goldstein, 2015; Tank and Lee Wong, 2015; Breen et al.,
2016).
In the past decades identification of neuronal circuits
associated to stress, as well as their interaction with mediators
over time, was critical not only for understanding physiological
stress
responses,
but
also
to
understand
their
clinical
implications.
Stress-related
brain
disorders
are
extremely
prevalent, so identification of mechanisms related to stress and
consequently the potential development of new pharmacological
therapeutic approaches are necessary and urgent.
As an example, pre-clinical studies on psychopathology-
related topics are being done with classic GR antagonist RU486
(Arp et al., 2016) as well as using newly developed compounds,
which modulate the GR in a tissue-gene specific fashion. These
compounds are the so-called selective glucocorticoid receptor
modulators (SGRMs) which upon binding to the GR promote a
differential conformation of the receptor leading to differential
recruitment of corregulators and therefore enhancing or
hampering gene expression in a cell-tissue specific manner. Thus,
the same compound can induce agonist- and antagonist-like
effects, for instance the SGRMs C108297 acts as an antagonist in
neurogenesis related processes such as proliferation and survival
of hippocampal neurons, and as an agonist in fear memory
retention on the avoidance behavior task (Zalachoras et al., 2013).
In the other hand the C118335 compound acts as an antagonist
in the same task whereas showing agonist effects on plasmatic
corticosterone levels (Atucha et al., 2015).
From our own experience the Wistar Audiogenic Rat (WAR)
strain is a genetically selected experimental epilepsy model,
which displays after 56 generations of inbreeding, not only
seizure-associated behaviors and electrophysiological alterations,
but also comorbidities which includes high anxiety, hyperactive
HPA axis, adrenal medulla hyperplasia, ectopic beats, high
blood pressure, tachychardia and central respiratory alterations
(Fazan et al., 2011, 2015; Umeoka et al., 2011; Granjeiro et al.,
2016; Totola et al., 2017), for a recent comprehensive review
on the WAR strain see Garcia-Cairasco et al. (2017). Further
experiments are therefore needed in order to evaluate the
pharmacological profile of new anti-epileptic, anxiolytic or even
anti-depressive drugs, using as a model of comorbidities of the
WAR strain.
In the clinical scenario a final comment can be done, when
referring to the additional complexity associated, for example,
to the presence of comorbid neurological and neuropsychiatric
conditions, such as, for example, the epilepsies, autism and
mood disorders, recognizing that we are talking about network
disorders (Kanner et al., 2017). In the particular case of
depression, anxiety and epilepsy, Kanner (2017) and Nogueira
et al. (2017) highlight how strong are the bidirectional
links that exist between epilepsy and depression, anxiety and
epilepsy. Therefore stressors, which work as triggers, such
as those cited in the current review, are common to all
the situations. On the other hand, Rayner (2017) highlights
that complex cognitive networks associated to depression
interact so strongly with epilepsy related networks, in a way
that the difficulties with diagnosis and treatment increase,
as soon as we recognize that those networks share common
structures and mechanisms. One way to overcome this, in
order to make relevant and reliable contributions in this
field, is the construction of algorhythms from computational
neuroscience modeling, where actual data, either from basic
science or from human clinical settings are used to generate
predictions with translational value. In that context, recently
Spiga et al. (2017) developed a mathematical model of the
adrenal steroidogenic regulatory network that accounts for key
regulatory processes occurring at different timescales and using
the model to predict the time evolution of steroidogenesis
in response to physiological ACTH alterations (basal pulses
vs. inflammatory stress). In brief, these authors showed in a
rat model, that although the steroidogenic regulatory network
architecture is sufficient to respond to both small and large
ACTH perturbations, coupling the regulatory network with the
immune system would explain dissociated dynamics between
ACTH and glucocorticoids observed when inflammatory stress
is present.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
We are able to adapt to the dynamic and challenging
environment we live in, as well as to unexpected life events we
face every now and then. Examples are endless and, most of the
time, we can overcome these events. We are able to do so because
the existence of quite complex networks, which integrate body
and brain, in order to enhance performance, promote adaptation
and ultimately survival, the stress system.
A diversity of brain areas integrates sensorial, physiological
and emotional signs. When different brain networks interpret
these signs as a threat (real or potential), a series of responses
follow, increasing performance to deal with the situation and
retain that information to better cope with similar situations in
the future, characterizing the stress response. The stress response,
by means of mediator molecules, promotes short and long-term
alterations in cellular excitability, as well as in neuronal and
synaptic plasticity leading to transient and/or permanent changes
in physiology and behavior.
The downside of the stress system is that sometimes it is not
able to overcome the environmental, physiological or emotional
demand. It mostly happens in occasions in which the demand is
extremely strong, chronic and/or during development.
The aim of this review article was to bring comprehensive
basic concepts about the stress system such as history of
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
13
July 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 127
 Godoy et al.
Neurobiology of Stress, Concepts and Implications
stress research, neuroanatomy, major effectors of the stress
response, time domains of stress and the clinical implication
of malfunction might have over the susceptibility to the
development of increasingly-common brapdin disorders.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
LDG, MTR and PD-P wrote the manuscript draft. NG-C and
EHLU conceptualize, wrote and corrected the manuscript. LDG
and MTR contributed equally to this work.
FUNDING
This work was funded by the National Council for Scientific and
Technological Development, Coordination for Improvement of
Higher Education Personnel, Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento
de Pessoal de Nível Superior (CAPES) PROEX-Physiology and
the São Paulo Research Foundation (Fundação de Amparo
à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo, FAPESP 2007/50261-4).
Currently
LDG
holds
FAPESP
fellowship
2014/17959-1
and
2017/11339-0,
MTR
holds
Conselho
Nacional
de
Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq) fellowship
142451/2014-2, PD-P holds CAPES fellowship, NG-C holds
CNPQ Research fellowship 305883/2014-3 and EHLU holds
FAPESP fellowships 2016/21369-0, 2015/18773-1.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank all students enrolled in the Course
on Behavioural, Neuro-Psychopharmacological, Endocrine and
Molecular Aspects of Stress (RFI-5803) held at the Graduate
Program in Physiology (PROEX-CAPES) of the FMRP-USP in
July 2015, who contributed with insightful discussions. To the
Course Staff Marian Joëls, Ron de Kloet, Mário Juruena, Marcus
Brandão, Samia Joca and Cristiane Baes for their inspirational
lectures.
REFERENCES
Abercrombie, E. D., Keefe, K. A., DiFrischia, D. S., and Zigmond, M. J.
(1989). Differential effect of stress on in vivo dopamine release in striatum,
nucleus accumbens, and medial frontal cortex. J. Neurochem. 52, 1655–1658.
doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.1989.tb09224.x
Aires, M. M. (2012). Fisiologia. 4th Edn. Rio de Janeiro: Guanabara-Koogan.
Alt, S. R., Turner, J. D., Klok, M. D., Meijer, O. C., Lakke, E. A. J. F.,
Derijk, R. H., et al. (2010). Differential expression of glucocorticoid receptor
transcripts in major depressive disorder is not epigenetically programmed.
Psychoneuroendocrinology 35, 544–556. doi: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2009.09.001
Amaral, D. G., and Witter, M. P. (1989). The three-dimensional organization of the
hippocampal formation: a review of anatomical data. Neuroscience 31, 571–591.
doi: 10.1016/0306-4522(89)90424-7
Amir, M., Kaplan, Z., and Kotler, M. (1996). Type of trauma, severity of
posttraumatic stress disorder core symptoms, and sssociated features. J. Gen.
Psychol. 123, 341–351. doi: 10.1080/00221309.1996.9921286
Andersen, P., Soleng, A. F., and Raastad, M. (2000). The hippocampal
lamella hypothesis revisited. Brain Res. 886, 165–171. doi: 10.1016/s0006-
8993(00)02991-7
Angeli, A., Masera, R. G., Sartori, M. L., Fortunati, N., Racca, S., Dovio, A., et al.
(1999). Modulation by cytokines of glucocorticoid action. Ann. N Y Acad. Sci.
876, 210–220. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1999.tb07641.x
Anisman, H., Zaharia, M. D., Meaney, M. J., and Meralis, Z. (1998). Do early-life
events permantently alter behavior and hormonal responses to stressors? Int.
J. Dev. Neurosci. 16, 149–164. doi: 10.1016/s0736-5748(98)00025-2
Antunes-Rodrigues, J., Moreira, A. C., Elias, L. L. K., and Castro, M. (2005).
Neuroendocrinologia: Básica e Aplicada. 1st Edn. Rio de Janeiro: Guanabra-
Koogan.
Armario, A., Daviu, N., Muñoz-Abellán, C., Rabasa, C., Fuentes, S., Belda, X., et al.
(2012). What can we know from pituitary-adrenal hormones about the nature
and consequences of exposure to emotional stressors? Cell. Mol. Neurobiol. 32,
749–758. doi: 10.1007/s10571-012-9814-6
Arnsten, A. F. T. (2009). Stress signaling pathways that impair prefrontal cortex
structure and function. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10, 410–422. doi: 10.1038/nrn2648
Arp, J. M., Ter Horst, J. P., Loi, M., den Blaauwen, J., Bangert, E., Fernández, G.,
et al. (2016). Blocking glucocorticoid receptors at adolescent age prevents
enhanced freezing between repeated cue-exposures after conditioned fear in
adult mice raised under chronic early life stress. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 133,
30–38. doi: 10.1016/j.nlm.2016.05.009
Atucha,
E.,
Zalachoras,
I.,
van
den
Heuvel,
J.
K.,
van
Weert, L. T. C. M., Melchers, D., Mol, I. M., et al. (2015). A mixed
glucocorticoid/mineralocorticoid
selective
modulator
with
dominant
antagonism
in
the
male
rat
brain.
Endocrinology
156,
4105–4114.
doi: 10.1210/en.2015-1390
Audet, M. C., Jacobson-Pick, S., Wann, B. P., and Anisman, H. (2011). Social
defeat promotes specific cytokine variations within the prefrontal cortex upon
subsequent aggressive or endotoxin challenges. Brain Behav. Immun. 25,
1197–1205. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2011.03.010
Audet, M. C., Mangano, E. N., and Anisman, H. (2010). Behavior and
pro-inflammatory cytokine variations among submissive and dominant mice
engaged in aggressive encounters: moderation by corticosterone reactivity.
Front. Behav. Neurosci. 4:156. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2010.00156
Audet, M.-C., McQuaid, R. J., Merali, Z., and Anisman, H. (2014). Cytokine
variations and mood disorders: influence of social stressors and social support.
Front. Neurosci. 8:416. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2014.00416
Bagot, R. C., Parise, E. M., Peña, C. J., Zhang, H.-X., Maze, I., Chaudhury, D.,
et al. (2015). Ventral hippocampal afferents to the nucleus accumbens regulate
susceptibility to depression. Nat. Commun. 6:7062. doi: 10.1038/ncomm
s8626
Bains, J. S., Wamsteeker Cusulin, J. I., and Inoue, W. (2015). Stress-related
synaptic plasticity in the hypothalamus. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 16, 377–388.
doi: 10.1038/nrn3881
Baker, D. G., West, S. A., Nicholson, W. E., Ekhator, N. N., Kasckow, J. W.,
Hill, K. K., et al. (1999). Serial CSF corticotropin-releasing hormone levels and
adrenocortical activity in combat veterans with posttraumatic stress disorder.
Am. J. Psychiatry 156, 585–588.
Banks, W. A. (2006). The blood-brain barrier in psychoneuroimmunology. Neurol.
Clin. 24, 413–419. doi: 10.1016/j.ncl.2006.03.009
Barbas, H., and Blatt, G. J. (1995). Topographically specific hippocampal
projections target functionally distinct prefrontal areas in the rhesus monkey.
Hippocampus 5, 511–533. doi: 10.1002/hipo.450050604
Bas
,oglu, M., Paker, M., Ozmen, E., Tas
,demir, O., and Sahin, D. (1994).
Factors related to long-term traumatic stress responses in survivors of
torture in Turkey. JAMA 272, 357–363. doi: 10.1001/jama.1994.035200500
37027
Bassareo, V., De Luca, M. A., and Di Chiara, G. (2002). Differential
expression of motivational stimulus properties by dopamine in nucleus
accumbens shell versus core and prefrontal cortex. J. Neurosci. 22, 4709–4719.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-11-04709.2002
Bath, K., Manzano-Nieves, G., and Goodwill, H. (2016). Early life stress
accelerates
behavioral
and
neural
maturation
of
the
hippocampus
in
male
mice.
Horm.
Behav.
82,
64–71.
doi:
10.1016/j.yhbeh.2016.
04.010
Bath, K. G., Russo, S. J., Pleil, K. E., Wohleb, E. S., Duman, R. S., and Radley, J. J.
(2017). Circuit and synaptic mechanisms of repeated stress: perspectives from
differing contexts, duration, and development. Neurobiol. Stress 7, 137–151.
doi: 10.1016/j.ynstr.2017.05.001
Bennur, S., Shankaranarayana Rao, B. S., Pawlak, R., Strickland, S., McEwen, B. S.,
and Chattarji, S. (2007). Stress-induced spine loss in the medial amygdala
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
14
July 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 127
 Godoy et al.
Neurobiology of Stress, Concepts and Implications
is mediated by tissue-plasminogen activator. Neuroscience 144, 8–16.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2006.08.075
Berens, A. E., Jensen, S. K. G., and Nelson, C. A. III. (2017). Biological embedding
of childhood adversity: from physiological mechanisms to clinical implications.
BMC Med. 15:135. doi: 10.1186/s12916-017-0895-4
Berkenbosch, F., van Oers, J., del Rey, A., Tilders, F., and Besedovsky, H.
(1987). Corticotropin-releasing factor-producing neurons in the rat activated
by interleukin-1. Science 238, 524–526. doi: 10.1126/science.2443979
Boron, W. F., and Boulpaep, E. L. (2009). Medical Physiology: A Cellular and
Molecular Approach. 2nd Edn. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders Elsevier.
Borski, R. J. (2000). Nongenomic membrane actions of glucocorticoids in
vertebrates. Trends Endocrinol. Metab. 11, 427–436. doi: 10.1016/s1043-
2760(00)00325-8
Bosnjak, J., Vukovic-Bobic, M., and Mejaski-bosnjak, V. (2002). Behavior effect
of war on the occurrence of epileptic seizures in children. Epilepsy Behav. 3,
502–509. doi: 10.1016/s1525-5050(02)00602-9
Bowman, K. M. (1930). Bodily changes in pain, hunger, fear and rage. (By Walter
B. Cannon, 404 pages. New York: D. Appleton and Co., 1929) Am. J. Psychiatry
86, 770–771. doi: 10.1176/ajp.86.4.770
Brand, S. R., Engel, S. M., Canfield, R. L., and Yehuda, R. (2006). The effect
of maternal PTSD following in utero trauma exposure on behavior and
temperament in the 9-month-old infant. Ann. N Y Acad. Sci. 1071, 454–458.
doi: 10.1196/annals.1364.041
Breen, M. S., Beliakova-Bethell, N., Mujica-Parodi, L. R., Carlson, J. M.,
Ensign, W. Y., Woelk, C. H., et al. (2016). Acute psychological stress induces
short-term variable immune response. Brain Behav. Immun. 53, 172–182.
doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2015.10.008
Bremner, J. D., Licinio, J., Darnell, A., Krystal, J. H., Owens, M. J., Southwick, S. M.,
et al. (1997). Elevated CSF corticotropin-releasing factor concentrations in
posttraumatic stress disorder. Am. J. Psychiatry 154, 624–629. doi: 10.1176/ajp.
154.5.624
Bremner, J. D., Vythilingam, M., Vermetten, E., Adil, J., Khan, S., Nazeer, A.,
et al. (2003). Cortisol response to a cognitive stress challenge in posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD) related to childhood abuse. Psychoneuroendocrinology
28, 733–750. doi: 10.1016/s0306-4530(02)00067-7
Brioni, J. D., Nagahara, A. H., and McGaugh, J. L. (1989). Involvement of the
amygdala GABAergic system in the modulation of memory storage. Brain Res.
487, 105–112. doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(89)90945-1
Brischoux, F., Chakraborty, S., Brierley, D. I., and Ungless, M. A. (2009). Phasic
excitation of dopamine neurons in ventral VTA by noxious stimuli. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U S A 106, 4894–4899. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0811507106
Burgos-Robles, A., Kimchi, E. Y., Izadmehr, E. M., Porzenheim, M. J., Ramos-
Guasp, W. A., Nieh, E. H., et al. (2017). Amygdala inputs to prefrontal cortex
guide behavior amid conflicting cues of reward and punishment. Nat. Neurosci.
20, 824–835. doi: 10.1038/nn.4553
Buschdorf, J. P., and Meaney, M. J. (2015). ‘‘Epigenetics/programming in the HPA
axis,’’ in Comprehensive Physiology, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons, Inc.,
87–110.
Cannon, W. B. (1914). The interrelations of emotions as suggested by recent
physiological researches. Am. J. Psychol. 25, 256–282. doi: 10.2307/1413414
Cannon, W. B. (1915). Bodily Changes in Pain, Hunger, Fear and Rage. An Account
of Recent Researches Into the Function of Emotional Excitement. New York, NY
and London: Appleton Co.
Cannon, W. B. (1929). Organization for physiological homeostasis. Physiol. Rev. 9,
399–431. doi: 10.1152/physrev.1929.9.3.399
Canteras, N. S., and Swanson, L. W. (1992). Projections of the ventral subiculum
to the amygdala, septum, and hypothalamus: a PHAL anterograde tract-tracing
study in the rat. J. Comp. Neurol. 324, 180–194. doi: 10.1002/cne.903240204
Carter, J. R., and Goldstein, D. S. (2015). Sympathoneural and adrenomedullary
responses to mental stress. Compr. Physiol. 5, 119–146. doi: 10.1002/cphy.
c140030
Caruso, A., Nicoletti, F., Mango, D., Saidi, A., Orlando, R., and Scaccianoce, S.
(2018). Stress as risk fator for Alzheimer’s disease. Pharmacol. Res. 132,
130–134. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2018.04.017
Cassens, G., Kuruc, A., Roffman, M., Orsulak, P. J., and Schildkraut, J. J. (1981).
Alterations in brain norepinephrine metabolism and behavior induced by
environmental stimuli previously paired with inescapable shock. Behav. Brain
Res. 2, 387–407. doi: 10.1016/0166-4328(81)90020-6
Castro, O. W., Santos, V. R., Pun, R. Y. K., McKlveen, J. M., Batie, M.,
Holland,
K.
D.,
et
al.
(2012).
Impact
of
corticosterone
treatment
on spontaneous seizure frequency and epileptiform activity in mice
with chronic epilepsy. PLoS One 7:e46044. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0046044
Chappell,
P.
B.,
Smith,
M.
A.,
Kilts,
C.
D.,
Bissette,
G.,
Ritchie,
J.,
Anderson, C., et al. (1986). Alterations in corticotropin-releasing factor-like
immunoreactivity in discrete rat brain regions after acute and chronic stress.
J. Neurosci. 6, 2908–2914. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.06-10-02908.1986
Chaudhury, D., Walsh, J. J., Friedman, A. K., Juarez, B., Ku, S. M., Koo, J. W.,
et al. (2012). Rapid regulation of depression-related behaviours by control of
midbrain dopamine neurons. Nature 493, 532–536. doi: 10.1038/nature11713
Choi, D. C., Furay, A. R., Evanson, N. K., Ostrander, M. M., Ulrich-Lai, Y. M.,
and Herman, J. P. (2007). Bed nucleus of the stria terminalis subregions
differentially
regulate
hypothalamic—pituitary—adrenal
axis
activity:
implications for the integration of limbic inputs. J. Neurosci. 27, 2025–2034.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4301-06.2007
Christoffel, D. J., Golden, S. A., Dumitriu, D., Robison, A. J., Janssen, W. G.,
Ahn, H. F., et al. (2011). IκB kinase regulates social defeat stress-
induced synaptic and behavioral plasticity. J. Neurosci. 31, 314–321.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4763-10.2011
Chrousos, G. P. (2009). Stress and disorders of the stress system. Nat. Rev.
Endocrinol. 5, 374–381. doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2009.106
Cole, B. J., and Koob, G. F. (1988). Propranolol antagonizes the enhanced
conditioned fear produced by corticotropin releasing factor. J. Pharmacol. Exp.
Ther. 247, 902–910.
Covington, H. E. III., Maze, I., LaPlant, Q. C., Vialou, V. F., Ohnishi, Y. N.,
Berton, O., et al. (2009). Antidepressant actions of histone deacetylase
inhibitors.
J.
Neurosci.
29,
11451–11460.
doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.
1758-09.2009
Covington, H. E. III., Maze, I., Sun, H., Bomze, H. M., DeMaio, K. D., Wu, E. Y.,
et al. (2011). A role for repressive histone methylation in cocaine-induced
vulnerability to stress. Neuron 71, 656–670. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.06.007
Cowan, C. S. M., Callaghan, B. L., Kan, J. M., and Richardson, R. (2016). The
lasting impact of early-life adversity on individuals and their descendants:
potential mechanisms and hope for intervention. Genes Brain Behav. 15,
155–168. doi: 10.1111/gbb.12263
Crestani, C. C., Alves, F. H., Gomes, F. V., Resstel, L. B., Correa, F. M., and
Herman, J. P. (2013). Mechanisms in the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis
involved in control of autonomic and neuroendocrine functions: a review.
Curr. Neuropharmacol. 11, 141–159. doi: 10.2174/1570159X11311020002
Cullinan, W. E., Herman, J. P., Battaglia, D. F., Akil, H., and Watson, S. J.
(1995). Pattern and time course of immediate early gene expression in rat
brain following acute stress. Neuroscience 64, 477–505. doi: 10.1016/0306-
4522(94)00355-9
Cullinan, W. E., Herman, J. P., and Watson, S. J. (1993). Ventral subicular
interactions with the hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus: evidence for a
relay in the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis. J. Comp. Neurol. 332, 1–20.
doi: 10.1002/cne.903320102
Cunningham, E. T. Jr., and Sawchenko, P. E. (1988). Anatomical specificity
of noradrenergic inputs to the paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei of
the rat hypothalamus. J. Comp. Neurol. 274, 60–76. doi: 10.1002/cne.9027
40107
Curley, J. P., Jensen, C. L., Mashoodh, R., and Champagne, F. A. (2011).
Social influences on neurobiology and behavior: epigenetic effects during
development. Psychoneuroendocrinology 36, 352–371. doi: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.
2010.06.005
Dallman, M. F. (2003). Stress by any other name ...? Horm. Behav. 43, 18–20.
doi: 10.1016/s0018-506x(02)00034-x
Dallman, M. F. (2005). Fast glucocorticoid actions on brain: back to the
future. Front. Neuroendocrinol. 26, 103–108. doi: 10.1016/j.yfrne.2005.
08.001
Daskalakis, N. P., Yehuda, R., and Diamond, D. M. (2013). Animal models
in translational studies of PTSD. Psychoneuroendocrinology 38, 1895–1911.
doi: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2013.06.006
Datson, N. A., Morsink, M. C., Meijer, O. C., and de Kloet, E. R. (2008). Central
corticosteroid actions: search for gene targets. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 583, 272–289.
doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2007.11.070
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
15
July 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 127
 Godoy et al.
Neurobiology of Stress, Concepts and Implications
Davidson, R. J., and McEwen, B. S. (2012). Social influences on neuroplasticity:
stress and interventions to promote well-being. Nat. Neurosci. 15, 689–695.
doi: 10.1038/nn.3093
Davies, K. J. A. (2016). Adaptive homeostasis. Mol. Aspects Med. 49, 1–7.
doi: 10.1016/j.mam.2016.04.007
Day, T. A. (2005). Defining stress as a prelude to mapping its neurocircuitry:
no help from allostasis. Prog. Neuropsychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry 29,
1195–1200. doi: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2005.08.005
Dayas, C. V., Buller, K. M., Crane, J. W., Xu, Y., and Day, T. A. (2001). Stressor
categorization: acute physical and psychological stressors elicit distinctive
recruitment patterns in the amygdala and in medullary noradrenergic
cell groups. Eur. J. Neurosci. 14, 1143–1152. doi: 10.1046/j.0953-816x.2001.
01733.x
de Kloet, E. R. (2013). Functional profile of the binary brain corticosteroid receptor
system: mediating, multitasking, coordinating, integrating. Eur. J. Pharmacol.
719, 53–62. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2013.04.053
de Kloet, E. R., Joëls, M., and Holsboer, F. (2005a). Stress and the brain:
from adaptation to disease. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 6, 463–475. doi: 10.1038/
nrn1683
de Kloet, E. R., Sibug, R. M., Helmerhorst, F. M., and Schmidt, M. (2005b). Stress,
genes and the mechanism of programming the brain for later life. Neurosci.
Biobehav. Rev. 29, 271–281. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2004.10.008
de Kloet, E. R., and Sarabdjitsingh, R. A. (2008). Everything has rhythm: focus
on glucocorticoid pulsatility. Endocrinology 149, 3241–3243. doi: 10.1210/en.
2008-0471
de Kloet, E. R., Sutanto, W., Rots, N., van Haarst, A., van den Berg, D., Oitzl, M.,
et al. (1991). Plasticity and function of brain corticosteroid receptors during
aging. Acta Endocrinol. 125, 65–72.
De Oca, B. M., DeCola, J. P., Maren, S., and Fanselow, M. S. (1998). Distinct
regions
of
the
periaqueductal
gray
are
involved
in
the
acquisition
and
expression
of
defensive
responses.
J.
Neurosci.
18,
3426–3432.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.18-09-03426.1998
Deak, T., Bordner, K. A., McElderry, N. K., Barnum, C. J., Blandino, P. Jr.,
Deak, M. M., et al. (2005). Stress-induced increases in hypothalamic IL-1: a
systematic analysis of multiple stressor paradigms. Brain Res. Bull. 64, 541–556.
doi: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2004.11.003
Dedovic, K., Duchesne, A., Andrews, J., Engert, V., and Pruessner, J. C. (2009). The
brain and the stress axis: the neural correlates of cortisol regulation in response
to stress. Neuroimage 47, 864–871. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.05.074
Dempsey, B., Le, S., Turner, A., Bokiniec, P., Ramadas, R., Bjaalie, J. G., et al.
(2017). Mapping and analysis of the connectome of sympathetic premotor
neurons in the rostral ventrolateral medulla of the rat using a volumetric brain
atlas. Front. Neural Circuits 11:9. doi: 10.3389/fncir.2017.00009
Di,
S.,
Malcher-Lopes,
R.,
Halmos,
K.
C.,
and
Tasker,
J.
G.
(2003).
Nongenomic glucocorticoid inhibition via endocannabinoid release in
the hypothalamus: a fast feedback mechanism. J. Neurosci. 23, 4850–4857.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.23-12-04850.2003
Di, S., Malcher-Lopes, R., Marcheselli, V. L., Bazan, N. G., and Tasker, J. G.
(2005). Rapid glucocorticoid-mediated endocannabinoid release and opposing
regulation of glutamate andalfa-aminobutyric acid inputs to hypothalamic
magnocellular neurons. Endocrinology 146, 4292–4301. doi: 10.1210/en.2005-
0610
Diamond, D. M., Campbell, A. M., Park, C. R., Halonen, J., and Zoladz, P. R.
(2007). The temporal dynamics model of emotional memory processing: a
synthesis on the neurobiological basis of stress-induced amnesia, flashbulb
and traumatic memories and the yerkes-dodson law. Neural Plast. 2007:60803.
doi: 10.1155/2007/60803
DiGangi, J., Guffanti, G., McLaughlin, K. A., and Koenen, K. C. (2013).
Considering
trauma
exposure
in
the
context
of
genetics
studies
of
posttraumatic stress disorder: a systematic review. Biol. Mood Anxiety Disord.
3:2. doi: 10.1186/2045-5380-3-2
Dilgen, J., Tejeda, H. A., and O’Donnell, P. (2013). Amygdala inputs drive
feedforward inhibition in the medial prefrontal cortex. J. Neurophysiol. 110,
221–229. doi: 10.1152/jn.00531.2012
Dioro, D., Viau, V., and Meaney, M. J. (1993). The role of the medial prefrontal
cortex (cingulate gyrus) in the regulation of hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
responses to stress. J. Neurosci. 13, 3839–3847. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.13-
09-03839.1993
Do-Monte, F. H., Quiñones-Laracuente, K., and Quirk, G. J. (2015). A temporal
shift in the circuits mediating retrieval of fear memory. Nature 519, 460–463.
doi: 10.1038/nature14030
Dünser, M. W., and Hasibeder, W. R. (2009). Sympathetic overstimulation during
critical illness: adverse effects of adrenergic stress. J. Intensive Care Med. 24,
293–316. doi: 10.1177/0885066609340519
Duval, F., Crocq, M. A., Guilon, M. S., Mokrani, M. C., Monreal, J., Bailey, P.,
et al. (2004). Increased adrenocorticotropin suppression after dexamethasone
administration in sexually abused adolescents with posttraumatic stress
disorder. Ann. N Y Acad. Sci. 1032, 273–275. doi: 10.1196/annals.1314.036
Duvarci, S., and Paré, D. (2007). Glucocorticoids enhance the excitability
of principal basolateral amygdala neurons. J. Neurosci. 27, 4482–4491.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0680-07.2007
Engeland, W. C., and Arnhold, M. M. (2005). Neural circuitry in the
regulation of adrenal corticosterone rhythmicity. Endocrine 28, 325–332.
doi: 10.1385/endo:28:3:325
Euler, U. S. V. (1946). A specific sympathomimetic ergone in adrenergic nerve
fibres (sympathin) and its relations to adrenaline and nor-adrenaline. Acta
Physiol. 12, 73–97. doi: 10.1111/j.1748-1716.1946.tb00368.x
Evanson, N. K., Herman, J. P., Sakai, R. R., and Krause, E. G. (2010). Nongenomic
actions of adrenal steroids in the central nervous system. J. Neuroendocrinol.
22, 846–861. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2826.2010.02000.x
Fazan, R. Jr., de Oliveira, M., Oliveira, J. A., Salgado, H. C., and Garcia-
Cairasco, N. (2011). Changes in autonomic control of the cardiovascular system
in the Wistar audiogenic rat (WAR) strain. Epilepsy Behav. 22, 666–670.
doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2011.09.010
Fazan, R. Jr., Silva, C. A., Oliveira, J. A., Salgado, H. C., Montano, N., and Garcia-
Cairasco, N. (2015). Evaluation of cardiovascular risk factors in the wistar
audiogenic rat (WAR) strain. PLoS One 10:e0129574. doi: 10.1371/journal.
pone.0129574
Felix-Ortiz, A. C., Burgos-Robles, A., Bhagat, N. D., Leppla, C. A., and Tye, K. M.
(2016). Bidirectional modulation of anxiety-related and social behaviors by
amygdala projections to the medial prefrontal cortex. Neuroscience 321,
197–209. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.07.041
Fenoglio, K. A., Brunson, K. L., and Baram, T. Z. (2006). Hippocampal
neuroplasticity induced by early-life stress: functional and molecular aspects.
Front. Neuroendocrinol. 27, 180–192. doi: 10.1016/j.yfrne.2006.02.001
Ferlisi, M., and Shorvon, S. (2014). Seizure precipitants (triggering factors) in
patients with epilepsy. Epilepsy Behav. 33, 101–105. doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2014.
02.019
Fernandes, V., and Osório, F. L. (2015). Are there associations between early
emotional trauma and anxiety disorders? Evidence from a systematic literature
review and meta-analysis. Eur. Psychiatry 30, 756–764. doi: 10.1016/j.eurpsy.
2015.06.004
Figueiredo, H. F., Bruestle, A., Bodie, B., Dolgas, C. M., and Herman, J. P.
(2003). The medial prefrontal cortex differentially regulates stress-induced
c-fos expression in the forebrain depending on type of stressor. Eur. J. Neurosci.
18, 2357–2364. doi: 10.1046/j.1460-9568.2003.02932.x
Frank, M. G., Watkins, L. R., and Maier, S. F. (2013). Stress-induced
glucocorticoids as a neuroendocrine alarm signal of danger. Brain Behav.
Immun. 33, 1–6. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2013.02.004
Frucht, M. M., Quigg, M., Schwaner, C., and Fountain, N. B. (2000). Distribution
of seizure precipitants among epilepsy syndromes. Epilepsia 41, 1534–1539.
doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2000.01534.x
Gabbott, P. L. A., Warner, T. A., Jays, P. R. L., Salway, P., and Busby, S. J. (2005).
Prefrontal cortex in the rat: projections to subcortical autonomic, motor, and
limbic centers. J. Comp. Neurol. 492, 145–177. doi: 10.1002/cne.20738
Gaillet, S., Lachuer, J., Malaval, F., Assenmacher, I., and Szafarczyk, A. (1991).
The involvement of noradrenergic ascending pathways in the stress-induced
activation of ACTH and corticosterone secretions is dependent on the nature
of stressors. Exp. Brain Res. 87, 173–180. doi: 10.1007/bf00228518
Garcia-Cairasco, N., Umeoka, E. H. L., and Cortes de Oliveira, J. A. (2017). The
Wistar Audiogenic Rat (WAR) strain and its contributions to epileptology and
related comorbidities: history and perspectives. Epilepsy Behav. 71, 250–273.
doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2017.04.001
Geerling, J. C., Shin, J. W., Chimenti, P. C., and Loewy, A. D. (2010).
Paraventricular hypothalamic nucleus: axonal projections to the brainstem.
J. Comp. Neurol. 518, 1460–1499. doi: 10.1002/cne.22283
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
16
July 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 127
 Godoy et al.
Neurobiology of Stress, Concepts and Implications
George, S. A., Knox, D., Curtis, A. L., Aldridge, J. W., Valentino, R. J., and
Liberzon, I. (2013). Altered locus coeruleus-norepinephrine function following
single prolonged stress. Eur. J. Neurosci. 37, 901–909. doi: 10.1111/ejn.
12095
Godoy, L. D., Umeoka, E. H. L., Ribeiro, D. E., Santos, V. R., Antunes-
Rodrigues, J., Joca, S. R. L., et al. (2018). Multimodal early-life stress induces
biological changes associated to psychopathologies. Horm. Behav. 100, 69–80.
doi: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2018.03.005
Godsil, B. P., Kiss, J. P., and Spedding, M. (2013). The hippocampal-prefrontal
pathway: the weak link in psychiatric disorders? Eur. J. Neuropsychopharmacol.
10, 1165–1181. doi: 10.1016/j.euroneuro.2012.10.018
Gold, P. W., Goodwin, F. K., and Chrousos, G. P. (1988). Clinical and
biochemical manifestations of depression. N. Engl. J. Med. 319, 413–420.
doi: 10.1056/nejm198808183190706
Goldstein, D. S., Eisenhofer, G., and Kopin, I. J. (2003). Sources and significance of
plasma levels of catechols and their metabolites in humans. J. Pharmacol. Exp.
Ther. 305, 800–811. doi: 10.1124/jpet.103.049270
Grace, A. A., Floresco, S. B., Goto, Y., and Lodge, D. J. (2007). Regulation of
firing of dopaminergic neurons and control of goal-directed behaviors. Trends
Neurosci. 30, 220–227. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2007.03.003
Granjeiro, É. M., da Silva, G. S., Giusti, H., Oliveira, J. A., Glass, M. L., and Garcia-
Cairasco, N. (2016). Behavioral, ventilatory and thermoregulatory responses to
hypercapnia and hypoxia in the wistar audiogenic rat (WAR) strain. PLoS One
11:e0154141. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0154141
Grbesa, I., and Hakim, O. (2017). Genomic effects of glucocorticoids. Protoplasma
254, 1175–1185. doi: 10.1007/s00709-016-1063-y
Griffiths, B. B., and Hunter, R. G. (2014). Neuroepigenetics of stress. Neuroscience
275, 420–435. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.06.041
Groeneweg, F. L., Karst, H., de Kloet, E. R., and Joëls, M. (2012). Mineralocorticoid
and glucocorticoid receptors at the neuronal membrane, regulators of
nongenomic corticosteroid signalling. Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 350, 299–309.
doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2011.06.020
Grossman, R., Yehuda, R., New, A., Schmeidler, J., Silverman, J., Mitropoulou, V.,
et al. (2003). Dexamethasone suppression test findings in subjects with
personality disorders: associations with posttraumatic stress disorder and
major depression. Am. J. Psychiatry 160, 1291–1298. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.160.
7.1291
Guimarães, S., and Moura, D. (2001). Vascular adrenoceptors: an update.
Pharmacol. Rev. 53, 319–356.
Gunnar, M. R., and Donzella, B. (2002). Social regulation of the cortisol
levels in early human development. Psychoneuroendocrinology 27, 199–220.
doi: 10.1016/s0306-4530(01)00045-2
Härfstrand, A., Fuxe, K., Cintra, A., Agnati, L. F., Zini, I., Wikström, A. C., et al.
(1986). Glucocorticoid receptor immunoreactivity in monoaminergic neurons
of rat brain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 83, 9779–9783. doi: 10.1073/pnas.83.
24.9779
Hariri, A. R., and Holmes, A. (2015). Finding translation in stress research. Nat.
Neurosci. 18, 1347–1352. doi: 10.1038/nn.4111
Heim, C., and Nemeroff, C. B. (2002). Neurobiology of early life stress: clinical
studies. Semin. Clin. Neuropsychiatry 7, 147–159. doi: 10.1053/scnp.2002.
33127
Heim, C., Newport, J., Heit, S., Graham, Y. P., Wilcox, M., Bonsall, R., et al. (2000).
Pituitary-Adrenal and autonomic responses to stress in women after sexual and
physical abuse in childhood. JAMA 284, 592–597. doi: 10.1001/jama.284.5.592
Heim, C., Newport, D. J., Mletzko, T., Miller, A. H., and Nemeroff, C. B. (2008).
The link between childhood trauma and depression: insights from HPA axis
studies in humans. Psychoneuroendocrinology 33, 693–710. doi: 10.1016/j.
psyneuen.2008.03.008
Hemanth Kumar, B. S., Mishra, S. K., Rana, P., Singh, S., and Khushu, S. (2012).
Neurodegenerative evidences during early onset of depression in CMS rats as
detected by proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy at 7 T. Behav. Brain Res.
232, 53–59. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2012.03.011
Herman, J. P., Figueiredo, H., Mueller, N. K., Ulrich-Lai, Y., Ostrander, M. M.,
Choi, D. C., et al. (2003). Central mechanisms of stress integration: hierarchical
circuitry controlling hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenocortical responsiveness.
Front. Neuroendocrinol. 24, 151–180. doi: 10.1016/j.yfrne.2003.07.001
Herman, J. P., and Mueller, N. K. (2006). Role of the ventral subiculum in stress
integration. Behav. Brain Res. 174, 215–224. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2006.05.035
Herman, J. P., Ostrander, M. M., Mueller, N. K., and Figueiredo, H.
(2005). Limbic system mechanisms of stress regulation: hypothalamo-
pituitary-adrenocortical axis. Prog. Neuropsychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry 29,
1201–1213. doi: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2005.08.006
Herman, J. P., Prewitt, C. M., and Cullinan, W. E. (1996). Neuronal circuit
regulation of the hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenocortical stress axis. Crit. Rev.
Neurobiol. 10, 371–394. doi: 10.1615/critrevneurobiol.v10.i3-4.50
Heshmati, M., and Russo, S. J. (2015). Anhedonia and the brain reward circuitry
in depression. Curr. Behav. Neurosci. Reports 2, 146–153. doi: 10.1007/s40473-
015-0044-3
Hill, M. N., McLaughlin, R. J., Pan, B., Fitzgerald, M. L., Roberts, C. J., Lee, T. T. Y.,
et al. (2011). Recruitment of prefrontal cortical endocannabinoid signaling by
glucocorticoids contributes to termination of the stress response. J. Neurosci.
31, 10506–10515. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0496-11.2011
Hillier, S. G. (2007). Diamonds are forever: the cortisone legacy. J. Endocrinol. 195,
1–6. doi: 10.1677/joe-07-0309
Hindmarch, C. C. T., and Ferguson, A. V. (2016). Physiological roles for the
subfornical organ: a dynamic transcriptome shaped by autonomic state.
J. Physiol. 594, 1581–1589. doi: 10.1113/jp270726
Hinwood, M., Morandini, J., Day, T. A., and Walker, F. R. (2012). Evidence
that micróglia mediate the neurobiological effects of chronic psychological
stress on the medial pré-frontal córtex. Cereb. Cortex 22, 1442–1454.
doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhr229
Hinwood, M., Tynan, R. J., Charnley, J. L., Beynon, S. B., Day, T. A., and
Walker, F. R. (2013). Chronic stress induced remodeling of the prefrontal
cortex: structural re-organization of microglia and the inhibitory effect of
minocycline. Cereb. Cortex 23, 1784–1797. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhs151
Hoijemakers, L., Heinen, Y., van Dam, A. M., Lucassen, P. J., and Korosi, A. (2016).
Microglial priming and Alzheimer’s disease: a possible role for (Early) imune
challenges and epigenetics? Front. Hum. Neurosci. 10:398. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.
2016.00398
Holmes, A., and Wellman, C. L. (2009). Stress-induced prefrontal reorganization
and executive dysfunction in rodents. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 33, 773–783.
doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2008.11.005
Homberg, J. R., Kyzar, E. J., Scattoni, M. L., Norton, W. H., Pittman, J.,
Gaikwad, S., et al. (2016). Genetic and environmental modulation of
neurodevelopmental disorders: translational insights from labs to beds. Brain
Res. Bull. 125, 79–91. doi: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2016.04.015
Huang, L. T. (2014). Early-life stress impacts the developing hippocampus and
primes seizure occurrence: cellular, molecular, and epigenetic mechanisms.
Front. Mol. Neurosci. 7:8. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2014.00008
Hueston, C. M., and Deak, T. (2014). The inflamed axis: the interaction between
stress, hormones, and the expression of inflammatory-related genes within key
structures comprising the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. Physiol. Behav.
124, 77–91. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2013.10.035
Hunter, R. G., McCarthy, K. J., Milne, T. A., Pfaff, D. W., and McEwen, B. S. (2009).
Regulation of hippocampal H3 histone methylation by acute and chronic
stress. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 106, 20912–20917. doi: 10.1073/pnas.09111
43106
Inslicht, S. S., Marmar, C. R., Neylan, T. C., Metzler, T. J., Hart, S. L., Otte, C.,
et al. (2006). Increased cortisol in women with intimate partner violence-
related posttraumatic stress disorder. Ann. N Y Acad. Sci. 1071, 428–429.
doi: 10.1196/annals.1364.035
Iversen, S., Iversen, L., and Saper, C. B. (2000). Principles of Neural Science.
4th Edn. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Jacobson, L., and Sapolsky, R. (1991). The role of the hippocampus in feedback
regulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical axis. Endocr. Rev. 12,
118–134. doi: 10.1210/edrv-12-2-118
Jagota, A., de la Iglesia, H. O., and Schwartz, W. J. (2000). Morning and evening
circadian oscillations in the suprachiasmatic nucleus in vitro. Nat. Neurosci. 3,
372–376. doi: 10.1038/73943
Janak, P. H., and Tye, K. M. (2015). From circuits to behaviour in the amygdala.
Nature 517, 284–292. doi: 10.1038/nature14188
Jedema, H. P., and Grace, A. A. (2004). Corticotropin-releasing hormone directly
activates noradrenergic neurons of the locus ceruleus recorded in vitro.
J. Neurosci. 24, 9703–9713. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2830-04.2004
Jeong, Y. H., Park, C. H., Yoo, J., Shin, K. Y., Ahn, S. M., Kim, H. S., et al. (2006).
Chronic stress accelerates learning and memory impairments and increases
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
17
July 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 127
 Godoy et al.
Neurobiology of Stress, Concepts and Implications
amyloid deposition in APPV717I-CT100 transgenic mice, na Alzheimer’s
disease model. FASEB J. 20, 729–731. doi: 10.1096/fj.05-4265fje
Joëls, M. (2009). Stress, the hippocampus, and epilepsy. Epilepsia 50, 586–597.
doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2008.01902.x
Joëls, M., and Baram, T. Z. (2009). The neuro-symphony of stress. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 10, 459–466. doi: 10.1038/nrn2632
Joëls, M., and de Kloet, E. R. (1989). Effects of glucocorticoids and
norepinephrine on the excitability in the hippocampus. Science 245, 1502–1505.
doi: 10.1126/science.2781292
Joëls, M., Pasricha, N., and Karst, H. (2013). The interplay between rapid and slow
corticosteroid actions in brain. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 719, 44–52. doi: 10.1016/j.
ejphar.2013.07.015
Joëls, M., Sarabdjitsingh, R. A., and Karst, H. (2012). Unraveling the time domains
of corticosteroid hormone influences on brain activity: rapid, slow, and chronic
modes. Pharmacol. Rev. 64, 901–938. doi: 10.1124/pr.112.005892
Johnson, L. R., Farb, C., Morrison, J. H., McEwen, B. S., and LeDoux, J. E. (2005).
Localization of glucocorticoid receptors at postsynaptic membranes in the
lateral amygdala. Neuroscience 136, 289–299. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2005.
06.050
Jones, P. B. (2013). Adult mental health disorders and their age at onset. Br.
J. Psychiatry Suppl. 202, s5–s10. doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp.112.119164
Jones, K. R., Myers, B., and Herman, J. P. (2011). Stimulation of the prelimbic
cortex differentially modulates neuroendocrine responses to psychogenic and
systemic stressors. Physiol. Behav. 104, 266–271. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2011.
03.021
Juruena, M. F. (2013). Early-life stress and HPA axis trigger recurrent
adulthood depression. Epilepsy Behav. 38, 148–159. doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2013.
10.020
Juruena, M. F., Cleare, J., and Pariante, M. (2004). The hypothalamic pituitary
adrenal axis, glucocorticoid receptor function and relevance to depression. Rev.
Bras. Psiquiatr. 26, 189–201. doi: 10.1590/S1516-44462004000300009
Kanner, A. M. (2012). Can neurobiological pathogenic mechanisms of depression
facilitate the development of seizure disorders? Lancet Neurol. 11, 1093–1102.
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(12)70201-6
Kanner, A. M. (2017). Can neurochemical changes of mood disorders explain the
increase risk of epilepsy or its worse seizure control? Sleep Med. 42, 2071–2076.
doi: 10.1007/s11064-017-2331-8
Kanner, A. M., Scharfman, H., Jette, N., Anagnostou, E., Bernard, C., Camfield, C.,
et al. (2017). Epilepsy as a network disorder (1): what can we learn from other
network disorders such as autistic spectrum disorder and mood disorders?
Epilepsy Behav. 77, 106–113. doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2017.09.014
Karst, H., Berger, S., Erdmann, G., Schütz, G., and Joëls, M. (2010). Metaplasticity
of amygdalar responses to the stress hormone corticosterone. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U S A 107, 14449–14454. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0914381107
Karst, H., Berger, S., Turiault, M., Tronche, F., Schültz, G., and Joëls, M. (2005).
Mineralocorticoid receptors are indispensable for nongenomic modulation of
hippocampal glutamate transmission by corticosterone. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U S A 102, 19204–19207. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0507572102
Karst, H., de Kloet, E. R., and Joëls, M. (1999). Episodic corticosterone
treatment accelerates kindling epileptogenesis and triggers long-term changes
in hippocampal CA1 cells, in the fully kindled state. Eur. J. Neurosci. 11,
889–898. doi: 10.1046/j.1460-9568.1999.00495.x
Kawakami, M., Seto, K., Terasawa, E., Yoshida, K., Miyamoto, T., Sekiguchi, M.,
et al. (1968). Influence of electrical stimulation and lesion in limbic structure
upon biosynthesis of adrenocorticoid in the rabbit. Neuroendocrinology 3,
337–348. doi: 10.1159/000121722
Kellner, M., Wiedemann, K., Yassouridis, A., Levengood, R., Guo, L. S.,
Holsboer,
F.,
et
al.
(2000).
Behavioral
and
endocrine
response
to
cholecystokinin tetrapeptide in patients with posttraumatic stress disorder.
Biol. Psychiatry 47, 107–111. doi: 10.1016/s0006-3223(99)00118-3
Kendall, E. C. (1953). Hormones of the adrenal cortex in health and disease. Proc.
Am. Philos. Soc. 97, 8–11.
Kessler, R. C., Sonnega, A., Bromet, E., Hughes, M., and Nelson, C. B. (1995).
Posttraumatic stress disorder in the national comorbidity survey. Arch. Gen.
Psychiatry 52, 1048–1060. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.1995.03950240066012
Kim,
J.
J.,
Song,
E.
Y.,
and
Kosten,
T.
A.
(2006).
Stress
effects
in
the
hippocampus:
synaptic
plasticity
and
memory.
Stress
9,
1–11.
doi: 10.1080/10253890600678004
Kitchener, P., Di Blasi, F., Borrelli, E., and Piazza, P. V. (2004). Differences
between brain structures in nuclear translocation and DNA binding of the
glucocorticoid receptor during stress and the circadian cycle. Eur. J. Neurosci.
19, 1837–1846. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2004.03267.x
Koe, A. S., Jones, N. C., Salzberg, M. R., Murphy, A. Z., and State, G. (2009). Early
life stress as an influence on limbic epilepsy: a hypothesis whose time has come?
Front. Behav. Neurosci. 3:24. doi: 10.3389/neuro.08.024.2009
Koolhaas, J. M., Bartolomucci, A., Buwalda, B., de Boer, S. F., Flügge, G.,
Korte, S. M., et al. (2011). Stress revisited: a critical evaluation of the stress
concept. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 35, 1291–1301. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.
2011.02.003
Koolhaas, J. M., de Boer, S. F., Coppens, C. M., and Buwalda, B. (2010).
Neuroendocrinology of coping styles: towards understanding the biology of
individual variation. Front. Neuroendocrinol. 31, 307–321. doi: 10.1016/j.yfrne.
2010.04.001
Krishnan, V., Han, M.-H., Graham, D. L., Berton, O., Renthal, W., Russo, S. J.,
et al. (2007). Molecular adaptations underlying susceptibility and resistance to
social defeat in brain reward regions. Cell 131, 391–404. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2007.
09.018
Kroenke, K., Spitzer, R. L., Williams, J. B. W., Monahan, P. O., and Löwe, B. (2007).
Anxiety disorders in primary care: prevalence, impairment, comorbidity, and
detection. Ann. Intern. Med. 146, 317–325. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-146-5-
200703060-00004
Krugers, H. J., Arp, J. M., Xiong, H., Kanatsou, S., Lesuis, S. L., Korosi, A.,
et al. (2017). Early life adversity: lasting consequences for emotional learning.
Neurobiol. Stress 6, 14–21. doi: 10.1016/j.ynstr.2016.11.005
Krugers, H., Karst, H., and Joels, M. (2012). Interactions between noradrenaline
and corticosteroids in the brain: from electrical activity to cognitive
performance. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 6:15. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2012.00015
Kumar, G., Couper, A., Brien, T. J. O., Salzberg, M. R., Jones, N. C., Rees, S. M.,
et al. (2007). The acceleration of amygdala kindling epileptogenesis by chronic
low-dose corticosterone involves both mineralocorticoid and glucocorticoid
receptors. Psychoneuroendocrinology 32, 834–842. doi: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.
2007.05.011
Kvetnansky, R., Sabban, E. L., and Palkovits, M. (2009). Catecholaminergic
systems in stress: structural and molecular genetic approaches. Physiol. Rev. 89,
535–606. doi: 10.1152/physrev.00042.2006
Lammel, S., Ion, D. I., Roeper, J., and Malenka, R. C. (2011). Projection-specific
modulation of dopamine neuron synapses by aversive and rewarding stimuli.
Neuron 70, 855–862. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.03.025
Lammel, S., Lim, B. K., and Malenka, R. C. (2014). Reward and aversion in a
heterogeneous midbrain dopamine system. Neuropharmacology 76, 351–359.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2013.03.019
Lammel, S., Lim, B. K., Ran, C., Huang, K. W., Betley, M. J., Tye, K. M., et al.
(2012). Input-specific control of reward and aversion in the ventral tegmental
area. Nature 491, 212–217. doi: 10.1038/nature11527
Langer, S. Z. (1980). Presynaptic regulation of the release of catecholamines.
Pharmacol. Rev. 32, 337–362.
Laviolette,
S.
R.,
and
Grace,
A.
A.
(2006).
Cannabinoids
potentiate
emotional
learning
plasticity
in
neurons
of
the
medial
prefrontal
cortex through basolateral amygdala inputs. J. Neurosci. 26, 6458–6468.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0707-06.2006
LeDoux, J. (2007). The amygdala. Curr. Biol. 17, 868–874. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2007.
08.005
LeDoux, J. (2012). Rethinking the emotional brain. Neuron 73, 653–676.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.02.004
Lightman, S. L., and Conway-Campbell, B. L. (2010). The crucial role of pulsatile
activity of the HPA axis for continuous dynamic equilibration. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 11, 710–718. doi: 10.1038/nrn2914
Lindauer, R. J. L., Olff, M., van Meijel, E. P. M., Carlier, I. V. E., and
Gersons, B. P. R. (2006). Cortisol, learning, memory, and attention in relation
to smaller hippocampal volume in police officers with posttraumatic stress
disorder. Biol. Psychiatry 59, 171–177. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2005.06.033
Linthorst, A. C., Flachskamm, C., Holsboer, F., and Reul, J. M. (1994).
Local administration of recombinant human interleukin-1 α in the rat
hippocampus
increases
serotonergic
neurotransmission,
hypothalamic-
pituitary-adrenocortical axis activity and body temperature. Endocrinology
135, 520–532. doi: 10.1210/en.135.2.520
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
18
July 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 127
 Godoy et al.
Neurobiology of Stress, Concepts and Implications
Lippmann, M., Bress, A., Nemeroff, C. B., Plotsky, P. M., and Monteggia, L. M.
(2007). Long-term behavioural and molecular alterations associated with
maternal separation in rats. Eur. J. Neurosci. 25, 3091–3098. doi: 10.1111/j.
1460-9568.2007.05522.x
Liu, J., Buisman-Pijlman, F., and Hutchinson, M. R. (2014). Toll-like receptor 4:
innate immune regulator of neuroimmune and neuroendocrine interactions in
stress and major depressive disorder. Front. Neurosci. 8:309. doi: 10.3389/fnins.
2014.00309
Loi, M., Koricka, S., Lucassen, P. J., and Joëls, M. (2014). Age- and sex-dependent
effects of early life stress on hippocampal neurogenesis. Front. Endocrinol. 5:13.
doi: 10.3389/fendo.2014.00013
Lucassen, P. J., Naninck, E. F. G., van Goudoever, J. B., Fitzsimons, C., Joels, M.,
and Korosi, A. (2013). Perinatal programming of adult hippocampal structure
and function; emerging roles of stress, nutrition and epigenetics. Trends
Neurosci. 36, 621–631. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2013.08.002
Lundberg, U. (2005). Stress hormones in health and illness: the roles of work
and gender. Psychoneuroendocrinology 30, 1017–1021. doi: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.
2005.03.014
Lupien, S. (2015). The history of the science of stress: from Hans Selye to the
discovery of anti-inflammatory medication. Sante Ment. Que. 40, 275–286.
doi: 10.7202/1033056ar
Lupien, S. J., McEwen, B. S., Gunnar, M. R., and Heim, C. (2009). Effects of
stress throughout the lifespan on the brain, behaviour and cognition. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 10, 434–445. doi: 10.1038/nrn2639
Machado, B. H. (2001). Neurotransmission of the cardiovascular reflexes in the
nucleus tractus solitarii of awake rats. Ann. N Y Acad. Sci. 940, 179–196.
doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2001.tb03676.x
Maier, S. F., and Seligman, M. E. P. (2016). Learned helplessness at fifty: insights
from neuroscience. Psychol. Rev. 123, 349–367. doi: 10.1037/rev0000033
Mantz, J., Thierry, A. M., and Glowinski, J. (1989). Effect of noxious tail pinch
on the discharge rate of mesocortical and mesolimbic dopamine neurons:
selective activation of the mesocortical system. Brain Res. 476, 377–381.
doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(89)91263-8
Martin, E. I., Ressler, K. J., Binder, E., and Nemeroff, C. B. (2009).
The
neurobiology
of
anxiety
disorders:
brain
imaging,
genetics
and
psychoneuroendocrinology.
Psychiatr.
Clin.
North
Am.
32,
549–575.
doi: 10.1016/j.psc.2009.05.004
Mason, J. W., Giller, E. L., Kosten, T. R., Ostroff, R. B., and Podd, L. (1986). Urinary
free-cortisol levels in posttraumatic stress disorder patient. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis.
174, 145–149. doi: 10.1097/00005053-198603000-00003
Mason, H. L., Myers, C. S., and Kendall, E. C. (1936). The chemistry of crystalline
substances isolated from the suprarrenal gland. J. Biol. Chem. 114, 613–631.
Matsumoto, M., and Hikosaka, O. (2009). Two types of dopamine neuron
distinctly convey positive and negative motivational signals. Nature 459,
837–841. doi: 10.1038/nature08028
McCall, J. G., Al-Hasani, R., Siuda, E. R., Hong, D. Y., Norris, A. J., Ford, C. P., et al.
(2015). CRH engagement of the locus coeruleus noradrenergic system mediates
stress-induced anxiety. Neuron 87, 605–620. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.07.002
McCann, S. M., and Brobeck, J. R. (1954). Evidence for a role of the
supraopticohypophyseal
system
in
regulation
of
adrenocorticotrophin
secretion. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med. 87, 318–324. doi: 10.3181/00379727-87-
21368
Mccorry, L. K. (2007). Physiology of the autonomic nervous system. Am. J. Pharm.
Educ. 71:78. doi: 10.5688/aj710478
Mcdonald, A. J. (1998). Cortical pathways to the mammalian amygdala. Prog.
Neurobiol. 55, 257–332. doi: 10.1016/s0301-0082(98)00003-3
McEwen, B. S. (2007). Physiology and neurobiology of stress and adaptation:
central role of the brain. Physiol. Rev. 87, 873–904. doi: 10.1152/physrev.
00041.2006
McEwen, B. S., Gray, J. D., and Nasca, C. (2015). 60 years of neuroendocrinology:
redefining neuroendocrinology: stress, sex and cognitive and emotional
regulation. J. Endocrinol. 226, T67–T83. doi: 10.1530/joe-15-0121
McEwen, B. S., and Karatsoreos, I. N. (2015). Sleep deprivation and circadian
disruption: stress, allostasis and allostatic load. Sleep Med. Clin. 10, 1–10.
doi: 10.1016/j.jsmc.2014.11.007
McEwen, B. S., and Magarinos, A. M. (1997). Stress effects on morphology and
function of the hippocampus. Ann. N Y Acad. Sci. 821, 271–284. doi: 10.1111/j.
1749-6632.1997.tb48286.x
McEwen, B. S., and Stellar, E. (1993). Stress and the individual: mechanism leading
to disease. Arch. Intern. Med. 153, 2093–2101. doi: 10.1001/archinte.153.
18.2093
McEwen, B. S., Weiss, J. M., and Schwartz, L. S. (1968). Selective retention
of corticosterone by limbic structures in rat brain. Nature 220, 911–912.
doi: 10.1038/220911a0
McGarry, L. M., and Carter, A. G. (2016). Inhibitory gating of basolateral
amygdala inputs to the prefrontal cortex. J. Neurosci. 36, 9391–9406.
doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.0874-16.2016
McGowan, P. O., Sasaki, A., D’Alessio, A. C., Dymov, S., Labonté, B., Szyf, M.,
et al. (2009). Epigenetic regulation of the glucocorticoid receptor in human
brain associates with childhood abuse. Nat. Neurosci. 12, 342–348. doi: 10.1038/
nn.2270
Mehta, D., and Binder, E. B. (2012). Gene × environment vulnerability factors
for PTSD: the HPA-axis. Neuropharmacology 62, 654–662. doi: 10.1016/j.
neuropharm.2011.03.009
Milad, M. R., and Quirk, G. J. (2012). Fear extinction as a model for translational
neuroscience: ten years of progress. Annu. Rev. Psychol. 63, 129–151.
doi: 10.1146/annurev.psych.121208.131631
Mitra, R., and Sapolsky, R. M. (2008). Acute corticosterone treatment is sufficient
to induce anxiety and amygdaloid dendritic hypertrophy. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U S A 105, 5573–5578. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0705615105
Mollica, R. F., McInnes, K., Pham, T., Smith Fawzi, M. C., Murphy, E., and
Lin, L. (1998). The dose-effect relationships between torture and psychiatric
symptoms in vietnamese ex-political detainees and a comparison group.
J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 186, 543–553. doi: 10.1097/00005053-199809000-00005
Morsink, M. C., Joëls, M., Sarabdjitsingh, A. R., Meijer, O. C., de Kloet, E. R., and
Datson, N. A. (2006). The dynamic pattern of glucocorticoid receptor-mediated
transcriptional responses in neuronal PC12 cells. J. Neurochem. 99, 1282–1298.
doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2006.04187.x
Moshe, S., Shilo, M., Chodick, G., Yagev, Y., Blatt, I., Korczyn, A. D., et al. (2008).
Occurrence of seizures in association with work-related stress in young male
army recruits. Epilepsia 49, 1451–1456. doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2008.01591.x
Muhammad, A., Carroll, C., and Kolb, B. (2012). Stress during development
alters dendritic morphology in the nucleus accumbens and prefrontal cortex.
Neuroscience 216, 103–109. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2012.04.041
Musazzi, L., Milanese, M., Farisello, P., Zappettini, S., Tardito, D., Barbiero, V. S.,
et al. (2010). Acute stress increases depolarization-evoked glutamate release in
the rat prefrontal/frontal cortex: the dampening action of antidepressants. PLoS
One 5:e8566. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008566
Myers, B., Scheimann, J. R., Franco-Villanueva, A., and Herman, J. P. (2017).
Ascending mechanisms of stress integration: implications for brainstem
regulation of neuroendocrine and behavioral stress responses. Neurosci.
Biobehav. Rev. 74, 366–375. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.05.011
Na, K. S., Chang, H. S., Won, E., Han, K. M., Choi, S., Tae, W. S.,
et al. (2014). Association between glucocorticoid receptor methylation and
hippocampal subfields in major depressive disorder. PLoS One 9:e85425.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085425
Naber, P. A., Lopes da Silva, F. H., and Witter, M. P. (2001). Reciprocal
connections between the entorhinal cortex and hippocampal fields CA1 and
the subiculum are in register with the projections from CA1 to the subiculum.
Hippocampus 11, 99–104. doi: 10.1002/hipo.1028
Nahar, J., Rainville, J. R., Dohanich, G. P., and Tasker, J. G. (2016). Further
evidence for a membrane receptor that binds glucocorticoids in the rodent
hypothalamus. Steroids 114, 33–40. doi: 10.1016/j.steroids.2016.05.013
Nakken, K. O., Solaas, M. H., Kjeldsen, M. J., Friis, M. L., Pellock, J. M., and
Corey, L. A. (2005). Which seizure-precipitating factors do patients with
epilepsy most frequently report? Epilepsy Behav. 6, 85–89. doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.
2004.11.003
Neeck, G. (2002). Fifty years of experience with cortisone therapy in the study
and treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. Ann. N Y Acad. Sci. 966, 28–38.
doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2002.tb04199.x
Nemeroff, C. B. (2016). Paradise lost: the neurobiological and clinical
consequences of child abuse and neglect. Neuron 89, 892–909. doi: 10.1016/j.
neuron.2016.01.019
Nemeroff, C. B., Bremner, J. D., Foa, E. B., Mayberg, H. S., North, C. S., and
Stein, M. B. (2006). Posttraumatic stress disorder: a state-of-the-science review.
J. Psychiatr. Res. 40, 1–21. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2005.07.005
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
19
July 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 127
 Godoy et al.
Neurobiology of Stress, Concepts and Implications
Nestler, E. J. (2014). Epigenetic mechanisms of depression. JAMA Psychiatry 71,
454–456. doi: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2013.4291
Nogueira, M. H., Yasuda, C. L., Coan, A. C., Kanner, A. M., and Cendes, F. (2017).
Concurrent mood and anxiety disorders are associated with pharmacoresistant
seizures in patients with MTLE. Epilepsia 58, 1268–1276. doi: 10.1111/epi.
13781
Noh, S. J., Kang, D.-W., Yoo, S. B., Lee, J. Y., Kim, J. Y., Kim, B.-T., et al.
(2012). Stress-responsive hypothalamic-nucleus accumbens regulation may
vary depending on stressors. Indian J. Exp. Biol. 50, 447–454.
O’Connor, K. A., Johnson, J. D., Hansen, M. K., Wieseler Frank, J. L.,
Maksimova, E., Watkins, L. R., et al. (2003). Peripheral and central
proinflammatory cytokine response to a severe acute stressor. Brain Res. 991,
123–132. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2003.08.006
Olijslagers, J. E., de Kloet, E. R., Elgersma, Y., Van Woerden, G. M., Joëls, M.,
and Karst, H. (2008). Rapid changes in hippocampal CA1 pyramidal cell
function via pre- as well as postsynaptic membrane mineralocorticoid
receptors. Eur. J. Neurosci. 27, 2542–2550. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2008.
06220.x
Otte, C., Lenoci, M., Metzler, T., Yehuda, R., Marmar, C. R., and Neylan, T. C.
(2007). Effects of metyrapone on hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis and sleep
in women with post-traumatic stress disorder. Biol. Psychiatry 61, 952–956.
doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2006.08.018
Palma-Gudiel, H., Córdova-Palomera, A., Leza, J. C., and Fañanás, L. (2015).
Glucocorticoid receptor gene (NR3C1) methylation processes as mediators of
early adversity in stress-related disorders causality: a critical review. Neurosci.
Biobehav. Rev. 55, 520–535. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2015.05.016
Pavlides, C., Ogawa, S., Kimura, A., and McEwen, B. S. (1996). Role of
adrenal steroid mineralocorticoid and glucocorticoid receptors in long-term
potentiation in the CA1 field of hippocampal slices. Brain Res. 738, 229–235.
doi: 10.1016/s0006-8993(96)00776-7
Pavlides, C., Watanabe, Y., and McEwen, B. S. (1993). Effects of glucocorticoids
on
hippocampal
long-term
potentiation.
Hippocampus
3,
183–192.
doi: 10.1002/hipo.450030210
Pelletier, J. G., Likhtik, E., Filali, M., and Paré, D. (2005). Lasting increases
in basolateral amygdala activity after emotional arousal: implications for
facilitated consolidation of emotional memories. Learn. Mem. 12, 96–102.
doi: 10.1101/lm.88605
Peña, C. J., Kronman, H. G., Walker, D. M., Cates, H. M., Bagot, R. C.,
Purushothaman, I., et al. (2017). Early life stress confers lifelong stress
susceptibility in mice via ventral tegmental area OTX2. Science 356, 1185–1188.
doi: 10.1126/science.aan4491
Pezzone, M. A., Lee, W. S., Hoffman, G. E., Pezzone, K. M., and Rabin, B. S.
(1993). Activation of brainstem catecholaminergic neurons by conditioned and
unconditioned aversive stimuli as revealed by c-Fos immunoreactivity. Brain
Res. 608, 310–318. doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(93)91472-5
Prewitt, C. M. F., and Herman, J. P. (1998). Anatomical interactions between
the central amygdaloid nucleus and the hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus
of the rat: a dual tract-tracing analysis. J. Chem. Neuroanat. 15, 173–185.
doi: 10.1016/s0891-0618(98)00045-3
Pu, Z., Krugers, H. J., and Joëls, M. (2007). Corticosterone time-dependently
modulates
α-adrenergic
effects
on
long-term
potentiation
in
the
hippocampal dentate gyrus. Learn. Mem. 14, 359–367. doi: 10.1101/lm.
527207
Pynoos, R. S., Goenjian, A., Tashjian, M., Karakashian, M., Manjikian, R.,
Manoukian, G., et al. (1993). Post-traumatic stress reactions in children after
the 1988 Armenian earthquake. Br. J. Psychiatry 163, 239–247. doi: 10.1192/bjp.
163.2.239
Radley, J. J. (2012). Toward a limbic cortical inhibitory network: implications
for hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal responses following chronic stress. Front.
Behav. Neurosci. 6:7. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2012.00007
Radley, J. J., Arias, C. M., and Sawchenko, P. E. (2006). Regional differentiation
of the medial prefrontal cortex in regulating adaptive responses to acute
emotional stress. J. Neurosci. 26, 12967–12976. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.4297-
06.2006
Radley, J. J., Morilak, D., Viau, V., and Campeau, S. (2015). Chronic stress and
brain plasticity: mechanisms underlying adaptive and maladaptive changes
and implications for stress-related CNS disorders. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 58,
79–91. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2015.06.018
Rayner, G. (2017). The contribution of cognitive networks to depression
in
epilepsy.
Epilepsy
Curr.
17,
78–83.
doi:
10.5698/1535-7511.
17.2.78
Reppert, S. M., and Weaver, D. R. (2002). Coordination of circadian timing in
mammals. Nature 418, 935–941. doi: 10.1038/nature00965
Reul, J. M., and de Kloet, E. R. (1985). Two receptor systems for corticosterone
in rat brain: microdistribution and differential occupation. Endocrinology 117,
2505–2511. doi: 10.1210/endo-117-6-2505
Reul, J. M., and de Kloet, E. R. (1986). Anatomical resolution of two types
of corticosterone receptor sites in rat brain with in vitro autoradiography
and
computerized
image
analysis.
J.
Steroid
Biochem.
24,
269–272.
doi: 10.1016/0022-4731(86)90063-4
Reyes, B. A. S., Valentino, R. J., Xu, G., and Van Bockstaele, E. J. (2005).
Hypothalamic projections to locus coeruleus neurons in rat brain. Eur.
J. Neurosci. 22, 93–106. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2005.04197.x
Reyes, B. A. S., Zitnik, G., Foster, C., Van Bockstaele, E. J., and Valentino, R. J.
(2015). Social stress engages neurochemically-distinct afferents to the rat locus
coeruleus depending on coping strategy. eNeuro 2:ENEURO.0042-15.2015.
doi: 10.1523/eneuro.0042-15.2015
Ridderinkhof, K. R., Ullsperger, M., Crone, E. A., and Nieuwenhuis, S. (2004).
The role of the medial frontal cortex in cognitive control. Science 306, 443–447.
doi: 10.1126/science.1100301
Ritter, S., Watts, A. G., Dinh, T. T., Sanchez-Watts, G., and Pedrow, C. (2003).
Immunotoxin lesion of hypothalamically projecting norepinephrine and
epinephrine neurons differentially affects circadian and stressor-stimulated
corticosterone secretion. Endocrinology 144, 1357–1367. doi: 10.1210/en.2002-
221076
Rohleder, N., and Karl, A. (2006). Role of endocrine and inflammatory alterations
in comorbid somatic diseases of post-traumatic stress disorder. Minerva
Endocrinol. 31, 273–288.
Roozendaal, B., Hernandez, A., Cabrera, S. M., Hagewoud, R., Malvaez, M.,
Stefanko,
D.
P.,
et
al.
(2010).
Membrane-associated
glucocorticoid
activity is necessary for modulation of long-term memory via chromatin
modification. J. Neurosci. 30, 5037–5046. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5717-
09.2010
Roozendaal, B., McEwen, B. S., and Chattarji, S. (2009). Stress, memory and the
amygdala. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10, 423–433. doi: 10.1038/nrn2651
Ruiz, J. E., Barbosa Neto, J., Schoedl, A. F., and Mello, M. F. (2007).
Psiconeuroendocrinologia do transtorno de estresse pós-traumático. Rev. Bras.
Psiquiatr. 29, s7–s12. doi: 10.1590/s1516-44462007000500003
Russo, S. J., and Nestler, E. J. (2013). The brain reward circuitry in mood disorders.
Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 14, 609–625. doi: 10.1038/nrn3381
Saito, H., Kaba, H., Sato, T., Honmura, A., Kawakami, T., Seto, K., et al. (1989).
Influence of electrical stimulation of the limbic structure on adrenocortical
steroidogenesis in hypophysctomized rats. Exp. Clin. Endrocinol. 94, 387–390.
doi: 10.1055/s-0029-1210926
Salzberg, M., Kumar, G., Supit, L., Jones, N. C., Morris, M. J., Rees, S., et al. (2007).
Early postnatal stress confers enduring vulnerability to limbic epileptogenesis.
Epilepsia 48, 2079–2085. doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2007.01246.x
Sánchez, M. M., Ladd, C. O., and Plotsky, P. M. (2001). Early adverse
experience as a developmental risk factor for later psychopathology:
evidence from rodent and primate models. Dev. Psychopathol. 13, 419–449.
doi: 10.1017/s0954579401003029
Saper, C. B., and Stornetta, R. L. (2015). ‘‘Central Autonomic System,’’ in The Rat
Nervous System, ed. G. Paxinos, 4th Edn. (Amsterdam: Elsevier), 629–673.
Sapolsky,
R.
M.
(2000a).
Glucocorticoids
and
hippocampal
atrophy
in
neuropsychiatric
disorders.
Arch.
Gen.
Psychiatry
57,
925–935.
doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.57.10.925
Sapolsky, R. M. (2000b). The possibility of neurotoxicity in the hippocampus in
major depression: a primer on neuron death. Biol. Psychiatry 48, 755–765.
doi: 10.1016/s0006-3223(00)00971-9
Sapolsky, R. M., Krey, L. C., and McEwen, B. S. (1985). Prolonged glucocorticoid
exposure reduces hippocampal neuron number: implications for aging.
J. Neurosci. 5, 1222–1227. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.05-05-01222.1985
Sapolsky, R. M., and Meaney, M. J. (1986). Maturation of the adrenocortical
stress
response:
neuroendocrine
control
mechanisms
and
the
stress
hyporesponsive period. Brain Res. 396, 64–76. doi: 10.1016/0165-0173(86)
90010-x
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
20
July 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 127
 Godoy et al.
Neurobiology of Stress, Concepts and Implications
Sapolsky, R., and Pulsinelli, W. (1985). Glucocorticoids potentiate ischemic
injury
to
neurons:
therapeutic
implications.
Science
229,
1397–1400.
doi: 10.1126/science.4035356
Sapolsky, R. M., Romero, L. M., and Munck, A. U. (2000). How do glucocorticoids
influence stress responses? Integrating permissive, suppressive, stimulatory
and preparative actions. Endocr. Rev. 21, 55–89. doi: 10.1210/edrv.21.
1.0389
Saveanu, R. V., and Nemeroff, C. B. (2012). Etiology of depression: genetic and
environmental factors. Psychiatr. Clin. North Am. 35, 51–71. doi: 10.1016/j.psc.
2011.12.001
Sawchenko, P. E., Brown, E. R., Chan, R. K., Ericsson, A., Li, H. Y., Roland, B. L.,
et al. (1996). The paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus and the
functional neuroanatomy of visceromotor responses to stress. Prog. Brain Res.
107, 201–222. doi: 10.1016/s0079-6123(08)61866-x
Sawchenko, P. E., Imaki, T., and Vale, W. (1992). Co-localization of neuroactive
substances in the endocrine hypothalamus. Ciba Found. Symp. 168, 16–30.
Schnyder, U., Moergeli, H., Klaghofer, R., and Buddeberg, C. (2001). Incidence
and prediction of posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms in severely injured
accident victims. Am. J. Psychiatry 158, 594–599. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.
158.4.594
Schulkin, J. (2003). Allostasis: a neural behavioral perspective. Horm. Behav. 43,
21–27. doi: 10.1016/s0018-506x(02)00035-1
Schulkin, J., Gold, P. W., and McEwen, B. S. (1998). Induction of corticotropin-
releasing
hormone
gene
expression
by
glucocorticoids:
implication
for understanding the states of fear and anxiety and allostatic load.
Psychoneuroendocrinology
23,
219–243.
doi:
10.1016/s0306-4530(97)
00099-1
Schulkin, J., McEwen, B. S., and Gold, P. W. (1994). Allostasis, amygdala and
anticipatory angst. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 18, 385–396. doi: 10.1016/0149-
7634(94)90051-5
Seggie, J. (1987). Differential responsivity of corticosterone and prolactin
to stress following lesions of the septum or amygdala: implications for
psychoneuroendocrinology. Prog. Neuropsychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry 11,
315–324. doi: 10.1016/0278-5846(87)90076-5
Selye, H. (1936). A syndrome produced by diverse nocuous agents. Nature 138:32.
doi: 10.1038/138032a0
Selye, H. (1950). Stress and the general adaptation syndrome. Br. Med. J. 1,
1383–1392.
Selye, H. (1976). The stress concept. Can. Med. Assoc. J. 115:718.
Senst, L., and Bains, J. (2014). Neuromodulators, stress and plasticity: a role for
endocannabinoid signalling. J. Exp. Biol. 217, 102–108. doi: 10.1242/jeb.089730
Shore, J. H., Tatum, E. L., and Vollmer, W. M. (1986). Psychiatric reactions to
disaster: the Mount St. Helens experience. Am. J. Psychiatry 143, 590–595.
doi: 10.1176/ajp.143.5.590
Simpson, J. B., and Routtenberg, A. (1975). Subfornical organ lesions
reduce intravenous angiotensin-induced drinking. Brain Res. 88, 154–161.
doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(75)90965-8
Skoluda, N., Strahler, J., Schlotz, W., Niederberger, L., Marques, S., Fischer, S.,
et al. (2015). Intra-individual psychological and physiological responses to
acute laboratory stressors of different intensity. Psychoneuroendocrinology 51,
227–236. doi: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2014.10.002
Smart, C., Strathdee, G., Watson, S., Murgatroyd, C., and McAllister-
Williams, R. H. (2015). Early life trauma, depression and the glucocorticoid
receptor gene-an epigenetic perspective. Psychol. Med. 45, 3393–3410.
doi: 10.1017/s0033291715001555
Smith, M. A., Davidson, J., Ritchie, J. C., Kudler, H., Lipper, S., Chappell, P.,
et al. (1989). The corticotropin-releasing hormone test in patients with
posttraumatic stress disorder. Biol. Psychiatry 26, 349–355. doi: 10.1016/0006-
3223(89)90050-4
Smith, S. M., and Vale, W. W. (2006). The role of the hypothalamic-pituitary-
adrenal axis in neuroendocrine responses to stress. Dialogues Clin. Neurosci.
8, 383–395.
Smotherman, W. P., Burt, G., Kimble, D. P., Strickrod, G., BreMiller, R.,
and Levine, S. (1981). Behavioral and corticosterone effects in conditioned
taste aversion following hippocampal lesions. Physiol. Behav. 27, 569–574.
doi: 10.1016/0031-9384(81)90224-9
Snow, B. R., Stellman, J. M., Stellman, S. D., and Sommer, J. F. Jr. (1988). Post-
traumatic stress disorder among american legionnaires in relation to combat
experience in vietnam: associated and contributing factors. Environ. Res. 47,
175–192. doi: 10.1016/s0013-9351(88)80040-9
Snyder, K., Wang, W. W., Han, R., McFadden, K., and Valentino, R. J.
(2012). Corticotropin-releasing factor in the norepinephrine nucleus, locus
coeruleus, facilitates behavioral flexibility. Neuropsychopharmacology 37,
520–530. doi: 10.1038/npp.2011.218
Southwick, S. M., Bremner, J. D., Rasmusson, A., Morgan, C. A. III., Arnsten, A.,
and Charney, D. S. (1999). Role of norepinephrine in the pathophysiology
and treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder. Biol. Psychiatry 46, 1192–1204.
doi: 10.1016/s0006-3223(99)00219-x
Spector, S., Cull, C., and Goldstein, L. H. (2000). Seizure precipitants and perceived
self-control of seizures in adults with poorly-controlled epilepsy. Epilepsy Res.
38, 207–216. doi: 10.1016/s0920-1211(99)00093-5
Sperling, M. R., Schilling, C. A., Glosser, D., Tracy, J. I., and Asadi-Pooya, A. A.
(2008). Self-perception of seizure precipitants and their relation to anxiety
level, depression, and health locus of control in epilepsy. Seizure 17, 302–307.
doi: 10.1016/j.seizure.2007.09.003
Spiga, F., Zavala, E., Walker, J. J., Zhao, Z., Terry, J. R., and Lightman, S. L. (2017).
Dynamic responses of the adrenal steroidogenic regulatory network. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U S A 114, E6466–E6474. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1703779114
Steptoe, A., Hamer, M., and Chida, Y. (2007). The effects of acute psychological
stress on circulating inflammatory factors in humans: a review and meta-
analysis. Brain Behav. Immun. 21, 901–912. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2007.03.011
Sterling, P., and Eyer, J. (1988). Allostasis A New Paradigm to Explain Arousal
Pathology. Handbook of Life Stress Cognition and Health. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Stevenson, M., Segui-Gomez, M., Lescohier, I., Di Scala, C., and McDonald-
Smith, G. (2001). An overview of the injury severity score and the new injury
severity score. InJ. Prev. 7, 10–13. doi: 10.1136/ip.7.1.10
Stewart, M. G., Davies, H. A., Sandi, C., Kraev, I. V., Rogachevsky, V. V.,
Peddie, C. J., et al. (2005). Stress suppresses and learning induces plasticity
in CA3 of rat hippocampus: a three-dimensional ultrastructural study of
thorny excrescences and their postsynaptic densities. Neuroscience 131, 43–54.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2004.10.031
Stuber, G. D., Sparta, D. R., Stamatakis, A. M., van Leeuwen, W. A.,
Hardjoprajitno, J. E., Cho, S., et al. (2011). Excitatory transmission from
the amygdala to nucleus accumbens facilitates reward seeking. Nature 475,
377–380. doi: 10.1038/nature10194
Sullivan, R. M., and Gratton, A. (1999). Lateralized effects of medial prefrontal
cortex lesions on neuroendocrine and autonomic stress responses in rats.
J. Neurosci. 19, 2834–2840. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.19-07-02834.1999
Sullivan, R. M., and Gratton, A. (2002). Behavioral effects of excitotoxic lesions
of ventral medial prefrontal cortex in the rat are hemisphere-dependent. Brain
Res. 927, 69–79. doi: 10.1016/s0006-8993(01)03328-5
Sun, S., Yang, S., Mao, Y., Jia, X., and Zhang, Z. (2015). Reduced cholesterol
is associated with the depressive-like behavior in rats through modulation of
the brain 5-HT1A receptor. Lipids Health Dis. 14:22. doi: 10.1186/s12944-015-
0020-7
Sutker, P. B., Allain, A. N., and Winstead, D. K. (1993). Psychopathology and
psychiatric diagnoses of World War II Pacific theater prisoner of war survivors
and combat veterans. Am. J. Psychiatry 150, 240–245. doi: 10.1176/ajp.1
50.2.240
Swanson, L. W., and Hartman, B. K. (1975). The central adrenergic system. An
immunofluorescence study of the location of cell bodies and their efferent
connections in the rat utilizing dopamine-α-hydroxylase as a marker. J. Comp.
Neurol. 163, 467–505. doi: 10.1002/cne.901630406
Swartz, J. R., Knodt, A. R., Radtke, S. R., and Hariri, A. R. (2015). A neural
biomarker of psychological vulnerability to future life stress. Neuron 85,
505–511. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.12.055
Swinkels, W. A. M., Engelsman, M., Kasteleijn-Nolst Trenite, D. G. A., Baal, M. G.,
de Haan, G. J., and Oosting, J. (1998). Influence of an evacuation in february
1995 in the Netherlands on the seizure frequency in patients with epilepsy:
a controlled study. Epilepsia 39, 1203–1207. doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1157.1998.
tb01312.x
Takahashi, A., Flanigan, M. E., McEwen, B. S., and Russo, S. J. (2018).
Aggression,
social
stress,
and
the
immune
system
in
humans
and
animal models. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 12:56. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2018.
00056
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
21
July 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 127
 Godoy et al.
Neurobiology of Stress, Concepts and Implications
Tan, K. R., Yvon, C., Turiault, M., Mirzabekov, J. J., Doehner, J., Labouèbe, G., et al.
(2012). GABA neurons of the VTA drive conditioned place aversion. Neuron
73, 1173–1183. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.02.015
Tank, A. W., and Lee Wong, D. (2015). Peripheral and central effects of circulating
catecholamines. Compr. Physiol. 5, 1–15. doi: 10.1002/cphy.c140007
Timmermans, W., Xiong, H., Hoogenraad, C. C., and Krugers, H. J. (2013). Stress
and excitatory synapses: from health to disease. Neuroscience 248, 626–636.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2013.05.043
Totola, L. T., Takakura, A. C., Oliveira, J. A., Garcia-Cairasco, N., and
Moreira,
T.
S.
(2017).
Impaired
central
respiratory
chemoreflex
in
an experimental genetic model of epilepsy. J. Physiol. 595, 983–999.
doi: 10.1113/JP272822
Tsai, H.-C., Zhang, F., Adamantidis, A., Stuber, G. D., Bonci, A., de Lecea, L.,
et al. (2009). Phasic firing in dopaminergic neurons is sufficient for behavioral
conditioning. Science 324, 1080–1084. doi: 10.1126/science.1168878
Tsankova, N. M., Berton, O., Renthal, W., Kumar, A., Neve, R. L., and
Nestler, E. J. (2006). Sustained hippocampal chromatin regulation in a mouse
model of depression and antidepressant action. Nat. Neurosci. 9, 519–525.
doi: 10.1038/nn1659
Tynan, R. J., Naicker, S., Hinwood, M., Nalivaiko, E., Buller, K. M., Pow, D. V.,
et al. (2010). Chronic stress alters the density and morphology of microglia in a
subset of stress-responsive brain regions. Brain Behav. Immun. 24, 1058–1068.
doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2010.02.001
Ulrich-Lai, Y. M., and Herman, J. P. (2009). Neural regulation of endocrine
and
autonomic
stress
responses.
Nat.
Rev.
Neurosci.
10,
397–409.
doi: 10.1038/nrn2647
Umeoka, E. H., Garcia, S. B., Antunes-Rodrigues, J., Elias, L. L., and Garcia-
Cairasco, N. (2011). Functional characterization of the hypothalamic-pituitary-
adrenal axis of the Wistar Audiogenic Rat (WAR) strain. Brain Res. 1381,
141–147. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2011.01.042
Vale, W., Rivier, C., Yang, L., Minick, S., and Guillemin, R. (1978). Effects of
purified hypothalamic corticotropin-releasing factor and other substances on
the secretion of adrenocorticotropin and α-endorphin-like immunoactivities
in vitro. Endocrinology 103, 1910–1915. doi: 10.1210/endo-103-5-1910
Vale, W., Spiess, J., Rivier, C., and Rivier, J. (1981). Characterization of a 41-residue
ovine hypothalamic peptide that stimulates secretion of corticotropin and α-
endorphin. Science 213, 1394–1397. doi: 10.1126/science.6267699
Valentino, R. J., Miselis, R. R., and Pavcovich, L. A. (1999). Pontine regulation of
pelvic viscera: pharmacological target for pelvic visceral dysfunctions. Trends
Pharmacol. Sci. 20, 253–260. doi: 10.1016/s0165-6147(99)01332-2
Valentino, R. J., Page, M. E., and Curtis, A. L. (1991). Activation of noradrenergic
locus coeruleus neurons by hemodynamic stress is due to local release
of corticotropin-releasing factor. Brain Res. 555, 25–34. doi: 10.1016/0006-
8993(91)90855-p
Valentino, R. J., Page, M., Van Bockstaele, E., and Aston-Jones, G. (1992).
Corticotropin-releasing factor innervation of the locus coeruleus region:
distribution of fibers and sources of input. Neuroscience 48, 689–705.
doi: 10.1016/0306-4522(92)90412-u
Valentino, R. J., Reyes, B., Van Bockstaele, E., and Bangasser, D. (2012).
Molecular and cellular sex differences at the intersection of stress and arousal.
Neuropharmacology 62, 13–20. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2011.06.004
Valentino, R. J., Sheng, C., Yan, Z., and Aston-Jones, G. (1996). Evidence
for divergent projections to the brain noradrenergic system and the spinal
parasympathetic system from Barrington’s nucleus. Brain Res. 732, 1–15.
doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(96)00482-9
Valentino, R. J., and Van Bockstaele, E. (2008). Convergent regulation of locus
coeruleus activity as an adaptive response to stress. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 583,
194–203. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2007.11.062
Van Bockstaele, E. J., Colago, E. E., and Valentino, R. J. (1998). Amygdaloid
corticotropin-releasing factor targets locus coeruleus dendrites: substrate for
the co-ordination of emotional and cognitive limbs of the stress response.
J. Neuroendocrinol. 10, 743–757. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2826.1998.00254.x
Van Bockstaele, E. J., Peoples, J., and Valentino, R. J. (1999). Anatomic basis for
differential regulation of the rostrolateral peri-locus coeruleus region by limbic
afferents. Biol. Psychiatry 46, 1352–1363. doi: 10.1016/s0006-3223(99)00213-9
van Campen, J. S., Jansen, F. E., de Graan, P. N., Braun, K. P., and Joëls, M.
(2014). Early life stress in epilepsy: a seizure precipitant and risk fator for
epileptogenesis. Epilepsy Behav. 38, 160–171. doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2013.09.029
van Campen, J. S., Jansen, F. E., Steinbusch, L. C., Joëls, M., and Braun, K. P. J.
(2012). Stress sensitivity of childhood epilepsy is related to experienced negative
life events. Epilepsia 53, 1554–1562. doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2012.03566.x
Verkuyl, J. M., Karst, H., and Joëls, M. (2005). GABAergic transmission in the rat
paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus is suppressed by corticosterone
and stress. Eur. J. Neurosci. 21, 113–121. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2004.
03846.x
Vialou, V., Bagot, R. C., Cahill, M. E., Ferguson, D., Robison, A. J., Dietz, D. M.,
et al. (2014). Prefrontal cortical circuit for depression- and anxiety-related
behaviors mediated by cholecystokinin: role of FosB. J. Neurosci. 34,
3878–3887. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1787-13.2014
Vitkovic, L., Konsman, J. P., Bockaert, J., Dantzer, R., Homburger, V., and
Jacque, C. (2000). Cytokine signals propagate through the brain. Mol.
Psychiatry 5, 604–615. doi: 10.1038/sj.mp.4000813
Vyas, A., Mitra, R., Shankaranarayana Rao, B. S., and Chattarji, S. (2002). Chronic
stress induces contrasting patterns of dendritic remodeling in hippocampal and
amygdaloid neurons. J. Neurosci. 22, 6810–6818. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-
15-06810.2002
Vyas, A., Pillai, A. G., and Chattarji, S. (2004). Recovery after chronic stress fails to
reverse amygdaloid neuronal hypertrophy and enhanced anxiety-like behavior.
Neuroscience 128, 667–673. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2004.07.013
Walsh, R. (2011). Lifestyle and mental health. Am. Psychol. 66, 579–592.
doi: 10.1037/a0021769
Wang, C. C., and Wang, S. J. (2009). Modulation of presynaptic glucocorticoid
receptors on glutamate release from rat hippocampal nerve terminals. Synapse
63, 745–751. doi: 10.1002/syn.20654
Weaver, I. C. G., Cervoni, N., Champagne, F. A., D’Alessio, A. C., Sharma, S.,
Seckl, J. R., et al. (2004). Epigenetic programming by maternal behavior. Nat.
Neurosci. 7, 847–854. doi: 10.1038/nn1276
Wei, J., Zhong, P., Qin, L., Tan, T., and Yan, Z. (2017). Chemicogenetic restoration
of the prefrontal cortex to amygdala pathway ameliorates stress-induced
deficits. Cereb. Cortex 28, 1980–1990. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhx104
Weikum, E. R., Knuesel, M. T., Ortlund, E. A., and Yamamoto, K. R. (2017).
Glucocorticoid receptor control of transcription: precision and plasticity
via allostery. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 18, 159–174. doi: 10.1038/nrm.20
16.152
Welsh, D. K., Logothetis, D. E., Meister, M., and Reppert, S. M. (1995). Individual
neurons dissociated from rat suprachiasmatic nucleus express independently
phased circadian firing rhythms. Neuron 14, 697–706. doi: 10.1016/0896-
6273(95)90214-7
Wessa, M., Rohleder, N., Kirschbaum, C., and Flor, H. (2006). Altered
cortisol
awakening
response
in
posttraumatic
stress
disorder.
Psychoneuroendocrinology
31,
209–215.
doi:
10.1016/j.psyneuen.2005.
06.010
Widom, C. S., DuMont, K., and Czaja, S. J. (2007). A prospective investigation of
major depressive disorder and comorbidity in abused and neglected children
grown up. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 64, 49–56. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.64.1.49
Wilker, S., and Kolassa, I. T. (2012). Genetic influences on posttraumatic stress
disorder (PTSD): inspirations from a memory-centered approach. Psychiatr.
Danub. 24, 278–279.
Wilkinson, M. B., Xiao, G., Kumar, A., LaPlant, Q., Renthal, W., Sikder, D.,
et al. (2009). Imipramine treatment and resiliency exhibit similar chromatin
regulation in the mouse nucleus accumbens in depression models. J. Neurosci.
29, 7820–7832. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0932-09.2009
Willner, P., Scheel-krüger, J., and Belzung, C. (2013). The neurobiology of
depression and antidepressant action. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 37, 2331–2371.
doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2012.12.007
Witter, M. P. (2007). The perforant path: projections from the entorhinal
cortex to the dentate gyrus. Prog. Brain Res. 163, 43–61. doi: 10.1016/s0079-
6123(07)63003-9
Wohleb, E. S., Hanke, M. L., Corona, A. W., Powell, N. D., Stiner, L. M.,
Bailey, M. T., et al. (2011). β-Adrenergic receptor antagonism prevents
anxiety-like behavior and microglial reactivity induced by repeated social
defeat. J. Neurosci. 31, 6277–6288. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0450-11.2011
Wohleb, E. S., McKim, D. B., Sheridan, J. F., and Godbout, J. P. (2015). Monocyte
trafficking to the brain with stress and inflammation: a novel axis of immune-
to-brain communication that influences mood and behavior. Front. Neurosci.
8:447. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2014.00447
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
22
July 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 127
 Godoy et al.
Neurobiology of Stress, Concepts and Implications
Wong, M. L., Kling, M. A., Munson, P. J., Listwak, S., Licinio, J., Prolo, P.,
et al. (2000). Pronounced and sustained central hypernoradrenergic function
in major depression with melancholic features: relation to hypercortisolism
and corticotropin-releasing hormone. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 97, 325–330.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.97.1.325
Wood, G. E., Norris, E. H., Waters, E., Stoldt, J. T., and McEwen, B. S. (2008).
Chronic immobilization stress alters aspects of emotionality and associative
learning in the rat. Behav. Neurosci. 122, 282–292. doi: 10.1037/0735-7044.122.
2.282
Wood, S. K., and Valentino, R. J. (2016). The brain norepinephrine system,
stress and cardiovascular vulnerability. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 74, 393–400.
doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.04.018
Xiong, W., Wei, H., Xiang, X., Cao, J., Dong, Z., Wang, Y., et al. (2004).
The effect of acute stress on LTP and LTD induction in the hippocampal
CA1 region of anesthetized rats at three different ages. Brain Res. 1005,
187–192. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2004.01.051
Xiong, F., and Zhang, L. (2013). Role of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis
in developmental programming of health and disease. Front. Neuroendocrinol.
34, 27–46. doi: 10.1016/j.yfrne.2012.11.002
Yang, J. C., Park, K., Eun, S. J., Lee, M. S., Yoon, J. S., Shin, I. S., et al. (2008).
Assessment of cerebrocortical areas associated with sexual arousal in depressive
women using functional MR imaging. J. Sex. Med. 5, 602–609. doi: 10.1111/j.
1743-6109.2007.00737.x
Yehuda, R., Boisoneau, D., Mason, J. W., and Giller, E. L. (1993). Glucocorticoid
receptor number and cortisol excretion in mood, anxiety, and psychotic
disorders. Biol. Psychiatry 34, 18–25. doi: 10.1016/0006-3223(93)90252-9
Yehuda, R., Golier, J. A., Halligan, S. L., and Harvey, P. D. (2004a). Learning
and memory in Holocaust survivors with posttraumatic stress disorder. Biol.
Psychiatry 55, 291–295. doi: 10.1016/s0006-3223(03)00641-3
Yehuda, R., Golier, J. A., Halligan, S. L., Meaney, M., and Bierer, L. M. (2004b). The
ACTH response to dexamethasone in PTSD. Am. J. Psychiatry 161, 1397–1403.
doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.161.8.1397
Yehuda, R., Hoge, C. W., McFarlane, A. C., Vermetten, E., Lanius, R. A.,
Nievergelt, C. M., et al. (2015). Post-traumatic stress disorder. Nat. Rev. Dis.
Primers 1:15057. doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2015.57
Yehuda, R., Southwick, S. M., Nussbaum, G., Wahby, V., Giller, E. L. Jr.,
and Mason, J. W. (1990). Low urinary cortisol excretion in patients
with posttraumatic stress disorder. J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 178, 366–369.
doi: 10.1097/00005053-199006000-00004
Young, E. A., Abelson, J., and Lightman, S. L. (2004). Cortisol pulsatility and
its role in stress regulation and health. Front. Neuroendocrinol. 25, 69–76.
doi: 10.1016/j.yfrne.2004.07.001
Yuen, E. Y., Wei, J., Liu, W., Zhong, P., Li, X., and Yan, Z. (2012). Repeated stress
causes cognitive impairment by suppressing glutamate receptor expression and
function in prefrontal cortex. Neuron 73, 962–977. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.
12.033
Zalachoras, I., Houtman, R., Atucha, E., Devos, R., Tijssen, A. M. I., Hu, P.,
et al. (2013). Differential targeting of brain stress circuits with a selective
glucocorticoid receptor modulator. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 110, 7910–7915.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1219411110
Zhang, D. Y., and Anderson, A. S. (2014). The sympathetic nervous system and
heart failure. Cardiol. Clin. 32, 33–45. doi: 10.1016/j.ccl.2013.09.010
Zhang, J., Abdallah, C. G., Chen, Y., Huang, T., Huang, Q., Xu, C., et al.
(2013). Behavioral deficits, abnormal corticosterone, and reduced prefrontal
metabolites of adolescent rats subject to early life stress. Neurosci. Lett. 545,
132–137. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2013.04.035
Zheng, C., and Zhang, T. (2015). Synaptic plasticity-related neural oscillations
on hippocampus-prefrontal cortex pathway in depression. Neuroscience 292,
170–180. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.01.071
Zhou,
M.,
Hoogenraad,
C.
C.,
Joëls,
M.,
and
Krugers,
H.
J.
(2012).
Combined β-adrenergic and corticosteroid receptor activation regulates AMPA
receptor function in hippocampal neurons. J. Psychopharmacol. 26, 516–524.
doi: 10.1177/0269881111424930
Zhu, W., Umegaki, H., Suzuki, Y., Miura, H., and Iguchi, A. (2001). Involvement
of the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis in hippocampal cholinergic system-
mediated activation of the hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenocortical axis in rats.
Brain Res. 916, 101–106. doi: 10.1016/s0006-8993(01)02871-2
Ziegler, D. R., Cass, W. A., and Herman, J. P. (1999). Excitatory influence of
the locus coeruleus in hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical axis responses to
stress. J. Neuroendocrinol. 11, 361–369. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2826.1999.00337.x
Zoccal, D. B., Furuya, W. I., Bassi, M., Colombari, D. S. A., and Colombari, E.
(2014). The nucleus of the solitary tract and the coordination of respiratory
and sympathetic activities. Front. Physiol. 5:238. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2014.00238
Zoladz, P. R., and Diamond, D. M. (2013). Current status on behavioral and
biological markers of PTSD: a search for clarity in a conflicting literature.
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 37, 860–895. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2013.03.024
Zoladz, P. R., and Diamond, D. M. (2016). Predator-based psychosocial stress
animal model of PTSD: preclinical assessment of traumatic stress at cognitive,
hormonal, pharmacological, cardiovascular and epigenetic levels of analysis.
Exp. Neurol. 284, 211–219. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2016.06.003
Zorn, J. V., Schür, R. R., Boks, M. P., Kahn, R. S., Joëls, M., and Vinkers, C. H.
(2017). Cortisol stress reactivity across psychiatric disorders: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Psychoneuroendocrinology 77, 25–36. doi: 10.1016/j.
psyneuen.2016.11.036
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2018 Godoy, Rossignoli, Delfino-Pereira, Garcia-Cairasco and Umeoka.
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums
is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited
and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted
academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not
comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
23
July 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 127
