 1
Goffe L, et al. BMJ Open 2019;9:e023441. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2018-023441
Open access 
Feasibility of working with a wholesale 
supplier to co-design and test 
acceptability of an intervention to 
promote smaller portions: an 
uncontrolled before-and-after study in 
British Fish & Chip shops
Louis Goffe,1,2,3 Frances Hillier-Brown,3,4 Natalie Hildred,3 Matthew Worsnop,5,6 
Jean Adams,7 Vera Araujo-Soares,1,3 Linda Penn,1,3 Wendy Wrieden,1,2,3 
Carolyn D Summerbell,3,4 Amelia A Lake,3,8 Martin White,1,7 Ashley J Adamson1,2,3
To cite: Goffe L, Hillier-Brown F, 
Hildred N, et al.  Feasibility 
of working with a wholesale 
supplier to co-design and test 
acceptability of an intervention 
to promote smaller portions: 
an uncontrolled before-and-
after study in British Fish 
& Chip shops. BMJ Open 
2019;9:e023441. doi:10.1136/
bmjopen-2018-023441
 
► Prepublication history and 
additional material for this 
paper are available online. To 
view these files, please visit 
the journal online (http:// 
dx. 
doi. 
org/ 
10. 
1136/ 
bmjopen- 
2018- 
023441).
Received 27 June 2018
Revised 26 November 2018
Accepted 19 December 2018
For numbered affiliations see 
end of article.
Correspondence to
Dr Louis Goffe;  
 
louis. 
goffe@ 
ncl. 
ac. 
uk
Research
© Author(s) (or their 
employer(s)) 2019. Re-use 
permitted under CC BY. 
Published by BMJ.
AbstrACt
Objectives To explore the feasibility of working with a 
wholesale supplier to co-design and deliver, and to assess 
the acceptability of, an intervention to promote smaller 
portions in Fish & Chip shops.
Design Uncontrolled before-and-after study.
setting Fish & Chip shops in northern England, 2016.
Participants Owners (n=11), a manager and customers 
(n=46) of Fish & Chip shops; and intervention deliverers 
(n=3).
Intervention Supplier-led, three-hour engagement 
event with shop owners and managers, highlighting the 
problem of excessive portion sizes and potential ways 
to reduce portion sizes; provision of box packaging to 
serve smaller portions; promotional posters and business 
incentives.
Data collection In-store observations and sales data 
collected at baseline and postintervention. Exit survey 
with customers. Semistructured interviews with owners/
managers and intervention deliverers postintervention.
results Twelve Fish & Chip shops were recruited. 
Observational data were collected from eight shops: at 
baseline, six shops did not promote the availability of 
smaller portion meals; at follow-up, all eight did and five 
displayed the promotional poster. Seven out of 12 shops 
provided sales data and all reported increased sales of 
smaller portion meals postintervention. Of 46 customers 
surveyed: 28% were unaware of the availability of smaller 
portion meals; 20% had bought smaller portion meals; 
and 46% of those who had not bought these meals were 
interested to try them in the future. Interviews revealed: 
owners/managers found the intervention acceptable but 
wanted a clearer definition of a smaller portion meal; 
the supplier valued the experience of intervention co-
production and saw the intervention as being compatible 
with their responsibility to drive innovation.
Conclusions The co-design of the intervention with 
a supplier was feasible. The partnership facilitated the 
delivery of an intervention that was acceptable to owners 
and customers. Sales of smaller meal packaging suggest 
that promotion of such meals is viable and may be 
sustainable.
IntrODuCtIOn 
Takeaway and fast food meals, particularly 
from independent businesses have been 
found to deliver excessive energy by means 
of large portion sizes,1 driving high-energy 
consumption,2 which is a major public health 
concern.3 Our previous work found that 
adults and children who ate takeaway meals 
at least weekly consumed 63–87 kcal and 
55–168 kcal per day, respectively, more than 
those who consumed such meals rarely.4 High 
takeaway meal consumption has been linked 
to weight gain5 and diet-related diseases.6 
strengths and limitations of this study
 
► This is the first study we are aware of to evaluate 
the feasibility of working with a wholesale supplier 
to co-design and deliver a public health intervention 
targeting hot food takeaways.
 
► It is also the first study we are aware of to detail the 
potential role that wholesale suppliers can play in 
improving the healthfulness of food offerings from 
hot food takeaways, exemplified by Fish & Chip 
shops.
 
► A mixed-method approach was employed, which 
successfully captured impacts of the interventions 
on all stakeholders.
 
► Data available on customer behaviours were limited 
and did not include takeaway food consumption.
 
► We had a small sample size, focused on one take-
away cuisine type and therefore the results may not 
be generalisable beyond the setting of Fish & Chip 
shops.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2018-023441 on 6 February 2019. Downloaded from 
 2
Goffe L, et al. BMJ Open 2019;9:e023441. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2018-023441
Open access 
In the UK, ‘Fish & Chips’ are culturally embedded,7 
with an estimated 10 500 shops nationally.8 Typical Fish 
& Chip shop meals consist of white fish in batter and 
chipped potatoes, both deep fried.9 One survey found 
that the median energy content of 64 Fish & Chip meals 
was 1658 kcal,1 representing 79% of a woman’s and 64% 
of a man’s estimated average daily energy requirement.10 
This suggests that reducing portion sizes could be a means 
to promote population health.11–14
As most outlets use a limited number of wholesale 
suppliers,15 these have substantial influence on what food 
is offered by independent hot food takeaways.16 While 
working with suppliers provides an opportunity for inter-
vention,17 to date, limited research has been done.16
The aim of this study was to explore the feasibility of 
working with a wholesale supplier to co-design and deliver 
an intervention to promote smaller portion meals in Fish 
& Chip shops in northern England; and the acceptability 
of this intervention to shop owners/managers and their 
customers. It was not a process or outcome evaluation 
study.
MethODs
Intervention co-design
We approached Henry Colbeck Limited (HC), an inde-
pendent specialist Fish & Chip shops wholesaler, supplying 
over 2500 shops across northern England and Scotland,18 
within a partnership supplying over 6000 shops across the 
UK.8 We asked HC if they would work with us to co-design 
and lead delivery of an intervention to encourage Fish 
& Chip shops to improve portion control and promote 
smaller portion meals. Members of the research team 
and HC staff set out their respective positions and terms 
of partnership that included: for HC—responsibility 
for intervention development and intervention delivery 
(including costs), as well as data sharing; for the research 
team—responsibility for study design and coordination 
of data collection, independence of analysis and right to 
publish findings.
We discussed findings of our previous studies on inde-
pendent takeaways4 19–23 with HC, and in turn, they shared 
their knowledge, detailing meal packaging options 
currently used: boxes, trays and paper wrapping. It was 
established that large portion size meals existed across the 
sector, driven primarily by high competition and a desire 
to offer customers ‘value-for-money’. We agreed to the 
dual-focus of an intervention to facilitate and promote: 
better portion control, supported through the use of box 
packaging that standardises portion size (in particular in 
comparison with paper wrapping); and active promotion 
of smaller portion meals. We agreed that implementa-
tion of the intervention should not incur direct costs to 
the participating Fish & Chip shops and that HC should 
promote to owners/managers primarily on the potential 
financial benefits of portion control and smaller portion 
sizes. HC recruited two owners with established smaller 
portion meal promotion to support intervention delivery 
to detail their practical experience and financial benefits. 
The intervention was theorised in detail by the research 
team (online supplementary file A).
Intervention description
The research team supported HC to develop a three-hour 
engagement event held in April 2016 at a hotel in North-
East England. Fish & Chip shop owners, managers and 
their staff were invited to attend by HC. The programme 
included sessions delivered by HC and two Fish & Chip 
shop owners, followed by a question and discussion 
session.
Owners/managers were encouraged to place a greater 
emphasis on portion control by using box packaging and 
to actively promote smaller portion meals. The potential 
financial benefits of attracting a wider customer base and 
reducing portion sizes without pro-rata reductions in 
the price charged were stressed throughout, such as an 
increase in trade and higher meal profit margin. Partici-
pants were presented with a range (by size and material) 
of smaller portion boxes, but the choice of packaging 
selected was made by the owner/manager. An enhanced 
action-planning activity developed by the research team 
included a goal-setting form (online supplementary file 
B).24 This included a ‘public pledge’, where Fish & Chip 
shop owners/managers detailed what changes they would 
make, how and when these would be delivered and how 
confident they were to deliver them. Owners/managers 
were encouraged to keep these pledges. We completed 
a template for intervention description and replication 
(TIDieR) checklist25 (online supplementary file C).
Following the engagement event, owners/managers 
were offered two copies of one of two different A0 size 
posters promoting smaller portion meals for their shops 
(figure 1). These were delivered to shops within 16 days. 
HC suggested that one poster could be displayed in-store, 
and the other made visible to passers-by. Additional incen-
tives offered by HC were 100 units of the box packaging 
chosen by the owner/manager and HC customer loyalty 
scheme points.
Additional intervention delivery was undertaken by 
HC sales staff who visited owners/managers who had 
expressed an interest in the engagement event but had 
not attended. An overview of the information presented 
at the event was provided to owners/managers and they 
were asked to complete the goal-setting form, offered the 
incentives and posters, and the recording of sales data was 
explained (see below).
recruitment to the intervention
HC purposively selected shops in northern England to be 
invited to the engagement event with the aim of recruiting 
shops: located in a range of socioeconomic settings, both 
within and outside major conurbations, and either known 
to be likely to engage or whose likelihood to engage was 
unknown. HC sent a postal invitation one month prior to 
the engagement event. This included a tailored message 
to the owner/manager with an invitation for them to 
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2018-023441 on 6 February 2019. Downloaded from 
 3
Goffe L, et al. BMJ Open 2019;9:e023441. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2018-023441
Open access
attend along with a member of their staff. Owners or 
managers who did not respond were contacted through 
phone by HC.
study design
We used an uncontrolled before-and-after study design to 
explore the feasibility of working with HC to co-design 
and deliver the intervention and its acceptability to Fish & 
Chip shop owners/managers and their customers.
Data collection
Fish & Chip shop owners/managers
Data collected about owners/managers who attended 
the engagement event or took part in one-to-one visits 
included: owner or manager status; number of Fish & 
Chip shops owned (if owner); and whether they attended 
the engagement event with a member of their staff. We 
recorded details of each shop’s: geographical location; 
local authority; location description (eg, city centre, 
village high street); Indices of Multiple Deprivation 
(IMD) decile of location26; seating provision; and Food 
Standards Agency (FSA) food hygiene rating.27
Goal setting
A digital image was taken of all completed goal-setting 
forms to record pledged changes.
Covert observations
To provide objective measures of change, covert data 
collection was completed in a subset of participating shops 
that were accessible to the research team, at three time 
points (baseline, two and six weeks postintervention). 
Members of the research team posed as customers. Data 
collected included the visibility (including the display of 
promotional posters) and availability of smaller portion 
meals. One regular size meal and one smaller portion 
meal (where available) was purchased from each shop. 
The shop menu description of the smaller portion meal 
was recorded as was the packaging used and meal cost. 
The components (battered fish and chips) of meals were 
weighed within two hours of purchasing.
Sales of Fish & Chip meals
Participating shops were provided with a booklet to record 
sales of regular and smaller portion meals from at least 
five days before to at least five days after first receiving the 
posters.
Customer survey
Following the completion of the six-week postintervention 
covert data collection, a customer survey was conducted 
in participating shops (online supplementary file D). 
Figure 1 Promotional A0 size poster options.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2018-023441 on 6 February 2019. Downloaded from 
 4
Goffe L, et al. BMJ Open 2019;9:e023441. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2018-023441
Open access 
Interviews were conducted in-person after customers had 
ordered their food but before the food had been served. 
Questions covered customer gender, age group, aware-
ness of the availability of smaller portion meals, views on 
meal portion size and purchasing behaviour including 
frequency of and reasons for purchasing, whether they 
had tried smaller portion meal and willingness to try 
smaller portion meals in the future.
Semistructured interviews
All shop owners/managers who engaged in the interven-
tion were invited to participate in a semistructured inter-
view, either in-person or by telephone, to explore their 
experience of the intervention (online supplementary 
file D), conducted by LG. Interviews were also conducted 
with those responsible for the development and delivery 
of the intervention at HC to explore their experiences 
of the intervention (online supplementary file D). Inter-
views with HC were conducted by a researcher, FHB, not 
involved in intervention development and delivery.
Data analysis
Descriptive statistics (sample size, means and propor-
tions), conducted in R (LG), were used to summarise 
quantitative data but not for statistical inference.28 Inter-
views were transcribed verbatim checked for accuracy 
and then anonymised. Thematic framework analysis with 
constant comparison was used to identify themes related 
to the feasibility and acceptability of the intervention.29 
The coding framework for each set of interviews was 
based on a priori themes from the interview topic guides 
and emergent themes from the data. The final coding 
framework was then applied to all transcripts, and the 
resulting themes were reviewed and agreed on by team 
members involved in the analysis (LG, AJA and MWh).
results
recruitment and retention
Thirty-one Fish & Chip shop owners or managers were 
invited to attend the engagement event. Of these, 15 
(48%) stated an intention to attend, nine (29%) attended 
and three did not attend but took part in one-to-one 
sessions with HC staff. Thus, 12 took part in the evalua-
tion (39%) (figure 2).
shop setting
Shops were spread across nine local authorities. Six of the 
12 shops provided seating. Shops were located in areas 
across all IMD deciles.26 The FSA hygiene rating of the 
shops was high, with ten receiving a maximum rating of 
five (table 1).
Goal setting
Eleven owners/managers completed the goal-setting 
form. All considered that they were already providing all 
of their customers with opportunities to purchase smaller 
portion meals in some form. The principal change to 
usual business practices that could be inferred from the 
forms was a public pledge to promote smaller portion 
meals, primarily through displaying posters (n=5; table 1).
Covert observations
We collected observational data from eight shops 
(table 2). At baseline, only two shops clearly displayed 
the availability of smaller portion meals. During at least 
one of the postintervention visits (two or six weeks), all 
eight shops displayed the availability of smaller portion 
meals. At baseline, one shop had smaller portion meals 
on their main menu, two provided smaller portion meals 
on their lunchtime menu only, two on their children’s 
menu only, and two had no smaller portion meals on any 
menu. Postintervention, five of the eight shops actively 
promoted smaller portion meals using an in-store facing 
poster and two also displayed a poster facing outside. Of 
the other three: one actively promoted their own branded 
smaller portion meals throughout but did not display the 
HC posters; another had introduced a smaller portion 
meal by the six-week follow-up; and one only had a 
smaller portion on the children’s menu. All but one shop 
used box packaging at baseline and all did so at follow-up.
Between baseline and six-week follow-up, we observed 
a 24 g increase in mean weight of battered fish, a 61 g 
decrease in mean weight of chips and a 37 g decrease in 
mean total meal weight of regular meals. With regards 
to the smaller portion meals, we observed a 2 g decrease 
in mean weight of battered fish, a 26 g decrease in mean 
weight of chips and a 27 g decrease in mean total meal 
weight.
sales of Fish & Chip meals
Seven shops returned usable sales data covering a mean 
of seven days predelivery and 32 days postdelivery of the 
posters. However, this was inconsistent in format and 
detailed analyses were not possible. The mean proportion 
of all meals sold which were a smaller portion was 14.2% 
preintervention and 21.2% postintervention. One shop 
did not return sales data due to illness, the remaining 
three did not provide a reason.
Customer survey
Five owners/managers permitted customer surveys to be 
conducted in their shops (table 1). A total of 46 question-
naires were completed (table 3). Most customers surveyed 
bought meals once a month or more, choosing the shop 
for taste or convenience. Most were aware that smaller 
portion meals were available (72%) though only 20% had 
purchased them. Of those who had not previously tried 
smaller portion meals, 46% said they would be interested 
in trying them in the future.
semistructured interviews
Interviews with owners/managers
Interviews were conducted with eight owners and one 
manager, five in-person and four by telephone (table 1). 
Thematic analysis identified six main themes.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2018-023441 on 6 February 2019. Downloaded from 
 5
Goffe L, et al. BMJ Open 2019;9:e023441. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2018-023441
Open access
Relationship between owner/manager and Henry Colbeck Limited
Those who had attended the engagement event were more 
enthusiastic about the process than those who received 
the intervention in a one-to-one session. They reported 
that the event provided a ‘unique’ [ID06, ID04] opportu-
nity to speak about an industry matter with their peers. 
They were impressed with the speakers but did not value 
the goal-setting form. Participants felt well supported by 
HC throughout. While they appreciated the incentives 
offered by HC they did not feel these were necessary.
Suggested changes and smaller portion meal definitions
All respondents considered that they were already 
providing smaller portion meals in some form at base-
line. For most, therefore, the intervention constituted the 
posters, whereas others reported developing a detailed 
Figure 2 Portion control intervention participation and data collection flowchart. HC, 
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2018-023441 on 6 February 2019. Downloaded from 
 6
Goffe L, et al. BMJ Open 2019;9:e023441. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2018-023441
Open access 
Table 1 Summary of data collected
Shop-level 
summary (count)
Individual Fish & Chip shop
ID01
ID02
ID03
ID04
ID05
ID06
ID07
ID08
ID09
ID10
ID11
ID12
Participant 
position
Owner=11
Manager=1
Manager
Owner
Owner
Owner
Owner
Owner
Owner
Owner
Owner
Owner
Owner
Owner
Number of total 
Fish & Chip shops 
owned
Own 1=10
Own>1 = 2
1
1
7
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
Attended the 
engagement 
event (number 
attendees)
Yes=9
No=3
Yes (2)
Yes (2)
Yes (1)
Yes (2)
No
Yes (1)
No
Yes (1)
Yes (2)
No
Yes (1)
Yes (1)
Completed goal-
setting form
Yes=11
No=1
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Public pledge
‘Smaller box’
‘Smaller 
box/Display 
poster’
‘Smaller 
portion’
‘Already 
doing’
‘Advertising’
‘Will promote 
smaller portion’
‘Already using’
‘Will display 
promotion 
posters’
‘Bio box’*
Not completed
‘Already 
doing’
‘Display poster 
and use on 
social media 
to promote lite 
bite’
Covert 
observations 
conducted
Yes=8
No=4
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Semistructured 
interview
Yes=9
No=3
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Number of 
customers 
surveyed
Shop
n=5
Customers
n=46
7
0
0
4
0
13
0
0
10
12
0
0
Semistructured 
interview
Yes=9
No=3
Yes (person)
Yes 
(telephone)
No
Yes (person)
Yes (person)
Yes (person)
No
No
Yes (telephone)
Yes (person)
Yes 
(telephone)
Yes (telephone)
Shop region
North-East=8
Yorkshire=3
North-West=1
North-East
North-East
Yorkshire and 
The Humber
North-East
North-East
North-East
North-East
North-East
Yorkshire and 
The Humber
North-East
North-West
Yorkshire and 
The Humber
Shop location 
description
Centre of a 
rural village
Residential 
area of a 
market town
Residential 
area of a city
Shopping 
centre in a 
residential 
area of a 
metropolitan 
borough
Shopping 
centre in a 
residential 
area of a 
metropolitan 
borough
High street in a 
seaside town in 
a metropolitan 
borough
High street 
in a seaside 
village in a 
metropolitan 
borough
High street in a 
seaside town in 
a metropolitan 
borough
Centre of a 
rural village
High street in a 
seaside town in 
a metropolitan 
borough
City centre
High street in 
a residential 
area of a 
metropolitan 
borough
Sit-in restaurant
Yes=6
No=6
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
IMD decile (where 
one is most 
deprived 10% of 
LSOAs)
9
4
7
1
3
8
5
8
9
7
3
5
Shop FSA hygiene 
rating (0 to 5, 
where 0 is low 
and 5 is high)
5
5
3
5
5
5
5
5
5
4
5
5
*Bio boxes constructed from biodegradable material extracted from sugar cane.
FSA, Food Standards Agency; IMD, Indices of Multiple Deprivation.
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2018-023441 on 6 February 2019. Downloaded from 
 7
Goffe L, et al. BMJ Open 2019;9:e023441. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2018-023441
Open access
strategy to promote smaller portion meals. One owner 
suggested industry-wide standards regarding portion 
sizes but acknowledged that ‘universal adoption’ [ID12] 
was unlikely.
Posters and shop setting
There was a mixed response to the posters. Some respon-
dents felt that they were ‘really good… it really just says 
it all… it is [poster] very relevant to our business’ [ID05], 
whereas others felt they did not fit with their shop’s 
ethos. The only manager who attended the engagement 
event stated that the shop’s owner felt the poster clashed 
with the shop’s branding and did not display it [ID01]. 
Another owner was highly critical stating that ‘posters that 
big look stupid’ and suggested a preference for alternative 
promotional material (eg, leaflet), detailing the ‘benefits of 
buying smaller’ [ID06].
Importance of quality customer service
All respondents stressed the importance of high-quality 
customer service in delivering smaller portion meals. One 
owner who had been involved in the Fish & Chip industry 
‘Pretty much all my life’ [ID09], had implemented numerous 
changes following the intervention with support from an 
owner who spoke at the engagement event. One owner 
who had been unable to attend the event reported that 
they had not implemented smaller portion meals in the 
evening as they could not rely on serving staff to deliver 
these consistently [ID05].
Customer feedback
Few respondents reported receiving feedback on smaller 
portion meals from customers. However, one detailed the 
enthusiasm from a group of builders who had seen the 
posters and welcomed the change [ID09].
The ease of recording sales data
Those who provided sales data reported that this had 
been straight forward. However, till systems limited the 
value of these for analyses.
Interviews with those who developed and delivered the 
intervention
Interviews were conducted with three people from HC. 
Thematic analysis identified five themes. In order to 
retain anonymity, the quotes below are not specifically 
attributed to a given intervention deliverer.
Intervention deliverers’ motivations regarding intervention delivery
HC representatives viewed individual shops as focused 
on daily sales meaning it was up to HC to take ‘strategic 
long-term views of the industry’. Respondents wanted shops 
to succeed in an increasingly competitive marketplace. 
They took responsibility for driving sector innovation and 
acknowledged that ‘I need Fish & Chip shops to stay in busi-
ness because they pay my wages’.
Considerations in the development of the intervention
HC representatives stated that effective engagement on 
smaller portion sizes with owners/managers could only 
be achieved by highlighting the financial and customer 
service benefits. HC staff saw themselves as providing 
information and choice to their customers, “It is up to the 
customer [business owner] to make that choice, we are not going 
to force them to do anything’. They were also happy to take 
Table 2 Summary of covert observation data collected from each shop
Baseline
Postintervention
2 weeks
6 weeks
Clearly displaying smaller portion meals available to all 
customers
Yes=2
No=6
Yes=7
No=1
Yes=6
No=2
Smaller portion meals available to buy
Yes=6
No=2
Yes=6
No=2
Yes=8
No=0
Active promotion of smaller portion meals
NA
Yes=5
No=3
Yes=4
No=4
Packaging used for regular meal
Boxes=7
Paper=1
Boxes=8
Boxes=8
Weight of regular meal (g): battered fish
Mean=265.1
Mean=277.9
Mean=289.3
Weight of regular meal (g): chips
Mean=399.9
Mean=384.9
Mean=339.1
Weight of regular meal (g): total
Mean=665.0
Mean=662.8
Mean=628.4
Packaging used for smaller portion meal
Boxes=6
Boxes=6
Boxes=8
Weight of smaller portion meal (g): battered fish
Mean=175.7
Mean=170.7
Mean=174.0
Weight of smaller portion meal (g): chips
Mean=273.0
Mean=233.7
Mean=247.4
Weight of smaller portion meal (g): total
Mean=448.7
Mean=404.3
Mean=421.4
Cost of regular meal (£)
Mean=£5.80
Mean=£5.79
Mean=£5.79
Cost of smaller portion meal (£)
Mean=£4.22
Mean=£4.07
Mean=£4.00
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2018-023441 on 6 February 2019. Downloaded from 
 8
Goffe L, et al. BMJ Open 2019;9:e023441. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2018-023441
Open access 
the lead on intervention development and delivery and 
the cost to HC was viewed as an ‘investment’.
Intervention deliverers’ views on acceptability
Representatives of HC were disappointed with attendance 
at the engagement event (nine of 31) and were frus-
trated that some shops ‘didn’t realise the potential’. While 
many had not provided a reason for non-attendance, 
some reportedly told HC that it was due to staffing issues. 
However, the responses HC received from those who did 
attend were positive, ‘I had quite a lot of people ring up and 
thanking me for the event’, and they had viewed it as a rare 
‘interactive’ event: ‘Fish fryers in the same room sharing ideas 
and you could see people writing down notes and bringing up 
their own problems. Other people were listening, engaging and 
offering advice and help. That does not happen often enough’.
HC staff were aware that not all businesses would display 
the posters, with some owners/managers reporting that 
they were too big. However, they felt that it was important 
to provide the means to clearly distinguish between 
regular and smaller portion meals.
HC also viewed the incentive component of the inter-
vention as an act of ‘goodwill’ showing their commitment 
to the intervention. They did not see incentives as imper-
ative to owner/manager involvement and, indeed, not all 
shops took advantage of them.
Future plans
As a direct result of this work, HC staff developed specific 
packaging for smaller portion meals and associated 
promotional material. At the time of interviews, they 
were also trying to source smaller fish fillets for this new 
packaging.
While HC staff saw smaller portion packaging as a 
sustainable change, more sustainable methods of deliv-
ering the portion control message were required. The 
engagement event and one-to-one visits were not consid-
ered scalable or efficient, ‘I can’t go around and visit thou-
sands of Fish & Chip shops because I am only one person’.
Experience in working with the research team
HC staff found working with the research team a posi-
tive and ‘enjoyable experience’. It had ‘re-stimulated our [HC’s] 
efforts’ and was felt to be rewarding for both parties.
DIsCussIOn
statement of principal findings
We found it was feasible to co-design and deliver 
an intervention to promote smaller portions with a 
commercial partner and the intervention was accept-
able to both Fish & Chip shops and their customers. 
Attendees at the engagement event valued and enjoyed 
it. Shop owners/managers were broadly willing to intro-
duce and promote smaller portion meals. We success-
fully measured portion sizes and collected some sales 
data. We observed a reduction in the size of both regular 
and smaller portion meals after the intervention and 
an increase in the proportion of meals sold that were 
a smaller portion. The reduction in the portion size 
of regular meals was due to the reduction in chips—
the least nutrient-dense component of the meal. As all 
participating owners/managers considered that their 
businesses provided smaller portion meals in some 
form at baseline, the additional overt promotion was 
broadly acceptable. Most also used box packaging at 
Table 3 Customer survey responses
Variable
Level
n (%)
Gender
Female
21 (46)
Male
25 (54)
Age category, years
18–30
10 (22)
31–40
11 (24)
41–50
2 (4)
51–60
8 (17)
61–70
7 (15)
>70
8 (17)
Regular customer
Yes
35 (76)
No
11 (24)
How regular
More than once a 
week
2 (4)
Once a week
10 (22)
Once every 2 
weeks
4 (9)
Once a month
10 (22)
Once every 3 
months
6 (13)
Once every 6 
months
5 (11)
Once a year
0 (0)
First time
9 (20)
Reasons for buying 
(up to two choices)
Taste/Quality
29
Convenience
32
Price
3
Portion size
0
Other
1
Portion sizes
Too small
0 (0)
Just right
36 (78)
Too big
2 (4)
NA (first time 
customer)
8 (17)
Know about small 
portion
Yes
33 (72)
No
13 (28)
Notice posters 
(where known to 
have been displayed)
Yes
10 (37)
No
17 (63)
Tried the promoted 
smaller portion meals
Yes
9 (20)
No
37 (80)
Try in the future
Yes
17 (37)
No
20 (43)
NA (previously tried)
9 (20)
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2018-023441 on 6 February 2019. Downloaded from 
 9
Goffe L, et al. BMJ Open 2019;9:e023441. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2018-023441
Open access
baseline meaning introduction of this was unlikely to 
be a key component of the intervention. The evaluation 
was conducted independently, avoiding the potential 
for competing interests of the commercial partners.
strengths and limitations of the study
To our knowledge, this is the first study to evaluate the 
feasibility of working with a wholesale supplier to co-de-
sign and deliver a public health intervention, and to 
demonstrate the potential role of wholesale suppliers in 
improving the food offerings from hot food takeaways.
Covert observations, while feasible, would be 
resource intensive in a larger study. While participating 
shops had high FSA hygiene ratings,27 they covered 
a wide range of IMD deciles,26 suggesting that the 
intervention may be feasible across a range of socio-
economic settings. Acceptability to shops with lower 
hygiene ratings is unknown. Participants did not feel 
goal setting through the ‘public pledge’ was useful. 
Greater clarity concerning what was expected of shop 
owners/managers may have improved this. Some shops 
did not make use of posters and other marketing mate-
rials, such as leaflets, may have engaged a wider range 
of shops. Due to the practical constraints of the study, 
the customer survey had to be brief. Therefore, we did 
not conduct in-depth interviews with customers and 
these would provide more insight into their choices 
and preferences. Some aspects of the intervention were 
not felt to be sustainable by HC and further thought is 
required to determine how any such intervention could 
be scaled-up. We collected no data on customers’ total 
diets or total population impact.
Due to time and resource constraints, our data are 
unlikely to be representative. Furthermore, we did not 
reach data saturation in interviews, nor was our customer 
survey validated or piloted prior to use. Our findings may 
not be generalisable beyond the UK.
strengths and limitations in relation to other studies
There are a limited number of intervention studies 
targeting takeaways in England, and few have been eval-
uated.23 Most interventions to date have been delivered 
by local authorities, limiting their geographical reach. 
Suppliers, such as HC, have a much greater geographical 
reach. While mandatory approaches to portion control 
may be more effective than voluntary schemes,30 31 these 
may be harder to implement.32 33 Our intervention is a 
rare voluntary, industry-led approach to portion control. 
Difficulties engaging independent takeaways in public 
health interventions have been previously described, 
where simply identifying a given takeaway owner can be 
challenging.17 The 29% recruitment rate we achieved 
compares favourably with other interventions in the 
sector; in another, unpublished, local authority-led study, 
we achieved a 10% recruitment rate.34 We received limited 
feedback from those who did not attend the engagement 
event, although lack of staff cover may be a problem.
study implications
Our findings suggest that, within the takeaway sector, it is 
feasible to develop a supplier-led intervention based on 
‘providing information’ and ‘enabling choice’35 and that 
this is acceptable across stakeholders. We highlight the 
importance of product-specific packaging that constrains 
portion size, which can, in part, offset variability in servers’ 
ability to deliver consistent portions. HC’s smaller portion 
box packaging was designed and branded to deliver 
a smaller sized ‘Lite-BITE’ meal.36 Sales of these boxes 
provide evidence of longer-term viability; in 2017, HC 
sold 552 300 units of the ‘Lite-BITE’ boxes to 253 unique 
accounts (D. McLean, personal communication, 2018). 
Takeaway owners/managers seem likely to be more recep-
tive to messages about portion control from peers than 
external organisations, framed primarily in the context 
of the potential financial benefits. The individual respon-
sible for implementing changes in a takeaway (usually 
the owner or manager) may require clear and practical 
instructions on how to make changes. Ideally, interven-
tions should seek to engage with takeaway owners or 
those responsible for branding, and this person should 
communicate changes to serving staff, within the wider 
context of good ‘customer service’.
unanswered questions and future research
HC is not planning further engagement events. An alter-
native platform to deliver the information and guidance 
in a collective format may be required to maximise the 
potential of smaller portion packaging (eg, seminars at 
trade events). While the promotion of smaller portion 
meals was broadly acceptable, over half of the customers 
surveyed, that had not previously purchased the smaller 
portion meals, were not interested in trying in the future. 
However, smaller portion meals were clearly attractive to 
others. Further work is required to assess whether and 
how customer choices can be further changed.35 Quali-
tative interviews with customers could usefully inform 
this, inclusive of their views with regards to meal value-
for-money. Future research could explore the impact of 
smaller portion meals in Fish & Chip shops on customers’ 
diet and the wider public health implications, as well as 
the potential to promote smaller portion meals through 
trade organisations and their events. Owners and 
managers would additionally benefit from a clearer defi-
nition of what constitutes a smaller portion meal from a 
practical perspective. Defining and developing guidelines 
to support delivery would be of use.
While this intervention was feasible in a sample of Fish 
& Chip shops, further work should seek to identify other 
sectors of the takeaway and wider catering industry where 
such an approach could be applied.
Author affiliations
1Institute of Health and Society, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK
2Human Nutrition Research Centre, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK
3Fuse – UKCRC Centre for Translational Research in Public Health, Newcastle upon 
Tyne, UK
4Department of Sport and Exercise Sciences, Durham University, Durham City, UK
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2018-023441 on 6 February 2019. Downloaded from 
 10
Goffe L, et al. BMJ Open 2019;9:e023441. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2018-023441
Open access 
5Newcastle Business School, Northumbria University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK
6Henry Colbeck Limited, Gateshead, UK
7MRC Epidemiology Unit, Centre for Diet and Activity Research (CEDAR), University 
of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
8Department of Science, School of Science, Engineering and Design, Teesside 
University, Middlesbrough, UK
Acknowledgements The authors thank Duncan McLean (director) and Bill Colbeck 
(chairman) of Henry Colbeck Limited for their time and commitment of resources 
to delivering the intervention, as well as their patience, understanding and respect 
of the study’s research process. They would also like thank Laura Cutler, Eimear 
Duffy, Joel Halligan, Eimear Mullen and Maisie Rowland from the Human Nutrition 
Research Centre, Newcastle University who provided invaluable help with data 
collection.
Contributors JA, VA-S, CDS, AAL, MWh and AJA: devised the concept for the 
Foodscape project. MWo: developed the intervention with support from LG, VAS 
and AJA. The evaluation study and associated methods were designed by LG, FHB, 
JA, VAS, LP, WW, CDS, MWh and AJA. Data collection was overseen by LG and 
completed by LG, MWo, FHB, NH and AJA. LG: led on data analysis and drafting the 
manuscript, supported by MWh and AA. All authors provided critical comments on 
drafts of the manuscript and read and approved the final version.
Funding This paper presents independent research funded by the National 
Institute for Health Research (NIHR) School for Public Health Research (SPHR). 
This research was part of the SPHR-funded project: Transforming the 'foodscape': 
development and feasibility testing of interventions to promote healthier takeaway, 
pub or restaurant food, with additional support from Durham and Newcastle 
Universities, SPHR is funded by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR). At 
the time of funding, SPHR was a partnership between the Universities of Sheffield, 
Bristol, Cambridge, Exeter, University College London; The London School for 
Hygiene and Tropical Medicine; the LiLaC collaboration between the Universities of 
Liverpool and Lancaster; and Fuse, the Centre for Translational Research in Public 
Health, a collaboration between Newcastle, Durham, Northumbria, Sunderland and 
Teesside Universities. Authors LG, FHB, NH, VAS, LP, CDS, AAL and AJA are members 
of Fuse. Funding for Fuse comes from the British Heart Foundation, Cancer 
Research UK, Economic and Social Research Council, Medical Research Council 
and the National Institute for Health Research, under the auspices of the UK Clinical 
Research Collaboration, and is gratefully acknowledged. AA is funded by the NIHR 
as a NIHR Research Professor. JA and MWh are funded by the Centre for Diet and 
Activity Research (CEDAR), a UKCRC Public Health Research Centre of Excellence. 
Funding from the British Heart Foundation, Cancer Research UK, Economic and 
Social Research Council, Medical Research Council, the National Institute for Health 
Research and the Wellcome Trust, under the auspices of the UK Clinical Research 
Collaboration, is gratefully acknowledged. 
Disclaimer The views expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and 
not necessarily those of the NHS, NIHR or the Department of Health and Social Care. 
The SPHR was not involved in the design of the study, analysis, interpretation of 
data nor writing the manuscript.
Competing interests The research funding contributed to the cost of design 
and production of some of the intervention materials. HC also contributed to the 
costs of intervention development and funded delivery. HC developed and sell the 
‘Lite-BITE®’ Fish & Chip meal boxes detailed in the study. Neither the project, nor 
individual researchers received financial contributions from HC for this study or 
any other work. MWh is funded by NIHR as Director of its Public Health Research 
Funding Programme. AJA is funded by NIHR as a Research Professor and the 
National Director of NIHR SPHR. CS and MWh are principal investigators in the 
NIHR SPHR. MWo led and delivered the intervention and provided the packaging 
materials; at the time of the research he was an undergraduate student at 
Newcastle Business School, Northumbria University on secondment to HC. After 
completion of the study (and his degree programme at Northumbria University), 
he became an employee of HC. HC an independent supplier to over 2500 Fish & 
Chip Shops in the North-East of England, Yorkshire, Cumbria and Scotland. HC is 
a private limited company founded in 1893 and based in Gateshead, North-East 
England. Company number 00822749 ( 
www. 
colbeck. 
co. 
uk).
Patient consent for publication Not required.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Data sharing statement Anonymised data relating to the covert observations, 
sales of Fish & Chip meals, customer survey and semi-structured interviews are 
available on reasonable request from the corresponding author (LG). 
Open access This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the 
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 Unported (CC BY 4.0) license, which permits 
others to copy, redistribute, remix, transform and build upon this work for any 
purpose, provided the original work is properly cited, a link to the licence is given, 
and indication of whether changes were made. See: https:// 
creativecommons. 
org/ 
licenses/ 
by/ 
4. 
0/.
reFerenCes
 1. Jaworowska A, M. Blackham T, Long R, et al. Nutritional 
composition of takeaway food in the UK. Nutrition & Food Science 
2014;44:414–30.
 2. Lachat C, Nago E, Verstraeten R, et al. Eating out of home and its 
association with dietary intake: a systematic review of the evidence. 
Obes Rev 2012;13:329–46.
 3. Public Health England. Calorie reduction: the scope and ambition for 
action: Department of Health and Social Care, 2018.
 4. Goffe L, Rushton S, White M, et al. Relationship between mean daily 
energy intake and frequency of consumption of out-of-home meals in 
the UK National Diet and Nutrition Survey. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act 
2017;14:131.
 5. Pereira MA, Kartashov AI, Ebbeling CB, et al. Fast-food habits, 
weight gain, and insulin resistance (the CARDIA study): 15-year 
prospective analysis. Lancet 2005;365:36–42.
 6. Bodicoat DH, Carter P
, Comber A, et al. Is the number of fast-food 
outlets in the neighbourhood related to screen-detected type 2 
diabetes mellitus and associated risk factors? Public Health Nutr 
2015;18:1–8.
 7. Walton JK. Fish and Chips, and the British Working Class, 1870-
1940: A&C Black. 1994.
 8. Brooks J. Fish and Chips in Commercial Foodservice 2016: Seafish. 
2017.
 9. Seafish AP
, Campden BRI. Enjoy Fish and Chips - Synopsis report. 
2016  
enjoyfishandchips. 
co. 
uk
 
10. Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition. Dietary reference values 
for energy. London: The Stattionery Office, 2011.
 
11. Hollands GJ, Shemilt I, Marteau TM, et al. Portion, package or 
tableware size for changing selection and consumption of food, 
alcohol and tobacco. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 
2015;9.
 
12. Marteau TM, Hollands GJ, Shemilt I, et al. Downsizing: policy options 
to reduce portion sizes to help tackle obesity. BMJ 2015;351:h5863.
 
13. Steenhuis I, Poelman M. Portion size: latest developments and 
interventions. Curr Obes Rep 2017;6:10–17.
 
14. Hollands GJ, Cartwright E, Pilling M, et al. Impact of reducing portion 
sizes in worksite cafeterias: a stepped wedge randomised controlled 
pilot trial. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act 2018;15:78.
 
15. Sharpe R. An inconvenient sandwich: the throwaway economics of 
takeaway food: new economics foundation. 2010.
 
16. Bagwell S, O’Keefe E, Doff S, et al. Encouraging healthier takeaways 
in low-income communities: tools to support those working to 
encourage healthier catering amongst fast food takeaways. London: 
Cities Institute, London Metropolitan University, 2014.
 
17. Goffe L, Penn L, Adams J, et al. The challenges of interventions 
to promote healthier food in independent takeaways in England: 
qualitative study of intervention deliverers' views. BMC Public Health 
2018;18:184.
 
18. Henry Colbeck Limited. Henry Colbeck limited: about us gateshead. 
2016 http://www. 
colbeck. 
co. 
uk/ 
about- 
us (Accessed Oct 2017).
 
19. Adams J, Goffe L, Brown T, et al. Frequency and socio-demographic 
correlates of eating meals out and take-away meals at home: cross-
sectional analysis of the UK national diet and nutrition survey, waves 
1-4 (2008-12). Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act 2015;12:51.
 
20. Goffe L, Hillier-Brown F
, Doherty A, et al. Comparison of sodium 
content of meals served by independent takeaways using standard 
versus reduced holed salt shakers: cross-sectional study. Int J Behav 
Nutr Phys Act 2016;13:102.
 
21. Goffe L, Wrieden W, Penn L, et al. Reducing the salt added to 
takeaway food: within-subjects comparison of salt delivered by 
five and 17 holed salt shakers in controlled conditions. PLoS One 
2016;11:e0163093.
 
22. Hillier-Brown FC, Summerbell CD, Moore HJ, et al. The impact of 
interventions to promote healthier ready-to-eat meals (to eat in, to 
take away or to be delivered) sold by specific food outlets open to 
the general public: a systematic review. Obes Rev 2017;18.
 
23. Hillier-Brown FC, Summerbell CD, Moore HJ, et al. A description 
of interventions promoting healthier ready-to-eat meals (to eat in, 
to take away, or to be delivered) sold by specific food outlets in 
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2018-023441 on 6 February 2019. Downloaded from 
 11
Goffe L, et al. BMJ Open 2019;9:e023441. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2018-023441
Open access
England: a systematic mapping and evidence synthesis. BMC Public 
Health 2017;17:93.
 
24. Michie S, Richardson M, Johnston M, et al. The behavior change 
technique taxonomy (v1) of 93 hierarchically clustered techniques: 
building an international consensus for the reporting of behavior 
change interventions. Ann Behav Med 2013;46:81–95.
 
25. Hoffmann TC, Glasziou PP
, Boutron I, et al. Better reporting of 
interventions: template for intervention description and replication 
(TIDieR) checklist and guide. BMJ 2014;348:g1687.
 
26. Department for Communities and Local Government. English indices 
of deprivation 2015: UK Government, 2015.
 
27. Food Standards Agency. Food hygiene ratings 2018. 2015 http:// 
ratings. 
food. 
gov. 
uk/ (Accessed 20 Jul 2015).
 
28. R Foundation for Statistical Computing. R: A Language and 
Environment for Statistical Computing [program]. 2018.
 
29. Ritchie J, Lewis J, Nicholls CM, et al. Qualitative research practice: a 
guide for social science students and researchers. Sage 2013.
 
30. Lloyd-Williams F
, Bromley H, Orton L, et al. Smorgasbord or 
symphony? Assessing public health nutrition policies across 30 
European countries using a novel framework. BMC Public Health 
2014;14:1195.
 
31. McGill R, Anwar E, Orton L, et al. Are interventions to promote 
healthy eating equally effective for all? Systematic review of 
socioeconomic inequalities in impact. BMC Public Health 
2015;15:457.
 
32. Department of Health. Localising the public health responsibility deal: 
toolkit for local authorities. 2013.
 
33. Knai C, Petticrew M, Durand MA, et al. Has a public–private 
partnership resulted in action on healthier diets in England? An 
analysis of the Public Health Responsibility Deal food pledges. Food 
Policy 2015;54:1–10.
 
34. Hillier-Brown F
, Lloyd S, Muhammad L, et al. Feasibility and 
acceptability of a Takeaway Masterclass aimed at improving healthier 
cooking practices and menu options in takeaway food outlets. In 
Submission 2018.
 
35. Nuffield Council on Bioethics. Public health: ethical issues: Nuffield 
Council on Bioethics. 2007.
 
36. Henry Colbeck Limited. The Lite-BITE® Gateshead. 2016 http://
www. 
colbeck. 
co. 
uk/ 
sf- 
docs/ 
resources/ 
Lite- 
bitewebpage. 
pdf 
(Accessed Mar 2017).
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://bmjopen.bmj.com/
BMJ Open: first published as 10.1136/bmjopen-2018-023441 on 6 February 2019. Downloaded from 
