 Clinical Infectious Diseases
1134 • CID 2017:64 (15 April) • CLINICAL PRACTICE
Clinical Infectious Diseases®  2017;64(8):1134–9
Eight Habits of Highly Effective Antimicrobial Stewardship 
Programs to Meet the Joint Commission Standards for 
Hospitals
Debra A. Goff,1 Ravina Kullar,2 Karri A. Bauer,2 and Thomas M. File Jr3
1The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, The Ohio State University College of Pharmacy, Columbus, Ohio; 2MRL, Merck & Co., Inc.,Kenilworth, New Jersey; and 3Division of Infectious 
Disease, Northeast Ohio Medical University, and Summa Health, Akron, Ohio
In an effort to decrease antimicrobial resistance and inappropriate antibiotic use, The Joint Commission (TJC) recently issued new 
antimicrobial stewardship standards, consisting of 8 elements of performance, applicable to hospitals effective January 1, 2017. These 
standards coincide with those recommended by the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) and the Society of Healthcare Ep-
idemiology (SHEA) guidelines. Little guidance exists on the “how” from these guidance documents. We review the 8 standards and 
provide real-world experience from established antimicrobial stewardship programs (ASPs) on how institutions can comply with 
these guidelines to reduce inappropriate antibiotic usage, decrease antimicrobial resistance, and optimize patient outcomes. TJC an-
timicrobial stewardship standards demonstrate actions being taken at the national level to make quality and patient safety a priority.
Keywords. antimicrobial stewardship; joint commission standards; antimicrobial resistance.
 
Approximately 700 000 people die every year from antibiotic 
resistant infections, with this number projected to surpass 10 
million per year by 2050 [1]. To help curb rates of resistance, 
The Joint Commission (TJC) recently issued New Antimicrobial 
Stewardship Standards, consisting of 8 elements of performance, 
applicable to hospitals effective January 1, 2017 [2]. As hospital 
administrators direct their attention to assure compliance with 
these standards, antibiotic stewards, who are the “boots on the 
ground” clinicians, need to assure that these new standards 
improve antimicrobial use and patient outcomes.
The standards align with those recommended by the 
Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA)/Society of 
Healthcare Epidemiology (SHEA) guidelines [3]. However, 
little guidance exists on the “how” from these guidance docu-
ments [2, 3]. To paraphrase author Stephen Covey, we foresee 
the 8 stewardship standards becoming 8 highly successful hab-
its of every clinician who prescribes antibiotics [4]. Therefore, 
this article will review TJC 8 standards and provide real-
world experience from established antimicrobial stewardship 
programs (ASPs) on how institutions can comply with these 
guidelines and optimize patient outcomes.
LEADERS ESTABLISH ANTIMICROBIAL 
STEWARDSHIP AS AN ORGANIZATIONAL PRIORITY
As emphasized by TJC standards and IDSA guidelines, strong 
leadership commitment is critical to the success of an ASP. 
This goal can be achieved via identifying healthcare leaders 
and promoting ASP as a patient care, safety, and quality issue. 
The physician and pharmacist co-leading ASP requires strong 
leadership skills, including trust, confidence, and willingness 
to stand on principles. Simply appointing a person to lead ASP 
does not qualify the individual as a leader. The ASP Director 
needs to be able to engage, motivate, inspire, influence others, 
and not fear confrontation [4].
We recommend the following strategies be employed to 
engender institutional support:
• Endorsement of the ASP policy by hospital administration.
• Develop a business plan to present to administration, empha-
sizing the potential for improvement in antimicrobial use 
and quality of care. Albeit a consequence of an effective ASP, 
the goal should not solely be cost-based.
• Identify barriers and provide strategies for resolution. Barriers 
include adequate provision of resources for support of trained 
pharmacists and physicians and information technology (IT). 
Emphasize the requirement for protected time and financial 
compensation for key members of an ASP, including an infec-
tious diseases (ID) pharmacist and physician, data manager, 
and IT.
• Provide plans for assessing the impact of an ASP with the 
anticipation of documenting improvement in quality of care 
metrics.
I N V I T E D  A R T I C L E
© The Author 2017. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious Diseases Society 
of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.
DOI: 10.1093/cid/cix065
Received 31 October 2016; editorial decision 23 December 2016; accepted 13 February 2017; 
published online March 13, 2017.
Correspondence: R. Kullar, Merck & Co., Inc., MRL, 2000 Galloping Hill Rd, Kenilworth, NJ 
07033 USA (Ravina.kullar@gmail.com).
CLINICAL PRACTICE: Ellie J. C. Goldstein, Section Editor
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/8/1134/2993838 by guest on 03 June 2019
 CLINICAL PRACTICE • CID 2017:64 (15 April) • 1135
• Acknowledge ASP goals are in alignment with professional 
societies, accrediting agencies, and payers, including IDSA, 
TJC, and CMS.
HOSPITALS EDUCATE STAFF AND LICENSED 
INDEPENDENT PRACTITIONERS INVOLVED IN 
ANTIMICROBIAL ORDERING, DISPENSING, 
ADMINISTRATION, AND MONITORING ABOUT 
ANTIMICROBIAL RESISTANCE AND ANTIMICROBIAL 
STEWARDSHIP PRACTICE
Antibiotics are prescribed universally by clinicians without reg-
ulation or certification. Although antibiotic guidelines often are 
put in place in hospitals, there are rarely consequences for cli-
nicians that do not comply. As highlighted by Goldstein et al., 
approaches to modifying the behavior of these noncompliant 
clinicians include identifying and understanding the local 
problems, planning and achieving hospital administration and 
medical staff support, as well as effective communication and 
education to these clinicians on evidence-based recommenda-
tions [5]. Therefore, all healthcare professionals (HCPs) must 
receive continuing education about antimicrobial resistance 
and appropriate antibiotic use, with ASP physicians/pharma-
cists leading this education. Didactic sessions alone cannot 
be used as they provide limited impact for sustained effect in 
changing antimicrobial prescribing [6].
We recommend the following:
• Mandate educational ASP competencies, including appropri-
ate drug, dose, duration, and pharmacokinetic/pharmacody-
namic principles, for all HCPs involved in antibiotic ordering, 
dispensing, administration, and monitoring on an annual basis 
through online and case-based learning [7].
• Encourage face-to-face interaction by ASP members when 
providing recommendations to HCPs. This provides real-
time education, leads to immediate action in antibiotic 
management of patients, and develops rapport with other 
disciplines [8].
HOSPITALS EDUCATE PATIENTS AND FAMILIES 
REGARDING 
THE APPROPRIATE USE OF 
ANTIMICROBIAL MEDICATIONS
Patients’ lack of knowledge on consequences of inappropriate 
use (i.e., collateral damage and antimicrobial resistance) con-
tributes to increased demand for antibiotics. Whether real or 
perceived, patients’ expectations for antibiotics affect physi-
cians’ prescribing behavior in both the inpatient and outpatient 
settings [9]. Education to patients and families on appropriate 
antimicrobial use is available through the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention (CDC), which provides free download-
able brochures, entitled “Get Smart, Know When Antibiotics 
Work” [10]. ASPs should work with their public relations 
department to distribute this information throughout the 
hospital.
ASPs can also create their own hospital-specific message 
that can be viewed through various communication venues. 
For example, television screens in the hospital lobby, cafeteria, 
patients’ rooms, and computer screens in patients’ rooms can be 
used to describe ASP and its mission. At The Ohio University 
Wexner Medical Center (OSUWMC), stewardship messages, 
such as “antibiotics should only be given to the right patient, 
at the right time, at the right dose, for the right duration” have 
been incorporated on patients’ computer screens. These mes-
sages can be altered to align with current ASP projects or goals.
Additionally, social media platforms such as Twitter, a space 
where patients are already active, provide a key mode for hos-
pitals to deliver short tweets and links to various articles and 
videos on stewardship topics [11]. Social media can also pro-
vide hospitals the ability to have real-time conversations with 
patients by answering their questions and concerns about 
appropriate antibiotic use.
THE HOSPITAL HAS AN ANTIMICROBIAL 
STEWARDSHIP MULTIDISCIPLINARY TEAM
ASPs should be led by ID-trained physicians and pharma-
cists, who should receive protected time supported by hospital 
administration to conduct stewardship activities. This may be 
difficult in hospitals with limited resources; however, several 
ASP training programs (Table 1) and resources (i.e., guidelines, 
education modules) from institutions (Table 2) are available 
to assist HCPs. Facilities with limited ID expertise can still 
achieve substantial returns by focusing on basic interventions, 
as revealed in a pharmacist-led study over 5 years that demon-
strated an 18.1% reduction in overall antibiotic consumption 
(P < .001) by integrating nonspecialized pharmacists into the 
ASP [12]. In rural settings, access to a remotely located ASP can 
be achieved through virtual web-based technology (i.e., “tele-
medicine”), and this team can be effectively leveraged across 
multiple facilities [13–15]. A detailed step-by-step process of a 
successful telemedicine-based ASP was recently published by 
McMahon and colleagues [16].
THE HOSPITAL
’S ASP INCLUDES 
THE 7 CORE 
ELEMENTS OF HOSPITAL ASPS FROM 
THE CDC
We describe Summa Health’s step-by-step ASP implementa-
tion process and how the program meets the CDC’s 7 core ele-
ments [17].
Leadership Commitment, Accountability, Drug Expertise. The 
implementation process started with the ID physician/pharma-
cist presenting a business plan to leadership in 2008, including 
a 3-month pilot project focusing on evaluating antibiotic use in 
one of the intensive care units (ICUs). Through a prior medi-
cation use evaluation of 50 patients prescribed linezolid, 50% 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/8/1134/2993838 by guest on 03 June 2019
 1136 • CID 2017:64 (15 April) • CLINICAL PRACTICE
was found to be inappropriate. In this project, the ID pharma-
cist prospectively evaluated 138 patients ordered linezolid for 
appropriateness. A recommendation was made to discontinue 
linezolid in 30 patients, with a 100% acceptance rate. This led 
to an average 6-day reduction of linezolid therapy, leading to 
an average savings of $845–$1103 per patient. Extrapolating 
the cost savings for 1 year, ASPs could save approximately $126 
750–$165 450 if focused on just 1 antibiotic. A broader program 
could see even larger savings and improvement in appropriate 
antibiotic use. Subsequently, a comprehensive ASP was initiated 
in 2010.
Action, Tracking, Reporting. Patients are prospectively 
evaluated daily (5 days/week) by an ID physician and ded-
icated ID pharmacist using a computer decision support 
software program (SafetySurveillor) to identify patients 
requiring intervention. Stewardship rounds are conducted on 
the general wards and ICUs, with the team’s recommenda-
tions communicated to the prescribing service in real time. 
Acceptance rates were 96.2% in 2015, which were tracked in 
SafetySurveillor (Politis P; Summa Pharmacy Department, 
personal communication).
Education. Summa Health’s ASP provides education via face-
to-face discussions with HCPs, presenting at other disciplines’ 
monthly meetings, and publishing on the impact of these 
stewardship initiatives on patient care. Prescriber feedback is 
assessed through the face-to-face discussions and by an ASP 
survey. In 2015, 60% of prescribers responded to a survey with 
96% expressing satisfaction (68% “very satisfied”) with the pro-
cess [18].
THE HOSPITAL
’S ASP USES ORGANIZATIONAL-
APPROVED MULTIDISCIPLINARY PROTOCOLS
How to operationalize guidelines in hospitals is a common bar-
rier to stewardship. We provide real-world examples of proto-
cols from established programs.
Antibiotic Formulary Restrictions. Implementation of antibi-
otic formulary restrictions have been shown to reduce antibi-
otic use [19, 20]. We propose replacing the term “restricted” 
antibiotics with “protected.” ASPs should consider protecting 
new antibiotics and those associated with significant collateral 
damage. For example, new antibiotics such as ceftolozane/tazo-
bactam or ceftazidime/avibactam should be protected as they 
target multidrug-resistant organisms that are best managed by 
ID expertise. Further, antibiotics such as fluoroquinolones are 
associated with significant collateral damage; therefore, their 
use needs to be protected. Importantly, specific antimicrobials 
can be protected in the absence of ID trained specialists with 
the establishment of use criteria and guidelines.
How to Implement a Guideline. ASPs should focus on disease 
state(s) that are of high priority and consistent with the institu-
tion’s goals in creating facility-specific guidelines. This can be 
accomplished via collaborating with the quality department to 
obtain the quantity of patients discharged with a specific disease 
state, as well as clinical and financial data. Various syndromes 
can be targeted, including acute bacterial skin and skin struc-
ture infections (ABSSSIs), community acquired pneumonia 
(CAP), and Clostridium difficile infection (CDI).
Next, ASPs should work closely with other departments to 
ensure a comprehensive guideline. For example, if ASPs are work-
ing on an institutional guideline for CAP management, input 
should be obtained from pulmonologists, hospitalists, emer-
gency department physicians, and microbiologists. By practicing 
broad-spectrum collaboration, ASPs can ensure that the guide-
line will be utilized throughout the institution. Incorporation of 
internal data and evidence-based literature into the guidelines is 
also important. Clinicians should be able to readily access guide-
lines through the institution’s website or pocket cards. To make an 
impact at the point of prescribing, we recommend a hyperlink in 
the electronic medical record (EMR) to the institution’s guideline 
related to the appropriate antimicrobial or microbiology result.
Table 1. Antimicrobial Stewardship Training Programs in the United States
Organization
Fee
Program type
Target audience
Location
Website
Infectious Diseases Society of 
America
Yes
Workshop
Physicians
Pharmacists
IDWeek annual 
meeting
http://www.idweek.org/
premeeting-workshop/#stewardship
Infectious Diseases Association  
of California
Yes
Workshop
Physicians, Pharmacists, 
Infection Preventionists
California
http://idac.org
Making a Difference in Infectious 
Disease
Yes
Certification
Physicians, Pharmacists
Online and Annual 
meeting
http://mad-id.org
Society of Infectious Diseases 
Pharmacists
Yes
Certification
Pharmacists
Online
http://sidp.org/Stewardship-Certificate
Society for Healthcare 
Epidemiology of America
Yes
2 Workshops:
1) Research Methods 
Workshop
2) Antibiotic Stewardship 
Training Course
Physicians, Pharmacists, 
Epidemiologists,
Infection Preventionists, 
Public health
California
http://www.asresearchworkshop.org/
http://sheaspring.org/program/agenda/
Stanford University
No
Workshop
Physicians, Pharmacists
Online
http://med.stanford.edu/cme/courses/
online/antimicrobial.html
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/8/1134/2993838 by guest on 03 June 2019
 CLINICAL PRACTICE • CID 2017:64 (15 April) • 1137
After approval of institution-specific guidelines, ASPs should 
evaluate the use and outcomes of guidelines at an appropriate 
time frame dependent on the institution (3 months to 1 year). 
These metrics may include length of stay, mortality, and read-
missions. ASPs must continue to evaluate internal and external 
data to incorporate updates as appropriate.
Creating an ABSSSI Protocol
An ABSSSI guideline was introduced at Summa Health simi-
lar to the algorithm in the 2014 IDSA SSTI guidelines [21]. 
Most nonsuppurative infections are caused beta-hemolytic 
Streptococcus spp. [22]; however, these patients were frequently 
treated with a combination of an antipseudomonal and anti-
MRSA agent. Through face-to-face education with attending 
physicians on appropriate SSTI management, ASP-intervened 
patients versus a historical control led to a lower mean length of 
stay (4.4 vs 6.2 days; P < .001) and 30-day ABSSSI readmission 
rate (3.33% vs 6.27%) [23]. Overall, ASP interventions reduced 
the use of resources in the management of patients admitted 
with ABSSSIs.
Creating a CDI Protocol
A key strategy implemented by ASPs to improve the overall 
management of patients with CDI is the use of care bundles. 
One study evaluated compliance with an ASP-implemented 
care bundle in patients with CDI compared with historical 
controls [24]. The primary outcome, compliance with overall 
bundle elements, was achieved when the following measures 
were accomplished: (1) appropriate CDI antimicrobial therapy 
based on the institutional treatment algorithm, (2) discontinua-
tion of acid-suppressant therapy in the absence of a prespecified 
indication, and (3) discontinuation of unnecessary antimicro-
bials. Compliance with overall bundle endpoints was signifi-
cantly higher in the bundle group versus control group (81% vs 
45%; P < .001). Individual components that were significantly 
improved in the bundle group included discontinuation of non-
essential acid suppressants (90% vs 18%; P < .001) and adminis-
tration of appropriate CDI therapy (82% vs 64%; P < .009). We 
recommend use of care bundles for effective CDI management.
Guidelines for Antimicrobial Dose Optimization in Adults
ASPs play a significant role in the appropriate dosing and opti-
mization of antimicrobials. For example, β-lactams via extended 
infusion (EI) (3–4 hours) should be considered for critically ill 
patients or those infected with an organism with a high mini-
mum inhibitory concentration (MIC). ASPs should collaborate 
with the microbiology laboratory to evaluate the MIC distri-
bution of specific organisms and infection sites in targeting EI 
antimicrobial administration. For instance, cefepime is often 
used for the treatment of P. aeruginosa. If the cefepime MIC dis-
tribution for the majority of P. aeurginosa isolates from invasive 
sites (blood, respiratory) is ≤ 2 mg/L, cefepime EI is potentially 
not warranted. In contrast, if the majority of MICs are ≥ 4 mg/L, 
ASPs should consider cefepime EI to optimize pharmacokinet-
ics/ pharmacodynamics.
In 2010, OSUWMC implemented cefepime EI (4 hours) for 
all patients regardless of hospital location, with the first dose 
administered over 30 minutes. After implementation, cefepime 
EI resulted in decreased mortality in the treatment of P. aerugi-
nosa bacteremia or pneumonia [25].
Table 2. Antimicrobial Stewardship Resources
Antimicrobial 
stewardship 
program
Content
Website
Cleveland  
Clinic
Disease state treatment 
guidelines
Drug specific (including  
dosing) guidelines
Microbiology guidelines
http://www.clevelandclinic-
meded.com/medicalpubs/
antimicrobial-guidelines/
Johns Hopkins 
Medicine
Disease state treatment 
guidelines
Drug specific (including  
dosing) guidelines
Microbiology guidelines
http://www.hopkinsmedi-
cine.org/amp/guidelines/
Antibiotic_guidelines.pdf
Nebraska 
Medicine
Disease state treatment 
guidelines
Drug specific (including  
dosing) guidelines
Microbiology guidelines
Visiting scholar preceptorship
http://www.nebras-
kamed.com/careers/
education-programs/asp
Sinai Health 
System
Disease state treatment 
guidelines
Antimicrobial stewardship 
fellowship
General antimicrobial 
stewardship
http://www.antimicrobi-
alstewardship.com/
Stanford 
Medicine
Disease state treatment 
guidelines
Drug specific (including  
dosing) guidelines
Microbiology guidelines
http://med.stanford.edu/
bugsanddrugs/guide-
book.html
The Ohio State 
University
Disease state treatment 
guidelines
Microbiology guidelines
http://rx.osumc.edu/asp2/
index.html
University of 
California Los 
Angeles
Disease state treatment 
guidelines
Drug specific (including  
dosing) guidelines
Microbiology guidelines
http://www.asp.mednet.
ucla.edu
University of 
California San 
Francisco
Disease state treatment 
guidelines
Drug specific guidelines
http://idmp.ucsf.edu/
ucsf-medical-cen-
ter-guidelines
University of 
Miami Health 
System
Disease state treatment 
guidelines
Antimicrobial dosing  
guidelines
http://www.ugotabug.med.
miami.edu
University of 
Pennsylvania 
Medical 
Center
Disease state treatment 
guidelines
Drug specific (including  
dosing) guidelines
Microbiology guidelines
http://www.uphs.upenn.
edu/bugdrug/antibiotic_
manual/table%20of%20
contents.htm
University of 
Wisconsin
Disease state treatment 
guidelines
Drug specific guidelines  
(including dosing)
http://www.uwhealth.org/
antimicrobial-stewardship/
main/36408
Wake Forest
Disease state treatment 
guidelines
Drug specific guidelines  
(including dosing)
Antibiotic stewardship 
curriculum
http://www.wakehealth.
edu/School/CAUSE
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/8/1134/2993838 by guest on 03 June 2019
 1138 • CID 2017:64 (15 April) • CLINICAL PRACTICE
THE HOSPITAL COLLECTS, ANALYZES, AND 
REPORTS DATA ON ITS ASP
Measuring the impact of an ASP is vital to direct program focus, 
provide benchmarking tools, and maintain administrative sup-
port. Antimicrobial use quantification is often hindered by the 
accessibility of electronic data. As discussed earlier in the man-
uscript, IT resources are mandatory in obtaining antimicrobial 
use. Antimicrobial use is most commonly presented as days of 
therapy or defined daily doses. The metric selected must be 
consistent for each stewardship intervention in order to appro-
priately reflect antimicrobial use over time. Clinical outcomes, 
including length of stay, mortality, and readmission should also 
be collected, analyzed, and reported in addition to antimicro-
bial use. ASPs need to present antimicrobial use and outcomes 
to hospital and pharmacy administration on an annual or 
semi-annual basis.
HOSPITALS 
TAKE ACTION ON IMPROVEMENT 
OPPORTUNITIES IDENTIFIED IN ITS ASP
Stewards can become overwhelmed at the breadth of interven-
tions required to conduct a successful ASP [26]. ASPs can be 
successful at selecting both obtainable targets and complicated 
management issues. Initial targets for new programs include 
intravenous-to-oral conversions, batching of intravenous anti-
microbials, therapeutic substitution, and formulary manage-
ment. ASPs should initially focus on staged and systematic 
interventions that address obvious areas of need, providing 
early successes for the program. These interventions will lead 
to more complex ASP interventions. For the remainder of the 
section, we focus on 2 complex interventions, including allergy 
assessment and rapid diagnostic testing.
Allergy Assessment
A key area of patient care improvement for ASPs is providing an 
allergy assessment and recommending either skin testing or alter-
native antibiotic for patients. Approximately 10–15% of hospital-
ized patients are labeled as having a penicillin allergy, whereas 
80–90% of these patients are negative on penicillin skin testing 
[27]. Further errors in antibiotic allergy labeling occur due to an 
overestimation of β-lactam cross-reactivity between and among 
β-lactams. Drug allergy assessments have been associated with 
improved antibiotic stewardship, reduced alternative antibiotic 
use, decreased length of hospital stay and costs, and increased 
guideline adherence [28, 29]. Park et al. showed that integrating 
trained pharmacists and allergists led to increased β-lactams in 
patients with a history of penicillin allergy [30]. ASPs should sup-
port such methods to advocate allergy assessments.
In Summa Health, when assessing a patient’s history of 
β-lactam allergy, many patients provided an “unknown” 
response or “my mother said I’m allergic” with no documented 
history of any reaction. Based on literature, a standardized 
algorithm was developed [31]. A trained pharmacist, who 
provides a recommendation on when to use β-lactams, inter-
prets responses to the algorithm. Of interest, the anesthesia 
department was a leading advocate because the designation 
of “penicillin” allergy significantly delayed administration of a 
prophylactic antimicrobial.
Rapid Diagnostic Tests
The capability of providing accurate and fast microbiology 
results in a clinically meaningful time frame, near the point of 
care, can be game-changing for ASPs [32]. Rapid diagnostic 
tests provide collaborative opportunities for ASPs to improve 
patient outcomes and decrease antimicrobial use but are of 
little value if ASPs do not have an active role as an educator 
of the results. Relevant microbiologic tests should be imple-
mented based on prevalent or problematic organisms within 
the hospital setting, with consideration given to the sensitivity 
and specificity of each test. Microbiologists with ASPs should 
consider the instrument cost, test supplies, laboratory space, 
and complexity of the test. It is mandatory that microbiology 
and stewards work together to determine the best approach to 
justify institutional costs of the technology. Depending on the 
institution, a 3 month to 1year study should be considered to 
demonstrate clinical and economic outcomes associated with 
the rapid diagnostic test with ASP interventions.
Rapid diagnostics with an ASP has been shown to impact 
clinical and economic outcomes. Bauer and colleagues studied 
the Xpert MRSA/SA BC assay in combination with ID phar-
macist intervention in S. aureus bacteremia. The mean time to 
switch from empiric vancomycin to either nafcillin or cefazolin 
in patients with MSSA bacteremia was 1.7 days shorter post-im-
plementation (P = .002) [33]. The mean length of stay (6.2 days 
shorter; P = .07) and hospital costs ($21 387 less per patient; 
P = .02) was also significantly lower. Huang et al. evaluated the 
impact of MALDI-TOF MS and stewardship intervention in 
patients with bacteremia or candidemia [34]. Compared with 
traditional methods, the impact of MALDI-TOF MS combined 
with real-time notification to a member of the ASP improved 
time to optimal antibiotic therapy (80.9 vs 23 hours; P < .001). 
Importantly, mortality among patients during the intervention 
period was lower (21% vs 8.9%; P = .01). We recommend rapid 
diagnostics used in combination with ASP.
CONCLUSIONS
We have provided real-world step-by-step processes to aide 
institutions in implementing TJC Standards. As we reflect on 
these 8 steps, we recognize that other institutions, such as those 
referenced on the CDC website, have applied similar strategies 
to optimize their ASP [17]. Further, California and countries 
such as the United Kingdom have had antimicrobial steward-
ship as an accreditation standard for sometime, with a recent 
article describing the road maps for success in these selected 
regions [35].
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/8/1134/2993838 by guest on 03 June 2019
 CLINICAL PRACTICE • CID 2017:64 (15 April) • 1139
Simply asking clinicians to do a better job at prescribing anti-
microbials has not and does not work. Unraveling years of over-
prescribing antimicrobials will require behavior change. TJC 
Standards will garner the attention of hospital administration, 
resulting in the formation of ASPs. However, these standards 
should not be implemented to simply “check the box” to fulfill 
having an ASP. Having a required established ASP at every US 
hospital allows clinicians to impact antimicrobial prescribing, 
optimize patient outcomes, and decrease resistance.
Notes
Disclaimer. The views expressed are those of the authors and do not 
necessarily represent those of the Merck & Co., Inc.
Potential conflicts of interest. R. K. and K. A. B. are employed by 
Merck & Co., Inc., Kenilworth, NJ, USA. All other authors report no 
 
conflict. All authors have submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of 
Potential Conflicts of Interest. Conflicts that the editors consider relevant to 
the content of the manuscript have been disclosed.
References
1. O’Neill J. Review on antimicrobial resistance: tackling drug-resistant infections 
globally — final report and recommendations (Wellcome Trust, UK Government, 
2016). Available at: http://amr-review.org/sites/default/files/160518_Final paper_
with cover.pdf. Accessed 9 September 2016.
2. APPROVED: New antimicrobial stewardship standard. Jt Comm Perspect 2016; 
36: 3–4, 8.
3. Barlam TF, Cosgrove SE, Abbo LM, et al. Implementing an antibiotic stewardship 
program: guidelines by the Infectious Diseases Society of America and the Society 
for Healthcare Epidemiology of America. Clin Infect Dis 2016; 62:e51–77.
4. Corey SR. The 8th habit from effectiveness to greatness. New York: Free Press, 2006.
5. Goldstein EJ, Goff DA, Reeve W, et al. Approaches to modifying the behavior of 
clinicians who are noncompliant with antimicrobial stewardship program guide-
lines. Clin Infect Dis 2016; 63:532–8.
6. Davey P, Brown E, Fenelon L, et al. Interventions to improve antibiotic prescribing 
practices for hospital inpatients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2005: CD003543.
7. Rocha-Pereira N, Lafferty N, Nathwani D. Educating healthcare professionals 
in antimicrobial stewardship: can online-learning solutions help? J Antimicrob 
Chemother 2015; 70:3175–7.
8. Foral PA, Anthone JM, Destache CJ, et al. Education and communication in an 
interprofessional antimicrobial stewardship program. J Am Osteopath Assoc 
2016; 116:588–93.
9. Macfarlane J, Holmes W, Macfarlane R, Britten N. Influence of patients’ expecta-
tions on antibiotic management of acute lower respiratory tract illness in general 
practice: questionnaire study. BMJ 1997; 315:1211–4.
10. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Get smart: know when antibiotics 
work. Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/getsmart/healthcare/pdfs/16_265926_
antibioticfactsheet_v7_508-final.pdf. Accessed 20 October 2016.
11. Goff DA, Kullar R, Newland JG. Review of Twitter for infectious diseases clini-
cians: useful or a waste of time? Clin Infect Dis 2015; 60:1533–40.
12. Brink AJ, Messina AP, Feldman C, et al.; Netcare Antimicrobial Stewardship Study 
Alliance. Antimicrobial stewardship across 47 South African hospitals: an imple-
mentation study. Lancet Infect Dis 2016; 16:1017–25.
13. Yam P, Fales D, Jemison J, Gillum M, Bernstein M. Implementation of an antimi-
crobial stewardship program in a rural hospital. Am J Health Syst Pharm 2012; 
69:1142–8.
14. Parmar P, Mackie D, Varghese S, Cooper C. Use of telemedicine technologies in 
the management of infectious diseases: a review. Clin Infect Dis 2015; 60:1084–94.
15. Siddiqui J, Shamiya R, Trotter M. Educational based antimicrobial stewardship 
program [abstract 1406]. In: Program and abstracts of the Infectious Disease 
Week meeting of Infectious Diseases Society of America (San Diego). Arlington, 
VA: 2015.
16. McMahon C, Siddiqui J, Kutza C. Telemedicine-based antimicrobial steward-
ship program improves prescribing, reduces bacterial resistance to antibiot-
ics at rural hospital. AHRQ healthcare innovations exchange. Service Delivery 
Innovation Profile. Available at: https://innovations.ahrq.gov/profiles/telemed-
icine-based-antimicrobial-stewardship-program-improves-prescribing-reduc-
es-bacterial Accessed 29 October 2016.
17. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Core elements of hospital antibiotic 
stewardship programs. Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/getsmart/healthcare/
pdfs/core-elements.pdf Accessed 15 October 2016.
18. Trienski TL, File TM Jr. Impact of an antimicrobial stewardship program at an 
academic medical center [abstract 83 OR]. In: Program and abstracts of the 
Annual Meeting Making a Difference in Infectious Diseases. Orlando, FL: May 
7–9, 2015.
19. Boel J, Andreasen V, Jarløv JO, et al. Impact of antibiotic restriction on resistance 
levels of Escherichia coli: a controlled interrupted time series study of a hospi-
tal-wide antibiotic stewardship programme. J Antimicrob Chemother 2016; 
71:2047–51.
20. Davey P, Brown E, Charani E, et al. Interventions to improve antibiotic prescribing 
practices for hospital inpatients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013: CD003543.
21. Stevens DL, Bisno AL, Chambers HF, et al. Practice guidelines for the diagnosis 
and management of skin and soft tissue infections: 2014 update by the Infectious 
Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis 2014; 59:147–59.
22. Jeng A, Beheshti M, Li J, Nathan R. The role of beta-hemolytic streptococci in 
causing diffuse, nonculturable cellulitis: a prospective investigation. Medicine 
(Baltimore) 2010; 89:217–26.
23. Pasquale TR, Trienski TL, Olexia DE, et al. Impact of an antimicrobial steward-
ship program on patients with acute bacterial skin and skin structure infections. 
Am J Health Syst Pharm 2014; 71:1136–9.
24. Brumley PE, Malani AN, Kabara JJ, Pisani J, Collins CD. Effect of an antimicrobial 
stewardship bundle for patients with Clostridium difficile infection. J Antimicrob 
Chemother 2016; 71:836–40.
25. Bauer KA, West JE, O’Brien JM, Goff DA. Extended-infusion cefepime reduces 
mortality in patients with Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections. Antimicrob Agents 
Chemother 2013; 57:2907–12.
26. Goff DA, Bauer KA, Reed EE, Stevenson KB, Taylor JJ, West JE. Is the “low-hang-
ing fruit” worth picking for antimicrobial stewardship programs? Clin Infect Dis 
2012; 55:587–92.
27. Blanca M, Romano A, Torres MJ, et al. Update on the evaluation of hypersensitiv-
ity reactions to betalactams. Allergy 2009; 64:183–93.
28. Trubiano J, Phillips E. Antimicrobial stewardship’s new weapon? A review of anti-
biotic allergy and pathways to ‘de-labeling.’ Curr Opin Infect Dis 2013; 26:526–37.
29. Charneski L, Deshpande G, Smith SW. Impact of an antimicrobial allergy 
label in the medical record on clinical outcomes in hospitalized patients. 
Pharmacotherapy 2011; 31:742–7.
30. Park MA, McClimon BJ, Ferguson B, et al. Collaboration between allergists and 
pharmacists increases β-lactam antibiotic prescriptions in patients with a history 
of penicillin allergy. Int Arch Allergy Immunol 2011; 154:57–62.
31. Gonzalez-Estrada A, Radojicic C. Penicillin allergy: a practical guide for clini-
cians. Cleve Clin J Med 2015; 82:295–300.
32. Caliendo AM, Gilbert DN, Ginocchio CC, et al.; Infectious Diseases Society of 
America (IDSA). Better tests, better care: improved diagnostics for infectious dis-
eases. Clin Infect Dis 2013; 57 Suppl 3:S139–70.
33. Bauer KA, West JE, Balada-Llasat JM, Pancholi P, Stevenson KB, Goff DA. An 
antimicrobial stewardship program’s impact with rapid polymerase chain reac-
tion methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus/S. aureus blood culture test in 
patients with S. aureus bacteremia. Clin Infect Dis 2010; 51:1074–80.
34. Huang AM, Newton D, Kunapuli A, et al. Impact of rapid organism identifica-
tion via matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight combined with 
antimicrobial stewardship team intervention in adult patients with bacteremia 
and candidemia. Clin Infect Dis 2013; 57:1237–45.
35. Goff DA, Kullar R, Goldstein EJ, et al. A global call from five countries to collab-
orate in antibiotic stewardship: united we succeed, divided we might fail. Lancet 
Infect Dis 2016.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article-abstract/64/8/1134/2993838 by guest on 03 June 2019
