 Hypoactive Sexual Desire Disorder: International
Society for the Study of Women’s Sexual Health
(ISSWSH) Expert Consensus Panel Review
Irwin Goldstein, MD; Noel N. Kim, PhD; Anita H. Clayton, MD;
Leonard R. DeRogatis, PhD; Annamaria Giraldi, MD, PhD; Sharon J. Parish, MD;
James Pfaus, PhD; James A. Simon, MD; Sheryl A. Kingsberg, PhD;
Cindy Meston, PhD; Stephen M. Stahl, MD; Kim Wallen, PhD;
and Roisin Worsley, MBBS
Abstract
The objective of the International Society for the Study of Women’s Sexual Health expert consensus panel
was to develop a concise, clinically relevant, evidence-based review of the epidemiology, physiology,
pathogenesis, diagnosis, and treatment of hypoactive sexual desire disorder (HSDD), a sexual dysfunction
affecting approximately 10% of adult women. Etiologic factors include conditions or drugs that decrease
brain dopamine, melanocortin, oxytocin, and norepinephrine levels and augment brain serotonin,
endocannabinoid, prolactin, and opioid levels. Symptoms include lack or loss of motivation to participate
in sexual activity due to absent or decreased spontaneous desire, sexual desire in response to erotic cues or
stimulation, or ability to maintain desire or interest through sexual activity for at least 6 months, with
accompanying distress. Treatment follows a biopsychosocial model and is guided by history and assess-
ment of symptoms. Sex therapy has been the standard treatment, although there is a paucity of studies
assessing efficacy, except for mindfulness-based cognitive behavior therapy. Bupropion and buspirone
may be considered off-label treatments for HSDD, despite limited safety and efficacy data. Menopausal
women with HSDD may benefit from off-label testosterone treatment, as evidenced by multiple clinical
trials reporting some efficacy and short-term safety. Currently, flibanserin is the only Food and Drug
Administrationeapproved medication to treat premenopausal women with generalized acquired HSDD.
Based on existing data, we hypothesize that all these therapies alter central inhibitory and excitatory
pathways. In conclusion, HSDD significantly affects quality of life in women and can effectively be
managed by health care providers with appropriate assessments and individualized treatments.
ª 2016 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) n Mayo Clin Proc. 2016;nn(n):1-15
H
ypoactive
sexual
desire
disorder
(HSDD), the most prevalent female
sexual health problem,1 was consid-
ered the persistent or recurrent deficiency or
absence of sexual fantasies and desire for sex-
ual activity with marked distress or interper-
sonal difficulty not otherwise accounted for
by a general medical or psychiatric condition.
An HSDD may be primary or secondary, life-
long or acquired, or generalized or situational.
The broadened definition of HSDD may
include any of the following: (1) lack of moti-
vation for sexual activity as manifested by
either reduced or absent spontaneous desire
(sexual thoughts or fantasies) or reduced or
absent responsive desire to erotic cues and
stimulation or inability to maintain desire or
interest through sexual activity or (2) loss of
desire to initiate or participate in sexual activ-
ity, including behavioral responses such as
avoidance of situations that could lead to sex-
ual activity, that is, not secondary to sexual
pain disorders, and is combined with clinically
significant personal distress that includes frus-
tration, grief, incompetence, loss, sadness,
sorrow, or worry.2
Women with HSDD have been found to
have impaired body image, self-confidence,
From Sexual Medicine,
Alvarado Hospital, San
Diego, CA (I.G.); Institute
for Sexual Medicine, San
Diego, CA (N.N.K.);
Department of Psychiatry
and Neurobehavioral Sci-
ences and Obstetrics and
Gynecology, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville
(A.H.C.); Maryland Center
for Sexual Health, Johns
Hopkins University School
Affiliations continued at
the end of this article.
CONSENSUS RECOMMENDATIONS
Mayo Clin Proc. n XXX 2016;nn(n):1-15
n http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.mayocp.2016.09.018
www.mayoclinicproceedings.org n ª 2016 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article
under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
1
 and self-worth and to feel less connected to
their partners.3 Total health care expenditures
compared with a control patient cohort were
higher for women with HSDD, including
outpatient office visits, prescription medica-
tion use, and other medical services, including
radiology, laboratory, and outpatient proced-
ures.4 Comorbidities include depression and
fatigue, similar to chronic conditions such as
diabetes and back pain.4,5 Research on the
neuroendocrine central mechanisms of sexual
desire has led to an improved understanding
of
the
underlying
pathogenesis
of
this
biopsychosocial condition. Misunderstandings
about HSDD exist, leaving few clinicians
feeling competent to inquire about or treat
this condition.
Despite the existence of numerous publi-
cations on HSDD, what has been lacking is a
concise resource that assists the clinician (in-
ternists/primary care physicians, gynecolo-
gists,
urologists,
and
advanced
practice
providers)
in
competently
screening
the
female patient for HSDD and providing appro-
priate therapeutic options in a biopsychosocial
paradigm. To this end, the International Soci-
ety for the Study of Women’s Sexual Health
(ISSWSH) commissioned a panel of experts
to write a concise review of the state-of-the-
art understanding of the neural circuitry that
regulates sexual desire, including a plausible
explanation
for
persistent
states
of
both
normal
and
hypoactive
sexual
desire;
a
description of current on- and off-label treat-
ment strategies, including their benefits and
pitfalls; and a discussion of the rationale for
using various therapies.
METHODS
In January 2016, the ISSWSH executive
committee chose co-chairs for this project to
identify potential panelists based on individ-
uals’ publications and research. After a plan-
ning conference call with the chosen experts,
panelists were asked to individually perform
an evidence-based literature review in their
respective
topics,
identifying
high-quality
publications that they judged to be important
and pertinent to the topic. Literature selection
criteria were not systematically defined but
were based on the expertise and experience
of each panelist. The panel of 13 researchers
and clinicians convened in Dallas, Texas, to
present and discuss the current state of knowl-
edge of HSDD. Participants declared potential
conflicts of interest and were ISSWSH mem-
bers and nonmembers. Panelists deliberated
on
the
history,
pathogenesis,
diagnostic
process, and treatment of HSDD and were
assigned to writing groups for the develop-
ment of this article.
The ISSWSH is a not-for-profit multidisci-
plinary academic and scientific organization
dedicated to supporting the highest standards
of ethics and professionalism in the research,
education, and clinical practice of women’s
sexual health. The ISSWSH received an unre-
stricted grant from industry for the develop-
ment
of
this
document.
No
industry
representatives were present in the closed com-
mittee meetings; there was no industry partic-
ipation in the evidence selection, discussion, or
creation of this document; and there was no
attempt by industry to influence its content.
History of HSDD and Nosology
Historically, the diagnoses of female sexual
dysfunctions have been made principally by
clinical
presentation
and
patient
history
rather than by nosology based on etiology,
pathogenesis, and clinical phenomenology.
Development of the diagnostic concept of
HSDD is closely tied to the evolution of the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders (DSM) system, the diagnostic classifi-
cation system of the American Psychiatric
Association.6
The
diagnostic
category
of
HSDD has existed for approximately 30 years,
with its antecedents labeled differently but
defined in a similar manner.7-11 The definition
has evolved with the text-revised versions of
the DSM-IV and the DSM-5.10,11 In the
DSM-5, HSDD has been eliminated as a
distinct nosologic entity and has been replaced
with an amalgamation of the DSM-IV HSDD
and female sexual arousal disorder diagnoses,
termed female sexual interest/arousal disorder.
This revised classification has been controver-
sial among experts in the area of sexual med-
icine because there is little empirical support
or validation of the new diagnostic category/
criteria in contemporary clinical research.12,13
Concern over what some consider to be
the inappropriate elimination of the diagnostic
MAYO CLINIC PROCEEDINGS
2
Mayo Clin Proc. n XXX 2016;nn(n):1-15
n http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.mayocp.2016.09.018
www.mayoclinicproceedings.org
 category of HSDD in DSM-5 has resulted in
the development of an autonomous nosology
for female sexual dysfunctions by two interna-
tional panels of experts in sexual medicine (the
ISSWSH Nomenclature Committee and the
International Consultation in Sexual Medi-
cine).2,14 Importantly, the ISSWSH nosology
retains HSDD as a distinct diagnostic entity,
consistent with what many believe to be
empirically based clinical experience. This
classification system is also consistent with
the International Statistical Classification
of
Diseases and Related Health Problems, 10th Revi-
sion (ICD-10) nomenclature system,15 which is
used throughout the world and applies to both
the
somatic
and
psychiatric
diagnostic
systems. In the ICD-10, HSDD (ICD-10 code
F 52.0) is represented as an independent diag-
nostic category, as it had been in the DSM
system before DSM-5.
Epidemiology
Hypoactive sexual desire disorder is a com-
mon but frequently undiagnosed condition.
Initially, epidemiologic studies examining the
prevalence of low desire in women did not
take into account the associated bother and
distress, a cardinal symptom of HSDD. How-
ever, they did associate lower quality-of-life
measures (eg, physical and emotional satisfac-
tion with sexual partners and general happi-
ness) in women with low desire compared
with women with no sexual problems.16 In
later studies that examined low sexual desire
with distress in large cohorts of premeno-
pausal and postmenopausal women in the
general population, the overall prevalence of
HSDD ranged from approximately 8% to
19%.1,17-19 These studies also found associa-
tions between distressing low sexual desire
and lower health-related quality of life, as
well as psychosocial factors such as dissatisfac-
tion with sex life, partner, or marriage and
negative emotional states, including frustra-
tion, hopelessness, anger, poor self-esteem,
and loss of femininity.
When subgroups were further character-
ized, women with a current spouse or part-
ner
were
more
likely
to
experience
concomitant distress with low sexual desire
than nonpartnered women.20 In addition,
self-assessed poor health, thyroid disease,
and urinary incontinence were associated
with increased probability of distressing low
sexual desire. There was also a marked asso-
ciation between depression and anxiety and
distressing low sexual desire.21 Interestingly,
although the prevalence of low sexual desire
increased with age and was higher in natu-
rally menopausal women, the prevalence of
associated distress declined with increasing
age.17 Similarly, in a study of US and Euro-
pean women aged 20 to 70 years, the occur-
rence of low desire increased with age and
distress about low desire decreased, resulting
in
relatively
constant
prevalence
rates
of distressing low sexual desire with age
(12%-19%
in
the
United
States
and
6%-13% in Europe).18
One potential limitation of population-
based surveys is that the data are self-
reported, with no independent verification.
Thus, it is important that a multicenter, longi-
tudinal, observational study of women with
clinically diagnosed HSDD was initiated in
2008 and completed enrollment of 1592
participants into an HSDD registry.22 Among
the baseline findings, one-third of the 1088
premenopausal women had symptoms or a
clinical
diagnosis
of
depression.23
In
a
subgroup
of
426
premenopausal
women
and
174
postmenopausal
women
with
HSDD, a significant proportion (54% pre-
menopausal;
66%
postmenopausal)
had
concomitant arousal or lubrication prob-
lems.24 These data illustrate the importance
of accurately and completely assessing pa-
tients presenting with HSDD to detect any
possible concomitant conditions and opti-
mize treatment.
Physiologic Mechanisms Modulating Sexual
Desire
Sexual desire has been studied in both the
clinical
and
laboratory settings. Validated
patient-reported instruments (eg, the Female
Sexual Function Index) enable clinically sensi-
tive assessment of changes in sexual desire. In
animal studies, sexual desire can be reliably
inferred from behaviors that anticipate or so-
licit sexual interaction or otherwise indicate
sexual interest. These behaviors and underly-
ing cognitive, emotional, and regulatory pro-
cesses
are
controlled
by
brain
systems
involved in sexual excitation and inhibi-
tion.25-30
HYPOACTIVE SEXUAL DESIRE DISORDER: ISSWSH REVIEW
Mayo Clin Proc. n XXX 2016;nn(n):1-15
n http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.mayocp.2016.09.018
www.mayoclinicproceedings.org
3
 Neural
Regulation. Key
regions
in
the
brain
that
regulate
sexual
desire
include
the prefrontal cortex, locus coeruleus, medial
preoptic area, paraventricular nucleus, and
reward- and attention-processing centers of
the ventral tegmental area and the nucleus
accumbens (Figure 1).25-30 Sexual excitation
involves the actions of brain dopamine, mel-
anocortin, oxytocin, vasopressin, and norepi-
nephrine. These neurotransmitters coordinate
pathways in the hypothalamus, limbic system,
and cortex to process and respond to sexual
stimuli.
Sexual
inhibition
involves
brain
opioid, serotonin, and endocannabinoid sys-
tems that are activated normally during sexual
refractoriness or as a function of primary
aversion
or
secondary
avoidance.
These
inhibitory systems blunt the ability of excit-
atory systems to be activated.
A large aggregate of animal and human
literature on the psychopharmacology of sex-
ual motivation and desire28-30 reports that sex-
ual desire can be inhibited by drugs or
conditions that (1) decrease brain dopamine
levels, (2) augment the action of brain seroto-
nin
specifically
through
serotonin
2A
Limbic integrator
Conscious
awareness/evaluation
Regulation/
reward
ACC
VP
Pir Ctx
Tu
PFC
mPOA
NAcc
CPu
DA
Serotonin
NE
MSH
CB1s
GnRH
OT
μ,δ
ArcN
VTA
PIT
Appetitive responses
 Sexual pleasure
Excitatory
Inhibitory
FIGURE 1. Neural pathways regulating sexual desire in the brain. The main excitatory (solid green) and
inhibitory (dashed red) pathways between key brain regions are depicted. Black pathways represent
known connections that can be both excitatory and inhibitory. Neurotransmitters (see icon key) and their
approximate sites of action are shown. Each neurotransmitter is highlighted to denote the excitatory
(green) or inhibitory (red) effect on specific pathways or at specific sites. The number of icons indicates
the relative strength of influence of a given neurotransmitter. The Venn diagram overlay represents 3
interactive functional systems that process external stimuli through evaluation of sexual reward that may
be integrated to facilitate or attenuate appetitive responses characteristic of sexual desire. ACC ¼ anterior
cingulate cortex; ArcN ¼ arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus; CB1s ¼ cannabinoid type 1 receptor;
CPu ¼ caudate-putamen; d ¼ delta opioid receptors; DA ¼ dopamine; GnRH ¼ gonadotropin-releasing
hormone; m ¼ mu opioid receptors; mPOA ¼ medial preoptic area; MSH ¼ melanocyte-stimulating
hormone; NAcc ¼ nucleus accumbens; NE ¼ norepinephrine; OT ¼ oxytocin; PFC ¼ prefrontal
corex; Pir Ctx ¼ piriform cortex; PIT ¼ pituitary; Tu ¼ olfactory tubercle; VP ¼ ventral pallidum; VTA ¼
ventral tegmental area. Adapted from Encyclopedia of Behavioral Neuroscience.29
MAYO CLINIC PROCEEDINGS
4
Mayo Clin Proc. n XXX 2016;nn(n):1-15
n http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.mayocp.2016.09.018
www.mayoclinicproceedings.org
 receptors, or (3) increase opioids acting at mu
receptors. Conversely, sexual desire can be
stimulated by drugs or conditions that (1) in-
crease hypothalamic and mesolimbic dopa-
mine or (2) decrease serotonin release or
inhibit postsynaptic binding in the prefrontal
cortex. Drugs that can selectively activate these
stimulatory pathways or reduce inhibitory
pathways are being actively evaluated for the
treatment of HSDD, with one (flibanserin)
currently approved by the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA).
Hormonal Regulation. Sexual motivation and
desire
peaks
in
women
and
nonhuman
mammalian females during the periovulatory
period.31-34 This peak is driven by ovarian
hormone actions that prime excitatory sexual
systems in the brain and periphery.35 However,
during much of the 20th century it was gener-
ally believed that women’s sexual desire was not
influenced by ovarian hormones.36 Although
earlier equivocal studies suggested that adrenal
androgens were crucial to women’s sexual
desire,37 evidence that ovariectomy reduced or
eliminated women’s sexual desire was not
published until the 1980s.38-40 Because these
ovariectomized women had functioning adre-
nal cortices, these findings ruled out the notion
that adrenal androgens were critical to women’s
sexual desire. Thus, the focus shifted to ovarian
corticosteroids, including estradiol and testos-
terone, as modulators of women’s sexual desire.
Although there remain problematic aspects
with the accuracy of testosterone assays for
women and in interpreting different experi-
mental
designs, hormone
therapy
studies
found that testosterone increased sexual desire
in surgically and naturally postmenopausal
women,
as
well
as
in
premenopausal
women.41,42 In these studies, total testosterone
plasma levels were in the upper normal or
supraphysiologic range, although this does
not necessarily predict levels of bioavailable
and free testosterone.36 In contrast, in a study
of naturally menopausal women, the decline
in sexual desire was best predicted by declines
in estradiol rather than testosterone.43 In
premenopausal women, studies of changes in
sexual desire in relation to changes in ovarian
hormone levels across the menstrual cycle
have produced mixed results, potentially due
to differences in methods, including using
frequency of sexual intercourse as a proxy
for sexual desire and the interval of ovarian
hormone
measurements.36,44
Nevertheless,
when sexual desire and ovarian hormone
levels were measured daily, estradiol was posi-
tively correlated with sexual desire, progester-
one was associated with decreased sexual
desire, and testosterone levels did not predict
any aspect of women’s sexual desire.43
Yet, recent clinical consensus statements
do not support the use of estrogen as a thera-
peutic intervention to treat HSDD.45 In addi-
tion,
ovarian
testosterone
levels
show
a
short-term rise during ovulation. It is possible
that this rise could activate excitatory sexual
mechanisms
directly
through
androgenic
action or indirectly either through conversion
to estrogen by aromatase. Alternatively, the
secreted androgen may bind to corticosteroid
hormone-binding globulins in blood, thus
allowing more estradiol to get into the brain,
where it stimulates excitatory sexual mecha-
nisms. Thus, hormones are important regula-
tors of sexual desire but are among a myriad
of other factors that are integrated in the excit-
atory and inhibitory pathways in the brain.
Pathogenesis of HSDD. The precise biolog-
ical
alterations
that
cause
HSDD
remain
incompletely
characterized.
Clinically,
no
identifiable hormonal differences characterize
premenopausal women with HSDD. Postmen-
opausal women often experience lower levels
of sexual desire but have lower rates of
distress.46 Although lower testosterone levels
have been associated with decreased sexual
desire, there is no level of testosterone that
predicts HSDD.47 Similarly, low sexual desire
is also associated with decreased estradiol
levels, but women with HSDD do not neces-
sarily have low estradiol levels. Thus, although
ovarian
corticosteroids
may
modulate
women’s sexual desire, their exact role in
HSDD remains unclear.
Irrespective
of
whether
imbalances
in
hormone levels play a causative role, it is likely
that primary and secondary generalized HSDD
involves either a predisposition toward inhibi-
tory pathways in the brain48 or functional and
structural neuroadaptations in these systems
that result in decreased excitation, increased
inhibition, or some mix of the two. Such
dynamic alterations in brain function and
HYPOACTIVE SEXUAL DESIRE DISORDER: ISSWSH REVIEW
Mayo Clin Proc. n XXX 2016;nn(n):1-15
n http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.mayocp.2016.09.018
www.mayoclinicproceedings.org
5
 structure may be additionally modulated or
reinforced by experience and behavior, further
propagating the condition. This process of
experience-based neuroplasticity is not unique
to HSDD and links behavior to cellular mecha-
nisms (neuronal circuits), synaptic mechanisms
(long-term potentiation or inhibition of synap-
tic strength), and molecular mechanisms (ion
channels, cell surface receptors, transcriptional
and translational events, and epigenetic modifi-
cations).49,50 This proposed mechanism is also
consistent
with
differential
brain
activity
patterns and structural differences between
women with and without HSDD.51-54
Among the most dramatic differences,
positron emission tomography studies of vol-
unteers shown erotic videos indicate that
women with HSDD have weaker activation
of the cerebral cortex in the right hemisphere
and significantly less deactivation in the left
hemisphere compared with women who do
not have HSDD (Figure 2A). It is possible
that the weaker activation of the right side
may represent a muted response to sexual
cues,
whereas
the
inability
to
deactivate
higher-order analytical processing on the left
side may perpetuate inhibitory neural path-
ways.
Mechanistically,
experience-based
neuroplasticity may explain how multiple
modalities of psychological and medical treat-
ment can benefit a patient with HSDD by
potentially modulating the underlying sexual
inhibition and excitation mechanisms in the
brain (Figure 2B).
Diagnosis of HSDD
The diagnosis of HSDD begins with a thor-
ough history to determine whether the root
cause
is
neurobiological,
interpersonal,
psychosocial, or some combination of these.
The diagnosis of HSDD may include bother-
some/distressing symptoms of reduced moti-
vation for participation in sexual activity due
to
decreased
spontaneous
desire
(sexual
thoughts/cognitions or fantasies), sexual desire
in response to erotic cues and stimulation, or
ability to maintain desire or interest through
sexual activity. Symptoms may also include
distressing behavioral manifestations of amoti-
vation, such as (1) reduced or absent initiation
of sexual activity, (2) avoidance of situations
that could lead to sexual activity (eg, going
to bed after partner is asleep, restricting casual
physical contact so as not to lead the partner
to misperceive an interest in sex, etc), and
(3) participation in sexual activity only out of
obligation or fear of loss of partner. Relation-
ship issues may lead to low desire but should
be addressed and excluded as the primary eti-
ology before diagnosing generalized acquired
HSDD. The diagnosis of HSDD does not
require complete loss of sexual desire but
rather a change for at least 3 months from
what it was previously. Importantly, personal
distress is a prerequisite for the diagnosis of
HSDD. The distress may manifest as frustra-
tion, grief, incompetence, loss, sadness, sor-
row, low self-esteem, confusion, or worry,
but these should not be the cause of the
diminished desire.10,14
History/Screening. Health
care
providers
should initiate the general discussion and
assessment of sexual concerns because pa-
tients are often uncomfortable and unwilling
to bring up the topic. Initial screening tools
can facilitate the discussion of HSDD. The
Decreased Sexual Desire Screener (Table 1),
a 5-question instrument completed by the
patient, was developed and validated for use
by clinicians to aid in making the diagnosis of
HSDD
in
premenopausal
and
post-
menopausal women per the DSM-IV-TR and
ISSWSH criteria.2,56,57 Women indicate yes/
no responses to the 5 questions (Table 1). The
purpose of questions 1 through 4 is to
determine whether there is HSDD. If the
patient responds yes to all the questions, this
is
consistent
with
generalized
acquired
HSDD.
The purpose of question 5 is to help deter-
mine whether the etiology of HSDD is primary
or secondary. In the case of secondary HSDD,
it is important to treat the underlying cause.
The presence of psychiatric and medical con-
ditions, other sexual issues in the woman or
her partner, use of substances/medications,
or relationship problems as a cause of the
diminished desire would be consistent with a
diagnosis of secondary HSDD. Discrepancy
of the level of desire between a woman and
her partner does not qualify the person with
the lower desire as having HSDD per se.
Note that having regular sex with a partner
does not necessarily indicate that a woman
does not have HSDD given that women have
MAYO CLINIC PROCEEDINGS
6
Mayo Clin Proc. n XXX 2016;nn(n):1-15
n http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.mayocp.2016.09.018
www.mayoclinicproceedings.org
 Treatment
Hypothetical mechanisms of action
Psychological
therapy
(mindfulness,
sensate
focus, CBT)
A
B
Experience/
behavior
Testosterone
Androgenic action
Decreased activation of PFC,
increased activation of
mPOA, VTA, and NAcc
PFC
NAcc
mPOA
VTA
Serotonin 2A
receptor antagonist
Flibanserin
Buspirone
Bupropion
Serotonin 1A
receptor partial agonist
Decreased
serotonin
Increased
NE and DA
Presynaptic DA
receptor antagonist
Reuptake inhibitor for
NE and DA
Trophic (neuroplastic)
and functional effects
FIGURE 2. A, Changes in neural activity in response to viewing an erotic video in women with or without
hypoactive sexual desire disorder (HSDD) assessed by positron emission tomography. Decreased acti-
vation, observed primarily in the left hemisphere, is shown in red, and increased activation, observed
primarily in the right hemisphere, is shown in green. Minimal deactivation was observed in the right
hemisphere and minimal activation was observed in the left hemisphere. Adapted with permission from
Sex Med Rev.55 B, Current treatments for HSDD and their hypothetical mechanisms of action. All
treatment modalities are hypothesized to modify the functional neural pathways summarized in Figure 1
through experiential stimuli, corticosteroid hormone action, and/or modulation of neurotransmitter
levels. CBT ¼ cognitive behavior therapy; DA ¼ dopamine agonist; mPOA ¼ medial preoptic area;
NAcc ¼ nucleus accumbens; NE ¼ norepinephrine; PFC ¼ prefrontal cortex; VTA ¼ ventral tegmental
area.
HYPOACTIVE SEXUAL DESIRE DISORDER: ISSWSH REVIEW
Mayo Clin Proc. n XXX 2016;nn(n):1-15
n http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.mayocp.2016.09.018
www.mayoclinicproceedings.org
7
 sex for many reasons unrelated to sexual
desire (eg, sexual coercion or out of fear or
duty).58
Obtaining a detailed description of the
woman’s problem, including the onset, dura-
tion, and severity of her low sexual desire
symptoms and her level of distress and bother,
may further establish the diagnosis and guide
treatment. Overlap of female sexual disorders
is common, such as HSDD impairing arousal
that impairs orgasm or may lead to pain (eg,
attempting
penetration
without
adequate
lubrication because she is not interested or
aroused). A full sexual history can help delin-
eate the primary problem, establish diagnoses,
and assist in developing an approach to indi-
vidualize treatment.
Additional
Evaluation/Testing. Although
a
physical examination is not required to make
the diagnosis of HSDD, it may be appropriate,
based on history, to rule out other factors that
may be contributing to the low sexual interest
condition, such as concerns of pain with
sexual activity or findings consistent with
hormone insufficiency states.
Although laboratory testing is not used to
make a diagnosis of HSDD, thyroid hormone
and prolactin levels should be measured where
clinically indicated to exclude an endocrine
TABLE 2. Example of Using the PLISSIT Model
d (P) Permission: the provider explicitly encourages a woman to discuss any sexual concerns or questions she may
have and validates her right to satisfying sexual function.
Y
d (LI) Limited Information: the practitioner may educate the patient about sexual physiology or suggest
educational resources such as literature, videos, and erotica.
Y
d (SS) Specific Suggestions: the clinician provides tailored approaches designed to improve sexual and emotional
communication, such as sensate focus exercises, masturbation, Kegel exercises, technical advice regarding sexual
positions, and the use of lubricants or dilators.
Y
d (IT) Intensive Therapy: may involve referral for individual or couples therapy to deal with long-standing conflict
that is contributing to a woman’s hypoactive sexual desire.
TABLE 1. Decreased Sexual Desire Screener
1. In the past, was your level of sexual desire or interest good and satisfying to you?
O Yes
O No
2. Has there been a decrease in your level of sexual desire or interest?
O Yes
O No
3. Are you bothered by your decreased level of sexual desire or interest?
O Yes
O No
4. Would you like your level of sexual desire or interest to increase?
O Yes
O No
5. Please check all the factors that you feel may be contributing to your current
decrease in sexual desire or interest:
a. An operation, depression, injuries, or other medical conditions
O Yes
O No
b. Medications, drugs, or alcohol you are currently taking
O Yes
O No
c. Pregnancy, recent childbirth, menopausal symptoms
O Yes
O No
d. Other sexual issues you may be having (pain, decreased arousal, or orgasms)
O Yes
O No
e. Your partner’s sexual problems
O Yes
O No
f. Dissatisfaction with your relationship or partner
O Yes
O No
g. Stress or fatigue
O Yes
O No
d If the patient answers no to any of the questions 1-4, then she does not qualify for the diagnosis of generalized
acquired hypoactive sexual desire disorder (HSDD).
d If the patient answers yes to all of the questions 1-4, and your review confirms no answers to all of the factors in
question 5, then she does qualify for the diagnosis of generalized acquired HSDD.
d If the patient answers “yes” to all of the questions 1-4 and “yes” to any of the factors in question 5, then decide
whether the answers to question 5 indicate a primary diagnosis other than generalized acquired HSDD. Comorbid
conditions such as arousal or orgasmic disorder do not rule out a concurrent diagnosis of HSDD.
Reprinted with permission from J Sex Med.56
MAYO CLINIC PROCEEDINGS
8
Mayo Clin Proc. n XXX 2016;nn(n):1-15
n http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.mayocp.2016.09.018
www.mayoclinicproceedings.org
 problem that may be causing or contributing to
low desire. Testosterone and sex hormone-
binding globulin levels are also not required
for the diagnosis of HSDD but are recommen-
ded if considering testosterone therapy.
Referral for assessment by a psychotherapist
is indicated if psychological or interpersonal/
relationship problems seem to be etiologically
related to the low desire or as a component of
a multimodal treatment approach regardless of
etiology. Referral for psychotherapy assessment
should not limit or postpone further medical
evaluation of HSDD if indicated.
Treatment of HSDD
The treatment of HSDD may engage both
psychosocial and biological strategies because
psychosocial/interpersonal
and
biological
factors impact each other.59 However, it is
reasonable to sequence treatment that focuses
on the suspected primary contributing compo-
nent(s), emphasizing treatment of the factors
that are most distressing to that individual
woman. Brief office-based counseling may be
helpful using the PLISSIT model (Permission,
Limited
Information,
Specific
Suggestions,
and Intensive Therapy), a stepped approach
specifically for general health care providers
caring
for
women
with
sexual
concerns
(Table 2).60 If psychotherapy is indicated,
the patient should be referred to a sex thera-
pist for management, including determination
of the appropriate form of therapy for that
patient or couple.
Cognitive and Motivational Aspects. Psycho-
therapy is a recognized treatment strategy for
HSDD,
typically
focused
on
modifying
thoughts, beliefs, behaviors, emotions, and rela-
tionship communication/behaviors that inter-
fere with desire. Cognitions typically addressed
include negative thoughts, beliefs, expectations,
cultural and religious standards, and attribu-
tions about sex, sexual activity, and altering/
correcting other thoughts that inhibit sexual
desire/lack of desire. Reactive sexual behaviors
(or avoidance) maintain negative cognitions/
emotional reactions, contributing to loss of
desire. With modification of these behaviors to
elicit positive emotional reactions and with pos-
itive reinforcement, the behaviors are more
likely to be repeated and continued. Emotions
refer to negative and positive feelings, such as
confidence, body image, and resentments. Rela-
tionship dimensions are (1) identification of
aspects such as couple expectations, autonomy,
cohesion, and commitment; (2) cooperation,
including interactions, conflict handling, and
pressure from partner; (3) emotional intimacy,
such as relationship feelings, empathy, and pres-
sure; and (4) determination regarding whether
the relationship conflict is the source of loss of
desire or whether loss of desire led to relation-
ship
conflict.59
A
woman
with
a
desire
discrepancy (less desire than her partner) may
feel pressured and consequently perceive sex as
a chore or, worse, aversive. The treatment
focuses on the dynamic interplay between the
woman and her partner in their sexual rela-
tionship. Questions during the assessment may
focus on how the woman/couple function
cognitively, their sexual behavior and skills,
communication of sexual needs, and sufficiency
of sexual stimulation.
Sensate focus. Sensate focus therapy involves
a
graded
series
of
nondemand
sensual
touching
exercises.61
Typically
used
with
couples, the objectives of sensate focus ther-
apy are to reduce anxiety and avoidance of
sensual touching or sexual activity, improve
sexual communication between partners, and
improve intimacy by reintroducing sexual
activity in a gradual way. Exercises begin with
nongenital
touching
and
with
successful
achievement of each progressive series of
exercises move to genital touching and, ulti-
mately, penetrative sexual activity/intercourse
or other genital sexual activity. Sensate focus
may be more helpful in a subgroup of women
with HSDD secondary to penetration-related
anxiety and associated behavioral avoidance.
Cognitive
Behavior
Therapy. Cognitive
behavior therapy (CBT) focuses on altering
thoughts and behaviors that distract or result
in inhibiting (or nonexciting) sexual thoughts
in a sexual situation with specific focus on
automatic thoughts and beliefs that may inhibit
sexual desire (cognitive component).62 The
behavioral component of therapy serves to
change sexual behavior by focusing on pleasure
and not on sexual form and planned sexual
activity and self-exploration instead of avoid-
ance of sexual activity. An important part of the
CBT approach is education that may help the
HYPOACTIVE SEXUAL DESIRE DISORDER: ISSWSH REVIEW
Mayo Clin Proc. n XXX 2016;nn(n):1-15
n http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.mayocp.2016.09.018
www.mayoclinicproceedings.org
9
 woman and her partner understand the physi-
ology and psychology of sexual desire and
change the perception of what is desire and sex.
McCabe63 found a CBT program to be effec-
tive in 44.4% of women with sexual health con-
cerns. Cognitive behavior therapy was most
likely to be effective in women with anorgasmia
and sexual arousal disorder and least likely to
be effective in women who experienced a lack
of sexual interest. A total of 54% of women
who underwent CBT still reported a lack of sex-
ual interest after CBT. Trudel et al64 found that
74% of women with HSDD were considered to
beimprovedbythe end of a CBT group interven-
tion.A total of64% remained improved at 1-year
follow-up after CBT. Neither study had an
adequate control group paradigm.65
Mindfulness. The goal of mindfulness-based
cognitive therapy is to encourage participants to
connect and engage with their sexuality by
learning and practicing a variety of mindfulness
exercisesthatattempttoimproveawarenessof the
here and now and acceptance and self-compas-
sion.66 Therapy also includes an educational
component regarding female sexuality and sexual
function. Session content may include helping
women discover the ways in which sexual interest
and motivation are influenced by thoughts, feel-
ings, behaviors, and relationships. Another goal is
to improve awareness and, thus, alter the effect of
sexual function on mood and self-esteem.
The paucity of clinical trials and lack of
adequate controls in the published studies
that evaluate the efficacy of psychotherapeutic
treatments of HSDD makes it difficult to draw
any useful conclusions at this time.63-66
Neuroendocrine/Neurochemical Aspects
Flibanserin. Flibanserin, dosed at 100 mg at
bedtime, is a nonhormonal, centrally acting,
postsynaptic serotonin 1A receptor agonist
and
a
serotonin
2A
receptor
antagonist
(a multifunctional serotonin agonist and antag-
onist) that results in a decrease in serotonin ac-
tivity and an increase in dopamine and
norepinephrine
activity.67
Flibanserin
is
currently the only FDA-approved treatment for
generalized acquired HSDD in premenopausal
women in the United States. A risk evaluation
and mitigation program requires certification
of prescribing health care providers and phar-
macists. Efficacy may not emerge for several
weeks, and treatment should be discontinued
after 8 weeks if no benefit is realized.68 Given
the limited clinical experience with flibanserin
due to its recent approval, additional infor-
mation is provided herein.
Statistically significant efficacy was estab-
lished in 3 North American pivotal clinical
trials in premenopausal women with HSDD,
with daily dosing of flibanserin 100 mg at
bedtime
demonstrating
increased
sexual
desire, decreased sexually related distress,
and increased satisfying sexual events.68,69
The clinically meaningful benefit of this ther-
apy was established based on the patient
global impression of improvement, which
demonstrated self-reported responder rates
for sexual desire (minimally, much, or very
much improved) of 54% to 58% in premeno-
pausal women for flibanserin vs 40% to 48%
for placebo treatment. Similar efficacy and
safety results were seen in studies of fliban-
serin in postmenopausal women,70 but fliban-
serin is not yet approved in this population.
Safety was also established in clinical trials
where the most common adverse events (AEs)
in terms of placebo-corrected rates of occur-
rence in premenopausal women were dizzi-
ness
(9.2%),
somnolence
(8.3%),
nausea
(6.5%), and fatigue (3.7%). Note that these
types of AEs are not uncommon with central
nervous systemeactive medications that influ-
ence serotonin. Most AEs were transient or
episodic, were mild to moderate in severity,
and were mitigated by bedtime dosing. The
discontinuation rate due to AEs was 13% in
patients treated with flibanserin 100 mg and
6% in patients treated with placebo.68-71 A
dedicated driving study found that flibanserin
use did not have a negative effect on next-day
cognitive function or driving performance.68
These results are reassuring regarding the
sedating effects of flibanserin.
An alcohol interaction study, in which
excessive exposure to alcohol was observed
to add to the adverse effects of flibanserin
when given in the morning, found increased
frequency and severity of sedation, hypoten-
sion, and syncope, which resolved in all cases
with lying down/Trendelenburg position.71 As
a result of this study, flibanserin has a boxed
warning highlighting the increased risks of
“serious
hypotension
and
syncope”
with
concomitant use of alcohol.
MAYO CLINIC PROCEEDINGS
10
Mayo Clin Proc. n XXX 2016;nn(n):1-15
n http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.mayocp.2016.09.018
www.mayoclinicproceedings.org
 In the clinical trials leading to approval,
alcohol intake was not restricted, and 58% of
women (n ¼ 898) treated with flibanserin
100 mg reported “social drinking” at study
entry. Although alcohol consumption was
not monitored during the trials, rates of
syncope and presyncope (including hypoten-
sion) remained low in the flibanserin group
(0.8% in drinkers and 0.2% in nondrinkers)
vs the placebo group (0.3% in drinkers and
0.2% in nondrinkers).71 In comparison, hypo-
tension and syncope are reported to have an
annual incidence of 6% in the general popula-
tion and to account for 1% to 3% of emer-
gency department visits and hospitalizations.72
Testosterone. Testosterone
therapy
is
an
evidence-based off-label treatment for peri-
menopausal and postmenopausal women with
HSDD.73-79 Transdermal testosterone therapy
using the 300-mg/d patch has been consis-
tently reported in multiple studies to be
effective for the treatment of HSDD. In
double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trials
in
naturally
and
surgically
menopausal
women,
testosterone
therapy
resulted
in
statistically significant improvements in the
number of satisfying sexual events, sexual
desire, and sexual distress that were 2-fold
greater
than
placebo.44,79
The
short-term
safety
of
testosterone
has
been
reported
across studies, and the most common AEs
include hirsutism and acne, which occur at
placebo-corrected rates of 3% to 8% in treated
women, although some studies in surgically
menopausal women have reported essentially
no
difference
between
testosterone
and
placebo treatment groups regarding AEs.79
Long-term
safety
of
testosterone
therapy
regarding breast cancer and cardiovascular
outcomes
are
limited
to
observational
studies.80-82
Women
prescribed
off-label
testosterone for HSDD should be carefully
monitored.
Efficacy
may
not
emerge for
several weeks, and treatment should not be
continued beyond 6 months if no benefit is
realized.83 Ideally, formulations should be
developed specifically for women.
Bupropion. Bupropion,
a
norepinephrine-
dopamine reuptake inhibitor, is approved as
an antidepressant and a treatment for smoking
cessation, but it is used as an off-label
treatment
for
HSDD.84-86
Bupropion
sustained-release 150- to 400-mg daily dosing
has been investigated in several clinical trials
for the treatment of HSDD, improving sexual
function as measured by the Changes in Sexual
Functioning Questionnaire and the Brief Index
of Sexual Functioning for Women.85,86
Although safety data for bupropion is not
specifically available in women diagnosed as
having HSDD, the most common AEs in terms
of placebo-corrected rates of occurrence in
placebo-controlled clinical trials for depression
were tremor (13.5%), agitation (9.7%), dry
mouth (9.2%), constipation (8.7%), excessive
sweating
(7.7%),
dizziness
(6.1%),
and
nausea/vomiting (4%). The AEs caused discon-
tinuation of treatment in approximately 10% of
2400 patients and volunteers in clinical trials.87
Buspirone. Buspirone, a serotonin 1A partial
agonist,
is
approved
as
an
anxiolytic
for
the management of generalized anxiety disorder
or the short-term relief of symptoms of anxiety,
and
it
is
used
as
an
off-label
treatment
for
HSDD.88-90
When
buspirone
was
co-
administered with selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors for the treatment of depression, a
reduction in selective serotonin reuptake inhib-
itoreinduced sexual dysfunction was noted.
Fifty-eight percent of individuals treated with
buspirone reported an improvement in sexual
function compared with 30% treated with pla-
cebo.89 Studies of treatment of HSDD have not
been published.
Similar to bupropion, safety data for bus-
pirone is not specifically available in women
diagnosed as having HSDD. The most com-
mon AEs in terms of placebo-corrected rates
of occurrence in placebo-controlled clinical
trials were dizziness (9%), nervousness (4%),
nausea (3%), and headache (3%). Approxi-
mately 10% of 2200 anxious patients in trials
discontinued treatment due to an AE.
Future
This
ISSWSH
expert
consensus
panel
reviewed current evidence related to multiple
facets of the most common female sexual
dysfunction, HSDD, including epidemiology,
physiology, pathophysiology, diagnosis, and
treatment. The aim was to review the state-
of-the-art, clinically relevant information that
would be used by the health care provider to
HYPOACTIVE SEXUAL DESIRE DISORDER: ISSWSH REVIEW
Mayo Clin Proc. n XXX 2016;nn(n):1-15
n http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.mayocp.2016.09.018
www.mayoclinicproceedings.org
11
 facilitate a broader understanding of the
condition of HSDD in affected women who
present during routine office visits. In the
future, ISSWSH plans to develop a focused
consensus document exclusively concerning
a first-ever step care, diagnostic, and treatment
paradigm for the management of women with
HSDD by the primary care physician. Also
note that other medical therapies for HSDD
are in development. Among these, bremelano-
tide, a centrally acting synthetic melanocortin
peptide, has demonstrated clinical efficacy in
phase 2 studies.90
CONCLUSION
Hypoactive sexual desire disorder in women is
an important female sexual dysfunction that
has been well-characterized for more than 3
decades. Based on contemporary research, the
pathogenesis of HSDD is attributed to an imbal-
ance in central sexual excitatory (dopamine,
norepinephrine, melanocortin, and oxytocin)
and sexual inhibitory (serotonin, opioid, endo-
cannabinoid, and prolactin) pathways. Epide-
miologic
studies
have
identified
multiple
contributing factors, such as psychological con-
ditions, relationship concerns, medical condi-
tions, medications, and menopause.
The health care provider should be aware
that diagnostic assessment of a woman with
HSDD engages a biopsychosocial perspective
and
is
primarily
based
on
history.
The
Decreased Sexual Desire Screener is a validated
instrument that aids in HSDD diagnosis. The
treatment of HSDD may also engage both
psychosocial and biological strategies. Treat-
ment should focus on the factors that are
most
distressing
to
the
individual.
Brief
office-based counseling or referral for sex ther-
apy may be helpful. Bupropion or buspirone
may be used as off-label treatments for
HSDD. Menopausal women with HSDD may
benefit from off-label testosterone therapy.
Flibanserin
is
currently
the
only
FDA-
approved medication for the treatment of
premenopausal women with HSDD, having
been found to have clinically meaningful
benefit
in
multiple
randomized,
double-
blind,
placebo-controlled
trials
involving
thousands
of
participants.
In
conclusion,
HSDD is a highly prevalent but often undiag-
nosed
condition
that
can
effectively
be
managed by the nonspecialist with appropriate
assessment and individualized treatment.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We thank Sue W. Goldstein, ISSWSH global
development chair, for her tireless assistance
in
completing
this
project;
and
Murray
Freedman,
MD,
ISSWSH
treasurer,
and
Andrew T. Goldstein, MD, ISSWSH past pres-
ident, for their helpful commentaries.
Abbreviations and Acronyms: ACC = anterior cingulate
cortex; AE = adverse event; ArcN = arcuate nucleus of the
hypothalamus; CB1s = cannabinoid type 1 receptor; CBT =
cognitive behavior therapy; CPu = caudate-putamen; d =
delta opioid receptors; DA = dopamine; DSM = Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders; FDA = Food and
Drug Administration; GnRH = gonadotropin-releasing hor-
mone; HSDD = hypoactive sexual desire disorder; ICD-10 =
International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related
Health Problems, 10th Revision; ISSWSH = International
Society for the Study of Women’s Sexual Health; m = mu
opioid receptors; mPOA = medial preoptic area; MSH =
melanocyte-stimulating hormone; NAcc = nucleus accum-
bens; NE = norepinephrine; OT = oxytocin; PFC = pre-
frontal corex; Pir Ctx = piriform cortex; PIT = pituitary; Tu =
olfactory tubercle; VP = ventral pallidum; VTA = ventral
tegmental area
Affiliations (Continued from the first page of this
article.): of Medicine, Baltimore (L.R.D.); Sexological Clinic,
Psychiatric Center Copenhagen, Institute of Clinical Medi-
cine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark
(A.G.); Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY
(S.J.P.); Center for Studies in Behavioral Neurobiology,
Department of Psychology, Concordia University, Montréal,
QC, Canada (J.P.); George Washington University, Washing-
ton, DC (J.A.S.); Division of Behavioral Medicine, Depart-
ment of Obstetrics/Gynecology, University Hospitals Case
Medical Center, Case Western Reserve University, Cleve-
land, OH (S.A.K.); Department of Psychology, University
of Texas at Austin (C.M.); Department of Psychiatry, Univer-
sity of California San Diego, and the Neuroscience Educa-
tion
Institute,
San
Diego
(S.M.S.);
Department
of
Psychology and Yerkes National Primate Research Center,
Emory University, Atlanta, GA (K.W.); and Women’s Health
Research Program, School of Public Health and Preventive
Medicine, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, Australia (R.W.).
Potential Competing Interests: Dr Goldstein serves on the
advisory board or as a consultant to Emotional Brain, Female
Condom Co, Lelo, Nuelle, Sprout/Valeant, and Strategic Sci-
ence & Technologies; has received grants/research funding
from Nuelle, Palatin, Shionogi, Sprout/Valeant, and Therapeu-
ticsMD; and is a speaker for Ascend. Dr Kim serves on the
advisory board or as a consultant to Sprout Pharmaceuticals
and Valeant Pharmaceuticals; has received grants/research
funding from Astellas Pharma US, Pharma-IN Corp, and
Valeant Pharmaceuticals; and is a stock shareholder in Sprout
Pharmaceuticals. Dr Clayton serves on the advisory board or
as a consultant to Forest Laboratories, Lundbeck, Otsuka,
MAYO CLINIC PROCEEDINGS
12
Mayo Clin Proc. n XXX 2016;nn(n):1-15
n http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.mayocp.2016.09.018
www.mayoclinicproceedings.org
 Palatin
Technologies,
Pfizer
Inc,
Roche,
S1
Bio-
pharmaceuticals, Sprout, a Division of Valeant Pharmaceuti-
cals, and Takeda; has received grants/research funding from
BioSante, Forest Research Institute Inc, Palatin Technologies,
and Trimel Pharma; is a stock shareholder in or receives other
financial support from Euthymics and S1 Biopharmaceuticals
Inc; and has received royalties from Changes in Sexual Func-
tioning Questionnaire, Guilford Publications. Dr DeRogatis
serves on the advisory board or as a consultant to Emotional
Brain, Endoceutics, Palatin Technologies, Sprout/Valeant, Tri-
mel Pharma, Fabre Kramer, and Viveve; and serves as a
speaker and has received grants/research funding from
Emotional Brain, Endoceutics, Palatin Technologies, and
Sprout/Valeant. Dr Giraldi serves on the advisory board or
as a consultant to Sandoz and Emotional Brain; serves as a
speaker for Pfizer Inc and Eli Lilly; and is a stockholder in
Novo Nordisk. Dr Parish serves on the advisory board or as
a consultant to Sprout, Emotional Brain, Palatin Technologies,
and Pfizer Pharmaceuticals. Dr Pfaus serves on the advisory
board or as a consultant for Emotional Brain and Palatin Tech-
nologies. Dr Simon serves on the advisory board or as a
consultant to AbbVie Inc, Amgen Inc, Apotex Inc, Ascend
Therapeutics, JDS Therapeutics LLC, Merck & Co Inc, Noven
Pharmaceuticals Inc, Novo Nordisk, Nuelle Inc, Perrigo Co
PLC, Radius Health Inc, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc,
Sanofi SA, SermonixPharmaceuticals Inc, Shionogi Inc, Sprout
Pharmaceuticals, Symbiotec Pharmalab, and Therapeu-
ticsMD; has received grant/research funding from AbbVie
Inc, Actavis PLC, Agile Therapeutics, Bayer Healthcare LLC,
New England Research Institute Inc, Novo Nordisk, Palatin
Technologies, Symbio Research Inc, and TherapeuticsMD;
serves as a speaker for Amgen Inc, Eisai Inc, Merck, Noven
Pharmaceuticals Inc, Novo Nordisk, and Shionogi Inc; and is
a stockholder in Sermonix Pharmaceuticals. Dr Kingsberg
serves on the advisory board or as a consultant to Emotional
Brain, Sprout/Valeant, Strategic Science & Technologies,
Nuelle, Palatin, TherapeuticsMD, Pfizer, Materna, NovoNor-
disk, Sermonix, Bayer Healthcare LLC, and Endoceutics. Dr
Meston serves on the advisory board or as a consultant to
Endoceutics, Palatin, S1 Biopharmaceuticals, and Strategic Sci-
ence & Technologies; has received grants/research funding
from Strategic Science & Technologies; and is a stock share-
holder in S1 Biopharmaceuticals. Dr Stahl serves on the advi-
sory board or as a consultant to Acadia, Alkermes, Allergan,
Arbor Pharmaceuticals, Avanir, Axovant, Axsome, Biogen,
Celgene, Forest, Forum, Genomind, Innovative Science Solu-
tions, Jazz, Lundbeck, Merck, Otsuka, PamLabs, Pierre Fabre,
Reviva, Servier, Shire, Sprout, Sunovion, Takeda, Teva, Tonix,
Vanda; has received grants/research funding from Acadia,
Actavis, Alkermes, Arbor Pharmaceuticals, Avanir, Axovant,
Biogen, Celgene, Eli Lilly, Forest, Forum, Jazz, Lundbeck,
Merck, Otsuka, Reviva, Servier, Shire, Sprout, Sunovion,
Takeda, Teva, Tonix, and Vanda; serves as a board member
for Genomind; and is a speaker for Forum, Lundbeck, Otsuka,
Servier, Sunovion, and Takeda.
Grant Support: This White Paper project is supported by
an unrestricted educational program grant from Valeant
Pharmaceuticals North America LLC.
Correspondence: Address to Irwin Goldstein, MD, Sexual
Medicine, Alvarado Hospital, 5555 Reservoir Dr, Ste 300,
San Diego, CA 92120 (dr.irwingoldstein@gmail.com).
REFERENCES
1. Shifren JL, Monz BU, Russo PA, Segreti A, Johannes CB. Sexual
problems and distress in United States women: prevalence and
correlates. Obstet Gynecol. 2008;112(5):970-978.
2. Parish SJ, Goldstein AT, Goldstein SW, et al. Toward a more ev-
idence-based nosology and nomenclature for female sexual dys-
functions: part II. J Sex Med. 2016 Nov 11. pii: S1743-6095(16)
30429-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jsxm.2016.09.020.
3. Kingsberg SA. Attitudinal survey of women living with low sex-
ual desire. J Womens Health (Larchmt). 2014;23(10):817-823.
4. Foley K, Foley D, Johnson BH, et al. Healthcare resource utili-
zation and expenditures of women diagnosed with hypoactive
sexual desire disorder. J Med Econ. 2010;13(4):583-590.
5. Biddle AK, West SL, D’Aloisio AA, Wheeler SB, Borisov NN,
Thorp J. Hypoactive sexual desire disorder in postmenopausal
women: quality of life and health burden. Value Health. 2009;
12(5):763-772.
6. American Psychiatric Association. The Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders. Washington, DC: American Psychi-
atric Association; 1952.
7. American Psychiatric Association. DSM-II: Diagnostic and Statis-
tical Manual of Mental Disorders. 2nd ed. Washington, DC:
American Psychiatric Association; 1968.
8. American Psychiatric Association. DSM-III: Diagnostic and Statis-
tical Manual of Mental Disorders. 3rd ed. Washington, DC:
American Psychiatric Association; 1980.
9. American Psychiatric Association. DSM-IV: Diagnostic and Statis-
tical Manual of Mental Disorders. 4th ed. Washington, DC:
American Psychiatric Association; 1994.
10. American Psychiatric Association. DSM-IV-TR: Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. 3rd rev ed. Washington,
DC: American Psychiatric Association; 2000.
11. American Psychiatric Association. DSM-5: Diagnostic and Statis-
tical Manual of Mental Disorders. 5th ed. Washington, DC:
American Psychiatric Association; 2013.
12. Clayton AH, DeRogatis LR, Rosen RC, Pyke R. Intended or un-
intended consequences? The likely implications of raising the
bar for sexual dysfunction diagnosis in the proposed DSM-V re-
visions: 2. For women with loss of subjective sexual arousal.
J Sex Med. 2012;9(8):2040-2046.
13. DeRogatis LR, Clayton AH, Rosen RC, Sand M, Pyke RE.
Should sexual desire and arousal disorders in women be
merged? Arch Sex Behav. 2011;40(2):217-219.
14. McCabe MP, Sharlip ID, Atalla E, Balon R, Fisher AD,
Laumann E, Lee SW, Lewis R, Segraves RT. Definitions of sex-
ual dysfunctions in women and men: A consensus statement
from the fourth International Consultation on Sexual Medicine
2015. J Sex Med. 2016;13(2):135-143.
15. World Health Organization. International Statistical Classification
of Diseases and Related Health Problems: 10th Revision. 4th ed.
Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization Press; 2011.
16. Laumann EO, Paik A, Rosen RC. Sexual dysfunction in the
United States: prevalence and predictors. JAMA. 1999;281(6):
537-544.
17. West SL, D’Aloisio AA, Agans RP, Kalsbeek WD, Borisov NN,
Thorp JM. Prevalence of low sexual desire and hypoactive sex-
ual desire disorder in a nationally representative sample of US
women. Arch Intern Med. 2008;168(13):1441-1449.
18. Hayes RD, Dennerstein L, Bennett CM, Koochaki PE, Leiblum SR,
Graziottin A. Relationship between hypoactive sexual desire dis-
order and aging. Fertil Steril. 2007;87(1):107-112.
19. Leiblum SR, Koochaki PE, Rodenberg CA, Barton IP, Rosen RC.
Hypoactive sexual desire disorder in postmenopausal women:
US results from the Women’s International Study of Health
and Sexuality (WISHeS). Menopause. 2006;13(1):46-56.
20. Rosen RC, Shifren JL, Monz BU, Odom DM, Russo PA,
Johannes CB. Correlates of sexually related personal distress
in women with low sexual desire. J Sex Med. 2009;6(6):
1549-1560.
HYPOACTIVE SEXUAL DESIRE DISORDER: ISSWSH REVIEW
Mayo Clin Proc. n XXX 2016;nn(n):1-15
n http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.mayocp.2016.09.018
www.mayoclinicproceedings.org
13
 21. Johannes CB, Clayton AH, Odom DM, et al. Distressing sexual
problems in United States women revisited: prevalence after
accounting for depression. J Clin Psychiatry. 2009;70(12):
1698-1706.
22. Rosen RC, Connor MK, Maserejian NN. The HSDD registry for
women: a novel patient registry for women with generalized
acquired hypoactive sexual desire disorder. J Sex Med. 2010;
7(5):1747-1756.
23. Clayton AH, Maserejian NN, Connor MK, Huang L, Heiman JR,
Rosen RC. Depression in premenopausal women with HSDD:
baseline findings from the HSDD Registry for Women. Psycho-
som Med. 2012;74(3):305-311.
24. Maserejian NN, Shifren J, Parish SJ, Segraves RT, Huang L,
Rosen RC. Sexual arousal and lubrication problems in women
with clinically diagnosed hypoactive sexual desire disorder: pre-
liminary findings from the hypoactive sexual desire disorder
registry for women. J Sex Marital Ther. 2012;38(1):41-62.
25. Bancroft J, Graham CA, Janssen E, Sanders SA. The dual control
model: current status and future directions. J Sex Res. 2009;
46(2-3):121-142.
26. Bitzer J, Geraldi A, Pfaus JG. Sexual desire and hypoactive sexual
desire disorder in women: introduction and overview: standard
operating procedure (SOP part 1). J Sex Med. 2013;10(1):36-49.
27. Georgiadis JR, Kringelbach ML, Pfaus JG. Sex for fun: bringing
together human and animal neurobiology. Nat Rev Urol.
2012;9(9):486-498.
28. Pfaus JG. Pathways of sexual desire. J Sex Med. 2009;6(6):
1506-1533.
29. Pfaus JG, Ismail N, Coria-Avila GA. Sexual motivation. In:
Koob GF, Le Moal M, Thompson RF, eds. Encyclopedia of
Behavioral Neuroscience, Vol. 3. Oxford, England: Academic
Press; 2010:201-209.
30. Stahl SM. Targeting circuits of sexual desire as a treatment strat-
egy for hypoactive sexual desire disorder. J Clin Psychiatry. 2010;
71(7):821-822.
31. Graham MD, Gardner Gregory J, Hussain D, Hussain D,
Brake WG, Pfaus JG. Ovarian steroids alter dopamine receptor
populations in the medial preoptic area of female rats: implica-
tions for sexual motivation, desire, and behaviour. Eur J
Neurosci. 2015;42(12):3138-3148.
32. Grebe NM, Emery Thompson M, Gangestad SW. Hormonal
predictors of women’s extra-pair vs. in-pair sexual attraction
in natural cycles: Implications for extended sexuality. Horm
Behav. 2016;78:211-219.
33. Stanislaw H, Rice FJ. Correlation between sexual desire and
menstrual cycle characteristics. Arch Sex Behav. 1988;17(6):
499-508.
34. Wallen K, Tannenbaum PL. Hormonal modulation of sexual
behavior and affiliation in rhesus monkeys. Ann N Y Acad Sci.
1997;807:185-202.
35. Krebs CJ, Jarvis ED, Pfaff DW. The 70-kDa heat shock cognate
protein (Hsc73) gene is enhanced by ovarian hormones in the
ventromedial hypothalamus. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999;
96(4):1686-1691.
36. Cappelletti M, Wallen K. Increasing women’s sexual desire: the
comparative effectiveness of estrogens and androgens. Horm
Behav. 2016;78:178-193.
37. Waxenberg SE, Drellich MG, Sutherland AM. The role of hor-
mones in human behavior, I: changes in female sexuality after
adrenalectomy. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1959;19(2):193-202.
38. Dennerstein L, Burrows GD, Wood C, et al. Hormones and
sexuality: effect of estrogen and progestogen. Obstet Gynecol.
1980;56(3):316-317.
39. Sherwin BB, Gelfand MM, Brender W. Androgen enhances sex-
ual motivation in females: a prospective, crossover study of sex
steroid administration in the surgical menopause. Psychosom
Med. 1985;47(4):339-351.
40. Sherwin BB, Gelfand MM. The role of androgen in the mainte-
nance of sexual functioning in oophorectomized women. Psy-
chosom Med. 1987;49(4):397-409.
41. Reis SL, Abdo CH. Benefits and risks of testosterone treatment
for hypoactive sexual desire disorder in women: a critical re-
view of studies published in the decades preceding and suc-
ceeding the advent of phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors.
Clinics. 2014;69(4):294-303.
42. Wahlin-Jacobsen S, Pedersen AT, Kristensen E, et al. Is there a
correlation between androgens and sexual desire in women?
J Sex Med. 2015;12(2):358-373.
43. Dennerstein L, Randolph J, Taffe J, et al. Hormones, mood,
sexuality, and the menopausal transition. Fertil Steril. 2002;
77(S4):42-48.
44. Roney JR, Simmons ZL. Hormonal predictors of sexual motiva-
tion in natural menstrual cycles. Horm Behav. 2013;63(4):
636-645.
45. Worsley R, Santoro N, Miller KK, Parish SJ, Davis SR.
Hormones and female sexual dysfunction: beyond estrogens
and
androgens:
findings
from
the
fourth
International
Consultation on Sexual Medicine. J Sex Med. 2016;13(3):
283-290.
46. Dennerstein L, Koochaki P, Barton I, Graziottin A. Hypoactive
sexual desire disorder in menopausal women: a survey of
Western European women. J Sex Med. 2006;3(2):212-222.
47. Davis SR, Davison SL, Donath S, Bell RJ. Circulating androgen
levels and self-reported sexual function in women. JAMA.
2005;294(1):91-96.
48. Toates F. An integrative theoretical framework for understand-
ing sexual motivation, arousal, and behavior. J Sex Res. 2009;
46(2-3):168-193.
49. Sweatt JD. Neural plasticity and behavior: sixty years of concep-
tual advances [published online]. J Neurochem. February 14,
2016. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jnc.13580.
50. Sale A, Berardi N, Maffei L. Environment and brain plasticity: to-
wards an endogenous pharmacotherapy. Physiol Rev. 2014;
94(1):189-234.
51. Arnow BA, Millheiser L, Garrett A, et al. Women with hypoac-
tive sexual desire disorder compared to normal females: a func-
tional magnetic resonance imaging study. Neuroscience. 2009;
158(2):484-502.
52. Bianchi-Demicheli
F,
Cojan
Y,
Waber
L,
Recordon
N,
Vuilleumier P, Ortigue S. Neural bases of hypoactive sexual
desire disorder in women: an event-related fMRI study. J Sex
Med. 2011;8(9):2546-2559.
53. Woodard TL, Nowak NT, Balon R, Tancer M, Diamond MP.
Brain activation patterns in women with acquired hypoactive
sexual desire disorder and women with normal sexual function:
a
cross-sectional
pilot
study.
Fertil
Steril.
2013;100(4):
1068-1076.
54. Bloemers J, Scholte S, van Rooij K, et al. Reduced gray matter
volume and increased white matter fractional anisotropy in
women with hypoactive sexual desire disorder. J Sex Med.
2014;11(3):753-767.
55. Holstege G. How the emotional motor system controls the
pelvic organs. Sex Med Rev. 2016;4(4):303-328.
56. Clayton AH, Goldfischer ER, Goldstein I, Derogatis L, Lewis-
D’Agostino DJ, Pyke R. Validation of the Decreased Sexual
Desire Screener (DSDS): a brief diagnostic instrument for
generalized acquired female hypoactive sexual desire disorder
(HSDD). J Sex Med. 2009;6(3):730-738.
57. Clayton AH, Goldfischer E, Goldstein I, et al. Validity of the
Decreased Sexual Desire Screener for diagnosing hypoac-
tive sexual desire disorder. J Sex Marital Ther. 2013;39(2):
132-143.
58. Meston CM, Buss DM. Why humans have sex. Arch Sex Behav.
2007;36(4):477-507.
59. Brotto L, Atallah S, Johnson-Agbakwu C, et al. Psychological
and interpersonal dimensions of sexual function and dysfunc-
tion. J Sex Med. 2016;13(4):538-571.
60. Annon JS. The PLISSIT model: a proposed conceptual scheme
for the behavioral treatment of sexual problems. J Sex Educ
Ther. 1976;2(1):1-15.
MAYO CLINIC PROCEEDINGS
14
Mayo Clin Proc. n XXX 2016;nn(n):1-15
n http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.mayocp.2016.09.018
www.mayoclinicproceedings.org
 61. Masters Q, Johnson VE. Human Sexual Inadequacy. Boston, MA:
Little Brown and Co; 1970.
62. Meston CM, Bradford A. Sexual dysfunctions in women. Annu
Rev Clin Psychol. 2007;3:233-256.
63. McCabe MP. Evaluation of cognitive behavior therapy program
for people with sexual dysfunction. J Sex Marital Ther. 2001;
27(3):259-271.
64. Trudel G, Marchand A, Ravart M, Aubin S, Turgeon L, Fortier P.
The effect of a cognitive-behavioral group treatment program
on hypoactive sexual desire in women. Sex Relation Ther.
2001;16(2):145-164.
65. Pyke RE, Clayton AH. Psychological treatment trials for hypoac-
tive sexual desire disorder: a sexual medicine critique and
perspective. J Sex Med. 2015;12(12):2451-2458.
66. Brotto LA, Basson R. Group mindfulness-based therapy signifi-
cantly improves sexual desire in women. Behav Res Ther. 2014;
57:43-54.
67. Stahl SM, Sommer B, Allers KA. Multifunctional pharma-
cology of flibanserin: possible mechanism of therapeutic ac-
tion in hypoactive sexual desire disorder. J Sex Med. 2011;
8(1):15-27.
68. Flibanserin [prescribing information]. Bridgewater, NJ: Valeant
Pharmaceuticals.
http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_
docs/label/2015/022526lbl.pdf. Accessed April 20, 2016.
69. Katz M, Derogatis LR, Ackerman R, et al. Efficacy of flibanserin
in women with hypoactive sexual desire disorder: results from
the BEGONIA trial. J Sex Med. 2013;10(7):1807-1815.
70. Simon JA, Kingsberg SA, Shumel B, Hanes V, Garcia M Jr,
Sand M. Efficacy and safety of flibanserin in postmenopausal
women with hypoactive sexual desire disorder: results of the
SNOWDROP trial. Menopause. 2014;21(6):633-640.
71. Flibanserin for the treatment of hypoactive sexual desire disor-
der in premenopausal women: Flibanserin Advisory Committee
briefing
document.
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/advisory
committees/committeesmeetingmaterials/drugs/drugsafetyand
riskmanagementadvisorycommittee/ucm449090.pdf. Published
June 4, 2015. Accessed April 20, 2016.
72. Kenny RA, Bhangu J, King-Kallimanis BL. Epidemiology of
syncope/collapse in younger and older Western patient popu-
lations. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2013;55(4):357-363.
73. Somboonporn W, Davis S, Seif MW, Bell R. Testosterone for
peri- and postmenopausal women. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. 2005;19(4):CD004509.
74. Abdallah RT, Simon JA. Testosterone therapy in women: its
role in the management of hypoactive sexual desire disorder.
Int J Impot Res. 2007;19(5):458-463.
75. Hubayter Z, Simon JA. Testosterone therapy for sexual
dysfunction in postmenopausal women. Climacteric. 2008;
11(3):181-191.
76. Krapf JM, Simon JA. The role of testosterone in the manage-
ment of hypoactive sexual desire disorder in postmenopausal
women. Maturitas. 2009;63(3):213-219.
77. Davis SR, Wahlin-Jacobsen S. Testosterone in women: the
clinical significance. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2015;3(12):
980-992.
78. Davis SR, Braunstein GD. Efficacy and safety of testosterone in
the management of hypoactive sexual desire disorder in post-
menopausal women. J Sex Med. 2012;9(4):1134-1148.
79. Simon J, Braunstein G, Nachtigall L, et al. Testosterone patch
increases sexual activity and desire in surgically menopausal
women with hypoactive sexual desire disorder. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab. 2005;90(9):5226-5233.
80. Dimitrakakis C, Jones R, Liu A, Bondy CA. Breast cancer inci-
dence in postmenopausal women using testosterone in addition
to usual hormone therapy. Menopause. 2004;11(5):531-535.
81. Davis SR, Wolfe R, Farrugia H, Ferdinand A, Bell RJ. The inci-
dence of invasive breast cancer among women prescribed
testosterone for low libido. J Sex Med. 2009;6(7):1850-1856.
82. Glaser RL, Dimitrakakis C. Reduced breast cancer incidence in
women treated with subcutaneous testosterone, or testos-
terone with anastrozole: a prospective, observational study.
Maturitas. 2013;76(4):342-349.
83. Davis SR, Worsley R, Miller KK, Parish SJ, Santoro N. Andro-
gens and female sexual function and dysfunction: findings
from the Fourth International Consultation of Sexual Medicine.
J Sex Med. 2016;13(2):168-178.
84. Stahl SM, Pradko JF, Haight BR, Modell JG, Rockett CB, Learned-
Coughlin S. A review of the neuropharmacology of bupropion, a
dual norepinephrine and dopamine reuptake inhibitor. Prim Care
Companion J Clin Psychiatry. 2004;6(4):159-166.
85. Segraves RT, Croft H, Kavoussi R, et al. Bupropion sustained
release (SR) for the treatment of hypoactive sexual desire
disorder (HSDD) in non-depressed women. J Sex Marital
Ther. 2001;27(3):303-316.
86. Segraves RT, Clayton A, Croft H, Wolf A, Warnock J. Bupro-
pion sustained release for the treatment of hypoactive sexual
desire disorder in premenopausal women. J Clin Psychopharma-
col. 2004;24(3):339-342.
87. Bupropion [prescribing information]. Research Triangle Park,
NC:
GlaxoSmithKline.
https://www.gsksource.com/pharma/
content/dam/GlaxoSmithKline/US/en/Prescribing_Information/
Wellbutrin_Tablets/pdf/WELLBUTRIN-TABLETS-PI-MG.PDF.
Revised April 2016. Accessed October 25, 2016.
88. Loane C, Politis M. Buspirone: what is it all about? Brain Res.
2012;1461:111-118.
89. Landén M, Eriksson E, Agren H, Fahlén T. Effect of buspirone
on sexual dysfunction in depressed patients treated with selec-
tive serotonin reuptake inhibitors. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 1999;
19(3):268-271.
90. Kingsberg SA, Clayton AH, Pfaus JG. The female sexual
response: current models, neurobiological underpinnings and
agents currently approved or under investigation for the treat-
ment of hypoactive sexual desire disorder. CNS Drugs. 2015;
29(11):915-933.
HYPOACTIVE SEXUAL DESIRE DISORDER: ISSWSH REVIEW
Mayo Clin Proc. n XXX 2016;nn(n):1-15
n http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.mayocp.2016.09.018
www.mayoclinicproceedings.org
15
