 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 5 0 0
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 6   June 2018
Introduction
Oncogene addiction has been described primarily in cancers that 
express oncogenes rendered constitutively active by mutation (1, 
2). Constitutive activation results in a continuous and unattenuat-
ed signaling, resulting in a widespread activation of intracellular 
pathways and a reliance of the cell on such pathways for survival 
(3). A subset of non–small cell lung cancers (NSCLCs) harbor epi-
dermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) activating mutations that 
render the receptor constitutively active and oncogene addicted 
(4–6). Lung cancers with activating EGFR mutations exhibit a 
dramatic initial clinical response to treatment with EGFR tyrosine 
kinase inhibitors (TKIs) (7), but this is followed by the inevitable 
development of secondary resistance (8). Major TKI resistance 
mechanisms include other EGFR mutations such as the T790M 
mutation that prevent TKI enzyme interaction (9) and activation 
of other receptor tyrosine kinases such as MET or Axl, providing a 
signaling bypass to EGFR TKI–mediated inhibition (10–12). Rap-
id feedback loops with activation of STAT3 may also contribute 
to EGFR TKI resistance in lung cancer cells with EGFR activating 
mutations (13, 14). Multiple additional mechanisms and distinct 
evolutionary pathways may lead to secondary resistance to EGFR 
inhibition in lung cancer (8, 15–17).
The most common type of EGFR expressed in lung cancer is 
EGFR wild type (EGFRwt). EGFRwt-expressing tumor cells are 
not oncogene addicted and are usually resistant to EGFR inhibi-
tion. EGFR activating mutations result in constitutive signaling 
and have been shown to be transforming (18). Compared with 
EGFRwt, EGFR activating mutations lead to activation of exten-
sive signaling networks that, in turn, lead to dependence of tumor 
cells on continuous EGFR signaling for survival (3). This is like-
ly the reason that EGFR inhibition is effective in EGFR-mutant 
NSCLC patients with EGFR activating mutations despite the 
well-documented generation of early adaptive survival responses 
such as STAT3 or NF-κB in EGFR-mutant cells (14, 19). Increased 
affinity of mutant EGFR for TKIs has also been reported (20, 21).
MicroRNAs are small noncoding RNAs that target coding 
RNAs, regulate the translation and degradation of mRNAs, and 
may play an important role in cancer (22, 23). Expression levels of 
microRNAs are altered in various types of cancer, including lung 
cancer (24). EGFR activity can regulate microRNA levels in lung 
cancer. The expression of 5 microRNAs (hsa-miR-155, hsa-miR-17-
3p, hsa-let-7a-2, hsa-miR-145, and hsa-miR-21) was altered in lung 
cancer from smokers compared with uninvolved lung tissue (25), 
and there is evidence that EGFR activity upregulates the expres-
Although aberrant EGFR signaling is widespread in cancer, EGFR inhibition is effective only in a subset of non–small cell lung 
cancer (NSCLC) with EGFR activating mutations. A majority of NSCLCs express EGFR wild type (EGFRwt) and do not respond 
to EGFR inhibition. TNF is a major mediator of inflammation-induced cancer. We find that a rapid increase in TNF level is 
a universal adaptive response to EGFR inhibition in NSCLC, regardless of EGFR status. EGFR signaling actively suppresses 
TNF mRNA levels by inducing expression of miR-21, resulting in decreased TNF mRNA stability. Conversely, EGFR inhibition 
results in loss of miR-21 and increased TNF mRNA stability. In addition, TNF-induced NF-κB activation leads to increased 
TNF transcription in a feed-forward loop. Inhibition of TNF signaling renders EGFRwt-expressing NSCLC cell lines and an 
EGFRwt patient-derived xenograft (PDX) model highly sensitive to EGFR inhibition. In EGFR-mutant oncogene-addicted cells, 
blocking TNF enhances the effectiveness of EGFR inhibition. EGFR plus TNF inhibition is also effective in NSCLC with acquired 
resistance to EGFR inhibition. We suggest concomitant EGFR and TNF inhibition as a potentially new treatment approach that 
could be beneficial for a majority of lung cancer patients.
TNF-driven adaptive response mediates resistance to 
EGFR inhibition in lung cancer
Ke Gong,1 Gao Guo,1 David E. Gerber,2,3 Boning Gao,4,5 Michael Peyton,4,5 Chun Huang,4,5 John D. Minna,2,4,5 Kimmo J. Hatanpaa,6 
Kemp Kernstine,7 Ling Cai,8 Yang Xie,8 Hong Zhu,3,9 Farjana J. Fattah,3 Shanrong Zhang,10 Masaya Takahashi,10  
Bipasha Mukherjee,11 Sandeep Burma,11 Jonathan Dowell,2,12 Kathryn Dao,13 Vassiliki A. Papadimitrakopoulou,14  
Victor Olivas,15 Trever G. Bivona,15 Dawen Zhao,16 and Amyn A. Habib1,3,12
1Department of Neurology and Neurotherapeutics, 2Internal Medicine, Division of Hematology-Oncology, 3Harold C. Simmons Comprehensive Cancer Center, 4Department of Pharmacology,  
5Hamon Center for Therapeutic Oncology Research, 6Department of Pathology, 7Department of Cardiovascular and Thoracic Surgery, 8Quantitative Biomedical Research Center, 9Department of Clinical 
Sciences, 10Department of Radiology, and 11Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA. 12VA North Texas Health Care System, Dallas, Texas, USA.  
13Baylor Research Institute, Dallas, Texas, USA. 14Department of Thoracic Head and Neck Medical Oncology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA. 15Department of Medicine, UCSF,  
San Francisco, California, USA. 16Departments of Biomedical Engineering and Cancer Biology, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA.
Authorship note: KG and GG contributed equally to this work.
Conflict of interest: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.
Submitted: July 7, 2017; Accepted: March 16, 2018.
Reference information: J Clin Invest. 2018;128(6):2500–2518. 
https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI96148.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 5 0 1
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 6   June 2018
This resulted in a rapid decrease in TNF mRNA and protein levels 
in both EGFR-mutant and EGFRwt cell lines (Figure 2, A–D, and 
Supplemental Figure 4, A–E). The rapid decrease in TNF mRNA 
suggests an effect on TNF mRNA stability rather than transcrip-
tion. Also, this experiment suggests that EGFR signaling normal-
ly keeps TNF levels low and a loss of EGFR signaling results in 
increased TNF levels. Next, we examined whether EGFR activity 
influences TNF mRNA stability using actinomycin D as an inhib-
itor of transcription. As can be seen in Figure 2, E and F, and Sup-
plemental Figure 4, F and G, inhibition of the EGFR with erlotinib 
led to an increase in TNF mRNA stability.
EGFR regulates TNF mRNA via expression of miR-21. miR-21, an 
EGFR-regulated microRNA, is known to negatively regulate TNF 
mRNA (26, 29–31). Thus, microRNA-mediated regulation of TNF 
mRNA seemed like a plausible mechanism of rapid regulation of 
TNF mRNA stability by EGFR signaling. We first confirmed the 
upregulation of miR-21 by EGFR activity and its downregulation 
by EGFR inhibition in multiple lung cancer cell lines as shown in 
Figure 2, G–J, and Supplemental Figure 4, H–K. The kinetics of 
miR-21 regulation by EGFR inhibition is shown in Figure 2, I and J, 
and Supplemental Figure 4, J and K, and generally correlates with 
the temporal profile of TNF upregulation following EGFR inhi-
bition. Additionally, RNA stability studies using actinomycin D 
demonstrated that the effect of erlotinib in enhancing TNF mRNA 
stability was blocked by a miR-21 mimic (Supplemental Figure 
4, L and M). Next, we found that inhibition of miR-21 resulted 
in a rescue of EGF-induced downregulation of TNF in multiple 
EGFR-mutant and EGFRwt cell lines (Figure 2, K and L, and Sup-
plemental Figure 5, A–D). We confirmed miR-21 inhibition by real-
time qPCR (Figure 2, M and N, and Supplemental Figure 5, E–H).
A canonical mechanism of action of microRNAs is to regu-
late gene expression through sequence-specific binding to the 
3′-UTR of a target mRNA (32). We used a TNF 3′-UTR reporter 
(33, 34) and found that the activity of this reporter was increased 
by EGFR inhibition (Supplemental Figure 6, A–H). Furthermore, 
a miR-21 mimic compensated for the loss of miR-21 induced by 
erlotinib and consequently mitigated the elevated activity of the 
TNF 3′-UTR reporter (Supplemental Figure 6, A, C, E, G, and I) 
with a corresponding increase in TNF mRNA levels (Supplemen-
tal Figure 6, J–M). Importantly, an antisense miR-21 neutralized 
EGF-generated miR-21 to restore activity of the TNF 3′-UTR 
reporter (Supplemental Figure 6, B, D, F, and H) and TNF mRNA 
levels (Figure 2, K–N, and Supplemental Figure 5, A–H). These 
experiments suggest that miR-21 binds to the TNF 3′-UTR and 
impairs posttranscriptional regulation of TNF mRNA.
Erlotinib-induced NF-κB activation is mediated by TNF. A previ-
ous study reported that NF-κB is rapidly activated in lung cancer 
cells expressing EGFR activating mutations (19). Since TNF is a 
major activator of NF-κB, we considered the possibility that erlo-
tinib activated NF-κB via an increase in TNF level. We confirmed 
that NF-κB was activated by erlotinib in EGFR-mutant cell lines 
and found that NF-κB was also activated in EGFRwt cell lines by 
using a reporter assay and detecting degradation of IκBα (Figure 
3, A and B). TNF receptor 1 (TNFR1) is expressed widely, while 
TNFR2 expression is limited to immune cells and endothelial cells 
(35, 36). We examined the effect of siRNA knockdown of TNFR1 in 
lung cancer cell lines. siRNA knockdown of TNFR1 led to inhibition 
sion of miR-21 while inhibition of EGFR activity downregulates 
miR-21. Both EGFRwt and mutant activity may regulate miR-21 
in lung cancer, although EGFR activating mutants appear to have 
a stronger effect (25, 26).
In this study, we demonstrate that a rapid increase in TNF lev-
els is a universal response to inhibition of EGFR signaling in lung 
cancer cells, regardless of whether EGFR is mutant or wild type. 
EGFR regulates TNF mRNA stability via miR-21 and by activa-
tion of NF-κB that leads to a further increase in TNF transcription, 
generating a feed-forward loop. The biological effect of this TNF- 
driven adaptive response is tumor cell survival despite cessation of 
EGFR signaling. Of great clinical translational importance, inhibi-
tion of the TNF adaptive response renders previously EGFR TKI– 
resistant EGFRwt tumor cells sensitive to EGFR inhibition, suggest-
ing that such resistant cells are still potentially oncogene addicted 
but are protected from EGFR TKI–induced cell death by this adap-
tive response. Additionally, TNF inhibition enhances the effective-
ness of EGFR inhibition in EGFR-mutant NSCLC. Finally, TNF 
inhibition renders NSCLCs with secondary EGFR TKI resistance 
sensitive to EGFR inhibition. Our data suggest a key role for TNF 
signaling in inducing resistance to EGFR inhibition in lung cancer.
Results
EGFR inhibition leads to upregulation of TNF expression in lung can-
cer cell lines and xenograft tumors. Previous studies have shown 
that exposure of lung cancer cells to EGFR TKIs results in a rapid 
and biologically significant activation of NF-κB in EGFR-mutant 
NSCLC cells (19, 27). TNF is a key activator of NF-κB (28), and 
we considered the possibility that TNF may mediate the NF-κB 
activation triggered by EGFR inhibition. Indeed, we find that 
exposure of lung cancer cell lines to erlotinib resulted in increased 
TNF mRNA levels in all 18 NSCLC cell lines examined (Supple-
mental Table 1; supplemental material available online with this 
article; https:/
/doi.org/10.1172/JCI96148DS1) as determined 
by real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR) (Figure 1, A–F, and Sup-
plemental Figure 1). Remarkably, while the temporal profiles 
vary, the increase in TNF is detected in both EGFRwt and EGFR- 
mutant cell lines. The increase in TNF levels upon EGFR inhibi-
tion was confirmed at a protein level by ELISA (Figure 1, G and 
H, and Supplemental Figure 2). Similar results were seen with 
afatinib, an irreversible EGFR inhibitor, in various cell lines (Sup-
plemental Figure 3), including H1975 and HCC820, which harbor 
the EGFR T790M mutation, rendering them resistant to first- 
generation TKIs like erlotinib (Supplemental Figure 2, G and H, 
and Supplemental Figure 3, E and F).
Erlotinib also induced upregulation of TNF in NSCLC tumors 
growing in mice. Athymic mice were inoculated with EGFR- 
mutant HCC827 and EGFRwt NSCLC A549 cells and in an EGFR-
wt patient-derived xenograft (PDX) model (HCC4087). Following 
formation of subcutaneous tumors, mice were treated with erlo-
tinib at various time points. As is shown in Figure 1, I–N, TNF was 
increased in tumors upon treatment of mice with erlotinib.
EGFR activation leads to a decrease in TNF mRNA levels. The 
increase in TNF mRNA following EGFR inhibition suggests that 
either the EGFR is actively suppressing TNF levels, or the rise in 
TNF could be secondary to a feedback mechanism. To examine 
direct effects of EGFR activation, cells were treated with EGF. 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 5 0 2
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 6   June 2018
Figure 1. Upregulation of TNF signaling by EGFR inhibition. (A–F) NSCLC cell lines were cultured in RPMI-1640 in 5% FBS and were treated with erlotinib 
for the times indicated followed by RNA extraction and quantitative PCR (qPCR) for TNF. (G and H) Cells were treated with erlotinib, and the TNF level 
was measured in the supernatant by ELISA. (I and J) Athymic mice were injected s.c. with HCC827 cells. After formation of tumors, erlotinib at the dose 
of 50 mg/kg body weight was administered for the times indicated followed by removal of tumor and quantitation of TNF mRNA by qPCR or protein by 
ELISA. (K and L) Athymic mice were injected s.c. with A549 cells. After formation of tumors, erlotinib at 100 mg/kg body weight was administered for the 
times indicated followed by removal of tumor and quantitation of TNF mRNA by qPCR or protein by ELISA. Since the TNF level remained high at 7 days in 
these cells, we added an additional time point at 14 days (n = 3 mice per group). (M and N) NOD/SCID mice were implanted s.c. with HCC4087 PDX tumor 
tissues. After formation of tumors, erlotinib at 100 mg/kg body weight was given to the mice for 0, 1, 2, 4, 7, and 14 days; then mice were sacrificed and 
tumors were removed for quantitation of TNF mRNA by qPCR or protein by ELISA (n = 3 mice per group). Data represent the mean ± SEM. n = 3 biologically 
independent experimental replicates (A–H) or 3 mice per group (I–N). *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, by Student’s t test.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 5 0 3
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 6   June 2018
Figure 2. EGFR activity regulates TNF mRNA stability mediated by upregulation of miR-21. (A–D) NSCLC cell lines were exposed to EGF (50 ng/ml) at the 
indicated time points followed by qPCR for TNF mRNA. (E) HCC827 cells were treated with actinomycin D (5 μg/ml) and erlotinib (100 nM) for the indicated 
time points followed by RNA extraction and qPCR for TNF mRNA. (F) A similar experiment was done in A549 cells using an erlotinib concentration of 1 
μM. (G and H) MiR-21 expression was examined in HCC827 and A549 cells following exposure to EGF for the indicated time points followed by qPCR using 
a TaqMan Human MicroRNA Assay kit. (I and J) HCC827 or A549 cells were exposed to erlotinib (100 nM or 1 μM) for the indicated time points followed by 
qPCR for miR-21 using a TaqMan Human MicroRNA Assay kit. (K and L) HCC827 or A549 cells were transfected with a control antisense oligonucleotide 
(C-AS) or a miR-21 antisense oligonucleotide (miR-21 AS) for 48 hours followed by exposure of cells to EGF for 1 hour and qPCR for TNF. (M and N) We 
confirmed the downregulation of miR-21 by the miR-21 antisense oligonucleotide. In all experiments involving the use of EGF, cells were serum-starved 
overnight. Data represent the mean ± SEM. n = 3 biologically independent experimental replicates. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, by Student’s t test.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 5 0 4
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 6   June 2018
Finally, we found that NF-κB could bind to 2 putative sites on the 
TNF promoter (Supplemental Figure 10) by chromatin immunopre-
cipitation coupled with qPCR (ChIP-qPCR) assay. While the binding 
of NF-κB p65 subunit to the TNF promoter was quite low under basal 
conditions, when EGFR was inhibited there was increased presence 
of NF-κB on the TNF promoter in both EGFRwt and EGFR-mutant 
cells (Figure 4K and Supplemental Figure 12, A–C).
TNF inhibition sensitizes lung cancer cells to EGFR inhibition. 
TNF is a key mediator of the inflammatory response and inflam-
mation-induced cancer (28, 44, 45). Depending on the cellular con-
text, it may play a role in cell death or in cell survival. We hypoth-
esized that increased TNF secretion protects EGFR-expressing 
lung cancer cells from cell death following the loss of EGFR sig-
naling. We started with EGFRwt-expressing A549 and H441 cells, 
which are known to be resistant to EGFR TKIs. First, we did siRNA 
knockdown of TNFR1 and found that this conferred sensitivity to 
erlotinib in cell survival assays. Erlotinib alone or TNFR1 silencing 
alone had no effect (Figure 5, A–C). Next, we examined the effect 
of thalidomide, an inhibitor of TNF and of NF-κB activation. Tha-
lidomide alone had no effect, but it rendered A549 and H441 cells 
sensitive to the effects of erlotinib (Figure 5, D and E). Thus EGFR 
inhibition combined with either biological or chemical inhibition 
of TNF signaling renders EGFRwt-expressing resistant cells sensi-
tive to EGFR inhibition. Etanercept also rendered both A549 and 
H441 cells sensitive to the effect of erlotinib (Figure 5, F and G), 
whereas etanercept alone had no effect. We also found that com-
bining etanercept or thalidomide with afatinib (1 μM) impacted 
cell viability (Figure 5, H–K). A colony formation assay confirmed 
that TNF inhibition rendered EGFRwt-expressing resistant lines 
sensitive to erlotinib (Figure 5, L and M, and Supplemental Figure 
13A). TNF inhibition also rendered EGFRwt-expressing cell lines 
sensitive to afatinib (Supplemental Figure 13, B–E).
Next we examined the effect of combining TNF and EGFR 
inhibition in sensitive lung cancer cells with EGFR activating 
mutations (HCC827, EGFR exon 19 deletion; or H3255, EGFR 
L858R mutation). Experiments with low concentrations of erlo-
tinib revealed a sensitizing effect of TNF inhibition obtained 
with TNFR1 gene silencing (Figure 6, A–C) or with etanercept or 
thalidomide (Figure 6, D–G), while TNF inhibition alone had no 
effect. We also tested a combination of afatinib and thalidomide 
or etanercept and found a greater sensitivity to EGFR inhibition 
(Figure 6, H–K). A colony formation assay confirmed that TNF 
inhibition enhanced sensitivity of EGFR-mutant lines to erlotinib 
(Figure 6, L and M, and Supplemental Figure 13A). Additional 
NSCLC lines with EGFRwt (Calu-3 and H1373) exhibited similar 
results (Supplemental Figure 14, A and B).
Since we hypothesize that erlotinib-induced TNF expression 
mediates resistance to EGFR inhibition, we examined whether 
exogenous TNF would protect cells from erlotinib-induced cell 
death observed in EGFR oncogene-addicted lines. Indeed, we 
find that exogenous TNF protected HCC827 and H3255 cells from 
erlotinib-induced cell death, as shown in Figure 6, N and O.
Inhibition of NF-κB enhances sensitivity to EGFR inhibition. 
Previous studies have shown that NF-κB plays a role in resistance 
to EGFR inhibition in EGFR-mutant cells (19, 27). We found that 
chemical inhibition of NF-κB rendered EGFRwt-expressing cell 
lines sensitive to EGFR inhibition (Figure 7, A–D, and Supplemen-
of erlotinib-induced NF-κB activation in both EGFR-mutant and 
EGFRwt cells (Figure 3, C and D, and Supplemental Figure 7, A and 
B). Etanercept is a fusion protein of TNFR and IgG1 and is in clinical 
use as a stable and effective TNF-blocking agent for rheumatolog-
ic diseases (37). Etanercept also blocked erlotinib-induced NF-κB 
activation in multiple cell lines (Figure 3, E and F, and Supplemen-
tal Figure 7, C and D). Thalidomide, a drug known to reduce TNF 
levels (37, 38), also inhibited erlotinib-induced NF-κB activation in 
both EGFRwt and EGFR-mutant cell lines (Figure 3, G and H, and 
Supplemental Figure 7, E and F). We confirmed that thalidomide 
inhibits erlotinib-induced TNF increase in lung cancer cells (Sup-
plemental Figure 8). Thalidomide also inhibits NF-κB activation 
independent of its effect on TNF (39), and we confirmed that tha-
lidomide can block NF-κB activation induced by exogenous TNF 
(Figure 3, I and J). Thus, our studies indicate that erlotinib induces 
activation of NF-κB via increased TNF signaling.
We recently found that EGFR inhibition results in activation 
of other signals such as JNK, Axl, and ERK in glioblastoma (40). 
However, consistent with previous studies in lung cancer cells 
(19), although these signals are attenuated following EGFR inhi-
bition, neither JNK, Axl, nor ERK reactivation is detected (Supple-
mental Figure 9, A–D). Similarly, activation of Src and activation of 
FAK have been implicated in mediating resistance to EGFR inhi-
bition in EGFR-mutant NSCLC (41). We found that EGFR inhibi-
tion led to a downregulation of both Src and FAK activation but no 
reactivation of these signals in multiple cell lines (Supplemental 
Figure 9, E and F). We did find an increase in FAK activation upon 
EGFR inhibition in PC9 cells (Supplemental Figure 8G) as was 
reported previously (41). Thus, while it is possible that Src activa-
tion and FAK activation contribute to EGFR resistance in subsets 
of EGFR-mutant NSCLC, they are unlikely to represent a broad 
mechanism of resistance to EGFR inhibition in both EGFRwt and 
EGFR-mutant NSCLC. In addition, we also examined the activa-
tion of YAP, since it has been implicated in mediating resistance 
to EGFR inhibition (42, 43). We found that YAP activation was 
increased in response to EGFR inhibition (Supplemental Figure 
9, E and F). However, TNF inhibition using either etanercept or 
thalidomide did not block EGFR inhibition–induced YAP activa-
tion (Supplemental Figure 9, H and I). Thus, while YAP activation 
may be a mechanism of resistance to EGFR inhibition, TNF is not 
required for YAP activation and represents a distinct and unique 
mechanism of resistance to EGFR inhibition.
Erlotinib-induced TNF expression is regulated by NF-κB in a 
feed-forward loop. Next, we considered the possibility that erlotinib- 
induced increase in TNF expression is mediated by NF-κB in a 
feed-forward loop. We examined whether inhibition of NF-κB 
using a chemical inhibitor or a dominant-negative IκBα (super- 
repressor) mutant would block the increase in TNF following expo-
sure of cells to erlotinib. Indeed we find that inhibition of NF-κB 
blocked the erlotinib-induced increase in TNF mRNA as detected 
by qPCR in both EGFRwt and EGFR-mutant cell lines (Figure 4, 
A, B, D, and E, and Supplemental Figure 11, D–G), while inhibition 
of Sp1 had no effect (Figure 4C and Supplemental Figure 11, A–C). 
Furthermore, blocking TNFR1 using siRNA or etanercept resulted 
in inhibition of erlotinib-induced TNF upregulation (Figure 4, F–J). 
These data indicate that TNF is upregulated via a feed-forward 
loop that requires activity of NF-κB and TNF signaling.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 5 0 5
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 6   June 2018
Figure 3. EGFR inhibition induces a TNF-dependent activation of NF-κB. (A) HCC827, H3255, A549, and H441 cells were exposed to erlotinib (100 nM for 
EGFR-mutant and 1 μM for EGFRwt cells) for 24 hours followed by a dual luciferase reporter assay. Renilla luciferase was used as an internal control. (B) 
Cells were treated with erlotinib at various time points followed by preparation of cell lysates and Western blot with an IκBα antibody. Western blots are 
representative of at least 3 independent replicates. The quantified values reflect the ratios of IκBα/actin. (C) siRNA knockdown of TNFR1 was performed 
in HCC827 cells followed by transfection of cells with an NF-κB luciferase reporter and exposure of cells to erlotinib, followed by a reporter assay. Silencing 
of TNFR1 was confirmed with a Western blot. (D) A similar experiment was undertaken in A549 cells, and TNFR1 silencing was confirmed with a Western 
blot. Western blots shown in C and D are representative of at least 3 independent replicates. (E) The TNF-blocking drug etanercept was used at a concen-
tration of 100 μg/ml along with erlotinib for 24 hours followed by a reporter assay in HCC827 cells. (F) A similar experiment was conducted in A549 cells. (G 
and H) Reporter assay for NF-κB in cells treated with erlotinib in the presence or absence of thalidomide (5 μg/ml) for 24 hours. (I and J) HCC827 and A549 
cells were treated with exogenous TNF (10 ng/ml) with or without thalidomide for 24 hours followed by a reporter assay for NF-κB transcriptional activity. 
In luciferase assays, cells were transfected with reporter 24 hours before exposure to erlotinib. Data represent the mean ± SEM. n = 3 biologically indepen-
dent experimental replicates (A and C–J). *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, by Student’s t test. Erl, erlotinib; Thal, thalidomide.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 5 0 6
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 6   June 2018
Figure 4. A TNF/NF-κB feed-forward loop regulates the expression of TNF in response to EGFR inhibition. (A) Inhibition of NF-κB using various chemical 
inhibitors — BMS-345541 (100 nM), 6-amino-4-(4-phenoxyphenylethylamino) quinazoline (QNZ; 1 μM), or sodium salicylate (5 mM) — inhibited erlotinib- 
induced upregulation of TNF in HCC827 cells as determined by qPCR. Cells were treated with NF-κB inhibitors for 1 hour and then 100 nM erlotinib for 
24 hours. (B) Expression of a dominant-negative (DN) IκBα super-repressor mutant blocks erlotinib-induced upregulation of TNF in HCC827 cells. (C) 
Mithramycin A (MMA) (1 μM), an inhibitor of Sp1, failed to inhibit erlotinib-induced TNF upregulation. (D and E) The same experiment as in A and B was 
conducted in A549 cells. Expression of the dominant-negative IκBα super-repressor mutant was detected by Western blot. The mutant protein migrates 
more slowly on electrophoretic gels. (F–H) siRNA knockdown of TNFR1 in NSCLC cells inhibits erlotinib-induced upregulation of TNF mRNA as detect-
ed by qPCR. Silencing of TNFR1 was confirmed by Western blot. (I and J) Inhibition of TNFR signaling using etanercept (100 μg/ml) results in a block of 
erlotinib-induced TNF upregulation in HCC827 and A549 cells. (K) ChIP was carried out to assess the recruitment of the NF-κB p65 subunit onto the TNF 
promoter using primers specific to NF-κB binding region 1 on the TNF promoter. There is a substantially increased p65 antibody enrichment (percentage 
of input, compared with rabbit IgG) on the TNF promoter in both HCC827 and A549 cells in response to erlotinib treatment for 24 hours. Data represent 
the mean ± SEM. n = 3 biologically independent experimental replicates. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, #not statistically significant, by Student’s t 
test for comparing 2 indicated groups, or 1-way ANOVA, Dunnett’s method, for comparing multiple groups with the same control (A and D). Western blot 
results are representative of at least 3 independent replicates.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 5 0 7
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 6   June 2018
Figure 5. Inhibition of TNF induces sensitivity of EGFRwt-expressing NSCLC cells to EGFR inhibition. (A and B) AlamarBlue cell viability assay in H441 
or A549 cells. TNFR1 was silenced by siRNA transfection for 48 hours, and cells were exposed to erlotinib (1 μM) for 72 hours in RPMI-1640 with 5% FBS. 
(C) Silencing of TNFR1 was confirmed by Western blot. Western blot results are representative of at least 3 independent replicates. (D and E) Thalidomide 
sensitizes H441 and A549 cells to EGFR inhibition with erlotinib. Thalidomide (5 μg/ml) and erlotinib were added to H441 and A549 cells concurrently, and 
AlamarBlue assay was done after 72 hours. (F and G) A similar experiment was done using etanercept (100 μg/ml) and erlotinib in H441 and A549 cells. (H) 
H441 cells were treated with afatinib (1 μM) in the presence or absence of etanercept. AlamarBlue assay was conducted after 72 hours. (I) H441 cells were 
treated with afatinib and thalidomide for 72 hours, followed by AlamarBlue assay. (J and K) Similar experiments were done as described in H and I in A549 
cells. (L and M) EGFRwt cells were seeded in 6-well plates at 1,000 cells per well, and incubated with 20 μg/ml thalidomide and/or 1 μM erlotinib. Fourteen 
days later, cell colonies were fixed by 100% methanol and then stained by 0.5% crystal violet in 25% methanol. Images were captured by a scanner, and 
colony counts were processed by ImageJ. Data represent the mean percentage of control ± SEM. n = 3 biologically independent experimental replicates (A, 
B, and D–M). *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, by Student’s t test.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 5 0 8
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 6   June 2018
omide resulted in a highly effective suppression of tumor growth 
(Figure 8A). We also found the combination of erlotinib and thalid-
omide to be highly effective in inhibiting the growth of an EGFRwt 
PDX tumor (Figure 8B). Additionally, we examined the effect of 
a combined TNF and EGFR inhibition in a mouse subcutaneous 
model using EGFR-mutant erlotinib-sensitive HCC827 cells and 
found that the combination of EGFR inhibition plus thalidomide 
resulted in a more effective inhibition of tumor growth than EGFR 
inhibition alone while thalidomide alone had no significant effect 
(Figure 8C). Next, to definitively determine the role of TNF, we 
examined the effect of stably silencing TNF using shRNA lentivi-
rus. Effective silencing of TNF was determined by decreased basal 
levels and a lack of TNF upregulation in response to LPS by qPCR 
and ELISA (Figure 8D and Supplemental Figure 16A). We also 
confirmed that TNF-silenced clones were more sensitive to EGFR 
inhibition in cell viability assays (Supplemental Figure 16, B and 
C). Next, we determined the effect of EGFR inhibition in A549 
cells with stably silenced TNF in a mouse subcutaneous model. 
As can be seen in Figure 8E, stable silencing of TNF resulted in 
enhanced sensitivity of xenografted tumors to afatinib. We also 
found that etanercept rendered A549 cells sensitive to the effect 
of EGFR inhibition (Figure 8F). Also, in addition to the increase 
in TNF levels (Figure 1, I–N), we confirmed activation of NF-κB 
by detecting nuclear localization of the p65 subunit of NF-κB in 
erlotinib-treated tumors (Supplemental Figure 17, A and B), as 
well as degradation of IκBα (Supplemental Figure 17C). We noted 
a downregulation of phosphorylated ERK (p-ERK) with erlotinib, 
while p-Akt was largely unaffected in mouse tumors (Supplemen-
tal Figure 17C). We also detected erlotinib-induced upregulation 
of NF-κB target genes in tumor tissue (Supplemental Figure 17, 
D–I); in addition, we detected the presence of apoptotic cells in 
untreated or treated A549, HCC827, and PDX tumors by TUNEL 
assay, and cell proliferation by Ki67 staining in formalin-fixed, 
paraffin-embedded tissues from these tumors. An increase in 
apoptosis could be detected when a combination of erlotinib plus 
thalidomide was used (Supplemental Figure 18, A and B). A less-
er degree of apoptosis could also be detected in HCC827-derived 
tumors treated with erlotinib alone. Proliferation was suppressed 
when a combination of erlotinib plus thalidomide was used and 
also, to a lesser degree, when erlotinib alone was used in HCC827 
tumors (Supplemental Figure 18, C and D).
To further examine the effect of combined EGFR plus TNF inhi-
bition in an immunocompetent model, we used a well-established 
transgenic mouse model of lung cancer that is driven by doxycy-
cline-mediated induction of the EGFR L858R mutation (49). Once 
tumors were detected by imaging, treatment was started with con-
trol vehicle, erlotinib, thalidomide, or erlotinib plus thalidomide as 
indicated in Figure 9, A and B. As expected, we found robust tumor 
growth in controls. Thalidomide alone did not have a significant 
effect on tumor growth. However, the combination of erlotinib plus 
thalidomide induced a more effective inhibition of tumor growth 
than erlotinib alone, demonstrating that EGFR plus TNF inhibition 
is also effective in an immunocompetent model.
A combination of EGFR plus TNF inhibition confers sensitivity to 
EGFR-mutant lung cancer cells with acquired resistance to erlotinib. 
We examined whether HCC827 lines rendered experimentally 
resistant to EGFR inhibition (11, 50) could be rendered sensitive 
tal Figure 14, E–H). We also confirmed that inhibition of NF-κB 
enhanced sensitivity of oncogene-addicted cells to EGFR inhibition 
(Figure 7, C and D, and Supplemental Figure 14, G and H). Finally, 
we find that overexpressing the p65 subunit of NF-κB resulted in 
a resistance to exposure of lung cancer cells with EGFR activating 
mutations to EGFR inhibition as shown in Figure 7, E–G, suggesting 
that NF-κB activation impairs sensitivity to EGFR inhibition.
Lymphotoxin-β is a key effector of TNF/NF-κB–induced resis-
tance to EGFR inhibition. To elucidate mechanisms that mediate 
the biological effects of TNF
/NF-κB regulation, we undertook an 
analysis of NF-κB target genes induced by EGFR inhibition in lung 
cancer cells, using a human NF-κB signaling pathway RT2 Profiler 
PCR Array (Qiagen) that evaluates the expression of 84 key NF-κB 
target genes. Twenty-nine of the 84 NF-κB target genes in this PCR 
array were increased twofold or greater, including TNF (Figure 7H 
and Supplemental Figure 14I). Next, we investigated whether indi-
vidual components of the NF-κB target signature genes play a key 
role in mediating resistance to EGFR inhibition. Lymphotoxin-β 
(LTB, TNFC), a member of the TNF superfamily, has a known role 
in cancer development, including in solid tumors (46), and may 
play an important role in mediating resistance to cetuximab in 
head and neck cancer (47). Lymphotoxin-β may trigger multiple 
survival mechanisms, including activation of NF-κB (46), acceler-
ation of Akt-induced cancer (48), and enhanced EGFR signaling 
(47). The induction of lymphotoxin-β following EGFR inhibition 
is particularly robust (25.51-fold) (Figure 7H). We confirmed the 
erlotinib-induced increase in lymphotoxin-β using qPCR (Figure 
7, I and J, and Supplemental Figure 15, A and B) and by ELISA 
(Supplemental Figure 15, E–H). An increase in lymphotoxin-β in 
response to EGFR inhibition was also detected in mouse tumors 
(Supplemental Figure 17, D–F). We confirmed that the increase in 
lymphotoxin-β that results from EGFR inhibition can be blocked 
by both TNF and NF-κB inhibition (Figure 7, I–L, and Supple-
mental Figure 15, A–H). Importantly, we find that the biological 
effects of concomitant EGFR inhibition and siRNA knockdown of 
lymphotoxin-β were similar to those of TNF or NF-κB inhibition 
and resulted in enhanced sensitivity of lung cancer cells to EGFR 
inhibition (Figure 7, M–P, and Supplemental Figure 15, I–L). These 
data indicate that lymphotoxin-β induction is mediated by TNF 
and NF-κB signaling in the context of EGFR inhibition and that 
lymphotoxin-β may be a key mediator of resistance to EGFR inhi-
bition in lung cancer cells.
Combined inhibition of TNF and EGFR in an animal model of 
lung cancer. Next, we examined whether a combined inhibition of 
TNF and EGFR would influence sensitivity to erlotinib in mouse 
xenograft models. Since our studies indicated that a TNF
/NF-κB 
loop was a key mediator of resistance to EGFR inhibition, we 
chose thalidomide for our initial studies. A number of studies have 
demonstrated that thalidomide downregulates TNF levels and 
also inhibits NF-κB activation directly. A549 cells (EGFRwt) were 
injected into the flanks of mice to form subcutaneous tumors. Once 
tumors became visible, treatment was started with control vehicle, 
erlotinib, thalidomide, or erlotinib plus thalidomide as indicated 
in Figure 8A. As expected, we found robust tumor growth in con-
trols. The groups treated with erlotinib or with thalidomide alone 
had a minor decrease in tumor growth that was not statistically 
significant. However, combined inhibition of erlotinib and thalid-
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 5 0 9
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 6   June 2018
Figure 6. Inhibition of TNF enhances sensitivity of NSCLC cells with EGFR activating mutations to EGFR inhibition. (A and B) AlamarBlue assay in HCC827 or 
H3255 cells. TNFR1 was silenced using siRNA, and 48 hours later cells were exposed to erlotinib for 72 hours. (C) Silencing of TNFR1 was confirmed by Western 
blot. Results are representative of 3 independent replicates. (D and E) Thalidomide sensitizes HCC827 and H3255 cells to EGFR inhibition. Thalidomide (5 μg/
ml) and erlotinib were added concurrently, and AlamarBlue assay was done after 72 hours. (F and G) Similar experiments were done using etanercept (100 μg/
ml) and erlotinib in HCC827 and H3255 cells. (H and I) HCC827 and H3255 cells were treated with afatinib with or without thalidomide for 72 hours, followed 
by AlamarBlue assay. (J and K) Similar experiments were performed in HCC827 and H3255 cells with afatinib and etanercept. The concentration of erlotinib or 
afatinib was 10 nM in A–K. (L and M) EGFR-mutant NSCLC cells were seeded in 6-well plates at 1,000 cells per well, and incubated with 5 μg/ml thalidomide 
and/or erlotinib 1 nM. Fourteen days later, cell colonies were fixed by 100% methanol and then stained by 0.5% crystal violet in 25% methanol. Images were 
captured by a scanner, and colony counting was processed by ImageJ. Data are presented as the average percentage of untreated colonies ± SEM from 3 exper-
iments. (N and O) Exogenous TNF protects H3255 and HCC827 from all erlotinib-induced cell death. Cells were exposed to erlotinib (100 nM) with or without 
TNF (1 ng/ml). Cell viability was determined 72 hours later using AlamarBlue assay. Data represent the mean percentage of control ± SEM. n = 3 biologically 
independent experimental replicates (A, B, and D–O). *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, by Student’s t test.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 5 1 0
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 6   June 2018
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 5 1 1
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 6   June 2018
increased in erlotinib-treated lung cancer tissue (Figure 10, D 
and E). Next, we examined the potential association of TNF and 
NF-κB activation in mitigating EGFR TKI responses in lung cancer 
patients by analyzing Biomarker-Integrated Approaches of Tar-
geted Therapy for Lung Cancer Elimination (BATTLE) trial data 
(51). Pre–erlotinib-treatment gene expression data were available 
from 28 patients who went on to be treated with erlotinib. Three 
patients within this group had a very short progression-free sur-
vival (<0.5 months) and overall survival (<1 month) after starting 
erlotinib and were excluded from the analysis, since they pre-
sumably relapsed before erlotinib could exert its effect. We first 
looked at whether the presence of TNF or other known NF-κB 
target genes would mitigate TKI response in patients. Indeed, we 
find that high levels of TNF and of multiple NF-κB–induced genes 
(52, 53) resulted in a shorter progression-free survival in patients 
treated with erlotinib in this trial, as determined by the log-rank 
test. Multiple genes correlated with a shorter progression-free sur-
vival, including TNF, IL2RA, LTB, PDGFB, TNFRSF1B (TNFR2), 
IL12B, CCL22, and TRAF2 (Figure 10F). Since our hypothesis is 
that resistance to EGFR inhibition is mediated by activation of 
NF-κB, we also confirmed that all of these genes were induced by 
experimental EGFR inhibition in lung cancer cells (Figure 7H). 
The NF-κB target genes above showed no significant differences 
between low and high subgroups in sorafenib treatment groups, 
suggesting a specific effect of EGFR inhibition (Supplemental Fig-
ures 20). These data support our model that TNF
/NF-κB activa-
tion plays a role in resistance to EGFR inhibition in NSCLC.
Discussion
The major finding of this study is the identification of an early 
and widespread mechanism that mediates primary resistance to 
EGFR inhibition in lung cancer cells, regardless of whether EGFR 
is wild type or mutant. NSCLC cells respond to EGFR inhibition 
with a rapid increase in TNF levels, and the TNF upregulation 
was detected in all NSCLC cell lines examined, in animal tumors 
derived from NSCLC cell lines, in a direct xenograft model, 
and in archival tissue from patients. In the case of EGFRwt- 
expressing NSCLCs, the increase in TNF appears sufficient to 
protect cells from loss of EGFR signaling. The TNF-driven adap-
tive response is also detected in NSCLCs with EGFR activating 
mutations but is only partially protective and is observed at low 
concentrations of EGFR inhibitors. STAT3 is also rapidly acti-
vated upon EGFR inhibition in NSCLCs with EGFR activating 
mutations (14) and does not seem to inhibit the clinical response 
in patients. Thus EGFR inhibition in oncogene-addicted cells in 
the clinical setting may trigger adaptive responses that are inef-
fective or partially effective. Interestingly, a biologically signifi-
cant TNF upregulation can also be detected in cells harboring the 
T790M mutation, suggesting a role in secondary resistance also. 
Importantly, exogenous TNF protects EGFR-mutant cells from 
cell death resulting from EGFR inhibition.
EGFR expression is common in NSCLC, and intermediate or 
high levels of EGFR have been detected in 57%–62% of NSCLCs 
by immunohistochemistry (54, 55). EGFR mutations are detected 
in 10%–15% of patients of European descent. In general, patients 
with EGFRwt do not respond to treatment with EGFR TKIs. 
Although most patients with EGFR activating mutations initial-
by TNF inhibition. First, we found that TNF was upregulated in all 
resistant clones compared with the parental cell line (Figure 9C). 
Next, we found that inhibition of TNF using thalidomide rendered 
these cells sensitive to EGFR inhibition (Figure 9, D and E, and 
Supplemental Figure 19, A and B). In addition, we tested H1975 
cells (with EGFR L858R/T790M) using afatinib and found that 
these cells also could be rendered sensitive to EGFR inhibition 
when TNF was inhibited using thalidomide, etanercept, or siRNA 
knockdown of TNFR1 (Figure 9F and Supplemental Figure 14, C 
and D). We examined whether a combined inhibition of EGFR and 
TNF would be effective in treating H1975 tumors in vivo. H1975 
cells were injected into the flanks of mice to form subcutaneous 
tumors. Once tumors formed, treatment was started. We found 
that a combined inhibition of afatinib and thalidomide resulted in 
a highly effective suppression of tumor growth (Figure 9G).
Next, we examined whether a combination of EGFR plus TNF 
inhibition would prevent the development of secondary resistance 
in a cell culture model. HCC827 cells were cultured in the contin-
uous presence of erlotinib as described previously (19) in the pres-
ence or absence of thalidomide. While prolonged culture in erlo-
tinib alone resulted in the emergence of resistant cells, a combined 
exposure to erlotinib and thalidomide inhibited the emergence of 
secondary resistance (Figure 9H). A similar effect was found in 
vivo, where a combination of EGFR plus TNF inhibition prevented 
the development of acquired EGFR resistance (Figure 9I). Thus, 
TNF appears to play a role in both intrinsic and acquired resistance 
to EGFR inhibition, and the effect of TNF can be demonstrated in 
multiple experimental models.
The TNF adaptive response to EGFR inhibition in NSCLC. Next, 
we investigated whether activation of TNF
/NF-κB signaling can 
also be detected in tumor tissue derived from patients. We exam-
ined 13 TKI-naive and 9 TKI-treated NSCLC patients and found 
that erlotinib-treated patients had higher TNF levels compared 
with TKI-naive patients (Figure 10A). We also found increased 
activation of NF-κB in erlotinib-treated patients (Figure 10, B and 
C). Additionally, expression of known NF-κB target genes was 
Figure 7. Inhibition of NF-κB sensitizes EGFRwt and EGFR-mutant NSCLC 
to EGFR inhibition. (A–D) NSCLC cells were exposed to erlotinib with or 
without NF-κB inhibitor BMS-345541 (100 nM) for 72 hours followed by 
an AlamarBlue assay. (E and F) HCC827 and H3255 cells were transiently 
transfected with NF-κB p65 plasmid; 48 hours later, cells were treated 
with erlotinib for 72 hours, followed by AlamarBlue assay. (G) Overex-
pression of p65 was confirmed by Western blot. Western blot results are 
representative of at least 3 independent replicates. (H) EGFR inhibition 
promotes expression of NF-κB target genes. A549 cells were treated with 
1 μM erlotinib or DMSO for 24 hours. The extracted RNA was subjected 
to Human NF-κB Signaling Targets PCR Array (Qiagen). The fold change 
in levels of NF-κB target genes is displayed. (I–L) A549 and HCC827 were 
treated with erlotinib in the presence or absence of NF-κB inhibitor BMS-
345541 (100 nM) or thalidomide (5 μg/ml) for 24 hours. LTB mRNA levels 
were determined by qPCR. (M and N) A549 and HCC827 cells were trans-
fected with LTB siRNA for 48 hours, and then treated with erlotinib for 72 
hours. Cell viability was measured by AlamarBlue assay. (O and P) Silencing 
of LTB was confirmed by qPCR. The erlotinib concentration used was 10 nM 
for EGFR-mutant cell lines and 1 μM for EGFRwt cell lines in A–D and G–P. 
The erlotinib concentration used was 100 nM in E and F. For A–F and I–P, 
data represent the mean ± SEM. n = 3 biologically independent experimen-
tal replicates. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, by Student’s t test.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 5 1 2
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 6   June 2018
Figure 8. Combined inhibition of EGFR and 
TNF in mouse models. (A) Athymic mice were 
injected s.c. with 1 × 106 A549 cells. When tumors 
formed, mice were randomly divided into 4 groups 
(control, erlotinib, thalidomide, and erlotinib plus 
thalidomide, n = 8). The mice were treated with 
100 mg/kg erlotinib by oral gavage and/or i.p. 
injection of 150 mg/kg thalidomide for 10 consecu-
tive days. (B) HCC4087 EGFRwt NSCLC PDX was 
implanted s.c. into NOD/SCID mice. When tumors 
formed, mice were divided into 4 groups (n = 12) 
and treated with 100 mg/kg erlotinib or 150 mg/
kg thalidomide for 28 days. (C) This experiment 
was conducted with HCC827 cells (n = 8), and mice 
were treated with erlotinib (10 mg/kg/day) and/
or thalidomide (150 mg/kg/day). (D) Two A549 
clones with stable TNF silencing were identified 
and have low basal and LPS-induced TNF (#16 and 
#23). n = 3 biologically independent experimental 
replicates. ***P < 0.001, 2-sample t test. (E) A549 
cells with stably silenced TNF (clone 16) or control 
shRNA were implanted in flanks of athymic mice. 
When tumors formed, mice were grouped into 
control shRNA, TNF shRNA, control shRNA + 
afatinib, and TNF shRNA + afatinib (n = 6). Afa-
tinib (25 mg/kg) was provided by oral gavage. (F) 
Athymic mice were injected s.c. with A549 cells. 
When tumors formed, mice were divided into 4 
groups (control, afatinib, thalidomide, afatinib 
plus etanercept, n = 6). The mice were treated by 
oral gavage of 25 mg/kg afatinib and/or 3 mg/
kg etanercept i.p. Each data point represents the 
mean tumor volume ± SEM. Statistical signifi-
cance was defined as P < 0.05 (repeated- 
measures 2-way ANOVA, Bonferroni correction for 
adjusting multiple comparisons, between EGFR 
inhibition group and combination of EGFR and 
TNF inhibition group, by GraphPad Prism 7.0).  
**P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 5 1 3
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 6   June 2018
Figure 9. EGFR and TNF inhibition prevents the acquired resistance. (A) TetO-EGFR-L858R and CCSP-rtTA mice were exposed to doxycycline diets to 
induce tumors. Lung tumor formation was confirmed by MRI between weeks 4 and 5. Starting from week 5, mice were randomly divided into 4 groups and 
treated by 6.25 mg/kg erlotinib and/or 150 mg/kg thalidomide for 2 weeks. Tumor sizes were measured by 2 blinded researchers using ImageJ. Data were 
presented as each tumor size and the mean ± SEM. (B) MRI images from representative mice in each group. The tumors grow as diffuse lung opacities. (C) 
TNF mRNAs were detected in HCC827 parent and erlotinib-resistant cell lines by qPCR. (D–F) HCC827/ER3, HCC827/ER4A, and H1975 cells were treated with 
5 μg/ml thalidomide and/or 100 nM erlotinib/afatinib for 72 hours followed by AlamarBlue assay. (G) 1 × 106 H1975 cells were injected s.c. into athymic mice. 
When tumors formed, mice were divided into 4 groups (n = 6) and treated with 5 mg/kg afatinib by oral gavage or 150 mg/kg thalidomide i.p. for 24 days. 
(H) HCC827 cells were planted in a 96-well plate and treated with 100 nM erlotinib with or without 5 μg/ml thalidomide. The day when cells reached 100% 
confluence was considered the appearance of acquired resistance. (I) HCC827 cells were injected subcutaneously into athymic mice. When tumors reached 
500 mm3, mice were divided into 4 groups (n = 6) and treated with 6.25 mg/kg erlotinib by oral gavage or 150 mg/kg thalidomide by i.p. for 32 days. For (C–F) 
data represent mean ± SEM. n = 3 biologically independent experimental replicates. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, by 2-sample t-test, except H by log-
rank test. For G and I, statistical significance was defined as P < 0.05 (repeated-measures 2-way ANOVA, Bonferroni correction, GraphPad Prism 7.0).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 5 1 4
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 6   June 2018
Figure 10. Erlotinib induces TNF and p65 activation in patient tissue. (A, D, and E) RNA was extracted from FFPE tissue from 22 NSCLC patients (13 untreated 
and 9 treated with erlotinib). TNF, LTB, and IL2RA mRNA levels were quantified by qPCR. Each dot represents the log2 mRNA level of each patient and median 
± interquartile range. *P < 0.05, by Student’s t test. (B) Immunostaining of nuclear-localized NF-κB p65 from representative tumor sections of 2 different 
patients in TKI-untreated (top) and -treated groups (bottom) (n = 3). p65-positive cells are indicated by black arrows. Scale bar: 50 μm. (C) Quantification of 
p65-positive cells. Four fields (×400) were randomly selected for each tissue block (n = 12). Data represent the mean ± SEM. **P < 0.01, by Student’s t test. (F) 
Association between patients’ progression-free survival (PFS) and their TNF/NF-κB gene expression profiles in the BATTLE trial was analyzed by log-rank test. 
Low or high levels of gene were defined as higher or lower than the median value of 25 patients. P less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 5 1 5
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 6   June 2018
the treatment of lung cancer and could greatly expand the reach 
and impact of EGFR-targeted treatment in NSCLC. A majority 
of NSCLCs express EGFRwt, with a smaller subset expressing 
EGFR activating mutations. The therapeutic approach we pro-
pose is potentially applicable to the majority of NSCLCs, includ-
ing EGFRwt-expressing cancers and including the subset with 
EGFR activating mutations. Our findings suggest that inhibiting 
EGFR with a combination of TKI plus a TNF inhibitor such as 
thalidomide or etanercept may be effective in the treatment of 
NSCLCs that express EGFRwt. In tumors with EGFR activating 
mutations, a combined treatment with EGFR and TNF inhibition 
may result in a more effective elimination of tumor cells during 
the initial treatment and perhaps eliminate or delay secondary 
resistance. We also found TNF upregulation in H1975 cells (har-
boring T790M mutation), and found that combined TNF and 
EGFR inhibition is effective in a mouse model, hinting that this 
approach may be worth testing in tumors with secondary resis-
tance. We have recently shown that EGFR inhibition triggers a 
biologically significant TNF upregulation that mediates primary 
resistance to EGFR inhibition in glioblastoma (GBM). Like in lung 
cancer, the TNF upregulation in GBM is also detected in EGFR-
wt- or EGFR mutant–expressing glioma cells. However, our initial 
studies indicate that the EGFR inhibition–triggered signaling net-
works downstream of TNF are distinct in brain and lung cancers. 
In GBM, TNF activates a JNK/Axl/ERK signaling axis (40, 61), 
while in lung cancer, the major downstream effector is NF-κB. 
EGFR expression is widespread in other types of human cancer 
(62, 63), and it will be interesting to determine whether a biologi-
cally significant upregulation of TNF in response to EGFR inhibi-
tion is a widespread feature of human cancers of epithelial origin.
Methods
Plasmids, transfection, and generation of cell lines
Calu-3 and A549 cells were obtained from American Type Culture 
 
Collection (ATCC). HCC827/ER3 and HCC827/ER4(A) were generat-
ed as described previously (11). HCC827/ER4(B) and HCC827/T790M 
were obtained from Eric Haura, Moffitt Cancer Center (Tampa, Flor-
ida, USA) (50). All other cell lines were obtained from the Hamon 
Center for Therapeutic Oncology Research at the University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center (UT Southwestern) (and deposited at 
the ATCC). Cells were cultured in RPMI-1640 in 5% FBS for all experi-
ments except those involving the use of EGF. In all experiments involv-
ing use of EGF, cells were cultured overnight in serum-free RPMI-1640, 
and EGF was added to serum-free medium. In such experiments, cells 
not treated with EGF were also serum-starved. Cell lines were DNA 
fingerprinted using Promega StemElite ID system, a short tandem 
repeat–based assay, at UT Southwestern genomics core and mycoplas-
ma tested using an e-Myco kit (Boca Scientific). p65 expression plas-
mid was obtained from Stratagene. NF-κB–LUC plasmid was provided 
by Ezra Burstein (UT Southwestern). TNF 3′-UTR luciferase reporter 
(SV40-luc-TNF) was a gift from Jay Steer and David Joyce, University 
of Western Australia (Perth, Western Australia, Australia).
RNA interference
For transient silencing we used a pool of siRNA sequences direct-
ed against human TNFR1, LTB, or control (scrambled) siRNA, all 
ly respond to EGFR TKIs, they inevitably developed a secondary 
resistance to this treatment, implying the persistence of subsets of 
cancer cells that are not eliminated during the initial treatment. 
Thus, a more effective elimination of cancer cells during the ini-
tial treatment may delay or abrogate the emergence of secondary 
resistance. In addition, it may be possible to overcome the second-
ary resistance of NSCLC with appropriately targeted treatments. 
Our studies indicate that combined inhibition of EGFR and TNF 
may prevent the development of secondary resistance. Further-
more, NSCLC cells with secondary resistance to EGFR inhibition 
become sensitive to EGFR TKIs if combined with TNF inhibition.
Primary or intrinsic resistance to EGFRwt inhibition could 
occur because the EGFRwt does not drive the survival/prolif-
eration of these cells. Alternatively, an adaptive response could 
prevent cell death in response to EGFR inhibition. Currently 
the EGFRwt does not appear to be a useful target for treatment, 
because EGFR inhibition is ineffective in EGFRwt-expressing 
NSCLC. However, EGFRwt overexpression is common, and the 
presence of EGFR ligand is common and well documented in 
lung cancer (56, 57). Furthermore, a constitutive overexpression- 
induced EGFRwt signaling has also been reported (58–60). Thus, 
it seems likely that EGFRwt is active in lung cancer. Our data indi-
cate that if the TNF-driven adaptive response is inhibited, EGFRwt- 
expressing NSCLCs become sensitive to EGFR inhibition.
We propose that EGFR inhibition results in an increase in 
TNF levels via a dual mechanism (as shown in the schematic in 
Supplemental Figure 21). First, we demonstrate that activation of 
EGFR signaling results in a rapid downregulation of TNF mRNA 
by a rapid induction of miR-21, and we find that inhibition of 
EGFR results in increased TNF mRNA stability by a decrease in 
miR-21 levels. A second mechanism involves the transcription 
factor NF-κB. TNF activates NF-κB, which in turn increases the 
transcription of TNF mRNA in a feed-forward loop. Our data 
suggest that TNF-mediated activation of NF-κB is likely to be a 
major mechanism of resistance to EGFR inhibition. Downstream 
of NF-κB we identify lymphotoxin-β as a key mediator of resis-
tance to EGFR inhibition.
The biological effect of increased TNF signaling is protec-
tion from cell death mediated by a loss of EGFR signaling. We 
examined the combined effect of TNF and EGFR inhibition in a 
resistant EGFRwt cell line, A549 cells, in a mouse model using 
multiple approaches to inhibit TNF. A combination of EGFR TKI 
plus thalidomide was also highly effective in inhibiting tumor 
growth in an EGFRwt PDX model, while EGFR inhibition or tha-
lidomide alone was ineffective. Thalidomide is a known inhibi-
tor of TNF and may regulate TNF transcription and/or stability 
(37, 38). Using a low concentration of erlotinib, we also noted a 
significant reduction in tumor growth with a combined inhibition 
of TNF and EGFR in HCC827 cells compared with EGFR inhibi-
tion alone, although the tumors were sensitive to EGFR inhibition 
alone. Importantly, a similar approach of combining EGFR plus 
TNF inhibition is also effective in an immunocompetent trans-
genic EGFR-mutant model, suggesting that this approach may be 
therapeutically useful in NSCLC patients.
NSCLC is a common cancer worldwide, constituting about 
85% of all lung cancer. A biologically significant upregulation of 
TNF upon EGFR inhibition may have enormous implications for 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 5 1 6
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 6   June 2018
About 10 days after injection, all mice had developed subcutaneous 
tumors. The mice were randomly divided into indicated groups. Mice 
were treated with drugs using the doses described in the figure legends. 
For combination treatment, both drugs were given concurrently for 
indicated periods. Tumor dimensions were measured every 2 days and 
tumor volumes calculated by the formula: volume = (length × width × 
width)/2. Mice were sacrificed when tumors reached over 2,000 mm3 
or after the indicated days. HCC4087 PDX model was established at 
UT Southwestern as described in Supplemental Methods.
Transgenic mouse model. Four- to six-week-old female and male 
TetO-EGFR-L858R and CCSP-rtTA mice were generated in Katerina 
Politi’s laboratory at Yale University (New Haven, Connecticut, USA) 
and shipped to UT Southwestern for further experiments. Mice were 
given continuous doxycycline in diet (TD.01306 2018 625 Doxycy-
cline, Envigo) to induce tumors. Lung tumor formation was confirmed 
by comparison of MRI between 4 and 5 weeks of doxycycline induc-
tion. Starting from week 5, mice were randomly divided into indicated 
groups and treated for 2 weeks. Tumor sizes were measured from MRI 
images by 2 blinded researchers using ImageJ (NIH).
MRI imaging. MRI was done at the Mouse MRI Core, Advanced 
Imaging Research Center, at UT Southwestern. Additional details 
regarding MRI studies are provided in Supplemental Methods.
Patient specimens
Twenty-two NSCLC patients’ formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded 
(FFPE) tissues were obtained from The Jackson Laboratory or UT 
Southwestern according to IRB-approved protocols. Thirteen speci-
mens were obtained from UT Southwestern and 9 from The Jackson 
Laboratory. Thirteen patients had no EGFR TKI treatment, and 9 
patients had undergone EGFR TKI treatment.
BATTLE trial data (ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00410059 for erlo-
tinib, NCT00411671 for sorafenib) were provided by the BATTLE 
group at MD Anderson Cancer Center.
Statistics
Error bars represent the means ± SEM of 3 independent experiments 
if not indicated. The subcutaneous tumor growth data were analyzed 
by repeated-measures 2-way ANOVA. Bonferroni correction was 
used to adjust the significance level for multiple comparisons, and 
the family-wise error rate (FWER) was set at 0.05. The significance 
of differences between 2 groups was determined by the P value of 
the treatment factor (the significance between EGFR inhibition and 
combination of EGFR plus TNF inhibition is shown). Kaplan-Meier 
survival curves were constructed and compared by log-rank test. For 
comparing multiple groups versus the same control, 1-way ANOVA 
with Dunnett’s method and a FWER of 0.05 was performed to cal-
culate the adjusted P value. All other data were analyzed for signif-
icance between the indicated treated group and control group, with 
2-tailed 2-sample t test. All analyses above were performed using 
GraphPad Prism 7.0 software. A P value or an adjusted P value for 
multiple comparison less than 0.05 was considered statistically sig-
nificant (*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, ****P < 0.0001; #not 
statistically significant).
Study approval
All animal studies were done under IACUC-approved protocols at UT 
Southwestern, North Texas VA Medical Center (Dallas, Texas, USA), 
obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. siRNA knockdown was per-
formed according to the manufacturer’s protocol using Lipofectamine 
2000 reagent (Invitrogen). Experiments were conducted 48 hours 
after siRNA transfection.
Antibodies, reagents, and Western blotting
Western blot and immunoprecipitation were performed according to 
standard protocols. Western blots are representative of at least 3 inde-
pendent experiments. A list of antibodies used is provided in Supple-
mental Methods. Uncropped Western blots are displayed in Supple-
mental Figures 22–24.
Recombinant human TNF and EGF were obtained from Pepro-
Tech. Erlotinib was purchased from SelleckChem. Afatinib was bought 
from AstaTech Inc. Thalidomide, actinomycin D, and mithramycin A 
were from Cayman Chemical. Etanercept (Enbrel) was purchased from 
McKesson Medical Supply. The NF-κB inhibitors BMS-345541, QNZ 
(EVP 4593), and sodium salicylate were obtained from MilliporeSigma.
cDNA synthesis and real-time PCR
Total RNA was isolated by TRIzol Reagent (Fisher Scientific). cDNA 
reverse transcription was performed using a High-Capacity cDNA 
Reverse Transcription Kit (Applied Biosystems). PCR primers were 
synthesized by Integrated DNA Technologies Inc. (IDT). Each PCR 
reaction was carried out in triplicate in a 20-μl volume using SYBR 
Green Master Mix (Applied Biosystems). Additional details and prim-
er sequences are provided in Supplemental Methods.
MicroRNA studies
For microRNA quantitation, we used a mirVana miRNA Isolation Kit 
(Ambion) to isolate the high-quality small RNAs. TaqMan MicroRNA 
Reverse Transcription Kit (Applied Biosystems) was used for convert-
ing microRNA to cDNA. The RT primers were within the TaqMan 
MicroRNA Assay hsa-miR-21-5p and hsa-miR-423-5p (Thermo Fisher 
Scientific). hsa-miR-423-5p was used as the endogenous control. PCR 
reactions were performed in triplicate by TaqMan Universal Master 
Mix II (Applied Biosystems), using the same PCR program as SYBR 
Green Master Mix. PCR primers of hsa-miR-21-5p and hsa-miR-423-
5p were from TaqMan MicroRNA Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 
Each experiment was carried out independently at least 3 times. The 
miR-21 expression levels were normalized to miR-423. Additional 
details of microRNA inhibition and microRNA overexpression are 
provided in Supplemental Methods.
Cell viability assay
Cell viability assay was conducted using AlamarBlue cell viability 
assay from Thermo Fisher Scientific, according to the manufacturer’s 
protocol. Cells were treated by the indicated drugs for 72 hours before 
detection. In AlamarBlue cell viability assay, cells were cultured in 
Corning 96-well black plates with clear bottom, and the detection 
was carried out under the fluorimeter (excitation at 544 nm and emis-
sion at 590 nm) using a POLARstar Omega Microplate Reader (BMG 
LABTECH). At least 3 independent experiments were done.
Animal studies
Four- to six-week-old female athymic mice were purchased from 
Charles River Laboratories. A549 cells (1 × 106), HCC827 cells (2 × 106), 
 
or H1975 cells (1 × 106) were injected s.c. into the flanks of athymic mice. 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 5 1 7
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 6   June 2018
AAH. This work was also supported by National Cancer Institute 
Lung Cancer SPORE (P50CA70907), U01CA176284, and the Can-
cer Prevention Research Institute of Texas (RP110708) to JDM. 
This work was also supported by NIH grant 1R01CA194578 to DZ 
and by NIH grants R01CA169338 and U54CA224081 to TGB. DEG 
is supported by a National Cancer Institute Midcareer Investigator 
Award in Patient-Oriented Research, K24CA201543-01. SB is sup-
ported by grants from the NIH (RO1CA197796, RO1CA149461, 
and R21CA202403) and the National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration (NNX16AD78G). We thank Katerina Politi for gen-
erating and providing TetO-EGFR-L858R and CCSP-rtTA mice. 
We thank Jay Steer and David Joyce for TNF-UTR plasmid, Eric 
Haura for providing erlotinib-resistant cell lines, and Jessica Sal-
tarski (UT Southwestern) for assistance in obtaining FFPE tissues.
Address correspondence to: Amyn A. Habib, University of Tex-
as Southwestern Medical Center, VA North Texas Health Care 
System, Mail Code 151, 4500 South Lancaster Road, Dallas, 
Texas 75216, USA. Phone: 214.857.3610; Email: Amyn.Habib@
UTSouthwestern.edu.
and Yale University (New Haven, Connecticut, USA). Human tissues 
were obtained from UT Southwestern after IRB approval and informed 
consent. The BATTLE trial was registered at US ClinicalTrials.gov.
Additional experimental details are provided in Supplemental 
Methods.
Author contributions
KJH, HZ, and MT analyzed data. AAH, KG, and GG designed 
experiments. KG, GG, BG, CH, and SZ performed experiments. 
BG, DEG, MP, CH, JDM, KK, FJF, VAP, VO, and TGB provided 
resources. LC, YX, BM, SB, DZ, SZ, KD, JD, KG, GG, and AAH 
analyzed data. AAH, KG, and GG wrote the manuscript with 
contributions from DEG and JDM. AAH conceived the study 
and supervised it.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by NIH grant R01 NS062080 and 
by the Office of Medical Research at the Department of Veterans 
Affairs, a Lung Cancer SPORE Career Enhancement Program 
Award, and support from the Dallas VA Research Corporation to 
 1. Sharma SV, Bell DW, Settleman J, Haber DA. Epi-
dermal growth factor receptor mutations in lung 
cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2007;7(3):169–181.
 2. Weinstein IB. Cancer. Addiction to oncogenes  
— the Achilles heal of cancer. Science. 
2002;297(5578):63–64.
 3. Guo A, et al. Signaling networks assembled by 
oncogenic EGFR and c-Met. Proc Natl Acad Sci  
U S A. 2008;105(2):692–697.
 4. Paez JG, et al. EGFR mutations in lung cancer: 
correlation with clinical response to gefitinib 
therapy. Science. 2004;304(5676):1497–1500.
 5. Lynch TJ, et al. Activating mutations in the 
epidermal growth factor receptor underlying 
responsiveness of non-small-cell lung cancer to 
gefitinib. N Engl J Med. 2004;350(21):2129–2139.
 6. Pao W, et al. EGF receptor gene mutations are 
common in lung cancers from “never smokers” 
and are associated with sensitivity of tumors to 
gefitinib and erlotinib. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2004;101(36):13306–13311.
 
7. Dowell JE, Minna JD. EGFR mutations and 
molecularly targeted therapy: a new era in the 
treatment of lung cancer. Nat Clin Pract Oncol. 
2006;3(4):170–171.
 8. Chong CR, Jänne PA. The quest to overcome 
resistance to EGFR-targeted therapies in cancer. 
Nat Med. 2013;19(11):1389–1400.
 9. Yu HA, et al. Analysis of tumor specimens at the 
time of acquired resistance to EGFR-TKI therapy 
in 155 patients with EGFR-mutant lung cancers. 
Clin Cancer Res. 2013;19(8):2240–2247.
 10. Engelman JA, et al. MET amplification leads to gefi-
tinib resistance in lung cancer by activating ERBB3 
signaling. Science. 2007;316(5827):1039–1043.
 11. Zhang Z, et al. Activation of the AXL kinase caus-
es resistance to EGFR-targeted therapy in lung 
cancer. Nat Genet. 2012;44(8):852–860.
 12. Rotow J, Bivona TG. Understanding and targeting 
resistance mechanisms in NSCLC. Nat Rev Can-
cer. 2017;17(11):637–658.
 13. Fan W, et al. MET-independent lung cancer cells 
evading EGFR kinase inhibitors are therapeuti-
cally susceptible to BH3 mimetic agents. Cancer 
Res. 2011;71(13):4494–4505.
 14. Lee HJ, Zhuang G, Cao Y, Du P, Kim HJ, Settle-
man J. Drug resistance via feedback activation of 
Stat3 in oncogene-addicted cancer cells. Cancer 
Cell. 2014;26(2):207–221.
 15. Liao S, Davoli T, Leng Y, Li MZ, Xu Q, Elledge SJ. 
A genetic interaction analysis identifies cancer 
drivers that modify EGFR dependency. Genes 
Dev. 2017;31(2):184–196.
 16. Hata AN, et al. Tumor cells can follow distinct 
evolutionary paths to become resistant to epider-
mal growth factor receptor inhibition. Nat Med. 
2016;22(3):262–269.
 17. Ohashi K, Maruvka YE, Michor F, Pao W. 
Epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine 
kinase inhibitor-resistant disease. J Clin Oncol. 
2013;31(8):1070–1080.
 18. Greulich H, et al. Oncogenic transformation by 
inhibitor-sensitive and -resistant EGFR mutants. 
PLoS Med. 2005;2(11):e313.
 19. Blakely CM, et al. NF-κB-activating complex 
engaged in response to EGFR oncogene inhibi-
tion drives tumor cell survival and residual dis-
ease in lung cancer. Cell Rep. 2015;11(1):98–110.
 20. Yun CH, et al. Structures of lung cancer- 
derived EGFR mutants and inhibitor complex-
es: mechanism of activation and insights into 
differential inhibitor sensitivity. Cancer Cell. 
2007;11(3):217–227.
 21. Mulloy R, et al. Epidermal growth factor recep-
tor mutants from human lung cancers exhibit 
enhanced catalytic activity and increased sensitiv-
ity to gefitinib. Cancer Res. 2007;67(5):2325–2330.
 22. Bartel DP. MicroRNAs: target recognition and 
regulatory functions. Cell. 2009;136(2):215–233.
 23. Lin S, Gregory RI. MicroRNA biogenesis pathways 
in cancer. Nat Rev Cancer. 2015;15(6):321–333.
 24. Lu J, et al. MicroRNA expression profiles classify 
human cancers. Nature. 2005;435(7043):834–838.
 25. Yanaihara N, et al. Unique microRNA molecular 
profiles in lung cancer diagnosis and prognosis. 
Cancer Cell. 2006;9(3):189–198.
 26. Seike M, et al. MiR-21 is an EGFR-regulated  
anti-apoptotic factor in lung cancer in 
never-smokers. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2009;106(29):12085–12090.
 27. Bivona TG, et al. FAS and NF-κB signalling mod-
ulate dependence of lung cancers on mutant 
EGFR. Nature. 2011;471(7339):523–526.
 28. Wajant H, Pfizenmaier K, Scheurich P. Tumor 
necrosis factor signaling. Cell Death Differ. 
2003;10(1):45–65.
 29. Zhang X, et al. MicroRNA-21 modulates the lev-
els of reactive oxygen species by targeting SOD3 
and TNFα. Cancer Res. 2012;72(18):4707–4713.
 30. Barnett RE, et al. Anti-inflammatory effects of 
miR-21 in the macrophage response to peritoni-
tis. J Leukoc Biol. 2016;99(2):361–371.
 31. Das A, Ganesh K, Khanna S, Sen CK, Roy S. 
Engulfment of apoptotic cells by macrophages: a 
role of microRNA-21 in the resolution of wound 
inflammation. J Immunol. 2014;192(3):1120–1129.
 32. Fabian MR, Sonenberg N, Filipowicz W. Reg-
ulation of mRNA translation and stability by 
microRNAs. Annu Rev Biochem. 2010;79:351–379.
 33. Park PH, Huang H, McMullen MR, Mandal P, 
Sun L, Nagy LE. Suppression of lipopolysaccha-
ride-stimulated tumor necrosis factor-alpha 
production by adiponectin is mediated by tran-
scriptional and post-transcriptional mechanisms. 
 
J Biol Chem. 2008;283(40):26850–26858.
 34. Zhu J, et al. TNF-α mRNA is negatively regulated 
by microRNA-181a-5p in maturation of dendritic 
cells induced by high mobility group box-1 pro-
tein. Sci Rep. 2017;7(1):12239.
 35. Brenner D, Blaser H, Mak TW. Regulation of 
tumour necrosis factor signalling: live or let die. 
Nat Rev Immunol. 2015;15(6):362–374.
 36. Faustman D, Davis M. TNF receptor 2 pathway: 
drug target for autoimmune diseases. Nat Rev 
Drug Discov. 2010;9(6):482–493.
 37. Sedger LM, McDermott MF. TNF and TNF- 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
R E S E A R C H  A R T I C L E
2 5 1 8
jci.org   Volume 128   Number 6   June 2018
receptors: from mediators of cell death and 
inflammation to therapeutic giants — past, 
present and future. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 
2014;25(4):453–472.
 38. Moreira AL, Sampaio EP, Zmuidzinas A, Frindt 
P, Smith KA, Kaplan G. Thalidomide exerts its 
inhibitory action on tumor necrosis factor alpha 
by enhancing mRNA degradation. J Exp Med. 
1993;177(6):1675–1680.
 39. Keifer JA, Guttridge DC, Ashburner BP, Baldwin 
AS. Inhibition of NF-kappa B activity by thalid-
omide through suppression of IkappaB kinase 
activity. J Biol Chem. 2001;276(25):22382–22387.
 40. Guo G, et al. A TNF-JNK-Axl-ERK signaling axis 
mediates primary resistance to EGFR inhibition in 
glioblastoma. Nat Neurosci. 2017;20(8):1074–1084.
 41. Ichihara E, et al. SFK/FAK signaling attenuates 
osimertinib efficacy in both drug-sensitive and 
drug-resistant models of EGFR-mutant lung can-
cer. Cancer Res. 2017;77(11):2990–3000.
 42. Lee JE, et al. Hippo pathway effector YAP inhibi-
tion restores the sensitivity of EGFR-TKI in lung 
adenocarcinoma having primary or acquired 
EGFR-TKI resistance. Biochem Biophys Res Com-
mun. 2016;474(1):154–160.
 43. Chaib I, et al. Co-activation of STAT3 and YES-as-
sociated Protein 1 (YAP1) pathway in EGFR-mutant 
NSCLC. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2017;109(9):djx014.
 44. Balkwill F. Tumour necrosis factor and cancer. 
Nat Rev Cancer. 2009;9(5):361–371.
 45. Sethi G, Sung B, Aggarwal BB. TNF: a master 
switch for inflammation to cancer. Front Biosci. 
2008;13:5094–5107.
 46. Fernandes MT, Dejardin E, dos Santos NR. Con-
text-dependent roles for lymphotoxin-β receptor 
signaling in cancer development. Biochim Biophys 
Acta. 2016;1865(2):204–219.
 47. Hsu DS, et al. Lymphotoxin-β interacts with 
methylated EGFR to mediate acquired resistance 
to cetuximab in head and neck cancer. Clin Can-
cer Res. 2017;23(15):4388–4401.
 48. Scarzello AJ, et al. LTβR signalling preferential-
ly accelerates oncogenic AKT-initiated liver 
tumours. Gut. 2016;65(10):1765–1775.
 49. Politi K, Zakowski MF, Fan PD, Schonfeld EA, 
Pao W, Varmus HE. Lung adenocarcinomas 
induced in mice by mutant EGF receptors found 
in human lung cancers respond to a tyrosine 
kinase inhibitor or to down-regulation of the 
receptors. Genes Dev. 2006;20(11):1496–1510.
 50. Yoshida T, et al. Tyrosine phosphoproteomics 
identifies both codrivers and cotargeting strat-
egies for T790M-related EGFR-TKI resistance 
in non-small cell lung cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 
2014;20(15):4059–4074.
 51. Kim ES, et al. The BATTLE trial: personaliz-
ing therapy for lung cancer. Cancer Discov. 
2011;1(1):44–53.
 52. Oeckinghaus A, Ghosh S. The NF-κB family of 
transcription factors and its regulation. Cold 
Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2009;1(4):a000034.
 53. Karin M, Cao Y, Greten FR, Li ZW. NF-κB in 
cancer: from innocent bystander to major culprit. 
Nat Rev Cancer. 2002;2(4):301–310.
 54. Tsao MS, et al. Erlotinib in lung cancer — molec-
ular and clinical predictors of outcome. N Engl J 
Med. 2005;353(2):133–144.
 55. Hirsch FR, et al. Epidermal growth factor recep-
tor in non-small-cell lung carcinomas: correla-
tion between gene copy number and protein 
expression and impact on prognosis. J Clin Oncol. 
2003;21(20):3798–3807.
 56. Hsieh ET, Shepherd FA, Tsao MS. Co-expression 
of epidermal growth factor receptor and trans-
forming growth factor-α is independent of ras 
mutations in lung adenocarcinoma. Lung Cancer. 
2000;29(2):151–157.
 57. Volante M, et al. Epidermal growth factor ligand/
receptor loop and downstream signaling activa-
tion pattern in completely resected nonsmall cell 
lung cancer. Cancer. 2007;110(6):1321–1328.
 58. Chakraborty S, et al. Constitutive and ligand- 
induced EGFR signalling triggers distinct and 
mutually exclusive downstream signalling net-
works. Nat Commun. 2014;5:5811.
 59. Guo G, Gong K, Wohlfeld B, Hatanpaa KJ, Zhao 
D, Habib AA. Ligand-independent EGFR signal-
ing. Cancer Res. 2015;75(17):3436–3441.
 60. Endres NF, et al. Conformational coupling across 
the plasma membrane in activation of the EGF 
receptor. Cell. 2013;152(3):543–556.
 61. Warta R, Herold-Mende C. Helping EGFR 
inhibition to block cancer. Nat Neurosci. 
2017;20(8):1035–1037.
 62. Gullick WJ. Prevalence of aberrant expression of 
the epidermal growth factor receptor in human 
cancers. Br Med Bull. 1991;47(1):87–98.
 63. Ciardiello F, Tortora G. EGFR antagonists in cancer 
treatment. N Engl J Med. 2008;358(11):1160–1174.
