 Bone Marrow Transplantation (2019) 54:353–367
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41409-018-0264-8
REVIEW ARTICLE
Utilization of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for the
treatment of multiple myeloma: a Mayo Stratification of Myeloma
and Risk-Adapted Therapy (mSMART) consensus statement
Wilson I. Gonsalves1
● Francis K. Buadi1
● Sikander Ailawadhi2
● P. Leif Bergsagel
3
● Asher A. Chanan Khan2
●
David Dingli1
● Angela Dispenzieri1
● Rafael Fonseca3
● Susan R. Hayman1
● Prashant Kapoor1
●
Taxiarchis V. Kourelis1
● Martha Q. Lacy1
● Jeremy T. Larsen3
● Eli Muchtar
1
● Craig B. Reeder3
● Taimur Sher2
●
A. Keith Stewart3
● Rahma Warsame1
● Ronald S. Go1
● Robert A. Kyle1
● Nelson Leung
1
● Yi Lin1
● John A. Lust1
●
Stephen J. Russell1
● Stephen R. Zeldenrust1
● Amie L. Fonder1
● Yi L. Hwa1
● Miriam A. Hobbs1
● Angela A. Mayo3
●
William J. Hogan
1
● S. Vincent Rajkumar1
● Shaji K. Kumar1
● Morie A. Gertz1
● Vivek Roy2
Received: 15 April 2018 / Revised: 10 May 2018 / Accepted: 11 May 2018 / Published online: 9 July 2018
© The Author(s) 2018. This article is published with open access
Abstract
Over the last two decades, the utilization of various novel therapies in the upfront or salvage settings has continued to
improve survival outcomes for patients with Multiple Myeloma (MM). Thus, the conventional role for hematopoietic stem
cell transplantation (HSCT) in MM either in the form of an autologous stem cell transplant (ASCT) or an allogeneic stem cell
transplant (Allo-SCT) warrants re-evaluation, given the aforementioned clinical advances. Here, we present a consensus
statement of our multidisciplinary group of over 30 Mayo Clinic physicians with a special interest in the care of patients with
MM and provide evidence-based recommendations on the use of HSCT in MM. We specifically address topics that include
the role and timing of an ASCT for MM in the era of novel agents, eligibility for an ASCT, post-ASCT consolidation, and
maintenance options, and finally the utility of an upfront tandem ASCT, salvage second ASCT, and an allo-SCT in MM.
Introduction
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) involves
high-dose chemotherapy followed by infusion of procured
autologous, allogeneic, or syngeneic stem cells. Utilization
of autologous stem cell transplant (ASCT) has increased in
the United States and Europe over the last decade and is
most commonly used for the treatment of multiple myeloma
(MM) [1, 2]. The therapeutic armamentarium for MM has
evolved over the last two decades with the incorporation of
numerous novel therapies such as proteasome inhibitors
(PIs), immunomodulators (IMiDs), and monoclonal anti-
bodies (mABs) for the treatment of patients with newly
diagnosed and relapsed MM [3, 4]. This has led to an
improvement in the depth and duration of disease response
that have eventually translated to an improved overall sur-
vival (OS) for patients with MM [5, 6]. Given that the
therapeutic regimens and their utilization have evolved
dramatically in clinical practice, the current role of HSCT in
MM at all stages of the disease warrants a systematic re-
evaluation. Our multidisciplinary group of over 30 Mayo
Clinic physicians at three different sites (Scottsdale, AZ;
Jacksonville, FL; and Rochester, MN) with a special interest
in the care of patients with MM have performed an exten-
sive review of the literature with the aim of making
evidence-based recommendations on the use of HSCT for
the management of patients with MM. This is part of the
Mayo Stratification for Myeloma and Risk-Adapted Ther-
apy (mSMART) guidelines that are available at http://www.
msmart.org and updated regularly in light of new data. A
* Wilson I. Gonsalves
gonsalves.wilson@mayo.edu
1
Division of Hematology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota,
USA
2
Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Mayo Clinic,
Jacksonville, Florida, USA
3
Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Mayo Clinic,
Scottsdale, Arizona, USA
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article
(https://doi.org/10.1038/s41409-018-0264-8) contains supplementary
material, which is available to authorized users.
1234567890();,:
1234567890();,:
 standard system for rating the evidence and grading of
recommendations will be utilized as outlined in Table 1.
Emphasis is placed on the outcomes from randomized
controlled trials (RCTs), but in the absence of such data,
recommendations are based on other non-RCT data and
consensus within the group. Given that this article relates
only to the utilization of HSCT for the treatment of MM, we
will not discuss the diagnosis and initial management of the
disease or other treatment options for relapsed disease. The
reader is referred to various guidelines that have been
published by our group in this regard [3, 4, 7, 8].
Rationale for the use of ASCT in the novel
agent era
Utilization
of
high-dose
intravenous
melphalan
che-
motherapy for the treatment of MM was first described by
McElwain and Powles in 1983 [9]. Subsequent studies
ameliorated the myelosuppressive effects of the high-dose
melphalan with a subsequent autologous hematopoietic
stem cell infusion [10, 11]. However, ASCT became the
standard of care for MM only after positive results from
phase III RCTs (Supplement Table 1) demonstrated the
superiority of ASCT compared to conventional cytotoxic
chemotherapy by improving the depth as well as duration of
hematological response [12–17]. All trials except for one
demonstrated improvement in the depth of hematologic
response and progression-free survival (PFS) or event-free
survival (EFS) favoring the use of an ASCT. However only
half of the trials, including two of the largest trials,
demonstrated significant improvements in OS of almost
12 months with ASCT [12, 13]. A meta-analysis of all these
earlier trials, which were done prior to the availability of
IMiDs or PIs, supported the use of ASCT in terms of PFS
extension but not OS [18]. Furthermore, one trial also
demonstrated a better QoL for patients undergoing an
ASCT which was defined as a significantly longer period of
time without symptoms, treatment, and treatment toxicity
(TwiSTT) [19]. Thus, based on these positive benefits
associated with ASCT as consolidative therapy, it was
incorporated as the standard of care for eligible MM
patients.
Currently, PI and/or IMiD combination regimens are
considered the standard of care for induction therapy as they
have consistently led to deeper and more durable hemato-
logic responses in almost all MM patients at all phases of
the treatment (induction, consolidation, and maintenance).
As a result, the value of ASCT as a standard of care for all
eligible MM patients has been questioned, especially since
the OS benefit has not been consistently noted in prior
RCTs. Thus, it is important to assess all the existing phase
III RCTs that evaluated the value of ASCT in the era of
novel agent in;duction therapies, which are summarized in
Table 2. Two RCTs utilized lenalidomide and dex-
amethasone induction followed by consolidation with either
a tandem ASCT using high-dose melphalan as the con-
ditioning regimen or a novel agent-based regimen (mel-
phalan,
prednisone,
and
lenalidomide
(MPR)
or
cyclophosphamide,
lenalidomide
and
dexamethasone
(CRd)) [20, 21]. In a pooled analysis of both studies, sig-
nificant improvements in PFS (42 months vs. 24 months)
and a benefit in OS at a 4-year follow-up (84% vs. 70%)
was observed in the groups undergoing ASCT as con-
solidation [22]. Even though most patients received two
courses of melphalan 200 mg/m2 in tandem fashion in these
trials, there was no difference in OS outcomes between
those who completed only one ASCT versus those who
received the intended tandem ASCT. An interim analysis
from the European Myeloma Network Trial (EMN02)
demonstrated that upfront consolidation with ASCT after
bortezomib,
cyclophosphamide,
and
dexamethasone
Table 1 Classification system
for levels of evidence and grades
of recommendations
Level
Type of evidence
I
Evidence obtained from a meta-analysis of multiple, well-designed, controlled studies.
Randomized trials with low false-positive and low false-negative errors (high power)
II
Evidence obtained from at least 1 well-designed experimental study. Randomized trials with high
false-positive and/or false-negative errors (low power)
III
Evidence obtained from well-designed, quasi-experimental studies such as non-randomized,
controlled single-group, pre–post, cohort, time series, or matched case-control series
IV
Evidence from well-designed, non-experimental studies, such as comparative and correlational
descriptive and case studies
V
Evidence from case reports and clinical samples
Grade
Type of evidence
A
Evidence of type I or consistent findings from multiple studies of type II, III, or IV
B
Evidence of type II, III, or IV, and findings are generally consistent
C
Evidence of type II, III, or IV, but findings are inconsistent
D
Minimal or no systematic empirical evidence
354
W. I. Gonsalves et al.
 induction was associated with a significant improvement in
depth of response and median PFS compared to con-
solidation with bortezomib, melphalan, and prednisone
(VMP) in the overall patient population (not reached vs.
44 months) [23]. This superiority of ASCT over VMP was
even more prominent in the high-risk cytogenetics group in
terms of 3-year PFS (52% vs. 30%) and 3-year OS benefit
(74% vs. 61%) [23].
One drawback of all these prospective studies is the lack
of PI and IMiD combination-based induction therapies
especially since this combination is now considered to be
the optimal induction regimen due to deeper and more
durable responses than induction regimens with either PI or
IMiDs alone [24]. The IFM/DFCI trial utilized bortezomib,
lenalidomide, and dexamethasone (VRd)-based induction
therapy with either an upfront or delayed consolidation with
ASCT. Based on initial data from the IFM portion of the
study, despite the use of a very effective induction regimen
with VRd, ASCT consolidation and maintenance lenalido-
mide
was superior in
producing deeper
hematologic
responses, including more minimal residual disease (MRD)
negative responses (79% vs. 65%, P <0.001) when com-
pared to continued consolidation with VRd followed by
maintenance lenalidomide [25]. At 4 years follow-up,
patients treated with ASCT consolidation also had a
superior PFS (50 months vs. 36 months) though no differ-
ence in 4-year OS was identified (81% vs. 82%). However,
79% of the patients who had disease progression on the
non-ASCT arm eventually underwent a salvage ASCT [25].
Finally, a meta-analysis incorporating both conventional
and network meta-analysis of three large phase III RCTs
from January 2000 to April 2017 showed that consolidation
with an ASCT was associated with superior PFS compared
with therapy using novel agents (IMiDs and PIs) [26]. Thus,
irrespective of the novel agent combination used in the
induction therapy, it appears that ASCT as consolidation
consistently improves the depth of response and PFS pro-
ducing very good survival results. This reinforces the
practice of ASCT as the standard of care for eligible patients
with NDMM treated with novel agent therapies.
Recommendation: In the era of novel agent induction
therapy regimens, autologous stem cell transplant (ASCT)
remains an essential component of MM therapy in eligible
patients. (Level of Evidence: I, Grade of Recommenda-
tion: A)
Timing of ASCT: upfront versus upon first
relapse
Given the likelihood of deep and durable hematologic
responses obtained with either PIs and/or IMiDs-based
induction therapy and the frequent but mostly transient
Table 2 Summary of phase III clinical trials evaluating the efficacy of ASCT in the era of novel agent induction therapy
Clinical trial
No.
Induction
Randomized arms
ORR
EFS/PFS
OS
Palumbo et al. [20]. NDMM pts <65 y/o
402
Rd × 4 cycles
MPR × 6 cycles →No maint
CR (post consolidation): 18%
Median PFS: 22 mos
5-year OS: 59%
MPR × 6 cycles →R-maint
Median PFS: 34 mos
5-year OS: 70%
Mel200 mg/m2 × 2 cycles → No maint
CR (post consolidation): 23%
Median PFS: 37 mos
5-year OS: 67%
Mel200 mg/m2 × 2 cycles → R-maint
Median PFS: 55 mos
5-year OS: 78%
Gay et al. [21]. NDMM pts ≤65 y/o
389
Rd × 4 cycles
CRd × 6 cycles → R-maint
CR: 27%
Median PFS: 28 mos
4-year OS: 76%
CRd × 6 cycles → Rp-maint
CR: 23%
Median PFS: 24 mos
4-year OS: 68%
Mel200 mg/m2 × 2 cycles → R-maint
CR: 33%
Median PFS: 32 mos
4-year OS: 75%
Mel200 mg/m2 × 2 cycles → Rp-maint
CR: 37%
Median PFS: 38 mos
4-year OS: 77%
Cavo et al. [23]. NDMM pts ≤65 y/o
1503
VCd × 3–4 cycles
VMP→+/− VRd → R-maint
≥VGPR: 75%
3-year PFS: 57%
Median OS: NR
Mel200 mg/m2 × 1 or 2 →+/− VRd →R-maint
≥VGPR: 84%
3-year PFS: 64%
Median OS: NR
Attal et al. [25]. NDMM pts ≤65 y/o
700
VRd × 3 cycles
VRd × 5 cycles →R-maint
CR: 48% MRD (−): 65%
Median PFS: 36 mos
4-year OS: 82%
Mel200 mg/m2 →VRd × 2 cycles →R-maint
CR: 59% MRD (−): 79%
Median PFS: 50 mos
4-year OS: 81%
CRd cyclophosphamide, lenalidomide, and dexamethasone, R-maint lenalidomide maintenance, Rp-maint lenalidomide and prednisone maintenance, VRd bortezomib, lenalidomide, and
dexamethasone, MPR melphalan, prednisone and lenalidomide, VCd bortezomib, cyclophosphamide and dexamethasone, ORR overall response rate, EFS event-free survival, PFS progression-
free survival, OS overall survival, CR complete remission, MRD (−) minimal residual disease negativity
Utilization of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for the treatment of multiple myeloma: a Mayo. . .
355
 toxicities associated with ASCT, the timing of an ASCT
during the course of a patient’s MM has been debated, i.e.,
should all eligible patients undergo an upfront ASCT as
consolidation after initial induction therapy or can ASCT be
delayed until first relapse? Though the first phase III RCT to
assess this question was conducted in the pre-novel agent era,
it demonstrated that despite equivalent survivals, patients
undergoing an upfront ASCT experienced a longer period of
time free from treatment and consequent side effects than
patients who continued on chemotherapy [19]. This advan-
tage is less applicable to current practice given the almost
universal use of continued maintenance therapy after an
upfront ASCT [27]. The current drug regimens are also
associated with less toxicity compared with the older
alkylator-containing regimens allowing for longer treatment
durations. Prior single institution retrospective studies have
suggested that early ASCT (within 12 months of diagnosis)
provided superior PFS but similar OS compared to patients
who underwent delayed ASCT in the setting of novel agent
induction therapy [28, 29]. The IFM portion of the IFM-DFCI
study, after a median follow-up of 39 months, demonstrated
that the use of an upfront ASCT improved the depth of
hematologic response both in terms of rates of CR (59% vs.
48%) as well as MRD negativity (79% vs. 65%) in patients
who obtained at least a very good partial response (VGPR).
An upfront ASCT also improved median PFS (50 months vs.
36 months) when compared to a delayed ASCT upon first
relapse [25]. In addition, QoL assessments favored the use of
an upfront ASCT. However, the 3-year post-randomization
rate of OS was similar in the two groups [25].
Thus, given that most studies have demonstrated an
improvement in depth of response and PFS with upfront
ASCT, we recommend that it should be the standard
approach for eligible MM patients. However, given the
equivalent OS with either upfront or delayed ASCT stra-
tegies, delaying an ASCT due to personal choice or other
logistical situations is reasonable especially in standard-risk
patients. This should be done in the context of a thorough
discussion with each patient informing them about the risk
of not being suitable candidates for ASCT in the future
upon first disease relapse. A retrospective study from our
institution estimated this risk at about 10% either due to
poor performance status, worsening comorbidities or rapid
uncontrolled disease relapse [30]. In contrast, for patients
with high-risk disease by cytogenetics or gene expression
profiling, in the absence of participation in a clinical trial,
our practice at the Mayo Clinic is to recommend the use of
an upfront ASCT over a delayed ASCT given that the best
OS outcomes to date for this patient population seems to be
derived from phase III clinical trials in which they all
underwent an upfront ASCT [31]. Early ASCT offers the
best chance of achieving CR, especially MRD-negative
status which has been shown to be associated with better
survival outcomes [32, 33]. Finally, it is important to
reiterate that the RCTs have shown equivalence in OS
between upfront ASCT and ASCT upon first relapse and
not upfront ASCT versus no ASCT ever or ASCT beyond
second line therapy. Fig. 1 summarizes the mSMART
algorithm for utilization of ASCT for the treatment of MM
in newly diagnosed patients based on cytogenetic risk.
Recommendation: Though a delayed ASCT upon first
relapse is safe and feasible, an upfront ASCT in eligible
MM patients remains the standard of care especially in
those patients with high-risk disease. (Level of Evidence: I,
Grade of Recommendation: A)
Eligibility for ASCT
Most clinical trials assessing the efficacy and safety of
ASCT in MM enrolled patients younger than 65 years and
this cut-off remains the standard inclusion criterion in most
Newly Diagnosed MM
Standard-Risk
Intermediate-Risk                   High-Risk
Induction therapy1
Induction therapy1
Mel200 ASCT3
Collect/store stem cells
Continue therapy2 
Upfront
ASCT? 
No
Consider Tandem
Mel200 ASCT3   
Maintenance therapy1
1Refer to newly diagnosed MSMART algorithm       
2Eventually transition to maintenance therapy
3For Age >70 or CrCl<30 ml/min, consider use Mel140 mg/m2 
Mel200 ASCT3
Yes
1
strelapse
Fig. 1 The mSMART algorithm
for utilization of ASCT for the
treatment of MM in newly
diagnosed patients based on
cytogenetic risk
356
W. I. Gonsalves et al.
 European
countries.
However,
several
studies
have
demonstrated the feasibility of performing an ASCT in MM
patients 65 to 76 years of age with similar efficacy and
toxicities to younger patients [34–36]. However, co-
morbidities do affect the outcomes of ASCT. Retro-
spective registry data have suggested that the HSCT co-
morbidity index (HCT-CI) score typically used for allo-
SCTs, where the higher score is associated with higher
morbidity, can predict for worse outcomes in patients with
MM undergoing ASCT [37]. Careful patient selection based
on overall health status rather than just chronological age or
presence of renal insufficiency is important to ensure an
optimal balance between risks and benefits.
Recommendation: In contrast to strict chronologic age
cutoffs
for
ASCT
eligibility,
performance
status
and
comorbidities should be considered for ASCT eligibility.
(Level of Evidence: III, Grade of Recommendation: B)
In general, depth of response to initial induction che-
motherapy has been positively associated with outcomes
post-ASCT [38]. However, it should be noted that very
rapid and deep responses to induction therapy in some
patients with MM have been subsequently followed by
early and quick disease relapses [39]. Thus, depth of
response is not always predictive of a positive outcome. A
retrospective study from the International Bone Marrow
Transplant Registry in the US showed no OS benefit when
providing additional induction therapy to deepen the
hematological response in MM patients with at least a
partial response (PR) to the original induction therapy [40].
Furthermore, several studies have evaluated the use of
ASCT in patients with refractory MM that show even such
patients may benefit from an upfront ASCT though this was
limited to pre-novel agent era studies [41–44]. Current
upfront MM therapy typically does not include conven-
tional cytotoxic chemotherapy. So, a poor response to these
novel agents does not necessarily preclude a response to
alkylator-based therapy such as high-dose melphalan fol-
lowed by an ASCT. Recent retrospective studies suggest
that even patients with refractory disease to novel agent
regimens can gain therapeutic benefit from ASCT though
less than those with responsive disease [45]. Thus, patients
not responding to initial induction therapy will likely
experience worse OS since they have a more chemoresistant
tumor. Such patients should undergo an ASCT as soon as
possible rather than delay the process for further tumor
debulking with salvage chemotherapy. The MRC XI phase
III trial evaluated the value of deepening hematological
responses prior to ASCT in a prospective randomized
fashion by providing additional sequential cycles of borte-
zomib, cyclophosphamide, and dexamethasone to half of
the patients who experienced a suboptimal hematologic
response (achieving only an MR or PR) with IMiD-based
triplet induction therapy [46]. This additional PI-based
therapy upgraded the hematological responses from MR or
PR to a VGPR or better in 41% of evaluable patients.
Patients who received additional sequential cycles of PI-
based therapy prior to an ASCT had an improved median
PFS of (55 vs. 30 months, P = 0.0003) but no difference in
OS when compared to those patients who did not receive
any further therapy prior to proceeding to an ASCT [46].
Recommendation: Depth of response to induction
therapy should not dictate eligibility for an ASCT. (Level of
Evidence: III, Grade of Recommendation: B)
Stem cell mobilization
Direct harvesting of hematopoietic stem cells from the bone
marrow is rarely performed for ASCTs and instead mobi-
lization of CD34+ cells from the bone marrow compart-
ment to the peripheral blood is the mainstay of collecting
hematopoietic stem cells. The peripheral blood approach to
stem cell mobilization can be performed with the use of
growth factor alone, growth factor in combination with
cytotoxic chemotherapy “chemomobilization” or growth
factor in combination with plerixafor. The ideal approach to
mobilize stem cells should produce the highest yield with
the lowest toxicity and cost for patients with MM [47]. The
minimum number of peripheral blood stem cells (PBSCs)
required for an ASCT is 2 × 106 CD34+ cells/kg while 3 to
5 × 106 CD34+ cells/kg are ideal [48]. Mobilization with G-
CSF alone followed by initiation of apheresis is widely used
and well tolerated. Plerixafor, a chemokine receptor 4
(CXCR4)
antagonist
which
disrupts
the
interactions
between the stromal derived factor 1 (SDF-1) and CXCR4,
can enhance stem cell mobilization and yield from each
apheresis session. Peripheral blood CD34+ cell count
monitoring prior to apheresis can identify patients at risk of
stem cell mobilizing failure [49]. In such cases, the use of
plerixafor prior to apheresis triggered by the peripheral
blood CD34+ cell count or initial apheresis yield can
minimize the risk of stem cell mobilization failures [50].
Chemomobilization is especially useful in those patients
with a high risk of stem cell mobilization failure as it can
increase the PBSC yield while concomitantly decreasing the
MM tumor burden. However, in a non-randomized assess-
ment, this has not yielded superior OS outcomes compared
to mobilization with G-CSF alone [51]. In addition, che-
momobilization increases the risk of toxicity such as
infections and is less predictable in timing to stem cell goal
collection when compared to growth factor in combination
with plerixafor [52, 53]. For these reasons, the role of
chemomobilization has been questioned in the era of novel
agent induction therapy [54]. Nevertheless, it can be con-
sidered in selected settings—prior failed stem cell mobili-
zation with G-CSF and/or plerixafor, the presence of high
Utilization of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for the treatment of multiple myeloma: a Mayo. . .
357
 numbers of circulating plasma cells in the peripheral blood,
or in the presence of progressive disease at the time of stem
cell mobilization [55].
Prolonged exposure to lenalidomide therapy has been
associated with suboptimal CD34+ stem cell mobilization
[56–58]. Fortunately, the use of plerixafor and/or chemo-
mobilization with cyclophosphamide and G-CSF has been
able to overcome the issue of poor mobilization related to
prior lenalidomide exposure [59–63]. Thus, we recommend
pursuing stem cell mobilization and collection within 4–6
cycles of lenalidomide exposure in all ASCT eligible
patients even if planning for a delayed ASCT. Finally,
salvage second and third ASCTs have been performed with
considerable success in patients with relapsed MM [64]. In
order to preserve these options of performing a tandem
ASCT or a second or third salvage ASCT, an attempt to
collect for at least two or more ASCTs in most patients aged
under 70 years is recommended [55].
Recommendation: For all ASCT eligible MM patients,
stem cells should be collected within 6 months of initiating
therapy especially in the presence of lenalidomide exposure.
(Level of Evidence: II, Grade of Recommendation: A)
Recommendation: An attempt to collect stem cells for at
least two or more ASCTs should be considered in all eli-
gible MM patients aged under 70 years. (Level of Evi-
dence: II, Grade of Recommendation: A)
Conditioning regimen
The current standard conditioning for patients with MM
undergoing ASCT has been melphalan 200 mg/m2 ever
since it was shown to be superior to melphalan 140 mg/m2
plus total body irradiation [65]. Unfortunately, most patients
relapse post-ASCT despite receiving melphalan 200 mg/m2
and hence further improvements in the conditioning regi-
mens are required with the hope of deepening response and
delaying disease relapse [66]. Investigators have evaluated
other conditioning regimens that combine melphalan with
standard chemotherapy or novel agents with limited success
[67–70]. In an open label, randomized phase III study by
the IFM network, the addition of bortezomib to high-dose
melphalan as part of conditioning therapy was not asso-
ciated with a significantly different depth of hematologic
response, PFS and OS when compared to high-dose mel-
phalan alone [71]. Nevertheless, recently, encouraging
results from a phase III trial showed that the conditioning
regimen of melphalan–busulfan was safe and associated
with an improved PFS (65 months vs. 34 months) compared
to melphalan alone [72].
With the inclusion of novel agents such as PIs as part of
induction therapy, there has been a reduction in the number
of
newly
diagnosed
MM
patients
still
experiencing
significant renal dysfunction. This is important since MM
patients with elevated creatinine are at risk for higher
transplant associated morbidity and mortality as well as a
shorter OS [73]. Nevertheless, ASCT utilizing high-dose
melphalan as the conditioning regimen can still be per-
formed safely in MM patients with certain comorbidities,
including renal insufficiency or while on hemodialysis [74–
76]. Administration of reduced doses of melphalan such as
140 mg/m2 should be considered for all patients who are
dialysis dependent or at least have a significantly impaired
creatinine clearance (<30 ml/min) [77]. Patients over 70
years of age may require a reduction of the melphalan dose
but this is less clear and requires clinical judgement based
on the physiologic fitness, the presence of comorbidities,
and the aggressiveness of the disease [34].
Recommendation: High-dose melphalan chemotherapy
remains the standard conditioning therapy used outside of a
clinical trial. However, participation in clinical trials look-
ing at improving the efficacy of conditioning chemotherapy
in MM with novel agents is preferred if available. (Level of
Evidence: I, Grade of Recommendation: A)
MM patients with extensive extramedullary disease have
poor outcomes. Retrospective results suggest that the
BEAM (dexamethasone with carmustine, etoposide, cytar-
abine, and melphalan) conditioning that is typically used for
lymphoma patients undergoing an ASCT may be effective
in those MM patients with extramedullary disease [78].
There seems to be a rationale for treating such MM patients
with lymphoma-like tumor biology with traditional lym-
phoma regimens. However, RCTs comparing BEAM to
high-dose melphalan alone as conditioning therapy are
lacking in MM patients with extramedullary disease.
Recommendation: In those MM patients with extensive
extramedullary disease undergoing an ASCT, a combina-
tion of carmustine, etoposide, cytarabine, and melphalan
(BEAM) may be considered as the conditioning therapy.
(Level of Evidence: IV, Grade of Recommendation: B)
Role for tandem ASCT
A pre-planned second ASCT within 6 months of the first
ASCT meets the definition of a tandem ASCT approach.
The rationale for its use is that a second exposure to high-
dose melphalan may lead to a deeper hematological
response. The first trial to evaluate the role of tandem ASCT
in MM was in the form of Total Therapy 1 designed by the
Arkansas Myeloma Group [79]. Several trials since then
were conducted to compare single versus tandem ASCT.
Several phase III studies demonstrated the ability of tandem
ASCT to improve EFS but only one had OS improvement
which was restricted to those patients who have not
achieved a VGPR after the first ASCT [80–82]. These
358
W. I. Gonsalves et al.
 studies were performed in the era prior to novel agent
induction therefore limiting the applicability of these studies
to current practice. Similarly, two prior meta-analyses of
studies utilizing non-novel agent treatment regimens did not
show any improvement in EFS or OS [83, 84]. To address
this drawback, an unplanned, pooled analysis of four dif-
ferent phase III studies in which single or tandem ASCT
was utilized (based on the treatment center) after treatment
with a bortezomib-based induction regimen was evaluated
[85]. This analysis demonstrated a significant improvement
in the median PFS as well as 5-year OS in favor of tandem
ASCT, especially for those patients with high-risk cytoge-
netics such as t(4;14) and/or deletion 17p who had not
achieved a CR after induction therapy (70% vs. 17%) [85].
However, since single versus tandem transplant was not
decided by randomization, an element of potential bias has
to be kept in mind. Therefore, these findings cannot be
considered conclusive. Similarly, preliminary assessments
in
the
EMN02/HO95
MM
study
showed
significant
improvement in the 3-year PFS (73% vs. 64%) and 3-year
OS (89% vs. 82%) in favor of tandem ASCT compared to
single ASCT [86]. The superiority of a tandem ASCT was
especially evident in patients with high-risk cytogenetics in
both 3-year PFS and OS [86]. In contrast to these positive
results, the prospective phase III BMT-CTN 0702 STA-
MINA study showed no improvement in outcomes between
patients who after an initial ASCT underwent consolidation
with either (a) tandem ASCT followed by lenalidomide
maintenance versus (b) consolidation with four cycles of
bortezomib, lenalidomide, and dexamethasone followed by
lenalidomide maintenance versus (c) lenalidomide main-
tenance alone [87]. Potential reasons for lack of benefit seen
in the BMT-CTN 0702 trial could be that most patients
received a combination of PI and IMiD-based induction
therapy with variable durations lasting up to 12 months
compared to the aforementioned European studies in
which only the PI, bortezomib, was included in the induc-
tion therapy that was planned for a shorter duration prior to
ASCT. Furthermore, the criteria for classification as high-
risk disease was different between the EMN02 and BMT-
CTN 0702 trials where the latter trial included patients
with an elevated β2-microglobulin as having high-risk
disease
making
it
difficult
to
discern
whether
the
tandem ASCT approach would have a select benefit in
patients with high-risk disease defined by cytogenetic risk
alone. Despite these discordant results summarized in
Table 3, the role of an upfront tandem ASCT should be
considered in MM patients with high-risk disease after a
detailed discussion especially if the patient has not achieved
at least a VGPR after the first ASCT or in the context of a
clinical trial.
Recommendation: In select patients with high-risk dis-
ease and good performance status, a tandem ASCT within
Table 3 Summary of phase III clinical trials evaluating the efficacy of tandem ASCT compared to single ASCT
Clinical trial
No.
Induction
Randomized groups
EFS/PFS
OS
Salwender/Cavo et al. [85]. Pooled analysis
of 4 RCTs in NDMM
606
Bortezomib-regimen
ASCT × 1 (Not randomized)
Median PFS: 38 mos
5-year OS: 63%
Bortezomib-regimen
ASCT × 2 (Not randomized)
Median PFS: 50 mos
5-year OS: 75%
Stadtmauer et al. [87]. NDMM pts <71 y/o
758
Any induction regimen as per
clinician choice up to 12 cycles
Mel200 mg/m2 →R-maint
Median PFS: 52 mos
Median OS: 83 mos
Mel200 mg/m2 × 2 →R-maint
Median PFS: 57 mos
Median OS: 86 mos
Mel200 mg/m2 →VRd →R-maint
Median PFS: 57 mos
Median OS: 82 mos
Cavo et al. [86]. NDMM pts ≤65 y/o
1503
VCd × 3–4 cycles
Mel200 mg/m2 × 1 →+/-VRd →R-
maint
3-year PFS: 64%
3-year OS: 82%
Mel200 mg/m2 × 2 →+/-VRd →R-
maint
3-year PFS: 73%
3-year OS: 89%
R-maint lenalidomide maintenance, VRd bortezomib, lenalidomide, and dexamethasone, VCd bortezomib, cyclophosphamide, and dexamethasone, PFS progression-free survival, OS overall
survival
Utilization of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for the treatment of multiple myeloma: a Mayo. . .
359
 6 months of the first ASCT should be considered. (Level of
Evidence: I, Grade of Recommendation: C)
Consolidation post-ASCT
The goal of consolidation therapy post-ASCT is to suppress
any residual disease (i.e., deepen the hematologic response)
and subsequently prolonging the duration of the response
and OS while minimizing toxicity. Several RCTs have
demonstrated the ability of consolidation regimens to dee-
pen responses as well as prolong PFS; however, the impact
on OS has been inconsistent [88–90]. The prospective phase
III BMT-CTN 0702 STAMINA trial showed no added
benefit of consolidation therapy with four cycles of borte-
zomib, lenalidomide, and dexamethasone in terms of PFS
and OS [87]. However, the EMN02 study suggested a
significant PFS benefit after consolidation with two cycles
of bortezomib, lenalidomide, and dexamethasone therapy
but OS benefit is unclear at present [91].
Recommendation: Consolidation therapy post-ASCT is
not routinely supported except in the setting of a clinical
trial or in special clinical circumstances. (Level of Evi-
dence: II, Grade of Recommendation: B)
Maintenance post-ASCT
In contrast to consolidation therapy, maintenance therapy is
typically low-dose therapy administered over a long period
of time with minimal toxicity. Single agent thalidomide has
consistently shown improvements in depth of response and
PFS [92–97], and in one trial [93] and two separate meta-
analyses [97, 98], it also improved OS. However, clinically
significant peripheral neuropathy and fatigue prevent it from
being an ideal maintenance agent. Furthermore, in patients
with high-risk cytogenetics such as deletion 17p, thalido-
mide maintenance has been associated with worse outcomes
compared to placebo [99].
Recommendation: Post-ASCT thalidomide maintenance
is not recommended in MM patients with high-risk cyto-
genetics. (Level of Evidence: II, Grade of Recommen-
dation: B)
Maintenance with the next generation IMiD, lenalido-
mide, is generally better tolerated than thalidomide. Two
large placebo-controlled RCTs by the IFM and CALGB
demonstrated that lenalidomide maintenance deepens the
hematological response as well as extends PFS significantly
compared to no maintenance [100, 101]. A third prospective
trial by the GIMEMA group demonstrated that lenalidomide
maintenance improved median PFS compared with no
maintenance [20]. However, only in the CALGB study did
the extended PFS translate into an improvement in OS for
patients receiving lenalidomide maintenance. A patient
level pooled meta-analysis compiling all the three afore-
mentioned RCTs confirmed the PFS benefit and demon-
strated an improved OS with lenalidomide maintenance
after ASCT when compared with placebo or observation
[102]. However, PFS and OS benefit for lenalidomide
maintenance was limited to those patients without adverse
risk cytogenetics. The Myeloma XI trial which compared
lenalidomide maintenance to no maintenance post-ASCT
also demonstrated significant improvement in PFS with
lenalidomide maintenance [103]. Finally, patients need to
be advised on the small but consistent risk of secondary
primary malignancies associated with prolonged lenalido-
mide maintenance post-ASCT [104].
Recommendation:
Post-ASCT
lenalidomide
main-
tenance should be considered in all MM patients with
standard risk cytogenetics. (Level of Evidence: I, Grade of
Recommendation: A)
Post-ASCT maintenance with a PI such as bortezomib
improved both PFS and OS for those patients with deletion
17p compared to maintenance with thalidomide outcomes
reported in the HOVON-65/GMMG-HD4 trial [31, 99].
Thus, PI maintenance post-ASCT should be considered in
high-risk MM patients with deletion 17p and this can likely
be extended to other high-risk cytogenetic abnormalities
such as t(4;14), t(14;16), and +1q amplification.
Recommendation:
Maintenance
therapy
post-ASCT
with a PI should be considered in all MM patients with
high-risk cytogenetics. (Level of Evidence: II, Grade of
Recommendation: B)
Second ASCT for salvage therapy
Most patients will relapse despite consolidation and main-
tenance therapy post-ASCT [66]. A second ASCT as a
salvage option in relapsed disease is a viable option for
some of these patients. Retrospective studies, mostly from
single institutions with small sample sizes and variable post-
ASCT maintenance have consistently shown that a salvage
second ASCT can be a safe and a beneficial option (Table 4)
[105–120]. A prospective, randomized phase III study of
salvage second ASCT was compared to conventional che-
motherapy with cyclophosphamide and showed that the
salvage ASCT improved PFS but not OS [121]. Generally,
the length of PFS gained after the first ASCT is associated
with the length of PFS gained after the second ASCT for
salvage therapy. However, the PFS after the second ASCT
as salvage therapy is generally shorter than that gained after
the first ASCT.
Recommendation: Second ASCT as salvage therapy
should be considered in patients with MM who had ade-
quate duration of disease control with their first ASCT: >
360
W. I. Gonsalves et al.
 18 months unmaintained or > 36 months-maintained
response to first ASCT. (Level of Evidence: II, Grade of
Recommendation: B)
Allogeneic stem cell transplantation
Even though evidence of a graft versus myeloma effect
associated with long-term disease control or cure has been
established in MM, the role of an allogeneic stem cell
transplant (Allo-SCT) in MM remains controversial. Allo-
SCT can be performed with either myeloablative or reduced
intensity conditioning (RIC). Unfortunately, myeloablative
approaches have been fraught with significant treatment-
related mortality (TRM) [122–124] and hence RIC allo-
SCTs have been favored. The latter offers the ability for less
toxic conditioning but with the benefits of a continuous
graft versus myeloma effect. Several studies have evaluated
tandem ASCT versus ASCT followed by RIC Allo-SCT in
the upfront setting; however, the pre-transplant induction
therapy, conditioning regimens, and graft versus host dis-
ease prophylaxis are quite different among these trials
making cross-trial comparisons difficult (Table 5) [125–
130]. Nevertheless, with long follow-up, some studies have
suggested a benefit for the ASCT-RIC-allo-SCT approach
[127, 129]. However, high TRM remains an issue and in a
meta-analysis of all available studies, there was a lack of
benefit of ASCT-RIC-allo-SCT over a tandem ASCT [131].
Given these inconsistent and contradictory results, the use
of an ASCT-RIC-allo-SCT in the upfront setting is mostly
limited to the setting of a clinical trial. The assessment of an
Allo-SCT with RIC conditioning in the relapsed setting has
been limited to retrospective studies. However, it has been
uniformly demonstrated that MM patients with multiply
relapsed disease do not appear to obtain any significant
survival benefit from a salvage allo-SCT compared to sal-
vage ASCT despite some studies suggesting lower relapse
rates in the former [118, 132–137]. This lack of survival
benefit with a salvage Allo-SCT seems to be driven by a
higher rate of non-relapse mortality. Thus, allo-SCT should
not be done as a “last resort”. If contemplated, it should be
done earlier in the disease course, for carefully selected
patients with “high-risk disease”, ideally on a clinical trial.
More importantly, patients must be made aware and be
willing to accept the risk of toxicities associated with allo-
SCT such as graft versus host disease and non-relapse
mortality.
Recommendations: We do not recommend the routine
use of a myeloablative or RIC-Allo-SCT as upfront therapy
except in the setting of a clinical trial or in special clinical
circumstances. (Level of Evidence: I, Grade of Recom-
mendation: C)
Recommendations: We suggest considering the use of
Allo-SCT as salvage therapy in eligible patients younger
than 60 years of age, with high-risk disease and who have
experienced an early relapse after primary therapy, but
preferably in the setting of a clinical trial. (Level of Evi-
dence: I, Grade of Recommendation: C)
Conclusions and future directions
The field of MM has seen unprecedented success as
the survival of patients with MM has improved con-
siderably over the last two decades with the incorporation
of
highly
effective
novel
therapies.
However,
even
though the extent of benefit provided by ASCT and its
timing will continue to be debated in the era of continued
development of novel therapies, it is still clear that
ASCT improves the depth of response and provides
Table 4 Retrospective studies
evaluating the use of salvage
ASCT in relapsed multiple
myeloma
Study
No.
ORR (%)
Median PFS (months)
Median OS (months)
TRM (%)
Shah et al. [111]
44
90
12.3
31.7
2
Jimenez-Zepaeda et al. [110]
81
97
16.4
53
3
Olin et al. [116]
41
55
8.5
20.7
7
Fenk et al. [114]
55
75
14
52
5
Alvares et al. [120]
83
—
15.6
34.8
—
Burzynski et al. [115]
25
64
12
19
8
Mehta et al. [133]
42
81
12.5
32
10
Eliece et al. [117]
26
69
14.8
38.1
0
Gonsalves et al. [107]
98
86
10.3
33
4
Yhim et al. [119]
48
—
18
55.5
—
Lemieux et al. [108]
81
93
18
48
0
Michaelis et al. [109]
187
—
3-year PFS: 13%
3-year OS: 46%
2
TRM treatment-related mortality, ORR overall response rate, PFS progression-free survival, OS overall
survival
Utilization of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for the treatment of multiple myeloma: a Mayo. . .
361
 significant PFS benefit producing unprecedented survi-
val outcomes. Thus, ASCT remains an integral part
of the management plan of all newly diagnosed
MM patients who are otherwise eligible. Similar to our
current Mayo Clinic consensus on the use of HSCT in
MM, the European Myeloma Network (EMN) guide-
lines also support the use of an upfront ASCT with high-
dose melphalan in all eligible MM patients followed by
PI and/or IMiD-based maintenance therapy [138].
However, differences between the two guidelines exist
in the strength of recommendation for routine use of
consolidation therapy for all MM patients prior to
maintenance therapy. Nevertheless, both the Mayo
Clinic and EMN guidelines strongly recommend the use
of salvage ASCT for relapsed disease based on the
duration of disease control obtained after the first ASCT.
Finally, the upfront use of an allo-SCT is not recom-
mended by either consensus guidelines except in the
setting
of
a
clinical
trial
or
in
special
clinical
circumstances.
The standardization and availability of MRD testing
for clinical use could allow for a more refined applica-
tion and identification of sub-groups of patients who are
most likely to benefit or for whom ASCT can be safely
deferred to first relapse. Just like the standard treatment
of MM, ASCT is not static. Novel conditioning regi-
mens are being evaluated that incorporate novel agents
(carfilzomib) or traditional chemotherapy drugs to build
on the efficacy of melphalan. There appears to be a role
for the use of tandem ASCT in MM patients with high-
risk cytogenetics. However, the role for allo-SCT still
needs to be better defined in the context of MM. Finally,
the role of ASCT will continue to have to be defined in
the context of emerging immunotherapies such as
mABs, antibody drug conjugates, immune checkpoint
inhibitors, Bispecific T-cell Engagers (BiTe), and chi-
meric antigen receptor-T cell therapy enter into clinical
practice. ASCT should be seen as complementary rather
than in competition to other available treatments, and a
judicious, personalized use of the right treatment at the
right time can be expected to lead to the best outcome
for the patient.
Acknowledgements This work is supported in part by grants
CA186781 and CA218742 from the National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, as well as the Marion Schwartz
Multiple Myeloma Foundation.
Author contributions WIG and VR designed the study and wrote
the paper with assistance from S.K.K.; F.K.B., S.A., P.L.B., A.A.
C., D.D., A.D., R.F., S.R.H., P.K., T.V.K., R.A.K., M.Q.L., J.T.
L., E.M., C.B.R., T.S., A.K.S., R.W., R.S.G., R.A.K., N.L., Y.L.,
J.A.L., S.J.R., S.R.Z., A.L.F., Y.L.H., M.A.H., A.A.M., W.H., S.
V.R., S.K.K., and M.A.G. critically reviewed the manuscript, and
approved the final version.
Table 5 Summary of phase III clinical trials evaluating the efficacy of tandem ASCT to ASCT-RIC-Allo-SCT in the upfront setting for patients with MM
Clinical trial
No.
Randomized groups
ORR
EFS/PFS
OS
TRM
Krishnan et al. [130]. NDMM pts ≤70 y/o
710
ASCT × 2
CR: 45%
3-year PFS: 46%
3-year OS: 80%
3-year TRM: 4%
ASCT→RIC-Allo-SCT (TBI 2 Gy)
CR: 58%
3-year PFS: 43%
3-year OS: 77%
3-year TRM: 11%
Giaconne et al. [129]. NDMM pts ≤65 y/o
162
ASCT × 2
CR: 26%
Median EFS: 2.4 years
Median OS: 4.25
years
2-year TRM: 2%
ASCT→RIC-Allo-SCT (TBI 2 Gy)
CR: 55%
Median EFS: 2.8 years
Median OS: NR
2-year TRM:10%
Gahrton et al. [127]. NDMM pts <70 y/o
357
ASCT × 2
CR: 41%
8-year PFS:12%
8-year OS: 36%
3-year TRM: 3%
ASCT→RIC-Allo-SCT (Flu/TBI 2
Gy)
CR: 50%
8-year PFS: 22%
8-year OS: 49%
3-year TRM: 13%
Moreau et al. [128]. NDMM pts <65 y/o (w/
del 13 and β2-microglobulin >3 mg/l)
284
ASCT × 2 (+/− anti-IL6 antibody)
CR: 38%
Median EFS: 22 mos
Median OS: 48 mos
5-year TRM: N/A
ASCT→RIC-Allo-SCT (Flu/Bu)
CR: 62%
Median EFS: 19 mos
Median OS: 34 mos
5-year TRM: 11%
Rosinol et al. [126]. NDMM pts <70 y/o
752
ASCT × 2
CR: 11%
Median PFS: 31 mos
Median OS: 58 mos
TRM: 5%
ASCT→RIC-Allo-SCT (Flu/Mel)
CR: 40%
Median PFS: NR
Median OS: NR
TRM: 16%
Knop et al. [125]. NDMM pts ≤60 y/o (w/
del 13)
199
ASCT × 2
CR: 31%
Median PFS: 23 mos
Median OS: 72 mos
2-year TRM: 4%
ASCT→RIC-Allo-SCT (Flu/Mel)
CR: 59%
Median PFS: 35 mos
Median OS: 70 mos
2-year TRM: 12%
ORR overall response rate, EFS event-free survival, PFS progression-free survival, OS overall survival, CR complete remission, TRM transplant-related mortality, NR not reached
362
W. I. Gonsalves et al.
 Compliance with ethical standards
Conflict
of
interest Dr.
Dingli
has
received
research
funding
from Millenium/Takeda. Dr. Ailawadhi has received grants and
other support from Takeda Oncology. Dr. Bergsagel has received
support
from
Millenium
and
Celgene.
Dr.
Dispenzieri
has
received grants from Celgene and Takeda. Dr. Gertz has received
personal fees from Celgene. Dr. Kapoor has received research funding
from Takeda and Celgene. Dr. Kumar has received consultancy fees
from Millennium/Takeda and Celgene. Dr. Lacy has received grants
from Celgene. The remaining authors declare that they have no conflict
of interest.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
1. Auner HW, Szydlo R, Hoek J, Goldschmidt H, Stoppa AM,
Morgan GJ, et al. Trends in autologous hematopoietic cell
transplantation for multiple myeloma in Europe: increased use
and improved outcomes in elderly patients in recent years. Bone
Marrow Transplant. 2015;50:209–15.
2. Costa LJ, Zhang MJ, Zhong X, Dispenzieri A, Lonial S,
Krishnan A, et al. Trends in utilization and outcomes of auto-
logous transplantation as early therapy for multiple myeloma.
Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2013;19:1615–24.
3. Mikhael JR, Dingli D, Roy V, Reeder CB, Buadi FK, Hayman
SR, et al. Management of newly diagnosed symptomatic multi-
ple myeloma: updated Mayo Stratification of Myeloma and Risk-
Adapted Therapy (mSMART) consensus guidelines 2013. Mayo
Clin Proc. 2013;88:360–76.
4. Dingli D, Ailawadhi S, Bergsagel PL, Buadi FK, Dispenzieri A,
Fonseca R, et al. Therapy for relapsed multiple myeloma:
guidelines from the Mayo Stratification for Myeloma and Risk-
Adapted Therapy. Mayo Clin Proc. 2017;92:578–98.
5. Kumar SK, Dispenzieri A, Lacy MQ, Gertz MA, Buadi FK,
Pandey S, et al. Continued improvement in survival in multiple
myeloma: changes in early mortality and outcomes in older
patients. Leukemia. 2014;28:1122–8.
6. Kumar SK, Rajkumar SV, Dispenzieri A, Lacy MQ, Hayman
SR, Buadi FK, et al. Improved survival in multiple myeloma and
the impact of novel therapies. Blood. 2008;111:2516–20.
7. Kumar SK, Mikhael JR, Buadi FK, Dingli D, Dispenzieri A,
Fonseca R, et al. Management of newly diagnosed symptomatic
multiple myeloma: updated Mayo Stratification of Myeloma and
Risk-Adapted Therapy (mSMART) consensus guidelines. Mayo
Clin Proc. 2009;84:1095–110.
8. Dispenzieri A, Rajkumar SV, Gertz MA, Fonseca R, Lacy MQ,
Bergsagel PL, et al. Treatment of newly diagnosed multiple
myeloma based on Mayo Stratification of Myeloma and Risk-
adapted Therapy (mSMART): consensus statement. Mayo Clin
Proc. 2007;82:323–41.
9. McElwain TJ, Powles RL. High-dose intravenous melphalan for
plasma-cell leukaemia and myeloma. Lancet. 1983;2:822–4.
10. Barlogie B, Hall R, Zander A, Dicke K, Alexanian R. High-dose
melphalan with autologous bone marrow transplantation for
multiple myeloma. Blood. 1986;67:1298–301.
11. Barlogie B, Alexanian R, Dicke KA, Zagars G, Spitzer G,
Jagannath S, et al. High-dose chemoradiotherapy and autologous
bone marrow transplantation for resistant multiple myeloma.
Blood. 1987;70:869–72.
12. Attal M, Harousseau JL, Stoppa AM, Sotto JJ, Fuzibet JG, Rossi
JF, et al. A prospective, randomized trial of autologous bone
marrow transplantation and chemotherapy in multiple myeloma.
Intergroupe
Francais
du
Myelome.
N
Engl
J
Med.
1996;335:91–7.
13. Child JA, Morgan GJ, Davies FE, Owen RG, Bell SE, Hawkins
K, et al. High-dose chemotherapy with hematopoietic stem-cell
rescue for multiple myeloma. N Engl J Med. 2003;348:1875–83.
14. Fermand JP, Katsahian S, Divine M, Leblond V, Dreyfus F,
Macro M, et al. High-dose therapy and autologous blood stem-
cell transplantation compared with conventional treatment in
myeloma patients aged 55 to 65 years: long-term results of a
randomized control trial from the Group Myelome-Autogreffe. J
Clin Oncol. 2005;23:9227–33.
15. Barlogie B, Kyle RA, Anderson KC, Greipp PR, Lazarus HM,
Hurd DD, et al. Standard chemotherapy compared with high-
dose chemoradiotherapy for multiple myeloma: final results of
phase
III
US
Intergroup
Trial
S9321.
J
Clin
Oncol.
2006;24:929–36.
16. Blade J, Rosinol L, Sureda A, Ribera JM, Diaz-Mediavilla J,
Garcia-Larana J, et al. High-dose therapy intensification com-
pared with continued standard chemotherapy in multiple mye-
loma patients responding to the initial chemotherapy: long-term
results from a prospective randomized trial from the Spanish
cooperative group PETHEMA. Blood. 2005;106:3755–9.
17. Palumbo A, Bringhen S, Petrucci MT, Musto P, Rossini F, Nunzi
M, et al. Intermediate-dose melphalan improves survival of
myeloma patients aged 50 to 70: results of a randomized con-
trolled trial. Blood. 2004;104:3052–7.
18. Koreth J, Cutler CS, Djulbegovic B, Behl R, Schlossman RL,
Munshi NC, et al. High-dose therapy with single autologous
transplantation versus chemotherapy for newly diagnosed mul-
tiple myeloma: a systematic review and meta-analysis of ran-
domized controlled trials. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant.
2007;13:183–96.
19. Fermand JP, Ravaud P, Chevret S, Divine M, Leblond V,
Belanger C, et al. High-dose therapy and autologous peripheral
blood stem cell transplantation in multiple myeloma: up-front or
rescue treatment? Results of a multicenter sequential randomized
clinical trial. Blood. 1998;92:3131–6.
20. Palumbo A, Cavallo F, Gay F, Di Raimondo F, Ben Yehuda D,
Petrucci MT, et al. Autologous transplantation and maintenance
therapy in multiple myeloma. N Engl J Med. 2014;371:895–905.
21. Gay F, Oliva S, Petrucci MT, Conticello C, Catalano L, Corra-
dini P, et al. Chemotherapy plus lenalidomide versus autologous
transplantation, followed by lenalidomide plus prednisone versus
lenalidomide maintenance, in patients with multiple myeloma: a
randomised,
multicentre,
phase
3
trial.
Lancet
Oncol.
2015;16:1617–29.
22. Gay F, Oliva S, Petrucci MT, Montefusco V, Conticello C,
Musto P, et al. Autologous transplant vs oral chemotherapy and
lenalidomide in newly diagnosed young myeloma patients: a
pooled analysis. Leukemia. 2017;31:1727–34.
23. Cavo M, Hájek R, Pantani L, Beksac M, Oliva S, Dozza L, et al.
Autologous
stem
cell
transplantation
versus
bortezomib-
melphalan-prednisone for newly diagnosed multiple myeloma:
Utilization of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for the treatment of multiple myeloma: a Mayo. . .
363
 second interim analysis of the phase 3 EMN02/HO95 study.
Blood. 2017;130 Suppl 1:397–397.
24. Durie BG, Hoering A, Abidi MH, Rajkumar SV, Epstein J,
Kahanic SP, et al. Bortezomib with lenalidomide and dex-
amethasone versus lenalidomide and dexamethasone alone in
patients with newly diagnosed myeloma without intent for
immediate autologous stem-cell transplant (SWOG S0777): a
randomised, open-label, phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2017;389:519–27.
25. Attal M, Lauwers-Cances V, Hulin C, Leleu X, Caillot D,
Escoffre M, et al. Lenalidomide, bortezomib, and dexamethasone
with
transplantation
for
myeloma.
N
Engl
J
Med.
2017;376:1311–20.
26. Dhakal B, Szabo A, Chhabra S, Hamadani M, D’Souza A,
Usmani SZ, et al. Autologous transplantation for newly diag-
nosed multiple myeloma in the era of novel agent induction: a
systematic
review
and
meta-analysis.
JAMA
Oncol.
2018;4:343–50.
27. Sengsayadeth S, Malard F, Savani BN, Garderet L, Mohty M.
Posttransplant maintenance therapy in multiple myeloma: the
changing landscape. Blood Cancer J. 2017;7:e545.
28. Kumar SK, Lacy MQ, Dispenzieri A, Buadi FK, Hayman SR,
Dingli D, et al. Early versus delayed autologous transplantation
after immunomodulatory agents-based induction therapy in
patients with newly diagnosed multiple myeloma. Cancer.
2012;118:1585–92.
29. Dunavin NC, Wei L, Elder P, Phillips GS, Benson DM Jr,
Hofmeister CC, et al. Early versus delayed autologous stem cell
transplant in patients receiving novel therapies for multiple
myeloma. Leuk Lymphoma. 2013;54:1658–64.
30. Kansagra A, Gonsalves WI, Gertz MA, Buadi FK, Dingli D,
Dispenzieri A, et al. Analysis of clinical factors and outcomes
associated with non-utilization of collected peripheral blood stem
cells for autologous stem cell transplants in transplant eligible
patients with multiple myeloma. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant.
2018 Apr 12. pii: S1083-8791(18)30188-5.
31. Goldschmidt H, Lokhorst HM, Mai EK, van der Holt B, Blau
IW, Zweegman S, et al. Bortezomib before and after high-dose
therapy in myeloma: long-term results from the phase III
HOVON-65/GMMG-HD4 trial. Leukemia. 2017;32:383–90.
32. Hoering A, Crowley J, Shaughnessy JD Jr., Hollmig K, Alsayed
Y, Szymonifka J, et al. Complete remission in multiple myeloma
examined as time-dependent variable in terms of both onset and
duration in Total Therapy protocols. Blood. 2009;114:1299–305.
33. Munshi NC, Avet-Loiseau H, Rawstron AC, Owen RG, Child
JA, Thakurta A, et al. Association of minimal residual disease
with superior survival outcomes in patients with multiple mye-
loma: a meta-analysis. JAMA Oncol. 2017;3:28–35.
34. Muchtar E, Dingli D, Kumar S, Buadi FK, Dispenzieri A,
Hayman SR, et al. Autologous stem cell transplant for multiple
myeloma patients 70 years or older. Bone Marrow Transplant.
2016;51:1449–55.
35. Dhakal B, Nelson A, Guru Murthy GS, Fraser R, Eastwood D,
Hamadani M, et al. Autologous hematopoietic cell transplanta-
tion in patients with multiple myeloma: effect of age. Clin
Lymphoma Myeloma Leuk. 2017;17:165–72.
36. Sharma M, Zhang MJ, Zhong X, Abidi MH, Akpek G, Bacher
U, et al. Older patients with myeloma derive similar benefit from
autologous transplantation. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant.
2014;20:1796–803.
37. Saad A, Mahindra A, Zhang MJ, Zhong X, Costa LJ, Dispenzieri
A, et al. Hematopoietic cell transplant comorbidity index is
predictive of survival after autologous hematopoietic cell trans-
plantation in multiple myeloma. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant.
2014;20:402–8.e1.
38. Chakraborty R, Muchtar E, Kumar SK, Buadi FK, Dingli D,
Dispenzieri A, et al. Impact of pre-transplant bone marrow
plasma cell percentage on post-transplant response and survival
in newly diagnosed multiple myeloma. Leuk Lymphoma.
2017;58:308–15.
39. van Rhee F, Bolejack V, Hollmig K, Pineda-Roman M, Anaissie
E, Epstein J, et al. High serum-free light chain levels and their
rapid reduction in response to therapy define an aggressive
multiple
myeloma
subtype
with
poor
prognosis.
Blood.
2007;110:827–32.
40. Vij R, Kumar S, Zhang MJ, Zhong X, Huang J, Dispenzieri A,
et al. Impact of pretransplant therapy and depth of disease
response before autologous transplantation for multiple mye-
loma. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2015;21:335–41.
41. Rosinol L, Garcia-Sanz R, Lahuerta JJ, Hernandez-Garcia M,
Granell M, de la Rubia J, et al. Benefit from autologous stem cell
transplantation in primary refractory myeloma? Different out-
comes in progressive versus stable disease. Haematologica.
2012;97:616–21.
42. Kumar S, Lacy MQ, Dispenzieri A, Rajkumar SV, Fonseca R,
Geyer S, et al. High-dose therapy and autologous stem cell
transplantation for multiple myeloma poorly responsive to initial
therapy. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2004;34:161–7.
43. Singhal S, Powles R, Sirohi B, Treleaven J, Kulkarni S, Mehta J.
Response to induction chemotherapy is not essential to obtain
survival benefit from high-dose melphalan and autotransplanta-
tion in myeloma. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2002;30:673–9.
44. Alexanian R, Weber D, Delasalle K, Handy B, Champlin R,
Giralt S. Clinical outcomes with intensive therapy for patients
with primary resistant multiple myeloma. Bone Marrow Trans-
plant. 2004;34:229–34.
45. Parrish C, Rahemtulla A, Cavet J, Pearce RM, Kirkland K, Lee J,
et al. Autologous stem cell transplantation is an effective salvage
therapy for primary refractory multiple myeloma. Biol Blood
Marrow Transplant. 2015;21:1330–4.
46. Jackson GH, Davies FE, Pawlyn C, Cairns DA, Striha A, Collett
C, et al. Response adapted induction treatment improves out-
comes for myeloma patients; results of the Phase III Myeloma XI
Study. Blood. 2016;128:244–244.
47. Sevindik OG, Korkmaz S, Altuntas F. Current status of
art mobilization in Myeloma. Transfus Apher Sci. 2017;
56:850–3.
48. Giralt S, Costa L, Schriber J, Dipersio J, Maziarz R, McCarty J,
et al. Optimizing autologous stem cell mobilization strategies to
improve patient outcomes: consensus guidelines and recom-
mendations. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2014;20:295–308.
49. DiPersio JF, Stadtmauer EA, Nademanee A, Micallef IN, Stiff
PJ, Kaufman JL, et al. Plerixafor and G-CSF versus placebo and
G-CSF to mobilize hematopoietic stem cells for autologous stem
cell transplantation in patients with multiple myeloma. Blood.
2009;113:5720–6.
50. Costa LJ, Alexander ET, Hogan KR, Schaub C, Fouts TV, Stuart
RK. Development and validation of a decision-making algorithm
to guide the use of plerixafor for autologous hematopoietic stem
cell mobilization. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2011;46:64–9.
51. Uy GL, Costa LJ, Hari PN, Zhang MJ, Huang JX, Anderson KC,
et al. Contribution of chemotherapy mobilization to disease
control in multiple myeloma treated with autologous hemato-
poietic
cell
transplantation.
Bone
Marrow
Transplant.
2015;50:1513–8.
52. Costa LJ, Miller AN, Alexander ET, Hogan KR, Shabbir M,
Schaub C, et al. Growth factor and patient-adapted use of pler-
ixafor is superior to CY and growth factor for autologous
hematopoietic stem cells mobilization. Bone Marrow Transplant.
2011;46:523–8.
53. Shaughnessy P, Islas-Ohlmayer M, Murphy J, Hougham M,
MacPherson J, Winkler K, et al. Cost and clinical analysis of
autologous hematopoietic stem cell mobilization with G-CSF
364
W. I. Gonsalves et al.
 and plerixafor compared to G-CSF and cyclophosphamide. Biol
Blood Marrow Transplant. 2011;17:729–36.
54. Hari P. Chemo-mobilization in myeloma-diminishing returns in
the era of novel agent induction? Biol Blood Marrow Transplant.
2018;24:203–4.
55. Gertz MA, Dingli D. How we manage autologous stem cell
transplantation for patients with multiple myeloma. Blood.
2014;124:882–90.
56. Kumar S, Dispenzieri A, Lacy MQ, Hayman SR, Buadi FK,
Gastineau DA, et al. Impact of lenalidomide therapy on stem cell
mobilization and engraftment post-peripheral blood stem cell
transplantation in patients with newly diagnosed myeloma.
Leukemia. 2007;21:2035–42.
57. Popat U, Saliba R, Thandi R, Hosing C, Qazilbash M, Anderlini
P, et al. Impairment of filgrastim-induced stem cell mobilization
after prior lenalidomide in patients with multiple myeloma. Biol
Blood Marrow Transplant. 2009;15:718–23.
58. Cavallo F, Bringhen S, Milone G, Ben-Yehuda D, Nagler A,
Calabrese E, et al. Stem cell mobilization in patients with newly
diagnosed multiple myeloma after lenalidomide induction ther-
apy. Leukemia. 2011;25:1627–31.
59. Costa LJ, Abbas J, Hogan KR, Kramer C, McDonald K, Butcher
CD, et al. Growth factor plus preemptive (‘just-in-time’) pler-
ixafor successfully mobilizes hematopoietic stem cells in multi-
ple myeloma patients despite prior lenalidomide exposure. Bone
Marrow Transplant. 2012;47:1403–8.
60. Mark T, Stern J, Furst JR, Jayabalan D, Zafar F, LaRow A, et al.
Stem cell mobilization with cyclophosphamide overcomes the
suppressive effect of lenalidomide therapy on stem cell collection
in
multiple
myeloma.
Biol
Blood
Marrow
Transplant.
2008;14:795–8.
61. Kumar S, Giralt S, Stadtmauer EA, Harousseau JL, Palumbo A,
Bensinger W, et al. Mobilization in myeloma revisited: IMWG
consensus perspectives on stem cell collection following initial
therapy
with
thalidomide-,
lenalidomide-,
or
bortezomib-
containing regimens. Blood. 2009;114:1729–35.
62. Micallef IN, Ho AD, Klein LM, Marulkar S, Gandhi PJ,
Calandra G, et al. Plerixafor (Mozobil) for stem cell mobilization
in patients with multiple myeloma previously treated with lena-
lidomide. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2011;46:350–5.
63. Malard F, Kroger N, Gabriel IH, Hubel K, Apperley JF, Basak
GW, et al. Plerixafor for autologous peripheral blood stem cell
mobilization in patients previously treated with fludarabine or
lenalidomide. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2012;18:314–7.
64. Garderet L, Iacobelli S, Koster L, Goldschmidt H, Johansson JE,
Bourhis JH, et al. Outcome of a salvage third autologous stem
cell transplantation in multiple myeloma. Biol Blood Marrow
Transplant. 2018 Apr 12. pii: S1083-8791(18)30188-5.
65. Moreau P, Facon T, Attal M, Hulin C, Michallet M, Maloisel F,
et al. Comparison of 200 mg/m(2) melphalan and 8 Gy total
body irradiation plus 140 mg/m(2) melphalan as conditioning
regimens for peripheral blood stem cell transplantation in
patients with newly diagnosed multiple myeloma: final analysis
of the Intergroupe Francophone du Myelome 9502 randomized
trial. Blood. 2002;99:731–5.
66. Gonsalves WI, Rajkumar SV, Gertz MA, Dispenzieri A, Lacy
MQ, Buadi FK, et al. Clinical course and outcomes of patients
with multiple myeloma who relapse after autologous stem cell
therapy. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2016;51:1156–8.
67. Lahuerta JJ, Mateos MV, Martinez-Lopez J, Grande C, de la
Rubia J, Rosinol L, et al. Busulfan 12 mg/kg plus melphalan 140
mg/m2 versus melphalan 200 mg/m2 as conditioning regimens
for autologous transplantation in newly diagnosed multiple
myeloma patients included in the PETHEMA/GEM2000 study.
Haematologica. 2010;95:1913–20.
68. Fenk R, Schneider P, Kropff M, Huenerlituerkoglu AN, Steidl U,
Aul C, et al. High-dose idarubicin, cyclophosphamide and mel-
phalan as conditioning for autologous stem cell transplantation
increases treatment-related mortality in patients with multiple
myeloma: results of a randomised study. Br J Haematol.
2005;130:588–94.
69. Vela-Ojeda J, Garcia-Ruiz-Esparza MA, Padilla-Gonzalez Y,
Gomez-Almaguer D, Gutierrez-Aguirre CH, Gomez-Rangel D,
et al. Autologous peripheral blood stem cell transplantation in
multiple myeloma using oral versus I.V. melphalan. Ann
Hematol. 2007;86:277–82.
70. Palumbo A, Bringhen S, Bruno B, Falcone AP, Liberati AM,
Grasso M, et al. Melphalan 200 mg/m(2) versus melphalan 100
mg/m(2) in newly diagnosed myeloma patients: a prospective,
multicenter phase 3 study. Blood. 2010;115:1873–9.
71. Roussel M, Hebraud B, Lauwers-Cances V, Macro M, Leleu X,
Hulin C, et al. Bortezomib and high-dose melphalan vs. high-
dose melphalan as conditioning regimen before autologous stem
cell transplantation in de novo multiple myeloma patients: a
phase 3 study of the Intergroupe Francophone Du Myelome
(IFM 2014-02). Blood. 2017;130 Suppl 1:398.
72. Qazilbash MH, Bashir Q, Thall PF, Milton DR, Shah N, Patel
KK, et al. A randomized phase III trial of busulfan+melphalan
vs melphalan alone for multiple myeloma. Blood. 2017;130
Suppl 1:399.
73. St Bernard R, Chodirker L, Masih-Khan E, Jiang H, Franke N,
Kukreti V, et al. Efficacy, toxicity and mortality of autologous
SCT in multiple myeloma patients with dialysis-dependent renal
failure. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2015;50:95–9.
74. Mahindra A, Hari P, Fraser R, Fei M, Huang J, Berdeja J, et al.
Autologous hematopoietic cell transplantation for multiple
myeloma patients with renal insufficiency: a center for interna-
tional blood and marrow transplant research analysis. Bone
Marrow Transplant. 2017;52:1616–22.
75. Sweiss K, Patel S, Culos K, Oh A, Rondelli D, Patel P. Mel-
phalan 200 mg/m(2) in patients with renal impairment is asso-
ciated with increased short-term toxicity but improved response
and longer treatment-free survival. Bone Marrow Transplant.
2016;51:1337–41.
76. Dimopoulos MA, Sonneveld P, Leung N, Merlini G, Ludwig H,
Kastritis E, et al. International myeloma working group recom-
mendations for the diagnosis and management of myeloma-
related renal impairment. J Clin Oncol. 2016;34:1544–57.
77. Bodge MN, Reddy S, Thompson MS, Savani BN. Preparative
regimen dosing for hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in
patients with chronic kidney disease: analysis of the literature
and
recommendations.
Biol
Blood
Marrow
Transplant.
2014;20:908–19.
78. Rasche L, Strifler S, Duell J, Rosenwald A, Buck A, Maeder U,
et al. The lymphoma-like polychemotherapy regimen “Dexa-
BEAM” in advanced and extramedullary multiple myeloma. Ann
Hematol. 2014;93:1207–14.
79. Barlogie B, Jagannath S, Desikan KR, Mattox S, Vesole D,
Siegel D, et al. Total therapy with tandem transplants for newly
diagnosed multiple myeloma. Blood. 1999;93:55–65.
80. Attal M, Harousseau JL, Facon T, Guilhot F, Doyen C, Fuzibet
JG, et al. Single versus double autologous stem-cell transplan-
tation for multiple myeloma. N Engl J Med. 2003;349:2495–502.
81. Cavo M, Tosi P, Zamagni E, Cellini C, Tacchetti P, Patriarca F,
et al. Prospective, randomized study of single compared with
double autologous stem-cell transplantation for multiple mye-
loma: Bologna 96 clinical study. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:2434–41.
82. Sonneveld P, van der Holt B, Segeren CM, Vellenga E,
Croockewit AJ, Verhoe GE, et al. Intermediate-dose melphalan
compared with myeloablative treatment in multiple myeloma:
Utilization of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for the treatment of multiple myeloma: a Mayo. . .
365
 long-term follow-up of the Dutch Cooperative Group HOVON
24 trial. Haematologica. 2007;92:928–35.
83. Kumar A, Kharfan-Dabaja MA, Glasmacher A, Djulbegovic B.
Tandem versus single autologous hematopoietic cell transplan-
tation for the treatment of multiple myeloma: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2009;101:100–6.
84. Naumann-Winter F, Greb A, Borchmann P, Bohlius J, Engert A,
Schnell R. First-line tandem high-dose chemotherapy and auto-
logous stem cell transplantation versus single high-dose che-
motherapy and autologous stem cell transplantation in multiple
myeloma, a systematic review of controlled studies. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2012;10:CD004626.
85. Salwender H, Rosiñol L, Moreau P, Petrucci MT, Blau IW,
Bladé J, et al. Double vs single autologous stem cell transplan-
tation after bortezomib-based induction regimens for multiple
myeloma: an integrated analysis of patient-level data from Phase
European III Studies. Blood. 2013;122:767.
86. Cavo M, Gay FM, Patriarca F, Zamagni E, Montefusco V, Dozza
L, et al. Double autologous stem cell transplantation significantly
prolongs progression-free survival and overall survival in com-
parison with single autotransplantation in newly diagnosed
multiple myeloma: an analysis of Phase 3 EMN02/HO95 Study.
Blood. 2017;130 Suppl 1:401.
87. Stadtmauer EA, Pasquini MC, Blackwell B, Knust K, Bashey A,
Devine SM, et al. Comparison of autologous hematopoietic cell
transplant (autoHCT), bortezomib, lenalidomide (Len) and dex-
amethasone (RVD) consolidation with len maintenance (ACM),
tandem autohct with len maintenance (TAM) and autohct with
len maintenance (AM) for up-front treatment of patients with
multiple myeloma (MM): primary results from the randomized
Phase III Trial of the Blood and Marrow Transplant Clinical
Trials Network (BMT CTN 0702 - StaMINA Trial). Blood.
2016;128:LBA-1.
88. Cavo M, Pantani L, Petrucci MT, Patriarca F, Zamagni E,
Donnarumma D, et al. Bortezomib-thalidomide-dexamethasone
is superior to thalidomide-dexamethasone as consolidation ther-
apy after autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in
patients with newly diagnosed multiple myeloma. Blood.
2012;120:9–19.
89. Mellqvist U-H, Gimsing P, Hjertner O, Lenhoff S, Laane E,
Remes K, et al. Bortezomib consolidation after autologous stem
cell transplantation in multiple myeloma: a Nordic Myeloma
Study
Group
randomized
phase
3
trial.
Blood.
2013;121:4647–54.
90. Straka C, Knop S, Vogel M, Müller J, Kropff M, Metzner B,
et al. Bortezomib consolidation following autologous transplant
equalizes the outcome for older patients with less intensive
pretreatme nt compared to younger patients with newly diag-
nosed multiple myeloma. Blood. 2016;128:516.
91. Sonneveld P, Beksac M, van der Holt B, Dimopoulos MA,
Carella AM, Ludwig H, et al. Consolidation followed by main-
tenance therapy versus maintenance alone in newly diagnosed,
transplant eligible patients with multiple myeloma (MM): a
randomized Phase 3 Study of the European Myeloma Network
(EMN02/HO95 MM Trial). Blood. 2016;128:242.
92. Barlogie B, Tricot G, Anaissie E, Shaughnessy J, Rasmussen E,
van Rhee F, et al. Thalidomide and hematopoietic-cell trans-
plantation
for
multiple
myeloma.
N
Engl
J
Med.
2006;354:1021–30.
93. Attal M, Harousseau JL, Leyvraz S, Doyen C, Hulin C, Ben-
boubker L, et al. Maintenance therapy with thalidomide
improves survival in patients with multiple myeloma. Blood.
2006;108:3289–94.
94. Lokhorst HM, van der Holt B, Zweegman S, Vellenga E,
Croockewit S, van Oers MH, et al. A randomized phase 3 study
on the effect of thalidomide combined with adriamycin,
dexamethasone, and high-dose melphalan, followed by thalido-
mide maintenance in patients with multiple myeloma. Blood.
2010;115:1113–20.
95. Stewart AK, Trudel S, Bahlis NJ, White D, Sabry W, Belch A,
et al. A randomized phase 3 trial of thalidomide and prednisone
as maintenance therapy after ASCT in patients with MM with a
quality-of-life assessment: the National Cancer Institute of
Canada Clinicals Trials Group Myeloma 10 Trial. Blood.
2013;121:1517–23.
96. Maiolino A, Hungria VT, Garnica M, Oliveira-Duarte G, Oli-
veira LC, Mercante DR, et al. Thalidomide plus dexamethasone
as a maintenance therapy after autologous hematopoietic stem
cell transplantation improves progression-free survival in multi-
ple myeloma. Am J Hematol. 2012;87:948–52.
97. Morgan GJ, Gregory WM, Davies FE, Bell SE, Szubert AJ,
Brown JM, et al. The role of maintenance thalidomide therapy in
multiple myeloma: MRC Myeloma IX results and meta-analysis.
Blood. 2012;119:7–15.
98. Kagoya Y, Nannya Y, Kurokawa M. Thalidomide maintenance
therapy for patients with multiple myeloma: meta-analysis. Leuk
Res. 2012;36:1016–21.
99. Sonneveld P, Schmidt-Wolf IG, van der Holt B, El Jarari L,
Bertsch U, Salwender H, et al. Bortezomib induction and
maintenance treatment in patients with newly diagnosed multiple
myeloma: results of the randomized phase III HOVON-65/
GMMG-HD4 trial. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30:2946–55.
100. Attal M, Lauwers-Cances V, Marit G, Caillot D, Moreau P, Facon
T, et al. Lenalidomide maintenance after stem-cell transplantation
for multiple myeloma. N Engl J Med. 2012;366:1782–91.
101. McCarthy PL, Owzar K, Hofmeister CC, Hurd DD, Hassoun H,
Richardson PG, et al. Lenalidomide after stem-cell transplanta-
tion for multiple myeloma. N Engl J Med. 2012;366:1770–81.
102. McCarthy PL, Holstein SA, Petrucci MT, Richardson PG, Hulin
C, Tosi P, et al. Lenalidomide maintenance after autologous
stem-cell transplantation in newly diagnosed multiple myeloma:
a meta-analysis. J Clin Oncol. 2017;35:3279–89.
103. Jackson GH, Davies F, Pawlyn C, Cairns DA, Striha A,
Waterhouse A, et al. Lenalidomide induction and maintenance
therapy for transplant eligible myeloma patients: results of the
myeloma XI study. J Clin Oncol. 2017;35 Suppl 15:8009.
104. Musto P, Anderson KC, Attal M, Richardson PG, Badros A, Hou
J, et al. Second primary malignancies in multiple myeloma: an
overview and IMWG consensus. Ann Oncol. 2017;28:228–45.
105. Auner HW, Szydlo R, Rone A, Chaidos A, Giles C, Kanfer E,
et al. Salvage autologous stem cell transplantation for multiple
myeloma relapsing or progressing after up-front autologous
transplantation. Leuk Lymphoma. 2013;54:2200–4.
106. Chow AW, Lee CH, Hiwase DK, To LB, Horvath N. Relapsed
multiple myeloma: who benefits from salvage autografts? Intern
Med J. 2013;43:156–61.
107. Gonsalves WI, Gertz MA, Lacy MQ, Dispenzieri A, Hayman
SR, Buadi FK, et al. Second auto-SCT for treatment of relapsed
multiple myeloma. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2013;48:568–73.
108. Lemieux E, Hulin C, Caillot D, Tardy S, Dorvaux V, Michel J,
et al. Autologous stem cell transplantation: an effective salvage
therapy in multiple myeloma. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant.
2013;19:445–9.
109. Michaelis LC, Saad A, Zhong X, Le-Rademacher J, Freytes CO,
Marks DI, et al. Salvage second hematopoietic cell transplanta-
tion
in
myeloma.
Biol
Blood
Marrow
Transplant.
2013;19:760–6.
110. Jimenez-Zepeda VH, Mikhael J, Winter A, Franke N, Masih-
Khan E, Trudel S, et al. Second autologous stem cell trans-
plantation as salvage therapy for multiple myeloma: impact on
progression-free and overall survival. Biol Blood Marrow
Transplant. 2012;18:773–9.
366
W. I. Gonsalves et al.
 111. Shah N, Ahmed F, Bashir Q, Qureshi S, Dinh Y, Rondon G,
et al. Durable remission with salvage second autotransplants in
patients with multiple myeloma. Cancer. 2012;118:3549–55.
112. Blimark C, Veskovski L, Westin J, Rodjer S, Brune M, Hjorth
M, et al. Melphalan 100 mg/m2 with stem cell support as first
relapse treatment is safe and effective for myeloma patients with
long remission after autologous stem cell transplantation. Eur J
Haematol. 2011;87:117–22.
113. Cook G, Liakopoulou E, Pearce R, Cavet J, Morgan GJ, Kirk-
land K, et al. Factors influencing the outcome of a second
autologous stem cell transplant (ASCT) in relapsed multiple
myeloma: a study from the British Society of Blood and Marrow
Transplantation
Registry.
Biol
Blood
Marrow
Transplant.
2011;17:1638–45.
114. Fenk R, Liese V, Neubauer F, Bruns I, Kondakci M, Balleisen S,
et al. Predictive factors for successful salvage high-dose therapy in
patients with multiple myeloma relapsing after autologous blood
stem cell transplantation. Leuk Lymphoma. 2011;52:1455–62.
115. Burzynski JA, Toro JJ, Patel RC, Lee S, Greene RE, Ochoa-
Bayona JL, et al. Toxicity of a second autologous peripheral
blood stem cell transplant in patients with relapsed or recurrent
multiple myeloma. Leuk Lymphoma. 2009;50:1442–7.
116. Olin RL, Vogl DT, Porter DL, Luger SM, Schuster SJ, Tsai DE,
et al. Second auto-SCT is safe and effective salvage therapy for
relapsed
multiple
myeloma.
Bone
Marrow
Transplant.
2009;43:417–22.
117. Elice F, Raimondi R, Tosetto A, D’Emilio A, Di Bona E, Piccin
A, et al. Prolonged overall survival with second on-demand
autologous transplant in multiple myeloma. Am J Hematol.
2006;81:426–31.
118. Qazilbash MH, Saliba R, De Lima M, Hosing C, Couriel D,
Aleman A, et al. Second autologous or allogeneic transplantation
after the failure of first autograft in patients with multiple mye-
loma. Cancer. 2006;106:1084–9.
119. Yhim HY, Kim K, Kim JS, Kang HJ, Kim JA, Min CK, et al.
Matched-pair analysis to compare the outcomes of a second
salvage auto-SCT to systemic chemotherapy alone in patients
with multiple myeloma who relapsed after front-line auto-SCT.
Bone Marrow Transplant. 2013;48:425–32.
120. Alvares CL, Davies FE, Horton C, Patel G, Powles R, Morgan
GJ. The role of second autografts in the management of myeloma
at first relapse. Haematologica. 2006;91:141–2.
121. Cook G, Williams C, Brown JM, Cairns DA, Cavenagh J, Snow-
den JA, et al. High-dose chemotherapy plus autologous stem-cell
transplantation as consolidation therapy in patients with relapsed
multiple myeloma after previous autologous stem-cell transplanta-
tion (NCRI Myeloma X Relapse [Intensive trial]): a randomised,
open-label, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2014;15:874–85.
122. Bensinger WI, Buckner CD, Anasetti C, Clift R, Storb R, Barnett
T, et al. Allogeneic marrow transplantation for multiple mye-
loma:
an
analysis
of
risk
factors
on
outcome.
Blood.
1996;88:2787–93.
123. Gahrton G, Tura S, Ljungman P, Blade J, Brandt L, Cavo M,
et al. Prognostic factors in allogeneic bone marrow transplanta-
tion for multiple myeloma. J Clin Oncol. 1995;13:1312–22.
124. Lokhorst HM, Segeren CM, Verdonck LF, van der Holt B,
Raymakers R, van Oers MH, et al. Partially T-cell-depleted
allogeneic stem-cell transplantation for first-line treatment of
multiple myeloma: a prospective evaluation of patients treated in
the
phase
III
study
HOVON
24
MM.
J
Clin
Oncol.
2003;21:1728–33.
125. Knop S, Liebisch P, Hebart H, Holler E, Engelhardt M, Metzner
B, et al. Autologous followed by allogeneic versus tandem-
autologous stem cell transplant in newly diagnosed FISH-del13q
myeloma. Blood. 2014;124:43.
126. Rosinol L, Perez-Simon JA, Sureda A, de la Rubia J, de
Arriba F, Lahuerta JJ, et al. A prospective PETHEMA
study of tandem autologous transplantation versus autograft
followed by reduced-intensity conditioning allogeneic trans-
plantation in newly diagnosed multiple
myeloma. Blood.
2008;112:3591–3.
127. Gahrton G, Iacobelli S, Bjorkstrand B, Hegenbart U, Gruber A,
Greinix H, et al. Autologous/reduced-intensity allogeneic stem
cell transplantation vs. autologous transplantation in multiple
myeloma: long-term results of the EBMT-NMAM2000 study.
Blood. 2013;121:5055–63.
128. Moreau P, Garban F, Attal M, Michallet M, Marit G, Hulin C,
et al. Long-term follow-up results of IFM99-03 and IFM99-04
trials
comparing
nonmyeloablative
allotransplantation
with
autologous transplantation in high-risk de novo multiple mye-
loma. Blood. 2008;112:3914–5.
129. Giaccone L, Storer B, Patriarca F, Rotta M, Sorasio R, Allione B,
et al. Long-term follow-up of a comparison of nonmyeloablative
allografting with autografting for newly diagnosed myeloma.
Blood. 2011;117:6721–7.
130. Krishnan A, Pasquini MC, Logan B, Stadtmauer EA, Vesole
DH, Alyea E 3rd, et al. Autologous haemopoietic stem-cell
transplantation followed by allogeneic or autologous haemo-
poietic stem-cell transplantation in patients with multiple mye-
loma (BMT CTN 0102): a phase 3 biological assignment trial.
Lancet Oncol. 2011;12:1195–203.
131. Armeson KE, Hill EG, Costa LJ. Tandem autologous vs auto-
logous plus reduced intensity allogeneic transplantation in the
upfront management of multiple myeloma: meta-analysis of
trials with biological assignment. Bone Marrow Transplant.
2013;48:562–7.
132. Freytes CO, Vesole DH, LeRademacher J, Zhong X, Gale RP,
Kyle RA, et al. Second transplants for multiple myeloma relap-
sing after a previous autotransplant-reduced-intensity allogeneic
vs.
autologous
transplantation.
Bone
Marrow
Transplant.
2014;49:416–21.
133. Mehta J, Tricot G, Jagannath S, Ayers D, Singhal S, Siegel D,
et al. Salvage autologous or allogeneic transplantation for mul-
tiple myeloma refractory to or relapsing after a first-line auto-
graft? Bone Marrow Transplant. 1998;21:887–92.
134. Kumar S, Zhang MJ, Li P, Dispenzieri A, Milone GA, Lonial S,
et al. Trends in allogeneic stem cell transplantation for multiple
myeloma: a CIBMTR analysis. Blood. 2011;118:1979–88.
135. Patriarca F, Einsele H, Spina F, Bruno B, Isola M, Nozzoli C,
et al. Allogeneic stem cell transplantation in multiple myeloma
relapsed after autograft: a multicenter retrospective study based
on
donor
availability.
Biol
Blood
Marrow
Transplant.
2012;18:617–26.
136. de Lavallade H, El-Cheikh J, Faucher C, Furst S, Stoppa AM,
Coso D, et al. Reduced-intensity conditioning allogeneic SCT as
salvage treatment for relapsed multiple myeloma. Bone Marrow
Transplant. 2008;41:953–60.
137. Wirk
B,
Byrne
M,
Dai
Y,
Moreb
JS.
Outcomes
of
salvage autologous versus allogeneic hematopoietic cell trans-
plantation for relapsed multiple myeloma after initial autologous
hematopoietic
cell
transplantation.
J
Clin
Med
Res.
2013;5:174–84.
138. Gay F, Engelhardt M, Terpos E, Wasch R, Giaccone L, Auner
HW, et al. From transplant to novel cellular therapies in multiple
myeloma: European Myeloma Network guidelines and future
perspectives. Haematologica. 2018;103:197–211.
Utilization of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for the treatment of multiple myeloma: a Mayo. . .
367
