 The Sociological Review
2017, Vol. 65(1) 67 
–82
© The Author(s) 2016
Reprints and permissions: 
 
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1111/1467-954X.12369
journals.sagepub.com/home/sor
The
 
Sociological
Review
Older homeless women’s 
identity negotiation: agency,  
resistance, and the 
construction of a valued self
Judith G Gonyea
Boston University, University of Vermont, USA
Kelly Melekis
Skidmore College, USA
Abstract
There is a growing awareness that the adult homeless population is ageing, mirroring the 
general US population trend. Although men still outnumber women among the adult homeless 
population, there has been a dramatic increase in the number of women, including older 
women, seeking shelter each night. The concept of ‘home’ is widely associated with women 
and serves as a source of identity and social order. Thus, homeless older women represent 
an intersection of stigma. This qualitative study utilized narrative analysis to investigate the 
intersectionality of gender, age and homelessness among six homeless urban women in their 
fifties and early sixties. Findings highlight how older homeless women experience stigmatization 
within the context of multiple marginalized identities. Data illustrate the women’s agency, 
resistance and resilience as they engage in ‘identity work’ to address the tension between how 
others view them and how they view themselves, and construct a sense of a valued life and self.
Keywords
homelessness, ageing, gender, self and identity, intersectionality, symbolic interactionism
Introduction
Although men greatly outnumber women among the US adult homeless population, in 
recent years there has been a steeper climb in homelessness among females. In New York 
City, for example, while women represented only about 5 per cent of the homeless 
individuals looking for shelter each night in 1980, currently that figure is closer to one in 
Corresponding author:
Judith G Gonyea, Boston University, School of Social Work, 264 Bay State Road, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
Email: jgonyea@bu.edu
678378 SOR0010.1177/0038026116678378Sociological ReviewGonyea and Melekis
research-article2016
Article
 68 
The Sociological Review 65(1) 
four (Coalition for the Homeless, 2014). Additionally, a 2010 survey of homeless women 
on Los Angeles’s Skid Row revealed that half were older than 50 (Downtown Women’s 
Action Coalition, 2011).
Within the US, concern about homelessness has focused largely on families (Bassuk 
et al., 2014), unaccompanied youth (Farrow et al., 1992), and veterans (Perl, 2015). 
Although a number of federally funded homelessness programmes have been enacted in 
recent decades, no federal effort has specifically targeted the needs of the nation’s older 
homeless population (Perl et al., 2015). Yet, the nation’s adult homeless population is 
ageing, mirroring the general US population trend. Determining exactly how many older 
Americans are experiencing homelessness is difficult, however, due to limited data. A 
primary data source on homeless trends is the US Department of Housing and Urban 
Development (HUD) Annual Homeless Assessment Reports (AHARs) to Congress. 
Derived largely from point-in-time counts of unduplicated one-night estimates of shel-
tered and unsheltered populations during the last week in January, the AHARs offer a 
‘snapshot’ of homelessness in America.1 They show that the age composition of the adult 
homeless population has changed significantly during the past two decades; between 
1990 and 2010, the median age of this group rose from 37 years to 50 years of age 
(National Health Care for the Homeless Council, 2013). Projections also suggest that the 
65 and older homeless population will double by 2050 to more than 95,000 individuals2 
(Sermons and Henry, 2010).
The percentage of homeless people who are elderly might be larger if not for the fact 
that people who experience chronic homelessness simply do not reach old age as often 
as the general population. A study of homeless mortality rates in seven North American 
and European cities found that the average life expectancy for persons lacking perma-
nent housing was between 42 and 52 years of age, far below each country’s average life 
expectancy of approximately 80 years (O’Connell, 2005). The majority of the US older 
homeless population is therefore between 50 and 64 years of age (typically referred to as 
‘older homeless’); only 5 per cent is 65 and older (often categorized as the ‘elderly 
homeless’) (HUD, 2012).
This qualitative study focuses on older homeless women – that is, women who are in 
their fifties and early sixties. Although emerging epidemiological surveys (Kimbler 
et al., 2015; 2015; Brown et al., 2011) and qualitative studies (Mills-Dick, 2012; 
Lewinson et al., 2014) offer insights into the broad characteristics of older homelessness, 
few researchers have investigated the interdependent roles of gender and age (Kisor and 
Kendal-Wilson, 2002). This study sought to address this gap through an in-depth inves-
tigation of the intersectionality of gender, age and homelessness for older women who 
find themselves without stable housing. In a society which both stigmatizes homeless 
persons and devalues older women, we delved into six older homeless women’s narra-
tives, using a framework informed by intersectionality and symbolic interactionism, to 
understand how they talk about their identities and non-identities in an effort to negotiate 
and control their own sense of self. A central aim of the study was to gain a deeper under-
standing of how older homeless women engage in ‘identity work’ to address the tension 
between how others view them and how they view themselves and construct a sense of a 
valued life and self.
 Gonyea and Melekis 
69
Persons experiencing homelessness are ascribed with a one-dimensional or singular 
identity based on their lack of stable housing – we know them primarily as homeless peo-
ple. By isolating them into a distinct category, which is imbued with stigmatizing negative 
representations of personal inadequacies and/or moral weaknesses, it becomes easier to 
marginalize individuals who find themselves without stable housing (Parsell, 2011). 
Historically, the image of single adult homelessness has been largely about men. Street 
homelessness, homeless shelters and soup kitchens have been socially constructed as pre-
dominantly male spaces. As Huey and Berndt (2008: 177) note, ‘the literature on urban 
spaces, particularly in relation to homeless communities, has subsumed women within the 
category of the undifferentiated “he”’. Yet, with rising numbers and visibility, the home-
lessness literature is expanding its scope to explore the phenomenon of homeless women.
It is difficult to explore homelessness apart from home as each serves to define the 
other. Home is both a source of identity and a foundation of social order. As Wardhaugh 
(1999: 97) explains, home has gendered meanings: ‘Home is widely, and often unprob-
lematically associated with female: both with the women who are expected to maintain 
hearth and home, and with the presumed feminine principles of boundedness, physicality 
and nurturance.’ Although research clearly refutes it as being the norm, the prominent 
social stereotype of older homeless women is that of ‘bag ladies’ – substance abusers 
and/or mentally ill hoarders who carry about their possessions and shout curses at people 
on the street (Liebow, 1995; Kisor and Kendal-Wilson, 2002). A core question thus exists 
regarding how older homeless women, who do not conform to the normative ideal of 
home and conventional family structure, experience stigmatization and marginalization. 
And, if older homeless women are perceived as deviant, what strategies do they use to 
resist the homeless identity?
Intersectionality and identity work
To answer these questions, we adopted an intersectional framework to explore how gen-
der and age intertwine in the management of the homeless identity. Introduced in the 
1990s, the concept of intersectionality is centred on structural inequality and emphasizes 
how power relations, rather than being seen as additive principles, should be viewed as 
dynamic interactions (Thorton Dill and Zambrana, 2009). Our analysis was informed by 
social identity theory, which focuses on two dimensions of identity: social identity as 
defined by group membership and/or social roles and personal identity comprised of 
attributes that distinguish oneself from others (Tajfel and Turner, 1979). Furthermore, we 
use a symbolic interactionist perspective which stresses that identity is a dynamic pro-
cess constructed through interactions between self and society (Blumer, 1969; Mead, 
1967). People come to know who they are through interactions with others and knowing 
how others see them (Cooley, 1902; Mead, 1967).
Interactionism emphasizes the process of identity construction and negotiation or 
‘identity work’ (Snow and Anderson, 1987; Killian and Johnson, 2006) that entails ‘self-
presentation’ or ‘impression management’ (Goffman, 1959; McCall and Simmons, 
1978). This approach suggests that a person’s capacity to take on identities can be pro-
moted or constrained by external factors and stresses the plurality and flexibility of self. 
 70 
The Sociological Review 65(1) 
It also aligns with the concept of intersectionality which, as Krekula (2007: 163) points 
out, ‘starts from an understanding of gender, ethnicity and age, etc., as something that is 
“done” by individual subjects in interaction, as opposed to being a quality of the 
individual’.
As Snow and Anderson (1987: 1340) note, those experiencing homelessness continu-
ally engage in identity work as they confront ‘the problem of constructing personal iden-
tities that are not a mere reflection of the stereotypical and stigmatized manner in which 
they are regarded as a social category’. In our analysis, we were mindful of not only the 
identities claimed by the participants or ‘role embracement’, but also their denial or 
resistance of identities through strategies such as ‘passing’, ‘impression management’ 
and ‘associational distancing’ (Goffman, 1963; Snow and Anderson, 1987). Social iden-
tity theorists argue that identity is derived from two processes, ‘apposition and opposi-
tion, a bringing together and a setting apart’ (Stone, 1962: 94). McCall (2003) views 
these as twinned processes of self-identification and self-disidentification which he has 
labelled as Me and Not-Me. He asserts that the Not-Me is not a negative identity; rather 
it is a form of reactive identity work in which people confront and respond to others’ 
representations of who they are in the situation. All of these strategies have in common a 
resistance to role ascription and active negotiation of identity.
Methods
This study was part of a qualitative research project on older urban homelessness 
approved by the Boston University Institutional Review Board. The participants were 
affiliated with a Northeastern city’s non-profit older homeless organization; its 146 out-
reach clients constituted the sampling frame with the only exclusion criterion being a 
non-English speaker. To obtain a final sample size of 20 homeless older adults, 30 indi-
viduals were randomly selected in recognition that recruitment and/or retention might be 
challenging. Individuals were provided with a project description by their outreach 
worker and offered the opportunity to complete a consent-to-contact form. Of the 20 
consented participants, 11 were male and 9 were female.
This study is based on a subset of the six homeless women who self-identified their 
age as between 50 and 64 (fitting the definition of ‘older homeless’) and participated in 
at least two interviews. The participants completed two to four in-depth semi-structured 
interviews spaced apart by 2 months to 7 months depending on the ability to connect 
with the interviewee. The interviews, which ranged from 60 to 90 minutes, occurred in 
an office or private space at the homeless organization or shelter. All interviews were 
conducted by the second author; a general interview guide approach was used to facili-
tate systematic and comprehensive data collection. Each interview was transcribed in its 
entirety; pseudonyms (either selected by the participant or assigned) were used to protect 
anonymity.
We approached our analysis with the view that the act of narrating is an ‘identity 
claim’. As Bamberg (2005: 223) explains, ‘[N]arratives, irrespective of whether they 
deal with one’s life or an episode or event in the life of someone else always reveal the 
speaker’s identity. By offering or telling a narrative, the speaker lodges a claim for him/
herself in terms of who he/she is.’ Using the qualitative software NVivo, coding was 
 Gonyea and Melekis 
71
done using a funnelling process (Charmaz, 2006). First cycle coding methods included 
the use of descriptive, structural, and simultaneous coding, while the primary coding 
method used during the second cycle focused on the development of major themes from 
the data (Saldana, 2009). The culminating phases of data analysis involved organizing 
the data in themes and subthemes to analyze and interpret their meaning. Given the phe-
nomenological nature of the study and the value of ‘displaying the comments of those 
being researched in their own voices’, long quotes are used, ‘with some theories/con-
cepts generated to provide broader explanations’ (Grbich, 2007: 19).
Participant characteristics
Five of the six participants lived in the city’s 120-bed women’s shelter; all resided on a 
floor designated as the transitional programme for older women. The sixth woman, 
Bippy, spent 9 months at the same location; however, she had recently moved to older 
adult single room only (SRO) lodging. At the time of their first interview, the women’s 
current shelter stays ranged from 5 to 20 months.
Three of the six women, Jill, Smitty and Bippy, had deep roots in the city; it is where 
they had spent their entire adulthoods or lives. Virginia was connected to the city through 
her deceased brother, a local priest for 26 years, and moved there in 2003. Dawn had 
always lived in an abutting urban community; only Penelope grew up in a rural area. The 
women self-identified as white, with the exception of Bippy, who identified as ‘mixed 
– cause I know I’m part Indian’. In terms of religious faith, Jill described herself as 
agnostic; the others identified with various Christian faiths. Dawn did not complete high 
school, Virginia and Jill had high school diplomas, Bippy and Smitty possessed associ-
ate’s degrees3 and Penelope earned a bachelor’s degree. Three of the women, Dawn, 
Smitty and Virginia, were never married, Bippy and Penelope were divorced, and Jill 
was widowed.
Pathways to older homelessness
Research suggests two predominant pathways into homelessness among older adults 
(National Health Care for the Homeless Council, 2013; Gonyea et al., 2010). The first 
pathway is that of adults with a history of stable housing who experience homelessness 
for the first time after age 50 (Shinn et al., 2007). Three of the participants – Jill, Penelope, 
and Smitty – described such a path. As Jill shared:
I’ve never been homeless before . . . I had been taking care of my mother who had dementia . . . 
my husband and I moved back into my mother’s house . . . and then my husband ended up with 
cancer. So at one point I had two hospital beds in the house, one for my mother and one for my 
husband and they both died within three and a half weeks of each other . . . then my cat died 
three weeks after that so I had three deaths in six weeks . . . I tried to commit suicide before I 
came here [the shelter].
The second path is simply the ageing of chronically homeless adults – that is, an inability 
to break the cycle of homelessness due to a myriad of problems. These vulnerable 
 72 
The Sociological Review 65(1) 
individuals continue to age beyond 50 without stable housing (McDonald et al., 2007). 
Bippy and Virginia shared narratives that illustrated this path. Virginia’s is a journey 
through more than a decade of precarious housing and intermittent homelessness due to 
job losses, deaths of family members, abusive boyfriends, evictions, and mental health 
problems. Virginia introduced herself by noting:
My story might be helpful to other people . . . Um, I was here [in the shelter] four years ago . . . 
I was in the transitional women’s program . . . And, I found a room at [SRO lodging] . . . A very 
nice place and I was there for four years . . . I was evicted, so I had to come back here. The 
reason I was evicted was non-payment of rent because, you know, the job slump.
Yet, as the interview progressed, Virginia shared that her housing first became precarious 
after her mother’s death in the early 1990s. Similar to Jill’s experience, Virginia’s hous-
ing began to unravel with the loss of a loved one and a family home.
I stayed with her ‘til the end, you know, I was her caregiver . . . I was the only sibling who 
wasn’t married, so of course I volunteered to do that. Then, after she passed, I went to live 
with an alcoholic boyfriend, which didn’t … wasn’t going too good because ah, he was … 
it was a like living with Jekyll and Hyde . . . I never knew how he was gonna be . . . Even 
when I applied for domestic violence . . . to get away from him, it was difficult finding that 
kind of help . . . Anyway, he took his life. He OD’d, they found him. And then I was free to 
come here.
Dawn’s path to older homelessness fell outside the typical two paths as her homeless-
ness began in childhood. Dawn disclosed that at the age of four or five, her alcoholic 
mother packed up her belongings and put her ‘out on the street’ where she was picked up 
by her grandmother. Yet, her grandmother’s home did not prove to be a safe haven; at the 
age of six, an uncle living in the same household began to sexually molest her. By her teens, 
Dawn was out drinking with her mother rather than at school – and, at age 16, she simply 
dropped out. Alcohol, drugs and prostitution marked her next years. Of this period, Dawn 
shared:
So we used to eat from the barrels. I could have gone home. But I didn’t want to go home . . . 
My life was out on the streets . . . You’ll see today, that you’ve got young girls out there that are 
prostitutes. They grow up in the street. They become street wise, they become alcoholics, they 
become drugs addicts. But they’re all the same . . . They have no place to go. They sleep in 
gutters. I have in my days, I have slept . . . I have been around . . . But I know what it’s like to 
live on the street. It’s not easy to live on the streets. It’s really, really hard.
At the age of 26, Dawn left the street, overcame her addictions, and became a ‘live-in 
housekeeper’ for a local ‘old timer’ and cared for him for 25 years until his death. After 
more than two decades of stable housing, Dawn faced eviction. Now, she is living in the 
same shelter in which her mother stayed.
I say to myself I hate [shelter]. I hate living in this place. I remember, long time ago, that my 
mother told me she used to live in this shelter. This is the shelter she lived in. She worked in this 
shelter, just like I do.
 Gonyea and Melekis 
73
The women’s narratives revealed that while eviction is often identified as a pathway into 
homelessness, for older women, eviction may be more complicated than simply losing a 
physical home. It may also represent the end of a caring relationship – whether informal or 
formal caregiving – and the loss of a significant social connection. In fact, Grenier et al.’s 
(2016) review of the older homeless literature suggests that there may be divergent gender 
paths. Contrary to older men, homelessness for older women was more often associated 
with poverty as a result of family circumstances and/or the pension system, trigger events 
such as family breakdown, eviction and abuse (Grenier et al., 2016). Our participants’ nar-
ratives highlighted that homelessness was often the result of a complex interaction of risk 
factors, trigger events, cumulative life experiences and structural conditions.
Homelessness and identity work
Stigmatized persons may not identify with the social label personally, but they still must 
deal with the interpersonal difficulties created by the discredited public identity conferred 
upon them (Goffman, 1963). The participants’ narratives underscored that their lives are 
multidimensional and complex and that the power dynamics between sexism, ageism and 
homelessness are linked. Our analysis also revealed that these homeless older women can 
and do express ‘agency’ in the way they enact elements of self. Informed by gerontological 
and feminist literatures, our definition of human agency encompasses the process by which 
individuals negotiate their past and construct a vision for the future to shape their choices 
within present circumstances (Wray, 2003). As Kabeer (1999: 438) expresses:
Agency is about more than observable action; it also encompasses the meaning and purpose 
which individuals bring to their activities . . .While agency tends to be operationalized as 
‘decision-making’ in the social science literature, it can take a number of other forms. It can 
take the form of bargaining and negotiation, deception and manipulation, subversion and 
resistance as well as more intangible, cognitive processes of reflection and analysis.
In enacting elements of self, the participants used identities that were both related to and 
distinct from their homelessness status. As Hall (2000: 17) points out, the self is not 
simply fluid nor are identities unified and singular, ‘but multiply constructed across dif-
ferent and often intersecting and antagonistic discourses, and practices and positions’. In 
fact, the women often resisted the identity of being a homeless person. If the word 
‘homeless’ was used at all, it was most often in response to interviewer questions such as 
‘would you describe yourself as homeless?’ or ‘what do you believe leads to homeless-
ness?’ For example, Virginia replied:
Well I am sleeping up here every night. It’s a dorm type of thing, but um, it doesn’t bother me 
. . . I don’t really consider myself homeless because my needs are being met. You know, some 
people walk around and [say] ‘I’m homeless’ . . . But, I don’t label myself like that . . . I think 
it’s a state of mind, actually.
Dawn shared:
To me, homeless is being . . . if someone dies and leaves you with nothing, and you have . . . 
say you have no relatives. You have nobody. You have to go out on the streets . . . Most people 
 74 
The Sociological Review 65(1) 
live in the streets. They live in cardboard boxes, some live in cars. That’s what you consider 
homelessness. I could never go back out there. Never, never, never. I lived out on the streets a 
long time ago . . . I could never go back out on the streets. I’d end up killing myself.
In efforts to ‘salvage the self’, Virginia and Dawn engaged in associational distancing 
(Snow and Anderson, 1993). They chose their location along the home-homeless con-
tinuum – or asserted their own identities – by distancing themselves from negative views 
of public (or street) homelessness. Furthermore, by claiming that homelessness is ‘a state 
of mind’, Virginia expresses agency – that is, she has the choice (or the power) to define 
her current life circumstances. Interestingly, Dawn defines homelessness not only in 
terms of physical space but also in regards to social space or connection. In stating that 
‘you have nobody’, she stresses the extreme disaffiliation and disconnection from sup-
portive relationships.
Associational distancing, particularly from other women in the shelter, was often pre-
sent in narratives. Smitty, who views herself as a professional, middle-class woman, 
spoke of the other women as having ‘started early in life being um, not middle class . . . 
their parents were on welfare’. Seeing herself as ‘hard working’, Penelope simply stated, 
‘a lot of people [in the shelter] are just plain lazy’. Jill also commented that the other 
women’s situations are about ‘laziness mostly’; but suggested that ‘if you did a survey 
and people were honest, you would find probably a good 60 to 70 percent of the people 
have mental problems’. What is especially striking is that, the women often adopted (and 
internalized) society’s extant framing of the cause of older women’s homelessness as 
being largely about irresponsibility, incompetence, substance abuse and mental illness. 
From a feminist perspective, it is noteworthy that study participants viewed homeless-
ness as primarily being about individual dysfunction and pathology rather than the 
broader social, economic and political context which marginalize and place older women 
at risk for late life homelessness (Kisor and Kendal-Wilson, 2002).
Passing is another impression management strategy that the women used. Virginia 
shared that ‘when I worked at [store], I wasn’t telling them that I was at [lodging] that is 
run by the [shelter]. I just let them think I was living on [street], you know, in a studio or 
whatever’. Smitty also noted that ‘talking with people one on one, I just say, no, I live in 
the [neighborhood]’. Here, the women demonstrated their agency in the explicit use of 
deception (Kabeer, 1999) to avoid being labelled as a member of the low-status group of 
‘the homeless’. Similarly, Jill disclosed an upcoming challenge of how to pass or hide 
her homeless status from potential health-care employers:
I haven’t figured out what I’m gonna do on this yet, its I know most places before they hire you 
they require a physical . . . I’m hoping that they have some place that they’ll send me to . . . I 
don’t want my physical coming from here, it says homeless shelter [Clinic], it’s medical for the 
homeless.
Yet, Jill also shared an encounter in which she strategically chose to reveal her homeless 
status.
I have to tell you a little story about when I wanted to go to school . . . I went over to [community 
college], I had an orientation . . . I had to make out paperwork and then they wanted to meet with 
 Gonyea and Melekis 
75
each of us individually . . . I cried and I told them my story . . . I think that was when it really hit 
me that I was homeless, you know? . . . When I really had to tell a stranger. And so, hopefully 
because I’m telling this stranger this, I can get something out of it – being accepted to school.
Jill strategically chose to project the image of a ‘deserving homeless woman’ to invoke 
sympathy and, even pity, to achieve her desired outcome.
Research suggests that individuals who have been homeless for longer periods of time 
are more likely to embrace self-concepts of homelessness; while those who are more 
recently dislocated express a strong aversion to other homeless persons (Snow and 
Anderson, 1993). In fact, only Bippy who had lived on the streets for a long time spoke 
of embracing this life and identity:
I was reluctant to go into the shelters because there was a lot of freedom on the street. But the 
main thing about living on the street was, well first of all, I pretty much had my own spot, a 
gang with my best buddies . . . I resisted going to the shelter for a long time . . . I’m also 
entertaining on the street so I’m everyone’s best buddy . . . even to this day though, I’m no 
longer technically homeless on the street if I see somebody I used to know – Hey, Hey. So I’ve 
learned how to be, you know, have this street persona.
The participants resisted not only the homeless identity, but also the identity of being 
an older woman. The participants’ rejection of the notion of themselves as ‘old’ is not 
surprising given American women typically say that a person becomes old at age 70 
(Taylor et al., 2009). While the demarcation of age 70 as entry into ‘old age’ may reflect 
gains in life expectancy, it may also be reflective of individuals’ desires to avoid the 
negative stereotypes of older adults as interpersonally, physically and cognitively defi-
cient. Further, there is some evidence of a double standard of ageing in that women are 
judged more harshly than men. Indeed, unlike some stigmatized groups, older adults 
often endorse negative stereotypes and views of ageing (Richeson and Shelton, 2006). 
When asked if she considered herself to be an older woman, Virginia simply answered 
that ‘I never think of myself as, in age numbers,’ Bippy replied, ‘Yes and no. It goes back 
and forth, I mean . . . I look young and have a young spirit’. Distancing herself from the 
image of the ‘older bag lady’, Bippy commented:
They tend to go more into dementia . . . they’re talking to themselves while walking down the 
street or they tend not to stay as clean or they accumulate, they get the, you know, the pack rat 
mentality . . . It’s the crazy OLD lady.
Yet, all of the participants acknowledged being in the shelter’s older women transitional 
programme and often expressed frustration with being a ‘tweener’ and falling between 
the cracks – that is, they were considered too old in the job market, but told they were not 
quite old enough to access housing or income benefits available to low-income seniors.
Constructing a positive sense of self
Beyond their resistance or rejection of the homeless label (or their oppositional and 
‘Not Me’ statements), what social memberships and roles (or appositional and ‘Me’ 
 76 
The Sociological Review 65(1) 
statements) did the women claim in their narratives to construct a valued sense of self? 
Only limited research exists on the structure and composition of homeless women’s 
social networks and much of it focuses on younger women with children. Based on their 
own study as well as existing research, Tucker et al. (2009: 9) concluded that while there 
is ‘some truth’ to the stereotype of homeless women being ‘relatively isolated individu-
als who have small personal networks, comprised mostly of high-risk peers who provide 
little emotional or tangible support’, it may be an ‘overly simplistic portrayal’. Among 
the 28 homeless women that they interviewed, almost one-half of the people in their 
personal networks were ‘low risk’ for engagement in unhealthy behaviours and these 
individuals were primarily family members, service providers, and people met through 
religious organizations. However, they characterized these relationships as ‘tenuous’; 
noting that ‘although relationship with relatives tended to be emotionally close and (by 
definition) long term, the average frequency of contact with a family members was only 
two or three times a month’ (Taylor et al., 2009: 9).
Research on the social memberships and networks of older homeless women is 
largely missing. In our study, we found that a central identity which all of the partici-
pants claimed and helped them create ‘a sense of valued self’, was that of being a 
nurturer or caregiver. The women devoted significant portions of their narratives to 
describing their roles and experiences as mothers, adult daughters, sisters, friends 
and, in some cases, paid caregivers. Similar to Tucker et al. (2009), we saw that the 
emotional bonds with family were very important to the participants while frequency 
of contact was relatively low. Tucker and colleagues emphasized the importance of 
these bonds in providing positive role models and access to tangible support; our 
research also underscored their value as affirming the participants’ identities, espe-
cially their goodness as women.
For instance, Jill spoke joyfully about her granddaughters and shared how she per-
formed the grandmother role despite her current hardships:
I have two granddaughters, they’re twins . . . They call, ‘Nana, are you coming for Christmas?’ 
They’re so cute, they’re ten . . . I spend money on my grandchildren . . . Christmas is going to 
cost me probably a good $200 . . . Between taking the bus there and back and um picking up 
some presents . . . I promised the girls that the day after Christmas that Nana would take them 
shopping . . . I’m gonna give them each $25, but when I get them out to the stores, they’re 
gonna say ‘Oh but Nana look at this.’ I’ll have another $25 set aside so I can overspend.
Bippy spoke of having three personae: ‘this street persona as well as my working 
persona as well as my mother and son persona’. Yet, when asked what had the biggest 
impact on her life, she quickly responded, ‘having children’. Bippy’s relationships with 
her two children are complicated. Her 26-year-old daughter was raised by and still lives 
with her father. Her son is a high school senior for whom Bippy surrendered her parental 
rights at age of 6. Bippy continually spoke of her attempts or struggles ‘to mother’ with-
out a hearth; simply stating, for example, ‘You can’t be homeless and have a kid on the 
street and so then I didn’t. I actually tried a couple of shelters with my son, but they were 
horrific.’ On surrendering her parental rights, Bippy confided:
 Gonyea and Melekis 
77
You know, it kind of tore my heart apart but [the woman who took custody’s] son and my son 
knew each other forever, and for the past several years, he’s had his own room . . . and actually 
it’s better that we live apart because we’re both Aries. We’re both fire signs [makes gun noise].
Even now, expressing concerns about her daughter’s boyfriend, Bippy noted her inability 
to offer tangible support, ‘I don’t have a situation yet that I can say, “Come on, come 
home to me” or you know, give her a big, you know, nest egg’. Although not sharing a 
physical home, Bippy views the three of them as family:
Because we’ve had so many losses . . . it’s really just being together that’s important. But even 
then we don’t intentionally plan to be all together for a particular time. We have more like 
casual dates . . . I try to be more consciousness, especially now that I’m like stabilized and not 
out on the street . . . About 50 percent of the time we manage to get all three of us together . . . 
We’re very, very close but we’re also very much loners.
Bippy expressed pride in her children’s accomplishments and her role in their successes. 
Speaking of her son’s college scholarship offers, Bippy commented, ‘I raised him the 
same way – to be independent and make his own choices’. Reflecting on her contribution 
to her children’s paths, she shared:
If you stick with it and stay faithful and true to yourself and to the Lord, Don’t pick up that 
drink, you know, and love your son, love your daughter, and love the ones you love and stay 
true to yourself, things will happen…
Smitty’s introductory statements were: ‘I am, ah, sixty-one. Single. I’ve never been mar-
ried. I’ve never been pregnant. I worked for thirty-five years in finance.’ Yet, her narra-
tive quickly shifted to the loss of her mother at a young age, remaining in her family’s 
home until age 35, and being the caregiver for a large extended family. Smitty used 
phrases such as ‘going through menopause’, ‘life without having a baby’ and experienc-
ing the ‘empty nest syndrome’. As her story unfolded, Smitty voiced her sense of pro-
found sadness and an opinion of herself as ‘a jerk’; the latter being her first allusion to 
alcoholism.
I just always thought I had time [for a baby] . . . you always think that I have a year or two left 
. . . I used to I’d have to drink . . . not have to . . . God bless us . . . I used to go out and have fun 
and it was fun . . . And then it got to a point, um of being so sad and not having anything to focus 
on, cause I took care of my own family, my own brothers and sisters and their families for a 
long time . . . And, they’re all in place. Everyone is fine. So I went through that . . . ah, empty 
nest syndrome . . . even though they weren’t my children, it was still my family . . . and, I just 
didn’t know what to fight for . . . what am I looking for . . . what am I?
Perhaps partly answering her own question of ‘what am I?’, Smitty spoke about her cur-
rent committed relationship:
My Peter. We’re not married . . . again, another homeless thing . . . we want to get married . . . 
but the benefits, we don’t know is it better for us to be married or to stay single? . . . He had a 
 78 
The Sociological Review 65(1) 
stroke and um, he’s been in the hospital. He’s now in rehab . . . that’s when I came to [shelter] 
. . . My brother hates hearing me say that nobody needs me. ‘We all need you!’ Nobody does 
need me. My Peter does.
Affirming the importance and continuity of her caregiver identity, Smitty states:
If somebody else needs me, or my Peter, or um, even some other folks; if there’s something I 
can do, it gives me something to do. Not that I look for it in that way, but I’m saying that if I 
can help anybody, I haven’t lost that.
Much of Penelope’s narrative focused on her estrangement from her adult son and 
daughter, both of whom she raised as a single parent. Although they live close by, neither 
child knows that she is living at a shelter. Painfully perplexed about its reason, Penelope 
spoke at length about this ‘rejection’:
I’ve been here almost two years. I think that I don’t know who raised my kids . . . I found it 
really interesting that they provided no support. Zip. Um, they look at things in a different way. 
Um, like you can’t stay here because I don’t have room . . . I can’t help you . . . Just not willing. 
And I don’t know why. And the thing that really bothers me about it is they won’t talk . . . Cause 
I don’t know what the problem is. I really truly don’t.
Ashamed by her adult children’s behaviour, Penelope asserted a claim about being a 
good mother, perhaps even being ‘too good’:
They’ll do more for their father than me, which I find very odd, because their father was not 
around most of the time. But it’s almost that going in search of your father kind of thing . . . I 
just don’t understand my side . . . because when you’re alone, you give a lot to them. Um, you 
probably give more than you should.
Of deep concern to Penelope is the impact of this estrangement on her relationship with 
her grandchildren:
There’s a lot of grandchildren . . . That’s tough . . . really tough . . . It’s very difficult. Very 
difficult. Very difficult. Like I cannot even tell you. I’m ashamed . . . I don’t talk about it . . . in 
part because I want to keep it private . . . because there’s a lot of gossip . . . And it’s too 
important to me.
Affirming her claim as a caring person, Penelope went on to share how she alone among 
the women in the shelter stepped forward to assist a shelter resident with numerous 
health problems. Calling the woman, ‘her friend’ Penelope stated, ‘I helped her . . . and 
nobody else offered to help her’.
Although Dawn experienced multiple traumas, including childhood sexual abuse, 
addictions, prostitution and homelessness, being a live-in housekeeper for the past 25 
years provided her with a positive sense of self and a stable life. Dawn remarked that ‘I 
liked my life there’ and questioned ‘why the heck he had to die, cause if he didn’t die, I 
wouldn’t be stuck in this place’. Abandoned, abused, betrayed and let down too many 
times, Dawn has little trust or faith in people; she has placed her faith in the Lord.
 Gonyea and Melekis 
79
That’s the only thing I believe in. I believe in the Lord Jesus. I don’t believe in anything else. I 
stopped believing in people a long time ago. I stopped really believing, stopped trusting people 
. . . if it wasn’t for the Lord Jesus, I wouldn’t be alive.
For Dawn, her deepest social connection is to her cat; she defined her future as simply 
obtaining a subsidized apartment and caring for this one remaining cat.
I miss my cat . . . I had to put my cat in a shelter and it’s been a year. I have one cat left. The 
other two are gone. And I keep hoping and praying, that I’m gonna get my cat back. I said 
everything that I’m doing; I’m doing for my cat. I’m not doing for myself; I’m doing for my 
cat. To have an income, okay I did that. Okay, I did that for myself, but I did that for my cat too. 
I pray for my cat . . . everything that I’m doing now, in some ways, I’m doing it for myself, but 
in another ways, I’m not . . . I’m doing it for her.
Conclusion
Although adult homelessness has long been perceived as largely being about men, the 
rising number of homeless women, many of whom are 50 and older, has increasingly 
raised questions about what it means to be ‘old, female and homeless’. In our study, we 
sought to explore this question using the women’s narratives to understand their interpre-
tation of the homelessness experience, the meaning it holds to them, and how it impacts 
their identity.
Rowe and Wolch (1990: 185) stress that ‘for the average “homed” or stably domiciled 
individual, social networks and daily paths create a powerful sense of time-space conti-
nuity, which in turn molds individual identity and self-esteem’. Homelessness, in con-
trast, creates time–space discontinuity and ‘the struggle to survive in a degraded and 
threatening environment can alter personal identity and have an impact on self -esteem’. 
For the study participants, being labelled ‘homeless’ was a prerequisite to their ability to 
access the homeless social service delivery system. To receive material resources for 
shelter and survival, participants had to take on bureaucratic definitions of homelessness 
(i.e., government eligibility requirements).
Similar to Takahashi et al. (2002), we found that in accessing services dedicated to the 
homeless population, individuals may become engulfed by a homeless self-identity. The 
tolls of the homeless identity – stress, depression and anxiety – were constantly men-
tioned by participants. The sense of marginalization and stigma resulting from their 
homelessness often contributed to a sense of a devalued self or a denial of individuality. 
Jill described homelessness as a ‘demeaning – horrible experience’. Smitty voiced frus-
tration and despair at being a member of ‘a sub-culture in which one’s opinion doesn’t 
matter . . . the only thing you are is . . . one of the numbers . . . I want to be back to being 
Smitty’.
Snow and Anderson’s (1987) concept of ‘identity work’ captures well the women’s 
active engagement in the process of identity negotiation. We found that the women 
actively resisted or rejected the labels of ‘homeless’ and ‘old’. Associational distancing, 
impression management, and passing were common coping mechanisms. Because the 
stigma associated with homelessness brings individual blame for lack of housing and 
economic resources, denial may work to some degree to deflect the assignment of 
 80 
The Sociological Review 65(1) 
negative characteristics associated with homelessness. Also important was embracing 
identities that connected them to the social world and gave them a sense of valued self. 
All of the women’s stories included themes about nurturing and taking care of others; 
most often for family members, but it also extended to helping other women in the shel-
ter. By sharing these nurturing or caring narratives, the participants lodged claims as 
valued persons who are living meaningful lives. Although the participants lacked hearths, 
their nurturer narratives, largely perceived as an extension of the feminine role, affirmed 
their ‘goodness as women’.
The homelessness service delivery system is currently focused on the material hardship 
and destitution experienced by homeless individuals. Our research suggests, however, that 
the social effects of homelessness for older women are not only determined by material 
conditions. Rather, as Rowe and Wolch (1990) emphasize, these deficient material condi-
tions are in themselves a consequence of the social context of homelessness. Thus, a poten-
tial policy direction would be for the current homeless service delivery system to not only 
focus on material conditions but to also support older homeless women in rebuilding their 
social networks, personal identities, and sense of a valued self and life.
Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research, authorship and/or publication of this 
article.
Notes
1. 
Point-in-time studies are criticized for their failure to accurately identify the intermittently 
homeless and ‘hidden homeless’ populations.
2. 
This figure is based on the US Census Bureau estimate of the 65+ population size by 2050, the 
2 per cent rate of deep poverty in the 65+ population remains constant through 2050, and ratio 
of 1 sheltered 65+ homeless adult to every 22 adults aged 65+ remains constant through 2050.
3. 
An associate’s degree is at the undergraduate level; a 60-credit hour programme, it provides 
basic knowledge which can be transferred to either a bachelor’s degree programme or offers 
a vocational or technical skill for employment.
References
Bamberg, M. (2005). Narrative discourse and identities. In J. C. Meister (Ed.), Narratology beyond 
literary criticism: Mediality disciplinarity, (pp. 457–514). Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
Bassuk, E. L., DeCandia, C. J., Beach, C. A., & Berman, F. (2014). America’s youngest outcasts: 
 
A report card on child homelessness. The National Center on Family Homelessness. Available 
at: http://new.homelesschildrenamerica.org/mediadocs/280.pdf
Blumer, H. (1969). Symbolic interactionism: Perspective and method. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice-Hall.
Brown, R. T., Kiely, D. K., Bharel, M., & Mitchell, S. L. (2011). Geriatric syndromes in older 
homeless adults. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 27(1): 6–22.
Charmaz, K. (2006). Constructing grounded theory: A practical guide through qualitative 
 
analysis. London: SAGE.
Coalition for the Homeless. (2014). State of the homeless 2014. Available at: www.coalitionforthe-
homeless.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/04/State-of-the-Homeless-2014-FORMATTED-
FINAL.pdf.
 Gonyea and Melekis 
81
Cooley, C. H. (1902). Human nature and the social order. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons.
Downtown Women’s Action Coalition (2011). 2010 downtown women’s need assessment. 
Available at: http://www.dwcweb.org/needs/DWAC_NeedsAssessment2010.pdf
Farrow, J. A., Deisher, R. W., Brown, R., Kulig, J. W., & Kipke, M. D. (1992). Health and 
health needs of homeless and runaway youth: A position paper of the Society for Adolescent 
Medicine. Journal of Adolescent Health, 13(8): 717–726.
Goffman, E. (1959). The presentation of self in everyday life. New York: Anchor Books.
Goffman, E. (1963). Stigma: Notes of the management of spoiled identity. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice-Hall.
Gonyea, J. G., Mills-Dick, K., & Bachman, S. S. (2010). The complexities of elder homelessness, 
a shifting political landscape and emerging community responses. Journal of Gerontological 
Social Work, 53(7), 575–590.
Grbich, C. (2007). Qualitative data analysis: An introduction. London: SAGE.
Grenier, A., Barken, R., Sussman, T., Rothwell, D., Bourgeois-Guerin, & LaVoie, J-P. (2016). 
Literature review on homelessness and aging: A policy and practice-relevant research agenda. 
Canadian Journal on Aging, 35(1), 28–41.
Hall, S. (2000). Who needs identity? In P. du Gay, J. Evans & P. Jess (Eds.). Identity: A reader, 
(pp. 15–30). London: SAGE.
Housing and Urban Development Office of Community Planning and Development (2012). The 
2011 annual homeless assessment report to Congress. Available at: https://www.hudex-
change.info/resources/documents/2011AHAR_FinalReport.pdf
Huey, L., & Brendt, E. (2008). You’ve gotta learn how to play the game: Homeless women’s use 
of gender performance as a tool for preventing victimization. The Sociological Review, 56(2), 
177–194.
Kabeer, N. (1999). Resources, agency, achievements: Reflections on the measurement of women’s 
empowerment. Development and Change, 30(3), 435–464.
Killian, C., & Johnson, C. (2006). I’m not an immigrant: Resistance, redefinition, and the role of 
resources in identity work. Social Psychology Quarterly, 69(1), 60–80.
Kimbler, K. J., DeWees, M. A., & Harris, A. N. (2015). Characteristics of the old and homeless: 
Identifying distinct service needs. Aging & Mental Health, Epub ahead of print 24 September. 
DOI: 10.1080/13607863.2015.1088512.
Kisor, A. J., & Kendal-Wilson, L. (2002). Older homeless women: Reframing the stereotype of 
the bag lady. Affilia, 17(3), 354–370.
Krekula, C. (2007). The intersection of age and gender: Reworking gender theory and social 
gerontology. Current Sociology, 55(2), 155–171.
Lewinson, T., Thomas, M. L., & White, S. (2014). Traumatic transitions: Homeless women’s nar-
ratives of abuse, loss, and fear. Affilia, 29(2), 192–205.
Liebow, E. (1995). Tell them who I am: The lives of homeless women. New York: Penguin Books.
McCall, G. J. (2003). The me and the not-me: Positive and negative poles of identity. In P. J. Burke 
(Ed.), Advances in Identity Theory and Research, (pp. 11–26). New York: Plenum.
McCall, G. J., & Simmons, J. L. (1978). Identities and interactions: Examination of human 
associations in everyday life. New York: Free Press.
McDonald, L., Dergal, J., & Cleghorn, L. (2007). Living on the margins: Older homeless adults in 
Toronto. Journal of Gerontological Social Work, 49(1–2), 19–46.
Mead, G. H. (1967). Mind, self, & society: From the standpoint of a social behaviorist, Vol. 1  
(1st edn.). Charles Morris (Ed.). Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Mills-Dick, K. (2012). Voices from the street: Exploring how older adults and outreach workers 
define and mitigate problems associated with urban elder homelessness. Boston, MA: Boston 
University.
 82 
The Sociological Review 65(1) 
National Health Care for the Homeless Council (2013). Aging and housing instability: 
Homelessness among older and elderly adults. In Focus: A Quarterly Research Review of the 
National HCH Council, 2(1), 1–5.
O’Connell, J. (2005). Premature mortality in homeless populations: A review of the literature. 
Available at: http://www.nhchc.org/PrematureMortalityFinal.pdf
Parsell, C. (2011). Homeless identities: Enacted and ascribed. British Journal of Sociology, 62(3), 
442–461.
Perl, L. (2015). Veterans and homelessness. Congressional Research Service. Available at: http://
fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/RL34024.pdf
Perl, L., Bagalman, E., Fernandes-Alcantara, A. L., Heisler, E. J., McCallion, G., McCarthy, F. 
X., & Sacco, L. N. (2015). Homelessness: Targeted federal programs and recent legislation. 
Congressional Research Service. Available at: https://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/RL30442.
pdf
Richeson, J. A., & Shelton, J. N. (2006). A social psychological perspective on the stigmatiza-
tion of older adults. In L. L. Carstensen & C. R. Hartel (Eds.), When I’m 64, (pp. 174–207). 
Washington DC: National Academies Press.
Rowe, S., & Wolch, J. (1990). Social networks in time and space: Homeless women in skid row, 
Los Angeles. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 80(2): 184–204.
Saldana, J. (2009). The coding manual for qualitative researchers. London: SAGE.
Sermons, M. W., & Henry, M. (2010). Demographics of homelessness series: The rising elderly 
population. Washington DC: Homelessness Research Institute. Available at: http://www.end-
homelessness.org/files/2698_file_Aging_Report.pdf
Shinn, M., Gottlieb, J., Wett, J. L, Bahl, A, Cohen, A., & Baron Ellis, D. (2007). Predictors of 
homelessness among older adults in New York City: Disability, economic, human and social 
capital and stressful events. Journal of Health Psychology, 12(5), 696–708.
Snow, D., & Anderson, L. (1987). Identity work among the homeless: The verbal construction and 
avowal of personal identities. American Journal of Sociology, 92(6), 1336–1371.
Snow, D., & Anderson, L. (1993). Down on their luck: A study of homeless street people. 
Berkeley, CA: University of California.
Stone, G. P. (1962). ‘Appearance and the self’, in A. M. Rose (ed.), Human behavior and social 
processes, (pp. 86–118). Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Tajfel, H., & Turner, J. (1979). An integrative theory of intergroup conflict. In W. G. Austin & S. 
Worchel (Eds.), The social psychology of intergroup relations, (pp.33–37). Monterey, CA: 
Brooks/Cole.
Takahashi, L. M., McElroy, J., & Rowe, S. (2002). The sociospacial stigmatization of homeless 
women with children. Urban Geography, 23(4), 301–322.
Taylor, P., Morin, R., Parker, K., Cohn, D., & Wang, W. (2009). Growing old in America: 
Expectations vs reality. Washington, DC: Pew Research Center. Available at: http://www.
pewsocialtrends.org/2009/06/29/growing-old-in-america-expectations-vs-reality/
Thorton Dill, B., & Zambrana, R. E. (2009). Critical thinking about inequality: An emerging lense. 
In B. Thorton Dill & R. E. Zambrana (Eds.). Emerging intersections: Race, class and gender 
in theory, policy and practice, (pp. 1–21). New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Tucker, J. S., Kennedy, D., Ryan, G., Wenzel, S. K., Gollinelli, D., & Zazzali, J. (2009). 
Homeless women’s personal networks: Implications for understanding risk behavior. Human 
Organization, 68(2): 129–140.
Wardhaugh, J. (1999). The unaccommodated woman: Home, homelessness and identity. 
Sociological Review, 49(1), 91–109.
Wray, S. (2003). Women growing older: agency, ethnicity and culture. Sociology, 37(3), 511–527.
