 Unexpected widespread hypophosphatemia and bone disease 
associated with elemental formula use in infants and children
Luisa F. Gonzalez Ballesterosa, Nina S. Mab, Rebecca J. Gordonc, Leanne Wardd, Philippe 
Backeljauwe, Halley Wassermane, David R. Weberf, Linda A. DiMegliog, Julie Gagneh, 
Robert Steini, Declan Codyj, Kimber Simmonsk, Paul Zimakasl, Lisa Swartz Toporm,n, 
Sungeeta Agrawalm,n, Andrew Calabriao, Peter Tebbenp, Ruth Fairclothq, Erik A. Imelg, 
Linda Caseyr,1, and Thomas O. Carpentera,*,1
aYale University School of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, New Haven, CT, United States 
bBoston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, United States cColumbia University Medical Center, 
New York, NY, United States dChildren's Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada 
eCincinnati Children's Hospital, Cincinnati, OH, United States fUniversity of Rochester, Rochester, 
NY, United States gRiley Hospital for Children, Indiana University, Indianapolis, IN, United States 
hCentre Hospitalier de l'Université Laval, Quebec City, QC, Canada iChildren's Hospital of 
Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada jOur Lady's Children's Hospital, Crumlin, Ireland 
kChildren's Hospital Colorado, Denver, CO, United States lUniversity of Vermont Medical Center, 
Burlington, VT, United States mAlpert Medical School of Brown University, Providence, RI, United 
States nHasbro Children's Hospital, Providence, RI, United States oChildren's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States pMayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States qWalter 
Reed National Military Medical Center, Bethesda, MD, United States rBritish Columbia Children's 
Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada
Abstract
Objective—Hypophosphatemia occurs with inadequate dietary intake, malabsorption, increased 
renal excretion, or shifts between intracellular and extracellular compartments. We noticed the 
common finding of amino-acid based elemental formula [EF] use in an unexpected number of 
cases of idiopathic hypophosphatemia occurring in infants and children evaluated for skeletal 
disease. We aimed to fully characterize the clinical profiles in these cases.
Methods—A retrospective chart review of children with unexplained hypophosphatemia was 
performed as cases accumulated from various centres in North America and Ireland. Data were 
*Corresponding author at: Yale University School of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics (Endocrinology), P.O Box 208064, LMP 
3103; 333 Cedar Street, New Haven, CT 06520-8064, United States. thomas.carpenter@yale.edu (T.O. Carpenter).
1Authors LC and TOC contributed equally to this work.
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2017.02.003.
Disclosures
Thomas O. Carpenter and Linda Casey have performed consulting services for Nutricia, North America. The other authors have 
indicated they have no financial relationships relevant to this article to disclose.
Conflict of interest
Ruth Faircloth, MD: The views expressed are those of the authors and do not reflect the official policy or position of the US Army, 
Department of Defense nor the US Government. The other authors have no potential conflicts of interest to disclose.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Bone. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 04.
Published in final edited form as:
Bone. 2017 April ; 97: 287–292. doi:10.1016/j.bone.2017.02.003.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 analyzed to explore any relationships between feeding and biochemical or clinical features, effects 
of treatment, and to identify a potential mechanism.
Results—Fifty-one children were identified at 17 institutions with EF-associated 
hypophosphatemia. Most children had complex illnesses and had been solely fed Neocate® 
formula products for variable periods of time prior to presentation. Feeding methods varied. 
Hypophosphatemia was detected during evaluation of fractures or rickets. Increased alkaline 
phosphatase activity and appropriate renal conservation of phosphate were documented in nearly 
all cases. Skeletal radiographs demonstrated fractures, undermineralization, or rickets in 94% of 
the cases. Although the skeletal disease had often been attributed to underlying disease, most all 
improved with addition of supplemental phosphate or change to a different formula product.
Conclusion—The observed biochemical profiles indicated a deficient dietary supply or severe 
malabsorption of phosphate, despite adequate formula composition. When transition to an 
alternate formula was possible, biochemical status improved shortly after introduction to the 
alternate formula, with eventual improvement of skeletal abnormalities. These observations 
strongly implicate that bioavailability of formula phosphorus may be impaired in certain clinical 
settings. The widespread nature of the findings lead us to strongly recommend careful monitoring 
of mineral metabolism in children fed EF. Transition to alternative formula use or implementation 
of phosphate supplementation should be performed cautiously with as severe hypocalcemia may 
develop.
1. Introduction
Hypophosphatemia is uncommon in childhood and can occur either with or without 
depletion of whole-body phosphate [P] stores [1]. In the acute setting, or upon refeeding 
after prolonged depletion, phosphate may shift from extracellular to intracellular 
compartments resulting in transient hypophosphatemia without phosphate depletion. In the 
more chronic setting, long-term phosphate depletion may occur after prolonged inadequate 
intake, malabsorption, or excessive urinary losses due to renal tubular disease. As phosphate 
is abundant in Western diets, inadequate phosphate supply is rarely encountered in the 
United States [US] and Canada, and observed in very specific situations, such as the 
breastfed premature infant (owing to the low P content of breast milk). Decreased intestinal 
absorption of phosphate may occur with generalized malabsorption, vitamin D deficiency or 
due to the use of phosphate binding agents. One such example has been often reported in 
individuals abusing antacids, whereby resultant bound phosphate is less available for 
intestinal absorption [2]. Alternatively, abnormal renal losses of phosphate may occur in the 
setting of hyperparathyroidism, excess fibroblast growth factor 23 [FGF23], or primary 
disorders of the renal tubule [1]. Generally, hypophosphatemia encountered in childhood is 
accompanied by characteristic historic and/or clinical features that suggest the most likely 
etiology.
The composition of nutritional formulas designed for infants and children follows 
nationally- and globally-established guidelines to maximize safety and nutritional adequacy 
across a variety of intakes [3]. When formula is used as the sole source of nutrition, intake is 
determined by energy requirements and micronutrient intake varies accordingly. Despite this 
variability in intake, micronutrient intake from formula is usually adequate to meet 
Gonzalez Ballesteros et al.
Page 2
Bone. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 requirements for most nutrients until intakes fall far below expected for age. As such, 
micronutrient deficiencies in children consuming infant and pediatric formulas across a wide 
range of intakes are rare. Furthermore, when low formula volumes are consumed due to low 
energy requirements, intake of all micronutrients is reduced, resulting in potential 
deficiencies of multiple micronutrients. Thus isolated micronutrient deficiency in a formula-
fed population is not commonly encountered.
In this manuscript, we describe a series of children who had unexpected and unexplained 
hypophosphatemia, and who had in common the consumption of single brand of amino-acid 
based nutritional formula.
2. Patients and methods
This was a retrospective chart review conducted in 17 centres in North America and Ireland 
between 2014 and 2016. Patients were referred to the various authors because of 
unexplained mechanism of marked hypophosphatemia in infants and young children, 
sometimes accompanied by significant bone disease. This case series was compiled when it 
became evident that several common clinical and biochemical features suggested a 
limitation in dietary phosphate intake or its intestinal absorption. After the development of a 
data collection form, centres/ clinicians who had contacted the senior authors regarding 
affected children provided descriptive details to facilitate comparison of cases. All 
biochemical measurements were performed at the individual treating centres' clinical 
laboratories. All data was collected and shared in compliance with the ethics requirements of 
each centre. After receipt of the supporting information for each case, data was collectively 
examined to identify similarities and differences, with the objective of describing clinical 
features, identifying potential risk factors and generating hypotheses regarding etiology of 
the problem. No cases were excluded because of the use of any particular formula products. 
Selected clinical case vignettes are provided as examples. (Further details enumerating all 
cases are found in the Supplementary Table S1).
3. Results
3.1. Cases
3.1.1. Case vignette 1—An 18 month-old boy had a history of esophageal atresia/
tracheoesophageal fistula repair and necrotizing enterocolitis. He was orally fed, receiving 
diuretics and glucocorticoids, and was relatively immobile. After 1 year of Neocate® 
feeding, he demonstrated irritability associated with knee and skeletal manipulation. A 
radiographic skeletal survey showed numerous fractures including those of the femur, 
fibulae, ulna, metatarsals, a metacarpal, and 3 ribs. Upon identification of a low blood P 
level (1.3 mg/dL; 0.40 mM) and elevated alkaline phosphatase (1137 IU/L), he was treated 
with calcitriol and oral phosphate. Subsequently the formula was changed to Elecare®, and 
phosphate supplementation was discontinued, with continue maintenance of a normal serum 
phosphorus level without added phosphate supplementation. Correction of serum alkaline 
phosphatase ensued and after 3 months, radiographs improved.
Gonzalez Ballesteros et al.
Page 3
Bone. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 3.1.2. Case vignette 2—A 4-year old girl with a history of hypoxic ischemic 
encephalopathy, gastric dysmotility, developmental delay and seizures had received Neocate 
Jr® for 2.6 years. Prior to presentation, she had decreased mobility, and had stopped all 
crawling and weight-bearing. Healing rib fractures were observed on radiographic 
examination of the chest; subsequent biochemical evaluation revealed low blood P (1.7 
mg/dL; 0.53 mM) and elevated alkaline phosphatase levels (1014 IU/L). She was then 
treated with oral phosphate supplements, and the formula was changed to Pediasure®. 
Phosphate supplementation was then discontinued with continued maintenance of a normal 
serum phosphorus level, and correction of alkaline phosphatase.
3.1.3. Case vignette 3—A 3.5-month old girl (born after a 28 week gestation) with 
bronchopulmonary dysplasia had a history of feeding intolerance with abdominal distention, 
which led to feeding with various formulas until milk protein allergy was diagnosed at 2 
months of age, when nasogastric Neocate® feeds were begun. Incidental biochemical testing 
performed 6 weeks later revealed low serum P (2.9 mg/dL; 0.90 mM) and elevated alkaline 
phosphatase levels (796 IU/L). She was briefly provided with oral phosphate, then changed 
to Alimentum® formula. Phosphate supplementation was discontinued with maintenance of 
normal serum P level, and correction of alkaline phosphatase.
3.1.4. Case vignette 4—An 8 month-old girl, born after a 31 week gestation, had been 
fed Neocate® since age 2 months due to a diagnosis of milk protein allergy. She had a 
history of retinopathy of prematurity, microcephaly, reflux, and hypertonia, and presented 
after 6 months of elemental formula exposure with a left tibia fracture in the absence of any 
history of recent trauma. Investigation revealed hypophosphatemia (2.9 mg/dL; 0.90 mM) 
and elevated alkaline phosphatase levels (1510 IU/L). The formula was changed to 
Elecare®, with correction of the serum phosphorus level, and alkaline phosphatase activity 
(Fig. 1). No supplemental phosphate was administered.
3.1.5. Case vignette 5—A 6.5 year-old boy presented to the emergency room with 
respiratory distress and decreased movement of his right arm for 2 weeks. Severe 
hypophosphatemia was identified incidentally (serumP, 0.6 mg/dL). He had a history of 
epidermolysis bullosa and profound global developmental delay. He had been fed Neocate® 
formula via gastrostomy tube since 3 years of age. Rickets and healing fractures were noted 
radiographically and phosphate supplementation was begun. One year later, Neocate® 
formula was changed to Elecare® with subsequent normalization of the serum P level 
without phosphate supplementation (see Table 1), however persistent diarrhea prompted a 
change back to Neocate® formula feeds. Two weeks after the resumption of Neocate® 
feedings, the serum P level decreased to 1.2 mg/dL, requiring the resumption of phosphate 
supplementation. A second attempt to use Elecare® two months later was well-tolerated, 
and coincident correction of the serum P level occurred. Eventually radiographic features of 
rickets healed.
3.2. Chart review
Fifty-one children were identified from17 centres in the US, Canada and Europe. 
Demographic features, and selected clinical characteristics are listed in Table 2. Age at the 
Gonzalez Ballesteros et al.
Page 4
Bone. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 time of identification ranged from 0.2 to 15.5 years (median, 3.0). Fifty-seven percent of 
these children were female and 43% were male. Most children (96%) were investigated 
because of rickets or unexplained single or multiple fractures. The remaining 4% were 
detected upon biochemical laboratory screening. All identified children were receiving 
Neocate® formula products as their sole source of nutrition. The formula was administered 
either via oral or intragastric routes (53%), via the transpyloric route (37%) or using both 
gastric and transpyloric routes (10%). Median duration of Neocate® feeding was 1.3 years 
(range 1 week to 8 years). All affected children had complex but highly variable medical 
histories (see Supplementary Table S1), without a single unifying explanatory feature. 
Documentation of medication use was available for 44 children (86%), and of these, 91% 
were exposed to medications that modify gastric acidity, usually proton pump inhibitors 
[PPIs], with one case of histamine receptor 2-blocker use. Height or length was at the third 
centile or less for age in 49% of children, and at tenth centile or less in 61%. Weight was at 
the third centile or less for age in 41% of children, and at tenth centile or less in 49%.
The results of laboratory investigations were remarkably consistent in all identified children 
(Table 3). The most striking features were markedly decreased serum phosphate, elevated 
alkaline phosphatase and normal 25 hydroxyvitamin D [25-OHD] levels. In most cases, 
serum phosphate and alkaline phosphatase values were far outside of reference ranges. 
Calcium (ionized and/or total) and PTH levels were usually in the normal range. Urinary 
phosphate was undetectable or extremely low in all cases, and tubular reabsorption of 
phosphate (TRP) [4] approached 100% when it could be calculated from the available data. 
When 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D [1,25(OH)2D] had been measured (n=37), it was 
consistently and significantly elevated, and thus may be a highly sensitive biomarker for this 
phenomenon. Circulating FGF23 levels (measured in only two cases) were low.
Various therapeutic approaches were employed across the multiple patients and centres, and 
evolved with increasing experience with the management of the cases. Initially, phosphorus 
supplementation was employed with continued use of Neocate® formula in most cases 
(75%). Calcium, vitamin D, and/or calcitriol were occasionally required, to treat severe 
hypocalcemia, which often occurred rapidly following the addition of phosphate 
supplements (Fig. 1). In other cases (25%) the formula product was substituted with breast 
milk, alternate formula products, or parenteral feeds. As with supplemental phosphate 
administration, hypocalcemia was also often precipitated when the formula product was 
substituted. Overall, 47% of the children developed hypocalcemia following intervention, 
and was occasionally severe. In one case, severe hypocalcemia may have contributed to a 
seizure episode and a subsequent cardiac arrest. After observing the correction of 
hypophosphatemia with formula product changes, several patients originally treated with 
phosphate also underwent changes in formula as to simplify their medication regimens. 
Nevertheless, four cases were intolerant of formula change (diarrhea or anaphylaxis) and 
required resumption of Neocate® with added phosphate supplements. A representative 
example of the biochemical and radiographic changes occurring at presentation and with 
application of treatment is shown in Figs. 1 and 2. In other cases, hypophosphatemia was 
evident as early as one week after the introduction of Neocate®, but was not recognized 
until several months later.
Gonzalez Ballesteros et al.
Page 5
Bone. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Overall, biochemical abnormalities resolved when supplements were introduced or formula 
was changed, and bone disease improved with continued therapy. In all cases where frequent 
follow up data is available, correction of the serum P occurred within 2–7 days after 
intervention, however no systematic determination of the rapidity of this correction was 
possible. Decrements in the elevated serum alkaline phosphatase values occurred within 
weeks, but the correction to the normal range was quite variable and may reflect the 
chronicity of precedent hypophosphatemia and severity of the bone disease. Radiographic 
improvement of rachitic disease was often evident by 4–8 weeks when X-ray images were 
available in this time frame.
4. Discussion
We describe a cohort of infants and children with previously unrecognized 
hypophosphatemia accompanied in most cases by significant bone disease. All had in 
common the use of amino-acid based infant or pediatric formulas. The formulas were 
prepared by a single manufacturer (Nutricia: Neocate Infant®, Neocate Junior®, and 
Neocate Advance®), although the possibility that hypophosphatemia may occur with other 
amino-acid based formulas cannot be excluded. Review of records from several patients in 
the series documented hypophosphatemia early in the course of formula use, but was not 
initially interpreted as related to the feedings. As some features had been evident several 
years prior to this analysis, it is unlikely that alterations in formulation or manufacturing 
processes account for the findings. It is presently unclear why some children experience the 
complication while others do not. Preliminary findings from a recent prospective study 
found no significant mineral deficiencies when Neocate® was used in children with isolated 
milk protein allergy and who were otherwise healthy [5].
The patients that we describe have in common complicated and diverse clinical histories 
without obvious unifying features. Many, but not all, were born prematurely, though 
hypophosphatemia was often observed far beyond the neonatal period. The majority were 
affected with gastro-intestinal diagnoses. Most were tube-fed via gastric or post-pyloric 
routes. Thus the hypophosphatemia may reflect an as yet unidentified interaction between 
patient factors and formula. The formula products used would be expected to meet or exceed 
recommended intakes of all minerals, including phosphorus. For instance Neocate Infant® 
formula contains 82.2 mg of phosphorus per 100 kcal [6], yet hypophosphatemia occurred. 
This is comparable to the phosphorus content of alternate amino acid formulas (Elecare® 
contains 84.2 mg of phosphorus/100 kcal).
The biochemical profile in all infants strongly suggests limited intestinal absorption of 
phosphate. The maximal renal conservation of phosphate documented in most cases at the 
time of diagnosis is a normal physiologic response to phosphate depletion, and excludes 
renal phosphate losses as causal. The marked elevation in circulating 1,25(OH)2D levels is a 
classic endocrine response to phosphate deprivation [7]. In two cases where available, 
circulating FGF23 levels were in the low range, as would be expected to occur with 
inadequate dietary phosphate, and allowing for the increase in 1,25(OH)2D.
Gonzalez Ballesteros et al.
Page 6
Bone. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Although these findings implicate that the hypophosphatemia resulted from reduced mineral 
bioavailability from the formula, an underlying mechanism remains unclear. Furthermore, 
the marked elevation in serum phosphorus following phosphate supplementation or formula 
change suggests a robust capacity of the native intestine to absorb phosphate when an 
alternate form of the mineral is provided. The hyperphosphatemia in this acute setting is 
likely explained by upregulation of Na-Pi2b sodium-phosphate cotransporters in the 
intestine, as would occur during phosphate starvation [8]. The accompanying low urinary 
phosphate excretion is best explained by upregulation of renal tubular Na-Pi2a and Na-Pi2c 
cotransporters, a well-known adaptation to phosphate starvation [9]. As it takes some time to 
downregulate these adaptive responses, the marked increase in serum phosphorus acutely 
after provision of a bioavailable form of the mineral would be predicted to occur, as the 
upregulated transporters would allow for robust intestinal absorption and renal tubular 
reabsorption of phosphate, compromising the capacity to excrete the newly acquired 
phosphate load.
Mineral solubility is a well-recognized problem in the preparation of parenteral nutrition 
solutions, affected by concentrations of calcium, phosphorus and amino-acids, as well as 
temperature and pH [10]. As precipitation issues are not evident with many formulas of 
similar mineral content, formula mineral concentration is not a likely explanation, however 
phosphate used in Neocate is listed as dibasic calcium phosphate, whereas calcium 
phosphate and potassium phosphate are used in Elecare, so differences exist in the species of 
phosphate salts employed in these formulas. Moreover, pH impacts mineral solubility and 
may vary from patient to patient, giving rise to variable clinical presentation, and the pH of 
the environment into which formula is delivered could significantly impact mineral 
solubility in vivo. Many children in this series were treated with gastric acid modifying 
agents, mostly PPI medications, likely resulting in greater than physiologic gastric pH. 
Nevertheless, no identifiable measures of systemic acid/base abnormalities were 
accompanied by these findings. Furthermore, correction of phosphate status occurred 
without alteration of acid-modifying (or other) medications. In addition, several children 
were fed postpylorically where the local pH is expected to be neutral [11]. Increasing pH 
(particularly in the non-acid range) adversely affects calcium and phosphate solubility and 
offers an attractive hypothesis for the apparently impaired mineral absorption [10]. A 
preliminary study describes 4 cases of hypophosphatemia in association with high doses of 
PPI medications in children receiving gastrostomy tube feedings [12], however, formula use 
was not reported. In our series formula change and/or phosphate supplementation resulted in 
correction of the serum phosphorus level while patients continued to receive acid-modifying 
agents. In case vignette 5, the reappearance of hypophosphatemia when Neocate formula 
was re-introduced after brief discontinuation emphasizes the peculiar association of the 
Neocate formula and hypophosphatemia. Another consideration is the possibility that 
materials in feeding tubes could bind to phosphate products, thereby affecting delivery of 
phosphate to the child, however this seems unlikely in view of the multiplicity of centres 
identifying the problem, and the use of various feeding methods (via gastrostomy, as well as 
oral, nasogastric, and transpyloric feeds). Case vignette 5 describes the occurrence of 
hypophosphatemia with a specific formula, which was not evident after a formula change 
using the same feeding method.
Gonzalez Ballesteros et al.
Page 7
Bone. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 As this condition has not previously been described and optimal management is unknown, 
the treatment of children in this series varied considerably. Biochemical findings and bone 
radiographs improved with mineral supplementation, or formula change. We have not 
identified any specific differences among these formulas that would explain a potential 
difference in the bioavailability of phosphate. Caution is necessary in initiating phosphate 
supplementation or transition to a new formula and should be done gradually to avoid severe 
hyperphosphatemia and hypocalcemia. The “hungry bone” syndrome may further compound 
this phenomenon as rapid skeletal mineralization ensues [13]. Continued monitoring to 
ensure clinical improvement, normalization of biochemical abnormalities is indicated, and 
periodic follow up is warranted to avoid recurrent abnormalities.
It appears from an increasing recognition of cases that the problem is not sporadic. After 
bringing this issue to the attention of the manufacturer, a statement was issued directed to 
prescribers of the formula recommending periodic monitoring of serum levels of 
micronutrients, including phosphate, in children with complex diseases [14]. We recommend 
periodic measurement of serum phosphorus, calcium and alkaline phosphatase; potential 
benefits of early identification and treatment of the condition would be predicted to offset 
the small costs of screening, at least until specific risk factors can be delineated. In children 
with overt clinical findings such as linear growth failure, radiologic osteopenia, rickets or 
fractures, a more extensive evaluation is indicated, including measurement of serum 
phosphorus, calcium, creatinine, alkaline phosphatase, 25-OHD and PTH. Assessment of 
urinary phosphorus and creatinine excretion and calculation of the tubular reabsorption of 
phosphate provide definition of renal phosphate handling, and measurement of serum 
1,25(OH)2D may serve as a corroborative test.
Limitations of this study include its retrospective nature, and the primarily descriptive data 
available. The lack of uniformity in the data collection makes it difficult to establish a 
necessary duration of exposure for the development of the condition. These constraints also 
preclude the identification of a specific mechanism for the finding, however the physiologic 
markers identified were sufficient to lead clinicians to management directed toward 
enhancing the nutritional phosphorus supply, which successfully corrected the condition. 
Finally, we cannot confirm a distinct host factor(s) which may contribute to the presumed 
impairment in phosphate availability, and can only speculate in this regard.
5. Conclusion
Clinicians should be aware of the potential for significant hypophosphatemia and bone 
disease in children receiving amino-acid based formula products (especially Neocate®), and 
particularly those with medically complex conditions receiving formula as their sole source 
of nutrition. The children in this series were managed with supplemental phosphate or 
alternative formula products, implicating reduced bioavailability of phosphorus in the 
formula for certain individuals. Patient-related risk-factors, and an understanding of the 
mechanism by which the availability of the phosphate provided in the formula is limited or 
compromised require further investigation.
Gonzalez Ballesteros et al.
Page 8
Bone. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Renee Mobley for her assistance with preparation of the graphic material and Drs. Mobley and 
Melinda Sharkey for informative and instructive discussion.
Funding source
Dr. Gordon was funded in part by NIH/NIDDK grant T32DK065522. No other funding was secured for this study.
References
1. Imel EA, Econs MJ. Approach to the hypophosphatemic patient. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 2012; 
97(3):696–706. [PubMed: 22392950] 
2. Insogna KL, Bordley DR, Caro JF, Lockwood DH. Osteomalacia and weakness from excessive 
antacid ingestion. JAMA. 1980; 244(22):2544–2546. [PubMed: 7431592] 
3. Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations, World Health Organization. [Last 
accessed May 5, 2016] Standard for infant formula and formulas for special medical purposes 
intended for infants; Codex Stan 72, Codex Alimentarius. International Food Standards. 1981. 
www.fao.org/input/download/standards/288/CXS_072e_2015.pdf
4. Ardeshirpour L, Cole DEC, Carpenter TO. Evaluation of bone and mineral disorders. Pediatr. 
Endocrinol. Rev. 2007; 5(Suppl. 1):584–598. [PubMed: 18167468] 
5. Harvey BM, Harthoorn LF, Burks AW. Mineral status of infants requiring dietary management of 
cow's milk allergy by using an amino acid-based formula. World Congress of Pediatric 
Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition (WCPGHAN), Montreal Canada. J. Pediatr. 
Gastroenterol. Nutr. 2016; 63(Suppl. 2):S399. (1172). 
6. Nutricia products guide/website. http://nutricia.com/our-products/paediatrics-nutrition/neocate/
what-is-neocate
7. Prié D, Friedlander G. Reciprocal control of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D and FGF23 formation 
involving the FGF23/Klotho system. Clin. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 2010; 5(9):1717–1722. [PubMed: 
20798257] 
8. Hattenhauer O, Traebert M, Murer H, Biber J. Regulation of small intestinal Na-Pi type IIb 
cotransporter by dietary phosphate intake. Am. J. Phys. 1999; 277(4):G756–G762.
9. Blaine J, Weinman EJ, Cunningham R. The regulation of renal phosphate transport. Adv. Chronic 
Kidney Dis. 2011; 1(2):77–84.
10. MacKay M, Jackson D, Eggert L, Fitzgerald K, Cash J. Practice-based validation of calcium and 
phosphorus solubility limits for pediatric parenteral nutrition solutions. Nutr. Clin. Pract. 2011; 
26(6):708–713. [PubMed: 22205559] 
11. Ovesen L, Bendtsen F, Tage-Jensen U, et al. Intraluminal pH in the stomach, duodenum, and 
proximal jejunum in normal subjects and patients with exocrine pancreatic insufficiency. 
Gastroenterology. 1986; 90(4):958–962. [PubMed: 3949122] 
12. Wolfe-Wylie, M., Mouzaki, M., Sochett, E., Harrington, J. Chronic high dose proton-pump 
inhibitors as a cause of hypophosphatemic rickets. Abstract at Endocrine Society's 98th Annual 
Meeting and Expo. Apr 1–4. 2016 (Boston http://press.endo-crine.org/doi/10.1210/endo-meetings.
2016.BCHVD.16.FRI-348)
13. Witteveen JE, van Thiel S, Romijn JA, Hamdy NA. Hungry bone syndrome: still a challenge in the 
post-operative management of primary hyperparathyroidism: a systematic review of the literature. 
Eur. J. Endocrinol. 2013; 168(3):R45–R53. [PubMed: 23152439] 
14. Update on monitoring micronutrients. Nutricia learning center website. http://
www.nutricialearningcenter.com/globalassets/pdfs/gi-allergy/update-on-monitoring-
micronutrients_mar2016.pdf
Gonzalez Ballesteros et al.
Page 9
Bone. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 1. 
Changes in serum calcium (blue), phosphorus (pink) and alkaline phosphatase (purple) in an 
8 month-old girl fed Neocate® since age 2 months due to milk protein allergy, presenting 
with a tibial fracture. After the formula was changed to Elecare®, serum phosphorus and 
alkaline phosphatase levels corrected. Supplemental phosphate was not administered.
Gonzalez Ballesteros et al.
Page 10
Bone. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 2. 
Radiographs showing severe rickets at presentation (left) and improvement 5 weeks after 
formula change (right).
Gonzalez Ballesteros et al.
Page 11
Bone. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 04.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Gonzalez Ballesteros et al.
Page 12
Table 1
Serum P relationship to formula and phosphate supplementation.
Date
Serum P (mg/dL)
Formula
Formula change
Phosphate supplementation
11/30/14
0.6
Neocate®
12/2014
Neocate®
Supplementation added
11/2015
2.5–3.5
Neocate® to Elecare®
Began tapering
12/1/15
4.5
Elecare®
Off
2/25/2016
Elecare® to Neocate®
3/10/16
1.2
Neocate®
Supplementation resumed
3/16/16
3.7
Neocate®
On
5/2016
Neocate® to Elecare®
Began tapering
8/24/16
4.1
Elecare®
10/26/16
4.7
Elecare®
Bone. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 04.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Gonzalez Ballesteros et al.
Page 13
Table 2
Clinical characteristics.
Clinical characteristics
Total/percentage
Age
Range: 0.2–15.5 years
Median: 3.0
Gender
Female
29/57%
Male
22/43%
Growth
Height/length ≤ 3rd centile
25/49%
Weight ≤ 3rd centile
21/41%
Formula
Infant
15/29%
Junior
35/69%
Advance
1/2%
Feeding route
Oral/gastric
27/53%
Jejunal
19/37%
Gastric and jejunal
5/10%
PPI use
Data available in 44 patients
40/91%
Primary treatment
Phosphate supplements
38/75%
Formula change
13/25%
Abbreviation: PPIs, proton pump inhibitors.
Bone. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 04.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Gonzalez Ballesteros et al.
Page 14
Table 3
Biochemical profile.
Biochemical profile
Mean (SD)
Reference values
Serum
Ca (mg/dL)
9.6 (0.8)a
8.8–10.2
P (mg/dL)
2.1 (0.7)
1–12 months: 3.0–7.5
1–11 years: 3.5–6.5
11–15 years: 3.5–5.3
Alk Phos (IU/L)
1123 (586)
1 month–6 years: 80–380
6–12 years: 60–480
12–15 years: 90–570 (male)
60–280 (female)
PTH (pg/mL)
39 (22, median)
10–69
25-OHD (ng/mL)
37 (14)
20–50
1,25(OH)2D (pg/mL)
254 (124)
<30 days: <10–72
1 month–17 years: 15–90
Urine
TRP (%)b
98 (3)
<0.25 years: 61–86
0.3–0.5 years: 68–93
0.6–1 year: 80–89
1–2 years: 78–93
3–10 years: 81–98
11–15 years: 86–99
TRP% = 1 −
Urinary Phosphate×Serum creatinine
Serum Phosphate×Urinary creatinine
× 100.
Abbreviations: Ca, calcium; P, phosphate; Alk Phos, alkaline phosphatase; PTH, parathyroid hormone; 25-OHD, 25 hydroxyvitamin D; 1,25(OH)2 
D, 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D; SD, standard deviation; TRP, tubular reabsorption of phosphate. [Reference range for 1,25(OH)2D is that in use at 
ESOTERIX/LabCore; reference ranges for all other serum values are those in use at Yale-New Haven Hospital. Values for TRP are those reviewed 
by Ardeshirpour [4].
aValues are in Mean (SD, unless otherwise indicated).
bn= 9 where calculable, 25 had undetectable urinary P.
Bone. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 04.
