 Cell Transplantation, Vol. 25, pp. 1945–1966, 2016 
0963-6897/16 $90.00 + .00
Printed in the USA. All rights reserved. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.3727/096368916X691682
Copyright Ó 2016 Cognizant, LLC. 
E-ISSN 1555-3892
 
www.cognizantcommunication.com
Received September 30, 2015; final acceptance August 10, 2016. Online prepub date: May 20, 2016.
1These authors provided equal contribution to this work.
Address correspondence to Dr. Russell A. Kern, International Stem Cell Corporation, 5950 Priestly Drive, Carlsbad, CA 92008, USA. Tel: +1-760-940-6383; 
Fax: +1-760-476-0600; E-mail: rk@intlstemcell.com
1945
Neural Stem Cells Derived From Human Parthenogenetic Stem  
Cells Engraft and Promote Recovery in a Nonhuman  
Primate Model of Parkinson’s Disease
Rodolfo Gonzalez,*1 Ibon Garitaonandia,*1 Maxim Poustovoitov,* Tatiana Abramihina,*  
Caleb McEntire,† Ben Culp,† Jordan Attwood,† Alexander Noskov,* Trudy Christiansen-Weber,*  
Marwa Khater,‡ Sergio Mora-Castilla,‡ Cuong To,‡ Andrew Crain,§ Glenn Sherman,*  
Andrey Semechkin,* Louise C. Laurent,‡ John D. Elsworth,¶ John Sladek,# Evan Y. Snyder,§  
D. Eugene Redmond Jr.,†¶ and Russell A. Kern*
*International Stem Cell Corporation, Carlsbad, CA, USA
†Axion Research Foundation, Hamden, CT, USA
‡Department of Reproductive Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA
§Stem Cell Research Center, Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA
¶Department of Psychiatry and Neurosurgery, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA
#Department of Neurology, Pediatrics and Neuroscience, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA
Cell therapy has attracted considerable interest as a promising therapeutic alternative for patients with Parkinson’s 
disease (PD). Clinical studies have shown that grafted fetal neural tissue can achieve considerable biochemical 
and clinical improvements in PD. However, the source of fetal tissue grafts is limited and ethically contro-
versial. Human parthenogenetic stem cells offer a good alternative because they are derived from unfertilized 
oocytes without destroying potentially viable human embryos and can be used to generate an unlimited sup-
ply of neural cells for transplantation. We have previously reported that human parthenogenetic stem cell-
derived neural stem cells (hpNSCs) successfully engraft, survive long term, and increase brain dopamine (DA) 
levels in rodent and nonhuman primate models of PD. Here we report the results of a 12-month transplanta-
tion study of hpNSCs in 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)-lesioned African green mon-
keys with moderate to severe clinical parkinsonian symptoms. The hpNSCs manufactured under current good 
manufacturing practice (cGMP) conditions were injected bilaterally into the striatum and substantia nigra of 
immuno 
suppressed monkeys. Transplantation of hpNSCs was safe and well tolerated by the animals with no 
dyskinesia, tumors, ectopic tissue formation, or other test article-related serious adverse events. We observed 
that hpNSCs promoted behavioral recovery; increased striatal DA concentration, fiber innervation, and number 
of dopaminergic neurons; and induced the expression of genes and pathways downregulated in PD compared 
to vehicle control animals. These results provide further evidence for the clinical translation of hpNSCs and 
support the approval of the world’s first pluripotent stem cell-based phase I/IIa study for the treatment of PD 
(Clinical Trial Identifier NCT02452723).
Key words: Parkinson’s disease (PD); Neural stem cells (NSCs);  
Human parthenogenetic stem cells (hpSCs); Pluripotent stem cells; Cell therapy
INTRODUCTION
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a disorder characterized by a 
profound loss of function of the basal ganglia, which results 
from the loss of dopamine (DA) neurons in the substantia 
nigra pars compacta. Current therapeutic approaches for PD 
include the DA precursor, L-DOPA, and DA agonists, which 
increase DA function and provide meaningful clinical 
improvements for the initial years, but eventually patients 
experience diminished effects, shorter periods of benefit, 
and distressing side effects, such as hallucinations and 
severe dyskinesias1. In order to reduce the pharmacologi-
cally induced dyskinesias, a surgical approach known as 
 1946 
GONZALEZ ET AL.
deep brain stimulation (DBS) was established2,3. DBS is 
a neuromodulatory treatment that provides symptomatic 
relief, especially of dyskinesias, for patients whose symp-
toms cannot be adequately controlled with medications4. 
Unfortunately, DBS loses efficacy after a few years, does 
not stop disease progression, and can lead to depression 
and the risk of suicide after surgery5–8.
An alternative approach for the treatment of PD is 
cell-based therapy. Small open-label clinical trials have 
been conducted since the 1980s to evaluate the viability 
of administration of fetal neural cells into the striatum 
as a therapy for PD9–24. These first human studies dem-
onstrated a wide variability of patient outcomes, with 
some exhibiting marked improvement. Transplantation 
of human fetal neural tissue into PD patients’ brains 
was shown to provide clear neurological benefits25–30, 
and in the best outcomes, the implanted cells survived, 
engrafted, connected to the host circuitry, released DA, 
and offered very long-term symptomatic benefit to PD 
patients sustained for up to 18 years without the need for 
pharmacological dopaminergic therapy31,32. Simultaneous 
transplantation of fetal tissue into the striatum and sub-
stantia nigra also led to an increase in the mean fluo-
rodopa uptake in the putamen and substantia nigra, 
improvements in the total Unified Parkinson’s Disease 
Rating Scale (UPDRS), and no intraoperative or periop-
erative complications23.
After the encouraging evidence of the open-label stud-
ies, two double-blind placebo-controlled trials followed, 
but they did not reveal significant improvement over sham 
surgery25,30. However, when the groups were divided by 
age, younger patients (<60 years) or those with milder 
disease benefitted the most from the therapy, with the 
younger group showing a UPDRS improvement of 34% 
and a statistically significant difference in the undefined 
off scores versus the sham surgery group25. Some patients 
suffered from graft-induced dyskinesias, with three of 
them needing surgical intervention25,30,33. Unfortunately, 
fetal tissue is heterogeneous, clinically impractical, and 
ethically controversial. The difficulty of using several 
human fetal donors for each host has severely limited 
the number of effective transplantation procedures that 
can be carried out. Future cell replacement therapy in 
PD must rely on alternative tissue sources in which self-
renewable stem cells can be propagated indefinitely in a 
standardized manner. Human pluripotent stem cells offer 
those qualities because they can be expanded indefinitely 
in the laboratory and provide an unlimited source of 
homogeneous cell populations for transplantation thera-
pies. Neural cells derived from human pluripotent stem 
cell have been shown to ameliorate symptoms in preclini-
cal models of PD34–37.
In this study we used human parthenogenetic stem cells 
(hpSCs), which are pluripotent stem cells derived from 
chemically activated unfertilized oocytes38,39. hpSCs dem-
onstrate the typical characteristics displayed by human 
embryonic stem cells (hESCs) including infinite division 
and in vitro and in vivo differentiation into cells of all 
three germ lineages38,40,41 but avoid the ethical problem 
of destroying a potentially viable human embryo38,40,41. 
Additionally, human leukocyte antigen (HLA) homozy-
gous hpSCs can be derived from both HLA homozygous 
or heterozygous donors with the potential to immune 
match a significant number of patients in cell-based ther-
apy applications if the HLA type is common39,42.
We have previously shown that hpSCs can be chemi-
cally directed to differentiate into a homogeneous popu-
lation of multipotent neural stem cells (hpNSCs) that 
are scalable, cryopreservable, express all the appropri-
ate neural markers, and can be further differentiated 
into functional dopaminergic neurons43. In a subsequent 
study, we showed that hpNSCs can functionally engraft 
and increase DA levels in two PD animal models: the 
6-hyroxydopamine (6-OHDA)-lesioned rat and the DA- 
depleted asymptomatic 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1, 
2,3,6-tetra-
hydropyridine (MPTP)-lesioned African green monkey44. 
In this study, we evaluated the safety and efficacy over 
12 months of two doses of Current Good Manufacturing 
Practice (cGMP)-manufactured hpNSCs (107 and 2 × 107 
cells) injected in the striatum and substantia nigra of 18 
MPTP-lesioned African green monkeys with moderate 
to severe PD symptoms. To study the biodistribution of 
the cells, two additional MPTP-lesioned monkeys were 
transplanted in the striatum with green fluorescent pro-
tein (GFP)- and red fluorescent protein (RFP)-labeled 
hpNSCs. Six monkeys were sacrificed at 6 months post-
transplantation to evaluate the safety and tolerability at 
an intermediate time point, and an additional 12 monkeys 
were sacrificed at 12 months after administration to eval-
uate for therapeutic efficacy, reversibility, persistence, or 
late onset of toxicities, such as tumor formation or dyski-
nesia (Table 1). The experimental design was intended to 
determine whether monkeys treated with hpNSCs showed 
greater improvement than identically treated and randomly 
assigned control vehicle [Dulbecco’s phosphate-buffered 
saline (DPBS)]-treated animals. The results of this study 
provide additional evidence for an hpNSC-based therapy 
and support the world’s first pluripotent stem cell-based 
Table 1. Study Design
Dose/Cells
No. of 
Monkeys
Sacrifices
6 Months
Sacrifices
12 Months
Vehicle control
6
1M, 1F
2M, 2F
Low cell dose 107
6
1M, 1F
2M, 2F
High cell dose 2 × 107
6
2M
1M, 2F
M, male; F, female.
 hpNSCs PROMOTE RECOVERY IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE 
1947
therapy for PD. This is a single-arm, open-label, dose-
escalating, phase I/IIa study evaluating the safety and 
tolerability of hpNSCs injected into the striatum and sub-
stantia nigra of patients with PD (Clinical Trial Identifier 
NCT02452723).
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Manufacturing of cGMP-Grade Human 
Parthenogenetic-Derived Neural Stem Cells
hpSC line LLC2P (International Stem Cell Corporation, 
Carlsbad, CA, USA)38 was initially cultured under cGMP 
conditions in knockout Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s 
medium (KDMEM)/F12 supplemented with 15% knock-
out serum replacement (KSR), 2 mM GlutaMAX, 0.1 mM 
minimum essential medium (MEM) nonessential amino 
acids, 0.1 mM b-mercaptoethanol, and 5 ng/ml basic 
fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) (all from Thermo Fisher 
Scientific, Carlsbad, CA, USA) on human neonatal skin 
fibroblasts (International Stem Cell Corporation) with 
mechanical passaging to preserve the genetic integrity 
of hpSCs45,46. The cells were then transferred to feeder-
free and xeno-free conditions in Essential 8 Medium 
(Thermo Fisher Scientific) on CTS CELLstart substrate 
(Thermo Fisher Scientific) and subcultured with StemPro 
Accutase (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for three passages 
before neural induction. Then when the culture reached 
80% confluency, the hpSCs were neuralized by treat-
ing with 5 µM SB218078 and 1 µM DMH-1 (both from 
Tocris, Bristol, UK) in KDMEM/F12, 1× GlutaMax, 
1× N2/B27 Supplement (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 
11 days. Neuralized hpSCs were dissociated with StemPro 
Accutase and Y-27632 dihydrochloride (Tocris) and 
plated on CTS CELLstart-coated dishes in StemPro NSC 
serum-free medium (SFM) (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 
hpNSCs were expanded and cryopreserved to generate 
master and working cell banks comprising more than 
2 billion cells each. The banks were extensively tested for 
expression of neural markers, absence of expression of 
pluripotency markers, sterility, mycoplasma, karyotype, 
short tandem repeat analysis, in vitro assays for adventi-
tious viral contaminants, in vivo assays for adventitious 
viruses, a comprehensive panel of human viruses by 
quantitative PCR/RT-PCR, ultrastructure cell morphol-
ogy and viral detection by thin section transmission elec-
tron microscopy, and PCR-based reverse transcription 
assay for retrovirus detection.
Flow Cytometry Analysis
Samples were harvested with StemPro Accutase 
(Thermo Fisher Scientific), washed with DPBS (Thermo 
Fischer Scientific), and fixed with 4% paraformalde-
hyde (PFA; Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA, USA) for 
30 min at room temperature (RT). Cells were washed 
twice with DPBS and blocked for 1 h at RT with 0.3% 
Triton X-100 (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), 
5% normal donkey serum (EMD Millipore, Temecula, 
CA, USA), and 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA; 
Sigma-Aldrich) in DPBS. Cells were then incubated 
overnight at 4°C with primary antibody in 0.3% Triton 
X-100, 5% normal donkey serum, and 1% BSA in 
DPBS (Table 2). Cells were washed twice with DPBS 
and incubated for 1 h at RT with secondary antibody 
in 0.3% Triton X-100, 5% normal donkey serum, and 
1% BSA in DPBS. The samples were run and analyzed 
on a Becton Dickinson C6 Accuri Cytometer (BD 
Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA).
GFP and RFP Constructs
GFP- and RFP-labeled hpNSCs were generated with the 
pGreenZeo (GFP, Cat. #SR501va-1) and pRedZeo (RFP, 
Cat. #SR10046va-1) (System Biosciences, Mountain View, 
CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
MPTP Neurotoxin Administration
The study was performed in compliance with the US 
Department of Agriculture’s (USDA) Animal Welfare 
Act (9 CFR Parts 1, 2, and 3) and with approval of the 
Table 2. Antibodies
Antigen
Catalog #
Dilution
Application
Manufacturer
MSI1
ab52865
1:300
ICC
Abcam
561468
1:20
Flow cytometry
BD Biosciences
NES
ab6320
1:200
ICC
Abcam
561231
1:20
Flow cytometry
BD Biosciences
SOX2
ab79351
1:100
ICC
Abcam
53-9811-82
1:100
Flow cytometry
eBiosciences
TH
P60101-0
1:500
IHC
Pel-Freeze
OCT-4
561628
1:20
Flow cytometry
BD Biosciences
SSEA-4
561565
1:20
Flow cytometry
BD Biosciences
CopGFP
AB513
1:2500
IHC
Evrogen
RFP
ab62341
1:100
IHC
Abcam
 1948 
GONZALEZ ET AL.
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) 
from Axion Research Foundation and St. Kitts Bio-
medical Research Foundation, which maintains an Ani-
mal Welfare Assurance statement with the National 
Institutes of Health (NIH; Bethesda, MD, USA) Office 
of Laboratory Animal Welfare and is accredited by the 
AAALAC. Green monkeys of St. Kitts origin (Chloro-
cebus sabaeus) were injected intramuscularly with the 
neurotoxin MPTP (Sigma-Aldrich), which induces bilat-
eral degeneration of the nigrostriatal pathway. Because 
of the varied sensitivity to the MPTP, 40 monkeys were 
treated in order to select a sample of 18 moderate to 
severe parkinsonian monkeys for the study. MPTP doses 
of 2.15 mg/kg were administered over a 5-day period47,48, 
and the 18 monkeys with the greatest severity were pseu-
dorandomly (stratified randomization) matched into the 
three treatment groups: animals receiving vehicle con-
trol, low-dose (107) hpNSCs, and high-dose (2 × 107) 
hpNSCs. The monkeys’ Parkscores were ranked from 
highest to lowest. Then each triad of monkeys, based 
on the ranks, was randomized into three groups. This 
ensures that the groups were perfectly matched but with 
treatment assignment randomized. Male and female 
animals were allocated to each equal-sized treatment 
group with assignment based on Parkinson’s score at 
4 weeks after MPTP treatment to achieve a balanced 
Parkinson’s score in each group. There were no signifi-
cant differences at baseline between the three groups. 
Two additional MPTP-lesioned monkeys were used for 
the transplantantion of GFP- and RFP-labeled hpNSCs.
Immunosuppression
Because the test model involves grafting across spe-
cies, all monkeys received triple immunosuppression, 
which was achieved with cyclosporine (1 mg/kg/day), 
prednisone (approximately 4.5 mg/kg/day) (both from 
Sandimmune; Henry Schein Animal Health, Pittsburgh, 
PA, USA), and azathioprine (starting at 5 mg/kg/day 
reducing to 1 mg/kg/day) (Sigma-Aldrich) starting 1 day 
prior to implantation and continuing until necropsy.
Transplantation of hpNSCs
Cells or vehicle (DPBS) control solution was implanted 
into the brain approximately 4 months after MPTP lesion 
using standard stereotactic procedures and verified ste-
reotactic coordinates. The anesthetized monkeys were 
carefully placed into Kopf primate stereotactic units, the 
scalp opened in the midline, and the muscles retracted 
using a periosteal elevator sufficient to expose the stereo-
taxic targets for the procedure. A special Kopf drill was 
used to drill small, 2-mm holes at the site of each entry 
point, using a diamond-covered spherical drill. The car-
rier was then changed to one carrying a 22-gauge needle 
attached to a 100-µl Hamilton syringe (Hamilton, Reno, 
NV, USA) mounted on a microinfusion pump (Stoelting, 
Wood Dale, IL, USA). The cells or vehicle (DPBS) con-
trol solution was backfilled into the syringe, and the nee-
dles were lowered into five sites bilaterally at stereotactic 
targets as measured from ear bar zero (Table 3). In the 
low-dose group, animals received a total of 10 million 
cells, with 5 million cells per hemisphere and 1 million 
cells per injection site: anterior caudate nucleus, posterior 
caudate nucleus, anterior putamen, posterior putamen, 
and substantia nigra. Animals of the high-dose group 
received a total of 20 million cells, with 10 million cells 
per hemisphere and 2 million cells per injection site. The 
two monkeys transplanted with GFP- and RFP-labeled 
cells received a total of 20 million cells, and 107 GFP-
labeled hpNSCs were implanted into four sites of the 
right striatum (anterior caudate nucleus, posterior caudate 
nucleus, anterior putamen, and posterior putamen) and 
107 RFP-labeled hpNSCs into four sites of the left stria-
tum. Insertion was performed slowly, and vehicle control 
or cell suspension at 100,000 cells/µl was extruded at a 
maximum rate of 2 µl/min, for a total volume of 10 µl 
(low dose), 20 µl (high dose), or 25 µl (GFP and RFP) 
Table 3. Stereotactic Coordinates
Anterior Posterior (mm)
Lateral (mm)
Vertical (mm)
Male
Anterior caudate nucleus
23.1
4.0
19.0
Posterior caudate nucleus
19.1
4.0
19.0
Anterior putamen
23.1
10.0
19.0
Posterior putamen
19.1
10.0
19.0
Substantia nigra
13.1
4.0
9.6
Female
Anterior caudate nucleus
23.1
3.5
19.0
Posterior caudate nucleus
19.1
3.5
19.0
Anterior putamen
23.1
9.5
19.0
Posterior putamen
19.1
9.5
19.0
Substantia nigra
13.1
3.5
9.6
 hpNSCs PROMOTE RECOVERY IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE 
1949
per injection site. A 2-min delay was performed before 
cannula withdrawal, which was done at a rate of 1 µm/
min. After all the injections were complete, the incision 
was irrigated, and the muscle, subcutaneous layer, and 
skin were closed using standard surgical methods. The 
animals were removed from the stereotactic device and 
monitored continuously until vital signs were stable and 
the animals were awake.
Behavioral Analysis
The scoring and rating of the behavior and motor 
movements of each monkey individually occurred dur-
ing two observation periods per day several times a 
week without knowledge of the experimental variables 
(blind). From these quantitative assessments of 29 
behaviors, a parkinsonian summary score was derived, 
based on a previous principal component factor anal-
ysis49. The parkinsonian summary score (Parkscore) 
contains different behaviors scored from 0 to 5, with 0 
being “normal” and 5 being “severely parkinsonian,” as 
well as time-based counts of specifically defined behav-
iors49. The Parkscore was used to classify subjects by 
severity, based on their average parkinsonian score after 
treatment. This method is highly responsive to pharma-
cological changes in DA function and correlates highly 
with striatal DA concentrations postmortem48,50. A broad 
range of normal behaviors was also quantified to enable 
a “healthy behavior score” (similar to the activities of 
daily living of the UPDRS) and was obtained for each 
animal51. Interrater reliability was assessed once a week, 
and the observers achieved a coefficient of concordance 
(Kendall’s) greater than 0.95 on all behaviors, eliminat-
ing observer “drift” or idiosyncrasy. In addition to this 
behavioral score, a dyskinesia rating scale was also car-
ried out once weekly on each monkey. These measures 
in combination with routine examination of brain for 
pathology allow the detection of possible detrimental 
effects of the implants48,51–55.
Body Weight and Food Consumption
Body weights were measured and recorded upon screen-
ing for study recruitment, at the time of baseline phleboto-
mies, monthly during the study, and immediately prior 
to sacrifice. Food and water consumption were observed 
daily, and inadequate intake was responded to by addi-
tional food and water or by nasogastric tube if necessary.
Clinical Pathology
The animals were fasted overnight prior to sample col-
lections or surgery. Animals were anesthetized, and blood 
samples (2–10 ml total volume per time point) were taken 
from the femoral vein via a 20-gauge needle attached to a 
12-ml syringe for hematology, coagulation, and clinical 
chemistry measures, before MPTP administration, before 
test article administration, and every 3 months during the 
study until necropsy.
Necropsy and Tissue Processing
Complete necropsy examinations were performed under 
procedures approved by a facility veterinarian (St. Kitts Bio-
medical Research Foundation, St. Kitts, West Indies). On 
the designated day, the monkeys were anesthetized and 
euthanized, followed by whole-body perfusion of ice-
cold saline, brain removal, and examination by the vet-
erinarian. Brains were sliced into 4-mm coronal sections, 
and tissue punches were removed from standardized 
locations in the caudate nucleus, putamen, and substantia 
nigra; placed in cryotubes; and frozen in liquid nitrogen 
as previously described47,56. After all tissue punches had 
been collected, brain slices were preserved by immersion 
into fixative solution [4% PFA in 0.1 M phosphate buf-
fer (pH 7.4)] (Sigma-Aldrich) at 4°C for 20 ± 2 h. The 
solution was then replaced with fresh fixative, and after 
6 h, the brain slices were moved into 0.1 M phosphate 
buffer (pH 7.4) containing sodium azide solution (0.1%) 
(Sigma-Aldrich). The animals were examined carefully 
for external abnormalities including palpable masses, 
and a comprehensive necropsy tissue collection was per-
formed along with organ weight recording. Appropriate 
organ weight ratios were calculated (relative to body and 
brain weights), paired organs were weighed separately, 
and all tissues were fixed in 10% neutral-buffered formalin 
(Sigma-Aldrich) for pathology analysis.
Dopamine Analysis
DA and its metabolite, homovanillic acid (HVA), were 
extracted from the tissue punches in different regions of 
the striatum, separated by high-performance liquid chro-
matography (HPLC) and quantified by electrochemi 
cal 
detection according to published methods48,57. Concen-
trations were corrected for protein content, measured by 
the Lowry method.
Immunohistochemistry
Brain blocks were cut using MultiBrain Technology 
(NeuroScience Associates, Knoxville, TN, USA) at a 
thickness of 40 µm in the coronal plane. For immuno-
fluorescence, monkey brain sections were washed in Tris 
buffer [0.1 M Tris, 0.85% NaCl (Sigma-Aldrich), pH 
7.5] for 5 min, then 15 min in wash buffer (0.1% Triton 
X-100 in Tris buffer), and 15 min in blocking buffer 
(2% BSA, 0.1% Triton X-100 in Tris buffer) (Sigma-
Aldrich). Sections were incubated with primary antibody 
diluted in blocking buffer at RT overnight with shaking 
(Table 2). Sections were washed for 15 min in wash buf-
fer and 15 min in blocking buffer, and incubated for 1 h 
at RT with secondary antibody diluted in blocking buf-
fer. Sections were washed four times, and coverslips were 
 1950 
GONZALEZ ET AL.
mounted on the slides with mounting medium contain-
ing 4¢,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI; Vectashield 
Laboratories, Burlingame, CA, USA).
For 3,3¢-diaminobenzidine (DAB) staining, sections 
were washed in Tris buffer for 5 min and incubated for 
30 min in 3% H2O2, 10% methanol (Sigma-Aldrich) in 
Tris buffer. The sections were then washed for 5 min in 
Tris buffer, 15 min in wash buffer, and 15 min in blocking 
buffer. Sections were incubated with primary antibody 
diluted in blocking buffer at RT overnight with shak-
ing. Sections were washed for 15 min in wash buffer and 
 
15 min in blocking buffer, and incubated for 1 h at RT with 
biotinylated secondary antibody diluted in blocking buffer. 
The avidin–biotin complex (ABC) solution was prepared 
using the Vectastain Elite Standard ABC Kit (Vectashield) 
and mixed for 30 min. Sections were washed for 15 min 
in wash buffer and 15 min in blocking buffer. Sections 
were then incubated for 1 h in avidin–biotin–horseradish 
peroxidase (HRP) complex (ABC solution) and washed 
twice for 15 min in Tris buffer. The sections were finally 
developed in DAB solution (Vectashield).
Stereological Analysis
Cell counts were estimated by uniform random sampling 
with the optical fractionator method58,59 using the “Stereo 
Investigator” software (MBF Bioscience Inc., Williston, 
VT, USA). Four sections per animals were counted bilat-
erally, and the tissue was sampled with a 10× objective 
using dissector X-Y-Z dimensions of 200 × 200 × 28 µm, 
using 2-µm guard zones above and below the counting 
box. The sampling grid was adjusted so that 10% of the 
selected region was counted. Data were expressed as aver-
age ± standard error of the mean (SEM).
Optical Density
The tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) immunoreactivity was 
visualized using an Axio Imager M2 microscope (Zeiss) 
with 20× objective and the AxioCam MRc digital cam-
era (Carl Zeiss Vision Inc., San Diego, CA, USA). The 
optical density (OD) of the TH+ fibers in the striatum 
was analyzed in three sections per animal using ImageJ 
software (NIH; http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij/). The OD was 
calibrated using built-in functions of the software (http://
imagej.nih.gov/ij/docs/examples/calibration/). The TH+ 
images were converted to 8-bit grayscale, without rescal-
ing. The OD of the striatum was assessed in three areas: 
rostral, mid, and caudal.
RNAseq Library Construction
RNA was isolated from tissue punches from the vehi-
cle control, hpNSC-transplanted animals, and a healthy 
monkey with no MPTP lesion or intracranial injection. The 
RNA was isolated with the miRVana miRNA Isolation 
Kit, using the manufacturer’s protocol for total RNA 
isolation (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Total RNA was 
quantified using the Quant-iT RiboGreen RNA Assay Kit 
(Thermo Fisher Scientific), and RNA quality was evalu-
ated using RNA6000 Nano Kit and BioAnalyzer 2100 
(Agilent Technologies Inc., La Jolla, CA, USA). RNAseq 
libraries were constructed using the TruSeq Stranded 
Total RNA Library Prep Kit (Illumina, San Diego, CA, 
USA). Sequencing and mapping were performed as pre-
viously described60. An average of 30.5 million uniquely 
mapped reads were generated per sample.
RNAseq Data Preprocessing
Counts for each gene were quantified using the python 
script RPKMforgenes (Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden) and annotated using human reference genome 
version Ensembl GRCh37 (National Center for Biotech-
nology Information, Bethesda, MD, USA). We note that 
we mapped to the human reference genome because there 
is no high-quality reference genome for the African green 
monkey available. The average uniquely mapped read 
percent for this dataset was 65.9% (range, 51.5%–71.5%), 
which is within the normal range for even human data-
sets. Genes without at least one sample with at least 10 
reads were removed from the analysis. An initial principal 
component analysis visualization was performed, and two 
putamen samples were found not to cluster with the other 
putamen samples and also had low uniquely mapped read 
counts after processing through RPKMforgenes and so 
were removed. The count data for the remaining samples 
were normalized using the R (v.3.1.1) package DESeq2 
(v.1.4.5)61,62.
Statistical Analysis
For continuous endpoints, descriptive statistics consists 
of means, SEM, and group size for each treatment group 
and time period. For categorical endpoints, incidence 
counts for each treatment group and time period were 
determined. Between-group differences were determined 
by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). Spearman 
rank correlation analyses were calculated comparing the 
mean Parkinson’s and healthy behavior scores from the 
last month before sacrifice with the DA concentration, 
TH density in the striatum, and number of TH+ neurons 
in the substantia nigra. Least-squares linear regression 
analyses were run on behavioral observations of the 
 
individual animals using the general linear models func-
tion of the Statistical Analysis System (version 6.12 for 
Macintosh; SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA) to predict the 
regressions of the Parkscores and healthy behavior score, 
with 95% confidence level of the regression and deter-
mination of the significance of the slopes at p < 0.05. The 
sum scores derived from factor analyses49 were used for 
analysis of the behavioral effects, thereby utilizing all of 
the data. These slopes provide some basis, along with 
 hpNSCs PROMOTE RECOVERY IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE 
1951
descriptive statistics, of determining treatment success or 
failure in individual animals that can be correlated with 
biological outcome data from biochemistry and histo-
logical cell counts. Both Parkinson’s and healthy behav-
ior scores were analyzed in this fashion. Group analyses 
were also carried out using a two-factor ANOVA with 
repeated measures, testing the control group and each 
individual dose group as the random factor, with repeated 
measures being each month of the study before MPTP 
treatment, after MPTP treatment, and monthly after the 
cell implantations. If there were significant interactions 
between Group and Month, the interactions were decom-
posed into simple main effects. Post hoc tests for signifi-
cant differences were carried out using Newman–Keuls 
test at p < 0.05.
For all differential expression analyses of the RNAseq 
data, one-way ANOVA with post hoc Tukey’s honest sig-
nificant difference (HSD) multiple comparison of mean 
Figure 1. cGMP manufacturing and characterization of hpNSCs. (A) Schematic diagram showing the cGMP manufacturing process. 
First, a MCB of hpSCs is derived from unfertilized embryos. hpNSCs are then derived from hpSCs through a chemically directed differen-
tiation method. The hpNSCs are then expanded into an MCB of hpNSCs. Finally, a vial of the MCB is expanded into a working cell bank 
(WCB) of hpNSCs. (B) Immunocytochemical analysis of hpNSCs shows that the cells are positive for neural markers SOX2 and nestin 
and have the appropriate morphology. Scale bar: 100 µm. (C) Quantitation by flow cytometry analysis of neural markers Musashi (MSI1) 
and nestin and pluripotency markers OCT-4 and SSEA-4. Representative flow cytometry data show that hpNSCs were more than 90% 
positive for neural makers and negative for pluripotency markers. Percentage of positive cells (blue) is calculated on the basis of isotype 
control-stained cells (red). (D) G-banding karyotyping analysis shows that the cells have a normal female 46 XX karyotype.
 1952 
GONZALEZ ET AL.
for comparing different brain regions based on gene 
counts was performed. Multiple testing correction was 
performed according to Benjamini and Hochberg63. For 
comparisons between brain regions, cutoffs of values of 
q £ 0.001 and fold change £0.67 or ³1.5 were used. For 
comparisons between the hpNSC-transplanted and con-
trol animals, which were performed for each brain region 
separately, cutoffs of values of q £ 0.05 and fold change 
£0.67 or ³1.5 were applied. Functional enrichment 
analysis was performed using DAVID (National Cancer 
Institute, Frederick, MD, USA)64,65. Network analysis 
was performed using the GeneMANIA plugin66,67 for 
Cytoscape68,69 (US National Institute of General Medical 
Sciences, Bethesda, MD, USA). Other statistical analyses 
such as two-tailed Student’s t-test, one-way ANOVA with 
Dunnett test, and two-way ANOVA with repeated mea-
sures were performed with GraphPad Prism (GraphPad 
Software Inc. La Jolla, CA, USA). The criterion for 
statistical significance under a confidence level of 95% 
(a = 0.05) was p < 0.05.
RESULTS
Generation of cGMP-Grade hpNSCs  
for Transplantation
hpNSCs were derived from hpSCs through a chemically 
directed differentiation method as previously described43,44. 
Master and working cell banks of hpNSC were manufac-
tured under cGMP conditions and tested throughout the 
manufacturing process (Fig. 1A). First, a master cell bank 
(MCB) of hpSCs was derived from unfertilized embryos 
under xeno-free conditions. Then hpNSCs were derived 
from hpSCs through a chemically directed differentiation 
method and expanded into an MCB of hpNSCs. Finally, 
a working cell bank (WCB) of hpNSCs was derived from 
a vial of MCB (Fig. 1A). Using flow cytometry analy-
sis, hpNSCs were characterized by the expression of 
immature precursor markers such as nestin, Musashi, and 
(sex-determining region Y)-box 2 (Sox2) and the lack of 
pluripotent markers such as octamer-binding transcription 
factor 4 (OCT-4) and stage-specific embryonic antigen 4 
(SSEA-4), which were used as release criteria to identify 
the hpNSCs that could promote recovery and qualify them 
for banking and testing (Fig. 1B and C). The hpNSCs 
were negative for mycoplasma and an extensive panel of 
adventitious agents as determined by in vitro, in vivo, and 
PCR-based assays and transmission electron microscopy 
(Table 4). hpNSCs passed the USP/EP-required sterility 
test without the growth of aerobic or anaerobic micro-
organisms (Table 4) and had a normal female 46 XX 
karyo 
type (Fig. 1D).
hpNSCs Promote Behavioral Recovery in PD  
Nonhuman Primates
The safety and efficacy of hpNSCs were assessed over 
a 12-month period in immunosuppressed Chlorocebus 
sabaeus monkeys with MPTP lesions and moderate to 
severe PD symptoms. The bilateral injection of 107 or 
2 × 107 hpNSCs into the caudate nucleus, putamen, and 
substantia nigra was well tolerated by the MPTP parkin-
sonian monkeys. There were no deaths attributable to the 
cells, but one monkey died of an intracerebral hemorrhage. 
There were no test article-related serious adverse events 
in any of the monkeys at the 6- or 12-month time points. 
Body weight changes were similar between the groups 
(Fig. 2A), and hematology, coagulation parameters, and 
clinical chemistry differences were not noted between the 
groups at any of the time points. There were no apparent 
adverse behavioral or functional effects and no dyskine-
sia observed during the entire study.
All groups of monkeys improved after MPTP expo-
sure, with decreasing Parkscores and increasing healthy 
behavior scores (Fig. 2B and C). The low cell dose group 
had the lowest Parkscores and highest healthy behavior 
scores at 12 months posttransplantation, but the difference 
with the control group was not statistically significant 
(Fig. 2B and C). Therefore, it was important to deter-
mine whether the treated groups improved significantly 
more than the control group over time. For this analy-
sis, the scores of each group were compared before and 
12 months posttransplantation and regressions were done 
separately for 12-month outcome periods by treatment 
group, and an analysis of covariance was done to deter-
mine whether the treatment groups were different from 
the controls (Fig. 2D–F). The Parkscore of the low-dose 
group at 12 months posttransplantation was significantly 
Table 4. Testing Results
Test
Result
In vitro assays for adventitious viral contaminants
Negative
In vivo assays for adventitious virus
Negative
Comprehensive panel of human viruses by quantitative PCR/RT-PCR
Negative
Ultrastructure cell morphology and viral detection by thin section transmission electron microscopy
Negative
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based reverse transcription assay (PERT) for retrovirus detection
Negative
Mycoplasma (28 days)
Negative
Sterility (14 days)
Negative
 hpNSCs PROMOTE RECOVERY IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE 
1953
Figure 2. Behavioral recovery after hpNSC treatment. (A) Body weights throughout the 12-month study. Baseline: before MPTP 
lesion; MPTP: after MPTP lesion; T01–12: 1–12 months posttransplantation. (B, C) Treatment groups’ Parkinson’s score (B) and 
healthy behavior scores (C) for baseline, duration of MPTP exposure without treatment, and each month of life following treatment 
for animals that were sacrificed 12 months after injections. Parkinson’s scores appeared to be lower for the low-dose group than for 
the controls, and both doses were lower than controls at the end, although this difference was not significant. The low-dose group also 
had higher healthy scores throughout most of the study; however, this also includes baseline and MPTP treatment before cell treat-
ment, so it is hard to distinguish whether the higher scores are because of treatment effect or group effect (n = 3–4). (D) Comparison 
of Parkscores before and 12 months posttransplantation for all three groups. Only the low-dose group had significantly different 
Parkscores compared to baseline (p < 0.0143). (E, F) Predicted values of Parkscore (E) and healthy behavior score (F) for 12 months by 
treatment group. Only the postoperative period is shown. It is noteworthy that the low-dose group is different from the control group 
at 12 months (ANCOVA), and that the final scores of both the low-dose and the high-dose groups appear lower than the controls. The 
low-dose group also appears to show more healthy behaviors at 12 months, although this group began treatment with higher scores.
 1954 
GONZALEZ ET AL.
Figure 3. Biochemical changes after hpNSC treatment. On the left are schematics of parasagittal sections with a red dotted line indi-
cating where the coronal diagram sections were taken. The coronal sections indicate where the punch biopsies were extracted from the 
caudate nucleus (CD) and putamen (PT) for the DA analysis in the rostral striatum (A), mid striatum (B), and caudal striatum (C). On 
the right are the concentrations of DA and HVA for each treatment group in the caudate nucleus and putamen. The low-dose group had 
consistently the highest DA and HVA concentrations in all the regions analyzed with statistically significant differences from vehicle 
control in the mid dorsal caudate nucleus and putamen (*p < 0.05).
Table 5. Spearman Rank Correlations of Parkscore, Healthy Behavior Score, 
and DA levels
DA Levels
Parkscore
Healthy Behavior Score
Left hemisphere
r = −0.9273 (p < 0.0001)
r = 0.7273 (p < 0.01)
Right hemisphere
r = −0.9091 (p < 0.0001)
r = 0.8091 (p < 0.0068)
Mid ventral caudate
r = −0.8364 (p < 0.0023)
r = 0.8000 (p < 0.00466)
Mid ventral putamen
r = −0.9091 (p < 0.00028)
r = 0.7818 (p < 0.0064)
 hpNSCs PROMOTE RECOVERY IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE 
1955
Figure 4. Histological analysis of nigrostriatal region at 12 months postimplantation. (A–C) Analysis of dopaminergic (TH+) fiber 
density in the rostral (A), mid (B), and caudal (C) striatum. On the left, parasagittal diagrams with a red dotted line and coronal diagram 
with a dotted square indicating where the analysis was conducted. Center, representative coronal sections of the different regions of the 
striatum stained with TH (brown) from each treatment group and the micrographs taken from them. On the right, quantitation of the 
mean optical density measures of TH staining in the different regions of the striatum for all three groups. Treated groups had higher TH 
density in the rostral (A), mid (B), and caudal (C) striatum than control. In the mid striatum (C), which is close to the injection sites, the 
low-dose group had significantly higher TH density than the vehicle control in the ventral and mid caudate nucleus and putamen. (D) 
Quantitation of dopaminergic (TH+) neurons in the substantia nigra. On the left, parasagittal section with red dotted line and coronal 
section with dotted square indicating where the analysis was conducted. Center, representative coronal sections of the substantia nigra 
stained with TH (brown) from each treatment group and the micrographs taken from them. On the right, quantitation of the number 
of TH+ DA neurons in the substantia nigra for all three treatment groups. Both the low- and high-dose groups had significantly higher 
number of TH+ DA neurons in the substantia nigra than the vehicle control animals (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01).
 1956 
GONZALEZ ET AL.
different (p < 0.0143) from the score before transplanta-
tion, but this was not the case for the control and high-
dose groups (Fig. 2D).
All three groups had almost identical Parkscores before 
transplantation, but the low-dose group showed a greater 
decrease in parkinsonism and the lowest scores at the 
end of 12 months (Fig. 2E and F). Analysis of covariance 
showed a statistically significant difference between the 
Parkscore slope of the low-dose and the control groups 
[F(1, 1003) = 6.21, p < 0.02] (Fig. 2E and F). There was 
no significant difference between the Parkscore slopes of 
the high-dose and control or the healthy behavior slopes of 
the low-dose and control groups (Fig. 2E and F). This test 
shows that the low-dose group was different from the con-
trol group, showing greater improvement in parkinsonism.
hpNSCs Promote Biochemical Changes in PD 
Nonhuman Primates
Postmortem, punch biopsies from the nigrostriatal 
region were analyzed for biochemical changes in DA and 
HVA to study the functional effects of the cells. Tissue 
punches were obtained from the dorsal and ventral areas 
of caudate nucleus and putamen, and the values for DA 
and HVA are shown in Figure 3. When the DA values from 
all the brain regions were combined, the low-dose group 
had the highest DA concentrations (5.81 ng/mg protein) 
versus the high-dose group (2.58 ng/mg protein) and the 
control (2.04 ng/mg protein), but the difference was not 
significant. However, when the values were analyzed sepa-
rately by brain region, the largest differences between the 
low-dose and control groups were observed in the mid 
ventral regions and were statistically significant in the mid 
dorsal caudate nucleus (p < 0.0433) and mid dorsal puta-
men (p < 0.0494) (Fig. 3). DA turnover was analyzed by 
measuring the concentration of the DA metabolite, HVA, 
and the low-dose group had the highest HVA concentra-
tion in the mid striatum (Fig. 3). The low-dose group also 
had consistently higher DA and HVA levels in striatal areas 
rostral and caudal to the injection site (Fig. 3). There were 
no statistically significant differences between the two 
sides of the brain across all groups.
The overall relationship between the DA levels and the 
mean Parkscores and healthy behavior score in the final 
month of life of the monkeys was examined by Spearman 
rank correlations. Parkscore inversely correlated with DA 
levels on the left hemisphere (r = −0.92727; p < 0.0001) and 
Table 6. Spearman Rank Correlations of Parkscore, Healthy Behavior Score, Striatal DA levels, and 
TH Density
TH Density
Parkscore
Healthy 
Behavior Score
[DA] Mid 
Ventral Caudate
[DA] Mid 
Ventral Putamen
Mid ventral putamen
r = −0.9000 
(p < 0.0004)
r = 0.6636 
(p < 0.031)
r = 0.7273 
(p < 0.0145)
r = 0.9000 
(p < 0.00038)
Mid ventral caudate
r = −0.8818 
(p < 0.0007)
r = 0.7818 
(p < 0.0064)
r = 0.8636 
(p < 0.00116)
r = 0.9545 
(p < 0.00002)
Mid mid putamen
r = −0.9545 
(p < 0.00003)
r = 0.8000 
(p < 0.0047)
r = 0.8091 
(p < 0.00395)
r = 0.9364 
(p < 0.00008)
Mid mid caudate
r = −0.7909 
(p < 0.0055)
r = 0.6364 
(p < 0.041)
r = 0.8818 
(p < 0.0007)
r = 0.9182 
(p < 0.0002)
Caudal mid putamen
r = −0.8000 
(p < 0.0047)
r = 0.7636 
(p < 0.0086)
r = 0.8818 
(p < 0.0007)
r = 0.8182 
(p < 0.0033)
Caudal ventral putamen
r = −0.9000 
(p < 0.0004)
r = 0.6182 
(p < 0.048)
r = 0.7273 
(p < 0.0145)
r = 0.8455 
(p < 0.00183)
Rostral ventral caudate
r = −0.7545 
(p < 0.0099)
r = 0.7091 
(p < 0.0182)
r = 0.6545 
(p < 0.0336)
r = 0.7000 
(p < 0.0204)
Rostral ventral putamen
r = −0.7455 
(p < 0.0113)
r = 0.7545 
(p < 0.0099)
r = 0.6091 
(p < 0.0520)
r = 0.6182 
(p < 0.0478)
FACING PAGE
Figure 5. Graphical representation of some of the most representative Spearman rank correlations between striatal TH density, 
Parkscore, healthy behavior score, and striatal DA levels. (A) Graphical representation of Spearman rank correlation between TH fiber 
density in the mid ventral putamen and Parkscore. (B) TH fiber density in mid mid putamen and Parkscore. (C) TH fiber density in mid 
ventral caudate and healthy behavior score. (D) TH fiber density in mid mid putamen and healthy behavior score. (E) TH fiber density 
in mid ventral caudate and DA concentration in the mid ventral putamen. (F) TH fiber density in mid mid putamen and DA concentra-
tion in the mid ventral putamen, (G) TH fiber density in mid mid caudate and DA concentration in mid ventral putamen. (H) TH fiber 
density in mid mid caudate and DA concentration in mid ventral caudate.
 hpNSCs PROMOTE RECOVERY IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE 
1957
 1958 
GONZALEZ ET AL.
on the right hemisphere (r = −0.90909; p < 0.0001) (Table 5). 
There was also a positive correlation with healthy behavior 
and DA levels on the left hemisphere (r = 0.72727; p < 0.01) 
and on the right hemisphere (r = 0.80909; p < 0.0068) 
(Table 5). By region, Parkscore inversely correlated and 
health score positively correlated with DA levels in the mid 
ventral caudate and ventral putamen (Table 5).
hpNSCs Promote Host Dopaminergic Neuron 
Innervation and Recovery
Histological analysis of the brain tissue 12 months 
posttransplantation indicated higher dopaminergic neu-
ron innervation in the striatum of monkeys transplanted 
with the low-dose cells (Fig. 4A–C). Coronal sections 
from the rostral, mid, and caudal striatum from all 
three groups were stained with TH, and the OD of the 
TH-stained fibers was measured in different regions of 
the caudate nucleus and putamen (Fig. 4A–C). The high-
est differences in fiber innervation between the low-dose 
group and the control were observed closer to the injec-
tion site in the mid striatum, with statistically signifi-
cant differences in the mid ventral putamen (p < 0.018), 
ventral caudate (p < 0.0308), mid putamen (p < 0.0454), 
and mid caudate (p < 0.0028) (Fig. 4B). Even though 
the differences with control were not statistically sig-
nificant in the rostral and caudal areas to the injection 
site, the low-dose group had consistently higher TH fiber 
innervation in all the regions examined. Additionally, 
stereological evaluation of the number of TH+ neu-
rons in the substantia nigra showed that both the low-
dose group (47,507 ± 5,555 cells) and high-dose group 
(49,028 ± 4,039 cells) had a significantly higher number 
of DA neurons than the control group (20,549 ± 1,252 
cells) at 12 months posttransplantation (Fig. 4D).
Figure 6. Survival, engraftment, and biodistribution of hpNSCs. (A) Coronal section of monkey striatum showing engraftment 
of GFP-labeled hpNSCs 12 months posttransplantation. The engrafted cells were detected with anti-GFP antibody (green). The 
numbered squares show the locations where the higher magnification micrographs were taken, and the white arrow points to the 
injection needle track. The first two micrographs (I, II) show the engrafted GFP-labeled cells lining the left (I) and right (II) lateral 
ventricle walls. The last two micrographs show GFP-labeled cells migrating in the corpus callosum (III) and septum pellucidum 
(IV). (B) GFP- and RFP-labeled cells lining the right and left lateral ventricle walls. The numbered rectangles show the locations 
where the higher magnification micrographs (I and II) were taken. RFP-labeled cells were detected with anti-RFP antibody (red). 
(C) Micrograph showing a graft of RFP-labeled cells in the ventral putamen. The dotted rectangle shows the location where the 
higher magnification micrograph on the right was taken. (D) RFP-labeled cells were found migrating through the internal capsule. 
The dotted rectangle shows the location where the higher magnification micrograph on the right was taken.
 hpNSCs PROMOTE RECOVERY IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE 
1959
When the overall relationships between the TH fiber, 
DA levels, and the mean Parkscores and healthy behav-
ior score in the final month of life of the monkeys were 
examined by Spearman rank correlations, it was observed 
that the Parkscore inversely correlated with TH fiber den-
sity in mid ventral putamen, mid ventral caudate, mid mid 
putamen, mid mid caudate, and caudal ventral putamen 
(Table 6 and Fig. 5). The healthy behavior score positively 
correlated with TH fiber density in the mid ventral caudate, 
mid mid putamen, caudal mid putamen, and rostral ventral 
putamen (Table 6 and Fig. 5). Striatal DA concentration in 
the ventral putamen and ventral caudate positively corre-
lated with TH fiber density in the mid ventral caudate, mid 
mid putamen, and mid mid caudate (Table 6 and Fig. 5).
Biodistribution of hpNSCs
To track the biodistribution of the cells, a parallel 
experiment was run with two MPTP-lesioned monkeys 
transplanted with GFP-labeled hpNSCs in the left stria-
tum and RFP-labeled cells in the right striatum. Survival 
and engraftment of the cells were confirmed 12 months 
posttransplantation by immunohistochemical analysis 
with anti-GFP and anti-RFP antibodies (Fig. 6). GFP- 
and RFP-labeled cells migrated extensively throughout 
the nigrostriatal pathway including the ventricles, corpus 
callosum, septum pellucidum, ventral tegmental area, 
and substantia nigra, including opposite hemispheres 
(Fig. 6). Figure 6A illustrates a coronal section of the stri-
atum region showing the GFP-labeled cells (green) lin-
ing the left and right lateral ventricle walls and migrating 
through the corpus callosum and the septum pellucidum. 
Figure 6B shows GFP- and RFP-labeled cells lining both 
the right and left lateral ventrical walls, and Figure 6C 
shows an engrafted area of RFP-labeled cells in the ven-
tral putamen. Transplanted cells were found migrating 
through the internal capsule (Fig. 6D) and all the way 
FACING COLUMN
Figure 7. Migration of the hpNSCs to the substantia nigra region 
and in vivo differentiation into DA neurons. (A) GFP-labeled cells 
were found lining the side of the third ventricle next to the ventral 
tegmental area. The dotted rectangle shows the location where the 
higher magnification micrograph on the right was taken, which 
shows fiber innervation from the graft. (B) DAB staining of RFP-
labeled cells showing their location in the substantia nigra close 
to the punched site. The dotted rectangle shows the location of 
the higher magnification image on the right, and the black arrows 
point to the RFP-labeled cells. (C) GFP-labeled graft (pointed by 
white arrow) located in the substantia nigra region close to the 
host TH+ DA neurons (red). The micrograph on the right shows 
some GFP-labeled cells (green) colabeling with TH (red) and 
adopting dopaminergic phenotype (yellow, pointed by white 
arrows). (D) Confocal images showing RFP-labeled cells (red) 
in the substantia nigra colabeling with TH (green) (indicated by 
white arrows and yellow lines).
 1960 
GONZALEZ ET AL.
 hpNSCs PROMOTE RECOVERY IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE 
1961
down to the substantia nigra region (Fig. 7A and B). Cell 
counts were performed in both hemispheres, and approxi-
mately 444,419 RFP-labeled cells were found in the puta-
men, 451,439 cells in the caudate, and 67,230 cells in the 
substantia nigra region. The total number of RFP-labeled 
cells engrafted in the nigrostriatal pathway was approxi-
mately 963,088, which accounts for 9.6% of the injected 
cells. Some of the engrafted GFP- and RFP-labeled cells 
in the substantia nigra colabeled with TH (Fig. 7B). Out 
of the 67,230 RFP-labeled cells found in the substantia 
nigra region, 17,820 cells were TH+, which accounts for 
1.85% of the total engrafted cells found in the nigrostri-
atal pathway.
Necropsy showed no evidence that the injection of the 
cells had any deleterious effect in any of the monkeys. 
Histopathological analysis by board-certified pathologists 
reported no microscopic evidence of tumor formation, 
ectopic tissues, or proliferative lesions in the brain or any 
of the tissues examined including lung, heart, liver, sali-
vary glands, kidney, testis, ovary, thyroid, adrenal gland, 
pituitary, thymus, spleen, prostate, seminal vesicles, uterus, 
cerebrospinal fluid, cervical, thoracic, and lumbar spinal 
cord. Biodistribution analysis by qPCR did not detect the 
presence of the implanted cells in these tissues.
Gene Expression Analysis of Monkey Brains
We performed differential expression analysis among 
three brain regions separately (caudate, putamen, and 
substantia nigra) and analyzed the data to identify tran-
scripts that were differentially expressed between con-
trol and hpNSC-transplanted animals (either low or high 
cell dose) (GEO dataset, GSE78921). No differentially 
expressed genes were detected for the caudate, while 
549 genes were identified for the putamen and 325 for 
the substantia nigra, out of which 114 were more highly 
expressed in the hpNSC-transplanted animals for both the 
putamen and substantia nigra. We then performed hier-
archical clustering of the transcripts that were differen-
tially expressed between control and hpNSC-transplanted 
animals for these regions, which revealed five clusters of 
transcripts (Fig. 8A). After functional enrichment and 
network analyses of these clusters, we found the most 
interesting results for cluster 2, which was most highly 
expressed in the putamen and substantia nigra of three 
hpNSC-transplanted animals and a healthy animal (with 
no MPTP exposure or intracranial injection). Functional 
enrichment analysis of cluster 2 reveals enrichment of 
genes associated with many GO categories, including 
SH3 domain, WD40 domain, and synapse/vesicle trans-
port/synaptic vesicle/neurotransmitter secretion. Cluster 2 
contains PINK1 and ATP13A2, both of which have been 
associated with autosomal recessive hereditary parkin-
sonism. Network analysis (including physical interac-
tions empirically demonstrated in humans and preclinical 
models) reveals five highly connected hubs (>20 edges) 
(Fig. 8B). All but one of these hubs have been implicated 
in PD: AKT1 (37 edges)70,71, HGS (26 edges), CDC37/
HSP90 (22 edges)72,73, STUB1/CHIP (20 edges)74, and 
HSPA1A (22 edges)75–77 (Fig. 7B).
DISCUSSION
In our study, we investigated the therapeutic poten-
tial of hpNSCs in a preclinical model of PD. Clinical-
grade hpNSCs were manufactured and administered 
bilaterally into the striatum and substantia nigra of 
MPTP-lesioned African green monkeys with moderate 
to severe PD. The cells were injected into the striatum 
and substantia nigra because previous clinical studies by 
Mendez and colleagues showed that it can lead to sig-
nificant improvement several years posttransplantation 
without complications23,78,79. The hpNSC-based therapy 
was well tolerated by the monkeys, and there were 
no test article-related serious adverse events such as 
tumors, ectopic tissue formation, or proliferative lesions 
in the brain or peripheral organs at the 6- or 12-month 
time points. The lack of tumors is one of the most criti-
cal parameters of a pluripotent stem cell-based therapy, 
attesting to the safety of this therapy80. There were no 
deaths attributable to the cells, but one monkey died 
of an intracerebral hemorrhage, a well-known risk of 
intracerebral injections, with some incidence in human 
studies using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) guid-
ance81. Monkeys showed no signs of dyskinesia during 
the entire study, which is a previously reported adverse 
event of the PD trials using fetal tissue25,30. There were 
no differences in body weight changes or clinical chem-
istry parameters between the groups. There were some 
FACING PAGE
Figure 8. Hierarchical clustering for differentially expressed transcripts and network analysis of genes. (A) Hierarchical cluster-
ing for transcripts differentially expressed between control and hpNSC-transplanted animals for both substantia nigra and putamen. 
DAVID functional enrichment analysis results are shown for each cluster (DAVID score ³1.10). (B) Network analysis of genes with 
higher expression in the substantia nigra and putamen of hpNSC-transplanted animals compared to controls. Genes from cluster 2 
were subjected to network analysis using GeneMANIA. Blue nodes indicate genes that are differentially expressed between hpNSC-
transplanted and control animals, while yellow nodes indicate genes (which are not differentially expressed) added by GeneMANIA 
to improve overall network connectivity. The connectedness of the genes was scored according to the number of physical interactions 
empirically demonstrated in humans and also predicted from interactions shown in preclinical models. More highly connected genes 
are indicated by circles that are both larger and have darker shading.
 1962 
GONZALEZ ET AL.
elevations in all groups in blood glucose levels, likely 
due to encouraging the monkeys to drink by added sugar 
to extra fluids.
All three groups of monkeys improved after MPTP 
exposure, with decreasing Parkscores and increasing 
healthy behavior scores. Even though the MPTP-lesioned 
African green monkey is the most comprehensive and 
studied preclinical PD model, it still has limitations and 
did not fully recapitulate in this case the disease progres-
sion characteristic in humans. The low cell dose group 
had the lowest Parkscores and highest healthy behavior 
scores at 12 months posttransplantation, but the differ-
ence with the control group was not statistically sig-
nificant probably because of the spontaneous recovery 
previously observed by lesion-induced sprouting49,82–85. 
Although this study was large for a primate study, the 
number of animals in each group was relatively small, 
and larger effects might have been seen if there was 
greater statistical power. A longer outcome period might 
have also demonstrated continued improvement and 
divergence from the controls, as shown in human stud-
ies where clinical improvement peaked at 2 to 4 years 
posttransplantation25,33. We did observe however, a sta-
tistically significant difference between the Parkscore 
slope of the low-dose and the control groups by analysis 
of covariance. This difference was not observed for the 
high-dose group, which could have been due to a host 
rejection induced by the higher cell volume injected per 
site. Interestingly, Isacson’s laboratory also observed 
that a lower dose of 10 million autologous iPSC-derived 
DA neurons outperformed a higher dose of 40 million 
cells in MPTP-lesioned nonhuman primates86.
Biochemical analysis of striatal regions 12 months 
posttransplantation showed that the low-dose group had 
the highest DA and HVA concentrations, corresponding 
to lower parkinsonism47,87. Statistically significant differ-
ences between the low-dose group and the control group 
were observed in areas close to the injection sites, the 
mid dorsal caudate nucleus and mid dorsal putamen. The 
low-dose group also had consistently higher DA concen-
tration and DA turnover in regions rostral and caudal to 
the injection site. There were no statistically significant 
differences between the two sides of the brain across 
all groups, but this was expected because the monkeys 
were given bilateral injections of the cells. We observed 
a high degree of correlation between the DA concentra-
tions and Parkscores and healthy behavior scores, which 
is consistent with prior findings by Elsworth et al.48,56 and 
Redmond Jr.49 that, regardless of the cell treatment, there 
is a very high correlation between striatal DA concentra-
tions and the Parkscore ratings.
Postmortem histological analysis of monkey brains 
showed that the low-dose group had significantly higher 
TH fiber density in striatal areas close to the injection sites 
than the control group. Even though the differences with 
control were not statistically significant in areas rostral 
and caudal to the injection sites, the TH fiber density was 
highest in the low-dose group in all the regions analyzed, 
consistent with the results from the Parkscores, healthy 
behavior scores, and biochemical measures. Spearman 
rank correlation analysis demonstrated that the TH fiber 
density in several striatal regions was highly correlated 
with Parkscore, healthy behavior score, and striatal DA 
concentrations. Stereological analysis showed that both 
the low- and high-dose groups had significantly higher 
number of TH+ neurons in the substantia nigra than the 
control group. Coincidently, the low-dose group had over 
double the TH+ neurons in the substantia nigra (~47,500 
cells) and whole-brain DA concentration (5.81 ng/mg 
protein) than the control group (~20,500 cells and 2.04 ng/ 
mg protein). The low-dose group had approximately 
28.6% of the nigral DA neurons of unlesioned monkeys, 
whereas the control only had 12.3% of the DA neu-
rons remaining88. According to Lindvall, a minimum of 
100,000 DA neurons per putamen is necessary for suc-
cessful transplantation of fetal transplants89, which is 
roughly 25% of the total nigral DA neurons in a healthy 
individual90 and similar to the percentage remaining in 
the low-dose group.
Further histological analysis showed clear evidence of 
survival and engraftment of the transplanted hpNSCs 12 
months posttransplantation. We found the GFP- and RFP-
labeled hpNSCs close to the injection sites in the striatum 
as well as evidence of their migration to areas including 
the ventricular system, corpus callosum, septum pellu-
cidum, ventral tegmental area, and the substantia nigra. 
This degree of migration is consistent with previous 
reports utilizing human neural stem cells in nonhuman 
primates54,91. We found RFP-labeled cells migrating from 
the caudate to the putamen via the internal capsule and 
evidence of their migration to the opposite hemisphere via 
the corpus callosum. The approximate number of surviv-
ing cells in the nigrostriatal pathway of both hemispheres 
was 963,088 cells or 9.6% of the implanted RFP-labeled 
cells, out of which approximately 17,820 differentiated 
into DA neurons, or 1.85% of the total engrafted cells, 
which is consistent with previous reports indicating the 
in vivo differentiation of NSCs into DA neurons in the 
substantia nigra region54,92. The differentiation of hpNSCs 
into DA neurons in vivo accounts for most of the differ-
ence observed in nigral DA neurons between the control 
and hpNSC-transplanted samples (~27,000 DA neurons). 
The remaining DA neurons (~10,000 cells) are of host 
origin and could be accounted for by the neurotrophic 
support and neuroprotection provided by the implanted 
hpNSCs44,54. We previously showed that transplantation 
of hpNSCs in rodents led to significantly higher levels of 
the neuroprotective cytokines brain-derived neurotrophic 
 hpNSCs PROMOTE RECOVERY IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE 
1963
factor (BDNF) and glial cell line-derived neurotrophic fac-
tor (GDNF), which contributed to the significant increase 
in DA levels observed in these animals44. Additionally, 
results from differential expression analysis of RNAseq 
data suggest that hpNSCs induce expression of genes and 
pathways that have been previously reported to be down-
regulated in PD. The combined effects of neuroprotec-
tion, downregulation of PD-associated genes, migration, 
and cell replacement led to the overall higher number and 
innervation of DA neurons over control. As we observed 
from the fate analysis, a significant proportion of these 
DA neurons were of graft origin. In that sense, this ther-
apy is similar to other hPSC-derived DA cell replacement 
approaches currently being developed34,37,93,94, but differs 
in the fact that hpNSCs also migrate to the substantia 
nigra and provide neurotrophic support. There is a clini-
cal trial currently being conducted in Europe known as 
the Transeuro trial, where fetal neural tissue is injected 
into PD patients, and results from this trial will also help 
in the development of future cell therapies95.
In summary, this is the first comprehensive study show-
ing functional recovery after transplantation of hpNSCs in 
a nonhuman primate with moderate to severe PD symp-
toms. The results of this and other studies support the clini-
cal translation of hpNSCs and the approval of the world’s 
first pluripotent stem cell-based therapy for treating PD.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS: We thank the staff of St. Kitts 
Biomedical Research Foundation for care and observations of 
the monkeys. L.C.L., M.K., S.M.-C., and C.T. were supported by 
funds from the UCSD Department of Reproductive Medicine, 
and computation resources were provided through an alloca-
tion from XSEDE. R.G. and I.G.: conception and design, collec-
tion and/or assembly of data, data analysis and interpretation, 
article writing; M.P., T.A., C. M., B.C., J.A., A.N., T.C.-W., M.K., 
S.M.-C., C.T., A.C., G.S., A.S., L.C.L., J.D.E., J.S., E.Y.S.: col-
lection and/or assembly of data; D.E.R. and R.K.: conception 
and design, data analysis and interpretation, article writing, 
final approval of the article. All authors who are employees of 
International Stem Cell Corporation declare stock option own-
ership. C.E., B.C., J.A., J.D.E., J.S., and D.E.R. are paid consul-
tants of International Stem Cell Corporation. L.C.L. and E.Y.S. 
declare no conflicts of interest.
REFERENCES
Fahn S. Description of Parkinson’s disease as a clinical 
 1. 
syndrome. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2003;991:1–14.
Limousin P, Pollak P, Benazzouz A, Hoffmann D, Le Bas 
 2. 
JF, Broussolle E, Perret JE, Benabid AL. Effect of parkin-
sonian signs and symptoms of bilateral subthalamic nucleus 
stimulation. Lancet 1995;345(8942):91–5.
Siegfried J, Lippitz B. Bilateral chronic electrostimula-
 3. 
tion of ventroposterolateral pallidum: A new therapeu-
tic approach for alleviating all parkinsonian symptoms. 
Neurosurgery 1994;35(6):1126–9; discussion 1129–30.
Alamri A, Ughratdar I, Samuel M, Ashkan K. Deep brain 
 4. 
stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus in Parkinson’s dis-
ease 2003–2013: Where are we another 10 years on? Br J 
Neurosurg. 2015;29(3):319–28.
Krack P, Batir A, Van Blercom N, Chabardes S, Fraix V, 
 5. 
Ardouin C, Koudsie A, Limousin PD, Benazzouz A, LeBas 
JF, Benabid AL, Pollak P. Five-year follow-up of bilat-
eral stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus in advanced 
Parkinson’s disease. N Engl J Med. 2003;349(20):1925–34.
Ostergaard K, Aa Sunde N. Evolution of Parkinson’s dis-
 6. 
ease during 4 years of bilateral deep brain stimulation of the 
subthalamic nucleus. Mov Disord. 2006;21(5):624–31.
Rodriguez-Oroz MC, Obeso JA, Lang AE, Houeto JL, 
 7. 
Pollak  P, Rehncrona S, Kulisevsky J, Albanese A, 
Volkmann J, Hariz MI, Quinn NP, Speelman JD, Guridi J, 
Zamarbide I, Gironell A, Molet J, Pascual-Sedano B, 
Pidoux B, Bonnet AM, Agid Y, Xie J, Benabid AL, Lozano 
AM, Saint-Cyr J, Romito L, Contarino MF, Scerrati M, 
Fraix V, Van Blercom N. Bilateral deep brain stimulation 
in Parkinson’s disease: A multicentre study with 4 years 
follow-up. Brain 2005;128(Pt 10):2240–9.
Voon V, Krack P, Lang AE, Lozano AM, Dujardin K, 
 8. 
Schupbach M, D’Ambrosia J, Thobois S, Tamma F, Herzog 
J, Speelman JD, Samanta J, Kubu C, Rossignol H, Poon 
YY, Saint-Cyr JA, Ardouin C, Moro E. A multicentre study 
on suicide outcomes following subthalamic stimulation for 
Parkinson’s disease. Brain 2008;131(Pt 10):2720–8.
Lindvall O, Brundin P, Widner H, Rehncrona S, Gustavii 
 9. 
B, Frackowiak R, Leenders KL, Sawle G, Rothwell JC, 
Marsden CD, Bjorklund A. Grafts of fetal dopamine neu-
rons survive and improve motor function in Parkinson’s 
disease. Science 1990;247(4942):574–7.
Lindvall O, Rehncrona S, Brundin P, Gustavii B, Astedt 
10. 
B, Widner H, Lindholm T, Bjorklund A, Leenders KL, 
Rothwell JC, Frackowiak R, Marsden D, Johnels B, Steg G, 
Freedman R, Hoffer BJ, Seiger A, Bygdeman M, Stromberg 
I, Olson L. Human fetal dopamine neurons grafted into the 
striatum in two patients with severe Parkinson’s disease. A 
detailed account of methodology and a 6-month follow-up. 
Arch Neurol. 1989;46(6):615–31.
Freed CR, Breeze RE, Rosenberg NL, Schneck SA, Wells 
11. 
TH, Barrett JN, Grafton ST, Huang SC, Eidelberg D, 
Rottenberg DA. Transplantation of human fetal dopamine 
cells for Parkinson’s disease. Results at 1 year. Arch Neurol. 
1990;47(5):505–12.
Henderson BT, Clough CG, Hughes RC, Hitchcock ER, 
12. 
Kenny BG. Implantation of human fetal ventral mesenceph-
alon to the right caudate nucleus in advanced Parkinson’s 
disease. Arch Neurol. 1991;48(8):822–7.
Lindvall O, Widner H, Rehncrona S, Brundin P, Odin 
13. 
P, Gustavii B, Frackowiak R, Leenders KL, Sawle G, 
Rothwell JC, Bjorklund A, Marsden CD. Transplantation 
of fetal dopamine neurons in Parkinson’s disease: One-
year clinical and neurophysiological observations in two 
patients with putaminal implants. Ann Neurol. 1992;31(2): 
155–65.
Widner H, Tetrud J, Rehncrona S, Snow B, Brundin P, 
14. 
Gustavii B, Bjorklund A, Lindvall O, Langston JW. Bilateral 
fetal mesencephalic grafting in two patients with parkin-
sonism induced by 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydro-
pyridine (MPTP). N Engl J Med. 1992;327(22):1556–63.
Freed CR, Breeze RE, Rosenberg NL, Schneck SA, Kriek E, 
15. 
Qi JX, Lone T, Zhang YB, Snyder JA, Wells TH, Ramig 
LO, Thompson L, Mazziotta JC, Huang SC, Grafton ST, 
Brooks D, Sawle G, Schroter G, Ansari AA. Survival of 
implanted fetal dopamine cells and neurologic improve-
ment 12 to 46 months after transplantation for Parkinson’s 
disease. N Engl J Med. 1992;327(22):1549–55.
 1964 
GONZALEZ ET AL.
Spencer DD, Robbins RJ, Naftolin F, Marek KL, Vollmer T, 
16. 
Leranth C, Roth RH, Price LH, Gjedde A, Bunney BS, Sass 
KJ, Elsworth JD, Kier EL, Makuch R, Hoffer PB, Redmond 
DE Jr. Unilateral transplantation of human fetal mesen-
cephalic tissue into the caudate nucleus of patients with 
Parkinson’s disease. N Engl J Med. 1992;327(22):1541–8.
Peschanski M, Defer G, N’Guyen JP, Ricolfi F, Monfort JC, 
17. 
Remy P, Geny C, Samson Y, Hantraye P, Jeny R, Gaston A, 
Keravel Y, Degos JD, Cesaro P. Bilateral motor improvement 
and alteration of L-dopa effect in two patients with Parkinson’s 
disease following intrastriatal transplantation of foetal ventral 
mesencephalon. Brain 1994;117 (Pt 3): 
487–99.
Lindvall O, Sawle G, Widner H, Rothwell JC, Bjorklund A, 
18. 
Brooks D, Brundin P, Frackowiak R, Marsden CD, Odin P, 
Rehncrona S. Evidence for long-term survival and function 
of dopaminergic grafts in progressive Parkinson’s disease. 
Ann Neurol. 1994;35(2):172–80.
Defer GL, Geny C, Ricolfi F, Fenelon G, Monfort JC, Remy P, 
19. 
Villafane G, Jeny R, Samson Y, Keravel Y, Gaston A, Degos 
JD, Peschanski M, Cesaro P, Nguyen JP. Long-term outcome 
of unilaterally transplanted parkinsonian patients. I. Clinical 
approach. Brain 1996;119 (Pt 1):41–50.
Levivier M, Dethy S, Rodesch F, Peschanski M, 
20. 
Vandesteene A, David P, Wikler D, Goldman S, Claes T, 
Biver F, Liesnard C, Goldman M, Hildebrand J, Brotchi J. 
Intracerebral transplantation of fetal ventral mesen-
cephalon for patients with advanced Parkinson’s dis-
ease. Methodology and 6-month to 1-year follow-up in 3 
patients. Stereotact Funct Neurosurg. 1997;69(1–4 Pt 2): 
99–111.
Wenning GK, Odin P, Morrish P, Rehncrona S, Widner H, 
21. 
Brundin P, Rothwell JC, Brown R, Gustavii B, Hagell P, 
Jahanshahi M, Sawle G, Bjorklund A, Brooks DJ, Marsden 
CD, Quinn NP, Lindvall O. Short- and long-term survival 
and function of unilateral intrastriatal dopaminergic grafts 
in Parkinson’s disease. Ann Neurol. 1997;42(1):95–107.
Hagell P, Schrag A, Piccini P, Jahanshahi M, Brown R, 
22. 
Rehncrona S, Widner H, Brundin P, Rothwell JC, Odin P, 
Wenning GK, Morrish P, Gustavii B, Bjorklund A, Brooks 
DJ, Marsden CD, Quinn NP, Lindvall O. Sequential bilat-
eral transplantation in Parkinson’s disease: Effects of the 
second graft. Brain 1999;122 (Pt 6):1121–32.
Mendez I, Dagher A, Hong M, Gaudet P, Weerasinghe S, 
23. 
McAlister V, King D, Desrosiers J, Darvesh S, Acorn T, 
Robertson H. Simultaneous intrastriatal and intranigral 
fetal dopaminergic grafts in patients with Parkinson dis-
ease: A pilot study. Report of three cases. J Neurosurg. 
2002;96(3):589–96.
Madrazo I, Leon V, Torres C, Aguilera MC, Varela G, 
24. 
Alvarez F, Fraga A, Drucker-Colin R, Ostrosky F, 
Skurovich M. Transplantation of fetal substantia nigra and 
adrenal medulla to the caudate nucleus in two patients with 
Parkinson’s disease. N Engl J Med. 1988;318(1):51.
Freed CR, Greene PE, Breeze RE, Tsai WY, DuMouchel  W, 
25. 
Kao R, Dillon S, Winfield H, Culver S, Trojanowski JQ, 
Eidelberg D, Fahn S. Transplantation of embryonic dop-
amine neurons for severe Parkinson’s disease. N Engl J 
Med. 2001;344(10):710–9.
Hauser RA, Freeman TB, Snow BJ, Nauert M, Gauger L, 
26. 
Kordower JH, Olanow CW. Long-term evaluation of bilat-
eral fetal nigral transplantation in Parkinson disease. Arch 
Neurol. 1999;56(2):179–87.
Kordower JH, Freeman TB, Chen EY, Mufson EJ, Sanberg 
27. 
PR, Hauser RA, Snow B, Olanow CW. Fetal nigral grafts 
survive and mediate clinical benefit in a patient with 
Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord. 1998;13(3):383–93.
Piccini P, Lindvall O, Bjorklund A, Brundin P, Hagell P, 
28. 
Ceravolo R, Oertel W, Quinn N, Samuel M, Rehncrona S, 
Widner H, Brooks DJ. Delayed recovery of movement-
related cortical function in Parkinson’s disease after striatal 
dopaminergic grafts. Ann Neurol. 2000;48(5):689–95.
Piccini P, Brooks DJ, Bjorklund A, Gunn RN, Grasby PM, 
29. 
Rimoldi O, Brundin P, Hagell P, Rehncrona S, Widner 
H, Lindvall O. Dopamine release from nigral transplants 
visualized in vivo in a Parkinson’s patient. Nat Neurosci. 
1999;2(12):1137–40.
Olanow CW, Goetz CG, Kordower JH, Stoessl AJ, Sossi V, 
30. 
Brin MF, Shannon KM, Nauert GM, Perl DP, Godbold J, 
Freeman TB. A double-blind controlled trial of bilateral 
fetal nigral transplantation in Parkinson’s disease. Ann 
Neurol. 2003;54(3):403–14.
Kefalopoulou Z, Politis M, Piccini P, Mencacci N, Bhatia K, 
31. 
Jahanshahi M, 
Widner H, Rehncrona S, Brundin P, Bjorklund 
A, 
Lindvall O, Limousin P, Quinn N, Foltynie T. Long-term clini-
cal outcome of fetal cell transplantation for Parkinson disease: 
Two case reports. JAMA Neurol. 2014;71(1):83–7.
Hallett PJ, Cooper O, Sadi D, Robertson H, Mendez I, 
32. 
Isacson O. Long-term health of dopaminergic neuron 
transplants in Parkinson’s disease patients. Cell Rep. 2014; 
7(6):1755–61.
Ma Y, Tang C, Chaly T, Greene P, Breeze R, Fahn S, 
33. 
Freed C, Dhawan V, Eidelberg D. Dopamine cell implan-
tation in Parkinson’s disease: Long-term clinical and 
(18)F-FDOPA PET outcomes. J Nucl Med. 2010;51(1): 
7–15.
Kriks S, Shim JW, Piao J, Ganat YM, Wakeman DR, Xie Z, 
34. 
Carrillo-Reid L, Auyeung G, Antonacci C, Buch A, Yang L, 
Beal MF, Surmeier DJ, Kordower JH, Tabar V, Studer L. 
Dopamine neurons derived from human ES cells efficiently 
engraft in animal models of Parkinson’s disease. Nature 
2011;480(7378):547–51.
Cooper O, Hargus G, Deleidi M, Blak A, Osborn T, 
35. 
Marlow E, Lee K, Levy A, Perez-Torres E, Yow A, 
Isacson O. Differentiation of human ES and Parkinson’s 
disease iPS cells into ventral midbrain dopaminergic neu-
rons requires a high activity form of SHH, FGF8a and spe-
cific regionalization by retinoic acid. Mol Cell Neurosci. 
2010;45(3):258–66.
Ganat YM, Calder EL, Kriks S, Nelander J, Tu EY, Jia 
36. 
F, Battista D, Harrison N, Parmar M, Tomishima MJ, 
Rutishauser U, Studer L. Identification of embryonic stem 
cell-derived midbrain dopaminergic neurons for engraft-
ment. J Clin Invest. 2012;122(8):2928–39.
Grealish S, Diguet E, Kirkeby A, Mattsson B, Heuer A, 
37. 
Bramoulle Y, Van Camp N, Perrier AL, Hantraye P, 
Bjorklund A, Parmar M. Human ESC-derived dopamine 
neurons show similar preclinical efficacy and potency to 
fetal neurons when grafted in a rat model of Parkinson’s 
disease. Cell Stem Cell 2014;15(5):653–65.
Revazova ES, Turovets NA, Kochetkova OD, Kindarova 
38. 
LB, Kuzmichev LN, Janus JD, Pryzhkova MV. Patient-
specific stem cell lines derived from human parthenoge-
netic blastocysts. Cloning Stem Cells 2007;9(3):432–49.
Revazova ES, Turovets NA, Kochetkova OD, Agapova LS, 
39. 
Sebastian JL, Pryzhkova MV, Smolnikova VI, Kuzmichev 
LN, Janus JD. HLA homozygous stem cell lines derived 
from human parthenogenetic blastocysts. Cloning Stem 
Cells 2008;10(1):11–24.
 hpNSCs PROMOTE RECOVERY IN PARKINSON’S DISEASE 
1965
Isaev DA, Garitaonandia I, Abramihina TV, Zogovic-
40. 
Kapsalis T, West RA, Semechkin AY, Muller AM, 
Semechkin RA. In vitro differentiation of human parthe-
nogenetic stem cells into neural lineages. Regen Med. 
2012;7(1):37–45.
Turovets N, Fair J, West R, Ostrowska A, Semechkin R, 
41. 
Janus J, Cui L, Agapov V, Turovets I, Semechkin A, 
Csete M, Agapova L. Derivation of high-purity definitive 
endoderm from human parthenogenetic stem cells using 
an in vitro analog of the primitive streak. Cell Transplant. 
2012;21(1):217–34.
Taylor CJ, Bolton EM, Pocock S, Sharples LD, Pedersen 
42. 
RA, Bradley JA. Banking on human embryonic stem cells: 
Estimating the number of donor cell lines needed for HLA 
matching. Lancet 2005;366(9502):2019–25.
Gonzalez R, Garitaonandia I, Abramihina T, Wambua GK, 
43. 
Ostrowska A, Brock M, Noskov A, Boscolo FS, Craw JS, 
Laurent LC, Snyder EY, Semechkin RA. Deriving dop-
aminergic neurons for clinical use. A practical approach. 
Sci Rep. 2013;3(1463):1–5.
Gonzalez R, Garitaonandia I, Crain A, Poustovoitov M, 
44. 
Abramihina T, Noskov A, Jiang C, Morey R, Laurent LC, 
Elsworth JD, Snyder EY, Redmond DE Jr, Semechkin R. 
Proof of concept studies exploring the safety and func-
tional activity of human parthenogenetic-derived neural 
stem cells for the treatment of Parkinson’s disease. Cell 
Transplant 2015;24(4):681–90.
Garitaonandia I, Amir H, Boscolo FS, Wambua GK, 
45. 
Schultheisz HL, Sabatini K, Morey R, Waltz S, Wang YC, 
Tran H, Leonardo TR, Nazor K, Slavin I, Lynch C, Li Y, 
Coleman R, Gallego Romero I, Altun G, Reynolds D, 
Dalton S, Parast M, Loring JF, Laurent LC. Increased risk 
of genetic and epigenetic instability in human embryonic 
stem cells associated with specific culture conditions. PLoS 
One 2015;10(2):e0118307.
Laurent LC, Ulitsky I, Slavin I, Tran H, Schork A, 
46. 
Morey R, Lynch C, Harness JV, Lee S, Barrero MJ, Ku S, 
Martynova M, Semechkin R, Galat V, Gottesfeld J, Izpisua 
Belmonte JC, Murry C, Keirstead HS, Park HS, Schmidt U, 
Laslett AL, Muller FJ, Nievergelt CM, Shamir R, Loring JF. 
Dynamic changes in the copy number of pluripotency and 
cell proliferation genes in human ESCs and iPSCs dur-
ing reprogramming and time in culture. Cell Stem Cell 
2011;8(1):106–18.
Elsworth JD, Deutch AY, Redmond DE Jr, Taylor JR, Sladek 
47. 
JR Jr, Roth RH. Symptomatic and asymptomatic 1-methyl- 
4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine-treated primates: Bio-
chemical changes in striatal regions. Neuroscience 1989; 
33(2):323–31.
Elsworth JD, Taylor JR, Sladek JR Jr, Collier TJ, Redmond 
48. 
DE Jr, Roth RH. Striatal dopaminergic correlates of sta-
ble parkinsonism and degree of recovery in old-world 
primates one year after MPTP treatment. Neuroscience 
2000;95(2):399–408.
Redmond DE Jr. Behavioral assessment in the African green 
49. 
monkey after MPTP administration. In: Lane EL, Dunnett 
SB, editors. Animal models of movement disorders volume 
I. Neuromethods. Springer Science; 2011. p. 401–35.
Taylor JR, Lawrence MS, Redmond DE Jr, Elsworth JD, 
50. 
Roth RH, Nichols DE, Mailman RB. Dihydrexidine, a full 
dopamine D1 agonist, reduces MPTP-induced parkinsonism 
in monkeys. Eur J Pharmacol. 1991;199(3):389–91.
Taylor JR, Elsworth JD, Roth RH, Sladek JR Jr, Redmond 
51. 
DE Jr. Severe long-term 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetra-
hydropyridine-induced parkinsonism in the vervet mon-
key (Cercopithecus aethiops sabaeus). Neuroscience 
1997;81(3):745–55.
Baulu J, Redmond DE Jr. Social and nonsocial behav-
52. 
iours of sex- and age-matched enclosed and free-ranging 
rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta). Folia Primatol (Basel) 
1980;34(3–4):239–58.
Redmond DE Jr, Sladek JR Jr, Roth RH, Collier TJ, 
53. 
Elsworth JD, Deutch AY, Haber S. Fetal neuronal grafts in 
monkeys given methylphenyltetrahydropyridine. Lancet 
1986;1(8490):1125–7.
Redmond DE Jr, Bjugstad KB, Teng YD, Ourednik V, 
54. 
Ourednik J, Wakeman DR, Parsons XH, Gonzalez R, 
Blanchard BC, Kim SU, Gu Z, Lipton SA, Markakis EA, 
Roth RH, Elsworth JD, Sladek JR Jr, Sidman RL, Snyder 
EY. Behavioral improvement in a primate Parkinson’s 
model is associated with multiple homeostatic effects 
of human neural stem cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 
2007;104(29):12175–80.
Redmond DE Jr, Vinuela A, Kordower JH, Isacson O. 
55. 
Influence of cell preparation and target location on the 
behavioral recovery after striatal transplantation of fetal 
dopaminergic neurons in a primate model of Parkinson’s 
disease. Neurobiol Dis. 2008;29(1):103–16.
Elsworth JD, Sladek JR Jr, Taylor JR, Collier TJ, Redmond 
56. 
DE Jr, Roth RH. Early gestational mesencephalon grafts, 
but not later gestational mesencephalon, cerebellum or sham 
grafts, increase dopamine in caudate nucleus of MPTP-
treated monkeys. Neuroscience 1996;72(2):477–84.
Morrow BA, Roth RH, Redmond DE Jr, Elsworth JD. 
57. 
Impact of methamphetamine on dopamine neurons in pri-
mates is dependent on age: Implications for development of 
Parkinson’s disease. Neuroscience 2011;189:277–85.
West MJ, Slomianka L, Gundersen HJ. Unbiased stereo-
58. 
logical estimation of the total number of neurons in the 
subdivisions of the rat hippocampus using the optical frac-
tionator. Anat Rec. 1991;231(4):482–97.
Dorph-Petersen KA, Nyengaard JR, Gundersen HJ. Tissue 
59. 
shrinkage and unbiased stereological estimation of particle 
number and size. J Microsc. 2001;204(Pt 3):232–46.
Ma H, Morey R, O’Neil RC, He Y, Daughtry B, Schultz MD, 
60. 
Hariharan M, Nery JR, Castanon R, Sabatini K, Thiagarajan 
RD, Tachibana M, Kang E, Tippner-Hedges R, Ahmed 
R, Gutierrez NM, Van Dyken C, Polat A, Sugawara A, 
Sparman M, Gokhale S, Amato P, Wolf DP, Ecker JR, 
Laurent LC, Mitalipov S. Abnormalities in human pluri-
potent cells due to reprogramming mechanisms. Nature 
2014;511(7508):177–83.
Love MI, Huber W, Anders S. Moderated estimation of fold 
61. 
change and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. 
Genome Biol. 2014;15(12):550.
Huber W, Carey VJ, Gentleman R, Anders S, Carlson M, 
62. 
Carvalho BS, Bravo HC, Davis S, Gatto L, Girke T, 
Gottardo R, Hahne F, Hansen KD, Irizarry RA, Lawrence M, 
Love MI, MacDonald J, Obenchain V, Oles AK, Pages H, 
Reyes A, Shannon P, Smyth GK, Tenenbaum D, Waldron L, 
Morgan M. Orchestrating high-throughput genomic analy-
sis with bioconductor. Nat Methods 2015;12(2):115–21.
Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y. Controlling the false discovery 
63. 
rate: A practical and powerful approach to multiple testing. 
J R Stat Soc Series B Stat Methodol. 1995;57(1):289–300.
Huang DW, Sherman BT, Lempicki RA. Systematic and 
64. 
integrative analysis of large gene lists using DAVID bioin-
formatics resources. Nat Protoc. 2009;4(1):44–57.
 1966 
GONZALEZ ET AL.
Huang DW, Sherman BT, Lempicki RA. Bioinformatics 
65. 
enrichment tools: Paths toward the comprehensive func-
tional analysis of large gene lists. Nucleic Acids Res. 
2009;37(1):1–13.
Mostafavi S, Ray D, Warde-Farley D, Grouios C, Morris Q. 
66. 
GeneMANIA: A real-time multiple association network 
integration algorithm for predicting gene function. Genome 
Biol. 2008;9 Suppl 1:S4.
Montojo J, Zuberi K, Rodriguez H, Kazi F, Wright G, 
67. 
Donaldson SL, Morris Q, Bader GD. GeneMANIA Cytoscape 
plugin: Fast gene function predictions on the desktop. Bio-
informatics 2010;26(22):2927–8.
Shannon P, Markiel A, Ozier O, Baliga NS, Wang JT, 
68. 
Ramage D, Amin N, Schwikowski B, Ideker T. Cytoscape: 
A software environment for integrated models of biomo-
lecular interaction networks. Genome Res. 2003;13(11): 
2498–504.
Smoot ME, Ono K, Ruscheinski J, Wang PL, Ideker T. 
69. 
Cytoscape 2.8: New features for data integration and net-
work visualization. Bioinformatics 2011;27(3):431–2.
Xiromerisiou G, Hadjigeorgiou GM, Papadimitriou A, 
70. 
Katsarogiannis E, Gourbali V, Singleton AB. Association 
between AKT1 gene and Parkinson’s disease: A protective 
haplotype. Neurosci Lett. 2008;436(2):232–4.
Ran C, Westerlund M, Anvret A, Willows T, Sydow O, 
71. 
Galter D, Belin AC. Genetic studies of the protein kinase 
AKT1 in Parkinson’s disease. Neurosci Lett. 2011;501(1): 
41–4.
Hurtado-Lorenzo A, Anand VS. Heat shock protein 90 modu-
72. 
lates LRRK2 stability: Potential implications for Parkinson’s 
disease treatment. J Neurosci. 2008;28(27):6757–9.
Weihofen A, Ostaszewski B, Minami Y, Selkoe DJ. Pink1 
73. 
Parkinson mutations, the Cdc37/Hsp90 chaperones and 
Parkin all influence the maturation or subcellular distribu-
tion of Pink1. Hum Mol Genet. 2008;17(4):602–16.
Imai Y, Soda M, Hatakeyama S, Akagi T, Hashikawa 
74. 
T, Nakayama KI, Takahashi R. CHIP is associated with 
Parkin, a gene responsible for familial Parkinson’s dis-
ease, and enhances its ubiquitin ligase activity. Mol Cell 
2002;10(1):55–67.
Dong Z, Wolfer DP, Lipp HP, Bueler H. Hsp70 gene trans-
75. 
fer by adeno-associated virus inhibits MPTP-induced 
nigrostriatal degeneration in the mouse model of Parkinson 
disease. Mol Ther. 2005;11(1):80–8.
Gao X, Carroni M, Nussbaum-Krammer C, Mogk A, 
76. 
Nillegoda NB, Szlachcic A, Guilbride DL, Saibil HR, 
Mayer MP, Bukau B. Human Hsp70 disaggregase reverses 
Parkinson’s-linked alpha-synuclein amyloid fibrils. Mol 
Cell 2015;59(5):781–93.
Pastukhov YF, Plaksina DV, Lapshina KV, Guzhova IV, 
77. 
Ekimova IV. Exogenous protein HSP70 blocks neurodegen-
eration in the rat model of the clinical stage of Parkinson’s 
disease. Dokl Biol Sci. 2014;457(1):225–7.
Mendez I, Sanchez-Pernaute R, Cooper O, Vinuela A, 
78. 
Ferrari D, Bjorklund L, Dagher A, Isacson O. Cell type 
analysis of functional fetal dopamine cell suspension trans-
plants in the striatum and substantia nigra of patients with 
Parkinson’s disease. Brain 2005;128(Pt 7): 
1498–510.
Mendez I, Vinuela A, Astradsson A, Mukhida K, Hallett P, 
79. 
Robertson H, Tierney T, Holness R, Dagher A, Trojanowski 
JQ, Isacson O. Dopamine neurons implanted into people 
with Parkinson’s disease survive without pathology for 14 
years. Nat Med. 2008;14(5):507–9.
Peterson SE, Loring JF. Genomic instability in pluripotent 
80. 
stem cells: Implications for clinical applications. J Biol 
Chem. 2014;289(8):4578–84.
Sahni R, Weinberger J. Management of intracerebral hem-
81. 
orrhage. Vasc Health Risk Manag. 2007;3(5):701–9.
Bergman H, Wichmann T, DeLong MR. Reversal of experi-
82. 
mental parkinsonism by lesions of the subthalamic nucleus. 
Science 1990;249(4975):1436–8.
Zhou FC, Bledsoe S, Murphy J. Serotonergic sprouting is 
83. 
induced by dopamine-lesion in substantia nigra of adult rat 
brain. Brain Res. 1991;556(1):108–16.
Deller T, Haas CA, Freiman TM, Phinney A, Jucker M, 
84. 
Frotscher M. Lesion-induced axonal sprouting in the central 
nervous system. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2006;557:101–21.
Nudo RJ. Recovery after brain injury: Mechanisms and 
85. 
principles. Front Hum Neurosci. 2013;7:887.
Hallett PJ, Deleidi M, Astradsson A, Smith GA, Cooper O, 
86. 
Osborn TM, Sundberg M, Moore MA, Perez-Torres E, 
Brownell AL, Schumacher JM, Spealman RD, Isacson O. 
Successful function of autologous iPSC-derived dopamine 
neurons following transplantation in a non-human primate 
model of Parkinson’s disease. Cell Stem Cell 2015;16(3): 
269–74.
Bernheimer H, Birkmayer W, Hornykiewicz O, Jellinger K, 
87. 
Seitelberger F. Brain dopamine and the syndromes of 
Parkinson and Huntington. Clinical, morphological and neu-
rochemical correlations. J Neurol Sci. 1973;20(4):415–55.
Pakkenberg H, Andersen BB, Burns RS, Pakkenberg B. 
88. 
A stereological study of substantia nigra in young and old 
rhesus monkeys. Brain Res. 1995;693(1–2):201–6.
Lindvall O. Developing dopaminergic cell therapy for 
89. 
Parkinson’s disease—Give up or move forward? Mov 
Disord. 2013;28(3):268–73.
Rudow G, O’Brien R, Savonenko AV, Resnick SM, 
90. 
Zonderman AB, Pletnikova O, Marsh L, Dawson TM, 
Crain BJ, West MJ, Troncoso JC. Morphometry of the 
human substantia nigra in ageing and Parkinson’s disease. 
Acta Neuropathol. 2008;115(4):461–70.
Bjugstad KB, Teng YD, Redmond DE Jr, Elsworth JD, 
91. 
Roth RH, Cornelius SK, Snyder EY, Sladek JR Jr. Human 
neural stem cells migrate along the nigrostriatal pathway 
in a primate model of Parkinson’s disease. Exp Neurol. 
2008;211(2):362–9.
Wakeman DR, Redmond DE Jr, Dodiya HB, Sladek JR 
92. 
Jr, Leranth C, Teng YD, Samulski RJ, Snyder EY. Human 
neural stem cells survive long term in the midbrain of dop-
amine-depleted monkeys after GDNF overexpression and 
project neurites toward an appropriate target. Stem Cells 
Transl Med. 2014;3(6):692–701.
Doi D, Samata B, Katsukawa M, Kikuchi T, Morizane A, 
93. 
Ono Y, Sekiguchi K, Nakagawa M, Parmar M, Takahashi 
J. Isolation of human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived 
dopaminergic progenitors by cell sorting for successful 
transplantation. Stem Cell Reports 2014;2(3):337–50.
Peng J, Liu Q, Rao MS, Zeng X. Survival and engraft-
94. 
ment of dopaminergic neurons manufactured by a good 
manufacturing practice-compatible process. Cytotherapy 
2014;16(9):1305–12.
Moore SF, Guzman NV, Mason SL, Williams-Gray CH, 
95. 
Barker RA. Which patients with Parkinson’s disease par-
ticipate in clinical trials? One centre’s experiences with a 
new cell based therapy trial (TRANSEURO). J Parkinsons 
Dis. 2014;4(4):671–6.
