 Article
Neural Control of Dynamic 3-Dimensional Skin
Papillae for Cuttlefish Camouflage
Paloma T.
Gonzalez-Bellido,
Alexia T. Scaros,
Roger T. Hanlon,
Trevor J. Wardill
tjw79@cam.ac.uk
HIGHLIGHTS
Papillae shape and skin
tone motoneurons are
located in the stellate
ganglion
Papillae exhibit extended
‘‘catch-like’’ tension in the
absence of neural
stimulation
FMRFa, ACh, and L-Glut
activate and 5-HT relaxes
papillae/skin tension
Sepia skin is composed of
distinct muscle layers with
striated and smooth
muscles
Gonzalez-Bellido et al.,
iScience 1, 24–34
March 23, 2018 ª 2018 The
Authors.
https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.isci.2018.01.001
 Article
Neural Control of Dynamic 3-Dimensional
Skin Papillae for Cuttlefish Camouflage
Paloma T. Gonzalez-Bellido,1,2,4 Alexia T. Scaros,1,3,4 Roger T. Hanlon,1 and Trevor J. Wardill1,2,5,*
SUMMARY
The color and pattern changing abilities of octopus, squid, and cuttlefish via chromatophore neuro-
muscular organs are unparalleled. Cuttlefish and octopuses also have a unique muscular hydrostat sys-
tem in their skin. When this system is expressed, dermal bumps called papillae disrupt body shape and
imitate the fine texture of surrounding objects, yet the control system is unknown. Here we report for
papillae: (1) the motoneurons and the neurotransmitters that control activation and relaxation, (2) a
physiologically fast expression and retraction system, and (3) a complex of smooth and striated mus-
cles that enables long-term expression of papillae through sustained tension in the absence of neural
input. The neural circuits controlling acute shape-shifting skin papillae in cuttlefish show homology to
the iridescence circuits in squids. The sustained tension in papillary muscles for long-term camouflage
utilizes muscle heterogeneity and points toward the existence of a ‘‘catch-like’’ mechanism that would
reduce the necessary energy expenditure.
INTRODUCTION
Coleoid cephalopods (squid, cuttlefish, and octopus) internalized their shell more than 400 Mya (Tanner
et al., 2017). Their soft bodies not only provided a unique set of opportunities related to motor control
but also rendered them more susceptible to predation. Their solutions are unique in the animal kingdom.
For example, their skin is covered with chromatophores, neurally innervated muscular organs of different
colors (Messenger, 2001). The chromatophore motoneurons are located in the brain, and their activation
allows the animal to quickly and dynamically change color and pattern (Messenger, 2001; Young, 1972).
In addition, squids have patches of skin cells called iridophores, each of which contains reflectin, a protein
that shifts conformation to reflect light when the cells are exposed to acetylcholine (ACh) (Hanlon et al.,
1990), thus yielding bright specific hues across the visible spectrum, including short-wavelength colors,
such as blue and green, which are not produced by the pigmented chromatophores (Izumi et al., 2010).
Recently, the iridescence system was shown to be neurally controlled, but unlike those of the chromato-
phores, their motoneurons reside in the stellate ganglion (Gonzalez-Bellido et al., 2014). Because most
cephalopods have been shown to be color blind (e.g., Marshall and Messenger, 1996; Ma
¨thger et al.,
2006, but also see Stubbs and Stubbs, 2016), it is currently thought that the highly polarized light reflected
from activated iridophores is used as a signal for intraspecific communication (Ma
¨ thger et al., 2009). How-
ever, the origin and purpose of this system still remain to be elucidated. Cuttlefish and octopus possess yet
another exquisite adaptation; within their skin, muscle groups work in an antagonistic and agonistic
manner, forming miniature muscular hydrostats. When activated, these muscles create dermal bumps
called papillae (Figures 1A and 1B). Individual papilla in the living cuttlefish can be fully expanded (or
retracted) in less than 1 s (Panetta et al., 2017). Different levels of structural complexity lead to larger
and more intricate papillary shapes, with each species having a fixed repertoire of papillae shapes (Allen
et al., 2013, 2014). This ability allows these benthic animals to be cryptic on substrates or masquerade
as nearby objects, such as kelp, algae, or coral (Panetta et al., 2017), but the neural circuit and muscular
anatomy that underlie it are unknown to date.
RESULTS
Neural Control of Papillae Is Routed through the Stellate Ganglion and Exits through a Nerve
Equivalent to the Squid Fin Iridescence Nerve
In addition to papillae, cuttlefish skin is covered in chromatophore organs comprising a cytoelastic sac of
pigment expanded by a radial array of muscles. Both of these skin elements are visually driven (Panetta
et al., 2017) yet controlled by different circuits, as papillae and chromatophores can be activated inde-
pendently (Figures 1A and 1B). The motoneurons that drive the chromatophore musculature originate in
the brain lobes and descend through the pallial nerve (Young, 1972; Messenger, 2001), which splits into
1Marine Biological Laboratory,
MBL Street, Woods Hole,
MA 02543-1015, USA
2Department of Physiology,
Development and
Neuroscience, University of
Cambridge, Downing Place,
Cambridge CB2 3EG, UK
3Department of Physiology
and Biophysics, Dalhousie
University, College Street,
Halifax, NS B3H 4R2, Canada
4These authors contributed
equally
5Lead Contact
*Correspondence:
tjw79@cam.ac.uk
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.
2018.01.001
24
iScience 1, 24–34, March 23, 2018 ª 2018 The Authors.
This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
 the fin nerve and the stellate connective (Figures 1C–1E). The fin nerve provides an ideal substrate to test
if the papillae motoneurons project parallel to the chromatophore motoneurons because (1) it is rela-
tively easy to access in live anesthetized animals and (2) chromatophore motoneurons that target the
posterior part of the mantle and the fins travel directly through the fin nerve (Gaston and Tublitz,
2004). Thus, we severed the fin nerve in vivo under anesthesia, and upon recovery we noted that the
fin was paralyzed and chromatophore activity had ceased from the posterior mantle tip to the posterior
bar, but papillae expression was not affected (Figure 1F; n = 2; Movie S1A). In the control surgery, we cut
the stellate connective, which yielded the inverse phenotype: chromatophores blanched from the ante-
rior end to the location of the anterior bar, but papillae control was entirely lost ipsilateral to the cut
(Figure 1G; n = 2; Movies S1B and S1C). The same phenotype was obtained when all the outputs of
the stellate ganglion were severed (Figure 1H; n = 1; Figure S1). We further confirmed the results by elec-
trically stimulating the stumps of the fin nerve and the stellate connective in ex vivo skin preparations
(Figures S2A–S2D; n = 2). Note that all procedures carried out in this study comply with institutional rec-
ommendations for cephalopods and follow the tenants outlined by the Animal Welfare Act.
The above results confirm that the neural activity driving the mantle papillae is routed through the stellate
ganglion. This situation is similar to the neural circuit for controlling squid iridescence. In squid, the moto-
neurons for iridescence originate in the stellate ganglion, then exit through a medial/posterior stellar nerve
(named the fin iridescence nerve), and then join the fin nerve (Gonzalez-Bellido et al., 2014). Upon de-
sheathing, we found that cuttlefish also possess a neural connection between the stellate ganglion and
the fin nerve, hereafter referred to as the fin connective (Figures 1C–1E). Severing the fin connective abol-
ished the animal’s ability to express papillae ipsilateral to the cut, but fin and chromatophore control
Figure 1. Neural Control System of the Cuttlefish Mantle and Fins
(A) An adult cuttlefish, Sepia officinalis, showing disrupted camouflage pattern while expressing papillae.
(B) A juvenile cuttlefish with many erect papillae over its dorsal surface.
(C) The peripheral nervous system for mantle, skin, and fins; the pallial nerve (red) splits into the stellate connective (purple) and the fin nerve (green). The
stellate connective travels into the stellate ganglion (orange), whereas the fin nerve projects directly to the fin. The most medial stellate nerves project out of
the ganglion and rejoin the fin nerve via the fin connective (blue). Note that branching of the fin nerve, after the fin connective, happens close to the stellate
ganglion as shown in D but has been separated in C for diagrammatic purposes.
(D) The main peripheral nerves and connectives overlaid on an image of a dissected S. officinalis stellate ganglion.
(E) A diagrammatic representation of the cuttlefish peripheral nervous system shown in D.
(F) Phenotype resulting from severing the left fin nerve between the pallial and fin connective.
(G) Phenotype resulting from severing the left stellate connective.
(H) Phenotype resulting from severing all visible left stellate outputs (along dashed line).
(I) Phenotype resulting from severing the left fin connective. See also Figure S1 and Movie S1.
iScience 1, 24–34, March 23, 2018
25
 remained intact (Figure 1I; n = 1; Movie S1D). We also carried out the reverse experiment and stimulated
with suction electrodes three of the nerves that make up the fin connective. This resulted in papillae expres-
sion and skin bunching in a topographic manner (Figure 2A; n = 2; Movie S2A). During stimulation the skin
also blanched because of chromatophore relaxation (Movie S2A); this may be a passive process resulting
from skin bunching or an active process driven by inhibitory neurons. By loading a fin connective nerve with
Lucifer yellow and by imaging the entire ganglia with a two-photon microscope, we found that the majority
Figure 2. Nerve Labeling and Denervation of Papillae Control System
(A) Effect of the electrical stimulation of two of the nerves forming the fin connective and diagrammatic representation of
the areas that they innervate.
(B) Images of backfilled S. officinalis fin connective nerve (indicated by *) showing three populations of neurons: (1) formed
by the majority of the fibers labeled, with the cells bodies located in the ventral medial wall of the stellate ganglion; (2)
a small number of cell bodies in the dorsal-medial wall; and (3) a small number of fibers that continue through into the
pallial nerve. Dashed box indicates volume used for the maximum intensity projection image shown on the right.
(C) The cell bodies labeled by backfilling the squid fin connective (indicated by *) are found in a similar location (see first
report in [Gonzalez-Bellido et al., 2014]).
(D) (i) Phenotype resulting from severing the pallial nerve under anesthesia when papillae were not being expressed. (ii)
Phenotype resulting from severing the pallial nerve under anesthesia when papillae were expressed (example indicated
by white arrow on lateral papillae). (iii and iv) Higher magnification view of papillae in a catch-like state (right) vs
unexpressed pair (left) (indicated by black arrows). Results were all seen instantly after severing the nerve, and prolonged
thereafter. See also Figure S2.
26
iScience 1, 24–34, March 23, 2018
 of the cell bodies are located in the medial-ventral wall of the stellate ganglion (Figure 2B; n = 3;
Movie S2B). Our anatomical and functional findings match those of the motoneurons that form the squid
fin iridescence nerve (Gonzalez-Bellido et al., 2014), including the presence of a minor number of cell
bodies in the dorsal wall and a few fibers that continue and join the pallial nerve (Figure 2C). The implica-
tions of these findings with regard to the evolution of dynamic control of iridescence and 3-dimensional (D)
skin texture are considered in the discussion.
Pallial Nerve Denervation and Sustained Papillae Expression
As a final control to the aforementioned set of experiments, we also severed the pallial nerve (Figure 2D;
n = 2). As the pallial nerves carry all neural signals between the brain and the mantle and fins, we expected
this cut to result in complete ipsilateral paralysis. As anticipated, in the first animal, (1) the fin became para-
lyzed and passively curled under the body, (2) the skin drooped, which shifted the skin’s midline toward the
paralyzed side, and (3) the chromatophores were instantly retracted, which produced the observed skin
blanching leaving the cuttlebone visible (Figure 2Di; Movie S2C). However, on the second animal, we found
that after recovery from anesthesia, the papillae remained completely expressed for over an hour. This was
true even for the large lateral multi-lobed papillae that require a significant level of coordinated motor con-
trol (Figure 2Dii, white arrows). To encourage the animal to relax the papillae and to test if other behaviors
were unaffected, we placed this animal on different substrates. This treatment elicited the expected
changes in chromatophore and papillae expression on the control side, but the denervated side remained
pale with fully expressed papillae (Figure 2Diii-iv; see also Movie S1C where a stellate connective cut left
fully expressed papillae). Tetanic post-severing activation is very unlikely to be responsible for the
observed phenotype for the following reasons: (1) Sepia skin functions as a muscular hydrostat. To maintain
the normal papillae form observed, tetanic post-severing activation would have to result in a precise spatial
and temporal pattern of muscle recruitment. (2) Tetanic post-severing activation would lead to indiscrim-
inate activation of the axons in such connective (although our electrophysiological experiments demon-
strate that such activation leads to skin bunching and papillae expression, the shape is not like that seen
in alive animals, neither controls nor those with stuck papillae phenotype; Figures 1, 2A, and 2D; Movies
S1C and S2A). (3) Tetanic post-severing activation would also affect other axons, but we have never seen
chromatophores stay expanded after severing the pallial nerve. A feasible alternative is that at the time
of the nerve dissection, papillary muscles were in a state that allows long-term maintenance of tone
through slow relaxation, akin to that achieved by the smooth muscles of vertebrates through a ‘‘latch-
bridge’’ mechanism (Dillon et al., 1981) or the smooth muscles of bivalve mollusks through a ‘‘catch’’ mech-
anism (Twarog, 1976). Catch muscles have been well studied in bivalves (Andruchov et al., 2006; Andru-
chova et al., 2005; Ishii et al., 1986), a molluscan lineage, but have not been reported in cephalopods.
Such catch-like ability may have evolved independently in cephalopods and may differ substantially
from that of bivalves. Next, we investigated which neurotransmitters control papillae expression, as these
may provide clues about their mechanism of action.
Neuropeptide and Neuromodulators Controlling Papillae Expression
We selected the neurotransmitters/neuromodulators to be tested by their role in the catch state of bivalve
muscles or on cephalopod chromatophore activation. They were diluted in seawater and injected locally
and subcutaneously in the most basal layers of the skin. The injection site was easily recognized, as the in-
jected fluid created a bolus that dissipated slowly. Control injections of sea water did not produce a
response (ex vivo Figure 3A; in vivo Figure S3). To determine the functional concentration, compounds
were tested at various concentrations (see Table S1). The lowest concentration that produced a reproduc-
ible response is reported below.
We first tested compounds with known excitatory roles: L-glutamate ((2S)-2-aminopentanedioic
acid), FMRFamide (H-Phe-Met-Arg-Phe-NH2), and acetylcholine (2-acetyloxyethyl(trimethyl)azanium).
L-Glutamate produces fast chromatophore expansion in all tested cephalopod species (Florey et al.,
1985; Messenger, 2001; Di Cosmo et al., 2006). As expected, L-glutamate caused chromatophore expan-
sion (1 mM; n = 2), but it also elicited skin buckling and expression of small dorsal papillae (10 mM; n = 4;
Figure 3B). Thus, L-glutamate appears to be a generalized fast excitatory neurotransmitter in skin muscles,
including papillae. In contrast to L-glutamate, FMRFamide affects only octopus and cuttlefish chromato-
phores, and the response is slower (Loi and Tublitz, 2000; Messenger, 2001). FMRFamide is known to elicit
catch state in bivalve muscle (Painter, 1982), and at a lower concentration, FMRFamide was sufficient to
elicit strong chromatophore expansion, skin buckling, and expression of papillae (100 mM; n = 9; Figure 3C);
iScience 1, 24–34, March 23, 2018
27
 even 10 mM FMRFamide elicited a minor skin bunching response (n = 1; Table S1). Because acetylcholine
can also induce catch in bivalve muscles, we also tested this compound. Just like FMRFamide, acetylcholine
produced a slow but constant onset (several seconds) of chromatophore expansion, and the leucophore
layer that sits at the tip of the small papillae took a spherical appearance (10 mM, n = 1; Figure 3D). We refer
to this phenomenon as ‘‘white caps’’ (Figure 3E). Although a higher concentration was necessary (100 mM),
acetylcholine also induced skin bunching (n = 2; Table S1).
The results thus far pointed to FMRFamide, acetylcholine, and L-glutamate as the main papillae neuro-
transmitters. As serotonin (3-(2-aminoethyl)-1H-indol-5-ol; 5-HT) is known to release the catch in bivalves,
Figure 3. Pharmacological Stimulation and Inhibition of Papillae
(A) Small dorsal mantle papillae in ex vivo mantle preparation before injection and 2.5 min after injection of seawater.
(B) Small dorsal mantle papillae ex vivo before injection of 10 mM L-glutamate and 2.5 min after injection.
(C) Small dorsal mantle papillae ex vivo before injection of 100 mM FMRFamide and 2.5 min after injection.
(D) Small dorsal mantle papillae ex vivo before injection of 10 mM acetylcholine (ACh) and 2.5 min after injection.
(E) Higher magnification of small dorsal mantle papilla in a control preparation and a different small dorsal papilla after
acetylcholine (ACh) injection. Expressed papillae shape outlined by a dashed line.
(F) Major lateral mantle papillae shown 20 min after in vivo subcutaneous injection of serotonin (5-HT, 1 mM) with adjacent
control papillae. Red circles here and below indicate injected papillae.
(G) The same major lateral mantle papillae shown in F, here 7 hr post injection, and a second serotonin injection in
neighboring papilla 10 min prior.
(H) Major lateral mantle papillae treated with methysergide injection (10% dilution of 28.29 mM); solid arrow indicates
affected papillae, empty arrows indicate neighboring unaffected unexpressed papillae.
(I) Two papillae injected with 1% methysergide. Solid arrows, treatment; open arrow, control papillae.
(J) Higher magnification of skin near methysergide injection (10% dilution of 28.29 mM). See also Figure S3 and Movie S3.
28
iScience 1, 24–34, March 23, 2018
 Figure 4. F-Actin Labeling of Skin Muscle Layers with Phalloidin
(A) Skin overview. Cuttlefish skin is composed of several layers. Muscles are found in the muscular dermal layer and the two sub-dermal layers. Red labeling is
phalloidin-DyLight554 stain. The pictures of the connective layer and basal membrane were taken with longer exposure to detect their structure from
autofluorescence. All scale bars, 200 mm. *, papilla.
(B) Phalloidin labeling of obliquely striated chromatophore muscles. Squares indicate areas shown at higher magnification.
iScience 1, 24–34, March 23, 2018
29
 we injected 5-HT in vivo to make sure that the papillae were being expressed naturally by the animal. Se-
rotonin (1 mM, n = 4) suppressed excitation to the point where no papillary bump was visible near the site of
injection, even when all other papillae around it were fully expressed (Figures 3F and 3G). The effect was
clearly visible within 10 minutes of the injection, complete abolition continued for over 20 minutes, and
papillary expression was still not completely recovered 7 hours later. As a control, we injected methyser-
gide ((6aR,9R)-N-[(2S)-1-hydroxybutan-2-yl]-4,7-dimethyl-6,6a,8,9-tetrahydroindolo[4,3-fg]quinoline-9-car-
boxamide;(Z)-but-2-enedioic acid; undiluted and diluted 50%, 10%, and 1% of methysergide maleate salt,
28.29 mM; n = 13), a strong inhibitor of the 5-HT pathway. Methysergide injection left expressed papillae in
a catch-like state, as they were left in the expressed position for over an hour, even when the rest of the
animal was not expressing any papillae (10%; Figure 3H; n = 3; 1%; Figure 3I; n = 5). Although 5-HT also
relaxes chromatophore muscles (Messenger, 2001), blocking 5-HT with methysergide at lower concentra-
tions did not result in continuously expanded chromatophores (10%; Figure 3J; n = 3) but maintained
papillae expression.
The neurotransmitter/neuromodulator results were consistent with the substances expected to induce and
release a catch-like state but do not provide a definitive answer because muscle structure is fundamental
for catch. For example, mollusk catch muscles are smooth (Twarog, 1967c). Although chromatophore mus-
cles are sensitive to acetylcholine, FMRFamide, and serotonin, they are also striated and do not display a
catch-like phenotype. In chromatophores, FMRFamide produces a slower expansion and retraction dy-
namic than L-glutamate and each transmitter acts independently (Loi and Tublitz, 2000). It is known that
cuttlefish have both striated and smooth-like muscles in their two tentacles, and the mix is thought to pro-
vide fast tentacle actuation but help maintain them coiled when not in use (Grimaldi et al., 2004). To eluci-
date if cuttlefish skin has a mix of smooth and striated muscles, we applied phalloidin, an f-actin label. After
labeling, the different skin layers became clearly visible, which allowed us to separate them manually (Fig-
ure 4A) and inspect them with high detail with a two-photon microscope. As expected from previous re-
ports, the phalloidin label showed oblique striations in the chromatophore muscles (Bell et al., 2013) as
well as the papillary retractor and circular erector muscles (Allen et al., 2014) (Figures 4B and 4C). However,
within the same optical slices (in sub-dermal layer a), we found that the internal volume of the papillae
(referred to as papillae core) was made of smooth horizontal dermal muscles (Figure 4C). Although it is
true that some striations may be difficult to see owing to muscle orientation, the lack of striations in hori-
zontal dermal muscles crossing the papillae and their presence in the retractors/circular erectors were
consistent in all the preparations that we imaged (n = 3). Similarly and consistently across preparations,
we found that the muscles of the sub-dermal layer 1 are smooth, but those of sub-dermal layer 2 are striated
(Figures 4D and 4E).
Our denervation study points toward a catch-like system for maintenance of papillae form. We have
also carried out electrophysiological experiments whereby we stimulated fascicles of dermal nerves
(See Transparent Methods), which demonstrated the presence of a fast system (<1 s) for papillae
expression and retraction (Figures S2E and S2F, Movie S4). It is noteworthy that stimulating the papillae
for longer than 30 s leaves them partially expressed for many minutes. This lingering expression is also
similar to the bivalve catch muscle, where the sustained contraction (catch mode) can be elicited with
DC stimulation (Twarog, 1967b, 1967a, 1967c). The application of neuroactive substances is consistent
with both the catch process of bivalves and non-catch muscle of cephalopods, and the microscopy re-
sults show that the cuttlefish skin is composed of several muscular layers, with both striated and smooth
muscles.
DISCUSSION
Octopus and cuttlefish can neurally control the dynamic morphing of their skin from flat 2D (i.e., no visible
bump) to physical 3D texture in different grades of expression. Individual papillae in the living cuttlefish can
be fully expanded (or retracted) in less than 1 s (Panetta et al., 2017). This ability allows these benthic an-
imals to be cryptic on substrates or masquerade as nearby objects, such as kelp, algae, or coral (Panetta
et al., 2017). Each species has a fixed repertoire of papillae shapes, and the biomechanical mechanism
Figure 4. Continued
(C) Phalloidin labeling of the dermal muscular layer a shows a mix of obliquely striated (retractor and circular erector papillary muscles; red squares) and
smooth (horizontal muscles of papillary core; cyan square) muscles. Arrows indicate striations on muscles.
(D) Sub-dermal layer 1 is composed of smooth fibers running along the longitudinal axis of the animal.
(E) Sub-dermal muscular layer 2 is composed of obliquely striated fibers running across the animal. See also Figure S2 and Movie S4.
30
iScience 1, 24–34, March 23, 2018
 of action is that of a muscular hydrostat (Allen et al., 2013). Here we investigated the neural basis of con-
trolling the different muscles in this unique ‘‘hydrostatic system’’ and found that (1) papillae signals target-
ing the mantle are routed through the stellate ganglion, (2) motoneurons that control the majority of the
mantle papillae originate in the stellate ganglion and exit this peripheral relay center via the fin connective
(made up of approximately five nerves) to re-join the fin nerve, and (3) this connective carries neural activity
that also controls overall skin tension but not chromatophore excitation. By backfilling this connective, we
showed three neuron populations. The majority of the fibers labeled formed population 1, with their cell
bodies located in the ventral medial wall of the stellate ganglion. Population 2 consists of a small number
of cell bodies in the dorsal-medial wall. Because the dorsal wall hosts sensory neurons, these are likely pres-
sure receptors from the skin (e.g., Young, 1972). Population 3 is made of a small number of fibers that
continue through into the pallial nerve (also found in squid [Gonzalez-Bellido et al., 2014]). We argue
that the papillary motoneurons are those of population 1 for the following reason: it is well known that if
following animal death one does not remove the connective sheaths surrounding the ganglia quickly to
expose the ganglion to oxygenated water, the synapses within it start to fail (Choi et al., 2014; Colton
et al., 1992), with the consequent lack of motor output even when the pallial nerve is strongly stimulated.
This is known to be the case for the giant axon system and the iridescence system in squids (Gonzalez-
Bellido et al., 2014). We found this to also be the case with papillae: stimulation of the pallial nerve causes
papillary expression straight after dissection but fails to do so shortly after (�10 min), whereas chromato-
phore expression due to pallial nerve stimulation continues reliably for hours (Figures S2A–S2D).
Hence, the mantle papillae motoneurons in cuttlefish and the mantle iridescence motoneurons in squid
appear to follow homologous pathways (see Gonzalez-Bellido et al., 2014) and share a similar location for
cell bodies in the stellate ganglion. In the mantle of the two species studied these systems are mutually
exclusive; Sepia officinalis cuttlefish have papillary control without tunable iridescence (acetylcholine
application or electrical stimulation has no observable effect on their iridescence; data not shown), whereas
Doryteuthis pealeii squid have neurally tunable iridescence (Wardill et al., 2012) but lack papillae (Hanlon,
1982). Therefore, an evolutionary question arises. It is parsimonious to propose that the two systems
diverged from a common ancestor that already possessed a peripheral nervous system for controlling
skin tension. Alternatively, did cuttlefish gain skin texture control by hijacking an existing iridescence control
circuit? This second explanation is also plausible because squids are thought to be the basal coleoid group
(Sutton et al., 2016). This question could be answered by studying papillae versus iridescence control in key
coleoid species. For now, the results presented here advance our knowledge about the control circuit for
these two skin elements and provide a novel framework in which to investigate the neural circuitry and brain
areas that control them.
Our accidental finding that papillae expression can be maintained in the absence of descending neural
input led us to investigate whether it is feasible that some papillae muscles could operate in a catch-like
state. Catch was originally described in bivalves, where it allows the anterior byssus retractor muscles to
sustain a contraction that resists stretch without the need for continuous stimulation from motoneurons
(Siegman et al., 1998). The catch mechanism of bivalves is well studied; a giant thick filament, known as
twitchin, binds to thin filaments when unphosphorylated, thereby completely bypassing any actin-myosin
cycling (Funabara et al., 2007). Catch allows posterior Mytilus adductor muscles to keep their bivalve shell
firmly closed with a state of low energy consumption (Galler et al., 2010). In this regard, the presence of a
catch-like mechanism in papillae would be highly beneficial, because papillae are muscular hydrostats in
continuous use (Allen et al., 2009, 2010, 2014) and thus must incur considerable energy expense. The
micro-muscles that form the papillae are too small and intricate to be isolated and permeated for exper-
imental tests as undertaken with bivalve muscles. Thus, to test whether the catch-like state of the papillae is
likely to follow the same mechanism as the catch of bivalve abductors, we first focused on the active com-
pounds that control them. Acetylcholine has been previously demonstrated to excite bivalve catch muscles
(Ishii et al., 1986; Hirata et al., 1989; Siegman et al., 1998), and FMRFamide has been demonstrated to
induce contraction in the anterior byssus retractor muscle, a catch muscle of Mytilus (Hirata et al., 1989).
It is therefore exciting that we found papillary muscles to be very sensitive to FMRFamide and Acetylcho-
line, in addition to L-glutamate, which drives a fast skin response. In addition, papillae seem to share the
same sensitivity to FMRFamide that bivalve catch muscles do, as FMRFamide contracture is 3- to 30-fold
lower threshold than acetylcholine (Painter, 1982). In bivalves, although FMRFamide seems to be more
potent, it elicits less forceful contractions. We also found that the effect of FMRFamide and acetylcholine
on papillae contraction was not identical. For example, only acetylcholine produces papillae ‘‘white-caps’’
in cuttlefish (i.e., forms the leucophore layer into a sphere). It is possible that the white-cap phenotype here
iScience 1, 24–34, March 23, 2018
31
 reported results from activation of the specialized circular muscles located at the base of each leucophore
mass (Allen et al., 2014). Interestingly, acetylcholine is the only compound that elicits iridescence in squid
skin (Ma
¨thger et al., 2004; Cooper et al., 1990; Hanlon et al., 1990), and Wardill et al. (2012) reported that the
iridescent splotches in squid (called iridophores) are nested on a set of micro-muscles whose role is yet to
be determined. It will also be interesting to know if these iridophore muscles also display catch-like
properties and whether they have any effect on persistence of the iridescence signal when electrically
stimulated.
We also investigated the release mechanism for the catch-like state. In bivalves, once twitchin is phosphor-
ylated by serotonin, the catch is released and relaxation occurs (Siegman et al., 1998; Hooper et al., 2008).
Our results are consistent as we showed that (1) 5-HT relaxes the papillae completely and (2) inhibiting 5-HT
action through the injection of methysergide (Ono et al., 1987) resulted in papillae that remain expressed in
the catch-like state for several hours, something not observed in chromatophores. Taken together, the
evidence shows that the main neurotransmitters of the bivalve catch muscle also control papillae expres-
sion. The presence of a tension-sustaining mechanism in cuttlefish skin is supported by the f-actin labeling,
which demonstrated that the papillary core and its sub-dermal base contain smooth muscles. However, a
catch-like system composed of smooth muscle cannot be the only mechanism of papillae expression
because (1) L-glutamate, the fast-action chromatophore excitatory neurotransmitter (Di Cosmo et al.,
2006), also has some effect on papillae expression and (2) papillary retractors and circular erectors are
striated muscles. We propose that in cuttlefish these muscles are activated by L-glutamate, allowing the
animal to immediately express and retract the papillae. Indeed, by stimulating fascicles of nerves that
were within the basal layers of the skin, we were able to rapidly express and retract papillae (<1 s, Movie S4).
An interpretation of our results is that the striated muscles are ideally located to implement the fast expres-
sion/retraction (as previously proposed [Allen et al., 2014]), whereas the smooth muscles are ideally posi-
tioned to maintain the papillae shape (base and core), and are responsible for the catch-like phenotype
observed. To determine if the catch mechanism of bivalves and the catch-like properties here observed
in cuttlefish skin share a mechanism, future experiments could employ calcium imaging to investigate
the Ca2+ dynamics during the catch-like state. To finally confirm if such smooth types are in nature the
same as the classic catch of bivalves, it would be necessary to label them against the twitchin isoform con-
taining the D1 domain that is specifically expressed in catch muscles (Kusaka et al., 2008). However, it is
possible that the catch-like phenotype observed here in a cephalopod is driven by mechanisms other
than the D1 domain of twitchin. For example, even the twitchin from striated scallop muscles exhibits
some level of ‘‘catchability’’ (defined as the ability to bind thick filaments tightly to thin filaments), and sim-
ply increasing its expression level could lead to catch (Tsutsui et al., 2007). In addition, smooth catch mus-
cles also have a catch-specific isoform of myosin (Shaffer and Kier, 2012). Moreover, cuttlefish may have
evolved a novel mechanism to hold the tension for prolonged periods. For example, nitric oxide has
been implicated in developing tension in chromatophore muscles with a much slower time course than
glutamate on its own (Mattiello et al., 2010).
Papillary catch muscles are an interesting example of how evolution has adapted the combined use of
smooth and striated muscles in different taxonomic classes (bivalves lock their shells closed versus ceph-
alopod express skin elements for camouflage and communication). Much is left to be discovered about
papillary control. Understanding the interplay between the fast- and slow-acting mechanisms could pro-
vide further bio-inspiration for engineering an industrial dynamic material (e.g., Pikul et al., 2017). In
summary, we propose that, in addition to a fast system for expression and retraction of papillae, coleoid
cephalopods have smooth dermal muscles with catch-like properties, which could provide an energy-effi-
cient means of maintaining papillae expression for long periods of camouflage, and that the motoneurons
for papillae and iridescence take the same nerve pathways, with cell bodies located in similar stellate gan-
glion regions and therefore likely evolved from a common coleoid ancestor.
METHODS
All methods can be found in the accompanying Transparent Methods supplemental file.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes Transparent Methods, three figures, one table, and four movies and
can be found with this article online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2018.01.001.
32
iScience 1, 24–34, March 23, 2018
 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was funded by an AFOSR grant no. FA9550-14-1-0134, Isaac Newton Trust/Wellcome Trust ISSF/
University of Cambridge Joint Research Grant (097814/Z/11/Z) to P.T.G-B., and a Biotechnology and Bio-
logical Sciences Research Council David Phillips Fellowship (BBSRC, BB/L024667/1) to T.J.W. We thank
MBL Equipment Resources, MBL Apparatus Department, and Zeiss Microscopes for assistance with
equipment. We thank the MBL Central Microscopy facility for providing imaging resources and the
Aquatic Resources Division of MBL for supplying squid. We thank Kate Feller for helping prepare elec-
trodes for the filling and stimulation of nerves and Donovan Ventimiglia for fruitful discussions on logistical
challenges.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
P.T.G-B., T.J.W., and R.T.H. designed the experiments, with A.T.S. designing the pharmacology experi-
ments. P.T.G-B. discovered the catch-like phenotype and carried out all dissections with assistance from
A.T.S. P.T.G-B. and T.J.W. performed the imaging. P.T.G-B., A.T.S., and T.J.W. performed the experi-
ments. All authors contributed to critical discussions and the writing of the manuscript.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
Received: June 21, 2017
Revised: January 10, 2018
Accepted: January 22, 2018
Published: February 15, 2018; corrected online: April 4, 2018
REFERENCES
Allen, J.J., Bell, G.R., Kuzirian, A.M., and Hanlon,
R.T. (2013). Cuttlefish skin papilla morphology
suggests a muscular hydrostatic function for rapid
changeability. J. Morphol. 274, 645–656.
Allen, J.J., Bell, G.R., Kuzirian, A.M., Velankar,
S.S., and Hanlon, R.T. (2014). Comparative
morphology of changeable skin papillae in
octopus and cuttlefish. J. Morphol. 275, 371–390.
Allen, J.J., Ma
¨thger, L.M., Barbosa, A., Buresch,
K.C., Sogin, E., Schwartz, J., Chubb, C., and
Hanlon, R.T. (2010). Cuttlefish dynamic
camouflage: responses to substrate choice and
integration of multiple visual cues. Proc. Biol. Sci.
277, 1031–1039.
Allen, J.J., Mathger, L.M., Barbosa, A., and
Hanlon, R.T. (2009). Cuttlefish use visual cues to
control three-dimensional skin papillae for
camouflage. J. Comp. Physiol. A Neuroethol.
Sens. Neural Behav. Physiol. 195, 547–555.
Andruchov, O., Andruchova, O., and Galler, S.
(2006). The catch state of mollusc catch muscle is
established during activation: experiments on
skinned fibre preparations of the anterior byssus
retractor muscle of Mytilus edulis L. using the
myosin inhibitors orthovanadate and
blebbistatin. J. Exp. Biol. 209, 4319–4328.
Andruchova, O., Hopflinger, M.C., Andruchov,
O., and Galler, S. (2005). No effect of twitchin
phosphorylation on the rate of myosin head
detachment in molluscan catch muscle: are
myosin heads involved in the catch state?
Pflugers Arch. 450, 326–334.
Bell, G.R.R., Kuzirian, A.M., Senft, S.L., Ma
¨thger,
L.M., Wardill, T.J., and Hanlon, R.T. (2013).
Chromatophore radial muscle fibers anchor in
flexible squid skin. Invertebrate Biol. 132,
120–132.
Choi, S., Yu, E., Rabello, G., Merlo, S., Zemmar, A.,
Walton, K.D., Moreno, H., Moreira, J.E., Sugimori,
M., and Llinas, R.R. (2014). Enhanced synaptic
transmission at the squid giant synapse by
artificial seawater based on physically modified
saline. Front. Synaptic Neurosci. 6, 2.
Colton, C.A., Colton, J.S., and Gilbert, D.L. (1992).
Oxygen dependency of synaptic transmission at
the squid Loligo pealei giant synapse. Comp.
Biochem. Physiol. Comp. Physiol. 102, 279–283.
Cooper, K.M., Hanlon, R.T., and Budelmann, B.U.
(1990). Physiological color change in squid
iridophores II. Ultrastructural mechanisms in
Lolliguncula brevis. Cell Tissue Res. 259, 15–24.
Di Cosmo, A., Di Cristo, C., and Messenger, J.B.
(2006). L-Glutamate and its ionotropic receptors
in the nervous system of cephalopods. Curr.
Neuropharmacol. 4, 305–312.
Dillon, P.F., Aksoy, M.O., Driska, S.P., and
Murphy, R.A. (1981). Myosin phosphorylation and
the cross-bridge cycle in arterial smooth-muscle.
Science 211, 495–497.
Florey, E., Dubas, F., and Hanlon, R.T. (1985).
Evidence for L-glutamate as a transmitter
substance of motoneurons innervating squid
chromatophore muscles. Comp. Biochem.
Physiol. C Toxicol. Pharmacol. 82, 259–268.
Funabara, D., Hamamoto, C., Yamamoto, K.,
Inoue, A., Ueda, M., Osawa, R., Kanoh, S.,
Hartshorne, D.J., Suzuki, S., and Watabe, S.
(2007). Unphosphorylated twitchin forms a
complex with actin and myosin that may
contribute to tension maintenance in catch.
J. Exp. Biol. 210, 4399–4410.
Galler, S., Litzlbauer, J., Kross, M., and
Grassberger, H. (2010). The highly efficient
holding function of the mollusc ’catch’ muscle is
not based on decelerated myosin head cross-
bridge cycles. Proc. Biol. Sci. 277, 803–808.
Gaston, M.R., and Tublitz, N.J. (2004). Peripheral
innervation patterns and central distribution of fin
chromatophore motoneurons in the cuttlefish
Sepia officinalis. J. Exp. Biol. 207, 3089–3098.
Gonzalez-Bellido, P.T., Wardill, T.J., Buresch,
K.C., Ulmer, K.M., and Hanlon, R.T. (2014).
Expression of squid iridescence depends on
environmental luminance and peripheral
ganglion control. J. Exp. Biol. 217, 850–858.
Grimaldi, A., Tettamanti, G., Brivio, M.F.,
Valvassori, R., and De Eguileor, M. (2004).
Differentiation of slow and fast fibers in tentacles
of Sepia officinalis (Mollusca). Dev. Growth Differ.
46, 181–193.
Hanlon, R.T. (1982). The functional organization of
chromatophores and iridescent cells in the body
patterning of Loligo plei (Cephalopoda,
Myopsida). Malacologia 23, 89–119.
Hanlon, R.T., Cooper, K.M., Budelmann, B.U., and
Pappas, T.C. (1990). Physiological color change in
squid iridophores I. Behavior, morphology and
pharmacology in Lolliguncula brevis. Cell Tissue
Res. 259, 3–14.
Hirata, T., Kubota, I., Imada, M., Muneoka, Y., and
Kobayashi, M. (1989). Effects of the catch-relaxing
peptide on molluscan muscles. Comp. Biochem.
Physiol. C Toxicol. Pharmacol. 92, 283–288.
iScience 1, 24–34, March 23, 2018
33
 Hooper, S.L., Hobbs, K.H., and Thuma, J.B.
(2008). Invertebrate muscles: thin and thick
filament structure; molecular basis of contraction
and its regulation, catch and asynchronous
muscle. Prog. Neurobiol. 86, 72–127.
Ishii, N., Takakuwa, T., and Takahashi, K. (1986).
Isolation of acetylcholine-sensitive smooth
muscle cells from a molluscan catch muscle.
Comp. Biochem. Physiol. C Toxicol. Pharmacol.
84, 1–6.
Izumi, M., Sweeney, A.M., Demartini, D., Weaver,
J.C., Powers, M.L., Tao, A., Silvas, T.V., Kramer,
R.M., Crookes-Goodson, W.J., Mathger, L.M.,
et al. (2010). Changes in reflectin protein
phosphorylation are associated with dynamic
iridescence in squid. J. R. Soc. Interface 7,
549–560.
Kusaka, M., Ikeda, D., Funabara, D., Hartshorne,
D.J., and Watabe, S. (2008). The occurrence of
tissue-specific twitchin isoforms in the mussel
Mytilus galloprovincialis. Fish Sci. 74, 677–686.
Loi, P.K., and Tublitz, N.J. (2000). Roles of
glutamate and FMRFamide-related peptides at
the chromatophore neuromuscular junction in
the cuttlefish, Sepia officinalis. J. Comp. Neurol.
420, 499–511.
Marshall, N.J., and Messenger, J.B. (1996).
Colour-blind camouflage. Nature 382, 408–409.
Ma
¨thger, L.M., Barbosa, A., Miner, S., and
Hanlon, R.T. (2006). Color blindness and contrast
perception in cuttlefish (Sepia officinalis)
determined by a visual sensorimotor assay. Vis.
Res. 46, 1746–1753.
Ma
¨thger, L.M., Collins, T.F.T., and Lima, P.A.
(2004). The role of muscarinic receptors and
intracellular Ca2+ in the spectral reflectivity
changes of squid iridophores. J. Exp. Biol. 207,
1759–1769.
Ma
¨thger, L.M., Shashar, N., and Hanlon, R.T.
(2009). Do cephalopods communicate using
polarized light reflections from their skin? J. Exp.
Biol. 212, 2133–2140.
Mattiello, T., Fiore, G., Brown, E.R., D’ischia, M.,
and Palumbo, A. (2010). Nitric oxide mediates the
glutamate-dependent pathway for
neurotransmission in Sepia officinalis
chromatophore organs. J. Biol. Chem. 285,
24154–24163.
Messenger, J.B. (2001). Cephalopod
chromatophores: neurobiology and natural
history. Biol. Rev. 76, 473–528.
Ono,H.,Miyamoto,M.,Kobayashi,M.,andFukuda,
H. (1987). 5-Hydroxytryptamine agonistic action of
methysergide and the absence of supersensitivity
to 5-HT agonists in spinal flexor reflexes in rats.
Neuropharmacology 26, 1371–1375.
Painter, S.D. (1982). FMRFamide catch
contractures of a molluscan smooth muscle:
pharmacology, ionic dependence, and cyclic
nucleotides. J. Comp. Physiol. 148, 491–501.
Panetta, D., Buresch, K., and Hanlon, R.T. (2017).
Dynamic masquerade with morphing three-
dimensional skin in cuttlefish. Biol. Lett. 13,
20170070.
Pikul, J.H., Li, S., Bai, H., Hanlon, R.T., Cohen, I.,
and Shepherd, R.F. (2017). Stretchable surfaces
with programmable 3D texture morphing for
synthetic camouflaging skins. Science 358,
210–214.
Shaffer, J.F., and Kier, W.M. (2012). Muscular
tissues of the squid Doryteuthis pealeii express
identical myosin heavy chain isoforms: an
alternative mechanism for tuning contractile
speed. J. Exp. Biol. 215, 239–246.
Siegman, M.J., Funabara, D., Kinoshita, S.,
Watabe, S., Hartshorne, D.J., and Butler, T.M.
(1998). Phosphorylation of a twitchin-related
protein controls catch and calcium sensitivity
of force production in invertebrate
smooth muscle. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 95,
5383–5388.
Stubbs, A.L., and Stubbs, C.W. (2016). Spectral
discrimination in color blind animals via
chromatic aberration and pupil shape. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 113, 8206–8211.
Sutton, M., Perales-Raya, C., and Gilbert, I. (2016).
A phylogeny of fossil and living neocoleoid
cephalopods. Cladistics 32, 297–307.
Tanner, A.R., Fuchs, D., Winkelmann, I.E.,
Gilbert, M.T., Pankey, M.S., Ribeiro, A.M.,
Kocot, K.M., Halanych, K.M., Oakley, T.H.,
Da Fonseca, R.R., et al. (2017). Molecular
clocks indicate turnover and diversification of
modern coleoid cephalopods during
the Mesozoic Marine Revolution. Proc.
Biol. Sci. 284, https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.
2016.2818.
Tsutsui, Y., Yoshio, M., Oiwa, K., and Yamada, A.
(2007). Striated muscle twitchin of bivalves has
"catchability", the ability to bind thick filaments
tightly to thin filaments, representing the catch
state. J. Mol. Biol. 365, 325–332.
Twarog, B.M. (1967a). Excitation of Mytilus
smooth muscle. J. Physiol. 192, 857–868.
Twarog, B.M. (1967b). Factors influencing
contraction and catch in Mytilus smooth muscle.
J. Physiol. 192, 847–856.
Twarog, B.M. (1967c). The regulation of catch in
molluscan muscle. J. Gen. Physiol. 50 (Suppl ),
157–169.
Twarog, B.M. (1976). Aspects of smooth muscle
function in molluscan catch muscle. Physiol. Rev.
56, 829–838.
Wardill, T.J., Gonzalez-Bellido, P.T., Crook, R.J.,
and Hanlon, R.T. (2012). Neural control of
tuneable skin iridescence in squid. Proc. Biol. Sci.
279, 4243–4252.
Young, J.Z. (1972). The organization of a
cephalopod ganglion. Philos. Trans. R. Soc.
Lond. B Biol. Sci. 263, 409–429.
34
iScience 1, 24–34, March 23, 2018
 ISCI, Volume 1
Supplemental Information
Neural Control of Dynamic 3-Dimensional
Skin Papillae for Cuttlefish Camouflage
Paloma T. Gonzalez-Bellido, Alexia T. Scaros, Roger T. Hanlon, and Trevor J. Wardill
 Supplemental Information 
 
Figure S1. Additional nerves severed and their observed phenotypes, Related to Figure 1. 
Fin nerve severed on the animal’s left side (right side of the image) results in chromatophore 
inhibition in the posterior two regions of the mantle, but full papillary expression ipsilateral 
to the cut (see equivalent response in Figure 1F). Note that the middle mantle skin region, 
lateral to the white square could be innervated by ether the small stellar nerves, medial to 
the stellate (indicated by small orange lines, potentially uncut in this animal) and/or 
innervated via small branches leaving the fin nerve, diagrammatically represented as small 
green nerves branching from fin nerve stump. The fin connective and the stellate branches 
severed on the animal’s right side (left side of the image) abolishes chromatophore expression 
in the anterior region and complete inhibition of papillae expression (see equivalent response 
in Figure 1H).  
  
Figure S2. Electrophysiology activating expression of the chromatophores and papillae, 
Related to Figure 2 & 4. (A) Ex vivo mantle preparation before stimulation. (B) Biphasic 
electrical stimulation delivered for 6 seconds with 5V 50 Hz 600 µs pulses through the stellate 
connective causes chromatophore expansion in the anterior region, in addition to general 
skin bunching and small papillae expression (as evidenced by browning of the tissue, a result 
of increased chromatophore density caused by the skin bunching). (C) Ex vivo mantle 
preparation before stimulation. (D) Biphasic electrical stimulation was delivered for 6 seconds 
with 5V 10 Hz 600 µs pulses through the fin nerve causes chromatophore expansion in 
posterior regions and fin. (E) Diagrammatic representation of the suction electrode location 
on a fascicle of a dermal nerve (orange). (F) Papilla expression (i) before electrical stimulation 
and (ii) during electrical stimulation. Papilla expression driven by stimulation of a different 
fascicle of the same dermal nerve (iii) before electrical stimulation and (iv) papilla retraction 
during electrical stimulation. Note that chromatophores were also activated because dermal 
nerves also carry chromatophore motoneurons.  
  
Figure S3. Seawater injections did not activate papillae, Related to Figure 3. Control injection 
of seawater in vivo did not result in any change in behavior, chromatophore, or papillary 
expression.  
 
 
 Supplementary Table 
Table S1. Determining optimal neurotransmitter concentration for pharmacological 
injections, Related to Figure 3. 
ex vivo  
(mantle tissue) 
10 µM 
100 µM 
1 mM 
10 mM 
L-Glutamate 
No chromatophore 
change 
No papillae expression 
No/minor skin bunching, 
 n=4 
Minor chromatophore 
activity 
Minor skin buckling 
No papillae expression 
n=1 
Minor chromatophore 
activity 
Small dorsal papillae 
expression 
Major skin bunching, 
n=2 
Minor chromatophore 
activity 
Possible papillae expression 
masked by major skin 
bunching 
n=4 
Acetylcholine 
Chromatophore activity 
Papillae expression 
White caps 
No skin bunching,  
n=1 
Chromatophore activity 
Papillae expression 
White caps 
Minor skin bunching, 
n=2 
Minor chromatophore 
activity 
(*probably injected in a 
skin layer too deep) 
n=1 
Chromatophore activity 
Papillae expression 
White caps 
Minor skin bunching, 
n=5 
FMRFamide 
No chromatophore 
change 
No papillae expression 
Minor skin bunching, not 
sustained 
n=1 
No chromatophore change 
Small and medium sized 
papillae expression, 
noticeable just before 
major skin bunching 
n=9 
N/A 
N/A 
in vivo 
10 µM 
100 µM 
1 mM 
10 mM 
FMRFamide 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
Dark chromatophore 
Papillae expressed 
Skin bunching 
n=3 
L-Glutamate 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
Dark chromatophore 
Small dorsal papillae 
expression 
Skin bunching 
n=3 
Acetylcholine 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
Dark chromatophore 
Papillary expression 
White caps 
n=6 
Serotonin 
N/A 
N/A 
Papillary inhibition; 
chromatophore 
inhibition 
n=4 
N/A 
Methysergide 
10ng/mL (100%) 
50% 
10% 
1% 
in vivo 
Constantly expressed 
chromatophores 
Papillae large 
n=2 
Constantly expressed 
chromatophores Papillae 
expressed 
n=3 
No change in 
chromatophores 
Excited papillae 
n=2 
No change in 
chromatophores 
Excited papillae 
n=5 
ex vivo 
Chromatophore 
inhibition 
Small dorsal papillae 
No skin bunching 
n=1 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
 
 
 
 Transparent Methods 
Key Resources Table 
REAGENT or RESOURCE 
SOURCE 
IDENTIFIER 
Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins 
L-glutamic acid monosodium salt monohydrate 
Sigma Aldrich 
G1626 
FMRFamide (Phe-Met-Arg-Phe) 
Sigma Aldrich 
P4898 
Acetylcholine chloride 
Sigma Aldrich 
A6625 
Serotonin 
Sigma Aldrich 
14927 
Methysergide maleate salt 
Sigma Aldrich  
M137 
Dimethyl sulfoxide 
Sigma Aldrich 
D2650 
Phalloidin-DyLight554 
New England 
Biolabs 
13054S 
Phalloidin-DyLight633 
ThermoFisher  
21840 
Lucifer yellow 
Invitrogen 
L-453 
Collagenase 
Roche 
10269638001 
Hyaluronidase 
Sigma-Aldrich 
H4272 
NeutrAvidin conjugated to DyLight 633 
Thermo Scientific 
22844 
anti-lucifer yellow antibody (rabbit IgG fraction; 
biotin-XX conjugate) 
Molecular Probes 
A-5751 
2,2′-thiodiethanol (TDE) 
Sigma-Aldrich 
88559 
Experimental Models: Organisms/Strains 
Sepia officinalis 
MBL 
Eggs collected from southern 
England, juveniles and adults 
cultured at MBL 
Doryteuthis pealeii 
MBL 
Wild caught 
Software and Algorithms 
Adobe Photoshop CC 2015 
Adobe Systems, 
Inc. 
http://www.adobe.com/products/
photoshop.html 
Microsoft PowerPoint 2010 
Microsoft Corp.  
https://products.office.com/en-
us/microsoft-powerpoint-2010 
FIJI ImageJ v3.2.1 
National Institute 
of Health 
Schindelin et al., 2012 
Vaa3D v3.1 
Peng et al. 2010 
http://www.alleninstitute.org/wh
at-we-do/brain-
science/research/products-
tools/vaa3d/ 
 
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled 
by the Lead Contact, Trevor Wardill (tjw79@cam.ac.uk).  
 
 
 
 Experimental model details 
Sepia officinalis  
Juvenile cuttlefish (Sepia officinalis, n=18) were cultured and maintained at the Marine 
Resources Center of the Marine Biological Laboratory in Woods Hole, Massachusetts, USA 
(Panetta et al., 2017). The sex of specimens was not determined as skin elements studied here 
are not known to be sexually dimorphic. Animals used were between 6 and 18 months old. 
For electrophysiology and pharmacology experiments, older animals (12-18 months old) were 
used for ethical reasons, as they had already been used in behavioral experiments in the 
laboratory and would die in the following year. Younger animals (6 months) were used for 
nerve backfilling, which was necessary for the tissue to be small enough to allow volumetric 
imaging. All animal procedures were in compliance with ARRIVE guidelines regulating animal 
experimentation. All efforts were made to minimize animal suffering and to reduce the 
number of animals used. To minimize stress, Sepia officinalis were held at low density (1–3 
cuttlefish) in each holding pen, made using divisions within large tanks. The tanks had a 
continuous high flow recirculating supply of seawater at 15±0.5°C. The cuttlefish were fed 
twice daily as juveniles with various live food and as adults with defrosted frozen shrimp. Only 
the animals that had fed well for at least 1 day, a sign of strength and drop in stress levels, 
were used for surgical experiments. For animal transfer, cuttlefish were caught with a bowl 
and carefully moved between enclosures. Any signs of stress displayed by the cuttlefish did 
not last more than a few seconds. Individuals were allocated randomly to multiple 
experimental groups to reduce number of animals used, in the case of pharmacological 
injection and papillae behavior experiments when such overlap did not result in an interaction 
and there were several days for the individuals to rest between experiments. Denervated 
animals (n=9) also participated in papillae expression behavioral experiments and 
pharmacological injections. 
Doryteuthis pealeii 
Adult Atlantic longfin squid (D. pealeii, aka. Loligo pealeii; n=2) were collected by brief 
trawling runs from the coastal waters near Woods Hole, Massachusetts. Animal housing and 
maintenance was previously reported (Wardill et al., 2012). The smallest available animals 
(15 cm long) were chosen, and the two ganglia used for the nerve backfills.  
Experimental methods 
Surgery 
For the experiments involving a fast denervation, the animals were lightly anesthetized by 
submersion in 1.5% EtOH in seawater for 30 s or until unresponsive, before being held by 
hand for a fast nerve section (< 5 seconds). For the experiments that required extensive in 
vivo dissection to expose nerves, the animals were first deeply anesthetized with 3% EtOH for 
30 seconds or until unresponsive, then placed in a recirculating oxygenated and Tris-buffered 
sea water bath (18°C) with 1.5% EtOH (with jets directed at their gills), for the duration of the 
surgery. Using small surgical scissors, the connective sheath was removed to expose the nerve 
of interest which was then severed with no harm to the surrounding nerves or tissue. For ex 
 vivo experiments, the animals were anesthetized by submersion in 3% EtOH until 
unresponsive, followed by decapitation and decerebration. All procedures carried out in this 
study comply with institutional recommendations for cephalopods. After surgery, all live 
animals were placed in recirculating cold-water tanks (18°C). Straight after surgery the 
animals were monitored for any sign of stress and photographed for effect on papillary 
expression, then left to heal for several days before pharmacological testing was conducted. 
The ex vivo tissues were quickly placed in Tris-buffered sea water bath (18°C) for experimental 
procedures.  
Stimulation experiments 
For ex vivo experiments, the mantle was fully opened and pinned to allow for full visualization 
of both stellate ganglia. Electrodes were placed on the ends of the cut nerve, and suction was 
applied so that several millimeters of nerve reached into the electrode. Electrophysiological 
settings were varied depending upon experimental setup, but most consisted of 5V (or 50V), 
10-50 Hz biphasic electrical stimulation of 600 µs pulses for a varying amount of time (6-50 
seconds). Videography was conducted as previously reported (Wardill et al., 2012). Once a 
nerve was connected to the stimulator (model 2100, A-M Systems), we coordinated electrical 
stimulation with videography (through the trinocular port of the stereo microscope), using a 
Power Lab data acquisition unit (PL3504) and Lab Chart software (AD Instruments) to trigger 
equipment, including a blue light-emitting diode (LED) light pulse (observable in the video or 
spectra measurements). High-definition video was collected at 30 frames per second with a 
Canon EOS 5D Mark II digital camera in manual mode.  
Papillae expression observations 
Cuttlefish were tested in an experimental chamber supplied with continually running 
seawater and surrounded by dark curtains to shield the animals from outside stimuli (Boal 
and Ni, 1996, King and Adamo, 2006, Allen et al., 2009). Cuttlefish were placed on black felt 
substrate inside a circular arena 24.5 cm in diameter and 8.0 cm tall. The experimental 
chamber was illuminated with a circular 40 W Fluorescent light source (Phillips CoolWhite; 
illumination at the level of the arena was approximately 1,000 lux). Before a trial began, each 
animal was allowed to acclimate to the experimental chamber. A cuttlefish was considered 
“settled” when it was sitting still on the substrate, maintaining a stable body pattern. This 
occurred within 5–20 min from introduction to the experimental chamber. Following 
acclimation, a five-megapixel digital photograph was taken remotely with a Nikon Coolpix 
5400 camera, as per Allen et al. (2009) for a pre-experimental control.  
Pharmacological experiments 
For a control, buffered sea water of the same pH, temperature, and salinity of the 
environment was injected subcutaneously at the same depth and angle as the chemicals. No 
papillary reaction occurred (see Figure S3). FMRFamide (Sigma Aldrich 4898) acetylcholine 
(Sigma Aldrich A6625), L-Glutamate (Sigma Aldrich, 49621), serotonin Sigma Aldrich, 14927, 
1 mM), Methysergide (Sigma Aldrich M137, 28.29 mM in DMSO) were injected at various 
concentrations. Because methysergide was dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), an in vivo 
 100% DMSO injection control performed. This showed that DMSO levels injected did not 
interfere with normal papillary function (ability to be expressed and relaxed, data not shown). 
Phalloidin muscle histochemistry 
Approximately 2 x 2 mm pieces of skin, previously fixed with 4% PFA for 12 hours, were cut 
with micro-scissors, then immersed in phalloidin-DyLight554 dissolved in methanol (New 
England Biolabs #13054S; 300 units ml–1) for 3 minutes at 25°C in the dark. The pieces where 
then picked up with tweezers and actively washed in PBS for 1 minute to remove unbound 
dye (PBS, 1x Phosphate buffer saline, Oxoid tablets # br0014g). This treatment rendered the 
muscle layers visible by fluorescence along the edges of the tissue. Under fluorescence light, 
viewing tissue through a stereomicroscope (Leica M165FC), layers were separated manually 
(using micro-scissors), according to their specific labelling patterns. The different layers were 
subsequently immersed in phalloidin-DyLight633 dissolved in methanol (ThermoFisher 
#21840; 300 units ml–1) for 3 - 5 mins. Tissue was then washed in PBS as above. A large drop 
of 80% glycerol (Fisher Scientific #G/0650/17) in PBS was placed on a cover slip (VWR, 22 x 40 
mm, # 630-1590), previously attached by nail varnish to a custom slide (with a 17 mm hole 
where the sample can be viewed from either side). The tissue was transferred to the glycerol 
drop and swirled around to encourage mixing. Another coverslip was placed on top, and a 
large bullet shaped fishing sinker used to hold the tissue flat and in place. Nail varnish was 
then used to seal the edges. The mounted samples were imaged with a Zeiss 25×, 0.8 NA, 
objective (Carl Zeiss 440852-9870-000; 600 µm working distance) corrected between oil and 
glycerol, a Newport Spectra-Physics InSight® DS+™ laser at 920 nm, and a Bruker (Prairie 
Technologies) in vivo 2-photon microscope using GFP (500-540 nm emission) and RFP (610-
650 nm emission) detection channels for detection of phalloidin-DyLight633. Minimal 
fluorescence from DyLight554 was detected by our 2-photon filter sets with 920 excitation, 
but DyLight554 could be viewed with our fluorescence ET RFP long pass filter sets.  
Fin connective back-fills with Lucifer yellow 
We back-filled the largest nerve that forms part of the fin connective with 3% Lucifer yellow 
(LY; Invitrogen, #L-453) using a similar procedure to Isaacson and Hedwig (Isaacson and 
Hedwig, 2017). The largest nerve of the fin connective was located, and supported with a 
metal spoon (bent needle). Water level was lowered, the nerve was dried with a piece of 
paper and protease crystals applied for 3 minutes. The nerve was then jet washed several 
times, dried with a piece of filter paper and then sucked immediately into a tight-fitting glass 
pipette containing the 3% LY and injected with current (between 50 and 100 µAmps) for 5 to 
10 minutes. In successful preparations, the dye could be seen traveling in the first minute. 
The stellate was then dissected out of the tissue, pinned in a dish, covered in sea water and 
left in the fridge overnight to allow the dye to travel further. At this point the ganglia where 
imaged with a fluorescence scope before being immersed in 4% paraformaldehyde in Tris-
buffered sea water, then triple rinsed and stored in Tris-buffered sea water at 4°C. 
Tissue was processed as described previously (Gonzalez-Bellido and Wardill, 2012). Briefly, 
the tissue was dehydrated and rehydrated in a series of steps to remove lipids and any 
trapped air, and then permeated with collagenase (Roche, 10269638001; 0.5 mg ml–1) and 
 hyaluronidase (Sigma-Aldrich, #H4272; 300 µg ml–1) to allow penetration. An anti-LY 
antibody (rabbit IgG fraction; biotin-XX conjugate; Molecular Probes, #A-5751) was used in 
conjunction with NeutrAvidin conjugated to DyLight 633 (Thermo Scientific, #22844) to shift 
the excitation into the red and away from tissue autofluorescence. Tissue was then cleared in 
thiodiethanol (TDE; Sigma-Aldrich, #88559) and mounted inside SYLGARD® 184 silicone 
elastomer chamber (inside a deep plastic container) and secured down with a cover glass. 
Automated imaging was undertaken with Bruker (Prairie Technologies) in vivo 2-photon 
microscope and a long-distance Olympus XLSLPLN25XGMP objective corrected for oil, a 
Newport Spectra-Physics InSight® DS+™ laser at 920 nm, and a Bruker (Prairie Technologies) 
In Vivo Microscope using GFP and RFP detection channels. Multiple tiled z-stacks were 
collected with brightness correction to compensate for increasing depth. Image z-stacks were 
stitched with the ‘Grid/Collection stitching’ plug-in within Fiji software, v. 1.46p (Preibisch et 
al., 2009). The NeurAvidin also labelled blood vessels in this tissue, which prevent us from 
tracing individual neurons, but different populations could be clearly seen. The stacks were 
viewed with freely available software Vaa3D, v. 3 (Peng et al., 2010) and Fiji.  
Quantification and statistical analysis 
Final figures were constructed using Adobe Photoshop CC 2015 (Adobe Systems, Inc., San 
Jose, CA, USA; http://www.adobe.com/products/photoshop.html) with adjustments for size, 
contrast, and brightness to ensure figure consistency without compromising scientific validity. 
Schematic diagrams were drawn using Adobe Photoshop CC 2015 and Microsoft PowerPoint 
2010 (Microsoft Corp. Redmond, WA, USA). 
Supplemental References 
Allen, J. J., Mathger, L. M., Barbosa, A. & Hanlon, R. T. 2009. Cuttlefish use visual cues to control 
three-dimensional skin papillae for camouflage. J Comp Physiol A Neuroethol Sens Neural 
Behav Physiol, 195, 547-55. 
Boal, J. G. & Ni, J. N. 1996. Ventilation rate of cuttlefish, Sepia officinalis, in response to visual 
stimuli. Veliger, 39, 342-347. 
Gonzalez-Bellido, P. T. & Wardill, T. J. 2012. Labeling and confocal imaging of neurons in thick 
invertebrate tissue samples. Cold Spring Harb Protoc, 2012, 969-83. 
Isaacson, M. D. & Hedwig, B. 2017. Electrophoresis of polar fluorescent tracers through the nerve 
sheath labels neuronal populations for anatomical and functional imaging. Sci Rep, 7, 40433. 
King, A. J. & Adamo, S. A. 2006. The ventilatory, cardiac and behavioural responses of resting 
cuttlefish (Sepia officinalis L.) to sudden visual stimuli. Journal of Experimental Biology, 209, 
1101-1111. 
Panetta, D., Solomon, M., Buresch, K. & Hanlon, R. T. 2017. Small-scale rearing of cuttlefish (Sepia 
officinalis) for research purposes. Marine and Freshwater Behaviour and Physiology, 50, 115-
124. 
Peng, H. C., Ruan, Z. C., Long, F. H., Simpson, J. H. & Myers, E. W. 2010. V3D enables real-time 3D 
visualization and quantitative analysis of large-scale biological image data sets. Nature 
Biotechnology, 28, 348-353. 
Preibisch, S., Saalfeld, S. & Tomancak, P. 2009. Globally optimal stitching of tiled 3D microscopic 
image acquisitions. Bioinformatics, 25, 1463-1465. 
Wardill, T. J., Gonzalez-Bellido, P. T., Crook, R. J. & Hanlon, R. T. 2012. Neural control of tuneable skin 
iridescence in squid. Proceedings of the Royal Society B-Biological Sciences, 279, 4243-52. 
