 nutrients
Review
Glucose Plus Fructose Ingestion for Post-Exercise
Recovery—Greater than the Sum of Its Parts?
Javier T. Gonzalez 1,*, Cas J. Fuchs 2, James A. Betts 1 and Luc J. C. van Loon 2
1
Department for Health, University of Bath, Bath BA2 7AY, UK; j.betts@bath.ac.uk
2
Department of Human Biology and Movement Sciences, NUTRIM School of Nutrition and Translational
Research in Metabolism, Maastricht University Medical Centre+ (MUMC+), P.O. Box 616,
6200 MD Maastricht, The Netherlands; cas.fuchs@maastrichtuniversity.nl (C.J.F.);
l.vanloon@maastrichtuniversity.nl (L.J.C.v.L.)
*
Correspondence: J.T.Gonzalez@bath.ac.uk
Received: 27 February 2017; Accepted: 27 March 2017; Published: 30 March 2017
Abstract: Carbohydrate availability in the form of muscle and liver glycogen is an important
determinant of performance during prolonged bouts of moderate- to high-intensity exercise.
Therefore, when effective endurance performance is an objective on multiple occasions within
a 24-h period, the restoration of endogenous glycogen stores is the principal factor determining
recovery. This review considers the role of glucose–fructose co-ingestion on liver and muscle
glycogen repletion following prolonged exercise. Glucose and fructose are primarily absorbed
by different intestinal transport proteins; by combining the ingestion of glucose with fructose, both
transport pathways are utilised, which increases the total capacity for carbohydrate absorption.
Moreover, the addition of glucose to fructose ingestion facilitates intestinal fructose absorption via
a currently unidentified mechanism. The co-ingestion of glucose and fructose therefore provides
faster rates of carbohydrate absorption than the sum of glucose and fructose absorption rates
alone. Similar metabolic effects can be achieved via the ingestion of sucrose (a disaccharide of
glucose and fructose) because intestinal absorption is unlikely to be limited by sucrose hydrolysis.
Carbohydrate ingestion at a rate of ≥1.2 g carbohydrate per kg body mass per hour appears to
maximise post-exercise muscle glycogen repletion rates. Providing these carbohydrates in the form
of glucose–fructose (sucrose) mixtures does not further enhance muscle glycogen repletion rates
over glucose (polymer) ingestion alone. In contrast, liver glycogen repletion rates are approximately
doubled with ingestion of glucose–fructose (sucrose) mixtures over isocaloric ingestion of glucose
(polymers) alone. Furthermore, glucose plus fructose (sucrose) ingestion alleviates gastrointestinal
distress when the ingestion rate approaches or exceeds the capacity for intestinal glucose absorption
(~1.2 g/min). Accordingly, when rapid recovery of endogenous glycogen stores is a priority, ingesting
glucose–fructose mixtures (or sucrose) at a rate of ≥1.2 g·kg body mass−1·h−1 can enhance glycogen
repletion rates whilst also minimising gastrointestinal distress.
Keywords: carbohydrates; glycogen; liver; metabolism; muscle; resynthesis; sports nutrition; sucrose
1. Introduction
Carbohydrates are a major substrate for oxidation during almost all exercise intensities [1].
The main determinants of carbohydrate utilisation during exercise are the intensity and duration of
exercise [1,2], followed by training and nutritional status [3,4]. In the fasted state, the main forms
of carbohydrate utilised during exercise are skeletal muscle glycogen and plasma glucose (derived
primarily from liver glycogen and gluconeogenesis) [1]. Compared to fat stores, the capacity for
humans to store carbohydrates is limited; >100,000 kcal stored as fat versus <3000 kcal stored as
carbohydrate in a typical 75-kg person with 15% body fat [5]. Therefore, glycogen stores can be almost
Nutrients 2017, 9, 344; doi:10.3390/nu9040344
www.mdpi.com/journal/nutrients
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 344
2 of 15
entirely depleted within 45–90 min of moderate- to high-intensity exercise [6,7], with the occurrence of
fatigue strongly associated with the depletion of endogenous carbohydrate stores [8–10]. Nutritional
strategies to complement or replace endogenous carbohydrate stores as a fuel during exercise have
been studied for decades [9,11]. It is now well established that carbohydrate ingestion during exercise
improves endurance performance and delays fatigue in events requiring a sustained moderate to high
intensity for more than 45 min [12]. Due to the strong relationship between replenishment of liver and
skeletal muscle glycogen stores with subsequent exercise tolerance [7,10], the main factor determining
recovery time is the rate of glycogen repletion. This is especially relevant when optimal performance
is required on more than one occasion with a limited interval between bouts, such as during intensive
training periods, stage races (e.g., Tour de France) and tournament-style competitions. In the hours
following exercise, carbohydrate ingestion is a requirement for substantial replenishment of skeletal
muscle glycogen stores [13], and the appropriate dose of carbohydrate (or co-ingestion of protein
with suboptimal carbohydrate intake) can accelerate the replenishment of skeletal muscle glycogen
contents [14,15].
In recent years, there has been an increasing appreciation of the different types of carbohydrates
that can be ingested during and after exercise. When large amounts of carbohydrate are ingested
(>1.4 g·min−1) the combined ingestion of glucose and fructose can improve performance by ~1–9%
over the ingestion of glucose (polymers) alone [16]. The performance benefits of glucose–fructose
co-ingestion are likely due to more rapid digestion and absorption of the carbohydrate, providing
exogenous fuel at a faster rate than glucose ingestion alone. Faster digestion and absorption rates
of carbohydrates during recovery from exercise may also have benefits for more rapid recovery of
glycogen stores post-exercise [15,17]. With this in mind, this review provides an overview of dietary
carbohydrates, glycogen stores and exercise capacity, before focussing on the role of glucose–fructose
mixtures in post-exercise recovery of skeletal muscle and liver glycogen stores.
2. Dietary Carbohydrates for Sport Nutrition
Dietary carbohydrates come in many forms, comprising monosaccharides such as glucose,
fructose and galactose; disaccharides such as maltose, sucrose and lactose; and polysaccharides
such as maltodextrin and starch (Table 1). The rates of digestion, intestinal absorption and hepatic
metabolism of carbohydrates are key determinants of carbohydrate delivery to skeletal muscle tissue.
These factors are therefore important considerations when choosing a nutritional strategy to optimize
carbohydrate delivery during and after exercise.
Table 1.
Common dietary carbohydrates, their constituent monomers and major intestinal
transport proteins.
Carbohydrate
Chain Length
Constituent Monomers
Bonds
Apical Membrane Intestinal
Transport Protein(s)
Glucose
1
-
-
SGLT1; GLUT2; GLUT12
Fructose
1
-
-
GLUT5; GLUT2; GLUT7;
GLUT8; GLUT12
Galactose
1
-
-
SGLT1; GLUT2
Maltose
2
Glucose + Glucose
α-1,4-glycosidic
SGLT1; GLUT2; GLUT8/12
Sucrose
2
Glucose + Fructose
α-1,2-glycosidic
SGLT1; GLUT5; GLUT2; GLUT7;
GLUT8 GLUT12
Isomaltulose
2
Glucose + Fructose
α-1,6-glycosidic
SGLT1; GLUT5; GLUT2; GLUT7;
GLUT8 GLUT12
Lactose
2
Glucose + Galactose
β-1,4-glycosidic
SGLT1; GLUT2; GLUT12
Maltodextrin
~3–9
Glucose + Glucose . . .
α-1,4-glycosidic
SGLT1; GLUT2; GLUT12
Starch
>9 (typically >300)
Glucose + Glucose . . .
α-1,4- and
α-1,6-glycosidic
SGLT1; GLUT2; GLUT12
Major transport proteins are highlighted in bold. GLUT, glucose transporter; SGLT, sodium-dependent glucose
transporter. Table comprised using information from references [18–23].
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 344
3 of 15
Glucose is a constituent of most disaccharides and polysaccharides and is therefore the most
ubiquitous carbohydrate in most people’s diets (Table 1). Glucose is also the primary cellular fuel
source in almost all human tissues. Carbohydrates must first be hydrolysed into their constituent
monomers before being absorbed across the intestine and entering the systemic circulation [23].
Therefore, most dietary carbohydrates are broken down into glucose, fructose and/or galactose
prior to their subsequent absorption. The major intestinal absorption route of glucose involves
sodium-dependent glucose transporter 1 (SGLT1), which transports glucose from the intestinal lumen
into the enterocyte [23]. Other putative routes include transport by glucose transporter 2 (GLUT2) and
GLUT12, although these are yet to be clearly established in humans [24], and are likely to play only
minor roles in intestinal glucose absorption [23]. Whilst fructose has an identical chemical formula to
glucose (C6H12O6), glucose has an aldehyde group at position 1 of its carbon chain, whereas fructose
possesses a keto group in position two of its carbon chain [25]. A notable difference in the handling of
fructose compared to most other carbohydrates is the primary intestinal transport protein responsible
for transporting fructose from the intestinal lumen to within the enterocyte: GLUT5 (Table 1). Other
fructose transporters may also be involved in fructose absorption, but again are likely to play minor
roles in comparison to GLUT5 [22].
When ingested alone, the hydrolysis of most carbohydrates is rapid and does not limit the rate of
digestion and absorption. Therefore, the rate at which glucose polymers such as maltose, maltodextrin
and starch can be digested, absorbed and used as a fuel source is not substantially slower than that of
glucose [26–28]. Furthermore, the hydrolysis of sucrose (by sucrase) is also rapid and exceeds the rate
of intestinal absorption of glucose and fructose [29]. An exception to this rule is isomaltulose. Due to
the different bond linking glucose and fructose, the hydrolysis rate of isomaltulose (by isomaltase)
is drastically slower than that of sucrose [20,30]. Isomaltulose thereby produces a lower glycaemic
and insulinaemic response following ingestion, and suppresses fat oxidation to a lesser extent than
sucrose [31]. However, presumably due to this slow rate of digestion and absorption, isomaltulose
exacerbates gastrointestinal distress when consumed in large amounts during exercise [32].
After intestinal absorption, the metabolism of various dietary carbohydrates also differs.
In contrast to glucose, which can bypass the liver and enter the systemic circulation, fructose and
galactose are almost completely metabolised upon first pass of the liver [25,33]. This splanchnic
sequestration appears to be enhanced by the co-ingestion of glucose [33]. Fructose and galactose are
converted in the liver into glucose, lactate, glycogen and lipids, which subsequently appear in the
circulation [25,33]. The energy cost of converting fructose into glucose and other substrates is likely to
account for the greater postprandial thermogenesis seen with fructose versus glucose ingestion [34].
Because of this hepatic metabolism, the blood glucose and insulin responses to fructose or galactose
ingestion are attenuated when compared to glucose ingestion [35,36]. This lower insulin response may
have implications for glycogen storage in recovery from exercise.
Hepatic fructose metabolism also differs from hepatic glucose metabolism in its regulation by
insulin. Both glucose and fructose enter the liver via the insulin-independent transporter, GLUT2.
However, hepatic glucose metabolism is then regulated by insulin and the cellular energy status [5,25].
Insulin, ATP and citrate concentrations regulate glucose flux to pyruvate via modulating the activity
of hexokinase IV and glycolytic enzymes [37]. Hepatic fructose metabolism on the other hand,
is independent of insulin and does not display negative feedback inhibition by ATP nor citrate [25].
3. Endogenous Carbohydrate Stores and Exercise Performance
3.1. Muscle Glycogen
The reintroduction of the muscle biopsy technique to exercise physiology in the 1960s clearly
demonstrated the heavy reliance on skeletal muscle glycogen as a fuel source during exercise [8,38].
There is a strong relationship between baseline skeletal muscle glycogen contents and subsequent
endurance exercise capacity [8]. Furthermore, the capacity for exercise is severely compromised when
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 344
4 of 15
skeletal muscle glycogen stores are depleted, even when other substrate sources are available in
abundance [9]. The defined mechanisms that link skeletal muscle glycogen contents and exercise
tolerance are incompletely understood. It is thought that skeletal muscle glycogen is more than just a
fuel source, and that glycogen also acts as a signalling molecule to control skeletal muscle cell function
and regulate exercise capacity [39].
Skeletal muscle glycogen provides a rapid and efficient (energy yield per unit oxygen) fuel source
for energy expenditure, such that when skeletal muscle glycogen stores are depleted, the rate of
energy production is severely compromised. Clear support for the important role of glycogen as a
substrate in supporting energy requirements to allow intense exercise is provided by observations
of individuals with McArdle’s disease (glycogen storage disease type V; GSD5). These individuals
display high skeletal muscle glycogen concentrations but an inability to utilise this glycogen as a
substrate source [40], and subsequently can also display extreme intolerance to intense exercise [41].
This is partly due to glycogen oxidation resulting in maximal ATP re-synthesis rates that are >2-fold
greater than fat or plasma glucose oxidation [42,43]. Therefore, when high rates of ATP re-synthesis
are required over a prolonged duration, it would appear there is no substitute for glycogen as a fuel.
Furthermore, the oxidation of carbohydrates is more oxygen efficient than that of fat, deriving more
energy per litre of oxygen consumed [44]. Consequently, oxidising carbohydrates over fats provides
an advantage in sports where the rate of oxygen delivery to active muscle is limiting to performance.
A reduced ability of glycogen to fuel metabolism may not fully account for the exercise
intolerance with low skeletal muscle glycogen content. Low glycogen contents are still associated
with impaired skeletal muscle function, even when ATP concentrations would be normalised [45].
Therefore, it has recently been proposed that glycogen is also an important signalling molecule
that regulates sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium release rates and thus skeletal muscle function [39].
Accordingly, adequate skeletal muscle glycogen availability appears to be critically important
(via multiple mechanisms) in maintaining optimal performance during prolonged bouts of moderate-
to high-intensity exercise.
3.2. Liver Glycogen
Liver glycogen plays a central role in blood glucose homeostasis during conditions such as exercise,
fasting and feeding [5]. After an overnight fast (e.g., 12 h), ~50% of plasma glucose appearance at rest
is accounted for by liver glycogen utilisation, with the remainder provided by gluconeogenesis [46].
Even resting metabolic requirements can therefore deplete liver glycogen stores almost entirely within
48 h of carbohydrate restriction [47].
Plasma glucose is constantly utilised as a fuel source at rest and during almost all exercise
intensities [1]. During exercise in a fasted state, plasma glucose that is taken up by skeletal muscle is
continuously replaced by gluconeogenesis and glycogen degradation, predominantly derived from
the liver [48]. In the absence of carbohydrate ingestion liver glycogen stores can be rapidly depleted
(by ~40%–60%) within 90 min of moderate- to high-intensity (~70% VO2 peak) exercise [6,7,49]. The rate
of liver glycogen depletion during exercise in a fasted state will depend primarily on the intensity
of exercise and the training status of the individual; higher exercise intensities are associated with
higher rates of liver glycogen utilisation, particularly in untrained individuals [5]. Endurance-trained
athletes do not appear to store more liver glycogen than untrained individuals but endurance-type
exercise training is associated with a lower rate of liver glycogen utilisation during exercise (at the
same absolute or relative intensity) [5]. Therefore, endurance athletes can exercise at a given exercise
intensity for longer before liver glycogen contents will reach a critically low level [5].
Few studies have directly measured the relationship between liver glycogen contents and exercise
tolerance in humans. One of the only studies to have performed concomitant measures of liver
glycogen content and exercise capacity demonstrated a modest positive relationship between liver
glycogen repletion after an initial bout of exercise, and subsequent endurance capacity [7]. Furthermore,
in this study the correlation between muscle glycogen repletion and subsequent endurance capacity
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 344
5 of 15
was weaker than that with liver glycogen repletion, and the addition of muscle glycogen repletion
to liver glycogen repletion did not further improve the relationship between liver glycogen repletion
and exercise capacity [7]. Consequently, post-exercise recovery of liver glycogen stores may be at
least as important as muscle glycogen stores for subsequent endurance capacity. The mechanisms
by which liver glycogen contents regulate exercise capacity currently remain unknown, but given
the fundamental role of hepatic metabolism in glucose homeostasis, low liver glycogen stores are
likely to inhibit exercise capacity (at least in part) via a reduction in blood glucose availability and
premature hypoglycaemia [5]. Liver glycogen may also act as a biological signal to regulate metabolism
(and potentially exercise capacity). Rodent data suggest that liver glycogen contents modulate fatty
acid availability via a liver–brain–adipose tissue axis [50]. Therefore, brain sensing of liver glycogen
contents could regulate metabolism (and theoretically fatigue) during exercise.
It has been suggested that it may take longer to recover liver, compared to muscle glycogen stores
post-exercise, in humans [5], which is likely due to changes in splanchnic handling of glucose in the
post-exercise period. Splanchnic glucose output of an oral glucose load is ~30% at rest, but can double
to ~60% post-exercise [51]. This may be partly due to greater post-exercise increases in blood flow
to muscle [52], compared to the liver, resulting in relatively more ingested glucose made available
to the muscle. On this basis, nutritional strategies to optimise short-term recovery from prolonged
exercise should focus on both liver and muscle glycogen repletion, since both display limitations
in their capacity to replenish carbohydrate stores and either could be instrumental to optimizing
subsequent performance.
4. Physiological Rationale for Glucose–Fructose Co-Ingestion in Post-Exercise Recovery
Alongside insulin concentrations, carbohydrate delivery to the liver and skeletal muscle can be
a rate limiting step in post-exercise glycogen re-synthesis, as demonstrated by >2-fold higher glycogen
repletion rates with glucose infusion [53,54] compared to the highest rates ever reported with oral
carbohydrate ingestion [55]. During exercise, exogenous carbohydrate oxidation can differ depending
on the type of carbohydrates ingested [56]. These differences may be attributable to differences in
carbohydrate digestion and absorption kinetics during exercise [56,57]. It could be hypothesised that
these differences are also evident during post-exercise recovery, implying that rapidly digested and
absorbed carbohydrates may accelerate recovery of endogenous glycogen stores.
To obtain insight into the role of glucose–fructose co-ingestion on carbohydrate digestion,
absorption and utilisation kinetics during exercise, we performed a literature search (PubMed, February
2017). This included the search terms “exogenous”, “carbohydrate”, “glucose”, “fructose”, “sucrose”
and “oxidation”. This search was complemented by a manual search of references within papers.
In order to minimize the potential for inter-subject and inter-laboratory variability, studies were
limited to peer-reviewed published articles to date that have directly compared glucose (polymer)
ingestion alone with glucose–fructose (sucrose) co-ingestion and determined exogenous carbohydrate
oxidation rates during exercise. When ingesting glucose(polymers) during exercise, the maximal rate
of exogenous carbohydrate oxidation increases in a curvilinear fashion with carbohydrate ingestion
rate, reaching a peak exogenous oxidation rate of ~1.2 g·min−1 (Figure 1) [26,27,58–69]. The primary
limitation in the rate of exogenous carbohydrate oxidation is thought to be intestinal absorption, since
gastric emptying rates of glucose during exercise have been reported to exceed 1.5 g·min−1 [70], and
when the intestine and liver are bypassed with intravenous glucose infusion, exogenous oxidation
rates of 2 g·min−1 can be achieved [57]. Furthermore, maximal intestinal glucose absorption rates
at rest have been estimated to be ~1.3 g·min−1 [71]. Exercise up to an intensity of 70% VO2 peak
does not alter the intestinal absorption of glucose [72]. Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that this
~1.3 g·min−1 limit also applies during most exercise intensities, suggesting that intestinal absorption
rather than liver glucose metabolism is the primary limitation to exogenous glucose oxidation during
exercise (Figure 2) [73]. Nevertheless, this remains speculative in the absence of direct measures of
intestinal absorption.
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 344
6 of 15
Nutrients 2017, 9, 344 
6 of 15 
 
 
Figure 1. Peak exogenous carbohydrate oxidation rates during exercise in studies that directly 
compared glucose (polymer) ingestion alone (GLU), vs. either glucose plus fructose co‐ingestion 
(GLU + FRU), or sucrose ingestion (SUC). Each symbol represents the mean from a single study. The 
light grey shaded area represents the 95% confidence intervals for GLU and the dark grey shaded 
area represents the 95% confidence intervals for GLU + FRU and SUC. Data extracted from references 
[22,23,55–66].  
 
Figure 2. Putative limitations in carbohydrate delivery to skeletal muscle during exercise with 
glucose–fructose (or sucrose) co‐ingestion. When large amounts of glucose (>1.5 g∙min−1) and 
fructose (>0.8 g∙min−1) are ingested during prolonged, moderate‐ to high‐intensity (50%–70% VO2 
peak) exercise, the rate of gastric emptying is unlikely to be limiting, since gastric emptying rates of 
glucose are in the region of 1.7 g∙min−1 [67]. Rates of intestinal glucose absorption are ~1.3 g∙min−1 
[68]. Rates of glucose appearance into the peripheral circulation and subsequently oxidised are ~1.2 
g∙min−1 [58,70]. Rates of fructose (and sucrose) gastric emptying and intestinal absorption must be at 
least 0.5 g∙min−1 since the appearance rate into the peripheral circulation of fructose derived 
carbohydrate is ~0.5 g∙min−1 [71], with ~50% in the form of glucose and 50% in the form of lactate, that 
are subsequently oxidised by skeletal muscle at a rate of ~0.5 g∙min−1 [71]. 
When fructose is co‐ingested with glucose during exercise, exogenous carbohydrate oxidation 
rates of ~1.7 g∙min−1 can be achieved; substantially higher than that seen with glucose ingestion alone 
(Figure 1) [26,27,58–69]. Whether glucose and fructose are ingested as sucrose or as free 
monosaccharides does not appear to influence the rate of exogenous carbohydrate oxidation (Figure 
1). This is consistent with observations that the rate of digestion and intestinal absorption of glucose 
and fructose does not differ when ingested as sucrose or as co‐ingestion of free glucose and free 
fructose [29]. Therefore, the hydrolysis of sucrose does not appear to be rate limiting to absorption of 
its monosaccharide products and can be used as an alternative to free glucose and free fructose. In a 
systematic assessment of optimal fructose:glucose ratios using dual‐isotope labelling, it is apparent 
Figure 1.
Peak exogenous carbohydrate oxidation rates during exercise in studies that directly
compared glucose (polymer) ingestion alone (GLU), vs. either glucose plus fructose co-ingestion
(GLU + FRU), or sucrose ingestion (SUC). Each symbol represents the mean from a single study.
The light grey shaded area represents the 95% confidence intervals for GLU and the dark grey
shaded area represents the 95% confidence intervals for GLU + FRU and SUC. Data extracted from
references [22,23,55–66].
Nutrients 2017, 9, 344 
6 of 15 
 
 
Figure 1. Peak exogenous carbohydrate oxidation rates during exercise in studies that directly 
compared glucose (polymer) ingestion alone (GLU), vs. either glucose plus fructose co‐ingestion 
(GLU + FRU), or sucrose ingestion (SUC). Each symbol represents the mean from a single study. The 
light grey shaded area represents the 95% confidence intervals for GLU and the dark grey shaded 
area represents the 95% confidence intervals for GLU + FRU and SUC. Data extracted from references 
[22,23,55–66].  
 
Figure 2. Putative limitations in carbohydrate delivery to skeletal muscle during exercise with 
glucose–fructose (or sucrose) co‐ingestion. When large amounts of glucose (>1.5 g∙min−1) and 
fructose (>0.8 g∙min−1) are ingested during prolonged, moderate‐ to high‐intensity (50%–70% VO2 
peak) exercise, the rate of gastric emptying is unlikely to be limiting, since gastric emptying rates of 
glucose are in the region of 1.7 g∙min−1 [67]. Rates of intestinal glucose absorption are ~1.3 g∙min−1 
[68]. Rates of glucose appearance into the peripheral circulation and subsequently oxidised are ~1.2 
g∙min−1 [58,70]. Rates of fructose (and sucrose) gastric emptying and intestinal absorption must be at 
least 0.5 g∙min−1 since the appearance rate into the peripheral circulation of fructose derived 
carbohydrate is ~0.5 g∙min−1 [71], with ~50% in the form of glucose and 50% in the form of lactate, that 
are subsequently oxidised by skeletal muscle at a rate of ~0.5 g∙min−1 [71]. 
When fructose is co‐ingested with glucose during exercise, exogenous carbohydrate oxidation 
rates of ~1.7 g∙min−1 can be achieved; substantially higher than that seen with glucose ingestion alone 
(Figure 1) [26,27,58–69]. Whether glucose and fructose are ingested as sucrose or as free 
monosaccharides does not appear to influence the rate of exogenous carbohydrate oxidation (Figure 
1). This is consistent with observations that the rate of digestion and intestinal absorption of glucose 
and fructose does not differ when ingested as sucrose or as co‐ingestion of free glucose and free 
fructose [29]. Therefore, the hydrolysis of sucrose does not appear to be rate limiting to absorption of 
its monosaccharide products and can be used as an alternative to free glucose and free fructose. In a 
systematic assessment of optimal fructose:glucose ratios using dual‐isotope labelling, it is apparent 
Figure 2.
Putative limitations in carbohydrate delivery to skeletal muscle during exercise with
glucose–fructose (or sucrose) co-ingestion.
When large amounts of glucose (>1.5 g·min−1) and
fructose (>0.8 g·min−1) are ingested during prolonged, moderate- to high-intensity (50%–70%
VO2 peak) exercise, the rate of gastric emptying is unlikely to be limiting, since gastric emptying
rates of glucose are in the region of 1.7 g·min−1 [67]. Rates of intestinal glucose absorption are
~1.3 g·min−1 [68]. Rates of glucose appearance into the peripheral circulation and subsequently
oxidised are ~1.2 g·min−1 [58,70]. Rates of fructose (and sucrose) gastric emptying and intestinal
absorption must be at least 0.5 g·min−1 since the appearance rate into the peripheral circulation of
fructose derived carbohydrate is ~0.5 g·min−1 [71], with ~50% in the form of glucose and 50% in the
form of lactate, that are subsequently oxidised by skeletal muscle at a rate of ~0.5 g·min−1 [71].
When fructose is co-ingested with glucose during exercise, exogenous carbohydrate oxidation
rates of ~1.7 g·min−1 can be achieved; substantially higher than that seen with glucose ingestion
alone (Figure 1) [26,27,58–69]. Whether glucose and fructose are ingested as sucrose or as free
monosaccharides does not appear to influence the rate of exogenous carbohydrate oxidation (Figure 1).
This is consistent with observations that the rate of digestion and intestinal absorption of glucose
and fructose does not differ when ingested as sucrose or as co-ingestion of free glucose and free
fructose [29]. Therefore, the hydrolysis of sucrose does not appear to be rate limiting to absorption
of its monosaccharide products and can be used as an alternative to free glucose and free fructose.
In a systematic assessment of optimal fructose:glucose ratios using dual-isotope labelling, it is apparent
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 344
7 of 15
that a fructose:glucose ratio of 0.8-1.0-1.0 (0.67 g·min−1 fructose plus 0.83 g·min−1 glucose (polymers))
provides the greatest exogenous carbohydrate oxidation efficiency and endurance performance [74].
Fructose metabolism differs markedly from glucose metabolism. Firstly, fructose is primarily
absorbed across the apical membrane of the intestinal enterocytes by different transport proteins
(GLUT5, as opposed to SGLT1). Secondly, plasma fructose concentrations remain relatively low
(<0.5 mmol·L−1) following fructose ingestion [75]. It is commonly reported that human skeletal muscle
cannot directly oxidise fructose. This is based on human skeletal muscle lacking ketohexokinase (the
enzyme responsible for catalysing the phosphorylation of fructose to fructose-1-phosphate). However,
in addition to phosphorylating glucose, hexokinase is also able to phosphorylate fructose [76] and
when fructose is infused (achieving plasma fructose concentrations of ~5.5 mmol·L−1) during exercise,
then quantitatively important amounts of fructose (0.3–0.4 g·min−1) are likely to be directly oxidised
by skeletal muscle [77]. Of course, this is of little relevance to sports nutrition because oral ingestion
of fructose rarely results in plasma fructose concentrations exceeding ~0.4 mmol·L−1 and thus direct
oxidation of fructose is negligible. The reason for a relatively low systemic fructose concentration after
fructose ingestion is that fructose is rapidly converted in the intestine and liver to glucose and lactate,
which then enter the systemic circulation and delivered to peripheral tissues [78] and/or contribute to
liver glycogen synthesis.
When fructose is co-ingested with glucose in large amounts (>0.8 g·min−1 each) during exercise,
systemic appearance of fructose derived carbohydrate is ~0.5 g·min−1 (equally split between
fructose-derived glucose and fructose-derived lactate) [78], and the subsequent oxidation of this
fructose derived glucose and lactate by skeletal muscle can thus fully account for the higher exogenous
carbohydrate oxidation rates seen with glucose–fructose mixtures (sucrose) over glucose alone
(Figures 1 and 2).
It is unclear what the rate-limiting step in exogenous fructose oxidation is
when co-ingested with glucose during exercise, although intestinal absorption is a probable factor.
The capacity for humans to absorb dietary fructose is comparatively limited when ingested in isolation.
Approximately 60% of individuals display fructose malabsorption after ingestion of large (50 g)
fructose loads, with this proportion halved if co-ingested with glucose [79]. Similarly, only 11% of
people exhibit fructose malabsorption when ingesting a lower dose of fructose (25 g), with appropriate
absorption in almost all cases if that lower dose is ingested with glucose or as sucrose [79]. Therefore,
not only does the addition of fructose to glucose ingestion takes advantage of an additional intestinal
transport pathway, the ingestion of glucose alongside fructose enhances fructose absorption (via a
currently unidentified mechanism) providing a dual mechanism for enhanced carbohydrate delivery.
High-fructose diets have been shown to increase intestinal GLUT5 protein content in mice [80].
Therefore, it could be speculated that regularly consuming fructose may enhance the maximal capacity
for intestinal fructose absorption, but this remains to be tested in humans.
For athletes, the primary benefit of ingesting glucose–fructose mixtures during exercise is an
ability to absorb a greater amount of exogenous carbohydrate to the systemic circulation. This can
then be used immediately as a fuel and/or to maintain endogenous carbohydrate stores. More rapid
digestion and absorption is also a likely cause of the lower gastrointestinal distress observed with
high ingestion rates of isocaloric glucose–fructose mixtures over glucose alone. Lower gastrointestinal
distress could, in part, account for some of the performance benefits seen with glucose–fructose
co-ingestion [16,81]. The high rates of carbohydrate absorption with glucose–fructose co-ingestion also
raise the possibility of enhancing the rate of recovery of endogenous carbohydrate stores post-exercise.
5. Glucose–Fructose Co-Ingestion and Recovery from Exercise
5.1. Muscle Glycogen Repletion
Glucose and lactate are the primary substrates for muscle glycogen re-synthesis; the latter is able to
account for at least 20% of total muscle glycogen re-synthesis following intense exhaustive exercise [82].
Therefore, the availability of carbohydrates (glucose and lactate) to muscle is an important factor in
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 344
8 of 15
maximising the rate of muscle glycogen repletion and reducing recovery time. Alongside insulinotropic
properties, the rate of digestion, intestinal absorption and hepatic metabolism of nutrients are thus
important considerations for optimising sports nutrition for rapid post-exercise recovery. Insulin
availability is also important for post-exercise glycogen re-synthesis. Insulin increases blood flow
to muscle, GLUT4 translocation to the plasma membrane, hexokinase II and glycogen synthase
activity [83–86], all of which contribute to enhanced muscle glucose uptake and glycogen synthesis.
A further consideration in the post-exercise period is that elevated catecholamine concentrations may
be inhibiting the rise in blood flow and some aspects of insulin signalling in muscle [85,87]. Based on
the metabolism of glucose and fructose during exercise (Figures 1 and 2) it could be hypothesised that
the greater carbohydrate availability to muscle with ingestion of large amounts of glucose–fructose
(sucrose) mixtures could augment post-exercise muscle glycogen repletion rates over isocaloric glucose
ingestion alone. In line with this, rates of post-exercise muscle glycogen repletion increase as the
rate of carbohydrate ingestion increases, up until ~1 g carbohydrate·kgBM−1·h−1. This is equivalent
to ~1.2 g·min−1 for a 72-kg athlete and is therefore in good agreement with the maximal rate of
glucose (polymer) digestion and intestinal absorption during exercise (Figure 2). This provides further
support for the rationale that carbohydrate delivery to muscle (controlled by digestion, absorption
and hepatic metabolism) could be a limiting factor in post-exercise muscle glycogen repletion with
carbohydrate feedings.
Studies that have directly compared the ingestion glucose–fructose mixtures (or sucrose) vs.
glucose (polymers) alone on post-exercise muscle glycogen repletion, have employed carbohydrate
ingestion rates ranging from 0.25 to 1.5 g·kgBM−1·h−1, across two to six hours of recovery [7,88–92].
Across this wide range of carbohydrate ingestion rates, post-exercise ingestion of glucose–fructose
(sucrose) mixtures do not appear to accelerate muscle glycogen repletion when compared to
glucose (polymer) ingestion alone (Figure 3A). However, lower insulinaemia was reported with
glucose–fructose (sucrose) co-ingestion in most [7,88–90], but not all [91,92] studies. Therefore, similar
muscle glycogen storage appears possible with glucose plus fructose ingestion, compared to glucose
ingestion alone, even when insulin availability is lower. It has been suggested that due to the hepatic
metabolism of fructose, less glucose may be retained in the liver with glucose–fructose (sucrose)
mixtures and more glucose is made available for muscle to be utilised for glycogen re-synthesis, thus
offsetting the lower insulin concentrations [89].
Nutrients 2017, 9, 344 
8 of 15 
 
important factor in maximising the rate of muscle glycogen repletion and reducing recovery time. 
Alongside insulinotropic properties, the rate of digestion, intestinal absorption and hepatic 
metabolism of nutrients are thus important considerations for optimising sports nutrition for rapid 
post‐exercise recovery. Insulin availability is also important for post‐exercise glycogen re‐synthesis. 
Insulin increases blood flow to muscle, GLUT4 translocation to the plasma membrane, hexokinase II 
and glycogen synthase activity [83–86], all of which contribute to enhanced muscle glucose uptake 
and glycogen synthesis. A further consideration in the post‐exercise period is that elevated 
catecholamine concentrations may be inhibiting the rise in blood flow and some aspects of insulin 
signalling in muscle [85,87]. Based on the metabolism of glucose and fructose during exercise 
(Figures 1 and 2) it could be hypothesised that the greater carbohydrate availability to muscle with 
ingestion of large amounts of glucose–fructose (sucrose) mixtures could augment post‐exercise 
muscle glycogen repletion rates over isocaloric glucose ingestion alone. In line with this, rates of 
post‐exercise muscle glycogen repletion increase as the rate of carbohydrate ingestion increases, up 
until ~1 g carbohydrate∙kgBM−1∙h−1. This is equivalent to ~1.2 g∙min−1 for a 72‐kg athlete and is 
therefore in good agreement with the maximal rate of glucose (polymer) digestion and intestinal 
absorption during exercise (Figure 2). This provides further support for the rationale that 
carbohydrate delivery to muscle (controlled by digestion, absorption and hepatic metabolism) could 
be a limiting factor in post‐exercise muscle glycogen repletion with carbohydrate feedings. 
Studies that have directly compared the ingestion glucose–fructose mixtures (or sucrose) vs. 
glucose (polymers) alone on post‐exercise muscle glycogen repletion, have employed carbohydrate 
ingestion rates ranging from 0.25 to 1.5 g∙kgBM−1∙h−1, across two to six hours of recovery [7,88–92]. 
Across this wide range of carbohydrate ingestion rates, post‐exercise ingestion of glucose–fructose 
(sucrose) mixtures do not appear to accelerate muscle glycogen repletion when compared to glucose 
(polymer) ingestion alone (Figure 3A). However, lower insulinaemia was reported with glucose–
fructose (sucrose) co‐ingestion in most [7,88–90], but not all [91,92] studies. Therefore, similar muscle 
glycogen storage appears possible with glucose plus fructose ingestion, compared to glucose 
ingestion alone, even when insulin availability is lower. It has been suggested that due to the hepatic 
metabolism of fructose, less glucose may be retained in the liver with glucose–fructose (sucrose) 
mixtures and more glucose is made available for muscle to be utilised for glycogen re‐synthesis, thus 
offsetting the lower insulin concentrations [89].  
 
Figure 3. Post‐exercise skeletal muscle (A) and liver (B) glycogen repletion rates in all published 
studies that have directly compared glucose (polymer) ingestion alone (GLU), vs. either glucose plus 
fructose co‐ingestion (GLU+FRU), or sucrose ingestion (SUC). Bars represent means ± 95% 
confidence intervals (calculated when sufficient data were available). Data extracted from references 
[7,85–89,92]. 
A further addition to this hypothesis could be that fructose co‐ingestion with glucose also 
provides lactate as an additional fuel source for muscle. Lactate can then be used for muscle 
glycogen synthesis and/or be oxidised [93], directing more glucose towards muscle glycogen 
Figure 3. Post-exercise skeletal muscle (A) and liver (B) glycogen repletion rates in all published
studies that have directly compared glucose (polymer) ingestion alone (GLU), vs. either glucose plus
fructose co-ingestion (GLU+FRU), or sucrose ingestion (SUC). Bars represent means ± 95% confidence
intervals (calculated when sufficient data were available). Data extracted from references [7,85–89,92].
A further addition to this hypothesis could be that fructose co-ingestion with glucose also provides
lactate as an additional fuel source for muscle. Lactate can then be used for muscle glycogen synthesis
and/or be oxidised [93], directing more glucose towards muscle glycogen synthesis. Consistent with
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 344
9 of 15
this, plasma lactate concentrations are higher with glucose–fructose (sucrose) ingestion in post-exercise
recovery, when compared to glucose alone, in all [88,90–92] but the lowest [7] carbohydrate ingestion
rates.
This raises the question as to whether providing additional substrate for liver glycogen
synthesis (e.g., via galactose co-ingestion) and/or stimulating insulinaemia (e.g., via amino acid
co-ingestion) can further accelerate muscle glycogen repletion rates with glucose–fructose mixtures
over glucose (polymers) alone. One study has directly compared protein plus sucrose co-ingestion
vs. sucrose ingestion alone with high carbohydrate ingestion rates (~1.25 g·kgBM−1·h−1) and found
no difference in muscle glycogen repletion rates. However, arterial glucose concentrations were
lower in the protein–sucrose co-ingestion trial [13]. This suggests that either gastric emptying was
delayed, and/or splanchnic glucose retention was enhanced with protein co-ingestion. It is therefore
currently unknown whether the addition of insulinotropic amino acids [that do not delay gastric
emptying [94]] to glucose–fructose (sucrose) mixtures may augment muscle glycogen re-synthesis at
high carbohydrate ingestion rates (1.5 g·kgBM−1·h−1). Combining amino acids with high ingestion
rates of glucose–fructose mixtures could take better advantage of high rates of intestinal absorption
and the capacity to deliver exogenous carbohydrate to the circulation in combination with higher
insulin availability (Figure 2).
Whilst current evidence does not indicate that post-exercise muscle glycogen repletion is
accelerated by glucose–fructose co-ingestion over glucose alone, this is achieved with lower
gastrointestinal issues. Ingestion of large amounts of carbohydrates is associated with gastrointestinal
distress. This could directly reduce the capacity to perform optimally in a subsequent bout of exercise
and/or reduce the capacity to tolerate large amounts of carbohydrate ingestion to achieve a muscle
glycogen repletion target. The ingestion of isocaloric amounts of glucose–fructose (or sucrose) mixtures,
compared to glucose (polymers) alone, reduces ratings of gastrointestinal distress when large amounts
of carbohydrate (1.5 g·kgBM−1·h−1) are ingested over a short-term recovery period (5 h) [90,92].
5.2. Liver Glycogen Repletion
In contrast to muscle, the liver is able to synthesize glucose in meaningful quantities from
3-carbon precursors such as glucogenic amino acids, galactose, fructose, glycerol, pyruvate and
lactate, in addition to the direct pathway involving intact hexose units [5]. With this in mind, there is
potentially a stronger hypothesis for glucose–fructose co-ingestion accelerating liver glycogen repletion
over glucose ingestion alone. In addition to higher rates of carbohydrate digestion and absorption,
the liver could make use of the ingested fructose for liver glycogen synthesis. Few studies have
directly compared glucose plus fructose (sucrose) ingestion with glucose (polymer) ingestion alone,
on post-exercise liver glycogen repletion (Figure 3B) [7,90,95]. From these studies, it is apparent that
when glucose is ingested alone, the rate of post-exercise liver glycogen repletion is ~3.6 g·h−1. Based
on the limited number of studies available this does not appear to be dependent on the ingestion rate
of glucose (Figure 3B). This may be due to differences in the degree of post-exercise liver glycogen
depletion, which appears to be a major driver of liver glycogen synthesis rates [5]. Furthermore,
there is large inter-individual variability in basal liver glycogen concentrations [49] and therefore it is
recommended that within-subject designs are used to clearly establish the dose-response relationship
between post-exercise carbohydrate ingestion and liver glycogen repletion.
When fructose is co-ingested with glucose (either as free glucose plus free fructose, or as sucrose),
the rate of liver glycogen repletion is typically ~7.3 g·h−1, approximately double the rate seen with
glucose ingestion alone (Figure 3B). This effect is clearest when the carbohydrate ingestion rate
exceeds 0.9 g·kg body mass−1·h−1 (Figure 3B). Furthermore, the accelerated liver glycogen repletion
rate is consistent when glucose and fructose are either co-ingested as their free monomers, or as
the disaccharide sucrose (Figure 3B). The majority of these studies again report lower insulinaemia
during post-exercise recovery with glucose–fructose co-ingestion vs. glucose ingestion alone [7,90,95].
It is currently unknown whether the addition of insulinotropic proteins to carbohydrate ingestion
can augment post-exercise liver glycogen repletion. It has been speculated that the co-ingestion of
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 344
10 of 15
protein and fat could also accelerate liver glycogen repletion by increasing gluconeogenic precursor
availability [5]. However, on the basis that dietary fat can delay gastric emptying [96], rapidly absorbed
amino acids/proteins would be preferable to fat as an option to explore in post-exercise recovery.
Only one study to date has determined post-exercise muscle and liver glycogen repletion with the
ingestion of large amounts of carbohydrate (>1 g·kgBM−1·h−1) [90]. Over a five-hour recovery period,
~560 g of carbohydrate was consumed as either glucose (polymers) or sucrose. Based on the maximal
rates of digestion, absorption and hepatic release (Figure 2) it could be expected that glucose ingestion
would deliver ~360 g to the circulation over the recovery period, compared to ~510 g with sucrose
ingestion. In spite of this theoretical 150 g surplus of carbohydrate, only an extra 17 g of glycogen was
stored (net) in the liver, and no additional glycogen was stored (net) in muscle (numerical difference
of <0.9 g·kg muscle−1). It could be speculated that the additional carbohydrate was either oxidised,
converted to lipid and/or stored in minor amounts in other glycogen containing tissues such as the
kidneys, brain, heart and even adipose tissue [97–99]. Fructose plus glucose ingestion accelerates liver
glycogen repletion rates over glucose ingestion alone. This acceleration is likely due to the preferential
hepatic metabolism of fructose and/or faster digestion and absorption kinetics with glucose plus
fructose ingestion, when compared to glucose ingestion.
6. Conclusions and Recommendations
The rapid recovery of both muscle and liver glycogen stores after prolonged exercise are important
determinants of the capacity to perform a subsequent bout of moderate- to high- intensity exercise.
The repletion of liver and muscle glycogen stores is limited by the systemic availability of carbohydrates
and glucogenic precursors, along with insulinaemia, the balance of which varies depending on the
scenario. The rate of appearance of ingested glucose in the circulation appears to be limited by the
capacity of intestinal transporters. Since intestinal fructose absorption utilises a different transport
mechanism, combining the ingestion of fructose and glucose takes advantage of both transport
mechanisms, thereby increasing the total capacity to absorb carbohydrates. Post-exercise muscle
glycogen repletion rates can be maximised by frequent ingestion of carbohydrate throughout recovery
at a rate of ≥1.2 g·kg body mass−1 every hour, with no further acceleration of glycogen repletion rates
if fructose (or sucrose) forms part of the ingested carbohydrate. However, when sufficient carbohydrate
is consumed to maximise muscle glycogen replenishment after exercise, the ingestion of glucose plus
fructose (sucrose) can minimise gastrointestinal distress. The combined ingestion of glucose plus
fructose (or sucrose) during post-exercise recovery strongly enhances liver glycogen repletion rates,
but there is currently insufficient evidence to provide guidelines on the carbohydrate ingestion rates
required to specifically maximize liver glycogen repletion. When rapid recovery from prolonged
exercise is a key objective, and maximal performance is required within 24 h, it is advised to consume
more than 1 g carbohydrate−1·kg body mass−1·h−1, starting as soon as possible after exercise and
at frequent intervals thereafter (i.e., every 30 min). When ingested in the form of glucose–fructose
mixtures (or sucrose), not only is this ingestion rate more tolerable due to lower gut discomfort but
total body glycogen status can also be enhanced over glucose (polymer) ingestion alone, due to greater
liver glycogen repletion.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
References
1.
Van Loon, L.J.; Greenhaff, P.L.; Constantin-Teodosiu, D.; Saris, W.H.; Wagenmakers, A.J. The effects of
increasing exercise intensity on muscle fuel utilisation in humans. J. Physiol. 2001, 536, 295–304. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
2.
Romijn, J.A.; Coyle, E.F.; Sidossis, L.S.; Gastaldelli, A.; Horowitz, J.F.; Endert, E.; Wolfe, R.R. Regulation of
endogenous fat and carbohydrate metabolism in relation to exercise intensity and duration. Am. J. Physiol.
1993, 265, E380–E391. [PubMed]
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 344
11 of 15
3.
Gonzalez, J.T.; Veasey, R.C.; Rumbold, P.L.; Stevenson, E.J. Breakfast and exercise contingently affect
postprandial metabolism and energy balance in physically active males. Br. J. Nutr. 2013, 110, 721–732.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
4.
Van Loon, L.J.; Jeukendrup, A.E.; Saris, W.H.; Wagenmakers, A.J. Effect of training status on fuel selection
during submaximal exercise with glucose ingestion. J. Appl. Physiol. 1999, 87, 1413–1420. [PubMed]
5.
Gonzalez, J.T.; Fuchs, C.J.; Betts, J.A.; van Loon, L.J. Liver glycogen metabolism during and after prolonged
endurance-type exercise. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 2016, 311, E543–E553. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6.
Stevenson, E.J.; Thelwall, P.E.; Thomas, K.; Smith, F.; Brand-Miller, J.; Trenell, M.I. Dietary glycemic index
influences lipid oxidation but not muscle or liver glycogen oxidation during exercise. Am. J. Physiol.
Endocrinol. Metab. 2009, 296, E1140–E1147. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7.
Casey, A.; Mann, R.; Banister, K.; Fox, J.; Morris, P.G.; Macdonald, I.A.; Greenhaff, P.L. Effect of carbohydrate
ingestion on glycogen resynthesis in human liver and skeletal muscle, measured by (13)c mrs. Am. J. Physiol.
Endocrinol. Metab. 2000, 278, E65–E75. [PubMed]
8.
Bergstrom, J.; Hermansen, L.; Hultman, E.; Saltin, B. Diet, muscle glycogen and physical performance.
Acta. Physiol. Scand. 1967, 71, 140–150. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9.
Coyle, E.F.; Coggan, A.R.; Hemmert, M.K.; Ivy, J.L. Muscle glycogen utilization during prolonged strenuous
exercise when fed carbohydrate. J. Appl. Physiol. 1986, 61, 165–172. [PubMed]
10.
Alghannam, A.F.; Jedrzejewski, D.; Tweddle, M.G.; Gribble, H.; Bilzon, J.; Thompson, D.; Tsintzas, K.;
Betts, J.A. Impact of muscle glycogen availability on the capacity for repeated exercise in man. Med. Sci.
Sports Exerc. 2016, 48, 123–131. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11.
Stellingwerff, T.; Boon, H.; Gijsen, A.P.; Stegen, J.H.; Kuipers, H.; van Loon, L.J. Carbohydrate
supplementation during prolonged cycling exercise spares muscle glycogen but does not affect
intramyocellular lipid use. Med. Sci. Sports Exer. 2007, 454, 635–647. [CrossRef]
12.
Vandenbogaerde, T.J.; Hopkins, W.G. Effects of acute carbohydrate supplementation on endurance
performance: A meta-analysis. Sports Med. 2011, 41, 773–792. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13.
Van Hall, G.; Shirreffs, S.M.; Calbet, J.A. Muscle glycogen resynthesis during recovery from cycle exercise:
No effect of additional protein ingestion. J. Appl. Physiol. 2000, 88, 1631–1636. [PubMed]
14.
Betts, J.A.; Williams, C. Short-term recovery from prolonged exercise: Exploring the potential for protein
ingestion to accentuate the benefits of carbohydrate supplements. Sports Med. 2010, 40, 941–959. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
15.
Burke, L.M.; van Loon, L.J.; Hawley, J.A. Post-exercise muscle glycogen resynthesis in humans.
J. Appl. Physiol. 2016. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16.
Rowlands, D.S.; Houltham, S.; Musa-Veloso, K.; Brown, F.; Paulionis, L.; Bailey, D. Fructose-glucose
composite carbohydrates and endurance performance: Critical review and future perspectives. Sports Med.
2015, 45, 1561–1576. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17.
Burke, L.M.; Collier, G.R.; Hargreaves, M. Muscle glycogen storage after prolonged exercise: Effect of the
glycemic index of carbohydrate feedings. J. Appl. Physiol. 1993, 75, 1019–1023. [PubMed]
18.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations; The World Health Organization. Carbohydrates
in Human Nutrition. Report of a joint FAO/WHO expert consultation. In FAO Food and Nutrition Paper; FAO:
Rome, Italy, 1998; Volume 66.
19.
Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition. SACN Carbohydrates and Health Report; Public Health England:
London, UK, 2015.
20.
Lina, B.A.; Jonker, D.; Kozianowski, G. Isomaltulose (palatinose): A review of biological and toxicological
studies. Food Chem. Toxicol. 2002, 40, 1375–1381. [CrossRef]
21.
Drozdowski, L.A.; Thomson, A.B. Intestinal sugar transport. World J. Gastroenterol. 2006, 12, 1657–1670.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
22.
DeBosch, B.J.; Chi, M.; Moley, K.H. Glucose transporter 8 (glut8) regulates enterocyte fructose transport and
global mammalian fructose utilization. Endocrinology 2012, 153, 4181–4191. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23.
Daniel, H.; Zietek, T. Taste and move: Glucose and peptide transporters in the gastrointestinal tract.
Exp. Physiol. 2015, 100, 1441–1450. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.
Rogers, S.; Chandler, J.D.; Clarke, A.L.; Petrou, S.; Best, J.D. Glucose transporter glut12-functional
characterization in xenopus laevis oocytes. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2003, 308, 422–426. [CrossRef]
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 344
12 of 15
25.
Tappy, L.; Le, K.A. Metabolic effects of fructose and the worldwide increase in obesity. Physiol Rev. 2010, 90,
23–46. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26.
Jentjens, R.L.; Venables, M.C.; Jeukendrup, A.E. Oxidation of exogenous glucose, sucrose, and maltose
during prolonged cycling exercise. J. Appl. Physiol. 2004, 96, 1285–1291. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27.
Moodley, D.; Noakes, T.D.; Bosch, A.N.; Hawley, J.A.; Schall, R.; Dennis, S.C. Oxidation of exogenous
carbohydrate during prolonged exercise: The effects of the carbohydrate type and its concentration. Eur. J.
Appl. Physiol. Occup. Physiol. 1992, 64, 328–334. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
28.
Hawley, J.A.; Dennis, S.C.; Laidler, B.J.; Bosch, A.N.; Noakes, T.D.; Brouns, F. High rates of exogenous
carbohydrate oxidation from starch ingested during prolonged exercise. J. Appl. Physiol. 1991, 71, 1801–1806.
[PubMed]
29.
Gray, G.M.; Ingelfinger, F.J. Intestinal absorption of sucrose in man: Interrelation of hydrolysis and
monosaccharide product absorption. J. Clin. Invest. 1966, 45, 388–398. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
30.
Dahlqvist, A.; Auricchio, S.; Semenza, G.; Prader, A. Human intestinal disaccharidases and hereditary
disaccharide intolerance.
The hydrolysis of sucrose, isomaltose, palatinose (isomaltulose), and a
1,6-alpha-oligosaccharide (isomalto-oligosaccharide) preparation. J. Clin. Invest. 1963, 42, 556–562. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
31.
Van Can, J.G.; Ijzerman, T.H.; van Loon, L.J.; Brouns, F.; Blaak, E.E. Reduced glycaemic and insulinaemic
responses following isomaltulose ingestion: Implications for postprandial substrate use. Br. J. Nutr. 2009,
102, 1408–1413. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32.
Oosthuyse, T.; Carstens, M.; Millen, A.M. Ingesting isomaltulose versus fructose-maltodextrin during
prolonged moderate-heavy exercise increases fat oxidation but impairs gastrointestinal comfort and cycling
performance. Int. J. Sport Nutr. Exerc. Metab. 2015, 25, 427–438. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33.
Sunehag, A.L.; Haymond, M.W. Splanchnic galactose extraction is regulated by coingestion of glucose in
humans. Metabolism 2002, 51, 827–832. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34.
Tappy, L.; Egli, L.; Lecoultre, V.; Schneider, P. Effects of fructose-containing caloric sweeteners on resting
energy expenditure and energy efficiency: A review of human trials. Nutr. Metab. 2013, 10, 54. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
35.
Chong, M.F.; Fielding, B.A.; Frayn, K.N. Mechanisms for the acute effect of fructose on postprandial lipemia.
Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2007, 85, 1511–1520. [PubMed]
36.
Jentjens, R.L.; Jeukendrup, A.E. Effects of pre-exercise ingestion of trehalose, galactose and glucose on
subsequent metabolism and cycling performance. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 2003, 88, 459–465. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
37.
Tornheim, K.; Lowenstein, J.M. Control of phosphofructokinase from rat skeletal muscle. Effects of fructose
diphosphate, amp, atp, and citrate. J. Biol. Chem. 1976, 251, 7322–7328. [PubMed]
38.
Bergstrom, J.; Hultman, E. Muscle glycogen synthesis after exercise: An enhancing factor localized to the
muscle cells in man. Nature 1966, 210, 309–310. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
39.
Ortenblad, N.; Westerblad, H.; Nielsen, J. Muscle glycogen stores and fatigue. J. Physiol. 2013, 591, 4405–4413.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
40.
Nielsen, J.N.; Wojtaszewski, J.F.; Haller, R.G.; Hardie, D.G.; Kemp, B.E.; Richter, E.A.; Vissing, J. Role of
5�amp-activated protein kinase in glycogen synthase activity and glucose utilization: Insights from patients
with mcardle’s disease. J. Physiol. 2002, 541, 979–989. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
41.
Lucia, A.; Ruiz, J.R.; Santalla, A.; Nogales-Gadea, G.; Rubio, J.C.; Garcia-Consuegra, I.; Cabello, A.; Perez, M.;
Teijeira, S.; Vieitez, I.; et al. Genotypic and phenotypic features of mcardle disease: Insights from the spanish
national registry. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 2012, 83, 322–328. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42.
Walter, G.; Vandenborne, K.; Elliott, M.; Leigh, J.S. In vivo ATP synthesis rates in single human muscles
during high intensity exercise. J. Physiol. 1999, 519 Pt 3, 901–910. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43.
Hultman, E.; Harris, R.C. Carbohydrate metabolism. In Principles of Exercise Biochemistry; Poortmans, J.R.,
Ed.; S.Karger: Basel, Switzerland, 1988.
44.
Jeukendrup, A.E.; Wallis, G.A. Measurement of substrate oxidation during exercise by means of gas exchange
measurements. Int. J. Sports Med. 2005, 26, S28–S37. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45.
Bangsbo, J.; Graham, T.E.; Kiens, B.; Saltin, B. Elevated muscle glycogen and anaerobic energy production
during exhaustive exercise in man. J. Physiol. 1992, 451, 205–227. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 344
13 of 15
46.
Petersen, K.F.; Price, T.; Cline, G.W.; Rothman, D.L.; Shulman, G.I. Contribution of net hepatic glycogenolysis
to glucose production during the early postprandial period. Am. J. Physiol. 1996, 270, E186–E191. [PubMed]
47.
Nilsson, L.H.; Hultman, E. Liver glycogen in man–the effect of total starvation or a carbohydrate-poor diet
followed by carbohydrate refeeding. Scand. J. Clin. Lab. Invest. 1973, 32, 325–330. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
48.
Bergman, B.C.; Horning, M.A.; Casazza, G.A.; Wolfel, E.E.; Butterfield, G.E.; Brooks, G.A. Endurance training
increases gluconeogenesis during rest and exercise in men. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 2000, 278,
E244–E251. [PubMed]
49.
Gonzalez, J.T.; Fuchs, C.J.; Smith, F.E.; Thelwall, P.E.; Taylor, R.; Stevenson, E.J.; Trenell, M.I.; Cermak, N.M.;
van Loon, L.J. Ingestion of glucose or sucrose prevents liver but not muscle glycogen depletion during
prolonged endurance-type exercise in trained cyclists. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 2015, 309,
E1032–E1039. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
50.
Izumida, Y.; Yahagi, N.; Takeuchi, Y.; Nishi, M.; Shikama, A.; Takarada, A.; Masuda, Y.; Kubota, M.;
Matsuzaka, T.; Nakagawa, Y.; et al.
Glycogen shortage during fasting triggers liver-brain-adipose
neurocircuitry to facilitate fat utilization. Nat. Commun. 2013, 4, 2316. [PubMed]
51.
Maehlum, S.; Felig, P.; Wahren, J. Splanchnic glucose and muscle glycogen metabolism after glucose feeding
during postexercise recovery. Am. J. Physiol. 1978, 235, E255–E260. [PubMed]
52.
Hurren, N.M.; Balanos, G.M.; Blannin, A.K. Is the beneficial effect of prior exercise on postprandial lipaemia
partly due to redistribution of blood flow? Clin. Sci. 2011, 120, 537–548. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
53.
Bergstrom, J.; Hultman, E. Synthesis of muscle glycogen in man after glucose and fructose infusion.
Acta Med. Scand. 1967, 182, 93–107. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
54.
Roch-Norlund, A.E.; Bergstrom, J.; Hultman, E. Muscle glycogen and glycogen synthetase in normal subjects
and in patients with diabetes mellitus. Effect of intravenous glucose and insulin administration. Scand. J.
Clin. Lab. Invest. 1972, 30, 77–84. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
55.
Pedersen, D.J.; Lessard, S.J.; Coffey, V.G.; Churchley, E.G.; Wootton, A.M.; Ng, T.; Watt, M.J.; Hawley, J.A.
High rates of muscle glycogen resynthesis after exhaustive exercise when carbohydrate is coingested with
caffeine. J. Appl. Physiol. 2008, 105, 7–13. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
56.
Jeukendrup, A.E. Carbohydrate and exercise performance: The role of multiple transportable carbohydrates.
Curr. Opin. Clin. Nutr. Metab. Care 2010, 13, 452–457. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
57.
Hawley, J.A.; Bosch, A.N.; Weltan, S.M.; Dennis, S.C.; Noakes, T.D. Glucose kinetics during prolonged
exercise in euglycaemic and hyperglycaemic subjects. Pflugers Archiv. Eur. J. Physiol. 1994, 426, 378–386.
[CrossRef]
58.
Hulston, C.J.; Wallis, G.A.; Jeukendrup, A.E. Exogenous cho oxidation with glucose plus fructose intake
during exercise. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2009, 41, 357–363. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
59.
Jentjens, R.L.; Jeukendrup, A.E. High rates of exogenous carbohydrate oxidation from a mixture of glucose
and fructose ingested during prolonged cycling exercise. Br. J. Nutr. 2005, 93, 485–492. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
60.
Jentjens, R.L.; Shaw, C.; Birtles, T.; Waring, R.H.; Harding, L.K.; Jeukendrup, A.E. Oxidation of combined
ingestion of glucose and sucrose during exercise. Metabolism 2005, 54, 610–618. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
61.
Jentjens, R.L.; Achten, J.; Jeukendrup, A.E. High oxidation rates from combined carbohydrates ingested
during exercise. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2004, 36, 1551–1558. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
62.
Jentjens, R.L.; Moseley, L.; Waring, R.H.; Harding, L.K.; Jeukendrup, A.E. Oxidation of combined ingestion
of glucose and fructose during exercise. J. Appl. Physiol. 2004, 96, 1277–1284. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
63.
Jentjens, R.L.; Underwood, K.; Achten, J.; Currell, K.; Mann, C.H.; Jeukendrup, A.E. Exogenous carbohydrate
oxidation rates are elevated after combined ingestion of glucose and fructose during exercise in the heat.
J. Appl. Physiol. 2006, 100, 807–816. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
64.
Jeukendrup, A.E.; Moseley, L.; Mainwaring, G.I.; Samuels, S.; Perry, S.; Mann, C.H. Exogenous carbohydrate
oxidation during ultraendurance exercise. J. Appl. Physiol. 2006, 100, 1134–1141. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
65.
Rowlands, D.S.; Thorburn, M.S.; Thorp, R.M.; Broadbent, S.; Shi, X. Effect of graded fructose coingestion
with maltodextrin on exogenous 14c-fructose and 13c-glucose oxidation efficiency and high-intensity cycling
performance. J. Appl. Physiol. 2008, 104, 1709–1719. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
66.
Roberts, J.D.; Tarpey, M.D.; Kass, L.S.; Tarpey, R.J.; Roberts, M.G. Assessing a commercially available sports
drink on exogenous carbohydrate oxidation, fluid delivery and sustained exercise performance. J. Int. Soc.
Sports Nutr. 2014, 11, 8. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 344
14 of 15
67.
Wagenmakers, A.J.; Brouns, F.; Saris, W.H.; Halliday, D. Oxidation rates of orally ingested carbohydrates
during prolonged exercise in men. J. Appl. Physiol. 1993, 75, 2774–2780. [PubMed]
68.
Wallis, G.A.; Rowlands, D.S.; Shaw, C.; Jentjens, R.L.; Jeukendrup, A.E. Oxidation of combined ingestion of
maltodextrins and fructose during exercise. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2005, 37, 426–432. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
69.
Trommelen, J.; Fuchs, C.J.; Beelen, M.; Lenaerts, K.; Jeukendrup, A.E.; Cermak, N.M.; van Loon, L.J. Fructose
and sucrose intake increase exogenous carbohydrate oxidation during exercise. Nutrients 2017, 9, 167.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
70.
Rehrer, N.J.; Wagenmakers, A.J.; Beckers, E.J.; Halliday, D.; Leiper, J.B.; Brouns, F.; Maughan, R.J.;
Westerterp, K.; Saris, W.H. Gastric emptying, absorption, and carbohydrate oxidation during prolonged
exercise. J. Appl. Physiol. 1992, 72, 468–475. [PubMed]
71.
Duchman, S.M.; Ryan, A.J.; Schedl, H.P.; Summers, R.W.; Bleiler, T.L.; Gisolfi, C.V. Upper limit for intestinal
absorption of a dilute glucose solution in men at rest. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 1997, 29, 482–488. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
72.
Fordtran, J.S.; Saltin, B. Gastric emptying and intestinal absorption during prolonged severe exercise.
J. Appl. Physiol. 1967, 23, 331–335. [PubMed]
73.
Jeukendrup, A.E.; Jentjens, R. Oxidation of carbohydrate feedings during prolonged exercise: Current
thoughts, guidelines and directions for future research. Sports Med. 2000, 29, 407–424. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
74.
O’Brien, W.J.; Stannard, S.R.; Clarke, J.A.; Rowlands, D.S. Fructose-maltodextrin ratio governs exogenous
and other cho oxidation and performance. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2013, 45, 1814–1824. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
75.
Rosset, R.; Lecoultre, V.; Egli, L.; Cros, J.; Dokumaci, A.S.; Zwygart, K.; Boesch, C.; Kreis, R.; Schneiter, P.;
Tappy, L. Postexercise repletion of muscle energy stores with fructose or glucose in mixed meals. Am. J.
Clin. Nutr. 2017. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
76.
Rikmenspoel, R.; Caputo, R. The michaelis-menten constant for fructose and for glucose of hexokinase in
bull spermatozoa. J. Reprod. Fertil. 1966, 12, 437–444. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
77.
Ahlborg, G.; Bjorkman, O. Splanchnic and muscle fructose metabolism during and after exercise.
J. Appl. Physiol. 1990, 69, 1244–1251. [PubMed]
78.
Lecoultre, V.; Benoit, R.; Carrel, G.; Schutz, Y.; Millet, G.P.; Tappy, L.; Schneiter, P. Fructose and glucose
co-ingestion during prolonged exercise increases lactate and glucose fluxes and oxidation compared with an
equimolar intake of glucose. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2010, 92, 1071–1079. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
79.
Truswell, A.S.; Seach, J.M.; Thorburn, A.W. Incomplete absorption of pure fructose in healthy subjects and
the facilitating effect of glucose. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 1988, 48, 1424–1430. [PubMed]
80.
Patel, C.;
Douard, V.;
Yu, S.;
Gao, N.;
Ferraris, R.P. Transport, metabolism, and endosomal
trafficking-dependent regulation of intestinal fructose absorption. FASEB J. 2015, 29, 4046–4058. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
81.
Stocks, B.; Betts, J.A.; McGawley, K. Effects of carbohydrate dose and frequency on metabolism,
gastrointestinal discomfort, and cross-country skiing performance. Scand. J. Med. Sci. Sports 2016, 26,
1100–1108. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
82.
Bangsbo, J.; Gollnick, P.D.; Graham, T.E.; Saltin, B. Substrates for muscle glycogen synthesis in recovery from
intense exercise in man. J. Physiol. 1991, 434, 423–440. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
83.
Kruszynska, Y.T.; Mulford, M.I.; Baloga, J.; Yu, J.G.; Olefsky, J.M. Regulation of skeletal muscle hexokinase ii
by insulin in nondiabetic and niddm subjects. Diabetes 1998, 47, 1107–1113. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
84.
Karlsson, H.K.; Chibalin, A.V.; Koistinen, H.A.; Yang, J.; Koumanov, F.; Wallberg-Henriksson, H.; Zierath, J.R.;
Holman, G.D. Kinetics of glut4 trafficking in rat and human skeletal muscle. Diabetes 2009, 58, 847–854.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
85.
Laakso, M.; Edelman, S.V.; Brechtel, G.; Baron, A.D. Effects of epinephrine on insulin-mediated glucose
uptake in whole body and leg muscle in humans: Role of blood flow. Am. J. Physiol. 1992, 263, E199–E204.
[PubMed]
86.
Yki-Jarvinen, H.; Mott, D.; Young, A.A.; Stone, K.; Bogardus, C. Regulation of glycogen synthase and
phosphorylase activities by glucose and insulin in human skeletal muscle. J. Clin. Invest. 1987, 80, 95–100.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
87.
Jensen, J.; Ruge, T.; Lai, Y.C.; Svensson, M.K.; Eriksson, J.W. Effects of adrenaline on whole-body glucose
metabolism and insulin-mediated regulation of glycogen synthase and pkb phosphorylation in human
skeletal muscle. Metabolism 2011, 60, 215–226. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Nutrients 2017, 9, 344
15 of 15
88.
Bowtell, J.L.; Gelly, K.; Jackman, M.L.; Patel, A.; Simeoni, M.; Rennie, M.J. Effect of different carbohydrate
drinks on whole body carbohydrate storage after exhaustive exercise. J. Appl. Physiol. 2000, 88, 1529–1536.
[PubMed]
89.
Blom, P.C.; Hostmark, A.T.; Vaage, O.; Kardel, K.R.; Maehlum, S. Effect of different post-exercise sugar diets
on the rate of muscle glycogen synthesis. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 1987, 19, 491–496. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
90.
Fuchs, C.J.; Gonzalez, J.T.; Beelen, M.; Cermak, N.M.; Smith, F.E.; Thelwall, P.E.; Taylor, R.; Trenell, M.I.;
Stevenson, E.J.; van Loon, L.J. Sucrose ingestion after exhaustive exercise accelerates liver, but not muscle
glycogen repletion when compared to glucose ingestion in trained athletes. J. Appl. Physiol. 2016, 120,
1328–1334. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
91.
Wallis, G.A.; Hulston, C.J.; Mann, C.H.; Roper, H.P.; Tipton, K.D.; Jeukendrup, A.E. Postexercise muscle
glycogen synthesis with combined glucose and fructose ingestion. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2008, 40, 1789–1794.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
92.
Trommelen, J.; Beelen, M.; Pinckaers, P.J.; Senden, J.M.; Cermak, N.M.; van Loon, L.J. Fructose coingestion
does not accelerate postexercise muscle glycogen repletion. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2016, 48, 907–912.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
93.
McLane, J.A.; Holloszy, J.O. Glycogen synthesis from lactate in the three types of skeletal muscle. J. Biol. Chem.
1979, 254, 6548–6553. [PubMed]
94.
Ullrich, S.S.; Fitzgerald, P.C.; Schober, G.; Steinert, R.E.; Horowitz, M.; Feinle-Bisset, C. Intragastric
administration of leucine or isoleucine lowers the blood glucose response to a mixed-nutrient drink by
different mechanisms in healthy, lean volunteers. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 2016, 104, 1274–1284. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
95.
Decombaz, J.; Jentjens, R.; Ith, M.; Scheurer, E.; Buehler, T.; Jeukendrup, A.; Boesch, C. Fructose and galactose
enhance postexercise human liver glycogen synthesis. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2011, 43, 1964–1971. [PubMed]
96.
Gentilcore, D.; Chaikomin, R.; Jones, K.L.; Russo, A.; Feinle-Bisset, C.; Wishart, J.M.; Rayner, C.K.;
Horowitz, M. Effects of fat on gastric emptying of and the glycemic, insulin, and incretin responses to
a carbohydrate meal in type 2 diabetes. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 2006, 91, 2062–2067. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
97.
Rigden, D.J.; Jellyman, A.E.; Frayn, K.N.; Coppack, S.W. Human adipose tissue glycogen levels and responses
to carbohydrate feeding. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 1990, 44, 689–692. [PubMed]
98.
Oz, G.; Henry, P.G.; Seaquist, E.R.; Gruetter, R. Direct, noninvasive measurement of brain glycogen
metabolism in humans. Neurochem. Int. 2003, 43, 323–329. [CrossRef]
99.
Biava, C.; Grossman, A.; West, M. Ultrastructural observations on renal glycogen in normal and pathologic
human kidneys. Lab. Investig. 1966, 15, 330–356. [PubMed]
© 2017 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
