 Challenges in Diagnosing Medication Resins in Surgical
Pathology Specimens
A Crystal-Clear Review Guide
Raul S. Gonzalez, MD; Stephen M. Lagana, MD; Oliver Szeto, MD; Christina A. Arnold, MD
� Context.—Medication resins, including Kayexalate, se-
velamer, and bile acid sequestrants, can be encountered in
gastrointestinal tract specimens. Their classic histologic
appearances have been well documented, but pathologist
recognition of the resins is 75%, patient history is not
always available, and atypical morphologic findings are
sometimes present.
Objective.—To offer a succinct overview of resins in the
gastrointestinal tract, including typical and atypical ap-
pearances, in order to serve as a quick reference guide.
Data Sources.—The study comprises published litera-
ture, survey data, and our personal experiences.
Conclusions.—Classic morphology is the benchmark for
identifying these resins, but color, location, and fish scale
pattern can deviate from the norm, making proper
identification a challenge. Patient history should be sought
whenever possible, and ancillary staining is an option
when necessary. Additionally, the presence of resins
should prompt the pathologist to search for potentially
related diagnoses (namely, causes of diarrhea in patients
on bile acid sequestrants and diagnoses associated with
renal failure in patients on Kayexalate or sevelamer).
(Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2017;141:1276–1282; doi:
10.5858/arpa.2016-0587-RA)
R
esins are nonabsorbable medications that facilitate ion
exchange. They are most commonly orally ingested and
can be identified anywhere along the tubular gastrointes-
tinal (GI) tract and in the lung, in cases of aspiration.1
Because the resins have differential capabilities to cause
(sometimes) fatal mucosal injury, recognition and timely
diagnosis can be life-saving. A 2016 online survey admin-
istered through the Rodger C. Haggitt Gastrointestinal
Pathology Society and Twitter revealed that 75% of 99
pathologists with a GI subspecialized interest had never
seen resin administration documented on the pathology
requisition. As a result, it is critical for pathologists to be
aware of the typical and atypical presentations of medication
resins. Of those who answered the survey, 24% incorrectly
identified the classic resin appearance on hematoxylin-eosin
(H&E) staining. Below is a review of the resins’ classic
morphology, common diagnostic pitfalls, helpful ancillary
studies, and reporting strategies.
CLASSIC MORPHOLOGY
To date, 3 types of resins have been identified (Figure 1).
The bile acid sequestrants (BAS) target bile acids and are
mainly used to treat diarrhea.2 They have been used safely
for more than 43 years and are considered biologically inert.
The BAS are usually bright orange on H&E, with a
rectangular shape and a smooth or glassy texture. They
can occasionally feature minute, pink dotlike inclusions. The
BAS include colesevelam (Welchol, Daiichi Sankyo Inc,
Tokyo, Japan), colestipol (Colestid, Pfizer Inc, New York,
New York), and cholestyramine (LoCholest, Warner Chil-
cott Inc, Rockaway, New Jersey; Prevalite, Upsher-Smith
Laboratories, Maple Grove, Minnesota; and Questran, Par
Pharmaceutical, Woodcliff Lake, New Jersey). Because these
medications are morphologically identical, they are best
diagnosed as ‘‘bile acid sequestrants,’’ unless a chart review
is performed to verify the specific BAS administered.2
Kayexalate
(Concordia
International
Corp,
Oakville,
Ontario, Canada), also known as sodium polystyrene
sulfonate, is a potassium-binding agent used in patients
with renal failure. It is rectangular in shape, purple on H&E,
and has ‘‘fish scales,’’ or internal demarcations that appear
similar to the external surface of a fish. Kayexalate is well
known
for
causing
sometimes
fatal
bowel
ischemia,
ulcerations, necrosis, pseudotumors, and perforations.3–15
The pathogenic properties of Kayexalate have long been
attributed to its hyperosmotic sorbitol diluent and not the
resins themselves. However, recent rat studies demonstrat-
ed that Kayexalate alone can result in fatal colonic necrosis,
Accepted for publication December 15, 2016.
Published as an Early Online Release February 7, 2017.
From the Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York (Dr
Gonzalez); the Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia
University Medical Center/New York Presbyterian Hospital, New
York, New York (Dr Lagana); Pathline Labs/Histopathology LLC,
Ramsey, New Jersey (Dr Szeto); and the Department of Pathology,
The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus (Dr
Arnold).
The authors have no relevant financial interest in the products or
companies described in this article.
Reprints: Christina A. Arnold, MD, Department of Pathology, The
Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, 410 W 10th Ave,
Columbus, OH 43210-1228 (email: christina.arnold@OSUMC.edu).
1276
Arch Pathol Lab Med—Vol 141, September 2017
Medication Resins Review Guide—Gonzalez et al
 suggesting that the resins themselves may be pathogenic.16
Similar conclusions have been drawn from a meta-analysis
of 58 cases of adverse events in patients on Kayexalate with
or without sorbitol.5
Sevelamer (Renvela and Renagel, Sanofi SA, Paris,
France) is the newest member of the resin family. It is a
phosphate-lowering medication used in patients with renal
failure.17 It is rectangular in shape and usually 2-toned in
color on H&E, with a pink center and yellow edges; it also
has fish scales. In the initial description, sevelamer was
associated
with
mucosal
injury
in
a
dose-dependent
manner, suggesting it may have the potential to cause
significant
injury.17
Subsequent
reports
have
reported
similar associations.18–24
ATYPICAL MORPHOLOGY
Nonclassical resin morphology represents a common
diagnostic challenge. The most common resin pitfalls are
discussed below.
H&E Color Is (Sometimes) Overrated
Sevelamer can be variably brown, deep red, or light
purple, thereby overlapping in appearance with both the
BAS and Kayexalate (Figure 2). In addition, the BAS can be
black, deep red, or dull orange, overlapping in color with
sevelamer. Potential factors influencing the resin coloration
include variable substrate binding and the background
pH.17–25
Fish Scales Are (Sometimes) Overrated
Historically, considerable weight has been placed on the
presence or absence, size, and shape of fish scales in
discerning the resins from each other. However, similar
fish scale patterns can be reproduced with histologically
processed gallbladder calculi, dystrophic calcifications,
unspecified luminal contents (possibly food), and large
BAS fragments (Figures 3 through 5). This raises the
possibility that the fish scales are a nonspecific histologic
artifact from knife-cutting of thick tissue. To those
unfamiliar with these atypical presentations, fish scales in
large BAS resins can lead to a misdiagnosis of Kayexalate
or sevelamer, and cases of Kayexalate lacking fish scales
could be erroneously overlooked. Moreover, in the initial
description of sevelamer,17 its fish scales were reported as
large and broad with curvilinear points of intersection, and
those of Kayexalate were described as narrow with
perpendicular lines of intersection. As experience with
these resins has grown, we now know that the shape of the
fish scales is not specific to the resin type. Kayexalate,
sevelamer, and BAS can have either narrow or broad fish
scales, although fish scales in BAS are uncommon and
almost always limited to large resins or thick sections
(Figures 4 and 5).
Figure 1.
Classic features of medication resins. Welchol: Daiichi Sankyo Inc, Tokyo, Japan; Colestid: Pfizer Inc, New York, New York; LoCholest:
Warner Chilcott Inc, Rockaway, New Jersey; Prevalite: Upsher-Smith Laboratories, Maple Grove, Minnesota; Questran: Par Pharmaceutical,
Woodcliff Lake, New Jersey; Kayexalate: Concordia International Corp, Oakville, Ontario, Canada; and Renvela and Renagel: Sanofi SA, Paris,
France. Abbreviations: AFB, acid-fast bacillus; H&E, hematoxylin-eosin (H&E, original magnification 31000).
Arch Pathol Lab Med—Vol 141, September 2017
Medication Resins Review Guide—Gonzalez et al
1277
 Resin Shape Is (Sometimes) Overrated
Classically, the resins are described as crystalline or
rectangular in shape. More recently, rounded structures
have been occasionally described with BAS, specifically
colestipol26 (Figure 6).
Location Is (Sometimes) Overrated
The resins are almost always identified along the tubular GI
tract, but they can occasionally be identified in unusual
locations. We have seen cutaneous resin deposition in
ostomy resection specimens. We have also observed resins
in the gallbladder of a patient with a history of biliary stenting
and in a separate surgical resection of a necrotic pancreas.
Theoretically, the resins may have escaped the tubular GI
tract in these cases by way of the adjoining bowel segment,
stent manipulation, and fistula formation between the
necrotic pancreas and stomach. Regardless of their location,
recognition is important to communicate with the clinician.
Figure 2.
The resin color on hematoxylin-eosin is sometimes overrated. Sevelamer is classically 2-toned, with a pink center and yellow edges (see
Figure 1). It can occasionally appear variably brown (not shown), deep red (A), or light purple (B), and overlap with both Kayexalate and bile acid
sequestrants (BAS). The BAS are classically bright orange, but they can appear black in thick sections (C) or dull orange (D), the latter overlapping in
color with sevelamer (hematoxylin-eosin, original magnifications 31000 [A, C, and D] and 3400 [B]).
1278
Arch Pathol Lab Med—Vol 141, September 2017
Medication Resins Review Guide—Gonzalez et al
 Figure 3.
Fish scales are sometimes overrated, part 1. Fish scales can be seen in histologically processed gallbladder calculi (A), dystrophic
calcifications (B), unspecified luminal material (favor food; C), and occasionally in large bile acid sequestrant fragments (see Figures 4, C and F, and
5), suggesting that fish scales are a histologic artifact of knife-cutting. Alternatively, rarely Kayexalate lacks fish scales (D). Specimen ink is also a
common resin mimic; it appears with a granular consistency at high power (E and F) (hematoxylin-eosin, original magnification 3400).
Figure 4.
Fish scales are sometimes overrated, part 2. Kayexalate, sevelamer, and bile acid sequestrants (BAS) can have either narrow fish scales
with perpendicular points of intersection (A, B, and C, respectively), or can have broad fish scales with curvilinear points of intersection (D, E, and F,
respectively) (hematoxylin-eosin, original magnifications 31000 [A, B, and D through F] and 3400 [C]).
Arch Pathol Lab Med—Vol 141, September 2017
Medication Resins Review Guide—Gonzalez et al
1279
 ANCILLARY STUDIES
As illustrated above, almost every ‘‘rule’’ of classic resin
morphology can be broken. To further compound these
diagnostic challenges, it is not uncommon to have more
than one resin in an individual case (Figure 5). The best way
to sort out these complicated cases is a combination of the
H&E morphology with a firm familiarity of the spectrum of
resin morphology. If ancillary studies are desired, our
experience is that the acid-fast bacillus special stain is the
most reliable ancillary tool; it stains BAS dull yellow,
Kayexalate black, and sevelamer magenta.2,27,28 We find
periodic acid–Schiff too inconsistent to be helpful.2
Another helpful tip is to scan all of the resin fragments
present in a slide. The atypical presentations discussed
above are usually only focal, with the more characteristic
resin morphology more easily seen in the surrounding resin
fragments. For example, fish scales are usually restricted to
large BAS resins and thick sections, with the more typical
smooth BAS texture consistently seen in the smaller
fragments2 (Figure 4, C). Above all, a low threshold for a
chart review or discussion with the clinician about the
medication list can be reassuring.
RESINS AS CLUES TO CRITICAL DIAGNOSES
The most important reason to recognize the resins is to
alert the clinician to the potentially dangerous effects of
Kayexalate and sevelamer when mucosal injury is seen.
Resins are also worthwhile to recognize because they can
serve as clues to other critical diagnoses. For example, BAS
are used to treat diarrhea and should serve as clues to look
for subtle causes of diarrhea, such as cytomegalovirus,
mycophenolate injury, and graft-versus-host disease. Sim-
ilarly, Kayexalate and sevelamer are used in the setting of
renal failure and should serve as clues to look for other
diagnoses associated with renal failure, such as amyloidosis,
cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus, Candida, and myco-
phenolate (Figure 7).
RESIN REPORTING
Atypical presentations and incomplete or inaccessible
medication lists can serve as barriers to resin identification.
Our approach is always to report the resins when they are
present
(Figure
8).
Based
on
the
wide
spectrum
of
morphology, recognition that we are at the very beginning
of understanding of these medications, and our personal
experience, our approach is to topline the specific resin only
when the morphology and location are classic and can be
confirmed by the clinician or review of the medication
record. Otherwise, we recommend a topline descriptive
diagnosis followed by a note that discusses the favored
diagnosis along with the risk of associated mucosal injury.
As an aside, at one point, all BAS were called ‘‘cholestyr-
amine’’
in
our
reports.
When
a
displeased
clinician
requested an amendment because the patient had never
been prescribed cholestyramine, we learned to adopt a more
descriptive and open-minded approach to the resins,
including medication review when possible. This interaction
also ultimately led to the discovery that BAS represent a
number of distinct medications that are histologically
identical.2
We consider Kayexalate or sevelamer associated with
mucosal injury a clinical emergency, and we document the
verbal conveyance of this critical information to the clinician
in an attempt to ensure that the patient is carefully
monitored
to
prevent
potential
deleterious
outcomes.
However, if Kayexalate or sevelamer is seen without
mucosal injury, we simply report the finding and explain
in the note the known associations with mucosal injury (but
we do not emergently contact the clinician). Examples are
detailed below.
Example 1: Classic Sevelamer Morphology and Site,
No Associated Injury, Sevelamer Administration Con-
firmed by Review of the Medication List; Similar
Approach For Analogous Case of Kayexalate.—Colon,
Figure 5.
Beware that patients with complications may have more than one resin onboard. This fatal case of ischemic colitis showed abundant
Kayexalate (arrow) and bile acid sequestrant (BAS) resins (bracket, asterisks) at the perforation site. Note that both the Kayexalate and the large BAS
resin (bracket) have broad fish scales, a common diagnostic pitfall seen in large or thick BAS fragments. The smaller BAS resins retain the
characteristic smooth texture free of fish scales (asterisks) (hematoxylin-eosin, original magnification 3400).
Figure 6.
Most resins appear rectangular or crystalline in shape, but the granule form can occasionally appear round, as depicted in this case of
colestipol (Colestid). Note that bile acid sequestrants may occasionally feature minute dotlike bright pink inclusions (arrows) (hematoxylin-eosin,
original magnification 31000).
1280
Arch Pathol Lab Med—Vol 141, September 2017
Medication Resins Review Guide—Gonzalez et al
 biopsy: ‘‘Sevelamer resins identified in otherwise unremark-
able colonic mucosa, See note.’’
Note.—In the small series available, sevelamer was associ-
ated with mucosal injury in a dose-dependent manner.
Clinical correlation was suggested.17
Example 2: Classic BAS Morphology With No Clinical
Confirmation Available, or Atypical BAS Morpholo-
gy.—‘‘Eosinophilic crystals identified, See note.’’
Note.—No clinical notes are available at time of slide review.
Eosinophilic crystals are seen on H&E. These structures are
yellow on acid-fast bacillus and are suggestive of BAS
(colesevelam [Welchol], colestipol [Colestid], cholestyr-
amine [LoCholest, Prevalite, Questran]). In the small series
available, BAS had no established role in causing mucosal
damage.2
Example 3: Classic Kayexalate Morphology With
Associated Injury but No Clinical Confirmation, or
Atypical Kayexalate Morphology, or Atypical Loca-
tion.—‘‘Purple crystals identified within pancreatic pseudo-
cyst, See note.’’
Note.—Scattered purple crystals with fish scales are seen on
H&E. These structures are black on acid-fast bacillus and
suggestive of Kayexalate. Kayexalate has been associated
with significant mucosal injury, including ischemia, ulcera-
tions, necrosis, and perforations. Clinical correlation sug-
gested. Dr [pathologist] verbally discussed these findings
with Dr [clinician] on [date] at [time].3,6,7
CONCLUSIONS
In summary, identification of colorful medications in the
tubular GI tract will only continue to increase as endoscopy
Figure 8.
A diagnostic algorithm to resin reporting. Abbreviation: H&E, hematoxylin-eosin.
Figure 7.
Resins can be clues to other critical diagnoses. Both sevelamer and Kayexalate are used in patients with renal failure and should prompt
consideration of other related diagnoses, such as amyloidosis, as seen in this case. The arrows highlight sevelamer (A). Note the sevelamer color is
atypical on hematoxylin-eosin and appears dark red, as opposed to its classic 2-toned color with a pink center and yellow edges (compare with
Figure 1). The adjoining amyloid is highlighted with brackets (B) and is bright orange on a Congo Red stain under direct light (C) (hematoxylin-eosin,
original magnifications 3100 [A] and 3400 [B]; original magnification 3400 [C]).
Arch Pathol Lab Med—Vol 141, September 2017
Medication Resins Review Guide—Gonzalez et al
1281
 rates and the incidence of polypharmacy rise. The resins are
commonly encountered medications that can be diagnosed
on H&E with awareness of the diagnostic pearls and pitfalls
discussed above. Timely diagnosis can be life-saving in the
cases of Kayexalate and sevelamer when the resins are seen
in association with mucosal injury; BAS are biologically
inert. Recognition of the resins may also provide important
clues
to
other
critical
diagnoses.
Lastly,
this
review
emphasizes effective reporting strategies with an emphasis
on conveying the risk of injury in the pathology report.
References
1. Mukhopadhyay S, Katzenstein AL. Pulmonary disease due to aspiration of
food and other particulate matter: a clinicopathologic study of 59 cases
diagnosed on biopsy or resection specimens. Am J Surg Pathol. 2007;31(5):
752–759.
2. Arnold M, Swanson BJ, Crowder CD, et al. Colesevelam and colestipol:
novel medication resins in the gastrointestinal tract. Am J Surg Pathol. 2014;
38(11):1530–1537.
3. Abraham SC, Bhagavan BS, Lee LA, Rashid A, Wu TT. Upper gastrointes-
tinal tract injury in patients receiving kayexalate (sodium polystyrene sulfonate) in
sorbitol: clinical, endoscopic, and histopathologic findings. Am J Surg Pathol.
2001;25(5):637–644.
4. Foresti V. Intestinal obstruction due to kayexalate in a patient concurrently
treated with aluminum hydroxide and morphine sulfate. Clin Nephrol. 1994;
41(4):252.
5. Harel Z, Harel S, Shah PS, Wald R, Perl J, Bell CM. Gastrointestinal adverse
events with sodium polystyrene sulfonate (Kayexalate) use: a systematic review.
Am J Med. 2013;126(3):264.e9–24.
6. Lillemoe KD, Romolo JL, Hamilton SR, Pennington LR, Burdick JF, Williams
GM. Intestinal necrosis due to sodium polystyrene (Kayexalate) in sorbitol
enemas: clinical and experimental support for the hypothesis. Surgery. 1987;
101(3):267–272.
7. Rashid A, Hamilton SR. Necrosis of the gastrointestinal tract in uremic
patients as a result of sodium polystyrene sulfonate (Kayexalate) in sorbitol: an
underrecognized condition. Am J Surg Pathol. 1997;21(1):60–69.
8. Scott TR, Graham SM, Schweitzer EJ, Bartlett ST. Colonic necrosis
following sodium polystyrene sulfonate (Kayexalate)-sorbitol enema in a renal
transplant patient: report of a case and review of the literature. Dis Colon Rectum.
1993;36(6):607–609.
9. Wootton FT, Rhodes DF, Lee WM, et al. Colonic necrosis with Kayexalate-
sorbitol enemas after renal transplantation. Ann Intern Med. 1989;111(11):947–
949.
10. Bui M, Chou SY, Faubert P, Loarte P, Cohen R. Resin-induced colonic
pseudotumor: rare complication from chronic use of potassium binders in a
hemodialysis patient. Case Rep Nephrol. 2016;2016:3692086.
11. Rodr´
ıguez-Luna MR, Ferna
´ndez-Rivera E, Guarneros-Za
´rate JE, Tueme-
Izaguirre J, Herna
´ndez-M´
endez JR. Cation exchange resins and colonic
perforation: what surgeons need to know. Int J Surg Case Rep. 2015;16:102–105.
12. Akagun T, Yazici H, Gulluoglu MG, Yegen G, Turkmen A. Colonic necrosis
and perforation due to calcium polystyrene sulfonate in a uraemic patient: a case
report. NDT Plus. 2011;4(6):402–403.
13. Dunlap RH, Martinez R. Total colectomy for colon perforation after
Kayexalate administration: a case report and literature review of a rare
complication. J Surg Case Rep. 2016;2016(10):pii: rjw167.
14. Trottier V, Drolet S, Morcos MW. Ileocolic perforation secondary to sodium
polystyrene sulfonate in sorbitol use: a case report. Can J Gastroenterol. 2009;
23(10):689–690.
15. Bomback AS, Woosley JT, Kshirsagar AV. Colonic necrosis due to sodium
polystyrene sulfate (Kayexalate). Am J Emerg Med. 2009;27(6):753.e1–2.
16. Ayoub I, Oh MS, Gupta R, McFarlane M, Babinska A, Salifu MO. Colon
necrosis due to sodium polystyrene sulfonate with and without sorbitol: an
experimental study in rats. PLoS One. 2015;10(9):e0137636.
17. Swanson BJ, Limketkai BN, Liu TC, et al. Sevelamer crystals in the
gastrointestinal tract (GIT): a new entity associated with mucosal injury. Am J Surg
Pathol. 2013;37(11):1686–1693.
18. Amer S, Nguyen C, DePetris G. Images of the month: gastric pneumatosis
due to sevelamer-mediated necrosis. Am J Gastroenterol. 2015;110(6):799.
19. Desai M, Reiprich A, Khov N, Yang Z, Mathew A, Levenick J. Crystal-
associated colitis with ulceration leading to hematochezia and abdominal pain.
Case Rep Gastroenterol. 2016;10(2):332–337.
20. Okwara C, Choi C, Park JY. Sevelamer-induced colitis presenting as a
pseudotumor. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2015;13(7):A39–A40.
21. Tieu C, Moreira RK, Song LM, Majumder S, Papadakis KA, Hogan MC. A
case report of sevelamer-associated recto-sigmoid ulcers. BMC Gastroenterol.
2016;16:20.
22. Yamaguchi T, Ohyama S, Furukawa H, et al. Sigmoid colon diverticula
perforation associated with sevelamer hydrochloride administration: a case
report. Ann Med Surg (Lond). 2016;10:57–60.
23. Chintamaneni P, Das R, Kuan SF, Kermanshahi TR, Hashash JG.
Hematochezia associated with Sevalamer-induced mucosal injury. ACG Case
Rep J. 2014;1(3):145–147.
24. Madan P, Bhayana S, Chandra P, Hughes JI. Lower gastrointestinal
bleeding: association with Sevelamer use. World J Gastroenterol. 2008;14(16):
2615–2616.
25. Chaplin AJ. The use of histological techniques for the demonstration of ion
exchange resins. J Clin Pathol. 1999;52(10):776–779.
26. Gonzalez RS, Schwartz DA, Shi C. Colestipol granules in the colon:
macroscopic and microscopic findings. Histopathology. 2015;67(1):141–142.
27. Voltaggio L, Lam-Himlin D, Limketkai BN, Singhi AD, Arnold CA. Message
in a bottle: decoding medication injury patterns in the gastrointestinal tract. J Clin
Pathol. 2014;67(10):903–912.
28. Arnold CA, Bhaijee F, Lam-Himlin D. Fifty shades of chronic colitis: non-
infectious imposters of inflammatory bowel disease. Diagn Histopathol. 2015;
21(7):276–282.
1282
Arch Pathol Lab Med—Vol 141, September 2017
Medication Resins Review Guide—Gonzalez et al
