 Healthy lifestyle technologies  
 
 
1 
Young people’s uses of wearable healthy lifestyle technologies; surveillance, self-
surveillance and resistance 
 
Victoria A Goodyeara, Charlotte Kernerb, and Mikael Quennerstedtc 
aSchool of Sport, Exercise and Rehabilitation Sciences, University of Birmingham, UK 
bDepartment of Life Sciences, Brunel University London, UK 
 cSchool of Health Sciences, Örebro University, Sweden 
 
*Corresponding Author: Victoria A Goodyear, School of Sport, Exercise and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK. Email: 
v.a.goodyear@bham.ac.uk.
 Healthy lifestyle technologies  
 
 
2 
Abstract 
An international evidence-base demonstrates that healthy lifestyle digital technologies, like 
exergames, health-related mobile applications (‘apps’) and wearable health devices are being 
used more and more within educational settings. Despite this, there is a lack of in-depth 
empirical evidence on young people’s experiences and uses of healthy lifestyle technologies. 
In this article we focus on young people’s uses of a wearable health device – Fitbit – and the 
associated health app. Informed by the work of Foucault, the purpose is to investigate the 
surveillance, self-surveillance and resistance that occur by young people. One hundred 13-14 
years olds (53 females, 47 males), from five physical education classes in two UK schools 
participated. Data were generated through 8 focus group interviews, and the nominal 
interview group technique was applied. Data were analyzed using key concepts from 
Foucault’s theoretical framework. The results demonstrated that, the daily 10,000 step and 
calorie burning targets set by the Fitbit device encouraged the young people to do more 
physical activity. Increases in physical activity occurred because of the self-surveillant 
practices promoted by the Fitbit through; (i) the monitoring and recording of steps and 
calories burned, and (ii) peer comparison (or monitoring). Surveillance and self-surveillance 
practices, however, were clearly connected to health equating to fitness and being ‘fit’ or not 
being ‘fat’. These narrow interpretations of health, equally, underpinned resistance. Daily step 
and calorie burning targets, (i) did not sustain young people’s engagement with the device 
beyond a few weeks, (ii) promoted negative feelings, and (iii) the device was resisted because 
it did not record physical activity accurately as part of young people’s daily lives. In turn, the 
young people resisted the educational value of the Fitbit and demonstrated a sceptical stance 
toward introducing health devices in school and physical education settings.  
 
Keywords: Fitbit, physical activity, biopedagogies, gaze, power relations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Healthy lifestyle technologies  
 
 
3 
An international evidence-base demonstrates that healthy lifestyle digital technologies, like 
exergames, health-related mobile applications (‘apps’) and wearable health devices are used 
more and more within educational settings (see Casey et al., 2017; Gard, 2014). The intent of 
such technology-integration is largely based on the feasibility of these devices and apps to 
promote and/or enhance health, in terms of physical activity, body image perception, and 
diet/nutritional behaviours (Dennison et al., 2013; Dute et al., 2016). A high level of advocacy 
for healthy lifestyle digital technologies is also evident in international policy (Rich & Miah, 
2017). Digital technologies are increasingly being positioned as cost-effective preventative 
solutions to rising levels of obesity, sedentary behaviour and associated non-communicable 
diseases (HM Government, 2015; World Health Organisation [WHO], 2011).  
 
Recent critical debates point at problematic consequences of the surveillance practices 
promoted by health devices and apps (Petherick, 2015; Rich & Miah, 2017; Williamson, 
2015). Surveillance is the ‘self-tracking practices [that] are directed at regularly monitoring 
and recording, and often measuring, elements of an individual’s behaviours or bodily 
functions’ (Lupton, 2016, p. 2). In young adults, self-tracking practices of healthy lifestyle 
technologies can impact negatively on health and wellbeing by encouraging obsessive/ 
addictive monitoring behaviours (Lupton, 2016) and by influencing body dissatisfaction, 
negative mood states and extreme weight loss behaviours (see Lewallen and Behm-Morawitz, 
2016). Despite the potential for negative impacts, self-tracking could become an imposed 
school practice (Lupton, 2014; Williamson, 2015). Quantifying and ranking physical activity 
in a physical education context could further impact negatively on young people’s health 
knowledge and behaviours, by health becoming a practice of being told, adopting and 
repeating easily described behaviours (Gard, 2014; Rich & Miah, 2017).  
 Healthy lifestyle technologies  
 
 
4 
These narrow and in many senses reductive notions of health in schools have widely been 
reported from many countries (e.g. Burrows & Wright, 2004; Harris et al., 2016; Powell & 
Fitzpatrick, 2015; Quennerstedt, Burrows & Maivorsdotter, 2010). Children and young people 
express quite a reductive idea of health relates to body weight and size and where health is 
often connected to avoiding being fat (Burrows & Wright, 2004; Harris et al., 2016; Powell & 
Fitzpatrick, 2015). Equally, studies show that there is a danger that self-tracking will restrict 
teachers’ capacity to support young people to become healthy citizens by self-tracking 
governing and controlling the entire educational process (Lupton, 2014; Williamson, 2015).   
 
Despite opportunities, potential negative impacts, and possibilities that self-tracking will be 
imposed, there is a lack of in-depth empirical evidence on young people’s experiences and 
uses of healthy lifestyle technologies (Dennison et al., 2013; Rich & Miah, 2017). This is an 
unfortunate omission, given the clear international policy and practice-referenced drives to 
use digital technologies to promote health, alongside the understandings that young people are 
active users of a range of apps and digital devices. The risk of this gap in research is that we 
continue to view technology either in terms of ‘the solution’ or as a quite deterministic 
technology of surveillance where young people’s actions and agency seldom are taken into 
account. Rich and Miah (2017) and Petherick (2015) thus call for more research on what and 
how young people learn about health and how they experience the surveillance mechanisms 
of digital technologies. 
 
In this article we focus on young people’s uses of a wearable health device – Fitbit – and the 
associated health app during an eight-week school-based intervention. The purpose is to 
investigate the surveillance, self-surveillance and resistance that occur by young people. The 
research questions are:  
 Healthy lifestyle technologies  
 
 
5 
- 
How does the process of health surveillance operate when Fitbits are used by young 
people? 
- 
How do young people’s self-surveillance appear as a consequence of this health 
surveillance? 
- 
How does the possibility for resistance stand out when Fitbits are used in school? 
 
Young people, digital technologies and health 
Digital tools used for self-tracking, measurement and quantification, that according to Pink 
and Fors (2017) also traverses the online/offline binary, are becoming increasingly popular in 
young people (Depper & Howe, 2017).For example, one quarter of American 13-18 year olds 
reported using health-related apps, digital games and/or wearable devices (Wartella et al., 
2016). The evidence-base on young people’s experiences and uses of healthy lifestyle 
technologies is however limited and inconclusive (Dennison et al., 2013; Petherick, 2015; 
Rich and Miah, 2017). A recent systematic review on adolescents and young adults (age 12-
25 years) identified only two empirical studies that measured the health-related effects of 
using nutritional and/or physical activity apps (Dute et al., 2016). Further, while a non-
commercial app resulted in weight reduction and improvements to motivation, other 
nonrandomized interventions report no significant differences in diet/nutrition and/or physical 
activity behaviours (Dute et al., 2016). In our own study, reductions in motivation were 
reported, alongside feelings of guilt and internal pressure (Kerner & Goodyear, 2017). 
Similarly, Depper and Howe’s (2017) concluded that apps reinforced narrow understanding of 
health that was related to fitness and slenderness in adolescent girls. Further understanding 
young people’s experiences of healthy lifestyle technologies would accordingly provide much 
needed insights into the health of young people.  
 
Surveillance  
 Healthy lifestyle technologies  
 
 
6 
As beautifully laid out by Galiĉ and colleagues (2017), there are different possible routes to 
go down in order to explore surveillance, self-surveillance and resistance. The basis for our 
study has been the work of Michel Foucault and his work on surveillance. Through the 
metaphor of Panopticon (a tower in a prison), Foucault (1977) discussed practices of 
surveillance in terms of how prisoners were being watched or who felt they were being 
watched. Foucault suggested that the prisoners internalized the gazes of the prison guards and, 
in turn, regulated their actions toward certain norms (Vaz & Bruno, 2003). Surveillance thus 
becomes a system of constant registration and constant inspection (Foucault, 1977/2008). The 
continual presence of the gaze (in our case the wearable health device and app) together with 
the regulation of actions, regardless of the actuality of the gaze, is what gives surveillance 
such deep rooted and enduring influence (Webb & Quennerstedt, 2010).  
 
Foucault’s Panopticon metaphor have however been criticised as being top-down, hierarchical 
and mainly focused on disciplinary aspects of surveillance, thus overemphasising surveillance 
in terms of ‘them on us’ (Galiĉ et al., 2017; Vaz & Bruno, 2003). Galiĉ et al (2017) also 
suggest that the metaphor is insufficient when studying technology and digital layers of 
surveillance. In our study, surveillance is therefore used as a tool to explore how power is 
exercised, but as Gallagher (2010) suggests the metaphor of Panopticon most fruitfully should 
be seen as a point of departure, something to build on and move beyond. We accordingly 
draw on Foucault’s work on surveillance, but as Vaz and Bruno (2003) suggest, add other 
propositions of his work on self-surveillance, resistance and power relations in order to make 
sense of how young people act in relation to a wearable health device and health app.  
 
In this sense, the practices of surveillance, at the same time, entail and promote self-
surveillance, which as Rose (1998) state are grounded in norms and claims of truth. Within 
 Healthy lifestyle technologies  
 
 
7 
the frame of this paper, self-surveillance involves certain truths about how health and healthy 
behaviour is privileged. For example, that healthy behaviour is about doing 10,000 steps per 
day. An acceptance of norms of health and the regulation of the self, in terms of self-
surveillance and in relation to self-tracking technologies like Fitbits, then becomes what 
Petherick (2015) calls a constant monitoring of young people’s daily health practices. 
Through the device and app young people potentially become subjects of both the 
normalising gaze of health as well as their own self-surveillance of who to become. 
 
With inspiration from Albrechslund (2008) we agree that individuals can resist surveillance 
and also embark on alternate ways to relate to technology and digitalisation. For this we need 
to be able to involve both the surveillance practices of what Lupton (2016) term imposed self-
tracking, as well as what Albrechtslund (2008) term ‘participatory surveillance’. where ‘users 
are actively engaged in surveillance themselves as watchers, but they also participate 
voluntarily and consciously in the role of watched’ (Galiĉ et al. 2017, p. 29). In this way, 
surveillance is not only analysed in the data as disciplinary and reproductive where the 
students are exposed the gaze, but also potentially involving pleasurable, empowering and 
participatory aspects of the practice (see Albrechtslund 2008; Best 2010; Whitson 2013). 
 
In order to explore resistance, we find Foucault’s (1982) notion of power as action-on-action 
helpful. Foucault argued that power and resistance are always interconnected in how power 
relations are manifested. Power relations guide or direct us to act in a field of greater or 
smaller possibilities. Power then is about both limitations and possibilities, where some 
actions are made possible and others not and where there always is a ‘possibility of action on 
the action of others’ (Foucault 1982, p. 345). It is accordingly through focusing on actions 
upon other actions that power relations can be understood. Power relations then: 
 Healthy lifestyle technologies  
 
 
8 
... operate on the field of possibilities in which the behaviour of active subjects is able to inscribe itself. It 
is a set of actions on possible actions; it incites, it induces, it seduces, it makes easier or more difficult; it 
releases or contrives, makes more probable or less; in the extreme, it constrains or forbids absolutely, but 
it is always a way of acting upon one or more acting subjects by virtue of their acting or being capable of 
action. A set of actions upon other actions. (Foucault 1982, p. 789) 
 
In this paper, we use the concepts of surveillance and self-surveillance with inspiration from 
the critical literature (e.g. Depper and Howe, 2017; Lupton, 2016; Petherick, 2015), but add 
young people into this equation in terms of resistance and how they act on these technologies, 
as well as on themselves and others.  
 
Methods 
Context and Participants 
A case study design was adopted to provide a contextually grounded, holistic, and detailed 
account on young people’s uses of the Fitbit device and app. The case was defined as, a group 
of 100 young people from two schools in the UK who wore a Fitbit and used the Fitbit device 
as part of an eight-week school-based intervention.  
 
One hundred 13-14 years olds (53 females, 47 males), from five physical education classes in 
two schools were invited to participate. A minimum age of 13 was selected due to Fitbit’s 
terms and conditions on age of use (Goodyear, 2017). The two schools varied in their socio-
economic background, that added variability to the data through providing different contexts 
in which the young people would use and experience the Fitbit. School one was a non-
selective private school in the South-East of England. School two was a comprehensive state 
school based in the North-West of England.  
 
Ethics  
Prior to data collection, university ethical approval was granted and informed consent and/or 
assent was obtained from all participants. A detailed account of the ethical procedures 
 Healthy lifestyle technologies  
 
 
9 
followed can be accessed in Goodyear (2017) that also details the briefing and debriefing 
lessons the researchers used to minimise risk and harm during the research. Fitbits terms and 
conditions were also consulted and followed. In the reporting of the findings, anonymity has 
been addressed through referring to the young people in a numerical format (e.g. Student 1).   
 
Fitbit 
The participants were provided with a Fitbit Charge to wear for an 8-week period. The main 
feature is the recording, monitoring, and measuring of the number of steps travelled during a 
day, where for example, a standardized target of 10,000 steps and calculations of calorie 
consumption is provided. The Fitbit Charge is a physical activity wristband that has a visual 
display. The visual display shows the time, steps taken, distance travelled, floors climbed and 
calories burnt. The individual’s data can be wirelessly synced to a computer or mobile device. 
An ‘app’ can be downloaded to a mobile device that automatically synchronizes the 
individual’s data from the wristband to the dashboard. The app allows the individual to 
monitor their data in graphs, adapt their physical activity goals, compete with friends, earn 
badges for physical activity progress, record exercise, track sleep patterns and log food intake. 
 
Data generation 
Data were generated from focus group interviews. While data was also generated from 
questionnaires and the Fitbit device, as part of the wider study design, these data sources did 
not align with the research questions and the stated purpose. This data was, therefore, not 
included. For further information, please see Kerner and Goodyear (2017).  
 
Focus group interviews took place following the eight-week period. Focus groups were 
selected to create a supportive environment that could encourage the expression of personal, 
multiple and sometimes conflicting viewpoints (Smith & Sparkes, 2016). 8 focus group 
 Healthy lifestyle technologies  
 
 
10 
interviews were conducted (3 interviews school 1, 5 interviews school 2; n = 41) with group 
sizes ranging from 4-6 participants, thus meeting an acceptable quantity of interviews and 
participants (Smith & Sparkes, 2016). Participants volunteered to participate in the interviews 
as part of the assent process. Focus groups were then formulated by the class teacher based 
on: (i) the inclusion of participants from a range of ability groups in their physical education 
classes; (ii) varied friendship groups; (iii) a range of socio-economic backgrounds.  
 
Focus group interviews were conducted by the researchers and a research assistant within a 
space adjacent to the participants’ physical education lesson. An adapted version of the 
nominal group technique was used (Macphail, 2001), and within the group, each pupil was 
asked to respond to a statement in turn that was presented to them by the interviewer. For 
example, statements introduced were “I would recommend using the Fitbit to other people my 
age because...” and “as a result of wearing the Fitbit I learnt...”. The benefit of this technique 
was that it provided data on participants’ immediate and individual responses to the 
statements. To gain further and in-depth insights, after every student had given their response 
they were then prompted to discuss their opinions and perceptions as a group until agreement 
was reached. The group were then guided by the interviewer to reach a level of consensus in 
their response to the statements. Toward the end of the interview, students were asked, in a 
more un-structured format, to share their experiences of the Fitbit. The interviews lasted 
between 15-30 minutes.  
 
Data analysis  
The concepts of surveillance, self-surveillance and resistance from Foucault were used to 
analyse the data. Tracy’s (2010) end goals for qualitative research, as well as Gordon and 
Patterson’s (2013) use of Tracy’s criteria, were further used as a compass during a process of 
 Healthy lifestyle technologies  
 
 
11 
deliberation in order to scrutinize and evaluate each step in the research process in terms of 
quality. 
 
In a first step, all transcripts were read through by the authors to identify important segments. 
The authors were guided by the concepts of surveillance, self-surveillance and resistance that 
occurs when young people relate to the Fitbits. In the second step, four analytical questions 
derived from Foucault were deliberated, decided upon and used. This process ensured that the 
research questions remained a central focus while also remaining open and reasonable to 
emerging understandings. Our analytical questions were: (i) how do students act upon the 
wearable technology device, (ii) what do they act upon and in what direction, (iii) how do 
students resist the use of the wearable technology device, and (iv) what is resisted?  
 
In the third step, we used a deliberative strategy, inspired by Tracy’s (2010) end goals for 
excellent qualitative research. Analytical questions were used by all researchers 
independently to answer the research questions. Each researcher formulated initial themes that 
became the basis for deliberation to make the themes something ‘in common’. In the fourth 
step, the agreed themes were discussed in relation to the end goals put forward by Tracy 
(2010) regarding presentation of results and a consensus over the final themes reached. The 
presentation of the analysis was organised in two sections: (i) surveillance and self-
surveillance; (ii) resistance. In the results section, data from School 1 is highlighted in 
interviews 1-4 and School 2 interviews 5-8. 
 
A deliberative strategy: a note on the process 
Even if we share Gordon and Patterson’s (2013) and Smith and McGannon’s (2017) 
hesitation about universal criteria for evaluating qualitative research, Tracy’s (2010) eight 
 Healthy lifestyle technologies  
 
 
12 
hallmarks for qualitative researchers can be useful as a guide for high quality research. In this 
paper, the hallmarks are not positioned as universally viable criteria but as aspects open for 
deliberation, and Tracy (2010), importantly, makes a distinction between ‘common end goals 
of strong research (universal hallmarks of quality) and the variant mean methods (practices, 
skills, and crafts) by which these goals are reached’ (p. 839). Tracy (2010) argues that with 
the distinction between end goals and variant means, the end goals are potentially flexible and 
that they in order to be relevant must undergo ‘dialogue, imagination, growth and 
improvisation’ (p. 837) to work with the practices, skills, and crafts of different research 
traditions. What, for example, credibility becomes will inevitably be different depending on 
tradition. In this sense, we agree with Smith and McGannon (2017) that judgements have to 
be made continuously in the research process and that these judgements must be made clear 
and open for scrutiny. 
 
Tracy’s (2010) end goals cover the whole research process from the scientific problem, via 
data collection, data analysis to presentation of the research. We have used the end goals as 
part of a deliberative strategy. Inspiration is drawn from Englund (2006), to argue that the 
deliberative strategy involves: ‘intelligent deliberation and balanced consideration of 
alternatives through mutual communication’ (p. 508). The deliberative strategy is accordingly 
not a process to come closer to an essential truth, but as a procedure to reach as high quality 
research as we can. In the process we have tried to clarify to ourselves and as a consequence 
to the readers our theoretical and methodological assumptions so that the research process and 
the claims are made clear (Smith & McGannon, 2017). The goal of the deliberation is a form 
of collective agreement where all co-authors are given the possibility to make judgements in 
relation to different alternatives, views and arguments. It is accordingly the process of 
deliberation in relation to the end goals rather than exclusively focusing on the categories, 
 Healthy lifestyle technologies  
 
 
13 
themes or results that is central for the quality of the research. The authors’ different 
backgrounds and experiences together with the respectful endeavour to clarify what the points 
of agreement were can be seen as a resource in the four steps of the analytical process in the 
study.  
 
Results  
Surveillance and self-surveillance 
Reaching 10,000 steps makes you fit and healthy 
Surveillance and self-surveillance were clearly connected to a norm of health equating to 
fitness and being ‘fit’. The young people spoke of how the Fitbit device and app supported 
their health and fitness: “[the Fitbit] helps a lot with keeping you fit” (Interview 5); “[it] helps 
you to improve your fitness” (Interview 7). The messages young people referred to as a 
measure of fitness were related to doing steps and burning calories.  
 
Steps were the strongest message the young people related to fitness. For example, “if you are 
interested in your fitness and everything, I think it does help you, like for your steps” 
(Interview 3). In turn, young people frequently spoke of how they valued the surveillance 
practices offered by the Fitbit: “I liked seeing how many steps [I] done” (Interview 4); “[it 
was] helpful for tracking how many steps you do” (Interview 6).  In this way students 
expressed pleasurable and participatory surveillance. 
 
In terms of the panoptical gaze, the norm of 10,000 steps per day became the measurement of 
health. For example, “I learnt that you have to do 10,000 steps a day” (Interview 7) to be 
healthy. This measure of health was seldom questioned, even though some young people 
created personal targets of, for example, 12,000 steps “I set it to 12,000 to see if I could hit it” 
 Healthy lifestyle technologies  
 
 
14 
(Interview 2). The understanding that health equals fitness and that fitness equals doing 
10,000 steps became a deep-rooted norm regarding health as a claim of truth. This truth was 
seen to stem from external sources: “what some people recommend” (Student 1) or that 
“some scientists” (Student 2) (Interview 2) recommend that doing 10.000 steps is healthy. 
 
The young people related to the messages from the self-surveillance practices through 
perceptions that they felt healthier if they achieved the goal of 10,000 steps: “it makes you 
feel good if you reach the target” (Interview 2); “it makes you feel healthier” (Interview 1). 
Due to these positive feelings, the young people claimed that they were more motivated to 
engage in physical activity: “when you have it, you want to do more…it motivated me, 
probably, to move around a bit more” (Interview 6); “it's helpful for tracking how many steps 
you do… and just kind of motivates you to do a bit more exercise than you might otherwise 
do” (Interview 6). Some young people became quite occupied with the self-surveillance 
practices in terms of constant monitoring of their step data: “I’m a bit addicted to check 
it…constantly checking it” (Interview 3); “some people get obsessive over it” (Interview 7). 
While obsession was evident, most described how the device helped them to achieve their 
step goal: “it keeps you on track of aiming for a goal” (Interview 1). By consequence, the 
young people acted on the data from the device by becoming “more active” (Interview 1), and 
increased levels of activity often occurred upon realisation that they hadn’t met the step 
target.  
Interviewer: So if you weren't approaching that [i.e. 10,000 steps], come, say, like six/seven 
o'clock of an evening, would you do anything about it? 
Student 1: Yeah (laughs)…. go on a run or something (laughs). 
Student 2: We were all just running. 
Student 1: Yeah, we started running in the house 
Student 2: We were going on a run, then after a few weeks we just kind of … 
Student 1: We were just doing star jumps and that (laughs). (Interview 3) 
 
The young people thus regulated their actions for both encouraging and harmful reasons 
toward a certain claim of truth i.e. 10.000 steps = health. The idea of being healthier was also 
 Healthy lifestyle technologies  
 
 
15 
evidently connected to a narrow interpretation of health equating to not being fat. As the 
below interview demonstrates, the young people report on the usefulness of the device for 
keeping their step count up as a way of being more active. The importance of being active is 
then related to the maintenance of an ideal weight, where health is viewed as not being fat.  
Student 1: It gives you an incentive to want to maybe do more sport and get your steps up, 
achieve your goals, etc. 
Interviewer: And why would you want to do that? 
Student 1: Well, to keep more active, stay active and, yeah. 
Interviewer: Anyone want to say why it's important to be active? 
Student 2: So you stay an ideal weight… 
 
Student 1: Keeps you healthy. 
Interviewer: Keeps you healthy.  What does healthy mean? 
Student 1: Not fat. (Interview 1) 
 
Health as not being fat thus became the norm of how to act as well as who to become. The 
device and/or app was particularly useful to, and reviewed positively by the young people, 
who defined health by being active as a means to not be fat: 
If you wanted to track your calories it’s quite an easy way to do it, because you don’t have to 
add everything yourself, it’d just do it for you. (Interview 3) 
          
 
It makes you feel slimmer because you’re like, I’ve done 2,000 calories (Interview 2) 
 
In relation to the norm of health as not being fat, calorie consumption equalling being slim 
was not challenged as acts of health. Even if some of them said that the notion of how many 
calories they burn did not bother them, they also confessed that they were constantly checking 
both steps and calorie consumption. For example, “it showed how many calories you burn on 
average per day” (Interview 3). The students also mentioned that in order to get fitter, 
monitoring and recording how many calories they were burning was essential, and thus that 
being fat equals being unhealthy. 
 
I just find it kind of interesting about how many steps I do and I like to set targets, like every 
day, to reach a certain amount of calorie burn (Interview 5) 
 
The measuring of 10,000 steps guided the young people towards a feeling that they were 
healthier. The device supported the young people how they should act and they could 
constantly monitor their behaviour towards certain norms of health. The young people were 
 Healthy lifestyle technologies  
 
 
16 
quite clear about self-surveillance appearing as a consequence of the health surveillant gaze of 
the Fitbit. They in some senses willingly participated in the surveillance. The device and/or 
app motivated them to be more active, and the measurements and daily targets set by the 
device encouraged them do more physical activity. Health, as a certain claim of truth, was 
defined as something that a person can reach and was constituted as a condition of continuous 
calorie burning that was related to doing a sufficient amount of steps. 
 
Peer surveillance makes you want to do more (or not) 
While a number of young people were only interested in their own data (for example, “I liked 
just seeing what I did” (Interview 4), peer comparison was appreciated by many: “I quite 
liked the friend feature so you can see how your friends are doing” (Interview 8); “I was like, 
“Oh how many steps have you done in a day?” (Interview 8). Peer comparison therefore 
functioned as an important part of ongoing surveillance and regulation of actions.  
 
Peer surveillance was most frequently represented in the form of competition, where the 
young people used the Fitbit app to create and engage with step count competitions: “people 
would have competitions to see how many steps they could do in an amount of time” 
(Interview 4). Engaging in what was described as a “friendly competition” (Interview 6) 
encouraged young people to increase their step count: “I think doing it with your friends, it 
gives you competition and it encourages you, definitely” (Interview 1); “it gives you a 
challenge” (Interview 1). In these competitions, peer-comparison became part of the 
surveillance that influenced exercise behaviours: “it makes you do a lot more walking because 
you want to try and beat your friends” (Interview 3); “I was encouraged to do a lot more 
sports when I was wearing the Fitbit… I wanted to try and beat my friend’s record, like steps” 
 Healthy lifestyle technologies  
 
 
17 
(Interview 1). Friendly competition thus constitutes surveillance through pleasurable 
regulation. 
 
Not all students regarded the competition as friendly however. For some, peer comparison 
developed a winning-at-all-costs mentally. For example, one young person stated that they 
“did 25,000 steps” in one day in attempt to win the competition (Interview 6). The young 
people who could not beat or match their peers step counts often removed themselves from 
the competitions: “I think I just pulled out of it because I kept losing” (Interview 4). 
Alternatively, the young people began to engage in extreme exercise behaviours, as a result of 
the fears of negative peer-comparison.  
 
You can sometimes feel guilty.  Like when I first got this Fitbit, if I hadn't done 10,000 steps before I 
went to bed, I used to just walk up and down the corridor because I couldn't let someone else beat me. 
(Interview 7) 
 
Through knowing that their peers could check their step counts, peer surveillance through the 
app acted to increase young people’s levels of physical activity. Using the device and app was 
about accepting the surveillance and gaze of others, and accepting the norm that you should 
want to compare and should want to win over your peers. Peers accordingly acted as a 
significant part of the daily surveillance practices of doing 10,000 steps or more. 
 
Resistance 
Measuring is not accurate and it can make you feel bad or bored 
The young people frequently described their experiences of using the Fitbit as interesting: “it 
was interesting to know how many [steps] you have done” (Interview 6); “it’s interesting to 
see how much you’re doing” (Interview 4). Yet interest in the device and/or app was not 
sustained: “it was interesting, but it got a bit boring after a while” (Interview 2). An 
 Healthy lifestyle technologies  
 
 
18 
overwhelming message was that interest and engagement with the device and/or app only 
lasted a few weeks: “I just stopped and did normal” (Interview 3). 
 
Student 1: We did the first few weeks 
 
Student 2: Then we kind of stopped 
 
Student 1: Yeah…I don’t really know we just stopped doing it 
 
Student 2: We stopped, yeah, just didn’t use the app as much. (Interview 3) 
 
The regulation of action thus seemed to stop, and for most of the young people, data from the 
Fitbit was not important in their lives. For example, “[it’s] not essential” (Interview 4); “you 
can go without [it]” (Interview 4). The device just became a fancy watch and they didn’t act 
upon or bother much about it: 
Student 1: I got in the shower with it on and then realised I had it on and throw it over the 
curtain. 
Student 2: Yeah, and then you leave it there and you completely forget about it, and then you 
don't wear it. (Interview 8) 
 
Many participants only felt comfortable monitoring behaviors that they understood. In this 
regard, step count was seen as the primary measure and they often disregarded data that they 
didn’t understand. For example, calories were a source of confusion and seen as unimportant, 
or not relevant for them: “I didn't use the calories one just because I didn't really get it.  So 
(laughs) I just don't get it” (Interview 3). Counting calories was too time consuming since 
calorie intake must be registered individually and some students questioned the value of 
monitoring their calories at their age. For them, calories might be important later on in life, 
but not now: "you had to log all your food as well” (Interview 3). The young people regulated 
their actions around information that could easily be related to and interpreted.  
 
While some of the young people simply forgot and/or became disinterested in the device 
and/or app, others through their actions resisted the surveillance practices. A key reason 
underpinning resistance was how the surveillance practices impacted on wellbeing. If a young 
person was not achieving 10,000 steps per day, they began to feel bad about themselves: “if 
you don’t do a lot of exercise in a day, then you just feel really bad” (Interview 8); “you sit 
 Healthy lifestyle technologies  
 
 
19 
there and realise it’s seven o’clock and you’ve got like ten steps and you feel really bad” 
(Interview 2); “it makes you feel fat” (Interview 2); “it puts pressure on you” (Interview 2). 
To navigate against these negative feelings of self, the young people disregarded the device 
and/or app. As one person noted, “when I'm not wearing it, it's less pressure to get the steps 
done” (Interview 4).  
 
A strong resistance against the predetermined target of 10,000 steps was also identified. The 
young people felt the need to recognise difference and called for targets that were more 
personalised:  
I think you should have your own target for you to … because some people do more exercise 
than others, and some people walk more … some people are fitter than others… everyone's 
different. (Interview 8) 
 
The need for personalised targets was reflected in the ways the young people reported on the 
unfairness of the device to represent physical activity in their daily lives. For example, “steps 
don’t show how much exercise you can do, so you can do a lot of steps but it doesn’t really 
count how much exercise you’ve actually done” (Interview 4). The device was also positioned 
as unfair because it could not measure all the activities they engage with: “I do rowing, so it 
doesn’t really count the amount of exercise I actually do” (Interview 4); “I don’t get to see 
what I do from the swimming” (Interview 5); “in football, if you come in for a strong 
challenge, it comes off quite easily” (Interview 4). By consequence, a lack of trust was placed 
in the device and the young people claimed the device was inaccurate: “it wasn’t very 
accurate” (Interview 5). 
 
The level of trust in the Fitbit’s ability to act as a credible tool of self-surveillance and peer 
comparison was further questioned through the inaccuracy of the readings. The young people 
began to observe that the device did not record their sedentary behaviour accurately and that 
 Healthy lifestyle technologies  
 
 
20 
they could manipulate the data recorded on the device. Further, the young people learnt that 
they could shake their hands to increase the steps recorded.  
When I went to Sicily, we left school at half past one in the morning and, in that day, I managed 
to get 30,000 steps and 210 floors because the bus was bumpy and the aeroplane had turbulence. 
(Interview 6) 
 
When you look at your steps, sometimes you think it's not high enough, so you do that [shaking 
hand] or something, just to try and get your steps up.  That's what quite a lot of people did. 
(Interview 4) 
 
 
The surveillance and self-surveillance practices were therefore resisted for a number of 
reasons: (i) the data was not essential and/or interesting; (ii) the data from the Fitbit made 
them feel bad about themselves; (iii) the device did not record physical activity as part of the 
daily lives. In turn, the device and/or app was resisted through, (a) not wearing the health 
device and/or (b) manipulating the step count. The young people did not trust the accuracy of 
the device, yet they trusted the norm of 10,000 steps equalling health. 
 
Measuring steps has no educational value 
 
Since the Fitbit device and app were introduced within physical education lessons, part of 
young people’s resistance was about if the Fitbits should be used within educational contexts. 
Related to the key reasons for resistance, the young people questioned the educational value 
of measuring steps and calories within physical education. The young people opposed the 
view that the teacher should add another layer of surveillance and saw this additional layer of 
surveillance impacting negatively on their wellbeing. Moreover, the monitoring of steps and 
calorie intake was not seen as part of the physical educator’s role. 
I think teachers shouldn't have to worry about telling us how much we should be doing because 
people will start worrying that they're not doing enough and it will mess with their heads and 
stuff. (Interview 7) 
 
It is not teachers job to talk about or check how many calories you burn or how many steps you 
take. That is for nurses or the family. (Interview 2) 
 
 Healthy lifestyle technologies  
 
 
21 
In this way the teacher was resisted as a valid authority on these issues of health. While peer-
comparison was highlighted as a way to support young people’s engagement with physical 
activity, competition in relation to step count in physical education was resisted. Class wide 
competitions could impact on their feelings of guilt and would encourage their peers to cheat, 
as a means of winning: 
Interviewer: What about if you had a class competition?  So you were all friends on the friends-
app thing and you were all competing against each other, would that be a good 
or a bad thing to do? 
Student 1:     I don't think I'd like that. 
Student 2:     No, I wouldn't like it. 
Student 3:     Yeah, I wouldn't like that…. 
Student 1:     Because I think certain people would make you feel guilty about how much you're 
doing. 
Student 2:     Yeah, some people would turn it into a— 
Student 1:     And there'd be cheating and then people would just be unreliable. 
Student 2:     Yeah, and I think it would turn into a horrible thing rather than a good thing. 
(Interview 7) 
 
The young people also resisted the idea that the quality of a physical education lesson should 
be measured quantitatively and by step count. Although it was not part of the study design for 
the teachers to use the Fitbit’s as an educational tool, the young people’s accounts of 
measuring steps within lessons highlights a lack of perceived relevance: “I don't think it'd be 
useful at all because, in the end, she had us walking round benches and stuff to get more 
steps, and therefore it's a better exercise than press-ups and that” (Interview 4). The resistance 
was also related to the need for personalisation and the perceived pressure that would result 
from step targets being set by teachers: “I think they [teachers] shouldn't, but I think you 
should do an amount of steps that you feel comfortable with. I don't think you should be 
forced to do an amount of steps” (Interview 8); “if you do less than that [steps], then you're 
going to feel under pressure to do it, just because they've said so” (Interview 6). Overall the 
perception was that physical education teachers, “should tell them just to be healthy, not how 
to do it” (Interview 2). 
 
 Healthy lifestyle technologies  
 
 
22 
The young people’s resistance demonstrates a quite sceptical stance towards introducing 
wearable health devices like Fitbits in school. In a way they resisted how power was exercised 
on the teacher by using steps as a norm for educational content. They also resisted a one-size-
fits-all norm regarding health in education, and a strong part of that resistance relates to the 
educational message offered that equates to health being measured and valued in terms of 
steps. 
Discussion  
Qualitative data drawn from an eight-week school-based intervention focussed on 100 young 
people has provided clear evidence on the surveillance, self-surveillance, and resistance when 
young people use a wearable health device. In terms of surveillance, the daily 10,000 step and 
calorie burning targets set by the Fitbit device encouraged the young people to do more 
physical activity. Reported increases in physical activity occurred because of the self-
surveillant practices promoted by the Fitbit through; (i) the monitoring and recording of steps 
and calories burned, and (ii) peer comparison. Surveillance and self-surveillance practices, 
however, were, in line with previous studies in schools (e.g. Burrows, 2010; Harris et al., 
2016), clearly connected to health equating to fitness and being ‘fit’ or as Powell and 
Fitzpatrick (2015) also highlight, not being ‘fat’. These narrow interpretations of health, 
equally, underpinned resistance. Daily step and calorie burning targets, (i) did not sustain their 
engagement with the device beyond a few weeks, (ii) promoted negative feelings, and (iii) the 
device was resisted because it did not record physical activity accurately as part of their daily 
lives. In turn, and in slight contrast to previous studies, the young people explicitly resisted 
the educational value of the Fitbit and demonstrated a sceptical stance toward introducing 
surveilling health devices in school and physical education settings.  
 
 Healthy lifestyle technologies  
 
 
23 
To date, the point of reference for positioning healthy lifestyle technologies in education has 
been adult perspectives, that centre on two assumptions: (i) young people will be willing and 
able to use healthy lifestyle technologies to inform and regulate their behaviour; or (ii) young 
people will experience negative impacts on their health and wellbeing because they will adopt 
regulative and disciplinary behaviours (Casey et al., 2017; Gard, 2014; Lupton, 2014; 
Petherick, 2015; Rich and Miah, 2017). Data from this study suggests that young people 
regulate their actions towards a norm of health equalling 10.000 steps, but in doing so they, at 
least short term, are encouraged to increase their physical activity levels. The data also 
suggest that they resist the self-tracking behaviours promoted by a Fitbit device and app, 
indicating that healthy lifestyle technologies will fail to impact on young people’s health. One 
reading of this could be to disregard healthy lifestyle technologies from education contexts. 
On the other hand, the pervasiveness of healthy lifestyle technologies in society (Gardner & 
Davis, 2014; Ofcom, 2016), their growing use by young people (Depper & Howe, 2017; 
Wartella et al., 2016), and the role of body pedagogies outside of school influencing health-
related behaviours (Powell & Fitzpatrick, 2013; Wright & Halse, 2014) encourages further 
thought and consideration about the role of technology in schools and in physical education.  
 
It was clear from the data that the young people resisted the Fitbit device/app – for accuracy 
and fairness – but they never resisted the norm of 10,000 steps as a measurement of health. 
Drawing on Wright and Halse (2014), the biopedagogical practices of the Fitbit thus worked 
to instruct, regulate, normalise, and construct an idea of a healthy young person as being 
active, fit and motivated to do 10,000 steps per day. Similar to cautions raised by Gard 
(2014), Powell and Fitzpatrick’s (2015) and Depper and Howe (2017), daily step targets 
reproduced an idea that health was achieved through 10,000 steps, positioning the young 
people as being active or inactive, fit or fat, healthy or unhealthy, good or bad, or those who 
 Healthy lifestyle technologies  
 
 
24 
cared or didn’t care about their health. Young people’s attendance to and acceptance of this 
narrow interpretation that health equates to numbers and health is a behaviour that can be 
quantified (Gard, 2014; Williamson, 2014) is an issue that needs to be addressed in physical 
education, particularly if self-tracking will become an imposed practice (Lupton, 2014).   
 
In agreement with a substantial and international evidence-base, critical pedagogical 
approaches are required in schools to address the societal, narrow and normative discourses of 
health (Burrows & Wright, 2004; Casey et al., 2017; Gard, 2014; Harris et al., 2016; Powell 
& Fitzpatrick, 2013). The suitability of a critical approach rather than an exclusively physical 
activity promoting approach is further supported by the views of young people in this study. 
In contrast to literature that advocates for the value of surveillance and the use of healthy 
lifestyle technologies in physical education contexts (Casey et al., 2017; Williamson, 2014), 
the young people stressed that there would be no educational value of integrating technology 
and that technology could negatively impact on their wellbeing. Yet, while a critical approach 
is commonly cited as way of supporting young people to navigate societal health discourses, 
evidence on the skills young people need to acquire, what a critical approach entails and how 
physical educators might practice a critical approach is more limited, particularly with regard 
to self-tracking and digital technologies (Casey et al., 2017; Powell & Fitzpatrick, 2015; Rich 
& Miah, 2017).  
 
Armour (2014) and Dudley et al. (2016), as well as others, stress that the starting point for any 
pedagogical encounter should be the diagnosis of learners needs, understandings and skills. 
Young people’s understandings and skills act as an important ‘springboard’ to begin 
conversations and work productively with young people (Powell & Fitzpatrick, 2015, p.481). 
Data from this study provides new insights into young people’s current needs, understandings 
 Healthy lifestyle technologies  
 
 
25 
and critical skills in relation to health and healthy lifestyle technologies. We know from 
earlier discussions that young people require support to address health equalling to numbers 
like BMI, steps or results on fitness tests (e.g. Petherick, 2015; Wright & Halse, 2014).  
 
On the other hand, the young people in our study express that health should be personalised to 
the individual, seen through the ways in which they appreciate that different people have 
different physical activity behaviours. In terms of skills, the young people also critically 
considered the value of healthy lifestyle technologies in their lives and in education, seen 
through the way they questioned the capabilities of self-tracking devices to regulate their 
individual physical activity behaviours and the measurement accuracy of the devices. Some 
young people do, however, lack the skills they require to respond to and navigate feelings of 
pressure and negative feelings of self, seen through their experiences of peer competition and 
narrow notions of health as not being fat (Powell & Fitzpatrick, 2015). A critical approach to 
healthy lifestyle technologies in physical education would, therefore, need to address the 
competing discourses of normativity and personalisation, in terms of how young people 
understand health, as well as supporting young people to further develop their existing critical 
skills to evaluate how they can best respond to pressure and negative feelings of self, an 
unfortunate product of using healthy lifestyle technologies.  Educators could build on young 
people’s already questioning stance and develop a health-wear-ability so they can critically 
scrutinise both the measuring, the measuring devise as well as what is measured including the 
surveillance that these devices are examples of. Equally, young people’s capabilities to act as 
critical consumers of healthy lifestyle technologies should be further developed and extended, 
to support them in constructing more nuanced understandings of a healthy young person. 
 
 
 
 Healthy lifestyle technologies  
 
 
26 
References  
Albrechtslund, A. (2008). Online social networking as participatory surveillance. First 
Monday, 13(3) Available at: http://journals.uic.edu/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/2142/1949 
(accessed 15 August 2017). 
Armour, K.M. (2014). Pedagogical Cases in Physical Education and Youth Sport. London: 
Routledge. 
Best, K. (2010). Living in the control society: Surveillance, users and digital screen 
technologies. International Journal of Cultural Studies, 13(1), 5-24. 
boyd, D. (2014). It’s complicated: the social lives of networked teens. London: Yale University Press. 
Burrows, L., & Wright, J. (2004). The good life: New Zealand children's perspectives on 
health and self. Sport, Education and Society, 9(2), 193-205. 
Burrows, L. (2010). Push play every day: New Zealand children's constructions of health and 
physical activity. In M. O'Sullivan & A.MacPhail (Eds.), Young people's voices in physical 
education and sport (pp. 145–162). Oxon: Routledge. 
Casey, A., Goodyear, V.A. & Armour, K.M. (2017). Rethinking the relationship between 
pedagogy, technology and learning in health and physical education. Sport, Education and 
Society, 22(2), 288-304. 
Dennison, L., Morrison, L., Conway, G. & Yardley, L. (2013). Opportunities and challenges 
for smartphone applications in supporting health behaviour change: qualitative study. Journal 
of Medical Internet Research, 15(4), e86. 
Depper, A., & Howe, P. D. (2017). Are we fit yet? English adolescent girls’ experiences of 
health and fitness apps. Health Sociology Review, 26(1), 98-112. 
Dudley, D.A., Okely, A.D., Pearson, P. & Peat, J. (2010). Engaging adolescent girls from 
linguistically diverse and low income backgrounds in school sport: a pilot randomised 
controlled trial. Journal of Science and Medicine in Sport, 13(2), 217-224. 
 Healthy lifestyle technologies  
 
 
27 
Dute, D.J., Bemelmans, W.J.E. & Breda, J. (2016). Using mobile apps to promote a healthy 
lifestyle among adolescents and students: a review of the theoretical basis and lessons learned. 
JMIR mHealth uHealth, 4(2), e:39. 
Englund, T. (2006). Deliberative communication: A pragmatist proposal. Journal of 
Curriculum Studies, 38(5), 503-520. 
Fardouly, J., & Vartanian, L.R. (2016). Social media and body image concerns: current 
research and future directions. Current Opinion in Psychology, 9, 1-5.   
Foucault, M. (1977/2008). " Panopticism" from Discipline & Punish: The Birth of the 
Prison. Race/Ethnicity: Multidisciplinary Global Contexts, 2(1), 1-12. 
Foucault, M. (1980). Power/knowledge: Selected interviews and other writings, 1972-1977. 
Pantheon. 
Foucault M. (1982). The subject and power. Critical Inquiry, 8, 777–795. 
Gallagher, M. (2010). Are schools panoptic?. Surveillance & Society, 7(3/4), 262-272. 
Galič, M., Timan, T., & Koops, B. J. (2017). Bentham, Deleuze and Beyond: An Overview of 
Surveillance Theories from the Panopticon to Participation. Philosophy & Technology, 30(1), 
9-37. 
Gard, M. (2014). eHPE: a history of the future. Sport, Education and Society, 19(6), 827-845. 
Gordon, J., & Patterson, J. A. (2013). Response to tracy’s under the “Big Tent” establishing 
universal criteria for evaluating qualitative research. Qualitative Inquiry, 19(9), 689-695. 
Goodyear, V.A. (2017). Social media, apps, and wearable technologies: navigating ethical 
dilemmas and procedures. Qualitative Research in Sport, Exercise and Health, 9(3), 285-302. 
Harris, J., Cale, L., Duncombe, R., & Musson, H. (2016). Young people’s knowledge and 
understanding of health, fitness and physical activity: issues, divides and dilemmas. Sport, 
Education and Society, 1-14. 
 Healthy lifestyle technologies  
 
 
28 
HM Government. (2015). Sporting Future: A New Strategy for an Active Nation. Retrieved 
from: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/486622/Sportin
g_Future_ACCESSIBLE.pdf  
Kerner, C., & Goodyear, V.A. (2017). The motivational impact of wearable healthy lifestyle 
technologies: a self-determination perspective on FitBits with adolescents. American Journal 
of Health Education, iFirst. 
Lupton, D. (2016). The diverse domains of quantified selves: self-tracking modes and 
dataveillance. Economy and Society, 45(1), 101-122. 
Lupton, D. (2015). Quantified sex: a critical analysis of sexual and reproductive self-tracking 
using apps. Culture, health & sexuality, 17(4), 440-453. 
Macphail, A. (2001). Nominal group technique: a useful method for working with young 
people. British Educational Research Journal, 27(2), 161-170. 
Petherick, L. (2015). Shaping the child as a healthy child: Health surveillance, schools, and 
biopedagogies. Cultural Studies? Critical Methodologies, 15(5), 361-370. 
Pink, S., & Fors, V. (2017). Self-tracking and mobile media: New digital materialities. Mobile 
Media & Communication, doi: 2050157917695578. 
Powell, D., & Fitzpatrick, K. (2015). ‘Getting fit basically just means, like, nonfat’: Children's 
lessons in fitness and fatness. Sport, Education and Society, 20(4), 463-484. 
Quennerstedt, M., Burrows, L., & Maivorsdotter, N. (2010). From teaching young people to 
be healthy to learning health. Utbildning och Demokrati, 19(2), 97-112. 
Rich, E., & Miah, A. (2017). Mobile, wearable and ingestible health technologies: towards a 
critical research agenda. Health Sociology Review, 26(1), 84-97. 
Rose, N. (1998). Inventing our selves: Psychology, power, and personhood. Cambridge 
University Press. 
 Healthy lifestyle technologies  
 
 
29 
Smith, B. & McGannon, K. R. (2017). Developing rigor in qualitative research: problems and 
opportunities within sport and exercise psychology. International Review of Sport and 
Exercise Psychology, 1-21. 
Smith, B. & Sparkes, A. (2016). Interviews: qualitative interviewing in the sport and exercise 
sciences. In B. Smith & A. Sparkes (Eds.), Routledge Handbook of Qualitative Research in 
Sport and Exercise (pp. 103-123). London: Routledge 
Tracy, S. J. (2010). Qualitative quality: Eight “big-tent” criteria for excellent qualitative 
research. Qualitative inquiry, 16(10), 837-851. 
Vaz, P., & Bruno, F. (2003). Types of Self-Surveillance: from abnormality to individuals ‘at 
risk’. Surveillance & Society, 1(3), 272-291. 
Wartella, E., Rideout, V., Montague, H., Beaudoin-Ryan, L. and Lauricella, A. (2016). Teens, 
Health and Technology: A National Survey. Media and Communications, 4(3), 13-23.  
Webb, L., & Quennerstedt, M. (2010). Risky bodies: Health surveillance and teachers’ 
embodiment of health. International journal of qualitative studies in education, 23(7), 785-
802. 
Whitson, J. R. (2013). Gaming the quantified self. Surveillance & Society, 11(1/2), 163-176. 
Williamson, B. (2015). Algorithmic skin: health-tracking technologies, personal analytics and 
the biopedagogies of digitized health and physical education. Sport, education and 
society, 20(1), 133-151. 
World Health Organization. (2011). mHealth: new horizons for health through technologies. 
Global Observatory Series, 3. Geneva: World Health Organisation. 
Wright, J., & Halse, C. (2014). The healthy child citizen: Biopedagogies and web-based 
health promotion. British Journal of Sociology of Education, 35(6), 837-855. 
 
 
