 e284
Abstract—Cognitive function is an important component of aging and predicts quality of life, functional independence, and risk of 
institutionalization. Advances in our understanding of the role of cardiovascular risks have shown them to be closely associated 
with cognitive impairment and dementia. Because many cardiovascular risks are modifiable, it may be possible to maintain 
brain health and to prevent dementia in later life. The purpose of this American Heart Association (AHA)/American Stroke 
Association presidential advisory is to provide an initial definition of optimal brain health in adults and guidance on how to 
maintain brain health. We identify metrics to define optimal brain health in adults based on inclusion of factors that could be 
measured, monitored, and modified. From these practical considerations, we identified 7 metrics to define optimal brain health 
in adults that originated from AHA’s Life’s Simple 7: 4 ideal health behaviors (nonsmoking, physical activity at goal levels, 
healthy diet consistent with current guideline levels, and body mass index <25 kg/m2) and 3 ideal health factors (untreated 
blood pressure <120/<80 mm Hg, untreated total cholesterol <200 mg/dL, and fasting blood glucose <100 mg/dL). In addition, 
in relation to maintenance of cognitive health, we recommend following previously published guidance from the AHA/
American Stroke Association, Institute of Medicine, and Alzheimer’s Association that incorporates control of cardiovascular 
risks and suggest social engagement and other related strategies. We define optimal brain health but recognize that the truly 
ideal circumstance may be uncommon because there is a continuum of brain health as demonstrated by AHA’s Life’s Simple 
7. Therefore, there is opportunity to improve brain health through primordial prevention and other interventions. Furthermore, 
although cardiovascular risks align well with brain health, we acknowledge that other factors differing from those related to 
cardiovascular health may drive cognitive health. Defining optimal brain health in adults and its maintenance is consistent with 
the AHA’s Strategic Impact Goal to improve cardiovascular health of all Americans by 20% and to reduce deaths resulting 
from cardiovascular disease and stroke by 20% by the year 2020. This work in defining optimal brain health in adults serves to 
provide the AHA/American Stroke Association with a foundation for a new strategic direction going forward in cardiovascular 
health promotion and disease prevention.   
(Stroke. 2017;48:e284-e303. DOI: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000148.)
Key Words: AHA Scientific Statements ◼ aging ◼ brain ◼ cognitive dysfunction  
◼ prevention and control ◼ risk factors ◼ stroke
Defining Optimal Brain Health in Adults
A Presidential Advisory From the American Heart Association/ 
American Stroke Association
Philip B. Gorelick, MD, MPH, FAHA, Chair*; Karen L. Furie, MD, MPH, FAHA, Co-Chair†;  
Costantino Iadecola, MD, FAHA, Co-Chair†; Eric E. Smith, MD, MPH, FAHA‡; Salina P. Waddy, MD§; 
Donald M. Lloyd-Jones, MD, ScM, FAHA║; Hee-Joon Bae, MD, PhD, FAHA; Mary Ann Bauman, MD; 
Martin Dichgans, MD; Pamela W. Duncan, PhD, PT, FAHA; Meighan Girgus;  
Virginia J. Howard, PhD, FAHA; Ronald M. Lazar, PhD, FAHA; Sudha Seshadri, MD, FAHA;  
Fernando D. Testai, MD, PhD, MS, FAHA; Stephen van Gaal, MD; Kristine Yaffe, MD, FAHA;  
Hank Wasiak, MBA; Charlotte Zerna, MD, MSc; on behalf of the American Heart Association/
American Stroke Association
*Also a member of Maintenance of Brain Health writing group section. †Also a member of Optimal Brain Health writing group section. ‡Lead of 
Maintenance of Brain Health writing group section. §Lead of Public Health Impact of Cognitive Impairment, Dementia, Stroke, and Cardiovascular and 
Stroke Risks writing group section. ║Senior reviewer.
The views in this report are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney 
Diseases, the Department of Health and Human Services, or the government of the United States.
The American Heart Association makes every effort to avoid any actual or potential conflicts of interest that may arise as a result of an outside relationship 
or a personal, professional, or business interest of a member of the writing panel. Specifically, all members of the writing group are required to complete 
and submit a Disclosure Questionnaire showing all such relationships that might be perceived as real or potential conflicts of interest.
This advisory was approved by the American Heart Association Science Advisory and Coordinating Committee on July 28, 2017, and the American Heart 
Association Executive Committee on  August 21, 2017. A copy of the document is available at http://professional.heart.org/statements by using either “Search for 
Guidelines & Statements” or the “Browse by Topic” area. To purchase additional reprints, call 843-216-2533 or e-mail kelle.ramsay@wolterskluwer.com.
The Data Supplement is available with this article at http://stroke.ahajournals.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1161/STR.0000000000000148/-/DC1.
The American Heart Association requests that this document be cited as follows: Gorelick PB, Furie KL, Iadecola C, Smith EE, Waddy SP, Lloyd-Jones 
DM, Bae H-J, Bauman MA, Dichgans M, Duncan PW, Girgus M, Howard VJ, Lazar RM, Seshadri S, Testai FD, van Gaal S, Yaffe K, Wasiak H, Zerna C; on 
behalf of the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association. Defining optimal brain health in adults: a presidential advisory from the American 
Heart Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke. 2017;48:e284-e303. DOI: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000148.
Expert peer review of AHA Scientific Statements is conducted by the AHA Office of Science Operations. For more on AHA statements and guidelines 
development, visit http://professional.heart.org/statements. Select the “Guidelines & Statements” drop-down menu, then click “Publication Development.”
Permissions: Multiple copies, modification, alteration, enhancement, and/or distribution of this document are not permitted without the express 
permission of the American Heart Association. Instructions for obtaining permission are located at http://www.heart.org/HEARTORG/General/Copyright-
Permission-Guidelines_UCM_300404_Article.jsp. A link to the “Copyright Permissions Request Form” appears on the right side of the page.
© 2017 American Heart Association, Inc.
Stroke is available at http://stroke.ahajournals.org 
DOI: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000148
AHA/ASA Presidential Advisory
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Gorelick et al  Defining Optimal Brain Health in Adults  e285
L
ife expectancy is projected to continue to increase in 
developed countries in the Americas, Australasia, cen-
tral and western Europe, and Asia-Pacific and is expected to 
be highest in South Korea, western European countries, and 
some emerging economies.1 Anticipated gains in longevity 
will occur in older age groups, particularly among women. 
By 2030, it is estimated there will be a >50% probability that 
women in some of the aforementioned regions will break 
the 90-year survival barrier.1 These gains may be explained 
by improvements in social status, education, and childhood 
and adolescent nutrition; expanded primary and secondary 
health care; a rapid scale-up of new medical technologies; and 
advances in public health and hygiene.
An increase in life expectancy creates an important public 
health challenge to plan for health and social services, housing, 
and pensions for the elderly and to care for those at risk for 
cognitive impairment and dementia.2 Another major challenge 
is that increased longevity is likely to be associated with an 
increase in the prevalence of cognitive impairment and demen-
tia. It is estimated that there are 47 million people with demen-
tia worldwide and that this will increase to 75 million in 2030 
and 131 million by 2050.3 These public health projections sug-
gest the need for the prevention of cognitive impairment and 
treatments to delay cognitive decline.4 Cardiovascular risks 
have been viewed as important targets for strategies to pre-
vent or delay cognitive impairment.5,6 Thus, there is a linkage 
between brain health and cardiovascular health.
Cognitive function is an important feature of successful 
aging, affecting quality of life, functional independence, and 
risk of institutionalization.7 According to the US Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, a healthy brain is one that can 
perform all the mental processes that encompass cognition such 
as the ability to learn and judge, use language, and remember.8 
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has concluded, 
however, that there is limited consumer information about cog-
nitive health and maintenance of cognition, existent messag-
ing is inadequate, and the perception of brain health varies by 
ethnic, cultural, and geographic group.8 In this American Heart 
Association/American Stroke Association (AHA/ASA) presi-
dential advisory, we aim to expand knowledge in this area by 
defining optimal brain health in adults and suggesting ways to 
maintain it. Such information will provide the AHA/ASA with 
the foundation for a new strategic direction going forward in 
cardiovascular health promotion and disease prevention.9
Methods
The writing committee was commissioned in November 
2016 to review the literature on brain health and maintenance 
and to develop a definition of optimal brain health in adults. 
With guidance from the officers of the AHA and members 
of the AHA Stroke Council, a task force developed an out-
line for the establishment of a manuscript on optimal brain 
health in adults. The outline focused on 3 key topics: public 
health impact of cognitive impairment, definition of optimal 
brain health, and recommendations for maintenance of brain 
health. In December 2016, the writing committee members 
were selected by the chair and co-chairs of this writing group. 
Writing committee members were chosen on the basis of 
expert knowledge in the area and experience with guideline 
development. Discretion was taken to achieve a balance of 
early-career and later-career investigators, as well as a balance 
in relation to sex, race, and ethnicity. All writing committee 
members were required to declare conflicts of interest.
The first writing committee conference call was held in 
March 2017. During the call, the purpose and topics of the state-
ment were discussed and finalized, and a literature strategy was 
established. Each of the major sections of the manuscript was 
assigned a lead, and the chair and co-chairs were responsible 
for drafting the introduction, methods, and concluding sections 
and editing all subsections of the manuscript. Relevant litera-
ture was identified through a systematic review complemented 
by hand searching of reference lists and expert knowledge of 
relevant articles focused primarily on topics relating to brain 
health and maintenance of brain health. Literature searches 
were conducted centrally. Full details of the search strategy 
are available in the Data Supplement (see Systematic Review: 
Supplement to Defining Brain Health). Section writing leads 
and members reviewed abstracts and titles for relevance and 
abstracted key information from the articles. Detailed evidence 
tables, however, were not required.
The statement was independently reviewed by the AHA 
Science Advisory and Coordinating Committee. The writing 
committee responded point by point to each comment made by 
the reviewers. Final approval of the manuscript was provided 
by the AHA Science Advisory and Coordinating Committee.
Public Health Impact of Cognitive Impairment, 
Dementia, Stroke, and Cardiovascular  
and Stroke Risks
Cognitive Impairment and Dementia
A healthy brain is essential for living a longer and fuller life. Brain 
health enables thought, planned action, and emotional connec-
tions that affect the daily lives and progress of individuals, fami-
lies, and communities. Sustaining brain health over the course 
of a lifetime is important to allow one to maximize one’s over-
all ability and independence. Maintenance of brain health may 
also curtail the need for diversion of economic and healthcare 
resources for care and treatments that may have limited the allo-
cation of resources to efforts aimed at maintaining and restoring 
one to a healthy brain state. Thus, the impact of maximizing and 
maintaining brain health has the potential to benefit individuals, 
family and friends, healthcare providers and systems, and society.
Poor brain health may eventually manifest as cognitive 
impairment or dementia via underlying disorders that include 
but are not limited to Alzheimer disease (AD), stroke and 
other causes of vascular cognitive impairment, brain trauma, 
and other neurodegenerative disorders. In 2010, it was esti-
mated that the second largest number of people living with 
dementia resided in the United States (3.9 million people),10 
with the largest number living in China (5.4 million people). 
Modifiable risks associated with poor cardiovascular health 
such as uncontrolled hypertension, diabetes mellitus, obesity, 
physical inactivity, smoking, and depression are associated 
with compromised brain health.4
Worldwide, >7 million new dementia cases are diagnosed 
annually.10 By 2050, the prevalence of dementia is expected to 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e286  Stroke  October 2017
increase by 116% in high-income countries and 264% in low-
income countries. From self-report, it is estimated that 1 in 8 
adults >60 years of age has memory loss and ≈35% of those 
report functional difficulties.11 In addition, an estimated 5.1 
million individuals in the United States who are ≥65 years of 
age have AD, which in the United States is predicted to rise to 
13.2 million by 2050.10,12
Cognitive impairment and dementia exact a high economic 
cost. In the United States, AD and related dementias are among 
the most expensive diseases to treat, with direct care expenses 
being greater than those for cancer and equal to those for heart 
disease.13 In 2013, direct payments for health care, long-term 
care, and hospice care were $203 billion, and among chronic 
diseases, dementia is the largest single contributor to disability 
and to the need for longer-term care among older individuals. 
However, direct care costs of cognitive impairment represent 
only part of the total financial costs. In 2011, >15 million 
Americans spent an average of 21.9 h/wk caring for family 
members with dementia, and the estimated monetary cost may 
be as high as $215 billion annually.12 This does not take into 
account, however, stress and related factors placed on caregiv-
ers and other family members. The toll on caregivers’ emotional 
state, for example, is just as striking, with an increased risk of 
anxiety, depression, and poorer quality of life. Although some 
studies have shown a benefit of caregiving,14 up to 50% of care-
givers have been shown to suffer from depression compared 
with 15% of noncaregiving individuals.15 Finally, dementia and 
cognitive impairment challenge the effective treatment of many 
concurrent illnesses, complicating consent and compliance.
Impact of Stroke
Stroke is especially common among those who are older, 
and it is estimated that 1 in 3 individuals will have a stroke, 
dementia, or both.16 Subclinical or silent stroke occurs at least 
5 times as commonly as symptomatic stroke and may not be 
silent because subclinical events are associated with impair-
ment of cognition and disturbances of mood and personality.17 
Furthermore, macroscopic infarcts occur in about one third to 
one half of elderly individuals, and of all major cognitively 
impairing disorders, including AD, there is a vascular compo-
nent in up to 80%.4,18,19 Thus, stroke and its antecedents play a 
pivotal role in the processes underlying cognitive impairment 
and dementia.
Cardiovascular and Stroke Risks
Cardiovascular and stroke risks are common in the United 
States and worldwide. In the United States, there are 75 mil-
lion people (1 of every 3 adults) with hypertension, and 54% 
of those have uncontrolled blood pressure (BP). When race 
and ethnicity are taken into account, there are higher rates of 
hypertension in blacks, followed by US non-Hispanic whites 
and Mexican Americans.20 In addition, diabetes mellitus and 
obesity are increasing in frequency across the United States. 
In 2014, there were an estimated 22 million Americans living 
with diabetes mellitus, a 4-fold increase from the 5.5 million 
with diabetes mellitus in 1980 and nearly double the 12.1 mil-
lion in 2000.18 Obesity rates are also high in the United States. 
Currently, 36.5% of US adults are categorized as being obese, 
with the prevalence of obesity being higher in women (38.3%) 
than men (34.3%) and highest in non-Hispanic blacks and 
Hispanics followed by non-Hispanic whites and non-Hispanic 
Asians.21 Among the 20 most populous countries, the high-
est level of age-standardized childhood obesity occurs in the 
United States.22
Because hypertension, obesity, smoking, and diabetes 
mellitus contribute to cognitive impairment and dementia23,24 
and there are interventions that successfully prevent or modify 
these risk factors, a strategy using AHA’s Life’s Simple 7 to 
decrease cardiovascular risk, stroke, and heart attack should 
also contribute to maintenance of brain health.25
Potential factors that may or may not favor optimal brain 
health and a causal chain of factors mediated by cardiovas-
cular risks that lead to stroke, dementia, and cognitive dys-
function are depicted in Figure 1. Cardiovascular risks may 
mediate subclinical and clinical brain injury, the antecedents 
of cognitive impairment.
Summary
Cognitive impairment and dementia are common in the popu-
lation, especially among older people, and exact a substantial 
economic and personal toll. As the population in the United 
States ages, cardiovascular risk factors such as obesity, hyper-
tension, and diabetes mellitus are expected to continue to sig-
nificantly increase in frequency. Subclinical vascular brain 
injury (eg, brain white matter hyperintensities, microinfarcts, 
cerebral microbleeds) and symptomatic stroke, anteced-
ent risks, and associated factors are frequently observed and 
linked to cognitive impairment and dementia in both clinical 
and neuropathologic studies. Thus, risks for stroke and car-
diovascular disease are well positioned to be targets of pre-
ventive strategies for cognitive impairment and dementia. In 
Figure 1. Major determinants of optimal brain health. Genetic, 
environmental, and behavioral factors can either promote or hin-
der optimal brain health. Vascular risk factors negatively influence 
optimal brain health through cardiovascular and cerebrovascular 
alterations that produce brain dysfunction and damage, leading 
to cognitive dysfunction.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Gorelick et al  Defining Optimal Brain Health in Adults  e287
addition, maintaining brain health is paramount because many 
public health sectors such as individual health care, healthcare 
finance, maintenance of employment, and family and commu-
nity health may be affected.
Optimal Brain Health
Basic Mechanisms and Milieu
Optimal brain function depends on many energy-intensive 
activities ranging from synaptic activity and subsequent resto-
ration of resting ionic gradients and chemical milieu to protein 
synthesis and axonal transport.26 With minimal or no energy 
reserves and the exquisite sensitivity of neurons and glia to 
chemical changes in the internal milieu, normal brain function 
is highly dependent on adequate delivery of energy substrates, 
mainly oxygen and glucose. These are delivered by cerebral 
blood flow, which, in turn, depends on cardiovascular and 
cerebrovascular health.
Vital cerebrovascular regulatory mechanisms ensure that 
the brain is adequately perfused. Neurovascular coupling 
ensures that focal increases in brain activity are associated with 
corresponding increases in blood flow to the activated areas.27 
Cerebrovascular autoregulation maintains cerebral blood flow 
relatively independently of changes in arterial pressure to 
protect the brain from damaging fluctuations in cerebral per-
fusion,28 whereas cerebral endothelial cells regulate microvas-
cular flow by releasing vasoactive agents such as nitric oxide 
and prostanoids.29 These fundamental properties of the cere-
bral microcirculation depend on the coordinated interaction of 
neurons, astrocytes, vascular endothelial cells, smooth muscle 
cells, pericytes, perivascular cells, and the cerebrovascular 
matrix, which collectively constitute a functional ensemble 
called the neurovascular unit (NVU; Figure 2).
In addition to regulating cerebral perfusion, the NVU is 
responsible for the blood-brain barrier, which finely controls 
the molecular exchange between blood and brain and vice 
versa through an intricate system of transporters located on 
the endothelial cell membrane.30 Another important function 
of the NVU is to dispose of unwanted products of brain activ-
ity and metabolism, such as β-amyloid and tau to prevent 
their accumulation in the brain tissue.31 To this end, clearance 
pathways efficiently remove these potentially deleterious mol-
ecules through transport across the vessel wall (transvascular 
pathway), retrograde convective flow in the perivascular space 
or vessel wall (perivascular pathway), and paravascular path-
ways involving astrocytic end-feet (glymphatic system).32 The 
NVU is also involved in the immune surveillance of the brain 
and in producing growth factors that support the survival of 
brain cells and blood vessels.33 Therefore, the NVU is critical 
for maintaining the homeostasis of the cerebral microenviron-
ment, which is essential for brain health (Figure 2).
Increasing evidence indicates that cumulative exposure 
to vascular risk factors throughout life, perhaps starting as 
early as in utero, and certainly from the fourth decade onward, 
affects the risk of common neurological diseases, such 
as stroke and dementia, as well as the burden of covert (or 
silent) brain lesions that may diminish optimal brain function, 
although not sufficiently to be recognized clinically until later 
in the course of disease. Vascular risk factors, for example, 
hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and dyslipidemia, have del-
eterious effects on the structure and function of cerebral blood 
vessels, leading to vascular remodeling and stiffness, impaired 
cerebral blood flow autoregulation, endothelial dysfunction, 
altered neurovascular coupling, and failure of clearance sys-
tems, resulting in neurovascular dysfunction and suboptimal 
brain health.33,34
Parallels Between Cardiovascular and 
Cerebrovascular Health and Brain Health
Aging affects all organ systems through common underlying 
mechanisms such as changes in the immune system, oxida-
tive stress, and DNA damage and replication errors, as well 
as epigenetic changes and accumulation of abnormal pro-
teins across multiple organ systems.35–38 Aging has profound 
effects on the structure and function of the cerebrovascular 
system,34,39 which may act in concert with vascular risk factors 
to further compromise brain health. Furthermore, age-related 
alterations in systemic organs such as the liver, kidney, lung, 
and endocrine and immune systems may also produce second-
ary deleterious effects on the brain. In turn, brain dysfunction 
and damage caused by age, age-related systemic diseases, and 
vascular risk factors may lead to deleterious effects on the 
cardiovascular system by altering neurohumoral mechanisms 
controlling the heart, blood vessels, and metabolism and pro-
moting cardiac damage and hypertension.40,41 Therefore, the 
health of the brain is inextricably related to cardiovascular and 
cerebrovascular health, and interventions aimed at promot-
ing cardiovascular health would be expected to promote brain 
health and vice versa.
How Do We Define Optimal Brain Health?
Most existing definitions of brain health emphasize an absence 
of overt vascular or neurodegenerative injury such as from 
stroke and AD. Some definitions additionally emphasize the 
absence of subclinical injury on brain imaging such as white 
matter hyperintensities, silent infarcts, microbleeds on brain 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), or cognitive function 
assessment values above the age- and education-dependent 
normative thresholds. More recently, molecular interrogation 
of brain parenchyma through cerebrospinal fluid studies and 
positron emission tomography imaging of amyloid and tau 
burden and of brain network connectivity patterns through 
functional and diffusion-weighted MRI has been added as a 
marker of subtle brain injury. There is a need for a broader 
perspective of the definition of brain health that does not 
depend on the mere absence of anatomic and physiological 
disease and encompasses the potential measurement, moni-
toring, and modification in individuals and in the population.
Optimal brain health can theoretically be defined as an 
optimal capacity to function adaptively in the environment. 
This could be assessed in terms of competencies across the 
domains of “thinking, moving, and feeling,” encompassing, 
for example, the abilities pay attention, perceive, and rec-
ognize sensory input; to learn and remember; to communi-
cate; to problem solve and make decisions; to have mobility; 
and to regulate emotional status. These domains are largely 
attributable to the functions of the brain (except for aspects 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e288  Stroke  October 2017
of mobility); can be operationally defined and measured; 
are affected by environment, behaviors, and disease; and are 
potentially modifiable if changes are detected early enough. 
Bodily functions such as sleep, continence, and appetite are 
also affected by the brain. These constructs can be readily 
understood by patients and their primary care providers and 
should be used as the equivalent of vital signs of the brain, that 
is, early warning indexes of brain health to be monitored and 
addressed at an at-risk stage for the brain.
Maintenance of Brain Health Requires 
Consideration of the Life Continuum
Many brain disorders manifest later in life but, in fact, are 
life-course illnesses. It has been shown that even during the 
period of brain development, subclinical injury can begin to 
accrue. Thus, the risk of stroke in the fifth and sixth decades 
of life depends not only on the BP at the time that risk is being 
assessed but also on BP patterns experienced in the preceding 
1 or 2 decades. Although this advisory statement is focused on 
adults, to best prevent late-life disease, interventions focused 
on modifiable risk and protective factors may ideally need 
to be applied in young adulthood, possibly as far back as 
childhood. Optimal brain health may be defined at any life 
stage as average performance levels among all people at that 
age who are free of known brain or other organ system dis-
ease in terms of decline from previously documented levels 
of function or as adequacy to perform all activities that the 
individual wishes to undertake.
Pragmatic Criteria to Evaluate and Promote 
Optimal Brain Health Throughout the Life Span
Actionable criteria need to focus on age-appropriate sen-
sitive measures and modifiable risk factors. Screening 
tests for brain health range from structured or semistruc-
tured questionnaires that score self-assessments or close 
family member assessments of daily function (Everyday 
Cognition,42 AD8,43 Informant Questionnaire on Cognitive 
Decline in the Elderly,44 Clinical Dementia Rating Scale,45 
Lawton-Brody Instrumental Activities of Daily Living46) to 
brief objective assessments of the abilities to attend, per-
ceive, learn, remember, communicate, problem solve, and 
decide (Folstein Mini-Mental State Examination,47 Montreal 
Cognitive Assessment,48 Telephone Interview of Cognitive 
Status,49 Modified Mini-Mental State Examination,50 Clock 
Figure 2. The neurovascular unit (NVU): the guardian of the homeostasis of the brain microenvironment. Schematic representation of the 
NVU at the level of the cerebral microvasculature (arterioles, capillaries). The NVU is constituted by endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells 
(replaced by pericytes in capillaries), astrocytes, neurons, perivascular cells, and the extracellular matrix, a complex meshwork of proteins 
and carbohydrates that provides support to the different cellular constituents. The NVU is responsible for maintaining the homeostasis of 
the cerebral microenvironment, ensuring an optimal milieu for the function of neurons and other brain cells. The NVU regulates the deliv-
ery of blood flow to the brain, ensuring that it is well matched to its energetic needs; is the site of the blood-brain barrier (BBB), which 
controls the bidirectional trafficking of molecules into and out of the brain; is involved in the trafficking of immune cells, promoting immu-
nosurveillance in the normal state and innate and adaptive immune responses after brain injury; produces neuronal, glial, and vascular 
growth factors that support the reciprocal survival of its cellular constituents and the adjacent brain parenchyma; and is a major conduit 
for the clearance of potentially deleterious byproducts of brain activity such as β-amyloid and tau through transvascular, perivascular, and 
paravascular (glymphatic) pathways. CBF indicates cerebral blood flow.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Gorelick et al  Defining Optimal Brain Health in Adults  e289
Drawing,51 7-minute screen,52 Canadian Stroke Network–
National Institute for Neurological Disorders and Stroke 
5-minute screen).53 In addition, there are assessments of 
mood (Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression 
Scale,54 Geriatric Depression Scale,55 Physician Health 
Questionnaire,56 Neuropsychiatric Inventory57) and mobil-
ity (timed walk,58 Short Physical Performance Battery,59 Get 
Up and Go60). Such indexes have been shown to be adversely 
affected by simple composite indexes of vascular risk factor 
exposure such as AHA’s Life’s Simple 7, which includes 4 
ideal health behaviors and 3 ideal health factors.9
In addition to such subjective or objective assessments, 
interpretation of future risk depends on an accurate assess-
ment of a priori risks in the specific sample. Various simple 
clinical tools have been proposed to assess such a priori risks 
in an office or community setting (Barnes index).61 They also 
depend on consideration of future disease risks not just in 
terms of annual, 5-year, or 10-year risks but in relation to risk 
over the remaining lifetime, assuming an average life expec-
tancy. These predictor models are the so-called lifetime risks 
of stroke and dementia described within cohorts, such as the 
Framingham Heart Study, and estimated for more diverse 
populations within the United States and worldwide.62 Such 
lifetime risk estimates may be used to encourage young and 
middle-aged people to assume personal responsibility for 
preservation of brain health. Educational models to promote 
risk factor awareness among these younger cohorts need to 
be developed.
Race-, ethnicity-, and geography-specific variations in 
disease-incidence risks associated with specific risk factors 
need to be better quantified, as do gene-environment interac-
tions. Furthermore, interactions between risk factors should 
be explored so that primary risk prevention prescriptions to 
prevent subclinical injury and clinical disease can be tailored 
to emphasize changes most likely to benefit the individual. 
The parameters of the risk or protective factors most corre-
lated with brain health often remain unclear. For instance, it is 
unknown whether light physical activity is sufficient to main-
tain brain health and whether optimal physical activity levels 
vary across each decade. In addition, the role of physical fit-
ness in brain health needs to be further clarified.
Risk Factors
Background
There has been substantial interest in the promotion of strate-
gies to achieve healthy brain aging and to reduce the risk of 
stroke and cognitive decline. Research has convincingly dem-
onstrated that cardiovascular risk factors are major contribu-
tors to late-life cognitive health and risk of stroke and AD. For 
example, having high fasting glucose or diabetes mellitus has 
been associated with cognitive impairment and dementia.63–65 
Potential mechanisms include vascular and neuronal dam-
age,66 as well as changes in cerebral blood flow and alterations 
in β-amyloid processing and deposition.67 Smoking has been 
implicated in the risk of cognitive decline68,69 and dementia70 
through atherosclerosis, inflammation, and oxidative stress 
pathways.68,69 Obesity,71–73 dyslipidemia,74–77 and high BP78,79 
are also major contributors to vascular brain health. Finally, 
adherence to a Mediterranean or DASH (Dietary Approach to 
Stop Hypertension) diet80 has been associated with reduced 
cognitive decline, potentially and controversially a result of 
homocysteine reduction, and through antioxidant and anti-
inflammatory pathways.81–83 Despite being well-established 
key risk factors of cognitive decline, AD, and other demen-
tias, much less is known about how cardiovascular risk factor 
exposure affects brain health in midlife or earlier in the life 
course.
The specific critical periods of influence of some key car-
diovascular risk factors such as high body mass index (BMI) 
and hypertension on cognitive decline remain uncertain. For 
example, studies have shown that there may be a U-shaped 
association between BMI and dementia such that individu-
als with either low or high BMI have the greatest risk.84 In 
addition, the timing of obesity (midlife versus late life) and 
the type of obesity (overall versus central) may have different 
effects on cognitive outcomes in late life. Studies suggest that 
midlife and late-life central obesity increases the risk of cogni-
tive impairment but that high late-life obesity (as assessed by 
BMI) may be protective.71–73 Further study is needed to clarify 
these risk relationships, which may be explained away, at least 
in part, by reverse causation.
Hypertension is another risk factor with an influence on 
cognition and dementia that may depend on age, severity, and 
cumulative time of exposure. Several population-based stud-
ies have found that midlife hypertension or high systolic BP 
is associated with cognitive dysfunction and decline85–88 and 
dementia.65,79 A J- or U-shaped association between systolic 
BP and cognitive decline has also been suggested in old age.79 
Inconsistencies in these associations may reflect the timing 
of exposure measurement relative to the age of study sub-
jects, reverse causation, potential survivor bias, and the pos-
sibility of either a cumulative effect or more specific window 
of opportunity for the exposure to exert a deleterious effect 
during the life course. The CARDIA study (Coronary Artery 
Risk Development in Young Adults), for example, showed that 
cumulative systolic and diastolic BPs and fasting glucose were 
consistently associated with worse cognition.89 The reader is 
referred to additional informative studies that detail the effect 
of various BP metrics in young adults on cognitive function 
in midlife.90–92
Prospective observational studies have generally found a 
positive association between physical activity and cognitive 
health outcomes. A meta-analysis of these studies concluded 
that physically active adults had a 35% lower risk of cognitive 
decline (relative risk, 0.65; 95% confidence interval, 0.55–0.76) 
compared with those who were physically inactive.93 In another 
recent systematic review, 21 of 24 prospective studies showed 
a positive association between physical activity and cognitive 
outcomes.94
A number of intervention studies have reported a ben-
efit of physical activity and exercise on cognition. For 
example, in a randomized trial, older women assigned 
to aerobic exercise for 4 months had better performance 
on cognitive tasks than women randomized to strength 
and flexibility training or no exercise.95 Other interven-
tional studies have often, but not always, found benefi-
cial effects of aerobic exercise on cognition.96–99 Several 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e290  Stroke  October 2017
meta-analyses100–102 have reported modest positive effect 
sizes for the exercise-cognition relationship. Some studies 
have shown larger benefits on executive tasks than other 
cognitive domains.97,99,102,103
Finally, 2 other factors merit mention. Atrial fibrillation 
is an important risk in that it is causally linked to stroke and 
subclinical stroke, is increased by certain cardiovascular risks, 
is associated with cognitive impairment, and is modifiable or 
preventable.104–106 In addition, a number of studies have sug-
gested that various aspects of sleep (eg, short or long sleep 
duration, excessive daytime sleepiness, greater number of 
night awakenings) may be associated with poorer cognition or 
cognitive decline.107–111 Because the findings have been incon-
sistent, additional studies are needed to determine whether 
and which sleep characteristics are causal in relation to cogni-
tive impairment.
AHA’s Life’s Simple 7
A recent study examined the association between overall 
cardiovascular health defined by AHA’s Life’s Simple 7 in 
early life to midlife and cognition in midlife. The authors 
investigated 7 components of cardiovascular health (BMI, 
diet, smoking status, physical activity, total cholesterol, 
BP, and fasting glucose) and reported that having a greater 
number of cardiovascular health metrics at ideal levels in 
early life was associated with better cognition in midlife.112 
Furthermore, in another study, cumulative exposure to car-
diovascular risk factors from early to middle adulthood, 
especially above recommended guideline levels, has been 
associated with worse cognition in midlife.89 In REGARDS 
(Reasons for Geographic and Racial Differences in Stroke), 
a US national study of 17 761 blacks and whites >45 years 
of age and followed up for an average of 4 years, those with 
intermediate or high cardiovascular health defined by AHA’s 
Life’s Simple 7 had a significantly lower incidence of cogni-
tive impairment compared with those with low indexes of 
cardiovascular health.25
Other Factors
Education and literacy are well-established predictors of later-
life cognitive function.113–115 This protective effect may be 
mediated by higher socioeconomic conditions that influence 
health behaviors and lifestyle choices, as well as improved 
access to health care and quality health care.116 Higher socio-
economic conditions also provide more opportunities for 
cognitive enrichment through more complex occupational 
exposure. Aside from education level, quality of education 
in early life, which is known to vary greatly by geographic 
region,117,118 also contributes to cognitive outcomes later in 
life. Regional disparities in cognitive decline have been shown 
to be similar to regional disparities in stroke mortality; resi-
dents of the Stroke Belt in the southeastern United States had 
greater adjusted odds of incident cognitive impairment than 
non–Stroke Belt residents,119 suggesting shared risk factors for 
these 2 outcomes. Less is known about other geographic and 
environmental factors that may contribute to vascular health. 
Air pollution is the factor that has been studied the most, but 
the results have not been consistent. Thus, air pollution was 
not included as a metric for optimal brain health in this AHA 
statement.120–122
Rationale for Incorporation of the Ability to 
Monitor, Measure, and Modify as a Consideration 
for Defining Metrics of Brain Health and the 
Distinction Between Metrics and Outcomes
To efficiently translate knowledge into action and to achieve 
the desired goal of optimal brain health, practitioners, indi-
viduals, and policy makers should be provided with metrics 
that are measurable, modifiable, and easily monitored. For 
instance, although age and genetic factors are among the sub-
stantial determinants of brain health, they are not modifiable 
and thus not well suited as metrics. To achieve the highest 
possible gain, metrics for optimal brain health should meet 
the following requirements: have a strong basis of evidence 
for affecting brain health; be measurable by simple methods 
that are broadly available and can be performed at reasonable 
cost; have a sufficient basis of evidence that modifying the 
metric will result in improved brain health; be applicable to 
all subsets of the population; and have face validity to ensure 
acceptance by relevant parties and can be acted on by indi-
viduals, practitioners, and policy makers. For instance, pub-
lic health messages about a diet rich in fruits, vegetables, and 
fiber-rich whole grains is better suited for health communica-
tion, translation, and action by practitioners, policy makers, 
and individuals than details on specific nutrients, which may 
be difficult to communicate and monitor.
Criteria for metrics to achieve optimal brain health (eg, abil-
ity to monitor, measure, and modify) are to be distinguished 
from outcomes such as cognitive function, stroke, and dementia. 
The latter outcomes are strongly influenced by metrics that act as 
antecedents for optimal brain health and serve as ongoing indi-
cators for brain health and the potential for maintenance of opti-
mal brain health. Outcomes should meet the following criteria: 
be clearly attributable to brain health, have a documented impact 
on quality of life, and be measurable by simple methods. The 
primary outcome should be a robust measure consisting of items 
that are easy to assess (eg absence of both stroke and demen-
tia). However, additional metrics to define secondary outcomes, 
including both clinical (eg, cognitive decline) and neuroimaging 
(eg, brain infarcts) outcomes, are needed.
Metrics for Defining Optimal Brain Health: 
AHA’s Life’s Simple 7
The health-related behaviors and health factors listed below have 
been chosen as metrics to define optimal brain health. These fac-
tors are derived from AHA’s Life’s Simple 7.9 Available evidence 
from study of AHA’s Life’s Simple 7 indicates that these factors 
play a role in the preservation of cognition and can be measured, 
modified, and monitored.25,112 These factors have been reviewed 
in the Risk Factors section above, and other study information 
on the factors is found elsewhere for nonsmoking status,4,123,124 
physical activity,4,99,123–125 BMI <25 kg/m2,71,126–133 healthy diet 
consistent with current guidelines,4 untreated BP <120/<80 
mm Hg,4,5 untreated total cholesterol <200 mg/dL,5,86,134–142 and 
fasting blood glucose <100 mg/dL.4,123,124
Health-Related Behaviors9
1. Nonsmoking status
2. Physical activity at goal levels
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Gorelick et al  Defining Optimal Brain Health in Adults  e291
3. BMI <25 kg/m2
4. Healthy diet consistent with current guidelines
Health-Related Factors
5. Untreated BP <120/<80 mm Hg
6. Untreated total cholesterol <200 mg/dL
7. Fasting blood glucose <100 mg/dL
Of note, the thresholds for definition of ideal levels of BP, 
glucose, and cholesterol are consistent with current guidelines 
and expert recommendations.9
Other Factors
Besides AHA’s Life’s Simple 7, a number of additional fac-
tors have an established impact on brain health either by influ-
encing stroke or dementia risk or by independent mechanisms. 
Examples include but are not limited to atrial fibrillation, which 
can be prevented or efficiently monitored and treated to prevent 
cardioembolism; low cardiac output, leading to hypoperfusion 
dementia; acute or chronic brain diseases distinct from stroke or 
neurodegeneration; and head injury, which can in part be influ-
enced by behavior. Although the importance of these factors with 
respect to optimal brain health is acknowledged, AHA’s Life’s 
Simple 7 was chosen to be the backbone of the definition of the 
metrics because of their relevance on individual and population 
levels, life-course perspective, and fit with the ability to monitor, 
measure, and modify, and because they further affect other estab-
lished risk factors for brain health, including atrial fibrillation.
The relationship between education or social engagement 
across the life span and brain health is complex. For instance, 
education may affect brain health by enhancing the capacity 
to compensate for the effects of brain pathology on brain func-
tion (eg, cognitive reserve). A potential benefit of interven-
tions to enhance social or cognitive lifestyle has thus far not 
convincingly been demonstrated. Nevertheless, this remains 
an important area for further investigation. A more detailed 
appraisal of other factors beyond AHA’s Life’s Simple 7 will 
be the focus of future brain health publications.
Primary and Secondary Outcomes for Brain 
Health and Monitoring
Outcomes for brain health can be broadly classified into 3 catego-
ries: clinical diagnoses coded in International Classification of 
Diseases, 10th Revision (eg, stroke or dementia); competencies 
across the domains of thinking, moving, or feeling; and metrics 
of brain structure or function as assessed by instrumental investi-
gations (eg, brain imaging). The last category includes subclinical 
injury on brain imaging (eg, presence or volume of MRI-defined 
white matter hyperintensities, covert infarcts, microbleeds, and 
microstructural change [quantifiable by diffusion tensor imag-
ing]), molecular markers (eg, amyloid measured by positron 
emission tomography or cerebrospinal fluid analysis), and both 
structural and functional connectivity, as assessed by diffusion 
tensor imaging and functional MRI, respectively.143,144
On a population level, International Classification of 
Diseases, 10th Revision–coded clinical diagnoses are more 
practical to assess than competencies or metrics of brain 
structure. In addition, surveillance of certain outcomes such 
as stroke, dementia, and mortality from these causes is more 
reliable than the surveillance of milder clinical disease expres-
sions such as transient ischemic attack (defined as a transient 
focal neurological deficit of vascular cause) or subjective cog-
nitive impairment. Hence, defining stroke and dementia as the 
primary outcomes of interest and transient ischemic attack 
and subjective or mild cognitive impairment as secondary out-
comes seems most logical given that the secondary outcomes 
correlate with less severe clinical expressions, competencies, 
and manifestations of brain dysfunction. Primary and second-
ary outcomes for brain health monitoring are listed in Table 1.
Maintenance of Brain Health
Evidence for Maintenance of Brain Health
There is robust observational epidemiological evidence asso-
ciating young adult and midlife vascular risk factors with later 
development of cognitive impairment. However, the random-
ized clinical trials (RCTs) investigating the effect of vascular 
risk factor modification on the prevention of cognitive decline 
have not shown consistent results (Table 2). Observational epi-
demiological study shows that individuals with hypertension 
treated to a BP <120/<80 mm Hg have less risk of stroke and 
cardiovascular events, but that risk is not as low as those the 
risk for those who have maintained untreated BP <120/<80 
mm Hg.159 Thus, primordial prevention may be a powerful 
means to prevent key primary and secondary cardiovascular 
outcomes because once risk factors are present, one may not be 
able to optimally reduce stroke and cardiovascular disease risk.
There is some suggestion for clinical benefit from BP con-
trol or multidomain interventions, including vascular risk modi-
fication combined with lifestyle and behavioral interventions156 
(Table 2). For example, in the placebo-controlled Syst-Eur study 
(Systolic Hypertension in Europe), a BP reduction of 8.3/3.8 
mm Hg was associated with a marginally significant drop in the 
risk of dementia of 50% at 2 years (P<0.05).145 However, several 
additional randomized trials failed to show a beneficial effect of 
BP reduction on cognition. 146–149,151–154 Thus, while BP lowering 
has been shown to substantially reduce the risk of stroke, in indi-
viduals with elevation of BP, BP lowering in a clinical trial setting 
has not been shown conclusively to preserve cognitive function.
Data from longitudinal observational studies indicate 
that different cardiovascular and lifestyle-related factors 
such as diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, anthropometric 
measures, and smoking, among others, may influence the 
trajectory of cognitive health. Encouraging results have 
been observed in some, but not all,99 RCTs targeting some of 
these conditions. In the PREDIMED study (Prevención con 
Dieta Mediterránea), for example, participants randomized 
Table 1. Primary and Secondary Outcomes for Brain Health 
Monitoring
Primary outcomes
 Stroke
 Dementia
Secondary outcomes
 Transient ischemic attack 
 Subjective or mild cognitive impairment
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e292  Stroke  October 2017
Table 2. Summary of Trial Data on Maintenance of Cognitive Function
Study
n
Age at 
Inclusion 
(mean), y
Follow-Up, y
Intervention
Cognitive Outcome
Results
Syst-Eur trial145
2418
≥60 (69.9)
2
Nitrendipine±enalapril± 
hydrochlorothiazide to reduce 
systolic BP by at least 20 mm Hg 
to reach a value <150 mm Hg
Dementia (DSM-III, Revised, 
criteria) and Mini-Mental State 
Examination
Active treatment was 
associated with a lower 
incidence of dementia by 
50% (P=0.05)
ONTARGET146
22 629
≥55 (66)
4.6
Ramipril vs telmisartan vs a 
combination of both drugs
Mini-Mental State Examination
No effect of treatment  
on cognition
TRANSCEND146
5231
≥55 (67) 
…
Telmisartan vs placebo
Mini-Mental State Examination
No effect of treatment on 
cognition
HYVET147
3336
≥80 (84)
2.2
Indapamide±perindopril vs 
placebo
Dementia (DSM-IV criteria)  
and Mini-Mental State 
Examination
No effect of treatment  
on dementia
SCOPE148
4694
70–89 (76)
3.7
Candesartan vs placebo
Mini-Mental State Examination
No effect of treatment  
on cognition
PRoFESS149
20 332
≥55 (66)
2.4
2×2 Factorial allocation
Mini-Mental State Examination
No effect of treatment  
on cognition
Aspirin+extended-release 
dipyridamole vs clopidogrel
Telmisartan vs placebo
PROGRESS150
6105
No set age 
criteria (64)
3.9
Perindopril±indapamide vs 
placebo
Dementia (DSM-IV criteria) and 
Mini-Mental State Examination
Active treatment reduced 
cognitive decline by 19% 
(P=0.01) but had no 
effect on dementia
SHEP151
4736
≥60 (72)
5
Chlorthalidone±atenolol vs 
placebo
Short-Comprehensive 
Assessment and Referral 
evaluation
No effect of treatment  
on cognition
ACCORD-MIND152
2977
No set age 
criteria (62)
3.3
Diabetic patients randomized to 
systolic BP <120 vs <140 mm Hg 
and to fibrate vs placebo
Digit Symbol Substitution Test
No effect of intensive 
blood pressure and 
fibrate treatment on 
cognition
HOPE-3153
1626
Cognition 
assessed in 
individuals ≥70 
only (74)
5.6
2×2 Factorial allocation
Digit Symbol Substitution Test
No effect of treatment  
on cognition
Rosuvastatin vs placebo and 
candesartan+hydrochlorothiazide 
vs placebo
SPS3154
2916
No set age 
criteria (63)
3
2×2 Factorial allocation
Cognitive Abilities Screening 
Instrument
No effect of treatment  
on cognition
Aspirin vs clopidogrel; systolic BP 
<130 vs 130–149 mm Hg
preDIVA155
3526
70–78 (75)
6.7
Usual care vs multidomain 
intervention (smoking habits, 
diet, physical activity, weight, 
BP, diabetes mellitus, and 
dyslipidemia)
Dementia (DSM-IV criteria)
No effect on dementia
FINGER156
2654
60–77 (69)
2
Usual care vs multidomain 
intervention (diet, physical 
exercise, cognitive training, and 
intensive vascular risk factor 
monitoring)
Neuropsychological test battery
Multidomain intervention 
reduced mean z score at 
2 y from 0.20±0.02 to 
0.16±0.51 (P=0.03)
MAPT157
1680
≥60 (75)
3
Usual care vs multidomain 
intervention (cognitive training, 
diet, nutrition advice, and 3 
preventive consultations±omega 
3 polyunsaturated fatty acids)
Free and Cued Selective 
Reminding test, 10 Mini-Mental 
State Examination orientation 
items, Digit Symbol Substitution 
Test, and Category Naming Test
No effect of treatment on 
cognition
(Continued )
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Gorelick et al  Defining Optimal Brain Health in Adults  e293
to a Mediterranean diet had modestly better cognition at 4 
years.158 In the FINGER study (Finnish Geriatric Intervention 
Study to Prevent Cognitive Impairment and Disability), par-
ticipants randomized to a multidomain intervention, includ-
ing coaching for vascular risk reduction, exercise, cognitive 
training, and adherence to a Mediterranean diet, had mod-
estly better cognitive performance at 2 years, with improve-
ments in executive functions and processing speed but not 
episodic memory.156
On the other hand, several trials have had neutral results 
for maintenance of cognition155,157 (Table 2). The neutral 
results or modest beneficial effect on cognition in these stud-
ies might be explained by administration of the interven-
tion too late in the disease time course, limited follow-up 
and thus inadequate statistical power, poor sustainability of 
healthy lifestyle changes, and relatively small differences in 
the baseline and longitudinal management of vascular risk 
factors in the placebo or control groups compared with active 
or intensive treatment because the control participants were 
already adhering well to standard care. In addition, none of 
the trials showed that dementia was prevented; even the posi-
tive trials showed only modest improvements in cognitive 
performance on neuropsychological tests of unclear signifi-
cance for daily functioning and quality of life. Although the 
clinical trials showed that implementing a long-term multi-
domain lifestyle intervention was feasible and in some cases 
improved cognition, the applicability and cost-effectiveness 
of such labor-intensive interventions (ie, often requiring a 
lifestyle coach, nutritionist, and supervised exercise ses-
sions) in the general population are unclear. Thus, additional 
studies are needed, especially in younger age groups, with 
the inclusion of sensitive indicators of trajectories of cogni-
tive function and vascular function.
Summary of Previous Guidance for Maintenance of 
Cognitive Vitality From the AHA/ASA and Other 
Organizations
Although the RCT evidence to prevent cognitive decline 
and dementia is still incomplete and evolving, the observa-
tional epidemiological evidence for modifiable risk factors is 
substantial. This evidence has been previously reviewed by 
several national organizations, along with guidance on how 
to translate this information into strategies to improve brain 
health.
In 2011, the AHA/ASA released a scientific statement on 
vascular contributions to cognitive impairment and dementia, 
reviewing clinical considerations for diagnosis and manage-
ment of symptomatic patients and prospects for the prevention 
of vascular cognitive impairment and AD.4 The statement did 
not recommend changes to the current management of cardio-
vascular risk factors to prevent dementia; however, it should 
be noted that the statement was released before the publication 
of the FINGER, LIFE (Life Interventions and Independence 
for Elders), and PREDIMED trials. The only Class I rec-
ommendation was, “In people at risk for vascular cognitive 
impairment, treatment of hypertension is recommended.”4 A 
more contemporary scientific statement found inconclusive 
evidence that BP control preserves cognition in the population 
at-large.5 Another scientific statement found insufficient evi-
dence on how to prevent or treat silent cerebrovascular disease 
(including silent strokes) detected on neuroimaging, which 
has been associated with increased risk of future dementia.143
PREDIMED158
334
Men: 55–80
Women: 60–80 
(67)
4.1
Mediterranean diet supplemented 
with extravirgin olive oil vs 
Mediterranean diet supplemented 
with mixed nuts versus  
control diet
Mini-Mental State Examination, 
Rey Auditory Verbal Learning 
Test, Animals Semantic 
Fluency, Digit Span Subtest 
from the Wechsler Adult 
Intelligence Scale, Verbal Paired 
Associates from the Wechsler 
Memory Scale, and the Color 
Trails Test
Improvement in cognition
LIFE99
1635
70–79 and 
80–89
2
Moderate-intensity physical 
activity program vs educational 
workshops and upper-extremity 
stretching
Digit Symbol Coding, Wechsler 
Adult Intelligence Scale, and 
Hopkins Verbal Learning Test
Among sedentary adults, 
a moderate-intensity 
physical activity program 
vs a health education 
program did not improve 
global or domain-specific 
cognitive function
ACCORD-MIND indicates Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes; BP, blood pressure; DSM, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders; 
FINGER, Finnish Geriatric Intervention Study to Prevent Cognitive Impairment and Disability; HOPE-3, Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation–3; HYVET, 
Hypertension in the Very Elderly Trial; LIFE, Life Interventions and Independence for Elders; MAPT, Multidomain Alzheimer Preventive Trial; ONTARGET, Ongoing 
Telmisartan Alone and in Combination With Ramipril Global Endpoint Trial; PREDIMED, Prevención con Dieta Mediterránea; preDIVA, Prevention of Dementia by 
Intensive Vascular Care; PRoFESS, Prevention Regimen for Effectively Avoiding Second Strokes; PROGRESS, Perindopril Protection Against Recurrent Stroke 
Study; SCOPE, Study on Cognition and Prognosis in the Elderly; SHEP, Systolic Hypertension in the Elderly Program; SPS3, Secondary Prevention of Small 
Subcortical Strokes Trial; Syst-Eur, Systolic Hypertension in Europe; and TRANSCEND, Telmisartan Randomized Assessment Study in ACE Intolerant Subjects 
With Cardiovascular Disease.
Table 2. Continued
Study
n
Age at 
Inclusion 
(mean), y
Follow-Up, y
Intervention
Cognitive Outcome
Results
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e294  Stroke  October 2017
The Alzheimer’s Association has summarized previous 
systematic reviews and meta-analyses, consensus state-
ments, and selected articles on modifiable risk factors for 
cognitive decline and dementia.160 The writing committee 
concluded that the evidence was sufficiently strong to sup-
port promotion of physical activity, management of vascular 
risk factors, healthy eating, and lifelong learning and cogni-
tive training. The Alzheimer’s Association website lists “10 
Ways to Love Your Brain,” consisting of advice to increase 
physical activity, pursue lifelong learning, cease smoking, 
manage cardiovascular risk, protect against brain injury, 
eat a healthy diet, get adequate sleep, take care of mental 
health, stay socially engaged, and partake in challenging 
mental activities.161
In 2015, the Institute of Medicine commissioned a 
report on cognitive aging.162 For individuals and families, 
the report recommended being physically active, manag-
ing cardiovascular risk factors, discussing health condi-
tions and medications that might influence cognition with 
a healthcare professional, being socially and intellectu-
ally engaged, getting adequate sleep, taking steps to avoid 
delirium if hospitalized, and carefully evaluating products 
advertised to improve cognition. For society, key recommen-
dations included increasing research on preserving cogni-
tive function, ensuring appropriate policies and guidelines 
for products that affect cognitive function, developing core 
competencies and curricula in cognitive aging distinct from 
dementia for health professionals, and expanding commu-
nity services to meet the needs of older adults and their fami-
lies with respect to cognitive health.
Recommendations for Maintenance of Optimal 
Brain Health
Considering the emerging evidence that now justifies a defi-
nition of optimal brain health, prudent actions are warranted 
to maintain optimal brain health throughout the life span. 
Thus, this statement endorses the recommendations from the 
Institute of Medicine and Alzheimer’s Association as means 
to maintain brain health.160–162 In addition, for primordial, 
primary, and recurrent stroke prevention and its relationship 
to brain health, we recommend following AHA/ASA guid-
ance4,5,124,142,143,163–167 (see also Table 3).
Decades of efforts to reduce stroke and cardiovascular risks 
by the AHA/ASA and other health organizations and, more 
recently, to promote cardiovascular health are likely to have 
already contributed to the declining incidence of dementia.172 
These efforts should be additionally leveraged for the pro-
motion of optimal brain health. This should include not only 
prevention of stroke but also treatment of stroke to improve 
outcomes, including poststroke cognitive impairment.
Addressing cardiovascular and stroke risk is a large 
part of maintaining optimal brain health, but not the only 
part. Addressing the many factors that may promote cogni-
tive reserve, including such factors as access to education, 
meaningful interpersonal and community social engage-
ment, and access to mental health care, is also likely to be 
a useful strategy. Active engagement by not only healthcare 
practitioners but also policymakers at all levels of govern-
ment is needed.
Maintaining optimal brain health requires actions by 
individuals, healthcare practitioners, public health organiza-
tions, policy makers, and the private sector. An overview of 
approaches to promoting optimal brain health is provided in 
Table 3 and categorized by target stakeholder.
Discussion
The main aim of this AHA/ASA advisory is to provide an ini-
tial definition of optimal brain health and guidance on how to 
maintain brain health. Our definition of optimal brain health 
emphasizes the importance of a favorable or ideal cardiovas-
cular risk profile. Such a risk profile earlier in life is associated 
with compression of morbidity and mortality. This has been 
shown in a recent publication from the CHA (Chicago Heart 
Association Detection Project in Industry). CHA included a 
cohort of men and women employed in 1967 to 1973 who 
were 90% white, 44 years of age on average at baseline, and 
followed up for 40 years. Overall, those CHA cohort members 
Table 3. Recommendations for Promotion and Maintenance 
of Optimal Brain Health
Individual168
 Check health status with AHA’s Life’s Simple 7 (http://www.heart.org)
 Remain physically active
  
Eat a healthy diet; evidence suggests that a Mediterranean-style diet 
preserves cognitive function better than a low-fat diet
 Address vascular risk factors, if present, with a primary care practitioner
Pursue cognitively stimulating and rewarding activities
  
Address mental health concerns with a primary care practitioner or 
specialist as needed
Healthcare practitioners
  
Apply primordial and primary preventive care for cardiovascular disease 
and stroke according to AHA/ASA guidelines9,124,142,163,164
  
Diagnose and treat symptomatic stroke according to AHA/ASA 
guidelines165–167
  
Administer brief screens to monitor cognitive status
Health systems
  
Support patients by providing access to preventive care and lifestyle 
modification
  
Support good-quality care for stroke169 and for primary prevention of 
cardiovascular disease170
Public health, health policy, private sector9,168
  
Disseminate knowledge of potentially modifiable risk factors for 
cognitive decline and dementia
  
Provide tools and resources to maintain healthy lifestyles such as the 
AHA Healthy for Good program171
  
Provide opportunities for stimulating cognitive, physical, and social 
activities
  
Maintain a healthy environment, including neighborhoods that promote 
cognitive and physical activity
  
Fund research on risk factors for cognitive decline and dementia and 
how to intervene to reduce risk
AHA indicates American Heart Association; and ASA, American Stroke 
Association.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Gorelick et al  Defining Optimal Brain Health in Adults  e295
who had a favorable health profile in midlife had prolonged 
survival by ≈4 years and postponed onset of all-cause and car-
diovascular mortality of 7 years.173 In addition, all morbidities 
were reduced, compression of morbidity was observed both 
absolutely and relatively, and there were lower cumulative 
and annual healthcare costs during the Medicare-eligibility 
life span in older ages for those with favorable cardiovascular 
health profiles in midlife.173 Although cognition was not the 
primary focus of this publication, several other study results 
support the belief that favorable cardiovascular health earlier 
in life leads to maintenance of cognitive vitality.89,174
Although healthy lifestyle, advances in overall medical 
care, and favorable socioeconomic profile might compress 
major morbidities of later life, they may be influenced by the 
age at which the subjects are studied and the time in life when 
preventives are administered, as suggested by the results of 
a Chinese longevity study of the oldest old.175 In this study, 
there was compression of activities of daily living disability, 
but life-span extension was associated with expansion of dis-
ability of physical and cognitive functioning because there 
were more frail elderly who survived health problems.175
Modifiable cardiovascular risks are prevalent worldwide, may 
occur across the age continuum, and are associated with adverse 
consequences later in life.128,176 Furthermore, cardiovascular mor-
tality, including ischemic heart disease and stroke, may vary sub-
stantially on the basis of geographic variation.177 Atherosclerosis, 
a manifestation of nonfavorable cardiovascular health, however, 
may not be inevitable. Recently, it has been shown that a for-
ager-horticulturalist population, the South American Tsimane of 
Bolivia, who have few coronary artery disease risk factors, have 
the lowest reported levels of coronary artery disease of any popu-
lation,178 suggesting the value of primordial prevention.
Furthermore, the development of vascular arterial stiff-
ness, a measure of vascular aging, may not be inevitable.179 
In the Framingham study, lower age, female sex, lower BMI, 
use of lipid-lowering drugs, and absence of diabetes mellitus 
in a cross-sectional study were associated with healthy vas-
cular aging. In addition, for every 1-unit higher AHA’s Life’s 
Simple 7 score (ie, 1 more factor or behavior at ideal levels), 
there was a 1.55-fold age- and sex-adjusted odds of healthy 
vascular aging. This observational study provides support 
for prevention strategies focused on modifiable health fac-
tors and behaviors to prevent or delay vascular aging and 
risk of cardiovascular disease and possibly other health con-
sequences associated with aging such as cognitive impair-
ment.179 This approach may apply to elderly populations.
Prevention of cognitive impairment and dementia may be 
viewed as a lifelong process predicated on a number of ante-
cedent factors, with cardiovascular risks playing an impor-
tant role.112 The promotion of healthy living across the life 
span may allow one to avoid adverse health outcomes such 
as multimorbidity, including cognitive impairment and other 
health-related adverse outcomes or events.9,180,181 In addition, 
favorable cardiovascular health may be associated with lower 
healthcare expenditures and resource use.182
In this advisory, AHA’s Life’s Simple 7 was chosen 
as the metric to define optimal brain health. AHA’s Life’s 
Simple 7 consists of 4 ideal health behaviors (physical 
activity at goal levels, healthy diet consistent with current 
guideline recommendations, nonsmoking, and BMI <25 
kg/m2) and 3 ideal health factors (untreated total choles-
terol <200 mg/dL, fasting blood glucose <100 mg/dL, and 
untreated BP <120/<80 mm Hg).9 These factors have been 
shown to improve the health trajectory.9,181 In addition, 
AHA’s Life’s Simple 7 has been linked to successful cogni-
tive health25,94,95,112 and is an ideal starting point for defining 
optimal brain health because it is easy to measure, monitor, 
and modify. Additional study to test the influence of AHA’s 
Life’s Simple 7 on brain health among different racial and eth-
nic groups, men and women, and people from different age 
groups across the life continuum is needed.
Beyond the metrics to initially define optimal brain health, 
primary and secondary outcomes for brain health have been iden-
tified in this advisory. On the basis of practical considerations, 2 
main primary outcomes, stroke and dementia, and 2 main sec-
ondary outcomes, transient ischemic attack and subjective or 
mild cognitive impairment, have been designated. Metrics of 
brain structure and function such as subclinical injury detected 
on brain imaging (eg, presence or volume of MRI-defined 
white matter hyperintensities, covert infarcts, microbleeds, and 
microscopic injury [quantifiable by diffusion tensor imaging]), 
molecular markers (eg, amyloid measured by positron emission 
tomography or cerebrospinal fluid analysis), and those of struc-
tural and functional connectivity, as assessed by diffusion tensor 
imaging and functional MRI, are important factors for future con-
sideration as the definition of optimal brain health evolves.
Finally, the available RCT and observational epidemio-
logical data were reviewed to provide guidance on the main-
tenance of cognitive health. Although the RCT evidence to 
prevent cognitive decline and dementia is incomplete but 
evolving, the observational epidemiological evidence for 
modifiable risk factors was judged to be substantially in favor 
of modifying key cardiovascular risks. Thus, application of 
the Institute of Medicine and Alzheimer’s Association guid-
ance for the maintenance of cognitive vitality, which includes 
both cardiovascular risk factor modification and other strate-
gies,160–162 and primordial, primary, and secondary stroke pre-
vention recommendations from the AHA/ASA as they relate 
to brain health has been recommended.4,5,124,142,143,163–167
The definition of optimal brain health and its maintenance 
chosen for this advisory has limitations. We acknowledge the 
complexity of defining optimal brain health for adults and that 
a broader definition of optimal brain health is possible when 
taking into account the various stages of the life continuum 
spanning from conception to old age and consequent environ-
mental, lifestyle, and genetic exposures. For example, there 
is a limited but increasing body of knowledge on the impor-
tance of childhood exposures affecting cognition in later life.183 
Furthermore, intrauterine and early-life exposures may play 
important roles in neurocognitive development, as may stress 
in early life. Therefore, we anticipate that future publications 
from the AHA/ASA brain health writing group will expand the 
definition of optimal brain health and incorporate factors of 
interest from, for example, earlier in life. In addition, there were 
inherent limitations of availability of variables of interest such 
as those based on demographic and race-ethnic composition of 
the available RCTs and observational epidemiological studies 
that were reviewed. Such limitations suggest the need for study 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e296  Stroke  October 2017
of individuals representing groups disproportionately affected 
by cardiovascular health disparities and those from early stages 
of life such as childhood.
Future Directions and the AHA Strategic  
Impact Goal
The AHA/ASA has set a Strategic Impact Goal by the year 
2020 to improve the cardiovascular health of Americans by 
20% while reducing deaths from cardiovascular diseases and 
stroke by 20%.9 The AHA/ASA is promoting cardiovascu-
lar health through application of Life’s Simple 7. As part of 
the effort to promote cardiovascular health, the AHA/ASA 
is adding brain health to its overall strategic initiatives. Brain 
health is an important component of successful aging and one 
in which cardiovascular risks seem to play a key role. The 
main purpose of this document is to serve as the first step in 
defining optimal brain health and how to maintain it. Future 
work will serve to refine the definition, metrics, and strategies 
to maintain cognitive vitality.
Acknowledgments
The authors wish to express their thanks to the follow-
ing AHA staff for their assistance in the development of 
this manuscript: Anne Leonard, senior science and medi-
cine advisor, and Connie Land, assistant managing editor, 
Scientific Publishing.
Disclosures
Writing Group Disclosures
Writing Group 
Member
Employment
Research Grant
Other  
Research  
Support
Speakers’  
Bureau/ 
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/
Advisory Board
Other
Philip B. 
Gorelick
Michigan State University, 
Mercy Health Hauenstein 
Neurosciences
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Karen L. Furie
Rhode Island Hospital and 
Alpert Medical School of 
Brown University
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Costantino 
Iadecola
Weill Cornell Medicine, 
Feil Family Brain and Mind 
Research Institute
NIH†
None
None
None
None
Broadview 
Ventures†
None
Hee-Joon Bae
Seoul National University, 
Bundang Hospital, 
Republic of Korea
Bayer†; Boehringer 
Ingelheim†; Daichi 
Sankyo†; AstraZeneca 
Korea†; Dong-A 
Pharmaceutical†; 
Yuhan Corp†; ESAI-
Korea†; BMS Korea†
None
Korean Drug Co, 
Ltd*; Shire Korea 
Ltd*
None
None
None
None
Mary Ann 
Bauman
Self-employed
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Martin 
Dichgans
Klinikum der Universität 
München, Ludwig-
Maximilians-University, 
Institute for Stroke and 
Dementia Research, 
Munich, Germany
EU FP7/Horizon 2020†; 
DFG/DLR†; DZNE†; 
BMBF†; Fondation 
Leducq†; Vascular 
Dementia Research 
Foundation†
None
None
None
None
DZNE*; Bayer 
Vital*; EVER*; 
Boehringer 
Ingelheim*; 
Daiichi Sankyo*
None
Pamela W. 
Duncan
Wake Forest Baptist 
Medical Center
PCORI (PI of COMPASS 
Trial)†; PCORI 
(investigator FALLS 
Trial)*; NIA (investigator 
REHAB_HF)*
None
Molec*
None
Care 
Directions*
None
PCORI/
NIH†
Meighan 
Girgus
American Heart 
Association
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Virginia J. 
Howard
University of Alabama at 
Birmingham
NIH-NINDS†; NIH-NIA†
None
None
None
None
None
None
Ronald M. 
Lazar‡
Columbia University 
Medical Center 
Neurological Institute
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Donald M. 
Lloyd-Jones
Northwestern University 
Feinberg School of 
Medicine
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
(Continued )
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Gorelick et al  Defining Optimal Brain Health in Adults  e297
References
 1. Kontis V, Bennett JE, Mathers CD, Li G, Foreman K, Ezzati M. Future 
life expectancy in 35 industrialised countries: projections with a 
Bayesian model ensemble. Lancet. 2017;389:1323–1335. doi: 10.1016/
S0140-6736(16)32381-9.
 2. Santosa A. A better world towards convergence of longevity? Lancet. 
2017;389:1278–1279.
 3. Winblad B, Amouyel P, Andrieu S, Ballard C, Brayne C, Brodaty H, 
Cedazo-Minguez A, Dubois B, Edvardsson D, Feldman H, Fratiglioni 
L, Frisoni GB, Gauthier S, Georges J, Graff C, Iqbal K, Jessen F, 
Johansson G, Jönsson L, Kivipelto M, Knapp M, Mangialasche F, Melis 
R, Nordberg A, Rikkert MO, Qiu C, Sakmar TP, Scheltens P, Schneider 
LS, Sperling R, Tjernberg LO, Waldemar G, Wimo A, Zetterberg H. 
Defeating Alzheimer’s disease and other dementias: a priority for 
European science and society. Lancet Neurol. 2016;15:455–532. doi: 
10.1016/S1474-4422(16)00062-4.
 4. Gorelick PB, Scuteri A, Black SE, Decarli C, Greenberg SM, Iadecola 
C, Launer LJ, Laurent S, Lopez OL, Nyenhuis D, Petersen RC, 
Schneider JA, Tzourio C, Arnett DK, Bennett DA, Chui HC, Higashida 
RT, Lindquist R, Nilsson PM, Roman GC, Sellke FW, Seshadri S; on 
behalf of the American Heart Association Stroke Council, Council on 
Epidemiology and Prevention, Council on Cardiovascular Nursing, 
Council on Cardiovascular Radiology and Intervention, and Council on 
Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia. Vascular contributions to cog-
nitive impairment and dementia: a statement for healthcare profession-
als from the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association. 
Stroke. 2011;42:2672–2713. doi: 10.1161/STR.0b013e3182299496.
 5. Iadecola C, Yaffe K, Biller J, Bratzke LC, Faraci FM, Gorelick PB, 
Gulati M, Kamel H, Knopman DS, Launer LJ, Saczynski JS, Seshadri 
S, Zeki Al Hazzouri A; on behalf of the American Heart Association 
Council on Hypertension; Council on Clinical Cardiology; Council on 
Cardiovascular Disease in the Young; Council on Cardiovascular and 
Stroke Nursing; Council on Quality of Care and Outcomes Research; 
and Stroke Council. Impact of hypertension on cognitive function: a sci-
entific statement from the American Heart Association. Hypertension. 
2016;68:e67–e94. doi: 10.1161/HYP.0000000000000053.
 6. National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine; Health 
and Medicine Division; Board on Health Sciences Policy; Committee 
on Preventing Dementia and Cognitive Impairment. In: Leshner AI, 
Landis S, Stroud C, Downey A, eds. Preventing Cognitive Decline and 
Dementia: A Way Forward. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 
2017:1–130. http://www.nap.edu/24782. Accessed June 23, 2017.
 7. Fiocco AJ, Yaffe K. Defining successful aging: the importance of includ-
ing cognitive function over time. Arch Neurol. 2010;67:876–880. doi: 
10.1001/archneurol.2010.130.
 8. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Healthy Aging. What is a 
healthy brain? New research explores perceptions of cognitive health 
among diverse older adults. https://www.cdc.gov/aging/pdf/perceptions_
of_cog_hlth_factsheet.pdf. Accessed April 11, 2017.
 9. Lloyd-Jones DM, Hong 
Y, Labarthe D, Mozaffarian D, Appel LJ, Van Horn 
L, Greenlund K, Daniels S, Nichol G, Tomaselli GF, Arnett DK, Fonarow 
GC, Ho PM, Lauer MS, Masoudi FA, Robertson RM, Roger V, Schwamm 
LH, Sorlie P, Yancy CW, Rosamond WD; on behalf of the American Heart 
Association Strategic Planning Task Force and Statistics Committee. 
Defining and setting national goals for cardiovascular health promotion 
and disease reduction: the American Heart Association’s Strategic Impact 
Goal through 2020 and beyond. Circulation. 2010;121:586–613.
 10. World Health Organization and Alzheimer’s Disease International. 
Dementia: a public health priority. Paper presented at: World Health 
Organization; April 11, 2012; Geneva, Switzerland.
 11. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Self-reported 
increased confusion or memory loss and associated functional diffi-
culties among adults aged ≥ 60 years - 21 States, 2011. MMWR Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep. 2013;62:347–350.
Sudha 
Seshadri
Boston University School 
of Medicine, Framingham 
Heart Study
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Eric E. Smith
University of Calgary, 
Canada
Canadian Institutes 
of Health Research†; 
Brain Canada†; 
McMaster University†; 
Ottawa Heart Institute†
None
None
None
None
None
None
Fernando D. 
Testai
University of Illinois at 
Chicago
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Stephen van 
Gaal
University of Calgary, 
Canada
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Salina P. Waddy
NIDDK, NIH, Office of 
Minority Research
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Hank Wasiak
University of Southern 
California, Marshall 
School of Business
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Kristine Yaffe
University of California, 
San Francisco
NHLBI†
None
None
None
None
None
None
Charlotte Zerna
University of Calgary, 
Canada
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
This table represents the relationships of writing group members that may be perceived as actual or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest as reported on the 
Disclosure Questionnaire, which all members of the writing group are required to complete and submit. A relationship is considered to be “significant” if (a) the person 
receives $10 000 or more during any 12-month period, or 5% or more of the person’s gross income; or (b) the person owns 5% or more of the voting stock or share of the 
entity, or owns $10 000 or more of the fair market value of the entity. A relationship is considered to be “modest” if it is less than “significant” under the preceding definition.
*Modest.
†Significant.
‡Dr Lazar is now at the University of Alabama.
Writing Group Disclosures Continued
Writing Group 
Member
Employment
Research Grant
Other  
Research  
Support
Speakers’  
Bureau/ 
Honoraria
Expert 
Witness
Ownership 
Interest
Consultant/
Advisory Board
Other
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e298  Stroke  October 2017
 12. Alzheimer's Association. 2013 Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures. 
Alzheimers Dement. 2013;9:208–245. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2013.02.003.
 13. Hurd MD, Martorell P, Delavande A, Mullen KJ, Langa KM. Monetary 
costs of dementia in the United States. N Engl J Med. 2013;368:1326–
1334. doi: 10.1056/NEJMsa1204629.
 14. Roth DL, Fredman L, Haley WE. Informal caregiving and its impact 
on health: a reappraisal from population-based studies. Gerontologist. 
2015;55:309–319. doi: 10.1093/geront/gnu177.
 15. Pinquart M, Sörensen S. Differences between caregivers and noncaregiv-
ers in psychological health and physical health: a meta-analysis. Psychol 
Aging. 2003;18:250–267.
 16. Hachinski V. Stroke and Alzheimer disease: fellow travelers or 
partners in crime? Arch Neurol. 2011;68:797–798. doi: 10.1001/
archneurol.2011.118.
 17. Hachinski V; World Stroke Organization. Stroke and potentially pre-
ventable dementias proclamation: updated World Stroke Day procla-
mation [published correction appears in Stroke. 2016;47:d18]. Stroke. 
2015;46:3039–3040. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.115.011237.
 18. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Diabetes public health resource. 
https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/statistics/prev/national/figpersons.htm. 
Accessed May 23, 2017.
 19. Dichgans M, Leys D. Vascular cognitive impairment. Circ Res. 
2017;120:573–591. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.116.308426.
 20. Merai R, Siegel C, Rakotz M, Basch P, Wright J, Wong B, Thorpe 
P. CDC grand rounds: a public health approach to detect and control 
hypertension. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2016;65:1261–1264. doi: 
10.15585/mmwr.mm6545a3.
 21. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Fryar CD, Flegal KM. Prevalence of obesity 
among adults and youth: United States, 2011–2014. NCHS Data Brief. 
2015:1–8.
 22. GBD 2015 Obesity Collaborators, Afshin A, Forouzanfar MH, Reitsma 
MB, Sur P, Estep K, Lee A, Marczak L, Mokdad AH, Moradi-Lakeh 
M, Naghavi M, Salama JS, Vos T, Abate KH, Abbafati C, Ahmed MB, 
Al-Aly Z, Alkerwi A, Al-Raddadi R, Amare AT, Amberbir A, Amegah 
AK, Amini E, Amrock SM, Anjana RM, Ärnlöv J, Asayesh H, Banerjee 
A, Barac A, Baye E, Bennett DA, Beyene AS, Biadgilign S, Biryukov 
S, Bjertness E, Boneya DJ, Campos-Nonato I, Carrero JJ, Cecilio P, 
Cercy K, Ciobanu LG, Cornaby L, Damtew SA, Dandona L, Dandona 
R, Dharmaratne SD, Duncan BB, Eshrati B, Esteghamati A, Feigin 
VL, Fernandes JC, Fürst T, Gebrehiwot TT, Gold A, Gona PN, Goto A, 
Habtewold TD, Hadush KT, Hafezi-Nejad N, Hay SI, Horino M, Islami 
F, Kamal R, Kasaeian A, Katikireddi SV, Kengne AP, Kesavachandran 
CN, Khader YS, Khang YH, Khubchandani J, Kim D, Kim YJ, Kinfu Y, 
Kosen S, Ku T, Defo BK, Kumar GA, Larson HJ, Leinsalu M, Liang X, 
Lim SS, Liu P, Lopez AD, Lozano R, Majeed A, Malekzadeh R, Malta 
DC, Mazidi M, McAlinden C, McGarvey ST, Mengistu DT, Mensah GA, 
Mensink GBM, Mezgebe HB, Mirrakhimov EM, Mueller UO, Noubiap 
JJ, Obermeyer CM, Ogbo FA, Owolabi MO, Patton GC, Pourmalek F, 
Qorbani M, Rafay A, Rai RK, Ranabhat CL, Reinig N, Safiri S, Salomon 
JA, Sanabria JR, Santos IS, Sartorius B, Sawhney M, Schmidhuber J, 
Schutte AE, Schmidt MI, Sepanlou SG, Shamsizadeh M, Sheikhbahaei 
S, Shin MJ, Shiri R, Shiue I, Roba HS, Silva DAS, Silverberg JI, Singh 
JA, Stranges S, Swaminathan S, Tabarés-Seisdedos R, Tadese F, Tedla 
BA, Tegegne BS, Terkawi AS, Thakur JS, Tonelli M, Topor-Madry R, 
Tyrovolas S, Ukwaja KN, Uthman OA, Vaezghasemi M, Vasankari 
T, Vlassov VV, Vollset SE, Weiderpass E, Werdecker A, Wesana J, 
Westerman R, Yano Y, Yonemoto N, Yonga G, Zaidi Z, Zenebe ZM, 
Zipkin B, Murray CJL. Health effects of overweight and obesity in 195 
countries over 25 years. N Engl J Med. 2017;377:13–27. doi: 10.1056/
NEJMoa1614362.
 23. Middleton LE, Yaffe K. Promising strategies for the prevention 
 
of dementia. Arch Neurol. 2009;66:1210–1215. doi: 10.1001/archneurol. 
2009.201.
 24. Unverzagt FW, McClure LA, Wadley VG, Jenny NS, Go RC, Cushman 
M, Kissela BM, Kelley BJ, Kennedy R, Moy CS, Howard V, Howard G. 
Vascular risk factors and cognitive impairment in a stroke-free cohort. 
Neurology. 2011;77:1729–1736. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e318236ef23.
 25. Thacker EL, Gillett SR, Wadley VG, Unverzagt FW, Judd SE, McClure 
LA, Howard VJ, Cushman M. The American Heart Association Life’s 
Simple 7 and incident cognitive impairment: the REasons for Geographic 
And Racial Differences in Stroke (REGARDS) study. J Am Heart Assoc. 
2014;3:e000635. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.113.000635.
 26. Attwell D, Laughlin SB. An energy budget for signaling in the grey mat-
ter of the brain. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2001;21:1133–1145. doi: 
10.1097/00004647-200110000-00001.
 27. Iadecola C. Neurovascular regulation in the normal brain and in 
Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2004;5:347–360. doi: 10.1038/
nrn1387.
 28. Cipolla MJ. The Cerebral Circulation. San Rafael, CA: Morgan & 
Claypool Life Sciences; 2009:1–59.
 29. Andresen J, Shafi NI, Bryan RM Jr. Endothelial influences on cerebro-
vascular tone. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2006;100:318–327.
 30. Zhao Z, Nelson AR, Betsholtz C, Zlokovic BV. Establishment and dys-
function of the blood-brain barrier. Cell. 2015;163:1064–1078. doi: 
10.1016/j.cell.2015.10.067.
 31. Iadecola C. The overlap between neurodegenerative and vascular factors 
in the pathogenesis of dementia. Acta Neuropathol. 2010;120:287–296. 
doi: 10.1007/s00401-010-0718-6.
 32. Tarasoff-Conway JM, Carare RO, Osorio RS, Glodzik L, Butler T, 
Fieremans E, Axel L, Rusinek H, Nicholson C, Zlokovic BV, Frangione 
B, Blennow K, Ménard J, Zetterberg H, Wisniewski T, de Leon MJ. 
Clearance systems in the brain: implications for Alzheimer disease 
[published correction appears in Nat Rev Neurol. 2016;12:248]. Nat Rev 
Neurol. 2015;11:457–470. doi: 10.1038/nrneurol.2015.119.
 33. Faraco G, Iadecola C. Hypertension: a harbinger of stroke and dementia. 
Hypertension. 2013;62:810–817. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA. 
113.01063.
 34. Faraci FM. Protecting against vascular disease in brain. Am J 
Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2011;300:H1566–H1582. doi: 10.1152/
ajpheart.01310.2010.
 35. Pal S, Tyler JK. Epigenetics and aging. Sci Adv. 2016;2:e1600584. doi: 
10.1126/sciadv.1600584.
 36. Kaeberlein M, Rabinovitch PS, Martin GM. Healthy aging: the ulti-
mate preventative medicine. Science. 2015;350:1191–1193. doi: 
10.1126/science.aad3267.
 37. Zahn LM. Aging and variability among immune cells. Science. 
2017;355:1386–1387.
 38. Labbadia J, Morimoto RI. The biology of proteostasis in aging 
and disease. Annu Rev Biochem. 2015;84:435–464. doi: 10.1146/
annurev-biochem-060614-033955.
 39. Farkas E, Luiten PG. Cerebral microvascular pathology in aging and 
Alzheimer’s disease. Prog Neurobiol. 2001;64:575–611.
 40. Tahsili-Fahadan P, Geocadin RG. Heart-brain axis: effects of neurologic 
injury on cardiovascular function. Circ Res. 2017;120:559–572. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.116.308446.
 41. Young CN, Davisson RL. Angiotensin-II, the brain, and hyperten-
sion: an update. Hypertension. 2015;66:920–926. doi: 10.1161/
HYPERTENSIONAHA.115.03624.
 42. Farias ST, Mungas D, Reed BR, Cahn-Weiner D, Jagust W, Baynes K, 
Decarli C. The measurement of everyday cognition (ECog): scale devel-
opment and psychometric properties. Neuropsychology. 2008;22:531–
544. doi: 10.1037/0894-4105.22.4.531.
 43. Galvin JE, Roe CM, Powlishta KK, Coats MA, Muich SJ, Grant E, 
Miller JP, Storandt M, Morris JC. The AD8: a brief informant inter-
view to detect dementia. Neurology. 2005;65:559–564. doi: 10.1212/01.
wnl.0000172958.95282.2a.
 44. Jorm AF, Jacomb PA. The Informant Questionnaire on Cognitive Decline 
in the Elderly (IQCODE): socio-demographic correlates, reliability, 
validity and some norms. Psychol Med. 1989;19:1015–1022.
 45. Berg L. Clinical Dementia Rating. Br J Psychiatry. 1984;145:339.
 46. Lawton MP, Brody EM. Assessment of older people: self-maintaining and 
instrumental activities of daily living. Gerontologist. 1969;9:179–186.
 47. Folstein MF, Folstein SE, McHugh PR. “Mini-Mental State”: a practi-
cal method for grading the cognitive state of patients for the clinician. 
 
J Psychiatr Res. 1975;12:189–198.
 48. Nasreddine ZS, Phillips NA, Bédirian V, Charbonneau S, Whitehead V, 
Collin I, Cummings JL, Chertkow H. The Montreal Cognitive 
Assessment, 
MoCA: a brief screening tool for mild cognitive impairment. J Am 
Geriatr Soc. 2005;53:695–699. doi: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2005.53221.x.
 49. Welsh KA, Breitner JC, Magruder-Habib KM. Detection of dementia in 
the elderly using telephone screening of cognitive status. Neuropsychiatry 
Neuropsychol Behav Neurol. 1993;6:103–110.
 50. Teng EL, Chui HC. The Modified Mini-Mental State (3MS) examina-
tion. J Clin Psychiatry. 1987;48:314–318.
 51. Tuokko H, Hadjistavropoulos T, Miller JA, Beattie BL. The Clock Test: 
a sensitive measure to differentiate normal elderly from those with 
Alzheimer disease. J Am Geriatr Soc. 1992;40:579–584.
 52. Solomon PR, Hirschoff A, Kelly B, Relin M, Brush M, DeVeaux RD, 
Pendlebury WW. A 7 minute neurocognitive screening battery highly 
sensitive to Alzheimer’s disease. Arch Neurol. 1998;55:349–355.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Gorelick et al  Defining Optimal Brain Health in Adults  e299
 53. Hachinski V, Iadecola C, Petersen RC, Breteler MM, Nyenhuis DL, 
Black SE, Powers WJ, DeCarli C, Merino JG, Kalaria RN, Vinters 
HV, Holtzman DM, Rosenberg GA, Wallin A, Dichgans M, Marler JR, 
Leblanc GG. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke-
Canadian Stroke Network vascular cognitive impairment harmonization 
standards [published correction appears in Stroke. 2007;38:1118]. Stroke. 
2006;37:2220–2241. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.0000237236.88823.47.
 54. Radloff LS. The CES-D scale: A self-report depression scale for research 
in the general population. Appl Psychol Measure. 1977;1:385–401.
 55. Yesavage JA, Brink TL, Rose TL, Lum O, Huang V, Adey M, Leirer VO. 
Development and validation of a geriatric depression screening scale: a 
preliminary report. J Psychiatr Res. 1983;17:37–49.
 56. Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JB. The PHQ-9: validity of a brief 
depression severity measure. J Gen Intern Med. 2001;16:606–613.
 57. Cummings JL, Mega M, Gray K, Rosenberg-Thompson S, Carusi DA, 
Gornbein J. The Neuropsychiatric Inventory: comprehensive assessment 
of psychopathology in dementia. Neurology. 1994;44:2308–2314.
 58. ATS Committee on Proficiency Standards for Clinical Pulmonary 
Function Laboratories. ATS statement: guidelines for the six-minute 
walk test. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2002;166:111–117.
 59. Guralnik JM, Simonsick EM, Ferrucci L, Glynn RJ, Berkman LF, 
Blazer DG, Scherr PA, Wallace RB. A short physical performance bat-
tery assessing lower extremity function: association with self-reported 
disability and prediction of mortality and nursing home admission.  
J Gerontol. 1994;49:M85–M94.
 60. Mathias S, Nayak US, Isaacs B. Balance in elderly patients: the “get-up 
and go” test. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 1986;67:387–389.
 61. Barnes DE, Covinsky KE, Whitmer RA, Kuller LH, Lopez OL, 
Yaffe K. Predicting risk of dementia in older adults: the late-life 
dementia risk index. Neurology. 2009;73:173–179. doi: 10.1212/
WNL.0b013e3181a81636.
 62. Seshadri S, Wolf PA. Lifetime risk of stroke and dementia: current 
concepts, and estimates from the Framingham Study. Lancet Neurol. 
2007;6:1106–1114. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(07)70291-0.
 63. Yaffe K, Weston AL, Blackwell T, Krueger KA. The metabolic syndrome 
and development of cognitive impairment among older women. Arch 
Neurol. 2009;66:324–328. doi: 10.1001/archneurol.2008.566.
 64. Young SE, Mainous AG 3rd, Carnemolla M. Hyperinsulinemia and cog-
nitive decline in a middle-aged cohort. Diabetes Care. 2006;29:2688–
2693. doi: 10.2337/dc06-0915.
 65. Kalmijn S, Foley D, White L, Burchfiel CM, Curb JD, Petrovitch H, 
Ross GW, Havlik RJ, Launer LJ. Metabolic cardiovascular syndrome 
and risk of dementia in Japanese-American elderly men: the Honolulu-
Asia Aging Study. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2000;20:2255–2260.
 66. Craft S. The role of metabolic disorders in Alzheimer disease and vascu-
lar dementia: two roads converged. Arch Neurol. 2009;66:300–305. doi: 
10.1001/archneurol.2009.27.
 67. Cosentino F, Battista R, Scuteri A, De Sensi F, De Siati L, Di Russo 
C, Camici GG, Volpe M. Impact of fasting glycemia and regional cere-
bral perfusion in diabetic subjects: a study with technetium-99m-ethyl 
cysteinate dimer single photon emission computed tomography. Stroke. 
2009;40:306–308. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.108.520627.
 68. Anstey KJ, von Sanden C, Salim A, O’Kearney R. Smoking as a risk 
factor for dementia and cognitive decline: a meta-analysis of prospec-
tive studies. Am J Epidemiol. 2007;166:367–378. doi: 10.1093/aje/
kwm116.
 69. Kalmijn S, van Boxtel MP, Verschuren MW, Jolles J, Launer LJ. Cigarette 
smoking and alcohol consumption in relation to cognitive performance 
in middle age. Am J Epidemiol. 2002;156:936–944.
 70. Yaffe K. Preclinical Alzheimer disease: prevention holy grail or 
Pandora’s box? Comment on “Heavy smoking in midlife and long-term 
risk of Alzheimer disease and vascular dementia.” Arch Intern Med. 
2011;171:339–340. doi: 10.1001/archinternmed.2010.547.
 71. Whitmer RA, Gunderson EP, Barrett-Connor E, Quesenberry CP Jr, 
Yaffe K. Obesity in middle age and future risk of dementia: a 27 year 
longitudinal population based study. BMJ. 2005;330:1360. doi: 10.1136/
bmj.38446.466238.E0.
 72. Barrett-Connor E. An introduction to obesity and dementia. Curr 
Alzheimer Res. 2007;4:97–101.
 73. Fitzpatrick AL, Kuller LH, Lopez OL, Diehr P, O’Meara ES, Longstreth 
WT Jr, Luchsinger JA. Midlife and late-life obesity and the risk of 
dementia: Cardiovascular Health Study. Arch Neurol. 2009;66:336–342. 
doi: 10.1001/archneurol.2008.582.
 74. Solomon A, Kåreholt I, Ngandu T, Wolozin B, Macdonald SW, Winblad 
B, Nissinen A, Tuomilehto J, Soininen H, Kivipelto M. Serum total 
cholesterol, statins and cognition in non-demented elderly. Neurobiol 
Aging. 2009;30:1006–1009. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2007.09.012.
 75. Solomon A, Kivipelto M, Wolozin B, Zhou J, Whitmer RA. Midlife 
serum cholesterol and increased risk of Alzheimer’s and vascular demen-
tia three decades later. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2009;28:75–80. 
doi: 10.1159/000231980.
 76. Reitz C, Tang MX, Luchsinger J, Mayeux R. Relation of plasma lipids 
to Alzheimer disease and vascular dementia. Arch Neurol. 2004;61:705–
714. doi: 10.1001/archneur.61.5.705.
 77. Mielke MM, Zandi PP, Sjögren M, Gustafson D, Ostling S, Steen B, 
Skoog I. High total cholesterol levels in late life associated with a reduced 
risk of dementia. Neurology. 2005;64:1689–1695. doi: 10.1212/01.
WNL.0000161870.78572.A5.
 78. Launer LJ, Ross GW, Petrovitch H, Masaki K, Foley D, White LR, 
Havlik RJ. Midlife blood pressure and dementia: the Honolulu-Asia 
Aging Study. Neurobiol Aging. 2000;21:49–55.
 79. Birns J, Kalra L. Cognitive function and hypertension. J Hum Hypertens. 
2009;23:86–96. doi: 10.1038/jhh.2008.80.
 80. Scarmeas N, Stern Y, Mayeux R, Manly JJ, Schupf N, Luchsinger 
JA. Mediterranean diet and mild cognitive impairment. Arch Neurol. 
2009;66:216–225. doi: 10.1001/archneurol.2008.536.
 81. Welch GN, Loscalzo J. Homocysteine and atherothrombosis. N Engl J 
Med. 1998;338:1042–1050. doi: 10.1056/NEJM199804093381507.
 82. Miller JW, Green R, Ramos MI, Allen LH, Mungas DM, Jagust WJ, 
Haan MN. Homocysteine and cognitive function in the Sacramento Area 
Latino Study on Aging. Am J Clin Nutr. 2003;78:441–447.
 83. Elias MF, Sullivan LM, D’Agostino RB, Elias PK, Jacques PF, Selhub 
J, Seshadri S, Au R, Beiser A, Wolf PA. Homocysteine and cognitive 
performance in the Framingham Offspring Study: age is important. Am J 
Epidemiol. 2005;162:644–653. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwi259.
 84. Beydoun MA, Beydoun HA, Wang Y. Obesity and central obesity as risk 
factors for incident dementia and its subtypes: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis [published correction appears in Obes Rev. 2008;9:267]. 
Obes Rev. 2008;9:204–218. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-789X.2008.00473.x.
 85. Kivipelto M, Helkala EL, Hänninen T, Laakso MP, Hallikainen M, 
Alhainen K, Soininen H, Tuomilehto J, Nissinen A. Midlife vascular 
risk factors and late-life mild cognitive impairment: a population-based 
study. Neurology. 2001;56:1683–1689.
 86. Reitz C, Tang MX, Manly J, Mayeux R, Luchsinger JA. Hypertension 
and the risk of mild cognitive impairment. Arch Neurol. 2007;64:1734–
1740. doi: 10.1001/archneur.64.12.1734.
 87. Gottesman RF, Schneider AL, Albert M, Alonso A, Bandeen-Roche K, 
Coker L, Coresh J, Knopman D, Power MC, Rawlings A, Sharrett AR, 
Wruck LM, Mosley TH. Midlife hypertension and 20-year cognitive 
change: the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities Neurocognitive Study. 
JAMA Neurol. 2014;71:1218–1227. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2014.1646.
 88. Knopman D, Boland LL, Mosley T, Howard G, Liao D, Szklo M, 
McGovern P, Folsom AR; Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) 
Study Investigators. Cardiovascular risk factors and cognitive decline in 
middle-aged adults. Neurology. 2001;56:42–48.
 89. Yaffe K, Vittinghoff E, Pletcher MJ, Hoang TD, Launer LJ, Whitmer R, 
Coker LH, Sidney S. Early adult to midlife cardiovascular risk factors 
and cognitive function. Circulation. 2014;129:1560–1567. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.113.004798.
 90. Yano Y, Ning H, Allen N, Reis JP, Launer LJ, Liu K, Yaffe K, Greenland 
P, Lloyd-Jones DM. Long-term blood pressure variability throughout 
young adulthood and cognitive function in midlife: the Coronary Artery 
Risk Development in Young Adults (CARDIA) study. Hypertension. 
2014;64:983–988. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.114.03978.
 91. Yano Y, Ning H, Muntner P, Reis JP, Calhoun DA, Viera AJ, Levine 
DA, Jacobs DR Jr, Shimbo D, Liu K, Greenland P, Lloyd-Jones D. 
Nocturnal blood pressure in young adults and cognitive function in 
midlife: the Coronary Artery Risk Development in Young Adults 
(CARDIA) Study. Am J Hypertens. 2015;28:1240–1247. doi: 10.1093/
ajh/hpv028.
 92. Yano Y, Ning H, Reis JP, Lewis CE, Launer LJ, Bryan RN, Yaffe K, 
Sidney S, Albanese E, Greenland P, Lloyd-Jones D, Liu K. Blood pres-
sure reactivity to psychological stress in young adults and cognition 
in midlife: the Coronary Artery Risk Development in Young Adults 
(CARDIA) Study. J Am Heart Assoc. 2016;5:e002718. doi: 10.1161/
JAHA.115.002718.
 93. Blondell SJ, Hammersley-Mather R, Veerman JL. Does physical activity 
prevent cognitive decline and dementia? A systematic review and meta-
analysis of longitudinal studies. BMC Public Health. 2014;14:510. doi: 
10.1186/1471-2458-14-510.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e300  Stroke  October 2017
 94. Beydoun MA, Beydoun HA, Gamaldo AA, Teel A, Zonderman AB, 
Wang Y. Epidemiologic studies of modifiable factors associated with 
cognition and dementia: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC 
Public Health. 2014;14:643. doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-14-643.
 95. Cohn NB, Dustman RE, Bradford DC. Age-related decrements in Stroop 
Color Test performance. J Clin Psychol. 1984;40:1244–1250.
 96. Blumenthal JA, Siegel WC, Appelbaum M. Failure of exercise to reduce 
blood pressure in patients with mild hypertension: results of a random-
ized controlled trial. JAMA. 1991;266:2098–2104.
 97. Kramer AF, Hahn S, Cohen NJ, Banich MT, McAuley E, Harrison 
CR, Chason J, Vakil E, Bardell L, Boileau RA, Colcombe A. Ageing, 
fitness and neurocognitive function. Nature. 1999;400:418–419. doi: 
10.1038/22682.
 98. Madden DJ, Blumenthal JA, Allen PA, Emery CF. Improving aerobic 
capacity in healthy older adults does not necessarily lead to improved 
cognitive performance. Psychol Aging. 1989;4:307–320.
 99. Sink KM, Espeland MA, Castro CM, Church T, Cohen R, Dodson JA, 
Guralnik J, Hendrie HC, Jennings J, Katula J, Lopez OL, McDermott MM, 
Pahor M, Reid KF, Rushing J, Verghese J, Rapp S, Williamson JD; LIFE 
Study Investigators. Effect of a 24-month physical activity intervention vs 
health education on cognitive outcomes in sedentary older adults: the LIFE 
randomized trial. JAMA. 2015;314:781–790. doi: 10.1001/jama.2015.9617.
 
100. Angevaren M, Aufdemkampe G, Verhaar HJ, Aleman A, Vanhees L. 
Physical activity and enhanced fitness to improve cognitive function in 
older people without known cognitive impairment. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev. 2008:CD005381. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD005381.pub3.
 
101. Colcombe S, Kramer AF. Fitness effects on the cognitive function of 
older adults: a meta-analytic study. Psychol Sci. 2003;14:125–130. doi: 
10.1111/1467-9280.t01-1-01430.
 
102. Smith PJ, Blumenthal JA, Hoffman BM, Cooper H, Strauman TA, 
Welsh-Bohmer K, Browndyke JN, Sherwood A. Aerobic exercise and 
neurocognitive performance: a meta-analytic review of randomized 
controlled trials. Psychosom Med. 2010;72:239–252. doi: 10.1097/
PSY.0b013e3181d14633.
 
103. Hsu CL, Best JR, Davis JC, Nagamatsu LS, Wang S, Boyd LA, Hsiung GR, 
Voss MW, Eng JJ, Liu-Ambrose T. Aerobic exercise promotes executive 
functions and impacts functional neural activity among older adults with 
vascular cognitive impairment [published online ahead of print April 21, 
2017]. Br J Sports Med. doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2016-096846. http://www.
bjsm.bmj.com/content/early/2017/04/21/bjsports-2016-096846.long. 
Accessed August 14, 2017.
 
104. de Bruijn RF, Heeringa J, Wolters FJ, Franco OH, Stricker BH, Hofman 
A, Koudstaal PJ, Ikram MA. Association between atrial fibrillation and 
dementia in the general population. JAMA Neurol. 2015;72:1288–1294. 
doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2015.2161.
 
105. Singh-Manoux A, Fayosse A, Sabia S, Canonico M, Bobak M, Elbaz A, 
Kivimaki M, Dugravot A. Atrial fibrillation as a risk factor for cognitive 
decline and dementia [published online ahead of print April 29, 2017]. 
Eur Heart J. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehx208. https://www.academic.oup.
com/eurheartj/article-lookup/doi/10.1093/eurheartj/ehx208. Accessed 
August 14, 2017.
 
106. Thacker EL, McKnight B, Psaty BM, Longstreth WT Jr, Sitlani CM, 
Dublin S, Arnold AM, Fitzpatrick AL, Gottesman RF, Heckbert SR. 
Atrial fibrillation and cognitive decline: a longitudinal cohort study. 
Neurology. 2013;81:119–125. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31829a33d1.
 
107. Lo JC, Groeger JA, Cheng GH, Dijk DJ, Chee MW. Self-reported 
sleep duration and cognitive performance in older adults: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Sleep Med. 2016;17:87–98. doi: 10.1016/j.
sleep.2015.08.021.
 
108. Wu L, Sun D, Tan Y. A systematic review and dose-response meta-anal-
ysis of sleep duration and the occurrence of cognitive disorders [pub-
lished online ahead of print June 6, 2017]. Sleep Breath. doi: 10.1007/
s11325-017-1527-0. https://www.link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2
Fs11325-017-1527-0. Accessed August 14, 2017.
 
109. Devore EE, Grodstein F, Schernhammer ES. Sleep duration in rela-
tion to cognitive function among older adults: a systematic review 
of observational studies. Neuroepidemiology. 2016;46:57–78. doi: 
10.1159/000442418.
 
110. Keage HA, Banks S, Yang KL, Morgan K, Brayne C, Matthews FE. What 
sleep characteristics predict cognitive decline in the elderly? Sleep Med. 
2012;13:886–892. doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2012.02.003.
 
111. Blackwell T, Yaffe K, Laffan A, Ancoli-Israel S, Redline S, Ensrud KE, 
Song Y, Stone KL; Osteoporotic Fractures in Men (MrOS) Study Group. 
Associations of objectively and subjectively measured sleep quality with 
subsequent cognitive decline in older community-dwelling men: the 
MrOS sleep study. Sleep. 2014;37:655–663. doi: 10.5665/sleep.3562.
 
112. Reis JP, Loria CM, Launer LJ, Sidney S, Liu K, Jacobs DR Jr, Zhu 
N, Lloyd-Jones DM, He K, Yaffe K. Cardiovascular health through 
young adulthood and cognitive functioning in midlife. Ann Neurol. 
2013;73:170–179. doi: 10.1002/ana.23836.
 
113. Alley D, Suthers K, Crimmins E. Education and cognitive decline in old-
er Americans: results from the AHEAD sample. Res Aging. 2007;29:73–
94. doi: 10.1177/0164027506294245.
 
114. Cagney KA, Lauderdale DS. Education, wealth, and cognitive function 
in later life. J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci. 2002;57:P163–P172.
 
115. Kaup AR, Simonsick EM, Harris TB, Satterfield S, Metti AL, 
Ayonayon HN, Rubin SM, Yaffe K. Older adults with limited literacy 
are at increased risk for likely dementia. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 
2014;69:900–906. doi: 10.1093/gerona/glt176.
 
116. Yaffe K, Falvey C, Harris TB, Newman A, Satterfield S, Koster A, 
Ayonayon H, Simonsick E; Health ABC Study. Effect of socioeconomic 
disparities on incidence of dementia among biracial older adults: pro-
spective study. BMJ. 2013;347:f7051.
 
117. Glymour M. Identifying Social Determinants of Old Age Cognitive 
Function [thesis]. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University; 2004.
 
118. Sisco S, Gross AL, Shih RA, Sachs BC, Glymour MM, Bangen KJ, 
Benitez A, Skinner J, Schneider BC, Manly JJ. The role of early-life edu-
cational quality and literacy in explaining racial disparities in cognition 
in late life. J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci. 2015;70:557–567. doi: 
10.1093/geronb/gbt133.
 
119. Wadley VG, Unverzagt FW, McGuire LC, Moy CS, Go R, Kissela B, 
McClure LA, Crowe M, Howard VJ, Howard G. Incident cognitive 
impairment is elevated in the Stroke Belt: the REGARDS study. Ann 
Neurol. 2011;70:229–236. doi: 10.1002/ana.22432.
 
120. Peters R, Peters J, Booth A, Mudway I. Is air pollution associated with 
increased risk of cognitive decline? A systematic review. Age Ageing. 
2015;44:755–760. doi: 10.1093/ageing/afv087.
 
121. Jung CR, Lin YT, Hwang BF. Ozone, particulate matter, and newly diag-
nosed Alzheimer’s disease: a population-based cohort study in Taiwan. 
 
J Alzheimers Dis. 2015;44:573–584. doi: 10.3233/JAD-140855.
 
122. Loop MS, Kent ST, Al-Hamdan MZ, Crosson WL, Estes SM, Estes 
MG Jr, Quattrochi DA, Hemmings SN, Wadley VG, McClure LA. Fine 
particulate matter and incident cognitive impairment in the REasons for 
Geographic and Racial Differences in Stroke (REGARDS) cohort [pub-
lished correction appears in PLoS One. 2015;10:e0125137]. PLoS One. 
2013;8:e75001. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075001.
 
123. Dichgans M, Zietemann V. Prevention of vascular cognitive impairment. 
Stroke. 2012;43:3137–3146. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.112.651778.
 
124. Meschia JF, Bushnell C, Boden-Albala B, Braun LT, Bravata DM, 
Chaturvedi S, Creager MA, Eckel RH, Elkind MS, Fornage M, Goldstein 
LB, Greenberg SM, Horvath SE, Iadecola C, Jauch EC, Moore WS, 
Wilson JA; on behalf of the American Heart Association Stroke Council; 
Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing; Council on Clinical 
Cardiology; Council on Functional Genomics and Translational Biology; 
Council on Hypertension. Guidelines for the primary prevention of 
stroke: a statement for healthcare professionals from the American Heart 
Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke. 2014;45:3754–3832. 
doi: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000046.
 
125. Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. Physical Activity 
Guidelines for Americans. https://www.health.gov/paguidelines/guidelines/. 
Accessed June 27, 2017.
 
126. Bogers RP, Bemelmans WJ, Hoogenveen RT, Boshuizen HC, Woodward 
M, Knekt P, van Dam RM, Hu FB, Visscher TL, Menotti A, Thorpe 
RJ Jr, Jamrozik K, Calling S, Strand BH, Shipley MJ; BMI-CHD 
Collaboration Investigators. Association of overweight with increased 
risk of coronary heart disease partly independent of blood pressure and 
cholesterol levels: a meta-analysis of 21 cohort studies including more 
than 300 000 persons. Arch Intern Med. 2007;167:1720–1728. doi: 
10.1001/archinte.167.16.1720.
 
127. Gorospe EC, Dave JK. The risk of dementia with increased body mass 
index. Age Ageing. 2007;36:23–29. doi: 10.1093/ageing/afl123.
 
128. Gottesman RF, Schneider AL, Zhou Y, Coresh J, Green E, Gupta N, 
Knopman DS, Mintz A, Rahmim A, Sharrett AR, Wagenknecht LE, 
Wong DF, Mosley TH. Association between midlife vascular risk factors 
and estimated brain amyloid deposition. JAMA. 2017;317:1443–1450. 
doi: 10.1001/jama.2017.3090.
 
129. Horie NC, Serrao VT, Simon SS, Gascon MR, Dos Santos AX, Zambone 
MA, Del Bigio de Freitas MM, Cunha-Neto E, Marques EL, Halpern 
A, de Melo ME, Mancini MC, Cercato C. Cognitive effects of inten-
tional weight loss in elderly obese individuals with mild cognitive im-
pairment. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2016;101:1104–1112. doi: 10.1210/
jc.2015-2315.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Gorelick et al  Defining Optimal Brain Health in Adults  e301
 
130. Murphy RA, Patel KV, Kritchevsky SB, Houston DK, Newman AB, 
Koster A, Simonsick EM, Tylvasky FA, Cawthon PM, Harris TB. Weight 
change, body composition, and risk of mobility disability and mortal-
ity in older adults: a population-based cohort study. J Am Geriatr Soc. 
2014;62:1476–1483. doi: 10.1111/jgs.12954.
 
131. Nguyen DM, El-Serag HB. The epidemiology of obesity. Gastroenterol 
Clin North Am. 2010;39:1–7. doi: 10.1016/j.gtc.2009.12.014.
 
132. Power BD, Alfonso H, Flicker L, Hankey GJ, Yeap BB, Almeida 
OP. Body adiposity in later life and the incidence of dementia: the 
Health in Men Study. PLoS One. 2011;6:e17902. doi: 10.1371/journal.
pone.0017902.
 
133. Yatsuya H, Yamagishi K, North KE, Brancati FL, Stevens J, Folsom 
AR; ARIC Study Investigators. Associations of obesity measures 
with subtypes of ischemic stroke in the ARIC Study. J Epidemiol. 
2010;20:347–354.
 
134. Banach M, Rizzo M, Nikolic D, Howard G, Howard V, Mikhailidis 
D. Intensive LDL-cholesterol lowering therapy and neurocogni-
tive function. Pharmacol Ther. 2017;170:181–191. doi: 10.1016/j.
pharmthera.2016.11.001.
 
135. Gómez-Pinilla F. Brain foods: the effects of nutrients on brain function. 
Nat Rev Neurosci. 2008;9:568–578. doi: 10.1038/nrn2421.
 
136. Holtzman DM, Herz J, Bu G. Apolipoprotein E and apolipoprotein E 
receptors: normal biology and roles in Alzheimer disease. Cold Spring 
Harb Perspect Med. 2012;2:a006312. doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.a006312.
 
137. Jones RW, Kivipelto M, Feldman H, Sparks L, Doody R, Waters DD, 
Hey-Hadavi J, Breazna A, Schindler RJ, Ramos H; LEADe Investigators. 
The Atorvastatin/Donepezil in Alzheimer’s Disease Study (LEADe): de-
sign and baseline characteristics. Alzheimers Dement. 2008;4:145–153. 
doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2008.02.001.
 
138. Ott BR, Daiello LA, Dahabreh IJ, Springate BA, Bixby K, Murali 
M, Trikalinos TA. Do statins impair cognition? A systematic review 
and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. J Gen Intern Med. 
2015;30:348–358. doi: 10.1007/s11606-014-3115-3.
 
139. Reed B, Villeneuve S, Mack W, DeCarli C, Chui HC, Jagust W. 
Associations between serum cholesterol levels and cerebral amyloidosis. 
JAMA Neurol. 2014;71:195–200. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.5390.
 
140. Schreurs BG. The effects of cholesterol on learning and memory. 
Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2010;34:1366–1379. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev. 
2010.04.010.
 
141. Shepherd J, Blauw GJ, Murphy MB, Bollen EL, Buckley BM, Cobbe 
SM, Ford I, Gaw A, Hyland M, Jukema JW, Kamper AM, Macfarlane 
PW, Meinders AE, Norrie J, Packard CJ, Perry IJ, Stott DJ, Sweeney 
BJ, Twomey C, Westendorp RG; PROSPER Study Group; PROspective 
Study of Pravastatin in the Elderly at Risk. Pravastatin in elderly indi-
viduals at risk of vascular disease (PROSPER): a randomised controlled 
trial. Lancet. 2002;360:1623–1630.
 
142. Stone NJ, Robinson JG, Lichtenstein AH, Bairey Merz CN, Blum 
CB, Eckel RH, Goldberg AC, Gordon D, Levy D, Lloyd-Jones DM, 
McBride P, Schwartz JS, Shero ST, Smith SC Jr, Watson K, Wilson PW, 
Eddleman KM, Jarrett NM, LaBresh K, Nevo L, Wnek J, Anderson JL, 
Halperin JL, Albert NM, Bozkurt B, Brindis RG, Curtis LH, DeMets 
D, Hochman JS, Kovacs RJ, Ohman EM, Pressler SJ, Sellke FW, Shen 
WK, Smith SC Jr, Tomaselli GF. 2013 ACC/AHA guideline on the treat-
ment of blood cholesterol to reduce atherosclerotic cardiovascular risk 
in adults: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American 
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines [published correc-
tions appear in Circulation. 2014;129[suppl 2]:S46–S48 and Circulation. 
2015;132:e396]. Circulation. 2014;129(suppl 2):S1–45. doi: 10.1161/01.
cir.0000437738.63853.7a.
 
143. Smith EE, Saposnik G, Biessels GJ, Doubal FN, Fornage M, Gorelick 
PB, Greenberg SM, Higashida RT, Kasner SE, Seshadri S; on be-
half of the American Heart Association Stroke Council; Council on 
Cardiovascular Radiology and Intervention; Council on Functional 
Genomics and Translational Biology; Council on Hypertension. 
Prevention of stroke in patients with silent cerebrovascular disease: a sci-
entific statement for healthcare professionals from the American Heart 
Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke. 2017;48:e44–e71. 
 
doi: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000116.
 
144. Wardlaw JM, Smith EE, Biessels GJ, Cordonnier C, Fazekas F, Frayne R, 
Lindley RI, O’Brien JT, Barkhof F, Benavente OR, Black SE, Brayne C, 
Breteler M, Chabriat H, Decarli C, de Leeuw FE, Doubal F, Duering M, 
Fox NC, Greenberg S, Hachinski V, Kilimann I, Mok V, Oostenbrugge 
Rv, Pantoni L, Speck O, Stephan BC, Teipel S, Viswanathan A, Werring 
D, Chen C, Smith C, van Buchem M, Norrving B, Gorelick PB, Dichgans 
M; STandards for ReportIng Vascular changes on nEuroimaging 
(STRIVE v1). Neuroimaging standards for research into small vessel 
disease and its contribution to ageing and neurodegeneration. Lancet 
Neurol. 2013;12:822–838. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(13)70124-8.
 
145. Forette F, Seux ML, Staessen JA, Thijs L, Birkenhäger WH, Babarskiene 
MR, Babeanu S, Bossini A, Gil-Extremera B, Girerd X, Laks T, Lilov 
E, Moisseyev V, Tuomilehto J, Vanhanen H, Webster J, Yodfat Y, 
Fagard R. Prevention of dementia in randomised double-blind placebo-
controlled Systolic Hypertension in Europe (Syst-Eur) trial. Lancet. 
1998;352:1347–1351.
 
146. Anderson C, Teo K, Gao P, Arima H, Dans A, Unger T, Commerford 
P, Dyal L, Schumacher H, Pogue J, Paolasso E, Holwerda N, Chazova 
I, Binbrek A, Young J, Yusuf S; ONTARGET and TRANSCEND 
Investigators. Renin-angiotensin system blockade and cognitive func-
tion in patients at high risk of cardiovascular disease: analysis of data 
from the ONTARGET and TRANSCEND studies. Lancet Neurol. 
2011;10:43–53. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(10)70250-7.
 
147. Peters R, Beckett N, Forette F, Tuomilehto J, Clarke R, Ritchie C, 
Waldman A, Walton I, Poulter R, Ma S, Comsa M, Burch L, Fletcher A, 
Bulpitt C; HYVET Investigators. Incident dementia and blood pressure 
lowering in the Hypertension in the Very Elderly Trial cognitive func-
tion assessment (HYVET-COG): a double-blind, placebo controlled trial. 
Lancet Neurol. 2008;7:683–689. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(08)70143-1.
 
148. Lithell H, Hansson L, Skoog I, Elmfeldt D, Hofman A, Olofsson B, 
Trenkwalder P, Zanchetti A; SCOPE Study Group. The Study on 
Cognition and Prognosis in the Elderly (SCOPE): principal results of a 
randomized double-blind intervention trial. J Hypertens. 2003;21:875–
886. doi: 10.1097/01.hjh.0000059028.82022.89.
 
149. Diener HC, Sacco RL, Yusuf S, Cotton D, Ounpuu S, Lawton WA, 
Palesch Y, Martin RH, Albers GW, Bath P, Bornstein N, Chan BP, Chen 
ST, Cunha L, Dahlöf B, De Keyser J, Donnan GA, Estol C, Gorelick 
P, Gu V, Hermansson K, Hilbrich L, Kaste M, Lu C, Machnig T, Pais 
P, Roberts R, Skvortsova V, Teal P, Toni D, VanderMaelen C, Voigt T, 
Weber M, Yoon BW; Prevention Regimen for Effectively Avoiding 
Second Strokes (PRoFESS) Study Group. Effects of aspirin plus extend-
ed-release dipyridamole versus clopidogrel and telmisartan on disability 
and cognitive function after recurrent stroke in patients with ischaemic 
stroke in the Prevention Regimen for Effectively Avoiding Second 
Strokes (PRoFESS) trial: a double-blind, active and placebo-controlled 
study [published correction appears in Lancet Neurol. 2008;7:985]. 
Lancet Neurol. 2008;7:875–884. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(08)70198-4.
 
150. Tzourio C, Anderson C, Chapman N, Woodward M, Neal B, MacMahon 
S, Chalmers J; PROGRESS Collaborative Group. Effects of blood pres-
sure lowering with perindopril and indapamide therapy on dementia and 
cognitive decline in patients with cerebrovascular disease. Arch Intern 
Med. 2003;163:1069–1075. doi: 10.1001/archinte.163.9.1069.
 
151. Applegate WB, Pressel S, Wittes J, Luhr J, Shekelle RB, Camel GH, 
Greenlick MR, Hadley E, Moye L, Perry HM Jr, Schron E, Wegener V. 
Impact of the treatment of isolated systolic hypertension on behavioral 
variables: results from the Systolic Hypertension in the Elderly Program. 
Arch Intern Med. 1994;154:2154–2160.
 
152. Williamson JD, Launer LJ, Bryan RN, Coker LH, Lazar RM, Gerstein 
HC, Murray AM, Sullivan MD, Horowitz KR, Ding J, Marcovina S, 
Lovato L, Lovato J, Margolis KL, Davatzikos C, Barzilay J, Ginsberg HN, 
Linz PE, Miller ME; Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes 
Memory in Diabetes Investigators. Cognitive function and brain structure 
in persons with type 2 diabetes mellitus after intensive lowering of blood 
pressure and lipid levels: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern Med. 
2014;174:324–333. doi: 10.1001/jamainternmed.2013.13656.
 
153. Bosch J; HOPE Investigators. The effect of blood pressure and choles-
terol lowering on cognition. Circulation. 2016;134:e703–e704.
 
154. Pearce LA, McClure LA, Anderson DC, Jacova C, Sharma M, Hart RG, 
Benavente OR; SPS3 Investigators. Effects of long-term blood pres-
sure lowering and dual antiplatelet treatment on cognitive function in 
patients with recent lacunar stroke: a secondary analysis from the SPS3 
randomised trial. Lancet Neurol. 2014;13:1177–1185. doi: 10.1016/
S1474-4422(14)70224-8.
 
155. Moll van Charante EP, Richard E, Eurelings LS, van Dalen JW, Ligthart 
SA, van Bussel EF, Hoevenaar-Blom MP, Vermeulen M, van Gool WA. 
Effectiveness of a 6-year multidomain vascular care intervention to pre-
vent dementia (preDIVA): a cluster-randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 
2016;388:797–805. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)30950-3.
 
156. Ngandu T, Lehtisalo J, Solomon A, Levälahti E, Ahtiluoto S, Antikainen 
R, Bäckman L, Hänninen T, Jula A, Laatikainen T, Lindström J, 
Mangialasche F, Paajanen T, Pajala S, Peltonen M, Rauramaa R, 
Stigsdotter-Neely A, Strandberg T, Tuomilehto J, Soininen H, Kivipelto 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 e302  Stroke  October 2017
M. A 2 year multidomain intervention of diet, exercise, cognitive train-
ing, and vascular risk monitoring versus control to prevent cognitive de-
cline in at-risk elderly people (FINGER): a randomised controlled trial. 
Lancet. 2015;385:2255–2263. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)60461-5.
 
157. Andrieu S, Guyonnet S, Coley N, Cantet C, Bonnefoy M, Bordes S, 
Bories L, Cufi MN, Dantoine T, Dartigues JF, Desclaux F, Gabelle A, 
Gasnier Y, Pesce A, Sudres K, Touchon J, Robert P, Rouaud O, Legrand 
P, Payoux P, Caubere JP, Weiner M, Carrié I, Ousset PJ, Vellas B; MAPT 
Study Group. Effect of long-term omega 3 polyunsaturated fatty acid 
supplementation with or without multidomain intervention on cogni-
tive function in elderly adults with memory complaints (MAPT): a ran-
domised, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Neurol. 2017;16:377–389. doi: 
10.1016/S1474-4422(17)30040-6.
 
158. Valls-Pedret C, Sala-Vila A, Serra-Mir M, Corella D, de la Torre R, 
Martínez-González MÁ, Martínez-Lapiscina EH, Fitó M, Pérez-Heras 
A, Salas-Salvadó J, Estruch R, Ros E. Mediterranean diet and age-re-
lated cognitive decline: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern Med. 
2015;175:1094–1103. doi: 10.1001/jamainternmed.2015.1668.
 
159. Liu K, Colangelo LA, Daviglus ML, Goff DC, Pletcher M, Schreiner 
PJ, Sibley CT, Burke GL, Post WS, Michos ED, Lloyd-Jones DM. 
Can antihypertensive treatment restore the risk of cardiovascular dis-
ease to ideal levels? The Coronary Artery Risk Development in Young 
Adults (CARDIA) Study and the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis 
(MESA). J Am Heart Assoc. 2015;4:e002275.
 
160. Baumgart M, Snyder HM, Carrillo MC, Fazio S, Kim H, Johns H. 
Summary of the evidence on modifiable risk factors for cognitive de-
cline and dementia: a population-based perspective. Alzheimers Dement. 
2015;11:718–726. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2015.05.016.
 
161. Alzheimer’s Association. 10 Ways to love your brain. http://www.alz.
org/brain-health/10_ways-to-love-your-brain.asp. Accessed May 15, 
2017.
 
162. IOM (Institute of Medicine). Cognitive Aging: Progress in Understanding 
and Opportunities for Action. 1st ed. Washington, DC: National Academies 
Press; 2015.
 
163. Eckel RH, Jakicic JM, Ard JD, de Jesus JM, Houston Miller N, 
Hubbard VS, Lee IM, Lichtenstein AH, Loria CM, Millen BE, Nonas 
CA, Sacks FM, Smith SC Jr, Svetkey LP, Wadden TA, Yanovski SZ, 
Kendall KA, Morgan LC, Trisolini MG, Velasco G, Wnek J, Anderson 
JL, Halperin JL, Albert NM, Bozkurt B, Brindis RG, Curtis LH, 
DeMets D, Hochman JS, Kovacs RJ, Ohman EM, Pressler SJ, Sellke 
FW, Shen WK, Smith SC Jr, Tomaselli GF. 2013 AHA/ACC guide-
line on lifestyle management to reduce cardiovascular risk: a report 
of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association 
Task Force on Practice Guidelines [published corrections appear 
in Circulation. 2014;129[suppl 2]:S100–S101 and Circulation. 
2015;131:e326]. Circulation. 2014;129(suppl 2):S76–S99. doi: 10.1161/ 
01.cir.0000437740.48606.d1.
 
164. Goff DC Jr, Lloyd-Jones DM, Bennett G, Coady S, D’Agostino RB, 
Gibbons R, Greenland P, Lackland DT, Levy D, O’Donnell CJ, Robinson 
JG, Schwartz JS, Shero ST, Smith SC Jr, Sorlie P, Stone NJ, Wilson PW, 
Jordan HS, Nevo L, Wnek J, Anderson JL, Halperin JL, Albert NM, 
Bozkurt B, Brindis RG, Curtis LH, DeMets D, Hochman JS, Kovacs RJ, 
Ohman EM, Pressler SJ, Sellke FW, Shen WK, Smith SC Jr, Tomaselli 
GF. 2013 ACC/AHA guideline on the assessment of cardiovascular 
risk: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart 
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines [published correc-
tion appears in Circulation. 2014;129[suppl 2]:S74–S75]. Circulation. 
2014;129(suppl 2):S49–S73. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.0000437741.48606.98.
 
165. Hemphill JC 3rd, Greenberg SM, Anderson CS, Becker K, Bendok BR, 
Cushman M, Fung GL, Goldstein JN, Macdonald RL, Mitchell PH, Scott 
PA, Selim MH, Woo D; on behalf of the American Heart Association 
Stroke Council; Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing; Council 
on Clinical Cardiology. Guidelines for the management of spontaneous 
intracerebral hemorrhage: a guideline for healthcare professionals from 
the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke. 
2015;46:2032–2060. doi: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000069.
 
166. Jauch EC, Saver JL, Adams HP Jr, Bruno A, Connors JJ, Demaerschalk 
BM, Khatri P, McMullan PW Jr, Qureshi AI, Rosenfield K, Scott PA, 
Summers DR, Wang DZ, Wintermark M, Yonas H; on behalf of the 
American Heart Association Stroke Council; Council on Cardiovascular 
Nursing; Council on Peripheral Vascular Disease; Council on Clinical 
Cardiology. Guidelines for the early management of patients with 
acute ischemic stroke: a guideline for healthcare professionals from 
the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke. 
2013;44:870–947. doi: 10.1161/STR.0b013e318284056a.
 
167. Kernan WN, Ovbiagele B, Black HR, Bravata DM, Chimowitz MI, 
Ezekowitz MD, Fang MC, Fisher M, Furie KL, Heck DV, Johnston 
SC, Kasner SE, Kittner SJ, Mitchell PH, Rich MW, Richardson D, 
Schwamm LH, Wilson JA; on behalf of the American Heart Association 
Stroke Council, Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing, Council 
on Clinical Cardiology, and Council on Peripheral Vascular Disease. 
Guidelines for the prevention of stroke in patients with stroke and tran-
sient ischemic attack: a guideline for healthcare professionals from the 
American Heart Association/American Stroke Association [published 
correction appears in Stroke. 2015;46:e54]. Stroke. 2014;45:2160–2236. 
doi: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000024.
 
168. Spring B, Ockene JK, Gidding SS, Mozaffarian D, Moore S, Rosal MC, 
Brown MD, Vafiadis DK, Cohen DL, Burke LE, Lloyd-Jones D; on be-
half of the American Heart Association Behavior Change Committee of 
the Council on Epidemiology and Prevention, Council on Lifestyle and 
Cardiometabolic Health, Council for High Blood Pressure Research, 
Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing. Better population 
health through behavior change in adults: a call to action. Circulation. 
2013;128:2169–2176. doi: 10.1161/01.cir.0000435173.25936.e1.
 
169. Smith EE, Saver JL, Alexander DN, Furie KL, Hopkins LN, Katzan 
IL, Mackey JS, Miller EL, Schwamm LH, Williams LS; on behalf of 
the AHA/ASA Stroke Performance Oversight Committee. Clinical per-
formance measures for adults hospitalized with acute ischemic stroke: 
performance measures for healthcare professionals from the American 
Heart Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke. 2014;45:3472–
3498. doi: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000045.
 
170. Redberg RF, Benjamin EJ, Bittner V, Braun LT, Goff DC Jr, Havas S, 
Labarthe DR, Limacher MC, Lloyd-Jones DM, Mora S, Pearson TA, 
Radford MJ, Smetana GW, Spertus JA, Swegler EW. AHA/ACCF 2009 
performance measures for primary prevention of cardiovascular disease 
in adults: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/
American Heart Association Task Force on Performance Measures 
(Writing Committee to Develop Performance Measures for Primary 
Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease) [published correction appears in 
Circulation. 2010;121:e445–e446]. Circulation. 2009;120:1296–1336.
 
171. American Heart Association. Healthy for Good. https://www.healthyforgood.
heart.org/. Accessed May 15, 2017.
 
172. Satizabal CL, Beiser AS, Chouraki V, Chêne G, Dufouil C, Seshadri S. 
Incidence of dementia over three decades in the Framingham Heart Study. 
N Engl J Med. 2016;374:523–532. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1504327.
 
173. Allen NB, Zhao L, Liu L, Daviglus M, Liu K, Fries J, Shih YT, 
Garside D, Vu TH, Stamler J, Lloyd-Jones DM. Favorable cardiovas-
cular health, compression of morbidity, and healthcare costs: forty-year 
follow-up of the CHA Study (Chicago Heart Association Detection 
Project in Industry). Circulation. 2017;135:1693–1701. doi: 10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.116.026252.
 
174. Gorelick PB, Erkinjuntti T, Hofman A, Rocca WA, Skoog I, Winblad 
B. Prevention of vascular dementia. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 
1999;13(suppl 3):S131–S139.
 
175. Zeng Y, Feng Q, Hesketh T, Christensen K, Vaupel JW. Survival, disabili-
ties in activities of daily living, and physical and cognitive functioning 
among the oldest-old in China: a cohort study. Lancet. 2017;389:1619–
1629. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)30548-2.
 
176. GBD 2015 Tobacco Collaborators. Smoking prevalence and attributable 
disease burden in 195 countries and territories, 1990–2015: a system-
atic analysis from the Global Burden of Disease Study 2015. Lancet. 
2017;389:1885–1906.
 
177. Roth GA, Dwyer-Lindgren L, Bertozzi-Villa A, Stubbs RW, Morozoff C, 
Naghavi M, Mokdad AH, Murray CJL. Trends and patterns of geograph-
ic variation in cardiovascular mortality among US counties, 1980–2014. 
JAMA. 2017;317:1976–1992.
 
178. Kaplan H, Thompson RC, Trumble BC, Wann LS, Allam AH, Beheim 
B, Frohlich B, Sutherland ML, Sutherland JD, Stieglitz J, Rodriguez DE, 
Michalik DE, Rowan CJ, Lombardi GP, Bedi R, Garcia AR, Min JK, 
Narula J, Finch CE, Gurven M, Thomas GS. Coronary atherosclerosis 
in indigenous South American Tsimane: a cross-sectional cohort study. 
Lancet. 2017;389:1730–1739. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)30752-3.
 
179. Niiranen TJ, Lyass A, Larson MG, Hamburg NM, Benjamin EJ, Mitchell GF, 
Vasan RS. Prevalence, correlates, and prognosis of healthy vascular aging 
in a Western community-dwelling cohort: the Framingham Heart Study. 
Hypertension. 2017;70:267–274. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA. 
117.09026.
 
180. Younus A, Aneni EC, Spatz ES, Osondu CU, Roberson L, Ogunmoroti 
O, Malik R, Ali SS, Aziz M, Feldman T, Virani SS, Maziak W, 
Agatston AS, Veledar E, Nasir K. A systematic review of the 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
 Gorelick et al  Defining Optimal Brain Health in Adults  e303
prevalence and outcomes of ideal cardiovascular health in US and non-
US populations. Mayo Clin Proc. 2016;91:649–670. doi: 10.1016/j.
mayocp.2016.01.019.
 
181. Arena R, Lavie CJ. Preventing bad and expensive things from happening by 
taking the healthy living polypill: everyone needs this medicine [published 
online ahead of print March 13, 2017]. Mayo Clin Proc. 2017;92:483–487. 
doi: 10.1016/j.mayocp.2017.02.005. https://www.linkinghub.elsevier.com/
retrieve/pii/S0025-6196(17)30121-0. Accessed August 14, 2017.
 
182. Osondu CU, Aneni EC, Valero-Elizondo J, Salami JA, Rouseff M, Das S, 
Guzman H, Younus A, Ogunmoroti O, Feldman T, Agatston AS, Veledar 
E, Katzen B, Calitz C, Sanchez E, Lloyd-Jones DM, Nasir K. Favorable 
cardiovascular health is associated with lower health care expenditures 
and resource utilization in a large US employee population: the Baptist 
Health South Florida Employee Study [published online ahead of print 
March 13, 2017]. Mayo Clin Proc. 2017;92:512–524. doi: 10.1016/j.
mayocp.2016.12.026. https://www.linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S0025-6196(17)30088-5. Accessed August 14, 2017.
 
183. Livingston G, Sommerlad A, Orgeta V, Costafreda SG, Huntley J, Ames 
D, Ballard C, Banerjee S, Burns A, Cohen-Mansfield J, Cooper C, Fox 
N, Gitlin LN, Howard R, Kales HC, Larson EB, Ritchie K, Rockwood 
K, Sampson EL, Samus Q, Schneider LS, Selbæk G, Teri L, Mukadam 
N.  Dementia prevention, intervention and care [published online ahead 
of print on July 19, 2017]. Lancet. 2017. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S0140-6736(17)31363-6. Accessed August 14, 2017.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 4, 2019
