 January-February 2018
HASTINGS CENTER REPORT      5
I
t is staggering to observe the new 
normal in America: 37.9 percent 
of adults are obese, and 70.7 per-
cent are either obese or overweight. 
One out of every five minors is obese. 
The real tragedy, of course, is the dis-
ability, suffering, and early death that 
devastates families and communities. 
But all of society pays, with the annual 
medical cost estimated at $147 billion. 
The causal pathways are complex—
poor diets and sedentary lifestyles. But 
if we drill down, sugar is a deeply con-
sequential pathway to obesity (and to 
dental disease), and the single greatest 
dietary source is sugar-sweetened bever-
ages (SSBs)—sodas, fruit drinks, energy 
drinks, and specialty coffees with added 
sugar, corn syrup, sucrose, fructose, 
glucose, or honey. Socioeconomic class 
drives SSB consumption, exacerbating 
unconscionable health disparities.1
The beverage industry for years has 
waged a “coordinated war” against pub-
lic health regulation.2 Corporations sur-
reptitiously funded misleading research, 
hid industry research showing profound 
harms, spent lavishly on political lobby-
ing, and formed faux grass-roots organi-
zations against any attempt to limit SSB 
sales.3 When compared to “Big Tobac-
co,” which is rightfully demonized, “Big 
Food” is better funded, more politically 
connected, and has greater influence.
Yet sugar has no nutritional value 
and does not trigger feelings of satiation. 
On any given day, half the population 
consumes SSBs. Multiple studies find 
major links between SSBs and weight 
gain, resulting in diabetes, cancers, and 
cardiovascular disease. One study found 
that for each twelve-ounce soda children 
consumed per day, the odds of becom-
ing obese increased by 60 percent.4 It 
is during one’s youth that taste prefer-
ences are developed and lifetime dietary 
habits are formed. And children and 
adolescents are the market beverage 
companies covet—the next generation 
of consumers.
The copious amount of sugar in the 
American diet is no accident. Industry 
practices and regulatory failures have 
fueled this explosion. Yet there are sen-
sible, effective interventions that would 
create the conditions for healthier be-
haviors. What are the key interven-
tions, and how can we overcome the 
social, political, and constitutional 
roadblocks? Tobacco control offers a 
powerful model, suggesting that suc-
cess requires a suite of interventions 
working in concert:  labeling, warnings, 
taxation, portion sizes, product formu-
lation, marketing restrictions, and bans 
in high-risk settings such as schools and 
hospitals. For example, public educa-
tion combined with multiple interven-
tions reduced SSB consumption in one 
Maryland county by 20 percent.5 Each 
intervention deserves detailed analysis, 
but I’m kick-starting scholarly and poli-
cy conversation by systematically laying 
out the major legal tools.
Advertising Restrictions: 
Commercial Speech
C
hildren and adolescents are bom-
barded with marketing for SSBs—
not only on television but also on 
social media, in children’s games (“ad-
vergames”), and through contests with 
SSBs as prizes. Companies use appeal-
ing figures, such as Disney characters, 
with marketing campaigns fully inte-
grated with common themes across 
multiple promotional platforms. The 
sheer size and strategic coordination of 
SSB marketing reveals the industry’s 
intentions to drive SSB sales, especially 
among children and adolescents.
Unlike in progressive jurisdictions 
around the globe, in the United States, 
marketing sugary foods is virtually un-
regulated.6 We rely on voluntary but 
mostly unkept promises from industry. 
In 2006, in response to public concern, 
the industry announced self-regulation, 
promising to change the ratio of food 
and beverage advertising directed to 
children to encourage healthier eat-
ing. Although companies did reduce 
ad campaigns targeted to children, they 
still spent $866 million in 2013 to ad-
vertise unhealthy drinks—more than 
four times the amount spent to pro-
mote water and 100 percent juice. Some 
companies, including Pepsi, Red Bull, 
and Snapple, actually increased youth 
marketing.7
Government seems unwilling to reg-
ulate advertising of SSBs due to indus-
try influence and the belief that the First 
Amendment protects the freedom to 
market unhealthy products. Although 
the commercial speech doctrine express-
ly excludes speech targeting children, 
proving that a commercial is targeted 
at children is hard. Advertisements in 
popular television shows, at sporting 
events, in magazines, and even in games 
and social media reach both adults and 
youth. The Supreme Court has become 
at law
Tackling Obesity and  
Disease: The Culprit Is Sugar; the 
Response Is Legal Regulation
by Lawrence O. Gostin
© 2018  The Hastings Center. Permission is required to reprint.
 6   HASTINGS CENTER REPORT
January-February 2018
more aggressive in defending commer-
cial speech, even protecting the world’s 
most dangerous product, tobacco.
Do corporations that spend lav-
ishly to market products they know are 
unhealthy have a constitutional right 
to free speech and to exemption from 
public health regulation? Throughout 
American history until 1985, the Su-
preme Court did not grant commercial 
speech any First Amendment protec-
tion; when it finally did, the Court gave 
corporations decidedly lower levels of 
protection. No other country follows 
the logic of the modern Supreme Court. 
That is “American Exceptionalism” of 
dubious distinction.
Labeling and Warnings: 
Compelled Speech
T
he Nutrition Labeling and Edu-
cation Act of 1990 required most 
processed foods and beverages to be la-
beled with a nutrition facts panel, but 
the current system confuses consumers. 
The FDA planned to launch a new sys-
tem in 2018, including larger font and 
disclosure of serving sizes and added 
sugars, but the Trump administration 
has delayed implementation until 2020 
or 2021. Even the new nutritional panel 
does not go far enough. The United 
Kingdom’s traffic light system requires 
vivid red warnings for excess sugar, so-
dium, and unhealthy fats. Consumers 
don’t want to buy, and companies don’t 
want to market, foods bearing large red 
lights on the package.
Graphic warnings have been particu-
larly effective. Australia’s plain packag-
ing law (prohibiting branding, such as 
logos, images, and colors, on packages 
of cigarettes and other tobacco prod-
ucts), for example, significantly lowered 
tobacco sales, and research demonstrates 
that warnings would drive down sales 
of SSBs. In 2015, San Francisco en-
acted a safety warning on SSB ads. But 
in September 2017, a federal appellate 
court issued an injunction, saying the 
city probably violated the First Amend-
ment by compelling companies to make 
controversial and burdensome disclo-
sures. Never mind that San Francisco’s 
language 
(“WARNING: 
Drinking 
beverages with added sugars contributes 
to obesity, diabetes, and tooth decay”) 
was truthful and scientifically ground-
ed. The court relied on FDA guidance 
that SSBs in moderation can be part of 
a healthy diet. That is true for virtually 
any food, but it doesn’t change the fact 
that sugar has no nutritional value and 
has a unique role in obesity, diabetes, 
and dental caries. Commercial market-
ing and corporations’ profit motives 
ought not be conflated with constitu-
tionally protected political and artistic 
expression. Corporations are not per-
sons, and money is not speech.
SSB Taxes: Politics or Public 
Health?
T
axes create powerful disincentives 
for purchasing SSBs. The World 
Health Organization recommends rais-
ing prices by 20 percent to lower con-
sumption, improve nutrition, and raise 
revenue for public health. Eight U.S. ju-
risdictions have adopted soda taxes, cov-
ering more than eight million people. 
Evidence from early adopters shows that 
taxes drive healthier consumption pat-
terns. Berkeley’s one-penny-per-ounce 
tax reduced sales by 21 percent in low-
income neighborhoods in the first year 
alone. Mexico’s one-peso-per-liter tax 
spurred a 5.5 percent reduction in the 
first year and 9.7 percent reduction in 
the second year, with the largest declines 
among low socioeconomic groups.8
The United Kingdom’s new gradu-
ated levy on SSBs is yielding yet another 
powerful impact: soda manufacturers 
are reformulating their beverages to 
significantly reduce the sugar content. 
Such product reformulation—whether 
incentivized or mandatory—helps re-
duce overconsumption of sugars at the 
societal level and marks a movement 
away from the longstanding notion that 
consumption is purely a matter of in-
dividual responsibility. While the pub-
lic has become accustomed to copious 
quantities of sugar in beverages, they 
would barely notice a slow, gradual de-
cline over years. That is the approach 
countries are taking with sodium and 
unhealthy fats.9
The political calculation is subtle. 
Chicago withdrew its SSB tax after a 
year, succumbing to industry lobbying. 
Yet Philadelphia had a winning strategy, 
selling the tax not as a public health 
measure but as a revenue generator for 
schools and urban development.
Portion Size: “Nanny Bloomberg”
P
ortion sizes have risen dramatically. 
In the 1950s, standard soft-drink 
bottles were 6.5 ounces; by the early 
1990s, 20-ounce plastic bottles became 
the norm, and today Big Gulps have ex-
ploded to 42 ounces. A 20-ounce Coca-
Cola, for example, contains 65 grams of 
added sugar. In the 1970s, SSBs com-
prised 4 percent of daily calorie intake; 
by 2001, they rose to 9 percent, with 
youth averaging 224 empty calorizes 
daily.
Given the steep size increase in soda 
bottles and fountain drinks, regulating 
portion size would appear to be a natu-
ral intervention. Think again. In 2012, 
“Big Beverage” companies funded and 
mobilized community opposition to 
New York City’s ban on selling SSBs 
in portions larger than 16 ounces. Six 
business associations sued. Public op-
position was fierce, linking the rule 
to “Nanny Bloomberg.”10 New York’s 
highest court ultimately struck down 
the rule, holding that the city’s board 
of health had, by issuing the ban, tres-
passed on the elected city council’s 
authority. Given the evidence linking 
portion size to weight gain and chronic 
disease, the court’s reasoning was puz-
zling: the board had the power to ban 
“inherently harmful”11 foods, but SSBs 
did not fall into that category.
This much we know. SSBs have no 
nutritional value and are highly corre-
lated with weight gain and chronic dis-
ease. The impacts are especially felt in 
low-income neighborhoods and among 
minorities and young people. And we 
understand the tactics of Big Beverage 
companies to mislead the public while 
donning the mantle of liberty—spout-
ing about personal autonomy, paren-
tal responsibility, limited government, 
low taxation, and free speech. This 
leaves society in a bind. The public is 
 January-February 2018
HASTINGS CENTER REPORT      7
bombarded with deceptive advertising, 
while fast food outlets flourish. Public 
health agencies have their hands tied by 
the forces of politics, constitutionalism, 
industry spending, and corporate per-
sonhood. America has placed the value 
of individualism on a pedestal, and the 
results mean that more people are cop-
ing with chronic diseases and dying pre-
maturely. For the first time in history, 
the next generation may live shorter 
lives than their parents. Why not try 
another way, placing the common good 
as a high value? A good place to start is 
to take action against the major harms 
wrought by the pervasive presence of 
sugar in the American diet.
1. “Get the Facts: Sugar-Sweetened Bever-
ages and Consumption,” Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, https://www.cdc.
gov/nutrition/data-statistics/sugar-sweetened-
beverages-intake.html. 
2. A. Lappe and C. Bronsing-Lazalde, “How 
to Win against Big Soda,” New York Times, 
October 15, 2017.
3. C. E. Kearns, D. Apollonio, and S. 
A. Glantz, “Sugar Industry Sponsorship of 
Germ-Free Rodent Studies Linking Sucrose 
to Hyperlipidemia and Cancer: An Historical 
Analysis of Internal Documents,” PLoS Biology 
15, no. 11 (2017): e2003460.
4. D. S. Ludwig, K. E. Peterson, and S. L. 
Gortmaker, “Relation between Consumption 
of Sugar-Sweetened Drinks and Childhood 
Obesity: A Prospective, Observational Analy-
sis,” Lancet 357 (2001): 505-508.
5. M. B. Schwartz et al., “Association of a 
Community Campaign for Better Beverage 
Choices with Beverage Purchases from Super-
markets,” JAMA Intern Medicine 177 (2017): 
666-74.
6. D. M. Studdert, J. Flanders, and M. M. 
Mello, “Searching for Public Health Law’s 
Sweet Spot: The Regulation of Sugar-Sweet-
ened Beverages,” PLoS Medicine 12, no. 7 
(2015): e1001848.
7. “Sugary Drinks Facts: Food Advertising 
to Children and Teens Score,” Rudd Center 
for Food Policy and Obesity, 2014, http://
www.sugarydrinkfacts.org/.
8. S. A. Roache and L. O. Gostin, “The 
Untapped Power of Soda Taxes: Incentivizing 
Consumers, Generating Revenue, and Alter-
ing Corporate Behavior,” International Journal 
of Health Policy & Management 6 (2017): 1-5.
9. L. O. Gostin et al., “Legal Priorities for 
Prevention of Non-communicable Diseases: 
Innovations from WHO’s Eastern Mediterra-
nean Region,” Public Health 144 (2017): 4-12.
10. L. O. Gostin, “Bloomberg’s Health Leg-
acy: Urban Innovator or Meddling Nanny,” 
Hastings Center Report 43, no. 5 (2013): 19-25.
11. In the Matter of New York Statewide 
Coalition of Hispanic Chambers of Commerce 
v. New York City Department of Health and 
Mental Hygiene (2014), http://www.nycourts.
gov/ctapps/Decisions/2014/Jun14/134opn14-
Decision.pdf. 
DOI: 10.1002/hast.804
