 A generation of research and drug development focused 
on understanding the molecular drivers of tumori­
genesis has resulted in an impressive array of molecu­
larly targeted therapies that have changed cancer care. 
BCR–ABL inhibitors have transformed chronic myelo­
genous leukaemia into a clinically managed, chronic 
disease1. Antagonists of the serine/threonine protein 
kinase BRAF and the mitogen/extracellular signal­ 
regulated kinase MEK achieve profound clinical responses 
in some patients with BRAF­mutant metastatic melanoma 
or advanced non­small­cell lung cancer (NSCLC)2,3. 
Therapies targeting epidermal growth factor receptor 
(EGFR) mutations and anaplastic lymphoma kinase 
(ALK) gene fusions similarly achieve a clinically mean­
ingful response in subsets of patients with lung cancer4,5. 
In parallel, the development of immune­based thera­
pies, including the administration of certain cytokines, 
blocking antibodies to negative regulators of T cell func­
tion (immune checkpoint inhibitors), engineered cell ther­
apies and oncolytic viruses, is also transforming cancer 
treatment. The most broadly efficacious immune­based 
 
therapies to date — which exhibit durable clinical 
responses in diverse solid tumours and haema 
tological 
malignancies — are antagonists of the cytotoxic 
 
T lymphocyte­associated antigen 4 (CTLA4) or pro­
grammed cell death protein 1 (PD1)–PD1 ligand 1 
(PDL1) pathways, collectively known as immune check­
point inhibitors6,7. Although the hypothesis that activation 
of the immune system can result in therapeutic benefit for 
cancer patients has been the subject of research for more 
than 100 years8, definitive evidence that immune manip­
ulation can serve as a foundation for cancer care has been 
obtained only recently.
On the strength of clinical data and in an effort to 
inform the design of rational therapeutic combination 
strategies, the research fields of targeted and immune­
based cancer therapies are gradually being integrated. 
There is an increased focus on investigating how targeted 
therapies — initially discovered through their impact on 
tumour cell­autonomous functions — and conventional 
treatments (chemotherapy and radiation therapy) have 
an impact on the generation of an effective antitumour 
immune response. Protective tumour immunity is gen­
erally thought to require stimulation of innate immune 
responses that provide tumour antigen­presenting, mature 
dendritic cells (DCs) and activated natural killer (NK) cells; 
1Exploratory Immuno-
Oncology, Novartis Institutes 
for BioMedical Research.
2Translational Clinical 
Oncology, Novartis Institutes 
for BioMedical Research.
3Oncology, Novartis Institutes 
for BioMedical Research, 
250 Massachusetts Avenue, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 
02139, USA.
Correspondence to G.D. 
glenn.dranoff@novartis.com
doi:10.1038/nrc.2017.17
Published online 24 Mar 2017
Prospects for combining targeted 
and conventional cancer therapy with 
immunotherapy
Philip Gotwals1, Scott Cameron2, Daniela Cipolletta1, Viviana Cremasco1, Adam Crystal2, 
Becker Hewes2, Britta Mueller1, Sonia Quaratino2, Catherine Sabatos-Peyton1,  
Lilli Petruzzelli2, Jeffrey A. Engelman3 and Glenn Dranoff1
Abstract | Over the past 25 years, research in cancer therapeutics has largely focused on two 
distinct lines of enquiry. In one approach, efforts to understand the underlying cell-autonomous, 
genetic drivers of tumorigenesis have led to the development of clinically important targeted 
agents that result in profound, but often not durable, tumour responses in genetically defined 
patient populations. In the second parallel approach, exploration of the mechanisms of 
protective tumour immunity has provided several therapeutic strategies — most notably the 
’immune checkpoint’ antibodies that reverse the negative regulators of T cell function — that 
accomplish durable clinical responses in subsets of patients with various tumour types. The 
integration of these potentially complementary research fields provides new opportunities to 
improve cancer treatments. Targeted and immune-based therapies have already transformed the 
standard-of-care for several malignancies. However, additional insights into the effects of 
targeted therapies, along with conventional chemotherapy and radiation therapy, on the 
induction of antitumour immunity will help to advance the design of combination strategies that 
increase the rate of complete and durable clinical response in patients.
NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER 
 ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION | 1
REVIEWS
© Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved
 Immune checkpoint 
inhibitors
Therapeutic agents that reverse, 
for example, programmed cell 
death protein 1 (PD1) and 
cytotoxic T lymphocyte- 
associated antigen 4 
(CTLA4)-mediated repression of 
cytotoxic T cell activity to 
enable an antitumour immune 
response.
Innate immune responses
Refers to the nonspecific 
immune defence mechanisms 
that identify and eliminate 
foreign pathogens. Cells of the 
innate immune response 
include natural killer cells, mast 
cells, eosinophils, basophils 
and phagocytic cells such as 
macrophages.
Dendritic cells
(DCs). Immune cells that 
process and display antigenic 
proteins in conjunction with 
major histocompatibility 
complex proteins on their 
surface to T cells and are the 
most potent antigen- 
presenting cells, regulating 
both protective immunity and 
tolerance.
Natural killer (NK) cells
Immune cells that can bind to 
and kill virally infected cells or 
tumour cells in the absence of 
antigen stimulation.
induction of potent cancer­specific cytotoxic T cells and 
antibodies; and modulation of the immunosuppressive 
tumour microenvironment (TME)9. Successful engage­
ment and destruction of the tumour can result in long­
term T cell­ and antibody­mediated immune memory 
responses that may be associated with durable remissions.
The tumour-immunity cycle (BOX 1) has been the sub­
ject of several recent reviews and forms the intellectual 
framework for immune­based therapeutic strategies9,10. 
Among the many treatment approaches in clinical 
testing, the oncolytic virus talimogene laherparepvec 
(T­VEC), which is approved for the treatment of mela­
noma, activates an innate immune response, enhancing 
tumour antigen processing and presentation by DCs, 
and eliciting a type I interferon (IFN) inflammatory 
response11. In addition to antagonists of the CTLA4 and 
PD1–PDL1 pathways, there are several other immune 
checkpoint inhibitors under development that may 
enhance cytotoxic T cell activity by antagonizing reg­
ulatory pathways that suppress T cell function7. These 
include agents that block lymphocyte activation gene 3 
(LAG3), T cell immunoglobulin and mucin domain­ 
containing 3 (TIM3; also known as HAVCR2), V­domain 
 
immunoglobulin (Ig) suppressor of T cell activation 
(VISTA; also known as C10orf54), and T cell immuno­
receptor with Ig and ITIM domains (TIGIT). There 
are also therapeutics that are engineered to agonize 
 
regulatory pathways that stimulate T cell function, 
 
including glucocorticoid­induced tumour necro­
sis factor (TNF) receptor­related protein (GITR; also 
known as TNFRSF18), 4­1BB (also known as CD137 
and TNFRSF9) and OX40 ligand receptor (OX40; 
also known as CD134 and TNFRSF4)12. Therapeutic 
 
inhibitors of immunosuppressive metabolites (for 
example, kynurenine and adenosine) and cytokines 
(for example, transforming growth factor­β (TGFβ)) 
that modulate the trafficking and maturation of 
 
myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) and T regulatory 
(Treg) cells are the subject of pharmaceutical development. 
Additional approaches that are being pursued include: 
bi­specific antibodies that redirect NK cell or T cell 
cytotoxicity to defined tumour targets; ex vivo expanded 
tumour­infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs); and T cells 
engineered with chimeric antigen receptors (CARs) or 
recombinant T cell receptors (TCRs) that directly bind to 
and kill tumours, effectively bypassing the steps required 
to mount an endogenous immune response13.
In this Review, we examine emerging evidence for the 
effects of targeted therapies on the molecular pathways 
that control immune cell function and protective tumour 
immunity. We also discuss selected low­molecular­weight 
inhibitors of key immune regulatory pathways, chemo­
therapy and radiation therapy, all of which are likely to 
become components of highly efficacious combination 
regimens. A vivid example of the intersection of targeted 
and immune­based cancer therapies is reflected in the 
crafting of several novel treatments for metastatic mela­
noma, a disease in which previous therapeutic approaches 
were largely ineffective (BOX 2). The impact of targeted 
therapies on cell­autonomous tumour growth, immune 
and stromal cell function, and the associated molecular 
interdependencies is dynamic and context dependent. 
A more comprehensive understanding of the complex 
interplay between targeted therapies, conventional ther­
apies and immunotherapies is required to optimize the 
integration of these approaches with cancer treatment 
 
and inform the challenges such as dosing and tempo­
ral sequencing associated with rational therapeutic 
combinations.
Stimulation of innate immunity
Cells of the innate immune system, via their roles 
in antigen presentation, T cell co­stimulation and 
direct tumour cell killing, are essential for the initi­
ation, maintenance and programming of antitumour 
immune reactions. Clinical response to immune­
based therapies, most notably immune checkpoint 
inhibitors, is associated with a relatively high tumour 
mutation burden14. A higher tumour mutational load 
may translate into increased processing and display of 
tumour­specific antigens by antigen­presenting cells to 
CD8+ T cells that drive tumour lysis. For example, data 
from 110 patients with melanomas that were resected 
before treatment with ipilimumab (anti­CTLA4) 
showed that clinical response was associated with 
overall tumour mutation burden, neo­antigen load 
and an immune­related expression signature15. 
Thus, targeted small molecules that directly or indi­
rectly amplify the expression and display of tumour­ 
specific antigens and stimulate the innate immune 
response are attractive candidates for generat­
ing de novo antitumour reactions, amplifying pre­ 
existing host immune responses and for combining 
with other cancer therapies. In this section, the discus­
sion focuses on therapeutic approaches to stimulating 
the innate response by, for example, amplifying antigen 
Box 1 | The tumour-immunity cycle
The tumour-immunity cycle can be broadly defined by three distinct steps that are 
required to achieve effective antitumour immunity9,10. Dendritic cells (DCs) must first 
sample antigens released from the tumour. These tumour-associated antigens may 
comprise mutated proteins, differentiation antigens associated with the tissue of origin 
of the cancer or preferentially expressed gene products. In parallel with antigen uptake, 
DCs must also receive an activation signal from, for example, factors released from 
dying tumour cells or through Toll-like receptors (TLRs) to enhance processing and 
display of tumour antigen-derived peptides. Therapeutic agents that either enhance 
the display of tumour-associated antigens or amplify DC activation signals may 
promote antitumour immunity. Tumour antigen-loaded DCs must next migrate to the 
lymphoid organs to generate the production of CD8+ T effector cells with cytotoxic 
potential. DCs may also trigger antibody and natural killer cell responses, both of which 
may contribute to tumour immunity. Finally, cancer-specific T cells must travel from the 
lymph node to the tumour site where they may encounter an immunosuppressive 
microenvironment. Tumours themselves may evade cytolytic T cells by downregulating 
major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC I) molecules required to display tumour 
antigens or expressing cell surface molecules such as programmed cell death protein 1 
ligand 1 (PDL1) that can engage receptors on the T cell surface to cause exhaustion. 
Dynamic interactions between the tumour and the hypoxic stromal environment result 
in the release of immunosuppressive molecules such as transforming growth factor-β 
(TGFβ), indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO), arginase and nitric oxide synthase that 
limit T cell function. Therapeutic agents that enhance antitumour T cell function such as 
immune checkpoint inhibitors or that reverse the immunosuppressive tumour 
microenvironment may be crucial in driving the antitumour immune response.
REVIEWS
2 | ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION 
www.nature.com/nrc
© Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved
 Tumour-immunity cycle
Refers to the sequence of 
events — tumour-associated 
antigen loading and activation 
of dendritic cells (DCs), antigen 
presentation by DCs to CD8+ 
T cells and T cell-directed 
cytolysis of tumours — that are 
required to drive a potent 
antitumour response.
Type I interferon
A class of secreted proteins 
that induce cell-intrinsic 
antiviral pathways, modulate 
the innate immune response  
to promote antigen 
presentation and natural killer 
cell function and promote the 
development of 
antigen-specific (adaptive)  
T and B cell memory responses.
Myeloid-derived  
suppressor cells
(MDSCs). A heterogeneous 
population of cells of the 
myeloid lineage that can 
potently suppress T effector 
cell responses and function.
T regulatory (Treg) cells
A subpopulation of T cells that 
help to maintain tolerance by 
suppressing the induction, 
proliferation and activity of 
T effector cells.
Actinic keratosis
Refers to a rough or scaly skin 
lesion typically associated with 
sun exposure.
presentation by antigen­presenting cells and tumour 
cells. Components of the innate immune system that 
may have an active role in negatively regulating the 
antitumour response, such as tumour­associated 
 
macrophages (TAMs) and MDSCs, are considered 
 
in the section below that focuses on the tumour 
 
immunosuppressive microenvironment.
Innate immune activators. Toll­like receptors (TLRs) 
have fundamental roles in the detection of diverse 
microbial agents and were among the first targets 
validated for cancer immunotherapy based on the 
clinical efficacy of Bacillus Calmette–Guerin (BCG) 
intra 
vesicular instillation in patients with early­stage 
bladder cancer16. TLR signalling stimulates robust DC 
maturation, antigen presentation, type I IFN production 
and tumour cell cytotoxicity17, which together with NK 
cell­dependent killing and cytokine expression create a 
potent immunostimulatory microenvironment18 (FIG. 1). 
Topical application of imiquimod, a TLR7 agonist that 
is currently approved for the treatment of actinic kera-
tosis and basal cell carcinoma, has shown preliminary 
clinical activity in breast cancer patients with superficial 
lesions19,20. By contrast, the systemic administration of 
TLR agonists has been associated with severe toxicity21, 
capping the maximum tolerated dose, which likely lim­
ited the overall antitumour effects22. Multiple clinical 
trials are under way aimed at defining the biological and 
antitumour effects of various TLR agonists (that is, tri­
als targeting TLR3, TLR4, TLR7 plus TLR8 and TLR9), 
alone or in combination with chemotherapy, radiation 
therapy or checkpoint inhibitors23–26 (TABLE 1).
The stimulator of interferon genes (STING; also 
known as TMEM173) pathway is triggered through 
the production of cyclic dinucleotides by cyclic 
GMP–AMP synthase (cGAS; also known as MB21D1), 
which serves as a cytosolic detector of double­stranded 
(ds) DNA. STING signalling elicits type I IFN pro­
duction, nuclear factor­κB (NF­κB) activation and the 
Janus kinase (JAK)–signal transducer and activator 
of transcription (STAT) cascade to initiate productive 
 
antitumour immune responses27 (FIG. 1). In mice bearing 
two tumours on opposing flanks, intratumoural admin­
istration of synthetic STING agonists into one of the 
tumours stimulates tumour­associated DCs to generate 
type I IFNs and prime tumour­specific T cells that infil­
trate and kill the uninjected tumour28. A phase I study 
of the intratumoural injection of STING agonists in 
patients with accessible lesions is currently under way29.
Retinoic acid inducible gene I (RIGI; also known 
as DDX58) is a helicase that primarily recognizes 
short 5′­triphosphate uncapped dsRNAs that are pro­
duced during some viral infections. RIGI stimulates 
 
pro­inflammatory cytokine production through 
engagement of mitochondrial antiviral signalling pro­
tein (MAVS) (FIG. 1). Small­molecule RIGI agonists 
can be used to enhance DC activation and directly 
cause tumour cell apoptosis. In preclinical models, the 
 
intratumoural injection of synthetic RIGI ligands mim­
ics a viral infection, triggering DC activation, type I IFN 
secretion and tumour cell apoptosis, which together 
favour effective priming of antitumour CD8+ T cells 
 
and systemic tumour immunity30,31. A synthetic RIGI 
ligand has entered clinical testing for patients with mul­
tiple sclerosis32, and the application of these agents to 
cancer therapy is anticipated in the near future. TLRs 
and RIGI may also be expressed by tumour cells, 
 
where they may have direct growth­stimulatory or 
pro­apoptotic effects, respectively 33,34. Identifying 
therapeutic approaches that limit the action of innate 
 
immune stimulators to immune cells in the tumour envi­
ronment and avoid the potential for enhancing tumour 
growth will be crucial for clinical success.
Chromatin-modifying enzymes. A wide variety of 
cancers carry mutations in genes encoding proteins 
that epigenetically regulate gene expression by mod­
ifying DNA and histones in a highly controlled man­
ner35,36, and preclinical data have provided compelling 
evidence for the modulation of the immune system 
through epigenetic therapies37. For example, histone 
acetylation, which is often found at enhancers and 
promoters and is associated with ‘active’ chromatin, 
is a highly dynamic histone post­translational modi­
fication that can be removed by histone deacetylases 
(HDACs). HDAC inhibition upregulates gene expres­
sion indirectly, but also has an effect on the stability or 
subcellular localization of certain non­histone proteins 
that are post­translationally modified by acetylation38. 
HDAC inhibitors influence the immunogenicity of 
tumours by upregulating the expression of NK cell 
activating ligands, major histocompatibility complex 
class I (MHC I) and MHC II molecules, and pro­ 
inflammatory cytokines39. HDAC inhibitors may also 
affect cells of the immune system directly to promote 
antitumour immunity. For example, in the syngeneic 
Box 2 | Metastatic melanoma
The characterization of driver mutations and genetic mechanisms of resistance in 
melanoma provided the foundation for developing potent inhibitors of BRAF 
(vemurafenib, dabrafenib and encorafenib) and MEK (trametinib, cobimetinib and 
binimetinib) that are now approved for therapy in patients with BRAF-mutant 
metastatic melanoma. In patients harbouring BRAF mutations, the combination of 
dabrafenib and trametinib increased response rate and progression-free survival 
relative to single-agent therapy2. Among various immune-based therapies tested  
in melanoma, the immune checkpoint inhibitors ipilimumab (anti-cytotoxic  
T lymphocyte-associated antigen 4 (CTLA4)), nivolumab (anti-programmed cell death 
protein 1 (PD1)) and pembrolizumab (anti-PD1), as single agents and in combination, 
have manifested the broadest clinical efficacy6,7. An analysis of pooled data from 
multiple trials of ipilimumab demonstrated that approximately 20% of patients with 
advanced melanoma may achieve 10-year survival, representing a substantial increase 
in survival relative to standard-of-care206. These data are consistent with the acquisition 
of immune memory that maintains effective tumour surveillance.
The independent clinical successes of targeted and immune-based approaches in the 
treatment of melanoma have fostered research into understanding how BRAF and MEK 
inhibitors may affect the antitumour immune response. For example, dabrafenib 
triggers an increase in intratumoural CD8+ T cell infiltrates, and dabrafenib and 
trametinib synergize with anti-PD1 therapy to promote tumour destruction in a 
genetically engineered mouse model of BRAF-mutant melanoma207,208. These early data 
suggest that combining BRAF, MEK and immune checkpoint inhibitors with the 
appropriate dose and temporal sequencing might improve patient outcomes, and these 
combinations are the subject of current clinical trials (TABLE 1).
REVIEWS
NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER 
 ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION | 3
© Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved
 IFN
IFN
ERVs
CXCL9
CXCL9
b
Increased 
cytotoxic
T cells and
NK cell 
activity
• IL-12
• IFN
cGAS
cGAMP
STING
TBK1
• DNMTi
• EZH2i
a
Dendritic
cell
NK
cell
T cell
Tumour 
cell
Dying
tumour cell
Hypoxic 
tumour cell
Nucleic acid
(RNA or DNA)
TAA
MHC-displayed,
processed TAA
MAVS
Mitochondrion
tumour 
cell
IFN
ERVs
CXCL9
Nucleus
dsRNA
TCR
Processed
TAA
MHC I
IFN
Endogenous retroviruses
(ERVs). Genomic viral elements 
that are derived from or 
resemble exogenous 
retroviruses. ERVs have been 
implicated in some cancers 
and autoimmune diseases.
CT26 and 4T1 preclinical mouse models, HDAC 
inhibition (with entinostat) together with azacitidine 
treatment and PD1 and CTLA4 checkpoint block­
ade led to complete regression in most mice and, in 
the case of the 4T1 model, also prevented metastasis 
formation. The treatment decreased the number of 
granulo 
cytic MDSCs to normal levels in tumour­bear­
ing mice40. In the preclinical syngeneic RENCA model, 
the number of forkhead box P3 (FOXP3+) Treg cells was 
decreased upon treatment with entinostat41. Several 
ongoing clinical trials combine HDAC inhibitors 
(for example, vorinostat, entinostat or panobinostat) 
 
with immune checkpoint blockade in an effort to 
 
suppress tumour immune evasion and activate 
 
adaptive antitumour immune responses (TABLE 1).
Methylated DNA is a hallmark of silenced chroma­
tin. The DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) inhibitors 
 
azacitidine and decitabine are approved for the 
treatment of haematological malignancies and lead not 
only to the reactivation of silenced tumour suppressor 
genes, but also to the upregulation of genes encod­
ing MHC I molecules, tumour antigens42,43 and IFN 
response proteins44. In an orthotopic mouse model of 
ovarian cancer, decitabine increased the number of NK 
cells and CD8+ T cells in tumour ascites and upregu­
lated chemokine expression by tumour cells in vitro45. 
Recent reports suggest a possible antitumour mecha­
nism of action for azacitidine. Low doses of azacitidine 
reactivate endo 
genous retroviruses (ERVs)46,47, the expres­
sion of which is tightly regulated by DNA methylation 
(along with histone lysine modifications)48,49. Most ERVs 
have lost the ability to mature and infect other cells, but 
they can still expand within their host genome50. Once 
DNMT inhibitors derepress ERV expression, dsRNA 
is produced, which is recognized by the RIGI–MAVS 
 
cytosolic RNA detection system, resulting in a type I 
Figure 1 | Stimulation of innate immunity. a | Stimulator of interferon genes (STING), select Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and 
retinoic acid inducible gene I (RIGI), expressed by antigen-presenting cells, including dendritic cells, recognize nucleic 
acids from dying tumour cells, which generates a molecular cascade that results in increased antigen presentation and 
production of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as interferons (IFNs) and interleukin-12 (IL-12). The STING pathway is 
activated by cytosolic double-stranded DNA (dsDNA), which engages the cyclic GMP–AMP synthase (cGAS) to generate 
intracellular cyclic dinucleotides (cGAMP) that aggregate STING, leading to the phosphorylation of tank-binding kinase 1 
(TBK1), which in turn phosphorylates the transcription factor interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), leading directly to the 
expression of type I IFN genes. b | Endogenous retroviruses (ERVs) are silenced by DNA methylation. Treatment with DNA 
methyltransferase inhibitors (DNMTis; such as azacitidine) or enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2) inhibitors (EZH2is) 
leads to dsRNA expression in tumour cells. DsRNA binds to mitochondrial antiviral signalling protein (MAVS), which leads, 
directly or indirectly, to expression of IFN, tumour-associated antigens (TAAs) and T helper 1 (TH1)-type chemokines  
such as C-X-C motif chemokine ligand 9 (CXCL9). Collectively, these molecular events result in proliferation of  
cytotoxic T cells and natural killer (NK) cells, creating a potent antitumour immunostimulatory environment. MHC I,  
major histocompatibility complex class I; TCR, T cell receptor.
REVIEWS
4 | ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION 
www.nature.com/nrc
© Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved
 Table 1 | Select clinical trials combining targeted therapies and immune checkpoint inhibitors
Target
Compound
Checkpoint inhibitor
Indication
Phase
Refs
TLR9
MGN1703 (also known as 
lefitolimod)
Ipilimumab
Melanoma
I
25
SD-101
Ipilimumab plus radiotherapy
B cell lymphoma
I/II
209
CMP-001
Pembrolizumab
Melanoma
I
210
HDAC
Vorinostat
Pembrolizumab
Renal and urothelial cell 
carcinoma
I/II
211
Entinostat
Pembrolizumab
NSCLC
I/II
212
Nivolumab and ipilimumab
HER2– breast cancer
I
213
DNMT
Azacitidine
Nivolumab and entinostat
NSCLC
II
51
Pembrolizumab
Melanoma
II
214
Pembrolizumab
NSCLC
II
215
Atezolizumab
Myelodysplastic syndromes
I
216
SGI-110 (also known as 
guadecitabine)
Ipilimumab
Melanoma
I
52
MEK and BRAF
Trametinib and dabrafenib
Ipilimumab and nivolumab
Melanoma
III
217
Pembrolizumab
Melanoma
I/II
218
Durvalumab
Melanoma
I/II
219
Vemurafenib and cobimetinib
Atezolizumab
Melanoma
I
220
Vemurafenib
Pembrolizumab
Melanoma
I
221
MAPK
LXH254
PDR001
Solid tumours
I
222
IAP
Birinapant
Pembrolizumab
Solid tumours
I/II
223
BTK
Ibrutinib
Nivolumab
CLL
II
101
Durvalumab
Solid tumours
I/II
105
PI3Kδ
Idelalisib
Pembrolizumab plus ibrutinib
CLL or B cell lymphomas
II
77
A2AR
CPI-444
Atezolizumab
Solid tumours
I
148
IDO
Epacadostat
Pembrolizumab
Melanoma
III
224
Atezolizumab
NSCLC and urothelial 
carcinoma
I
225
Indoximod
Ipilimumab, 
nivolumab plus pembrolizumab
Melanoma
I/II
226
GDC-0919
Atezolizumab
Solid tumours
I
227
M-CSF–M-CSFR
MCS110
PDR001
Solid tumours
I/II
228
RG7155 (also known as 
emactuzumab)
Atezolizumab
Solid tumours
I
229
PLX3397 (also known as 
pexidartinib)
Pembrolizumab
Solid tumours
I/II
230
BLZ945
PDR001
Solid tumours
I/II
231
PI3Kγ
IPI-549
Nivolumab
Solid tumours
I
168
VEGFA
Bevacizumab
Ipilimumab
Melanoma
I
232
Mivolumab plus ipilimumab
Renal cell carcinoma
II
233
Pembrolizumab
Glioblastoma
II
234
Atezolizumab
Renal cell carcinoma
III
235
TGFβ
Galunisertib
Nivolumab
NSCLC, hepatocellular 
carcinoma and glioblastoma
I/II
186
MET
INC280 (also known as 
capmatinib)
PDR001
Hepatocellular carcinoma
I/II
236
Nivolumab
NSCLC
II
237
A2AR, A2a adenosine receptor; BTK, Bruton tyrosine kinase; CLL, chronic lymphocytic leukaemia; M-CSF, macrophage colony-stimulating factor; M-CSFR, 
M-CSF receptor; DNMT, DNA methyltransferase; HDAC, histone deacetylase; IAP
, inhibitor of apoptosis protein; IDO, indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase;  
NSCLC, non-small-cell lung cancer; TGFβ, transforming growth factor-β; TLR9, Toll-like receptor 9; VEGFA, vascular endothelial growth factor A.
REVIEWS
NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER 
 ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION | 5
© Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved
 T cell exhaustion
A state of T cell dysfunction 
characterized by diminished 
effector functions and 
sustained expression of 
inhibitory receptors that is 
associated with chronic 
infection and cancer.
IFN response46,47 (FIG. 1). Therefore, azacitidine seems 
to induce cancer cells to mimic virally infected cells, 
and the immune system responds accordingly, gener­
ating an antitumour immune response38. Several clini­
cal trials with azacitidine in combination with immune 
checkpoint inhibitors are ongoing (TABLE 1). One study 
is also examining the combination of a DNMT inhibi­
tor (azacitidine), an HDAC inhibitor (entinostat) and an 
immune checkpoint inhibitor (nivolumab, a PD1 inhibi­
tor) in NSCLC51. Moreover, a trial combining the DNMT 
inhibitor SGI­100 (also known as guadecitabine) with 
CTLA4 blockade (ipilimumab) is recruiting patients 
with metastatic melanoma52.
Another clinically relevant chromatin­modifying 
enzyme is the histone methyltransferase subunit of 
the polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2), enhancer 
of zeste homologue 2 (EZH2), which trimethylates 
lysine 27 of histone H3 (H3K27me3) to silence genes53 
and is frequently overexpressed in human malignan­
cies. EZH2 represses the production of the T helper 1 
(TH1) type chemokines C­X­C motif chemokine 
ligand 9 (CXCL9) and CXCL10 and thus may alter 
tumour immunogenicity54,55. EZH2­specific inhib­
itors are in phase I clinical trials as monotherapy56, 
and a study testing the EZH2 inhibitor tazemetostat 
in combination with the PDL1 antibody atezolizumab 
is planned for patients with diffuse large B cell lym­
phoma (DLBCL)57. Global DNA hypomethylation 
accompanied by repressive histone marks can also 
lead to a reduction in gene expression58. In this context, 
combined treatment with azacitidine and an EZH2 
inhibitor increased CD8+ T cell infiltration, decreased 
tumour growth and enhanced the activity of immune 
checkpoint blockade in a syngeneic mouse model 
 
of ovarian cancer. Similarly, in NSG mice bearing 
human ovarian cancer xenotransplants, greater anti­
tumour effects were achieved with a combination of 
treatment with tumour­associated antigen (TAA)­
specific CD8+ T cells, an EZH2 inhibitor and azaciti­
dine compared with mice that received the adoptive 
T cell therapy alone. This enhanced antitumour effect 
was dependent on C­X­C motif chemokine receptor 3 
(CXCR3), the receptor for CXCL9 and CXCL10, because 
 
CXCR3 blockade diminished the recruitment of the 
TAA­specific cytotoxic CD8+ T cells to the TME55.
Post­translational histone methylation can also be 
removed by lysine demethylases (KDMs). The first 
KDM identified was lysine­specific demethylase 1 
(LSD1; also known as KDM1A), the substrate of which 
is methylated H3K4 (REF. 59). LSD1 is often dysregulated 
in cancers, and LSD1 inhibitors have shown promising 
results in preclinical studies60,61. Phase I clinical trials are 
ongoing for haematological malignancies37, and further 
investigation is warranted to understand the impact of 
KDM inhibition on the immune system.
The efficacy of current immune­based therapies 
such as immune checkpoint blockade is typically 
dependent on a pre­existing, active antitumour inflam­
matory response. Therapeutic strategies that elicit a 
de novo innate immune response, as described above, in 
tumours that otherwise lack immune infiltrates open the 
possibility of dramatically expanding the number and 
type of tumours that can be effectively targeted with 
immunotherapy. Furthermore, approaches focused on 
augmenting immune priming and enhancing the expres­
sion and display of tumour­derived antigens are poised 
to combine efficiently with the growing armament 
arium 
of therapeutic agents that amplify ongoing, nascent 
responses such as those that modulate T cell function 
(immune checkpoint inhibitors) and those that modify 
the immunosuppressive TME.
Modulation of T cell function
Growth factor receptor and TCR signalling share com­
mon molecular pathways (FIG. 2). Thus, targeted thera­
pies, originally developed to decrease tumour viability 
in a cell­autonomous manner, may also modulate T cell 
(and other immune cell) functions and combine with 
other immune­based therapies such as immune check­
point inhibitors to increase and extend durable clinical 
responses.
MAPK–MEK pathway. The MAPK signalling axis 
is a crucial driver of tumorigenesis and has been the 
subject of intense pharmaceutical research and devel­
opment, which has resulted in the regulatory approval 
of the MEK inhibitors trametinib and cobimetinib for 
use in patients with unresectable or metastatic mela­
noma containing BRAF­V600 mutations. The main 
pathways engaged downstream of TCR­mediated 
signalling include Ca2+ modulation, the MAPK cas­
cade and NF­κB activation, providing multiple targets 
for T cell signalling modulation that converge with 
tumour­targeted therapies62 (FIG. 2). Genetic absence 
or modulation of the activity of MEKK2 or ERK1 and 
ERK2, which are directly phosphorylated by MEK, as 
well as pharmacological inhibition of MEK, abrogate 
interleukin­2 (IL­2) secretion and impede priming, 
proliferation and survival of naive T cells in response 
to antigen stimulation63–65. Paradoxically, recent evi­
dence suggests that selective inhibition of the MAPK 
pathway and its downstream mediators can lead to 
enhanced T cell activation. In a syngeneic mouse model 
of colon carcinoma, trametinib synergized with com­
bined PD1 and CTLA4 antibody blockade to enhance 
antitumour efficacy66. Timing of administration of the 
drug combination was crucial: trametinib administered 
for 1 week before combination treatment (trametinib 
plus anti­PD1) was more effective than anti­PD1 
administration followed by the combination. A recent 
study by Ebert and colleagues67 further elucidated the 
possible mechanism for the distinct effects of MEK 
inhibition on T cell priming and expansion. MEK inhi­
bition potentiates antitumour immunity by inducing 
the expansion of antigen­specific CD8+ TILs, likely 
through inhibition of signalling that leads to full T cell 
exhaustion or apoptosis. The net outcome of MEK inhi­
bition, in this preclinical setting, is an enhanced anti­
tumour T effector cell (Teff cell) response, despite clear 
inhibition of naive T cell priming. Further investigation 
is warranted to understand the long­term impact of 
MEK inhibition on the antitumour immune response.
REVIEWS
6 | ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION 
www.nature.com/nrc
© Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved
 b
a  T cell    
TCR
CD4 or
CD8
CD28
ZAP70
CARMA1
MALT1
BCL-10
LAT
PLCγ
SLP76
DAG
Ca2+
IP3
PDK1
RASGRP1
PKCθ
NF-κB
IKK
RAS
RAF
AKT
MEK1 or MEK2
ERK1 or ERK2
LCK
Sequencing of administration
Favours Teff 
cell and memory 
CD8+ T cell 
expansion
Favours Treg cell 
expansion
Equivalent Treg 
cell and Teff cell 
expansion
Vaccine
mTOR inhibitor
Immune
stimulation
mTOR inhibitor dose
PIP2
Vaccine
mTOR 
inhibitor
Activation of transcription factors
Teff cells
Treg cells
Nucleus
PI3K
Collectively, these data suggest that pharma 
cological 
inhibition of MAPK signalling may potentiate the effect 
of immune checkpoint inhibition, a hypothesis that is 
being tested in multiple clinical trials (TABLE 1). For exam­
ple, recently reported early clinical data suggest that the 
combination of the MEK inhibitor cobimetinib with ate­
zolizumab may be tolerable and active in patients with 
metastatic colorectal cancer68. However, combination 
of the BRAF inhibitor vemurafenib with ipilimumab 
in patients with metastatic melanoma harbouring 
BRAF­V600 mutation resulted in a high frequency of 
dose­limiting hepatotoxicity, highlighting the risks 
associated with new combination therapies targeting 
the MAPK pathway69.
PI3K–AKT–mTOR pathway. Inhibitors of the PI3K 
(particularly the PI3Kδ isoform)–AKT–mTOR pathway 
modulate the differentiation, homeostasis and functional 
activities of Teff cells and Treg cells70,71. Loss of the lipid phos­
phatase PTEN and subsequent enhanced PI3K signalling 
correlate with resistance to immune checkpoint inhibi­
tors in patients with melanoma. Furthermore, treatment 
with a selective PI3Kβ inhibitor in an engineered mouse 
model of preclinical cancer that spontaneously develops 
BRAF­mutant, PTEN­null melanomas augments the 
efficacy of immune checkpoint blockade, likely through 
enhanced T cell trafficking and/or increased T cell­ 
mediated tumour cell killing72. However, these roles of 
PI3Kβ are thought to be tumour cell autonomous, as T cell 
function and viability were not affected, and a direct role 
for PI3Kβ inhibition in T cells in tumour models remains 
to be established. FOXP3+ Treg cells in mice with inactive 
p110δ (encoded by PIK3CD), the catalytic subunit of 
PI3Kδ, have decreased suppressor function in vitro and 
do not produce the anti­inflammatory cytokine IL­10 
(REFS 73,74). Treg cells isolated from these mice fail to pro­
tect against experimental colitis73 and mice have enhanced 
resistance to Leishmania major infection75. Inhibition of 
p110δ in Treg cells also leads to enhanced antitumour 
immunity in preclinical models of melanoma and lym­
phoma76, suggesting that targeting PI3Kδ could facili­
tate antitumour immune activation. The PI3Kδ­specific 
inhibitor idelalisib is currently being tested clinically in 
combination with PD1 blockade in relapsed or refractory 
chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) or other low­grade 
B cell non­Hodgkin lymphomas for which idelalisib has 
established clinical activity77–79 (TABLE 1).
In the setting of solid organ transplantation, 
mTOR inhibitors are used therapeutically to induce 
immuno 
suppression and prevent graft rejection80. 
Figure 2 | Modulation of T cell function. a | Schematic overview of T cell signalling pathways. Growth factor and 
T cell receptors (TCRs) share common molecular signalling pathways. Thus, therapies that have been developed to 
inhibit tumour cell-autonomous growth — for example, through inhibition of RAF, MEK and/or PI3K — may also 
modulate T cell function and affect immune function. b | Modulation of mTOR illustrates the importance that dose 
and sequencing of a therapeutic agent may have on immune function. In this example, delivery of an mTOR inhibitor 
after vaccine administration promotes immunostimulation whereas delivery before vaccine administration 
promotes immunosuppression. Similarly, high-dose mTOR inhibition results in immunosuppression whereas 
low-dose inhibition results in immunostimulation. CARMA1, caspase recruitment domain (CARD)-containing MAGUK 
protein 1; DAG, diacylglycerol; IKK, inhibitor of nuclear factor-κB; IP3, inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate; LAT, linker for 
activation of T cells family member 1; MALT1, mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma translocation 1;  
NF-κB, nuclear factor-κB; PDK1, 3-phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase 1; PIP2, phosphatidylinositol 
4,5-bisphosphate; PKCθ, protein kinase Cθ; PLCγ, phospholipase Cγ; RASGRP1, RAS guanyl-releasing protein 1; 
SLP76, SH2 domain-containing leukocyte protein of 76 kDa; T
eff cell, T effector cell; Treg cell, T regulatory cell;  
ZAP70, 70 kDa ζ-chain-associated protein.
REVIEWS
NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER 
 ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION | 7
© Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved
 Humoral immunity
The component of the adaptive 
immune response that is driven 
by B cell activation (with the 
help of CD4+ T cells), which 
results in the secretion of 
antibodies from plasma cells. It 
also broadly refers to secreted 
or soluble factors that are part 
of an immune response, 
including complement.
X-linked 
agammaglobulinaemia
A heritable immunodeficiency 
caused by a mutation in Bruton 
tyrosine kinase (BTK) in which 
patients do not generate 
mature B cells and hence do 
not make antibodies.
Waldenström 
macroglobulinaemia
A type of non-Hodgkin 
lymphoma characterized by 
lymphoplasmacytoid cells that 
secrete large amounts of 
monoclonal antibodies known 
as macroglobulin.
TH1 cells
(T helper 1 cells). An effector 
population of activated, 
differentiated CD4+ T cells 
characterized by the secretion 
of inflammatory cytokines 
interferon-γ and tumour 
necrosis factor, as well as 
interleukin-2.
However, Araki and colleagues81 demonstrated that, 
in contrast to these immunosuppressive effects, treat­
ment with the mTOR inhibitor rapamycin after acute 
lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) infection 
facilitated not only CD8+ LCMV­specific Teff cell expan­
sion, but also a robust immunological memory response. 
 
Similar responses were observed in mice with a non­ 
replicating viral vaccine and in non­human primates 
with a live­attenuated viral vaccine81. These findings 
were extended to the cancer immunotherapy setting 
with the combination of the rapamycin derivative tem­
sirolimus (which targets mTOR) and vaccination with 
a heat shock protein 110 kDa (HSP110; also known 
as HSPH1) adjuvant that binds and facilitates anti­
gen presentation of tumour­specific protein carbonic 
 
an 
hydrase 9 (CA9) or gp100 (REF. 82). Similarly, enhanced 
therapeutic effects were observed with a combination 
of the mTOR inhibitor AZD8055 and an agonistic 
CD40 monoclonal antibody (mAb)83. Both approaches 
demonstrated increased tumour­specific T cell infil­
trates and antitumour activity in mouse syngeneic 
graft models of renal cell carcinoma and melanoma82,83. 
The dose, timing and sequencing of administration of 
mTOR inhibitors relative to other treatments will likely 
prove crucial for combinations with cancer immuno­
therapy because mTOR inhibition can result in either 
immuno 
suppression or immune activation, depending 
on the manner and setting in which it is used. mTOR 
inhibition may expand Treg cells if administered before 
immunization or TCR stimulation84, whereas continu­
ous mTOR inhibition under homeostatic conditions or 
after immune stimulation may impede Treg cells and Teff 
cells equivalently85 (FIG. 2). Pre­priming of T cells and 
the metabolic state of Treg cells84 as well as the TME85 
may have an impact on Treg cell effects on antitumour 
immunity. In addition, dose, temporal sequencing of 
administration and the impact of mTOR inhibition on 
other cell types may all have a role in the type of immune 
response seen. Nevertheless, recent clinical data support 
the immuno 
stimulatory potential of short­term, low­
dose administration of mTOR inhibitors. In a study of 
elderly volunteers, 6 weeks of everolimus before influ­
enza immunization enhanced the vaccine response and 
decreased the percentage of peripheral CD4+ and CD8+ 
T cells expressing PD1 (REF. 86). Notably, the effective 
doses used in that study were well below the dose of 
everolimus approved for cancer indications. Low­dose 
mTOR inhibition may thus be clinically tolerable and 
effective in combination with immune checkpoint 
inhibitors, and the combination of these agents warrants 
 
clinical exploration.
Inhibitors of apoptosis. Antagonists of the inhibi­
tor of apoptosis proteins (IAPs) were initially devel­
oped to block caspase activation and sensitize cancer 
 
cells to TNF­ and FAS­mediated death stimuli87. Dougan 
and colleagues88 determined that IAP inhibitors can 
mimic co­stimulatory signalling in T cells with TCR 
co­engagement, leading to enhanced proliferation and 
cytokine secretion as well as enhanced antitumour activ­
ity in combination with the GVAX melanoma vaccine, 
which comprises lethally irradiated B16 melanoma cells 
that are engineered to secrete granulocyte­macrophage 
colony­stimulating factor (GM­CSF; also known as 
CSF2), in a mouse model of melanoma. IAP inhibition 
appeared to co­stimulate T cell activation by blocking the 
ability of cellular inhibitor of apoptosis (cIAP) to inhibit 
non­canonical NF­κB2 signalling, possibly through 
cIAP1 (also known as BIRC2) and cIAP2 (also known as 
BIRC3)­mediated regulation of NF­κB­inducing kinase 
(NIK; also known as MAP3K14)89. Addition of the sec­
ond mitochondria­derived activator of caspase (SMAC; 
also known as DIABLO) mimetic and IAP antagonist 
LCL161 during T cell activation with anti­CD3­ and 
anti­CD28­coated beads has also been shown to expand 
antigen­specific CD8+ T cells in vitro and enhance IL­2 
and TNF secretion by T cells90. As is the case with mTOR 
inhibition, timing and dose of treatment can lead to dis­
tinct effects, as seen in a model of acute LCMV infec­
tion in which high­dose IAP antagonists inhibited the 
expansion of viral antigen­specific T cells91. The hypoth­
esis that IAP antagonism may potentiate the efficacy 
 
of immune checkpoint inhibitors is currently being 
 
clinically tested (TABLE 1).
TEC family kinases. The TEC family of non­ 
receptor tyrosine kinases includes five members: Bruton 
tyrosine kinase (BTK), tyrosine kinase expressed in 
hepatocellular carcinoma (TEC), IL­2­inducible T cell 
kinase (ITK), bone­marrow tyrosine kinase gene in 
chromosome X (BMX) and resting lymphocyte kinase 
(RLK; also known as TXK)92. Kinases of the TEC fam­
ily are expressed abundantly in haematopoietic cells 
and mediate antigen receptor signalling. ITK and BTK 
have drawn considerable attention as potential oncol­
ogy drug targets. BTK propagates B cell signalling 
 
and is crucial for the maintenance of humoral 
 
immunity and some myeloid cell functions. Defective 
BTK results in X-linked agammaglobulinaemia93, and dys­
regulation of BTK is associated with autoimmune dis­
ease94 and B cell malignancies95. Ibrutinib, an irreversible 
oral BTK inhibitor, is approved for the treatment of 
leukaemia, mantle cell lymphoma and Waldenström 
macroglobulinaemia. In these settings, ibrutinib is likely 
effective owing to cell­autonomous consequences of 
BTK inhibition. However, preclinical data demonstrate 
that ibrutinib may also potentiate antitumour immune 
responses96. The immune­mediated antitumour effects 
of ibrutinib may not be mediated primarily through 
BTK inhibition, but instead through the inhibition of 
ITK, which drives TCR signalling96,97, is crucial in reg­
ulating T cell differentiation and is required for IL­17A 
production98. The inhibition of ITK favours the gener­
ation of TH1 cells99 and thus the production of IFNγ, a 
response that is associated with antitumour immunity. 
In preclinical mouse models of lymphoma, breast can­
cer and colon carcinoma, ibrutinib markedly enhanced 
the antitumour effect of anti­PDL1 therapy100. Clinical 
trials that examine ibrutinib in combination with 
immune checkpoint inhibitors in both haematological 
malignancies77,101–104 and solid tumours105 are under way 
(TABLE 1). Further mechanistic research is required to 
REVIEWS
8 | ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION 
www.nature.com/nrc
© Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved
 TH17 cell
(T helper 17 cell). A type of 
activated CD4+ T cell that 
promotes neutrophil activation, 
immunity to pathogens and 
inflammation.
understand whether ITK or some alternative target is 
crucial for the potentiation of checkpoint inhibitors 
 
by ibrutinib.
MALT1. The paracaspase mucosa­associated lymphoid 
tissue lymphoma translocation 1 (MALT1) is a com­
ponent of the caspase recruitment domain (CARD)­
containing MAGUK 1 (CARMA1; also known as 
CARD11)–BCL­10–MALT1 (CBM) complex that relays 
TCR­ and B cell receptor­mediated initiation of canoni­
cal NF­κB signalling, with described roles as a scaffold­
ing protein and as a protease. The scaffolding role of 
MALT1 in the CBM signalling complex is crucial for 
TCR­mediated T lymphocyte activation, proliferation 
and cytokine production106–108 (FIG. 2). Correspondingly, 
the cIAP2–MALT1 fusion protein results in upreg­
ulation of NF­κB signalling and is associated with 
mucosa­associated lymphoid tumours (MALT lympho­
mas)109,110. Similarly, hyperactive NF­κB signalling is the 
hallmark of the activated B cell­like subtype of DLBCL 
(ABC­DLBCL). Dysregulation of MALT1 is a common 
feature of ABC­DLBCL111–113. In addition to its role in 
 
T and B cells, MALT1 pleiotropically regulates the immune 
response with described roles in NK, mast and myeloid 
cells114–118. MALT1­mediated proteolytic cleavage of sev­
eral substrates, including A20 (also known as TNFAIP3), 
the deubiquitinase CYLD and RELB (an NF­κB subunit) 
serves to increase NF­κB activity119. MALT1­mediated 
degradation of RNA­binding proteins such as the 
roquins and regnase 1 (also known as ZC3H12A) 
regulates TH17 cell differentiation, which can have a 
 
context­dependent impact on the antitumour response, 
with both immune­stimulatory and immune­inhibitory 
roles described for IL­17 in the TME119. Additionally, 
TCR­mediated alternative splicing of MALT1 RNA serves 
to modulate T cell activation120.
There has been considerable interest in the develop­
ment of pharmacological inhibitors of MALT1 pro­
teolytic activity based on the central role of MALT1 
in the pathogenesis of ABC­DLBCL and MALT 
lymphomas, and in the regulation of T cell function. 
 
Low­molecular­weight MALT1 inhibitors are effective 
in in vitro and in vivo models of ABC­DLBCL121,122, 
but further investigation is warranted to address 
whether appropriate dosage and sequencing of MALT1 
inhibitors will potentiate immune checkpoint block­
ade. The profound defect in Treg cell generation in 
MALT1­deficient mice suggests that MALT1 inhibition 
could enhance antitumour immunity123. However, mice 
deficient in MALT1 function also display inhibition of 
T cell proliferation and IL­2 secretion, suggesting that 
the complex roles of MALT1 in T cell biology require 
further understanding106,108,124,125. Efforts to uncouple 
the scaffolding and proteolytic roles of MALT1 led 
to reports demonstrating that genetically engineered 
mice expressing catalytically inactive MALT1 develop 
multi­organ inflammation124–126. Congenital MALT1 
mutations leading to MALT1 deficiency in humans are 
associated with combined immunodeficiency (CID), 
suggesting additional caution in the development of 
MALT1 inhibitors127,128.
Emerging preclinical and clinical data support the 
hypothesis that therapies designed to target tumour­ 
intrinsic growth mechanisms can directly affect the 
immune response, including signalling downstream 
of TCR engagement and subsequent T cell responses. 
Detailed dissection of these mechanisms in the context 
of the TME can help inform strategies for dose selec­
tion and timing, rational combinations and sequence 
of administration with potentially synergistic immuno­
therapies. Of note, several agents (that is, MEK inhibitors 
and mTOR inhibitors) that may inhibit T cell prolifer­
ation can also support expansion of CD8+ Teff cell or 
memory responses, suggesting that careful elucidation of 
mechanism will be crucial for their optimal application 
in cancer immunotherapy.
Modulation of the TME
Tumour development is accompanied by profound 
physical and structural changes to the surround­
ing tissues that result in a complex TME com 
prising 
immune, endothelial and mesenchymal cells, extra­
cellular matrix and metabolites129. The collabora­
tive interaction between cancer cells and stroma 
contributes to cancer growth and progression, and is an 
 
obstacle to anti 
tumour immunity130–132. Hallmarks 
of the TME include hypoxia, desmoplasia and high 
interstitial pressure133, which collaborate to restrict 
antitumour immune responses. Tissue fibrosis and an 
aberrant vasculature hamper immune cell infiltration 
and extra 
vasation to the tumour parenchyma134,135, and 
the function of those immune cells that may reach the 
tumour is impaired by molecules with potent immune­ 
modulatory activity secreted by endothelial and mesen­
chymal cells129. Thus, therapies designed to normalize 
the tissue patho 
physiology associated with the TME 
through, for example, the modulation of metabolites, 
growth factors and cytokines may create an environment 
that supports antitumour immune responses136 (FIG. 3).
Metabolites. Tumour cells that have high metabolic 
demands may compromise the function of certain 
populations of immune cells by competing for nutri­
ents. Glucose consumption by tumours meta 
bolically 
restricts the infiltration and function of antitumour 
T cells by modulating mTOR activity and IFNγ pro­
duction137. The efficacy of immune checkpoint inhib­
itors may reflect, at least in part, their impact on 
glucose metabolism. Blockade of PDL1 on tumour 
cells reduces glycolysis through downregulation of gly­
colytic enzymes and inhibition of mTOR activity. The 
precise mechanism by which PDL1 signals to mTOR 
remains unknown137. PD1 and CTLA4 inhibition is 
also associated with the restoration of glucose in the 
TME and has been shown to increase the glycolytic 
rate of activated T cells137. Nutrient deprivation and 
the accumulation of metabolites such as adenosine, 
kynurenine and lactic acid in the TME impair the cyto­
toxicity of Teff cells and promote the survival of immu­
nosuppressive cells such as Treg cells and MDSCs138. 
The stimulation of the A2a adenosine receptor (A2AR; 
also known as ADORA2A), the adenosine receptor 
REVIEWS
NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER 
 ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION | 9
© Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved
 NK
cell
CTL
Treg 
cell
MDSC
Tumour cells
TAM
• TGFβ
• ARG
• TGFβ
• IDO
• IL-10
• TGFβ
• TSLP
• TGFβ
• IDO
• TDO2
• ARG
• NO 
• ROS
• IDO
• IL-10
↓ Cytotoxic responses
↓ Diapedesis or
extravasation
↓ Infiltration
↑ Treg cell-mediated
suppression
↑ Treg cell
differentiation
CAF
ECM
TGFβ
VEGFA
IDO
Endothelium
Dendritic cell
A2AR
Adenosine
M-CSFR
M-CSF
LRP
WNT
MET
HGF
family member predominantly expressed on immune 
cells139, induces a Treg cell immuno 
suppressive pheno­
type, inhibits the proliferation, cytokine production 
and cytotoxicity of T cells and NK cells, and decreases 
antigen presentation by macrophages and DCs140,141. 
The combination of an adenosine receptor antag­
onist (SCH58261 or ZM241365) with an immune 
checkpoint inhibitor reduced established tumours 
and metastasis in the B16F10 mouse model of mela­
noma142–144. These data support non­redundant roles 
for adenosine and immune checkpoint molecules 
in the antitumour immune response and provide a 
rationale for testing this combination in the clinic. 
Recent studies have reported that A2AR­deficient 
TILs might have a shorter half­life in vivo than wild­
type T cells, suggesting that long­term A2AR blockade 
may interfere with the generation of immunological 
memory145. Therefore, dose and schedule of A2AR 
antagonists in the clinic might require careful con­
sideration. The A2AR antagonists CPI­444, PBF509 
and AZD4635 have been studied in Parkinson disease, 
and are currently undergoing cancer clinical trials in 
combination with immune checkpoint inhibitors146–149 
(TABLE 1). Therapeutic agents directed at other path­
ways that directly affect adenosine metabolism, 
including the A2b adenosine receptor (ADORA2B), 
CD73 (also known as NT5E) and CD39 (also known as 
ENTPD1) are under development, raising the possibil­
ity that simultaneous inhibition of multiple adenosin­
ergic pathways might result in additive or synergistic 
effects on the antitumour immune response.
The indoleamine 2,3­dioxygenase (IDO) family 
of haem­containing dioxygenases (IDO1, IDO2 and 
tryptophan 2,3­dioxygenase (TDO2)) is respon­
sible for the catabolism of tryptophan to kynure­
nine and additional metabolites that contribute to 
the generation and maintenance of the immuno­
suppressive TME in many types of cancer 150. IDO 
and TDO2 expression, which correlates with poor 
prognosis, has been detected in several tumour 
types151. Similar to adenosine­mediated immuno­
suppression, IDO activity leads to an impaired 
antitumour Teff cell response by promoting the dif­
ferentiation of Treg cells and decreasing DC func­
tion150. IDO blockade strongly synergizes with 
 
CTLA4 and PD1 or PDL1 antibodies in preclinical models 
 
and results in increased activation of intratumoural 
CD8+ T cells151,152, providing a strong justification 
to explore clinical combinations of IDO inhibitors 
and immune checkpoint therapy. Three IDO inhib­
itors have entered clinical trials in combination with 
immune checkpoint blockade (TABLE 1).
Growth factors and cytokines. M­CSF (also known as 
CSF1) and its receptor M­CSFR (also known as CSF1R) 
are crucial in recruiting and maintaining macrophages 
at sites of injury and tumour formation. An increase in 
CD68+ or CD163+ TAMs has been identified as an inde­
pendent predictor for poor prognosis for several types of 
cancer153–155. TAMs secrete pro­angiogenic growth fac­
tors and immunosuppressive cytokines156 that enhance 
the survival, proliferation, invasion and metastasis 
of tumour cells and generate a stroma that promotes 
tumour vascularization and suppresses antitumour 
immunity. Recent preclinical data demonstrate that it is 
possible to reverse IDO­induced immunosuppression 
by targeting MDSCs through M­CSFR blockade, and 
that inhibition of M­CSFR sensitizes IDO­expressing 
tumours to immune checkpoint blockade157. Therapeutic 
strategies to target the M­CSF regulatory pathway in the 
clinic include antibodies directed against either M­CSF 
(MCS110) or M­CSFR (RG7155; also known as emac­
tuzumab) and small molecules that inhibit M­CSFR 
Figure 3 | Modulation of the tumour immunosuppressive microenvironment. 
Tumour development is associated with the generation of a complex 
microenvironment comprising multiple cell types, extracellular matrix (ECM) and 
metabolic mediators. Each of these cellular and molecular components represents a 
considerable hurdle to cytotoxic lymphocytes and profoundly impinges on the ensuing 
antitumour immune responses. The vascular aberrations of solid tumours, fostered by 
the high levels of vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA), impair the diapedesis 
of T cells, thus limiting their extravasation. Transforming growth factor-β (TGFβ) 
broadly affects immune responses by acting on structural and cellular determinants of 
the tumour. Other factors such as macrophage-colony stimulating factor (M-CSF), 
hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) and WNT ligands can act on several myeloid cells and 
polarize them towards a more immunosuppressive phenotype. Metabolic mediators, 
and in particular adenosine and products of tryptophan catabolism (generated by 
indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) and tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase (TDO2) activity), 
contribute to the immunosuppressive environment, and their roles are pleiotropic. 
Therapeutic agents that target these growth factors or metabolic signalling  
pathways may normalize the tissue pathophysiology associated with the tumour 
microenvironment and help to promote a robust antitumour immune response. A2AR, 
A2a adenosine receptor; ARG, arginase; CAF, cancer-associated fibroblast; CTL, 
cytotoxic T lymphocyte; DC, dendritic cell; IL-10, interleukin-10; LRP
, low-density 
lipoprotein receptor-related protein; M-CSFR, M-CSF receptor; MDSC, 
myeloid-derived suppressor cell; NK cell, natural killer cell; NO, nitric oxide; ROS, 
reactive oxygen species; TAM, tumour-associated macrophage; Treg cell, T regulatory 
cell; TSLP
, thymic stromal lymphopoietin.
REVIEWS
10 | ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION 
www.nature.com/nrc
© Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved
 (BLZ945 and PLX3397, also known as pexi 
dartinib)158,159. 
BLZ945 modulates TAMs in vivo, resulting in the regres­
sion of established high­grade glioblastoma in a mouse 
model160,161. In other preclinical studies, the combina­
tion of insulin­like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF1R) 
or PI3K blockade with BLZ945 significantly prolonged 
overall survival of mice with otherwise refractory 
tumours due, in part, to antagonism of the activities of 
 
M­CSF­dependent TAMs161. The combination of BLZ945 
with immune checkpoint blockade is more efficacious 
than either single agent alone in a preclinical neuroblas­
toma model160. Both RG7155 and PLX3397 are in clinical 
development in solid tumours in combination with either 
PD1­ or PDL1­blocking antibodies (TABLE 1).
Overall, the increasing success derived from block­
ade of the M­CSF–M­CSFR signalling axis has re 
­
inforced the importance of TAM reprogramming for 
cancer immunotherapy and has motivated the craft­
ing of other targeted approaches aimed at containing 
TAM recruitment and/or immunosuppressive activity. 
In this context, CNTO 888 (also known as carlumab), 
a mAb directed against C­C motif chemokine ligand 2 
(CCL2), the chemokine that regulates the influx of 
circulating monocytes in tumour tissue, showed 
promising initial results in cancer patients162,163 but no 
significant antitumour responses164, and it has since 
been discontinued. Furthermore, preclinical mod­
els have shown that discontinuation of anti­CCL2 
treatment caused rebound influx of monocytes into 
the metastatic sites, which enhanced metastatic out­
growth165. This raises a cautionary note when con­
sidering anti­CCL2 agents as a therapeutic option 
for cancer. More recently, two studies have provided 
compelling evidence that TAM­mediated immune 
suppression in the TME may be reversed by target­
ing PI3Kγ in tumour­infiltrating myeloid cells. Using 
both genetic tools and pharmacological inhibitors, 
 
Kaneda et al.166 showed that PI3Kγ represents a molec­
ular switch in TAMs that initiates a transcriptional 
programme leading to immunosuppression. The 
authors demonstrated that PI3Kγ blockade is sufficient 
to drive robust antitumour immunity in preclinical 
animal models, and positively synergizes with check­
point inhibitors, data consistent with the findings of 
De Henau et al.167. A clinical trial designed to explore 
the safety and pharmacokinetics of a first­in­class 
PI3Kγ inhibitor IPI­549, alone and in combination 
with anti­PD1, has been initiated168 (TABLE 1).
Anti­angiogenic therapies, a standard­of­care for sev­
eral malignancies, are associated with positive immu­
nological changes in neoplastic tissues owing to their 
ability to normalize aberrant tumour vasculature169–171. 
Therapeutic agents that target vascular endothelial 
growth factor A (VEGFA) or its receptors, including 
bevacizumab, sorafenib and sunitinib, improve tissue 
perfusion, increase the numbers of intratumoural Teff 
cells and reduce accumulation of immuno 
suppressive 
Treg cells in renal cell carcinoma172,173. In addition, beva­
cizumab treatment has been correlated with enhanced 
tumour antigen presentation in patients with breast, lung 
and colorectal cancers174. Anti­angiogenic treatments 
may also be an effective strategy to potentiate thera­
peutic vaccines. For example, a significant increase 
in the prostate­specific antigen (PSA; also known as 
KLK3) doubling time was observed in patients with 
recurrent early­stage prostate cancer who received the 
autologous cell­based vaccine sipuleucel­T, which is 
directed against the antigen prostatic acid phosphatase 
(PAP; also known as ACPP), in combination with bev­
acizumab175. Furthermore, several studies reported 
that the combination of VEGFA or VEGF receptor 
inhibitors with immune checkpoint blockade can lead 
to clinical benefits. In metastatic melanoma, for exam­
ple, the combination of bevacizumab with ipilimumab 
improved immune cell infiltration and augmented effi­
cacy of CTLA4 blockade176 (TABLE 1). Synergistic com­
binations have been reported for bevacizumab with 
anti­PDL1 therapy177,178 and for sunitinib with anti­PD1 
therapy179 in patients with renal cell carcinoma.
The pleiotropic cytokine TGFβ, which is a key 
driver of myofibroblast differentiation and fibrosis in 
tumours, also directly suppresses effector immune cell 
activation180,181. Genetic or pharmacological inhibition 
of TGFβ in preclinical models drives immune activa­
tion in many conditions, including cancer, and syner­
gizes with various immunotherapeutic regimens182,183. 
The TGFβ mAb fresolimumab has been tested in 
patients with renal cell carcinoma or melanoma as a 
single agent, exhibiting preliminary evidence of anti­
tumour activity184, and is currently under evaluation 
in combination with radiation therapy for lung can­
cer185. Another ongoing clinical trial is examining 
whether a TGFβ receptor 1 low­molecular­weight 
tyrosine kinase inhibitor (galunisertib) may potenti­
ate the effects of PD1 blockade in several solid tumour 
 
indications186 (TABLE 1).
Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), the sole ligand for 
the HGF receptor MET, is present at high concentra­
tions in the TME of select tumours. MET activation 
increases tumour cell proliferation and invasiveness, 
and mediates resistance to therapies targeting EGFR187. 
HGF–MET signalling has been shown to cause 
human monocytes to differentiate into suppressive 
 
DC­like cells that secrete IL­10 and suppress 
CD4+CD25− Teff cells188. HGF is present in high con­
centrations in the blood of patients with CLL, in which 
bone marrow nurse­like cells and monocytes express 
functional MET. MET signalling increases IDO 
expression and IL­10 secretion to create an immuno­
suppressive milieu189, and inhibitors of MET signalling 
(for example, INC280 (also known as capmatinib)) 
are in clinical testing, including in combination with 
immune checkpoint inhibitors (TABLE 1).
Increased WNTβ–catenin signalling has been asso­
ciated with multiple tumour types, including metastatic 
melanoma190. Melanoma­derived WNT ligands increase 
IDO activity in DCs, thereby promoting differentia­
tion to produce Treg cells191. In a genetically modified 
 
mouse model of melanoma, signalling through the 
WNT–β­catenin pathway increased activating tran­
scription factor 3 (ATF3) expression and suppressed 
CCL4 production, which hindered DC recruitment 
REVIEWS
NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER 
 ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION | 11
© Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved
 Nature Reviews | Cancer
Dendritic cell
Anthracycline
• ATP
• Type 1 IFN
• CALR
• HMGB1
• TLRs
T cell
Tumour 
cell
Dying 
tumour cell
Immunogenic cell death
(ICD). A form of cell death that 
is characterized by the release 
of damage-associated 
molecular patterns (DAMPs) 
and results in an 
immunostimulatory response.
Damage-associated 
molecular patterns
(DAMPs). Refers to host-derived 
molecules such as calreticulin, 
high mobility group box 1 
protein (HMGB1), heat shock 
proteins, ATP and DNA that 
initiate and maintain an 
inflammatory response.
and priming of antitumour CD8+ cytotoxic T cells192. 
Together, these findings suggest that the WNT–β­catenin 
 
pathway may have a role in primary resistance to 
immune checkpoint blockade192, and support combin­
ing WNT inhibitors (which are in clinical development) 
with immunotherapy193.
The TME represents a therapeutically crucial obsta­
cle to antitumour immunity and may limit the clinical 
benefits of immunotherapies. Nevertheless, the meta­
bolic and biochemical pathologies associated with 
the TME hold invaluable prognostic and response­ 
predictive information, and represent a therapeu­
tically attractive avenue to augment the efficacy of 
 
current and future immune­based therapeutic strate­
gies. Furthermore, as our understanding of the biol­
ogy of the TME grows, it is likely that new regulatory 
nodes will be identified, leading to the development of 
novel targeted therapies.
Chemotherapy and radiation therapy
The efficacy of chemotherapies has historically been 
thought to rest on their ability to autonomously block 
tumour cell division and promote tumour cell killing 
through the disruption of DNA replication, cellular 
metabolism or microtubule assembly. Over the past dec­
ade, however, preclinical and clinical data have emerged 
suggesting that certain conventional chemotherapies 
may act in part through immune­stimulatory mecha­
nisms. For example, anthracyclines drive a regulated, 
immunogenic cell death (ICD) phenotype and directly 
block immunosuppressive pathways in the TME194. In 
brief, ICD is associated with an adaptive stress response 
that favours the maturation of DCs, including the expo­
sure of the endoplasmic reticulum chaperone calreti­
culin, release of ATP and stimulation of a type I IFN 
inflammatory response (FIG. 4). In a genetically engi­
neered mouse model of lung adenocarcinoma, a com­
bination of oxaliplatin and cyclophosphamide rendered 
the tumours, which lacked T cell infiltrates, sensitive to 
treatment with PD1 and CTLA4 antibodies195. These 
data are consistent with the clinical observation that the 
addition of ipilimumab to paclitaxel and carboplatin 
in first­line treatment of NSCLC modestly improved 
progression­free survival and overall survival196,197. 
Important lines of future research will include under­
standing whether targeted therapies also engender 
ICD of tumour cells, and mechanisms of resistance to 
immunogenic chemotherapy. For example, recent pre­
clinical data argue that three different mouse models of 
 
castration­resistant prostate cancer are resistant 
 
to oxaliplatin, in part, owing to the infiltration of 
 
immunosuppressive B cells into the TME198.
Emerging data also suggest that, in certain clinical 
scenarios, immune checkpoint therapy may replace 
chemotherapy. In previously untreated patients with 
advanced NSCLC and expression of PDL1 on at least 
50% of their tumour cells, PD1 antibody treatment was 
associated with a significant improvement in efficacy 
and reduced adverse events relative to standard­of­care 
chemotherapy199. Moreover, preliminary results sug­
gest that combining chemotherapy and PD1 blockade 
as first­line therapy for patients with advanced non­ 
squamous NSCLC might achieve greater antitumour 
effects than either treatment alone200.
Local radiation therapy is also thought to provide 
therapeutic benefit primarily by generating irreparable 
DNA damage and inhibiting tumour cells from further 
replication and division. However, recent data argue 
that radiation therapy can result in a multiplicity of 
immune­stimulating functions, including the release 
 
of TAAs and damage-associated molecular patterns 
(DAMPs), which together favour immune cell prim­
ing and the destruction of an immunosuppressive 
tumour­supporting stroma201. Several clinical case 
reports document that the combination of local irra­
diation and ipilimumab in patients with melanoma or 
NSCLC can result in the resolution of metastatic lesions 
distant from the locally irradiated tumour202–204. An 
elegant study delineated the contribution of radiation 
therapy and immune­based therapies to efficacy and 
resistance in patients with melanoma and in mouse 
models of melanoma: the antitumour activity of com­
bined CTLA4 antibodies and radiation therapy was 
limited through IFN­driven upregulation of PDL1 
expression, whereas the addition of PD1 blockade 
 
markedly increased therapeutic efficacy205.
Challenges for combination therapies
The challenges associated with developing rational 
combinations of targeted, conventional and immune­
based therapies can be organized into three broad, 
interdependent areas: the requirement for a deeper 
understanding of the impact that targeted, conven­
tional and immune­based therapies have on the 
patient’s immune system; optimization of efficacy, 
toxicity and tolerability (therapeutic index) through 
appropriate dosing and sequencing; and a robust 
approach to prioritizing and resourcing the myr­
iad possibilities for combination therapies. The first 
challenge can be addressed, in part, by thoroughly 
interrogating pre­ and on­treatment clinical samples 
obtained from patients undergoing combination ther­
apy with detailed immune­assessment techniques, 
Figure 4 | Mechanisms of immunogenic cell death. The treatment of tumours with, for 
example, anthracycline-based chemotherapy can elicit an adaptive stress response that 
is accompanied by immune-stimulating pathways including: expression of type 1 
interferon (IFN); secretion of ATP; exposure of calreticulin (CALR) on the outer plasma 
membrane surface; and release of high mobility group box 1 (HMGB1). These 
representative danger-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) are recognized by  
pattern-recognition receptors such as Toll-like receptors (TLRs) expressed on 
antigen-presenting cells. Collectively, these DAMPs, in collaboration with 
tumour-associated antigens, drive dendritic cell maturation and elicit an antitumour 
immune response that can potentially mediate antitumour immunity.
REVIEWS
12 | ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION 
www.nature.com/nrc
© Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved
 and making sure that trials are powered appro­
priately to extract meaningful information from 
those samples. The data gleaned from these patient­ 
derived samples will inform target discovery and the 
development of more accurate preclinical models, and 
will identify appropriate thera 
peutic combinations 
to further develop clinically. However, information 
from preclinical and translational data alone will not 
completely limit the exponential number of therapeu­
tic agent, dose and sequencing possibilities. Toxicity, 
tolerability and robust efficacy data from small, well­ 
designed trials will also be required to inform further 
clinical development of combination therapies. The 
oncology research community will need to challenge 
the value of investing substantial resources in combina­
tion therapies of incremental benefit and focus efforts 
instead on those combinations that result in transfor­
mation of standard­of­care. Finally, acceleration of the 
emerging approaches to collaborative efforts between 
academic, industry, government and non­profit 
 
institutions will be required to increase the investment, 
share the risk and access therapeutic agents required to 
fully develop an armamentarium of combination treat­
ments. Wise and imaginative use of emerging tech­
nologies and therapeutics that are of unprecedented 
 
quantity and quality will likely prove crucial to identi­
fying treatments that will transform the care of larger 
numbers of cancer patients.
1. 
Saglio, G. et al. Nilotinib versus imatinib for newly 
diagnosed chronic myeloid leukemia. N. Engl. J. Med. 
362, 2251–2259 (2010).
2. 
Long, G. V. et al. Overall survival and durable 
responses in patients with BRAF V600-mutant 
metastatic melanoma receiving dabrafenib combined 
with trametinib. J. Clin. Oncol. 34, 871–878 (2016).
3. 
Planchard, D. et al. Dabrafenib plus trametinib in 
patients with previously treated BRAF(V600E)-mutant 
metastatic non-small cell lung cancer: an open-label, 
multicentre phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol. 17, 984–993 
(2016).
4. 
Shepherd, F. A. et al. Erlotinib in previously treated 
non-small-cell lung cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 353, 
123–132 (2005).
5. 
Shaw, A. T. et al. Ceritinib in ALK-rearranged non-
small-cell lung cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 370,  
1189–1197 (2014).
6. 
Sharma, P. & Allison, J. P. The future of immune 
checkpoint therapy. Science 348, 56–61 (2015).
7. 
Topalian, S. L., Drake, C. G. & Pardoll, D. M. Immune 
checkpoint blockade: a common denominator 
approach to cancer therapy. Cancer Cell 27, 450–461 
(2015).
8. 
Coley, W. B. The treatment of malignant tumors by 
repeated inoculations of erysipelas. With a report of 
ten original cases. Am. J. Med. Sci. 105, 487–511 
(1893).
9. 
Mellman, I., Coukos, G. & Dranoff, G. Cancer 
immunotherapy comes of age. Nature 480, 480–489 
(2011).
10. Chen, D. S. & Mellman, I. Oncology meets 
immunology: the cancer-immunity cycle. Immunity 39, 
1–10 (2013).
11. Andtbacka, R. H. et al. Talimogene laherparepvec 
improves durable response rate in patients with 
advanced melanoma. J. Clin. Oncol. 33, 2780–2788 
(2015).
12. Mahoney, K. M., Rennert, P. D. & Freeman, G. J. 
Combination cancer immunotherapy and new 
immunomodulatory targets. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 
14, 561–584 (2015).
13. Fesnak, A. D., June, C. H. & Levine, B. L. Engineered 
T cells: the promise and challenges of cancer 
immunotherapy. Nat. Rev. Cancer 16, 566–581 
(2016).
14. Gubin, M. M. & Schreiber, R. D. The odds of 
immunotherapy success. Science 350, 158–159 
(2015).
15. Van Allen, E. M. et al. Genomic correlates of response 
to CTLA-4 blockade in metastatic melanoma. Science 
350, 207–211 (2015).
16. Morales, A., Eidinger, D. & Bruce, A. W. Intracavitary 
Bacillus Calmette-Guerin in the treatment of 
superficial bladder tumors. J. Urol. 116, 180–183 
(1976).
17. Stary, G. et al. Tumoricidal activity of TLR7/8-activated 
inflammatory dendritic cells. J. Exp. Med. 204,  
1441–1451 (2007).
18. Trinchieri, G. & Santoli, D. Anti-viral activity induced 
by culturing lymphocytes with tumor-derived or virus-
transformed cells. Enhancement of human natural 
killer cell activity by interferon and antagonistic 
inhibition of susceptibility of target cells to lysis. 
J. Exp. Med. 147, 1314–1333 (1978).
19. Lebwohl, M. et al. Imiquimod 5% cream for the 
treatment of actinic keratosis: results from two 
phase III, randomized, double-blind, parallel group, 
vehicle-controlled trials. J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 50, 
714–721 (2004).
20. Adams, S. et al. Topical TLR7 agonist imiquimod can 
induce immune-mediated rejection of skin metastases 
in patients with breast cancer. Clin. Cancer Res. 18, 
6748–6757 (2012).
21. Dudek, A. Z. et al. First in human phase I trial of 
852A, a novel systemic toll-like receptor 7 agonist, to 
activate innate immune responses in patients with 
advanced cancer. Clin. Cancer Res. 13, 7119–7125 
(2007).
22. Northfelt, D. W. et al. A phase I dose-finding study of 
the novel Toll-like receptor 8 agonist VTX-2337 in 
adult subjects with advanced solid tumors or 
lymphoma. Clin. Cancer Res. 20, 3683–3691 (2014).
23. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT01294293 (2014).
24. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02180698 (2017).
25. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02668770 (2016).
26. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02556463 (2016).
27. Ishikawa, H. & Barber, G. N. STING is an endoplasmic 
reticulum adaptor that facilitates innate immune 
signalling. Nature 455, 674–678 (2008).
28. Corrales, L. et al. Direct activation of STING in the 
tumor microenvironment leads to potent and systemic 
tumor regression and immunity. Cell Rep. 11,  
1018–1030 (2015).
This paper demonstrates that direct activation of 
STING through intratumoural administration of 
selective agonists induces regression of established 
tumours in mice, generates systemic immune 
responses capable of rejecting distant metastases 
(abscopal effect) and results in an antitumour 
immune memory response.
29. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02675439 (2016).
30. Duewell, P. et al. RIG-I-like helicases induce 
immunogenic cell death of pancreatic cancer cells and 
sensitize tumors toward killing by CD8+ T cells. Cell 
Death Differ. 21, 1825–1837 (2014).
31. Poeck, H. et al. 5ʹ-triphosphate-siRNA: turning gene 
silencing and Rig-I activation against melanoma. Nat. 
Med. 14, 1256–1263 (2008).
32. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02364986 (2016).
33. Besch, R. et al. Proapoptotic signaling induced by 
RIG-I and MDA-5 results in type I interferon-
independent apoptosis in human melanoma cells. 
J. Clin. Invest. 119, 2399–2411 (2009).
34. He, W. et al. TLR4 signaling promotes immune escape 
of human lung cancer cells by inducing 
immunosuppressive cytokines and apoptosis 
resistance. Mol. Immunol. 44, 2850–2859 (2007).
35. Dawson, M. A. & Kouzarides, T. Cancer epigenetics: 
from mechanism to therapy. Cell 150, 12–27 
(2012).
36. Newbold, A., Falkenberg, K. J., Prince, M. H. & 
Johnstone, R. W. How do tumor cells respond to HDAC 
inhibition? FEBS J. 283, 4032–4046 (2016).
37. Zahnow, C. A. et al. Inhibitors of DNA methylation, 
histone deacetylation, and histone demethylation: a 
perfect combination for cancer therapy. Adv. Cancer 
Res. 130, 55–111 (2016).
38. Terranova-Barberio, M., Thomas, S. & Munster, P. N. 
Epigenetic modifiers in immunotherapy: a focus on 
checkpoint inhibitors. Immunotherapy 8, 705–719 
(2016).
39. West, A. C., Smyth, M. J. & Johnstone, R. W. The 
anticancer effects of HDAC inhibitors require the 
immune system. Oncoimmunology 3, e27414 (2014).
40. Kim, K. et al. Eradication of metastatic mouse cancers 
resistant to immune checkpoint blockade by 
suppression of myeloid-derived cells. Proc. Natl Acad. 
Sci. USA 111, 11774–11779 (2014).
41. Shen, L. & Pili, R. Class I histone deacetylase inhibition 
is a novel mechanism to target regulatory T cells in 
immunotherapy. Oncoimmunology 1, 948–950 
(2012).
42. Karpf, A. R. et al. Limited gene activation in tumor and 
normal epithelial cells treated with the DNA 
methyltransferase inhibitor 5-aza-2ʹ-deoxycytidine. 
Mol. Pharmacol. 65, 18–27 (2004).
43. Karpf, A. R. et al. Inhibition of DNA methyltransferase 
stimulates the expression of signal transducer and 
activator of transcription 1, 2, and 3 genes in colon 
tumor cells. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 96,  
14007–14012 (1999).
44. Li, H. et al. Immune regulation by low doses of the 
DNA methyltransferase inhibitor 5-azacitidine in 
common human epithelial cancers. Oncotarget 5, 
587–598 (2014).
45. Wang, L. et al. Decitabine enhances lymphocyte 
migration and function and synergizes with CTLA-4 
blockade in a murine ovarian cancer model. Cancer 
Immunol. Res. 3, 1030–1041 (2015).
46. Chiappinelli, K. B. et al. Inhibiting DNA methylation 
causes an interferon response in cancer via dsRNA 
including endogenous retroviruses. Cell 162,  
974–986 (2015).
This paper illustrates that, in ovarian cancer, 
DNMT inhibitors can upregulate hypermethylated 
ERVs, which activate an immune signalling 
response through the viral defence pathway. 
Additionally, in patients with melanoma treated 
with immune checkpoint inhibitors, a high viral 
defence signature is associated with durable 
clinical response, suggesting that DNMT inhibitors 
may sensitize patients to treatment with 
immunotherapy.
47. Roulois, D. et al. DNA-demethylating agents target 
colorectal cancer cells by inducing viral mimicry by 
endogenous transcripts. Cell 162, 961–973 (2015).
This paper demonstrates that the DNMT inhibitor 
azacitidine induces dsRNAs derived, in part, from 
ERVs that activate the mitochondrial antiviral RNA 
recognition pathway to produce an antitumour 
immune response.
48. Dewannieux, M. & Heidmann, T. Endogenous 
retroviruses: acquisition, amplification and taming of 
genome invaders. Curr. Opin. Virol. 3, 646–656 
(2013).
49. Kassiotis, G. & Stoye, J. P. Immune responses to 
endogenous retroelements: taking the bad with the 
good. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 16, 207–219 (2016).
50. Thompson, P. J., Macfarlan, T. S. & Lorincz, M. C. Long 
terminal repeats: from parasitic elements to building 
blocks of the transcriptional regulatory repertoire. 
Mol. Cell 62, 766–776 (2016).
51. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT01928576 (2016).
REVIEWS
NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER 
 ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION | 13
© Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved
 52. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02608437 (2015).
53. Margueron, R. & Reinberg, D. The Polycomb complex 
PRC2 and its mark in life. Nature 469, 343–349 
(2011).
54. Nagarsheth, N. et al. PRC2 epigenetically silences 
TH1-type chemokines to suppress effector T-cell 
trafficking in colon cancer. Cancer Res. 76, 275–282 
(2016).
55. Peng, D. et al. Epigenetic silencing of TH1-type 
chemokines shapes tumour immunity and 
immunotherapy. Nature 527, 249–253 (2015).
This paper demonstrates that, in ovarian cancer 
mouse models, inhibition of EZH2 or DNMT1 
reverses the repression of TH1‑type chemokines 
CXCL9 and CXCL10, increases T cell infiltrates into 
tumours and sensitizes to anti‑PDL1 therapy.
56. Kim, K. H. & Roberts, C. W. Targeting EZH2 in cancer. 
Nat. Med. 22, 128–134 (2016).
57. Epizyme (2016). Epizyme initiates collaboration on 
combination trial of tazemetostat and Tecentriq™ 
(atezolizumab) for treatment of non-Hodgkin 
lymphoma. http://amda-1rbic2.client.shareholder.
com/releasedetail.cfm?ReleaseID=976750 (2016).
58. Hon, G. C. et al. Global DNA hypomethylation coupled 
to repressive chromatin domain formation and gene 
silencing in breast cancer. Genome Res. 22, 246–258 
(2012).
59. Shi, Y. et al. Histone demethylation mediated by the 
nuclear amine oxidase homolog LSD1. Cell 119,  
941–953 (2004).
60. Harris, W. J. et al. The histone demethylase KDM1A 
sustains the oncogenic potential of MLL-AF9 leukemia 
stem cells. Cancer Cell 21, 473–487 (2012).
61. Schenk, T. et al. Inhibition of the LSD1 (KDM1A) 
demethylase reactivates the all-trans-retinoic acid 
differentiation pathway in acute myeloid leukemia. 
Nat. Med. 18, 605–611 (2012).
62. Huse, M. The T-cell-receptor signaling network. J. Cell 
Sci. 122, 1269–1273 (2009).
63. DeSilva, D. R. et al. Inhibition of mitogen-activated 
protein kinase kinase blocks T cell proliferation but 
does not induce or prevent anergy. J. Immunol. 160, 
4175–4181 (1998).
64. D’Souza, W. N., Chang, C. F., Fischer, A. M., Li, M. & 
Hedrick, S. M. The Erk2 MAPK regulates CD8 T cell 
proliferation and survival. J. Immunol. 181,  
7617–7629 (2008).
65. Su, B., Cheng, J., Yang, J. & Guo, Z. MEKK2 is 
required for T-cell receptor signals in JNK activation 
and interleukin-2 gene expression. J. Biol. Chem. 276, 
14784–14790 (2001).
66. Liu, L. et al. The BRAF and MEK inhibitors dabrafenib 
and trametinib: effects on immune function and in 
combination with immunomodulatory antibodies 
targeting PD-1, PD-L1, and CTLA-4. Clin. Cancer Res. 
21, 1639–1651 (2015).
67. Ebert, P. J. et al. MAP kinase inhibition promotes T 
cell and anti-tumor activity in combination with 
PD-L1 checkpoint blockade. Immunity 44, 609–621 
(2016).
This paper demonstrates that, although inhibition 
of MEK blocks naive CD8+ T cell priming in the 
lymph node, in the TME, MEK inhibition increases 
antigen‑specific CD8+ T cells, protects TILs from 
death and combines with anti‑PDL1 therapy to 
generate durable tumour regression in mouse 
models.
68. Bendell, J. C. et al. Clinical activity and safety of 
cobimetinib (cobi) and atezolizumab in colorectal 
cancer (CRC). J. Clin. Oncol. 34, abstr. 3502 (2016).
69. Ribas, A., Hodi, F. S., Callahan, M., Konto, C. & 
Wolchok, J. Hepatotoxicity with combination of 
vemurafenib and ipilimumab. N. Engl. J. Med. 368, 
1365–1366 (2013).
This letter outlines hepatic adverse events in a 
clinical study evaluating the concurrent use of the 
BRAF inhibitor vemurafenib and the CTLA4 
inhibitor ipilimumab, highlighting the dosing and 
sequencing challenges of combining targeted and 
immune‑based therapies.
70. Gamper, C. J. & Powell, J. D. All PI3Kinase signaling is 
not mTOR: dissecting mTOR-dependent and 
independent signaling pathways in T cells. Front. 
Immunol. 3, 312 (2012).
71. Pollizzi, K. N. & Powell, J. D. Regulation of T cells by 
mTOR: the known knowns and the known unknowns. 
Trends Immunol. 36, 13–20 (2015).
72. Peng, W. et al. Loss of PTEN promotes resistance to T 
cell-mediated immunotherapy. Cancer Discov. 6,  
202–216 (2016).
73. Patton, D. T. et al. Cutting edge: the phosphoinositide 
3-kinase p110 delta is critical for the function of 
CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ regulatory T cells. J. Immunol. 
177, 6598–6602 (2006).
74. Patton, D. T., Wilson, M. D., Rowan, W. C., 
Soond, D. R. & Okkenhaug, K. The PI3K p110δ 
regulates expression of CD38 on regulatory T cells. 
PLoS ONE 6, e17359 (2011).
75. Liu, D. et al. The p110δ isoform of phosphatidylinositol 
3-kinase controls susceptibility to Leishmania major 
by regulating expansion and tissue homing of 
regulatory T cells. J. Immunol. 183, 1921–1933 
(2009).
76. Ali, K. et al. Inactivation of PI(3)K p110δ breaks 
regulatory T-cell-mediated immune tolerance to 
cancer. Nature 510, 407–411 (2014).
This paper demonstrates that inactivation of 
p110δ, the catalytic subunit of PI3Kδ, in Treg cells 
inhibits their suppressive function and stimulates 
CD8+ cytotoxic T cells to induce tumour regression.
77. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02332980 (2016).
78. Furman, R. R. et al. Idelalisib and rituximab in 
relapsed chronic lymphocytic leukemia. N. Engl. 
J. Med. 370, 997–1007 (2014).
79. Gopal, A. K. et al. PI3Kδ inhibition by idelalisib in 
patients with relapsed indolent lymphoma. N. Engl. 
J. Med. 370, 1008–1018 (2014).
80. Araki, K., Ellebedy, A. H. & Ahmed, R. TOR in the 
immune system. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 23, 707–715 
(2011).
81. Araki, K. et al. mTOR regulates memory CD8 T-cell 
differentiation. Nature 460, 108–112 (2009).
82. Wang, Y., Wang, X. Y., Subjeck, J. R., Shrikant, P. A. & 
Kim, H. L. Temsirolimus, an mTOR inhibitor, enhances 
anti-tumour effects of heat shock protein cancer 
vaccines. Br. J. Cancer 104, 643–652 (2011).
83. Jiang, Q. et al. mTOR kinase inhibitor AZD8055 
enhances the immunotherapeutic activity of an 
agonist CD40 antibody in cancer treatment. Cancer 
Res. 71, 4074–4084 (2011).
84. Procaccini, C. et al. An oscillatory switch in mTOR 
kinase activity sets regulatory T cell responsiveness. 
Immunity 33, 929–941 (2010).
85. Wang, Y. et al. Regulatory T cells require mammalian 
target of rapamycin signaling to maintain both 
homeostasis and alloantigen-driven proliferation in 
lymphocyte-replete mice. J. Immunol. 186,  
2809–2818 (2011).
86. Mannick, J. B. et al. mTOR inhibition improves 
immune function in the elderly. Sci. Transl Med. 6, 
268ra179 (2014).
87. Fesik, S. W. Promoting apoptosis as a strategy for 
cancer drug discovery. Nat. Rev. Cancer 5, 876–885 
(2005).
88. Dougan, M. et al. IAP inhibitors enhance 
co-stimulation to promote tumor immunity. J. Exp. 
Med. 207, 2195–2206 (2010).
89. Varfolomeev, E. & Vucic, D. (Un)expected roles of 
c-IAPs in apoptotic and NFκB signaling pathways. Cell 
Cycle 7, 1511–1521 (2008).
90. Knights, A. J., Fucikova, J., Pasam, A., Koernig, S.  
& Cebon, J. Inhibitor of apoptosis protein (IAP) 
antagonists demonstrate divergent 
immunomodulatory properties in human immune 
subsets with implications for combination therapy. 
Cancer Immunol. Immunother. 62, 321–335 
(2013).
91. Gentle, I. E. et al. Inhibitors of apoptosis proteins 
(IAPs) are required for effective T-cell expansion/
survival during antiviral immunity in mice. Blood 123, 
659–668 (2014).
92. Horwood, N. J., Urbaniak, A. M. & Danks, L. Tec family 
kinases in inflammation and disease. Int. Rev. 
Immunol. 31, 87–103 (2012).
93. Thomas, J. D. et al. Colocalization of X-linked 
agammaglobulinemia and X-linked immunodeficiency 
genes. Science 261, 355–358 (1993).
94. Kil, L. P. et al. Btk levels set the threshold for B-cell 
activation and negative selection of autoreactive 
B cells in mice. Blood 119, 3744–3756 (2012).
95. Hendriks, R. W., Yuvaraj, S. & Kil, L. P. Targeting 
Bruton’s tyrosine kinase in B cell malignancies. Nat. 
Rev. Cancer 14, 219–232 (2014).
96. Dubovsky, J. A. et al. Ibrutinib is an irreversible 
molecular inhibitor of ITK driving a Th1-selective 
pressure in T lymphocytes. Blood 122, 2539–2549 
(2013).
97. Liao, X. C. & Littman, D. R. Altered T cell receptor 
signaling and disrupted T cell development in mice 
lacking Itk. Immunity 3, 757–769 (1995).
98. Andreotti, A. H., Schwartzberg, P. L., Joseph, R. E. & 
Berg, L. J. T-Cell signaling regulated by the Tec family 
kinase, Itk. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 2, 
a002287 (2010).
99. Fowell, D. J. et al. Impaired NFATc translocation and 
failure of Th2 development in Itk-deficient CD4+ 
T cells. Immunity 11, 399–409 (1999).
100. Sagiv-Barfi, I. et al. Therapeutic antitumor immunity 
by checkpoint blockade is enhanced by ibrutinib, an 
inhibitor of both BTK and ITK. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 
USA 112, E966–E972 (2015).
This paper demonstrates that ibrutinib, an inhibitor 
of the TEC family members BTK and ITK, in 
combination with PDL1 inhibition suppresses tumour 
growth in mouse models of lymphoma that are 
insensitive to ibrutinib alone and in solid tumours. 
These data suggest that this combination can be 
used clinically in tumours other than lymphoma.
101. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/nCT02420912 (2016).
102. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02401048 (2016).
103. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02329847 (2016).
104. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02733042 (2016).
105. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02403271 (2017).
106. Ruefli-Brasse, A. A., French, D. M. & Dixit, V. M. 
Regulation of NF-κB-dependent lymphocyte activation 
and development by paracaspase. Science 302, 
1581–1584 (2003).
107. Ruland, J. et al. Bcl10 is a positive regulator of 
antigen receptor-induced activation of NF-κB and 
neural tube closure. Cell 104, 33–42 (2001).
108. Ruland, J., Duncan, G. S., Wakeham, A. & Mak, T. W. 
Differential requirement for Malt1 in T and B cell 
antigen receptor signaling. Immunity 19, 749–758 
(2003).
109. Hosokawa, Y., Suzuki, H., Nakagawa, M., Lee, T. H. & 
Seto, M. API2-MALT1 fusion protein induces 
transcriptional activation of the API2 gene through 
NF-kappaB binding elements: evidence for a positive 
feed-back loop pathway resulting in unremitting NF-κB 
activation. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 334, 
51–60 (2005).
110. Dierlamm, J. et al. The apoptosis inhibitor gene API2 
and a novel 18q gene, MLT, are recurrently rearranged 
in the t(11;18)(q21;q21) associated with mucosa-
associated lymphoid tissue lymphomas. Blood 93, 
3601–3609 (1999).
111. Dierlamm, J. et al. Gain of chromosome region 18q21 
including the MALT1 gene is associated with the 
activated B-cell-like gene expression subtype and 
increased BCL2 gene dosage and protein expression 
in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Haematologica 93, 
688–696 (2008).
112. Hailfinger, S. et al. Essential role of MALT1 protease 
activity in activated B cell-like diffuse large B-cell 
lymphoma. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 106,  
19946–19951 (2009).
113. Ngo, V. N. et al. A loss-of-function RNA interference 
screen for molecular targets in cancer. Nature 441, 
106–110 (2006).
114. Rebeaud, F. et al. The proteolytic activity of the 
paracaspase MALT1 is key in T cell activation. Nat. 
Immunol. 9, 272–281 (2008).
115. Jeltsch, K. M. et al. Cleavage of roquin and regnase-1 
by the paracaspase MALT1 releases their 
cooperatively repressed targets to promote TH17 
differentiation. Nat. Immunol. 15, 1079–1089 
(2014).
116. Klein, T. et al. The paracaspase MALT1 cleaves HOIL1 
reducing linear ubiquitination by LUBAC to dampen 
lymphocyte NF-κB signalling. Nat. Commun. 6, 8777 
(2015).
117. Uehata, T. et al. Malt1-induced cleavage of regnase-1 
in CD4+ helper T cells regulates immune activation. 
Cell 153, 1036–1049 (2013).
118. Coornaert, B. et al. T cell antigen receptor stimulation 
induces MALT1 paracaspase-mediated cleavage of the 
NF-κB inhibitor A20. Nat. Immunol. 9, 263–271 
(2008).
119. Bailey, S. R. et al. Th17 cells in cancer: the ultimate 
identity crisis. Front. Immunol. 5, 276 (2014).
120. Meininger, I. et al. Alternative splicing of MALT1 
controls signalling and activation of CD4+ T cells. Nat. 
Commun. 7, 11292 (2016).
This paper outlines the mechanism by which 
TCR‑induced alternative splicing of MALT1 
enhances signalling and optimal T cell activation.
REVIEWS
14 | ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION 
www.nature.com/nrc
© Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved
 121. Fontan, L. et al. MALT1 small molecule inhibitors 
specifically suppress ABC-DLBCL in vitro and in vivo. 
Cancer Cell 22, 812–824 (2012).
122. Nagel, D. et al. Pharmacologic inhibition of MALT1 
protease by phenothiazines as a therapeutic approach 
for the treatment of aggressive ABC-DLBCL. Cancer 
Cell 22, 825–837 (2012).
123. Mc Guire, C. et al. Paracaspase MALT1 deficiency 
protects mice from autoimmune-mediated 
demyelination. J. Immunol. 190, 2896–2903 (2013).
124. Jaworski, M. et al. Malt1 protease inactivation 
efficiently dampens immune responses but causes 
spontaneous autoimmunity. EMBO J. 33, 2765–2781 
(2014).
125. Yu, J. W. et al. MALT1 protease activity is required for 
innate and adaptive immune responses. PLoS ONE 
10, e0127083 (2015).
126. Bornancin, F. et al. Deficiency of MALT1 paracaspase 
activity results in unbalanced regulatory and effector T 
and B cell responses leading to multiorgan 
inflammation. J. Immunol. 194, 3723–3734 (2015).
127. McKinnon, M. L. et al. Combined immunodeficiency 
associated with homozygous MALT1 mutations. 
J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 133, 1458–1462.e7 (2014).
128. Punwani, D. et al. Combined immunodeficiency due to 
MALT1 mutations, treated by hematopoietic cell 
transplantation. J. Clin. Immunol. 35, 135–146 (2015).
129. Turley, S. J., Cremasco, V. & Astarita, J. L. 
Immunological hallmarks of stromal cells in the 
tumour microenvironment. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 15, 
669–682 (2015).
130. Hugo, W. et al. Genomic and transcriptomic features 
of response to anti-PD-1 therapy in metastatic 
melanoma. Cell 165, 35–44 (2016).
131. Joyce, J. A. & Pollard, J. W. Microenvironmental 
regulation of metastasis. Nat. Rev. Cancer 9,  
239–252 (2009).
132. Polyak, K., Haviv, I. & Campbell, I. G. Co-evolution of 
tumor cells and their microenvironment. Trends Genet. 
25, 30–38 (2009).
133. Hanahan, D. & Weinberg, R. A. Hallmarks of cancer: 
the next generation. Cell 144, 646–674 (2011).
134. Castermans, K. & Griffioen, A. W. Tumor blood vessels, 
a difficult hurdle for infiltrating leukocytes. Biochim. 
Biophys. Acta 1776, 160–174 (2007).
135. Padera, T. P. et al. Pathology: cancer cells compress 
intratumour vessels. Nature 427, 695 (2004).
136. Jain, R. K. Normalization of tumor vasculature: an 
emerging concept in antiangiogenic therapy. Science 
307, 58–62 (2005).
137. Chang, C. H. et al. Metabolic competition in the tumor 
microenvironment is a driver of cancer progression. 
Cell 162, 1229–1241 (2015).
138. Antonioli, L., Blandizzi, C., Pacher, P. & Hasko, G. 
Immunity, inflammation and cancer: a leading role for 
adenosine. Nat. Rev. Cancer 13, 842–857 (2013).
139. Fredholm, B. B. et al. International Union of 
Pharmacology. XXV. Nomenclature and classification 
of adenosine receptors. Pharmacol. Rev. 53,  
527–552 (2001).
140. Ohta, A. et al. The development and 
immunosuppressive functions of CD4+ CD25+ FoxP3+ 
regulatory T cells are under influence of the 
adenosine-A2A adenosine receptor pathway. Front. 
Immunol. 3, 190 (2012).
141. Sitkovsky, M. & Ohta, A. Targeting the hypoxia-
adenosinergic signaling pathway to improve the 
adoptive immunotherapy of cancer. J. Mol. Med. 
(Berl.) 91, 147–155 (2013).
142. Iannone, R., Miele, L., Maiolino, P., Pinto, A. & 
Morello, S. Adenosine limits the therapeutic 
effectiveness of anti-CTLA4 mAb in a mouse melanoma 
model. Am. J. Cancer Res. 4, 172–181 (2014).
143. Mittal, D. et al. Antimetastatic effects of blocking PD-1 
and the adenosine A2A receptor. Cancer Res. 74, 
3652–3658 (2014).
144. Beavis, P. A. et al. Adenosine receptor 2A blockade 
increases the efficacy of anti-PD-1 through enhanced 
antitumor T-cell responses. Cancer Immunol. Res. 3, 
506–517 (2015).
This paper demonstrates that CD73, a 
5ʹ‑nucleoside that generates immunosuppressive 
adenosine in the TME, limits the efficacy of PD1 
blockade. The combination of PD1 inhibition and 
an A2AR inhibitor increases the expression of IFNγ 
and granzyme B by tumor‑infiltrating CD8+ T cells 
and significantly reduces tumour growth.
145. Cekic, C. & Linden, J. Adenosine A2A receptors 
intrinsically regulate CD8+ T cells in the tumor 
microenvironment. Cancer Res. 74, 7239–7249 
(2014).
146. Ohta, A. A. Metabolic immune checkpoint: adenosine 
in tumor microenvironment. Front. Immunol. 7, 109 
(2016).
147. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02740985 (2017).
148. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02655822 (2016).
149. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02403193 (2016).
150. Mellor, A. L. & Munn, D. H. IDO expression by 
dendritic cells: tolerance and tryptophan catabolism. 
Nat. Rev. Immunol. 4, 762–774 (2004).
151. Okamoto, A. et al. Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase 
serves as a marker of poor prognosis in gene 
expression profiles of serous ovarian cancer cells. Clin. 
Cancer Res. 11, 6030–6039 (2005).
152. Spranger, S. et al. Mechanism of tumor rejection with 
doublets of CTLA-4, PD-1/PD-L1, or IDO blockade 
involves restored IL-2 production and proliferation of 
CD8+ T cells directly within the tumor 
microenvironment. J. Immunother. Cancer 2, 3 
(2014).
153. DeNardo, D. G. et al. Leukocyte complexity predicts 
breast cancer survival and functionally regulates 
response to chemotherapy. Cancer Discov. 1, 54–67 
(2011).
154. Ruffell, B. & Coussens, L. M. Macrophages and 
therapeutic resistance in cancer. Cancer Cell 27,  
462–472 (2015).
155. Shabo, I., Stal, O., Olsson, H., Dore, S. & Svanvik, J. 
Breast cancer expression of CD163, a macrophage 
scavenger receptor, is related to early distant 
recurrence and reduced patient survival. Int. J. Cancer 
123, 780–786 (2008).
156. Komohara, Y., Ohnishi, K., Kuratsu, J. & Takeya, M. 
Possible involvement of the M2 anti-inflammatory 
macrophage phenotype in growth of human gliomas. 
J. Pathol. 216, 15–24 (2008).
157. Holmgaard, R. B., Zamarin, D., Munn, D. H., 
Wolchok, J. D. & Allison, J. P. Indoleamine 
2,3-dioxygenase is a critical resistance mechanism in 
antitumor T cell immunotherapy targeting CTLA-4. 
J. Exp. Med. 210, 1389–1402 (2013).
158. Pyonteck, S. M. et al. CSF-1R inhibition alters 
macrophage polarization and blocks glioma 
progression. Nat. Med. 19, 1264–1272 (2013).
159. Ries, C. H. et al. Targeting tumor-associated 
macrophages with anti-CSF-1R antibody reveals a 
strategy for cancer therapy. Cancer Cell 25, 846–859 
(2014).
160. Mao, Y. et al. Targeting suppressive myeloid cells 
potentiates checkpoint inhibitors to control 
spontaneous neuroblastoma. Clin. Cancer Res. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-15-1912 (2016).
161. Quail, D. F. et al. The tumor microenvironment 
underlies acquired resistance to CSF-1R inhibition in 
gliomas. Science 352, aad3018 (2016).
This paper demonstrates that, in a mouse model of 
gliobastoma, acquired resistance to M‑CSFR 
inhibition is associated with elevated PI3K activity 
driven by macrophage‑derived IGF1. Resistance 
can be overcome by combining M‑CSFR inhibitors 
with IGF1R or PI3K blockade.
162. Pienta, K. J. et al. Phase 2 study of carlumab (CNTO 
888), a human monoclonal antibody against 
CC-chemokine ligand 2 (CCL2), in metastatic 
castration-resistant prostate cancer. Invest. New 
Drugs 31, 760–768 (2013).
163. Sandhu, S. K. et al. A first-in-human, first-in-class, 
phase I study of carlumab (CNTO 888), a human 
monoclonal antibody against CC-chemokine ligand 2 
in patients with solid tumors. Cancer Chemother. 
Pharmacol. 71, 1041–1050 (2013).
164. Brana, I. et al. Carlumab, an anti-C-C chemokine 
ligand 2 monoclonal antibody, in combination with 
four chemotherapy regimens for the treatment of 
patients with solid tumors: an open-label, multicenter 
phase 1b study. Target. Oncol. 10, 111–123 (2015).
165. Bonapace, L. et al. Cessation of CCL2 inhibition 
accelerates breast cancer metastasis by promoting 
angiogenesis. Nature 515, 130–133 (2014).
166. Kaneda, M. M. et al. PI3Kγ is a molecular switch that 
controls immune suppression. Nature 539, 437–442 
(2016).
167. De Henau, O. et al. Overcoming resistance to 
checkpoint blockade therapy by targeting PI3Kγ in 
myeloid cells. Nature 539, 443–447 (2016).
168. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02637531 (2016).
169. Batchelor, T. T. et al. AZD2171, a pan-VEGF receptor 
tyrosine kinase inhibitor, normalizes tumor vasculature 
and alleviates edema in glioblastoma patients. Cancer 
Cell 11, 83–95 (2007).
170. Carmeliet, P. & Jain, R. K. Principles and mechanisms 
of vessel normalization for cancer and other 
angiogenic diseases. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 10,  
417–427 (2011).
171. Willett, C. G. et al. Direct evidence that the VEGF-
specific antibody bevacizumab has antivascular effects 
in human rectal cancer. Nat. Med. 10, 145–147 
(2004).
172. Desar, I. M. et al. Sorafenib reduces the percentage of 
tumour infiltrating regulatory T cells in renal cell 
carcinoma patients. Int. J. Cancer 129, 507–512 
(2011).
173. Guislain, A. et al. Sunitinib pretreatment improves 
tumor-infiltrating lymphocyte expansion by reduction 
in intratumoral content of myeloid-derived suppressor 
cells in human renal cell carcinoma. Cancer Immunol. 
Immunother. 64, 1241–1250 (2015).
174. Osada, T. et al. The effect of anti-VEGF therapy on 
immature myeloid cell and dendritic cells in cancer 
patients. Cancer Immunol. Immunother. 57,  
1115–1124 (2008).
175. Rini, B. I. et al. Combination immunotherapy with 
prostatic acid phosphatase pulsed antigen-
presenting cells (provenge) plus bevacizumab in 
patients with serologic progression of prostate 
cancer after definitive local therapy. Cancer 107, 
67–74 (2006).
176. Hodi, F. S. et al. Bevacizumab plus ipilimumab in 
patients with metastatic melanoma. Cancer Immunol. 
Res. 2, 632–642 (2014).
177. Amin, A. et al. Nivolumab (anti-PD-1; BMS-936558, 
ONO-4538) in combination with sunitinb or 
pazopanib in patients (pts) with metastatic renal cell 
carcinoma (mRCC). J. Clin. Oncol. 32, abstr. 5010 
(2014).
178. Sznol, M. et al. Phase Ib evaluation of MPDL3280A 
(anti-PDL1) in combination with bevacizumab (bev) in 
patients (pts) with metastatic renal cell carcinoma 
(mRCC). J. Clin. Oncol. 33, abstr. 410 (2015).
179. Bendell, J. C. et al. Safety and efficacy of 
MPDL328OA (anti-PDL1) in combination with 
bevacizumab (bev) and/or FOLFOX in patients (pts) 
with metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC). J. Clin. 
Oncol. 33, abstr. 704 (2015).
180. Wakefield, L. M. & Hill, C. S. Beyond TGFβ: roles of 
other TGFβ superfamily members in cancer. Nat. Rev. 
Cancer 13, 328–341 (2013).
181. Yang, L., Pang, Y. & Moses, H. L. TGF-β and immune 
cells: an important regulatory axis in the tumor 
microenvironment and progression. Trends Immunol. 
31, 220–227 (2010).
182. Akhurst, R. J. & Hata, A. Targeting the TGFβ signalling 
pathway in disease. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 11,  
790–811 (2012).
183. Wojtowicz-Praga, S. Reversal of tumor-induced 
immunosuppression by TGF-β inhibitors. Invest. New 
Drugs 21, 21–32 (2003).
184. Morris, J. C. et al. Phase I study of GC1008 
(fresolimumab): a human anti-transforming growth 
factor-β (TGFβ) monoclonal antibody in patients with 
advanced malignant melanoma or renal cell 
carcinoma. PLoS ONE 9, e90353 (2014).
185. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02581787 (2016).
186. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02423343 
(2016).
187. Liska, D., Chen, C. T., Bachleitner-Hofmann, T., 
Christensen, J. G. & Weiser, M. R. HGF rescues 
colorectal cancer cells from EGFR inhibition via MET 
activation. Clin. Cancer Res. 17, 472–482 (2011).
188. Rutella, S. et al. Hepatocyte growth factor favors 
monocyte differentiation into regulatory interleukin 
(IL)-10++IL-12low/neg accessory cells with dendritic-cell 
features. Blood 108, 218–227 (2006).
189. Giannoni, P. et al. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia nurse-
like cells express hepatocyte growth factor receptor 
(c-MET) and indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase and display 
features of immunosuppressive type 2 skewed 
macrophages. Haematologica 99, 1078–1087 
(2014).
190. Damsky, W. E. et al. Beta-catenin signaling controls 
metastasis in Braf-activated Pten-deficient 
melanomas. Cancer Cell 20, 741–754 (2011).
191. Holtzhausen, A. et al. Melanoma-derived Wnt5a 
promotes local dendritic-cell expression of IDO and 
immunotolerance: opportunities for pharmacologic 
enhancement of immunotherapy. Cancer Immunol. 
Res. 3, 1082–1095 (2015).
REVIEWS
NATURE REVIEWS | CANCER 
 ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION | 15
© Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved
 192. Spranger, S., Bao, R. & Gajewski, T. F. Melanoma-
intrinsic β-catenin signalling prevents anti-tumour 
immunity. Nature 523, 231–235 (2015).
This paper demonstrates an association between 
activation of the WNT–β‑catenin signalling pathway 
and the lack of a T cell gene expression signature in 
human samples of metastatic melanoma. Using 
mouse tumour models, the authors illustrate a 
mechanism by which tumour cell‑autonomous 
active β‑catenin signalling blocks TILs, promoting 
resistance to anti‑PDL1 and anti‑CTLA4 therapy.
193. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02649530 (2016).
194. Galluzzi, L., Buque, A., Kepp, O., Zitvogel, L. & 
Kroemer, G. Immunological effects of conventional 
chemotherapy and targeted anticancer agents. Cancer 
Cell 28, 690–714 (2015).
195. Pfirschke, C. et al. Immunogenic chemotherapy 
sensitizes tumors to checkpoint blockade therapy. 
Immunity 44, 343–354 (2016).
196. Lynch, T. J. et al. Ipilimumab in combination with 
paclitaxel and carboplatin as first-line treatment in 
stage IIIB/IV non-small-cell lung cancer: results from a 
randomized, double-blind, multicenter phase II study. 
J. Clin. Oncol. 30, 2046–2054 (2012).
197. Reck, M. et al. Ipilimumab in combination with 
paclitaxel and carboplatin as first-line therapy in 
extensive-disease-small-cell lung cancer: results from a 
randomized, double-blind, multicenter phase 2 trial. 
Ann. Oncol. 24, 75–83 (2013).
198. Shalapour, S. et al. Immunosuppressive plasma cells 
impede T-cell-dependent immunogenic chemotherapy. 
Nature 521, 94–98 (2015).
199. Reck, M. et al. Pembrolizumab versus chemotherapy 
for PD-L1-positive non-small-cell lung cancer. N. Engl. 
J. Med. 375, 1823–1833 (2016).
This paper demonstrates that in previously 
untreated patients with advanced NSCLC and 
expression of PDL1 on at least 50% of their tumour 
cells, PD1 blockade was associated with a significant 
improvement in efficacy and reduced adverse events 
relative to standard‑of‑care chemotherapy.
200. Langer, C. J. et al. Carboplatin and pemetrexed with 
or without pembrolizumab for advanced, non-
squamous non-small-cell lung cancer: a randomised, 
phase 2 cohort of the open-label KEYNOTE-021 study. 
Lancet Oncol. 17, 1497–1508 (2016).
201. Bernstein, M. B., Krishnan, S., Hodge, J. W. & 
Chang, J. Y. Immunotherapy and stereotactic ablative 
radiotherapy (ISABR): a curative approach? Nat. Rev. 
Clin. Oncol. 13, 516–524 (2016).
202. Golden, E. B., Demaria, S., Schiff, P. B., Chachoua, A. & 
Formenti, S. C. An abscopal response to radiation and 
ipilimumab in a patient with metastatic non-small cell 
lung cancer. Cancer Immunol. Res. 1, 365–372 (2013).
203. Hiniker, S. M. et al. A systemic complete response of 
metastatic melanoma to local radiation and 
immunotherapy. Transl Oncol. 5, 404–407 (2012).
204. Postow, M. A. et al. Immunologic correlates of the 
abscopal effect in a patient with melanoma. N. Engl. 
J. Med. 366, 925–931 (2012).
205. Twyman-Saint Victor, C. et al. Radiation and dual 
checkpoint blockade activate non-redundant immune 
mechanisms in cancer. Nature 520, 373–377 (2015).
206. Schadendorf, D. et al. Pooled analysis of long-term 
survival data from phase II and phase III trials of 
ipilimumab in unresectable or metastatic melanoma. 
J. Clin. Oncol. 33, 1889–1894 (2015).
207. Frederick, D. T. et al. BRAF inhibition is associated 
with enhanced melanoma antigen expression and a 
more favorable tumor microenvironment in patients 
with metastatic melanoma. Clin. Cancer Res. 19, 
1225–1231 (2013).
This paper examines biopsies from patients with 
metastatic melanoma treated with a BRAF 
inhibitor (vemurafenib) either alone or in 
combination with a MEK inhibitor 
(dabrafenib 
plus 
trametinib) and demonstrates 
that either treatment results in increased 
expression of melanoma antigens, increased CD8+ 
T cell infiltrate and a decrease in 
immunosuppressive cytokines, consistent with a 
more favourable antitumour immune environment.
208. Hu-Lieskovan, S. et al. Improved antitumor activity of 
immunotherapy with BRAF and MEK inhibitors in 
BRAF(V600E) melanoma. Sci. Transl Med. 7, 279ra41 
(2015).
This paper reports that the triple combination of 
BRAF, MEK and PD1 inhibition demonstrates 
superior antitumour efficacy in a mouse model of 
BRAF‑V600E‑driven melanoma, supporting the use 
of this therapeutic combination in the clinic.
209. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02254772 (2016).
210. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02680184 (2016).
211. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02619253 (2017).
212. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02437136 (2016).
213. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02453620 (2017).
214. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02816021 (2017).
215. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02546986 (2016).
216. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02508870 (2017).
217. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02224781 (2017).
218. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02130466 (2017).
219. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02027961 (2017).
220. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT01656642 (2016).
221. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02818023 (2017).
222. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02607813 (2017).
223. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02587962 (2016).
224. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02752074 (2017).
225. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02298153 (2016).
226. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02073123 (2016).
227. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02471846 (2017).
228. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02807844 (2017).
229. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02323191 (2016).
230. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02452424 (2016).
231. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02829723 (2017).
232. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT00790010 (2017).
233. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02210117 
(2017).
234. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02337491 
(2016).
235. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02420821 
(2016).
236. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02795429 
(2016).
237. US National Library of Medicine. ClinicalTrials.gov 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT02323126 
(2017).
Competing interests statement
The authors declare competing interests: see Web version 
for details.
REVIEWS
16 | ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION 
www.nature.com/nrc
© Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved
