 sensors
Article
Novel Isoprene Sensor for a Flu Virus Breath Monitor
Pelagia-Irene Gouma 1,2,*, Lisheng Wang 2, Sanford R. Simon 2 and Milutin Stanacevic 2
1
Department of Materials Science & Engineering & IPPM-UTARI, University of Texas at Arlington,
Arlington, TX 76019, USA
2
Center for Nanomaterials and Sensor Development, State University of New York,
Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA; iamxiaogua@gmail.com (L.W.); sanford.simon@stonybrook.edu (S.R.S.);
milutin.stanacevic@stonybrook.edu (M.S.)
*
Correspondence: pelagia.gouma@uta.edu; Tel.: +1-817-272-2704
Academic Editor: W. Rudolf Seitz
Received: 23 October 2016; Accepted: 18 January 2017; Published: 20 January 2017
Abstract: A common feature of the inflammatory response in patients who have actually contracted
influenza is the generation of a number of volatile products of the alveolar and airway epithelium.
These products include a number of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and nitric oxide (NO).
These may be used as biomarkers to detect the disease. A portable 3-sensor array microsystem-based
tool that can potentially detect flu infection biomarkers is described here. Whether used in connection
with in-vitro cell culture studies or as a single exhale breathalyzer, this device may be used to provide
a rapid and non-invasive screening method for flu and other virus-based epidemics.
Keywords: sensors; health; flu virus detection
1. Introduction
Recent outbreaks of infectious diseases have revealed the paucity of rapid noninvasive methods
for screening individuals who might have increased risk of exposure to pathogens. The Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) are now reporting that, in the United States, a more immediate
health crisis than the Ebola epidemic in Africa is emerging with the reappearance of the H3N2 strain
of the influenza A virus, a recurring strain that has apparently undergone genetic drift in 2014,
such that vaccines may offer only limited protection [1]. According to recent reports in the CDC
FluView, influenza resulted in over 26 casualties in the pediatric population as of the beginning of
2015, and health care facilities in over 80% of the states have reported significant upsurges in visits to
emergent care facilities consistent with epidemic proportions [2]. The course of influenza, which is
generally self-limiting but can be especially problematic for the young and the elderly, is marked by a
rapid onset of fever and respiratory symptoms, followed by a gradual resolution of these symptoms;
early treatment with antiviral medications can limit the severity of the disease. Unlike some bacterial
infections, in which toxins produced by the infectious agent cause much of the pathology, many of
the symptoms of influenza reflect the host response to the virus, which is marked by the release of
pro-inflammatory cytokines that produce the classic constellation of fatigue, lethargy, diffuse pain, and
malaise in addition to the early fever. These inflammatory cytokines may be produced in many other
infections as well as with certain immune-stimulatory therapies for conditions such as cancer; patients
receiving such agents typically report “flu-like symptoms.” Vaccination can induce some degree of
systemic inflammation that is part of the immune response, which has led some patients to confuse
their symptoms with having contracted the flu from their vaccination. A general pattern of the course
of this viral disease, however, is that inflammation develops early and resolves concurrently with
diminution of risk of transmitting the infection.
A common feature of the inflammatory response in patients who have actually contracted
influenza, which is mimicked to some extent by individuals who have received a live attenuated
Sensors 2017, 17, 199; doi:10.3390/s17010199
www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors
 Sensors 2017, 17, 199
2 of 7
virus in a vaccine formulation, is the generation of a number of volatile products of the alveolar
and airway epithelium as well as from leukocytes that infiltrate the lungs. These products include
a number of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and nitric oxide (NO). It is especially important
that the time course of appearance of these biomarkers of inflammation roughly coincides with the
time course of disease symptoms, especially with regard to onset. Regardless of the instrumentation
employed to detect these biomarkers, measurements must be made repeatedly on definitively or
potentially infected individuals to map the rise and fall of the biomarkers over time. It should be noted
that the need to carry out repeated measurements on individuals is justified not only by the already
documented distinctive time course of the levels of biomarkers in influenza, but in other viral diseases,
even Ebola [3], as well.
A number of reports in the literature [4–6] have described the detection of biomarkers of
inflammation in the respiratory system using a variety of techniques, but most methods of detection
are research methods, such as gas chromatography/mass spectroscopy (GC/MS) or specific ion flow
tube/mass spectroscopy (SIFT/MS), that are not amenable to use by personnel without specialized
training and cannot be regarded as portable for use in homes or public places where screening of
individuals would be of special value. The instrumentation developed by our team, as described
below, and in its earlier form in [7], is certainly compact enough to be easily deployed. It has the added
advantage of the capacity to transmit data remotely so that more qualified staff could be called upon to
assess the significance of digital readings from the sensors. Unlike the signals from other instruments
that have been used to profile and quantitate gaseous analytes in breath, which are interpretable
only by research personnel, these sensors have both specificity/selectivity and sensitivity, so that
the significance of the digital data can be recognized with a high degree of confidence. Nitric oxide,
acetone, and ammonia-gas detecting sensors and breathalyzers have been previously developed and
described by our research group [7–18]. This work focuses on a novel isoprene sensor to be used
together with NO and acetone or ammonia in flu virus detection.
2. Results and Discussion
2.1. Description of the Breathalyzer Instrumentation
2.1.1. Three-Nanosensor Array Microsystem
A novel concept of a three-nanosensor array system that may potentially serve as a general
monitoring tool for flu infection is described here. By interfacing a three-sensor array to a circuit for
electrical readout and temperature control, a complete system capable of capturing a single exhaled
breath and analyzing it with respect to the relative content of isoprene, ammonia, and NO is described
here. Gouma and Stanacevic have developed and demonstrated single-sensor handheld devices for
breath analysis that utilize resistive chemosensing technology [8–10]. The advantages of these tools
have been (i) a low cost of fabrication of the sensor and the device; (ii) the application of nanotechnology
that obviates any need of cooling the sensor chamber or impacting the device portability; (iii) the
simplicity of sample acquisition (single exhale into a mouthpiece); (iv) the ease of collecting and
analyzing the sensing data obtained; and (v) the built-in stability and reliability of the prototypes.
While single gas sensing elements may be useful in detecting certain diseases (e.g., asthma
monitoring based on NO biomarker detection), monitoring viral infections is much more useful if more
than one exhaled breath marker is followed simultaneously over time. By using a crystallo-chemical
approach, selective interactions between different gases and distinct crystallographic arrangements of
metal oxides were utilized in building the sensing systems [11–13]. Furthermore, our earlier research
showed that it is possible to control the microstructure of nanocrystalline metal oxide films and the
operating temperature of the sensor so as to stabilize oxide polymorph phases that are sensitive to
only a specific class, or even a single chemical species of gaseous analytes [14].
For example, WO3 exists in a series of stable solid phases at different temperatures from α phase
to ε phase and an unstable hexagonal phase (h-WO3) [15]. Open structured h-WO3 nanoparticles were
 Sensors 2017, 17, 199
3 of 7
produced by an acid precipitation method [16]. It was found that h-WO3 is very sensitive to NOx
compared to other gases at 150 ◦C due to the open tunnel structure of h-WO3. Such selectivity is lost at
350 ◦C. Instead, the material is very sensitive and selective to isoprene gas at 350 ◦C.
2.1.2. Novel Isoprene Detector
The isoprene detector is a novel concept. Isoprene: 2-methyl-1,3-butadiene (C5H8) is a reactive
aliphatic hydrocarbon [7] and a VOC marker of the flu. Although more than 1000 kinds of VOCs have
been found in human breath, only a few exist in all human bodies. Among them, isoprene is the most
common one, which is always present as a precursor of many important organic compounds during
the metabolic process.
The acid precipitation method was used to synthesize the h-WO3 material. This method is
somewhat similar to the one used by Gerand et al. in 1979 [17]. A detailed description is as follows:
1.17 g of Na2WO4·2H2O of analytical grade is dissolved in 17 mL of water and the solution is cooled
to 10 ◦C. To this, 8.4 mL of normal hydrochloric acid solution (analytical grade, 18% in excess of
equimolar reaction) cooled to the same temperature is added in one dose. The mixture is put back into
the refrigerator and allowed to stay for about 20 h. The following reaction occurs:
Na2WO4 · 2H2O + H+ = H2WO4 · 2H2O + Na+
(1)
After this time, the whole mixture turned to a whitish gel. Then, 110 mL of water was added to the
vessel, and the gel and water were lightly stirred manually. By centrifuging the supernatant liquid was
removed. Then, 130 mL of water was added to the precipitate, and the steps of light manual stirring,
centrifuging, and removal of supernatant liquid were repeated several times to obtain H2WO4·H2O,
the precursor of the final h-WO3 powders. H2WO4·H2O suspensions were passed to hydrothermal
dehydration and carried out in Parr acid digestion bombs at 125 ◦C ± 5 ◦C. Dehydration under air:
furnace temperature: 300–330 ◦C; annealing time: 90 min.
The color of the synthesized h-WO3 is grey. There are typically two shapes of grains: equiaxed
particles and rod-shaped particles (see Figure 1). These two shapes are mixed together, and the rods
are the majority. There is a certain dispersion of the diameter distribution, from 20 to 50 nm, with
an average size of 35 nm. The HRTEM image and the SAED pattern (Figure 1c,d) confirm that these
particles are polycrystalline and can be indexed in the h-WO3 structure. The diameters of the rods are
30–100 nm with an average value of 50 nm, and their lengths are up to 100–300 nm with an average
value of 200 nm. The HRTEM image clearly records the lattice of the h-WO3 (001) planes with an
interplanar spacing of about 0.39 nm, indicating the WO3 rods are single crystalline in most regions
and grow along the [001] direction, which is in accordance with the SAED pattern.
A heat treatment was usually necessary for the sensor to become stable, e.g., to remove the
residual tungsten hydrate by-product. For h-WO3, the heat treatment was done at 350 ◦C for 8 h.
h-WO3 showed a sensitive and selective detection of isoprene at 350 ◦C (see Figure 2 and Table 1
below). The sensitivity of h-WO3 sensor to isoprene is 7.34, which is higher than any other gas.
Table 1. Response of h-WO3 to various gases of 1 ppm concentration at 350 ◦C.
Sensitivity
Response Time (s)
Recovery Time (s)
NO
2.66
24
98
NO2
2.98
82
77
methanol
2
112
380
isoprene
7.34
65
145
 Sensors 2017, 17, 199
4 of 7
Sensors 2017, 17, 199 
4 of 7 
 
 
Figure 1. Morphology and structure of h-WO3 powders: (a) TEM image; (b) HRTEM image (inset: 
SAED) of nanoparticles; (c) TEM image; (d) HRTEM image (inset: SAED) of nanorods. 
 
Figure 2. Resistance change of h-WO3 with exposure to NO, NO2, methanol, and isoprene at 350 °C. 
Selective detection on isoprene at 350 °C is clearly proven above. Previous reports on 
commercially 
available 
devices 
for 
isoprene 
detection 
are 
always 
based 
on 
spectrometry/spectroscopy methods. Ohira et al. used ozone-induced chemiluminescence as another 
approach to the measurement of breath isoprene [18]. However, it requires breath sample collection 
and pre-concentration, making the detection not portable at all. There is a sole study involving 
isoprene detection using chemo-resistive sensors and that was reported by our group earlier [19]. 
Figure 1.
Morphology and structure of h-WO3 powders: (a) TEM image; (b) HRTEM image
(inset: SAED) of nanoparticles; (c) TEM image; (d) HRTEM image (inset: SAED) of nanorods.
Sensors 2017, 17, 199 
4 of 7 
 
 
Figure 1. Morphology and structure of h-WO3 powders: (a) TEM image; (b) HRTEM image (inset: 
SAED) of nanoparticles; (c) TEM image; (d) HRTEM image (inset: SAED) of nanorods. 
 
Figure 2. Resistance change of h-WO3 with exposure to NO, NO2, methanol, and isoprene at 350 °C. 
Selective detection on isoprene at 350 °C is clearly proven above. Previous reports on 
commercially 
available 
devices 
for 
isoprene 
detection 
are 
always 
based 
on 
spectrometry/spectroscopy methods. Ohira et al. used ozone-induced chemiluminescence as another 
approach to the measurement of breath isoprene [18]. However, it requires breath sample collection 
and pre-concentration, making the detection not portable at all. There is a sole study involving 
isoprene detection using chemo-resistive sensors and that was reported by our group earlier [19]. 
Figure 2. Resistance change of h-WO3 with exposure to NO, NO2, methanol, and isoprene at 350 ◦C.
Selective detection on isoprene at 350 ◦C is clearly proven above. Previous reports on commercially
available devices for isoprene detection are always based on spectrometry/spectroscopy methods.
Ohira et al. used ozone-induced chemiluminescence as another approach to the measurement of
 Sensors 2017, 17, 199
5 of 7
breath isoprene [18]. However, it requires breath sample collection and pre-concentration, making the
detection not portable at all. There is a sole study involving isoprene detection using chemo-resistive
sensors and that was reported by our group earlier [19]. However, these sensors were based on
FSP-made TiO2 nanoparticles neither sensitive (S = 2, 1 ppm) nor selective (lower sensitivity than
acetone) to isoprene. Comparing h-WO3 to the previously reported γ-WO3, although γ-WO3 is also
sensitive to isoprene (S = 4.8), it has a cross sensitivity to acetone (S = 4). Therefore, to the best of our
knowledge, the h-WO3 presented here might be the first isoprene-selective chemical sensor that has
the potential to be used in a non-invasive portable device.
2.1.3. The Breathalyzer Device
We have previously designed a single-sensor system with a Bluetooth interface on a printed
circuit board (PCB) with dimensions of 3 × 3 in. (Figure 3a). A three-sensor system with the same
readout and heater control circuit with the wired connection to PC has been designed here (Figure 3b).
To achieve higher sensitivity in quantifying the gas concentrations and to reduce power consumption,
a modification of our previously described single channel readout integrated circuit with CMOS
technology was implemented [20]. Although the sensors have high specificity, the digital sensor
data from the readout circuit may be further processed to improve selectivity and compensate for
cross-sensitivity, using an algorithm to compensate for any drift in the resistance of the sensors
over time.
Sensors 2017, 17, 199 
5 of 7 
 
However, these sensors were based on FSP-made TiO2 nanoparticles neither sensitive (S = 2, 1 ppm) 
nor selective (lower sensitivity than acetone) to isoprene. Comparing h-WO3 to the previously 
reported γ-WO3, although γ-WO3 is also sensitive to isoprene (S = 4.8), it has a cross sensitivity to 
acetone (S = 4). Therefore, to the best of our knowledge, the h-WO3 presented here might be the first 
isoprene-selective chemical sensor that has the potential to be used in a non-invasive portable 
device. 
2.1.3. The Breathalyzer Device 
We have previously designed a single-sensor system with a Bluetooth interface on a printed 
circuit board (PCB) with dimensions of 3 × 3 in. (Figure 3a). A three-sensor system with the same 
readout and heater control circuit with the wired connection to PC has been designed here (Figure 
3b). To achieve higher sensitivity in quantifying the gas concentrations and to reduce power 
consumption, a modification of our previously described single channel readout integrated circuit 
with CMOS technology was implemented [20]. Although the sensors have high specificity, the 
digital sensor data from the readout circuit may be further processed to improve selectivity and 
compensate for cross-sensitivity, using an algorithm to compensate for any drift in the resistance of 
the sensors over time. 
 
 
(a) 
(b)
Figure 3. (a) A single sensor readout circuit with Bluetooth module; (b) A three-sensor system with 
integrated readout and heater control circuit as a step toward wireless handheld multi-sensor 
breathalyzer. 
2.2. Proposed Use of the Breathalyzer in In-Vitro Studies 
Limitations of In-Vitro Studies with a Live Attenuated Influenza Virus (FluMist®) 
The literature on in vitro studies with human cells exposed to influenza virus strains is not 
extensive. Experiments in which culture medium and/or headspace gas have been assayed 
subsequent to exposure of mouse neutrophils [21] or an immortalized human B cell line [22] to active 
influenza virus have been reported in which generation of NO or VOCs was detected in a 
virus-strain and dose-dependent fashion, but these studies did not effectively replicate the 
contribution of the epithelium to the environment of the human respiratory system. Studies 
employing human volunteers exposed to a live attenuated influenza virus vaccine (FluMist®) have 
been carried out, using GC/MS [5] and SIFT/MS measurements, and they show both increases as 
well as decreases in the levels of a number of VOCs over the course of a two-week period, which the 
authors have attributed to a combination of the activation of oxidative stress pathways and the 
inhibition of the formation of lipid peroxidation products (NO levels along with VOC levels were 
measured in only one study on human subjects [4]). Interpretation of the experimental data required 
Figure 3.
(a) A single sensor readout circuit with Bluetooth module;
(b) A three-sensor
system with integrated readout and heater control circuit as a step toward wireless handheld
multi-sensor breathalyzer.
2.2. Proposed Use of the Breathalyzer in In-Vitro Studies
Limitations of In-Vitro Studies with a Live Attenuated Influenza Virus (FluMist®)
The literature on in vitro studies with human cells exposed to influenza virus strains is not
extensive. Experiments in which culture medium and/or headspace gas have been assayed subsequent
to exposure of mouse neutrophils [21] or an immortalized human B cell line [22] to active influenza
virus have been reported in which generation of NO or VOCs was detected in a virus-strain and
dose-dependent fashion, but these studies did not effectively replicate the contribution of the
epithelium to the environment of the human respiratory system. Studies employing human volunteers
exposed to a live attenuated influenza virus vaccine (FluMist®) have been carried out, using GC/MS [5]
and SIFT/MS measurements, and they show both increases as well as decreases in the levels of a
 Sensors 2017, 17, 199
6 of 7
number of VOCs over the course of a two-week period, which the authors have attributed to a
combination of the activation of oxidative stress pathways and the inhibition of the formation of lipid
peroxidation products (NO levels along with VOC levels were measured in only one study on human
subjects [4]). Interpretation of the experimental data required the use of sophisticated instrumentation
as well as mathematical models for analysis, making the approach not especially user-friendly, and
the use of human subjects imposes significant restrictions on further investigative experiments. The
3-sensor microsystem-based tool described here may provide a viable and inexpensive alternative to
carrying out these cell culture studies.
3. Conclusions
An unanticipated serious epidemic of influenza can highlight an urgent need facing the population.
A strategy to address such a rapidly emerging public health crisis as well as recurrent events that are
likely to appear in the future is needed. One viable approach makes use of a system that can monitor
the ongoing progression of individual cases of influenza or other diseases with a major respiratory
component so that persons with symptoms of lung inflammation can be properly managed with
therapeutic intervention or supportive care. The system described here relies on a device that can
measure biomarkers of the inflammatory response in breath, noninvasively. The sensor system utilizes
a 3-probe array to detect nitric oxide (NO) and volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and may be used by
personnel with minimal training to collect and transmit data from individuals suspected of early stages
of illness to central facilities, where more medically skilled workers can call for early intervention.
We envision that, in its final iteration, our system could be taken home by a patient who could then
simply exhale into the sensor system to generate the relevant data that would then be transmitted to a
central service for collection and interpretation.
Acknowledgments: This work was funded by NSF awards: DMR-0304169 and IIS-1231761.
Author Contributions: P. Gouma and L. Wang conceived and designed the experiments on the isoprene sensing
material and device, and their performance evaluations. M. Stanacevic designed the circuitry and overall interface
between the sensors and the device; P. Gouma and M. Stanacevic prototyped the breathalyzer device and analyzed
the data from the sensors; S. Simon contributed the bio-medical aspects of the paper. P. Gouma wrote the paper.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1.
CDC: Flu Activity Expands. Available online: http://www.cdc.gov/flu/news/flu-activity-expands.htm
(accessed on 2 January 2017).
2.
Weekly US Influenza Surveillance Report. Available online: http://www.cdc.gov/flu/weekly (accessed on
2 January 2017).
3.
Sanchez, A.; Lukwiya, M.; Bausch, D.; Mahanty, S.; Sanchez, A.J.; Wagoner, K.D.; Rollin, P.E. Analysis
of Human Peripheral Blood Samples from Fatal and Nonfatal Cases of Ebola (Sudan) Hemorragic Fever:
Cellular Responses, Virus Load, and Nitric Oxide Levels. J. Virol. 2004, 78, 10370–10377. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4.
Mashir, A.; Paschke, K.M.; van Duin, D.; Shreshta, N.K.; Laskowski, D.; Storer, M.K.; Yen-Lieberman, B.;
Gordon, S.; Aytekin, M.; Dweik, R.A. Effect of influenza A (H1N1) live attenuated intranasal vaccine on
nitric oxide (FENO) and other volatiles in exhaled breath. J. Breath Res. 2011, 5, 037107. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5.
Phillips, M.; Cataneo, R.N.; Chaturvedi, A.; Danaher, P.J.; Devadiga, A.; Legendre, D.A.; Nail, K.L.; Schmitt, P.;
Wai, J. Effect of influenza vaccination on oxidative stress products in breath. J. Breath Res. 2010, 4, 026001.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
6.
Schivo, M.; Aksenov, A.A.; Linderholm, A.L.; McCartney, M.M.; Simmons, J.; Harper, R.W.; Davis, C.E.
Volatile emanations from in vitro airway cells infected with human rhinovirus. J. Breath Res. 2014, 8, 037110.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
7.
Gouma, P.; Prasad, A.; Stanacevic, M. A Selective Nanosensor Device for Exhaled Breath Analysis.
J. Breath Res. 2011, 5, 037110. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Sensors 2017, 17, 199
7 of 7
8.
Gouma, P.I.; Prasad, A.K.; Iyer, K.K. Selective Nanoprobes for ‘Signaling Gases’. Nanotechnology 2006, 17,
S48–S53. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9.
Gouma, P.; Kalyanasundaram, K.; Yun, X.; Stanacevic, M.; Wang, L. Chemical sensor and breath analyzer for
ammonia detection in exhaled human breath. IEEE Sens. 2010, 10, 49–53. [CrossRef]
10.
Wang, L.; Kalyanasundaram, K.; Stanacevic, M.; Gouma, P. Nanosensor Device for Breath Acetone Detection.
Sens. Lett. 2010, 8, 709–712. [CrossRef]
11.
Gouma, P. Nanoscale Polymorphic Oxides for Selective Chemosensors. Sci. Adv. Mater. 2011, 3, 787–793.
[CrossRef]
12.
Gouma, P.I. Controlling Gas Selectivity through Polyorphic Selection for Metal Oxide Chemical Detectors.
Chem. Sens. 2004, 20 (Suppl. B), 186–187.
13.
Gouma, P.; Stanacevic, M.; Simon, S. An overview of the translation of selective semiconducting gas
sensors from first results to automotive exhaust gas monitors to a platform for breath-based diagnostics.
Transl. Mater. Res. 2015, 2, 045001. [CrossRef]
14.
Gouma, P.I. Nanostructured Polymorphic Oxides for Advanced Chemosensors. Rev. Adv. Mater. Sci. 2003, 5,
123–138.
15.
Wang, L.; Gouma, P. Selective Microstructure Synthesis and Sensing Dependencies: A WO3 study.
In Metal Oxide Nanomaterials for Chemical Sensors; Carpenter, M.A., Mathur, S., Kolmakov, A., Eds.; Springer:
New York, NY, USA, 2013.
16.
Wang, L. Tailored Synthesis and Characterization of Selective Metabolite-Detecting Nanoprobes for
Handheld Breath Analysis. Ph.D. Thesis, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, USA, December 2008.
17.
Gerand, B.; Nowogrocki, G.; Guenot, J.; Figlarz, M. Structural study of a new hexagonal form of
tungsten trioxide. J. Solid State Chem. 1979, 29, 429–434. [CrossRef]
18.
Ohira, S.; Li, J.; Lonneman, W.A.; Dasgupta, P.K.; Toda, K. Can breath isoprene be measured by
ozone chemiluminescence? Anal. Chem. 2007, 79, 2641–2649. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
19.
Teleki, A.; Pratsinis, S.E.; Kalyanasundaram, K.; Gouma, P.I. Sensing of organic vapors by flame-made
TiO2 nanoparticles. Sens. Actuators B 2006, 119, 683–690. [CrossRef]
20.
Gouma, P.; Sood, S.; Stanacevic, M.; Simon, S. Selective Chemosensing and diagnostic Breathalyzer.
Proced. Eng. 2014, 87, 9–15. [CrossRef]
21.
Perrone, L.A.; Belser, A.J.; Wadford, D.A.; Katz, J.M.; Tumpey, T.M. Inducible Nitric Oxide Contributes to
Viral Pathogenesis Following Highly Pathogenic Influenza Virus Infection in Mice. J. Infect. Dis. 2013, 207.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
22.
Askenov, A.A.; Sandrock, C.E.; Zhao, W.; Sankaran, S.; Schivo, M.; Harper, R.; Cardona, C.J.; Xing, Z.;
Davis, C.E. Cellular Scent of Influenza Virus Infection. ChemBioChem 2014, 15, 1040–1048.
© 2017 by the authors; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
