 JCB
JCB: Article
T H E  J O U R N A L  O F  C E L L  B I O L O G Y
3291
The Rockefeller University Press 
J. Cell Biol. Vol. 216 No. 10 3291–3305
https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201612148
Introduction
Amyloid plaques, a defining feature of Alzheimer’s disease 
(AD) brain pathology, have long been recognized to contain 
an extracellular aggregate of the β-amyloid peptide that is 
surrounded by microglia and an abundance of swollen axons 
(Terry et al., 1964; Itagaki et al., 1989; Tsai et al., 2004; Fiala, 
2007; Condello et al., 2011). These axons contain a massive 
accumulation of organelles that resemble lysosomes and/or hy-
brid organelles arising from the fusion of lysosomes with late 
endosomes and autophagosomes (subsequently referred to as 
lysosomes for simplicity; Terry et al., 1964; Su et al., 1993; 
Cataldo et al., 1994; Nixon et al., 2005; Condello et al., 2011; 
Gowrishankar et al., 2015). Despite their long-known and ro-
bust occurrence, the disease relevance of these lysosome-filled 
axonal swellings has not been established.
Our current understanding of AD has been greatly influ-
enced by the identification of mutations in the amyloid precursor 
protein (APP), presenilin 1 (PSEN1), and presenilin 2 (PSEN2) 
genes as causes of early onset, familial forms of the disease 
(Selkoe and Hardy, 2016). These advances in the understand-
ing of human AD genetics have supported the development of 
transgenic mice that develop amyloid plaque pathology due to 
the expression of mutant forms of APP and presenilin. Even in 
these mouse models, the amyloid plaques are surrounded by 
swollen, lysosome-filled axons (Yu et al., 2005; Dikranian et 
al., 2012; Kandalepas et al., 2013; Gowrishankar et al., 2015). 
The possible disease relevance of these lysosome-filled axonal 
swellings is supported by human and mouse studies that re-
vealed striking enrichment for both APP and BACE1 within the 
swollen axons at amyloid plaques (Cras et al., 1991; Cummings 
et al., 1992; Kandalepas et al., 2013; Yoon et al., 2013; Gowr-
ishankar et al., 2015; Yuan et al., 2016). Furthermore, a recent 
investigation of the subcellular localization of PSENs revealed 
lysosomal localization of AD-related PSEN1 mutants and the 
constitutive localization of WT PSEN2 to lysosomes (Sannerud 
et al., 2016). The presence of PSEN1 within lysosome-like or-
ganelles at plaques is further supported by observations in the 
human AD brain (Yu et al., 2005). Although such observations 
strongly suggest that the lysosome-filled axonal swellings at 
amyloid plaques could act as important sites of Aβ peptide pro-
duction, this model is largely based on descriptive studies and 
lacks direct evidence of causality.
The high abundance of lysosomes within axonal swellings 
at amyloid plaques and their potential role as sites of APP pro-
cessing also raise questions concerning the fundamental mecha-
nisms that govern axonal lysosome abundance. Multiple studies 
have identified late endosomes and autophagosomes within dis-
tal regions of axons that likely play key housekeeping functions 
by sequestering old or damaged proteins and organelles (Hol-
lenbeck, 1993; Maday et al., 2012; Maday and Holzbaur, 2014; 
Cheng et al., 2015). However, to degrade and recycle their con-
tents, these organelles must acquire lysosomal properties such 
as hydrolytic enzymes and a highly acidic lumen. To this end, 
these organelles are thought to undergo a maturation process 
within axons that is coupled with their retrograde axonal trans-
port toward the neuronal cell body (Hollenbeck, 1993; Overly 
Lysosomes robustly accumulate within axonal swellings at Alzheimer’s disease (AD) amyloid plaques. However, the un-
derlying mechanisms and disease relevance of such lysosome accumulations are not well understood. Motivated by 
these problems, we identified JNK-interacting protein 3 (JIP3) as an important regulator of axonal lysosome transport 
and maturation. JIP3 knockout mouse neuron primary cultures accumulate lysosomes within focal axonal swellings that 
resemble the dystrophic axons at amyloid plaques. These swellings contain high levels of amyloid precursor protein 
processing enzymes (BACE1 and presenilin 2) and are accompanied by elevated Aβ peptide levels. The in vivo impor-
tance of the JIP3-dependent regulation of axonal lysosomes was revealed by the worsening of the amyloid plaque pa-
thology arising from JIP3 haploinsufficiency in a mouse model of AD. These results establish the critical role of 
JIP3-dependent axonal lysosome transport in regulating amyloidogenic amyloid precursor protein processing and sup-
port a model wherein Aβ production is amplified by plaque-induced axonal lysosome transport defects.
Impaired JIP3-dependent axonal lysosome transport 
promotes amyloid plaque pathology
Swetha Gowrishankar,1,2 Yumei Wu,1,2 and Shawn M. Ferguson1,2
1Department of Cell Biology and 2Program in Cellular Neuroscience, Neurodegeneration and Repair, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
© 2017 Gowrishankar et al. This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution–
Noncommercial–Share Alike–No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the 
publication date (see http 
://www 
.rupress 
.org 
/terms 
/). After six months it is available under 
a Creative Commons License (Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike 4.0 International 
license, as described at https 
://creativecommons 
.org 
/licenses 
/by 
-nc 
-sa 
/4 
.0 
/).
Correspondence to Shawn M. Ferguson: shawn.ferguson@yale.edu
Abbreviations used: AD, Alzheimer’s disease; APP, amyloid precursor protein; 
DIV, days in vitro; KO, knockout; PSEN, presenilin; TBI, traumatic brain injury.
on June 3, 2019
jcb.rupress.org 
Downloaded from 
http://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201612148
Published Online: 7 August, 2017 | Supp Info: 
 JCB • Volume 216 • NumBer 10 • 2017
3292
et al., 1995; Maday et al., 2012). We previously identified such 
lysosome intermediates in healthy axons based on their low 
content of lysosomal proteases (Gowrishankar et al., 2015). Be-
cause of the similarly low protease content of axonal lysosomes 
at amyloid plaques, we furthermore proposed that a plaque- 
triggered defect in retrograde transport and maturation causes 
local accumulation of immature lysosomes at sites of contact 
between axons and amyloid fibrils (Gowrishankar et al., 2015).
To test the contribution of axonal lysosomes to amyloid 
plaque pathology, we first sought to develop a genetic strategy 
to perturb axonal lysosome abundance. To this end, we iden-
tified an important role for mouse JNK-interacting protein 
3 (JIP3) in regulating the abundance and maturation state of 
axonal lysosomes. Of particular interest, immature lysosomes 
accumulated in the axons of JIP3 knockout (KO) neurons in a 
manner that recapitulated the key molecular and morphological 
properties of plaque-proximal axonal lysosomes in AD, includ-
ing the buildup of APP-processing machinery. Such changes 
in the abundance and/or localization of APP-processing pro-
teins were accompanied by increased Aβ peptide production. 
We then tested the in vivo effect of depleting JIP3 in a mouse 
model of AD and found a dramatic worsening in the severity of 
amyloid plaque pathology. These observations support a model 
wherein the accumulation of lysosomes within local axonal 
swellings at plaques actively contributes to APP processing and 
plaque development and suggest that restoration of normal ax-
onal lysosome transport and maturation could help to suppress 
the development and progression of AD brain pathology.
Results
Lysosomes accumulate in axons of JIP3 
KO neurons
Lysosome-filled axonal swellings are a major but poorly under-
stood feature of AD amyloid plaques. To test the relevance of 
such axonal lysosomes to amyloid plaque pathology, we sought 
to establish a strategy to perturb axonal lysosome abundance. 
Relatively little is known about the factors that selectively regu-
late such organelles. However, a literature search for mutations 
in model organisms that increased axonal lysosome abundance 
yielded studies on the Caenorhabditis elegans and zebrafish or-
thologues of mammalian JIP3 (Drerup and Nechiporuk, 2013; 
Edwards et al., 2013). Although conclusions about the underly-
ing mechanisms varied between these studies, the similar axonal 
lysosome phenotypes in JIP3 mutants in such distantly related 
organisms suggested an evolutionarily conserved role for JIP3 
as a negative regulator of axonal lysosome abundance. JIP3 KO 
mice were previously reported to lack the telencephalic com-
missure and die shortly after birth because of impaired breath-
ing (Kelkar et al., 2003) but had not been characterized from the 
perspective of neuronal lysosome cell biology.
To specifically address the relationship between mam-
malian JIP3 and axonal lysosomes, we obtained this JIP3 KO 
mouse strain and generated primary cultures of cortical neurons 
from JIP3 KO embryos (E16–E18) and their littermate controls. 
After confirming the absence of JIP3 protein in the KO cul-
tures (Fig. S1 A), lysosomes were first examined by analysis 
of lysosome-associated membrane protein 1 (LAMP1) immu-
nofluorescence. Although lysosomes in control neurons were 
most concentrated within neuronal cell bodies (Fig. 1, A and 
J), with a much smaller number distributed throughout neur-
ites, LAMP1 localization in the JIP3 KO neurons was strikingly 
different because of the presence of numerous large LAMP1- 
positive foci outside of cell bodies (Fig. 1, B and K). Colo-
calization with neurofilament (an axonal marker; Fig. 1 I) and 
VAMP2 (a synaptic vesicle protein; Fig. 1 K) and lack of over-
lap with a dendritic marker (MAP2B, Fig. 1 K) established that 
these lysosome accumulations are axonal.
As previously reported (Sato et al., 2015), JIP3 KO neu-
rons showed signs of axonal degeneration by 21 days in vitro 
(DIV; unpublished data). Importantly, we observed axonal ly-
sosomal accumulations in these neurons by 7 DIV (Fig. 1 D). 
This lag between the appearance of axonal lysosome accumu-
lations and axonal degeneration suggests that lysosome trans-
port defects are not a secondary consequence of degeneration. 
Although this lysosome localization phenotype was robust in 
neurons, JIP3 KO astrocytes did not exhibit altered LAMP1 
staining (Fig. S1, B and C). The differential effect of JIP3 de-
pletion on neurons versus astrocytes was paralleled by higher 
JIP3 levels in neurons (Fig. S1 B).
We used LysoTracker (a fluorescent dye that preferentially 
identifies acidic organelles) labeling to examine the dynamics 
and localization of lysosomes in primary neurons. For these 
experiments, the neurons were cultured at low density to en-
able morphological discrimination between the axons and den-
drites of individual neurons. In both WT and JIP3 KO neurons, 
LysoTracker- 
positive puncta were most concentrated in the cell 
body. Lysosomes in dendrites exhibited bidirectional movement 
(Video 1). Meanwhile, axons had relatively few LysoTracker 
puncta in WT neurons (Fig. 1 C, arrowheads), and these moved 
in a predominantly retrograde direction (Video 1). In contrast 
to the low abundance of axonal lysosomes in WT neurons, by 
10 DIV, 92.8% of the JIP3 KO neurons exhibited one or more 
lysosome-filled axonal swellings (Fig. 1, D [arrowheads] and 
E). Consistent with measurements from a recent study of axonal 
lysosomes (Allison et al., 2017), we observed approximately 
one lysosome per 10 μm of axon in WT neurons (Fig. 1 F). Even 
outside of the swellings, the density of lysosomes was higher in 
JIP3 KO axons (Fig. 1, F and G).
We also found that there is a higher fraction of stationary 
lysosomes in JIP3 KO axons (measured outside of lysosome- 
enriched swellings) compared with WT axons (Fig. 1 H). Lyso-
somes move locally within each swelling in the JIP3 KO but only 
occasionally escape out into the axonal process (Video 2). The 
lysosome accumulation in JIP3 axons is selective, as mitochon-
dria (visualized by both MitoTracker labeling and cytochrome 
c staining) do not similarly accumulate in these swellings (Fig. 
S1, E–K). There is an ∼30-fold increase in lysosome abundance 
within JIP3 axonal swellings as compared with WT axons (Fig. 
S1 H), whereas mitochondrial abundance changed less than 
twofold (Fig. S1 I), and this modest change likely reflects the 
increase in volume associated with the swelling. In addition to 
LAMP1 and LysoTracker, additional lysosome proteins such 
as GFP-Rab7 and GFP-Arl8 also showed robust enrichment 
within these axonal swellings (Fig. S1, D and E).
JIP3 KO axonal swellings resemble amyloid 
plaque-proximal dystrophic axons
Axonal lysosome accumulations in the JIP3 KO neurons were 
also robustly detected by EM (Fig. 2, A–C). Low- 
magnification 
images revealed numerous clusters of electron-dense organ-
elles that were selectively abundant in the axons of JIP3 KO 
cultures (Fig. 2 B). Higher-magnification observations showed 
 Axonal lysosomes contribute to amyloid plaque pathology • Gowrishankar et al.
3293
numerous organelles with lysosome morphology (lamellar, 
multivesicular, and electron-dense properties) within such 
clusters without any similarly major accumulation of other 
prominent axonal organelles such as mitochondria or synap-
tic vesicles. The selective accumulations of lysosomes in these 
axonal swellings strongly resemble those found around am-
yloid plaques in AD mice (Yu et al., 2005; Dikranian et al., 
2012; Kandalepas et al., 2013; Gowrishankar et al., 2015) and 
in human AD brain tissue (Terry et al., 1964; Cataldo et al., 
1994; Nixon et al., 2005).
Figure 1. Loss of JIP3 results in the axonal accumulation of lysosomes. (A and B) LAMP1 immunofluorescence in WT and JIP3 KO cortical neuron primary 
cultures (12 DIV). Arrows indicate position of cell bodies. Bar, 10 µm. (C and D) Live-cell images of LysoTracker fluorescence in WT and JIP3 KO axons of 
primary neurons grown at low density. Arrowheads highlight individual lysosomes in the WT axon and focal axonal swellings filled with lysosomes in the 
JIP3 KO. Bar, 10 µm. (E) Quantification of the percentage of neurons with lysosome-filled axonal swellings (10 DIV, low-density cultures, mean ± SD from 
three independent KO and control cultures, >30 neurons per genotype; ***, P < 0.001, unpaired t test). (F) Axonal LysoTracker signals in WT and JIP3 
KO (outside of swellings) neurons. Bar, 5 µm. (G) Quantification of lysosome density in WT and JIP3 KO axons (outside of swellings; 15–17 neurons per 
genotype from 3 independent cultures; mean ± SD; *, P = 0.0118, unpaired t test). (H) Quantification of fraction of stationary axonal lysosomes in WT and 
JIP3 KO (outside of swellings) neurons (mean ± SD); n = 3 independent WT and JIP3 KO littermate cultures; ∼90 WT lysosomes and 150 JIP3 KO lysosomes 
analyzed; **, P < 0.01, unpaired t test). (I) LAMP1 and neurofilament immunofluorescence confirm the axonal localization of lysosome accumulations in the 
JIP3 KO neurons. Bar, 10 µm. (J and K) Stitched images of VAMP2 (green; presynaptic protein), LAMP1 (red; lysosomes), and MAP2 (blue; dendrites) immu-
nofluorescence in WT and JIP3 KO neurons reveals that sites of lysosome accumulation are positive for the presynaptic marker. Bars: 25 µm; (inset) 1 µm.
 JCB • Volume 216 • NumBer 10 • 2017
3294
JIP3 KO axonal lysosome accumulations 
contain low levels of lysosomal proteases
Having previously defined the axonal lysosomes that accumu-
late at amyloid plaques as being distinct from the lysosomes of 
the somatodendritic compartment based on their low content of 
luminal proteases (Gowrishankar et al., 2015), we next investi-
gated the enrichment of such proteins within the JIP3 KO axons. 
In both WT and JIP3 KO axons, lysosomal proteases such as 
cathepsin B, cathepsin D, and asparagine endopeptidase (AEP) 
were strongly enriched within lysosomes of neuronal cell bodies 
(Fig. 3, A–C; Fig. S2, A–C; and Fig. S3 C). However, the highly 
abundant lysosomes within JIP3 KO axonal swellings contained 
only low or undetectable levels of these lysosomal proteases 
(Fig. 3, A–C, arrows). Thus, the lysosomes accumulating in JIP3 
KO axons are lacking in multiple lysosomal proteases in a pattern 
that is similar to that of the dystrophic axons found at AD neuritic 
plaques (Gowrishankar et al., 2015). The low protease levels 
in these axonal lysosomes distinguish them from lysosomes of 
neuronal cell bodies and argue against anterograde transport of 
cell-body lysosomes into the axon as the major source of these 
organelles. These observations instead favor a model wherein the 
retrograde transport and maturation of lysosome precursors that 
form distally are impaired in the absence of JIP3.
In addition to the ultrastructural evidence supporting a 
selective accumulation of lysosomes versus other organelles 
within JIP3 KO axonal swellings, the specificity of this pheno-
type was further established by a light microscopy examina-
tion of the impact of JIP3 KO on the abundance and subcellular 
localization of other organelles. In contrast to studies that re-
ported axonal early endosome and Golgi accumulation in C. el-
egans UNC-16/JIP3 mutants (Brown et al., 2009; Edwards et 
al., 2013), mouse JIP3 KO axonal swellings did not show en-
richment for early endosome antigen 1 (EEA1; Fig. 3 E and 
Fig. S2 E). There was also no enrichment of sortilin 1–positive 
endosomes in the JIP3 KO axonal swellings (Fig. S3, A and B). 
We also observed that the Golgi (GM130) was restricted to the 
somatodendritic region in both WT and KO neurons and unde-
tectable in the lysosome-filled axonal swellings (Fig. 3 D and 
Fig. S2 D). Coupled with our mitochondrial localization results 
(Fig. S1, J and K), our data thus defines a selective role for mam-
malian JIP3 in the regulation of axonal lysosome abundance.
JIP3 localizes to axonal lysosomes and 
is necessary for normal axonal lysosome 
distribution
The axonal swellings filled with lysosomes combined with 
defects in their axonal transport raised questions about the un-
derlying mechanisms. The possibility of a direct role for JIP3 
in controlling axonal lysosome transport is consistent with 
past studies of interactions between JIP3 and kinesin as well 
as dynein motor subunits (Cavalli et al., 2005; Arimoto et al., 
2011; Huang et al., 2011; Sun et al., 2011; Sato et al., 2015). 
As a first step toward addressing the mechanisms that support 
JIP3-dependent regulation of axonal lysosome abundance, we 
sought to validate the use of a GFP-JIP3 fusion protein by in-
vestigating its subcellular localization and its ability to rescue 
lysosome accumulation in JIP3 KO neurons. Consistent with 
our previous observations of untransfected neurons (Fig. 1), 
transfection of JIP3 KO neurons with GFP (negative control) 
and mCherry-Rab7 (lysosome marker) revealed lysosome-filled 
axonal swellings in 87.16% of neurons (Fig. 4, A and C). This 
phenotype was significantly rescued following cotransfection 
with GFP-JIP3 and mCherry-Rab7 (Fig. 4, B and C). The strong 
reduction in the JIP3 KO phenotype following expression of 
GFP-JIP3 supports the functionality of this fusion protein. In 
the few JIP3 KO neurons that still exhibited swellings following 
GFP-JIP3 expression, the extent of the lysosome accumulation 
was relatively mild compared with that of the cells transfected 
with the GFP (negative control) plasmid, suggesting a partial 
rescue even in these cells (Fig. S3, F and G). Having established 
the functionality of the GFP-JIP3 fusion protein, we examined 
its subcellular localization. In both WT and KO neurons, GFP-
JIP3 was diffusely cytosolic in the cell bodies and dendrites 
but was distinctly enriched within axon endings and at branch 
points (Fig. 4 F, arrowheads). Additionally, GFP-JIP3 was also 
present on axonal lysosomes (defined by colocalization with ei-
ther Cherry-tagged LAMP1 or Rab7) in WT (Fig. 4, D and E) 
and KO neurons (Fig. S3 H). We observed that the lysosome 
distribution in axons was sensitive to the levels of JIP3 expres-
sion. Similar to the JIP3 KO, excessively high levels of JIP3 
overexpression also resulted in axonal swellings even in WT 
neurons (Fig. 4 G, asterisks), suggesting that the pathway in 
which JIP3 functions is very sensitive to JIP3 expression lev-
Figure 2. Ultrastructure of axonal lysosome accumulations in JIP3 KO neurons. (A and B) Low-magnification EM images of WT and JIP3 KO neurons 
showing increased abundance of axonal lysosomes in JIP3 KO neurons (arrows). Bars, 5 µm. (C) Higher-magnification image of one such JIP3 KO axonal 
swelling (arrow) reveals the selective accumulation of organelles with lysosome-like morphology. Bar, 1 µm.
 Axonal lysosomes contribute to amyloid plaque pathology • Gowrishankar et al.
3295
Figure 3. Analysis of organelle distribution and lysosomal protein composition of JIP3 KO axonal lysosomes. (A–C) JIP3 KO neurons triple stained for 
cathepsin B (A), AEP (B), and cathepsin D (C), along with both LAMP1 and MAP2. Arrows highlight representative axonal LAMP1 accumulations that have 
low levels of the respective lysosomal proteases compared with lysosomes of nearby neuronal cell bodies. (D and E) JIP3 KO neurons triple labeled for 
LAMP1 and MAP2 along with GM130 (D) or EEA1 (E), showing that axonal swellings filled with lysosomes (LAMP1 staining; arrows) are devoid of Golgi (D) 
and early endosomes (E). Images are representative of results from at least three independent JIP3 KO neuron cultures grown for 10–12 DIV. Bars, 10 µm.
 JCB • Volume 216 • NumBer 10 • 2017
3296
els. This sensitivity to JIP3 levels may also help to explain 
the lack of full rescue of the JIP3 KO phenotype with exoge-
nous GFP-JIP3 (Fig. 4 C).
APP-processing machinery is enriched 
within JIP3 KO axonal swellings
High levels of BACE1 are a striking feature of the plaque- 
Figure 4. GFP-JIP3 localizes to axonal lysosomes and rescues axonal lysosomes over abundance in JIP3 KO neurons. (A and B) Representative stitched 
image of 9 DIV JIP3 KO neurons transfected at 7 DIV with GFP and Cherry-Rab7 (A) or GFP-JIP3 and Cherry-Rab7 (B) showing that GFP-transfected KO 
neurons have large axonal swellings filled with lysosomes (A; yellow box with dashed lines), whereas the majority of GFP-JIP3–transfected KO neurons do 
not exhibit this phenotype. Bars: 25 µm; (inset) 5 µm. (C) Quantification of fraction of neurons showing one or more lysosome-filled axonal swellings in GFP 
or GFP-JIP3–transfected JIP3 KO neurons (n = 5 independent experiments, mean ± SD; 35–45 neurons per treatment/transfection type; ***, P < 0.001). 
(D and E) Portions of WT axons transfected with either GFP-JIP3 and Cherry-LAMP1 (D) or GFP-JIP3 and Cherry-Rab7 (E) showing enrichment of GFP-JIP3 
(green arrowheads) on lysosomes (red arrowheads). Bars, 5 µm. (F) Image of GFP-JIP3–transfected WT axon showing GFP-JIP3 distributed in vesicles and 
local accumulation at axon tips and branches (arrowheads highlight JIP3-positive vesicles). Bar, 10 µm. (G) High levels of GFP-JIP3 overexpression induce 
the formation of abnormal axonal swellings (asterisk) even in WT neurons. Bar, 10 µm.
 Axonal lysosomes contribute to amyloid plaque pathology • Gowrishankar et al.
3297
associated dystrophic axons (Zhao et al., 2007; Kandalepas et 
al., 2013; Gowrishankar et al., 2015). However, the pathophys-
iological relevance of this abnormal BACE1 abundance and 
localization has not been well established. We thus sought to 
determine whether JIP3 KO could serve as a tool for dissect-
ing this problem. Consistent with what has been previously re-
ported (Vassar et al., 1999), we observed a punctate pattern for 
BACE1 that is distinct from that of lysosomes in WT neurons 
(Fig. 5 A and Fig. S4 A). In contrast, BACE1 strongly coaccu-
mulated with LAMP1 in axonal swellings in the JIP3 KO neu-
rons (Fig. 5 B and Fig. S4 B, arrows). Furthermore, there was 
an increase in total BACE1 protein abundance in the JIP3 KO 
cultures (Fig. 5 C), whereas levels of multiple canonical lyso-
some proteins remained unchanged (Fig. S4 C). Interestingly, 
this observation from JIP3 KO neurons parallels the increased 
overall BACE1 protein abundance in mouse AD models (Kan-
dalepas et al., 2013) and human AD brains (Ewers et al., 2008).
It was recently reported that BACE1 and APP are cotrans-
ported in axons based on observations of reporter proteins con-
taining split Venus fragments (APP: VN+BACE-1: VC) that 
depend on BACE1–APP interactions for reconstitution of Venus 
protein fluorescence (Das et al., 2016). This suggested the ex-
istence of interactions within axons between these proteins that 
are required for Aβ production. By extension, defects in axon 
transport, such as those that occur following JIP3 depletion, 
could prolong this convergence of APP-processing machinery 
and thus result in increased Aβ production. We tested this model 
by examining the axonal distribution of the split Venus-tagged 
APP and BACE1 reporter proteins. Compared with WT axons, 
where only occasional discrete puncta were observed (Fig. 5 D), 
there was robust accumulation of the reconstituted Venus sig-
nal in JIP3 KO neuron axonal swellings (Fig. 5 D). The high 
endogenous BACE1 levels (Fig. 5, B and C) and the BACE1–
APP split construct signal at axonal lysosome accumulations 
(Fig. 5 D) suggested that they might act as sites of APP process-
ing. This raised questions about PSEN localization.
The subcellular localization and site of action of the PSENs 
have long been controversial (Cupers et al., 2001). Some studies 
suggested that PSENs and other γ secretase components (nicas-
trin, APH-1, and PEN-2) are enriched in lysosomes (Pasternak 
et al., 2003) or autophagosomes (Yu et al., 2005). Meanwhile, 
others found an ER, Golgi, or plasma membrane localization 
for PSEN1 (Kovacs et al., 1996; Annaert et al., 1999; Kim et 
al., 2000; Area-Gomez et al., 2009). A major limiting factor in 
conclusively establishing PSEN localization has been the lack 
of specific antibodies and knowledge concerning trafficking 
mechanisms that control PSEN subcellular distribution. How-
ever, PSEN2 was recently shown to contain a sorting motif that 
targets it to late endosomes and lysosomes within cell bodies 
and dendrites of WT neurons (Sannerud et al., 2016). We took 
advantage of the PSEN2 antibody that was described by San-
nerud et al. (2016) to robustly detect the endogenous mouse 
PSEN2 protein and observed that it colocalized with LAMP1 
in both WT and JIP3 KO neuronal cell bodies (Fig. 6, A and 
B). Interestingly, we also noted that PSEN2 puncta addition-
ally colocalized with LAMP1 in both WT axons and dendrites 
(Fig. 6, A and B). Most importantly, we detected a striking 
buildup of PSEN2 in the LAMP1-positive axonal swellings of 
JIP3 KO neurons (Fig. 6, B and D). Thus, a consequence of 
the axonal lysosome transport defects in JIP3 KO is the con-
vergence of high local levels of BACE1 and PSEN2 within the 
lysosome-filled swellings.
As the localization of PSEN2 at amyloid plaques has 
not been previously established, we next examined PSEN2 lo-
Figure 5. Impact of JIP3 KO on the abundance and localization of BACE1. (A and B) Representative images of WT and JIP3 KO primary cortical neurons 
stained for BACE1 and LAMP1. BACE1 is seen in LAMP1-negative puncta in cell bodies of both genotypes, whereas JIP3 KO neurons also contain large 
amounts of BACE1 coaccumulating with LAMP1 in the axonal swellings (arrows, n = 5 independent JIP3 KO cultures). Bars, 10 µm. (C) Immunoblotting 
reveals increased levels of BACE1 protein in JIP3 KO neurons compared with WT neurons (VAPB used as loading control; n = 4; mean ± SD; ***, P < 
0.001; unpaired t test). (D) WT and JIP3 KO primary axons (straightened) expressing APP and BACE proteins tagged with split Venus fragments (APP: 
VN+BACE-1: VC). Note the accumulation of the complemented (interacting proteins) at axonal swellings in JIP3 KO. Bar, 5 µm.
 JCB • Volume 216 • NumBer 10 • 2017
3298
calization in the mouse 5xFAD model of AD (Oakley et al., 
2006) and observed that PSEN2 is present within a subset of the 
swollen axons present at amyloid plaques (Fig. S4 D). We had 
previously hypothesized that a defect in the retrograde move-
ment of immature axonal lysosomes leads to a local buildup 
of APP-processing enzymes that could result in enhanced Aβ 
peptide production (Gowrishankar et al., 2015). In this study, 
we have recapitulated key aspects of this phenotype using JIP3 
KO neurons (Fig. 6 F). The convergence of APP, BACE1, and 
PSEN2 within JIP3 KO neurons suggested the possibility of in-
creased APP processing and Aβ42 generation. Consistent with 
this prediction, ELI 
SA assays revealed significantly elevated 
Aβ42 levels in JIP3 KO neurons (Fig. 6 E).
JIP3 haploinsufficiency exacerbates amyloid 
plaque pathology
Having established that JIP3 plays a critical role in controlling 
the abundance and maturation state of axonal lysosomes, we 
next used the JIP3 genetic perturbation to assess the contribu-
tion of such lysosomes to the in vivo development of amyloid 
plaque pathology. As the JIP3 KO mice die perinatally (Kelkar 
et al., 2003; unpublished data), we examined the impact of JIP3 
haploinsufficiency on the development of amyloid plaque pa-
thology in the 5xFAD mouse model of AD. Analysis of amyloid 
plaque pathology via LAMP1 and Aβ immunofluorescence re-
vealed a striking increase in overall plaque burden (area occu-
pied by plaques) in the cerebral cortex of JIP3+/−; 5xFAD mice 
compared with their respective gender-matched 5xFAD control 
littermates (Fig. 7, A and C). Additionally, examination of in-
dividual plaques revealed a greater mean area per plaque that 
was occupied by axonal dystrophies (LAMP1 staining) and am-
yloid deposits (Aβ staining; Fig. 7 B). These observations are 
supported by quantification of the mean area occupied by each 
of these markers per plaque (Fig. 7, D and E; and Fig. S5 A). 
There was also an increased number of lysosome-filled axonal 
swellings per plaque (Fig. 7 F and Fig. S5 B). Lastly, in addi-
tion to the worsened amyloid plaque pathology, there were also 
increased amounts of soluble Aβ42 in JIP3+/−; 5xFAD brains 
Figure 6. PSEN2 accumulates within axonal swellings in JIP3 KO neurons. (A and B) PSEN2, LAMP1, and MAP2 immunofluorescence shows that PSEN2 
colocalizes with lysosomes in neuronal cell bodies, axons, and dendrites of both WT and KO neurons. Large accumulations of PSEN2 on lysosomes in 
axonal swellings are selectively observed in JIP3 KO neurons (arrows; images are representative of results from five independent cultures). Bars, 10 µm. 
 
(C and D) Magnified images showing PSEN2 (green) and LAMP1 (red) colocalization in both WT (C) and JIP3 KO (D) axons. Bars, 1 µm. All results 
obtained from DIV 10–12 neuronal cultures. (E) Quantification of endogenous mouse Aβ42 based on ELI 
SA measurements (mean ± SD) from n = 5 inde-
pendent WT and KO cultures (***, P < 0.001, unpaired t test). (F) Schematic diagram summarizing that axonal lysosome accumulations in the JIP3 KO 
neurons are accompanied by the local buildup of APP, BACE1, and PSEN2 and increased production of Aβ42.
 Axonal lysosomes contribute to amyloid plaque pathology • Gowrishankar et al.
3299
compared with their 5xFAD littermates (Fig. 7 G). Consistent 
with their genotype, JIP3 heterozygous 5xFAD mice had half 
the levels of JIP3 protein of their 5xFAD littermates (Fig. 7 H). 
Collectively, these results identify JIP3-dependent regulation 
of axonal lysosome transport as protective against the develop-
ment of amyloid plaque pathology.
Our neuron primary culture and in vivo data are consistent 
with the conclusion that JIP3 depletion results in intraneuronal 
APP processing and Aβ42 generation. However, given that mi-
croglia can also play a role as negative regulators of amyloid 
plaque pathology (Wang et al., 2016; Yuan et al., 2016), we also 
examined the microglia in JIP3+/−; 5xFAD animals but did not 
detect any changes in activated (Iba1-positive) microglia abun-
dance and/or recruitment to plaques that could explain the in-
creased amyloid plaque abundance in the JIP3 KO mice (Fig. 8, 
A–D). As observed previously (Gowrishankar et al., 2015), we 
found that there is a positive correlation between plaque size (di-
ameter) and the number of activated microglia associated with 
each plaque (Fig. 8, B and D). The higher frequency of larger 
plaques in JIP3+/−; 5xFAD mice was accompanied by propor-
tionally more microglia at these plaques (Fig. 8, C and D). The 
number of astrocytes (GFAP staining) at these plaques also did 
not differ (Fig. 8, E–G). Thus, based on the Aβ42 increases in 
both cultured JIP3 KO neurons and JIP3+/−; 5xFAD brain ho-
mogenates, as well as the microglial and astrocyte staining in 
JIP3+/−; 5xFAD animals, we propose that the enhanced plaque 
pathology in JIP3+/−; 5xFAD mice is a result of increased 
intraneuronal APP processing rather than a secondary conse-
quence of altered glial responses to amyloid plaque pathology.
Discussion
Lysosome-filled axonal swellings are a major but poorly under-
stood feature of amyloid plaques in both human AD patients 
and mouse models of the disease (Terry et al., 1964; Cataldo 
et al., 1994; Nixon et al., 2005; Dikranian et al., 2012; Kan-
dalepas et al., 2013; Gowrishankar et al., 2015). Based on our 
previous study, which identified an immature, protease-defi-
cient population of lysosomes that builds up in axons at amy-
loid plaques (Gowrishankar et al., 2015), we proposed a model 
where these axonal lysosomes accumulate because of a local 
Figure 7. JIP3 haploinsufficiency exacer-
bates in vivo Aβ42 levels and the development 
of amyloid plaque pathology. (A) Lysosomes 
(LAMP1, green) and amyloid plaque (Aβ, 
red) labeling in stitched confocal images of 
the cerebral cortex of 5xFAD and JIP3+/−; 
5xFAD littermates. Bars, 100 µm. (B) High- 
magnification images of Aβ deposits and their 
surrounding lysosome-filled dystrophic axons 
from 5xFAD and JIP3+/−; 5xFAD littermates. 
Bars, 10 µm. (C) Quantification of the plaque 
burden (area occupied by plaques, normal-
ized to 5xFAD sample) in three pairs of 5xFAD 
controls and JIP3+/−; 5xFAD gender-matched 
littermates. ***, P < 0.001, unpaired t test. (D) 
Area of individual plaques as defined by Aβ 
signal in JIP3+/−; 5xFAD animals normalized 
to their corresponding gender-matched 5xFAD 
littermates (n = 5 pairs of gender-matched 
littermates, 45–50 plaques measured per ani-
mal per genotype; ***, P < 0.001, unpaired 
t test). (E) Quantification of the area of indi-
vidual dystrophic axon cross sections (LAMP1 
signal) in JIP3+/−; 5xFAD animals normalized 
to their corresponding gender-matched litter-
mates (45–50 accumulations per genotype 
per animal were analyzed; **,P < 0.01, un-
paired t test). (F) Cumulative frequency distri-
bution of the number of axonal swellings per 
plaque in both 5xFAD and JIP3+/−; 5xFAD 
littermates (***, P < 0.001, Kolmogorov–
Smirnov test). (G) Quantification of soluble 
Aβ42 (outside of plaques) levels in brain ho-
mogenates from three pairs of 5xFAD and 
JIP3+/−; 5xFAD gender-matched littermates 
(**, P < 0.01, unpaired t test). (H) Quantifi-
cation of JIP3 protein levels from three pairs 
of 5xFAD and JIP3+/−; 5xFAD littermates 
 
(***, P < 0.001, unpaired t test). Data pre-
sented as mean ± SD in C–E, G, and H.
 JCB • Volume 216 • NumBer 10 • 2017
3300
defect in their retrograde transport and maturation and represent 
pathologically meaningful sites of Aβ production. In the current 
study, we sought to test this model. To this end, we identified 
JIP3 as a candidate for regulating axonal lysosome abundance 
and validated such a function through extensive cell biologi-
cal characterization of JIP3 KO mouse neurons. We found that 
JIP3 is an important regulator of the transport, abundance, and 
maturation state of axonal lysosomes. Furthermore, we docu-
mented multiple similarities between the axonal lysosomes that 
accumulate at amyloid plaques and in JIP3 KO neurons. This 
included a buildup of APP, BACE1, and PSEN2 that suggested 
that the loss of JIP3 could be accompanied by an increase in 
the processing of APP into Aβ peptides. Indeed, we detected 
significantly elevated Aβ levels in the JIP3 KO neurons. We 
then tested the in vivo effect of decreasing JIP3 gene dosage 
by assessing the development of amyloid plaque pathology in 
a mouse model of AD and found that reduced JIP3 expression 
resulted in an increase in soluble Aβ levels, plaque size, abun-
dance, and axonal dystrophy. These results collectively support 
a model wherein efficient retrograde axonal lysosome transport 
acts as a negative regulator of APP processing and development 
of amyloid plaque pathology.
Regulation of axonal lysosome 
abundance by JIP3
From a neuronal cell biology perspective, the high abundance 
of lysosomes within axons at amyloid plaques raises questions 
about the normal processes that control the biogenesis, transport, 
and abundance of lysosomes within this specific subcellular 
compartment. Recent years have yielded advances in the under-
standing of mechanisms that control the subcellular distribution 
of lysosomes (Pu et al., 2016), as well as an appreciation that 
distinct subtypes of lysosomes can exist within different subcel-
lular compartments (Johnson et al., 2016). However, there is still 
little known about how such processes are adapted to the unique 
demands of neurons. Although previous studies of C. elegans 
Figure 8. JIP3 haploinsufficient 5xFAD animals do not exhibit defects in glial recruitment to plaques. (A–D) Representative images of 5xFAD (A) controls 
and JIP3+/−; 5xFAD (C) gender-matched littermate brain sections stained for LAMP1 (plaque; red) and Iba-1 (activated microglia; green. Bars, 10 µm. 
(B and D) Correlation between number of microglia at plaque with plaque size from 5xFAD (B) and JIP3+/−; 5xFAD (D) mice showing that the number of 
activated microglia at a plaque is similarly correlated with the plaque size in both genotypes (n = 3 pairs of gender-matched littermates; 30–40 plaques 
per animal per genotype analyzed). (E and F) Representative images from 5xFAD (E) and JIP3+/−; 5xFAD (F) cerebral cortices stained for GFAP (astrocytes; 
red) and LAMP1 (lysosomes; green) showing similar astrocyte recruitment to plaques in both genotypes. Bars, 10 µm. (G) Quantification of mean number of 
astrocytes per plaque (mean ± SD) in three pairs of 5xFAD controls and JIP3+/−; 5xFAD gender-matched littermates. 30–45 plaques and their associated 
astrocytes were analyzed per animal per genotype.
 Axonal lysosomes contribute to amyloid plaque pathology • Gowrishankar et al.
3301
and zebrafish both concluded that the loss of JIP3 resulted in 
increased axonal lysosome abundance (Drerup and Nechiporuk, 
2013; Edwards et al., 2013), they differed in their interpretation 
of the underlying mechanisms. The C. elegans JIP3 (UNC-16) 
loss-of-function mutant was proposed to have a defect in the 
ability of axon initial segments to inhibit export of lysosomes 
from the cell body (Edwards et al., 2013). Meanwhile, analysis 
of zebrafish JIP3 mutants instead concluded that JIP3 is critical 
for the removal of lysosomes from axons via dynein-mediated 
retrograde transport (Drerup and Nechiporuk, 2013).
Our observations of the mouse JIP3 KO neurons fit best 
with the retrograde transport model for JIP3 function, as the 
lysosomes that accumulated in the JIP3 KO axons were dis-
tinguishable from cell body lysosomes by their low levels of 
cathepsins. They are thus more likely to reflect intermediates 
in the axonal biogenesis of lysosomes rather than cell body 
lysosomes that have escaped into the axon. This interpretation 
builds on a growing appreciation that there are high rates of 
autophagy in the distal regions of axons but that such auto-
phagosomes must fuse with endosomes and acquire lysosomal 
properties such as acidification before undergoing efficient ret-
rograde back toward the cell body for the eventual degradation 
and recycling of their cargos (Hollenbeck, 1993; Maday et al., 
2012; Maday and Holzbaur, 2014; Cheng et al., 2015). We also 
observed an increased fraction of stationary lysosomes in JIP3 
KO axons and localized JIP3 to axonal lysosomes. Regulation 
of retrograde axonal transport of lysosomes by JIP3 is addition-
ally supported by previous observations that it interacts with 
dynein subunits such as p150glued (Cavalli et al., 2005) and the 
dynein light intermediate chain (DLIC; Huang et al., 2011). 
Furthermore, JIP3 coenrichment with p150glued at sites distal to 
sciatic nerve injury (Cavalli et al., 2005) also fits with putative 
direct functions for JIP3 in retrograde axonal transport.
The robust, evolutionarily conserved axonal lysosome 
phenotype in JIP3 KO neurons raises important questions about 
the spatiotemporal regulation of JIP3 interactions with mo-
tors, small GTPases, and signaling proteins and their respec-
tive contributions to regulation of axonal lysosome transport. 
In other cellular contexts, the small GTPase Rab7 links dynein 
to late endosomes and lysosomes via the RILP adaptor pro-
tein (Jordens et al., 2001). Although JIP3 has not been found 
to bind to Rab7, interactions have been detected between JIP3 
and Rab36, and Rab36 has been implicated in the retrograde 
movement of melanosomes in melanocytes (Matsui et al., 
2012). However, the physiological relevance of the JIP3–Rab36 
interaction is not known, and little is known about the Rab36 
function in neurons. Another GTPase, Arf6, binds the leucine 
zipper region on JIP3 (Montagnac et al., 2009). This JIP3–Arf6 
interaction was implicated in early parts of the endocytic path-
way (Montagnac et al., 2009) in nonneuronal cells, but Arf6 
is not known to have a direct role in the axonal transport of 
lysosomes. Thus, although known interactions with these small 
GTPases may warrant further investigation, there is also a need 
for the unbiased identification of physiologically relevant neu-
ronal binding partners for JIP3.
Convergence of Aβ−processing machinery 
within axonal lysosomes
Initial observations of organelle accumulation in swollen axons 
around amyloid plaques in human AD brains were made over 
five decades ago (Terry et al., 1964). Subsequent studies noted 
that the dystrophic axons that surround amyloid plaques in 
human AD brains contain BACE1, PSEN1, and APP (Cum-
mings et al., 1992; Yu et al., 2005; Kandalepas et al., 2013; 
Gowrishankar et al., 2015; Yuan et al., 2016). These observa-
tions previously led us to propose that such dystrophic axons at 
amyloid plaques could represent sites of APP processing to gen-
erate Aβ peptides and thus actively contribute to further disease 
progression (Gowrishankar et al., 2015). Our new results sup-
port an important role for efficient retrograde transport of axo-
nal lysosomes in limiting APP processing and the development 
of amyloid plaque pathology. While this article was under revi-
sion, additional support for this model was provided by a study 
that targeted the snapin gene and also observed similar effects 
on BACE1 transport and Aβ production in response to impaired 
axonal transport of lysosomes (Ye et al., 2017). Snapin was 
previously proposed to link late endosomes/lysosomes to the 
dynein intermediate chain and thus promote their retrograde, 
dynein-dependent axonal transport (Cai et al., 2010). However, 
as snapin was subsequently also identified as a subunit of the 
BORC complex that promotes the kinesin-dependent transport 
of lysosomes (Pu et al., 2015), it remains to be determined how 
the proposed role for snapin in retrograde axonal transport of 
lysosomes is coordinated with its role within the BORC com-
plex in promoting anterograde transport of axonal lysosomes 
(Farías et al., 2017). Given the emerging importance of axonal 
lysosome transport in regulating amyloidogenic processing of 
APP, further dissection and understanding of the complex in-
terplay of adaptors and scaffolding proteins (such as JIP3) that 
control the anterograde and retrograde movement of axonal ly-
sosomes is critically required.
Axonal transport and AD vulnerability
In this study, we found that increasing the abundance of ax-
onal lysosomes had striking consequences for the localization 
and levels of APP-processing machinery and exacerbated the 
amyloid plaque pathology in a mouse model of AD. These re-
sults suggest that other genetic and nongenetic perturbations 
that impair axonal transport could influence APP processing 
and thus confer AD risk. Indeed, reducing kinesin levels was 
previously reported to increase the abundance of axonal swell-
ings, Aβ deposition, and plaque burden in a mouse model of 
AD (Stokin et al., 2005). Traumatic brain injury (TBI) may be 
an AD risk factor (Johnson et al., 2010), and controlled cortical 
impact TBI enhances intra-axonal Aβ levels in 3x-Tg AD mice 
(Tran et al., 2011). TBI also recapitulates many of these factors, 
including axonal swellings, axonal organelle accumulations, 
and enhanced Aβ production (Sherriff et al., 1994; Johnson et 
al., 2010), as well as rapid and abundant accumulation of APP 
(Gentleman et al., 1993). Buildup of APP-processing machin-
ery (BACE1 and PSENs) also occurs in axons in both animal 
and human models of TBI (Roberts et al., 1991). These studies 
offer broad support for a model wherein axonal organelles are 
a source of Aβ and perturbation of axonal transport through in-
jury or genetic means can potentially promote the development 
of amyloid plaque pathology.
Conclusion
Collectively, our results indicate that the axonal accumulations 
of lysosomes at amyloid plaques are not innocent bystanders 
but instead are important contributors to APP processing and 
amyloid plaque growth. These findings emphasize the need for 
a more comprehensive elucidation of the mechanisms that regu-
late the abundance and transport of axonal lysosomes as well as 
 JCB • Volume 216 • NumBer 10 • 2017
3302
the mechanisms whereby contact between axons and amyloid 
fibrils locally disrupts such processes at amyloid plaques. The 
robust axonal lysosome phenotype arising in JIP3 KO neurons 
raises questions about how this protein functions as part of a 
pathway that controls axonal lysosome abundance and protects 
against the amyloidogenic processing of APP. The identification 
of other proteins that function alongside JIP3 and the elucidation 
of rate-limiting steps in this process will be critical for develop-
ing strategies that enhance the axonal transport and maturation 
of lysosomes. Our characterization of JIP3 KO neurons resulted 
in the development of an in vitro model that will support future 
studies of mechanisms that regulate axonal lysosome trans-
port and maturation as well as the coordination of both β- and 
γ-secretase activities at such sites. Increased understanding of 
these problems could ultimately lead to strategies to modulate 
the axonal abundance of lysosomes for therapeutic purposes.
Materials and methods
Mouse strains
Animal procedures were approved by and performed in accordance 
with guidelines established by the Institutional Animal Care and Use 
Committee at Yale University. 5xFAD mice (Oakley et al., 2006) were 
provided by R. Vasser (Northwestern University, Evanston, IL). The 
JIP3 KO (MAPK8ip3tm1Rjd/J strain) mice (Kelkar et al., 2003) were 
acquired from The Jackson Laboratory. 5xFAD heterozygous male 
transgenic mice were bred with JIP3 heterozygous females. The re-
sulting 5xFAD;JIP3+/− offspring were compared with age- and sex-
matched 5xFAD littermates.
Primary neuron culture
Embryos from JIP3+/− matings were obtained at embryonic day 16–
18. The brains were stored in ice-cold Hibernate E medium (Thermo 
Fisher Scientific) while PCR-based genotyping was performed to 
identify WT and KO embryos.
Neuron culture. 
 Growth of neurons at low density was performed 
in the following manner: Divots were made in 12-well plates using a 
soldering iron to create micropedestals. These dishes were then coated 
with poly-d-lysine (PDL; 20 µg/ml; Sigma Aldrich). In parallel, No. 
1.5 18-mm coverslips (Assistant Brand; Carolina Biological) were 
added to other 12-well plates and also coated with PDL. Neurons were 
subsequently plated at high density (300,000/well) on the bottom of the 
dish containing the pedestals and at low density (5,000–8,000/cover-
slip) on the coverslips. Neurons on the coverslips were allowed to grow 
overnight before they were inverted over the high-density support. This 
was accompanied by replacement of the plating medium with Neuro-
basal + 2% B27, 1% glutamax, and penicillin/streptomycin (Neuronal 
Medium). Neurons were grown in this media until experiments were 
performed. For imaging of neurons grown at high density, 100,000–
300,000 neurons were directly plated onto PDL-coated, 18-mm cover-
slips in 12-well dishes and grown in Neuronal Medium.
Microscopy
16-bit images (512 × 512 pixels) were acquired with a laser scanning 
confocal microscope (LSM 710; ZEI 
SS) equipped with a 63× plan Apo 
(NA 1.4) oil immersion objective or a 20× (NA 0.8) objective and a 
QUA 
SAR (quiet spectral array) photomultiplier detector. Z-stacks with 
a step size of 0.49 µm and 1.0 µm were routinely acquired with the 63× 
and 20× objectives, respectively. Spinning disk confocal images were 
obtained using the UltraVIEW VoX system (PerkinElmer), including 
an inverted microscope (Nikon Ti-E Eclipse equipped with a spin-
ning disk confocal scan head; CSU-X1; Yokogawa) driven by Volocity 
(PerkinElmer) software. Images were acquired without binning with 
a 14-bit (1,000 × 1,000) electron-multiplying charge-coupled device 
camera (Hamamatsu Photonics). Spinning disk confocal images were 
obtained with a 60× (NA 1.3) objective.
Live imaging of lysosomes in primary neurons
Neurons were incubated with 10 nM LysoTracker Red alone or Lyso-
Tracker Deep Red (Invitrogen) and MitoTracker green (Invitrogen; 10 
nM each) for 2 min and then rinsed gently twice with imaging me-
dium (136 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM KCl, 2 mM CaCl2, 1.3 mM MgCl2, and 
10 mM Hepes, pH 7.4, supplemented with BSA and glucose) and im-
aged in the same buffer for 10 min.
Quantification of neurons with axonal swellings
For quantification of the percentage of neurons with lysosome-filled ax-
onal swellings, DIV 10 primary cortical neurons grown at low density 
were incubated with LysoTracker Red (10 nm; 2 min) and imaged using 
the spinning disk confocal microscope. Stitched images of entire neu-
rons were obtained to capture the full axonal length, and only those neu-
rons whose axons were uniquely identifiable were used for the analysis.
Analysis of lysosome density and mobility in axons
Lysosome density and mobility in axons were analyzed in young (DIV 4) 
 
primary cortical neurons cultured from WT and JIP3 KO embryos, as 
this age preceded the major development of lysosome-filled axonal 
swellings. Neurons grown at low density were incubated with Lyso-
Tracker Red (10 nM; 2 min) and subsequently imaged by spinning disk 
confocal microscopy. Lysosome dynamics were imaged at a rate of 120 
frames/min for 2 min. Individual axons in the first frame were traced 
to measure their lengths, and the number of lysosomes in that length 
was counted and expressed as the number of lysosomes per microme-
ter axon length. To measure the mobility of axonal lysosomes, kymo-
graphs were generated using the “reslice” function on “straightened” 
axons (ImageJ), and the percentage of lysosomes that were stationary 
(moved <2 µm in 2 min) in each axon was measured. At least four 
axons per culture per genotype were analyzed from three independent 
WT and JIP3 KO cultures (90 and 150 lysosomes, respectively).
Rescue experiments with GFP-JIP3
For expression of N-terminal GFP-tagged JIP3, a mouse JIP3 cDNA 
(GenBank accession no. BC068312) was purchased from Thermo 
Fisher Scientific and cloned into pEGFP-C1 (Clontech). Primary 
neurons from JIP3 KO embryos were cultured and transfected using 
Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) with Cherry-Rab7 (from G. Voeltz, 
University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO), Addgene plasmid no. 
61804; Rowland et al., 2014) and either control GFP or GFP-JIP3 on 
7 DIV and imaged live on 9 DIV on a spinning disk microscope. All 
transfected neurons (with Cherry-Rab7 plus GFP or GFP-JIP3) whose 
axons could be traced were used for evaluation, and the fraction of total 
neurons that contained at least one lysosome-filled axonal swelling was 
calculated. Five independent experiments (cultures) were performed, 
with a total of 35–45 neurons per transfection condition.
Immunofluorescence analysis of neurons
Primary cultures of WT and JIP3 KO embryonic cortical neurons were 
prepared and used between DIV 9 and 14. Cells were fixed with 4% 
PFA in 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.2, and 4% sucrose for 20 
min, rinsed with 50 mM NH4Cl, and permeabilized with PBS contain-
ing 0.1% Triton X-100 (PBST) for 10 min. Cells were then blocked 
with PBST + 3% BSA. Primary (overnight) and secondary antibody 
(1 h) incubations were performed in the same buffer with three 10-min 
 Axonal lysosomes contribute to amyloid plaque pathology • Gowrishankar et al.
3303
washes in PBST before and after secondary antibody treatment. Anti-
bodies used in this study are summarized in Table S1.
EM of primary neurons
Neurons were grown on coverslips at high density and processed for 
EM at 12–14 DIV as described previously (Wu et al., 2014).
Immunoblotting
Primary neurons (WT and JIP3 KO) were grown on six-well plates 
(600,000 cells/well). DIV 14 neurons were washed with ice-cold PBS 
and then lysed in lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 20 mM Hepes, 0.5% 
SDS, and protease inhibitor cocktail) and spun at 13,000 g for 5 min. 
The supernatant was collected and incubated at 95°C for 5 min in SDS 
sample buffer before SDS-PAGE, transfer to nitrocellulose membranes, 
and immunoblotting. See Table S1 for antibody information.
Immunofluorescence on mouse brain sections
Immunofluorescence on free-floating coronal mouse brain sections was 
performed as described previously (Gowrishankar et al., 2015).
ELI 
SA-based measurement of endogenous Aβ
Primary neurons from JIP3 KO and WT embryos (littermates) were 
cultured as described in the Neuron culture section for 2 wk. Aβ42 
ELI 
SA measurements were performed as per a previously validated 
assay for the measurement of mouse and human Aβ42 (Teich et al., 
2013). In brief, neurons were lysed in Tris-EDTA with protease in-
hibitor and processed double-blind for ELI 
SA measurements using a 
high-sensitivity ELI 
SA kit (catalog no. 292–64501; Wako). Standard 
curves were generated using Aβ1-42 peptide standards for each set of 
experiments. Such ELI 
SA measurements were made from five inde-
pendent WT and KO cultures.
ELI 
SA-based measurement of Aβ42 from mouse brains
Brains from 3.5- to 4-mo-old JIP3+/−; 5xFAD/+ animals and their 
gender-matched littermate controls (5xFAD/+) were homogenized in 
Tris buffer (10 mM Tris, 1 mM EDTA, 250 mM sucrose) with pro-
tease inhibitor and spun at 13,000 g for 5 min. Supernatant was used 
for ELI 
SA measurements using a high-sensitivity ELI 
SA kit (catalog 
no. 292–64501; Wako). Standard curves were generated using Aβ1-42 
peptide standards for each experiment.
Quantification of axonal lysosome accumulation and amyloid plaque 
abundance
Quantification of the area of axonal lysosome accumulations and am-
yloid plaque size was done as described previously (Gowrishankar 
et al., 2015). In brief, coronal brain sections from 3.5- to 4-mo-old 
JIP3+/−; 5xFAD/+ animals and their gender-matched control litter-
mates (5xFAD/+) were costained for LAMP1 and Aβ and imaged on 
a spinning disk microscope to acquire both lysosome and amyloid 
plaque signals. Regions of interest were identified based on the dis-
tinct patterns of both Aβ and LAMP1 signals and manually out-
lined for area measurements.
Quantification of plaque burden in AD mice
Coronal brain sections from 3.5- to 4-mo-old JIP3+/−; 5xFAD/+ an-
imals and their gender-matched littermate controls (5xFAD/+) were 
costained for LAMP1 and Aβ and imaged with the 20× objective on 
the LSM710 confocal microscope using the Zen software “Tile” option 
to obtain a stitched image of amyloid plaques throughout the entire 
neocortex region. Plaques were identified (based on Aβ staining) in an 
automated fashion using the “threshold” and “analyze particle” func-
tions of ImageJ software, and the area of the entire cortical tissue that 
was outlined was calculated. The percentage area of tissue occupied by 
amyloid plaques in JIP3+/−; 5xFAD mice was normalized to that of the 
gender-matched 5xFAD littermate controls.
Statistical analysis
Data are represented as mean ± SD unless otherwise specified. Statisti-
cal analysis was performed using Prism 7 software. Detailed statistical 
information (statistical test performed, number of independent experi-
ments, and p-values) is described in the respective figure legends.
Online supplemental material
Fig. S1 shows lysosome distribution in astrocytes (WT and JIP3 KO) 
and mitochondrial distribution in neurons. Fig. S2 summarizes the dis-
tribution of multiple organelles and lysosomal enzymes in WT neurons. 
Fig. S3 demonstrates the organelle composition of axonal swellings 
in JIP3 KO neurons and rescue following GFP-JIP3 expression. Fig. 
S4 presents the distribution and levels of APP-processing machinery in 
JIP3 KO neurons. Fig. S5 shows characteristics of amyloid plaque pa-
thology in JIP3 haploinsufficient mice. Table 1 lists antibodies (source 
and dilution) used in the study. Table 2 describes plasmids used in 
the study. Videos 1 and 2 show lysosome dynamics in a WT and JIP3 
KO neuron, respectively.
Acknowledgments
We thank Pietro De Camilli for his generous advice, Agnes 
Roczniak-Ferguson and Frank Wilson for superb management and 
maintenance of laboratory infrastructure, Wendolyn Hill for illustration 
assistance, and Heather Wheeler for outstanding technical assistance.
This work was supported in part by grants from the National 
Institutes of Health (NIH; GM105718 and AG047270) to S.M. Fergu-
son; S.M. Ferguson was also supported by the Ellison Medical Foun-
dation. S. Gowrishankar is a recipient of a BrightFocus postdoctoral 
fellowship. Support for S. Gowrishankar and Y. Wu was also pro-
vided by grants to Pietro De Camilli from the NIH (NS036251 and 
DK45735). Microscopy studies were supported by the Yale University 
Program in Cellular Neuroscience, Neurodegeneration, and Repair 
imaging facility.
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Author contributions: S. Gowrishankar and S.M. Ferguson con-
ceived of and designed all experiments. S. Gowrishankar and 
S.M. Ferguson analyzed and interpreted data and wrote the manu-
script. S. Gowrishankar carried out all experiments with the exception 
of the EM studies that are presented in Fig. 2 (Y. Wu).
Submitted: 20 December 2016
Revised: 18 May 2017
Accepted: 6 July 2017
References
Allison, R., J.R. Edgar, G. Pearson, T. Rizo, T. Newton, S. Günther, F. Berner, 
J. Hague, J.W. Connell, J. Winkler, et al. 2017. Defects in ER–endosome 
contacts impact lysosome function in hereditary spastic paraplegia. 
J. Cell Biol. 216:1337–1355. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1083 
/jcb 
.201609033
Annaert, W.G., L. Levesque, K. Craessaerts, I. Dierinck, G. Snellings, 
D. Westaway, P.S. George-Hyslop, B. Cordell, P. Fraser, and B. De 
Strooper. 1999. Presenilin 1 controls gamma-secretase processing of 
amyloid precursor protein in pre-golgi compartments of hippocampal 
neurons. J. Cell Biol. 147:277–294. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1083 
/jcb 
.147 
.2 
.277
Area-Gomez, E., A.J. de Groof, I. Boldogh, T.D. Bird, G.E. Gibson, C.M. Koehler, 
W.H. Yu, K.E. Duff, M.P. Yaffe, L.A. Pon, and E.A. Schon. 2009. 
 JCB • Volume 216 • NumBer 10 • 2017
3304
Presenilins are enriched in endoplasmic reticulum membranes associated 
with mitochondria. Am. J. Pathol. 175:1810–1816. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.2353 
/ajpath 
.2009 
.090219
Arimoto, M., S.P. Koushika, B.C. Choudhary, C. Li, K. Matsumoto, and 
N. Hisamoto. 2011. The Caenorhabditis elegans JIP3 protein UNC-
16 functions as an adaptor to link kinesin-1 with cytoplasmic dynein. 
J. Neurosci. 31:2216–2224. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1523 
/JNE 
URO 
SCI 
.2653 
-10 
.2011
Brown, H.M., H.A. Van Epps, A. Goncharov, B.D. Grant, and Y. Jin. 2009. The 
JIP3 scaffold protein UNC-16 regulates RAB-5 dependent membrane 
trafficking at C. elegans synapses. Dev. Neurobiol. 69:174–190. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1002 
/dneu 
.20690
Cai, Q., L. Lu, J.H. Tian, Y.B. Zhu, H. Qiao, and Z.H. Sheng. 2010. Snapin-
regulated late endosomal transport is critical for efficient autophagy-
lysosomal function in neurons. Neuron. 68:73–86. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.neuron 
.2010 
.09 
.022
Cataldo, A.M., D.J. Hamilton, and R.A. Nixon. 1994. Lysosomal abnormalities 
in degenerating neurons link neuronal compromise to senile plaque 
development in Alzheimer disease. Brain Res. 640:68–80. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/0006 
-8993(94)91858 
-9
Cavalli, V., P. Kujala, J. Klumperman, and L.S. Goldstein. 2005. Sunday Driver 
links axonal transport to damage signaling. J. Cell Biol. 168:775–787. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1083 
/jcb 
.200410136
Cheng, X.T., B. Zhou, M.Y. Lin, Q. Cai, and Z.H. Sheng. 2015. Axonal 
autophagosomes recruit dynein for retrograde transport through fusion 
with late endosomes. J. Cell Biol. 209:377–386. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1083 
/jcb 
.201412046
Condello, C., A. Schain, and J. Grutzendler. 2011. Multicolor time-stamp reveals 
the dynamics and toxicity of amyloid deposition. Sci. Rep. 1:19. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/srep00019
Cras, P., M. Kawai, D. Lowery, P. Gonzalez-DeWhitt, B. Greenberg, and 
G. Perry. 1991. Senile plaque neurites in Alzheimer disease accumulate 
amyloid precursor protein. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 88:7552–7556. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.88 
.17 
.7552
Cummings, B.J., J.H. Su, J.W. Geddes, W.E. Van Nostrand, S.L. Wagner, 
D.D. Cunningham, and C.W. Cotman. 1992. Aggregation of the amyloid 
precursor protein within degenerating neurons and dystrophic neurites 
in Alzheimer’s disease. Neuroscience. 48:763–777. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/0306 
-4522(92)90265 
-4
Cupers, P., M. Bentahir, K. Craessaerts, I. Orlans, H. Vanderstichele, P. Saftig, 
B. De Strooper, and W. Annaert. 2001. The discrepancy between 
presenilin subcellular localization and gamma-secretase processing of 
amyloid precursor protein. J. Cell Biol. 154:731–740. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1083 
/jcb 
.200104045
Das, U., L. Wang, A. Ganguly, J.M. Saikia, S.L. Wagner, E.H. Koo, and S. Roy. 
2016. Visualizing APP and BACE-1 approximation in neurons yields 
insight into the amyloidogenic pathway. Nat. Neurosci. 19:55–64. http 
://
dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nn 
.4188
Dikranian, K., J. Kim, F.R. Stewart, M.A. Levy, and D.M. Holtzman. 2012. 
Ultrastructural studies in APP/PS1 mice expressing human ApoE iso-
forms: Implications for Alzheimer’s disease. Int. J. Clin. Exp. Pathol. 
5:482–495.
Drerup, C.M., and A.V. Nechiporuk. 2013. JNK-interacting protein 3 mediates 
the retrograde transport of activated c-Jun N-terminal kinase and 
lysosomes. PLoS Genet. 9:e1003303. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1371 
/journal 
.pgen 
.1003303
Edwards, S.L., S.C. Yu, C.M. Hoover, B.C. Phillips, J.E. Richmond, and 
K.G. Miller. 2013. An organelle gatekeeper function for Caenorhabditis 
elegans UNC-16 (JIP3) at the axon initial segment. Genetics. 194:143–
161. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1534 
/genetics 
.112 
.147348
Ewers, M., Z. Zhong, K. Bürger, A. Wallin, K. Blennow, S.J. Teipel, Y. Shen, 
and H. Hampel. 2008. Increased CSF-BACE 1 activity is associated 
with ApoE-ε4 genotype in subjects with mild cognitive impairment and 
Alzheimer’s disease. Brain. 131:1252–1258. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1093 
/
brain 
/awn034
Farías, G.G., C.M. Guardia, R. De Pace, D.J. Britt, and J.S. Bonifacino. 2017. 
BORC/kinesin-1 ensemble drives polarized transport of lysosomes into 
the axon. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 114:E2955–E2964. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.1616363114
Fiala, J.C. 2007. Mechanisms of amyloid plaque pathogenesis. Acta Neuropathol. 
114:551–571. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1007 
/s00401 
-007 
-0284 
-8
Gentleman, S.M., M.J. Nash, C.J. Sweeting, D.I. Graham, and G.W. Roberts. 
1993. β-amyloid precursor protein (β APP) as a marker for axonal injury 
after head injury. Neurosci. Lett. 160:139–144. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/0304 
-3940(93)90398 
-5
Gowrishankar, S., P. Yuan, Y. Wu, M. Schrag, S. Paradise, J. Grutzendler, P. De 
Camilli, and S.M. Ferguson. 2015. Massive accumulation of luminal 
protease-deficient axonal lysosomes at Alzheimer’s disease amyloid 
plaques. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 112:E3699–E3708. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.1510329112
Hollenbeck, P.J. 1993. Products of endocytosis and autophagy are retrieved from 
axons by regulated retrograde organelle transport. J. Cell Biol. 121:305–
315. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1083 
/jcb 
.121 
.2 
.305
Huang, S.H., S. Duan, T. Sun, J. Wang, L. Zhao, Z. Geng, J. Yan, H.J. Sun, 
and Z.Y. Chen. 2011. JIP3 mediates TrkB axonal anterograde transport 
and enhances BDNF signaling by directly bridging TrkB with 
kinesin-1. J. Neurosci. 31:10602–10614. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1523 
/JNE 
URO 
SCI 
.0436 
-11 
.2011
Itagaki, S., P.L. McGeer, H. Akiyama, S. Zhu, and D. Selkoe. 1989. Relationship 
of microglia and astrocytes to amyloid deposits of Alzheimer disease. 
J. 
Neuroimmunol. 
24:173–182. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/0165 
-5728(89)90115 
-X
Johnson, D.E., P. Ostrowski, V. Jaumouillé, and S. Grinstein. 2016. The position 
of lysosomes within the cell determines their luminal pH. J. Cell Biol. 
212:677–692. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1083 
/jcb 
.201507112
Johnson, V.E., W. Stewart, and D.H. Smith. 2010. Traumatic brain injury and 
amyloid-β pathology: A link to Alzheimer’s disease? Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 
11:361–370.
Jordens, I., M. Fernandez-Borja, M. Marsman, S. Dusseljee, L. Janssen, 
J. Calafat, H. Janssen, R. Wubbolts, and J. Neefjes. 2001. The Rab7 
effector protein RILP controls lysosomal transport by inducing the 
recruitment of dynein-dynactin motors. Curr. Biol. 11:1680–1685. http 
://
dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/S0960 
-9822(01)00531 
-0
Kandalepas, P.C., K.R. Sadleir, W.A. Eimer, J. Zhao, D.A. Nicholson, and 
R. Vassar. 2013. The Alzheimer’s β-secretase BACE1 localizes to 
normal presynaptic terminals and to dystrophic presynaptic terminals 
surrounding amyloid plaques. Acta Neuropathol. 126:329–352. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1007 
/s00401 
-013 
-1152 
-3
Kelkar, N., M.H. Delmotte, C.R. Weston, T. Barrett, B.J. Sheppard, R.A. Flavell, 
and R.J. Davis. 2003. Morphogenesis of the telencephalic commissure 
requires scaffold protein JNK-interacting protein 3 (JIP3). Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 100:9843–9848. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.1733944100
Kim, S.H., J.J. Lah, G. Thinakaran, A. Levey, and S.S. Sisodia. 2000. Subcellular 
localization of presenilins: association with a unique membrane pool in 
cultured cells. Neurobiol. Dis. 7:99–117. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1006 
/nbdi 
.1999 
.0280
Kovacs, D.M., H.J. Fausett, K.J. Page, T.W. Kim, R.D. Moir, D.E. Merriam, 
R.D. Hollister, O.G. Hallmark, R. Mancini, K.M. Felsenstein, et al. 1996. 
Alzheimer-associated presenilins 1 and 2: neuronal expression in brain 
and localization to intracellular membranes in mammalian cells. Nat. 
Med. 2:224–229. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nm0296 
-224
Maday, S., and E.L. Holzbaur. 2014. Autophagosome biogenesis in primary 
neurons follows an ordered and spatially regulated pathway. Dev. Cell. 
30:71–85. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.devcel 
.2014 
.06 
.001
Maday, S., K.E. Wallace, and E.L. Holzbaur. 2012. Autophagosomes initiate 
distally and mature during transport toward the cell soma in primary 
neurons. J. Cell Biol. 196:407–417. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1083 
/jcb 
.201106120
Matsui, T., N. Ohbayashi, and M. Fukuda. 2012. The Rab interacting lysosomal 
protein (RILP) homology domain functions as a novel effector domain 
for small GTPase Rab36: Rab36 regulates retrograde melanosome 
transport in melanocytes. J. Biol. Chem. 287:28619–28631. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1074 
/jbc 
.M112 
.370544
Montagnac, G., J.B. Sibarita, S. Loubéry, L. Daviet, M. Romao, G. Raposo, and 
P. Chavrier. 2009. ARF6 interacts with JIP4 to control a motor switch 
mechanism regulating endosome traffic in cytokinesis. Curr. Biol. 
19:184–195. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cub 
.2008 
.12 
.043
Nixon, R.A., J. Wegiel, A. Kumar, W.H. Yu, C. Peterhoff, A. Cataldo, and 
A.M. Cuervo. 2005. Extensive involvement of autophagy in Alzheimer 
disease: An immuno-electron microscopy study. J. Neuropathol. Exp. 
Neurol. 64:113–122. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1093 
/jnen 
/64 
.2 
.113
Oakley, H., S.L. Cole, S. Logan, E. Maus, P. Shao, J. Craft, A. Guillozet-
Bongaarts, M. Ohno, J. Disterhoft, L. Van Eldik, et al. 2006. Intraneuronal 
β-amyloid aggregates, neurodegeneration, and neuron loss in transgenic 
mice with five familial Alzheimer’s disease mutations: Potential factors 
in amyloid plaque formation. J. Neurosci. 26:10129–10140. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1523 
/JNE 
URO 
SCI 
.1202 
-06 
.2006
Overly, C.C., K.D. Lee, E. Berthiaume, and P.J. Hollenbeck. 1995. Quantitative 
measurement of intraorganelle pH in the endosomal-lysosomal pathway 
in neurons by using ratiometric imaging with pyranine. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. USA. 92:3156–3160. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.92 
.8 
.3156
Pasternak, S.H., R.D. Bagshaw, M. Guiral, S. Zhang, C.A. Ackerley, B.J. Pak, 
J.W. Callahan, and D.J. Mahuran. 2003. Presenilin-1, nicastrin, amyloid 
precursor protein, and gamma-secretase activity are co-localized in the 
 Axonal lysosomes contribute to amyloid plaque pathology • Gowrishankar et al.
3305
lysosomal membrane. J. Biol. Chem. 278:26687–26694. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1074 
/jbc 
.M304009200
Pu, J., C. Schindler, R. Jia, M. Jarnik, P. Backlund, and J.S. Bonifacino. 2015. 
BORC, a multisubunit complex that regulates lysosome positioning. Dev. 
Cell. 33:176–188. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.devcel 
.2015 
.02 
.011
Pu, J., C.M. Guardia, T. Keren-Kaplan, and J.S. Bonifacino. 2016. Mechanisms 
and functions of lysosome positioning. J. Cell Sci. 129:4329–4339. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1242 
/jcs 
.196287
Roberts, G.W., S.M. Gentleman, A. Lynch, and D.I. Graham. 1991. β A4 amyloid 
protein deposition in brain after head trauma. Lancet. 338:1422–1423. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/0140 
-6736(91)92724 
-G
Rowland, A.A., P.J. Chitwood, M.J. Phillips, and G.K. Voeltz. 2014. ER contact 
sites define the position and timing of endosome fission. Cell. 159:1027–
1041. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cell 
.2014 
.10 
.023
Sannerud, R., C. Esselens, P. Ejsmont, R. Mattera, L. Rochin, A.K. Tharkeshwar, 
G. De Baets, V. De Wever, R. Habets, V. Baert, et al. 2016. Restricted 
location of PSEN2/γ-secretase determines substrate specificity and 
generates an intracellular Aβ pool. Cell. 166:193–208. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cell 
.2016 
.05 
.020
Sato, T., M. Ishikawa, M. Mochizuki, M. Ohta, M. Ohkura, J. Nakai, 
N. Takamatsu, and K. Yoshioka. 2015. JSAP1/JIP3 and JLP regulate 
kinesin-1-dependent axonal transport to prevent neuronal degeneration. 
Cell Death Differ. 22:1260–1274. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/cdd 
.2014 
.207
Selkoe, D.J., and J. Hardy. 2016. The amyloid hypothesis of Alzheimer’s disease 
at 25 years. EMBO Mol. Med. 8:595–608. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.15252 
/
emmm 
.201606210
Sherriff, F.E., L.R. Bridges, and S. Sivaloganathan. 1994. Early detection of 
axonal injury after human head trauma using immunocytochemistry for 
β-amyloid precursor protein. Acta Neuropathol. 87:55–62. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1007 
/BF00386254
Stokin, G.B., C. Lillo, T.L. Falzone, R.G. Brusch, E. Rockenstein, S.L. Mount, 
R. Raman, P. Davies, E. Masliah, D.S. Williams, and L.S. Goldstein. 
2005. Axonopathy and transport deficits early in the pathogenesis of 
Alzheimer’s disease. Science. 307:1282–1288. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/science 
.1105681
Su, J.H., B.J. Cummings, and C.W. Cotman. 1993. Identification and distribution 
of axonal dystrophic neurites in Alzheimer’s disease. Brain Res. 625:228–
237. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/0006 
-8993(93)91063 
-X
Sun, F., C. Zhu, R. Dixit, and V. Cavalli. 2011. Sunday Driver/JIP3 binds kinesin 
heavy chain directly and enhances its motility. EMBO J. 30:3416–3429. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/emboj 
.2011 
.229
Teich, A.F., M. Patel, and O. Arancio. 2013. A reliable way to detect endogenous 
murine β-amyloid. PLoS One. 8:e55647. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1371 
/
journal 
.pone 
.0055647
Terry, R.D., N.K. Gonatas, and M. Weiss. 1964. Ultrastructural studies in 
Alzheimer’s presenile dementia. Am. J. Pathol. 44:269–297.
Tran, H.T., F.M. LaFerla, D.M. Holtzman, and D.L. Brody. 2011. Controlled 
cortical impact traumatic brain injury in 3xTg-AD mice causes acute 
intra-axonal amyloid-β accumulation and independently accelerates the 
development of τ abnormalities. J. Neurosci. 31:9513–9525. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1523 
/JNE 
URO 
SCI 
.0858 
-11 
.2011
Tsai, J., J. Grutzendler, K. Duff, and W.B. Gan. 2004. Fibrillar amyloid 
deposition leads to local synaptic abnormalities and breakage of neuronal 
branches. Nat. Neurosci. 7:1181–1183. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nn1335
Vassar, R., B.D. Bennett, S. Babu-Khan, S. Kahn, E.A. Mendiaz, P. Denis, 
D.B. Teplow, S. Ross, P. Amarante, R. Loeloff, et al. 1999. β-secretase 
cleavage of Alzheimer’s amyloid precursor protein by the transmembrane 
aspartic protease BACE. Science. 286:735–741. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/science 
.286 
.5440 
.735
Wang, Y., T.K. Ulland, J.D. Ulrich, W. Song, J.A. Tzaferis, J.T. Hole, P. Yuan, 
T.E. Mahan, Y. Shi, S. Gilfillan, et al. 2016. TREM2-mediated early 
microglial response limits diffusion and toxicity of amyloid plaques. 
J. Exp. Med. 213:667–675. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1084 
/jem 
.20151948
Wu, Y., E.T. O’Toole, M. Girard, B. Ritter, M. Messa, X. Liu, P.S. McPherson, 
S.M. Ferguson, and P. De Camilli. 2014. A dynamin 1-, dynamin 3- and 
clathrin-independent pathway of synaptic vesicle recycling mediated by 
bulk endocytosis. eLife. 3:e01621. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.7554 
/eLife 
.01621
Ye, X., T. Feng, P. Tammineni, Q. Chang, Y.Y. Jeong, D.J. Margolis, H. Cai, 
A. Kusnecov, and Q. Cai. 2017. Regulation of synaptic amyloid-β 
generation through BACE1 retrograde transport in a mouse model of 
Alzheimer’s disease. J. Neurosci. 37:2639–2655. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1523 
/JNE 
URO 
SCI 
.2851 
-16 
.2017
Yoon, S.Y., J.U. Choi, M.H. Cho, K.M. Yang, H. Ha, I.J. Chung, G.S. Cho, 
and D.H. Kim. 2013. α-secretase cleaved amyloid precursor protein 
(APP) accumulates in cholinergic dystrophic neurites in normal, aged 
hippocampus. Neuropathol. Appl. Neurobiol. 39:800–816. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1111 
/nan 
.12032
Yu, W.H., A.M. Cuervo, A. Kumar, C.M. Peterhoff, S.D. Schmidt, J.H. Lee, 
P.S. Mohan, M. Mercken, M.R. Farmery, L.O. Tjernberg, et al. 2005. 
Macroautophagy—A novel β-amyloid peptide-generating pathway 
activated in Alzheimer’s disease. J. Cell Biol. 171:87–98. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1083 
/jcb 
.200505082
Yuan, P., C. Condello, C.D. Keene, Y. Wang, T.D. Bird, S.M. Paul, W. Luo, 
M. Colonna, D. Baddeley, and J. Grutzendler. 2016. TREM2 
haplodeficiency in mice and humans impairs the microglia barrier 
function leading to decreased amyloid compaction and severe axonal 
dystrophy. Neuron. 90:724–739. (published erratum appears in Neuron 
2016. 92:252–264) http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.neuron 
.2016 
.05 
.003
Zhao, J., Y. Fu, M. Yasvoina, P. Shao, B. Hitt, T. O’Connor, S. Logan, E. Maus, 
M. Citron, R. Berry, et al. 2007. β-site amyloid precursor protein cleaving 
enzyme 1 levels become elevated in neurons around amyloid plaques: 
Implications for Alzheimer’s disease pathogenesis. J. Neurosci. 27:3639–
3649. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1523 
/JNE 
URO 
SCI 
.4396 
-06 
.2007
