 Original research n Neuroradiology
888 
radiology.rsna.org n Radiology: Volume 279: Number 3—June 2016
1 From the Departments of Radiology and Clinical Neuro-
sciences, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada 
(M.G., B.K.M.); Departments of Neurology and Neurological 
Surgery, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, 
Pa (A.P.J., T.J.); Department of Neuroradiology, Hôpital 
Gui-de-Chauliac, Montpellier, France (A.B.); Department 
of Neurology, University Hospital of University Duisburg-
Essen, Essen, Germany (H.D.); Division of Neuroradiology 
and Division of Neurosurgery, Department of Medical 
Imaging and Department of Surgery, Toronto Western 
Hospital, University Health Network, University of Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada (V.M.P.); Department of Neurosurgery, 
State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY (E.L.); 
Department of Radiology, Erlanger Hospital at the University 
of Tennessee, Chattanooga, Tenn (B.B.); and Division of 
Interventional Neuroradiology (R.J.) and Department of 
Neurology and Comprehensive Stroke Center (J.L.S.), David 
Geffen School of Medicine at the University of California 
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, Calif. Received January 25, 
2016; revision requested February 4; revision received 
February 22; accepted February 24; final version accepted 
March 10. Address correspondence to M.G., Seaman 
Family MR Research Centre, Foothills Medical Centre, 
1403-29th St NW, Calgary, AB, Canada T2N 2T9 (e-mail: 
mgoyal@ucalgary.ca).
The SWIFT PRIME trial was supported by Covidien.
q RSNA, 2016
Purpose:
To study the relationship between functional independence 
and time to reperfusion in the Solitaire with the Intention 
for Thrombectomy as Primary Endovascular Treatment for 
Acute Ischemic Stroke (SWIFT PRIME) trial in patients with 
disabling acute ischemic stroke who underwent endovascular 
therapy plus intravenous tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) 
administration versus tPA administration alone and to inves-
tigate variables that affect time spent during discrete steps.
Materials and 
Methods:
Data were analyzed from the SWIFT PRIME trial, a global, 
multicenter, prospective study in which outcomes were com-
pared in patients treated with intravenous tPA alone or in 
combination with the Solitaire device (Covidien, Irvine, Ca-
lif). Between December 2012 and November 2014, 196 pa-
tients were enrolled. The relation between time from (a) 
symptom onset to reperfusion and (b) imaging to reperfu-
sion and clinical outcome was analyzed, along with patient 
and health system characteristics that affect discrete steps in 
patient workflow. Multivariable logistic regression was used 
to assess relationships between time and outcome; negative 
binomial regression was used to evaluate effects on workflow. 
The institutional review board at each site approved the trial. 
Patients provided written informed consent, or, at select 
sites, there was an exception from having to acquire explicit 
informed consent in emergency circumstances.
Results:
In the stent retriever arm of the study, symptom onset to re-
perfusion time of 150 minutes led to 91% estimated proba-
bility of functional independence, which decreased by 10% 
over the next hour and by 20% with every subsequent hour 
of delay. Time from arrival at the emergency department to 
arterial access was 90 minutes (interquartile range, 69–120 
minutes), and time to reperfusion was 129 minutes (interquar-
tile range, 108–169 minutes). Patients who initially arrived at a 
referring facility had longer symptom onset to groin puncture 
times compared with patients who presented directly to the 
endovascular-capable center (275 vs 179.5 minutes, P , .001).
Conclusion:
Fast reperfusion leads to improved functional outcome among 
patients with acute stroke treated with stent retrievers. Detailed 
attention to workflow with iterative feedback and aggressive time 
goals may have contributed to efficient workflow environments.
q 
RSNA, 2016
Online supplemental material is available for this article.
Mayank Goyal, MD, FRCPC
Ashutosh P. Jadhav, MD, PhD
Alain Bonafe, MD
Hans Diener, MD
Vitor Mendes Pereira, MD
Elad Levy, MD
Blaise Baxter, MD
Tudor Jovin, MD
Reza Jahan, MD
Bijoy K. Menon, MD
Jeffrey L. Saver, MD
For the SWIFT PRIME investigators
analysis of Workflow and Time 
to Treatment and the effects 
on Outcome in endovascular 
Treatment of acute ischemic 
stroke: Results from the SWIFT 
PRIME Randomized Controlled Trial1
This copy is for personal use only. To order printed copies, contact reprints@rsna.org
 Radiology: Volume 279: Number 3—June 2016 n radiology.rsna.org 
889
NEURORADIOLOGY: Workflow and Outcomes in Endovascular Treatment of Acute Ischemic Stroke 
Goyal et al
investigators and representatives of 
the sponsor. The site investigators 
gathered the data, with monitoring 
and database maintenance performed 
by the sponsor. The first and subse-
quent drafts of the manuscript were 
written by the first and second au-
thors by incorporating input from all 
authors. The academic authors had 
unrestricted access to the data (M.G., 
A.P.J.), performed the data analysis 
with the primary and the indepen-
dent study statisticians, and attest to 
the integrity of the trial and the com-
pleteness and accuracy of the reported 
data. The trial was monitored by an 
independent data and safety monitor-
ing board.
Quality Improvement Program
Sites were instructed to fill in a work-
flow form (Fig 1) after each patient 
enrollment that was immediately sent 
for analysis to the global interventional 
workflow principal investigator of the 
study (M.G., see Appendix E1 [on-
line]). Data from the form were used 
to calculate various time intervals and 
were used to provide feedback via con-
ference call and e-mail. Other sourc-
es of time stamps, such as computed 
quality improvement program was con-
ducted with all participating sites dur-
ing the trial. We sought to understand 
the relationship between functional 
independence and time to reperfusion 
in the SWIFT PRIME trial and inves-
tigated variables that affect the time 
spent during discrete steps.
Materials and Methods
SWIFT PRIME was a global, multi-
center, randomized, controlled trial 
conducted to compare the benefit of 
Solitaire stent retriever (Covidien, Ir-
vine, Calif) thrombectomy added to 
intravenous tissue plasminogen acti-
vator (tPA) administration versus in-
travenous tPA administration alone. 
The methods and primary results have 
been published previously (8,9). In the 
trial, 196 patients were enrolled (98 in 
each arm) before termination due to 
crossing of a predefined effectiveness 
boundary. The institutional review 
board at each site approved the trial. 
Enrolled patients provided written 
informed consent, or at select sites, 
there was an exception from having 
to acquire explicit informed consent 
in emergency circumstances. For sites 
within the United States, Health Insur-
ance Portability and Accountability Act 
guidelines were followed. The trial was 
funded by Covidien (now Medtronic) 
and was designed and led by a steer-
ing committee that included academic 
Published online before print
10.1148/radiol.2016160204 Content code: 
Radiology 2016; 279:888–897
Abbreviations:
CI = confidence interval
ECC = endovascular-capable center
ED = emergency department
IQR = interquartile range
SWIFT PRIME = Solitaire with the Intention for  
Thrombectomy as Primary Endovascular Treatment  
for Acute Ischemic Stroke
tPA = tissue plasminogen activator
Author contributions:
Guarantors of integrity of entire study, M.G., R.J.; study 
concepts/study design or data acquisition or data 
analysis/interpretation, all authors; manuscript drafting or 
manuscript revision for important intellectual content, all 
authors; approval of final version of submitted manuscript, 
all authors; agrees to ensure any questions related to the 
work are appropriately resolved, all authors; literature 
research, M.G., A.P.J., E.L., B.K.M., J.L.S.; clinical studies, 
M.G., A.B., H.D., V.M.P., E.L., T.J., J.L.S.; statistical analysis, 
E.L., B.K.M., J.L.S.; and manuscript editing, all authors
Conflicts of interest are listed at the end of this article.
Advances in Knowledge
 
n Revascularization within 2.5 
hours of symptom onset was as-
sociated with functional indepen-
dence (minimal or no disability) 
in 91% of patients.
 
n Likelihood of functional indepen-
dence was 10% higher in patients 
treated within 2.5 hours com-
pared with patients treated 
between 2.5 and 3.5 hours after 
stroke onset.
 
n Every 60-minute delay after 3.5 
hours resulted in a 20% lower 
likelihood of functional 
independence.
 
n Upon arrival to the emergency 
department, sources of delay 
from imaging acquisition, de-
livery of patient to the angiog-
raphy suite, and reperfusion can 
all be decreased with streamlined 
workflow.
Implications for Patient Care
 
n Optimizing outcomes in patients 
undergoing mechanical throm-
bectomy requires fast workflow, 
as rapid recanalization is associ-
ated with higher likelihood of 
functional independence.
 
n Quality initiatives for monitoring 
workflow may be warranted to 
identify and address sources of 
delay.
 
n Interfacility transfer times are 
prolonged and are currently a 
significant source of delay in the 
treatment of patients with acute 
large-vessel occlusive disease.
I
n acute ischemic stroke, “time is 
brain.” Multiple studies have shown 
a correlation between early recan-
alization and functional independence 
(1,2), but initial endovascular trials 
failed to show benefit with mechani-
cal clot retrieval (3–5). Analysis of the 
Interventional Management of Stroke 
III trial demonstrated that the median 
time from emergency department (ED) 
arrival to recanalization was more than 
230 minutes (6), indicating that there 
was substantial scope for improvement 
in workflow. Establishing target time in-
tervals and providing direct feedback in 
real time have led to improvements in 
workflow and outcomes in patients un-
dergoing percutaneous coronary inter-
vention after myocardial infarction (7).
On the basis of these consider-
ations, the Solitaire with the Intention 
for Thrombectomy as Primary Endo-
vascular Treatment for Acute Ischemic 
Stroke (SWIFT PRIME) trial was de-
signed to include an intensive program 
of workflow acceleration. Aggressive 
time targets were set (eg, qualifying 
image acquisition to groin puncture of 
,70 minutes) to promote faster work-
flow (8). In addition, a continuous 
 890 
radiology.rsna.org n Radiology: Volume 279: Number 3—June 2016
NEURORADIOLOGY: Workflow and Outcomes in Endovascular Treatment of Acute Ischemic Stroke 
Goyal et al
Figure 1
Figure 1: SWIFT PRIME patient workflow timesheet.
 Radiology: Volume 279: Number 3—June 2016 n radiology.rsna.org 
891
NEURORADIOLOGY: Workflow and Outcomes in Endovascular Treatment of Acute Ischemic Stroke 
Goyal et al
catheter that can be advanced to the 
intracranial circulation), and a routine 
guide catheter.
Statistical Analyses
Workflow time intervals as cited ear-
lier are reported by using medians and 
interquartile ranges (IQRs), owing to 
nonnormality of the data; differences 
between subgroups were tested by us-
ing the Wilcoxon rank sum test. The 
association between time intervals and 
baseline characteristics of the patient, 
mode of arrival at the ECC, and pro-
cedural characteristics was evaluated 
with multivariable negative binomial 
regression by using a logarithmic link 
function, and absolute differences in 
minutes between subgroups were eval-
uated by using the same models but by 
using the identity link; goodness of fit 
was checked by using the Akaike infor-
mation criterion. Outputs from these 
analyses include rate ratios and their 
associated 95% confidence limits. The 
relationship between time and func-
tional independence was assessed by 
using standard logistic regression in ad-
justed and unadjusted analyses.
In the adjusted analyses, the three 
clinically relevant covariates used as 
stratification variables at randomization 
(National Institutes of Health Stroke 
Scale, age, and occlusion location) and 
the two baseline characteristics found 
to be significantly different between 
randomized groups (presence of cervi-
cal carotid artery stenosis and platelet 
count at baseline) were incorporated. 
In analyses in which patients from both 
randomized groups were incorporated, 
treatment assignment was also included 
as a stratification variable. Reported P 
values are two sided, with values less 
than .05 deemed to indicate a statis-
tically significant difference. Statistical 
analysis was performed by using R ver-
sion 3.2.1 software (R Development 
Core Team, R Foundation, Vienna, 
Austria).
Results
Median interval times for the overall 
workflow are summarized in Table 2. 
 
Qualifying image acquisition to groin 
the time of CT or MR angiographic im-
age acquisition among subsequent pa-
tients when perfusion imaging was en-
couraged but not mandated. Additional 
time intervals were also evaluated when 
relevant, including time from arrival at 
the ED to randomization, symptom on-
set to reperfusion, and arrival at the ED 
to reperfusion.
The probability of functional in-
dependence (as defined by a modified 
Rankin scale score of 0–2 at 90 days) 
was evaluated as a function of time 
from symptom onset to reperfusion 
for the full cohort of patients, in both 
adjusted and unadjusted analyses. The 
probability of functional independence 
was also evaluated as a function of 
qualifying imaging acquisition to reper-
fusion (as defined by Thrombolysis in 
Cerebral Infarction grade 2b or 3 re-
perfusion). The imaging to reperfusion 
time analysis was restricted to patients 
who presented directly to endovascular-
capable centers (ECCs), in whom im-
aging to reperfusion times are a major 
component of overall treatment speed. 
In patients who are given intravenous 
tPA infusion at a primary facility before 
being transferred to an ECC, extended 
time periods at the referring hospital 
and in interfacility transfer have a dom-
inant effect over imaging to reperfu-
sion times at study hospitals (Fig 2 and 
Table 1).
Analysis of the endovascular in-
traprocedural workflow was also per-
formed. This included an analysis of 
groin puncture to first stent retriever 
deployment and groin puncture to final 
reperfusion on the basis of (a) degree 
of tortuosity in the neck vessels (as as-
sessed by experienced neurointerven-
tionists in the core laboratory on the 
basis of a trichotomized scale—mild, 
moderate, or severe), reflecting subjec-
tive impression of the degree to which 
vessel tortuosity would cause difficulty 
in accessing the relevant carotid artery 
or the intracranial occlusion; (b) right-
sided versus left-sided occlusion; and (c) 
type of guide catheter used, including a 
balloon guide catheter (a guide catheter 
with a balloon at its tip that can be in-
flated to occlude antegrade flow), a dis-
tal access catheter (a large-bore pliable 
tomographic (CT) images, angiography 
images, and postprocessed perfusion 
images, were also used for workflow 
analysis. It was acknowledged that 
there would be some degree of inac-
curacy in these times, owing to a lack 
of synchronization across all clocks; 
however, there is no expectation of di-
rectionality of effect (there is no reason 
clocks would be biased in a particular 
direction). Overall guidance regarding 
workflow and parallel processing was 
provided on the basis of previously 
recommended strategies aimed to im-
prove process (2,10). For sites with ex-
cellent workflow, the phone calls were 
taken as opportunities to learn about 
local best practices and techniques that 
could be used to educate staff and im-
prove workflow within sites. Sites with 
excellent workflow were highlighted in 
the monthly newsletter to encourage 
further improvement. The primary 
metric of workflow efficiency was a tar-
get time of qualifying imaging acquisi-
tion to groin puncture of less than 70 
minutes.
For 
this 
current 
report, 
the 
following time intervals were calcu-
lated: (a) symptom onset to arrival at 
the hospital ED that was participating 
in the trial and was capable of admin-
istering endovascular treatment, (b) 
arrival at the ED to start of imaging, 
(c) start of imaging to qualifying image 
acquisition, (d) start of imaging to ac-
quisition of penumbral imaging post-
processed maps (whenever this was 
performed), and (e) start of imaging 
to start of intravenous tPA administra-
tion (only in patients who presented 
to and were treated within the same 
center). In the interventional arm, the 
additional following times were calcu-
lated: (a) qualifying image acquisition 
to groin puncture, (b) groin puncture 
to first deployment of device, and (c) 
groin puncture to reperfusion, with 
reperfusion defined as Thrombolysis 
in Cerebral Infarction grade 2b or 3. 
Qualifying image acquisition time was 
(a) the time of CT perfusion or mag-
netic resonance (MR) perfusion image 
acquisition among the first 72 enrolled 
patients, when perfusion imaging was 
mandatory for randomization; and (b) 
 892 
radiology.rsna.org n Radiology: Volume 279: Number 3—June 2016
NEURORADIOLOGY: Workflow and Outcomes in Endovascular Treatment of Acute Ischemic Stroke 
Goyal et al
puncture was achieved with a median 
time of 52 minutes; in 61% of patients 
(59 of 97), the optimal time of less than 
70 minutes was achieved, and in 88% 
of patients (85 of 97), the protocol-
specified maximal time of less than 90 
minutes was achieved.
Overall Effect of Time on Outcome
In adjusted analysis, the probability of 
functional independence among patients 
 
Figure 2
Figure 2: Graph of time intervals in patients treated within the same institution (an ECC) versus those who were transferred from 
another facility after receiving intravenous tPA therapy. Deployment = device deployment, puncture = groin puncture, qualifying = 
qualifying image acquisition.
Table 1
Patient Transfer Type
Time Interval
Patient Presented Directly  
to the ECC Facility (min)
Patient Transferred from  
a Non-ECC Facility (min)
Qualifying image acquisition to groin puncture
69.5 (48–83)
40 (27–54)
Qualifying image acquisition to device deployment
93 (73–122)
64 (56–94)
Arrival at the ED to groin puncture
107 (83–131)
63 (52–81)
Arrival at the ED to device deployment
137 (112–167)
84.5 (74–119)
Arrival at the ED to reperfusion
149 (121–187.5)
104 (86–137)
Symptom onset to device deployment
203 (173–263)
299 (273–348)
Note.—Data are medians, with IQRs in parentheses.
Table 2
Time Intervals in Patients Treated in the SWIFT PRIME Trial
Time Interval
No. of Patients
Median Time (min)
IQR (min)
Symptom onset to arrival at the ED
192
109.5
54–192.5
Arrival at the ED to start of imaging
192
16
10–23.5
Start of imaging to qualifying image acquisition
184
9
5–19.5
Qualifying image acquisition to randomization
190
30
20–48
Randomization to groin puncture
97
22
12–32
Groin puncture to device deployment
85
24
18–33
Device deployment to reperfusion
78
8
5–23
Arrival at ED to groin puncture
97
90
69–120
Arrival at ED to device deployment
85
119
94–146
Arrival at ED to reperfusion
79
139
108–169
with stent retrievers was 91% if reper-
fusion was achieved 150 minutes from 
symptom onset, which decreased by 
approximately 10% (absolute) over the 
next 60 minutes and then 20% (abso-
lute) with every subsequent 60-minute 
delay (Fig 3a). Findings were similar in 
unadjusted analysis (Fig E1a [online]). 
Similarly, rates of functional indepen-
dence among patients with reperfusion 
in the stent retriever group declined 
substantially as the time from qualify-
ing imaging acquisition to reperfusion 
increased among patients who pre-
sented directly to the ECC in adjusted 
(Fig 3b) and unadjusted (Fig E1b [on-
line]) analyses. A relation between time 
from qualifying imaging acquisition to 
rate of functional independence effect 
was not present when analysis included 
patients who were given intravenous 
tPA infusion at a primary facility before 
being transferred to an ECC, among 
whom imaging to reperfusion time 
was a much smaller fraction of overall 
symptom onset to reperfusion time (Fig 
E2 [online]). The odds ratio for func-
tional independence rates in the stent 
retriever group versus the tPA alone 
group showed superiority of the stent 
retriever group, with a nominal down-
ward trend over time that did not reach 
statistical significance (Fig 3c, Fig E1c 
[online]).
Patient Arrival Route and Timing
During the study period, a total of 196 
patients were randomized in SWIFT 
PRIME, with most patients arriving 
directly at the ECC versus arriving at 
a referring facility, where personnel 
initiated intravenous thrombolysis and 
subsequently transferred the patient 
to the study site (126 vs 66 patients, 
Fig 2a). In multivariable analysis, initial 
presentation to a referral facility added 
129 minutes to when the patient finally 
arrived at the ECC; this corresponded 
to a 158% increase in delay in reaching 
the emergency room of the ECC (Fig 4, 
 
Table E1 [online]). In patients who 
were transferred to the ECC, workflow 
within the ECC was much faster than 
 Radiology: Volume 279: Number 3—June 2016 n radiology.rsna.org 
893
NEURORADIOLOGY: Workflow and Outcomes in Endovascular Treatment of Acute Ischemic Stroke 
Goyal et al
Figure 3
Figure 3: Graphs show (a) rates of functional independence in relation to 
symptom onset to reperfusion time in all patients in the endovascular arm, 
(b) rates of functional independence in relation to qualifying imaging acquisition 
to reperfusion time in ECC patients only, and (c) the odds ratio for functional 
independence of patients in the endovascular arm versus the tPA-only arm in 
relation to symptom onset to randomization time. The solid line represents the 
point estimate of the odds ratio across time, while the dotted lines collectively 
represent the 95% CI (upper and lower values) for the odds ratio.
when patients presented directly to the 
ECC; in multivariable analyses, arrival 
at the ED to imaging time was less 
(rate ratio, 0.73; 95% confidence inter-
val [CI]: 0.57, 0.92; P = .009; absolute 
difference, 7 minutes), and time of im-
aging to groin puncture was less (rate 
ratio, 0.55; 95% CI: 0.47, 0.65; P , 
.001; absolute difference, 41 minutes) 
(Fig 4). Patients who presented during 
weekday hours (Monday to Friday, 8 am 
to 5 pm) had a shorter time from arrival 
in the ED to randomization (rate ratio, 
0.81; 95% CI: 0.71, 0.92; P , .001; ab-
solute difference, 17 minutes) versus 
those who presented during evening, 
overnight, and weekend hours (Fig 4).
Baseline Imaging
The imaging modality for qualifying 
imaging acquisition was CT in 83% of 
patients (161 of 193) and MR imaging 
in 17% of patients (32 of 193). Over-
all, there was no difference in arrival to 
randomization time according to image 
modality; however, this analysis was in 
part confounded by the greater use of 
MR imaging in patients who were given 
intravenous tPA infusion at a primary 
facility before being transferred to an 
ECC. Still, when analysis was confined 
to patients who reported directly to the 
ECC, numerical differences in arrival 
to randomization time among patients 
who underwent MR imaging versus CT 
did not reach statistical significance 
(median time of 84 minutes for MR im-
aging vs 76 minutes for CT; P = .17).
While the SWIFT PRIME inves-
tigators initially mandated perfusion 
imaging for patient selection by using 
automated software, a revision was 
made to the protocol during the study 
period that allowed enrollment without 
perfusion imaging, although perfusion 
imaging was still encouraged whenever 
feasible. As a result, a preponderance 
of patients underwent CT or MR perfu-
sion imaging (81%, 158 of 195). In 126 
patients, likely accurate times of perfu-
sion map acquisition by using automated 
software were available. Among patients 
in whom CT perfusion imaging was used 
or likely used for randomization, the 
unenhanced CT to CT angiography ac-
quisition time was 9 minutes (IQR, 4–26 
minutes), while the time from unen-
hanced head CT to successful postpro-
cessing of CT perfusion images by using 
RAPID software (Ischemaview, Calif) 
was 22 minutes (IQR, 14–34 minutes). 
(In patients in whom CT perfusion im-
aging was used, the time stamp on the 
 894 
radiology.rsna.org n Radiology: Volume 279: Number 3—June 2016
NEURORADIOLOGY: Workflow and Outcomes in Endovascular Treatment of Acute Ischemic Stroke 
Goyal et al
for the stent retriever device (38 of 62 
patients) and 38.6% for tPA (22 of 57 
patients) (absolute difference, 22.7%; 
95% CI: 3.5%, 38.6%; P = .02); (c) no 
perfusion imaging performed: 60.0% for 
the stent retriever device (nine of 15 pa-
tients) and 27.3% for tPA (six of 22 pa-
tients) (absolute difference, 32.7%; 95% 
CI: 23.9%, 69.3%; P = .09); and (d) 
automated perfusion imaging process 
likely not used for randomization (either 
perfusion imaging not performed or pro-
cessed only after randomization): 57.9% 
for the stent retriever device (22 of 38 
patients) and 28.6% for tPA (10 of 35 
However, this difference was not signif-
icant in patients who reported directly 
to an ECC (4 minutes; 95% CI: 212, 
21). For rates of independent modified 
Rankin score of 0–2, outcomes accord-
ing to different imaging strategies were 
as follows: (a) automated perfusion im-
age processing mandated for randomiza-
tion (initial study phase): 54.1% for the 
stent retriever device (20 of 37 patients) 
and 28.1% for tPA (nine of 32 patients) 
(absolute difference, 26.0%; 95% CI: 
3.6%, 48.3%; P = .049); (b) automated 
perfusion image processing likely per-
formed prior to randomization: 61.3% 
postprocessed CT perfusion images was 
prior to the time stamp of randomiza-
tion; however, it was not documented 
whether the perfusion data were actu-
ally used [trial eligibility could be met 
without perfusion data after revision F], 
 
and errors in the time stamp were pos-
sible [since the clocks were not syn-
chronized]). In multivariable analyses, 
automated perfusion image process-
ing prior to randomization was associ-
ated with longer time from emergency 
room arrival to randomization at hospi-
tals where patients were transferred to 
the ECC (19 minutes; 95% CI: 4, 35). 
Figure 4
Figure 4: Graph shows the subgroup analyses for the adjusted effects of patient presentation and process features on work flow. All interval 
times except first unenhanced CT examination to groin puncture and groin puncture to first reperfusion time were significantly different on 
the basis of enrollment location when that variable was included in the models. A rate ratio of more than 1 indicates prolonged interval times. 
NIHSS = National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale, TICI = Thrombolysis in Cerebral Infarction.
 Radiology: Volume 279: Number 3—June 2016 n radiology.rsna.org 
895
NEURORADIOLOGY: Workflow and Outcomes in Endovascular Treatment of Acute Ischemic Stroke 
Goyal et al
efficiencies achieved in the trial are 
generalizable to multiple hospitals and 
national health systems.
Workflow was more efficient when 
patients were candidates to be given 
intravenous tPA infusion before being 
transferred to an ECC, which is likely 
related to the advance notice pro-
vided to the study center, permitting 
mobilization of the stroke evaluation 
and intervention teams, clearance of 
imaging units, and preparation of the 
catheterization laboratory. Further-
more, consent to receive tPA infusion 
and delivery of the intravenous tPA 
itself introduces workflow delays, and 
the completion of this step in advance 
likely contributed to improved work-
flow once the patient arrived at the 
study hospital (13). However, a major 
cause for delay among patients who re-
ceived initial tPA before transfer was 
the prolonged arrival time from refer-
ral hospitals to the ECC. Several fac-
tors may have accounted for these de-
lays, such as inefficient mechanisms of 
triage in the referral center; overall or-
ganization of stroke care at the refer-
ral center, including interpretation of 
images and consent and decision mak-
ing for intravenous tPA administration; 
and organization of a separate trans-
port team. Transport might be delayed 
until the 1-hour tPA infusion is com-
plete, unless a specialized critical-care 
emergency medical services transport 
team is available. Potential solutions to 
this challenge include training emer-
gency medical services staff to detect 
patients who have a high likelihood of 
having a proximal vessel occlusion so 
they may bypass the nearest hospital 
and go directly to an ECC. Selective 
use of direct routing to ECCs would of 
course need to be fine-tuned on the ba-
sis of local geography, travel times, and 
available regional resources.
The results in this study highlight 
the importance of tracking endovascular 
workflow times and providing feedback 
to maintain good results in the acute 
management of stroke. To achieve the 
outcomes observed in SWIFT PRIME 
in routine practice, quality improve-
ment target interval times will need 
to match more closely and preferably 
from qualifying imaging to endovascu-
lar reperfusion are strongly associated 
with increased likelihood of functional 
independence. In SWIFT PRIME, a ro-
bust relation between speed of reperfu-
sion and outcome was observed—every 
6-minute delay from symptom onset to 
reperfusion in the stent retriever arm 
was associated with 1–1.5 fewer func-
tionally independent outcomes at 90 
days among every 100 patients treated. 
When patients underwent reperfu-
sion hyperacutely, within the first 2.5 
hours of onset, nearly nine of every 
10 achieved an independent outcome. 
This work adds to a growing body of 
evidence supporting the importance 
of “time is brain” in the endovascular 
treatment of acute ischemic stroke 
(1,11,12).
The intensive workflow speed focus 
in SWIFT PRIME succeeded in yielding 
faster treatment times than in earlier 
endovascular trials. In the Interven-
tional Management of Stroke III clin-
ical trial, a time of under 90 minutes 
from intravenous tPA bolus to groin 
puncture was targeted and achieved, 
but this time metric may not have been 
aggressive enough. A detailed analysis 
of the Interventional Management of 
Stroke III trial demonstrated particu-
larly long delays from randomization to 
groin puncture (62 minutes compared 
with 22 minutes in SWIFT PRIME) and 
groin puncture to reperfusion (120.5 
minutes compared with 32 minutes 
in SWIFT PRIME). This improvement 
by 128.5 minutes in the interval from 
randomization to reperfusion time 
was likely an important contributor 
(in addition to other factors, such as 
the use of newer-generation devices 
and achieving excellent reperfusion in 
the endovascular arm) to the higher 
rate of functional independence in 
the endovascular treatment arm of 
the SWIFT PRIME trial. A key com-
ponent to improved workflow was the 
parallel nature of care processes in the 
SWIFT PRIME trial. Notably, the rapid 
workflow in SWIFT PRIME was consis-
tent across 39 study sites in multiple 
countries and states across two con-
tinents, independent of academic af-
filiation, suggesting that the workflow 
patients) (absolute difference, 29.3%; 
95% CI: 4.9%, 53.8%; P = .02).
Procedural Features
Most patients underwent mechanical 
thrombectomy without general anes-
thesia (64%, 61 of 96 patients), but the 
centers that used general anesthesia 
as part of their routine practice in all 
patients did not experience workflow 
delay in the time from arrival at the ED 
to groin puncture (median, 89 minutes 
for general anesthesia vs 95.5 minutes 
for conscious sedation; P = .76; Fig 4). 
Severe vessel tortuosity and left-sided 
lesions were found to lead to longer 
groin puncture to reperfusion time, 
although neither difference was statis-
tically significant (median, 38 minutes 
for left-sided lesions vs 34.5 minutes 
for right-sided lesions [P = .12]; me-
dian, 42 minutes for severe tortuosity 
vs 38 minutes for nonsevere tortuos-
ity [P = .86]). In both cases, the main 
delay was in groin access to target le-
sion engagement (deployment), par-
ticularly for left-sided lesions (median, 
32.5 minutes for left-sided lesions vs 
22 minutes for right-sided lesions; P = 
.046). Once deployment was achieved, 
deployment to reperfusion times were 
comparable. Finally, the use of a guide 
catheter was not required in this study 
design, but most cases involved use of 
the balloon guide catheter or routine 
catheter. The median times from groin 
puncture to reperfusion were 35.5 mi-
nutes for the balloon guide catheter 
 
(n = 51), 49 minutes for the distal ac-
cess catheter (n = 40), and 37.5 minutes 
(n = 3) for the routine catheter. These 
variables were, however, not significant 
in multivariable analysis (Fig 4).
Center Characteristics
Several center-specific characteristics 
were investigated as potential modifiers 
of workflow process. Academic affilia-
tion and United States versus European 
location did not alter workflow.
Discussion
This multicenter trial demonstrated 
that faster times from stroke symptom 
onset to endovascular reperfusion and 
 896 
radiology.rsna.org n Radiology: Volume 279: Number 3—June 2016
NEURORADIOLOGY: Workflow and Outcomes in Endovascular Treatment of Acute Ischemic Stroke 
Goyal et al
no relevant relationships. A.P.J. disclosed no 
relevant relationships. A.B. Activities related 
to the present article: author received payment 
from Medtronic. Activities not related to the 
present article: author received payment from 
Stryker. Other relationships: disclosed no rel-
evant relationships. H.D. Activities related to 
the present article: author received payment 
from Covidien as the European co-principal in-
vestigator for the SWIFT PRIME study. Activ-
ities not related to the present article: author 
received support from Abbott, Allergan, Astra-
Zeneca, Bayer Vital, BMS, Boehringer Ingel-
heim, CoAxia, Corimmun, Covidien, Daiichi-
Sankyo, D-Pharm, Fresenius, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Janssen-Cilag, Johnson & Johnson, Knoll, Lilly, 
MSD, Medtronic, MindFrame, Neurobiological 
Technologies, Novartis, Novo-Nordisk, Paion, 
Parke-Davis, Pfizer, Sanofi-Aventis, Schering-
Plough, Servier, Solvay, St. Jude, Syngis, Talec-
ris, Thrombogenics, WebMD Global, Wyeth and 
Yamanouchi, GSK, and Lundbeck. Other rela-
tionships: disclosed no relevant relationships. 
V.M.P. Activities related to the present article: 
author received payment from Medtronic as 
principal investigator of the trial. Activities not 
related to the present article: author received 
payment from Stryker. Other relationships: dis-
closed no relevant relationships. E.L. Activities 
related to the present article: author received 
payment from Covidien for training and lectures. 
Activities not related to the present article: au-
thor was the national principal investigator for 
SWIFT PRIME; author received payment from 
Pulsar and Blockade Medical for consulting; au-
thor received payment from Abbott for training; 
author received other from Stryker, NeXtGen 
Biologics, and MEDX for advisory board partic-
ipation; author received payment from Renders 
Medical for serving as an expert witness. Other 
relationships: disclosed no relevant relation-
ships. B.B. Activities related to the present arti-
cle: author received payment from Covidien for 
consulting. Activities not related to the present 
article: author received payment from Penum-
bra, Stryker, and Silk Road for consulting. Other 
relationships: author has a patent regarding de-
vices and methods for perfusion therapy. T.J. 
Activities related to the present article: author 
received nonfinancial support from Covidien 
Neurovascular; author received payment from 
Covidien Neurovascular for travel expenses. 
Activities not related to the present article: au-
thor received payment from Silk Road Medical 
for advisory board participation; author owns 
stock in Silk Road Medical; author received non-
financial support from Covidien Neurovascular; 
author received payment from Covidien Neuro-
vascular, Stryker Neurovascular, and REVASCAT 
for travel expenses; author received nonfinancial 
support from Stryker Neurovascular; author re-
ceived payment from Air Liquide for consulting; 
author received nonfinancial support from the 
Fundacio Ictus Malaltia Vascular. Other relation-
ships: disclosed no relevant relationships. R.J. 
Activities related to the present article: author 
received payment from Medtronic Neurovascu-
lar; author received support from Medtronic 
Neurovascular for travel support. Activities not 
related to the present article: author received 
payment from Medtronic Neurovascular for con-
and consent processes, and procedural 
times in patients with difficult anatomy.
The SWIFT PRIME investigators are as follows: 
Thomas Devlin, Chattanooga Center for Neu-
rologic Research and Erlanger Hospital, U.S.; 
Vivek Reddy, University of Pittsburgh Medical 
Center (UPMC), U.S.; Adnan Siddiqui, Univer-
sity of Buffalo Neurosurgery (UBNS) and Buf-
falo General Hospital, U.S.; Alain Bonafé, CHU 
Montpellier–Hôpital Gui de Chauliac, France; 
Richard Du Mesnil de Rochemont, Klinikum der 
Johann Wolfgang Goethe-Universität, Germany; 
Raul Nogueira, Emory University, Grady Medical 
Center, U.S.; Demetrius Lopes, Rush University 
Medical Center, U.S.; Jeffrey Carpenter, West 
Virginia University Hospital, U.S.; Christian 
Weimar, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Germany; 
Gernot Reimann, Klinikum Dortmund, Germa-
ny; Wayne Clark, Oregon Health and Sciences 
University (OHSU), U.S.; Ronald Budzik, Ohio 
Health Research Institute and Riverside Meth-
odist Hospital, U.S.; M. Shazam Hussain, Cleve-
land Clinic Cerebrovascular Center, U.S.; Peter 
Ringleb, Universitätsklinikum Heidelberg and 
Neurologische Klinik und Poliklinik, Germany; 
Indrani Acosta, Florida Hospital, U.S.; Robert 
Ecker, Maine Medical Center, U.S.; Christian 
Ramsey, Central Baptist Hospital, U.S.; Panagi-
otis Papanagiotou, Klinikum Bremen-Mitte, Ger-
many; Brian-Fred Fitzsimmons, Medical College 
of Wisconsin (MCW) and Froedtert Memorial 
Lutheran Hospital, U.S.; Vivek Deshmukh, Prov-
idence Brain and Spine Institute, U.S.; Ameer 
Hassan, Valley Baptist Medical Center, U.S.; 
Olav Jansen, Universitätsklinikum Kiel, Ger-
many; Luca Remonda, Kantonsspital Aarau, 
Switzerland; Sid Starkman, UCLA and Ronald 
Reagan UCLA Medical Center, U.S.; Dileep Yav-
agal, University of Miami and Jackson Memorial 
Hospital, U.S.; Juan Arenillas, Hospital Clinico 
Universitario de Valladolid, Spain; Casper 
Brekenfeld, Universitätsklinikum Hamburg-Ep-
pendorf, Germany; Bharathi Jagadeesan, Hen-
nepin County Medical Center (HCMC), U.S.; 
Eric Deshaies, State University of New York 
(SUNY) Upstate, U.S.; Mouhammad Jumaa, 
Promedica Toledo Hospital, U.S.; Ajit Puri, Uni-
versity of Massachusetts Medical Center, U.S.; 
Coleman Martin, Saint Luke’s Hospital, U.S.; 
Hamed Farid, St Jude Medical Center, U.S.; 
Ali Malek, Tenet Health Systems, U.S.; Klaus 
Hansen, Rigshospitalet Copenhagen University 
Hospital, Denmark; Monika Killer-Oberpfalzer, 
Universitätsklinikum Christian Doppler Klinik 
Salzburg, Austria; Sascha Prothmann, Klinikum 
rechts der Isar-Technische Universität München, 
Germany; Hans-Peter Haring, Landes-Nerven-
klinik Wagner-Jauregg, Austria; and Grethe An-
dersen, Aarhus University Hospital, Denmark.
Disclosures of Conflicts of Interest: M.G. 
Activities related to the present article: insti-
tution received payment from Covidien and 
Medtronic; author received payment from Co-
vidien and Stryker for consulting. Activities not 
related to the present article: author received 
payment from Microvention for consulting; au-
thor received payment from GE Healthcare for 
patents; author has stock or stock options in 
Quikflo Health. Other relationships: disclosed 
exceed the time intervals achieved in 
the trial. Recent recommendations 
from the Society of Neurointerventional 
Surgery support this approach (14). In 
the SWIFT PRIME trial, time between 
head CT and successful postprocess-
ing of CT perfusion images was longer 
than the time between CT and CT an-
giography source image availability. 
The use of perfusion imaging did not 
affect the effectiveness of treatment. 
The results in patients enrolled with-
out the use of perfusion imaging are 
consistent with the results of the Endo-
vascular Treatment for Small Core and 
Anterior Circulation Proximal Occlu-
sion with Emphasis on Minimizing CT 
to Recanalization Times, or ESCAPE, 
 
trial (15). Given the data regarding 
the substantial decrease in functional 
independence with increase in time to 
reperfusion, every step in the work-up 
and treatment of these patients shall 
need to be weighed against the time 
spent versus the potential benefit.
There are several limitations to this 
study. All the participating centers were 
chosen on the basis of their experience 
and patient volume. As such, the results 
may not be generalizable to all centers 
that offer endovascular treatment for 
acute stroke. Some of the components of 
the imaging paradigm used for decision 
making were not precisely documented 
but had to be extrapolated from the 
time stamps. Experienced operators de-
termined the degree of tortuosity on a 
subjective scale. The scale has not been 
validated. The quality improvement and 
feedback process was implemented for 
the entire duration of the trial. Hence, it 
is not possible to precisely determine its 
effect on overall workflow.
In conclusion, detailed analysis of 
the workflow in the SWIFT PRIME 
trial provides further data on the im-
portance of time and efficiency in acute 
ischemic stroke management, likely 
contributing to the superior clinical 
outcome observed in the intervention 
arm of the trial. Aggressive time met-
rics and frequent feedback likely played 
a key role in maintaining efficiency. Tar-
gets for further improvement include 
patient triage and transport at referring 
facilities, efficient imaging paradigms 
 Radiology: Volume 279: Number 3—June 2016 n radiology.rsna.org 
897
NEURORADIOLOGY: Workflow and Outcomes in Endovascular Treatment of Acute Ischemic Stroke 
Goyal et al
sulting, lectures, and educational presentations. 
Other relationships: disclosed no relevant rela-
tionships. B.K.M. Activities related to the pre-
sent article: disclosed no relevant relationships. 
Activities not related to the present article: in-
stitution received a grant from Covidien; author 
received a grant from PRoveIT. Other relation-
ships: author has a patent pending for systems 
of triage in acute stroke. J.L.S. Activities related 
to the present article: institution received a 
grant, consulting fees, and travel support from 
Medtronic. Activities not related to the present 
article: author received payment from Stryker 
and Neuravia for consulting; author received 
payment from Medtronic for lectures; author 
has stock or stock options in Cognition Med-
ical. Other relationships: disclosed no relevant 
relationships.
References
 1. Khatri P, Yeatts SD, Mazighi M, et al. Time 
to angiographic reperfusion and clinical 
outcome after acute ischaemic stroke: an 
analysis of data from the Interventional 
Management of Stroke (IMS III) phase 3 
trial. Lancet Neurol 2014;13(6):567–574.
 2. Menon BK, Almekhlafi MA, Pereira VM, et al. 
Optimal workflow and process-based perfor-
mance measures for endovascular therapy in 
acute ischemic stroke: analysis of the Solitaire 
FR Thrombectomy for Acute Revasculariza-
tion study. Stroke 2014;45(7):2024–2029.
 3. Kidwell CS, Jahan R, Saver JL. Endovascu-
lar treatment for acute ischemic stroke. N 
Engl J Med 2013;368(25):2434–2435.
 4. Ciccone A, Valvassori L; SYNTHESIS Expan-
sion Investigators. Endovascular treatment 
for acute ischemic stroke. N Engl J Med 
 
2013;368(25):2433–2434.
 5. Broderick JP, Tomsick TA, Palesch YY. Endo-
vascular treatment for acute ischemic stroke. 
N Engl J Med 2013;368(25):2432–2433.
 6. Goyal M, Almekhlafi MA, Fan L, et al. 
Evaluation of interval times from onset to 
reperfusion in patients undergoing endovas-
cular therapy in the Interventional Manage-
ment of Stroke III trial. Circulation 2014; 
130(3):265–272.
 7. Bradley EH, Herrin J, Wang Y, et al. Strat-
egies for reducing the door-to-balloon time 
in acute myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med 
2006;355(22):2308–2320.
 8. Saver JL, Goyal M, Bonafe A, et al. Soli-
taire™ with the Intention for Thrombec-
tomy as Primary Endovascular Treatment 
for Acute Ischemic Stroke (SWIFT PRIME) 
trial: protocol for a randomized, controlled, 
multicenter study comparing the Solitaire 
revascularization device with IV tPA with 
IV tPA alone in acute ischemic stroke. Int J 
Stroke 2015;10(3):439–448.
 9. Saver JL, Goyal M, Bonafe A, et al. Stent-
retriever thrombectomy after intravenous 
t-PA vs. t-PA alone in stroke. N Engl J Med 
2015;372(24):2285–2295.
 
10. Almekhlafi MA, Eesa M, Menon BK, Dem-
chuk AM, Goyal M. Ultrashort imaging to 
reperfusion time interval arrests core ex-
pansion in endovascular therapy for acute 
ischemic stroke. J Neurointerv Surg 2013; 
5(Suppl 1):i58–i61.
 
11. Saver JL, Fonarow GC, Smith EE, et al. Time 
to treatment with intravenous tissue plas-
minogen activator and outcome from acute 
ischemic stroke. JAMA 2013;309(23):2480–
2488.
 
12. Khatri P, Abruzzo T, Yeatts SD, et al. Good 
clinical outcome after ischemic stroke with 
successful revascularization is time-depen-
dent. Neurology 2009;73(13):1066–1072.
 
13. Prabhakaran S, Ward E, John S, et al. Trans-
fer delay is a major factor limiting the use 
of intra-arterial treatment in acute ischemic 
stroke. Stroke 2011;42(6):1626–1630.
 
14. McTaggart RA, Ansari SA, Goyal M, et al. 
Initial hospital management of patients with 
emergent large vessel occlusion (ELVO): re-
port of the standards and guidelines com-
mittee of the Society of Neurointerventional 
Surgery. J Neurointerv Surg 2015 Aug 31. 
[Epub ahead of print]
 
15. Goyal M, Demchuk AM, Menon BK, et al. 
Randomized assessment of rapid endovas-
cular treatment of ischemic stroke. N Engl J 
Med 2015;372(11):1019–1030.
