 the
Orthopaedic
forum
The Safety of Hand and Upper-Extremity Surgical
Procedures at a Freestanding Ambulatory Surgery Center
A Review of 28,737 Cases
Kanu S. Goyal, MD, Sameer Jain, MD, Glenn A. Buterbaugh, MD, and Joseph E. Imbriglia, MD
Investigation performed at the Hand & UpperEx Center, Wexford, Pennsylvania
Background: More procedures are being completed on an outpatient basis at freestanding ambulatory surgery centers.
The purpose of our study was to determine the safety and rate of adverse events in outpatient hand and upper-extremity
surgical procedures.
Methods: A retrospective review of cases at a single, freestanding ambulatory surgery center over an eleven-year period
was performed. In our analysis, 28,737 cases were performed and were included. Adverse events were defined as serious
complications causing harm to a patient or leading to additional treatment. Using state-reportable adverse events criteria
as a guideline, we divided the adverse events into seven categories: infection requiring intravenous antibiotics or return to
the operating room, postoperative transfer to a hospital, wrong-site surgical procedure, retention of a foreign object, post-
operative symptomatic thromboembolism, medication error, and bleeding complications. These adverse events were then
analyzed to determine if they led to additional laboratory testing, hospital admission, return to the operating room, emer-
gency department visits, or physical or mental permanent disability.
Results: There were fifty-eight reported adverse events, for an overall rate of 0.20%. There were no deaths. There were
fourteen infections, eighteen postoperative transfers to a hospital, twenty-one hospital admissions after discharge, one
medication error, and four postoperative hematomas. There were no cases of wrong-site surgical procedures or retained
foreign bodies.
Conclusions: Our study shows that, with a selected patient population, a very low adverse event rate (0.20%) can be
achieved. Our review showing few adverse events, no deaths, and no wrong-site surgical procedures supports our view
continued
Peer Review: This article was reviewed by the Editor-in-Chief and one Deputy Editor, and it underwent blinded review by two or more outside experts. The Deputy Editor
reviewed each revision of the article, and it underwent a final review by the Editor-in-Chief prior to publication. Final corrections and clarifications occurred during one or
more exchanges between the author(s) and copyeditors.
Disclosure: There was no external funding source. The Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest forms are provided with the online version of
the article.
700
COPYRIGHT � 2016 BY THE JOURNAL OF BONE AND JOINT SURGERY, INCORPORATED
J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2016;98:700-4
d http://dx.doi.org/10.2106/JBJS.15.00239
 that hand and upper-extremity surgical procedures can be completed safely in the outpatient setting at a freestanding
ambulatory surgery center.
Level of Evidence: Therapeutic Level IV. See Instructions for Authors for a complete description of levels of evidence.
Advances in medicine have allowed surgeons to perform proce-
dures that were once reserved solely for hospital operating rooms
in outpatient surgery centers. Outpatient surgical procedures give
patients and physicians an option for safe, cost-effective surgical
care offering improved patient comfort and increased efficiency 1.
The current U.S. Medicare fee schedule indicates that hospital
outpatient surgical facilities are paid 81% more than ambulatory
surgery centers for the same service. The U.S. Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC) performed a survey in 2006 and
found that 62% of all procedures were performed in an outpatient
setting and 43% of the outpatient surgical procedures were per-
formed in a freestanding ambulatory surgery center
2. A freestand-
ing ambulatory surgical center is defined as a facility independent
from a hospital. The number has grown dramatically; in 1983,
there were 239 ambulatory surgery centers in the U.S., and in 2008
there were more than 5000 such centers2,3. In 2007, on the basis of
Medicare claims, approximately 7% of all procedures performed
at ambulatory surgery centers were orthopaedic in nature; and
from 2000 to 2007, there was a 77% growth in orthopaedic pro-
cedures performed at ambulatory surgery centers because of a
shift of service from an inpatient to an outpatient setting 3.
The U.S. Healthcare Cost Utilization Project (HCUP)
states that the State Ambulatory Surgery and Services Data-
bases (SASD) include data from hospital-owned ambulatory
surgery facilities; however, patient safety data in hand and
upper-extremity surgical procedures are not available for free-
standing surgery centers. Despite the rapid growth in the num-
ber of outpatient surgical procedures being performed, to our
knowledge, there remains a paucity of literature on the subject.
As the number of procedures performed on an outpatient basis
continues to grow, it becomes important that we continue to
examine and to monitor the safety of outpatient surgical pro-
cedures. In 2010, the U.S. Agency for Healthcare Research and
Quality (AHRQ) initiated a safety program for ambulatory sur-
gical procedures with this concern in mind
4.
There is literature on risk factors for adverse outcomes in
ambulatory surgery centers
5-7; however, to our knowledge, no
specific literature exists on the safety of outpatient hand and
upper-extremity surgical procedures. The purpose of this study
was to determine the rate of adverse events affecting outpa-
tients undergoing hand and other upper-extremity surgical
procedures at a freestanding ambulatory surgery center. We
hypothesized that, with the selected patient population, a very
low rate of adverse events could be achieved.
Materials and Methods
After obtaining institutional review board approval, a retrospective review of
cases performed by five board-certified hand and upper-extremity surgeons at a
single, freestanding ambulatory surgery center over an eleven-year period (2001
to 2012) was performed. Upper-extremity surgical procedures predominate at
this facility; however, other surgical procedures are also performed, such as
ophthalmologic; oculoplastic; urologic; ear, nose and throat (ENT); foot and
ankle; and pain management surgical procedures. The surgery center is not
affiliated with any particular hospital. The five contributing hand surgeons have
partial ownership of the ambulatory surgery center, and the surgeons have an
academic affiliation with the University of Pittsburgh and train orthopaedic and
plastic surgery residents and hand surgery fellows. There are two board-certified
anesthesiologists who perform regional and general anesthesia and supervise
nurse anesthetists. They are permitted to provide medical direction in up to four
operating rooms simultaneously, consistent with guidelines from the Centers for
Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS).
Depending on the patient’s medical condition, preoperative clearance
by the patient’s primary care physician or cardiologist is obtained, and the
anesthesiologists confirm the patient’s appropriateness for the surgery center.
Patients with severe lung disease, latex allergy, active infection (methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus, vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus, or Clos-
tridium difficile), quadriplegia, or an American Society of Anesthesiologists
physical status (ASA PS) classification of 4 are not allowed to have their pro-
cedure performed at the facility. Patients with morbid obesity or other medical
problems (such as chronic kidney disease or cardiac disease) are reviewed by the
anesthesiologists on a case-by-case basis.
All of the 28,737 procedures that were performed were included in our
analysis. Of these cases, 8% were shoulder procedures and the remaining cases
were hand, wrist, or elbow procedures; 95% of the cases were elective in nature,
and 5% were related to trauma. Procedures canceled in the preoperative hold-
ing area prior to the administration of anesthesia, by either the surgeon or the
anesthesiologist, were not counted in our adverse event analysis. Adverse events
were defined as serious complications causing harm to a patient or leading to
additional treatment. Using state-reportable adverse events criteria as a guide-
line, we divided these into seven main categories: acute infection (defined as
requiring formal irrigation and debridement in the operating room or inpatient
admission for intravenous antibiotics), postoperative transfer to a hospital,
wrong-site surgical procedure, retention of a foreign object, postoperative
symptomatic thromboembolism, medication error, and bleeding complica-
tions. Infections that only required oral antibiotics were considered minor
and not major adverse events. These minor infections were also not consistently
reported, and therefore we did not include them in our analysis. Medication
sensitivities that did not result in hospital admission were not included in our
analysis, as these were considered minor occurrences. These adverse events
were then analyzed and were categorized to determine if they led to additional
laboratory testing, hospital admission, return to the operating room, emer-
gency department visits, permanent physical disability, or permanent mental
impairment. We identified adverse events by reviewing occurrence reports,
which are collected from every office at a minimum of thirty days from the
day of the surgical procedure. All of these adverse events were additionally
reported to the state.
Results
Cancelled Cases
From the 28,838 cases scheduled, there were 101 cases (0.35%)
that were cancelled by either the surgeon or the anesthesiologist
in the preoperative holding area prior to the administration of
anesthesia. Of these cases, 16% were cancelled because either
the patient or the surgeon believed that the surgical procedure
701
THE JOURNAL OF BONE & JOINT SURGERY
d JBJS.ORG
VOLUME 98-A
d NUMBER 8
d APRIL 20, 2016
THE SAFETY OF HAND AND UP PER-EXTREMITY SURGERY AT A
FRE ESTA ND ING AMBULATORY SURGE RY CE NTE R
 no longer needed to be performed, 15% were cancelled because
of a protocol breach (e.g., the patient had coffee the morning of
the surgical procedure), 17% were cancelled because of the
presence of a skin lesion at the surgical site (e.g., burn or rash),
and 52% were cancelled for medical optimization reasons
(44% of these for hypertension, 30% for cardiac arrhythmias
or electrocardiogram abnormalities, 8% for elevated blood glu-
cose, 10% for respiratory reasons, and 8% for fevers).
Adverse Events
Of the 28,737 cases, 24% of the patients were classified as
ASA 1, 43% were ASA 2, and 33% were ASA 3. There were a
total of fifty-eight occurrence reports for the 28,737 cases, for a
reported adverse event rate of 0.20%. The majority of the ad-
verse events (fifty-four of fifty-eight) occurred in patients with
ASA scores of 1 and 2. Four of the fifty-eight adverse events
occurred in four different patients with an ASA score of 3, for a
total adverse event rate of 0.04% in cases where the patient was
classified as ASA 3. Figure 1 summarizes the adverse events.
Infection
There were fourteen patients with major infections, for a
rate of 0.05%. Of these fourteen, eleven patients required return
to the operating suite for irrigation and debridement, and three
patients required inpatient admission for intravenous antibiotic
administration. Open shoulder surgical procedures accounted
for five of the eleven cases requiring irrigation and debridement.
The other six cases were for soft-tissue procedures in the hand or
wrist. All infections were successfully treated with some combi-
nation of intravenous antibiotics and debridement.
Bleeding Complications
Four patients (0.01%) had to be taken back to the operating
room for complications related to bleeding. Two of these patients
had had nerve block anesthesia and the other two had had local
anesthesia. Two patients were taken back immediately after the
surgical procedure from the post-anesthesia care unit because of
saturated dressings or hematoma formation, and two patients
presented to the office with hematomas requiring surgical evac-
uation. Three of the cases were open shoulder cases (one rotator
cuff repair, one labral repair, and one soft-tissue biopsy), and the
other case was a wrist arthrodesis. None of the patients sustained
any long-term morbidity.
Postoperative Symptomatic Thromboembolism
There was one case of postoperative pulmonary embolism, for a
rate of 0.003%. This patient presented to an emergency room ten
days after an open rotator cuff repair and acromioplasty, report-
ing chest pain and shortness of breath. A review of the case did
not identify an underlying predisposition or cause of the pulmo-
nary embolism, and the patient made a full recovery (this patient
is counted in the postoperative transfer to hospital subcategory).
Retention of a Foreign Object
There were no cases reported of retained foreign objects. A stan-
dard count is performed by the circulating nurse and technician
prior to closure.
Medication Error
There was one medication error, for a total rate of 0.003% (one of
28,737 patients). This patient was inadvertently given intravenous
cefazolin despite a penicillin allergy; Benadryl (diphenhydra-
mine) was given and no adverse reaction occurred. There were
another fifty-eight patients who reported a sensitivity to the
medication prescribed to them, such as a skin rash, pruritis, or
gastrointestinal upset. Nine of the fifty-eight patients went to
their local emergency room for symptoms related to medica-
tion sensitivity, and two were admitted for electrolyte imbal-
ance due to prolonged nausea and vomiting (these two patients
are counted in the postoperative transfer to hospital subcate-
gory). There were no long-term morbidities reported.
Wrong-Site Surgical Procedure
There were no cases of wrong-site surgical procedure reported
among the 28,737 procedures performed. In the case of upper-
extremity surgical procedures, the approximate incision is marked
by the attending surgeon in the preoperative holding area and is
confirmed with the patient. In the operating room prior to inci-
sion, the surgeon also performs a surgical time-out.
Postoperative Transfer or Admission to a Hospital
Seventeen patients were transferred to a hospital immediately
postoperatively, and one patient was transferred prior to the sur-
gical procedure but after an axillary block had been administered,
leading to a total transfer rate of 0.06% (eighteen of 28,737). In all
of the cases in which the patient was transferred postoperatively,
the abnormality was detected in the operating room or in the post-
anesthesia care unit, and the procedure was safely completed in all
cases. Of the seventeen patients, six were transferred for cardiac
abnormalities (irregular rhythms and chest pain); two were trans-
ferred for uncontrolled hypertension; three were transferred for
respiratory issues, with one patient requiring emergency intuba-
tion in the post-anesthesia care unit secondary to low oxygen
Fig. 1
Pie chart showing a total of fifty-eight adverse events of 28,737 cases
performed. Adverse events were defined as serious complications causing
harm to a patient or leading to additional treatment.
702
THE JOURNAL OF BONE & JOINT SURGERY
d JBJS.ORG
VOLUME 98-A
d NUMBER 8
d APRIL 20, 2016
THE SAFETY OF HAND AND UP PER-EXTREMITY SURGERY AT A
FRE ESTA ND ING AMBULATORY SURGE RY CE NTE R
 saturation (this patient was extubated prior to transfer); three were
transferred for pain control (two had incomplete blocks, and one
had an open reduction and internal fixation of a clavicle fracture
done under general anesthesia); two were transferred because of
excessive drowsiness, with subsequent negative work-ups at the
hospital for any pathological cause; and one was transferred after
sustaining a generalized seizure in the post-anesthesia care unit
and was stabilized prior to transfer. One patient sustained symp-
toms of a transient ischemic attack after an axillary nerve block
was placed but prior to starting the scheduled surgical procedure.
There were no deaths in this subgroup of patients.
Twenty-one patients were admitted to the hospital in the
immediate postoperative period (within seven days of the surgical
procedure) but after discharge from our ambulatory surgery cen-
ter, for a rate of 0.07%. Six of the twenty-one patients were ad-
mitted for pain control after the regional anesthesia had worn off.
Two patients had myocardial infarctions; one required a cardiac
stent, and the other required a permanent pacemaker. Both pa-
tients had undergone soft-tissue hand procedures and had shown
no evidence of cardiac abnormalities during or immediately after
the surgical procedure. One patient had a pulmonary embolism.
Two of the twenty-one patients were admitted for decreased oxy-
gen saturation. Subsequent testing was unable to determine a
cause, and both patients were discharged after short observational
stays. One patient had an acute compartment syndrome after
revision open reduction and internal fixation for nonunion of
both-bone forearm fractures necessitating emergency fasciotomy
on the first postoperative day, but the patient did not have any
long-term sequelae. Of the twenty-one patients, three were ad-
mitted for postoperative nausea, and two were admitted for in-
travenous antibiotics.
One patient was admitted to the intensive care unit after
developing diabetic ketoacidosis after a carpal tunnel release. Post-
operative blood glucose just prior to discharge from the surgery
center had been 93 mg/dL. Another patient was found unrespon-
sive by his son on postoperative day 1 and had sustained a cerebral
hemorrhage; the exact etiology was not clear. He unfortunately
did have some permanent deficits. One patient was admitted for
postoperative confusion, and one patient was admitted for post-
operative constipation.
Combining both patients transferred to the hospital directly
from the ambulatory surgery center and those admitted within
the immediate postoperative period, the rate of admission to a
hospital after upper-extremity surgery at our ambulatory surgery
center was 0.14% (thirty-nine of 28,737).
Discussion
Outpatient surgical procedures performed at ambulatory surgery
centers can offer certain advantages over those performed in a
hospital-based setting. Ambulatory surgery centers often special-
ize in certain procedures. This specialization leads to increased
volume for these specific procedures and leads to improved pa-
tient outcomes
8,9. By performing more of the same procedure,
these centers become more efficient as staff become more familiar
with their routines
10. Hair et al. showed, in an analysis of the 2006
National Survey of Ambulatory Surgery public data, that surgical
procedures performed in freestanding ambulatory surgery centers
took a mean of 39% less total time than those performed in
hospital-based ambulatory surgery centers
11. With greater special-
ization and efficiency, coordination and communication among
staff are also improved, potentially leading to fewer adverse
events12. Grisel and Arjmand analyzed the qualityof four common
pediatric ENT procedures performed at an ambulatory surgery
center compared with a hospital-based facility. Of 211 cases at the
hospital-based facility, there were nine unexpected events,
whereas, at the ambulatory surgery center, there were no unex-
pected events in 275 cases
13. Mart´
ın-Ferrero et al. reported on
their experience of 10,032 patients undergoing an outpatient
orthopaedic surgical procedure (upper and lower extremity) in
an ambulatory surgery center located in Spain
14. They had an
unplanned overnight admission rate of 0.14%, a readmission
rate of 0.11% within thirty days, an emergency room visit rate
of 1.21%, and no deaths in their series. The rate of unexpected
events in our study is lower, perhaps because we only included
upper-extremity procedures.
In our freestanding outpatient surgery center, hand and
upper-extremity surgical procedures are the predominant surgery
performed. There have been five hand and upper-extremity sur-
geons operating at the facility during the eleven-year time period
studied, and four of the surgeons are very involved in the educa-
tion of surgical fellows and residents at the surgery center. There is
a low turnover rate among the operating room staff, with most
being there for more than five consecutive years, and thus they are
very familiar with the surgical routines of the surgeons. They also
take pride in their work, are efficient (the mean turnover time is
thirteen minutes), and make sure that the patients have a safe
surgical experience.
We report no wrong-site upper-extremity surgical proce-
dures after 28,737 cases despite hand surgical procedure being
high-risk
15,16. At this facility, the attending physician always
marks the surgical incision site in the preoperative holding area
with the patient awake. Further, we strictly adhere to our surgical
checklist and time-out, allowing all members of the operative
team to agree on the procedure and surgical site before incision.
Checklists have been shown to be effective in reducing compli-
cations in multiple health-care settings
17. In addition, there is less
staff handover during and after cases, as the majority of cases
performed are less than one hour long. This also has been shown
to reduce complications
18.
In the current study, we did not examine the associations
between the occurrence of infection and deliverance of preoper-
ative antibiotics or patient comorbidities. However, in a prior
study performed at the surgery center, it was found that the rate
of surgical site infections was not associated with the use of pre-
operative antibiotics but was associated with smoking status, di-
abetes mellitus, and longer operative time19.
This study did raise the question of whether some proce-
dures should be performed in the hospital with a planned ad-
mission. Of the 28,737 cases performed in the ambulatory
surgery center, only nine patients were admitted to a hospital
for postoperative pain control. Pain management after extensive
surgery involving bone work can be difficult. However, the great
703
THE JOURNAL OF BONE & JOINT SURGERY
d JBJS.ORG
VOLUME 98-A
d NUMBER 8
d APRIL 20, 2016
THE SAFETY OF HAND AND UP PER-EXTREMITY SURGERY AT A
FRE ESTA ND ING AMBULATORY SURGE RY CE NTE R
 majority of such cases did not result in postoperative admissions
for pain control, and therefore admitting all of these patients is
believed to be unnecessary and a waste of health-care dollars. We
also had one case of acute compartment syndrome after a fore-
arm nonunion surgical procedure. This patient had been dis-
charged home with a regional block in effect. Although the risk
of compartment syndrome after this procedure is quite low,
consideration should be given to performing this procedure in
the hospital setting with a planned admission.
Selection bias of patients treated at a freestanding outpa-
tient surgery center exists. Healthy patients are allowed to un-
dergo procedures at a freestanding surgery center, whereas
sicker and more complex patients are often treated at facilities
attached to a hospital. This selection process exists for the safety
of patients20. Our review showing few complications (0.20%)
and no deaths supports our view that hand and upper-extremity
surgical procedures can be completed safely in the outpatient
setting at a freestanding surgery center with careful patient
selection, coordinated care, and strict adherence to patient
safety protocols. n
Kanu S. Goyal, MD
1
Sameer Jain, MD2
Glenn A. Buterbaugh, MD
2
Joseph E. Imbriglia, MD
2
1Department of Orthopaedic Surgery,
Division of Hand and Upper Extremity,
The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center,
Columbus, Ohio
2Hand & UpperEx Center,
Wexford, Pennsylvania
E-mail address for K.S. Goyal: kanusgoyal@gmail.com
References
1. Keyes GR, Singer R, Iverson RE, McGuire M, Yates J, Gold A, Thompson D.
Analysis of outpatient surgery center safety using an Internet-based quality improve-
ment and peer review program. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2004 May;113(6):1760-70.
2. Cullen KA, Hall MJ, Golosinskiy A. Ambulatory surgery in the United States, 2006.
Natl Health Stat Rep. 2009 Jan 28;11:1-25.
3. Koenig L, Doherty J, Dreyfus J, Xanthopoulos J. An analysis of recent growth of am-
bulatory surgery centers: final report. 2009 Jun 5. http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/
download?doi=10.1.1.512.4498&rep=rep1&type=pdf. Accessed 2015 Oct 8.
4. Agency of Healthcare Research and Quality. About the program. 2010. http://
ascsafetyprogram.org/. Accessed 2015 Oct 8.
5. Lim S, Jordan SW, Jain U, Kim JY. Predictors and causes of unplanned re-
operations in outpatient plastic surgery: a multi-institutional analysis of 6749
patients using the 2011 NSQIP database. J Plast Surg Hand Surg. 2014 Aug;48
(4):270-5. Epub 2014 Feb 17.
6. Mioton LM, Buck DW 2nd, Rambachan A, Ver Halen J, Dumanian GA, Kim JY.
Predictors of readmission after outpatient plastic surgery. Plast Reconstr Surg.
2014 Jan;133(1):173-80.
7. Fischer JP, Wes AM, Nelson JA, Serletti JM, Kovach SJ. Factors associated with
readmission following plastic surgery: a review of 10,669 procedures from the 2011
American College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement Program data
set. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2013 Sep;132(3):666-74.
8. Gawande A. Complications: a surgeon’s notes on an imperfect science. New
York: Picador; 2003.
9. Chowdhury MM, Dagash H, Pierro A. A systematic review of the impact of volume
of surgery and specialization on patient outcome. Br J Surg. 2007 Feb;94(2):145-61.
10. Munnich EL, Parente ST. Procedures take less time at ambulatory surgery
centers, keeping costs down and ability to meet demand up. Health Aff (Millwood).
2014 May;33(5):764-9.
11. Hair B, Hussey P, Wynn B. A comparison of ambulatory perioperative times in
hospitals and freestanding centers. Am J Surg. 2012 Jul;204(1):23-7. Epub 2012
Feb 16.
12. Gawande A. Better: a surgeon’s notes on performance. New York: Picador;
2007.
13. Grisel J, Arjmand E. Comparing quality at an ambulatory surgery center and a
hospital-based facility: preliminary findings. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2009
Dec;141(6):701-9.
14. Mart´
ın-Ferrero MA, Faour-Mart´
ın O, Simon-Perez C, P´
erez-Herrero M, de Pedro-
Moro JA. Ambulatory surgery in orthopedics: experience of over 10,000 patients.
J Orthop Sci. 2014 Mar;19(2):332-8. Epub 2014 Jan 7.
15. Meinberg EG, Stern PJ. Incidence of wrong-site surgery among hand surgeons.
J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2003 Feb;85(2):193-7.
16. Robinson PM, Muir LT. Wrong-site surgery in orthopaedics. J Bone Joint Surg Br.
2009 Oct;91(10):1274-80.
17. Weiser TG, Haynes AB, Lashoher A, Dziekan G, Boorman DJ, Berry WR,
Gawande AA. Perspectives in quality: designing the WHO Surgical Safety Checklist.
Int J Qual Health Care. 2010 Oct;22(5):365-70. Epub 2010 Aug 11.
18. Smith AF, Pope C, Goodwin D, Mort M. Interprofessional handover and patient
safety in anaesthesia: observational study of handovers in the recovery room. Br J
Anaesth. 2008 Sep;101(3):332-7. Epub 2008 Jun 13.
19. Bykowski MR, Sivak WN, Cray J, Buterbaugh G, Imbriglia JE, Lee WP. Assessing
the impact of antibiotic prophylaxis in outpatient elective hand surgery: a single-
center, retrospective review of 8,850 cases. J Hand Surg Am. 2011 Nov;36
(11):1741-7. Epub 2011 Oct 5.
20. Lovald S, Ong K, Lau E, Joshi G, Kurtz S, Malkani A. Patient selection in out-
patient and short-stay total knee arthroplasty. J Surg Orthop Adv. 2014 Spring;23
(1):2-8.
704
THE JOURNAL OF BONE & JOINT SURGERY
d JBJS.ORG
VOLUME 98-A
d NUMBER 8
d APRIL 20, 2016
THE SAFETY OF HAND AND UP PER-EXTREMITY SURGERY AT A
FRE ESTA ND ING AMBULATORY SURGE RY CE NTE R
