 PEPFAR 
2016 Annual Report 
to Congress
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
Front cover photos
LEFT: 
Photo: Girls at HIV prevention program in Kenya 
Photo Credit: Rose Mutisya/USAID Kenya
RIGHT: 
Photo: PMTCT mother and baby at Iganga Hospital in Central Uganda
Photo Credit: Karin Schermbrucker, courtesy of mothers2mothers
2
3
PEPFAR 
2016 Annual Report 
to Congress
3
 Contents
PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
4
5
Young women in Kenya. Photo Credit: Irene Angwenyi/USAID Kenya
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
..........................................................................................................................................................................................................7
APPENDIX A: How PEPFAR Uses Data for Maximum Impact to Get to Epidemic Control ................................................................................24
APPENDIX B: How PEPFAR Documents Results  
.........................................................................................................................................................38
APPENDIX C: Global Trends in New HIV Infections ................................................................................................................................................... 41
APPENDIX D: Infections Averted ...................................................................................................................................................................................48
APPENDIX E: Global Prevalence—Refining PEPFAR’s Impact and Progress Toward Epidemic Control .......................................................49
APPENDIX F: Rates of Adherence and Retention  ......................................................................................................................................................51
APPENDIX G: How New WHO Guidelines Impact the HIV/AIDS Epidemic and Policy Change as Part of Shared Responsibility 
........... 52
APPENDIX H: HIV Burden and Treatment Response  
................................................................................................................................................54
APPENDIX I: Supportive Care ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 57
APPENDIX J: PEPFAR and Prevention Interventions—PMTCT, VMMC, DREAMS 
...................................................................................................58
APPENDIX K: PMTCT 
..........................................................................................................................................................................................................59
APPENDIX L: Preventing New HIV Infections in Young Men—VMMC 
......................................................................................................................61
APPENDIX M: Prioritizing Prevention of New HIV Infections in Women, Adolescent Girls, and Children  .................................................63
APPENDIX N: Pediatrics and OVC—Focusing the Program Toward Achieving an AIDS-Free Generation and Healthy Children 
.............71
APPENDIX O: Driving a Sustainability Agenda with Country Partners .................................................................................................................74
APPENDIX P: Strengthening Program Cost Effectiveness ...................................................................................................................................... 75
APPENDIX Q: Engaging Partner Governments and Civil Society 
...........................................................................................................................83
APPENDIX R: Engaging Faith-Based, Locally Based, and Minority Partners 
......................................................................................................85
APPENDIX S: Engaging International and Nongovernmental Partners 
............................................................................................................... 87
APPENDIX T: Addressing the Co-Infections and Co-Morbidities of HIV/AIDS ....................................................................................................89
APPENDIX U: Strengthening Health Training and Data Systems  .........................................................................................................................92
APPENDIX V: Evaluation Standards of Practice 
.........................................................................................................................................................93
APPENDIX W: Supporting Tables 
..................................................................................................................available on http://www.pepfar.gov/
Tables and Figures in this Report ................................................................................................................................................................................96
Glossary ..............................................................................................................................................................................................................................98
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
6
7
Executive Summary
“When we help African countries feed their people 
and care for the sick it’s the right thing to do, and 
it prevents the next pandemic from reaching our 
shores. Right now, we’re on track to end the scourge 
of HIV/AIDS. That’s within our grasp.”
– President Barack Obama,
State of the Union Address,  January 12, 2016 
The bold and visionary leadership by President 
George W. Bush and the United States (U.S.) 
Congress that created the U.S. President’s 
Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR)—a 
legacy that President Barack Obama has 
embraced and on which he has significantly 
expanded—has fundamentally transformed 
the global HIV/AIDS response. Since 2003, with 
Congress’s extraordinary investment, PEPFAR 
has helped to halt the relentless escalation of 
new HIV infections and mortality rates across 
the globe. PEPFAR has saved millions of lives 
and prevented millions more HIV infections by 
providing core HIV prevention and treatment 
services, changing the very course of the HIV 
pandemic. Our investments have resulted in 
more than 1.5 million babies who would have 
otherwise been infected being born HIV-free, 
and have provided compassionate care and 
support for millions of AIDS orphans and vul-
nerable children (OVC). 
PEPFAR has built and strengthened the capacity 
of country-specific and country-led responses 
in both government and civil society, and 
brought key partners to the table. We have 
fostered collaboration among the U.S. govern-
ment, partner governments, and global partners 
around the world, including multilateral insti-
tutions, civil society, including faith-based 
organizations (FBOs), the private sector, founda-
tions, and people living with HIV. 
Our engagement on the ground has provided 
invaluable lessons and experience that will 
continue to inform and improve the U.S. govern-
ment’s responses to unforeseen health crises 
in the future. The U.S. government, through 
PEPFAR, has accelerated the progress toward 
a world safer and more secure from infectious 
disease threats by strengthening the global 
capacity to prevent, detect, and respond to 
health threats. PEPFAR’s substantial health 
system strengthening investments in countries 
with a sizable HIV/AIDS burden have paid large 
dividends in these countries’ ability to swiftly 
detect and respond to Ebola, avian flu, cholera, 
and other outbreaks.
e
s
u
o
 H
te
Whi
 9
PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
8
PEPFAR's impact extends well beyond the health 
sector, also strengthening economic development, 
stability and communities. PEPFAR has powerfully 
and unequivocally proven that investing in health 
is not only the right thing to do, but also the smart 
thing to do.
Our nation has demonstrated that we can work 
together, save lives, and ensure global health 
security while doing good around the world. As 
President Bush said when proposing PEPFAR, 
“seldom has history offered a greater opportu-
nity to do so much for so many,” a philosophy that 
guides our work. Across all of sub-Saharan Africa, 
fewer than 50,000 people were on treatment in 
2002. To save lives and decrease transmission of 
HIV, as of September 30, 2015, PEPFAR has sup-
ported lifesaving antiretroviral treatment (ART) for 
9.5 million men, women, and children—a more than 
four-fold increase since the beginning of President 
Obama’s administration. To prevent infection in 
young men, PEPFAR has supported more than 
8.9 million voluntary medical male circumcisions 
(VMMCs) in eastern and southern Africa. In fiscal 
year 2015 alone, to prevent infection in babies, 
PEPFAR supported HIV testing services (HTS) for 
more than 14.7 million pregnant women. This 
enabled 831,500 of the women who tested positive 
to get antiretroviral medications (ARVs) for their 
own health and to ensure their babies are born 
HIV-free. PEPFAR is on track to achieve the bold 
HIV prevention and treatment targets announced 
by President Obama in September 2015. But these 
results are more than numbers; each individual 
reached through PEPFAR contributes to the health 
of his or her family, community, and country. This 
is our ultimate measure of success. 
At its core, PEPFAR is a reflection of the compas-
sion of the American people. It has become an 
iconic brand of U.S. government engagement in 
health, development, and diplomacy and has 
proven that by setting and being held accountable 
to clear metrics, it is possible to demonstrate clear 
outcomes and impact. And this work is far from 
done.  
© AP Images
On May 27, 2003, President George W. Bush signed P.L. 108-25, the 
 
United States Leadership Against Global HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis, and 
Malaria Act of 2003.
“HIV/AIDS is one of the greatest medical 
challenges of our time…Across Africa, 
this disease is filling graveyards and 
creating orphans and leaving millions in 
a desperate fight for their own lives. They 
will not fight alone… The legislation I sign 
today launches an emergency effort that 
will provide $15 billion over the next five 
years to fight AIDS abroad. This is the 
largest single up-front commitment in 
history for an international public health 
initiative involving a specific disease…
In the face of preventable death and 
suffering, we have a moral duty to act, 
and we are acting.”
-President George W. Bush, PEPFAR Bill Signing, May 27, 2003
President George W. Bush, PEPFAR Bill Signing, May 27, 2003
Achieving an AIDS-Free Generation 
Is Possible, but the Time to Act Is 
Now
Today, thanks to our efforts and those of 
PEPFAR’s many partners, we have everything 
we need—the tools, science, shared vision—to 
decrease the number of new HIV infections 
by 90 percent. We envision the creation of 
an AIDS-free generation where no one is left 
behind, when every person diagnosed with HIV 
will be prioritized for treatment immediately, 
and when HIV is no longer a public health 
threat. That future is possible, but the time to 
act is now.  
According to the Joint United Nations 
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), nearly 37 
million people are living with HIV/AIDS globally. 
Although the current estimate of individuals 
on treatment for HIV (15.8 million) has doubled 
within the last five years—an amazing accom-
plishment—there is still more to do. With 
“business as usual,” we risk a cumulative 
100 million HIV infections by 2030, which is 
far beyond the global community’s ability to 
respond.   
Every week, nearly 35,000 people are infected 
with HIV globally. While HIV incidence has 
declined by 50 percent since its peak in sub-
Saharan Africa, the population in the region 
has increased by 340 million during the same 
period. Due to the resulting “youth bulge” in 
sub-Saharan Africa, millions of young people 
are entering a time in life when they are most 
susceptible to HIV infection. In fact, Africa has 
the youngest population in the world, with 
200 million people between 15 and 24 years 
of age. Given these demographic trends, we 
have to work hard just to keep up with, and 
9.5
MILLION
Men, women, and 
children receiving 
life-saving 
antiretroviral 
treatment
190
THOUSAND
New 
health care
workers 
receving
training
8.9
MILLION
Voluntary
medical male
circumcision
procedures
performed
5.5
MILLION
Orphans and 
vulnerable
children 
received 
care and 
support
68.2
MILLION
People
received
HIV testing
and
counseling
14.7
MILLION
Pregnant
women
received 
HIV testing
and counseling
As of September 30, 2015, PEPFAR is supporting life-saving 
antiretroviral treatment for 9.5 million people. Of these individuals, 
5.7 million are receiving direct support. An additional 3.8 million are
benefiting from essential technical support to partner countries 
As of September 30, 2015, PEPFAR 
has supported more than 8.9 million 
voluntary medical male circumcision 
procedures in Eastern and Southern 
Africa to reduce the risk of HIV 
transmission.
In Fiscal Year (FY) 2015 PEPFAR 
provided care and support for 
more than 5.5 million orphans 
and vulnerable children.
In FY 2015, PEPFAR supported HIV 
testing and counseling for more than 
68.2 million people, providing a critical 
entry point to prevention, treatment, 
and care.
As of September 30, 2015, PEPFAR is supporting training (including 
pre-service training) for more than 190,000 new health care workers in 
PEPFAR-supported countries to deliver HIV and other health services.
In FY 2015, PEPFAR supported HIV 
testing and counseling for more than 
14.7 million pregnant women.
• For 831,500 of the women who
tested positive for HIV, PEPFAR
provided antiretroviral medications
to prevent mother-to-child 
transmission of the virus.
• Due to PEPFAR support, 267,000
babies that would otherwise have
been infected were born HIV-free
in FY 2015 alone.
The U.S. President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) represents America’s commitment to 
saving lives and the shared responsibility of all global partners toward achieving an AIDS-free generation. 
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
10
11
Source: John Stover, 2015
even harder to keep ahead of, the epidemic. 
It is clear that if we begin to drift, lessen our 
aspirations, or fail to follow the science, we will 
have squandered our cumulative investments 
and allowed the accomplishments of the last 
decade to unravel. 
We must seize this opportunity. We have a 
five-year window to fast-track our efforts and 
thereby change the trajectory of the HIV/AIDS 
epidemic and create a better future. In 
September 2015, when the world adopted the 
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and 
the Sustainable Development Goals, the global 
community collectively committed to a goal of 
ending the AIDS epidemic by 2030. President 
Obama made clear that the United States will 
lead the way by announcing bold new HIV 
treatment and prevention targets for PEPFAR. 
By the end of 2017, PEPFAR will:
• 
Support 12.9 million men, women, and children 
with lifesaving treatment.  
• 
Provide 13 million VMMCs.
• 
Reduce HIV incidence by 40 percent among 
adolescent girls and young women within the 
highest-burden geographic areas of 10 sub-
Saharan African countries.  
New game changing guidelines from the World 
Health Organization (WHO) in fall 2015 provide 
tremendous opportunities to prevent and treat 
HIV/AIDS immediately. WHO released guidance 
that recommends ART for all persons living 
with HIV irrespective of clinical or immunologic 
status through a “Test and Start” treatment 
model (see box on page 11). This will increase 
First Ladies Michelle Obama and Laura Bush at the African Leadership Summit
White House
the number of persons eligible for treatment, 
but will also provide an individual as well as 
population-level benefit, as persons who start 
ART early remain healthier and greatly reduce 
their risk of transmitting the virus to others. 
WHO also released new service delivery 
guidelines that recognize the evolution in the 
HIV/AIDS response. Stable patients who are 
identified while already healthy will require 
fewer clinical interventions. A large number of 
patients who are stable on ART can be cared 
for with less frequent clinical visits (every six 
months) and less frequent medication refills 
(every six months). Such patients can safely 
receive care in their communities by lay pro-
viders, improving adherence and decongesting 
clinics so they may focus on the smaller group 
of sicker patients who need clinical care. Rapid 
adoption of this streamlined approach has 
great potential to free up resources to treat 
more patients in need (see box on page 11). 
Finally, WHO also released new guidance 
related to pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) rec-
ommending that oral PrEP containing tenofovir 
should be offered as an additional prevention 
choice for people at substantial risk of HIV 
infection. This recommendation enables key 
at-risk populations to benefit from this addi-
tional prevention option. 
We need to seize these opportunities working 
in close coordination with our partner coun-
tries and multilateral organizations to explore 
the implementation of these recommenda-
tions. As has been documented from the 
Fast-Track strategies of UNAIDS and others, the 
speed at which countries adopt these new 
policies is key to reducing new HIV infections 
and reducing future treatment costs. Expanding 
treatment eligibility to all persons living with 
HIV and the adoption of key service delivery 
recommendations in the next few months will 
have the greatest impact in achieving the 2020 
and 2030 global goals. We can make our limited 
resources twice as effective with respect to 
lives saved and infections averted if these 
changes are appropriately and aggressively 
implemented. If implemented, we can control 
and ultimately reduce the out-year costs of 
addressing the HIV/AIDS pandemic. 
The World Before PEPFAR
Just 15 years ago, an AIDS-free generation 
was unimaginable. The reports from the front 
lines were fraught with despair. At that time, 
an HIV diagnosis was a virtual death sentence 
in many countries. Families and communities 
were being devastated around the globe, with 
disastrous social and economic consequences. 
Gains in global health and development were 
being lost: in the hardest-hit regions of sub-
Saharan Africa, infant mortality had doubled, 
child mortality had tripled, and life expectancy 
Cost Savings: We Can 
Support 2 ART Clients 
for the Price of 1
Models show that if partner countries 
rapidly adopt the 2015 WHO guidelines for 
Test and START and new differentiated 
models of care, 28 million people can access 
antiretroviral treatment by 2020 (up from 
15.8 million in June 2015). By pursuing 
Treatment for All, we can reduce new HIV 
infections and AIDS-related deaths by more 
than 50 percent by 2020. Best of all, through 
these strategic policy changes, this can be 
accomplished in a nearly revenue-neutral 
manner. 
We have a five-year window to put coun-
tries on the path to controlling their HIV/
AIDS epidemics and, ultimately, achieving 
an AIDS-free generation. This requires all 
partners to pull in the same direction.
Source: John Stover, 2015
had dropped by 20 years or more. At that time, 
the rate of new HIV infections in the hardest-
hit regions was exploding, and people were 
getting sick and dying during the most produc-
tive years of their lives. 
Despite early efforts to provide HIV preven-
tion, care, and treatment services, the epidemic 
continued to rage unabated, as lifesaving 
medications that might have turned the tide 
were inaccessible and unaffordable to those 
most in need. Further, many experts assumed 
that people living with HIV/AIDS in many parts 
of the world would be unable to sustain the 
complicated dosing regimens required.
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
12
13
Following President Bush’s call to action in his 
2003 State of the Union Address, the U.S. 
Congress passed PEPFAR with strong bipartisan 
support just four months after it was 
announced. At that point, the tide began to turn. 
Turning the Tide
At the time of its launch, PEPFAR was well 
named: the global HIV/AIDS epidemic was an 
emergency. By 2003, more than 20 million men, 
women, and children had died in sub-Saharan 
Africa alone. They were mothers, fathers, 
teachers, doctors, and nurses, and in the wake 
of their untimely deaths, 14 million orphaned 
children were left behind.
While Phase I of PEPFAR focused on the emer-
gency response, Phase II, which commenced in 
2008, emphasized enhanced country engage-
“As our nation moves troops and 
builds alliances to make our world 
safer, we must always remember 
our calling, as a blessed country is 
to make the world better…We have 
confronted, and will continue to 
confront HIV/AIDS in our own  
country. And to meet a severe 
and urgent crisis abroad, tonight I 
propose the Emergency Plan for AIDS 
Relief, a work of mercy beyond all 
current international efforts.” 
 –President George W. Bush, State of the 
 
Union Address, January 28, 2003 
2016
By the end of 2016, achieve a 
25 percent reduction in HIV incidence among 
adolescent girls and young women (aged 15-24) within the highest burden 
geographic areas of 10 sub-Saharan African countries. 
2017
By the end of 2017, achieve a 
40 percent reduction in HIV incidence 
among adolescent girls and young women (aged 15-24) within the highest 
burden geographic areas of 10 sub-Saharan African countries.  
2016
By the end of 2016, PEPFAR will provide 
11 million 
voluntary medical male circumcisions for HIV 
prevention, cumulatively. 
2017
By the end of 2017, PEPFAR will provide 
13 million 
voluntary medical male circumcisions for HIV 
prevention, cumulatively. 
By the end of 2016, PEPFAR will support a total of 
11.4 million children, pregnant 
women receiving B+, and adults on life-saving anti-retroviral treatment, 
of which 7.2 million  are directly supported by PEPFAR funding and 
4.2 million 
are supported through technical assistance, jointly with partner countries.  
11.4
MILLIION
2016
2017
By the end of 2017, PEPFAR will support a total of 
12.9 million  children, pregnant 
women receiving B+, and adults on life-saving anti-retroviral treatment, of which 
8.5 
million  are directly supported by PEPFAR funding and 
4.4 million  are supported 
through technical assistance, jointly with partner countries.  
12.9
MILLIION
MILLION
13
11
MILLION
40%
REDUCTION
25%
REDUCTION
PREVENTION
TREATMENT
PEPFAR HIV PREVENTION AND TREATMENT TARGETS
ment and sustainability. During this period, 
PEPFAR established Partnership Frameworks 
(PFs)—joint strategic roadmaps on HIV/AIDS, 
agreed to and signed by the United States and 
partner governments, promoting mutual 
accountability and sustainability of the HIV/
AIDS response. PEPFAR signed 22 PFs from 2009 
to 2012, launching a new era of collaborative 
planning with our partner governments.  
Evidence-based interventions driven by sound 
public health science were brought to scale: 
ART, prevention of mother-to-child transmis-
sion (PMTCT), VMMC, and comprehensive 
prevention programs that included the use of 
condoms were implemented with PEPFAR 
support in countries around the world.
The Vision for Getting It Done
To control the epidemic and, ultimately, 
achieve an AIDS-free generation, we must 
sustain and expand our collective gains. Led 
by our strategic vision, PEPFAR 3.0—Controlling 
the Epidemic: Delivering on the Promise of an 
AIDS-free Generation—we are using data to do 
the right things, in the right places, right now, 
and in the right way. PEPFAR 3.0 outlines our 
strategic focus for Phase III of the program: 
sustainable control of the HIV/AIDS epidemic 
through five action agendas.
• Impact Action Agenda—focusing resources and 
leveraging finances to address the most vulner-
able populations and to control the epidemic.
• Efficiency Action Agenda—increasing transpar-
ency, oversight, and accountability across PEPFAR 
and its interagency partners to ensure every 
taxpayer dollar is optimally invested and tracked. 
 
• Sustainability Action Agenda—ensuring that 
when the United States and partner countries 
have scaled up interventions and reached 
epidemic control, the services, systems, 
financing, and policies required to maintain 
that control are readily available to PEPFAR 
beneficiaries.  
• Partnership Action Agenda—strengthening part-
nerships to achieve sustainability and ultimately 
create an AIDS-free generation.
Spotlight:  
Public-Private 
Partnerships for Impact
PEPFAR has changed how we engage in 
public-private partnerships, maximizing 
impact by aligning our core programs 
with private sector partners. 
Investing in Adolescent Girls 
and Young Women
•  DREAMS is an ambitious $385 million 
partnership to support adolescent girls 
in becoming Determined, Resilient, 
Empowered, AIDS-free, Mentored, and 
Safe women. The partnership brings 
together PEPFAR, the Bill & Melinda 
Gates Foundation, Girl Effect, Johnson & 
Johnson, Gilead, and ViiV Healthcare to 
reduce new HIV infections among ado-
lescent girls and young women within 
the highest-burden areas of 10 sub-
Saharan African countries.
Delivering on Our 
Commitment to Children
•  Accelerating Children’s HIV/AIDS 
Treatment (ACT): PEPFAR and the 
Children’s Investment Fund Foundation 
(CIFF) are jointly investing $200 million 
to accelerate children’s access to HIV/
AIDS treatment. ACT is a two-year effort 
to double the number of children 
receiving lifesaving antiretroviral 
treatment (ART) in nine high-priority 
countries in sub-Saharan Africa. As of 
September 30, 2015, PEPFAR is sup-
porting 498,000 children (0–19 years of 
age) with ART, putting ACT on track to 
achieving the fiscal year 2017 target of 
600,000 children on lifesaving treatment.   
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
14
15
• Human Rights Action Agenda—securing and 
protecting human rights and addressing the 
human rights challenges of those affected by the 
disease.
UNAIDS’s Fast-Track strategy, which has now 
been adopted by many countries as their 
own, sets out 90-90-90 targets: 90 percent of 
people living with HIV know their HIV status, 90 
percent of people who know their HIV status 
are accessing treatment, and 90 percent of 
people on treatment have suppressed viral 
loads. Together, in 2015, PEPFAR and our inter-
governmental partners have made significant 
strides toward achieving these goals. 
Delivering Results, Improving 
Efficiencies
We have learned many lessons since 2003, 
and we never forget that we are accountable 
to the U.S. Congress and the American people. 
They put their trust in PEPFAR to save lives 
and to adapt and evolve in order to deliver the 
greatest possible return on their investment. 
From its inception, PEPFAR has thrived due to 
the exceptional contributions from within the 
U.S. government. The leadership at the U.S. 
Department of State’s Office of the Global AIDS 
Coordinator and Health Diplomacy; United 
States Agency for International Development; 
the U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services and its agencies, including the Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention, Health 
Resources and Services Administration, and the 
National Institutes of Health; the Department 
of Defense; the Peace Corps; and the 
Department of Labor, as well as our new part-
nership with the U.S. Treasury, has been 
instrumental and has demonstrated the true 
strength of interagency collaboration. The 
dedicated career staff working internationally 
under the leadership of the chiefs of mission 
at our embassies have been equally important 
to bilateral engagement and ensuring suc-
cessful implementation of the program. 
We have been steadfast in the adoption of 
a data-driven, targeted approach to address 
one of the most complex global health crises 
in modern history. By taking evidence-based, 
community-focused HIV prevention, treatment, 
and care programs to scale in under-resourced 
settings, the United States has challenged the 
conventional wisdom that nothing could be 
done to turn the tide of new HIV infections and 
disease progression among those infected. 
PEPFAR has become even more efficient and 
effective, driving down costs to save dollars and 
save lives. However, we know that it will take 
all partners, working in a focused, coordinated, 
data-driven manner, to succeed. PEPFAR works 
 Veronica Davison/PEPFAR
Rick Warren, Senior Pastor of Saddleback Church, Sir Elton John, Amb. Mark Dybul, Executive Director of the Global Fund, and Amb. Deborah Birx, U.S. 
Global AIDS Coordinator & Special Representative for Global Health Diplomacy testifying before the Senate Appropriations Committee on May 6, 2015.
Examples of PEPFAR and Global Fund Engagement
Level
Description
Policy & 
Governance
• 
Senior U.S. government officials participate in Global Fund board meetings twice each year.  
• 
Senior U.S. government officials serve in leadership positions on the Global Fund board 
committees on strategy, finance, and governance. The designated PEPFAR official on each 
committee participates in committee meetings throughout the year.
• 
Every month, PEPFAR participates in the Global Fund’s Grant Approvals Committee (the 
governance body that recommends funding decisions for new and existing Global Fund grants). 
Program
• 
At the headquarters level, PEPFAR: communicates daily with Global Fund staff, seconds personnel 
to Global Fund headquarters, hosts headquarters-to-headquarters meetings to assess key 
implementation challenges in core joint-investment countries, and hosts annual coordination 
meetings with the Global Fund on implementation topics, such as procurement and supply chain.  
• 
At the country level, PEPFAR teams: deploy “Global Fund Liaisons” to coordinate implementation 
and share information about the Global Fund with PEPFAR teams (and vice versa), share 
implementation data with Global Fund counterparts quarterly, and are actively involved in 
country-level Global Fund governance bodies that oversee grant implementation. 
• 
In 2015, PEPFAR invited Global Fund Portfolio Managers to participate in PEPFAR’s Country 
Operational Plan process and invited the Global Fund to provide input on the FY 2016 Country 
Operational Plan Guidance.
Technical 
Assistance
• 
PEPFAR is the largest donor in technical assistance to support the activities of the Global Fund.
• 
Global Fund Technical Assistance activities include supporting development of national strategic 
plans and grant proposals, building the capacity of governments to manage their grants, 
supporting countries to mobilize increased domestic resources for HIV/AIDS, and strengthening 
national supply chains to deliver lifesaving commodities. 
• 
PEPFAR is an active partner in the Global Fund’s Implementation Through Partnership (ITP) 
project, launched in 2015, to drive programmatic success in 20 high-priority countries. These 20 
countries represent 54 percent of all Global Fund money and 67 percent of expected scale-up 
activities.  
• 
PEPFAR’s investments in technical assistance for the Global Fund will be aligned to support the 
actions identified in the ITP project.        
with the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis 
(TB) and Malaria (the Global Fund), of which 
we are the largest donor, to maximize our joint 
investments. Increased partnership between 
PEPFAR and the Global Fund serves to improve 
the impact of our investments through more 
strategic use of resources to support efficient 
and evidence-based programs that are truly col-
laborative and sustainable. 
Since its founding, PEPFAR has worked to build 
health infrastructure and strengthen capacity 
through an emphasis on sustainability. These 
efforts have not only supported patients living 
with HIV/AIDS, but also are leveraged for 
maternal and child health, malaria, immuniza-
tions, and emergency disease outbreak 
response. We have invested in strong laborato-
ries and well-trained laboratory specialists 
critical to well-functioning health systems, 
enabling clinicians and health workers to 
diagnose and treat a range of diseases and 
conditions. To date, PEPFAR has trained more 
than 190,000 health care workers to deliver HIV 
care and other health services. These efforts 
not only improve HIV care, but also enable 
countries to improve the overall health of their 
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
16
17
of its third phase—PEPFAR 3.0—in which the 
earlier successes are being leveraged aggres-
sively to focus on the sustainable control of 
the epidemic. PEPFAR is partnering with the 
international community to drive toward the 
UNAIDS 90-90-90 global goals, and in order to 
do so, PEPFAR has shifted its manner of doing 
business. This pivot, based on what has been 
learned in the previous 10 years and where the 
future epidemic trend is leading, is toward a 
data-driven approach that strategically targets 
geographic areas and populations where the 
greatest impact can be achieved. 
We are determined to dramatically reduce new 
HIV infections among adolescent girls and 
young women by implementing a comprehen-
sive, targeted strategy to protect their health, 
secure economic opportunity for them, and 
enable them to pursue their dreams. Every 
year, 380,000 adolescent girls and young 
women are infected with HIV—more than 1,000 
every day. Globally, adolescent girls and young 
women face more than 1,000 new HIV infec-
tions every day, and in sub-Saharan Africa, they 
account for 71 percent of new HIV infections 
among adolescents. Since gender-based 
violence (GBV) and HIV are intricately linked, 
girls who experience violence are three times 
more likely than girls who do not experience 
violence to have an unwanted pregnancy, and 
up to three times more likely to have HIV or 
other sexually transmitted infections. 
That is why PEPFAR, the Bill & Melinda Gates 
Foundation, and Girls Effect were founding 
members of the DREAMS partnership, now $385 
million (subject to approval by the U.S. 
Congress). DREAMS is supporting adolescent 
girls and young women to be Determined, 
Resilient, Empowered, AIDS-free, Mentored, and 
Safe, and it aims to achieve a 40 percent reduc-
tion in new HIV infections among adolescent 
girls and young women within the hardest-hit 
areas of 10 sub-Saharan Africa countries by the 
end of 2017. 
On World AIDS Day 2015, PEPFAR and several 
private sector partners announced new invest-
ments in DREAMS, including the new DREAMS 
Innovation Challenge. PEPFAR committed an 
additional $80 million from within its existing FY 
2015 budget for this Challenge, and Johnson & 
Engaging and Investing in 
Civil Society
Involving Civil Society Early and Often  
in PEPFAR Planning Process 
•  To ensure increased participation and inte-
gration of civil society in HIV/AIDS planning 
and implementation, all PEPFAR countries 
were directed to actively engage civil society 
throughout the development of their annual 
Country/Regional Operational Plans (COP/
ROP). During the 2015 COP in-person reviews, 
each country was empowered to invite 
members of civil society, partner country 
governments, multilaterals, and other stake-
holders to participate in discussions directly 
with Ambassador Birx around the annual 
PEPFAR planning process. 
• In November 2015, PEPFAR posted its draft 
2016 Country/Regional Operational Plan 
(COP/ROP) Guidance online to collect 
feedback from all stakeholders, including 
civil society organizations. The comments 
directly informed the final guidance, posted 
online on December 1, 2015.
Investing in Civil Society Leadership  
and Capacity 
In 2015, PEPFAR announced several investments 
to strengthen the leadership and capacity of civil 
society organizations, including:  
• $80 million for the DREAMS Innovation 
Challenge; 
• $10 million for PEPFAR’s partnership with the 
Elton John AIDS Foundation to provide grants 
to organizations working to meet the HIV-
related needs of LGBT people;
• a $10 million contribution to the Robert Carr 
Civil Society Networks Fund (RCNF) over the 
next three years to support and build the 
capacity of global and regional civil society 
networks; and
• a joint $4 million contribution to the PEPFAR-
UNAIDS Faith Initiative.  
Young women at DREAMS workshop in Tanzania
Veronica Davison / PEPFAR
citizens by creating a lasting infrastructure that 
positions partner countries to respond to a 
range of health challenges and threats. 
There are indirect economic benefits for treating 
people living with HIV before they develop 
AIDS. Healthy HIV-infected individuals on 
treatment are able to work and support their 
families. Keeping parents healthy also lessens 
other social costs, such as caring for orphans 
whose parents die of AIDS-related illnesses. 
Robust statistical models have shown that 
the economic benefits of treatment will likely 
exceed program costs within just 10 years of 
investment. In other words, treating people will 
not only save lives, but will also generate con-
siderable economic returns.
The Work Ahead
PEPFAR continues to make great strides, 
focusing on reaching and serving key affected 
populations (including adolescent girls and 
young women), strengthening community 
engagement, addressing stigma and dis-
crimination, and making program decisions 
supported by clearer and more granular data. 
Despite these successes, considerable 
work remains and critical gaps need to be 
addressed, as Secretary of State John Kerry 
stated on World AIDS Day 2015. 
PEPFAR is now well into the implementation 
Secretary Kerry visits PEPFAR-supported HIV/AIDS clinic in Ethiopia.
U.S. Department of State
“Even as we mark the progress 
we’ve made, we recognize that 
the months and years ahead will 
be critical. There are still over 20 
million people worldwide living 
with HIV/AIDS, without any treat-
ment at all. Experts tell us that we 
have a five-year window to funda-
mentally change the trajectory of 
the HIV/AIDS epidemic—to accel-
erate the progress we’ve made and 
stop HIV/AIDS in its tracks.” 
 
 -Secretary of State John Kerry on World AIDS Day 2015
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
18
19
children under the age of 15 were living with 
HIV/AIDS globally. Of these children, nearly 90 
percent live in sub-Saharan Africa, and only 
32 percent were receiving ART in 2014. Without 
ART, half of the children infected with HIV at 
birth or in infancy will die before their second 
birthday, and 80 percent will die before their 
fifth birthday. PEPFAR has taken action to 
change this, including through the Accelerating 
Children’s HIV/AIDS Treatment (ACT) Initiative—a 
two-year, $200 million partnership between 
PEPFAR and the Children’s Investment Fund 
Foundation to double the total number of 
children receiving lifesaving treatment in nine 
high-priority countries by the end of 2017. As of 
September 30, 2015, in just one year, we have 
more than doubled the number of children 
tested for HIV and have achieved a 55 percent 
increase in the rate of new children on ART. 
PEPFAR is supporting 498,000 children ages 
0–19 with lifesaving ART, putting ACT on track to 
achieve the FY 2017 target of 600,000 children 
living with HIV/AIDS on ART with PEPFAR support. 
We are ensuring that our OVC programs—which 
play a valuable role for both children and their 
caregivers, including socioeconomic support—
provide key linkages to other services such as 
HIV treatment and prevention. 
We are enhancing our efforts through PMTCT to 
reach the day when no child is born HIV-positive 
and to ensure that mothers remain healthy 
through expansion of Option B+ programming, 
or lifelong ART, for pregnant women.  Since 
2009, there has been a 48 percent reduction 
in new HIV infections among children in the 21 
priority countries of the Global Plan Towards 
the Elimination of New HIV Infections among 
Children by 2015 and Keeping Their Mothers 
Alive, which PEPFAR has co-chaired with UNAIDS. 
 
Driven by the President’s targets, we are 
scaling up targeted prevention investments 
in VMMC, which is a core prevention inter-
vention. Circumcision reduces the risk of 
heterosexually-acquired HIV infection in men 
by approximately 60 percent. PEPFAR has 
supported more than 8.9 million VMMC proce-
dures in eastern and southern Africa to reduce 
the risk of HIV transmission, and will have 
Johnson, Gilead Sciences, and ViiV Healthcare 
joined our call to action by committing $25 
million to support both the DREAMS partner-
ship and the Innovation Challenge. This 
partnership model reflects a shift toward 
aligning our core programs with private sector 
partners to maximize our investment and our 
collective impact.  
We are committed to saving children’s lives 
through an aggressive plan to provide com-
prehensive treatment, care, and support to 
those infected with HIV. In 2014, 2.6 million 
Preventing New HIV Infections 
Through Voluntary Medical 
Male Circumcisions 
As a result of one PEPFAR-funded organization in South 
Africa, 100,000 men have reduced the risk of contracting 
HIV by 60 percent. It is estimated that five circumcisions 
result in one averted HIV infection. So far, the voluntary 
medical male circumcision (VMMC) program has averted 
20,000 new HIV infections. 
Clinical research has shown medical circumcisions reduce 
the risk of acquiring HIV by 60 percent. Men who have had 
this procedure find it easier to maintain personal hygiene 
while protecting their female partners from a number of 
other sexually transmitted infections. Circumcision also 
reduces a woman’s risk of cervical cancer.
Since commencing in 2010, the program has made a 
considerable impact in the Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, 
Mpumalanga, and Free State communities.
At the organization’s Pietermaritzburg site alone, it has 
performed some 4,277 VMMCs annually since the program 
started. This site, which operates from a temporary 
mobile location, is responsible for 21 percent of the 
nationwide achievement of 100,000 VMMCs.
Xolani Zwane, a 38-year-old, became the organization’s 
100,000th VMMC client. Prior to his visit to the clinic, he 
had no knowledge of this service. Susan Molutsoane, the 
clinic’s site manager, told him about the procedure and its 
medical benefits.
“The final decision to get circumcised came from me, 
there was no reason for me not to do it and I feel great,” 
Xolani said two days after his circumcision.
The father of three is so pleased with the procedure’s 
outcome that he plans for his four-year-old son to get 
circumcised as soon as medically possible. 
supported 13 million circumcisions by FY 2017.
We are collecting, using, and sharing data like 
never before through a program-wide impera-
tive to have the greatest possible impact with 
each dollar entrusted to us by the Congress 
and the American people. This allows PEPFAR to 
strategically target populations at greatest risk 
in geographic areas with the highest HIV/AIDS 
burden—reaching more individuals, families, 
and communities with lifesaving HIV prevention, 
treatment, and care services. 
We are steadfast in our conviction that the 
protection of human rights must remain at the 
core of our work, including for key affected 
populations. When human rights are valued, 
promoted, and preserved, people have the 
ability to access HIV/AIDS or other health 
services without facing stigma or discrimination. 
Conversely, when any member of a community is 
stigmatized or discriminated against, the health 
and human dignity of everyone in that commu-
nity is at risk. 
Pope Francis blesses a young woman living with HIV in Uganda. 
Andrew Medichini/AP Photo
Taking Care of Herself for 
the Sake of Her Child 
When Nteboheleng discovered she was pregnant 
with her second child, she waited nearly five 
months—much longer than recommended—to 
have her first prenatal visit. Nteboheleng knew 
with this visit, she would also learn her HIV status, 
something she had delayed for years.
“I was suffering to go, but afraid of the 
psychological stress of learning my [HIV] status,” 
she explains. But, with a new baby on the way, she 
knew she needed to take care of herself for the 
sake of her child. When Nteboheleng finally visited 
a maternal and child health clinic in Lesotho, she 
learned she was HIV-positive and immediately 
started antiretroviral treatment (ART) to protect 
her unborn child from becoming infected with HIV.
Nteboheleng’s immediate enrollment on 
treatment is a result of the World Health 
Organization’s guidelines for treatment of 
pregnant women living with HIV. The Lesotho 
Ministry of Health and its partners have adopted 
these recommendations, often referred to as 
“Option B+.” Nteboheleng is now on lifelong 
HIV treatment, meaning ART will protect the 
life of her child through pregnancy, childbirth, 
and breastfeeding—as well as her own health 
throughout the course of her life.
“I am now OK with my status,” says Nteboheleng. 
“I thought when I learned I was HIV-positive I 
was going to get sick. But I am now stronger than 
before. Getting into treatment before I got sick … I 
really appreciate that.”
Nteboheleng
Heather Mason/EGPAF
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
20
21
To achieve an AIDS-free generation, we must 
ensure that every person can access the HIV/
AIDS prevention and treatment services they 
need. No one should be left behind. Reaching 
this goal not only requires robust clinical 
interventions, but also addressing social, 
cultural, economic, and legal barriers that 
inhibit equal access to health services. We 
must build the capacity of civil society organi-
zations, engage partner governments, and work 
in concert with our multilateral and bilateral 
partners. We are committed to ensure that 
partners receiving PEPFAR funds implement 
their programs in a way that supports the 
protection of and respect for human rights. 
We are ensuring that our efforts are informed 
by and engaged with a variety of voices from all 
sectors and disciplines. Since the earliest days 
of the HIV/AIDS epidemic, civil society has been 
at the forefront of the response—demanding 
accountability, delivering lifesaving services, 
and driving transformational change. Without 
civil society, we would never be where we 
are today, and its role now is as vital as ever. 
PEPFAR is committed to engaging, empowering, 
and supporting civil society at every step of the 
planning process.
Girls in New Delhi, India participate in a walk commemorating World AIDS Day.
Gurinder Osan/AP Photo
We are working hand-in-hand with our Chiefs of 
Mission, who have the unique diplomatic access 
and assets to strengthen our partnership with 
host countries, promote key policy changes, and 
advance critical dialogue around sustainability.
We are engaging and coordinating in unprec-
edented ways with all our partners, since we 
know our best chance of success is to have 
all of our partner countries fully involved in a 
transparent process of program development 
and implementation to help drive our decision 
making. Underlying all of our programming must 
be a dedication to ensuring information and 
program data are understandable, digestible, 
Transparency in Action
+40 
PEPFAR’s score improvement  
    
  
        on the Aid Transparency Index
PEPFAR has opened its data, leading by 
example to drive greater transparency, 
impact, and accountability. Data are 
only as useful as they are accessible, 
usable, and actionable:
• In the past two years, PEPFAR’s score 
on the Aid Transparency Index has 
risen by more than 40 points (16.1 to 
56.5). 
• Building on the new data available 
on the PEPFAR Dashboards, in 2016 
PEPFAR plans to release even more 
data, including around the impact of 
our work at the subnational level. 
• PEPFAR also has joined a wide 
range of partners through the 
Global Partnership for Sustainable 
Development Data to fill critical data 
gaps and to invest in capacity building 
so that data can be analyzed and used 
by the people that need it most. 
Becoming a  
Proud Peer Educator
Robinah Babirye, a Ugandan, remembers her mother 
giving her pills from the time she was very young, but 
she didn’t know why and couldn’t explain it to her 
questioning classmates.
It wasn’t until age 9 that she and her twin sister 
discovered they were born HIV-positive. Their mother 
told them she had contracted HIV during a blood 
transfusion in 1994 and didn’t have access to measures 
for preventing transmission to her children.  
To avoid fellow students’ questions, Robinah tried 
taking her pills without anyone noticing, or not taking 
them at all. “Growing up with HIV was hard,” Robinah 
says. “I had to take lots of medicines daily, yet I 
was told the disease I had was incurable. This was 
demoralizing, and I could not tell people about it.”
As a result of poor adherence to her medication, 
Robinah developed resistance to antiretroviral therapy. 
With her life in danger, Robinah was put on second-line 
treatment. Her mother paid for her to attend weekly 
counseling sessions, and Robinah developed a strategy 
to take her medications in her school clinic. When she 
forgot to take her pills, the school nurse reminded her. 
 
Once she finished her secondary studies, Robinah 
decided to make a change. She posted a picture of 
herself on Facebook wearing a shirt with the words “I 
AM HIV POSITIVE.” That night, she connected with many 
people who applauded her courage. She was suddenly 
in the public eye and began appearing on TV and radio 
shows. Since then, Robinah has started university and 
founded an organization to help young HIV-positive 
people with adherence and psychological challenges. 
“Being HIV-positive is not the end of life,” Robinah 
says. “Whoever reads my story will be empowered and 
encouraged to fight stigma in society. I am grateful to 
the American people for giving us support.”
Jane Justing Mirembe
Robinah Babirye
PEPFAR prioritizes daily our key collabora-
tions with multilateral organizations, including 
UNAIDS and the Global Fund. PEPFAR works 
closely with UNAIDS, drawing on the UNAIDS 
and partner country epidemiological technical 
resources and capacity. This collabora-
tion provides critical support to countries 
in overcoming key policy, programming, and 
implementation challenges. As discussed 
above, PEPFAR works with the Global Fund to 
maximize our joint investments. 
We are collaborating with and gaining critical 
knowledge from our many private sector 
partners, leveraging not only their financial 
resources but also their business acumen 
and insights, which bring innovation and new 
thinking to address difficult problems. The 
progress we are making through our ACT and 
DREAMS initiatives, as well as the recently 
launched “Treatment For All” campaign, can be 
attributed to the shared engagement of and 
the novel contributions of these partners. 
We are benefitting from the expertise and 
experience of leading scientists, academics, 
and practitioners, including new and diverse 
members of PEPFAR’s Scientific Advisory Board 
named in 2015.  
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
22
23
and actionable. We need to be more nimble 
and act more rapidly in making program 
improvements for impact based on the latest 
data. We are committed to using data to focus 
our investments on the geographic areas and 
populations that face the greatest HIV/AIDS 
burden. Our collective ability to achieve an 
AIDS-free generation requires the ongoing 
translation of what we know into programs that 
have impact.
Conclusion
The road ahead will be challenging and will 
test our resolve, but we will reach our destina-
tion. The ways in which we are focusing and 
strengthening PEPFAR’s efforts and partner-
ships will hasten our arrival. Over the last 
13 years, PEPFAR has adapted, responding 
to changing needs on the ground among 
the people we serve. We have taken lessons 
learned to heart, and our stewardship over 
PEPFAR has been informed by our clear 
responsibility to spend each dollar appro-
priated to us by the U.S. Congress and the 
American people in the most wise and pur-
poseful way. We can’t afford not to. 
Our work is guided each day by the memory of 
the more than 40 million people who have died 
since the HIV/AIDS epidemic was first recog-
nized, including the estimated 1.6 million lives 
lost in the past year. We are inspired by the 
millions of people who are living today with 
HIV/AIDS to work harder, faster, and smarter 
with our partners across the globe to create an 
AIDS-free generation. And it is possible if we 
remain focused, steadfast, and keep pushing 
together. The time to act is now. 
Appendices
A nun holds a baby boy in Zambia.
Vasco Possley
A mother and her children in Malawi
James Pursey/EGPAF
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
24
25
APPENDIX A: How PEPFAR Uses 
Data for Maximum Impact to 
Get to Epidemic Control
PEPFAR is now 14 months into the implementa-
tion of its third phase—PEPFAR 3.01—in which 
earlier successes are being leveraged aggres-
sively to focus on the sustainable control of 
the epidemic. PEPFAR is intensely focused on 
increasing the impact of every dollar invested. 
We are partnering with the international com-
munity to drive toward an AIDS-free generation 
through the Joint United Nations Programme 
on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) 90-90-90 global goals,2 
while at the same time expanding the critical 
prevention intervention of VMMC and of the 
DREAMS partnership to reduce the number 
of new HIV infections in adolescent girls and 
young women. 
Since 2014, PEPFAR has shifted its manner of 
doing business. This pivot, based on what has 
been learned in the previous 10 years and on 
where the future epidemic trend is leading, is 
toward a data-driven approach that strategi-
cally targets geographic areas and populations 
where the greatest impact can be achieved. 
1 
 PEPFAR. (2012). PEPFAR 3.0 – Controlling the Epidemic: Delivering on the Promise 
of an AIDS-free Generation. Available at http://www.pepfar.gov/documents/organiza-
tion/234744.pdf
2 
 90 percent of people living with HIV know their HIV status, 90 percent of people 
who know their HIV status are accessing treatment, and 90 percent of people on 
treatment have suppressed viral loads.
A woman visits an HIV testing and counseling clinic in Vietnam. 
The encompassing PEPFAR 3.0 agendas are 
built upon multiple strategies to address the 
HIV/AIDS epidemic through improvements in 
impact, efficiency, sustainability, partnerships, 
and human rights. In particular, the Impact 
Action Agenda is grounded in the need to do 
the right things in the right places right now. 
Right Things
Science has demonstrated what tools are 
most effective in reducing new HIV infections 
and AIDS-related mortality globally. PEPFAR 
has realigned its programming to ensure an 
even greater focus on evidence-based core 
activities that will accelerate progress toward 
achieving sustainable control of the epidemic. 
Combination prevention—ART, PMTCT, VMMC, 
condoms, and DREAMS interventions focused 
on geographic areas and populations with 
higher disease burden—forms the backbone 
of PEPFAR’s approach. In addition, PEPFAR’s 
support to orphans and vulnerable children 
(OVC) and their families, and to specific 
elements of health systems strengthening, 
remains key to reaching this goal.   
Right Places
Global and national patterns in HIV burden 
have guided intervention responses for years. 
But as data systems evolve (both surveil-
lance and program), more precise data from 
local units, including counties and districts, 
demonstrate considerable variation in the HIV 
epidemic within every country context. PEPFAR 
has driven the more granular analysis as well 
as the utilization of the data to target the 
geographic areas and populations in greatest 
need of effective responses. PEPFAR continues 
to develop new analytic tools, in conjunction 
with site-specific service delivery and quality 
data, to drive the allocation of resources and 
program responses in order to strengthen 
epidemic control strategies.  
Right Now
Evidence demonstrates that earlier treatment 
for adults (including key populations, people 
co-infected with TB/HIV, and sero-discordant 
couples) leads to improved outcomes and 
will have a dramatic impact on controlling the 
epidemic.3 Preventing new infections among 
young women and girls is also vital to con-
trolling the epidemic. Earlier HIV testing for 
exposed infants and children, tied to imme-
diate linkage to care and treatment services, 
will address another significant component 
of the epidemic, providing quality services for 
adolescents through OVC and ART services 
and strengthening the suppression of new 
infections in the future. We know that with the 
youth bulge in sub-Saharan Africa, there are 40 
percent more young people at risk. This rapid 
demographic shift has the ability to reverse all 
our collective gains if new interventions are 
not scaled immediately. Accelerating scale-up 
of all core interventions in geographic areas 
with the highest disease burden is essential 
to achieving sustainable epidemic control as 
quickly as possible.  
Changing the Annual Country 
Operational Plan (COP): Focus on 
Data for Program Improvement
PEPFAR is utilizing a variety of tools and 
data sources to accelerate progress toward 
epidemic control and has integrated new 
analytic methodology into the very fabric of 
our planning cycle.  
3 
 WHO. (2013). Consolidated guidelines on the use of antiretroviral drugs for 
treating and preventing HIV infection. Available at http://www.who.int/hiv/pub/guide-
lines/arv2013/en/  
Table 1 illustrates the different types of data 
used for COP planning and program moni-
toring. Different survey and surveillance data 
reveal variation in the risk of HIV infection and 
burden of disease at a subnational level both 
geographically and by subpopulations.4 The 
locations and subpopulations with greatest 
disease burden and highest rates of HIV 
transmission demand more focused atten-
tion from program interventions to control 
epidemic growth and achieve positive program 
outcomes. Program performance data (i.e., 
results) are tied to individual service delivery 
sites and individuals. These data are being 
leveraged in many ways and include: 
(1) Use of PMTCT results at the site level, 
providing the granular information that 
may be available from survey data, allowing 
for further targeting of investments; 
(2) Identification of sites that have not been 
productive in the past year, allowing for the 
redirection of resources to sites that are 
diagnosing and treating more individuals 
living with HIV/AIDS; and
(3) Mapping sites and service uptake with 
disease burden to optimize allocative 
efficiency.
Analyses of expenditure data also reveal 
expenditure trends by subnational unit and 
by implementing partners. Integrating these 
three data sources—survey and surveillance, 
program performance, and expenditure—offers 
an evidence-based alignment of resources and 
programs to most effectively strengthen the 
response to the epidemic. Success in these 
applications leads to successful epidemic 
control. 
Finally, the analytic framework moves analysis 
down to the most granular level (at site level) 
to ensure every site is performing optimally. 
This methodology identifies both high-per-
forming sites, which can be evaluated for 
determination of success, and poor performers. 
4 
 Anderson, S-J., Cherutich, P., Kilonzo, N., et al. (2014). Maximising the effect of 
combination HIV prevention through prioritisation of the people and places in great-
est need: a modelling study. The Lancet, 384, 249–256.  
Table 1. Data Sources by Level of Disaggregation
Level of Disaggregation
Data Source
National
Survey, surveillance, 
mathematical modeling, 
budget
Local (Subnational e.g., 
region, district)
Expenditure analysis, 
survey, surveillance
Site
Targets, results, SIMS, 
sentinel surveillance
USAID
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
26
27
The information can then be used to improve 
overall program performance through detailed 
site improvement plans and may be used to 
shift partners as needed. 
The initial use of the full complement of these 
data sources was in the COP submissions for 
U.S. Government Fiscal Year 2015. In the year 
prior to the COP 2015 submission, headquarter 
and U.S. government country teams sharpened 
their understanding of the heterogeneity of 
the epidemic within their countries and the 
optimal programmatic response. This resulted 
in a more targeted alignment of program inter-
ventions to address the most critical drivers of 
the epidemic. 
The PEPFAR Country/Regional Operational Plan 
2015 Guidance5 detailed how this approach 
was to be applied in order to advance progress 
toward achieving an AIDS-free generation and 
toward the UNAIDS 90-90-90 goals,6 which aim 
to ensure 81 percent of people living with HIV 
are on ART and 73 percent of people living with 
5 
 PEPFAR. (2015). PEPFAR Country/Regional Operational Plan (COP/ROP) 2015 Guid-
ance. Available at http://www.pepfar.gov/documents/organization/237669.pdf  
6 
 UNAIDS. (2014). 90-90-90: An ambitious treatment target to help end the 
AIDS epidemic. Available at http://www.unaids.org/sites/default/files/media_as-
set/90-90-90_en_0.pdf
Young girls living in small village in Malawi
Veronica Davison/PEPFAR
HIV are virally suppressed. As these goals also 
are beyond what PEPFAR alone can achieve in 
any given country, PEPFAR country teams were 
instructed to identify the geographic areas 
in which new infections were likely to be the 
greatest and where interventions were well 
coordinated with other relevant stakeholders. 
PEPFAR country teams designed portfolios 
that, at a minimum, will assist partner country 
governments in reaching 80 percent coverage 
of people living with HIV on ART by the end of 
FY 2017 in select high-burden subnational units 
and/or populations, optimizing program impact 
through geographic focusing and targeted, 
effective interventions.7 
Developing a portfolio to achieve these goals 
requires a sharper focus on geographic loca-
tions and populations with the greatest 
HIV/AIDS burden. This alignment requires a 
targeted inquiry of demographic, epidemio-
logic, and programmatic data to the lowest 
possible subnational level, in addition to 
understanding how the current response 
7 
 PEPFAR. (2015). PEPFAR Country/Regional Operational Plan (COP/ROP) 2015 Guid-
ance. Available at http://www.pepfar.gov/documents/organization/237669.pdf  
is funded and implemented by all relevant 
partners. PEPFAR country teams were 
instructed to review the alignment of the 
current PEPFAR portfolio with the epidemic 
profile, and to account for identified gaps, 
bottlenecks, and structural or cultural barriers 
that might impede progress toward epidemic 
control.8 Once priority, high-burden geographic 
areas were identified, PEPFAR country teams 
adjusted their portfolios accordingly and set 
targets to reach 80 percent coverage of those 
in need of combination prevention strategies 
in these areas. 
Site Improvement Monitoring 
System (SIMS): Data for 
Quality Assurance and Quality 
Improvement 
In 2014, PEPFAR initiated an ambitious effort 
to improve site-level quality, referred to as the 
Site Improvement through Monitoring System 
(SIMS). SIMS is PEPFAR’s primary, standards-
based quality assurance system designed 
to improve and increase the impact of HIV 
programs toward achieving 90-90-90 global 
goals. PEPFAR country and regional staff have 
been visiting sites for program monitoring 
purposes utilizing different frameworks since 
the inception of PEPFAR. However, SIMS system-
izes and broadens site monitoring and improves 
documentation of oversight by using standard 
tools to assess adherence to standards of 
quality service delivery. Under SIMS, program 
quality is assessed and monitored at both the 
point of service delivery—in health facilities and 
surrounding communities—and at the “above-
site” level through assessment of the quality of 
technical support provided to institutions that 
guide and support service delivery. SIMS results 
are used to ensure compliance of PEPFAR-
supported services with global and national 
service delivery standards, as well as to serve as 
a basis for monitoring program improvement.
Launched within all of PEPFAR’s 36 Operating 
Units at the beginning of FY 2015, there has 
8 
 PEPFAR. (2015). Country/Regional Operational Plan (COP/ROP) 2015 Guidance. 
Available at http://www.pepfar.gov/documents/organization/237669.pdf  
been a clear demonstration of scale-up by 
PEPFAR teams, as well as use of SIMS data, 
within PEPFAR at all levels for program 
improvement. During FY 2015, more than 4,000 
SIMS visits took place across all of PEPFAR’s 
implementing agencies. Three-quarters of 
those visits took place within health facilities, 
with the remainder occurring in communities 
that link beneficiaries to facility-based services 
and above-site institutions that support 
delivery of HIV services. SIMS data are being 
analyzed by all programmatic areas within 
PEPFAR. SIMS data are serving as the basis for 
PEPFAR teams to initiate program improvement 
within their countries, for headquarters agency 
staff to understand cross-country challenges 
to delivery of HIV services, and for all PEPFAR 
stakeholders to identify areas of needed inten-
sified technical assistance to improve program 
quality. Significant scaling up of coverage of 
SIMS visits will begin in FY 2016, directly sup-
porting PEPFAR teams’ programmatic pivots to 
the high-volume health facilities and priority 
geographic areas that are the critical gateways 
to achieving 90-90-90 global goals.  
All PEPFAR country teams submitting annual 
operational plans implemented PEPFAR’s new 
approach in 2015, and after extensive effort 
to compile, analyze, and review the data, all 
PEPFAR country teams have made adjust-
ments to their program portfolios. To illustrate 
how this new approach to data is leveraging 
more effective programming and leading to 
increasing impact, Uganda is presented here as 
a case study for this critical realignment.  
Uganda Case Study: Why We  
Know PEPFAR’s Focused  
Approach Will Work
Unlike most other countries in sub-Saharan 
Africa, Uganda experienced a resurgence in 
new HIV infections between 1998 and 2011, 
countering the tremendous gains that had 
been made toward achieving epidemic control 
in the previous decade (Figure 1). PEPFAR 
responded to this trend while planning for COP 
FY 2012, resulting in a more targeted approach 
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
28
29
to service delivery to more directly 
address the key drivers of the epidemic. 
The program results are reflected in ART 
(Figure 2), PMTCT (Figure 3), and VMMC 
(Figure 4), and associated impacts can be 
observed in the larger trends in new 
infections (Figure 1). The data underlying 
this programmatic realignment were 
much more limited than what are cur-
rently available, but the principles are 
the same. The objective was to focus 
resources and provide high-quality, 
effective programs in the geographic 
areas and populations with the greatest 
HIV/AIDS burden to prevent the growth of 
new infections and AIDS-related mor-
tality. Critically, the program realignment 
resulted in a substantial increase in 
results in a budget-neutral environment. 
But more importantly, the acceleration in 
performance has been maintained over 
the past 3 years. The impact on the 
epidemic is clearly seen in Figure 5.
Local school children learn more about HIV/AIDS at a U.S. Embassy Uganda event.
U.S. Embassy Uganda
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
0.0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
1.2 
1.4 
1.6 
1.8 
2008 
2009 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 
Thousands 
Millions 
PMTCT Test 
PMTCT B+ 
Uganda 
Focus on Core (PMTCT) 
Tes6ng of Pregnant Women & Lifelong ART 
Uganda Program 
Review 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
16 
0 
20000 
40000 
60000 
80000 
100000 
120000 
140000 
160000 
1990 
1991 
1992 
1993 
1994 
1995 
1996 
1997 
1998 
1999 
2000 
2001 
2002 
2003 
2004 
2005 
2006 
2007 
2008 
2009 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
Prevalence 
New Infec.ons, Mortality 
New Infec3ons 
AIDS Mortality 
Prevalence 
Source: UNAIDS 2015 
Uganda 
Trends in New HIV Infec.ons, AIDS Mortality, and HIV Prevalence 
Figure 3. PEPFAR-Supported PMTCT Trends After Program Realignment, Uganda 
Figure 2. PEPFAR-Supported ART Trends Relative to Overall Budget Demonstrates  
Dramatic Increase in Results with Realignment in 2011, Uganda
Figure 1. Trends in New HIV Infections,  
AIDS Mortality, and HIV Prevalence, Uganda
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
30
31
Geospatial Mapping to Ensure 
Program Impact
PEPFAR placed an even greater emphasis on the 
use of data for decision making in preparation 
for COP FY 2015 and developed new visualiza-
tion tools to facilitate data analysis for action. 
The fundamental parameters for this approach 
are established according to the distribution of 
the estimated number of people living with HIV 
and HIV prevalence rates in Uganda. These can 
vary considerably among subnational (district) 
units (Figures 6 and 7), leading to significant 
differentiation in the burden of disease across 
geographic areas. Disseminating limited HIV/
AIDS care and treatment services equally across 
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1,000
 250
 260
 270
 280
 290
 300
 310
 320
 330
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
Thousands
Millions
Axis Title
Budget
VMMC
Uganda
Focus  on Core (VMMC)
Total OU Budget & Male Circumcisions 
Uganda
Program 
Review
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
16 
0 
20000 
40000 
60000 
80000 
100000 
120000 
140000 
160000 
Prevalence 
New Infec.ons, Mortality 
New Infec/ons 
AIDS Mortality 
Prevalence 
Source: UNAIDS 2015 
Uganda 
Trends in New HIV Infec.ons, AIDS Mortality, and HIV Prevalence 
Figure 6. Distribution of People Living with HIV by District 
 Demonstrating Burden of Disease, Uganda 
all of these areas led to geographic areas with 
large numbers of people living with HIV being 
underserved and those with few people living 
with HIV being overserved. Conversely, current 
distribution patterns for ART services (Figure 
8), PMTCT (Figure 9), and OVC and VMMC (Figure 
10) reflect an equity-driven approach to service 
delivery across Uganda, whereby availability 
of services is increasingly being aligned with 
identified burden and need. 
The Uganda PEPFAR team ranked districts 
according to the number of people living with 
HIV and found that 82 percent of people living 
with HIV reside in 61 of 111 total districts. This 
means that 45 percent of the districts serve 
less than 18 percent of the burden. The 61 
Figure 5. Trends in New HIV Infections, AIDS 
Figure 4. PEPFAR-Supported VMMC Trends After Program Realignment, Uganda 
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
32
33
Figure 7. Distribution of HIV Prevalence by District, Demonstrating  
Areas of More Intense HIV Transmission, Uganda 
districts where 82 percent of the people living 
with HIV reside were designated as priorities for 
scaling up core interventions in COP 2015.
Using Program Data to Drive 
Program Efficiency
The next step in this process was to conduct 
efficiency analysis of HIV diagnosis at HIV testing 
and PMTCT sites. The analysis prepared for COP 
2015 found that 45 percent of the HIV testing sites 
(1,029 sites) diagnosed 90 percent of the people 
identified as living with HIV (Figure 11) in Uganda. 
Through this analysis PEPFAR learned that 135 of 
these sites had zero HIV-positive patients identi-
fied. The trend was similar for diagnosing 
pregnant women, with 36.5 percent of the PMTCT 
sites (2,138) diagnosing 80 percent of the women. 
These analyses informed the relocation of 
resources to sites that were effectively diagnosing, 
linking, and treating more individuals. 
Using epidemiologic data and site-level perfor-
mance, resources were expanded to scale up 
CDC
CDC Officer interviews a nurse at a health center in Namibia.
efforts in high disease burden areas, with the 
goal of reaching 80 percent of people living with 
HIV with lifesaving treatment, including support 
for adherence and retention, by FY 2017. 
Figure 12 provides an overview of the distribu-
tion of ART service sites after this transition. 
This realignment consolidates resources in 
these high-burden areas to expand testing, 
Figure 9. Distribution of Pregnant Women on ARVs by District,  
Ensuring All HIV-Positive Women Have Access to Services, Uganda
Figure 8. Distribution of ART Clients Age 15+ by District, 
 Ensuring Services Are Aligned with Need to Increase 
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
34
35
Figure 11. Efficiency Analysis: HIV Testing Yield by Site
PMTCT, and ARV provision rapidly and increase 
the overall impact of these investments in terms 
of both treatment and prevention, driving down 
mortality rates and new infections—the two 
critical measures of epidemic control.  
In the last decade, there has been tremen-
dous progress in addressing some of the most 
pressing global health challenges. The U.S. gov-
ernment, including PEPFAR, has been a major 
force behind this progress, both in terms of 
funding and the use of data-driven innovation. 
This last decade has provided an unprec-
edented opportunity to learn from experience 
and leverage these lessons to improve imple-
mentation and increase impact.  
One of the most valuable lessons from the last 
decade of the global HIV/AIDS response is the 
recognition that national-level data are no 
longer sufficient. To better tailor our response 
to the complexity of the epidemic and 
maximize our impact, we need more detailed, 
higher-quality data, as well as more sophis-
ticated analytics. Achieving epidemic control 
demands new approaches and new thinking, 
all based on more complete and better 
information.  
Summary
The programmatic transformation in Uganda 
illustrates the profound impact of applying a 
data-driven approach to preventing more new 
HIV infections and saving more lives. This is 
the methodology we are translating to every 
PEPFAR country, increasing our effectiveness 
site by site, district by district, and country 
Figure 10. Distribution of OVC and VMMC Services by District: Improving Core Prevention Interventions 
 with Areas of Transmission to Maximize Impact and Value Per Dollar Invested, Uganda 
Figure 12. Distribution of PEPFAR-Supported Sites According  
to Priority Category and District, Uganda 
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
36
37
by country. Effectively employing this new 
methodological approach demanded sub-
stantial effort in the assembly, organization, 
and analysis of data. The results of this work 
have critical implications for the local HIV/
AIDS portfolios—as illustrated in the evolution 
of the ART service delivery strategy—and have 
increased the impact of the overall response. 
In coming years, this approach will continue to 
be refined by expanding sources of informa-
tion and increasing analytics and visualization 
techniques. 
In order to expand our technical skills across 
all agencies to the use of data for decision 
making, in FY 2015 the Office of the U.S. Global 
AIDS Coordinator and Health Diplomacy 
(OGAC) at the State Department established 
the Interagency Collaborative for Program 
Improvement (ICPI). ICPI brings together 
subject matter experts in HIV/AIDS technical 
areas, data, and analytics from PEPFAR’s six 
interagency partners to serve as a catalyst for 
data-driven, objective, and transparent inter-
agency decision making. Through the ICPI, 
there will be an increased emphasis on more 
validated decision making and more effective 
progress toward epidemic control. Through 
these efforts, PEPFAR endeavors to dramatically 
reduce new HIV infections and HIV/AIDS-related 
mortality and help put partner countries on an 
accelerated path to achieving epidemic control.
Early Measures of PEPFAR 3.0
The initial measure of progress in imple-
mentation of PEPFAR 3.0 is how effectively 
the program has realigned its programs and 
investments to those facilities and communi-
ties that bear a greater proportion of the HIV/
AIDS burden. This realignment, in turn, will be 
reflected in more targeted transitions of activi-
ties from lower-yield to higher-yield sites, from 
what have been prioritized as “centrally sup-
ported” and “sustained” sites to “scale-up” 
sites. PEPFAR is monitoring these pivots with 
new quarterly reviews of all PEPFAR countries. 
Long-Term Strategy Countries
Long-Term Strategy (LTS) countries are 
countries in need of external support for             
HIV/AIDS programs and are generally character-
ized by high HIV prevalence, significant unmet 
service needs, substantial gaps in capacity, 
and insufficient domestic financial resources. 
LTS countries are low or low-middle income 
countries. 
Among LTS countries, one can observe greater 
alignment between disease burden and service 
delivery by reviewing FY 2015 results and FY 
2016 targets (Figure 13). Across the 18 LTS 
countries, persons currently on ART are linked 
to 74 percent of scale-up sites in FY 2015, and 
this proportion increases to 82 percent in FY 
2016. This signals an important improvement 
among treatment programs to provide ARVs to 
a greater proportion of people living with HIV 
for more effective epidemic control.
Similarly, a dramatic shift can be seen in the 
delivery of PMTCT testing services between 
FY 2015 results and FY 2016 targets. Results 
contributed from scale-up sites in FY 2015 
represent 27 percent of the total; in FY 2016, 
this proportion will increase to 65 percent. 
This change is indicative of a shift in focus and 
resources to PMTCT sites where the number 
of HIV-positive pregnant women is higher and 
more services are needed. The final category of 
0% 
10% 
20% 
30% 
40% 
50% 
60% 
70% 
80% 
90% 
100% 
-ARV Curr 
 
PMTCT 
Status 
 
PMTCT ARV 
-ARV Curr 
 
PMTCT 
Status 
 
PMTCT ARV 
Long-Term Strategy Countries 
Metrics by Site Priority 
Scale-Up 
Sustained 
Centrally Supported 
FY 2015 Results 
FY 2016 Targets 
0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1 
)ARV Curr 
 
PMTCT Status 
 
PMTCT ARV 
)ARV Curr 
 
PMTCT Status 
 
PMTCT ARV 
Uganda 
Metrics by Site Priority 
Scale-Up 
Sustained 
Centrally Supported 
FY 2015 Results 
FY 2016 Targets 
A young girl celebrates World AIDS Day after visiting 
 
a health care center in Cambodia. 
Figure 13. Distribution of Indicator Results and Targets by 
 Site Prioritization, Long-Term Strategy Countries (LTS)
Figure 14. Distribution of Indicator Results and Targets  
by Site Prioritization, Uganda
Peace Corps 
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
38
39
of programs across all LTS offers the greatest 
opportunity to reach the Sustainable 
Development Goal target of ending the AIDS 
epidemic by 2030.  
APPENDIX B: How PEPFAR 
Documents Results 
As discussed in Appendix A, one of the ways 
that PEPFAR ensures impact is by thorough 
monitoring of all data from the global HIV/
AIDS response—tracking both national and 
PEPFAR results. A critical part of strength-
ening the PEPFAR 3.0 results reporting is using 
specific progress indicators and outcome 
measurements, as well as expanding to impact 
indicators.  
PEPFAR support definitions were revised in FY 
2014 to accommodate a greater cognizance 
of the scope of the program in accordance 
with the statutory requirements of the PEPFAR 
Stewardship and Oversight Act of 2013 
(Public Law 113-56) and the related Senate 
Foreign Relations Committee’s Report on 
those requirements (S. Rept. 113-112). In the 
context of increased country capacity to plan, 
deliver, manage, and directly fund HIV preven-
tion, care, and treatment programs, PEPFAR 
program support has evolved. PEPFAR’s revised 
approach to program monitoring, evalua-
tion, and reporting is focused on specifically, 
accurately, and effectively capturing the range 
and evolution of PEPFAR efforts to support 
host country governments’ HIV responses. 
In addition to clarifying PEPFAR support and 
capturing results, we are also measuring the 
quality of the program providing the results, 
the cost of generating those results, and the 
impact of the collective results on the HIV/
AIDS epidemic country by country, province by 
province, district by district, and site by site. 
Through this methodology, PEPFAR will be able 
to define those programs and sites with the 
most effective programming to evaluate those 
effective sites and ensure all sites receive the 
same rapid feedback for continual improve-
ment toward the most effective programs.
sites presented in Figure 13, PMTCT ARVs, shows 
that PEPFAR is ensuring that PMTCT testing 
sites that serve high volumes of HIV-positive 
women also provide ARVs to women, which 
greatly increases the linkages of HIV-positive 
pregnant women to services that can save their 
lives and ensure their babies are born HIV-
negative. Consistent with the encompassing 
framework of PEPFAR 3.0, these improvements 
from FY 2015 to FY 2016 underlie the greater 
efficiencies to be achieved in PEPFAR programs, 
which will help reach an AIDS-free generation.  
The Uganda realignment offers important 
lessons for how this approach can be broadly 
applied. As demonstrated by the propor-
tional transitions of ARV and PMTCT service 
sites between FY 2015 results and FY 2016 
targets (Figure 14), Uganda profiles between 
these two time points are nearly identical. 
As noted above, Uganda undertook a similar 
approach to target high-yield service delivery 
sites in preparation for COP FY 2012. The site 
priority categorization for FY 2015 results and 
FY 2016 targets illustrate that the initial FY 
2012 approach yielded similar results to those 
achieved within the framework of PEPFAR 
3.0. This is why we know this approach will 
be effective and why we have moved aggres-
sively to align all PEPFAR countries. Uganda 
has modeled the PEPFAR 3.0 evolution, and 
while supporting the resurgence of epidemic 
control strategies in the country, realignment 
A community health worker sits with her patients after 
making a home health care visit in Haiti. 
The new approach will allow PEPFAR to dif-
ferentiate the type of support provided to 
beneficiaries, recognizing the greater share of 
investment made by countries able to make 
significant financial contributions to their HIV/
AIDS response, such as South Africa, Namibia, 
Botswana, and Vietnam. There are two primary 
types of PEPFAR support: 
• Technical Assistance for Service Delivery 
Improvement (TA-SDI) support—referred 
to as “otherwise supported activities” 
in P.L. 113–56—is defined by the provi-
sion of essential technical support 
to the site, which takes place on at 
least a quarterly basis. This technical 
support may take the form of clinical 
mentorship, supportive supervision, 
site-level quality improvement, or 
quality assurance support, as well as 
routine support of monitoring, evalu-
ation, and reporting activities. This 
type of assistance, described below in 
Table 2, was included in our FY 2014 
results and is highlighted in Appendix 
W: Tables  (available at www.pepfar.
gov), and shows this transition from U.S. 
government direct support to tech-
nical assistance support. This evolution 
recognizes the leadership and financial 
investment by those countries.
• Direct Service Delivery (DSD) support 
requires direct financial investment 
from PEPFAR toward critical inputs 
to support those in need, including 
health care worker salaries and com-
modities at the site level. In addition 
to these inputs, quarterly visits at the 
point of service delivery are essential 
to ensure quality services are being 
provided (Table 2). In the aggregate, this 
approach will allow the U.S. government 
to describe our efforts as a contribution 
to national and global efforts alongside 
all partners.
Subsequent tables address these different 
types of support in terms of portfolio balance 
and program impact (Appendix W: Tables).
Overall, PEPFAR’s revised approach to moni-
toring, evaluation, and reporting provides 
increased accountability of U.S. government 
investments, and more accurately and effec-
tively captures the range of PEPFAR efforts to 
support countries’ HIV responses. PEPFAR can 
now differentiate the type of support provided 
to beneficiaries, recognizing the greater share 
of investment made by financial collabora-
tion countries. OGAC is working with each U.S. 
implementing agency to ensure validation of 
results at the site level. During FY 2016, PEPFAR 
will specifically validate reported data from 
sites by making site visits. 
In addition, PEPFAR is equally committed to 
improving how we document results, and 
during FY 2015 we began a process to explore 
options to achieve this objective. The prin-
ciples underlying this effort are to ensure our 
alignment with 90-90-90 goals and epidemic 
control, to simplify data collection and reduce 
data points required, to align gender and 
age disaggregates with global practices, to 
strengthen our alignment of indicators with 
our multilateral partners, and to increase 
reporting frequency to align with and support 
national and multilateral procedures. Results 
from these deliberations and formal changes 
to PEPFAR practices will be announced in early 
2016. 
Table 2. Two Types of PEPFAR Support, Applied  
to Individual and Site-Based Indicators
Technical Assistance for Service Delivery Improvement (TA-SDI)[Otherwise 
Supported]
Individuals (individual-based indicators) and sites (site-based indicators) will be 
counted when PEPFAR support is used for
• 
Frequent, at least quarterly, support to improve quality of services
Direct Service Delivery (DSD)
Individuals (individual-based indicators) and sites (site-based indicators) will be 
counted when PEPFAR support is used for 
• 
Provision of key staff or commodities 
• 
Frequent, at least quarterly, support to improve quality of services
Ketcia Orilius/USAID
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
40
41
Figure 15. UNAIDS Fast Track: New HIV Infections in LMIC Will Rise Due to the Expanding 
Population Between 15-24 If We Do Not Change How We Work
Figure 16. UNAIDS Fast Track: New HIV Infections & AIDS-Related Deaths in Eastern  
and Southern Africa, the Regions with the Largest HIV Disease Burden 
PEPFAR is specifically focused on the sustain-
able control of the epidemic. An 
ever-expanding epidemic—and the associated 
expanding need for services—is not financially 
sustainable, even with the collective effort of 
all partners. Ensuring a focus on impact, 
changing the course of the epidemic through 
specific and focused intervention where the 
epidemic is expanding rather than contracting 
will define the overall success of the PEPFAR 
investment. UNAIDS, in its December 2014 
Fast-Track document, clearly projects the 
course of the epidemic over the next 15 years. 
There are two pathways: one distinguished by 
expanded burden of disease that outdistances 
our collective ability to afford the response and 
puts our multibillion dollar investment at risk, 
and one characterized by a new and focused 
effort that brings epidemic control while 
decreasing or stabilizing the need for long-
term investment (Figure 15).9 This pathway is 
illustrated by the data on new HIV infections 
and AIDS-related deaths in eastern and 
southern Africa (Figure 16).
APPENDIX C: Global Trends in 
New HIV Infections
PEPFAR will ensure that core HIV prevention 
and treatment interventions (Figure 17) are 
strategically scaled up to reduce the number 
of new HIV infections below the number of 
all-cause mortality among persons infected 
with HIV—an essential metric in demonstrating 
epidemic control (Figure 18). When the number 
of new infections is less than the mortality of 
all HIV-positive individuals, the total burden of 
disease and the financial cost of the epidemic 
will decline globally. The number of annual 
new infections across all PEPFAR-supported 
countries was 2,585,400 in 2003; 1,638,000 in 
2013; and 1,372,600 in 2014. Accelerating this 
downward trend is key to achieving an AIDS-
free generation (Appendix W: Table 1).
10 PEPFAR 
9 
 UNAIDS. (2014). Fast-Track – Ending the AIDS epidemic by 2030. Geneva.
10 
 In the 2012 PEPFAR Blueprint: Creating an AIDS-free Generation, Secretary Clin-
ton defined an AIDS-free generation as one where “virtually no children are born with 
the virus. As these children become teenagers and adults, they are at far lower risk 
of becoming infected than they would be today thanks to a wide range of prevention 
tools, and if they do acquire HIV, they have access to treatment that helps prevent 
them from developing AIDS and passing the virus on to others.”
Source: UNAIDS 2015 
We have a 5-YEAR 
WINDOW 
Business 
as usual 
Fast- Track 
Strategy 
is focused on continuing to reduce new infec-
tions by working to saturate high-burden 
areas at the subnational level (county, district, 
and subdistrict) with prevention and treat-
ment services, including targeted HIV testing 
and counseling. By strategically refocusing, 
PEPFAR programs will be able to identify 
and treat as many HIV-infected persons as 
possible, reducing new infections by lowering 
the community viral load (the amount of 
HIV particles in a sample of blood) in high 
transmission areas. Ensuring saturation with 
prevention services in the same high transmis-
sion zones will result in the greatest impact 
on the epidemic. These efforts will focus on 
increasing coverage of combination prevention 
interventions among priority populations: sero-
discordant couples, key populations, people 
co-infected with TB/HIV, children, and young 
women and girls.
Overall, there has been a significant decrease 
in rate (incidence) of new HIV infections over 
the last 15 years, and the percent change in 
new infections varies by country (Figures 19, 
20, and 21). These declines have been driven in 
large part by effective PMTCT programming and 
decreasing the number of pediatric infections. 
Unfortunately, progress in decreasing new 
infections in adults has been substantially less, 
Two health extension workers prepare for site visits in Ethiopia.
USAID
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
42
43
Figure 18. Global Trends in New HIV infections, 1990-2014
• Activities central to HIV/AIDS, 
critical to saving lives & 
preventing new infections –
grounded in science
CORE
• Activities that directly support 
HIV/AIDS goals and cannot yet 
be done well by other partners 
or host government
NEAR CORE
• Activities that do not directly 
impact HIV/AIDS goals and/or 
can be taken on by other 
partners or host government
NON CORE
Figure 17. The Right Things: Core, Near-Core, and Non-Core Activities
% Reduc(on in New Pediatric HIV/AIDS Infec(ons (2000-2014) 

0% 
20% 
40% 
60% 
80% 
100% 
120% 
Nigeria 
DRC 
Zambia 
CI 
Lesotho 
Cameroon 
Ghana 
Uganda 
Moz 
Malawi 
Kenya 
Zim 
Tanzania 
Namibia 
RSA 
Swazi 
Botswana 
Rwanda 
Source: UNAIDS, 2015 
Figure 20. Percent Change in New Pediatric HIV Infections,  
Select Countries, 2000-2014, Substantial Progress in Preventing New Pediatric Infections
% Reduc(on In New HIV Infec(ons 2000-2014
-60% 
-40% 
-20% 
0% 
20% 
40% 
60% 
80% 
Uganda 
Cameroon 
Lesotho 
Nigeria 
DRC 
Zambia 
Moz 
Kenya 
RSA 
Swazi 
Namibia 
CI 
Botswana 
Zim 
Ghana 
Malawi 
Tanzania 
Rwanda 
Source: UNAIDS, 2015 
Figure 19. Percent Change in New HIV Infections,  
Select Countries, 2004-2014
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
44
45
Figure 22. Trends in New HIV Infections, AIDS Mortality, and HIV Prevalence, Botswana
and uneven. This is why PEPFAR has increased 
funding to focus on preventing infections in 
young women through DREAMS (COP 2015) and 
expanding VMMC (COP 2015) to prevent infec-
tions in young men. A critical missing element 
has been the testing and treating of HIV-
positive men to improve their health and 
decrease transmission. This is a key focus of 
COP 2016. 
Globally, the shift is the greatest in sub-Saharan 
Africa, where the epidemic has been the most 
costly and deadly, but results vary due to the 
natural history of the epidemic and coverage 
of specific interventions. Effective interventions 
have not advanced at the same rate and in the 
same manner, and so changes in new infections 
and AIDS-related mortality differ (Appendix W: 
Table 1). In countries with effective scale-up of 
combination prevention services; for example, 
Botswana (Figure 22) and Tanzania (Figure 23), 
new infection and mortality rates drop markedly, 
while those countries with more moderate 
scale-up, such as Kenya (Figure 24), follow a 
similar but less dramatic pattern of reductions. 
Countries with slow or stalled scale-up, like 
Uganda (Figure 25), have more complex inci-
dence and mortality trends associated with an 
earlier loss of momentum and a subsequent 
resurgent response to control the epidemic in 
recent years. 
The focus on decreasing the absolute number of 
new infections—not just incidence—is essential 
for both epidemic control and fiscal sustain-
ability because it drives the burden of disease 
and cost for caring for HIV-infected individuals. 
While the incidence rate has declined in most 
PEPFAR countries, the populations most at risk 
for HIV infection, especially young women, have 
substantially expanded in the last 20 years due 
to overall population growth, particularly in sub-
Saharan Africa due to high fertility rates and 
improving child survival (Figure 26). With the 
significant increases in the total population of 
sub-Saharan Africa and specifically the increase 
in young people, we have reached a critical 
juncture. 
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
35 
0 
5000 
10000 
15000 
20000 
25000 
30000 
35000 
40000 
45000 
Prevalence 
New Infec.ons, Mortality 
New Infec/ons 
AIDS Mortality 
Prevalence 
Source: UNAIDS 2015 
 
Botswana 
Trends in New HIV Infec.ons, AIDS Mortality, and HIV Prevalence 
% Reduc(on In New Adult HIV/AIDS Infec(ons (2000-2014) 

-100% 
-80% 
-60% 
-40% 
-20% 
0% 
20% 
40% 
60% 
80% 
Uganda 
Kenya 
Cameroon 
Lesotho 
Zambia 
Moz 
DRC 
Nigeria 
Swazi 
RSA 
Rwanda 
Namibia 
Botswana 
CI 
Zim 
Tanzania 
Ghana 
Malawi 
Source: UNAIDS, 2015 
Each year, the population at risk for HIV infec-
tion is increasing, and each year our programs 
must be that much more effective in order to 
maintain the status quo. 
If we do not increase program effectiveness 
either through more effective interventions 
or enhanced geographic focusing, the actual 
burden of HIV in sub-Saharan Africa increases 
by 25–26 million more new infections by 2030,
11 
nearly doubling the current cost globally to 
provide needed services. The escalating cost 
of treatment to save lives cannot be sustained 
by any combination of financing from a host 
country, the Global Fund, or PEPFAR. We are at 
a moment in time when we have the tools to 
change the course of the epidemic, but we must 
laser focus every dollar in a new way or face an 
epidemic that could spiral out of control.
11 
 UNAIDS. (2014). Fast-Track – Ending the AIDS epidemic by 2030.  
Geneva.
A young  girl smiles during a visit by dignitaries in Malawi.
Josh Estey/CARE
Figure 21. Percent Change in New Adult HIV Infections, Select Countries, 2000-2014,  
Less Progress in Adult New Infections Than Pediatric New Infections
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
46
47
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
0 
20000 
40000 
60000 
80000 
100000 
120000 
140000 
160000 
180000 
Prevalence 
New Infec.ons, Mortality 
New Infec3ons 
AIDS Mortality 
Prevalence 
Tanzania 
Trends in New HIV Infec.ons, AIDS Mortality, and HIV Prevalence 
Source: UNAIDS 2015 
Figure 23. Trends in New HIV Infections, AIDS Mortality, and HIV Prevalence, Tanzania
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
0 
50000 
100000 
150000 
200000 
250000 
300000 
Prevalence 
New Infec.ons, Mortality 
New Infec1ons 
AIDS Mortality 
Prevalence 
Kenya 
Trends in New HIV Infec.ons, AIDS Mortality, and HIV Prevalence 
Source: UNAIDS 2015 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
16 
0 
20000 
40000 
60000 
80000 
100000 
120000 
140000 
160000 
Prevalence 
New Infec.ons, Mortality 
New Infec/ons 
AIDS Mortality 
Prevalence 
Source: UNAIDS 2015 
Uganda 
Trends in New HIV Infec.ons, AIDS Mortality, and HIV Prevalence 
Figure 26. Demographic Shift in Sub-Saharan Africa
Figure 24. Trends in New HIV Infections, AIDS Mortality, and HIV Prevalence, Kenya
Figure 25. Trends in New HIV Infections, AIDS Mortality, and HIV Prevalence, Uganda
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
48
49
APPENDIX D: Infections Averted
Currently, the documentation of infections 
averted is primarily dependent on mathemat-
ical modeling, but it is increasingly also 
measured directly and estimated more pre-
cisely through impact assessments. PEPFAR is 
modeling partner country results with the most 
recent national data available from UNAIDS 
using the Goals model, which UNAIDS devel-
oped for costing and resource allocation during 
the development of national HIV/AIDS strategic 
plans and investment framework.
12 Preliminary 
work has been conducted for a global illustra-
tion with 2013 results (Figure 27). Figure 27 
illustrates where the epidemic was headed 
without intervention, depicting the trend line 
of new HIV infections without more than a 
decade of investments in treatment and pre-
vention from PEPFAR, the Global Fund, and the 
countries themselves. There is a second trend 
12 
 UNAIDS. (2014). Fast-Track – Ending the AIDS epidemic by 2030. Geneva.
APPENDIX E: Global 
Prevalence—Refining PEPFAR’s 
Impact and Progress Toward 
Epidemic Control
According to the UNAIDS World AIDS Day 2015 
Fact Sheet, sub-Saharan African countries 
account for 70 percent of the yearly two million 
new HIV infections that occurred in 2014.
13 The 
report notes that focusing on populations that 
are underserved and at higher risk of HIV is 
essential to ending the AIDS epidemic. This 
principle underpins the PEPFAR 3.0 strategy: 
doing the right things, in the right places, at 
the right time to achieve maximum impact.  
On a country-by-country basis, there are four 
general patterns of prevalence (Appendix W: 
Table 21):
13 
 UNAIDS. (2015). World AIDS Day 2015 Fact Sheet. Geneva, 13.
Men at an advocacy training organized in Kenya
 Omar Banos/MSMGF
Figure 27. Modeling New Infection Trends, Continuing Intervention Scale-Up vs. Stable Programming from 2002
line, estimating the impact of the interventions 
implemented since 2002. The cumulative result 
of these differences indicates infections 
averted, totaling approximately three million. 
Validation of this model is proceeding in two 
ways: First, three combination prevention 
studies in five countries (Botswana, Kenya, 
South Africa, Uganda, and Zambia) will 
measure HIV incidence directly; second, large 
surveys called Population HIV Impact 
Assessments (PHIA) will estimate HIV inci-
dence, prevalence, and viral load suppression 
among adults and children. We have launched 
PHIAs in three countries in 2015, and several 
more countries will be initiated in 2016, with 
incidence data to be available by World AIDS 
Day 2016. 
0
500,000
1,000,000
1,500,000
2,000,000
2,500,000
3,000,000
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
New Infections in Sub-Saharan Africa, 1975 - 2013
Actual
No change post 2002
• The first category includes prevalence 
curves that exhibit a generally flat 
profile (e.g., Kenya [Figure 24], Lesotho, 
Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa, and 
Swaziland) based on a rate of new infec-
tions that is consistently greater than 
mortality. This link suggests that the new 
infections “replace” those persons lost due 
to AIDS-related mortality, resulting in a 
flat trajectory. The total burden of disease 
remains constant, and thus costs are either 
constant or increasing as coverage of 
services improves and countries adopt new 
eligibility criteria that all persons living 
with HIV now benefit from HIV treatment 
(the “Treatment for All” recommendation 
from the WHO, also referred to by PEPFAR 
as “Test and START”).  
• The second category includes those 
countries in which new infection rates 
are slightly lower than or nearly equal 
to mortality rates (e.g., Tanzania [Figure 
23], Ethiopia, Ghana, Haiti, Malawi, and 
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
50
51
Zimbabwe). Prevalence rates exhibit a 
downward trend, and there is a sustained 
decline in new infections. In these coun-
tries, the disease burden is decreasing, 
and cost increases are primarily driven by 
expanding service delivery coverage of com-
bination prevention in high transmission 
areas to ensure the rates of new infections 
remain in check. Overall, out-year costs 
will begin to decline as the cohort ages. 
In high transmission areas, it is important 
to ensure that patients adhere to and are 
retained on treatment to maintain viral 
load suppression and epidemic control.
• The third category includes countries with 
curves trending slightly downward but not 
as sharply as those in the previous class. 
This category includes a mix of countries 
that have new infection rates that are 
slightly greater than mortality rates (e.g., 
Botswana [Figure 22], Nigeria, and Rwanda). 
Some countries, like Botswana and Rwanda, 
have excellent service coverage and marked 
decreases in deaths due to AIDS, but 
epidemic control has not been achieved 
due to the rate of new infections. In Nigeria, 
where core service coverage is poor, high 
AIDS mortality persists, new infections 
continue despite significant investment 
from PEPFAR and the Global Fund, and costs 
will continue to escalate so long as service 
coverage remains inadequate. PEPFAR and 
Nigeria have been in long-term discussions 
on increasing focus to demonstrate impact.
• The final category comprises countries with 
a prevalence rate trending upward and with 
a new infection rate that is significantly 
greater than the mortality; currently, only 
Uganda (Figure 25) falls into this category. 
Uganda demonstrates how easily progress 
can be reversed and previous gains lost. 
Bringing this expanded epidemic under 
control will be costly and is a warning for 
all countries of what can occur if continual 
analysis and focus is not maintained. Since 
FY 2012 and the programmatic realignment 
(see Appendix A), the tide has begun to turn 
in Uganda. 
Additional core measures of success in the 
global HIV/AIDS response are incidence and 
mortality rates. These two data points provide 
the most direct evidence of how well an 
epidemic is transitioning in a country and how 
well the combination prevention services are 
controlling this movement. Prevalence rates 
are more complex in structure, and conse-
quently so are their interpretations. In PEPFAR 
3.0, we show outcomes through PHIAs, which 
collect HIV prevalence, incidence, historic mor-
tality, and service coverage data down to the 
household level (Table 3).
APPENDIX F: Rates of 
Adherence and Retention 
PEPFAR evaluates rates of adherence and 
retention across all supported countries by 
examining the total number of people on 
treatment from one year to the next to deter-
mine how many have stopped their treatment 
regimen, have been lost to follow-up, or have 
potentially died. Generally, this involves moni-
toring a cohort of individuals who have been 
on ART for 12, 24, and 36 months or longer. At 
the end of FY 2015, PEPFAR had a 77 percent 
retention rate at 12 months on ART (Appendix 
W: Table 6). 
Reviewing country-specific retention rates has 
helped PEPFAR treatment programs focus on 
gaps and ensure that individuals who start 
their treatment remain on treatment. Lesotho 
had a treatment retention rate of 71.7 percent 
in 2013, but after deploying strategic interven-
tions, like ensuring a consistent stock of drugs 
and supplies, appropriate clinical staff support 
training on retention issues, improvements in 
loss-to-follow-up, and contact tracing, the pro-
gram’s retention rate increased to 83.6 percent 
in 2014. Treatment adherence and retention are 
critical to achieving an AIDS-free generation 
and ensuring that transmission, incidence, and 
costs decline. ICPI is monitoring this care-
fully to ensure that retention rates are closely 
tracked at six-month intervals. Countries that 
drop below 80 percent retention are evaluated, 
and immediate steps are taken to improve pro-
grammatic treatment retention.
PEPFAR also looks at the rate of viral sup-
pression by scaling viral load testing over the 
next few years. Routine viral load monitoring 
is now recommended by WHO and forms the 
cornerstone of the third “90” of the UNAIDS 
90-90-90 goals. People living with HIV who are 
known to have an undetectable viral load can 
safely space out clinic visits and pharmacy 
drug refills, thus reducing the burden on them 
and decongesting health services. Effective 
prevention programs, alongside treatment and 
viral suppression in 90 percent of HIV-infected 
individuals in geographically prioritized areas, 
will prevent the majority of transmissions and 
lead to eventual epidemic control. PEPFAR has 
provided six countries with catalytic funds 
for viral load scale-up in 2015 and will look to 
expand to all PEPFAR-supported countries in 
2016 with site-level availability of viral load 
testing, national planning, and use of results to 
provide differentiated patient care. 
Table 3. Implementation Timeline of HIV Impact Assessments
Country 
HIA Implementation 
Year (planned)
Status
Malawi
2015
Data collection began  
November 2015
Zimbabwe
2015
Data collection began  
October 2015
Mozambique
2015
Data collection completed 
Lesotho
2016
Protocol drafted
Namibia
2016
Protocol drafted
Uganda 
2016
Protocol under ethics review
Zambia
2016
Field pilot in December 2015
Nigeria
2016
Protocol under ethics review 
(Kaduna state)
Swaziland
2016
Protocol under ethics review
Cameroon
2016
Protocol in development
Tanzania
2016
Protocol under ethics review
Côte d’Ivoire
2017
Protocol in development
Ethiopia
2017
Protocol in development
Kenya
2017
In planning
Haiti
2017
In planning 
DRC
TBD
Protocol under ethics review
A mother and daughter walk home arm in arm in Malawi.
Josh Estey/CARE
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
52
53
APPENDIX G: How New WHO 
Guidelines Impact the  
HIV/AIDS Epidemic, and Policy 
Change as Part of Shared 
Responsibility
The World Health Organization (WHO) is the 
leading institution responsible for estab-
lishing normative guidance related to HIV/AIDS 
programs. On September 30, 2015, WHO released 
new guidance that recommends ART for all 
persons living with HIV irrespective of clinical 
or immunologic status.
14 Widespread adoption 
of these guidelines will increase the number 
of persons eligible for treatment, and will also 
provide an individual as well as population-level 
benefit, as persons who start ART early remain 
healthier and greatly reduce their risk of trans-
mitting the virus to others (Figure 28). 
Also on September 30, 2015 WHO released new 
guidance related to PrEP that now recommends 
that oral PrEP containing tenofovir should be 
offered as an additional prevention choice for 
people at substantial risk.
15 This recommenda-
tion enables a wider range of populations to 
benefit from this additional prevention option. 
It also allows the offer of PrEP to be based on 
individual assessment, rather than risk group, 
and it is intended to foster implementation that 
is informed by local epidemiological evidence 
regarding risk factors for acquiring HIV.  
On December 1, 2015, WHO released the execu-
tive summary of revised guidelines for the use 
of ARVs, with full guidance expected shortly.
16 
These guidelines offer important recommen-
dations for reconceptualizing service delivery 
models to offer more streamlined services to 
patients who are clinically well (stable on ART or 
14 
 WHO. (2015). Guideline on when to start antiretroviral therapy and on 
pre-exposure prophylaxis for HIV. Available at: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstre
am/10665/186275/1/9789241509565_eng.pdf
15 
 WHO. (2015). Guideline on when to start antiretroviral therapy and on 
pre-exposure prophylaxis for HIV. Available at: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstre
am/10665/186275/1/9789241509565_eng.pdf
16 
 WHO. (2015). Consolidated guidelines on the use of antiretroviral drugs for treat-
ing and preventing HIV infection: what’s new. Available at: http://www.who.int/hiv/
pub/arv/policy-brief-arv-2015/en/
newly initiating with few symptoms) and more 
intensive services to those who need it (patients 
with clinical disease or who are failing therapy). 
These guidelines also promote more patient-
friendly services and the community-based 
models. For stable patients (who may account 
for as much as 80 percent of all persons on ART), 
spacing out clinic visits and drug refills offers 
an important opportunity to treat more patients 
with existing resources (Figure 29). As the costs 
of ARVs have declined over the last decade, the 
costs of provided ART are now driven by service 
delivery costs and not drug costs.
WHO guidance released in 2014–2015 on key 
populations, consolidated approaches to 
strategic information, and HIV testing services 
also offer important new recommendations, 
including the use of lay providers for HIV 
testing and the possibility of HIV self-testing. 
Key populations guidance for men who have 
sex with men (MSM), transgender persons, 
people who inject drugs (PWID), sex workers, 
and prisoners provides important recom-
mendations on reaching these vulnerable 
populations with evidence-based interven-
tions using appropriate, peer-led service 
delivery models.
17, 18 The Consolidated Strategic 
Information guidelines for HIV provides a 
global framework with 10 global indicators for 
monitoring the HIV response using a “results 
chain” approach, and brings together all 
existing strategic information recommenda-
tions into a single, harmonized document.
19 
17 
 WHO. (2014). Consolidated guidelines on HIV prevention, diagnosis, treatment 
and care for key populations. Available at: http://www.who.int/hiv/pub/guidelines/
keypopulations/en/
18 
 WHO. (2015). Tool to set and monitor targets for HIV prevention, diagnosis, treat-
ment and care for key populations; Supplement to the 2014 Consolidated guidelines 
for HIV prevention, diagnosis, treatment and care for key populations. Available at: 
http://www.who.int/hiv/pub/toolkits/kpp-monitoring-tools/en/
19 
 WHO. (2015). Consolidated strategic information guidelines for HIV in the health 
sector. Available at: http://www.who.int/hiv/pub/guidelines/strategic-information-
guidelines/en/
World Health Organization logo
Figure 28. New HIV Infections and AIDS Deaths with 5-Year 
 Window for Treatment for All (28M on ART by 2020)
Figure 29. Cost of Serving One ART Client with 1-3 Month 
 Follow-Up vs. Two Clients with 6-12 Month Follow-Up
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
54
55
APPENDIX H: HIV Burden and 
Treatment Response 
There are an increasing number of people 
living with HIV/AIDS, which is consistent with 
the growth of the epidemic and the availability 
of lifesaving treatment. At the end of 2014, 36.9 
million people were living with HIV globally, 
including nearly 25 million in sub-Saharan 
Africa (Figure 30; Appendix W: Table 20). As 
treatment programs are implemented across 
partner countries, people living with HIV are 
living longer and more productive lives. The 
PEPFAR-supported treatment cohorts are also 
aging, with 10–15 percent of patients on treat-
ment over 50 years old. Today, with effective 
treatment, far fewer people living with HIV will 
die due to AIDS-related causes. 
The number of persons on treatment and lives 
saved dramatically increased with the creation 
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
1990 
1991 
1992 
1993 
1994 
1995 
1996 
1997 
1998 
1999 
2000 
2001 
2002 
2003 
2004 
2005 
2006 
2007 
2008 
2009 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
Millions 
Zimbabwe 
Zambia 
UR Tanzania 
Uganda 
Swaziland 
South Sudan 
South Africa 
Rwanda 
Nigeria 
Namibia 
Mozambique 
Malawi 
Lesotho 
Kenya 
Ghana 
Ethiopia 
DR Congo 
Cameroon 
Cote d'Ivoire 
Burundi 
Botswana 
Angola 
Na*onal Data, Persons Living with HIV 
Sub-Saharan Africa 
 
Source: UNAIDS 2015 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
2004 
2005 
2006 
2007 
2008 
2009 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
Millions 
Zimbabwe 
Zambia 
UR Tanzania 
Uganda 
Swaziland 
South Sudan 
South Africa 
Rwanda 
Nigeria 
Namibia 
Mozambique 
Malawi 
Lesotho 
Kenya 
Ghana 
Ethiopia 
DR Congo 
Cameroon 
Cote d'Ivoire 
Burundi 
Botswana 
Angola 
Source: UNAIDS 2015 
Na*onal Data, Persons on ART 
Sub-Saharan Africa 
 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
2004 
2005 
2006 
2007 
2008 
2009 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 
Millions 
Other 
Zimbabwe 
Zambia 
Vietnam 
Uganda 
Tanzania 
Swaziland 
South Africa 
Rwanda 
Nigeria 
Namibia 
Mozambique 
Malawi 
Lesotho 
Kenya 
HaiN 
Ethiopia 
Cote d'Ivoire 
PEPFAR Treatment Results 
Young women at South Africa DREAMS launch
U.S. Embassy, South Africa
Figure 32.  Cumulative Trends of Persons Receiving ART,  
PEPFAR Specific Data Sub-Saharan Africa, 2004-2015
Figure 31. Cumulative Trends of Persons Receiving ART,  
National Level Data Sub-Saharan Africa, 2004-2014
Figure 30. Cumulative Trends of Persons Living with HIV, Sub-Saharan Africa, 1990-2014
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
56
57
and expansion of the investments by PEPFAR 
and the Global Fund from 2004–2014 (Figure 
31; Appendix W: Table 22). In the large majority 
of countries, expansion of treatment was slow 
but steady from 2004 to 2007 (PEPFAR Phase I), 
after which enrollments increased. From 2008 
to 2010 (beginning of PEPFAR Phase II), enroll-
ments rapidly increased and have continued 
along these same trajectories through the 
current reporting periods (Figure 32). The rapid 
implementation of evidenced-based interven-
tions is fundamental to the dramatic shifts in 
new infections and mortality rates, and ongoing 
success toward the creation of an AIDS-free 
generation is completely dependent on con-
tinuing this momentum.
As shown in the Figure 32, there was a flat-
tening of the treatment expansion slopes in the 
2013–2014 timeframe. The slope recovered in 
2014–2015 with the realignment of resources in 
adherence with the 50 percent care and treat-
ment directive included in P.L. 113-56. PEPFAR 
is closely tracking both the slope of scale-up 
of services as well as the geographic coverage 
to ensure that community viral load levels are 
suppressed to undetectable. It is clear that both 
speed-to-coverage and percent coverage is 
important in controlling the HIV epidemic. This 
saves lives as well as decreases transmission.  
ART coverage rates combine the figures for 
persons on treatment and those who need 
ART (as modeled by countries and UNAIDS as 
all persons with HIV infection). These rates 
provide a telling story of progress in each 
country (Appendix W: Table 17). As demonstrated 
by Figure 33, all partner countries are on an 
upward trend in their responses. Some indica-
tions suggest that countries with HIV prevalence 
greater than 5 percent are improving at a slightly 
accelerated rate. Considerable variation exists 
on a country-by-country basis. Some countries 
are making tremendous progress while others 
are progressing very slowly. This provides further 
evidence supporting PEPFAR’s strategy to utilize 
its resources to support services in settings with 
the greatest need and potential for greatest 
impact. This pivot remains a priority to ensure 
that countries are capable of aggressively 
addressing their epidemics within the current 
envelope of global HIV/AIDS funding. Viral loads 
must be suppressed to create an AIDS-free gen-
eration and allow communities and countries to 
thrive.
One of the more important milestones toward 
controlling the epidemic is when new enroll-
ments in treatment start to outnumber the 
estimated new infections in a given year once 
overall treatment coverage reaches 80 percent 
at the national level. This transition point 
reflects a care and treatment scale-up rate 
that is successfully limiting the transmission of 
HIV to uninfected persons. A lower number of 
new infections suggests that the future influx 
of patients requiring treatment will be more 
manageable, smaller, and cheaper, and that 
the epidemic will begin to contract. This shift 
in trends, while important in the ongoing effort 
to control the epidemic, does not imply that 
continuing efforts can lapse. Any faltering of 
national treatment efforts might easily allow 
the trend lines to return to an earlier, more 
negative pattern, and new HIV infections will 
increase once again. Any drop in adherence or 
retention will result in increasing viral loads 
and substantial surges in HIV transmission.   
As illustrated in Uganda, PEPFAR refocused the 
program when new infections were rising, and 
there was dramatic increase in VMMC and 
PMTCT through rapid rollout of B+ programming 
(initiating lifelong ART for pregnant women) 
and treatment expansion. The realignment 
substantially changed results and impact on 
new infections (Figure 34).  
APPENDIX I: Supportive Care
In February 2014, PEPFAR developed a strategy 
for the prioritization of care and support 
interventions. This strategy was based upon an 
extensive, in-depth review of evidence and best 
practices for people living with HIV. Four activi-
ties were identified as priority for the greatest 
impact on morbidity and mortality, considered 
core services in PEPFAR 3.0. These interventions 
are supported by a strong evidence base and 
Figure 34. New Infections and AIDS Deaths, Uganda
1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 
New Infec. 15000
0 
13000
0 
11000
0 
93000 79000 71000 66000 64000 65000 67000 70000 74000 80000 87000 94000 10000
0 
11000
0 
11000
0 
12000
0 
13000
0 
14000
0 
13000
0 
11000
0 
11000
0 
10000
0 
Deaths 
49000  
59000  
68000  
77000  
83000  
89000  
92000  
93000  
94000  
92000  
91000  
88000  
83000  
79000  
74000  
64000  
56000  
59000  
58000  
53000  
50000  
46000  
42000  
39000  
33000 
0 
60,000 
120,000 
180,000 
Source: UNAIDS How AIDS changed everything – http://aidsinfo.unaids.org/  
 
New HIV Infec+ons & AIDS Deaths:  Uganda 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
Percentage 
DR Congo 
Burundi 
Ethiopia 
Ghana 
Hai= 
Angola 
South Sudan 
Rwanda 
Nigeria 
Cote d'Ivoire 
Cameroon 
Na+onal Data, ART Coverage 
Select Countries, HIV Prevalence <= 5% 
2010-2014 
 
Source: UNIADS 2015 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
Percentage 
Kenya 
UR Tanzania 
Uganda 
Malawi 
Mozambique 
Zambia 
Namibia 
Zimbabwe 
South Africa 
Lesotho 
Botswana 
Swaziland 
Na+onal Data, ART Coverage 
Select Countries, HIV Prevalence > 5% 
2010-2014 
 
Source: UNIADS 2015 
Figure 33. Trends in ART Coverage, Select Countries, 2010-2014
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
58
59
are universally applicable in every country and 
for every person living with HIV (Appendix W: 
Table 2). They include:
• regular clinical and laboratory 
monitoring; 
• screening for active TB with referral for 
treatment as appropriate;
• cotrimoxazole (CTX) prophylaxis for 
opportunistic infections (OI) per country 
guidelines; and
• evidence-based interventions (both 
clinical and nonclinical) to optimize 
retention and adherence, including 
support groups for people living with 
HIV in the community.
Based on the evolution of WHO guidelines for 
the care and treatment of people living with 
HIV where treatment for all is recommended, 
care and treatment will now be one entity to 
be consistent with the guidelines. The care 
focus will be on TB co-infection and preventing 
TB reactivation.
APPENDIX J: PEPFAR and 
Prevention Interventions—
PMTCT, VMMC, DREAMS
• PMTCT: Preventing HIV Infection in Babies—
Appendix K
• VMMC: Ensuring Young Men Remain 
HIV-Free—Appendix L
• DREAMS: Ensuring Young Women Remain 
HIV-Free—Appendix M
Prevention, treatment, and care have been 
the three pillars of PEPFAR programming 
since 2003; this comprehensive approach was 
mandated by Congress in PEPFAR’s authorizing 
legislation, P.L. 108–25, the ‘‘United States 
Leadership Against HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis, and 
Malaria Act of 2003,” and it has been included 
in each subsequent reauthorization.  
PEPFAR’s implementation of evidence-based 
HIV prevention is fundamental to the control of 
the epidemic, and our methods of prevention 
have changed as the epidemic has evolved. 
PEPFAR supports prevention services including 
HTS, PMTCT, DREAMS, and VMMC. In FY 2015, 
PEPFAR supported HIV testing and counseling 
for more than 68.2 million people, providing 
a critical entry point to prevention, treat-
ment, and care. (Appendix W: Table 3). Through 
HTS, PEPFAR helped millions to know their 
HIV status and to protect themselves, their 
partners, and their children from HIV infection. 
These testing targets were set and achieved in 
conjunction with partner countries and are key 
to achieving 90 percent of all people living with 
HIV knowing their status by 2020, in line with 
UNAIDS 90-90-90 global goals.  
For optimal impact, prevention services are 
often grouped together in a comprehensive 
package. In FY 2015, PEPFAR reached more than 
19.8 million members of priority populations 
with these packages and more than 1.5 million 
members of specific key populations (Appendix 
W: Tables 4 and 5). 
PEPFAR has been enormously successful 
in PMTCT implementation, dramatically 
decreasing new pediatric infections and 
helping mothers with HIV thrive. These 
programs will continue to be a cornerstone 
of PEPFAR. Protecting babies and ensuring 
they remain HIV-free has resulted in signifi-
cant improvements in the under five survival 
rates in progress toward the Millennium 
Development Goals. But these babies must 
remain HIV-free. Over the past 18 months, 
PEPFAR has prioritized preventing HIV infec-
tions in young men and young women through 
VMMC and DREAMS programming respectively.  
Figures 20 and 21 demonstrate that there has 
been dramatic improvement in keeping babies 
HIV-free, but much less impact in adult new 
infections, thus the refocusing on preventing 
infections in young adults.
APPENDIX K: PMTCT
In June 2013, Secretary of State John Kerry 
announced that more than one million babies 
had been born HIV-free due to PEPFAR support, 
and by September 2015 this number reached 
267,000 in one year alone. We remain fully 
committed to working toward the elimina-
tion of new HIV infections among children and 
keeping their mothers alive as outlined in the 
Global Plan Towards the Elimination of New 
HIV Infections among Children by 2015 and 
Keeping Their Mothers Alive, announced at the 
United Nations in June 2011.20 Since the incep-
tion of the Global Plan, the number of new HIV 
infections in infants each year has dropped by 
nearly 50 percent in Global Plan countries.  
PEPFAR has invested significantly in PMTCT and 
has provided extensive support for the use 
of lifelong ART for all HIV-infected pregnant 
and breastfeeding women, an approach that 
20 
UNAIDS. Global Plan towards the Elimination of New HIV Infections among Chil-
dren by 2015 and Keeping Their Mothers Alive. 2011. Available at: http://www.unaids.
org/en/resources/documents/2011/20110609_JC2137_Global-Plan-Elimination-HIV-
Children_en.pdf
Hospital worker in Kenya provides support to a new mother.
Karin Schermbrucker/mothers2mothers
Pregnant women accessing HIV/AIDS services at clinic in Namibia
Veronica Davison/PEPFAR
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
60
61
leads to the best outcomes for women, their 
partners, and their children. After release 
of the 2013 WHO Consolidated Treatment 
Guidelines recommending combination ART 
for pregnant women, PEPFAR supported coun-
tries in rapidly implementing ART for pregnant 
women. In FY 2014 alone, the proportion of 
pregnant women receiving ART, rather than zid-
ovudine prophylaxis, increased from 60 percent 
to 90 percent, and now stands at 98 percent. 
With release of the 2015 WHO Guideline on 
When to Start Antiretroviral Therapy and on 
Pre-exposure Prophylaxis for HIV,21 which rec-
ommends lifelong ART for all pregnant women 
living with HIV, PEPFAR will work to ensure that 
all supported countries are providing lifelong 
ART to pregnant women living with HIV. 
PEPFAR has focused efforts on providing 
funding and technical support to improve every 
step of the treatment and care continuum, 
from HIV testing to treatment for mothers and 
follow-up testing for babies. This ensures an 
effective PMTCT cascade, resulting in an HIV-
negative baby and a mother with a suppressed 
viral load. In addition, PEPFAR will increase the 
focus on keeping pregnant women who test 
negative for HIV free from infection through 
increased partner testing. This will enable 
PEPFAR to identify and provide immediate 
treatment for men living with HIV and referral 
for VMMC for those who are negative, and will 
also allow PEPFAR to educate and empower 
women to protect themselves.  
In FY 2015, PEPFAR directly supported HIV testing 
for more than 14.7 million pregnant women 
and provided technical support to clinics for 
an additional 3.5 million tested (Appendix W: 
Table 7). PMTCT service coverage, as well as an 
effective cascade of services, are variable and 
differ greatly between communities. PEPFAR 
uses site-specific data to ensure resources are 
focused in the highest-burden areas with the 
greatest need to maximize the impact on babies 
and their mothers. Countries are required to 
focus investments and to increase their targets 
21 
 WHO. (2015). Guideline on when to start antiretroviral therapy and on 
pre-exposure prophylaxis for HIV. Available at: http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstre
am/10665/186275/1/9789241509565_eng.pdf
in high-burden areas. Ultimately, the goal is to 
increase antenatal care attendance and to test 
95 percent of pregnant women receiving an 
antenatal care visit. 
PEPFAR has continued to shift resources from 
low-burden to high-burden areas to ensure 
strong linkages for HIV-positive pregnant 
women to the continuum of care. An addi-
tional benefit of this site-level analysis is the 
utilization of program data to geographically 
map the HIV epidemic at a granular level. This 
initiative, conducted by ICPI, is being replicated 
across partner countries to further focus the 
HIV response and to gain understanding of the 
evolving epidemic at a geographic and facility 
level.  
In FY 2015, 14.7 million pregnant women 
learned their HIV status with PEPFAR support, 
92 percent received ARVs during their preg-
nancy to reduce vertical transmission, and of 
these, 93 percent received Option B+—initiation 
of lifelong ART—and an additional 5 percent 
received triple combination regimens for 
prevention (Figure 35). ART reduces mother-
to-child transmission at birth to less than 5 
percent. Transmission rates under 1 percent 
are seen among women who conceive while 
on ART and who continue their ART throughout 
pregnancy. While 95 percent of babies are 
born HIV-free, if their mothers do not remain 
on treatment, there is a 15–25 percent risk 
for infection to be transferred to the infant 
during the breastfeeding period. Therefore, 
the breastfeeding period is a high-risk time 
for women to be lost from care. PEPFAR rec-
ognizes the need for data on retention of 
pregnant and breastfeeding women and is 
now requiring partner countries to report the 
percentage of women known to be alive and on 
treatment 12 months after initiation of lifelong 
therapy. During 2015, PEPFAR’s retention rate 
in nine countries with the highest number of 
pregnant women was 63 percent (Appendix W: 
Table 6). Increased efforts are being directed at 
retaining pregnant and breastfeeding women 
in care and treatment and providing testing 
for their infants to allow for early treatment of 
infected infants. PEPFAR programs are working 
closely with civil society organizations and OVC 
programs to provide support to breastfeeding 
women and their families to maintain them on 
ART and ensure follow-up for their infants.
The new WHO 2015 guidelines provide PEPFAR 
with a unique opportunity to change the 
message of PMTCT programs. Moving forward, 
all HIV-positive pregnant and breastfeeding 
women should be offered lifelong ART both for 
their own health and to prevent HIV infection 
in their babies.  
APPENDIX L: Preventing New HIV 
Infections in Young Men—VMMC
VMMC is a one-time, low-cost intervention 
shown to reduce men’s risk of HIV by approxi-
mately 60 percent in randomized control trials, 
and that preventive effect has been maintained 
over time. Recent evidence from Uganda (Rakai 
District) demonstrated that the HIV-preventive 
effect of VMMC continues to increase, rather 
PSI
Popular Zimbabwean musician, Jah Prayzah signing a pride board at a 
male circumcision site soon after getting circumcised. He was part of a 
campaign to create demand for VMMC.
Figure 35. PEPFAR PMTCT Regimens: Ensuring the Most Effective Regimens to 
 Save Mothers and Ensure Babies Are Born HIV-Free 
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
62
63
Figure 36. Significant Impact Is Assured with Greater Efficiencies  
When Targeting VMMC to the 15-24 Year Age Band
than decline.22 VMMC has the potential to 
prevent millions of new infections and to save 
millions of lives and billions of dollars. 
Importantly, the procedure brings men into 
health services, some for the first time. As of 
September 30, 2015, PEPFAR has supported 
more than 8.9 million VMMC procedures in 
eastern and southern African countries 
(Figures 36 and 37; Appendix W: Table 9). 
PEPFAR programs strive to achieve 80 percent 
adult male circumcision coverage, prioritizing 
the high transmission areas among these 14 
countries to maximally and efficiently reduce 
HIV incidence in the shortest period of time 
possible and contribute to PEPFAR’s over-
arching strategies for epidemic control. PEPFAR 
aims to support a cumulative 11 million VMMCs 
by the end of FY 2016 and a cumulative 13 
million VMMCs by the end of FY 2017. Assuming 
each country reaches the 90-90-90 HIV treat-
ment targets, modeling analysis projects that 
VMMCs conducted to date will avert more than 
240,000 HIV infections by 2025. PEPFAR con-
tinues to prioritize this one-time intervention 
by increasing central funding to this interven-
tion in 2015.  
 
22 
 Gray, R. H., et al. (2012). The Effectiveness of Male Circumcision for HIV Preven-
tion and Effects on Risk Behaviors in a Post-Trial Follow up Study in Rakai, Uganda. 
AIDS 26(5), 609–615. Available at: http://doi.org/10.1097/QAD.0b013e3283504a3f
100%
60%
71%
81%
84%
95%
104%
125%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100% 120% 140%
15-49 (baseline)
15 to 24
15 to 29
15 to 34
10 to 24
10 to 29
10 to 34
10 to 39
#MCs (2010-17) (millions)
100%
78%
87%
94%
80%
91%
97%
107%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80% 100% 120% 140%
15-49 (baseline)
15 to 24
15 to 29
15 to 34
10 to 24
10 to 29
10 to 34
10 to 39
HIA (millions) (2010-25)
VMMC Impact and Program Cost, Zambia
Reaching 15-24 yr
olds preserves 
almost 80% of 
impact for 40% 
fewer VMMCs
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
2009 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 
Millions 
Zimbabwe 
Zambia 
Uganda 
Tanzania 
Swaziland 
South Africa 
Rwanda 
Namibia 
Mozambique 
Malawi 
Lesotho 
Kenya 
Ethiopia 
Botswana 
PEPFAR Cumula1ve VMMCs 
APPENDIX M: Prioritizing 
Prevention of New HIV 
Infections in Women, 
Adolescent Girls, and Children 
HIV remains the leading cause of death and 
disease in women of reproductive age, leading 
to increased risk of death for orphaned 
children as well.23 In sub-Saharan Africa, 60 
percent of those living with HIV are women, 
and in some of these countries, prevalence 
among young women ages 15–24 is three times 
higher than among men of the same age 
(Figures 38 and 39). Maternal mortality is the 
second leading cause of death, resulting in an 
estimated 287,000 deaths each year; 99 percent 
of these women live in low-income countries, 
and is higher among women living with HIV.24 
Without adequate treatment, women living with 
HIV are eight times more likely to die during 
pregnancy, delivery, or the early postpartum 
period.25 One in three women will experience 
GBV in her lifetime.26 Women account for two-
thirds of the world’s 774 million adults who are 
23 
 Ortblad, K. F., Lozano, R., Murray, C. J.. (2013). The burden of HIV: insights from the 
Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. AIDS 27(13), 2003–2017.  
24 
  WHO. (2015). Women’s Health. Geneva.
25 
 Calvert, C., Ronsmans, C. (2013). The contribution of HIV to pregnancy-related 
mortality: a systematic review and meta-analysis. AIDS 27(10), 1631–1639.
26 
 United States Agency for International Development. (2015). Report on Gender 
Equality and Women’s Empowerment. Washington, DC. January 2015.
Figure 37. PEPFAR Cumulative VMMC Results, 2009-2015, Accelerated Slope  
Continues Across the Program 
“We’re working together to ensure that girls 
have access to education and that women 
are protected from violence. Today, I can 
announce that Kenya will be part of our 
DREAMS initiative to help keep adolescent 
girls safe and AIDS-free. And across Africa, 
Kenya and the United States will keep 
working to strengthen public health systems 
and deal with outbreaks and diseases before 
they become epidemics.” 
 –President Barack Obama, July 25, 2015
President Obama during historic visit to Kenya and Ethiopia speaking 
at the African Union.
white House
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
64
65
illiterate, 54 percent of the 72 million children 
who are out of school, and 98 percent of all 
cross-border trafficking victims in sex exploi-
tation cases.27 All of these factors negatively 
impact the overall health and well-being of 
women, while placing adolescent girls and 
young women at heightened risk for HIV infec-
tion and HIV-positive women at increased risk 
of maternal mortality.  
Since its inception, PEPFAR has prioritized care 
and treatment for women and children; in FY 
2015 more than 35 million women and girls were 
tested, and more than 5.4 million women and 
girls are in treatment. PEPFAR is dedicated to 
continued implementation of its 2013 Gender 
Strategy,28 which calls for increasing gender 
equity in HIV/AIDS programs and services, 
including reproductive health, preventing and 
responding to GBV, engaging men and boys 
to address social norms and behaviors, and 
improving gender-related legal protections.
Every year, an astonishing 380,000 adoles-
cent girls and young women are infected with 
HIV—7,000 every week, more than 1,000 every 
day. Girls and young women account for 71 
27 
 UNAIDS. (2010). The World’s Women 2010: Trends and Statistics. Geneva.
28 
 PEPFAR. (2013). Updated Gender Strategy. Available at: http://www.pepfar.gov/
documents/organization/219117.pdf
percent of new HIV infections among ado-
lescents in sub-Saharan Africa. That is why 
PEPFAR, the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, 
and Girl Effect were founding members of the 
DREAMS partnership. The goal of DREAMS is 
to reduce new HIV infections in adolescent 
girls and young women in the hardest-hit 
areas of 10 sub-Saharan Africa countries by 
helping girls become Determined, Resilient, 
Empowered, AIDS-free, Mentored, and Safe 
women. The administration announced that 
DREAMS is targeting a 40 percent reduction 
in new HIV infections among adolescent girls 
and young women within DREAMS geographic 
areas—the hardest-hit areas of 10 sub-Saharan 
Africa countries—by the end of 2017.
DREAMS—Increasing Effective 
Targeted Prevention Interventions
In July 2015, President Obama, during his 
historic trip to Kenya and Ethiopia, announced 
the 10 countries participating in DREAMS: 
Kenya, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, South 
Africa, Swaziland, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia, 
and Zimbabwe. The 10 DREAMS countries 
account for nearly half of all the new infec-
tions that occurred among adolescent girls 
and young women globally in 2014. DREAMS 
is about multiple solutions surrounding 
one problem, delivering a core package that 
combines evidence-based approaches that 
go beyond the health sector, addressing the 
structural drivers that directly and indirectly 
increase girls’ HIV risk, including poverty, 
gender inequality, sexual violence, and a lack 
of education (Figure 40).
Many adolescent girls and young women lack 
a full range of opportunities and are too often 
devalued because of gender bias, leading 
them to be seen as unworthy of investment 
or protection. Social isolation, economic dis-
advantage, discriminatory cultural norms, 
orphanhood, GBV, and school dropout all con-
tribute to girls’ vulnerability to HIV. DREAMS has 
the potential to change how we work together 
to ensure an AIDS-free future for adolescent 
girls and young women.
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
16 
Percentage 
Female 
Male 
Source: UNAIDS 2015 
Na+onal Data, HIV Prevalence among Young (15-24) Females and Males 
Select Countries, 2014 
Age-Gender Disparity in New HIV Infections Globally, 2014 : RSA example 
720,000  
new infections 
primarily  
driven  
by infection of 
young women 
A young woman smiles for the camera in a classroom in rural Malawi.
Josh Estey/CARE
Figure 38. HIV Prevalence Among Young Females and Males
Figure 39. Age-Gender Disparity in New HIV Infections Globally, 2014  
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
66
67
Kenya: The DREAMS Vision 
Translated into Action
In Kenya, DREAMS is implemented in four high-
priority counties: Nairobi, Homa Bay, Siaya, and 
Kisumu, as shown in Figure 41. Selection of focus 
counties was based on their proportional geo-
graphic HIV/AIDS burden and on HIV incidence 
in high transmission zones in subcounties and 
informal settlements (Figure 41). This selec-
tion of these four counties aligns with Kenya’s 
plan for geographic focus proposed during FY 
2015 COP and coincides with the ACT initiative 
and VMMC scale-up counties. The layering of a 
combination of effective interventions will allow 
DREAMS partners to leverage targeted services 
for male sexual partners of adolescent girls and 
young women and effectively link adolescent 
girls and pregnant adolescent girls as well as 
young women who test positive to adolescent-
friendly HIV care and treatment sites through 
the ACT Initiative.
The core package of interventions for each 
of the selected DREAMS counties is broadly 
outlined in Table 4. New interventions include 
provision of PrEP, strengthening family inter-
ventions and characterization of male partners. 
The planning and proposal development 
portion of DREAMS was completed at the end of 
FY 2015, and implementation started at the 
beginning of FY 2016. In Kenya, DREAMS partners 
were providing some services within the 
DREAMS core package, and through the addition 
of DREAMS resources these partners will expand 
their availability. In cases where DREAMS 
partners do not offer the outlined services, they 
will coordinate with other PEPFAR partners in 
the area to ensure effective linkages. 
PEPFAR Kenya will work with its partners to 
ensure that appropriate populations are 
reached and that implementing partners 
provide the agreed-upon interventions with a 
COP
DREAMS Core 
Package
Additive 
VMMC
Additive
Test and 
Start
DREAMS
Putting it all Together
Figure 40. The DREAMS Core Package 
series of capacity building activities. Each 
DREAMS implementing partner will participate 
in a comprehensive DREAMS workshop that 
outlines the vision, technical strategy, and 
monitoring and evaluation framework. Partners 
will also participate in intervention-specific 
training for new programs to ensure implemen-
tation fidelity across partners.
How Does the Kenya Vision for 
DREAMS Depart from Business as 
Usual? 
The packages of services for DREAMS are 
clearly defined, comprehensive, and evi-
dence-informed, and integrate education, 
contraception, and social and economic inter-
ventions. With DREAMS support, Kenya will 
develop an adolescent girls and young women-
centered approach to service delivery and will 
reduce risk among this group by understanding 
their sexual networks.  
Figure 41. HIV Disease Burden by County and Location of DREAMS Focus Counties: Kenya
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
68
69
Augmenting the combination prevention inter-
ventions of DREAMS, supporting the reduction 
in incidence of HIV among adolescent girls and 
young women is the additive VMMC as well as 
to find more men and initiate them on treat-
ment (Figure 42). Additional funding has been 
allocated to expand VMMC programs, in par-
ticular targeting young men in the age 15–24 
cohort in the DREAMS focus areas. This group 
represents the next generation of older males 
who are sexual partners of young females; 
keeping these males HIV-free with VMMC will 
further strengthen and protect the young 
women with whom they will engage in sexual 
relations. 
A more generalized strategy attempting to 
provide VMMC to all eligible males (e.g., 15–49 
years old) would improve overall coverage but 
is not cost efficient. For example, modeling in 
Zambia supports the proposition that targeting 
the 15–24-year-old age band ensures approxi-
mately 80 percent of the impact for 40 percent 
fewer procedures (Figure 36). This efficiency 
can move VMMC programs rapidly toward sig-
nificant reductions in new infections and can 
also be used to further leverage support for 
expanded programming. Combining this VMMC 
initiative with the VMMC component of the 
DREAMS program offers critical additive value 
to the entire goal of reducing new infections 
among adolescent girls and young women.  
DREAMS also includes a strong monitoring and 
evaluation plan, in which data will be moni-
tored monthly and quarterly so as to allow for 
timely course correction if needed. Semiannual 
program review meetings will also be held for 
partners to share best practices and address 
challenges.
DREAMS Innovation Challenge
On World AIDS Day 2015, PEPFAR and several 
private sector partners announced new invest-
ments in DREAMS, including through the new 
DREAMS Innovation Challenge, bringing the 
total investment to $385 million, subject to 
approval by the U.S. Congress. PEPFAR com-
mitted $80 million from within its existing 
FY 2014 and 2015 budgets for this Innovation 
Challenge Fund, and Johnson & Johnson, 
Gilead Sciences, and ViiV Healthcare joined 
the call to action, committing $25 million to 
Table 4. DREAMS, Kenya Summary of Interventions, 
Kenya by County 
Category  
and Code
Intervention
Empower Girls 
and Young Women 
(EG&YW)
Condom promotion and provision (male 
and female) [No promotion or provision  
for 10-14 year olds in interventions.]
HIV Testing Services
PrEP [not offered in Year 1]
Post-Violence Care
Expand and Improve Contraceptive 
Method Mix
Social Asset Building
Mobilize  
Communities 
(MoCom)
School-based HIV and violence prevention
Community mobilization and norms 
change
Strengthen  
Families (SF)
Parenting/Caregiver Programs
Cash Transfers
Education Subsidies
Combination Socioeconomic Approaches
Decrease risk in sex 
partners (Part)
Characterization of male partners (for 
AGYW ages 15-24)
DREAMS logo
support both the DREAMS partnership and 
Innovation Challenge Fund. The DREAMS 
Innovation Challenge Fund is designed to build 
upon existing evidence-based approaches 
and infuse additional resources and innova-
tive approaches to better meet the urgent and 
complex needs of adolescent girls and young 
women in sub-Saharan Africa. 
The DREAMS Innovation Challenge will invite 
investment ideas in the following core areas: 
•
Strengthening leadership and capacity of
community-based organizations to support
the expansion of interventions included in the
DREAMS Core Package.
•
Keeping girls in secondary school by ensuring
their transition and access to enrollment and
addressing underlying retention issues.
•
Pioneering new ways to find young and adult
men and link them to HIV counseling and testing,
treatment, and VMMC services.
•
Supporting PrEP interventions by identifying
APR15 Treatment Results for DREAMS Countries 
Source: PEPFAR FY15 report to Congress.  Results for Uganda were unavailable at time of reporting 
0 
200,000 
400,000 
600,000 
800,000 
1,000,000 
1,200,000 
1,400,000 
1,600,000 
Kenya 
Lesotho 
Malawi 
Mozambique 
South Africa 
Swaziland 
Tanzania 
Zambia 
Zimbabwe 
Men 
Women 
Number of adults 15+ receiving 
ART 
adolescent girls and young women appropriate 
for PrEP initiation and adherence services.
•
Providing a postsecondary school bridge to
employment for young women (ages 19–24) to
decrease their risk for transactional sex and HIV.
•
Increasing the availability and use of
Data4Dreams to inform policy and increase
program impact, with support from the
Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC).
Figure 42. Significant Impact Is Assured with Greater Efficiencies 
When Targeting VMMC to the 15-24 Year Age Band
A peer educator speaking to fellow students at a school in Kenya. 
USAID
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
70
71
DREAMS Evaluation
The DREAMS initiative has developed a moni-
toring and evaluation (M&E) framework as 
a reference for all DREAMS countries. This 
framework follows a logic model that guides 
how programs are monitored and evaluated. 
This model lays out the epidemiologic and 
sociologic context that puts adolescent girls 
and young women at higher risk of HIV infec-
tion, the interventions proposed to address 
these contextual factors, the expected outputs 
and outcomes of these interventions, and the 
overall impact of those interventions in combi-
nation. The logic model is purposely high level, 
as it applies to DREAMS across all 10 countries, 
and it can be adapted to fit specific country 
plans, context, and encompassing M&E frame-
works. The structure of this framework reflects 
the fundamentals of the overall PEPFAR M&E 
strategy, using the same data sources, indica-
tors, and analytical processes. The differences 
rest in additional metrics, other data collection 
processes, and analyses that are linked to the 
specific objectives of this initiative.  
The evaluation of processes and outputs will 
address questions pertaining to the achieve-
ment of DREAMS targets, to reaching the 
correct populations, to successful rollout of 
interventions, and to delivery of quality inter-
ventions. Additional in-depth studies will be 
conducted to explore three primary ques-
tions: 1) how well are programs identifying 
and linking adolescent girls and young women 
to programs and services; 2) how well are 
programs identifying and linking male partners 
of adolescent girls and young women to 
decrease their risk; and 3) what are appropriate 
and effective strategies for the use of PrEP 
among adolescent girls and young women? 
Outcomes also will be examined, reflecting 
behavioral changes associated with the 
intervention objectives. These will include 
educational attainment, levels of violence 
and victimization, unplanned pregnancies, 
sexual risk behaviors, and changes to com-
munity norms, among others. Ultimately, the 
goal is to achieve a reduction in HIV incidence 
among adolescent girls and young women, the 
impact of this overall agenda. Evaluation of the 
impact will employ proxy indicators (e.g., PMTCT 
program data, prevalence among 15–24-year-
old females) and modeling. Another special 
study will be implemented to directly monitor 
changes in incidence, employing existing sur-
veillance platforms and supporting additional 
research as needed. This study will target four 
locations, two in Kenya and one each in South 
Africa and Zimbabwe. 
PEPFAR’s Investments 
to Combat GBV
Gender-based Violence and HIV are intricately 
linked. Girls who experience violence are three 
times more likely to have an unwanted preg-
nancy and up to three times more likely to 
have HIV or other sexually transmitted infec-
tions. Sexual violence against preadolescents 
and adolescents is alarmingly high, with 28 
to 39 percent of girls reporting an unwanted 
sexual experience before they turn 18.29  
29 
 WHO. (2014). Global Status Report on Violence Prevention 2014. Geneva.
PEPFAR is working with U.S. implementing 
agencies, partner countries, civil society 
groups, the Global Fund, and other multilateral 
partners to comprehensively address GBV and 
HIV prevention for adolescent girls. This means 
bringing together relevant approaches from 
multiple sectors—education, health, economic, 
and psychosocial—to establish a core package 
of evidence-based interventions.  
PEPFAR has strengthened its gender indicators 
by including more refined age by sex-disaggre-
gated categories to their two gender-equality 
indicators; these indicators measure the 
number of people receiving post-GBV care and 
the number of people completing an activity 
pertaining to changing gender norms. PEPFAR 
continues to reach tens of thousands of 
women a year with postexposure prophylaxis 
to prevent HIV for sexual violence survivors 
(Appendix W: Table 12).   
Investing in adolescent girls and young women 
is not only the right thing to do, it’s the 
smart thing. If we can impact their lives, we 
can contribute to progress for their families 
and communities. Simultaneously, PEPFAR is 
focused on finding and testing HIV-positive 
men, linking them immediately to lifesaving 
treatment, and ensuring they achieve viral 
suppression to break the life cycle of HIV. This 
will require rapid adoption of the 2015 WHO 
guidelines.
APPENDIX N: Pediatrics and 
OVC—Focusing the Program 
Toward Achieving an AIDS-Free 
Generation and Healthy 
Children
Pediatrics
Over the last five years there has been a 
dramatic decline in new pediatric infections, 
but the children that have been born HIV-
positive are in critical need of HIV treatment 
to save their lives. In 2014, 2.6 million children 
under age 15 were living with HIV/AIDS—nearly 
90 percent of whom live in sub-Saharan Africa. 
One new pediatric HIV infection occurred 
approximately every three minutes. Without 
ART, 50 percent of children living with HIV/
AIDS will die before their second birthday and 
80 percent will die before their fifth birthday. 
Children living with HIV/AIDS are one-quarter 
as likely to receive treatment compared with 
adults. 
In August 2014, the U.S. Department of State 
announced the ACT initiative at the U.S. African 
Leaders Summit. ACT is a two-year initiative to 
double the total number of children receiving 
lifesaving ART in nine high-priority countries 
in sub-Saharan Africa. The nine ACT countries 
(Cameroon, Democratic Republic of the Congo, 
Kenya, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Tanzania, 
Zambia, and Zimbabwe) are among those 
with the lowest access to pediatric treatment. 
These countries also have some of the greatest 
disparities in treatment coverage for children 
compared with adults living with HIV/AIDS. The 
$200 million initiative represents a joint invest-
ment by PEPFAR and the Children’s Investment 
Fund Foundation (CIFF) that will enable 300,000 
more children living with HIV in these countries 
Adolescent girls say “no” to gender-based violence and HIV in Ethiopia.
Emnet Mekoya/Public Affairs Section
From left to right: Steve Letsike, Chairperson, South African National AIDS 
Council’s Civil Society Forum, Aaron Motsoaledi, Minister of Health, South Africa, 
Ambassador Birx, Patrick Gaspard, U.S. Ambassador to South Africa, Luiz Loures, 
UNAIDS Deputy Executive Director at the South African DREAMS Launch. 
U.S. Embassy, South Africa
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
72
73
to receive ART. This is more than the right thing 
to do; it is the best way to ensure not only an 
AIDS-free Generation, but a strong and stable 
sub-Saharan Africa.  Healthy children will grow 
economies, create jobs, and strengthen their 
communities for decades to come.
PEPFAR has established new MER indicators 
for OVC that include tracking the number of 
children and caregivers served (disaggregated 
by age and sex) and supporting referrals to 
HIV clinical services made possible by OVC 
programs. In addition, a new package of 
outcome indicators is collected biennially 
through special studies. These indicators are 
drawn from the 2013 OVC Survey toolkit that 
was designed to assist programs with measure-
ment of child and household well-being.  
PEPFAR will work with OVC implementing 
partners to ensure that most vulnerable, 
at-risk children receive appropriate HIV testing 
and access to lifesaving services. PEPFAR 
regularly evaluates OVC programs to ensure 
they adapt to the changing demographics 
of the epidemic and the shifting evidence 
for core interventions. PEPFAR sets aside 10 
percent of its program funding to address the 
diverse, complex, and often critical needs of 
OVC. This year alone, more than five million 
children have benefited from PEPFAR’s services 
(Appendix W: Table 13)—plus, there are two 
million children who did not become orphans 
because of the treatment of parents and care-
givers living with HIV.  
The first year of implementation of ACT has 
shown strong results. As of September 30, 2015, 
PEPFAR is supporting 498,000 children ages 
0–19 years with lifesaving ART, putting ACT on 
track to achieving the fiscal year 2017 target 
of 600,000 children on lifesaving treatment. 
The number of children ages 0–14 years who 
received HIV testing and counseling services 
and their test results has more than doubled 
during the first year of ACT compared with the 
previous year, increasing to 4.3 million in FY 
2015 from 2.1 million in FY 2014. Countries will 
continue to receive technical support to accel-
erate pediatric treatment scale-up in FY 2016. 
In order to make ACT a successful initiative, 
adoption of the WHO guidelines to treat all 
HIV-infected children and adolescents is a 
critical step in bridging the gap between HIV-
positive children and linking them to care. 
PEPFAR is focused on ensuring that all vulner-
able children have access to HIV testing, care, 
and treatment by expanding the OVC platform 
to ensure testing and linkages to lifesaving 
services.
OVC: Strengthening Children’s 
Resilience and Supporting an 
AIDS-Free Generation
OVC programs remain central to achieving an 
AIDS-free generation. Worldwide, more than 
13.3 million children are living without one 
or both parents due to AIDS, down from 14.3 
million at the height of the epidemic.30 As 
care and treatment programs have expanded, 
parents are living successfully with HIV/AIDS, 
and PEPFAR continues to refine the services 
for OVC in high prevalence communities. The 
programs respond to socioeconomic issues 
that negatively impact the lives of children. 
Through strategic efforts to strengthen the 
capacity of OVC, their families, their commu-
nities, and systems of care and support, OVC 
programs create an environment for children—
and their parents and caregivers—that enables 
them to access other services, including 
core HIV treatment and prevention services. 
30 
 UNAIDS. (2015). How AIDS changed everything – MDG6: 15 years, 15 lessons of 
hope from the AIDS response. Available at: http://www.unaids.org/sites/default/files/
media_asset/MDG6Report_en.pdf
An HIV awareness banner created by children 
 
infected and affected by HIV in Ukraine.
Peace Corps
PEPFAR continues to maximize the impact of 
the OVC platform by focusing on an approach 
that strengthens children’s resilience. This 
focuses investments on scaling up evidence-
based interventions; linking community and 
clinical services; enhancing family-centered 
care; and strengthening the measurement of 
quality improvement, cost data, and monitoring 
program outcomes.  
PEPFAR’s support to these programs must 
continue to meet the evolving needs of OVC. 
In countries with substantial declines in HIV 
mortality over the past decade, OVC are aging 
into adolescence as the number of orphans 
dramatically declines. This is a success for 
PEPFAR-supported programs. However, the 
incidence of new infections among girls in 
many of these countries has not declined, 
and girls remain 60 percent more likely to 
become HIV-infected than their male counter-
parts. The focus in these countries must shift 
to preventing HIV infection among vulnerable 
young girls and ensuring strong linkages to 
a comprehensive continuum of care. These 
services should provide HIV-positive adoles-
cents with the necessary social support to 
complement access to treatment. The focus 
is two-fold: adhering to treatment and living 
a happy, healthy, AIDS-free future. In addition 
to focusing on adolescent girls, PEPFAR’s 
OVC programs must reach the very young 
children—children less than two years old—to 
ensure that children exposed to or infected 
with HIV have access to care and treatment 
while integrating early childhood interven-
tions to mitigate the impact of HIV on cognitive, 
physical, emotional, and social development.
In FY 2015, PEPFAR supported several high-
level consultations related to OVC. In February, 
PEPFAR convened an OVC Forum with United 
States government and implementing partners 
to build an understanding of PEPFAR's 
Monitoring, Evaluation, and Reporting (MER) 
indicators, including the outcomes monitoring 
survey to be conducted biannually. The partici-
pants also discussed geographic prioritization 
and transitioning of OVC activities to Scale Up 
districts for activities. In September 2015, during 
the ACT Regional meeting held in Zambia, U.S. 
government and implementing partners iden-
tified OVC program contributions to the ACT 
goals. Participants at the meeting focused on 
U.S. Embassy, South Africa
Adolescents in Swaziland 
Eric Bond/EGPAF
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
74
75
best practices for identifying children infected 
by HIV through targeted testing of children and 
families in OVC programs, as well as providing 
psychosocial support to HIV-positive children 
and their families, which improves retention and 
adherence. 
APPENDIX O: Driving a 
Sustainability Agenda with 
Country Partners
Phase II of PEPFAR emphasized country-led 
sustainable responses as the end goal, where 
partner countries will lead, manage, coor-
dinate, and increasingly finance the efforts 
needed to achieve an AIDS-free generation and 
an effective, efficient, and durable response. 
This has not stopped just because PEPFAR has 
entered a new phase. In fact, it has expanded; 
one of the five pillars of PEPFAR 3.0 is the 
Sustainability Action Agenda, whereby the 
U.S. government aims to engage both partner 
governments and civil society in service and 
systems strengthening.
PEPFAR’s Sustainability Action Agenda focuses 
on: 
•
the policy, administrative, and legal
environment that would ensure access
to services and social protection for
vulnerable populations;
•
rapid adoption of the 2015 WHO guide-
lines that will substantially increase the
effectiveness of PEPFAR investments;
•
the financing and delivery of necessary
HIV/AIDS services and what can be done
to support increased domestic invest-
ment in these areas;
•
the systems and capabilities to facili-
tate the strategic use of data; and
•
the accountability of partner country
governments to be responsive to stake-
holders for achieving results and to be
good stewards of HIV/AIDS monies.
A key component of the Sustainability 
Action Agenda is the development and use 
of the Sustainability Index and Dashboard 
(SID), a measurement tool that provides a 
periodic snapshot of the elements central 
to a sustained and controlled epidemic. The 
implementation of the SID allows PEPFAR to 
objectively track progress toward PrEP sustain-
ability goals. These goals are “owned” by the 
country and have been supported by PEPFAR. 
The Index targets 15 elements organized under 
four overarching domains:
•
Governance, Leadership, and
Accountability;
•
National Health System and Service
Delivery;
•
Strategic Investments, Efficiency, and
Sustainable Financing; and
•
Strategic Information
The specific indicators and milestones included 
within the SID measure key areas, such as the 
extent to which partner countries are mobilizing 
domestic financial resources for their HIV/AIDS 
response and allocating those resources stra-
tegically and efficiently; collecting, analyzing, 
and using the right types of data for decision 
making; and ensuring a secure, reliable, and 
adequate supply and distribution of drugs and 
other commodities for eventually achieving sus-
tainable epidemic control.
The SID was implemented for the first time in 
33 countries during the PEPFAR COP meetings in 
2015 and was received enthusiastically by many 
stakeholders who engaged in the process. Based 
on the lessons learned from that initial experi-
ence, the tool has been revised and refined for 
implementation during COP 2016 (“SID 2.0”), 
the results from which are intended to serve 
as the baseline going forward. The findings 
from periodic implementation of the SID will 
contribute to a shared understanding of each 
country’s sustainability landscape; help identify 
strengths, gaps, and weaknesses within the 
national HIV response; and inform the annual 
planning of PEPFAR investments. 
Recognizing the importance of full participa-
tion by nongovernmental partners, including 
the private sector, to the success and sustain-
ability of efforts to combat HIV, the revised SID 
more explicitly reflects and assesses the role 
these groups play in national HIV responses. In 
addition, to further ensure increased partici-
pation and integration of civil society in HIV/
AIDS planning and implementation, all PEPFAR 
countries were directed to actively involve civil 
society throughout the development of their 
annual Country/Regional Operational Plans. 
During the COP 2015 in-person reviews, each 
country was empowered to invite members of 
civil society, host country governments, multi-
laterals, and other stakeholders to participate 
in discussions with Ambassador Birx around the 
annual PEPFAR planning process. Additionally, 
in November 2015, PEPFAR posted its draft 2016 
Country/Regional Operational Plan (COP/ROP) 
Guidance online to collect feedback from all 
stakeholders, including civil society organiza-
tions. The comments directly informed the final 
guidance, posted online on December 1, 2015.
Treatment can be expanded in a revenue-
neutral manner if the new WHO guideline for 
Test and Start treatment begins immediately 
and new differentiated models of care are 
adopted by host countries. These changes will 
result in a more than 50 percent decline in 
new infections and deaths from HIV. Test and 
START allows simplification of the process of 
starting newly identified persons living with HIV 
on treatment, reducing costs, and increasing 
retention in care. For clients who are asymp-
tomatic at treatment initiation, less frequent 
follow-up is possible, allowing treatment of 
two clients for the same cost as treating one 
using previous guidelines and models of care. 
Treatment for all prevents sexual transmis-
sion to uninfected partners, leading to rapid 
declines in new infections.
APPENDIX P: Strengthening 
Program Cost Effectiveness
Informed by economic and financial data, 
PEPFAR designs and redesigns sustainable 
models of service delivery that adapt to 
changing circumstances. To attain epidemic 
control and an AIDS-free generation, PEPFAR 
is implementing programmatic changes to 
achieve efficiency gains that deliver greater 
results for its investments. 
Accurate cost and expenditure data enable 
policy makers and program planners to better 
coordinate donors, especially the Global Fund 
and host-country funding; assess gaps in 
coverage; reduce duplication and redundancy; 
direct resources to high-impact interventions, 
regions, service providers, and populations; 
determine resources required to sustain 
programs in the future; and advocate for addi-
tional support, both from external and internal 
sources. These data are also essential inputs 
for developing national strategic plans and 
PFs for HIV and health. PEPFAR, as the largest 
source of support in many countries and as 
the one-third contributor to the Global Fund, 
has committed to sharing financial data with 
our partner country counterparts to strengthen 
sustainability. PEPFAR also harmonizes our 
A student proudly wears his HIV/AIDS ribbon on World AIDS Day while listening to 
a presentation at his primary school in Cambodia on health and HIV/AIDS. 
 Peace Corps 
 77
PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
76
financial monitoring and construct a framework 
for comparable expenditure datasets between 
the two organizations. With the inception of the 
Global Fund New Funding Model, these efforts 
have been concretized through a minimum 
dataset capturing financial data from both the 
Global Fund and PEPFAR within the year. Over 
the past 18 months, PEPFAR has dramatically 
increased its engagement with the Global Fund 
Secretariat at all levels.
The U.S. government and the Global Fund 
are committed to controlling HIV, TB, and 
malaria through a shared approach. Practically 
speaking, this means aligning ourselves to do 
the right things, in the right places, right now. It 
requires a special focus on key and vulnerable 
populations, with both the U.S. government 
and the Global Fund stepping up to jointly lead 
efforts that target geographic areas and popu-
lations with the greatest burden, including 
adolescent girls and young women. Together, 
we are also leveraging the comparative advan-
tage of each organization. For example, we are 
efforts with those of other donors and stake-
holders to produce routine and comparable 
spending data that empower more informed 
planning and country-driven decision making. 
This approach facilitates the identification of 
positive and negative outliers for expanding 
program innovation and corrective actions 
for program improvement. This is an ongoing 
process and PEPFAR is now completing detailed 
analyses quarterly. 
The analysis of site-level results, the cost of 
achieving those results, and the quality of the 
results are essential to identifying the sites with 
the most efficient programs. The best practices 
of the most efficient programs can then be 
scaled up and replicated to improve all sites.
Coordination with Multilaterals 
As part of a broader collaborative strategy 
to improve coordination between the Global 
Fund and PEPFAR, we have been working with 
the Global Fund since early 2012 to harmonize 
ensuring an integrated HIV response through 
PEPFAR’s direct support for the provision of 
technical care and treatment services, and the 
Global Fund using its bulk pricing and pur-
chasing power to procure key commodities, 
including test kits and lifesaving medicines.
We have enhanced coordination to support 
the development and success of national 
health strategies and national strategic plans 
for impact. The U.S. government has been 
actively involved with the Global Fund’s grant 
development process, most notably through 
active engagement with country-level multi-
stakeholder partnerships, to ensure that they 
develop technically sound funding requests 
that complement U.S. government programs. 
PEPFAR has also invited the Global Fund and 
other external stakeholders to attend and 
provide input at in-person PEPFAR Country 
Operational Plan reviews. In addition, PEPFAR 
has seconded personnel to the Global Fund 
headquarters to enhance communication and 
collaboration.  
To improve program implementation, we 
continue to communicate weekly at the head-
quarters level to discuss strategy and program 
alignment. We have instituted headquarters-to-
headquarters meetings to update and analyze 
progress through core joint-investment coun-
tries multiple times per year. In addition, the 
Global Fund’s Geneva-based Fund Portfolio 
Managers meet with PEPFAR in-country teams 
during each of the former’s monthly country 
visits. For example, in Tanzania, these regular 
monthly meetings have led to greater program 
alignment between PEPFAR and the Global 
Fund, and enhanced the quality of HIV service 
provision and early detection of and rapid 
response to grant implementation bottlenecks. 
In Haiti, PEPFAR country teams and the Global 
Fund have worked together to map all ART 
sites, giving a full picture of the geographic 
locations where implementing partners are 
present. In Mozambique, PEPFAR and other 
partners have worked with the Global Fund to 
produce epidemic models that illustrate the 
impact of treatment scale-up under various 
funding scenarios, which are used to inform 
decision making during the Global Fund’s grant 
process. These are a few of the many examples 
of the ongoing collaboration and coordina-
tion between PEPFAR and the Global Fund to 
improve program implementation and health 
outcomes.
PEPFAR and the Global Fund are each maxi-
mizing our use of data to drive decision 
making, and sharing what we learn. Through 
site-level monitoring, PEPFAR’s country teams 
have employed the SIMS to increase the 
impact of PEPFAR programs by monitoring the 
quality of support at the site level (e.g., health 
facility, ward, district, etc.). The data collected 
through SIMS will be made publically available, 
enabling the Global Fund and other partners 
to best utilize resources in a complementary 
manner.   
From the country perspective, host govern-
ments are working to better understand how 
donor resources—from PEPFAR, the Global 
Fund, and other sources—are matched with 
local resources and translate to the delivery 
of HIV services and support. Standard interna-
tional tracking tools that are available include 
the National AIDS Spending Assessment 
(NASA), developed by UNAIDS, and the National 
Health Accounts (NHA)/System of Health 
Accounts (SHA), developed by WHO. 
In 2015, PEPFAR worked with UNAIDS to provide 
data to inform the global resource needs esti-
mates in the Global AIDS Report. PEPFAR also 
is working with the Global Fund, World Bank, 
UNAIDS, WHO, and The Bill & Melinda Gates 
Foundation to identify countries to support 
joint reporting of HIV/AIDS expenditures.
Expenditure Analysis (EA)
The PEPFAR Expenditure Analysis (EA) Initiative 
was institutionalized in 2012. EA is an important 
tool for better understanding where resources 
are going and what outputs are produced by 
these investments. In 2014, PEPFAR expanded the 
EA to include all countries; results were used as 
part of the evidence-based budgeting process in 
2015 for COP development. In the fall of 2015, the 
From left: Executive Director of the Global Fund Mark Dybul, Michel Sidibe, Executive Director of UNAIDS, Filipe Jacinto Nyusi, 
 
President of Mozambique, Amb. Deborah Birx, Nazira Abdula, Minister of Health, Mozambique. 
UNAIDS
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
79
78
U.S. President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief
Teams have also used the data to identify data 
quality gaps. When spending is linked with 
results, this has highlighted potential data 
quality issues. For example, when the team 
reviewed the data and found one partner was 
an outlier with high spend per beneficiary, it 
was then determined that the reason for the 
result was that the partner had not appropri-
ately reported its results. This did not come to 
light until the results were linked to spending 
and partner performance did not align with the 
team’s expectations.
PEPFAR also shared its data with host govern-
ments and multilateral partners to improve 
coordination of resource planning and improve 
reporting. The expenditure data are collected 
once by partners and are used for internal 
performance monitoring, but also provide high-
quality and consistent data to the National 
AIDS Spending Assessments and the National 
Health Accounts. PEPFAR EA data benefit not 
only the PEPFAR program to improve efficiency, 
but also the global community in its resource 
planning.
Import Duties and Internal Taxes 
Imposed on Commodities
An important part of the program efficiency 
gains has been optimizing the costs of com-
modities; one aspect of this is ensuring that 
commodities do not have internal import 
taxes imposed. By and large, PEPFAR-procured 
commodities are imported tax-free in coun-
tries where PEPFAR is supporting the national 
HIV response, but in certain cases, commodi-
ties are taxed. In such situations, the PEPFAR 
country teams work with partner governments 
to reverse taxation charges and avoid future 
import duties. If import or internal taxes are 
imposed and not reimbursed, the Department 
of State would comply with any related and 
applicable legal restrictions on future assis-
tance to that country.
PEPFAR EA Initiative continued its phased expan-
sion to include expenditures related to central 
initiatives that accelerate the delivery of priority 
HIV/AIDS interventions, such as VMMC and Key 
Populations Fund (Appendix S).  
Table 5 outlines the total expenditures 
reported by countries in core intervention 
areas, and Table 6 presents the unit expen-
diture observed for achieving results in core 
intervention areas. Unit expenditure does not 
equal unit cost; rather, it represents the cost 
to PEPFAR to deliver services and support to 
reported beneficiaries. In practice, the true 
unit cost is higher when considering all the 
sources of support that typically contribute to 
implementation of national HIV programs (e.g., 
Global Fund, host country government). Though 
not the full unit cost, these data provide an 
evidence base for building budgets and specifi-
cally identifying areas for increased technical 
and productive efficiencies.
Many factors contribute to the range of the 
unit expenditure across countries, such as the 
extent of PEPFAR’s support and the number of 
beneficiaries reached. From a global perspec-
tive, PEPFAR reviews the range to gain a better 
understanding of the potential variance in 
the type of support provided for certain inter-
ventions. For example, the PEPFAR spend per 
person on treatment is $33 and $324 in South 
Africa and Côte d’Ivoire, respectively. In South 
Africa, the government of South Africa finances 
most of the HIV/AIDS effort; therefore, PEPFAR’s 
support can be leveraged to benefit more indi-
viduals on treatment. 
PEPFAR has used EA data to identify potential 
efficiencies and improve portfolio manage-
ment. During the annual COP process, data 
are used to validate proposed budgets and 
evaluate the past year’s performance. For 
example, one country team compared their 
past year’s budget estimate with their per-
formance and found that the PEPFAR spend 
per person reached was higher than what 
was budgeted for the proposed targets. The 
team was able to evaluate the reasons for the 
variance and reprogram accordingly. 
Table 5. Total Report PEPFAR Expenditures by Program Area
Country
Facility 
Based Care, 
Treatment 
and 
Support
Community 
Based Care, 
Treatment 
and Support
PMTCT
VMMC
HTC
Lab
OVC
General 
Population 
Prevention 
–  
GP- PREV
Key 
Population 
Prevention 
- 
persons 
who inject 
drugs 
- 
KP-PWID
Key 
Population 
Prevention 
- 
female sex 
workers 
- 
KP-FSW
Key 
Population 
Prevention 
- 
men who have 
sex with men and 
transgender 
- 
KP-MSMTG
Strategic 
Information
Total
Angola
$0.00 
$1.40 
$1.70 
$0.00 
$2.30 
$0.60 
$0.00 
$2.00 
$0.00 
$1.90 
$0.40 
$0.50 
$10.80 
Botswana
$13.60 
$0.70 
$0.80 
$4.50 
$5.50 
$5.10 
$4.50 
$3.90 
$0.00 
$0.30 
$0.10 
$4.60 
$43.60 
Burma
$2.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.10 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.20 
$0.03 
$0.70 
$0.70 
$0.00 
$3.73 
Burundi
$1.20 
$0.40 
$6.50 
$0.06 
$1.50 
$0.90 
$0.08 
$0.40 
$0.00 
$0.10 
$0.00 
$0.10 
$11.24 
Cambodia
$1.30 
$1.80 
$0.30 
$0.00 
$0.90 
$0.60 
$0.30 
$0.70 
$0.20 
$1.50 
$1.40 
$0.20 
$9.20 
Cameroon
$1.20 
$0.01 
$7.00 
$0.00 
$0.30 
$3.00 
$0.20 
$0.10 
$0.00 
$0.60 
$0.50 
$1.70 
$14.61 
Cote d’Ivoire
$37.00 
$6.60 
$11.30 
$0.00 
$6.60 
$18.80 
$10.30 
$5.10 
$0.01 
$1.30 
$0.50 
$4.50 
$102.01 
Dominican 
Republic
$1.10 
$0.70 
$1.50 
$0.00 
$0.60 
$1.40 
$0.02 
$0.70 
$0.30 
$1.10 
$1.30 
$2.40 
$11.12 
DRC
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
Ethiopia
$38.10 
$12.80 
$14.40 
$0.40 
$12.80 
$24.80 
$21.20 
$15.40 
$0.00 
$4.90 
$0.00 
$21.60 
$166.40 
Ghana
$0.40 
$1.60 
$0.20 
$0.00 
$1.30 
$1.80 
$0.30 
$0.20 
$0.01 
$1.80 
$1.50 
$0.03 
$9.14 
Guyana
$2.20 
$0.30 
$0.40 
$0.00 
$1.30 
$0.30 
$0.20 
$0.20 
$0.02 
$0.20 
$0.10 
$0.30 
$5.52 
Haiti
$39.90 
$10.50 
$10.60 
$0.00 
$13.70 
$17.50 
$4.20 
$6.40 
$0.00 
$0.50 
$0.30 
$5.80 
$109.40 
India
$3.70 
$0.03 
$0.30 
$0.00 
$0.20 
$1.30 
$0.01 
$2.50 
$0.40 
$1.40 
$0.50 
$6.30 
$16.64 
Indonesia
$0.20 
$0.50 
$0.30 
$0.00 
$0.40 
$0.30 
$0.00 
$1.80 
$0.20 
$1.10 
$0.70 
$2.10 
$7.60 
Kenya
$218.60 
$17.60 
$25.30 
$15.30 
$29.30 
$20.50 
$30.90 
$17.80 
$1.40 
$6.30 
$2.50 
$29.40 
$414.90 
Lesotho
$6.00 
$2.40 
$3.00 
$6.50 
$3.40 
$1.90 
$2.20 
$3.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.70 
$29.10 
Malawi
$11.70 
$4.00 
$8.20 
$10.10 
$4.00 
$6.50 
$3.80 
$7.50 
$0.00 
$0.50 
$0.40 
$7.10 
$63.80 
Mozambique
$113.10 
$18.00 
$35.10 
$25.50 
$18.70 
$14.90 
$16.00 
$13.20 
$1.30 
$2.20 
$0.40 
$9.20 
$267.60 
Namibia
$10.70 
$4.00 
$3.20 
$4.00 
$7.00 
$3.90 
$3.10 
$9.40 
$0.00 
$1.40 
$0.40 
$9.30 
$56.40 
Nigeria
$143.00 
$18.80 
$81.60 
$0.07 
$37.70 
$36.10 
$33.20 
$6.30 
$2.80 
$5.50 
$2.80 
$8.70 
$376.57 
Papua 
New Guinea
$0.60 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.40 
$0.20 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.60 
$0.60 
$0.30 
$2.70 
Rwanda
$44.10 
$1.40 
$5.20 
$1.60 
$9.00 
$14.70 
$10.50 
$1.10 
$0.05 
$0.90 
$0.60 
$1.20 
$90.35 
South Africa
$142.60 
$24.60 
$28.30 
$54.20 
$28.00 
$9.00 
$25.50 
$32.40 
$0.30 
$2.40 
$1.60 
$33.90 
$382.80 
79
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
80
81
Table 5. Total Report PEPFAR Expenditures by Program Area
Country
Facility 
Based Care, 
Treatment 
and 
Support
Community 
Based Care, 
Treatment 
and Support
PMTCT
VMMC
HTC
Lab
OVC
General 
Population 
Prevention 
–  
GP- PREV
Key 
Population 
Prevention 
- 
persons 
who inject 
drugs 
- 
KP-PWID
Key 
Population 
Prevention 
- 
female sex 
workers 
- 
KP-FSW
Key 
Population 
Prevention 
- 
men who have 
sex with men and 
transgender 
- 
KP-MSMTG
Strategic 
Information
Total
South Sudan
$1.30 
$0.30 
$1.70 
$0.00 
$2.40 
$0.40 
$0.00 
$0.20 
$0.01 
$1.10 
$0.00 
$0.10 
$7.51 
Swaziland
$10.00 
$1.90 
$4.60 
$2.80 
$3.10 
$3.10 
$3.40 
$2.60 
$0.00 
$0.40 
$0.40 
$1.60 
$33.90 
Tanzania
$114.50 
$21.60 
$44.30 
$24.50 
$21.20 
$24.50 
$22.20 
$18.70 
$2.20 
$3.00 
$1.20 
$9.70 
$307.60 
Uganda
$121.30 
$10.10 
$18.70 
$29.30 
$13.70 
$32.10 
$21.10 
$6.00 
$0.05 
$1.20 
$0.80 
$11.70 
$266.05 
Ukraine
$1.10 
$0.20 
$0.10 
$0.00 
$1.80 
$0.60 
$0.00 
$0.06 
$1.20 
$0.20 
$0.70 
$2.60 
$8.56 
Vietnam
$22.30 
$1.30 
$1.10 
$0.00 
$3.40 
$5.30 
$0.70 
$0.06 
$1.70 
$1.20 
$0.70 
$4.80 
$42.56 
Zambia
$87.50 
$8.40 
$27.60 
$16.00 
$29.10 
$24.40 
$15.10 
$34.30 
$1.10 
$1.00 
$0.30 
$6.70 
$251.50 
Zimbabwe
$35.20 
$3.80 
$5.70 
$18.00 
$6.10 
$5.30 
$7.10 
$1.60 
$0.00 
$0.10 
$0.00 
$3.70 
$86.60 
Asia Regional Program
China
$0.20 
$0.20 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.10 
$0.07 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.06 
$0.07 
$0.08 
$0.78 
Laos
$0.01 
$0.10 
$0.02 
$0.00 
$0.80 
$0.01 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.01 
$0.03 
$0.03 
$1.01 
Thailand
$0.40 
$0.70 
$0.10 
$0.00 
$3.70 
$0.05 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.01 
$0.03 
$0.10 
$0.30 
$5.39 
Caribbean Regional Program
Antigua and 
Barbuda
$0.03 
$0.04 
$0.00 
$0.03 
$0.00 
$0.10 
$0.00 
$0.10 
$0.00 
$0.20 
$0.10 
$0.40 
$1.01 
Bahamas
$0.05 
$0.00 
$0.03 
$0.00 
$0.08 
$0.20 
$0.00 
$0.40 
$0.00 
$0.10 
$0.20 
$0.20 
$1.26 
Barbados
$0.04 
$0.03 
$0.01 
$0.00 
$0.07 
$0.20 
$0.01 
$0.40 
$0.00 
$0.20 
$0.20 
$0.06 
$1.21 
Belize
$0.50 
$0.07 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.20 
$0.03 
$0.00 
$0.07 
$0.00 
$0.10 
$0.20 
$0.20 
$1.37 
Dominica
$0.10 
$0.02 
$0.01 
$0.00 
$0.04 
$0.10 
$0.01 
$0.10 
$0.00 
$0.08 
$0.07 
$0.10 
$0.62 
Grenada
$0.01 
$0.01 
$0.01 
$0.00 
$0.01 
$0.10 
$0.01 
$0.07 
$0.00 
$0.08 
$0.07 
$0.04 
$0.40 
Jamaica
$1.80 
$0.20 
$0.10 
$0.00 
$0.40 
$0.20 
$0.02 
$0.70 
$0.00 
$0.80 
$1.20 
$0.04 
$5.46 
Saint Kitts 
and Nevis
$0.10 
$0.02 
$0.01 
$0.00 
$0.01 
$0.10 
$0.01 
$0.06 
$0.00 
$0.01 
$0.01 
$0.04 
$0.36 
Saint Lucia
$0.10 
$0.00 
$0.01 
$0.00 
$0.04 
$0.30 
$0.01 
$0.06 
$0.00 
$0.01 
$0.01 
$0.01 
$0.54 
Saint Vincent
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
Table 5. Total Report PEPFAR Expenditures by Program Area
Country
Facility 
Based Care, 
Treatment 
and 
Support
Community 
Based Care, 
Treatment 
and Support
PMTCT
VMMC
HTC
Lab
OVC
General 
Population 
Prevention 
–  
GP- PREV
Key 
Population 
Prevention 
- 
persons 
who inject 
drugs 
- 
KP-PWID
Key 
Population 
Prevention 
- 
female sex 
workers 
- 
KP-FSW
Key 
Population 
Prevention 
- 
men who have sex 
with men and trans-
gender 
- 
KP-MSMTG
Strategic 
Information
Total
Suriname
$0.04 
$0.00 
$0.01 
$0.00 
$0.03 
$0.10 
$0.05 
$0.30 
$0.00 
$0.07 
$0.06 
$0.09 
$0.75 
Trinidad and 
Tobago
$0.10 
$0.09 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.03 
$0.10 
$0.02 
$0.20 
$0.00 
$0.20 
$0.30 
$0.50 
$1.54 
Central America Regional Program
Costa Rica
$0.04 
$0.02 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.04 
$0.00 
$0.05 
$0.00 
$0.10 
$0.20 
$0.10 
$0.55 
El Salvador
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
Guatemala
$0.80 
$0.07 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.20 
$0.20 
$0.00 
$0.10 
$0.02 
$0.40 
$0.70 
$0.30 
$2.79 
Honduras
$0.70 
$0.00 
$0.20 
$0.00 
$0.60 
$0.20 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.50 
$0.30 
$2.50 
Nicaragua
$0.10 
$0.06 
$0.01 
$0.00 
$0.20 
$0.20 
$0.00 
$0.08 
$0.00 
$0.20 
$0.80 
$0.20 
$1.85 
Panama
$0.40 
$0.07 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.07 
$0.20 
$0.00 
$0.06 
$0.00 
$0.30 
$0.40 
$0.20 
$1.70 
Central Asia Regional Program
Kazakhstan
$0.30 
$0.10 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.20 
$0.20 
$0.00 
$0.01 
$0.30 
$0.05 
$0.07 
$0.40 
$1.63 
Kyrgyzstan
$0.40 
$0.30 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.40 
$0.20 
$0.00 
$0.07 
$0.60 
$0.20 
$0.10 
$0.40 
$2.67 
Tajikistan
$0.30 
$0.20 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.20 
$0.20 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.80 
$0.40 
$0.10 
$0.40 
$2.60 
Turkmenistan
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
Uzbekistan
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.10 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.10 
TOTAL   
$1,232.02 
$178.04 
$349.50 
$212.86 
$273.18 
$282.90 
$236.23 
$196.65 
$15.12 
$49.00 
$26.89 
$195.22 
$3,247.60 
South Africa
$142.60 
$24.60 
$28.30 
$54.20 
$28.00 
$9.00 
$25.50 
$32.40 
$0.30 
$2.40 
$1.60 
$33.90 
$382.80 
Table 5 continued
Table 5 continued
80
81
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
83
82
Table 6. PEPFAR Unit Expenditure for Core Interventions
Country
Adult 
ART
Pediatric  
ART
Pregnant 
Woman 
Tested
Pregnant  
Woman 
on 
ARV
HTC
VMMC
OVC
General 
Population 
Prevention 
–  
GP- PREV
Key 
Population 
Prevention 
- 
persons 
who inject 
drugs 
- 
KP-PWID
Key 
Population 
Prevention 
- 
female sex 
workers 
- 
KP-FSW
Key 
Population 
Prevention 
- 
men who 
have sex 
with men 
and trans-
gender 
- 
KP-MSMTG
Cameroon
n/a
n/a
$2 
$409 
$12 
n/a
$350 
$11 
n/a
$123 
$254 
Cote d’Ivoire
$324 
$328 
$4 
$188 
$5 
n/a
$48 
$17 
n/a
$38 
$34 
DRC
$305 
$356 
$9 
$781 
$9 
n/a
$116 
$6 
n/a
$29 
$135 
Ethiopia
$211 
$221 
$3 
$655 
$4 
$46 
$47 
$43 
n/a
$72 
n/a
Haiti
$550 
$621 
$12 
$868 
$12 
n/a
$72 
$143 
n/a
$41 
$93 
Kenya
$279 
$327 
$4 
$161 
$4 
$61 
$41 
$15 
$101 
$34 
$202 
Lesotho
$34 
$34 
$14 
$59 
$9 
$147 
$25 
$39 
n/a
n/a
n/a
Malawi
$25 
$39 
$2 
$50 
$3 
$130 
$12 
$17 
n/a
$42 
$245 
Mozambique
$228 
$247 
$3 
$223 
$9 
$134 
$48 
$52 
$2,387 
$78 
$1,189 
Nigeria
$209 
$224 
$8 
$403 
$6 
n/a
$42 
$28 
$153 
$52 
$72 
Rwanda
$437 
$458 
$4 
$189 
$4 
$18 
$73 
$20 
n/a
$52 
$461 
South Africa
$33 
$39 
$4 
$39 
$4 
$160 
$64 
$292 
$111 
$154 
$59 
South Sudan
$135 
$135 
$51 
$497 
$54 
n/a
n/a
$2 
n/a
$594 
n/a
Swaziland
$44 
$101 
$18 
$270 
$13 
$227 
$53 
$25 
n/a
$445 
$1,144 
Tanzania
$213 
$221 
$4 
$340 
$4 
$40 
$56 
$17 
$191 
$42 
$82 
Uganda
$181 
$189 
$3 
$84 
$2 
$30 
$47 
$3 
n/a
$16 
n/a
Zambia
$173 
$187 
$7 
$114 
$20 
$59 
$19 
$11 
$37,888 
$100 
$2,478 
Zimbabwe
$46 
$46 
$2 
$29 
$14 
$108 
$42 
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
A family in Mozambique.
Sarah Day Smith/PEPFAR 
APPENDIX Q: Engaging Partner 
Governments and Civil Society
The 22 Partnership Frameworks (PFs) estab-
lished between PEPFAR and its partner 
countries during Phase II marked the shift 
from an emergency response to a sustainable 
response. This initiated a new level of consul-
tation with partner countries that prioritized 
country-led management, coordination, and 
implementation, as well as increased financing 
of the national HIV/AIDS response where it was 
appropriate, while sustaining programmatic 
quality and coverage goals.  
Several PFs expired between 2012 and 2014, 
which provided valuable lessons. These 
lessons included the importance of focusing 
on key investments required to accelerate 
and sustain gains for epidemic control and 
the consequences of not negotiating PFs with 
entities such as Ministries of Finance. Another 
lesson learned was the impact of a lack of data 
use and transparency in the decision making 
process for resource allocation. There were 
also positive lessons from the PFs, including 
recognizing the value of a high-level, bilateral 
consultation to resolve disagreement, and of 
candid dialogue, transparency, and rewarding 
good governance. 
Developing a shared responsibility through 
ongoing diplomatic and programmatic rela-
tions with host country governments is critical 
to reaching the 90-90-90 goals and sustained 
HIV epidemic control. In doing so, governments 
will need to demonstrate political will and 
mobilize resources to establish and effectively 
implement fundamental policy and program-
matic reforms to increase access to lifesaving 
ARV medications. This specifically includes 
adopting WHO’s Test and START guidelines, 
improving efficiencies in the delivery of HIV 
care and treatment services within the existing 
HIV care system, specifically prescriptive and 
82
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
84
85
Bank. PEPFAR and Treasury staff are creating 
HIV expenditure committees in partnership 
with ministries of finance to better coordinate 
all sources of funding. The goal is to increase 
efficiency, increase domestic resources, and 
deploy those domestic resources in the most 
effective and coordinated manner. 
The April 2015 roundtable marked the first 
of many important discussions—among 
donors, between donors and partner country 
governments, and within partner country gov-
ernments—so that practical steps can be taken 
to deliver on the promise of a healthier and 
more prosperous future for the people of sub-
Saharan Africa and around the globe. 
PEPFAR, in collaboration with UNAIDS, recently 
initiated a Sustainability Working Group with 
the Global Fund and World Bank. Each institu-
tion has put sustainability front and center, 
given not only the flat funding environ-
ment, but also the increased capacities and 
movement toward epidemic control in many 
mid-level income countries. The group’s objec-
tive is to foster a common understanding of 
how each institution approaches sustainability 
within its investments. The working group 
will focus initially in three to four countries 
to mutually influence progress on identified 
needed dimensions (e.g., health insurance as 
part of sustainable domestic resource mobili-
zation) to ensure sustained epidemic control.
PEPFAR is also opening its data to drive 
program efficiency, transparency, coordina-
tion, and mutual accountability. In 2015, PEPFAR 
released a range of additional data on the 
PEPFAR Dashboards, including for the first time 
PEPFAR procurement transaction data from 
the U.S. Agency for International Development 
Supply Chain Management System (SCMS). 
These data provides a more complete picture 
of global spending on HIV/AIDS medical com-
modities and allows all stakeholders to make 
data-driven decisions. The SCMS dataset is 
particularly valuable for understanding ranges 
and trends in pricing for specific commodities, 
as well as trends in the types of commodities 
that have been delivered to various countries.
diagnostic practices at the clinic level. These 
reforms will require both systematic and insti-
tutional reforms within the national human 
resource environment regarding the types and 
roles of community health care workers for 
HIV testing and drug dispensing, as well as the 
mobilization of additional domestic resources 
to address the current funding gaps in the 
drug supply. PEPFAR has extensive experience 
working with host governments to develop 
and implement these types of reforms. Our 
engagement will result in stronger government-
to-government relations to enhance shared 
responsibilities toward epidemic control.
Given the lessons learned from the PFs and the 
current budget environment, PEPFAR is part-
nering with the U.S. Department of the Treasury 
to leverage its bilateral economic dialogue with 
finance ministries, deploy Department of the 
Treasury Technical Assistance advisors to work 
with partner finance ministries, and access 
the Department of the Treasury’s expertise in 
economic and fiscal analysis. To support the 
Treasury engagement, PEPFAR will provide 
funding for two headquarters staff and for 
full-time Office of Technical Assistance (OTA) 
advisors in up to six countries, plus addi-
tional short-term staff. Treasury will work with 
finance ministries to channel new funding 
commitments into productive investments and 
support the longer-term transition to country 
management and financing of HIV treatment. 
The agreement with Treasury is flexible and will 
enable PEPFAR and Treasury to reorient efforts 
both within countries and between countries 
as needs change. 
In April 2015, PEPFAR and the U.S. Department 
of the Treasury co-hosted a roundtable with 
African finance ministers and other interna-
tional partners during the World Bank/IMF 
Spring Meetings in Washington, D.C., to discuss 
the economic and fiscal challenges of the HIV/
AIDS epidemic. Participants in the roundtable 
included: senior Finance Ministry represen-
tatives from Malawi, Mozambique, Uganda, 
and Zambia, along with senior representa-
tives from UNAIDS, the Global Fund, the IMF, 
the World Bank, and the African Development 
APPENDIX R: Engaging 
Faith-Based, Locally Based, 
and Minority Partners
The significant contributions of academic insti-
tutions, FBOs, and other stakeholders to the 
global response to HIV/AIDS are essential to 
reaching an AIDS-free generation. The domestic 
and global HIV/AIDS communities are working 
together in a focused, coordinated, data-driven 
manner (focusing on doing the right things, in 
the right places, right now) to achieve epidemic 
control. 
FBOs
FBOs are among our central partners in the 
development of policies guiding PEPFAR, as 
well as the delivery of care and treatment 
services. In April 2015, PEPFAR, in cooperation 
with academic institutions, brought together 
more than 50 religious and FBO leaders from 
Kenya, Rwanda, Uganda, and Tanzania to 
discuss how to strategically work together in 
the response to HIV. Participants discussed 
a number of issues, including how to best 
serve key and vulnerable populations, combat 
GBV, and ensure the health and well-being 
of OVC, including adolescent girls and young 
women. At the conclusion of the consultation, 
participants drafted 10 recommendations on 
how to maximize the capacities of FBOs in 
a coordinated, sustained way (Table 7). The 
recommendations focus on expanding the 
availability of data, increased accountability, 
and greater collaboration between FBOs and 
other stakeholders, including global partners. 
At the United Nations General Assembly 
meeting in September 2015, PEPFAR and 
UNAIDS launched a two-year, $4 million ini-
tiative, informed by the report “Building on 
Firm Foundations: The 2015 Consultation on 
Strengthening Partnerships Between Faith-
Based Organizations and PEPFAR to Build 
Capacity for Sustained Responses to HIV/AIDS.” 
The first phase of the initiative will strengthen 
partnerships with FBOs in up to five countries 
across five focus areas: 
1. Collect, analyze, and disseminate data
on health care services provided by FBOs.
2. Address stigma and discrimination in
communities and health care settings.
3. Demand creation and retention in care;
build capacity for joint action between
communities of people living with HIV
and FBOs.
4. Strengthen HIV and AIDS-related
service provision for networks of faith-
based health service providers to reach
the most marginalized populations with
His Grace Bishop Paul Yowakim of Coptic Hospital in Nairobi, Kenya 
converses with Fr. Mena Attwa at PEPFAR-supported faith-based 
consultation.
Rev. Canon Gideon Byamugisha shares a moment with community 
members at PEPFAR-supported faith-based consultation in Kenya.
Veronica Davison/PEPFAR
Veronica Davison/PEPFAR
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
86
87
comprehensive, equitable HIV testing, 
prevention, and treatment services.
5. Bolster FBO leadership and advocacy 
for the UNAIDS Fast-Track approach and 
a sustained response to end the global 
AIDS epidemic by 2030.
United States Minority Serving 
Institutions (MSI)
United States Minority Serving Institutions, 
including Historically Black Colleges and 
Universities (HBCUs), bring particular strength 
and expertise in the delivery of HIV pre-
vention, care, and treatment services in 
resource-limited environments and to vulner-
able populations. In 2015 and early 2016, the 
U.S. Global AIDS Coordinator Ambassador Birx 
directly engaged with students, faculty, and 
administrators of Spelman College, Morehouse 
College, Meharry Medical College, and Charles 
R. Drew University of Medicine and Science, to 
strengthen our collaborative partnerships.
Table 7.  Ten Recommendations Made by FBO Leaders  
at the April 2015 Consultation
1. Leverage the trust that has developed between FBOs and local 
communities to build strong, inclusive, integrated HIV prevention 
efforts. 
2. Develop the capacity for FBOs to advocate for improved health care 
for all citizens and hold governments accountable. 
3. Maximize the existing organizational infrastructure of faith-based 
health systems to reach communities impacted by HIV. 
4. Strengthen the capacity of FBOs to develop systems and tools for 
gathering, sharing and utilizing data for decision making and advocacy.  
5. Actively solicit community input and investment into FBO 
administration and programming. 
6. Develop mechanisms to support the organizational development of 
FBOs. 
7. Increase FBOs’ capacities to develop and implement effective 
programs and systems. 
8. Broaden participation among diverse FBOs. 
9.  Ensure strong monitoring and evaluation for all FBO programs. 
10. Strengthen leadership development initiatives to better equip the 
next generation of leaders. 
Scientific Advisory Board (SAB) 
Ambassador Birx announced new members 
of PEPFAR’s Scientific Advisory Board in 2015 
in order to ensure broader and more diverse 
engagement with scientific communities across 
multiple sectors (Table 8). In March 2015, 
PEPFAR SAB’s charter was renewed. 
New members of the Scientific Advisory 
Board (SAB) include experts affiliated 
with HBCUs, such as Dr. Celia Maxwell of 
Howard University and Dr. Lejeune Lockett 
of Charles Drew University of Medicine and 
Science, and the faith community, such as 
Reverend Edwin Sanders of the Metropolitan 
Interdenominational Church of Nashville and 
Dr. Nyambura Njoroge of the World Council of 
Churches. The Board issued recommendations 
this year in two broad critical areas for PEPFAR: 
(1) Recommendations for use of Pre-Exposure 
Prophylaxis (PrEP) for all Populations, and (2) 
Recommendations Regarding Provision of ART 
for all Persons Living with HIV (Test and START). 
For further information, please see: http://
www.pepfar.gov/sab/
APPENDIX S: Engaging 
International and 
Nongovernmental Partners
In 2015, PEPFAR launched and/or implemented 
several initiatives that focused on bolstering 
the role of new partners and civil society 
organizations—core leaders in the HIV/AIDS 
response and in protecting human rights 
so that all people have access to HIV/AIDS 
services without the fear of stigma and facing 
discrimination.
• Inclusive PEPFAR Planning Process: 
PEPFAR committed to engaging, empow-
ering, and supporting civil society at 
every step of the Country and Regional 
Operational planning process in 2015. 
All PEPFAR countries were directed to 
actively involve civil society throughout 
the development of their annual plans. 
During the COP 2015 in-person reviews, 
each country was required to invite 
members of civil society, host country 
governments, multilaterals, and other 
stakeholders to participate in discus-
sions with Ambassador Birx around 
our annual PEPFAR planning process. 
Additionally, in November 2015, PEPFAR 
posted its draft 2016 COP/ROP Guidance 
online to collect feedback from all 
stakeholders, including civil society 
organizations. The comments directly 
informed the final guidance, posted 
online on World AIDS Day 2015. 
• Gender and Sexual Diversity Trainings: 
PEPFAR headquarters staff and Health 
Policy Project31 staff together trained 
more than 1,200 PEPFAR staff and more 
than 1,000 of implementing partner staff 
on the importance of understanding the 
impact of gender on the HIV epidemic, 
especially high-burden sexual minorities. 
Many PEPFAR programs operate in coun-
tries where gender and sexual minorities 
face increasing violence, legal sanctions, 
and a disproportionate burden of HIV, 
and are further imperiled under hostile 
social and political conditions, making 
our efforts to scale up HIV programs 
increasingly difficult. To ensure that 
PEPFAR and partner staff understand 
existing constructs around gender and 
sexual diversity, the PEPFAR Gender and 
Sexual Diversity Training was conducted 
in 39 PEPFAR countries. 
• PEPFAR’s Local Capacity Initiative 
(LCI): LCI provides funding to local 
nongovernmental organizations in 14 
PEPFAR countries to support and build 
their capacity to address the HIV/AIDS 
epidemic through legal and policy 
advocacy, stigma and discrimination 
reduction, and planning and implemen-
tation of country programs. In November 
2015, LCI held an African Advocacy 
31 
 The Health Policy Project is a partner of USAID that works to strengthen policy, 
advocacy, governance, and finance for strategic, equitable, and sustainable health 
programming.
Table 8. Members of the PEPFAR Scientific Advisory Board
Name
Institution
Quarraisha Abdool 
Karim
University of KwaZulu-Natal; Centre for the 
AIDS Programme of Research in South Africa 
(CAPRISA); Columbia University
Judith Auerbach
University of California, San Francisco, School 
of Medicine
Peter Berman 
Harvard University School of Public Health
Connie Celum
University of Washington, School of Medicine
Judith Currier
University of California, Los Angeles, School 
of Medicine
Carlos del Rio 
Emory University
Sofia Gruskin 
University of Southern California
Mark Harrington 
Treatment Action Group (TAG)
Mark Heywood 
Section 27
Musimbi Kanyoro
Global Fund for Women
Etienne Karita 
Rwanda Zambia HIV Research Group, Project 
San Francisco
Jennifer Kates 
Kaiser Family Foundation
Lejeune Lockett
Charles Drew University of Medicine and 
Science
Ruth Macklin
Yeshiva University
Celia Maxwell
Howard University
Kenneth Mayer
Fenway Institute; Harvard University; Beth 
Israel Deaconess Medical Center
Jesse Milan 
Altarum Institute
Angela Mushavi
Ministry of Health and Child Welfare, 
Zimbabwe
Christine Nabiryo
Transforming Communities: A Village at a 
Time
Nyambura Njoroge
Ecumenical HIV and AIDS Initiatives and 
Advocacy, World Council of Churches
Jean Pape
Weill Medical Cornell College; GHESKIO
David Peters 
Johns Hopkins University
Edwin Sanders 
Metropolitan Interdenominational Church of 
Nashville
Fredrick Sawe 
Kenya Medical Research Institute/Walter 
Reed Project
Albert Siemens 
FHI Foundation
Carole Treston
Association of Nurses in AIDS Care
Mitchell Warren
AVAC: Global Advocacy for HIV Prevention
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
88
89
global and regional civil society networks 
as strong partners in the delivery of HIV 
services and champions of human rights. 
This investment will help to bring often 
marginalized populations out of the 
shadows and into prevention services and 
health care clinics. As co-chairs of the 
RCNF Replenishment, UNAIDS and PEPFAR 
will help ensure access to HIV prevention, 
treatment, and care services through the 
partnership of the networks with local 
organizations to achieve the UNAIDS 
90-90-90 goals and Fast-Track strategy. 
The RCNF is especially important to sup-
porting efforts aimed at key populations 
that include MSM (such as through the 
Global Forum on MSM & HIV), sex workers, 
PWID, and all people living with HIV—
from young people who have lived with 
HIV since birth to older men and women 
who have now survived for more than a 
decade due to the success of treatment. 
workshop that was designed to bring 
together African LCI grantees to share 
their advocacy experiences and provide 
a deeper understanding to civil society 
organizations and others of the role of 
advocacy, appropriate advocacy interven-
tions, and how to implement advocacy 
activities to improve the quality and 
uptake of HIV/AIDS services for vulner-
able and key populations. The meeting 
facilitated south-to-south exchanges of 
information and best practices, and was 
an opportunity for LCI grantees to further 
develop skills in essential advocacy 
competencies, as well as share lessons 
learned and best practices from imple-
mentation of LCI activities.  
• Robert Carr Civil Society Network Fund: 
In September 2015, PEPFAR announced 
that it will make a $10 million contri-
bution to the Robert Carr Civil Society 
Networks Fund (RCNF) over the next three 
years to support and build the capacity of 
Adolescents advocating for sexual abuse victims during a “Shout the Silence” forum in Kenya.
Eric Onyiego/USAID 
• Investing in Key Populations: PEPFAR 
ensures countries are targeting funds 
for expanding HIV services delivery and 
technical assistance to key popula-
tions. PEPFAR will continue to do so 
through implementing targeted initia-
tives for key populations, including the 
Key Populations Challenge Fund, a $33 
million program designed to stimulate a 
greater programmatic response for and 
commitment to key populations. 
• Partnership with the Elton John 
Foundation: In November 2015, PEPFAR 
and the Elton John AIDS Foundation 
(EJAF) announced the launch of a $10 
million partnership to provide grants to 
organizations working to meet the HIV-
related needs of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual 
and Transgender (LGBT) people, with 
an initial focus on sub-Saharan Africa. 
The new partnership will see EJAF 
and PEPFAR each invest $5 million to 
improve access to HIV services for LGBT 
people and help to create nonstigma-
tizing environments by working with 
community leaders, civil society, and 
service providers, and targeting projects 
that support LGBT people within coun-
tries with a high HIV burden.  
APPENDIX T: Addressing 
the Co-Infections and 
Co-Morbidities of HIV/AIDS
TB-HIV Co-infection
TB is the leading cause of death among 
people living with HIV in sub-Saharan Africa, 
accounting for more than 1,000 lives lost each 
day. In 2014, an estimated 9.6 million people 
developed TB, of whom 1.2 million were people 
living with HIV; 1.5 million people died from 
TB, of whom 390,000 (26 percent) people 
living with HIV. By the end of 2014, despite a 
37 percent reduction in TB-related mortality 
among people living with HIV compared with 
2004 (570,000 deaths), TB/HIV still accounts 
for one-third of the estimated 1.2 million AIDS 
deaths among people living with HIV. For a 
person living with HIV, ART reduces the risk of 
developing TB by around 65 percent, and when 
combined with isoniazid preventive treatment, 
this prevention impact increases to around 90 
percent. Additionally, ART reduces the mortality 
for people living with HIV who develop TB by 
approximately 50 percent. PEPFAR can have 
the biggest impact on the HIV/TB epidemic by 
adopting the new WHO treatment guidelines 
and beginning HIV treatment immediately upon 
diagnosis and preventing TB.
Given this enormous human toll, PEPFAR con-
tinues to address the deadly links between 
TB and HIV as a top policy and program-
matic priority. PEPFAR, in alignment with 
the goals of the National Action Plan for 
Combating Multidrug-Resistant Tuberculosis 
(National Action Plan),32 aims to dramati-
cally reduce the impact of HIV-associated TB 
through a combination of expanded access 
to early HIV diagnosis and treatment, preven-
tive therapy with isoniazid, infection control 
activities, and early identification and treat-
ment of TB. Implementation of the National 
32 
 The White House. (2015). National Action Plan for Combating Multidrug-Resistant 
Tuberculosis. Available at: https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/
ostp/national_action_plan_for_tuberculosis_20151204_final.pdf
Demonstration by men who have sex with men in Mozambique
PSI
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
90
91
joint program planning and funding for HIV, TB, 
and HIV-associated TB. Stakeholders engaged in 
HIV and TB have jointly developed programs.
Across the cascade of TB/HIV services, PEPFAR-
supported programs reflect the following 
priorities: 
• Achieve 90-90-90 goals, which will 
have a significant impact on the TB 
epidemic (ART is the most powerful HIV-
associated TB prevention measure).
• Ensure all patients with presumptive TB 
or actual TB receive HIV testing.
• Provide immediate access to ART for 
patients with TB who are infected with 
HIV, with the goal of providing universal 
(100 percent) ART coverage among HIV-
infected TB patients. 
• Support integration of TB/HIV care 
and treatment to ensure linkage and 
retention.
• Implement, track, and report on TB 
screening among people living with HIV, 
ensure diagnostic follow-up for people 
living with HIV with presumptive TB and 
TB treatment for people living with HIV 
with TB disease, and provide isoniazid 
preventive therapy for people living 
with HIV who do not have active TB 
disease. 
• Support TB infection control measures 
to prevent transmission in health care 
and community settings.
• Expand interventions, including Xpert 
MTB/RIF assay, to improve early diag-
nosis and treatment of TB among 
people living with HIV. 
• Strengthen TB/HIV program monitoring 
and evaluation.
PEPFAR continues its efforts to support 
scale-up of the Cepheid GeneXpert MTB/RIF 
test, an innovative, fully automated molec-
ular diagnostic test for TB. This test enables 
programs to diagnose TB quickly, which can 
Action Plan and achievement of its goals and 
objectives will depend not only on sustained 
coordination among U.S. agencies to ensure 
a strategic, whole-of-government approach, 
but also on close collaboration with other 
nations’ Ministries of Health, the WHO, the 
Stop TB Partnership, the Global Fund, and 
other domestic and global partners in the fight 
against TB.
Collaborative TB/HIV activities offer important 
opportunities to achieve the ambitious 90-90-90 
goals—testing TB patients for HIV and pro-
viding immediate ART contributes to 90-90-90 
and epidemic control. By the end of FY 2015, 
PEPFAR had screened 12.1 million HIV-positive 
persons in care for TB (Appendix W: Table 15). 
In all efforts, PEPFAR closely coordinates with 
national TB and AIDS programs, multilateral 
institutions, and other partners to strengthen 
systems that address both diseases. The Global 
Fund decision in 2013 requiring the 38 highest 
TB and HIV burden countries to submit a single 
concept note for both diseases has improved 
co-investment and opportunities for better 
coordination and enhanced impact through 
help reduce transmission and decrease mor-
tality. PEPFAR and the USAID are partnering 
closely with UNITAID and the Bill & Melinda 
Gates Foundation in an innovative public-
private partnership to reduce the cost of Xpert 
MTB/RIF cartridges by 40 percent. 
Cervical Cancer 
Given the established link between HIV and 
cervical cancer—especially the most aggres-
sive form of cervical cancer in HIV-positive 
women—PEPFAR has supported screening and 
treatment to prevent cervical cancer in HIV-
positive women since 2006, termed “screen and 
treat.” PEPFAR has also worked with countries 
and the Vaccine Alliance (GAVI) to increase 
access to primary prevention of cervical cancer 
through HPV vaccination. PEPFAR specifically 
focuses on secondary prevention of cervical 
cancer, providing screening and treatment for 
precancerous lesions to prevent the develop-
ment of invasive cancer. These cervical cancer 
programs build on the HIV platform to leverage 
existing systems and maximize synergies 
and efficiencies. In most programs, cervical 
cancer screening and treatment are offered 
in HIV care and treatment settings, providing 
integrated service delivery and optimizing 
accessibility for HIV-positive women. PEPFAR’s 
work developing and implementing cervical 
cancer screening and treatment programs has 
laid the groundwork for governments and other 
partners to build and expand programming to 
serve broader populations.  
PEPFAR is also a founding member of Pink 
Ribbon Red Ribbon (PRRR), a public-private 
partnership launched in 2011 focused on 
combating cervical and breast cancer in devel-
oping nations in sub-Saharan Africa and Latin 
America. Led by the founding partners—the 
George W. Bush Institute, PEPFAR, Susan G. 
Komen for the Cure, and UNAIDS, along with 
multiple private-sector partners and founda-
tions—PRRR works to expand the availability 
of prevention, screening, and treatment for 
cervical cancer and promote education and 
early detection for breast cancer. PEPFAR 
currently supports cervical cancer program-
ming through PRRR in Zambia, Botswana, and 
Tanzania, with planning underway for expan-
sion into Ethiopia and Namibia. Zambia is 
considered a flagship program, with cervical 
cancer screening and treatment now avail-
able in all 10 provinces at 37 fixed sites, with 
mobile units reaching an additional 48 sites. 
Since the inception of PEPFAR/PRRR program-
ming in Zambia, Botswana, and Tanzania, 
nearly 200,000 women have been screened 
for cervical cancer. Importantly, PRRR has 
served as a catalyst, working closely with host 
countries to move from pilots to scale and full-
country funding. This cycle is being completed 
in less than five years with PEPFAR support in 
Botswana and Zambia.      
Volunteers register women for cervical cancer screenings in 
the Iringa region of Tanzania.
Pink Ribbon Red Ribbon.
A state-of-the-art GeneXpert machine in South Africa 
 
provides TB diagnosis in hours rather than weeks.
The Global Fund
Health care volunteers work to end stigma and discrimination 
while providing essential services. 
Tugela Ridley/USAID
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
92
93
• Implementation of the HRH Strategy has 
enhanced HRH programming; helped 
to increase the availability, quality, 
and retention of health care workers; 
and resulted in improved delivery of 
HIV/AIDS services. As of September 
30, 2015, PEPFAR is supporting training 
(including preservice training) for more 
than 190,000 new health care workers in 
PEPFAR-supported countries to deliver 
HIV and other health services. 
• Interagency visits to Liberia and DRC 
were undertaken to assess gaps, 
identify priorities, and ensure a har-
monized U.S. government approach to 
addressing the country’s HRH issues 
following the Ebola epidemic. 
• In Tanzania, faculty incentives and 
recruitment efforts have helped grow 
the number of medical school faculty 
from 96 to 167 in less than five years.
• In Malawi, PEPFAR supported training 
for clinicians in detection, diagnosis, 
and treatment of HIV-associated 
cancers. The services were implemented 
in three clinics, reaching 15,000 HIV-
infected women per year. 
APPENDIX U: Strengthening 
Health Training and Data 
Systems 
Human Resources for Health (HRH) 
PEPFAR supports partner countries in increasing 
human resources for health (HRH) in order to 
deliver HIV services where the epidemic is most 
acute. Our HRH investments ensure that health 
workers with the right skills are in the right 
places to scale up HIV services at the right time 
to achieve the UNAIDS 90-90-90 goal. PEPFAR 
3.0’s HRH Strategy focuses investments on sup-
porting the delivery of HIV services to priority 
populations in PEPFAR-supported sites and 
geographic areas by:
• assessing HRH capacity; 
• supporting HRH supply and retention; 
• improving service quality; and 
• ensuring sustainable financing for 
health workers providing HIV services. 
To support this PEPFAR committed $116.5 
million to strengthen the capacity of health 
workers to address HIV/AIDS across Africa 
with a particular focus on some of the world’s 
most fragile states. This funding will support 
an increase in the supply of skilled clinicians 
available to provide HIV services by expanding 
the role of the Peace Corps Global Health 
Service Partnership program and by supporting 
NIH/FIC in increasing capacity of key training 
institutions in Africa. HRH investments will be 
leveraged to address drivers of HIV and other 
health epidemics through a five-year com-
mitment with Health Resources and Services 
Administration (HRSA) that will expand the 
quantity and quality of health workforces in 
fragile states. In addition, funding will support 
implementation science by NIH/DAIDS to 
continue to ensure PEPFAR invests in evidence-
based interventions. Past HRH investments 
by PEPFAR have yielded important results, 
including the following: 
• In Malawi, PEPFAR support has gone to 
more than 400 Global AIDS Interfaith 
Alliance nursing scholars and resulted 
in 97 percent of graduates currently 
working in the public sector or having 
completed their service agreement. 
• Translating these pockets of excellence 
across the PEPFAR investment countries 
will be the focus of the next 12 months 
and will form the basis of the new HRH 
Strategy.
Strengthening Data Systems for 
Sustainability
PEPFAR is leading by example and forging 
innovative partnerships to support countries in 
strengthening their data systems, and is lever-
aging these systems to accelerate, focus, and 
sustain the response to HIV/AIDS. 
• Global Partnership for Sustainable 
Development Data: PEPFAR has 
joined public, private, and civil society 
partners through the Global Partnership 
for Sustainable Development Data 
(Global Partnership) to fill critical data 
gaps and invest in capacity building 
so data can be optimally analyzed 
and used. PEPFAR, on behalf of the 
United States, will provide $3 million 
as part of a consortium of funders to 
seed this initiative. PEPFAR will focus 
on data efforts to achieve an AIDS-
free generation, linkages with global 
health, and accelerating gender equality 
programming.
• Data Collaboratives for Local Impact: 
PEPFAR and the MCC are partnering 
to invest $21.8 million in multistake-
holder Data Collaboratives for Local 
Impact in sub-Saharan Africa. These 
Collaboratives will use data on HIV/
AIDS, global health, gender equality, 
and economic growth to improve 
programs and policies. The Tanzania 
Data Collaborative is being established 
in Dar es Salaam as an innovative work 
space and technology platform to share, 
combine, and use data from multiple 
sectors and sources to inform health 
and development programs and build 
local capacity and demand around 
data. The “Data for Local Impact” 
Innovation Challenge will identify, 
support, and mobilize innovative, high-
impact approaches to fill data gaps and 
improve data for decision making at the 
subnational level. 
APPENDIX V: Evaluation 
Standards of Practice
In September 2015, PEPFAR published 
Evaluation Standards of Practice Version 2,33 
which elaborated on the original standards 
presentation with additional clarity and 
more details regarding requirements for the 
Annual Report and for the Country/Regional 
Operational Plans. The fundamental prin-
ciples constructed on a common definition 
of evaluation—the “systematic collection and 
analysis of information about the character-
istics, outcomes, and impact of programs and 
projects”—remained the same, as have the 11 
standards of practice (SOP) to which all PEPFAR 
evaluations must adhere.  
The Standards of Practice (SOP) 
These evaluation standards were identified 
and defined by an interagency committee. Full 
descriptions for each standard can be found in 
the document cited above. 
• 
Engage stakeholders
• 
Clearly state evaluation questions, 
purpose, and objectives
• 
Use appropriate evaluation design, 
methods, and analytical techniques 
• 
Address ethical considerations and 
assurances 
• 
 
Identify resources and articulate 
budget
33 
 PEPFAR. (2015). Evaluation Standards of Practice – Version 2.0. Available at: 
http://www.pepfar.gov/documents/organization/247074.pdf
A new class of health care workers completes their training in Malawi.
CDC
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
94
95
Fifty percent of the 26 
evaluation reports are on a 
publicly available website. 
The remaining reports are not 
online for a range of reasons, 
including outstanding 
feedback from Operating 
Units (OU). Since all PEPFAR 
implementing agencies now 
mandate public reporting, 
the reports that are not cur-
rently online will be published 
online in the near future. 
Adherence to 
Standards
Determining compliance with 
standards is dependent on 
a review of an evaluation 
final report and responding 
to a question or series of 
questions associated with each standard 
(see the Evaluation Standards of Practice V.2). 
Responses to these questions were limited 
to “Yes,” “Partial,” and “No.” For composite 
standards based on several questions, if all 
answers were “yes,” the final score was “yes”; 
if all were “no,” the final score was “no”; and 
any other combination of answers was given 
a “partial” score. Data completion for these 
reviews was nearly complete, with a very few 
missing responses.  
The total number of completed evaluations 
documented in FY 2015 included 26 studies. 
These evaluations were conducted in 11 coun-
tries, eight in Africa (19 evaluations) and three 
in Asia (7 evaluations). PEPFAR support was 
provided by CDC for 14 of the studies and by 
USAID for 12. 
Examining these same studies in the aggregate 
according to each standard—employing arbi-
trary cutoff criteria consistent with those used 
in FY 2014 (see note in Table 9)—the evaluations 
were found to adhere to five of the eleven SOP 
(Table 9). This pattern suggests that while many 
of these studies were developed on a relatively 
strong foundation, considerable improvement 
• 
Construct data collection and manage-
ment plans 
• 
Ensure appropriate evaluator  
qualifications and independence 
• 
 
Monitor the planning and  
implementation of evaluations 
• Produce quality evaluation reports 
•  Disseminate results 
•  Use findings for program improvement 
Findings 
FY 2015 is the second year for submission of 
evaluation results and offers an opportunity 
to compare results with those of the previous 
year. Submissions for the FY 2015 Annual 
Program Results (APR) reflected the comple-
tion of 26 PEPFAR evaluations during this year 
(Table 9). Similar to last year, these evaluations 
started in years prior to the release of the 
Evaluation Standards of Practice; as such, this 
assessment of adherence was conducted for 
projects that started before the release of the 
standards. 
is still necessary. We anticipate stronger 
patterns to become evident in the next few 
years as more evaluations are launched, fully 
guided by these SOP.
Consideration by Standards 
Relatively poor scores are assigned to SOPs 
5, 7, and 10. Describing resources and budgets 
(Standard 5) and dissemination of results 
(Standard 10) also scored poorly last year, 
while evaluator qualifications and indepen-
dence (Standard 7) scored in the mid-level last 
year and low-level this year. Recognizing that 
these standards are relatively new for already 
implementing and terminating evaluations, 
some of these practices still should be easy to 
remedy even for evaluations near completion. 
These particular practices will receive consid-
erably greater attention this next year through 
specific technical assistance from the PEPFAR 
implementing agencies.  
The mid-level scores for ethical considerations 
(Standard 4), quality reports (Standard 9), 
and uses of findings (Standard 11) are also of 
concern. Standards 9 and 11 scored similarly 
last year, while Standard 4 was found adherent 
last year. This pattern of decreasing adher-
ence for ethical considerations is especially 
important, while the continuing mid-level 
trends for reports and use of findings demand 
more focused interventions with the evaluation 
implementers.
Compared with results from FY 2014, the overall 
quantity of FY 2015 studies is lower. In obvious 
respects this trend is concerning, yet some 
of this pattern might be associated with the 
fact that most of the older evaluations from 
multiple years were documented last year as a 
cumulative total; conversely, the current year 
submission represented a more limited time 
period of execution. In both cases, all of these 
evaluations were initiated before the introduc-
tion of the standards, although some of the 
standard guidance might have been better 
integrated into the ongoing work.  
The headquarters evaluation committee will 
continue to work closely with headquarters 
and country teams to improve the quality of 
evaluations and expand the availability of 
results. These gaps are being actively analyzed, 
appropriate policies and requirements will 
be modified, greater engagement of head-
quarter and OU staff with the evaluators will 
be pursued, and further work to re-emphasize 
these SOP to all implementing partners to 
ensure improved adherence will be initiated. 
Agencies are integrating more formal evalua-
tion requirements tied to the standards into 
contracts, and monitoring efforts as evalu-
ations are conducted are increasing. These 
results also highlight that the public dis-
semination of reports and data need greater 
attention, and the interagency evaluation work 
group is reviewing agency policies and prac-
tices to ensure they are consistent and share 
the same ultimate objective of public access. 
This year, greater attention will be focused on 
stronger and better configured evaluation port-
folios, while integrating U.S. government agency 
and host country priorities.
PEPFAR Evaluation Standards of Practice - FY 2015
Adherence
SOP1
SOP2
SOP3
SOP4
SOP5
SOP6
SOP7
SOP8
SOP9
SOP10
SOP11
Yes
20
24
19
15
3
22
4
19
11
7
15
Partial
4
2
6
8
1
3
17
1
15
15
5
No
2
0
1
3
22
1
0
6
0
4
6
Note: Green signifies high levels of compliance with a standard (Yes =61% or greater of total); yellow indicates mid-level (Yes = 41-60% of 
total);  and red reflects low-level (Yes = 40% or less of total).
Table 9.  Aggregate Adherence Patterns for PEPFAR Evaluation Standards of Practice, 2014
Teachers participate in a candlelight vigil after receiving training on HIV/AIDS in Ukraine.
Peace Corps
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
96
97
Figures and Tables in this Report
PEPFAR LATEST RESULTS ..................................................................................................................................................................................9
PEPFAR HIV PREVENTION AND TREATMENT TARGETS .............................................................................................................................. 12
Table: Examples of PEPFAR and Global Fund Engagement ................................................................................................................... 15
Table 1. Data Sources by Level of Disaggregation ..................................................................................................................................25
Figure 1. Trends in New HIV Infections, AIDS Mortality, and HIV Prevalence, Uganda 
...................................................................28
Figure 2. PEPFAR-Supported ART Trends Relative to Overall Budget Demonstrates  
Dramatic Increase in Results with Realignment in 2011, Uganda .......................................................................................................28
Figure 3. PEPFAR-Supported PMTCT Trends After Program Realignment, Uganda  
........................................................................29
Figure 4. PEPFAR-Supported VMMC Trends After Program Realignment, Uganda  ........................................................................30
Figure 5. Trends in New HIV Infections, AIDS  
...........................................................................................................................................30
Figure 6. Distribution of People Living with HIV by District demonstrating burden of disease, Uganda  ............................... 31
Figure 7. Distribution of HIV Prevalence by District, Demonstrating Areas of More Intense HIV Transmission, Uganda  ....32
Figure 8. Distribution of ART Clients Age 15+ by District, Ensuring Services Are Aligned with Need to Increase  .................32
Figure 9. Distribution of Pregnant Women on ARVs by District, Ensuring All HIV  
Positive Women Have Access to Services, Uganda .................................................................................................................................33
Figure 10. Distribution of OVC and VMMC Services by District: Improving Core Prevention Interventions 
with Areas of Transmission to Maximize Impact and Value Per Dollar Invested, Uganda  
...........................................................34
Figure 11. Efficiency Analysis: HIV Testing Yield by Site.........................................................................................................................34
Figure 12. Distribution of PEPFAR-Supported Sites According to Priority Category and District, Uganda ..............................35
Figure 13. Distribution of Indicator Results and Targets by Site Prioritization, Long-Term Strategy Countries (LTS) .......... 37
Figure 14. Distribution of Indicator Results and Targets by Site Prioritization, Uganda 
.............................................................. 37
Table 2. Two Types of PEPFAR Support, Applied to individual and site-based indicators. ..........................................................39
Figure 15. UNAIDS Fast Track: New HIV Infections in LMIC  ...................................................................................................................40
Figure 16. UNAIDS Fast Track: New HIV Infections & AIDS-Related Deaths in Eastern  
and Southern Africa, the Regions with the Largest HIV Disease Burden  
.........................................................................................40
Figure 17. The Right Things: Core, Near-Core, and Non-Core Activities 
.............................................................................................42
Figure 18. Global Trends in New HIV infections, 1990-2014 ..................................................................................................................42
Figure 19. Percent Change in New HIV Infections, Select Countries, 2004-2014 .............................................................................43
Figure 20. Percent Change in New Pediatric HIV Infections,  
Select Countries, 2000-2014, Substantial Progress in Preventing New Pediatric Infections ......................................................43
Figure 21. Percent Change in New Adult HIV Infections, Select Countries, 2000-2014,  
Less Progress in Adult New Infections Than Pediatric New Infections .............................................................................................44
Figure 22. Trends in New HIV Infections, AIDS Mortality, and HIV Prevalence, Botswana ............................................................44
Figure 23. Trends in New HIV Infections, AIDS Mortality, and HIV Prevalence, Tanzania ..............................................................46
Figure 24. Trends in New HIV Infections, AIDS Mortality, and HIV Prevalence, Kenya ...................................................................46
Figure 25. Trends in New HIV Infections, AIDS Mortality, and HIV Prevalence, Uganda ................................................................ 47
Figure 26. Demographic Shift in Sub-Saharan Africa:  
........................................................................................................................... 47
Figure 27. Modeling New Infection Trends, Continuing Intervention Scale-Up vs. Stable Programming from 2002 .............48
Table 3. Implementation Timeline of HIV Impact Assessments ..........................................................................................................50
Figure 28. New HIV Infections and AIDS Deaths with 5-Year Window for Treatment for All (28M on ART by 2020) ...............53
Figure 29. Cost of Serving One ART Client with 1-3 Month Follow-Up vs. Two Clients with 6-12 Month Follow-Up................53
Figure 30. Cumulative Trends of Persons Living with HIV, Sub-Saharan Africa, 1990-2014 
..........................................................54
Figure 31. Cumulative Trends of Persons Receiving ART, National Level Data Sub-Saharan Africa, 2004-2014......................55
Figure 32.  Cumulative Trends of Persons Receiving ART, PEPFAR Specific Data Sub-Saharan Africa, 2004-2015 
..................55
Figure 33. Trends in ART Coverage, Select Countries, 2010-2014 ........................................................................................................56
Figure 34. New Infections and AIDS Deaths, Uganda .............................................................................................................................56
Figure 35. PEPFAR PMTCT Regimens: Ensuring the Most Effective Regimens to Save Mothers  
and Ensure Babies Are Born HIV Free.  ...................................................................................................................................................... 61
Figure 36. Significant Impact Is Assured with Greater Efficiencies When Targeting VMMC to the 15-24 Year Age Band ......62
Figure 37. PEPFAR Cumulative VMMC Results, 2009-2015, Accelerated Slope Continues Across the Program  
.......................62
Figure 38. HIV Prevalence Among Young Females and Males ..............................................................................................................64
Figure 39. Age-Gender Disparity in New HIV Infections Globally, 2014   ...........................................................................................64
Figure 40. The DREAMS Core Package  .......................................................................................................................................................66
Figure 41. HIV Disease Burden by County and Location of DREAMS Focus Counties: Kenya ....................................................... 67
Table 4. DREAMS, Kenya Summary of Interventions, Kenya by County  ............................................................................................68
Figure 42. Significant Impact Is Assured with Greater Efficiencies When Targeting VMMC to the 15-24 year Age Band ......69
Table 5. Total Report PEPFAR Expenditures by Program Area ............................................................................................................. 79
Table 6. PEPFAR Unit Expenditure for Core Interventions  ...................................................................................................................82
Table 7.  Ten Recommendations Made by FBO Leaders at the April 2015 Consultation ................................................................86
Table 8. Members of the PEPFAR Scientific Advisory Board 
.................................................................................................................86
Table 9.  Aggregate Adherence Patterns for PEPFAR Evaluation Standards of Practice, 2014.  
...................................................95
 PEPFAR 2016 Annual Report to Congress
98
99
ACT
Accelerating Children’s HIV/AIDS  
Treatment Initiative
ART
Antiretroviral Therapy
ARV
Antiretroviral Medications
CDC
Centers for Disease Control  
and Prevention
CIFF
Children’s Investment Fund Foundation
COP
Country Operational Plan
CTX
Cotrimoxazole
DOD
Department of Defense
DREAMS
Determined, Resilient, Empowered,  
AIDS-free, Mentored, and Safe Women
DSD
Direct Service Delivery
EA
Expenditure Analysis
FBOs
Faith-Based Organizations
FY
Fiscal Year
GAVI
The Vaccine Alliance
GBV
Gender-Based Violence
Global 
Fund
The Global Fund to Fight AIDS,  
Tuberculosis and Malaria
HHS
Department of Health and  
Human Services
HIA
HIV/AIDS Impact Assessment
HIV
Human Immunodeficiency Virus
HRH
Human Resources for Health
HRSA
Heath Resources and Services 
Administration
HSS
Health System Strengthening
HTS
HIV Testing Services
LCI
Local Capacity Initiative
LGBT
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender
MCC
Millennium Challenge Corporation
MER
Monitoring, Evaluation, and Reporting
MSM
Men who have Sex with Men
NACS
Nutritional Assessment, Counseling and 
Support
NIH
National Institutes of Health
OGAC
Office of the U.S. Global AIDS Coordinator  
& Health Diplomacy
OVC
Orphans and Vulnerable Children
PEPFAR
U.S. President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS 
Relief
PF
Partnership Frameworks
PHIA
Population HIV/AIDS Impact Assessment
PLHIV
People Living with HIV
PMTCT
Prevention of Mother-to-Child  
Transmission
PPP
Public-Private Partnerships
PrEP
Pre-exposure Prophylaxis
PRRR
Pink Ribbon Red Ribbon
ROP
Regional Operational Plan
TA-SDI
Technical Assistance for Service Delivery 
Improvement 
TB
Tuberculosis
UNAIDS
Joint United Nations Programme on       
HIV/AIDS
UNICEF
The United Nations Children’s Fund
USAID
United States Agency for International 
Development
VMMC
Voluntary Medical Male Circumcision
WHO
World Health Organization
Glossary
Peace Corps volunteers in Lesotho help local children stay active and healthy.
Peace Corps
 The Office of the U.S. Global AIDS Coordinator 
and Health Diplomacy
February 2016
