 Six-Month Follow-Up of Recovery-Oriented
Cognitive Therapy for Low-Functioning Individuals
With Schizophrenia
Paul M. Grant, Ph.D., Keith Bredemeier, Ph.D., Aaron T. Beck, M.D.
Objective: The study examined six-month follow-up results
and the impact of length of illness on treatment outcomes of
recovery-oriented cognitive therapy (CT-R).
Methods: Sixty outpatients (mean age 38.4 years, 33% female,
65% African American) with schizophrenia or schizoaffective
disorder and elevated negative symptoms were randomly
assigned to CT-R or standard treatment. Assessments were
conducted at baseline, midtreatment (six and 12 months), end
of treatment (18 months), and follow-up (24 months, N=46
after attrition) by assessors blind to treatment condition. Global
functioning, measured with the Global Assessment Scale, was
the primary outcome. Secondary outcomes were negative
symptoms (avolition-apathy score on the Scale for the
Assessment of Negative Symptoms) and positive symptoms
(total score on the Scale for the Assessment of Positive
Symptoms). Length of illness indexed chronicity (less chronic,
one to 12 years; more chronic, 13 to 40 years).
Results: Intent-to-treat analyses (hierarchal linear modeling)
at follow-up indicated significant benefits for individuals
assigned to CT-R compared with standard treatment: higher
global functioning scores (between-group Cohen’s d=.53),
lower scores for negative symptoms (d=–.66), and lower
scores for positive symptoms (d=–1.36). Length of illness
moderated treatment effects on global functioning, such
that those with a less chronic illness began to show im-
provements earlier (at the trend level by six months and
reaching significance by the end of treatment), whereas the
group with a more chronic illness did not show significant
improvements until later (at follow-up).
Conclusions: CT-R produced durable effects that were
present even among individuals with the most chronic
illness.
Psychiatric Services 2017; 68:997–1002; doi: 10.1176/appi.ps.201600413
More than a century ago, Kraepelin (1) described dementia
praecox as a progressively deteriorating condition. Longitudi-
nal research published over the past 20 years has shown that
recovery in schizophrenia is more common than previously
thought (2). Nonetheless, the view of schizophrenia as pro-
gressive and deteriorating is still commonplace in departments
of psychiatry, state hospitals, and community mental health
agencies, especially as applied to the third of individuals who
have the most severe course (3,4). Buttressing this view is
structural imaging research that shows thinning of the cortex for
a proportion of individuals with schizophrenia over the course
of their illness, indicating a significant loss of brain tissue (5).
Antipsychotic medications have established efficacy
(6–8) but also well-documented limitations: most individuals
do not show a clinically significant antipsychotic response
in the short term (9), significant side effects that reduce
quality of life and shorten the life span are common (10–13),
little evidence has been found that supports long-term effi-
cacy in reducing psychotic symptoms (14), and there is also
minimal evidence of improvement in negative symptoms (15)
or functional outcomes (16).
Given that medications are a useful but limited tool for
promoting recovery, there is a need for nonpharmacologi-
cal approaches to this disorder. Psychotherapy has shown
promise in this regard over the past 100 years. In 1909, Jung
described an efficacious psychotherapeutic approach for a
series of individuals who were given the diagnosis of de-
mentia praecox (17,18). Nearly 50 years later, Beck (19) re-
ported successful treatment of an individual with chronic
schizophrenia. Forty more years passed before several
British clinicians and investigators developed a successful
application of cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) for indi-
viduals with treatment-refractory schizophrenia (20–22).
Meta-analyses have established CBT for schizophrenia as
the most efficacious psychotherapy for the disorder (23).
However, a trial by Garety and colleagues (24) found limi-
tations of this approach, because individuals with schizo-
phrenia who had a history of relapsing did not show any
significant reduction in relapse compared with an active
control group.
Our research group proposed that the psychotherapeutic
approach to low-functioning individuals with schizophrenia
Psychiatric Services 68:10, October 2017
ps.psychiatryonline.org
997
This article addresses the Core Competency of Medical Knowledge
ARTICLES
 could be greatly facilitated by pinpointing the specific psy-
chological factors that interfere with recovery, particularly
those that are not typically addressed by medications. We
identified defeatist and asocial beliefs as factors that cross-
sectionally (25,26) and longitudinally (27) predict negative
symptoms and poor functional outcomes among individ-
uals with schizophrenia. On the basis of these empirical
findings, we developed an alternative cognitive-behavioral
approach that is heavily influenced by the principles of
the recovery movement (28,29). Recovery-oriented cogni-
tive therapy (CT-R) experientially neutralizes negative be-
liefs and attitudes while activating each individual’s latent
positive attitudes to promote enduring adaptive living in the
community (30).
Because most individuals with low-functioning schizo-
phrenia are profoundly isolated from interactions with others
and have limited access to personal motivation to engage in
activities, the treatment approach begins with various meth-
ods to engage and establish a connection (for example, lis-
tening to music, singing, dancing, and going for a walk). With
an established engagement, the therapist works collabora-
tively with the individual to identify personal, meaningful, and
valued aspirations for the future, such as obtaining a partic-
ular job, reconnecting with family, developing relationships
with friends or lovers, and pursuing independent living in
the community. The therapy then involves a series of nested
success experiences along the path to the long-term ambition.
The person is guided by the therapist to an adaptive cognitive
shift regarding personal and social efficacy. Obstacles, such
as low energy, hallucinations, delusions, disorganization, ag-
gressive behavior, and substance use, are often blocks to re-
covery. The therapist uses the cognitive model to understand
and help the individual attenuate the effects of these obstacles,
thereby promoting progress (31).
Previously, we reported the results of a randomized con-
trolled trial showing the success of this therapeutic approach,
compared with standard treatment in the community, for low-
functioning outpatients with schizophrenia or schizoaffective
disorder (32). At the end of treatment (18 months), individuals
assigned to CT-R showed statistically significant improve-
ment in global functioning, as well as statistically significant
reductions in avolition-apathy and positive symptoms com-
pared with individuals in the control condition (standard
treatment in the community).
In this study, we addressed two additional questions from
the randomized trial. First, does the experimental group
maintain improvement during a six-month follow-up pe-
riod? If differences between the two conditions are main-
tained after the therapy is withdrawn, this would support
the durability of the skill acquisition and belief change to
the person’s life posttherapy. Second, because a significant
proportion of individuals with chronic schizophrenia lan-
guish in state hospitals and other institutions (correctional
or residential facilities), we addressed whether our novel
approach works for the individuals in the sample with the
most chronic illness.
METHODS
The trial compared 18 months of CT-R plus standard treat-
ment with standard treatment alone for 60 adults with
schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder who had low func-
tioning, defined as at least moderate severity on the Scale for
the Assessment of Negative Symptoms (SANS) global subscales
or marked severity on one subscale. The mean6SD age of the
sample was 38.4611.6 years. The sample included 20 (33%)
women and 39 (65%) African Americans. Participants were
recruited from local community mental health agencies or a
pool of names maintained at the University of Pennsylvania.
These individuals completed two midtreatment assessments
(six months and 12 months after baseline), an 18-month end-of-
treatment assessment, and a 24-month follow-up assessment.
Forty-six participants (CT-R, N=24; standard treatment, N=22)
completed the follow-up assessment. Assessors were blind to
treatment condition. All raters who were available to be tested
(six of seven) performed no better than chance when asked
to guess the participants’ condition (50 correct guesses and
53 incorrect guesses).
The CT-R condition focused on engagement within a goal-
directed framework that included personalized treatment
targets. Later sessions aimed to consolidate functional gains
and prevent relapse. The standard treatment condition con-
sisted minimally of antipsychotic pharmacotherapy. Most
participants received services provided by local community
mental health centers that could include case management,
supportive counseling, day treatment services, housing ser-
vices, peer support, and vocational rehabilitation.
The protocol and consent form were approved by two
institutional review boards (the University of Pennsylvania
and the City of Philadelphia). Each participant gave written
informed consent before enrollment. Data collection oc-
curred from January 2007 through May 2012. [A CONSORT
diagram is presented in an online supplement to this article.]
Intent-to-treat analyses were conducted using hierarchal
linear modeling (HLM). The primary outcome was global
functioning (Global Assessment Scale) (GAS) (33). An
interviewer-scored assessment, the GAS is scored on a 100-
point scale, with lower scores indicating poorer functioning.
Secondary outcomes were negative symptoms (global rat-
ing for avolition-apathy on the SANS [34]) and positive symp-
toms (total score on the Scale for the Assessment of Positive
Symptoms [SAPS] [35]). Possible scores on the global rating
for avolition-apathy range from 0 to 5, with higher scores
indicating more severe symptoms. Possible total scores on the
SAPS range from 0 to 150, with higher scores indicating more
severe positive symptoms. Treatment effects at follow-up
were tested by examining treatment condition 3 24-month
interaction terms. To follow-up on these analyses, we com-
puted nonparametric (Spearman’s rank) correlations between
length of illness and (standardized residual) changes in GAS
for those who received CT-R. In addition, t tests (paired
sample) were conducted to determine whether and when
significant changes in GAS emerged among participants with
998
ps.psychiatryonline.org
Psychiatric Services 68:10, October 2017
SIX-MONTH FOLLOW-UP OF RECOVERY-ORIENTED COGNITIVE THERAPY
 a longer length of illness (based on a median split) in the
CT-R condition.
RESULTS
End-of-treatment and follow-up between-group effect
sizes for the outcome variables are presented in Figure 1.
The treatment 3 24-month interaction was statistically
significant for global functioning (t=3.40, df=229, p,.01),
indicating that global functioning in the CT-R group
was superior to that in the standard treatment group at
follow-up (adjusted mean6SE GAS scores, 63.1464.64
versus 58.0064.84; between-group d=.53). Similarly, the
treatment 3 24-month interaction was significant for
negative (avolition-apathy) symptoms (t=–2.46, df=229,
p,.05 [adjusted mean scores: CT-R, 1.636.43; standard
treatment, 2.176.45; d=–.66]) and for positive symptoms
(t=–3.52, df=228, p,.01 [adjusted mean scores, 1463.61
versus 19.9363.78, respectively; d=–1.36]).
Length of illness varied considerably in the sample, ranging
from one to 40 years (mean=15.4611.8). Also, although partic-
ipants in the CT-R condition showed greater improvements in
functional outcome overall, individual responses varied. HLM
analyses predicting global functioning that included length
of illness revealed a significant effect of chronicity (t=22.93,
df=219, p,.01), as well as a significant condition 3 length of
illness 318-month interaction (t=3.11, df=219, p,.01).
Twenty-four month follow-up analyses showed evidence
that these results reflected delayed improvement in the
CT-R condition for individuals with longer length of illness.
Specifically, chronicity was significantly correlated with
changes in GAS from baseline to six months (N=28 in CT-R
condition with data available, rs=–.33, p,.05), as well as from
baseline to the end of the active treatment phase (18 months)
(N=21, rs=–.63, p,.01), but chronicity was not significantly
correlated with changes in functioning at 12 months. Nota-
bly, length of illness was not significantly correlated with
changes in GAS at any assessment point in the standard
treatment group. In addition, those with a shorter length of
illness (12 years or less) in the CT-R condition began to show
evidence for improved functional outcome (compared with
baseline) as early as six months (trend level, p=.07), with a
statistically significant improvement evident by the end of
active treatment (t=–3.62, df=8, p,.01), which was main-
tained at follow-up (24 months; t=–3.37, df=12, p,.01). In
contrast, those with a longer length of illness (more than
12 years) did not show statistically significant or reliable
improvement (from baseline) until the end of the follow-up
phase (t=2.72, df=10, p,.05), because gains in this group
were more modest at earlier assessment points. These
findings are portrayed graphically in Figure 2.
DISCUSSION
Previously, we demonstrated that at the end of treatment
individuals assigned to CT-R showed significantly greater
improvement, compared with the standard treatment group,
on global functioning, avolition-apathy symptoms, and pos-
itive symptoms (32). The findings presented here show that
these improvements over baseline were maintained across
the follow-up period when therapy was withdrawn, sup-
porting the notion that CT-R produces an enduring change
in beliefs and skills that enables individuals to continue to
maintain gains without their therapist. Given that negative
symptoms have been linked to hospitalization rates (36,37),
a promising direction for future research would be to de-
termine whether CT-R’s amelioration of negative symp-
toms allows individuals to remain and participate in the
community (36).
In addition, we hypothesized that the group of patients
with more entrenched disability, as indicated by a longer
length of illness, would show a significant response to
treatment if given sufficient time. Our findings supported
this hypothesis, because the group with more chronic illness
showed a delay in improvement in global functioning that
achieved statistical significance compared with baseline only
at the follow-up assessment. This finding suggests that even
individuals with the most seemingly recalcitrant illness can
improve and start to succeed at achieving their personally
meaningful chosen goals.
The group with chronic illness had a number of charac-
teristics that made their illness more refractory to treatment.
Clinically, they appeared to be much more detached from
the outside world and less reactive to psychosocial inputs—
in particular, to talking—than the group with less chronic ill-
ness. In addition, isolation is motivated by clusters of negative
expectancies and defeatist and asocial attitudes (25,26), which
persons with chronic illness endorse to a greater degree than
those with less chronic illness (37). Finally, these individuals
appear to be complacent when they are allowed to stay in a
FIGURE 1. End-of-treatment (18 months) and follow-up
(24 months) between-group effect sizes for the three outcome
variablesa
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
.8
.6
.4
.2
0
18
24
Assessment month
Effect size (d)
SANS
GAS
SAPS
a Recovery-oriented cognitive therapy plus standard treatment was
compared with standard treatment alone. SANS, Scale for the Assess-
ment of Negative Symptoms; GAS, Global Assessment Scale; SAPS, Scale
for the Assessment of Positive Symptoms
Psychiatric Services 68:10, October 2017
ps.psychiatryonline.org
999
GRANT ET AL.
 withdrawn mode, and they endorse less depression than those
with less severe illness (37).
Individuals with more chronic illness can be described as
disengaged. The disengagement is characterized by a more
global loss of interest in the outside world and future goals
and a loss of engagement regarding basic psychological pro-
cesses, such as attention, recall, and executive function.
CT-R ameliorates these problems and enables individuals to
become reengaged, which produces more energy and access
to motivation, and opens up the opportunity to talk about
aspirations for the future. The process of therapy reduces
isolation, increases motivation, and overcomes obstacles,
such as positive symptoms. Given that weekly sessions of
CT-R can produce significant gains in functional outcome
in the group with more chronic illness, more intensive
treatment (delivered more than once weekly by a com-
munity treatment team or on a long-term inpatient unit)
could increase the speed of response to treatment in this
group, something we have observed in our implementa-
tion work.
This study illustrates how CT-R adds to the current
treatment armamentarium for schizophrenia. CT-R com-
pared favorably to psychiatric rehabilitation approaches,
specifically cognitive remediation and social skills training.
CT-R as a stand-alone treatment significantly and durably
improved daily functioning, access to motivation, and posi-
tive symptoms. Cognitive remediation tends to show effects
on functional outcomes only when embedded in a larger
treatment package (38), and it demonstrates modest effects
on negative and positive symptoms (38,39). Social skills
training has been shown to have an impact on social
functioning and negative symptoms, but it affects positive
symptoms to a minimal degree (40). CT-R has powerful
methods for engaging individuals in treatment and thus ex-
tends to more withdrawn individuals who typically refuse
psychiatric rehabilitation. Accordingly, we present evidence
in this report that individuals with the most chronic illness
responded to CT-R, which is also an advance.
We hypothesized that the mechanism of change in daily
functioning is a reduction in negative attitudes about per-
formance and socializing and a corresponding strengthening
of positive attitudes about self, others, and the future. We
have evidence that experiences of success can directly con-
tribute to improvements in cognitive variables and perfor-
mance among individuals with schizophrenia who have the
same level of severity as the group with more chronic illness
(41). We suggest, further, that the group with chronic illness
requires more repetition of success, which accounts for their
slower trajectory of improvement.
This study had limitations. Most notably, the sample
was relatively small, limiting statistical power as well
as confidence in the generalizability of the findings. The
small sample made the study underpowered to determine
the mechanism by which length of illness affected the
outcome. It will be important to replicate these results,
ideally in larger samples. Another limitation of the study
is the use of GAS scores as a primary outcome mea-
sure. This scale is well validated and widely used, and
the decision to use it is in line with the focus of CT-R,
which emphasizes improving functioning rather than
decreasing symptoms. Nevertheless, this scale arguably
provides a relatively coarse index of the treatment
goals of CT-R and other recovery-oriented interventions.
Future work can address this limitation by incorpo-
rating cutting-edge measures of specific recovery out-
comes (42).
CONCLUSIONS
This study showed that the significant benefits of CT-R over
standard treatment were maintained at follow-up and that
the effect sizes were comparable to those observed at the
end of treatment (43), suggesting that treatment gains were
well retained. Also, we found that length of illness predicted
response to treatment, such that individuals with less
chronicity who received CT-R began to show reliable im-
provements in functioning sooner (by 12 months), with the
most prominent differences evident at the end of active
treatment (18 months). Of note, those with greater chron-
icity showed reliable improvements, but they did so later
(at 24 months), suggesting that clinicians should not give up
on these individuals when it seems that they are not im-
proving as quickly as hoped. More intensive treatment might
quicken their recovery response. These findings add to our
understanding of CT-R and specifically suggest that the
therapeutic effects are durable and are present even among
those with chronic illness.
FIGURE 2. Mean scores on the Global Assessment Scale (GAS) of
participants in recovery-oriented cognitive therapy at five
assessment points, by illness chronicitya
70
55
40
Assessment month
12
18
24
6
Baseline
Mean score
**
*
Shorter illness (N=17)
Longer illness (N=14)
a The vertical bars indicate standard errors of the mean. The GAS is scored
on a 100-point scale, with lower scores indicating poorer functioning.
There was a trend toward improved functional outcomes between
baseline and six months among those with shorter illnesses (p,.10).
*p,.05, **p,.01
1000
ps.psychiatryonline.org
Psychiatric Services 68:10, October 2017
SIX-MONTH FOLLOW-UP OF RECOVERY-ORIENTED COGNITIVE THERAPY
 AUTHOR AND ARTICLE INFORMATION
The authors are with the Department of Psychiatry, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia. Send correspondence to Dr. Grant (e-mail:
pgrant@mail.med.upenn.edu).
This work was supported by a Distinguished Investigator Award from the
National Alliance for Research on Schizophrenia and Depression and by
grants from the Heinz Foundation and the Fieldstone 1793 Foundation.
The authors express gratitude to the individuals who participated in this
research and thereby made it possible. They also thank Gloria A. Huh,
M.S.Ed., Dimitri Perivoliotis, Ph.D., Neal M. Stolar, M.D., Sally Riggs, Clin.
Psy.D., Luke Schultz, Ph.D., Jarrod Reisweber, Psy.D., Nadine Chang,
Ph.D., and Amy Wenzel, Ph.D., for assistance with the study and Marguerite
Cruz, B.A., Robyn Himelstein, B.A., and Nina Bertolami, B.A., for assistance
with the manuscript.
Dr. Grant reports receiving royalties from Guilford Press for a book on
schizophrenia treatment with cognitive therapy.
Received September 9, 2016; revision received January 5, 2017; accepted
March 10, 2017; published online June 1, 2017.
REFERENCES
1. Kraepelin E: Dementia praecox and paraphrenia. Chicago, Chicago
Medical Book Co, 1919
2. Davidson L, Harding C, Spaniol L: Recovery From Severe Men-
tal Illnesses: Research Evidence and Implications for Practice.
Boston, Boston University, Center for Psychiatric Rehabilitation,
2006
3. Emsley R, Chiliza B, Asmal L, et al: The concepts of remission and
recovery in schizophrenia. Current Opinion in Psychiatry 24:114–121,
2011
4. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th ed.
Arlington, Va, American Psychiatric Association, 2013
5. Andreasen NC, Nopoulos P, Magnotta V, et al: Progressive brain
change in schizophrenia: a prospective longitudinal study of first-
episode schizophrenia. Biological Psychiatry 70:672–679, 2011
6. Leucht S, Arbter D, Engel RR, et al: How effective are second-
generation antipsychotic drugs? A meta-analysis of placebo-controlled
trials. Molecular Psychiatry 14:429–447, 2009
7. Leucht S, Komossa K, Rummel-Kluge C, et al: A meta-analysis of
head-to-head comparisons of second-generation antipsychotics in
the treatment of schizophrenia. American Journal of Psychiatry
166:152–163, 2009
8. Leucht S, Corves C, Arbter D, et al: Second-generation versus first-
generation antipsychotic drugs for schizophrenia: a meta-analysis.
Lancet 373:31–41, 2009
9. Case M, Stauffer VL, Ascher-Svanum H, et al: The heterogeneity
of antipsychotic response in the treatment of schizophrenia. Psy-
chological Medicine 41:1291–1300, 2011
10. Moncrieff J, Leo J: A systematic review of the effects of antipsy-
chotic drugs on brain volume. Psychological Medicine 40:1409–1422,
2010
11. Ray WA, Chung CP, Murray KT, et al: Atypical antipsychotic drugs
and the risk of sudden cardiac death. New England Journal of
Medicine 360:225–235, 2009
12. Weinmann S, Read J, Aderhold V: Influence of antipsychotics on
mortality in schizophrenia: systematic review. Schizophrenia Re-
search 113:1–11, 2009
13. Foley DL, Morley KI: Systematic review of early cardiometabolic
outcomes of the first treated episode of psychosis. Archives of
General Psychiatry 68:609–616, 2011
14. Harrow M, Jobe TH: Does long-term treatment of schizophrenia
with antipsychotic medications facilitate recovery? Schizophrenia
Bulletin 39:962–965, 2013
15. Fusar-Poli P, Papanastasiou E, Stahl D, et al: Treatments of neg-
ative symptoms in schizophrenia: meta-analysis of 168 randomized
placebo-controlled trials. Schizophrenia Bulletin 41:892–899, 2015
16. Swartz MS, Perkins DO, Stroup TS, et al: Effects of antipsychotic
medications on psychosocial functioning in patients with chronic
schizophrenia: findings from the NIMH CATIE study. American
Journal of Psychiatry 164:428–436, 2007
17. Jung CG: The Psychology of Dementia Praecox. New York, Journal
of Nervous and Mental Disease Publishing, 1909
18. Silverstein SM: Jung’s views on causes and treatments of schizo-
phrenia in light of current trends in cognitive neuroscience and
psychotherapy research: I. aetiology and phenomenology. Journal
of Analytical Psychology 59:98–129, 2014
19. Beck AT: Successful outpatient psychotherapy of a chronic schizo-
phrenic with a delusion based on borrowed guilt. Psychiatry 15:
305–312, 1952
20. Kingdon DG, Turkington D: The use of cognitive behavior therapy
with a normalizing rationale in schizophrenia: preliminary report.
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease 179:207–211, 1991
21. Fowler D, Morley S: The cognitive-behavioural treatment of hal-
lucinations and delusions: a preliminary study. Behavioural Psy-
chotherapy 17:267–282, 1989
22. Tarrier N, Beckett R, Harwood S, et al: A trial of two cognitive-
behavioural methods of treating drug-resistant residual psychotic
symptoms in schizophrenic patients: I. outcome. British Journal of
Psychiatry 162:524–532, 1993
23. van der Gaag M, Valmaggia LR, Smit F: The effects of individually
tailored formulation-based cognitive behavioural therapy in audi-
tory hallucinations and delusions: a meta-analysis. Schizophrenia
Research 156:30–37, 2014
24. Garety PA, Fowler DG, Freeman D, et al: Cognitive-behavioural
therapy and family intervention for relapse prevention and symptom
reduction in psychosis: randomised controlled trial. British Journal
of Psychiatry 192:412–423, 2008
25. Grant PM, Beck AT: Defeatist beliefs as a mediator of cognitive
impairment, negative symptoms, and functioning in schizophrenia.
Schizophrenia Bulletin 35:798–806, 2009
26. Grant PM, Beck AT: Asocial beliefs as predictors of asocial be-
havior in schizophrenia. Psychiatry Research 177:65–70, 2010
27. Thomas EC, Luther L, Zullo L, et al: From neurocognition to
community participation in serious mental illness: the intermediary
role of dysfunctional attitudes and motivation. Psychological Medi-
cine 47:822–836, 2017
28. Davidson L, Rowe M, Tondora J, et al: A Practical Guide to Recovery-
Oriented Practice: Tools for Transforming Mental Health Care. New
York, Oxford University Press, 2008
29. Recovery and Recovery Support. Rockville, Md, Substance Abuse
and Mental Health Services Administration, 2015. http://www.
samhsa.gov/recovery
30. Beck AT, Rector NA, Stolar N, et al: Schizophrenia: Cognitive
Theory, Research, and Therapy. New York, Guilford, 2009
31. Beck AT, Perivoliotis D, Brinen AP, et al: Recovery-Oriented
Cognitive Therapy for Schizophrenia. New York, Guilford, in press
32. Grant PM, Huh GA, Perivoliotis D, et al: Randomized trial to evaluate
the efficacy of cognitive therapy for low-functioning patients with
schizophrenia. Archives of General Psychiatry 69:121–127, 2012
33. Endicott J, Spitzer RL, Fleiss JL, et al: The Global Assessment
Scale: a procedure for measuring overall severity of psychiatric
disturbance. Archives of General Psychiatry 33:766–771, 1976
34. Andreasen NC: Scale for the Assessment of Negative Symptoms
(SANS). Iowa City, University of Iowa, 1984
35. Andreasen NC: Scale for the Assessment of Positive Symptoms
(SAPS). Iowa City, University of Iowa, 1984
36. Kaplan K, Salzer MS, Brusilovskiy E: Community participation as
a predictor of recovery-oriented outcomes among emerging and
mature adults with mental illnesses. Psychiatric Rehabilitation
Journal 35:219–229, 2012
37. Beck AT, Grant PM, Huh GA, et al: Dysfunctional attitudes and
expectancies in deficit syndrome schizophrenia. Schizophrenia
Bulletin 39:43–51, 2013
Psychiatric Services 68:10, October 2017
ps.psychiatryonline.org
1001
GRANT ET AL.
 38. McGurk SR, Twamley EW, Sitzer DI, et al: A meta-analysis of cog-
nitive remediation in schizophrenia. American Journal of Psychiatry
164:1791–1802, 2007
39. Cella M, Preti A, Edwards C, et al: Cognitive remediation for
negative symptoms of schizophrenia: a network meta-analysis.
Clinical Psychology Review 52:43–51, 2017
40. Grant PM, Perivolitois D, Luther L, et al: Rapid improvement in
beliefs, mood, and performance following an experimental success
experience in an analogue test of recovery-oriented cognitive
therapy. Psychological Medicine, 2017 (in press)
41. Kurtz MM, Mueser KT: A meta-analysis of controlled research on
social skills training for schizophrenia. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology 76:491–504, 2008
42. Drapalski AL, Medoff D, Unick GJ, et al: Assessing recovery of
people with serious mental illness: development of a new scale.
Psychiatric Services 63:48–53, 2012
43. Grant PM, Brinen AP, Inverso E: Transformation: broad spectrum
approaches to promote recovery and resilience in schizophrenia.
Presented at the national convention of the National Alliance on
Mental Illness, Denver, July 6–9, 2016
1002
ps.psychiatryonline.org
Psychiatric Services 68:10, October 2017
SIX-MONTH FOLLOW-UP OF RECOVERY-ORIENTED COGNITIVE THERAPY
