 Attachment & Human Development
ISSN: 1461-6734 (Print) 1469-2988 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rahd20
Disorganized attachment in infancy: a review of
the phenomenon and its implications for clinicians
and policy-makers
Pehr Granqvist, L. Alan Sroufe, Mary Dozier, Erik Hesse, Miriam Steele,
Marinus van Ijzendoorn, Judith Solomon, Carlo Schuengel, Pasco Fearon,
Marian Bakermans-Kranenburg, Howard Steele, Jude Cassidy, Elizabeth
Carlson, Sheri Madigan, Deborah Jacobvitz, Sarah Foster, Kazuko Behrens,
Anne Rifkin-Graboi, Naomi Gribneau, Gottfried Spangler, Mary J Ward,
Mary True, Susan Spieker, Sophie Reijman, Samantha Reisz, Anne Tharner,
Frances Nkara, Ruth Goldwyn, June Sroufe, David Pederson, Deanne
Pederson, Robert Weigand, Daniel Siegel, Nino Dazzi, Kristin Bernard, Peter
Fonagy, Everett Waters, Sheree Toth, Dante Cicchetti, Charles H Zeanah,
Karlen Lyons-Ruth, Mary Main & Robbie Duschinsky
To cite this article: Pehr Granqvist, L. Alan Sroufe, Mary Dozier, Erik Hesse, Miriam Steele,
Marinus van Ijzendoorn, Judith Solomon, Carlo Schuengel, Pasco Fearon, Marian Bakermans-
Kranenburg, Howard Steele, Jude Cassidy, Elizabeth Carlson, Sheri Madigan, Deborah Jacobvitz,
Sarah Foster, Kazuko Behrens, Anne Rifkin-Graboi, Naomi Gribneau, Gottfried Spangler,
Mary J Ward, Mary True, Susan Spieker, Sophie Reijman, Samantha Reisz, Anne Tharner,
Frances Nkara, Ruth Goldwyn, June Sroufe, David Pederson, Deanne Pederson, Robert
Weigand, Daniel Siegel, Nino Dazzi, Kristin Bernard, Peter Fonagy, Everett Waters, Sheree
Toth, Dante Cicchetti, Charles H Zeanah, Karlen Lyons-Ruth, Mary Main & Robbie Duschinsky
(2017) Disorganized attachment in infancy: a review of the phenomenon and its implications
for clinicians and policy-makers, Attachment & Human Development, 19:6, 534-558, DOI:
10.1080/14616734.2017.1354040
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/14616734.2017.1354040
© 2017 The Author(s). Published by Informa
UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis
Group.
Published online: 26 Jul 2017.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 17034
 Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rahd20
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 29 View citing articles 
 Disorganized attachment in infancy: a review of the
phenomenon and its implications for clinicians and
policy-makers
Pehr Granqvista, L. Alan Sroufeb, Mary Dozierc, Erik Hessed, Miriam Steelee,
Marinus van Ijzendoornf, Judith Solomong, Carlo Schuengel
h, Pasco Fearoni,
Marian Bakermans-Kranenburgj, Howard Steelee, Jude Cassidyk, Elizabeth Carlsonb,
Sheri Madiganl, Deborah Jacobvitzm, Sarah Fostern, Kazuko Behrenso, Anne Rifkin-
Graboip, Naomi Gribneaug, Gottfried Spanglerq, Mary J Wardr, Mary Trues,
Susan Spiekert, Sophie Reijmang, Samantha Reiszg,u, Anne Tharnerf, Frances Nkarad,
Ruth Goldwynv, June Sroufew, David Pedersonx, Deanne Pedersony, Robert Weigandz,
Daniel Siegelaa, Nino Dazzibb, Kristin Bernardcc, Peter Fonagy
i, Everett Waterscc,
Sheree Tothdd, Dante Cicchettib, Charles H Zeanahee, Karlen Lyons-Ruthff, Mary Maind
and Robbie Duschinskyg
aDepartment of Psychology, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden; bInstitute of Child Development,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA; cDepartment of Psychological and Brain Sciences,
University of Delaware, Newark, NY, USA; dDepartment of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley,
CA, USA; ePsychology Department, The New School, New York, NY, USA; fDepartment of Psychology,
Education, and Child Studies, Erasmus University Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands; gDepartment of
Public Health & Primary Care, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK; hClinical Child and Family Studies
and Amsterdam Public Health, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; iResearch
Department of Clinical, Educational and Health Psychology, University College of London, London, UK;
jChild and Family Studies, Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands; kPsychology Department, University
of Maryland, Washington DC, USA; lDepartment of Psychology, University of Calgary, Calgary, Canada;
mDepartment of Psychology, The University of Texas, Austin, TX, USA; nFaculty of Health and Life Sciences,
University of Northumbria, Newcastle, UK; oDepartment of Social and Behavioral Sciences, SUNY
Polytechnic Institute, Utica, NY, USA; pthe Neurodevelopmental Research Center, the Singapore Institute
for Clinical Sciences, Singapore, Singapore; qDevelopmental and Educational Psychology, University of
Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany; rDepartment of Pediatrics, Weill Cornell Medical College, New
York, NY, USA; sPsychology Department, St Mary’s College of California, Moraga, NY, USA; tCenter on
Human Development and Disability, University of Washington, Seattle, MA, USA; uthe Department of
Human Development and Family Sciences, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA; vChild and
Adolsecent Mental Health Service, Trafford Children and Young Peoples Service, Manchester, UK;
wMinnesota Institute for Contemporary Psychotherapy and Psychoanalysis, Minneapolis, MI, USA;
xDepartment of Psychology, University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada; yUniversity of Western
Ontario, London, ON, Canada; zT. Denny Sanford School of Social & Family Dynamics, Arizona State
UniversityTempe, AZ, USA; aaSchool of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA;
bbDepartment of Dynamic and Clinical Psychology, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy; ccDepartment
of Psychology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, USA; ddThe Mt. Hope Family Center, University of
Rochester, Rochester, NY, USA; eeInstitute of Infant and Early Childhood Mental Health, Tulane University,
New Orleans, LA, USA; ffDepartment of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
ABSTRACT
Disorganized/Disoriented (D) attachment has seen widespread
interest from policy makers, practitioners, and clinicians in recent
years. However, some of this interest seems to have been based
on some false assumptions that (1) attachment measures can be
ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 22 June 2017
Accepted 7 July 2017
CONTACT Pehr Granqvist
pehr.granqvist@psychology.su.se; Robbie Duschinsky
rd522@medschl.cam.ac.uk
ATTACHMENT & HUMAN DEVELOPMENT, 2017
VOL. 19, NO. 6, 534–558
https://doi.org/10.1080/14616734.2017.1354040
© 2017 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
 used as definitive assessments of the individual in forensic/child
protection settings and that disorganized attachment (2) reliably
indicates child maltreatment, (3) is a strong predictor of pathology,
and (4) represents a fixed or static “trait” of the child, impervious
to development or help. This paper summarizes the evidence
showing that these four assumptions are false and misleading.
The paper reviews what is known about disorganized infant
attachment and clarifies the implications of the classification for
clinical and welfare practice with children. In particular, the differ-
ence between disorganized attachment and attachment disorder
is examined, and a strong case is made for the value of attach-
ment theory for supportive work with families and for the devel-
opment
and
evaluation
of
evidence-based
caregiving
interventions.
KEYWORDS
Disorganized attachment;
infancy; attachment-based
interventions; maltreatment;
attachment disorder
This review paper represents a broadly held consensus concerning what we currently
understand about disorganized infant attachment and its implications across clinical and
child welfare practices. Our hope is that this review will prove to be useful both in
supporting best practice and in highlighting the gaps that occasionally surround the
concept of attachment disorganization, particularly between basic theory and research
on the one hand and their applications in clinical and child welfare practice on the other.
Summary of 10 topics to be elaborated upon in this review
(1) The disorganized infant attachment category can be assigned by trained and
certified coders to infant behavior (age 12–20 months) in the Strange Situation
when there is a sufficient fit to one or several of the behaviors listed under Main
and Solomon’s (1986, 1990) seven thematic headings. Persons interested in
seeking training to code disorganized attachment should go directly to attach-
ment-training.com.
(2) Behaviors from Main and Solomon’s list can occur for a variety of reasons. They
are quite common at low levels in the Strange Situation among infants from
populations facing adversity. Only when these behaviors are sufficiently intense
can a classification of disorganized attachment be assigned.
(3) Disorganized infant attachment is more common among maltreated infants but
does not necessarily indicate maltreatment. As it stands, the disorganized attach-
ment classification cannot be used to screen for maltreatment. This is because a
significant proportion of maltreated infants do not show disorganized attach-
ment in the Strange Situation, and many infants showing disorganized attach-
ment in the Strange Situation have not been maltreated. Thus, there are other
pathways to disorganized attachment besides maltreatment.
(4) These other pathways to disorganized attachment may feature a parent’s unresolved
trauma or loss. Such experiences may lead a parent to display subtly frightening,
frightened, or dissociative behaviors toward their infant. Other contributing factors for
at least some of the behaviors used to classify disorganized attachment may include
the infant’s genetic and temperamental susceptibility. In addition, major or repeated
ATTACHMENT & HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
535
 separations can cause disorganized behaviors. Therefore, for children in placement
who undergo such separations, disorganized behaviors may be especially misleading
regarding the usual state of child–parent attachment.
(5) Research at the group level has established disorganized infant attachment as a
small-moderate predictor for the development of social and behavior problems.
However, disorganized infant attachment does not inevitably cause later pro-
blems. When infants classified as disorganized do develop such problems, this
may be the result of a continuation of difficult life circumstances rather than
solely an effect of early disorganized attachment.
(6) Disorganized infant attachment is not a validated individual-level clinical diag-
nosis. This is unlike the two attachment-related disorders included in the DSM/
ICD diagnostic systems, developed for the clinical categorization of young
children reared in conditions of severe neglect. These disorders are expressed
across contexts – that is, they are present in multiple settings and with different
adults. In contrast with those clinical disorders, disorganized infant attachment is
not a fixed property of the individual child but is relationship specific.
(7) It is crucial to recognize that some misapplications of ideas relating to disorganized
attachment have accrued in recent years (e.g. in the context of child removal
decisions). Such misapplications can result from erroneous assumptions that (1)
attachment measures can be used as definitive assessments of the individual in
forensic/child protection settings and that disorganized attachment (2) reliably
indicates child maltreatment, (3) is a strong predictor of pathology, and (4) repre-
sents a fixed or static “trait” of the child (i.e. is not altered by development or
changes in available family support). These are myths or exaggerations regarding
disorganized attachment, without support from research evidence.
(8) Misapplications are likely to selectively harm already underprivileged families
(e.g. those raised by parents in socioeconomic adversity or with functional
impairments). Misapplications may violate children’s and parents’ human rights
and represent discriminatory practice against minorities in need of social and
material support. Child removal from his/her original family can never be justi-
fied solely by the child’s display of disorganized attachment to a caregiver.
(9) It is important to recognize that there is robust evidence that both (1) attachment-
based interventions and (2) naturalistically occurring reparative experiences (stable,
safe, and nurturing relationships) can break intergenerational cycles of abuse and
lower the proportion of children with disorganized attachment.
(10) The real practical utility of attachment theory and research resides in supporting
understanding of families and in providing evidence-based interventions. In this
way, attachment theory, assessments, and research can have major roles to play in
clinical formulation and supportive welfare and clinical work. We offer key examples of
interventions in the section “Attachment-based clinical interventions”.
Introduction
It is not uncommon to hear clinicians, practitioners, and policy makers speak about
disorganized child–parent attachment. The concept of disorganized infant attachment
536
P. GRANQVIST ET AL.
 was initially proposed to account for conflicted, disoriented, or fearful behavior shown
by infants toward their caregiver in a laboratory setting (Main & Solomon, 1986, 1990).
This work has led to an array of empirical research that has tested key assumptions
about the causes and implications of disorganized attachment (Madigan et al., 2006; van
IJzendoorn, 1995) and now provides the evidence base for intervention programs (see
Facompré, Bernard, & Waters, 2017; Steele & Steele, in press). There has also been appeal
to the disorganized attachment classification in the context of custodial placements and
child welfare assessments.
Sometimes thinking about disorganized attachment has supported excellent prac-
tice, by informing clinical and child welfare practitioners in reflecting on family needs
and service provision in the context of a variety of other forms of assessment.
However, regrettably, it has also been evident that use of the disorganized attach-
ment classification has sometimes reflected serious misapplications of attachment
theory
and
related
research
(see
discussions
by
Alexius
&
Hollander,
2014;
Granqvist, 2016). We sympathize wholeheartedly with practitioners, who often find
themselves confronted by challenging and important tasks but without the resources
required to carry out those tasks with sufficient time and rigor, and without required
training in attachment. We recognize that this structural shortcoming, which places
practitioners in need of a shortcut, is likely at the core of the problems to be
discussed (Boris & Renk, 2017).
This consensus statement has three aims. Misinformation about the classification is
truly widespread. So, our first aim is to characterize and explain the concept of disorga-
nized infant attachment. Second, in the service of preventing future misuse, we identify
misconceptions and misapplications of the idea of disorganized attachment, especially in
the context of assessment. Third, we provide recommendations for the relevance of
attachment theory and the value of evidence-based applications of attachment theory for
practitioners reflecting on the best way to help families; this is where the real practical
utility of attachment theory resides. We start by describing secure and organized-
insecure forms of infant attachment in order to situate disorganized attachment and
its relevance for practitioners.
What are secure and organized-insecure attachment?
Infant patterns of attachment were identified in a formal laboratory situation known as
the Strange Situation, developed by Mary Ainsworth (Ainsworth, Blehar, Waters, & Wall,
1978). Ainsworth and subsequent researchers looked at how the infant explored an
unfamiliar room and its toys, and how the infant responded to the caregiver when
alarmed or distressed by two brief separations. What Ainsworth and colleagues termed
“secure attachment” has two aspects. First, it refers to a basic confidence that the infant
has in the caregiver to be responsive and comforting when the infant is alarmed or
stressed. Second, secure attachment also means that children have confidence in their
caregiver as a secure base from which to explore, meaning that during their ventures
and play, they expect support, not interference, and can attend fully to exploration
when feeling calm. Ainsworth et al.’s (1978) home observations revealed that the
confidence of securely attached infants to strike a balance between attachment and
exploration was based on experiencing responsive care at home. Later, research and
ATTACHMENT & HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
537
 intervention work with parents have supported this conclusion (e.g. Powell, Cooper,
Hoffman, & Marvin, 2013).
Yet, not all infants show this degree of confidence. For example, some infants
experience consistent rebuff of distress signals and approach behavior by their care-
giver. Typically, such infants develop an “insecure-avoidant” attachment pattern
(Ainsworth et al., 1978), in which their response to alarm, where possible, is to shift
their attention toward exploration of the environment at the expense of communication
of their feelings to their caregiver. In doing so, they are thought to be responding to the
caregiver’s discomfort with close contact. In other words, these infants minimize their
attention to attachment-related information that might otherwise lead them to
approach the caregiver, as this retains the availability of the caregiver (Main, 1990). As
long as the caregiver continues to provide reasonable protection and monitoring in the
context of more emotional distance, this adjustment allows the infant to achieve an
organized, workable attachment strategy.
Other infants may have experienced unreliable caregiver responsiveness when they
make their desire for comfort known, leading them to be highly vigilant about their
attachment figure’s accessibility. Typically, such infants develop “insecure-ambivalent
/resistant” attachment, seen as inconsolable distress and/or anger in the Strange
Situation, which retains the attention of the caregiver (Ainsworth et al., 1978). Even
in situations without significant alarming cues, these infants may engage in attachment
behavior such as clinging to the caregiver at the expense of play, or mixing whiny or
angry behavior with distress. In other words, they maximize their attention to attach-
ment-related information (Main, 1990) to such an extent that it interferes with explora-
tion. Again, to the extent that the caregiver does respond by giving attention, the child’s
heightening of attachment behaviors can result in an organized workable attachment
strategy. These three basic patterns (i.e. secure, insecure-avoidant, insecure-ambivalent
/resistant) serve as the background for our understanding of disorganized attachment.
Importantly, these infant–caregiver patterns have been shown to be relationship specific:
this means that an infant/toddler may well show one pattern to a particular caregiver,
and a different pattern to another caregiver – as practitioners may well have observed in
informal situations.
What is disorganized attachment?
The idea of disorganized attachment (Main & Solomon, 1986, 1990) arose out of a
growing awareness amongst researchers that not all infant responses in the Strange
Situation could be placed in the original patterns defined by Ainsworth (see Duschinsky,
2015). On reunion with their caregiver in the Strange Situation, some infants were seen
to display various conflicted, disoriented, or fearful behaviors. The term “disorganized”
itself can be a little confusing, since in ordinary language, the word can mean “random.”
However, in fact, Main and Solomon (1986, 1990) identified specified classes of beha-
viors that – if seen at sufficient intensity and in the presence of the parent in the Strange
Situation – could lead to a disorganized attachment classification. The classes were (1)
sequential and (2) simultaneous display of contradictory behavior patterns; (3) undir-
ected, misdirected, incomplete, and interrupted movements and expressions; (4) stereo-
typies, asymmetrical, and mistimed movements and anomalous postures; (5) freezing,
538
P. GRANQVIST ET AL.
 stilling, and slowed movements and expressions; (6) direct indices of apprehension
regarding the parent; and (7) Direct indices of disorganization and disorientation. It is
the intensity of the display of conflict, disorientation or fear, and the extent to which this
disrupts a child’s attachment strategy that lead to a disorganized attachment classifica-
tion. For this reason, infants classified as disorganized are also given an alternate “best-
fitting” (secondary) organized category as well (e.g. disorganized/avoidant attachment).
This convention has led to a particularly marked decrease in primary resistant category
assignments; when resistance is present to a significant degree, the child also often
receives a disorganized classification due to marked display of disorganized behaviors
(van IJzendoorn, Schuengel, & Bakermans-Kranenburg, 1999).
Experienced coders of the Strange Situation know that it is fairly common for infants
to show a certain amount of the behaviors listed by Main and Solomon, and even more
so for infants drawn from populations facing adversity. As a result, seeing one or another
example of disorganized infant behavior in the Strange Situation is not, in itself,
sufficient for a disorganized classification unless certain thresholds of intensity are met
(Main & Solomon, 1990). Recognizing such thresholds forms a core part of the accredited
training and reliability process (see http://attachment-training.com/at/home/training/).
Moreover, an infant may display disorganized attachment with one parent and yet
organized, even secure, attachment with the other (e.g. Steele, Steele, & Fonagy,
1996). Thus, disorganized attachment is not a fixed property or trait of the individual
child but tends to be relationship specific. Even within a child’s relationship with a
particular caregiver, disorganized attachment displays only modest stability over time
(van IJzendoorn et al., 1999).
Finally, Main and Solomon (1990) advise that the disorganized attachment coding
system should not be used for infants above 20 months, since after that children generally
develop more sophisticated strategies for coping with caregiver behavior, and may there-
fore no longer show the indexed disorganized behaviors. The focus of this consensus
statement is on infancy. However, it can be briefly noted that with growing cognitive and
social abilities, formerly disorganized children may adopt controlling (caregiving or puni-
tive) strategies to help manage dysregulated, unpredictable, or frightening caregiving
environments (e.g. Main & Cassidy, 1988; Solomon, George, & De Jong, 1995; compare
with Crittenden, 2016). When assessed via representational (e.g. semi-projective interviews)
rather than behavioral methods, these children’s attachment representations are none-
theless likely to express fearful elements (e.g. catastrophic fantasies; Main, Kaplan, &
Cassidy, 1985). It should be noted, however, that the infant disorganized attachment
classification under discussion here, and its connection with fearful attachment representa-
tions, should not be confused with constructs from the self-report romantic attachment
literature (e.g. “fearful adult attachment style”). There is as yet little evidence that they refer
to the same thing, even if the self-report assessments appeal to some of the same concepts
such as “attachment” and “fear” (see Bartholomew & Horowitz, 1991; Bifulco, Jacobs, Bunn,
Thomas, & Irving, 2008; Rholes, Paetzold, & Kohn, 2016).
What are the psychological processes behind disorganized attachment?
Both outside and inside the Strange Situation, it is important to note that the behaviors
listed by Main and Solomon can occur for a variety of reasons unrelated to the history of
ATTACHMENT & HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
539
 the relationship with the caregiver. For example, exhaustion, illness, irresolvable pain,
neurological disturbance, and excessive situational stress (e.g. brief parental unavail-
ability in a busy and noisy supermarket) might all lead an infant to show some of the
behaviors that Main and Solomon list, for instance tension behaviors like stereotypies.
However, that would not be the kind of disorganization that we are concerned with
when we are thinking about disorganized attachment.
Disorganized attachment is coded in a standardized procedure in which a child has
been moderately alarmed, and where the display of the behaviors that Main and
Solomon list can be assumed to reflect, to varying degrees, a disruption of the child’s
attachment response to their caregiver in the context of that alarm. There is consensus
in the field that this can occur for a variety of reasons. For example, some infants may,
because of dispositional or neurological factors, have more difficulty than others in
achieving a single strategy for utilizing the caregiver as a safe haven. This could increase
their odds of showing conflicted behavior in the Strange Situation, though not necessa-
rily overtly frightened responses to the caregiver (e.g. Padrón, Carlson, & Sroufe, 2014;
Spangler, Femmer-Bombik, & Grossmann, 1996). Relatedly, the behaviors listed by Main
and Solomon (1986, 1990) may well be seen in infants who would not receive a
disorganized classification by experienced coders. For instance, stereotypic behaviors
would be discounted by trained coders if they suspect that the infant has a neurological
or developmental disorder (e.g. Capps, Sigman, & Mundy, 1994; Rozga et al., in press;
Dozier & Bernard, 2017).
However, as mentioned in the previous section, a classification of disorganized
attachment with one caregiver does not have an association with disorganized attach-
ment with another (van IJzendoorn et al., 1999). This suggests that much of the variance
can be accounted for by relationship-specific factors, or by interactions between infant
disposition and the caregiving environment. For example, one study by Bakermans-
Kranenburg and van IJzendoorn (2007) found that a genetic marker (DRD4 7-repeat
polymorphism) increased the risk of developing disorganized attachment when com-
bined with environmental risk. Similarly, Spangler, Johann, Ronai, and Zimmermann
(2009) found an association between a serotonin transporter gene (the short allele
variation of the 5-HTTLPR) and attachment disorganization when maternal responsive-
ness was low, but not when responsiveness was high.
In considering the kinds of caregiving behavior that tend to be associated with infant
disorganized attachment, it has been theorized that infants may show disorganized
attachment in the Strange Situation because they have had experiences of their care-
giver as a regular source of alarm. Alarming behavior can take several forms, including
subtly frightening or frightened parental behaviors (e.g. Hesse & Main, 2006), states of
mind that leave the caregiver psychologically unavailable to the child, threats of harm,
or even unusually extended absences (Solomon & George, 2011). A child may also be
expected to associate alarm with a caregiver who they have seen subjected to partner
violence (Lieberman & Amaya-Jackson, 2005). Experiences of the caregiver as a source of
alarm can lead to a disposition to move away, withdraw, or flee from the caregiver when
future experiences of alarm occur. However, the attachment response directs an infant
to seek safety from their caregiver. The result is a paradoxical situation for the infant
(Duschinsky, Main, & Hesse, in press; Hesse & Main, 2000). Albeit to varying degrees, the
different behaviors listed by Main and Solomon (1990) can be regarded as consequences
540
P. GRANQVIST ET AL.
 of a tendency to approach the attachment figure and a simultaneous tendency to move
away from the attachment figure. This is why most forms of disorganized attachment
appear as conflicted, confused, and/or apprehensive behavior toward the caregiver,
since these qualities can characterize a child’s paradoxical situation (Hesse & Main,
2006; Solomon, Duschinsky, Bakkum, & Schuengel, in press).
It might seem strange that a child who is alarmed by the caregiver is nonetheless
motivated to approach the caregiver, for instance after a brief laboratory separation.
However, the child’s attachment system is one of multiple behavioral systems (including
the caregiving system, the fear system) which, when activated, motivate the organism to
achieve a certain goal. The attachment system is biologically channeled to make the
child want to approach a familiar caregiver when there are cues to danger in the
environment or when he or she has been unexpectedly separated from that caregiver.
This concrete prediction was one of the core elements of John Bowlby’s (1969) theory
and part of what has made attachment theory so compelling and powerful as a research
tool and basis for thinking about clinical interventions. Hesse and Main (2000) reasoned
that, at an evolutionary level, proximity to even an alarming caregiver would likely have
helped a human infant survive, given that infants are unable to fend for or regulate
themselves.
This conclusion is supported by findings that a number of (often subtle) frightening,
frightened, and dissociative caregiver behaviors are associated with elevated rates of
infant D attachment (e.g. Abrams, Rifkin, & Hesse, 2006; Madigan et al., 2006; Schuengel,
Bakermans-Kranenburg, & van IJzendoorn, 1999). These are especially common in par-
ents who are still troubled by their own experiences of loss or trauma to the point that
this intrudes into their thinking and behavior (what is known as “unresolved loss or
trauma”). For instance, Hughes, Turton, McGauley, and Fonagy (2006) found that a
majority of infants to mothers who had unresolved loss regarding a previous still-birth
received a classification of disorganized attachment. There is no expectation that these
mothers are abusive to their infants, but women who have had this terribly sad thing
happen may remain very troubled by the experience in a way that impacts their
caregiving of a next-born child.
Even though the caregiver may not be doing anything abusive to the infant, a
caregiver who is him- or herself in some way alarming to the child can create a
paradoxical predicament for a child because the parent who is the source of safety is
then also the source of alarm, increasing the chances of disorganized attachment being
displayed by the infant in the Strange Situation. A parent who is experiencing an acute
combination of socioeconomic risks or a parent unresolved with regard to loss or trauma
(like sexual or physical abuse in their own history) may be a sensitive, non-abusive
caregiver. However, they may nonetheless still harbor frightening ideas, experience
dysregulating emotions, and be prone to enter segregated (mildly dissociative) mental
states. When the parent shows fear or threat in these states, he or she is theorized to be
alarming to the infant (e.g. looming into the baby’s face; Jacobvitz, Leon, & Hazen, 2006).
The expression of such behaviors by the caregiver can, in many cases, be outside the
conscious awareness of the individual. It is important to recognize that “blaming” these
caregivers for their behavior, or engaging in punitive responses to them, is therefore
mistaken and likely counterproductive. As we will elaborate further in the sections that
follow, understanding the development of attachments changes the clinical imperative
ATTACHMENT & HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
541
 from retribution for errors to efforts in assisting parents to adopt caregiving behaviors
that promote feelings of safety and security in the child.
Can disorganized attachment be used to infer children’s experiences with
caregivers and forecast their developmental prospects?
Practitioners will wish to consider what they can infer from a classification of disorga-
nized attachment. Even if told by a certified attachment coder that an infant’s behavior
in the Strange Situation has received a disorganized classification, a practitioner can only
infer that this infant has experienced alarm in relation to the caregiver for some reason
and has a somewhat higher risk of social–emotional developmental difficulties. These
two inferences suggest priorities and areas for support for the caregiver, but with only
broad brushstrokes in the absence of additional assessment. Accordingly, disorganized
attachment with a particular caregiver is best thought of as a risk factor for later social
and externalizing problems, contributing as one factor among many others (Fearon,
Bakermans-Kranenburg, van IJzendoorn, Lapsley, & Roisman, 2010; Groh et al., 2014;
Groh, Fearon, IJzendoorn, Bakermans-Kranenburg, & Roisman, 2017). The average effect
size linking infant disorganized attachment with a particular caregiver to later behavior
problems is small to moderate (for discussion of what effect sizes mean in practice, see
Ferguson, 2009). In other words, a child assigned a disorganized classification is not
necessarily expected to develop behavior problems. Additionally, when infants classified
as disorganized do develop such problems, this may also be the result of a continuation
of difficult life circumstances rather than solely an effect of early disorganized attach-
ment (Sroufe, 2016).
Similarly, assessments of disorganized attachment are reasonably good at discerning
infants’ experiences of caregiving at the group level, but they have not been validated
for making inferences about an individual infant’s experience. Disorganized classifica-
tions are typically based on an infant’s behavior at a single point in time during a brief
assessment; it cannot be taken to be a true reflection of the infant’s attachment
relationship in every case. In research, direct effects of early relationships on later
outcomes are probabilistic and are more in evidence when cumulative assessments
are used rather than a single measure at a particular time (Sroufe, Egeland, Carlson, &
Collins, 2005). Researchers and clinicians can increase the validity of conclusions about
an infant’s experiences by carefully compiling a body of observations and information
about the history of that particular parent–infant dyad. This should include, above all,
what goes on in the home, as well as consideration of the wider context supporting or
depleting the emotional and material resources available both to the caregiver and to
the infant. Naturally, for a clinician who encounters an infant exhibiting disorganized
behaviors toward a caregiver, it is perfectly reasonable to use this as a way of trying to
understand how to intervene to enhance the relationship. If frightening or frightened
behaviors are evident, for example, working with a parent to eliminate these is indicated
(see also the “Attachment in clinical assessment and formulation” section). However, this
is quite different from using observations of disorganized behaviors prognostically.
Maltreatment was identified quite early as one possible cause of disorganized attach-
ment in relation to the caregiver (Carlson, Cicchetti, Barnett, & Braunwald, 1989).
However, there are two important qualifications that need to be made in relation to
542
P. GRANQVIST ET AL.
 this statement. A first is that a significant proportion of maltreated infants do not receive
a classification of disorganized attachment with the maltreating caregiver in the Strange
Situation. Although meta-analytic data show that maltreated infants are much more
likely to receive a disorganized attachment classification than infants drawn from
samples with few risk factors (Cyr, Euser, Bakermans-Kranenburg, & van IJzendoorn,
2010), such data also show that a large proportion of maltreated infants do not receive
a disorganized classification (van IJzendoorn et al., 1999).
The second qualification is that there are other pathways to disorganized attachment
besides maltreatment. Of particular relevance here for the issue of specificity is that for
infants from families experiencing five or more socioeconomic risk factors, rates of
disorganized attachment are also high, and similar in prevalence to samples of infants
known to be maltreated (Cyr et al., 2010). Cyr and colleagues argue that such findings do
not necessarily imply that these socioeconomic risk families with infants classified as
disorganized all engage in maltreatment. Rather, the authors argue that the accumula-
tion of socioeconomic risks leads to a disorganized attachment classification by creating
a frightening and distressing situation for a caregiver who might otherwise be able to
provide adequate care (Cyr et al., 2010).
Can the disorganized attachment classification be used to screen for
maltreatment?
We know that disorganized attachment is overrepresented in maltreatment samples
compared to samples from the general population. Therefore, it may be tempting to ask
whether assessments of disorganized attachment might be used at least as a “proxy” or
screening tool for maltreatment? Recommendations have been offered to practitioners
(e.g. Building Great Britons, 2015; Wilkins, 2012), suggesting that the disorganized attach-
ment classification offers child protection workers a way to cut through the particularities
of potential maltreatment cases, seeing through to the needs of a child and their likely
future outcomes. In a resource-strapped context, such a prospect is understandably
appealing; and child protection workers report that it has helped them in making assess-
ments of families, made decision-making easier, and helped them distinguish between
abused and non-abused children (Wilkins, 2017). However, caution is warranted here.
In order to understand the value and limitations of disorganized attachment, it may
be helpful to identify some relevant key requirements of screening instruments.
Screening instruments require adequate sensitivity (i.e. high probability of detecting a
phenomenon) and specificity (i.e. accuracy in detecting nonclinical phenomena) to be
useful. The disorganized attachment classification has insufficient sensitivity and speci-
ficity for screening for maltreatment (Granqvist et al., 2016; Main, Hesse, & Hesse, 2011).
In addition to this, there is the need for proper training to code disorganized attachment
(http://attachment-training.com/at/), and the child protection workers interviewed by
Wilkins (2017) had not received accredited reliability to do so. We know, of course, that
child protection workers can and do make fine coders of disorganized attachment.
However, even when accredited reliability is in place, the results of any assessment of
attachment should be used to inform clinical formulation (to be discussed further
shortly), rather than as a definitive means of assessment for maltreatment or develop-
mental risk.
ATTACHMENT & HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
543
 Disorganized attachment vis-à-vis attachment disorder
How does disorganized attachment relate, then, to “attachment disorder,” which is an
individual-level clinical diagnosis? To be clear, they are completely different things.
Disorganized attachment is a technical, research-based term that comes from coding
infant behaviors in a specific laboratory situation, the Strange Situation, at age 12–-
20 months. No replicated research has yet established that children assigned a disorga-
nized classification in the Strange Situation show the behaviors listed by Main and
Solomon in naturalistic settings, such as the child’s home. Conversely, children who
display disorganized behaviors in naturalistic settings may or may not receive a classi-
fication of disorganized attachment in the Strange Situation (Schuengel, van IJzendoorn,
Bakermans-Kranenburg, & Blom, 1998).
In contrast, the attachment-related disorders listed in psychiatric diagnostic systems such
as the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM; American Psychiatric Association, 2013) refer
to clusters of behaviors first described among children reared from infancy in orphanages,
without biological parents present. In the DSM, there are two attachment-related diagnoses,
and both are strongly associated with experiences of extreme social neglect, capturing
“distinctive patterns of aberrant attachment and social behaviors in young children who are
socially neglected or are being raised in environments that limit opportunities to form
selective attachments” (Zeanah et al., 2016, p. 990). The first is reactive attachment disorder
(RAD), which is assigned to children who are very inhibited or withdrawn from their
caregivers and who do not show proximity seeking or contact maintenance to the care-
givers, even when the children display high distress. The second attachment-related diag-
nosis in the DSM is disinhibited social engagement disorder (DSED; formerly RAD subtype II:
disinhibited). It is characterized by failure to show a preference for familiar caregivers, even
when the child is frightened or distressed. In an important study, Woolgar and Baldock
(2015) reported data suggesting the widespread overuse of the attachment disorder
diagnoses for children who do not meet the DSM criteria. Both attachment disorders should
only be assigned to children who meet the diagnostic criteria before the age of 5 years and
after 9 months of age (i.e. when an attachment has usually formed).
Unlike disorganized attachment, which is a response to a particular caregiver in a
specific situation, both attachment-related disorders signify behaviors that are understood
to permeate many naturalistic situations in the child’s life. While an association between
disorganized attachment with the primary caregiver in infancy and DSED has been
reported (Gleason et al., 2014; Lyons-Ruth, Bureau, Riley, & Atlas-Corbett, 2009; Vorria
et al., 2003), disorganized attachment is much more prevalent than either of the two
attachment-related disorders and cannot be equated with them. For instance, Smyke,
Zeanah, Fox, Nelson, and Guthrie (2010) found that rates of disorganized attachment
substantially declined for infants randomly assigned to high-quality foster care – but, by
contrast, rates of DSED did not differ between infants who remained institutionalized and
those in foster care. Zeanah et al. (2016, p. 992) have recently questioned whether DSED
should be considered an “attachment” disorder at all, as it “may occur in the absence of
attachment, in an aberrant attachment or in a healthy attachment to a subsequent foster
or adoptive parent” (though see also Lyons-Ruth & Jacobvitz, 2016).
Though reliable epidemiologic data are lacking, correctly diagnosed attachment-
related disorders are in all likelihood very rare in the general population. Thus, to
544
P. GRANQVIST ET AL.
 understand attachment among the overwhelming majority of children in most popula-
tions, clinicians and practitioners should not reach for diagnostic attachment entities
designed for use with children from contexts of extreme neglect or institutionalization.
Neither should the disorganized attachment classification be “pressed into service” to fill
a perceived gap in attachment-related diagnoses for community populations, especially
prior to any attempts to validate it for such use.
Some markers of disorganization may, however, be found to enrich clinical assess-
ment if embedded as part of a larger, more comprehensive assessment battery. For
example, the continuous scale for the intensity of disorganized behavior (Main &
Solomon, 1990) might prove useful. Though we do not know at present, extreme
indications of disorganization might point to psychopathology with more or less severe
symptoms and consequences (van IJzendoorn & Bakermans-Kranenburg, 2003). We
return to this possibility in the next section.
Attachment in clinical assessment and formulation
Though we offer cautions about the scope and interpretation of attachment assess-
ments, the rich theoretical and conceptual work of Bowlby and Ainsworth has provided
us with a solid base that can help guide clinical work. Attachment theory and research
have a major role to play in supportive welfare and clinical work with children and
families. And, it is targeted supportive work, much more than assessment, that actually
makes a difference to child outcomes (Fuller & Nieto, 2014; Palusci & Ondersma, 2012).
However, within the context of a wider approach with a family, attachment-related
assessments may offer valuable information. The Strange Situation may be used to
provide important confirmatory or disconfirmatory information, give extra insight into
the child’s expectations about their caregiver, or nuance other knowledge about the
dyad. To give another example where an attachment-related assessment has been used
to good effect, Cyr and her team, as well as van IJzendoorn and colleagues, have
independently proposed to use a brief, video-feedback-based parenting intervention
that lowers rates of disorganized behaviors (see next section) as itself a tool to examine
whether a parent is able to profit from further parenting support or not. A decision to
treat the clinical problems within the family or place the child in out-of-home care (in a
stable alternative family) may be informed by the outcome of this dynamic assessment
procedure, leading to a closer connection between assessment and treatment (see
Bakermans-Kranenburg, Juffer, & van IJzendoorn, in press).
If such a dynamic assessment approach were to be found sufficiently sensitive and
specific in identifying maltreatment and/or predicting psychopathology and were
empirically shown to do so better than “assessment as usual,” then it could be used
as a valuable instrument to inform relevant interventions. Lyons-Ruth and Jacobvitz
(2016) and the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (2016) have recently
argued that work toward such a procedure is a “priority” for the field. An important spur
for such work are findings suggesting diversity among children placed within the
disorganized classification in terms of their antecedents and implications for develop-
ment, and therefore their potential risk (see e.g. Lyons-Ruth et al., 2013; Waters &
Valenzuela 1999). In a recent landmark study, Padrón et al. (2014) found evidence that
some forms of disorganization (indices I–V) may be more associated with genetic or
ATTACHMENT & HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
545
 individual factors, and others (indices VI–VII) might be more associated with an infant’s
adverse experiences with the caregiver. Such findings underline why the disorganized
classification as a whole, developed as a research tool, is not an appropriate substitute
for a validated, psychometrically sound instrument for assessing caregiver or infant
behaviors serving as markers of developmental risk.
However, beyond assessments per se, attachment theory and research may greatly
benefit clinicians in supporting clinical insights and clinical case formulation. Although
formal attachment assessments may be too costly for regular use by practitioners, the
principles derived from attachment theory can inform clinical practice (see Slade, 2004;
Steele & Steele, 2008; Woolgar & Baldock, 2015; Zeanah et al., 2016). For example, it may
be useful to consider whether the child can use the caregiver as a safe haven when
distressed and as a secure base for exploration (e.g. Powell et al., 2013). If not, supportive
work can be targeted accordingly. That disorganized attachment is relationship specific
also implies that clinicians need to observe the child with all his or her caregivers in
order to make a more informed set of recommendations in the best interests of the
child, consistent with good child welfare practice.
The idea of a paradoxical situation could also inform the practitioner’s thinking about
a child’s predicament. For instance, it may be crucial for thinking about why a child who
has been maltreated may still cling to his or her caregiver and be distressed by a
separation, behavior that might otherwise lead a practitioner to think that the relation-
ship between child and caregiver is robust and healthy. Practitioners can additionally
learn a lot from looking at research on the intergenerational transmission of attachment
(e.g. van IJzendoorn, 1995; Verhage et al., 2016). Caregivers who represent their own
attachment history in a particular way on the Adult Attachment Interview (Main,
Goldwyn, & Hesse, 2003), say, have flexible attention and produce a coherent narrative,
tend to have children who come to display attachment behaviors to the caregiver in
similar ways (i.e. can use him/her as a secure base from which to explore and a safe
haven when alarmed). This link across generations appears to be at least partly
explained by aspects of caregiving behavior and the caregiver’s representation of his/
her child (Madigan, Hawkins, Plamondon, Moran, & Benoit, 2015).
The intergenerational “cycle of abuse” is a similar case in point, referring to a connec-
tion between a parent’s own history of abuse and an increased probability that the parent
will maltreat his or her own child. This connection has been firmly established in empirical
research at the group level (see meta-analysis by Schofield, Lee, & Merrick, 2013). Yet,
research is clear that not every parent who was abused as a child will abuse his or her own
child. Rather, studies have reported that about 30% of those who had been maltreated go
on to abuse or neglect their children, which is twice the proportion of maltreatment
present in families without a history of abuse matched for age, income, class, and race
(Ben-David, Jonson-Reid, Drake, & Kohl, 2015; Widom, Czaja, & DuMont, 2015). Attachment
theory can offer important insights into the cycle of abuse. For instance, Thompson’s
(2006) research with mothers who had experienced sexual or physical violence as children
found that they were substantially more likely to have a child known to social services.
However, the link between the generations was not direct, as would follow from the idea
that the abuse occurs through direct imitation. Instead, experiencing abuse as a child
predicted less supportive relationships as an adult and greater likelihood of experiencing
546
P. GRANQVIST ET AL.
 physical violence as an adult. These two factors in turn predicted the likelihood that their
child would experience abuse from the mother or her partner.
We have also learned how the cycle of abuse can be broken, and this highlights factors
that are important for practitioners. In the Minnesota study of child development and
adaptation (Egeland, Jacobvitz, & Sroufe, 1988), there were three factors that jointly
accounted for interruptions in the cycle of abuse. One was that many of these parents
received help as children from non-abusive adults; the second was that they received
therapy at some point in their lives; and the third was that the abused person entered into
a supportive and non-abusive spousal relationship in adulthood (see also Thornberry et al.,
2013). Those three relational themes taken together were a powerful reparative trio
(Egeland, 1991). None of the caregivers who had received support from a non-abusive
adult during their childhood or who had received at least a year of therapy went on to
maltreat their child in this sample. Dixon, Browne, and Hamilton-Giachritsis (2009) likewise
found that social supports markedly reduce the likelihood of the intergenerational cycle of
abuse but, in addition, found that financial stability played an important protective role in
supporting parent–child relationships. Similarly, it is notable that Loman and Siegel (2012)
document substantial effects on family safety even a decade after an anti-poverty service,
provided to families as part of involvement with social services, which assured that the
family had reliable funds for food, clothing, and housing. However, meta-analytic data
suggest that in order to be reliably successful in preventing child maltreatment, interven-
tions may have to include parent training, and not just support (Euser, Alink, Stoltenborgh,
Bakermans-Kranenburg, & van IJzendoorn, 2015).
Therefore, what we know about breaking the cycle of abuse is that even if parents
have a maltreatment history, they can be helped to establish healthier relationships with
their own children. Important factors include having a relationship with a therapist or
other professional (e.g. as part of a parent training program), providing services to help
them with financial stability, facilitating supportive relationships with a partner or
friends, and helping them to identify patterns of behavior that may alarm their child
or that reduce their capacity to meet their child’s needs. Thus, even though research
shows an intergenerational cycle of abuse at a probabilistic group level, it is very far
from destiny at the individual level. We know that families can be helped, and attach-
ment theory is a powerful framework for guiding that help.
Attachment-based clinical interventions
Attachment theory has been an important, guiding framework for designing specific
clinical and child welfare interventions (see Steele and Steele, in press). We give four
examples below to show the range of interventions, and also the diverse learning that
has come from them.
First, Child-Parent Psychotherapy (CPP) is a weekly 10–12 month attachment theory-
informed intervention that utilizes joint sessions between the caregiver and their young
child to promote protective caregiving and secure attachment, and to target maladap-
tive attributions between parent and child (Lieberman, Gosh Ippen, & Van Horn, 2015).
CPP has been provided to families from diverse socioeconomic and cultural back-
grounds and to families confronted with child maltreatment, domestic violence, and
parental depression. CPP strives to restore the caregiver into the protective shield role
ATTACHMENT & HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
547
 and to help both parent and child better regulate their emotions related to traumatic
experiences, creating a shared narrative regarding the child’s experiences. Numerous
positive child outcomes have been obtained in randomized controlled trials, and CPP
was the first intervention to demonstrate that disorganized attachment was modifiable
(Cicchetti, Rogosch, & Toth, 2006; Toth, Rogosch, Manly, & Cicchetti, 2006).
Second, Dozier and colleagues (Bernard et al., 2012) have developed a 10-session,
manualized at-home intervention, the Attachment and Biobehavioral Catch-up (or ABC)
program, for caregivers who are at very high risk for abusing or neglecting their children.
This intervention targets three domains of caregiving, helping caregivers to (1) be
nurturing when their child is distressed (e.g. to pick up a crying baby), (2) follow the
child’s lead (which in turn aids children in developing regulatory capabilities), and (3)
avoid displaying frightening behaviors. A distinctive feature of this intervention is the
active and central role taken by caregiving coaches, who provide frequent and specific
comments “in the moment.” In randomized controlled trials, the ABC intervention has
been shown to facilitate parental sensitivity and child regulatory capabilities, as well as
to substantially reduce rates of disorganized attachment (Bernard et al., 2012). These
intervention effects have now been replicated at multiple sites (Dozier & Bernard, 2017).
Third, the Video-feedback Intervention to promote Positive Parenting and Sensitive
Discipline (VIPP-SD: Juffer, Bakermans-Kranenburg, & van IJzendoorn, 2005, 2017) is also
an evidence-based, short-term intervention (usually six sessions). VIPP-SD is based on an
integration of attachment theory and social learning theory, particularly coercion theory
(Patterson, 1982). The program is both standardized and individualized, meaning that
interveners work from a standard protocol but attune the guidelines from the protocol
to the parent–child dyad, resulting in individualized video feedback. Video enables
precise observation of even subtle child and parent behaviors, and by providing “sub-
titles” to the child’s emotions and behavior shown on the film, parents are stimulated to
take the child’s perspective. As a result, their observational skills improve, which is an
essential element of parental sensitivity. Moreover, positive moments of parent–child
interaction are reinforced by stilling and repeating such important episodes. The VIPP
has been found effective (in randomized controlled trials) in improving parental sensi-
tivity and in lowering rates of disorganized – and its later equivalent “controlling” – child
attachment, especially in at-risk populations (Juffer et al., 2005, 2017; Moss et al., 2011).
Training workshops are being offered on a regular basis in several countries.
Fourth, with pilot results in print (Steele, Murphy, & Steele, 2010), and a randomized
controlled trial recently completed (Murphy et al., 2015), the Group Attachment-Based
Intervention (GABI) is another promising manualized intervention targeting trauma- and
poverty-exposed families with children aged zero to three. GABI runs for 26 weeks, and
the families meet three times each week in a group over 2 h. This intervention includes
parents-and-children, parents-only, and children-only components in each 120-min ses-
sion. The families enrolled are quite extreme in terms of risk. Besides parental trauma
and poverty, domestic and neighborhood violence, health disparities, and inability to
find an adequate place to live are parts of these families’ reality. Although intensive,
GABI is cost-effective because it is delivered in a group, and it combats the social
isolation and poor impulse control, endemic among these families, while working on
key qualities of parent–child relationships. The recently completed randomized-control
trial has reported significant improvements for GABI in maternal sensitivity, child
548
P. GRANQVIST ET AL.
 engagement, and dyadic security in free-play observations at baseline compared to end-
of-treatment. This was in contrast to no gains in the treatment as usual comparison
group who received parenting education classes only (M. Steele, 2017).
These supportive interventions have all demonstrated – in randomized controlled
trials – that the caregiving conditions contributing to (or maintaining) disorganized
attachment can be changed even among very high-risk families (for meta-analytic
results, see Facompré et al., 2017). Additionally, they have helped us understand
important therapeutic mechanisms that can be used by clinicians and child welfare
practitioners outside of manualized interventions. These include helping caregivers to
follow the child’s lead, avoid alarming behavior and provide nurturance, make sense of
traumatic experiences, break social isolation, and learn strategies to remain with the
child in the moment rather than become lost in memories. The question of which
components are particularly effective is a topic of great significance, and, together
with the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence or NICE (2016), we encourage
funding for further work in this area. For an infant, the parent is the world, so by
changing the behavior of the parent, we change the infant’s world. This in turn enables
a transformation of the child’s behavioral regulation and sense of confidence in the
caregiver. That this can often be effectively done with short-term interventions is
remarkable and should effectively counteract any misconception that child attachment –
whether disorganized or not – is a fixed/static trait.
We emphasize our strong consensus on the need for supportive work for families,
and we are dismayed by evidence that the thresholds for forensic assessments of
families are so low, and the thresholds for receiving supportive interventions are so
high. For instance in the United Kingdom, 1 in 5 children born in the 2009–10 was
referred to children’s social care before their fifth birthday, and 1 in 19 received a
forensic assessment for child maltreatment (Bilson & Martin, 2016). Such intense focus
on investigative-forensic assessment contrasts with the slim availability of supportive
services for families in the United Kingdom.
In appraising such policy and service priorities from an attachment perspective, we
must highlight that child removal is itself a highly risky undertaking. Extra-parental care
arrangements are often unstable over time (e.g. Berlin, Vinnerljung, & Hjern, 2011), and
research shows that – likely for multiple reasons – children in unstable foster care often
exhibit a developmental profile comparable to children who continue to live in mal-
treating environments (Lawrence, Carlson, & Egeland, 2006).
Nonetheless, adoption and stable foster home placements are effective interventions for
children from families where children are at risk of serious harm, such as where there are
high levels of irresolvable violence and addiction (Oosterman, Schuengel, Slot, Bullens, &
Doreleijers, 2007). Thus, we concur with Bowlby (1958) that child removal and placement
into stable foster or adoptive care is sometimes fully justified with the child’s best long-term
interests in mind. More specifically, we believe that child removal should be undertaken if (a)
there is compelling evidence of maltreatment and (b) a fully adequate provision of suppor-
tive services has been exhausted or can be judged with confidence to be futile. In other
words, by no means should family preservation always take precedence over child removal.
Attachment theory may then inform effective foster parenting as well as promote under-
standing of why some foster children’s behaviors may be slow to change even after a good
foster relationship has been built (Dozier & Rutter, 2016).
ATTACHMENT & HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
549
 One specific population where child removal, at the expense of parent training and
sufficient social and material supports, has occurred with some frequency is among families
with a parent who has been diagnosed with an intellectual disability. Research indicates that
30–50% of such families face child removal, a higher rate than for any other studied
population (e.g. Booth, Booth, & McConnell, 2005). Behind these removals, there is often
an assumption among practitioners that these parents with intellectual disabilities are
inherently unable to provide sufficient care, that their children consequently will have
attachment problems (e.g. disorganized attachment), and that there is no reason to provide
interventions for the parents, because they will presumably fail to learn from them as a
natural function of their learning disability (Alexius & Hollander, 2014; McConnell &
Llewellyn, 2002). These assumptions run counter to well-established empirical research
suggesting considerable functional differences among parents diagnosed with intellectual
disabilities as well as indication that their caregiving may be responsive to supportive
interventions (for reviews, see Feldman, 2010; Schuengel, Kef, Hodes, & Meppelder, 2017).
In the only child attachment study conducted in this population, parental intellectual
disability alone was not associated with either fearful/disorganized attachment representa-
tions or with other forms of insecure attachment (Granqvist, Forslund, Fransson, Springer, &
Lindberg, 2014). However, the combination of maternal intellectual disability and the
mothers having been subjected to serious forms of maltreatment during their own upbring-
ing made it difficult for these mothers to be sensitive to their children (Lindberg et al., 2017)
and predicted fearful/disorganized attachment representations (Granqvist et al., 2014).
The evidence of effectiveness of some supportive interventions for families in redu-
cing rates of child maltreatment and disorganized attachment suggest that such inter-
ventions should be a public health priority, and an area of further investment. However,
though policy that curbs maltreatment (via supportive interventions) will likely contri-
bute toward the reduction of disorganized attachment, it will not lead to its eradication,
as disorganized attachment is sometimes caused by other factors than maltreatment.
Summary and conclusions
Disorganized behaviors can occur for a variety of reasons, and many of them do not in
themselves indicate maltreatment, developmental risk, or mental illness. Under existing
protocols, only when they are of sufficient intensity and occur in the caregiver’s
presence in a standardized procedure (i.e. the Strange Situation) can a classification of
disorganized attachment be assigned in a valid way. This is also predicated on the
classification being completed by a certified coder.
Disorganized attachment is more common among children who have been maltreated.
However, a substantial proportion of maltreated children do not show disorganized
attachment in the Strange Situation, and many children showing disorganized attachment
in the Strange Situation have not been maltreated. There are other pathways to disorga-
nized attachment besides maltreatment. These other pathways often feature frightening,
frightened, and dissociative parental behaviors, which are more common among care-
givers struggling with unresolved loss/trauma or multiple compounded socioeconomic
risks. Other causal conditions include major (extended or repeated) separations under
adverse conditions, and congenital factors, possibly in combination with caregiver factors
(Lakatos et al., 2000; Padrón et al., 2014; Spangler et al. 1996).
550
P. GRANQVIST ET AL.
 Empirical research at the group level has established disorganized attachment as a pre-
dictor, of small-to-moderate magnitude, for the development of social and behavior problems.
However, this research is equally clear that disorganized attachment does not inevitably cause
later problems. Nor is disorganized attachment a validated individual-level clinical diagnosis,
unlike the two attachment disorders included in the DSM/ICD diagnostic systems – conditions
originally developed for young children brought up under deprivation in institutional settings.
Misapplications of attachment theory in general, and disorganized attachment in parti-
cular, have accrued in recent years, as reflected for example in some child removal
decisions. These misapplications can result from erroneous assumptions that (1) attach-
ment measures can be used as definitive assessments of the individual in forensic/child-
protection settings and that (2) disorganized attachment reliably indicates child maltreat-
ment (3) is a strong predictor of pathology and (4) cannot be changed through interven-
tions in the child’s original home. Such misapplications may selectively harm already
underprivileged families, such as those facing multiple socioeconomic risk factors or
including a parent with functional impairments. These misapplications not only violate
children’s and parents’ human rights but in many cases, they may also represent discrimi-
natory practice against minorities in need of our social and material support.
However, it is also important to recognize that attachment theory, assessments, and
research can have major roles to play in clinical formulation and supportive welfare and clinical
work. There is robust evidence that attachment-based interventions as well as naturalistically
occurring reparative relationship experiences (stable, safe, and nurturing relationships) can
break intergenerational cycles of abuse and lower the proportion of children displaying
disorganized attachment. We conclude that the real practical utility of attachment theory
and research resides in supporting understanding of families and in providing supportive,
evidence-based interventions.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank many researchers, clinicians, and social workers who gave
feedback on previous drafts on this paper. We have really appreciated their contributions. A
particular thank you to Felicity Callard, Sue Lampitt, and Matt Woolgar for their suggestions, which
led to substantial improvements of the paper. The authors are indebted to the Wellcome Trust
(Grant Number WT103343MA) whose support has made a real difference to us and facilitated the
discussions that led to this consensus statement. The writing of this paper was also facilitated by a
grant from the John Templeton Foundation (Grant Number 51897) to Pehr Granqvist.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.
Funding
This work was supported by the Wellcome Trust: [Grant Number WT103343MA] and the writing of
this paper was also facilitated by a grant from the John Templeton Foundation (Grant Number
51897) to Pehr Granqvist.
ATTACHMENT & HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
551
 ORCID
Carlo Schuengel
http://orcid.org/0000-0001-5501-3341
Peter Fonagy
http://orcid.org/0000-0003-0229-0091
References
Abrams, K. Y., Rifkin, A., & Hesse, E. (2006). Examining the role of parental frightened/frightening
subtypes in predicting disorganized attachment within a brief observational procedure.
Development and Psychopathology, 18(2), 345–361. doi:10.1017/S0954579406060184
Ainsworth, M. D. S., Blehar, M. C., Waters, E., & Wall, S. N. (1978). Patterns of attachment: A
psychological study of the Strange Situation. New York: Psychology Press.
Alexius, K., & Hollander, A. (2014). Care assessments concerning involuntary removal of children
from intellectually disabled parents. Journal of Social Welfare and Family Law, 36(3), 295–310.
doi:10.1080/09649069.2014.933591
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders
(DSM-5®). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Pub.
Bakermans-Kranenburg, M. J., Juffer, F., & van IJzendoorn, M. H. (in press). Reflections on the
mirror: On video-feedback to promote positive parenting and infant mental health. In C. Zeanah
(Ed.), Handbook of infant mental health. New York: Guilford.
Bakermans-Kranenburg, M. J., & Van IJzendoorn, M. H. (2007). Research review: Genetic vulner-
ability or differential susceptibility in child development: The case of attachment. Journal of
Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 48(12), 1160–1173. doi:10.1111/jcpp.2007.48.issue-12
Bartholomew, K., & Horowitz, L. M. (1991). Attachment styles among young adults: A test of a
four-category model. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61, 226–244. doi:10.1037/
0022-3514.61.2.226
Ben-David, V., Jonson-Reid, M., Drake, B., & Kohl, P. L. (2015). The association between childhood
maltreatment experiences and the onset of maltreatment perpetration in young adulthood
controlling for proximal and distal risk factors. Child Abuse & Neglect, 46, 132–141. doi:10.1016/j.
chiabu.2015.01.013
Berlin, M., Vinnerljung, B., & Hjern, A. (2011). School performance in primary school and psycho-
social problems in young adulthood among care leavers from long term foster care. Children
and Youth Services Review, 33(12), 2489–2497. doi:10.1016/j.childyouth.2011.08.024
Bernard, K., Dozier, M., Bick, J., Lewis-Morrarty, E., Lindhiem, O., & Carlson, E. (2012). Enhancing
attachment organization among maltreated children: Results of a randomized clinical trial. Child
Development, 83, 623–636.
Bifulco, A., Jacobs, C., Bunn, A., Thomas, G., & Irving, K. (2008). The Attachment Style Interview
(ASI): A support-based adult assessment tool for adoption and fostering practice. Adoption &
Fostering, 32, 33–45. doi:10.1177/030857590803200306
Bilson, A., & Martin, K. E. (2016). Referrals and child protection in England: One in five children
referred to children’s services and one in nineteen investigated before the age of five. British
Journal of Social Work. Early View. doi:10.1093/bjsw/bcw054
Booth, T., Booth, W., & McConnell, D. (2005). The prevalence and outcomes of care proceedings
involving parents with learning difficulties in the family courts. Journal of Applied Research in
Intellectual Disabilities, 18(1), 7–17. doi:10.1111/jar.2005.18.issue-1
Boris, N. W., & Renk, K. (2017). Beyond reactive attachment disorder: How might attachment
research inform child psychiatry practice? Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Clinics of North
America, 26(3), 455–476. doi:10.1016/j.chc.2017.03.003
Bowlby, J. (1958). Separation of mother and child. The Lancet, 271(7029), 1070–1071. doi:10.1016/
S0140-6736(58)92031-2
Bowlby, J. (1969). Attachment (1st ed.). London, UK: Penguin.
552
P. GRANQVIST ET AL.
 Building Great Britons Report. (2015). Building Great Britons. http://www.wavetrust.org/sites/default/
files/reports/Building_Great_Britons_Report-APPG_Conception_to_Age_2-Wednesday_25th_
February_2015.pdf
Capps, L., Sigman, M., & Mundy, P. (1994). Attachment security in children with autism.
Development and Psychopathology, 6, 249–261. doi:10.1017/S0954579400004569
Carlson, V., Cicchetti, D., Barnett, D., & Braunwald, K. (1989). Finding order in disorganization:
Lessons from research on maltreated infants’ attachments to their caregivers. In D. Cicchetti & V.
Carlson (Eds.), Child maltreatment: Theory and research on the causes and consequences of child
abuse and neglect (pp. 494–528). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cicchetti, D., Rogosch, F. A., & Toth, S. L. (2006). Fostering secure attachment in infants in
maltreating families through preventive interventions. Development and Psychopathology, 18,
623–649. doi:10.1017/S0954579406060329
Crittenden, P. M. (2016). Raising parents: Attachment, representation, and treatment (2nd ed.).
London: Routledge.
Cyr, C., Euser, E. M., Bakermans-Kranenburg, M., & van IJzendoorn, M. (2010). Attachment security
and disorganization in maltreating and high-risk families: A series of meta-analyses.
Development and Psychopathology, 22, 87–108. doi:10.1017/S0954579409990289
Dixon, L., Browne, K., & Hamilton-Giachritsis, C. (2009). Patterns of risk and protective factors in the
intergenerational cycle of maltreatment’. Journal of Family Violence, 24, 111–122. doi:10.1007/
s10896-008-9215-2
Dozier, M., & Bernard, K. (2017). Attachment and biobehavioral catch-up: Addressing the needs of
infants and toddlers exposed to inadequate or problematic caregiving. Current Opinion in
Psychology, 15, 111–117. doi:10.1016/j.copsyc.2017.03.003
Dozier, M., & Rutter, M. (2016). Challenges to the development of attachment relationships faced
by young children in foster and adoptive care. In J. Cassidy & P. R. Shaver (Eds.), Handbook of
attachment: Theory, research, and clinical applications (3rd ed., pp. 696–714). NY: Guilford.
Duschinsky, R. (2015). The emergence of the disorganized/disoriented (D) attachment classifica-
tion, 1979–1982. History of Psychology, 18, 32–46. doi:10.1037/a0038524
Duschinsky, R., Main, M., & Hesse, E. (in press). Respecifying ‘Fright without Solution’: Infant
disorganized attachment, fear and regulation. Infant Mental Health Journal
Egeland, B., Jacobvitz, D., & Sroufe, L. A. (1988). Breaking the cycle of abuse. Child Development, 59,
1080–1088.
Egeland, B. (1991). A longitudinal study of high risk families: Issues and findings. In R. H. Starr &
D. A. Wolfe (Eds.), The effects of child abuse and neglect: Issues and research (pp. 33–56). NY:
Guilford Press.
Euser, S., Alink, L. R. A., Stoltenborgh, M., Bakermans-Kranenburg, M. J., & Van IJzendoorn, M. H.
(2015). A gloomy picture: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials reveals disappointing
effectiveness of programs aiming at preventing child maltreatment. BMC Public Health, 15,
1068–1081. doi:10.1186/s12889-015-2387-9
Facompré, C. R., Bernard, K., & Waters, T. E. (2017). Effectiveness of interventions in preventing
disorganized
attachment:
A
meta-analysis.
Development
and
Psychopathology,
1–11.
doi:10.1017/S0954579417000426
Fearon, R. P., Bakermans-Kranenburg, M. J., Van IJzendoorn, M. H., Lapsley, A.-M., & Roisman, G. I.
(2010). The significance of insecure attachment and disorganization in the development of
children’s externalizing behavior: A meta-analytic study. Child Development, 81, 435–456.
doi:10.1111/(ISSN)1467-8624
Feldman, M. (2010). Parenting education programs. In G. Llewellyn, R. Taustadóttir, D. McConnell, &
H. B. Sigurjónsdóttir (Eds.), Parents with intellectual disabilities: Past, present and futures (pp.
121–136). Oxford, UK: Wiley-Blackwell.
Ferguson, C. J. (2009). An effect size primer: A guide for clinicians and researchers. Professional
Psychology: Research and Practice, 40, 532–538. doi:10.1037/a0015808
Fuller, T., & Nieto, M. (2014). Child welfare services and risk of child maltreatment rereports: Do
services ameliorate initial risk? Children and Youth Services Review, 47, 46–54. doi:10.1016/j.
childyouth.2013.11.015
ATTACHMENT & HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
553
 Gleason, M. M., Fox, N. A., Drury, S. S., Smyke, A. T., Nelson, C. A., 3rd, & Zeanah, C. H. (2014).
Indiscriminate behaviors in previously institutionalized young children. Pediatrics, 133(3),
657–665. doi:10.1542/peds.2013-0212
Granqvist, P. (2016). Observations of disorganized behaviour yield no magic wand: Response to
Shemmings.
Attachment
&
Human
Development,
18,
529–533.
doi:10.1080/
14616734.2016.1189994
Granqvist, P., Forslund, T., Fransson, M., Springer, L., & Lindberg, L. (2014). Mothers with intellectual
disability, their experiences of maltreatment, and their children’s attachment representations: A
small-group matched comparison study. Attachment & Human Development, 16, 417–436.
doi:10.1080/14616734.2014.926946
Granqvist, P., Hesse, E., Fransson, M., Main, M., Hagekull, B., & Bohlin, G. (2016). Prior participation
in the strange situation and overstress jointly facilitate disorganized behaviours: Implications for
theory, research and practice. Attachment & Human Development, 18, 235–249. doi:10.1080/
14616734.2016.1151061
Groh, A. M., Fearon, R. M., IJzendoorn, M. H., Bakermans-Kranenburg, M. J., & Roisman, G. I. (2017).
Attachment in the early life course: Meta-analytic evidence for its role in socioemotional
development. Child Development Perspectives, 11, 70–76.
Groh, A. M., Fearon, R. P., Bakermans-Kranenburg, M. J., Van IJzendoorn, M. H., Steele, R. D., &
Roisman, G. I. (2014). The significance of attachment security for children’s social competence
with peers: A meta-analytic study. Attachment & Human Development, 16, 103–136. doi:10.1080/
14616734.2014.883636
Hesse, E., & Main, M. (2000). Disorganized infant, child, and adult attachment: Collapse in beha-
vioral and attentional strategies. Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association, 48,
1097–1127. doi:10.1177/00030651000480041101
Hesse, E., & Main, M. (2006). Frightened, threatening, and dissociative parental behavior in low-risk
samples: Description, discussion, and interpretations. Development and Psychopathology, 18,
309–343. doi:10.1017/S0954579406060172
Hughes, P., Turton, P., McGauley, G. A., & Fonagy, P. (2006). Factors that predict infant disorganiza-
tion in mothers classified as U in pregnancy. Attachment & Human Development, 8(2), 113–122.
doi:10.1080/14616730600785660
Jacobvitz, D., Leon, K., & Hazen, N. (2006). Does expectant mothers’ unresolved trauma predict
frightened/frightening maternal behavior? Risk and protective factors. Development and
Psychopathology, 18, 363–379. doi:10.1017/S0954579406060196
Juffer, F., Bakermans-Kranenburg, M. J., & IJzendoorn, M. H. (2005). The importance of parenting in
the development of disorganized attachment: Evidence from a preventive intervention study in
adoptive families. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 46(3), 263–274. doi:10.1111/
jcpp.2005.46.issue-3
Juffer, F., Bakermans-Kranenburg, M. J., & van IJzendoorn, M. H. (2017). Video-feedback interven-
tion to promote positive parenting and sensitive discipline (VIPP-SD): Development and meta-
analytic evidence of its effectiveness. In H. Steele & M. Steele (Eds.), Handbook of attachment-
based interventions. New York: Guilford Press.
Lakatos, K., Toth, I., Nemoda, Z., Ney, K., Sasvari-Szekely, M., & Gervai, J. (2000). Dopamine D4
receptor (DRD4) gene polymorphism is associated with attachment disorganization in infants.
Molecular Psychiatry, 5, 633–637. doi:10.1038/sj.mp.4000773
Lawrence, C., Carlson, E., & Egeland, B. (2006). The impact of foster care on development.
Development and Psychopathology, 18, 57–76. doi:10.1017/S0954579406060044
Lieberman, A., & Amaya-Jackson, L. (2005). Reciprocal influences of attachment and trauma. In L.
Berlin, Y. Ziv, L. Amaya-Jackson, & M. Greenberg (Eds.), Enhancing early attachments (pp.
100–126). NY: Guilford.
Lieberman, A. F., Ippen, G., & Van Horn, P. (2015). Don’t hit my mommy!: A manual for Child-
Parent Psychotherapy with young children exposed to violence and other trauma (2nd ed.).
Washington, DC: Zero to Three.
Lindberg, L., Fransson, M., Forslund, T., Springer, L., & Granqvist, P. (2017). Maternal sensitivity in
mothers with mild intellectual disabilities is related to experiences of maltreatment and
554
P. GRANQVIST ET AL.
 predictive of child attachment: A matched-comparison study. Journal of Applied Research in
Intellectual Disabilities, 30, 445–455. Early View. doi:10.1111/jar.2017.30.issue-3
Loman, L. A., & Siegel, G. L. (2012). Effects of anti-poverty services under the differential response
approach to child welfare. Children and Youth Services Review, 34(9), 1659–1666. doi:10.1016/j.
childyouth.2012.04.023
Lyons-Ruth, K., Bureau, J.-F., Easterbrooks, M., Obsuth, I., Hennighausen, K., & Vulliez-Coady, L.
(2013). Parsing the construct of maternal insensitivity: Distinct longitudinal pathways associated
with early maternal withdrawal. Attachment & Human Development, 15(5–6), 562–582.
doi:10.1080/14616734.2013.841051
Lyons-Ruth, K., Bureau, J.-F., Riley, C., & Atlas-Corbett, A. (2009). Socially indiscriminate attachment
behavior in the Strange Situation: Convergent and discriminant validity in relation to caregiving
risk, later behavior problems, and attachment insecurity. Development and Psychopathology, 21,
355–372. doi:10.1017/S0954579409000376
Lyons-Ruth, K., & Jacobvitz, D. (2016). Attachment disorganization from infancy to adulthood:
Neurobiological correlates, parenting contexts, and pathways to disorder. In J. Cassidy & P. R.
Shaver (Eds.), Handbook of Attachment: Theory, research, and clinical applications (3rd ed., pp.
667–695). NY: Guilford.
Madigan, S., Bakermans-Kranenburg, M. J., van IJzendoorn, M. H., Moran, G., Pederson, D. R., &
Benoit, D. (2006). Unresolved states of mind, anomalous parental behavior, and disorganized
attachment: A review and meta-analysis of a transmission gap. Attachment & Human
Development, 8(2), 89–111. doi:10.1080/14616730600774458
Madigan, S., Hawkins, E., Plamondon, A., Moran, G., & Benoit, D. (2015). Maternal representations
and infant attachment: An examination of the prototype hypothesis. Infant Mental Health
Journal, 36(5), 459–468. doi:10.1002/imhj.21527
Main, M. (1990). Cross-cultural studies of attachment organization: Recent studies, changing
methodologies, and the concept of conditional strategies. Human Development, 33(1), 48–61.
doi:10.1159/000276502
Main, M., & Cassidy, J. (1988). Categories of response to reunion with the parent at age 6:
Predictable from infant attachment classifications and stable over a 1-month period.
Developmental Psychology, 24(3), 415–426. doi:10.1037/0012-1649.24.3.415
Main, M., Goldwyn, R., & Hesse, E. (2003). Adult attachment scoring and classification systems
(Version no. 7.2). Unpublished manuscript. Berkeley, CA: Department of Psychology, University
of California.
Main, M., Hesse, E., & Hesse, S. (2011). Attachment theory and research: Overview with suggested
applications to child custody. Family Court Review, 49(3), 426–463. doi:10.1111/fcre.2011.49.
issue-3
Main, M., Kaplan, N., & Cassidy, J. (1985). Security in infancy, childhood, and adulthood: A move to
the level of representation. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 50,
66–104. doi:10.2307/3333827
Main, M., & Solomon, J. (1986). Discovery of a new, insecure-disorganized/disoriented attachment
pattern. In M. Yogman & T. B. Brazelton (Eds.), Affective development in infancy (pp. 95–124).
Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Main, M., & Solomon, J. (1990). Procedures for identifying infants as disorganised/disoriented
during the Ainsworth Strange Situation. In M. T. Greenberg, D. Cicchetti, & E. M. Cummings
(Eds.), Attachment in the preschool years (pp. 121–160). Chicago,IL: University of Chicago
Press.
McConnell, D., & Llewellyn, G. (2002). Stereotypes, parents with intellectual disability and child
protection. The Journal of Social Welfare & Family Law, 24(3), 297–317. doi:10.1080/
09649060210161294
Moss, E., Dubois-Comtois, K., Cyr, C., Tarabulsy, G. M., St-Laurent, D., & Bernier, A. (2011). Efficacy of
a home-visiting intervention aimed at improving maternal sensitivity, child attachment, and
behavioral outcomes for maltreated children: A randomized control trial. Development and
Psychopathology, 23(01), 195–210. doi:10.1017/S0954579410000738
ATTACHMENT & HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
555
 Murphy, A., Steele, H., Bate, J., Nikitiades, A., Allman, B., Bonuck, K., … Steele, M. (2015). Group
attachment-based intervention: Trauma-informed care for families with adverse childhood
experiences. Family & Community Health, 38(3), 268–279. doi:10.1097/FCH.0000000000000074
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence or NICE. (2016). Children’s attachment: Attachment
in children and young people who are adopted from care, in care or at high risk of going into care.
London: National Institute for Health and Care Excellence.
Oosterman, M., Schuengel, C., Slot, N. W., Bullens, R. A., & Doreleijers, T. A. (2007). Disruptions in
foster care: A review and meta-analysis. Children and Youth Services Review, 29, 53–76.
doi:10.1016/j.childyouth.2006.07.003
Padrón, E., Carlson, E. A., & Sroufe, L. A. (2014). Frightened versus not frightened disorganized
infant attachment: Newborn characteristics and maternal caregiving. American Journal of
Orthopsychiatry, 84(2), 201–208. doi:10.1037/h0099390
Palusci, V. J., & Ondersma, S. J. (2012). Services and recurrence after psychological maltreatment
confirmed
by child
protective services.
Child
Maltreatment,
17,
153–163. doi:10.1177/
1077559511433817
Patterson, G. R. (1982). Coercive family process. Eugene, OR: Castilia.
Powell, B., Cooper, G., Hoffman, K., & Marvin, B. (2013). The circle of security intervention: Enhancing
attachment in early parent-child relationships. NY: Guilford.
Rholes, W. S., Paetzold, R. L., & Kohn, J. L. (2016). Disorganized attachment mediates the link from
early trauma to externalizing behavior in adult relationships. Personality and Individual
Differences, 90, 61–65. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2015.10.043
Rozga, A., Hesse, E., Duschinsky, R., Beckwith, L., Main, M., & Sigman, M. (In press). A short-term
longitudinal study of correlates and sequelae of attachment security in autism. Attachment &
Human Development.
Schofield, T. J., Lee, R. D., & Merrick, M. T. (2013). Safe, stable, nurturing relationships as a
moderator of intergenerational continuity of child maltreatment: A meta-analysis. Journal of
Adolescent Health, 53, S32–S38. doi:10.1016/j.jadohealth.2013.05.004
Schuengel, C., Bakermans-Kranenburg, M. J., & Van IJzendoorn, M. H. (1999). Frightening maternal
behavior linking unresolved loss and disorganized infant attachment. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 67(1), 54–63. doi:10.1037/0022-006X.67.1.54
Schuengel, C., Kef, S., Hodes, M., & Meppelder, M. (2017). Parents with intellectual disability. Current
Opinion in Psychology, 15, 50–54. doi:10.1016/j.copsyc.2017.02.022
Schuengel, C., Marinus, I. H. V., Bakermans-Kranenburg, M. J., & Blom, M. (1998). Frightening
maternal behaviour, unresolved loss, and disorganized infant attachment: A pilot-study.
Journal
of
Reproductive
and
Infant
Psychology,
16(4),
277–283.
doi:10.1080/
02646839808404575
Slade, A. (2004). The move from categories to process: Attachment phenomena and clinical
evaluation. Infant Mental Health Journal, 25(4), 269–283. doi:10.1002/(ISSN)1097-0355
Smyke, A. T., Zeanah, C. H., Fox, N. A., Nelson, C. A., & Guthrie, D. (2010). Placement in foster care
enhances quality of attachment among young institutionalized children. Child Development, 81,
212–223. doi:10.1111/cdev.2010.81.issue-1
Solomon, J., Duschinsky, R., Bakkum, L., & Schuengel, C. (In press). Towards an architecture of
attachment disorganization: John Bowlby’s published and unpublished reflections. Clinical Child
Psychology & Psychiatry.
Solomon, J., George, C., & De Jong, A. (1995). Children classified as controlling at age six: Evidence
of disorganized representational strategies and aggression at home and at school. Development
and Psychopathology, 7, 447–463. doi:10.1017/S0954579400006623
Solomon, J., & George, C. (2011). Disorganization of maternal caregiving across two genera-
tions. In J. Solomon & C. George (Eds.), Disorganized attachment & caregiving (pp. 25–51). NY:
Guilford.
Spangler, G., Fremmer-Bombik, E., & Grossmann, K. (1996). Social and individual determinants of
infant attachment security and disorganization. Infant Mental Health Journal, 17, 127–139.
doi:10.1002/(ISSN)1097-0355
556
P. GRANQVIST ET AL.
 Spangler, G., Johann, M., Ronai, Z., & Zimmermann, P. (2009). Genetic and environmental influence
on attachment disorganization. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 50, 952–961.
doi:10.1111/jcpp.2009.50.issue-8
Sroufe, L. A., Egeland, B., Carlson, E. A., & Collins, W. A. (2005). The development of the person: The
Minnesota study of risk and adaptation from birth to adulthood. NY: Guilford Press.
Sroufe, L. A. (2016). The place of attachment in development. In J. Cassidy & P. R. Shaver (Eds.),
Handbook of attachment: Theory, research, and clinical applications (3rd ed., pp. 997–1011). NY:
Guilford.
Steele, H., & Steele, M. (Eds). (2008). Clinical applications of the adult attachment interview. NY:
Guilford Press.
Steele, H., & Steele, M. (Eds.). (in press). Handbook of attachment-based interventions. New York:
Guilford Press.
Steele, H., Steele, M., & Fonagy, P. (1996). Associations among attachment classifications of
mothers, fathers, and their infants. Child Development, 67, 541–555. doi:10.2307/1131831
Steele, M. (2017, June 30). A report on the Group Attachment-Based Intervention (GABI). In Keynote
address to the 8th International Attachment Conference. London, UK.
Steele,
M.,
Murphy,
A.,
&
Steele,
H.
(2010).
Identifying
therapeutic
action
in
an
attachment-centered intervention with high risk families. Clinical Social Work Journal, 38,
61–72. doi:10.1007/s10615-009-0257-6
Thompson, R. (2006). Exploring the Link Between Maternal History of Childhood Victimization
and Child Risk of Maltreatment. Journal of Trauma Practice, 5(2), 57–72. doi:10.1300/
J189v05n02_04
Thornberry, T. P., Henry, K. L., Smith, C. A., Ireland, T. O., Greenman, S. J., & Lee, R. D. (2013).
Breaking the cycle of maltreatment: The role of safe, stable, and nurturing relationships. Journal
of Adolescent Health, 53, S25–S31. doi:10.1016/j.jadohealth.2013.04.019
Toth, S. L., Rogosch, F. A., Manly, J. T., & Cicchetti, D. (2006). The efficacy of toddler-parent
psychotherapy to reorganize attachment in the young offspring of mothers with major depres-
sive disorder: A randomized preventive trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 74(6),
1006–1016. doi:10.1037/0022-006X.74.6.1006
van IJzendoorn, M. H. (1995). Adult attachment representations, parental responsiveness, and
infant attachment: A meta-analysis on the predictive validity of the Adult Attachment
Interview. Psychological Bulletin, 117(3), 387–403. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.117.3.387
van IJzendoorn, M. H., & Bakermans-Kranenburg, M. J. (2003). Attachment disorders and disorga-
nized attachment: Similar and different. Attachment & Human Development, 5, 313–320.
doi:10.1080/14616730310001593938
van IJzendoorn, M. H., Schuengel, C., & Bakermans-Kranenburg, M. J. (1999). Disorganized attach-
ment in early childhood: Meta-analysis of precursors, concomitants, and sequelae. Development
and Psychopathology, 11, 225–250. doi:10.1017/S0954579499002035
Verhage, M. L., Schuengel, C., Madigan, S., Fearon, R. M., Oosterman, M., Cassibba, R., … van
IJzendoorn, M. H. (2016). Narrowing the transmission gap: A synthesis of three decades of
research on intergenerational transmission of attachment. Psychological Bulletin, 142(4),
337–366. doi:10.1037/bul0000038
Vorria, P., Papaligoura, Z., Dunn, J., van IJzendoorn, M., Steele, H., Kontopoulou, A., & Sarafidou, Y.
(2003). Early experiences and attachment relationships of Greek infants raised in residential
group care. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 44, 1208–1220. doi:10.1111/jcpp.2003.44.
issue-8
Waters, E., & Crowell, J. A. (1999). Atypical attachment in atypical circumstances. Monographs of the
Society for Research in Child Development, 64(3), 213–220. doi:10.1111/mono.1999.64.issue-3
Widom, C. S., Czaja, S. J., & DuMont, K. A. (2015). Intergenerational transmission of child abuse and
neglect: Real or detection bias? Science, 347(6229), 1480–1485. doi:10.1126/science.1259917
Wilkins, D. (2012). Disorganised attachment indicates child maltreatment. How is this link useful for
child protection social workers? Journal of Social Work Practice, 26, 15–30.
Wilkins, D. (2017). Using Q methodology to understand how child protection social workers use
attachment theory. Child & Family Social Work, 22, 70–80. doi:10.1111/cfs.v22.S4
ATTACHMENT & HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
557
 Woolgar, M., & Baldock, E. (2015). Attachment disorders versus more common problems in looked
after and adopted children: Comparing community and expert assessments. Child and
Adolescent Mental Health, 20(1), 34–40. doi:10.1111/camh.2015.20.issue-1
Zeanah, C. H., Chesher, T., Boris, N. W., Walter, H. J., Bukstein, O. G., Bellonci, C., … Stock, S. (2016).
Practice parameter for the assessment and treatment of children and adolescents with Reactive
Attachment Disorder and Disinhibited Social Engagement Disorder. Journal of the American
Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 55, 990–1003. doi:10.1016/j.jaac.2016.08.004
558
P. GRANQVIST ET AL.
