 A clinical approach to diagnosis of autoimmune encephalitis
Prof. Francesc Graus, MD, Maarten J Titulaer, MD, Ramani Balu, MD, Susanne Benseler, 
MD, Prof. Christian G Bien, MD, Tania Cellucci, MD, Irene Cortese, MD, Prof. Russell C 
Dale, MD, Jeffrey M Gelfand, MD, Michael Geschwind, MD, Carol A Glaser, MD, Prof. 
Jerome Honnorat, MD, Romana Höftberger, MD, Takahiro Iizuka, MD, Sarosh R Irani, MD, 
Eric Lancaster, MD, Frank Leypoldt, MD, Harald Prüss, MD, Alexander Rae-Grant, MD, Prof. 
Markus Reindl, PhD, Prof. Myrna R Rosenfeld, MD, Kevin Rostásy, MD, Albert Saiz, MD, 
Arun Venkatesan, MD, Prof. Angela Vincent, FRS, Prof. Klaus-Peter Wandinger, Patrick 
Waters, PhD, and Prof. Josep Dalmau, MD
Neuroimmunology Program, Institut d’Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, Barcelona, 
Spain (Prof F Graus MD, Prof M R Rosenfeld MD, A Saiz MD, Prof J Dalmau MD); Service of 
Neurology, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain (Prof F Graus, A Saiz); Department of Neurology, 
Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands (M J Titulaer MD); Department of Neurology, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA (R Balu MD, E Lancaster MD, Prof J Dalmau); 
Correspondence to: Prof Francesc Graus, Institut, d’Investigacions Biomèdiques, August Pi i Sunyer Hospital, Clínic, Universitat de 
Barcelona, Barcelona 08036, Spain, fgraus@clinic.ub.es or Prof Josep Dalmau, Institut, d’Investigacions Biomèdiques, August Pi i 
Sunyer Hospital, Clínic, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona 08036, Spain, jdalmau@clinic.ub.es. 
Contributors
FG and JD developed the idea for the Position Paper, chaired the project, wrote the initial draft of the manuscript, which was fully 
reviewed by MRR and MJT, and revised the manuscript. All other authors reviewed and commented on two subsequent drafts, and the 
complete manuscript was commented on, revised, and approved by all authors.
Declaration of interests
FG receives royalties from licensing fees to Euroimmun for the use of IgLON5 as a diagnostic test. MJT has received research funding 
for consultancy work for MedImmune, and a travel grant for Sun Pharma. CGB has given scientific advice to Eisai and UCB; 
undertaken industry-funded travel with support from Eisai, UCB, Desitin, and Grifols; obtained honoraria for speaking engagements 
from Eisai, UCB, Desitin, Diamed, Fresenius Medical Care; and received research support from Astellas Pharma, Octapharma, 
Diamed, and Fresenius Medical Care. CGB is an employee of Krankenhaus Mara, Bielefeld, Germany, which runs a laboratory for the 
detection of autoantibodies including those described in this paper; external senders are charged for antibody diagnostics. RCD has 
received research funding from the Star Scientific Foundation and Pfizer Neuroscience and speaker’s honoraria from Biogen Idec and 
Bristol-Myers Squibb. JMG has received compensation for medical legal consulting and for consulting on a scientific advisory board 
for Medimmune and Roche; he has received research funding through the University of California, San Francisco, USA, from Quest 
Diagnostic for work on a dementia care pathway. MG receives grants from Quest Diagnostics and has received personal fees for 
consultancy work from MedaCorp, Gerson-Lehman Group, Best Doctors, Advance Medical, Inc, and Optio LLC. JH receives royalties 
from licensing fees to Athena Diagnostics, Euroimmun, and ravo Diagnostika for a patent for the use of CV2/CRMP5 as diagnostic 
tests. SRI receives royalties from licensing fees to Euroimmun for patents for the use of LGI1, CASPR2, and contactin-2 as 
autoantibody tests. EL has received speaker’s honoraria and consultancy fees from Grifols, and consultancy fees from Medimmune. 
FL has received speaker’s honoraria from Grifols, Teva, and Biogen Idec and is employed by University Medical Center Schleswig-
Holstein, Kiel, Germany, which offers commercial antibody testing without any personal reimbursements. MR reports that his 
employers, the University Hospital and Medical University of Innsbruck, Austria, receive payments for antibody assays (NMDA 
receptor, AQP4, and other autoantibodies) and for AQP4 antibody validation experiments organised by Euroimmun. MRR receives 
royalties from licensing fees to Euroimmun for a patent for the use of NMDA receptor as an autoantibody test, and from licensing fees 
to Athena Diagnostics for a patent for the use of Ma2. AS has received compensation for consulting services and speaker honoraria 
from Bayer-Schering, Merck-Serono, Biogen Idec, Sanofi-Aventis, Teva, and Novartis. AVe reports personal fees from Medimmune. 
AVi receives royalties from licensing fees to Euroimmun for the use of LGI1 and CASPR2 as diagnostic tests. PW receives royalties 
for the use of LGI1 and CASPR2 as autoantibody diagnostic tests; is a named inventor on a patent for the use of GABAA receptor as 
an autoantibody test; and has received speaker honoraria from Biogen Idec and Euroimmun. JD receives royalties from licensing fees 
to Athena Diagnostics for a patent for the use of Ma2 as an autoantibody test; licensing fees to Euroimmun for patents for the use of 
NMDA receptor and GABAB receptor as autoantibody tests; licensing fees for the use of DPPX, GABAA receptor, and IgLON5 
antibodies as diagnostic tests; and has received a research grant from Euroimmun. RB, SB, TC, IC, CAG, RH, TI, HP, AR-G, KR, and 
K-PW declare no competing interests. None of the funding sources had any influence in the preparation of this Position Paper.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Lancet Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Lancet Neurol. 2016 April ; 15(4): 391–404. doi:10.1016/S1474-4422(15)00401-9.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Department of Pediatrics, Alberta Children Hospital, Calgary, AB, Canada (S Benseler MD); 
Epilepsy Centre Bethel, Krankenhaus Mara, Bielefeld, Germany (Prof C G Bien MD); Department 
of Pediatrics, McMaster Children’s Hospital, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada (T 
Cellucci MD); Neuroimmunology Clinic, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA (I Cortese MD); Neuroimmunology Group, 
Children’s Hospital at Westmead, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia (Prof R C Dale 
MD); Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA (J M Gelfand 
MD, M Geschwind MD); Division of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Kaiser Permanente, Oakland 
Medical Center and University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA (C A Glaser MD); French 
Reference Center on Paraneoplastic Neurological Syndrome, Hospices Civils De Lyon, Hôpital 
Neurologique, Inserm U1028, CNRS UMR 5292, Lyon’s Neurosciences Research Center, 
Université Claude-Bernard Lyon-1, Lyon, France (Prof J Honnorat MD); Institute of Neurology, 
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria (R Höftberger MD); Department of Neurology, 
Kitasato University School of Medicine, Kanagawa, Japan (T Iizuka MD); Nuffield Department of 
Clinical Neurosciences, John Radcliffe Hospital, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK (S R Irani MD, 
Prof A Vincent FRS, P Waters PhD); Neuroimmunology, Institute of Clinical Chemistry, and 
Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany (F 
Leypoldt MD); Department of Neurology, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany (H 
Prüss MD); German Center for Neurodegenerative Disorders Berlin, Berlin, Germany (H Prüss); 
Department of Neurology, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH, USA (A Rae-Grant MD); 
Clinical Department of Neurology, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria (Prof M 
Reindl PhD); Department of Pediatric Neurology, Children’s Hospital Datteln, Witten/Herdecke 
University, Datteln, Germany (K Rostásy MD); Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA (A Venkatesan MD); Institute of Clinical 
Chemistry and Department of Neurology, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Lübeck, 
Germany (Prof K-P Wandinger MD); and Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats 
(ICREA), Barcelona, Spain (Prof J Dalmau)
Abstract
Encephalitis is a severe inflammatory disorder of the brain with many possible causes and a 
complex differential diagnosis. Advances in autoimmune encephalitis research in the past 10 years 
have led to the identification of new syndromes and biomarkers that have transformed the 
diagnostic approach to these disorders. However, existing criteria for autoimmune encephalitis are 
too reliant on antibody testing and response to immunotherapy, which might delay the diagnosis. 
We reviewed the literature and gathered the experience of a team of experts with the aims of 
developing a practical, syndrome-based diagnostic approach to autoimmune encephalitis and 
providing guidelines to navigate through the differential diagnosis. Because autoantibody test 
results and response to therapy are not available at disease onset, we based the initial diagnostic 
approach on neurological assessment and conventional tests that are accessible to most clinicians. 
Through logical differential diagnosis, levels of evidence for autoimmune encephalitis (possible, 
probable, or definite) are achieved, which can lead to prompt immunotherapy.
Graus et al.
Page 2
Lancet Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Introduction
Acute encephalitis is a debilitating neurological disorder that develops as a rapidly 
progressive encephalopathy (usually in less than 6 weeks) caused by brain inflammation.1 
The estimated incidence of encephalitis in high-income countries is about 5–10 per 100 000 
inhabitants per year; encephalitis affects patients of all ages and represents a significant 
burden to patients, families, and society.2,3
Because the most frequently recognised causes of encephalitis are infectious, existing 
diagnostic criteria and consensus guidelines for encephalitis assume an infectious 
origin.1,4–6 However, in the past 10 years an increasing number of non-infectious, mostly 
autoimmune, encephalitis cases have been identified and some of them do not meet existing 
criteria.7 These newly identified forms of autoimmune encephalitis might be associated with 
antibodies against neuronal cell-surface or synaptic proteins (table)8–23 and can develop with 
core symptoms resembling infectious encephalitis, and also with neurological and 
psychiatric manifestations without fever or CSF pleocytosis.7 To improve the recognition of 
these disorders, in this Position Paper, we aim to provide a practical clinical approach to 
diagnosis that should be accessible to most physicians.
General scope and objectives
These guidelines focus on autoimmune encephalitis that presents with subacute onset of 
memory deficits or altered mental status, accompanied or not by other symptoms and 
manifestations, with the goal of helping to establish a prompt diagnosis. These guidelines do 
not address the clinical approach to other CNS autoimmune disorders (stiff person 
syndrome,24 progressive encephalomyelitis with rigidity and myoclonus,25 or autoimmune 
cerebellopathies26) that usually present with a clinical profile clearly different from 
autoimmune encephalitis.
Existing diagnostic criteria for autoimmune encephalitis are too reliant on antibody testing 
and response to immunotherapy.27 In our opinion, it is not realistic to include antibody status 
as part of the early diagnostic criteria in view of the fact that antibody testing is not readily 
accessible in many institutions and results can take several weeks to obtain. Furthermore, the 
absence of autoantibodies does not exclude the possibility that a disorder is immune 
mediated, and a positive test does not always imply an accurate diagnosis. Use of the 
response to immunotherapy as part of the diagnostic criteria is also not practical because this 
information is not available at the time of symptom onset or early clinical evaluation. Some 
patients with autoimmune encephalitis might not respond to immunotherapy or could need 
intensive and prolonged therapies that are not available in most health-care systems unless a 
firm diagnosis has been pre-established.28 Conversely, patients with other disorders might 
respond to immunotherapy (eg, primary CNS lymphoma).
The clinical facts and evidence suggesting that early immunotherapy improves outcome29–31 
have been considered in the development of the guidelines presented here, in which 
conventional neurological evaluation and standard diagnostic tests (eg, MRI, CSF, or EEG 
studies) prevail in the initial assessment. This approach should allow the initiation of 
Graus et al.
Page 3
Lancet Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 preliminary treatment while other studies and comprehensive antibody tests are processed 
and subsequently used to refine the diagnosis and treatment.
The above-mentioned focus of these guidelines and the initial approach based on 
conventional clinical assessment explain why some disorders are included in the main text 
and others are included in the appendix or excluded. As an example, we have included acute 
disseminated encephalomyelitis because the clinical presentation can be similar to that of 
other autoimmune encephalitis disorders.32 Another example is Hashimoto’s 
encephalopathy, the existence of which is under discussion, but in practice is frequently 
listed in the differential diagnosis of autoimmune encephalitis;33 thus, we believed it should 
be discussed, while emphasising the controversies and diagnostic limitations. By contrast, 
Morvan’s syndrome34 and Rasmussen’s encephalitis,35 which have a solid autoimmune 
basis, are not included in the main text because they usually follow a more chronic course 
and the initial or predominant symptoms (peripheral nerve hyperexcitability, or focal 
seizures and unilateral deficits) are different from those mentioned above. We recognise the 
overlap that can occur between these disorders and autoimmune encephalitis and for this 
reason they are discussed in the appendix.
Because children do not develop many of the autoimmune encephalitis disorders that affect 
adults, and the syndrome presentation might be different or less clinically recognisable, 
these guidelines should be applied with caution in children, particularly in children younger 
than 5 years.36,37
Methods
An initial draft of these guidelines was developed by two authors (FG and JD) and 
subsequently underwent three rounds of reviews and updates by a panel of investigators who 
have expertise in autoimmune encephalitis. In the first stage, we reviewed previously 
published guidelines and diagnostic criteria for encephalitis (of any cause or idiopathic). 
This review along with clinical experience with forms of autoimmune encephalitis described 
in the past 10 years (eg, some of them not necessarily causing alteration in consciousness, 
but changes in memory or personality) led us to a definition of so-called possible 
autoimmune encephalitis, which is not dependent on neuronal autoantibody status. We next 
reviewed the existing criteria for specific clinical syndromes (eg, limbic encephalitis or 
Bickerstaff’s brainstem encephalitis), identified other disorders for which criteria were 
unclear, and modified or developed new diagnostic criteria (eg, probable anti-NMDA 
receptor encephalitis), which focused on symptom assessment and standard paraclinical 
tests, and were not dependent on autoantibody status. This work resulted in the 
establishment of three levels of clinical evidence for autoimmune encephalitis: possible and 
probable for which the autoantibody status is not needed in most cases, and definite for 
which the autoantibody status is often needed. In parallel, we reviewed the literature and our 
experience in neuronal autoantibody studies and identified caveats for interpretation, which 
led to recommendations for the use and interpretation of findings of autoantibodies in 
autoimmune encephalitis.
Graus et al.
Page 4
Lancet Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Initial clinical assessment: possible autoimmune encephalitis
We regard a patient with new-onset encephalitis as having possible autoimmune encephalitis 
if the criteria shown in panel 1 are met. These criteria differ from those previously proposed 
for encephalitis (any cause or idiopathic) in which changes in the level of consciousness, 
fever, CSF pleocytosis, and EEG alterations are more often needed.1,4–6 These criteria 
needed to be adapted for autoimmune encephalitis because patients with autoimmune 
encephalitis could present with memory or behavioural deficits without fever or alteration in 
the level of consciousness, or with normal brain MRI or CSF results.7 In this context, 
memory deficits refer to the inability to form new, long-term memories owing to 
hippocampal dysfunction, or problems with working memory, which refers to structures and 
processes used for temporary storage and manipulation of information.
Panel 1
Diagnostic criteria for possible autoimmune encephalitis
Diagnosis can be made when all three of the following criteria have been met:
1.
Subacute onset (rapid progression of less than 3 months) of working 
memory deficits (short-term memory loss), altered mental status*, or 
psychiatric symptoms
2.
At least one of the following:
•
New focal CNS findings
•
Seizures not explained by a previously known seizure 
disorder
•
CSF pleocytosis (white blood cell count of more than 
five cells per mm3)
•
MRI features suggestive of encephalitis†
3.
Reasonable exclusion of alternative causes (appendix)
Most patients with encephalitis undergo brain MRI at early stages of the disease. The 
findings could be normal or non-specific, but sometimes they might suggest an autoimmune 
cause (see below). By contrast, alterations in EEG are rarely specific. We acknowledge the 
use of some EEG patterns in the diagnosis of specific forms of encephalitis (eg, extreme 
delta brush in anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis),38 in the differential diagnosis of other 
disorders (Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease), or to reveal subclinical seizures and non-convulsive 
status epilepticus.
*Altered mental status defined as decreased or altered level of consciousness, lethargy, or personality change.
†Brain MRI hyperintense signal on T2-weighted fluid-attenuated inversion recovery sequences highly restricted to one or both 
medial temporal lobes (limbic encephalitis), or in multifocal areas involving grey matter, white matter, or both compatible with 
demyelination or inflammation.
Graus et al.
Page 5
Lancet Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 In addition to the above criteria, patients should be carefully examined for other diseases that 
can mimic autoimmune encephalitis and cause rapidly progressive encephalopathy 
(appendix). These diseases should be excluded before immunotherapy begins and in most 
instances a detailed clinical history, complete general and neurological examination, routine 
blood and CSF analysis, and brain MRI including diffusion sequences will suffice to 
accomplish this goal. The most frequent differential diagnoses are herpes simplex virus 
encephalitis and other CNS infections. Importantly, CSF herpes simplex virus PCR can be 
negative if done too early (eg, within 24 h), and this test should be repeated if the clinical 
suspicion remains high.39 Previous reviews have addressed the differential diagnosis of 
infectious encephalitis.1,40
Approach to patients with clinically recognisable syndromes
A substantial number of patients with autoimmune encephalitis do not present with a well 
defined syndrome. In some of these patients, demographic information and some 
comorbidities (eg, diarrhoea, ovarian teratoma, faciobrachial dystonic seizures) might 
initially suggest the underlying disorder (anti-dipeptidyl-peptidase-like protein-6 [DPPX], 
anti-NMDA receptor, anti-leucine-rich, glioma-inactivated 1 [LGI1] encephalitis), but these 
features are not pathognomonic and might be absent in some patients.11,41,42 In such cases, 
the diagnosis of definite autoimmune encephalitis greatly depends on the results of 
autoantibody tests. By contrast, disorders exist in which the clinical syndrome and MRI 
findings allow for classification as probable or definite autoimmune encephalitis before the 
autoantibody status is known. These include limbic encephalitis, acute disseminated 
encephalomyelitis and other syndromes with MRI features that predominantly involve white 
matter, anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis, and Bickerstaff’s brainstem encephalitis (Figure 
1).43
Autoimmune limbic encephalitis
Diagnostic criteria for autoimmune limbic encephalitis are shown in panel 2.44,45 We have 
modified our previous criteria to include evidence of bilateral involvement of the medial 
temporal lobes on T2-weighted fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) MRI studies 
(Figure 2; see below).46,47 In our proposed criteria, antibody status is not needed to consider 
limbic encephalitis as having a definite autoimmune origin because immune-mediated 
limbic encephalitis can occur without detectable autoantibodies (figure 2, appendix).48,49 
Measurement of autoantibodies, however, remains important for two reasons: their presence 
clarifies the immunological subgroup of limbic encephalitis, with comorbidities, tumour 
association, and prognosis that might differ according to the autoantibody;8,10,50–53 and, in 
patients who do not satisfy the indicated criteria, detection of autoantibodies establishes the 
diagnosis of autoimmune limbic encephalitis (panel 2).
Panel 2
Diagnostic criteria for definite autoimmune limbic encephalitis
Diagnosis can be made when all four* of the following criteria have been met:
Graus et al.
Page 6
Lancet Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 1.
Subacute onset (rapid progression of less than 3 months) of working 
memory deficits, seizures, or psychiatric symptoms suggesting 
involvement of the limbic system
2.
Bilateral brain abnormalities on T2-weighted fluid-attenuated inversion 
recovery MRI highly restricted to the medial temporal lobes†
3.
At least one of the following:
•
CSF pleocytosis (white blood cell count of more than 
five cells per mm3)
•
EEG with epileptic or slow-wave activity involving the 
temporal lobes
4.
Reasonable exclusion of alternative causes (appendix)
The clinical picture of limbic encephalitis is characterised by rapid development of 
confusion, working memory deficit, mood changes, and often seizures. The subacute 
development of short-term memory loss is considered the hallmark of the disorder, but it can 
be overlooked because of the presence of other symptoms.46 CSF analysis shows mild-to-
moderate lymphocytic pleocytosis (usually less than 100 white blood cells per mm3) in 60–
80% of patients, and elevated IgG index or oligoclonal bands in approximately 50% of 
cases.46,51,52 Among all immunological subtypes of limbic encephalitis, patients with LGI1 
antibodies present with a lower frequency of CSF pleocytosis (41%) or elevated CSF protein 
concentrations (47%) and rarely have intrathecal IgG synthesis.54 The absence of 
inflammatory changes in the CSF of these patients might initially suggest a non-
inflammatory encephalopathy.
MRI often shows increased signal on T2-weighted FLAIR imaging in the medial aspect of 
the temporal lobes. Although limbic encephalitis can occur with MRI evidence of unilateral 
involvement (or be normal) we do not consider these cases as definite limbic encephalitis 
unless specific antibodies are subsequently detected. The reason for this is that several non-
immune disorders could result in similar unilateral MRI abnormalities, including among 
others, seizures, herpes simplex virus encephalitis, or gliomas (appendix, figure 2).40,55–57 
MRI findings of immune-compromised patients with human herpes virus 6-associated 
encephalitis can mimic precisely findings from patients with autoimmune limbic 
encephalitis, but the clinical setting is different and directs the diagnosis.58 By contrast, the 
findings in herpes simplex virus encephalitis are less confined to the limbic system, can 
occur with haemorrhagic features, and often show restricted diffusion abnormalities and 
contrast uptake.59
*If one of the first three criteria is not met, a diagnosis of definite limbic encephalitis can be made only with the detection of 
antibodies against cell-surface, synaptic, or onconeural proteins.
†18 Fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) PET can be used to fulfil this criterion. Results from studies from the past 5 years suggest 
that 18F-FDG-PET imaging might be more sensitive than MRI to show an increase in FDG uptake in normal-appearing medial 
temporal lobes.44,45
Graus et al.
Page 7
Lancet Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Some demographic and clinical clues could suggest the underlying immune response of 
limbic encephalitis (appendix), but the immunological subtypes can be established only by 
measurement of autoantibodies.7 Distinction among immunological subtypes is important 
because those associated with onconeuronal antibodies are much less responsive to 
immunotherapy than those associated with cell-surface antibodies. The onconeuronal 
antibodies that more frequently occur with limbic encephalitis are Hu and Ma2, and patients 
who have these antibodies almost always have an underlying cancer.8,9 By contrast, the 
neuronal cell-surface antibodies that are more frequently associated with limbic encephalitis 
are LGI1,18 GABAB receptor,51,60 and AMPA receptor52 antibodies (see appendix for less 
frequent antibodies). The frequency and type of tumours vary according to the antibody 
(table).7
Antibodies against the intracellular antigen glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) occur in a 
subgroup of patients with limbic encephalitis. These patients are mainly young women 
(median age 23 years) with predominant seizures and no evidence of cancer.10 The risk of 
cancer, usually small-cell lung carcinoma or thymoma, is higher, however, among patients 
with GAD antibodies and limbic encephalitis who are older than 50 years or have 
concomitant GABAB receptor antibodies.23
Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis and other syndromes with MRI features of 
demyelination
Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis is a monophasic, inflammatory disease of the CNS 
that mainly occurs in children and adults younger than 40 years.61 The disorder can be 
preceded by an acute systemic infection or vaccination.62,63 It is characterised by a variable 
extent of encephalopathy (a mandatory criterion for a definitive diagnosis; panel 3), and 
other neurological signs, such as cranial nerve palsies, ataxia, hemiparesis, myelopathy, or 
optic neuritis. CSF analysis typically shows mild pleocytosis (less than 50 lymphocytes per 
mm3), but CSF oligoclonal bands are uncommon (less than 7% of all cases).64 Brain MRI 
shows multiple, large (>2 cm) abnormalities on T2-weighted FLAIR imaging that can be 
present in the supratentorial white matter, basal ganglia, brainstem, cerebellum, and spinal 
cord, with or without contrast enhancement (figure 2).65 There are no specific biomarkers of 
acute disseminated encephalomyelitis, and a set of criteria has been proposed for children 
(panel 3).32 According to these criteria one of the requirements for definite acute 
disseminated encephalomyelitis is the absence of new clinical and MRI findings 3 months 
after symptom onset. Except for this criterion (which cannot be predicted at onset), we 
believe the rest of the criteria are robust enough to establish that patients who meet them 
have probable acute disseminated encephalomyelitis and can be started on immunotherapy.
Panel 3
Diagnostic criteria for definite acute disseminated encephalomyelitis32
Diagnosis can be made when all five of the following criteria have been met:
1.
A first multifocal, clinical CNS event of presumed inflammatory 
demyelinating cause
Graus et al.
Page 8
Lancet Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 2.
Encephalopathy that cannot be explained by fever
3.
Abnormal brain MRI:
•
Diffuse, poorly demarcated, large (>1–2 cm) lesions 
predominantly involving the cerebral white matter
•
T1-hypointense lesions in the white matter in rare cases
•
Deep grey matter abnormalities (eg, thalamus or basal 
ganglia) can be present
4.
No new clinical or MRI findings after 3 months of symptom onset
5.
Reasonable exclusion of alternative causes
Evidence exists that myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) antibodies can transiently 
occur in almost 50% of children with acute disseminated encephalomyelitis.20,66,67 At 
present, the inclusion of MOG antibodies in the diagnostic criteria for acute disseminated 
encephalomyelitis is not considered for two reasons: the antibodies can be present in 
demyelinating disorders with encephalopathy, but without MRI features of acute 
disseminated encephalomyelitis, or in patients with demyelinating disorders without 
encephalopathy;68 and antibody testing remains unavailable at many centres.
Susac’s syndrome is a rare, but important, differential diagnosis in patients who meet criteria 
for possible autoimmune encephalitis and have MRI features of demyelination. The 
syndrome is considered an autoimmune vasculopathy resulting in microvessel thromboses at 
three levels: the brain, retina, and inner ear.69 In a review of 304 cases of Susac’s syndrome, 
230 (76%) patients presented with encephalopathy, but simultaneous involvement of the 
three levels at disease onset occurred in only 31 of 247 (13%) patients.70 The diagnosis is 
based on presence of branch retinal artery occlusions on fluorescein angiography, and MRI 
findings including snowball-like lesions or holes in the central portion of the corpus 
callosum and other periventricular white matter abnormalities on T2-weighted FLAIR 
imaging (figure 2). These MRI findings are different from those seen in acute disseminated 
encephalomyelitis and in the setting of encephalopathy are highly suggestive of Susac’s 
syndrome.70
Anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis
Anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis is frequently recognisable on clinical grounds and is 
associated with CSF IgG antibodies against the GluN1 subunit of the NMDA receptor.11 
These antibodies are highly specific and their pathogenicity has been demonstrated in 
cultured neurons and in-vivo models.71,72 In a multicentre, observational study of 577 
patients, the disease was shown to predominantly affect young individuals (549 [95%] 
younger than 45 years, and 211 [37%] younger than 18 years) with a female sex 
predominance of 4:1. This female predominance was less evident in children younger than 
12 years and adults older than 45 years.28 The frequency of an underlying tumour varied 
with age and sex, ranging from 0–5% in children (male and female) younger than 12 years, 
to 58% in women older than 18 years (usually an ovarian teratoma).28 Adults older than 45 
Graus et al.
Page 9
Lancet Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 years have a lower frequency of tumours (23%), and these are usually carcinomas instead of 
teratomas.11
Teenagers and adults usually present with abnormal behaviour (psychosis, delusions, 
hallucinations, agitation, aggression, or catatonia) with irritability and insomnia, followed by 
speech dysfunction, dyskinesias, memory deficits, autonomic instability, and a decrease in 
the level of consciousness.11,73 Seizures can take place at any time during the disease, but 
tend to occur earlier in males.74 In the above-mentioned observational cohort study,28 
compared with teenagers and adults, young children more frequently presented with 
abnormal movements or seizures. Regardless of the patient’s age and presentation, the 
clinical picture at 3–4 weeks after symptom onset was similar in most cases. By the end of 
the first month, 498 (87%) of 571 patients had four or more of the following categories of 
symptoms, including (from highest-to-lowest frequency) abnormal behaviour and cognition; 
memory deficit; speech disorder; seizures; abnormal movements (orofacial, limb, or trunk 
dyskinesias); loss of consciousness or autonomic dysfunction; central hypoventilation; and 
cerebellar ataxia or hemiparesis.28 Only six patients (1%) had one category of symptoms.
On the basis of these data, and while waiting for confirmatory IgG anti-GluN1 antibody 
results, we regard a patient with rapidly progressive encephalopathy as having probable anti-
NMDA receptor encephalitis if they satisfy the criteria shown in panel 4. Memory deficit is 
common, but we have excluded it from the criteria because it is difficult to assess in patients 
with psychosis or agitation, or in young children. Hemiparesis and cerebellar ataxia are not 
included because these symptoms are less frequent and if they occur they predominantly 
affect children in combination with the other symptoms. In patients who meet these criteria, 
immunotherapy and the search for a neoplasm (according to sex and age) should be started. 
In a retrospective analysis of data from the observational cohort study,28 425 (80%) of 532 
patients with anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis met these criteria within the first month of 
symptom onset, including 254 (74%) of 342 without teratoma and 171 (90%) of 189 with 
teratoma.
Panel 4
Diagnostic criteria for anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis
Probable anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis*
Diagnosis can be made when all three of the following criteria have been met:
1.
Rapid onset (less than 3 months) of at least four of the six following 
major groups of symptoms:
•
Abnormal (psychiatric) behaviour or cognitive 
dysfunction
•
Speech dysfunction (pressured speech, verbal 
reduction, mutism)
*Patients with a history of herpes simplex virus encephalitis in the previous weeks might have relapsing immune-mediated 
neurological symptoms (post-herpes simplex virus encephalitis).
Graus et al.
Page 10
Lancet Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 •
Seizures
•
Movement disorder, dyskinesias, or rigidity/abnormal 
postures
•
Decreased level of consciousness
•
Autonomic dysfunction or central hypoventilation
2.
At least one of the following laboratory study results:
•
Abnormal EEG (focal or diffuse slow or disorganised 
activity, epileptic activity, or extreme delta brush)
•
CSF with pleocytosis or oligoclonal bands
3.
Reasonable exclusion of other disorders (appendix)
Diagnosis can also be made in the presence of three of the above groups of symptoms 
accompanied by a systemic teratoma
Definite anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis*
Diagnosis can be made in the presence of one or more of the six major groups of 
symptoms and IgG anti-GluN1 antibodies,† after reasonable exclusion of other disorders 
(appendix)
Patients with partial symptoms who might be missed with these initial criteria will be 
identified with an antibody test (figure 1). Antibody studies should include CSF analysis; a 
risk of false-negative or false-positive diagnoses exists if only serum is used.75 Findings 
from three other studies have suggested that serum testing is less consistent, or showed 
antibodies in patients without anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis or immune-mediated 
disorders.74,76,77
Analysis of CSF for the presence of NMDA receptor antibodies is mandatory in patients 
with relapsing symptoms after herpes simplex encephalitis.78,79 This relapsing form of 
herpes simplex encephalitis is an autoimmune disorder that at times is indistinguishable 
from the full-blown syndrome of anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis, affects 20% of patients 
with herpes simplex encephalitis, and manifests with new-onset choreoathetosis 
(predominantly in children)79,80 or psychiatric symptoms (mainly in adults and teenagers) a 
few weeks or, rarely, months after the viral infection.81 In addition to NMDA receptor 
antibodies, a few patients develop GABAA receptor or dopamine receptor 2 antibodies.81,82
Bickerstaff’s brainstem encephalitis
Bickerstaff’s brainstem encephalitis is characterised by subacute onset, in less than 4 weeks, 
of progressive impairment of consciousness along with ataxia and bilateral, mostly 
symmetrical, ophthalmoparesis.83 The syndrome is usually preceded by an infectious event, 
runs a monophasic course, and has a good outcome. Additionally, patients frequently 
†Antibody testing should include testing of CSF. If only serum is available, confirmatory tests should be included (eg, live neurons 
or tissue immunohistochemistry, in addition to cell-based assay).
Graus et al.
Page 11
Lancet Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 develop pupillary abnormalities, bilateral facial palsy, Babinski’s sign, and bulbar palsy. 
Generalised limb weakness can occur, which overlaps with features of Guillain-Barré 
syndrome.84 CSF pleocytosis occurs in 45% of patients. Brain MRI is usually normal, but 
brainstem abnormalities on T2- weighted FLAIR imaging are present in 23% of patients.83
Most of the proposed criteria for Bickerstaff’s brainstem encephalitis include the triad of 
abnormal mental status, bilateral external ophthalmoplegia, and ataxia (panel 5).83 IgG anti-
GQ1b antibodies are highly specific for this disorder and the related Miller-Fisher 
syndrome, leading some clinicians to group these disorders under the term GQ1b antibody 
syndrome.22 We agree with the criteria proposed in 2014, which do not specify the need for 
GQ1b antibody testing for a definitive diagnosis of Bickerstaff’s brainstem encephalitis 
because up to 32% of patients do not have detectable antibodies.43 Measurement of these 
antibodies, however, allows confirmation of the diagnosis in patients with incomplete 
syndromes or atypical symptoms, or when the altered mental status prevents the assessment 
of ataxia. The occasional complexity in the differential diagnosis is exemplified by the third 
case in the original report by Bickerstaff and Cloake,85 in which a 24-year-old woman, who 
was admitted for ovarian cystectomy, in addition to brainstem symptoms, developed 
seizures, hyperthermia, psychosis, and episodes of maniacal excitement alternating with 
catatonia that lasted 2 months. Measurement of GQ1b and NMDA receptor antibodies (not 
available at that time) would probably have clarified the diagnosis.
Panel 5
Diagnostic criteria for Bickerstaff’s brainstem encephalitis
Probable Bickerstaff’s brainstem encephalitis
Diagnosis can be made when both of the following criteria have been met:
1.
Subacute onset (rapid progression of less than 4 weeks) of all the 
following symptoms:
•
Decreased level of consciousness
•
Bilateral external ophthalmoplegia
•
Ataxia
2.
Reasonable exclusion of alternative causes
Definite Bickerstaff’s brainstem encephalitis
Diagnosis can be made in the presence of positive IgG anti-GQ1b antibodies even if 
bilateral external ophthalmoplegia is not complete or ataxia cannot be assessed, or if 
recovery has occurred within 12 weeks after onset
Disorders to consider in the differential diagnosis of Bickerstaff’s brainstem encephalitis 
include Listeria rhombencephalitis, EV71 encephalitis in children, paraneoplastic and 
postinfectious brainstem encephalitis, chronic lymphocytic inflammation with pontine 
perivascular enhancement responsive to steroids (CLIPPERS), neurosarcoidosis, and 
primary CNS lymphoma.86–88
Graus et al.
Page 12
Lancet Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Antibody testing: clinical considerations and caveats
The detection of specific autoantibodies (table, figure 1) establishes a definitive diagnosis of 
autoimmune encephalitis, identifies immunological subtypes of limbic encephalitis, and 
assists in the differential diagnosis of atypical clinical cases. Therefore, measurement of 
antibodies is a crucial step in the definite diagnosis of many types of autoimmune 
encephalitis and clinicians must be aware of potential pitfalls in the interpretation of results.
Several concepts that apply to classic onconeuronal or GAD antibodies (discussed later) are 
not applicable to antibodies against neuronal cell-surface proteins. Onconeuronal and GAD 
antibodies target intracellular proteins and because they are present in the serum and CSF, 
and their epitopes are linear, they are detectable with many techniques including ELISA, 
immunoblotting, and immunohistochemistry. By contrast, antibodies against neuronal cell-
surface proteins have different properties that should be considered for a better 
understanding of the most appropriate tests to use and interpretation of their results. Here, 
we discuss these issues and some more general caveats applicable to the detection of 
autoantibodies.
Conformational antigens
Most antibodies against neuronal cell-surface proteins recognise target epitopes only if they 
are expressed in their native conformation. Techniques that meet this requirement are cell-
based assays (used by most clinical laboratories), immunohistochemistry of brain sections 
adapted to membrane proteins (commercially available; sometimes used as a confirmatory 
test), and immunocytochemistry of cultures of dissociated rodent live hippocampal neurons 
(only used in research laboratories).12
Molecular precision
The target antigens of autoantibodies can be composed of several subunits. Antibodies 
against each of the subunits can have different clinical significance and implications. For 
example, the NMDA receptor is a heterotetramer comprised of two GluN1 subunits and two 
GluN2/3 subunits. Detection of IgG antibodies against the GluN1 subunit is a signature of 
anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis.89 By contrast, antibodies against linear epitopes of GluN2 
or GluR ε2 have been reported in many different disorders and their clinical significance is 
uncertain.90
Molecular precision is important for the voltage-gated potassium channel complex (VGKC) 
antibodies. This name was adopted by some investigators after they showed that the target 
antigen was not the VGKC itself, but the proteins LGI1 and contactin-associated protein-like 
2 (CASPR2), complexed with the VGKC.17,18 Antibodies against LGI1 and CASPR2 have 
well defined syndrome associations. By contrast, radioimmunoassay studies have shown that 
antibodies directed against the VGKC complex that do not target LGI1 or CASPR2 are not 
syndrome specific and cannot be used as proof of an immune-mediated pathogenesis.91–93
Graus et al.
Page 13
Lancet Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Immunoglobulin class
The antibodies associated with autoimmune encephalitis in the table are IgG antibodies. 
Detection of IgA or IgM antibodies against any of these antigens has unclear significance. 
For example, whereas IgG antibodies against the GluN1 subunit of the NMDA receptor are 
specific for anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis, IgM or IgA antibodies have been reported in 
the serum of 10% of patients with different disorders and in a similar proportion of healthy 
people.94
CSF studies
Analysis of CSF plays a central part in all diagnostic criteria for encephalitis, including 
infectious encephalitis, and has a similar role in the detection of autoantibodies in suspected 
cases of autoimmune encephalitis. The investigation of CSF antibodies is important for four 
reasons: (1) most patients with autoimmune encephalitis have CSF antibodies and relevant 
antibodies might be found only in the CSF51,52—eg, in patients with anti-NMDA receptor 
encephalitis up to 14% have antibodies in the CSF, but not in the serum;75 (2) the repertoire 
of antibodies in the CSF and serum can be different in the same patient (eg, NMDA receptor 
in CSF and serum, and GABAA receptor only in serum), and in this setting, the types of 
antibodies in the CSF usually determine the clinical picture;14 (3) for some disorders, such 
as anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis, the concentration of CSF antibodies correlates better 
with the clinical course than antibody concentrations in the serum;75 and (4) neuronal 
antibody testing using serum and cell-based assays could lead to false-positive or false-
negative results; this problem rarely occurs with CSF analysis. On the basis of these data and 
while we await larger studies with other autoantibodies, our recommendation is to include 
both CSF and serum for neuronal antibody testing in patients with suspected autoimmune 
encephalitis.
These concepts have implications for patient management. The approach of first testing the 
serum and proceeding with the CSF if negative could delay diagnosis. If serum testing is 
positive, but the CSF is negative, or if the clinical picture does not fit with the antibody 
identified, the possibilities of a laboratory result unrelated to the syndrome or a false-
positive result should be considered;95 in such cases, the laboratory should be contacted 
regarding retesting of the samples or the use of confirmatory tests (eg, brain 
immunohistochemistry or cultured neurons). Finally, treatment decisions during the course 
of the disease should rely more on clinical assessment than on antibody titres. Although the 
titres might correlate with the clinical course, this correlation is imperfect, and antibodies 
often remain detectable after clinical recovery.75
Antibodies in demyelinating disorders that overlap with anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis
About 4% of patients with anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis develop two different 
syndromes that can occur separately or simultaneously. Each syndrome is related to a 
distinct pathogenic mechanism, such as anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis along with MOG-
related or aquaporin 4 (AQP4)-related syndromes (figure 2).96 In practice, physicians should 
be aware that a demyelinating disorder can present as an autoimmune encephalitis disorder, 
and that overlapping syndromes can occur. Patients with a demyelinating disorder and 
atypical features (eg, dyskinesias or prominent psychiatric manifestations) or patients with 
Graus et al.
Page 14
Lancet Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis with atypical features (eg, optic neuritis or demyelination 
on MRI) should be comprehensively studied for coexisting disorders, rather than being 
classified as having an expansion of the spectrum of a single disease. These clinical 
situations imply the need for testing for AQP4 and MOG antibodies in the serum (because 
intrathecal production of these antibodies is rare),20,97 and for NMDA receptor antibodies in 
the serum and CSF.
GAD antibodies in limbic encephalitis and other syndromes
Serum antibodies against intracellular GAD can occur at low titres in 1% of healthy people 
and in 80% of people with type 1 diabetes mellitus.98 Only serum GAD antibodies at high 
titres are associated with autoimmune neurological disorders, such as limbic encephalitis 
and other syndromes.99 The definition of high titre depends on the technique used, but 
neurological symptoms usually occur with titres that are 100–1000 times higher than those 
seen in people with diabetes. When examining a patient with limbic encephalitis, clinicians 
should keep in mind that, albeit rare, high titres of serum GAD antibodies could suggest the 
presence of diabetes or other endocrine disorders. In this setting, specific intrathecal 
production of GAD antibodies or CSF oligoclonal bands support an association with the 
neurological syndrome.99
Approach to patients without recognisable syndromes or autoantibodies
After excluding all well characterised syndromes of autoimmune encephalitis (with or 
without autoantibodies) and other syndromes accompanied by well defined auto-antibodies, 
a group of patients who have possible autoimmune encephalitis will remain (panel 1). 
Patients in this group can be regarded as having probable autoimmune encephalitis if they 
satisfy criteria for Hashimoto’s encephalopathy (panel 6)101 or the criteria proposed in panel 
7.
Panel 6
Diagnostic criteria for Hashimoto’s encephalopathy
Diagnosis can be made when all six of the following criteria have been met:
1.
Encephalopathy with seizures, myoclonus, hallucinations, or stroke-
like episodes
2.
Subclinical or mild overt thyroid disease (usually hypothyroidism)
3.
Brain MRI normal or with non-specific abnormalities
4.
Presence of serum thyroid (thyroid peroxidase, thyroglobulin) 
antibodies*
5.
Absence of well characterised neuronal antibodies in serum and CSF
6.
Reasonable exclusion of alternative causes
*There is no disease-specific cutoff value for these antibodies (detectable in 13% of healthy individuals).100
Graus et al.
Page 15
Lancet Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Panel 7
Criteria for autoantibody-negative but probable autoimmune encephalitis
Diagnosis can be made when all four of the following criteria have been met:
1.
Rapid progression (less than 3 months) of working memory deficits 
(short-term memory loss), altered mental status, or psychiatric 
symptoms
2.
Exclusion of well defined syndromes of autoimmune encephalitis (eg, 
typical limbic encephalitis, Bickerstaff’s brainstem encephalitis, acute 
disseminated encephalomyelitis)
3.
Absence of well characterised autoantibodies in serum and CSF, and at 
least two of the following criteria:
•
MRI abnormalities suggestive of autoimmune 
encephalitis*
•
CSF pleocytosis, CSF-specific oligoclonal bands or 
elevated CSF IgG index, or both*
•
Brain biopsy showing inflammatory infiltrates and 
excluding other disorders (eg, tumour)
4.
Reasonable exclusion of alternative causes
The definition of Hashimoto’s encephalopathy has been linked to a good response to 
steroids, and consequently the disorder is deemed immune mediated, despite the unclear 
physiopathology and the absence of response to prednisone in the patient in the original 
report.103 This disorder predominantly affects women in a wide age range, from the first to 
the eighth decade of life. Overt or subclinical thyroid disease, usually hypothyroidism, 
occurs in most cases (54 of 80 patients in a review of reported cases).104 By definition, 
patients develop encephalopathy, which can be associated with seizures (56 of 85 reviewed 
patients), myoclonus (32 patients), hallucinations (31 patients), and stroke-like episodes (23 
patients) with normal or non-specific CSF and brain MRI abnormalities.33,104 Most reported 
patients (66 of 69 patients treated with corticosteroids with or without levothyroxine) 
improved;104 however, this outcome is expected in view of the definition of the disorder, 
which in 2006 was renamed as steroid-responsive encephalopathy with autoimmune 
thyroiditis.101
Patients who have a non-specific encephalopathy with subclinical or overt thyroid disease, 
anti-thyroid antibodies, and no better explanation for the symptoms should be considered for 
a trial of steroids. However, thyroid antibodies are not specific for Hashimoto’s 
encephalopathy because they are present in up to 13% of healthy individuals (27% in white 
women older than 60 years) and patients with other autoimmune encephalitis disorders.100 
*Some inherited mitochondrial and metabolic disorders can present with symmetric or asymmetric MRI abnormalities and CSF 
inflammatory changes resembling an acquired autoimmune disorder.102
Graus et al.
Page 16
Lancet Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Similarly, α-enolase antibodies have been identified in up to 68% of patients with 
Hashimoto’s encephalopathy,105 but they cannot be used as biomarkers of the disease 
because they have been detected in healthy people and in patients with other autoimmune 
disorders.33,106
We propose use of the term Hashimoto’s encephalopathy only when rigorous clinical 
assessment and comprehensive testing for well characterised neuronal antibodies exclude 
other potential causes of encephalopathy (panel 6).100 Because the underlying pathogenic 
mechanism is unclear, diagnosis of Hashimoto’s encephalopathy should be classified as 
probable autoimmune encephalitis (figure 1).
Other poorly defined syndromes with no antibodies can be regarded as probable 
autoimmune encephalitis if they satisfy the criteria in panel 7. When considering these 
criteria the following should be kept in mind: (1) the absence of pleocytosis does not rule out 
autoimmune encephalitis (eg, 59% of patients with LGI1 antibody-associated encephalitis 
do not have CSF pleocytosis),54 normal routine CSF studies do not imply that there is no 
intrathecal IgG synthesis or an absence of CSF antibodies, and in fact, almost all antibody-
associated autoimmune encephalitis disorders have detectable antibodies in the CSF; (2) 
autoimmune encephalitis can occur with normal or atypical MRI findings (figure 2); and (3) 
mainly applicable to children, several genetic disorders, mitochondrial diseases, or 
leukodystrophies can develop with MRI and CSF abnormalities (eg, symmetric brain 
involvement, pleocytosis) similar to those found in autoimmune encephalitis and might also 
respond to steroids.102
For patients who meet the criteria of probable autoimmune encephalitis, but do not have well 
characterised autoantibodies (panel 7), investigation of CSF and serum for new antibodies in 
reference laboratories is important. Detection of CSF antibodies that react with the cell 
surface of neurons (even when the antigens are unknown) strongly supports the diagnosis of 
autoimmune encephalitis; the clinical significance of the detection of antibodies in serum 
only is less clear (eg, serum GABAA receptor antibodies are associated with a wide variety 
of symptoms, some of unclear clinical relevance).14,107 The importance of these studies 
cannot be overemphasised and surpasses the clinical significance of inflammatory infiltrates 
in a brain biopsy, which suggest an inflammatory process, but cannot be used to establish the 
autoimmune cause.
For patients who do not satisfy criteria for probable autoimmune encephalitis and do not 
have any autoantibody (well characterised or against unknown neuronal cell-surface 
antigens), or who do not satisfy criteria for any of the aforementioned diseases and 
syndromes, the likelihood of an autoimmune cause becomes smaller and alternative 
diagnoses should be reconsidered.
There are several autoimmune CNS disorders (primary CNS angiitis [appendix],108 
Rasmussen’s encephalitis,35 Morvan’s syndrome34) and other diseases of unclear cause (eg, 
febrile infection-related epilepsy syndrome [FIRES]109) that are often considered in the 
differential diagnosis of autoimmune encephalitis (panel 1). We have summarised these 
Graus et al.
Page 17
Lancet Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 disorders (appendix) and emphasised the clinical features that lead to the differential 
diagnosis with autoimmune encephalitis.
Implications and directions for future research
We have shown that it is possible to proceed through a logical differential diagnosis of 
autoimmune encephalitis using criteria based on conventional clinical neurological 
assessment and standard diagnostic tests (MRI, EEG, and CSF studies). Through this 
approach, levels of evidence of probable and definite autoimmune encephalitis can be 
achieved early and therapies implemented quickly, with the possibility of fine-tuning the 
diagnosis and treatment when antibody results become available. Treatment 
recommendations for each type of autoimmune encephalitis are outside the scope of these 
guidelines; moreover, the evidence is limited for many of these disorders. The stepwise 
escalation of immunotherapy, which includes first-line therapy (steroids; IVIg, plasma 
exchange, or both) followed, if there is no clinical response, by second-line therapy 
(rituximab, cyclo phosphamide, or other), is often used in the treatment of anti-NMDA 
receptor and other autoimmune types of encephalitis, but rituximab is increasingly being 
considered as a first-line therapy.16 Not all autoimmune encephalitis syndromes, however, 
need a similar approach. For example, patients with limbic encephalitis and LGI1 antibodies 
appear to respond faster and better to steroids than patients with anti-NMDA receptor 
encephalitis, yet the long-term outcome seems to be better for those with anti-NMDA 
receptor encephalitis.28,53
We acknowledge the need for future research to drive improvements in the diagnosis of 
autoimmune encephalitis. The repertoire of autoimmune encephalitis in children is different 
from that of adults. The younger the child the more difficult it is to recognise specific 
autoimmune encephalitis syndromes, which suggests that guidelines for paediatric 
autoimmune encephalitis will be more dependent on antibody and other ancillary tests than 
the syndrome-based guidelines in this Position Paper. Conversely, clinical assessment of 
autoimmune encephalitis in elderly people (aged over 65 years) has another set of challenges 
imposed by the high frequency of brain changes in this group caused by systemic and non-
immune-mediated disorders, or the coexistence of age-related disorders that can affect 
memory and cognition. Other areas of improvement will be dictated by cumulative clinical 
experience, better differential diagnoses with diseases that resemble autoimmune 
encephalitis, and increased accessibility to antibody tests with faster turnaround, while 
keeping in mind the caveats for interpretation of some of these tests.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank the Autoimmune Encephalitis Alliance (USA), the Encephalitis Society (UK), the Anti-NMDA Receptor 
Encephalitis Foundation Inc (Canada), and the Anti-NMDA Receptor Encephalitis Patient Initiative (Germany) for 
disseminating information, helping patients and families, and promoting research in autoimmune encephalitis. FG 
was supported in part by grant 20141830 Fundació la Marató TV3. MJT has been supported by an Erasmus 
fellowship, the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (Veni-incentive), and a grant from the Dutch 
Graus et al.
Page 18
Lancet Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Epilepsy Foundations (NEF project 14–19). RCD has received research funding from the National Health and 
Medical Research Council, MS Research Australia, the Tourette Syndrome Association, the University of Sydney, 
and the Petre Foundation. MG receives grants from the National Institute on Aging; has received grants from 
CurePSP and the Tau Consortium; and has received speaker’s fees and research funding from Grand Round 
Lectures, and the Michael J Homer Family Fund. PW is supported by the National Health Service National 
Specialised Commissioning Group for Neuromyelitis Optica, UK, and the National Institute for Health Research 
Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, and has received travel grants from the Guthy-Jackson Charitable Foundation. 
JD was supported by the Instituto Carlos III (FIS 14/00203) grant, National Institutes of Health RO1NS077851 
grant, and Fundació Cellex.
References
1. Venkatesan A, Tunkel AR, Bloch KC, et al. for the International Encephalitis Consortium. Case 
definitions, diagnostic algorithms, and priorities in encephalitis: consensus statement of the 
international encephalitis consortium. Clin Infect Dis. 2013; 57:1114–28. [PubMed: 23861361] 
2. Jmor F, Emsley HC, Fischer M, Solomon T, Lewthwaite P. The incidence of acute encephalitis 
syndrome in Western industrialised and tropical countries. Virol J. 2008; 5:134–46. [PubMed: 
18973679] 
3. Vora NM, Holman RC, Mehal JM, Steiner CA, Blanton J, Sejvar J. Burden of encephalitis-
associated hospitalizations in the United States, 1998–2010. Neurology. 2014; 82:443–51. 
[PubMed: 24384647] 
4. Ball R, Halsey N, Braun MM, et al. for the VAERS Working Group. Development of case 
definitions for acute encephalopathy, encephalitis, and multiple sclerosis reports to the vaccine: 
Adverse Event Reporting System. J Clin Epidemiol. 2002; 55:819–24. [PubMed: 12384197] 
5. Sejvar JJ, Kohl KS, Bilynsky R, et al. for the Brighton Collaboration Encephalitis Working Group. 
Encephalitis, myelitis, and acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM): case definitions and 
guidelines for collection, analysis, and presentation of immunization safety data. Vaccine. 2007; 
25:5771–92. [PubMed: 17570566] 
6. Britton PN, Eastwood K, Paterson B, et al. for the Australasian Society of Infectious Diseases 
(ASID), the Australasian College of Emergency Medicine (ACEM), the Australian and New 
Zealand Association of Neurologists (ANZAN), and the Public Health Association of Australia 
(PHAA). Consensus guidelines for the investigation and management of encephalitis in adults and 
children in Australia and New Zealand. Intern Med J. 2015; 45:563–76. [PubMed: 25955462] 
7. Leypoldt F, Armangue T, Dalmau J. Autoimmune encephalopathies. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2015; 
1338:94–114. [PubMed: 25315420] 
8. Alamowitch S, Graus F, Uchuya M, Reñé R, Bescansa E, Delattre JY. Limbic encephalitis and small 
cell lung cancer. Clinical and immunological features. Brain. 1997; 120:923–28. [PubMed: 
9217677] 
9. Dalmau J, Graus F, Villarejo A, et al. Clinical analysis of anti-Ma2-associated encephalitis. Brain. 
2004; 127:1831–44. [PubMed: 15215214] 
10. Malter MP, Helmstaedter C, Urbach H, Vincent A, Bien CG. Antibodies to glutamic acid 
decarboxylase define a form of limbic encephalitis. Ann Neurol. 2010; 67:470–78. [PubMed: 
20437582] 
11. Dalmau J, Lancaster E, Martinez-Hernandez E, Rosenfeld MR, Balice-Gordon R. Clinical 
experience and laboratory investigations in patients with anti-NMDAR encephalitis. Lancet 
Neurol. 2011; 10:63–74. [PubMed: 21163445] 
12. Lai M, Hughes EG, Peng X, et al. AMPA receptor antibodies in limbic encephalitis alter synaptic 
receptor location. Ann Neurol. 2009; 65:424–34. [PubMed: 19338055] 
13. Lancaster E, Lai M, Peng X, et al. Antibodies to the GABA(B) receptor in limbic encephalitis with 
seizures: case series and characterisation of the antigen. Lancet Neurol. 2010; 9:67–76. [PubMed: 
19962348] 
14. Petit-Pedrol M, Armangue T, Peng X, et al. Encephalitis with refractory seizures, status 
epilepticus, and antibodies to the GABAA receptor: a case series, characterisation of the antigen, 
and analysis of the effects of antibodies. Lancet Neurol. 2014; 13:276–86. [PubMed: 24462240] 
15. Lancaster E, Martinez-Hernandez E, Titulaer MJ, et al. Antibodies to metabotropic glutamate 
receptor 5 in the Ophelia syndrome. Neurology. 2011; 77:1698–701. [PubMed: 22013185] 
Graus et al.
Page 19
Lancet Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 16. Dale RC, Merheb V, Pillai S, et al. Antibodies to surface dopamine-2 receptor in autoimmune 
movement and psychiatric disorders. Brain. 2012; 135:3453–68. [PubMed: 23065479] 
17. Lai M, Huijbers MG, Lancaster E, et al. Investigation of LGI1 as the antigen in limbic encephalitis 
previously attributed to potassium channels: a case series. Lancet Neurol. 2010; 9:776–85. 
[PubMed: 20580615] 
18. Irani SR, Alexander S, Waters P, et al. Antibodies to Kv1 potassium channel-complex proteins 
leucine-rich, glioma inactivated 1 protein and contactin-associated protein-2 in limbic encephalitis, 
Morvan’s syndrome and acquired neuromyotonia. Brain. 2010; 133:2734–48. [PubMed: 
20663977] 
19. Boronat A, Gelfand JM, Gresa-Arribas N, et al. Encephalitis and antibodies to dipeptidyl-
peptidase-like protein-6, a subunit of Kv4. 2 potassium channels. Ann Neurol. 2013; 73:120–28. 
[PubMed: 23225603] 
20. Brilot F, Dale RC, Selter RC, et al. Antibodies to native myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein in 
children with inflammatory demyelinating central nervous system disease. Ann Neurol. 2009; 
66:833–42. [PubMed: 20033986] 
21. McKeon A, Lennon VA, Lotze T, et al. CNS aquaporin-4 autoimmunity in children. Neurology. 
2008; 71:93–100. [PubMed: 18509092] 
22. Shahrizaila N, Yuki N. Bickerstaff brainstem encephalitis and Fisher syndrome: anti-GQ1b 
antibody syndrome. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2013; 84:576–83. [PubMed: 22984203] 
23. Ariño H, Höftberger R, Gresa-Arribas N, et al. Paraneoplastic neurological syndromes and 
glutamic acid decarboxylase antibodies. JAMA Neurol. 2015; 72:874–81. [PubMed: 26099072] 
24. Alexopoulos H, Dalakas MC. Immunology of stiff person syndrome and other GAD-associated 
neurological disorders. Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 2013; 9:1043–53. [PubMed: 24168411] 
25. Carvajal-González A, Leite MI, Waters P, et al. Glycine receptor antibodies in PERM and related 
syndromes: characteristics, clinical features and outcomes. Brain. 2014; 137:2178–92. [PubMed: 
24951641] 
26. Demarquay G, Honnorat J. Clinical presentation of immune-mediated cerebellar ataxia. Rev 
Neurol (Paris). 2011; 167:408–17. [PubMed: 21055784] 
27. Zuliani L, Graus F, Giometto B, Bien C, Vincent A. Central nervous system neuronal surface 
antibody associated syndromes: review and guidelines for recognition. J Neurol Neurosurg 
Psychiatry. 2012; 83:638–45. [PubMed: 22448032] 
28. Titulaer MJ, McCracken L, Gabilondo I, et al. Treatment and prognostic factors for long-term 
outcome in patients with anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis: an observational cohort study. Lancet 
Neurol. 2013; 12:157–65. [PubMed: 23290630] 
29. Byrne S, Walsh C, Hacohen Y, et al. Earlier treatment of NMDAR antibody encephalitis in children 
results in a better outcome. Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm. 2015; 2:e130. [PubMed: 
26236759] 
30. Ances BM, Vitaliani R, Taylor RA, et al. Treatment-responsive limbic encephalitis identified by 
neuropil antibodies: MRI and PET correlates. Brain. 2005; 128:1764–77. [PubMed: 15888538] 
31. Vincent A, Buckley C, Schott JM, et al. Potassium channel antibody-associated encephalopathy: a 
potentially immunotherapy-responsive form of limbic encephalitis. Brain. 2004; 127:701–12. 
[PubMed: 14960497] 
32. Krupp LB, Tardieu M, Amato MP, et al. for the International Pediatric Multiple Sclerosis Study 
Group. International Pediatric Multiple Sclerosis Study Group criteria for pediatric multiple 
sclerosis and immune-mediated central nervous system demyelinating disorders: revisions to the 
2007 definitions. Mult Scler. 2013; 19:1261–67. [PubMed: 23572237] 
33. Schiess N, Pardo CA. Hashimoto’s encephalopathy. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2008; 1142:254–65. 
[PubMed: 18990131] 
34. Irani SR, Pettingill P, Kleopa KA, et al. Morvan syndrome: clinical and serological observations in 
29 cases. Ann Neurol. 2012; 72:241–55. [PubMed: 22473710] 
35. Bien CG, Granata T, Antozzi C, et al. Pathogenesis, diagnosis and treatment of Rasmussen 
encephalitis: a European consensus statement. Brain. 2005; 128:454–71. [PubMed: 15689357] 
36. Armangue T, Petit-Pedrol M, Dalmau J. Autoimmune encephalitis in children. J Child Neurol. 
2012; 27:1460–69. [PubMed: 22935553] 
Graus et al.
Page 20
Lancet Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 37. Pillai SC, Hacohen Y, Tantsis E, et al. Infectious and autoantibody-associated encephalitis: clinical 
features and long-term outcome. Pediatrics. 2015; 135:e974–84. [PubMed: 25802349] 
38. Schmitt SE, Pargeon K, Frechette ES, Hirsch LJ, Dalmau J, Friedman D. Extreme delta brush: a 
unique EEG pattern in adults with anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis. Neurology. 2012; 79:1094–
100. [PubMed: 22933737] 
39. Weil AA, Glaser CA, Amad Z, Forghani B. Patients with suspected herpes simplex encephalitis: 
rethinking an initial negative polymerase chain reaction result. Clin Infect Dis. 2002; 34:1154–57. 
[PubMed: 11915008] 
40. Solomon T, Michael BD, Smith PE, et al. for the National Encephalitis Guidelines Development 
and Stakeholder Groups. Management of suspected viral encephalitis in adults—association of 
British Neurologists and British Infection Association National Guidelines. J Infect. 2012; 64:347–
73. [PubMed: 22120595] 
41. Tobin WO, Lennon VA, Komorowski L, et al. DPPX potassium channel antibody: frequency, 
clinical accompaniments, and outcomes in 20 patients. Neurology. 2014; 83:1797–803. [PubMed: 
25320100] 
42. Irani SR, Michell AW, Lang B, et al. Faciobrachial dystonic seizures precede Lgi1 antibody limbic 
encephalitis. Ann Neurol. 2011; 69:892–900. [PubMed: 21416487] 
43. Wakerley BR, Uncini A, Yuki N. for the GBS Classification Group, and the GBS Classification 
Group. Guillain-Barré and Miller Fisher syndromes—new diagnostic classification. Nat Rev 
Neurol. 2014; 10:537–44. [PubMed: 25072194] 
44. Baumgartner A, Rauer S, Mader I, Meyer PT. Cerebral FDG-PET and MRI findings in 
autoimmune limbic encephalitis: correlation with autoantibody types. J Neurol. 2013; 260:2744–
53. [PubMed: 23900756] 
45. Heine J, Prüss H, Bartsch T, Ploner CJ, Paul F, Finke C. Imaging of autoimmune encephalitis - 
Relevance for clinical practice and hippocampal function. Neuroscience. 2015; 309:68–83. 
[PubMed: 26012492] 
46. Gultekin SH, Rosenfeld MR, Voltz R, Eichen J, Posner JB, Dalmau J. Paraneoplastic limbic 
encephalitis: neurological symptoms, immunological findings and tumour association in 50 
patients. Brain. 2000; 123:1481–94. [PubMed: 10869059] 
47. Graus F, Delattre JY, Antoine JC, et al. Recommended diagnostic criteria for paraneoplastic 
neurological syndromes. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2004; 75:1135–40. [PubMed: 15258215] 
48. Graus F, Saiz A, Lai M, et al. Neuronal surface antigen antibodies in limbic encephalitis: clinical-
immunologic associations. Neurology. 2008; 71:930–36. [PubMed: 18794496] 
49. Najjar S, Pearlman D, Zagzag D, Devinsky O. Spontaneously resolving seronegative autoimmune 
limbic encephalitis. Cogn Behav Neurol. 2011; 24:99–105. [PubMed: 21677575] 
50. Voltz R, Gultekin SH, Rosenfeld MR, et al. A serologic marker of paraneoplastic limbic and brain-
stem encephalitis in patients with testicular cancer. N Engl J Med. 1999; 340:1788–95. [PubMed: 
10362822] 
51. Höftberger R, Titulaer MJ, Sabater L, et al. Encephalitis and GABAB receptor antibodies: novel 
findings in a new case series of 20 patients. Neurology. 2013; 81:1500–06. [PubMed: 24068784] 
52. Höftberger R, van Sonderen A, Leypoldt F, et al. Encephalitis and AMPA receptor antibodies: 
novel findings in a case series of 22 patients. Neurology. 2015; 84:2403–12. [PubMed: 25979696] 
53. Malter MP, Frisch C, Schoene-Bake JC, et al. Outcome of limbic encephalitis with VGKC-
complex antibodies: relation to antigenic specificity. J Neurol. 2014; 261:1695–705. [PubMed: 
24935858] 
54. Jarius S, Hoffmann L, Clover L, Vincent A, Voltz R. CSF findings in patients with voltage gated 
potassium channel antibody associated limbic encephalitis. J Neurol Sci. 2008; 268:74–77. 
[PubMed: 18068189] 
55. Athauda D, Delamont RS, Pablo-Fernandez ED. High grade glioma mimicking voltage gated 
potassium channel complex associated antibody limbic encephalitis. Case Rep Neurol Med. 2014; 
2014:458790. [PubMed: 24716020] 
56. Chevret L, Husson B, Nguefack S, Nehlig A, Bouilleret V. Prolonged refractory status epilepticus 
with early and persistent restricted hippocampal signal MRI abnormality. J Neurol. 2008; 
255:112–16. [PubMed: 18204804] 
Graus et al.
Page 21
Lancet Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 57. Chow FC, Glaser CA, Sheriff H, et al. Use of clinical and neuroimaging characteristics to 
distinguish temporal lobe herpes simplex encephalitis from its mimics. Clin Infect Dis. 2015; 
60:1377–83. [PubMed: 25637586] 
58. Seeley WW, Marty FM, Holmes TM, et al. Post-transplant acute limbic encephalitis: clinical 
features and relationship to HHV6. Neurology. 2007; 69:156–65. [PubMed: 17620548] 
59. Renard D, Nerrant E, Lechiche C. DWI and FLAIR imaging in herpes simplex encephalitis: a 
comparative and topographical analysis. J Neurol. 2015; 262:2101–05. [PubMed: 26092520] 
60. Jeffery OJ, Lennon VA, Pittock SJ, Gregory JK, Britton JW, McKeon A. GABAB receptor 
autoantibody frequency in service serologic evaluation. Neurology. 2013; 81:882–87. [PubMed: 
23925760] 
61. Wingerchuk DM. The clinical course of acute disseminated encephalomyelitis. Neurol Res. 2006; 
28:341–47. [PubMed: 16687063] 
62. Wingerchuk DM. Postinfectious encephalomyelitis. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2003; 3:256–64. 
[PubMed: 12691631] 
63. Karussis D, Petrou P. The spectrum of post-vaccination inflammatory CNS demyelinating 
syndromes. Autoimmun Rev. 2014; 13:215–24. [PubMed: 24514081] 
64. Wingerchuk DM, Weinshenker BG. Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis, transverse myelitis, 
and neuromyelitis optica. Continuum (Minneap Minn). 2013; 19:944–67. [PubMed: 23917095] 
65. Kesselring J, Miller DH, Robb SA, et al. Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis. MRI findings and 
the distinction from multiple sclerosis. Brain. 1990; 113:291–302. [PubMed: 2328406] 
66. Baumann M, Sahin K, Lechner C, et al. Clinical and neuroradiological differences of paediatric 
acute disseminating encephalomyelitis with and without antibodies to the myelin oligodendrocyte 
glycoprotein. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2015; 86:265–72. [PubMed: 25121570] 
67. Huppke P, Rostasy K, Karenfort M, et al. Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis followed by 
recurrent or monophasic optic neuritis in pediatric patients. Mult Scler. 2013; 19:941–46. 
[PubMed: 23128668] 
68. Reindl M, Di Pauli F, Rostásy K, Berger T. The spectrum of MOG autoantibody-associated 
demyelinating diseases. Nat Rev Neurol. 2013; 9:455–61. [PubMed: 23797245] 
69. Kleffner I, Duning T, Lohmann H, et al. A brief review of Susac syndrome. J Neurol Sci. 2012; 
322:35–40. [PubMed: 22640902] 
70. Dörr J, Krautwald S, Wildemann B, et al. Characteristics of Susac syndrome: a review of all 
reported cases. Nat Rev Neurol. 2013; 9:307–16. [PubMed: 23628737] 
71. Moscato EH, Peng X, Jain A, Parsons TD, Dalmau J, Balice-Gordon RJ. Acute mechanisms 
underlying antibody effects in anti-N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor encephalitis. Ann Neurol. 2014; 
76:108–19. [PubMed: 24916964] 
72. Planagumà J, Leypoldt F, Mannara F, et al. Human N-methyl D-aspartate receptor antibodies alter 
memory and behaviour in mice. Brain. 2015; 138:94–109. [PubMed: 25392198] 
73. Dalmau J, Gleichman AJ, Hughes EG, et al. Anti-NMDA-receptor encephalitis: case series and 
analysis of the effects of antibodies. Lancet Neurol. 2008; 7:1091–98. [PubMed: 18851928] 
74. Viaccoz A, Desestret V, Ducray F, et al. Clinical specificities of adult male patients with NMDA 
receptor antibodies encephalitis. Neurology. 2014; 82:556–63. [PubMed: 24443452] 
75. Gresa-Arribas N, Titulaer MJ, Torrents A, et al. Antibody titres at diagnosis and during follow-up 
of anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis: a retrospective study. Lancet Neurol. 2014; 13:167–77. 
[PubMed: 24360484] 
76. Zandi MS, Paterson RW, Ellul MA, et al. Clinical relevance of serum antibodies to extracellular N-
methyl-D-aspartate receptor epitopes. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2015; 86:708–13. [PubMed: 
25246644] 
77. Wang R, Guan HZ, Ren HT, Wang W, Hong Z, Zhou D. CSF findings in patients with anti-N-
methyl-D-aspartate receptor-encephalitis. Seizure. 2015; 29:137–42. [PubMed: 26076857] 
78. Prüss H, Finke C, Höltje M, et al. N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antibodies in herpes simplex 
encephalitis. Ann Neurol. 2012; 72:902–11. [PubMed: 23280840] 
79. Armangue T, Leypoldt F, Málaga I, et al. Herpes simplex virus encephalitis is a trigger of brain 
autoimmunity. Ann Neurol. 2014; 75:317–23. [PubMed: 24318406] 
Graus et al.
Page 22
Lancet Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 80. Hacohen Y, Deiva K, Pettingill P, et al. N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antibodies in post-herpes 
simplex virus encephalitis neurological relapse. Mov Disord. 2014; 29:90–96. [PubMed: 
24014096] 
81. Armangue T, Moris G, Cantarín-Extremera V, et al. for the Spanish Prospective Multicentric Study 
of Autoimmunity in Herpes Simplex Encephalitis. Autoimmune post-herpes simplex encephalitis 
of adults and teenagers. Neurology. 2015; 85:1736–43. [PubMed: 26491084] 
82. Mohammad SS, Sinclair K, Pillai S, et al. Herpes simplex encephalitis relapse with chorea is 
associated with autoantibodies to N-Methyl-D-aspartate receptor or dopamine-2 receptor. Mov 
Disord. 2014; 29:117–22. [PubMed: 24115338] 
83. Koga M, Kusunoki S, Kaida K, et al. Nationwide survey of patients in Japan with Bickerstaff 
brainstem encephalitis: epidemiological and clinical characteristics. J Neurol Neurosurg 
Psychiatry. 2012; 83:1210–15. [PubMed: 22851608] 
84. Odaka M, Yuki N, Yamada M, et al. Bickerstaff’s brainstem encephalitis: clinical features of 62 
cases and a subgroup associated with Guillain-Barré syndrome. Brain. 2003; 126:2279–90. 
[PubMed: 12847079] 
85. Merwick A, Dalmau J, Delanty N. Insights into antibody-associated encephalitis—Bickerstaff’s 
1950’s papers revisited. J Neurol Sci. 2013; 334:167–68. [PubMed: 23927937] 
86. Moragas M, Martínez-Yélamos S, Majós C, Fernández-Viladrich P, Rubio F, Arbizu T. 
Rhombencephalitis: a series of 97 patients. Medicine (Baltimore). 2011; 90:256–61. [PubMed: 
21694648] 
87. Pittock SJ, Debruyne J, Krecke KN, et al. Chronic lymphocytic inflammation with pontine 
perivascular enhancement responsive to steroids (CLIPPERS). Brain. 2010; 133:2626–34. 
[PubMed: 20639547] 
88. Wang SM, Liu CC. Enterovirus 71: epidemiology, pathogenesis and management. Expert Rev Anti 
Infect Ther. 2009; 7:735–42. [PubMed: 19681701] 
89. Gleichman AJ, Spruce LA, Dalmau J, Seeholzer SH, Lynch DR. Anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis 
antibody binding is dependent on amino acid identity of a small region within the GluN1 amino 
terminal domain. J Neurosci. 2012; 32:11082–94. [PubMed: 22875940] 
90. Takahashi Y, Mori H, Mishina M, et al. Autoantibodies and cell-mediated autoimmunity to 
NMDA-type GluRepsilon2 in patients with Rasmussen’s encephalitis and chronic progressive 
epilepsia partialis continua. Epilepsia. 2005; 46(suppl 5):152–58. [PubMed: 15987271] 
91. Huda S, Wong SH, Pettingill P, O’Connell D, Vincent A, Steiger M. An 11-year retrospective 
experience of antibodies against the voltage-gated potassium channel (VGKC) complex from a 
tertiary neurological centre. J Neurol. 2015; 262:418–24. [PubMed: 25428531] 
92. Paterson RW, Zandi MS, Armstrong R, Vincent A, Schott JM. Clinical relevance of positive 
voltage-gated potassium channel (VGKC)-complex antibodies: experience from a tertiary referral 
centre. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2014; 85:625–30. [PubMed: 23757422] 
93. Klein CJ, Lennon VA, Aston PA, et al. Insights from LGI1 and CASPR2 potassium channel 
complex autoantibody subtyping. JAMA Neurol. 2013; 70:229–34. [PubMed: 23407760] 
94. Dahm L, Ott C, Steiner J, et al. Seroprevalence of autoantibodies against brain antigens in health 
and disease. Ann Neurol. 2014; 76:82–94. [PubMed: 24853231] 
95. Armangue T, Santamaria J, Dalmau J. When a serum test overrides the clinical assessment. 
Neurology. 2015; 84:1379–81. [PubMed: 25724228] 
96. Titulaer MJ, Höftberger R, Iizuka T, et al. Overlapping demyelinating syndromes and anti-N-
methyl-D-aspartate receptor encephalitis. Ann Neurol. 2014; 75:411–28. [PubMed: 24700511] 
97. Jarius S, Paul F, Franciotta D, et al. Cerebrospinal fluid findings in aquaporin-4 antibody positive 
neuromyelitis optica: results from 211 lumbar punctures. J Neurol Sci. 2011; 306:82–90. 
[PubMed: 21550068] 
98. Meinck HM, Faber L, Morgenthaler N, et al. Antibodies against glutamic acid decarboxylase: 
prevalence in neurological diseases. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2001; 71:100–03. [PubMed: 
11413272] 
99. Saiz A, Blanco Y, Sabater L, et al. Spectrum of neurological syndromes associated with glutamic 
acid decarboxylase antibodies: diagnostic clues for this association. Brain. 2008; 131:2553–63. 
[PubMed: 18687732] 
Graus et al.
Page 23
Lancet Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 100. Hollowell JG, Staehling NW, Flanders WD, et al. Serum TSH, T(4), and thyroid antibodies in the 
United States population (1988 to 1994): National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 
(NHANES III). J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002; 87:489–99. [PubMed: 11836274] 
101. Castillo P, Woodruff B, Caselli R, et al. Steroid-responsive encephalopathy associated with 
autoimmune thyroiditis. Arch Neurol. 2006; 63:197–202. [PubMed: 16476807] 
102. Tardieu M, Deiva K. Rare inflammatory diseases of the white matter and mimics of multiple 
sclerosis and related disorders. Neuropediatrics. 2013; 44:302–08. [PubMed: 24166147] 
103. Brain L, Jellinek EH, Ball K. Hashimoto’s disease and encephalopathy. Lancet. 1966; 2:512–14. 
[PubMed: 4161638] 
104. Chong JY, Rowland LP, Utiger RD. Hashimoto encephalopathy: syndrome or myth? Arch Neurol. 
2003; 60:164–71. [PubMed: 12580699] 
105. Yoneda M, Fujii A, Ito A, Yokoyama H, Nakagawa H, Kuriyama M. High prevalence of serum 
autoantibodies against the amino terminal of alpha-enolase in Hashimoto’s encephalopathy. J 
Neuroimmunol. 2007; 185:195–200. [PubMed: 17335908] 
106. Servettaz A, Guilpain P, Tamas N, Kaveri SV, Camoin L, Mouthon L. Natural anti-endothelial cell 
antibodies. Autoimmun Rev. 2008; 7:426–30. [PubMed: 18558356] 
107. Pettingill P, Kramer HB, Coebergh JA, et al. Antibodies to GABAA receptor α1 and γ2 subunits: 
clinical and serologic characterization. Neurology. 2015; 84:1233–41. [PubMed: 25636713] 
108. Hajj-Ali RA, Singhal AB, Benseler S, Molloy E, Calabrese LH. Primary angiitis of the CNS. 
Lancet Neurol. 2011; 10:561–72. [PubMed: 21601163] 
109. Nabbout R. FIRES and IHHE: delineation of the syndromes. Epilepsia. 2013; 54(suppl 6):54–56. 
[PubMed: 24001074] 
Graus et al.
Page 24
Lancet Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Search strategy and selection criteria
Relevant papers were identified through PubMed searches of articles published in 
English up to Nov 23, 2015, using the search terms (alone or in combination): 
“autoimmune encephalitis”, “limbic encephalitis”, “anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis”, 
“ acute disseminated encephalomyelitis”, “brainstem encephalitis”, “basal ganglia 
encephalitis”, “Hashimoto encephalopathy”, “Rasmussen encephalitis”, “primary CNS 
angiitis”, “primary CNS vaculitis”, “Susac syndrome”, “Morvan syndrome”, and 
“neuronal autoantibodies”. Additional studies were identified from the authors’ files. The 
final reference list was generated on the basis of relevance to the topics covered in this 
Position Paper.
Graus et al.
Page 25
Lancet Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Algorithm for the diagnosis of autoimmune encephalitis
AE=autoimmune encephalitis. LE=limbic encephalitis. Abs=antibodies. AQP4=aquaporin 4. 
MOG=myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein. NMDARE=NMDA receptor encephalitis. 
ADEM=acute disseminated encephalomyelitis. *Although results of autoantibodies are not 
necessary for a definitive diagnosis of some types of autoimmune encephalitis, their 
determination is important to further characterise subtypes of limbic encephalitis that have 
different prognosis, type of treatment, and comorbidities. †See table. ‡Research laboratories 
can screen for new antibodies (eg, using live neurons). §IgG anti-GluN1 antibodies in the 
CSF; if only serum is used, confirmatory tests should be included (panel 4). ¶Definitive 
diagnosis of Bickerstaff’s brainstem encephalitis can be made in the presence of core 
Graus et al.
Page 26
Lancet Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 clinical features (hypersomnolence, ophthalmoplegia, and ataxia)43 or positive GQ1b 
antibodies if core symptoms are incomplete.
Graus et al.
Page 27
Lancet Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. MRI patterns in autoimmune encephalitis and its mimics
Typical MRI of limbic encephalitis (A) with bilateral abnormalities in the medial temporal 
lobe on T2-weighted fluid-attenuated inversion recovery imaging; this patient with autopsy-
proven limbic encephalitis did not have serum or CSF antineuronal antibodies. Patient with 
final diagnosis of glioma (B) who presented with unilateral right hippocampal involvement 
mimicking limbic encephalitis. Typical MRI of acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (C) 
with bilateral large lesions in the white matter. Multiple lesions involving the corpus 
callosum in a patient with Susac’s syndrome (D). MRI of a patient with overlapping 
syndrome (NMDA receptor and myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibodies; E) 
showing a right frontal abnormality compatible with demyelination. Diffusion MRI 
sequence in a patient with AMPA receptor antibody-associated encephalitis (F) mimicking 
MRI changes seen in patients with Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. Left side of images=right side 
of brain.
Graus et al.
Page 28
Lancet Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Graus et al.
Page 29
Table 1
Antibodies in the diagnosis of autoimmune encephalitis
Syndrome
Diagnostic assay
Frequency of cancer
Main type of cancer
Antibodies against intracellular antigens
Hu (ANNA1)8*
Limbic encephalitis
Western blot
>95%
Small-cell lung carcinoma
Ma29
Limbic encephalitis†
Western blot
>95%
Testicular seminoma
GAD10
Limbic encephalitis‡
Radioimmunoassay
25%§
Thymoma, small-cell lung 
carcinoma
Antibodies against synaptic receptors
NMDA receptor11
Anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis
Cell-based assay
Varies with age and 
sex
Ovarian teratoma¶
AMPA receptor12
Limbic encephalitis
Cell-based assay
65%
Thymoma, small-cell lung 
carcinoma
GABAB receptor13
Limbic encephalitis
Cell-based assay
50%
Small-cell lung carcinoma
GABAA receptor14
Encephalitis
Cell-based assay
<5%
Thymoma
mGluR515
Encephalitis
Cell-based assay
70%
Hodgkin’s lymphoma
Dopamine 2 receptor16
Basal ganglia encephalitis
Cell-based assay
0%
..
Antibodies against ion channels and other cell-surface proteins
LGI117
Limbic encephalitis
Cell-based assay
5–10%
Thymoma
CASPR218
Morvan’s syndrome|| or limbic 
encephalitis
Cell-based assay
20–50%
Thymoma**
DPPX19
Encephalitis††
Cell-based assay
<10%
Lymphoma
MOG20‡‡
Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis
Cell-based assay
0%
..
Aquaporin 421‡‡
Encephalitis
Cell-based assay
0%
..
GQ1b22
Bickerstaff’s brainstem encephalitis
ELISA
0%
..
GAD=glutamic acid decarboxylase. LGI1=leucine-rich glioma inactivated 1. CASPR2=contactin associated protein 2. DPPX=dipeptidyl-peptidase-
like protein-6. MOG=myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein.
*Amphiphysin or CV2 (CRMP5) antibodies instead of Hu antibodies in a few patients with limbic encephalitis and small-cell lung carcinoma.
†Limbic encephalitis frequently associated with hypothalamic and mesencephalic involvement.
‡GAD antibodies occur more frequently in patients with stiff person syndrome and cerebellar ataxia. The association with cancer preferentially 
occurs in patients with limbic encephalitis.
§Tumours found more frequently in men older than 50 years.23
¶Ovarian teratoma usually found in young women aged 12–45 years.
||Morvan’s syndrome usually has a more chronic clinical course, but might present with predominant cognitive and behavioural symptoms fulfilling 
criteria of possible autoimmune encephalitis.
**Thymoma associated with Morvan’s syndrome rather than limbic encephalitis.
††Encephalitis associated with diarrhoea and hyperekplexia.
‡‡Mostly restricted to children.
Lancet Neurol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
