  
 
Supplementary Materials for 
 
Bone CLARITY: Clearing, imaging, and computational analysis of 
osteoprogenitors within intact bone marrow 
 
Alon Greenbaum, Ken Y. Chan, Tatyana Dobreva, David Brown, Deepak H. Balani, 
Rogely Boyce, Henry M. Kronenberg, Helen J. McBride, Viviana Gradinaru* 
 
 
*Corresponding author. Email: viviana@caltech.edu 
 
Published 26 April 2017, Sci. Transl. Med. 9, eaah6518 (2017) 
DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aah6518 
 
The PDF file includes: 
 
Methods 
Fig. S1. Bone CLARITY clearing process. 
Fig. S2. The effect of amino alcohol on reducing autofluorescence. 
Fig. S3. Bone CLARITY setup. 
Fig. S4. Sample progression through Bone CLARITY clearing process. 
Fig. S5. LSFM setup. 
Fig. S6. Signal quality metrics to quantify imaging depth of Bone CLARITY. 
Fig. S7. Computational pipeline. 
Fig. S8. Volume comparisons in the tibia and femur. 
Fig. S9. tdTomato expression in the vertebral columns. 
Fig. S10. Antibody staining using Bone CLARITY. 
Legends for movies S1 to S3 
Reference (49) 
 
Other Supplementary Material for this manuscript includes the following: 
(available at 
www.sciencetranslationalmedicine.org/cgi/content/full/9/387/eaah6518/DC1) 
 
Movie S1 (.mov format). Visualizing endogenous fluorescence throughout a 
cleared mouse femur. 
Movie S2 (.mov format). Visualizing endogenous fluorescence throughout a 
cleared mouse tibia. 
Movie S3 (.mov format). Visualizing endogenous fluorescence throughout a 
cleared mouse vertebral body. 
www.sciencetranslationalmedicine.org/cgi/content/full/9/387/eaah6518/DC1 
 Design file for the chamber holder (.stl) 
Raw data values for cell counts (.xlsx) 
 Methods 
Computational pipeline: LSFM generates multidimensional datasets on the order of 
hundreds of gigabytes, for example 500 GB for tibia with 2 color channels, motivating a 
necessity for high-throughput automated computational tools to do data processing, management, 
and visualization. Thus, we established a computational pipeline optimized for large datasets that 
interfaces between 3D visualization and analysis software (Imaris, Bitplane) and a programming 
framework (Matlab, Mathworks) although alternatives can also be used (e.g. Amira, Python).  
Tile stitching was done with TeraStitcher (49). The acquired tiles (.tiff format) were 
saved according to the TeraStitcher two-level hierarchy and file naming convention. The 
resulting stitched tiles were saved as large individual.tiff format file per Z section. To accelerate 
processing and manipulation of 3D images in Imaris, the lateral resolution was down-sampled by 
a factor of 2 and 4 for vertebrae and long bones, respectively. These image stacks were then 
converted into a single large multiresolution 3D Imaris image. The 3D image is then used to 
construct the VOI, performing quality control for the automatic cell detector, and obtaining 
relevant statistics about the position of the cells within the VOI.  
Using Imaris surface tools, a VOI was constructed around the bone surface, while 
excluding connective tissue. The VOI was used to count cells and evaluate morphology (fig. S7). 
For the femur and tibia, the VOI was defined around known anatomical regions: the third 
trochanter and tibial crest, respectively. The surface for the vertebral body aimed to surround the 
inner marrow of interest and exclude surrounding compact bone and chondrocyte-dense 
endplates.  
2D stitched images were used for automatic Sox9+ cell detection (Fig. 2B). The algorithm 
iterates through the image stack and divides the 2D stitched images into a number of smaller 
regions. For each region, the standard deviation and mean value of fluorescence intensity is 
calculated. Sox9+ cells are expected to be significantly brighter in intensity than the surrounding 
tissue, therefore each sub region is thresholded with a value of approximately 9 standard 
deviations above the mean value. The thresholded images are then converted to a binary format 
and morphological operations are conducted to improve connectivity and discard noise. A 3D 
binary matrix is then constructed from the 2D binary images and connected voxels are grouped 
into 3D blobs. Blobs that showed one of the following criteria were removed: (i) blobs with 
volume outside of a 523-33,500 µm3 range, (ii) blob with spatial position outside of the VOI and 
(iii) blobs that show strong signal in the autofluorescence channel. The centroids of the 
remaining blobs are imported into Imaris to perform manual adjustments. The goal of the 
automatic detection is to facilitate manual detection by saving time and reducing the chance of 
error from long annotation sessions.  
Using Imaris’ clipping plane tool, the 3D image is divided into thick slices (~ 100 µm) to 
allow for manual adjustments of the automatically detected cells. Viewing cells in these thick 
 sections allows for visualization of 3D features that help to accurately identify cells. When 
counting the cells, 2 color channels were used to disambiguate between autofluorescence (green) 
and the true Sox9+ signal (red). If the Sox9+ cell under question is present with strong intensity in 
the autofluorescence channel, then it was not included in the quantification. 
Following manual cell count adjustments, Imaris was used to generate distance to surface 
and cell count statistics. The surface was imported into Imaris’ cell object with the marked Sox9+ 
spots as its vesicles. Automatically generated statistics were imported to Matlab for further 
processing and plotting. 
Sample mounting for light-sheet microscope: To mount the sample for LSFM, one end of 
a 4 cm long plastic capillary was flattened using a plier, and a small amount of All Purpose 
Krazy Glue (KG585) was applied on this end. The flattened end was later placed on the edge of 
the cleared condyles (femur) and L3 (vertebral column) bone while moderate pressure was 
applied. Four minutes later, the capillary bonded with the bone and the sample was placed back 
into RIMS. Before imaging, the plastic capillary was fitted to a glass capillary, which can be 
attached to the sample stage of the LSFM (fig. S5). 
Simulated stereology: To investigate the variability between 3D counting and 2D section 
counting, we performed a series of simulated stereology experiments using our 3D datasets. To 
start, the coordinates of each cell center were imported to MATLAB as a list, and the VOI was 
imported to MATLAB as a binary mask. From the binary mask, the volume of each 2D section 
was calculated by accumulating the number of pixels in the 2D section and multiplying it by the 
voxel size. Then, a simple random sampling stereology experiment was simulated by 
stochastically selecting N digital sections (6 μm thick) from the entire VOI. Only cells whose 
centroids were within the volume of the selected digital sections were counted, this guarantees 
that each cell will be counted only once and cell will not be overrepresented. To calculate the cell 
density, the total number of counted cells in the selected digital sections was divided by their 
accumulated volume. From sampled cell density and the known volume of the entire bone, the 
total number of cells in the bone was estimated. In order to calculate the coefficient of variation, 
each experiment was repeated 5 times and the standard deviation of the experiments was divided 
by the total cell number of the volume. To reflect modern stereology sampling techniques, we 
also simulated systematic uniform random sampling (SURS) stereology experiments. As 
compared to simple random sampling, SURS has a stricter subset of possible samplings. Rather 
than looking at any random subset of slices, SURS requires sampling the tissue with a fixed 
interval, while the first starting slice is randomly selected (Fig. 3A). In order to compare SURS 
with simple random sampling, each SURS experiment consisted of a specific number of digital 
slices. Since a specific number of digital slices can be attained by a variety of sample intervals, 
the minimum interval that would yield the desired number of slices was selected. Once the 
digital sections were selected for SURS, the cell density was calculated in the same manner as 
simple random sampling. To calculate the coefficient of variation, each SURS experiment was 
 repeated for 5 random starting positions. Figure 3C shows only numbers of slices that yielded at 
least 5 possible starting positions. 
Quantifying the effect of amino alcohol (related to fig. S2): High levels of 
autofluorescence can overshadow elements of interest and lead to false inclusion of features. 
Intensity data from the mouse femur and tibia before and after treatment with amino alcohol 
(N,N,N',N'-tetrakis(2-hydroxypropyl) ethylenediamine) (Sigma, #122262-1L) were analyzed. 
The starting depth (0 µm) was defined as the first section that contained both sufficient compact 
bone and marrow for analysis. Then, for 7-9 depths along the imaging dimension, two areas (~ 
1000 µm2) were extracted. The first area exclusively contained compact bone, while the other 
exclusively contained marrow. The mean intensities of the two areas (marrow and compact bone) 
were then calculated. The mean intensity ratio (marrow versus compact bone) was used to 
quantify the amino alcohol effect on quenching auto-fluorescence in the marrow, since amino 
alcohol operates on heme, which is found only in the marrow. To verify that amino alcohol did 
not quench endogenous fluorescence, we compared the same region of the bone before and after 
amino alcohol treatment (fig. S2). 
Quantifying imaging depth at different anatomical regions of the bone (related to fig. 
S6): Bone tissue is difficult to clear and image in 3D, particularly in deeper regions where the 
SNR is low. Additionally, bones are highly heterogeneous and different regions have 
significantly different biological makeup that affects imaging SNR. In order to characterize the 
imaging depth capabilities of LSFM in bone tissue cleared by Bone CLARITY, we quantitatively 
assessed cell detection in several anatomically distinct regions using a Peak SNR (PSNR) metric 
(equation 1).  
𝑃𝑆𝑁𝑅 = 20 × log10
𝑀𝐴𝑋−𝜇
𝜎
    (1) 
MAX is the maximum intensity of pixels in the region containing the cell, μ is the mean 
intensity of all pixels in the region that is at least 20 μm away from the cell center, and σ is their 
standard deviation. For each anatomical region, the starting point (0 µm) of the sample was 
defined as the first depth that bone tissue filled at least 50% of the field-of-view. Then, at least 
10 isolated Sox9+ cells were selected along the image stack and their PSNR were calculated. For 
PSNR calculation, an area of 0.123 mm2 and 0.086 mm2 (for long bones and vertebrae, 
respectively) was used for the region around the cell. Based on visual inspection, the minimum 
PSNR for cell detection was 24. Consequently, we could reliably image bone tissue to a depth of 
approximately 1.5 mm. With the exception of chondrocyte-dense regions such as the growth 
plate and the epiphysis, this demonstrates that Bone CLARITY and LSFM provide end-to-end 
imaging of mouse bone tissue. Note that in regions with high concentration of chondrocytes, no 
isolated cells could be found, thus creating large gaps along the imaging depth in fig. S6E. 
Antibody staining: Mice were perfused transcardially with 0.01M PBS (Sigma, #P3813) 
followed by 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) (VWR, #100496-496). The femurs and tibias were 
 extracted and post-fixed overnight with 4% PFA. The bones were demineralized with 10% 
EDTA in 0.01M PBS (Lonza, #51234) for two weeks at 4 degrees with daily solution exchange. 
Afterwards, the bones were incubated in 30% sucrose (Sigma, #S0389) in 0.01M PBS until they 
equilibrated to the solution. Next, the bones were embedded in OCT compound (Sakura Finetek, 
#M71484) in a tissue mold cassette and slowly frozen in powdered dry ice containing ethanol 
(Sigma, #E7023). The bones were then cut along its longitudinal plane with a cryostat (Leica, 
Biosystems) until one-half remained. The OCT compound was removed from the bisected bone 
and cleared following the Bone CLARITY protocol starting with hydrogel embedding and 
ending before refractive index matching stage. Antibody staining was performed using an anti-
osteocalcin antibody (Abcam, #ab93876) at 1:100 in 0.5mM SDS with 0.01 % sodium azide 
(Ricca Chemical Company, #7144.8-16) for 2 days at room temperature. The bones were then 
washed for 2 days at room temperature using PBST (0.02% Triton-X100) and then incubated in 
secondary conjugated to Alexa-647 (Jackson Immuno Research, #711-606-152) for 2 days. 
Samples were then washed for 2 days and incubated in RIMS stepwise from 1.38-1.47 over 3 
days. Bones were then imaged using a Zeiss 780 confocal. 
 
 
  
Fig. S1. Bone CLARITY clearing process. (A) As a first step (blue) in Bone CLARITY 
method transcardial perfusion is performed with 0.01M PBS, pH 7.4, and 4% paraformaldehyde 
(PFA) in PBS, pH 7.4. Hard tissue is then extracted and post-fixed with 4% PFA in PBS, pH 7.4 
at 4°C for 16 hours. Hard tissue is then decalcified (orange). During this step, daily-exchange of 
10% EDTA in PBS, pH 8, at 4°C under constant stirring is performed. Hydrogel stabilization to 
prevent protein loss is carried out (purple). The tissue is incubated in a hydrogel composed of 4% 
acrylamide with 0.25% VA044 in PBS at 4°C under constant stirring for 16 hours. Afterwards, 
the hydrogel is degased with nitrogen gas and polymerized at 37°C. Delipidation is carried out 
with 8% SDS in PBS, pH 7.4 at 37°C under constant stirring (green). A wash step with PBS is 
performed before heme removal from the tissue (gray). Heme removal is performed with 25% 
amino alcohol in PBS, pH 9, at 37°C under constant stirring (red). A second wash step is 
performed on the tissue (gray). Finally, the tissue is refractive index matched to 1.47 through 
daily step-wise buffer exchange (pink).  
  
Fig. S2. The effect of amino alcohol on reducing autofluorescence. (A) MIP of a mouse femur 
rendered transparent using Bone CLARITY without the addition of amino alcohol. The dashed 
regions show the locations of progressively zoomed in images. (B) MIP of the same mouse 
femur shown in (A), after the addition of amino alcohol. Zoomed in images of the same regions 
as in (A) show that the same spatial pattern in the sample was maintained after amino alcohol 
treatment. (C) A representative image of the regions of tissue (marrow and compact bone) used 
for the analysis of the autofluorescence quenching effect. (D) The mean ratio of marrow to 
compact bone intensity in a mouse femur and tibia before and after the addition of amino alcohol 
- which removes autofluorescence in the bone marrow. The intensity ratio between the marrow 
and compact bone should be independent of the imaging depth and illumination variations. (E) 
The ratio of marrow to compact bone intensity from different sample regions along the imaging 
depth of the bone. A depth of 0 μm refers to the first region along the imaging depth that had 
both marrow and compact bone. 
  
 
Fig. S3. Bone CLARITY setup. (A) The individual parts of the setup, which is composed of: 
(1) A 3D printed holder for histology cassettes. (2) A large histology cassette with rubber inserts. 
(3) Rubber inserts to prop the tissue above the 3D printed holder, and consequently position the 
tissue within the convective current. (4) A stir bar. (5) A glass slide for placement of the stir bar 
above the 3D printed holder. (B) The histology cassettes arranged inside a 15 cm petri dish with 
a 14.7 cm plastic petri dish cover. (C) The petri dish is placed on a closed loop temperature 
controlled stir plate. For repeatability, six cassettes are always placed in the chamber, and the stir 
bar is rotated at a speed of 400 rotations per minute at 37ºC. The design file for the 3D printed 
holder is available as an auxiliary supplementary file.  
 
 
  
Fig. S4. Sample progression through Bone CLARITY clearing process. (A) Micrographs 
documenting the progression of the femur, tibia and vertebral column throughout each phase of 
Bone CLARITY. (B) The percent change in length of the bones before and after Bone 
CLARITY. (C) The percent change in width of the bones before and after Bone CLARITY. For 
(B) and (C), n = 6 for the femur, n = 5 for the tibia and n = 4 for the vertebral column. All values 
are mean ± s.e.m. 
  
Fig. S5. LSFM setup. (A) Schematic diagram of the multi-color dual-side illumination light-
sheet microscope with the confocal slit detection. The microscope acquisition speed is up to 22 
frames per second; consequently, it allows for high-resolution acquisition of large cleared tissue. 
L – lens, M – mirror, DM - dichroic mirror, GS – galvano scanner, BS – beam splitter, MS – 
mechanical shutter, RL – relay lenses and EF emission filter. (B) A photograph of the light-sheet 
setup, the sample (S) is directly immersed in the sample chamber (SC).  
 
  
Fig. S6. Signal quality metrics to quantify imaging depth of Bone CLARITY. (A) MIP of a 
cleared mouse femur with estimates of imaging depth limit at different anatomical regions. The 
arrows indicate the direction of analysis and the calculated imaging depth. (B) Examples of 
isolated Sox9+ cells at different imaging depths and in different bone regions. Sox9+ cells remain 
distinguishable at the deepest parts of the metaphysis and diaphysis, but signal loss is evident in 
the deeper parts of the epiphysis. The same analysis was repeated for a cleared mouse tibia (C) 
and vertebra (D). (E) The peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) of isolated Sox9+ cells. The dashed 
lines represent a qualitative estimate of where cells are no longer distinguishable from 
background noise, at a PSNR of around 24. 
 
  
Fig. S7. Computational pipeline. (A) A block diagram of the computational pipeline. (B) VOI 
creation in the vertebra body. In each block of approximately 10 longitudinal sections a ROI 
(dotted line) is marked around regions that contain marrow. The VOI is then interpolated from 
the ROIs. (C) VOI creation in the tibia and femur, where approximately 10 transverse slices are 
used to create the VOI. For cell distance to surface calculation, the VOI is extended from both 
ends, in order to ensure distance calculation to the real bone boundaries and not to artificial 
perpendicular surfaces.  
  
 
Fig. S8. Volume comparisons in the tibia and femur. No significant change in the volume of 
interest was observed between the Sox9+ and Tam+ group and the two control groups (wild type; 
Sox9+ and Tam-). For all groups n = 3, all values are mean ± s.e.m; two-tailed, unpaired t-test, (p 
≥ 0.05 = N.S.).  
 
 
  
Fig. S9. tdTomato expression in the vertebral columns. (A) No fluorescence signal is present 
in the emission spectrum of tdTomato (556 nm laser excitation) in the vertebral column of a 
wild-type mouse. (B) Using the same imaging settings as in panel (A), Sox9+ mouse shows 
tdTomato expression even without tamoxifen induction. The fluorescence signal is primarily 
located at the endplates and attributed to leakage. (C) Using the same imaging settings as panel 
(A), Sox9+ mouse shows high levels of tdTomato expression after tamoxifen induction.  
 
 
  
Fig. S10. Antibody staining using Bone CLARITY. (A) The approximate region imaged in the 
bisected femur is outlined by a black square. Digital slices of 10 µm thickness are shown in 300 
and 400 µm from the surface of the femur. Red shows Osteocalcin staining of cells lining the 
surface of bone, green shows autofluorescence. (B) The region imaged in the bisected tibia is 
outlined by a black square. Digital slices of 10 µm thickness are shown in 200 and 300 µm from 
the surface of the tibia. Red shows Osteocalcin staining of cells lining the surface of bone, green 
shows autofluorescence. 
 
 
 Movie S1. Visualizing endogenous fluorescence throughout a cleared mouse femur. The 
movie shows a MIP image of an entire mouse femur at different angles and zoomed in view of 
the greater trochanter area. Digital sections with 30 µm thickness are shown at different bone 
depths at the greater trochanter. Sox9+ cells are labeled with red fluorescent protein (tdTomato), 
while tissue autofluorescence in green provides structural cues. 
Movie S2. Visualizing endogenous fluorescence throughout a cleared mouse tibia. MIP 
image of an entire mouse tibia rotated in different angles. Zoomed in digital sections (30 µm 
thick) of the tuberosity and the diaphysis are shown. The Sox9+ cells are labeled with tdTomato 
and tissue autofluorescence in green for structural orientation. When the red channel is turned off 
(Z = 2016 µm) some cellular processes can be seen.  
Movie S3. Visualizing endogenous fluorescence throughout a cleared mouse vertebral body. 
The movie shows an L4 vertebra body of a mouse. The intervertebral disks labeled in red can be 
seen in the vertical edge of the image. Longitudinal sections (30 µm thick) of the vertebra body 
at different depths can also be seen where the red channel shows Sox9+ cells and the green 
channel shows tissue autofluorescence.  
