 Article
A Family of non-GPCR Chemosensors Defines an
Alternative Logic for Mammalian Olfaction
Graphical Abstract
Highlights
d The MS4A proteins are mammalian chemosensors
expressed in the ‘‘necklace’’ olfactory system
d Ligands for these non-GPCR receptors are enriched for food
odors and pheromones
d Unlike conventional odor receptors, many MS4As are
expressed in each sensory neuron
Authors
Paul L. Greer, Daniel M. Bear,
Jean-Marc Lassance, ..., Rory Kirchner,
Hopi E. Hoekstra, Sandeep Robert Datta
Correspondence
srdatta@hms.harvard.edu
In Brief
Chemosensory receptors in a subset of
mammalian olfactory sensing neurons
are structurally distinct from GPCRs, and
multiple subtypes are expressed per
neuron, suggesting an unexpected
mechanism for olfactory detection and
encoding.
Greer et al., 2016, Cell 165, 1734–1748
June 16, 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Inc.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2016.05.001
 Article
A Family of non-GPCR Chemosensors Defines
an Alternative Logic for Mammalian Olfaction
Paul L. Greer,1,4 Daniel M. Bear,1,4 Jean-Marc Lassance,2 Maria Lissitsyna Bloom,1 Tatsuya Tsukahara,1
Stan L. Pashkovski,1 Francis Kei Masuda,1 Alexandra C. Nowlan,1 Rory Kirchner,3 Hopi E. Hoekstra,2
and Sandeep Robert Datta1,*
1Department of Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA
2Departments of Molecular and Cellular Biology and Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Center for Brain Science, Harvard University,
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
3Department of Biostatistics, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA
4Co-first author
*Correspondence: srdatta@hms.harvard.edu
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2016.05.001
SUMMARY
Odor perception in mammals is mediated by parallel
sensory pathways that convey distinct information
about the olfactory world. Multiple olfactory subsys-
tems express characteristic seven-transmembrane
G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) in a one-recep-
tor-per-neuron pattern that facilitates odor discrimi-
nation. Sensory neurons of the ‘‘necklace’’ subsystem
are nestled within the recesses of the olfactory epithe-
lium and detect diverse odorants; however, they do
not express known GPCR odor receptors. Here, we
report that members of the four-pass transmembrane
MS4A protein family are chemosensors expressed
within necklace sensory neurons. These receptors
localize to sensory endings and confer responses to
ethologically relevant ligands, including pheromones
and fatty acids, in vitro and in vivo. Individual necklace
neurons co-express many MS4A proteins and are
activated by multiple MS4A ligands; this pooling of
information suggests that the necklace is organized
more like subsystems for taste than for smell. The
MS4As therefore define a distinct mechanism and
functional logic for mammalian olfaction.
INTRODUCTION
As animals navigate the natural world, they encounter an unend-
ing variety of small molecules, which are rich sources of informa-
tion that signify the presence of organisms and salient objects in
the environment. The olfactory system detects many of these
molecules through odorant receptor proteins expressed by pe-
ripheral olfactory sensory neurons (OSNs), which are coupled
to higher brain circuits mediating odor perception (Axel, 1995;
Ihara et al., 2013). In mammals, the olfactory system is divided
into multiple, parallel processing streams made up of anatomi-
cally and molecularly distinct sensory neuron populations. The
largest subdivision, the main olfactory system, is capable of
detecting nearly all volatile odorants and plays key roles in
odor discrimination and learning. Smaller subsystems (such as
the vomeronasal system) are thought to play a more specialized
role in odor perception, discriminating odors of innate signifi-
cance and releasing specific patterns of reproductive, agonistic,
or defensive behavior (Munger et al., 2009).
The main and vomeronasal olfactory systems each express
characteristic odorant receptor families that belong to the G-pro-
tein-coupled receptor (GPCR) superfamily; these receptor fam-
ilies define the specific receptive fields and therefore the function
of each subsystem (Buck and Axel, 1991; Dulac and Axel, 1995;
Herrada and Dulac, 1997; Liberles and Buck, 2006; Liberles
et al., 2009; Matsunami and Buck, 1997; Rivie
` re et al., 2009;
Ryba and Tirindelli, 1997). The identification of these receptor
genes (including the odorant receptors [ORs], vomeronasal
type 1 receptors, vomeronasal type 2 receptors [V2Rs], formyl
peptide receptors, and the trace amine-associated receptors)
has revealed a key organizational principle: each mature olfac-
tory sensory neuron (with the exception of those within the basal
subdivision of the vomeronasal system) expresses just a single
receptor gene of the hundreds encoded in the genome (Dalton
and Lomvardas, 2015). This pattern of expression defines spe-
cific information channels in the olfactory system, as the axons
of those sensory neurons that express the same odorant recep-
tor converge on a small number of insular structures within the
olfactory bulb called glomeruli; these glomeruli are differentially
recruited as animals sense distinct smells, enabling the brain
to discriminate odors detected by the nose (Mori and Sakano,
2011). Individual basal vomeronasal sensory neurons also target
specific bulb glomeruli but express two V2Rs instead of a single
receptor (Martini et al., 2001).
While the identification of odorant receptor genes has led to
deep insight into the sensory tuning and functional architecture
of the main and vomeronasal subsystems, there are additional
mammalian subsystems whose modes of odor detection—and
therefore function—are less clear. Particularly mysterious is the
‘‘necklace’’ subsystem, which is distinguished by its unusual
anatomy: OSNs within this subsystem are concentrated in the
recesses of the olfactory epithelium (the ‘‘cul-de-sac’’ regions),
and project axons to a ring of 12–40 apparently interconnected
glomeruli that encircle the caudal olfactory bulb like beads on
a necklace (Juilfs et al., 1997; Shinoda et al., 1989). Necklace
1734
Cell 165, 1734–1748, June 16, 2016 ª 2016 Elsevier Inc.
 sensory neurons and glomeruli respond to a diverse range of
chemical stimuli, including gases (such as carbon disulfide
and carbon dioxide), pheromones (such as 2,5-dimethylpyra-
zine (2,5-DMP), 2-heptanone, and E-farnesene), plant-derived
odorants, and urinary peptides (Fu
¨ lle et al., 1995; Hu et al.,
2007; Juilfs et al., 1997; Leinders-Zufall et al., 2007; Meyer
et al., 2000; Munger et al., 2010; Sun et al., 2009). While
many of these ligands have innate significance for the mouse,
the specific role of the necklace in olfactory perception remains
unclear.
Intriguingly, necklace OSNs do not express the signaling
proteins known to mediate GPCR-based chemotransduction
in the rest of the main olfactory epithelium (Juilfs et al., 1997;
Meyer et al., 2000). While the ability of the necklace system
to detect and behaviorally respond to gases and peptides re-
quires
the
single-pass
transmembrane
protein
guanylate
cyclase-D (GC-D), which is specifically expressed in all neck-
lace neurons, the remainder of the diverse sensory responses
observed in this system are unexplained (Guo et al., 2009;
Leinders-Zufall et al., 2007; Sun et al., 2009). These observa-
tions suggest that necklace OSNs harbor an as-yet unrec-
ognized receptor type, whose identification could reveal key
features of the functional organization and neural logic that
governs the necklace system.
Here, we show that necklace OSNs express a previously un-
identified class of chemoreceptor encoded by the Ms4a
gene family. Each MS4A protein detects a specific set of
odors—including ethologically relevant odorants like fatty acids
and the putative mouse pheromone 2,5-DMP—that stimulate
necklace sensory neurons in vivo. Ectopic expression of MS4A
proteins is sufficient to confer responses to MS4A ligands
upon conventional olfactory neurons. However, unlike all known
mammalian olfactory receptors, the Ms4a genes do not belong
to the GPCR superfamily and are not expressed in the conven-
tional one-receptor-one-neuron pattern; instead, each Ms4a
gene encodes a four-pass transmembrane protein, and many
Ms4a family members are expressed in every necklace sensory
neuron. Taken together, this work defines a new mechanism for
mammalian olfaction and identifies a population of atypical ol-
factory sensory neurons that each express many members of a
receptor gene family, suggesting a distinct perceptual role for
odor information coursing through the necklace subsystem.
Because MS4A proteins are also expressed in chemosensory
cells that reside outside of the nasal epithelium, these findings
further suggest a broader role for the MS4A proteins in the detec-
tion of chemical cues.
RESULTS
To identify candidate receptor gene families specific to the neck-
lace olfactory system, RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) was used
to compare transcripts expressed by FACS-isolated GC-D-
expressing and conventional OSNs (Figures 1A, 1B, S1A, and
S1B). This analysis failed to reveal expression of known odorant
receptor families or enrichment of other GPCR subfamilies
within necklace sensory neurons. Consistent with this and prior
reports, Golf, Adcy3, Cnga2, Cnga4, Trpc2, and Trpm5—gene
products required for odor-related signal transduction in con-
ventional OSNs—also were not expressed in GC-D cells
(Munger et al., 2009). To screen for potential non-GPCR odorant
receptors, the RNA-seq data were filtered to identify transmem-
brane protein families that exhibit sufficient molecular diversity
to potentially interact with a wide range of ligands. As detailed
below, this screen identified the membrane-spanning, 4-pass A
(Ms4a) genes, which encode a class of four-transmembrane
(4TM)-spanning proteins that are structurally distinct from
GPCRs (Eon Kuek et al., 2015).
RNA-seq revealed transcripts for several Ms4a family mem-
bers in GC-D-expressing cells (Figure 1B). Because Ms4a
transcripts had low RNA-seq read counts, the Nanostring sin-
gle-molecule detection technique was used to unambiguously
determine the presence of every member of the Ms4a gene
family in GC-D cells (Khan et al., 2011). This analysis revealed
the reproducible expression of 12 Ms4a family members (of
the 17 members annotated in the mouse genome), demon-
strating that GC-D cells express low levels of a specific subset
of Ms4a genes (Figure 1C). None of these 12 genes was de-
tected in conventional OSNs above background (data not
shown). Notably absent from GC-D cells are the two best-stud-
ied Ms4a genes, Ms4a1 and Ms4a2, which have been impli-
cated in calcium signaling downstream of the B cell receptor
and high-affinity Fc-Epsilon receptor, respectively but whose
precise function remains unclear (Bubien et al., 1993; Dombro-
wicz et al., 1998; Koslowski et al., 2008; Lin et al., 1996; Polyak
et al., 2008).
To assess the molecular diversity of the MS4A family, Ms4a
genes were identified from representative species of all major
mammalian lineages. We then asked how different these genes
were within a given species, as amino acid differences are a pre-
requisite for individual MS4As to interact with distinct odors.
Multiple sequence alignments revealed substantial intraspecies
diversity among the MS4As, particularly within the extracellular
domains of the protein, whose length is variable (Figures S2A
and S2B). This diversity is comparable to that observed in the
third through seventh transmembrane domains in conventional
ORs, the regions thought to form ligand-binding pockets that
give rise to odorant specificity (Buck and Axel, 1991; Man
et al., 2004; Singer, 2000). These findings raise the possibility
that each MS4A within a given organism may interact with a
distinct set of extracellular cues.
Ms4a genes are found in a single genomic cluster in all
queried mammals; this organization, suggestive of tandem
duplication, is also found in known chemoreceptor gene fam-
ilies and is thought to facilitate diversification of family mem-
bers (Figure 2A) (Nei et al., 2008). We therefore also assessed
differences between Ms4a genes across species to identify
those regions of the MS4A protein subject to diversifying or
purifying selection. MS4A proteins were significantly divergent
across evolution (Figure S2C) (Nei et al., 2008); the most
rapidly evolving amino acid residues in the MS4A proteins
are highly enriched in the predicted extracellular loops, where
contact with environmental chemical stimuli could occur (Fig-
ure 2B). Bitter taste receptors, which accommodate the spe-
cific diet of their host organism, exhibit a similar pattern of
diversifying selection (Figure 2B) (Hayakawa et al., 2014;
Wooding, 2011). In contrast, members of the Orai family, which
Cell 165, 1734–1748, June 16, 2016
1735
 encode 4TM proteins and are not thought to detect environ-
mental chemical stimuli, show no signs of diversifying selection
(Figure 2B) (Amcheslavsky et al., 2015). The MS4A family
therefore exhibits a pattern of expansion and divergence
similar to other chemosensors, although the observation that
both within- and between-species MS4A sequence variability
is enriched within extracellular loops—rather than traditional
hydrophobic binding pockets—suggests that, if the MS4As
detect odors, they do so through a distinct domain from con-
ventional GPCR ORs.
MS4A Proteins Confer Odor Responses In Vitro
Although no endogenous or natural ligands have been identified
for any member of the MS4A family, the specific expression of
a molecularly diverse complement of MS4As within olfactory
sensory neurons—taken with prior evidence suggesting involve-
ment in calcium signaling—raised the possibility that Ms4a
genes encode a novel class of chemoreceptor (Bubien et al.,
1993; Dombrowicz et al., 1998; Koslowski et al., 2008; Lin
et al., 1996; Polyak et al., 2008). To test whether specific interac-
tions between odors and MS4A proteins induce calcium influx in
cells, we heterologously expressed individual MS4A proteins
together with the genetically encoded fluorescent calcium
indicator GCaMP6s in HEK293 cells (Figures S3A and S3B);
expression of MS4A proteins did not increase the baseline rate
of calcium transients (Figures S3C and S3D). Six MS4A proteins
(selected for their structural diversity) were exposed to 11 com-
pound mixtures, each of whose constituents shared similar
chemical structure. These mixes were designed to cover a broad
swath of odor space and included known ligands for conven-
tional and necklace glomeruli (Gao et al., 2010; Saito et al.,
2009). Increases in intracellular calcium were observed during
odor exposure for specific MS4A protein/odor mixture pairs,
demonstrating that MS4A proteins transduce signals reflecting
the presence of extracellular small molecule ligands (Figures
3A and 3B).
MS4A sensory responses were specifically tuned to particular
odor categories, with responses enriched for long-chain fatty
acids, steroids, and heterocyclic compounds. To identify indi-
vidual MS4A ligands, the odorant mixture that evoked the largest
response for each MS4A was broken down into its monomo-
lecular constituents (Figure 3C). Individual MS4As conferred
responses to a specific subset of odor molecules within a func-
tional class. For example, cells expressing MS4A6C responded
to a known ligand for necklace glomeruli, 2,5-dimethylpyrazine
(2,5-DMP), as well as to a molecule not previously known to acti-
vate the necklace, 2,3-dimethylpyrazine (2,3-DMP)—but only
weakly to 2,6-dimethylpyrazine, (2,6-DMP) and not at all to other
structurally similar molecules in the parent mixture (Figure 3C).
A
B
C
Figure 1. Expression of Ms4a Genes in Necklace Sensory Neurons
(A) (Left) The Gucy2d-IRES-TauGFP allele marks necklace sensory neurons
expressing PDE2A (blue) and GC-D (red). Grayscale is nuclear counterstain
(DAPI). (Right) Pde2a+ necklace sensory neurons reside in epithelial cul-de-
sacs and do not express the Omp-IRES-GFP allele or the conventional OR
signal transduction protein adenylyl cyclase3 (red). Scale bars, 10 mM.
(B) Enrichment versus expression plot for every sequenced mRNA in GC-D+
and OMP+ sensory neurons. Each point is a transcript with detectable
RNA-seq reads, with marker genes associated with GC-D cells (Car2,
Pde2a, and Cnga3) and OMP cells (Golf, Cnga2, and Cnga4) labeled in red
and green, respectively; reliably detected Ms4a family members are high-
lighted in blue.
(C) NanoString-based mRNA quantification of GC-D cells relative to OMP
cells. Marker genes for OMP and GC-D cells are shown in green and red,
respectively. Twelve of the 17 annotated Ms4a genes are significantly enriched
in GC-D cells relative to OMP cells. Data are presented as mean ± SEM from
three independent biological samples. *p < 0.05, unpaired t test.
See also Figure S1.
1736
Cell 165, 1734–1748, June 16, 2016
 Several additional ligand-receptor relationships were identified,
including MS4A4B/alpha-linolenic acid (ALA), MS4A6D/oleic
acid (OA), MS4A6D/arachidonic acid (AA), MS4A4D/4-preg-
nan-11b,21-diol-3,20-dione 21-sulfate, MS4A7/5-pregnan-3A-
ol-20-one sulfate, and MS4A8A/4-pregnan-11b,21-diol-3,20-di-
one,21-sulfate (Figures 3C, S4A, and S4B).
Figure 2. Genomic Clustering and Positive
Selection of the Ms4a Gene Family
(A) Graphical representation of chromosome 19
of Mus musculus, including the entire Ms4a gene
family (red); immediately telomeric to the Ms4a
gene cluster resides a large group of conventional
mammalian odorant receptor genes (blue).
(B) Topographical representations of the primary
sequences of Mus musculus MS4A4A (upper-left),
MS4A6B (upper-right), ORAI1 (lower-left), and
TAS2R1 (lower-right). Amino acid residues under
strong purifying selection are shown in blue,
whereas those under positive selection are shown
in red (posterior probability > 0.90, see Experi-
mental Procedures); residues under positive se-
lection are enriched within extracellular loops of
MS4A proteins and bitter taste receptors (p =
5.06 3 10�16 and p = 6.76 3 10�7, respectively,
hypergeometric test).
See also Figure S2.
We also asked whether the MS4As and
conventional ORs responded to odors
with similar kinetics in vitro. No statistically
significant differences were observed in
time to response onset, time to half-
maximal
response,
or
time
to
peak
response either between four queried
MS4As or between these MS4As and the
conventional odorant receptor MOR9-1
(Figure S4C). However, because the bulk
calcium imaging assay used to screen
MS4A
ligands
is
not
optimized
for
assessing response timing, we verified
these results using GCaMP6f (a more
rapidly responding calcium indicator than
GCaMP6s), a faster imaging rate, and a
stimulus pencil to focally deliver odorants
directly above the imaged cells. These ex-
periments revealed that MS4A responses
occur seconds after odor presentation,
with similar or slightly faster response dy-
namics to those observed with MOR9-1
(Figures S4D and S4E; see Experimental
Procedures). Dose-response curves re-
vealed low micromolar EC50s for three
specific MS4A/odor pairs, similar to the
EC50 observed for MOR9-1/vanillin (Fig-
ure 3D) and well within the range of EC50s
typically
observed
for
conventional
odorant receptor/ligandpairs in vitro (Saito
et al., 2009; Mainland et al., 2015).
Depleting extracellular calcium abolished
MS4A-ligand-dependent calcium transients (Figure S4F). Taken
together, these results demonstrate that individual MS4A proteins
enable calcium influx in response to specific monomolecular
odorants in heterologous cells, with different MS4A proteins
conferring responses to different ligands. The simplest explana-
tion for this result is that the MS4A proteins are odorant receptors.
Cell 165, 1734–1748, June 16, 2016
1737
 A
C
D
B
(legend on next page)
1738
Cell 165, 1734–1748, June 16, 2016
 Many Ms4a Genes and Proteins Are Expressed in Each
Necklace Sensory Neuron
The functional organization of the mammalian olfactory system
depends on each mature OSN expressing just one (or two) of
the hundreds of possible olfactory receptor genes (Dalton and
Lomvardas, 2015). We therefore asked whether the MS4As are
expressed in a one-receptor-per-neuron pattern within GC-D
cells, which would suggest that the necklace system follows a
similar functional logic to the main and accessory olfactory sys-
tems. Target Ms4a mRNA molecules within dissociated GC-D
cells were labeled using a single-molecule detection approach
(RNAScope), in which messages are detected as diffraction-
limited fluorescent puncta whose abundance reflects transcript
levels (Wang et al., 2012). RNAScope probes generated multiple
puncta in individual GC-D cells for each of the 12 Ms4a genes
found by RNA profiling, consistent with the presence of these
Ms4a messages in GC-D cells (Figure 4A). Conversely, RNA-
Scope failed to identify Ms4a1, Ms4a2, and Ms4a5 puncta in
GC-D cells above the background detection rate, consistent
with the absence of these specific Ms4a genes in our earlier
RNA-profiling experiments (Figures 4B and S5A).
Using a stringent criterion (in which a cell is counted positive
only if it harbors two or more puncta), transcripts for each of
the 12 Ms4a genes expressed in GC-D cells were found in
5%–30% of GC-D cells (Figure 4B). Moreover, employing a
less stringent criterion for Ms4a positivity—in which cells with
any Ms4a puncta are considered positive—reveals that individ-
ual Ms4a family members may be expressed in >50% of GC-D
cells (Figure S5B). Under both of these analyses, the proportions
of cells expressing each Ms4a message sum to significantly
greater than 100%, raising the surprising possibility that each
GC-D cell expresses more than one Ms4a gene. To directly
test whether Ms4a genes are co-expressed, we simultaneously
labeled cells in two different colors with RNAScope probes
recognizing distinct Ms4a genes. Every tested pair revealed a
significant rate of cells that were positive for more than one
Ms4a gene, demonstrating that, unlike conventional ORs, multi-
ple Ms4a genes are co-expressed in individual necklace sensory
neurons (Figures 4C, S5C, and data not shown). These data are
consistent with a model in which each GC-D cell expresses mul-
tiple Ms4a genes.
Because different probes could have distinct false-negative
rates (and because Ms4a transcript levels are low), RNAScope
could not be used to definitively determine the number of unique
Ms4a genes expressed per necklace OSN (Kim et al., 2015). We
therefore asked whether the Ms4a expression pattern was more
apparent at the protein level. Peptide antibodies were raised
against several MS4As and were used to stain the olfactory
epithelium. Consistent with every necklace cell expressing all
members of the MS4A family (of the subset expressed in GC-D
cells), each of five different anti-MS4A antibodies labeled >95%
of GC-D neurons (Figures 5A and 5B). As expected, these anti-
bodies did not label conventional OMP+ OSNs (Figure 5A), and
control antibodies against MS4As not detected in necklace
neurons by RNA profiling—MS4A1, MS4A2, and MS4A5—did
not label GC-D cells (Figure 5B and data not shown). Purified
anti-MS4A antibodies were specific in vivo as assessed by pep-
tide competition and in vitro as assessed by staining HEK293T
cells overexpressing individual MS4A proteins, although minor
cross-reactivity was observed between pairs of highly homolo-
gous MS4A proteins (e.g., MS4A6B/MS4A6C and MS4A4B/
MS4A4C) (Figures S6A and S6B).
If MS4As function as necklace chemoreceptors, they must be
present at sensory endings where transduction of odorant bind-
ing occurs (Barnea et al., 2004). Consistent with this possibility,
high-resolution imaging demonstrated that each MS4A antibody
strongly labeled the dendritic knobs of GC-D cells, with some
staining apparent in the cilia as well (Figure 5C). Sensory neurons
in the main olfactory epithelium also traffic receptors to their
axonal endings, which terminate in glomeruli in the olfactory
bulb. To test whether MS4A proteins are similarly localized to
axonal endings, olfactory bulb tissue sections were probed
with anti-MS4A antibodies, which revealed that each MS4A anti-
body labeled every necklace glomerulus—but failed to label any
conventional glomeruli—within the olfactory bulb (Figure 5D).
Taken together, these data demonstrate that MS4A proteins
are appropriately positioned within sensory endings to detect
chemical cues in the environment and that every glomerulus in
the necklace system receives input from sensory afferents
potentially representing information pooled from all of the
MS4As expressed in the necklace system; this pattern of organi-
zation differs sharply from that apparent in the rest of the olfac-
tory system, where individual receptors (or pairs of receptors)
define specific glomerular information channels.
Necklace Olfactory Neurons Respond to MS4A Ligands
In Vivo
The expression of multiple MS4A family members in GC-D cells
predicts that the chemoreceptive fields of individual necklace
olfactory neurons in vivo should include the ligands identified
for different MS4A proteins in vitro. To address this possibility,
the intact olfactory epithelium was explanted, and functional
Figure 3. MS4A Proteins Confer Responses to Odorants
(A) GCaMP6 fluorescence in response to indicated chemical mixtures in representative HEK293 cells expressing either the indicated MS4A protein or GPCR
mOR + G protein (odor delivery indicated by gray bars after accounting for line and mixing delays, see Experimental Procedures).
(B) Responses of expressed MS4A protein/odor mixture pairs performed as in (A) (10 mM per odor, see Table S3 for mixture definitions, 97 total compounds).
Color code indicates percentage of cells responding (n = 3, total cells in experiment > 50,000) after thresholding statistically significant responses (see
Experimental Procedures). Deconvolved mixture-MS4A pairs are indicated with red circles.
(C) Deconvolution identifies monomolecular odors that activate each MS4A receptor. Individual odors delivered at 50 mM in liquid phase (n = 3, total cells in
experiment > 68,000) to cells co-expressing GCaMP6s and the indicated MS4A receptor (bottom) or GCaMP6s alone (top). The aggregate percent of cells that
responded to each chemical across three independent experiments is color mapped as in (B). SFA, saturated fatty acids; UFA, unsaturated fatty acids.
(D) Dose-response curves reveal low micromolar EC50s for MS4A4B/ALA, MS4A6C/2,3-DMP, and MS4A6D/OA. Each data point represents the mean ± SEM
from at least four independent coverslips.
See also Figures S3 and S4.
Cell 165, 1734–1748, June 16, 2016
1739
 A
B
C
Figure 4. Multiple Ms4a Genes Are Expressed in Each Necklace Sensory Neuron
(A) RNAScope single-molecule fluorescent in situ hybridization of dissociated olfactory epithelial cells detects Ms4a family members (red). Necklace cells
identified via co-labeling with an antibody against Car2 (blue), GFP from the Gucy2d-IRES-TauGFP allele (green, upper-left), or an RNAScope probe against a
necklace marker gene (green, all panels except the upper-left). Necklace cells are not marked by a probe against the conventional OR gene Olfr151 (upper-right).
Nuclei marked by DAPI (grayscale); cytoplasmic anti-CAR2 signal was saturated to demarcate the entire volume of each GC-D cell. Scale bar, 5 mM.
(B) Proportion of Car2+ necklace OSNs with two or more detected puncta for each Ms4a (blue bars) and Olfr probe (red bars, including Ms4a puncta in OR174-9-
IRES-GFP-expressing cells; n = 3 experiments, between 150 and 750 cells/probe, error bars are standard error of the proportion). Dashed red line represents the
(legend continued on next page)
1740
Cell 165, 1734–1748, June 16, 2016
 responses were assessed by multiphoton microscopy as odor-
ants were delivered in liquid phase. Necklace neurons were
labeled with the fluorescent calcium reporter molecule GCaMP3
using the Emx1-Cre driver line; the Emx1 gene was enriched
in RNA-seq and NanoString analyses of GC-D neurons and dis-
tinguishes necklace cells from conventional OSNs, which ex-
press the related protein EMX2 (Figure S7A and data not shown)
(Hirota and Mombaerts, 2004). Because Emx1-Cre labels a
number of non-GC-D cells in the nasal epithelium (whose
identity is unclear), we specifically imaged cul-de-sac regions,
where nearly all GCaMP3-positive cells belong to the necklace
(Figure S7B), and heuristically identified necklace neurons as
those that responded to carbon disulfide, a known necklace
ligand whose detection requires the GC-D protein (Munger
et al., 2010).
Necklace neurons were activated by a mixture of the unsatu-
rated fatty acids oleic acid and a-linolenic acid (UFAs) and by a
mixture of 2,3- and 2,5-dimethylpyrazine (DMPs)—two chemical
classes that stimulated MS4A proteins in vitro—but rarely by
mixtures of ketones, esters, or alcohols, which were not identi-
fied as MS4A ligands (Figures 6A, 6B, and 3B). Importantly,
UFAs and DMPs do not activate adjacent conventional OSNs,
(i.e., those that responded to the control odor mixtures, but not
to CS2 [data not shown]); necklace cells are therefore specifically
tuned to MS4A-activating compounds. These data also demon-
strate that single necklace cells respond to multiple compounds
that individually activate different MS4A proteins in vitro, as oleic
acid and a-linolenic acid are ligands for MS4A6D and MS4A4B,
respectively, and the dimethylpyrazines are ligands for MS4A6C;
indeed, in separate experiments, individual necklace cells re-
sponded to multiple monomolecular MS4A ligands (Figures 6A,
6B, and 3C and data not shown). These results strongly suggest
that co-expression of Ms4a genes confers upon each GC-D cell
a tuning profile that is broader than that associated with any sin-
gle MS4A protein.
Given that MS4A ligands posess a range of volatilities, we
wished to directly demonstrate that these odorants can activate
necklace sensory neurons in intact mice. Freely behaving mice
were exposed to MS4A ligands in gas phase, and then activation
ofGC-Dcellswasmeasured usinganantibodyagainstphosphor-
ylated ribosomal S6 protein, an established marker of prior OSN
activity (Jiang et al., 2015). These experiments revealed that the
MS4A6C ligands 2,5-DMP and 2,3-DMP, the MS4A4B ligand
a-linolenic acid, and the MS4A6D ligands oleic acid and arachi-
donic acid reliably activated GC-D cells in vivo to a similar extent
as the positive control carbon disulfide (Figure 7A). Conversely,
general odorants (including acetophenone and eugenol) and
compounds
that
only
weakly
activated
MS4A-expressing
HEK293 cells (such as 2,6-DMP) did not activate necklace cells
above the background rate of plain air (Figure 7A). While prior
work had implicated 2,5-DMP as a necklace ligand, 2,3-DMP,
arachidonic acid, and the fatty acids had not been previously
shown to activate this olfactory subsystem. These experiments
demonstrate that, in the context of active exploration, necklace
sensory neurons respond to ligands for MS4A receptors.
It is not clear how soluble ligands such as urinary peptides
gain access to necklace sensory neurons within the olfactory
epithelium; nevertheless, one soluble class of MS4A ligand—
the sulfated steroids—also activated the necklace, albeit more
weakly than observed for other odorants (control DMSO = 8.7 ±
0.6 versus sulfated steroids 1,3,5(10)-estratrien-3,17b-diol disul-
phate/1,3,5(10)-estratrien-3,17a-diol 3-sulfate 12.9% ± 1.5%
cells positive, n = 4, p < 0.05 unpaired t test). It is notable that,
both in explants and in vivo, the MS4A ligands and the control
ligand carbon disulfide activated a fraction of the necklace sen-
sory neurons. While these partial responses (also previously
observed for urinary peptides) (Leinders-Zufall et al., 2007) may
reflect specific technical features of these experiments, the
consistency of this observation across ligands and preparations
raises the possibility that cellular responses in the intact necklace
system may be context or state dependent.
Altogether, these results support a model in which MS4A re-
ceptors bind inhaled odorants and induce calcium influx into
necklace OSNs. This model raises the possibility that ectopically
expressed MS4A protein will confer its in vitro chemosensitivity
onto the receptive fields of conventional olfactory neurons. To
test this hypothesis directly, mouse nares were irrigated with
adenovirus encoding bicistronic Ms4a6c-IRES-GFP transcript,
yielding sparse populations of GFP+ OSNs. This approach
generated neurons that expressed MS4A6C protein as well as
a subset of cells that were infected but did not express
MS4A6C, which served as an internal control (Figure 7B); the fail-
ure of MS4A6C protein expression in some GFP-positive cells
may reflect stochastic (and potentially cell-type-specific) effects
related to ectopic chemosensor expression within mature OSNs
(Tsai and Barnea, 2014). Ectopic MS4A6C protein was localized
to dendritic endings in infected neurons, suggesting that MS4A
proteins associate intrinsically with sensory structures even
outside of the molecular milieu of the necklace (Figure 7B and
data not shown). Quantitative analysis of neural activity (as-
sessed by phosphorylated S6 protein levels, Figure 7C, blue
channel) after exposing awake, behaving animals to odors in
gas phase revealed that ectopic MS4A6C confers responses
to its in vitro ligands 2,3-DMP and 2,5-DMP, but not to the con-
trol odorants eugenol and acetophenone (Figure 7C). Similarly,
adenovirally mediated ectopic expression resulted in effective
targeting of MS4A6D to sensory endings in conventional olfac-
tory sensory neurons and conferred specific responses to the
MS4A6D ligand oleic acid, but not to the control odorant eugenol
(Figure 7C). These results demonstrate that an MS4A protein can
directly impart its chemoreceptive properties to generic olfactory
neurons in vivo and, furthermore, that signaling downstream of
average value of negative controls. All Ms4a probes (other than Ms4a1, Ms4a2, Ms4a5) give a significantly higher proportion of positive cells than negative
controls (**p < 0.01, one-tailed Z test on population proportions).
(C) Representative images of Car2+ (blue) cells labeled with probes against the indicated Ms4a family members (top panels). The proportion and total number of
cells with multiple puncta for neither, one, or both colors were quantified (bottom panels, total cell number in parentheses). Each pair shows significantly more
double-positive cells (yellow) than expected (p < 0.05, Fisher’s exact test on 2 3 2 table). Scale bar, 2 mM.
See also Figure S5.
Cell 165, 1734–1748, June 16, 2016
1741
 MS4A proteins does not require necklace-specific molecular
components such as GC-D, PDE2A, or CNGA3. The concor-
dance of necklace cell responses with the chemoreceptive
fields of MS4A proteins expressed ectopically—both in vitro
and in vivo—implies that the necklace subsystem uses the
Ms4a family to sense odors.
A
B
C
D
Figure 5. Multiple MS4A Proteins Are Expressed within Necklace Sensory Endings and Glomeruli
(A) Anti-MS4A4B antibody stains every anti-PDE2A+ cell, but no OMP-IRES-GFP+ cells, in sections of the olfactory epithelium. Scale bar, 10 mM.
(B) Representative images of immunostaining with antibodies against five different MS4A family members, each of which stains >95% of anti-PDE2A+ necklace
cells in epithelial cul-de-sacs; control antibody against MS4A5, which is not detected at the mRNA level in GC-D cells, does not label necklace cells (lower-right).
Scale bars, 10 mM.
(C) Anti-MS4A antibodies label dendritic knobs. Many MS4A antibodies also appear to stain perinuclear and nuclear regions; although the origin of this staining,
which is eliminated by peptide competition (Figure S6B), is unknown, it may represent MS4A protein trapped within the endoplasmic reticulum or MS4A protein
fragments (Cruse et al., 2013). Scale bars, 5 mM.
(D) Anti-MS4A6D staining overlaps with all GCD-IRES-TauGFP+ necklace glomeruli in sections of the olfactory bulb (left). Blue arrows mark non-necklace
glomeruli, which are not stained by anti-MS4A6D antibody. Similarly, anti-MS4A4B and anti-MS4A7 antibodies label each necklace glomerulus (right panels).
Scale bars, 20 mM.
See also Figure S6.
1742
Cell 165, 1734–1748, June 16, 2016
 DISCUSSION
Insects and mammals use similar molecular mechanisms to
detect light, heat, and several gases, suggesting that solutions
to common sensory problems are often conserved (Caterina,
2007; Dhaka et al., 2006; Terakita, 2005). However, peripheral
mechanisms for odor detection differ among phyla; insects like
Drosophila melanogaster deploy several structurally distinct ion-
otropic odorant receptor classes to interrogate the chemical
world, whereas mammals were thought to detect smells exclu-
sively through metabotropic GPCRs (Silbering and Benton,
2010). Our identification of a non-GPCR family of odorant recep-
tor reveals an unexpected similarity between the mammalian
olfactory system and that of insects: both use multiple unrelated
receptor types to transduce chemosensory cues into intracel-
lular signals.
A
B
Figure 6. Multiple In Vitro MS4A Ligands Activate Single Necklace Cells In Vivo
(A) Functional responses of individual necklace cells (labeled with Emx1-cre/GCaMP3) to the indicated odorants were heatmapped (top row), and dF/F traces for
six cells (drawn from the heatmapped image) were plotted (bottom rows). Colored bars represent the 10 s odor delivery period (after accounting for line and mixing
delays, see Experimental Procedures). All mixtures were at 100 mM total odorant concentration (DMP: 2,3-DMP and 2,5-DMP; UFA: oleic acid and a-linolenic
acid, ketones, esters, and alcohols as in Table S3). Scale bar, 10 mM.
(B) The odor-tuning properties of 74 CS2-responsive cells (columns) across eight experiments were quantified, with color coding as in the top panel. DMPs and
UFAs each activated significantly more cells (response >25% dF/F) than each negative control (p < 0.0001, Fisher’s exact test, corrected for multiple com-
parisons). Significantly more cells responded to both UFAs and DMPs than were expected by chance (p < 0.01, Fisher’s Exact Test).
See also Figure S7.
Cell 165, 1734–1748, June 16, 2016
1743
 Multiple lines of evidence indicate that Ms4a genes encode
a novel family of chemoreceptors. Mammalian MS4A pro-
teins are localized to the dendritic endings of olfactory sen-
sory neurons, the site of odorant chemotransduction, and
contain hypervariable regions that can potentially interact
with diverse extracellular cues. Expression of MS4As in both
HEK293 cells in vitro and conventional OSNs in vivo confers
specific responses to odorants, indicating that MS4A pro-
teins are sufficient to transduce the binding of extracellular
ligands
into
intracellular
signals.
Furthermore,
individual
necklace sensory neurons, which co-express multiple MS4A
proteins, each respond in vivo to multiple MS4A ligands
identified in vitro. These data demonstrate that the MS4As
define a new mechanism and logic for mammalian chemo-
sensation and are likely responsible for endowing the neck-
lace olfactory subsystem with specific sensory odor tuning
properties.
A
B
C
Figure 7. MS4A Ligands Activate Necklace
Sensory Neurons, and MS4A Proteins Confer
MS4A Ligand Responses to Conventional Ol-
factory Sensory Neurons in Awake, Behaving
Mice
(A) Example images of cul-de-sacs from mice
exposed to the indicated odorant, immunostained
for the necklace cell marker PDE2A (blue) and the
neuronal activity marker phospho-S6 (pSerine240/
244) (red) (left panels). Quantification of the pro-
portion of pS6+ necklace cells in odor-exposed
mice (right panel, mean ± SEM, n R three inde-
pendent experiments, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, and
***p < 0.0001, unpaired t test compared to null
exposure). Scale bar, 10 mM.
(B) Olfactory epithelial sections of mice infected
with adenovirus carrying an Ms4a6c-IRES-Gfp
expression cassette reveal a subset of virally in-
fected cells (green) that also express MS4A6C
protein (red). Scale bars, 5 mM.
(C) Representative images (left panels) and quanti-
fication (right panel) of phospho-S6-positive OSNs
infected with Ms4a6c-IRES-Gfp or Ms4a6d-IRES-
Gfp-expressing adenovirus and exposed to the
indicated odorant (DMP, dimethylpyrizine; OA,
oleic acid). Gray bars: GFP-positive/MS4A6C- or
MS4A6D-negative cells; red bars: GFP-positive/
MS4A6C or MS4A6D-positive cells (n R three ani-
mals per odor, ** p < 0.001, ***p < 0.0001, Fisher’s
exact test comparing MS4A-positive to MS4A-
negative cells for each odorant). Scale bars, 5 mM.
An Alternative Logic Organizes the
Necklace Olfactory System
We find that MS4A ligands are enriched for
molecules with innate significance for the
mouse, including the aversive pheromone
2,5-DMP and several appetitive long-
chain fatty acids; interestingly, seeds and
nuts, which are a major food source for
mice in the wild, have high concentrations
of those specific fatty acids detected by
the MS4As (Sabir et al., 2012). Like the
MS4A ligands, many of the molecules previously shown to
trigger activity within the necklace olfactory system also have
innate meaning for mice; these include carbon dioxide, which
mice robustly avoid, and carbon disulfide and the peptides gua-
nylin and uroguanlyin, each of which promotes the social trans-
mission of food preferences (STFP) between mice (Arakawa
et al., 2013; Hu et al., 2007; Munger et al., 2010).
The tuning properties of the necklace system appears to
reflect the co-expression of genes encoding multiple MS4A
receptors within individual necklace sensory neurons. This
pattern of odor receptor gene expression stands in stark
contrast to the canonical one-receptor-per-neuron rule that
(to a first approximation) organizes the remainder of the
mammalian and the entirety of the Drosophila olfactory sys-
tems. In those systems, each OR is associated with one or a
small number of glomeruli in the brain; in the necklace system,
each sensory neuron and glomerulus is, in principle, capable
1744
Cell 165, 1734–1748, June 16, 2016
 of conveying odor information detected by all of the MS4A re-
ceptors expressed in the nose.
The ability of individual necklace neurons to detect multiple
innately relevant signals (including gases, peptides, and volatile
odors) of widely differing valences suggests two broad models
for the perceptual function of the necklace subsystem. First, the
necklace could discriminate between odors, albeit through
distinct mechanisms from the conventional olfactory system.
Odor-evoked differences
in
activity
in individual
necklace
glomeruli could be generated by subtle differences in MS4A
expression within subsets of sensory neurons (but see Figure 5);
such differences could also be caused by conventional OSN
axons,whichmayco-minglewithnecklacesensoryaxonsinneck-
lace glomeruli (Cockerham et al., 2009; Secundo et al., 2014).
Stimulus discrimination could alternatively be achieved through
linear or non-linear interactions between intracellular signals
downstream of individual MS4A receptors, which could allow
the integration or gating of signals arising from distinct odorants
and gases detected by single necklace neurons (van Giesen
et al., 2016); this process could generate a range of firing rates (de-
pending, for example, on the specific odor components present in
a blend) that could then be differentially read-out by the brain.
Second,themainfunctionofthenecklace systemcould beodor
detection rather than discrimination. In this model, the necklace
system may be organized in a similar manner to the mammalian
bitter taste and C. elegans olfactory systems, which co-express
receptors with widely divergent receptive fields in sensory
neurons coupled to circuits mediating stereotypical behavioral
outputs, such as attraction or aversion (Adler et al., 2000;
Troemel et al., 1995). In the case of the necklace system, this sin-
gular behavioral output could be aversion, as many of the MS4A
ligands have been shown to be contextually aversive, including
(despite their nutritional value) fatty acids at high concentrations
(Galindo et al., 2012). Alternatively, the necklace could act as
an alert system, signaling the presence of salient cues in the
environment (whose identity would be disentangled by other
sensory systems); such a notification system could be useful for
modulating the internal state of the animal in response to particu-
larly relevant external cues, thereby facilitating both innate re-
sponses to odors and odor-related learning processes (potentially
including STFP).
In either the discrimination or detection model, the physiolog-
ical function of the necklace could depend upon interactions
between intracellular signals downstream of the MS4A receptors
and GC-D. Although the MS4As do not obligately require GC-D
to promote calcium influx, GC-D enzymatic activity is sensitive to
calcium levels in vitro (Duda and Sharma, 2008). This observa-
tion raises the possibility that the MS4A and GC-D pathways
intersect in some manner, perhaps facilitating coincidence
detection between gases and peptides on the one hand and
volatile odors on the other.
Dissecting MS4A Function
Previous work has suggested that the MS4As may facilitate in-
creases in intracellular calcium by acting as co-receptors for
associated ligand-binding proteins such as the B-cell receptors
(Dombrowicz et al., 1998; Eon Kuek et al., 2015). Here, we show
that small molecule ligands cause an MS4A-dependent influx of
extracellular calcium, demonstrating that the MS4A molecules
themselves have a receptor function. It is not clear, however,
whether the MS4A proteins themselves form a calcium-perme-
able channel (similar to the Drosophila IR odorant receptors) or
whether the MS4As act as ligand-binding co-receptors for an
ion channel that is expressed in many cell types (Abuin et al.,
2011; Benton et al., 2009).
The underlying molecular mechanisms through which the
MS4A proteins interact with ligands are not known. The observa-
tion that the molecular diversity within the MS4A family is largely
found within extracellular domains—rather than transmembrane
domains—suggests that the MS4As interact with odor ligands
through biophysical mechanisms that are distinct from those
used by conventional ORs. These mechanisms may be similar
to those used by mammalian bitter taste receptors, whose diver-
sity is also found largely in extracellular domains (Hayakawa
et al., 2014; Wooding, 2011). It is also unclear whether the
MS4As, despite being co-expressed in single cells, primarily
interact with odorants as homomers (like the bitter taste recep-
tors) or whether they heteromerize in a manner that alters their
tuning properties (Howie et al., 2009).
The Four-Pass Transmembrane MS4As: Chemical
Detectors across Cell Types and Species?
Although a number of cellular roles have been suggested for
individual MS4A proteins (largely in the context of the immune
system), no clear picture has emerged of the core function of
the MS4A family across cell types. The finding that multiple
MS4As encode olfactory receptors suggests that they act as
chemosensors in a range of tissues; this role may be both extero-
ceptive, serving to detect small molecules from the outside
world, and interoceptive, as several of the ligands for MS4A pro-
teins (e.g., oleic acid and arachidonic acid) are used as signaling
molecules physiologically. Consistent with this hypothesis,
members of the MS4A6/7 subfamily are expressed in microglia,
neuroimmune cells responsible for sensing and responding to a
variety of endogenous protein and lipid chemosignals in the
mammalian brain; human MS4A8B and MS4A12 are expressed
in epithelial cells at the lumenal surface of the small and large in-
testine, tissues that both sense dietary lipids; human MS4A8B is
localized specifically in chemosensory cilia in lung cells tasked
with probing the sensory environment; and MS4A5 is expressed
in mammalian spermatocytes, which chemotax to oocytes (Eon
Kuek et al., 2015; Koslowski et al., 2008).
MS4A homologs are present in all mammalian lineages and in
many sequenced deuterostomes, including osteichthyes (Fig-
ure S2C and data not shown), implying that the evolution of the
Ms4a genes antedates the advent of the mammalian receptors
for taste and for pheromones (Grus and Zhang, 2009). Taken
with the finding that the MS4As detect a variety of innately rele-
vant cues, these observations invite the speculation that the
MS4A molecules represent an ancient mechanism for sensing
ethologically salient small molecules in the environment. Testing
this hypothesis will require establishing chemosensory roles for
Ms4a genes in other species and better definition of those natu-
ral ligands that optimally activate the MS4As (given the limits of
the synthetic odor panel explored here). It is important to note
that all MS4A ligands thus far identified are also detected by
Cell 165, 1734–1748, June 16, 2016
1745
 other receptor molecules in the smell and taste systems (Isogai
et al., 2011; Mamasuew et al., 2011; Oberland et al., 2015).
Nevertheless, the maintenance of the MS4A receptor repertoire
for more than 400 million years, especially given the evolu-
tionary success of G-protein-coupled odor receptors, argues
that MS4As play an important—and non-redundant—role in
sensory physiology (Zuccolo et al., 2010).
Although the Ms4a genes are conserved across vertebrates,
Gucy2d is itself pseudogenized in most primates (Young et al.,
2007). It is unclear whether the absence of GC-D reflects a disap-
pearance of the necklace system in primates or merely that
GC-D became unnecessary for the tasks required of the primate
necklace, given the persistence of the Ms4a genes (Young et al.,
2007). Similarly, the vomeronasal organ, the sensory epithelium
thought to mediate the majority of pheromone responses in
rodents, became vestigial �25 million years ago (Zhang and
Webb, 2003). Future investigation of the functional role of
Ms4a gene families across chordates—and the relevance of in-
teractions between MS4A proteins and ethologically relevant
cues like pheromones and fatty acids—will reveal both common
and species-specific roles of the MS4As in processing informa-
tion from the chemical environment.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Graphical representations of the data are presented as the mean ± SEM unless
otherwise noted. All mice were obtained from the Jackson Laboratory, with the
exception of OR174-9-IRES-tauGFP, which was obtained from the Axel lab.
For deep sequencing, olfactory epithelia were dissociated using papain and
individual cells were FAC sorted; RNA was then isolated using Trizol (Invitro-
gen) before SmartSeq2-based amplification and Illumina-based sequencing.
NanoString-based RNA quantitation was performed using a modified protocol
to optimize for recovery of low-abundance transcripts. MS4A sequences were
extracted from the Ensembl and NCBI databases. MS4A proteins were ex-
pressed in HEK293 cells using a Tet-regulatable system to control protein
expression (Invitrogen); odor delivery was either achieved via bulk exchange
or through a focal stimulus pencil placed over specific fields of view, and
odor delays were determined using Rhodamine B dye as a surrogate. Odor re-
sponses were imaged in both configurations using an Andor Neo sCMOS cam-
era mounted on an Olympus IX83. Single-molecule in situ RNA detection was
performed using RNAScope (Advanced Cell Diagnostics); this protocol was
adapted to simultaneously immunostain with either anti-CAR2 or anti-GFP an-
tibodies. Custom antibodies against the MS4A proteins were developed in
rabbits or guinea pigs (Covance) and were purified using protein A-sepharose
and bead-conjugated peptides. Multiphoton-based functional imaging (Prairie
Technologies) of explanted olfactory epithelia was performed in superfused
carboygenated modified Ringer’s solution, with odor delivery in liquid phase
controlled by a solenoid valve system (Warner Instruments); image alignment
was achieved using custom feature-tracking and homography algorithms. Hu-
man adenoviruses were generated by the UNC Viral Core facility. See Supple-
mental Experimental Procedures for details regarding experimental methods,
reagent sources, and statistical procedures.
ACCESSION NUMBERS
The RNA-seq data reported in this paper have been deposited in the SRA data-
base at NCBI under the accession number SRP074687.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes Supplemental Experimental Procedures,
seven figures, and three tables and can be found with this article online at
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2016.05.001.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
P.L.G., D.M.B., and S.R.D. conceived and designed the experiments. P.L.G.,
D.M.B., M.L.B., T.T., S.L.P., and A.C.N. carried out all of the wet-lab experi-
ments; evolutionary analysis was performed by J.-M.L., F.K.M., and H.E.H.
R.K. performed RNA-seq read quality control and alignment.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Vanessa Ruta, Michael Greenberg, Richard Axel, Steve Liberles,
Bernardo Sabatini, Rachel Wilson, Elizabeth Hong, Steve Flavell, Eric Griffith,
and members of the Datta Lab for helpful discussions and comments on the
manuscript and Allison Petrosino, Neha Bhagat, and Lauren Coritt for labora-
tory assistance. We thank Andrew Giessel, Alexander Wiltschko, and Jeffrey
Markowitz for coding assistance and Hannah Somhegyi for generation of the
graphical abstract. P.L.G. was supported by the Nancy Lurie Marks Founda-
tion, the William Randolph Hearst Fund, the Leonard and Isabelle Goldenson
Fund, and the Edward and Anne Lefler Foundation. D.M.B. is supported by
a NSF predoctoral fellowship and a Sackler Scholarship in Psychobiology.
J.-M.L. is supported by the European Molecular Biology Organization (ALTF
379-2011), the Human Frontiers Science Program (LT001086/2012), and the
Belgian American Educational Foundation. M.L.B. is supported by a NSF pre-
doctoral fellowship. T.T. is supported by a postdoctoral fellowship from the
Alice and Joseph E. Brooks Foundation, the Astellas Foundation for Research
on Metabolic Disorders, and the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science
postdoctoral fellowship for Research Abroad. S.L.P. was supported by a
NIDA F31 (DA036922-01) and is a Stuart H.Q. & Victoria Quan Fellow at Har-
vard Medical School. H.H. is supported by the Howard Hughes Medical Insti-
tute. S.R.D. is supported by fellowships from the Burroughs Wellcome Fund,
the Searle Foundation, the Sloan Foundation, the Vallee Foundation, the
McKnight Foundation, the Khodadad Program, by grants DP2OD007109
and RO11DC011558 from the National Institutes of Health, and by the Global
Brain Initiative from the Simons Foundation.
Received: December 3, 2015
Revised: March 14, 2016
Accepted: April 28, 2016
Published: May 26, 2016
REFERENCES
Abuin, L., Bargeton, B., Ulbrich, M.H., Isacoff, E.Y., Kellenberger, S., and Ben-
ton, R. (2011). Functional architecture of olfactory ionotropic glutamate recep-
tors. Neuron 69, 44–60.
Adler, E., Hoon, M.A., Mueller, K.L., Chandrashekar, J., Ryba, N.J., and Zuker,
C.S. (2000). A novel family of mammalian taste receptors. Cell 100, 693–702.
Amcheslavsky, A., Wood, M.L., Yeromin, A.V., Parker, I., Freites, J.A., Tobias,
D.J., and Cahalan, M.D. (2015). Molecular biophysics of Orai store-operated
Ca2+ channels. Biophys. J. 108, 237–246.
Arakawa, H., Kelliher, K.R., Zufall, F., and Munger, S.D. (2013). The receptor
guanylyl cyclase type D (GC-D) ligand uroguanylin promotes the acquisition
of food preferences in mice. Chem. Senses 38, 391–397.
Axel, R. (1995). The molecular logic of smell. Sci. Am. 273, 154–159.
Barnea, G., O’Donnell, S., Mancia, F., Sun, X., Nemes, A., Mendelsohn, M.,
and Axel, R. (2004). Odorant receptors on axon termini in the brain. Science
304, 1468.
Benton, R., Vannice, K.S., Gomez-Diaz, C., and Vosshall, L.B. (2009). Variant
ionotropic glutamate receptors as chemosensory receptors in Drosophila. Cell
136, 149–162.
Bubien, J.K., Zhou, L.J., Bell, P.D., Frizzell, R.A., and Tedder, T.F. (1993).
Transfection of the CD20 cell surface molecule into ectopic cell types gener-
ates a Ca2+ conductance found constitutively in B lymphocytes. J. Cell Biol.
121, 1121–1132.
Buck, L., and Axel, R. (1991). A novel multigene family may encode odorant re-
ceptors: a molecular basis for odor recognition. Cell 65, 175–187.
1746
Cell 165, 1734–1748, June 16, 2016
 Caterina, M.J. (2007). Transient receptor potential ion channels as participants
in thermosensation and thermoregulation. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp.
Physiol. 292, R64–R76.
Cockerham, R.E., Puche, A.C., and Munger, S.D. (2009). Heterogeneous sen-
sory innervation and extensive intrabulbar connections of olfactory necklace
glomeruli. PLoS ONE 4, e4657.
Cruse, G., Beaven, M.A., Ashmole, I., Bradding, P., Gilfillan, A.M., and Met-
calfe, D.D. (2013). A truncated splice-variant of the FcεRIb receptor subunit
is critical for microtubule formation and degranulation in mast cells. Immunity
38, 906–917.
Dalton, R.P., and Lomvardas, S. (2015). Chemosensory receptor specificity
and regulation. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 38, 331–349.
Dhaka, A., Viswanath, V., and Patapoutian, A. (2006). Trp ion channels and
temperature sensation. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 29, 135–161.
Dombrowicz, D., Lin, S., Flamand, V., Brini, A.T., Koller, B.H., and Kinet, J.P.
(1998). Allergy-associated FcRbeta is a molecular amplifier of IgE- and IgG-
mediated in vivo responses. Immunity 8, 517–529.
Duda, T., and Sharma, R.K. (2008). ONE-GC membrane guanylate cyclase, a
trimodal odorant signal transducer. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 367,
440–445.
Dulac, C., and Axel, R. (1995). A novel family of genes encoding putative pher-
omone receptors in mammals. Cell 83, 195–206.
Eon Kuek, L., Leffler, M., Mackay, G.A., and Hulett, M.D. (2015). The MS4A
family: counting past 1, 2 and 3. Immunol Cell Biol. 94, 11–23.
Fu
¨ lle, H.J., Vassar, R., Foster, D.C., Yang, R.B., Axel, R., and Garbers, D.L.
(1995). A receptor guanylyl cyclase expressed specifically in olfactory sensory
neurons. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92, 3571–3575.
Galindo, M.M., Voigt, N., Stein, J., van Lengerich, J., Raguse, J.D., Hofmann,
T., Meyerhof, W., and Behrens, M. (2012). G protein-coupled receptors in hu-
man fat taste perception. Chem. Senses 37, 123–139.
Gao, L., Hu, J., Zhong, C., and Luo, M. (2010). Integration of CO2 and odorant
signals in the mouse olfactory bulb. Neuroscience 170, 881–892.
Grus, W.E., and Zhang, J. (2009). Origin of the genetic components of the vom-
eronasal system in the common ancestor of all extant vertebrates. Mol. Biol.
Evol. 26, 407–419.
Guo, D., Zhang, J.J., and Huang, X.Y. (2009). Stimulation of guanylyl cyclase-D
by bicarbonate. Biochemistry 48, 4417–4422.
Hayakawa, T., Suzuki-Hashido, N., Matsui, A., and Go, Y. (2014). Frequent ex-
pansions of the bitter taste receptor gene repertoire during evolution of mam-
mals in the Euarchontoglires clade. Mol. Biol. Evol. 31, 2018–2031.
Herrada, G., and Dulac, C. (1997). A novel family of putative pheromone recep-
tors in mammals with a topographically organized and sexually dimorphic
distribution. Cell 90, 763–773.
Hirota, J., and Mombaerts, P. (2004). The LIM-homeodomain protein Lhx2 is
required for complete development of mouse olfactory sensory neurons.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 23, 8751–8755.
Howie, D., Nolan, K.F., Daley, S., Butterfield, E., Adams, E., Garcia-Rueda, H.,
Thompson, C., Saunders, N.J., Cobbold, S.P., Tone, Y., et al. (2009). MS4A4B
is a GITR-associated membrane adapter, expressed by regulatory T cells,
which modulates T cell activation. J. Immunol. 183, 4197–4204.
Hu, J., Zhong, C., Ding, C., Chi, Q., Walz, A., Mombaerts, P., Matsunami, H.,
and Luo, M. (2007). Detection of near-atmospheric concentrations of CO2
by an olfactory subsystem in the mouse. Science 317, 953–957.
Ihara, S., Yoshikawa, K., and Touhara, K. (2013). Chemosensory signals and
their receptors in the olfactory neural system. Neuroscience 254, 45–60.
Isogai, Y., Si, S., Pont-Lezica, L., Tan, T., Kapoor, V., Murthy, V.N., and Dulac,
C. (2011). Molecular organization of vomeronasal chemoreception. Nature
478, 241–245.
Jiang, Y., Gong, N.N., Hu, X.S., Ni, M.J., Pasi, R., and Matsunami, H. (2015).
Molecular profiling of activated olfactory neurons identifies odorant receptors
for odors in vivo. Nat. Neurosci. 18, 1446–1454.
Juilfs, D.M., Fu
¨ lle, H.J., Zhao, A.Z., Houslay, M.D., Garbers, D.L., and Beavo,
J.A. (1997). A subset of olfactory neurons that selectively express cGMP-stim-
ulated phosphodiesterase (PDE2) and guanylyl cyclase-D define a unique
olfactory signal transduction pathway. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94, 3388–
3395.
Khan, M., Vaes, E., and Mombaerts, P. (2011). Regulation of the probability of
mouse odorant receptor gene choice. Cell 147, 907–921.
Kim, S.T., Do, I.G., Lee, J., Sohn, I., Kim, K.M., and Kang, W.K. (2015). The
NanoString-based multigene assay as a novel platform to screen EGFR,
HER2, and MET in patients with advanced gastric cancer. Clin. Transl. Oncol.
17, 462–468.
Koslowski, M., Sahin, U., Dhaene, K., Huber, C., and Tu
¨ reci, O. (2008).
MS4A12 is a colon-selective store-operated calcium channel promoting ma-
lignant cell processes. Cancer Res. 68, 3458–3466.
Leinders-Zufall, T., Cockerham, R.E., Michalakis, S., Biel, M., Garbers, D.L.,
Reed, R.R., Zufall, F., and Munger, S.D. (2007). Contribution of the receptor
guanylyl cyclase GC-D to chemosensory function in the olfactory epithelium.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 104, 14507–14512.
Liberles, S.D., and Buck, L.B. (2006). A second class of chemosensory recep-
tors in the olfactory epithelium. Nature 442, 645–650.
Liberles, S.D., Horowitz, L.F., Kuang, D., Contos, J.J., Wilson, K.L., Siltberg-
Liberles, J., Liberles, D.A., and Buck, L.B. (2009). Formyl peptide receptors
are candidate chemosensory receptors in the vomeronasal organ. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 106, 9842–9847.
Lin, S., Cicala, C., Scharenberg, A.M., and Kinet, J.P. (1996). The Fc(epsilon)
RIbeta subunit functions as an amplifier of Fc(epsilon)RIgamma-mediated
cell activation signals. Cell 85, 985–995.
Mainland, J.D., Li, Y.R., Zhou, T., Liu, W.L., and Matsunami, H. (2015). Human
olfactory receptor responses to odorants. Sci. Data 2, 150002.
Mamasuew, K., Hofmann, N., Breer, H., and Fleischer, J. (2011). Grueneberg
ganglion neurons are activated by a defined set of odorants. Chem. Senses 36,
271–282.
Man, O., Gilad, Y., and Lancet, D. (2004). Prediction of the odorant binding site
of olfactory receptor proteins by human-mouse comparisons. Protein Sci. 13,
240–254.
Martini, S., Silvotti, L., Shirazi, A., Ryba, N.J., and Tirindelli, R. (2001). Co-
expression of putative pheromone receptors in the sensory neurons of the
vomeronasal organ. J. Neurosci. 21, 843–848.
Matsunami, H., and Buck, L.B. (1997). A multigene family encoding a diverse
array of putative pheromone receptors in mammals. Cell 90, 775–784.
Meyer, M.R., Angele, A., Kremmer, E., Kaupp, U.B., and Muller, F. (2000). A
cGMP-signaling pathway in a subset of olfactory sensory neurons. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 97, 10595–10600.
Mori, K., and Sakano, H. (2011). How is the olfactory map formed and inter-
preted in the mammalian brain? Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 34, 467–499.
Munger, S.D., Leinders-Zufall, T., and Zufall, F. (2009). Subsystem organiza-
tion of the mammalian sense of smell. Annu. Rev. Physiol. 71, 115–140.
Munger, S.D., Leinders-Zufall, T., McDougall, L.M., Cockerham, R.E., Schmid,
A., Wandernoth, P., Wennemuth, G., Biel, M., Zufall, F., and Kelliher, K.R.
(2010). An olfactory subsystem that detects carbon disulfide and mediates
food-related social learning. Curr. Biol. 20, 1438–1444.
Nei, M., Niimura, Y., and Nozawa, M. (2008). The evolution of animal chemo-
sensory receptor gene repertoires: roles of chance and necessity. Nat. Rev.
Genet. 9, 951–963.
Oberland, S., Ackels, T., Gaab, S., Pelz, T., Spehr, J., Spehr, M., and Neuhaus,
E.M. (2015). CD36 is involved in oleic acid detection by the murine olfactory
system. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 9, 366.
Polyak, M.J., Li, H., Shariat, N., and Deans, J.P. (2008). CD20 homo-oligomers
physically associate with the B cell antigen receptor. Dissociation upon recep-
tor engagement and recruitment of phosphoproteins and calmodulin-binding
proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 283, 18545–18552.
Cell 165, 1734–1748, June 16, 2016
1747
 Rivie
` re, S., Challet, L., Fluegge, D., Spehr, M., and Rodriguez, I. (2009). Formyl
peptide receptor-like proteins are a novel family of vomeronasal chemosen-
sors. Nature 459, 574–577.
Ryba, N.J., and Tirindelli, R. (1997). A new multigene family of putative phero-
mone receptors. Neuron 19, 371–379.
Sabir, A., Unver, A., and Kara, Z. (2012). The fatty acid and tocopherol constit-
uents of the seed oil extracted from 21 grape varieties (Vitis spp.). J. Sci. Food
Agric. 92, 1982–1987.
Saito, H., Chi, Q., Zhuang, H., Matsunami, H., and Mainland, J.D. (2009). Odor
coding by a Mammalian receptor repertoire. Sci. Signal. 2, ra9.
Secundo, L., Snitz, K., and Sobel, N. (2014). The perceptual logic of smell.
Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 25, 107–115.
Shinoda, K., Shiotani, Y., and Osawa, Y. (1989). ‘‘Necklace olfactory glomeruli’’
form unique components of the rat primary olfactory system. J. Comp. Neurol.
284, 362–373.
Silbering, A.F., and Benton, R. (2010). Ionotropic and metabotropic mecha-
nisms in chemoreception: ‘chance or design’? EMBO Rep. 11, 173–179.
Singer, M.S. (2000). Analysis of the molecular basis for octanal interactions in
the expressed rat 17 olfactory receptor. Chem. Senses 25, 155–165.
Sun, L., Wang, H., Hu, J., Han, J., Matsunami, H., and Luo, M. (2009). Guanylyl
cyclase-D in the olfactory CO2 neurons is activated by bicarbonate. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 106, 2041–2046.
Terakita, A. (2005). The opsins. Genome Biol. 6, 213.
Troemel, E.R., Chou, J.H., Dwyer, N.D., Colbert, H.A., and Bargmann, C.I.
(1995). Divergent seven transmembrane receptors are candidate chemosen-
sory receptors in C. elegans. Cell 83, 207–218.
Tsai, L., and Barnea, G. (2014). A critical period defined by axon-targeting
mechanisms in the murine olfactory bulb. Science 344, 197–200.
van Giesen, L., Hernandez-Nunez, L., Delasoie-Baranek, S., Colombo, M., Re-
naud, P., Bruggmann, R., Benton, R., Samuel, A.D., and Sprecher, S.G. (2016).
Multimodal stimulus coding by a gustatory sensory neuron in Drosophila
larvae. Nat. Commun. 7, 10687.
Wang, F., Flanagan, J., Su, N., Wang, L.C., Bui, S., Nielson, A., Wu, X., Vo, H.T.,
Ma, X.J., and Luo, Y. (2012). RNAscope: a novel in situ RNA analysis platform
for formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues. J. Mol. Diagn. 14, 22–29.
Wooding, S. (2011). Signatures of natural selection in a primate bitter taste re-
ceptor. J. Mol. Evol. 73, 257–265.
Young, J.M., Waters, H., Dong, C., Fu
¨ lle, H.J., and Liman, E.R. (2007). Degen-
eration of the olfactory guanylyl cyclase D gene during primate evolution. PLoS
ONE 2, e884.
Zhang, J., and Webb, D.M. (2003). Evolutionary deterioration of the vomero-
nasal pheromone transduction pathway in catarrhine primates. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 100, 8337–8341.
Zuccolo, J., Bau, J., Childs, S.J., Goss, G.G., Sensen, C.W., and Deans, J.P.
(2010). Phylogenetic analysis of the MS4A and TMEM176 gene families.
PLoS ONE 5, e9369.
1748
Cell 165, 1734–1748, June 16, 2016
