 Clinical practice guidelines on the evidence-based use of 
integrative therapies during and following breast cancer 
treatment
Heather Greenlee, ND, PhD, MPH, Melissa J. DuPont-Reyes, MPH, MPhil, Lynda G. 
Balneaves, RN, PhD, Linda E. Carlson, PhD, Misha R. Cohen, OMD, LAc, Gary Deng, MD, 
PhD, Jillian A. Johnson, MSc, Matthew Mumber, MD, Dugald Seely, ND, MSc, Suzanna Zick, 
ND, MPH, Lindsay Boyce, MLIS, and Debu Tripathy, MD
Department of Epidemiology, Mailman School of Public Health (HG, MD), Herbert Irving 
Comprehensive Cancer Center (HG), Columbia University, New York, NY; College of Nursing, 
Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, Winnipeg, MB, Canada (LGB); Department of Oncology, 
University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada (LEC); Institute for Health and Aging, University of 
California San Francisco, CA (MC); Chicken Soup Chinese Medicine, San Francisco, CA (MC); 
Department of Medicine (GD), Memorial Sloan Kettering Library (LB), Memorial Sloan Kettering 
Cancer Center, New York, NY (GD); Department of Biobehavioral Health, The Pennsylvania State 
University, University Park, PA (JJ); Harbin Clinic, Rome, GA (MM); Ottawa Integrative Cancer 
Center, Ottawa, ON, Canada (DS); Canadian College of Naturopathic Medicine, Toronto, ON, 
Canada (DS); Department of Family Medicine, University of Michigan Health System (SMZ), 
Department of Nutritional Sciences, School of Public Health (SMZ), and Department of Family 
Medicine (SMZ), University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI; Department of Breast Medical Oncology, 
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX (DT)
Abstract
Patients with breast cancer commonly use complementary and integrative therapies as supportive 
care during cancer treatment and to manage treatment-related side effects. However, evidence 
supporting the use of such therapies in the oncology setting is limited. This report provides 
updated clinical practice guidelines from the Society for Integrative Oncology on the use of 
integrative therapies for specific clinical indications during and after breast cancer treatment, 
including anxiety/stress, depression/mood disorders, fatigue, quality of life/physical functioning, 
chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting, lymphedema, chemotherapy-induced peripheral 
neuropathy, pain, and sleep disturbance. Clinical practice guidelines are based on a systematic 
literature review from 1990 through 2015. Music therapy, meditation, stress management, and 
yoga are recommended for anxiety/stress reduction. Meditation, relaxation, yoga, massage, and 
music therapy are recommended for depression/mood disorders. Meditation and yoga are 
recommended to improve quality of life. Acupressure and acupuncture are recommended for 
reducing chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting. Acetyl-L-carnitine is not recommended to 
Correspondence to: Heather Greenlee, ND, PhD, MPH, Department of Epidemiology, Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia 
University, 722 W. 168th Street, 7th Floor, New York, NY 10032 (hg2120@columbia.edu). 
COI: The authors report no conflicts of interest
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURES: none
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Published in final edited form as:
CA Cancer J Clin. 2017 May 06; 67(3): 194–232. doi:10.3322/caac.21397.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 prevent chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy due to a possibility of harm. No strong 
evidence supports the use of ingested dietary supplements to manage breast cancer treatment-
related side effects. In summary, there is a growing body of evidence supporting the use of 
integrative therapies, especially mind-body therapies, as effective supportive care strategies during 
breast cancer treatment. Many integrative practices, however, remain understudied, with 
insufficient evidence to be definitively recommended or avoided.
Keywords
Breast cancer; integrative therapies; complementary therapies; implementation strategies; 
integrative oncology; integrative medicine; music therapy; meditation; yoga; stress management; 
relaxation; massage; acupressure; acupuncture
INTRODUCTION
Patients with breast cancer and breast cancer survivors are frequent users of complementary 
and integrative therapies and there are a growing number of formal integrative oncology 
programs within cancer centers.1–6 A variety of terms are used to describe such use and it is 
helpful at the outset to define terms. Complementary and alternative therapies are generally 
defined as any medical system, practice, or product that is not part of conventional medical 
care.7, 8 Other relevant terminology includes “complementary medicine”, which comprises 
therapies used as a complement alongside conventional medicine; “alternative medicine”, 
which comprises therapies used in place of conventional medicine; and “integrative 
medicine”, which is the coordinated use of evidence-based complementary practices and 
conventional care. Integrative oncology refers to the use of complementary and integrative 
therapies in collaboration with conventional oncology care. In oncology, individuals employ 
complementary and integrative therapies with the intent of enhancing wellness, improving 
quality of life (QOL), and relieving symptoms of disease and side effects of conventional 
treatments. However, the evidence supporting the use of complementary and integrative 
therapies in the oncology setting is limited.
In November 2014, the Society for Integrative Oncology (SIO) published clinical practice 
guidelines to inform both clinicians and patients on the use of integrative therapies during 
breast cancer treatment and to treat breast cancer treatment-related symptoms.9 SIO adapted 
methods established by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force10 to develop graded 
recommendations on the use of specific integrative therapies for defined clinical indications 
based on strength of available evidence concerning associated benefits and harms. The 2014 
clinical practice guidelines were derived from a systematic review of randomized clinical 
trials published between 1990 and 2013 and organized by specific clinical conditions (e.g., 
anxiety/stress, fatigue). This review provides an updated set of clinical practice guidelines 
based upon a current systematic literature review of randomized controlled trials published 
through December 2015. In addition, this review provides detailed definitions of integrative 
therapies and clinical outcomes of interest, a detailed summary of the literature upon which 
the clinical practice guidelines are based, and suggestions for how appropriate therapies may 
be integrated into clinical practice.
Greenlee et al.
Page 2
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Of note, it is important to define the use of the term “recommendation” in these clinical 
practice guidelines. In many settings, a clinical guideline “recommendation” infers that it be 
used as the standard of care and is favorable or equal compared to all other options based on 
best clinical evidence for benefit/risk ratio. Here, in the setting of integrative oncology, we 
use the term “recommendation” to infer that the therapy should be considered as a viable but 
not singular option for the management of a specific symptom or side effect. Few studies 
have conducted a head to head comparison of a given integrative therapy against a 
conventional treatment, and most integrative therapies are used in conjunction with standard 
therapy and have been studied in this manner. Moreover, combination-based approaches and 
the interactions of the numerous permutations of integrative and conventional treatments 
have not been formally investigated, such that recommendations must account for this 
limitation of our knowledge. Despite these limitations to the evaluation of the use of 
integrative therapies in the oncology setting, there is a body of well-conducted trials of 
specific therapies for specific conditions that provide sufficient evidence to warrant 
recommendations on the therapies as viable options for treating specific conditions.
This review provides clinicians and patients with updated SIO clinical practice guidelines on 
the use of integrative therapies to manage symptoms and side effects during and after breast 
cancer treatment. The clinical practice guidelines do not address breast cancer recurrence 
and survival endpoints as there are very few adequately powered randomized controlled 
trials examining the effect of integrative therapies on these outcomes. This review provides a 
definition of each integrative therapy that had a sufficiently large body of evidence to 
formulate specific recommendations. Information is also provided on how to implement the 
recommendations into the clinical setting, with caveats for specific clinical situations. In 
addition, this review summarizes pertinent meta-analyses and identifies promising areas for 
future investigation. The information that arose from other published reviews and meta-
analyses did not change the interpretation of the findings or quality of specific trials, but the 
information was used to influence the establishment of specific recommendation grades 
based on consistency, reproducibility and assessment of potential harms and benefits. The 
goal of this current review is to provide clinicians and patients with practical information 
and tools to evaluate whether there is an evidence-base to support the use of a defined 
integrative therapy for a specific clinical application in the context of breast cancer.
METHODS
Systematic Review Methodology
To update the previously published clinical practice guidelines that were based upon the a 
systematic review of the literature from January 1, 1990 through December 31, 20139, we 
conducted a systematic review of published randomized controlled trials from January 1, 
2014 through December 31, 2015 using the same search criteria and process. The process 
followed the methods set forth by the Institute of Medicine on clinical guideline 
development.11 The following databases were searched: Embase, MEDLINE, PsychINFO, 
and CINAHL. As previously reported9, trials were selected for inclusion in the systematic 
review if they met the following criteria: (1) peer-reviewed published randomized controlled 
trial; (2) available in English; (3) included ≥ 50% breast cancer patients and/or reported 
Greenlee et al.
Page 3
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 results separately for breast cancer patients; (4) used an integrative therapy as an 
intervention during standard treatment with surgery, chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and/or 
hormonal therapy, or addressed symptoms and side effects resulting from diagnosis and/or 
treatment; and (5) addressed an endpoint of clinical relevance to breast cancer patients and 
survivors (Supplemental Table 1).9 Several lifestyle and psychological interventions were 
excluded from current as well as previous guidelines because they have already been well 
summarized by other groups (e.g., diet 12, 13 and physical activity 12–14 recommendations 
for cancer survivors) and/or because they have a strong evidence base and are often 
considered to be mainstream rather than integrative or complementary (e.g., cognitive-
behavioral therapy 15, psychoeducation 16, counseling 17, and support groups 16). Other 
interventions excluded were in early or pilot stages of research (e.g., attention restoration 
therapy) or were not considered to be an integrative oncology therapy for the purposes of the 
SIO guidelines (e.g., prayer, spirituality). Each article was scored according to quality of 
design and reporting based on the Jadad scoring scale and a modified scale adapted from the 
Delphi scoring system.18, 19 Finally, grades of evidence were determined for each therapy as 
applied to a specific clinical outcome using a modified version of the U.S. Preventive 
Services Task Force Grading System.10 Grades were based upon strength of evidence, 
determined by the number of trials, quality of trials, magnitude of effect, statistical 
significance, sample size, consistency of results across studies, and whether the outcomes 
were primary or secondary. The highest grades (A and B) indicate that a specific therapy is 
recommended for a particular clinical indication. Grade A indicates there is high certainty 
that the net benefit is substantial, while grade B indicates there is high certainty that the net 
benefit is moderate or there is moderate certainty that the net benefit is moderate to 
substantial. Grade C indicates that the evidence is equivocal, or that there is at least 
moderate certainty that the net benefit is small. The lowest grades (D, H, and I) indicate no 
demonstrated effect, suggest harm, or indicate that the current evidence is inconclusive, 
respectively.
Following the clinical guideline development process outlined by the Institute of Medicine,
11 drafts prepared by the SIO Guideline Working group were distributed to an 
interdisciplinary group of SIO internal and external reviewers. Reviewer comments, 
suggestions and critiques were incorporated into the final version of these guidelines.
It is important to note that as we reviewed the literature, we recognized that there is a 
difference between statistical and clinical significance. The graded recommendations reflect 
our assessment of the clinical significance based upon our assessment of the body of 
literature, including the importance of statistical significance with respect to the primary 
endpoint. We did not report on specific magnitudes of effect because of the range of 
outcome measures and statistical methods used across the trials, making it difficult to 
describe detailed data on effect sizes across all trials. Though some of the trials with small 
sample sizes (n<100) may have been methodologically sound, we downplayed their 
contribution to the graded recommendation because larger trials provided more information 
on generalizability of results to larger populations. Due to space limitations, p-values are 
reported and citations are provided to reference the primary reports for additional details.
Greenlee et al.
Page 4
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Definitions of Complementary and Integrative Therapies 20, 21
Below are definitions listed alphabetically for each of the complementary and integrative 
therapies that received a Grade A, B, C, D or H in the updated clinical practice guidelines 
presented here. Table 1 displays the graded recommendations9. Table 2 provides background 
information on the specific training, licensure, and professional organizations associated 
with each therapy. If a therapy is known to have a specific contraindication or caution, it is 
noted in the description. The descriptions include statements on how the therapies are often 
used by cancer patients and survivors, but do not indicate the level of evidence supporting 
such use. The guideline recommendations provide the summary of the evidence on the use 
for specific conditions. In addition to the information provided below, there are continuously 
updated well-referenced websites that can provide additional details on the range of 
therapies, including Natural Medicines (https://
www.naturalmedicines.therapeuticresearch.com), Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer 
Center’s About Herbs website (https://www.mskcc.org/cancer-care/treatments/symptom-
management/integrative-medicine/herbs), and the National Cancer Institute’s Office of 
Cancer Complementary and Alternative Medicine CAM Therapies: A-Z website (https://
cam.cancer.gov/health_information/cam_therapies_a-z.htm).
Acetyl-L-carnitine—Acetyl-L-carnitine is a dietary supplement that some patients use to 
treat cancer-related fatigue by enhancing energy and lowering inflammation in the body22. It 
has shown to be effective at preventing and treating diabetic neuropathy and, therefore, was 
of interest to examine in the context of chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy. It is a 
substance made in muscle and liver tissue and is found in foods including meats, poultry, 
fish, and some dairy products.
Acupuncture—Acupuncture involves the stimulation of specific points, (i.e., acupoints) 
by penetrating the skin with thin, solid, metallic needles.23, 24 A variation of acupuncture 
includes electroacupuncture, in which a small electric current is passed along acupuncture 
needles25 to provide a stronger stimulus than acupuncture alone, with distinct effects 
suggested by functional MRI 25, 26. Acupuncture has been practiced in Asia for thousands of 
years as a component of traditional medicine systems (e.g., traditional forms of Chinese, 
Japanese and Korean medicine) and is thought to stimulate the flow of a form of energy 
called qi (chee) throughout the body. 27 Traditional Chinese acupuncture, commonly used in 
North America, requires needle manipulation to produce a de qi sensation (a soreness, 
fullness, heaviness, or local area distension28, 29), along with a period of time of rest with the 
placed needles.30 This is posited to remove energetic blockages, thus reestablishing 
homeostasis. The mechanisms for acupuncture’s effects are not well understood but are 
thought to function in part through modulation of specific neuronal/cortical pathways.31 
Acupuncture practice typically requires formal education through schools, training 
programs, and certifications (see Table 2). Acupuncture is often used in the oncology setting 
for chemotherapy-induced nausea/vomiting (CINV), pain management, musculoskeletal 
complaints, hot flashes, fatigue, stress, anxiety and sleep disorders. The practice of 
acupuncture in North American is regulated by some U.S. states and Canadian provinces 
and territories (see Table 2)
Greenlee et al.
Page 5
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Acupressure—Acupressure draws on the same knowledge and philosophical system as 
acupuncture. A trained therapist, or the patient, uses his/her hands and fingers, or possibly a 
device to apply pressure to specific points on the body (acupoints), in contrast to metallic 
needles. Practices can range from stimulating a single point or a combination of points to 
achieve the intended outcome. In the oncology setting, acupressure is often used for CINV 
pain, stress management and fatigue.
Aloe Vera—Aloe vera gel is derived from the leaves of the perennial succulent plant, Aloe 
vera (Liliaceae). It is typically applied topically or ingested in the form of a clear thick gel.22 
Aloe vera gel is found in multiple skin products, such as lotions, creams, and sunblock. Aloe 
vera is used as a topical ointment to heal wounds, sunburn, insect bites, and skin conditions 
including psoriasis and frostbite.32 It oncology, it is typically used with the goal of healing 
surgical wounds or preventing or treating radiation induced dermatitis.
Ginger—Ginger (Zingiber officianale) comes from the rhizome or root of a tropical plant 
with green-purple flowers and an aromatic stem.22, 33 Ginger can be used as a food in 
cooking and for medicinal purposes. In Asian medicine, ginger is used to treat stomach 
aches, nausea, and diarrhea. For cancer patients, it has been studied for the treatment of 
chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting (CINV). Ginger is available in capsule form, 
fresh as a root, as a tea, as a candy, or in very diluted quantities in ginger ale. Ginger 
supplementation should not be used in perioperative settings or in patients with bleeding 
disorders due to potential risk for increased bleeding.32
Ginseng—Ginseng is derived from a plan root and has been used to treat certain medical 
problems.22 There are two common types of ginseng used, Asian ginseng (Panax ginseng) 
and American ginseng (Panax quinquefolius), while the herb called Siberian ginseng or 
eleuthero is not a true ginseng.32 Asian and American ginsengs are used to boost the 
immune system and promote well being and stamina. Ginseng comes in capsule form made 
of ground ginseng, extracts, and teas as well as creams and other products for topical use. 
Taken as an herbal supplement, ginseng is often used to treat cancer-related fatigue.32 Side 
effects of taking ginseng may include headaches, breast tenderness and menstrual 
irregularities, sleep problems, restlessness, rapid heart rate, low blood sugar, allergic 
reactions, and gastrointestinal problems.32
Glutamine—Glutamine is a non-essential amino acid used in the biosynthesis of proteins 
and is primarily synthesized in skeletal muscle.32 Most of the glutamine synthesized in the 
body is utilized by the intestinal tract. Glutamine has numerous biological functions 
including protein and lipid synthesis, regulation of acid-base balance in the kidney, and as an 
important mitochondrial cellular energy source. Normally the body can synthesize its own 
glutamine; however, during a critical illness such as cancer not enough glutamine is made, 
leading to problems such as fatigue and muscle wasting. Glutamine has been used as an oral 
supplement in cancer patients to reverse cachexia in patients with advanced cancer. It has 
also been used for CINV in cancer patients. Glutamine can be obtained from food or 
supplements, with important food sources being beef, pork, chicken, fish, eggs, milk, dairy 
products, wheat, cabbage, beets, beans, spinach, and parsley.32
Greenlee et al.
Page 6
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Guarana—Guarana is an herbal supplement from the guarana plant (Paullinia cupana) 
native to the Amazon basin.32 Guarana supplements contains various phytochemicals, 
including caffeine, theobromine, theophylline, tannins, saponins, catechins, epicatechins, 
proanthocyanidols and other compounds in minor concentrations. Guarana has been used as 
a stimulant since pre-Columbian times.32 In the oncology setting, guarana is often used to 
decrease fatigue.
Healing touch—Healing touch (also known as therapeutic touch) is based on the belief 
that vital energy flows through and around the human body and may be transferred or 
modified. A healing touch practitioner (often a nurse trained in the practice) passes his/her 
hands over, or gently touches, a patient’s body to balance or increase their energy. Healing 
touch is often used among cancer patients to improve quality of life, pain, fatigue and 
depression.
Hyaluronic acid cream—Hyaluronic acid cream is a topical cream containing hyaluronic 
acid that is used to heal wounds through repair-promoting, skin moisturizing, and potential 
radioprotective properties.22 When the cream is applied, the hyaluronic acid adheres to 
injured tissue, provides hydration to the skin, and protects against dehydration, chemical and 
mechanical irritation. Hyaluronic acid cream is often used by cancer patient to prevent and 
treat radiation induced dermatitis.
Hypnosis—Hypnosis is facilitated by a specially trained therapist or is practiced on one’s 
own (self-hypnosis). It is characterized by a trance-like state, which allows a patient to be 
more aware, focused and open to suggestion. A person in a hypnotic state can concentrate 
more clearly on specific feelings, thoughts, images, sensations, or behaviors without 
distraction.34 The hypnotic state is obtained by first relaxing the body, then shifting attention 
toward a narrow range of object or ideas given by the hypnotist or hypnotherapist. A person 
under hypnosis may feel more calm, relaxed, and open to suggestion. In cancer patients, 
hypnosis is often used to help relieve stress, anxiety, and pain.
Laser therapy—Low-level laser treatment (wave lengths 650–1000 nm) has been 
approved in some countries, including the United States, to treat lymphedema after breast 
cancer surgery and is administered by trained users. Low-level laser therapy is thought to 
stimulate macrophages and the immune system, and break down scar tissue, thus improving 
lymphatic flow.35
Manual lymphatic drainage and compression bandaging—Manual lymphatic 
drainage and compression bandaging are used singly and in combination for the treatment of 
lymphedema following breast cancer surgery.35 Manual lymph drainage is a specific type of 
therapeutic massage delivered by a health professional ideally certified in the technique. 
Manual lymph drainage can decrease lymphedema when administered early, before 
symptoms advance.35 Compression bandages or garments, including sleeves, stockings, 
bras, compression shorts, gloves, bandages, or neck compression wraps, are also used to 
treat lymphedema and can be worn during the day or night depending on the garment and 
individual.35
Greenlee et al.
Page 7
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Massage—There are many different forms of this form of physical therapy that involves a 
therapist stroking, kneading, applying friction, and stretching specific muscles and other 
connective tissues at an even tempo with varying levels of pressure.36 In cancer patients, the 
goal of massage is to promote relaxation, address muscle stiffness and pain, and to resolve 
musculoskeletal complaints. There are multiple forms of massage, including but not limited 
to, Swedish, shiatsu, and deep tissue massage. The National Cancer Institute urges massage 
therapists to take precautions with all cancer patients and avoid massaging specific 
vulnerable areas of the body including open wounds, bruises, skin breakdown, a blood clot 
in a vein, a tumor site, near a medical device (e.g., drain), or sensitive skin following 
radiation therapy.37, 38 In addition, certain patients with multiple bone metastases may be at 
risk for fracture during deep massage. The practice of massage therapy in North American is 
regulated by some U.S. states and Canadian provinces and territories (see Table 2).
Meditation—Meditation is a group of self-regulation practices that focus on training 
attention and awareness on bringing mental processes under greater voluntary control. 39 In 
cancer patients, these practices are intended to foster general mental well-being, calmness, 
clarity, and concentration. The ultimate goal of meditation varies depending on the type of 
practice, its history, and application. Most meditation practices have four elements in 
common: a quiet location with few distractions; a specific, comfortable posture achieved by 
sitting or lying down; a focus of attention; and an open attitude of letting thoughts come and 
go naturally without judgment.40 The focus of attention may be towards a specific target, 
such as on the breath, repeating a sound or mantra (known as concentration meditation), on 
all mental events that enter the field of awareness (called mindfulness meditation), or a 
combination of both. There has been a growing interest in cancer care on the practice of a 
secular form of mindfulness meditation called Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction 
(MBSR), based on the work of Jon Kabat-Zinn.41 MBSR is typically delivered in an 8-week 
structured group program consisting of a range of meditation practices including a sensate 
focus body scan, sitting meditation, walking meditation, loving-kindness practice and gentle 
Hatha yoga postures. All formal practices are designed to cultivate increasing levels of 
mindfulness in day-to-day life. Participants engage in home practice daily throughout the 
program, and each session involves teaching of relevant concepts, discussion of progress and 
barriers to practice, and introduction and practice of new meditation modalities. A number 
of recent papers and meta-analyses have reviewed the literature on the use of MBSR in the 
oncology setting, some specific to breast cancer.42–45
Mistletoe—The use of mistletoe in cancer care is based on the premise that injections of 
specially prepared extracts of the plant during chemotherapy and radiation therapy can 
create a host response that is immune stimulatory, preferentially cytotoxic to cancer cells and 
protective of host cells.46 Mistletoe is a parasitic plant from the Santalacea family that 
attaches to and penetrates the branches of a tree or shrub in order to absorb water and 
nutrients from the host plant. Use of mistletoe as a medicine extends back centuries, whereas 
modern use for cancer care was promoted in Europe and particularly in Germany in the early 
part of the 20th century.47 There are three main types of mistletoe: European Mistletoe 
(Viscum album), Korean Mistletoe (Viscum album var. coloratum) and American Mistletoe 
(Phoradendron leucarpum), but multiple methods of preparation and formulation exist. 
Greenlee et al.
Page 8
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Preparations from European Mistletoe are some of the most commonly prescribed 
substances internationally in out-patient clinics for cancer, where it is provided most often as 
a subcutaneous injection or occasionally intravenously by infusion.48 While this therapy is 
often used clinically for its antineoplastic potential, the clinical trial evidence on the use of 
mistletoe is based on trials where it is co-administered with conventional treatments to 
improve quality of life.48
Music therapy—Music therapy is the clinical use of music to accomplish individualized 
goals within a therapeutic relationship by a credentialed professional.49 In cancer care, 
music therapy is used to address a variety of physical, emotional, cognitive, and social 
needs. Qualified music therapists assess patient’s strengths and needs and provide indicated 
treatment such as creating, singing, moving to, and listening to music. Music therapy 
interventions can be described as either passive (e.g., listening to music prior to a medical 
intervention) or active (e.g., therapist instructing a patient to engage in the creation of live 
music) depending on the level of engagement required. Although the exact mechanisms by 
which music therapy works are not well understood, the most commonly accepted theories 
are through neurologic, psychological, behavioral and physiological pathways 50, 51 The 
practice of music therapy in North American is regulated by some U.S. states (see Table 2).
Reflexology—In reflexology, a trained practitioner applies pressure to the feet, hands, 
ears, and face with specific thumb, finger, and hand techniques with the goal of stimulating 
the reflex areas to promote physiological change in the body. The theory behind reflexology 
states that specific areas on the feet and hands correspond to specific glands, organs, and 
other parts of the body, which are stimulated in order to help numerous health problems.52 
Reflexology is used to cause relaxation and healing in those specific stimulated parts of the 
body. In oncology, reflexology is often used to promote relaxation and improve quality of 
life.
Relaxation techniques—A variety of techniques are employed to promote relaxation in 
cancer patients. The National Cancer Institute (NCI) defines relaxation techniques as 
including progressive muscle relaxation (PMR), guided imagery, autogenic training, 
biofeedback, self-hypnosis, and deep breathing exercises.53 PMR focuses on the tightening 
and relaxation of specific successive muscle groups and is usually combined with breathing 
and imagery exercises.54 Guided imagery can be self-directed or led by a practitioner or a 
recording and often involves focusing on pleasant imagery to replace negative or stressful 
feelings.54 Autogenic training involves concentrating on physical sensations of warmth, 
heaviness, and relaxation in different parts of the body.54 Biofeedback uses electronic 
devices to monitor and teach control of certain bodily functions, such as breathing or heart 
rate, in order to facilitate relaxation.54 Self-hypnosis refers to the training of patients to learn 
to induce a hypnotic state, a natural state of aroused, attentive focal concentration along with 
a relative suspension of peripheral awareness, on their own or when prompted by a phrase or 
a cue.54 Deep breathing exercises involve the use of slow, deep, and even breaths, sometimes 
called diaphragmatic or belly breathing.54
Greenlee et al.
Page 9
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Qigong—The word qigong consists of two Chinese words: ‘qi’ (chee) meaning life force or 
vital energy that flows through all things in the universe; and ‘gong’ (gung) meaning 
accomplishment or skill that is cultivated through steady practice.55 Qigong is a form of 
ancient and traditional Chinese medicine that integrates movement (physical postures), 
meditation (focused attention), and controlled breathing. Qigong aims to enhance vital 
energy or life force that balances a patient’s spiritual, emotional, mental and physical health. 
Qigong practices are used to increase the qi, circulate it, use it to cleanse and heal the body, 
store it, or emit qi to help heal others. Practices range in intensity from the gentle 
movements of Tai Chi to the more vigorous practice of Kung Fu.55 In cancer patients, 
qigong is often used to reduce anxiety, fatigue, and pain, support the immune system, and 
improve physical and emotional balance.
Stress management—Acute stress is a normal physical and emotional reaction that 
people experience as they encounter changes in life56, including following a cancer 
diagnosis, during cancer treatment, and during cancer survivorship. Long-term chronic stress 
may contribute to or worsen a range of health problems including digestive disorders, 
headaches, sleep disorders, depression, anxiety, and other mental health problems.56 To 
address stress and induce the relaxation response, stress management programs teach such 
techniques as progressive muscle relaxation (PMR), guided imagery, and breathing 
exercises. Stress management also typically incorporates elements of cognitive-behavioral 
therapy, such as understanding the effects of appraisal and perception on the experience of 
subjective stress.57, 58 Participants are taught coping skills and practice various techniques 
for cognitive re-appraisal. One common structured group stress reduction program studied in 
oncology is called Cognitive Behavioral Stress Management (CBSM).59, 60. There are 
overlaps in some techniques used in stress management, relaxation, and meditation 
therapies. For example, meditation, guided imagery, and yoga may be practiced as 
techniques in isolation or combined. In this review, we distinguish between stress 
management, relaxation, and meditation interventions. Stress management interventions 
include psychoeducation on stress and coping, and emphasize cognitive-behavioral therapy 
and coping skills training; relaxation interventions typically consist of PMR and guided 
imagery; and meditation interventions use some form of meditation practice as the focal 
point of the training.
Soy—Soy is a plant in the pea family that has been common in Asian diets for thousands of 
year and more recently in the American diet.32 Soybeans are the seeds of the soy plant and 
contain isoflavones and soy protein. Soy is available in dietary supplements in tablet or 
capsule form, and contains isoflavones and/or soy protein. Soybeans can be cooked or eaten 
or used to make tofu, soy milk, and other food products. Soy is also used as an additive to 
other processed foods such as baked goods. Soy is used to treat menopausal symptoms, 
osteoporosis, memory problems, high blood pressure, and high cholesterol levels.32 In 
cancer patients, soy is often used to treat hot flashes.
Yoga—Yoga is a mind-body practice with origins in ancient South Asian philosophy and 
practice.61 The term “yoga” is derived from the Sanskrit word yug, meaning “yoke” or 
“union”.62 This, according to traditional yoga philosophy, is the ultimate intent of a yoga 
Greenlee et al.
Page 10
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 practice—to unite the individual with the totality of the universe. The techniques of yoga 
include ethical daily living (yamas and niyamas), physical postures (asanas), breathing 
techniques (pranayama), and meditation training (dhyana). There are a wide range of yoga 
forms and styles. The most commonly practiced form of yoga in the U.S. and Canada is 
Hatha yoga, which emphasizes postures (asanas) and often breathing exercises (pranayama). 
In cancer patients, yoga is used for a variety of conditions, including stress, anxiety, 
depression, and fatigue, as well as a method to increase physical activity.
LITERATURE REVIEW ON USE OF COMPLEMENTARY AND INTEGRATIVE 
THERAPIES FOR CLINICAL OUTCOMES IN BREAST CANCER PATIENTS
The clinical outcomes addressed here are common symptoms and side effects that breast 
cancer patients experience during treatment or as sequelae of treatment. The outcomes of 
interest include: anxiety/stress, pain, depression/mood, fatigue, sleep disturbances, quality of 
life and physical functioning, CINV, radiation dermatitis, vasomotor outcomes, 
lymphedema, chemotherapy-induced peripheral neuropathy (CIPN), pain and sleep 
disturbance. Guidelines outlining conventional approaches to managing these symptoms and 
outcomes have been issued by national organizations such as NCCN and the American 
Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO), but many of the prior guidelines and reviews have 
not included thorough reviews of complementary and integrative medicine approaches.63–67 
This review fills that gap for breast cancer patients.
Below, for each therapy and clinical outcome of interest that received an A or B grade, we 
summarize the trials that contributed to the graded recommendation in order for the reader to 
have an understanding of the specific interventions that were tested. To provide additional 
context we provide a brief review of the literature on the use of the integrative therapy for 
conditions other than breast cancer. We also provide a risk/benefit assessment of each 
therapy as well as suggestions for future research. For therapies and clinical outcomes of 
interest that received C, D or H grades, we provide a brief overview of the rationale for the 
graded recommendation. Supplemental tables provide detailed information on each trial that 
informed an A or B graded recommendations (Supplemental Tables 2–5). Table 3 lists the 
clinical outcome and integrative therapy combinations that had insufficient evidence to make 
an A, B, C, D or H graded recommendation.
Updated Recommendations
While the majority of graded recommendations remained the same from the previously 
published guidelines,9 there are five noteworthy changes. For the outcome of anxiety and 
stress reduction, the use of meditation moved from grade B to grade A due to results of a 
fifth trial68, in addition to the previously published four trials.69–72, showing beneficial 
effects. The use of yoga for depression and mood disturbance was downgraded from grade A 
to grade B due to four new published studies demonstrating conflicting results.73–76 The use 
of yoga for improving quality of life changed from grade C to grade B due to two added 
trials showing beneficial effects.77, 78 Finally, new trials on the use of yoga73–75, 78 and 
hypnosis79, 80 for fatigue upgraded previous recommendations from grade I to grade C.
Greenlee et al.
Page 11
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Use of Integrative Therapies for Anxiety/Stress Reduction
Description of anxiety/stress—Cancer patients may experience stress related to the life 
changes associated with a cancer diagnosis, both during and after treatment. Anxiety is 
categorized under CTCAE psychiatric disorders from grade 1 (mild symptoms and no 
intervention required) to grade 4 (life-threatening). Stress is often the result of life 
challenges that exceed the individual’s perceived ability to cope, and is a common and 
normal reaction during cancer diagnosis and treatment. This stress is associated with 
symptoms of anxiety and somatic complaints that can significantly diminish quality of life.81 
Patients with anxiety may worry more frequently, have difficulty relaxing, or feel tense. 
Patients with cancer-related anxiety also may have elevated heart rate, myalgias, headaches, 
sleep disturbances, changes in appetite, nausea, diarrhea, and difficulty concentrating. The 
percentage of breast cancer patients reporting anxiety ranges from 12% to 47%, with 
approximately 11–16% of patients experiencing combined symptoms of anxiety and 
depression.82–85 Evidence suggests that effective anxiety management is associated with 
improvements in quality of life, psychological adjustment, understanding of the disease, 
decision making, and adherence to treatment.86–88
Meditation (A grade)
Overview of meditation interventions for anxiety/stress reduction: Meditation is 
recommended for reducing anxiety in breast cancer patients including during radiation 
therapy (Grade A). Many uncontrolled trials have been published, but this recommendation 
is based on five RCTs completed between 2009 and 2013 that used meditation to reduce 
anxiety symptoms (Supplemental Table 2).69–72, 89 Anxiety was the primary outcome for 
four of the trials. In all five studies, a meditation intervention was compared with a usual-
care control condition. Study participants included women undergoing radiation or 
chemotherapy, breast cancer survivors who had completed treatment, and older adult breast 
cancer survivors ages 50 years and older. The study sample sizes ranged from 49 to 336 
participants. Among these trials, three types of meditation interventions were tested. Three 
trials implemented an intensive, integrated MBSR program, customized for breast cancer 
patients, in which participants were trained in mindfulness meditation and gentle yoga for 
body awareness.68, 71, 72 A fourth intervention was called the Mindful Movement Program 
and was also an intensive, integrated program, customized for breast cancer patients, that 
included mindful walking/moving, group discussion, exploration of body parts, specific and 
deliberate movements, moving with intentional effort, active energetic movement, and 
partner work.69 The fifth trial assessed a Brain Wave Vibration meditation70, or a mind/body 
training technique that combines simple, rhythmic movements with music, action, and 
positive messages.89
A systematic review and meta-analysis examined meditation in terms of its ability to reduce 
general psychological distress and stress-related health problems in adult clinical 
populations with a variety of health conditions; this analysis included 47 trials with 3,515 
participants.90 Overall, mindfulness meditation programs showed moderate evidence of 
improved anxiety at 8 weeks and at 3–6 months and showed low evidence of improved 
stress/distress and mental health-related quality of life. The findings of these reviews across 
other patient populations and disease types support our recommendations.
Greenlee et al.
Page 12
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The earliest work in MBSR interventions specifically showed sustained benefits for 
individuals with anxiety disorders, and more recent research has continued to show a benefit 
for generalized anxiety.91–93 The first study conducted with cancer patients, a RCT of 89 
patients with a variety of cancer types, found substantial decreases in anxiety for the group 
receiving MBSR compared with results for a usual-care control group; results for the MBSR 
interventions were maintained at 6-month follow-up.94, 95 The reduction in anxiety observed 
in the above trials, specifically those that used more traditional forms of MBSR, provide 
support for the recommendation that meditation can be beneficial for the management of 
anxiety in women with breast cancer.
A recent systematic review and meta-analysis of 22 studies examined the effect of 
mindfulness-based therapy specifically on symptoms of anxiety and depression in adult 
cancer patients and survivors where 21 studies included a substantial percentage or all breast 
cancer patients.96 Overall, this review included 12 nonrandomized studies and RCTs. In the 
nonrandomized studies, mindfulness-based therapy was associated with significantly 
reduced symptoms of anxiety post-intervention with a moderate effect size, while the pooled 
effects sizes of RCTs, including the one listed above,71 resulted in a larger effect size (P < 
0.001). Although the review reported that overall study quality varied among studies 
included, there appears to be sound evidence from carefully conducted RCTs (n=9) 
supporting the use of mindfulness-based therapies for the management of anxiety in breast 
cancer patients and survivors. Another review of nine studies (including two RCTs, one 
quasi-experimental case-control study, and six single-group pre-post intervention studies) 
investigated the efficacy of MBSR on mental health specifically in breast cancer patients and 
found an overall decrease in anxiety scores following MBSR (P < 0.01).97 This review 
provides further support for the use of MBSR to manage anxiety, specifically in women with 
breast cancer. Many other reviews reached similar conclusions, reporting positive moderate 
effect sizes of mind-body interventions on anxiety and distress in cancer.45, 98
Risk/Benefit assessment of meditation interventions: Meditation therapies pose very little 
risk to participants in this type of intervention. Few adverse events have been reported in any 
trials, but there has been recent interest within the meditation research community in 
exploring adverse reactions to intensive meditation practice, particularly in vulnerable 
individuals.99, 100 Typically, potential participants are screened through individual 
orientation interviews prior to joining meditation group programs, and participants who have 
serious mental health issues are often re-directed to individual counseling or psychiatric 
intervention prior to or concomitant with mind-body intervention participation. Group 
facilitators are typically mental health care professionals trained to identify and manage 
psychological symptoms and reactions that may occur during the training.
Typically, participants in these meditation therapy groups report that the sessions are 
enjoyable, and dropout rates are often low and comparable to other psychosocial group 
programs. Because they are offered in group settings, meditation interventions are more 
cost-effective than traditional individual counseling or psychotherapy are and can often 
achieve similar results. However, the literature on meditation therapy is lacking in head-to-
head comparisons with other forms of therapy, including individual counseling, cognitive-
behavioral therapy, or other mind-body interventions. Hence, the specificity of meditation 
Greenlee et al.
Page 13
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 therapy is not yet known. With the exception of Carlson et al.,68 studies have not compared 
mindfulness-based interventions with other effective interventions. Other research suggests 
that the benefit is related to the degree of the participant’s engagement in and commitment 
to the practice,94, 101 in that participants who practice more at home often benefit more, but 
this area is still being investigated.102 Drawbacks of these types of group interventions are 
the requirement for highly trained facilitators and the need for and ability of participants to 
attend in person, usually in large cities with tertiary cancer centers. In response to these 
issues, online and home-based adaptations of MBIs are being developed. For example, 
Zernicke et al.103 demonstrated that an online live MBI group in which rural and remotely 
located cancer patients participated weekly over eight weeks had similar benefit to the on-
site, in-person version, and patients were highly satisfied with the remote MBI adaptations.
Future research in meditation interventions for anxiety reduction: Future research on 
the use of meditation interventions for anxiety can similarly test novel interventions in 
populations who may not have ready access to in-person meditation programs.
Music therapy (B grade)
Overview of music therapy interventions for anxiety/stress reduction: Passive music 
therapy is recommended to reduce anxiety during radiation therapy, chemotherapy sessions, 
and post-surgery (Grade B), based upon results from five randomized clinical trials (RCTs) 
comparing music therapy interventions to standard care (Supplemental Table 2).104–108 
Study participants included breast cancer patients undergoing mastectomy, chemotherapy, 
and/or radiation therapy. The sample sizes of these studies ranged from 30 to 170 
participants. The music therapy interventions were described as either passive or active 
music therapy, depending on the level of engagement required by the individual. Four trials 
examined the effect of passive music therapy, which was found to decrease anxiety scores in 
the intervention group104, 105, 107, 108, including reducing sedation requirements during 
radiation therapy (measured as a secondary outcome).104, 105, 107 The fifth trial, conducted 
by Hanser et al.,106 examined active music therapy (which required active engagement of the 
participant) and yielded substantially different results from the four trials of passive music 
therapy. In this study, active music therapy did not result in decreases in anxiety. The 
discrepancy in trial results between passive and active music therapy might have occurred 
because the participant engagement required for active therapy does not include the potential 
relaxing components of passive music therapy (e.g., listening to music).
A recent systematic review and meta-analysis by Boehm et al.109 assessed the effect of 
different expressive therapies, including passive and active music therapy, on improving 
anxiety, depression, and quality of life in breast cancer patients. The review included three of 
the RCTs that formed the basis for our recommendation of passive music therapy for 
anxiety/stress reduction, of which two trials tested passive music therapy104, 107 and one trial 
tested active music therapy.106 Another recent meta-analysis included one additional RCT 
evaluating art therapy.110 Boehm et al. found a clinically and statistically significant mean 
difference (P < 0.01) in the anxiety scores of patients receiving music therapy compared to 
the control group,109 thus further supporting our recommendation of passive music therapy 
for reducing anxiety. Passive music therapy has also been shown to reduce anxiety among 
Greenlee et al.
Page 14
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 patients undergoing mammographic screening indicating that the recommendation may 
apply broadly to an adult women in a clinical cancer setting.111
Risk/benefit assessment of music therapy: Passive music therapy is noninvasive, does not 
interfere with a patient’s privacy, and has no reported deleterious effects. Furthermore, it 
does not require costly, technologically advanced equipment and can be implemented in a 
variety of locations. As such, passive music therapy can be safely and effectively 
implemented in clinical settings with breast cancer patients to help reduce short-term anxiety 
associated with receiving medical care for their cancer.
Future research in music therapy for anxiety reduction: Future research should assess 
long-term effects of passive music therapy on anxiety, as the trials reviewed here only 
assessed short-term reductions in anxiety. Although active music therapy may also have 
benefit, more than one existing trial will be needed for a comprehensive risk/benefit 
assessment. Trials that directly compare the effect of passive music therapy and active music 
therapy on anxiety are needed to clarify whether benefit is due to listening to music in a 
relaxed state or participating in the creation of music.
Stress Management (B grade)
Overview of stress management interventions for anxiety/stress reduction: Stress 
management is recommended to reduce anxiety in patients during breast cancer treatment, 
(Grade B) but long-term stress management group programs appear to be better than self-
administered home programs. This recommendation is based on four RCTs completed in 
2008–2013 with breast cancer patients that tested a stress management intervention 
compared with usual care in improving anxiety as the primary outcome.112–115 Study 
participants included only breast cancer patients in two112, 115 of the four trials and mixed 
cancer patients with a significant proportion of breast cancer patients in the other two.113, 114 
For all four trials, breast cancer patients were included from defined periods along the 
continuum of care, including pre-surgery, during chemotherapy, and after cancer treatment. 
Patients were thus either undergoing or had undergone surgery, chemotherapy, or radiation 
therapy, either alone or in combination. The study sample sizes for these trials ranged from 
85 to 286 participants. Of the four trials, two studies found that the improvement was 
statistically significantly different compared to the control group.113, 115 One trial found 
similar improvement in both the intervention and control group with no statistically 
significant differences across groups, 112 while the fourth trial found no improvement. 114 
(see Supplemental Table 2, Stress Management).
Stress management interventions varied among the studies (Supplemental Table 2).112–115 
One trial112 implemented a self-administered stress management intervention before 
receiving chemotherapy. The intervention included video and booklet information specific to 
stress management and exercise and was delivered by a doctoral level psychologist.112 A 
second trial112 offered stress management modalities that included guided imagery 
techniques, relaxation, meditative exercises, and counseling that aimed to promote active 
coping, alert relaxation, and a positive attitude toward change. Instruction was given in 
person and was complemented by audio CDs for use at home. Face-to-face sessions lasted 
Greenlee et al.
Page 15
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 45–60 minutes each and took place in the hospital.112 The stress management portion 
included information, demonstrations and instructions for paced breathing, progressive 
muscle relaxation with guided imagery, and use of coping strategies to manage stress. A 
third trial113, a multi-center community clinical oncology program involving 20 clinical 
sites, was designed to determine whether a self-administered stress management 
intervention, previously found to be beneficial to cancer patients, would improve quality of 
life and decrease psychological distress (including anxiety and depression) in patients 
receiving chemotherapy at community clinical centers. The study used a factorial design to 
test stress management training, exercise training, the combination of stress management 
and exercise training, and usual care. Patients assigned to stress management training were 
provided written materials and videos on three techniques, including progressive muscle 
relaxation and guided imagery, abdominal breathing, and coping skills training. 113 A fourth 
trial115 examined the effects of a cognitive behavioral stress management intervention 
(comprised of relaxation training including meditation, guided imagery, PMR, and breathing 
techniques, cognitive restructuring, and coping skills training) on late-afternoon serum 
cortisol and relaxation indicators in women undergoing treatment for non-metastatic breast 
cancer.
A systematic review by Trijsburg et al. evaluated the effects of stress management 
techniques on mental health outcomes, including anxiety, across 22 studies using samples of 
heterogeneous cancer populations that included six studies of breast cancer-only samples.116 
The interventions assessed were all structured and included counseling and coping 
components in addition to some interventions including progressive muscle relaxation, 
guided imagery, self-hypnosis, and deep breathing. Overall, the review found positive effects 
for mental health outcomes, including anxiety scores.
Risk/benefit assessment of stress management interventions: Stress management therapy 
is noninvasive, nontoxic, and has no appreciable risk to patients. Stress management does 
not require specialized equipment and can be implemented in a variety of locations. 
Resources for providing instruction on self-management practices are broadly available. As 
the majority of the trials discussed above tested long-term interventions, the guideline 
recommendation is specific to long-term stress management programs. This may, however, 
be complicated by other factors, including the potential increase to the cost of delivery for 
providers/facilitators as a result of the implementation of longer term programs and could 
also present a barrier to patients with access-to-care and other health care disparity issues. 
Overall, it is recommended that stress management therapy can be safely and effectively 
implemented in clinical settings for breast cancer patients.
Future research in stress management interventions for anxiety reduction: Future 
research in this area should compare in-person, professionally led stress management group 
programs to home-based self-study and internet-based stress management intervention 
options that are less costly and more broadly accessible. Research should also examine long-
term outcomes of each type of delivery modality.
Greenlee et al.
Page 16
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Yoga (B grade)
Overview of yoga interventions for anxiety/stress reduction: Yoga is recommended for 
reducing anxiety in breast cancer patients (Grade B). This recommendation is based on nine 
RCTs, completed between 2007 and 2014, in which a yoga intervention was implemented to 
reduce physical symptoms and psychological distress, including anxiety, which assessed as 
the primary outcome in four of the studies (Supplemental Table 2).75, 117–124 These nine 
trials tested five different yoga interventions. The first intervention was an intensive, 
integrated yoga program, customized for breast cancer patients, in which participants were 
led through slow stretching and loosening exercises, various postures (asanas), guided 
imagery specific to cancer, positive thought provocation, chanting exercises, various 
breathing exercises (pranayama), and soothing sound vibrations and guided imagery (yoga 
nidra).117–120 A second intervention implemented Iyengar yoga, a traditional form of Hatha 
yoga that emphasizes postures and breathing techniques that target symptom-specific 
concerns using passive inversions (upside-down postures with the head lower than the heart) 
and passive backbends (supported spinal extensions).121 A third intervention used Patanjali’s 
Yoga Sutras that included warm-up movements synchronized with breathing, selected 
postures, deep relaxation techniques, alternate-nostril breathing (pranayama), and 
meditation.124 The fourth intervention implemented meditation and breathing exercises that 
focused attention on internal body sensations, as well as yoga exercises (modified asanas) 
composed of gentle stretching and strengthening exercises.75 Pranayama or yoga breathing 
practices was tested in the remaining trials. 122, 123 Study participants included women who 
had been recently diagnosed with breast cancer, those who were currently undergoing 
radiation or chemotherapy or a combination of both, and those who were experiencing 
significant fatigue post treatment. The study sample sizes ranged from 23 to 98 participants.
Several recent reviews of yoga interventions for individuals with cancer have been 
published.125–128 The first meta-analysis investigating the impact of yoga interventions on 
psychological health outcomes129 identified 10 articles that examined outcomes in breast 
cancer patients (n=7 articles), lymphoma patients (n=1), and mixed cancer populations 
(n=2). Analyses involving eight trials that assessed anxiety found lower anxiety associated 
with the yoga groups relative to controls (P = 0.009); similar results with yoga interventions 
were observed for distress (P = 0.003) and stress (P = 0.006). However, since this was a 
heterogeneous sample of patients, it was unclear whether the results could be generalized 
specifically to breast cancer patients. More recently, a systematic review and meta-analysis 
assessing the impact of yoga interventions on quality of life and psychological health 
specifically in breast cancer patients and survivors was conducted.130 Overall, 12 
randomized clinical trials were included in the analysis with a total of 742 participants. 
Analyses revealed short-term positive effects of yoga interventions on improved 
psychological health, including anxiety (P < 0.01), perceived stress (P = 0.03), and 
psychological distress (P < 0.01). It is, however, notable that these effects were applicable 
only to those who engaged in yoga during active cancer treatment and not in the post-
treatment period. The authors state that based on these positive preliminary results, a wide 
variety of yoga practices could be recommended for this population.130 Finally, although the 
methodological quality across the trials is variable, yoga has been shown to be beneficial for 
Greenlee et al.
Page 17
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 reducing psychological distress in a wide variety of non-cancer clinical populations, 
including adult patients with anxiety and depression.131, 132
Risk/Benefit assessment of yoga interventions: Yoga interventions are noninvasive and 
with proper instruction can be adapted to people with functional and other impairments 
without harm. Yoga interventions are low cost and can be practiced at home with 
instructional videos but in the context of breast cancer are best undertaken under the 
guidance of certified yoga instructors with specific training in teaching cancer patients and 
survivors. Such programs also have the ability to be adapted and modified for people with 
medical conditions or limited mobility.133 Older adults, individuals with limited mobility, 
and those with chronic medical conditions should proceed with yoga therapy only under the 
guidance of a certified instructor to minimize potential risk of harms such as strained 
muscles and dizziness if yoga postures are attempted incorrectly or prematurely.
Future research in yoga interventions for anxiety reduction: Many of the studies 
investigating the impact of yoga on psychological outcomes in individuals with cancer 
should be interpreted with caution given that many of these studies are small and 
preliminary. Furthermore, the studies summarized above have some inconsistency of results; 
the trials from India117–120 reported consistently positive results while the trials from North 
America75, 121–124 reported less consistent positive results. Nevertheless, many of the studies 
and reviews that examined yoga interventions reported overall positive outcomes in several 
physical, psychological, and quality of life measures. Future trials of yoga interventions for 
anxiety/stress reduction should focus on testing forms of yoga that can be more easily 
applied, and in order to improve the generalizability of the results, test the interventions in 
larger sample size and in minority and underserved populations who may not have easy 
access to yoga programs.
C graded therapies for anxiety and stress reduction—Acupuncture134–136, 
massage137–140 and relaxation141–145 can be considered for use for anxiety and stress 
reduction (Grades C). Three high-quality trials assessed acupuncture for anxiety and stress 
reduction, which were secondary outcomes. Two of the three positive trials were 
small134, 135 and one trial showed no effect134. Four studies examined massage for anxiety, 
however, three studies with positive findings included fewer than 40 participants137–139 and 
one study found no effect137. Results were inconclusive regarding relaxation for anxiety and 
stress reduction due to inconsistent results and small sample sizes. Future directions in 
research can focus on assessing these modalities in a large high-quality trial assessing 
anxiety as the primary outcome.
Use of Integrative Therapies for Depression/Mood Disturbances
Description of depression/mood disturbances—Both during and after cancer 
therapy, patients may experience symptoms of depression, as they often feel a sense of loss 
of health and the life they had before their cancer diagnosis.81 The CTCAE categorizes 
depression as a psychiatric disorder on a scale of 1 (mild) to 5 (death). Symptoms of 
depression in cancer patients may include persistent feelings of sadness, numbness, 
nervousness, guilt, worthlessness, helplessness or hopelessness, difficulty concentrating or 
Greenlee et al.
Page 18
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 behavior that includes being short-tempered or moody, crying for long periods of time or 
many times each day, lacking interest or pleasure in performing activities, and having 
suicidal thoughts. Other symptoms may include weight change, sleep disturbances, 
tachycardia, dry mouth, increased perspiration, gastrointestinal symptoms, diarrhea, changes 
in energy level, persistent fatigue, headaches, or myalgias. The percentage of breast cancer 
patients reporting depression ranges from 3% to 34% and 11–16% of patients experienced 
combined depression and anxiety symptoms, depending on the population studied.82–85 
Effectively managing depression may improve quality of life, psychological adjustment, 
understanding of the disease, decision making, adherence with cancer treatment, and 
response to cancer treatment.86–88
Music therapy (B grade)
Overview of music therapy interventions: Passive music therapy is recommended to 
improve depression/mood disturbances in newly diagnosed breast cancer patients (Grade B). 
This recommendation is based on four RCTs completed between 200 and 2011 that tested a 
music therapy intervention to improve mood/depression (Supplemental Table 3).
106, 108, 146, 147 Depression/mood disturbances was assessed as either the primary outcome 
or secondary outcome to anxiety. In all four trials, a music therapy intervention group was 
compared with either a waitlist or a standard care control group. Study participants included 
women with a breast cancer diagnosis who had completed mastectomy, chemotherapy, or 
radiation therapy or who had metastatic disease. The study sample sizes ranged from 8 to 
170 participants. Three trials examined the effect of passive music therapy, which was found 
to decrease depression scores compared to control 108, 146, 148, while the fourth trial 
examining active music therapy 106 yielded no clinically meaningful long-term effects 
between groups or over time. Active music therapy resulted in immediate effects on 
happiness within the intervention group, which was not sustained over time. Therefore, the 
guideline recommendation is specific to passive music therapy.
Out of five studies combined in the meta-analysis described above that assessed multiple 
types of art therapies for improving anxiety, depression, and quality of life among breast 
cancer patients109 (four music therapy interventions including two trials identified in our 
review106, 110, and one art therapy trial), a clinically and statistically significant mean 
difference (P = 0.05) was found across all depression scores in the music therapy 
intervention groups compared with control groups. Further, a systematic review of music 
therapy specifically for depression in the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews found 
that although only five RCTs have tested music therapy interventions for depression and met 
the review study inclusion criteria, this therapy is widely accepted and beneficial to a broad 
range of individuals with depression and is associated with improvements in mood 
disturbances.149 Taken together, this literature supports our recommendation of passive 
music therapy for reducing depression and improving mood.
Risk/benefit assessment of music therapy interventions: The risk/benefit assessment of 
passive and active music therapy interventions for depression/mood among breast cancer 
patients is the same as for anxiety depression (see above).
Greenlee et al.
Page 19
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Future research in music therapy interventions for depression/mood: Future research in 
this area should assess long-term effects of passive music therapy on mood disturbances/
depression because the reviewed trials are limited to assessing short-term improvement of 
mood/depression following breast cancer treatments or during metastatic cancer diagnosis. 
In addition, studies should attempt to replicate the null findings of active music therapy 
interventions in order to formulate a comprehensive risk/assessment regarding active music 
therapy. Suggestions for future research in music therapy for improving depression/mood are 
similar to those for anxiety, as stated in the anxiety section above.
Yoga (B grade)
Overview of yoga interventions for depression/mood disturbances: Yoga is 
recommended for improving mood disturbances and depressive symptoms in women with 
breast cancer (Grade B). This recommendation is based on the results of 15 RCTs completed 
between 2006 and 2015 that employed a yoga intervention to reduce physical symptoms and 
psychological distress, including depression (Supplemental Table 3).
73–76, 117–119, 121–124, 150–153 Depression or depressive symptoms were the primary or 
secondary outcome for all studies included in this review. Study participants included 
women recently diagnosed with or having a recurrence of breast cancer; women who were 
undergoing radiation therapy, chemotherapy, or a combination of both; an ethnically diverse 
and underserved sample of female patients, and women who had completed breast cancer 
treatment. Five different yoga interventions were tested in study samples ranging from 23 to 
200 participants. Five trials assessed an intensive, integrated yoga program, customized for 
breast cancer patients, including asanas, pranayama, and yoga nidra.76, 117, 118, 153, 154 Five 
trials implemented Iyengar yoga, a traditional form of Hatha yoga, and passive backbends.
74, 121, 150–152 Two trials assessed Patanjali’s Yoga Sutras that included warm-up movements 
synchronized with breathing, selected postures, deep relaxation techniques, meditation, and 
alternate-nostril breathing (Pranayama),73, 124 while two trials evaluated only the Pranayama 
practices.122, 123 Finally, a yoga exercise intervention implemented meditation and breathing 
exercises that focused attention on internal body sensations, as well as yoga exercises 
(modified asanas) composed of gentle stretching and strengthening exercises.75
Yoga has been shown to be beneficial for reducing depression in a wide variety of clinical 
populations.132, 155–157 and specifically for individuals with cancer.125–128 One meta-
analysis investigating the impact of yoga interventions on psychological health outcomes129 
analyzed eight trials of yoga interventions for depression and showed improvement in 
depressive symptoms in the yoga groups when compared with patients in the control groups 
(P = 0.002) among a heterogeneous sample of patients. Specifically in breast patients and 
survivors, a meta-analysis130 of 12 RCTs, representing a total of 742 participants, revealed 
short-term effects of yoga interventions on improved psychological health, including 
depression (P < 0.01). A caveat was that the observed efficacy was only applicable for yoga 
practiced during active cancer treatment and not necessarily in the post-treatment period. 
Overall, the authors state that based on these positive preliminary results, yoga therapy 
should be used in this population.
Greenlee et al.
Page 20
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Risk/benefit assessment of yoga interventions: The risk/benefit assessment of the effects 
of yoga on depression and mood disturbance outcomes is similar to the assessment for 
anxiety outcomes. Studies assessing yoga for psychological outcomes in individuals with 
cancer are typically small, not well controlled, and preliminary in nature. Furthermore, 
comparability across studies is difficult as findings differ between populations from 
India117–119, 153 and North America.121, 122, 150–152, 158 Despite these limitations, the 
evidence suggests that yoga interventions could be added to treatment plans or added in the 
post-treatment period, provided these interventions are facilitated by appropriately trained 
yoga instructors and can be adapted and modified for people with medical conditions or 
limited mobility.133
Future research in yoga interventions for depression/mood: Future trials of yoga 
interventions to improve mood disturbances/depression should test the effects of different 
types, doses and durations of yoga on patient populations with varying degrees and types of 
mood disturbances and depression in addition to including larger sample sizes and testing 
across active controls.
Meditation (A grade)
Overview of meditation interventions for depression/mood disturbances: Meditation, 
particularly MBSR, is recommended for treating mood disturbance and depressive 
symptoms in breast cancer patients (Grade A). This recommendation is based on 10 RCTs, 
completed between 2009 and 2015 that used meditation to help reduce depressive symptoms 
(Supplemental Table 3).68–72, 159–162 Depression was the primary or secondary outcome for 
all of the trials. In eight69–72, 159–161 of the 10 trials, a meditation intervention was compared 
with a usual care group, a waitlist control, or another active intervention; two other trials 
used a three-arm trial design.68, 162 Study participants included women undergoing current 
radiation therapy or chemotherapy for breast cancer, breast cancer survivors who had 
completed treatment, and adult breast cancer survivors 55 years and older. The study sample 
sizes ranged from 33 to 336 participants and tested six different types of meditation 
interventions, including an intensive, integrated MBSR program customized for breast 
cancer patients68, 71, 72, 160, 162, the Mindful Movement Program69, Brain Wave Vibration 
meditation70, Tibetan sound meditation159, Cognitively-Based Compassion Training163, and 
Transcendental Meditation161.
In the meta-analysis examining the effect of mindfulness-based therapy on psychological 
outcomes in adult cancer populations,96 compared with results in controls, mindfulness-
based therapy was associated with significantly reduced depression post-intervention, with a 
moderate effect size in the nonrandomized studies and the RCTs, including one trial listed 
above71 (P < 0.001). Using evidence from nine well-conducted studies, the review and meta-
analysis by Zainal et al. confirms the use of mindfulness-based therapies for the 
management of depression in breast cancer patients and survivors despite the heterogeneity 
in the reviewed studies. The results of the meta-analysis found a significant pooled effect 
size for MBSR on depression scores (effect size = 0.575; 95% CI = 0.429, 0.722; P < 0.01).
97 In their study, Teasdale et al.164 modified traditional MBSR by combining it with 
principles of cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) to create mindfulness-based cognitive 
Greenlee et al.
Page 21
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 therapy (MBCT), which was designed specifically to prevent recurrence of depressive 
symptoms in individuals with relapsed major depression.165 The intervention proved 
effective for preventing depression relapse164 in a sample of >75% women with cancer 
(though type of cancer is not specified), and has since been widely applied and adapted to 
treat depression symptoms in a range of clinical samples.166 In cancer patients, other RCTs 
of meditative interventions showed decreasing depressive symptoms,94 with results 
maintained after 6-months’ follow-up.95 The reduction in depressive symptoms observed in 
the above trials comprising these reviews and meta-analyses provide further support for the 
recommendation that meditation can be beneficial for the management of depressive 
symptoms in women with breast cancer.
Risk/benefit assessment of meditation interventions: The risk/benefit assessment of the 
effects of meditation intervention on depression and mood disturbance outcomes is similar 
to the assessment of anxiety outcome. Despite these limitations, the evidence suggests that 
meditation and MBSR could be added to treatment plans or added in the post-treatment 
period, provided that these interventions are facilitated by appropriately trained instructors 
and can be adapted and modified if needed for individuals with cancer.
Future research in meditation interventions for depression/mood: Future research on 
meditation interventions to improve mood disturbances/depression should focus on 
understanding the type, duration and lasting effect of specific meditation techniques on 
specific mental health outcomes.
Massage (B Grade)
Overview of massage therapy interventions for depression/mood disturbances: Massage 
therapy is recommended to improve mood disturbance in breast cancer survivors following 
active treatment (i.e., surgery, chemotherapy, radiation) (Grade B). This recommendation is 
based on results from six trials completed between 2004 and 2012. 138–140, 167–169 In the 
trial reported by Listing et al.,168 the primary outcomes focused on physical discomfort and 
fatigue, with mood disturbance being a secondary outcome. The other five trials assessed 
depression as the primary outcome and had other secondary outcomes, including perceived 
stress, quality of life, pain, heart rate variability, and emesis. In the five trials, the effect of 
massage therapy was compared with the effect of standard care. The studies, which took 
place in the United States,138 Germany139, 167, 168, England140, and Spain,169 all included 
breast cancer survivors who had completed active cancer treatment at least three months 
prior to study enrollment. The study sample sizes ranged from 20 to 288 participants. In 
three of the six trials, the massage therapy intervention was a variation of classic massage 
involving rhythmic stroking, kneading, and acupressure at select areas on the body.
139, 167, 168 The study of Fernandez-Lao used an experienced and trained physical therapist 
to administer manual massage therapy.169 Wilkinson et al.140 included aromatherapy as part 
of the massage therapy, which was individualized across study participants. Hernandez-Reif 
et al.138 combined massage with acupressure and Trager®, which uses hundreds of small, 
rocking and elongating movements that release muscle tension. The number and frequency 
of massage therapy sessions varied across the studies.
Greenlee et al.
Page 22
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 All of the trials assessing classic massage therapy used the same protocol of bi-weekly, 30-
minute massages for five weeks139, 167, 168 with the exception of the Fernandez-Lao et al. 
trial, which assessed a one-time 40-minute massage session.169 Across these studies, 
compared with control groups, women in the intervention group reported significant 
improvement in mental health outcomes, including reduced depression and mood 
disturbance scores particularly in relation to anxious depression, anger, and tiredness. These 
differences between groups, however, were not consistently sustained across all studies. For 
example, in the study of Fernandez-Lao et al., the improvements in depression outcomes 
with one-session massage intervention depended on the participant’s individual level of 
enthusiasm for that intervention. The classic massage studies139, 167, 168 and one trial with 
massage combined with aromatherapy140 found that the massage interventions significantly 
decreases depression only immediately following the intervention but not long term. The 
remaining study that combined massage therapy with acupressure and Trager®138 
demonstrated a positive effect of the interventions on anxiety and depression with these 
effects sustained at long term follow-up.
A systematic review and meta-analysis examined the role of massage interventions in the 
management of treatment-related side effects associated with breast cancer in terms of 
improvement in overall quality of life, including measures of depression.170 A total of 18 
RCTs were included in this review. Overall regular massage therapy was shown to have 
positive effects on other outcomes such as anger and fatigue symptoms, but the meta-
analysis of eight trials, three of which were summarized in this section,138, 139, 168 did not 
find significant beneficial effects of massage therapy for depression. This meta-analysis, 
however, was limited by significant heterogeneity across the studies assessing depression as 
the outcome (P = 0.002) as well as by small and possibly underpowered sample sizes that 
may have accounted for the non-significant results. An earlier systematic review of massage 
therapy in breast cancer populations that found no positive effect of massage on depression 
also concluded that few rigorous trials have been conducted and that the risk of bias in such 
trials is high.171
Risk/benefit assessment of massage therapy interventions: Classic massage is a non-
invasive therapy that has limited adverse effects. For cancer patients, massage therapy by a 
trained massage professional appears to have few risks and may reduce pain, promote 
relaxation, and boost mood, at least in the short term.172 Since trained, licensed therapists 
delivered the interventions tested in these studies, the recommendation of massage for 
depression applies specifically to massage by trained therapists.173, 174 Some caution is 
needed, however, for individuals receiving anti-coagulation therapy due to their risk of 
bruising. Women with breast cancer who have undergone radiation therapy or surgery or 
have implanted medical devices also may need to be cautious in having massage to the 
affected regions. In addition, some women may be reluctant to disrobe due to altered body 
image, modesty, or ethnocultural issues. Thus, important considerations include appropriate 
draping of the individual and ensuring that the massage therapist is sensitive to the treatment 
experiences of women with breast cancer and develops a therapeutic relationship with the 
individual. Ensuring that the massage therapist is the same gender as the patient is 
considered best practice in the massage profession and may also increase an individual’s 
Greenlee et al.
Page 23
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 comfort with receiving massage therapy. However, this practice was not tested in the studies 
included in this review.
Future research in massage interventions for depression/mood: A 2008 systematic 
review of massage therapy for depression in the general public concluded that evidence to 
support massage as an effective treatment for this indication and population was lacking.175 
However, a more recent (2010) meta-analysis of 17 RCTs concluded that massage therapy 
had a positive effect on individuals suffering from depression.176 That meta-analysis also 
highlighted the heterogeneity across massage therapy trials in terms of therapy protocols, 
outcomes measurement, and populations and underscored the need for standardization 
across future massage therapy trials. These issues are also true for the trials assessing 
massage interventions for depression/mood in breast cancer patients. Future research on 
massage therapy interventions to improve depression/mood disturbances should focus on 
understanding how best to disseminate cost-effective massage interventions in routine 
clinical settings.
Relaxation (A grade)
Overview of relaxation interventions for depression/mood disturbances: Relaxation 
therapy is recommended for improving mood disturbances and depressive symptoms when 
added to standard care (Grade A). The recommendation put forth in the guidelines is based 
on results from six RCTs, completed between 1999 and 2007, which implemented a 
relaxation program with or without guided imagery as an intervention to improve mood 
disturbances and treat depression (Supplemental Table 3).141, 144, 145, 177–179 Five of the six 
trials measured depression as the primary outcome. In all six trials, a relaxation therapy 
intervention group was compared with a standard care group. The interventions comprised 
some form of relaxation therapy that included progressive muscle relaxation and guided 
imagery or visualization techniques. One trial141 assessed autogenic training that provided 
training in relaxation that is meant to induce heaviness and warmth of limbs, calming of the 
heart and breathing, abdominal warmth, and cooling of the forehead. Limitations of all of 
these trials included the potential for expectation bias attributable to the inability to blind 
participants and a lack of attention control groups, although one study used a health 
education attention control.179 Participants in these studies included breast cancer patients 
who had or were currently undergoing surgery, chemotherapy, or radiation therapy. The 
study sample sizes ranged from 31 to 183 participants.
The majority of pertinent systematic reviews combine relaxation techniques with stress 
management, psychosocial, and psychological interventions for breast cancer patients. Thus, 
a review specific to relaxation interventions that includes progressive muscle relaxation and 
guided imagery for depression/mood or other psychological outcomes in breast cancer 
patients and survivors is warranted. A review study of guided imagery as adjuvant cancer 
therapy broadly assessed six RCTs and found the methodological quality inconsistent.180 
Across trials, the results provided few details, and the studies were implemented with 
heterogeneous cancer populations, interventions, and outcome measures, which ultimately 
precluded statistical pooling of the results. Despite these limitations, guided imagery as a 
Greenlee et al.
Page 24
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 sole adjuvant cancer therapy was found to be supportive and to increase comfort in patients 
with few risks.
Beyond decreasing depression, relaxation therapy may also have a beneficial impact on 
other symptoms important to women with breast cancer. For instance, progressive muscle 
relaxation has been found effective at ameliorating sleep problems and fatigue in women 
undergoing chemotherapy for breast cancer.181 Other likely benefits attributable to this 
therapy in this breast cancer population include reduced nausea and anxiety.182–185
Risk/benefit assessment of relaxation interventions: Relaxation therapy is non-invasive 
and positively engages the patient with very little potential for harm. The goal of this 
treatment approach is to use principles of psychoneuroimmunology to better regulate the 
hypothalamic pituitary-adrenal axis, modulate cortisol production, and decrease stress, 
which may have other health benefits including psychological outcomes that may be affected 
by stress and distress (such as anxiety and depression/mood disturbances). Some of the 
appeal of relaxation therapy includes its low cost, safety, and portability. With adequate 
training, patients themselves can apply this therapy when and where they want without the 
need for supervision. However, the durability of relaxation therapy and the frequency 
required to sustain a long-term positive effect on depression remain unclear. It seems that 
relaxation therapy is not only applicable for those with breast cancer and depression but also 
has been shown to be beneficial in other contexts, including to decrease depression in 
adults186, 187 and depression associated with cardiac disease.188 The minimal cost and low 
potential for harm with relaxation therapy in conjunction with its evidence of benefit 
supports its A grade recommendation for depression.
Future research in relaxation interventions for depression/mood: In addition to the gaps 
in the literature described above, future research on the use of relaxation interventions to 
improve mood disturbances should focus on how to use novel electronic communication 
strategies to deliver low-cost relaxation techniques to diverse patient populations.
C graded therapies for depression/mood—As trials have been conducted on the 
effects of acupuncture134–136, 189, 190, healing touch191, 192, and stress 
management112–114, 193, 194 on depression and improvement in mood, these therapies can be 
considered (Grades C). Five trials assessed acupuncture as a treatment for depression/mood 
(but as a secondary outcome) and only one trial was large, 136 with mixed findings in terms 
of effect. Two studies assessed the effect of healing touch on depression as a primary 
outcome, with one small study showing no effect191 and a larger study showing a positive 
effect192. Though five large studies were reviewed for the effect of stress management on 
depression/mood, findings were inconclusive due to inconsistent results across trials. Future 
research directions include conducting trials with larger samples sizes and replicating trials 
with these modalities to examine impact on depression symptoms and improving mood as 
the primary outcome.
Greenlee et al.
Page 25
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Use of Integrative Therapies for Fatigue
Description of fatigue—Among cancer patients, fatigue is commonly referred to as 
cancer-related fatigue. Fatigue is a multi-factorial condition marked by extreme tiredness 
and inability to function due to lack of energy.195 According to National Comprehensive 
Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines, ratings of fatigue of 4 or higher on a scale of 0 to 10 
(where 10 is very severe fatigue) are further evaluated for known contributing factors such as 
pain, emotional distress, anemia, sleep, nutrition, and level of activity. These comorbidities 
are then treated. The CTCAE measures fatigue from grade 1 (relieved by rest) to grade 3 
(not relieved by rest, limiting activities of daily living). Fatigue is the most frequent and 
distressing side effect of common antineoplastic therapies, including chemotherapy, 
radiation therapy, surgery, and selected biologic response modifiers.196 Although cancer-
related fatigue typically improves upon the conclusion of treatment, it can last for months or 
years in up to one-third of patients and become a chronic condition that leads to a variety of 
physical and psychological effects long into survivorship. Symptoms of fatigue include 
feeling tired, weak, worn-out, heavy, slow, or having “no energy or get-up-and-go”. Cancer-
related fatigue is different from common tiredness in both its magnitude and quality. Cancer-
related fatigue is not typically relieved by rest and is much more profound than simply 
feeling tired. About 33% of patients with breast cancer experience moderate to severe 
fatigue. 197–199 Fatigue has disruptive consequences and can have a negative impact on a 
patient’s quality of life, mood, and self-esteem.64 Cancer-related fatigue can prevent patients 
from taking part in daily activities, relationships, social events, community activities, as well 
as work or school, which can have financial consequences, such as loss of employment and 
health insurance.64
C and D graded therapies for fatigue—There are no A or B graded therapies to report 
for fatigue. Trials evaluating hypnosis 79, 80, Acetyl-L-carnitine200, and guarana201, 202 have 
examined their effects on fatigue during treatment as a primary outcome. Two trials from a 
single research group reported beneficial effects of hypnosis on fatigue during treatment, 
therefore hypnosis can be considered for use for fatigue during treatment (Grade C). Neither 
Acetyl-L-carnitine nor guarana are recommended for improving fatigue during treatment 
due to a lack of effect in clinical trials among cancer patients (Grades D). Ginseng received a 
Grade C for fatigue during treatment based upon a single high quality trial with a large 
sample size.203 A previous large, high quality dose finding study by the same group 
indicated that a higher dose was more effective.204 In subset analyses in the subsequent trial, 
which tested use in patients reporting fatigue either during or after treatment, results showed 
that ginseng was more effective in patients undergoing active treatment. Trials testing the 
effects of acupuncture136, 205–207 and yoga73, 74, 78, 121, 152, 208, 209 for post treatment fatigue 
yielded modest results, suggesting that these therapies can be considered for use (Grades C). 
Four high quality acupuncture trials assessed fatigue as the primary outcome; three of the 
four trials included a large sample size.136, 205–207 Acupuncture for post treatment fatigue 
received a C grade mainly due to inconsistent comparison groups across the trials, including 
sham acupuncture,205, 207 standard of care,136, 206 self-administered acupuncture,206 and 
wait-list control.207 Six trials evaluated yoga for post treatment fatigue as a secondary 
outcome only;73, 74, 78, 121, 152, 208, 209 only two studies had a large sample size73, 74 where 
each reported contrasting results.
Greenlee et al.
Page 26
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Use of Integrative Therapies for Quality of Life/Physical Functioning
Description of quality of life and physical functioning—Quality of life is a multi-
dimensional construct typically measuring the functioning of emotional, physical, role, and 
social domains using validated questionnaires.210 The majority of breast cancer patients 
report some level of diminished quality of life during cancer treatment and/or survivorship.
211 The physical domain includes common physical side effects of cancer and cancer 
treatment, including constipation and diarrhea, fatigue, hair loss, fever, hot flashes and night 
sweats, lymphedema, nausea and vomiting, poor nutrition, oral complications, pain, and skin 
changes, as well as the ability to function physically in everyday life. The emotional domain 
includes psychological functioning with indicators of anxiety, depression, distress, 
confusion, and memory problems. The sexual functioning domain refers to patients’ 
perception of sexuality and sexual functioning, attractiveness, and fertility. Finally, the social 
domain refers to the patients’ social functioning, their social role, and level of social support. 
Each of the domains, either individually or in combination, influences a patient’s quality of 
life.212–214 Decrements in quality of life may persist upon the conclusion of treatment, on 
chronic/long-term hormonal and biotherapies and into survivorship.215
Meditation (A grade)
Overview of meditation interventions for quality of life/physical functioning: Meditation 
is recommended for improving quality of life in breast cancer patients (Grade A). This 
recommendation is based on seven RCTs, completed between 2009 and 2013, which used 
meditation for this indication (Supplemental Table 4).69–71, 160–162, 216 Quality of life was 
the primary outcome in four of the seven trials.160–162, 216 In four trials, a meditation 
intervention group was compared with a usual care or waitlist control condition group, and 
three other trials160, 162, 216 used a three-arm design. Study participants included women 
undergoing radiation therapy for breast cancer, newly diagnosed breast cancer patients of 
stages 0-IV, breast cancer survivors who had completed treatment, and older adult breast 
cancer survivors aged 55 years and older. The study sample sizes ranged from 47 to 180 
participants. These trials overlap with the trials described under meditation intervention for 
anxiety and depression outcomes (see above). Of these trials, four trials tested an intensive, 
integrated MBSR program customized for breast cancer patients where two studies included 
women post-surgery, radiation or chemotherapy treatments,118, 152, one study included 
women during radiation therapy154, and one study included recently diagnosed patients. 
71, 160, 162, 216 One trial assessed the Mindful Movement Program, also an intensive, 
integrated program for breast cancer patients69, in addition to a trial assessing Brain Wave 
Vibration meditation70 and Transcendental Meditation161 for improvements in quality of life 
scores.
Previous research has supported the role of MBSR interventions for improved quality of life 
in heterogeneous samples of cancer patients and survivors, with effect sizes ranging from 
small to large on quality of life scales.101, 217, 218 One review in particular assessed the 
impact of MBSR on quality of life in breast cancer patients.45 In that review, the authors 
identified only three studies that met their criteria and also measured quality of life as an 
outcome.71, 216, 219 Of the three studies that measured quality of life, only one study (also 
included in our review) reported significant improvements post-MBSR intervention71 
Greenlee et al.
Page 27
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 relative to results in control or comparator groups. The other two trials reported no 
significant improvements in quality of life after MBSR intervention or at follow-up. A 
second systematic review and meta-analysis was conducted to investigate the effect of 
MBSR in the cancer care setting on several psychological outcomes, including quality of 
life.98 The analyses specific to the quality of life outcome included 248 patients in six 
studies and reported a small effect size (P < 0.01). The authors suggest that although these 
findings support the use of MBSR for improving quality of life, more well-conducted RCTs 
are required that implement adequate controls, longer follow-up periods, larger samples 
sizes, and obtainment of patients’ psychological profiles.
Risk/benefit assessment of meditation interventions: There is very little risk to 
participants who use meditation therapies to improve quality of life and/or physical 
functioning. Few adverse events have been reported in any trials involving meditation, with 
participants typically reporting positive feedback about meditation, resulting in low dropout 
rates from the programs. Group meditation formats and online and home-based adaptations 
of MBIs103 are cost-effective and beneficial therapies that can be used as adjuncts to 
traditional individual counseling or psychotherapy.
Future research in meditation interventions for quality of life/physical functioning: To 
improve specificity of the effective components of meditation and to compare meditation 
interventions to other mind-body interventions, research assessing meditation as a treatment 
for improved quality of life and/or physical functioning should be extended to directly 
compare meditation with other forms of therapy, including individual counseling, cognitive 
behavioral therapy, and other mind-body interventions, similar to the therapies compared in 
the trial by Carlson et al.68
Yoga (B grade)
Overview of yoga interventions for quality of life/physical functioning: Yoga is 
recommended for improving the quality of life in breast cancer patients (Grade B). This 
recommendation is based on 12 RCTs, completed between 2006 and 2015, which tested a 
variety of yoga programs (Supplemental Table 4).77, 78, 119, 122, 124, 150–153, 208, 209, 220 
Quality of life was the primary outcome for six of the 12 trials.77, 150, 151, 208, 209, 220 In 10 
trials, a yoga intervention group was compared with a usual care or waitlist control condition 
group, and two others used brief supportive therapy as a comparison group.154, 221 Study 
participants included women undergoing radiation therapy or chemotherapy for breast 
cancer, newly diagnosed breast cancer patients, and breast cancer survivors who had 
completed treatment. The study sample sizes ranged from 15 to 128 participants. Several of 
these trials overlap with those described under yoga interventions for anxiety and depression 
outcomes (see above). A total of four different types of yoga interventions were investigated, 
including: Iyengar or Hatha yoga,78, 150–152, 208, 209 an integrated yoga program,77, 154, 221, 
Pranayama or yoga breathing,122, 220 and Patanjali’s Yoga Sutras124.
A systematic review and meta-analysis assessed the impact of yoga interventions on quality 
of life and psychological health specifically in breast cancer patients and survivors.130 
Overall, 12 RCTs were included in the analysis with a total of 742 participants. Analyses 
Greenlee et al.
Page 28
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 revealed short-term effects on improved psychological health, including anxiety (P < .01), 
perceived stress (P = .03), and psychological distress (P < .01). It is, however, notable that 
these effects were only applicable to those who engaged in yoga during active cancer 
treatment and not in the post-treatment period. The authors state that with these positive 
preliminary results, yoga should be used in this population.
Risk/benefit assessment of yoga interventions: As stated above regarding yoga for 
anxiety/stress and for depression/mood disturbances, yoga can be adapted and modified for 
use in this population with low risk to the patient. Overall, yoga has shown preliminary 
efficacy in improving quality of life, and is recommended for use with breast cancer patients.
Future research in yoga interventions for quality of life/physical functioning: As stated 
earlier, future trials of yoga to improve quality of life/physical functioning should examine 
the effects of different types, doses, and durations of yoga on quality of life outcomes. 
Higher quality trials, including trials with larger and more diverse samples, should be 
conducted.
C and D graded therapies for quality of life/physical functioning—Trials in 
acupuncture130, 132, 203, 235, 236, Qigong222, 223, reflexology224–226, and mistletoe227–230 
have assessed the effect of these therapies on quality of life/physical functioning and 
received a C Grade indicating that they can be considered for use. The five trials evaluating 
acupuncture had mixed findings and small sample sizes; future studies should replicate the 
trials of acupuncture that compared real and sham acupuncture, which were the study 
designs showing no effect.130, 132, 203, 235, 236 Two trials 222, 223 found qigong to have 
beneficial effects on quality of life, however, the studies were fairly small and should be 
replicated in larger and more diverse patient populations. Three large high-quality 
trials224–226 of reflexology for improving quality of life reported mixed findings.
There is some evidence that mistletoe may improve the quality of life in breast cancer 
patients227–230. However, while the trials have study quality and sample sizes that could 
merit a “B” grade, the final decision to assign a “C” grade is due to two areas of uncertainty. 
First, while several different preparations and formulations have been found to be effective 
in trials of moderate size, the assessment does not result in a higher grade because of the 
non-specificity and variability of formulations of agents tested. Secondly, mistletoe is an 
injected bioactive compound with a potential for a differential risk benefit ratio due to 
toxicities and drug interaction with standard cancer therapies that may not be detected in 
smaller studies; a similar stringency need not to be applied to mind-body interventions as 
they have lower risk profiles. The Grade C recommendation is based on four RCTs, 
completed between 2004 and 2014, which tested the use of mistletoe for improving quality 
of life.227–230 Quality of life was the primary outcome in all four trials where a mistletoe 
product group was compared with placebo227, 228 or standard care229, 230 control group. The 
mistletoe products tested, all injected subcutaneously, included PS76A2227, 228, Helixor 
A230, and Iscador229. Study participants included women receiving chemotherapy treatment 
for breast cancer and sample sizes ranged from 61 to 352 participants. To improve 
specificity of the effectiveness of mistletoe as a treatment for improved quality of life in 
breast cancer patients, double blind trials need to directly evaluate and compare the different 
Greenlee et al.
Page 29
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 products available and also assess long-term benefit and safety from the use of mistletoe 
products. Trials of bioactive agents carry the additional requirement of adequate size and 
statistical power to exclude drug interactions and attenuation of cancer outcome benefits of 
concurrently administered adjuvant treatments. Two systematic literature reviews48, 231 of 
controlled clinical trials of mistletoe, including a Cochrane database analysis, did find an 
improvement in survival in the adjuvant setting. Though this outcome is outside the scope of 
this current review, the two reviews found a suggestion of benefit for quality of life and 
called for further confirmatory trials.48, 231
Use of Integrative Therapies for Chemotherapy Induced Nausea and Vomiting (CINV)
Description of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting—Chemotherapy-
induced nausea and vomiting (CINV) is experienced by some cancer patients following 
chemotherapy administration.232–234 Acute CINV is typically defined as occurring during 
the first 24-hour period following chemotherapy administration. Delayed or late CINV is felt 
to be mediated by different mechanisms compared to acute CINV 235 and occurs more than 
24 hours following chemotherapy administration. In a large prospective study of breast 
cancer patients receiving chemotherapy treatments, 37% reported any nausea and 13% 
reported any vomiting at the first 24-hour period. 236 In the 2–5 days following 
chemotherapy administration: 70% reported any nausea and 15% reported any vomiting. 
67, 236 Consequences of CINV include dehydration, serious metabolic derangements, 
nutritional depletion and anorexia, deterioration of physical and mental status, withdrawal 
from potentially useful and curative antineoplastic treatment, and decrease in self-care and 
functional ability. CINV is considered to be one of the most severe and feared adverse 
effects of cancer treatment by patients and can have a significant impact on quality of life.
232, 237–239 Standard of care anti-emetics for managing CINV have changed considerably in 
the last 5 years, thus many of the trials evaluating integrative approaches are not tested with 
the newest and most effective standard treatment regimen.233, 234 Most contemporary studies 
use the endpoint of proportion of patients achieving a complete response defined as no 
emesis or use of rescue medication. Additionally, anti-emetics themselves have side effects 
such as headaches, constipation, and neuropsychiatric effects and therefore merit study 
designs that replace medications with integrative approaches and use equivalence or non-
superiority designs for the CINV endpoints and medication side effect endpoints.
Acupressure (B grade)
Overview of acupressure interventions for CINV: For breast cancer patients receiving 
chemotherapy, acupressure can be considered as an addition to anti-emetics to help control 
nausea and vomiting (Grade B). This recommendation is based on results from three RCTs, 
reported between 2000 and 2007, of an acupressure intervention used in conjunction with 
antiemetics to treat CINV (Supplemental Table 5).240–242 Acute and delayed nausea and 
vomiting were the primary outcomes for all three trials. In two trials240, 242, the acupressure 
plus usual care intervention group was compared with a usual care group. The third trial241 
was a three-arm trial comparing 1) true acupressure at the P6 and SI3 points in addition to 
usual care; 2) sham acupressure, or placebo acupressure on a different acupressure point, in 
addition to usual care; and 3) usual care only. (Of note, the use of sham controls in 
acupressure and acupuncture studies is to attempt to control for the experience of receiving 
Greenlee et al.
Page 30
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the treatment and if implemented well, participants will not be able to discern between the 
true and sham techniques.) Study participants included breast cancer patients undergoing the 
first, second, or third cycle of chemotherapy. The study sample sizes in the trials ranged 
from 17 to 160 participants. The acupressure interventions included self-acupressure240, 241 
using a finger and wearing acupressure wristbands.242 Across the three trials, acupressure 
therapy produced significant decreases in nausea, retching, and vomiting (P < 0.05 for 
multiple outcomes assessing CINV; see Supplemental Table 5 for details).
A review assessing acupressure as a nonpharmacologic adjunctive intervention for CINV 
control across all cancers concluded that acupressure should be strongly recommended as an 
effective intervention along with standard care for CINV control.243 Other studies of 
acupressure to reduce nausea and vomiting have shown efficacy in other populations, 
including pregnant women and postoperative patients, including after thyroidectomy.244 All 
of these studies were conducted with acupressure wristbands placed on both the patient’s 
arms at the PC-6 acupoint.245 A review of acupuncture and acupressure for CINV control 
among breast cancer patients concludes that the therapies are both safe and effective.246 A 
secondary data analysis of the Dibble et al.241 multi-center study concluded that breast 
cancer patients whose nausea intensity started higher from the acute phase continued to 
experience higher symptom intensity during the 11 days after chemotherapy administration 
and required more frequent acupressure on acupressure point PC6 even after the peak of 
nausea.247 However, a recent publication by Molassiotis, a lead author of one of the included 
trials in our review,248 suggests an overall placebo effect in the study of acupressure for 
control of CINV, although this interpretation included a mix of cancer populations and was 
not limited to breast cancer patients.
Risk/benefit assessment of acupressure interventions: Self-administered acupressure is 
easy to perform, safe, cost-effective, noninvasive, does not interfere with a patient’s privacy, 
and has no deleterious effects on patients. Acupressure can be performed anywhere with 
little or no equipment.
Future research in acupressure interventions for CINV: Future research in this area 
could assess how to identify the best patients that can be instructed to perform self-
administered acupressure, when acupressure can be performed, and whether additional 
points can be administered along with PC6 to increase the effectiveness of self-administered 
acupressure to reduce nausea and vomiting.
Electroacupuncture (B grade)
Overview of electroacupuncture interventions for CINV: Electroacupuncture or 
acustimulation can be considered as an addition to antiemetics to control CINV in breast 
cancer patients during chemotherapy (Grade B). This recommendation is based on two 
RCTs, published in 2000 and 2012 (Supplemental Table 5)249, 250, as well as the 1997 NIH 
Consensus Conference on acupuncture.251 However, most of these trials predated the use of 
newer agents including 5-HT3 or NK1 receptor antagonists, which have become standard 
anti-emetic therapies for patients receiving highly emetogenic chemotherapy. We do not 
have a body of evidence to evaluate whether the addition of acupuncture to contemporary 
Greenlee et al.
Page 31
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 anti-emetics yields added benefit. Participants in the trials in this analysis included breast 
cancer patients who had received moderately high or highly emetogenic chemotherapy 
without a 5-HT3 or neurokinin-1 (NK1) receptor antagonist.234 Both trials used PC-6 and 
ST-36 acupoints and sham controls, and both trials evaluated the effects of these acupoints 
on acute and delayed CINV. One trial additionally used acupoint LI-4249 and found that 
electroacupuncture was no better than sham electroacupuncture and that a likely contributor 
to the lack of effect of electroacupuncture in CINV is the fact that the study evaluated only 
feasibility with minimal electroacupuncture intervention and without a no-acupuncture arm.
249 The second trial250 found that patients receiving electroacupuncture experienced 
significantly fewer emesis episodes over the five days of the acupressure intervention than 
did patients receiving mock therapy or antiemetics alone (P < 0.001). Between-group 
differences in the number of emesis episodes were also significant for electroacupuncture 
versus minimal needling (P < .001) and for minimal needling versus antiemetics alone (P = 
0.01).250
A multicenter study by Yang et al.252 that compared ST-36 electroacupuncture plus anti-
emetics with anti-emetics alone in 246 patients with heterogeneous cancers indicated an 
additive effect with the use of electroacupuncture (P < 0.01) with greater decreases in nausea 
and vomiting scores (P < 0.001) compared to use of anti-emetics alone. Two early studies by 
Dundee et al.253, 254 reported significantly less CINV with a PC-6 electroacupuncture 
intervention, although investigators noted that the brevity of emetic action was a major 
problem. In a recent review of acupuncture studies including studies that evaluated CINV, 
investigators concluded that only the electroacupuncture study of Shen et al.250 had a low 
risk of bias.31 In addition, an earlier meta-analysis by Ezzo et al.255 determined that 
electroacupuncture, not manual acupuncture, was beneficial for first-day vomiting and that 
needle insertion as part of manual and electroacupuncture provides greater intensity of 
stimulation and produces more beneficial effects than surface electrostimulation.
Risk/benefit assessment of electroacupuncture interventions for CINV: With proper 
administration, electroacupuncture has been shown to be both safe and effective.256–261 In 
addition to possibly reducing CINV, PC-6 stimulation has been associated with other 
positive benefits, including analgesic,256 sedative,262 and anxiolytic effects.263 Further, 
because CINV is drug-specific rather than disease-specific, these benefits should extend to 
CINV in other cancer patient populations, as suggested in the study of Yang et al.252 with 
participants who had a variety of cancers. Practical issues to consider are that 
electroacupuncture should not be used in patients with a pacemaker or implantable 
defibrillators and that special attention is required when treating patients who are pregnant, 
have seizure disorders, or are disoriented.31
Future research in electroacupuncture interventions for CINV: Future trials on the use 
of electroacupuncture interventions for CINV in breast cancer patients can focus on the 
testing the use of electroacupuncture with new standard of care treatment regimens, as well 
as the dissemination and implementation of this technique in the clinical setting. In addition, 
nausea that is unrelated to chemotherapy is also a common problem in cancer patients and 
Greenlee et al.
Page 32
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 this modality could be tested in comparison to less potent anti-emetics or to best supportive 
care when other therapies are ineffective.
C and D graded therapies for CINV—Three trials of ginger264–266 and two trials of 
relaxation144, 177 have examined their effects on CINV as a primary outcome. Though there 
were a limited number of trials, results suggested enough of an effect to result in Grade C 
recommendations stating that ginger and relaxation can be considered as an addition to 
antiemetics for the control of acute CINV. Future directions in research should focus on 
replicating trials of these modalities for CINV as the primary outcome. Glutamine is not 
recommended for improving CINV due to a lack of effect from two trials267, 268 in which 
CINV was assessed as a secondary outcome (Grade D).
Use of Integrative Therapies for Acute Radiation Dermatitis
Patients respond to radiation therapy uniquely.269 As radiation is a localized, targeted 
therapy side effects are most often locoregional within the targeted area; however, damage to 
normal local tissues and adjacent organs at risk can result in fatigue as the body expends 
energy in normal tissue repair. The most common side effect in breast cancer patients is 
acute skin irritation. Late changes to normal tissue can occur years following therapy and 
can include soft tissue fibrosis, lymphedema, lung, heart and chest wall damage.269 Not all 
patients experience one or all of the side effects of radiation, but patients who do experience 
acute side effects of radiation typically see the effects go away after several weeks following 
treatment.269 Acute radiation dermatitis can occur with radiation therapy and may result in 
reactions ranging from faint erythema to dry, itchy, and peeling skin and ultimately to moist 
desquamation and ulceration.270 The CGCTC is the most common scale to measure acute 
radiation skin toxicity that is used by cooperative groups during cancer clinical trials and 
grades skin reactions from 0 to 4 with grade 1 being erythema and grade 4 being ulceration. 
Most breast cancer patients develop mild to moderate acute skin reactions of grade 1–3 
during and shortly after a course of radiation therapy. These reactions usually resolve 
quickly but can cause significant symptoms, especially with higher grade toxicity.270
D graded therapies for acute radiation dermatitis—There are no A, B or C graded 
therapies to report for acute radiation dermatitis post treatment. Aloe vera gel and hyaluronic 
cream are both not recommended as a standard therapy to prevent or treat acute radiation 
dermatitis simply due to lack of effect (Grade D). Our review consisted of two quality 
studies for each product with large sample sizes for both the aloe vera trials271, 272 (N=208; 
N=194) and hyaluronic cream trials273, 274 (N=200; N=74). Each trial assessed the acute 
skin reaction from radiation therapy as its primary outcome.
Use of Integrative Therapies for Vasomotor Outcomes
Vasomotor symptoms are common in breast cancer patients and include hot flashes, intense 
sweating, flushing on the face and chest, and may come with heart palpitations and anxiety.
275 These symptoms occur episodically, including nocturnally when night sweats can 
significantly disrupt women’s sleep. According to NCI, about two thirds of postmenopausal 
women with a history of breast cancer experience hot flashes. These symptoms may occur 
naturally or as a consequence of surgery, chemotherapy or endocrine therapy.276 While 
Greenlee et al.
Page 33
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 vasomotor symptoms may resolve on their own, 20% of affected women suffer from 
persistent hot flashes four years later after last menses.275 Together, vasomotor symptoms 
can significantly impact women’s quality of life.276
C and D graded therapies for vasomotor outcomes—There are no A or B graded 
therapies to recommend for vasomotor outcomes. Acupuncture can be considered as a 
therapy for hot flashes based upon nine trials assessing acupuncture for hot flashes (Grade 
C).134, 189, 190, 277–282 Seven trials assessed hot flashes as the primary outcome and only one 
trial282 had more than 100 participants. Overall, the literature showed mixed findings; 
however, the single large trial showed significant reductions in hot flashes in their 
electroacupuncture group compared to sham and control groups. The use of soy as a therapy 
for hot flashes is not recommended due to lack of effect (Grade D). Three large trials283–285 
assessed soy for the treatment of hot flashes as the primary outcome and showed a lack of 
effect.
Use of Integrative Therapies for Lymphedema
Lymphedema—Lymphedema is a condition following treatment such as surgery or 
radiation therapy where parts of the lymph system become damaged or blocked, leading to 
an accumulation of lymph fluid that does not drain properly, builds up in tissues, and causes 
swelling.35 The CTCAE grades edema of the limbs from grade 1 (5–10% interlimb 
discrepancy) up to grade 3 (>30% interlimb discrepancy). Lymphedema commonly affects 
the arm or leg but can also impact other parts of the body. For breast cancer patients and 
survivors, lymphedema is most common in the upper extremities and sometimes in the 
breast and/or chest wall, and can occur up to 30 years following treatment. Owing to 
difference in diagnosis and characteristics of patients studied, and inadequate follow-up the 
overall incidence of arm lymphedema after breast cancer has been found to range from 8% 
to 56%.286 Breast cancer survivors with arm lymphedema in particular have been found to 
have decreased quality of life and increased psychological distress and disability compared 
to survivors without lymphedema.286–288
C graded therapies for lymphedema—There are no A or B graded therapies to report 
for lymphedema. Two trials assessed laser therapy289, 290 and seven trials assessed manual 
lymphatic drainage291–297 for the treatment of lymphedema as a primary outcome. The two 
trials evaluating laser therapy were small in sample size and showed mixed findings. Only 
two of the seven trials assessing manual lymphatic drainage had a sample size greater than 
100 participants292, 297. Overall, the literature suggests that manual lymphatic drainage and 
compression bandaging are equivalent. Thus, either therapy can be considered as treatment 
options for lymphedema, with manual lymphatic drainage being considered for those who 
have sensitivity to bandaging (Grade C).
Use of Integrative Therapies for Chemotherapy Induced Peripheral Neuropathy (CIPN)
Chemotherapy induced peripheral neuropathy (CIPN)—Cancer treatments, 
including chemotherapy, may cause damage to the peripheral nerves resulting in neuropathy.
298 The CGCTC categorizes neuropathy under neurologicsensory and grades from 0–3 with 
3 being severe objective sensory loss or paresthesias that interfere with function. Sensory 
Greenlee et al.
Page 34
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 neuropathy can include symptoms of pain, tingling, numbness, or a pins-and-needles feeling, 
the inability to feel a hot or cold sensation, or the inability to feel pain. Motor neuropathy 
can include problems with balance, weak or achy muscles, twitching, cramping or wasting 
muscles, or swallowing or breathing difficulties. Autonomic nerve damage can cause 
dizziness or faintness, and digestive, sexual, sweating and urination problems. 298
H graded therapies for CIPN—There are no A or B graded therapies to report for the 
prevention or treatment of CIPN. Acetyl-L-carnitine is not recommended as a standard 
therapy to prevent or treat CIPN due to harm (Grade H). A single large and high-quality 
study200 assessing the use of acetyl-L-carnitine capsules to prevent CIPN following taxane 
therapy as a primary outcome (N=409) found that acetyl-L-carnitine administered during 
taxane chemotherapy was associated with worse CIPN symptoms.
Use of Integrative Therapies for Pain
Pain—According to the International Association for the Study of Pain, pain can be defined 
as “an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience associated with actual or potential tissue 
damage.”299 The CTCAE grades pain from 1 (mild) to 3 (severe, limiting self care). Pain 
can be caused by cancer therapies, including surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, 
targeted therapy, supportive care therapies and/or diagnostic procedures.300 Pain is 
commonly experienced by breast cancer patients with a prevalence ranging from 40–89%.
299 Pain management requires proper assessment including measurement of intensity.300 It is 
also important to evaluate the impact of pain on the patients physical, mental, and social 
health as pain can negatively impact a patient’s functional status and quality of life. Pain 
management can include both pharmacologic and non-pharmacologic modalities. Proper 
education about treatment and longitudinal follow-up are essential.
C graded therapies for pain—There are no A or B graded therapies to report for pain. 
Energy 301 and healing touch192 for pain following chemotherapy, music therapy104, 107 and 
hypnosis302, 303 for pain following surgery, and acupuncture304–308 for pain associated with 
aromatase inhibitor associated musculoskeletal symptoms were examined and each received 
a C grade indicating that they can be recommended as a therapy for pain. A single large trial 
assessed healing touch192 for pain following chemotherapy as a secondary outcome showing 
small positive effects favoring the therapy. Similarly, two trials assessed music 
therapy104, 107 and hypnosis302, 303 for pain following surgery as a primary outcome 
showing small positive effects favoring the therapy. However, there is a lack of multiple 
large trials to support each therapy. Finally, five trials evaluated acupuncture for pain 
associated with aromatase inhibitor-associated musculoskeletal symptoms as the primary 
outcome.304–308 All trials had small sample sizes and reported mixed findings.
Use of Integrative Therapies for Sleep Disturbance
Sleep disturbances—Studies have shown that nearly half of all breast cancer patients 
have sleep-related problems due to a range of causes including side effects of antineoplastic 
medications, long hospital stays, or stress.309, 310 In addition, a growing number of breast 
cancer patients are obese,311 which increases the incidence of sleep apnea, a major cause for 
insomnia. Insomnia, a specific sleep disorder of initiating and maintaining sleep, is most 
Greenlee et al.
Page 35
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 common in cancer patients and often occurs along with anxiety and depression.312 The 
CTCAE measures insomnia under psychiatric disorders from grade 1–3, with grade 3 being 
severe difficulty falling asleep, staying asleep or waking up early.
C graded therapies for sleep disturbance—There are no A or B graded therapies to 
report for sleep disturbance. Yoga can be considered for sleep disturbance (Grade C). Five 
trials assessed yoga for sleep disturbance73, 121, 124, 152, 313 and in four of these trials sleep 
was a secondary outcome. Two trials were of high quality with more than 100 
participants73, 313. Overall, the body of literature showed no greater effect in sleep quality 
than health education classes, stretching groups, and wait list control.
CONCLUSION
In this review, we closely examined and described the RCTs that provide support for the 
highest graded therapy recommendations for the use of integrative therapies during the 
patient experience of breast cancer and for side effects related to breast cancer treatment. 
High levels of evidence support the routine use of mind-body practices, such as yoga, 
meditation, relaxation techniques and passive music therapy to address common mental 
health concerns among breast cancer patients, including anxiety, stress, depression, and 
mood disturbances. Additionally, meditation has been shown to improve quality of life and 
physical functioning, and yoga has been found to improve quality of life and fatigue. 
Massage has been shown to improve mood and acupressure and electroacupuncture decrease 
CINV. Given the high level of evidence of benefit coupled with the and the relative low level 
of risk, these therapies can be incorporated as an option care for patients, especially when 
there is poor symptom control. As is the case with many standard therapies, the impact of 
integrative approaches on symptom management is highly individualized. Therefore, a 
patient-centered trial and evaluation approach may be needed and can be guided by the 
grade of recommendations and altered as needed along with the incorporation of patient 
preferences. In addition to the modalities discussed in this review that were given lower 
grade (C or D), patients are using many other forms of integrative therapies with little or no 
supporting evidence; this serves as a compelling call for further research to support patients 
and health care providers in making more informed decisions that avoid harm. In the 
meantime, while further clinical evaluation is underway, clinicians and patients need to be 
cautious about the use of therapies that received a Grade of C or D and need to fully 
understand the potential risks and benefits of use, including the risk associated with not 
using a conventional therapy that may effectively prevent or treat the condition. For 
example, in a patient with incurable disease who has marked symptoms not adequately 
managed with conventional therapies, carefully monitored use of a Grade C therapy could be 
medically reasonable even though more research clearly would be needed to apply this 
broadly across a patient population. This review and others support referral or provision of 
clinical services to include both evidence-based conventional and integrative therapy 
options.
The limited number of integrative modalities with A or B grades emphasizes the need for all 
cancer care providers to initiate a dialogue early in their relationship with cancer patients to 
develop a framework for how evidence forms the basis for all clinical decisions. Patients and 
Greenlee et al.
Page 36
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 clinicians should engage in shared decision making based on the best available evidence on 
the benefits and harms, while reflecting patient values and preferences. A careful appraisal 
of the evidence base for integrative therapies can help allay a patient’s concern that their 
care team is informed and not overlooking options that may be of interest to them. In 
addition, such an appraisal of the evidence will offer those modalities that do merit 
consideration and allow for better personalization of care and shared decision making.
This systematic review with grades of evidence adds to a growing literature base including 
reviews of integrative therapy for breast cancer and other cancer populations. For example, 
there are numerous reviews that support the use of integrative therapies including passive 
music therapy109, stress management programs116, various yoga practices129, meditation 
and MBSR96, massage170, and relaxation techniques180 as adjunctive therapies for 
psychological outcomes, specifically the anxiety/stress and depression/mood outcomes 
assessed in this review. Acupressure for CINV is also well supported in the review literature 
across all cancer patients.243 There are mixed findings in the areas of meditation and MBSR 
for quality of life, 45, 98, and electroacupuncture for CINV,31 which suggests overall low 
quality or too few studies. Thus, future research on the impact of these integrative therapies 
on the relevant clinical outcomes is warranted. A limitation to the generalizability of our 
findings is that the majority of participating subjects in the clinical trials evaluated were non-
Hispanic white women with high socioeconomic status relative to the general population. In 
addition, none of the trials examined age-related responses, and or differential responses in 
pre- vs. post-menopaual women. There is a clear need to design well-powered controlled 
trials using the best standard treatment control or an appropriate placebo.
Challenges of implementing integrative therapies in breast oncology
Cancer patients face a number of psychological and physical challenges as they move 
through cancer diagnosis, treatment and survivorship. According to NCCN guidelines, 
comprehensive clinical programs should systematically screen for cancer-related symptoms 
and side effects in the process of mandated screening for distress. This review and others 
support subsequent referral or provision of clinical services to include both evidence-based 
conventional and integrative therapy options.66, 314
Based on recent estimates from the U.S. National Health Interview Survey, 75% of 
individuals with a history of cancer use one or more complementary and integrative 
therapies.315 Many North American cancer centers now operate formal integrative oncology 
programs. As most of these services are not reimbursable by insurance, the methods and 
models of funding and implementing these programs vary; some programs and services are 
fully funded and provided free of charge to patients, some are entirely paid for out-of-pocket 
by patients, and some are a combination of the two. Often mind-body therapies are available 
from trained clinical staff already employed at cancer centers, such as oncology nurses or 
social workers, and hence, are more readily accessible at low or no cost. Others such as 
massage therapy and acupuncture may be covered by some forms of insurance, varying by 
country, province/territory and state.
Implementing complementary and integrative therapies in a clinical setting not only requires 
funding and infrastructure, but also requires well-trained, knowledgeable providers. Many of 
Greenlee et al.
Page 37
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 the integrative therapies do not have a one-size-fits-all approach and need to be provided and 
administered by appropriately trained practitioners who can evaluate which are the best 
forms and techniques to use with a specific patient. Though training and credentialing for 
many integrative providers varies by jurisdictions, best practices suggest that providers be 
trained to the highest standard of their profession, even if that exceeds the state or province-
based standards, such as a requirement for institutional credentialing that may include 
proctoring. As the fields of integrative therapies are expanding, there are now new 
professional associations that specialize in oncology, for example the Society for Oncology 
Massage and the Oncology Association of Naturopathic Physicians.316, 317
Future research
Rigorous clinical research that appropriately reflects integrative care as it is used in the 
community and at integrative cancer centers is needed to responsibly move this field 
forward. Integrative modalities can be tested in addition to standard supportive treatments, or 
even in place of them, if the standard therapy is associated with side effects or significant 
costs and the trial design allows for early discontinuation in the event of futility. Clinical 
trials designed to test efficacy in tightly controlled academic research settings are often 
testing protocols that are not realistically implementable in the community setting. 
Implementation and dissemination research designs to consider include pragmatic trials that 
involve multi-modal therapies that are applied in the manner in which they are typically 
offered in clinical settings. This approach, while unable to pinpoint clear causal relationships 
between specific interventions and outcomes, allows an exploration and evaluation of 
clinical impact that is more truly generalizable. Head-to-head comparisons of different 
integrative therapies and conventional symptom management therapies would help provide 
some specificity and direction for health care providers making recommendations to 
patients. Comparative effectiveness research testing integrative modalities in relationship to 
pharmacological and other approaches would also be informative in providing options as 
well as comparisons of toxicities and cost effectiveness. Studies that examine mechanism of 
action are also needed, however, the emphasis here is on trials of agents that are actively in 
use, unlike novel pharmacological therapies. Importantly, interventions need to be tested in 
economically and culturally diverse patient populations in order to understand the 
applicability of an intervention to the growing population of cancer survivors.
Future studies need to include systematic assessments of treatment toxicities, including 
toxicities from both the integrative and the convetional therapies. In this review, when 
possible, the NCI Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) are used to 
describe cancer treatment side effects. However, many of the trials did not report toxicities 
or adverse events, and among the trials that did, the majority of the trials did not assess 
toxicities and adverse events systematically. The CTCAE are a set of criteria for the standard 
grading and classifications of adverse effects of drugs used in cancer therapy and the FDA is 
increasingly using CTCAE patient reported outcomes (CTCAE-PROs) to monitor treatment 
side effects.318, 319 Ideally, trials will include systematic evaluation of both provider (i.e., 
CTCAE) and patient (i.e., CTCAE-PROs) assessments of adverse events. If future trials do 
not use these methods, at minimum, validated measurement tools need to be used to allow 
for ongoing quantitative assessments of adverse events using robust statistical analyses.
Greenlee et al.
Page 38
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Ongoing challenges include the inability to blind subjects to most of the integrative 
modalities studied, as most measures are subjective and thus susceptible to suggestive biases 
in which patients perceive benefit to an intervention simply because they are receiving it. 
Using a mixed methods model of research including both qualitative inquiry that explores 
the patient’s experience of their treatments and quantitative data will be helpful to validate 
and better justify the use of integrative therapies. Additionally, the use of both subjective and 
objective patient-reported outcomes should be employed within a mixed methods model. 
This approach can be used in both clinical trials or in prospective observational studies. To 
better enable real clinical uptake and change, knowledge translation experts, cancer patients, 
policy makers and decision makers should be involved in both study design and 
interpretation to better enable integration of these therapies into clinical practice.
In conclusion, awareness of the base of evidence for complementary and integrative 
therapies based on the recently published SIO guidelines and the emerging literature should 
be a core competence for the cancer care provider and should be applied in decision making 
with breast cancer patients requiring supportive care. Billions of dollars are spent each year 
on complementary and integrative health therapies, with unknown benefits and for those that 
have thus far been shown to be ineffective.320 Research in this area could save large amounts 
of healthcare dollars and resources and more importantly can redirect patients to treatments 
with known benefits and better safety profiles. This article provides greater depth of 
discussion of these interventions, such that clinicians and patients can begin the process of 
integration, based upon patient needs in their specific setting and context.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank the following internal and external reviewers for their insightful comments and critiques: Internal 
reviewers: Executive Committee of the Society for Integrative Oncology; Board of Trustees of the Society for 
Integrative Oncology; Donald Abrams, MD (University of California, San Francisco), Ting Bao, MD (Memorial 
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center), Gustav Dobos, MD (Duisberg-Essen University), Petra Klose, MD (Duisberg-
Essen University), Omer Kucuk, MD (Emory University), Jodi MacLeod (University of Pennsylvania), Gregory 
Plotnikoff, MD (Minnesota Personalized Medicine) and Santosh Rao, MD (Banner MD Anderson). External SIO 
reviewers included Gabriel Hortobagyi, MD (MD Anderson Cancer Center), Shelley Hwang, MD (Duke 
University), and Anna Wu, PhD (University of Southern California).
References
1. Boon HS, Olatunde F, Zick SM. Trends in complementary/alternative medicine use by breast cancer 
survivors: comparing survey data from 1998 and 2005. BMC Womens Health. 2007; 7:4. [PubMed: 
17397542] 
2. Greenlee H, Kwan ML, Ergas IJ, et al. Changes in vitamin and mineral supplement use after breast 
cancer diagnosis in the pathways study: a prospective cohort study. BMC Cancer. 2014; 14:382–
397. [PubMed: 24884705] 
3. Link AR, Gammon MD, Jacobson JS, et al. Use of self-care and practitioner-based forms of 
complementary and alternative medicine before and after a diagnosis of breast cancer. Evid Based 
Complement Alternat Med. 2013; 2013:1–16.
Greenlee et al.
Page 39
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 4. Matsuno RK, Pagano IS, Maskarinec G, Issell BF, Gotay CC. Complementary and alternative 
medicine use and breast cancer prognosis: a pooled analysis of four population-based studies of 
breast cancer survivors. J Womens Health (Larchmt). 2012; 21:1252–1258. [PubMed: 23075455] 
5. Greenlee H, Kwan ML, Ergas IJ, et al. Complementary and alternative therapy use before and after 
breast cancer diagnosis: the Pathways Study. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2009; 117:653–665. 
[PubMed: 19184414] 
6. Bright-Gbebry M, Makambi KH, Rohan JP, et al. Use of multivitamins, folic acid and herbal 
supplements among breast cancer survivors: the Black Women’s Health Study. BMC Complement 
Altern Med. 2011; 11:30–35. [PubMed: 21496245] 
7. Office of Cancer Complementary and Alternative Medicine. [accessed 06/18/2015] CAM 
Definitions. Available from URL: http://cam.cancer.gov/health_definitions.html
8. National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health. [accessed 6/18/15] Complementary, 
alternative, or integrative health: what’s in a name?. Available from URL: http://nccam.nih.gov/
health/whatiscam
9. Greenlee H, Balneaves LG, Carlson LE, et al. Clinical Practice Guidelines on the Use of Integrative 
Therapies as Supportive Care in Patients Treated for Breast Cancer. JNCI Monographs. 2014; 
2014:346–358.
10. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. [accessed 5/10/14] Grade Definitions. Available from URL: 
http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/grades.htm
11. Institute of Medicine Committee on Standard for Developing Trustworthy Clincal Practice 
Guidelines. Clinical Practice Guidelines We Can Trust. Washington DC: The National Academies 
Press; 2011. 
12. World Cancer Research Fund/American Institute for Cancer Research. Food, nutrition, physical 
activity, and the prevention of cancer: a global perspective. Washington, D.C: AICR; 2007. 
13. Rock CL, Doyle C, Demark-Wahnefried W, et al. Nutrition and physical activity guidelines for 
cancer survivors. CA Cancer J Clin. 2012; 62:243–274. [PubMed: 22539238] 
14. Schmitz KH, Courneya KS, Matthews C, et al. American College of Sports Medicine roundtable 
on exercise guidelines for cancer survivors. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2010; 42:1409–1426. [PubMed: 
20559064] 
15. Duijts SF, Faber MM, Oldenburg HS, van Beurden M, Aaronson NK. Effectiveness of behavioral 
techniques and physical exercise on psychosocial functioning and health-related quality of life in 
breast cancer patients and survivors--a meta-analysis. Psychooncology. 2011; 20:115–126. 
[PubMed: 20336645] 
16. Faller H, Schuler M, Richard M, Heckl U, Weis J, Kuffner R. Effects of psycho-oncologic 
interventions on emotional distress and quality of life in adult patients with cancer: systematic 
review and meta-analysis. J Clin Oncol. 2013; 31:782–793. [PubMed: 23319686] 
17. Galway K, Black A, Cantwell M, Cardwell CR, Mills M, Donnelly M. Psychosocial interventions 
to improve quality of life and emotional wellbeing for recently diagnosed cancer patients. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012; 11:CD007064. [PubMed: 23152241] 
18. Jadad AR, Moore RA, Carroll D, et al. Assessing the quality of reports of randomized clinical 
trials: is blinding necessary? Control Clin Trials. 1996; 17:1–12. [PubMed: 8721797] 
19. Verhagen AP, de Vet HC, de Bie RA, et al. The Delphi list: a criteria list for quality assessment of 
randomized clinical trials for conducting systematic reviews developed by Delphi consensus. J 
Clin Epidemiol. 1998; 51:1235–1241. [PubMed: 10086815] 
20. National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health. [accessed 6/18/15] Health Topics A-Z. 
Available from URL: https://nccih.nih.gov/health/atoz.htm
21. National Cancer Institute. [accessed 6/18/15] Complementary and Alternative Medicine. Available 
from URL: http://www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/cam
22. National Cancer Institute. [accessed 6/27/16] NCI Dictionary of Cancer Terms. Available from 
URL: http://www.cancer.gov/publications/dictionaries/cancer-terms
23. National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health. [accessed 6/18/15] Acupuncture. 
Available from URL: https://nccih.nih.gov/health/acupuncture
24. Cohen, MR. The New Chinese Medicine Handbook: An Innovative Guide to Integrating Eastern 
Wisdom with Western Practice for Modern Healing. Fairwinds Press; 2015. 
Greenlee et al.
Page 40
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 25. Napadow V, Makris N, Liu J, Kettner NW, Kwong KK, Hui KK. Effects of electroacupuncture 
versus manual acupuncture on the human brain as measured by fMRI. Hum Brain Mapp. 2005; 
24:193–205. [PubMed: 15499576] 
26. Shen Y, Liu L, Chiang JS, et al. Randomized, placebo-controlled trial of K1 acupoint 
acustimulation to prevent cisplatin-induced or oxaliplatin-induced nausea. Cancer. 2015; 121:84–
92. [PubMed: 25204437] 
27. Magnusson M, Hoglund P, Johansson K, et al. Pentoxifylline and vitamin E treatment for 
prevention of radiation-induced side-effects in women with breast cancer: a phase two, double-
blind, placebo-controlled randomised clinical trial (Ptx-5). Eur J Cancer. 2009; 45:2488–2495. 
[PubMed: 19540105] 
28. Gottschling S, Reindl TK, Meyer S, et al. Acupuncture to alleviate chemotherapy-induced nausea 
and vomiting in pediatric oncology - a randomized multicenter crossover pilot trial. Klin Padiatr. 
2008; 220:365–370. [PubMed: 18949672] 
29. Rithirangsriroj K, Manchana T, Akkayagorn L. Efficacy of acupuncture in prevention of delayed 
chemotherapy induced nausea and vomiting in gynecologic cancer patients. Gynecol Oncol. 2015; 
136:82–86. [PubMed: 25449310] 
30. Melchart D, Ihbe-Heffinger A, Leps B, von Schilling C, Linde K. Acupuncture and acupressure for 
the prevention of chemotherapy-induced nausea--a randomised cross-over pilot study. Support 
Care Cancer. 2006; 14:878–882. [PubMed: 16523265] 
31. Garcia MK, McQuade J, Haddad R, et al. Systematic review of acupuncture in cancer care: a 
synthesis of the evidence. J Clin Oncol. 2013; 31:952–960. [PubMed: 23341529] 
32. Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center. [accessed June 27, 2016] Integrative Medicine: About 
Herbs, Botanicals and Other Products. Available from URL: https://www.mskcc.org/cancer-care/
treatments/symptom-management/integrative-medicine/herbs
33. National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health. [accessed 6/27/16] Ginger. Available 
from URL: https://nccih.nih.gov/health/ginger
34. National Cancer Institute. [accessed 11/29/16] Topics in Integrative, Alternative, and 
Complementary Therapies (PDQ)- Patient Version. Available from URL: https://www.cancer.gov/
about-cancer/treatment/cam/patient/cam-topics-pdq-link/_34_toc
35. National Cancer Institute. [accessed 6/27/16] Lymphedema (PDQ) Health Professional Version. 
Available from URL: http://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/side-effects/lymphedema/
lymphedema-hp-pdq
36. National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health. [accessed 6/18/15] Massage therapy 
for health purposes: what you need to know. Available from URL: https://nccih.nih.gov/health/
massage/massageintroduction.htm
37. Gecsedi RA. Massage therapy for patients with cancer. Clin J Oncol Nurs. 2002; 6:52–54. 
[PubMed: 11842490] 
38. National Cancer Institute. [accessed 6/18/15] Pain-for health professionals (PDQ): Physical, 
Integrative, Cognitive-Behavioral and Pyschosocial Interventions. Available from URL: http://
www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/side-effects/pain/pain-hp-pdq-section/_231
39. Walsh R, Shapiro SL. The meeting of meditative disciplines and Western psychology - A mutually 
enriching dialogue. American Psychologist. 2006; 61:227–239. [PubMed: 16594839] 
40. Bond K, Ospina MB, Hooton N, et al. Defining a Complex Intervention: The Development of 
Demarcation Criteria for “Meditation”. Psychology of Religion and Spirituality. 2009; 1:129–137.
41. Kabat-Zinn, JNHT. Full Catastrophe Living. New York, New York: Bantam Dell; 1990. 
42. Shennan C, Payne S, Fenlon D. What is the evidence for the use of mindfulness-based 
interventions in cancer care? A review. Psychooncology. 2011; 20:681–697. [PubMed: 20690112] 
43. Matchim Y, Armer JM, Stewart BR. Mindfulness-based stress reduction among breast cancer 
survivors: a literature review and discussion. Oncol Nurs Forum. 2011; 38:E61–71. [PubMed: 
21356643] 
44. Zainal NZ, Booth S, Huppert FA. The efficacy of mindfulness-based stress reduction on mental 
health of breast cancer patients: a meta-analysis. Psychooncology. 2013; 22:1457–1465. [PubMed: 
22961994] 
Greenlee et al.
Page 41
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 45. Cramer H, Lauche R, Paul A, Dobos G. Mindfulness-based stress reduction for breast cancer-a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Curr Oncol. 2012; 19:e343–352. [PubMed: 23144582] 
46. Marvibaigi M, Supriyanto E, Amini N, Abdul Majid FA, Jaganathan SK. Preclinical and clinical 
effects of mistletoe against breast cancer. Biomed Res Int. 2014; 2014:785479. [PubMed: 
25136622] 
47. Bussing, A. Mistletoe: The Genus Viscum. The Netherlands: CRC Press; 2000. 
48. Horneber MA, Bueschel G, Huber R, Linde K, Rostock M. Mistletoe therapy in oncology. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008:CD003297. [PubMed: 18425885] 
49. American Music Therapy Association. [accessed 6/22/15] What is music therapy?. Available from 
URL: http://www.musictherapy.org/about/musictherapy/
50. Nilsson U. The anxiety- and pain-reducing effects of music interventions: a systematic review. 
AORN J. 2008; 87:780–807. [PubMed: 18395022] 
51. Guetin S, Charras K, Berard A, et al. An overview of the use of music therapy in the context of 
Alzheimer’s disease: a report of a French expert group. Dementia (London). 2013; 12:619–634. 
[PubMed: 24337333] 
52. National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health. [accessed 6/27/16] Reflexology. 
Available from URL: https://nccih.nih.gov/health/reflexology
53. National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health. [accessed 6/18/15] Relaxation 
Techniques for Health: What you need to know. Available from URL: https://nccih.nih.gov/health/
stress/relaxation.htm
54. National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health. [accessed 3/10/15] Relaxation 
Techniques for Health: What you need to know. Available from URL: https://nccih.nih.gov/health/
stress/relaxation.htm
55. National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health. [accessed 6/27/16] Tai Chi and Qi 
Gong: In Depth. Available from URL: https://nccih.nih.gov/health/taichi/introduction.htm
56. National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health. [accessed 6/18/15] Stress. Available 
from URL: https://nccih.nih.gov/health/stress
57. National Cancer Institute. [accessed 8/10/15] Depression- for health professionals (PDQ). 
Available from URL: http://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/coping/feelings/depression-hp-pdq/-
link/_74
58. National Cancer Institute. [accessed 8/8/15] Cancer-related post-traumatic stress- for health 
professionals (PDQ). Available from URL: http://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/coping/
survivorship/new-normal/ptsd-hp-pdq/-link/stoc_h2_4
59. Antoni MH, Lechner SC, Kazi A, et al. How stress management improves quality of life after 
treatment for breast cancer. J Consult Clin Psychol. 2006; 74:1143–1152. [PubMed: 17154743] 
60. Antoni MH, Lehman JM, Kilbourn KM, et al. Cognitive-behavioral stress management 
intervention decreases the prevalence of depression and enhances benefit finding among women 
under treatment for early-stage breast cancer. Health Psychol. 2001; 20:20–32. [PubMed: 
11199062] 
61. National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health. [accessed 6/18/15] Yoga. Available 
from URL: https://nccih.nih.gov/health/yoga
62. Iyengar, B. Light on pranayama: the yogic art of breathing. Crossroad Publishing Company; 2005. 
63. Andersen BL, DeRubeis RJ, Berman BS, et al. Screening, assessment, and care of anxiety and 
depressive symptoms in adults with cancer: an American Society of Clinical Oncology guideline 
adaptation. J Clin Oncol. 2014; 32:1605–1619. [PubMed: 24733793] 
64. Bower JE, Bak K, Berger A, et al. Screening, assessment, and management of fatigue in adult 
survivors of cancer: an American Society of Clinical oncology clinical practice guideline 
adaptation. J Clin Oncol. 2014; 32:1840–1850. [PubMed: 24733803] 
65. Hershman DL, Lacchetti C, Dworkin RH, et al. Prevention and management of chemotherapy-
induced peripheral neuropathy in survivors of adult cancers: American Society of Clinical 
Oncology clinical practice guideline. J Clin Oncol. 2014; 32:1941–1967. [PubMed: 24733808] 
66. Runowicz CD, Leach CR, Henry NL, et al. American Cancer Society/American Society of Clinical 
Oncology Breast Cancer Survivorship Care Guideline. J Clin Oncol. 2016; 34:611–635. [PubMed: 
26644543] 
Greenlee et al.
Page 42
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 67. Jordan K, Jahn F, Aapro M. Recent developments in the prevention of chemotherapy-induced 
nausea and vomiting (CINV): a comprehensive review. Ann Oncol. 2015; 26:1081–1090. 
[PubMed: 25755107] 
68. Carlson LE, Doll R, Stephen J, et al. Randomized controlled trial of Mindfulness-based cancer 
recovery versus supportive expressive group therapy for distressed survivors of breast cancer. J 
Clin Oncol. 2013; 31:3119–3126. [PubMed: 23918953] 
69. Crane-Okada R, Kiger H, Sugerman F, et al. Mindful movement program for older breast cancer 
survivors: a pilot study. Cancer Nurs. 2012; 35:E1–13.
70. Kim YH, Kim HJ, Ahn SD, Seo YJ, Kim SH. Effects of meditation on anxiety, depression, fatigue, 
and quality of life of women undergoing radiation therapy for breast cancer. Complement Ther 
Med. 2013; 21:379–387. [PubMed: 23876569] 
71. Lengacher CA, Johnson-Mallard V, Post-White J, et al. Randomized controlled trial of 
mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR) for survivors of breast cancer. Psycho-Oncology. 
2009; 18:1261–1272. [PubMed: 19235193] 
72. Wurtzen H, Dalton SO, Elsass P, et al. Mindfulness significantly reduces self-reported levels of 
anxiety and depression: results of a randomised controlled trial among 336 Danish women treated 
for stage I–III breast cancer. Eur J Cancer. 2013; 49:1365–1373. [PubMed: 23265707] 
73. Chandwani KD, Perkins G, Nagendra HR, et al. Randomized, controlled trial of yoga in women 
with breast cancer undergoing radiotherapy. J Clin Oncol. 2014; 32:1058–1065. [PubMed: 
24590636] 
74. Kiecolt-Glaser JK, Bennett JM, Andridge R, et al. Yoga’s impact on inflammation, mood, and 
fatigue in breast cancer survivors: a randomized controlled trial. J Clin Oncol. 2014; 32:1040–
1049. [PubMed: 24470004] 
75. Taso CJ, Lin HS, Lin WL, Chen SM, Huang WT, Chen SW. The effect of yoga exercise on 
improving depression, anxiety, and fatigue in women with breast cancer: a randomized controlled 
trial. The journal of nursing research: JNR. 2014; 22:155–164. [PubMed: 25111109] 
76. Rao RM, Raghuram N, Nagendra HR, et al. Effects of an integrated Yoga Program on Self-
reported Depression Scores in Breast Cancer Patients Undergoing Conventional Treatment: A 
Randomized Controlled Trial. Indian J Palliat Care. 2015; 21:174–181. [PubMed: 26009671] 
77. Siedentopf F, Utz-Billing I, Gairing S, Schoenegg W, Kentenich H, Kollak I. Yoga for Patients with 
Early Breast Cancer and its Impact on Quality of Life - a Randomized Controlled Trial. 
Geburtshilfe und Frauenheilkunde. 2013; 73:311–317. [PubMed: 24771916] 
78. Cramer H, Rabsilber S, Lauche R, Kummel S, Dobos G. Yoga and meditation for menopausal 
symptoms in breast cancer survivors - A randomized controlled trial. Cancer. 2015; 121:2175–
2184. [PubMed: 25739642] 
79. Montgomery GH, David D, Kangas M, et al. Randomized controlled trial of a cognitive-behavioral 
therapy plus hypnosis intervention to control fatigue in patients undergoing radiotherapy for breast 
cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2014; 32:557–563. [PubMed: 24419112] 
80. Montgomery GH, Kangas M, David D, et al. Fatigue during breast cancer radiotherapy: an initial 
randomized study of cognitive-behavioral therapy plus hypnosis. Health Psychol. 2009; 28:317–
322. [PubMed: 19450037] 
81. National Cancer Institute. [accessed 6/18/15] Feelings and Cancer. Available from URL: http://
www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/coping/feelings - stress
82. Brintzenhofe-Szoc KM, Levin TT, Li YL, Kissane DW, Zabora JR. Mixed Anxiety/Depression 
Symptoms in a Large Cancer Cohort: Prevalence by Cancer Type. Psychosomatics. 2009; 50:383–
391. [PubMed: 19687179] 
83. Eskelinen M, Ollonen P. Assessment of General Anxiety in Patients with Breast Disease and Breast 
Cancer Using the Spielberger STAI Self Evaluation Test: A Prospective Case-Control Study in 
Finland. Anticancer Research. 2011; 31:1801–1806. [PubMed: 21617243] 
84. Ollonen P, Lehtonen J, Eskelinen M. Anxiety, depression, and the history of psychiatric symptoms 
in patients with breast disease: A prospective case-control study in Kuopio, Finland. Anticancer 
Research. 2005; 25:2527–2533. [PubMed: 16080488] 
85. Anderson ER, Mayes LC. Race/ethnicity and internalizing disorders in youth: a review. Clin 
Psychol Rev. 2010; 30:338–348. [PubMed: 20071063] 
Greenlee et al.
Page 43
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 86. Institute of Medicine. Cancer care for the whole patient: meeting psychosocial health needs. 
Washington, DC: The National Academic Press; 2007. 
87. Valentine, A. MD Anderson manual of psychosocial oncology. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, Inc; 
2011. Mood disorders; p. 271-288.
88. Rashid, A. MD Anderson manual of psychosocial oncology. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, Inc; 
2011. Anxiety in cancer patients; p. 271-288.
89. Carlson LE, Doll R, Stephen J, et al. Randomized controlled trial of mindfulness-based cancer 
recovery versus supportive expressive group therapy for distressed survivors of breast cancer 
(MINDSET). Journal of Clinical Oncology. 2013 JCO. 2012.2047. 5210. 
90. Goyal M, Singh S, Sibinga EM, et al. Meditation programs for psychological stress and well-being: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Intern Med. 2014; 174:357–368. [PubMed: 
24395196] 
91. Miller JJ, Fletcher K, Kabat-Zinn J. Three-year follow-up and clinical implications of a 
mindfulness meditation-based stress reduction intervention in the treatment of anxiety disorders. 
General hospital psychiatry. 1995; 17:192–200. [PubMed: 7649463] 
92. Kabat-Zinn J, Massion AO, Kristeller J, et al. Effectiveness of a meditation-based stress reduction 
program in the treatment of anxiety disorders. Am J Psychiatry. 1992; 149:936–943. [PubMed: 
1609875] 
93. Hoge EA, Bui E, Marques L, et al. Randomized controlled trial of mindfulness meditation for 
generalized anxiety disorder: effects on anxiety and stress reactivity. The Journal of clinical 
psychiatry. 2013; 74:786. [PubMed: 23541163] 
94. Speca M, Carlson LE, Goodey E, Angen M. A randomized, wait-list controlled clinical trial: the 
effect of a mindfulness meditation-based stress reduction program on mood and symptoms of 
stress in cancer outpatients. Psychosomatic medicine. 2000; 62:613–622. [PubMed: 11020090] 
95. Carlson LE, Ursuliak Z, Goodey E, Angen M, Speca M. The effects of a mindfulness meditation-
based stress reduction program on mood and symptoms of stress in cancer outpatients: 6-month 
follow-up. Supportive care in Cancer. 2001; 9:112–123. [PubMed: 11305069] 
96. Piet J, Würtzen H, Zachariae R. The effect of mindfulness-based therapy on symptoms of anxiety 
and depression in adult cancer patients and survivors: A systematic review and meta-analysis. J 
Consult Clin Psychol. 2012; 80:1007. [PubMed: 22563637] 
97. Zainal NZ, Booth S, Huppert FA. The efficacy of mindfulness-based stress reduction on mental 
health of breast cancer patients: a meta-analysis. Psycho-Oncology. 2013; 22:1457–1465. 
[PubMed: 22961994] 
98. Musial F, Büssing A, Heusser P, Choi K-E, Ostermann T. Mindfulness-based stress reduction for 
integrative cancer care: a summary of evidence. 2011
99. Rocha T. The Dark Knight of the Soul. The Atlantic. 2014:25.
100. Lomas T, Cartwright T, Edginton T, Ridge D. A qualitative analysis of experiential challenges 
associated with meditation practice. Mindfulness. 2014:1–13.
101. Lengacher CA, Kip KE, Barta M, et al. A pilot study evaluating the effect of mindfulness-based 
stress reduction on psychological status, physical status, salivary cortisol, and interleukin-6 
among advanced-stage cancer patients and their caregivers. Journal of Holistic Nursing. 2012; 
30:170–185. [PubMed: 22442202] 
102. Tamagawa R, Speca M, Stephen J, Pickering B, Lawlor-Savage L, Carlson LE. Predictors and 
Effects of Class Attendance and Home Practice of Yoga and Meditation Among Breast Cancer 
Survivors in a Mindfulness-Based Cancer Recovery (MBCR) Program. Mindfulness. 2015:1–10.
103. Zernicke KA, Campbell TS, Speca M, McCabe-Ruff K, Flowers S, Carlson LE. A Randomized 
Wait-List Controlled Trial of Feasibility and Efficacy of an Online Mindfulness–Based Cancer 
Recovery Program: The eTherapy for Cancer Applying Mindfulness Trial. Psychosomatic 
medicine. 2014; 76:257–267. [PubMed: 24804884] 
104. Binns-Turner PG, Wilson LL, Pryor ER, Boyd GL, Prickett CA. Perioperative music and its 
effects on anxiety, hemodynamics, and pain in women undergoing mastectomy. Aana j. 2011; 
79:S21–27. [PubMed: 22403963] 
Greenlee et al.
Page 44
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 105. Bulfone T, Quattrin R, Zanotti R, Regattin L, Brusaferro S. Effectiveness of music therapy for 
anxiety reduction in women with breast cancer in chemotherapy treatment. Holist Nurs Pract. 
2009; 23:238–242. [PubMed: 19574761] 
106. Hanser SB, Bauer-Wu S, Kubicek L, et al. Effects of a music therapy intervention on quality of 
life and distress in women with metastatic breast cancer. J Soc Integr Oncol. 2006; 4:116–124. 
[PubMed: 19442346] 
107. Li XM, Zhou KN, Yan H, Wang DL, Zhang YP. Effects of music therapy on anxiety of patients 
with breast cancer after radical mastectomy: a randomized clinical trial. J Adv Nurs. 2012; 
68:1145–1155. [PubMed: 21978087] 
108. Zhou K, Li X, Li J, et al. A clinical randomized controlled trial of music therapy and progressive 
muscle relaxation training in female breast cancer patients after radical mastectomy: results on 
depression, anxiety and length of hospital stay. European journal of oncology nursing : the 
official journal of European Oncology Nursing Society. 2015; 19:54–59. [PubMed: 25181938] 
109. Boehm K, Cramer H, Staroszynski T, Ostermann T. Arts therapies for anxiety, depression, and 
quality of life in breast cancer patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Evid Based 
Complement Alternat Med. 2014; 2014:103297. [PubMed: 24817896] 
110. Thyme KE, Sundin EC, Wiberg B, Oster I, Astrom S, Lindh J. Individual brief art therapy can be 
helpful for women with breast cancer: a randomized controlled clinical study. Palliat Support 
Care. 2009; 7:87–95. [PubMed: 19619378] 
111. Zavotsky KE, Banavage A, James P, Easter K, Pontieri-Lewis V, Lutwin L. The effects of music 
on pain and anxiety during screening mammography. Clin J Oncol Nurs. 2014; 18:E45–49. 
[PubMed: 24867123] 
112. Garssen B, Boomsma MF, de Meezenbroek EJ, et al. Stress management training for breast 
cancer surgery patients. Psychooncology. 2013; 22:572–580. [PubMed: 22383279] 
113. Jacobsen PB, Phillips KM, Jim HS, et al. Effects of self-directed stress management training and 
home-based exercise on quality of life in cancer patients receiving chemotherapy: a randomized 
controlled trial. Psychooncology. 2013; 22:1229–1235. [PubMed: 22715124] 
114. Aguado Loi CX, Taylor TR, McMillan S, et al. Use and helpfulness of self-administered stress 
management therapy in patients undergoing cancer chemotherapy in community clinical settings. 
J Psychosoc Oncol. 2012; 30:57–80. [PubMed: 22269076] 
115. Phillips KM, Antoni MH, Lechner SC, et al. Stress management intervention reduces serum 
cortisol and increases relaxation during treatment for nonmetastatic breast cancer. Psychosom 
Med. 2008; 70:1044–1049. [PubMed: 18842742] 
116. Trijsburg RW, van Knippenberg FC, Rijpma SE. Effects of psychological treatment on cancer 
patients: a critical review. Psychosom Med. 1992; 54:489–517. [PubMed: 1502290] 
117. Banerjee B, Vadiraj H, Ram A, et al. Effects of an integrated yoga program in modulating 
psychological stress and radiation-induced genotoxic stress in breast cancer patients undergoing 
radiotherapy. Integrative Cancer Therapies. 2007; 6:242–250. [PubMed: 17761637] 
118. Vadiraja H, Raghavendra RM, Nagarathna R, et al. Effects of a yoga program on cortisol rhythm 
and mood states in early breast cancer patients undergoing adjuvant radiotherapy: a randomized 
controlled trial. Integrative Cancer Therapies. 2009
119. Raghavendra R, Nagarathna R, Nagendra H, et al. Effects of an integrated yoga programme on 
chemotherapy-induced nausea and emesis in breast cancer patients. European journal of cancer 
care. 2007; 16:462–474. [PubMed: 17944760] 
120. Rao MR, Raghuram N, Nagendra H, et al. Anxiolytic effects of a yoga program in early breast 
cancer patients undergoing conventional treatment: a randomized controlled trial. Complement 
Ther Med. 2009; 17:1–8. [PubMed: 19114222] 
121. Bower JE, Garet D, Sternlieb B, et al. Yoga for persistent fatigue in breast cancer survivors: a 
randomized controlled trial. Cancer. 2012; 118:3766–3775. [PubMed: 22180393] 
122. Dhruva A, Miaskowski C, Abrams D, et al. Yoga breathing for cancer chemotherapy-associated 
symptoms and quality of life: results of a pilot randomized controlled trial. J Altern Complement 
Med. 2012; 18:473–479. [PubMed: 22525009] 
Greenlee et al.
Page 45
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 123. Pruthi S, Stan DL, Jenkins SM, et al. A Randomized controlled pilot study assessing feasibility 
and impact of yoga practice on quality of life, mood, and perceived stress in women with newly 
diagnosed breast cancer. Global Advances In Health and Medicine. 2012; 1:30–35.
124. Chandwani KD, Thornton B, Perkins GH, et al. Yoga improves quality of life and benefit finding 
in women undergoing radiotherapy for breast cancer. J Soc Integr Oncol. 2010; 8:43–55. 
[PubMed: 20388445] 
125. Smith KB, Pukall CF. An evidence-based review of yoga as a complementary intervention for 
patients with cancer. Psycho-Oncology. 2009; 18:465–475. [PubMed: 18821529] 
126. Culos-Reed SN, Mackenzie MJ, Sohl SJ, Jesse MT, Zahavich ANR, Danhauer SC. Yoga & cancer 
interventions: a review of the clinical significance of patient reported outcomes for cancer 
survivors. Evidence-based Complementary and Alternative Medicine. 2012; 2012
127. Buffart LM, Van Uffelen JG, Riphagen II, et al. Physical and psychosocial benefits of yoga in 
cancer patients and survivors, a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled 
trials. BMC Cancer. 2012; 12:559. [PubMed: 23181734] 
128. Sadja J, Mills PJ. Effects of yoga interventions on fatigue in cancer patients and survivors: a 
systematic review of randomized controlled trials. EXPLORE: The Journal of Science and 
Healing. 2013; 9:232–243.
129. Lin K-Y, Hu Y-T, Chang K-J, Lin H-F, Tsauo J-Y. Effects of yoga on psychological health, quality 
of life, and physical health of patients with cancer: a meta-analysis. Evidence-based 
Complementary and Alternative Medicine. 2011; 2011
130. Cramer H, Lange S, Klose P, Paul A, Dobos G. Yoga for breast cancer patients and survivors: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Cancer. 2012; 12:412. [PubMed: 22988934] 
131. Kirkwood G, Rampes H, Tuffrey V, Richardson J, Pilkington K. Yoga for anxiety: a systematic 
review of the research evidence. British Journal of Sports Medicine. 2005; 39:884–891. 
[PubMed: 16306493] 
132. Woolery A, Myers H, Sternlieb B, Zeltzer L. A yoga intervention for young adults with elevated 
symptoms of depression. Alternative therapies in health and medicine. 2004; 10:60–63. 
[PubMed: 15055096] 
133. Cramer H, Krucoff C, Dobos G. Adverse events associated with yoga: a systematic review of 
published case reports and case series. PloS one. 2013; 8:e75515. [PubMed: 24146758] 
134. Bao T, Cai L, Snyder C, et al. Patient-reported outcomes in women with breast cancer enrolled in 
a dual-center, double-blind, randomized controlled trial assessing the effect of acupuncture in 
reducing aromatase inhibitor-induced musculoskeletal symptoms. Cancer. 2014; 120:381–389. 
[PubMed: 24375332] 
135. Mao JJ, Farrar JT, Bruner D, et al. Electroacupuncture for fatigue, sleep, and psychological 
distress in breast cancer patients with aromatase inhibitor-related arthralgia: A randomized trial. 
Cancer. 2014; 120:3744–3751. [PubMed: 25077452] 
136. Molassiotis A, Bardy J, Finnegan-John J, et al. Acupuncture for cancer-related fatigue in patients 
with breast cancer: a pragmatic randomized controlled trial. J Clin Oncol. 2012; 30:4470–4476. 
[PubMed: 23109700] 
137. Billhult A, Bergbom I, Stener-Victorin E. Massage relieves nausea in women with breast cancer 
who are undergoing chemotherapy. J Altern Complement Med. 2007; 13:53–57. [PubMed: 
17309378] 
138. Hernandez-Reif M, Ironson G, Field T, et al. Breast cancer patients have improved immune and 
neuroendocrine functions following massage therapy. J Psychosom Res. 2004; 57:45–52. 
[PubMed: 15256294] 
139. Listing M, Krohn M, Liezmann C, et al. The efficacy of classical massage on stress perception 
and cortisol following primary treatment of breast cancer. Arch Womens Ment Health. 2010; 
13:165–173. [PubMed: 20169378] 
140. Wilkinson SM, Love SB, Westcombe AM, et al. Effectiveness of aromatherapy massage in the 
management of anxiety and depression in patients with cancer: a multicenter randomized 
controlled trial. J Clin Oncol. 2007; 25:532–539. [PubMed: 17290062] 
Greenlee et al.
Page 46
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 141. Hidderley M, Holt M. A pilot randomized trial assessing the effects of autogenic training in early 
stage cancer patients in relation to psychological status and immune system responses. European 
Journal of Oncology Nursing. 2004; 8:61–65. [PubMed: 15003745] 
142. Kovacic T, Kovacic M. Impact of relaxation training according to Yoga In Daily Life(R) system 
on perceived stress after breast cancer surgery. Integr Cancer Ther. 2011; 10:16–26. [PubMed: 
21147813] 
143. Kovacic T, Zagoricnik M, Kovacic M. Impact of relaxation training according to the Yoga In 
Daily Life(R) system on anxiety after breast cancer surgery. J Complement Integr Med. 2013; 
10:153–164.
144. Molassiotis A, Yung HP, Yam BM, Chan FY, Mok TS. The effectiveness of progressive muscle 
relaxation training in managing chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting in Chinese breast 
cancer patients: a randomised controlled trial. Support Care Cancer. 2002; 10:237–246. 
[PubMed: 11904789] 
145. Nunes DF, Rodriguez AL, da Silva Hoffmann F, et al. Relaxation and guided imagery program in 
patients with breast cancer undergoing radiotherapy is not associated with 
neuroimmunomodulatory effects. J Psychosom Res. 2007; 63:647–655. [PubMed: 18061756] 
146. Burns DS. The effect of the bonny method of guided imagery and music on the mood and life 
quality of cancer patients. J Music Ther. 2001; 38:51–65. [PubMed: 11407965] 
147. Zhou KN, Li XM, Yan H, Dang SN, Wang DL. Effects of music therapy on depression and 
duration of hospital stay of breast cancer patients after radical mastectomy. Chin Med J (Engl). 
2011; 124:2321–2327. [PubMed: 21933563] 
148. Zhou KN, Li XM, Yan H, Dang SN, Wang DL. Effects of music therapy on depression and 
duration of hospital stay of breast cancer patients after radical mastectomy. Chinese Medical 
Journal. 2011; 124:2321–2327. [PubMed: 21933563] 
149. Maratos AS, Gold C, Wang X, Crawford MJ. Music therapy for depression. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev. 2008:CD004517. [PubMed: 18254052] 
150. Culos-Reed SN, Carlson LE, Daroux LM, Hately-Aldous S. A pilot study of yoga for breast 
cancer survivors: physical and psychological benefits. Psychooncology. 2006; 15:891–897. 
[PubMed: 16374892] 
151. Moadel AB, Shah C, Wylie-Rosett J, et al. Randomized controlled trial of yoga among a 
multiethnic sample of breast cancer patients: effects on quality of life. J Clin Oncol. 2007; 
25:4387–4395. [PubMed: 17785709] 
152. Danhauer SC, Mihalko SL, Russell GB, et al. Restorative yoga for women with breast cancer: 
findings from a randomized pilot study. Psychooncology. 2009; 18:360–368. [PubMed: 
19242916] 
153. Vadiraja H, Rao MR, Nagarathna R, et al. Effects of yoga program on quality of life and affect in 
early breast cancer patients undergoing adjuvant radiotherapy: a randomized controlled trial. 
Complement Ther Med. 2009; 17:274–280. [PubMed: 19942107] 
154. Raghavendra RM, Nagarathna R, Nagendra HR, et al. Effects of an integrated yoga programme 
on chemotherapy-induced nausea and emesis in breast cancer patients. European journal of 
cancer care. 2007; 16:462–474. [PubMed: 17944760] 
155. Pilkington K, Kirkwood G, Rampes H, Richardson J. Yoga for depression: the research evidence. 
Journal of affective disorders. 2005; 89:13–24. [PubMed: 16185770] 
156. Shapiro D, Cook IA, Davydov DM, Ottaviani C, Leuchter AF, Abrams M. Yoga as a 
complementary treatment of depression: effects of traits and moods on treatment outcome. 
Evidence-based Complementary and Alternative Medicine. 2007; 4:493–502. [PubMed: 
18227917] 
157. Uebelacker LA, Epstein-Lubow G, Gaudiano BA, Tremont G, Battle CL, Miller IW. Hatha yoga 
for depression: critical review of the evidence for efficacy, plausible mechanisms of action, and 
directions for future research. Journal of Psychiatric Practice®. 2010; 16:22–33. [PubMed: 
20098228] 
158. Chandwani KD, Thornton B, Perkins GH, et al. Yoga improves quality of life and benefit finding 
in women undergoing radiotherapy for breast cancer. J Soc Integr Oncol. 2009; 8:43–55.
Greenlee et al.
Page 47
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 159. Milbury K, Chaoul A, Biegler K, et al. Tibetan sound meditation for cognitive dysfunction: results 
of a randomized controlled pilot trial. Psycho-Oncology. 2013; 22:2354–2363. [PubMed: 
23657969] 
160. Hoffman CJ, Ersser SJ, Hopkinson JB, Nicholls PG, Harrington JE, Thomas PW. Effectiveness of 
mindfulness-based stress reduction in mood, breast- and endocrine-related quality of life, and 
well-being in stage 0 to III breast cancer: a randomized, controlled trial. J Clin Oncol. 2012; 
30:1335–1342. [PubMed: 22430268] 
161. Nidich SI, Fields JZ, Rainforth MV, et al. A randomized controlled trial of the effects of 
transcendental meditation on quality of life in older breast cancer patients. Integr Cancer Ther. 
2009; 8:228–234. [PubMed: 19815592] 
162. Henderson VP, Massion AO, Clemow L, Hurley TG, Druker S, Hebert JR. A randomized 
controlled trial of mindfulness-based stress reduction for women with early-stage breast cancer 
receiving radiotherapy. Integr Cancer Ther. 2013; 12:404–413. [PubMed: 23362338] 
163. Dodds SE, Pace TWW, Bell ML, et al. Feasibility of Cognitively-Based Compassion Training 
(CBCT) for breast cancer survivors: a randomized, wait list controlled pilot study. Supportive 
care in Cancer. 2015; 23:3599–3608. [PubMed: 26275769] 
164. Teasdale JD, Segal ZV, Williams JMG, Ridgeway VA, Soulsby JM, Lau MA. Prevention of 
relapse/recurrence in major depression by mindfulness-based cognitive therapy. J Consult Clin 
Psychol. 2000; 68:615. [PubMed: 10965637] 
165. Segal ZV, Teasdale JD, Williams JM, Gemar MC. The mindfulness-based cognitive therapy 
adherence scale: inter-rater reliability, adherence to protocol and treatment distinctiveness. 
Clinical Psychology & Psychotherapy. 2002; 9:131–138.
166. Hofmann SG, Sawyer AT, Witt AA, Oh D. The effect of mindfulness-based therapy on anxiety 
and depression: A meta-analytic review. J Consult Clin Psychol. 2010; 78:169. [PubMed: 
20350028] 
167. Krohn M, Listing M, Tjahjono G, et al. Depression, mood, stress, and Th1/Th2 immune balance 
in primary breast cancer patients undergoing classical massage therapy. Support Care Cancer. 
2011; 19:1303–1311. [PubMed: 20644965] 
168. Listing M, Reisshauer A, Krohn M, et al. Massage therapy reduces physical discomfort and 
improves mood disturbances in women with breast cancer. Psychooncology. 2009; 18:1290–
1299. [PubMed: 19189275] 
169. Fernandez-Lao C, Cantarero-Villanueva I, Diaz-Rodriguez L, Cuesta-Vargas AI, Fernandez-
Delas-Penas C, Arroyo-Morales M. Attitudes towards massage modify effects of manual therapy 
in breast cancer survivors: a randomised clinical trial with crossover design. European journal of 
cancer care. 2012; 21:233–241. [PubMed: 22060159] 
170. Pan YQ, Yang KH, Wang YL, Zhang LP, Liang HQ. Massage interventions and treatment-related 
side effects of breast cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Clin Oncol. 2014; 
19:829–841. [PubMed: 24275985] 
171. Lee MS, Lee EN, Ernst E. Massage therapy for breast cancer patients: a systematic review. Ann 
Oncol. 2011; 22:1459–1461. [PubMed: 21543629] 
172. Kutner JS, Smith MC, Corbin L, et al. Massage therapy versus simple touch to improve pain and 
mood in patients with advanced cancer: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 2008; 149:369–379. 
[PubMed: 18794556] 
173. Ernst E. The safety of massage therapy. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2003; 42:1101–1106. [PubMed: 
12777645] 
174. Wilkinson S, Barnes K, Storey L. Massage for symptom relief in patients with cancer: systematic 
review. J Adv Nurs. 2008; 63:430–439. [PubMed: 18727744] 
175. Coelho HF, Boddy K, Ernst E. Massage therapy for the treatment of depression: a systematic 
review. Int J Clin Pract. 2008; 62:325–333. [PubMed: 18081800] 
176. Hou WH, Chiang PT, Hsu TY, Chiu SY, Yen YC. Treatment effects of massage therapy in 
depressed people: a meta-analysis. J Clin Psychiatry. 2010; 71:894–901. [PubMed: 20361919] 
177. Yoo HJ, Ahn SH, Kim SB, Kim WK, Han OS. Efficacy of progressive muscle relaxation training 
and guided imagery in reducing chemotherapy side effects in patients with breast cancer and in 
improving their quality of life. Support Care Cancer. 2005; 13:826–833. [PubMed: 15856335] 
Greenlee et al.
Page 48
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 178. Walker LG, Walker MB, Ogston K, et al. Psychological, clinical and pathological effects of 
relaxation training and guided imagery during primary chemotherapy. Br J Cancer. 1999; 
80:262–268. [PubMed: 10390006] 
179. Gudenkauf LM, Antoni MH, Stagl JM, et al. Brief cognitive-behavioral and relaxation training 
interventions for breast cancer: A randomized controlled trial. J Consult Clin Psychol. 2015; 
83:677–688. [PubMed: 25939017] 
180. Roffe L, Schmidt K, Ernst E. A systematic review of guided imagery as an adjuvant cancer 
therapy. Psychooncology. 2005; 14:607–617. [PubMed: 15651053] 
181. Demiralp M, Oflaz F, Komurcu S. Effects of relaxation training on sleep quality and fatigue in 
patients with breast cancer undergoing adjuvant chemotherapy. J Clin Nurs. 2010; 19:1073–1083. 
[PubMed: 20492052] 
182. Goerling U, Jaeger C, Walz A, Stickel A, Mangler M, van der Meer E. The efficacy of short-term 
psycho-oncological interventions for women with gynaecological cancer: a randomized study. 
Oncology. 2014; 87:114–124. [PubMed: 25012072] 
183. Park ER, Traeger L, Willett J, et al. A relaxation response training for women undergoing breast 
biopsy: exploring integrated care. Breast. 2013; 22:799–805. [PubMed: 23587450] 
184. Song QH, Xu RM, Zhang QH, Ma M, Zhao XP. Relaxation training during chemotherapy for 
breast cancer improves mental health and lessens adverse events. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2013; 
6:979–984. [PubMed: 24260607] 
185. Yilmaz SG, Arslan S. Effects of progressive relaxation exercises on anxiety and comfort of 
Turkish breast cancer patients receiving chemotherapy. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2015; 16:217–
220. [PubMed: 25640354] 
186. Tanyi RA, Berk LS, Lee JW, Boyd K, Arechiga A. The effects of a psychoneuroimmunology 
(PNI) based lifestyle intervention in modifying the progression of depression in clinically 
depressed adults. Int J Psychiatry Med. 2011; 42:151–166. [PubMed: 22409094] 
187. Klainin-Yobas P, Oo WN, Suzanne Yew PY, Lau Y. Effects of relaxation interventions on 
depression and anxiety among older adults: a systematic review. Aging Ment Health. 2015:1–13.
188. Younge JO, Gotink RA, Baena CP, Roos-Hesselink JW, Hunink MM. Mind-body practices for 
patients with cardiac disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Prev Cardiol. 2014
189. Nedstrand E, Wijma K, Wyon Y, Hammar M. Vasomotor symptoms decrease in women with 
breast cancer randomized to treatment with applied relaxation or electro-acupuncture: A 
preliminary study. Climacteric. 2005; 8:243–250. [PubMed: 16390756] 
190. Walker EM, Rodriguez AI, Kohn B, et al. Acupuncture versus venlafaxine for the management of 
vasomotor symptoms in patients with hormone receptor-positive breast cancer: a randomized 
controlled trial. J Clin Oncol. 2010; 28:634–640. [PubMed: 20038728] 
191. FitzHenry F, Wells N, Slater V, Dietrich MS, Wisawatapnimit P, Chakravarthy AB. A randomized 
placebo-controlled pilot study of the impact of healing touch on fatigue in breast cancer patients 
undergoing radiation therapy. Integrative Cancer Therapies. 2014; 13:105–113. [PubMed: 
24105358] 
192. Post-White J, Kinney ME, Savik K, Gau JB, Wilcox C, Lerner I. Therapeutic massage and 
healing touch improve symptoms in cancer. Integr Cancer Ther. 2003; 2:332–344. [PubMed: 
14713325] 
193. Lechner SC, Whitehead NE, Vargas S, et al. Does a community-based stress management 
intervention affect psychological adaptation among underserved black breast cancer survivors? 
Journal of the National Cancer Institute. Monographs. 2014; 2014:315–322. [PubMed: 
25749598] 
194. Stagl JM, Bouchard LC, Lechner SC, et al. Long-term psychological benefits of cognitive-
behavioral stress management for women with breast cancer: 11-year follow-up of a randomized 
controlled trial. Cancer. 2015; 121:1873–1881. [PubMed: 25809235] 
195. National Cancer Institute. [accessed 6/18/15] Fatigue (PDQ). Available from URL: http://
www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/supportivecare/fatigue/HealthProfessional
196. Berger AM, Abernethy AP, Atkinson A, et al. NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines Cancer-related 
fatigue. J Natl Compr Canc Netw. 2010; 8:904–931. [PubMed: 20870636] 
Greenlee et al.
Page 49
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 197. Minton O, Stone P. How common is fatigue in disease-free breast cancer survivors? A systematic 
review of the literature. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2008; 112:5–13.
198. Bower JE, Ganz PA, Desmond KA, et al. Fatigue in long-term breast carcinoma survivors - A 
longitudinal investigation. Cancer. 2006; 106:751–758. [PubMed: 16400678] 
199. Stone P, Richardson A, Ream E, et al. Cancer-related fatigue: Inevitable, unimportant and 
untreatable? Results of a multi-centre patient survey. Annals of Oncology. 2000; 11:971–975. 
[PubMed: 11038033] 
200. Hershman DL, Unger JM, Crew KD, et al. Randomized double-blind placebo-controlled trial of 
acetyl-L-carnitine for the prevention of taxane-induced neuropathy in women undergoing 
adjuvant breast cancer therapy. J Clin Oncol. 2013; 31:2627–2633. [PubMed: 23733756] 
201. da Costa Miranda V, Trufelli DC, Santos J, et al. Effectiveness of guarana (Paullinia cupana) for 
postradiation fatigue and depression: Results of a pilot double-blind randomized study. J Altern 
Complement Med. 2009; 15:431–433. [PubMed: 19388866] 
202. de Oliveira Campos MP, Riechelmann R, Martins LC, Hassan BJ, Casa FBA, Giglio AD. Guarana 
(Paullinia cupana) improves fatigue in breast cancer patients undergoing systemic chemotherapy. 
J Altern Complement Med. 2011; 17:505–512. [PubMed: 21612429] 
203. Barton DL, Liu H, Dakhil SR, et al. Wisconsin Ginseng (Panax quinquefolius) to improve cancer-
related fatigue: a randomized, double-blind trial, N07C2. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2013; 105:1230–
1238. [PubMed: 23853057] 
204. Barton DL, Soori GS, Bauer BA, et al. Pilot study of Panax quinquefolius (American ginseng) to 
improve cancer-related fatigue: a randomized, double-blind, dose-finding evaluation: NCCTG 
trial N03CA. Support Care Cancer. 2010; 18:179–187. [PubMed: 19415341] 
205. Deng G, Chan Y, Sjoberg D, et al. Acupuncture for the treatment of post-chemotherapy chronic 
fatigue: a randomized, blinded, sham-controlled trial. Support Care Cancer. 2013; 21:1735–1741. 
[PubMed: 23334562] 
206. Molassiotis A, Bardy J, Finnegan-John J, et al. A randomized, controlled trial of acupuncture self-
needling as maintenance therapy for cancer-related fatigue after therapist-delivered acupuncture. 
Ann Oncol. 2013; 24:1645–1652. [PubMed: 23436910] 
207. Smith C, Carmady B, Thornton C, Perz J, Ussher JM. The effect of acupuncture on post-cancer 
fatigue and well-being for women recovering from breast cancer: a pilot randomised controlled 
trial. Acupunct Med. 2013; 31:9–15. [PubMed: 23196311] 
208. Banasik J, Williams H, Haberman M, Blank SE, Bendel R. Effect of Iyengar yoga practice on 
fatigue and diurnal salivary cortisol concentration in breast cancer survivors. Journal of the 
American Academy of Nurse Practitioners. 2011; 23:135–142. [PubMed: 21355946] 
209. Littman AJ, Bertram LC, Ceballos R, et al. Randomized controlled pilot trial of yoga in 
overweight and obese breast cancer survivors: effects on quality of life and anthropometric 
measures. Support Care Cancer. 2012; 20:267–277. [PubMed: 21207071] 
210. Victorson, DCD., Wagner, L., Kramer, L., Smith, ML. Measuring quality of life in cancer 
survivors. In: Feuerstein, Me, editor. Handbook of cancer survivorship. New York: Springer; 
2007. p. 79-110.
211. Ganz PA, Rowland JH, Desmond K, Meyerowitz BE, Wyatt GE. Life after breast cancer: 
understanding women’s health-related quality of life and sexual functioning. J Clin Oncol. 1998; 
16:501–514. [PubMed: 9469334] 
212. National Cancer Institute. [accessed 6/18/15] Managing Physical Effects. Available from URL: 
http://www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/coping/physicaleffects
213. Ganz PA, Guadagnoli E, Landrum MB, Lash TL, Rakowski W, Silliman RA. Breast cancer in 
older women: Quality of life and psychosocial adjustment in the 15 months after diagnosis. 
Journal of Clinical Oncology. 2003; 21:4027–4033. [PubMed: 14581426] 
214. Weitzner MA, Meyers CA, Stuebing KK, Saleeba AK. Relationship between quality of life and 
mood in long-term survivors of breast cancer treated with mastectomy. Supportive care in Cancer. 
1997; 5:241–248. [PubMed: 9176972] 
215. Montazeri A, Vahdaninia M, Harirchi I, Ebrahimi M, Khaleghi F, Jarvandi S. Quality of life in 
patients with breast cancer before and after diagnosis: an eighteen months follow-up study. BMC 
Cancer. 2008:8. [PubMed: 18194582] 
Greenlee et al.
Page 50
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 216. Henderson VP, Clemow L, Massion AO, Hurley TG, Druker S, Hebert JR. The effects of 
mindfulness-based stress reduction on psychosocial outcomes and quality of life in early-stage 
breast cancer patients: a randomized trial. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012; 131:99–109. [PubMed: 
21901389] 
217. Foley E, Baillie A, Huxter M, Price M, Sinclair E. Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for 
individuals whose lives have been affected by cancer: a randomized controlled trial. J Consult 
Clin Psychol. 2010; 78:72. [PubMed: 20099952] 
218. Kieviet-Stijnen A, Visser A, Garssen B, Hudig W. Mindfulness-based stress reduction training for 
oncology patients: Patients’ appraisal and changes in well-being. Patient Education and 
Counseling. 2008; 72:436–442. [PubMed: 18657376] 
219. Shapiro SL, Bootzin RR, Figueredo AJ, Lopez AM, Schwartz GE. The efficacy of mindfulness-
based stress reduction in the treatment of sleep disturbance in women with breast cancer: an 
exploratory study. J Psychosom Res. 2003; 54:85–91. [PubMed: 12505559] 
220. Pruthi S. A Randomized Controlled Pilot Study Assessing Feasibility and Impact of Yoga Practice 
on Quality of Life, Mood, and Perceived Stress in Women With Newly Diagnosed Breast Cancer. 
Global Advances In Health and Medicine. 2012; 1:30–35.
221. Vadiraja HS, Rao MR, Nagarathna R, et al. Effects of yoga program on quality of life and affect 
in early breast cancer patients undergoing adjuvant radiotherapy: a randomized controlled trial. 
Complement Ther Med. 2009; 17:274–280. [PubMed: 19942107] 
222. Chen Z, Meng Z, Milbury K, et al. Qigong improves quality of life in women undergoing 
radiotherapy for breast cancer: results of a randomized controlled trial. Cancer. 2013; 119:1690–
1698. [PubMed: 23355182] 
223. Oh B, Butow PN, Mullan BA, et al. Effect of medical Qigong on cognitive function, quality of 
life, and a biomarker of inflammation in cancer patients: a randomized controlled trial. Support 
Care Cancer. 2012; 20:1235–1242. [PubMed: 21688163] 
224. Dyer J, Thomas K, Sandsund C, Shaw C. Is reflexology as effective as aromatherapy massage for 
symptom relief in an adult outpatient oncology population? Complement Ther Clin Pract. 2013; 
19:139–146. [PubMed: 23890460] 
225. Sharp DM, Walker MB, Chaturvedi A, et al. A randomised, controlled trial of the psychological 
effects of reflexology in early breast cancer. Eur J Cancer. 2010; 46:312–322. [PubMed: 
19906525] 
226. Wyatt G, Sikorskii A, Rahbar MH, Victorson D, You M. Health-related quality-of-life outcomes: 
a reflexology trial with patients with advanced-stage breast cancer. Oncol Nurs Forum. 2012; 
39:568–577. [PubMed: 23107851] 
227. Semiglasov VF, Stepula VV, Dudov A, Lehmacher W, Mengs U. The Standardised Mistletoe 
Extract PS76A2 Improves QoL in Patients with Breast Cancer Receiving Adjuvant CMF 
Chemotherapy: A Randomised, Placebo-controlled, Double-blind, Multicentre Clinical Trial. 
Anticancer Research. 2004; 24:1293–1302. [PubMed: 15154663] 
228. Semiglazov VF, Stepula VV, Dudov A, Schnitker J, Mengs U. Quality of life is improved in 
breast cancer patients by standardised mistletoe extract PS76A2 during chemotherapy and 
follow-up: A randomised, placebo-controlled, double-blind, multicentre clinical trial. Anticancer 
Research. 2006; 26:1519–1529. [PubMed: 16619567] 
229. Troger W, Jezdic S, Zdrale Z, Tisma N, Hamre HJ, Matijasevic M. Quality of life and neutropenia 
in patients with early stage breast cancer: A randomized pilot study comparing additional 
treatment with mistletoe extract to chemotherapy alone. Breast Cancer: Basic and Clinical 
Research. 2009; 3:35–45. [PubMed: 21556248] 
230. Tröger W, Zdrale Z, Tišma N, Matijašević M. Additional Therapy with a Mistletoe Product during 
Adjuvant Chemotherapy of Breast Cancer Patients Improves Quality of Life: An Open 
Randomized Clinical Pilot Trial. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2014; 2014:430518. 
[PubMed: 24701238] 
231. Ostermann T, Raak C, Bussing A. Survival of cancer patients treated with mistletoe extract 
(Iscador): a systematic literature review. BMC Cancer. 2009; 9:451. [PubMed: 20021637] 
232. National Cancer Institute. [accessed 6/22/15] Nausea and Vomiting (PDQ). Available from URL: 
http://www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/supportivecare/nausea/HealthProfessional
Greenlee et al.
Page 51
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 233. Roila F, Ruggeri B, Ballatori E, Del Favero A, Tonato M. Aprepitant versus dexamethasone for 
preventing chemotherapy-induced delayed emesis in patients with breast cancer: a randomized 
double-blind study. J Clin Oncol. 2014; 32:101–106. [PubMed: 24323030] 
234. Hesketh PJ, Bohlke K, Lyman GH, et al. Antiemetics: American Society of Clinical Oncology 
Focused Guideline Update. J Clin Oncol. 2016; 34:381–386. [PubMed: 26527784] 
235. Rojas C, Raje M, Tsukamoto T, Slusher BS. Molecular mechanisms of 5-HT(3) and NK(1) 
receptor antagonists in prevention of emesis. Eur J Pharmacol. 2014; 722:26–37. [PubMed: 
24184669] 
236. Booth CM, Clemons M, Dranitsaris G, et al. Chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting in 
breast cancer patients: a prospective observational study. J Support Oncol. 2007; 5:374–380. 
[PubMed: 17944146] 
237. Lindley CM, Hirsch JD. Nausea and Vomiting and Cancer-Patients Quality-of-Life - Discussion. 
Br J Cancer. 1992; 66:S26–S29.
238. Fabi A, Barduagni M, Lauro S, et al. Is delayed chemotherapy-induced emesis well managed in 
oncological clinical practice? An observational study. Supportive care in Cancer. 2003; 11:156–
161. [PubMed: 12618925] 
239. Carlotto A, Hogsett VL, Maiorini EM, Razulis JG, Sonis ST. The economic burden of toxicities 
associated with cancer treatment: review of the literature and analysis of nausea and vomiting, 
diarrhoea, oral mucositis and fatigue. Pharmacoeconomics. 2013; 31:753–766. [PubMed: 
23963867] 
240. Dibble SL, Chapman J, Mack KA, Shih AS. Acupressure for nausea: results of a pilot study. 
Oncol Nurs Forum. 2000; 27:41–47. [PubMed: 10660922] 
241. Dibble SL, Luce J, Cooper BA, et al. Acupressure for chemotherapy-induced nausea and 
vomiting: a randomized clinical trial. Oncol Nurs Forum. 2007; 34:813–820. [PubMed: 
17723973] 
242. Molassiotis A, Helin AM, Dabbour R, Hummerston S. The effects of P6 acupressure in the 
prophylaxis of chemotherapy-related nausea and vomiting in breast cancer patients. Complement 
Ther Med. 2007; 15:3–12. [PubMed: 17352966] 
243. Lee J, Dodd M, Dibble S, Abrams D. Review of acupressure studies for chemotherapy-induced 
nausea and vomiting control. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2008; 36:529–544. [PubMed: 18440769] 
244. Kwon JH, Shin Y, Juon HS. Effects of Nei-Guan (P6) Acupressure Wristband: On Nausea, 
Vomiting, and Retching in Women After Thyroidectomy. Cancer Nurs. 2015
245. Noroozinia H, Mahoori A, Hasani E, Gerami-Fahim M, Sepehrvand N. The effect of acupressure 
on nausea and vomiting after cesarean section under spinal anesthesia. Acta Med Iran. 2013; 
51:163–167. [PubMed: 23605600] 
246. Collins KB, Thomas DJ. Acupuncture and acupressure for the management of chemotherapy-
induced nausea and vomiting. J Am Acad Nurse Pract. 2004; 16:76–80. [PubMed: 15055425] 
247. Lee J, Dibble S, Dodd M, Abrams D, Burns B. The relationship of chemotherapy-induced nausea 
to the frequency of pericardium 6 digital acupressure. Oncol Nurs Forum. 2010; 37:E419–425. 
[PubMed: 21059575] 
248. Molassiotis A, Russell W, Hughes J, et al. The effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of acupressure 
for the control and management of chemotherapy-related acute and delayed nausea: Assessment 
of Nausea in Chemotherapy Research (ANCHoR), a randomised controlled trial. Health Technol 
Assess. 2013; 17:1–114.
249. Beith JM, Oh B, Chatfield MD, Davis E, Venkateswaran R. Electroacupuncture for nausea, 
vomiting, and myelosuppression in women receiving adjuvant chemotherapy for early breast 
cancer: a randomized controlled pilot trial. Medical Acupuncture. 2012; 24:241–248.
250. Shen J, Wenger N, Glaspy J, et al. Electroacupuncture for control of myeloablative chemotherapy-
induced emesis: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2000; 284:2755–2761. [PubMed: 
11105182] 
251. NIH Consensus Conference. Acupuncture. JAMA. 1998; 280:1518–1524. [PubMed: 9809733] 
252. Yang Y, Zhang Y, Jing NC, et al. Electroacupuncture at Zusanli (ST 36) for treatment of nausea 
and vomiting caused by the chemotherapy of the malignant tumor: a multicentral randomized 
controlled trial. Zhongguo Zhen Jiu. 2009; 29:955–958. [PubMed: 20088412] 
Greenlee et al.
Page 52
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 253. Dundee JW, Ghaly RG, Fitzpatrick KT, Abram WP, Lynch GA. Acupuncture prophylaxis of 
cancer chemotherapy-induced sickness. J R Soc Med. 1989; 82:268–271. [PubMed: 2666662] 
254. Dundee JW, Ghaly RG, Fitzpatrick KT, Lynch GA, Abram WP. Acupuncture to prevent cisplatin-
associated vomiting. Lancet. 1987; 1:1083.
255. Ezzo J, Vickers A, Richardson MA, et al. Acupuncture-point stimulation for chemotherapy-
induced nausea and vomiting. J Clin Oncol. 2005; 23:7188–7198. [PubMed: 16192603] 
256. Gan TJ, Jiao KR, Zenn M, Georgiade G. A randomized controlled comparison of electro-acupoint 
stimulation or ondansetron versus placebo for the prevention of postoperative nausea and 
vomiting. Anesth Analg. 2004; 99:1070–1075. [PubMed: 15385352] 
257. Wang XQ, Yu JL, Du ZY, Xu R, Jiang CC, Gao X. Electroacupoint stimulation for postoperative 
nausea and vomiting in patients undergoing supratentorial craniotomy. J Neurosurg Anesthesiol. 
2010; 22:128–131. [PubMed: 20308818] 
258. El-Deeb AM, Ahmady MS. Effect of acupuncture on nausea and/or vomiting during and after 
cesarean section in comparison with ondansetron. J Anesth. 2011; 25:698–703. [PubMed: 
21761206] 
259. Rusy LM, Hoffman GM, Weisman SJ. Electroacupuncture prophylaxis of postoperative nausea 
and vomiting following pediatric tonsillectomy with or without adenoidectomy. Anesthesiology. 
2002; 96:300–305. [PubMed: 11818760] 
260. Lee S, Lee MS, Choi DH, Lee SK. Electroacupuncture on PC6 prevents opioid-induced nausea 
and vomiting after laparoscopic surgery. Chin J Integr Med. 2013; 19:277–281. [PubMed: 
23546631] 
261. Zhang H, Wang L, Zhang M, et al. Effects of electroacupuncture on postoperative functional 
recovery in patients with gynaecological laparoscopic surgery. Zhongguo Zhen Jiu. 2014; 
34:273–278. [PubMed: 24843973] 
262. White PF, Issioui T, Hu J, et al. Comparative efficacy of acustimulation (ReliefBand) versus 
ondansetron (Zofran) in combination with droperidol for preventing nausea and vomiting. 
Anesthesiology. 2002; 97:1075–1081. [PubMed: 12411789] 
263. Genc F, Tan M. The effect of acupressure application on chemotherapy-induced nausea, vomiting, 
and anxiety in patients with breast cancer. Palliat Support Care. 2014:1–10. [PubMed: 23915975] 
264. Arslan M. Oral Intake of Ginger for Chemotherapy-Induced Nausea and Vomiting Among 
Women With Breast Cancer. 2015; 19:E92–E97 96p.
265. Panahi Y, Saadat A, Sahebkar A, Hashemian F, Taghikhani M, Abolhasani E. Effect of ginger on 
acute and delayed chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting: a pilot, randomized, open-label 
clinical trial. Integr Cancer Ther. 2012; 11:204–211. [PubMed: 22313739] 
266. Ryan JL, Heckler CE, Roscoe JA, et al. Ginger (Zingiber officinale) reduces acute chemotherapy-
induced nausea: A URCC CCOP study of 576 patients. Support Care Cancer. 2012; 20:1479–
1489. [PubMed: 21818642] 
267. Bozzetti F, Biganzoli L, Gavazzi C, et al. Glutamine supplementation in cancer patients receiving 
chemotherapy: a double-blind randomized study. Nutrition. 1997; 13:748–751. [PubMed: 
9263281] 
268. Peterson DE, Jones JB, Petit RG II. Randomized, placebo-controlled trial of Saforis for 
prevention and treatment of oral mucositis in breast cancer patients receiving anthracycline-based 
chemotherapy. Cancer. 2007; 109:322–331. [PubMed: 17154160] 
269. National Cancer Institute. [accessed 6/27/16] Radiation Therapy. Available from URL: http://
www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/types/radiation-therapy-RTCCSE
270. National Cancer Institute. [accessed 6/27/16] Skin and Nail Changes. Available from URL: http://
www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/side-effects/skin-nail-changes
271. Heggie S, Bryant GP, Tripcony L, et al. A Phase III study on the efficacy of topical aloe vera gel 
on irradiated breast tissue. Cancer Nurs. 2002; 25:442–451. [PubMed: 12464836] 
272. Williams MS, Burk M, Loprinzi CL, et al. Phase III double-blind evaluation of an aloe vera gel as 
a prophylactic agent for radiation-induced skin toxicity. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1996; 
36:345–349. [PubMed: 8892458] 
Greenlee et al.
Page 53
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 273. Kirova YM, Fromantin I, De Rycke Y, et al. Can we decrease the skin reaction in breast cancer 
patients using hyaluronic acid during radiation therapy? Results of phase III randomised trial. 
Radiother Oncol. 2011; 100:205–209. [PubMed: 21624699] 
274. Pinnix C, Perkins GH, Strom EA, et al. Topical hyaluronic acid vs. standard of care for the 
prevention of radiation dermatitis after adjuvant radiotherapy for breast cancer: single-blind 
randomized phase III clinical trial. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2012; 83:1089–1094. [PubMed: 
22172912] 
275. National Cancer Institute. [accessed 12/19/16] Hot flashes and night sweats (PDQ). Available 
from URL: https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/side-effects/sexuality-fertility-
women/hot-flashes-hp-pdq
276. Vincent A. Management of menopause in women with breast cancer. Climactric. 2014; 8:690–
701.
277. Bokmand S, Flyger H. Acupuncture relieves menopausal discomfort in breast cancer patients: a 
prospective, double blinded, randomized study. Breast. 2013; 22:320–323. [PubMed: 22906948] 
278. Deng G, Vickers A, Yeung S, et al. Randomized, controlled trial of acupuncture for the treatment 
of hot flashes in breast cancer patients. J Clin Oncol. 2007; 25:5584–5590. [PubMed: 18065731] 
279. Frisk J, Carlhall S, Kallstrom AC, Lindh-Astrand L, Malmstrom A, Hammar M. Long-term 
follow-up of acupuncture and hormone therapy on hot flushes in women with breast cancer: a 
prospective, randomized, controlled multicenter trial. Climacteric. 2008; 11:166–174. [PubMed: 
18365859] 
280. Hervik J, Mjaland O. Quality of life of breast cancer patients medicated with anti-estrogens, 2 
years after acupuncture treatment: a qualitative study. Int J Womens Health. 2010; 2:319–325. 
[PubMed: 21151679] 
281. Liljegren A, Gunnarsson P, Landgren BM, Robeus N, Johansson H, Rotstein S. Reducing 
vasomotor symptoms with acupuncture in breast cancer patients treated with adjuvant tamoxifen: 
a randomized controlled trial. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012; 135:791–798. [PubMed: 
21153699] 
282. Mao J, Bowman M, Xie S, Bruner D, De Michele A, Farrar J. Electroacupuncture versus 
gabapentin for hot flashes among breast cancer survivors: A randomized placebo-controlled trial. 
Journal of Clinical Oncology. 2015; 33:3615–3620. [PubMed: 26304905] 
283. MacGregor CA, Canney PA, Patterson G, McDonald R, Paul J. A randomised double-blind 
controlled trial of oral soy supplements versus placebo for treatment of menopausal symptoms in 
patients with early breast cancer. Eur J Cancer. 2005; 41:708–714. [PubMed: 15763646] 
284. Quella SK, Loprinzi CL, Barton DL, et al. Evaluation of soy phytoestrogens for the treatment of 
hot flashes in breast cancer survivors: A North Central Cancer Treatment Group trial. J Clin 
Oncol. 2000; 18:1068–1074. [PubMed: 10694559] 
285. Van Patten CL, Olivotto IA, Chambers GK, et al. Effect of soy phytoestrogens on hot flashes in 
postmenopausal women with breast cancer: a randomized, controlled clinical trial. J Clin Oncol. 
2002; 20:1449–1455. [PubMed: 11896091] 
286. Paskett ED, Naughton MJ, McCoy TP, Case LD, Abbott JM. The epidemiology of arm and hand 
swelling in premenopausal breast cancer survivors. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2007; 
16:775–782. [PubMed: 17416770] 
287. Ridner SH. Quality of life and a symptom cluster associated with breast cancer treatment-related 
lymphedema. Support Care Cancer. 2005; 13:904–911. [PubMed: 15812652] 
288. Pyszel A, Malyszczak K, Pyszel K, Andrzejak R, Szuba A. Disability, psychological distress and 
quality of life in breast cancer survivors with arm lymphedema. Lymphology. 2006; 39:185–192. 
[PubMed: 17319631] 
289. Ahmed Omar MT, Abd-El-Gayed Ebid A, El Morsy AM. Treatment of post-mastectomy 
lymphedema with laser therapy: double blind placebo control randomized study. J Surg Res. 
2011; 165:82–90. [PubMed: 20538293] 
290. Ridner SH, Poage-Hooper E, Kanar C, Doersam JK, Bond SM, Dietrich MS. A pilot randomized 
trial evaluating low-level laser therapy as an alternative treatment to manual lymphatic drainage 
for breast cancer-related lymphedema. Oncol Nurs Forum. 2013; 40:383–393. [PubMed: 
23803270] 
Greenlee et al.
Page 54
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 291. Andersen L, Hojris I, Erlandsen M, Andersen J. Treatment of breast-cancer-related lymphedema 
with or without manual lymphatic drainage: a randomized study. Acta Oncol. 2000; 39:399–405. 
[PubMed: 10987238] 
292. Devoogdt N, Christiaens MR, Geraerts I, et al. Effect of manual lymph drainage in addition to 
guidelines and exercise therapy on arm lymphoedema related to breast cancer: randomised 
controlled trial. BMJ. 2011; 343:d5326. [PubMed: 21885537] 
293. Gurdal SO, Kostanoglu A, Cavdar I, et al. Comparison of intermittent pneumatic compression 
with manual lymphatic drainage for treatment of breast cancer-related lymphedema. Lymphat 
Res Biol. 2012; 10:129–135. [PubMed: 22984910] 
294. Maher J, Refshauge K, Ward L, Paterson R, Kilbreath S. Change in extracellular fluid and arm 
volumes as a consequence of a single session of lymphatic massage followed by rest with or 
without compression. Support Care Cancer. 2012; 20:3079–3086. [PubMed: 22410862] 
295. McNeely ML, Magee DJ, Lees AW, Bagnall KM, Haykowsky M, Hanson J. The addition of 
manual lymph drainage to compression therapy for breast cancer related lymphedema: a 
randomized controlled trial. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2004; 86:95–106. [PubMed: 15319562] 
296. Williams AF, Vadgama A, Franks PJ, Mortimer PS. A randomized controlled crossover study of 
manual lymphatic drainage therapy in women with breast cancer-related lymphoedema. Eur J 
Cancer Care (Engl). 2002; 11:254–261. [PubMed: 12492462] 
297. Dayes IS, Whelan TJ, Julian JA, et al. Randomized trial of decongestive lymphatic therapy for the 
treatment of lymphedema in women with breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2013; 31:3758–3763. 
[PubMed: 24043733] 
298. National Cancer Institute. [accessed 11/27/16] Nerve Problems. Available from URL: http://
www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/side-effects/nerve-problems
299. International Association for the Study of Pain. [accessed 6/6/16] Epidemiology of Cancer Pain. 
Available from URL: http://www.iasppain.org/AM/Template.cfm?
Section=Home&Template=/CM/ContentDisplay.cfm&ContentID=7395
300. National Cancer Institute. [accessed 6/27/16] Cancer Pain (PDQ). Available from URL: http://
www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/side-effects/pain/pain-hp-pdq
301. Barsevick A, Beck SL, Dudley WN, et al. Efficacy of an intervention for fatigue and sleep 
disturbance during cancer chemotherapy. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2010; 40:200–216. [PubMed: 
20705231] 
302. Montgomery GH, Bovbjerg DH, Schnur JB, et al. A randomized clinical trial of a brief hypnosis 
intervention to control side effects in breast surgery patients. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2007; 99:1304–
1312. [PubMed: 17728216] 
303. Montgomery GH, Weltz CR, Seltz M, Bovbjerg DH. Brief presurgery hypnosis reduces distress 
and pain in excisional breast biopsy patients. Int J Clin Exp Hypn. 2002; 50:17–32. [PubMed: 
11778705] 
304. Bao T, Cai L, Giles JT, et al. A dual-center randomized controlled double blind trial assessing the 
effect of acupuncture in reducing musculoskeletal symptoms in breast cancer patients taking 
aromatase inhibitors. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2013; 138:167–174. [PubMed: 23393007] 
305. Crew KD, Capodice JL, Greenlee H, et al. Pilot study of acupuncture for the treatment of joint 
symptoms related to adjuvant aromatase inhibitor therapy in postmenopausal breast cancer 
patients. J Cancer Surviv. 2007; 1:283–291. [PubMed: 18648963] 
306. Crew KD, Capodice JL, Greenlee H, et al. Randomized, blinded, sham-controlled trial of 
acupuncture for the management of aromatase inhibitor-associated joint symptoms in women 
with early-stage breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2010; 28:1154–1160. [PubMed: 20100963] 
307. Oh B, Kimble B, Costa DSJ, et al. Acupuncture for treatment of arthralgia secondary to 
aromatase inhibitor therapy in women with early breast cancer: pilot study. Acupunct Med. 2013; 
31:264–271. [PubMed: 23722951] 
308. Mao JJ, Xie SX, Farrar JT, et al. A randomised trial of electro-acupuncture for arthralgia related 
to aromatase inhibitor use. European journal of cancer (Oxford, England : 1990). 2014; 50:267–
276.
309. Savard J, Morin CM. Insomnia in the context of cancer: a review of a neglected problem. J Clin 
Oncol. 2001; 19:895–908. [PubMed: 11157043] 
Greenlee et al.
Page 55
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 310. National Cancer Institute. [accessed 6/27/16] Sleep Disorders (PDQ). Available from URL: http://
www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/treatment/side-effects/sleep-disorders-hp-pdq
311. Greenlee H, Shi Z, Sardo Molmenti CL, Rundle A, Tsai WY. Trends in Obesity Prevalence in 
Adults With a History of Cancer: Results From the US National Health Interview Survey, 1997 to 
2014. J Clin Oncol. 2016; 34:3133–3140. [PubMed: 27458295] 
312. Bardwell WA, Profant J, Casden DR, et al. The relative importance of specific risk factors for 
insomnia in women treated for early-stage breast cancer. Psychooncology. 2008; 17:9–18. 
[PubMed: 17428006] 
313. Mustian K, Sprod L, Janelsins M, et al. Multicenter, randomized controlled trial of yoga for sleep 
quality among cancer survivors. J Clin Oncol. 2013; 31:3233–3241. [PubMed: 23940231] 
314. Witt CM, Cardoso MJ. Complementary and integrative medicine for breast cancer patients - 
Evidence based practical recommendations. Breast. 2016; 28:37–44. [PubMed: 27203402] 
315. John, Gabriella M., DLH, Falci, Laura, Shi, Zaixing, Tsai, Wei-Yann, Greenlee, Heather. Out-of-
Pocket Costs of Vitamin/Mineral and Complementary and Alternative Medicine Use among 
Cancer Survivors in the United States: Results from the 2012 National Health Interview Survey. 
Journal of Cancer Survivorship. In review. 
316. Society for Oncology Massage. [accessed 6/18/15] Society for Oncology Massage. Available 
from URL: http://www.s4om.org/
317. OncANP. [accessed 12/14/16] Oncology Association of Naturopathic Physicians. Available from 
URL: https://oncanp.org/
318. Kluetz PG, Chingos DT, Basch EM, Mitchell SA. Patient-Reported Outcomes in Cancer Clinical 
Trials: Measuring Symptomatic Adverse Events With the National Cancer Institute’s Patient-
Reported Outcomes Version of the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (PRO-
CTCAE). Am Soc Clin Oncol Educ Book. 2016; 35:67–73. [PubMed: 27249687] 
319. National Cancer Institute. [accessed 10/26/16] CTCAE Files. Available from URL: https://
evs.nci.nih.gov/ftp1/CTCAE/About.html
320. John GM, Hershman DL, Falci L, Shi Z, Tsai WY, Greenlee H. Complementary and alternative 
medicine use among US cancer survivors. J Cancer Surviv. 2016; 10:850–864. [PubMed: 
26920872] 
321. Dibble SL, Chapman J, Mack KA, Shih AS. Acupressure for nausea: results of a pilot study. 
Oncology nursing forum. 2000; 27:41–47. [PubMed: 10660922] 
322. Dibble SL, Luce J, Cooper BA, et al. Acupressure for chemotherapy-induced nausea and 
vomiting: A randomized clinical trial. Oncology nursing forum. 2007; 34:813–820. [PubMed: 
17723973] 
323. Molassiotis A, Helin AM, Dabbour R, Hummerston S. The effects of P6 acupressure in the 
prophylaxis of chemotherapy-related nausea and vomiting in breast cancer patients. Complement 
Ther Med. 2007; 15:3–12. [PubMed: 17352966] 
324. Beith JM, Oh B, Chatfield MD, Davis E, Venkateswaran R. Electroacupuncture for nausea, 
vomiting, and myelosuppression in women receiving adjuvant Chemotherapy for Early Breast 
Cancer: A Randomized Controlled Pilot Trial. Medical Acupuncture. 2012; 24:241–248.
325. Shen J, Wenger N, Glaspy J, et al. Electroacupuncture for control of myeloablative chemotherapy-
induced emesis: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of the American Medical Association. 
2000; 284:2755–2761. [PubMed: 11105182] 
326. Arslan, M. Oral Intake of Ginger for Chemotherapy-Induced Nausea and Vomiting Among 
Women With Breast Cancer. Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania: Oncology Nursing Society; 2015. p. E92-
E97.
327. Banasik J, Williams H, Haberman M, Blank SE, Bendel R. Effect of Iyengar yoga practice on 
fatigue and diurnal salivary cortisol concentration in breast cancer survivors. J Am Acad Nurse 
Pract. 2011; 23:135–142. [PubMed: 21355946] 
328. Frisk J, Kallstrom AC, Wall N, Fredrikson M, Hammar M. Acupuncture improves health-related 
quality-of-life (HRQoL) and sleep in women with breast cancer and hot flushes. Support Care 
Cancer. 2012; 20:715–724. [PubMed: 21468626] 
Greenlee et al.
Page 56
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 329. Rostock M, Jaroslawski K, Guethlin C, Ludtke R, Schroder S, Bartsch HH. Chemotherapy-
induced peripheral neuropathy in cancer patients: a four-arm randomized trial on the 
effectiveness of electroacupuncture. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2013; 2013:1–9.
330. Lerman R, Jarski R, Rea H, Gellish R, Vicini F. Improving symptoms and quality of life of female 
cancer survivors: a randomized controlled study. Ann Surg Oncol. 2012; 19:373–378. [PubMed: 
21913014] 
331. Zick SM, Alrawi S, Merel G, et al. Relaxation acupressure reduces persistent cancer-related 
fatigue. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2011; 2011:1–10.
332. Targ EF, Levine EG. The efficacy of a mind-body-spirit group for women with breast cancer: a 
randomized controlled trial. Gen Hosp Psychiatry. 2002; 24:238–248. [PubMed: 12100834] 
333. Yaal-Hahoshen N, Maimon Y, Siegelmann-Danieli N, et al. A prospective, controlled study of the 
botanical compound mixture LCS101 for chemotherapy-induced hematological complications in 
breast cancer. Oncologist. 2011; 16:1197–1202. [PubMed: 21712486] 
334. Zhuang SR, Chiu HF, Chen SL, et al. Effects of a Chinese medical herbs complex on cellular 
immunity and toxicity-related conditions of breast cancer patients. Br J Nutr. 2012; 107:712–718. 
[PubMed: 21864416] 
335. Yang B, Li H, Qi Y, Lu M, Bo Y. Clinical study on treatment of mammary cancer by Shenqi 
Fuzheng Injection in cooperation with chemotherapy. Chin J Integr Med. 2007; 13:37–40. 
[PubMed: 17578316] 
336. Monti DA, Kash KM, Kunkel EJ, et al. Changes in cerebral blood flow and anxiety associated 
with an 8-week mindfulness programme in women with breast cancer. Stress Health. 2012; 
28:397–407. [PubMed: 23129559] 
337. Gaston-Johansson F, Fall-Dickson JM, Nanda J, et al. The effectiveness of the comprehensive 
coping strategy program on clinical outcomes in breast cancer autologous bone marrow 
transplantation. Cancer Nurs. 2000; 23:277–285. [PubMed: 10939175] 
338. Robb KA, Newham DJ, Williams JE. Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation vs. 
transcutaneous spinal electroanalgesia for chronic pain associated with breast cancer treatments. J 
Pain Symptom Manage. 2007; 33:410–419. [PubMed: 17397702] 
339. Frank LS, Frank JL, March D, Makari-Judson G, Barham RB, Mertens WC. Does therapeutic 
touch ease the discomfort or distress of patients undergoing stereotactic core breast biopsy? A 
randomized clinical trial. Pain Med. 2007; 8:419–424. [PubMed: 17661855] 
340. Schnur JB, Bovbjerg DH, David D, et al. Hypnosis decreases presurgical distress in excisional 
breast biopsy patients. Anesth Analg. 2008; 106:440–444. [PubMed: 18227298] 
341. Marshall-Mckenna R, Paul L, McFadyen AK, et al. Myofascial release for women undergoing 
radiotherapy for breast cancer: A pilot study. European Journal of Physiotherapy. 2014; 16:58–
64.
342. Baker BS, Harrington JE, Choi BS, Kropf P, Muller I, Hoffman CJ. A randomised controlled pilot 
feasibility study of the physical and psychological effects of an integrated support programme in 
breast cancer. Complement Ther Clin Pract. 2012; 18:182–189. [PubMed: 22789796] 
343. Liu CJ, Hsiung PC, Chang KJ, et al. A study on the efficacy of body-mind-spirit group therapy 
for patients with breast cancer. J Clin Nurs. 2008; 17:2539–2549. [PubMed: 18808621] 
344. Stephenson NL, Weinrich SP, Tavakoli AS. The effects of foot reflexology on anxiety and pain in 
patients with breast and lung cancer. Oncol Nurs Forum. 2000; 27:67–72. [PubMed: 10660924] 
345. Potter PJ. Breast biopsy and distress: feasibility of testing a reiki intervention. J Holist Nurs. 
2007; 25:238–251. [PubMed: 18029964] 
346. Robins JLW, McCain NL, Elswick RK, Walter JM, Gray DP, Tuck I. Psychoneuroimmunology-
based stress management during adjuvant chemotherapy for early breast cancer. Evid Based 
Complement Alternat Med. 2013; 2013:1–7.
347. Jo SH, Kim LS, Kim SA, et al. Evaluation of short-term use of N-acetylcysteine as a strategy for 
prevention of anthracycline-induced cardiomyopathy: EPOCH trial - A prospective randomized 
study. Korean Circ J. 2013; 43:174–181. [PubMed: 23613694] 
348. Roscoe JA, Matteson SE, Morrow GR, et al. Acustimulation wrist bands are not effective for the 
control of chemotherapy-induced nausea in women with breast cancer. J Pain Symptom Manage. 
2005; 29:376–384. [PubMed: 15857741] 
Greenlee et al.
Page 57
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 349. Lua PL, Salihah N, Mazlan N. Effects of inhaled ginger aromatherapy on chemotherapy-induced 
nausea and vomiting and health-related quality of life in women with breast cancer. Complement 
Ther Med. 2015; 23:396–404. [PubMed: 26051575] 
350. Valadares F, Novaes MRCG, Canete R. Effect of Agaricus sylvaticus supplementation on 
nutritional status and adverse events of chemotherapy of breast cancer: a randomized, placebo-
controlled, double-blind clinical trial. Indian J Pharmacol. 2013; 45:217–222. [PubMed: 
23833361] 
351. Perol D, Provencal J, Hardy-Bessard AC, et al. Can treatment with Cocculine improve the control 
of chemotherapy-induced emesis in early breast cancer patients? A randomized, multi-centered, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled Phase III trial. BMC Cancer. 2012; 12:603. [PubMed: 
23244208] 
352. Moradian S, Walshe C, Shahidsales S, Ghavam Nasiri MR, Pilling M, Molassiotis A. Nevasic 
audio program for the prevention of chemotherapy induced nausea and vomiting: A feasibility 
study using a randomized controlled trial design. European journal of oncology nursing : the 
official journal of European Oncology Nursing Society. 2015; 19:282–291. [PubMed: 25534959] 
353. Cimprich B, Ronis DL. An environmental intervention to restore attention in women with newly 
diagnosed breast cancer. Cancer Nurs. 2003; 26:284–292. [PubMed: 12886119] 
354. Derry HM, Bennett JM, Jaremka LM, et al. Yoga and self-reported cognitive problems: A 
randomized controlled trial for breast cancer survivors. 2014; 76:A-3.
355. Togni S, Maramaldi G, Bonetta A, Giacomelli L, Di Pierro F. Clinical evaluation of safety and 
efficacy of Boswellia-based cream for prevention of adjuvant radiotherapy skin damage in 
mammary carcinoma: a randomized placebo controlled trial. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2015; 
19:1338–1344. [PubMed: 25967706] 
356. Jain S, Pavlik D, Distefan J, et al. Complementary medicine for fatigue and cortisol variability in 
breast cancer survivors. Cancer. 2012; 118:777–787. [PubMed: 21823103] 
357. Lesser GJ, Case D, Stark N, et al. A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study of oral 
coenzyme Q10 to relieve self-reported treatment-related fatigue in newly diagnosed patients with 
breast cancer. J Support Oncol. 2013; 11:31–42. [PubMed: 22682875] 
358. Zhao H, Zhang Q, Zhao L, Huang X, Wang J, Kang X. Spore powder of Ganoderma lucidum 
improves cancer-related fatigue in breast cancer patients undergoing endocrine therapy: a pilot 
clinical trial. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2012; 2012:1–8.
359. Schnur JB, David D, Kangas M, Green S, Bovbjerg DH, Montgomery GH. A randomized trial of 
a cognitive-behavioral therapy and hypnosis intervention on positive and negative affect during 
breast cancer radiotherapy. J Clin Psychol. 2009; 65:443–455. [PubMed: 19226611] 
360. Andersen BL, Farrar WB, Golden-Kreutz DM, et al. Psychological, behavioral, and immune 
changes after a psychological intervention: a clinical trial. J Clin Oncol. 2004; 22:3570–3580. 
[PubMed: 15337807] 
361. Spahn G, Choi KE, Kennemann C, et al. Can a multimodal mind-body program enhance the 
treatment effects of physical activity in breast cancer survivors with chronic tumor-associated 
fatigue? A randomized controlled trial. Integr Cancer Ther. 2013; 12:291–300. [PubMed: 
23766391] 
362. Balk J, Day R, Rosenzweig M, Beriwal S. Pilot, randomized, modified, double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial of acupuncture for cancer-related fatigue. J Soc Integr Oncol. 2009; 7:4–11. 
[PubMed: 19476729] 
363. Johnston MF, Hays RD, Subramanian SK, et al. Patient education integrated with acupuncture for 
relief of cancer-related fatigue randomized controlled feasibility study. BMC Complement Altern 
Med. 2011; 11:49. [PubMed: 21703001] 
364. Ancoli-Israel S, Rissling M, Neikrug A, et al. Light treatment prevents fatigue in women 
undergoing chemotherapy for breast cancer. Support Care Cancer. 2012; 20:1211–1219. 
[PubMed: 21660669] 
365. van der Lee ML, Garssen B. Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy reduces chronic cancer-related 
fatigue: a treatment study. Psychooncology. 2012; 21:264–272. [PubMed: 22383268] 
Greenlee et al.
Page 58
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 366. Reis D, Walsh ME, Young-McCaughan S, Jones T. Effects of Nia exercise in women receiving 
radiation therapy for breast cancer. Oncology Nursing Forum. 2013; 40:E374–381. [PubMed: 
23989030] 
367. Adamsen L, Quist M, Andersen C, et al. Effect of a multimodal high intensity exercise 
intervention in cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy: randomised controlled trial. BMJ. 
2009; 339:895–898.
368. Bjorneklett HG, Lindemalm C, Rosenblad A, et al. A randomised controlled trial of support group 
intervention after breast cancer treatment: results on anxiety and depression. Acta Oncol. 2012; 
51:198–207. [PubMed: 21923569] 
369. de Souza Fede AB, Bensi CG, Trufelli DC, et al. Multivitamins do not improve radiation therapy-
related fatigue: results of a double-blind randomized crossover trial. Am J Clin Oncol. 2007; 
30:432–436. [PubMed: 17762445] 
370. Roscoe J, Matteson S, Mustian K, Padmanaban D, Morrow G. Treatment of radiotherapy-induced 
fatigue through a nonpharmacological approach. Integr Cancer Ther. 2005; 4:8–13. [PubMed: 
15695472] 
371. Mustian KM, Roscoe JA, Palesh OG, et al. Polarity Therapy for cancer-related fatigue in patients 
with breast cancer receiving radiation therapy: a randomized controlled pilot study. Integr Cancer 
Ther. 2011; 10:27–37. [PubMed: 21382958] 
372. Rissanen R, Arving C, Ahlgren J, Nordin K. Group versus individual stress management 
intervention in breast cancer patients for fatigue and emotional reactivity: A randomised 
intervention study. Acta Oncologica. 2014; 53:1221–1229. [PubMed: 25007225] 
373. Steindorf K, Schmidt ME, Klassen O, et al. Randomized, controlled trial of resistance training in 
breast cancer patients receiving adjuvant radiotherapy: results on cancer-related fatigue and 
quality of life. Annals of Oncology. 2014; 25:2237–2243. [PubMed: 25096607] 
374. Schmidt ME, Wiskemann J, Armbrust P, Schneeweiss A, Ulrich CM, Steindorf K. Effects of 
resistance exercise on fatigue and quality of life in breast cancer patients undergoing adjuvant 
chemotherapy: A randomized controlled trial. International journal of cancer Journal 
international du cancer. 2015; 137:471–480. [PubMed: 25484317] 
375. Pruthi S, Qin R, Terstreip SA, et al. A phase III, randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind 
trial of flaxseed for the treatment of hot flashes: North Central Cancer Treatment Group N08C7. 
Menopause. 2012; 19:48–53. [PubMed: 21900849] 
376. Cluzan RV, Alliot F, Ghabboun S, Pascot M. Treatment of secondary lymphedema of the upper 
limb with CYCLO 3 FORT. Lymphology. 1996; 29:29–35. [PubMed: 8721977] 
377. Belmonte R, Tejero M, Ferrer M, et al. Efficacy of low-frequency low-intensity electrotherapy in 
the treatment of breast cancer-related lymphoedema: a cross-over randomized trial. Clin Rehabil. 
2012; 26:607–618. [PubMed: 22172923] 
378. Cluzan RV, Pecking AP, Mathiex-Fortunet H, Leger Picherit E. Efficacy of BN165 (Ginkor Fort) 
in breast cancer related upper limb lymphedema: a preliminary study. Lymphology. 2004; 37:47–
52. [PubMed: 15328756] 
379. Gothard L, Cornes P, Earl J, et al. Double-blind placebo-controlled randomised trial of vitamin E 
and pentoxifylline in patients with chronic arm lymphoedema and fibrosis after surgery and 
radiotherapy for breast cancer. Radiother Oncol. 2004; 73:133–139. [PubMed: 15542159] 
380. Loudon A, Barnett T, Piller N, Immink MA, Williams AD. Yoga management of breast cancer-
related lymphoedema: a randomised controlled pilot-trial. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2014; 
14:214. [PubMed: 24980836] 
381. Ghoreishi Z, Esfahani A, Djazayeri A, et al. Omega-3 fatty acids are protective against paclitaxel-
induced peripheral neuropathy: a randomized double-blind placebo controlled trial. BMC Cancer. 
2012; 12:355. [PubMed: 22894640] 
382. Argyriou AA, Chroni E, Koutras A, et al. Preventing paclitaxel-induced peripheral neuropathy: a 
phase II trial of vitamin E supplementation. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2006; 32:237–244. 
[PubMed: 16939848] 
383. Pace A, Giannarelli D, Galie E, et al. Vitamin E neuroprotection for cisplatin neuropathy: a 
randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Neurology. 2010; 74:762–766. [PubMed: 20194916] 
Greenlee et al.
Page 59
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 384. Santos Araujo MDC, Farias IL, Gutierres J, et al. Uncaria tomentosa - adjuvant treatment for 
breast cancer: clinical trial. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2012; 2012:1–8.
385. Troger W, Jezdic S, Zdrale Z, Tisma N, Hamre HJ, Matijasevic M. Quality of life and neutropenia 
in patients with early stage breast cancer: a randomized pilot study comparing additional 
treatment with mistletoe extract to chemotherapy alone. Breast Cancer (Auckl). 2009; 3:35–45. 
[PubMed: 21556248] 
386. Arathuzik D. Effects of cognitive-behavioral strategies on pain in cancer patients. Cancer Nurs. 
1994; 17:207–214. [PubMed: 8055491] 
387. Rastelli AL, Taylor ME, Gao F, et al. Vitamin D and aromatase inhibitor-induced musculoskeletal 
symptoms (AIMSS): a phase II, double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized trial. Breast 
Cancer Res Treat. 2011; 129:107–116. [PubMed: 21691817] 
388. Butler LD, Koopman C, Neri E, et al. Effects of supportive-expressive group therapy on pain in 
women with metastatic breast cancer. Health Psychol. 2009; 28:579–587. [PubMed: 19751084] 
389. Sharp L, Finnila K, Johansson H, Abrahamsson M, Hatschek T, Bergenmar M. No differences 
between Calendula cream and aqueous cream in the prevention of acute radiation skin reactions--
results from a randomised blinded trial. European Journal of Oncology Nursing. 2013; 17:429–
435. [PubMed: 23245940] 
390. Brisbois TD, de Kock IH, Watanabe SM, et al. Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol may palliate altered 
chemosensory perception in cancer patients: results of a randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled pilot trial. Ann Oncol. 2011; 22:2086–2093. [PubMed: 21343383] 
391. Noguchi N, Maruyama I, Yamada A. The influence of chlorella and its hot water extract 
supplementation on quality of life in patients with breast cancer. Evid Based Complement 
Alternat Med. 2014; 2014:704619. [PubMed: 24799942] 
392. Panahi Y, Saadat A, Beiraghdar F, Sahebkar A. Adjuvant therapy with bioavailability-boosted 
curcuminoids suppresses systemic inflammation and improves quality of life in patients with 
solid tumors: a randomized double-blind placebo-controlled trial. Phytother Res. 2014; 28:1461–
1467. [PubMed: 24648302] 
393. Richardson M, Post-White J, Grimm E, Moye L, Singletary S, Justice B. Coping, life attitudes, 
and immune responses to imagery and group support after breast cancer treatment. Alternative 
therapies in health and medicine. 1997; 3:62–70.
394. Frass M, Friehs H, Thallinger C, et al. Influence of adjunctive classical homeopathy on global 
health status and subjective wellbeing in cancer patients - A pragmatic randomized controlled 
trial. Complement Ther Med. 2015; 23:309–317. [PubMed: 26051564] 
395. Jacobs J, Herman P, Heron K, Olsen S, Vaughters L. Homeopathy for menopausal symptoms in 
breast cancer survivors: A preliminary randomized controlled trial. J Altern Complement Med. 
2005; 11:21–27. [PubMed: 15750360] 
396. Thompson EA, Oxon BA, Montgomery A, Douglas D, Reilly D. A pilot, randomized, double-
blinded, placebo-controlled trial of individualized homeopathy for symptoms of estrogen 
withdrawal in breast-cancer survivors. J Altern Complement Med. 2005; 11:13–20. [PubMed: 
15750359] 
397. Sandel SL, Judge JO, Landry N, Faria L, Ouellette R, Majczak M. Dance and movement program 
improves quality-of-life measures in breast cancer survivors. Cancer Nurs. 2005; 28:301–309. 
[PubMed: 16046894] 
398. Witt CM, Ausserer O, Baier S, et al. Effectiveness of an additional individualized multi-
component complementary medicine treatment on health-related quality of life in breast cancer 
patients: a pragmatic randomized trial. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2015; 149:449–460. [PubMed: 
25555830] 
399. Loprinzi CL, Levitt R, Barton DL, et al. Evaluation of shark cartilage in patients with advanced 
cancer: a North Central Cancer Treatment Group trial. Cancer. 2005; 104:176–182. [PubMed: 
15912493] 
400. Kissane DW, Grabsch B, Clarke DM, et al. Supportive-expressive group therapy for women with 
metastatic breast cancer: survival and psychosocial outcome from a randomized controlled trial. 
Psycho-Oncology. 2007; 16:277–286. [PubMed: 17385190] 
Greenlee et al.
Page 60
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 401. Campo RA, O’Connor K, Light KC, et al. Feasibility and acceptability of a Tai Chi Chih 
randomized controlled trial in senior female cancer survivors. Integr Cancer Ther. 2013; 12:464–
474. [PubMed: 23620504] 
402. Mustian KM, Katula JA, Gill DL, Roscoe JA, Lang D, Murphy K. Tai Chi Chuan, health-related 
quality of life and self-esteem: a randomized trial with breast cancer survivors. Support Care 
Cancer. 2004; 12:871–876. [PubMed: 15599776] 
403. Sprod LK, Janelsins MC, Palesh OG, et al. Health-related quality of life and biomarkers in breast 
cancer survivors participating in tai chi chuan. J Cancer Surviv. 2012; 6:146–154. [PubMed: 
22160628] 
404. Elias AC, Ricci MD, Rodriguez LH, Pinto SD, Giglio JS, Baracat EC. The biopsychosocial 
spiritual model applied to the treatment of women with breast cancer, through RIME intervention 
(relaxation, mental images, spirituality). Complement Ther Clin Pract. 2015; 21:1–6. [PubMed: 
25682524] 
405. Huang C, Hou M, Kan J, et al. Prophylactic Treatment with Adlay Bran Extract Reduces the Risk 
of Severe Acute Radiation Dermatitis: A Prospective, Randomized, Double-Blind Study. 
Evidence-based Complementary and Alternative Medicine. 2015; 2015
406. Ansari M, Dehsara F, Mosalaei A, Omidvari S, Ahmadloo N, Mohammadianpanah M. Efficacy of 
topical Alpha ointment (containing natural henna) compared to topical hydrocortisone (1%) in 
the healing of radiation-induced dermatitis in patients with breast cancer: a randomized 
controlled clinical trial. Iran J Med Sci. 2013; 38:293–300. [PubMed: 24293782] 
407. Gosselin TK, Schneider SM, Plambeck MA, Rowe K. A prospective randomized, placebo-
controlled skin care study in women diagnosed with breast cancer undergoing radiation therapy. 
Oncol Nurs Forum. 2010; 37:619–626. [PubMed: 20797953] 
408. Pommier P, Gomez F, Sunyach MP, D’Hombres A, Carrie C, Montbarbon X. Phase III 
randomized trial of Calendula Officinalis compared with trolamine for the prevention of acute 
dermatitis during irradiation for breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2004; 22:1447–1453. [PubMed: 
15084618] 
409. Maiche AG, Grohn P, Maki-Hokkonen H. Effect of chamomile cream and almond ointment on 
acute radiation skin reaction. Acta Oncol. 1991; 30:395–396. [PubMed: 2036252] 
410. Ryan JL, Heckler CE, Ling M, et al. Curcumin for radiation dermatitis: a randomized, double-
blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial of thirty breast cancer patients. Radiat Res. 2013; 180:34–
43. [PubMed: 23745991] 
411. Rubio I, Suva LJ, Todorova V, et al. Oral glutamine reduces radiation morbidity in breast 
conservation surgery. J Parenter Enteral Nutr. 2013; 37:623–630.
412. Balzarini A, Felisi E, Martini A, De Conno F. Efficacy of homeopathic treatment of skin reactions 
during radiotherapy for breast cancer: a randomised, double-blind clinical trial. Br Homeopath J. 
2000; 89:8–12. [PubMed: 10703904] 
413. Moolenaar M, Poorter RL, van der Toorn PP, Lenderink AW, Poortmans P, Egberts AC. The effect 
of honey compared to conventional treatment on healing of radiotherapy-induced skin toxicity in 
breast cancer patients. Acta Oncol. 2006; 45:623–624. [PubMed: 16864180] 
414. Shoma A, Eldars W, Noman N, et al. Pentoxifylline and local honey for radiation-induced burn 
following breast conservative surgery. Curr Clin Pharmacol. 2010; 5:251–256. [PubMed: 
20925642] 
415. Kunos CAMDP, Abdallah RRLA, Lyons JAMD. Hydration During Breast Radiotherapy May 
Lower Skin Toxicity. Breast Journal. Nov-Dec;2014 20:679–681. [PubMed: 25252223] 
416. Bourgeois JF, Gourgou S, Kramar A, Lagarde JM, Guillot B. A randomized, prospective study 
using the LPG technique in treating radiation-induced skin fibrosis: clinical and profilometric 
analysis. Skin Res Technol. 2008; 14:71–76. [PubMed: 18211604] 
417. Jensen JM, Gau T, Schultze J, et al. Treatment of acute radiodermatitis with an oil-in-water 
emulsion following radiation therapy for breast cancer: a controlled, randomized trial. 
Strahlenther Onkol. 2011; 187:378–384. [PubMed: 21603988] 
418. Enomoto TM, Johnson T, Peterson N, et al. Combination glutathione and anthocyanins as an 
alternative for skin care during external-beam radiation. Am J Surgery. 2005; 189:627–631.
Greenlee et al.
Page 61
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 419. Wheat J, Currie G, Coulter K. Wheatgrass extract as a topical skin agent for acute radiation skin 
toxicity in breast radiation therapy: a randomised controlled trial. Journal of the Australian 
Traditional-Medicine Society. 2006; 12:135–137.
420. Jacobson G, Bhatia S, Smith BJ, Button AM, Bodeker K, Buatti J. Randomized trial of 
pentoxifylline and vitamin E vs standard follow-up after breast irradiation to prevent breast 
fibrosis, evaluated by tissue compliance meter. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2013; 85:604–608. 
[PubMed: 22846413] 
421. Delanian S, Porcher R, Balla-Mekias S, Lefaix JL. Randomized, placebo-controlled trial of 
combined pentoxifylline and tocopherol for regression of superficial radiation-induced fibrosis. J 
Clin Oncol. 2003; 21:2545–2550. [PubMed: 12829674] 
422. Andersen SR, Wurtzen H, Steding-Jessen M, et al. Effect of mindfulness-based stress reduction 
on sleep quality: results of a randomized trial among Danish breast cancer patients. Acta Oncol. 
2013; 52:336–344. [PubMed: 23282113] 
423. Lengacher CA, Reich RR, Paterson CL, et al. The effects of mindfulness-based stress reduction 
on objective and subjective sleep parameters in women with breast cancer: a randomized 
controlled trial. Psychooncology. 2015; 24:424–432. [PubMed: 24943918] 
424. Hernandez Munoz G, Pluchino S. Cimicifuga racemosa for the treatment of hot flushes in women 
surviving breast cancer. Maturitas. 2003; 44:S59–S65. [PubMed: 12609560] 
425. Jacobson JS, Troxel AB, Evans J, et al. Randomized trial of black cohosh for the treatment of hot 
flashes among women with a history of breast cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2001; 19:2739–2745. 
[PubMed: 11352967] 
426. Elkins G, Marcus J, Stearns V, et al. Randomized trial of a hypnosis intervention for treatment of 
hot flashes among breast cancer survivors. J Clin Oncol. 2008; 26:5022–5026. [PubMed: 
18809612] 
427. Carpenter JS, Wells N, Lambert B, et al. A pilot study of magnetic therapy for hot flashes after 
breast cancer. Cancer Nurs. 2002; 25:104–109. [PubMed: 11984098] 
428. Dyer J, Ashley S, Shaw C. A study to look at the effects of a hydrolat spray on hot flushes in 
women being treated for breast cancer. Complement Ther Clin Pract. 2008; 14:273–279. 
[PubMed: 18940714] 
429. Barton DL, Loprinzi CL, Quella SK, et al. Prospective evaluation of vitamin E for hot flashes in 
breast cancer survivors. J Clin Oncol. 1998; 16:495–500. [PubMed: 9469333] 
430. Carson JW, Carson KM, Porter LS, Keefe FJ, Seewaldt VL. Yoga of Awareness program for 
menopausal symptoms in breast cancer survivors: results from a randomized trial. Support Care 
Cancer. 2009; 17:1301–1309. [PubMed: 19214594] 
Greenlee et al.
Page 62
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Greenlee et al.
Page 63
Table 1
Graded integrative therapies for use in breast cancer patients according to clinical outcomes*
Clinical Outcomes
Recommended therapy
Strength of 
Evidence Grade
Acute Radiation Skin Reaction
Aloe vera271, 272 and Hyaluronic acid cream273, 274 should not be recommended for improving acute radiation skin reaction.
D
Anxiety/Stress Reduction
Meditation is recommended for reducing anxiety.69–72, 89
A
Music therapy is recommended for reducing anxiety.104–108
B
Stress management is recommended for reducing anxiety during treatment, but longer group programs are likely better than self-
administered home programs or shorter programs.112–115
B
Yoga is recommended for reducing anxiety.75, 117–124
B
Acupuncture134–136, Massage137–140, Relaxation141–145 can be considered for reducing anxiety.
C
Chemotherapy Induced Nausea and 
Vomiting
Acupressure can be considered as an addition to anti-emetics drugs to control nausea and vomiting during CT. 321–323
B
Acupuncture can be considered as an addition to anti-emetics drugs to control vomiting during CT.324, 325
B
Ginger265, 266, 326, Relaxation144, 177 can be considered as an addition to anti-emetics drugs to control nausea and vomiting during 
CT.
C
Glutamine267, 268 should not be recommended for improving nausea and vomiting during CT.
D
Depression/Mood Disturbance
Meditation, particularly MBSR, is recommended for treating mood disturbance and depressive symptoms. 69–72, 89, 159–163
A
Relaxation is recommended for improving mood disturbance and depressive symptoms.141, 144, 145, 177–179
A
Yoga is recommended for improving mood and depressive symptoms.73–76, 117–119, 121–124, 150–152
B
Massage is recommended for improving mood disturbance.138–140, 167–169
B
Music therapy is recommended for improving mood.106, 108, 146, 147
B
Acupuncture134–136, 189, 190, Healing Touch191, 192, Stress Management112–114, 193, 194 can be considered for improving mood 
disturbance and depressive symptoms.
C
Fatigue
Hypnosis79, 80 and ginseng203 can be considered for improving fatigue during treatment.
C
Acupuncture136, 205–207 and Yoga73, 74, 78, 121, 152, 209, 327 can be considered for improving fatigue post treatment.
C
Acetyl-L-carnitine200 and Guarana201, 202 should not be recommended for improving fatigue during treatment.
D
Lymphedema
Laser therapy289, 290, Manual lymphatic drainage and compression bandaging291–297 can be considered for improving lymphedema.
C
Neuropathy
Acetyl-L-carnitine is not recommended for prevention of neuropathy in breast cancer patients due to harm.200
H
Pain
Acupuncture256, 304–308, Healing Touch192, Hypnosis302, 303, Music therapy104 can be considered for the management of pain.
C
Quality of life
Meditation is recommended for improving quality of life.69–71, 160–162, 216
A
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Greenlee et al.
Page 64
Clinical Outcomes
Recommended therapy
Strength of 
Evidence Grade
Yoga is recommended for improving quality of life.77, 78, 119, 122, 124, 150–153, 208, 209, 220
B
Acupuncture134, 136, 206, 328, 329, mistletoe229, 230, 321, 322, Qigong222, 223, Reflexology224–226, Stress management59, 112–114, 193, 194, 330 
can be considered for improving quality of life.
C
Sleep disturbance
Gentle yoga73, 121, 124, 152, 313 can be considered for improving sleep.
C
Vasomotor/Hot flashes
Acupuncture134, 189, 190, 277–282 can be considered for improving hot flashes.
C
Soy283–285 is not recommended for hot flashes in BC patients due to lack of effect.
D
Abbreviations: BC, Breast Cancer; CT, Chemotherapy; MBSR, Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction
Notes: The clinical population is breast cancer (BC) patients during treatment, including surgery, chemotherapy, hormonal/biological therapy, and radiation therapy. The clinical question is “What 
integrative therapies can be used to prevent, treat and manage symptoms and side effects encountered during breast cancer treatment?” Definitions of the Grade of Recommendations are listed below.10
Grade A: Recommends the modality. There is high certainty that the net benefit is substantial. Offer/provide this modality.
Grade B: Recommends the modality. There is high certainty that the net benefit is moderate or there is moderate certainty that the net benefit is moderate to substantial. Offer/provide this modality.
Grade C: Recommends selectively offering or providing this service to individual patients based on professional judgment and patient preferences. There is at least moderate certainty that the net benefit is 
small. Offer/provide this modality for selected patients depending on individual circumstances.
Grade D: Recommends against the service. There is moderate or high certainty that the modality has no net benefit. Discourage the use of this modality.
Grade H: Recommends against the service. There is moderate or high certainty that the harms outweigh the benefits. Discourage the use of this modality.
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Greenlee et al.
Page 65
Table 2
Training and licensure information for A and B grade integrative therapies
Modality or Therapy
Training
Licensure and Regulation
Professional Societies and Organizations
Acupuncture, electro-
acupuncture, and 
acupressure
Licensed acupuncturists generally have attended formal schools of 
Asian medicine and have passed national certification examinations 
in order to sit for state or provincial licensing exams. The 
Accreditation Commission for Acupuncture and Oriental Medicine 
(ACAOM) accredits schools of Asian medicine in the U.S. Degrees 
include the Masters of Acupuncture requiring a minimum of 3 years 
and 1900 hours of training and the Masters of Acupuncture and 
Oriental Medicine requiring a 3–4 year program, averaging 2,700–
3,465 hours of training.
Advanced degrees include Doctor of Acupuncture and Oriental 
Medicine (DAOM), Oriental Medicine Doctor (OMD), Doctor of 
Acupuncture and Chinese Medicine (DACM) and Doctor of Oriental 
Medicine (DOM) who provide advanced evaluations, integrative 
medicine as well as acupuncture and herbal therapy and can provide 
access to the whole breadth of Chinese medicine. Advanced degrees 
require a Masters level degree with additional 1000+ hours of 
training. The National Certification Commission for Acupuncture 
and Oriental Medicine (NCCAOM) offers acupuncture, herbal and 
Oriental medicine certifications on a national level.24
US: Acupuncture and Chinese herbology and 
Oriental medicine are regulated via state licensing 
bodies. NCCAOM reports 44 states plus the 
District of Columbia have acupuncture practice 
acts. 43 states currently require passage of 
NCCAOM national examinations for initial 
licensure. The NCCAOM certifies acupuncture, 
Chinese herbology and Oriental medicine. 
Currently, California requires passage of its own 
state examinations for licensure and does not 
accept the NCCAOM. A subset of states regulate 
acupressure under acupuncture or massage 
regulations.
CANADA: Acupuncture is regulated via 
provincial licensing bodies in the provinces of 
British Columbia, Alberta Ontario, Quebec and 
Newfoundland. Chinese medicine is currently 
only regulated in British Columbia and Ontario.
The Accreditation Commission for 
Acupuncture and Oriental Medicine 
(ACAOM): http://www.acaom.org
National Certification Commission for 
Acupuncture and Oriental Medicine 
(NCCAOM): http://mx.nccaom.org
College of Traditional Chinese Medicine 
Practitioners and Acupuncturists of British 
Columbia (CTCMA): http://www.ctcma.bc.ca
College of Traditional Chinese Medicine 
Practitioners and Acupuncturists of Ontario 
(CTCMPAO): http://www.ctcmpao.on.ca/
College and Association of Acupuncturists of 
Alberta (CAAA:): http://acupuncturealberta.ca/
Association of Acupuncturists of Quebec 
(AAQ):http://www.acupuncture-
quebec.com/en/home.html
Newfoundland and Labrador Council of Health 
Professionals (nlchp): http://www.nlchp.ca/
Hypnosis
Mental health and medical professionals typically practice hypnosis 
as a specialty or sub-specialty. Certified hypnotherapists, in general, 
hold a graduate-level or bachelor’s-level degree in a broad range of 
specialties including: MD, registered nurse, dentist, social worker, 
licensed counselor or psychologist. pastoral counselor, ordained 
minister, chiropractor, among many others, prior to obtaining training 
in hypnosis.
At present, there are no accredited schools offering standard college 
or university degrees in hypnosis; therefore, training in one of the 
above professions is typically required prior to acceptance into one of 
many training or certification programs. These programs have a wide 
range of training requirements, but in general require anywhere from 
50 to 200 hours of classroom and clinical training prior to 
certification.
US: To be certified as a clinical hypnotherapist, 
applicants typically require anywhere from 50 to 
200 hours or training, and often years of 
experience. There are a number of certification 
programs with a range of requirements (see links). 
Regulations for the practice of hypnosis vary on a 
state-by-state basis (http://www.aihcp.org/
hypnosis-regulation.htm).
Typically clinical hypnotherapists must renew 
their certification every 2 to 4 years and have 
completed 20+ hours of approved training during 
that time.
CANADA: Certification is similar to the US 
however requirements are much higher, between 
225 and 1100 hours: https://www.archcanada.ca/
The Council of Professional Hypnosis 
encompasses many professional societies and 
organizations listed: http://www.copho.com/
org.htm.
Association of Registered Clinical 
Hypnotherapists (ARCH): https://
www.archcanada.ca/
American College of Hypnotherapy at the 
American Institute of Health Care 
Professionals: http://aihcp.net/american-
college-of-hypnotherapy/
American Society of Clinical Hypnosis 
(ASCH): http://www.asch.net/
Hypnosis Motivation Institute (HMI): https://
hypnosis.edu/
National Board for Certified Clinical 
Hypnotherapists (NBCCH): http://
www.natboard.com
The International Society of Hypnosis (ISH): 
http://www.ishhypnosis.org/
Society for Clinical and Experimental 
Hypnosis (SCEH): http://www.sceh.us/
The Milton H. Erickson Foundation: http://
www.erickson-foundation.org/
Massage
Associated Bodywork and Massage Professional (ABMP) members 
at the certified or professional levels must possess a valid massage 
license from a regulated state/province/territory, have completed 500 
approved educational hours, or be certified through the National 
Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and Body work 
(NCTMB). Licensed nurse and physical therapists may qualify for 
membership at either the certified or professional level with a 
minimum of 50 hours of additional massage therapy training. Board 
Certification is the highest voluntary credential attainable to massage 
US: Massage therapy is regulated by some U.S. 
states. See link for state-by-state massage 
licensure information. http://
www.massagetherapy.com/careers/
stateboards.php
CANADA: Massage therapists can only be 
registered not licensed in Canada. Currently only 
four provinces regulate massage therapists: 
Ontario, British Columbia, New Brunswick and 
American Massage Therapy Association: 
http://www.amtamassage.org
Associated Bodywork and Massage 
Professionals (ABMP): www.abmp.com
The National Certification Board for 
Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork 
(NCTMB): http://www.ncbtmb.org/
Society for Oncology Massage: http://
www.s4om.org/
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Greenlee et al.
Page 66
Modality or Therapy
Training
Licensure and Regulation
Professional Societies and Organizations
therapists and bodyworkers in the profession today. For the 
requirements of Board Certification, see: http://www.ncbtmb.org/
board-certification.
Newfoundland. The website for the Ontario 
Massage Therapists has links to the four provinces 
registration procedures and links to other 
provincial massage organizations.
Massage Therapists’ Association of Ontario: 
https://secure.rmtao.com/massage_therapy/
regulation_of_mt/
massage_therapy_in_canada.htm
Meditation
Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction: The Centre for Mindfulness in 
Massachusetts provides meditation specialist training –: http://
www.umassmed.edu/cfm/training/detailed-training-information/
teacher-certification-review/
University of California San Diego (UCSD) Center for Mindfulness 
provides extensive training: http://mbpti.org/
University of Bangor in Wales awards a Masters in Mindfulness and 
also has a range of teacher training programs: http://
www.bangor.ac.uk/mindfulness/courses.php.en
Centre for Mindfulness Studies in Toronto, Canada offer one-day 
workshops as well as intensive professional training in Mindfulness-
Based Cognitive Therapy (MBCT). http://
www.mindfulnessstudies.com/
In both the US and Canada board certification is 
the highest credential attainable for meditation 
teachers in the healthcare profession today. There 
is no registration or licensure currently available.
Completing mindfulness teacher training courses 
at one of the recognized training programs, in 
addition to professional certification, would be the 
optimal level of training for providing these 
interventions.
American Mindfulness Research Association: 
https://goamra.org/
Music therapy
A professional music therapist holds a bachelor’s degree or higher in 
music therapy from one of over 70 American Music Therapy 
Association (AMTA) approved college and university programs. 
Music therapists who currently hold professional designation are 
listed on the National Music Therapy Registry (NMTR) and are 
qualified to practice music therapy
Music therapist is regulated by some U.S. states 
(e.g., North Dakota, Nevada). See link for state-
by-state massage licensure information: http://
www.cbmt.org/examination/state-licensure/
Currently no Canadian provinces/territories 
license or regulate music therapists.
The Certification Board for Music Therapists 
(CBMT): http://www.cbmt.org/
Canadian Association for Music Therapy 
(CAMT): http://www.musictherapy.ca/en/
Relaxation and Stress 
Management
Relaxation and stress management are usually provided by trained 
mental health professionals such as Registered/Chartered/Counseling 
Psychologists, Psychiatrists, Marital and Family Counselors or, 
Clinical Social Workers and Nurses. Any of these professions could 
have specific training in these two modalities.
Typically the aforementioned professionals would 
take courses in relaxation training or stress 
management as part of their training.
Every jurisdiction has a college of 
psychologists and social workers.
American Psychological Association (APA): 
http://www.apa.org/
Canadian Psychological Association (CPA): 
http://www.cpa.ca
Yoga
There are very stringent criteria to be a yoga instructor and most 
jurisdictions have their own requirements. Most jurisdictions have 
criteria in place in order to become a “certified yoga instructor”. 
There are also requirements for specific genres of yoga such as 
Bikram, Iyengar, Ashtanga, restorative yoga, etc. Most states and 
provinces/territories have a designation as a certified yoga instructor. 
In the U.S. and Canada, the Yoga Alliance is the biggest body that 
registers teachers: https://www.yogaalliance.org/Credentialing/
Credentials_for_Teachers; and https://www.yogaalliance.org/
Credentialing/CredentialsforSchools; http://
www.canadianyogicalliance.com
There are currently no states or Canadian 
provinces/territories that regulate or license yoga.
Most states and provinces have a professional 
association (or more than one) for certified 
yoga instructors.
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Greenlee et al.
Page 67
Table 3
Clincial outcomes and integrative therapies with insufficient evidence to form a clinical recommendation (I-statement)
Outcome
Integrative Therapies
Adherence
Acupressure331, Multi-Modal 332
Anemia
LCS101 Combination botanical333, RG-CMH Combination botanical334, Shenqi Fuzheng Injection 335
Anxiety/Stress Reduction
Art Therapy110, 336, Comprehensive Coping Strategy337, Electrical Nerve Stimulation338, Healing Touch191, 339, Hypnosis340, Myofascial Release341, Multi-
Modal342, 343, Reflexology225, 226, 344, Reiki345, Tai-Chi346
Cardiomyopathy
N-Acetylcystelne347
Chemotherapy Induced Nausea 
and Vomiting
Acupressure348, Aromatherapy349, Agaricus sylvaticus350, Cocculine (complex homeopathic Rx)351, Comprehensive Coping Strategy337, Massage137, Nevasic 
Audio Program352, Yoga119
Cognition
Natural Environment353, Ginkgo biloba203, Meditation159, Yoga354
Constipation
Self-Management Program355
Depression/Mood
Art Therapy110, Biofield Healing356, Comprehensive Coping Strategy337, CoQ10357, Electrical Nerve Stimulation338, Gandoderma lucidium358, Guarana201, 
Hypnosis359, Multi-Modal332, 342, 360, 361, Myofascial Release341, Qi-gong222, Reflexology225, 226, Tai-Chi346
Fatigue
Acupressure331, Acupuncture135, 362, 363, Biofield Healing356, Comprehensive Coping Strategy337, CoQ10357, Gandoderma lucidium358, Light treatment364, 
Massage168, Meditation159, 163, Mind-Body Cognitive Therapy365, Movement366, Multi-Modal361, 367, 368, Multivitamin369, Polarity Therapy370, 371, Stress 
Management372, Qigong222, Reflexology226, Relaxation373, 374, Stress Management112, Yoga73, 75, 122, 124, 151, 375
Lymphedema
CYCLO 3 FORT376, Electro-therapy377, Ginkgo forte378, Pentoxifylline27, 379, Yoga380
Neuropathy
Omega 3 Fatty Acids381, Vitamin E382, 383, Acupuncture329
Neutropenia/Leukopenia
Cat’s Claw384, LCS101 Combination botanical333, RG-CMH Combination botanical334, Mistletoe230, 385, Shenqi Fuzheng Injection335
Pain
Comprehensive Coping Strategy337, 386, Stress Management112, Vitamin D2387, Electrical Nerve Stimulation338, Cognitive and Behavioral Therapy, 
Hypnosis388, Massage169, Myofascial Release341, Reflexology226, 344
Quality of life
Acupressure348, Biofield Healing356, Calendula cream389, Cannabis390, Chlorella extract391, CoQ10357, Curcuminoids392, Electrical Nerve Stimulation338, 
Electro-therapy377, Flaxseed375, Ganoderma lucidum358, Gingko forte378, Guided Imagery393, Healing Touch191, Homeopathy394–396, Hypnosis79, Laser 
therapy290, Manual Lymphatic Draining292, Massage168, Meditation68, 159, Movement366, 397, Music Therapy146, Multi-moda332, 342, 361, 367, 368, 398 l, 
Multivitamin369, Polarity therapy370, 371, Relaxation177, 178, Shengi Fuzheng335, Shark cartilage399, Soy283, Supportive-Expressive Group therapy400, Tai-
Chi346, 401–403
Physical Functioning
Mind-Body Cognitive Therapy365, Music Therapy106, Multi-modal332, Myofascial Release341, Reflexology226, Stress management113, Tai-Chi401, 403, 
Yoga73, 121, 152, 404
Radiation therapy induced toxicity 
outcomes
Adlay Bran Extract405, Alpha Ointment with Henna406, Aquaphor-Biafine-RadiaCare407, Boswella cream355, Calendula Cream389, 408, Chamomile409, 
Curcumin410, Glutamine411, Homeopathic Pills412, Honey413, 414, Hydration415, Massage416, Oil-In-Water Emulsion417, Ray Gel418, What Grass Extract419, 
Pentoxifylline & Vitamin E420, 421
Sleep disturbance
Acupuncture134, 135, 328, Calendula cream389, Meditation159, 219, 422, 423, Qigong222, Stress management techniques112
Vasomotor Outcomes
Black Cohosh424, 425, Flaxseed375, Homeopathy395, 396, Hypnosis426, Magnetic therapy427, Meditation160, Peppermint428, Vitamin E429, Yoga78, 430
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Greenlee et al.
Page 68
Notes: Definition of the I Statement: Concludes that the current evidence is insufficient to assess the balance of benefits and harms of the service. Evidence is lacking, of poor quality, or conflicting, and the 
balance of benefits and harms cannot be determined. Read the Clinical Considerations section of the USPSTF Recommendation Statement. If the service is offered, patients should understand the 
uncertainty about the balance of benefits and harms.
CA Cancer J Clin. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 10.
