 170 
VOLUME 47 | NUMBER 7 | JULY 2015 | NATURE GENETICS
COMMENTARY
tion to be centralized, freely accessible, openly 
debated and accurately interpreted for appli-
cation in the clinic. Existing efforts to facili-
tate clinical interpretation of variants include 
the Gene Drug Knowledge Database4, the 
Database of Curated Mutations5, ClinVar6, 
ClinGen7, PharmGKB8, Cancer Driver 
Log9, My Cancer Genome10, Jax-Clinical 
Knowledgebase11, the Personalized Cancer 
Therapy Knowledgebase, the Precision 
Medicine Knowledgebase, the Cancer 
Genome Interpreter, OncoKB and others 
(Supplementary Table 1). These resources 
often have barriers to widespread adoption, 
including some combination of (i) no pub-
lic access to content, (ii) restrictive content 
licenses, (iii) no public API, (iv) no bulk data 
download capabilities and (v) no mechanism 
for rapid improvement of the content (see 
Supplementary Table 1 for detailed feature 
comparison). To address these limitations, we 
present CIViC, an open-access, open-source 
knowledgebase for expert crowdsourcing of 
Clinical Interpretation of Variants in Cancer 
(http://civicdb.org/; Fig. 1).
The critical distinguishing features of the 
CIViC initiative, in comparison to several of 
Understanding of the genetic heterogeneity 
and mutational landscape underlying cancer 
has seen incredible advances in recent years. 
This has accelerated the implementation of 
precision medicine strategies in which clini-
cians and researchers target specific molecu-
lar variants with treatments tailored to the 
individual and their disease1. The biomedical 
literature describing such associations is large 
and growing rapidly. As a result, the inter-
pretation of individual variants observed in 
patients has become a bottleneck in clinical 
sequencing workflows2. Many cancer hospitals 
and research centers are engaged in separate 
efforts to interpret cancer-driving variants 
and genes in the context of clinical relevance. 
These efforts are largely occurring within 
independent ‘information silos’
, producing 
interpretations that require constant updates, 
lack community consensus and involve intense 
manual input.
Estimates of the proportion of patients with 
cancer who would benefit from comprehen-
sive molecular profiling vary substantially3, 
in part because of the lack of both a commu-
nity consensus definition of actionability and 
a comprehensive catalog of specific clinical 
variant interpretations. Achieving the goals of 
precision medicine will require this informa-
1McDonnell Genome Institute, Washington 
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, 
USA. 2Siteman Cancer Center, Washington 
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, 
USA. 3Department of Genetics, Washington 
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, 
USA. 4Department of Medicine, Washington 
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, 
USA. 5Charité Comprehensive Cancer Center, 
Charité Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany. 
6Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, British 
Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British 
Columbia, Canada. 7Department of Molecular 
and Experimental Medicine, Scripps Research 
Institute, La Jolla, California, USA. 8Oncology 
Data Science Group, Vall d’Hebron Institute of 
Oncology, Barcelona, Spain. 9Computational 
Biology, Oregon Health and Science University, 
Portland, Oregon, USA. 10Institute for Research 
in Biomedicine, Barcelona Institute of Science and 
Technology, Barcelona, Spain. 11These authors 
contributed equally to this work. Correspondence 
should be addressed to M.G. (mgriffit@wustl.edu) 
or O.L.G. (obigriffith@wustl.edu).
CIViC is a community knowledgebase 
for expert crowdsourcing the clinical 
interpretation of variants in cancer
Malachi Griffith1–4,11, Nicholas C Spies1,11, Kilannin Krysiak1,4,11, Joshua F McMichael1, Adam C Coffman1,  
Arpad M Danos1, Benjamin J Ainscough1–3, Cody A Ramirez1, Damian T Rieke5, Lynzey Kujan1, Erica K Barnell1, 
Alex H Wagner1,2, Zachary L Skidmore1, Amber Wollam1, Connor J Liu1, Martin R Jones6, Rachel L Bilski1,  
Robert Lesurf1, Yan-Yang Feng1, Nakul M Shah1, Melika Bonakdar6, Lee Trani1, Matthew Matlock1,  
Avinash Ramu1, Katie M Campbell1, Gregory C Spies1, Aaron P Graubert1, Karthik Gangavarapu7, James M Eldred1, 
David E Larson1,3, Jason R Walker1, Benjamin M Good7, Chunlei Wu7, Andrew I Su7, Rodrigo Dienstmann8,  
Adam A Margolin9, David Tamborero10, Nuria Lopez-Bigas10, Steven J M Jones6, Ron Bose4, David H Spencer1,4, 
Lukas D Wartman1,2,4, Richard K Wilson1–4, Elaine R Mardis1–4 & Obi L Griffith1–4
CIViC is an expert-crowdsourced knowledgebase for Clinical Interpretation of Variants in Cancer describing the therapeutic, 
prognostic, diagnostic and predisposing relevance of inherited and somatic variants of all types. CIViC is committed to open-
source code, open-access content, public application programming interfaces (APIs) and provenance of supporting evidence 
to allow for the transparent creation of current and accurate variant interpretations for use in cancer precision medicine.
OPEN
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
 NATURE GENETICS | VOLUME 49 | NUMBER 2 | FEBRUARY 2017 
171
C O M M E N TA RY
one of four evidence types indicating whether 
a variant is predictive of response to therapy, 
prognostic, diagnostic and/or predisposing 
for cancer. Evidence records are also assigned 
to an evidence level ranging from established 
clinical utility (level A) to inferential (level E) 
evidence (Supplementary Figs. 3 and 4). The 
quality of the underlying published evidence 
is rated from one to five stars. As evidence 
records accumulate for a single variant, they 
are in turn synthesized into a human-readable 
‘variant summary’ of the variant’s overall sig-
nificance in cancer. Variants can also be aggre-
gated into ‘variant groups’ that share a clinical 
significance (for example, imatinib resistance). 
All variant types are supported (including 
the resources cited above, stem from its strong 
commitment to openness and transparency. 
We believe that these principles (Box 1) are 
necessary for widespread adoption of such a 
resource. The target audience of CIViC is delib-
erately broad, encompassing researchers, clini-
cians and patient advocates. CIViC is designed 
to encourage development of community con-
sensus by leveraging an interdisciplinary, inter-
national team of experts collaborating remotely 
within a centralized curation interface. Variant 
interpretations are created with a high degree 
of transparency and detailed provenance. The 
interface is designed to help keep interpre-
tations current and comprehensive, and to 
acknowledge the efforts of content creators 
(Supplementary Fig. 1). CIViC accepts pub-
lic knowledge contributions but requires that 
experts review these submissions.
The manner in which the clinical relevance 
of variants in cancer is presented in the pub-
lished literature is highly heterogeneous. To 
represent these data in a more easily inter-
pretable and consistent fashion, the CIViC 
data model is highly structured and ontol-
ogy driven (Supplementary Fig. 2). Clinical 
interpretations are captured and displayed 
as evidence records consisting of a freeform 
‘evidence statement’ and several structured 
attributes. Each evidence record is associ-
ated with a specific gene, variant, disease and 
clinical action. Evidence records belong to 
Curates variant interpretations 
from the published literature 
Variant databases:
Knowledgebases:
2 pt
Treat patient
need
Launch research
project
dbSNP
ICGC
DoCM
ClinVar
COSMIC
TCGA/GDC
OMIM
Disease Ontology
Sequence Ontology
PubMed
EntrezDB
PubChem
Increases patient 
awareness of 
precision medicine 
advances
Uses raw API data to 
improve quality of 
automated analysis
Imports API data to 
extend and improve 
internal corporate or 
institutional clinical 
knowledgebases 
Submit case study and/or data
Submit manuscripts and/or data
Generates hypothesis, inspired by 
available research and samples
coverage, as revealed by CIViC reports
Promotes funding initiatives that 
support personalized medicine
Estimates the clinical actions a 
test will yield for a patient group
Designs custom capture reagent 
for cancer type of interest
Orders a more comprehesive and 
informative sequencing panel
Prioritizes variants for validation 
experiments and functional study
Discusses current clinical relevance 
of a variant in context of a patient
Integrates CIViC data with other 
tools and resources
Uses high-quality drug−variant 
associations for machine learning
Learns of novel molecular tools 
to aid diagnosis and prognosis
Records outlier responses in 
Recommends new basket clinical 
trials (e.g., ‘MATCH’ and ‘TAPUR’)
patient with no approved options
Aliases
Sources
Direction
Stop
Start
Rep. transcript
Reference bases
Reference build
Chr.
Ensembl version
Gene record
Variant record
Evidence record
Disease ontology
Statement
Summary
Type
Summary
Imported gene details
Rating
Disease
Origin
Citation
Clinical
Level
Drug
Type
API
Allows users to 
programatically 
access CIViC 
data using their 
own processes, 
pipelines, and 
databases. 
Provides the 
same access as 
the CIViC Web UI.
Add ••
Discuss ••
D
i
s
c
u
s
s
 
•
•
V
i
e
w
 
•
•
•
A
c
c
e
p
t
 
•
E
d
i
t
 
•
•
www.civicdb.org
Curation community
View user contributions
Collect activity points
Discuss additions & edits
Compete on leaderboards
CIViC curation roles & permissions (cumulative)
   Anyone: view all records, discussions, histories
   Curators: submit new evidence, submit edits, discuss*
   Editors: accept new evidence and edits
* Anyone with internet access may 
  create a CIViC Curator account.
Software development
GitHub serves both as a host for CIViC’s two 
code repositories, and as a help and support 
center for bug reports and support requests.
github.com/genome/civic-server
Builds deployed to live server on a weekly basis
github.com/genome/civic-client
Implements a desired feature 
and submits a git pull request
Fixes a reported bug and 
submits a git pull request
Submits request for assistance 
All references maintain links to knowledgebase records.
Research scientist        Clinical scientist        Patient advocate        Developer
|  
Research cycle           Clinical treatment cycle          CIViC Curation cycle
View user profles
signifcance
Publication
Evaluation
Intervention
Interpretation
Analysis
Sequencing
Sampling
Generates hypothesis to fll gaps in knowledgebase
Identifes off-label therapy for a
molecularly defned patient group
with client installation diffculties
Identifes cancer subtypes for
molecular profling
Figure 1  Contribution of CIViC to the precision cancer treatment cycle. The diagram summarizes how research, clinical treatment and CIViC knowledge 
curation are interrelated. The CIViC knowledgebase aims to develop clinical interpretations for raw cancer variant observations stored in large variant 
databases (gray). Each CIViC variant interpretation is based on published evidence and leverages complementary knowledgebases and ontologies 
wherever possible (yellow). The precision medicine clinical treatment cycle (blue) and research cycle (green) both involve sampling, sequencing, analysis, 
interpretation, intervention, evaluation and publication. These cycles start with hypothesis generation, followed by research projects or clinical trials, and 
dissemination of their findings. Examples of how each stage specifically relates to or benefits from the CIViC resource are represented by ‘persona’ icons 
for the four types of CIViC stakeholders: research scientists (green), clinical scientists (blue), patient advocates (orange) and developers (red). Each is 
accompanied by a brief description of a possible research, clinical, outreach or software development action. In the center of the diagram, key features of 
the CIViC interface and data model are summarized (purple). These include the roles and permissions of CIViC users, especially consumers of the content, 
curators and editors. Members of the CIViC community participate by adding, editing, discussing and approving individual evidence records and summaries 
that support the clinical interpretation of cancer variants. Anyone willing to log in may assume the role of curator, but contributions must be reviewed by 
expert editors before acceptance.
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
 172 
VOLUME 49 | NUMBER 2 | FEBRUARY 2017 | NATURE GENETICS
C O M M E N TA RY
data model and ontologies allow rapid adop-
tion of CIViC in clinical workflows. As the 
user base grows, the number of experts with 
a vested interest in the content will increase, 
driving community engagement and increas-
ing curation from external users.
A critical concern, as CIViC content 
expands, is the maintenance of high-quality 
data and the inherent tradeoff between data 
quality and rapid or automated updating. The 
curation workflow of CIViC (Supplementary 
Fig. 10) requires agreement between at least 
two independent contributors before accep-
tance of new evidence or revisions of existing 
content (Supplementary Figs. 11 and 12). At 
least one of these users must be an expert edi-
tor, and editors are barred from approving their 
own contributions. CIViC includes features 
such as typeahead suggestions (recommenda-
tions that appear as soon as you start to type), 
automatic warning of possible duplicates, 
detailed documentation in all entry forms, 
and input validation to encourage high-quality 
data entry. To facilitate team curation efforts 
(Supplementary Fig. 10), the CIViC interface 
also includes features such as subscriptions, 
notifications and mentions. Curators can also 
use an advanced search interface to generate 
and share complex queries of CIViC data that 
help guide curation effort and content con-
sumption (Supplementary Fig. 13). Many of 
these features were inspired by the ‘best prac-
tices’ of active online collaborative research 
and software development platforms, includ-
ing BioStars20 and GitHub.
A major challenge to the success of CIViC 
is the scope and complexity of the knowledge 
that needs to be summarized, and the develop-
ment of strategies to assess the completeness of 
the resource. The American College of Medical 
Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) and the 
Association for Molecular Pathology (AMP) 
recently reported on the variability among 
nine laboratories in clinical interpretations 
of germline variants relevant to Mendelian 
 
structural variants, RNA fusions and other 
expression events) as well as all variant origins 
(somatic mutation, germline mutation and 
germline polymorphism). Genomic coordi-
nates, transcript identifiers and variant syn-
onyms are determined by curators, reviewed by 
editors and stored in a standardized format (for 
example, HGVS) for each variant. Additional 
variant information is imported through the 
MyVariant.info annotation API12, providing 
links to complementary resources and variant 
annotations such as ClinVar6, COSMIC13 and 
ExAC14. Each variant is associated with a single 
gene, and each gene view provides a curated 
‘gene summary’ synthesizing all of the vari-
ants it contains. Additional gene information is 
imported through the MyGene.info annotation 
API12, allowing users to focus curation effort 
on clinical impact and not repeat the efforts of 
other databases. Integration of public ontolo-
gies and databases, such as Disease Ontology15 
and Sequence Ontology16, allows CIViC’s data 
to be formally structured (Supplementary 
Fig. 5) and integrated with other resources. 
This structure provides both computationally 
accessible information and human-interpre-
table content with the flexibility to capture 
key details for the wide range of variants and 
experiment types being interpreted (refer to 
the Supplementary Note for implementation 
details).
CIViC currently contains 1,678 curated 
interpretations of clinical relevance for 713 
variants affecting 283 genes (Supplementary 
Fig. 6). These interpretations were curated 
from 1,077 published studies by 58 CIViC 
curators. CIViC evidence records are sup-
ported by a wide range of evidence levels and 
trust ratings, currently biased toward somatic 
alterations and positive associations with 
treatment response (Supplementary Fig. 7). 
At least one evidence record has been created 
for 209 cancer subtypes and 291 drugs, with 
some bias toward lung, breast, hematologic, 
colorectal and skin cancers and associated 
targeted therapies (Supplementary Fig. 8). 
Supporting publications for these interpreta-
tions come from a large number of journals, 
primarily over the last five years, and tend to 
provide just one or two evidence records each 
(Supplementary Fig. 9). From the public 
launch of CIViC in June 2015 to December 
2016, external curators (not affiliated with 
Washington University) contributed 46.7% 
of the evidence statements within the knowl-
edgebase (Supplementary Fig. 6b). Thus far, 
submissions, revisions, comments and expert 
reviews have produced 11,254 distinct cura-
tion actions. These numbers continue to grow. 
More than 16,000 users have accessed CIViC 
interpretations from academic, governmental 
and commercial institutions around the world 
(Supplementary Fig. 6c,d). Early adopters 
of CIViC include leaders in developing can-
cer genomics pipelines17, the UCSC Genome 
Browser18 and Agilent’s Cartagenia Bench 
Lab NGS. Early curation and content partners 
include the Gene Drug Knowledgebase4 and 
the Personalized Oncogenomics Program19. 
The CIViC resource is freely accessible with-
out login, and no fees or exclusive access will 
be introduced in the future. Both academic 
and commercial adoption is free and encour-
aged. The variant and gene summaries, with 
additional statistics summarizing the level of 
supporting evidence in CIViC, can be auto-
matically incorporated into clinical reports 
using the CIViC API or bulk data releases 
(updated nightly, with stable monthly releases) 
(Fig. 1). The source code for the CIViC web-
site and public API are released under an open-
source license (the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology or ‘MIT’ license), and all curated 
content within CIViC is released under an 
open-access license (the Creative Commons 
Public Domain Dedication or ‘CC0’ license). 
The unencumbered availability of the CIViC 
bulk data releases, lack of requirements to 
establish a licensing agreement, the well-doc-
umented public API, and use of a structured 
Box 1 CIViC principles
1. Interdisciplinary. An interdisciplinary approach is needed to combine the expertise of genome scientists, healthcare providers, 
patient advocates and others.
2. Community consensus. The interpretations of clinical actionability required to enable precision medicine should be freely 
available and openly discussed across a diverse community. To facilitate consensus building, the interface must support direct 
contribution from members of the community.
3. Transparency. Content should be created with transparency, kept current, be comprehensive, track provenance and 
acknowledge the efforts of its creators.
4. Computationally accessible. The interface should be both structured enough to allow computational data mining (via APIs) 
and agile enough to handle the product of openly debated human interpretation.
5. Freely accessible. Curated knowledge will remain free and can be accessed anonymously without login unless the user wishes 
to contribute to content. No fees will be introduced.
6. Open license. CIViC will encourage both academic and commercial engagement through flexible licensing. Access will not be 
restricted by exclusive licensing.
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
 NATURE GENETICS | VOLUME 49 | NUMBER 2 | FEBRUARY 2017 
173
C O M M E N TA RY
National Cancer Institute (NCI) of the National 
Institutes of Health (NIH) under award number 
U01CA209936 to O.L.G. (with M.G. and E.R.M. 
as co-principal investigators). This work was also 
supported by a grant to R.K.W. from the National 
Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI) of the 
NIH under award number U54HG003079. D.T.R. 
was supported by the German Federal Ministry 
of Education and Research under award numbers 
031L0030E and 031L0023B. The Institute for Research 
in Biomedicine is a recipient of a Severo Ocho Centre 
of Excellence Award from MINECO (Government of 
Spain) and is supported by CERCA (Generalitat de 
Catalunya). D.T. is funded by a grant from the Spanish 
Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness and 
FEDER/UE (SAF2015-74072-JIN). M.G. is supported 
by the NHGRI under award number K99HG007940. 
O.L.G. is supported by the NCI under award number 
K22CA188163. L.D.W. is supported by the NCI under 
award number K08CA166229. The content of this 
manuscript is solely the responsibility of the authors 
and does not necessarily represent the official views 
of the NIH.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
M.G., N.C.S., K.K. and O.L.G. wrote the paper 
with input from A.M.D., E.K.B., E.R.M., A.H.W., 
R.L., A.C.C., J.F.M., B.J.A., Z.L.S., C.A.R., C.J.L., 
D.T.R. and G.C.S. A.C.C. led the back-end code 
development with contributions from N.C.S., J.F.M., 
M.G., O.L.G., K.K., G.C.S. and K.G. J.F.M. led the 
front-end code development with contributions from 
A.P.G., A.C.C., K.K., M.G., O.L.G. and N.C.S. B.M.G., 
A.I.S., A.A.M., D.T., N.L.-B. and S.J.M.J. contributed 
ideas relating to crowdsourcing functionality and 
integration with existing community resources. 
J.M.E., D.E.L., C.W. and J.R.W. contributed software 
engineering expertise. Substantial curation efforts 
were contributed by M.G., N.C.S., K.K., A.M.D., 
B.J.A., C.A.R., D.T.R., L.K., E.K.B., A.H.W., Z.L.S., 
A.W., C.J.L., M.R.J., R.L.B., R.L., Y.-Y.F., N.M.S., M.B., 
L.T., M.M., A.R., K.M.C., R.D., R.B., D.H.S., L.D.W., 
E.R.M. and O.L.G. Guidance on developing CIViC 
for clinical applications was provided by R.D., R.B., 
D.H.S. and L.D.W. Trainee supervision and project 
leadership were provided by M.G., R.K.W., E.R.M. 
and O.L.G.
COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
 
This work is licensed under a 
Creative Commons Attribution 
4.0 International (CC BY 4.0) 
licence. The images or other third party material 
in this article are included in the article’s Creative 
Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in the 
credit line; if the material is not included under the 
Creative Commons licence, users will need to obtain 
permission from the licence holder to reproduce the 
material. To view a copy of this licence, visit  
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
1. Collins, F.S. & Varmus, H. A new initiative on precision 
medicine. N. Engl. J. Med. 372, 793–795 (2015).
2. Good, B.M., Ainscough, B.J., McMichael, J.F., Su, 
A.I. & Griffith, O.L. Organizing knowledge to enable 
personalization of medicine in cancer. Genome Biol. 
15, 438 (2014).
3. Meric-Bernstam, F. et al. Feasibility of large-scale 
genomic testing to facilitate enrollment onto genomi-
cally matched clinical trials. J. Clin. Oncol. 33, 
2753–2762 (2015).
4. Dienstmann, R., Jang, I.S., Bot, B., Friend, S. & 
Guinney, J. Database of genomic biomarkers for cancer 
 
informatics resources (see the Supplementary 
Note for further discussion). To facilitate such 
engagement and seek broad input and exter-
nal guidance for our efforts, we have recently 
established a Variant Interpretation for Cancer 
Consortium (VICC) as part of the Global 
Alliance for Genomics Health (GA4GH). We 
have also established a panel of clinical domain 
experts to provide independent guidance on 
development of the resource and to assess the 
completeness and accuracy of our variant cura-
tion efforts.
CIViC is designed to address many of the 
challenges of cancer variant interpretation. To 
our knowledge, CIViC is the only variant inter-
pretation effort currently capable of leveraging 
community experts and additionally has the 
most open model (open-access content, open-
source code and an open API). We believe 
that this open strategy represents a sustainable 
model for achieving current, standardized and 
comprehensive interpretations of the clinical 
relevance of cancer variants. As the community 
of contributors grows, an increased incentive 
will emerge to help keep CIViC updated with 
cutting-edge clinical trial and US Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) investigational 
new drug (IND) findings. As we have created 
a comprehensive and modern API, centers can 
rapidly integrate CIViC into automated clini-
cal report generation for gene panel, exome, 
whole-genome and RNA sequencing of tumor 
samples. While there are many challenges faced 
by an effort such as this one, we hope that, with 
input from a critical mass of interested parties, 
these challenges can be largely overcome. We 
invite all researchers, healthcare providers and 
patient advocates engaged in clinical interpre-
tation of variants to join the community at 
CIViC (http://civicdb.org/).
URLs. The Clinical Interpretation of 
Variants in Cancer resource described by this 
work is available at http://www.civicdb.org/. 
Personalized Cancer Therapy Knowledgebase, 
https://pct.mdanderson.org/; 
Precision 
Medicine Knowledgebase, https://pmkb.weill.
cornell.edu/; Cancer Genome Interpreter, 
https://www.cancergenomeinterpreter.org/; 
OncoKB, http://oncokb.org/; GitHub, https://
github.com/; GA4GH Variant Interpretation 
for Cancer Consortium (VICC), http://
ga4gh.org/#/vicc; MIT license, https://open-
source.org/licenses/MIT; CC0 license, https:// 
creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/.
Note: Any Supplementary Information and Source Data 
files are available in the online version of the paper  
(doi:10.1038/ng.3774).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
First and foremost, we are grateful to the community 
of curators, editors, domain experts and users who 
make CIViC possible. CIViC is supported by the 
diseases21, a field where the ACMG–AMP have 
proposed detailed standards and guidelines for 
variant classification22. This report identified a 
low rate of interpretation agreement between 
laboratories (34% concordance). However, dis-
cussion and review of criteria were able to more 
than double this concordance, demonstrating 
the need for and success of open discourse in 
clinical variant interpretation21. Recently, the 
Somatic Working Group (WG) of the Clinical 
Genome Resource (ClinGen) has published 
a consensus set of minimal variant-level data 
(MVLD) to help standardize data elements 
needed for curation of the clinical utility of 
somatic cancer variants23. At present, cancer 
variant interpretation efforts that nominally 
have the same goals show a remarkably low 
overlap in source publications cited for these 
interpretations (1.6–71.6%, but generally less 
than 25%; Supplementary Table 2). This sug-
gests that no single effort has comprehensively 
identified or summarized even the most rel-
evant literature in this area, further illustrating 
the high curation burden involved. Conversely, 
these small overlaps emphasize the impor-
tance of reducing duplication of effort moving 
forward, especially considering the vastness 
of the existing literature and its tremendous 
growth rate. In CIViC, curation efforts thus 
far have focused on variants relevant to cancer 
types of particular interest at our center (for 
example, acute myeloid leukemia, breast can-
cer and lung cancer; Supplementary Fig. 8b), 
on variants identified as high priority by early 
CIViC partners4,19 and on variants targeted 
by proof-of-principle precision medicine 
‘basket’ clinical trials such as NCI-MATCH 
(also known as EAY131 or NCT02465060). 
Our ability to provide expertise in these areas 
is complemented by the expert knowledge of 
other groups and organizations, making CIViC 
a more comprehensive resource than would be 
possible with a ‘siloed data’ approach. To this 
end, recruitment of external contributors and 
domain experts from multiple fields is a top 
priority. This is accomplished in part through 
planning of CIViC-sponsored events in the 
cancer research and treatment community. 
We also allow for different levels of external 
community involvement, including submis-
sion of suggested publications to a queue to 
guide others to generate new evidence records 
(Supplementary Fig. 14).
Additional challenges faced by CIViC 
include long-term sustainability of fund-
ing, ensuring broad clinical engagement and 
maintaining the enthusiasm for the crowd-
sourcing efforts. We are addressing each of 
these challenges by engagement with other 
resources, experts and funding agencies with 
track records of long-term maintenance of 
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
 174 
VOLUME 49 | NUMBER 2 | FEBRUARY 2017 | NATURE GENETICS
C O M M E N TA RY
2016 update. Nucleic Acids Res. 44 D1, D717–D725 
(2016).
19. Laskin, J. et al. Lessons learned from the application 
of whole-genome analysis to the treatment of patients 
with advanced cancers. Cold Spring Harb. Mol. Case 
Stud. 1, a000570 (2015).
20. Parnell, L.D. et al. BioStar: an online question & 
answer resource for the bioinformatics community. 
PLOS Comput. Biol. 7, e1002216 (2011).
21. Amendola, L.M. et al. Performance of ACMG-AMP 
Variant-Interpretation Guidelines among nine labora-
tories in the Clinical Sequencing Exploratory Research 
Consortium. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 98, 1067–1076 
(2016).
22. Richards, S. et al. Standards and guidelines for the 
interpretation of sequence variants: a joint consen-
sus recommendation of the American College of 
Medical Genetics and Genomics and the Association 
for Molecular Pathology. Genet. Med. 17, 405–424 
(2015).
23. Ritter, D.I. et al. Somatic cancer variant curation and 
harmonization through consensus minimum variant 
level data. Genome Med. 8, 117 (2016).
profiles to targeted therapies. Hum. Genomics 10, 4 
(2016).
12. Xin, J. et al. High-performance web services for query-
ing gene and variant annotation. Genome Biol. 17, 91 
(2016).
13. Forbes, S.A. et al. COSMIC: somatic cancer genetics at 
high-resolution. Nucleic Acids Res. 45, D777–D783 
(2017).
14. Karczewski, K.J. et al. The ExAC browser: displaying 
reference data information from over 60 000 exomes. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 45, D840–D845 (2017).
15. 
Kibbe, W.A. et al. Disease Ontology 2015 update: 
an expanded and updated database of human dis-
eases for linking biomedical knowledge through dis-
ease data. Nucleic Acids Res. 43, D1071–D1078 
(2015).
16. Eilbeck, K. et al. The Sequence Ontology: a tool for 
the unification of genome annotations. Genome Biol. 
6, R44 (2005).
17. Gagan, J. & Van Allen, E.M. Next-generation sequenc-
ing to guide cancer therapy. Genome Med. 7, 80 
(2015).
18. Speir, M.L. et al. The UCSC Genome Browser database: 
drugs and clinical targetability in solid tumors. 
Cancer Discov. 5, 118–123 (2015).
5. Ainscough, B.J. et al. DoCM: a database of curated 
mutations in cancer. Nat. Methods 13, 806–807 
(2016).
6. Landrum, M.J. et al. ClinVar: public archive of inter-
pretations of clinically relevant variants. Nucleic Acids 
Res. 44 D1, D862–D868 (2016).
7. Rehm, H.L. et al. ClinGen—the Clinical Genome 
Resource. N. Engl. J. Med. 372, 2235–2242 (2015).
8. Thorn, C.F., Klein, T.E. & Altman, R.B. PharmGKB: 
the Pharmacogenomics Knowledge Base. Methods 
Mol. Biol. 1015, 311–320 (2013).
9. Damodaran, S. et al. Cancer Driver Log (CanDL): cata-
log of potentially actionable cancer mutations. J. Mol. 
Diagn. 17, 554–559 (2015).
10. Yeh, P. et al. DNA-Mutation Inventory to Refine and 
Enhance Cancer Treatment (DIRECT): a catalog of 
clinically relevant cancer mutations to enable genome-
directed anticancer therapy. Clin. Cancer Res. 19, 
1894–1901 (2013).
11. Patterson, S.E. et al. The clinical trial landscape 
in oncology and connectivity of somatic mutational 
© 2017 Nature America, Inc., part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
