 Embryo implantation evolved from an ancestral
inflammatory attachment reaction
Oliver W. Griffitha,b,1, Arun R. Chavana,b, Stella Protopapasa,b, Jamie Maziarza,b, Roberto Romeroc,d,e,f,
and Gunter P. Wagnera,b,g,h
aDepartment of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520; bYale Systems Biology Institute, Yale University, West Haven, CT
06516; cPerinatology Research Branch, Division of Obstetrics and Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Division of Intramural Research, Eunice Kennedy Shriver
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Detroit, MI 48201; dDepartment of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109; eDepartment of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824; fCenter
for Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48202; gDepartment of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences,
Yale Medical School, New Haven, CT 06510; and hDepartment of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48202
Edited by Hopi E. Hoekstra, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, and approved July 5, 2017 (received for review January 24, 2017)
The molecular changes that support implantation in eutherian
mammals are necessary to establish pregnancy. In marsupials,
pregnancy is relatively short, and although a placenta does
form, it is present for only a few days before parturition. However,
morphological changes in the uterus of marsupials at term mimic
those that occur during implantation in humans and mice. We
investigated the molecular similarity between term pregnancy in the
marsupials and implantation in eutherian mammals using the gray
short-tailed opossum (Monodelphis domestica) as a model. Tran-
scriptomic analysis shows that term pregnancy in the opossum is
characterized by an inflammatory response consistent with implan-
tation in humans and mice. This immune response is temporally
correlated with the loss of the eggshell, and we used immunohisto-
chemistry to report that this reaction occurs at the materno–fetal
interface. We demonstrate that key markers of implantation, includ-
ing Heparin binding EGF-like growth factor and Mucin 1, exhibit
expression and localization profiles consistent with the pattern ob-
served during implantation in eutherian mammals. Finally, we show
that there are transcriptome-wide similarities between the opossum
attachment reaction and implantation in rabbits and humans. Our
data suggest that the implantation reaction that occurs in eutherians
is derived from an attachment reaction in the ancestral therian mam-
mal which, in the opossum, leads directly to parturition. Finally, we
argue that the ability to shift from an inflammatory attachment re-
action to a noninflammatory period of pregnancy was a key inno-
vation in eutherian mammals that allowed an extended period of
intimate placentation.
placenta | marsupial | inflammation | pregnancy | evolution
I
n eutherian (so-called “placental”) mammals, pregnancy be-
gins when the blastocyst attaches to the uterine wall, followed
by the establishment of a stable fetal–maternal interface. Im-
plantation involves the apposition, attachment, and, in many spe-
cies, the invasion of the blastocyst into the uterus (1). In particular,
structural and molecular changes occur in the luminal epithelia
that allow the embryo to attach and invade the uterus (2). Epi-
thelial changes are followed by remodeling of the endometrial
stroma, generally known as “decidualization,” i.e., the transfor-
mation of endometrial stromal fibroblasts into decidual stromal
cells, as well as modifications of the endometrial vascular bed (3).
When these changes do not occur or occur incompletely, blasto-
cysts fail to implant, resulting in early pregnancy failure (4, 5). In
humans, 75% of unsuccessful pregnancies are the result of failures
of implantation, and implantation failure is the limiting factor for
in vitro fertilization treatment. Furthermore, decades of research
have failed to produce clinically effective treatments that increase
uterine receptivity to implantation (6–8). Given the magnitude of
this problem, extensive efforts have been made to characterize the
endometrium for signatures of receptivity (9, 10).
Implantation in humans and rodents paradoxically relies on
a proinflammatory mechanism. During the “implantation win-
dow,” the uterus is primed to produce several proinflamma-
tory signals, such as prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), and a range of
proinflammatory cytokines, including TNF and IL6 (11–13).
This inflammatory reaction is essential for successful implanta-
tion, and in humans, the consumption of antiinflammatory drugs
during the implantation window is associated with an increased
rate of miscarriage (14). Following implantation, the endome-
trium switches to an antiinflammatory state, which is necessary to
prevent rejection of the fetus, because the fetus contains paternal
genetic material and perturbs the tissue integrity of the endo-
metrium (15). Given that an antiinflammatory state is essential
for the maintenance of pregnancy, the evolutionary origins of
implantation as a proinflammatory process is paradoxical and
requires explanation. Here we present evidence that an in-
flammatory reaction occurs during the short-lived attachment of
the opossum placenta, but no switch to an antiinflammatory
regime is evident, a fundamental difference from what occurs
in eutherians.
Opossum as a Model for Understanding Early Therian
Mammal Reproductive Biology
The first mammals were egg-laying (oviparous) and therefore did
not undergo any form of implantation (Fig. 1). This inference is
supported by the facts that most reptiles (the sister taxon of
mammals) are egg-laying and that the most basally branching
lineage of mammals, i.e., extant monotremes, are also egg-laying.
Significance
Our data suggest that implantation in eutherians is derived from
an ancestral inflammatory reaction to embryo attachment in the
therian ancestor. These results explain the paradoxical role of
inflammation at the beginning and the end of pregnancy in hu-
mans: Inflammation is necessary for implantation and parturition,
but for most of pregnancy, inflammation threatens the continu-
ation of pregnancy. We argue that the role of inflammation
during implantation is an ancestral response to the embryo as a
foreign body. By changing the way investigators think about
implantation, we expect this research to contribute to new ways
to study and treat implantation disorders, the most vulnerable
step of assisted reproductive technology, in women.
Author contributions: O.W.G. and G.P.W. designed research; O.W.G., S.P., and J.M. per-
formed research; O.W.G. and A.R.C. analyzed data; and O.W.G., R.R., and G.P.W. wrote
the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Freely available online through the PNAS open access option.
Data deposition: All transcriptome reads will be available for download from the Se-
quence Read Archive (accession no. SRP111668).
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: oliver.griffith@yale.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1701129114/-/DCSupplemental.
E6566–E6575
|
PNAS
|
Published online July 26, 2017
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1701129114
 Monotremes have a short, 15- to 21-d gestation following ovulation
and a short, ∼10-d period of development in the egg after laying.
Monotreme hatchlings are highly altricial (16, 17). Two major vi-
viparous mammalian lineages exist today: eutherians and marsu-
pials. Thus, viviparity likely evolved before the most recent common
ancestor of marsupials and eutherians within the therian stem
lineage 180–150 million years ago. Although viviparity has evolved
many times in the animal kingdom, it appears to have occurred only
once in mammals (18, 19). In eutherians, following fertilization,
blastocysts attach to the uterine wall, and in most species, including
humans, this attachment is followed by the formation of an invasive
placenta. This invasive mode of development, although not uni-
versal in eutherians, is nevertheless their ancestral mode of devel-
opment (20–22). Embryonic development occurs during an extended
period of gestation following attachment.
Marsupials, although viviparous, have retained many features
of monotreme reproductive biology. Like monotremes, marsu-
pial young are highly altricial. Further, they have a shelled egg,
which is breached only shortly before birth (23). However, once
the eggshell is breached, the choriovitelline membrane of the
embryo attaches to the uterine endometrium, forming a short-
lived placenta. As in eutherians, placenta formation involves
remodeling of the uterus, maternal–fetal interaction, and at-
tachment (24–27). Because marsupials share features with eu-
therian and monotreme reproduction, marsupials are likely close
to the style of reproduction that existed in the first live-bearing
mammals. Opossums, in particular, are the best model for the
configuration from which the eutherian mode of pregnancy
evolved, because they retain ancestral features of marsupial
pregnancy and, likely, therian pregnancy (25). For these reasons,
the opossum has been used to understand the evolutionary ori-
gins of pregnancy in live-bearing mammals (28, 29).
Although marsupial pregnancy is short, important structural
changes to the uterus take place during the formation of the
placenta that are similar to those that occur at implantation in
eutherian mammals. To understand the evolutionary origins of
implantation, we examined the molecular changes coincident
with the attachment reaction in the gray short-tailed opossum
(Monodelphis domestica). We tested the hypothesis that the
opossum attachment reaction is homologous to the inflamma-
tory phase of eutherian implantation but lacks the switch to an
antiinflammatory phenotype characteristic of human and rodent
pregnancy by examining gene-expression changes in response to
the attachment reaction in M. domestica and found that the pro-
duction of inflammatory mediators is associated with attachment.
We then investigated the expression of key implantation markers,
Heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor (HBEGF) and Mucin 1
(MUC1), and found that their expression and localization correlate
with attachment of the embryo. These molecular changes are fol-
lowed immediately by parturition, showing that the opossum lacks
the antiinflammatory phase known from eutherian pregnancy.
Results
Histological Description of Placental Contact in Monodelphis. Monodelphis
gestation lasts for 14.5 d post copulation on average. Throughout
most of gestation, the embryonic capsule is small, 500–1,000 μm
across, and is covered by a shell coat (Fig. 2A). By 11.5 d post
copulation, the embryonic membranes have grown extensively, and
there is a high degree of folding and substantial interdigitation
between the folds of the trophoblast and endometrium, but the
shell coat is still intact, and no direct physical contact between
maternal and embryonic tissue occurs (Fig. 2B). Up to this ges-
tational stage, the luminal epithelium remains pseudostratified and
columnar, with dense nuclei and a smooth, partially ciliated sur-
face. The subepithelial layer of endometrial stromal cells, typical
for nonpregnant opossum epithelium (30), disappears and is
replaced by an oedematic extracellular matrix and a net of sub-
epithelial capillaries. On day 12.5 post copulation this shell coat is
breached (Fig. 2C). The luminal epithelium becomes less pseu-
dostratified, and the nuclei align at one level, suggesting an ex-
pansion of the epithelial surface area. On day 13.5 post copulation
(the last day of pregnancy), luminal cells become lower, the nuclei
become lighter, and thus the luminal epithelial cells show signs of
strong metabolic activation. At the luminal surface, large vesicles
(5–15 μm across) actively bud from the apical surface of epithelial
cells. This apocrine secretion is associated with an apparently less
intimate contact between fetal and maternal surfaces and likely
hinders strong attachment by the fetus. At this stage the luminal
epithelial surface seems to enlarge even further so that, in some
places, the luminal epithelium folds back onto itself, forming ep-
ithelial septa. Direct physical contact between the fetal membrane
and the endometrium thus only starts to develop on the 12th day
of a 14-d gestation. On day 14, parturition occurs.
We used these histological findings as a foundation for in-
vestigating gene-expression changes associated with these alter-
ations in the fetal–maternal relationship, the presence of a
conceptus confined in the shell coat, and the eventual (although
brief) direct contact between the chorion and the luminal epi-
thelium. We first pursued this objective with whole-uterus
transcriptome analysis.
Fig. 1.
Relationship between major groups of mammals. Oviparity is still
observed in the extant monotremes. Viviparity evolved in the stem therians
and is present in almost all mammals today; however, marsupial pregnancy
is short, and an extended pregnancy is observed only in eutherian mammals.
Fig. 2.
Histological examination of the fetal–maternal interface in the
opossum through the second half of gestation. H&E-stained uterine sections
from females 7 (A), 11.5 (B), 12.5 (C), and 13.5 (D) d post copulation. Par-
turition occurs 14.5 d post copulation. Before day 12.5 there is an intact shell
coat (SH) that separates the embryonic trophoblast (T) from the uterine lu-
minal epithelial cells (arrows). On day 13.5 of gestation large vesicles actively
bud from the apical surface of the uterine lumen. (Scale bars: 100 μm.) Ar-
rows point to uterine luminal epithelial cells. E, developing egg/embryo; G,
uterine glandular tissue.
Griffith et al.
PNAS
|
Published online July 26, 2017
|
E6567
EVOLUTION
PNAS PLUS
 Gene-Expression Changes Associated with the Attachment Reaction.
We examined uterine gene expression by sequencing the tran-
scriptomes of uteri of nonpregnant, preattachment (7 d post
copulation), and postattachment (13.5 d post copulation) females.
Hierarchical clustering and principal component analysis of
all mapped genes (n = 23,899 genes) suggest there are gene-
expression changes in the uterus of M. domestica throughout the
reproductive cycle (Fig. 3). Principal component analysis (Fig. 3B)
separates the three groups of uterine samples. The first principal
component separates postattachment samples from other uterine
samples and explains 51% of the variance (Fig. 3B).
Gene-expression changes throughout the reproductive cycle
clearly show that there are clusters of genes that are uniquely up-
regulated in mid or late pregnancy as well as a large number of
genes that are up-regulated in both stages of pregnancy (Fig. 3C).
Differential gene-expression analysis using DESeq2 identified
massive gene-expression changes throughout pregnancy (Fig. 3C).
The full output of the differential expression analysis is shown in
Dataset S1, Tables S1 and S2. Dataset S1, Tables S3–S6 demon-
strate the full output of gene ontology (GO) analysis of differentially
expressed genes.
There is greater expression of genes involved in nutrient metab-
olism and transport in pregnant samples than in nonpregnant
samples (Fig. 4). In the postattachment uterus compared with pre-
attachment uterus, there is strong up-regulation of genes involved in
inflammation and wound healing, including an overrepresentation
of genes involved in inflammatory response (GO:0006954, 2.43-fold,
q = 9.72 × 10−8), immune response (GO: 0006955, 1.77-fold, q =
5.8 × 10−5), and cytokine secretion (GO:0050663, 3.86-fold, q =
6.75 × 10−3). Inflammatory markers include PTGS2, also known as
“cyclooxygenase-2” (COX2), the key enzyme of prostaglandin syn-
thesis, several proinflammatory cytokines (TNF, IL6, IL1A, IL19,
and IL17A), and the antiinflammatory cytokine IL10.
Despite the increase in inflammatory markers, differential
gene-expression analysis does not identify a significant increase
in known leukocyte marker genes. Protein tyrosine phosphatase
receptor type C (the pan-leukocyte marker CD45) has lower
expression at midgestation than in nonpregnant or late-gestation
females, suggesting that the leukocyte density changes through-
out pregnancy. There is down-regulation of the B-cell marker
MS4A1, low but stable expression of the T-cell markers CD3D,
CD3E, CD3G, CD4, and CD8B, significant decrease of the
natural killer cell marker NCAM1, and stable levels of the
macrophage markers CD68, IL3RA1, and IL4R. However, there
is a significant 40% increase in the level of CD14 during pregnancy;
CD14 is primarily produced by macrophages, so this increase
suggests there could be some additional macrophage activity.
CD14 and its interaction partner lipopolysaccharide-binding
Fig. 3.
Correlations of transcriptome samples. (A) A
heatmap showing the correlations between each
pair of transcriptome samples. (B) Principal compo-
nent analysis of uterine gene expression between
samples at different stages of the reproductive cy-
cle. LG, late gestation (postattachment, day 13.5 of
pregnancy); MG, midgestation (preattachment, day
7 of pregnancy); NP, nonpregnant tissue. (C) Heat-
map of clustering of differentially expressed genes
in each uterine tissue sample. Gene-expression val-
ues
are
normalized
by
using
a
z-score
trans-
formation on TPM. (D) Number of differentially
expressed genes in pairwise comparisons between
each reproductive stage.
E6568
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1701129114
Griffith et al.
 protein (LBP) have also been detected in opossum endometrial
stromal cells (31). Further, there is a qualitative increase in
neutrophil-specific elastase, ELANE, with few mapped transcripts
in nonpregnant and midgestation samples but expression of this
gene in all late-gestation samples, with a mean level of 1.1 tran-
scripts per million (TPM), suggestive of neutrophil infiltration of
the uterus during the attachment reaction. GO terms associated
with inflammation or the immune system are found only in the list
of genes up-regulated at late gestation.
GO analysis of genes with increased expression in late gesta-
tion also identified an overrepresentation of genes involved in
the response to hormone (GO: 0009725, 1.86-fold, q = 2.53 ×
10−5); genes present include the oxytocin receptor OXTR, an-
giogenic factors such as VEGFA, and several genes involved in
retinol metabolism, including RDH12, RDH8, RBP4, and RPE65.
Although RNA levels for genes involved in prostaglandin me-
tabolism and synthesis, including PTGS2 and Prostaglandin
E2 synthase (PTGES) increase, the levels of RNA encoding the
estrogen receptor ESR1 and progesterone receptor PGR de-
crease through pregnancy.
Implantation Marker Expression Is Induced Following Uterine–
Trophoblast Contact. To test the hypothesis that the expression of
inflammatory signals is homologous to implantation-related in-
flammation in eutherians, we examined whether the expression
of eutherian implantation markers is correlated with the loss of
the shell-coat barrier and thus with the initiation of direct fetal–
maternal contact. Specifically, we examined the expression of these
implantation markers at a finer scale using qPCR (Fig. 5). As can
be seen, the up-regulation of several inflammatory markers (IL6,
TNF, and PTGS2) does not occur until after attachment, i.e., after
11.5 d post copulation (Fig. 5 A–C). In addition, MUC1, HBEGF,
and PTGES show moderate increases in expression following the
breach of the shell coat and a consistent pattern of increasing ex-
pression through successive days of pregnancy. Given the temporal
correlation between the expression of these genes and the attach-
ment reaction, we predict that these genes will be localized to the
tissues of the attachment reaction.
Implantation Markers Are Localized to the Maternal–Fetal Interface. To
investigate the hypothesis that the opossum attachment reaction is
homologous with the eutherian implantation process, we immu-
nolocalized several known markers of implantation that share ex-
pression profiles in the transcriptome data with uterine tissue at
key stages of gestation (Fig. 6). Although there were many genes
that we would have wished to investigate, many interesting mole-
cules could not be studied because of limitations of available an-
tibodies that would be cross-reactive with Monodelphis. Validation
of the antibodies we used is provided in the SI Appendix.
Each of the examined proteins showed expression levels that
were broadly consistent with the expression levels observed in
transcriptomics (Figs. 5 and 6). PTGS2 is the rate-limiting enzyme
in the prostaglandin synthesis pathway, and strong cytoplasmic
staining was seen in uterine luminal epithelial cells in the post-
attachment phase of pregnancy (Fig. 6C). This finding is consistent
with the uterine tissue expressing inflammatory markers as a
component of the attachment reaction and is consistent with
PTGS2 expression in eutherian implantation (32).
HBEGF facilitates the interaction between the trophoblast
and endometrium in humans and rodents and other eutherians
(33). HBEGF reactivity was strongly localized to the cytoplasm
of epithelial cells in the postattachment uterus (Fig. 6F). We also
saw HBEGF nuclear staining of some glandular epithelial cells
throughout the reproductive cycle; however, staining did not
appear in all nuclei (Fig. 6 D–F).
Mucins are glycoproteins that line organ surfaces exposed to the
external environment, including lung, gut, and eyes. MUC1 inhibits
cell–cell interactions in vitro and can act as a physical barrier to
implantation (34). MUC1 is degraded as a barrier to implantation
by the trophoblast in rabbits (35), is down-regulated by the blas-
tocyst in vitro in humans (36), and is secondarily down-regulated at
implantation in mice by steroid hormones (37). In humans,
MUC1 acts as a scaffold and ligand for selectins present on the
blastocyst, facilitating attachment (38, 39). MUC1 reactivity was
consistently found on the apical surface of luminal epithelial cells
in the opossum (Fig. 6 G–I) and was strongest in nonpregnant
and postattachment females. In postattachment females, MUC1
Fig. 4.
Semantic clustering of significantly over-
represented GO terms in differentially expressed
genes in comparisons between nonpregnant (A) and
midgestation (B) tissue and between preattachment
(C) and postattachment (D) tissue. GO analysis was
performed by GOrilla (77), and semantic clustering
was achieved by ReviGO (78). In each gene set there
is significant enrichment of GO terms.
Griffith et al.
PNAS
|
Published online July 26, 2017
|
E6569
EVOLUTION
PNAS PLUS
 surrounds budding vesicles as they separate from the luminal ep-
ithelia. In humans, MUC1 is secreted by uterine luminal epithelial
cells, and maximal expression is observed during the implantation
window of the estrous cycle (40). The presence of MUC1 does not
appear to be weakened by the trophoblast, because it is expressed
in regions that both are and are not in contact with embryonic
trophoblast. The persistence of MUC1 in postattachment luminal
epithelium may act to decrease the ability of the trophoblast to
damage and invade the endometrium.
In addition to uterine markers, we localized two molecules to
the fetal side of the placenta. Serine protease 8 is present in
trophoblast cells of the placenta 14.5 d post copulation (SI Ap-
pendix, Fig. S1). The expression of PGE2 synthase (PGES) has
been found in the late-gestation uterine RNA, but the protein
localization is limited to the trophoblast (Fig. 6L), suggesting
that the RNA in the late-gestation samples is, in part, the result
of contamination with trophoblast cells. Given the potential
for trophoblast contamination of uterine tissue, future work
should aim to identify the cell types responsible for inflammatory
gene expression using either laser-captured microdissection and
RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) or in situ hybridization on uterine
sections. It is interesting that the two key steps in PGE2 synthesis
are distributed in different tissues: PTGS2 in the uterine luminal
epithelium and PTGES in the trophoblast, suggesting that the
production of PGE2 can signal the presence of a fetus.
Transcriptome-Wide Similarities Between the Opossum Attachment
Reaction and Eutherian Implantation. To identify whether the simi-
larities between implantation in eutherian mammals and term
pregnancy in the opossum were limited to a small number of
implantation biomarkers or whether there is evidence for global
transcriptome overlaps, we performed transcriptome-wide com-
parisons with a number of existing eutherian implantation tran-
scriptome datasets. In eutherians, various experimental designs
have been used to identify implantation-specific gene-expression
changes. In rodents and rabbits, experimental designs typically
compare gene expression in implantation sites and interim-
plantation sites within the uterus.
There is a highly significant overlap in the genes expressed in
the implantation sites of rabbits (41) and in the genes up-regu-
lated during the opossum attachment reaction (P = 3.7 × 10−20,
χ2 test) (Fig. 7D). The detected overlap is substantial and includes
83 genes that are up-regulated in both the rabbit implantation sites
and the postattachment opossum uterus. This overlap set is highly
enriched in genes related to hormone response (GO:0009725, 6.97-
fold, q = 2.42 × 10−7), cellular secretion (GO:0032940, 5.19-fold,
q = 2.5 × 10−7), and inflammatory response (GO:0006954, 4.98-
fold, q = 8.74 × 10−3). We also find that genes involved in em-
bryo implantation are enriched (GO:0007566, 15.2-fold, q = 6.2 ×
10−2). These genes include the implantation biomarkers osteopontin
(SPP1), stanniocalcin 1 (STC1), and fibulin 1 (FBLN1). In contrast,
studies that used a similar design in mice (42, 43) showed a degree
of overlap that is not statistically significant (SI Appendix, Fig. S2 A
and B).
In humans, studies have conducted uterine tissue biopsies either
within or outside the window of implantation. There are sub-
stantial discrepancies among the many studies that have been
conducted (44). These discrepancies might reflect real biological
variation, heterogeneity within the uterus, and/or biopsy technique.
Furthermore, the human transcriptome data were generated using
microarrays that limit the ability to detect gene-expression changes,
so the number of identified implantation genes is lower than in
RNA-seq experiments. Despite these differences, there is a sig-
nificant overlap between the genes up-regulated during the at-
tachment reaction in the opossum and the genes up-regulated in
the human implantation window as identified by Riesewijk et al.
(45) (P = 1.5 × 10−6, χ2 test) (Fig. 7E), Mirkin et al. (46) (P = 3.2 ×
10−3, χ2 test) (Fig. 7F), and Kao et al. (47) (P = 9.3 × 10−4, χ2 test)
(Fig. 7G). Specifically, we see an overlap in the key implantation
biomarker SPP1, which is the only consistent implantation window
biomarker identified from all human microarray experiments (44).
Because the number of identified implantation window genes in
the human studies is low, there is limited power to perform GO
analysis on each of the studies. However, when we pooled the
genes from all the human studies, we found the overrepresentation
of some interesting GO terms, namely, response to external stimulus
(GO:0009605, 4.10-fold, q = 2.34 × 10−2) and regulation of apoptotic
processes (GO:0042981, 3.70-fold, q = 1.25 × 10−2). Several of
these overlapping genes, including G0S2 (48) and SGK1 (49),
have been implicated in diseases associated with implantation
pathologies.
Together, these global comparisons between implantation and the
opossum attachment reaction suggest that there is a transcriptome-
level similarity between the opossum attachment reaction and
gene expression during rabbit implantation as well as in the human
window of implantation, supporting our suggestion that they are
Fig. 5.
Expression of key markers (as labeled in A–F) of implantation in M. domestica through key days of pregnancy, as measured by real-time qPCR. The
time of shell-coat breach is marked by a red arrow, and parturition is marked by a star. Expression levels are reported relative to expression in nonpregnant
uterine tissue and to the internal reference gene TBP. The change in mean value is indicated by a black line.
E6570
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1701129114
Griffith et al.
 homologous. The lack of a statistically significant overlap with gene
expression in mouse studies is interesting, because specific genes
with an experimentally verified role in implantation (HBEGF,
COX2, and others) are seen in both mouse implantation and
opossum attachment reaction. These admittedly limited com-
parisons may suggest that implantation in the mouse is more highly
derived from the ancestral attachment reaction than is implantation
in rabbits and humans.
Discussion
The Attachment Reaction in Monodelphis Has Molecular Signatures
Consistent with Human and Rodent Implantation. In humans, im-
plantation follows a series of structural and molecular changes to
the endometrial lining; in particular, these changes involve the
production of proteins to regulate maternal–embryo interactions
(Fig. 7A). The changes to the luminal epithelial cells and the
density of cell-adhesion molecules in the opossum attachment
reaction are similar to the implantation reaction in human and
rodent pregnancy (50, 51). Several of the changes that support
implantation in eutherians also occur at term in M. domestica (Fig.
7B). The most striking similarity is that, despite there being normal
physiological processes and despite the absence of an infection
or pathogens, both implantation in eutherians and parturition in
M. domestica involve a conserved set of inflammation markers and
immune signaling pathways (Fig. 7A). The expression of key im-
plantation markers and consistent patterns of inflammation sug-
gest that the attachment reaction in M. domestica is homologous
with the molecular processes of implantation in human and rodent
pregnancies and also support the hypothesis that viviparity evolved
before the most recent common ancestor of eutherians and mar-
supials. Homology implies that the human implantation process
evolved through the modification of an ancestral attachment re-
action similar to that documented here in the opossum. This view
is consistent with the interpretation of human implantation as a
modified inflammatory reaction (11).
In the opossum, HBEGF localization patterns are consistent
with this molecule being a key component of the attachment re-
action. HBEGF is most abundant in luminal epithelial cells during
implantation in rodent and human pregnancy (33, 52). An in-
teresting difference is that in the mouse HBEGF is also expressed
in the trophoblast; we did not find any staining in the opossum
trophoblast. Although the functional significance of HBEGF in
Monodelphis pregnancy cannot be inferred from our data, it is
likely to be important for maternal–embryo communication fol-
lowing placenta formation. Although HBEGF localization corre-
lates with uterine gene expression levels in nonpregnant and
postattachment Monodelphis (Fig. 6 D and F), on day 8 of preg-
nancy there is an increase in HBEGF mRNA expression that does
not appear to result in the presence of HBEGF protein in tissues
(Fig. 5E). We suspect that this gene exhibits posttranscriptional
regulation in the preattachment uterus. HBEGF exists in a
membrane-bound form (which facilitates interactions with adja-
cent cells) and as a secreted molecule (which signals to nearby
cells, such as stromal fibroblasts) (53). Localization of HBEGF to
the cytoplasm of cells suggests that it exists in a secretable form
and may have a signaling function in the attachment reaction. In
mice, uterine production of HBEGF is dependent on hormonal
signals from the blastocyst and does not occur during pseudo-
pregnancy (33, 54). Blastocyst-sized beads laced with HBEGF
were sufficient to evoke implantation-like responses in the mouse
Fig. 6.
Immunolocalization of key implantation markers to the uterine tissue of M. domestica. Images present the localization of PTGS2, also known as COX2 (A–
C), HBEGF (D–F), MUC1 (G–I), and PTGES (J–L). Uterine tissue was collected at different stages of the reproductive cycle from nonpregnant (A, D, G, J), pre-
attachment (B, E, H, K), and postattachment (C, F, I, L) females. Localization was visualized with 3,3′-diaminobenzidine-tetrahydrochloride (DAB), which appears as
a brown precipitate in sections. (Scale bars: 100 μm.) Arrowheads point to uterine luminal epithelial cells. G, uterine glandular tissue; T, trophoblast tissue.
Griffith et al.
PNAS
|
Published online July 26, 2017
|
E6571
EVOLUTION
PNAS PLUS
 endometrium, including the production of PTGS2 and the
decidualization of endometrial stromal cells in vivo (55, 56). Ec-
topic HBEGF is also sufficient to induce the expression of
HBEGF in the endometrium, suggesting that it may positively
regulate itself.
Implantation in eutherian mammals is an inflammatory pro-
cess (11). During normal pregnancy, this inflammation is initiated
by the trophoblast and involves the recruitment of natural killer
cells to the site of implantation as well as the production of a range
of proinflammatory cytokines including IL6 and TNF (57). Lo-
calized injury and endometrial biopsies before in vitro fertilization
treatment result in greater implantation rates; these increased rates
are suspected to be caused by an induction of the proinflammatory
molecules necessary for implantation (58, 59). Term pregnancy in
M. domestica is also inflammatory, with many of the same cyto-
kines (including IL6, TNF, and IL19) being produced in the
uterus. PGE2 is a lipid that promotes inflammation locally and gen-
erally in vertebrates. PTGS2 is the rate-limiting enzyme in PGE2
synthesis, and it is expressed only during inflammation in normal
tissues. We localized the expression of PTGS2 to opossum luminal
Fig. 7.
Transcriptomic comparisons between the opossum attachment reaction and eutherian implantation. (A) Comparison between known inflammatory
molecules produced during implantation in several eutherian lineages and their production during attachment in the opossum. PG, prostaglandin. References:
sheep (79–81), pig (79, 82–86), horse (87–89), dog (90, 91), mouse (92–94). (B and C) The timing of implantation marker expression relative to the menstrual cycle in
humans (B) and in opossum in days following copulation (C). (B) The periods of expression of key markers of implantation during the menstrual cycle are indicated
by the horizontal bars (5). The window for successful implantation (orange bar) occurs when there is coexpression of each protein. (C) The expression of key
implantation markers in different stages of the reproductive cycle in M. domestica. No expression (<3 TPM) is indicated by empty circles; solid circles indicate that
expression was observed (>3 TPM); large circles indicate that expression was very high (>30 TPM). (D–G) Statistical tests of overlap between transcriptome-wide
changes in gene expression during implantation in eutherians and during the opossum attachment reaction. (D) Overlap between genes enriched in the rabbit
implantation site compared with the interimplantation site (41) and opossum attachment. (E–G) Overlap of genes more highly expressed in the human endo-
metrium during the implantation window (45–47) and during opossum attachment. P values were calculated using the χ2 test.
E6572
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1701129114
Griffith et al.
 epithelial cells at the placental interface, indicating that this in-
terface is inducing a proinflammatory state (Fig. 6I). In mice, local-
ized repression of PTGS2 results in multiple forms of reproductive
failure, including implantation and decidualization failure of the
uterus (60).
PTGES is another enzyme crucial for the production of PGE2.
Unlike PTGS2, PTGES is localized to trophoblast tissue (Fig. 6L).
The expression of PTGS2 in the uterus and PTGES in the tro-
phoblast suggests that the induction of placental inflammation is
likely a signal indicating the presence of a fetus, because both the
activation of the uterus providing PTGS2 and the trophoblast pro-
viding PTGES seem to be necessary to produce PGE2. We would
expect only inflammatory PGE2 signaling when the primed uterus
expressing PTGS2 is adhered to the trophoblast, which expresses
PTGES, the final enzyme responsible for PGE2 synthesis.
Endometrial inflammation is likely induced by a combination
of two processes: tissue damage caused by the trophoblast, which
may induce inflammation, and a concerted effort (by the mother
and embryo), which may evolve to induce inflammation as a
mechanism to induce parturition. In humans and mice, the tro-
phoblast produces a range of serine proteases responsible for up-
regulating inflammatory molecules such as PTGS2 (61). Simi-
larly, the opossum trophoblast produces serine protease 8 (SI
Appendix, Fig. S1) and cathepsins (62) associated with the deg-
radation of the shell membrane. Serine protease 8 also is among
the most induced proteases in the mouse and the human blas-
tocyst (61). Following the breakdown of the shell, these prote-
ases may damage the uterine tissue, inducing inflammation.
The immune consequences of pregnancy appear to be milder in
viviparous reptiles, in which some specific interleukin genes ap-
pear to be down-regulated and no whole-scale up-regulation of
inflammatory markers has been observed (19, 63, 64). This dif-
ference could be caused, in part, by the absence of an invasive
trophoblast or other properties of the chorionic tissue unique to
mammals and not associated with the evolution of viviparity (65,
66). The absence of a strong inflammatory and immune response
in viviparous reptiles with a placenta suggests that derived prop-
erties of the therian trophoblast may induce the inflammatory
response observed in M. domestica. In particular, the production
of components of the PGE2 synthesis pathway in maternal and
embryonic tissue (Fig. 6) suggests that the inflammatory response
seen at term is the result of a cooperative process between mother
and embryo to induce parturition.
Evolution and Function of the Attachment Reaction During the
Evolution of Therian Pregnancy. The reason for the marsupial re-
productive mode—short gestation with very short placental at-
tachment and extended postpartum development and growth—is
a question fundamental to understanding marsupial evolution.
The trophoblast of M. domestica invades between maternal uter-
ine epithelial cells but does not breach the basal membrane (67).
This tissue damage is likely to induce inflammation in maternal
tissues, thus raising the question: “Why have trophoblast cells
evolved to penetrate between uterine epithelial cells in marsupials
at all?” Unlike eutherians, marsupials gain scant resources from
the mother before birth, so invasion as a means to increase em-
bryonic control over placental transport seems unlikely.
Alternatively, quasi-invasion may have evolved specifically to
induce an inflammatory process to bring about parturition. In-
flammation is an important component of the parturition process
in eutherian mammals, and infection can cause preterm labor (68,
69). In wallabies, inflammatory prostaglandins are sufficient to
induce parturition behavior, and blocking prostaglandin activity
late in gestation results in the extension of pregnancy (70, 71). Our
data suggest that in the opossum prostaglandin E2 synthesis via the
production of PTGS2 and PTGES is a consequence of the at-
tachment reaction, and these processes may be linked to the in-
duction of parturition.
Given the inflammatory nature of the attachment reaction in
marsupials and eutherians alike, and presumably in the therian
ancestor, the extension of pregnancy in eutherians must require a
mechanism to suppress the immune system to prevent maternal
rejection of the baby. Pregnancy in humans and mice is sustained
by an extended antiinflammatory period between implantation
and parturition (11), suggesting that the switch to an anti-
inflammatory state following implantation was an innovation of
fundamental importance to the extension of pregnancy in eu-
therians (Fig. 8). This hypothesis can be tested by identifying
whether the more basal eutherian clades Afrotheria and Xenarthra
also have mechanisms to control the inflammatory processes in-
duced during implantation (72, 73).
Given that eutherian parturition, like implantation, is an in-
flammatory process (11, 68), and the attachment reaction in the
opossum is inflammatory, an interesting hypothesis is that both
implantation and parturition are proinflammatory reactions be-
cause they are both derived forms of the therian attachment re-
action (Fig. 8). Therefore, only the noninflammatory phase of
pregnancy is unique to eutherian mammals. Alternatively, the
inflammation occurring at parturition in eutherians might be an
independently derived strategy unique to this group (Fig. 8). To
disentangle these hypotheses, future research should test whether
(i) inflammation facilitates parturition in the opossum, (ii) the
inflammation during eutherian parturition, like implantation,
shows an overlap at the transcriptome level with the marsupial
Fig. 8.
Comparison between the key stages of pregnancy in the opossum and human. The eutherian reproductive condition has evolved by inserting an anti-
inflammatory period of gestation between the inflammatory attachment reaction and the inflammatory parturition reaction. Dashed arrows represent the
two hypotheses that could explain how secondary inflammation arose in eutherians: 1) eutherian pregnancy can be understood either through the insertion
of an antiinflammatory phase of pregnancy into what was one inflammatory process in the ancestral therian; or 2) by the addition of both an
antiinflammatory phase and an independently derived secondary inflammation at parturition.
Griffith et al.
PNAS
|
Published online July 26, 2017
|
E6573
EVOLUTION
PNAS PLUS
 attachment reaction, and (iii) the type of inflammation at im-
plantation and parturition have conserved elements.
A caveat of our study is that it assumes that the reproductive
mode observed in Monodelphis is representative of the stem
therian mammal. Although it can be argued that the broad re-
productive pattern of the opossum likely reflects the ancestral
therian mammal, it is not possible to test this hypothesis using
ancestral state reconstructions because of the topology of the
mammalian phylogeny, i.e., there is only one viviparous mam-
malian clade outside the eutherians. Furthermore, fossils that
could identify whether the marsupial or eutherian reproductive
strategy more closely reflects that of the ancestral therian have
not been found. Therefore, an alternative explanation of our
findings can be proposed if we assume that eutherians more
closely
represent
the
ancestral
live-bearing
mammal’s
re-
productive strategy. Under this model, the gene-expression
changes observed in the uterus at term in the opossum are ho-
mologous to that of eutherian implantation because marsupial
pregnancy can be viewed as an early termination of pregnancy at
implantation. Although we do not think this scenario is likely, it
is important to state it as an alternative interpretation.
Conclusions
Our data support the hypothesis that the molecular processes that
occur at the maternal–fetal interface during embryo attachment in
the opossum are homologous to those that occur at implantation
in human and rodent pregnancies. This hypothesis suggests that
the inflammatory nature of implantation in eutherians is an evo-
lutionary heritage from the ancestral condition for live-bearing
mammals. We propose that the inflammatory processes induced
by the attachment reaction are likely to be a barrier to the ex-
tension of pregnancy in marsupials, possibly explaining the limited
diversity in gestation length and stage of development at birth in
this group. We further suggest that a modification of these in-
flammatory processes was a key innovation in the evolution of
eutherian reproduction and is worthy of further investigation.
Methods
Animal Husbandry and Tissue Collection. All animal procedures were con-
ducted under protocols approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee of Yale University. Opossum uterine tissue was collected from a
M. domestica colony housed at Yale University. Tissue from specific stages of
the reproductive cycle were collected by following a standard breeding
protocol outlined in Kin et al. (30). Once collected, tissue was stored for RNA
analysis, histology, and Western blot analysis.
RNA-Seq and Analysis. For RNA-seq analysis we examined uterine tissue from
nonpregnant females (n = 3) and from females at the preattachment (7 d
post copulation, n = 3) and postattachment (13.5–4 d post copulation, n = 3)
stage. Illumina sequencing libraries were generated by Yale Centre for Ge-
nome
Analysis,
using
strand-specific, Poly-A–selected,
in-house
library
preparation methods. Sequencing of libraries was performed on the Illumina
HiSeq 2500 System.
Gene expression was quantified by aligning raw sequencing reads to the
M. domestica genome (release 79) with Tophat2 (74), and gene counts were
calculated with HTSeq (75). We performed hierarchical clustering and principal
components analysis in the R stats package to confirm that treatment groups
broadly had distinct gene-expression profiles. We compared differential gene
expression between nonpregnant and preattachment females as well as be-
tween preattachment and postattachment females using DESeq2 (76).
GO analysis was performed in GOrilla (77); the list of all genes in
M. domestica was used as a background for analyses. GO analysis was
visualized with ReviGO (78).
qPCR. To test the association between the expression of key genes and the
attachment reaction, we performed real-time qPCR for IL6, TNF, PTGS2,
MUC1, HBEGF, and PTGES over a finer time scale than was used in tran-
scriptome analysis. RNA was extracted and reverse transcribed; then qPCR
reactions were performed for each sample and gene. The expression of each
gene was normalized using the internal reference gene TBP.
Immunostaining. We localized the expression of PTGS2, HBEGF, MUC1, and
PTGES using immunohistochemistry. Fixed tissues were embedded in paraffin,
sectioned, deparaffinized, cleared, and then incubated with a primary antibody
specific to the protein of interest. Sections then were washed and stained with a
secondary antibody, and staining was visualized with 3,3’-diaminobenzidine-
tetrahydrochloride. The specificity of each primary antibody was confirmed
with Western blot analysis.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. This research was funded by a Gaylord Donnelley
Postdoctoral Environmental Fellowship (to O.W.G.) and John Templeton
Foundation Grant 54860 (to G.P.W.), and, in part, by the Perinatology Research
Branch, Division of Obstetrics and Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Division of Intra-
mural Research, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development, National Institutes of Health, US Department of Health
and Human Services (NICHD/NIH/DHHS); and, in part, with Federal funds from
NICHD/NIH/DHHS under Contract HHSN275201300006C.
1. Cross JC, Werb Z, Fisher SJ (1994) Implantation and the placenta: Key pieces of the
development puzzle. Science 266:1508–1518.
2. Murphy CR (2004) Uterine receptivity and the plasma membrane transformation. Cell
Res 14:259–267.
3. Filant J, Spencer TE (2014) Uterine glands: Biological roles in conceptus implantation,
uterine receptivity and decidualization. Int J Dev Biol 58:107–116.
4. Cha J, Sun X, Dey SK (2012) Mechanisms of implantation: Strategies for successful
pregnancy. Nat Med 18:1754–1767.
5. Sharkey AM, Smith SK (2003) The endometrium as a cause of implantation failure.
Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 17:289–307.
6. Galliano D, Bellver J, Díaz-García C, Simón C, Pellicer A (2015) ART and uterine pa-
thology: How relevant is the maternal side for implantation? Hum Reprod Update 21:
13–38.
7. Norwitz ER, Schust DJ, Fisher SJ (2001) Implantation and the survival of early preg-
nancy. N Engl J Med 345:1400–1408.
8. Koot YEM, et al. (2016) An endometrial gene expression signature accurately predicts
recurrent implantation failure after IVF. Sci Rep 6:19411.
9. Gómez E, Ruíz-Alonso M, Miravet J, Simón C (2015) Human endometrial tran-
scriptomics: Implications for embryonic implantation. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med
5:a022996.
10. Garrido-Gómez T, et al. (2013) Profiling the gene signature of endometrial re-
ceptivity: Clinical results. Fertil Steril 99:1078–1085.
11. Mor G, Cardenas I, Abrahams V, Guller S (2011) Inflammation and pregnancy: The role
of the immune system at the implantation site. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1221:80–87.
12. Kover K, Liang L, Andrews GK, Dey SK (1995) Differential expression and regulation
of cytokine genes in the mouse uterus. Endocrinology 136:1666–1673.
13. Vilella F, et al. (2013) PGE2 and PGF2α concentrations in human endometrial fluid as
biomarkers for embryonic implantation. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 98:4123–4132.
14. Li D-K, Liu L, Odouli R (2003) Exposure to non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs during
pregnancy and risk of miscarriage: Population based cohort study. BMJ 327:368.
15. Giuliani E, Parkin KL, Lessey BA, Young SL, Fazleabas AT (2014) Characterization of
uterine NK cells in women with infertility or recurrent pregnancy loss and associated
endometriosis. Am J Reprod Immunol 72:262–269.
16. Hawkins M, Battaglia A (2009) Breeding behaviour of the platypus (Ornithorhynchus
anatinus) in captivity. J Zoology 57:283–293.
17. Hall BK (1999) The paradoxical platypus. Bioscience 49:211–218.
18. Griffith OW, et al. (2015) Ancestral state reconstructions require biological evidence
to test evolutionary hypotheses: A case study examining the evolution of re-
productive mode in squamate reptiles. J Exp Zoolog B Mol Dev Evol 324:493–503.
19. Griffith OW, Wagner GP (2017) The placenta as a model for understanding the origin
and evolution of vertebrate organs. Nat Ecol Evol 1:0072.
20. Wildman DE, et al. (2006) Evolution of the mammalian placenta revealed by phylo-
genetic analysis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103:3203–3208.
21. Mess A, Carter AM (2007) Evolution of the placenta during the early radiation of
placental mammals. Comp Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol 148:769–779.
22. Elliot MG, Crespi BJ (2009) Phylogenetic evidence for early hemochorial placentation
in eutheria. Placenta 30:949–967.
23. Selwood L (2000) Marsupial egg and embryo coats. Cells Tissues Organs 166:208–219.
24. Renfree MB (2010) Review: Marsupials: Placental mammals with a difference.
Placenta 31:S21–S26.
25. Freyer C, Zeller U, Renfree MB (2003) The marsupial placenta: A phylogenetic analysis.
J Exp Zoolog A Comp Exp Biol 299:59–77.
26. Dudley JS, Murphy CR, Thompson MB, McAllan BM (2015) Desmoglein-2 during
pregnancy and its role in the evolution of viviparity in a marsupial (Sminthopsis
crassicaudata; Dasyuridae). J Morphol 276:261–272.
27. Laird MK, Hearn CM, Shaw G, Renfree MB (2016) Uterine morphology during diapause
and early pregnancy in the tammar wallaby (Macropus eugenii). J Anat 229:459–472.
28. Kin K, et al. (2016) The transcriptomic evolution of mammalian pregnancy: Gene
expression innovations in endometrial stromal fibroblasts. Genome Biol Evol 8:
2459–2473.
E6574
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1701129114
Griffith et al.
 29. Hansen VL, Schilkey FD, Miller RD (2016) Transcriptomic changes associated with
pregnancy in a marsupial, the gray short-tailed opossum Monodelphis domestica.
PLoS One 11:e0161608.
30. Kin K, Maziarz J, Wagner GP (2014) Immunohistological study of the endometrial
stromal fibroblasts in the opossum, Monodelphis domestica: Evidence for homology
with eutherian stromal fibroblasts. Biol Reprod 90:111.
31. Kin K, Nnamani MC, Lynch VJ, Michaelides E, Wagner GP (2015) Cell-type phyloge-
netics and the origin of endometrial stromal cells. Cell Reports 10:1398–1409.
32. Scherle PA, Ma W, Lim H, Dey SK, Trzaskos JM (2000) Regulation of cyclooxygenase-
2 induction in the mouse uterus during decidualization. An event of early pregnancy.
J Biol Chem 275:37086–37092.
33. Das SK, et al. (1994) Heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor gene is induced in the
mouse uterus temporally by the blastocyst solely at the site of its apposition: A possible
ligand for interaction with blastocyst EGF-receptor in implantation. Development 120:
1071–1083.
34. Ligtenberg MJL, Buijs F, Vos HL, Hilkens J (1992) Suppression of cellular aggregation
by high levels of episialin. Cancer Res 52:2318–2324.
35. Hoffman LH, Olson GE, Carson DD, Chilton BS (1998) Progesterone and implanting
blastocysts regulate Muc1 expression in rabbit uterine epithelium. Endocrinology 139:
266–271.
36. Meseguer M, et al. (2001) Human endometrial mucin MUC1 is up-regulated by pro-
gesterone and down-regulated in vitro by the human blastocyst. Biol Reprod 64:590–601.
37. Surveyor GA, et al. (1995) Expression and steroid hormonal control of Muc-1 in the
mouse uterus. Endocrinology 136:3639–3647.
38. Carson DD, Julian J, Lessey BA, Prakobphol A, Fisher SJ (2006) MUC1 is a scaffold for
selectin ligands in the human uterus. Front Biosci 11:2903–2908.
39. Genbacev OD, et al. (2003) Trophoblast L-selectin-mediated adhesion at the
maternal-fetal interface. Science 299:405–408.
40. Hey NA, Graham RA, Seif MW, Aplin JD (1994) The polymorphic epithelial mucin
MUC1 in human endometrium is regulated with maximal expression in the implan-
tation phase. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 78:337–342.
41. Liu J-L, Zhao M, Peng Y, Fu Y-S (2016) Identification of gene expression changes in
rabbit uterus during embryo implantation. Genomics 107:216–221.
42. Su R-W, et al. (2010) The integrative analysis of microRNA and mRNA expression in
mouse uterus under delayed implantation and activation. PLoS One 5:e15513.
43. Reese J, et al. (2001) Global gene expression analysis to identify molecular markers of
uterine receptivity and embryo implantation. J Biol Chem 276:44137–44145.
44. Aghajanova L, Hamilton AE, Giudice LC (2008) Uterine receptivity to human embryonic
implantation: Histology, biomarkers, and transcriptomics. Semin Cell Dev Biol 19:204–211.
45. Riesewijk A, et al. (2003) Gene expression profiling of human endometrial receptivity
on days LH+2 versus LH+7 by microarray technology. Mol Hum Reprod 9:253–264.
46. Mirkin S, et al. (2005) In search of candidate genes critically expressed in the human
endometrium during the window of implantation. Hum Reprod 20:2104–2117.
47. Kao LC, et al. (2002) Global gene profiling in human endometrium during the win-
dow of implantation. Endocrinology 143:2119–2138.
48. Kao LC, et al. (2003) Expression profiling of endometrium from women with endo-
metriosis reveals candidate genes for disease-based implantation failure and in-
fertility. Endocrinology 144:2870–2881.
49. Salker MS, et al. (2011) Deregulation of the serum- and glucocorticoid-inducible ki-
nase SGK1 in the endometrium causes reproductive failure. Nat Med 17:1509–1513.
50. Laird MK, Thompson MB, Murphy CR, McAllan BM (2014) Uterine epithelial cell
changes during pregnancy in a marsupial (Sminthopsis crassicaudata; Dasyuridae).
J Morphol 275:1081–1092.
51. Laird MK, Turancova M, McAllan BM, Murphy CR, Thompson MB (2016) Uterine focal
adhesion dynamics during pregnancy in a marsupial (Sminthopsis crassicaudata; Da-
syuridae). Anat Rec 300:1150–1159.
52. Yoo H-J, Barlow DH, Mardon HJ (1997) Temporal and spatial regulation of expression
of heparin-binding epidermal growth factor-like growth factor in the human endo-
metrium: A possible role in blastocyst implantation. Dev Genet 21:102–108.
53. Raab G, et al. (1996) Mouse preimplantation blastocysts adhere to cells expressing the
transmembrane form of heparin-binding EGF-like growth factor. Development 122:
637–645.
54. Lim HJ, Dey SK (2009) HB-EGF: A unique mediator of embryo-uterine interactions
during implantation. Exp Cell Res 315:619–626.
55. Paria BC, Reese J, Das SK, Dey SK (2002) Deciphering the cross-talk of implantation:
Advances and challenges. Science 296:2185–2188.
56. Paria BC, et al. (2001) Cellular and molecular responses of the uterus to embryo im-
plantation can be elicited by locally applied growth factors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 98:
1047–1052.
57. Mor G, Abrahams VM (2003) Potential role of macrophages as immunoregulators of
pregnancy. Reprod Biol Endocrinol 1:119.
58. Barash A, et al. (2003) Local injury to the endometrium doubles the incidence of suc-
cessful pregnancies in patients undergoing in vitro fertilization. Fertil Steril 79:1317–1322.
59. Raziel A, et al. (2007) Favorable influence of local injury to the endometrium in in-
tracytoplasmic sperm injection patients with high-order implantation failure. Fertil
Steril 87:198–201.
60. Lim H, et al. (1997) Multiple female reproductive failures in cyclooxygenase 2-deficient
mice. Cell 91:197–208.
61. Brosens JJ, et al. (2014) Uterine selection of human embryos at implantation. Sci Rep
4:3894.
62. McGowen MR, et al. (2013) Gene expression in the term placenta of the opossum
Monodelphis domestica and the evolution of the therian placenta. Placenta 34:
A24–A25.
63. Griffith OW, Brandley MC, Belov K, Thompson MB (2016) Reptile pregnancy is un-
derpinned by complex changes in uterine gene expression: A comparative analysis of
the uterine transcriptome in viviparous and oviparous lizards. Genome Biol Evol 8:
3226–3239.
64. Brandley MC, Young RL, Warren DL, Thompson MB, Wagner GP (2012) Uterine gene
expression in the live-bearing lizard, Chalcides ocellatus, reveals convergence of
squamate reptile and mammalian pregnancy mechanisms. Genome Biol Evol 4:
394–411.
65. Griffith OW, Van Dyke JU, Thompson MB (2013) No implantation in an extra-uterine
pregnancy of a placentotrophic reptile. Placenta 34:510–511.
66. Griffith OW, Brandley MC, Whittington CM, Belov K, Thompson MB (2017) Compar-
ative genomics of hormonal signaling in the chorioallantoic membrane of oviparous
and viviparous amniotes. Gen Comp Endocrinol 244:19–29.
67. Freyer C, Zeller U, Renfree MB (2002) Ultrastructure of the placenta of the tammar
wallaby, Macropus eugenii: Comparison with the grey short-tailed opossum, Mono-
delphis domestica. J Anat 201:101–119.
68. Thomson AJ, et al. (1999) Leukocytes infiltrate the myometrium during human parturi-
tion: Further evidence that labour is an inflammatory process. Hum Reprod 14:229–236.
69. Romero R, Dey SK, Fisher SJ (2014) Preterm labor: One syndrome, many causes.
Science 345:760–765.
70. Hinds LA, Tyndale-Biscoe CH, Shaw G, Fletcher TP, Renfree MB (1990) Effects of
prostaglandin and prolactin on luteolysis and parturient behaviour in the non-
pregnant tammar, Macropus eugenii. J Reprod Fertil 88:323–333.
71. Renfree MB, Shaw G, Fletcher TP (1994) Evidence for the essential role of prostaglandins
for parturition in a marsupial, Macropus eugenii. J Reprod Fertil 102:433–446.
72. Chavan AR, Bhullar BA, Wagner GP (2016) What was the ancestral function of decidual
stromal cells? A model for the evolution of eutherian pregnancy. Placenta 40:40–51.
73. Chavan AR, Wagner GP (2016) The fetal-maternal interface of the nine-banded ar-
madillo: Endothelial cells of maternal sinus are partially replaced by trophoblast.
Zoological Lett 2:11.
74. Kim D, et al. (2013) TopHat2: Accurate alignment of transcriptomes in the presence of
insertions, deletions and gene fusions. Genome Biol 14:R36.
75. Anders S, Pyl PT, Huber W (2015) HTSeq–a Python framework to work with high-
throughput sequencing data. Bioinformatics 31:166–169.
76. Love MI, Huber W, Anders S (2014) Moderated estimation of fold change and dis-
persion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol 15:550.
77. Eden E, Navon R, Steinfeld I, Lipson D, Yakhini Z (2009) GOrilla: A tool for discovery and
visualization of enriched GO terms in ranked gene lists. BMC Bioinformatics 10:48.
78. Supek F, Bo�
snjak M, �
Skunca N, �
Smuc T (2011) REVIGO summarizes and visualizes long
lists of gene ontology terms. PLoS One 6:e21800.
79. Mathialagan N, Bixby JA, Roberts RM (1992) Expression of interleukin-6 in porcine,
ovine, and bovine preimplantation conceptuses. Mol Reprod Dev 32:324–330.
80. Staples LD, Heap RB, Wooding FBP, King GJ (1983) Migration of leucocytes into the
uterus after acute removal of ovarian progesterone during early pregnancy in the
sheep. Placenta 4:339–349.
81. Vogiagis D, Fry RC, Sandeman RM, Salamonsen LA (1997) Leukaemia inhibitory factor
in endometrium during the oestrous cycle, early pregnancy and in ovariectomized
steroid-treated ewes. J Reprod Fertil 109:279–288.
82. Bischof RJ, Brandon MR, Lee CS (1995) Cellular immune responses in the pig uterus
during pregnancy. J Reprod Immunol 29:161–178.
83. Blitek A, Morawska E, Ziecik AJ (2012) Regulation of expression and role of leukemia
inhibitory
factor
and
interleukin-6
in
the
uterus
of
early
pregnant
pigs.
Theriogenology 78:951–964.
84. Geisert R, Fazleabas A, Lucy M, Mathew D (2012) Interaction of the conceptus and
endometrium to establish pregnancy in mammals: Role of interleukin 1β. Cell Tissue
Res 349:825–838.
85. Ross JW, Malayer JR, Ritchey JW, Geisert RD (2003) Characterization of the in-
terleukin-1β system during porcine trophoblastic elongation and early placental at-
tachment. Biol Reprod 69:1251–1259.
86. Wilson ME, Fahrenkrug SC, Smith TPL, Rohrer GA, Ford SP (2002) Differential ex-
pression of cyclooxygenase-2 around the time of elongation in the pig conceptus.
Anim Reprod Sci 71:229–237.
87. Atli MO, et al. (2010) Evaluation of genes involved in prostaglandin action in equine
endometrium during estrous cycle and early pregnancy. Anim Reprod Sci 122:124–132.
88. Haneda S, et al. (2009) Interleukin-1 receptor antagonist expression in the equine en-
dometrium during the peri-implantation period. Domest Anim Endocrinol 36:209–218.
89. Villani M, Vriend BAM, Paris DBBP, Stout TAE (2010) A role for Leukemia Inhibitory
Factor (LIF) during implantation in the mare? Anim Reprod Sci 121:309.
90. Kuribayashi T, et al. (2003) Determination of serum C-reactive protein (CRP) in healthy
beagle dogs of various ages and pregnant beagle dogs. Exp Anim 52:387–390.
91. Schäfer-Somi S, et al. (2008) Expression of genes in the canine pre-implantation uterus
and embryo: Implications for an active role of the embryo before and during invasion.
Reprod Domest Anim 43:656–663.
92. Basak S, Dubanchet S, Zourbas S, Chaouat G, Das C (2002) Expression of pro-
inflammatory cytokines in mouse blastocysts during implantation: Modulation by
steroid hormones. Am J Reprod Immunol 47:2–11.
93. Bhatt H, Brunet LJ, Stewart CL (1991) Uterine expression of leukemia inhibitory factor
coincides with the onset of blastocyst implantation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 88:
11408–11412.
94. De M, Sanford TR, Wood GW (1993) Expression of interleukin 1, interleukin 6 and
tumour necrosis factor alpha in mouse uterus during the peri-implantation period of
pregnancy. J Reprod Fertil 97:83–89.
Griffith et al.
PNAS
|
Published online July 26, 2017
|
E6575
EVOLUTION
PNAS PLUS
