 Articles
538 
www.thelancet.com   Vol 389   February 4, 2017
Use of MRI in the diagnosis of fetal brain abnormalities in 
utero (MERIDIAN): a multicentre, prospective cohort study
Paul D Griffi
  ths, Michael Bradburn, Michael J Campbell, Cindy L Cooper, Ruth Graham, Deborah Jarvis, Mark D Kilby, Gerald Mason, Cara Mooney, 
Stephen C Robson, Allan Wailoo, on behalf of the MERIDIAN collaborative group*
Summary
Background In-utero MRI (iuMRI) has shown promise as an adjunct to ultrasound but the comparative diagnostic 
performance has been poorly defi
 ned. We aimed to assess whether the diagnostic accuracy and confi
 dence of the 
prenatal diagnosis of fetal brain abnormalities is improved with iuMRI and assess the clinical impact and patient 
acceptability of iuMRI.
Methods We did a multicentre, prospective, cohort study in the UK, at 16 fetal medicine centres, of pregnant women aged 
16 years or older whose fetus had a brain abnormality detected by ultrasound at a gestational age of 18 weeks or more, had 
no contraindications to iuMRI, and consented to enter the study. Women carrying a fetus suspected of having a brain 
anomaly on ultrasound had iuMRI done within 14 days of ultrasound. The fi
 ndings were reviewed by two independent 
panels and used to estimate diagnostic accuracy and confi
 dence by comparison with outcome diagnoses. Changes in 
diagnosis, prognosis, and clinical management brought about by iuMRI and patient acceptability were assessed.
Findings Participants were recruited between July 29, 2011, and Aug 31, 2014. The cohort was subdivided by gestation into 
the 18 weeks to less than 24 weeks fetus cohort (n=369) and into the 24 weeks or older fetus cohort (n=201). Diagnostic 
accuracy was improved by 23% (95% CI 18–27) in the 18 weeks to less than 24 weeks group and 29% (23–36) in the 
24 weeks and older group (p<0·0001 for both groups). The overall diagnostic accuracy was 68% for ultrasound and 93% 
for iuMRI (diff
 erence 25%, 95% CI 21–29). Dominant diagnoses were reported with high confi
 dence on ultrasound in 
465 (82%) of 570 cases compared with 544 (95%) of 570 cases on iuMRI. IuMRI provided additional diagnostic 
information in 387 (49%) of 783 cases, changed prognostic information in at least 157 (20%), and led to changes in 
clinical management in more than one in three cases. IuMRI also had high patient acceptability with at least 95% of 
women saying they would have an iuMRI study if a future pregnancy were complicated by a fetal brain abnormality.
Interpretation iuMRI improves diagnostic accuracy and confi
 dence for fetal brain anomalies and leads to management 
changes in a high proportion of cases. This fi
 nding, along with the high patient acceptability, leads us to propose that 
any fetus with a suspected brain abnormality on ultrasound should have iuMRI to better inform counselling and 
management decisions.
Funding National Institute for Health Research Health Technology Assessment programme.
Copyright © The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an Open Access article under the CC BY license.
Introduction
Fetal imaging with ultrasonography has been the 
mainstay of antenatal screening programmes and 
detailed anomaly scanning in the UK for many years. 
The fetal brain is particularly important because of the 
high frequency of abnormalities (approximately 3 in 
1000 pregnancies).1,2 A wide range of neuropathological 
changes occur, many associated with serious clinical 
morbidities. Previous studies have suggested that in-
utero MRI (iuMRI) imaging might be a useful adjunct to 
ultrasonography for detecting fetal brain abnormalities3–5 
but uncertainty remains about the extent of diagnostic 
and clinical impact. The magnetic resonance imaging to 
enhance the diagnosis of fetal developmental brain 
abnormalities in utero (MERIDIAN) study was designed 
to address those uncertainties.
In this Article, we report the results of MERIDIAN in 
terms of diagnostic performance, clinical impact, and 
acceptability of iuMRI to pregnant women to provide 
holistic conclusions about the value of iuMRI. We deliver 
fi
 ndings capable of informing best clinical practice in 
women whose fetus has a possible brain abnormality 
detected on ultrasound.
Methods
Ethics and participants
MERIDIAN was undertaken in accordance with the 
Medicines for Human Use (Clinical Trials) Regulations 
2004, through adherence to the Sheffi
  eld Clinical Trials 
Research Unit’s standard operating procedures. Three 
committees were established to govern the conduct of the 
study: a Trial Steering Committee (independent), a Data 
Monitoring and Ethics Committee (independent), and a 
Trial Management Group (researchers associated with the 
study). We obtained ethical approval for a multicentre 
study through the Integrated Research Application System 
Lancet 2017; 389: 538–46
Published Online
December 14, 2016
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S0140-6736(16)31723-8
See Comment page 483
*MERIDIAN collaborative group 
members are listed at the end of 
the paper
Academic Unit of Radiology 
(Prof P D Griffiths FRCR, 
D Jarvis BSc) and Clinical Trials 
Research Unit, School of Health 
and Related Research 
(M Bradburn MSc, 
Prof M J Campbell PhD, 
Prof C L Cooper PhD, 
C Mooney MSc) and INSIGNEO 
Institute for in silico Medicine 
(Prof P D Griffiths) and Health 
Economics and Decision 
Science, School of Health and 
Related Research 
(Prof A Wailoo), University of 
Sheffield, Sheffield, UK; 
Newcastle University, 
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK 
(R Graham PhD, 
Prof Stephen C Robson MD); 
Centre for Women’s and 
Newborn Health, Institute of 
Metabolism and Systems 
Research, University of 
Birmingham, Birmingham, UK 
(Prof M D Kilby DSc); Fetal 
Medicine Centre, Birmingham 
Women’s Foundation Trust 
(Birmingham Health Partners), 
Birmingham, UK 
(Prof M D Kilby); and Leeds 
Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust, 
Leeds, UK (G Mason MD)
Correspondence to:
Miss Cara Mooney, Clinical Trials 
Research Unit, School of Health 
and Related Research, University 
of Sheffield, Regent Court, 
Sheffield S1 4DA, UK, 
c.d.mooney@sheffield.ac.uk
 Articles
www.thelancet.com   Vol 389   February 4, 2017 
539
(62734). Inclusion criteria were pregnant women aged 
16 years or older whose fetus had a brain abnormality 
detected by ultrasound at a gestational age of 18 weeks or 
more, had no contraindications to iuMRI, and gave written 
informed consent to enter the study. Pregnant women 
were not recruited into the study if they were unable to 
give informed consent, had any contraindications to 
iuMRI, were unable to understand English (except where 
translation services were available), or if they were under 
the age of 16 years old. 
Sample size calculation
We planned to recruit 750 pregnant women from whom 
we anticipated complete outcome reference diagnoses 
(ORD) in 504 fetuses, 336 of whom would be of 18 weeks 
to less than 24 weeks gestational age at the time that the 
iuMRI was done, the subgroup of specifi
 c interest and 
on whom the sample size calculation was based. We 
assumed ultrasonography would achieve an accurate 
and complete diagnosis of brain abnormalities in 70% 
of cases6–15 and would increase to at least 80% with 
iuMRI, with iuMRI and ultrasound being concordant 
(correctly and incorrectly) in 70% of cases overall. If the 
“true” increase is only 10%, a sample size of 336 patients 
ensures that we can rule out any improvement in 
diagnostic accuracy less than 5% with 90% power and 
95% confi
 dence. We predicted that a change of that 
magnitude would be of clinical importance, as it would 
lead to changes in fetal prognostic information and 
management intent in around 5% of all cases. On 
the basis of our experience from earlier research 
studies, we envisaged that we would scan one woman 
with a fetus aged 24 weeks gestation or older for every 
two fetuses scanned in the 18 weeks to less than 24 weeks 
group, hence the total recruitment target was 504 fetuses 
with complete ORD.
Recruitment and imaging examinations
Recruitment was from 16 fetal medicine units in the UK 
(appendix), which covers a population of 28 million 
people. Women were recruited into the study by being 
off
 ered an iuMRI scan after a having had a detailed 
ultrasound scan suggesting a brain abnormality in the 
fetus. No specifi
 c requirements were made for the 
ultrasound technique and brain abnormalities were 
recorded with nomenclature used in the most up-to-date 
version of ViewPoint antenatal ultrasound reporting 
software (GE Healthcare, Chalfont St Giles, UK) at the 
time of the study. Clinicians were also asked to record 
their certainty of diagnosis for each brain abnormality 
with a fi
 ve-point Likert scale16 namely: “Very unsure” 
(10% certain), “Unsure” (30% certain), “Equivocal” (50% 
certain), “Confi
 dent” (70% certain), and “Highly 
confi
 dent” 
(90% 
certain). 
Afterwards, 
ultrasound 
participants underwent iuMRI at one of six sites all 
performed at 1·5 T. It was not possible to match protocols 
exactly across the sites because diff
 erent manufacturers’ 
MRI systems were used but there was an absolute 
requirement to obtain T2-weighted images of the fetal 
brain in the three orthogonal planes with the best 
ultrafast method available (maximum slice thickness 
5 mm) and a T1-weighted ultrafast sequence in at least 
one plane (usually axial). Other sequences could be 
added by the attending radiologist as appropriate to the 
case. The radiologist was aware of the diagnoses and the 
level of certainty made by the ultrasound expert before 
the iuMRI study was done and had access to the full 
clinical ultrasound report. The radiologist was required 
Research in context
Evidence before this study
The ultrafast imaging methods required to do in-utero MRI 
(iuMRI) have been available for approximately 20 years. There is 
good evidence relating to the safety of the procedure and to the 
ability to obtain high quality anatomical images of the fetal 
brain. No formal systematic review was done before this study 
was started. There have been several fairly small studies 
(n=15–185) looking at diagnostic performance, all with 
substantial methodological weaknesses. Those studies have 
been the subject of three published systematic reviews, the most 
recent in 2015, which reported 1184 fetuses from 27 studies. 
A reference standard diagnosis was available in only 454 fetuses 
and showed that ultrasonography agreed with the reference 
diagnosis in 54% of cases whilst iuMRI agreed in 80% of cases. 
There have been no large prospective studies of changes of 
diagnostic confi
 dence brought about by doing iuMRI to diagnose 
brain abnormalities; similarly the published evidence relating to 
clinical impact and patient acceptability is sparse. We aimed to fi
 ll 
this knowledge gap with MERIDIAN.
Added value of this study
MERIDIAN is a prospective, multicentre cohort study 
recruiting from 16 fetal medicine centres in the UK, designed 
to provide information on diagnostic and clinical impact of 
iuMRI as well as the opinions of pregnant women about 
having iuMRI as an adjunct investigation. Our results show 
clear diagnostic advantages in doing iuMRI in fetuses with 
brain abnormalities at gestational age of 18 weeks or older in 
terms of diagnostic accuracy and confi
 dence, change in 
prognosis, and changes in clinical management. There is also 
high acceptability for iuMRI in women whose unborn babies 
are thought to have a brain abnormality.
Implications of all available evidence
Our data suggest that a fetus with a suspected brain 
abnormality on ultrasound should have iuMRI as part of the 
routine diagnostic pathway and this procedure will provide 
robust information on which formal counselling can 
be based. 
See Online for appendix
 Articles
540 
www.thelancet.com   Vol 389   February 4, 2017
to comment on each anatomical diagnosis made with the 
ultrasound (using “diagnosis excluded” if they disagreed 
with a fi
 nding) and added extra anatomical diagnoses 
where appropriate. Each entry was accompanied by an 
indicator of confi
 dence with the same Likert scale as the 
ultrasound assessment.
Outcome reference diagnoses
In cases where pregnancy continued and the child 
survived, the ORD was the neuroanatomical diagnosis 
from post natal neuroimaging studies done for clinical 
purposes up to the age of 6 months (term corrected). In 
cases of termination of pregnancy (TOP), stillbirth, or 
neonatal death the ORD was based on autopsy or 
post-mortem MRI, or both.
A two-level review process was used to establish 
agreement between ultrasonography, iuMRI, and ORD. 
The fi
 rst level review was carried out by one of two 
neuroradiologists, not associated with MERIDIAN. Their 
role was to determine, on the basis of ORD, whether full 
review by the Multidisciplinary Independent Expert 
Panel (MIEP) described below was required. Full review 
was required unless there was complete and unequivocal 
agreement 
between 
the 
anatomical 
fi
 ndings 
on 
ultrasound, iuMRI, and the ORD; or ventriculomegaly 
was the only fi
 nding described on both ultrasound and 
iuMRI examinations but the size of the ventricles had 
returned to normal as shown on ultrasound later in 
pregnancy or on neonatal imaging. Ventricle reduction 
was counted as agreement because enlargement of 
ventricles can often resolve spontaneously during 
pregnancy.
The MIEP consisted of three UK National Health 
Service consultants (neuroradiology, fetal medicine, 
paediatric neurology) from a single centre (University 
Hospitals 
Southampton 
NHS 
Foundation 
Trust, 
Southampton, UK) that did not recruit into MERIDIAN. 
The MIEP were given tabulated diagnostic results for 
each fetus in such a way that they were masked to 
whether it was an ultrasound or an iuMRI report. They 
were asked whether each report agreed with the ORD 
completely (all listed diagnoses correct) and, in the case 
of ultrasonography and iuMRI disagreeing, which one 
indicated the more severe pathology. The results were 
subsequently unblinded by staff
  at the Sheffi
  eld Clinical 
Trials Research Unit. In a small number of cases, the 
MIEP required more information and had access to the 
full clinical reports and imaging, if necessary, at which 
point blinding was no longer possible.
Diagnostic accuracy
The primary analysis population comprised participants 
who underwent iuMRI within 14 days of ultrasound and 
for whom ORD was available. The time diff
 erence 
between the ultrasound and iuMRI examinations is an 
important confounding factor for diagnostic accuracy of 
pathology of the fetal brain as it is growing and maturing 
rapidly in the late second to third trimester. Most brain 
abnormalities will be easier to detect in larger, more 
mature fetal brains, particularly for iuMRI. To reduce 
potential biased to show improvements in the diagnostic 
accuracy of iuMRI, the time between ultrasound and 
iuMRI should be as short as reasonably possible. The 
choice of 2 weeks as the cutoff
  for the primary analysis 
was made to balance between these issues and the 
expected ease of access to MRI facilities.
Although repeat scans were allowed, only the results of 
the fi
 rst scans are reported in this Article. In cases with 
multiple anatomical diagnoses, all had to be reported 
accurately on the imaging study to be classifi
 ed as correct. 
Because a positive ultrasound scan was a requirement 
for study entry, neither sensitivity nor specifi
 city could be 
used as summary measures; instead, we estimated the 
overall diagnostic accuracy, defi
 ned as (true positives) 
divided by total for ultrasound and (true positives + true 
negatives) divided by total for iuMRI. This percentage is 
equivalent to the positive predictive value for ultrasound. 
Diagnostic accuracy was calculated for both gestational 
age groups (18 weeks to <24 weeks and ≥24 weeks) and 
overall with McNemar’s paired binomial test.
Diagnostic confi
 dence
Assessment of diagnostic confi
 dence in this Article is 
purely descriptive, comparing the level of confi
 dence of 
diagnosis made by ultrasound and iuMRI with the 
accuracy of diagnosis obtained from the ORD. A more 
detailed assessment of change in diagnostic confi
 dence 
on a case by case basis will be published elsewhere. 
Diagnostic confi
 dence of the dominant diagnosis (the 
one most likely to infl
 uence prognostication as assessed 
by the independent panels) on the Likert scale was 
converted to high confi
 dence (70% and 90%) or low 
confi
 dence (10%, 30%, and 50%) diagnoses for both 
ultrasound and iuMRI. This information was plotted on 
a histogram along with the information about whether 
the diagnosis was correct or not compared with the 
ORD.
Clinical impact
The prognostic information given to participants after 
ultrasound was categorised as either: normal (no worse 
than the risk to a fetus without a demonstrable brain 
abnormality), favourable (normal neurological outcome 
expected in >90% of cases), intermediate (normal 
neurological outcome expected in 50–90% of cases), poor 
(normal neurological outcome expected in <50% of 
cases), or unknown.
The fetal medicine specialists were also asked if TOP 
had been discussed or off
 ered if the abnormalities on 
ultrasound were suffi
  cient to consider that option under 
Ground E of the Abortion Act (1967, section 1[1]d 
substantial risk of serious mental or physical handicap). 
At the next consultation with the woman, where the 
iuMRI report was available, the fetal medicine specialist 
 Articles
www.thelancet.com   Vol 389   February 4, 2017 
541
recorded the updated diagnostic and prognostic 
information, and management plan. From a diagnostic 
perspective, the clinicians were asked if iuMRI had 
provided additional information and, if so, could the new 
imaging features be confi
 rmed on follow-up ultrasound. 
For prognosis, they were asked if iuMRI had changed the 
prognostic information given to the woman and to 
regrade the prognosis with the same fi
 ve categories used 
previously (subsequently referred to as the tabulated 
prognostic information). The fetal medicine specialists 
also recorded whether or not TOP had been either 
discussed or off
 ered. They were also requested to 
consider if iuMRI had altered counselling and 
management and if so, what was the extent of change. 
This analysis does not require ORD, so all 823 cases with 
successful iuMRI studies are included.
The acceptability of iuMRI to pregnant women is 
presented in the appendix. The protocol for this study 
was peer-reviewed and accepted by The Lancet; a 
summary of the protocol was published on the journal’s 
website, and the journal then made a commitment to 
peer-review the primary clinical manuscript. This trial 
was registered with ISRCTN, number ISRCTN27626961.
Role of the funding source
The funders had no role in study design, data collection, 
data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of the report. 
The corresponding author had full access to all the data 
in the study and had fi
 nal responsibility for the decision 
to submit for publication.
Results 
The recruitment, which took place between July 29, 2011, 
and Aug 31, 2014, scanning, and follow-up process is 
summarised in fi
 gure 1. Most iuMRI procedures (64% of 
all procedures) were done at the University of Sheffi
  eld’s 
MRI facility (Sheffi
  eld, UK), whilst the others were done 
at one of the fi
 ve collaborating centres and reported by 
local radiologists. In fi
 ve cases, iuMRI was abandoned 
without useful information being obtained: four because 
of the mother’s claustrophobia and one for physical 
discomfort 
arising 
from 
backache. 
Two 
iuMRI 
examinations were stopped before completion when it 
was realised that the fetus had died since referral from 
ultrasound. Successful iuMRI studies were done, 
therefore, in 823 (99%) of 830 women. ORD was collected 
in 638 fetuses of which 570 (89%) had iuMRI within 
2 weeks of the ultrasound; 502 fetuses were continued 
pregnancies and 68 fetuses resulted in a TOP. Of the 
570 fetuses, 369 (65%) were in the 18 weeks to less than 
24 weeks group (110% of required) and 201 (35%) in the 
24 weeks and older group (120% of required).
The overall diagnostic accuracies of ultrasound was 
68% and of iuMRI was 93% (diff
 erence 25%, 
95% CI 21–29; see table 1). Ultrasound and iuMRI reports 
were both correct in 385 [68%] of 570 cases, and both 
incorrect in 39 (7%). Incorrect ultrasound reports were 
corrected by iuMRI in 144 (25%) of 570 cases, and 
two fetuses (<1%) were diagnosed correctly by ultrasound 
and incorrectly by iuMRI. The diagnostic accuracy of 
ultrasound was lower in fetuses 24 weeks or older 
gestational age compared with those aged 18 weeks to 
24 weeks whilst iuMRI remained similar (table 1).
The three most common ultrasound diagnoses were 
ventriculomegaly as the only intracranial abnormality 
(306 [54%] of 570 fetuses), an abnormality restricted to 
contents of the posterior fossa (83 [15%] of 570 fetuses), 
and failed commissuration (ie, agenesis or hypogenesis 
of the corpus callosum; 79 [14%] of 570 fetuses). 
These anatomical subgroups will be described fully in 
subsequent publications.
Two potential sources of bias were the proportionately 
large number of scans undertaken at the host institution 
(which could favour iuMRI) and the possible non-random 
sample of cases with missing ORD (which could favour 
either modality). A number of sensitivity analyses were 
For more on the trial protocol 
see http://www.thelancet.com/
protocol-reviews/11PRT-2491
Figure 1: Trial profi
 le
*One participant carried two fetuses: one fetus was a complete dataset and the 
other fetus incomplete. Therefore the participant is counted in both the incomplete 
and complete data boxes. †176 had iuMR <2 weeks from referral. ‡Fetal medicine 
management decision made. §Gestational age at time of MRI. 
1101 potential participants
(1109 fetuses)
 
198 ineligible or declined participants
(198 fetuses)
112 MRI offered but declined or 
contraindicated
86 MRI not offered
903 eligible participants
(911 fetuses)
823 completed MRI 
(829 fetuses)
80 did not complete MRI
(82 fetuses)
46 MR referrals or examinations 
cancelled, abandoned, or 
incomplete (48 fetuses) 
34 withdrawals before MRI
191 incomplete data (191 fetuses)*
180 incomplete or inadequate 
reference diagnosis available†
9 lost to follow-up
2 withdrawals after MRI and 
before outcome data collected
633 complete data* 
(638 fetuses)
565 reference standard 
(<2 weeks from referral 
[570 fetuses])
565 completed cases 
(570 fetuses)‡
367 before 24 weeks§ 
(369 fetuses)
198 at 24 weeks§ 
(201 fetuses) or older
68 excluded (68 fetuses)
68 >2 weeks after referral
40 2–3 weeks
12 3–4 weeks
16 >4 weeks
 Articles
542 
www.thelancet.com   Vol 389   February 4, 2017
undertaken that confi
 rmed the robustness of the fi
 ndings 
(appendix). Cases for which no ORD was available were 
more likely to be fetuses that were younger than 24 weeks 
of gestational age (table 2), had poor prognosis, and had 
TOP 
(appendix): 
upweighting 
cases 
with 
these 
characteristics with imputation methods gave similar 
fi
 ndings to the overall cohort. Cases referred into the 
host institution showed a marginally higher diagnostic 
accuracy on both modalities compared with other 
centres, with the diff
 erence between the two therefore 
being similar in host and other centres.
The dominant diagnosis (as defi
 ned by the independent 
panels) was reported with high confi
 dence on ultrasound 
in 465 (82%) of 570 cases compared with 544 (95%) of 
570 cases on iuMRI, an absolute diff
 erence of 13% (fi
 gure 2). 
High confi
 dence diagnoses were subsequently found to be 
incorrect in 124 patients after ultrasound (22% of overall 
population) compared with 32 (6%) of 570 patients who 
had iuMRI. IuMRI made fewer diagnoses with low 
confi
 dence than ultrasound (5% vs 18%), of which 17 (3% 
of all cases) were found to be correct compared with 
46 (8%) of cases correct on ultrasound.
Complete data for clinical impact was available in 
783 (95%) of 823 cases, the higher fi
 gure being because 
ORD was not required for this analysis. The 40 missing 
or excluded forms resulted from: no follow-up (n=26), 
incomplete clinical feedback form (n=13), and withdrawal 
from the study (n=1).
IuMRI was considered to provide additional diagnostic 
information in 387 (49%) of 783 cases by the referring 
fetal medicine expert. In 201 (52%) of 387 patients, the 
apparent new anatomical abnormalities described on 
iuMRI were obvious on repeat ultrasound.
Fetal medicine clinicians answered yes to the question 
“did iuMRI imaging change your prognosis”’ in 189 (24%) 
of 783 cases. Additional non-neuroimaging investigations 
(eg, karyotyping, fetal cardiac echo, and infection 
screening) were done in tandem with the iuMRI in 
138 (73%) of 189 cases, 32 of which were considered to 
have a major infl
 uence on prognosis. We estimate, 
therefore, that iuMRI itself changed the prognostic 
information in at least 157 (20%) of 783 cases.
When the tabulated regrading of prognostic information 
was analysed, changes in prognosis were recorded in 
342 (44%) of 783 cases despite the fact that the clinicians 
had answered yes to the direct question in only 24% of 
cases. After iuMRI, there were 30% fewer cases in the 
“Intermediate” category and 55% fewer cases in the 
“Unknown” category with correspondingly more cases in 
the “Normal”, “Favourable”, and “Poor” categories (table 3). 
In the 342 cases in which a change of prognosis was 
recorded, the most frequent change was from “Unknown” 
on ultrasound to some grade of known risk after iuMRI, 
(113 [14%] of 783 cases). There was change from a quotable 
risk on ultrasound to “Unknown” after iuMRI in 33 (4%) 
of 783 cases. In cases where the prognosis was quotable on 
both ultrasound and iuMRI the prognosis improved after 
iuMRI in 102 [13%] of 783 cases and worsened in 94 [12%] 
of 783 cases. The number of cases in which TOP was 
discussed in the consultations before and after iuMRI 
consultation was similar (51% before iuMRI and 49% after 
iuMRI), however, TOP was off
 ered in an additional 
84 (11%) cases after iuMRI (25% to 36%).
Of the 783 cases, iuMRI was considered to have no 
infl
 uence on counselling in 172 (22%) cases, minor 
infl
 uence in 496 (63%) cases, and major infl
 uence in 
115 (15%) 783. Of the 783 cases, the contribution of 
iuMRI to the fi
 nal choice of management was felt to be 
of “no value” in 95 (12%) of cases, “minor infl
 uence” in 
419 (53%) cases, “signifi
 cant” in 201 (26%) cases, 
Ultrasound 
correct (%)
iuMRI correct (%)
Percentage 
diff
 erence (95% CI)
p value*
18 to <24 weeks (n=369)
258 (70%)
341 (92%)
23% (18–27)
<0·0001
≥24 weeks (n=201)
129 (64%)
188 (94%)
29% (23–36)
<0·0001
Combined (n=570)
387 (68%)
529 (93%)
25% (21–29)
<0·0001
Data are n (%) unless otherwise stated. iuMRI=in-utero MRI. *McNemar’s test between ultrasound and iuMRI correct 
diagnoses.
Table 1: Diagnostic accuracy of ultrasound and iuMRI by age of fetus in the 570 cases constituting the 
primary group 
ORD available 
(n=570)
ORD 
unavailable 
(n=176)
Excluded 
(n=81)
Gestational age at iuMRI (weeks)
Mean age
24·5 (4·5)
23·9 (4·2)
25·7 (3·6)
<24 weeks
369 (65%)
127 (72%)
35 (43%)
≥24 weeks
201 (35%)
49 (28%)
46 (57%)
Time from ultrasound to iuMRI (days)
Mean time
5·8 (3·5)
5·3 (3·3)
22·6 (8·6)
<1 week
403 (71%)
134 (76%)
0
1–2 weeks
167 (29%)
42 (24%)
0
>2 weeks
0
0
81 (100%)
iuMRI site
Sheffi
  eld
380 (67%)
121 (69%)
31 (38%)
Birmingham
75 (13%)
34 (19%)
15 (19%)
Newcastle
66 (12%)
6 (3%)
9 (11%)
Leeds
34 (6%)
12 (7%)
11 (14%)
Nottingham
12 (2%)
3 (2%)
1 (1%)
Belfast
3 (1%)
0 (0%)
14 (17%)
Pregnancy type
Singleton
539 (95%)
166 (94%)
78 (96%)
Multiple
31 (5%)
10 (6%)
3 (4%)
Previous iuMRI for pregnancy
No
7 (1%)
3 (2%)
2 (2%)
Yes
563 (99%)
173 (98%)
79 (98%)
Data are mean (SD) or n (%). iuMRI=in-utero MRI. ORD=outcome reference 
diagnoses.
Table 2: Participant characteristics in the primary cohort and in those 
excluded
 Articles
www.thelancet.com   Vol 389   February 4, 2017 
543
“major infl
 uence” in 49 (6%) cases, and “decisive” in 
19 (3%) cases.
As shown in the appendix, the overall acceptability of 
iuMRI was high; at least 95% of women said they would 
have an iuMRI study if a future pregnancy were 
complicated by a fetal brain abnormality. Additionally, 
approximately 90% of women considered that the care 
they received after referral for iuMRI was either “very 
good” or “excellent”. Overall, around 80% of women 
strongly agreed or agreed that information from iuMRI 
had helped them to understand their baby’s problem, 
while around 70% strongly agreed or agreed that the 
information had helped them to understand how their 
baby’s brain pathology could aff
 ect his or her future 
quality of life.
Discussion
The accuracy of a positive ultrasound in diagnosing fetal 
brain abnormalities has been the subject of several 
previous studies.2–4 Our fi
 nding that ultrasound was 
accurate in 70% of fetuses of gestational age below 
24 weeks and 64% in 24 weeks and older gestation is 
consistent with those reports. The reduced accuracy of 
ultrasound in older gestational age fetuses can be 
attributed to several factors including diffi
  culties caused 
by the ongoing ossifi
 cation of the fetal skull, the 
increased physical size of the woman, and the descent of 
the fetal head into the maternal pelvis. We found that 
adding iuMRI to the diagnostic pathway increased the 
diagnostic accuracy to 92% for fetuses younger than 
24 weeks and 94% thereafter (p<0·0001 for both 
comparisons). This, together with the encouraging 
fi
 ndings of other studies described later, suggests that 
iuMRI signifi
 cantly increases the accuracy of fetal brain 
diagnoses compared to ultrasound alone in all fetuses 
18 weeks and older.2–4
The main study group in MERIDIAN was 18 weeks to 
younger than 24 weeks fetuses because of the need to 
respond to problems raised at the mid-pregnancy 
(18–21 weeks) anomaly ultrasound programme in the 
UK. There are many institutions worldwide that do not 
do iuMRI before 24 weeks gestation and although 
MERIDIAN was not powered for fetuses of that age, they 
were recruited into the study. We have shown signifi
 cant 
improvements in diagnostic accuracy in the 24 weeks 
and older group and the absolute diff
 erence in diagnostic 
accuracy was greater in that age group when compared 
with 18 weeks to younger than 24 weeks fetuses, mainly 
because of reduced accuracy of ultrasonography. 
Although we believe that the diagnostic impact data are 
generalisable, further studies are needed to assess 
clinical impact in countries that have, for example, 
diff
 erent laws on termination of pregnancy.
The relevance of diagnostic accuracy in assessing an 
imaging technology is self-evident but the importance of 
the diagnostic confi
 dence in imaging examinations is 
often overlooked and less well studied, although Ng and 
Palmer17 have explained its relevance. Our data show the 
proportion of high confi
 dence diagnoses increased by 
13% after iuMRI (from 82% to 95%) but there are other 
considerations that highlight the advantages of iuMRI 
further. As highlighted by Ng and Palmer, an incorrect 
diagnosis made with high confi
 dence can result in an 
inappropriate change in management (in this case an 
inappropriate TOP). We found iuMRI gave fewer high 
confi
 dence but incorrect diagnoses than ultrasound 
(6% vs 22% of the total number of cases). Alternatively, 
TOP might not be off
 ered if an imaging diagnosis is 
made with low confi
 dence. This situation again can bring 
about medical errors if the diagnosis is found to be 
correct, as withholding an intervention might have 
detrimental eff
 ects. The MERIDIAN data show that the 
iuMRI resulted in fewer low-confi
 dence diagnoses 
(5% vs 18%) and fewer correct low-confi
 dence diagnoses 
(3% vs 8%). Subsequent publications with the MERIDIAN 
cohort will explore this issue further.
There was a wide range of previous experience of 
reporting iuMRI examinations for the radiologists 
Figure 2: The proportion of diagnoses made with high and low confi
 dence on 
antenatal ultrasound and iuMRI in the 570 patients with complete outcome 
data and who had iuMRI within 2 weeks of the ultrasound
Diagnoses were compared with the outcome reference diagnoses. 
iuMRI=in-utero MRI. 
Ultrasound
iuMR
Ultrasound
iuMR
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Number of cases
Confidence level
High confidence
Low confidence
22%
82%
6%
95%
18%
5%
3%
8%
Correct diagnoses
Incorrect diagnoses
Prognosis on the 
basis of ultrasound 
(before iuMRI; 
n=783)
Prognosis after 
iuMRI (n=783)
Normal
20 (3%)
47 (6%)
Favourable
278 (36%)
329 (42%)
Intermediate
220 (28%)
155 (20%)
Poor
120 (15%)
187 (24%)
Unknown
145 (19%)
65 (8%)
Data are for the 783 (95%) of 823 cases that had complete data for clinical 
impact. iuMRI=in-utero MRI.
Table 3: The tabulated results of prognostic grade given to pregnant 
women before and after iuMRI assessments
 Articles
544 
www.thelancet.com   Vol 389   February 4, 2017
contributing to MERIDIAN at the start of the study. The 
most experienced radiologist (PDG) was from the host 
site (Sheffi
  eld, UK) where approximately two thirds of 
the cases in the study were done. Previous experience of 
iuMRI is probably related to improvement in diagnostic 
accuracy and this subject will be analysed in the future 
with MERIDIAN data.
As far as we are aware, there are no published studies 
concerning diagnostic confi
 dence in the fi
 eld of iuMRI but 
other indicators of diagnostic performance have been the 
source of three systematic reviews. One published before 
the start of MERIDIAN (Mundy and colleagues3) was 
produced as a technology report for the Australian 
Government in 2007 about iuMRI and combined both 
brain and somatic fetal pathology. Fifteen studies were 
analysed (nine prospective and six retrospective) but 
cumulative diagnostic accuracy was not reported although 
discordant diagnoses between ultrasound and MRI were 
found in 6% to 58% of cases. That review concluded that 
iuMRI changed the diagnosis in 6% to 32% of cases and 
provided additional information in 18–85% of cases. Rossi 
and Prefumo4 reviewed only CNS anomalies from 
13 studies of 710 fetuses and showed that iuMRI agreed 
with ORD in 670 (94%) of 710 cases, including 40 (6%) of 
710 cases in which both showed normal brains. Brain 
abnormalities were over-diagnosed on iuMRI in 31 (4%) of 
710 cases, including 18 (3%) cases in which the ORD was 
normal and abnormalities were missed on iuMRI in 
13 (2%) cases. More recently, in 2015, Van Doorn and 
colleagues5 analysed 27 studies with 1184 fetuses. In 65% 
of cases ultrasound and iuMRI agreed, in 23% iuMRI gave 
diff
 erent or additional pathology to ultrasound, and in 8% 
iuMRI excluded the ultrasound diagnosis. The postnatal 
diagnosis was available in 454 cases only, but when 
comparison was made with the reference standard, 
ultrasound was correct in 54% of cases and iuMRI correct 
in 80% of cases.
These 
systematic 
reviews 
highlight 
consistent 
methodological weaknesses that compromise their 
validity. Many included studies had no reference 
standards to confi
 rm or refute the imaging fi
 ndings. Only 
half of the studies reported the level of expertise of the 
clinicians doing the ultrasound and iuMRI and the time 
diff
 erence between the examinations was rarely reported. 
Rossi and Prefumo4 reported a pooled sensitivity and 
specifi
 city for iuMRI but acknowledged the fl
 aw in doing 
so without true negatives and false negatives (an 
inevitable eff
 ect in studies that have abnormal ultrasound 
fi
 ndings as an entrance criterion). We have not attempted 
to report sensitivity or specifi
 city in this study for those 
reasons. It is notable that the reported diagnostic accuracy 
for ultrasound of 54% in the most recent review5 is 
signifi
 cantly lower than the 70% widely accepted in the 
published literature, used in our power calculation, and 
close to that observed in our study. It is highly likely that 
the low fi
 gure refl
 ects substantial selection bias in many 
of the earlier iuMRI studies which, for example, might 
not have included cases of isolated ventriculomegaly. We 
believe that MERIDIAN has major advantages over the 
previous studies and systematic reviews because it is a 
prospective study, appropriately powered, and does not 
exclude any type of fetal brain pathology.
This study was designed to be pragmatic, to evaluate 
the diagnostic and clinical impact of the use of iuMRI 
as an adjunct to, as opposed to a replacement for, 
ultrasound, refl
 ecting how the service would be 
implemented in clinical practice. The limitations of the 
study design include potential for investigators to bias 
reporting of diagnostic and prognostic outcomes as well 
as information about their confi
 dence in the outputs. 
However, changes in prognosis were under-reported by 
clinicians, suggesting that they were not systematically 
going back to review their initial decisions at the time of 
reviewing the iuMRI results.
Two sensitivity analyses were undertaken to address 
the potential impact of missing ORD (which occurred in 
24% of cases) and the high proportion (67%) of iuMRI 
scans undertaken at the host institution. The details are 
provided in the appendix and confi
 rm the robustness of 
the diff
 erence in favour of iuMRI.
Much work has already been undertaken and published 
about the safety of iuMRI. The general risks of MRI 
apply and include scanning people with contraindications 
(eg, pacemakers) and the risks of taking ferromagnetic 
objects into the scan room, which become a projectile 
threat. These risks are mitigated by rigorous screening 
procedures by appropriately trained MRI radiographers 
and no adverse events of this type occurred during the 
course of MERIDIAN. The expertise of the MRI 
radiographers doing the examinations in the MERIDIAN 
study is highly likely to have contributed to the high 
completion rate of iuMRI in this study (more than 
99% of patients).
The specifi
 c risks to the fetus have been discussed in 
detail elsewhere but the consensus of opinion is that 
iuMRI is a safe procedure18–21 provided that it is done 
within the energy deposition limits set by the 
International Electrotechnical Commission.19 The main 
concern is about raising the temperature of the fetus 
during a study, which cannot be measured directly 
and has to be modelled. No assessments in MERIDIAN 
were abandoned because of subjective warming of 
the pregnant woman but core temperatures were not 
measured. Additionally, the theoretical risk of hearing 
impairment in a child who had iuMRI brought about by 
the high acoustic noise (around 100 dB) has not 
been supported by any measurable harmful eff
 ects on 
hearing postnatally.20
To our knowledge, this prospective analysis of clinical 
impact of iuMRI in fetuses with brain abnormalities is 
the fi
 rst and in this Article we have shown that iuMRI 
brings about changes in counselling and management in 
a high percentage of cases. Specifi
 cally, iuMRI provided 
additional diagnostic information in 49% of cases, caused 
 Articles
www.thelancet.com   Vol 389   February 4, 2017 
545
a documented change in prognosis in 44%, and had 
major eff
 ects on counselling in 15% of cases. The 
contribution of iuMRI to overall clinical management 
was judged to be “signifi
 cant” in 26% of cases and had 
either a “decisive” or “major infl
 uence” in a further 9% of 
cases. This eff
 ect is considerably larger than the 
5% change in management anticipated at the design 
stage, an increase that can be attributed to the greater 
than predicted improvement in diagnostic accuracy.
One important contributory factor to the change in 
management was that fetal medicine specialists gave more 
decisive prognoses after iuMRI compared with results 
from the ultrasound alone because there was a move away 
from “Intermediate” and “Unknown” prognosis groups 
(30% fewer cases in the “Intermediate” category and 55% 
fewer in the “Unknown” category) with a move towards 
“Normal”, “Favourable”, and “Poor” prognoses. This 
fi
 nding is important because parents are likely to fi
 nd 
“Intermediate” and “Unknown” prognosis groups the 
hardest to resolve. Additionally, iuMRI provided increased 
certainty that the indication for TOP (where off
 ered) was 
based on a greater probability of risk of substantial 
handicap. We have considered the possibility that other 
non-neuroimaging investigations done in parallel might 
have contributed to the 24% change in prognosis, but our 
data indicate that iuMRI alone was responsible for the 
change in at least 20% of cases. One aspect of our 
assessment of prognostic information warrants further 
discussion. On direct questioning, the fetal medicine 
specialists stated that prognosis was changed by iuMRI in 
24% of cases, whereas the tabulated regrading of prognosis 
data indicate changes in 44% of cases. The most likely 
explanation is referring clinicians did not refer back to 
their earlier post-ultrasound prognosis when describing 
the fi
 ndings of iuMRI, or felt the change in prognostic 
category was qualitatively unimportant. It is also important 
to point out that iuMRI did not always worsen the 
prognosis; in 26 cases where the prognosis was described 
as “Poor” on ultrasound this improved to “Normal” in four 
cases and “Favourable” in six cases after iuMRI. These data 
suggest that a prognosis based on only ultrasound results 
could result in off
 ers of TOP on the basis of predictions 
from inaccurate diagnoses.
We have described a high completion rate for iuMRI in 
MERIDIAN (more than 99% of patients) and in the 
appendix we have presented a more detailed analysis 
of acceptability.
In conclusion, our results indicate a 23% absolute 
increase in diagnostic accuracy when iuMRI is used to 
supplement ultrasound imaging in the 18 weeks to 
younger than 24 weeks gestational age group of fetuses 
and a 29% increase in the 24 weeks or older fetuses. 
Diagnostic confi
 dence is also improved when iuMRI is 
used to assess prenatal fetal neuropathology as an 
adjunct to ultrasound. The increased diagnostic accuracy 
and confi
 dence results in changes in counselling and 
clinical management in a high proportion of cases. These 
factors, in conjunction with high patient acceptability, 
lead us to propose that any fetus with a suspected brain 
abnormality on ultrasound should have iuMRI before 
defi
 nitive counselling.
We predict the publication of several further papers 
based on the MERIDIAN cohort to cover aspects of the 
published protocol that have either not been covered or 
only partly covered in this Article. Those papers will 
include but are not limited to: a formal assessment of 
changes in diagnostic confi
 dence brought about by using 
iuMRI; a detailed analysis of the three commonest 
anatomical subgroups of abnormalities referred from 
ultrasound, ventriculomegaly, agenesis of the corpus 
callosum, and abnormalities confi
 ned to the posterior 
fossa; qualitative assessment of pregnant women’s views 
of iuMRI; health economic analysis; a detailed analysis of 
diagnostic errors made on iuMRI in relation to experience 
of the reporter.
Contributors
PDG (Chief Investigator) oversaw all study conduct; helped to develop 
the study design and all study materials including the study protocol; 
assessed participant eligibility and was the reporting radiologist for MRI 
scans completed at the Sheffi
  eld site; participated in data analysis and 
interpretation of the results; and drafted and revised the manuscript. 
MB and MJC were the study statisticians, assisting with the study design 
and providing advice and input to all statistical issues; completed the data 
analysis and data interpretation and revised the manuscript. 
CLC provided oversight to the trial design, helped to develop study 
materials including the trial protocol, provided oversight to trial conduct, 
and revised the manuscript. RG led the substudy and led the design of 
the substudy components; provided advice and input into all the 
substudy components, supervised the qualitative data collection and 
analysis of the data relating to parents’ perspectives; contributed to the 
analysis and interpretation of the data relating to parent perspectives; and 
revised the manuscript. DJ was a radiographer on the study, assisted with 
data analysis, completed literature searching and revised the manuscript. 
MDK was a principal investigator at the Birmingham research site, 
referred and actively recruited participants, assessed participant 
eligibility, and assisted with data collection; interpreted results; and 
revised the manuscript. GM and SCR were collaborators and principal 
investigators at sites; assisted with development of the protocol and other 
study materials; referred and actively recruited participants, assessed 
participant eligibility, and assisted with data collection; interpreted 
results, and revised the manuscript. CM was the study manager who 
coordinated study activities, provided training for research sites, assisted 
with and facilitated data collection; participated in data analysis and 
revised the manuscript. AW was the health economist for the study, 
contributed to the study design, completed data analysis and 
interpretation and revised the manuscript.
MERIDIAN Collaborative Group
Participating Centres—Birmingham Children’s Hospital NHS 
Foundation Trust L MacPherson (Site Lead), H Alton, K Bradshaw, 
S Chapman, K Foster, C Miller, S Moholkar, A Oates, H Williams; 
Birmingham Women’s Hospital NHS Foundation Trust M Kilby 
(Site Lead), T Johnston, W Martin, S Pretlove, T Selman, P Thompson; 
Bradford Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Dr J Wright 
(Site Lead); P Munjuluri; Cambridge University Hospitals NHS 
Foundation Trust C Lees (Site Lead), J Brockelsby (Site Lead), G Hackett, 
H Missfelder-Lobos, G Smith; Hull and East Yorkshire Hospitals NHS 
Trust AM Coady (Site Lead); Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust Site 
Lead C Lees (Site Lead); NHS Fife G Tydeman (Site Lead); Norfolk and 
Norwich University NHS Foundation Trust R Smith (Site Lead), 
M Cameron, A McKelvey; Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust 
P Loughna (Site Lead), G Bugg (Site Lead), R Dineen, T Jaspan; Leeds 
Teaching Hospitals NHS Trust G Mason (Site Lead), K Cohen 
(Site Lead), T Glanville, M Weston, C Sparey; Royal Maternity Hospital 
 Articles
546 
www.thelancet.com   Vol 389   February 4, 2017
Belfast S Dornan (Site Lead), S McKinstry; Royal Victoria Infi
 rmary, 
Newcastle upon Tyne S Robson (Site Lead), A Gholkar, T Hannon, 
P Moran; Sheffi
  eld Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust 
D Anumba (Site Lead), T Farrell, R Jokhi; St Mary’s Hospital, Central 
Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust E Johnstone 
(Site Lead), P Bullen, K Chan, J Gillham, R Samangaya, C Tower, 
S Vause; University Hospitals of Leicester NHS Trust I Scudamore (Site 
Lead), H Mousa (Site Lead), M Khare, O Navti, F Siddiqui, T Singhal; 
University of North Midlands (NHS) Trust A Long (Site Lead), G Masson 
(Site Lead), P Young. Expert Panel members—Sheffi
  eld Teaching Hospital 
NHS Foundation Trust D Connolly, F Williams; University Hospitals 
Southampton NHS Foundation Trust Karen Brackley, Mary Gawne-Cain, 
Brigitte Vollmer. Central team—Newcastle University Mabel Lie; 
University of Sheffi
  eld Laura Mandefi
 eld, Jonathon Tosh. 
Declaration of interests
All authors declare no competing interests. 
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank The Perinatal Trust Funds for supporting the 
study. This project was funded by the National Institute for Health 
Research (NIHR) Health Technology Assessment Programme (project 
number 09/06/01). The views and opinions expressed therein are those 
of the authors and do not necessarily refl
 ect those of the Health 
Technology Assessment Programme, NIHR, National Health Service, or 
the Department of Health. We gratefully acknowledge the support and 
advice from the members of our Trial Steering Committee and Data 
Monitoring and Ethics Committee. We off
 er special thanks to the 
research midwives and the research teams at the participating Trusts for 
their hard work and support. 
References
 
1 
European anomaly registers. http://www.eurocat-network.eu/
prenatalscreeeningand%20diagnosis (accessed Nov 10, 2016).
2 
Gov.uk. Congenital anomalies. http://webarchive.nationalarchives.
gov.uk/20140721132900/http://www.statistics.gov.uk/downloads/
theme_health/MB3-No22/CongARVfi
 nal.pdf (accessed Nov 10, 2016).
3 
Mundy L, Hiller J, Braunack-Mayer A, Merlin T. MRI for the 
detection of foetal abnormalities. Adelaide: Adelaide Health 
Technology Assessment, 2007
.
4 
Rossi AC, Prefumo F. Additional value of fetal magnetic resonance 
imaging in the prenatal diagnosis of central nervous system 
anomalies: a systematic review of the literature. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2014; 44: 388–93.
5 
Van Doorn M, Oude Rengerink K, Newsum EA, Reneman L, 
Majoie CB, Pajkrt E. Added value of fetal MRI in foetuses with 
suspected brain abnormalities on neurosonography: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 2015; 23: 1–13.
6 
Antonsson P, Sundberg A, Kublickas M, et al. Correlation between 
ultrasound and autopsy fi
 ndings after 2nd trimester terminations of 
pregnancy. J Perinat Med 2008; 36: 59–69.
7 
Carroll SG, Porter H, Abdel-Fattah S, Kyle PM, Soothill PW. 
Correlation of prenatal ultrasound diagnosis and pathologic fi
 ndings 
in fetal brain abnormalities. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2000; 
16: 149–53.
8 
Sun CC, Grumbach K, DeCosta DT, Meyers CM, Dungan JS. 
Correlation of prenatal ultrasound diagnosis and pathologic 
fi
 ndings in fetal anomalies. Pediatr Dev Pathol 1999; 2: 131–42.
9 
Akgun H, Basbug M, Ozgun MT, et al. Correlation between 
prenatal ultrasound and fetal autopsy fi
 ndings in fetal anomalies 
terminated in the second trimester. Prenat Diagn 2007; 27: 457–62.
10 
Amini H, Antonsson P, Papadogiannakis N, et al. Comparison of 
ultrasound and autopsy fi
 ndings in pregnancies terminated due to 
fetal anomalies. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 2006; 85: 1208–16.
11 
Boyd PA, Tondi F, Hicks NR, Chamberlain PF. Autopsy after 
termination of pregnancy for fetal anomaly: retrospective cohort 
study. BMJ 2004; 328: 137
.
12 
Fadda GM, Capobianco G, Balata A, et al. Routine second trimester 
ultrasound screening for prenatal detection of fetal malformations 
in Sassari University Hospital, Italy: 23 years of experience in 
42 256 pregnancies. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 2009; 144: 110–14.
13 
Grandjean H, Larroque D, Levi S. The performance of routine 
ultrasonographic screening of pregnancies in the Eurofetus Study. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol 1999; 181: 446–54.
14 
Richmond S, Atkins J. A population-based study of the prenatal 
diagnosis of congenital malformation over 16 years. BJOG 2005; 
112: 1349–57
.
15 
Northern Regional Survey Steering Group. Fetal abnormality: 
an audit of its recognition and management. Arch Dis Child 1992; 
67: 770–74.
16 
Likert R. A technique for the measurement of attitudes. 
Arch Psychol 1932; 22: 1–55.
17 
Ng CS, Palmer CR. Analysis of diagnostic confi
 dence and diagnostic 
accuracy: a unifi
 ed framework. Br J Radiol 2007; 80: 152–60.
18 
American College of Radiology, Society for Pediatric Radiology. 
ACR-SPR Practice guideline for the safe and optimal performance 
of fetal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), resolution 13. Reston: 
American College of Radiology, 2010: 10.
19 
International Electrotechnical Commission, Medical electrical 
equipment; part 2–33. Particular requirements for the safety of 
magnetic resonance equipment for medical diagnosis IEC 
60601-2-33, edn 2.2, consolidated with amendments 1 and 2. 
Geneva: International Electrotechnical Commission, 2008.
20 Reeves MJ, Brandreth M, Whitby EH, et al. Neonatal cochlear 
function: measurement after exposure to acoustic noise during in 
utero MR imaging. Radiology 2010; 257: 802–09.
21 
Kok RD, de Vries MM, Heerschap A, van den Berg PP. Absence of 
harmful eff
 ects of magnetic resonance exposure at 1.5 T in utero 
during the third trimester of pregnancy: a follow-up study. 
Magn Reson Imaging 2004; 22: 851–54.
