 E-Mail karger@karger.com
 
Clinical Practice Committee Publication 
 
Horm Res Paediatr 2016;86:361–397 
 
DOI: 10.1159/000452150 
 
Guidelines for Growth Hormone and Insulin-Like
Growth Factor-I Treatment in Children and 
Adolescents: Growth Hormone Deficiency, 
Idiopathic Short Stature, and Primary Insulin-Like 
Growth Factor-I Deficiency 
 
Adda Grimberg 
  
a, b    Sara A. DiVall 
  
c, d    Constantin Polychronakos 
  
e    David B. Allen 
  
f, g 
 
 
 
Laurie E. Cohen 
  
h    Jose Bernardo Quintos 
  
i, j    Wilma C. Rossi 
  
a, b    Chris Feudtner 
  
a, k–n    
Mohammad Hassan Murad 
  
o    on behalf of the Drug and Therapeutics Committee 
and Ethics Committee of the Pediatric Endocrine Society 
 
a 
  
Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, and  
b 
  
Division of Endocrinology 
and Diabetes, The Children’
s Hospital of Philadelphia,  
Philadelphia, PA 
,  
c 
  
Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Washington School of Medicine, and  
d 
  
Division of Endocrinology, Seattle Children’
s Hospital,  
Seattle, WA 
, USA;  
e 
  
Division 
of Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, The McGill University Health Centre,  
Montreal, QC 
, Canada;  
f 
  
Department of 
Pediatrics, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, and  
g 
  
Division of Endocrinology and Diabetes, 
American Family Children’
s Hospital – Madison,  
Madison, WI 
,  
h 
  
Division of Endocrinology, Boston Children’
s Hospital, 
and Harvard Medical School,  
Boston, MA 
,  
i 
  
The Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University, and  
j 
  
Division of 
Pediatric Endocrinology, Rhode Island Hospital/Hasbro Children’
s Hospital,  
Providence, RI 
, Departments of  
k 
  
Medical 
Ethics and  
l 
  
Health Policy, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, and  
m 
  
Department of Medical Ethics 
and  
n 
  
Division of General Pediatrics, The Children’
s Hospital of Philadelphia,  
Philadelphia, PA 
, and  
o 
  
Evidence-Based 
Practice Center, Mayo Clinic,  
Rochester, MN 
, USA
 
cused on these three diagnoses, thereby adding recombi-
nant IGF-I therapy to the GH guidelines for the first time. 
 
Methods: This guideline was developed following the 
GRADE approach (Grading of Recommendations, Assess-
ment, Development, and Evaluation).  
Results: This guideline 
provides recommendations for the clinical management of 
children and adolescents with growth failure from GHD, ISS, 
or PIGFD using the best available evidence.  
Conclusion: The 
taskforce suggests that the recommendations be applied in 
clinical practice with consideration of the evolving literature 
and the risks and benefits to each individual patient. In many 
instances, careful review highlights areas that need further 
research. 
 
© 2016 S. Karger AG, Basel 
 
Keywords 
 
Growth hormone ·
 Insulin-like growth factor-I ·
 Children ·
 
Treatment ·
 Guidelines 
 
Abstract 
 
Background/Aims: On behalf of the Drug and Therapeutics, 
and Ethics Committees of the Pediatric Endocrine Society, 
we sought to update the guidelines published in 2003 on the 
use of growth hormone (GH). Because idiopathic short stat-
ure (ISS) remains a controversial indication, and diagnostic 
challenges often blur the distinction between ISS, GH defi-
ciency (GHD), and primary IGF-I deficiency (PIGFD), we fo-
 
Received: July 15, 2016 
 
Accepted: September 30, 2016 
 
Published online: November 25, 2016 
HORMONE
RESEARCH IN 
 
PÆDIATRICS
 
Assoc. Prof. Adda Grimberg 
 
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
 
Scientific Director, Diagnostic and Research Growth Center, The Children’
s Hospital  
 
of Philadelphia, 3401 Civic Center Blvd., Suite 11NW30, Philadelphia, PA 19104 (USA) 
 
E-Mail Grimberg 
  
@ 
  
email.chop.edu 
 
© 2016 S. Karger AG, Basel
 
 
www.karger.com/hrp 
  
Grimberg 
  et al.
 
Horm Res Paediatr 2016;86:361–397
DOI: 10.1159/000452150
362
 
In the decade since the publication of the last guide-
lines for the use of growth hormone (GH) by the Drug 
and Therapeutics Committee of the Pediatric Endocrine 
Society (PES; formerly named in honor of Lawson 
Wilkins)  
[1] 
, both the field and the approach to guidelines 
have changed considerably. This report serves to update 
the 2003 guidelines by following the approach recom-
mended by the Grading of Recommendations, Assess-
ment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) group  
[2] 
. 
The large number of approved indications for GH treat-
ment is too unwieldy to review in this manner in a single 
document. Because idiopathic short stature (ISS) remains 
a controversial indication, and diagnostic challenges of-
ten blur the distinction between ISS, GH deficiency 
(GHD), and primary IGF-I deficiency (PIGFD), we fo-
cused on these three diagnoses in this guidelines state-
ment. Thus, we have added recombinant IGF-I therapy 
to the GH guidelines for the first time.
 
In 1985, GHD became the first indication for recom-
binant human GH approved by the US Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA), which it described as “the treat-
ment of pediatric patients who have growth failure due 
to inadequate secretion of endogenous GH.” In 2003, the 
FDA expanded GH use to the treatment of ISS, also called 
non-GH-deficient short stature, defined by height stan-
dard deviation score (SDS)  
≤ 
–2.25 ( 
≤ 
1.2nd percentile) 
and associated with growth rates unlikely to permit at-
tainment of adult height (AH) in the normal range, in 
pediatric patients for whom diagnostic evaluation ex-
cludes other causes of short stature that should be ob-
served or treated by other means. The height cutoff of 
–2.25 SD (1.2nd percentile) corresponds in adults to 160 
cm (63 inches) for men and 150 cm (59 inches) for wom-
en  
[3] 
. The FDA approved IGF-I treatment in 2005 for 
the long-term treatment of growth failure in pediatric 
patients with severe PIGFD (defined as both height and 
serum IGF-I concentration below –3 SD despite normal 
or elevated GH levels) or with GH gene deletion who de-
veloped neutralizing antibodies to GH after a trial of GH 
therapy. The FDA further stipulated that IGF-I is not
indicated to treat secondary IGF-I deficiency result-
ing from GHD, malnutrition, hypothyroidism or other 
causes; thus, it is not a substitute for GH therapy. The 
definitions have evolved since the original FDA indica-
tions, with the most recent iteration provided by the In-
ternational Classification of Pediatric Endocrine Diag-
noses (ICPED)  
[4] 
.
 
 
These guidelines provide recommendations for the 
clinical management of children and adolescents with 
growth failure due to GHD, ISS, or PIGFD by systemati-
cally reviewing the published evidence regarding various 
practices. In many instances, careful review revealed a 
paucity of evidence and highlighted areas that need fur-
ther research. The lack of studies of sufficient quality in 
support of a practice is not the same as evidence against 
the practice; until such studies can be performed, indi-
vidualization of clinical care remains the central tenet of 
therapy.
 
Summary of Recommendations 
 
1. Efficacy of GH Treatment for GHD 
 
1.1. We recommend the use of GH to normalize AH 
and avoid extreme shortness in children and adolescents 
with GHD. (Strong recommendation, ⚫⚫⚫⚫)
 
 
1.2. We suggest against routine cardiac testing, dual 
X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) scanning, and measure-
ment of lipid profiles in children and adolescents treated 
with GH. (Conditional recommendation, ⚫⚫⚪⚪)
 
2. Consideration and Diagnosis of GHD  
 
2.1. Conditions where GH provocative testing is not 
required to diagnose GHD.
 
Of note, for patients who do not meet the following cri-
teria yet present a high index of suspicion, GHD can be 
diagnosed by the conventional approach. 
 
2.1.1. We suggest establishing a diagnosis of GHD 
without GH provocative testing in patients possessing all 
of the following three conditions: auxological criteria, hy-
pothalamic-pituitary defect (such as major congenital 
malformation [ectopic posterior pituitary and pituitary 
hypoplasia with abnormal stalk], tumor or irradiation), 
and deficiency of at least one additional pituitary hor-
mone. (Conditional recommendation, ⚫⚫⚪⚪)
 
2.1.2. We suggest that GHD due to congenital hypopi-
tuitarism be diagnosed without formal GH provocative 
testing in a newborn with hypoglycemia who does not at-
tain a serum GH concentration above 5 μg/L and has de-
ficiency of at least one additional pituitary hormone and/
or the classical imaging triad (ectopic posterior pituitary 
and pituitary hypoplasia with abnormal stalk). (Condi-
tional recommendation, ⚫⚫⚪⚪)
 
Technical Remark: 
 A low GH concentration at the time 
of spontaneous hypoglycemia is alone insufficient to di-
agnose GHD.
 
2.2. GH provocative testing.
 
2.2.1. We recommend against reliance on GH provoc-
ative test results as the sole diagnostic criterion of GHD. 
(Strong recommendation, ⚫⚫⚫⚫)
  
PES GH/IGF-I Guidelines 
Horm Res Paediatr 2016;86:361–397
DOI: 10.1159/000452150
363
 
Technical Remark: 
 Very low peak GH levels on pro-
vocative testing are consistent with severe GHD, and pa-
tients with such results are expected to benefit greatly 
from GH treatment. However, the threshold test result 
that distinguishes normal from partial GHD that re-
sponds to treatment has not been well established.
 
Technical Remark: Given the substantial number of 
healthy, normally growing children who test below ac-
cepted limits, inadequate response to two different pro-
vocative tests is required for diagnosis of GHD. While it 
is possible that combining tests might yield different re-
sults from tests performed on separate days, there is no 
evidence against performing both tests sequentially on 
the same day. 
 
Technical Remark: 
 GH responses to provocative test-
ing are blunted in obese or overweight individuals, and 
the peak values decrease with increasing body mass index 
(BMI). Unlike adults, obesity-dependent modifications 
to diagnostic criteria in children are undetermined.
 
2.2.2. Given the large discrepancies between GH as-
says, we recommend that institutions require laboratories 
to provide harmonized GH assays using the somatropin 
standard, IRP IS 98/574, 22k rhGH isoform, as recom-
mended by the 2006 and 2011 consensus statements, and 
the published commutability standards. (Strong recom-
mendation, ⚫⚫⚫⚫)
 
 
2.2.3. We suggest sex steroid priming prior to provoc-
ative GH testing in prepubertal boys older than 11 and in 
prepubertal girls older than 10 years with AH prognosis 
within –2 SD of the reference population mean in order 
to prevent unnecessary GH treatment of children with 
constitutional delay of growth and puberty. (Conditional 
recommendation, ⚫⚫⚪⚪)
 
Technical Remark: Best available evidence exists for 
boys; evidence is extrapolated to girls.
 
Technical Remark: 
 A reasonable approach in both 
boys and girls would be 2 mg (1 mg for body weight <20 
kg) of β-estradiol (not ethinyl estradiol) orally on each of 
the 2 evenings preceding the test. Alternatively, boys can 
be primed with intramuscular testosterone (50–100 mg 
of a depot formulation administered 1 week before the 
test).
 
Technical Remark: This recommendation applies to 
GH-naïve patients; it does not retroactively apply to pa-
tients already on GH treatment.
 
2.3. Measurement of spontaneous GH secretion.
 
 
2.3.1. We recommend against the use of spontaneous 
GH secretion in the diagnosis of GHD in a clinical setting. 
(Strong recommendation, ⚫⚫⚪⚪)
 
3. Dosing of GH Treatment for Patients with GHD 
 
3.1. We recommend the use of weight-based or body 
surface area (BSA)-based GH dosing in children with 
GHD. (Strong recommendation, ⚫⚫⚫⚪)
 
Technical Remark: We cannot make a recommenda-
tion regarding IGF-I-based dosing because there are no 
published AH data using this method. The rationale is 
logical, but the target IGF-I level has not been established 
to optimize the balance between AH gain, potential risks, 
and cost.
 
 
3.2. We recommend an  
initial 
 GH dose of 0.16–0.24 
mg/kg/week (22–35 μg/kg/day) with individualization of 
subsequent dosing. (Strong recommendation, ⚫⚫⚪⚪)
 
Technical Remark: Some patients may require higher 
doses. 
 
3.3. We suggest measurement of serum IGF-I levels 
as a tool to monitor adherence and IGF-I production in 
response to GH dose changes. We suggest that the GH 
dose be lowered if serum IGF-I levels rise above the lab-
oratory-defined normal range for the age or pubertal 
stage of the patient. (Conditional recommendation, 
⚫⚪⚪⚪)
 
3.4. During puberty, we recommend against the rou-
tine increase in GH dose to 0.7 mg/kg/week in every child 
with GHD. (Strong recommendation, ⚫⚫⚪⚪)
 
 
3.5. We recommend that GH treatment at pediatric 
doses not continue beyond attainment of a growth veloc-
ity below 2–2.5 cm/year. The decision to discontinue pe-
diatric dosing prior to attainment of this growth veloc-
ity should be individualized. (Strong recommendation, 
⚫⚫⚪⚪)
 
4. Safety Issues of GH Treatment for Patients with 
GHD 
 
4.1. We recommend that prospective recipients of GH 
treatment receive anticipatory guidance regarding the 
potential adverse effects of intracranial hypertension, 
slipped capital femoral epiphysis (SCFE), and scoliosis 
progression. (Ungraded good practice statement)
 
4.2. We recommend monitoring of GH recipients for 
potential development of intracranial hypertension, 
SCFE, and scoliosis progression by soliciting pertinent 
history and performing a physical examination at every 
follow-up clinic visit; further testing should be pursued if 
indicated. (Strong recommendation, ⚫⚫⚫⚫)
 
4.3. We recommend re-assessment of both the adrenal 
and thyroid axes after initiation of GH therapy in patients 
whose cause of GHD is associated with possible multiple 
pituitary hormone deficiencies (MPHD). (Strong recom-
mendation, ⚫⚫⚪⚪)
  
Grimberg 
  et al.
 
Horm Res Paediatr 2016;86:361–397
DOI: 10.1159/000452150
364
 
Technical Remark: 
 Evaluate for possible central adre-
nal and thyroid insufficiencies in those not yet diagnosed, 
and consider increasing hydrocortisone and/or levothy-
roxine doses in those already on these hormone re-
placement(s).
 
4.4. We recommend discussion about and monitoring 
of glucose metabolism of GH recipients who are at in-
creased risk for diabetes due to insulin resistance. (Un-
graded good practice statement)
 
4.5. Counseling prospective recipients of GH treat-
ment regarding the risk of neoplasia.
 
 
4.5.1. We recommend informing at-risk patients about 
available data and encourage long-term follow-up with 
their oncologist. (Ungraded good practice statement)
 
4.5.1.1. For children with acquired GHD due to effects 
of a primary malignancy:
 
4.5.1.1.1. We recommend shared decision-making 
that involves the patient, family, oncologist, and treating 
endocrinologist. Before initiation of GH treatment, we 
recommend sharing with families the most recent data 
about risks, including the potential effect of GH treat-
ment on the timing of second neoplasm occurrence. (Un-
graded good practice statement)
 
 
4.5.1.1.2. For GH initiation after completion of tumor 
therapy with no evidence of ongoing tumor, a standard 
waiting period of 12 months to establish “successful ther-
apy” of the primary lesion is reasonable, but can also be 
altered depending on individual patient circumstances. 
(Ungraded good practice statement)
 
Technical Remark: Although many of the intracranial 
tumors are not “malignant” (i.e., craniopharyngioma), 
they have the potential to recur. There are no data to sug-
gest treating them differently than malignant tumors with 
regard to observation periods before initiating GH treat-
ment. 
 
4.5.1.2. In the rare situation where a child with GHD 
has an accompanying condition with intrinsic increased 
risk for malignancy (e.g., neurofibromatosis-1, Down 
syndrome, Bloom syndrome, Fanconi anemia, Noonan 
syndrome, and Diamond-Blackfan anemia), we recom-
mend providing counseling regarding the lack of evi-
dence concerning GH effect on malignancy risk in these 
groups. (Ungraded good practice statement)
 
 
4.5.2. For children considered not to be at risk, we rec-
ommend that counseling includes information about the 
unknown long-term (i.e., posttreatment) risks of neopla-
sia still being studied. (Ungraded good practice state-
ment)
 
4.6. We recommend that prospective recipients of GH 
treatment be informed about the uncertainty regarding 
long-term safety (posttreatment adverse effects in adult-
hood). (Ungraded good practice statement)
 
5. Transitional Care after Childhood GH Treatment  
 
5.1. We recommend that patients with multiple ( 
≥ 
3) 
pituitary hormone deficiencies regardless of etiology, or 
GHD with a documented causal genetic mutation or spe-
cific pituitary/hypothalamic structural defect except ec-
topic posterior pituitary, be diagnosed with persistent 
GHD. (Strong recommendation, ⚫⚫⚫⚪)
 
 
5.2. We recommend re-evaluation of the somatotrop-
ic axis for persistent GHD in persons with GHD and de-
ficiency of only one additional pituitary hormone, idio-
pathic isolated GHD (IGHD), IGHD with or without a 
small pituitary/ectopic posterior pituitary, and in patients 
after irradiation. (Strong recommendation, ⚫⚫⚫⚪)
 
Technical Remark: 
 Testing can be performed after a 
trial of at least 1 month off GH treatment. 
 
5.2.1. We suggest that measurement of the serum IGF-
I concentration be the initial test of the somatotropic axis 
if re-evaluation of the somatotropic axis is clinically indi-
cated. (Conditional recommendation, ⚫⚪⚪⚪)
 
5.2.2. We recommend GH provocative testing to eval-
uate the function of the somatotropic axis in the transi-
tion period if indicated by a low IGF-I level. (Strong rec-
ommendation, ⚫⚫⚫⚪)
 
 
5.3. We suggest that GH treatment be offered to indi-
viduals with persistent GHD in the transition period. 
There is evidence of benefit; however, the specifics of the 
patient population that benefits, the optimal time to re-
initiate treatment, and the optimal dose are not clear. 
(Conditional recommendation, ⚫⚫⚪⚪)
 
Technical Remark: The transition period is the time 
from late puberty to establishment of adult muscle and 
bone composition, and encompasses attainment of AH.
 
6. GH Treatment of Patients with ISS 
 
6.1. In the USA, for children who meet FDA criteria, 
we suggest a shared decision-making approach to pursu-
ing GH treatment for a child with ISS. The decision can 
be made on a case-by-case basis after assessment of phys-
ical and psychological burdens, and discussion of risks 
and benefits. We recommend against the routine use of 
GH in every child with height SDS (HtSDS)  
≤ 
–2.25. 
(Conditional recommendation, ⚫⚫⚫⚪)
 
Technical Remark: While studies have shown GH 
treatment increases the mean height of treated cohorts, 
there is marked interindividual variability in responses, 
including some individuals who do not respond to treat-
ment.
  
PES GH/IGF-I Guidelines 
Horm Res Paediatr 2016;86:361–397
DOI: 10.1159/000452150
365
 
6.2. We suggest a follow-up assessment of benefit in 
HtSDS and psychosocial impact 12 months after GH ini-
tiation and dose optimization. (Conditional recommen-
dation, ⚫⚫⚪⚪)
 
6.3. Because there is overlap in response between dos-
ing groups, we suggest initiating GH at a dose of 0.24 mg/
kg/week, with some patients requiring up to 0.47 mg/kg/
week. (Conditional recommendation, ⚫⚫⚪⚪)
 
7. IGF-I Treatment of Patients with PIGFD 
 
7.1. We recommend the use of IGF-I therapy to in-
crease height in patients with severe PIGFD. (Strong rec-
ommendation, ⚫⚫⚫⚫)
 
7.2. Given the absence of a single “best” test that pre-
dicts responsiveness to GH treatment, we suggest basing 
the diagnosis of PIGFD/GH insensitivity syndrome 
(GHIS) on a combination of factors that fall into 4 stages: 
(Conditional recommendation, ⚫⚫⚫⚪)
 
1 Screening: auxological parameters and low IGF-I con-
centration
 
2 Causes of secondary IGF-I deficiency must be exclud-
ed, including under-nutrition, hepatic disease, and 
GHD
 
3 Circulating levels of GH-binding protein (GHBP): 
very low or undetectable levels suggest Laron syn-
drome/GHIS while normal levels are noninformative
 
 
4 IGF-I generation test and mutation analyses can be 
helpful, but have limitations
 
7.3. We recommend a trial of GH therapy before initi-
ating IGF-I for patients with unexplained IGF-I deficien-
cy. Patients with hormone signaling defects known to be 
unresponsive to GH treatment can start directly on IGF-
I replacement; these include patients with very low or
undetectable levels of GHBP and/or proven GH recep-
tor (GHR) gene mutations known to be associated with 
Laron syndrome/GHIS, GH-neutralizing antibodies, 
 
STAT5b 
 gene mutations, and  
IGF1 
 gene deletion or mu-
tation. (Strong recommendation, ⚫⚫⚪⚪)
 
7.4. We suggest an IGF-I dose of 80–120 μg/kg b.i.d. 
Similar short-term outcomes were seen with 80 and 120 
μg, but published studies had limitations and there is no 
strong evidence supporting superiority of one dose over 
the other. (Conditional recommendation, ⚫⚫⚪⚪)
 
Technical Remark: 
 Outside of the USA, IGF-I is also 
used at 150–180 μg/kg once daily.
 
7.5. We recommend administration of IGF-I 20 min 
after a carbohydrate-containing meal or snack, and edu-
cation of patients/families on the symptoms and risk of 
hypoglycemia associated with IGF-I treatment. (Strong 
recommendation, ⚫⚫⚫⚫)
 
8. General Recommendations 
 
8.1. We recommend that physicians with expertise in 
managing endocrine disorders in children manage or 
provide consultation for the evaluation for GHD-ISS-
PIGFD and treatment thereof. (Ungraded good practice 
statement)
 
8.2. We recommend further study of the unresolved 
issues highlighted in these guidelines. (Ungraded good 
practice statement)
 
Methods 
 
Taskforce Members 
 
The guidelines taskforce was comprised of 7 pediatric 
endocrinologists from USA and Canada, and a pediatric 
bioethicist. The PES Board of Directors approved the ap-
pointment of each taskforce member following the soci-
ety’
s conflict of interest review policy (available from the 
PES administrative offices) prior to project commence-
ment. Completed conflict disclosure forms are available 
through Degnon Associates Inc., the management firm 
for PES. PES provided funding for a 1-day meeting at-
tended by all taskforce members in Washington, DC, in 
May 2013; PES members (i.e., the endocrinologists) were 
reimbursed the cost of one night’
s hotel stay, while the 
bioethicist was reimbursed for hotel plus travel expenses, 
and all were provided lunch during the meeting. Most of 
the work was accomplished via regular conference calls 
and e-mail. Taskforce members received no other remu-
neration for their work on the guidelines, from either PES 
or any commercial entities. A member of the GRADE 
group served as consultant, via telephone for the 1-day 
meeting, and throughout the writing process.
 
Literature Review and Grading of the Evidence 
 
A series of key questions pertaining to the clinical 
management of patients with GHD-ISS-PIGFD was 
drafted and revised until approved by the PES Board of 
Directors. A medical informationalist from the Johns 
Hopkins School of Medicine was recruited to assist with 
appropriate search term generation, comprehensive da-
tabase queries, and reference management. PubMed, Em-
base, and the Cochrane Library databases were queried 
using the terms “growth hormone”, “insulin-like growth 
factor-I,” their synonyms, and their trade names with the 
following limits: English language, humans, all child 0–18 
years, and published 1985–present. Taskforce members 
created comprehensive lists of synonymous search terms 
to capture all studies germane to the key questions. The 
  
Grimberg 
  et al.
 
Horm Res Paediatr 2016;86:361–397
DOI: 10.1159/000452150
366
query excluded studies of pituitary-derived GH due to 
their poor external validity for clinicians today. A total of 
 
∼ 
15,000 citations were retrieved and a web-based data-
base of the resultant references was generated (RefWorks-
COS, Bethesda, MD, USA). Approximately 6,300 cita-
tions were specific to GHD or PIGFD.
 
Each key question was assigned a primary and second-
ary reviewer, who performed a two-stage review. The pri-
mary reviewers sorted the citations collected for their key 
questions for further inclusion or exclusion by judging 
the topic relevance according to title and abstract. Ab-
stracts excluded by the primary reviewers were re-re-
viewed by the secondary reviewers to ensure that all ap-
propriate studies were included. In the second stage, the 
primary reviewers distilled the study design and results of 
the full papers into evidence review spreadsheets, includ-
ing their assessment of the applicability and risk of bias of 
the individual studies. The secondary reviewers then add-
ed comments to the primary reviewers’
 spreadsheets, in-
dependently rating the internal and external validity of 
each paper. Additional pertinent studies that were found 
in the bibliographies of the reviewed papers, but had been 
inadvertently omitted in the database, were pulled and 
similarly reviewed. ClinicalTrials.gov was also searched 
for ongoing studies that may have affected consideration 
of the evidence, and FDA adverse event reports supple-
mented the safety data.
 
 
The 2 reviewers graded the totality of evidence and de-
termined the recommendation for the key question ac-
cording to the GRADE system  
[2] 
. In brief, the quality of 
the evidence was judged as very low (⚫⚪⚪⚪), low 
(⚫⚫⚪⚪), moderate (⚫⚫⚫⚪), or high (⚫⚫⚫⚫), re-
flecting the reviewers’
 assessment of the quality of the ev-
idence according to GRADE guidelines. Recommenda-
tions were assessed as strong (denoted by “We recom-
mend”) or conditional (denoted by “We suggest”). In 
accordance with GRADE guidelines, strong recommen-
dations reflect confidence that providing such care will 
afford patients, on balance, more good than harm, while 
conditional recommendations require more individual-
ized consideration of the risk-benefit assessment for a 
given patient. On occasion, the taskforce made state-
ments that are marked as “ungraded good practice state-
ments.” These are recommendations without direct sup-
porting evidence that are usually noncontestable and are 
important to include in the guideline to emphasize cer-
tain aspects of care such as providing counseling and ed-
ucation to patients  
[5] 
.
 
At the in-person taskforce meeting, each primary re-
viewer presented the recommendation and evidence 
grade for the key question with a summary of the support-
ing evidence. Discussion ensued until the taskforce 
achieved consensus, defined as at least 6 of the 8 members 
agreeing on the recommendation as strong or weak. 
Notes were kept of each discussion, such that major dis-
senting opinion(s) could be included in the guidelines, 
which were written based on the results of the taskforce 
meeting. Further deliberation occurred after the attended 
meeting via phone conferences and email to determine 
the final recommendations.
 
Guiding Principles 
 
Prior to 
  
review of the published evidence, the task-
force created a set of guiding principles to standardize 
the approach across individual reviewers that was ap-
proved by all reviewers. AH was selected as the primary 
outcome in considerations of efficacy. In the absence of 
data on AH, surrogate short-term outcomes such as 
growth velocity, change in height z-score, or change in 
predicted height were considered, but did not form the 
basis of a recommendation. This is because the short-
term outcomes are dynamic and do not reliably predict 
AH for many children; wide individual variability exists 
within the heterogeneous treatment population, and 
outcomes such as change in predicted AH vary mark-
edly depending on the methodology used  
[6] 
. To com-
pare AH data across studies for GHD, the parameter 
(AH SDS – midparental height [MPH] SDS) was used or 
calculated from available data. The formula for MPH 
SDS calculation varied among studies. Therefore, the 
MPH SDS reported for each study was used. To compare 
AH data across studies for ISS, the parameter (AH SDS 
minus baseline HtSDS) was used because of the hetero-
geneity of the populations (familial short stature and 
nonfamilial short stature). (AH SDS – MPH SDS) was 
not used for ISS, because MPH may not reflect genetic 
potential if one or both of the parents has an un-
diagnosed condition. Studies utilizing predicted AH 
were excluded, because the short-term effect of GH on
HtSDS, especially in high doses, may overestimate the 
effect on AH  
[7] 
.
 
The taskforce values and preferences were consistent 
in that harm prevention was the utmost factor in formu-
lating strength of recommendation. As a result, the guide-
lines describe a conservative approach to treating patients 
with GHD-ISS-PIGFD, recommending only those prac-
tices with supporting evidence of sufficient quality and 
that minimize potential risks to patients. Recommenda-
  
PES GH/IGF-I Guidelines 
Horm Res Paediatr 2016;86:361–397
DOI: 10.1159/000452150
367
tions in this document were made using the existing lit-
erature; future studies may provide evidence that contra-
dict or support the recommendations. Therefore, the 
taskforce suggests that the recommendations be applied 
in clinical practice with consideration of the evolving lit-
erature and the risks and benefits to each individual pa-
tient.
 
Evidence Supporting Each of the Recommendations 
 
1. Efficacy of GH Treatment for GHD 
 
1.1. We recommend the use of GH to normalize AH 
and avoid extreme shortness in children and adolescents 
with GHD. (Strong recommendation, ⚫⚫⚫⚫)
 
The primary objectives of GH treatment for patients 
with GHD are acceleration of growth velocity to promote 
normalization of growth and stature during childhood 
and attainment of normal AH appropriate for the child’
s 
genetic potential. AH data are available in multiple stud-
ies of GH treatment for pediatric GHD including GH 
postmarketing surveillance registries  
[8–11] 
, a popula-
tion-based registry  
[12] 
, a cancer survivor registry  
[13] 
, 
and clinic/hospital-based case series  
[14–17] 
. Collective-
ly, more than 4,520 patients were treated to AH with a 
mean HtSDS of approximately –1.0. Patients were treated 
for a mean duration of 7 years (range 2–15.4 years) using 
a mean GH dose of 0.25 mg/kg/week (range 0.14–0.7 mg/
kg/week). The difference between AH SDS and MPH 
SDS, which reflects whether a patient has achieved his or 
her genetic potential, showed a mean difference of –0.4 
SD (–2.8 cm) with a range of –0.2 to –0.6 SD (–1.4 to –4.2 
cm). In contrast, AH SDS of individuals with untreated 
idiopathic IGHD had a mean of –4.7, with a range of –3.9 
to –6 SD  
[18] 
.
 
 
Analysis of 1,258 patients with GHD from the Pfizer 
International Growth Study (KIGS) showed that Cauca-
sian patients with IGHD treated with GH achieved a 
mean AH SDS of –0.8 in males and –1.0 in females  
[9] 
. 
Patients with MPHD achieved a mean AH of –0.7 in 
males and –1.1 SD in females. [AH SDS – MPH SDS] were 
–0.2 for IGHD (males) and –0.5 (females); for MPHD 
–0.4 (males) and –0.8 (females). The mean GH dose was 
0.21 mg/kg/week for IGHD and 0.18 mg/kg/week for 
MPHD. Variables that correlated with total height incre-
ment (ΔHtSDS) on multivariate analysis included midpa-
rental target height, height gain in the first year, height at 
the start of GH treatment, duration of GH treatment, the 
maximum GH peak on provocative testing, presence or 
absence of MPHD, and birth weight. The variables with 
highest positive correlation were the MPH SDS and the 
first-year growth velocity.
 
In 2,165 patients with idiopathic IGHD from the 
French population-based registry  
[12] with a mean 
chronological age of 13.2 ± 2 years and a mean bone age 
of 10.6 ± 2.3 years in boys and a mean chronological age 
of 11.6 ± 1.9 years and a mean bone age of 9.5 ± 2 years 
in girls, mean height gain was 1.1 ± 0.9 SDS resulting in 
an average AH of –1.6 SD (girls 154 ± 5 cm and boys 165 
± 6 cm). The AH SDS was 0.4 SD lower than MPH SDS, 
and the GH dose used was only 0.14 mg/kg/week. Base-
line variables that predicted favorable height outcome in-
cluded younger age at start of GH treatment, greater bone 
age delay, prepubertal status, and severe GHD. In this co-
hort, 65% were prepubertal at baseline and 48% had peak 
GH secretion between 7 and 10 μg/L, raising concern that 
a significant proportion of patients had constitutional de-
lay of growth and puberty. Sex steroid priming was used 
in only 2% of patients before GH provocative testing. No 
data on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain 
and pituitary gland were reported.
 
 
The available studies are not controlled and differ in 
their definition of GHD, with various diagnostic thresh-
old peak GH levels, pharmacological agents employed in 
the GH provocative tests, and GH assays used. Some in-
cluded patients who may have had underlying ISS instead 
of GHD. Registries are limited by the fact that the enrolled 
population is vastly heterogeneous and limited to those 
patients who consent to enrollment. AH in idiopathic 
IGHD depends not only on treatment variables (age at 
initiation of GH treatment, pubertal delay, peak GH level 
and GH assay used to define GHD, and GH dose), but 
also on the criteria used to determine AH and consider-
ation of GH termination. Randomized controlled trials 
(RCT) of GH would have been unethical, as efficacy of 
treatment in increasing height of patients with GHD had 
been shown previously with pituitary GH (data not re-
viewed here).
 
 
1.2. We suggest against routine cardiac testing, DXA 
scanning, and measurement of lipid profiles in children 
and adolescents treated with GH. (Conditional recom-
mendation, ⚫⚫⚪⚪)
 
In addition to increasing linear growth, GH exerts cru-
cial effects on lipid, protein, and glucose metabolism. 
Adults with GHD have reduced cardiac mass and im-
paired cardiac performance, unfavorable lipid profiles, 
increased body fat, reduced fibrinolytic activity, de-
creased insulin sensitivity, premature atherosclerosis, 
and impaired glucose tolerance  
[19–21] 
. Few studies have 
examined the effects of GH treatment for GHD in grow-
  
Grimberg 
  et al.
 
Horm Res Paediatr 2016;86:361–397
DOI: 10.1159/000452150
368
ing children and adolescents on cardiac function, lipid 
metabolism, body composition, adipokines, and periph-
eral inflammatory markers  
[22, 23] 
.
 
Short-term studies (5 case-control  
[22, 23] and 1 un-
controlled  
[24] 
) involving approximately 120 children 
with GHD documented a positive effect of GH treatment 
on left ventricular mass, but data on cardiac performance 
measured by echocardiography (fractional shortening 
and left ventricular ejection fraction) and vascular func-
tion (intimal media thickness at common carotid arter-
ies) were inconsistent. In the prospective, uncontrolled 
study of Shulman et al.,  
[24] 
, 10 prepubertal children 
(mean age 5.7 ± 2.7 years; 5 IGHD/5 MPHD (7 with ab-
normal pituitary gland on MRI and 3 idiopathic) had re-
duced left ventricular mass that significantly increased 
after 1 year of GH treatment without any changes in car-
diac function, findings similar to those reported by Met-
walley et al. 
 [25] 
 and Salerno et al.  
[26, 27] 
. In the follow-
up by Salerno’
s group, a 2-year prospective case-control 
study involving 30 prepubertal children with GHD (27 
IGHD and 3 MPHD) compared to healthy children 
matched by age, sex, BSA, and BMI, reduced left ventric-
ular mass normalized after the first year of GH treatment 
and improvement in left ventricular mass positively cor-
related with the increase in IGF-I levels  
[26] 
. Left ven-
tricular systolic and diastolic function did not change af-
ter 2 years of treatment. However, in another study, sub-
tle alterations in left ventricular systolic function were 
noted  
[28] 
.
 
Data on bone density and body composition in chil-
dren with GHD are generally more consistent. Using 
DXA, children with untreated GHD showed decreased 
bone mineral density, decreased lean mass, and increased 
fat mass, while GH treatment improved these abnormal-
ities in multiple studies  
[29–31] 
. In a 6-year prospective 
study of 59 children with GHD, lumbar spine bone min-
eral density, total body bone mineral density, and body 
composition were measured using DXA  
[31] 
. Mean lum-
bar spine and total body bone mineral densities were re-
duced at diagnosis and normalized after 1 year of GH 
treatment; percentage of body fat was increased at base-
line and normalized within 6 months. The severity of 
GHD or presence of other pituitary hormone deficiencies 
(IGHD vs. MPHD) was not associated with bone mineral 
density at diagnosis or with response to GH therapy. In 
contrast, a study of 5 years of GH treatment found a sig-
nificant increase in lumbar spine bone mineral density 
z-score in 35 children with IGHD, but not in 15 children 
with MPHD  
[32] 
. The cohort of patients with MPHD in 
the first study predominantly had acquired GHD mainly 
due to intracerebral tumors while the latter cohort of 
MPHD patients was mostly due to congenital pituitary 
abnormalities. Thus, the duration of GHD, presence of 
gonadotropin deficiency, and/or inadequacy of sex ste-
roid replacement may explain the difference between 
their findings.
 
 
Data on lipid profiles in children with untreated GHD 
compared to healthy controls and the effect of GH treat-
ment are inconsistent. Most of these studies involved 
small cohorts of children, between 12 and 158 patients. 
Some studies reported unhealthy lipid profiles in untreat-
ed GHD compared to healthy controls, which improved 
with GH treatment  
[22, 25, 33–35] 
. In contrast, other 
studies reported normal lipid profiles compared to 
healthy controls, but GH treatment led to significant re-
duction in total and LDL cholesterol levels and in athero-
genic indices  
[26, 28, 31, 36] 
.
 
Differences in results in the above studies can be at-
tributed to the following factors: severity of GHD (severe 
defined as peak GH level on provocative testing of either 
<3 or <5 μg/L vs. partial GHD with peak GH level between 
5 and 10 μg/L); IGHD versus MPHD; different GH assays 
used to define GHD (polyclonal radioimmunoassay vs. 
immunometric assays); different GH dosages used; and 
different durations of GH treatment.
 
2. Consideration and Diagnosis of GHD  
 
2.1. Conditions where GH provocative testing is not 
required to diagnose GHD.
 
 
Of note, for patients who do not meet the following 
criteria yet present a high index of suspicion, GHD can be 
diagnosed by the conventional approach.
 
2.1.1. We suggest establishing a diagnosis of GHD 
without GH provocative testing in patients possessing all 
of the following three conditions: auxological criteria, hy-
pothalamic-pituitary defect (such as major congenital 
malformation [ectopic posterior pituitary and pituitary 
hypoplasia with abnormal stalk], tumor or irradiation), 
and deficiency of at least one additional pituitary hor-
mone. (Conditional recommendation, ⚫⚫⚪⚪)
 
2.1.2. We suggest that GHD due to congenital hypopi-
tuitarism be diagnosed without formal GH provocative 
testing in a newborn with hypoglycemia who does not at-
tain a serum GH concentration above 5 μg/L and has de-
ficiency of at least one additional pituitary hormone and/
or the classical imaging triad (ectopic posterior pituitary 
and pituitary hypoplasia with abnormal stalk). (Condi-
tional recommendation, ⚫⚫⚪⚪)
  
PES GH/IGF-I Guidelines 
Horm Res Paediatr 2016;86:361–397
DOI: 10.1159/000452150
369
 
Technical Remark: A low GH concentration at the time 
of spontaneous hypoglycemia is alone insufficient to di-
agnose GHD.
 
“Classical” GHD, as described by Lawson Wilkins re-
fers to the complete or near-complete inability to secrete 
GH, resulting in extremely slow growth velocity and AH 
many standard deviations below the mean  
[37] 
. In classi-
cal GHD, GH treatment restores normal growth, with 
catch-up to a percentile compatible with MPH, including 
the upper percentiles of adult stature. In the majority of 
cases, classical GHD is associated with hypothalamic-pi-
tuitary abnormalities on imaging  
[38] 
, MPHD, or a his-
tory of insult to the area such as tumor, surgery, and/or 
cranial irradiation  
[39] 
. In observational studies of these 
children, provocative tests show GH concentrations very 
distinct from the normal range such that test precision, 
reproducibility, and assay performance may not be cru-
cial barriers to precise diagnosis. For example, in a study 
of 63 treated patients with GHD, all 15 with imaging
abnormalities achieved a peak GH concentration below
5 μg/L  
[38] 
. Additionally, in the Genetics and Neuro-
endocrinology of Short Stature International Study 
(GeNeSIS), the median peak GH level was 2.7 μg/L for the 
1,071 subjects with GHD plus any imaging abnormality 
 
[39] 
. In KIGS (Pfizer International Growth Study Data-
base), mean GH peak was 3.1 μg/L in children with imag-
ing abnormalities (excluding pituitary hypoplasia) versus 
4.9 μg/L for pituitary hypoplasia and 6.6 μg/L for idio-
pathic GHD  
[40] 
. These tests were not validated as a basis 
for intervention in an RCT, but observational studies 
tend to show that very low peak GH response correlates 
with dramatic response to GH treatment  
[41–43] 
. 
 
 
Normal neonates have relative hypersomatotropism, 
with random GH levels higher than older children and 
adults in the first 5–7 days of life  
[44, 45] 
 and falling in 
subsequent weeks  
[46] 
. Newborns with congenital GHD 
associated with panhypopituitarism have a greater inci-
dence of hypoglycemia; of 44 patients with congenital 
GHD, none of the neonates with IGHD had hypoglyce-
mia, while 60–70% of neonates with panhypopituitarism 
(with or without abnormalities on imaging) experienced 
hypoglycemia  
[47] 
. Neonatal cholestasis with hypoglyce-
mia occurs in panhypopituitarism and improves with re-
placement of pituitary hormones including GH  
[48] 
. A 
GH level (whether random or associated with spontane-
ous hypoglycemia) that distinguishes infants with GHD 
from those with GH sufficiency has not been established 
definitively. A retrospective study using a validated assay 
on dried filter-paper blood spots, found that in 314 new-
borns less than 5 days old, the median GH concentration 
was 16.4 μg/L with 95% confidence interval of 7–39.4 
μg/L. In contrast, 9 newborns with MPHD had GH levels 
of 5.5 μg/L or less on the same GH assay but samples were 
collected from these babies between 5 and 28 days of
age  
[44] 
. Because of GH assay variability, a GH value of 
 
≤ 
5 μg/L in the first week of life in a neonate with defi-
ciency of other pituitary hormones who experiences hy-
poglycemia is likely sufficient to accurately diagnose 
GHD. Beyond the first week of life, there are no clear GH 
threshold levels that discern normal newborns from those 
with GHD. Beyond the neonatal period, a low GH con-
centration at the time of hypoglycemia is alone insuffi-
cient to diagnose GHD due to low specificity  
[49] 
. The 
challenges in defining normal GH and IGF-I levels in the 
first 18 months of life are reviewed elsewhere  
[50] 
.
 
2.2. GH provocative testing.
 
2.2.1. We recommend against reliance on GH provoc-
ative test results as the sole diagnostic criterion of GHD. 
(Strong recommendation, ⚫⚫⚫⚫)
 
Technical Remark: 
 Very low peak GH levels on pro-
vocative testing are consistent with severe GHD, and pa-
tients with such results are expected to benefit greatly 
from GH treatment. However, the threshold test result 
that distinguishes normal from partial GHD that re-
sponds to treatment has not been well established.
 
Technical Remark: Given the substantial number of 
healthy, normally growing children who test below ac-
cepted limits, inadequate response to two different pro-
vocative tests is required for diagnosis of GHD. While it 
is possible that combining tests might yield different re-
sults from tests performed on separate days, there is no 
evidence against performing both tests sequentially on 
the same day. 
 
Technical Remark: 
 GH responses to provocative test-
ing are blunted in obese or overweight individuals, and 
the peak values decrease with increasing BMI. Unlike 
adults, obesity-dependent modifications to diagnostic 
criteria in children are undetermined.
 
Defining growth failure conceptually implies abnor-
mally low growth velocity, while the definition of inade-
quate GH secretion must be based on more complex evi-
dence. Many cases of GHD are not accompanied by other 
hypophyseal hormone deficiencies or known hypotha-
lamic-pituitary pathology (idiopathic GHD) and must be 
diagnosed by measuring GH levels (other GH-related 
endpoints, e.g. body composition and IGF-I levels, have 
insufficient sensitivity and specificity to clearly distin-
guish children with or without GHD). This is further 
complicated by the pulsatile nature of GH secretion that 
necessitates the use of provocative (stimulation) testing.
  
Grimberg 
  et al.
 
Horm Res Paediatr 2016;86:361–397
DOI: 10.1159/000452150
370
 
There are no randomized controlled studies to AH 
that correlate GH provocative testing results with subse-
quent GH treatment effects on AH. Available evidence is 
derived from response to treatment in the first few years 
and consistently shows some predictive value of peaks 
<10 μg/L on gain in AH SDS  
[51–53] 
. However, there is 
no controlled, evidence-based gold standard for this cut-
off, which was adopted for identifying partial cases in the 
continuum between complete deficiency and normal. By 
modern immunometric methods and standards, 10 μg/L 
is just below the mean response obtained to most pro-
vocative tests in normally growing children, whose 5th 
percentile lies below 5 μg/L for most tests  
[54, 55] 
.
 
In the absence of evidence from controlled studies, 
postmarketing surveys might help estimate how levels 
within this continuum predict response to treatment. 
Data from KIGS were mathematically modeled from 593 
GH-treated prepubertal children diagnosed as having 
GHD on the basis of a GH response <10 μg/L  
[56] 
. Add-
ing peak GH response to a model of auxological param-
eters increased the percentage of variance explained from 
45 to 60%, making it a statistically significant, but rather 
modest predictor. However, when individual values for 
the improvement in first-year height velocity prediction 
attributable to the GH peak were plotted, the prediction 
came from peak levels <5 μg/L; at this level, the GH peak 
increased the prediction by as much as 4 cm of growth in 
the first year. Similar results were shown in 236 prepuber-
tal children enrolled in the NCGS study in the USA  
[57] 
. 
First-year increase in HtSDS (ΔHtSDS) was indistin-
guishable between children with peak GH responses 5–10 
or >10 μg/L, and ΔHtSDS >1.5 SD was seen only with GH 
peaks <5 μg/L. The specificity of the cutoff of 10 μg/L was 
estimated at only 25%. In 1,192 children enrolled in
the ICGS study in Japan  
[58] (also industry-sponsored), 
a larger ΔHtSDS was seen in children with GH peaks
<5 μg/L on two tests, compared to those with at least one 
test with a peak >5 μg/L. AH analyses from the postmar-
keting studies are not available and would not be mean-
ingful because of a strong bias to continue treatment only 
in good early responders.
 
 
In addition to lack of AH-based evidence supporting a 
diagnostically meaningful threshold test result, there are 
several limitations to comparing peak GH responses 
across provocative tests. We could find no evidence indi-
cating that peak GH values are similar using different 
provocative agents. Using the same analytical assay to 
measure peak GH concentrations of 68 normally growing 
children, Zadik et al.  
[54] found good agreement between 
insulin- and arginine-stimulated GH peaks (14.2 ± 6.3 vs. 
13.1 ± 6.1 μg/L), but clonidine, another widely used stim-
ulus, gave much higher levels (21.0 ± 10.7 μg/L). In this 
study of normally growing children, 1 SD below the mean 
for peak GH value was at or below 10 μg/L, with the 5th 
percentile being less than half of this cutoff. These results 
were corroborated in a large, registry-based study of 3,233 
cases in France  
[59] 
, in which correlation coefficients  
(r) 
between GH peaks on two tests in the same patient ranged 
from 0.35 to 0.6, meaning that the  
r 
2 
 (expressing the frac-
tion of the total variance explained by the fact that the two 
tests were performed on the same subject) ranged from 
12 to 36%. These results also suggested imperfect repro-
ducibility of the same test in the same patient, with the 
highest correlation, that being for duplicate testing with 
insulin stimulation, having a coefficient of only 0.72 ( 
r 
2 = 
52%).
 
Studies show that GH response to provocative testing 
depends on BMI and that GH response to stimulation is 
considerably lower in obese children  
[60, 61] 
. In a pro-
spective study of 65 normally growing obese children, 
spontaneous GH secretion was less than half of reference, 
and it normalized after weight loss  
[62] 
. There is insuf-
ficient evidence for establishing BMI-corrected cutoffs 
for GH provocative testing in children. A retrospective 
cross-sectional study of glucagon stimulation testing in 
adults with BMI  
≥ 
25 proposed lowering the diagnostic 
threshold from the standard 3 μg/L (failed by 45% of the 
47 healthy adults studied) to 1 μg/L (failed by 6% of 
healthy controls, 59% of 41 adults with partial pituitary 
deficiency, and 90% of the 20 adults with total pituitary 
deficiency studied)  
[63] 
. For the obese child with poor 
growth, other endocrinopathies (e.g., hypothyroidism 
and hypercortisolism) should be excluded before testing 
for GHD, as these conditions, if present and untreated, 
can cause falsely low GH levels upon GH provocative 
testing. 
 
2.2.2. Given the large discrepancies between GH as-
says, we recommend that institutions require laboratories 
to provide harmonized GH assays using the somatropin 
standard, IRP IS 98/574, 22k rhGH isoform, as recom-
mended by the 2006 and 2011 consensus statements, and 
the published commutability standards. (Strong recom-
mendation, ⚫⚫⚫⚫)
 
Serum GH concentrations are currently measured us-
ing a variety of methods against a variety of standards. 
Normal values were established using polyclonal radio-
immunoassays and purified pituitary standards. Current-
ly used immunometric assays with monoclonal antibod-
ies and recombinant standards have higher specificity, 
but the use of different standards and antibodies with 
  
PES GH/IGF-I Guidelines 
Horm Res Paediatr 2016;86:361–397
DOI: 10.1159/000452150
371
specificities for different GH isoforms has resulted in 
large discrepancies between assays. 
 
 
Therefore, standardization or, at least, harmonization 
is required to meaningfully evaluate and compare results. 
An important first step in harmonization is the adoption 
of recombinant primary reference material, the most cur-
rent and widely used of which is IRP IS 98/574, 22k rhGH 
isoform, as recommended by the 2006 and 2011 consen-
sus statements  
[64] 
. If different methods give the same 
result for the same serum pools, the assays can be consid-
ered standardized. If not, harmonization is achieved by 
documenting sample-independent differences and deriv-
ing correction factors to obtain the same values for the 
same sample, by the use of commutable serum pools as 
outlined by Ross et al.  
[65] 
.
 
Discrepancies among current GH assays lead to diag-
nostic misclassifications. Using three reference assays 
(two using the same standard, 88/624), Hauffa et al. 
 [66] 
re-examined 699 peak samples from GH provocative test-
ing. The mean difference among assays varied from 5.4 to 
10.3 mU/L (2.7 to 5.1 μg/L). Assignment to GHD- versus 
GH-sufficient groups varied substantially among differ-
ent assays in a subset of 132 subjects who had had stan-
dardized insulin and arginine testing, resulting in mis-
classification of up to 29% of cases. In another study, sam-
ples from 47 provocative tests were assayed with four 
different methods  
[67] 
. Discrepancies were found with 
significant effects on diagnostic outcome. One immuno-
metric assay classified 36% of tests as indicating GHD 
compared to 15% for the standard radioimmunoassay.
 
Several countries have sought to standardize or har-
monize their GH assays. A systematic, multi-laboratory 
effort at standardization of assays in Finland between 
1998 and 2003 showed considerable improvement in 
concordance, but even in the last year of the effort, dis-
crepancies persisted  
[68] 
. Another harmonization effort 
in Germany found a 27% misclassification rate before ad-
justing results by a conversion factor  
[69] 
. In Japan, a sys-
tematic effort at harmonization using a uniform biosyn-
thetic standard resulted in lowering of the cutoff from 10 
to 6 μg/L due largely to the immunometric methods mea-
suring much lower than the original radioimmunoassay 
 
[70] 
.
 
 
2.2.3. We suggest sex steroid priming prior to provoc-
ative GH testing in prepubertal boys older than 11 and in 
prepubertal girls older than 10 years with AH prognosis 
within –2 SD of the reference population mean in order 
to prevent unnecessary GH treatment of children with 
constitutional delay of growth and puberty. (Conditional 
recommendation, ⚫⚫⚪⚪)
 
Technical Remark: Best available evidence exists for 
boys; evidence is extrapolated to girls.  
 
Technical Remark: 
 A reasonable approach in both 
boys and girls would be 2 mg (1 mg for body weight <20 
kg) of β-estradiol (not ethinyl estradiol) orally on each of 
the 2 evenings preceding the test. Alternatively, boys can 
be primed with intramuscular testosterone (50–100 mg 
of a depot formulation administered 1 week before the 
test).
 
Technical Remark: This recommendation applies to 
GH-naïve patients; it does not retroactively apply to pa-
tients already on GH treatment. 
 
In children with constitutional delay of growth and 
puberty, the normal decline in prepubertal growth veloc-
ity with age (interrupted by the pubertal growth spurt) is 
prolonged and may lead to frankly abnormal growth ve-
locity  
[71] 
. This is accompanied by a reduction in the GH 
response to provocative stimuli  
[72] 
, which has led to the 
supposition that, in prepubertal children of pubertal age, 
GH testing be preceded by brief treatment with sex ste-
roids. 
 
Sex steroid priming before GH provocative testing in 
prepubertal children of pubertal age improves diagnostic 
specificity without compromising the sensitivity of diag-
nosing severe GHD and can prevent inappropriate GH 
treatment of children with constitutional delay of growth 
and puberty. Administration of 1–2 mg of estradiol to 44 
children with ISS raised the mean lower 95% confidence 
interval of peak GH response to a sequential arginine-
clonidine test from clearly “abnormal” at 3.7 up to 8.3 
μg/L. This very substantial gain in specificity was not ac-
companied by a loss of sensitivity, as response was unal-
tered in 15 children with GHD established by the pres-
ence of other pituitary defects (7 of the 15 cases), imaging 
findings, or other phenotypic features  
[73] 
. In a longitu-
dinal study of 8 children with delayed puberty, mean peak 
GH response was 8.2 μg/L, below the GHD cutoff and 
substantially lower than that seen in control children of 
prepubertal age. Mean peak response completely normal-
ized to 15.8 μg/L when the children developed puberty 
0.83–2.14 years later  
[72] 
. Similar results were found in a 
cross-sectional study of 84 normal, untreated children, 
where the percentage of those who would have been clas-
sified as GHD by the stricter cutoff of 7 μg/L declined 
from 61% at Tanner stage I to zero at stages IV and V  
[74] 
. 
An observational study reported AH in 50 otherwise 
healthy boys evaluated for short stature with delayed pu-
berty (mean delay of 2 years) and growth velocity <5 cm/
year. These boys had peak GH values in the deficient 
range without sex steroid priming (mean 4.9–5.4 μg/L ± 
  
Grimberg 
  et al.
 
Horm Res Paediatr 2016;86:361–397
DOI: 10.1159/000452150
372
2.1–3.0)  
[75] 
. With sex steroid priming, mean peak GH 
values after stimulation were 15.4–19.3 μg/L ± 5.1–5.9 us-
ing three different priming doses of testosterone. Un-
treated, the boys’
 mean HtSDS changed from –2.4 ± 0.4 
(range –4.0 to –1.7) at time of testing to –1.27 ± 0.72 
(range –2.54 to +0.49) at AH. The resultant HtSDS was 
within the normal range and commensurate with the 
boys’
 MPH. However, there were no data on females, and 
most of the boys had a normal AH prediction at the time 
of testing (mean –1.3 ± 1.0 SD, with range from –3.1 SD 
to +2 SD). 
 
In generating this statement, the guidelines taskforce 
placed high value on reducing unnecessary GH treat-
ment of children with constitutional delay of growth 
and puberty, with its associated potential harms (proven 
or theoretical), costs, and psychological and physical 
burden. Sex steroid priming was repeatedly shown to 
increase the specificity, without hampering the sensitiv-
ity, of GH provocative testing for severe GHD, but the 
studies all involved small sample sizes, and there was 
only one study reporting AH, the chosen outcome to 
grade the evidence. This study showed that the boys 
reached normal AHs without GH treatment, but many 
had predicted AHs in the normal range at the time of 
testing. While the range of predicted AHs in this study 
went down to –3.1 SD, group data can obscure changes 
at the individual level. There is no direct evidence that 
patients with predicted AH below –2 SD at the time of 
testing and classified as GH-deficient solely when tested 
without sex hormone priming achieve a height within 
the adult normal range without GH treatment. Hence, 
the evidence was graded as low. The taskforce reached a 
unanimous consensus that prepubertal children of pu-
bertal age diagnosed with GHD using sex steroid prim-
ing likely will experience greater benefit from GH treat-
ment than such children diagnosed without priming. 
The possibility remains that, of such patients diagnosed 
as having GHD solely without sex steroid priming, the 
patients with abnormally low AH predictions at the time 
of testing may still require GH treatment to achieve a 
normal AH.
 
 
No gynecomastia in boys or other side effects have 
been reported with the recommended doses of sex steroid 
priming. No systematic controlled evidence exists to fa-
vor any of the proposed protocols over another. Wetterau 
 
[76] summarized the various methods used.
 
2.3. Measurement of spontaneous GH secretion.
 
 
2.3.1. We recommend against the use of spontaneous 
GH secretion in the diagnosis of GHD in a clinical setting. 
(Strong recommendation, ⚫⚫⚪⚪)
 
Given the limitations of provocative testing, the idea 
of measuring spontaneous secretion as a profile with se-
rial sampling  
[77] or as an integrated level by continuous 
withdrawal  
[78] is attractive. It seems plausible that a 
child unable to normally secrete GH could still respond 
to the nonphysiological pharmacology of provocative 
testing, a condition termed neurosecretory dysfunction 
 
[77] 
. This hypothesis was tested by GH treatment of 7 
short children with abnormally low growth velocity, who 
had provocative responses >10 μg/L but low spontaneous 
secretion  
[77] 
. Short-term acceleration of growth was ob-
served, similar to that seen in children with convention-
ally defined GHD. Neither long-term growth nor adult-
height data were presented. In addition to first-year ac-
celeration of height velocity being a very imperfect 
predictor of AH gain, a major weakness of this study was 
that 4 of the 7 patients were of pubertal age with severe 
bone age delay. Onset of puberty during treatment was 
not evaluated and could account for much or all of this 
acceleration. A similar first-year growth acceleration was 
reported in 2 other studies of children diagnosed by the 
same criteria  
[79–81] 
, and both of these studies suffered 
from the same limitations.
 
 
We could find a report of the effects on AH in only one 
retrospective study  
[80] that showed a mean AH gain of 
1.03 SDS following GH treatment in children who met 
the criteria for neurosecretory dysfunction, compared to 
untreated ISS cases with normal spontaneous secretion. 
This gain is virtually identical to that obtained in treated 
ISS (see discussion below) making the contribution of the 
spontaneous GH measurement very questionable.
 
 
Normative data for spontaneous GH secretion were 
established by a study that showed that 4/10 normal-
height, normally growing children and 8/35 with consti-
tutional delay, but normal growth velocity, had overnight 
secretory patterns compatible with the diagnosis of neu-
rosecretory GHD  
[82] 
. An additional study also found 
overlap of spontaneous GH secretion between healthy, 
normally growing children and children with GHD  
[83] 
. 
Unfortunately, results of frequent GH sampling were in-
consistent when normal children were studied on two 
separate occasions under identical conditions  
[84] 
. In 
light of these limitations, the taskforce felt any potential 
benefit of overnight GH sampling did not warrant the 
burden to patients and, hence, rated this recommenda-
tion strongly. 
 
3. Dosing of GH Treatment for Patients with GHD 
 
For the indication of GHD, manufacturers of somatro-
pin obtained governmental agency approval for dose 
  
PES GH/IGF-I Guidelines 
Horm Res Paediatr 2016;86:361–397
DOI: 10.1159/000452150
373
ranges of 25–35 μg/kg/day or 0.16–0.24 mg/kg/week, as 
listed in product inserts (so called standard dosing). In 
the USA, a few manufacturers obtained approval for 
higher dosing prepubertally (up to 0.3 mg/kg/week or 
 
∼ 
42–50 μg/kg/day depending upon dosing of GH 6 days 
or 7 days per week) and up to 0.7 mg/kg/week during pu-
berty (pubertal dosing; for GHD only). Dosing based 
upon BSA is also reported in some product inserts used 
outside the USA. In this section, doses are reported as mg/
kg/week or mg/m 
2 
/week. Some studies reported doses in 
international units (IU). The conversion formula 3.0 IU 
per 1 mg of GH was used for dose comparison, as most of 
the studies cited administered authentic rhGH (the con-
version formula for methionyl GH, an early GH formula-
tion, is 2.7 IU per 1 mg). Studies reporting doses in mg/
m 
2 
 were not converted to mg/kg because weight and BSA 
change at different rates during childhood, thereby pre-
cluding a reliable formula for dose conversion. As a point 
of reference, for a 30-kg, 1-m 
2 child, 0.16–0.24 mg/kg/
week equals 4.8–7.2 mg/m 
2 
/week.
 
 
3.1. We recommend the use of weight-based or BSA-
based GH dosing in children with GHD. (Strong recom-
mendation, ⚫⚫⚫⚪)
 
Technical Remark: We cannot make a recommenda-
tion regarding IGF-I-based dosing because there are no 
published AH data using this method. The rationale is 
logical, but the target IGF-I level has not been established 
to optimize the balance between AH gain, potential risks, 
and cost. 
 
 
Studies demonstrating the positive effects of GH on 
achieved AH have overwhelmingly used weight- or BSA-
based dosing  
[8–17, 85–88] 
. Selection of dosing based 
upon weight or BSA seems to be a matter of personal or 
national preference  
[89] 
. The rationale for using BSA-
based dosing draws upon the supposition that drug me-
tabolism does not decrease proportionally to increases in 
body weight, as it is mainly dependent on extracellular 
fluid volume, which is weight-independent. Differences 
in dose calculations between the weight- and BSA-based 
approaches are most prominent at younger ages and with 
obesity. Hughes et al. 
 [90] noted that older children re-
ceive a lower total GH dose if BSA dosing is used, rather 
than weight-based dosing. Rigorous studies comparing 
weight-based with BSA-based dosing have not been con-
ducted; thus, there is insufficient evidence to recommend 
one dosing regimen over the other.
 
IGF-I-based dosing of GH treatment has been pro-
posed based on two premises. First, there is large interin-
dividual variation in growth response to the same per kg 
body weight GH dose, so anthropometric-based dosing 
may not be optimal for a particular patient. Second, be-
cause the growth effects of GH are due in large part to its 
induction of IGF-I, serum IGF-I concentration can serve 
as a biomarker of GH action in an individual patient and 
allow more individualized dose titration, akin to dosing 
levothyroxine based on thyroid function tests. Cohen et 
al. 
 [91] evaluated the efficacy of serum IGF-I-based dos-
ing on growth after 2 years of GH therapy in a random-
ized trial. Children diagnosed with GHD who received 
GH doses that achieved a serum IGF-I SDS of +2 ex-
perienced a statistically significant greater difference in 
HtSDS (+2.04 ± 0.17 from pretreatment HtSDS) than 
children randomized to receive GH to achieve a serum 
IGF-I SDS of 0 (+1.41 ± 0.13 from pretreatment HtSDS). 
The average GH dose to achieve an IGF-I SDS of +2 was 
91 μg/kg/day (median 65 μg/kg/day), while the average 
GH dose to achieve a serum IGF-I SDS of 0 was 37 μg/kg/
day (median 33 μg/kg/day). Within each treatment group, 
a wide range of doses was needed to achieve the target 
IGF-I level. With an IGF-I target of +2 SDS, fewer than 
65% of children required GH doses above 50 μg/kg/day, 
while 35% required GH doses of 50 μg/kg/day ( 
∼ 
0.35 mg/
kg/week) or less. In the IGF-I target of 0 SDS group, few-
er than 20% of children required GH doses above 50 μg/
kg/day. Thus, some children with GHD experience a 
more robust rise in IGF-I level (correlated with linear 
growth) than others on similar weight-based doses  
[92] 
. 
Studies comparing the effectiveness of IGF-I-based dos-
ing with that of standard weight-based dosing on AH 
have not yet been done. As the panel elected to base rec-
ommendations on AH outcomes, there is insufficient ev-
idence at this time to recommend IGF-I-based dosing 
over weight- or BSA-based dosing.
 
Thrice weekly (TIW) dosing of GH was used initially 
after introduction of recombinant GH as a holdover from 
dosing paradigms used with pituitary-derived GH. Daily 
dosing of GH resulted in higher absolute height gain and 
gain in HtSDS than dividing the same weekly dose as TIW 
in 1–4 years of comparison study  
[93, 94] 
. In the studies 
reporting AH in GH-treated children, dosing of GH was 
6–7 days per week in the majority of studies, or a mixture 
of TIW or more frequent dosing in the remaining. As
the bulk of AH data were obtained in persons who re-
ceived dosing more often than TIW, TIW dosing is not 
suggested.
 
3.2. We recommend an initial GH dose of 0.16–0.24 
mg/kg/week (22–35 μg/kg/day) with individualization of 
subsequent dosing. (Strong recommendation, ⚫⚫⚪⚪)
 
Technical Remark: Some patients may require higher 
doses. 
  
Grimberg 
  et al.
 
Horm Res Paediatr 2016;86:361–397
DOI: 10.1159/000452150
374
 
The strength of the evidence indicating a difference in 
AH between children with GHD who receive different 
doses of GH is moderate-low as studies differ in their con-
clusions. Given the burden of GH treatment on the 
health-care system and the unresolved long-term risks of 
treatment, the lowest dose with demonstrated efficacy 
should be used.
 
The body of evidence concerning the effect of differ-
ent GH dosing regimens on AH outcomes is of moder-
ate-to-low quality. This evidence consists of reports of 
mean GH doses used in registry- or population-based 
studies, analyses of potential variables that may affect AH 
in patients enrolled in registries, and nonrandomized or 
randomized trials with low patient numbers. Early data 
from the NCGS and KIGS registries, which included data 
with higher weekly doses of recombinant GH (0.18–0.3 
mg/kg/week) than were used in pituitary-derived GH 
studies  
[95, 96] 
, indicated that mean AH SDS-MPH SDS 
was –0.5 SD with  
∼ 
0.18 mg/kg/week  
[10] or –0.5 SD with 
0.3 mg/kg/week  
[11] 
, suggesting that the higher weekly 
dose of recombinant GH could result in larger height 
gains over the lower weekly dose that had been used with 
pituitary-derived GH. Later data with a greater number 
of enrolled subjects in the French national registry (n = 
1,524), Pharmacia/Pfizer registry (n = 1,258), and a 
Dutch cohort (n = 552), did not find a significant corre-
lation between GH dose and AH on multivariate analysis 
 
[9, 12, 97] 
. Participants in these studies were treated for 
4–9 years, and the reported mean GH doses were 0.18–
0.24 mg/kg/week with a range between 0.11 and 0.28 mg/
kg/week. In a Canadian cohort of 96 patients, a fixed dose 
of 0.18 mg/kg/week given for an average of 9 years re-
sulted in heights that were within –0.5 SD from MPH 
 
[15] 
. A retrospective case-control study of 26 patients 
who received 0.15 or 0.3 mg/kg/week found that the 13 
patients who received the 0.3 mg/kg/week GH dose 
achieved a mean AH SDS – MPH SDS 0.73 SD higher 
than patients who received the lower dose  
[14] 
. The par-
ticipants had similar MPH, baseline height, and treat-
ment duration. An RCT of 35 subjects compared AH in 
children receiving 0.7 mg/m 
2 
/day (4.9 mg/m 
2 
/week) ver-
sus 
  
1.4 mg/m 
2 
/day (9.8 mg/m 
2 
/week)  
[98] 
. The mean AH 
SDS – MPH SDS was –0.7 versus –0.3 SD in the low and 
high dose groups, respectively, a difference of 4 cm that 
did not reach statistical significance. This study may have 
been insufficiently powered to detect a difference, so 
larger controlled trials may yet demonstrate a statistical-
ly significant effect of higher GH doses. In summary, in 
studies reporting AH, the majority of patients were ad-
ministered GH doses between 0.18 and 0.24 mg/kg/week 
and multivariate analysis of the data did not consistently 
reveal a correlation between higher dosing and greater 
AH. Studies directly comparing different dose regimens 
enrolled small numbers of patients and results differed 
between studies. 
 
As one of its guiding principles, the guidelines task-
force endorses harm prevention (theoretical or proven) 
over practices that have unproven benefits. High dosing 
of GH carries a higher risk of long-term adverse effects 
theoretically and a certain higher cost burden on health-
care systems. Since the body of evidence is conflicting on 
the comparative effectiveness of different GH doses on 
AH, the panel elected to recommend initiation of GH at 
the lower dose range.
 
 
Interindividual variability in growth velocity after ini-
tiation of GH, likely reflecting heterogeneity of popula-
tions diagnosed with GHD, suggests that subsequent dos-
ing should be individualized. Variables such as first-year 
growth velocity, height at start, duration of treatment, 
peak GH concentration during provocative testing, and 
MPH have been correlated with a taller AH  
[9, 12] 
. In ef-
forts to predict individual response to GH from pretreat-
ment characteristics and short-term treatment outcomes, 
models have been developed using data from registries  
[7, 
56, 99, 100] 
. Models have been verified retrospectively in 
two different cohorts of less than 100 children  
[56] 
. One 
study compared growth of children with GHD random-
ized to receive standard weight-based GH dosing or indi-
vidualized GH dosing modeled from pretreatment char-
acteristics  
[101] 
. After 2 years of treatment, the HtSDS – 
MPH SDS was similar between the groups (–0.42 ± 0.46 
vs. –0.48 ± 0.67), but the individualized GH dose group 
had a narrower distribution of SDS (range of 2.25 in the 
individualized group vs. 3.36 in the standard dose group). 
In other studies, short-term growth endpoints, such as 1- 
and 2-year growth velocity and change in HtSDS, have 
been shown to be increased by factors such as higher GH 
dosing or dose titration to IGF-I levels  
[92, 102] 
. Al-
though logical and promising, these strategies to optimize 
growth parameters in the short term have not been tested 
to AH. Additionally, the comparative effectiveness of 
these various strategies has not been tested. Thus, a state-
ment on the most effective strategy to individualize GH 
dosing after GH initiation (using anthropometric param-
eters, modeled GH responsiveness, and/or IGF-I levels) 
cannot be surmised from the available data.
 
3.3. We suggest measurement of serum IGF-I levels as 
a tool to monitor. adherence and IGF-I production in re-
sponse to GH dose changes. We suggest that the GH dose 
be lowered if serum IGF-I levels rise above the laboratory-
  
PES GH/IGF-I Guidelines 
Horm Res Paediatr 2016;86:361–397
DOI: 10.1159/000452150
375
defined normal range for the age or pubertal stage of the 
patient. (Conditional recommendation, ⚫⚪⚪⚪)
 
GH stimulates the synthesis and secretion of IGF-I, 
whose circulating concentration generally increases with 
increased GH dose. Thus, serum IGF-I concentration is a 
useful biomarker of GH exposure both in diagnosis and 
in treatment monitoring  
[102] 
. The target IGF-I level that 
results in optimal growth while minimizing future theo-
retical risk is not known. Meta-analysis of cohort and 
case-control studies in the general non-GH-treated pop-
ulation indicates that serum IGF-I levels in both the low 
and high ends of the normal range are associated with 
greater cancer and all-cause mortality  
[103] 
. The studies 
used for the meta-analysis measured IGF-I levels in sub-
jects of various ages from 20 to 98 years, with the major-
ity between ages 40–90 years and the duration of follow-
up ranging between 5 and 18 years. The long-term effects 
of briefer periods of higher IGF-I levels in childhood are 
not known.
 
The long-term risks of higher IGF-I levels of short or 
long duration are not resolved. The consensus panel en-
dorses harm prevention in the treatment of children with 
GH. As long as the potential risk is unresolved, we sug-
gest that the serum IGF-I concentration be monitored on 
a regular basis with the goal to keep IGF-I levels in the 
normal range for age and pubertal status. Assays used
to quantify IGF-I include immunometric and liquid 
chromatography/tandem mass spectroscopy techniques. 
Available commercial assays may provide different IGF-I 
values when applied to the same serum sample  
[104] 
. For 
that reason, when making clinical decisions for an indi-
vidual, the IGF-I values must be interpreted against the 
gender-, age-, and puberty-specific reference ranges pro-
vided by the commercial laboratory used in measuring 
that value. Levels of IGF-binding protein 3 (IGFBP-3) 
and acid-labile subunit have also been associated incon-
sistently with risk of certain cancers, and modulate the 
bioavailability of IGF-I. However, the complex interac-
tions among the three proteins have not been studied suf-
ficiently to support using alternative markers (e.g., molar 
ratio of IGF-I/IGFBP-3 as an estimation of free IGF-I) to 
predict long-term risks  
[105–107] 
.
 
 
3.4. During puberty, we recommend against the rou-
tine increase in GH dose to 0.7 mg/kg/week in every child 
with GHD. (Strong recommendation, ⚫⚫⚪⚪)
 
 
The FDA approved higher GH dosing during puberty 
based on results of an RCT  
[85] in which individuals who 
received the higher GH dose of 0.7 mg/kg/week during 3 
years of puberty had a higher growth velocity and achieved 
a higher AH SDS. The absolute difference in mean AH 
between the high dose and control dose (0.3 mg/kg/week) 
groups was 4.6 cm after 3 years and 5.7 cm after 4 years. 
Although MPH SDS between the two groups was not dif-
ferent at baseline, AH SDS – MPH SDS was not reported; 
the effect of therapy experienced by the individual may 
well be different from the group. The control dose group 
achieved median IGF-I levels of 615 μg/L (range 139–
1,079) whereas the high dose group achieved IGF-I levels 
of 910 μg/L (range 251–1,843) after 36 months of therapy. 
Of the 97 subjects enrolled, 10 experienced serious ad-
verse events, 4 in the standard dose group and 6 in the 
high dose group. Four of the 48 patients receiving the 
higher dose experienced effects consistent with GH ex-
cess, such as enlarging shoe size, ankle swelling, and hip 
pain. Although no cases of intracranial hypertension or 
slipped capped femoral epiphysis were reported, the 
study was not adequately powered to detect these poten-
tial serious side effects.
 
Randomized studies comparing pubertal doses lower 
than 0.7 mg/kg/week to standard dosing have also been 
performed  
[108–110] 
. Ninety-two Swedish children were 
randomized to standard dosing (0.1 IU/kg/day,  
∼ 
33 μg/
kg/day) or pubertal dosing once or twice daily (0.2 IU/kg/
day,  
∼ 
67 μg/kg/day) at Tanner stage 2  
[109] 
. Median AH 
SDS – MPH SDS was between 0 and 1 SD for all groups 
with a similar distribution of data. Another study ran-
domized 49 adolescents to standard dosing (0.7 mg/m 
2 
/
day) or pubertal dosing (1.4 mg/m 
2 
/day) at Tanner stage 
2  
[110] 
. Mean AH SDS – MPH SDS (0.1) was not differ-
ent between groups. Using data from the KIGS database, 
multiple linear regression analysis revealed that gender, 
age at puberty onset, and height at puberty onset were as-
sociated more strongly with pubertal growth than was 
GH dose  
[111] 
.
 
Members of the consensus panel unanimously agreed 
that the high rate of observed effects consistent with GH 
excess and the untested potential for more adverse effects 
in a greater sample size carried an undesirable risk of 
harm to patients receiving the 0.7 mg/kg/week dose. This 
concern, coupled with the unresolved long-term risk of 
higher dose of GH and health-care cost burden of the 0.7 
mg/kg/week dose, prompted the consensus panel to rec-
ommend against the routine use of this dose during pu-
berty. 
 
 
3.5. We recommend that GH treatment at pediatric 
doses not continue beyond attainment of a growth veloc-
ity below 2–2.5 cm/year. The decision to discontinue pe-
diatric dosing prior to attainment of this growth velocity 
should be individualized. (Strong recommendation, 
⚫⚫⚪⚪) 
  
Grimberg 
  et al.
 
Horm Res Paediatr 2016;86:361–397
DOI: 10.1159/000452150
376
 
Studies describing the effect of GH on the outcome of 
AH have involved treatment to AH or near-AH as de-
fined by extremely slow growth rate and/or attainment of 
a specified skeletal maturation  
[8–17, 85–88] 
. Across 
studies, growth rates used to define near-AH and consid-
eration of GH discontinuation varied from 0.5 to 3 cm/
year, with the majority of studies using rates between 2 
and 2.5 cm/year. Definition by bone age also varied across 
studies, with 14–15 years used for girls and 16–17 years 
used for boys. There have been no studies comparing AH 
in persons in whom therapy was deemed complete at a 
certain growth rate versus a certain bone age. Although 
evidence behind the recommendation is of low quality, 
the taskforce agreed that acromegalic changes are possi-
ble with use of pediatric GH doses in adolescents with 
fused epiphyseal plates and should be avoided. Because of 
the potential for benefit regarding certain metabolic pa-
rameters, the panel recommends evaluation for persistent 
GHD, as detailed below.
 
 
The guidelines taskforce recognizes that the risk and 
logistics of GH therapy to achieve a specific height goal 
may differ between individuals, so it may be appropriate 
to discontinue GH therapy earlier in some individuals. 
This decision may be influenced by the clinical factors 
surrounding the diagnosis of GHD; many children with 
idiopathic IGHD have normal test results when the GH 
axis is re-evaluated upon achievement of AH  
[112] 
. Ad-
ditionally, re-examination of the GH axis 1 or more years 
after diagnosis of idiopathic IGHD in still growing chil-
dren can yield normal results in a majority of patients 
 
[113] 
. In a nonrandomized study, patients who re-tested 
normal during puberty and discontinued GH achieved an 
AH SDS – MPH SDS similar to children who re-tested as 
having GHD and remained on GH treatment; the abso-
lute height in centimeters was not significantly different 
between groups  
[114] 
. One study reporting on patients 
who ended treatment prior to attainment of AH found 
their achieved heights were similar to those who main-
tained treatment until growth plate fusion  
[12] 
, though 
the “stopped early” group was not defined. These data 
raise the question as to whether all children diagnosed 
with IGHD need to continue GH treatment until growth 
plate fusion to achieve target AH.
 
4. Safety Issues of GH Treatment for Patients with 
GHD 
 
On-treatment safety and adverse effects of GH thera-
py  
[115] 
 have been extensively tracked and reviewed for 
children with GHD (isolated or as part of MPHD) and 
ISS  
[1, 116] 
. Available information, derived mainly from 
postmarketing surveillance studies maintained by GH 
manufacturers (e.g., KIGS and NCGS)  
[115, 117] 
, indi-
cates a low frequency (i.e., <3% of treated children) of 
adverse effects and reinforces a favorable on-treatment 
safety profile of GH. The size and duration of these post-
marketing studies provides reassurance that on-treat-
ment adverse events that are either frequent or have cat-
astrophic consequences are not being missed. However, 
the full spectrum of potential GH adverse effects is not 
comprehensively or accurately elucidated by postmar-
keting surveillance studies due to: (1) inherent weakness-
es in patient cohort surveillance such as dependence on 
physician reports of occurrence and uncertain relevance 
to GH treatment; (2) changes over time in GH dosage 
and/or recipient characteristics that may alter risk for ad-
verse effects; (3) failure to capture adverse events that 
only become manifest after treatment; and (4) lack of a 
valid control population for comparisons. Thus, all po-
tential risks should be evaluated with regard to the un-
derlying diagnosis and individually before initiating GH 
treatment.
 
4.1. We recommend that prospective recipients of GH 
treatment receive anticipatory guidance regarding the 
potential adverse effects of intracranial hypertension, 
SCFE, and scoliosis progression. (Ungraded good prac-
tice statement)
 
4.2. We recommend monitoring of GH recipients for 
potential development of intracranial hypertension, 
SCFE, and scoliosis progression by soliciting pertinent 
history and performing a physical examination at every 
follow-up clinic visit; further testing should be pursued if 
indicated. (Strong recommendation, ⚫⚫⚫⚫)
 
(A) Intracranial hypertension 
 
Intracranial hypertension may occur with GH therapy 
 
[118] 
. It occurs at an overall incidence of 28 per 100,000 
treatment-years, with a higher rate among patients with 
chronic renal insufficiency, Turner syndrome, and or-
ganic GHD, and at a lower rate in patients with ISS. It 
generally occurs during treatment initiation or dosage in-
creases, and reverses with discontinuation of GH. A refer-
ral for formal funduscopic examination by an ophthal-
mologist is advised if symptoms suggestive of intracra-
nial hypertension occur such as severe headache, double/
blurry vision, and vomiting. Treatment can often be re-
instituted at lower doses without return of symptoms.
 
(B) Slipped capital femoral epiphysis 
 
SCFE is reported at an incidence of 73 per 100,000 
treatment years and occurs less frequently in patients 
  
PES GH/IGF-I Guidelines 
Horm Res Paediatr 2016;86:361–397
DOI: 10.1159/000452150
377
with IGHD (18.3) and ISS (14.5) compared to those with 
GHD due to intracranial neoplasms (86.1), craniopha-
ryngioma (120), or after stem cell transplantation  
[119, 
120] 
. The median duration from onset of GH therapy to 
SCFE ranges from 0.4 to 2.5 years. Routine monitoring 
for suggestive symptoms such as hip and/or knee pain 
and changes in gait is advised and, if positive, careful 
physical examination and consideration of imaging and 
orthopedic specialty consultation. SCFE requires surgical 
pinning of the capital femoral epiphysis to correct its mal-
position. 
 
(C) Scoliosis progression 
 
Scoliosis progression during GH therapy appears due 
to rapid growth rather than as a direct side effect of GH 
per se. Scoliosis is observed in  
∼ 
0.2% of children with ISS 
or IGHD treated with GH  
[102] 
, less frequently than in 
diagnostic groups with a higher baseline incidence (e.g., 
Turner syndrome and Prader-Willi syndrome)  
[121] 
. 
Routine examination for scoliosis presence or progres-
sion is advised in recipients of GH treatment.
 
4.3. We recommend re-assessment of both the adrenal 
and thyroid axes after initiation of GH therapy in patients 
whose cause of GHD is associated with possible MPHD. 
(Strong recommendation, ⚫⚫⚪⚪)
 
Technical Remark: 
 Evaluate for possible central adre-
nal and thyroid insufficiencies in those not yet diagnosed, 
and consider increasing hydrocortisone and/or levothy-
roxine doses in those already on these hormone re-
placement(s).
 
Physiological effects of GH on glucocorticoid metabo-
lism (i.e., reducing hepatic 11β-HSD1-mediated conver-
sion of inactive cortisone to active cortisol and increasing 
CYP3A4-mediated cortisol catabolism) raise theoretical 
concerns that GH treatment could make manifest an un-
derlying adrenal insufficiency. While adrenal insufficien-
cy has been identified as a predominant cause of prevent-
able deaths in long-term follow-up of pituitary GH re-
cipients  
[122] 
, more recent data indicate a rate of adrenal 
insufficiency in GH recipients (most of whom did not 
have MPHD) equal to that expected for the general popu-
lation  
[115] 
, suggesting association of adrenal insuffi-
ciency and GH treatment rather than causality.
 
 
Similarly, GH can lower serum free T4 concentrations, 
often used to diagnose central hypothyroidism, by in-
creasing the peripheral deiodination of T4 to T3  
[123] 
.
 
4.4. We recommend discussion about and monitoring 
of glucose metabolism of GH recipients who are at in-
creased risk for diabetes due to insulin resistance. (Un-
graded good practice statement)
 
The incidence of type 1 diabetes mellitus (DM) is not 
increased by GH therapy. However, carbohydrate metab-
olism is altered during GH therapy of children with either 
IGHD (i.e., restoration of normal insulin sensitivity) or 
ISS (i.e., decrease in insulin sensitivity and compensatory 
increase in insulin secretion with maintenance of eugly-
cemia)  
[124–127] 
. Thus, children with type 1 DM will 
require higher doses of insulin if/when concurrently 
treated with GH. In children with compromised insulin 
secretion or sensitivity, GH may induce glucose intoler-
ance and manifest hyperglycemia in the prediabetic phase 
of type 1 DM. Reported effects on the incidence of type 2 
DM include both an increase  
[128] and no change in in-
cidence  
[115] 
 compared to population expectations. To 
date, overall data suggest: (1) decreases in insulin sensitiv-
ity are concurrent with GH therapy and return toward 
normal with cessation of treatment; (2) no clear adverse 
effects on glucose metabolism during and following GH 
therapy; and (3) monitoring for potential development of 
diabetes with blood testing for glucose and/or HbA1c lev-
els should be focused on GH recipients at high risk  
[129] 
.
 
 
4.5. Counseling prospective recipients of GH treat-
ment regarding the risk of neoplasia
 
4.5.1. We recommend informing at-risk patients about 
available data and encourage long-term follow-up with 
their oncologist. (Ungraded good practice statement)
 
 
4.5.1.1. For children with acquired GHD due to effects 
of a primary malignancy:
 
4.5.1.1.1. We recommend shared decision-making 
that involves the patient, family, oncologist, and treating 
endocrinologist. Before initiation of GH treatment, we 
recommend sharing with families the most recent data 
about risks, including the potential effect of GH treat-
ment on the timing of second neoplasm occurrence. (Un-
graded good practice statement)
 
 
4.5.1.1.2. For GH initiation after completion of tumor 
therapy with no evidence of ongoing tumor, a standard 
waiting period of 12 months to establish “successful ther-
apy” of the primary lesion is reasonable, but can also be 
altered depending on individual patient circumstances. 
(Ungraded good practice statement)
 
Technical Remark: 
 Although many of the intracranial 
tumors are not “malignant” (i.e., craniopharyngioma), 
they have the potential to recur. There are no data to sug-
gest treating them differently than malignant tumors with 
regard to observation periods before initiating GH treat-
ment. 
 
4.5.1.2. In the rare situation where a child with GHD 
has an accompanying condition with intrinsic increased 
risk for malignancy (e.g., neurofibromatosis-1, Down 
  
Grimberg 
  et al.
 
Horm Res Paediatr 2016;86:361–397
DOI: 10.1159/000452150
378
syndrome, Bloom syndrome, Fanconi anemia, Noonan 
syndrome, and Diamond-Blackfan anemia), we recom-
mend providing counseling regarding the lack of evi-
dence concerning GH effect on malignancy risk in these 
groups. (Ungraded good practice statement) 
 
4.5.2. For children considered not to be at risk, we rec-
ommend that counseling includes information about the 
unknown long-term (i.e., posttreatment) risks of neopla-
sia still being studied. (Ungraded good practice state-
ment)
 
 
Pathophysiological and epidemiological observations 
prompt concern that GH might increase risk of malig-
nancy during or after therapy. IGF-I and GH are mito-
genic, anti-apoptotic, and their receptors are found in tu-
mors. States of impaired  
[130] 
 and excess  
[131] 
 GH secre-
tion/action are associated with reduced and increased 
malignancy risk, respectively. Reduction in IGF-I via ca-
loric restriction induces apoptosis and prevents or slows 
tumor growth  
[132] 
. Some, but not all, epidemiological 
studies associated increases in GH and IGF-I levels with 
colon, breast, thyroid, and prostate cancer  
[133] 
. A retro-
spective analysis of adults who received human pituitary-
derived GH as children suggested an increased mortality 
rate from colon cancer and Hodgkin disease, but based 
on only two cases of each type of malignancy  
[134] 
. Over-
all, the data suggest a permissive/facilitative rather than 
causative role for GH in oncogenesis  
[135] 
.
 
 
Current evidence indicates the following general con-
clusions regarding GH treatment in children with GHD, 
small for gestational age (SGA), or ISS: (1) incidence of 
new-onset leukemia during treatment  
[115] 
 or malignan-
cies in general following treatment  
[136–139] in children 
without associated risk factors is not increased compared 
with that in the age-matched general population; (2) any 
increased risk for new-onset leukemia appears limited to 
children with underlying conditions that already predis-
pose them to develop malignancies  
[140] 
; (3) tumor re-
currence is not increased in persons successfully treated 
for their primary lesion  
[141, 142] 
; and (4) GH treatment 
of children with a history of malignancy (particularly 
when treated with radiation) may slightly hasten the ap-
pearance of a second neoplasm  
[142, 143] but does not 
appear to increase the overall risk of second neoplasm oc-
currence  
[144] when compared to patients not treated 
with GH  
[143] 
. While analysis of available data is compli-
cated by the elevated risk for malignancy in any child with 
a prior malignancy, and single institution studies have 
reported absence of GH effect on second neoplasm occur-
rence  
[145–147] 
, an increased risk of developing second 
neoplasms in GH-treated childhood cancer survivors is 
currently listed in US labeling for all GH products. Data 
are lacking regarding GH effects on the risk of neoplasia 
in patients with conditions already associated with an in-
trinsically increased malignancy risk  
[148-153] 
. Risk of 
neoplasia in pediatric patients treated with GH was re-
viewed extensively by the PES Drug and Therapeutics 
Committee, with a key recommendation being that ongo-
ing long-term posttreatment surveillance of GH recipi-
ents is paramount  
[154] 
. 
 
4.6. We recommend that prospective recipients of GH 
treatment be informed about the uncertainty regarding 
long-term safety (posttreatment adverse effects in adult-
hood). (Ungraded good practice statement)
 
Long-term follow-up (mean 17 years) of 6,928 chil-
dren with IGHD, ISS, or a history of being born SGA who 
started GH treatment between 1985 and 1996 in France 
revealed a 30% increase in all-cause mortality compared 
to the general population  
[136] 
. All type cancer-related 
mortality was not increased, but standardized mortality 
rates (SMR) were increased for bone tumor-related (5.00; 
CI 1.01–14), circulatory system (3.07; CI 1.4–5.8), and ce-
rebral hemorrhage (6.66; CI 1.8–17) events. Dosage of 
GH >50 μg/kg/day conferred an SMR of 2.94. Derived 
from the same database, a recent study reported a signif-
icantly higher risk of stroke (particularly hemorrhagic 
stroke) among patients treated with GH in childhood 
 
[155] 
. In contrast, follow-up of 2,543 IGHD, ISS, and 
SGA patients from other European countries, for whom 
vital status data were available for 98%, revealed no effect 
of GH exposure and/or dosage on mortality or the inci-
dence of cardiovascular events  
[137] 
. A separate study de-
vised an advanced model that adjusted for birth weight, 
birth length, and neonatal health to estimate SMR using 
the Swedish Medical Birth Registry. Applying the ad-
vanced model to GH-treated Swedes ( 
n = 3,847) with 
IGHD, ISS, or SGA, the SMR with GH treatment was 
0.955 (CI 0.591–1.456)  
[139] 
. Validity of reports from the 
French data could be confounded by lack of an untreated 
control population, appropriateness of the reference pop-
ulation chosen, a large number of “idiopathic deaths,” 
and missing data about GH treatment details and con-
comitant conditions.
 
In summary, available data support the following con-
clusions regarding safety of GH therapy for children with 
IGHD, organic GHD, and ISS: (1) certain adverse effects 
associated with rapid growth (scoliosis progression and 
SCFE) and others of unknown mechanism (intracranial 
hypertension) occur rarely and merit anticipatory guid-
ance and close monitoring; (2) insulin sensitivity is re-
duced, but overt hyperglycemia is rare (increased risk for 
  
PES GH/IGF-I Guidelines 
Horm Res Paediatr 2016;86:361–397
DOI: 10.1159/000452150
379
type 2 DM is not evident overall, but should be considered 
in patients already at higher risk); (3) levels of endoge-
nous cortisol can decrease due to effects of GH on gluco-
corticoid metabolism, so that GH therapy in severe GHD 
may unmask previously unsuspected central adrenal in-
sufficiency; and (4) GH does not increase risk for new 
malignancy in children without risk factors, and current 
data suggest that GH treatment has a slight-to-absent ef-
fect on increasing or hastening onset of second neoplasms 
in patients previously treated for cancer, particularly 
when such treatment includes cranial irradiation.
 
 
With regard to potential adverse effects of GH in gen-
eral, caution is warranted when extrapolating findings 
from earlier studies to future safety of GH  
[156] 
. Increas-
ing dosages of GH, like spontaneous GH excess, could 
increase the chances for remote metabolic or malignancy 
risks not detected in current analyses. Most patient-years 
available for analysis involve administration of GH doses 
used for hormone replacement for GHD (<0.3 mg/kg/
week), whereas the expanding cohort of non-GHD pa-
tients includes those receiving pharmacological doses of 
GH (e.g., 0.375 mg/kg/week for ISS  
[140] 
 and 0.7 mg/kg/
week for “pubertal dosing”  
[85] 
). Change in recipient 
characteristics due to ethnic demographics and rising 
childhood obesity rates could increase risk for type 2 DM 
precipitated by GH. Moreover, drug adverse events can 
occur remotely after the drug has been discontinued, but 
only adverse events occurring during GH therapy have 
been tracked in postmarketing surveillance studies; de-
tection of subsequent adverse effects depends on physi-
cian-initiated reports to monitoring agencies. Since stud-
ies of non-GH-treated populations suggest that high-nor-
mal levels of free IGF-I (often seen in GH-treated children) 
may increase rates of breast and prostate cancers, a poten-
tial relationship between GH exposure and future risk for 
neoplasia requires continued vigilance. Finally, the ap-
propriate level of risk to be tolerated for the newest and 
potentially largest GH-treated group in the future – es-
sentially healthy, but short children – remains to be de-
fined  
[157] 
.
 
5. Transitional Care after Childhood GH Treatment  
 
Adults with childhood-onset GHD can have altera-
tions in body composition, bone mineral density, and lip-
id metabolism that are mitigated by GH treatment  
[20] 
. 
Yet a number of children with a diagnosis of GHD have 
a normal somatotropic axis upon retesting in late adoles-
cence  
[112, 158–160] 
. Therefore, re-evaluation of the so-
matotropic axis in children diagnosed with GHD is re-
quired during the so-called transition period. The transi-
tion period is the time from late puberty to establishment 
of adult muscle and bone composition, and encompasses 
attainment of AH. As attainment of adult or near-AH is 
an easily measurable variable, re-evaluation of the so-
matotropic axis is most conveniently performed when 
growth has slowed to the point when pediatric GH dosing 
will be discontinued, as detailed above.
 
5.1. We recommend that patients with multiple ( 
≥ 
3) 
pituitary hormone deficiencies regardless of etiology, or 
GHD with a documented causal genetic mutation or spe-
cific pituitary/ hypothalamic structural defect except ec-
topic posterior pituitary, be diagnosed with persistent 
GHD. (Strong recommendation, ⚫⚫⚫⚪)
 
Individuals with MPHD, defined as three or more pi-
tuitary hormone deficiencies, develop metabolic altera-
tions associated with adult GHD  
[161, 162] and meet 
adult criteria for GHD upon GH provocative testing in 
the transition period  
[160, 163–165] 
. Individuals with 
MPHD also have persistent GHD if provocative testing is 
repeated later in adulthood  
[166–168] 
. GHD is persistent 
in these individuals whether the MPHD is due to known 
underlying causes (organic) or idiopathic. In persons 
with two pituitary hormone deficiencies on a nonorganic 
basis, they may or may not test as possessing persistent 
GHD on provocative testing; thus, provocative testing is 
advised (see below). Adolescents with IGHD and struc-
tural pituitary defects such as absence of the pituitary 
stalk meet criteria for adult GHD  
[164, 169, 170] when 
tested. Persons with small pituitary glands at diagnosis 
have a high rate of testing normal when retested after 
completion of growth  
[164, 171] 
; thus, a small pituitary is 
not considered a structural defect. The risk of persistent 
GHD in individuals with ectopic posterior pituitary var-
ies according to their pituitary structure, as discussed in 
section 5.2.
 
Adolescents with MPHD or a structural defect (except 
ectopic posterior pituitary, see discussion below) have a 
nearly 100% fail rate on GH provocative testing  
[160, 
163–165, 172] 
. Hence, an IGF-I measurement off GH 
therapy in these persons is not necessary. Although an 
IGF-I level may be obtained off GH treatment to confirm 
the diagnosis of persistent GHD to the patient, the pa-
tient’
s family, or a third-party payer, a significant number 
of persons with MPHD can have an IGF-I concentration 
in the normal range  
[167] 
. Thus, the results of IGF-I test-
ing must be interpreted carefully.
 
 
5.2. We recommend re-evaluation of the somatotrop-
ic axis for persistent GHD in persons with GHD and de-
ficiency of only one additional pituitary hormone, idio-
pathic IGHD, IGHD with or without a small pituitary/
  
Grimberg 
  et al.
 
Horm Res Paediatr 2016;86:361–397
DOI: 10.1159/000452150
380
ectopic posterior pituitary, and in patients after irradia-
tion. (Strong recommendation, ⚫⚫⚫⚪)
 
Technical Remark: Testing can be performed after a 
trial of at least 1 month off GH treatment.
 
 
Individuals with GHD and deficiency of only one ad-
ditional pituitary hormone may or may not have persis-
tent GHD upon testing  
[164, 167, 173, 174] 
. Individuals 
with an ectopic posterior pituitary gland associated with 
pituitary stalk agenesis have persistent GHD  
[164] while 
those with a normal pituitary stalk tend to have normal 
GH levels upon provocative testing in the transition pe-
riod  
[171] 
. However, in a small study, when individuals 
with an ectopic posterior pituitary gland and normal GH 
provocative testing on initial re-evaluation were retested 
2 years later, GH provocative testing indicated GH peak 
<5 μg/L and worsening lipid function compared to con-
trols  
[175] 
. This suggests a need for more studies to de-
termine the frequency and best practices for the re-assess-
ment of these patients over time. In the absence of data, 
it is prudent to follow persons with ectopic posterior pi-
tuitary who tested GH sufficient, and consider testing of 
the somatotropic axis more than once in the transition 
period. 
 
The development of GHD after radiation treatment is 
dose and time dependent  
[176, 177] 
. A large percentage 
of adolescents with radiation-induced GHD diagnosed 
and treated in childhood do not meet criteria for adult 
GHD on retesting  
[178] 
. Those who re-tested as having 
persistent GHD had received the highest radiation dose 
or passed the longest duration since radiation treatment. 
Considering the evolution of radiation-induced GHD, 
individuals who initially re-test GH-sufficient should be 
monitored over time, similar to persons with ectopic pos-
terior pituitary.
 
 
5.2.1. We suggest that measurement of the serum IGF-
I concentration be the initial test of the somatotropic axis 
if re-evaluation of the somatotropic axis is clinically indi-
cated. (Conditional recommendation, ⚫⚪⚪⚪)
 
 
Individuals with idiopathic IGHD and serum IGF-I 
greater than 0 SD for age are highly likely to have normal 
GH provocative testing. Thus, provocative testing ap-
pears unnecessary in these individuals. The remaining in-
dividuals should undergo GH provocative testing.
 
 
Individuals diagnosed with idiopathic IGHD have a 
high likelihood of retesting sufficient on GH provocative 
testing  
[112, 159, 160, 166] 
. In many series, individuals 
with idiopathic IGHD and an IGF-I concentration >0 SD 
do not meet criteria for adult GHD on re-testing  
[159, 
160, 172, 179, 180] 
. Many adolescents with an IGF-I level 
greater than 0 SD will have normal results on provocative 
testing, but the absolute IGF-I cutoff value below which 
children re-test as having persistent GHD varies between 
studies and, thus, is not clear  
[159, 160, 169, 172, 179, 
180] 
. Individuals with idiopathic IGHD who re-test suf-
ficient on provocative testing have normal metabolic 
functioning upon follow-up  
[181, 182] 
.
 
Individuals with MPHD who subsequently test as hav-
ing persistent GHD on provocative testing can have IGF-
I levels in the normal range  
[159, 160, 169, 172, 179, 180] 
; 
thus, a normal IGF-I level does not preclude the need for 
provocative GH testing. The metabolic status later in life 
of individuals with discordant IGF-I and GH provocative 
testing results is not clear. In these cases, the clinical sce-
nario is often used to consider the diagnosis of persistent 
GHD. Observation and repeat testing may be necessary 
in these individuals.
 
IGFBP-3 is often used to assist in the diagnosis of GHD 
in children. One study of 55 US children found that an 
IGBP-3 level less than –2 SD conferred a specificity of 
100% and sensitivity of 35% in the diagnosis of persistent 
GHD in the transition period  
[160] 
. However, no other 
study investigated the diagnostic performance of IGFBP-3 
testing in the transition period, and IGFBP-3 testing is 
not routinely used in the diagnosis of GHD in adults. For 
these reasons, recommendations for IGFBP-3 testing in 
the transition period are not provided.
 
5.2.2. We recommend GH provocative testing to eval-
uate the function of the somatotropic axis in the transi-
tion period if indicated by a low IGF-I level. (Strong rec-
ommendation, ⚫⚫⚫⚪)
 
The insulin tolerance test (ITT) has been validated for 
the diagnosis of adult GHD  
[20, 168] and persistent GHD 
in the transition period  
[165, 172, 179] 
. During an ITT, a 
GH cutoff of 5.6 μg/L using an immunometric assay had 
the highest diagnostic accuracy for predicting persistent 
GHD  
[179] with a sensitivity of 77%, specificity of 93%, 
and correct classification of 87% of patients. This is simi-
lar to the cutoff of 5.1 μg/L found to be most accurate in 
adults (96% sensitivity and 92% specificity)  
[168] 
. The di-
agnostic threshold with the optimal sensitivity and speci-
ficity upon GH-releasing hormone (GHRH)-arginine 
testing in the transition period varied between studies 
 
[165, 180] 
 and was higher than in adults  
[168] 
. GHRH-
arginine test results may be falsely normal in individuals 
with hypothalamic dysfunction.
 
 
Although the ITT has been validated for diagnosis of 
persistent GHD in the transition period, it is contraindi-
cated in some individuals and is not practical in many 
endocrine practices due to the risks of symptomatic hy-
poglycemia. Additionally, GHRH is currently unavailable 
  
PES GH/IGF-I Guidelines 
Horm Res Paediatr 2016;86:361–397
DOI: 10.1159/000452150
381
in the USA, so alternative testing methods are desired. 
Arginine- 
L 
-dopa testing has not been systematically test-
ed in the transition population and in adults poorly pre-
dicts GHD  
[168] 
. Glucagon stimulation testing is a prom-
ising alternative for provocative testing in adults  
[183, 
184] 
, but has not been specifically tested in the transition 
period.
 
5.3. We suggest that GH treatment be offered to indi-
viduals with persistent GHD in the transition period. 
There is evidence of benefit; however, the specifics of the 
patient population that benefits, the optimal time to re-
initiate treatment, and the optimal dose are not clear. 
(Conditional recommendation, ⚫⚫⚪⚪)
 
Technical Remark: The transition period is the time 
from late puberty to establishment of adult muscle and 
bone composition, and encompasses attainment of AH. 
 
 
Young adults with childhood-onset GHD have lower 
bone mineral density, lower lean mass, and may have a 
more unfavorable cholesterol profile with lower HDL and 
higher LDL than individuals with adult-onset GHD  
[161, 
162, 174, 185–187] 
. Three RCTs in young adults with per-
sistent GHD indicated that 2 years of GH treatment in-
creased bone mineral density, normalized IGF-I levels, 
and improved lipid profiles from baseline  
[188–191] 
. Par-
ticipants who did not receive GH treatment had a decline 
in bone mineral density, persistently abnormal serum 
IGF-I concentrations, and more unfavorable lipid pro-
files than at baseline. The majority of patients in these 
studies had MPHD, the duration off GH was 1–6 years, 
and the average age at re-initiation of GH treatment was 
18–23 years with a range of 15–35 years. A fourth RCT 
did not demonstrate, after 2 years of GH treatment, a dif-
ference in bone mineral density or lipids from baseline, 
compared to nontreated GHD patients or compared to 
normal controls  
[181] 
. A large proportion of participants 
in this study had IGHD and the average age at transition 
was 16 years. Additionally, the duration off pediatric dos-
es of GH was 1 month per study design. The variability in 
the effect of GHD and GH treatment among these studies 
suggests that GH efficacy in the persistent GHD popula-
tion is dependent on age, duration off GH, and etiology. 
These factors must be taken into account in discussing 
with adolescents the benefits of GH replacement in the 
transition period.
 
The optimal GH dose during the transition period is 
not clear. The RCTs used GH doses that varied from 12.5 
to 25 μg/kg/day (weight-based) to 200 μg/day (fixed dos-
ing). The physiological decline in GH secretion and IGF-
I levels with age in adults is well described  
[192, 193] 
. 
Thus, young adults may need higher GH doses than old-
er adults for the same metabolic effects. The optimal dose 
to achieve the desired metabolic effects in young adults is 
not established. The Endocrine Society Guidelines for 
Evaluation and Treatment of Adult Growth Hormone 
Deficiency suggest that patients <30 years of age may ben-
efit from initial doses of 400–500 μg daily (as opposed to 
the initial doses of 200–300 μg daily for patients aged 30–
60 years), and those transitioning from pediatric to adult 
replacement may need even higher doses. Females receiv-
ing oral estrogen (but not transdermal) may need higher 
doses than other patients. Doses subsequently should be 
titrated to normalize the serum IGF-I concentration for 
age and gender  
[20] 
. This is a reasonable approach con-
sidering the variability of dosing patterns used in the 
RCTs. 
 
6. GH Treatment of Patients with ISS 
 
6.1. In the USA, for children who meet FDA criteria, 
we suggest a shared decision-making approach to pursu-
ing GH treatment for a child with ISS. The decision can 
be made on a case-by-case basis after assessment of phys-
ical and psychological burdens, and discussion of risks 
and benefits. We recommend against the routine use of 
GH in every child with HtSDS less than –2.25. (Condi-
tional recommendation, ⚫⚫⚫⚪)
 
Technical Remark: While studies have shown GH 
treatment increases the mean height of treated cohorts, 
there is marked interindividual variability in responses 
including some individuals who do not respond to treat-
ment.
 
6.2. We suggest a follow-up assessment of benefit in 
HtSDS and psychosocial impact 12 months after GH ini-
tiation and dose optimization. (Conditional recommen-
dation, ⚫⚫⚪⚪)
 
 
GH increases AH in some children with ISS, defined 
by the FDA as stated above in the introduction. As out-
lined by the ICPED, ISS is heterogeneous and includes 
familial ISS and nonfamilial ISS, both with and without 
pubertal delay  
[4] 
. Genetic disorders, including genetic 
mutations affecting the growth plate such as SHOX and 
NPR2 defects, must be excluded; it is important to assess 
body proportions in all children with short stature to di-
agnose conditions that result in disproportionate short 
stature  
[194, 195] 
. The prediction of an individual’
s spon-
taneous AH involves the utilization of information about 
parents’
 heights, bone age, and growth in untreated co-
horts to determine the assumed height target. Patients 
with ISS and their families should be counseled about het-
erogeneity in response to GH; i.e., while on average there 
will be an approximately 5-cm (2-inch) increase in AH 
  
Grimberg 
  et al.
 
Horm Res Paediatr 2016;86:361–397
DOI: 10.1159/000452150
382
with approximately 5 years of GH treatment, individual 
responses are highly variable, including no measurable 
increase in HtSDS in some patients.
 
 
There are 3 RCTs with GH treatment to AH  
[196–
198] 
; only 1 had a placebo control arm  
[197] 
. These stud-
ies differed on criteria for diagnosis of GHD versus ISS 
(i.e., cutoff value on GH provocative testing), whether 
children with a history of SGA were included, GH dose 
used (0.22–0.47 mg/kg/week), frequency of injections 
(3–7 per week), and mean duration of treatment (4.6–6.2 
years). Combining the 3 RCTs and not excluding SGA, 
237 subjects were studied (152 treated and 85 controls), 
146 of whom were treated per protocol until near AH or 
AH (100 treated and 46 controls). One trial ( 
n 
 = 18) stud-
ied only females  
[196] 
. A systematic review by Deodati 
and Cianfarani  
[199] 
 reported that the mean height gain 
of GH-treated children in these 3 RCTs exceeded that of 
control children by 0.79 SDS (95% CI 0.50–1.09,  
p < 
0.001), or 4.7 cm (1.85 inch). In the largest RCT  
[196–
198] 
, the mean HtSDS attained for non-SGA ISS subjects 
treated per protocol ( 
n = 68) with GH 67 μg/kg/day (0.47 
mg/kg/week) or 33 μg/kg/day (0.23 mg/kg/week) was 
–1.5 and –1.7, respectively, versus –2.2 for controls, with 
mean gain in HtSDS of 1.3 and 1.2, respectively, versus 
0.4. Thus, mean improvement over controls was about
5 cm ( 
∼ 
2 inches). Many patients in all 3 groups achieved 
AH still below –2 SD, and there was only 1 patient with 
an AH above average (in the higher dose group). How-
ever, there was significant variability in responses be-
tween individuals, with subsets of patients responding to 
GH therapy much better or worse than others. Specifi-
cally, taller parents, greater delay in bone age, and taller 
predicted height at enrollment were associated with a 
greater increase in HtSDS (see below). None of the studies 
correlated growth velocity to AH, which would allow 
some prediction of achievable AH using growth velocity 
response.
 
 
There are several other studies to AH that used his-
torical or no controls, many of which relied on the out-
come of AH relative to predicted AH, which may overes-
timate improvement. A meta-analysis by Finkelstein et al. 
 
[200] of 10 controlled trials and 28 uncontrolled trials, 
only 4 to AH, suggested an average gain in AH from GH 
therapy of approximately 4–6 cm (range 2.3–8.7 cm), 
with an average of about 1 cm per year of treatment. A 
study by Sotos and Tokar  
[201] reported a gain in HtSDS 
of +1.9 (±0.76) in GH-treated (0.32 ± 0.03 mg/kg/week) 
children with ISS versus +0.49 SDS (0.18–0.8 SDS) in un-
treated children with ISS for a net gain of 1.41 SDS. The 
limitation of this study is that it was a retrospective study, 
not an RCT. Additionally, the data for the untreated con-
trol group were historical data from 9 different published 
studies. 
 
Patients and their parents/guardians should be coun-
seled that not starting GH therapy at all is an option. 
Since not all children with ISS will respond to GH ther-
apy, HtSDS improvement after 12 months of therapy 
should be assessed, and the discontinuation of GH ther-
apy should be considered if adequate height gain has not 
been achieved. Models utilizing the first year change in 
growth rate may assist in predicting longer term re-
sponse  
[202, 203] 
. Additionally, patients should be 
monitored for changes in psychological functioning and 
quality of life; better clinical tools for these outcomes 
need to be developed and validated for this patient pop-
ulation. 
 
6.3. Because there is overlap in response between dos-
ing groups, we suggest initiating GH at a dose of 0.24 mg/
kg/week, with some patients requiring up to 0.47 mg/kg/
week. (Conditional recommendation, ⚫⚫⚪⚪)
 
The approved GH doses are based on the doses used 
in the studies and may not be optimal for the diagnosis of 
ISS in general or for individual patients. There is consid-
erable interpatient variability in growth responses with-
out a clear dose-response relationship between change in 
HtSDS and dose of GH administered to patients with ISS, 
so the lowest dose of GH with demonstrated efficacy 
should be used. Because partial or lesser degrees of GHD 
and ISS may have similar presentations and laboratory 
findings, it is reasonable to initiate treatment using the 
upper range of GHD dosing and then titrate upward as 
necessary. There are no data to support weight-based 
dosing >0.47 mg/kg/week and, given the unresolved long-
term risks of treatment, there should be caution in using 
higher doses. GH therapy should be discontinued in pa-
tients who do not respond.
 
 
Only one study of dose effect, that of Albertsson-Wik-
land et al.  
[198] 
, included an untreated control group (see 
section 3.1.1). In the study’
s ISS per protocol subjects, the 
difference in gain in HtSDS between 0.23 and 0.47 mg/kg/
week (33 and 67 μg/kg/day) was nonsignificant, and was 
borderline significant ( 
p 
 = 0.056) in the combined ISS and 
SGA group. Wit et al.  
[204] compared growth responses 
in 239 children, only 50 to AH. There were no untreated 
controls, and the subjects received 0.24 mg/kg/week, 0.24 
for the first year then 0.37 mg/kg/week thereafter, or 0.37 
mg/kg/week with a mean change in HtSDS from baseline 
of 1.55 ± 0.14, 1.52 ± 0.27, and 1.85 ± 0.2, respectively 
(statistical testing not performed between groups), sug-
gesting that increasing the dose by 50% may not add sig-
  
PES GH/IGF-I Guidelines 
Horm Res Paediatr 2016;86:361–397
DOI: 10.1159/000452150
383
nificant benefit in the majority of patients. A study of 15 
subjects with ISS and no untreated controls found no dif-
ference in AH using 0.5 or 1 U/kg/week, roughly equiva-
lent to 0.17 or 0.33 mg/kg/week  
[205] 
. No data exist to 
support advantages of weight-based dosing at >0.47 mg/
kg/week in children with ISS. Short-term data suggest 
that targeting GH dosing to IGF-I levels may improve the 
growth response  
[91, 92, 206, 206] 
, but there are no data 
to AH.
 
 
Predictors of response to GH have not been validated 
in controlled studies. There is likely a continuum of re-
sponsiveness to GH. Based on modeling from the KIGS 
database by Ranke et al.  
[111, 202] 
, determinants may in-
clude height deficit relative to genetics (HtSDS – MPH 
SDS) and earlier age at treatment start (<10 years in boys 
and <9 years in girls). Total gain in height seems to cor-
relate with first-year responsiveness, while bone age delay 
may  
[198] or may not be predictive  
[111, 202] 
. Alberts-
son-Wikland et al.  
[207] 
 also found on re-analysis that 
height difference with respect to parents, as well as HtSDS 
and IGF-I SDS at baseline, explained some of the variance 
of the responses in their study. In a further analysis of 
these data, Kristrom et al. 
 [208] 
 determined that the 
change in IGF-I SDS from baseline to mean study level 
was the most important determinant in the long-term 
growth response; the lower the IGF-I SDS at baseline, the 
higher was the on-treatment increment in IGF-I SDS. 
While higher GH doses were associated with greater 
change in IGF-I SDS, there was considerable overlap in 
responses between dosing groups, suggesting that not all 
patients require higher doses of GH to achieve a good re-
sponse.
 
 
Defining an adequate growth response is challenging. 
The actual increase in annualized growth velocity that re-
sults in a gain in height relative to age and gender is de-
pendent on age; younger prepubertal and pubertal chil-
dren grow faster than older prepubertal children. Like-
wise, the equivalent height in centimeters corresponding 
to 1.0 HtSDS increases over time. To date, there is no 
consensus as to what comprises an adequate short-term 
first-year growth response  
[209] 
. At ages 3–8 years, 
healthy children may have a normal increase in HtSDS of 
<0.3  
[210] 
. Many studies use an increase in HtSDS of 
greater than 0.3–0.5 over 1 year. These values were also 
suggested in a consensus statement from the Growth 
Hormone Research Society, PES, and the European Soci-
ety for Pediatric Endocrinology (ESPE)  
[211] 
. Addition-
ally, there are published height velocity targets for the first 
year of GH therapy to use as reference  
[203] 
. 
 
7. IGF-I Treatment of Patients with PIGFD 
 
7.1. We recommend the use of IGF-I therapy to in-
crease height in patients with severe PIGFD. (Strong rec-
ommendation, ⚫⚫⚫⚫)
 
Laron syndrome/GHIS, caused by mutations in the 
GHR gene, is the most common and prototypical condi-
tion within the PIGFD category. Untreated patients with 
Laron syndrome have heights –4 to –10 SD during child-
hood that persist into adulthood, with AHs of 106–142 
cm in males and 95–136 cm in females  
[212–215] 
. Treat-
ment with IGF-I for a mean duration of 10 years to adult 
or near-AH (defined as bone age at least 16 years for 
males and 14 for females) was reported in 21 patients with 
PIGFD (6 with GHR mutations, 10 with clinically sus-
pected Laron syndrome/GHIS, and 5 with GH gene dele-
tion type 1A and anti-GH antibodies)  
[216] 
. Mean growth 
velocity increased from 3.1 cm/year pretreatment to 7.4 
cm/year in year 1, 5.6 cm/year in year 2, and a range of 
3.9–5 cm/year in years 3–12 of treatment. HtSDS com-
pared to pretreatment values increased by a mean of +1.9 
SD, and (near) AH achieved was a mean of 13.4 cm more 
than expected from their untreated trajectory on the Lar-
on syndrome growth charts  
[216] 
. Although only 3 pa-
tients in this study reached a normal AH (greater than –2 
SD), the severe phenotype of untreated adults, the sig-
nificant increase in (near-) AH reported, the unanimous 
growth velocity acceleration compared to pretreatment 
values in multiple short-term studies, and the lack of an 
alternative treatment make IGF-I a strongly recommend-
ed treatment for growth failure in patients with PIGFD as 
diagnosed below.
 
7.2. Given the absence of a single “best” test that pre-
dicts responsiveness to GH treatment, we suggest basing 
the diagnosis of PIGFD/GH insensitivity syndrome 
(GHIS) on a combination of factors that fall into 4 stages: 
(Conditional recommendation,  
⚫⚫⚫⚪ 
 
)
 
1 Screening: auxological parameters and low IGF-I con-
centration
 
2 Causes of secondary IGF-I deficiency must be exclud-
ed, including under-nutrition, hepatic disease, and 
GHD
 
3 Circulating levels of GHBP: very low or undetectable 
levels suggest Laron syndrome/GHIS while normal 
levels are noninformative
 
4 IGF-I generation test and mutation analyses can be 
helpful, but have limitations
 
Diagnosing PIGFD/GHIS has important therapeutic 
implications; these patients are expected to require IGF-I 
treatment because their underlying defect would make 
them unresponsive to GH therapy. Unfortunately, a gold 
  
Grimberg 
  et al.
 
Horm Res Paediatr 2016;86:361–397
DOI: 10.1159/000452150
384
standard test that predicts responsiveness to GH treat-
ment is still lacking. Thus, we recommend basing the di-
agnosis of PIGFD/GHIS on a combination of factors that 
fall into 4 stages.
 
The first two stages investigate whether a patient with 
short stature could potentially fall into the PIGFD/GHIS 
category. Patients with PIGFD/GHIS exhibit postnatal 
linear growth failure, and depending on type of PIGFD, 
can have prenatal growth failure as well (IGF-I gene de-
fects, IGFALS deficiency, and some patients with Laron 
syndrome/GHIS). Additional characteristic features, 
such as microcephaly, protruding forehead, saddle nose, 
small chin, and high-pitched voice, may raise clinical sus-
picion  
[212, 217] 
. Serum IGF-I concentrations must be 
abnormally low for age and gender. Causes of secondary 
IGF-I deficiency must be excluded. These include GHD 
(via GH provocative tests, as discussed above), undernu-
trition (via weight for length or BMI curves; a 3-day diet 
analysis may also be helpful), and hepatic disease (via his-
tory, physical examination, and liver function tests). Of 
note, subtle undernutrition, consisting of caloric restric-
tion or reduced protein intake, may suffice to lower IGF-
I production. Thus, if suspected, repeat measurement of 
serum IGF-I concentration following a period of nutri-
tional intervention is a worthwhile diagnostic exercise.
 
The third stage involves measurement of circulating 
levels of GHBP because very low or undetectable levels 
suggest Laron syndrome/GHIS, the most common and 
prototypical condition within the severe PIGFD/GHIS 
category. GHBP is created by proteolytic cleavage of the 
extracellular GH-binding domain of the GHR, so that pa-
tients lacking GHBP also lack the extracellular domain of 
the GHR, without which they cannot respond to GH 
treatment. However, patients with Laron syndrome may 
occasionally have normal or high levels of GHBP should 
their GHR gene mutation occur in the exons that encode 
either the transmembrane or cytoplasmic domain  
[212, 
218, 219] 
. Thus, normal GHBP levels are insufficient to 
exclude the diagnosis of Laron syndrome or postreceptor 
defects. 
 
GHBP measurement has other diagnostic limitations. 
Testing the 14 subjects enrolled in NCGS with the diag-
nosis of ISS and low (less than –2 SD) levels of GHBP 
identified GHR mutations in only 4  
[220] 
. GHBP levels 
were not predictive of responses to GH treatment among 
patients undergoing short stature evaluations who did 
not have overt Laron syndrome  
[221] 
.
 
 
The fourth stage consists of tests to confirm the diag-
nosis of PIGFD/GHIS. Relative concentrations of IGF-I, 
IGFBP-3, and acid labile subunit may provide clues as to 
the location of the defect along the somatotropic axis. The 
rationale behind an IGF-I generation test seems straight-
forward; measuring the IGF-I (and, in some cases, 
IGFBP-3) rise upon a brief course (<10 days) of GH injec-
tions can categorize patients into those who produce an 
adequate IGF-I response to GH and those who do not, 
and thereby predict which patients would be expected to 
respond clinically or not to GH treatment. Unfortunately, 
multiple protocols have been proposed for the IGF-I gen-
eration test, including incorporating it into a greater clin-
ical scoring system  
[222, 223] 
, but a standard protocol 
with IGF-I cutoff levels that have high sensitivity and 
specificity has not been established. Protocols and cutoff 
points determined using IGF-I measured by radioimmu-
noassay  
[111, 202] may not be currently valid, as IGF-I 
assays currently available clinically (double-antibody as-
says and mass spectrometry) have different reference 
ranges. Additionally, discordant results were obtained 
when the test was repeated in the same subjects using the 
same laboratory  
[224] 
. A randomized, cross-over design 
compared IGF-I generation tests using two different GH 
doses (7 days each) with IGF-I measurements on days 5 
and 8 of GH administration in 198 subjects who had ei-
ther normal growth, Laron syndrome homozygous for 
the same GHR mutation, the heterozygous relatives of 
Laron subjects, or children with GHD or ISS  
[225] 
. IGF-I 
and IGFBP-3 measurements significantly correlated from 
one test to the other while the rise in IGF-I or IGFBP-3 
correlated between the low- and high-dose GH for all 
subjects except the ISS group  
[225] 
. Both basal and stim-
ulated IGF-I levels overlapped between subjects with 
GHD and Laron syndrome, with 6/23 subjects with GHD 
failing to adequately increase IGF-I and 5/22 subjects 
with Laron syndrome exceeding the threshold rise in 
stimulated IGF-I, thereby limiting the diagnostic value of 
the test  
[226] 
.
 
An alternative to the IGF-I generation test is mutation 
analysis of the genes known to cause PIGFD/GHIS [re-
viewed in  
227–229 
]. Mutation analysis of the GHR gene 
if the GHBP level is very low or undetectable is confirma-
tory for Laron syndrome/GHIS. However, availability of 
genetic testing is currently limited (in the USA), with few 
commercial or research laboratories offering the service 
 
[230] 
. It may become easier to diagnose PIGFD/GHIS 
within the next years as genetic testing is expected to be-
come more available and less costly. Gene-specific testing 
will always be limited to the known causes of PIGFD/
GHIS, while the advent of whole-exome sequencing may 
enable identification of novel genetic causes  
[231] 
. Ge-
netic testing is desirable for individuals for whom diag-
  
PES GH/IGF-I Guidelines 
Horm Res Paediatr 2016;86:361–397
DOI: 10.1159/000452150
385
nostic uncertainty is problematic, in order to better direct 
treatment.
 
7.3. We recommend a trial of GH therapy before initi-
ating IGF-I for patients with unexplained IGF-I deficien-
cy. Patients with hormone signaling defects known to be 
unresponsive to GH treatment can start directly on IGF-
I replacement; these include patients with very low or un-
detectable levels of GHBP and/or proven GHR gene mu-
tations known to be associated with Laron syndrome/
GHIS, GH-neutralizing antibodies,  
STAT5b gene muta-
tions, and  
IGF1 gene deletion or mutation. (Strong rec-
ommendation, ⚫⚫⚪⚪)
 
Patients with hormone signaling defects unresponsive 
to GH treatment may be started on IGF-I as initial thera-
py; at present, these are associated with very low or unde-
tectable levels of GHBP and/or  
GHR mutations known to 
cause Laron syndrome/GHIS,  
GH1  
gene deletion (GHD 
type 1A) with GH-neutralizing antibodies,  
STAT5b gene 
mutations, and  
IGF1  
gene deletion or mutation. Other 
patients diagnosed with PIGFD should start with a thera-
peutic trial of GH, which, if effective (i.e., in patients with 
only partial GH insensitivity  
[232, 233] 
), is preferable to 
IGF-I treatment for 4 reasons. Studies have shown that 
the growth response of patients with GHD to GH treat-
ment exceeds the growth response of patients with PIGFD 
to IGF-I treatment, with first-year treatment growth ve-
locities of 10–12 cm/year versus 8–9 cm/year, respective-
ly  
[217, 234, 235] 
. The difference is hypothesized to result 
from IGF-I-independent actions of GH on the growth 
plate; whereas most of the effects of GH are mediated via 
IGF-I, IGF-I treatment cannot replace the direct actions 
of GH itself  
[235, 236] 
. The second reason involves pa-
tient convenience and adherence to therapy; GH is a 
once-daily subcutaneous injection, while IGF-I (in the 
USA) is administered as twice-daily subcutaneous injec-
tions. Thirdly, hypoglycemia is not a risk with GH thera-
py, as it is with IGF-I treatment  
[237] 
. Lastly, GH increas-
es not only IGF-I levels, but levels of IGFBP-3 as well. This 
may make it more physiological than IGF-I therapy and, 
at least theoretically, may be favorable regarding cancer 
risk  
[238] 
. Patients with Kowarski syndrome have a mu-
tation in the  
GH1 gene causing expression of a bioinactive 
GH; they present with low IGF-I levels, normal or slight-
ly increased GH secretion, and short stature that is re-
sponsive to GH therapy  
[239, 240] 
. Patients with IGFALS 
defects do not respond well to either GH or IGF-I treat-
ment. Despite profoundly low circulating concentrations 
of IGF-I, their growth failure is mild  
[241, 242] 
.
 
7.4. We suggest an IGF-I dose of 80–120 μg/kg b.i.d. 
Similar short-term outcomes were seen with 80 and 120 
μg, but published studies had limitations and there is no 
strong evidence supporting superiority of one dose over 
the other. (Conditional recommendation, ⚫⚫⚪⚪)
 
Technical Remark: Outside of the USA, IGF-I is also 
used at 150–180 μg/kg once daily.
 
Effect of IGF-I dosing on AH outcomes has not been 
studied systematically. A single report of adult or near-
AH (defined as bone age at least 16 years for males and 14 
for females) in 21 patients treated with IGF-I for a mean 
of 10 years (6 with GHR mutations, 10 with clinically sus-
pected Laron syndrome/GHIS, and 5 with  
GH1 
 gene de-
letion and anti-GH antibodies) showed increased growth 
velocity and HtSDS compared to pretreatment values and 
to the AH expected from their untreated trajectory on the 
Laron syndrome growth charts  
[216] 
, as described in sec-
tion 7.1. above. However, this was an open-label, uncon-
trolled study in which doses varied (began at 40 μg/kg 
b.i.d. and increased by 40 μg/kg increments every 2 weeks 
up to 120 μg/kg b.i.d., though some subjects received 40–
80 μg/kg b.i.d. for several months and some received dos-
es as high as 150 μg/kg b.i.d. during some of their puber-
tal years) and were further confounded by the admin-
istration of gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist 
therapy in 9 subjects with normally timed puberty who 
wanted to prolong time for growth.
 
The majority of data on IGF-I dosing effects come 
from comparisons across studies (which were predomi-
nantly uncontrolled) and open-label descriptive studies 
reporting on-treatment growth velocity and HtSDS ver-
sus pretreatment values. Tabulations of data, usually as 
growth velocity by year on treatment by study, can be 
found in several papers  
[217, 237, 243, 244] 
. Doses gener-
ally fell into twice-daily regimens of 40–120 μg/kg/dose 
or once-daily dosing at 150–200 μg/kg. The twice-daily 
dosing regimen developed in response to a pharmacoki-
netic study of IGF-I that found faster IGF-I turnover in 
patients with Laron syndrome than in healthy volunteers 
 
[245] 
. However, the once-daily approach is still followed 
by some, claiming similar growth velocities and fewer 
side effects  
[243, 246] 
.
 
While authors have used comparisons across studies 
to support their preferred dosing regimen, this approach 
is fraught with limitations that preclude determination
of definitive recommendations. Most studies provided 
short-term outcomes only. While some patients embed-
ded within several studies reached AH, the effect of dos-
ing on AH was not studied systematically. Patients were 
heterogeneous across studies, differing in diagnoses and 
age at initiation of treatment, and different preparations 
of IGF-I were used. With PIGFD being such a rare entity, 
  
Grimberg 
  et al.
 
Horm Res Paediatr 2016;86:361–397
DOI: 10.1159/000452150
386
there have been four main study groups (Israel, Ecuador, 
USA, and Europe), and many papers actually represent 
different time points or outcomes of the same subjects 
from other papers, such that some published data are re-
dundant. All studies were open-label. Puberty was a po-
tential confounder in two ways: some patients also re-
ceived gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist therapy, 
and many reached puberty within their respective stud-
ies. Despite this, Tanner staging was not reported even 
though the primary outcome was growth velocity. There 
may also be limitations from publication bias (unpub-
lished results) and in generalizability of results (most sub-
jects studied had Laron syndrome/GHIS, and optimal 
dosing may differ for other forms of PIGFD).
 
As stated in the guiding principles of this document, 
harm prevention was accorded the utmost importance in 
formulating the recommendations. A published trial di-
rectly compared 2- and 3-year outcomes of two common-
ly recommended IGF-I doses given to Ecuadorian pa-
tients homozygous for the same GHR mutation  
[234, 
247] 
. Fourteen received 120 μg/kg b.i.d. while 7 received 
80 μg/kg b.i.d. based on time of entry into the study (2 
started high dose in a randomized, placebo-controlled 
study, but 1 dropped out and another had acromegalic 
changes, so was moved to the lower dose). While the two 
dosing arms produced similar increases in growth veloc-
ity and HtSDS, the higher dose group showed accelerated 
skeletal maturation in the third year, associated with in-
creased percent body fat and adrenal growth  
[247] 
. These 
short-term results suggest that the higher dose not only 
costs more, but may compromise AH gains via acceler-
ated skeletal maturation. The potential for increased side 
effects, albeit from a study with limitations, in the absence 
of hard evidence clearly supporting benefit of high versus 
lower IGF-I doses for increasing AH in patients with 
PIGFD/GHIS led us to conditionally suggest use of the 
lower dose. Well-designed, randomized trials are needed 
to determine the optimal IGF-I dose that best balances 
benefit and risk.
 
7.5. We recommend administration of IGF-I 20 min 
after a carbohydrate-containing meal or snack, and edu-
cation of patients/families on the symptoms and risk of 
hypoglycemia associated with IGF-I treatment. (Strong 
recommendation, ⚫⚫⚫⚫)
 
Hypoglycemia has been reported as a side effect of 
IGF-I treatment in every study and is included in the 
package insert, citing an occurrence rate of 42% of pa-
tients during their course of therapy. Although most epi-
sodes were mild or moderate, severe hypoglycemic reac-
tions including loss of consciousness and seizure also 
have occurred. Thus, an important aspect of patient safe-
ty is the education of patients/families about the symp-
toms, risks, and management of hypoglycemia associated 
with IGF-I treatment. The risk can be mitigated by ad-
ministration of IGF-I 20 min after carbohydrate-contain-
ing meals or snacks, withholding an IGF-I dose if the pa-
tient is not going to eat, and being more vigilant during 
intercurrent illnesses, including home glucometer use. 
While the risk of hypoglycemia has been attributed to the 
insulin-like actions of IGF-I (a notable difference from 
GH treatment, which decreases insulin sensitivity as de-
scribed above in section 4.4), hypoglycemia also has been 
recognized as a common feature of Laron syndrome/
GHIS itself (attributed to the profound loss of GH action) 
 
[212, 248, 249] 
.
 
Other potential side effects of IGF-I treatment are sim-
ilar to those of GH: intracranial hypertension, SCFE, and 
progression of scoliosis. Like GH, IGF-I treatment is con-
traindicated in patients with active malignancy. Addi-
tional potential side effects of IGF-I treatment include 
lymphoid tissue hypertrophy (i.e., enlargement of the 
tonsils and adenoids), hypersensitivity and allergic reac-
tions, and reactions to the benzyl alcohol component of 
the diluent.
 
 
GH Treatment: Balance of Benefit, Risk, and Cost 
 
Children with severe GHD clearly benefit from GH 
treatment, so much so that the benefits markedly out-
weigh any potential harms due to GH treatment. For chil-
dren with ISS who do not have GHD, the benefits of 
achieving taller stature via GH treatment are uncertain 
and of a lesser magnitude than the treatment benefits ex-
perienced by children with GHD. The degree of psycho-
social disability in children with ISS is not clear. Quality 
of life studies regarding the burden of short stature and 
the benefit of treating with GH have had mixed results, 
with some negating the widely held belief that short chil-
dren and adults have lowered self-esteem and quality of 
life than their taller peers  
[250–253] 
 and others showing 
improvement in these parameters with GH therapy and 
taller stature  
[253–255] 
. The topic of psychological out-
comes of GH treatment for short stature is systematically 
reviewed elsewhere  
[256] 
.
 
Accordingly, for ISS treatment decisions where poten-
tial benefits are limited and uncertain, even potential 
harms of small magnitude or low probability become im-
portant considerations, since children with ISS are healthy 
and will continue to be healthy without treatment. Long-
  
PES GH/IGF-I Guidelines 
Horm Res Paediatr 2016;86:361–397
DOI: 10.1159/000452150
387
term risks are unknown, but there are theoretical con-
cerns regarding increased risk of cancer, cerebrovascular 
disease, and metabolic side effects of GH treatment. The 
SAGhE (Safety and Appropriateness of Growth hormone 
treatments in Europe) study showed an increase in over-
all mortality in the French subgroup of GH-treated pa-
tients with ISS, GHD and SGA; however, another sub-
group from the Netherlands, Belgium, and Sweden did 
not demonstrate a difference in mortality in similar pa-
tients  
[136, 137, 155] 
. Further studies are needed to clar-
ify the benefits and long-term risks of GH treatment in 
the ISS population. Potentially, the degree of physical 
and/or psychosocial disability that an individual child 
suffers due to short stature could be used to determine 
which children should receive GH therapy  
[257] 
. Those 
ISS patients with an extremely short AH prediction could 
be considered physically disabled in that it may be diffi-
cult for them to navigate a world built to accommodate 
much taller adults. For these children, even a small in-
crease in AH may be a considerable benefit. For children 
whose height will be closer to the adult normal range, the 
benefit of GH therapy versus the risk and the high cost of 
treatment may be less acceptable.
 
Additionally, the high cost of GH therapy (USD 
35,000–50,000 per inch of height gained)  
[258] 
 is difficult 
to justify for those in whom it is unclear if there are ben-
efits of treatment. In light of these considerations, treat-
ing patients with ISS requires careful evaluation and 
monitoring, with consideration of alternative treatments 
such as psychological counseling  
[211] 
.
 
Growth-Promoting Treatment: Expansion of Use 
 
As a consequence of FDA approval for GH treatment 
for ISS, short children who do not meet the criteria for ISS 
(i.e., children in this “short but not ISS” category) are now 
seeking GH therapy to augment their height. (This cate-
gory excludes short children with non-ISS conditions 
such as Turner syndrome and SHOX haploinsufficiency.) 
Since many insurance companies do not cover GH ther-
apy for this purpose, parents who choose this option have 
to pay out of pocket. While GH therapy may increase 
height in these children by up to several inches, no evi-
dence exists that this additional height significantly im-
proves their quality of life or provides any other benefit. 
Given the absence of any evidence of benefit, there is no 
justification to tolerate even small degrees of potential 
harm due to GH treatment for medical height enhance-
ment. GH treatment poses some possible serious long-
term adverse events that are not acceptable risks in a 
healthy child with normal AH potential. Therefore, re-
gardless of parents’
 ability to pay, GH treatment for height 
augmentation in children who do not fit the criteria of ISS 
should be discouraged  
[259] 
.
 
Severe PIGFD as defined by the FDA and in this state-
ment is a rare disorder. IGF-I treatment is indicated for 
PIGFD with both height and IGF-I levels below –3 SD. 
FDA approval for treatment with IGF-I included those 
children with IGF-I gene deletion or inactivating muta-
tion, GHR gene mutation or postreceptor signal trans-
duction defects, or GH-inactivating antibodies. Low IGF-
I levels are commonly found in GHD, undernutrition, 
chronic glucocorticoid use, hypothyroidism, and chronic 
illness, all of which are conditions that are associated with 
slow growth. Therefore, low IGF-I concentrations and 
slow growth velocity alone are insufficient criteria to 
make the diagnosis of PIGFD. Treatment directed at the 
cause of secondary IGF-I deficiency should be sought, 
rather than IGF-I therapy. While some authors have sug-
gested that many children with ISS have IGF-I deficiency, 
and would be better served if treated with IGF-I rather 
than GH, there are no data to support this hypothesis. In 
fact, treating a GH-sufficient child with IGF-I may sup-
press endogenous GH production, decrease production 
of IGF-I, and reduce delivery of GH to growing bone 
 
[260] 
. 
 
Better diagnostic tests are needed in order to more de-
finitively determine which children have PIGFD and 
would be best served by treating with IGF-I rather than 
GH. For children who do not meet the FDA criteria for 
PIGFD, yet meet indications for GH therapy, an initial 
trial of GH can be used. The safety profile of IGF-I is sim-
ilar to that of GH, but with the addition of hypoglycemia. 
This additional risk should be considered when deciding 
if IGF-I should be used as initial treatment when the di-
agnosis of PIGFD is suspected. 
 
 
Conclusions and Future Directions 
 
Careful review of the existing evidence revealed gaps 
in the knowledge base and areas open for future clinical 
investigation and treatment guideline development. 
Chief among the challenges is assessing the outcome of 
AH. Much of today’
s clinical practice is based on studies 
with short-term outcomes. The lack of tight correlation 
between short-term and long-term outcomes downgrad-
ed the reliability of such studies in accordance with the 
rigorous methodologies used in the creation of this docu-
  
Grimberg 
  et al.
 
Horm Res Paediatr 2016;86:361–397
DOI: 10.1159/000452150
388
ment. At the same time, while AH and other long-term 
outcomes are the benchmarks to be sought, we must ac-
knowledge the logistical and cost challenges in conduct-
ing such long-term studies prospectively and the difficul-
ties in correctly categorizing subjects and treatments in 
such long-term studies retrospectively.
 
 
Beyond duration of follow-up, the current knowledge 
base contains gaps that impede the clear definition and 
hence delivery of what is considered good clinical care. 
First and foremost is the need for improved diagnostics. 
This includes universal adoption of standardized IGF-I 
and GH assays and standards, and modification of cur-
rent and/or development of new functional tests (GH 
provocative and IGF-I generation tests) that better distin-
guish patients into hormonally deficient versus sufficient. 
Genetic testing is expected to expand and offer addition-
al insights, and elucidation of markers for therapeutic re-
sponsiveness may help guide clinical decisions. While 
current MRI technology is useful in identifying gross 
structural lesions, advances in imaging techniques will 
hopefully allow diagnosis of more subtle changes that 
correlate with clinical function.
 
In order to define quality care, complementing the 
need for better diagnostics is the need for better outcome 
metrics. Much of short stature treatment, including that 
aimed at the entire ISS category, is based on the supposi-
tion that taller stature will lead to improved quality of life. 
Designing and validating quality of life measures that ap-
propriately assess this patient population, such as the 
QoLISSY instrument currently under development  
[261, 
262] 
, is only the first step in testing the underlying sup-
position and the effectiveness of treatment modalities. 
More reasoned and uniform therapeutic goals will aid in 
determining the appropriate endpoints for treatment 
clinically  
[263] and increase consistency across future re-
search studies. Long-term safety data, i.e. effects in adults 
who had been treated during childhood, still need to be 
collected, a topic discussed in the position statement on 
GH Safety on behalf of the European Society for Pediatric 
Endocrinology, the GH Research Society, and the PES 
 
[264] 
.
 
Meanwhile, the field is continuing to evolve. Newer 
therapeutics include bioequivalent GH products and a 
combined GH/IGF-I product  
[265] 
. The most sought-af-
ter intervention possibility continues to be an effective 
sustained-release GH preparation that will reduce the re-
quired frequency of injections  
[266, 267] 
. Likewise, some 
studies have suggested potential benefit of treating pa-
tients with GH who have non-FDA-approved indica-
tions, such as Crohn disease, cystic fibrosis, and gluco-
corticoid-dependent patients, and some have advocated 
further expanding the potential patient population by re-
laxing the height criteria for ISS and PIGFD; these topics 
are beyond the scope of this document to review.
 
Finally, in assessing the benefits, risks, and costs of GH 
and IGF-I treatments, both as a whole and for a given pa-
tient, one must take into account the availability of alter-
native therapies  
[268] 
. Growth-augmenting treatment 
options include oxandrolone, testosterone for boys with 
constitutional delay of growth and puberty (an indication 
for which GH is considered inappropriate), and analogs 
of gonadotropin-releasing hormone to delay puberty and 
experimentally with aromatase inhibitors, both aimed at 
delaying epiphyseal fusion. No treatment at all is also a 
very reasonable option, given that short stature per se is 
not a disease, and the relationship between AH and adult 
quality of life is weak and poorly understood. Psycholog-
ical counseling should always be offered for patients suf-
fering due to their stature, either in addition to or instead 
of hormone treatment as appropriate, although the effi-
cacy of counseling for short stature has not been rigor-
ously evaluated.
 
 
In conclusion, given the unanswered questions, the 
nuanced distinctions, and the dynamic status of the field, 
we recommend that only pediatric endocrinologists man-
age the evaluation for GHD-ISS-PIGFD and their treat-
ment. We also recommend further study of the unre-
solved issues highlighted in these guidelines. In the mean-
time, we reiterate the importance of individualized patient 
care; lack of studies of sufficient quality in support of a 
practice is not the same as evidence against the practice, 
and interpatient variability means recommendations 
made at the group level may not be optimal for a particu-
lar individual patient.
 
Acknowledgements 
 
We are grateful to Katie Lobner, medical informationalist at the 
Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, for assisting with appropriate 
search term generation, performing our comprehensive database 
queries, and organizing our library of references. We would like to 
thank the staff at Degnon Associates, in particular Christy Mc-
Ginty Levine, Jessica Padilla, Katie Moore, and Janice Wilkins, for 
their logistical support in organizing our conference calls, task 
force meeting, annual COI documentation, and feedback from so-
ciety membership review. We are also grateful to Leona Cuttler 
and Alan Rogol for their helpful input at the conception of this 
project, and to the membership of the Drug and Therapeutics 
Committee (Elka Jacobson-Dickman, Steve Willi, Katie Barger, 
Preneet Brar, Phillippe F. Backeljauw, Rubina Heptulla, Bradley 
Miller, Deborah Mitchell, Kathleen Moltz, Diana Stanescu, Naveen 
  
PES GH/IGF-I Guidelines 
Horm Res Paediatr 2016;86:361–397
DOI: 10.1159/000452150
389
Uli, Swati Banerjee, Mark DeBoer, Patricia Fechner, Sripriya Ra-
man, and Maria G. Vogiatzi), Ethics Committee (Radha Nandago-
pal, Jill Brodsky, Ayanna Butler-Cephas, Kavitha Dileepan, George 
Ford, Robert P. Hoffman, Dorit Koren, Natalie Nokoff, Dorothy 
Shulman, Daniel Shumer, Kankadurga Singer, and Craig Alter) 
and Board of Directors (Craig Alter, Bruce Boston, John S. Fuqua, 
Mitchell E. Geffner, Sally Radovick, Stephen Rosenthal, Karen Ru-
bin, and Dorothy Shulman) of the PES for their careful review and 
feedback on the manuscript. We would also like to thank the gen-
eral membership of the PES who further reviewed the document 
prior to submission for publication. Most of all, we are grateful to 
the countless patients and their families who volunteered to par-
ticipate in, the many investigators who contributed their skills and 
effort to, and the government, foundation, institutional, and phar-
maceutical sponsors who funded the decades of research on the 
diagnosis and treatment of children and adolescents with growth 
disorders; without them, these guidelines and our entire knowl-
edge base would not have been possible. We invite and thank those 
who follow in their footsteps as we continue to work towards im-
proving the care of children and adolescents with growth disor-
ders.
 
Disclosure Statement 
 
Adda Grimberg: received an honorarium from Scherer Clinical 
Communications for a lecture in a course that was supported by a 
grant from Novo Nordisk; joined the Steering Committee of the 
Pfizer International Growth Study (KIGS) Database after the 
Guidelines had been written and submitted for review by the re-
spective PES committees and board. 
 Sara A. DiVall: received an 
honorarium from Scherer Clinical Communications for a lecture 
in a course that was supported by a grant from Novo Nordisk. 
 Con-
stantin Polychronakos: receiving competitive, peer-reviewed re-
search support (LRAP program) from Eli Lilly. 
 David B. Allen: no 
financial or other potential conflicts of interest to report. 
 Laurie E. 
Cohen: received an honorarium from Scherer Clinical Communi-
cations for a lecture in a course that was supported by a grant from 
Novo Nordisk. 
 Jose Bernardo Quintos: no financial or other poten-
tial conflicts of interest to report. 
 Wilma Rossi: 
 no financial or oth-
er potential conflicts of interest to report. 
 Chris Feudtner: no finan-
cial or other potential conflicts of interest to report. 
 M. Hassan 
Murad: 
 no financial or other potential conflicts of interest to re-
port.
 
 
References 
 
 1 Wilson TA, Rose SR, Cohen P, Rogol AD, 
Backeljauw P, Brown R, Hardin DS, Kemp SF, 
Lawson M, Radovick S, Rosenthal SM, Silver-
man L, Speiser P: Update of guidelines for the 
use of growth hormone in children: The Law-
son Wilkins Pediatric Endocrinology Society 
Drug and Therapeutics Committee. J Pediatr 
2003; 
  
143: 
  
415–421. 
 2 GRADE Working Group: Grading quality of 
evidence and strength of recommendations. 
BMJ DOI: 10.1136/bmj.328.7454.1490. 
 3 National Center for Health Statistics: Centers 
for Disease Control Growth Charts for Chil-
dren Aged 2 and Older in the United States. 
2010. http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts. 
 4 International Classification of Pediatric En-
docrine Diagnoses Consortium: Internation-
al Classification of Pediatric Endocrine Diag-
noses. 2016. http://www.icped.org. 
 5 Guyatt GH, Schunemann HJ, Djulbegovic B, 
Akl EA: Guideline panels should not GRADE 
good practice statements. J Clin Epidemiol 
2014; 
  
68: 
  
597–600. 
 6 Topor LS, Feldman HA, Bauchner H, Cohen 
LE: Variation in methods of predicting adult 
height for children with idiopathic short stat-
ure. Pediatrics 2010; 
  
126: 
  
938–944. 
 7 Wit JM, Ranke MB, Albertsson-Wikland K, 
Carrascosa A, Rosenfeld RG, Van Buuren S, 
Kristrom B, Schoenau E, Audi L, Hokken-
Koelega AC, Bang P, Jung H, Blum WF, Sil-
verman LA, Cohen P, Cianfarani S, Deal C, 
Clayton PE, de Graaff L, Dahlgren J, Kleintjens 
J, Roelants M: Personalized approach to 
growth hormone treatment: clinical use of 
growth prediction models. Horm Res Paedi-
atr 2013; 
  
79: 
  
257–270. 
 8 Root AW, Dana K, Lippe B: Treatment of 
growth hormone-deficient infants with re-
combinant human growth hormone to near-
adult height: patterns of growth. Horm Res 
Paediatr 2011; 
  
75: 
  
276–283. 
 9 Reiter EO, Price DA, Wilton P, Albertsson-
Wikland K, Ranke MB: Effect of growth hor-
mone (GH) treatment on the near-final height 
of 1,258 patients with idiopathic GH deficien-
cy: analysis of a large international database. J 
Clin Endocrinol Metab 2006; 
  
91: 
  
2047–2054. 
 
10 Cutfield W, Lindberg A, Albertsson Wikland 
K, Chatelain P, Ranke MB, Wilton P: Final 
height in idiopathic growth hormone defi-
ciency: the KIGS experience. KIGS Interna-
tional Board. Acta Paediatr Suppl 1999; 
  
88: 
 
 
72–75. 
 
11 Blethen SL, Baptista J, Kuntze J, Foley T, La-
Franchi S, Johanson A: Adult height in growth 
hormone (GH)-deficient children treated 
with biosynthetic GH. The Genentech 
Growth Study Group. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 1997; 
  
82: 
  
418–420. 
 
12 Carel JC, Ecosse E, Nicolino M, Tauber M, 
Leger J, Cabrol S, Bastie-Sigeac I, Chaussain 
JL, Coste J: Adult height after long term treat-
ment with recombinant growth hormone for 
idiopathic isolated growth hormone deficien-
cy: observational follow up study of the French 
population based registry. BMJ 2002; 
  
325: 
  
70. 
 
13 Brownstein CM, Mertens AC, Mitby PA, 
Stovall M, Qin J, Heller G, Robison LL, Sklar 
CA: Factors that affect final height and change 
in height standard deviation scores in survi-
vors of childhood cancer treated with growth 
hormone: a report from the childhood cancer 
survivor study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2004; 
 
 
89: 
  
4422–4427. 
 
14 Radetti G, Buzi F, Paganini C, Pilotta A, 
Felappi B: Treatment of GH-deficient chil-
dren with two different GH doses: effect on 
final height and cost-benefit implications. Eur 
J Endocrinol 2003; 
  
148: 
  
515–518. 
 
15 Rachmiel M, Rota V, Atenafu E, Daneman D, 
Hamilton J: Final height in children with id-
iopathic growth hormone deficiency treated 
with a fixed dose of recombinant growth hor-
mone. Horm Res 2007; 
  
68: 
  
236–243. 
 
16 Cacciari E, Cicognani A, Pirazzoli P, Zucchini 
S, Salardi S, Balsamo A, Cassio A, Pasini A, 
Carla G, Tassinari D, Gualandi S: Final height 
of patients treated for isolated GH deficiency: 
examination of 83 patients. Eur J Endocrinol 
1997; 
  
137: 
  
53–60. 
 
17 Thomas M, Massa G, Bourguignon JP, Craen 
M, De Schepper J, de Zegher F, Dooms L, Du 
Caju M, Francois I, Heinrichs C, Malvaux P, 
Rooman R, Thiry-Counson G, Vandeweghe 
M, Maes M: Final height in children with id-
iopathic growth hormone deficiency treated 
with recombinant human growth hormone: 
the Belgian experience. Horm Res 2001; 
  
55: 
 
 
88–94. 
 
18 Wit JM, Kamp GA, Rikken B: Spontaneous 
growth and response to growth hormone 
treatment in children with growth hormone 
deficiency and idiopathic short stature. Pedi-
atr Res 1996; 
  
39: 
  
295–302. 
 
19 Carroll PV, Christ ER, Bengtsson BA, Carls-
son L, Christiansen JS, Clemmons D, Hintz R, 
Ho K, Laron Z, Sizonenko P, Sonksen PH, 
Tanaka T, Thorne M: Growth hormone defi-
ciency in adulthood and the effects of growth 
hormone replacement: a review. Growth Hor-
mone Research Society Scientific Committee. 
J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1998; 
  
83: 
  
382–395. 
  
Grimberg 
  et al.
 
Horm Res Paediatr 2016;86:361–397
DOI: 10.1159/000452150
390
 
20 Molitch ME, Clemmons DR, Malozowski S, 
Merriam GR, Vance ML: Evaluation and 
treatment of adult growth hormone deficien-
cy: an Endocrine Society clinical practice 
guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2011; 
  
96: 
 
 
1587–1609. 
 
21 Molitch ME, Clemmons DR, Malozowski S, 
Merriam GR, Shalet SM, Vance ML: Clinical 
practice guideline – evaluation and treatment 
of adult growth hormone deficiency: an endo-
crine society clinical practice guideline. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 2006; 
  
91: 
  
1621–1634. 
 
22 Capalbo D, Mattace Raso G, Esposito A, Di 
Mase R, Barbieri F, Meli R, Bruzzese D, Saler-
no M: Cluster of cardiometabolic risk factors 
in children with GH deficiency: a prospective, 
case-control study. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 
2014; 
  
80: 
  
856–862. 
 
23 Lanes R, Paoli M, Carrillo E, Villaroel O, Pa-
lacios A: Peripheral inflammatory and fibri-
nolytic markers in adolescents with growth 
hormone deficiency: relation to postprandial 
dyslipidemia. J Pediatr 2004; 
  
145: 
  
657–661. 
 
24 Shulman DI, Root AW, Diamond FB, Bercu 
BB, Martinez R, Boucek RJ Jr: Effects of one 
year of recombinant human growth hormone 
(GH) therapy on cardiac mass and function in 
children with classical GH deficiency. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 2003; 
  
88: 
  
4095–4099. 
 
25 Metwalley KA, Farghaly HS, Abd El-Hafeez 
HA: Evaluation of left ventricular mass and 
function, lipid profile, and insulin resistance 
in Egyptian children with growth hormone 
deficiency: a single-center prospective case-
control study. Indian J Endocrinol Metab 
2013; 
  
17: 
  
876–882. 
 
26 Salerno M, Esposito V, Farina V, Radetti G, 
Umbaldo A, Capalbo D, Spinelli L, Muzzica S, 
Lombardi G, Colao A: Improvement of car-
diac performance and cardiovascular risk fac-
tors in children with GH deficiency after two 
years of GH replacement therapy: an observa-
tional, open, prospective, case-control study. 
J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2006; 
  
91: 
  
1288–1295. 
 
27 Salerno M, Esposito V, Spinelli L, Di Somma C, 
Farina V, Muzzica S, de Horatio LT, Lombardi 
G, Colao A: Left ventricular mass and function 
in children with GH deficiency before and dur-
ing 12 months GH replacement therapy. Clin 
Endocrinol (Oxf) 2004; 
  
60: 
  
630–636. 
 
28 Capalbo D, Lo Vecchio A, Farina V, Spinelli 
L, Palladino A, Tiano C, Lettiero T, Lombardi 
G, Colao A, Salerno M: Subtle alterations of 
cardiac performance in children with growth 
hormone deficiency: results of a two-year 
prospective, case-control study. J Clin Endo-
crinol Metab 2009; 
  
94: 
  
3347–3355. 
 
29 Boot AM, Engels MA, Boerma GJ, Krenning 
EP, De Muinck Keizer-Schrama SM: Changes 
in bone mineral density, body composition, 
and lipid metabolism during growth hor-
mone (GH) treatment in children with GH 
deficiency. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1997; 
  
82: 
 
 
2423–2428. 
 
30 Kuromaru R, Kohno H, Ueyama N, Hassan 
HM, Honda S, Hara T: Long-term prospec-
tive study of body composition and lipid pro-
files during and after growth hormone (GH) 
treatment in children with GH deficiency: 
gender-specific metabolic effects. J Clin En-
docrinol Metab 1998; 
  
83: 
  
3890–3896. 
 
31 van der Sluis IM, Boot AM, Hop WC, De
Rijke YB, Krenning EP, de Muinck Keizer-
Schrama SM: Long-term effects of growth 
hormone therapy on bone mineral density, 
body composition, and serum lipid levels in 
growth hormone deficient children: a 6-year 
follow-up study. Horm Res 2002; 
  
58: 
  
207–214. 
 
32 Gonc EN, Kandemir N: Long-term effects of 
growth hormone (GH) on bone mineral sta-
tus and bone turnover markers in patients 
with isolated GH deficiency and multiple pi-
tuitary hormone deficiency. Clin Endocrinol 
(Oxf) 2007; 
  
66: 
  
672–677. 
 
33 Lanes R, Soros A, Flores K, Gunczler P, Car-
rillo E, Bandel J: Endothelial function, carotid 
artery intima-media thickness, epicardial adi-
pose tissue, and left ventricular mass and 
function in growth hormone-deficient ado-
lescents: apparent effects of growth hormone 
treatment on these parameters. J Clin Endo-
crinol Metab 2005; 
  
90: 
  
3978–3982. 
 
34 Ciresi A, Amato MC, Criscimanna A, Mattina 
A, Vetro C, Galluzzo A, D’
Acquisto G, Gior-
dano C: Metabolic parameters and adipokine 
profile during GH replacement therapy in 
children with GH deficiency. Eur J Endocri-
nol 2007; 
  
156: 
  
353–360. 
 
35 Lanes R, Soros A, Gunczler P, Paoli M, Car-
rillo E, Villaroel O, Palacios A: Growth hor-
mone deficiency, low levels of adiponectin, 
and unfavorable plasma lipid and lipopro-
teins. J Pediatr 2006; 
  
149: 
  
324–329. 
 
36 Foster C, Burton A, Scholl J, Scott ML, Gunt-
er V, McCormick K: Lipid patterns in treated 
growth hormone deficient children vs. short 
stature controls. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab 
2014; 
  
27: 
  
909–914. 
 
37 Martin M, Wilkins L: Pituitary dwarfism: di-
agnosis and treatment. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 1958; 
  
18: 
  
679–693. 
 
38 Coutant R, Rouleau S, Despert F, Magontier 
N, Loisel D, Limal JM: Growth and adult 
height in GH-treated children with nonac-
quired GH deficiency and idiopathic short 
stature: the influence of pituitary magnetic 
resonance imaging findings. J Clin Endocri-
nol Metab 2001; 
  
86: 
  
4649–4654. 
 
39 Deal C, Hasselmann C, Pfaffle RW, Zimmer-
mann AG, Quigley CA, Child CJ, Shavrikova 
EP, Cutler GB Jr, Blum WF: Associations be-
tween pituitary imaging abnormalities and 
clinical and biochemical phenotypes in chil-
dren with congenital growth hormone defi-
ciency: data from an international observation-
al study. Horm Res Paediatr 2013; 
  
79: 
  
283–292. 
 
40 Maghnie M, Lindberg A, Koltowska-Hägg-
ström M, Ranke MB: Magnetic resonance im-
aging of CNS in 15 
043 children with GH de-
ficiency in KIGS (Pfizer International Growth 
Database). Eur J Endocrinol 2013; 
  
168: 
  
211–
217. 
 
41 MacGillivray M, Clopper R, Sandberg D, Bu-
chlis J, Irizarry L: Final height outcomes of hy-
popituitary children after growth hormone 
(GH) treatment during the pituitary GH and 
recombinant GH eras. Pediatr Res 1997; 
  
41: 
  
69. 
 
42 Frisch H, Birnbacher R: Final height and pu-
bertal development in children with growth 
hormone deficiency after long-term treat-
ment. Horm Res 1995; 
  
43: 
  
132–134. 
 
43 Dean HJ, McTaggart TL, Fish DG, Friesen 
HG: The educational, vocational, and marital 
status of growth hormone-deficient adults 
treated with growth hormone during child-
hood. Am J Dis Child 1985; 
  
139: 
  
1105–1110. 
 
44 Binder G, Weidenkeller M, Blumenstock G, 
Langkamp M, Weber K, Franz AR: Rational 
approach to the diagnosis of severe growth 
hormone deficiency in the newborn. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 2010; 
  
95: 
  
2219–2226. 
 
45 Ogilvy-Stuart AL, Hands SJ, Adcock CJ, Hol-
ly JM, Matthews DR, Mohamed-Ali V, Yud-
kin JS, Wilkinson AR, Dunger DB: Insulin, 
insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I), IGF-
binding protein-1, growth hormone, and 
feeding in the newborn. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 1998; 
  
83: 
  
3550–3557. 
 
46 Cornblath M, Parker ML, Reisner SH, Forbes 
AE, Daughaday WH: Secretion and metabo-
lism of growth hormone in premature and 
full-term infants. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
1965; 
  
25: 
  
209–218. 
 
47 Mehta A, Hindmarsh PC, Stanhope RG, Tur-
ton JP, Cole TJ, Preece MA, Dattani MT: The 
role of growth hormone in determining birth 
size and early postnatal growth, using con-
genital growth hormone deficiency (GHD) as 
a model. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 2005; 
  
63: 
  
223–
231. 
 
48 Binder G, Martin DD, Kanther I, Schwarze 
CP, Ranke MB: The course of neonatal cho-
lestasis in congenital combined pituitary hor-
mone deficiency. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab 
2007; 
  
20: 
  
695–702. 
 
49 Kelly A, Tang R, Becker S, Stanley CA: Poor 
specificity of low growth hormone and corti-
sol levels during fasting hypoglycemia for the 
diagnoses of growth hormone deficiency and 
adrenal insufficiency. Pediatrics 2008; 
  
122:
e522–e528. 
 
50 Hawkes CP, Grimberg A: Measuring growth 
hormone and insulin-like growth factor-I in 
infants: what is normal? Pediatr Endocrinol 
Rev 2013; 
  
11: 
  
126–146. 
 
51 Cole TJ, Hindmarsh PC, Dunger DB: Growth 
hormone (GH) provocation tests and the re-
sponse to GH treatment in GH deficiency. 
Arch Dis Child 2004; 
  
89: 
  
1024–1027. 
 
52 Wilson DM, Frane J: A brief review of the use 
and utility of growth hormone stimulation 
testing in the NCGS: do we need to do pro-
vocative GH testing? Growth Horm IGF Res 
2005; 
  
15(suppl A):S21–S25. 
 
53 Rogol AD, Blethen SL, Sy JP, Veldhuis JD: Do 
growth hormone (GH) serial sampling, insu-
lin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) or auxological 
measurements have an advantage over GH 
stimulation testing in predicting the linear 
growth response to GH therapy? Clin Endo-
crinol (Oxf) 2003; 
  
58: 
  
229–237. 
  
PES GH/IGF-I Guidelines 
Horm Res Paediatr 2016;86:361–397
DOI: 10.1159/000452150
391
 
54 Zadik Z, Chalew SA, Kowarski A: Assessment 
of growth hormone secretion in normal stat-
ure children using 24-hour integrated con-
centration of GH and pharmacological stimu-
lation. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1990; 
  
71: 
  
932–
936. 
 
55 Ghigo E, Bellone J, Aimaretti G, Bellone S, 
Loche S, Cappa M, Bartolotta E, Dammacco 
F, Camanni F: Reliability of provocative tests 
to assess growth hormone secretory status. 
Study in 472 normally growing children. J 
Clin Endocrinol Metab 1996; 
  
81: 
  
3323–3327. 
 
56 Ranke MB, Lindberg A, Chatelain P, Wilton 
P, Cutfield W, Albertsson-Wikland K, Price 
DA: Derivation and validation of a mathe-
matical model for predicting the response to 
exogenous recombinant human growth hor-
mone (GH) in prepubertal children with id-
iopathic GH deficiency. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 1999; 
  
84: 
  
1174–1183. 
 
57 Bright GM, Julius JR, Lima J, Blethen SL: 
Growth hormone stimulation test results as 
predictors of recombinant human growth hor-
mone treatment outcomes: preliminary analy-
sis of the National Cooperative Growth Study 
database. Pediatrics 1999; 
  
104: 
  
1028–1031. 
 
58 Fujieda K, Hanew K, Hirano T, Igarashi Y, Ni-
shi Y, Tachibana K, Takano K, Tanaka T, Yo-
koya S: Growth response to growth hormone 
therapy in patients with different degrees of 
growth hormone deficiency. Endocr J 1996; 
 
 
43:S19–S25. 
 
59 Carel JC, Tresca JP, Letrait M, Chaussain JL, 
Lebouc Y, Job JC, Coste J: Growth hormone 
testing for the diagnosis of growth hormone 
deficiency in childhood: a population regis-
ter-based study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
1997; 
  
82: 
  
2117–2121. 
 
60 Stanley TL, Levitsky LL, Grinspoon SK, Misra 
M: Effect of body mass index on peak growth 
hormone response to provocative testing in 
children with short stature. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 2009; 
  
94: 
  
4875–4881. 
 
61 Loche S, Guzzetti C, Pilia S, Ibba A, Civolani 
P, Porcu M, Minerba L, Casini MR: Effect of 
body mass index on the growth hormone re-
sponse to clonidine stimulation testing in 
children with short stature. Clin Endocrinol 
(Oxf) 2011; 
  
74: 
  
726–731. 
 
62 Argente J, Caballo N, Barrios V, Pozo J, Mu-
noz MT, Chowen JA, Hernandez M: Multiple 
endocrine abnormalities of the growth hor-
mone and insulin-like growth factor axis in 
prepubertal children with exogenous obesity: 
effect of short- and long-term weight reduc-
tion. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1997; 
  
82: 
  
2076–
2083. 
 
63 Dichtel LE, Yuen KC, Bredella MA, Gerweck 
AV, Russell BM, Riccio AD, Gurel MH, Sluss 
PM, Biller BM, Miller KK: Overweight/Obese 
adults with pituitary disorders require lower 
peak growth hormone cutoff values on gluca-
gon stimulation testing to avoid overdiagno-
sis of growth hormone deficiency. J Clin En-
docrinol Metab 2014; 
  
99: 
  
4712–4719. 
 
64 Clemmons DR: Consensus statement on the 
standardization and evaluation of growth 
hormone and insulin-like growth factor as-
says. Clin Chem 2011; 
  
57: 
  
555–559. 
 
65 Ross HA, Lentjes EWGM, Menheere PMM, 
Sweep CGJ: Harmonization of growth hor-
mone measurement results: the empirical ap-
proach. Clin Chim Acta 2014; 
  
432: 
  
72–76. 
 
66 Hauffa BP, Lehmann N, Bettendorf M, Mehls 
O, Dorr HG, Partsch CJ, Schwarz HP, Stahn-
ke N, Steinkamp H, Said E, Sander S, Ranke 
MB: Central reassessment of GH concentra-
tions measured at local treatment centers in 
children with impaired growth: consequences 
for patient management. Eur J Endocrinol 
2004; 
  
150: 
  
291–297. 
 
67 Rakover Y, Lavi I, Masalah R, Issam T, Wein-
er E, Ben-Shlomo I: Comparison between 
four immunoassays for growth hormone 
(GH) measurement as guides to clinical deci-
sions following GH provocative tests. J Pedi-
atr Endocrinol Metab 2000; 
  
13: 
  
637–643. 
 
68 Morsky P, Tiikkainen U, Ruokonen A, Mark-
kanen H: Problematic determination of se-
rum growth hormone: experience from exter-
nal quality assurance surveys 1998–2003. 
Scand J Clin Lab Invest 2005; 
  
65: 
  
377–386. 
 
69 Muller A, Scholz M, Blankenstein O, Binder 
G, Pfaffle R, Korner A, Kiess W, Heider A, 
Bidlingmaier M, Thiery J, Kratzsch J: Harmo-
nization of growth hormone measurements 
with different immunoassays by data adjust-
ment. Clin Chem Lab Med 2011; 
  
49: 
  
1135–
1142. 
 
70 Tanaka T, Tachibana K, Shimatsu A, Katsu-
mata N, Tsushima T, Hizuka N, Fujieda K, 
Yokoya S, Irie M: A nationwide attempt to 
standardize growth hormone assays. Horm 
Res 2005; 
  
64(suppl 2):6–11. 
 
71 Butenandt O, Kunze D: Growth velocity in 
constitutional delay of growth and develop-
ment. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab 2010; 
  
23: 
 
 
19–25. 
 
72 Saggese G, Cesaretti G, Giannessi N, Bracalo-
ni C, Cinquanta L, Cioni C: Stimulated 
growth hormone (GH) secretion in children 
with delays in pubertal development before 
and after the onset of puberty: relationship 
with peripheral plasma GH-releasing hor-
mone and somatostatin levels. J Clin Endocri-
nol Metab 1992; 
  
74: 
  
272–278. 
 
73 Martinez AS, Domene HM, Ropelato MG, 
Jasper HG, Pennisi PA, Escobar ME, Heinrich 
JJ: Estrogen priming effect on growth hor-
mone (GH) provocative test: a useful tool for 
the diagnosis of GH deficiency. J Clin Endo-
crinol Metab 2000; 
  
85: 
  
4168–4172. 
 
74 Marin G, Domene HM, Barnes KM, Blackwell 
BJ, Cassorla FG, Cutler GB Jr: The effects of 
estrogen priming and puberty on the growth 
hormone response to standardized treadmill 
exercise and arginine-insulin in normal girls 
and boys. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1994; 
  
79: 
 
 
537–541. 
 
75 Gonc EN, Kandemir N, Ozon A, Alikasifoglu 
A: Final heights of boys with normal growth 
hormone responses to provocative tests fol-
lowing priming. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab 
2008; 
  
21: 
  
963–971. 
 
76 Wetterau LA: The pros and cons of sex steroid 
priming in growth hormone stimulation test-
ing. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab 2012; 
  
25: 
 
 
1049–1055. 
 
77 Spiliotis BE, August GP, Hung W, Sonis W, 
Mendelson W, Bercu BB: Growth hormone 
neurosecretory dysfunction. A treatable 
cause of short stature. JAMA 1984; 
  
251: 
  
2223–
2230. 
 
78 Kowarski A, Thompson RG, Migeon CJ, Bliz-
zard RM: Determination of integrated plasma 
concentrations and true secretion rates of hu-
man growth hormone. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 1971; 
  
32: 
  
356–360. 
 
79 Rochiccioli P, Dechaux E, Tauber MT, Pien-
kowski C, Tiberge M: Growth hormone treat-
ment in patients with neurosecretory dys-
function. Horm Res 1990; 
  
33(suppl 4):97–
101. 
 
80 Radetti G, Buzi F, Cassar W, Paganini C, 
Stacul E, Maghnie M: Growth hormone se-
cretory pattern and response to treatment in 
children with short stature followed to adult 
height. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 2003; 
  
59: 
  
27–
33. 
 
81 Hernandez M, Nieto JA, Sobradillo B, Pombo 
M, Ferrandez A, Rejas J: Multicenter clinical 
trial to evaluate the therapeutic use of recom-
binant growth hormone from mammalian 
cells in the treatment of growth hormone neu-
rosecretory dysfunction. Horm Res 1991; 
  
35: 
 
 
13–18. 
 
82 Lanes R: Diagnostic limitations of spontane-
ous growth hormone measurements in nor-
mally growing prepubertal children. Am J Dis 
Child 1989; 
  
143: 
  
1284–1286. 
 
83 Rose SR, Ross JL, Uriarte M, Barnes KM, Cas-
sorla FG, Cutler GB Jr: The advantage of mea-
suring stimulated as compared with sponta-
neous growth hormone levels in the diagnosis 
of growth hormone deficiency. N Engl J Med 
1988; 
  
319: 
  
201–207. 
 
84 Blizzard R, Johanson A: Disorders of growth; 
in Kappy M, Blizzard R, Migeon C (eds): 
Wilkins – The Diagnosis and Treatment of 
Endocrine Disorders in Childhood and Ado-
lescence. Springfield, Charles C Thomas, 
1994, pp 383–455. 
 
85 Mauras N, Attie KM, Reiter EO, Saenger P, 
Baptista J, Genentech I, Cooperative Study G: 
High dose recombinant human growth hor-
mone (GH) treatment of GH-deficient pa-
tients in puberty increases near-final height: a 
randomized, multicenter trial. J Clin Endocri-
nol Metab 2000; 
  
85: 
  
3653–3660. 
 
86 Rikken B, Massa GG, Wit JM, Delamarre-van 
de Waal, HA, Drayer NM, de Muinck Keizer-
Schrama SM, Oostdijk W, Otten BJ, Reeser 
HM, Jansen M, Vulsma T, Waelkens JJJ, Ze-
lissen PMJ: Final height in a large cohort of 
dutch patients with growth hormone defi-
ciency treated with growth hormone. Horm 
Res 1995; 
  
43: 
  
135–137. 
 
87 Chipman JJ, Hicks JR, Holcombe JH, Draper 
MW: Approaching final height in children 
treated for growth hormone deficiency. Horm 
Res 1995; 
  
43: 
  
129–131. 
  
Grimberg 
  et al.
 
Horm Res Paediatr 2016;86:361–397
DOI: 10.1159/000452150
392
 
88 De Luca F, Maghnie M, Arrigo T, Lombardo 
F, Messina MF, Bernasconi S: Final height 
outcome of growth hormone-deficient pa-
tients treated since less than five years of age. 
Acta Paediatr 1996; 
  
85: 
  
1167–1171. 
 
89 Juul A, Bernasconi S, Clayton PE, Kiess W, 
DeMuinck-Keizer Schrama S, Drugs and 
Therapeutics Committee of the European So-
ciety for Paediatric Endocrinology (ESPE): 
European audit of current practice in diagno-
sis and treatment of childhood growth hor-
mone deficiency. Horm Res 2002; 
  
58: 
  
233–
241. 
 
90 Hughes IP, Harris M, Cotterill A, Ambler G, 
Cowell CT, Cutfield WS, Werther G, Choong 
CS: Comparison of weight versus body sur-
face area based growth hormone dosing for 
children: implications for response. Clin En-
docrinol (Oxf) 2013; 
  
80: 
  
384–394. 
 
91 Cohen P, Germak J, Rogol AD, Weng W, 
Kappelgaard AM, Rosenfeld RG: Variable 
degree of growth hormone (GH) and insu-
lin-like growth factor (IGF) sensitivity in 
children with idiopathic short stature com-
pared with GH-deficient patients: evidence 
from an IGF-based dosing study of short 
children. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2010; 
  
95: 
 
 
2089–2098. 
 
92 Cohen P, Weng W, Rogol AD, Rosenfeld RG, 
Kappelgaard AM, Germak J: Dose-sparing 
and safety-enhancing effects of an IGF-I-
based dosing regimen in short children treat-
ed with growth hormone in a 2-year random-
ized controlled trial: therapeutic and pharma-
coeconomic considerations. Clin Endocrinol 
(Oxf) 2014; 
  
81: 
  
71–76. 
 
93 MacGillivray MH, Baptista J, Johanson A: 
Outcome of a four-year randomized study of 
daily versus three times weekly somatropin 
treatment in prepubertal naive growth hor-
mone-deficient children. Genentech Study 
Group. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1996; 
  
81: 
 
 
1806–1809. 
 
94 Rosenbloom AL, Knuth C, Shulman D: 
Growth hormone by daily injection in pa-
tients previously treated for growth hormone 
deficiency. South Med J 1990; 
  
83: 
  
653–655. 
 
95 Burns EC, Tanner JM, Preece MA, Cameron 
N: Final height and pubertal development in 
55 children with idiopathic growth hormone 
deficiency, treated for between 2 and 15 years 
with human growth hormone. Eur J Pediatr 
1981; 
  
137: 
  
155–164. 
 
96 Hibi I, Tanaka T: Final height of patients with 
idiopathic growth hormone deficiency after 
long-term growth hormone treatment. Com-
mittee for Treatment of Growth Hormone 
Deficient Children, Growth Science Founda-
tion, Japan. Acta Endocrinol (Copenh) 1989; 
 
 
120: 
  
409–415. 
 
97 de Muinck Keizer-Schrama S, Van den 
Broeck J, Sas T, Hokken-Koelega A: Final 
height of growth hormone-treated GH-defi-
cient children and girls with Turner’
s syn-
drome: the Dutch experience. The Dutch Ad-
visory Group on Growth Hormone. Horm 
Res 1999; 
  
51(suppl 3):127–131. 
 98 Sas TC, de Ridder MA, Wit JM, Rotteveel J, 
Oostdijk W, Reeser HM, Otten BJ, de 
Muinck Keizer-Schrama SM: Adult height 
in children with growth hormone deficien-
cy: a randomized, controlled, growth hor-
mone dose-response trial. Horm Res Paedi-
atr 2010; 
  
74: 
  
172–181. 
 
 99 Wikland KA, Kristrom B, Rosberg S, Svens-
son B, Nierop AF: Validated multivariate 
models predicting the growth response to 
GH treatment in individual short children 
with a broad range in GH secretion capaci-
ties. Pediatr Res 2000; 
  
48: 
  
475–484. 
 
100 Ranke MB, Lindberg A, Mullis PE, Geffner 
ME, Tanaka T, Cutfield WS, Tauber M, 
Dunger D: Towards optimal treatment with 
growth hormone in short children and ado-
lescents: evidence and theses. Horm Res 
Paediatr 2013; 
  
79: 
  
51–67. 
 
101 Kristrom B, Aronson AS, Dahlgren J, Gus-
tafsson J, Halldin M, Ivarsson SA, Nilsson 
NO, Svensson J, Tuvemo T, Albertsson-
Wikland K: Growth hormone (GH) dosing 
during catch-up growth guided by individu-
al responsiveness decreases growth response 
variability in prepubertal children with GH 
deficiency or idiopathic short stature. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 2009; 
  
94: 
  
483–490. 
 
102 Cohen P, Bright GM, Rogol AD, Kappel-
gaard AM, Rosenfeld RG: Effects of dose and 
gender on the growth and growth factor re-
sponse to GH in GH-deficient children: im-
plications for efficacy and safety. J Clin En-
docrinol Metab 2002; 
  
87: 
  
90–98. 
 
103 Burgers AMG, Biermasz NR, Schoones JW, 
Pereira AM, Renehan AG, Zwahlen M, Eg-
ger M, Dekkers OM: Meta-analysis and 
dose-response metaregression: circulating 
insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) and 
mortality. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2011; 
  
96: 
 
 
2912–2920. 
 
104 Chanson P, Arnoux A, Mavromati M, Brail-
ly-Tabard S, Massart C, Young J, Piketty ML, 
Souberbielle JC; VARIETE Investigators: 
Reference values for insulin-like growth fac-
tor I (IGF-I) serum concentrations: compar-
ison of six immunoassays. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 2016; 
  
101: 
  
3450–3458. 
 
105 Renehan AG, Zwahlen M, Minder C, 
O’
Dwyer ST, Shalet SM, Egger M: Insulin-
like growth factor (IGF)-I, IGF binding pro-
tein-3, and cancer risk: systematic review 
and meta-regression analysis. Lancet 2004; 
 
 
363: 
  
1346–1353. 
 
106 Schairer C, McCarty CA, Isaacs C, Sue LY, 
Pollak MN, Berg CD, Ziegler RG: Circulat-
ing insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I and 
IGF binding protein (IGFBP)-3 levels and 
postmenopausal breast cancer risk in the 
prostate, lung, colorectal, and ovarian can-
cer screening trial (PLCO) cohort. Horm 
Cancer 2010; 
  
1: 
  
100–111. 
 
107 Douglas JB, Silverman DT, Pollak MN, Tao 
Y, Soliman AS, Stolzenberg-Solomon RZ: 
Serum IGF-I, IGF-II, IGFBP-3, and IGF-I/
IGFBP-3 molar ratio and risk of pancreatic 
cancer in the prostate, lung, colorectal, and 
ovarian cancer screening trial. Cancer Epi-
demiol Biomarkers Prev 2010; 
  
19: 
  
2298–
2306. 
 
108 Stanhope R, Uruena M, Hindmarsh P, 
Leiper AD, Brook CG: Management of 
growth hormone deficiency through puber-
ty. Acta Paediatr Scand Suppl 1991; 
  
372: 
  
47–
52; discussion 53. 
 
109 Albertsson Wikland K, Alm F, Aronsson S, 
Gustafsson J, Hagenas L, Hager A, Ivarsson 
S, Kristrom B, Marcus C, Moell C, Nilsson 
KO, Ritzen M, Tuvemo T, Westgren U, 
Westphal O, Aman J: Effect of growth hor-
mone (GH) during puberty in GH-deficient 
children: preliminary results from an ongo-
ing randomized trial with different dose reg-
imens. Acta Paediatr Suppl 1999; 
  
88: 
  
80–84. 
 
110 Coelho R, Brook CG, Preece MA, Stanhope 
RG, Dattani MT, Hindmarsh PC: A ran-
domised study of two doses of biosynthetic 
human growth hormone on final height of 
pubertal children with growth hormone de-
ficiency. Horm Res 2008; 
  
70: 
  
85–88. 
 
111 Ranke MB, Lindberg A: Observed and pre-
dicted total pubertal growth during treat-
ment with growth hormone in adolescents 
with idiopathic growth hormone deficiency, 
Turner syndrome, short stature, born small 
for gestational age and idiopathic short stat-
ure: KIGS analysis and review. Horm Res 
Paediatr 2011; 
  
75: 
  
423–432. 
 
112 Tauber M, Moulin P, Pienkowski C, Jouret 
B, Rochiccioli P: Growth hormone (GH) re-
testing and auxological data in 131 GH-defi-
cient patients after completion of treatment. 
J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1997; 
  
82: 
  
352–356. 
 
113 Loche S, Bizzarri C, Maghnie M, Faedda A, 
Tzialla C, Autelli M, Casini MR, Cappa M: 
Results of early reevaluation of growth hor-
mone secretion in short children with appar-
ent growth hormone deficiency. J Pediatr 
2002; 
  
140: 
  
445–449. 
 
114 Zucchini S, Pirazzoli P, Baronio F, Gennari 
M, Bal MO, Balsamo A, Gualandi S, Cicog-
nani A: Effect on adult height of pubertal 
growth hormone retesting and withdrawal 
of therapy in patients with previously diag-
nosed growth hormone deficiency. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 2006; 
  
91: 
  
4271–4276. 
 
115 Bell J, Parker KL, Swinford RD, Hoffman 
AR, Maneatis T, Lippe B: Long-term safety 
of recombinant human growth hormone in 
children. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2010; 
  
95: 
 
 
167–177. 
 
116 Growth Hormone Research Society: Con-
sensus guidelines for the diagnosis and treat-
ment of growth hormone (GH) deficiency in 
childhood and adolescence: summary state-
ment of the GH Research Society. GH Re-
search Society. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
2000; 
  
85: 
  
3990–3993. 
 
117 Darendeliler F, Karagiannis G, Wilton P: 
Headache, idiopathic intracranial hyperten-
sion and slipped capital femoral epiphysis 
during growth hormone treatment: a safety 
update from the KIGS database. Horm Res 
2007; 
  
68(suppl 5):41–47. 
  
PES GH/IGF-I Guidelines 
Horm Res Paediatr 2016;86:361–397
DOI: 10.1159/000452150
393
 
118 Malozowski S, Tanner LA, Wysowski DK, 
Fleming GA, Stadel BV: Benign intracranial 
hypertension in children with growth hor-
mone deficiency treated with growth hor-
mone. J Pediatr 1995; 
  
126: 
  
996–999. 
 
119 Mostoufi-Moab S, Isaacoff EJ, Spiegel D, 
Gruccio D, Ginsberg JP, Hobbie W, Shults J, 
Leonard MB: Childhood cancer survivors 
exposed to total body irradiation are at sig-
nificant risk for slipped capital femoral 
epiphysis during recombinant growth hor-
mone therapy. Pediatr Blood Cancer 2013; 
 
 
60: 
  
1766–1771. 
 
120 Vedi A, Neville K, Johnston K, Saravanja D, 
Cohn RJ: Slipped capital femoral epiphyses 
after total body irradiation. Pediatr Blood 
Cancer 2014; 
  
61: 
  
1140. 
 
121 Kim JY, Rosenfeld SR, Keyak JH: Increased 
prevalence of scoliosis in Turner syndrome. 
J Pediatr Orthop 2001; 
  
21: 
  
765–766. 
 
122 Mills JL, Schonberger LB, Wysowski DK, 
Brown P, Durako SJ, Cox C, Kong F, Fradkin 
JE: Long-term mortality in the United States 
cohort of pituitary-derived growth hormone 
recipients. J Pediatr 2004; 
  
144: 
  
430–436. 
 
123 Laurberg P, Jakobsen PE, Hoeck HC, Vester-
gaard P: Growth hormone and thyroid func-
tion: is secondary thyroid failure underdiag-
nosed in growth hormone deficient pa-
tients? Thyroidology 1994; 
  
6: 
  
73–79. 
 
124 Lesage C, Walker J, Landier F, Chatelain P, 
Chaussain JL, Bougneres PF: Near normal-
ization of adolescent height with growth-
hormone therapy in very short children 
without growth-hormone deficiency. J Pedi-
atr 1991; 
  
119: 
  
29–34. 
 
125 Heptulla RA, Boulware SD, Caprio S, Silver 
D, Sherwin RS, Tamborlane WV: Decreased 
insulin sensitivity and compensatory hyper-
insulinemia after hormone treatment in 
children with short stature. J Clin Endocri-
nol Metab 1997; 
  
82: 
  
3234–3238. 
 
126 Saenger P, Attie KM, DiMartino-Nardi J, 
Hintz R, Frahm L, Frane JW: Metabolic con-
sequences of 5-year growth hormone (GH) 
therapy in children treated with GH for id-
iopathic short stature. Genentech Collabor-
ative Study Group. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
1998; 
  
83: 
  
3115–3120. 
 
127 Bareille P, Azcona C, Matthews DR, Conway 
GS, Stanhope R: Lipid profile, glucose toler-
ance and insulin sensitivity after more than 
four years of growth hormone therapy in 
non-growth hormone deficient adolescents. 
Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 1999; 
  
51: 
  
347–353. 
 
128 Cutfield WS, Wilton P, Bennmarker H, Al-
bertsson-Wikland K, Chatelain P, Ranke 
MB, Price DA: Incidence of diabetes mellitus 
and impaired glucose tolerance in children 
and adolescents receiving growth-hormone 
treatment. Lancet 2000; 
  
355: 
  
610–613. 
 
129 Dahlgren J: Metabolic benefits of growth 
hormone therapy in idiopathic short stature. 
Horm Res Paediatr 2011; 
  
76(suppl 3):56–58. 
 
130 Aguiar-Oliveira M, Oliveira FT, Pereira RM, 
Oliveira CR, Blackford A, Valenca EH, San-
tos EG, Gois-Junior M, Meneguz-Moreno R, 
Araujo VP, Oliveira-Neto L, Almeida RP, 
Santos MA, Farias NT, Silveira DC, Cabral 
GW, Calazans FR, Seabra JD, Lopes TF, Ro-
drigues EO, Porto LA, Oliveira IP, Melo EV, 
Martari M, Salvatori R: Longevity in un-
treated congenital growth hormone defi-
ciency due to a homozygous mutation in the 
GHRH receptor gene. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 2010; 
  
95: 
  
714–721. 
 
131 Orme SM, McNally RJQ, Cartwright RA, 
Belchetz PE; for the United Kingdom Acro-
megaly Study Group: Mortality and cancer 
incidence in acromegaly: a retrospective co-
hort study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1998; 
 
 
83: 
  
2730–2734. 
 
132 Speakman JR, Mitchell SE: Caloric restric-
tion. Mol Aspects Med 2011; 
  
32: 
  
159–221. 
 
133 Cohen P, Clemmons DR, Rosenfeld RG: 
Does the GH-IGF axis play a role in cancer 
pathogenesis? Growth Horm IGF Res 2000; 
 
 
10: 
  
297–305. 
 
134 Swerdlow AJ, Higgins CD, Adlard P, Preece 
MA: Risk of cancer in patients treated with 
human pituitary growth hormone in the 
UK, 1959–1985: a cohort study. Lancet 2002; 
 
 
360: 
  
273–277. 
 
135 Gallagher EJ, LeRoith D: Minireview: IGF, 
insulin, and cancer. Endocrinology 2011; 
 
 
152: 
  
2546–2551. 
 
136 Carel JC, Ecosse E, Landier F, Meguellati-
Hakkas D, Kaguelidou F, Rey G, Coste J: 
Long-term mortality after recombinant 
growth hormone treatment for isolated 
growth hormone deficiency or childhood 
short stature: preliminary report of the 
French SAGhE study. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 2012; 
  
97: 
  
416–425. 
 
137 Savendahl L, Maes M, Albertsson-Wikland 
K, Borgstrom B, Carel JC, Henrard S, Spey-
broeck N, Thomas M, Zandwijken G, Hok-
ken-Koelega A: Long-term mortality and 
causes of death in isolated GHD, ISS, and 
SGA patients treated with recombinant 
growth hormone during childhood in Bel-
gium, The Netherlands, and Sweden: pre-
liminary report of 3 countries participating 
in the EU SAGhE study. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 2012; 
  
97:E213–E217. 
 
138 Wilton P, Mattsson AF, Darendeliler F: 
Growth hormone treatment in children is 
not associated with an increase in the inci-
dence of cancer: experience from KIGS 
(Pfizer International Growth Database). J 
Pediatr 2010; 
  
157: 
  
265–270. 
 
139 Albertsson-Wikland K, Martensson A, Sav-
endahl L, Niklasson A, Bang P, Dahlgren J, 
Gustafsson J, Kristrom B, Norgren S, Pehrs-
son NG, Oden A: Mortality is not increased 
in recombinant human growth hormone-
treated patients when adjusting for birth 
characteristics. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
2016; 
  
101: 
  
2149–2159. 
 
140 Nishi Y, Tanaka T, Takano K, Fujieda K, 
Igarashi Y, Hanew K, Hirano T, Yokoya S, 
Tachibana K, Saito T, Watanabe S: Recent 
status in the occurrence of leukemia in 
growth hormone-treated patients in Japan. 
GH Treatment Study Committee of the 
Foundation for Growth Science, Japan. J 
Clin Endocrinol Metab 1999; 
  
84: 
  
1961–
1965. 
 
141 Sklar CA, Mertens AC, Mitby P, Occhio-
grosso G, Qin J, Heller G, Yasui Y, Robison 
LL: Risk of disease recurrence and second 
neoplasms in survivors of childhood cancer 
treated with growth hormone: a report from 
the Childhood Cancer Survivor Study. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 2002; 
  
87: 
  
3136–3141. 
 
142 Karavitaki N, Warner JT, Marland A, Shine 
B, Ryan F, Arnold J, Turner HE, Wass JA: 
GH replacement does not increase the risk 
of recurrence in patients with craniopharyn-
gioma. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 2006; 
  
64: 
  
556–
560. 
 
143 Ergun-Longmire B, Mertens AC, Mitby P, 
Qin J, Heller G, Shi W, Yasui Y, Robison LL, 
Sklar CA: Growth hormone treatment and 
risk of second neoplasms in the childhood 
cancer survivor. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
2006; 
  
91: 
  
3494–3498. 
 
144 Essig S, Li Q, Chen Y, Hitzler J, Leisenring 
W, Greenberg M, Sklar C, Hudson MM, 
Armstrong GT, Krull KR, Neglia JP, Oeffin-
ger KC, Robison LL, Kuehni CE, Yasui Y, 
Nathan PC: Risk of late effects of treatment 
in children newly diagnosed with standard-
risk acute lymphoblastic leukaemia: a report 
from the Childhood Cancer Survivor Study 
cohort. Lancet Oncol 2014; 
  
15: 
  
841–851. 
 
145 Leung W, Rose SR, Zhou Y, Hancock ML, 
Burstein S, Schriock EA, Lustig R, Danish 
RK, Evans WE, Hudson MM, Pui CH: Out-
comes of growth hormone replacement 
therapy in survivors of childhood acute lym-
phoblastic leukemia. J Clin Oncol 2002; 
  
20: 
 
 
2959–2964. 
 
146 Packer RJ, Boyett JM, Janss AJ, Stavrou T, 
Kun L, Wisoff J, Russo C, Geyer R, Phillips 
P, Kieran M, Greenberg M, Goldman S, Hy-
der D, Heideman R, Jones-Wallace D, Au-
gust GP, Smith SH, Moshang T: Growth 
hormone replacement therapy in children 
with medulloblastoma: use and effect on tu-
mor control. J Clin Oncol 2001; 
  
19: 
  
480–487. 
 
147 Mackenzie S, Craven T, Gattamaneni HR, 
Swindell R, Shalet SM, Brabant G: Long-
term safety of growth hormone replacement 
after CNS irradiation. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 2011; 
  
96: 
  
2756–2761. 
 
148 Howell SJ, Wilton P, Lindberg A, Shalet SM: 
Growth hormone replacement and the risk 
of malignancy in children with neurofibro-
matosis. J Pediatr 1998; 
  
133: 
  
201–205. 
 
149 Anneren G, Tuvemo T, Gustafsson J: 
Growth hormone therapy in young children 
with Down syndrome and a clinical compar-
ison of Down and Prader-Willi syndromes. 
Growth Horm IGF Res 2000; 
  
10(suppl B):
S87–S91. 
 
150 Howell JC, Joshi SA, Hornung L, Khoury J, 
Harris RE, Rose SR: Growth hormone im-
proves short stature in children with Dia-
mond-Blackfan anemia. Pediatr Blood Can-
cer 2015; 
  
62: 
  
402–408. 
  
Grimberg 
  et al.
 
Horm Res Paediatr 2016;86:361–397
DOI: 10.1159/000452150
394
 
151 Forlenza GP, Polgreen LE, Miller BS, Mac-
Millan ML, Wagner JE, Petryk A: Growth 
hormone treatment of patients with Fanconi 
anemia after hematopoietic cell transplanta-
tion. Pediatr Blood Cancer 2014; 
  
61: 
  
1142–
1143. 
 
152 Brock PR, de Zegher F, Casteels-Van Daele 
M, Vanderschueren-Lodeweyckx M: Malig-
nant disease in Bloom’
s syndrome children 
treated with growth hormone. Lancet 1991; 
 
 
337: 
  
1345–1346. 
 
153 Romano AA, Dana K, Bakker B, Davis DA, 
Hunold JJ, Jacobs J, Lippe B: Growth re-
sponse, near-adult height, and patterns of 
growth and puberty in patients with noonan 
syndrome treated with growth hormone. J 
Clin Endocrinol Metab 2009; 
  
94: 
  
2338–2344. 
 
154 Raman S, Grimberg A, Waguespack SG, 
Miller BS, Sklar CA, Meacham LR, Patterson 
BC: Risk of neoplasia in pediatric patients 
receiving growth hormone therapy – a re-
port from the Pediatric Endocrine Society 
Drug and Therapeutics Committee. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 2015; 
  
100: 
  
2192–2203. 
 
155 Poidvin A, Touze E, Ecosse E, Landier F, Be-
jot Y, Giroud M, Rothwell PM, Carel JC, 
Coste J: Growth hormone treatment for 
childhood short stature and risk of stroke in 
early adulthood. Neurology 2014; 
  
83: 
  
780–
786. 
 
156 Allen DB: Growth hormone post-marketing 
surveillance: safety, sales, and the unfinished 
task ahead. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2010; 
 
 
95: 
  
52–55. 
 
157 Allen DB: Growth hormone therapy for 
short stature: is the benefit worth the bur-
den? Pediatrics 2006; 
  
118: 
  
343–348. 
 
158 Toogood AA, Shalet SM: Diagnosis of severe 
growth hormone (GH) deficiency in young 
adults who received GH replacement thera-
py during childhood. Acta Paediatr Suppl 
1997; 
  
423: 
  
117–120. 
 
159 Juul A, Kastrup KW, Pedersen SA, Skakke-
baek NE: Growth hormone (GH) provoca-
tive retesting of 108 young adults with child-
hood-onset GH deficiency and the diagnos-
tic value of insulin-like growth factor I 
(IGF-I) and IGF-binding protein-3. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 1997; 
  
82: 
  
1195–1201. 
 
160 Quigley C, Zagar A, Liu CC, Brown D, Huse-
man C, Levitsky L, Repaske D, Tsalikian E, 
Chipman J: United States multicenter study 
of factors predicting the persistence of GH 
deficiency during the transition period be-
tween childhood and adulthood. Int J Pedi-
atr Endocrinol 2013; 
  
2013: 
  
6. 
 
161 Attanasio AF, Lamberts SW, Matranga AM, 
Birkett MA, Bates PC, Valk NK, Hilsted J, 
Bengtsson BA, Strasburger CJ: Adult growth 
hormone (GH)-deficient patients demon-
strate heterogeneity between childhood on-
set and adult onset before and during human 
GH treatment, Adult Growth Hormone De-
ficiency Study Group. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 1997; 
  
82: 
  
82–88. 
 
162 Attanasio AF, Howell S, Bates PC, Frewer P, 
Chipman J, Blum WF, Shalet SM: Body com-
position, IGF-I and IGFBP-3 concentrations 
as outcome measures in severely GH-defi-
cient (GHD) patients after childhood GH 
treatment: a comparison with adult onset 
GHD patients. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
2002; 
  
87: 
  
3368–3372. 
 
163 Banerjee I, Tudorancea A, Scanlon MF, 
Gregory JW: Are factors at diagnosis of 
growth hormone deficiency in childhood as-
sociated with persistence of growth hor-
mone deficiency into adult life? J Pediatr En-
docrinol Metab 2005; 
  
18: 
  
943–947. 
 
164 Maghnie M, Strigazzi C, Tinelli C, Autelli M, 
Cisternino M, Loche S, Severi F: Growth 
hormone (GH) deficiency (GH deficiency) 
of childhood onset: reassessment of GH sta-
tus and evaluation of the predictive criteria 
for permanent GH deficiency in young 
adults. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1999; 
  
84: 
 
 
1324–1328. 
 
165 Donaubauer J, Kiess W, Kratzsch J, Nowak 
T, Steinkamp H, Willgerodt H, Keller E: Re-
assessment of growth hormone secretion in 
young adult patients with childhood-onset 
growth hormone deficiency. Clin Endocri-
nol (Oxf) 2003; 
  
58: 
  
456–463. 
 
166 Nicolson A, Toogood AA, Rahim A, Shalet 
SM: The prevalence of severe growth hor-
mone deficiency in adults who received 
growth hormone replacement in childhood. 
Clin Endocrinol 1996; 
  
44: 
  
311–316. 
 
167 Hartman ML, Crowe BJ, Biller B, Ho K, 
Clemmons DR, Chipman JJ: Which patients 
do not require a GH stimulation test for the 
diagnosis of adult GH deficiency? J Clin En-
docrinol Metab 2002; 
  
87: 
  
477–485. 
 
168 Biller B, Samuels MH, Zagar A, Cook DM, 
Arafah BM, Bonert V, Stavrou S, Kleinberg 
DL, Chipman JJ, Hartman ML: Sensitivity 
and specificity of six tests for the diagnosis 
of adult GH deficiency. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 2002; 
  
87: 
  
2067–2079. 
 
169 Maghnie M, Salati B, Bianchi S, Rallo M, 
Tinelli C, Autelli M, Aimaretti G, Ghigo E: 
Relationship between the morphological 
evaluation of the pituitary and the growth 
hormone (GH) response to GH-releasing 
hormone plus arginine in children and 
adults with congenital hypopituitarism. J 
Clin Endocrinol Metab 2001; 
  
86: 
  
1574–
1579. 
 
170 Chen S, Leger J, Garel C, Hassan M, Czer-
nichow P: Growth hormone deficiency with 
ectopic neurohypophysis: Anatomical varia-
tions and relationship between the visibility 
of the pituitary stalk asserted by magnetic 
resonance imaging and anterior pituitary 
function. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1999; 
  
84: 
 
 
2408–2413. 
 
171 Leger J, Danner S, Simon D, Garel C, Czer-
nichow P: Do all patients with childhood-
onset growth hormone deficiency (GHD) 
and ectopic neurohypophysis have persis-
tent GHD in adulthood? J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 2005; 
  
90: 
  
650–656. 
 
172 Maghnie M, Aimaretti G, Bellone S, Bona G, 
Bellone J, Baldelli R, de Sanctis C, Gargan-
tini L, Gastaldi R, Ghizzoni L, Secco A, Ti-
nelli C: Diagnosis of GH deficiency in the 
transition period: accuracy of insulin toler-
ance test and insulin-like growth factor-I 
measurement. Eur J Endocrinol 2005; 
  
152: 
 
 
589–596. 
 
173 Toogood AA, Beardwell CG, Shalet SM: The 
severity of growth hormone deficiency in 
adults with pituitary disease is related to the 
degree of hypopituitarism. Clin Endocrinol 
1994; 
  
41: 
  
511–516. 
 
174 Attanasio AF, Howell S, Bates PC, Blum WF, 
Frewer P, Quigley C, Shalet SM: Confirma-
tion of severe GH deficiency after final 
height in patients diagnosed as GH deficient 
during childhood. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 
2002; 
  
56: 
  
503–507. 
 
175 di Iorgi N, Secco A, Napoli F, Tinelli C, Cal-
cagno A, Fratangeli N, Ambrosini L, Rossi A, 
Lorini R, Maghnie M: Deterioration of 
growth hormone (GH) response and ante-
rior pituitary function in young adults with 
childhood-onset GH deficiency and ectopic 
posterior pituitary: a two-year prospective 
follow-up study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
2007; 
  
92: 
  
3875–3884. 
 
176 Toogood AA, Ryder WD, Beardwell CG, 
Shalet SM: The evolution of radiation-in-
duced growth hormone deficiency in adults 
is determined by the baseline growth hor-
mone status. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 1995; 
  
43: 
 
 
97–103. 
 
177 Clayton PE, Shalet SM: Dose dependency of 
time of onset of radiation-induced growth 
hormone deficiency. J Pediatr 1991; 
  
118: 
 
 
226–228. 
 
178 Gleeson HK, Gattamaneni HR, Smethurst 
L, Brennan BM, Shalet SM: Reassessment 
of growth hormone status is required at fi-
nal height in children treated with growth 
hormone replacement after radiation ther-
apy. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2004; 
  
89: 
  
662–
666. 
 
179 Secco A, di Iorgi N, Napoli F, Calandra E, 
Calcagno A, Ghezzi M, Frassinetti C, 
Fratangeli N, Parodi S, Benassai M, Leitner 
Y, Gastaldi R, Lorini R, Maghnie M, Radetti 
G: Reassessment of the growth hormone sta-
tus in young adults with childhood-onset 
growth hormone deficiency: reappraisal of 
insulin tolerance testing. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 2009; 
  
94: 
  
4195–4204. 
 
180 Aimaretti G, Baffoni C, Bellone S, Di Vito L, 
Corneli G, Arvat E, Benso L, Camanni F, 
Ghigo E: Retesting young adults with child-
hood-onset growth hormone (GH) deficien-
cy with GH-releasing-hormone-plus-argi-
nine test. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2000; 
  
85: 
 
 
3693–3699. 
 
181 Mauras N, Pescovitz OH, Allada V, Messig 
M, Wajnrajch MP, Lippe B; on behalf of the 
Transition Study Group: Limited efficacy of 
growth hormone (GH) during transition of 
GH-deficient patients from adolescence to 
adulthood: a phase III multicenter, double-
blind, randomized two-year trial. J Clin En-
docrinol Metab 2005; 
  
90: 
  
3946–3955. 
  
PES GH/IGF-I Guidelines 
Horm Res Paediatr 2016;86:361–397
DOI: 10.1159/000452150
395
 
182 Tauber M, Jouret B, Cartault A, Lounis N, 
Gayrard M, Marcouyeux C, Pienkowski C, 
Oliver I, Moulin P, Otal P, Joffre F, Arnaud 
C, Rochiccioli P: Adolescents with partial 
growth hormone (GH) deficiency develop 
alterations of body composition after GH 
discontinuation and require follow-up. J 
Clin Endocrinol Metab 2003; 
  
88: 
  
5101–5106. 
 
183 Conceicao FL, da Costa e Silva A, Leal Costa 
AJ, Vaisman M: Glucagon stimulation test 
for the diagnosis of GH deficiency in adults. 
J Endocrinol Invest 2003; 
  
26: 
  
1065–1070. 
 
184 Yuen KC, Biller BM, Katznelson L, Rhoads 
SA, Gurel MH, Chu O, Corazzini V, Spiller 
K, Gordon MB, Salvatori R, Cook DM: Clin-
ical characteristics, timing of peak responses 
and safety aspects of two dosing regimens of 
the glucagon stimulation test in evaluating 
growth hormone and cortisol secretion in 
adults. Pituitary 2013; 
  
16: 
  
220–230. 
 
185 Drake WM, Carroll PV, Maher KT, Metcal-
fe KA, Camacho-Hubner C, Shaw NJ, Dung-
er DB, Cheetham TD, Savage MO, Monson 
JP: The effect of cessation of growth hor-
mone (GH) therapy on bone mineral accre-
tion in GH-deficient adolescents at the com-
pletion of linear growth. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 2003; 
  
88: 
  
1658–1663. 
 
186 Carroll PV, Drake WM, Maher KT, Metcal-
fe K, Shaw NJ, Dunger DB, Cheetham TD, 
Camacho-Hubner C, Savage MO, Monson 
JP: Comparison of continuation or cessation 
of growth hormone (GH) therapy on body 
composition and metabolic status in adoles-
cents with severe GH deficiency at comple-
tion of linear growth. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 2004; 
  
89: 
  
3890–3895. 
 
187 Johannsson G, Albertsson-Wikland K, 
Bengtsson BA: Discontinuation of growth 
hormone (GH) treatment: metabolic effects 
in GH-deficient and GH-sufficient adoles-
cent patients compared with control sub-
jects. Swedish Study Group for Growth Hor-
mone Treatment in Children. J Clin Endo-
crinol Metab 1999; 
  
84: 
  
4516–4524. 
 
188 Attanasio AF, Shavrikova E, Blum WF, 
Cromer M, Child CJ, Paskova M, Lebl J, 
Chipman JJ, Shalet SM: Continued growth 
hormone (GH) treatment after final height 
is necessary to complete somatic develop-
ment in childhood-onset GH-deficient pa-
tients. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2004; 
  
89: 
 
 
4857–4862. 
 
189 Shalet SM, Shavrikova E, Cromer M, Child 
CJ, Keller E, Zapletalova J, Moshang T, Blum 
WF, Chipman JJ, Quigley CA, Attanasio AF: 
Effect of growth hormone (GH) treatment 
on bone in postpubertal GH-deficient pa-
tients: a 2-year randomized, controlled, 
dose-ranging study. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 2003; 
  
88: 
  
4124–4129. 
 
190 Underwood LE, Attie KM, Baptista J: 
Growth hormone (GH) dose-response in 
young adults with childhood-onset GH de-
ficiency: a two-year, multicenter, multiple-
dose, placebo-controlled study. J Clin Endo-
crinol Metab 2003; 
  
88: 
  
5273–5280. 
 
191 Conway GS, Szarras-Czapnik M, Racz K, 
Keller A, Chanson P, Tauber M, Zacharin M: 
Treatment for 24 months with recombinant 
human GH has a beneficial effect on bone 
mineral density in young adults with child-
hood-onset GH deficiency. Eur J Endocrinol 
2009; 
  
160: 
  
899–907. 
 
192 Elmlinger MW, Kuhnel W, Weber MM, 
Ranke MB: Reference ranges for two auto-
mated chemiluminescent assays for serum 
insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) and IGF-
binding protein 3 (IGFBP-3). Clin Chem 
Lab Med 2004; 
  
42: 
  
654–664. 
 
193 Bidlingmaier M, Friedrich N, Emeny RT, 
Spranger J, Wolthers OD, Roswall J, Ko-
rner A, Obermayer-Pietsch B, Hubener C, 
Dahlgren J, Frystyk J, Pfeiffer AF, Doering 
A, Bielohuby M, Wallaschofski H, Arafat 
AM: Reference intervals for insulin-like 
growth factor-1 (IGF-I) from birth to se-
nescence: results from a multicenter study 
using a new automated chemilumines-
cence IGF-I immunoassay conforming to 
recent international recommendations. J 
Clin Endocrinol Metab 2014; 
  
99: 
  
1712–
1721. 
 
194 De Sanctis V, Tosetto I, Iughetti L, Antoni-
azzi F, Clementi M, Toffolutti T, Facchin P, 
Monti E, Pisanello L, Tonini G, Greggio 
NA: The SHOX gene and the short stature. 
Roundtable on diagnosis and treatment of 
short stature due to SHOX haploinsuffi-
ciency: how genetics, radiology and an-
thropometry can help the pediatrician in 
the diagnostic process Padova (April 20th, 
2011). Pediatr Endocrinol Rev 2012; 
  
9: 
  
727–
733. 
 
195 Wit JM, Oostdijk W, Losekoot M, van 
Duyvenvoorde HA, Ruivenkamp CA, Kant 
SG: Mechanisms in endocrinology: novel 
genetic causes of short stature. Eur J Endo-
crinol 2016; 
  
174:R145–R173. 
 
196 McCaughey ES, Mulligan J, Voss LD, Betts 
PR: Randomised trial of growth hormone in 
short normal girls. Lancet 1998; 
  
351: 
  
940–
944. 
 
197 Leschek EW, Rose SR, Yanovski JA, Troen-
dle JF, Quigley CA, Chipman JJ, Crowe BJ, 
Ross JL, Cassorla FG, Blum WF, Cutler GB 
Jr, Baron J: Effect of growth hormone treat-
ment on adult height in peripubertal chil-
dren with idiopathic short stature: a ran-
domized, double-blind, placebo-controlled 
trial. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2004; 
  
89: 
 
 
3140–3148. 
 
198 Albertsson-Wikland K, Aronson AS, Gus-
tafsson J, Hagenas L, Ivarsson SA, Jonsson B, 
Kristrom B, Marcus C, Nilsson KO, Ritzen 
EM, Tuvemo T, Westphal O, Aman J: Dose-
dependent effect of growth hormone on fi-
nal height in children with short stature 
without growth hormone deficiency. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 2008; 
  
93: 
  
4342–4350. 
 
199 Deodati A, Cianfarani S: Impact of growth 
hormone therapy on adult height of children 
with idiopathic short stature: systematic re-
view. BMJ 2011; 
  
342:c7157. 
 
200 Finkelstein BS, Imperiale TF, Speroff T, 
Marrero U, Radcliffe D, Cuttler L: Effect of 
growth hormone therapy on height in chil-
dren with idiopathic short stature: a meta-
analysis. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 2002; 
  
3: 
 
 
230–240. 
 
201 Sotos JF, Tokar NJ: Growth hormone signif-
icantly increases the adult height of children 
with idiopathic short stature: comparison of 
subgroups and benefit. Int J Pediatr Endo-
crinol 2014; 
  
2014: 
  
15. 
 
202 Ranke MB, Lindberg A, Price DA, Daren-
deliler F, Albertsson-Wikland K, Wilton P, 
Reiter EO: Age at growth hormone therapy 
start and first-year responsiveness to growth 
hormone are major determinants of height 
outcome in idiopathic short stature. Horm 
Res 2007; 
  
68: 
  
53–62. 
 
203 Bakker B, Frane J, Anhalt H, Lippe B, Rosen-
feld RG: Height velocity targets from the na-
tional cooperative growth study for first-
year growth hormone responses in short 
children. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2008; 
  
93: 
 
 
352–357. 
 
204 Wit JM, Rekers-Mombarg L, Cutler GB, 
Crowe B, Beck TJ, Roberts K, Gill A, Chaus-
sain JL, Frisch H, Yturriaga R, Attanasio AF: 
Growth hormone (GH) treatment to final 
height in children with idiopathic short stat-
ure: evidence for a dose effect. J Pediatr 2005; 
 
 
146: 
  
45–53. 
 
205 Loche S, Cambiaso P, Setzu S, Carta D, Mari-
ni R, Borrelli P, Cappa M: Final height after 
growth hormone therapy in non-growth-
hormone-deficient children with short stat-
ure. J Pediatr 1994; 
  
125: 
  
196–200. 
 
206 Cohen P, Rogol AD, Weng W, Kappelgaard 
A, Rosenfeld RG, Germak J, The American 
Norditropin Study Group: Efficacy of IGF-
based growth hormone (GH) dosing in non-
GH-deficient (nonGHD) short stature chil-
dren with low IGF-I is not related to basal 
IGF-I levels. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 2013; 
  
78: 
 
 
405–414. 
 
207 Albertsson-Wikland K, Kristrom B, Jonsson 
B, Hochberg Z: Long-term response to GH 
therapy in short children with a delayed in-
fancy-childhood transition (DICT). Pediatr 
Res 2011; 
  
69: 
  
504–510. 
 
208 Kristrom B, Lundberg E, Jonsson B, Alberts-
son-Wikland K; study group: IGF-1 and 
growth response to adult height in a ran-
domized GH treatment trial in short non-
GH-deficient children. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 2014; 
  
99: 
  
2917–2924. 
 
209 Bang P, Bjerknes R, Dahlgren J, Dunkel L, 
Gustafsson J, Juul A, Kristrom B, Tapa-
nainen P, Aberg V: A comparison of differ-
ent definitions of growth response in short 
prepubertal children treated with growth 
hormone. Horm Res Paediatr 2011; 
  
75: 
 
 
335–345. 
 
210 Karlberg J, Fryer JG, Engstrom I, Karlberg 
P: Analysis of linear growth using a math-
ematical model. II. From 3 to 21 years of 
age. Acta Paediatr Scand Suppl 1987; 
  
337: 
 
 
12–29. 
  
Grimberg 
  et al.
 
Horm Res Paediatr 2016;86:361–397
DOI: 10.1159/000452150
396
 
211 Cohen P, Rogol AD, Deal CL, Saenger P, Re-
iter EO, Ross JL, Chernausek SD, Savage 
MO, Wit JM: Consensus statement on the 
diagnosis and treatment of children with id-
iopathic short stature: a summary of the 
Growth Hormone Research Society, the 
Lawson Wilkins Pediatric Endocrine Soci-
ety, and the European Society for Paediatric 
Endocrinology Workshop. J Clin Endocri-
nol Metab 2008; 
  
93: 
  
4210–4217. 
 
212 Laron Z: Laron syndrome (primary growth 
hormone resistance or insensitivity): the 
personal experience 1958–2003. J Clin En-
docrinol Metab 2004; 
  
89: 
  
1031–1044. 
 
213 Laron Z: Consequences of not treating chil-
dren with Laron syndrome (primary growth 
hormone insensitivity). J Pediatr Endocrinol 
Metab 2001; 
  
14(suppl 5):1243–1248; discus-
sion 1261–1262. 
 
214 Laron Z, Lilos P, Klinger B: Growth curves 
for Laron syndrome. Arch Dis Child 1993; 
 
 
68: 
  
768–770. 
 
215 Rosenbloom AL, Guevara-Aguirre J, Rosen-
feld RG, Francke U: Growth hormone recep-
tor deficiency in Ecuador. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 1999; 
  
84: 
  
4436–4443. 
 
216 Backeljauw PF, Kuntze J, Frane J, Calikoglu 
AS, Chernausek SD: Adult and near-adult 
height in patients with severe insulin-like 
growth factor-I deficiency after long-term 
therapy with recombinant human insulin-
like growth factor-I. Horm Res Paediatr 
2013; 
  
80: 
  
47–56. 
 
217 Laron Z: The essential role of IGF-I: lessons 
from the long-term study and treatment of 
children and adults with Laron syndrome. J 
Clin Endocrinol Metab 1999; 
  
84: 
  
4397–4404. 
 
218 Shevah O, Laron Z: Genetic analysis of the 
pedigrees and molecular defects of the GH-
receptor gene in the Israeli cohort of patients 
with Laron syndrome. Pediatr Endocrinol 
Rev 2006; 
  
3(suppl 3):489–497. 
 
219 Woods KA, Clark AJ, Amselem S, Savage 
MO: Relationship between phenotype and 
genotype in growth hormone insensitivity 
syndrome. Acta Paediatr Suppl 1999; 
  
88: 
 
 
158–162; discussion 163. 
 
220 Goddard AD, Covello R, Luoh SM, Clackson 
T, Attie KM, Gesundheit N, Rundle AC, 
Wells JA, Carlsson LM: Mutations of the 
growth hormone receptor in children with 
idiopathic short stature. The Growth Hor-
mone Insensitivity Study Group. N Engl J 
Med 1995; 
  
333: 
  
1093–1098. 
 
221 Attie KM, Julius JR, Stoppani C, Rundle AC: 
National Cooperative Growth Study sub-
study VI: the clinical utility of growth-hor-
mone-binding protein, insulin-like growth 
factor I, and insulin-like growth factor-
binding protein 3 measurements. J Pediatr 
1997; 
  
131:S56–S60. 
 
222 Blum WF, Cotterill AM, Postel-Vinay MC, 
Ranke MB, Savage MO, Wilton P: Improve-
ment of diagnostic criteria in growth hor-
mone insensitivity syndrome: solutions and 
pitfalls. Pharmacia Study Group on Insulin-
like Growth Factor I Treatment in Growth 
Hormone Insensitivity Syndromes. Acta 
Paediatr Suppl 1994; 
  
399: 
  
117–124. 
 
223 Schwarze CP, Wollmann HA, Binder G, 
Ranke MB: Short-term increments of insu-
lin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) and IGF-
binding protein-3 predict the growth re-
sponse to growth hormone (GH) therapy in 
GH-sensitive children. Acta Paediatr Suppl 
1999; 
  
88: 
  
200–208. 
 
224 Jorge AA, Souza SC, Arnhold IJ, Mendonca 
BB: Poor reproducibility of IGF-I and IGF 
binding protein-3 generation test in chil-
dren with short stature and normal coding 
region of the GH receptor gene. J Clin Endo-
crinol Metab 2002; 
  
87: 
  
469–472. 
 
225 Selva KA, Buckway CK, Sexton G, Pratt KL, 
Tjoeng E, Guevara-Aguirre J, Rosenfeld RG: 
Reproducibility in patterns of IGF genera-
tion with special reference to idiopathic 
short stature. Horm Res 2003; 
  
60: 
  
237–246. 
 
226 Buckway CK, Guevara-Aguirre J, Pratt KL, 
Burren CP, Rosenfeld RG: The IGF-I gen-
eration test revisited: a marker of GH sensi-
tivity. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2001; 
  
86: 
 
 
5176–5183. 
 
227 Savage MO: Phenotypes, investigation and 
treatment of primary IGF-1 deficiency. En-
docr Dev 2013; 
  
24: 
  
138–149. 
 
228 Wit JM, Kiess W, Mullis P: Genetic evalua-
tion of short stature. Best Pract Res Clin En-
docrinol Metab 2011; 
  
25: 
  
1–17. 
 
229 David A, Hwa V, Metherell LA, Netchine I, 
Camacho-Hubner C, Clark AJ, Rosenfeld 
RG, Savage MO: Evidence for a continuum 
of genetic, phenotypic, and biochemical ab-
normalities in children with growth hor-
mone insensitivity. Endocr Rev 2011; 
  
32: 
 
 
472–497. 
 
230 Rosenfeld RG, von Stein T: A database and 
website for molecular defects of the GH-IGF 
axis: www.growthgenetics.com. Horm Res 
Paediatr 2013; 
  
80: 
  
443–448. 
 
231 Dauber A, Rosenfeld RG, Hirschhorn JN: 
Genetic evaluation of short stature. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 2014; 
  
99: 
  
3080–3092. 
 
232 Johnston LB, Savage MO: Partial growth 
hormone insensitivity. J Pediatr Endocrinol 
Metab 1999; 
  
12(suppl 1):251–257. 
 
233 Goddard AD, Dowd P, Chernausek S, Geff-
ner M, Gertner J, Hintz R, Hopwood N, Ka-
plan S, Plotnick L, Rogol A, Rosenfield R, 
Saenger P, Mauras N, Hershkopf R, Angulo 
M, Attie K: Partial growth-hormone insen-
sitivity: the role of growth-hormone recep-
tor mutations in idiopathic short stature. J 
Pediatr 1997; 
  
131:S51–S55. 
 
234 Guevara-Aguirre J, Rosenbloom AL, Vas-
conez O, Martinez V, Gargosky SE, Allen
L, Rosenfeld RG: Two-year treatment of 
growth hormone (GH) receptor deficiency 
with recombinant insulin-like growth factor 
I in 22 children: comparison of two dosage 
levels and to GH-treated GH deficiency. J 
Clin Endocrinol Metab 1997; 
  
82: 
  
629–633. 
 
235 Laron Z: Insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-
1): a growth hormone. Mol Pathol 2001; 
  
54: 
 
 
311–316. 
 
236 Hunziker EB, Wagner J, Zapf J: Differential 
effects of insulin-like growth factor I and 
growth hormone on developmental stages of 
rat growth plate chondrocytes in vivo. J Clin 
Invest 1994; 
  
93: 
  
1078–1086. 
 
237 Ranke MB, Wolfle J, Schnabel D, Bettendorf 
M: Treatment of dwarfism with recombi-
nant human insulin-like growth factor-1. 
Dtsch Arztebl Int 2009; 
  
106: 
  
703–709. 
 
238 Grimberg A: p53 and IGFBP-3: apoptosis 
and cancer protection. Mol Genet Metab 
2000; 
  
70: 
  
85–98. 
 
239 Besson A, Salemi S, Deladoey J, Vuissoz JM, 
Eble A, Bidlingmaier M, Burgi S, Honegger 
U, Fluck C, Mullis PE: Short stature caused 
by a biologically inactive mutant growth 
hormone (GH-C53S). J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 2005; 
  
90: 
  
2493–2499. 
 
240 Kowarski AA, Schneider J, Ben-Galim E, 
Weldon VV, Daughaday WH: Growth fail-
ure with normal serum RIA-GH and low so-
matomedin activity: somatomedin restora-
tion and growth acceleration after exoge-
nous GH. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1978; 
  
47: 
 
 
461–464. 
 
241 Hogler W, Martin DD, Crabtree N, Nightin-
gale P, Tomlinson J, Metherell L, Rosenfeld 
R, Hwa V, Rose S, Walker J, Shaw N, Barrett 
T, Frystyk J: IGFALS gene dosage effects on 
serum IGF-I and glucose metabolism, body 
composition, bone growth in length and 
width, and the pharmacokinetics of recom-
binant human IGF-I administration. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 2014; 
  
99:E703–E712. 
 
242 Domene HM, Hwa V, Argente J, Wit JM, 
Camacho-Hubner C, Jasper HG, Pozo J, van 
Duyvenvoorde HA, Yakar S, Fofanova-
Gambetti OV, Rosenfeld RG; International 
ALS Collaborative Group: Human acid-la-
bile subunit deficiency: clinical, endocrine 
and metabolic consequences. Horm Res 
2009; 
  
72: 
  
129–141. 
 
243 Laron Z: Insulin-like growth factor-I treat-
ment of children with Laron syndrome (pri-
mary growth hormone insensitivity). Pedi-
atr Endocrinol Rev 2008; 
  
5: 
  
766–771. 
 
244 Azcona C, Preece MA, Rose SJ, Fraser N, 
Rappaport R, Ranke MB, Savage MO: 
Growth response to rhIGF-I 80 microg/kg 
twice daily in children with growth hormone 
insensitivity syndrome: relationship to se-
verity of clinical phenotype. Clin Endocrinol 
(Oxf) 1999; 
  
51: 
  
787–792. 
 
245 Grahnen A, Kastrup K, Heinrich U, Gour-
melen M, Preece MA, Vaccarello MA, Gue-
vara-Aguirre J, Rosenfeld RG, Sietnieks A: 
Pharmacokinetics of recombinant human 
insulin-like growth factor I given subcutane-
ously to healthy volunteers and to patients 
with growth hormone receptor deficiency. 
Acta Paediatr Suppl 1993; 
  
82(suppl 391):9–
13; discussion 14. 
 
246 Laron Z: If one daily injection of IGF-I has 
the same growth-promoting effect as 2 injec-
tions per day, why continue to give two in-
jections? Pediatr Endocrinol Rev 2013; 
  
10: 
 
 
277–279. 
  
PES GH/IGF-I Guidelines 
Horm Res Paediatr 2016;86:361–397
DOI: 10.1159/000452150
397
 
247 Guevara-Aguirre J, Rosenbloom AL, Gue-
vara-Aguirre M, Saavedra J, Procel P: Rec-
ommended IGF-I dosage causes greater fat 
accumulation and osseous maturation than 
lower dosage and may compromise long-
term growth effects. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 2013; 
  
98: 
  
839–845. 
 
248 Woods KA, Savage MO: Laron syndrome: 
typical and atypical forms. Baillieres Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 1996; 
  
10: 
  
371–387. 
 
249 Guevara-Aguirre J, Rosenbloom AL, Vacca-
rello MA, Fielder PJ, de lV, Diamond FB Jr, 
Rosenfeld RG: Growth hormone receptor 
deficiency (Laron syndrome): clinical and 
genetic characteristics. Acta Paediatr Scand 
Suppl 1991; 
  
377: 
  
96–103. 
 
250 Theunissen NC, Kamp GA, Koopman HM, 
Zwinderman KA, Vogels T, Wit JM: Quality 
of life and self-esteem in children treated for 
idiopathic short stature. J Pediatr 2002; 
  
140: 
 
 
507–515. 
 
251 Sandberg DE, Colsman M: Growth hor-
mone treatment of short stature: status of the 
quality of life rationale. Horm Res 2005; 
  
63: 
 
 
275–283. 
 
252 Voss LD, Sandberg DE: The psychological 
burden of short stature: evidence against. 
Eur J Endocrinol 2004; 
  
151(suppl 1):S29–
S33. 
 
253 Chaplin JE, Kristrom B, Jonsson B, Hagglof 
B, Tuvemo T, Aronson AS, Dahlgren J, Al-
bertsson-Wikland K: Improvements in be-
haviour and self-esteem following growth 
hormone treatment in short prepubertal 
children. Horm Res Paediatr 2011; 
  
75: 
  
291–
303. 
 
254 Ross JL, Sandberg DE, Rose SR, Leschek EW, 
Baron J, Chipman JJ, Cassorla FG, Quigley 
CA, Crowe BJ, Roberts K, Cutler GB Jr: Psy-
chological adaptation in children with idio-
pathic short stature treated with growth hor-
mone or placebo. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
2004; 
  
89: 
  
4873–4878. 
 
255 Christensen TL, Djurhuus CB, Clayton P, 
Christiansen JS: An evaluation of the rela-
tionship between adult height and health-
related quality of life in the general UK pop-
ulation. Clin Endocrinol 2007; 
  
67: 
  
407–412. 
 
256 Gardner M, Boshart ML, Yeguez CE, Desai 
KM, Sandberg DE: Coming up short: risks of 
bias in assessing psychological outcomes in 
growth hormone therapy for short stature. J 
Clin Endocrinol Metab 2016; 
  
101: 
  
23–30. 
 
257 Allen DB, Fost N: hGH for short stature: eth-
ical issues raised by expanded access. J Pedi-
atr 2004; 
  
144: 
  
648–652. 
 
258 Allen DB, Cuttler L: Clinical practice. Short 
stature in childhood – challenges and choic-
es. N Engl J Med 2013; 
  
368: 
  
1220–1228. 
 
259 Gill DG: “Anything you can do, I can do big-
ger?”: the ethics and equity of growth hor-
mone for small normal children. Arch Dis 
Child 2006; 
  
91: 
  
270–272. 
 
260 Rosenbloom AL: Is there a role for recombi-
nant insulin-like growth factor-I in the treat-
ment of idiopathic short stature? Lancet 
2006; 
  
368: 
  
612–616. 
 
261 Bullinger M, Quitmann J, Silva N, Rohen-
kohl A, Chaplin JE, DeBusk K, Mimoun E, 
Feigerlova E, Herdman M, Sanz D, Woll-
mann H, Pleil A, Power M: Cross-cultural 
equivalence of the patient- and parent-re-
ported quality of life in short stature youth 
(QoLISSY) questionnaire. Horm Res Paedi-
atr 2014; 
  
82: 
  
18–30. 
 
262 Quitmann J, Rohenkohl A, Bullinger M, 
Chaplin JE, Herdman M, Sanz D, Mimoun 
E, Feigerlova E, DeBusk K, Power M, Woll-
mann H, Pleil A: Parental perception of 
health-related quality of life in children and 
adolescents with short stature: literature re-
view and introduction of the parent-report-
ed QoLISSY instrument. Pediatr Endocrinol 
Rev 2013; 
  
11: 
  
147–160. 
 
263 Silvers JB, Marinova D, Mercer MB, Con-
nors A, Cuttler L: A national study of physi-
cian recommendations to initiate and dis-
continue growth hormone for short stature. 
Pediatrics 2010; 
  
126: 
  
468–476. 
 
264 Allen DB, Backeljauw P, Bidlingmaier M, Bill-
er BMK, Boguszewski M, Burman P, Butler G, 
Chihara K, Christiansen J, Cianfarani S, Clay-
ton P, Clemmons D, Cohen P, Darendeliler F, 
Deal C, Dunger D, Erfurth EM, Fuqua JS, 
Grimberg A, Haymond M, Higham C, Ho K, 
Hoffman AR, Hokken-Koelega A, Johanns-
son G, Juul A, Kopchick J, Lee P, Pollak M, 
Radovick S, Robison L, Rosenfeld R, Ross
RJ, Savendahl L, Saenger P, Toft Sorensen H, 
Stochholm K, Strasburger C, Swerdlow A, 
Thorner M: GH safety workshop position pa-
per: a critical appraisal of recombinant human 
GH therapy in children and adults. Eur J En-
docrinol 2016; 
  
174:P1–P9. 
 
265 Backeljauw PF, Miller BS, Dutailly P, 
Houchard A, Lawson E, Hale DE, Reiner B, 
Sperling MA: Recombinant human growth 
hormone plus recombinant human insulin-
like growth factor-1 coadministration ther-
apy in short children with low insulin-like 
growth factor-1 and growth hormone suffi-
ciency: results from a randomized, multi-
center, open-label, parallel-group, active 
treatment-controlled trial. Horm Res Paedi-
atr 2015; 
  
83: 
  
268–279. 
 
266 Hoybye C, Cohen P, Hoffman AR, Ross R, 
Biller BM, Christiansen JS, Growth Hor-
mone Research Society: Status of long-act-
ing-growth hormone preparations – 2015. 
Growth Horm IGF Res 2015; 
  
25: 
  
201–206. 
 
267 Christiansen JS, Backeljauw PF, Bidlingma-
ier M, Biller BM, Boguszewski MC, Casanu-
eva FF, Chanson P, Chatelain P, Choong CS, 
Clemmons DR, Cohen LE, Cohen P, Frystyk 
J, Grimberg A, Hasegawa Y, Haymond MW, 
Ho K, Hoffman AR, Holly JM, Horikawa R, 
Hoybye C, Jorgensen JO, Johannsson G, Juul 
A, Katznelson L, Kopchick JJ, Lee KO, Lee 
KW, Luo X, Melmed S, Miller BS, Misra M, 
Popovic V, Rosenfeld RG, Ross J, Ross RJ, 
Saenger P, Strasburger CJ, Thorner MO, 
Werner H, Yuen K: Growth Hormone Re-
search Society perspective on the develop-
ment of long-acting growth hormone prepa-
rations. Eur J Endocrinol 2016; 
  
174:C1–C8. 
 
268 Wit JM, Oostdijk W: Novel approaches to 
short stature therapy. Best Pract Res Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 2015; 
  
29: 
  
353–366. 
 
