 Risk Analysis
DOI: 10.1111/risa.12706
Hazard Characteristics and Patterns of Environmental
Injustice: Household-Level Determinants of Environmental
Risk in Miami, Florida
Sara E. Grineski,1,∗ Timothy W. Collins,1 Jayajit Chakraborty,1 and Marilyn Montgomery2
Limited systematic comparative knowledge exists about patterns of environmental injustices
in exposure to varied natural and technological hazards. To address this gap, we examine
how hazard characteristics (i.e., punctuated event/suddenness of onset, frequency/magnitude,
and divisibility) influence relationships between race/ethnicity, nativity, socioeconomic status
(SES), older age, housing tenure, and residential hazard exposure. Sociodemographic data
come from a random sample survey of 602 residents of the tricounty Miami Metropolitan
Statistical Area (Florida). Hazard exposure was measured using spatial data from the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, the National Air Toxics Assessment, and the Emergency
Response Notification System. We specified generalized estimating equations (GEEs)—
which account for sociospatial clustering—predicting 100-year flood risk, acute chemical ac-
cidental releases, and chronic cancer risk from air toxics from all and on-road mobile sources.
We found that for punctuated, sudden onset events, some socially advantaged people were
significantly at risk. Racial/ethnic minority variables were significant predictors of greater ex-
posure to the three technological hazards, while higher SES was associated with 100-year
flood risk exposure. Black and foreign-born Hispanic residents, and white and U.S.-born His-
panic residents, shared nearly identical risk profiles. Results demonstrate the complexities
found in human-hazard associations and the roles of hazard characteristics in shaping dis-
parate risk patterns.
KEY WORDS: Environmental injustice; hazard characteristics; Miami, Florida
1. INTRODUCTION
Environmental justice (EJ) research on the so-
cial and spatial distribution of hazards suffers from
conceptual, empirical, and methodological limita-
tions. First, the vast majority of studies focus on ana-
lyzing inequities emanating from chronic (long-term)
exposure to various technological hazards. This
1Department of Sociology & Anthropology, University of Texas
at El Paso, El Paso, TX, USA.
2Wharton Risk Management and Decision Processes Center, Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
∗Address correspondence to Sara Grineski, Department of Soci-
ology & Anthropology, University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso,
TX 79968, USA; segrineski@utep.edu.
literature has paid limited attention to assessing dis-
proportionate exposure to sudden onset (short-term)
pollution events or accidental releases of hazardous
chemicals.(1–3) Second, most EJ studies focus on as-
sessing disproportionate exposure to a single type
of technological hazard in a given study site. Al-
though recent spatial quantitative research has fo-
cused on environmental inequities surrounding natu-
ral hazards,(4,5) few published studies have attempted
to analyze such inequities in simultaneous exposure
to both natural and technological hazards and thus
provide a more comprehensive understanding of the
sociospatial consequences of environmental hazards
in a particular place (see Ref. 6 for an exception).
1
0272-4332/16/0100-0001$22.00/1 C
� 2016 Society for Risk Analysis
 2
Grineski et al.
Third, EJ studies have relied on the statistical
analysis of aggregated secondary data on the sociode-
mographic characteristics of the residential popula-
tion. This methodological reliance on aggregated sec-
ondary data has led to an omission of individual-
level factors, such as a householder’s employment
status, age, gender, nativity, and race.(7–9) Addition-
ally, individual- and household-level characteristics
cannot be inferred from analyses based on aggre-
gated data derived from census units because this
would constitute an ecological fallacy. The use of ag-
gregated secondary data has meant that most studies
utilize broad racial and ethnic categorizations to an-
alyze racial/ethnic disparities in hazard exposure. In
relying on traditional aggregated variables for race
and ethnicity (e.g., percent Hispanic), EJ researchers
have implicitly assumed a fair amount of homogene-
ity within minority populations.(10) In EJ research
studies conducted in cities with diverse Hispanic pop-
ulations, like Miami, Florida (where this study takes
place), the use of the aggregated Hispanic/Latino cat-
egory is problematic because it groups people with
substantial differences in nativity, Spanish-language
proficiency, country of origin, and social class, among
other characteristics.(11)
To address the limitations identified above, we
present a case study that compares patterns of envi-
ronmental injustice at the individual/household level
for four different hazards (i.e., 100-year flood risk,
risk from accidental releases of hazardous chemi-
cals, total cancer risk from hazardous air pollutants
[HAPs], and cancer risk from HAPs from on-road
mobile sources) in the Miami MSA, Florida. We con-
sider the following predictors: foreign-born Hispanic,
U.S.-born Hispanic, non-Hispanic black, socioeco-
nomic status, housing tenure, older age, and female-
headed households with children.
In doing so, the article answers the following re-
search question: How do hazard characteristics (i.e.,
suddenness of onset, frequency/magnitude, and di-
visibility) influence relationships between social vul-
nerability and hazard exposure? By “social vulner-
ability” we mean “the characteristics of a person
or group and their situation that influence their ca-
pacity to anticipate, cope with, resist and recover
from the impact of a natural hazard.”(12, p. 11) Based
on decades of research,(12) our study assumes that
members of racial/ethnic minority groups, those with
lower SES, people of older age, renters, and female-
headed households with children are more socially
vulnerable to hazards than others, even though we
recognize that this could potentially mask important
within-group differences. Our use of four hazard in-
dicators allows us to better develop and test a com-
parative framework for analyzing patterns of envi-
ronmental injustice than has previously been done.(6)
The comparative framework, based on Kates,(13)
relies on the four hazard characteristics listed
above.(6) Suddenness of onset refers to the rapidity
with which a hazard event occurs and it can range
from punctuated events that are quite sudden (e.g.,
an accidental chemical release on a freeway) to punc-
tuated events with somewhat slower onset (e.g., a
flood event for which there is several days’ warning)
to chronic hazards that operate on a decadal time
scale (e.g., ambient air pollution). Slower onset and
chronic hazards are typically more predictable than
sudden events, so affluent people are likely to reside
away from slow onset hazards. For example, an ac-
cidental chemical spill on a highway cannot be pre-
dicted, but many would anticipate poor air quality
around highways with higher traffic volume. In the
previous EJ studies examining slow onset exposures,
such as from polluting factories or vehicular traf-
fic, lower-income and racial/ethnic minority neigh-
borhoods have suffered from greater exposure.(14,15)
Fewer studies have examined sudden onset hazards
and the findings are mixed.(1,2,16) Most recently, in
Houston, neighborhood income and percent black
were not significantly related to accidental chem-
ical releases, but percent Hispanic was positively
related.(3) We hypothesize that higher social vulnera-
bility will be associated with exposure to chronic and
slower onset hazards and that lower social vulnerabil-
ity will be associated with rapid onset hazards (H1),
although it may also be the case that social vulner-
ability will not be associated significantly with expo-
sure to rapid onset hazards given that these hazards
occur without warning and therefore may not struc-
ture urban settlement patterns
Frequency relates to how often the hazard oc-
curs, while magnitude refers to the size of the haz-
ard event. Usually, frequency/magnitude character-
istics are inversely related for natural hazards: the
higher the frequency, the lower the magnitude. For
example, 100-year floods are of lower magnitude and
higher frequency than 500-year floods. Compared to
most technological hazards, however, flooding gener-
ally represents a high-magnitude and low-frequency
event. For technological hazards, this inverse associa-
tion between frequency and magnitude is not always
the case. While large-scale industrial accidents (e.g.,
Bhopal, India) are low frequency/high magnitude,
it is possible for a factory to release high levels of
 Hazard Characteristics and Patterns
3
pollution every day. The more common pattern is
for technological hazards to be high frequency and
low magnitude, given that living near a busy road-
way or factory generates relatively low levels of ex-
posure day in and day out. In one of the only EJ stud-
ies to explicitly examine frequency/magnitude, lower
social vulnerability was associated with greater cov-
erage of 100-year flood zones (low frequency/high
magnitude) and higher social vulnerability with air
toxics exposure (high frequency/low magnitude), at
a neighborhood level.(6) We hypothesize that higher
social vulnerability will be associated with expo-
sure to higher-frequency/lower-magnitude hazards
and vice versa (H2).
Divisibility refers to the ability to separate the
risks and benefits associated with a hazard.(13) In
general, natural hazards have lower levels of divis-
ibility than technological ones; for example, it is
hard to separate the beauty of a flood-prone land-
scape from its risks. The benefits of industrial pro-
duction, on the other hand, are felt in corporate of-
fices far from where the factories are located. The
distributional EJ literature on flooding in the United
States has found that socially advantaged people (i.e.,
those of low social vulnerability) may experience
the highest preevent exposure to flood hazards in
their neighborhoods,(5,6,17–19) which suggests a link
between lower divisibility hazards and social advan-
tage. Conversely, the EJ literature on hazards asso-
ciated with industrial facilities has found that it is
low-income and minority neighborhoods (i.e., those
of high social vulnerability) that are disproportion-
ately exposed in the United States,(20,21) suggesting
an association between social marginality and higher
divisibility hazards. Therefore, we hypothesize that
higher social vulnerability will be associated with ex-
posure to higher divisibility hazards and lower so-
cial vulnerability will be associated with exposure to
lower divisibility hazards (H3).
The four different hazards examined herein have
more than one of the above characteristics associated
with them, so comparisons are not mutually exclu-
sive (see Table I). A 100-year flood can be considered
a low divisibility, punctuated event with moderately
rapid onset and relatively low frequency/high mag-
nitude. An accidental release is a high divisibility,
punctuated event that typically occurs very rapidly
and with relatively high frequency/low magnitude.
On-road mobile and total cancer risk from HAPs
can both be considered chronic hazards that are very
slow onset and that are higher frequency/lower mag-
nitude. Whereas total air toxics has high divisibil-
ity, on-road mobile can be classified as moderate
divisibility, since there are some accessibility bene-
fits to living near main roadways that cannot be har-
nessed without exposure to pollution. Our analyses
are designed to assess how the types and character-
istics of hazards influence patterns of environmental
injustice in the Miami MSA.
1.1. Study Area
With a total population of 5.56 million (2010),
the Miami Metropolitan Statistical Area (Miami-
Dade, Broward, and Palm Beach Counties) is the
largest conurbation in Florida and the eighth largest
in the United States (Fig. 1). The Miami MSA is
an intriguing study site for EJ research because of
its racial/ethnic diversity, history of Hispanic immi-
gration, and high levels of air pollution and flood
risk.(5,6,11) The Miami MSA is one of the most eth-
nically diverse urban areas of the United States; ac-
cording to the 2010 Census, non-Hispanic white resi-
dents account for only 35% of the population, while
42% are Hispanic and 21% are non-Hispanic black.
Miami faces threats from numerous environmental
hazards. It is one of the most hurricane-prone urban
areas in the world because of its unique location be-
tween the Gulf of Mexico and the Atlantic Ocean.
A study of coastal flood risk ranked Miami as first
in asset exposure and fourth in population exposure
for cities worldwide.(22) Broward, Miami-Dade, and
Palm Beach (the three counties of the Miami MSA)
were ranked first, second, and third, respectively, for
flood-induced property damage in Florida from 1997
to 2001.(23) These three counties also represent those
facing the greatest cumulative cancer risk from am-
bient exposure to hazardous air pollutants (HAPs)
in Florida.(24) Given the relative lack of industrializa-
tion (e.g., the city of Miami ranks only 29th in terms
of total pounds of on-site industrial toxic releases out
of all cities in Florida [2010], according to RTK.net),
the high HAP concentrations in Miami largely re-
flect the dense network of heavily trafficked road-
ways throughout the study area.
While there is a growing need to document and
analyze various environmental injustices in this im-
portant U.S. urban area, few quantitative EJ stud-
ies can be found in the published literature.(5,6,11) To
date, we know that neighborhood-level cancer risks
from airborne exposure to traffic pollution in the Mi-
ami MSA are distributed inequitably with respect
to median household income and Hispanic ethnic
status.(11) Racial/ethnic minorities are significantly
 4
Grineski et al.
Table I. Comparison between Four Hazards on the Hypothetically Important Hazard Features.
Hazard Characteristic
100-Year Flood
Accidental Releases
On-Road Mobile HAPs
Total HAPs
Type
Natural
Technological
Technological
Technological
Suddenness of onset: Punctuated event
Punctuated
Punctuated
Chronic
Chronic
Suddenness of onset: Speed
Moderately fast
Very fast
Slow
Slow
Frequency
Low
High
High
High
Magnitude
High
Low
Low
Low
Divisibility
Low
High
Moderate
High
Fig. 1. The Miami MSA, Florida study area.
overrepresented in neighborhoods covered by inland
flood zones and underrepresented in coastal flood
zones, which are characterized by significantly higher
median income and housing values.(5) In a compara-
tive analysis of a technological versus a natural haz-
ard in the Miami MSA, results of spatial regres-
sion models show that greater residential instability,
lower proportion of Hispanic residents, and greater
neighborhood economic insecurity were significantly
associated with greater levels of cancer risk from
HAPs from all sources. Lower percentages of black
residents and reduced levels of economic insecurity
were associated with significantly greater coverage
of 100-year flood zones.(6) While valuable, all three
studies rely on aggregated census data and compare
only two hazards. This study addresses these limita-
tions.
2. DATA
2.1. Data Collection
Data used to construct the independent vari-
ables were derived from an institutional-review-
board-approved cross-sectional telephone survey of
randomly selected adults in the Miami MSA that
was conducted from June 28 to August 1, 2012. The
survey instrument and sampling approach were de-
signed by the authors, with input from scientists from
survey research and sampling firms. The survey fo-
cused on socioeconomic and demographic charac-
teristics and residential locational decision making,
among other topics. It was conducted in English and
Spanish. It was originally written in English, and then
subjected to three translation iterations, including a
 Hazard Characteristics and Patterns
5
back translation. The telephone interviews were con-
ducted by trained, English–Spanish bilingual inter-
viewers employed by a firm with expertise in survey
research with Hispanic populations. The survey pro-
gram was pretested by the authors and firm employ-
ees to correct errors and revise problematic items. It
was then field-piloted with the first 61 participants in
order to make final changes and achieve a 30-minute
length (mean length = 29.93 minutes). Incentives of
$10 in cash were provided to all participants.(8)
Our sampling strategy was chosen based on the
requirements that the sample be drawn randomly us-
ing probability methods and be socially and spatially
representative of the Miami MSA. We employed a
two-stage sampling approach that involved stratify-
ing and randomly selecting a subset of census tracts
across geographic quadrants of the Miami MSA in
stage one, and then completing telephone surveys
with randomly selected residents in each selected
census tract in stage two. Comparable approaches
are described elsewhere.(25,26) Our sampling strategy
called for completing telephone surveys with a min-
imum of five randomly selected residents in each of
120 randomly selected census tracts (based on 2010
Decennial Census boundaries) in the Miami MSA.
To select the census tracts for household sam-
pling, geographic quadrants in the Miami MSA were
delineated to contain equal numbers of census tracts.
Within each quadrant, census tracts were stratified
into quintiles based on a measure constructed from
two 2010 U.S.-Decennial-Census-derived variables
representing race/ethnicity and socioeconomic sta-
tus that are integral to EJ research: percent non-
Hispanic white and median household income (α =
0.608). Within each quintile in each quadrant, we ran-
domly selected six census tracts, for a total of 30 se-
lected census tracts per quadrant.
For sampling at the household level, the frame
included all listed residential landline telephone
numbers located within the selected census tracts,
which were obtained from a marketing research firm
specializing in survey sampling. We relied on listed
residential landlines due to the fine-scale spatial na-
ture of the research project. We needed to precisely
tie each resident to a home location within our se-
lected census tracts. Overall, the survey had a re-
sponse rate of 33%,3 which is comparable to that
3The 33% response rate is for the total sample, which included
participants from both the Miami and Houston Metropolitan Sta-
tistical Areas. We applied the same sampling strategy in Houston
as we did in Miami. Only results from Miami are presented here
achieved in recent published studies based on ran-
dom digit dialing surveys.(27) Studies indicate that
similar and even substantially lower survey response
rates can yield representative samples(28–30) and a
meta-analysis found response rates to poorly predict
nonresponse bias.(31)
Our sampling design yielded a generally repre-
sentative sample with respect to our study area. Ac-
cording to the 2010 census, 41.3% of Miami MSA
adults are Hispanic and 17.9% are non-Hispanic
black. In our sample, those percentages were 31.4%
and 13.5%, respectively. In the Miami MSA, 73.6%
of Hispanic adults are foreign born (ACS 2009–2013)
and in our sample, this was 84.0%. The Hispanic pop-
ulation is 42.8% of Cuban origin in the Miami MSA
and our figure was 46.7%. The median income in the
Miami MSA was $48,213 (ACS 2009–2013); in our
sample, it was $35,000. The mean income in the Mi-
ami MSA was $71,445 and the mean in our sample
was $54,236. We used address-based geocoding with
ArcGIS 10 and Google Earth to geolocate all respon-
dents.
For this study, data for 602 participants (for
whom home address data were geocodable and
nearly complete survey data were available for the
variables under study) were analyzed (see Fig. 1).
In terms of participants’ demographic characteristics
not yet mentioned, 22% rent and 17.8% of the sur-
veys were completed in Spanish; 63.1% of respon-
dents were female and 36.9% were male; and 47.2%
of respondents were over age 65.
2.2. Dependent Variables
We analyze four dependent variables at the level
of the individual/household. See Table II for descrip-
tive statistics and Fig. 2 for a map of the four hazards.
2.2.1. 100-Year Flood Zone
The most common approach to delineating the
threat of flooding in the United States is with what
is referred to as the “100-year floodplain.” This des-
ignation represents areas with a 1% probability of
flooding per year and was created to develop a stan-
dardized measure that can be utilized by federal,
state, and local agencies involved with floodplain
management.(4,5) The boundaries of 100-year flood
as a case study. Adding Houston would have detracted from our
in-depth focus on the Miami MSA. Other analyses focus on the
Houston sample.(8)
 6
Grineski et al.
Table II. Descriptive Statistics for All Analysis Variables, Miami MSA
Continuous Variables
N
Min.
Max.
Mean
SD
Percent Missing
Count of all hazardous materials
incidents (ERNS) within 1-km
buffers*
602
0
27
1.620
4.090
0
Cancer risk from air toxics—all
sources*
602
41.146
99.358
60.162
7.611
0
Cancer risk from air
toxics—on-road mobile*
602
0.970
23.428
8.389
4.230
0
100-year flood zone*
602
0
1
0.520
0.380
0
Socioeconomic status (education
and income factor)
446
–2.967
2.143
0.00
1
25.91
Dichotomous Variables
N
Yes
No
Percent Missing
Presence of resident(s) over 65 in
household
433
240
193
28.07
Renter status
581
133
448
3.49
Non-Hispanic black
600
81
519
0.003
Foreign-born Hispanic
599
157
442
0.005
U.S.-born Hispanic
599
31
568
0.005
Non-Hispanic white/Asian/other
597
329
268
0.01
*Indicates dependent variables.
Fig. 2. The locations of the four hazards in the Miami MSA, Florida.
zones were provided by U.S. Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) digital flood insur-
ance rate maps (DFIRMs). We consider both A
zones (inland) and V zones (coastal) in our mea-
sure. For 100-year flood risk, household-level values
were assigned based on the proportion of the area
of a 1-km circular buffer surrounding the home site
falling within flood zone boundaries. This approach
addresses the fuzziness of flood zone delineations,
which is attested to by the fact that people living
 Hazard Characteristics and Patterns
7
outside 100-year flood zones may experience dam-
ages during an event,(32,33) while people living within
100-year flood zones may not.
2.2.2. Accidental Releases
Our information source for estimating risks from
accidental releases of hazardous chemicals is the
ERNS (Emergency Response Notification System)
database. This is a compilation of incidents reported
to the National Response Center since 1990. Inci-
dents in the ERNS database include chemical spills,
accidents involving chemicals (such as fires or ex-
plosions), oil spills, transportation accidents that in-
volve oil or chemicals, releases of radioactive materi-
als, sightings of oil sheens on water bodies, terrorist
incidents involving chemicals, and incidents where
illegally dumped chemicals have been found. Our
study uses the Right-To-Know Network’s (RTK
NET) online database, which provides information
on ERNS incidents reported to the National Re-
search Council.(3) To ensure adequate numbers of
incidents, we downloaded information on ERNS in-
cidents that occurred in the three counties of the
Miami MSA from 2007 to 2011. Our analysis en-
compasses 1,327 reported incidents in the ERNS
database for which complete locational informa-
tion is available in the form of a street address or
latitude-longitude coordinates. The locations of 1,291
(97.3%) of these incidents were geocoded to the
street network of the MSA on the basis of street
address information, while the remaining 36 (2.7%)
ERNS incidents were geocoded using their geo-
graphic coordinates. To create the analysis variable
for this article, the total number of ERNS incidents
occurring within one kilometer of each respondent’s
home was calculated.
2.2.3. Total Cancer Risk from HAPs
Potential cancer risks from ambient exposure
to hazardous air pollutants (HAPs) were derived
from the U.S. EPA’s National-Scale Air Toxics
Assessment (NATA), which has emerged as an im-
portant and reliable database for estimating public
health risks associated with the inhalation of HAPs
from various emission sources.(34) HAPs, also known
as air toxics or noncriteria air pollutants, include
188 specific substances identified by the Clean Air
Act Amendments of 1990 that are known to cause
or suspected of causing cancer and other serious
health problems, including respiratory, neurological,
immune, or reproductive effects.(24) The methodol-
ogy used to generate estimates of health risk for
the 2005 NATA comprises several steps and is dis-
cussed elsewhere.(10,24) The total cancer risk measure
is based on the potential lifetime cancer risk from
inhalation exposure to four different types of HAP
emission sources (i.e., point, nonpoint, on-road mo-
bile, and nonroad mobile sources), along with back-
ground and secondary sources. The total measure
represents the sum of the six sources. We used an in-
terpolation technique to assign the total cancer risk
values to individual households based on the levels
for the census block where they reside.
2.2.4. On-Road Mobile Source Cancer
Risk from HAPs
On-road mobile risk values were also deter-
mined from the U.S. EPA’s National-Scale Air
Toxics Assessment (NATA) using the same ap-
proach described above. On-road mobile sources in-
clude motorized vehicles operating on roads and
highways (e.g., cars, trucks, buses); this emission cat-
egory does not include airplanes, trains, lawnmowers,
and construction vehicles. As with total cancer risk,
we used the same interpolation technique to assign
the on-road mobile cancer risk values to individual
households based on the levels for the census block
where they reside.
2.3. Independent Variables
The independent variables were selected to in-
clude a range of social vulnerability/environmental
justice variables relevant to the Miami MSA, in-
cluding race/ethnicity, nativity, socioeconomic sta-
tus, housing tenure, old age, and gender. Specifically,
we measure race/ethnicity and nativity using a cate-
gorical variable comprised of foreign-born Hispanic
(1 = yes, 0 = no); U.S.-born Hispanic (1 = yes, 0 =
no); non-Hispanic black (1 = yes, 0 = no), and non-
Hispanic white/Asian/other (1 = yes, 0 = no). SES
is measured using a continuous, standardized vari-
able that combines annual household income and the
level of education for the individual in the household
with the highest attainment using principal compo-
nents analysis. Housing tenure is measured on the ba-
sis of renter/ownership status using 1 = renter and 0
= owner. Over age 65 is an indicator variable coded
1 if the household has one or more persons over 65 in
the home and 0 if it does not. Finally, female-headed
 8
Grineski et al.
households with one or more children under 18 are
coded as 1, while other household types are coded
as 0.
3. METHODS
3.1. Analysis Approach
Multiple imputation (MI) was employed to
address nonresponse bias associated with missing
values for all analysis variables derived from the
household survey (see Table II for percent missing
statistics for the variables). MI is a best practice for
addressing missing data in statistical analysis.(35) MI
involves creating multiple sets of values for miss-
ing observations using a regression-based approach.
It is used to avoid the bias that can occur when
missing values are not missing completely at ran-
dom (MCAR)(36) and is appropriate for self-reported
survey data.(37) Using IBM SPSS Statistics version
20 software, 20 imputed data sets were specified to in-
crease power and 200 between-imputation iterations
were used to ensure that the resulting imputations
were independent of each other (Enders 2010). In
order to compute the generalized estimating equa-
tions (GEEs), SPSS was used to run the statistics 20
times (once per imputed data set) and then pool the
results.
Following Collins et al.,(8) generalized estimating
equations (GEEs) with robust (i.e., Huber/White)
covariance estimates were used; they extend the gen-
eralized linear model(38) to accommodate clustered
data. GEEs provide a general method for the analy-
ses of clustered variables, and relax several assump-
tions of traditional regression models. GEEs enable
us to compare patterns of environmental injustice
based on hazard characteristics in reference to non-
normally distributed dependent variables of differ-
ent types, while accounting for geographic clustering.
For our purposes, GEEs are preferable to other mod-
eling approaches that account for nonindependence
of data (e.g., mixed models with random effects).
This is because GEEs estimate unbiased population-
averaged (i.e., marginal) regression coefficients, even
with misspecification of the correlation structure
when using a robust variance estimator,(39,40) which
is appropriate for analyses of general patterns of
environmental
inequality
across
subpopulations.
Mixed models with random effects, in contrast,
generate cluster-specific (i.e., conditional, subject-
specific) results, which would not elucidate av-
erage responses over subpopulations nor provide
as solid an inferential basis for making compar-
isons across groups or subpopulations in the cur-
rent analysis.(41) Additionally, because our focus
is on correlates of hazard exposure at the house-
hold level, and not neighborhood effects, GEEs
are appropriate because the intracluster correla-
tion estimates are adjusted for as nuisance param-
eters and not modeled (as in multilevel modeling
approaches).(42)
To fit a GEE model, clusters of observations
must be defined. It is assumed that observations
from within a cluster are correlated, while observa-
tions from different clusters are independent. GEEs
with clusters defined based on median year of hous-
ing construction culled from the 2009–2013 five-
year American Community Survey estimates by ge-
ographic quadrant for census tracts in which sur-
veyed households reside were used in the mod-
els presented here in order to adjust for spatial
clustering.(8) This cluster definition method was se-
lected over other alternatives (e.g., defining clusters-
based census tract of residence) since GEE tech-
niques assume dependence of observations within
clusters and independence between clusters. These
assumptions would be erroneous if census tracts
were used to define clusters, since data for house-
holds living in separate census tracts—but within the
same urban developmental context with shared so-
ciodemographic characteristics—would be treated as
independent.(8) The median year of home construc-
tion by geographic quadrant method of cluster def-
inition used here much more closely corresponds
with the urban developmental context within which
households are nested. Using these two variables to
define clusters is also theoretically informed, since
they correspond with spatial and temporal contex-
tual built-environmental features associated with the
historical-geographical formation of environmental
injustice.(43–45)
GEEs require the specification of an intracluster
dependency correlation structure, that is, a working
correlation matrix.(39,40) Although other method-
ological approaches may account for the intracluster
correlation, especially when the dependent variable
is normally distributed, GEEs offered the additional
advantage of not requiring the correct specification
of the correlation matrix in order to reach unbi-
ased statistical conclusions about the covariates’
effects, given that the robust estimation of standard
errors be applied (as is the case in our analysis).
In this case, we specified the exchangeable corre-
lation matrix, which assumes constant intracluster
 Hazard Characteristics and Patterns
9
dependency (i.e., compound symmetry), so that all
the off-diagonal elements of the correlation matrix
are equal.
We began by analyzing the main effects of the
explanatory variables on each dependent variable.
To select the best-fitting model, we ran the GEEs
multiple times for each dependent variable, varying
the model specifications. For the continuous depen-
dent variables (i.e., total, on-road, 100-year flood),
we tested normal, gamma, and inverse Gaussian dis-
tributions with log and identity links for a total of
six models. The selection of an identity link function
means the dependent variable is predicted directly
and is not transformed, while use of a log link func-
tion means that the natural log of the dependent vari-
able is predicted.(46) For the count dependent vari-
able (i.e., accidental releases), we used a negative
binomial distribution with log and identity links for
a total of two models. For each dependent variable,
we selected the specifications that yielded the low-
est QIC (quasi-likelihood under the independence
model criterion) value, indicating the best fit (see
Table III). Unfortunately, GEEs do not support
model fit statistics that indicate the proportion of
variance explained. Instead, QIC fit statistics are pro-
vided, which are interpretable similar to the Akaike’s
information criterion (AIC) as applied to generalized
linear models (i.e., smaller values indicate better fit).
While QIC fit statistics are useful for selecting best-
fitting models (e.g., determining which is the best link
function), but they are not comparable across the
GEEs.
Then, we predicted each of the four depen-
dent variables three times for a total of 15 runs.
First, we used the reference category of “white/
Asian/other.” Then we put “white/Asian/other” in
the model and instead removed “U.S. Hispanic.”
Finally, we removed “foreign-born Hispanic” after
putting “U.S. Hispanic” back in the model. This en-
abled all racial/ethnic/nativity groups to be compared
to each other and the same procedure was followed
for all four dependent variables; all other indepen-
dent variables remained the same between the runs.
Since SPSS does not perform multicollinearity di-
agnostic tests with in the GEE procedure, ordinary
least squares regression was used to examine pos-
sible multicollinearity among the analysis variables
included in each model. According to variance in-
flation factor and tolerance criteria scores reported
in Table IV, inferences from the models do not
appear to have been affected by multicollinearity
problems.(47)
4. RESULTS
Results of the four GEEs are presented in
Table IV. When we use the term “significant” in the
text, we are referring to a p < 0.05 level.
4.1. 100-Year Flood Risk
Higher SES was associated with significantly
greater odds of residence in a 100-year flood zone.
There were no significant racial/ethnic differences in
100-year flood risk. The 100-year flood risk seems
to be associated more closely with higher SES than
race/ethnicity/nativity.
4.2. Accidental Releases
There were three significant findings in this
model. Having one or more older adults in the house-
hold was associated with increasing numbers of ac-
cidental releases and being foreign-born Hispanic
was associated with fewer accidental releases as com-
pared to being white and as compared to being U.S.-
born Hispanic. While not significant or near signif-
icance, being in the predominately white reference
group was associated with more accidental releases
than being Hispanic (any nativity) or black; and be-
ing black or foreign-born Hispanic was associated
with fewer releases than being a U.S. Hispanic. Ac-
cidental releases were associated with older age and
to a lesser degree with race/ethnicity/nativity-based
privilege.
4.3. Total Cancer Risk from HAPs
Non-Hispanic blacks and foreign-born Hispanics
had significantly greater exposure to cancer-causing
HAPs from all sources than did the predominately
white group. Foreign-born Hispanics and blacks had
significantly greater risk than did U.S.-born His-
panics. Lower SES was significantly associated with
greater exposure as well. Both racial/ethnic marginal-
ity and SES played a role in total cancer risk from
HAPs.
4.4. On-Road Mobile Risk from HAPs
Non-Hispanic blacks and foreign-born Hispanics
had significantly greater exposure to cancer-causing
HAPs from on-road mobile sources than did the pre-
dominately white group. Non-Hispanic blacks had
significantly greater risk than U.S.-born Hispanics to
 10
Grineski et al.
Table III. Model Fit Statistics (i.e., QIC scores) for the Specifications Considered for the GEEs
Normal Distribution
Gamma Distribution
Inverse Gaussian
Distribution
Negative Binomial
Distribution
Log Link
Identity Link
Log Link
Identity Link
Log Link
Identity Link
Log Link
Identity Link
Total HAPs
17417.8
17414.5
23.9
24.0
19.0a
19.1
On-road HAPs
4740.3
4728.4
102.8
104.2
29.9a
31.4
100-year flood
61.2
60.6a
520.7
520.3
Error
3300.1
Accidental releases
578.1a
901.1
Note: QIC (quasi-likelihood under the independence model criterion) model fit statistics are not comparable between the GEEs predicting
different dependent variables; smaller values correspond to better fit when selecting between model specifications.
aBest-fitting model; results reported in Table IV.
on-road sources of HAPs. While SES was not sig-
nificant, being a renter was associated with signifi-
cantly increased risk. Both racial/ethnic marginality
and renter status were associated with mobile cancer
risk from HAPs.
5. DISCUSSION
There were several notable trends across the sta-
tistical results related to the hypotheses about so-
cial vulnerability and hazard characteristics. First, we
hypothesized that higher social vulnerability would
be associated with exposure to chronic, slower on-
set hazards and that lower social vulnerability would
be associated with exposure to punctuated, rapid on-
set hazards (H1). This hypothesis was generally sup-
ported by the empirical analyses. Specifically, some
socially advantaged people were significantly at risk
from the punctuated hazards (i.e., accidental releases
and 100-year floods), while none were significantly
at risk for the chronic/slow onset hazards (i.e., to-
tal and on-road mobile air toxics). For example, pre-
dominately white and U.S.-born Hispanic residents
are exposed to significantly higher risk than foreign-
born Hispanics from accidental releases and higher
SES was associated with 100-year flood risk. In terms
of the chronic, slower onset hazards, they were as-
sociated with greater social vulnerability: black and
foreign-born Hispanics generally faced greater risks
from total and on-road mobile air toxics than did
U.S.-born Hispanics and whites.
Second, we hypothesized that higher social vul-
nerability would be associated with exposure to
higher-frequency/lower-magnitude hazards and vice
versa (H2). This hypothesis was generally supported.
The 100-year flood variable represented the rela-
tively low-frequency/high-magnitude hazard in this
analysis, and we found that being of higher SES was
related to greater odds of flood zone residence. In
terms of the high-frequency/low-magnitude hazards,
the findings for total and on-road cancer risk aligned
with the hypothesis as it was more socially vulner-
able people who faced greater risks. There were
mixed findings for the accidental release variable as
it was non-Hispanic whites and U.S.-born Hispanics
(vs. foreign-born Hispanics) and residents over age
65 who faced greater risk and none of the other vari-
ables were significant. It may be that accidental re-
leases did not conform to the other technological
hazards due to their association with transportation-
related sources in Miami, which contributed to a
highly dispersed spatial pattern and low frequency
of occurrence at any given location. Some acciden-
tal releases are spatially fixed, as they emanate from
a given point source (e.g., a refinery) relatively fre-
quently. However, other accidental releases occur on
highways, and are thus spatially infrequent to any
given road segment, even though accidental releases
are a high-frequency hazard overall across the MSA.
In Miami, only 29% of the accidental releases ana-
lyzed here occurred at fixed locations (e.g., factory
or storage tank); this differs from other EJ studies of
similar hazards where all(2,16) or half(1) were spatially
fixed.
Third, we hypothesized that higher social vulner-
ability would be associated with exposure to higher
divisibility hazards and lower social vulnerability
with exposure to lower divisibility hazards (H3). This
was confirmed for flood zones, and for on-road and
total cancer risk, but not for accidental releases. For
example, higher SES was linked to the low divisibility
hazard of flood zone residence while lower SES was
associated with the high divisibility hazard of total air
toxics risk. On-road air toxic hazards are moderately
 Hazard Characteristics and Patterns
11
Table IV. GEE Results for Models Predicting Four Hazards (n = 602) in the Miami MSA
GEE Type
100-Year Flood
Normal Identity
Parameter (CI) Sig.
Accidental Releases
Negative Binomial Log
Parameter (CI) Sig.
Total HAPs
Inv. Gaussian Log
Parameter (CI) Sig.
On-Road
Inv. Gaussian Log
Parameter (CI) Sig.
Tolerancea
VIFa
(Ref: Predominately white)
Black non-Hisp
0.008 (−0.135, 0.152)
−0.282 (−0.627, 0.064)
0.035 (0.008. 0.063)c
0.212 (0.093, 0.331)c
0.840
1.190
Hisp FB
−0.070 (−0.145, 0.005)
−0.434, (−0.669, –0.199)c
0.32 (0.001, 0.063)c
0.172 (0.098, 0.246)c
0.792
1.263
Hisp U.S.
−0.062 (−0.184, 0.060)
0.003 (−0.329, 0.335)
−0.004 (−0.032, 0.025)
0.046 (−0.055, 0.147)
0.932
1.073
(Ref: U.S. Hisp)
Black non-Hisp
0.071 (−0.105, 0.246)
−0.285 (−0.718, 0.148)
0.046 (0.009, 0.083)c
0.139 (0.026, 0.252)c
0.336
2.978
Hisp FB
−0.008 (−0.175, 0.160)
−0.437 (−0.803, –0.072)c
0.041 (0.001, 0.080)c
0.103 (−0.002, 0.209)
0.234
4.273
(Ref: FB Hispanic)
Black non-Hisp
0.078 (−0.074, 0.231)
0.152 (−0.172, 0.477)
0.003 (−0.034, 0.040)
0.039 (−0.090, 0.169)
0.779
1.283
Other varsb
Intercept
0.509 (0.420, 0.598)c
0.901 (0.098, 1.705)c
4.086 (4.056, 4.117)c
2.067 (1.891, 2.244)
SES
0.055 (0.023, 0.087)c
0.104 (−0.036, 0.244)
−0.011 (−0.021, 0.002)c
−0.015 (−0.048, 0.018)
0.766
1.305
Over 65
0.028 (−0.048, 0.104)
0.397 (0.182, 0.611)c
−0.013 (−0.027, 0.001)
−0.025 (−0.099, 0.050)
0.880
1.136
Rent
−0.015 (−0.093, 0.063)
0.186 (−0.104, 0.476)
0.019 (−0.011, 0.048)
0.102 (0.030, 0.173)c
0.896
1.116
aCollinearity criteria are reported for original data only and not pooled across multiple data sets.
bParameter estimates, confidence internals, and p values for the four “other vars” were taken from the model using “White/Asian/Other” as the reference group.
cp < 0.05.
 12
Grineski et al.
divisible and the findings were in-between, with SES
being negative but nonsignificant. The accidental re-
lease findings did not conform to this pattern as they
are highly divisible but SES was positive and not
significant. This may relate in part to the fact that
the accidental release hazards are punctuated (i.e.,
not chronic) and typically relatively low magnitude
and infrequent events at any given location in Mi-
ami. The punctuated character of accidental releases,
combined with the fact that they are primarily at-
tributable to transportation-related sources in Miami
(and are thus infrequent occurrences at any given
location), implies that they very rarely produce no-
ticeable effects in residential environments. Thus, we
suspect that people rarely consider potential impacts
associated with accidental releases in terms of their
residential decision making within Miami.
The differences in findings between flood zones
and chronic technological hazards are relatively well-
supported in the literature.(5,6,14,15,19) This suggests
that divisibility plays a pivotal role in patterns of
hazard exposure, even though it has not been well-
integrated in EJ research.(6,48–50) In the Miami MSA,
findings suggest residence in the 100-year flood zone
may be closely tied to amenity benefits. Analysis of
interviews with Miami residents revealed that it was
common for residents living in 100-year flood zones
to refer specifically to water-based amenities (e.g.,
water views and being close to beach) when asked
why they lived where they did. For example, Ruby,
who resides in the 100-year flood zone, indicated that
she liked that the ocean was nearby and that she has
a “lovely view of Biscayne Bay” from her window,
which was “very, very soothing” (unpublished data).
It seems as if the presence of socioeconomi-
cally affluent residents in 100-year flood zones re-
lates closely to divisibility and the fact that, in or-
der to access water-based benefits (e.g., ocean views
and beach access), they must deal with the risk. How-
ever, they are not particularly vulnerable to flood-
ing. While flood insurance was not examined as a
variable in this study, these more affluent residents
likely externalize the risks of flood zone living to the
U.S. federal government through insurance cover-
age provided by the National Flood Insurance Pro-
gram (NFIP), which offers highly subsidized premi-
ums to residents in 100-year flood zones. The ma-
jority of subsidized flood insurance rates are for
properties within coastal flood hazard zones,(51,52)
where more affluent residents live. Thus, the risks of
dwelling within flood hazard areas are mitigated by
institutionally mediated access to flood insurance
policies with premiums well below the actuarial costs
of flood hazards.
Also related to H3, it was notable that none of
the race/ethnicity predictors were significant for the
low divisibility hazard (flooding), while they were sig-
nificant for the two higher divisibility/slower onset
hazards (but not the high divisibility/sudden onset
accidental releases). Specifically, black and foreign-
born Hispanics were at risk for total and on-road
air toxics, even when controlling for SES, which
suggests that there is a racial/ethnic component to
the environmental injustice associated with these
high divisibility hazards.(44,53) When there are few
benefits associated with proximate residence, it was
the racial/ethnic minority/immigrant individuals who
faced the greatest risk, without the added benefits of
subsidized health insurance. This situation, in terms
of access to social protections, is quite different than
the government-subsidized property/contents insur-
ance available to residents in the 100-year flood
plain. In fact, some minority residents face distinct
disadvantages under the U.S.’s Patient Protection
and Affordable Care Act (ACA; also known as
“Obamacare”). Undocumented immigrants (mostly
included within our “foreign-born Hispanic” cate-
gory) are ineligible for any type of health insurance.
Legally present foreign-born Hispanics are permit-
ted to purchase insurance during the five-year wait-
ing period for Medicaid, the U.S. public insurance
program for the poor, under the law,(54) but receive
no subsidized premiums because of the environmen-
tal risks they face.
Across all four hazards, the dramatic differences
in risk exposures observed between the foreign-born
and U.S.-born Hispanics reinforce the importance of
not lumping diverse groups together as one group
in EJ studies. This finding represents a clear con-
tribution to the EJ literature and suggests that eth-
nic heterogeneity (specific to each study area) should
be integrated in future analyses. In Miami, non-
Hispanic blacks indicated greater exposure to risk
than foreign-born Hispanics in all models, but the
parameter never approached statistical significance.
The differences in risk between U.S. Hispanics and
the predominately white reference groups never ap-
proached significance. In Miami, this suggests that
blacks and foreign-born Hispanics share similar ex-
posure patterns to hazards as do whites and U.S.-
born Hispanics. This finding underscores the impor-
tance of accounting for racial/ethnic heterogeneity
in EJ research;(10,11,55) here nativity among Hispan-
ics was critically important. Using proportions of
 Hazard Characteristics and Patterns
13
racial/ethnic groups as an indicator of neighborhood
marginalization in EJ studies is imprecise and likely
to conceal significant intragroup heterogeneity, espe-
cially in study areas with ample intraethnic diversity.
As with any analysis, this study has several lim-
itations. The most important limitation is the con-
founding nature of the comparisons, which are com-
plicated by the multifactorial nature of the four
hazards under study. For example, we only have one
hazard that is “very sudden onset” and it is techno-
logical in nature; this limits our ability to understand
“suddenness of onset” as a hazard characteristic.
There are other hazard types that could be added
to future comparative studies to improve the re-
search design. They were not included here due to
a lack of survey respondents exposed in our Miami
sample. A 500-year flood zone would theoretically
help with the frequency/magnitude comparison since
it is lower frequency/higher magnitude than the
100-year flood zone. Because the 100-year flood
zone is spatially enclosed by the 500-year zone and
many fewer survey respondents resided in the much
smaller 500-year zone, including the 500-year flood
zone as its own discrete category was not a ten-
able option. Additionally, we could not consider in-
land flood zones versus coastal 100-year flood zones,
due to a lack of survey respondents in the coastal
zones, even though this would have helped to re-
fine our consideration of divisibility. At the neigh-
borhood level in Miami, social vulnerability indica-
tors were generally positively associated with inland
flood zones and negatively associated with coastal
flood zones.(5) This aligns with our hypotheses about
divisibility given that the inland flood zones—which
typically lack the water-based amenities of coastal
zones—are characterized by a risk pattern that con-
forms to traditional EJ expectations. We were unable
to consider major point source hazards in this analy-
sis, even though these data are readily available from
the NATA, because point source hazards comprise
only 5% of the total NATA risk in Miami. This is
a limitation since point source hazards are a perfect
example of a technological hazard that is highly divis-
ible as the benefits (e.g., the use and exchange values
of the items produced) are by design separated from
the location where the products are manufactured.
Restricting the analysis to one metro area is also
a limitation in terms of generalizability. Miami is a
unique city that is not typical of the rest of the United
States. Miami has a larger proportion of its total
population being Hispanic than even Los Angeles
(where there are more Hispanic people)(56) and the
largest population of Cubans outside of Cuba.(57) It
is also oriented toward the coast and rich in environ-
mental amenities. It is possible that the pattern for
flood hazard may be different in noncoastal cities lo-
cated in other regions of the United States where all
flood zones may be relatively low in amenities com-
pared to Miami.
In terms of limitations with the survey meth-
ods, we relied on landline numbers for our sampling
frame. Cell phones cannot currently be spatially sam-
pled in the United States at subcounty levels, which
was what we needed to carry out a geographically-
specific sampling strategy. It is important to note
that including a cell-only sample with a landline sam-
ple may produce general population estimates that
are nearly identical to those from a landline sam-
ple alone.(58) While landline-only surveys like this
one may disproportionately exclude people known
to have high rates of cell-only usage (e.g., Hispanics)
from sampling frames, research indicates that this
does not necessarily produce more biased estimates
for those groups.(59)
6. CONCLUSION
This article represents a second and more de-
tailed exploration of the hazard comparison frame-
work introduced in Grineski et al.(6) to analyze social
inequities in the spatial distribution of environmental
risks. It is an improvement on the previous study with
its use of individual-level data (as opposed to census
tracts) and four hazards (as opposed to two), which
allows for a better understanding of hazard charac-
teristics across both natural and technological haz-
ards. The analysis allows us to begin to address the
three limitations outlined in the introduction to the
article.
First, considering acute and “natural” hazards,
alongside
the
more
commonly
studied
chronic
“technological” hazards, reveals complexity in pat-
terns of injustice and illuminates the role of hazard
characteristics in shaping risk profiles. Overall, we
found differences between exposure to natural and
technological risks that are largely reflective of the
hazard characteristics associated with each. The
differences in findings between the technological
and natural hazards relate closely to divisibility.
Residence in the 100-year flood zone, for example, is
closely tied to amenity values (e.g., water views, close
beach access), which is not the case for residence in a
neighborhood with high levels of air toxics exposure
or accidental releases. The connection between
 14
Grineski et al.
100-year flood zone residence and amenities in
Miami could partially explain why the 100-year flood
zone was more closely associated with lower social
vulnerability than the other three hazards.
Second, consideration of multiple types of tech-
nological hazards revealed the differences in social
patterns of exposure for sudden (accidental releases)
versus chronic/very slow onset (total and on-road
air toxics) risks. For example, the accidental releases
hazard is a sudden and punctuated event, and it was
associated with lower social vulnerability to a greater
degree than were the two chronic (slow onset) haz-
ards, which were on-road and total air toxics.
Third, using primary data, not aggregated sec-
ondary data, allowed us to avoid the ecological fal-
lacy and consider variables not readily available in
the U.S. Census or American Community Survey
(e.g., having one or more person over 65 in the house-
hold). Primary data enabled us to examine differ-
ences between U.S.-born Hispanics and foreign-born
Hispanics. This revealed that that U.S.-born Hispan-
ics have a risk profile similar to non-Hispanic whites,
while foreign-born Hispanics share a risk profile with
non-Hispanic blacks in Miami.
While our study addresses three methodologi-
cal limitations of prior research, the findings empha-
size the need to formulate appropriate policy solu-
tions that focus on mitigating exposure to both flood
risks and hazardous air pollutants in the Miami area,
especially in neighborhoods where socially vulnera-
ble residents are likely to be disproportionately im-
pacted by these hazards. The significant link between
older age and exposure to accidental releases at the
individual level has practical implications. Elderly
residents require special attention because they of-
ten have mobility restrictions that force them to de-
pend on others in the event of a chemical spill that
requires evacuation. If older adults reside in an area
with higher probability of exposure to accidental re-
leases, this must be considered by engaging emer-
gency response personnel so that appropriate evac-
uation routes or contingencies can be identified.
The
existence
of
distributive
injustices
for
racial/ethnic minority and lower-SES residents and
the overall level of air toxics exposure in the Mi-
ami MSA speak to the need for policy interventions
to reduce air pollution from all sources. In addition,
subsidized health insurance coverage to help resi-
dents mitigate the detrimental health risks of liv-
ing near technological hazards is important. Since
U.S. taxpayers protect the property of those who live
in flood zones through the NFIP, similar subsidized
protections should be offered to the property and
bodies of those who live in high-technological-hazard
zones. Given that foreign-born Hispanics are among
those disproportionately at risk, it must be noted that
some at-risk residents will not be legal U.S. residents
and therefore not legally entitled to health benefits
under the ACA; special provisions must be taken to
ensure that they are also protected. Finally, the find-
ings of this study highlight the differences between
U.S.-born versus foreign-born Hispanics in terms of
exposure to environmental hazards, and these dif-
ferences should be noted when disseminating risk
and safety information. In Miami, it was foreign-born
Hispanics who were at risk from chronic technolog-
ical hazards to a greater degree than U.S.-born His-
panics, which makes Spanish-language communica-
tion regarding those hazards essential.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge U.S. National Science Foun-
dation (NSF) grants CMMI-1129984 and CCMI-
1536113 for funding this work. The content is solely
the responsibility of the authors and does not neces-
sarily reflect the news of the U.S. NSF.
REFERENCES
1. Margai FL. Health risks and environmental inequity: A geo-
graphical analysis of accidental releases of hazardous materi-
als. Professional Geographer, 2001; 53(1):422–434.
2. Chakraborty J. Acute exposure to extremely hazardous sub-
stances: An analysis of environmental equity. Risk Analysis,
2001; 21:883–894.
3. Chakraborty J, Collins TW, Montgomery MC, Grineski SE,
Hernandez M. Comparing disproportionate exposure to acute
and chronic pollution risks: A case study in Houston, Texas.
Risk Analysis, 2014; 34(11):2005–2020.
4. Maantay J, Maroko A. Mapping urban risk: Flood hazards,
race, and environmental justice in New York. Applied Geog-
raphy, 2009; 29(1):111–124.
5. Chakraborty J, Collins TW, Montgomery MC, Grineski SE.
Social and spatial inequities in exposure to flood risk: A
case study in Miami, Florida. Natural Hazards Review, 2014;
15(3):04014006.
6. Grineski SE, Collins TW, Chakraborty J, Montgomery MC.
Hazardous air pollutants and flooding: A comparative in-
terurban study of environmental injustice. GeoJournal, 2015;
80(1):145–158.
7. Mohai P, Lantz P, Morenoff J, House J, Mero R. Racial and
socioeconomic disparities in residential proximity to pollut-
ing industrial facilities: Evidence from the Americans’ Chang-
ing Lives Study. American Journal of Public Health, 2009;
99(S3):S649–S656.
8. Collins
TW,
Grineski
SE,
Chakraborty
J,
Hernandez
M, Montgomery MC. Downscaling environmental justice
analysis: Determinants of household-level hazardous air pollu-
tant exposure in Greater Houston. Annals of the Association
of American Geographers, 2015; 105(4):684–703.
 Hazard Characteristics and Patterns
15
9. Crowder K, Downey L. Inter-neighborhood migration, race,
and environmental hazards: Modeling microlevel processes
of environmental inequality. American Journal of Sociology,
2010; 115(4):1110–1149.
10. Collins T, Grineski S, Chakraborty J, McDonald Y. Under-
standing environmental health inequalities through compara-
tive intracategorical analysis: Racial/ethnic disparities in can-
cer risks from air toxics in El Paso County, Texas. Health and
Place, 2011; 17:335–344.
11. Grineski SE, Collins TW, Chakraborty J. Hispanic hetero-
geneity and environmental injustice: Intra-ethnic patterns of
exposure to cancer risks from vehicular air pollution in Miami.
Population and Environment, 2013; 35(1):26–44.
12. Wisner B, Blaikie P, Cannon T, Davis I. At Risk: Natural Haz-
ards, People’s Vulnerability and Disasters, 2nd ed. London:
Routledge, 2004.
13. Kates RW. Natural hazard in human ecological perspec-
tive: Hypotheses and models. Economic Geography, 1971;
47(3):438–451.
14. Mohai P, Pellow DN, Roberts JT. Environmental justice. An-
nual Review of Environment and Resources, 2009; 34:405–
430.
15. Brulle RJ, Pellow DN. Environmental justice: Human health
and environmental inequalities. Annual Review of Public
Health, 2006; 27:103–124.
16. Elliott M, Wang Y, Lowe R, Kleindorfer P. Environmental
justice: Frequency and severity of US chemical industry acci-
dents and the socioeconomic status of surrounding communi-
ties. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, 2004;
58:24–30.
17. Ueland J, Warf B. Racialized topographies: Altitude and race
in southern cities. Geographical Review, 2006; 96(1):50–78.
18. Fielding J, Burningham K. Environmental inequality and
flood hazard. Local Environment, 2005; 10(4):379–395.
19. Montgomery MC, Chakraborty J. Social vulnerability to
coastal and inland flood hazards: A comparison of GIS-based
spatial interpolation methods. International Journal of Ap-
plied Geospatial Research, 2013; 4:58–79.
20. Brender JD, Maantay JA, Chakraborty J. Residential prox-
imity to environmental hazards and adverse health outcomes.
American Journal of Public Health, 2011; 101(S1):S37–S52.
21. Wilson SM, Fraser-Rahim H, Williams E, Zhang H, Rice L,
Svendsen E, Abara W. Assessment of the distribution of toxic
release inventory facilities in metropolitan Charleston: An en-
vironmental justice case study. American Journal of Public
Health, 2012; 102(10):1974–1980.
22. Nicholls RJ, Hanson S, Herweijer C, Patmore N, Hallegatte
S, Corfee-Morlot J, Chateau J, Muir Wood R. Ranking Port
Cities with High Exposure and Vulnerability to Climate Ex-
tremes: Exposure Estimates. Paris, France: OECD Publishing,
2008.
23. Brody S, Zahran S, Maghelal P, Grover H, Highfield W. The
rising costs of floods: Examining the impact of planning and
development decisions on property damage in Florida. Jour-
nal of the American Planning Association, 2007; 73(3):330–
345.
24. Environmental Protection Agency. 2005 National-Scale Air
Toxics Assessment, 2011. Available at: http://www.epa.gov/
ttn/atw/nata2005/index.html, Accessed July 4, 2011.
25. Vall´
ee J, Souris M, Fourne F, Bochaton A, Mobillion V, Pey-
ronnie K, Salem G. Sampling in health geography: Reconcil-
ing geographical objectives and probabilistic methods. An ex-
ample of a health survey in Vientiane (Lao PDR). Emerging
Themes in Epidemiology, 2007; 4(6):DOI: 10.1186/1742-7622-
4-6
26. Duran A, Roux AD, Latorre M, Jaime P. Neighborhood so-
cioeconomic characteristics and differences in the availability
of healthy food stores and restaurants in Sao Paulo, Brazil.
Health & Place, 2013; 23:39–47.
27. Mumpower J, Shi L, Stoutenborough J, Vedlitz A. Psychomet-
ric and demographic predictors of the perceived risk of terror-
ist threats and the willingness to pay for terrorism risk man-
agement programs. Risk Analysis, 2013; 33(10):1802–1811.
28. Curtin R, Presser S, Singer E. The effects of response rate
changes on the index of consumer sentiment. Public Opinion
Quarterly, 2000; 64(4):413–428.
29. Holbrook A, Krosnick J, Pfent A. The causes and conse-
quences of response rates in surveys by the news media and
government contractor survey research. Pp. 499–528 in Lep-
kowski JM, Tucker NC, Brick JM, DeLeeuw ED, Japec L,
Lavrakas PJ, Link MW, Sangster RL. (eds). Advances in Tele-
phone Survey Methodology. New York: Wiley, 2008.
30. Keeter S, Kennedy C, Dimock M, Best J, Craighill P. Gaug-
ing the impact of growing non response on estimates from a
national RDD telephone survey. Public Opinion Quarterly,
2006; 70(5):759–779.
31. Groves R, Peytcheva E. The impact of nonresponse rates on
nonresponse bias: A meta-analysis. Public Opinion Quarterly,
2008; 72(2):167–189.
32. Brody SD, Blessing R, Sebastian A, Bedient P. Delianeating
the reality of flood risk and loss in southeast Texas. Natural
Hazards Review, 2013; 14(2):89–97.
33. Highfield WE, Norman SA, Brody SA. Examining the 100-
year floodplain as a metric of risk, loss, and household adjust-
ment. Risk Analysis, 2013; 33(2):186–191.
34. Chakraborty J, Maantay J. Proximity analysis for exposure as-
sessment in environmental health justice research. Pp. 111–
138 in Maantay JA, McLafferty S (eds). Geospatial Analysis
of Environmental Health. New York: Springer, 2011.
35. Baraldi A, Enders C. An introduction to modern missing data
analyses. Journal of School Psychology, 2010; 48(1):5–37.
36. Penn DA. Estimating missing values from the General Social
Survey: An application of multiple imputation. Social Science
Quarterly, 2007; 88(2):573–584.
37. Enders CK. Applied Missing Data Analysis. New York: Guil-
ford Press, 2010.
38. Nelder J, Wedderburn R. Generalized linear models. Journal
of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A, 1972; 135:370–384.
39. Liang K, Zeger S. Longitudinal data analysis using generalized
linear models. Biometrika, 1986; 73:13–22.
40. Zeger S, Liang K. Longitudinal data analysis for discrete and
continuous outcomes. Biometrics, 1986; 42:121–130.
41. Diggle P, Heagerty P, Liang K, Zeger S. Longitudinal Data
Analysis, 2nd ed. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 2002.
42. Diez Roux A. A glossary for multilevel analysis. Journal of
Epidemiology and Community Health, 2002; 56:588–594.
43. Bolin B, Grineski S, Collins T. Geography of despair: Envi-
ronmental racism and the making of South Phoenix, Arizona,
USA. Human Ecology Review, 2005; 12(2):155–167.
44. Pulido L. Rethinking environmental racism: White privilege
and urban development in Southern California. Annals of the
Association of American Geographers, 2000; 90(1):12–40.
45. Boone CG, Modarres A. Creating a toxic neighborhood in Los
Angeles County—A historical examination of environmental
inequity. Urban Affairs Review, 1999; 35(2):163–187.
46. Garson G. Generalized Linear Models and Generalized Esti-
mating Equations. Asheboro, NC: Statistical Associates Pub-
lishing, 2012.
47. Belsley D, Kuh E, Welsch R. Regression Diagnostics: Identi-
fying Influential Data and Sources of Collinearity. Hoboken,
NJ: Wiley, 1980.
48. Collins T. The political ecology of hazard vulnerability:
Marginalization, facilitation and the production of differential
risk to urban wildfires in Arizona’s White Mountains. Journal
of Political Ecology, 2008; 15:21–55.
49. Collins T. The production of unequal risk in hazardscapes: An
explanatory frame applied to disaster at the U.S.-Mexico bor-
der. Geoforum, 2009; 40(4):589–601.
 16
Grineski et al.
50. Collins T. Marginalization, facilitation, and the production of
unequal risk: The 2006 Paso del Norte floods. Antipode, 2010;
42(2):258–288.
51. U.S. Congressional Budget Office. Value of Properties in
the National Flood Insurance Program, 2007. Available at:
www.cbo.gov/, Accessed December 10, 2012.
52. Property Causality Insurers Association of America. True
Market Risk-Rates for Flood Insurance, 2011. Available
at:
http://www.pciaa.net/legtrack/web/naiipublications.nsf/
lookupwebcontent/6e0eaf2197902a0a862578950071061/$File/
NFIP_White_Paper_June2011.pdf,
Accessed
October
31,
2013.
53. Pulido L, Sidawi S, Vos R. An archaeology of environmen-
tal racism in Los Angeles. Urban Geography, 1996; 17(5):419–
439.
54. Stevens J, Artiga S. Key facts on health coverage for low-
income immigrants today and under the Affordable Care Act,
2013. Available at: http://kaiserfamilyfoundation.files.word
press.com/2013/03/8279-02.pdf, Accessed March 27, 2015.
55. Chakraborty J, Grineski SE, Collins TW. Cancer risks
from exposure to vehicular air pollution: A household level
analysis of intra-ethnic heterogeneity in Miami, Florida.
Urban
Geography,
2016;
http://www.tandfonline.com/
doi/abs/10.1080/02723638.2016.1150112.
56. Suro R, Singer A. Latino Growth in Metropolitan America:
Changing Patterns, New Locations. Washington, DC: Center
on Urban & Metropolitan Policy and the Pew Hispanic Cen-
ter, 2002.
57. Woltman K, Newbold KB. Of flights and flotillas: Assimila-
tion and race in the Cuban diaspora. Professional Geographer,
2009; 61(1):70–86.
58. Keeter S, Kennedy C, Clark A, Tompson T, Mokrzycki M.
What’s missing from national landline RDD surveys? The
impact of the growing cell-only population. Public Opinion
Quarterly, 2007; 71(5):772–792.
59. Lee S, Elkasabi M, Streja L. Increasing cell phone usage
among Hispanics: Implications for telephone surveys. Amer-
ican Journal of Public Health, 2012; 102(6):e19–e24.
