 Survey Highlights Differences In Medicaid Coverage For 
Substance Use Treatment And Opioid Use Disorder Medications
Colleen M. Grogan [professor],
School of Social Service Administration, University of Chicago, in Illinois.
Christina Andrews [assistant professor],
College of Social Work, University of South Carolina, in Columbia.
Amanda Abraham [assistant professor],
Department of Public Administration and Policy at the University of Georgia, in Athens.
Keith Humphreys [professor of psychiatry and behavioral sciences],
Department of Psychiatry at the Stanford School of Medicine, in California.
Harold A. Pollack [Helen Ross Professor],
School of Social Service Administration, University of Chicago.
Bikki Tran Smith [doctoral student], and
School of Social Service Administration, University of Chicago.
Peter D. Friedmann [chief research officer]
Baystate Health, in Springfield, Massachusetts.
Abstract
The Affordable Care Act requires state Medicaid programs to cover substance use disorder 
treatment for their Medicaid expansion population but allows states to decide which individual 
services are reimbursable. To examine how states have defined substance use disorder benefit 
packages, we used data from 2013–14 that we collected as part of an ongoing nationwide survey 
of state Medicaid programs. Our findings highlight important state-level differences in coverage 
for substance use disorder treatment and opioid use disorder medications across the United States. 
Many states did not cover all levels of care required for effective substance use disorder treatment 
or medications required for effective opioid use disorder treatment as defined by American Society 
of Addiction Medicine criteria, which could result in lack of access to needed services for low-
income populations.
The expansion of Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act (ACA) has extended health 
insurance benefits to an estimated 1.6 million previously uninsured people with substance 
use disorders.1,2 The law requires states that have adopted the Medicaid expansion to cover 
substance use disorder treatment in their alternative benefit plans. Furthermore, the 
Department of Health and Human Services has clarified that federal parity regulations, 
established by the Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act of 2008, apply to 
substance use disorder treatment coverage for enrollees in alternative benefit plans, 
Medicaid managed care plans, and the Children’s Health Insurance Program.3 To fulfill 
parity requirements, all state Medicaid programs must ensure that coverage and limits on the 
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 13.
Published in final edited form as:
Health Aff (Millwood). 2016 December 01; 35(12): 2289–2296. doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2016.0623.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 use of treatment for substance use disorders are no more restrictive than those placed on 
other medical and surgical services.4
Combined, the ACA and the mental health parity legislation have the potential to improve 
access to substance use disorder treatment through Medicaid.5,6 Yet little is known about the 
specific services state Medicaid programs cover. The essential health benefits (ten categories 
of services health plans must cover under the ACA) require state Medicaid expansion 
programs to include coverage for treating substance use disorders in their alternative benefit 
plans, but the ACA does not specify which services must be included. Moreover, because the 
ACA does not mandate essential health benefits for traditional Medicaid enrollees, state 
traditional Medicaid programs maintain broad discretion over substance use disorder benefit 
decisions. To examine how states have defined substance use disorder benefit packages, we 
analyzed data from 2013–14 that we collected as part of an ongoing survey of state 
Medicaid programs.
As with all insurance programs, benefit design decisions within Medicaid influence access 
to care7,8 and can potentially affect health outcomes.9,10 As Medicaid is poised to become 
the largest payer of substance use disorder treatment in the United States,11,12 such decisions 
are also likely to influence whether treatment providers decide to offer particular 
services.5,13 Given the importance of Medicaid substance use disorder benefit policies, our 
study compared state decisions for such coverage against American Society of Addiction 
Medicine (ASAM) clinical guidelines for substance use disorder services.
ASAM began developing a national set of criteria for the treatment of addiction in the 
1980s. Numerous validation studies have established that matching the severity of a patient’s 
substance use disorder to the levels of care specified in the ASAM criteria optimizes 
treatment processes and outcomes.14 Based on this research, there is now considerable 
clinical and scientific consensus regarding the continuum of care, and the ASAM criteria are 
now the most widely used and evaluated set of guidelines for treating patients with substance 
use disorders.15,16 The majority of states (66 percent) require state block grant–funded 
providers of substance use disorder treatment to use the ASAM criteria,17 and many private 
health care plans use the ASAM criteria to determine medical necessity care guidelines.18,19 
Moreover, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) recently sent a 
notification letter to state Medicaid directors, informing them that to receive approval for the 
section 1115 waiver for innovative service delivery in substance use disorders, “states must 
implement a process to assess and demonstrate that residential providers meet ASAM 
Criteria prior to participating in the Medicaid program.” This statement indicates that CMS 
also views the ASAM criteria as a legitimate clinical guideline.20
The ASAM criteria specify four levels of care that are essential for effective treatment of 
substance use disorders: level 1 outpatient services, level 2 intensive outpatient services, 
level 3 residential inpatient services, and level 4 intensive inpatient services (see online 
Appendix A1).21
Additionally, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved four medications that 
can be used in combination with psychosocial treatment for effective treatment of opioid use 
Grogan et al.
Page 2
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 disorders.22–24 These medications are methadone, buprenorphine, and both oral and 
extended-release injectable naltrexone. ASAM’s practice guideline for these medications 
suggests that each one is important to the provider toolkit because the presenting symptoms 
of patients vary.22
The ASAM guideline also recommends that all opioid use disorder medications be offered 
in conjunction with the appropriate level of psychosocial treatment, which is most often 
delivered in the context of outpatient treatment (either level 1 outpatient or level 2 intensive 
outpatient).
Because states retain discretion under the ACA to select the specific substance use disorder 
treatment services and opioid use disorder medications they cover within their Medicaid 
programs, the extent to which state Medicaid coverage for substance use disorder treatment 
aligns with the ASAM clinical guidelines is unclear. Given the importance of these policy 
choices, our study examined state coverage decisions regarding the continuum of substance 
use disorder treatment services across the ASAM criteria and evidence-based medications 
for opioid use disorder treatment, as well as combined availability of opioid use disorder 
medications and concurrent outpatient substance use disorder treatment. The study also 
examined the extent to which state Medicaid programs imposed usage limits on the services 
they covered. Finally, for those states that adopted the Medicaid expansion, the study 
explored whether state coverage of disorder treatment services for newly eligible people 
differed from that offered to traditional Medicaid enrollees.
Study Data And Methods
Data
Data were collected as part of the National Drug Abuse Treatment System Survey 
(NDATSS), a panel study of substance use disorder treatment providers which has been 
conducted periodically since 1984. We used the 2013 survey, which included an Internet 
survey administered to state Medicaid programs in the fifty states and the District of 
Columbia. Each Medicaid director was mailed a packet that contained a study description 
and an invitation to participate or to designate a knowledgeable staff person to participate. 
Follow-up e-mails and phone calls were made to directors who did not respond to the packet 
or the initial e-mail.
Data were collected from November 2013 through December 2014 from forty-seven of the 
nation’s fifty-one Medicaid programs. Four state Medicaid programs opted not to complete 
the survey but shared documentation regarding their agency’s substance use disorder 
treatment service benefits that enabled our research staff to complete the survey on their 
behalf.
To reduce the data collection burden on Medicaid staff, an analysis of all fifty-one Medicaid 
plans on file with CMS and agency websites was conducted to prefill our survey information 
to the extent possible before sending the survey to the state Medicaid programs. Survey 
instructions explained to respondents that some responses were prefilled and asked them to 
confirm whether the responses were correct.
Grogan et al.
Page 3
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 In the case of methadone, buprenorphine, and injectable naltrexone, coverage data collected 
by ASAM were used. ASAM used data collected from state Medicaid agencies and 
published state formularies to determine which of these opioid use disorder medications 
were covered and whether limits were imposed. When preauthorization limits and annual 
maximum limits were not specified, we used our survey data on coverage limitations.
The federal government should consider a financial incentive for states to cover 
services across the ASAM levels of care.
State Medicaid coverage decisions were assessed for services included in the ASAM 
criteria:25 level 1 outpatient treatment: individual and group outpatient treatment, recovery 
support services; level 2 intensive outpatient treatment: intensive outpatient treatment; level 
3 residential treatment: short-term and long-term residential treatment; and level 4 medically 
managed inpatient treatment: inpatient detoxification (see Appendix A1 for an illustration of 
the levels of care).21 Coverage decisions were also assessed for the four FDA-approved 
opioid use disorder medications.
For each of these services and medications, information on the following utilization control 
limits was collected: cost sharing, including copayments and deductibles; preauthorization; 
and annual maximums. These utilization management mechanisms are commonly used by 
private and public health plans to control unnecessary usage. Finally, for those state 
Medicaid programs participating in the ACA’s Medicaid expansion, the questionnaire asked 
whether the alternative benefit plans offered to Medicaid expansion enrollees differed from 
traditional Medicaid benefits with regard to the types of services covered and the use of 
service utilization limits. At the time of our study, twenty states and the District of Columbia 
had expanded Medicaid; for a list of the states, see Appendix A2.21
Limitations
This study had several limitations. First, almost all states contract with managed care 
organizations representing at least a portion of their Medicaid enrollees (77 percent of total 
state Medicaid enrollment as of 2014),26 and these organizations are allowed to set their own 
limitation policies. While state contracts with managed care organizations specify coverage 
of some or most of the benefits that are covered under their state plans, states and managed 
care organizations also might agree to give contracted organizations added flexibility to 
cover services “in lieu of” services specified under the state plan but permissible under 
Medicaid.27 In practice, a state’s Medicaid managed care system could conceivably cover 
services in addition to those covered under the state plan. Because our data were based on 
the state Medicaid plans (and confirmed by Medicaid agency staff), they reflect the 
minimum substance use disorder services covered in the state. However, managed care 
organizations might have more stringent limit policies (such as preauthorization). Yet they 
still are required at a minimum to offer the covered services specified in the state Medicaid 
plan. It is clear that coverage alone does not necessarily denote access to services, which is 
why we also asked about state limitation policies. Nonetheless, it is important to 
acknowledge that we do not have data on managed care organizations’ limitation policies.
Second, our data collection method relied on information specified in state Medicaid plans 
submitted for approval to CMS and review of the accuracy of these data by a staff 
Grogan et al.
Page 4
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 representative in each state’s Medicaid program office. We expected this two-pronged 
approach to minimize data error. However, if state information was incorrectly entered in the 
state plan and the staff representative was unaware of the error or unaware of updates not 
reflected in the state plan, some errors might have been included in the data. Also, in four 
states we had only the state plan data and lacked the staff review of those data. If these states 
updated their substance use disorder coverage policies after submitting the plan to CMS, our 
data would be inaccurate.
Third, the survey questions did not ask about all possible substance use disorder services or 
medications, or all possible ways to limit coverage. We asked about the services most 
pertinent under the ASAM criteria and the medications considered most important to treat 
opioid use disorders, but we do not suggest that our study has captured all of the important 
services or medications. Moreover, states might limit coverage in ways we did not capture, 
such as through the use of coinsurance.
Fourth, the survey questions assumed uniformity in Medicaid coverage across 
subpopulations of Medicaid enrollees and across geographic regions, and thus did not 
account for possible variations in coverage among enrollees living in the same state. For 
example, if a state had a waiver to vary benefits by region28 or by population group (about 
ten states as of 2012)29 and chose to vary coverage for substance use disorders, that variation 
would not be captured in our analyses.
Finally, because state policy data do not reveal how frequently limitation policies 
(preauthorization, annual maximums, and copayments) are used or how they are employed, 
we could not make evaluative judgments about these policies.
Study Results
Coverage Across Criteria
Twenty-six states and the District of Columbia provided coverage for at least one service in 
each of the four levels of care specified in the ASAM criteria. Thirteen states and the District 
of Columbia covered all seven services across the four levels of care—a comprehensive 
package of substance use disorder services. Among the other twenty-four states, fifteen 
lacked coverage in at least one level of care, five lacked coverage in two levels of care, and 
four lacked coverage in three levels of care (Exhibit 1). (For additional details, see Appendix 
A1.)21
Among states that limited coverage, it was most common to restrict level 3 residential 
treatment. Twenty-one states provided no short- or long-term residential services. Ten states 
did not cover level 2 intensive outpatient services, and nine of the twenty-four states that 
limited coverage did not cover any services in levels 2 or 3. Finally, six states offered no 
coverage of level 4 medically managed inpatient services.
Almost all states and the District of Columbia covered two of the three services listed under 
level 1 individual and group outpatient treatment services. Although coverage of these 
Grogan et al.
Page 5
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 outpatient services is common, only half of the states and the District of Columbia provided 
Medicaid-funded recovery support services (Exhibit 2).
Coverage Of Medications For Opioid Use Disorders
Medicaid programs in all states and the District of Columbia (n = 51) provided coverage for 
buprenorphine, and almost all states and the District of Columbia (n = 48) covered injectable 
naltrexone. However, there was much less widespread coverage for oral naltrexone (n = 34) 
and methadone (n = 32) (Exhibit 2).
Looking at coverage of the four opioid use disorder medications, thirty-one states and the 
District of Columbia provided comprehensive coverage: methadone, buprenorphine, and one 
(n = 10) or both (n = 22) of the two forms of naltrexone. The remaining nineteen states did 
not provide comprehensive medication coverage for opioid use disorders; most notably, they 
did not cover methadone treatment (Exhibit 3). Eleven of these nineteen states provided 
coverage for buprenorphine and both forms of naltrexone. Six states covered buprenorphine 
and injectable naltrexone, and two states covered only buprenorphine (data not shown).
Combined Coverage
Seventeen states and the District of Columbia covered the entire package of opioid use 
disorder medications and all three treatments across levels 1 and 2 (individual and group 
outpatient and intensive outpatient). An additional seven states offered most medications 
(methadone, buprenorphine, and injectable naltrexone) and all three treatment services. The 
remaining half of the states (n = 26) either lacked coverage of any of the four medications or 
lacked coverage of outpatient treatment.
No statistically significant relationship was detected between coverage of substance use 
disorder services across the ASAM criteria and coverage of opioid use disorder medications. 
States that had comprehensive coverage across the ASAM criteria did not necessarily have 
comprehensive coverage for opioid use disorder medications. Only eighteen states and the 
District of Columbia provided comprehensive coverage across the ASAM criteria and opioid 
use disorder medications. The remaining thirty-two states lacked coverage across the ASAM 
levels of care or medications for treatment of opioid use disorders, or both.
Limits On Substance Use Disorder Services And Opioid Use Disorder Medications
The vast majority of state and the District of Columbia Medicaid programs set limits on 
covered substance use disorder treatment services (Exhibit 4). Coverage for short-term 
residential, long-term residential, and recovery support services was limited under Medicaid 
in more than 80 percent of states and the District of Columbia. Buprenorphine was the most 
prominent example among opioid use disorder medications, with limits imposed in all but 
one state. The most common way states set limits was to require preauthorization. Many 
states also imposed annual maximums on service coverage. While this approach is common, 
the specific rules for setting annual maximums varied dramatically across states and across 
services and medications. For example, state annual maximum rules for individual outpatient 
services ranged from twelve visits per year before preauthorization was required, to twenty-
six hours total, to thirty-two quarter-hour units per week, to 365 treatments per year.
Grogan et al.
Page 6
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Copayments and deductibles were uncommon for substance use disorder treatment benefits 
in state and the District of Columbia Medicaid programs. Nonetheless, cost sharing was 
required for buprenorphine in sixteen states and the District of Columbia and for oral 
naltrexone and individual outpatient services in thirteen states and the District of Columbia.
Alternative Benefits
Among the twenty-five states and the District of Columbia that expanded Medicaid at the 
time of this survey, only five states offered different substance use disorder treatment 
coverage for the expansion group. There was no clear pattern within this small group of 
states. The alternative benefit plan for new enrollees was more generous in two states, 
whereas in three others it was more restrictive. In the remainder of expansion states, 
coverage was the same between traditional enrollees and those people newly eligible. 
However, many states indicated that they were working on developing their alternative 
benefit plan at the time of our survey, so the number of states with distinctive alternative 
benefit plans for newly eligible people might have increased.
Discussion
Our findings highlight important state-level disparities in coverage for substance use 
disorder treatment across the United States. Many states do not cover all levels of care 
required for effective treatment, as defined by the ASAM criteria—a well-researched, 
widely endorsed national standard of care. For treatment providers, limited coverage for the 
full continuum of treatment settings and modalities constrains their ability to make optimal 
treatment decisions.
These state decisions regarding benefit coverage of substance use disorder services and 
opioid use disorder medications have real-world consequences for patients with addictive 
disorders.9,10 For example, if a patient is assessed as “needs close monitoring,” the patient 
will be at high risk for relapse in the twenty-one states that do not cover residential treatment 
and in the nine states that do not cover either level 3 residential or level 2 intensive 
outpatient services.
Moreover, while all fifty-one Medicaid programs cover buprenorphine and forty-seven states 
and the District of Columbia cover injectable naltrexone, lack of coverage of all four opioid 
use disorder medications can still cause problems for people with opioid use disorders. 
Although these two treatments are effective, methadone—the medication covered by the 
fewest states—remains the most efficacious and rigorously studied medication in the 
armamentarium.30 Just as there are multiple medications to treat hypertension, effective 
treatment of opioid use disorders requires access to the full range of effective medications.
Finally, the widespread use of limitation policies such as preauthorization and significant 
variation in how annual maximums are set raise concerns about what clinical guidelines are 
used to determine limits and whether access to needed substance use disorder services are 
unnecessarily or inappropriately denied.31,32 Given that the use of preauthorization policies 
has been linked to underuse of mental health and substance use disorder services,33–36 the 
lack of knowledge about how states impose limits and what clinical reasoning is used when 
Grogan et al.
Page 7
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 services are denied underscores the need for further research on the effect of limitation 
policies.
Policy Implications
The fact that so many states do not cover level 3 residential services points to a larger 
tension in federal Medicaid policy, which generally prohibits the use of federal Medicaid 
funds to cover Medicaid enrollees in institutions for mental diseases (IMDs) with more than 
sixteen beds (the so-called IMD exclusion). Although states can provide coverage for 
smaller facilities providing residential services or for care in larger settings that would not be 
defined as IMDs, this federal policy is one clear barrier to Medicaid-funded residential 
services and might explain why many states choose not to provide any Medicaid-funded 
residential coverage. While the federal government has recently relaxed the IMD exclusion 
for inpatient stays of fifteen days or fewer,37 the long-term impact of the policy change 
remains to be studied.
CMS’s notification letter regarding substance use disorder delivery-of-care waivers and the 
requirement to use the ASAM criteria is a first step toward aligning CMS policies with 
clinical standards for substance use disorder care. However, because states are accorded 
wide discretion in coverage policy, the federal government should consider a financial 
incentive for states to cover services across the ASAM levels of care, regardless of whether 
the state submits a waiver. Similarly, the federal government should consider financial 
incentives for states to cover all four effective medications for opioid use disorders.
Conclusion
Our findings highlight important state-level disparities in coverage decisions for substance 
use disorder treatments and opioid use disorder medications across the United States. When 
levels of care are not covered, Medicaid-eligible patients might not be able to gain access to 
needed services. Patients without access to the full range of efficacious services or 
medications are more likely to be mismanaged or treated in inappropriate settings.38–40 
Consequently, they are put at higher risk for relapse, which has serious public health 
implications.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge support from the National Institute on Drug Abuse, National Institutes of Health (Grant 
No. R01DA034634), for its project, “The impact of health reform on outpatient substance abuse treatment 
programs,” although the recommendations and responsibility for any errors rest solely with the authors. The authors 
acknowledge data collection support from the University of Chicago Survey Lab and helpful feedback from Sara 
Rosenbaum, the editors of Health Affairs, and three anonymous reviewers.
Grogan et al.
Page 8
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 NOTES
1. Barry CL, Huskamp HA. Moving beyond parity—mental health and addiction care under the ACA. 
N Engl J Med. 2011; 365(11):973–975. [PubMed: 21848453] 
2. Humphreys K, Frank RG. The Affordable Care Act will revolutionize care for substance use 
disorders in the United States. Addiction. 2014; 109(12):1957–1958. [PubMed: 24965487] 
3. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Baltimore (MD): CMS; 2016 Mar 29. Medicaid fact 
sheet: mental health and substance use disorder parity final rule for Medicaid and CHIP [Internet]. 
(SMD No. 2333-f). Available from: https://staging.medicaid.gov/medicaid/benefits/downloads/
factsheet-cms-2333-f.pdf [[cited on 2016 Oct 26]]
4. Beronio, K., Po, R., Skopec, L., Glied, S. Washington (DC): Department of Health and Human 
Services, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation; 2013 Feb 20. Affordable 
Care Act expands mental health and substance use disorder benefits and federal parity protections 
for 62 million Americans [Internet]. Available from: https://aspe.hhs.gov/report/affordable-care-act-
expands-mental-health-and-substance-use-disorder-benefits-and-federal-parity-protections-62-
million-americans [cited 2016 Oct 13]
5. Andrews C, Grogan CM, Brennan M, Pollack HA. Lessons from Medicaid’s divergent paths on 
mental health and addiction services. Health Aff (Millwood). 2015; 34(7):1131–1138. [PubMed: 
26153307] 
6. Buck JA. The looming expansion and transformation of public substance abuse treatment under the 
Affordable Care Act. Health Aff (Millwood). 2011; 30(8):1402–1410. [PubMed: 21821557] 
7. Deck DD, Wiitala WL, Laws KE. Medicaid coverage and access to publicly funded opiate 
treatment. J Behav Health Serv Res. 2006; 33(3):324–334. [PubMed: 16752109] 
8. Wen H, Druss BG, Cummings JR. Effect of Medicaid expansions on health insurance coverage and 
access to care among low-income adults with behavioral health conditions. Health Serv Res. 2015; 
50(6):1787–1809. [PubMed: 26551430] 
9. Fuller BE, Rieckmann TR, McCarty DJ, Ringor-Carty R, Kennard S. Elimination of methadone 
benefits in the Oregon health plan and its effects on patients. Psychiatr Serv. 2006; 57(5):686–691. 
[PubMed: 16675764] 
10. Stein B, Orlando M, Sturm R. The effect of copayments on drug and alcohol treatment following 
inpatient detoxification under managed care. Psychiatr Serv. 2000; 51(2):195–198. [PubMed: 
10655002] 
11. Andrews C, Abraham A, Grogan CM, Pollack HA, Bersamira C, Humphreys K, et al. Despite 
resources from the ACA, most states do little to help addiction treatment programs implement 
health care reform. Health Aff (Millwood). 2015; 34(5):828–835. [PubMed: 25941285] 
12. Mark TL, Levit KR, Yee T, Chow CM. Spending on mental and substance use disorders projected 
to grow more slowly than all health spending through 2020. Health Aff (Millwood). 2014; 33(8):
1407–1415. [PubMed: 25092843] 
13. Ducharme LJ, Abraham AJ. State policy influence on the early diffusion of buprenorphine in 
community treatment programs. Subst Abuse Treat Prev Policy. 2008; 3(1):17. [PubMed: 
18570665] 
14. Stallvik M, Gastfriend DR. Predictive and convergent validity of the ASAM criteria software in 
Norway. Addict Res Theory. 2014; 22(6):515–523.
15. American Society of Addiction Medicine. The ASAM criteria [Internet]. Chevy Chase (MD): 
ASAM; Available from: http://www.asam.org/publications/the-asam-criteria/about [cited 2016 Oct 
13]
16. Chuang E, Wells R, Alexander JA, Friedmann PD, Lee IH. Factors associated with use of ASAM 
criteria and service provision in a national sample of outpatient substance abuse treatment units. J 
Addict Med. 2009; 3(3):139–150. [PubMed: 21769010] 
17. Kolsky, GD. Current state AOD agency practices regarding the use of patient placement criteria 
(PPC)—an update [Internet]. Washington (DC): National Association of State Alcohol and Drug 
Abuse; 2006 Nov 6. Available from: http://www.asam.org/docs/publications/
survey_of_state_use_of_ppc_nasadad-2006.pdf?Status=Master [cited 2016 Oct 13]
Grogan et al.
Page 9
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 18. Blue Cross Blue Shield of Illinois. Behavioral health medical necessity criteria [Internet]. Chicago 
(IL): BCBS of Illinois; Available from: http://www.bcbsil.com/provider/clinical/
medical_necessity.html [cited 2016 Oct 13]
19. American Society of Addiction Medicine. An introduction to the ASAM criteria for patients and 
families [Internet]. Hartford (CT): Aetna; 2015. Available from: http://www.aetna.com/healthcare-
professionals/documents-forms/asam-criteria.pdf [cited 2016 Oct 13]
20. Wachino, V. Baltimore (MD): Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services; 2015 Jul 27. New 
service delivery opportunities for individuals with a substance use disorder [Internet]. (SMD No. 
15-003). Available from: https://www.medicaid.gov/federal-policy-guidance/downloads/
SMD15003.pdf [cited on 2016 Oct 12]
21. To access the Appendix, click on the Appendix link in the box to the right of the article online.
22. Kampman K, Jarvis M. American Society of Addiction Medicine (ASAM) national practice 
guideline for the use of medications in the treatment of addiction involving opioid use. J Addict 
Med. 2015; 9(5):358–367. [PubMed: 26406300] 
23. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. Rockville (MD): SAMHSA; 2015. 
Medication for the treatment of alcohol use disorder: a brief guide [Internet]. Available from: 
http://store.samhsa.gov/shin/content//SMA15-4907/SMA15-4907.pdf [cited 2016 Oct 13]
24. Mann, C., Frieden, T., Hyde, PS., Volkow, ND., Koob, GF. Baltimore (MD): Centers for Medicare 
and Medicaid Services; 2014 Jul 11. Medication assisted treatment for substance use disorders 
[Internet]. Available from: https://www.medicaid.gov/Federal-Policy-Guidance/Downloads/
CIB-07-11-2014.pdf [cited on 2016 Oct 13]
25. Mee-Lee, D. The ASAM criteria: treatment criteria for addictive, substance-related, and co-
occurring conditions. Third. Chevy Chase (MD): American Society of Addiction Medicine; 2013. 
26. Henry, J. Kaiser Family Foundation. State health facts: total Medicaid managed care enrollment 
[Internet]. Menlo Park (CA): KFF; 2014. Available from: http://kff.org/medicaid/state-indicator/
total-medicaid-mc-enrollment/ [cited 2016 Oct 13]
27. Rosenbaum S. Twenty-first century Medicaid: the final managed care rule. Health Affairs Blog 
[blog on the Internet]. 2016 May 5. [cited 2016 Oct 13] Available from: http://healthaffairs.org/
blog/2016/05/05/twenty-first-century-medicaid-the-final-managed-care-rule/. 
28. Hanson KW, Huskamp HA. State health care reform: behavioral health services under Medicaid 
managed care: the uncertain implications of state variation. Psychiatr Serv. 2001; 52(4):447–450. 
[PubMed: 11274487] 
29. Henry, J. Kaiser Family Foundation. State health facts: Medicaid benefits: rehabilitation services—
mental health and substance abuse [Internet]. Menlo Park (CA): KFF; 2014. Available from: http://
kff.org/medicaid/state-indicator/rehabilitation-services-mental-health-and-substance-abuse/ [cited 
2016 Oct 13]
30. Mattick RP, Breen C, Kimber J, Davoli M. Buprenorphine maintenance versus placebo or 
methadone maintenance for opioid dependence. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014; 
(2):CD002207. [PubMed: 24500948] 
31. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. Rockville (MD): SAMHSA; 2014. 
Medicaid coverage and financing of medications to treat alcohol and opioid use disorders 
[Internet]. Available from: http://store.samhsa.gov/shin/content//SMA14-4854/SMA14-4854.pdf 
[cited 2016 Oct 13]
32. Pew Charitable Trusts. Substance use disorders and the role of the states [Internet]. Washington 
(DC): Pew Charitable Trusts; 2015 Mar. Available from: http://www.pewtrusts.org/~/media/assets/
2015/03/substanceusedisordersandtheroleofthestates.pdf [cited 2016 Oct 13]
33. Clark RE, Baxter JD, Barton BA, Aweh G, O’Connell E, Fisher WH. The impact of prior 
authorization on buprenorphine dose, relapse rates, and cost for Massachusetts Medicaid 
beneficiaries with opioid dependence. Health Serv Res. 2014; 49(6):1964–1979. [PubMed: 
25040021] 
34. Mark TL, Lubran R, McCance-Katz EF, Chalk M, Richardson J. Medicaid coverage of medications 
to treat alcohol and opioid dependence. J Subst Abuse Treat. 2015; 55:1–5. [PubMed: 25921475] 
Grogan et al.
Page 10
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 35. Vogt WB, Joyce G, Xia J, Dirani R, Wan G, Goldman DP. Medicaid cost control measures aimed at 
second-generation antipsychotics led to less use of all antipsychotics. Health Aff (Millwood). 
2011; 30(12):2346–2354. [PubMed: 22147863] 
36. Zhang Y, Adams AS, Ross-Degnan D, Zhang F, Soumerai SB. Effects of prior authorization on 
medication discontinuation among Medicaid beneficiaries with bipolar disorder. Psychiatr Serv. 
2009; 60(4):520–527. [PubMed: 19339328] 
37. Whitlock R. The IMD exclusion: changes now and changes to come. Health Law and Policy 
Matters [blog on the Internet]. 2016 Apr 27. [cited 2016 Oct 13] Available from: https://
www.healthlawpolicymatters.com/2016/04/27/the-imdexclusion-changes-now-and-changes-to-
come/. 
38. Capoccia VA, Grazier KL, Toal C, Ford JH 2nd, Gustafson DH. Massachusetts’s experience 
suggests coverage alone is insufficient to increase addiction disorders treatment. Health Aff 
(Millwood). 2012; 31(5):1000–1008. [PubMed: 22566439] 
39. Garfield RL, Lave JR, Donohue JM. Health reform and the scope of benefits for mental health and 
substance use disorder services. Psychiatr Serv. 2010; 61(11):1081–1086. [PubMed: 21041345] 
40. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. Rockville (MD): SAMHSA; 2014. 
Results from the 2013 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: summary of national findings 
[Internet]. Available from: http://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/files/
NSDUHresultsPDFWHTML2013/Web/NSDUHresults2013.pdf [cited 2016 Oct 13]
Grogan et al.
Page 11
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Exhibit 1. State coverage of the American Society of Addiction Medicine (ASAM) continuum of 
care levels
SOURCE Authors’ analysis of National Drug Abuse Treatment System Survey data, 2013–
14. NOTE The District of Columbia provides coverage across all levels of care.
Grogan et al.
Page 12
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Exhibit 2. State coverage across the American Society of Addiction Medicine (ASAM) continuum 
of care levels and opioid use disorder (OUD) medications
SOURCE Authors’ analysis of National Drug Abuse Treatment System Survey data, 2013–
14. NOTE “Covered with limits” means that a state covers the service but imposes limits by 
either using prior authorization, annual maximum limits, or copayments and 
deductibles. aIncludes the District of Columbia.
Grogan et al.
Page 13
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Exhibit 3. State coverage of opioid use disorder medications
SOURCE Authors’ analysis of National Drug Abuse Treatment System Survey data, 2013–
14. NOTE The District of Columbia provides coverage for all medications.
Grogan et al.
Page 14
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Exhibit 4. Types of limits imposed on substance use disorder services across the American 
Society of Addiction Medicine (ASAM) continuum of care levels and opioid use disorder (OUD) 
medications
SOURCE Authors’ analysis of National Drug Abuse Treatment System Survey data, 2013–
14. aIncludes the District of Columbia.
Grogan et al.
Page 15
Health Aff (Millwood). Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 February 13.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
