 Recommendations and Reports / Vol. 67 / No. 3 
August 24, 2018 
Prevention and Control of Seasonal Influenza  
with Vaccines: Recommendations of the Advisory 
Committee on Immunization Practices— 
United States, 2018–19 Influenza Season  
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
 Recommendations and Reports
The MMWR series of publications is published by the Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Atlanta, GA 30329-4027.
Suggested citation: [Author names; first three, then et al., if more than six.] [Title]. MMWR Recomm Rep 2018;67(No. RR-#):[inclusive page numbers].
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Robert R. Redfield, MD, Director
Anne Schuchat, MD, Principal Deputy Director
Leslie Dauphin, PhD, Acting Associate Director for Science 
Joanne Cono, MD, ScM, Director, Office of Science Quality 
Chesley L. Richards, MD, MPH, Deputy Director for Public Health Scientific Services
William R. Mac Kenzie, MD, Acting Director,  Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services 
MMWR Editorial and Production Staff (Serials)
Charlotte K. Kent, PhD, MPH, Acting Editor in Chief, Executive Editor 
Christine G. Casey, MD, Editor
Mary Dott, MD, MPH, Online Editor
Teresa F. Rutledge, Managing Editor
David C. Johnson, Lead Technical Writer-Editor
Jeffrey D. Sokolow, MA, Project Editor
Martha F. Boyd, Lead Visual Information Specialist
Maureen A. Leahy, Julia C. Martinroe, 
Stephen R. Spriggs, Tong Yang,
Visual Information Specialists
Quang M. Doan, MBA, Phyllis H. King, 
Terraye M. Starr, Moua Yang,
Information Technology Specialists
MMWR Editorial Board
Timothy F. Jones, MD, Chairman
Matthew L. Boulton, MD, MPH
Virginia A. Caine, MD 
Katherine Lyon Daniel, PhD
Jonathan E. Fielding, MD, MPH, MBA
David W. Fleming, MD 
William E. Halperin, MD, DrPH, MPH
Robin Ikeda, MD, MPH 
Phyllis Meadows, PhD, MSN, RN
Jewel Mullen, MD, MPH, MPA
Jeff Niederdeppe, PhD
Patricia Quinlisk, MD, MPH 
Patrick L. Remington, MD, MPH 
Carlos Roig, MS, MA
William Schaffner, MD
CDC Adoption of ACIP Recommendations for MMWR 
Recommendations and Reports, MMWR Policy Notes, and 
Immunization Schedules (Child/Adolescent, Adult)
Recommendations for routine use of vaccines in children, 
adolescents, and adults are developed by the Advisory 
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). ACIP is 
chartered as a federal advisory committee to provide expert 
external advice and guidance to the Director of CDC on 
use of vaccines and related agents for the control of vaccine-
preventable diseases in the civilian population of the United 
States. Recommendations for routine use of vaccines in 
children and adolescents are harmonized to the greatest 
extent possible with recommendations made by the American 
Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), the American Academy of Family 
Physicians (AAFP), and the American College of Obstetricians 
and Gynecologists (ACOG). Recommendations for routine use 
of vaccines in adults are harmonized with recommendations 
of AAFP
, ACOG, and the American College of Physicians 
(ACP). ACIP recommendations approved by the CDC 
Director become agency guidelines on the date published in the 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR). Additional 
information is available at https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip.
CONTENTS
Introduction ............................................................................................................1
Methods 
....................................................................................................................2
Primary Changes and Updates in the Recommendations .....................4
Recommendations for the Use of Influenza Vaccines, 2018–19 
...........4
Influenza Vaccine Composition and Available Products 
...................... 11
Additional Sources for Information Regarding Influenza and 
Influenza Vaccines ........................................................................................... 14
References 
............................................................................................................. 16
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / August 24, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 3 
1
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Prevention and Control of Seasonal Influenza with Vaccines: 
Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization 
Practices—United States, 2018–19 Influenza Season
Lisa A. Grohskopf, MD1
Leslie Z. Sokolow, MSc, MPH1,2
Karen R. Broder, MD3
Emmanuel B. Walter, MD4
Alicia M. Fry, MD1
Daniel B. Jernigan, MD1
1Influenza Division, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, CDC
2Battelle Memorial Institute, Atlanta, Georgia
3Immunization Safety Office, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC
4Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina
Summary
This report updates the 2017–18 recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) regarding 
the use of seasonal influenza vaccines in the United States (MMWR Recomm Rep 2017;66[No. RR-2]). Routine annual influenza 
vaccination is recommended for all persons aged ≥6 months who do not have contraindications. A licensed, recommended, and 
age-appropriate vaccine should be used. Inactivated influenza vaccines (IIVs), recombinant influenza vaccine (RIV), and live 
attenuated influenza vaccine (LAIV) are expected to be available for the 2018–19 season. Standard-dose, unadjuvanted, inactivated 
influenza vaccines will be available in quadrivalent (IIV4) and trivalent (IIV3) formulations. Recombinant influenza vaccine 
(RIV4) and live attenuated influenza vaccine (LAIV4) will be available in quadrivalent formulations. High-dose inactivated 
influenza vaccine (HD-IIV3) and adjuvanted inactivated influenza vaccine (aIIV3) will be available in trivalent formulations.
Updates to the recommendations described in this report reflect discussions during public meetings of ACIP held on October 25, 
2017; February 21, 2018; and June 20, 2018. New and updated information in this report includes the following four items. 
First, vaccine viruses included in the 2018–19 U.S. trivalent influenza vaccines will be an A/Michigan/45/2015 (H1N1)
pdm09–like virus, an A/Singapore/INFIMH-16-0019/2016 (H3N2)-like virus, and a B/Colorado/06/2017–like virus 
(Victoria lineage). Quadrivalent influenza vaccines will contain these three viruses and an additional influenza B vaccine virus, 
a B/Phuket/3073/2013–like virus (Yamagata lineage). Second, recommendations for the use of LAIV4 (FluMist Quadrivalent) 
have been updated. Following two seasons (2016–17 and 2017–18) during which ACIP recommended that LAIV4 not be 
used, for the 2018–19 season, vaccination providers may choose to administer any licensed, age-appropriate influenza vaccine 
(IIV, RIV4, or LAIV4). LAIV4 is an option for those for whom it is appropriate. Third, persons with a history of egg allergy of 
any severity may receive any licensed, recommended, and age-appropriate influenza vaccine (IIV, RIV4, or LAIV4). Additional 
recommendations concerning vaccination of egg-allergic persons are discussed. Finally, information on recent licensures and labeling 
changes is discussed, including expansion of the age indication for Afluria Quadrivalent (IIV4) from ≥18 years to ≥5 years and 
expansion of the age indication for Fluarix Quadrivalent (IIV4), previously licensed for ≥3 years, to ≥6 months.
This report focuses on the recommendations for use of vaccines for the prevention and control of influenza during the 2018–19 
season in the United States. A Background Document containing further information and a brief summary of these recommendations 
are available at https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/acip-recs/vacc-specific/flu.html.
These recommendations apply to U.S.-licensed influenza vaccines used within Food and Drug Administration–licensed 
indications. Updates and other information are available at CDC’s influenza website (https://www.cdc.gov/flu). Vaccination and 
health care providers should check CDC’s influenza website periodically for additional information.
Corresponding author: Lisa A. Grohskopf, Influenza Division, 
National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, CDC. 
Telephone: 404-639-2552; E-mail: Lkg6@cdc.gov.
Introduction
Influenza viruses typically circulate in the United States 
annually, most commonly from late fall through early spring. 
Most persons who contract influenza will recover without 
 Recommendations and Reports
2 
MMWR / August 24, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
sequelae. However, influenza can cause serious illness, 
hospitalization, and death, particularly among older adults, 
very young children, pregnant women, and those with certain 
chronic medical conditions (1–6).
Routine annual influenza vaccination for all persons aged 
≥6 months who do not have contraindications has been 
recommended by CDC and CDC’s Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices (ACIP) since 2010 (7). This report 
updates the 2017–18 ACIP recommendations regarding 
the use of seasonal influenza vaccines (8) and provides 
recommendations and guidance for vaccine providers regarding 
the use of influenza vaccines for the 2018–19 season. A variety 
of different formulations of influenza vaccine are available 
(Table 1). Contraindications and precautions to the use of 
influenza vaccines are summarized (Table 2). Abbreviations are 
used in this report to denote the various types of vaccines (Box).
This report focuses on the recommendations for use of 
influenza vaccines for the prevention and control of influenza 
during the 2018–19 season in the United States. A summary 
of these recommendations and a Background Document 
containing additional information on influenza-associated 
illnesses and influenza vaccines are available at https://www.
cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/acip-recs/vacc-specific/flu.html.
Methods
ACIP provides annual recommendations for the use of 
influenza vaccines for the prevention and control of influenza. 
The ACIP Influenza Work Group meets by teleconference 
once to twice per month throughout the year. Work Group 
membership includes several voting members of ACIP and 
representatives of ACIP Liaison Organizations.* Discussions 
include topics such as influenza surveillance, vaccine 
effectiveness and safety, vaccine coverage, program feasibility, 
cost-effectiveness, and vaccine supply. Presentations are 
requested from invited experts, and published and unpublished 
data are discussed.
In general, the Background Document is updated to reflect 
recent additions to the literature related to the following: 
1) recommendations that were made in previous seasons, 
2) changes in the viral antigen composition of seasonal influenza 
vaccines, and 3) minor changes in guidance for the use of 
influenza vaccines (e.g., guidance for timing of vaccination 
and other programmatic issues, guidance for dosage in specific 
populations, guidance for selection of vaccines for specific 
populations that are already recommended for vaccination, and 
changes that reflect use that is consistent with Food and Drug 
* A list of Work Group members may be found on page 20 of this report. A 
Disclosure of Relationships may be found on page 19.  
Administration [FDA]–licensed indications and prescribing 
information). The summary included in the Background 
Document for such topics is not a systematic review but is 
intended to provide a broad overview of current literature. In 
general, systematic review and evaluation of the evidence using 
the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development 
and Evaluation (GRADE) approach is performed for new 
recommendations or substantial changes in the recommendations 
(e.g., expansion of the recommendation for influenza vaccination 
to new populations not previously recommended for vaccination 
or potential preferential recommendations for specific vaccines).
Updates and changes to the recommendations described 
in this report are of four types: 1) the vaccine virus 
composition for 2018–19 U.S. seasonal influenza vaccines; 
2) a recommendation for the 2018–19 season that LAIV4 
is an option for influenza vaccination of persons for whom 
it is appropriate; 3) a recommendation that persons with a 
history of egg allergy may receive any licensed, recommended, 
and age-appropriate influenza vaccine (IIV, RIV4, or LAIV4; 
and 4) recent regulatory actions, including new vaccine 
licensures and labeling changes for previously licensed vaccines. 
Information relevant to these changes included the following:
1. Recommendations for the composition of Northern 
Hemisphere influenza vaccines are made by the 
World Health Organization (WHO), which organizes 
a consultation, generally in February of each year. 
Surveillance data are reviewed and candidate vaccine 
viruses are discussed. A summary of the WHO meeting 
for selection of the 2018–19 Northern Hemisphere 
vaccine viruses is available at http://www.who.int/
influenza/vaccines/virus/recommendations/201802_
recommendation.pdf. Subsequently, FDA, which 
has regulatory authority over vaccines in the United 
States, convenes a meeting of its Vaccines and Related 
Biological Products Advisory Committee (VRBPAC). 
This committee considers the recommendations 
of WHO, reviews and discusses similar data, and 
makes a final decision regarding vaccine virus 
composition for influenza vaccines licensed and 
marketed in the United States. A summary of the FDA 
VRBPAC meeting of March 1, 2018, at which the 
composition of the 2018–19 U.S. influenza vaccines was 
discussed, is available at https://www.fda.gov/downloads/
AdvisoryCommittees/CommitteesMeetingMaterials/
BloodVaccinesandOtherBiologics/VaccinesandRelated 
BiologicalProductsAdvisoryCommittee/UCM602610.pdf.
2. Regarding the recommendation for the 2018–19 season 
that LAIV4 is an option for influenza vaccination of those 
for whom it is appropriate, ACIP reviewed data from three 
sources in February 2018. T
wo were evaluations of previous 
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / August 24, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 3 
3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
TABLE 1. Influenza vaccines — United States, 2018–19 influenza season*
Trade name  
(Manufacturer)
Presentation
Age  
indication
HA (IIVs and 
RIV4) or virus 
count (LAIV4) 
per dose (each 
vaccine virus)
Egg-grown  
virus,† cell 
culture-grown 
virus, or 
recombinant HA
Adjuvanted  
(Yes/No)
Latex  
(Yes/No)
Route
Thimerosal 
(Yes/No)
If Yes, mercury 
µg/0.5mL
Quadrivalent IIVs (IIV4s)—Standard Dose—Contain inactivated virus
Afluria Quadrivalent 
(Seqirus)
0.5 mL PFS
≥5 yrs
15 µg/0.5 mL
Egg
No
No
IM§
No
5.0 mL MDV
≥5 yrs (needle/
syringe)
Yes (24.5)
18 through 64 yrs 
(jet injector)
Fluarix Quadrivalent 
(GlaxoSmithKline)
0.5 mL PFS
≥6 mos
15 µg/0.5 mL
Egg
No
No
IM§
No
Flulaval Quadrivalent  
(ID Biomedical Corp.  
of Quebec)
0.5 mL PFS
≥6 mos
15 µg/0.5 mL
Egg
No
No
IM§
No
5.0 mL MDV
Yes (<25)
Fluzone Quadrivalent  
(Sanofi Pasteur)
0.25 mL PFS
6 through 35 mos
7.5 µg/0.25 mL 
15 µg/0.5 mL
Egg
No
No
IM§
No
0.5 mL PFS
≥3 yrs
No
0.5 mL SDV
≥3 yrs
No
5.0 mL MDV
≥6 mos
Yes (25)
Flucelvax Quadrivalent 
(Seqirus)
0.5 mL PFS
≥4 yrs
15 µg/0.5 mL
Cell culture
No
No
IM§
No
5.0 mL MDV
Yes (25)
Trivalent IIV (IIV3)—Standard Dose—Contains inactivated virus
Afluria (Seqirus)
0.5 mL PFS
≥5 yrs
15 µg/0.5 mL
Egg
No
No
IM§
No
5.0 mL MDV
≥5 yrs (needle/
syringe)
Yes (24.5)
18 through 64 yrs 
(jet injector)
Trivalent IIV3—High-Dose—Contains inactivated virus
Fluzone High-Dose  
(Sanofi Pasteur)
0.5 mL PFS
≥65 yrs
60 µg/0.5 mL
Egg
No
No
IM§
No
Trivalent IIV3—Adjuvanted—Contains inactivated virus
Fluad (Seqirus)
0.5 mL PFS
≥65 yrs
15 µg/0.5 mL
Egg
Yes (MF59)
No 
IM§
No
Quadrivalent RIV (RIV4)—Contains recombinant HA
Flublok Quadrivalent  
(Sanofi Pasteur)
0.5 mL PFS
≥18 yrs
45 µg/0.5 mL
Recombinant
No
No
IM§
No
Quadrivalent LAIV (LAIV4)—Contains live, attenuated, cold-adapted virus
FluMist Quadrivalent 
(AstraZeneca)
0.2 mL prefilled 
single-use 
intranasal sprayer
2 through 49 yrs
106.5–7.5 
fluorescent focus 
units/0.2 mL
Egg
No
No
NAS
No
Abbreviations: ACIP = Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices; HA = hemagglutinin; IIV = inactivated influenza vaccine; IM = intramuscular; LAIV = live 
attenuated influenza vaccine; MDV = multidose vial; NAS = intranasal; PFS = prefilled syringe; RIV=recombinant influenza vaccine; SDV = single-dose vial.
* Immunization providers should consult Food and Drug Administration–approved prescribing information for 2018–19 influenza vaccines for the most complete 
and updated information, including (but not limited to) indications, contraindications, warnings, and precautions. Package inserts for U.S.-licensed vaccines are 
available at https://www.fda.gov/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/ucm093833.htm. Availability of specific products and presentations might 
change and differ from what is described in this table and in the text of this report.
† Persons with a history of egg allergy may receive any licensed, recommended, age-appropriate influenza vaccine (IIV, RIV4, or LAIV4) that is otherwise appropriate 
for their health status. Those who report having had reactions to egg involving symptoms other than urticaria (hives), such as angioedema, respiratory distress, 
lightheadedness, or recurrent emesis; or who required epinephrine or another emergency medical intervention, should be vaccinated in an inpatient or outpatient 
medical setting (including, but not necessarily limited to, hospitals, clinics, health departments, and physician offices). Vaccine administration should be supervised 
by a health care provider who is able to recognize and manage severe allergic conditions.
§ For adults and older children, the recommended site for intramuscular influenza vaccination is the deltoid muscle. The preferred site for infants and young children 
is the anterolateral aspect of the thigh. Specific guidance regarding site and needle length for intramuscular administration is available in the ACIP General Best 
Practice Guidelines for Immunization, available at https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/acip-recs/general-recs/index.html.
seasons’ data concerning LAIV effectiveness among children 
aged 2 through 17 years, including 1) a combined individual-
patient-level analysis of data from five U.S. observational 
studies of LAIV effectiveness for the 2013–14 through 
2015–16 seasons, and 2) a systematic review and meta-
analysis of U.S. and non-U.S. observational studies of LAIV 
effectiveness for the 2010–11 through 2016–17 seasons (for 
which further details are available in the Appendix to the 
Background Document). These observational data indicated 
that LAIV was poorly effective against influenza A(H1N1)
pdm09-like viruses, and was significantly less effective than 
IIV against these viruses. However, LAIV was effective 
against influenza B viruses, and effectiveness of LAIV and 
IIV against influenza A(H3N2) viruses generally did not 
 Recommendations and Reports
4 
MMWR / August 24, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
differ significantly. No estimates of the effectiveness of 
the current formulation of LAIV4, which contains a new 
H1N1pdm09-like vaccine virus, were available at the time 
of this review. The third source was manufacturer data 
concerning shedding and immunogenicity associated with 
administration of LAIV containing the new H1N1pdm09-
like vaccine virus, A/Slovenia/2903/2015, among children 
aged 24 months through <4 years. These data suggest that this 
new H1N1pdm09-like virus has improved replicative fitness 
over previous H1N1pdm09-like viruses included in LAIV
.
3. Regarding recommendations for persons with a history 
of egg allergy, persons with egg allergy of any severity 
were previously recommended to receive any licensed, 
recommended, and age-appropriate influenza vaccine. 
Use of LAIV4 for persons with egg allergy of any severity 
was approved by ACIP in February 2016, prior to the 
recommendations made for the 2016–17 and 2017–18 
seasons that LAIV4 not be used in any population 
because of effectiveness concerns (9). In discussing 
LAIV4 for egg-allergic persons in February 2016, ACIP 
heard data from three studies which evaluated the use of 
LAIV in egg-allergic children, in which no cases of 
anaphylaxis occurred (10–12).
4. With regard to recommendations for newly licensed 
influenza vaccines and changes to the licensed indications 
for existing vaccines, ACIP relies on FDA for review of 
safety, immunogenicity, and effectiveness data pertaining 
to the licensure of influenza vaccines. Regulatory 
information pertinent to the labeling change for Afluria 
Quadrivalent (IIV4) is available at https://www.fda.gov/
BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/
ucm518291.htm. Regulatory information pertinent to 
the labeling change for Fluarix Quadrivalent (IIV4) is 
available at https://www.fda.gov/BiologicsBloodVaccines/
Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/ucm342391.htm.
Primary Changes and Updates in the 
Recommendations
Routine annual influenza vaccination of all persons aged 
≥6 months without contraindications continues to be 
recommended. No preferential recommendation is made for 
one influenza vaccine product over another for persons for 
whom more than one licensed, recommended, and appropriate 
product is available. Updated information and guidance in this 
report includes the following:
• Vaccine viruses included in the 2018–19 U.S. trivalent 
influenza vaccines will be an A/Michigan/45/2015 (H1N1)
pdm09–like virus, an A/Singapore/INFIMH-16-0019/2016 
(H3N2)-like virus, and a B/Colorado/06/2017–like virus 
(Victoria lineage). Quadrivalent influenza vaccines will contain 
these three viruses and an additional influenza B vaccine virus, 
a B/Phuket/3073/2013–like virus (Yamagata lineage).
• Following two seasons (2016–17 and 2017–18) during 
which ACIP recommended that LAIV4 not be used, ACIP 
voted in February 2018 to recommend that for the 
2018–19 season, vaccination providers may choose to 
administer any licensed, age-appropriate influenza vaccine 
(IIV, RIV4, or LAIV4). LAIV4 is an option for those for 
whom it is appropriate (Table 2).
• Persons with a history of egg allergy of any severity may 
receive any licensed, recommended, and age-appropriate 
influenza vaccine (IIV, RIV4, or LAIV4). IIV and RIV4 
have been previously recommended. Use of LAIV4 for 
persons with egg allergy was approved by ACIP in February 
2016. Additional recommendations concerning vaccination 
of egg-allergic persons are discussed.
• Two recent regulatory actions are described. In August 2017, 
FDA approved an expanded age indication for Afluria 
Quadrivalent (IIV4).  Previously licensed for ages ≥18 years, 
Afluria Quadrivalent is now licensed for ages ≥5 years. In 
January 2018, FDA approved an expanded age indication 
for Fluarix Quadrivalent (IIV4). Previously licensed for 
persons aged ≥3 years, Fluarix Quadrivalent is now licensed 
for persons aged ≥6 months. Children aged 6 through 
35 months may receive Fluarix Quadrivalent at the same 
0.5 mL per dose (containing 15 µg of hemagglutinin [HA] 
per vaccine virus) as is used for older children and adults. 
This licensure creates a third option for inactivated influenza 
vaccines for children aged 6 through 35 months, in addition 
to the previously available 0.5 mL per dose (containing 
15 µg of HA per vaccine virus) presentation of FluLaval 
Quadrivalent (IIV4) and 0.25 mL per dose presentation 
(containing 7.5 µg of HA per vaccine virus) of Fluzone 
Quadrivalent (IIV4).
Recommendations for the Use of 
Influenza Vaccines, 2018–19
Groups Recommended for Vaccination
Routine annual influenza vaccination is recommended for all 
persons aged ≥6 months who do not have contraindications. 
Recommendations regarding timing of vaccination, 
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / August 24, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 3 
5
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
TABLE 2. Contraindications and precautions to the use of influenza 
vaccines — United States, 2018–19 influenza season*
Vaccine 
type
Contraindications
Precautions
IIV
History of severe allergic reaction to any 
component of the vaccine† or after a 
previous dose of any influenza vaccine
Moderate or severe acute 
illness with or without 
fever
History of Guillain-Barré 
syndrome within 6 
weeks of receipt of 
influenza vaccine
RIV
History of severe allergic reaction to any 
component of the vaccine
Moderate or severe acute 
illness with or without 
fever
History of Guillain-Barré 
syndrome within 
6 weeks of receipt of 
influenza vaccine
LAIV
History of severe allergic reaction to any 
component of the vaccine† or after a 
previous dose of any influenza vaccine
Moderate or severe acute 
illness with or without 
fever
Concomitant aspirin- or salicylate-
containing therapy in children and 
adolescents
History of Guillain-Barré 
syndrome within 
6 weeks of receipt of 
influenza vaccine
Children aged 2 through 4 years who 
have received a diagnosis of asthma or 
whose parents or caregivers report that 
a health care provider has told them 
during the preceding 12 months that 
their child had wheezing or asthma or 
whose medical record indicates a 
wheezing episode has occurred during 
the preceding 12 months
Asthma in persons aged 
≥5 years
Other underlying 
medical conditions that 
might predispose to 
complications after 
wild-type influenza 
infection (e.g., chronic 
pulmonary, 
cardiovascular [except 
isolated hypertension], 
renal, hepatic, 
neurologic, 
hematologic, or 
metabolic disorders 
[including diabetes 
mellitus])
Children and adults who are 
immunocompromised due to any 
cause (including immunosuppression 
caused by medications or by HIV 
infection)
Close contacts and caregivers of severely 
immunosuppressed persons who 
require a protected environment
Pregnancy
Receipt of influenza antiviral medication 
within the previous 48 hours
Abbreviations: ACIP = Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices; IIV = 
Inactivated Influenza Vaccine; LAIV = Live-Attenuated Influenza Vaccine; RIV = 
Recombinant Influenza Vaccine.
* Immunization providers should check Food and Drug Administration–
approved prescribing information for 2018–19 influenza vaccines for the most 
complete and updated information, including (but not limited to) indications, 
contraindications, and precautions. Package inserts for US-licensed vaccines 
are available at https://www.fda.gov/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/
ApprovedProducts/ucm093833.htm.
† History of severe allergic reaction (e.g., anaphylaxis) to egg is a labeled 
contraindication to the use of IIV and LAIV. However, ACIP recommends that 
any licensed, recommended, and age-appropriate influenza vaccine (IIV, 
RIV, or LAIV) may be administered to persons with egg allergy of any severity 
(see Persons with a History of Egg Allergy for further recommendations 
and information).  
considerations for specific populations, the use of specific 
vaccines, and contraindications and precautions are summarized 
in the sections that follow.
Timing of Vaccination
Balancing considerations regarding the unpredictability 
of timing of onset of the influenza season and concerns that 
vaccine-induced immunity might wane over the course of a 
season, it is recommended that vaccination should be offered 
by the end of October. Children aged 6 months through 
8 years who require 2 doses (see Children Aged 6 Months 
Through 8 Years) should receive their first dose as soon as 
possible after vaccine becomes available, to allow the second 
dose (which must be administered ≥4 weeks later) to be received 
by the end of October. Community vaccination programs 
should balance maximizing likelihood of persistence of 
vaccine-induced protection through the season with avoiding 
missed opportunities to vaccinate or vaccinating after onset 
of influenza circulation occurs. Revaccination later in the 
season of persons who have already been fully vaccinated is not 
recommended. Vaccination should continue to be offered as 
long as influenza viruses are circulating and unexpired vaccine 
is available. To avoid missed opportunities for vaccination, 
providers should offer vaccination during routine health care 
visits and hospitalizations.
Optimally, vaccination should occur before onset of 
influenza activity in the community. However, because timing 
of the onset, peak, and decline of influenza activity varies, the 
ideal time to start vaccinating cannot be predicted each season. 
Moreover, more than one outbreak might occur in a given 
community in a single year. In the United States, localized 
outbreaks that indicate the start of seasonal influenza activity 
can occur as early as October. However, in 75% of influenza 
BOX. Abbreviation conventions for vaccines discussed in this report
• IIV = Inactivated Influenza Vaccine
• RIV = Recombinant Influenza Vaccine
• LAIV = Live Attenuated Influenza Vaccine
• Numerals following letter abbreviations indicate valence
 
– 3 for trivalent vaccines
 
– 4 for quadrivalent vaccines
• Prefixes are used when necessary to refer to some 
specific vaccine types
 
– a for adjuvanted vaccine (e.g., aIIV3)
 
– cc for cell culture-based vaccine (e.g., ccIIV4)
 
– HD for high-dose vaccine (e.g., HD-IIV3)
 
– SD for standard-dose vaccine (e.g., SD-IIV3)
 Recommendations and Reports
6 
MMWR / August 24, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
seasons from 1982–83 through 2017–18, peak influenza 
activity (which often is close to the midpoint of influenza 
activity for the season) has not occurred until January or later, 
and in 58% of seasons, the peak was in February or later (13).
A number of observational studies (14–21) and a post hoc 
analysis from a randomized controlled trial (22) have reported 
decreases in vaccine effectiveness (VE) within a single influenza 
season, with increasing time postvaccination. Waning effects 
have not been observed consistently across age groups, virus 
subtypes, and seasons; and observed declines in protection 
could be at least in part attributable to bias, unmeasured 
confounding, or the late season emergence of antigenic drift 
variants that are less well-matched to the vaccine strain. Some 
studies suggest this occurs to a greater degree with A(H3N2) 
viruses than with A(H1N1) or B viruses (19,21). This effect 
might also vary with recipient age; in some studies waning was 
more pronounced among older adults (14,15) and younger 
children (15). Rates of decline in VE have also varied. A 
multiseason (2011–12 through 2014–15) analysis from the 
U.S. Influenza Vaccine Effectiveness (U.S. Flu VE) Network 
found that VE declined by about 7% per month for H3N2 and 
influenza B, and 6%–11% per month for H1N1pdm09 (16). 
VE remained greater than zero for at least 5 to 6 months after 
vaccination. An analysis from the 2011–12 through 2013–14 
seasons noted protection ranging from 54% to 67% during 
days 0 through 180 postvaccination (20). A third multiseason 
analysis (2011–12 through 2014–15) conducted in Europe 
noted a decline in VE to 0% at 111 days postvaccination for 
A(H3N2) viruses. VE against B viruses declined more slowly 
and VE against A(H1N1) viruses remained roughly stable at 
50-55% through the influenza season (21).
Variable data concerning presence and rate of waning 
immunity following influenza vaccination, coupled with the 
unpredictable timing of the influenza season each year, prevent 
determination of an optimal time to vaccinate. Programmatic 
issues are also a consideration. Although some available data 
indicate that early vaccination (e.g., in July and August) might 
be associated with suboptimal immunity before the end of the 
influenza season, particularly among older adults, the relative 
contribution of potential waning of immunity compared with 
those of other determinants of the impact of vaccination (e.g., 
timing and severity of the influenza season, the impact of 
missed opportunities when individuals delay vaccination and 
fail to return later in the season, and programmatic constraints) 
is unknown. Although delaying vaccination might result in 
greater immunity later in the season, deferral also might result 
in missed opportunities to vaccinate, as well as difficulties 
in vaccinating a population within a more constrained time 
period. Efforts should be structured to optimize vaccination 
coverage before influenza activity in the community begins.
Vaccination efforts should continue throughout the season 
because the duration of the influenza season varies, and influenza 
activity might not occur in certain communities until February 
or March. Providers should offer influenza vaccine routinely, and 
organized vaccination campaigns should continue throughout 
the influenza season, including after influenza activity has 
begun in the community. Although vaccination by the end of 
October is recommended, vaccine administered in December 
or later, even if influenza activity has already begun, is likely to 
be beneficial in the majority of influenza seasons.
Guidance for Use in Specific Populations 
and Situations
Populations at Higher Risk for Medical 
Complications Attributable to Severe Influenza
All persons aged ≥6 months without contraindications 
should be vaccinated annually. However, vaccination to 
prevent influenza is particularly important for persons who 
are at increased risk for severe complications from influenza 
and for influenza-related outpatient, emergency department, 
or hospital visits. When vaccine supply is limited, vaccination 
efforts should focus on delivering vaccination to persons at 
higher risk for medical complications attributable to severe 
influenza who do not have contraindications. These persons 
include (no hierarchy is implied by order of listing):
• All children aged 6 through 59 months;
• All persons aged ≥50 years;
• Adults and children who have chronic pulmonary 
(including asthma) or cardiovascular (excluding isolated 
hypertension), renal, hepatic, neurologic, hematologic, or 
metabolic disorders (including diabetes mellitus);
• Persons who are immunocompromised due to any cause 
(including immunosuppression caused by medications or 
by HIV infection);
• Women who are or will be pregnant during the influenza 
season;
• Children and adolescents (aged 6 months through 
18 years) who are receiving aspirin- or salicylate-containing 
medications and who might be at risk for experiencing 
Reye syndrome after influenza virus infection;
• Residents of nursing homes and other long-term care 
facilities;
• American Indians/Alaska Natives; and
• Persons who are extremely obese (body mass index ≥40).
An age-appropriate IIV or RIV4 is suitable for persons in all 
risk groups. LAIV4 is not recommended for some populations, 
including some groups listed above. Contraindications and 
precautions to the use of LAIV4 are noted (Table 2).
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / August 24, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 3 
7
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Persons Who Live with or Care for Persons at 
Higher Risk for Influenza-Related Complications
All persons aged ≥6 months without contraindications should 
be vaccinated annually; however, continued emphasis should 
be placed on vaccination of persons who live with or care for 
persons at higher risk for influenza-related complications. 
When vaccine supply is limited, vaccination efforts should 
focus on delivering vaccination to persons at higher risk for 
influenza-related complications, as well as persons who live 
with or care for such persons:
• Health care personnel, including physicians, nurses, and 
other workers in inpatient and outpatient-care settings, 
medical emergency-response workers (e.g., paramedics and 
emergency medical technicians), employees of nursing home 
and long-term care facilities who have contact with patients 
or residents, and students in these professions who will have 
contact with patients. ACIP guidance for immunization of 
health care personnel has been published previously (23);
• Household contacts (including children) and caregivers 
of children aged ≤59 months (i.e., aged <5 years) and 
adults aged ≥50 years, particularly contacts of children 
aged <6 months; and
• Household contacts (including children) and caregivers 
of persons with medical conditions that put them at higher 
risk for severe complications from influenza.
Health care personnel and persons who are contacts of 
persons in these groups (with the exception of those of severely 
immunocompromised persons who require a protected 
environment) may receive any influenza vaccine that is otherwise 
indicated. Persons who care for severely immunocompromised 
persons requiring a protected environment should receive either 
IIV or RIV4. ACIP and the Healthcare Infection Control 
Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC) have previously 
recommended that health care personnel who receive LAIV 
should avoid providing care for severely immunosuppressed 
patients requiring a protected environment for 7 days after 
vaccination, and that hospital visitors who have received 
LAIV should avoid contact with such persons for 7 days after 
vaccination (24). However, such persons need not be restricted 
from visiting less severely immunosuppressed patients.
Children Aged 6 Months Through 8 Years
Dose volume for children aged 6 through 35 months: 
Children aged 6 through 35 months may receive one of three 
IIV4 products at the appropriate volume for each dose needed. 
The appropriate dose volume varies by product:
• 0.5 mL FluLaval Quadrivalent (containing 15 µg of HA 
per vaccine virus),
• 0.5 mL Fluarix Quadrivalent (containing 15 µg of HA 
per vaccine virus), or
• 0.25 mL Fluzone Quadrivalent (containing 7.5 µg of HA 
per vaccine virus).
Alternatively, healthy children aged ≥2 years may receive LAIV4, 
0.2mL intranasally (0.1 mL each nostril) (see Contraindications 
and Precautions for the Use of LAIV4; Table 2).
Care should be taken to administer the appropriate volume 
for each needed dose of the respective product. In each instance 
the needed volume may be administered from a prefilled 
syringe containing the appropriate volume (as supplied by the 
manufacturer), a single dose vial, or a multidose vial. However, 
if a 0.5 mL single-dose vial of Fluzone Quadrivalent is used 
for a child aged 6 through 35 months, only half the volume 
should be administered and the other half should be discarded.
Before November 2016, the only IIV formulations licensed 
for children aged 6 through 35 months were the 0.25 mL dose 
formulations of Fluzone and Fluzone Quadrivalent (containing 
7.5 µg of HA per vaccine virus). The recommendation for 
use of a reduced dose volume for children in this age group 
(half that recommended for persons aged ≥3 years) was 
based on increased reactogenicity noted among children 
(particularly younger children) following influenza vaccines, 
primarily observed with whole-virus inactivated vaccines 
(25–29). Vaccines more similar to currently available split-
virus inactivated products demonstrated less reactogenicity 
(29). In a randomized trial comparing immunogenicity 
and safety of 0.5 mL FluLaval Quadrivalent with 0.25 mL 
Fluzone Quadrivalent, safety and reactogenicity were similar 
between the two vaccines (30). In a post hoc analysis, superior 
immunogenicity was noted for the B components of FluLaval 
Quadrivalent among infants aged 6 through 17 months and for 
unprimed children (those who had not previously received at 
least 2 doses of influenza vaccine) aged 6 through 35 months.
Number of doses for children aged 6 months through 
8 years: Evidence from several studies indicates that children 
aged 6 months through 8 years require 2 doses of influenza 
vaccine administered a minimum of 4 weeks apart during their 
first season of vaccination for optimal protection (31–34). 
Children aged 6 months through 8 years who have previously 
received ≥2 total doses of trivalent or quadrivalent influenza 
vaccine at least 4 weeks apart before July 1, 2018, require 
only one dose for 2018–19. The 2 doses of influenza vaccine 
do not have to have been administered in the same season 
or consecutive seasons. Children in this age group who have 
not previously received ≥2 doses of trivalent or quadrivalent 
influenza vaccine before July 1, 2018 require 2 doses for the 
2018–19 season. The interval between the 2 doses should be 
at least 4 weeks (Figure).
 Recommendations and Reports
8 
MMWR / August 24, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
FIGURE. Influenza vaccine dosing algorithm for children aged 
6 months through 8 years — Advisory Committee on Immunization 
Practices, United States, 2018–19 influenza season 
Has the child received ≥2 doses of 
trivalent or quadrivalent influenza vaccine
 before July 1, 2018
(Doses need not have been given during same or 
consecutive seasons)
Yes
No / Don’t know
1 dose of 
2018–19 influenza 
vaccine
2 doses of 
2018–19 influenza vaccine
(administered 
≥4 weeks apart)
Pregnant Women
Pregnant and postpartum women have been observed to be at 
higher risk for severe illness and complications from influenza, 
particularly during the second and third trimesters. ACIP and 
the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 
(35–37) recommend that all women who are pregnant or who 
might be pregnant during the influenza season receive influenza 
vaccine. Any licensed, recommended, and age-appropriate 
IIV or RIV4 may be used. LAIV4 should not be used during 
pregnancy. Influenza vaccine can be administered at any time 
during pregnancy, before and during the influenza season.
Although there is substantial experience with the use of IIVs 
during pregnancy, data specifically reflecting administration 
of influenza vaccines during the first trimester are relatively 
limited (see Safety of Influenza Vaccines—Pregnant Women 
and Neonates in the Background Document). Most studies have 
not noted an association between influenza vaccination and 
adverse pregnancy outcomes. One recent observational Vaccine 
Safety Datalink (VSD) study conducted during the 2010–11 
and 2011–12 seasons noted an association between receipt 
of IIV containing H1N1pdm09 and risk for spontaneous 
abortion (miscarriage) in the 28 days after IIV, when an 
H1N1pdm-09-containing vaccine had also been received 
the previous season (38). This was an unexpected finding, as 
prior studies (39–47), and systematic reviews (48,49), did not 
find an association between IIV and spontaneous abortion. A 
follow-up VSD study is in progress (50).
There is substantially less experience with more recently 
licensed IIV products (e.g., quadrivalent, cell culture-based, 
and adjuvanted vaccines) during pregnancy as compared 
with previously available products. For RIV (available 
as RIV3 from 2013–14 through 2017–18, and as RIV4 
since 2017–18), data are limited to reports of pregnancies 
occurring incidentally during clinical trials, VAERS reports, 
and pregnancy registry reports. Pregnancy registries and 
surveillance studies exist for some products; information may 
be found in package inserts (51–56), available at https://www.
fda.gov/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/
ucm094045.htm for trivalent vaccines and https://www.fda.
gov/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/
ucm295057.htm for quadrivalent vaccines.
Older Adults
Because of the vulnerability of this population to severe 
influenza illness, hospitalization, and death, efficacy and 
effectiveness of influenza vaccines among older adults is an 
area of active research (see Immunogenicity, Efficacy, and 
Effectiveness of Influenza Vaccines: HD-IIV3, aIIV3, and 
RIV4 for Older Adults in the Background Document). Recent 
comparative studies of vaccine efficacy/effectiveness against 
laboratory-confirmed influenza outcomes among older adults 
have focused on HD-IIV3 (Fluzone High-Dose) (57,58), 
RIV4 (Flublok Quadrivalent) (59), and aIIV3 (Fluad) (60) 
(see Table in Background Document; https://www.cdc.gov/
flu/professionals/acip/2018-19/table3.html). Of note, each 
of these three vaccines has been studied in comparison to a 
standard dose, unadjuvanted IIV (SD-IIV3 as the comparator 
for HD-IIV3 and aIIV3; SD-IIV4 as the comparator for RIV4). 
To date, HD-IIV3 has been the most extensively studied in this 
regard, and evidence has accumulated for its superior efficacy 
and effectiveness compared with SD-IIV3 in this population. 
Data from studies comparing the efficacy or effectiveness of 
HD-IIV3, aIIV3, and RIV4 with one another against laboratory-
confirmed influenza outcomes among older adults are limited, 
which prevents recommending one of these three vaccines 
over another for this population. In comparative safety studies, 
some injection site and systemic reactions were observed more 
frequently in older persons vaccinated with HD-IIV3 and aIIV3, 
compared with unadjuvanted SD-IIV3 (61,62).
Fluzone High-Dose (HD-IIV3) met prespecified criteria 
for superior efficacy against laboratory-confirmed influenza 
to that of SD-IIV3 in a randomized trial conducted over 
two seasons among 31,989 persons aged ≥65 years, and 
might provide better protection than SD-IIV3 for this age 
group (57,63,64). For the primary outcome (prevention of 
laboratory-confirmed influenza caused by any viral type or 
subtype and associated with protocol-defined ILI), relative 
efficacy of HD-IIV3 compared with SD-IIV3 was 24.2% 
(95% CI = 9.7–36.5%). These findings are further supported 
by results from retrospective studies of Centers for Medicare 
and Medicaid Services (CMS) and Veterans Administration 
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / August 24, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 3 
9
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
data, as well as a cluster-randomized trial of HD-IIV3 versus 
SD-IIV among older adults in nursing homes (65–69). A meta-
analysis reported that HD-IIV3 provided better protection 
than SD-IIV3 against ILI (relative VE = 19.5%; 95% CI = 8.6–
29.0%); all-cause hospitalizations (relative VE = 9.1%; 95% 
CI = 2.4–15.3); and hospitalizations due to influenza (relative 
VE = 17.8%; 95% CI = 8.1–26.5), pneumonia (relative 
VE = 24.3%; 95% CI = 13.9–33.4), and cardiorespiratory 
events (relative VE = 18.2%; 95% CI = 6.8–28.1) (70).
In an exploratory analysis of data from a single-season 
randomized trial conducted among 8,604 adults aged 
≥50 years, Flublok Quadrivalent (RIV4) was more efficacious 
than SD-IIV4 (59,71); however, no claim of superiority was 
approved for the package insert (71). For the primary outcome 
(RT-PCR-confirmed, protocol-defined ILI caused by any 
influenza virus type or subtype), the relative VE of RIV4 
compared with IIV4 was 30% (95% CI = 10–47). When 
restricted to persons aged ≥65 years, the relative VE of RIV4 
was 17% (95% CI = -20–43%).
Fluad (aIIV3) was more effective against laboratory-confirmed 
influenza than unadjuvanted SD-IIV3 among adults aged 
≥65 years (N = 227; 165 of whom received aIIV3 and 62 IIV3) 
in an analysis from a small single-season observational study (60). 
Relative effectiveness of aIIV3 compared with unadjuvanted 
IIV3 was 63% (95% CI = 4–86). No data are yet available 
concerning efficacy of aIIV3 compared with nonadjuvanted 
IIV3 against laboratory-confirmed influenza outcomes from a 
randomized trial in this population.
Additional data concerning these vaccines from studies 
examining immunogenicity and nonlaboratory-confirmed 
influenza outcomes are discussed in the Background 
Document. ACIP will continue to review data concerning 
the efficacy and effectiveness of these vaccines as more 
information emerges. No preference is expressed for any one 
vaccine type. Vaccination should not be delayed if a specific 
product is not readily available. For persons aged ≥65 years, 
any age-appropriate IIV formulation (standard-dose or high-
dose, trivalent or quadrivalent, unadjuvanted or adjuvanted) 
or RIV4 are acceptable options.
Immunocompromised Persons
Immunocompromised states comprise a heterogeneous range 
of conditions. In many instances, limited data are available 
regarding the use of influenza vaccines in the setting of specific 
immunocompromised states. ACIP recommends that LAIV4 
not be used for immunocompromised persons (72) because 
of the uncertain but biologically plausible risk for disease 
attributable to the vaccine virus. In addition to potential safety 
issues, immune response to live or inactivated vaccines might 
be blunted in some clinical situations, such as for persons 
with congenital immune deficiencies, persons receiving cancer 
chemotherapy, and persons receiving immunosuppressive 
medications. For this reason, timing of vaccination might be 
a consideration (e.g., vaccinating during some period either 
before or after an immunocompromising intervention).
The Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) has 
published detailed guidance for the selection and timing of 
vaccines for persons with specific immunocompromising 
conditions, including congenital immune disorders, stem cell 
and solid organ transplant, anatomic and functional asplenia, 
and therapeutic drug-induced immunosuppression, as well as 
for persons with cochlear implants or other conditions leading 
to persistent cerebrospinal fluid-oropharyngeal communication 
(73). Given the paucity of safety data for LAIV in most of these 
populations, and the availability of alternative vaccines, IIV or 
RIV4 should be used instead of LAIV for these persons. ACIP 
will continue to review accumulating data on use of influenza 
vaccines in these contexts.
Persons with a History of Guillain-Barré Syndrome 
Following Influenza Vaccination
A history of Guillain-Barré Syndrome (GBS) within 6 weeks 
following a previous dose of any type of influenza vaccine is 
considered a precaution to vaccination (Table 2). Persons 
who are not at higher risk for severe influenza complications 
(see Populations at Higher Risk for Medical Complications 
Attributable to Severe Influenza) and who are known to have 
experienced GBS within 6 weeks of a previous influenza 
vaccination generally should not be vaccinated. As an 
alternative to vaccination, physicians might consider using 
influenza antiviral chemoprophylaxis for these persons (74). 
However, the benefits of influenza vaccination might outweigh 
the risks for certain persons who have a history of GBS and who 
also are at higher risk for severe complications from influenza.
Persons with a History of Egg Allergy
As is the case for other vaccines, influenza vaccines contain 
various different components that might cause allergic and 
anaphylactic reactions. Not all such reactions are related to 
egg proteins; however, the possibility of reactions to influenza 
vaccines in egg-allergic persons might be of concern to 
these persons and vaccine providers. Currently available 
influenza vaccines, with the exceptions of RIV4 (Flublok 
Quadrivalent) and ccIIV4 (Flucelvax Quadrivalent), are 
prepared by propagation of virus in embryonated eggs. Only 
RIV4 is considered egg-free. For ccIIV4, ovalbumin is not 
directly measured. During manufacture of ccIIV4, viruses are 
propagated in mammalian cells rather than in eggs. However, 
one of the four viruses provided to the manufacturer is egg-
derived; therefore, egg proteins might potentially be introduced 
 Recommendations and Reports
10 
MMWR / August 24, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
at the start of the manufacturing process. Once these viruses are 
received by the manufacturer, no eggs are used, and dilutions 
at various steps during the manufacturing process result in a 
theoretical maximum of 1.7×10-8 µg/0.5 mL dose of total egg 
protein (Seqirus, unpublished data, 2018).
Severe allergic reactions to vaccines, although rare, can 
occur at any time, even in the absence of a history of previous 
allergic reaction. Therefore, all vaccine providers should be 
familiar with the office emergency plan, and be certified in 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (72). For persons who report a 
history of egg allergy, ACIP recommends the following (based 
upon the recipient’s previous symptoms after exposure to egg):
• Persons with a history of egg allergy who have experienced 
only urticaria (hives) after exposure to egg should receive 
influenza vaccine. Any licensed, recommended, and age-
appropriate influenza vaccine (i.e., any IIV, RIV4, or 
LAIV4) that is otherwise appropriate for the recipient’s 
health status may be used.
• Persons who report having had reactions to egg involving 
symptoms other than urticaria (hives), such as angioedema, 
respiratory distress, lightheadedness, or recurrent emesis; 
or who required epinephrine or another emergency 
medical intervention, may similarly receive any licensed, 
recommended, and age-appropriate influenza vaccine (i.e., 
any IIV, RIV4, or LAIV4) that is otherwise appropriate 
for their health status. The selected vaccine should be 
administered in an inpatient or outpatient medical setting 
(including, but not necessarily limited to, hospitals, clinics, 
health departments, and physician offices). Vaccine 
administration should be supervised by a health care 
provider who is able to recognize and manage severe 
allergic reactions.
• A previous severe allergic reaction to influenza vaccine, 
regardless of the component suspected of being responsible 
for the reaction, is a contraindication to future receipt of 
the vaccine.
No postvaccination observation period is recommended 
specifically for egg-allergic persons. However, ACIP recommends 
that vaccine providers consider observing patients (seated or 
supine) for 15 minutes following administration of any vaccine 
to decrease the risk for injury should syncope occur (72).
Persons who are able to eat lightly cooked egg (e.g., scrambled 
egg) without reaction are unlikely to be allergic. Egg-allergic 
persons might tolerate egg in baked products (e.g., bread or 
cake). Tolerance to egg-containing foods does not exclude 
the possibility of egg allergy. Egg allergy can be confirmed 
by a consistent medical history of adverse reactions to eggs 
and egg-containing foods, plus skin and/or blood testing for 
immunoglobulin E directed against egg proteins (75).
Occasional cases of anaphylaxis in egg-allergic persons have 
been reported to VAERS after administration of influenza 
vaccines (76,77). ACIP will continue to review available data 
regarding anaphylaxis cases following influenza vaccines.
Vaccination Issues for Travelers
Travelers who want to reduce the risk for influenza infection 
should consider influenza vaccination, preferably at least 
2 weeks before departure. In particular, persons residing in 
the United States who are at higher risk for complications of 
influenza and who were not vaccinated with influenza vaccine 
during the preceding Northern Hemisphere fall or winter 
should consider receiving influenza vaccine before departure if 
they plan to travel to the tropics, with organized tourist groups 
or on cruise ships, or to the Southern Hemisphere during the 
Southern Hemisphere influenza season (April–September).
Persons at higher risk who received the previous season’s 
vaccine before travel should consult with their health care 
provider to discuss the risk for influenza or other travel-related 
diseases before embarking on travel during the summer. Persons 
vaccinated before travel should receive the current vaccine the 
following fall or winter.
In temperate climate regions of the Northern and Southern 
hemispheres, influenza activity is seasonal, occurring approximately 
from October through May in the Northern Hemisphere and 
April through September in the Southern Hemisphere. In the 
tropics, influenza occurs throughout the year. T
ravelers can be 
exposed to influenza when travelling to an area where influenza is 
circulating, or when traveling as part of large tourist groups (e.g., 
on cruise ships) that include persons from areas of the world in 
which influenza viruses are circulating (78–81).
Influenza vaccine formulated for the Southern Hemisphere 
might differ in viral composition from the Northern 
Hemisphere vaccine. For persons traveling to the Southern 
Hemisphere during the Southern Hemisphere influenza 
season, receipt of a current U.S.-licensed Southern Hemisphere 
formulation influenza vaccine prior to departure might be 
reasonable, but might not be feasible in many instances. 
With the exception of the Southern Hemisphere formulation 
of Fluzone Quadrivalent (IIV4), Southern Hemisphere 
formulation seasonal influenza vaccines are not licensed in the 
U.S., and Southern Hemisphere formulations generally are not 
commercially available in the United States. More information 
on influenza vaccines and travel is available at https://www.
cdc.gov/flu/travelers/travelersfacts.htm.
Use of Influenza Antiviral Medications
Administration of IIV or RIV4 to persons receiving influenza 
antiviral medications for treatment or chemoprophylaxis is 
acceptable. However, influenza antiviral medications may 
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / August 24, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 3 
11
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
reduce the effectiveness of LAIV4 if given within 48 hours 
before to 14 days after LAIV4 (82). Persons who receive 
influenza antiviral medications during this period surrounding 
receipt of LAIV4 may be revaccinated with another appropriate 
vaccine formulation (e.g., IIV or RIV4).
Administration of Influenza Vaccines with Other 
Vaccines
In general, data regarding simultaneous or sequential 
administration for the many potential combinations of vaccines 
are limited. Therefore, following the ACIP General Best Practice 
Guidelines for Immunization is prudent (72). IIVs and RIV4 
may be administered concomitantly or sequentially with other 
inactivated vaccines or with live vaccines. Injectable vaccines 
that are given concomitantly should be administered at separate 
anatomical sites. LAIV4 may be administered simultaneously 
with other live or inactivated vaccines. However, following 
administration of a live vaccine (such as LAIV4), at least 4 weeks 
should pass before another live vaccine is administered.
Relatively limited data are available on the concomitant 
administration of influenza vaccines with other vaccines. 
In a study comparing the immunogenicity of IIV and live 
attenuated zoster vaccine given either concomitantly or 
separated by a 4-week interval to adults aged ≥50 years, 
antibody responses were similar for both schedules (83). In 
some studies, reduced responses have been noted to PCV13 
(84,85), tetanus antigens (86), and pertussis antigens (86) 
when co-administered with IIV; in most instances the clinical 
significance of this is uncertain. Reassuring safety profiles have 
been noted for simultaneous administration of IIV with live 
attenuated zoster vaccine (83), PCV13 (84,85), PPSV23 (87) 
and Tdap (86) among adults and of Tdap among pregnant 
women (88). Increased prevalence of injection site and/or 
systemic adverse reactions has been noted with concurrent 
administration in some of these studies, but these symptoms 
have generally been reported to be mild or moderate.
Among children, co-administration of IIV and PCV13 was 
associated with increased risk for fever on the day of vaccination 
and the day following (i.e., days 0–1 postvaccination) in 
children aged 6 through 23 months in a study conducted 
during the 2011–12 season (89). Increased risk for febrile 
seizures in this age group has been noted within days 0–1 
following co-administration of IIV with PCV7, PCV13, 
or DTaP-containing vaccines during the 2006–07 through 
2010–11 seasons (90), and with PCV13 during the 2014–15 
season (91). While frightening to parents, most febrile seizures 
are brief and have a good prognosis (92). After considering 
risks and benefits, no changes in the recommendations for 
administration of these vaccines were made, and these vaccines 
may be given concomitantly. Surveillance of febrile seizures 
is ongoing through VAERS, and the VSD annual influenza 
vaccine safety surveillance includes monitoring for seizures 
following vaccination.
Studies of concomitant administration of LAIV with other 
vaccines are limited. Concurrent administration to children 
of LAIV3 with MMR and varicella vaccine was not associated 
with diminished immunogenicity to antigens in any of the 
vaccines in one study (93); diminished response to rubella 
was observed in another study examining co-administration 
of LAIV3 and MMR (94). No safety concerns were revealed 
in these studies.
In recent years several vaccines containing novel, nonaluminum 
adjuvants have been licensed for use in the United States. 
These include AS01B (in Shingrix, recombinant zoster 
subunit vaccine); MF59 (in Fluad, aIIV3); and cytosine 
phosphoguanine oligodeoxynucleotide (in Heplisav-B, 
recombinant hepatitis B surface antigen vaccine). Data are 
limited regarding co-administration of these vaccines with other 
adjuvanted or unadjuvanted vaccines. Co-administration of 
Shingrix with unadjuvanted IIV4 has been studied; no evidence 
of decreased immunogenicity or safety concerns were noted (95). 
The immunogenicity and safety of simultaneous or sequential 
administration of two novel adjuvant-containing vaccines has not 
been evaluated, and the ideal interval between such vaccines when 
given sequentially is not known. In the study of Shingrix and IIV4 
discussed above, most reactogenicity symptoms resolved within 
4 days. Given unknown but theoretical concerns of increased 
reactogenicity when administering two novel adjuvant-containing 
vaccines, and the availability of nonadjuvanted influenza vaccine 
options, selection of a nonadjuvanted influenza vaccine may be 
considered in situations where influenza vaccine and another 
vaccine containing a novel adjuvant are to be administered 
concomitantly. However, vaccination should not be delayed if a 
specific product is not available. Vaccines with newer adjuvants, 
like other vaccines, should be administered at separate sites from 
other vaccines that are given concomitantly (72).
Influenza Vaccine Composition and 
Available Products
Influenza Vaccine Composition for the 
2018–19 Season
All influenza vaccines licensed in the United States 
will contain components derived from influenza viruses 
antigenically similar to those recommended by FDA 
(https://www.fda.gov/downloads/AdvisoryCommittees/
CommitteesMeetingMaterials/BloodVaccinesandOtherBiologics/
VaccinesandRelatedBiologicalProductsAdvisoryCommittee/
 Recommendations and Reports
12 
MMWR / August 24, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
UCM602610.pdf). Both trivalent and quadrivalent influenza 
vaccines will be available in the United States. The 2018–19 
U.S. influenza vaccines will contain hemagglutinin derived 
from the following:
• an A/Michigan/45/2015 (H1N1)pdm09–like virus,
• an A/Singapore/INFIMH-16-0019/2016 (H3N2)–like 
virus, and
• a B/Colorado/06/2017–like virus (Victoria lineage).
The 2018–19 U.S. quadrivalent vaccines will contain the same 
three antigens and an additional influenza B virus component, 
a B/Phuket/3073/2013–like virus (Yamagata lineage). 
Compared with the 2017–18 season, the composition for 
2018–19 represents changes in the A(H3N2) and B (Victoria) 
components of both the trivalent and quadrivalent vaccines.
Vaccine Products for the 2018–19 Season
A variety of influenza vaccine products are licensed and 
available from several different manufacturers (Table 1). For 
many vaccine recipients, more than one type or brand of 
vaccine might be appropriate within approved indications and 
ACIP recommendations. A licensed, age-appropriate influenza 
vaccine product should be used. Not all products are likely 
to be uniformly available in any practice setting or locality. 
Vaccination should not be delayed in order to obtain a specific 
product when an appropriate one is already available. Within 
these guidelines and approved indications, where more than 
one type of vaccine is appropriate and available, no preferential 
recommendation is made for use of any influenza vaccine 
product over another.
Since the publication of the previous season’s guidelines, there 
have been changes in the licensed age indications for Afluria 
Quadrivalent and Fluarix Quadrivalent. Further details are in 
the Recent Influenza Vaccine Product Approvals section. New 
licensures and changes to FDA-approved labeling might occur 
subsequent to publication of this report. As these changes occur, 
they will be reflected in the online version of Table 1, available 
at https://www.cdc.gov/flu/protect/vaccine/vaccines.htm.
Dosage, Administration, 
Contraindications, and Precautions
Inactivated Influenza Vaccines (IIVs)
Available products: IIVs comprise multiple products 
(Table 1). Both quadrivalent and trivalent formulations are 
available. For the 2018–19 season, it is anticipated that all 
standard-dose, unadjuvanted inactivated influenza vaccines will 
be quadrivalent (IIV4s), with the exception of Afluria, which 
will be available in both trivalent (IIV3) and quadrivalent 
formulations. High-dose unadjuvanted inactivated influenza 
vaccine (HD-IIV3, Fluzone High-Dose) and adjuvanted 
inactivated influenza vaccine (aIIV3, Fluad) will be trivalent.
With one exception, U.S.-licensed IIVs are manufactured 
through propagation of virus in eggs. The exception, the cell 
culture-based vaccine Flucelvax Quadrivalent (ccIIV4), contains 
vaccine viruses propagated in Madin-Darby canine kidney cells. 
Flucelvax Quadrivalent is not considered egg-free, as one of 
the initial vaccine viruses provided to the manufacturer is egg-
derived. For the 2018–19 season, the influenza A (H3N2) and 
both influenza B components will be cell-derived; the influenza A 
(H1N1) component will be egg-derived.
With one exception, IIVs licensed in the United States 
contain no adjuvant. The exception, Fluad (aIIV3) contains 
the adjuvant MF59.
There are IIVs that are licensed for persons as young as 
6 months of age. However, age indications for the various 
individual IIVs differ (Table 1). Only age-appropriate products 
should be administered. Providers should consult package inserts 
and updated CDC/ACIP guidance for current information.
Dosage and administration: All IIV preparations available for 
the 2018–19 season contain 15 µg of HA per vaccine virus strain 
(45 µg total for IIV3s and 60 µg total for IIV4s) per 0.5 mL dose, 
with the exception of Fluzone High-Dose. Fluzone High-Dose 
(HD-IIV3), an IIV3 licensed for persons aged ≥65 years, contains 
60 µg of HA per vaccine virus strain (180 µg total) (63).
For children aged 6 through 35 months, three IIV4 products 
are licensed by FDA. The approved dose volumes differ 
for these products. For each recommended dose, children 
in this age group may receive either 1) 0.5 mL of FluLaval 
Quadrivalent (51), which contains 15 µg of HA per virus; 
2) 0.5mL of Fluarix Quadrivalent (52), which contains 15 µg 
of HA per virus; or 3) 0.25 mL of Fluzone Quadrivalent (56), 
which contains 7.5 µg of HA per virus. Care must be taken 
to administer each at the appropriate dose for each product 
in this age group. If prefilled syringes are not available, the 
dose can be taken from a single-use or multidose vial, at the 
appropriate volume for the given product.
Children aged 36 months through 17 years and adults aged 
≥18 years who are receiving IIV should receive 0.5 mL per 
dose. If a smaller intramuscular vaccine dose (e.g., 0.25 mL) 
is administered inadvertently to a person aged ≥36 months, 
an additional 0.25 mL dose should be administered to provide 
a full dose (0.5 mL). If the error is discovered later (after the 
patient has left the vaccination setting), a full 0.5 mL dose 
should be administered as soon as the patient can return. 
Vaccination with a formulation approved for adult use should 
be counted as a dose if inadvertently administered to a child.
IIVs are administered intramuscularly. For adults and older 
children, the deltoid is the preferred site. Infants and younger 
children should be vaccinated in the anterolateral thigh. 
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / August 24, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 3 
13
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Additional specific guidance regarding site selection and needle 
length for intramuscular administration is provided in the 
ACIP General Best Practice Guidelines for Immunization (72). 
Two IIVs, Afluria (IIV3) and Afluria Quadrivalent (IIV4), are 
licensed for intramuscular administration via jet injector (Stratis, 
Pharmajet) for persons aged 18 through 64 years (53,96).
Trivalent versus quadrivalent IIVs: Both trivalent and 
quadrivalent IIVs will be available during the 2018–19 season. 
Quadrivalent vaccines contain one virus from each of the two 
influenza B lineages (one B/Victoria virus and one B/Yamagata 
virus), whereas trivalent vaccines contain one influenza B virus 
from one lineage. Quadrivalent vaccines are thus designed to 
provide broader protection against circulating influenza B viruses. 
However, no preference is expressed for either IIV3 or IIV4.
Contraindications and precautions for the use of IIVs: 
Manufacturer package inserts and updated CDC/ACIP guidance 
should be consulted for current information on contraindications 
and precautions for individual vaccine products. In general, 
history of severe allergic reaction to the vaccine or any of its 
components (including egg) is a labeled contraindication to 
the receipt of IIVs (Table 2). However, ACIP makes specific 
recommendations for the use of influenza vaccine for persons 
with egg allergy (see Persons with a History of Egg Allergy). 
Influenza vaccine is not recommended for persons with a history 
of severe allergic reaction to the vaccine or to components other 
than egg. Information about vaccine components is located in 
package inserts from each manufacturer. Prophylactic use of 
antiviral agents is an option for preventing influenza among 
persons who cannot receive vaccine (74).
Moderate or severe acute illness with or without fever is a 
general precaution for vaccination (72). GBS within 6 weeks 
following a previous dose of influenza vaccine is considered a 
precaution for use of influenza vaccines (Table 2).
Recombinant Influenza Vaccine (RIV4)
Available products: One RIV product, Flublok Quadrivalent 
(RIV4), is expected to be available for the 2018–19 influenza 
season. RIV4 is indicated for persons aged ≥18 years. RIV4 is 
manufactured without the use of influenza viruses; therefore, 
similarly to IIVs, no shedding of vaccine virus will occur. RIV4 is 
produced without the use of eggs, and is egg-free. No preference 
is expressed for RIV4 versus IIVs within specified indications.
Dosage and administration: RIV4 is administered by 
intramuscular injection. A 0.5 mL dose contains 45 µg of HA 
derived from each vaccine virus (180 µg total) (55).
Contraindications and precautions for the use of RIV4: 
RIV4 is contraindicated in persons who have had a severe 
allergic reaction to any component of the vaccine. Moderate or 
severe acute illness with or without fever is a general precaution 
for vaccination (72). GBS within 6 weeks following a previous 
dose of influenza vaccine is considered a precaution for use of 
influenza vaccines (Table 2). RIV4 is not licensed for use in 
children aged <18 years.
Live Attenuated Influenza Vaccine (LAIV4)
Available products: One LAIV4 product, FluMist Quadrivalent, 
is expected to be available during the 2018–19 influenza season. 
LAIV4 is licensed for persons aged 2 through 49 years.
Dosage and administration: LAIV4 is administered 
intranasally using the supplied prefilled, single-use sprayer 
containing 0.2 mL of vaccine. Approximately 0.1 mL (i.e., half 
of the total sprayer contents) is sprayed into the first nostril 
while the recipient is in the upright position. An attached 
dose-divider clip is removed from the sprayer to administer 
the second half of the dose into the other nostril. If the 
vaccine recipient sneezes immediately after administration, 
the dose should not be repeated. However, if nasal congestion 
is present that might impede delivery of the vaccine to the 
nasopharyngeal mucosa, deferral of administration should be 
considered until resolution of the illness, or another appropriate 
vaccine should be administered instead.
Contraindications and precautions for the use of LAIV4: Per 
the package insert, LAIV4 is contraindicated for persons with a 
history of severe allergic reaction to any component of the vaccine 
or to a previous dose of any influenza vaccine, and in children and 
adolescents receiving concomitant aspirin or salicylate-containing 
medications (Table 2). While LAIV is an egg-based vaccine, ACIP 
makes specific recommendations for the use of influenza vaccine 
for persons with egg allergy (see Persons with a History of Egg 
Allergy). In addition to the labeled contraindications (other than 
allergy to egg), ACIP also recommends that LAIV should not be 
administered to the following groups:
• Children aged 2 through 4 years who have received a 
diagnosis of asthma or whose parents or caregivers report 
that a health care provider has told them during the 
preceding 12 months that their child had wheezing or 
asthma or whose medical record indicates a wheezing 
episode has occurred during the preceding 12 months;
• Persons who are immunocompromised due to any cause 
(including immunosuppression caused by medications 
and HIV infection);
• Close contacts and caregivers of severely immunosuppressed 
persons who require a protected environment;
• Pregnant women; and
• Persons who have received influenza antiviral medications 
within the previous 48 hours.
Moderate or severe acute illness with or without fever is a general 
precaution for vaccination (72). GBS within 6 weeks following a 
previous dose of influenza vaccine is considered a precaution for 
use of influenza vaccines. Additional precautions specific to LAIV4 
 Recommendations and Reports
14 
MMWR / August 24, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
include asthma in persons aged ≥5 years and presence of an underlying 
medical condition (other than the instances listed in which LAIV4 
should not be used) that might predispose to complications after 
wild-type influenza infection (see Populations at Higher Risk for 
Medical Complications Attributable to Severe Influenza; Table 2).
Recent Influenza Vaccine Product Approvals
Since the publication of the previous season’s guidance, 
there have been two labeling changes for previously licensed 
influenza vaccines. These include expansions in the age 
indications for Afluria Quadrivalent and Fluarix Quadrivalent.
Afluria Quadrivalent (IIV4)
In August 2017, FDA approved expansion of the licensed 
age indication for Afluria Quadrivalent. Previously licensed for 
persons aged ≥18 years, Afluria Quadrivalent is now licensed 
for persons aged ≥5 years. In a multicenter observer-blind 
trial in which 2,278 children aged 5 through 17 years were 
randomized 3:1 to receive Afluria Quadrivalent or a licensed 
comparator IIV4, Afluria Quadrivalent met criteria for 
noninferior immunogenicity for all four vaccine virus strains 
(97). The overall safety profiles were comparable. Fever occurred 
more frequently among Afluria Quadrivalent recipients, but the 
difference was not statistically significant. Myalgia was more 
frequent among Afluria Quadrivalent recipients aged 9 through 
17 years, (relative risk: 1.50; 95% CI = 1.03–2.19) but in most 
instances was mild to moderate in severity.
Fluarix Quadrivalent (IIV4)
In January 2018, FDA approved expansion of the licensed 
age indication for Fluarix Quadrivalent (IIV4). Previously 
licensed for persons aged ≥3 years, Fluarix Quadrivalent is 
now licensed for persons aged ≥6 months. The approved dose 
volume is 0.5 mL for all ages (52,98).
In a multicenter randomized observer-blind controlled 
trial conducted among 12,018 children aged 6–35-months 
in 13 countries that compared the efficacy, immunogenicity, 
and safety of 0.5 mL Fluarix Quadrivalent with noninfluenza 
control vaccines (pneumococcal conjugate vaccine, hepatitis A 
vaccine, or varicella vaccine, depending upon participant age 
and prior influenza receipt status), vaccine efficacy (VE) of 
Fluarix Quadrivalent for reverse transcriptase polymerase chain 
reaction (RT-PCR)-confirmed influenza infection of any severity 
due to any virus was 50% (97.5% CI = 42–57). VE against 
moderate-to-severe RT-PCR-confirmed influenza was 63% 
(97.5% CI = 52–72). Moderate to severe influenza was defined 
as RT-PCR-confirmed influenza with any of the following: 
fever >39.0°C; physician-diagnosed acute otitis media, lower 
respiratory infection, or serious extrapulmonary complication of 
influenza; intensive care unit hospitalization; or requirement for 
supplemental oxygen for >8 hours. Considering culture-confirmed 
influenza due to viruses matching those in the vaccine, VE against 
influenza of any severity was 60% (95% CI = 49–69) and against 
moderate to severe influenza was 78% (95% CI = 64–87). 
Prevalence of injection site and systemic solicited reactions, 
unsolicited adverse events, and medically attended adverse events 
were generally similar between the treatment arms (98,99).
Storage and Handling of Influenza Vaccines
In all instances, approved manufacturer packaging information 
should be consulted for authoritative guidance concerning 
storage and handling of all influenza vaccines. Vaccines should be 
protected from light and stored at recommended temperatures. 
In general, influenza vaccines are recommended to be stored 
refrigerated between 2° to 8°C (36° to 46°F) and should not 
be frozen. Vaccine that has frozen should be discarded. Single-
dose vials should not be accessed for more than one dose. 
Multiple-dose vials should be returned to recommended storage 
conditions between uses, and once first accessed should not be 
kept beyond the recommended period of time. For information 
on permissible temperature excursions and other departures from 
recommended storage conditions that are not discussed in the 
package labeling, contact the manufacturer. Vaccines should not 
be used after the expiration date on the label.
Additional Sources for Information 
Regarding Influenza and Influenza 
Vaccines
Influenza Surveillance, Prevention, and Control
Updated information regarding influenza surveillance, 
detection, prevention, and control is available at https://www.
cdc.gov/flu. U.S surveillance data are updated weekly during 
October–May on FluView (https://www.cdc.gov/flu/weekly). In 
addition, periodic updates regarding influenza are published in 
MMWR (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr). Additional information 
regarding influenza vaccine can be obtained from CDC-INFO 
by calling 1-800-232-4636. State and local health departments 
should be consulted about availability of influenza vaccine, access 
to vaccination programs, information related to state or local 
influenza activity, reporting of influenza outbreaks and influenza-
related pediatric deaths, and advice concerning outbreak control.
Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System
The National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act of 1986 requires 
health care providers to report any adverse event listed by the vaccine 
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / August 24, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 3 
15
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
manufacturer as a contraindication to further doses of the vaccine, 
or any adverse event listed in the VAERS Table of Reportable Events 
Following Vaccination (https://vaers.hhs.gov/docs/VAERS_Table_
of_Reportable_Events_Following_Vaccination.pdf) that occurs 
within the specified time period after vaccination. In addition 
to mandated reporting, health care providers are encouraged to 
report any clinically significant adverse event following vaccination 
to VAERS. Information on how to report a vaccine adverse 
event is available at https://vaers.hhs.gov/index.html. Additional 
information on VAERS and vaccine safety is available by emailing 
info@vaers.org or by calling 1-800-822-7967.
National Vaccine Injury Compensation 
Program
The National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program (VICP), 
established by the National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act 
of 1986, as amended, provides a mechanism through which 
compensation can be paid on behalf of a person determined to 
have been injured or to have died as a result of receiving a vaccine 
covered by VICP
. The Vaccine Injury Table (https://www.hrsa.gov/
vaccinecompensation/vaccineinjurytable.pdf) lists the vaccines 
covered by VICP and the associated injuries and conditions 
(including death) that might receive a legal presumption of 
causation. If the injury or condition is not on the Table, or does not 
occur within the specified time period on the Table, persons must 
prove that the vaccine caused the injury or condition. Eligibility 
for compensation is not affected by whether a covered vaccine is 
used off-label or inconsistently with recommendations.
To be eligible for compensation under VICP
, a claim must 
be filed within 3 years after the first symptom of the vaccine 
injury. Death claims must be filed within 2 years of the vaccine-
related death and not more than 4 years after the start of the 
first symptom of the vaccine-related injury from which the 
death occurred. When a new vaccine is covered by VICP or 
when a new injury/condition is added to the Table, claims 
that do not meet the general filing guidelines must be filed 
within 2 years from the date the vaccine or injury/condition 
is added to the Table for injuries or deaths that occurred up 
to 8 years before the Table change (100). Persons of all ages 
who receive a VICP-covered vaccine might be eligible to file 
a claim. Additional information is available at https://www.
hrsa.gov/vaccinecompensation or by calling 1-800-338-2382.
Additional Resources
ACIP Statements
• General Best Practice Guidelines for Immunization: Best 
Practices Guidance of the Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices (ACIP). https://www.cdc.gov/
vaccines/hcp/acip-recs/general-recs/index.html
• Immunization of Healthcare Personnel: Recommendations of 
the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP), 
2011. MMWR Recomm Rep 2011;60(No. RR-7). https://
www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr6007a1.htm
• Recommended Immunization Schedules for Adults Aged 
19 Years or Older, United States, 2018. https://www.cdc.
gov/vaccines/schedules/hcp/adult.html
• Recommended Immunization Schedule for Children and 
Adolescents Aged 18 years or Younger, United States, 
2018. https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules/hcp/child-
adolescent.html
Vaccine Information Sheets (VISs)
• VIS for IIV and RIV: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/
vis/vis-statements/flu.pdf
• VIS for LAIV: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/vis/vis-
statements/flulive.pdf
Influenza Vaccine Package Inserts
• T
rivalent Vaccines: https://www.fda.gov/BiologicsBloodVaccines/
Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/ucm094045.htm
• Quadrivalent Vaccines: https://www.fda.gov/
BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/
ucm295057.htm
CDC Influenza Antiviral Guidance
• Antiviral Drugs: Information for Healthcare Professionals: 
https://www.cdc.gov/flu/professionals/antivirals/index.htm
American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) Guidance
• AAP Recommendations for Prevention and Control of 
Influenza in Children (Red Book Online): https://redbook.
solutions.aap.org/ss/influenza-resources.aspx
Infectious Diseases Society of America  
(IDSA) Guidance
• 2013 IDSA Clinical Practice Guideline for Vaccination 
of the Immunocompromised Host: https://academic.oup.
com/cid/article/58/3/e44/336537
American College of Obstetricians and 
Gynecologists (ACOG)
• Influenza Vaccination During Pregnancy, ACOG 
Committee Opinion No. 732: https://www.acog.org/
Clinical-Guidance-and-Publications/Committee-
Opinions/Committee-on-Obstetric-Practice/
Influenza-Vaccination-During-Pregnancy
 Recommendations and Reports
16 
MMWR / August 24, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
References
 1. Barker WH. Excess pneumonia and influenza associated hospitalization 
during influenza epidemics in the United States, 1970–78. Am J Public 
Health 1986;76:761–5. https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.76.7.761
 2. Barker WH, Mullooly JP
. Impact of epidemic type A influenza in a 
defined adult population. Am J Epidemiol 1980;112:798–813. https://
doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a113052
 3. Poehling KA, Edwards KM, Griffin MR, et al. The burden of influenza 
in young children, 2004–2009. Pediatrics 2013;131:207–16. https://
doi.org/10.1542/peds.2012-1255
 4. Poehling KA, Edwards KM, Weinberg GA, et al.; New Vaccine 
Surveillance Network. The underrecognized burden of influenza in 
young children. N Engl J Med 2006;355:31–40. https://doi.
org/10.1056/NEJMoa054869
 5. Siston AM, Rasmussen SA, Honein MA, et al.; Pandemic H1N1 
Influenza in Pregnancy Working Group. Pandemic 2009 influenza 
A(H1N1) virus illness among pregnant women in the United States. 
JAMA 2010;303:1517–25. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2010.479
 6. Mullooly JP
, Bridges CB, Thompson WW, et al.; Vaccine Safety Datalink 
Adult Working Group. Influenza- and RSV-associated hospitalizations 
among adults. Vaccine 2007;25:846–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
vaccine.2006.09.041
 7. Fiore AE, Uyeki TM, Broder K, et al.; CDC. Prevention and control of 
influenza with vaccines: recommendations of the Advisory Committee 
on Immunization Practices (ACIP), 2010. MMWR Recomm Rep 
2010;59(No. RR-8):1–62.
 8. Grohskopf LA, Sokolow LZ, Broder KR, et al. Prevention and control 
of seasonal influenza with vaccines: recommendations of the Advisory 
Committee on Immunization Practices—United States, 2017–18 
influenza season. MMWR Recomm Rep 2017;66:(No. RR-2)1–20. 
https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.rr6602a1
 9. Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices. Summary report: 
February 24, 2016 (Meeting minutes). Atlanta, GA: US Department of 
Health and Human Services, CDC; 2016.
10. Des Roches A, Samaan K, Graham F, et al. Safe vaccination of patients 
with egg allergy by using live attenuated influenza vaccine. J Allergy Clin 
Immunol Pract 2015;3:138–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaip.2014.08.008
11. Turner PJ, Southern J, Andrews NJ, Miller E, Erlewyn-Lajeunesse M; 
SNIFFLE-2 Study Investigators. Safety of live attenuated influenza 
vaccine in young people with egg allergy: multicentre prospective cohort 
study. BMJ 2015;351:h6291. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.h6291
12. Turner PJ, Southern J, Andrews NJ, et al.; SNIFFLE Study Investigators. 
Safety of live attenuated influenza vaccine in atopic children with egg 
allergy. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2015;136:376–81. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jaci.2014.12.1925
13. CDC. The flu season. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and 
Human Services, CDC; 2015. https://www.cdc.gov/flu/about/season/
flu-season.htm
14. Castilla J, Martínez-Baz I, Martínez-Artola V, et al.; Primary Health Care 
Sentinel Network; Network for Influenza Surveillance in Hospitals of 
Navarre. Decline in influenza vaccine effectiveness with time after 
vaccination, Navarre, Spain, season 2011/12. Euro Surveill 2013;18:20388. 
https://doi.org/10.2807/ese.18.05.20388-en
15. Belongia EA, Sundaram ME, McClure DL, Meece JK, Ferdinands J, 
VanWormer JJ. Waning vaccine protection against influenza A (H3N2) 
illness in children and older adults during a single season. Vaccine 
2015;33:246–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2014.06.052
16. Ferdinands JM, Fry AM, Reynolds S, et al. Intraseason waning of 
influenza vaccine protection: Evidence from the US Influenza Vaccine 
Effectiveness Network, 2011–12 through 2014–15. Clin Infect Dis 
2017;64:544–50.
17. Kissling E, Valenciano M, Larrauri A, et al. Low and decreasing vaccine 
effectiveness against influenza A(H3) in 2011/12 among vaccination 
target groups in Europe: results from the I-MOVE multicentre case-
control study. Euro Surveill 2013;18:20390. https://doi.org/10.2807/
ese.18.05.20390-en
18. Pebody R, Andrews N, McMenamin J, et al. Vaccine effectiveness of 
2011/12 trivalent seasonal influenza vaccine in preventing laboratory-
confirmed influenza in primary care in the United Kingdom: evidence 
of waning intra-seasonal protection. Euro Surveill 2013;18:20389. 
https://doi.org/10.2807/ese.18.05.20389-en
19. Puig-Barberà J, Mira-Iglesias A, Tortajada-Girbés M, et al.; Valencia 
Hospital Network for the Study of Influenza and other Respiratory 
Viruses (VAHNSI, Spain). Waning protection of influenza vaccination 
during four influenza seasons, 2011/2012 to 2014/2015. Vaccine 
2017;35:5799–807. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2017.09.035
20. Radin JM, Hawksworth AW, Myers CA, Ricketts MN, Hansen EA, 
Brice GT. Influenza vaccine effectiveness: maintained protection 
throughout the duration of influenza seasons 2010–2011 through 
2013–2014. Vaccine 2016;34:3907–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
vaccine.2016.05.034
21. Kissling E, Nunes B, Robertson C, et al.; I-MOVE case–control study 
team. I-MOVE multicentre case-control study 2010/11 to 2014/15: is 
there within-season waning of influenza type/subtype vaccine 
effectiveness with increasing time since vaccination? Euro Surveill 
2016;21.
22. Petrie JG, Ohmit SE, Truscon R, et al. Modest waning of influenza 
vaccine efficacy and antibody titers during the 2007–2008 influenza 
season. J Infect Dis 2016;214:1142–9. https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/
jiw105
23. CDC. Immunization of health-care personnel: recommendations of the 
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR 
Recomm Rep 2011;60(No. RR-7):1–45.
24. Pearson ML, Bridges CB, Harper SA; Healthcare Infection Control 
Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC); Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices (ACIP). Influenza vaccination of health-care 
personnel: recommendations of the Healthcare Infection Control 
Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC) and the Advisory Committee 
on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR Recomm Rep 2006;55(No. 
RR-2):1–16.
25. Wright PF, Thompson J, Vaughn WK, Folland DS, Sell SH, Karzon 
DT. Trials of influenza A/New Jersey/76 virus vaccine in normal children: 
an overview of age-related antigenicity and reactogenicity. J Infect Dis 
1977;136(Suppl 3):S731–41. https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/136.
Supplement_3.S731
26. Wright PF, Dolin R, La Montagne JR. Summary of clinical trials of 
influenza vaccines—II. J Infect Dis 1976;134:633–8. https://doi.
org/10.1093/infdis/134.6.633
27. Wright PF, Sell SH, Thompson J, Karzon DT. Clinical reactions and 
serologic response following inactivated monovalent influenza type B 
vaccine in young children and infants. J Pediatr 1976;88:31–5. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0022-3476(76)80722-6
28. Gross PA. Reactogenicity and immunogenicity of bivalent influenza 
vaccine in one- and two-dose trials in children: a summary. J Infect Dis 
1977;136(Suppl 3):S616–25. https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/136.
Supplement_3.S616
29. Bernstein DI, Zahradnik JM, DeAngelis CJ, Cherry JD. Clinical 
reactions and serologic responses after vaccination with whole-virus or 
split-virus influenza vaccines in children aged 6 to 36 months. Pediatrics 
1982;69:404–8.
30. Jain VK, Domachowske JB, Wang L, et al. Time to change dosing of 
inactivated quadrivalent influenza vaccine in young children: evidence 
from a Phase III, randomized, controlled trial. J Pediatric Infect Dis Soc 
2017;6:9–19.
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / August 24, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 3 
17
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
31. Neuzil KM, Jackson LA, Nelson J, et al. Immunogenicity and 
reactogenicity of 1 versus 2 doses of trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine 
in vaccine-naive 5–8-year-old children. J Infect Dis 2006;194:1032–9. 
https://doi.org/10.1086/507309
32. Allison MA, Daley MF, Crane LA, et al. Influenza vaccine effectiveness 
in healthy 6- to 21-month-old children during the 2003–2004 season. 
J Pediatr 2006;149:755–62. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpeds.2006.06.036
33. Ritzwoller DP
, Bridges CB, Shetterly S, Yamasaki K, Kolczak M, France 
EK. Effectiveness of the 2003–2004 influenza vaccine among children 
6 months to 8 years of age, with 1 vs 2 doses. Pediatrics 2005;116:153–9. 
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2005-0049
34. Eisenberg KW, Szilagyi PG, Fairbrother G, et al.; New Vaccine 
Surveillance Network. Vaccine effectiveness against laboratory-confirmed 
influenza in children 6 to 59 months of age during the 2003–2004 and 
2004–2005 influenza seasons. Pediatrics 2008;122:911–9. https://doi.
org/10.1542/peds.2007-3304
35. ACOG Committee on Obstetric Practice. ACOG Committee Opinion 
No. 732. Influenza vaccination during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 
2018;131:e109–14. https://doi.org/10.1097/AOG.0000000000002588
36. ACOG Committee on Obstetric Practice. ACOG Committee Opinion No. 
732. Mummary: influenza vaccination during pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 
2018;131:752–3. https://doi.org/10.1097/AOG.0000000000002586
37. ACOG Immunization, Infectious Disease, and Public Health 
Preparedness Expert Work Group. ACOG Committee Opinion No. 
741. Maternal immunization. Obstet Gynecol 2018;131:e214–7. 
https://doi.org/10.1097/AOG.0000000000002665
38. Donahue JG, Kieke BA, King JP
, et al. Association of spontaneous 
abortion with receipt of inactivated influenza vaccine containing 
H1N1pdm09 in 2010–11 and 2011–12. Vaccine 2017;35:5314–22. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2017.06.069
39. Chambers CD, Johnson DL, Xu R, et al.; OTIS Collaborative Research 
Group. Safety of the 2010–11, 2011–12, 2012–13, and 2013–14 
seasonal influenza vaccines in pregnancy: birth defects, spontaneous 
abortion, preterm delivery, and small for gestational age infants, a study 
from the cohort arm of VAMPSS. Vaccine 2016;34:4443–9. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2016.06.054
40. Huang WT, Tang FW, Yang SE, Chih YC, Chuang JH. Safety of 
inactivated monovalent pandemic (H1N1) 2009 vaccination during 
pregnancy: a population-based study in Taiwan. Vaccine 2014;32:6463–8. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2014.09.054
41. Ma F, Zhang L, Jiang R, et al. Prospective cohort study of the safety of 
an influenza A(H1N1) vaccine in pregnant Chinese women. Clin Vaccine 
Immunol 2014;21:1282–7. https://doi.org/10.1128/CVI.00375-14
42. Irving SA, Kieke BA, Donahue JG, et al.; Vaccine Safety Datalink. Trivalent 
inactivated influenza vaccine and spontaneous abortion. Obstet Gynecol 
2013;121:159–65. https://doi.org/10.1097/AOG.0b013e318279f56f
43. Chambers CD, Johnson D, Xu R, et al. Risks and safety of pandemic 
H1N1 influenza vaccine in pregnancy: birth defects, spontaneous 
abortion, preterm delivery, and small for gestational age infants. Vaccine 
2013;31:5026–32.
44. Oppermann M, Fritzsche J, Weber-Schoendorfer C, et al. A(H1N1)
v2009: a controlled observational prospective cohort study on vaccine 
safety in pregnancy. Vaccine 2012;30:4445–52. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
vaccine.2012.04.081
45. Pasternak B, Svanström H, Mølgaard-Nielsen D, et al. Vaccination 
against pandemic A/H1N1 2009 influenza in pregnancy and risk of fetal 
death: cohort study in Denmark. BMJ 2012;344:e2794. https://doi.
org/10.1136/bmj.e2794
46. Sammon CJ, Snowball J, McGrogan A, de Vries CS. Evaluating the 
hazard of foetal death following H1N1 influenza vaccination; a 
population based cohort study in the UK GPRD. PLoS One 
2012;7:e51734. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0051734
47. Heikkinen T, Young J, van Beek E, et al. Safety of MF59-adjuvanted A/
H1N1 influenza vaccine in pregnancy: a comparative cohort study. Am 
J Obstet Gynecol 2012;207:177 e1–8.
48. McMillan M, Porritt K, Kralik D, Costi L, Marshall H. Influenza 
vaccination during pregnancy: a systematic review of fetal death, 
spontaneous abortion, and congenital malformation safety outcomes. 
Vaccine 2015;33:2108–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2015.02.068
49. Bratton KN, Wardle MT, Orenstein WA, Omer SB. Maternal influenza 
immunization and birth outcomes of stillbirth and spontaneous abortion: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Infect Dis 2015;60:e11–9. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciu915
50. Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices. Summary report: 
October 25–26, 2017 (Meeting minutes). Atlanta, GA: US Department 
of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2017.
51. FluLaval Quadrivalent [Package Insert]. Quebec City, Quebec, Canada: 
ID Biomedical Corporation of Quebec; 2018.
52. Fluarix Quadrivalent [Package Insert]. Research Triangle Park, North 
Carolina: GlaxoSmithKline; 2018.
53. Afluria Quadrivalent [Package Insert]. Parkville, Victoria, Australia: 
Seqirus; 2018.
54. Flucelvax Quadrivalent [Package Insert]. Holly Springs, NC: Seqirus; 
2018.
55. Flublok Quadrivalent [Package Insert]. Swiftwater, PA: Sanofi Pasteur; 
2018.
56. Fluzone Quadrivalent. Swiftwater, PA: Sanofi Pasteur; 2018.
57. DiazGranados CA, Dunning AJ, Kimmel M, et al. Efficacy of high-dose 
versus standard-dose influenza vaccine in older adults. N Engl J Med 
2014;371:635–45. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1315727
58. DiazGranados CA, Robertson CA, Talbot HK, Landolfi V, Dunning 
AJ, Greenberg DP
. Prevention of serious events in adults 65 years of age 
or older: a comparison between high-dose and standard-dose inactivated 
influenza vaccines. Vaccine 2015;33:4988–93. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
vaccine.2015.07.006
59. Dunkle LM, Izikson R, Patriarca P
, et al.; PSC12 Study Team. Efficacy 
of recombinant influenza vaccine in adults 50 years of age or older. 
N Engl J Med 2017;376:2427–36. https://doi.org/10.1056/
NEJMoa1608862
60. Van Buynder PG, Konrad S, Van Buynder JL, et al. The comparative 
effectiveness of adjuvanted and unadjuvanted trivalent inactivated 
influenza vaccine (TIV) in the elderly. Vaccine 2013;31:6122–8. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2013.07.059
61. Clinical Review: Fluad. Silver Spring, MD: US Department of Health 
and Human Services, Food and Drug Administration; 2014.
62. Falsey AR, Treanor JJ, Tornieporth N, Capellan J, Gorse GJ. Randomized, 
double-blind controlled phase 3 trial comparing the immunogenicity 
of high-dose and standard-dose influenza vaccine in adults 65 years of 
age and older. J Infect Dis 2009;200:172–80. https://doi.
org/10.1086/599790
63. Fluzone High-Dose [Package Insert]. Swiftwater, PA: Sanofi Pasetur; 
2018.
64. Food and Drug Administration. October 29, 2014 clinical review—
Fluzone High-Dose. Silver Spring, MD: US Department of Health and 
Human Services, Food and Drug Administration; 2014.
65. Gravenstein S, Davidson HE, Taljaard M, et al. Comparative effectiveness 
of high-dose versus standard-dose influenza vaccination on numbers of 
US nursing home residents admitted to hospital: a cluster-randomised 
trial. Lancet Respir Med 2017;5:738–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S2213-2600(17)30235-7
66. Young-Xu Y, Van Aalst R, Mahmud SM, et al. Relative vaccine 
effectiveness of high-dose versus standard-dose influenza vaccines among 
Veterans Health Administration patients. J Infect Dis 2018;217:1718–
27. https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jiy088
67. Richardson DM, Medvedeva EL, Roberts CB, Linkin DR; CDC 
Epicenter Program. Comparative effectiveness of high-dose versus 
standard-dose influenza vaccination in community-dwelling veterans. 
Clin Infect Dis 2015;61:171–6. https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/civ261
 Recommendations and Reports
18 
MMWR / August 24, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
68. Shay DK, Chillarige Y, Kelman J, et al. Comparative effectiveness of 
high-dose versus standard-dose influenza vaccines among US Medicare 
beneficiaries in preventing postinfluenza deaths during 2012–2013 and 
2013–2014. J Infect Dis 2017;215:510–7. https://doi.org/10.1093/
infdis/jiw641
69. Izurieta HS, Thadani N, Shay DK, et al. Comparative effectiveness of 
high-dose versus standard-dose influenza vaccines in US residents aged 
65 years and older from 2012 to 2013 using Medicare data: a 
retrospective cohort analysis. Lancet Infect Dis 2015;15:293–300. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(14)71087-4
70. Lee JKH, Lam GKL, Shin T, et al. Efficacy and effectiveness of high-dose 
versus standard-dose influenza vaccination for older adults: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Expert Rev Vaccines 2018;17:435–43.
71. Food and Drug Administration. Summary basis for regulatory action—
Flublok Quadrivalent. Silver Spring, MD: US Department of Health 
and Human Services, Food and Drug Administration; 2016.
72. Kroger AT, Duchin J, Vázquez M. Best practices guidance of the Advisory 
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). Atlanta, GA: US 
Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2017. https://www.
cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/acip-recs/general-recs/downloads/general-recs.pdf
73. Rubin LG, Levin MJ, Ljungman P
, et al.; Infectious Diseases Society of 
America. 2013 IDSA clinical practice guideline for vaccination of the 
immunocompromised host. Clin Infect Dis 2014;58:e44–100. https://
doi.org/10.1093/cid/cit684
74. CDC. Antiviral drugs: information for healthcare professionals. Atlanta, 
GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC. https://
www.cdc.gov/flu/professionals/antivirals/index.htm
75. Erlewyn-Lajeunesse M, Brathwaite N, Lucas JS, Warner JO. 
Recommendations for the administration of influenza vaccine in children 
allergic to egg. BMJ 2009;339(sep15 3):b3680. https://doi.org/10.1136/
bmj.b3680
76. CDC. Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices summary report: 
June 20–21, 2012 (meeting minutes). Atlanta, GA: US Department of 
Health and Human Services, CDC; 2012.
77. CDC. Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices summary report: 
June 19–20, 2013 (meeting minutes). Atlanta, GA: US Department of 
Health and Human Services, CDC; 2013.
78. Miller JM, Tam TW, Maloney S, et al. Cruise ships: high-risk passengers 
and the global spread of new influenza viruses. Clin Infect Dis 
2000;31:433–8. https://doi.org/10.1086/313974
79. Uyeki TM, Zane SB, Bodnar UR, et al.; Alaska/Yukon Territory 
Respiratory Outbreak Investigation Team. Large summertime influenza 
A outbreak among tourists in Alaska and the Yukon Territory. Clin Infect 
Dis 2003;36:1095–102. https://doi.org/10.1086/374053
80. Mutsch M, Tavernini M, Marx A, et al. Influenza virus infection in 
travelers to tropical and subtropical countries. Clin Infect Dis 
2005;40:1282–7. https://doi.org/10.1086/429243
81. Ratnam I, Black J, Leder K, et al. Incidence and risk factors for acute 
respiratory illnesses and influenza virus infections in Australian travellers to 
Asia. J Clin Virol 2013;57:54–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcv.2013.01.008
82. Flumist Quadrivalent [Package Insert]. Gaithersburg, Maryland: 
MedImmune; 2018.
83. Kerzner B, Murray AV, Cheng E, et al. Safety and immunogenicity profile 
of the concomitant administration of ZOSTAVAX and inactivated influenza 
vaccine in adults aged 50 and older. J Am Geriatr Soc 2007;55:1499–507. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1532-5415.2007.01397.x
84. Frenck RW Jr, Gurtman A, Rubino J, et al. Randomized, controlled trial 
of a 13-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine administered concomitantly 
with an influenza vaccine in healthy adults. Clin Vaccine Immunol 
2012;19:1296–303. https://doi.org/10.1128/CVI.00176-12
85. Schwarz TF, Flamaing J, Rümke HC, et al. A randomized, double-blind 
trial to evaluate immunogenicity and safety of 13-valent pneumococcal 
conjugate vaccine given concomitantly with trivalent influenza vaccine 
in adults aged ≥65 years. Vaccine 2011;29:5195–202. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.05.031
 86. McNeil SA, Noya F, Dionne M, et al. Comparison of the safety and 
immunogenicity of concomitant and sequential administration of an 
adult formulation tetanus and diphtheria toxoids adsorbed combined 
with acellular pertussis (Tdap) vaccine and trivalent inactivated 
influenza vaccine in adults. Vaccine 2007;25:3464–74. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2006.12.047
 87. Song JY, Cheong HJ, Tsai TF, et al. Immunogenicity and safety of 
concomitant MF59-adjuvanted influenza vaccine and 23-valent 
pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine administration in older adults. 
Vaccine 2015;33:4647–52. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2015.05.003
 88. Sukumaran L, McCarthy NL, Kharbanda EO, et al. Safety of tetanus 
toxoid, reduced diphtheria toxoid, and acellular pertussis and influenza 
vaccinations in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 2015;126:1069–74. https://
doi.org/10.1097/AOG.0000000000001066
 89. Stockwell MS, Broder K, LaRussa P
, et al. Risk of fever after pediatric 
trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine and 13-valent pneumococcal 
conjugate vaccine. JAMA Pediatr 2014;168:211–9. https://doi.
org/10.1001/jamapediatrics.2013.4469
 90. Duffy J, Weintraub E, Hambidge SJ, et al.; Vaccine Safety Datalink. 
Febrile seizure risk after vaccination in children 6 to 23 months. Pediatrics 
2016;138:e20160320. https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2016-0320
 91. Li R, Stewart B, McNeil MM, et al. Post licensure surveillance of 
influenza vaccines in the Vaccine Safety Datalink in the 2013–2014 
and 2014–2015 seasons. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 2016;25:928–
34. https://doi.org/10.1002/pds.3996
 92. Patterson JL, Carapetian SA, Hageman JR, Kelley KR. Febrile seizures. Pediatr 
Ann 2013;42:e258–63. https://doi.org/10.3928/00904481-20131122-09
 93. Nolan T, Bernstein DI, Block SL, et al.; LAIV Study Group. Safety 
and immunogenicity of concurrent administration of live attenuated 
influenza vaccine with measles-mumps-rubella and varicella vaccines 
to infants 12 to 15 months of age. Pediatrics 2008;121:508–16. https://
doi.org/10.1542/peds.2007-1064
 94. Lum LC, Borja-Tabora CF, Breiman RF, et al. Influenza vaccine 
concurrently administered with a combination measles, mumps, and 
rubella vaccine to young children. Vaccine 2010;28:1566–74. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2009.11.054
 95. Schwarz TF, Aggarwal N, Moeckesch B, et al. Immunogenicity and 
safety of an adjuvanted herpes zoster subunit vaccine coadministered 
with aged seasonal influenza vaccine in adults 50 years or older. J Infect 
Dis 2017;216:1352–61. https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jix481
 96. Afluria [Package Insert]. Parkville, Victoria, Australia: Seqirus; 2018.
 97. Airey J, Albano FR, Sawlwin DC, et al. Immunogenicity and safety of 
a quadrivalent inactivated influenza virus vaccine compared with a 
comparator quadrivalent inactivated influenza vaccine in a pediatric 
population: A phase 3, randomized noninferiority study. Vaccine 
2017;35:2745–52. 
 98. Clinical Review. (STN: 125127/834)—Fluarix Quadrivalent. Sliver 
Spring, MD: US Department of Health and Human Services, Food and 
Drug Administration; 2018. https://www.fda.gov/downloads/
BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/UCM593001.pdf
 99. Claeys C, Zaman K, Dbaibo G, et al. Prevention of vaccine-matched 
and mismatched influenza in children aged 6–35 months: a 
multinational randomized trial across five influenza seasons. Lancet 
Child Adolesc Health 2018;2:338–49. 
 
100. Health Resources and Services Administration. What you need to know 
about the National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program (VICP). 
Washington, DC: US Department of Health and Human Services, 
Health Resources and Services Administration; 2016.
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / August 24, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 3 
19
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Disclosure of Relationship
Emmanuel B. Walter reports grants from Novavax and Merck & Co, outside the submitted work. Other content experts and 
CDC planners wish to disclose they have no financial interests or other relationships with the manufacturers of commercial 
products, suppliers of commercial services, or commercial supporters. This report includes discussion of the unlabeled use of 
influenza vaccines in the instance of vaccination of persons with a history of egg allergy. A history of severe allergic reaction to 
influenza vaccine or any of its components (including egg) is a labeled contraindication to receipt of most IIVs and LAIV. However, 
ACIP and CDC recommend that persons with egg allergy of any severity should receive any licensed, recommended, and age-
appropriate influenza vaccine that is otherwise appropriate for their health status. Persons with a history of severe allergic reaction 
to egg should be vaccinated in an inpatient or outpatient medical setting (including, but not necessarily limited to, hospitals, 
clinics, health departments, and physician offices). Vaccine administration should be supervised by a health care provider who is 
able to recognize and manage severe allergic conditions. No postvaccination observation period is recommended specifically for 
egg-allergic persons. However, ACIP recommends that vaccine providers consider observing patients (seated or supine) for 15 
minutes following administration of any vaccine to decrease the risk for injury should syncope occur.  
 Recommendations and Reports
20 
MMWR / August 24, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP), July 1, 2017–June 30, 2018
Chair: Nancy Bennett, MD, University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, New York.
Executive Secretary: Amanda Cohn, MD, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, CDC, Atlanta, Georgia.
Members: Robert L. Atmar, MD, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas; Edward Belongia, MD, Marshfield Clinic Research Foundation, Marshfield, 
Wisconsin; Henry Bernstein, DO, Cohen Children’s Medical Center, New Hyde Park, New York; Echezona Ezeanolue, MD, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, 
Nevada; Sharon E. Frey, MD, St. Louis University Medical School, St. Louis, Missouri; Paul Hunter, MD, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and 
Public Health, Milwaukee, Wisconsin; Grace M. Lee, MD, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California; Kelly Moore, MD, Vanderbilt 
University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee; Cynthia Pellegrini, March of Dimes, District of Columbia; Laura E. Riley, MD, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts; José R. Romero, MD, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas; David Stephens, MD, Emory University 
School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia; Peter Szilagyi, MD, University of California, Los Angeles, California; Emmanuel (Chip) Walter, MD, Duke University 
School of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina.
Ex Officio Members: Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), Mary Beth Hance, Baltimore, Maryland; Department of Defense (DOD), Eric 
Deussing, MD, Atlanta, Georgia; Department of Veterans Affairs (DVA), Jane A. Kim, MD, Durham, North Carolina; Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 
Wellington Sun, MD, Rockville, Maryland; Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA), Narayan Nair, MD, Rockville, Maryland; Indian Health 
Service (IHS), Amy Groom, MPH, Albuquerque, New Mexico; National Vaccine Program Office (NVPO), Angela K. Shen, ScD, District of Columbia; 
National Institutes of Health (NIH), Linda C. Lambert, PhD, Bethesda, Maryland.
Liaison Representatives: American Academy of Family Physicians (AAFP), Pamela G. Rockwell, DO, Ann Arbor, Michigan; American Academy of Pediatrics 
(AAP), Committee on Infectious Diseases (COID), Carrie L. Byington, MD, Bryan, Texas; American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), Red Book Editor, David 
Kimberlin, MD, Birmingham, Alabama; American Academy of Physician Assistants (AAPA), Marie-Michèle Léger, MPH, Alexandria, Virginia; American 
College Health Association (ACHA), Susan Even, MD, Columbia, Missouri; American College of Nurse Midwives (ACNM), Carol E. Hayes, MN, MPH, 
Atlanta, Georgia; American College of Nurse Midwives (ACNM), (alternate) Pamela M. Meharry, PhD, Chicago, Illinois; American College of Obstetricians 
and Gynecologists (ACOG), Kevin A. Ault, MD, Kansas City, Kansas; American College of Physicians (ACP), Sandra Adamson Fryhofer, MD, Atlanta, 
Georgia; American College of Physicians (ACP) (alternate), Gregory A. Poland, MD, Rochester, Minnesota; American Geriatrics Society (AGS), Kenneth 
Schmader, MD, Durham, North Carolina; America’s Health Insurance Plans (AHIP), Mark J. Netoskie, MD, Houston, Texas; American Medical Association 
(AMA), Sandra Adamson Fryhofer, MD, Atlanta, Georgia; American Nurses Association (ANA), Charles (Chad) Rittle, DNP
, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; 
American Osteopathic Association (AOA), Stanley E. Grogg, DO, Tulsa, Oklahoma; American Pharmacists Association (APhA), Stephan L. Foster, PharmD, 
Memphis, Tennessee; Association of Immunization Managers (AIM), Christine Finley, MPH, Burlington, Vermont; Association for Prevention Teaching and 
Research (APTR), W. Paul McKinney, MD, Louisville, Kentucky; Association of State and Territorial Health Officials (ASTHO), Nathaniel Smith, MD, Little 
Rock, Arkansas; Biotechnology Industry Organization (BIO) Phyllis A. Arthur, MBA, Washington, District of Columbia; Council of State and Territorial 
Epidemiologists (CSTE), Christine Hahn, MD, Boise, Idaho; Canadian National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI), Caroline Quach, MD, 
Montreal, Québec, Canada; Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA), Kathleen M. Neuzil, MD, Baltimore, Maryland; Infectious Diseases Society of 
America (IDSA) (alternate), Carol J. Baker, MD, Houston, Texas; National Association of County and City Health Officials (NACCHO), Matthew Zahn, 
MD, Santa Ana, California; National Association of County and City Health Officials (NACCHO), (alternate) Jeffrey Duchin, MD, Seattle, Washington; 
National Association of Pediatric Nurse Practitioners (NAPNAP), Patricia A. Stinchfield, MS, St. Paul, Minnesota; National Foundation for Infectious Diseases 
(NFID), William Schaffner, MD, Nashville, Tennessee; National Immunization Council and Child Health Program, Mexico, Luis Durán, MD, Mexico 
City, Mexico; National Medical Association (NMA), Patricia Whitley-Williams, MD, New Brunswick, New Jersey; National Vaccine Advisory Committee 
(NVAC), Kimberly Thompson, ScD, Orlando, Florida; Pediatric Infectious Diseases Society (PIDS), Sean O’Leary, MD, Aurora, Colorado; Pediatric Infectious 
Diseases Society (PIDS) (alternate), Mark H. Sawyer, MD, San Diego, California; Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America (PhRMA), David 
R. Johnson, MD, Swiftwater, Pennsylvania; Society for Adolescent Health and Medicine (SAHM), Amy B. Middleman, MD, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; 
Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America (SHEA), David Weber, MD, Chapel Hill, North Carolina.
ACIP Influenza Vaccine Work Group
Chair: Emmanuel (Chip) Walter, MD, Durham, North Carolina.
Members: Robert Atmar, MD, Houston, Texas; Kevin Ault, MD, Kansas, City, Kansas; Edward Belongia, MD, Marshfield, Wisconsin; Henry Bernstein, 
DO, Hempstead, New York; Karin Bok, PhD, Bethesda, Maryland; Sarah Coles, MD, Phoenix, Arizona; Clarence B. Creech, MD, Nashville, Tennessee; 
Sarah Despres, JD, District of Columbia; Jeff Duchin, MD, Seattle, Washington; David Cho, PhD, Silver Spring, Maryland; Janet Englund, MD, Seattle, 
Washington; Sandra Fryhofer, MD, Atlanta, Georgia; Ian Gemmill, MD, Kingston, Ontario, Canada; Ruth Karron, MD, Baltimore, Maryland; Wendy 
Keitel, MD, Houston, Texas; Lucia Lee, MD, Silver Spring, Maryland; Marie-Michèle Léger, MPH, Alexandria, Virginia; Susan Lett, MD, Jamaica Plain, 
Massachusetts; Jamie Loehr, MD, Ithaca, New York; Flor M. Munoz, MD, Houston, Texas; Kathleen M. Neuzil, MD, Baltimore, Maryland; Cynthia Nolletti, 
MD, Silver Spring, Maryland; Roshan Ramanathan, MD, Silver Spring, Maryland; Chris Roberts, PhD, Rockville, Maryland; William Schaffner, MD, 
Nashville, Tennessee; Robert Schechter, MD, Richmond, California; Kenneth Schmader, MD, Durham, North Carolina; Tamara Sheffield, MD, Salt Lake 
City, Utah; Patricia Stinchfield, MS, St. Paul, Minnesota; Rob Stirling, MD, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Peter Szilagyi, MD, Los Angeles, California; Wendy 
Vaudry, MD, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada; Matthew Zahn, MD, Santa Ana, California.  
  ISSN: 0149-2195 (Print)
The Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) Series is prepared by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and is available free 
of charge in electronic format. To receive an electronic copy each week, visit MMWR at https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/index.html. 
Readers who have difficulty accessing this PDF file may access the HTML file at https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/67/rr/rr6703a1.htm?s_
cid=rr6703a1_w. Address all inquiries about the MMWR Series, including material to be considered for publication, to Executive Editor, MMWR Series, 
Mailstop E-90, CDC, 1600 Clifton Rd., N.E., Atlanta, GA 30329-4027 or to mmwrq@cdc.gov.
All material in the MMWR Series is in the public domain and may be used and reprinted without permission; citation as to source, however, is appreciated.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply endorsement of these organizations 
or their programs by CDC or the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content of these sites. URL addresses 
listed in MMWR were current as of the date of publication.
