 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
Recommendations and Reports / Vol. 66 / No. 2 
August 25, 2017 
Prevention and Control of Seasonal Influenza 
with Vaccines: Recommendations of the 
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices — 
United States, 2017–18 Influenza Season
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
 Recommendations and Reports
The MMWR series of publications is published by the Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Atlanta, GA 30329-4027.
Suggested citation: [Author names; first three, then et al., if more than six.] [Title]. MMWR Recomm Rep 2017;66(No. RR-#):[inclusive page numbers].
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Brenda Fitzgerald, MD, Director 
William R. Mac Kenzie, MD, Acting Associate Director for Science 
Joanne Cono, MD, ScM, Director, Office of Science Quality 
Chesley L. Richards, MD, MPH, Deputy Director for Public Health Scientific Services
Michael F. Iademarco, MD, MPH, Director, Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services 
MMWR Editorial and Production Staff (Serials)
Sonja A. Rasmussen, MD, MS, Editor-in-Chief
Charlotte K. Kent, PhD, MPH, Executive Editor 
Christine G. Casey, MD, Editor
Teresa F. Rutledge, Managing Editor
David C. Johnson, Lead Technical Writer-Editor
Jeffrey D. Sokolow, MA, Project Editor
Martha F. Boyd, Lead Visual Information Specialist
Maureen A. Leahy, Julia C. Martinroe, 
Stephen R. Spriggs, Tong Yang,
Visual Information Specialists
Quang M. Doan, MBA, Phyllis H. King, 
Paul D. Maitland, Terraye M. Starr, Moua Yang,
Information Technology Specialists
MMWR Editorial Board
Timothy F. Jones, MD, Chairman
Matthew L. Boulton, MD, MPH
Virginia A. Caine, MD 
Katherine Lyon Daniel, PhD
Jonathan E. Fielding, MD, MPH, MBA
David W. Fleming, MD 
William E. Halperin, MD, DrPH, MPH
King K. Holmes, MD, PhD 
Robin Ikeda, MD, MPH 
Rima F. Khabbaz, MD
Phyllis Meadows, PhD, MSN, RN
Jewel Mullen, MD, MPH, MPA
Jeff Niederdeppe, PhD
Patricia Quinlisk, MD, MPH 
Patrick L. Remington, MD, MPH 
Carlos Roig, MS, MA
William L. Roper, MD, MPH 
William Schaffner, MD
CONTENTS
Introduction ............................................................................................................2
Methods 
....................................................................................................................2
Primary Changes and Updates in the Recommendations .....................5
Recommendations for the Use of Influenza Vaccines, 
2017–18 Season ..................................................................................................6
Influenza Vaccine Composition and Available Products 
...................... 13
Additional Sources for Information Regarding Influenza  
and Vaccines ...................................................................................................... 16
References 
............................................................................................................. 17
CDC Adoption of ACIP Recommendations
Recommendations for the routine use of vaccines in 
children, adolescents, and adults are developed by the 
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). 
ACIP is chartered as a federal advisory committee to provide 
expert external advice and guidance to the Director of CDC 
on use of vaccines and related agents for the control of 
vaccine-preventable diseases in the civilian population of the 
United States. Clinical recommendations for routine use of 
vaccines are harmonized to the greatest extent possible with 
recommendations made by others (e.g., the American Academy 
of Pediatrics, the American Academy of Family Physicians, the 
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, and the 
American College of Physicians).
ACIP recommendations adopted by the CDC Director 
become agency guidelines on the date published in MMWR. 
The accompanying recommendations that summarize the 
ACIP findings and conclusions were drafted based on the 
recommendations and revised based on feedback from 
ACIP voting members. The CDC Director approved these 
recommendations prior to publication. Opinions of individual 
members of ACIP might differ to some extent from the 
recommendations in this report as these recommendations are 
the position of CDC based on the ACIP recommendations to 
the CDC Director. Additional information regarding ACIP is 
available at https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip. 
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / August 25, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 2 
1
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Prevention and Control of Seasonal Influenza with Vaccines: 
Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization 
Practices — United States, 2017–18 Influenza Season
Lisa A. Grohskopf, MD1
Leslie Z. Sokolow, MSc, MPH1,2
Karen R. Broder, MD3
Emmanuel B. Walter, MD4
Joseph S. Bresee, MD1
Alicia M. Fry, MD1
Daniel B. Jernigan, MD1
1Influenza Division, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, CDC
2Battelle Memorial Institute, Atlanta, Georgia
3Immunization Safety Office, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC
4Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina
Summary
This report updates the 2016–17 recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) regarding the use 
of seasonal influenza vaccines (MMWR Recomm Rep 2016;65[No. RR-5]). Routine annual influenza vaccination is recommended for 
all persons aged ≥6 months who do not have contraindications. A licensed, recommended, and age-appropriate vaccine should be used.
For the 2017–18 season, quadrivalent and trivalent influenza vaccines will be available. Inactivated influenza vaccines (IIVs) 
will be available in trivalent (IIV3) and quadrivalent (IIV4) formulations. Recombinant influenza vaccine (RIV) will be available 
in trivalent (RIV3) and quadrivalent (RIV4) formulations. Live attenuated influenza vaccine (LAIV4) is not recommended for use 
during the 2017–18 season due to concerns about its effectiveness against (H1N1)pdm09 viruses during the 2013–14 and 2015–16 
seasons. Recommendations for different vaccine types and specific populations are discussed. No preferential recommendation is made 
for one influenza vaccine product over another for persons for whom more than one licensed, recommended product is available.
Updates to the recommendations described in this report reflect discussions during public meetings of ACIP held on 
October 20, 2016; February 22, 2017; and June 21, 2017. New and updated information in this report includes the following:
• Vaccine viruses included in the 2017–18 U.S. trivalent influenza vaccines will be an A/Michigan/45/2015 (H1N1)
pdm09–like virus, an A/Hong Kong/4801/2014 (H3N2)-like virus, and a B/Brisbane/60/2008–like virus (Victoria 
lineage). Quadrivalent influenza vaccines will contain these three viruses and an additional influenza B vaccine virus, 
a B/Phuket/3073/2013–like virus (Yamagata lineage).
• Information on recent licensures and labelling changes is discussed, including licensure of Afluria Quadrivalent (IIV4; 
Seqirus, Parkville, Victoria, Australia); Flublok Quadrivalent (RIV4; Protein Sciences, Meriden, Connecticut); and 
expansion of the age indication for FluLaval Quadrivalent (IIV4; ID Biomedical Corporation of Quebec, Quebec 
City, Quebec, Canada), previously licensed for ≥3 years, to ≥6 months.
• Pregnant women may receive any licensed, recommended, age-appropriate influenza vaccine.
• Afluria (IIV3; Seqirus, Parkville, Victoria, Australia) may be used for persons aged ≥5 years, consistent with Food and 
Drug Administration–approved labeling.
• FluMist Quadrivalent (LAIV4; MedImmune, Gaithersburg, Maryland) should not be used during the 2017–18 season due 
to concerns about its effectiveness against influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 viruses in the United States during the 2013–14 and 
2015–16 influenza seasons.
This report focuses on the recommendations for use of vaccines for the prevention and control of influenza during the 2017–18 
season in the United States. A Background Document containing further information and a summary of these recommendations are 
available at https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/acip-recs/vacc-specific/flu.html. These recommendations apply to licensed influenza 
vaccines used within Food and Drug Administration–licensed indications, including those licensed after the publication date 
of this report. Updates and other information are available at 
CDC’s influenza website (https://www.cdc.gov/flu). Vaccination 
and health care providers should check CDC’s influenza website 
periodically for additional information.
Corresponding author: Lisa A. Grohskopf, Influenza Division, 
National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, CDC. 
Telephone: 404-639-2552; E-mail: Lkg6@cdc.gov.
 Recommendations and Reports
2 
MMWR / August 25, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 2
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Introduction
Influenza viruses typically circulate widely in the United States 
annually, from the late fall through the early spring. Although 
most persons with influenza will recover without sequelae, 
influenza can cause serious illness and death, particularly among 
older adults, very young children, pregnant women, and those 
with certain chronic medical conditions (1–6).
Routine annual influenza vaccination for all persons aged 
≥6 months who do not have contraindications has been 
recommended by CDC and CDC’s Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices (ACIP) since 2010 (7). This report 
updates the 2016–17 ACIP recommendations regarding 
the use of seasonal influenza vaccines (8) and provides 
recommendations and guidance for vaccine providers regarding 
the use of influenza vaccines for the 2017–18 season. A variety 
of different formulations of influenza vaccine are available 
(Table 1). Contraindications and precautions to the use of 
influenza vaccines are summarized (Table 2). Abbreviations are 
used in this report to denote the various types of vaccines (Box).
This report focuses on the recommendations for use of 
influenza vaccines for the prevention and control of influenza 
during the 2017–18 season in the United States. A summary 
of these recommendations and a Background Document 
containing additional information on influenza-associated 
illnesses and influenza vaccines are available at https://www.
cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/acip-recs/vacc-specific/flu.html.
Methods
ACIP provides annual recommendations for the use of 
influenza vaccines for the prevention and control of influenza. 
The ACIP Influenza Work Group meets by teleconference once to 
twice per month throughout the year. Work Group membership 
includes several voting members of ACIP and representatives of 
ACIP Liaison Organizations.* Discussions include topics such 
as influenza surveillance, vaccine effectiveness and safety, vaccine 
coverage, program feasibility, cost-effectiveness, and vaccine 
supply. Presentations are requested from invited experts, and 
published and unpublished data are discussed.
In general, the Background Document is updated to reflect 
recent additions to the literature related to the following: 
1) recommendations that were made in previous seasons, 2) changes 
in the viral antigen composition of seasonal influenza vaccines, and 
3) minor changes in guidance for the use of influenza vaccines (e.g., 
guidance for timing of vaccination and other programmatic issues, 
guidance for dosage in specific populations, guidance for selection 
of vaccines for specific populations that are already recommended 
for vaccination, and changes that reflect use consistent with 
* A list of Work Group members may be found on page 20 of this report.
Food and Drug Administration [FDA]–licensed indications 
and prescribing information). The summary included in the 
Background Document for such topics is not a systematic review, 
but is intended to provide a broad overview of current literature. 
In general, systematic review and evaluation of the evidence using 
the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development 
and Evaluation (GRADE) approach is performed for new 
recommendations or substantial changes in the recommendations 
(e.g., expansion of the recommendation for influenza vaccination 
to new populations not previously recommended for vaccination 
or potential preferential recommendations for specific vaccines).
Updates and changes to the recommendations described in 
this report are of five types: 1) the vaccine virus composition for 
2017–18 U.S. seasonal influenza vaccines; 2) recent regulatory 
actions, including new vaccine licensures and labeling changes for 
previously licensed vaccines; 3) updated recommendations for the 
use of influenza vaccines in pregnancy, including a recommendation 
that pregnant women may receive any licensed, recommended, 
age-appropriate influenza vaccine; 4) a recommendation that the 
trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine (IIV3) Afluria (Seqirus, 
Parkville, Victoria, Australia) may be used for persons aged ≥5 years, 
consistent with FDA-approved labeling; and 5) a recommendation 
(continued from the 2016–17 season) that LAIV4 not be used 
during the 2017–18 season. Systematic review and GRADE were 
not performed for these updates and changes. Information relevant 
to these changes includes the following:
• Recommendations for composition of Northern Hemisphere 
influenza vaccines are made by the World Health 
Organization (WHO), which organizes a consultation, 
generally in February of each year. Surveillance data are 
reviewed and candidate vaccine viruses are discussed. 
A summary of the WHO meeting for selection of 
the 2017–18 Northern Hemisphere vaccine viruses is 
available at http://www.who.int/influenza/vaccines/
virus/recommendations/201703_recommendation.
pdf. Subsequently, FDA, which has regulatory authority 
over vaccines in the United States, convenes a meeting 
of its Vaccines and Related Biological Products Advisory 
Committee (VRBPAC). This committee considers 
the recommendations of WHO, reviews and discusses 
similar data, and makes a final decision regarding vaccine 
virus composition for influenza vaccines licensed and 
marketed in the United States. A summary of the FDA 
VRBPAC meeting of March 9, 2017, at which the 
composition of the 2017–18 U.S. influenza vaccines was 
discussed, is available at https://www.fda.gov/downloads/
AdvisoryCommittees/CommitteesMeetingMaterials/
B l o o d V a c c i n e s a n d O t h e r B i o l o g i c s /
VaccinesandRelatedBiologicalProductsAdvisoryCommittee/
UCM552054.pdf.
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / August 25, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 2 
3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
TABLE 1. Influenza vaccines — United States, 2017–18 influenza season*
Trade name
Manufacturer
Presentation
Age  
indication
Mercury  
(from 
thimerosal, 
µg/0.5 mL)
Latex
Route
Inactivated influenza vaccines, quadrivalent (IIV4s), standard-dose†
Afluria Quadrivalent
Seqirus
0.5 mL prefilled syringe
≥18 years
NR
No
IM§
5.0 mL multidose vial
≥18 years 
 (by needle/syringe) 
18 through 64 years  
(by jet injector)
24.5
No
IM
Fluarix Quadrivalent
GlaxoSmithKline
0.5 mL prefilled syringe
≥3 years
NR
No
IM
FluLaval Quadrivalent
ID Biomedical Corp. of 
Quebec (distributed by 
GlaxoSmithKline)
0.5 mL prefilled syringe
≥6 months
NR
No
IM
5.0 mL multidose vial
≥6 months
<25
No
IM
Fluzone Quadrivalent
Sanofi Pasteur
0.25 mL prefilled syringe
6 through 35 months
NR
No
IM
0.5 mL prefilled syringe
≥3 years
NR
No
IM
0.5 mL single-dose vial
≥3 years
NR
No
IM
5.0 mL multidose vial
≥6 months
25
No
IM
Inactivated influenza vaccine, quadrivalent (ccIIV4), standard-dose,† cell culture-based
Flucelvax Quadrivalent
Seqirus
0.5 mL prefilled syringe
≥4 years
NR
No
IM
5.0 mL multidose vial
≥4 years
25
No
IM
Inactivated influenza vaccine, quadrivalent (IIV4), standard-dose, intradermal¶
Fluzone Intradermal 
Quadrivalent
Sanofi Pasteur
0.1 mL single-dose prefilled 
microinjection system
18 through 64 years
NR
No
ID**
Inactivated Influenza Vaccines, trivalent (IIV3s), standard-dose†
Afluria
Seqirus
0.5 mL prefilled syringe
≥5 years
NR
No
IM
5.0 mL multidose vial
≥5 years  
(by needle/syringe)  
18 through 64 years  
(by jet injector)
24.5
No
IM
Fluvirin
Seqirus
0.5 mL prefilled syringe
≥4 years
≤1
Yes††
IM
5.0 mL multidose vial
≥4 years
25
No
IM
Adjuvanted inactivated influenza vaccine, trivalent (aIIV3),† standard-dose
Fluad
Seqirus
0.5 mL prefilled syringe
≥65 years
NR
Yes††
IM
Inactivated Influenza Vaccine, trivalent (IIV3), high-dose§§
Fluzone High-Dose
Sanofi Pasteur
0.5 mL prefilled syringe
≥65 years
NR
No
IM
Recombinant Influenza Vaccine, quadrivalent (RIV4)¶¶
Flublok Quadrivalent
Protein Sciences
0.5 mL prefilled syringe
≥18 years
NR
No
IM
Recombinant Influenza Vaccine, trivalent (RIV3)¶¶
Flublok
Protein Sciences
0.5 mL single-dose vial
≥18 years
NR
No
IM
Live Attenuated Influenza Vaccine, quadrivalent (LAIV4)*** (not recommended for use during the 2017–18 season)
FluMist Quadrivalent
MedImmune
0.2 mL single-dose prefilled 
intranasal sprayer
2 through 49 years
NR
No
NAS
Abbreviations: ACIP = Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices; ID = intradermal; IM = intramuscular; NAS = intranasal; NR = not relevant (does not 
contain thimerosal).
 * Immunization providers should check Food and Drug Administration–approved prescribing information for 2017–18 influenza vaccines for the most complete 
and updated information, including (but not limited to) indications, contraindications, warnings, and precautions. Package inserts for U.S.-licensed vaccines are 
available at https://www.fda.gov/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/ucm093833.htm. Availability of specific products and presentations might 
change and differ from what is described in this table and in the text of this report.
 
† Standard dose intramuscular IIVs contain 15 μg of each vaccine HA antigen (45 μg total for trivalents and 60 μg total for quadrivalents) per 0.5 mL dose.
 
§ For adults and older children, the recommended site for intramuscular influenza vaccination is the deltoid muscle. The preferred site for infants and young children 
is the anterolateral aspect of the thigh. Specific guidance regarding site and needle length for intramuscular administration is available in the ACIP General Best 
Practice Guidelines for Immunization, available at https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/acip-recs/general-recs/index.html.
 
¶ Quadrivalent inactivated influenza vaccine, intradermal: a 0.1-mL dose contains 9 μg of each vaccine HA antigen (36 μg total).
 ** The preferred injection site is over the deltoid muscle. Fluzone Intradermal Quadrivalent is administered per manufacturer’s instructions using the delivery system 
included with the vaccine.
 †† Syringe tip cap might contain natural rubber latex.
 §§ High-dose IIV3 contains 60 μg of each vaccine antigen (180 μg total) per 0.5 mL dose.
 ¶¶ RIV contains 45 μg of each vaccine HA antigen (135 μg total for trivalent 180 μg total for quadrivalent) per 0.5 mL dose.
 
*** ACIP recommends that FluMist Quadrivalent (LAIV4) not be used during the 2017–18 season.
 Recommendations and Reports
4 
MMWR / August 25, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 2
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
TABLE 2. Contraindications and precautions to the use of influenza vaccines — United States, 2017–18 influenza season*
Vaccine type
Contraindications
Precautions
IIV
History of severe allergic reaction to any component of the vaccine† or after 
previous dose of any influenza vaccine
Moderate-to-severe acute illness with or without fever 
 
History of Guillain-Barré syndrome within 6 weeks of receipt 
of influenza vaccine
RIV
History of severe allergic reaction to any component of the vaccine
Moderate-to-severe acute illness with or without fever 
 
History of Guillain-Barré syndrome within 6 weeks of receipt 
of influenza vaccine
LAIV
For the 2017–18 season, ACIP recommends that LAIV not be used. Content is provided for information.
History of severe allergic reaction to any component of the vaccine† or after 
a previous dose of any influenza vaccine 
 
Concomitant aspirin or salicylate-containing therapy in children and 
adolescents 
 
Children aged 2 through 4 years who have received a diagnosis of asthma or 
whose parents or caregivers report that a health care provider has told them 
during the preceding 12 months that their child had wheezing or asthma or 
whose medical record indicates a wheezing episode has occurred during the 
preceding 12 months 
 
Children and adults who are immunocompromised due to any cause 
(including immunosuppression caused by medications or by HIV infection)  
 
Close contacts and caregivers of severely immunosuppressed persons who 
require a protected environment 
 
Pregnancy 
 
Receipt of influenza antiviral medication within the previous 48 hours
Moderate-to-severe acute illness with or without fever 
 
History of Guillain-Barré syndrome within 6 weeks of receipt 
of influenza vaccine 
 
Asthma in persons aged ≥5 years 
 
Other underlying medical conditions that might 
predispose to complications after wild-type influenza 
infection (e.g., chronic pulmonary, cardiovascular 
[except isolated hypertension], renal, hepatic, neurologic, 
hematologic, or metabolic disorders [including 
diabetes mellitus])
Abbreviations: ACIP = Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices; IIV = Inactivated Influenza Vaccine; LAIV = Live-Attenuated Influenza Vaccine; RIV = Recombinant 
Influenza Vaccine.
* Immunization providers should check Food and Drug Administration–approved prescribing information for 2017–18 influenza vaccines for the most complete and 
updated information, including (but not limited to) indications, contraindications, and precautions. Package inserts for US-licensed vaccines are available at https://
www.fda.gov/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/ucm093833.htm.
† History of severe allergic reaction (e.g., anaphylaxis) to egg is a labeled contraindication to the use of IIV and LAIV. However, ACIP recommends that any licensed, 
recommended, and appropriate IIV or RIV may be administered to persons with egg allergy of any severity (see Persons with a History of Egg Allergy).
• With regard to recommendations for newly licensed influenza 
vaccines and changes to the licensed indications for existing 
vaccines, ACIP relies on FDA for review of safety, 
immunogenicity, and effectiveness data pertaining to the 
licensure of influenza vaccines. Regulatory information 
pertinent to the two recently licensed products and one 
labelling change discussed in this report is available at https://
www.fda.gov/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/
ApprovedProducts/ucm518291.htm (for Afluria Quadrivalent; 
Seqirus, Parkville, Victoria, Australia), https://www.fda.gov/
BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/
ucm524660.htm (for Flublok Quadrivalent; Protein Sciences, 
Meriden, Connecticut), and https://www.fda.gov/
BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/
ucm366061.htm (for FluLaval Quadrivalent; ID Biomedical 
Corporation of Quebec, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada).
• For the recommendation that pregnant women may 
receive any licensed, recommended, and age-appropriate 
influenza vaccine, because there have been no studies 
evaluating use of RIV3 or RIV4 in pregnancy, ACIP 
reviewed available information presented by the 
manufacturer and summarized in public documents by 
FDA concerning pregnancies that occurred among women 
participating in studies of RIV and pregnancy registry 
data. RIV reports to the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting 
System (VAERS) also were presented. Regulatory 
information pertinent to this discussion is available at 
https://www.fda.gov/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/
ApprovedProducts/ucm524660.htm.
• For the recommendation that Afluria (IIV3; Seqirus, 
Parkville, Victoria, Australia) may be used for persons aged 
≥5 years, ACIP reviewed data from studies performed by 
the manufacturer concerning the cause of an increase in the 
rate of febrile seizures that occurred in association with the 
2010 Southern Hemisphere formulation of this product, 
and resulting changes in the vaccine manufacturing process. 
This change makes the ACIP recommendation consistent 
with FDA-approved labelling for this product. Minutes of 
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / August 25, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 2 
5
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
BOX. Abbreviation conventions for influenza vaccines used in 
this report
• Inactivated influenza vaccines are abbreviated IIV. For 
the 2017–18 season, IIVs as a class will include:
 
– egg-based, unadjuvanted, and adjuvanted trivalent 
influenza vaccines (IIV3s); and
 
– egg-based or cell culture-based unadjuvanted 
quadrivalent influenza vaccines (IIV4s).
• RIV refers to recombinant hemagglutinin influenza 
vaccine, available in trivalent (RIV3) and quadrivalent 
(RIV4) formulations for the 2017–18 season.
• LAIV refers to live-attenuated influenza vaccine, 
available as a quadrivalent formulation (LAIV4) since 
the 2013–14 season.
• IIV, RIV, and LAIV denote vaccine categories; 
numeric suffix specifies the number of hemagglutinin 
(HA) antigens in the vaccine.
• When necessary to refer specifically to cell culture-
based vaccine, the prefix “cc” is used (e.g., ccIIV4).
• When necessary to refer specifically to adjuvanted 
vaccine, the prefix “a” is used (e.g., aIIV3).
• When necessary to refer specifically to standard-dose 
or high-dose vaccines, the prefixes “SD-” or “HD-” 
are used (e.g., SD-IIV3 and HD-IIV3).
the ACIP presentation of these data are available at https://
www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/meetings/downloads/min-
archive/min-2017-02.pdf. Regulatory information is 
available at https://www.fda.gov/BiologicsBloodVaccines/
Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/ucm094043.htm.
• The recommendation that LAIV4 not be used due to 
concerns regarding its effectiveness against 
influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 viruses during the 2013–14 
and 2015–16 U.S. seasons was initially made for the 
2016–17 season (9). This recommendation continues to 
be made for the 2017–18 season. ACIP will continue to 
review data concerning LAIV4 as they become available.
Primary Changes and Updates in 
the Recommendations
Routine annual influenza vaccination of all persons aged 
≥6 months without contraindications continues to be 
recommended. No preferential recommendation is made 
for one influenza vaccine product over another for persons 
for whom more than one licensed, recommended product is 
available. Updated information and guidance in this report 
includes the following:
• 2017–18 U.S. trivalent influenza vaccines will contain an 
A/Michigan/45/2015 (H1N1)pdm09–like virus, an 
A/Hong Kong/4801/2014 (H3N2)–like virus and a 
B/Brisbane/60/2008–like virus (Victoria lineage). 
Quadrivalent vaccines will include an additional vaccine 
virus strain, a B/Phuket/3073/2013–like virus (Yamagata 
lineage). This represents a change in the 
influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 virus component from the 
previous season.
• Recent regulatory actions, including two new licensures 
and one labelling change are described:
 
– Afluria Quadrivalent (IIV4; Seqirus, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia) was licensed by FDA in August, 2016 for 
persons aged ≥18 years. Regulatory information is 
available at https://www.fda.gov/BiologicsBloodVaccines/
Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/ucm518291.htm.
 
– Flublok Quadrivalent (RIV4; Protein Sciences, Meriden, 
Connecticut) was licensed by FDA in October 2016, for 
persons aged ≥18 years. Regulatory information is 
available at https://www.fda.gov/BiologicsBloodVaccines/
Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/ucm524660.htm.
 
– The age indication for FluLaval Quadrivalent (IIV4; ID 
Biomedical Corporation of Quebec, Quebec City, 
Quebec, Canada) was extended from ≥3 years to 
≥6 months in November 2016. Regulatory information 
is available at https://www.fda.gov/BiologicsBloodVaccines/
Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/ucm366061.htm. Children 
aged 6 through 35 months may receive FluLaval 
Quadrivalent at the same 0.5 mL per dose (containing 
15 µg of hemagglutinin [HA] per vaccine virus) as is used 
for older children and adults. This licensure creates an 
additional option for vaccination of children aged 
6 through 35 months, in addition to the previously 
available 0.25 mL per dose presentation (containing 7.5 µg 
of HA per vaccine virus) of Fluzone Quadrivalent (IIV4; 
Sanofi Pasteur, Swiftwater, Pennsylvania).
• Pregnant women may receive any licensed, recommended, 
age-appropriate influenza vaccine.
• Afluria (IIV3; Seqirus, Parkville, Victoria, Australia) is 
now recommended for persons aged ≥5 years, consistent 
with FDA-approved labelling.
• In light of its low effectiveness against influenza A(H1N1)
pdm09 in the United States during the 2013–14 and 
2015–16 seasons, for the 2017–18 season, ACIP continues 
the recommendation that LAIV4 should not be used. 
Because LAIV4 is still a licensed vaccine that might be 
available and that some providers might elect to use, for 
informational purposes only, reference is made in this 
report to previous recommendations for its use.
 Recommendations and Reports
6 
MMWR / August 25, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 2
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Recommendations for the Use of 
Influenza Vaccines, 2017–18 Season
Groups Recommended for Vaccination
Routine annual influenza vaccination is recommended for all 
persons aged ≥6 months who do not have contraindications. 
Recommendations regarding timing of vaccination, 
considerations for specific populations, the use of specific 
vaccines, and contraindications and precautions are summarized 
in the sections that follow.
Timing of Vaccination
Optimally, vaccination should occur before onset of influenza 
activity in the community. Health care providers should offer 
vaccination by the end of October, if possible. Children aged 
6 months through 8 years who require 2 doses (see Children 
Aged 6 Months through 8 Years) should receive their first dose 
as soon as possible after vaccine becomes available, to allow the 
second dose (which must be administered ≥4 weeks later) to be 
received by the end of October. Although some available data 
indicate that early vaccination (e.g., in July and August) might 
be associated with suboptimal immunity before the end of the 
influenza season, particularly among older adults, the relative 
contribution of potential waning of immunity compared 
with those of other determinants of the impact of vaccination 
(e.g., timing and severity of the influenza season, the impact 
of missed opportunities when individuals delay vaccination 
and fail to return later in the season, and programmatic 
constraints) is unknown. Although delaying vaccination 
might result in greater immunity later in the season, deferral 
also might result in missed opportunities to vaccinate, as 
well as difficulties in vaccinating a population within a more 
constrained time period. Community vaccination programs 
should balance maximizing likelihood of persistence of 
vaccine-induced protection through the season with avoiding 
missed opportunities to vaccinate or vaccinating after onset 
of influenza circulation occurs. Revaccination later in the 
season of persons who have already been fully vaccinated is 
not recommended.
Vaccination should continue to be offered as long as influenza 
viruses are circulating and unexpired vaccine is available. 
To avoid missed opportunities for vaccination, providers 
should offer vaccination during routine health care visits and 
hospitalizations when vaccine is available. Vaccination efforts 
should be structured to ensure the vaccination of as many persons 
as possible before influenza activity in the community begins.
In any given season, the optimal time to vaccinate cannot be 
predicted precisely because influenza seasons vary in timing and 
duration. Moreover, more than one outbreak might occur in a 
given community in a single year. In the United States, localized 
outbreaks that indicate the start of seasonal influenza activity 
can occur as early as October. However, in 74% of influenza 
seasons from 1982–83 through 2015–16, peak influenza 
activity (which often is close to the midpoint of influenza 
activity for the season) has not occurred until January or later, 
and in 59% of seasons, the peak was in February or later (10).
In recent seasons, initial shipments of influenza vaccine have 
arrived to some vaccine providers as early as July. Very early 
availability of vaccine as compared with typical onset and peak 
of influenza activity raises questions related to the ideal time 
to begin vaccination. Several observational studies of influenza 
vaccine effectiveness have reported decreased vaccine protection 
within a single season, particularly against influenza A(H3N2) 
(11–14). In some of these studies decline in VE was particularly 
pronounced among older adults (12,13). Some studies have 
documented decline in protective antibodies over the course of 
one season (15–17), with antibody levels decreasing with greater 
time elapsed postvaccination. However, the rate and degree of 
decline observed has varied. Among adults in one study, HA and 
neuraminidase antibody levels declined slowly, with a two-fold 
decrease in titer estimated to take >600 days (18). A review of 
studies reporting postvaccination seroprotection rates among 
adults aged ≥60 years noted that seroprotection levels meeting 
Committee of Proprietary Medicinal Products standards 
were maintained for ≥4 months for the H3N2 component 
in all 8 studies and for the H1N1 and B components in five 
of seven studies (19). A recent multiseason analysis from the 
U.S. Influenza Vaccine Effectiveness (U.S. Flu VE) Network 
found that VE declined by about 7% per month for H3N2 
and influenza B, and 6%–11% per month for H1N1pdm09 
(20). VE remained greater than zero for at least 5 to 6 months 
after vaccination. Similar waning effects have not been observed 
consistently across age groups and virus subtypes in different 
populations, and the observed decline in protection could be 
attributable to bias, unmeasured confounding, or the late season 
emergence of antigenic drift variants that are less well-matched 
to the vaccine strain.
Vaccination efforts should continue throughout the season 
because the duration of the influenza season varies and 
influenza activity might not occur in certain communities 
until February or March. Providers should offer influenza 
vaccine routinely, and organized vaccination campaigns should 
continue throughout the influenza season, including after 
influenza activity has begun in the community. Although 
vaccination by the end of October is recommended, vaccine 
administered in December or later, even if influenza activity 
has already begun, is likely to be beneficial in the majority of 
influenza seasons.
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / August 25, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 2 
7
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Guidance for Use in 
Specific Populations and Situations
Populations at Higher Risk for Medical 
Complications Attributable to Severe Influenza
All persons aged ≥6 months without contraindications 
should be vaccinated annually. However, vaccination to 
prevent influenza is particularly important for persons who are 
at increased risk for severe complications from influenza and 
for influenza-related outpatient, ED, or hospital visits. When 
vaccine supply is limited, vaccination efforts should focus on 
delivering vaccination to the following persons at increased 
risk for medical complications attributable to severe influenza 
who do not have contraindications (no hierarchy is implied 
by order of listing):
• all children aged 6 through 59 months;
• all persons aged ≥50 years;
• adults and children who have chronic pulmonary 
(including asthma) or cardiovascular (except isolated 
hypertension), renal, hepatic, neurologic, hematologic, or 
metabolic disorders (including diabetes mellitus);
• persons who are immunocompromised due to any cause 
(including immunosuppression caused by medications or 
by HIV infection);
• women who are or will be pregnant during the 
influenza season;
• children and adolescents (aged 6 months through 18 years) 
who are receiving aspirin- or salicylate-containing 
medications and who might be at risk for experiencing 
Reye syndrome after influenza virus infection;
• residents of nursing homes and other long-term care 
facilities;
• American Indians/Alaska Natives; and
• persons who are extremely obese (BMI ≥40).
ACIP recommends that LAIV4 not be used during the 
2017–18 season for any population. Providers who elect to 
use it should consider previous guidance for use of LAIV4 for 
high-risk populations (Table 2).
Persons Who Live With or Care for Persons at 
Higher Risk for Influenza-Related Complications
All persons aged ≥6 months without contraindications 
should be vaccinated annually; however, continued emphasis 
should be placed on vaccination of persons who live with 
or care for persons at higher risk for influenza-related 
complications. When vaccine supply is limited, vaccination 
efforts should focus on delivering vaccination to persons at 
higher risk for influenza-related complications listed above, 
as well as these persons:
• health care personnel, including physicians, nurses, and 
other workers in inpatient and outpatient-care settings, 
medical emergency-response workers (e.g., paramedics 
and emergency medical technicians), and employees of 
nursing home and long-term care facilities who have 
contact with patients or residents, and students in these 
professions who will have contact with patients. ACIP 
guidance for immunization of health care personnel has 
been published previously (21);
• household contacts (including children) and caregivers of 
children aged ≤59 months (i.e., aged <5 years) and adults 
aged ≥50 years, particularly contacts of children aged 
<6 months; and
• household contacts (including children) and caregivers of 
persons with medical conditions that put them at high 
risk for severe complications from influenza.
ACIP recommends that LAIV4 not be used during 
the 2017–18 season for any population. Providers who 
elect to use it should consider previous guidance for use 
of LAIV4 for persons who care for or have contact with 
immunocompromised persons (22). Health care personnel and 
persons who are contacts of persons in these groups and who 
are contacts of severely immunocompromised persons (those 
living in a protected environment) may receive any IIV or RIV 
that is otherwise indicated. ACIP and HICPAC have previously 
recommended that health care personnel who receive LAIV 
should avoid providing care for severely immunosuppressed 
patients requiring a protected environment for 7 days after 
vaccination, and that hospital visitors who have received LAIV4 
should avoid contact with severely immunosuppressed persons 
(i.e., persons requiring a protected environment) for 7 days after 
vaccination. However, such persons should not be restricted 
from visiting less severely immunosuppressed patients.
Children Aged 6 Months Through 8 Years
Dose volume for children aged 6 through 35 months: 
Children aged 6 through 35 months may receive one of two 
products at the appropriate volume for each dose needed: 
0.5 mL FluLaval Quadrivalent (containing 15 µg of HA per 
vaccine virus) or 0.25 mL Fluzone Quadrivalent (containing 
7.5 µg of HA per vaccine virus). These are the only two 
influenza vaccine products licensed for this age group. Care 
should be taken to administer the appropriate volume for each 
needed dose of either product. In either instance, the needed 
volume may be administered from an appropriate prefilled 
syringe, a single dose vial, or multidose vial, as supplied by 
the manufacturer. Note, however, that if a 0.5 mL single-use 
vial of Fluzone Quadivalent is used for a child aged 6 through 
35 months, only half the volume should be administered and 
the other half should be discarded.
 Recommendations and Reports
8 
MMWR / August 25, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 2
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Before November 2016, the only influenza vaccine 
formulations licensed for children aged 6 through 35 months 
were the 0.25 mL (containing 7.5 µg of HA per vaccine virus) 
dose formulations of Fluzone and Fluzone Quadrivalent. The 
recommendation for use of a reduced dose volume for children 
in this age group (half that recommended for persons aged 
≥3 years) was based on increased reactogenicity noted among 
children (particularly younger children) following receipt of 
influenza vaccines in trials conducted during the 1970s. This 
increased reactogenicity was primarily observed with whole-
virus inactivated vaccines (23–27). Studies with vaccines 
more similar to currently available split-virus inactivated 
products demonstrated less reactogenicity (27). Recent 
comparative studies of 0.5 mL vs. 0.25 mL doses of IIV3 
conducted among children aged 6 through 23 months (28) 
and 6 through 35 months (29) noted no significant difference 
in reactogenicity at the higher dose. In a randomized trial 
comparing immunogenicity and safety of 0.5 mL FluLaval 
Quadrivalent with 0.25 mL Fluzone Quadrivalent, safety 
and reactogenicity were similar between the two vaccines. In 
a post-hoc analysis, superior immunogenicity was noted for 
the B components of FluLaval Quadrivalent among infants 
aged 6 through 17 months and for unprimed children (those 
who had not previously received at least 2 doses of influenza 
vaccine) aged 6 through 35 months (30).
Number of doses for children aged 6 months through 
8 years: Evidence from several studies indicates that children 
aged 6 months through 8 years require 2 doses of influenza 
vaccine (administered a minimum of 4 weeks apart) during 
their first season of vaccination for optimal protection (31–34). 
Children aged 6 months through 8 years who have previously 
received ≥2 total doses of trivalent or quadrivalent influenza 
vaccine before July 1, 2017 require only 1 dose for 2017–18. 
The 2 doses of influenza vaccine do not have to have been 
administered in the same season or consecutive seasons. 
Children in this age group who have not previously received 
≥2 doses of trivalent or quadrivalent influenza vaccine before 
July 1, 2017 require 2 doses for the 2017–18 season. The 
interval between the 2 doses should be at least 4 weeks (Figure).
Pregnant Women
Because pregnant and postpartum women are at higher risk 
for severe illness and complications from influenza than women 
who are not pregnant, ACIP recommends that all women 
who are pregnant or who might be pregnant in the influenza 
season receive influenza vaccine. Any licensed, recommended, 
and age-appropriate influenza vaccine may be used. Influenza 
vaccine can be administered at any time during pregnancy, 
before and during the influenza season. ACIP recommends 
that LAIV4 not be used in any population for the 2017–18 
season. Providers should note that, as a live virus vaccine, 
LAIV4 should not be used during pregnancy.
Although experience with the use of IIVs is substantial, 
and data from observational studies are available to support 
the safety of these vaccines in pregnancy, data are more 
limited for vaccination during the first trimester (see Safety 
of Influenza Vaccines: Pregnant Women and Neonates in the 
Background Document). Moreover, there is substantially less 
experience with more recently licensed IIV products (e.g., 
quadrivalent, cell culture-based, and adjuvanted vaccines) 
during pregnancy in general. For RIV (available as RIV3 
since the 2013–14 influenza season, and as RIV3 and RIV4 
for 2017–18), data are limited to reports of pregnancies 
occurring incidentally during clinical trials, VAERS reports, 
and pregnancy registry reports. Pregnancy registries and 
surveillance studies exist for some products; information may 
be found in package inserts (35–42), available at https://www.
fda.gov/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/
ucm094045.htm for trivalent vaccines and https://www.fda.
gov/BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/
ucm295057.htm for quadrivalent vaccines.
Older Adults
For persons aged ≥65 years, any age-appropriate IIV 
formulation (standard-dose or high-dose, trivalent or 
quadrivalent, unadjuvanted or adjuvanted) or RIV are 
acceptable options. Fluzone High-Dose (HD-IIV3; Sanofi 
Pasteur, Swiftwater, Pennsylvania) met prespecified criteria 
for superior efficacy to that of SD-IIV3 in a randomized 
trial conducted over two seasons among 31,989 persons aged 
≥65 years, and might provide better protection than SD-IIV3 
for this age group (43–45). In an exploratory analysis of data 
from a single-season randomized trial conducted among 
8,604 adults aged ≥50 years, Flublok Quadrivalent (RIV4; 
Protein Sciences, Meriden, Connecticut) was more efficacious 
than SD-IIV4 (46,47); however, no claim of superiority was 
approved for the package insert (47). Fluad (aIIV3; Seqirus, 
Holly Springs, North Carolina) was more effective against 
laboratory-confirmed influenza than unadjuvanted SD-IIV3 
among adults aged ≥65 years (N = 227) in an analysis from a 
small observational study (48). No preferential recommendation 
is made for any specific vaccine product. Vaccination should not 
be delayed if a specific product is not readily available.
Because of the vulnerability of this population to severe 
influenza illness, hospitalization, and death, efficacy and 
effectiveness of influenza vaccines among older adults is an 
area of active research (see Immunogenicity, Efficacy, and 
Effectiveness of Influenza Vaccines: HD-IIV3, aIIV3, and 
RIV4 for Older Adults in the Background Document). 
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / August 25, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 2 
9
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Recent comparative studies of efficacy/effectiveness against 
laboratory-confirmed influenza outcomes among older adults 
have focused on HD-IIV3 (Fluzone High Dose; Sanofi Pasteur, 
Swiftwater, Pennsylvania) (43,49–51), aIIV3 (Fluad, Seqirus, 
Holly Springs, North Carolina) (48), and RIV4 (Flublok 
Quadrivalent; Protein Sciences, Meriden, Connecticut) (46). 
Characteristics of these studies are summarized (Table 3). In 
each instance, the comparator vaccines have been standard 
dose, inactivated vaccines (SD-IIV3 as the comparator for 
HD-IIV3 and aIIV3; SD-IIV4 as the comparator for RIV4). 
No data are yet available from studies comparing the efficacy or 
effectiveness of HD-IIV3, aIIV3, and RIV4 with one another 
among older adults. This lack of comparative data prevents 
recommending one of these three vaccines over another for 
this population. HD-IIV3 exhibited superior efficacy over 
a comparator standard-dose IIV3 for adults aged ≥65 years 
in a large (N = 31,989), two-season randomized, controlled, 
double-blind trial (43,44), and might provide better protection 
than SD-IIV3s for this age group. Additional data concerning 
relative efficacy of HD-IIV3 for other clinical outcomes, as 
well as cost-effectiveness analyses and observational studies, are 
summarized in the Background Document. In a single-season 
randomized, controlled, double-blind trial comparing RIV4 
with a standard-dose unadjuvanted IIV4 among adults aged 
≥50 years (N = 8,604), RIV4 was more effective; however, 
approval for a claim of superiority was not made as a result of 
this exploratory analysis (46,47). Additional data, including 
discussion of immunogenicity studies, are described in the 
Background Document. Fluad (aIIV3; Seqirus, Holly Springs, 
North Carolina) was more effective against laboratory-
confirmed influenza than unadjuvanted SD-IIV3 among 
adults aged ≥65 years (N = 227) in an analysis from a small 
observational study (48); no data are yet available concerning 
efficacy of Fluad compared with nonadjuvanted IIV3 against 
laboratory-confirmed influenza outcomes from a randomized 
trial in this population. Additional data concerning 
aIIV3, from studies examining immunogenicity and non-
laboratory confirmed influenza outcomes, are discussed in the 
Background Document. ACIP will continue to review data 
concerning the efficacy and effectiveness of these vaccines as 
more information emerges.
Immunocompromised Persons
Immunocompromised states comprise a heterogeneous 
range of conditions. In many instances, limited data are 
available regarding the use of influenza vaccines in the setting 
of specific immunocompromised states. ACIP recommends 
that LAIV4 not be used in any population for the 2017–18 
season; providers considering its use should note that live 
virus vaccines should not be used for persons with most forms 
of altered immunocompetence (52), given the uncertain 
but biologically plausible risk for disease attributable to the 
vaccine virus. In addition to potential safety issues, immune 
response to live or inactivated vaccines might be blunted in 
some clinical situations, such as for persons with congenital 
immune deficiencies, persons receiving cancer chemotherapy, 
and persons receiving immunosuppressive medications. For 
this reason, timing of vaccination might be a consideration 
(e.g., vaccinating during some period either before or after an 
immunocompromising intervention).
The Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) has 
published detailed guidance for the selection and timing of 
vaccines for persons with specific immunocompromising 
conditions, including congenital immune disorders, stem cell 
and solid organ transplant, anatomic and functional asplenia, 
and therapeutic drug-induced immunosuppression, as well as 
for persons with cochlear implants or other conditions leading 
to persistent cerebrospinal fluid-oropharyngeal communication 
(53). ACIP will continue to review accumulating data on use 
of influenza vaccines in these contexts.
Persons with a History of Guillain-Barré Syndrome 
Following Influenza Vaccination
A history of Guillain-Barré Syndrome (GBS) within 6 weeks 
following a previous dose of any type of influenza vaccine is 
considered a precaution to vaccination (Table 2). Persons 
FIGURE. Influenza vaccine dosing algorithm for children aged 
6 months through 8 years — Advisory Committee on Immunization 
Practices, United States, 2017–18 influenza season
Has the child received ≥2 total doses of 
trivalent or quadrivalent infuenza vaccine 
before July 1, 2017? (Doses need not have 
been received during the same season 
or consecutive seasons.) 
1 dose of 2017–18 
infuenza vaccine
Yes
No or don’t know
2 doses of 2017–18 
infuenza vaccine 
(administered 
≥4 weeks apart)
 Recommendations and Reports
10 
MMWR / August 25, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 2
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
TABLE 3. Summary of studies of efficacy/effectiveness of HD-IIV3, aIIV3, and RIV4 compared with unadjuvanted SD-IIVs against laboratory-
confirmed influenza among older adults*
Comparator 
(proprietary 
name)
Study  
design
Ages 
enrolled
No.  
participants
Season(s) 
(predominant 
viruses)†
Location
Primary  
outcome
Main  
efficacy/effectiveness  
findings
HD-IIV3 (Fluzone High-Dose, Sanofi Pasteur)
SD-IIV3 
(Fluzone)§
RCT,  
double-blind
≥65 years
6,107 HD-IIV3 
3,051 SD-IIV3
2009–10 
([H1N1] 
pdm09;  
not contained 
in HD-IIV3 or 
SD-IIV3)
U.S.  
(99 sites)
Culture- and/or 
RT-PCR-confirmed 
ILI, caused by types/
subtypes similar to 
those contained in the 
vaccine
Primary outcome not evaluable due to 
emergence of (H1N1)pdm09 pandemic 
(no cases meeting primary endpoint of 
laboratory-confirmed influenza caused 
by viral types/subtypes similar to those in 
vaccine were observed; all confirmed cases 
were due to [H1N1]pdm09)
SD-IIV3 
(Fluzone)¶
RCT,  
double-blind
≥65 years
15,990 HD-IIV3 
15,993 SD-IIV3
2011–12 
(H3N2) and 
2012–13 
([H3N2], 
mismatch)
U.S., 
Canada 
(126 sites)
Laboratory confirmed 
(culture- and/or RT-
PCR) influenza caused 
by any influenza viral 
types or subtypes, 
in association with 
protocol-defined ILI
Culture- and/or RT-PCR-confirmed 
influenza; any type or subtype, with 
protocol-defined ILI: 
All influenza: RE 24.2% (95% CI = 9.7–36.5) 
Influenza A: RE 24.0% (95% CI = 7.8–37.4) 
Influenza B: RE 25.5% (95% CI =-15.7–52.4)  
 
Culture- and/or RT-PCR-confirmed 
influenza; strains similar to vaccine, with 
protocol-defined ILI: 
All influenza: RE 35.4% (95% CI = 12.5–52.5) 
Influenza A: RE 31.7% (95% CI = 2.9–52.3) 
Influenza B: RE 45.2% (95% CI = -2.2–71.5)  
 
Culture-confirmed influenza; any type or 
subtype, with protocol-defined ILI: 
All influenza: RE 23.1% (95% CI = 7.5–36.2) 
Influenza A: RE 23.4% (95% CI = 6.0–37.6) 
Influenza B: RE 21.7% (95% CI =-23.8–50.8)  
 
Culture-confirmed influenza; strains similar 
to vaccine. with protocol-defined ILI: 
All influenza: RE 31.5% (95% CI = 4.6–51.1) 
Influenza A: RE 27.0% (95% CI = -8.5–51.2) 
Influenza B: RE 41.4% (95% CI = -10.3–69.8)
See table footnotes on the next page. 
who are not at high risk for severe influenza complications 
(see Populations at Higher Risk for Medical Complications 
Attributable to Severe Influenza) and who are known to have 
experienced GBS within 6 weeks of a previous influenza 
vaccination generally should not be vaccinated. As an 
alternative to vaccination, physicians might consider using 
influenza antiviral chemoprophylaxis for these persons (54). 
However, the benefits of influenza vaccination might outweigh 
the risks for certain persons who have a history of GBS and who 
also are at high risk for severe complications from influenza.
Persons with a History of Egg Allergy
As is the case for other vaccines, influenza vaccines contain 
various different components that might cause allergic and 
anaphylactic reactions. Not all such reactions are related to 
egg proteins; however, the possibility of reactions to influenza 
vaccines in egg-allergic persons might be of concern to these 
persons and vaccine providers. Currently available influenza 
vaccines, with the exceptions of RIV3, RIV4 and ccIIV4, are 
prepared by propagation of virus in embryonated eggs. Only 
RIV3 and RIV4 are considered egg-free. For ccIIV4 (Flucelvax 
Quadrivalent; Seqirus, Holly Springs, North Carolina), 
ovalbumin is not directly measured. During manufacture of 
ccIIV4, viruses are propagated in mammalian cells rather than in 
eggs; however, some of the viruses provided to the manufacturer 
are egg-derived, and therefore egg proteins may potentially be 
introduced at the start of the manufacturing process. Once these 
viruses are received by the manufacturer, no eggs are used, and 
dilutions at various steps during the manufacturing process result 
in a theoretical maximum of 5x10-8 µg/0.5 mL dose of total egg 
protein (Seqirus, unpublished data, 2016).
Severe allergic reactions to vaccines, although rare, can occur 
at any time, despite a recipient’s allergy history. Therefore, all 
vaccine providers should be familiar with the office emergency 
plan, and be certified in cardiopulmonary resuscitation 
(52). For persons who report a history of egg allergy, ACIP 
recommends the following (based upon the recipient’s previous 
symptoms after exposure to egg):
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / August 25, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 2 
11
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
TABLE 3. (Continued) Summary of studies of efficacy/effectiveness of HD-IIV3, aIIV3, and RIV4 compared with unadjuvanted SD-IIVs against 
laboratory-confirmed influenza among older adults*
Comparator 
(proprietary 
name)
Study  
design
Ages 
enrolled
No.  
participants
Season(s) 
(predominant 
viruses)†
Location
Primary  
outcome
Main  
efficacy/effectiveness  
findings
RIV4 (Flublok Quadrivalent, Protein Sciences)
SD-IIV4 (Fluarix 
Quadrivalent)**
RCT,  
double-blind
≥50 years
4,303 RIV4 
4,301 IIV4
2014–15  
(H3N2, 
mismatch)
U.S.  
(40 sites)
RT-PCR-confirmed ILI 
caused by any type 
or subtype.
RT-PCR-positive protocol-defined ILI; 
Aged ≥50 years: 
All influenza: RE 30% (95% CI = 10–47) 
Influenza A: RE 36% (95%CI: 14–53) 
Influenza B: RE 4% (95% CI =: -72–46) 
 
RT-PCR-positive protocol-defined ILI; 
Aged 50 through 64 years: 
All influenza: RE 42% (95% CI = 15–61) 
Aged ≥65 years: 
All influenza: RE 17% (95% CI = -20–43)  
 
Culture-positive protocol-defined ILI: 
Aged ≥50 years: 
All influenza: RE 43% (95% CI = 21–59) 
Influenza A: RE 44% (95% CI = 22–61) 
Influenza B: RE 25% (95% CI =-121–75)  
 
Culture-positive protocol-defined ILI: 
Aged 50–64 years: 
All influenza: RE 44% (95% CI = 10–65) 
Aged ≥65 years: 
All influenza: RE 42% (95% CI = 9–65)
aIIV3 (Fluad, Seqirus)
SD-IIV3; 
unvaccinated††
Nonrandomized, 
observational, 
prospective 
test negative 
case-control
≥65 years, 
presenting 
with 
symptoms 
of ILI
165 aIIV3 
62 IIV3 
55 
unvaccinated
2011–12 
(H3N2)
Canada 
(3 health 
authorities)
RT-PCR- confirmed ILI
Effectiveness of aIIV3 vs. unvaccinated: 
58% (95% CI = 5–82) 
 
Effectiveness of IIV3 vs. unvaccinated: 
-2% (95% CI = -139–57)  
 
Relative effectiveness of aIIV3 vs. IIV3: 
63% (95% CI = 4–86)
Abbreviations: aIIV3=trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine, adjuvanted; CI = confidence interval; HD-IIV3 = High-Dose Inactivated Influenza Vaccine, trivalent; 
ILI=influenza-like illness; RE=relative efficacy (compared to active comparator vaccine); RIV4 = Recombinant Influenza Vaccine, quadrivalent; SD-IIV3 = Standard-Dose 
Inactivated Influenza Vaccine, trivalent.
 * Studies conducted among human participants of laboratory-confirmed (by viral culture and/or RT-PCR) influenza outcomes. Modeling and medical record database 
studies are not included in this Table, but are discussed in the Background Document.
 † Information on predominant viruses is from U.S. national surveillance data (CDC, FluView, available at https://www.cdc.gov/flu/weekly/index.htm).
 § Source: DiazGranados CA, Dunning AJ, Jordanov E, Landolfi V, Denis M, Talbot HK. High-dose trivalent influenza vaccine compared to standard dose vaccine in 
elderly adults: safety, immunogenicity and relative efficacy during the 2009–2010 season. Vaccine 2013;31:861–6.
 ¶ Source: DiazGranados CA, Dunning AJ, Kimmel M, et al. Efficacy of high-dose versus standard-dose influenza vaccine in older adults. N Engl J Med 
2014;371:635–45.
 ** Source: Dunkle LM, Izikson R, Patriarca P, et al.; PSC12 Study Team. Efficacy of recombinant influenza vaccine in adults 50 years of age or older. N Engl J Med 
2017;376:2427–36.
 †† Source: Van Buynder PG, Konrad S, Van Buynder JL, et al. The comparative effectiveness of adjuvanted and unadjuvanted trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine 
(TIV) in the elderly. Vaccine 2013;31:6122–8.
• Persons with a history of egg allergy who have experienced 
only urticaria (hives) after exposure to egg should receive 
influenza vaccine. Any licensed and recommended influenza 
vaccine (i.e., any IIV or RIV) that is otherwise appropriate 
for the recipient’s age and health status may be used.
• Persons who report having had reactions to egg involving 
symptoms other than urticaria (hives), such as angioedema, 
respiratory distress, lightheadedness, or recurrent emesis; 
or who required epinephrine or another emergency 
medical intervention, may similarly receive any licensed 
and recommended influenza vaccine (i.e., any IIV or RIV) 
that is otherwise appropriate for the recipient’s age and 
health status. The selected vaccine should be administered 
in an inpatient or outpatient medical setting (including, 
but not necessarily limited to, hospitals, clinics, health 
departments, and physician offices). Vaccine administration 
should be supervised by a health care provider who is able 
to recognize and manage severe allergic conditions.
• A previous severe allergic reaction to influenza vaccine, 
regardless of the component suspected of being responsible 
for the reaction, is a contraindication to future receipt of 
the vaccine.
 Recommendations and Reports
12 
MMWR / August 25, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 2
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
No period of postvaccination observation period is 
recommended specifically for egg-allergic persons. However, 
ACIP recommends that vaccine providers consider observing 
patients for 15 minutes following administration of any vaccine 
to decrease the risk for injury should syncope occur (52).
Persons who are able to eat lightly cooked egg (e.g., scrambled 
egg) without reaction are unlikely to be allergic. Egg-allergic 
persons might tolerate egg in baked products (e.g., bread or 
cake). Tolerance to egg-containing foods does not exclude 
the possibility of egg allergy. Egg allergy can be confirmed 
by a consistent medical history of adverse reactions to eggs 
and egg-containing foods, plus skin and/or blood testing for 
immunoglobulin E directed against egg proteins (55).
Occasional cases of anaphylaxis in egg-allergic persons have 
been reported to VAERS after administration of influenza 
vaccines (56,57). ACIP will continue to review available data 
regarding anaphylaxis cases following influenza vaccines.
Vaccination Issues for Travelers
Travelers who want to reduce the risk for influenza infection 
should consider influenza vaccination, preferably at least 
2 weeks before departure. In particular, persons residing in 
the United States who are at high risk for complications of 
influenza and who were not vaccinated with influenza vaccine 
during the preceding Northern Hemisphere fall or winter 
should consider receiving influenza vaccine before departure 
if they plan to travel:
• to the tropics,
• with organized tourist groups or on cruise ships, or
• to the Southern Hemisphere during the Southern 
Hemisphere influenza season (April–September).
No information is available indicating a benefit to 
revaccinating persons before summer travel who already 
were vaccinated during the preceding fall. In many cases, 
revaccination will not be feasible as Southern Hemisphere 
formulations of influenza vaccine are not generally available in 
the United States. Persons at high risk who receive the previous 
season’s vaccine before travel should receive the current vaccine 
the following fall or winter. Persons at higher risk for influenza 
complications should consult with their health care practitioner 
to discuss the risk for influenza or other travel-related diseases 
before embarking on travel during the summer.
In temperate climate regions of the Northern and Southern 
hemispheres, influenza activity is seasonal, occurring 
approximately from October through May in the Northern 
Hemisphere and April through September in the Southern 
Hemisphere. In the tropics, influenza occurs throughout the 
year. Travelers can be exposed to influenza when travelling to 
an area where influenza is circulating, or when traveling as 
part of large tourist groups (e.g., on cruise ships) that include 
persons from areas of the world in which influenza viruses are 
circulating (58,59). In a survey of Swiss travelers to tropical 
and subtropical countries, among 211 who reported febrile 
illness during or after travelling abroad and who provided 
paired serum samples, 40 demonstrated serologic evidence of 
influenza infection (60). Among 109 travelers returning to 
Australia from travel in Asia who reported acute respiratory 
infection symptoms, four (3.7%) had evidence of influenza A 
infection (evidenced by fourfold rise in antibody titer) (61).
Influenza vaccine formulated for the Southern Hemisphere 
might differ in viral composition from the Northern Hemisphere 
vaccine. However, with the exception of the Southern 
Hemisphere formulation of Fluzone Quadrivalent (IIV4; 
Sanofi Pasteur, Swiftwater, Pennsylvania), Southern Hemisphere 
formulation seasonal influenza vaccines are not licensed in 
the United States, and Southern Hemisphere formulations 
generally are not commercially available in the United States. 
More information on influenza vaccines and travel is available 
at https://www.cdc.gov/flu/travelers/travelersfacts.htm.
Use of Influenza Antiviral Medications
Administration of IIV or RIV to persons receiving influenza 
antiviral medications for treatment or chemoprophylaxis is 
acceptable. ACIP recommends that LAIV4 should not be used 
during the 2017–18 season. If used, providers should note that 
influenza antiviral medications may reduce the effectiveness of 
LAIV4 if given within 48 hours before to 14 days after LAIV4 
(62). Persons who receive influenza antiviral medications 
during this period surrounding receipt of LAIV4 may be 
revaccinated with another appropriate vaccine formulation 
(e.g., IIV or RIV).
Concurrent Administration of Influenza Vaccine 
with Other Vaccines
Data regarding potential interference following simultaneous 
or sequential administration for the many potential combinations 
of vaccines are limited. Therefore, following the ACIP General 
Best Practice Guidelines for Immunization is prudent (52). IIVs 
and RIV may be administered concurrently or sequentially with 
other inactivated vaccines or with live vaccines. LAIV4 is not 
recommended for use in 2017–18. Providers considering its use 
should note that although inactivated or live vaccines can be 
administered simultaneously with LAIV4, after administration 
of a live vaccine (such as LAIV4), at least 4 weeks should pass 
before another live vaccine is administered.
Relatively limited data are available on the concurrent 
administration of influenza vaccines with other vaccines. In a 
study comparing the immunogenicity of IIV and zoster vaccine 
given either concurrently or separated by a 4-week interval to 
adults aged ≥50 years, antibody responses were similar for both 
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / August 25, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 2 
13
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
schedules (63). In some studies, reduced responses have been noted 
to PCV13 (64,65), tetanus antigens (66), and pertussis antigens 
(66) when co-administered with IIV; in most instances the clinical 
significance of this is uncertain. Reassuring safety profiles have 
been noted for simultaneous administration of zoster vaccine (63), 
PCV13 (64,65), PPSV23 (67) and Tdap (66) among adults and of 
Tdap among pregnant women (68). Increased prevalence of local 
and/or systemic adverse reactions have been noted with concurrent 
administration in some of these studies, but these symptoms have 
generally been reported to be mild or moderate. Among children, 
co-administration of IIV and PCV13 was associated with increased 
risk of fever on the day of vaccination and the day following (i.e., 
days 0–1 postvaccination) after vaccination in children aged 
6 through 23 months in a study conducted during the 2011–12 
season (69). Increased risk of febrile seizure in this age group has 
been noted within days 0–1 following coadministration of IIV 
with PCV7, PCV13, or DTaP-containing vaccines during the 
2006–07 through 2010–11 seasons (70), and with PCV13 during 
the 2014–15 season (71). No changes in the recommendations 
for administration of these vaccines were made, and these vaccines 
may be given concomitantly. Surveillance of febrile seizures 
is ongoing through VAERS, and the Vaccine Safety Datalink 
annual influenza vaccine safety surveillance includes monitoring 
for seizures following vaccination.
Concurrent administration to children of LAIV3 with 
MMR and varicella vaccine was not associated with diminished 
immunogenicity to antigens in any of the vaccines in one study (72); 
diminished response to rubella was observed in another examining 
coadministraion of LAIV3 and MMR (73). Administration of 
OPV was not associated with interference when administered 
with LAIV (74). No safety concerns were revealed in these studies.
Influenza Vaccine Composition and 
Available Products
Influenza Vaccine Composition  
for the 2017–18 Season
All influenza vaccines licensed in the United States 
will contain components derived from influenza viruses 
antigenically similar to those recommended by FDA (75). Both 
trivalent and quadrivalent influenza vaccines will be available 
in the United States. The 2017–18 U.S. influenza vaccines 
will contain the following components:
• an A/Michigan/45/2015 (H1N1)pdm09–like virus,
• an A/Hong Kong/4801/2014 (H3N2)–like virus, and
• a B/Brisbane/60/2008–like virus (Victoria lineage).
The 2017–18 U.S. quadrivalent vaccines will contain the same 
three antigens and an additional influenza B virus component, a 
B/Phuket/3073/2013–like virus (Yamagata lineage). Compared 
with 2016–17, the composition for 2017–18 represents a change 
in the influenza A(H1N1)pdm09–like virus.
Vaccine Products for the 2017–18 Season
A variety of influenza vaccine products are licensed and 
available from several different manufacturers (Table 1). For 
many vaccine recipients, more than one type or brand of 
vaccine might be appropriate within approved indications and 
ACIP recommendations. A licensed, age-appropriate influenza 
vaccine product should be used. Not all products are likely 
to be uniformly available in any practice setting or locality. 
Vaccination should not be delayed in order to obtain a specific 
product when an appropriate one is already available. Within 
these guidelines and approved indications, where more than 
one type of vaccine is appropriate and available, no preferential 
recommendation is made for use of any influenza vaccine 
product over another.
Since the publication of the previous season’s guidelines, two 
new influenza vaccine products have been licensed; Afluria 
Quadrivalent (IIV4; Seqirus, Parkville, Victoria, Australia) 
and Flublok Quadrivalent (RIV4; Protein Sciences, Meriden, 
Connecticut). In addition, a labeling change has been approved 
for a previously-licensed product: FluLaval Quadrivalent 
(IIV4, ID Biomedical Corporation of Quebec, Quebec City, 
Quebec, Canada) is now licensed for children aged 6 months 
and older. These are described in the New Influenza Vaccine 
Product Approvals section. New licensures and changes to 
FDA-approved labeling might occur subsequent to this report. 
These recommendations apply to all licensed influenza vaccines 
used within FDA–licensed indications, including changes in 
FDA-approved labeling that might occur after publication of 
this report. As these changes occur, they will be reflected in 
the online version of Table 1, available at https://www.cdc.gov/
flu/protect/vaccine/vaccines.htm.
Dosage, Administration, 
Contraindications, and Precautions
Inactivated Influenza Vaccines (IIVs)
Available products: IIVs comprise multiple products (Table 1). 
Both quadrivalent and trivalent formulations are available.
With one exception, U.S.-licensed IIVs are manufactured 
through propagation of virus in eggs. The exception, the cell 
culture-based vaccine Flucelvax Quadrivalent (ccIIV4; Seqirus, 
Holly Springs, North Carolina), contains vaccine viruses 
propagated in Madin-Darby canine kidney cells. Flucelvax 
Quadrivalent is not considered egg-free, as some of the initial 
 Recommendations and Reports
14 
MMWR / August 25, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 2
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
vaccine viruses provided to the manufacturer by WHO are 
egg-derived. For the 2017–18 season, the influenza A (H1N1) 
and both influenza B components will be egg-derived; the 
influenza A (H3N2) component will be cell-derived.
With one exception, IIVs licensed in the United States 
contain no adjuvant. The exception, Fluad (aIIV3; Seqirus, 
Holly Springs, North Carolina) contains the adjuvant MF59.
There are IIVs that are licensed for persons as young as age 
6 months. However, age indications for the various individual 
IIVs differ (Table 1). Only age-appropriate products should 
be administered. Afluria (IIV3, Seqirus, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia), which was previously recommended for persons 
aged ≥9 years, is now recommended for persons aged ≥5 years. 
Providers should consult package inserts and updated CDC/
ACIP guidance for current information.
Dosage and administration: All IIV preparations contain 
15 µg of HA per vaccine virus strain (45 µg total for IIV3s 
and 60 µg total for IIV4s) per 0.5 mL dose, with two 
exceptions. Fluzone High Dose (HD-IIV3; Sanofi Pasteur, 
Swiftwater, Pennsylvania), an IIV3 licensed for persons 
aged ≥65 years, contains 60 µg of each HA per vaccine virus 
strain (180 µg total) (44). Fluzone Intradermal Quadrivalent 
(intradermal IIV4; Sanofi Pasteur, Swiftwater, Pennsylvania), 
an intradermally administered IIV4 licensed for persons aged 
18 through 64 years, contains 9 µg of each HA per vaccine 
virus strain (36 µg total) (36).
For children aged 6 through 35 months, two IIV products 
are licensed by FDA. The approved dose volumes differ for 
these two products. Children in this age group may receive 
either 1) 0.5 mL of FluLaval Quadrivalent (ID Biomedical 
Corporation of Quebec, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada) (37), 
which contains 15 µg of HA per virus, or 2) 0.25 mL of Fluzone 
Quadrivalent (Sanofi Pasteur, Swiftwater, Pennsylvania) (35), 
which contains 7.5 µg of HA per virus. Care must be taken 
to administer each at the appropriate dose for each product 
in this age group. If prefilled syringes are not available, the 
appropriate dose can be taken from a single-use or multidose 
vial, at the appropriate volume for the given product.
Children aged 36 months through 17 years (for whom only 
intramuscular IIVs are licensed) and adults aged ≥18 years 
who are receiving intramuscular preparations of IIV should 
receive 0.5 mL per dose. If a smaller intramuscular vaccine 
dose (e.g., 0.25 mL) is administered inadvertently to an adult, 
an additional 0.25 mL dose should be administered to provide 
a full dose (0.5 mL). If the error is discovered later (after the 
patient has left the vaccination setting), a full 0.5 mL dose 
should be administered as soon as the patient can return. 
Vaccination with a formulation approved for adult use should 
be counted as a dose if inadvertently administered to a child.
With the exception of Fluzone Intradermal Quadrivalent 
(Sanofi Pasteur, Swiftwater, Pennsylvania), IIVs are 
administered intramuscularly. For adults and older children, 
the deltoid is the preferred site. Infants and younger children 
should be vaccinated in the anterolateral thigh. Additional 
specific guidance regarding site selection and needle length 
for intramuscular administration are provided in the 
ACIP General Best Practice Guidelines for Immunization 
(52). Fluzone Intradermal Quadrivalent is administered 
intradermally, preferably over the deltoid muscle, using the 
included delivery system (36). Two IIVs, Afluria and Afluria 
Quadrivalent (Seqirus, Parkville, Victoria, Australia), are 
licensed for intramuscular administration via jet injector 
(Stratis; Pharmajet, Golden, Colorado) for persons aged 
18 through 64 years (39,76).
Trivalent versus quadrivalent IIVs: Both trivalent and 
quadrivalent IIVs will be available during the 2017–18 season. 
Quadrivalent vaccines contain one virus from each of the two 
influenza B lineages (one B/Victoria virus and one B/Yamagata 
virus), whereas trivalent vaccines contain one influenza B virus 
from one lineage. Quadrivalent vaccines are thus designed to 
provide broader protection against circulating influenza B viruses. 
However, no preference is expressed for either IIV3 or IIV4.
Contraindications and precautions for the use of IIVs: 
Manufacturer package inserts and updated CDC/ACIP 
guidance should be consulted for current information on 
contraindications and precautions for individual vaccine 
products. In general, history of severe allergic reaction to the 
vaccine or any of its components (including egg) is a labeled 
contraindication to the receipt of IIVs (Table 2). However, 
ACIP makes specific recommendations for the use of influenza 
vaccine for persons with egg allergy (see Persons with a History 
of Egg Allergy). Influenza vaccine is not recommended 
for persons with a history of severe allergic reaction to the 
vaccine or to components other than egg. Information about 
vaccine components is located in package inserts from each 
manufacturer. Prophylactic use of antiviral agents is an option 
for preventing influenza among persons who cannot receive 
vaccine (54).
Moderate or severe acute illness with or without fever is a 
general precaution for vaccination (52). GBS within 6 weeks 
following a previous dose of influenza vaccine is considered a 
precaution for use of influenza vaccines (Table 2).
Recombinant Influenza Vaccine (RIVs)
Available products: Two RIV products, Flublok (RIV3) 
and Flublok Quadrivalent (RIV4), are expected to be available 
for the 2017–18 influenza season. RIV3 and RIV4 are 
indicated for persons aged ≥18 years. RIVs are manufactured 
without the use of influenza viruses; therefore, similarly 
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / August 25, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 2 
15
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
to IIVs, no shedding of vaccine virus will occur. These 
vaccines are produced without the use of eggs, and are egg-
free. No preference is expressed for RIVs versus IIVs within 
specified indications.
Dosage and administration: RIVs are administered by 
intramuscular injection. A 0.5 mL dose contains 45 µg of HA 
derived from each vaccine virus (135 µg total for RIV3 and 
180 µg total for RIV4).
Trivalent versus quadrivalent RIV: Both trivalent and 
quadrivalent RIV will be available during the 2017–18 season. 
Quadrivalent vaccines contain one virus from each of the two 
influenza B lineages (one B/Victoria virus and one B/Yamagata 
virus), whereas trivalent vaccines contain one influenza B virus 
from one lineage. Quadrivalent vaccines are thus designed to 
provide broader protection against circulating influenza B viruses. 
However, no preference is expressed for either RIV3 or RIV4.
Contraindications and precautions for use of RIV: RIVs are 
contraindicated in persons who have had a severe allergic reaction 
to any component of the vaccine. Moderate or severe acute illness 
with or without fever is a general precaution for vaccination (52). 
GBS within 6 weeks following a previous dose of influenza vaccine 
is considered a precaution for use of influenza vaccines (Table 2). 
Flublok is not licensed for use in children aged <18 years.
Live Attenuated Influenza Vaccine (LAIV4)
Pending further data, for the 2017–18 season, ACIP 
recommends that LAIV4 not be used because of concerns 
regarding its effectiveness against influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 
viruses in the United States during the 2013–14 and 2015–16 
seasons. As it is a licensed vaccine and might be available 
during 2017–18, the material in this section is provided 
for information.
Dosage and administration: LAIV4 is administered 
intranasally using the supplied prefilled, single-use sprayer 
containing 0.2 mL of vaccine. Approximately 0.1 mL (i.e., half 
of the total sprayer contents) is sprayed into the first nostril 
while the recipient is in the upright position. An attached 
dose-divider clip is removed from the sprayer to administer 
the second half of the dose into the other nostril. If the 
vaccine recipient sneezes immediately after administration, 
the dose should not be repeated. However, if nasal congestion 
is present that might impede delivery of the vaccine to the 
nasopharyngeal mucosa, deferral of administration should be 
considered until resolution of the illness, or another appropriate 
vaccine should be administered instead.
Contraindications and precautions: ACIP recommends 
that LAIV4 not be used during the 2017–18 season. Previously 
issued guidance regarding contraindications and precautions is 
provided for informational purposes only (Table 2).
New Influenza Vaccine Product Approvals
Since the publication of the previous season’s guidance, 
there have been two new product approvals (Afluria 
Quadrivalent and Flublok Quadrivalent) and one change to 
the approved indication for an existing product (expansion of 
the age indication for FluLaval Quadrivalent from ≥3 years 
to ≥6 months).
Afluria Quadrivalent (IIV4)
Afluria Quadrivalent (IIV4, Seqirus, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia) was licensed by FDA in August 2016, for persons 
aged ≥18 years, and was available during the 2016–17 season 
alongside the trivalent formulation of Afluria. In a prelicensure 
study of the safety and immunogenicity of Afluria Quadrivalent 
compared with two formulations of Afluria (each containing one 
of the two influenza B viruses contained in the quadrivalent) 
among persons aged ≥18 years, Afluria Quadrivalent met pre-
specified criteria for immunologic noninferiority for all four 
vaccine viruses, and criteria for immunologic superiority for 
each B virus as compared to the trivalent formulation containing 
the alternate B virus. Some local injection site reactions were 
more common among those who received Afluria Quadrivalent, 
including an imbalance of Grade 3 injection site induration/
swelling at 0.3% in the Afluria Quadrivalent group and 0.06% 
in the pooled Afluria trivalent groups), but rates of these reactions 
were low overall (77,78).
Flublok Quadrivalent (RIV4)
Flublok Quadrivalent (RIV4; Protein Sciences, Meriden, 
Connecticut) was licensed by FDA in October 2016, for persons 
aged ≥18 years. It is anticipated that Flublok Quadrivalent 
will be available for the 2017–18 season, alongside the 
trivalent formulation of Flublok. In a prelicensure analysis of 
immunogenicity data from a subset of participants enrolled 
in a randomized relative efficacy trial comparing Flublok 
Quadrivalent with a licensed comparator standard-dose IIV4 
among persons aged ≥50 years during the 2014–15 season, 
Flublok Quadrivalent met criteria for noninferiority to the 
comparator IIV4 for the A(H3N2) and B/Yamagata antigens, 
but not for the A(H1N1) or B/Victoria antigens (47). In an 
exploratory analysis of data from this trial (N = 8,604), Flublok 
Quadrivalent demonstrated 30% greater relative efficacy (95% 
confidence interval [CI] = 10–47) over IIV4 (46,47). In a 
second prelicensure study, evaluating safety, reactogenicity, 
and immunogenicity compared with a licensed IIV4 among 
persons aged 18 through 49 years during the 2014–15 season, 
Flublok Quadrivalent met criteria for noninferiority to the 
comparator IIV4 for the A(H1N1), A(H3N2) and B/Yamagata 
antigens, but not for the B/Victoria antigen. Safety data from 
 Recommendations and Reports
16 
MMWR / August 25, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 2
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
both studies suggested comparable safety to the comparator 
IIV4 for persons aged ≥18 years (47).
FluLaval Quadrivalent (IIV4)
In November 2016, FDA approved expansion of the 
licensed age indication for FluLaval Quadrivalent (IIV4; ID 
Biomedical Corporation of Quebec, Quebec City, Quebec, 
Canada). Previously licensed for persons aged ≥3 years, 
FluLaval Quadrivalent is now licensed for persons aged 
≥6 months. The approved dose volume is 0.5 mL for all ages. 
This represents a new option for vaccination of children aged 
6 through 35 months, for whom previously the only approved 
influenza vaccine formulation was the 0.25 mL dose volume 
of Fluzone Quadrivalent. With this approval, children in this 
age group may receive either 0.5 mL of FluLaval Quadrivalent 
or 0.25 mL of Fluzone Quadrivalent for each dose needed.
In a prelicensure study comparing the immunogenicity 
and safety of 0.5 mL of FluLaval Quadrivalent to that of 
0.25 mL of Fluzone Quadrivalent among children aged 
6 through 35 months, FluLaval Quadrivalent met criteria for 
immunogenic noninferiority for all four vaccine strains. Safety 
and reactogenicity were similar between the two vaccines (30,79).
Storage and Handling of 
Influenza Vaccines
In all instances, approved manufacturer packaging 
information should be consulted for authoritative guidance 
concerning storage and handling of all influenza vaccines. 
Vaccines should be protected from light and stored at 
recommended temperatures. In general, influenza vaccines 
are recommended to be stored refrigerated between 2° to 8°C 
(36° to 46°F) and should not be frozen. Vaccine that has 
frozen should be discarded. In addition, the cold chain must 
be maintained when LAIV4 is transported. Single-dose vials 
should not be accessed for more than one dose. Multiple-dose 
vials should be returned to recommended storage conditions 
between uses, and once first accessed should not be kept 
beyond the recommended period of time. For information on 
permissible temperature excursions and other departures from 
recommended storage conditions that are not discussed in the 
package labelling, contact the manufacturer. Vaccines should 
not be used after the expiration date on the label.
Additional Sources for Information 
Regarding Influenza and Vaccines
Influenza Surveillance, Prevention, 
and Control
Updated information regarding influenza surveillance, 
detection, prevention, and control is available at https://www.
cdc.gov/flu. U.S surveillance data are updated weekly during 
October–May on FluView (https://www.cdc.gov/flu/weekly). In 
addition, periodic updates regarding influenza are published in 
MMWR (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr). Additional information 
regarding influenza vaccine can be obtained from CDC by 
calling 1-800-232-4636. State and local health departments 
should be consulted about availability of influenza vaccine, access 
to vaccination programs, information related to state or local 
influenza activity, reporting of influenza outbreaks and influenza-
related pediatric deaths, and advice concerning outbreak control.
Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System
The National Childhood Vaccine Injury Act of 1986 requires 
health care providers to report any adverse event listed by the 
vaccine manufacturer as a contraindication to further doses of 
the vaccine, or any adverse event listed in the VAERS Table of 
Reportable Events Following Vaccination (https://vaers.hhs.
gov/docs/VAERS_Table_of_Reportable_Events_Following_
Vaccination.pdf) that occurs within the specified time period 
after vaccination. In addition to mandated reporting, health 
care providers are encouraged to report any clinically significant 
adverse event following vaccination to VAERS. Information 
on how to report a vaccine adverse event is available at https://
vaers.hhs.gov/index.html. Additional information on VAERS 
and vaccine safety is available by emailing info@vaers.org or by 
calling 1-800-822-7967.
National Vaccine Injury 
Compensation Program
The National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program 
(VICP), established by the National Childhood Vaccine Injury 
Act of 1986, as amended, provides a mechanism through which 
compensation can be paid on behalf of a person determined 
to have been injured or to have died as a result of receiving a 
vaccine covered by VICP
. The Vaccine Injury Table (https://
www.hrsa.gov/vaccinecompensation/vaccineinjurytable.pdf) 
lists the vaccines covered by VICP and the associated injuries 
and conditions (including death) that might receive a legal 
presumption of causation. If the injury or condition is not on 
the Table, or does not occur within the specified time period 
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / August 25, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 2 
17
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
on the Table, persons must prove that the vaccine caused the 
injury or condition. Eligibility for compensation is not affected 
by whether a covered vaccine is used off-label or inconsistently 
with recommendations.
To be eligible for compensation under VICP
, a claim must 
be filed within 3 years after the first symptom of the vaccine 
injury. Death claims must be filed within 2 years of the vaccine-
related death and not more than 4 years after the start of the 
first symptom of the vaccine-related injury from which the 
death occurred. When a new vaccine is covered by VICP or 
when a new injury/condition is added to the Table, claims 
that do not meet the general filing guidelines must be filed 
within 2 years from the date the vaccine or injury/condition 
is added to the Table for injuries or deaths that occurred up 
to 8 years before the Table change (80). Persons of all ages 
who receive a VICP-covered vaccine might be eligible to file 
a claim. Additional information is available at https://www.
hrsa.gov/vaccinecompensation or by calling 1-800-338-2382.
Additional Resources
ACIP Statements
• General Best Practice Guidelines for Immunization: Best 
Practices Guidance of the Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices (ACIP). https://www.cdc.gov/
vaccines/hcp/acip-recs/general-recs/index.html
• Immunization of Healthcare Personnel: Recommendations 
of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices 
(ACIP), 2011. MMWR Recomm Rep 2011;60(No. RR-7). 
https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/
rr6007a1.htm
• Recommended Immunization Schedules for Adults, 2017: 
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules/hcp/adult.html
• Recommended Immunization Schedule for Children and 
Adolescents Aged 18 years or Younger, 2017: https://www.
cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules/hcp/child-adolescent.html
Vaccine Information Sheets (VISs)
• VIS for IIV and RIV: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/
vis/vis-statements/flu.pdf
• VIS for LAIV: https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/vis/vis-
statements/flulive.pdf
Influenza Vaccine Package Inserts
• Trivalent Vaccines: https://www.fda.gov/
BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/
ucm094045.htm
• Quadrivalent Vaccines: https://www.fda.gov/
BiologicsBloodVaccines/Vaccines/ApprovedProducts/
ucm295057.htm
CDC Influenza Antiviral Guidance
• Antiviral Drugs: Information for Healthcare Professionals: 
https://www.cdc.gov/flu/professionals/antivirals/index.htm
American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) Guidance
• AAP Recommendations for Prevention and Control of 
Influenza in Children: https://redbook.solutions.aap.org/
ss/influenza-resources.aspx
Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) 
Guidance
• 2013 IDSA Clinical Practice Guideline for Vaccination 
of the Immunocompromised Host: https://academic.
o u p . c o m / c i d / a r t i c l e / 5 8 / 3 / e 4 4 / 3 3 6 5 3 7 / 
2013–IDSA-Clinical-Practice-Guideline-for
References
 1. Barker WH. Excess pneumonia and influenza associated hospitalization 
during influenza epidemics in the United States, 1970–78. Am J Public 
Health 1986;76:761–5. https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.76.7.761
 2. Barker WH, Mullooly JP
. Impact of epidemic type A influenza in a 
defined adult population. Am J Epidemiol 1980;112:798–811. https://
doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a113052
 3. Poehling KA, Edwards KM, Weinberg GA, et al.; New Vaccine 
Surveillance Network. The underrecognized burden of influenza 
in young children. N Engl J Med 2006;355:31–40. https://doi.
org/10.1056/NEJMoa054869
 4. Fowlkes A, Steffens A, Temte J, et al.; Influenza Incidence Surveillance 
Project Working Group. Incidence of medically attended influenza during 
pandemic and post-pandemic seasons through the Influenza Incidence 
Surveillance Project, 2009-13. Lancet Respir Med 2015;3:709–18. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-2600(15)00278-7
 5. Siston AM, Rasmussen SA, Honein MA, et al.; Pandemic H1N1 
Influenza in Pregnancy Working Group. Pandemic 2009 influenza 
A(H1N1) virus illness among pregnant women in the United States. 
JAMA 2010;303:1517–25. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2010.479
 6. Mullooly JP
, Bridges CB, Thompson WW, et al.; Vaccine Safety Datalink 
Adult Working Group. Influenza- and RSV-associated hospitalizations 
among adults. Vaccine 2007;25:846–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
vaccine.2006.09.041
 7. Fiore AE, Uyeki TM, Broder K, et al. Prevention and control of 
influenza with vaccines: recommendations of the Advisory Committee 
on Immunization Practices (ACIP), 2010. MMWR Recomm Rep 
2010;59(No. RR-8):1–62.
 8. Grohskopf LA, Sokolow LZ, Broder KR, et al. Prevention and 
control of seasonal influenza with vaccines. MMWR Recomm Rep 
2016;65(No. RR-5).
 9. Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). Summary 
report: June 22–23, 2016 (meeting minutes). Atlanta, GA: US 
Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2016.
 
10. CDC. The flu season. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human 
Services, CDC; 2015. https://www.cdc.gov/flu/about/season/flu-season.htm
 
11. Kissling E, Valenciano M, Larrauri A, et al. Low and decreasing vaccine 
effectiveness against influenza A(H3) in 2011/12 among vaccination 
target groups in Europe: results from the I-MOVE multicentre case-
control study. Euro Surveill 2013;18(5):pii=20390.
 
12. Belongia EA, Sundaram ME, McClure DL, Meece JK, Ferdinands J, 
VanWormer JJ. Waning vaccine protection against influenza A (H3N2) 
illness in children and older adults during a single season. Vaccine 
2015;33:246–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2014.06.052
 Recommendations and Reports
18 
MMWR / August 25, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 2
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
 
13. Castilla J, Martínez-Baz I, Martínez-Artola V, et al.; Primary Health 
Care Sentinel Network. Network for Influenza Surveillance in 
Hospitals of Navarre. Decline in influenza vaccine effectiveness with 
time after vaccination, Navarre, Spain, season 2011/12. Euro Surveill 
2013;18(5):pii=20388.
 
14. Pebody R, Andrews N, McMenamin J, et al. Vaccine effectiveness of 
2011/12 trivalent seasonal influenza vaccine in preventing laboratory-
confirmed influenza in primary care in the United Kingdom: evidence of 
waning intra-seasonal protection. Euro Surveill 2013;18(5):pii=20389.
 
15. Ochiai H, Shibata M, Kamimura K, Niwayama S. Evaluation of the 
efficacy of split-product trivalent A(H1N1), A(H3N2), and B influenza 
vaccines: reactogenicity, immunogenicity and persistence of antibodies 
following two doses of vaccines. Microbiol Immunol 1986;30:1141–9. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1348-0421.1986.tb03043.x
 
16. Künzel W, Glathe H, Engelmann H, Van Hoecke C. Kinetics of humoral 
antibody response to trivalent inactivated split influenza vaccine in 
subjects previously vaccinated or vaccinated for the first time. Vaccine 
1996;14:1108–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/0264-410X(96)00061-8
17. Song JY, Cheong HJ, Hwang IS, et al. Long-term immunogenicity 
of influenza vaccine among the elderly: risk factors for poor immune 
response and persistence. Vaccine 2010;28:3929–35. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2010.03.067
18. Petrie JG, Ohmit SE, Johnson E, Truscon R, Monto AS. Persistence of 
antibodies to influenza hemagglutinin and neuraminidase following one 
or two years of influenza vaccination. J Infect Dis 2015;212:1914–22. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jiv313
 
19. Skowronski DM, Tweed SA, De Serres G. Rapid decline of influenza 
vaccine-induced antibody in the elderly: is it real, or is it relevant? 
J Infect Dis 2008;197:490–502. https://doi.org/10.1086/524146
 
20. Ferdinands JM, Fry AM, Reynolds S, et al. Intraseason waning of 
influenza vaccine protection: Evidence from the US Influenza Vaccine 
Effectiveness Network, 2011–12 through 2014–15. Clin Infect Dis 
2017;64:544–50.
 
21. Shefer A, Atkinson W, Friedman C, et al. Immunization of health-care 
personnel: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization 
Practices (ACIP). MMWR Recomm Rep 2011;60(No. RR-7).
 
22. Pearson ML, Bridges CB, Harper SA. Influenza vaccination of health-
care personnel: recommendations of the Healthcare Infection Control 
Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC) and the Advisory Committee on 
Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR Recomm Rep 2006;55(No. RR-2).
 
23. Wright PF, Thompson J, Vaughn WK, Folland DS, Sell SH, Karzon DT. 
Trials of influenza A/New Jersey/76 virus vaccine in normal children: 
an overview of age-related antigenicity and reactogenicity. J Infect 
Dis 1977;136(Suppl):S731–41. https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/136.
Supplement_3.S731
 
24. Wright PF, Dolin R, La Montagne JR. Summary of clinical trials 
of influenza vaccines–II. J Infect Dis 1976;134:633–8. https://doi.
org/10.1093/infdis/134.6.633
 
25. Wright PF, Sell SH, Thompson J, Karzon DT. Clinical reactions and 
serologic response following inactivated monovalent influenza type B 
vaccine in young children and infants. J Pediatr 1976;88:31–5. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0022-3476(76)80722-6
 
26. Gross PA. Reactogenicity and immunogenicity of bivalent influenza 
vaccine in one- and two-dose trials in children: a summary. J Infect 
Dis 1977;136(Suppl):S616–25. https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/136.
Supplement_3.S616
 
27. Bernstein DI, Zahradnik JM, DeAngelis CJ, Cherry JD. Clinical 
reactions and serologic responses after vaccination with whole-virus or 
split-virus influenza vaccines in children aged 6 to 36 months. Pediatrics 
1982;69:404–8.
 
28. Skowronski DM, Hottes TS, Chong M, et al. Randomized controlled 
trial of dose response to influenza vaccine in children aged 6 to 23 
months. Pediatrics 2011;128:e276–89. https://doi.org/10.1542/
peds.2010-2777
 
29. Halasa NB, Gerber MA, Berry AA, et al. Safety and immunogenicity of 
full-dose trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine (TIV) compared with half-
dose TIV administered to children 6 through 35 months of age. J Pediatric 
Infect Dis Soc 2015;4:214–24. https://doi.org/10.1093/jpids/piu061
 
30. Jain VK, Domachowske JB, Wang L, et al. Time to change dosing of 
inactivated quadrivalent influenza vaccine in young children: evidence 
from a Phase III, randomized, controlled trial. J Pediatric Infect Dis Soc 
2017;6:9–19.
 
31. Neuzil KM, Jackson LA, Nelson J, et al. Immunogenicity and 
reactogenicity of 1 versus 2 doses of trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine 
in vaccine-naive 5-8-year-old children. J Infect Dis 2006;194:1032–9. 
https://doi.org/10.1086/507309
 
32. Allison MA, Daley MF
, Crane LA, et al. Influenza vaccine effectiveness 
in healthy 6- to 21-month-old children during the 2003-2004 season. 
J Pediatr 2006;149:755–62. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpeds.2006.06.036
 
33. Ritzwoller DP
, Bridges CB, Shetterly S, Yamasaki K, Kolczak M, France 
EK. Effectiveness of the 2003-2004 influenza vaccine among children 6 
months to 8 years of age, with 1 vs 2 doses. Pediatrics 2005;116:153–9. 
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2005-0049
 
34. Eisenberg KW, Szilagyi PG, Fairbrother G, et al.; New Vaccine 
Surveillance Network. Vaccine effectiveness against laboratory-confirmed 
influenza in children 6 to 59 months of age during the 2003–2004 and 
2004-2005 influenza seasons. Pediatrics 2008;122:911–9. https://doi.
org/10.1542/peds.2007-3304
 
35. Sanofi Pasteur. Fluzone Quadrivalent [package insert]. Swiftwater, PA: 
Sanofi Pasteur; 2017.
 
36. Sanofi Pasteur. Fluzone Intradermal Quadrivalent [package insert]. 
Swiftwater, PA: Sanofi Pasteur; 2017.
 
37. ID Biomedical Corporation of Quebec. Flulaval Quadrivalent [package 
insert]. Quebec City, Canada: IB Biomedical Corporation of Quebec; 2017.
 
38. GlaxoSmithKline. Fluarix Quadrivalent [package insert]. Research 
Triangle Park, NC: GlaxoSmithKline; 2017.
 
39. Seqirus. Afluria Quadrivalent [package insert]. Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia: Seqirus; 2017.
 
40. Seqirus. Flucelvax Quadrivalent [package insert]. Holly Springs, NC: 
Seqirus; 2017
 
41. Protein Sciences. Flublok [package insert]. Meriden, CT: Protein 
Sciences; 2017.
 
42. Protein Sciences. Flublok Quadrivalent [package insert]. Meriden, CT: 
Protein Sciences; 2017.
 
43. DiazGranados CA, Dunning AJ, Kimmel M, et al. Efficacy of high-dose 
versus standard-dose influenza vaccine in older adults. N Engl J Med 
2014;371:635–45. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1315727
 
44. Sanofi Pasteur. Fluzone High-Dose [package insert]. Swiftwater, PA: 
Sanofi Pasteur; 2017.
 
45. Food and Drug Administration. October 29, 2014 clinical review—
Fluzone High-Dose. Silver Spring, MD: US Department of Health and 
Human Services, Food and Drug Administration; 2014.
 
46. Dunkle LM, Izikson R, Patriarca P, et al.; PSC12 Study Team. 
Efficacy of recombinant influenza vaccine in adults 50 years of age or 
older. N Engl J Med 2017;376:2427–36. https://doi.org/10.1056/
NEJMoa1608862
 
47. Food and Drug Administration. Summary basis for regulatory action—
Flublok Quadrivalent. Silver Spring, MD: US Department of Health 
and Human Services, Food and Drug Administration; 2016.
 
48. Van Buynder PG, Konrad S, Van Buynder JL, et al. The comparative 
effectiveness of adjuvanted and unadjuvanted trivalent inactivated 
influenza vaccine (TIV) in the elderly. Vaccine 2013;31:6122–8. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2013.07.059
 
49. DiazGranados CA, Robertson CA, Talbot HK, Landolfi V, Dunning AJ, 
Greenberg DP
. Prevention of serious events in adults 65 years of age or 
older: A comparison between high-dose and standard-dose inactivated 
influenza vaccines. Vaccine 2015;33:4988–93. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
vaccine.2015.07.006
 Recommendations and Reports
MMWR / August 25, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 2 
19
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
 
50. DiazGranados CA, Dunning AJ, Robertson CA, Talbot HK, Landolfi V, 
Greenberg DP
. Efficacy and immunogenicity of high-dose influenza 
vaccine in older adults by age, comorbidities, and frailty. Vaccine 
2015;33:4565–71. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2015.07.003
 
51. DiazGranados CA, Dunning AJ, Jordanov E, Landolfi V, Denis M, 
Talbot HK. High-dose trivalent influenza vaccine compared to standard 
dose vaccine in elderly adults: safety, immunogenicity and relative efficacy 
during the 2009-2010 season. Vaccine 2013;31:861–6. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2012.12.013
 
52. Kroger AT, Duchin J, Vázquez M. Best practices guidance of the Advisory 
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). Atlanta, GA: US 
Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2017. https://www.
cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/acip-recs/general-recs/downloads/general-recs.pdf
 
53. Rubin LG, Levin MJ, Ljungman P
, et al.; Infectious Diseases Society of 
America. 2013 IDSA clinical practice guideline for vaccination of the 
immunocompromised host. Clin Infect Dis 2014;58:309–18. https://
doi.org/10.1093/cid/cit816
 
54. CDC. Antiviral drugs: information for healthcare professionals. Atlanta, 
GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, CDC. https://
www.cdc.gov/flu/professionals/antivirals/index.htm
 
55. Erlewyn-Lajeunesse M, Brathwaite N, Lucas JS, Warner JO. 
Recommendations for the administration of influenza vaccine in children 
allergic to egg. BMJ 2009;339(sep15 3):b3680. https://doi.org/10.1136/
bmj.b3680
 
56. CDC. Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices summary report: 
June 20–21, 2012 (meeting minutes). Atlanta, GA: US Department of 
Health and Human Services, CDC; 2012.
 
57. CDC. Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices summary report: 
June 19–20, 2013 (meeting minutes). Atlanta, GA: US Department of 
Health and Human Services, CDC; 2013.
 
58. Miller JM, Tam TW, Maloney S, et al. Cruise ships: high-risk passengers 
and the global spread of new influenza viruses. Clin Infect Dis 
2000;31:433–8. https://doi.org/10.1086/313974
 
59. Uyeki TM, Zane SB, Bodnar UR, et al.; Alaska/Yukon Territory 
Respiratory Outbreak Investigation Team. Large summertime influenza 
A outbreak among tourists in Alaska and the Yukon Territory. Clin Infect 
Dis 2003;36:1095–102. https://doi.org/10.1086/374053
 
60. Mutsch M, Tavernini M, Marx A, et al. Influenza virus infection 
in travelers to tropical and subtropical countries. Clin Infect Dis 
2005;40:1282–7. https://doi.org/10.1086/429243
 
61. Ratnam I, Black J, Leder K, et al. Incidence and risk factors for 
acute respiratory illnesses and influenza virus infections in Australian 
travellers to Asia. J Clin Virol 2013;57:54–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jcv.2013.01.008
 
62. MedImmune. FluMist Quadrivalent [package insert]. Gaithersburg, 
MD: MedImmune; 2016.
 
63. Kerzner B, Murray AV, Cheng E, et al. Safety and immunogenicity profile 
of the concomitant administration of ZOSTAVAX and inactivated influenza 
vaccine in adults aged 50 and older. J Am Geriatr Soc 2007;55:1499–507. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1532-5415.2007.01397.x
 
64. Frenck RW Jr, Gurtman A, Rubino J, et al. Randomized, controlled trial of 
a 13-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine administered concomitantly 
with an influenza vaccine in healthy adults. Clin Vaccine Immunol 
2012;19:1296–303. https://doi.org/10.1128/CVI.00176-12
 
65. Schwarz TF, Flamaing J, Rümke HC, et al. A randomized, double-blind 
trial to evaluate immunogenicity and safety of 13-valent pneumococcal 
conjugate vaccine given concomitantly with trivalent influenza vaccine 
in adults aged ≥65 years. Vaccine 2011;29:5195–202. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.05.031
 
66. McNeil SA, Noya F, Dionne M, et al. Comparison of the safety and 
immunogenicity of concomitant and sequential administration of an 
adult formulation tetanus and diphtheria toxoids adsorbed combined 
with acellular pertussis (Tdap) vaccine and trivalent inactivated influenza 
vaccine in adults. Vaccine 2007;25:3464–74. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
vaccine.2006.12.047
 
67. Song JY, Cheong HJ, Tsai TF, et al. Immunogenicity and safety of 
concomitant MF59-adjuvanted influenza vaccine and 23-valent 
pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine administration in older adults. 
Vaccine 2015;33:4647–52. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2015.05.003
 
68. Sukumaran L, McCarthy NL, Kharbanda EO, et al. Safety of tetanus 
toxoid, reduced diphtheria toxoid, and acellular pertussis and influenza 
vaccinations in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 2015;126:1069–74. https://
doi.org/10.1097/AOG.0000000000001066
 
69. Stockwell MS, Broder K, LaRussa P
, et al. Risk of fever after pediatric 
trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine and 13-valent pneumococcal 
conjugate vaccine. JAMA Pediatr 2014;168:211–9.
 
70. Duffy J, Weintraub W, Hambidge SJ, et al; Vaccine Safety Datalink. 
Febrile Seizure Risk after Vaccination in Children 6 to 23 Months. 
Pediatrics 2016; 138: e20160320.
 
71. Li R, Stewart B, McNeil MM, et al. Post licensure surveillance of 
influenza vaccines in the Vaccine Safety Datalink in the 2013–2014 and 
2014–2015 seasons. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 2016;8:928–34.
 
72. Nolan T, Bernstein DI, Block SL, et al.; LAIV Study Group. Safety 
and immunogenicity of concurrent administration of live attenuated 
influenza vaccine with measles-mumps-rubella and varicella vaccines to 
infants 12 to 15 months of age. Pediatrics 2008;121:508–16. https://
doi.org/10.1542/peds.2007-1064
 
73. Lum LC, Borja-Tabora CF, Breiman RF, et al. Influenza vaccine 
concurrently administered with a combination measles, mumps, and 
rubella vaccine to young children. Vaccine 2010;28:1566–74. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2009.11.054
 
74. Breiman RF, Brooks WA, Goswami D, et al. A multinational, 
randomized, placebo-controlled trial to assess the immunogenicity, 
safety, and tolerability of live attenuated influenza vaccine coadministered 
with oral poliovirus vaccine in healthy young children. Vaccine 
2009;27:5472–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2009.07.002
 
75. Food and Drug Administration. Summary minutes: 145th Vaccines and 
Related Biological Products Advisory Committee, March 9, 2017. Silver 
Spring, MD: US Department of Health and Human Services, Food and 
Drug Administration; 2017.
 
76. Seqirus. Afluria [package insert]. Parkville, Victoria, Australia: Seqirus; 2017.
 
77. Food and Drug Administration. Summary basis for regulatory action–
Afluria Quadrivalent. Silver Spring, MD: US Department of Health 
and Human Services, Food and Drug Administration; 2016.
 
78. Treanor JT, Albano FR, Sawlwin DC, et al. Immunogenicity and safety of 
a quadrivalent inactivated influenza vaccine compared with two trivalent 
inactivated influenza vaccines containing alternate B strains in adults: A 
phase 3, randomized noninferiority study. Vaccine 2017;35:1856–64. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2017.02.066
 
79. Food and Drug Administration. Clinical review. November 17, 2016–
FluLaval Quadrivalent. US Department of Health and Human Services, 
Food and Drug Administration; 2016.
 
80. Health Resources and Services Administration. What you need to know 
about the National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program (VICP). 
Washington, DC: US Department of Health and Human Services. 
Health Resources and Services Administration; 2017.
 Recommendations and Reports
20 
MMWR / August 25, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 2
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
ACIP Members, July 1, 2016–June 30, 2017
Chair: Nancy Bennett, MD, University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, New York.
Executive Secretary: Amanda Cohn, MD, National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, CDC, Atlanta, Georgia.
Members: Robert L. Atmar, MD, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas; Edward Belongia, MD, Marshfield Clinic Research Foundation, Marshfield, 
Wisconsin; Echezona Ezeanolue, MD, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, Nevada; Paul Hunter, MD, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public 
Health, Milwaukee, Wisconsin; Allison Kempe, MD, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Denver, Colorado; Grace M. Lee, MD, Harvard Pilgrim 
Health Care Institute and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts; Kelly Moore, MD, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee; 
Cynthia Pellegrini, March of Dimes, District of Columbia; Arthur L. Reingold, MD, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California; Laura E. Riley, 
MD, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts; José R. Romero, MD, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas; David 
Stephens, MD, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia; Peter Szilagyi, MD, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California; 
Emmanuel (Chip) Walter, MD, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina.
Ex Officio Members: Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, Mary Beth Hance, Baltimore, Maryland; Department of Defense, Eric Deussing, MD, 
Atlanta, Georgia; Department of Veterans Affairs, Jane A. Kim, MD, Durham, North Carolina; Food and Drug Administration, Wellington Sun, MD, 
Rockville, Maryland; Health Resources and Services Administration, Narayan Nair, MD, Rockville, Maryland; Indian Health Service, Amy Groom, MPH, 
Albuquerque, New Mexico; National Vaccine Program Office, Bruce Gellin, MD, District of Columbia; National Institutes of Health, Richard L. Gorman, 
MD, Bethesda, Maryland.
Liaison Representatives: American Academy of Family Physicians (AAFP), Margot Savoy, MD, Wilmington, Delaware; American Academy of Pediatrics 
(AAP), Committee on Infectious Diseases (COID), Carrie L. Byington, MD, Salt Lake City, Utah; American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP); Red Book Editor, 
David Kimberlin, MD, Birmingham, Alabama; American Academy of Physician Assistants (AAPA), Marie-Michèle Léger, MPH, Alexandria, Virginia; American 
College Health Association (ACHA), Susan Even, MD, Columbia, Missouri; American College of Nurse Midwives (ACNM), Carol E. Hayes, MN, MPH, 
Atlanta, Georgia; American College of Nurse Midwives (ACNM), (alternate) Pamela M. Meharry, PhD, Middletown, Connecticut; American College of 
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG), Kevin A. Ault, MD, Kansas City, Kansas; American College of Physicians (ACP), Sandra Adamson Fryhofer, MD, 
Atlanta, Georgia; American College of Physicians (ACP) (alternate), Gregory A. Poland, MD, Rochester, Minnesota; American Geriatrics Society (AGS), 
Kenneth Schmader, MD, Durham, North Carolina; America’s Health Insurance Plans (AHIP), Mark J. Netoskie, MD, MBA, Houston, Texas; American 
Medical Association (AMA), Sandra Adamson Fryhofer, MD, Atlanta, Georgia; American Nurses Association (ANA), Charles (Chad) Rittle, DNP
, Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania; American Osteopathic Association (AOA), Stanley E. Grogg, DO, Tulsa, Oklahoma; American Pharmacists Association (APhA), Stephan L. 
Foster, PharmD, Memphis, Tennessee; Association of Immunization Managers (AIM), Christine Finley, MPH, Burlington, Vermont; Association for Prevention 
Teaching and Research (APTR), W. Paul McKinney, MD, Louisville, Kentucky; Association of State and Territorial Health Officials (ASTHO); Terry L. Dwelle, 
MD, Bismarck, North Dakota; Biotechnology Industry Organization (BIO) Phyllis A. Arthur, MBA, District of Columbia; Council of State and Territorial 
Epidemiologists (CSTE), Christine Hahn, MD, Boise, Idaho; Canadian National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI), Ian MacDonald Gemmill, 
MD, Kingston, Ontario, Canada; Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA), Kathleen M. Neuzil, MD, Baltimore, Maryland; Infectious Diseases Society 
of America (IDSA) (alternate), Carol J. Baker, MD, Houston, Texas; National Association of County and City Health Officials (NACCHO), Matthew Zahn, 
MD, Santa Ana, California; National Association of County and City Health Officials (NACCHO), (alternate) Jeffrey Duchin, MD, Seattle, Washington; 
National Association of Pediatric Nurse Practitioners (NAPNAP), Patricia A. Stinchfield, MS, St. Paul, Minnesota; National Foundation for Infectious Diseases 
(NFID), William Schaffner, MD, Nashville, Tennessee; National Immunization Council and Child Health Program, Mexico, Ignacio Villaseñor Ruiz, MD, 
Mexico City, Federal District, Mexico; National Medical Association (NMA), Patricia Whitley-Williams, MD, New Brunswick, New Jersey; National Vaccine 
Advisory Committee (NVAC), Kimberly Thompson, ScD, Orlando, Florida; Pediatric Infectious Diseases Society (PIDS), Sean O’Leary, MD, Denver, 
Colorado; Pediatric Infectious Diseases Society (PIDS) (alternate), Mark H. Sawyer, MD, San Diego, California; Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers 
of America (PhRMA); David R. Johnson, MD, Swiftwater, Pennsylvania; Society for Adolescent Health and Medicine (SAHM), Amy B. Middleman, MD, 
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America (SHEA), David Weber, MD, Chapel Hill, North Carolina.
ACIP Influenza Vaccine Work Group
Chair: Emmanuel (Chip) Walter, MD, Durham, North Carolina.
Members: Kevin Ault, MD, Kansas, City, Kansas; Edward Belongia, MD, Marshfield, Wisconsin; Henry Bernstein, DO, Hempstead, New York; Karin Bok, 
MS, Bethesda, Maryland; PhD; Jeff Duchin, MD, Seattle, Washington; David Cho, PhD, Silver Spring, Maryland; Janet Englund, MD, Seattle, Washington; 
Sandra Fryhofer, MD, Atlanta, Georgia; Bruce Gellin, MD, District of Columbia; Ruth Karron, MD, Baltimore, Maryland; Wendy Keitel, MD, Houston, 
Texas; Lucia Lee, MD, Silver Spring, Maryland; Marie‐Michèle Léger, MPH, Alexandria, Virginia; Susan Lett, MD, Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts; Jamie 
Loehr, MD, Ithaca, New York; Flor M. Munoz, MD, Houston, Texas; Kathleen M. Neuzil, MD, Baltimore, Maryland; Cynthia Nolletti, MD, Silver Spring, 
Maryland; Roshan Ramanathan, MD, Silver Spring, Maryland; Chris Roberts, PhD, Rockville, Maryland; William Schaffner, MD, Nashville, Tennessee; 
Robert Schechter, MD, Richmond, California; Kenneth Schmader, MD, Durham, North Carolina; Tamara Sheffield, MD, Salt Lake City, Utah; Patricia 
Stinchfield, MS, St. Paul, Minnesota; Rob Stirling, MD, MSc, MHSc, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Peter Szilagyi, MD, Los Angeles, California; Wendy Vaudry, 
MD, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada; Matthew Zahn, MD, Santa Ana, California.
  ISSN: 1057-5987 (Print)
The Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) Series is prepared by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and is available free of 
charge in electronic format. To receive an electronic copy each week, visit MMWR’s free subscription page at https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/mmwrsubscribe.html. 
Paper copy subscriptions are available through the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402; telephone 
202-512-1800.
Readers who have difficulty accessing this PDF file may access the HTML file at https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/66/rr/rr6602a1.htm?s_
cid=rr6602a1_w. Address all inquiries about the MMWR Series, including material to be considered for publication, to Executive Editor, MMWR Series, 
Mailstop E-90, CDC, 1600 Clifton Rd., N.E., Atlanta, GA 30329-4027 or to mmwrq@cdc.gov. 
All material in the MMWR Series is in the public domain and may be used and reprinted without permission; citation as to source, however, is appreciated.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply endorsement of these organizations 
or their programs by CDC or the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content of these sites. URL addresses 
listed in MMWR were current as of the date of publication.
