 JCB
JCB: Article
T H E  J O U R N A L  O F  C E L L  B I O L O G Y
2179
The Rockefeller University Press 
J. Cell Biol. Vol. 216 No. 7 2179–2199
https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201606065
Introduction
Neurons are highly polarized cells and typically contain multi-
ple dendrites and a single long axon, crucial for conveying input 
and output electrical signals, respectively. Intrinsic mechanisms 
governing neuronal polarity have been extensively investigated 
(Namba et al., 2015; Bentley and Banker, 2016). However, a 
neuron cannot survive and properly function alone. Besides 
chemical and electrical communications, it physically interacts 
with its microenvironment constantly. The interaction depends 
on the forces acting on and exerted by the neuron, their mechan-
ical properties, and coupling. Although it is widely accepted 
that mechanical forces are involved in normal neural develop-
ment, such as neurogenesis, neuron–glia interactions, neuronal 
migration, axonal outgrowth, growth cone motility, synapse and 
neural circuit formation, and brain folding (Van Essen, 1997; 
Gilmour et al., 2004; Engler et al., 2006; Lu et al., 2006; Elkin 
et al., 2007; Franze et al., 2009; Betz et al., 2011; Amack and 
Manning, 2012; Cámpas et al., 2014), the underlying mecha-
nisms are poorly understood. In particular, little is known about 
mechanical regulation of morphological and functional polarity 
of central neurons. Such possible regulation may represent a 
novel form of neuronal plasticity.
Mechanical impact can alter the morphology and function 
of neurons in the central nervous system (CNS). A traumatic 
brain injury (TBI) includes the primary injury that occurs at 
the moment of traumatic impact and the secondary injury that 
occurs afterward and often involves excitotoxicity and inflam-
mation. For neurons, both axons and dendrites are found to be 
damaged in a TBI. As a prominent feature of TBI, a diffuse 
axonal injury displays characteristic axonal varicosities (swell-
ing or beading; Smith et al., 2013). In mild TBI (mTBI), axons 
are not uniformly injured, and unmyelinated axons appear more 
vulnerable (Reeves et al., 2005). On the other hand, dendritic 
varicosities and degenerating spines were also observed in 
the mTBI mouse model (Gao et al., 2011). However, it is not 
clear which neuronal compartment is more likely damaged first 
during the initial primary injury. Moreover, abundant axonal 
varicosities are a key sign for irreversible neurodegeneration 
in Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases and multiple sclero-
sis (Nikić et al., 2011; Yang et al., 2013). In fact, even in the 
normal CNS, not all axons appear like perfect long tubes with 
uniform diameters. Axonal varicosities often form before axo-
nal pruning and synapse formation during development of the 
CNS and persist at a low level in the normal adult brain (Shep-
herd and Harris, 1998; Luo and O’Leary, 2005; Nikić et al., 
2011; Smith et al., 2013). Although varicosities can profoundly 
affect action potential propagation and synaptic transmission 
(Debanne, 2004), how varicosities are induced in axons under 
various normal and abnormal conditions remains a mystery. 
Little is known about mechanical regulation of morphological and functional polarity of central neurons. In this study, we 
report that mechanical stress specifically induces varicosities in the axons but not the dendrites of central neurons by 
activating TRPV4, a Ca2+/Na+-permeable mechanosensitive channel. This process is unexpectedly rapid and reversible, 
consistent with the formation of axonal varicosities in vivo induced by mechanical impact in a mouse model of mild 
traumatic brain injury. In contrast, prolonged stimulation of glutamate receptors induces varicosities in dendrites but not 
in axons. We further show that axonal varicosities are induced by persistent Ca2+ increase, disassembled microtubules 
(MTs), and subsequently reversible disruption of axonal transport, and are regulated by stable tubulin-only polypeptide, 
an MT-associated protein. Finally, axonal varicosity initiation can trigger action potentials to antidromically propagate 
to the soma in retrograde signaling. Therefore, our study demonstrates a new feature of neuronal polarity: axons and 
dendrites preferentially respond to physical and chemical stresses, respectively.
Polarity of varicosity initiation in central neuron 
mechanosensation
Yuanzheng Gu,1 Peter Jukkola,2 Qian Wang,3 Thomas Esparza,4 Yi Zhao,3 David Brody,4 and Chen Gu1,2
1Department of Biological Chemistry and Pharmacology, 2Biomedical Sciences Graduate Program, and 3Biomedical Engineering Department, The Ohio State University, 
Columbus, OH
4Department of Neurology, Washington University, St. Louis, MO
© 2017 Gu et al. This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution–Noncommercial–
Share Alike–No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the publication date (see http 
://www 
.rupress 
.org 
/terms 
/). After six months it is available under a Creative Commons 
License (Attribution–Noncommercial–Share Alike 4.0 International license, as described at 
https 
://creativecommons 
.org 
/licenses 
/by 
-nc 
-sa 
/4 
.0 
/).
Correspondence to Chen Gu: gu.49@osu.edu
Abbreviations used: AIS, axon initial segment; AM, acetoxymethyl; CNS, cen-
tral nervous system; DIV, day in vitro; MBP, myelin basic protein; MS, mech-
anosensitive; MT, microtubule; mTBI, mild TBI; NMDA, N-methyl-d-aspartate; 
NMDG, N-methyl-d-glucamine; STOP, stable tubulin-only polypeptide; TBI, trau-
matic brain injury; TEM, transmission EM; TRP, transient receptor potential; TTX, 
tetrodotoxin.
on June 3, 2019
jcb.rupress.org 
Downloaded from 
http://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201606065
Published Online: 12 June, 2017 | Supp Info: 
 JCB • Volume 216 • NumBer 7 • 2017
2180
It is not known how micromechanical stress regulates axonal 
varicosity formation in terms of time course, reversibility, and 
underlying mechanism. Because the vertebrate brain is well 
protected by the skull, its structure and function have not been 
extensively investigated in the context of mechanics. The inves-
tigation is further hindered in part by technical challenges in 
microbiomechanical measurements and manipulations as well 
as a knowledge gap in mechanosensitive (MS) proteins and 
their downstream signaling pathways.
Progress has been made in understanding mechanosen-
sation and mechanotransduction of specialized cell types and 
organs, such as cochlear hair cells, touch-sensing organs in 
skin, and kidneys for fluid pressure, where MS ion channels 
play critical roles in rapid sensing and responding to me-
chanical stimuli (Árnadóttir and Chalfie, 2010; Delmas et al., 
2011). Newly identified MS channels are emerging rapidly, 
including some that are traditionally assigned for completely 
different functions (Gu and Gu, 2014). Several criteria are 
suggested to define an MS ion channel, including tissue ex-
pression, deletion phenotype, in vitro reconstitution, and the 
mechanosensing mechanism of the channel (Christensen and 
Corey, 2007; Árnadóttir and Chalfie, 2010). So far, only a few 
candidates meet all these criteria (Gu and Gu, 2014). Several 
members of the transient receptor potential (TRP) channel 
family represent a major group among MS ion channels. The 
first TRP channel was described in the fruit fly Drosophila 
melanogaster in 1969 and was later cloned in 1989 (Cosens 
and Manning, 1969; Montell and Rubin, 1989). All TRP chan-
nel members can be divided into eight subfamilies (TRPC, 
TRPV, TRPM, TRPN, TRPA, TRPP, TRP 
ML, and TRPY in 
yeast; Venkatachalam and Montell, 2007). These channels can 
be activated by light, sound, chemicals, temperature, osmolar-
ity, touch, heat, the phorbol ester derivative, or lipids down-
stream of arachidonic acid metabolism. It appears that nearly 
every TRP subfamily contains a member that can be activated 
by physical stimuli (Christensen and Corey, 2007). The TRPV 
subfamily contains six members (TRPV1–TRPV6). Its first 
member, TRPV1, the capsaicin receptor, was cloned in 1997 
(Caterina et al., 1997). TRPV4, first cloned in 2000, is also 
known as vanilloid receptor–related osmotically activated 
channel (VR-OAC), OTR 
PC4, TRP12, or VRL-2 (Liedtke et 
al., 2000; Strotmann et al., 2000). Both TRPV1 and TRPV4 
are candidates of MS ion channels (Liedtke and Friedman, 
2003; Venkatachalam and Montell, 2007; Gu and Gu, 2014). 
However, the potential roles of MS TRP channels in the CNS 
are underexplored and are thus still poorly understood.
Signaling downstream to mechanical activation during in-
jury is still not clear, especially in axonal varicosity formation. 
A recent study shows that axonal injuries induce axon–soma 
communication through the following two mechanisms: a rapid 
one encoded by Ca2+ waves and a slower one conveyed by mo-
lecular motors (Rishal and Fainzilber, 2014). In axotomy, the 
breach of the axonal membrane causes rapid changes in intra-
cellular ion concentrations via Ca2+ channel activation, reversal 
of the Na+/Ca2+ exchanger, and/or Ca2+ release from internal 
stores, inducing Ca2+ waves propagating back to the soma (Ziv 
and Spira, 1995; Cho et al., 2013). The slower retrograde sig-
naling is mediated by macromolecular signaling complexes 
that are carried by dynein motors, a mechanism likely shared 
with retrograde neurotrophic factor signaling and subjected to 
complex regulations (Harrington and Ginty, 2013; Rishal and 
Fainzilber, 2014). Therefore, it will be interesting to determine 
whether and how axons may rapidly communicate with the 
soma under micromechanical stress.
In this study, we discovered that mechanical stress pref-
erentially induces varicosities in the axons of hippocampal 
neurons. In sharp contrast, excitotoxicity induces varicosity for-
mation in the dendrites. Mechanical stress–induced varicosity 
formation in axons is unexpectedly rapid and reversible. Our 
study further reveals that an MS ion channel (TRPV4) and a 
microtubule (MT)-binding protein (stable tubulin-only poly-
peptide [STOP]) play critical roles in this process. Importantly, 
varicosity initiation in axons can trigger action potentials to an-
tidromically propagate to the soma as a novel rapid form of ret-
rograde communication. These results provide new mechanistic 
insights into axonal varicosity initiation, a novel form of neuro-
nal plasticity and a potentially common process in both normal 
neural development and subconcussive brain injury.
Results
Micromechanical stress induces rapid and 
reversible formation of varicosities in the 
axons but not the dendrites of 
central neurons
To visualize axonal and dendritic morphology in different CNS 
regions, we imaged brain sections expressing YFP from Thy1-
YFP transgenic mice in which a subset of projection neurons 
expresses YFP. Although neuronal morphology was clearly re-
vealed by YFP fluorescence, we stained myelin segments with 
an antibody against myelin basic protein (MBP), a mature my-
elin marker. We found axonal varicosities that were indicated by 
YFP along unmyelinated but not myelinated axons in the hip-
pocampus as well as in other brain regions (Fig. 1 A). In sharp 
contrast, varicosities were never found along dendrites in the 
normal brain. Our results are consistent with a previous study 
showing that many axonal varicosities in the hippocampal CA3 
region are likely presynaptic boutons, whereas some do not 
contain any presynaptic apparatuses and hence have unknown 
function (Shepherd and Harris, 1998). We were intrigued by 
this observation and wondered why axonal varicosities are pres-
ent in unmyelinated axons but not in dendrites and myelinated 
axons. Furthermore, how are axonal varicosities initiated and 
maintained in general? Do they represent irreversibly degener-
ating axons like those observed in injured or diseased brains?
In a drug perfusion experiment, we accidentally discov-
ered that puffing Hank’s buffer itself induced rapid and revers-
ible varicosity formation along axons of cultured hippocampal 
neurons (Fig. 1 B and Video 1). The solution in the puffing 
pipette was identical to the bath solution (Hank’s buffer) and 
was driven by gravity; axonal varicosity formation correlated 
with the strength of puffing pressure (Fig. S1, A and B). To de-
termine whether the puffing pressure was within the ranges of 
physiological and pathophysiological conditions in the brain, 
we measured and compared it with other known values of mi-
cromechanical pressure. Although the static pressure at the tip 
of the puffing pipette can be calculated, the exact fluid pres-
sure onto the neurons had to be determined experimentally. 
When 190 mmH2O static pressure (at the tip) was applied via 
the puffing pipette, there was ∼0.25 ± 0.06 nN/µm2 pressure 
on the neurons, which was measured with microfabricated sil-
icone membranes as described previously (Fig. S1 C; Wang et 
al., 2013). This value (including both compression and shear) 
 Polarized initiation of neuronal varicosities • Gu et al.
2181
Figure 1. Mechanics-induced rapid and reversible initiation of axonal varicosities. (A) Axonal varicosities along unmyelinated (bottom) but not myelinated 
axons (top) in the hippocampus of Thy1-YFP transgenic mice. Axons are indicated by YFP fluorescence (green) and myelin segments by the anti-MBP stain-
ing (red). (B) Puffing induced rapid and reversible formation of axonal varicosities in cultured hippocampal neurons at 7 DIV, revealed by transmitted lights 
(top) and transiently expressed YFP (bottom). YFP signals are inverted. Transient or sustained mechanical pressures were delivered by puffing of Hank’s 
buffer via a glass pipette onto cultured hippocampal neurons as described in Fig. S1. The puffing time was 150 s. (C) Puffing did not induce varicosity 
formation in proximal axons (7 DIV). Neurons were transfected with YFP. The soma was on the left. (D) Puffing did not affect dendrite morphology (7 DIV). 
(E) Puffing induced varicosity formation in the middle axon of a neuron at 17 DIV. (F) Puffing induced varicosity formation along axons but not dendrites nor 
 JCB • Volume 216 • NumBer 7 • 2017
2182
is physiologically and/or pathologically relevant, which will 
be discussed in the Discussion. Our experimental setting may 
mimic increased local mechanical stress onto unmyelinated 
CNS axons induced by cell growth and migration, tissue swell-
ing, or mechanical impact. Throughout the rest of study, 190 
mmH2O was used for puffing for reliably inducing axonal var-
icosities, whereas 50 mmH2O was used for perfusion, under 
which no varicosity could form.
To determine the spatial and temporal specificity of hip-
pocampal neuron mechanosensation, we first examined how 
puffing affected different neuronal compartments. Puffing only 
induced varicosities along middle and distal axons, but not in 
dendrites, dendritic spines, or proximal axons (Fig. 1, C–F; Fig. 
S2 A; and Video 2). Axonal varicosities were highly restricted 
within the axonal segment inside the puffing area (Fig. S2 B). 
During puffing, varicosity initiation was much faster in young 
axons (∼7 d in vitro [DIV]) than older ones (∼21 DIV), but 
importantly, both types of axons started to recover right after 
puffing (Figs. 1 G and S2, C and D). This rapid, reversible, and 
localized change of axonal morphology in response to micro-
mechanical stress may represent a previously unrecognized 
form of neuronal plasticity, different from axon degeneration.
To investigate how varicosity initiation may be regulated 
by trains of short puffing pulses, which mimic repetitive sub-
concussive impacts, we applied short puffing pulses (2 s in 
duration) at different frequencies. Axonal varicosities were 
induced in a frequency-dependent manner. No obvious vari-
cosity formation was observed if the interval was at or longer 
than 20 s, but at 5-s intervals, varicosities were rapidly induced 
(Fig. 1 H). Thus, there is a clear accumulative effect of short 
pulses of micromechanical stress on central neuron axons.
Formation of axonal varicosities in the 
mouse model of repetitive closed-skull TBIs
To confirm the in vivo relevance of puffing-induced formation 
of axonal varicosities, we performed the mouse model of repet-
itive closed-skull TBIs (Shitaka et al., 2011). Thy1-YFP trans-
genic mice were used for analyzing morphological changes of 
the axons and dendrites of a subset of projection neurons im-
mediately after the second impact. This early time point was 
not examined before. In this experiment, we focused on exam-
ining varicosity formation in YFP+ axons and dendrites in the 
somatosensory cortex, which was directly beneath the impact 
site and hence the primary region of injury in which mechanical 
forces were presumably the highest (Fig. 2 A). Indeed, many 
axonal varicosities were observed together with apparently 
normal dendrites nearby in a multifocal fashion in mTBI mice 
(Fig. 2, B and C). These varicosities resemble to those in cul-
tured neurons induced by puffing in terms of the size, number, 
and pattern (Fig. 2, D and E). To determine whether some of 
these varicosities in mTBI mice might be presynaptic boutons, 
we performed costaining for two different endogenous markers 
of presynaptic boutons: Bassoon and vesicle-associated mem-
brane protein 2 (VAMP2). We found that the majority of these 
varicosities in mTBI mice did not contain the two presynaptic 
markers (Fig. 2, F–I). Thus, most of these varicosities induced 
in mTBI mice are not likely presynaptic boutons. Collectively, 
this experimental result confirmed that axonal varicosities in-
deed rapidly form upon mechanical impact in vivo in the mouse 
model of repetitive mTBI. 
TRPV4 is the major MS ion channel 
mediating puffing-induced axonal varicosity 
formation in hippocampal neurons
The new features of puffing-induced formation of axonal var-
icosities include rapid onset, slow reversibility, and localized 
and cumulative properties (Figs. 1 and S2), suggesting a role 
of ionic influx through MS ion channels on axonal membranes. 
To determine which cation in Hank’s buffer is required for 
puffing- 
induced varicosity initiation in axons, we replaced three 
cations one by one in the buffer. In puffing experiments, the 
bath and pipette solutions were always identical. Removing 
Ca2+ but not Mg2+ significantly increased the time for varicosity 
formation and reduced varicosity size and abundance (Fig. S3, 
A–D). Interestingly, replacing Na+ with N-methyl-d-glucamine 
(NMDG), an organic monovalent cation, also made axons more 
resistant to puffing, but its effect was significantly less than that 
of removing Ca2+, especially in onset time and varicosity den-
sity (Fig. S3, A–D). The most effective condition to suppress 
puffing-induced varicosity initiation was removal of both Ca2+ 
and Na+ (Fig. S3, A–D; Videos 3 and 4). These results indi-
cate that Ca2+ influx plays a major role in puffing-induced var-
icosity initiation, whereas Na+ influx may play a minor role. 
Therefore, the MS channels involved in puffing-induced var-
icosity formation in axons are likely permeable to Ca2+ and, 
to a lesser extent, Na+.
Among the known MS ion channels (Gu and Gu, 2014), 
we focused on TRPV1 and TRPV4 because they are permeable 
to Ca2+ and, to a lesser extent, Na+ and are present in central neu-
rons (Shibasaki et al., 2007; Gibson et al., 2008). In particular, 
the ratio of Ca2+ and Na+ permeability of TRPV4 is ∼6:1. When 
being perfused, the TRPV4 agonist (0.1 µM GSK101) was 
significantly more effective than the TRPV1 agonist (1 µM 
capsaicin) in inducing axonal varicosities (Fig. S3, E–G). Con-
versely, treating with Gd3+ (200 µM; a general blocker for MS 
ion channels), RN1734 (10 µM; a TRPV4-specific blocker), or 
HC067047 (100 nM; another TRPV4-specific blocker) markedly 
reduced puffing-induced varicosities (Fig. S3, E–G), suggesting 
a potential role of TRPV4 in this process.
To recapitulate the mechanosensation, we expressed 
TRPV1 and TRPV4 channels in HEK293 cells and per-
formed whole-cell voltage-clamp recording. Both channels 
were activated by their respective agonists, but only TRPV4 
was activated by puffing that could induce axonal varicosi-
ties (Fig. 3, A–C). To determine TRPV4 expression and tar-
geting in hippocampal neurons, we used an antibody against 
TRPV4 that was previously extensively validated (Ryskamp 
et al., 2011). TRPV4 was indeed expressed in cultured hip-
pocampal neurons with relatively higher axonal levels in 
young neurons, whereas its axonal level moderately declined 
in mature neurons (Fig. S4). To estimate TRPV4 levels at the 
axons that are sensitive to mechanical stress, we performed 
the puffing experiment on hippocampal neurons (6 DIV) 
loaded with calcein acetoxymethyl (AM) dye and fixed the 
dendritic spines at 17 DIV. Red arrows indicate axonal varicosities. Related quantifications are included in Fig. S2. Bars: (A) 10 µm; (B) 50 µm; (C–F) 15 
µm. (G) Older axons (21 DIV) were more resistant to puffing-induced varicosity formation than younger ones (7 DIV). (H) Frequency-dependent varicosity 
initiation in young axons receiving 2-s puffing pulses. Error bars show means ± SEM. Unpaired t test: *, P < 0.05. 5-s interval versus 20-s interval in H.
 Polarized initiation of neuronal varicosities • Gu et al.
2183
neurons after varicosities were induced. Indeed, distal axons 
had higher levels of endogenous TRPV4, revealed by post 
hoc staining, and the most varicosities, revealed by calcien 
AM fluorescence, induced by puffing (Fig. 3, D–F).
To determine the role of TRPV4 in puffing-induced ax-
onal varicosity initiation, we adopted the siRNA knockdown 
approach. The siRNA probe was extensively validated and pub-
lished previously (Benfenati et al., 2011). Transiently knock-
ing down TRPV4 with siRNA significantly increased the onset 
time and reduced the size of varicosities (Fig. 3, G–J). How-
ever, it did not completely eliminate varicosities, consistent 
with a partial knockdown by siRNA (Fig. 3, K–M). This partial 
knockdown agrees with previously reported results (Benfenati 
et al., 2011). Collectively, these results confirmed a major role 
Figure 2. Axonal varicosity induction in a repetitive closed-skull mTBI mouse model. (A) Low-magnification image of a coronal section from the brain of 
a Thy1-YFP transgenic mouse that had received impact on the right side. YFP fluorescent signals are inverted. This is a compilation of multiple images. The 
boxed area indicates the brain region that this study focused on. The black arrow indicates head impact location. (B) YFP+ dendrites and axons in the cor-
tex of a control mouse. The apical dendrites of layer V projection neurons in the cortex point in the upward direction. (C) YFP+ dendrites and axons in the 
cortex of an mTBI mouse. Cornered areas are provided in the insets to show normal axons (B) and axons with clear varicosities (C). (D) A normal axonal 
segment from a control mouse. (E) An axonal segment with many varicosities from an mTBI mouse. YFP is in green, and nuclear dye Hoechst is in blue in 
merged images. (F and G) Partial colocalization of axonal varicosities (left gray images; green in the merged images) with presynaptic markers (middle 
gray images; red in the merged images) in VAMP2 (F) and Bassoon (G) from mTBI mice. Arrows indicate axonal varicosities (indicated by YFP) contain-
ing a presynaptic marker (indicated by anti-VAMP2 or anti-Bassoon staining), and arrowheads indicate axonal varicosities without presynaptic markers. 
Bars: (B and C, main images) 100 µm; (B and C, insets) 30 µm; (D–G) 20 µm. (H) Percentages of axons with clear varicosities in control and mTBI mice. 
 
(I) Percentages of varicosities in axons from mTBI mice without costaining of the presynaptic markers. Error bars indicate means ± SEM. Unpaired t test: 
 
*, P < 0.05. anti-B, anti-Bassoon; anti-V, anti-VAMP2. 
 JCB • Volume 216 • NumBer 7 • 2017
2184
of TRPV4 in axonal varicosity formation that is induced by 
micromechanical stress.
Opposite polarity of varicosity formation 
induced by mechanical stress and 
excitotoxicity
Why does puffing specifically induce varicosity formation in 
axons but not in dendrites? This may result from a more pro-
nounced TRPV4 activity in axons. TRPV4 channel proteins ap-
pear relatively more enriched in distal axons of young neurons, 
but overall polarized targeting of TRPV4 is not impressive, es-
pecially in older neurons (Fig. 3, D–F; and Fig. S4). Therefore, it 
is possible that signaling downstream to TRPV4 activation also 
plays a critical role in this polarized mechanosensation. Pro-
longed increase of intracellular Ca2+ can destroy mitochondria, 
generate reactive oxygen species, and activate proteolytic en-
zymes to degrade ion channels and cytoskeleton proteins (Iwata 
et al., 2004; Yang et al., 2013). Calpain is a key Ca2+-activated 
nonlysosomal protease in axon degeneration, but its action re-
quires long-lasting Ca2+ elevation (∼30 min) and is irreversible 
(Iwata et al., 2004; Yang et al., 2013) and therefore unlikely to 
be responsible for such rapid initiation of axonal varicosities.
To dissect the signaling pathway involved in axonal 
varicosity initiation, we first compared puffing- and gluta-
mate (Glu)-induced varicosity formation in different neuronal 
compartments. Prolonged stimulation of the Ca2+-permeable 
N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor was shown to induce 
swellings in dendrites via MT disassembly, but its effect on 
axons was unknown (Hasbani et al., 2001; Tseng and Firestein, 
2011). In our experiments, we activated glutamate receptors 
including NMDA receptors and blocked action potential firing 
with application of 100 µM l-Glu, 10 µM l-glycine, and 0.5 µM 
Figure 3. TRPV4 channel plays a major role in axonal varicosity initiation in hippocampal neuron mechanosensation. (A and B) When expressed in 
HEK293 cells, TRPV4 but not YFP was activated by TRPV4 agonist GSK101 (GSK; 0.5 µM; A) and puffing (B). (C) Summary of the effects of their respective 
agonist (top) or puffing (bottom) on HEK293 cells expressing YFP, TRPV4, or TRPV1. (D) An axonal segment loaded with calcien AM (inverted signals) 
before (left) and after (right) puffing. (E) A distal axonal segment loaded with calcien AM (green) without puffing and stained for endogenous TRPV4 (red). 
(F) Post hoc staining of the axon in D for endogenous TRPV4 (red). (G) Effects of puffing on axons transfected with control (top) or TRPV4 (bottom) siRNA 
(siR). (H) The onset and degree of varicosity formation along axons with TRPV4 siRNA markedly reduced. (I and J) Under the same puffing condition, axons 
with TRPV4 siRNA had significantly longer onset time (I) and smaller varicosities (J). (K) Young axons (7 DIV) expressing YFP (green) and control siRNA were 
stained for endogenous TRPV4 (red in merged image and inverted in grayscale image). (L) Young axons (7 DIV) expressing YFP (green) and TRPV4 siRNA 
were stained for endogenous TRPV4 (red in merged image and inverted in grayscale image). Arrows indicate coexpressing YFP and double-stranded small 
RNA. Bars, 20 µm. (M) TRPV4 siRNA significantly reduced TRPV4 staining intensity in both axons and soma of cultured neurons. Error bars indicate means 
± SEM. Unpaired t test: **, P < 0.01.
 Polarized initiation of neuronal varicosities • Gu et al.
2185
tetrodotoxin (TTX; a Na+ channel blocker to suppress action po-
tential firing). After ∼20 min, varicosities were slowly induced 
along dendrites but not axons (Fig. 4, A and B; and Video 5). 
This effect is completely opposite to that of puffing (Fig. 1 F 
and Video 2). Therefore, axons and dendrites appear to form 
varicosities in response to mechanical stress (a physical stimu-
lus) and Glu excitotoxicity (a chemical stimulus), respectively.
To determine whether actin or MT cytoskeleton is in-
volved in axonal varicosity initiation, we treated neurons with 
10 µg/ml nocodazole (Noco; depolymerizing MT filaments) or 
2.5 µM latrunculin A (LatA; depolymerizing actin filaments). 
Noco but not LatA treatment induced axonal varicosities 
(Fig. 4, C–G). To visualize ultrastructural changes of axons and 
dendrites induced by puffing and Glu treatments, we performed 
Figure 4. MT disassembly in puffing-induced initiation of axonal varicosities. (A and B) Stimulating NMDA receptors (100 µM l-glutamate, 10 µM l-glycine, 
and 0.5 µM TTX) for 20 min induced varicosities in dendrites (A) but not axons (B) in mature neurons (23 DIV). (C and D) Depolymerizing MTs by Noco (10 
µg/ml for 15 min; C) but not actin filaments by LatA (2.5 µM for 2.5 h; D) induced varicosities in axons. (E–G) The onset time (E), density (F), and size (G) of 
induced varicosities along dendrites or axons under the conditions in A–D. In the drug treatment experiments, the onset time was defined as the time needed to 
form clear varicosities. Error bars indicate means ± SEM. Unpaired t test: **, P < 0.05. (H) Long axonal segments under control conditions (top) or developing 
multiple varicosities induced by puffing (bottom) were imaged by TEM. TEM experiments showed ultrastructural changes of axons (top) and dendrites (bottom) 
under control (7 DIV; I), puffing (7 DIV; J), and Glu treatment (17 DIV; K) conditions. Bars: (A–D) 25 µm; (H–K) 1 µm.
 JCB • Volume 216 • NumBer 7 • 2017
2186
transmission EM (TEM). In 7-DIV control axons, MT tracts 
were clearly observed, whereas MT tracts were disrupted in 
the varicosities of the axons that received puffing (Fig. 4 H). 
Puffing- 
induced axonal varicosities displayed interesting het-
erogeneity: ∼50% of them with a few MTs remaining, ∼30% 
without any visible MT, and ∼20% with extensive vesicular 
structures. Although axonal varicosities formed, dendritic mor-
phology was not altered by puffing (Fig. 4, I and J). In 17-DIV 
neurons, Glu treatment altered dendritic but not axonal struc-
ture, and dendrites became irregular in shape and contained 
many vesicle-shaped structures (Fig. 4 K). Therefore, the TEM 
results are consistent with the results of fluorescence imaging, 
showing that MT disassembly plays a key role in axonal vari-
cosity initiation. MT disassembly can be induced by intraaxonal 
Ca2+ elevation. In fact, it was reported that Ca2+ directly binds to 
the C terminus of tubulin to destabilize MT filaments (Serrano 
et al., 1986; Lefèvre et al., 2011).
Persistent Ca2+ increase in puffing-induced 
axonal varicosities revealed by Ca2+ imaging
To determine whether puffing can indeed stimulate Ca2+ levels 
during axonal varicosity formation, we performed live-cell Ca2+ 
imaging on neuronal processes under control and puffing con-
ditions. Cultured hippocampal neurons at 7 DIV were loaded 
with Fluo-4 AM, a Ca2+ indicator with increased fluorescence 
intensity and no shift in wavelength upon Ca2+ binding. Under 
the control condition without puffing, spontaneous Ca2+ tran-
sients were quite rare. The highest fluorescence intensity was 
observed in the soma and proximal dendrites, whereas the in-
tensities in axons varied in a larger range, with some barely 
detectable. Under the same puffing condition that reliably in-
duced axonal varicosity formation (Fig. 1), Fluo-4 AM fluores-
cence increased and sustained within axonal varicosities but not 
in intervaricosity axonal regions around the same time when 
axonal varicosities started to form (Fig. 5, A–E; and Video 6). 
In sharp contrast, under the same puffing condition, some tran-
sient increases of Ca2+ levels were observed in the entire den-
drite in ∼30–50% of the neurons we examined (Fig. 5, F–J; 
and Video 7). Therefore, the spatial and temporal patterns of 
Ca2+ signaling were quite different in axons and dendrites in the 
puffing assay. The relatively persistent increase of Ca2+ levels 
in axonal spots where varicosities form may be more effective 
in causing MT disassembly. In vivo, however, the direct effect 
of Ca2+ on MT disassembly can be regulated by several factors, 
including MT-binding proteins.
MT-binding protein STOP plays 
an important role in axonal 
varicosity formation
To determine how stabilizing MTs may regulate axonal varicosity 
initiation induced by mechanical stress, we examined the effects 
of changing expression levels of three representative MT-binding 
proteins. MT filaments are polymeric cylinders composed of α/β 
tubulin dimers. Because of the head-to-tail arrangement of the 
dimers, MTs are intrinsically polarized. The plus end, where β tu-
bulin is exposed, is the fast-growing end in vitro and the only end 
that grows in vivo. Several plus end–tracking proteins including 
EB1 specifically track the rapidly growing MT plus end, forming 
cometlike accumulations there. EB1 is a conserved small dimeric 
protein present in distal axons and plays a key role in regulating 
MT dynamics and MT-based protein targeting (Gu et al., 2006; 
Akhmanova and Steinmetz, 2008). It is important to note that 
EB1 proteins do not move along MTs processively but exchange 
rapidly at MT plus ends by recognizing some specific structural 
features of the growing end. Overexpressed EB1 can stabilize 
MT filaments by promoting MT elongation and bundling (Bu 
and Su, 2001; Ligon et al., 2003) and is often used to reveal MT 
dynamics (Zheng et al., 2008). In our experiments, expressing 
EB1-YFP in hippocampal axons did not change puffing-induced 
varicosity initiation (Fig. 6, A and D).
However, MT-associated protein 2 (MAP2) is mainly en-
riched in dendrites and binds to both tubulin and actin. MAP2 
induces MT bundling likely via cross-linking MTs by MAP2 
dimerization (Sánchez et al., 2000; Koleske, 2013). Is it pos-
sible that the high expression level of MAP2 in dendrites ren-
ders their resistance to puffing-induced varicosity formation? 
We overexpressed YFP-MAP2 into hippocampal neurons. Al-
though it was mainly enriched in dendrites, there was a sig-
nificant amount of YFP-MAP2 present in axons. Significantly 
higher levels of YFP-MAP2 did not alter puffing-induced vari-
cosity formation in axons either (Fig. 6, B and D). 
Another MT-binding protein, STOP (NST 
OP is the 
splice variant of adult form), was initially isolated as a calm-
odulin-binding protein associated with purified rat brain cold- 
stable MTs (Margolis et al., 1986; Bosc et al., 1996). STOP has 
intrinsic MT cold stabilizing activity in vitro, which is inhibited 
by Ca2+-bound calmodulin (Pirollet et al., 1992). STOP proteins 
are expressed in both developing and adult brains, localized 
in axons, and are likely responsible for a high degree of MT 
stabilization observed in neuronal cells (Guillaud et al., 1998; 
Couégnas et al., 2007; Richard et al., 2009). Reduced STOP ex-
pression in mice leads to synaptic deficits as well as behavioral 
and cognitive disorders (Andrieux et al., 2002; Eastwood et al., 
2007; Fournet et al., 2012). In sharp contrast with EB1-YFP 
and YFP-MAP2, hippocampal axons expressing NST 
OP-GFP 
became markedly resistant to puffing-induced varicosity forma-
tion (Fig. 6, C and D). Therefore, STOP that is regulated by Ca2+/
calmodulin may play a key role together with TRPV4 in shap-
ing the mechanics-mediated response of hippocampal neurons.
To reveal the temporal and spatial expression of STOP in 
neurons, we used both anatomical and biochemical techniques. 
During maturation of the CNS, the total protein levels markedly 
increased for STOP but not for TRPV4, as revealed by West-
ern blotting (Fig. 6 E). Next, we examined the expression and 
localization patterns of STOP in the mouse brain at different 
developmental stages and found that they were consistent with 
the immunoblotting results. Immunostaining of adult brain sec-
tions showed that STOP was present along axonal fibers in the 
hippocampus, whereas the level of TRPV4 was higher in the 
soma and proximal processes (Fig. 6 F). Therefore, the differ-
ential expression and targeting patterns of STOP and TRPV4 
appear consistent with our finding that younger and distal axons 
are more likely to form varicosities under mechanical stress. 
Neuronal expression of STOP was further confirmed in cultured 
rat hippocampal neurons. STOP was expressed in hippocampal 
neurons and relatively concentrated in the soma as well as in 
proximal dendrites and axons (Fig. 6, G and H; and Fig. S5). 
Because proximal axons, including the axon initial segment 
(AIS), were relatively resistant to puffing-induced varicosity 
formation compared with distal axons (Figs. 1 C and S2), en-
dogenous STOP appears to be enriched in the neuronal com-
partments that are relatively resistant to puffing.
To verify STOP’s role in axonal varicosity initiation, we 
examined the effect of knocking down STOP using siRNA. The 
 Polarized initiation of neuronal varicosities • Gu et al.
2187
siRNA probe was previously published and used to successfully 
knock down endogenous STOP in cultured subicular neurons 
in mice (Deloulme et al., 2015). In control mouse hippocam-
pal neurons at 10 DIV, endogenous STOP was concentrated in 
the proximal axon and tapered off near the distal end of the 
middle axon (Fig. 7, A and B). In the neurons transfected with 
STOP siRNA, endogenous STOP was largely absent, indicating 
successful knockdown (Fig. 7, C and D). When being puffed, 
the middle axons of the neurons (10 DIV) transfected with 
STOP siRNA developed more varicosities much faster with 
larger varicosity size compared with those of the control neu-
rons (Fig. 7, E and F). This effect was reversed by coexpression 
of NST 
OP construct (rat), in which the neurons were cotrans-
fected with NST 
OP-GFP and mouse STOP siRNA (Fig. 7, 
G and H). Collectively, our results have indicated that STOP 
plays an important role in puffing-induced varicosity formation 
in axons, most likely through mediating Ca2+-dependent regu-
lation of MT stability.
MT plus end tracking and axonal transport 
of mitochondria and synaptic proteins 
pause in axonal varicosity initiation
In axons, most MTs are oriented with the plus end toward the 
axonal growth cone and with the minus end toward the soma. 
Figure 5. Sustained Ca2+ increase in axonal varicosities induced by mechanical stress. (A) An axonal segment before (0 s; control) and after (50 s; Puff) 
puffing. Signals are inverted. (B) Kymograph of Fluo-4 fluorescence along the axonal segment in A. (C) Fluorescence profiles along the axonal segment at 
two time points in A. (D) Fluorescence intensities (INT) over time at five different locations indicated by arrowheads in B. (E) Summary of intensity changes 
of Fluo-4 fluorescence without (Cont) and with (Spot, in a varicosity; Inter-spot, between varicosities) puffing. (F) A dendrite before (0 s) and after (25 s) 
puffing. Bars, 10 µm. (F) Kymograph of Fluo-4 fluorescence along the dendrite in F. (H) Fluorescence profiles along the dendrite at two time points in F.  
(I) Fluorescence intensities over time at five different locations indicated by arrowheads in G. (J) Summary of intensity changes of Fluo-4 fluorescence with-
out and with (Dend) puffing. Fcont, fluorescence intensity before puffing; FPeak, the maximal fluorescence intensity reached during puffing; FLate, fluorescence 
intensity at 80 s; arrows, the puffing onset. Background was not subtracted in C, D, H, or I. Background was subtracted in E and J. Error bars indicate 
means ± SEM. A one-way ANO 
VA followed by Dunnett's test was used in E and an unpaired t test was used in J. *, P < 0.05. 
 JCB • Volume 216 • NumBer 7 • 2017
2188
How does axonal varicosity formation affect MT dynamics, 
especially the plus end dynamics? Could MT orientation be 
reversed during MT reassembly after varicosity formation? 
Using live-cell imaging of EB1-YFP–expressing axons of cul-
tured hippocampal neurons, we visualized the anterograde and 
retrograde movements of EB1-YFP before, during, and after 
puffing. We found that MT plus-end tracking paused during 
puffing-induced varicosity formation and slowly recovered af-
terward, consistent with MT disassembly induced by puffing 
and MT reassembly during recovery (Fig. 8 A). Importantly, 
the orientation of MT plus end tracking did not change during 
MT reassembly after puffing. Interestingly, the tracking veloc-
ity, distance, and frequency did reduce after puffing compared 
with those before puffing (Fig. 8, D–F). This result suggests 
Figure 6. The level of MT-binding protein NST 
OP correlates with the resistance of puffing-induced varicosity formation. (A and B) Axons expressing differ-
ent MT-binding proteins were puffed, and expressing EB1-YFP (A) or YFP-MAP2 (B) in axons did not change puffing-induced varicosity formation. (C) The 
axon expressing NST 
OP-GFP became more resistant to puffing. (D) Summary of the effects of three MT-binding proteins on axonal varicosity formation. 
Error bars indicate means ± SEM. One-way ANO 
VA followed by Dunnett’s test: **, P < 0.01. (E) Expression levels of STOP and TRPV4 in the brain during 
development. Western blotting for STOP and TRPV4 from mouse brain lysate was performed, and β-tubulin was used as a control. Molecular masses are 
indicated in kilodaltons. (F) Costaining for endogenous STOP (green) and TRPV4 (red) in the hippocampal slice of an adult mouse. (G and H) Costaining for 
endogenous STOP (green in merged) and MAP2 (red in merged) was performed in cultured hippocampal neurons at 12 DIV (G) and 21 DIV (H). Arrows 
indicate MAP2-negative axons containing anti-STOP staining signals. Bars: (A–C) 25 µm; (F–H) 100 µm.
 Polarized initiation of neuronal varicosities • Gu et al.
2189
Figure 7. Axonal distribution of STOP and its knockdown on varicosity formation. (A) Endogenous STOP (red in merged image on the left; inverted 
grayscale on the right) expression from neurons at 10 DIV. Cornered area, enlarged (2.5-fold) bottom panels. White arrowheads show the montage line 
of two overlapping images. (B) STOP fluorescence intensities along two labeled axonal segments in A. (C) Significant reduction of STOP in the neuron 
transfected with STOP siRNA (siR). Arrows indicate the axon of the transfected neuron. (D) Summary of the effect of STOP siRNA knockdown along middle 
axons. Mean fluorescence intensity was measured from a segment of middle axons from control (black bar) and STOPsiR (open bar) neurons. Unpaired 
t test: *, P < 0.05. (E) Middle axons transfected with YFP and control siRNA were puffed. YFP signals were inverted. (F) A middle axon transfected with 
YFP and STOP siRNA was puffed. (G) A middle axon transfected with NST 
OP-GFP (rat) and STOP siRNA was puffed. Resc, Rescue. (H) Summary of the 
puffing results for the effects of STOP siRNA on onset (left), varicosity number (middle), and size (right). Mouse hippocampal neurons were cultured from 
mouse pups at P0–P2. Error bars indicate means ± SEM. One-way ANO 
VA followed by Dunnett's test: *, P < 0.05. Bars: (A [main images] and C) 100 
µm; (A, inset) 20 µm; (E–G) 15 µm.
 JCB • Volume 216 • NumBer 7 • 2017
2190
that MT plus end dynamics, although not reversed, are altered 
at least transiently during axonal varicosity formation in-
duced by mechanical stress.
Crucial for axonal functions is proper MT-based axonal 
transport of organelles and proteins, including mitochondria 
and presynaptic proteins. Their transport in both anterograde 
and retrograde directions was observed (Kang et al., 2008; 
Wang and Schwarz, 2009; Barry et al., 2014). We wondered 
how fast puffing-induced MT disassembly affects their axo-
nal transport and in which direction the transport may be dis-
rupted. We also wondered whether newly reassembled MTs 
can immediately support axonal transport in both directions. 
Mito-YFP contains a mitochondria-targeting motif and is spe-
cifically localized in mitochondria. When expressed in hippo-
campal neurons, both anterograde and retrograde movements 
were observed, paused during puffing-induced varicosity for-
mation, and recovered after puffing was stopped (Fig. 8, B and 
D–F). We further examined two synaptic proteins, VAMP2 (a 
v-SNA 
RE) and synaptosomal-associated protein 25 (SNAP-25; 
a t-SNA 
RE). YFP-VAMP2 and YFP-SNAP25 were expressed 
in hippocampal neurons. Both moved along axons in antero-
grade and retrograde directions, paused during puffing, and 
resumed movements after puffing (Fig. 8, C–F). Collectively, 
axonal transport largely stopped during puffing-induced axonal 
varicosity formation, reflecting MT disassembly, and immedi-
ately resumed when puffing stopped, albeit with lower transport 
frequency in both directions. There were some reductions in 
transport velocity and distance. Moreover, during puffing, MT 
disassembly disrupted general axonal transport in both antero-
grade and retrograde directions, which likely led to an accumu-
lation of axonal contents and hence the formation of varicosities.
A new form of rapid axon–soma 
communication during axonal 
varicosity formation
Axotomy of dorsal root ganglion neurons causes the back-prop-
agation of Ca2+ waves at the speed of 10 µm/s, which invade the 
soma and initiate injury-related transcription programs (Cho et 
Figure 8. Mechanics-induced axonal varicosities are accompanied with transiently halted MT dynamics and axonal transport. (A) Kymograph of EB1-YFP 
plus end tracking before, during, and after puffing along an axonal segment. (B) Kymograph of Mito-YFP transport before, during, and after puffing along 
an axonal segment. (C) Kymograph of YFP-VAMP2 transport before, during, and after puffing along an axonal segment. Red arrowheads show movements 
before puffing, and blue arrowheads show movements after puffing. (D–F) Effects of puffing on moving velocity (D), distance (E), and frequency (F) of EB1-
YFP plus end tracking, mitochondria transport, and presynaptic protein transport in anterograde and retrograde directions. Error bars indicate means 
± SEM. Unpaired t test between pre- and post-puffing: *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01.
 Polarized initiation of neuronal varicosities • Gu et al.
2191
al., 2013). Is the neuronal soma able to detect axonal varicosity 
formation induced by mechanical stress? If yes, how fast can 
the soma detect it? To determine the potential electrical sig-
naling during axonal varicosity formation induced by puffing, 
we simultaneously performed whole-cell patch-clamp record-
ing from the neuronal soma along with time-lapse imaging of 
axonal segments that were ∼300 µm away from the soma and 
received puffing (Fig. 9 A). Remarkably, puffing could induce 
action potentials antidromically propagating to the soma during 
varicosity initiation in both young and old neurons (Fig. 9, B and 
C). Although axonal varicosities were reliably induced, back- 
propagating action potentials were only recorded from ∼30% 
of neurons. Their onset time also varied greatly, from 2–100 s 
(Fig. 9 D), suggesting that puffing-induced varicosity initiation 
can be rapidly detected by the soma through antidromic action 
potential propagation in some neurons. The variation may re-
sult from diverse availability and regulation of voltage-gated 
sodium (Nav) channels in different axonal branches.
Previous studies suggest that Nav channel activity can 
be regulated by mechanical stress (Morris and Juranka, 2007; 
Beyder et al., 2010). In hippocampal neurons cultured at 7 DIV, 
endogenous Nav channels are mainly concentrated at the AIS 
(Barry et al., 2014). To examine a potential role of Nav chan-
nel in puffing-induced varicosity formation, we first transfected 
the hippocampal neurons with Nav1.2-GFP cDNA construct. 
Nav1.2 is the major isoform expressed in young hippocampal 
neurons. Nav1.2-GFP was mainly concentrated at the AIS in 
the proximal axon, where no varicosity was induced by puff-
ing (Fig. S6 A). Our previous study showed that knocking 
down endogenous Ankyrin-G (AnKG) eliminated endogenous 
Nav channels in axons (Barry et al., 2014). Neither overex-
pressing AnkG-GFP nor knocking down AnkG with shRNA 
allowed the AIS to form varicosities when being puffed (Fig. 
S6, B and C). Thus, Nav channels and AnkG-clustered AIS 
components are unlikely to be involved in puffing-induced 
axonal varicosities. Collectively, our study shows that axonal 
varicosity initiation is likely accompanied by a receptor poten-
tial via TPRV4 activation, which can trigger action potential 
(via Nav channel activation) antidromic propagation, a much 
faster axon–soma communication compared with Ca2+ waves 
and retrograde transport.
Discussion
Our study has demonstrated rapid, reversible, and polarized var-
icosity initiation in central neuron mechanosensation. This pro-
cess depends on the strength and duration of mechanical stress, 
neuron age, and importantly, subcellular compartment. Based 
on our results, we propose the following mechanistic model that 
micromechanical stress activates TRPV4 in axonal membranes, 
leading to Ca2+ influx into the axon. Subsequently, increased 
Ca2+-bound calmodulin levels in the axon compete with STOP 
for MTs, which destabilizes MTs and thus disrupts normal axo-
nal transport, further leading to aberrant accumulation of axonal 
cargos and formation of axonal varicosities (Fig. 10, A and B). 
Our findings suggest a potentially new pathogenic mechanism 
underlying repeated subconcussive brain injury. For a glutama-
tergic CNS neuron, mechanical stresses are likely first sensed 
by its axon but not dendrites and then broken axonal segments 
release glutamate to damage dendrites and soma via excitotox-
icity (Fig. 10, C–E). Furthermore, our results have revealed a 
novel and rapid axon–soma communication upon varicosity ini-
tiation mediated by back-propagating action potentials.
The puffing pressure (0.25 ± 0.06 nN/µm2) onto the neu-
rons in our experimental setting is physiologically or patholog-
ically relevant. It does fall within the range of what previous 
Figure 9. Axonal varicosity initiation can induce antidromic propaga-
tion of action potentials. (A) Experimental diagram of recording back- 
propagating action potentials initiated by puffing. The YFP-expressing 
neuron over the transmitted-light background was recorded by a patch 
pipette at the soma. Its axons received mechanical stimuli provided by the 
puffing pipette. The red arrow indicates the area containing YFP-positive 
axons shown before (Control; left) and after (Puff; right) puffing. (B) Simul-
taneous imaging of an axonal segment (top) and whole-cell current-clamp 
recording (bottom) of a young neuron (7 DIV) before (left) and after (right) 
puffing. (C) Simultaneous imaging of an axonal segment (top) and whole-
cell current-clamp recording (bottom) of a more mature neuron (16 DIV) 
before (left) and after (right) puffing. Bars: (A) 30 µm; (B and C) 20 µm. 
(D) Summary of the time to induce action potentials for all neurons (left) 
and means ± SEM (right). Gray short lines in the left panel indicated 
the mean time for axonal varicosity initiation. AP, action potential. Error 
bars indicate means ± SEM. 
 JCB • Volume 216 • NumBer 7 • 2017
2192
investigators used in in vitro and in vivo studies. Using scan-
ning force microscopy, an early study reported that the applied 
stress (0.27 ± 0.04 nN/µm2) altered exploratory behaviors of the 
leading edge of neurite processes in vitro in a neuronal cell line 
(Franze et al., 2009). Currently, it is still not feasible to accu-
rately measure micromechanical pressures within a living brain. 
Limited progress was made for measuring mechanical stress in 
vivo. Using fluorescent cell-sized oil microdroplets with defined 
mechanical properties, a recent study estimated that the maxi-
mal anisotropic stress generated by mesenchymal cells in liv-
ing embryos at the stage E11 was ∼1.6 ± 0.8 nN/µm2 (Campàs 
et al., 2014). Interestingly, the value of puffing pressure in our 
setting is similar to that of the elastic modulus of hippocampal 
neurons, which was measured with scanning force microscopy, 
bulk rheology, and optically induced deformation to reflect vis-
coelastic characteristics of pyramidal neurons (Lu et al., 2006; 
Elkin et al., 2007). Besides the variation among different cell 
types, the stiffness of soma and neurites can differ (Grevesse et 
al., 2015). If the external pressure equals the elastic modulus of 
the material with an ideal linear elastic property and an infinite 
yield strength, a large deformation with 100% strain would be 
achieved. However, because cells are viscoelastic and stress- 
responsive materials, the viscosity, loading rate, and mechanical 
adaptation in addition to compressive pressure are required to 
be considered in calculating the deformation. Nonetheless, the 
pressure of such value should induce significant deformation to 
neurons and subsequently cause cytoskeleton remodeling, me-
chanical adaptation, or even damage.
In our experimental setting, the mechanical stress mainly 
consists of out-of-plane compression and shearing. There was 
no gross movement of neuronal processes as a result of good 
attachment to coverslips. This is different from other experi-
mental settings mainly involving bending and in-plane stretch-
ing (or tension) such as, for instance, deflection of axonal 
bundles like moving strings (Chung et al., 2005; Staal et al., 
2007) or stretching axons growing on micropatterned chan-
nels or stretchable membranes (Hemphill et al., 2011; Tang- 
Schomer et al., 2012). Consistent with our results, all of these 
can also induce axonal varicosities. However, in sharp contrast, 
axonal varicosity formation in these settings takes much longer 
(from 10 min to several hours; Staal et al., 2007; Hemphill et 
al., 2011; Tang-Schomer et al., 2012) to develop and appears 
irreversible. Therefore, our assay system is very different from 
those existing in vitro systems and provides novel insights into 
central neuron mechanosensation.
Under our experimental condition, we show two un-
expected features of axonal varicosity formation induced by 
mechanical stress, rapidness, and reversibility. The initial ap-
pearance of axonal varicosities under our condition was <5 s 
for young neurons (Fig. 1), which was not reported before. The 
onset time increased when the neurons become more mature, 
likely in part because the expression and localization patterns of 
the MS channels TRPV4 and STOP change in mature neurons 
(Figs. 3, 6, S4, and S5). It is important to note that the moder-
ate reduction of endogenous TRPV4 level in mature axons is 
not complete elimination, and thus our results are still relevant 
Figure 10. A new model of polarized ini-
tiation of neuronal varicosities induced by 
mechanical stress. (A) Diagram of signaling 
molecules on both sides of axonal membrane 
under control condition. (B) Mechanical stress 
induces a signaling cascade across the axonal 
membrane to induce axonal varicosity forma-
tion. (C–E) A new model diagram of sequential 
axonal and dendritic swelling under patholog-
ical mechanical stress. (C) Dendrites, dendritic 
spines, and axons under normal conditions. 
(D) Under mechanical stress, axonal varicosi-
ties start to form while dendrites and dendritic 
spines remain unchanged. (E) Under pro-
longed or pathological mechanical stresses, 
axonal varicosities become irreversible and 
are eventually broken to release the neurotrans-
mitter glutamate, which can overstimulate its 
receptors on dendrites to induce swelling and 
hence neuronal death. (F) Prolonged stimu-
lation of Glu (particularly NMDA) receptors 
causes swelling in dendrites but not in axons.
 Polarized initiation of neuronal varicosities • Gu et al.
2193
to the mature brain. Moreover, TRPV4 level change, in sharp 
contrast with the marked increase of STOP proteins, is likely 
uneven in different neurons of the mature brain, consistent with 
the uneven injury of a subset of axons in mTBI. Furthermore, 
myelination increases with maturation of the CNS. Myelin 
membranes may effectively insulate older axons from ionic in-
flux and hence prevent axonal varicosity formation under mild 
micromechanical stress (Fig. 1 A), representing a potentially 
novel role of axonal myelination. Collectively, it will be inter-
esting to further determine whether these factors can indeed 
make a mature brain more resistant to an mTBI or concussive 
brain injury than a young brain in future studies.
Dendritic varicosities are likely induced through a very 
different pathway. In comparison, the induction of dendritic 
varicosities by a pathological level of glutamate took ∼20 min 
(Fig. 4). This is ∼100-fold slower than puffing-induced varicos-
ity formation in axons. Thus, these two events appear to have 
different underlying mechanisms. Furthermore, histochemical 
studies using mouse models of mTBI revealed the changes in 
the brain, including axonal and dendritic varicosities, only over 
a much longer period, from a few hours to several days (Reeves 
et al., 2005; Gao et al., 2011). Our study suggests that formation 
of axonal and dendritic varicosities may take place at different 
time courses because of different underlying mechanisms.
Axonal varicosities induced in vivo and in vitro in various 
disease or injury models are usually thought to be irreversible 
as a sign of axon degeneration. Unexpectedly, our study shows 
that the transient formation of axonal varicosities induced by 
mechanical stress is actually reversible, although it takes a much 
longer time to recover than that to initiate (Fig. 1 G). The revers-
ibility may be caused by the micromechanical pressure we ap-
plied, which likely resembles the situation in a subconcussion, 
and which can recover. However, repeated subconcussions can 
still lead to accumulative permanent brain injury, just like what 
we found for hippocampal axons under repeated short pulses of 
puffing (Fig. 1 H). The reversibility of puffing-induced axonal 
varicosities in this study is consistent with the observation that 
some axonal swellings can be spontaneously reversed in a few 
hours in a mouse model of multiple sclerosis (Nikić et al., 2011). 
However, it is not known whether micromechanical stress plays 
a role there because of potential tissue swelling induced by in-
flammation. Furthermore, the reversibility of varicosity forma-
tion allows it to be involved in normal neural development or 
even in the adult brain as a novel form of neural plasticity.
Our previous study using a repetitive closed-skull impact 
model (Shitaka et al., 2011) confirmed that mild mechanical 
stress can indeed induce axonal varicosities in vivo (Fig. 2). 
There are several other animal models for studying repetitive 
mTBI (Kanayama et al., 1996; Laurer et al., 2001; DeFord et 
al., 2002). In general, the pathological features of the injury ap-
peared relatively subtle in comparison with the extent of the 
behavioral deficits (Shitaka et al., 2011). This might be because 
of the sensitivity of histological tools and potential recovery of 
structural alterations. In our study, we fixed the mice immedi-
ately after the second impact instead of 6 d later in the prior 
study (Shitaka et al., 2011). This allowed us to better capture 
the initiation of axonal varicosities (Fig. 2), whereas axonal 
varicosities with staining of amyloid precursor protein (APP) 
were rare 6 d later (Shitaka et al., 2011), which might result 
from recovery. Alternatively, APP staining likely represents de-
generating axons but does not exist in transient and reversible 
formation of axonal varicosities. In addition, we used Thy1-
YFP transgenic mice in our study, which allow better detec-
tion of axons and axonal varicosities. Multifocal axonal injury 
and other changes in different brain regions were previously 
detected in this model (Shitaka et al., 2011). Consistent with 
these findings, we did observe axonal varicosities in the multi-
focal fashion in our study, which supports our results from cul-
tured neurons. It is important to note that a more comprehensive 
study would include examination of the effects on neurons by 
altering the strength, number, and interval of mechanical im-
pacts. Perhaps the most informative strategy is to perform in 
vivo imaging of neuronal morphology before, during, and after 
mechanical impact. Unfortunately, this technique currently is 
not yet available. Nonetheless, our in vivo results not only show 
axonal varicosity formation but also raise several interesting 
questions for future studies.
The closed-skull impact model has been established for 
studying mTBI (Shitaka et al., 2011). Our in vitro puffing 
model mimics many aspects of mTBI as well in terms of the 
moderate strength, compression and shearing stresses, varicos-
ity formation, and recovery that we have discussed. On the other 
hand, during mTBI, the contact between an object and the skull 
of the head is usually very short, shorter than the time needed 
for puffing-induced varicosity formation in axons. However, it 
is important to note that there is a spring-dashpot system be-
tween the impact point at the skull and the neurons because 
of the presence of elastic tissues and the cerebrospinal fluid in 
between. The system affects the stress magnitude and the mo-
ment of peak stress. In particular, it may take longer to reach 
the peak stress value, and the force may last longer than that 
for the initiate impact for various neurons in the brain to be 
compressed, torn, or stretched, causing membrane deformation 
that activates MS ion channels. Furthermore, varicosity forma-
tion, which is the readout of our puffing assay, involves multiple 
steps after the initial mechanical loading and takes more time 
to develop, as illustrated in our summary diagram (Fig. 10, A 
and B). Therefore, our findings with the puffing system are rel-
evant to concussion or mTBI.
Our study has provided several lines of evidence show-
ing that TRPV4 functions as the major MS ion channel in me-
chanical stress–induced varicosity formation in the axons of 
hippocampal neurons: (a) TRPV4 was permeable to Ca2+ and, 
to a lesser extent, Na+ (∼1:6 ratio), which is consistent with 
the effects of removing the two cations in axonal varicosity ini-
tiation (Fig. S3, A–D); (b) TRPV4 agonist perfusion induced 
axonal varicosity formation (Fig. S3, E–G); (c) two TRPV4 
antagonists blocked puffing-induced varicosity formation (Fig. 
S3, E–G); (d) TRPV4 expressed in HEK293 cells was activated 
by puffing (Fig. 3, A–C); and (e) TRPV4 was detected in the 
axons of hippocampal neurons, consistent with a previous study 
(Shibasaki et al., 2007), and its knockdown by shRNA reduced 
puffing-induced axonal varicosity initiation (Figs. 3 and S4). 
Collectively, these data indicate a key role of TRPV4. However, 
at this time, we cannot completely rule out the potential role 
of other unidentified and Ca2+-permeable MS ion channels in 
this process. Therefore, it will be interesting to determine how 
different expression of potential MS channels in various CNS 
neurons may be responsible for neurons’ distinct sensitivity to 
various mechanical stresses in future studies.
Neuronal morphological and functional polarity has been 
extensively investigated. Our study has demonstrated for the 
first time that micromechanical stress and excitotoxicity pref-
erentially affect axons and dendrites, respectively (Figs. 1 and 
 JCB • Volume 216 • NumBer 7 • 2017
2194
4). Dendritic varicosities were induced by glutamate (plus gly-
cine and TTX) in ∼20 min (Fig. 4), consistent with the time 
course of previous studies using sublethal NMDA exposure 
(Hasbani et al., 2001; Tseng and Firestein, 2011). A previous 
study showed that prolonged activation of NMDA receptors led 
to MT fragmentation, in which two postsynaptic proteins, PDS-
95 and Cypin, played regulatory roles (Tseng and Firestein, 
2011). Under our treatment condition, we cannot rule out the 
potential role of other types of glutamate receptors. Because of 
dendritic localization of NMDA receptors (and other glutamate 
receptors) and downstream signaling, excitotoxicity may initi-
ate only in dendrites, but not axons. However, degeneration of 
neuronal dendrites and soma eventually led to axon degenera-
tion. In sharp contrast, micromechanical stress preferentially af-
fected axons in which MS channel TRPV4 is relatively enriched 
and the MT-stabilizing effect of STOP can be reversed (Figs. 3 
and 6). For both excitotoxicity and mechanical stress–induced 
varicosities, Ca2+ influx and subsequent MT disassembly play 
critical roles. Under the puffing condition, our live-cell imag-
ing experiments show that the spatial and temporal patterns 
of Ca2+ signaling are different in axons and dendrites. Ca2+ in-
creases accompanied axonal varicosity formation and were rel-
atively more persistent, whereas there were only transient Ca2+ 
increases (<20 s) in some dendrites (Fig. 5). This may result 
from a strong Ca2+ sequestration mechanism in dendrites, which 
may only be overpowered by excitotoxicity. Why does replac-
ing external Na+ with NMDG render axons some resistance to 
puffing-induced varicosity initiation? Na+ influx can activate 
voltage-gated Ca2+ channels by depolarizing the axonal mem-
brane and reverse Na+/Ca2+ exchangers (Barsukova et al., 2012), 
leading to additional Ca2+ increase in axons. In the absence of 
external Ca2+, Na+ influx may indirectly lead to a minor Ca2+ 
increase via the release from internal Ca2+ stores (Barsukova 
et al., 2012). Therefore, external Na+ may indirectly regulate 
intraaxonal Ca2+ levels, whereas Ca2+ plays a central role in 
puffing-induced varicosity initiation. Furthermore, a markedly 
larger volume in dendrites also requires significantly more Ca2+ 
cations to reach a higher free Ca2+ concentration and/or to de-
polarize the membrane. The same puffing pressure may induce 
less deformation in dendrites compared with axons, leading to 
less activated TRPV4 ion channels in dendrites. The TRPV4 
protein levels on the neuronal surface are still not clear, and 
maybe are less on dendritic membranes. All of these factors 
contribute to the result that mechanical stress is less likely to 
induce varicosities in dendrites. More extensive studies using 
Ca2+ imaging in vivo and combined with imaging of MS chan-
nel activation and MT dynamics/stability are interesting re-
search topics for future investigation.
The MT cytoskeleton plays a key role in the establishment 
and maintenance of neuronal polarity. MT dynamics and stabil-
ity in neurons can be regulated through different mechanisms, 
including many different MT-binding proteins (Baas et al., 
2016; van Beuningen and Hoogenraad, 2016). In our study, we 
have tested three MT-binding proteins, EB1, MAP2, and STOP, 
when overexpressed, which can stabilize MTs in very different 
ways. Our results show that EB1 and MAP2 are not likely in-
volved in puffing-induced axonal varicosity initiation, whereas 
STOP likely plays an important role because overexpressing 
NST 
OP-GFP inhibited this process (Fig. 6, A–D). Interestingly, 
endogenous STOP proteins were not evenly distributed along 
an axon, with the highest level in proximal axons and the lowest 
level in distal axons (Fig. 7, A and B). The high levels of STOP 
proteins in proximal axons as well as in soma and dendrites 
are consistent with the results that these regions are more re-
sistant to puffing-induced varicosity formation (Fig. 1) and that 
the axons with overexpressed NST 
OP-GFP are varicosity resis-
tant (Fig. 6, C and D). However, the moderate level of STOP 
in middle and distal axons may allow it to reversibly regulate 
MT stability in response to different Ca2+/calmodulin levels 
with the axon. To confirm its important role in this process, we 
performed siRNA knockdown of endogenous STOP and found 
that the middle axons from mouse hippocampal neurons trans-
fected with STOP siRNA became significantly more sensitive 
to puffing, which was reversed or rescued when NST 
OP-GFP 
(rat) was cotransfected (Fig. 7, C–H). It is important to note that 
this experiment was performed using mouse hippocampal neu-
rons cultured from postnatal pups because the published STOP 
siRNA is mouse specific (Deloulme et al., 2015). Furthermore, 
these results indicate that not all axons are equally sensitive to 
micromechanical stress, consistent with the previous results 
from mTBI models (Reeves et al., 2005). Myelinated, aged, 
and proximal axons are relatively more resistant to mechanical 
stress (Figs. 1 and S2), likely resulting from less Ca2+ influx and 
more rigid MT filaments.
Interestingly, STOP was initially discovered by its func-
tion of stabilizing MT filaments at cold temperatures (Margolis 
et al., 1986; Bosc et al., 1996), whereas TRPV4 activity can 
be regulated by temperature changes (Christensen and Corey, 
2007; Venkatachalam and Montell, 2007). Temperature is a 
physical factor. Therefore, our study leads to a novel model in 
which axons and dendrites of CNS neurons may be designed to 
selectively sense and respond to physical and chemical stim-
uli, respectively. In younger neurons, there are relatively higher 
TRPV4 and lower STOP levels compared with older neurons. 
The similar pattern exists for distal axons compared with prox-
imal axons. Higher TRPV4 activity leads to more Ca2+ influx 
induced by mechanical stimuli, and lower STOP levels are more 
likely to cause Ca2+-mediated MT disassembly, which is re-
quired for axonal varicosity formation. Nonetheless, currently, 
we still cannot rule out the potential role of other MT-binding 
proteins in this mechanical stress–induced varicosity formation 
in axons. Particularly, our results suggest that the MT-binding 
proteins that are similar to STOP in terms of axonal localization 
and sensitivity to Ca2+ and/or Ca2+-binding proteins should be 
further examined in future investigations.
MT disassembly and reassembly appear to play key roles 
in puffing-induced initiation of axonal varicosities and recovery, 
respectively. During puffing-induced axonal varicosity initia-
tion, MT disassembly is indicated by elimination of EB1-YFP 
plus end tracking (Fig. 8 A). At the same time, axonal trans-
port of mitochondria and two different presynaptic proteins 
stopped in both directions (Fig. 8, B and C), consistent with 
MT disassembly. More interestingly, at the recovery stage when 
puffing stopped, EB1-YFP plus end tracking resumed with the 
same orientation (Fig. 8 A), indicating the same mechanism 
governing MT assembly and reassembly. Could those newly 
reassembled MTs support axonal transport in both anterograde 
and retrograde directions? The answer is yes. Detailed analysis 
revealed that there are some differences between original MTs 
and reassembled MTs in MT dynamics and axonal transport 
velocity, distance, and frequency (Fig. 8, D–F), which may re-
sult from modification by Ca2+ signaling. Nonetheless, during 
puffing, MT disassembly may disrupt general axonal transport 
and lead to accumulation of axonal cargos, resulting at least 
 Polarized initiation of neuronal varicosities • Gu et al.
2195
partially in varicosity formation. During recovery after puffing, 
active transport may help to remove those accumulated contents 
and reduce varicosities.
The neurophysiological effects of concussion or sub-
concussion are normally immediately felt, consistent with our 
results that axonal varicosity formation can initiate action poten-
tials that antidromically propagate back to soma (Fig. 9). This is 
different from the situation during axotomy, where axon–soma 
communication is mediated by retrograde Ca2+ waves at a speed 
of ∼10 µm/s (Cho et al., 2013; Rishal and Fainzilber, 2014). 
With the speed of Ca2+ waves, it will take ∼30 s for signals 
to reach soma along a 300-µm-long axon. This would be too 
slow for the onset of neurophysiological effects after mechani-
cal impact. It is important to note that Ca2+ increases in axonal 
varicosities are more persistent and highly localized (Fig. 5), 
consistent with localized formation of axonal varicosities (Figs. 
1 and S2) and different from propagating Ca2+ waves. However, 
in contrast with the reliable induction of axonal varicosities, 
rapid antidromic action potentials could only be recorded in 
∼30% of the neurons (Fig. 9). The variation may be caused by 
the location of axonal varicosity formation, where the amount 
of Nav channels available for generation of action potentials 
varies. As we know, efficient generation of action potentials 
normally occurs at the AIS, a unique site in a neuron where 
the high concentration of Nav channels is unparalleled. It is 
much more difficult and unreliable to generate antidromic ac-
tion potentials in the middle of axonal branches. Nonetheless, 
a neural circuit consisting of many different axons is still likely 
to reliably sense mechanical impact as a group. Furthermore, 
besides antidromic action potentials, axonal varicosity forma-
tion could also use Ca2+ waves and/or retrograde transport to 
communicate with the soma in long-term changes. Therefore, 
it is possible that there are multiple forms of axon–soma sig-
naling that play a role at different stages of varicosity formation 
and/or in different neurons. These will be interesting research 
topics for future studies.
Collectively, our findings from this study provide novel 
mechanistic insights into the initial stage of a newly recognized 
axonal plasticity in health and disease. This process, which is 
still poorly characterized, may play a key role in neural devel-
opment, CNS function in adults, chronic brain disorders, and 
various acute brain injuries.
Materials and methods
cDNA plasmids
EB1-YFP was previously described (Gu et al., 2006; Gu and Gu, 2010; 
Barry et al., 2014). YFP-MAP2 was made by subcloning the MAP2 
cDNA into the pEYFP-N1 vector (Takara Bio Inc.). Mito-YFP was 
purchased from Takara Bio Inc. NST 
OP-GFP was provided by C. Bosc 
and A. Andrieux (University Grenoble Alpes, Grenoble, France). 
TRPV4 was a gift from B.M. Spiegelman and L. Ye (Harvard Univer-
sity, Cambridge, MA). TRPV1 was purchased from OpenBiosystem. 
All constructs were confirmed by sequencing.
Rat hippocampal neuron culture and transfection
All animal experiments were conducted in accordance with the Na-
tional Institutes of Health Animal Use Guidelines and the Institu-
tional Animal Care and Use Committee of the Ohio State University. 
Hippocampal neuron culture was prepared from rat embryos at E18 
as previously described (Xu et al., 2007, 2010). Rat tail collagen and 
poly-d-lysine were used to coat glass coverslips for neuron culture. 
In brief, 2 d after neuron plating, 1 µM cytosine arabinose (Sigma- 
Aldrich) was added to neuronal culture media to inhibit glial growth for 
the subsequent 2 d and then was replaced with normal neuronal culture 
media. Culture media were replenished twice a week by replacing half 
volume. For transient transfection, neurons in culture at 5–7 DIV were 
incubated in Opti-MEM containing 0.8 µg of cDNA plasmid and 1.5 µl 
of Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) for 20 min at 37°C. For old neuron 
(14–28 DIV) transfection, the Ca2+-phosphate method was used, which 
was previously described (Barry et al., 2014). The neurons (21 DIV) 
were incubated with the calcium phosphate–cDNA mixture contain-
ing 1 µg of cDNA plasmid and 3.1 µl CaCl2 (2 M) for 45–60 min at 
37°C and then the medium was replaced by 10% CO2 preequilibrated 
mixture of half-volume original medium plus 30% volume fresh me-
dium (Barry et al., 2014).
Fluid micromechanical pressure provided by local puffing
To induce axonal varicosities by local puffing, the glass pipette (tip di-
ameter ∼50 µm) was connected to a syringe via tubing filled with 5 ml 
Hank’s buffer or other solutions. The buffer was pushed to axons or 
dendrites by gravity. The vertical distance between the pipette tip and 
cultured neurons was set at 0.4 mm. When the 190 mmH2O pressure 
was applied, axonal varicosities were reliably induced. The formation 
of axonal swelling was considered a varicosity when it was ∼200% 
width of its adjacent axonal shafts. The onset time was defined as the 
time for an axonal segment to reach 10 varicosities per 100-µm length 
during puffing. It is important to note that, whereas the diameter of a 
varicosity increased during puffing, the diameter of its adjacent axonal 
shafts decreased to smaller than the diameter of normal axonal shafts 
before puffing (Fig. 4, I–K). Moreover, under normal conditions with-
out puffing, no varicosity can be detected in proximal axons, but diam-
eters of middle and distal axons are not perfectly uniform, sometimes 
containing a low level of varicosities. Therefore, the baseline of vari-
cosity density in middle and distal axons was not absolute zero. These 
data are reflected in quantification of varicosity results.
Measurement of the fluid micromechanical pressure
The actual loading pressure exerted on neurons was determined with 
a microfabricated silicone membrane (500 µm in diameter and 50 µm 
thick) under the same experimental setup. Arrays of microdots (4 µm 
in diameter and 10 µm apart from center to center) were patterned on 
the top surface of the membrane for tracking the membrane deflec-
tion (Wang et al., 2013) under the puffing area (Fig. S1). Upon load-
ing driven by 190 mmH2O gravity, the mean center deflection of the 
membrane was measured as w = −3.143 ± 0.69 µm (mean ± SD; n 
= 6). According to the linear fit of differential pressure versus center 
deflection of the membrane (p = −0.798w; |w| ≤ 12 µm; R2 = 0.9997; 
unit of p: mbar), the corresponding pressure was P = 2.51 ± 0.55 
mbar = 0.25 ± 0.06 nN/µm2.
Live-cell time-lapse imaging
Neurons growing on 25-mm coverslips were loaded into the imaging 
chamber (Molecular Devices) and incubated with Hank’s buffer or other 
modified buffers at room temperature. The time-lapse imaging setup was 
built on an inverted microscope (TE2000; Nikon). Images were captured 
with a charge-coupled device camera (CoolSNAP HQ; Photometrics) 
through YFP or other filter sets with 1-s exposure time. The filters were 
changed through filter wheels controlled via Lambda 10–3 (Sutter In-
strument) by MetaMorph software (Molecular Devices). Time-lapse im-
aging was performed with indicated intervals for hundreds of frames. 
This procedure was described in previous studies (Gu and Gu, 2010; 
Barry et al., 2014). To localize endogenous TRPV4 channels to axonal 
 JCB • Volume 216 • NumBer 7 • 2017
2196
segments that are sensitive to puffing, we initially loaded cultured hip-
pocampal neurons (7 DIV) with 2 µM calcien AM (Thermo Fisher Sci-
entific) in neuron culture medium at 37°C for 30 min. The neurons were 
washed twice and incubated with Hank’s buffer at room temperature 
for the puffing assay and time-lapse imaging. Immediately after clear 
induction of axonal varicosities, the neurons were fixed with 4% form-
aldehyde in PBS and stained with the anti-TRPV4 antibody (see the 
Antibodies and immunofluorescence staining section for more details).
Solutions with different ionic components
The Hank’s buffer, pH 7.4, contained 150 mM NaCl, 4 mM KCl, 
1.2 mM MgCl2, 1 mM CaCl2, 10 mg/ml glucose, and 20 mM Hepes. 
The Ca2+-free buffer, pH 7.4, was made by removing CaCl2 and adding 
2 mM EGTA. The Mg2+-free buffer, pH 7.4, was made by removing 
MgCl2. The Na+-free buffer, pH 7.4, was made by replacing NaCl with 
equal molar of NMDG (Sigma-Aldrich). The Ca2+- and Na+-free buffer, 
pH 7.4, was made by removing CaCl2, adding 2 mM EGTA, and replac-
ing NaCl with equal molar NMDG.
Repetitive closed-skull TBI model using Thy1-YFP transgenic mice
The detailed procedure was previously described (Shitaka et al., 2011). 
In brief, male C57BL/6J and Thy1-YFP transgenic mice (6 wk old; n 
= 10; from The Jackson Laboratory) were anesthetized with 5% isoflu-
rane and placed in a stereotaxic frame with rounded Kopf head holders 
(David Kopf Instruments). Temperature was controlled at 37°C using 
a feedback temperature controller (Cell Microcontrols). Isoflurane was 
delivered by nose cone at 2% in air. The heads were shaved and pre-
pared with Betadine. A midline skin incision was made, and the skull 
was exposed. A rubber tip (Precision Associates, Inc.) was mounted 
on an electromagnetic stereotaxic impact device. The deformation of 
the rubber tip spread the impact force over the skull. There were <3% 
skull fractures and no immediate fatalities after these injuries. Mice 
with skull fractures were killed and were not used in any experiments, 
and mice with hemorrhages were excluded from the analyses. After 24 
± 1 h, a second identical closed-skull TBI procedure was performed 
and then mice were immediately perfused and fixed. For sham injuries, 
the same procedure was performed, except the impact device was dis-
charged in the air; the handling of the mice and duration of anesthesia 
were the same for TBI and sham procedures. Impacts and staining pro-
cedures were performed in a blinded fashion.
Brain tissue fixation, sectioning, and immunostaining
The procedures of cardiac perfusion, fixation, sectioning, staining, and 
imaging were described in our previous papers (Jukkola et al., 2012, 
2013; Barry et al., 2013, 2014). In brief, animals were anesthetized 
with 250 mg/kg avertin (Sigma-Aldrich). After cardiac perfusion and 
fixation, the brain was removed and postfixed in 4% formaldehyde in 
PBS for 1 h. The brain was cut into 3-mm blocks using an acrylic brain 
matrix (Braintree Scientific) and placed in 30% sucrose for at least 24 h 
before sectioning. The brain was arranged in the same block, embedded 
in optimal cutting temperature media (Sakura Finetek USA, Inc.), and 
stored at −80°C until sectioning. The tissue blocks were cut with a 
Microm HM550 cryostat (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and the 40-µm 
sections were collected on Superfrost Plus microscope slides (Thermo 
Fisher Scientific) for storage at −20°C. After immunostaining, all sec-
tions were coverslipped using tris-buffered Fluoro-Gel mounting media 
(Electron Microscopy Sciences). 
Drug treatment
LatA, RN-1734, and GSK1016790a (GSK) from Sigma-Aldrich and Noco 
from EMD Millipore were prepared in DMSO. l-Glutamate and gado-
linium from Sigma-Aldrich and glycine from Thermo Fisher Scientific 
were prepared in double-distilled H2O. Capsaicin (Sigma-Aldrich) was 
dissolved in ethanol. All stock solutions were kept at −20°C and then were 
added to neuron culture media during treatment (<0.1% DMSO) or were 
freshly diluted in Hank’s buffer during puffing or perfusion. To analyze the 
potential role of cytoskeletal proteins, neurons were treated with 10 µg/ml 
Noco for up to 60 min or with 2.5 µM LatA for 2 h at 37°C. 1 µM capsaicin 
or 0.5 µM GSK was perfused to HEK293 cells transfected with TRPV1 
or TRPV4 channels, respectively, to induce channel currents via a glass 
pipette (tip diameter ∼50 µm).
Expression of TRP channels in HEK293 cells and voltage-clamp 
recording
Whole-cell voltage-clamp recording was performed on transfected 
HEK293 cells at room temperature (∼25°C) as described previously 
(Gu et al., 2012, 2013). Glass micropipettes with a resistance of ∼2–3 
MΩ were pulled with a Model P-1000 Flaming/Brown micropipette 
puller (Sutter Instrument) and filled with the internal solution contain-
ing 122 mM KMeSO4, 20 mM NaCl, 5 mM Mg-ATP, 0.3 mM GTP, and 
10 mM Hepes, pH 7.2. The external solution was Hank’s buffer. The 
whole-cell access resistance was ∼2–3 MΩ. Cells with higher access 
resistance were discarded. The compensation for series resistance was 
set at >60%. The recording was done using an Axopatch 200B ampli-
fier, a Digidata 1440A, and pCLA 
MP10 software (Molecular Devices). 
Currents were filtered at 5 kHz. Membrane potentials of isolated cells 
were normally held at −80 mV.
TRPV4 siRNA knockdown
Stealth RNAi TRPV4 siRNA (ID: RSS330372) targeting to nucleotides 
1,322–1,346 of rat TRPV4 (GenBank accession number NM_023970) 
was purchased from Invitrogen (Benfenati et al., 2011). The stock solu-
tion of double-strained siRNA was made in RNase-free water according 
to the instructions of the manufacturer and stored at −20°C. Scrambled 
siRNA was used as a negative control. Plasmid DNA (YFP) and siRNA 
were cotransfected into cultured neurons using Lipofectamine 2000. 
In brief, neurons in culture media without antibiotics at 4–5 DIV were 
incubated in Opti-MEM containing 20 pmol siRNA, 0.8 µg of YFP 
plasmid, and 1.5 µl of Lipofectamine 2000 for 20 min at 37°C. The 
neurons were used for live-cell time-lapse imaging or immunostaining 
4–5 d after transfection.
Antibodies and immunofluorescence staining
Antibodies used in this study include rabbit polyclonal anti-TRPV4 
(Lifespan Biosciences, Inc.), mouse anti-TRPV1 antibody (clone 
N221/17; NeuroMAB), mouse anti-STOP antibody (Cell Signaling 
Technology), mouse anti-β-tubulin (EMD Millipore), mouse anti- 
MAP2, rabbit anti-Tau1, rat anti-MBP antibodies (EMD Millipore), 
and Cy2- and Cy5-conjugated secondary antibodies (Jackson Immuno-
Research Laboratories, Inc.). In particular, the anti-TRPV4 antibody 
(LS-C94498; Lifespan Biosciences) was extensively validated by using 
Western blots and immunostaining of wild-type and TRPV4-null mice 
(as well as TRPV4 cDNA; Ryskamp et al., 2011). The procedure of 
immunocytochemistry was previously described (Jukkola et al., 2012, 
2013). In brief, neurons were fixed with 4% formaldehyde (10% ultra-
pure EM grade and methanol free; Polysciences, Inc.) and 4% sucroseq 
in PBS for 20 min and then stained with specified antibodies under 
permeabilized conditions in the presence of 0.2% Triton X-100 to label 
total proteins. To distinguish axons and dendrites of neurons, the anti- 
MAP2 (a dendritic marker) antibody was used in costaining.
Ca2+ imaging with Fluo-4 AM on hippocampal neurons under puffing
Cultured hippocampal neurons at 7 DIV were loaded with 5 µM Fluo-4 
AM (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in neuron culture medium at 37°C for 
 Polarized initiation of neuronal varicosities • Gu et al.
2197
30 min. The neurons were washed twice and incubated in the Hank’s 
buffer for the puffing assay and time-lapse imaging. The neurons 
were imaged continuously with the exposure time for each image at 
0.5 s. Images were quantified with MetaMorph software.
Western blotting analysis for endogenous protein expression
Mice were killed with carbon dioxide, and brain and spinal cord tis-
sues were immediately removed, flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and 
stored at −80°C until use. Tissue samples were weighed and then ho-
mogenized in 1:4 (wt/vol) Laemmli sample buffer (Bio-Rad Labora-
tories) with 5% β-mercaptoethanol (Sigma-Aldrich). Protein samples 
were resolved by SDS-PAGE and transferred to a PVDF membrane 
(GE Healthcare) for Western blotting, which was described previously 
(Barry et al., 2014). The β-tubulin level was used as control.
TEM
Monolayer primary hippocampal neurons were fixed with 4% para-
formaldehyde and 3% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer, pH 
7.4. Embedding, sectioning, and imaging with TEM were done in the 
Campus Microscopy and Imaging facility at The Ohio State University 
as described previously (Gardner et al., 2012).
STOP siRNA knockdown in mouse hippocampal neurons
Mouse hippocampal neurons were cultured from hippocampi of wild-
type C57BL/6 mouse pups at P0–P1 with the same culture method as 
the rat embryonic neuron culture. Stealth RNAi, or STOP (or MAP6) 
siRNA (ID: MSS275832; sequence 5′-CCA 
AUA 
AGC 
CCA 
GUG 
CAG 
CGG 
ACAA-3′) targeting mouse STOP, was purchased from Thermo 
Fisher Scientific. This siRNA probe was validated and successfully 
used in a recent study (Deloulme et al., 2015).
Simultaneous recording of action potentials and imaging of axonal 
varicosity initiation induced by puffing
The current-clamp recording procedure was described previously 
(Gu et al., 2012). The same internal solution and Hank’s buffer were 
used for recording action potentials from primary cultured neurons. 
Action potentials were recorded from the neuronal soma, whereas 
its axons >300 µm away were puffed for the induction of varicosi-
ties imaged with time-lapse imaging at the same time. The membrane 
resistance, capacitance, and resting membrane potential were mea-
sured from these neurons.
Statistical analysis
Results are presented as means ± SEM. A two-tailed Student’s t test 
was used for comparisons between two groups. One-way ANO 
VA fol-
lowed by Dunnett’s test was used for comparing two or more groups 
to one control group. *, P < 0.05 and **, P < 0.01 were considered 
statistically significant.
Online supplemental material
Fig. S1 shows the effect and strength of micromechanical pressure. Fig. 
S2 shows that puffing-induced varicosity formation depends on the age 
and subcellular compartment of neurons. Fig. S3 shows identification of 
MS ion channels responsible for puffing-induced varicosity formation in 
axons. Fig. S4 shows TRPV4 expression in hippocampal neurons at dif-
ferent developmental stages. Fig. S5 shows the development-dependent 
expression and localization of STOP in cultured hippocampal neurons. 
Fig. S6 shows how alterations of Nav channels and/or AnkG at the AIS 
do not affect the AIS’s resistance to puffing-induced varicosity forma-
tion. Video 1 shows how puffing induced rapid and reversible varicosity 
formation in axons of young neurons expressing YFP. Video 2 shows 
how puffing induced varicosity formation in axons but not in dendrites 
or dendritic spines of mature neurons expressing YFP. Video 3 shows a 
low magnification view of puffing (by normal Hank’s buffer) induced 
rapid and reversible varicosity formation in axons of young neurons ex-
pressing YFP. Video 4 shows how puffing with the buffer containing no 
Ca2+ and Na+ failed to induce varicosities in axons of young neurons ex-
pressing 
YFP. Video 5 shows how stimulating NMDA receptors with Glu 
and Gly induced varicosity formation along dendrites but not axons of 
mature neurons over time. Video 6 shows how puffing induced persistent 
Ca2+ increase within varicosities along an axonal segment. Video 7 
shows how puffing induced a transient Ca2+ increase in a dendrite. 
Acknowledgments
We thank Drs. Bruce M. Spiegelman, Christophe Bosc, and Annie 
Andrieux for cDNA constructs, the Campus Microscopy and Imaging 
facility at The Ohio State University for technical assistance in TEM, 
and Drs. Stuart Mangel, Annie Andrieux, and Jacques Brocard for 
commenting on the manuscript at various stages. All animal experi-
ments have been conducted in accordance with the National Institutes 
of Health Animal Use Guidelines.
This work was supported in part by grants from National 
 
Institutes of Health (R01NS062720, R01NS093073, and 
R21AA024873) to C. Gu. 
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Author contributions: C. Gu designed and supervised the re-
search. Y. Gu, P. Jukkola, and C. Gu performed experiments, ana-
lyzed data, and made figures. Q. Wang and Y. Zhao performed 
the measurement of micromechanical forces. T. Esparza and 
D. Brody performed the repetitive closed-skull TBI model. C. Gu 
wrote the manuscript.
Submitted: 13 June 2016
Revised: 17 January 2017
Accepted: 20 April 2017
References
Akhmanova, A., and M.O. Steinmetz. 2008. Tracking the ends: a dynamic 
protein network controls the fate of microtubule tips. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell 
Biol. 9:309–322. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nrm2369
Amack, J.D., and M.L. Manning. 2012. Knowing the boundaries: Extending 
the differential adhesion hypothesis in embryonic cell sorting. Science. 
338:212–215. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/science 
.1223953
Andrieux, A., P.A. Salin, M. Vernet, P. Kujala, J. Baratier, S. Gory-Fauré, 
C. Bosc, H. Pointu, D. Proietto, A. Schweitzer, et al. 2002. The 
suppression of brain cold-stable microtubules in mice induces synaptic 
defects associated with neuroleptic-sensitive behavioral disorders. Genes 
Dev. 16:2350–2364. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1101 
/gad 
.223302
Árnadóttir, J., and M. Chalfie. 2010. Eukaryotic mechanosensitive channels. 
Annu. Rev. Biophys. 39:111–137. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1146 
/annurev 
.biophys 
.37 
.032807 
.125836
Baas, P.W., A.N. Rao, A.J. Matamoros, and L. Leo. 2016. Stability properties of 
neuronal microtubules. Cytoskeleton (Hoboken). 73:442–460.
Barry, J., M. Xu, Y. Gu, A.W. Dangel, P. Jukkola, C. Shrestha, and C. Gu. 2013. 
Activation of conventional kinesin motors in clusters by Shaw voltage-
gated K+ channels. J. Cell Sci. 126:2027–2041. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1242 
/jcs 
.122234
Barry, J., Y. Gu, P. Jukkola, B. O’Neill, H. Gu, P.J. Mohler, K.T. Rajamani, and 
C. Gu. 2014. Ankyrin-G directly binds to kinesin-1 to transport voltage-
gated Na+ channels into axons. Dev. Cell. 28:117–131. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.devcel 
.2013 
.11 
.023
Barsukova, A.G., M. Forte, and D. Bourdette. 2012. Focal increases of 
axoplasmic Ca2+, aggregation of sodium–calcium exchanger, N-type 
Ca2+ channel, and actin define the sites of spheroids in axons undergoing 
oxidative stress. J. Neurosci. 32:12028–12037. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1523 
/
JNE 
URO 
SCI 
.0408 
-12 
.2012
Benfenati, 
V., M. Caprini, M. Dovizio, M.N. Mylonakou, S. Ferroni, O.P. Ottersen, 
and M. Amiry-Moghaddam. 2011. An aquaporin-4/transient receptor 
 JCB • Volume 216 • NumBer 7 • 2017
2198
potential vanilloid 4 (AQP4/TRPV4) complex is essential for cell-volume 
control in astrocytes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 108:2563–2568. http 
://
dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.1012867108
Bentley, M., and G. Banker. 2016. The cellular mechanisms that maintain neuro-
nal polarity. Nature. 17:611–622.
Betz, T., D. Koch, Y.B. Lu, K. Franze, and J.A. Käs. 2011. Growth cones as 
soft and weak force generators. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 108:13420–
13425. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.1106145108
Beyder, A., J.L. Rae, C. Bernard, P.R. Strege, F. Sachs, and G. Farrugia. 2010. 
Mechanosensitivity of Nav1.5, a voltage-sensitive sodium channel. 
J. Physiol. 588:4969–4985. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1113 
/jphysiol 
.2010 
.199034
Bosc, C., J.D. Cronk, F. Pirollet, D.M. Watterson, J. Haiech, D. Job, and 
R.L. Margolis. 1996. Cloning, expression, and properties of the 
microtubule-stabilizing protein STOP. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 
93:2125–2130. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.93 
.5 
.2125
Bu, W., and L.K. Su. 2001. Regulation of microtubule assembly by human EB1 
family proteins. Oncogene. 20:3185–3192. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/sj 
.onc 
.1204429
Campàs, O., T. Mammoto, S. Hasso, R.A. Sperling, D. O’Connell, A.G. Bischof, 
R. Maas, D.A. Weitz, L. Mahadevan, and D.E. Ingber. 2014. Quantifying 
cell-generated mechanical forces within living embryonic tissues. Nat. 
Methods. 11:183–189. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nmeth 
.2761
Caterina, M.J., M.A. Schumacher, M. Tominaga, T.A. Rosen, J.D. Levine, and 
D. Julius. 1997. The capsaicin receptor: a heat-activated ion channel in 
the pain pathway. Nature. 389:816–824. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/39807
Cho, Y., R. Sloutsky, K.M. Naegle, and V. Cavalli. 2013. Injury-induced 
HDAC5 nuclear export is essential for axon regeneration. Cell. 155:894–
908. (published erratum appears in Cell. 2015. 161:691) http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cell 
.2013 
.10 
.004
Christensen, A.P., and D.P. Corey. 2007. TRP channels in mechanosensation: 
direct or indirect activation? Nature. 8:510–521.
Chung, R.S., J.A. Staal, G.H. McCormack, T.C. Dickson, M.A. Cozens, 
J.A. Chuckowree, M.C. Quilty, and J.C. Vickers. 2005. Mild axonal 
stretch injury in vitro induces a progressive series of neurofilament 
alterations ultimately leading to delayed axotomy. J. Neurotrauma. 
22:1081–1091. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1089 
/neu 
.2005 
.22 
.1081
Cosens, D.J., and A. Manning. 1969. Abnormal electroretinogram from a 
Drosophila mutant. Nature. 224:285–287. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/224285a0
Couégnas, A., A. Schweitzer, A. Andrieux, M.S. Ghandour, and N. Boehm. 2007. 
Expression pattern of STOP lacZ reporter gene in adult and developing 
mouse brain. J. Neurosci. Res. 85:1515–1527. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1002 
/jnr 
.21278
Debanne, D. 2004. Information processing in the axon. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 
5:304–316. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nrn1397
DeFord, S.M., M.S. Wilson, A.C. Rice, T. Clausen, L.K. Rice, A. Barabnova, 
R. Bullock, and R.J. Hamm. 2002. Repeated mild brain injuries result in 
cognitive impairment in B6C3F1 mice. J. Neurotrauma. 19:427–438. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1089 
/08977150252932389
Delmas, P., J. Hao, and L. Rodat-Despoix. 2011. Molecular mechanisms of 
mechanotransduction in mammalian sensory neurons. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 
12:139–153. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nrn2993
Deloulme, J.C., S. Gory-Fauré, F. Mauconduit, S. Chauvet, J. Jonckheere, 
B. Boulan, E. Mire, J. Xue, M. Jany, C. Maucler, et al. 2015. Microtubule-
associated protein 6 mediates neuronal connectivity through Semaphorin 
3E-dependent signalling for axonal growth. Nat. Commun. 6:7246. http 
://
dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/ncomms8246
Eastwood, S.L., L. Lyon, L. George, A. Andrieux, D. Job, and P.J. Harrison. 
2007. Altered expression of synaptic protein mRNAs in STOP (MAP6) 
mutant mice. J. Psychopharmacol. (Oxford). 21:635–644. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1177 
/0269881106068825
Elkin, B.S., E.U. Azeloglu, K.D. Costa, and B. Morrison III. 2007. Mechanical 
heterogeneity of the rat hippocampus measured by atomic force 
microscope indentation. J. Neurotrauma. 24:812–822. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1089 
/neu 
.2006 
.0169
Engler, A.J., S. Sen, H.L. Sweeney, and D.E. Discher. 2006. Matrix elasticity 
directs stem cell lineage specification. Cell. 126:677–689. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cell 
.2006 
.06 
.044
Fournet, V., A. Schweitzer, C. Chevarin, J.C. Deloulme, M. Hamon, B. Giros, 
A. Andrieux, and M.P. Martres. 2012. The deletion of STOP/MAP6 
protein in mice triggers highly altered mood and impaired cognitive 
performances. J. Neurochem. 121:99–114. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1111 
/j 
.1471 
-4159 
.2011 
.07615 
.x
Franze, K., J. Gerdelmann, M. Weick, T. Betz, S. Pawlizak, M. Lakadamyali, 
J. Bayer, K. Rillich, M. Gögler, Y.B. Lu, et al. 2009. Neurite branch 
retraction is caused by a threshold-dependent mechanical impact. 
Biophys. J. 97:1883–1890. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.bpj 
.2009 
.07 
.033
Gao, X., P. Deng, Z.C. Xu, and J. Chen. 2011. Moderate traumatic brain injury 
causes acute dendritic and synaptic degeneration in the hippocampal 
dentate gyrus. PLoS One. 6:e24566. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1371 
/journal 
.pone 
.0024566
Gardner, A., P. Jukkola, and C. Gu. 2012. Myelination of rodent hippocampal 
neurons in culture. Nat. Protoc. 7:1774–1782. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nprot 
.2012 
.100
Gibson, H.E., J.G. Edwards, R.S. Page, M.J. Van Hook, and J.A. Kauer. 
2008. TRPV1 channels mediate long-term depression at synapses on 
hippocampal interneurons. Neuron. 57:746–759. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.neuron 
.2007 
.12 
.027
Gilmour, D., H. Knaut, H.M. Maischein, and C. Nüsslein-Volhard. 2004. Towing 
of sensory axons by their migrating target cells in vivo. Nat. Neurosci. 
7:491–492. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nn1235
Grevesse, T., B.E. Dabiri, K.K. Parker, and S. Gabriele. 2015. Opposite 
rheological properties of neuronal microcompartments predict axonal 
vulnerability in brain injury. Sci. Rep. 5:9475. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/srep09475
Gu, Y., and C. Gu. 2010. Dynamics of Kv1 channel transport in axons. PLoS 
One. 5:e11931. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1371 
/journal 
.pone 
.0011931
Gu, Y., and C. Gu. 2014. Physiological and pathological functions of 
mechanosensitive ion channels. Mol. Neurobiol. 50:339–347. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1007 
/s12035 
-014 
-8654 
-4
Gu, C., W. Zhou, M.A. Puthenveedu, M. Xu, Y.N. Jan, and L.Y. Jan. 2006. The 
microtubule plus-end tracking protein EB1 is required for Kv1 voltage-
gated K+ channel axonal targeting. Neuron. 52:803–816. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.neuron 
.2006 
.10 
.022
Gu, Y., J. Barry, R. McDougel, D. Terman, and C. Gu. 2012. Alternative splicing 
regulates kv3.1 polarized targeting to adjust maximal spiking frequency. 
J. Biol. Chem. 287:1755–1769. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1074 
/jbc 
.M111 
.299305
Gu, Y., J. Barry, and C. Gu. 2013. Kv3 channel assembly, trafficking and 
activity are regulated by zinc through different binding sites. J. Physiol. 
591:2491–2507. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1113 
/jphysiol 
.2013 
.251983
Guillaud, L., C. Bosc, A. Fourest-Lieuvin, E. Denarier, F. Pirollet, L. Lafanechère, 
and D. Job. 1998. STOP proteins are responsible for the high degree 
of microtubule stabilization observed in neuronal cells. J. Cell Biol. 
142:167–179. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1083 
/jcb 
.142 
.1 
.167
Harrington, A.W., and D.D. Ginty. 2013. Long-distance retrograde neurotrophic 
factor signalling in neurons. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 14:177–187. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nrn3253
Hasbani, M.J., M.L. Schlief, D.A. Fisher, and M.P. Goldberg. 2001. Dendritic 
spines lost during glutamate receptor activation reemerge at original sites 
of synaptic contact. J. Neurosci. 21:2393–2403.
Hemphill, M.A., B.E. Dabiri, S. Gabriele, L. Kerscher, C. Franck. J.A. Goss, 
P.W. Alford, and K.K. Parker. 2011. A possible role for integrin signaling 
in diffuse axonal injury. PLoS One. 6:e22899 http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1371 
/
journal 
.pone 
.0022899
Iwata, A., P.K. Stys, J.A. Wolf, X.H. Chen, A.G. Taylor, D.F. Meaney, and 
D.H. Smith. 2004. Traumatic axonal injury induces proteolytic cleavage 
of the voltage-gated sodium channels modulated by tetrodotoxin and 
protease inhibitors. J. Neurosci. 24:4605–4613. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1523 
/JNE 
URO 
SCI 
.0515 
-03 
.2004
Jukkola, P.I., A.E. Lovett-Racke, S.S. Zamvil, and C. Gu. 2012. K+ 
channel alterations in the progression of experimental autoimmune 
encephalomyelitis. Neurobiol. Dis. 47:280–293. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.nbd 
.2012 
.04 
.012
Jukkola, P., T. Guerrero, V. Gray, and C. Gu. 2013. Astrocytes differentially 
respond to inflammatory autoimmune insults and imbalances of neural 
activity. Acta Neuropathol. Commun. 1:70. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1186 
/2051 
-5960 
-1 
-70
Kanayama, G., M. Takeda, H. Niigawa, Y. Ikura, H. Tamii, N. Taniguchi, 
T. Kudo, Y. Miyamae, T. Morihara, and T. Nishimura. 1996. The ef-
fects of repetitive mild brain injury on cytoskeletal protein and behavior. 
Methods Find. Exp. Clin. Pharmacol. 18:105–115.
Kang, J.S., J.H. Tian, P.Y. Pan, P. Zald, C. Li, C. Deng, and Z.H. Sheng. 2008. 
Docking of axonal mitochondria by syntaphilin controls their mobility 
and affects short-term facilitation. Cell. 132:137–148. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cell 
.2007 
.11 
.024
Koleske, A.J. 2013. Molecular mechanisms of dendrite stability. Nature. 
14:536–550.
Laurer, H.L., F.M. Bareyre, V.M. Lee, J.Q. Trojanowski, L. Longhi, R. Hoover, 
K.E. Saatman, R. Raghupathi, S. Hoshino, M.S. Grady, and T.K. McIntosh. 
2001. Mild head injury increasing the brain’s vulnerability to a second 
 Polarized initiation of neuronal varicosities • Gu et al.
2199
concussive impact. J. Neurosurg. 95:859–870. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.3171 
/jns 
.2001 
.95 
.5 
.0859
Lefèvre, J., K.G. Chernov, V. Joshi, S. Delga, F. Toma, D. Pastré, P.A. Curmi, 
and P. Savarin. 2011. The C terminus of tubulin, a versatile partner for 
cationic molecules: Binding of Tau, polyamines, and calcium. J. Biol. 
Chem. 286:3065–3078. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1074 
/jbc 
.M110 
.144089
Liedtke, W., and J.M. Friedman. 2003. Abnormal osmotic regulation in trpv4-/- 
mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 100:13698–13703. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.1735416100
Liedtke, W., Y. Choe, M.A. Martí-Renom, A.M. Bell, C.S. Denis, A. Sali, 
A.J. Hudspeth, J.M. Friedman, and S. Heller. 2000. Vanilloid receptor-
related osmotically activated channel (VR-OAC), a candidate vertebrate 
osmoreceptor. 
Cell. 
103:525–535. 
http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/S0092 
-8674(00)00143 
-4
Ligon, L.A., S.S. Shelly, M. Tokito, and E.L. Holzbaur. 2003. The microtubule 
plus-end proteins EB1 and dynactin have differential effects on 
microtubule polymerization. Mol. Biol. Cell. 14:1405–1417. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1091 
/mbc 
.E02 
-03 
-0155
Lu, Y.B., K. Franze, G. Seifert, C. Steinhäuser, F. Kirchhoff, H. Wolburg, 
J. Guck, P. Janmey, E.Q. Wei, J. Käs, and A. Reichenbach. 2006. 
Viscoelastic properties of individual glial cells and neurons in the CNS. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 103:17759–17764. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.0606150103
Luo, L., and D.D. O’Leary. 2005. Axon retraction and degeneration in 
development and disease. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 28:127–156. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1146 
/annurev 
.neuro 
.28 
.061604 
.135632
Margolis, R.L., C.T. Rauch, and D. Job. 1986. Purification and assay of a 
145-kDa protein (STOP145) with microtubule-stabilizing and motility 
behavior. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 83:639–643. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.83 
.3 
.639
Montell, C., and G.M. Rubin. 1989. Molecular characterization of the 
drosophila trp locus: A putative integral membrane protein required for 
phototransduction. Neuron. 2:1313–1323. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/0896 
-6273(89)90069 
-X
Morris, C.E., and P.F. Juranka. 2007. Nav channel mechanosensitivity: Activation 
and inactivation accelerate reversibly with stretch. Biophys. J. 93:822–
833. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1529 
/biophysj 
.106 
.101246
Namba, T., Y. Funahashi, S. Nakamuta, C. Xu, T. Takano, and K. Kaibuchi. 2015. 
Extracellular and intracellular signaling for neuronal polarity. Physiol. 
Rev. 95:995–1024. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1152 
/physrev 
.00025 
.2014
Nikić, I., D. Merkler, C. Sorbara, M. Brinkoetter, M. Kreutzfeldt, F.M. Bareyre, 
W. Brück, D. Bishop, T. Misgeld, and M. Kerschensteiner. 2011. 
A reversible form of axon damage in experimental autoimmune 
encephalomyelitis and multiple sclerosis. Nat. Med. 17:495–499. http 
://
dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nm 
.2324
Pirollet, F., J. Derancourt, J. Haiech, D. Job, and R.L. Margolis. 1992. Calcium-
calmodulin regulated effectors of microtubule stability in bovine brain. 
Biochemistry. 31:8849–8855. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1021 
/bi00152a022
Reeves, T.M., L.L. Phillips, and J.T. Povlishock. 2005. Myelinated and 
unmyelinated axons of the corpus callosum differ in vulnerability and 
functional recovery following traumatic brain injury. Exp. Neurol. 
196:126–137. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.expneurol 
.2005 
.07 
.014
Richard, M., J. Sacquet, M. Jany, A. Schweitzer, F. Jourdan, A. Andrieux, and 
V. Pellier-Monnin. 2009. STOP proteins contribute to the maturation of 
the olfactory system. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 41:120–134. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.mcn 
.2009 
.02 
.004
Rishal, I., and M. Fainzilber. 2014. Axon–soma communication in neuronal 
injury. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 15:32–42. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nrn3609
Ryskamp, D.A., P. Witkovsky, P. Barabas, W. Huang, C. Koehler, N.P. Akimov, 
S.H. Lee, S. Chauhan, W. Xing, R.C. Rentería, et al. 2011. The polymodal 
ion channel transient receptor potential vanilloid 4 modulates calcium 
flux, spiking rate, and apoptosis of mouse retinal ganglion cells. 
J. Neurosci. 31:7089–7101. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1523 
/JNE 
URO 
SCI 
.0359 
-11 
.2011
Sánchez, C., J. Díaz-Nido, and J. Avila. 2000. Phosphorylation of microtubule-
associated protein 2 (MAP2) and its relevance for the regulation of the 
neuronal cytoskeleton function. Prog. Neurobiol. 61:133–168. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/S0301 
-0082(99)00046 
-5
Serrano, L., A. Valencia, R. Caballero, and J. Avila. 1986. Localization of the 
high affinity calcium-binding site on tubulin molecule. J. Biol. Chem. 
261:7076–7081.
Shepherd, G.M., and K.M. Harris. 1998. Three-dimensional structure and com-
position of CA3→CA1 axons in rat hippocampal slices: Implications 
for presynaptic connectivity and compartmentalization. J. Neurosci. 
18:8300–8310.
Shibasaki, K., M. Suzuki, A. Mizuno, and M. Tominaga. 2007. Effects of 
body temperature on neural activity in the hippocampus: Regulation of 
resting membrane potentials by transient receptor potential vanilloid 
4. J. Neurosci. 27:1566–1575. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1523 
/JNE 
URO 
SCI 
.4284 
-06 
.2007
Shitaka, Y., H.T. Tran, R.E. Bennett, L. Sanchez, M.A. Levy, K. Dikranian, 
and D.L. Brody. 2011. Repetitive closed-skull traumatic brain injury in 
mice causes persistent multifocal axonal injury and microglial reactivity. 
J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 70:551–567. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1097 
/NEN 
.0b013e31821f891f
Smith, D.H., R. Hicks, and J.T. Povlishock. 2013. Therapy development for 
diffuse axonal injury. J. Neurotrauma. 30:307–323. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1089 
/neu 
.2012 
.2825
Staal, J.A., T.C. Dickson, R.S. Chung, and J.C. Vickers. 2007. Cyclosporin-A 
treatment attenuates delayed cytoskeletal alterations and secondary 
axotomy following mild axonal stretch injury. Dev. Neurobiol. 67:1831–
1842. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1002 
/dneu 
.20552
Strotmann, R., C. Harteneck, K. Nunnenmacher, G. Schultz, and T.D. Plant. 
2000. OTR 
PC4, a nonselective cation channel that confers sensitivity to 
extracellular osmolarity. Nat. Cell Biol. 2:695–702. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/35036318
Tang-Schomer, M.D., V.E. Johnson, P.W. Baas, W. Stewart, and D.H. Smith. 
2012. Partial interruption of axonal transport due to microtubule breakage 
accounts for the formation of periodic varicosities after traumatic axonal 
injury. Exp. Neurol. 233:364–372. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.expneurol 
.2011 
.10 
.030
Tseng, C.Y., and B.L. Firestein. 2011. The role of PSD-95 and cypin in 
morphological changes in dendrites following sublethal NMDA 
exposure. J. Neurosci. 31:15468–15480. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1523 
/JNE 
URO 
SCI 
.2442 
-11 
.2011
van Beuningen, S.F., and C.C. Hoogenraad. 2016. Neuronal polarity: remodeling 
microtubule organization. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 39:1–7. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.conb 
.2016 
.02 
.003
Van Essen, D.C. 1997. A tension-based theory of morphogenesis and compact 
wiring in the central nervous system. Nature. 385:313–318. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/385313a0
Venkatachalam, K., and C. Montell. 2007. TRP channels. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 
76:387–417. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1146 
/annurev 
.biochem 
.75 
.103004 
.142819
Wang, X., and T.L. Schwarz. 2009. The mechanism of Ca2+-dependent regulation 
of kinesin-mediated mitochondrial motility. Cell. 136:163–174. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cell 
.2008 
.11 
.046
Wang, Q., X. Zhang, and Y. Zhao. 2013. Micromechanical stimulator for 
localized cell loading: fabrication and strain analysis. J. Micromech. 
Microeng. 23:015002. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1088 
/0960 
-1317 
/23 
/1 
/015002
Xu, M., R. Cao, R. Xiao, M.X. Zhu, and C. Gu. 2007. The axon–dendrite 
targeting of Kv3 (Shaw) channels is determined by a targeting motif that 
associates with the T1 domain and ankyrin G. J. Neurosci. 27:14158–
14170. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1523 
/JNE 
URO 
SCI 
.3675 
-07 
.2007
Xu, M., Y. Gu, J. Barry, and C. Gu. 2010. Kinesin I transports tetramerized Kv3 
channels through the axon initial segment via direct binding. J. Neurosci. 
30:15987–16001. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1523 
/JNE 
URO 
SCI 
.3565 
-10 
.2010
Yang, J., R.M. Weimer, D. Kallop, O. Olsen, Z. Wu, N. Renier, K. Uryu, and 
M. Tessier-Lavigne. 2013. Regulation of axon degeneration after injury 
and in development by the endogenous calpain inhibitor calpastatin. 
Neuron. 80:1175–1189. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.neuron 
.2013 
.08 
.034
Zheng, Y., J. Wildonger, B. Ye, Y. Zhang, A. Kita, S.H. Younger, S. Zimmerman, 
L.Y. Jan, and Y.N. Jan. 2008. Dynein is required for polarized dendritic 
transport and uniform microtubule orientation in axons. Nat. Cell Biol. 
10:1172–1180. http 
://dx 
.doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/ncb1777
Ziv, N.E., and M.E. Spira. 1995. Axotomy induces a transient and localized el-
evation of the free intracellular calcium concentration to the millimolar 
range. J. Neurophysiol. 74:2625–2637.
