 ORIGINAL PAPER
A Review of the Status of Brain Structure Research in
Transsexualism
Antonio Guillamon1,2 • Carme Junque3,4 • Esther Go
´mez-Gil4,5
Received: 16 July 2014 / Revised: 22 September 2015 / Accepted: 29 April 2016 / Published online: 2 June 2016
� The Author(s) 2016. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Abstract The present review focuses on the brain structure of
male-to-female (MtF) and female-to-male (FtM) homosexual
transsexuals before and after cross-sex hormone treatment as
shown by in vivo neuroimaging techniques. Cortical thickness
and diffusion tensor imaging studies suggest that the brain of
MtFs presents complex mixtures of masculine, feminine, and
demasculinized regions, while FtMs show feminine, masculine,
and defeminized regions. Consequently, the specific brain phe-
notypes proposed for MtFs and FtMs differ from those of both
heterosexual males and females. These phenotypes have theo-
retical implications for brain intersexuality, asymmetry, and
bodyperceptionintranssexualsaswellasforBlanchard’shypothe-
sis on sexual orientation in homosexual MtFs. Falling within the
aegis of the neurohormonal theory of sex differences, we hypoth-
esizethatcorticaldifferencesbetweenhomosexualMtFsandFtMs
and male and female controls are due to differently timed cortical
thinning in different regions for each group. Cross-sex hormone
studies have reported marked effects of the treatment on MtF and
FtM brains. Their results are used to discuss the early postmortem
histological studies of the MtF brain.
Keywords Transsexualism � Sex differences �
Gender identity � Gender dysphoria �
Cross-sex hormone treatment � Magnetic resonance imaging
Introduction
Transsexuals seek or have undergone a social transition from
maletofemale(MtF)orfemaletomale(FtM),atransitionthatin
many,butnotall,casesalsoinvolvesasomatictransitionbycross-
sexhormonetreatmentandgenitalsurgery(AmericanPsychiatric
Association, 2013; Meyer-Bahlburg, 2010, 2013).
Although the etiology of transsexualism is unknown, biolog-
icalandenvironmentalfactorshavebeensuggestedtocontribute
to gender identity variations (Cohen-Kettenis & Gooren, 1999;
Savic, Garcia-Falgueras, & Swaab, 2010; Lawrence & Zucker,
2014). Biological causes for gender dysphoria (GD) are sup-
portedby studies on familial groups (Gomez-Gil et al., 2010;
Green, 2000), birth order (Blanchard & Sheridan, 1992; Blan-
chard,Zucker,Cohen-Kettenis,Gooren,&Bailey,1996;Gomez-
Gil et al., 2011; VanderLaan, Blanchard, Wood, Garzon, &
Zucker,2015;Vasey&VanderLaan,2007),andtwins(McKee,
Roback,&Hollender,1976;Zucker&Bradley,1995).Areview
of the literature of twins concordant and discordant for GD sug-
gestsaroleforgeneticsinthedevelopmentofGD(Heylensetal.,
2012). Molecular genetics have been used to analyze peripheral
sexsteroid-relatedpolymorphismsinsteroidreceptorsorsteroid
enzymegenes(Fernandezetal.,2014a,2014b;Hareetal.,2009;
Henningssonetal.,2005;Ujikeetal.,2009).Researchonprenatal
androgen exposure markers has provided some evidence of
transsexual differences based on the 2D:4D ratio (Schneider,
Pickel&Stalla,2006;Wallien,Zucker,Steensma&Cohen-
Kettenis,2008).The findingsfrom allthe abovestudiessuggest
thatgeneticfactorscouldinfluencebrainandbehavioralphe-
notypes.
& Antonio Guillamon
aguillamon@psi.uned.es
1
Departamento de Psicobiologı
´a, Universidad Nacional de
Educacio
´n a Distancia, c/Juand del Rosal, 10, 28040 Madrid,
Spain
2
Academia de Psicologı
´a de Espan
˜a, Madrid, Spain
3
Departamento de Psiquiatrı
´a y Psicobiologı
´a Clı
´nica,
Universidad de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
4
InstituteofBiomedicalResearchAugustPiiSunyer,Barcelona,
Spain
5
Unidad de Identidad de Ge
´nero, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona,
Spain
123
Arch Sex Behav (2016) 45:1615–1648
DOI 10.1007/s10508-016-0768-5
 In regard to environmental variables, parental and family fac-
tors have been reviewed (Lawrence & Zucker, 2014); parental
influencesseemtobe acontributingfactor tothe developmentof
GID (Cohen-Kettenis & Gooren, 1999) and play a role in social
gender transitioning (Steensma, McGuire, Kreukels, Beekman,
& Cohen-Kettenis, 2013).
With respect to the developmental course of GD and sexual
orientation,DSM-5indicatesthatinbothnatallymaleandfemale
children showing persistence, almost all are sexually attracted to
individuals of their natal sex. Moreover, there are two broad
trajectories for the development of GD: early-onset and late-
onset. Early-onset GD starts in childhood and continues into
adolescence and adulthood, while late-onset GD begins
around puberty or even much later in life. Adolescent and adult
natalmaleswithearlyonsetofGDarealmostalwaysandrophilic,
while most with a late onset are gynephilic. In natal females, the
most common course is early-onset GD; they are almost always
gynephilic, while the few with late-onset GD are usually andro-
philic (APA, 2013, pp. 455–456). Although DSM-5 criteria no
longer include diagnostic subtyping by sexual orientation, early
and late GD onset and sexual orientation have been stressed by
thoseauthorswhodistinguishtwosubtypesofMtFsandFtMs
(Blanchard,1989a,1989b;Smith,vanGoozen,Kuiper,&Cohen-
Kettenis, 2005). Blanchard, taking into account the sex chromo-
somes at birth, has named androphilic MtFs homosexual and
gynephilic MtFs nonhomosexual (Blanchard, 1989a, 1989b).
However, Gooren had reservations about the use of the terms
‘‘homo’’
- and‘
‘nonhomosexual’’because MtFs do not view them-
selves as homosexuals, considering themselves women in their
sexual interaction with men (Gooren, 2006). The fact that two
subtypes of MtFs and FtMs can be distinguished has important
theoretical and clinical implications for the etiology of transsexu-
alism(Blanchard,2005).Consequently,distinctionsbetweenearly-
andlate-onsetGDandandrophilicandgynephilicsexualorientation
becomeessentialwhenapproachingthebrainoftranssexuals.
Moreover,predictionsforbraindifferencesbetweenMtFsubtypes
havebeenadvancedinlightofthisdistinction(Blanchard,2008).
Brain sex differences have been used to study transsexuality.
The approach was based on previous reports regarding the exis-
tenceofmorphologicalsexdifferencesinthemammalianbrain.It
seemslogicaltocomparethebrainsofMtFsandFtMswithbrains
from both male and female controls.
The early brain studies on transsexuality, directed toward the
hypothalamusandtheextendedamygdalainpostmortemhuman
specimens,reportedthatthe central part of the bed nucleusofthe
stria terminalis (BSTc) was feminine in MtFs (Zhou, Hofman,
Gooren, & Swaab, 1995). More recently, a few groups have
explored how brain sex differences are expressed in vivo in the
brain of MtFs and FtMs using neuroimaging techniques.
This review focuses on the brain structure of early-onset GD
androphilic (homosexual) MtFs and early-onset GD gynephilic
(homosexual)FtMs.TheearlyonsetofGDandsexualorientation
are key points in the following analysis. Our main aims are to (1)
addressthestructuralphenotypeofthebraininhomosexualMtFs
and FtMs before cross-sex hormone treatment; (2) discuss these
brainphenotypesinthelightoftheneurohormonaltheoryofsex-
ual differentiation of the brain; (3) describe the effects of cross-
sex hormone treatment on the structure of the brain; and (4) ana-
lyzethehistologicalpostmortemstudiesinlightoftheinvivoneu-
roimagingresults.Investigatingtheseobjectiveshassuggestedan
explanatory hypothesis on gender. In approaching these objec-
tives, we encountered several difficulties. The main one is the
scantnumberofpublishedMRIstudiesonthebrainoftranssexu-
als; this scarcity is more extreme in regard to nonhomosexual
MtFsandFtMs.Moreover,somestudiesdonotreportsexualori-
entation or mix homosexual and nonhomosexual subjects.
Morphological Characteristics of Sex Differences in
the Mammalian Brain
Neurohormonal Theory of Brain Sexual
Differentiation
Observations arising from embryological and behavioral studies
have guided research into the function of gonadal steroids in dif-
ferentiatingthebrainsofmalesandfemalesatthemorphological,
physiological, and behavioral levels. These seminal works have
shaped what is known as the neurohormonal theory of brain sex-
ualdifferentiation,whichisakeypointtounderstandingthebrain
in relation to gender.
Jost (1947), working with gonadally indifferent rabbit
embryos,showedthatanindifferenturogenitaltractgoesthrough
maledifferentiationifatestisdevelopsandfemaledifferentiation
if an ovary develops. Embryos gonadectomized before the indif-
ferent gonad differentiates develop as phenotypically female.
These experiments, carried out in the middle of the last century,
demonstratethattheinducedphenotypeismaleinmammalsand
that testicular secretions are necessary for further male develop-
ment (for review, see Jost, 1972).
In the laboratory of Young (Phoenix, Goy, Gerall, & Young,
1959), a decade after Jost’s findings, a series of studies began on
thesexualbehaviorofmaleandfemaleguineapigsbornofmoth-
erstreatedwithtestosteronepropionateduringpregnancy.Andro-
genized female pups were less likely to show lordosis and more
likely to display mounting behavior in adulthood than were con-
trolanimalswhenbothweregonadectomizedandtreatedwiththe
appropriate sex hormones. It was suggested that testosterone
administered prenatally had an organizing effect on the neural
tissuesmediatingsexual behavior,while gonadalhormonesacti-
vatedthesetissuesandbehaviorwhenadministeredinadulthood.
This hypothesis has guided researchonthe sexualdifferentiation
of brain and behavior. However, there are behavioral traits that
onlyrequireorganizingactionsbyandrogens,andnoactivational
influence is necessary for their full expression by the individual;
examples are juvenile play and mounting behavior in rhesus
1616
Arch Sex Behav (2016) 45:1615–1648
123
 monkeysandthemicturitionalpatternsofdogs(Goy&McEwen,
1980).
The organizational–activational hypothesis is the foundation
foraunifiedtheoryofsexualdifferentiationofallmammaltissues
(Arnold,2009).However,somesexdifferencesarenotexplained
by gonadal hormonal effects, but by a primary action of genes
encoded in the sex chromosomes. This understanding allowed
Arnold to integrate the sex chromosome effects in the neuro-
hormonal theory of brain and behavior differentiation.
The conceptual terminology was revisited 10years ago by
Becker et al. (2005). The words‘‘masculine’’and‘‘feminine’’are
used to describe brain morphological or behavioral traits that are
typical of the males or females of a species, respectively. Mas-
culinization and feminization refer to any change that makes an
individualmoreliketypicalmalesorfemales.Demasculinization
and defeminization denote any change that makes an individual
less like a typical male or female.
Animal Studies
Studies on brain sex differences show three main morphological
characteristics.Thefirstiscomparativesize.Sexdifferencestake
one of two opposite morphological patterns in the adult brain
(Segovia & Guillamon, 1993). Neurohistological studies reveal
that in some brain structures males show greater morphological
measurements(i.e.,volume,number ofneurons,dendritespines,
etc.) than females, while in other structures the opposite is true
(Guillamon&Segovia,1996;Segovia&Guillamon,1993).Thus,
the brain of each sex shows M[F and F[M morphological pat-
terns, according to the region studied (Fig.1a, b). Of course, there
are brain structures that, comparing sexes, are isomorphic (M=
F). Morphologically, the cerebral pattern of M[F, F[M, and
M=F structures determines the sex of the brain. Below, we will
see that male and female patterns reflect different growth pro-
grams for particular structures. The fact that brain sex differences
are present in two opposite morphological patterns (M[F and
F[M)isakeypointtounderstanding(1)whatistrulyfeminineor
masculine in the brain and (2) how the concepts of masculiniza-
tion,demasculinization,feminization,anddefeminizationinbrain
morphology can be correctly applied in a given sex. If a structure
hasanF[Mpatternofsexdifferences(tobemasculineinthispat-
ternistohavesmallermorphologicalmeasurementsthanfemales),
thenfeminizationofthisstructureinmaleswouldmeananincrease
inthemorphologicalmeasurementsresultinginanM=Fpattern
for that structure, while demasculinization would mean a varia-
tion of the morphological parameters making that structure sig-
nificantly different from both F and M.
The second characteristic is that brain sex differences are pre-
sent in complex networks involving many regions (Cosgrove,
Mazure, & Staley, 2007; Segovia & Guillamon, 1993; Simerly,
2002).Asanexample,theaccessoryolfactorysystem,implicated
in the control of sexual and maternal behaviors, is known to be
sexually dimorphic in rodents (Segovia & Guillamon, 1993) and
lagomorphs (Segovia et al., 2006). The olfactory system also
showssex differencesinhumans (Garcia-Falgueraset al., 2006).
Third, animal ontogenetic studies of the M[F and F[M
patternsshowtwoimportantaspectsastohowsexdifferencesare
built up in the brain. Natural cell death (apoptosis) and neuroge-
nesis are intrinsic to sex differences’ development and are dif-
ferently timed in different regions.
Thebednucleusoftheaccessoryolfactorytract(BAOT)inthe
rat, which belongsto the accessory olfactory system network(de
Olmos, Hardy, & Heimer, 1978), is sexually dimorphic and pre-
sents an M[F pattern with respect to its volume and number of
neurons (Collado, Guillamon, Valencia, & Segovia, 1990). Sex
differences in this nucleus are controlled in the early postnatal
days by testosterone, probably aromatized to estradiol (Collado
et al., 1990) and, as shown in Fig.1c, these sex differences are
alreadypresentveryearlyindevelopment;pubertymayjust
enhancethemfurtherthroughthedecreaseinneuronnumberthat
occurs in females at that time (Collado, Segovia, & Guillamon,
1998). This suggests that sex differences in the M[F pattern are
due to apoptosis occurring around puberty in the female.
The locus coeruleus, the main origin of noradrenergic projec-
tions to the brain, presents an F[M pattern of sex differences in
rats with respect to its volume and neuron numbers (Guillamon,
de Blas, & Segovia, 1988). Ontogenetic studies from embryonic
daystoadulthoodshowthat,infemales,thenumberofneuronsin
thisnucleusincreasesuntiladulthood,while,inmales,itplateaus
at day 45 after birth (Fig.1d; Pinos et al., 2001). Puberty, which
occurs between days 35 and 40 in the rat, seems to be important
for building up sex differences.
There are a substantial number of behavioral works with ani-
mals showing that gonadal hormones secreted during puberty
initiateasecondperiodofbrainorganizationinmalesandfemales
(Schulz, Molenda-Figueira, & Sisk, 2009). New cells, including
neurons, arise in M[F and F[M brain regions during puberty
and removing the gonads before puberty eliminates this mecha-
nism of sexual differentiation (Ahmed et al., 2008).
Human Studies
Sexdifferencesinthehumanbrainhavethesamemorphological
characteristics observed in animal studies. Postmortem anatom-
ical (Dekaban & Sadowsky, 1978; Pakkenberg & Gundersen,
1997; Rabinowicz, Dean, Petetot, & de Courten-Myers, 1999)
and in vivo MRI studies (Cosgrove et al., 2007; Luders & Toga,
2010; Ruigrok et al., 2014) consistently report 9–12% greater
intracranial volume (ICV) in adult males than females as well as
inchildren(Lenroot&Giedd,2010).ArecentMRImeta-analysis
confirms that ICV shows robust sex differences and suggests a
biastowards18-to59-year-oldswithrespecttoICV,whitematter
(WM),graymatter(GM),andcerebrospinalfluid(CSF)volumes
(Ruigrok et al., 2014). The pattern for all these parameters is
M[F (Table1).
Arch Sex Behav (2016) 45:1615–1648
1617
123
 However, when regional aspects of the brain are approached
and ICV controlled, the F[M pattern of volumetric sex differ-
encesisobserved.ThepatternF[Memergesinthepercentageof
GMandthevolumeofthecortex.Subcorticalregionsandtheper-
centage of WM show an M[F pattern (Tables1, 2).
Brain corticalthickness(CTh) studies measure the distance
between the pia mater and white matter in tens of thousands of
pointsinthecortexandprovidebetterinformationthanthoseusing
voxel-based morphometry (VBM) because cortical volume mea-
surements obtained by VBM procedures blend the effects of
cortical surface and folding (Panizzon et al., 2009; Winkler et al.,
2010).CThstudieshaveshownthatfemaleshaveathickercortex
thanmales,eveninstudiesthatcontrolforICV,bodysize,andage
(Table2).
The best technique to study the microstructure of the WM is
Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI). It measures diffusivity of the
water molecules within the axons and detects subtle changes in
the WM and has been used in developmental (Huster, Wester-
hausen, Kreuder, Schweiger, & Wittling, 2009; Schmithorst,
Holland, & Dardzinski, 2008; Westerhausen et al., 2003) and
psychiatric studies (Nucifora, Verma, Lee, & Melhem, 2007).
DTI measures fractional anisotropy (FA), which indicates white
matter coherence and axonal organization (Lebel, Walker, Lee-
mans, Phillips, & Beaulieu, 2008). Another parameter used to
assess white matter integrity is mean diffusivity (MD) values—
theyarecomplementaryinformationtoFAwithhighMDvalues
indicating loss of white matter integrity, while a low FA reflects
thesame(Lebeletal.,2008).AsshowninTable3,therearesexdif-
ferences in the WM microstructure and, depending on the region,
they present an M[F pattern.
StructuralMRIstudiesalsoshowsexdifferencesinage-related
brainvolume(BrainDevelopmentCooperativeGroup,2012;
Sowelletal.,2007)andpubertyseemstoplayasignificantrolein
the developmental course of human white (Giedd et al., 1999;
Perrin et al., 2008) and gray matter (Raznahan et al.,2010; Shaw
et al., 2008; see also Tables1, 2, 3).
Finally, using functional techniques, sex differences have
beenreportedintheconnectome,withmaleshavinggreaterintra-
Fig. 1 Main morphological characteristics of sex differences in the
brain and their ontogeny. Sex differences in the brain present two
morphological patterns as exemplified in the bed nucleus of the stria
terminalisoftherat(BST).ThemedialposteriorregionoftheBSThasan
M[F pattern, with males showing a greater number of neurons than
females (a), while the lateral anterior region of the BST has an F[M
pattern, with females showing more neurons than males (b). These two
patternsofsexdifferencedifferintheirontogenyascanbeobservedwith
respect tothe numberof neuronsinthe bednucleus ofthe accessory tract
(BAOT) (c) and the locus coeruleus (LC) (d) of rats. Puberty in the rat
occurs between days 35 and 40. Both figures (c, d) show how females
present decreases (c) and increases (d) in the number of neurons around
thisperiodoflifeindifferentstructures.Figuresadaptedwithpermission
from Guillamon, Segovia & Del Abril, 1988; Collado, Segovia &
Guillamon, 1998 and Pinos, Collado, Rodriguez-Zafra, Rodriguez,
Segovia & Guillamon, 2001. E embryonic days, P postnatal days
1618
Arch Sex Behav (2016) 45:1615–1648
123
 Table 1 Sex differences in intracranial volume and brain compartments of the adult brain
Brain
region/
aspect
Sample size and age (M ± SD
or range)
Sample source
Brain-relevant sample
characteristics
Brain imaging methods
and measurements
Statistically
controlled
confounding
variables
Selected findings and conclusions
Pattern
Authors
ICV
GM
WM
CSF
40 M; 40 F
Age: 18–45 (whole sample)
Recruited by advertisement
Department Psychiatry,
University Pennsylvania (USA)
Healthy
Right-handed Ss
F: premenopausal
1.5 T General Electric
scanner
Brain volume extracted
automatically
MRI segmentation GM,
WM, CSF
Measurements Volume;
% respect ICV;
cortical surface
Age
ICV
Volume, M[F:
ICV, GM, WM, CSF
When adjusted by ICV:
All volumes
and %
M[F, except
for % GM: F
[M
Gur et al. (1999)
% GM: F[M
% WM: M[F
% CSF: M[F
Conclusions SD depending on brain
compartment
ICV
GM
WM
42 M; 42 F
Age:
M:19–31
F: 19.31
Recruited by advertisement College
of Medicine, University of Iowa
(USA)
Healthy volunteers
matched for age,
education, IQ
1.5 T General Electric
Signa scanner
Processing imaging by
locally developed
software
Measurements Volume;
% respect ICV; surface
anatomy
Height as covariate
for all
measurements
ICV: M[F
When adjusted by ICV:
% GM F[M in both parietal lobes
Conclusions SD depends on cerebral
lobes
M[F: ICV
F[M: % GM
parietallobes
Nopoulos et al.
(2000)
ICV
GM
WM
22 M; 32 F
Range: 20–86
M: 44.7 ± 19.9
F: 48.3 ± 19.9
Fox Chase Cancer Center,
Philadelphia (USA)
Healthy volunteers no
differences in age
between M and F
1.5 T General Electric
Signa scanner
Volumes segmented by
semi automated
software
Measurements volume
Age
M[F: ICV
Conclusions SD in ICV not in % GM
controlled by ICV.
M[F: ICV
Ge et al. (2002)
ICV
GM
WM
CSF
Sample matched by ICV:
24 M, 24 F
Age range:
M: 21–61; F: 19–69
Extreme sample (F with the
smallest ICV and M with the
largest ICV)
24 M; 24 F
Age range:
M: 18–69; F: 19–65
ICBM data base for normal adults.
USA, Germany, Canada. Brain
images from USA
MandFwithsimilarbrain
size
1.5 T Siemens Sonata
VBM
Corrected (FDR)
Measurements regional
volumes
Age
ICV
No significant interaction of ICV 9 Sex
All Ss (48 M vs. 48 F) ICV: M[F
Matched by ICV (24 M and 24 F):
NodifferencesinICV,GM,WM,andCSF
ratios.
Regional GM
In regions of the four lobes and caudate
nucleus: Matched F
[Matched M.
Conclusions Anatomical differences
between MandFexist independently of
brain size effects
M[F: ICV
F[M: GM in
regions of
four lobes
Luders, Gaser,
Narr, and
Toga (2009a)
ICV intracraneal volume, GM gray matter, WM white matter, CSF cerebrospinal fluid (includes ventricles and cisterns), FDR false discovery rate, VBM voxel-based morphometry, F female, M male, Ss subjects, SD sex differences, ICBM
International Consortium for Brain Mapping
Arch Sex Behav (2016) 45:1615–1648
1619
123
 Table 2 Sex differences in cortical and subcortical structures of the adult brain
Brain region/
aspect
Sample size and
age (M ± SD or
range)
Sample source
Brain-relevant
sample
characteristics
Brain imaging
methods and
measurements
Statistically
controlled
confounding
variables
Selected findings and Conclusions
Pattern
Authors
Cortex
30 M; 30 F
M: 25.45 ± 4.72
F: 24.32 ± 4.35
Images from Center for Scientific Innovation and
Technology, Magdeburg, Germany
Healthy young M and
F
1.5 T General
Electric Loni
software
Measurements
CTh
ICV
Age
Without ICV correction, F[M in the four lobes
With ICV correction, still F[M, except for a small
region in the temporal lobe
Conclusions F have thicker cortex than M
F[M
Luders et al.
(2006)
Cortex
90 M; 94 F
Age range:
M: 18–67
F: 18–70
Normal Ss from TongRen Hospital, Beijing,
China
Healthy adult M and
F, population from
Asia
1.5 General
Electric Signa
scanner
CTh measured
using an
automated
surface
method ? graph
theoretical
approaches
Measurements
CTh
ICV
Age
F[M: Frontal, parietal and occipital lobes.
M[F: Small portions of temporal lobes
ConclusionsFthickercortexthanM.InsmallregionsM
[F
F[M
M[F
(small
regions)
Lv et al.
(2010)
Cortex
31 M; 21 F
Age range:
M: 18–42
F: 19–36
Seoul Normal Ss from National University
Hospital, Seoul, Korea
HealthyadultMandF
Population from Asia
1.5 T General
Electric Signa
scanner
Measurements:
CTh
ICV
Age
F[M: frontal, parietal and occipital lobes
Temporal lobes show relatively less significant
thickening in F
Conclusions F thicker cortex than M
F[M
Im et al.
(2006)
Cortex
90 M; 86 F
M: 31 ± 21.3
F: 33.9 ± 22.3
Age range whole
sample: 7–87
Normal Ss community sample, Department of
Psychiatry, Columbia University, New York,
USA
A large age range
population
1.5 T General
Electric Signa
GM thickness
calculated using
Eikonal fire
equation
Measurements
CTh
Age
ICV
body size
The thicker cortices in F than M: right inferior parietal
andposteriortemporalindependentofdifferencesin
body size and ICV
Conclusions F thicker cortex than M
F[M
Sowell et al.
(2007)
Cortex,
amygdala and
hypothalamus
27 M; 21 F
M: 39.13 ± 12
F:36.3 ± 10.5
Normal, 93% Caucasian Ss. Department of
Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
USA
Healthyadults,Mand
F same ethnicity,
education
1.5 T General
Electric Signa
Semiautomatic
delimitations
Measurements
Volume
Age
ICV
Volume: M[F amygdala and
hypothalamus
F[M: cortex
Conclusions M greater volumes
in amygdala & hypothalamus
M[F
F[M
Goldstein
et al.
(2001)
Amygdala and
hippocampus
313 M; 306 F
Agerangeforthe
whole sample
40–90
Mental Health Institute of Beijing Medical
University, China
Large population of
normal adults
from Asia
1.5 T MR unit
Volume of
structures
Manually outlined
using as a brain
atlas slices from
2 postmortem
specimens
Measurements
Volume
Volume of amygdale and hippocampus
declines with age
No sex differences
Conclusions No SD in large sample no caucasian
M = F
Mu et al.
(1999)
1620
Arch Sex Behav (2016) 45:1615–1648
123
 Table 2 continued
Brain region/
aspect
Sample size and
age (M ± SD or
range)
Sample source
Brain-relevant
sample
characteristics
Brain imaging
methods and
measurements
Statistically
controlled
confounding
variables
Selected findings and Conclusions
Pattern
Authors
Amygdala and
hippocampus
57 M; 59 F
M:27.0 – 5.7
F:25.0 – 5.3
Volunteers
Department of Psychiatry,
University Medical Center, Philadelphia, USA
Healthy adult
population
1.5 T General
Electric Signa
Brain volumes
extracted
automatically
‘ROIS manually
outlined for
subcortical
structures
Measurements
Volume
ICV
M and F have similar volume in amygdale and
hippocampus
Conclusions No SD
M = F
Gur et al.
(2002)
Basal ganglia
463 M; 541 F
Age range whole
sample: 18–36
Ss enrolled in the Brain Imaging Genetic project
at Medical Center, Radboud University,
Nijmegen, Netherlands
Large healthy
population
1.5 and 3 T
scanners
Automatic
volumetry on
MRI images
Measurements
volume
Age
Separate cohorts
for the two type
of scanners
Control for total
GM and WM
M[F putamen and globus pallidus
No SD for caudate nucleus and nucleus accumbens
Conclusions some basal ganglia show SD
M[F
Rijpkema
et al.
(2012)
Cortex and
subcortical
structures
40 M; 51 F
Age range whole
sample: 18–33
Healthy young adults.
Department of Psychiatry and clinical
Psychobiology, University of Barcelona,
Spain
Healthy adult
population
1.5 T General
Electric
scanner
VBM
ROIs analyses of
olfactory system
structures
Uncorrected
Measurements
concentration
Age
M[F: BA 28, pallidum.
F[M: BA10, 11, 25, hippocampus, amygdala
Conclusions subcortical regions show bothM[FandF
[M patterns of SD
M[F
F[M
Garcı
´a-
Falgueras
et al.
(2006)
Temporal lobe
Superior
temporal gyrus
Amygdala
Hippocampus
53 M, 46 F
Age range all Ss:
4.7–17.8
Recruited from the community,
Child Psychiatric
Branch, National Institute of Mental Health,
Bethesda, USA
Healthy young
population
1.5 T Signa
Advance
scanner
Manual tracing
Measurements
volume
Age
Handedness
Tanner stage
ICV
R Amygdala increases only in M, while R
Hippocampus increases only in F
Conclusions SD in maturational changes
M[F
F[M
Giedd et al.
(1996)
ICV intracraneal volume, GM gray matter, WM white matter, CTh cortical thickness, BA Brodmann’s area, VBM voxel-based morphometry, SD sex differences, F female, M male, Ss subjects
Arch Sex Behav (2016) 45:1615–1648
1621
123
 Table 3 Sex differences in white matter microstructure of the adult brain
Brain region/
aspect
Sample size and
age (M ± SD or
range)
Sample source
Brain-relevant
sample
characteristics
Brain imaging methods
and measurements
Statistically
controlled
confounding
variables
Selected findings and
conclusions
Pattern Authors
White matter
microstructure
Right-handed:
16 M; 18 F
Left-handed: 16
M; 17 F
Age range
whole sample:
19–34
Ss: Center for Neuropsychol.
Research, students from
University of Trier, Germany
Healthy young
adults,
handedness
1.5 Philips Intera
DTI
Measurements: FA, MD
in whole corpus
callosum (CC)
Age
Handedness
CC:
L
[
R
M[F
Conclusions SD in
microstructure CC
M[F
Westerhausen
et al. (2003)
White matter
microstructure
20 M; 13 F
8 B; 7G
Range:
M ? F: 22–64
B ? G:14–21
Ss: Volunteers Department
Psychiatry Columbia University,
New York, USA
Comparison
healthy adults
and adolescents
1.5 T General Electric
DTI; ROIS of 13 regions
Measurements FA
Age
CC: M[F and F[M
F[M: L Cingulum
SD in the majority of
fascicles, most marked
in Cingulum
F[M in L Cingulum
M[F R Cingulum
Conclusions SD in
relation to the
hemisphere and region
M[F
F[M
Schneiderman
et al. (2007)
White matter
microstructure
Right-handed:
17 M; 17 F
Left-handed: 21
M; 24 F
Age range
whole sample:
19–34
Ss: Center for Neuropsychol.
Research, students from
University of Trier, Germany
Healthy young
adults,
handedness
1.5 Philips Intera DTI
Measurements In
cingulum: FA and MD
WM volume
Handedness
ICV
FA more discriminative
than MD for gender
Conclusions SD in
microstructure of
Cingulum
M[F
Huster et al.
(2009)
ICV intracraneal volume, GM gray matter, WM white matter, CC corpus callosum, VBM voxel-based morphometry, DTI diffusion tensor imaging, FA fractional anisotropy, MD mean diffusivity, SD
sex differences, L left, R right, F female, M male, Ss subjects, B boys, G girls
1622
Arch Sex Behav (2016) 45:1615–1648
123
 hemispheric connectivity, while, in females, inter-hemispheric
connectivity predominates (Ingalhalikar et al., 2014).
The Brain Phenotype of Untreated Transsexuals
The Brain of Male-to-Female Homosexual
Transsexuals Before Cross-Sex Hormone Treatment
Volume and Brain Compartments
MRI studies show that ICV in adult (Rametti et al., 2011b) and
adolescent (Hoekzema et al., 2015) untreated homosexual MtFs
is similar to male controls’. Moreover, GM, WM, and CSF vol-
umes in homosexual MtFs do not differ from those of control
males and are significantly greater than those of control females
(Table4).
Cortex
There aretwovolumetricstudiesofthe cortexusingvoxel-based
morphometry(VBM)inadolescentandadultuntreatedMtFs
(Table 5).ThesestudiescompareMtFswithmaleandfemale
controlsthatshowsexdifferences.Simonetal.(2013)havestud-
ied a small sample of untreated homosexual MtFs. Homosexual
MtFs and female controls had less gray matter volume in the left
somatosensoryandprimarymotorcorticesaswellastheposterior
cingulateandcalcarinegyriandtheprecuneusthanmalecontrols
and FtMs. These findings suggest that homosexual MtFs have a
feminine cortical pattern. However, the results shouldbe taken
cautiously because of the small sample size and the brain sta-
tisticalmapsshowingsignificancewereatanuncorrectedlevel
(p\.001).
More recently, the gray matter of untreated androphilic GD
adolescents has been addressed (Hoekzema et al., 2015). MtFs
have smaller volume than male controls in the left superior pos-
teriorhemisphereof thecerebellum andsmaller volume than
femalecontrolsintherightinferiororbitofrontalcortex.Thus,
untreatedMtFadolescentsdiffer frombothmale andfemale
controls in some cortical regions.
CThhasalsobeenusedtoinvestigatebraindifferencesintrans-
sexuals (Table5). Zubiarre-Elorza et al. (2013) compared early-
onsetuntreatedhomosexual MtFswithfemale andmalecontrols.
MtFsdidnotdifferinCThfromfemalecontrolsbuttheirCThwas
greater than that of control males in the orbitofrontal, insular, and
medial occipital regions of the right hemisphere. This report was
the first to show the feminization of large portions of the cortex in
early-onset homosexual MtFs and it concluded that MtFs had a
feminine cortical thickness but differed from control males in
regions that female controls did not (Table5; Fig.2b).
White matter
Recently, white matter microstructure has been studied in
early-onset homosexual MtFs using DTI (Table 5; Fig. 3a).
There are sex differences in FA, males showing greater FA
values in important brain fascicles such as the right and left
superiorlongitudinalfasciculi(rSLF;lSLF),theinferiorfronto-
occipitalfasciculus(IFOF),thecingulum(Cin),theforcepsminor
(Fm), and the corticospinal tract (CST) (Rametti et al., 2011b).
Interestingly, early-onset homosexual MtFs show demasculin-
ized FA in all these brain fascicles because their FA values were
statisticallydifferentfromthevaluesforboththemaleandfemale
controlgroups.TheMtFIFOFismasculinebecauseitsFAdidnot
differfrommalecontrols’.Curiously,thedemasculinizedfascicles
seemtoberestrictedtotherighthemisphere(Table5;Ramettietal.,
2011b).
Conclusions
Overall,invivoMRIstudiesindicatethatthemainmorphological
parametersofthebrain(ICV,GM,WM,andCSF)arecongruent
with their natal sex in untreated homosexual MtFs. However,
somecorticalregionsshowfemininevolumeandthicknessandit
shouldbeunderscoredthatCThpresentsanF[Mmorphological
pattern. Nevertheless, with respect to CTh, this feminine cortical
patternisnotthesameastheoneshownbycontrolfemales(com-
pare Fig.2a andb).Onthe otherhand,the main white matter fas-
cicles in MtFs are demasculinized, while others are still mascu-
line (Fig.3a). Moreover, most of the differences appear to be
located in the right hemisphere. So far, the studies on the white
matter, like those above on gray matter, strongly suggest that
MtFshavetheirownbrainphenotypethatmainlyaffectstheright
hemisphere.
The Brain of Nonhomosexual Male-to-Female
Transsexuals Before Cross-Sex Hormone Treatment
All we know about the morphology of the brain of nonhomo-
sexualMtFs comesfrom a single VBMstudy(Savic &Arver,
2011). Nonhomosexual MtFs have the same total intracranial
volume as control males. They also show a larger gray matter
volumeincorticalregionsinwhichthemaleandfemalecontrols
didnotdifferinthestudy.Theseregionsweretherightparieto-
temporaljunction,therightinferiorfrontal,andtheinsularcor-
tices.Itwasconcludedthattheirdatadidnotsupportthenotion
that the nonhomosexual MtF brain was feminized.
With respect to subcortical structures, it was reported that
untreatednonhomosexualMtFshadarelativelysmallerputamen
and thalamus than male and female controls although these two
latter groups did not show sex differences in the two structures
(Savic & Arver, 2011).
Arch Sex Behav (2016) 45:1615–1648
1623
123
 In summary, the cortex of nonhomosexual MtFs presents
morphological peculiarities in regions in which male and female
controls do not differ.
The Brain of Female-to-Male Transsexuals Before
Cross-Sex Hormone Treatment
Brain Morphology
AlthoughtherearefewworksonthebrainmorphologyofFtMsas
yet, several studies have described the gray and white matter of
untreated homosexual FtMs. These works can give us an initial
approach to the morphology of their brain (Rametti et al., 2011a;
Zubiaurre-Elorza et al., 2013). In regards to the gross morphol-
ogy, the intracranial volume of adolescent FtMs is similar to
female controls’ (Hoekzema et al., 2015).
There are only two works using VBM (Table6). Simon et al.
(2013) studied seven homosexual FtMs and found that these
subjects and their male controls had larger volumes than female
controls and MtFs in the left gyri: pre- and postcentral; posterior
cingulate; and calcarine as well as the precuneus regions. These
observations indicate that certain regions of the left hemisphere
aremasculineinFtMs.Butthestatisticalmapswereuncorrected.
UntreatedandrophilicadolescentFtMshavealsobeenstudied
(Hoekzema et al., 2015), and they show less volume in the left
superiormedialfrontalcortexthancontrolfemalesandlessinthe
right insula than control males; this study shows that certain
regions of the cortex of adolescent FtMs are different from both
male and female controls.
There is only one study of cortical thickness in early-onset
homosexual FtMs (Table6; Fig.2c). Their CTh does not differ
statistically from female controls but it does differ significantly
from some regions in male controls in which male and female
controls do not differ in CTh. Contrary to control females, FtMs
showed significantly greater CTh than males in the left parieto-
temporal cortex but, unlike control females, they did not differ
from control males in the prefrontal orbital region (Fig. 2c;
Zubiaurre-Elorza et al., 2013).
Withrespecttosubcorticalstructures(Table6),thevolumeof
theputamenislargerinmalethaninfemalecontrols,butinhomo-
sexual FtMs the volume is masculinized, being similar to that of
control males and differing from the volume of control females
(Zubiaurre-Elorza et al., 2013).
White matter microstructure has been studied in homosexual
FtMs using DTI (Table 6). It was reported that brain bundles
involvedincognitiveandemotionalbehaviorweremasculinized
inhomosexualFtMs(Fig.3b).MaleshavegreaterFAvaluesthan
female controls. FtM FA values are significantly greater than
those of female controls and similar to those of male controls in
theanteriorandposteriorrightSLFandFm.However,theirCST
is defeminized; that is, FtM FA values lie just between male and
female controls and are significantly different from each of these
two groups (Rametti et al., 2011a).
Table 4 Brain volume of untreated homosexual male-to-female transsexuals
Brain
region/
aspect
Normative sex
differences (M vs.
F)
Sample size and age
(M ± SD)
Sample source
Brain-relevant
sample
characteristics
Brain imaging
methods and
measurements
Statistically controlled
confounding variables
Selected findings and conclusions
Authors
Whole
brain
GM
WM
CSF
M[F
18 untreated early-onset
GD Hom MtF
19 Het F
19 Het M
MtF: 24.71 ± 8.15
Het F:33 ± 8.23
Het M: 31.94 ± 6.11
Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain
Untreated early-
onset GD MtFs
3 T Siemens Trio
SIENAX
Measurement ICV
Age
SD
MtF = M: ICV, GM, WM, CSF
ConclusionsInMtFICVandGM,WM,
and CSF compartments are
masculine
Rametti
et al.
(2011b)
Whole
brain
M[F
11 Untreated androphilic
MtF adolescents: 44 M
and 52 F
MtFs: 13.77 ± 2.42
M: 16.42 ± 2.75
F: 16.29 ± 2.96
Center of Expertise on Gender Dysphoria, VU
University Medical Center, Amsterdam,
Netherlands
Untreated
adolescent
MtFs
VBM
Measurement
Intracranial
volume
Tanner stage
MF
[
F
Conclusions ICV masculine
Hoekzema
et al.
(2015)
ICVintracranialvolume,GMgraymatter,WMwhitematter,CSFcerebrospinalfluid(includesventriclesandcisterns),FDRfalsediscoveryrate,VBMvoxel-basedmorphometry,SDsexdifferences,Mmale,Ffemale,Sssubjects,MtFmale-to-
female transsexuals, Hom homosexual, Het heterosexual
1624
Arch Sex Behav (2016) 45:1615–1648
123
 Table 5 The cortex and the white matter of untreated homosexual male-to-female transsexuals
Brain
region/
aspect
Normative sex
differences (M
vs. F)
Sample size and
age (M ± SD or
range)
Sample source
Brain-relevant sample
characteristics
Brain imaging
methods and
measurements
Statistically
controlled
confounding
variables
Findings and conclusions
Authors
Cortex
F[M
10 Hom MtF
7 Hom FtM
7 M
11F
MtFs:
228.8 ± 7.69
M: 27.1 ± 75.54
F: 23.9 ± 73.424
Psychiatry and Psychotherapy Department,
Semmelweis University, Budapest,
Hungary
Untreated Ho MtFs Sexual
orientation
3TPhilipsAchieva
scanner
VBM
Cluster threshold:
30 voxels.
Uncorrected
Measurements
Volume
Age
M[F:Right posterior cingulated; precuneus
F[M: Right superior temporal gyrus
F&MtF
\
M&FtM: Left pre-postcentral gyrus,
posterior cingulated, calcarine gyrus, and
precuneus
F&MtF
[
FtM&M:
Right occipital lobe (middle inferior occipital,
fusiform, and lingual gyri.
Right inferior temporal gyrus
Conclusions Differences between transsexuals
and control same biological gender
Simon et al.
(2013)
Cortex
F[M
11 Untreated
androphilic
MtF
adolescents
44 M adolescents
52 F adolescents
MtFs:
13.77 ± 2.42
M: 16.42 ± 2.75
F: 16.29 ± 2.96
CenterofExpertise onGenderDysphoriaVU
University Medical Center, Amsterdam,
Netherlands
Untreated adolescent
androphilic MtF Sexual
orientation
3 T Philips Intera
scanner
VBM c Clusters
threshold[
10
voxels
FWE corrected
Measurements
Volume
Tanner stage
MtF
\
M: Left superior hemisphere of
cerebellum.
MtF
\
F: Right inferior orbitofrontal cortex
Conclusions In MtF adolescents the volume of
cortex differs from M and F controls in some
regions
Hoekzema
et al.
(2015)
Cortex
F[M
18 Hom MtFs
24 Hom FtM
29 Het M
23 Het F
Hom MtF:
25.50 ± 6.91
Hom FtM:
26.21 ± 9.50
Het M.
29.28 ± 6.35
Het F:
31.09 ± 8.64
Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain
Early GD onset untreated
young adults Ho MtF
Sexual orientation
3 T TIM TRIO
Siemens
scanner
CTh analysis by
FreeSurfer
FWE correction
Measurements
CTh
Age
F[M: Left inferior parietal; Right postcentral;
Right pars triangularis.
MtF
[M:
Right: rostral middle frontal; cuneus; medial
orbitofrontal
Conclusions MtFs thicker (feminine) CTh than
M, but differed from Min regions that F do not
(see Fig. 4)
Zubiaurre-
Elorza
et al.
(2013)
Arch Sex Behav (2016) 45:1615–1648
1625
123
 Conclusions
InFtMs, the gross morphological parameterscorrespond to their
natalsex;theircortexisgenerallyfemininebutdiffersfrommales
indifferentregionsthandocontrolfemales(compareFig.2aand
c). Furthermore, some brain bundles are masculinized (Fig.3b).
All these findings suggest that homosexual FtMs have their own
phenotype with respect to cortical thickness, subcortical struc-
tures, and white matter microstructure. Moreover, these changes
are mostly seen in the right hemisphere.
The Brain of Untreated Male-to-Female and Female-
to-Male Transsexuals from Mixed Samples of
Homosexual and Nonhomosexual Subjects
Some studies in the literature have used groups of mixed samples
ofMtFsinregardtotheirsexualorientationandthisaspectwasalso
unspecified in their control groups (Luders et al., 2009b, 2012).
Others mix homosexual and nonhomosexual MtFs and FtMs and
useagatheringofheterosexual,homosexual,andbisexualsubjects
as controls (Hahn et al., 2015; Kranz et al., 2014). These stud-
ies are very difficult to interpret and any comparison with the
structural data presented in the previous sections, studying homo-
geneousgroupsofhomosexual or nonhomosexualMtFsor FtMs,
couldconfusethepictureofthebrainstructureofMtFsandFtMsin
thecontextoftheexpressionofsexdifferences.Nevertheless,they
are summarized in Table7.
The studyofmixedsamplesimplicitlyassumesthattranssex-
ualsareahomogeneousgroup.Thisisfarfromthetruthwith
respecttotheonsetofGDandsexualorientation(Blanchard,1989a,
1989b). Moreover, sexual orientation is associated to different
body phenotypes. Homosexual MtFs are shorter than men in the
general population, whereas nonhomosexual MtFs have been
reported to be similar in height to control males (Blanchard,
Dickey,&Jones,1995).Althoughalaterstudyfoundnosignificant
differences regarding body mass between homosexual and nonho-
mosexual MtFs, other distinctive developmental and behavioral
characteristics (age of onset; cross-dressing, having been married,
cross-gender appearance) have been described for each subtype of
transsexual (Smithet al., 2005). Finally,from the studies of Savic’s
group, we know that homosexual persons show phenotypic char-
acteristics in cortical and subcortical structures. Homosexual males
and heterosexual females had thinner cortices primarily in visual
areasandsmallerthalamusvolumesthanheterosexualmales(Abe
´,
Johansson, Allze
´n, & Savic, 2014). Moreover, in contrast to
heterosexual males, and in congruence with heterosexual females,
homosexualmalesdisplayedhypothalamicactivationinresponseto
a putative male pheromone (Savic, Berglund, & Lindstrom,2005).
These observations signify that control groups in studies of the
transsexual brain must be homogenous in regards to sexual orien-
tation. Nevertheless, it is possible to extract some data from these
studies if we compare those that use the same MRI techniques and
measurements.
Table 5 continued
Brain
region/
aspect
Normative sex
differences (M
vs. F)
Sample size and
age (M ± SD or
range)
Sample source
Brain-relevant sample
characteristics
Brain imaging
methods and
measurements
Statistically
controlled
confounding
variables
Findings and conclusions
Authors
White
matter
M[F
18 Hom MtF
19 Het F
19 Het M
MtF: 24.71 ± 8.15
HetF:33.00 ± 8.23
Het M: 31.94 ±
6.11
Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain
Early GD onset untreated Ho
MtF Sexual orientation
3 T TIM TRIO
Siemens
scanner
Measurements FA
Age
MtFs
\
M and MtFs
[
F
Right: superior longitudinal fasciculus.
Cingulum
Forceps minor
Corticospinal tract
Left: Superior longitudinal fasciculus
Conclusions The main fascicles of the right
hemisphere are demasculinized in MtFs
Rametti et al.
(2011b)
ICVintracranealvolume,GMgraymatter,WMwhitematter,CSFcerebrospinalfluid(includesventriclesandcisterns),CThcorticalthickness,FAfractionalanisotropy,Mmale,Ffemale,Sssubjects,FDRfalsediscoveryrate,VBMvoxel-based
morphometry, FWE family-wise error correction, Het heterosexual, Hom homosexual, GD gender dysphoria
1626
Arch Sex Behav (2016) 45:1615–1648
123
 The volumetric study by Luders et al. (2009b) found that the
pattern of GM variation in MtFs was more similar to the pattern
found in men than in women (Table7). They studied a mixed
sampleofhomosexualandnonhomosexualMtFs.TheSavicand
Arver(2011)volumetricstudyofnonhomosexualMtFsreported
that their brains were not feminized. It could be that in Luders
etal.’s(2009b)studythereweremorenonhomosexualthanhomo-
sexual MtFs and, as a result, the two studies reached the same
conclusion, in contrast to the volumetric study of Simon et al.
(2013) that reported cortical feminization in homosexual MtFs.
Itispracticallyimpossibletocomparethe twostudiesonCTh
in MtFs because of the differences in their samples and designs.
Luders et al. (2012) did not specify sexual orientation in either
theirtranssexualortheircontrolgroupandusedonlymalesascon-
trols,whileZubiaurre-Elorzaetal.’s(2013)studydesignemployed
maleandfemaleheterosexualcontrolstostudyhomosexualMtFs.
In regard to white matter microstructure, the study of Kranz
et al. (2014) mixedsexual orientation within their MtF,FtM,and
female and male control groups (Table7). The differences in
designandsamplingmakeitalmostimpossibletocomparethese
studieswith those of our group(Rametti etal., 2011a,2011b;see
Tables5,6,7).However,sinceinKranz et al.’sstudymost ofthe
FtMs were homosexuals (19/24), it could feasibly be compared
withtheresultsofRamettietal.(2011a)presentedintheprevious
section(Table6).Kranzetal.didnotfindFAdifferencesbetween
FtMsandcontrolgroupsbuttheydidfindsignificantlydecreased
MD values in FtMs with respect to control females in the same
tracts with increased FA values in FtMs (Rametti et al. 2011a;
Table6). Thus, MD results also indicate a defeminization or
masculinization of the white matter microstructure in FtMs, as
was reported by Rametti et al. (2011a).
With the same design and sample as in Kranz et al., structural
connectivityhasbeenstudiedfromDTIusinggraphtheory(Hahn
et al., 2015). The study reported that FtMs, with respect to male
andfemale controlsandMtFs,have decreasedintra-hemispheric
connectivity between the right subcortical/limbic and right tem-
poral lobes (Table7). Interestingly, the changes in brain con-
nectivity found in FtMs and MtFs are in opposite directions and
are only seen in the right hemisphere.
Recently, resting-state fMRI was used to study the similarities
between spontaneous brain connectivity in one untreated FtM of
unspecifiedGDonsetandsexualorientationwithpolycysticovary
syndromeandmaleandfemalecontrols.ThisFtMsubjectshowed
afunctionalconnectivityprofilethatwascomparabletothatofthe
subject’s natal sex (Santarnecchi, Vatti, Dettore, & Rossi, 2012).
Theoretical and Functional Implications of the Brain
Phenotype of Untreated Homosexual Transsexuals
Untreated homosexual MtFs and FtMs show a complex picture
for the expression of sex differences in their brains (Tables5, 6).
Contrary to some popular ideas, the MtF brain is not completely
feminized but presents a mixture of masculine, feminine, and
demasculinizedtraits.ThisisbetterillustratedbythedataonCTh
andFA(Table8).Moreover,thebrainofhomosexualFtMsisnot
uniformlymasculinizedbutpresentsamixtureoffeminine,defem-
inized, and masculinized morphological traits (Table9). For both
MtFs and FtMs, the morphological traits observed depend on the
regionandthetypeof measurementtaken.Thus,themorphology
of the brain of homosexual MtFs and FtMs strongly suggests that
eachonehasitsownphenotype,andthatthephenotypeisdifferent
from those of heterosexual males and females.
In terms of psychological presentation, people with an early
onsetofGDhavemuchincommonwithindividualswithsomatic
intersexuality (Meyer-Bahlburg, 2011). None of the above neu-
roimaging studies included subjects with signs of somatic inter-
sexuality. MtFs and FtMs each have their own cerebral phe-
notype. This would suggest that early-onset homosexual trans-
sexuals have an intersex condition restricted to the brain.‘‘Brain
hermaphroditism’’wassuggestedintheearlypostmortemstudies
(Kruijver, Zhou, Pool, Hofman, Gooren, & Swaab, 2000).
It has been pointed out that verifying this hypothesis requires
corroborating at least one of the genetic, hormonal, or morpho-
logical lines of research into some specific effect by hormones
thatwouldaffectbrainorganizationofsexualdifferencesbutnot
other organs (Meyer-Bahlburg, 2011, 2013). The existing find-
ings on brain changes fulfill at least one of the conditions and
provide evidence that the brain structures are already affected in
still untreated homosexual MtFs and FtMs. Moreover, in andro-
genizedFtMs,FAvalueincreasesintheSLFandtheCSTcanbe
predicted by the free testosterone index before the treatment
begins(Ramettietal.,2012).Allthesefindingssupporttheinter-
sex hypothesis of transsexuality.
The right-side asymmetry in the differences between MtFs,
FtMs, and control males (Tables8, 9) focuses attention on that
hemisphere. Sex differences in functional hemispheric lateral-
izationarewellknown.Transsexualshavebeenstudiedfromthis
perspective, especially in relation to mental rotation and hand-
edness, because these may be influenced by prenatal androgen
levels, which would reflect some developmental anomaly. Lab-
oratory animal experiments with rats suggest that cerebral cor-
tical laterality differs between the sexes and that gonadectomy at
birth will alter the usual cortical laterality (Diamond, 1991).
Therighthemisphereisinvolvedinmentalrotationandmales
outperform females (Voyer, Voyer, & Bryden, 1995). Mental
rotation performance in untreated early-onset homosexual MtFs
andFtMsisconsistentwiththatoftheirnatalsexandnotwiththat
of their gender identity (Haraldsen, Opjordsmoen, Egeland, &
Finset, 2003). This is also reflected by the finding that untreated
MtFs perform better than untreated FtMs in these tasks (Slab-
bekoorn, van Goozen, Gooren, & Cohen-Kettenis, 2001). How-
ever,therearereportsinwhichtranssexualgroupsshowapattern
ofperformancethatisdifferentfromtheirbiologicalsex(Cohen-
Kettenis, van Goozen, Doorn, & Gooren, 1998). The pattern of
brain activation in mental rotation involves the frontal, parietal,
Arch Sex Behav (2016) 45:1615–1648
1627
123
 andposterior occipitalregions(Carrilloet al., 2010;Cohen et al.,
1996;Hugdahl,Thomsen,&Ersland,2006).UntreatedMtFsand
FtMsshowparietalactivation(Sommer etal.,2008).Thefronto-
parietal-occipital pattern of activation is also seen in early-onset
homosexual MtFs and FtMs after long-term cross-sex hormone
treatment (Carrillo et al., 2010). At present, it is not possible to
relate changes observed in the right cortex and fascicles of trans-
sexuals (Tables8, 9) with differences in mental rotation abilities.
However, the superior longitudinal fasciculus, which connects
fronto-parietalregions,isdemasculinizedinMtFsandmasculin-
izedinFtMs.Moreover,therightparietalregionisthickerinFtMs
than in males, while MtFs present a thicker cortex than males in
visuoperceptive occipital regions (cuneus and pericalcarine
regions) (see Fig.2b, c). We are still far from being able to relate
thesemorphologicaldifferencestospatialabilitiesintranssexuals.
Handpreferencehasalsobeenstudiedintranssexuals(Green&
Young,2001).Sexdifferencesinhandpreferencearewellknown,
left-handedness being more common in males than females (Mc
Glone,1980).Inyoungboysandgirls,prenataltestosteroneexpo-
surewasrelatedtoadecreaseinstrengthofhandedness(Lustetal.,
2011). Pre-pubertal boys with GD were more often left-handed
than control males (Zucker, Beaulieu, Bradley, Grimshaw, &
Wilcox, 2001). This is also seen in adult MtFs and FtMs before
(Cohen-Kettenis et al., 1998) and after cross-sex hormone treat-
ment (Green & Young, 2001; Orlebeke, Boomsma, Gooren,
Verschoor, & Van Den Bree, 1992; Watson & Coren, 1992;
Wisniewski,Prendeville,&Dobs,2005).Thiswouldsuggesta
different patternofcerebralhemispheric organizationintrans-
sexuals.
The CST is the most important motor tract with fibers origi-
nating in motor, premotor, and sensory cortices (Lemon, 2008).
StudiesusingDTItechniqueshaveshownthattheCSTexhibitsa
leftward asymmetry (Dubois et al., 2009; Westerhausen, Huster,
Kreuder, Wittling, & Schweiger, 2007) that is present as early as
4monthsoflife(Duboisetal.,2009)andseemstobeunrelatedto
handpreference(Nathan,Smith,&Deacon,1990;Westerhausen
etal.,2007).However,astudyoftheCSTin400adolescents(12–
18years old) found that this tract, at the level of the internal
capsule, shows a strong left[right hemispheric asymmetry that
isless marked in left-handed subjects(Herve et al.,2009). More-
over, CST increases in this region in males but not in females, so
the increases must be related to the plasma levels of testosterone
(Herveetal.,2009).UsingDTItechniques,itwasfoundthatearly-
onset homosexual MtFs have a demasculinized CST (Rametti
et al., 2011b), while, in early-onset homosexual FtMs, this tract is
masculinized(Ramettietal.,2011a).DTIstudiesofCSTmicrostruc-
Fig. 2 Cortical thickness of untreated homosexual male-to-female
(MtF) and female-to-male (FtM) transsexuals. Upper panel: (a)
comparison between male and female controls. Bottom panel: (b)
comparisonbetweenMtFandmalecontrols;ccomparisonbetweenFtM
and male controls. All significant comparisons showed the F[M
pattern. Note that both MtFs (b) and FtMs (c) show a feminine pattern
although they differ in different regions from males than do control
females. L left hemisphere, R right hemisphere. Zubiaurre-Elorza,
Junque, Go
´mez-Gil, Segovia, Carrillo & Guillamon, 2013, with
permission
1628
Arch Sex Behav (2016) 45:1615–1648
123
 tureintranssexualsareafirststepandsignalanewdirectionfor
future explorations of hand preference in transsexuals.
Results on cortical thickness also suggest that this parameter
wouldbeagoodtargetforasystematicstudyonbodyperception
mechanisms in MtFs and FtMs. The right hemisphere is mainly
involved in the analysis of body perception and its emotional
connotations (Longo, Azanon, & Haggard, 2010). It was under-
scored above that the main brain differences shown by trans-
sexuals are located in the right hemisphere. Generally, the emer-
genceofamasculineorfeminineidentitymustbestronglymedi-
atedbytheearlydevelopmentofa maleorfemalebodyself-per-
ception. This requires several levels of construction of somatop-
erceptionandsomatorepresentation;thelatterincludesemotions,
attitudes directed towards one’s own body, and the link between
thephysicalbodyandthepsychologicalself(Longoetal.,2010).
Thebodymodelofidentityintegritywouldimplicatearightfronto-
parietal and insular network (Giummarra, Bradshaw, Nicholls,
Hilti, & Brugger, 2011) and differences have been reported for
homosexualMtFsandFtMsinalltheseregions(Zubiaurre-Elorza
et al., 2013).
Theliteratureonbodyperceptionintranssexualsreflectstwo
approaches. One comes from an analysis of the desire to ampu-
tate a limb as a type of identity disorder (First, 2005) and the
other isa theoretical hypothesis generated from the analysis
ofthephantomlimbphenomenon(Ramachandran&McGeoch,
2007).
Ithasbeensuggestedthatthedesireforlimbamputationcould
be similar to transsexualism because in most cases the goal of
amputationistomatchone’sbodytoone’sidentity(First,2005).
The similarities with transsexuals are mainly associated with the
feeling of being uncomfortable with an aspect of one’s anatom-
icalidentity.Itshouldberememberedthatsometranssexualsnot
only reject the masculine or feminine aspects of their bodies but
theydislikespecificregions(i.e.,breastsinFtMsandgenitalsinMtFs).
This body uneasiness experienced by transsexuals diminishes
aftercross-sexhormonetreatment(Fisheretal.,2014).Inaddition,
the desire for limb amputation has an early onset in childhood or
adolescenceandasignificantsubgroupoftheseindividualsexperi-
encessexualarousalbyfantasizingaboutthedesiredlimbamputee
identity (First, 2005).
Fig. 3 Histograms showing
fractional anisotropy mean
values (FA) of untreated
homosexual male-to-female
(MtF) and female-to-male (FtM)
transsexuals and male (M) and
female(F)controls.Upperpanel:
(a) FA values in MtF differ
significantly from females in all
six comparisons, and from males
in only five out of the six. Bottom
panel: (b) FA values in FtMs
differ significantly from females
in all four comparisons, from
males in only one out of the four.
SLF superior longitudinal
fasciculus (r right, l left), IFOF
inferior fronto-occipital
fasciculus. Rametti et al. 2011a
and 2011b, with permission
Arch Sex Behav (2016) 45:1615–1648
1629
123
 The theoretical parallel between the desire for limb amputa-
tion and transsexuality has been analyzed by Lawrence (2006).
Nonhomosexual but not homosexual MtFs seem to share some
characteristics with those who desire limb amputation. It should
be noted that in most cases subjects want a left-limb amputation
(First, 2005) and this may reflect some dysfunction in the right
hemisphere, precisely the hemisphere in which homosexual
MtFs and FtMs present differences with controls (Zubiaurre-
Elorza et al., 2013).
Based on amputation studies and provisional data on the
phantom limb phenomenon after penis or breast amputation
in transsexuals, it was hypothesized that during embryolog-
ical development the brain of transsexuals was hard-wired in a
manner that was opposite to that of their natal sex (Ramachandran
&McGeoch,2007).Noposteriorstudyhasverifiedthishypothesis
nor have the preliminary data been published or shown by
the authors.
Recently, a new strategy has been employed (Feusner et al.,
2016). Homosexual/bisexual FtMs viewed photographs of their
own body that were morphed by different degrees to bodies of
other females or males and were instructed to rate ‘‘To what
degree is this picture you?’’ FtMs differed from heterosexual
male and female controls because they rated body images as
moreself-likewhentheyweremorphedtothesexcongruentwith
their gender identity rather than to their natal sex.
Cerebral circuitry involved in body perception has been
studied.Theinferiorparietalandpremotorcorticesplayarole
in perceptual judgment about body configuration; the insular
lobes are involved in body awareness in general and the right
insula in egocentric representation, self-recognition, and
body ownership (Tsakiris, 2010). Circuitry and connectivity
analyses have revealed the afferent and efferent connectivity
of the insula, the somatosensorial, the temporo-parietal, and
the premotor cortices. MRI and neuropsychological data
favor a right hemispheric specificity for self-processing in
general and for body ownership specifically. We have seen
that MtFs differ from males in visuoperceptive regions such
asthecuneusandcalcarineregionaswellasinregionsrelated
with body perception and emotional experience of the body
(insula) and reward value (medial orbitofrontal cortex;
Fig. 2b).Moreover,somefasciclesrelatedtotheseregionsare
demasculinized(Fig. 3a).Ontheotherhand,FtMsdifferfrom
males in the parietal and postcentral regions of the right
hemisphere and have masculine fascicles related to these
regions in the right frontal lobe (Figs. 2c, 3b). Thus, the
available structural data show specific differences for MtFs
and FtMs in cortical regions and fascicles involved in body
perception.
SavicandArver(2011)foundthatnonhomosexualMtFshave
larger gray matter volume than male and female controls in the
Fig. 4 Cortical thickness
developmental trajectories and
changes with respect to gender. a
Zubiarre-Elorza et al.’s (2013)
findings on the regions in which
cortical thicknesses in untreated
male-to-female (MtF) and
female-to-male (FtM)
transsexuals and control females
(F) are thicker than those in
control males are summarized on
the top panels over the graphs
representing the developmental
process for cortical thickness (b),
described by Shaw et al. (2008).
Thestructuresinthetopleftpanel
are homotypical-isocortical and
follow a cubic trajectory, while
those in the top right panel are
transitional and follow a
quadratic trajectory. Note that
maximum cortical thickness
occurs around puberty (b, left)
and adolescence (b, right)
1630
Arch Sex Behav (2016) 45:1615–1648
123
 Table 6 The cortex, subcortical structures, and white matter microstructure of untreated homosexual female-to-male transsexuals
Brain
region/
aspect
Normative
sex
differences
(M vs. F)
Samplesize and
age (M ± SD or
range)
Sample source
Brain-
relevant
sample
characteristics
Brain imaging
methods and
measurements
Statistically
controlled
confounding
variables
Findings and conclusions
Authors
Cortex
F[M
10 MtF
7 FtM
7 M
11 F
MtFs:
228.8 ± 7.69.
FtM:
24.8 ± 6.45
M: 27.1 ± 5.54.
F: 23.9 ± 3.424
Psychiatry and Psychotherapy
Department, Semmelweis
University, Budapest, Hungary
Ho FtMs
3 T Philips Achieva
scanner
VBM
Cluster threshold:
30 voxels
Uncorrected
Measurements
Volume
Age
M[F: Right posterior cingulated;
precuneus
F[M: Right superior temporal gyrus
F&MtF
\
M& FtM: Left pre-postcentral
gyrus, posterior cingulated, calcarine
gyrus, and precuneus
F&MtF
[
FtM&M: Right occipital lobe,
middle inferior occipital, fusiform, and
lingual gyri
Right inferior temporal gyrus
Conclusions structural differences between
transsexuals and controls same biological
gender
Simon
et al.
(2013)
Cortex
F[M
17 untreated
androphilic
FtM
adolescents
11 untreated
MtF
44 M
adolescents
52 F
adolescents
FtMs:
15.20 ± 2.76
MtFs:
13.77 ± 2.42
M:
16.42 ± 2.75
F: 16.29 ± 2.96
Center of Expertise on Gender
Dysphoria, VU University
Medical Center, Amsterdam,
Netherlands
Untreated
androphilic
adolescent
FtM
3 T Philips Intera
scanner
VBM
Clusters threshold
[
10 voxels
FEW corrected
Measurements
Volume
Tanner stage
Age
IQ
FtM[F: medial frontal cortex
Conclusions The volume of cortex in
adolescent FtMs differs from F in the
frontal cortex
Hoekzema
et al.
(2015)
Arch Sex Behav (2016) 45:1615–1648
1631
123
 Table 6 continued
Brain
region/
aspect
Normative
sex
differences
(M vs. F)
Sample sizeand
age (M ± SD or
range)
Sample source
Brain-
relevant
sample
characteristics
Brain imaging
methods and
measurements
Statistically
controlled
confounding
variables
Findings and conclusions
Authors
Cortex
Putamen
F[M
18 Hom MtFs
24 Hom FtM
29 Het M
23 Het F
Hom MtF:
25.50 ± 6.91
Hom FtM:
26.21 ± 9.50
Het M.
29.28 ± 6.35
Het F: 31.09
± 8.64
Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain
Early GD
onset
Untreated
FtMs
3 T TIM TRIO
Siemens scanner
analysis by
FreeSurfer
FEW corrected
Measurements
Cortical thickness
Age
FtM = F
F[M: Left inferior parietal; Right
postcentral; Right pars triangularis
FtM
[
M: Inferior and superior parietal,
superior temporal, postcentral,
supramarginal Putamen: FtM = M
Conclusions FtMs=F
FtM thicker (feminine) CTh than M but
differed from M in regions that F did not
(Fig. 2). Their putamen is masculine
Zubiaurre-
Elorza
et al.
(2013)
White
matter
M[F
18 Hom FtMs
19 Het F
24 Het M
FtM:
28.24 ± 10.61
Het F:
31.22 ± 6.09
Het M:
33.00 ± 8.22
Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain
Early GD
onset
Untreated
FtMs
3 T TIM TRIO
Siemens scanner
Measurements FA
Age
M[F: Right and left Superior longitudinal
fasciculus, Forceps minor,
Corticoespinal tract
FtM = M: Right Posterior longitudinal ,
Forceps minor and corticospinal tract
fasciculi
Conclusions The main fascicles of the right
hemisphere are masculine in FtMs
(Fig. 3b)
Rametti
et al.
(2011a)
ICV intracraneal volume, GM gray matter, WM white matter, CSF cerebrospinal fluid (includes ventricles and cisterns), FDR false discovery rate, VBM voxel-based morphometry, FEW family-wise
error correction, CTh cortical thickness, FA fractional anisotropy, GD gender dysphoria, FtM female-to-male transsexuals, MtF male-to-female transsexuals, Hom homosexual, Het heterosexual, M
male, F female, IQ intelligence quotient
1632
Arch Sex Behav (2016) 45:1615–1648
123
 Table 7 Gray and white matter in studies with mixed samples of untreated homosexual and nonhomosexual male-to-female and female-to-male transsexuals
Brainregion/
aspect
Normative
sex
differences
(M vs. F)
Sample size & age (M ± SD or
range)
Sample source
Brain-relevant sample
characteristics
Brain imaging methods
and measurements
Statistically
controlled
confounding
variables
Findings and conclusions
Authors
Cortex
F[M
24 MtF
30 M
30 F
FandMfromtheConsortiumof
Brain Mapping data base
MtF: 23-72
M: 23–69
F: 23–73
MtFs: volunteers from
local transsexual
community, Los
Angeles, USA
A mixed sample of untreated
Hom and Nonhom MtFs
1.5 T Siemens Sonata
scanner
VBM
Corrected by FDR
Measurements Volume
Age
Cortex: F[M and MtFs
MtFs = M
Putamen: MtF[M
ConclusionsGraymatterinMtFs
is more similar to the pattern of
M than F
Luders
et al.
(2009b)
Cortex
F[M
24 MtFs (the same Ss as in
Luders et al. (2009b) M from
the Consortium of Brain
Mapping data base
MtFs: 45.7 ± 13.8
M: 45.9 ± 13.7
MtFs volunteers from
local transsexual
community, Los
Angeles, USA
Mixed sample of untreated
Hom and Nonhom MtFs
6MtFs:attractedtomenand18
attracted to women
No control F group
1.5 T Siemens Sonata
scanner
CTh by own developed
strategy of analyses
Measurements CTh
Age
MtFs
[
M:
Left: orbitofrontal cortex;middle
frontal gyrus
Right: pre- and post central
gyrus; temporal cortex;
parietal cortex; precuneus;
lingual gyrus
Conclusions MtFs have a thicker
CTh than M
Luders
et al.
(2012)
White matter M[F
21 MtF (5 Hom; 4 Nonhom; 12
Bi)
22 M (16 Het; 6 Hom)
23 F (15 Het; 5 Hom; 3 Bi)
23FtM(19Ho;1Nonhom;3Bi)
MtFs: 30.86 ± 8.38
M: 25.45 ± 4.76
F: 25.96 ± 6.07
FtM: 25.91 ± 6.83
Department of Obstetrics
and Gynaecology,
Medical University,
Vienna, Austria
Mixed sample of Hom,
Nonhom and Bi MtFs, FtMs
Mixed sample of Het, Hom,
and Bi M and F controls
GD onset before or at puberty
3 T TIM Trio Siemens
scanner
DTI; TBSS
Measurements FA
MD
Age
ICV
MD:F
[
FtM
[
MtF[M
Conclusions: differences
between groups in almost all
white matter tracts
Kranz
et al.
(2014)
Connectivity
The same as in Kranz et al.
(2014) ? 2 M
Department of Obstetrics
and Gynaecology,
Medical University,
Vienna, Austria
Mixed sample of Hom,
Nonhom and Bi MtFs, FtMs
Mixed sample of Het, Hom,
and Bi M and F controls
GD onset before or at puberty
3 T TIM Trio Siemens
scanner
DTI
Probabilistic
tractography
Measurements:
Several measures
from graph theory
Age
ICV
Increased inter-hemispheric
lobar connectivity weights in
MtFs and e intra-hemispheric
decreases in FtMs
Conclusions MtFs and FtMs
show phenotypic
characteristics in structural
connectivity
Hahn et al.
(2015)
ICVintracranealvolume,GMgraymatter,WMwhitematter,FDRfalsediscoveryrate,VBMvoxel-basedmorphometry,CThcorticalthickness,DTIdiffusiontensorimaging,TBSStract-basedstatistics,MtFmale-
to-female transsexuals, FtM female-to-male transsexuals, M male, F female, Hom homosexual, Nonhom nonhomosexual transsexuals, Bi bisexual, Het heterosexual
Arch Sex Behav (2016) 45:1615–1648
1633
123
 right parieto-temporal junction and the right inferior frontal and
the insular cortices. As shown above, these regions are related to
body self perception. The authors suggested that the experience
ofdissociationoftheselffromthebodymaybearesultoffailure
to integrate complex somatosensory and memory processes in
these regions. Future research should explore possible differ-
ences in the structural connectivity of these regions.
Differenceshave beendetectedinthe neuralnetworkof body
representation in transsexuals (Lin et al., 2014). Lin et al. inves-
tigatedtheregionalchangesinthedegreeofcentralityinresting-
statefunctionalconnectivityofthebrain;thedegreeofcentrality
isanindexofthefunctionalimportanceofa nodeinaneuralnet-
work. They hypothesized that three key regions of the body rep-
resentation network (primary somatosensory cortex, parietal
lobe,andinsula)wouldshowahigherdegreeofcentralityinuntre-
ated transsexuals with respect to controls. Transsexuals do
showahigherdegreeofcentralityinthebilateralparietallobe
and the somatosensory cortex. However, their data analysis
pooledthedatafromMtFsandFtMs.Althoughthefindingsof
Lin et al. are indicative of specific connectivity features in
transsexuals, they should be taken cautiously until separate
analyses distinguishing between MtFs and FtMs, the onset of
the GD, and sexual orientation can be presented.
Comment on the Brain of Nonhomosexual
Transsexuals
As noted above, there is only one morphological study on
untreated nonhomosexual transsexuals in the literature (Savic &
Arver,2011).Thisstudyandourproposedphenotypesforhomo-
sexualMtFsandFtMscouldhelpustakethefirststepsindiscern-
ing between homosexual and nonhomosexual transsexuals.
Homosexual MtFsarefemale-like inaseriesofsexuallydimor-
phicbehaviors,whilenonhomosexualMtFsarenot(Blanchard,
1989a, 1989b). It has also been hypothesized that the brain of
homosexual and nonhomosexual MtFs would differ from that
ofmalesindifferentways.InhomosexualMtFs,thedifferences
would involve sexually dimorphic structures and the nature of
thedifferenceswouldbeashifttowardthefemale-typicalpatterns,
while in nonhomosexual MtFs the differences themselves would
notinvolvesexuallydimorphicstructures(Blanchard,2008).More-
over,itwasalsosuggestedthat‘
‘ifthereisanyneuroanatomicinter-
sexuality, it is in the homosexual group’
’(Blanchard, 2008).
Following this line of thought, Cantor (2011, 2012, but also
see Italiano, 2012) has recently suggested that Blanchard’s pre-
dictions have been fulfilled in two independent structural neu-
roimaging studies. Specifically, Savic and Arver (2011) using
VBMonthecortexofuntreatednonhomosexualMtFsandanother
study using DTI in homosexual MtFs (Rametti et al., 2011b)
illustrate the predictions. Cantor seems to be right. Nonhomosex-
ualMtFspresentdifferenceswithheterosexualmalesinstructures
thatarenotsexuallydimorphic(Savic&Arver,2011),while
homosexual MtFs (as well as homosexual FtMs) show
differenceswithrespecttomaleandfemalecontrolsinaseriesof
brain fascicles (Rametti et al., 2011a, 2011b). If other VBM and
CThstudiesonthecortexofhomosexualMtFsareadded(Simon
et al., 2013; Zubiaurre-Elorza et al., 2013), there is a more sub-
stantial number of untreated homosexual MtFs and FtMs that
fulfill Blanchard’s prediction but still only one study on nonho-
mosexual MtFs; to fully confirm the hypothesis, more indepen-
dent studies on nonhomosexual MtFs are needed. A much better
verification of the hypothesis could be supplied by a specifically
designedstudyincludinghomosexualandnonhomosexualMtFs.
Finally, for Blanchard, MtF and FtM homosexual transsexu-
ality is an extreme expression of homosexuality. He considered
the following continuum: homosexual?gender dysphoric homo-
sexual?transsexual homosexual (Blanchard, Clemmensen, &
Steiner,1987).Later,Blanchardalsohypothesizedthathomosex-
ual transsexuals should show differences in sexually dimorphic
brainstructures(Blanchard,2008).Thus,fromBlanchard’sview,
there would be no brain differences between homosexual trans-
sexuals and homosexual persons. This hypothesis has not been
directlytestedyet.However,therearetwostudiesintheliterature
withrespecttocorticalthicknessthat,takencautiously,mayappro-
achBlanchard’shypothesisontherelationshipbetweentrans-
sexuality and homosexuality.
The only study on the CTh of homosexual persons that do not
presentgenderdysphoriaisbytheSavicgroup(Abe
´ etal.,2014).
If we compare this study with that of Zubiaurre-Elorza et al.
(2013) on the CTh of homosexual MtFs, we see both studies
report sex differences showing an F[M pattern in similar struc-
turesoftherighthemisphere.Butthereisonlyoneregion,thepars
triangularis, in which homosexuals and homosexual MtFs both
present differences. However, these changes are in opposite
directions. The pars triangularis of homosexual MtFs is thicker
than in heterosexual male controls, while for homosexuals it is
thinner than in heterosexual males. Thus, it seems that for trans-
sexuals this region is feminized but demasculinized in homo-
sexualindividuals.Interestingly,inbothstudies,theaffectedpars
triangularis is in the right hemisphere. Nevertheless, confirming
Blanchard’s prediction still needs a specifically designed com-
parisonofhomosexualMtF,homosexualmale,andheterosexual
male and female people.
The Transsexual Brain Phenotype in the Light of the
Neurohormonal Theory of Brain Sexual
Differentiation
ThecortexofhomosexualMtFsandFtMsisfeminineandhasan
F[M morphological pattern of sex differences. Nevertheless,
theFAof brainfasciclesiseither demasculinized(MtFs)or mas-
culinized/defeminized (FtMs), while in control groups, sex dif-
ferences in the FA show an M[F pattern (see Tables8, 9).
Fortunately, animal models have provided information on the
1634
Arch Sex Behav (2016) 45:1615–1648
123
 hormonal mechanisms implicated in the development of the M
[FandF[Mpatterns.Thisinformationhelpsexplaintheroleof
hormonesincreatingthedifferenthumansexualbrainphenotypes.
The F[M patterninthe cortex of MtFs,FtMs,and females is
also present in structures of the rat brain such as the medial ante-
rior region of the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BSTMA),
lateral anterior region of the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis
(BSTLA),anteroventralperiventricularnucleus(AVPv),arcuate
nucleus (Arc), parastrial nucleus (PS), and the locus coeruleus
(LC) (Guillamon & Segovia, 1996). Neonatal orchidectomy in
males increases the morphological measurements (volume and/
or number of cells) of the BSTMA (del Abril, Segovia, & Guil-
lamon, 1987), BSTLA (Guillamon, Segovia & del Abril, 1988),
and AVPv (Davis, Shryne, & Gorski, 1996) to levels similar to
thoseoffemales.However,earlypostnatalandrogenizationof
femalesdecreasedthe morphological measurementsinthe
BSTMAandBSTLA(delAbriletal.,1987;Guillamon,Segovia
& del Abril,1988).In consequence,itwassuggested that the
smallermeasurementsofmaleswereduetoan‘‘inhibitory’’action
by androgens (Segovia & Guillamon, 1993).
Table 8 Thebrainphenotypeofuntreatedhomosexualmale-to-femaletranssexualsfromstudiesofcorticalthicknessandwhitemattermicrostructure
Normative sex differences (M vs. F)
Phenotype
Hemisphere
Cerebral compartments
M[F
Masculine
Gray matter
M[F
Masculine
White matter
M[F
Masculine
Intracranial volume
M[F
Masculine
CSF
Cortical thickness
F[M
Feminine
Right
Global
F[M
Feminine
Right
Orbitofrontal
F[M
Feminine
Right
Insular
F[M
Feminine
Right
Cuneus
White matter microstructure
Longitudinal superior
M[F
Demasculinized
Right
Fronto-occipital inferior
M[F
Masculine
Forceps minor
M[F
Demasculinized
Right
Cingulum
M[F
Demasculinized
Right
Corticospinal tract
M[F
Demasculinized
Right
This table summarizes findings shown in Table 5. See Rametti et al. (2011b) and Zubiaurre-Elorza et al. (2013)
Table 9 Thebrainphenotypeofuntreatedhomosexualfemale-to-maletranssexualsfromstudiesofcorticalthicknessandwhitemattermicrostructure
Normative sex differences (M vs. F)
Phenotype
Hemisphere
Cerebral compartments
Gray matter
M[F
Feminine
White matter
M[F
Feminine
Intracranial volume
M[F
Feminine
CSF
M[F
Feminine
Cortical thickness
Global
F[M
Feminine
Right
Parieto-temporal
F[M
Feminine
Right and left
Parietal
F[M
Feminine
Right
Subcortical structures
Putamen (volume)
M[F
Masculine
Right
White matter microstructure
Longitudinal superior
M[F
Masculine
Right and left
Forceps minor
M[F
Masculine
Right
Corticospinal tract
M[F
Defeminized
Right
This table summarizes findings shown in Table 6. See Rametti et al. (2011a) and Zubiaurre-Elorza et al. (2013)
Arch Sex Behav (2016) 45:1615–1648
1635
123
 This inhibitory effect is supported by a study comparing the
volumeandthenumberofneuronsintheLCofratswithtesticular
feminization syndrome (Tfm) to that in their male littermates. In
theLC,TfmratslackfunctionalARandhavealargervolumeand
greater number of neurons than their control male littermates
(Garcia-Falgueras et al., 2005). However, the inhibitory mecha-
nismmayvarydependingontheregion,sinceERseemstomedi-
ate neuronal cell death in the AVPv (Waters & Simerly, 2009).
Curiously, the development of sex differences in the AVPv and
LC nuclei occurs postpuberally (Davis et al., 1996; Pinos et al.,
2001),indicatingtheimportanceofpubertyinthedevelopmentof
the F[M pattern.
This inhibitory androgen action also operates in the human
cortex.Ithasbeenshownthatthepossessionofanalleleconferring
more efficient functiononthe AR isassociatedwith a thinner
cortex (Raznahan et al., 2010) and a relatively thinner and less
densegraymatter(Pausetal.,2010)inadolescents.Thethicker
cortex observed in specific regions of the cortices of MtFs and
FtMscouldbeexplainedbyanatypicalregionalfunctioningof
thetestosterone-receptorcomplexthatwouldbeconstrainedto
particular regions of the brains of MtFs and FtMs (compare
Fig. 2b and c). A possible explanation could be differential
geneexpressionproducedbysomeepigeneticprocessthatwould
affecttheARand/ortheirequilibriumwithERincertainregions
of the cortex of transsexuals.
Human white matter shows sex differences that follow the
M[Fpattern.Maleshaveagreaterincreaseinbrainwhitematter
during childhood and adolescence than females (De Bellis et al.,
2001; Lenroot et al., 2007; Perrin et al., 2008). The human white
matter microstructure, as measured by FA, is also M[F. This
patternhasbeenthemostreportedinanimalstudies.Testosterone
is responsible for promoting the greater volume and number of
neurons seen in males, as has been shown in the nuclei con-
stituting the neural network of the accessory olfactory system in
therat(Guillamon&Segovia,1996).Neonatalmalegonadectomy
decreases the volume and number of neurons in these nuclei,
while neonatal androgenization of the female increases the vol-
ume and number of neurons.
TheroleoftestosteroneandtheARhasbeenstudiedinrelation
tothegrowthofthewhitematterinadolescents.Thetestosterone-
related increase in white matter volume was stronger in adoles-
cents with fewer CAG repeats in the androgen receptor gene
(Perrinetal.,2008);fewerCAGrepeatsmakeandrogenreceptors
moreeffective.ThemasculinizationofFAobservedinsomebrain
fasciclesofFtMsbeforecross-sexhormonetreatmentseemstobe
relatedtotestosterone(Table9;Fig.3b).Thisisbecausetheincre-
mentsinFAvaluesintheSLFandCSTtractsarepredictedbythe
free testosterone index before hormonal treatment (Rametti et al.,
2012).BrainfasciclesaredemasculinizedinMtFs(Table8;Fig.3a)
and this might be related to atypical function of testosterone
or the androgen receptor.
Examining the two morphological patterns of sexual dimor-
phismtogether,generalrulesemerge.InstructureswiththeF[M
pattern, testosterone inhibits development in both males and
females.ThefactthatMtFsandFtMsshowatypicaldevelopment
in specific cortical regions suggests that this rule does not hold in
the particular cortical regions in which homosexual MtFs and
FtMs differ from male and female controls. In structures with the
M[F pattern, testosterone promotes growth but this rule again
does not hold for the white matter microstructure of some brain
bundles in MtFs and FtMs.
A Unifying Neurodevelopmental Hypothesis to
Explain the Expression of Sex Differences in
Untreated Homosexual Male-to-Female and
Female-to-Male Transsexuals
The phenotype for cortical thickness has a common feature in
homosexualMtFs,FtMs,andfemales;inallthreecases,themor-
phological pattern is F[M. This observation could help provide
ahypothesisthatsuppliesasingleexplanationforthecorticalphe-
notypeinMtFs,FtMs,andmaleandfemalecontrols.Weacknowl-
edge that our hypothesis is still tentative because of the paucity of
studies on CTh in homosexual transsexuals and of the limitations
inherent to MRI techniques.
The hypothesis emerges from a developmental approach to
thecortex.Whythecortex?First,focusingattentiononthecortex
is quite justified in studying gender identity because of its inte-
grative and commanding functions with respect to all types of
behaviors and its interconnectivity with subcortical structures.
Second, the most marked and most consistent differences found
in transsexuals’ brains are seen in the cortex (Zubiaurre-Elorza
et al., 2013). Third, the cortex contains receptors for androgens
(Beyenburgetal.,2000;Finley&Kritzer,1999;Puyetal.,1995),
and a- and b-estrogen (Gonzalez et al., 2007; Montague et al.,
2008; Osterlund, Gustafsson, Keller, & Hurd, 2000). Fourth and
last,corticalsexdifferencesfollowtheF[Mpatternandthehor-
mone mechanisms that control this pattern in mammals agree
withtheMRIdevelopmentalstudiesofthehumancortexasshown
above.
Although control females, MtFs, and FtMs all have an F[M
pattern, they are different among themselves because they differ
from control males in different cortical regions. As a result, each
of these categories has a distinct phenotype.
ThethicknessofthehumancortexpresentsanF[Mpatternof
sexdifferences(Imetal.,2006;Luders,Narr,Zaidel,Thompson,
& Toga, 2006; Raznahan et al., 2010; Shaw et al., 2008; Sowell
etal.,2007;Zubiaurre-Elorzaetal.,2013)anditbecomesthinner
over the first three decades of life (Shaw et al., 2008). However,
thisprocessisnothomogeneous,sincecorticalregionswithasimple
laminararchitecture(limbicareas)alsoshowsimplegrowthtrajec-
tories(linearandquadratic),whilepolysensoryandhigh-order
association areas of the cortex have more complex develop-
mental trajectories (cubic) (Shaw et al., 2008).
1636
Arch Sex Behav (2016) 45:1615–1648
123
 If the figures presented by Shaw et al. (2008) on the devel-
opmentaltrajectoriesofcorticalstructuresarecomparedwiththe
findings of Zubiaurre-Elorza et al. (2013), it can be seen that
females, MtFs, and FtMs differ from males (Fig.4). In addition,
thecubicandquadraticdevelopmentaltrajectoriesshowapeakin
cortical thickness during puberty and adolescence.
Moreover,arecentstudyhasshownthatpossessionofanallele
conferringmoreefficientfunctioningontheARisassociated
withmasculinization(thinning)ofadolescentcorticalthickness
(Raznahanetal.,2010).Thus,sexdifferencesinthedevelopment
ofcorticalthicknessmightbemediatedbyAR.Whatseemstobe
clearfromalltheseobservations isthatfemales,MtFs,andFtMs
share the same developmental process that produces a thicker
cortex than in males.
It should be remembered from the above animal studies that
somebrainnucleipresentanF[Mpatternofsexdifferencesasin
thehumancortex,andandrogensandsexhormonereceptors(AR
or ER) are implicated in the development of this pattern.
Although there are conflicting results (Ujike et al., 2009), a sig-
nificant association has been reported between longer AR gene
polymorphisms and MtFs (Hare et al., 2009) and ERb polymor-
phism in FtMs (Fernandez et al., 2014b; Henningsson et al.,
2005).
Taking all these data together with the observation that
females,MtFs,andFtMsallhaveanF[Mpatternofsexdiffer-
enceswithrespecttotheircorticalthickness,weproposeaslow-
ing (or a stop) in the cortical thinning process in females,MtFs,
and FtMscomparedtothe thinning processinmales. However,
this slowing of the thinning processaffects different cortical
regionsin females, MtFs,and FtMs,and thisparticularitygives
each of them their characteristic cortical phenotype.
The different thinning processes in different cortical regions
support a unifying developmental hypothesis that explains cor-
tical development for both MtFs and FtMs, and how it affects
differentareasatdifferenttimes.Thishypotheticalprocess,based
ondifferentialdevelopmentalprocessesinspecificcorticalregions,
would influence the development of gender identity for all:
male, female, MtF, and FtM.
Thishypothesisfortheexpressionofsexdifferencesingender
identityassumesaperinatalactionbyandrogens(ortheirmetabo-
lites) but it should be remembered that the process of cortical
thinning begins around puberty (Fig.4). Puberty is an important
periodingenderidentity(Steensma,Kreukels,deVries,&Cohen-
Kettenis, 2013), one in which adolescents may persist, desist (de
Vries & Cohen-Kettenis, 2012; Drummond, Bradley, Peterson-
Badali,&Zucker,2008; Steensma,Biemond,de Boer,&Cohen-
Kettenis,2011;Wallien&Cohen-Kettenis,2008),initiate(Zucker
et al., 2012), or even desist and then return to their gender dys-
phoria (Steensma & Cohen-Kettenis, 2015). It should also be
notedthat animal modelsindicate that puberty isa periodof brain
remodeling (Schulz et al., 2009; Sisk & Zehr, 2005).
Returning to the neurohormonal theory of brain and behavior
differentiation, it seems that in children who have no problems
with their gender identity and those who experience GD at these
agesandcontinuetodosoafterpuberty(persisters),genderiden-
tity does not seem to have been affected by sex hormone activa-
tion. The existence of behavioral traits that only need the
organizational action of sex hormones was mentioned above
(Goy & McEwen, 1980) and is not unknown in transsexuals,
forinstance,theorganizingbutnotactivatingeffectsofhormones
were demonstrated in spatial tests in homosexual MtFs and FtMs
(van Goozen, Slabbekoorn, Gooren, Sanders, & Cohen-Kettenis,
2002).
However, for those children whose GD fades (desisters) the
activationaleffectsofsexhormoneandenvironmentalinfluences
during puberty might play a significant role. In these cases, hor-
monesatpubertymightactintwoways.Onewouldbedirectlyon
the brain, affecting cortical development, and the other would be
toguidethedevelopmentofthesecondarysexcharacteristicsthat
would in turn be perceived as congruent because of the brain
changes that take place at this age. Whether persisters-after-in-
terruptioncouldbefitintooneofthetwopreviousdevelopmental
pathways depends on whether this probably new developmental
categoryissubstantiatedbyfutureresearch.Moreover,onewayto
verify our neurodevelopmental hypothesis ongender would be to
compare the CTh of young untreated adult persisters, desisters,
and male and female controls of the same age.
The Brain of Transsexuals After Cross-Sex
Hormonal Treatment
EffectsofCross-SexHormoneTreatmentontheBrain
of MtFs and FtMs
The objective of cross-sex hormonal treatment is to feminize the
bodies of MtFs, administering estradiol plus antiandrogens, or to
masculinize thebodyof FtMs,administeringtestosterone.These
treatmentsdonotaffecttheirgenderfeelings,whichmustbevery
well established to make them eligible for cross-sex hormone
treatment. The treatments are intended to overcome dysphoria
and increase their quality of life (Gomez-Gil, Zubiaurre-Elorza,
de Antonio, Guillamon, & Salamero, 2014; Gomez-Gil et al.,
2012).
Reviewing the effects of cross-sex hormonal treatment on the
brainisimportant.Mostofthestudiesontheeffectsofsuchtreat-
ments focus on the vascular and skin systems as well as the
metabolism (Gooren, Giltay & Bunck, 2008).
Arch Sex Behav (2016) 45:1615–1648
1637
123
 Acoupleofstudiesexaminedtheeffectsofcross-sexhormone
treatment on the shape and area of the corpus callosum. Emory
et al. (1991) using in vivo MRI techniques and a cross-sectional
design in MtFs and FtMs did not find differences with respect to
male and female controls. However, using a different technique,
Yokotaetal.(2005)reportedthatatthemidsagittalplanecallosal
shapeswerecongruentwithgenderidentityinpresumablytreated
MtF and FtM individuals.
Only three published studies have addressed the effect of
cross-sexhormonetreatmentsonthebrainoftranssexualsinvivo
using a longitudinal design; that is, studying the same people
before and after treatment (Hulshoff Pol et al., 2006; Rametti
et al., 2012; Zubiaurre-Elorza, Junque, Gomez-Gil, & Guilla-
mon, 2014). These studies give a consistent picture on the effect
of cross-sex hormone treatment on the brain.
With respect to MtFs, Hulshoff Pol et al. (2006) found that
beforetreatmentsubjects’brainvolumewasconsistentwiththeir
natal sex. Estradiol plus antiandrogen produced a decrease in
brainvolume‘
‘towardsfemaleproportions’
’after4monthsoftreat-
ment,a decrease they found to be ten timesthe average annual
decrease in healthy adults. Moreover, the ventricles became
larger.
Recently, Zubiaurre-Elorza et al. (2014) measured cortical
thicknessandthevolumeofthebrainandcorticalandsubcortical
structures in MtFs. After at least 6 months of treatment, they
foundageneraldecreaseinallthesemeasurementstogetherwith
increased ventricle volume. The volumetric analyses showed a
significantdecreaseinthetotalandcorticalgraymattervolumes.
Subcortical gray matter volume also showed a decrease that was
centered in the right thalamus and right pallidum. Consequently,
and due to the production of a mechanical vacuum, there was a
significantincreaseinthewholeventricularsystem.Thedecrease
seen in CTh was also generalized but most strongly affected the
cortex in the occipital, temporal, and parietal regions and some
areas of the frontal lobes (Fig.5).
In relation to FtMs after testosterone treatment, Hulshoff Pol
et al. (2006) reported that 4months of androgen treatment incre-
ased total brain and hypothalamus volumes. Moreover, Zubiarre-
Elorzaetal.(2014)reportedthat total(cortical?subcortical)gray
mattervolumeincreasedafteratleast6monthsoftreatment.With
respecttosubcorticalstructures,therightthalamusvolumewasincre-
ased.Inaddition,CThincreasesinparietalandoccipitalregions
ofthelefthemispherewerecorrelatedwiththeriseintheserum
testosteroneandfreetestosteroneindex(Fig.5).Theandrogenization
treatmentdidnotsignificantlyaffecttheventricularsystemofFtMs.
The effects of testosterone treatment on FA values were also
studied in FtMs (Rametti et al., 2012). After seven months of
treatment,FAvaluesincreasedintherightSLFandtherightCST
fascicles compared to pre-treatment values. These increments in
FAwerepredictedbythefreetestosteroneindexbeforethetestos-
terone treatment. The higher the testosterone index before hor-
monaltreatment,thehighertheincreasesinFAvaluesintheSLF
and the CST fascicles under androgenization.
The above three studies suggest that cross-sex hormone treat-
ment affects the gross morphology as well as the white matter
microstructureofthebrain.Changesaretobeexpectedwhenhor-
mones reach the brain in pharmacological doses. Consequently,
one cannot take hormone-treated transsexual brain patterns as
evidence of the transsexual brain phenotype because the treat-
ment alters brain morphology and obscures the pre-treatment
brain pattern. Thus, at least two main questions emerge from the
above results. First, what mechanisms produce these alterations
in the brain of MtFs and FtMs? Second, do these changes have
clinical consequences?
Fig. 5 Effects of the cross-sex
hormonal treatment on the
cortical thickness of male-to-
female (MtFs) and female-to-
male (FtMs) transsexuals. Blue;:
cortical regions in which
estradiol ? antiandrogens
thinned the cortex in MtFs. Red::
cortical regions in which
testosterone thickened the cortex
in FtMs. Data transformed in
images from the longitudinal
study of Zubiaurre-Elorza et al.
(2014)
1638
Arch Sex Behav (2016) 45:1615–1648
123
 Possible Mechanisms That Control Brain Alterations
After Cross-Sex Hormone Treatment
Withrespecttothemechanisms,itshouldberememberedthatthe
human brain contains receptors for androgen and estrogen (see
above), as well as glucocorticoids (Kicman, 2008) and, what is
more, it also possesses most of the enzymes involved in the
biosynthesis and metabolism of sex steroids and glucocorticoids
(O
¨ sterlund, Keller, & Hurd, 2000).
In relation to FtMs, it was suggested that the reported morpho-
logical increments might be due to the anabolic effects of testos-
terone (Zubiaurre-Elorza et al., 2014). Testosterone has virilizing
and anabolic effects that are inseparable. FtMs under hormonal
treatment are natal females with supraphysiological levels of
testosterone that might affect the normal metabolic mechanisms of
androgens. There are several nonexclusive mechanisms involving
theARandERthatcouldaccountforthemorphologicalincrements
observedinFtMs.Testosterone,anditsreducedmetabolitedihy-
drotestosterone,canactdirectlyviatheAR.Moreover,somereduced
metabolitesfromdihydrotestosterone(3adioland3bdiol)can
alsobindER. Inaddition,testosterone isconverted toestradiol
inthebrainviathep450enzymearomataseandthenbindstoER.
Human brain is known to express aromatase and reductase activ-
ities (Lephart, 1996; O
¨ sterlund et al., 2000; Pelletier, 2010).
There is yet another mechanism that could contribute to mor-
phologicalincreasesinFtMbrains.Androgensinterferewithglu-
cocorticoid receptor expression (Negri-Cesi, Poletti, & Celotti,
1996) producing an anticatabolic effect and a positive nitrogen
balance.Theviewthatmorphologicalincrementsinthebrainare
due to anabolic effectsisalsosupported bythe increasedFA val-
uesobservedinseveralbrainfasciclesaftertestosteronetreatment
(Rametti et al., 2012). These FA increments could be due to
increases in the number of microtubules and macromolecules
induced by testosterone. In summary, the effects of testosterone
on the brain of FtMs should be interpreted as an anabolic side
effect.
Contrary to FtMs, the suppression of testosterone in MtFs via
antiandrogens would diminish the anabolic tone in brain tissues
and induce decreases (Zubiaurre-Elorza et al., 2014). Moreover,
theeffectofestradioladministrationcouldalsoplayanadditional
role via its adverse effects on the brain (Zubiaurre-Elorza et al.,
2014).
Estradiol is selectively cytotoxic to b-endorphin neurons and
perhaps other cells. The mechanism involves aromatic hydroxy-
lationofestradioltocatecholestrogensandtheproductionoffree
radicals in the hypothalamus (Brawer, Beaudet, Desjardins, &
Schipper, 1993); the developing human hypothalamus and cere-
bral cortex can produce catechol estrogens (Fishman, Naftolin,
Davies, Ryan, & Petro, 1976).
Finally, morphological decreases are not only seen in MtFs
after cross-sex hormone treatment since menopausal estrogen
therapyhasalsobeenassociatedwithsmallerregionalvolumesin
frontal, temporal, and limbic regions as well as the hippocampus
(Casanova etal.,2011;Resnicketal.,2009).Moreover,estrogen
therapy has been associated with greater brain atrophy among
women aged 65years or older (Resnick et al., 2009). Taking all
theseobservationstogether,thebraindecreasesobservedinMtFs
after cross-sex hormone treatment should be interpreted as side
effectsduetoalossoftheanabolictoneproducedbysuppression
of testosterone combined with some deleterious effects from
estradiol.
Clinical Consequences
Do cross-sex hormone treatment induced brain changes have
clinical consequences? The few existing studies on transsexuals
report on short- to medium-term treatment durations and during
this period cross-sex hormone treatment seems to be reasonably
safe for clinical variables associated with the vascular system,
metabolism, and skeleton (Gooren, 2011; Wierckx et al., 2012).
However, nothing is known about older transsexuals; long-term
clinicalstudiesareyettobepublished,andrisksmaybecomemore
apparent as the duration of hormone exposure increases (Gooren,
2011). Up until now, neuropsychological research on cross-sex
hormonetreatmentintranssexualshasbeenmainlyfocusedonthe
effectsofgonadalhormonesonsexuallydimorphicemotionaland
cognitive behaviors (van Goozen, Cohen-Kettenis, Gooren, Fri-
jda, & van de Poll, 1995). From a clinical viewpoint, neuropsy-
chological tests that are sensitive to subtle brain changes and tests
that are sensitive to the cognitive functions subserved by the
structures that experience the most significant changes after
treatment are needed and have yet to be carried out.
Postmortem Studies of the Brain of Male-to-Female
Transsexuals
Forthesakeofclarity,thisreviewfirstdiscussedinvivostudieson
brains of MtFs and FtMs before and after cross-sex hormone
treatment. However, historically, the first studies of the trans-
sexual brain were done in postmortem specimens of cross-sex
hormone-treated MtFs. These seminal studies are better under-
stood after reading the previous sections.
AllthepostmortemstudiesonMtFshavebeendoneinSwaab’s
laboratory in the Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience. They
patientlycollecteduptoadozenhypothalamiandadjacentregions
ofcross-sexhormone-treatedMtFsandoneFtMtranssexual.With
respect to sexual orientation, their MtFs are a mixture of homo-
sexual,nonhomosexual,andunknownsexualorientationandalso
amixtureofearly-andlate-onsetGD(Garcia-Falgueras&Swaab,
2008).
Postmortem Brain Weight
The postmortem data on the weight of the brain of MtFs are not
conclusive (Table 10). In a first report, MtFs had a brain weight
Arch Sex Behav (2016) 45:1615–1648
1639
123
 thatdidnotdifferfromthatofthestudiedmaleandfemalecontrol
specimens (Zhou et al., 1995). When more subjects were inclu-
ded in the study, it was found that brain weight was almost sig-
nificantly lower than those of control males, but did not differ
from those of control females (Garcia-Falgueras, Ligtenberg,
Kruijver, & Swaab, 2011; Garcia-Falgueras & Swaab, 2008;
Table 10). As was seen above, this‘
‘in between’
’position for the
MtF brain weight seems to be a consequence of the cross-sex
hormone treatment and not a phenotypic characteristic of the
MtFs; rather, it would be the dramatic effect of estradiol and
antiandrogen treatment on their gray matter (Hulshoff Pol
et al., 2006; Zubiaurre-Elorza et al., 2014).
Hypothalamic Nuclei and the Bed Nucleus of the Stria
Terminalis
A land-mark in the study of the brain of transsexuals was the
postmortem neurohistological report showing that hormonally
treatedMtFshaveafemininecentralpartofthebednucleusofthe
stria terminalis (BSTc) (Zhou et al., 1995). Their laboratory had
previously reported sex differences in the human hypothalamus
(Hofman & Swaab, 1989; Swaab & Hofman, 1988) and tried to
relate some nuclei of this region with sexual orientation (Swaab,
Gooren, & Hofman, 1992), a line of research followed by others
(Allen & Gorski, 1990; LeVay, 1991). The interest of the Swaab
group in the BST had arisen from previous animal studies
showingthatthisolfactorynucleus,implicatedinsexualbehavior
(Claro, Segovia, Guilamon, & Del Abril, 1995; Emery & Sachs,
1976), was sexually dimorphic in guinea pigs (Hines, Davis,
Coquelin, Goy, & Gorski, 1985) and rats (del Abril et al., 1987;
Guillamon,Segovia&delAbril,1988).Moreover,atthattime,it
was already known that BST neurons have androgen and estro-
gen receptors (Simerly, Chang, Muramatsu, & Swanson, 1990)
aswellasaromataseactivity(Jakab,Horvath,Leranth,Harada,&
Naftolin, 1993). Indeed, Allen and Gorski (1990), in human
postmortem material, had shown sex differences in the darkly
stained posterior medial region of the BST (BSTdsmp), where
males showed a larger volume than females. It should be noted
that the BST and the central and medial amygdaloid nuclei con-
stitutetheextendedamygdala(deOlmosetal.,1978;deOlmos&
Ingram, 1972).
ThestudiesoftheSwaabgrouparesummarizedinTable11.In
humans, the volume of the BSTc, calculated after immunocyto-
chemical staining of vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) or
somatostatin (SOM) fibers, is greater in male than in female
controls (Kruijver et al., 2000; Zhou et al., 1995). These differ-
encesbecome significantonlyinadulthood(Chung,De Vries,&
Swaab, 2002). Generally, males had stronger nuclear androgen
immunoreactivitythanfemales.Themalehypothalamusshowed
intenseandrogenreceptorimmunoreactivity,whileweakerlabel-
ingwasfoundintheBST(Fernandez-Guastietal.,2000).Insome
areas of the hypothalamus, ARs are unrelated to transsexuality
(Kruijver, Fernandez-Guasti, Fodor, Kraan, & Swaab, 2001).
However, in MtFs, the volume and the number of SOM neurons
intheBSTcarefeminine(Kruijveretal.,2000;Zhouetal.,1995;
Table11).
Swaab’s laboratory has examined several other structures,
includingtheinterstitialnucleusoftheanteriorhypothalamus
number1(INAH-1),theINAH-3,theINAH-4,andtheinfundibu-
lar, paraventricular, and suprachiasmatic nuclei of the hypotha-
lamus (Table11). The INAH-1 (Allen, Hines, Shryne, & Gorski,
1989)isalsoknownasthesexuallydimorphicnucleusofthepre-
opticarea(SDN-POA)(Swaab&Fliers,1985)ortheintermediate
nucleus of the preoptic area (InM, Garcia-Falgueras et al., 2011).
SexdifferencesintheINAH-1arecontroversialwithpositive(Swaab
&Fliers,1985)andnegativereports(Allenetal.,1989;Byneetal.,
2000; LeVay, 1991). Males have a larger INAH-1afterthionin
andgalaninneuronstaining.However,theINAH-1ofMtFsismas-
culinesincethesesubjectsdonotsignificantlydifferfrommale
controls(Garcia-Falguerasetal.,2011).Thisconfirmedprevious
results on this nucleus from the same group (Zhou et al.,
1995).
Theparaventricularandsuprachiasmaticnucleiofthehypotha-
lamusseemtobemasculineinMtFs(Zhouetal.,1995).Theunci-
natehypothalamicnucleus,composedoftheINAH-3andINAH-
4, has also been studied. In the INAH-3, when thionin, but not
neuropeptideY(NPY),wasusedasastain,malesshowedalarger
volume and greater number of neurons than females (Garcia-Fal-
gueras&Swaab,2008).Thevolumeandnumberofneuronsinthe
INAH-3 of MtFs were similar to those in control females when
thioninstainingwasused.Itshouldbenotedthatinhomosexualmen
the volume of the INAH-3 was reported to be feminine (LeVay,
1991).
Peptidergic neurons synthesizing kisspeptin (KS) and neu-
rokinin B (NKB) in the infundibular nucleus of the hypothala-
mus (INF) play a role in the secretory output of gonadotropin-
releasing hormone (GnRH) and show an F[M pattern of sex
differences (Hrabovszky et al., 2010). Recently, it was reported
that an estimation of INF volume, based on neurokinin B-cell
immunoreactivity, showedlarger human NKB system volumes
infemalesthanmales(Taziaux,Swaab,&Bakker,2012).NKB
immunoreactivitywasreportedtobetypicallyfemale intheInF
of MtFs (Taziaux et al., 2012). Moreover, MtFs also showed a
feminine pattern in the number of KS neurons in the INF (Tazi-
aux et al., 2016).
The studies of Swaab’s laboratory on the expression of sex
differences in hypothalamic nuclei and the BSTc of MtFs rep-
resent an extraordinary effort and underscore the importance of
developmental processes in MtFs. The postmortem studies as a
whole suggest the following.
First,istheBSTcamarkerofmale-to-femaletranssexualism?
Several arguments challenge this. First, Chung et al. (2002) in
theirontogeneticstudyofthehumanBSTcfromfetallifeonwards
found that sex differences in volume and number of neurons
became significant only in adulthood. Thus, the BSTc becomes
1640
Arch Sex Behav (2016) 45:1615–1648
123
 Table 10 Brain weight in a mixed sample of treated homosexual and nonhomosexual male-to-female transsexuals
Brain
region/
aspect
Normative sex
differences (M
vs. F)
Sample size and age
(range)
Sample source
Brain-relevant
sample
characteristics
Brain methods and
measurements
Statistically controlled
confounding variables
Selectedfindingsandconclusions Authors
Brain
Weight
M[F
6 MtF (2 Hom; 3 Nonhom;
1 Bi)
9 Hom M (AIDS)
10 F (2 postmenopausal; 1
AIDS; 2 abnormal
hormone levels)
15 presumed Het M (3
AIDS; 4 abnormal
hormone levels)
Netherlands Institute
for Neuroscience,
Netherlands
MtF cross-sex
hormone
treated
Anatomopathology
Measurement
Postmortembrain
weight
Matchedage,postmortem
time, duration of
formalin fixation
No significant group differences
for brain weight
Conclusions brain weight of MtF
do not differ from male and
female controls’
Zhou et al.
(1995)
Brain
Weight
M[F
6 MtF (same Zhou et al.
(1995) ? 1 untreated)
10 Het M (3 sex hormone
disorders)
9 Hom M
10 F (3 sex hormone
disorders)
1 FtM
Netherlands Institute
for Neuroscience,
Netherlands
MtF cross-sex
hormone
treated
Anatomopathology
Measurement
Postmortembrain
weight
Matchedage,postmortem
time, duration of
formalin fixation
No significant group differences
for brain weight
Conclusions brain weight of MtF
do not differ from males and
female controls
Kruijver et al.
(2000)
Brain
Weight
M[F
12 MtF (7 Nonhom; 2
Hom;3unknownsexual
orientation)
14 Het M
11 Het F
Age range:
MtF: 26–84
Het M: 25–81
Het F: 21–82
Netherlands Institute
for Neuroscience,
Netherlands
MtF cross-sex
hormone
treated
Anatomopathology
Measurement
Postmortembrain
weight
Matchedage,postmortem
time, duration of
formalin fixation
No significant group differences
for brain weight
Conclusions brain weight of MtF
do not differ from males and
female controls’
Garcia-
Falgueras
and Swaab
(2008)
AIDS acquired immune deficiency syndrome, GD gender dysphoria, SD sex differences, M male, F female, Ss subjects, MtF male-to-female transsexuals, Hom homosexual, Nonhom nonhomosexual
transsexuals, Het heterosexual, Bi bisexual
Arch Sex Behav (2016) 45:1615–1648
1641
123
 sexually dimorphic long after the symptoms of transsexualism
typicallyappear(Lawrence&Zucker,2014).Chungetal.(2002),
onthebasisofthestudybyDavisetal.(1996)ontheontogenyof
the anteroventral periventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus
(AVPv), argued that organizational effects of testosterone on
sexual differentiation may become clear later in life. Davis et al.
(1996)foundthatthelengthoftheAVPvinratsissexuallydimor-
phicinadulthoodbetweendays60and80afterbirth.Aswasmen-
tioned earlier (Fig.1d), a similar finding was reported for the rat
locus coeruleus (Pinos et al.,2001). Interestingly, both the AVPv
andthelocuscoeruleuspresentamorphologicalpatternofF[M
sexdifferencesandhavesimilarontogeny.However,themorpho-
logical pattern of sex differences of the BSTc is M[F and this
patternhasadifferenttypeofontogeny.TheontogenyoftheM[
Fpatternofsexdifferencehasbeeninvestigatedinthebednucleus
of the accessory olfactory tract and differences appeared early in
life (Collado, Segovia, & Guillamon, 1998; Fig.1c); one would
expect this type of pattern for the human BSTc. Moreover,
testosteronepromotesgrowthintheM[Fpatternbutinhibitsitin
the F[M pattern (Guillamon & Segovia, 1996).
Second, postmortem human studies, as in other mammals,
show that sex differences appear in two morphological patterns
M[F (BSTc, INAH-3) and F[M (INF), so the feminization of
MtFs in these nuclei occurs because the morphological mea-
surementseitherdecrease(BSTc,INAH-3)orincrease(INF).All
the postmortem studies were done on cross-sex hormone-treated
MtFsandthepossibleeffectsofthehormonetreatmentcannotbe
discounted. Feminization treatment of MtFs requires the admin-
istration of pharmacologically active doses of estradiol to natal
men. The adverse effects of estradiol on the hypothalamus
(Hulshoff Pol et al., 2006) and the right thalamus, pallidum, and
CTh (Zubiaurre-Elorza et al., 2014) have been reported and dis-
cussed in the previous section and also noted elsewhere (Lawr-
ence & Zucker, 2014). Moreover, the effects of testosterone
suppression by antiandrogens were underscored above (Zubi-
aurre-Elorza et al.,2014).Therefore,itisnotpossibletodiscount
deleterious effects from estradiol being the explanation for the
‘‘feminization’’intheINAH-3ortheBSTcofMtFs.Thesenuclei
present anM[Fsexuallydimorphic pattern.It couldbe the case
that the morphological decreases interpreted as ‘‘feminine’’ in
these nuclei might only reflect the negative effects of the high
doses of estradiol plus antiandrogens that MtFs chronically
receive (Hulshoff Pol et al., 2006; Zubiaurre-Elorza et al., 2014).
The feminine INF in MtFs (Taziaux et al., 2012, 2016) is a
completely different case because the pattern of sexual dimor-
phisminthisnucleusisF[Mandonthisoccasionthepatternof
sex differences precludes a biased interpretation because the
deleterious effect of the treatment predicts morphological decrea-
ses and yet the F[M pattern was still observed in this nucleus in
MtFs.
Table 11 Selected findings from Swaab laboratory on postmortem brain specimen of male-to-female transsexuals
Structure and stained cells
Normative pattern of
sexual dimorphism
MtFs
References
Volume
Neurons number
BSTC
VIP
M[F
Feminine
Zhou et al. (1995)
Somatostatin
M[F
Feminine
Feminine
Kruijver et al. (2000)
INAH-1
Thionin
M[F
Masculine
Masculine
Galanin
M[F
Masculine
Masculine
VIP
M[F
Masculine
Masculine
INAH-3
M[F
Feminine
Feminine
Garcı
´a-Falgueras and Swab (2008)
Thionin
M[F
Isomorphic
Isomorphic
NPY
M = F
Isomorphic
Isomorphic
INAH-4
M = F
Uncinate (ANAH-3 ? ANAH-4)
NPY
M = F
Isomorphic
Isomorphic
Synaptophysin
M = F
Isomorphic
Isomorphic
Infundibular nucleus
F[M
Feminine
Feminine
Taziaux et al. (2012)
NKB
F[M
Feminine
Feminine
Kisspeptin
F[M
Feminine
Taziaux et al. (2016)
Paraventricular nucleus
M = F
Isomorphic
Isomorphic
Zhou et al. (1995)
Suprachiasmatic nucleus
M = F
Isomorphic
Isomorphic
BSTCcentralregionofthebednucleusofstriaterminalis,INAHinterstitialnucleusofanteriorhypothalamus(1,3,4),VIPvasointestinalpeptide,NPY
neuropeptide Y,NKB neurokinin B. Except for thionin staining, under each structure is indicated the type of cells marked using immunocytochemical
techniques
1642
Arch Sex Behav (2016) 45:1615–1648
123
 Third, throughout this review we have made a point of the
importance of distinguishing the sexual orientation and onset of
gender dysphoria in MtFs and FtMs. With respect to sexual
orientation, the postmortem studies of MtFs are a mixture of
homosexual, nonhomosexual, and unknown sexual orientation
and also a mixture of early and late onset of the GD (Garcia-
Falgueras&Swaab,2008).Ithasbeensuggestedthatthesample
of these studies might be consistent with the hypothesis that all
were nonhomosexual transsexuals (Lawrence & Zucker, 2014).
Recently, it was noted (Lawrence & Zucker, 2014) that a voxel-
based morphometry study of pedophilic offenders found reduced
gray matter in the amygdale, hypothalamus (bilaterally), septal
regions,substantiainnominata,andtheBST(Schiltzetal.,2007).
Lawrence and Zucker (2014) suggestedthat afeminineBSTc
might be‘‘a marker for paraphilic male sexuality or for only
nonhomosexual MtF transsexualism, rather than for all
types of transsexualism. Alternatively, the BSTc findings may be
attributabletotheeffectsoftransgenderhormonetherapy’
’(p.621).
If we take intoaccount the in vivostudiesonthe brain effects of
cross-sexhormonetreatment,thelatermightbethemoreprobable
explanation.
Fourth, the postmortem studies show that the feminization of
MtFsseemstoaffectcellsthatexpressspecificpeptidesbecause
feminizationisdetectedincellsthatexpressNKBandKSimmunore-
activity(INF)andVIP(BSTc)andgalanin(SDN-POA)butnotNPY
or synaptophysin (INAH-3). This reflects the complexities of sex
differences’ expression, which types of cells are feminized in (non-
homosexual?)MtFs,andconstitutesafirststepandaguideforfuture
morphological and molecular analyses.
Conclusions
UntreatedMtFsandFtMswhohaveanearlyonsetoftheirgender
dysphoria and are sexually oriented to persons of their natal sex
show a distinctive brain morphology, reflecting a brain phe-
notype. These phenotypes are different from those of heterosex-
ual males or females; the differences affect the right hemisphere
and cortical structures underlying body perception. The genesis
of these phenotypes might be caused by atypical effects of sex
hormonesortheirmetabolitesinspecificcorticalregionsofMtFs
and FtMs. These effects of hormones on the cortex suggest the
hypothesis that brain differences between homosexual MtFs and
FtMs and male and female controls are due to differences in the
development of the cortex; this hypothesis would imply that the
thinningprocessundergonebysomeregionsofthecortexistimed
differently in each phenotype.
Thereviewoftheavailabledataseemstosupporttwoexisting
hypotheses: (1) a brain-restricted intersexuality in homosexual
MtFs and FtMs and (2) Blanchard’s insight on the existence of
two brain phenotypes that differentiate‘‘homosexual’’and‘‘non-
homosexual’’MtFs. The studies on the effects of cross-sex hor-
mone treatment on the brain of MtFs and FtMs consistently
indicatedramaticeffectsonthegrayandwhitematteraftershort-
tomedium-termtreatmentsbutthelong-termeffectsonthebrain
require evaluation. Finally, the postmortem studies should be
interpreted in light of these in vivo findings as well as of their
underlying mechanisms.
Acknowledgments Funding for this study was provided by the Spanish
Ministerio de Economı
´a y Competitividad (MEC), Grant PSI2014-58004.
TheMEChadnofurtherroleinanystepofthepresentstudy.ThankstoRosa
Sa
´nchez, Alexis Moreno, Carol Fox Warren, Alberto Marcos, Marı
´a Nun
˜ez
del Prado, and Carmen Malo de Molina for their editorial help.
Open Access
This articleis distributedunder the termsofthe Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecomm
ons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution,
andreproductioninanymedium,providedyougiveappropriatecreditto
the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.
References
Abe
´, C., Johansson, E., Allze
´n, E., & Savic, I. (2014). Sexual orientation
relateddifferencesincorticalthicknessinmaleindividuals.PLoSONE,
9, e114721.
Ahmed, E. I., Zehr, J. L., Schulz, K. M., Lorenz, B. H., DonCarlos, L. L., &
Sisk, C. L. (2008). Pubertal hormones modulate the addition of new
cells to sexually dimorphic brain regions. Nature Neuroscience, 11,
995–997.
Allen,L. S.,&Gorski, R. A. (1990). Sexdifferenceinthebednucleusofthe
striaterminalisofthehumanbrain.JournalofComparativeNeurology,
302, 697–706.
Allen, L. S., Hines, M., Shryne, J. E., & Gorski, R. A. (1989). Two sexually
dimorphic cell groups in the human brain. Journal of Neuroscience, 9,
497–506.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical man-
ual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Washington, DC: American Psy-
chiatric Association.
Arnold, A. P. (2009). The organizational-activational hypothesis as the
foundation for a unified theory of sexual differentiation of all mam-
malian tissues. Hormones and Behavior, 55, 570–578.
Becker, J. B., Arnold, A. P., Berkley, K. J., Blaustein, J. D., Eckel, L. A.,
Hampson,E.,…Young,E.(2005).Strategiesandmethodsforresearch
on sex differences in brain and behavior. Endocrinology, 146, 1650–
1673.
Beyenburg,S.,Watzka,M.,Clusmann,H.,Blumcke,I.,Bidlingmaier,F.,Elger,
C.E.,&Stoffel-Wagner,B.(2000).AndrogenreceptormRNAexpression
in the human hippocampus. Neuroscience Letters, 294, 25–28.
Blanchard, R. (1989a). The classification and labeling of nonhomosexual
gender dysphorias. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 18, 315–334.
Blanchard, R. (1989b). The concept of autogynephilia and the typology of
male gender dysphoria. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 177,
616–623.
Blanchard,R.(2005).Earlyhistoryoftheconceptofautogynephilia.Archives
of Sexual Behavior, 34, 439–446.
Blanchard,R.(2008).Deconstructingthefeminineessencenarrative.Archivesof
Sexual Behavior, 37, 434–438.
Blanchard, R., Clemmensen, L. H., & Steiner, B. W. (1987). Heterosexual
and homosexual gender dysphoria. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 16,
139–152.
Blanchard, R., Dickey, R., & Jones, C. L. (1995). Comparison of height and
weightinhomosexualversusnonhomosexualmalegenderdysphorics.
Archives of Sexual Behavior, 24, 543–554.
Arch Sex Behav (2016) 45:1615–1648
1643
123
 Blanchard,R.,&Sheridan,P.M.(1992).Sibshipsize,siblingsexratio,birth
order, and parental age in homosexual and nonhomosexual gender
dysphorics. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 180, 40–47.
Blanchard,R.,Zucker,K.J.,Cohen-Kettenis,P.T.,Gooren,L.J.,&Bailey,J.M.
(1996). Birth order and sibling sex ratio in two samples of Dutch gender-
dysphorichomosexualmales.ArchivesofSexualBehavior,25,495–514.
Brain Development Cooperative Group. (2012). Total and regional brain
volumesinapopulation-basednormativesamplefrom4to18years:The
NIHMRIstudyofnormalbraindevelopment.CerebralCortex,22,1–12.
Brawer, J. R., Beaudet, A., Desjardins, G. C., & Schipper, H. M. (1993).
Pathologic effect of estradiol on the hypothalamus. Biology of Repro-
duction, 49, 647–652.
Byne,W.,Lasco,M.S.,Kemether,E.,Shinwari,A.,Edgar,M.A.,Morgello,
S., … Tobet, S. (2000). The interstitial nuclei of the human anterior
hypothalamus: An investigation of sexual variation in volume and cell
size, number and density. Brain Research, 856, 254–258.
Cantor, J. M. (2011). New MRI studies support the Blanchard typology
ofmale-to-femaletranssexualism[LettertotheEditor].Archivesof
Sexual Behavior, 40, 863–864.
Cantor,J.M.(2012).ReplytoItaliano’s(2012)CommentonCantor(2011).
[Letter to the Editor]. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 41, 1081–1082.
Carrillo,B.,Gomez-Gil,E.,Rametti,G.,Junque,C., Gomez,A.,Karadi,K.,
… Guillamon, A. (2010). Cortical activation during mental rotation in
male-to-female and female-to-male transsexuals under hormonal
treatment. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 35, 1213–1222.
Casanova,R.,Espeland,M.A.,Goveas,J.S.,Davatzikos,C.,Gaussoin,S.A.,
Maldjian,J.A.,…Resnick,S.M.(2011).Applicationofmachinelearn-
ingmethodstodescribetheeffectsofconjugatedequineestrogensther-
apyonregion-specificbrainvolumes.MagneticResonanceImaging,29,
546–553.
Chung,W.C.,DeVries,G.J.,&Swaab,D.F.(2002).Sexualdifferentiation
of the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis in humans may extend into
adulthood. Journal of Neuroscience, 22, 1027–1033.
Claro, F., Segovia, S., Guilamon, A., & Del Abril, A. (1995). Lesions in the
medial posterior region of the BST impair sexual behavior in sexually
experiencedandinexperiencedmalerats.BrainResearchBulletin,36,1–
10.
Cohen, M. S., Kosslyn, S. M., Breiter, H. C., DiGirolamo, G. J., Thompson,
W.L.,Anderson,A.K.,…Belliveau,J.W.(1996).Changesincortical
activityduringmentalrotation.AmappingstudyusingfunctionalMRI.
Brain, 119, 89–100.
Cohen-Kettenis, P. T., & Gooren, L. J. (1999). Transsexualism: A review of
etiology,diagnosisandtreatment.JournalofPsychosomaticResearch,
46, 315–333.
Cohen-Kettenis, P. T., van Goozen, S. H., Doorn, C. D., & Gooren, L. J.
(1998). Cognitive ability and cerebral lateralisation in transsexuals.
Psychoneuroendocrinology, 23, 631–641.
Collado, P., Guillamon, A., Valencia, A., & Segovia, S. (1990). Sexual
dimorphisminthebednucleusoftheaccessoryolfactorytractintherat.
Brain Research: Developmental Brain Research, 56, 263–268.
Collado, P., Segovia, S., & Guillamon, A. (1998). Development of sex
differencesinthebednucleusoftheaccessoryolfactorytractintherat.
Brain Research: Developmental Brain Research, 109, 99–108.
Cosgrove,K.P.,Mazure,C.M.,&Staley,J.K.(2007).Evolvingknowledge
ofsexdifferencesinbrainstructure,function,andchemistry.Biological
Psychiatry, 62, 847–855.
Davis, E. C., Shryne, J. E., & Gorski, R. A. (1996). Structural sexual
dimorphisms in the anteroventral periventricular nucleus of the rat
hypothalamusaresensitivetogonadalsteroidsperinatally,butdevelop
peripubertally. Neuroendocrinology, 63, 142–148.
De Bellis, M. D., Keshavan, M. S., Beers, S. R., Hall, J., Frustaci, K.,
Masalehdan, A., … Boring, A. M. (2001). Sex differences in brain
maturation during childhood and adolescence. Cerebral Cortex, 11,
552–557.
deOlmos,J.,Hardy,H.,&Heimer,L.(1978).Theafferentconnectionsofthe
main and the accessory olfactory bulb formations in the rat: An
experimental HRP-study. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 181,
213–244.
de Olmos, J. S., & Ingram, W. R. (1972). The projection field of the stria
terminalis in the rat brain. An experimental study. Journal of Com-
parative Neurology, 146, 303–334.
de Vries, A. L., & Cohen-Kettenis, P. T. (2012). Clinical management of
gender dysphoria in children and adolescents: The Dutch approach.
Journal of Homosexuality, 59, 301–320.
Dekaban,A.S.,&Sadowsky,D.(1978).Changesinbrainweightsduringthe
spanofhumanlife:Relationofbrainweightstobodyheightsandbody
weights. Annals of Neurology, 4, 345–356.
del Abril, A., Segovia, S., & Guillamon, A. (1987). The bed nucleus of the
striaterminalisintherat:regionalsexdifferencescontrolledbygonadal
steroids early after birth. Brain Research, 429, 295–300.
Diamond, M. C. (1991). Hormonal effects on the development or cerebral
lateralization. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 16, 121–129.
Drummond, K. D., Bradley, S. J., Peterson-Badali, M., & Zucker, K. J.
(2008).Afollow-upstudyofgirlswithgenderidentitydisorder.Devel-
opmental Psychology, 44, 34–45.
Dubois, J., Hertz-Pannier, L., Cachia, A., Mangin, J. F., Le Bihan, D., &
Dehaene-Lambertz, G. (2009). Structural asymmetries in the infant
language and sensori-motor networks. Cerebral Cortex, 19, 414–423.
Emery, D. E., & Sachs, B. D. (1976). Copulatory behavior in male rats with
lesionsinthebednucleusofthestriaterminalis.Physiology&Behavior,
17, 803–806.
Emory, L. E., Williams, D. H., Cole, C. M., Amparo, E. G., & Meyer, W. J.
(1991). Anatomic variation of the corpus callosum in persons with
gender dysphoria. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 20, 409–417.
Fernandez,R.,Esteva,I.,Gomez-Gil,E.,Rumbo,T.,Almaraz,M.C.,Roda,E.,
… Pasaro, E.(2014a). AssociationstudyofERbeta, AR, andCYP19A1
genes and MtF transsexualism. Journal of Sexual Medicine, 11, 2986–
2994.
Fernandez,R.,Esteva,I.,Gomez-Gil,E.,Rumbo,T.,Almaraz,M.C.,Roda,E.,
…Pasaro,E.(2014b).The(CA)npolymorphismofERbetageneisasso-
ciatedwithFtMtranssexualism.JournalofSexualMedicine,11,720–728.
Fernandez-Guasti,A.,Kruijver,F.P.,Fodor,M.,&Swaab,D.F.(2000).Sex
differences in the distribution of androgen receptors in the human
hypothalamus. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 425, 422–435.
Feusner,J.D.,Dervisic,J.,Kosidou,K.,Dhejene,C.,Bookheimer,S.,&Savic,
I. (2016). Female-to-male transsexual individuals demonstrate different
own body identification. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 45, 525–536.
Finley, S. K., & Kritzer, M. F. (1999). Immunoreactivity for intracellular
androgen receptors in identified subpopulations of neurons, astrocytes
and oligodendrocytes in primate prefrontal cortex. Journal of Neuro-
biology, 40, 446–457.
First,M.B.(2005).Desireforamputationofalimb:Paraphilia,psychosis,or
a new type of identity disorder. Psychological Medicine, 35, 919–928.
Fisher, A. D., Castellini, G., Bandini, E., Casale, H., Fanni, E., Benni, L., …
Rellini, A. H. (2014). Cross-sex hormonal treatment and body uneasi-
nessinindividualswithgenderdysphoria.JournalofSexualMedicine,
11, 709–719.
Fishman, J., Naftolin, F., Davies, I. J., Ryan, K. J., & Petro, Z. (1976).
Catechol estrogen formation by the human fetal brain and pituitary.
Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, 42, 177–180.
Garcia-Falgueras, A., Junque, C., Gimenez, M., Caldu, X., Segovia, S., &
Guillamon, A. (2006). Sex differences in the human olfactory system.
Brain Research, 1116, 103–111.
Garcia-Falgueras,A.,Ligtenberg,L.,Kruijver,F.P.,&Swaab,D.F.(2011).
Galanin neurons in the intermediate nucleus (InM) of the human
hypothalamus in relation to sex, age, and gender identity. Journal of
Comparative Neurology, 519, 3061–3084.
1644
Arch Sex Behav (2016) 45:1615–1648
123
 Garcia-Falgueras, A., Pinos, H., Collado, P., Pasaro, E., Fernandez, R.,
Jordan,C.L.,…Guillamon,A.(2005).Theroleofandrogenreceptorin
CNS masculinization. Brain Research, 1035, 13–23.
Garcia-Falgueras, A., & Swaab, D. F. (2008). A sex difference in the
hypothalamicuncinatenucleus:Relationshiptogenderidentity.Brain,
131, 3132–3146.
Ge, Y., Grossman, R. I., Babb, J. S., Rabin, M. L., Mannon, L. J., & Kolson,
D.L.(2002).Age-relatedtotalgraymatterandwhitematterchangesin
normaladultbrain.PartI:VolumetricMRimaginganalysis.American
Journal of Neuroradiology, 23, 1327–1333.
Giedd, J. N., Blumenthal, J., Jeffries, N. O., Castellanos, F. X., Liu, H.,
Zijdenbos, A., … Rapoport, J. L. (1999). Brain development during
childhood and adolescence: A longitudinal MRI study. Nature Neuro-
science, 2, 861–863.
Giedd, J. N., Vaituzis, A. C., Hamburger, S. D., Lange, N., Rajapakse, J. C.,
Kaysen, D., … Rapoport, J. L. (1996). Quantitative MRI of the tem-
poral lobe, amygdala, and hippocampus in normal human develop-
ment: Ages 4-18 years. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 366, 223–
230.
Giummarra, M. J.,Bradshaw, J. L., Nicholls, M. E., Hilti, L.M., &Brugger,
P.(2011).Bodyintegrityidentitydisorder:Derangedbodyprocessing,
rightfronto-parietaldysfunction,andphenomenologicalexperienceof
body incongruity. Neuropsychology Review, 21, 320–333.
Goldstein, J. M., Seidman, L. J., Horton, N. J., Makris, N., Kennedy, D. N.,
Caviness,V.S,Jr,…Tsuang,M.T.(2001).Normalsexualdimorphism
oftheadulthumanbrainassessedbyinvivomagneticresonanceimag-
ing. Cerebral Cortex, 11, 490–497.
Gomez-Gil, E., Esteva, I., Almaraz, M. C., Pasaro, E., Segovia, S., &
Guillamon, A. (2010). Familiality of gender identity disorder in non-
twin siblings. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 39, 546–552.
Gomez-Gil, E., Esteva, I., Carrasco, R., Almaraz, M. C., Pasaro, E.,
Salamero,M.,&Guillamon,A.(2011).Birthorderandratioofbrothers
to sisters in Spanish transsexuals. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 40,
505–510.
Gomez-Gil, E., Zubiaurre-Elorza, L., de Antonio, I. E., Guillamon, A., &
Salamero, M. (2014). Determinants of quality of life in Spanish trans-
sexualsattendingagenderunitbeforegenitalsexreassignmentsurgery.
Quality of Life Research, 23, 669–676.
Gomez-Gil, E., Zubiaurre-Elorza, L., Esteva, I., Guillamon, A., Godas, T.,
Cruz Almaraz, M., … Salamero, M. (2012). Hormone-treated trans-
sexuals report less social distress, anxiety and depression. Psychoneu-
roendocrinology, 37, 662–670.
Gonzalez,M.,Cabrera-Socorro,A.,Perez-Garcia,C.G.,Fraser,J.D.,Lopez,
F.J.,Alonso,R.,&Meyer,G.(2007).Distributionpatternsofestrogen
receptor alpha and beta in the human cortex and hippocampus during
development and adulthood. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 503,
790–802.
Gooren,L.(2006).Thebiologyofhumanpsychosexualdifferentiation.Hor-
mones and Behavior, 50, 589–601.
Gooren, L. J. (2011). Care of transsexual persons. New England Journal of
Medicine, 364, 1251–1257.
Gooren, L. J., Giltay, E. J., & Bunck, M. C. (2008). Long-term treatment of
transsexuals with cross-sex hormones: Extensive personal experience.
Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, 93, 19–25.
Goy, R. W., & McEwen, B. S. (1980). Sexual differentiation of the brain.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Green,R.(2000).Familycooccurrenceof‘
‘genderdysphoria’’:Tensiblingor
parent-child pairs. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 29, 499–507.
Green, R., & Young, R. (2001). Hand preference, sexual preference, and
transsexualism. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 30, 565–574.
Guillamon, A., de Blas, M. R., & Segovia, S. (1988). Effects of sex steroids
on the development of the locus coeruleus in the rat. Brain Research,
468, 306–310.
Guillamon,A.,&Segovia,S.(1996).SexualdimorphismintheCNSandthe
role of steroids. In T. W. Stone (Ed.), CNS neurotransmitters and
neuromodulators: neuroactive steroids (pp. 127–152). Boca Raton,
FL: CRC Press.
Guillamon, A., Segovia, S., & del Abril, A. (1988). Early effects of gonadal
steroids on the neuron number in the medial posterior region and the
lateral division of the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis in the rat.
Developmental Brain Research, 44, 281–290.
Gur, R. C., Gunning-Dixon, F., Bilker, W. B., & Gur, R. E. (2002). Sex
differences in temporo-limbic and frontal brain volumes of healthy
adults. Cerebral Cortex, 12, 998–1003.
Gur, R. C., Turetsky, B. I., Matsui, M., Yan, M., Bilker, W., Hughett, P., &
Gur, R. E. (1999). Sex differences in brain gray and white matter in
healthy young adults: Correlations with cognitive performance. Jour-
nal of Neuroscience, 19, 4065–4072.
Hahn, A., Kranz, G. S., Kublbock, M., Kaufmann, U., Ganger, S., Hummer,
A., … Lanzenberger, R. (2015). Structural connectivity networks of
transgender People. Cerebral Cortex, 25, 3527–3534.
Haraldsen, I. R., Opjordsmoen, S., Egeland, T., & Finset, A. (2003). Sex-
sensitive cognitive performance in untreated patients with early onset
gender identity disorder. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 28, 906–915.
Hare, L., Bernard, P., Sanchez, F. J., Baird, P. N., Vilain, E., Kennedy, T., &
Harley, V. R. (2009). Androgen receptor repeat length polymorphism
associatedwithmale-to-femaletranssexualism.BiologicalPsychiatry,
65, 93–96.
Henningsson, S., Westberg, L., Nilsson, S., Lundstrom, B., Ekselius, L.,
Bodlund, O., … Landen, M. (2005). Sex steroid-related genes and
male-to-female transsexualism. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 30, 657–
664.
Herve,P.Y.,Leonard,G.,Perron,M.,Pike,B.,Pitiot,A.,Richer,L.,…Paus,
T.(2009).Handedness,motorskillsandmaturationofthecorticospinal
tract in the adolescent brain. Human Brain Mapping, 30, 3151–3162.
Heylens, G., De Cuypere, G., Zucker, K. J., Schelfaut, C., Elaut, E., Vanden
Bossche, H., … T’Sjoen, G. (2012). Gender identity disorder in twins:
A review of the case report literature. Journal of Sexual Medicine, 9,
751–757.
Hines, M., Davis, F. C., Coquelin, A., Goy, R. W., & Gorski, R. A. (1985).
Sexually dimorphic regions in the medial preoptic area and the bed
nucleusofthestriaterminalisoftheguineapigbrain:Adescriptionand
an investigation of their relationship to gonadal steroids in adulthood.
Journal of Neuroscience, 5, 40–47.
Hoekzema, E., Schagen, S. E., Kreukels, B. P., Veltman, D. J., Cohen-
Kettenis, P. T., Delemarre-van de Waal, H., & Bakker, J. (2015).
Regional volumes and spatial volumetric distribution of gray matter in
the gender dysphoric brain. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 55, 59–71.
Hofman, M. A., & Swaab, D. F. (1989). The sexually dimorphic nucleus of
the preoptic area in the human brain: A comparative morphometric
study. Journal of Anatomy, 164, 55–72.
Hrabovszky, E.,Ciofi,P.,Vida,B., Horvath,M. C.,Keller,E.,Caraty,A.,&
Kallo, I. (2010). The kisspeptin system of the human hypothalamus:
Sexual dimorphism and relationship with gonadotropin-releasing hor-
mone and neurokinin B neurons. European Journal of Neuroscience,
31, 1984–1998.
Hugdahl, K., Thomsen, T., & Ersland, L. (2006). Sex differences in visuo-
spatial processing: An fMRI study of mental rotation. Neuropsycholo-
gia, 44, 1575–1583.
Hulshoff Pol, H. E., Cohen-Kettenis, P. T., Van Haren, N. E., Peper, J. S.,
Brans, R. G., Cahn, W., … Kahn, R. S. (2006). Changing your sex
changes your brain: Influences of testosterone and estrogen on adult
human brain structure. European Journal of Endocrinology, 155, S107–
S114.
Huster, R. J., Westerhausen, R., Kreuder, F., Schweiger, E., & Wittling, W.
(2009). Hemispheric and gender related differences in the midcingu-
lum bundle: a DTI study. Human Brain Mapping, 30, 383–391.
Im, K., Lee, J. M., Lee, J., Shin, Y. W., Kim, I. Y., Kwon, J. S., & Kim, S. I.
(2006). Gender difference analysis of cortical thickness in healthy
young adults with surface-based methods. Neuroimage, 31, 31–38.
Arch Sex Behav (2016) 45:1615–1648
1645
123
 Ingalhalikar, M., Smith, A., Parker, D., Satterthwaite, T. D., Elliott, M. A.,
Ruparel, K., … Verma, R. (2014). Sex differences in the structural
connectomeofthehumanbrain.ProceedingsoftheNationalAcademy
of Sciences of the United States of America, 111, 823–828.
Italiano, M. (2012). Comment on Cantor (2011) [Letter to the Editor].
Archives of Sexual Behavior, 41, 1079.
Jakab, R. L., Horvath, T. L., Leranth, C., Harada, N., & Naftolin, F. (1993).
Aromatase immunoreactivity in the rat brain: Gonadectomy-sensitive
hypothalamic neurons and an unresponsive‘‘limbic ring’’of the lateral
septum-bed nucleus-amygdala complex. Journal of Steroid Biochem-
istry and Molecular Biology, 44, 481–498.
Jost, A. (1947). Sur les de
´rive
´smu
¨lleriens d’embryons de lapin des deux
sexes castre
´s a 21 jours. Comptes Rendus des Seances de la Societe de
Biologie et de Ses Filiales, 141, 126–129.
Jost,A.(1972).Anewlookatthemechanismscontrollingsexdifferentiation
in mammals. Johns Hopkins Medical Journal, 130, 38–53.
Kicman,A.T.(2008).Pharmacologyofanabolicsteroids.BritishJournalof
Pharmacology, 154, 502–521.
Kranz,G.S.,Hahn,A.,Kaufmann,U.,Kublbock,M.,Hummer,A.,Ganger,
S., … Lanzenberger, R. (2014). White matter microstructure in trans-
sexuals and controls investigated by diffusion tensor imaging. Journal
of Neuroscience, 34, 15466–15475.
Kruijver,F.P.,Fernandez-Guasti,A.,Fodor,M.,Kraan,E.M.,&Swaab,D.
F. (2001). Sex differences in androgen receptors of the human
mamillary bodies are related to endocrine status rather than to sexual
orientation or transsexuality. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and
Metabolism, 86, 818–827.
Kruijver, F. P., Zhou, J. N., Pool, C. W., Hofman, M. A., Gooren, L. J., &
Swaab, D. F. (2000). Male-to-female transsexuals have female neuron
numbers in a limbic nucleus. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and
Metabolism, 85, 2034–2041.
Lawrence,A.A.(2006).Clinicalandtheoreticalparallelsbetweendesirefor
limb amputation and gender identity disorder. Archives of Sexual
Behavior, 35, 263–278.
Lawrence,A.A.,&Zucker,K.J.(2014).Genderdysphoria.InD.C.Beidel,
B.C.Frueh,&M.Hersen(Eds.),Adultpsychopathologyanddiagnosis
(7th ed., pp. 603–639). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Lebel, C., Walker, L., Leemans, A., Phillips, L., & Beaulieu, C. (2008).
Microstructural maturation of the human brain from childhood to
adulthood. Neuroimage, 40, 1044–1055.
Lemon,R.N.(2008).Descendingpathwaysinmotorcontrol.AnnualReview
of Neuroscience, 31, 195–218.
Lenroot,R.K.,&Giedd,J.N.(2010).Sexdifferencesintheadolescentbrain.
Brain and Cognition, 72, 46–55.
Lenroot, R. K., Gogtay, N., Greenstein, D. K., Wells, E. M., Wallace, G. L.,
Clasen, L. S., … Giedd, J. N. (2007). Sexual dimorphism of brain
developmental trajectories during childhood and adolescence. Neu-
roimage, 36, 1065–1073.
Lephart,E.D.(1996).AreviewofbrainaromatasecytochromeP450.Brain
Research Reviews, 22, 1–26.
LeVay, S. (1991). A difference in hypothalamic structure between
heterosexual and homosexual men. Science, 253, 1034–1037.
Lin,C.S.,Ku,H.L.,Chao,H.T.,Tu,P.C.,Li,C.T.,Cheng,C.M.,…Hsieh,
J. C. (2014). Neural network of body representation differs between
transsexuals and cissexuals. PLoS One, 9, e85914.
Longo,M.R.,Azanon,E.,&Haggard,P.(2010).Morethanskindeep:Body
representationbeyondprimarysomatosensorycortex.Neuropsycholo-
gia, 48, 655–668.
Luders, E., Gaser, C., Narr, K.L., & Toga, A.W. (2009a). Why sexmatters:
Brainsizeindependentdifferencesingraymatterdistributionsbetween
men and women. Journal of Neuroscience, 29, 14265–14270.
Luders, E., Narr, K. L., Zaidel, E., Thompson, P. M., &Toga, A. W. (2006).
Gender effects on callosal thickness in scaled and unscaled space.
NeuroReport, 17, 1103–1106.
Luders, E., Sanchez, F. J., Gaser, C., Toga, A. W., Narr, K. L., Hamilton, L.
S., & Vilain, E. (2009b). Regional gray matter variation in male-to-
female transsexualism. Neuroimage, 46, 904–907.
Luders,E.,Sanchez,F.J.,Tosun,D.,Shattuck,D.W.,Gaser,C.,Vilain,E.,&
Toga, A. W. (2012). Increased cortical thickness in male-to-female
transsexualism. Journal of Behavioral and Brain Science, 2, 357–362.
Luders, E., & Toga, A. W. (2010). Sex differences in brain anatomy.
Progress in Brain Research, 186, 3–12.
Lust,J.M.,Geuze,R.H.,vandeBeek,C.,Cohen-Kettenis,P.T.,Bouma,A.,
&Groothis,T.G.(2011).Differentialeffectsofprenataltestosteroneon
lateralization of handedness and language. Neuropsychology, 25, 581–
589.
Lv, B., Li, J., He, H., Li, M., Zhao, M., Ai, L., … Wang, Z. (2010). Gender
consistency anddifference inhealthy adults revealed bycortical thick-
ness. Neuroimage, 53, 373–382.
McGlone, J. (1980). Sex differences in human brain asymmetry: A critical
survey. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 3, 215–227.
McKee, E. A., Roback, H. B., & Hollender, M. H. (1976). Transsex-
ualism in two male triplets. American Journal of Psychiatry, 133,
334–340.
Meyer-Bahlburg,H.F.L.(2010).Frommentaldisordertoiatrogenichypog-
onadism: Dilemmas in conceptualizing gender identity variants as
psychiatric conditions. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 39, 461–476.
Meyer-Bahlburg, H. F. L. (2011). Transsexualism (‘‘gender identity
disorder’’): A CNS-limited form of intersexuality? Advances in
Experimental Medicine and Biology, 707, 75–79.
Meyer-Bahlburg,H.F.L.(2013).Sexsteroidsandvariantsofgenderidentity.
EndocrinologyandMetabolismClinicsofNorthAmerica,42,435–452.
Montague, D., Weickert, C. S., Tomaskovic-Crook, E., Rothmond, D. A.,
Kleinman, J. E., & Rubinow, D. R. (2008). Oestrogen receptor alpha
localisation in the prefrontal cortex of three mammalian species.
Journal of Neuroendocrinology, 20, 893–903.
Mu,Q.,Xie,J.,Wen,Z.,Weng,Y.,&Shuyun,Z.(1999).AquantitativeMR
study of the hippocampal formation, the amygdala, and the temporal
horn of the lateral ventricle in healthy subjects 40 to 90years of age.
American Journal of Neuroradiology, 20, 207–211.
Nathan,P.W.,Smith,M.C.,&Deacon,P.(1990).Thecorticospinaltractsin
man.Courseandlocationoffibresatdifferentsegmentallevels.Brain,
113, 303–324.
Negri-Cesi,P.,Poletti,A.,&Celotti,F.(1996).Metabolismofsteroidsinthe
brain:Anew insightintotheroleof5alpha-reductaseandaromatasein
brain differentiation and functions. Journal of Steroid Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, 58, 455–466.
Nopoulos, P., Flaum, M., O’Leary, D., & Andreasen, N. C. (2000). Sexual
dimorphism in the human brain: Evaluation of tissue volume, tissue
composition and surface anatomy using magnetic resonance imaging.
Psychiatry Research, 98, 1–13.
Nucifora, P. G., Verma, R., Lee, S. K., & Melhem, E. R. (2007). Diffusion-
tensor MR imaging and tractography: Exploring brain microstructure
and connectivity. Radiology, 245, 367–384.
Orlebeke,J.F.,Boomsma,D.I.,Gooren,L.J.,Verschoor,A.M.,&VanDen
Bree, M. J. (1992). Elevated sinistralityin transsexuals. Neuropsychol-
ogy, 6, 351–355.
Osterlund, M. K., Gustafsson, J. A., Keller, E., & Hurd, Y. L. (2000).
Estrogen receptor beta (ERbeta) messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA)
expression within the human forebrain: Distinct distribution pattern to
ERalpha mRNA. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism,
85, 3840–3846.
O
¨ sterlund,M.K.,Keller,E.,&Hurd,Y.L.(2000).Thehumanforebrainhas
discrete estrogen receptor alpha messenger RNA expression: High
levels in the amygdaloid complex. Neuroscience, 95, 333–342.
Pakkenberg, B., & Gundersen, H. J. (1997). Neocortical neuron number in
humans:Effectofsexandage.JournalofComparativeNeurology,384,
312–320.
1646
Arch Sex Behav (2016) 45:1615–1648
123
 Panizzon, M. S., Fennema-Notestine, C., Eyler, L. T., Jernigan, T. L., Prom-
Wormley, E., Neale, M., … Kremen, W. S. (2009). Distinct genetic
influencesoncorticalsurfaceareaandcorticalthickness.CerebralCortex,
19, 2728–2735.
Paus,T.,Nawaz-Khan,I.,Leonard,G.,Perron,M.,Pike,G.B.,Pitiot,A.,…
Pausova,Z.(2010).Sexualdimorphismintheadolescentbrain:Roleof
testosteroneandandrogenreceptoringlobalandlocalvolumesofgrey
and white matter. Hormones and Behavior, 57, 63–75.
Pelletier, G. (2010). Steroidogenic enzymes in the brain: Morphological
aspects. Progress in Brain Research, 181, 193–207.
Perrin, J. S., Herve, P. Y., Leonard, G., Perron, M., Pike, G. B., Pitiot, A., …
Paus,T.(2008).Growthofwhitematterintheadolescentbrain:Roleof
testosterone and androgen receptor. Journal of Neuroscience, 28,
9519–9524.
Phoenix, C. H., Goy, R. W., Gerall, A. A., & Young, W. C. (1959).
Organizing action of prenatally administered testosterone propionate
on the tissues mediating mating behavior in the female guinea pig.
Endocrinology, 65, 369–382.
Pinos, H., Collado, P., Rodriguez-Zafra, M., Rodriguez, C., Segovia, S., &
Guillamon,A.(2001).Thedevelopmentofsexdifferencesinthelocus
coeruleus of the rat. Brain Research Bulletin, 56, 73–78.
Puy,L.,MacLusky,N.J.,Becker,L.,Karsan,N.,Trachtenberg,J.,&Brown,
T. J. (1995). Immunocytochemical detection of androgen receptor in
human temporal cortex characterization and application of polyclonal
androgenreceptor antibodies infrozen andparaffin-embeddedtissues.
Journal of Steroid Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 55, 197–209.
Rabinowicz, T., Dean, D. E., Petetot, J. M., & de Courten-Myers, G. M.
(1999). Gender differences in the humancerebral cortex: Moreneurons
inmales;moreprocessesinfemales.JournalofChildNeurology,14,98–
107.
Ramachandran, V. S., & McGeoch, P. D. (2007). Occurrence of phantom
genitalia after gender reassignment surgery. Medical Hypotheses, 69,
1001–1003.
Rametti,G.,Carrillo,B.,Gomez-Gil,E.,Junque,C.,Segovia,S.,Gomez,A.,
& Guillamon, A. (2011a). White matter microstructure in female to
male transsexuals before cross-sex hormonal treatment. A diffusion
tensor imaging study. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 45, 199–204.
Rametti, G., Carrillo, B., Gomez-Gil, E., Junque, C., Zubiarre-Elorza, L.,
Segovia, S., … Guillamon, A. (2011b). The microstructure of white
matter in male to female transsexuals before cross-sex hormonal
treatment.ADTIstudy.JournalofPsychiatricResearch,45,949–954.
Rametti, G., Carrillo, B., Gomez-Gil, E., Junque, C., Zubiaurre-Elorza, L.,
Segovia,S.,…Guillamon,A.(2012).Effectsofandrogenizationonthe
whitemattermicrostructureoffemale-to-maletranssexuals.Adiffusion
tensor imaging study. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 37, 1261–1269.
Raznahan, A., Lee, Y., Stidd, R., Long, R., Greenstein, D., Clasen, L., &
Giedd, J. N. (2010). Longitudinally mapping the influence of sex and
androgen signaling on the dynamics of human cortical maturation in
adolescence. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 107, 16988–16993.
Resnick, S. M., Espeland, M. A., Jaramillo, S. A., Hirsch, C., Stefanick, M.
L.,Murray,A.M.,…Davatzikos,C.(2009).Postmenopausalhormone
therapy and regional brain volumes: The WHIMS-MRI Study. Neu-
rology, 72, 135–142.
Rijpkema, M., Everaerd, D., van der Pol, C., Franke, B., Tendolkar, I., &
Fernandez, G. (2012). Normal sexual dimorphism in the human basal
ganglia. Human Brain Mapping, 33, 1246–1252.
Ruigrok, A. N., Salimi-Khorshidi, G., Lai, M. C., Baron-Cohen, S.,
Lombardo,M.V.,Tait,R.J.,&Suckling,J.(2014).Ameta-analysisof
sex differences in human brain structure. Neuroscience and Biobe-
havioral Reviews, 39, 34–50.
Santarnecchi,E.,Vatti,G.,Dettore,D.,&Rossi,A.(2012).Intrinsiccerebral
connectivity analysis in an untreated female-to-male transsexual sub-
ject:Afirstattemptusingresting-statefMRI.Neuroendocrinology,96,
188–193.
Savic,I.,&Arver,S.(2011).Sexdimorphismofthebraininmale-to-female
transsexuals. Cerebral Cortex, 21, 2525–2533.
Savic, I., Berglund, H., & Lindstrom, P. (2005). Brain response to putative
pheromones in homosexual men. Proceedings of the National
AcademyofSciencesoftheUnitedStatesofAmerica,102,7356–7361.
Savic,I.,Garcia-Falgueras,A.,&Swaab,D.F.(2010).Sexualdifferentiation
ofthehumanbraininrelationtogenderidentityandsexualorientation.
Progress in Brain Research, 186, 41–62.
Schiltz, K., Witzel, J., Northoff, G., Zierhut, K., Gubka, U., Fellmann, H., &
Bogert, B. (2007). Brain pathology in pedophilic offenders: Evidence
of volume reduction in the right amygdala and related diencephalic
structures. Archives of General Psychiatry, 64, 737–746.
Schmithorst,V.J.,Holland,S.K.,&Dardzinski,B.J.(2008).Developmental
differencesinwhitematterarchitecturebetweenboysandgirls.Human
Brain Mapping, 29, 696–710.
Schneider, H. J., Pickel, J., & Stalla, G. K. (2006). Typical female 2nd-4th
finger length (2D:4D) ratios in male-to-female transsexuals-possible
implicationsforprenatalandrogenexposure.Psychoneuroendocrinol-
ogy, 31, 265–269.
Schneiderman, J., Buchsbaum, M., Haznedar, M., Brickman, A.,
Shihabuddin, L., Brand, J., … Hof, P. (2007). Difussion tensor
anisotropy in adolescents and adults. Neuropsychobiology, 55, 96–
11.
Schulz, K. M., Molenda-Figueira, H. A., & Sisk, C. L. (2009). Back to the
future: The organizational-activational hypothesis adapted to puberty
and adolescence. Hormones and Behavior, 55, 597–604.
Segovia,S.,Garcia-Falgueras,A.,Carrillo,B.,Collado,P.,Pinos,H.,Perez-Laso,
C.,… Guillamon, A. (2006). Sexualdimorphisminthevomeronasal sys-
tem of the rabbit. Brain Research, 1102, 52–62.
Segovia,S.,&Guillamon,A.(1993).Sexualdimorphisminthevomeronasal
pathway and sex differences in reproductive behaviors. Brain Research:
Brain Research Reviews, 18, 51–74.
Shaw, P., Kabani, N. J., Lerch, J. P., Eckstrand, K., Lenroot, R., Gogtay, N.,
… Wise, S. P. (2008). Neurodevelopmental trajectories of the human
cerebral cortex. Journal of Neuroscience, 28, 3586–3594.
Simerly, R. B. (2002). Wired for reproduction: Organization and develop-
mentofsexuallydimorphiccircuitsinthemammalianforebrain. Annual
Review of Neuroscience, 25, 507–536.
Simerly, R. B., Chang, C., Muramatsu, M., & Swanson, L. W. (1990).
Distribution of androgen and estrogen receptor mRNA-containing
cells in the rat brain: An in situ hybridization study. Journal of Com-
parative Neurology, 294, 76–95.
Simon, L., Kozak, L. R., Simon, V., Czobor, P., Unoka, Z., Szabo, A., &
Csukly, G. (2013). Regionalgreymatterstructuredifferences between
transsexuals and healthycontrols—a voxel basedmorphometrystudy.
PLoS One, 8, e83947.
Sisk, C. L., & Zehr, J. L. (2005). Pubertal hormones organize the adolescent
brain and behavior. Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology, 26, 163–174.
Slabbekoorn,D.,vanGoozen,S.H. M., Gooren,L.J., &Cohen-Kettenis,P.
T. (2001). Effects of cross-sex hormone treatment on emotionality in
transsexuals. International Journal of Transgenderism, 5, 3.
Smith, Y. L., van Goozen, S. H., Kuiper, A. J., & Cohen-Kettenis, P. T.
(2005). Transsexual subtypes: Clinical and theoretical significance.
Psychiatry Research, 137, 151–160.
Sommer, I. E., Cohen-Kettenis, P. T., van Raalten, T., Vd Veer, A. J.,
Ramsey,L.E.,Gooren,L.J.,…Ramsey,N.F.(2008).Effectsofcross-
sex hormones on cerebral activation during language and mental
rotation:AnfMRIstudyintranssexuals.EuropeanNeuropsychophar-
macology, 18, 215–221.
Sowell,E.R.,Peterson,B.S.,Kan,E.,Woods,R.P.,Yoshii,J.,Bansal,R.,…
Toga, A. W. (2007). Sex differences in cortical thickness mapped in
Arch Sex Behav (2016) 45:1615–1648
1647
123
 176 healthy individuals between 7 and 87years of age. Cerebral
Cortex, 17, 1550–1560.
Steensma, T. D., Biemond, R., de Boer, F., & Cohen-Kettenis, P. T. (2011).
Desisting and persisting gender dysphoria after childhood: A qualitative
follow-upstudy.ClinicalChildPsychologyandPsychiatry,16,499–516.
Steensma, T. D., & Cohen-Kettenis, P. T. (2015). More than two devel-
opmental pathways in children with gender dysphoria? [Letter to the
Editor]. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, 54, 147–148.
Steensma, T. D., Kreukels, B. P., de Vries, A. L., & Cohen-Kettenis, P. T.
(2013a). Gender identity development in adolescence. Hormones and
Behavior, 64, 288–297.
Steensma, T. D., McGuire, J. K., Kreukels, B. P., Beekman, A. J., &Cohen-
Kettenis,P.T.(2013b).Factorsassociatedwithdesistenceandpersistence
ofchildhoodgenderdysphoria:Aquantitativefollow-upstudy.Journalof
theAmericanAcademyofChildandAdolescentPsychiatry,52,582–590.
Swaab,D.F.,&Fliers,E.(1985).Asexuallydimorphicnucleusinthehuman
brain. Science, 228, 1112–1115.
Swaab, D. F., Gooren, L. J., & Hofman, M. A. (1992). The human
hypothalamus in relation to gender and sexual orientation. Progress in
Brain Research, 93, 205–217.
Swaab, D. F., &Hofman, M. A. (1988). Sexual differentiationofthe human
hypothalamus: Ontogeny of the sexually dimorphic nucleus of the
preoptic area. Developmental Brain Research, 44, 314–318.
Taziaux,M.,Staphorsius,A.S.,Ghatei,M.A.,Bloom,S.R.,Swaab,D.F.,&
Bakker, J. (2016). Kisspeptin expression in the human infundibular
nucleus in relation to sex, gender identity and sexual orientation.
Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism,. doi:10.1210/jc.
2015-4175.
Taziaux, M., Swaab, D. F., & Bakker, J. (2012). Sex differences in the
neurokinin B system in the human infundibular nucleus. Journal of
Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, 97, 2210–2220.
Tsakiris,M.(2010).Mybodyinthebrain:Aneurocognitivemodelofbody-
ownership. Neuropsychologia, 48, 703–712.
Ujike, H., Otani, K., Nakatsuka, M., Ishii, K., Sasaki, A., Oishi, T., …
Kuroda, S. (2009). Association study of gender identity disorder and
sex hormone-related genes. Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology
and Biological Psychiatry, 33, 1241–1244.
vanGoozen,S.H.,Cohen-Kettenis,P.T.,Gooren,L.J.,Frijda,N.H.,&van
de Poll, N. E. (1995). Gender differences in behaviour: Activation
effects of cross-sex hormones. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 20, 343–
363.
van Goozen, S. H., Slabbekoorn, D., Gooren, L. J., Sanders, G., & Cohen-
Kettenis, P. T. (2002). Organizing and activating effects of sex hor-
mones in homosexual transsexuals. Behavioral Neuroscience, 116,
982–988.
VanderLaan, D. P.,Blanchard,R.,Wood, H., Garzon,L. C., &Zucker, K. J.
(2015).Birthweightandtwopossibletypesofmaternaleffectsonmale
sexualorientation:Aclinicalstudyofchildrenandadolescentsreferred
to a Gender Identity Service. Developmental Psychobiology, 57, 25–
34.
Vasey, P. L., & VanderLaan, D. P. (2007). Birth order and male androphilia
in Samoan fa’afafine. Proceedings Biological Sciences, 274, 1437–
1442.
Voyer, D., Voyer, S., &Bryden, M. P. (1995). Magnitude of sexdifferences
in spatial abilities: A meta-analysis and consideration of critical vari-
ables. Psychological Bulletin, 117, 250–270.
Wallien, M. S., & Cohen-Kettenis, P. T. (2008). Psychosexual outcome of
gender-dysphoricchildren.JournaloftheAmericanAcademyofChild
and Adolescent Psychiatry, 47, 1413–1423.
Wallien, M. S., Zucker, K. J., Steensma, T. D., & Cohen-Kettenis, P. T.
(2008). 2D:4D finger-length ratios in children and adults with gender
identity disorders. Hormones and Behavior, 54, 450–454.
Waters,E.M.,&Simerly,R.B.(2009).Estrogeninducescaspase-dependent
celldeathduringhypothalamicdevelopment.JournalofNeuroscience,
29, 9714–9718.
Watson, D. B., & Coren, S. (1992). Left-handedness in male-to-female
transsexuals.JournaloftheAmericanMedicalAssociation,267,1342.
Westerhausen, R., Huster, R. J., Kreuder, F., Wittling, W., & Schweiger, E.
(2007). Corticospinal tract asymmetries at the level of the internal
capsule: Is there an association with handedness? Neuroimage, 37, 379–
386.
Westerhausen, R., Walter, C., Kreuder, F., Wittling, R. A., Schweiger, E., &
Wittling, W. (2003). The influence of handedness and gender on the
microstructure of the humancorpus callosum: A diffusion-tensor mag-
netic resonance imaging study. Neuroscience Letters, 351, 99–102.
Wierckx,K.,Mueller,S.,Weyers,S.,VanCaenegem,E.,Roef,G.,Heylens,
G., & T’Sjoen, G. (2012). Long-term evaluation of cross-sex hormone
treatmentintranssexualpersons.JournalofSexualMedicine,9,2641–
2651.
Winkler,A.M.,Kochunov,P.,Blangero,J.,Almasy,L.,Zilles,K.,Fox,P.T.,
…Glahn,D.C.(2010).Corticalthicknessorgreymattervolume?The
importance of selecting the phenotype for imaging genetics studies.
Neuroimage, 53, 1135–1146.
Wisniewski, A. B., Prendeville, M. T., & Dobs, A. S. (2005). Handedness,
functional cerebral hemispheric lateralization, and cognition in male-
to-female transsexuals receiving cross-sex hormone treatment. Archives
of Sexual Behavior, 34, 167–172.
Yokota, Y., Kawamura, Y., & Kameya, Y. (2005). Callosal shapes at the
midsagittal plane: MRI differences of normal males, normal females,
andGID.ConferenceProceedings-IEEEEngineeringinMedicineand
Biology Society, 3, 3055–3058.
Zhou, J. N., Hofman, M. A., Gooren, L. J., & Swaab, D. F. (1995). A sex
differenceinthehumanbrainandits relationtotranssexuality.Nature,
378, 68–70.
Zubiaurre-Elorza, L., Junque, C., Gomez-Gil, E., & Guillamon, A. (2014).
Effects of cross-sex hormone treatment on cortical thickness in
transsexual individuals. Journal of Sexual Medicine, 11, 1248–1261.
Zubiaurre-Elorza, L., Junque, C., Gomez-Gil, E., Segovia, S., Carrillo, B.,
Rametti, G., & Guillamon, A. (2013). Cortical thickness in untreated
transsexuals. Cerebral Cortex, 23, 2855–2862.
Zucker, K. J., Beaulieu, N., Bradley, S. J., Grimshaw, G. M., & Wilcox, A.
(2001). Handedness in boys with gender identity disorder. Journal of
Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 42, 767–776.
Zucker, K. J., & Bradley, S. J. (1995). Gender identity disorder and psy-
chosexual problems in children and adolescents. New York: Guilford
Press.
Zucker, K. J., Bradley, S. J., Owen-Anderson, A., Kibblewhite, S. J., Wood,
H., Singh, D., & Choi, K. (2012). Demographics, behavior problems,
and psychosexual characteristics of adolescents with gender identity
disorder or transvestic fetishism. Journal of Sex and Marital Therapy,
38, 151–189.
1648
Arch Sex Behav (2016) 45:1615–1648
123
