 The slow death of the concept of schizophrenia and
the painful birth of the psychosis spectrum
S. Guloksuz1,2 and J. van Os1,3,4*
1Department of Psychiatry and Psychology, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, the Netherlands
2Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA
3Department of Psychiatry, Brain Centre Rudolf Magnus, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands
4Department of Psychosis Studies, King’s College London, King’s Health Partners, Institute of Psychiatry, London, UK
The concept of schizophrenia only covers the 30% poor outcome fraction of a much broader multidimensional psychotic
syndrome, yet paradoxically has become the dominant prism through which everything ‘psychotic’ is observed, even
affective states with mild psychosis labelled ‘ultra-high risk’ (for schizophrenia). The inability of psychiatry to frame
psychosis as multidimensional syndromal variation of largely unpredictable course and outcome – within and between
individuals – hampers research and recovery-oriented practice. ‘Psychosis’ remains firmly associated with ‘schizophre-
nia’, as evidenced by a vigorous stream of high-impact but non-replicable attempts to ‘reverse-engineer’ the hypothe-
sized biological disease entity, using case–control paradigms that cannot distinguish between risk for illness onset
and risk for poor outcome. In this paper, the main issues surrounding the concept of schizophrenia are described. We
tentatively conclude that with the advent of broad spectrum phenotypes covering autism and addiction in DSM5, the
prospect for introducing a psychosis spectrum disorder – and modernizing psychiatry – appears to be within reach.
Received 3 January 2017; Revised 1 June 2017; Accepted 2 June 2017; First published online 10 July 2017
Key words: Classification, clinical staging, diagnosis, DSM, outcome, psychosis spectrum disorder.
Ever since its conception, ‘schizophrenia’ has been an
‘essentially contested concept’ (Geekie & Read, 2009).
Debates at (European) mental health conferences invari-
ably end with around 50% in favour of abandoning the
term, and 50% in favour of the status quo. This divide
has become the implicit hallmark of academic psych-
iatry: a science in search of solid data to back up its
early 20th century nosological outlook on mental vari-
ation. For decades, biological approaches have been
tested in an attempt to essentially ‘reverse-engineer’
the hypothesized disease entity, using the classical
case–control
comparison.
However,
despite
many
claims of success (‘genes for schizophrenia’, ‘cognitive
illness’, ‘brain disease’), biological findings in psych-
iatry, whilst fascinating, are fuzzy and unreliable
(Ioannidis, 2005), and do not suggest categorical distinc-
tions (Kapur et al. 2012).
Schizophrenia represents the 30% poor outcome of a
much broader spectrum of psychotic disorders (Perala
et al. 2007). It is at least 10 times more researched than
the other 70% of the clinical psychosis spectrum (van
Os, 2016) and basically has come to represent every-
thing ‘psychotic’ – even those with subtle experiences
of psychosis in the context of anxiety and depression,
said to be at ‘Ultra High Risk’ (of schizophrenia)
(Van Os & Guloksuz, 2017).
The question that we – prudently and constructively –
attempt to address in this article is: should psychiatry
continue to look at human variation through the
‘schizo’-prism, as embedded in major classification
systems, or can an alternative case be made that makes
more sense, both in clinical practice and in research?
The devolution of the concept of schizophrenia
‘We stand atop a long tradition of clinical descriptive research
and ‘authority-based’ diagnostic systems, in which, in the strug-
gle for dominance of psychiatric nosologies, the most famous and
articulate professor won.’ (Kendler, 2016b).
The concept of schizophrenia has – not – evolved since
Kraepelin coined the term ‘dementia praecox’ about a
century ago. Kraepelin first conceptualized dementia
praecox and manic-depressive psychosis as two distinct
natural disease entities; Bleuler later introduced the term
‘schizophrenia’ for the first time in his monograph:
‘Dementia Praecox or the Group of Schizophrenias’
(Jablensky, 2010). Based on his extensive clinical work
with patients, Bleuler challenged the gloomy viewpoint
of dementia praecox: Progressive deterioration to
dementia and early onset were neither exclusive nor uni-
form to justify a discrete disease category. In contrast to
* Address for correspondence: Jim van Os, Department of
Psychiatry, University Medical Centre Utrecht, PO BOX 85500, 3508
GA Utrecht.
(Email: vanosj@gmail.com)
Psychological Medicine (2018), 48, 229–244.
© Cambridge University Press 2017
doi:10.1017/S0033291717001775
REVIEW ARTICLE
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291717001775
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 77.173.35.219, on 02 Jun 2019 at 13:09:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
 Kraepelin’s narrow perspective of dementia praecox,
limited to the most severe clinical representation, he
adopted a much broader approach that expanded the
boundaries of schizophrenia to incorporate acontinuum
phenotype from latent schizotypy and schizophrenia
(Jablensky, 2010). Early efforts to classifying mental dis-
orders in the USA – largely influenced by the main-
stream
psychoanalytical
formulation
–
embraced
Bleuler’s broad and more psychologically-oriented con-
cept of schizophrenia untilthe release of thethird edition
of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders (DSM-III) (Andreasen, 1989). The DSM-III,
preceding endeavours to increase the reliability of psy-
chiatric
diagnoses
in
research,
e.g.
the
Research
Diagnostic Criteria and Feighner Criteria, introduced a
‘mutated’ Kraepelinian diagnostic practice thatwassub-
stantially influenced by Langfeldt’s poor outcome
schizophrenia theory and Schneider’s first rank symp-
toms.
One
of
the
main
driving
forces
for
the
neo-Kraepelinian movement was the disappointment
with low reliability hindering collaborative research
efforts (Dutta et al. 2007). The widespread use of antipsy-
chotics with serious – sometimes irreversible and even
life-threatening – side effects also necessitated this nar-
row diagnostic convention to improve the risk–benefit
ratio of antipsychotics by limiting the treatment to the
most severe and chronic manifestations of illness
(Andreasen, 1989). This progressive movement – cutting
all ties with psychoanalysis and emphasizing the
importance of psychiatric nosology akin to European
practice – were welcomed across the pond (Murray,
1979). However, this revolution in psychiatry, like
other radical shifts in history, has subsequently evolved
into a dogma per se that ignores all criticisms.
Sailing before the wind of biological psychiatry, data
of which are applied in attempts to reverse-engineer
the narrow concept of schizophrenia, seeded first in
the USA, has dominated the field over the last 40 years
(Dutta et al. 2007).
The outcome bias
‘Schizophrenia is heterogeneous. Some patients with the disorder
do well at follow-up and should not, for this alone, be regarded as
misdiagnosed.’ (McGlashan, 1988)
Robins and Guze (pioneers of the DSM-III) concluded:
‘good prognosis “schizophrenia” is not mild schizo-
phrenia, but a different illness’ (Robins & Guze,
1970). However, evidence suggests that the schizophre-
nia construct is subject to Berkson’s bias, which is a
specific type of selection bias that occurs when the
research sample is limited to help-seeking populations,
particularly when the research is carried out at specia-
lized tertiary centres. The restrictive construct of
schizophrenia,
particularly
emphasizing
chronicity
and deterioration, filters out less severe cases with
good prognosis and leads to morbidity concentration
(Cohen & Cohen, 1984) (Fig. 1). This ‘enriched’ sample
of severely ill patients with poor outcome represents
only a fraction of the broader phenotype that includes
a variety of psychosis spectrum diagnostic categories
such as schizophreniform disorder, delusional dis-
order, brief psychotic disorder and so on (Perala et al.
2007). Prospective studies of patients with an initial
diagnosis of schizophrenia indicate a vast amount of
outcome heterogeneity within and between patients
(Harding et al. 1987; Allardyce & van Os, 2010).
Patients with better outcome either never enter, or
eventually drop out of mental health care: They either
recover and do not necessitate mental health treatment
or display a favourable illness course and thus no
longer fit into the schizophrenia definition per current
classification systems.
Thus, the biased cluster of diagnosed help-seeking
patients shares similarities that are discretely asso-
ciated with poor outcome but are not necessarily
expressed across the whole phenotypic spectrum
(van Os et al. 1997; Zipursky et al. 2013). Researchers
searching
for
indices
of
deterioration,
akin
to
Kraepelin’s dementia praecox, may have failed to dem-
onstrate such neurodegeneration, but their remarks –
albeit within a different context – were accurate: ‘The
‘true’ natural history of an illness cannot be deter-
mined
from
studies
in
treated
populations’
(Waddington et al. 1997).
Considering major advances in mental health care, a
linear increase in good outcome would logically be
anticipated. However, a meta-analysis of outcome
studies of schizophrenia in the last century demon-
strated that a biphasic pattern exists, not as a function
of improvement in treatment but as a function of diag-
nostic trends (Hegarty et al. 1994). The steady rising
trend in the proportion of patients with a favourable
outcome, which saw a remarkable twofold increase
to around 50% after the introduction of antipsychotics
in the 1950s and 1960s, came to an end after the 1970s
when the broad definition of schizophrenia was
replaced with stringent diagnostic criteria, initiating a
downward trend, with a drop of 15% by 1990
(Hegarty et al. 1994). Findings indicate that the narrow
definition of schizophrenia is significantly associated
with a decline in the rates of patients with a favourable
outcome
(McGlashan,
1988).
Studies
using
the
Kraepelinian diagnostic systems also found lower but
not statistically significant recovery estimates in com-
parison to non-Kraepelinian samples (median of 9%
v. 12.5%) (Jaaskelainen et al. 2013). Contrary to expecta-
tions, more recent findings from the 10-year follow-up
of the Suffolk County Mental Health Project cohort
showed no significant improvement in the rate of
230
S. Guloksuz and J. van Os
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291717001775
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 77.173.35.219, on 02 Jun 2019 at 13:09:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
 favourable outcome compared with those in previous
samples (Bromet et al. 2005). The investigators argued
that the lack of progress might be attributed to the
nosological switch from the broader schizophrenia
concept in DSM-II to a narrowly defined chronic
schizophrenia in DSM-III, as well as the influence of
Berkson’s bias.
Inclusiveness of diagnostic criteria appears to be a
significant confounder in studies of predictors for out-
come, such as in the case of the higher male/female
ratio in patients with an unfavourable outcome as a
function
of
more
restrictive
diagnostic
systems
(Castle et al. 1993). Similarly, enriched samples of
poor outcome spuriously find a more co-occurrence
of positive and negative symptom domains, thus creat-
ing a false conception of a distinct illness, when in fact
an inflated rate of concurrence has been the individual
contribution of each dimension to help-seeking behav-
iour (Maric et al. 2004).
Meta-analyses report that male sex is associated with
a 1.3–1.5-fold increase in the risk of developing schizo-
phrenia (Aleman et al. 2003; McGrath et al. 2004).
Similar to the outcome bias, the sex difference in inci-
dence rates were significantly higher in studies with
samples collected in the post-DSM-III era compared
with those collected prior to 1980 (Aleman et al. 2003)
– apparently as a result of the use of more stringent
diagnostic criteria (Lewine et al. 1984; Castle et al.
1993; Beauchamp & Gagnon, 2004). Conversely, no
statistically significant sex difference exists in preva-
lence estimates of schizophrenia (Saha et al. 2005;
Perala et al. 2007). Aside from methodological issues
(Saha et al. 2008), the ebb of male preponderance in
prevalence estimates, contrasting with comparable
incidence rates, could be interpreted with two proposi-
tions: (i) Male sex predicts both development of schizo-
phrenia
and
either
better
outcome
or
greater
illness-related mortality during the course. However,
evidence indicates no sex-difference in standardized
mortality ratios (Saha et al. 2007) and better outcome
in women diagnosed with schizophrenia (Abel et al.
2010). (ii) Clinicians, guided by diagnostic manuals
with rigid criteria, erroneously tend to overdiagnose
schizophrenia in males at first contact. With this dis-
cussion, our aim was not to disentangle this paradox
but to prompt researchers about how different defini-
tions can dramatically influence even basic demo-
graphic and epidemiological parameters underlying a
disease concept.
Psychosis continuum
Modern classification systems, embracing a polythetic
approach, categorize schizophrenia and related disor-
ders based on different combinations of a required
number of symptom domains that exceed the oper-
ational threshold of severity. This taxonomy implies a
point of rarity, a unique phenotype with precise
boundaries. However, a systematic review of taxo-
metric
research
on
schizophrenia
concluded
that
studies favouring a categorical construct over a single
distribution model were heavily influenced by a var-
iety of methodological issues endangering the external
and the internal validity (Linscott et al. 2010).
Fig. 1. Depicts the morbidity concentration in an inception cohort of first episode psychosis over a period. The relative
balance between poor (red), intermediate (yellow) and favourable outcome (green) shifts towards poor outcome as a fraction
of the patients with favourable outcome (green) either recover or no longer meet diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia (blue).
The slow death of the concept of schizophrenia
231
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291717001775
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 77.173.35.219, on 02 Jun 2019 at 13:09:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
 Consecutive meta-analyses of modern epidemio-
logical data further suggest that psychosis expression
is not an all-or-none phenomenon, but, in fact, phe-
nomenologically and temporally continuous across
the general population, with prevalence rates of sub-
threshold states varying from around 5% (delimited
to interview-based reporting) to 8% (including self-
report estimates) and incidence rates of 2.5% (van Os
et al. 2009; Linscott & van Os, 2013). With regard to
temporal continuity, psychotic experiences at a sub-
clinical level in adolescence and early adulthood have
some predictive value for psychotic disorders and
also, to a lesser degree, for non-psychotic disorders,
but mainly for a more severe psychopathology: func-
tional impairment, violence and suicide (Poulton
et al. 2000; Hanssen et al. 2005; Rossler et al. 2007;
Dominguez et al. 2010, 2011; Saha et al. 2011; Kaymaz
et al. 2012; Kelleher et al. 2012; Werbeloff et al. 2012;
Sharifi et al. 2015; Honings et al. 2016a, b). Recent
findings from World Health Organization World
Mental Health Surveys showing bidirectional temporal
associations between positive psychotic experiences
and a broad spectrum of non-psychotic mental disor-
ders concur with the notion that subtle psychosis
expression is transdiagnostic (McGrath et al. 2016).
Psychotic experiences are generally (almost over
three-fourths)
transient
(Hanssen
et
al.
2005;
Cougnard et al. 2007). However, the likelihood of
later psychopathology that requires professional care
increases as a function of the additive interaction
between subthreshold expression of multiple psychotic
symptom domains – for example, the co-occurrence of
hallucinations and delusions predicts higher psycho-
pathology load and greater severity (Smeets et al.
2012; Nuevo et al. 2013; Smeets et al. 2013). Similarly,
the greater the admixture with affective disturbance
(Hanssen et al. 2005) or motivational impairments
(Dominguez et al. 2010), the greater the risk of
psychotic disorder in the future. The presence of
psychosis can thus be considered as a marker for
more severe psychopathology that negatively impacts
outcome. To what degree psychosis itself, rather than
the severity of the mixed psychopathological states it
forms a part of, causally impacts outcome remains
uncertain.
Evidence that environmental and genetic load are
shared across clinical and subthreshold psychotic
phenomena lend further support for aetiological con-
tinuity and provides us with a framework to dissect
diverse paths from transitory psychotic experiences to
persistent psychosis expression and subsequent need
for care. Studies have shown that genetic liability and
exposure to environmental risk factors (trauma, urban
environment, cannabis, etc.) synergistically increase
psychosis expression – as a function of the severity of
comorbid psychopathology – in a dose–response fash-
ion (Guloksuz et al. 2015) and further predicts subse-
quent persistence and need for care in those with
baseline subthreshold psychotic experience (Henquet
et al. 2004; Spauwen et al. 2004, 2006a, b).
Insteadofabinary model,theliability-thresholdmodel
(Gottesman & Shields, 1967), providing a basis to predict
phenotypic outcome quantitatively by the cumulative
risk load of genetic and environmental factors, might be
advantageous in investigating psychosis expression
lying on the same continuum with normality (Fig. 2).
Transdiagnostic psychosis manifestation
‘If we were to accept that the affective and schizophrenic manifes-
tations of insanity are not in themselves the external expression of
certain disease processes, but merely reveal those areas of our per-
sonality in which such processes take place, . . . [t]heir significance
would then only reside in the fact that the schizophrenic illnesses
affect different parts of our emotional life from the manic-
depressive insanity.’ (Kraepelin, 1992)
A spectrum model of psychosis has testable implica-
tions (e.g. across the psychosis spectrum there are no
qualitative differences in psychopathology, aetiology,
treatment and outcome; there is movement over the
spectrum and across dimensions within individuals),
many of which are supported by the existing literature.
Thus, similarities between schizophrenia and bipolar
disorder exceed their differences: phenomenological
expression (van Os et al. 2000; Krabbendam et al.
2004; Kaymaz et al. 2007), cognitive functioning (Bora
et al. 2009; Hill et al. 2013), genetic liability (Van
Snellenberg & de Candia, 2009; Ritsner & Gottesman,
2011; Lee et al. 2013; van Os et al. 2017) and possible
neuroanatomical
correlates
(Ivleva
et
al.
2013;
Goodkind et al. 2015). Recent efforts to discriminate
the DSM categories of bipolar disorder and schizo-
phrenia using a multimodal set of biomarkers (cogni-
tion, evoked potentials, anti-saccadic eye movement
and neuroimaging) failed to yield a desirable outcome
(Tamminga et al. 2013). Clinical data suggest that bipo-
lar disorder and schizophrenia lie at distant ends of a
severity continuum, with schizoaffective being in the
middle (Mancuso et al. 2015). Also, in help-seeking
samples said to show ‘Clinical High Risk’, mood and
anxiety
disorders
commonly
coexist
with
sub-
threshold psychotic symptoms, anticipating relatively
unfavourable prognosis (Perlis et al. 2011; Wigman
et al. 2014), questionably framed as ‘clinical transition’
(Fusar-Poli et al. 2014).
Similar to data in clinical populations, a significant,
albeit relatively weaker, association between dimen-
sions of affective disturbance and psychotic expression
has
been
shown
in
general
population
studies
(Krabbendam et al. 2004; van Rossum et al. 2011;
232
S. Guloksuz and J. van Os
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291717001775
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 77.173.35.219, on 02 Jun 2019 at 13:09:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
 Wigman et al. 2011). Epidemiological data further
show
that
affective
dysregulation
and
psychosis
expression, with greater exposure to environmental
risk factors, interact with each other, giving rise to a
more severe outcome (Hanssen et al. 2005; Kaymaz
et al. 2007; Wigman et al. 2012; Guloksuz et al. 2015;
Isvoranu et al. 2016).
These findings might be more suggestive of a unitary
model of psychosis. Bipolar disorder and schizophrenia
may well be different expressions (phenotypic presenta-
tions) of a substantially shared pathoaetiology, with
varying outcomes due to disease modifiers (e.g. neuro-
developmental impairment), rather than two distinct
entities with entirely diverse pathoaetiological pro-
cesses (Murray et al. 2004). There are indeed various
examples in medicine, such as multiple sclerosis, follow-
ing distinct illness patterns (clinically isolated syn-
drome, relapsing-remitting, secondary progressive and
primary progressive) with varying symptoms and out-
comes but stemming from the same pathoaetiology
(Confavreux & Vukusic, 2006; Lublin et al. 2014).
Figure 3 illustrates illness course across different types
of multiple sclerosis; in brackets, the DSM-IV diagnostic
categories (Brief Psychotic Episode, Bipolar Disorder,
Schizoaffective
Disorder
and
Schizophrenia)
were
given on the basis of the resemblance of putative illness
course. Similar to multiple sclerosis, these different psy-
chiatric conditions may reasonably belong to the same
spectrum of illness. Accordingly, a recent line of work
suggests the existence of a general transdiagnostic
psychosis phenotype at both subclinical and clinical
levels – coinciding across the psychosis spectrum:
schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder and bipolar dis-
order – encompassing affective and non-affective symp-
toms, with five symptom dimensions (positive and
negative symptoms, mania, depression and disorgan-
ization) disentangling the heterogeneity (Reininghaus
et al. 2013, 2016; Shevlin et al. 2017). Originally, DSM5
was set up to encompass the model of psychotic disor-
ders pertaining to a spectrum with transdiagnostic
dimensions to allow for diagnosing heterogeneity; how-
ever, halfway the process, the idea of transdiagnostic
dimensions was abandoned.
From a researcher’s standpoint, an artificial categor-
ization leads to a considerable loss of power and preci-
sion (Kraemer, 2007); from a clinician’s standpoint,
categories based on illness course – regardless if they
are different types of the same illness or not – are prag-
matically necessary to determine treatment strategy.
The category of schizophrenia-type psychosis, confined
to the most severely ill patients with poor outcome, may
be beneficial in approximating need for care, outcome,
course and treatment (Kendell & Jablensky, 2003).
However, mounting evidence suggests that a transdiag-
nostic dimensional approach, complementary to the
clinical utility of the categorical approach, may provide
in-depth information that covers different aspects of
psychopathology beyond the borders of the modern
operationalized criteria (Demjaha et al. 2009; Russo
et al. 2014; van Os & Reininghaus, 2016).
Fig. 2. The liability-threshold model, assuming a Gaussian distribution of a continuous liability in the general population,
posits phenotypic outcome can be determined quantitatively by the combined effects of genetic load and environmental
factors. If cumulative predisposition exceeds a certain threshold value, individual manifests the clinical syndrome.
The slow death of the concept of schizophrenia
233
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291717001775
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 77.173.35.219, on 02 Jun 2019 at 13:09:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
 One
of
the
clinically-derived
arguments
for
Kraepelinian dichotomy is that patients with bipolar
disorder respond to lithium, whereas patients with
non-affective psychosis do not. However, affective
symptoms
respond
to
lithium
dimensionally,
i.e.
affective symptoms in the context of schizophrenia
(i.e. schizo-affective disorder) also respond to lithium.
In regard to this groundless notion of splitting and
lumping of disorders on the basis of response to treat-
ment, one may also declare the opposite, namely that
these two phenotypes are identical based on the fact
that they both respond to treatment with second-
generation antipsychotics. In addition, cyclic illness
course characterized by full remission between epi-
sodes predicts response far better than both categorical
diagnoses (Tighe et al. 2011). There is no doubt that this
represents very useful information for treating clini-
cians, but it is a reductionist fallacy to propose these
observations as the reasoning behind splitting or unify-
ing the two conditions.
A lack of diagnostic markers in psychiatry impedes
an objective classification. In this regard, current artifi-
cial boundaries drift the field to a paradox by hinder-
ing efforts to develop novel diagnostic tools, essential
for
a
classification
system
grounded
in
theory.
Research practice should resist the temptation of
clinical pragmatism and better move away from the
dichotomous approach to set sail for an evidence-
based diagnostic practice replacing the century-old
construct. Indeed, this was the reasoning behind the
Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) system, introduced
by the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)
(Cuthbert & Insel, 2010).
Schizophrenia is an obstacle to aspirational work of
early intervention
‘There is no dark side of the moon really. Matter of fact it’s all
dark. The only thing that makes it look light is the sun’ (in
‘Eclipse’, a song by Pink Floyd from the album: The Dark Side
of the Moon)
Diagnostic manuals are like standard operating proce-
dures: they simplify the decision-making process and
guide clinicians to approximate diagnosis when valid
and specific measures are not available or readily
accessible
to
ascertain
pathoaetiology.
Therefore,
objective diagnostic tools or lack thereof are critical
for validating the diagnosis. At its best, check-listing
diagnostic criteria improve reliability. Schizophrenia
diagnosis has indeed ensured a high reliability, but
as summarized above, its validity is debatable. Over
Fig. 3. Shows current multiple sclerosis classification based on disease progression. The colour red represents active disease;
colour green represents remission. In brackets, the DSM-IV diagnostic categories were listed based on the resemblance of
putative illness course. (a) Clinically Isolated Syndrome (Brief Psychotic Disorder), (b) Relapsing-remitting Multiple Sclerosis
(Bipolar Disorder), (c) Primary Progressive Multiple Sclerosis (Schizophrenia), (d) Secondary Progressive Multiple Sclerosis
(Schizoaffective Disorder).
234
S. Guloksuz and J. van Os
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291717001775
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 77.173.35.219, on 02 Jun 2019 at 13:09:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
 the years, the weak validity and specificity of the
schizophrenia construct have arisen as a critical meth-
odological issue. As discussed previously, schizophre-
nia, along with other diagnostic categories, originally
formulated to bring order to psychiatric taxonomy,
has become reified over time and transformed into
an impediment to research (Kendler, 2016a).
Early intervention strategy became entangled in
schizophrenia reification by hinging on the prototypic
psychotic illness (schizophrenia) (Van Os & Delespaul,
2005; Fusar-Poli et al. 2014). In keeping with classifica-
tion
manuals,
operationalized
criteria
have
been
applied to conceptualize the binary model of clinical
high-risk state – prodromal stage – as a proxy for
schizophrenia. The target population has been iden-
tified as individuals with attenuated positive psychotic
symptoms or a family history of psychotic disorder.
Adopting a pragmatic model, early intervention
efforts have primarily aimed to reduce false discovery
rate by implementing a narrow description of clinical
high-risk state restricted only to subthreshold positive
psychotic
symptoms
in
help-seeking
individuals
(Miller et al. 2003; Yung et al. 2005). The basic assump-
tion of this indicated prevention, modelled after suc-
cessful secondary prevention strategies in medicine,
is that the detection of early warning symptoms of
schizophrenia and subsequent intervention shall pre-
vent subtle psychopathology from transitioning to a
manifest clinical syndrome and ultimately reduce func-
tional impairment (Van Os & Delespaul, 2005).
However, as discussed previously, epidemiological
data from different populations have consistently
demonstrated that a model based on psychosis expres-
sion per se – hallucinations and delusions at a sub-
threshold level, which are not rare and often transient
in the general population – overlooks the dynamic
interplay between other elements of psychopathology
and may, therefore, be insufficient to predict later psy-
chopathology (Bentall & Beck, 2004; van Os, 2013). In
accordance, over three-fourths of the at-risk population
enrolled
in
The
North
American
Prodrome
Longitudinal
Study–2
had
sought
help
for
non-
psychotic complaints prior to the onset of recognizable
psychotic experiences (Woodberry et al. 2016). The ini-
tial intent of the prodromal psychosis concept, similar
to its point of origin, schizophrenia, is to ascertain the
group that benefits most from a therapeutic interven-
tion,
and
thereby
avoid
unnecessary
treatment
(McGorry
et
al.
2002;
McGlashan
et
al.
2003).
However, this conceptualization possesses a danger
of giving an implicit message to clinicians in the field
that the at-risk population is the ‘pre-schizophrenia’
group and should be vigorously treated for that rea-
son. Accordingly, a recent survey shows that clinicians
follow a more conservative path than guidelines in
deciding on dose reduction and discontinuation of
antipsychotics after complete remission of the first
psychotic episode (Thompson et al. 2016).
Emerging evidence from at-risk samples was a
wake-up call to early intervention (Fusar-Poli et al.
2014; McGorry & Nelson, 2016): (i) The framework of
‘transition’ as an end result fails to explain the hetero-
geneity in clinical and functional outcome, (ii) Studies
that control for ‘false transition’ representing natural
fluctuation of an existing psychotic state find very
low ‘transition’ rates (Morrison et al. 2012), (iii) An
over-reliance on positive psychotic symptoms sets a
self-limiting barrier to capture early expression of non-
specific psychopathology, the severity of which is
‘marked’ but not ‘caused’ by attenuated psychosis,
(iv) ‘Clinical High Risk’ criteria majorly identify indivi-
duals with diagnosed states of anxiety/depression and/
or drug use who also display subtle psychotic experi-
ences, which research has shown is a marker for –
but not necessarily the cause of – relatively poor out-
come
(Perlis
et
al.
2011;
Wigman
et
al.
2014;
McAusland et al. 2015). Thus, early treatment of psy-
chopathology (including treatment of subtle psychotic
experiences), in states of anxiety/depression/drug use
with a degree of psychosis admixture will naturally
improve outcome; it does not seem necessary or
valid, however, to claim that this effort represents ‘pre-
vention of schizophrenia’ (Van Os & Guloksuz, 2017).
Evidently, the aspirational work of early intervention
shall evolve by abandoning confusing terminology
based on the ill-defined concept of schizophrenia. A uni-
versal early intervention strategy in psychiatry, as
embedded in the Headspace initiative (McGorry et al.
2016), should be the ultimate – and likely more effective
– goal.
The term ‘schizophrenia’
‘The way a word is used this year is its phenotype, but it has a
deeply seated, immutable meaning, often hidden, which is the
genotype.’ (Thomas, 1973)
The origin of the term ‘schizophrenia’ is Greek, mean-
ing ‘split mind’. The metamorphosis of the term
‘schizophrenia’ has been striking: Schizophrenia is
now not only a medical term, but also a physics term
to describe the split personality of electrons (Chase,
2008) and a widely-used metaphor in economy for an
unpredictable market.
The dark view of the current concept of schizophre-
nia – a distinct, genetic brain disease with a poor
course – is also a key factor that further increases
stigma and discrimination. Of all diagnostic categories,
schizophrenia has been by far the most stigmatized
mental condition that generates negative emotions:
The slow death of the concept of schizophrenia
235
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291717001775
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 77.173.35.219, on 02 Jun 2019 at 13:09:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
 desperation, pity and fear (Lasalvia et al. 2015). Social
media research has shown that ‘schizophrenia’ has
been used inappropriately and non-medically with,
as expected, the adjective form ‘schizophrenic’ being
even more often negative (Joseph et al. 2015). Until
the recent renaming of schizophrenia in Japan, these
negative connotations had made clinicians largely
reluctant to use the term in their communication with
patients and their families (Takahashi et al. 2009). A
similar pattern was also observed in other countries,
such as Scotland (Allardyce et al. 2000). Although a
simple renaming of schizophrenia may forestall its
metaphorical use, a semantic revision without a recon-
ceptualization may not be adequate to decrease stigma
immediately (Lieberman & First, 2007; Koike et al.
2016). However, even more important than stigma
may be internalised negative expectations associated
with schizophrenia (Sullivan et al. 2015) and its pessim-
istic and unproven ‘devastating genetic brain disease’
description
in
the
scientific
literature
(Sawa
&
Snyder, 2002). The recently formulated CHIME frame-
work identifies ‘hope and optimism’ as one of the core
conditions for personal recovery (Leamy et al. 2011).
The question is to what degree mental health profes-
sionals, influenced by a long tradition of pessimistic
and mystifying ‘schizo’ formulations of psychotic ill-
ness, provide an environment where patients are met
with hope and optimism. More hopeful, and arguably
scientifically more valid, alternatives, in the direction
of a broad underlying susceptibility, have recently
been proposed by those with lived experience of
psychosis (George & Klijn, 2013). The CHIME frame-
work shows a clear need to diagnose not only on the
basis of symptoms, but also on the basis of where the
person is in the process of personal recovery, starting
with the phase of being completely overwhelmed by
the illness, to living a meaningful life despite continu-
ing mental challenges.
From rare mental disorder (schizophrenia) to
psychosis spectrum disorders: dimensional
assessment and multifactorial staging system
‘I expect to see the end of the concept of schizophrenia soon.
Already the evidence that it is a discrete entity rather than just
the severe end of psychosis has been fatally undermined.’
(Murray, 2017)
Like all other things, the way we think about mental
illness is subject to a set of shared beliefs that can
show change over time as a result of, for example,
novel scientific insights or persistent calls for change
from subgroups with deviant beliefs. In the area of
mental health, the shared belief that mental distress
comes
as
diagnosable
discrete
disease
entities
increasingly is co-existing with the view that mental
suffering in reality represents a series of spectrum phe-
notypes. The coexistence of beliefs has found its way to
the DSM5, in which the idea of mental illness as a spec-
trum phenotype was emphatically introduced in the
areas of autism, substance use and – nearly – personal-
ity disorder, but, remarkably, not for psychotic dis-
order. Thus, in the DSM5 fact sheet of the American
Psychiatric Association (2013), it is stated that ‘The
symptoms of people with Autism Spectrum Disorder
will fall on a continuum, with some individuals show-
ing mild symptoms and others having much more
severe symptoms. This spectrum will allow clinicians
to account for the variations in symptoms and beha-
viours from person to person’. The introduction of
this type of spectrum thinking is remarkable, given
that until relatively recently, autism was considered a
rare and uniformly severe, poor prognosis mental
disorder.
Psychotic phenomena might well be conceptualized
as a broad spectrum ranging from mild but persistent
schizotypy to severe and recurrent schizophrenia.
Indeed, the DSM5 psychosis workgroup attempted to
introduce the idea of a spectrum in the structure and
the ordering of the chapter, using the level, number
and the duration of psychotic signs and symptoms to
demarcate psychotic disorders from each other, ‘as a
stepping-stone towards a more valid classification sys-
tem’ (Heckers et al. 2013). A multimodal investigation
of genetic susceptibility at different layers of environ-
mental exposure using the unbiased multidimensional
assessment of the psychosis spectrum, not confounded
by current diagnostic categories, would contribute to a
better understanding of psychotic phenomena. This
‘liberated’ strategy (Moncrieff & Middleton, 2015) has
a greater probability of generating novel findings and
discerning distinct pathological processes that will
pave the way for a coherent theory-based classification.
For example, if a neurodevelopmental factor predis-
poses to poor outcome in the psychosis spectrum,
this association may not be detectable if the research
population is limited to those with poor outcome
who may be universally exposed to the neurodevelop-
mental factor in question. A thorough assessment of
symptom dimensions stratified by risk (genetic and
environmental) and resilience tiers allows for a true
precision medicine in clinical practice. In fact, this is
no different than what mental health professionals
exercise routinely when they formulate a case.
Current health care practice demands clinicians to
make quick decisions under pressure. Therefore, the
primary concern with the multidimensional psychosis
spectrum approach is whether it will be beneficial or
burdensome in the hectic routine of clinical practice
involving
ever-increasing
administrative
demands
236
S. Guloksuz and J. van Os
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291717001775
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 77.173.35.219, on 02 Jun 2019 at 13:09:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
 and chronic imbalance between clinical load and men-
tal health workforce across the world. Another argu-
ment against the utility of this approach is that
clinical decisions are often binary not dimensional:
admission v. discharge or treatment v. no treatment.
An additional obstacle stalling the implementation of
the dimensional approach in routine practice is the gen-
eral lack of data verifying its applicability in clinical set-
tings. Therefore, the next step should be to design
pragmatic clinical trials testing the utility of the dimen-
sional spectrum approach. These studies may yield
datato construct an empirical clinical course staging sys-
tem that is established on a dimensional formulation of
psychopathology
across
the
psychosis
spectrum.
Clinicians in the field might find this system more famil-
iar and handy in their dailyoperations: abstract, categor-
ical and more importantly allowing for a bidirectional
(up and down) shift between stages/types as opposed
to the supposedly static diagnostic categories. The diag-
nostic stability and consistency of psychotic conditions
identified based on current classifications are insuffi-
cient, mediocre even for the chronic, poor outcome frac-
tion diagnosed as schizophrenia. Diagnostic switches
are common because diagnostic classification often
relies on a snapshot of psychopathology, which in real-
ity varies over time. Nevertheless, there are other
important longitudinal elements that carry a lot of
weight with the clinician’s decision, such as the episodic
nature – Kraepelin indeed prioritized cyclicity above
other factors for discriminating manic-depressive insan-
ity and dementia praecox.
The DSM schizophrenia concept has been criticized
for: (i) overreliance on positive symptoms; (ii) negli-
gence of affective, negative and cognitive dimensions;
(iii) extraneous emphasis on Schneiderian first-rank
symptoms and subtyping, which were both removed
in the DSM5; and (iv) incompetency in overcoming
heterogeneity (the polythetic structure of the oper-
ational criteria further complicating the matter). The
value of the negative symptom domain for diagnosis
has been consistently demonstrated in empirical stud-
ies, long before the release of DSM-III (Carpenter
et al. 1973) – largely by means of predicting (albeit
with relatively low predictive value) poor outcome,
poor treatment response, and functional and cognitive
impairment (Milev et al. 2005; Ventura et al. 2009). Over
the years, the negative symptom domain has become
an active area of investigation in psychosis research
with hopes of reducing heterogeneity and developing
targeted treatment (Kirkpatrick et al. 2006).
Taking the debate on negative symptoms further,
the Maryland group conceived an appealing concept
to reduce heterogeneity: the deficit subtype of schizo-
phrenia, characterized by persistent primary negative
symptoms that are not secondary to depression,
mental retardation, positive psychotic symptoms and
medication use (Carpenter et al. 1988). There exist
some data – mainly from studies conducted by the
same group that coined the deficit syndrome – suggest-
ing a distinct disease entity: differences in clinical out-
come, risk factors and biological parameters between
deficit
and
non-deficit
types
of
schizophrenia
(Kirkpatrick & Galderisi, 2008).
However, several methodological issues require fur-
ther deliberation before drawing a conclusion. First, it
is extremely difficult to make a valid and reliable dis-
tinction between primary and secondary negative
symptoms, particularly in the context of enduring
symptoms. Second, although the presence of persistent
primary negative symptoms has been defined as the
core inclusion criterion for deficit syndrome, the influ-
ence of exclusion criteria to rule out secondary nega-
tive symptoms should also be taken into account
while interpreting findings. As a matter of fact, some
of the distinct clinical features observed in deficit
syndrome might have resulted from the exclusion
criteria: lower rates of substance abuse, depressive
symptoms, suicidal ideation and severe suspiciousness
(Kirkpatrick et al. 2001). Therefore, even if deficit syn-
drome constitutes a distinct disease entity within
schizophrenia; it is difficult to attribute biological and
aetiological differences to enduring primary negative
symptoms exclusively. If cognitive dysfunction and
negative symptoms are associated with the level of
functional impairment, this lends further support to
the suggestion that the staging strategy and multidi-
mensional approach would work better than the cur-
rent taxonomy with a fuzzy algorithm. In this regard,
the
flexible
and
integrated
spectrum
approach,
employing a staging system for clinical practice and a
multidimensional structure for research use, may pro-
vide us with the essential framework to elucidate
these enmeshed issues giving rise to often frustrating
heterogeneity.
The introduction of a staging system across the spec-
trum of psychosis would produce a durable strategy
(McGorry & van Os, 2013). In modern medicine, sta-
ging systems are frequently revised in the light of accu-
mulating evidence about pathoaetiology, technological
advancements and progress in treatment. Until a true
discovery, these modifications, taking place within
the illness spectrum, will not lead to a synthetic reclas-
sification of diagnosis with each revision – the diagnos-
tic category of a patient may artificially change over
time with each new release of the current classification
systems, e.g. the rise and fall of schizoaffective
disorder.
Given apparent flaws of schizophrenia, both com-
plementary and alternative paradigms, bearing a
resemblance to our speculations in the current article,
The slow death of the concept of schizophrenia
237
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291717001775
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 77.173.35.219, on 02 Jun 2019 at 13:09:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
 have been debated for a long time (Strauss & Gift,
1977; Bentall et al. 1988; Brockington, 1992; Boteva &
Lieberman, 2003; van Os, 2009; Keshavan et al. 2011).
Despite a series of demands for reconceptualization,
these scholarly communications (in particular, strat-
egies for clinical implementation) have been stuck at
the theoretical level. Given the call for a change coming
from highly influential scholars, one might ask why
these discussions failed to go beyond ‘Monday morn-
ing quarterbacking’.
There are likely various reasons for this lack of pro-
gress, but the most obvious and influential ones in
order of importance may be: (i) the influence of the
DSM stronghold with a monopoly mentality, killing
the competition in advance by not giving them a foot-
hold; (ii) the sunk cost fallacy or, despite clear lack of
progress, to continue to cling to the concept, because
an enormous amount of funding and time have been
invested in understanding schizophrenia overacentury.
The idea of schizophrenia as a distinct categorical
entity has recently been contested by the release of
the NIMH research initiative, the RDoC (Cuthbert &
Insel,
2010);
and
the
multidimensional
approach
slowly gaining a foothold in the DSM (Heckers et al.
2013). At last, these advances would generate most-
needed funding to foster more research incorporating
multidimensional assessment of transdiagnostic sam-
ples that would hopefully provide us with essential
data for a reconceptualization along spectrum lines.
However, the current construct of schizophrenia still
dominates the field as if there is no other reality with-
out its borders, and therefore remains to be an obstruc-
tion, which stagnate the efforts to prudent and feasible
solutions. Accordingly, limited data exist about how
we may feed dimensional assessment into a staging
system. For now, instead of repeating the mistake by
proposing a radical shift towards a new framework
offering unwarranted promises, we can modestly
start with following the footsteps of the reconceptuali-
zation of autism spectrum disorder: a single umbrella
disorder – psychosis spectrum disorder (PSD) – with
specifiers. Even this subtle revision will help the field
to rethink psychosis without the borders of schizophre-
nia and therefore clear the way for a better conceptual-
ization in the future.
This unifying approach, however, should not be
interpreted as a refutation of likelihood existence of
distinct diseases in the broad PSD – deconstruction
will eventually lead to a more stable reconstruction.
For now, the reconceptualization is merely acknow-
ledging the limits of our knowledge about PSD. Also,
the reconceptualization of PSD cannot be complete
without a semantic revision – the term ‘schizophrenia’
should be abolished.
In his self-reflection, looking back at his prolific career
spanning over 50 years, Carpenter states that his major
regret is his failure to be bold enough in pressing the
field for reconstructing schizophrenia (Carpenter, 2017).
We can learn from the past and finally show some collect-
ive courage to open up the discussion of how we could
replace the slowly dying schizophrenia concept.
Conclusion
Psychosis
remains
an
enigma;
despite
intensive
research, much remains to be elucidated in terms of aeti-
ology, diagnosis and treatment. Given this state of
affairs, perpetuating the diagnostic status quo has
been the default to date. Furthermore, schizophrenia is
a psychiatric tradition as much as a diagnosis, contribut-
ing to the identity of diagnosing professionals. In Japan
and South Korea, change was perhaps easier as the con-
cept of ‘splitting mind disease’ was imported from
another part of the world, making replacement with a
culturally more acceptable concept a viable option. In
Europe, the concept of schizophrenia is associated
with the origins of scientific psychiatry, something to
be proud of, a symbol of progression. However, with
the introduction of spectrum phenotypes in DSM5,
and an increasingly vocal movement for change
(George & Klijn, 2013; Henderson & Malhi, 2014;
Lasalvia et al. 2015; Moncrieff & Middleton, 2015) the
tipping point may have been reached. Just as schizo-
phrenia was the last diagnosis to benefit from research
linking to childhood adversity to adult mental health
outcomes (Read & Bentall, 2012), so may it be the last
to benefit from the advantages of a modern spectrum
diagnostic approach. There is hope for schizophrenia.
Acknowledgements
SG and JvO would like to acknowledge the European
Community’s
Seventh
Framework
Program
under
grant agreement No. HEALTH-F2-2009-241909 (Project
EU-GEI). Authors would like to thank Lotta-Katrin
Pries and Ilgin Guloksuz for their help with designing
the figures.
Declaration of Interest
None.
238
S. Guloksuz and J. van Os
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291717001775
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 77.173.35.219, on 02 Jun 2019 at 13:09:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
 Summary box
• With the introduction of spectrum phenotypes in
DSM5, and an increasingly vocal movement for
change,
the
tipping
point
may
have
been
reached. Just as schizophrenia was the last diag-
nosis to benefit from research linking childhood
adversity to adult mental health outcomes, so
may it be the last to benefit from the advantages
of a modern spectrum diagnostic approach.
• The current concept of schizophrenia, described by
diagnostic
guidelines
and
later
reified,
has
become detrimental to progress in mental health
by confining research efforts to a constantly
changing construct that does not exist in Nature.
• The current concept of schizophrenia, subject to
Berkson’s bias, represents only a minor fraction
with the worst outcome of a much broader and
under-researched spectrum phenotype, yet has
come to represent everything ‘psychotic’ – even
psychotic experiences in non-psychotic disorders
(‘Ultra-High Risk’).
• The current concept of schizophrenia overlooks evi-
dence indicating that psychosis expression is con-
tinuous across the general population and can,
therefore, be better explored using a quantitative
dimensional approach than a dichotomous dis-
tinction between ill and healthy on the basis of
arbitrary set points.
• The current concept of schizophrenia is far from
being specific, as evidenced by the significant
overlap between schizophrenia and other diag-
nostic constructs, concerning treatment, phenom-
enological expression, genetic liability, molecular
mediation and anatomical representation.
• The current concept of schizophrenia, dictated by
recent diagnostic manuals, is inadequate – even
misleading at times – to convey an in-depth
information to guide clinicians and patients in
the decision-making process.
• The current concept of schizophrenia, as the proto-
typic psychotic illness, sets a self-limiting barrier
to aspirational work of early intervention.
• The current concept of schizophrenia has led to the
transformation of a medical term to a loaded lay-
man’s term with various negative connotations.
• The current concept of schizophrenia represents iatro-
genic hopelessness (‘devastating genetic brain dis-
ease’),
resulting
in
internalized
negative
expectations and undermining the CHIME frame-
work guiding mental health services development.
References
Abel KM, Drake R, Goldstein JM (2010). Sex differences
in schizophrenia. International Review of Psychiatry 22, 417–
428.
Aleman A, Kahn RS, Selten JP (2003). Sex differences in the
risk of schizophrenia: evidence from meta-analysis. Archives
of General Psychiatry 60, 565–571.
Allardyce J, Morrison G, Van Os J, Kelly J, Murray RM,
McCreadie RG (2000). Schizophrenia is not disappearing in
south-west Scotland. British Journal of Psychiatry 177, 38–41.
Allardyce J, van Os J (2010). The natural history of the course
and outcome of schizophrenia. In Advances in Schizophrenia
Research 2009 (ed. W. F. Gattaz, G. Busatto), pp. 51–65.
Springer New York: New York, NY.
American Psychiatric Association (2013). DSM-5 Fact Sheets.
(https://www.psychiatry.org/psychiatrists/practice/dsm/
educational-resources/dsm-5-fact-sheets). Accessed 1
January 2017.
Andreasen NC (1989). The American
concept of schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin 15, 519–531.
Beauchamp G, Gagnon A (2004). Influence of diagnostic
classification on gender ratio in schizophrenia – a
meta-analysis of youths hospitalized for psychosis. Social
Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology 39, 1017–1022.
Bentall RP, Beck AT (2004). Madness Explained: Psychosis and
Human Nature. Penguin Books: London.
Bentall RP, Jackson HF, Pilgrim D (1988). Abandoning the
concept of ‘schizophrenia’: some implications of validity
arguments for psychological research into psychotic
phenomena. British Journal of Clinical Psychology 27(Pt 4),
303–324.
Bora E, Yucel M, Pantelis C (2009). Cognitive functioning in
schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder and affective
psychoses: meta-analytic study. British Journal of Psychiatry
195, 475–482.
Boteva K, Lieberman J (2003). Reconsidering the
classification of schizophrenia and manic depressive
illness--a critical analysis and new conceptual model. World
Journal of Biological Psychiatry 4, 81–92.
Brockington IF (1992). Schizophrenia: yesterday’s concept.
European Psychiatry 7, 203–207.
Bromet EJ, Naz B, Fochtmann LJ, Carlson GA,
Tanenberg-Karant M (2005). Long-term diagnostic
stability and outcome in recent first-episode
cohort studies of schizophrenia. Schizophrenia
Bulletin 31, 639–649.
Carpenter WT (2017). Fifty years: do over or move forward.
Schizophrenia Bulletin 43, 257–259.
Carpenter Jr. WT, Heinrichs DW, Wagman AM (1988).
Deficit and nondeficit forms of schizophrenia: the concept.
American Journal of Psychiatry 145, 578–583.
Carpenter Jr. WT, Strauss JS, Bartko JJ (1973). Flexible
system for the diagnosis of schizophrenia: report from the
WHO International Pilot Study of Schizophrenia. Science
182, 1275–1278.
Castle DJ, Wessely S, Murray RM (1993). Sex and
schizophrenia: effects of diagnostic stringency, and
The slow death of the concept of schizophrenia
239
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291717001775
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 77.173.35.219, on 02 Jun 2019 at 13:09:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
 associations with and premorbid variables. British Journal of
Psychiatry 162, 658–664.
Chase R (2008). Schizophrenia is a disease, so electrons aren’t
at risk. Nature 451, 127.
Cohen P, Cohen J (1984). The clinician’s illusion. Archives of
General Psychiatry 41, 1178–1182.
Confavreux C, Vukusic S (2006). Natural history of
multiple sclerosis: a unifying concept. Brain 129, 606–616.
Cougnard A, Marcelis M, Myin-Germeys I, De Graaf R,
Vollebergh W, Krabbendam L, Lieb R, Wittchen HU,
Henquet C, Spauwen J, Van Os J (2007). Does normal
developmental expression of psychosis combine with
environmental risk to cause persistence of psychosis? A
psychosis proneness-persistence model. Psychological
Medicine 37, 513–527.
Cuthbert BN, Insel TR (2010). Toward new approaches to
psychotic disorders: the NIMH Research Domain Criteria
project. Schizophrenia Bulletin 36, 1061–1062.
Demjaha A, Morgan K, Morgan C, Landau S, Dean K,
Reichenberg A, Sham P, Fearon P, Hutchinson G, Jones
PB, Murray RM, Dazzan P (2009). Combining dimensional
and categorical representation of psychosis: the way
forward for DSM-V and ICD-11? Psychological Medicine 39,
1943–1955.
Dominguez MD, Saka MC, Lieb R, Wittchen HU, van Os J
(2010). Early expression of negative/disorganized
symptoms predicting psychotic experiences and
subsequent clinical psychosis: a 10-year study. American
Journal of Psychiatry 167, 1075–1082.
Dominguez MD, Wichers M, Lieb R, Wittchen HU, van Os J
(2011). Evidence that onset of clinical psychosis is an
outcome of progressively more persistent subclinical
psychotic experiences: an 8-year cohort study. Schizophrenia
Bulletin 37, 84–93.
Dutta R, Greene T, Addington J, McKenzie K, Phillips M,
Murray RM (2007). Biological, life course, and
cross-cultural studies all point toward the value of
dimensional and developmental ratings in the classification
of psychosis. Schizophrenia Bulletin 33, 868–876.
Fusar-Poli P, Yung AR, McGorry P, van Os J (2014). Lessons
learned from the psychosis high-risk state: towards a
general staging model of prodromal intervention.
Psychological Medicine 44, 17–24.
Geekie J, Read J (2009). Making Sense of Madness: Contesting
the Meaning of Schizophrenia. Routledge: New York, NY.
George B, Klijn A (2013). A modern name for schizophrenia
(PSS) would diminish self-stigma. Psychological Medicine 43,
1555–1557.
Goodkind M, Eickhoff SB, Oathes DJ, Jiang Y, Chang A,
Jones-Hagata LB, Ortega BN, Zaiko YV, Roach EL,
Korgaonkar MS, Grieve SM, Galatzer-Levy I, Fox PT,
Etkin A (2015). Identification of a common neurobiological
substrate for mental illness. JAMA Psychiatry 72, 305–315.
Gottesman II, Shields J (1967). A polygenic theory of
schizophrenia. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America 58, 199–205.
Guloksuz S, van Nierop M, Lieb R, van Winkel R, Wittchen
HU, van Os J (2015). Evidence that the presence of
psychosis in non-psychotic disorder is environment-
dependent and mediated by severity of non-psychotic
psychopathology. Psychological Medicine 45, 2389–2401.
Hanssen M, Bak M, Bijl R, Vollebergh W, van Os J (2005).
The incidence and outcome of subclinical psychotic
experiences in the general population. British Journal of
Clinical Psychology 44, 181–191.
Harding CM, Zubin J, Strauss JS (1987). Chronicity in
schizophrenia: fact, partial fact, or artifact? Hospital and
Community Psychiatry 38, 477–486.
Heckers S, Barch DM, Bustillo J, Gaebel W, Gur R, Malaspina
D, Owen MJ, Schultz S, Tandon R, Tsuang M, Van Os J,
Carpenter W (2013). Structure of the psychotic disorders
classification in DSM-5. Schizophrenia Research 150, 11–14.
Hegarty JD, Baldessarini RJ, Tohen M, Waternaux C, Oepen
G (1994). One hundred years of schizophrenia: a
meta-analysis of the outcome literature. American Journal of
Psychiatry 151, 1409–1416.
Henderson S, Malhi GS (2014). Swan song for schizophrenia?
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry 48, 302–305.
Henquet C, Krabbendam L, Spauwen J, Kaplan C, Lieb R,
Wittchen H-U, van Os J (2004). Prospective cohort study of
cannabis use, predisposition for psychosis, and psychotic
symptoms in young people. BMJ 330, 11.
Hill SK, Reilly JL, Keefe RS, Gold JM, Bishop JR, Gershon
ES, Tamminga CA, Pearlson GD, Keshavan MS, Sweeney
JA (2013). Neuropsychological impairments in
schizophrenia and psychotic bipolar disorder: findings
from the Bipolar-Schizophrenia Network on Intermediate
Phenotypes (B-SNIP) study. American Journal of Psychiatry
170, 1275–1284.
Honings S, Drukker M, Groen R, van Os J (2016a). Psychotic
experiences and risk of self-injurious behaviour in the
general population: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Psychological Medicine 46, 237–251.
Honings S, Drukker M, van Nierop M, van Winkel R,
Wittchen HU, Lieb R, Ten Have M, de Graaf R, van
Dorsselaer S, van Os J (2016b). Psychotic experiences and
incident suicidal ideation and behaviour: disentangling the
longitudinal associations from connected psychopathology.
Psychiatry Research 245, 267–275.
Ioannidis JP (2005). Why most published research findings
are false. PLoS Medicine 2, e124.
Isvoranu AM, Borsboom D, van Os J, Guloksuz S (2016).
A network approach to environmental impact in psychotic
disorder: brief theoretical framework. Schizophrenia Bulletin
42, 870–873.
Ivleva EI, Bidesi AS, Keshavan MS, Pearlson GD, Meda SA,
DodigD,MoatesAF,LuH,FrancisAN,TandonN,Schretlen
DJ, Sweeney JA, Clementz BA, Tamminga CA (2013). Gray
matter volume as an intermediate phenotype for psychosis:
Bipolar-Schizophrenia Network on Intermediate Phenotypes
(B-SNIP). American Journal of Psychiatry 170, 1285–1296.
Jaaskelainen E, Juola P, Hirvonen N, McGrath JJ, Saha S,
Isohanni M, Veijola J, Miettunen J (2013). A systematic
review and meta-analysis of recovery in schizophrenia.
Schizophrenia Bulletin 39, 1296–1306.
Jablensky A (2010). The diagnostic concept of schizophrenia:
its history, evolution, and future prospects. Dialogues in
Clinical Neuroscience 12, 271–287.
240
S. Guloksuz and J. van Os
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291717001775
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 77.173.35.219, on 02 Jun 2019 at 13:09:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
 Joseph AJ, Tandon N, Yang LH, Duckworth K, Torous J,
Seidman LJ, Keshavan MS (2015). #Schizophrenia: use and
misuse on Twitter. Schizophrenia Research 165, 111–115.
Kapur S, Phillips AG, Insel TR (2012). Why has it taken so
long for biological psychiatry to develop clinical tests and
what to do about it? Molecular Psychiatry 17, 1174–1179.
Kaymaz N, Drukker M, Lieb R, Wittchen HU, Werbeloff N,
Weiser M, Lataster T, van Os J (2012). Do subthreshold
psychotic experiences predict clinical outcomes in
unselected non-help-seeking population-based samples? A
systematic review and meta-analysis, enriched with new
results. Psychological Medicine 42, 2239–2253.
Kaymaz N, van Os J, de Graaf R, Ten Have M, Nolen W,
Krabbendam L (2007). The impact of subclinical psychosis
on the transition from subclinicial mania to bipolar
disorder. Journal of Affective Disorders 98, 55–64.
Kelleher I, Keeley H, Corcoran P, Lynch F, Fitzpatrick C,
Devlin N, Molloy C, Roddy S, Clarke MC, Harley M,
Arseneault L, Wasserman C, Carli V, Sarchiapone M, Hoven
C, Wasserman D, Cannon M (2012). Clinicopathological
significance of psychotic experiences in non-psychotic young
people: evidence from four population-based studies. British
Journal of Psychiatry 201, 26–32.
Kendell R, Jablensky A (2003). Distinguishing between the
validity and utility of psychiatric diagnoses. American
Journal of Psychiatry 160, 4–12.
Kendler KS (2016a). Phenomenology of schizophrenia and
the representativeness of modern diagnostic criteria. JAMA
Psychiatry 73, 1082–1092.
Kendler KS (2016b). The transformation of American
psychiatric nosology at the dawn of the twentieth century.
Molecular Psychiatry 21, 152–158.
Keshavan MS, Nasrallah HA, Tandon R (2011).
Schizophrenia, ‘Just the Facts’ 6. Moving ahead with the
schizophrenia concept: from the elephant to the mouse.
Schizophrenia Research 127, 3–13.
Kirkpatrick B, Buchanan RW, Ross DE, Carpenter Jr.
WT (2001). A separate disease within the syndrome
of schizophrenia. Archives of General Psychiatry
58, 165–171.
Kirkpatrick B, Fenton WS, Carpenter Jr. WT, Marder SR
(2006). The NIMH-MATRICS consensus statement on
negative symptoms. Schizophrenia Bulletin 32, 214–219.
Kirkpatrick B, Galderisi S (2008). Deficit schizophrenia: an
update. World Psychiatry 7, 143–147.
Koike S, Yamaguchi S, Ojio Y, Ohta K, Ando S (2016). Effect
of name change of schizophrenia on mass media between
1985 and 2013 in Japan: a text data mining analysis.
Schizophrenia Bulletin 42, 552–559.
Krabbendam L, Myin-Germeys I, De Graaf R, Vollebergh
W, Nolen WA, Iedema J, Van Os J (2004). Dimensions of
depression, mania and psychosis in the general population.
Psychological Medicine 34, 1177–1186.
Kraemer HC (2007). DSM categories and dimensions in
clinical and research contexts. International Journal of
Methods in Psychiatric Research 16(Suppl 1), S8–S15.
Kraepelin E (1992). Die Erscheinungsformen des Irreseins:
(the manifestations of insanity). History of Psychiatry 3, 509–
529.
Lasalvia A, Penta E, Sartorius N, Henderson S (2015). Should
the label ‘schizophrenia’ be abandoned? Schizophrenia
Research 162, 276–284.
Leamy M, Bird V, Le Boutillier C, Williams J, Slade M
(2011). Conceptual framework for personal recovery in
mental health: systematic review and narrative synthesis.
British Journal of Psychiatry 199, 445–452.
Lee SH, Ripke S, Neale BM, Faraone SV, Purcell SM, Perlis
RH, Mowry BJ, Thapar A, Goddard ME, Witte JS, Absher
D, Agartz I, Akil H, Amin F, Andreassen OA, Anjorin A,
Anney R, Anttila V, Arking DE, Asherson P, Azevedo
MH, Backlund L, Badner JA, Bailey AJ, Banaschewski T,
Barchas JD, Barnes MR, Barrett TB, Bass N, Battaglia A,
Bauer M, Bayes M, Bellivier F, Bergen SE, Berrettini W,
Betancur C, Bettecken T, Biederman J, Binder EB, Black
DW, Blackwood DH, Bloss CS, Boehnke M, Boomsma DI,
Breen G, Breuer R, Bruggeman R, Cormican P, Buccola
NG, Buitelaar JK, Bunney WE, Buxbaum JD, Byerley WF,
Byrne EM, Caesar S, Cahn W, Cantor RM, Casas M,
Chakravarti A, Chambert K, Choudhury K, Cichon S,
Cloninger CR, Collier DA, Cook EH, Coon H, Cormand B,
Corvin A, Coryell WH, Craig DW, Craig IW, Crosbie J,
Cuccaro ML, Curtis D, Czamara D, Datta S, Dawson G,
Day R, De Geus EJ, Degenhardt F, Djurovic S, Donohoe
GJ, Doyle AE, Duan J, Dudbridge F, Duketis E, Ebstein
RP, Edenberg HJ, Elia J, Ennis S, Etain B, Fanous A,
Farmer AE, Ferrier IN, Flickinger M, Fombonne E, Foroud
T, Frank J, Franke B, Fraser C, Freedman R, Freimer NB,
Freitag CM, Friedl M, Frisen L, Gallagher L, Gejman PV,
Georgieva L, Gershon ES, Geschwind DH, Giegling I,
Gill M, Gordon SD, Gordon-Smith K, Green EK,
Greenwood TA, Grice DE, Gross M, Grozeva D, Guan W,
Gurling H, De Haan L, Haines JL, Hakonarson H,
Hallmayer J, Hamilton SP, Hamshere ML, Hansen TF,
Hartmann AM, Hautzinger M, Heath AC, Henders AK,
Herms S, Hickie IB, Hipolito M, Hoefels S, Holmans PA,
Holsboer F, Hoogendijk WJ, Hottenga JJ, Hultman CM,
Hus V, Ingason A, Ising M, Jamain S, Jones EG, Jones I,
Jones L, Tzeng JY, Kahler AK, Kahn RS, Kandaswamy R,
Keller MC, Kennedy JL, Kenny E, Kent L, Kim Y, Kirov
GK, Klauck SM, Klei L, Knowles JA, Kohli MA, Koller
DL, Konte B, Korszun A, Krabbendam L, Krasucki R,
Kuntsi J, Kwan P, Landen M, Langstrom N, Lathrop M,
Lawrence J, Lawson WB, Leboyer M, Ledbetter DH, Lee
PH, Lencz T, Lesch KP, Levinson DF, Lewis CM, Li J,
Lichtenstein P, Lieberman JA, Lin DY, Linszen DH, Liu C,
Lohoff FW, Loo SK, Lord C, Lowe JK, Lucae S, MacIntyre
DJ, Madden PA, Maestrini E, Magnusson PK, Mahon PB,
Maier W, Malhotra AK, Mane SM, Martin CL, Martin
NG, Mattheisen M, Matthews K, Mattingsdal M,
McCarroll SA, McGhee KA, McGough JJ, McGrath PJ,
McGuffin P, McInnis MG, McIntosh A, McKinney R,
McLean AW, McMahon FJ, McMahon WM, McQuillin A,
Medeiros H, Medland SE, Meier S, Melle I, Meng F,
Meyer J, Middeldorp CM, Middleton L, Milanova V,
Miranda A, Monaco AP, Montgomery GW, Moran JL,
Moreno-De-Luca D, Morken G, Morris DW, Morrow EM,
Moskvina V, Muglia P, Muhleisen TW, Muir WJ,
Muller-Myhsok B, Murtha M, Myers RM, Myin-Germeys
The slow death of the concept of schizophrenia
241
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291717001775
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 77.173.35.219, on 02 Jun 2019 at 13:09:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
 I, Neale MC, Nelson SF, Nievergelt CM, Nikolov I,
Nimgaonkar V, Nolen WA, Nothen MM, Nurnberger JI,
Nwulia EA, Nyholt DR, O’Dushlaine C, Oades RD,
Olincy A, Oliveira G, Olsen L, Ophoff RA, Osby U, Owen
MJ, Palotie A, Parr JR, Paterson AD, Pato CN, Pato MT,
Penninx BW, Pergadia ML, Pericak-Vance MA, Pickard
BS, Pimm J, Piven J, Posthuma D, Potash JB, Poustka F,
Propping P, Puri V, Quested DJ, Quinn EM,
Ramos-Quiroga JA, Rasmussen HB, Raychaudhuri S,
Rehnstrom K, Reif A, Ribases M, Rice JP, Rietschel M,
Roeder K, Roeyers H, Rossin L, Rothenberger A, Rouleau
G, Ruderfer D, Rujescu D, Sanders AR, Sanders SJ,
Santangelo SL, Sergeant JA, Schachar R, Schalling M,
Schatzberg AF, Scheftner WA, Schellenberg GD, Scherer
SW, Schork NJ, Schulze TG, Schumacher J, Schwarz M,
Scolnick E, Scott LJ, Shi J, Shilling PD, Shyn SI,
Silverman JM, Slager SL, Smalley SL, Smit JH, Smith EN,
Sonuga-Barke EJ, St Clair D, State M, Steffens M,
Steinhausen HC, Strauss JS, Strohmaier J, Stroup TS,
Sutcliffe JS, Szatmari P, Szelinger S, Thirumalai S,
Thompson RC, Todorov AA, Tozzi F, Treutlein J, Uhr M,
van den Oord EJ, Van Grootheest G, Van Os J, Vicente
AM, Vieland VJ, Vincent JB, Visscher PM, Walsh CA,
Wassink TH, Watson SJ, Weissman MM, Werge T,
Wienker TF, Wijsman EM, Willemsen G, Williams N,
Willsey AJ, Witt SH, Xu W, Young AH, Yu TW, Zammit S,
Zandi PP, Zhang P, Zitman FG, Zollner S, Devlin B, Kelsoe
JR, SklarP, DalyMJ, O’Donovan MC, CraddockN, Sullivan
PF, Smoller JW, Kendler KS, Wray NR (2013). Genetic
relationshipbetweenfivepsychiatricdisordersestimatedfrom
genome-wide SNPs. Nature Genetics 45, 984–994.
Lewine R, Burbach D, Meltzer HY (1984). Effect of diagnostic
criteria on the ratio of male to female schizophrenic
patients. American Journal of Psychiatry 141, 84–87.
Lieberman JA, First MB (2007). Renaming schizophrenia.
BMJ 334, 108.
Linscott RJ, Allardyce J, van Os J (2010). Seeking
verisimilitude in a class: a systematic review of evidence
that the criterial clinical symptoms of schizophrenia are
taxonic. Schizophrenia Bulletin 36, 811–829.
Linscott RJ, van Os J (2013). An updated and conservative
systematic review and meta-analysis of epidemiological
evidence on psychotic experiences in children and adults:
on the pathway from proneness to persistence to
dimensional expression across mental disorders.
Psychological Medicine 43, 1133–1149.
Lublin FD, Reingold SC, Cohen JA, Cutter GR, Sorensen
PS, Thompson AJ, Wolinsky JS, Balcer LJ, Banwell B,
Barkhof F, Bebo Jr. B, Calabresi PA, Clanet M, Comi G,
Fox RJ, Freedman MS, Goodman AD, Inglese M, Kappos
L, Kieseier BC, Lincoln JA, Lubetzki C, Miller AE,
Montalban X, O’Connor PW, Petkau J, Pozzilli C, Rudick
RA, Sormani MP, Stuve O, Waubant E, Polman CH (2014).
Defining the clinical course of multiple sclerosis: the 2013
revisions. Neurology 83, 278–286.
Mancuso SG, Morgan VA, Mitchell PB, Berk M, Young A,
Castle DJ (2015). A comparison of schizophrenia,
schizoaffective disorder, and bipolar disorder: results from
the second Australian national psychosis survey. Journal of
Affective Disorders 172, 30–37.
Maric N, Myin-Germeys I, Delespaul P, de Graaf R,
Vollebergh W, Van Os J (2004). Is our concept of
schizophrenia influenced by Berkson’s bias? Social
Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology 39, 600–605.
McAusland L, Buchy L, Cadenhead KS, Cannon TD,
Cornblatt BA, Heinssen R, McGlashan TH, Perkins DO,
Seidman LJ, Tsuang MT, Walker EF, Woods SW, Bearden
CE, Mathalon DH, Addington J (2015). Anxiety in youth at
clinical high risk for psychosis. Early Intervention in
Psychiatry. In press. doi: 10.1111/eip.12274.
McGlashan TH (1988). A selective review of recent North
American long-term followup studies of schizophrenia.
Schizophrenia Bulletin 14, 515–542.
McGlashan TH, Zipursky RB, Perkins D, Addington J,
Miller TJ, Woods SW, Hawkins KA, Hoffman R,
Lindborg S, Tohen M, Breier A (2003). The PRIME North
America randomized double-blind clinical trial of
olanzapine versus placebo in patients at risk of being
prodromally symptomatic for psychosis. I. Study rationale
and design. Schizophrenia Research 61, 7–18.
McGorry P, Nelson B (2016). Why we need a transdiagnostic
staging approach to emerging psychopathology, early
diagnosis, and treatment. JAMA Psychiatry 73, 191–192.
McGorry P, van Os J (2013). Redeeming diagnosis in
psychiatry: timing versus specificity. Lancet 381, 343–345.
McGorry PD, Hamilton M, Goldstone S, Rickwood DJ
(2016). Response to Jorm: headspace – a national and
international innovation with lessons for redesign of mental
health care in Australia. Australian and New Zealand Journal
of Psychiatry 50, 9–10.
McGorry PD, Yung AR, Phillips LJ, Yuen HP, Francey S,
Cosgrave EM, Germano D, Bravin J, McDonald T, Blair A,
Adlard S, Jackson H (2002). Randomized controlled trial of
interventions designed to reduce the risk of progression to
first-episode psychosis in a clinical sample with
subthreshold symptoms. Archives of General Psychiatry 59,
921–928.
McGrath J, Saha S, Welham J, El Saadi O, MacCauley C,
Chant D (2004). A systematic review of the incidence of
schizophrenia: the distribution of rates and the influence of
sex, urbanicity, migrant status and methodology. BMC
Medicine 2, 13.
McGrath JJ, Saha S, Al-Hamzawi A, Andrade L, Benjet C,
Bromet EJ, Browne MO, Caldas de Almeida JM, Chiu
WT, Demyttenaere K, Fayyad J, Florescu S, de Girolamo
G, Gureje O, Haro JM, Ten Have M, Hu C,
Kovess-Masfety V, Lim CC, Navarro-Mateu F, Sampson
N, Posada-Villa J, Kendler KS, Kessler RC (2016). The
bidirectional associations between psychotic experiences
and DSM-IV mental disorders. American Journal of
Psychiatry 173, 997–1006.
Milev P, Ho BC, Arndt S, Andreasen NC (2005). Predictive
values of neurocognition and negative symptoms on
functional outcome in schizophrenia: a longitudinal
first-episode study with 7-year follow-up. American Journal
of Psychiatry 162, 495–506.
242
S. Guloksuz and J. van Os
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291717001775
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 77.173.35.219, on 02 Jun 2019 at 13:09:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
 Miller TJ, McGlashan TH, Rosen JL, Cadenhead K, Cannon
T, Ventura J, McFarlane W, Perkins DO, Pearlson GD,
Woods SW (2003). Prodromal assessment with the
structured interview for prodromal syndromes and the
scale of prodromal symptoms: predictive validity, interrater
reliability, and training to reliability. Schizophrenia Bulletin
29, 703–715.
Moncrieff J, Middleton H (2015). Schizophrenia: a critical
psychiatry perspective. Current Opinion in Psychiatry 28,
264–268.
Morrison AP, French P, Stewart SL, Birchwood M, Fowler
D, Gumley AI, Jones PB, Bentall RP, Lewis SW, Murray
GK, Patterson P, Brunet K, Conroy J, Parker S, Reilly T,
Byrne R, Davies LM, Dunn G (2012). Early detection and
intervention evaluation for people at risk of psychosis:
multisite randomised controlled trial. BMJ 344, e2233.
Murray RM (1979). A reappraisal of American psychiatry.
Lancet 1, 255–258.
Murray RM (2017). Mistakes I have made in my research
career. Schizophrenia Bulletin 43, 253–256.
Murray RM, Sham P, Van Os J, Zanelli J, Cannon M,
McDonald C (2004). A developmental model for
similarities and dissimilarities between schizophrenia and
bipolar disorder. Schizophrenia Research 71, 405–416.
Nuevo R, Van Os J, Arango C, Chatterji S, Ayuso-Mateos JL
(2013). Evidence for the early clinical relevance of
hallucinatory-delusional states in the general population.
Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica 127, 482–493.
Perala J, Suvisaari J, Saarni SI, Kuoppasalmi K, Isometsa E,
Pirkola S, Partonen T, Tuulio-Henriksson A, Hintikka J,
Kieseppa T, Harkanen T, Koskinen S, Lonnqvist J (2007).
Lifetime prevalence of psychotic and bipolar I disorders in a
general population. Archives of General
Psychiatry 64, 19–28.
Perlis RH, Uher R, Ostacher M, Goldberg JF, Trivedi MH,
Rush AJ, Fava M (2011). Association between bipolar
spectrum features and treatment outcomes in outpatients
with major depressive disorder. Archives of General
Psychiatry 68, 351–360.
Poulton R, Caspi A, Moffitt TE, Cannon M, Murray R,
Harrington H (2000). Children’s self-reported psychotic
symptoms and adult schizophreniform disorder: a 15-year
longitudinal study. Archives ofGeneral Psychiatry 57, 1053–1058.
Read J, Bentall RP (2012). Negative childhood experiences and
mental health: theoretical, clinical and primary prevention
implications. British Journal of Psychiatry 200, 89–91.
Reininghaus U, Bohnke JR, Hosang G, Farmer A, Burns T,
McGuffin P, Bentall RP (2016). Evaluation of the validity
and utility of a transdiagnostic psychosis dimension
encompassing schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. British
Journal of Psychiatry 209, 107–113.
Reininghaus U, Priebe S, Bentall RP (2013). Testing the
psychopathology of psychosis: evidence for a general
psychosis dimension. Schizophrenia Bulletin 39, 884–895.
Ritsner MS, Gottesman II (2011). The schizophrenia
construct after 100 years of challenges. In Handbook of
Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders, Volume I: Conceptual Issues
and Neurobiological Advances (ed. M. S. Ritsner), pp. 1–44.
Springer: Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
Robins E, Guze SB (1970). Establishment of diagnostic
validity in psychiatric illness: its application to
schizophrenia. American Journal of Psychiatry 126, 983–987.
Rossler W, Riecher-Rossler A, Angst J, Murray R, Gamma A,
Eich D, van Os J, Gross VA (2007). Psychotic experiences in
the general population: a twenty-year prospective
community study. Schizophrenia Research 92, 1–14.
Russo M, Levine SZ, Demjaha A, Di Forti M, Bonaccorso S,
Fearon P, Dazzan P, Pariante CM, David AS, Morgan C,
Murray RM, Reichenberg A (2014). Association between
symptom dimensions and categorical diagnoses of
psychosis: a cross-sectional and longitudinal investigation.
Schizophrenia Bulletin 40, 111–119.
Saha S, Chant D, McGrath J (2007). A systematic review of
mortality in schizophrenia: is the differential mortality gap
worsening over time? Archives of General Psychiatry 64,
1123–1131.
Saha S, Chant D, McGrath J (2008). Meta-analyses of the
incidence and prevalence of schizophrenia: conceptual and
methodological issues. International Journal of Methods in
Psychiatric Research 17, 55–61.
Saha S, Chant D, Welham J, McGrath J (2005). A systematic
review of the prevalence of schizophrenia. PLoS Medicine 2,
e141.
Saha S, Scott JG, Varghese D, McGrath JJ (2011). The
association between general psychological distress and
delusional-like experiences: a large population-based study.
Schizophrenia Research 127, 246–251.
Sawa A, Snyder SH (2002). Schizophrenia: diverse
approaches to a complex disease. Science 296, 692–695.
Sharifi V, Eaton WW, Wu LT, Roth KB, Burchett BM,
Mojtabai R (2015). Psychotic experiences and risk of death
in the general population: 24–27 year follow-up of the
Epidemiologic Catchment Area study. British Journal of
Psychiatry 207, 30–36.
Shevlin M, McElroy E, Bentall RP, Reininghaus U, Murphy
J (2017). The psychosis continuum: testing a bifactor model
of psychosis in a general population sample. Schizophrenia
Bulletin 43, 133–141.
Smeets F, Lataster T, Dominguez MD, Hommes J, Lieb R,
Wittchen HU, van Os J (2012). Evidence that onset of
psychosis in the population reflects early hallucinatory
experiences that through environmental risks and affective
dysregulation become complicated by delusions.
Schizophrenia Bulletin 38, 531–542.
Smeets F, Lataster T, van Winkel R, de Graaf R, Ten Have
M, van Os J (2013). Testing the hypothesis that psychotic
illness begins when subthreshold hallucinations combine
with delusional ideation. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica 127,
34–47.
Spauwen J, Krabbendam L, Lieb R, Wittchen HU, van Os J
(2004). Does urbanicity shift the population expression of
psychosis? Journal of Psychiatric Research 38, 613–618.
Spauwen J, Krabbendam L, Lieb R, Wittchen HU, van Os J
(2006a). Evidence that the outcome of developmental
expression of psychosis is worse for adolescents growing up
in an urban environment. Psychological Medicine 36, 407–415.
Spauwen J, Krabbendam L, Lieb R, Wittchen HU, van Os J
(2006b). Impact of psychological trauma on the development
The slow death of the concept of schizophrenia
243
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291717001775
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 77.173.35.219, on 02 Jun 2019 at 13:09:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
 of psychotic symptoms: relationship with psychosis
proneness. British Journal of Psychiatry 188, 527–533.
Strauss JS, Gift TE (1977). Choosing an approach for
diagnosing schizophrenia. Archives of General Psychiatry 34,
1248–1253.
Sullivan G, Mittal D, Reaves CM, Haynes TF, Han X,
Mukherjee S, Morris S, Marsh L, Corrigan PW (2015).
Influence of schizophrenia diagnosis on providers’ practice
decisions. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 76, 1068–1074; quiz
1074.
Takahashi H, Ideno T, Okubo S, Matsui H, Takemura K,
Matsuura M, Kato M, Okubo Y (2009). Impact of changing
the Japanese term for ‘schizophrenia’ for reasons of
stereotypical beliefs of schizophrenia in Japanese youth.
Schizophrenia Research 112, 149–152.
Tamminga CA, Ivleva EI, Keshavan MS, Pearlson GD,
Clementz BA, Witte B, Morris DW, Bishop J, Thaker GK,
Sweeney JA (2013). Clinical phenotypes of psychosis in the
Bipolar-SchizophreniaNetworkonIntermediate Phenotypes
(B-SNIP). American Journal of Psychiatry 170, 1263–1274.
Thomas L (1973). Notes of a biology-watcher. Living
language. New England Journal of Medicine 289, 1298–1300.
Thompson A, Singh S, Birchwood M (2016). Views of early
psychosis clinicians on discontinuation of antipsychotic
medication following symptom remission in first episode
psychosis. Early Intervention in Psychiatry 10, 355–361.
Tighe SK, Mahon PB, Potash JB (2011). Predictors of lithium
response in bipolar disorder. Therapeutic Advances in Chronic
Disease 2, 209–226.
van Os J (2009). A salience dysregulation syndrome. British
Journal of Psychiatry 194, 101–103.
van Os J (2013). The dynamics of subthreshold
psychopathology: implications for diagnosis and treatment.
American Journal of Psychiatry 170, 695–698.
van Os J (2016). ‘Schizophrenia’ does not exist. BMJ 352, i375.
Van Os J, Delespaul P (2005). Toward a world consensus on
prevention of schizophrenia. Dialogues in Clinical
Neuroscience 7, 53–67.
van Os J, Gilvarry C, Bale R, van Horn E, Tattan T, White I,
Murray R (2000). Diagnostic value of the DSM and ICD
categories of psychosis: an evidence-based approach.
UK700 Group. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology
35, 305–311.
Van Os J, Guloksuz S (2017). A critique of the ‘ultra-high risk’
and ‘transition’ paradigm. World Psychiatry 16, 200–206.
van Os J, Linscott RJ, Myin-Germeys I, Delespaul P,
Krabbendam L (2009). A systematic review and
meta-analysis of the psychosis continuum: evidence for a
psychosis proneness-persistence-impairment model of
psychotic disorder. Psychological Medicine 39, 179–195.
van Os J, Reininghaus U (2016). Psychosis as a
transdiagnostic and extended phenotype in the general
population. World Psychiatry 15, 118–124.
van Os J, van der Steen Y, Islam MA, Guloksuz S, Rutten
BP, Simons CJ, Investigators G (2017). Evidence that
polygenic risk for psychotic disorder is expressed in the
domain of neurodevelopment, emotion regulation and
attribution of salience. Psychological Medicine 1–17. In press.
doi: 10.1017/S0033291717000915.
van Os J, Wright P, Murray R (1997). Follow-up studies of
schizophrenia I: natural history and
non-psychopathological predictors of outcome. European
Psychiatry 12(Suppl 5), 327s–341s.
van Rossum I, Dominguez MD, Lieb R, Wittchen HU, van
Os J (2011). Affective dysregulation and reality distortion: a
10-year prospective study of their association and clinical
relevance. Schizophrenia Bulletin 37, 561–571.
Van Snellenberg JX, de Candia T (2009). Meta-analytic
evidence for familial coaggregation of schizophrenia
andbipolardisorder.ArchivesofGeneralPsychiatry66,748–755.
Ventura J, Hellemann GS, Thames AD, Koellner V,
Nuechterlein KH (2009). Symptoms as mediators of the
relationship between neurocognition and functional
outcome in schizophrenia: a meta-analysis. Schizophrenia
Research 113, 189–199.
Waddington JL, Scully PJ, Youssef HA (1997).
Developmental trajectory and disease progression in
schizophrenia: the conundrum, and insights from a 12-year
prospective study in the Monaghan 101. Schizophrenia
Research 23, 107–118.
Werbeloff N, Drukker M, Dohrenwend BP, Levav I, Yoffe
R, van Os J, Davidson M, Weiser M (2012). Self-reported
attenuated psychotic symptoms as forerunners of severe
mental disorders later in life. Archives of General Psychiatry
69, 467–475.
Wigman JT, Lin A, Vollebergh WA, van Os J, Raaijmakers
QA, Nelson B, Baksheev G, Yung AR (2011). Subclinical
psychosis and depression: co-occurring phenomena that do
not predict each other over time. Schizophrenia Research 130,
277–281.
Wigman JT, van Nierop M, Vollebergh WA, Lieb R,
Beesdo-Baum K, Wittchen HU, van Os J (2012). Evidence
that psychotic symptoms are prevalent in disorders of
anxiety and depression, impacting on illness onset, risk,
and severity -- implications for diagnosis and ultra-high
risk research. Schizophrenia Bulletin 38, 247–257.
Wigman JT, van Os J, Abidi L, Huibers MJ, Roelofs J, Arntz
A, Kelleher I, Peeters FP (2014). Subclinical psychotic
experiences and bipolar spectrum features in depression:
association with outcome of psychotherapy. Psychological
Medicine 44, 325–336.
Woodberry KA, Seidman LJ, Bryant C, Addington J,
Bearden CE, Cadenhead KS, Cannon TD, Cornblatt BA,
McGlashan TH, Mathalon DH, Perkins DO, Tsuang MT,
Walker EF, Woods SW (2016). Treatment precedes positive
symptoms in North American adolescent and young adult
clinical high risk cohort. Journal of Clinical Child and
Adolescent Psychology 1–10. In press. doi:10.1080/
15374416.2016.1212361.
Yung AR, Yuen HP, McGorry PD, Phillips LJ, Kelly D,
Dell’Olio M, Francey SM, Cosgrave EM, Killackey E,
Stanford C, Godfrey K, Buckby J (2005). Mapping the
onset of psychosis: the comprehensive assessment of at-risk
mental states. Australian and New Zealand Journal of
Psychiatry 39, 964–971.
Zipursky RB, Reilly TJ, Murray RM (2013). The myth of
schizophrenia as a progressive brain disease. Schizophrenia
Bulletin 39, 1363–1372.
244
S. Guloksuz and J. van Os
https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291717001775
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. IP address: 77.173.35.219, on 02 Jun 2019 at 13:09:14, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at
