  
1 
Alzheimer’s disease in humans and other animals; a consequence of post-
reproductive lifespan and longevity rather than ageing 
Danièlle Gunn-Moore1, Oksana Kaidanovich-Beilin2, María Carolina Gallego Iradi3, Frank 
Gunn-Moore4 and Simon Lovestone5 
 
1. University of Edinburgh, Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Studies and The Roslin 
Institute, Easter Bush Campus, Roslin, EH25 9RG, UK  
2. Previously at: Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Toronto, Canada 
3. University of Florida, College of Medicine, Department of Neuroscience, Center for 
Translational Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA 
4. University of St Andrews, School of Biology, St Andrews, KY16 9TF, UK 
5. University of Oxford, Department of Psychiatry, Oxford, OX3 7JX, UK 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
2 
Abstract 
Two diseases of the modern world – Alzheimer’s and diabetes mellitus – are linked by 
epidemiology, genetics and molecular pathogenesis. They may also be linked by the 
remarkable observation that insulin signaling sets the limits on longevity. In worms, flies 
and mice, disrupting insulin signaling increases lifespan leading some to speculate that 
caloric restriction might extend lifespan in man. It is our contention that man is already a 
long lived organism, specifically with a remarkably high post-fertility life span, and that it is 
this that results in the high prevalence of Alzheimer’s and diabetes. We review evidence 
for this hypothesis that carries specific predictions including that other animals with 
exceptionally long post-reproductive lifespan will have increased risk of both diabetes and 
Alzheimer’s disease and present novel evidence that Dolphin, like man, an animal with 
exceptional longevity, might be one of the very few natural models of Alzheimer’s disease.  
 
  
3 
Main text 
Diabetes mellitus and Alzheimer’s disease 
As populations all over the world age, enormous challenges are posed by chronic 
disorders such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). 
Alzheimer’s disease in particular is a devastating condition. With a long prodromal period 
of perhaps ten to twenty years followed by another decade of clinical symptoms, AD and 
related dementia conditions are becoming a priority for many governments, not least as it 
is 
estimated 
that 
1% 
of 
global 
GDP 
is 
spent 
on 
dementia 
care 
(http://www.alz.co.uk/research/files/WorldAlzheimerReport2010.pdf). As well as growing 
older, the populations of the developed economies are also growing obese and sedentary. 
Whilst this is most marked in the developed nations, it is truly an international trend and as 
children in particular show dramatic increases in body mass index, this is a deeply 
concerning indicator of health problems to come. These health problems are significant as 
obesity increases risk of cancers, cardiovascular disease and metabolic syndromes 
including T2DM.  
 
These two health challenges – an ageing population at risk of neurodegenerative disease 
such as AD, and an increasingly obese population at risk of metabolic conditions such as 
T2DM – may seem unconnected and unfortunate consequences of modern civilization. It 
could be suggested that improved health care and sanitation leading to older populations, 
combined with seemingly unlimited access to highly processed and calorific foods and an 
increasingly sedentary lifestyle suggests entirely independent and environmental, or more 
specifically social and historical, causes of the twin challenges of AD and T2DM. It is our 
contention however, that this construct is only partially explanatory and that there is a 
molecular link between longevity and both AD and T2DM that suggests a relationship 
  
4 
whereby both arise not as an unfortunate consequence of growing older in the modern 
world, but are intrinsic to it. In other words that AD and T2DM are conditions not of ageing 
as they are usually considered, but of longevity. It is not so much how long an organism 
lives for that governs whether the organism is vulnerable in particular to AD, but the 
molecular mechanisms that underlie this period; a period that is highly characteristic for 
any given species. Moreover, that this longevity-associated disease risk explains why AD 
and T2DM are disorders principally of man. Here we propose a hypothesis that AD and 
T2DM are the price we pay for the molecular underpinning that allows us to be almost 
uniquely long-lived animals. 
 
Alzheimer’s disease is a form of dementia characterised by two main pathological lesions, 
the amyloid plaque and the neurofibrillary tangle. Whilst it remains contentious whether 
these lesions are themselves causative of the neuronal loss that results in functional 
deficits or whether they are simply indicative of an underlying process, the evidence from 
molecular genetics and experimental neuroscience is compelling that the amyloid cascade 
is at the heart of the pathology of AD [1]. This cascade involves first the generation of beta 
amyloid (A) from the Amyloid Precursor Protein (APP) and subsequently the aggregation 
of highly phosphorylated tau protein. Other processes including neuroinflammation clearly 
play a role, perhaps to exacerbate the amyloid cascade, perhaps triggered by the cascade 
or perhaps independently. In addition to genetic causes of familial early onset AD and 
genetic influences on late onset AD, a considerable effort has been expended on 
searching for environmental influences on AD. Despite this, relatively few have been 
identified and arguably, other than age itself only two – head injury and obesity/diabetes – 
have been unambiguously replicated [2, 3]. The evidence that diabetes and obesity 
increase the risk of dementia has been consistently reported from many epidemiological 
  
5 
studies, themselves the subject of multiple systematic reviews [4-9]. The mechanism 
underlying this risk might be at multiple levels, the most parsimonious of which might be 
that metabolic complications increases vascular damage to the brain and this either 
exacerbates AD pathology or is an additive or independent insult [3]. However, insulin 
resistance predicts the development of cerebral amyloid pathology as measured by PET 
imaging [10] and considerable evidence from cell and animal models suggests that a 
failure of insulin signaling directly contributes to AD pathological processes, including the 
formation of tau pathology as we discuss below.  
 
Insulin actions: role of Glycogen Synthase Kinase – 3 (GSK-3)  
For a failure of insulin signaling to effect the risk of AD directly rather than through a 
mediating factor such as vascular damage, then insulin resistance in the periphery should 
be reflected in insulin resistance in the brain. Considerable evidence suggests that this is 
in fact the case [11-13]. For example, in mid-life, peripheral insulin resistance is associated 
with central glucose metabolic abnormality as well as with poorer cognitive performance 
[14, 15] and predicts amyloid deposition [10]. In turn, there is evidence that central insulin 
signaling failure or abnormality can induce peripheral insulin resistance. In mice, ablation 
of insulin receptors (IR) either from the whole brain (neuronal-specific IR knockout, 
NIRKO) or specifically from hypothalamus or midbrain dopamine neurons, induces 
hyperphagia, body weight gain, and peripheral insulin resistance [16],[17],[18]. Also, brain-
specific genetic inactivation of the insulin receptor substrate 2 (IRS2) that is essential for 
insulin signaling, results in obesity and diabetic phenotypes [19].  
 
These data demonstrate a critical link between the CNS and the periphery and, 
importantly, both mice lacking the neuronal insulin receptor and those with IRS2 deleted 
  
6 
are characterized by elevated tau phosphorylation and cognitive alterations, both 
characteristics of AD [20, 21]. Moreover, animal models of aspects of AD pathology show 
dysregulated metabolism [22] providing further experimental evidence for an intertwining of 
the molecular mechanisms of metabolic function and insulin signaling with AD. This link, 
and the increased risk of dementia in people with diabetes, suggests that there may be 
therapeutic opportunities for AD in enhancing insulin signaling, or tackling insulin 
resistance. Real-world data studies suggest that the commonly used therapy for T2DM, 
Pioglitazone a PPAR agonist that enhances insulin signalling, reduces the incidence of 
AD, [23] and intranasal insulin beneficially alters APP processing and reduces cognitive 
impairment in early AD [24-26]. Large-scale trials of both intranasal insulin and 
pioglitazone are now underway. Whilst the outcomes of these trials are some years away it 
is clear that systemic insulin signaling disruption increases the risk of AD and might do so 
through shared molecular mechanisms and not simply through end-organ damage as a 
consequence of vascular or other T2DM-induced pathology.  
 
One such molecular mechanism that might plausibly underlie this link between insulin 
signaling in the brain and AD processes is mediated by Glycogen Synthase Kinase-3 
(GSK-3) initially discovered through its ability to phosphorylate glycogen synthase [27]. 
Given its critical role in insulin signaling it is not surprising that GSK-3 has been implicated 
in the pathogenesis of obesity and insulin resistance [28, 29], but it has also been shown 
to have a fundamental role in the pathogenesis of AD [30, 31]. Tau is a physiological 
substrate of GSK-3 and transgenic mice with increased GSK-3 activity have 
neurodegeneration phenotypes including tau hyperphosphorylation and cognitive 
impairments [32]. Even before neurodegeneration sets in, GSK-3 over-activity suppresses 
long term potentiation (LTP) [33], whilst inhibition of GSK-3 is required following LTP to 
  
7 
block long term depression (LTD) [34] suggesting that the normal regulation of GSK-3 is 
essential for synaptic plasticity [35]. If GSK-3 is altered in AD, then early neuronal 
dysfunction could be a consequence of this disruption of plasticity before tau becomes 
phosphorylated, aggregated and participates in pathological spread.  
 
Given the role of GSK-3 in synaptic plasticity, as well as other functions of neurons such 
as axonal transport [36] then it is not surprising that these functions become perturbed in 
the context of metabolic dysfunction such as insulin resistance, resulting in neuronal 
dysfunction and – for example – cognitive impairment. The finding that a failure of insulin 
signaling also results in AD pathology are in line with the concept that these 
neuropathological features represent a final common pathway of disease with multiple 
influences including in this context insulin signaling but also potentially other processes 
such as a failure of calcium homeostasis  for example [37]. 
 
Insulin signaling as a key regulator of longevity 
This evidence powerfully argues for a role of insulin signaling and its downstream 
molecules, in particular perhaps GSK-3, in AD pathogenesis. It would explain, in part, the 
epidemiological evidence that insulin resistance conditions such as T2DM are risk factors 
for AD. Insulin signaling however is also, remarkably, associated with longevity. In worms, 
flies and mice, perturbations in insulin signaling leading to decreased insulin response also 
lead to a substantially increased lifespan [38-41]. The increase in life span is considerable 
– in some animals a fold change in normal longevity and in mammals up to a 50% 
increase. Both caloric restriction resulting in a decreased responsiveness of the insulin 
signaling pathway and direct knock-out of insulin signaling and associated pathway genes 
have this effect. The effect is so large, and so consistent, that there are reports of people 
  
8 
attempting to extend their own lives through caloric restriction and many web-sites offer 
advice on how to do this with various levels of warning about the potential dangers of 
partial-starvation diets. Clearly there is much to recommend avoiding obesity or even the 
moderate over-weight state that is becoming the norm in the industrialized nations. 
Moreover, there is consistent evidence from two long primate studies and one long canine 
study for the benefits of caloric restriction on health, although they differ on whether caloric 
restriction increases lifespan in monkeys and dogs as it does in mice [42-45]. However, it 
remains to be seen, and remains highly controversial, as to whether caloric restriction will 
have effects on longevity in man.  
 
Man as an exception to the longevity thesis 
We believe that this argument, which regularly escapes into the non-scientific general 
media, is missing an important observation. Man is not like most other animals. 
Specifically, humans have a notably extended post-fertility lifespan (PFLS). Whilst some 
life beyond fertility is not uniquely human, indeed it is a characteristic shared with many 
mammalian species, as Cohen in his review of the relevant literature points out [46]. 
Nonetheless, even evaluating Cohen’s own review data, it is clear that as a proportion of 
total life span, humans have a remarkable and highly extended PFLS. Women cease to 
become fecund at a maximum age of ~45 years and lifespan in man is recorded to 110 
years and above. Also from Cohen’s review only one other animal was identified with an 
extended PFLS similar to man – the killer whale, Orcinus Orca, which has a total lifespan 
of twice the fertility span (see reference [46] Table 1). Theories abound regarding why man 
has such a remarkably extended PFLS, the most popular of which is the ‘grandmother 
hypothesis’ variants of which suggest an evolutionary advantage to having members of a 
close-knit hunter-gatherer unit available for child caring and other societal functions [47]. 
  
9 
Recently, similar reasoning has been extended beyond man to that other mammal with 
extended PFLS, Orcinus Orca [48-50], with a model demonstrating that improved 
reproductive success in younger individuals combined with the usefulness of non-fertile 
related individuals provides a selection pressure that could account for the evolution of 
menopause and an extended post-fertility life [51].  
 
However, regardless of the evolutionary origins of PFLS, the link between longevity and 
the insulin signaling pathway and between insulin signaling and AD suggests a hypothesis. 
This is that increasing longevity is achieved through increases in PFLS, the molecular 
underpinning of which is a reduced ‘efficiency’ of insulin and IGF signaling (IIS) and as a 
consequence of this reduced IIS, organisms with relatively increased PFLS are at 
relatively increased risk of AD. In such a hypothesis, the ‘efficiency’ of IIS might refer to 
decreased tonic activity or control over the pathway or decreased response, for example, 
of insulin to metabolic stimulus or of cell response to signaling, or some combination 
thereof. Whatever the specific mediators of the general mechanism of ‘efficiency of IIS’, 
the hypothesis we propose here brings some specific predictions. Most obvious, and most 
testable, is the prediction that the molecular and pathological characteristics of AD will be 
more common in animals with a relatively longer PFLS as a proportion of total lifespan. In 
other words, that plaques and tangles and associated molecular events will be correlated 
not with age per se but with longevity. We would predict the features of AD to be 
associated more with PFLS than with lifespan and to be a disease not only of man but of 
other animals with a long PFLS. Specifically, to be a disease in animals such as Orca 
more than of our closer relatives, such as the Chimpanzee.  
 
Do cetaceans, or other diving animals, have dementia? 
  
10 
We are unaware of any data on AD pathology, let alone cognitive and functional 
impairment in Orca. However, a related cetacean, Stenella coeruleoalba, the striped 
dolphin, has an average lifespan of ~58 years, and the females drop fecundity at 30 years 
giving them a PFLS of ~ 48 (Prof V Janik, Scottish Oceans Institute, University of St 
Andrews, personal communication), similar to the killer whale. Therefore, we set out to 
examine this hypothesis predicting that an animal with a long PFLS would have evidence 
of AD pathology hitherto not identified in free living, wild animals. To do this, we obtained, 
8 brains from stranded dolphins from different coastal areas of Spain. RNA extraction from 
this material allowed the identification of the coding region of the APP gene covering the 
40-43 amino acid region of the A peptide and was shown to be identical across 3 species 
of dolphins, Tursiops truncatus (bottlenose dolphin), Grampus griseus (Risso´s dolphin) 
and Stenella coeruleoalba, and man (Fig. 1A) suggesting that these species of dolphins 
could generate A from the precursor protein. Three specimens belonging to Stenella 
coeruleoalba species were immuno-positive for amyloid plaques and 4 (3 Stenella 
coeruleoalba and 1 Tursiops truncatus) for tau fibrillary tangles. Specifically, 2 types of 
amyloid deposits were visualised: firstly in the parietal cortex as diffuse deposits, and 
secondly in the cerebellum, the region of the brain used for echo-location, where there 
were structures that resembled more compact senile plaques (Fig. 1B). These latter 
amyloid deposits were up to 50 m in diameter and in some areas the plaques were 
relatively numerous. Neurites surrounding these plaques were immunopositive for tau, 
similar to that seen in cortical amyloid deposits in humans. In the frontal cortex, as well as 
in the parietal cortex, thalamus and cerebellum, there was evidence of tau pathology, for 
example, seen as well-defined neurofibrillary threads in the cortex of an adult animal (Fig. 
1C). In summary, these studies found evidence of both amyloid deposits and tau 
pathology in stranded dolphins including in the same individuals (see for example Figure 
  
11 
1E), making this animal one of very few naturally occurring models of an almost uniquely 
human disease. Clearly it would be of considerable interest to know whether the pathology 
we observe in these animals had effects on cognition and indeed on behaviour and 
although such studies are unlikely to be achievable in wild animals, it may be possible to 
determine the relationship between AD-like pathology and function in captive individuals. 
We note also with considerable interest that dolphins are also prone to T2DM, showing 
blood based indicators of insulin resistance [52] and possibly being a natural model of 
metabolic syndrome [53]. Whilst this is in line with our hypothesis we cannot know if the 
individuals in this case had such deficits in insulin signaling and response in part because 
the reference values for dolphin are less certain and in part because analysis of post-
mortem samples for analytes such as glucose and insulin is challenging in man [54, 55] 
and, to our knowledge, not informative in cetaceans.  
 
These findings suggest that full AD pathology – as well as T2DM - can occur in free-living, 
wild cetaceans. In addition, recent evidence suggests other changes, perhaps indicative of 
early AD, can be found in other sea mammals. Investigating the stranding and death of 
sea-lions suffering from domoic acid toxicosis due to blue-green algae, it has been 
reported that CSF from these animals shows evidence of changes indicative of 
neurodegeneration [56]. Using untargeted mass spectrometry proteomics methods, Neely 
et al found an excess of multiple complement proteins and gelsolin, proteins we and others 
have reported to be associated with AD [57, 58]. Other proteins found in the CSF of these 
animals include Neuronal Cell Adhesion Molecule and Reelin, both proteins previously 
having been implicated in AD pathology [59, 60]. Even more remarkably to our mind is the 
observation of altered Dickkopf 3 protein (DKK3) in sea lion CSF in that study. This is of 
considerable interest as the DKK proteins are the predominant negative regulators of wnt 
  
12 
signaling, the final effector of which is GSK-3 suggesting a possible link to both insulin 
signaling and to AD pathogenesis. Evidence for a role of DKK in AD abounds. DKK1 is 
increased by A in human brain and in animal models [61], inhibition or silencing DKK1 
prevents A induced synaptic loss [62] and we have shown DKK induction by A transmits 
the toxic signal through clusterin to not only neurotoxicity but also tau phosphorylation and 
cognitive impairment [63]. Not surprisingly, given these findings, DKK1 is now of 
considerable interest as a target for therapy [64]. Most of these studies have focused on 
DKK1 but not excluded the involvement of the other, highly similar, DKK proteins; 
however, in at least one study DKK3 co-localised with A pathology in AD brain [65] and 
was increased in CSF and plasma of people with AD [66].  
 
Alzheimer’s disease; just how common is it (in other animals)? 
The finding of both amyloid and tau pathology in dolphins, as we report above, is all the 
more remarkable an observation as AD pathology has only been rarely reported in other 
mammals [67]. In a recent, detailed and comprehensive review of the ageing brain in non-
human animals Youssef et al [67] find evidence of some features of human 
neurodegenerative disease in many animals although note considerable differences from 
human disease and the absence of a natural model linking the twin features of AD 
(plaques and tangles) with each other and neuronal loss and with cognitive impairment. 
Specifically, they note that highly phosphorylated tau but not NFTs are found in sheep, 
goats, cheetah, bison, baboon, and bears. Closer to man, non-human primates, including 
Chimpanzee, Orangutan, Gorilla, Baboon, Rhesus, Cynomolgus and Green monkeys are 
all found to have amyloid plaques but not NFTs (Youssef et al Table 1 [67]) 
 
  
13 
Just as in many of these animals, previous studies have found evidence in dogs (cross-
breeds and beagles) of amyloid, but not tau pathology [67]. Cohen (Table 1) indicates that 
dogs (beagles) have a PFLS of 23.3, though in reality this is breed specific [68, 69], and 
some families of beagles may be prone to premature senility and develop amyloid deposits 
but not neuritic plaques [70, 71]. Our hypothesis that PFLS associates with AD pathology 
would predict that breeds with a longer PFLS than Beagle would be likely to have more AD 
pathology including neuritic plaques.  
 
The domestic cat has a longer PFLS than dog, of 38 or more (Gunn-Moore, 2016 personal 
experience), and with reference to T2DM show pathology signs more akin to humans than 
any other non-primate[72]. Moreover, cats develop early amyloid changes but not plaques 
[73, 74] although In unpublished findings noted in Youssef et al [67], Nakayama reports 
neuronal cell loss in the hippocampus of aged cats associated with NFTs composed of 
highly phosphorylated tau. In a recent comprehensive neuropathological study, Chambers 
et al, quite remarkably, found the full extent of AD pathology and proposed the cat as a 
natural model of Alzheimer’s [75].In the context of the cat, many pet animals are neutered, 
and as such their fecundity will have been dramatically reduced, while their PFLS will have 
been markedly increased. Importantly, neutering increases not only longevity in our pets 
but also their risk of obesity, and as indicated above in relation to cats, an increase in 
T2DM. It is not known whether this increase in obesity and T2DM in neutered animals 
reflects the critical change in ‘IIS efficiency’ we postulate to be the molecular mechanism 
underlying the association between PFLS and AD or whether it is central as well as 
systemic. However, our hypothesis would suggest that, to the extent that it does, then 
evidence of AD pathology would be present in aged neutered cats. Just as inter-breed 
  
14 
studies in dog might be a means to test the hypothesis then studies in neutered cats might 
be a means to test the underlying molecular mechanisms.  
 
 
Conclusions and some suggestions for further study 
In summary then, the findings we report and review here suggest that, almost uniquely 
other than in man, sea mammals and cats might have AD-like neurodegeneration. This 
ranges from sea lions with domoic acid toxicosis having CSF markers also found in AD, to 
post-mortem amyloid and tau pathology in the brains of dolphins. Moreover dolphins are 
uniquely prone to a (pre-) diabetes state and are one of the few animals, alongside other 
cetaceans and man with a naturally long post-fertility lifespan. Cats have both T2DM and 
recent evidence suggests, full AD pathology and also have a moderately long PFLS albeit 
not as long as man and Orca. Is this sharing of AD pathology, diabetes and PFLS 
important? We suggest it is and this then is our hypothesis: that humans, at some point in 
our evolutionary history, acquired an insulin pathway trait characteristic that makes it less 
responsive to external signaling or less effective in transmitting this signal to targets 
generally or to GSK3 specifically. This characteristic results in longer life relative to other 
animals but also the twin diseases of T2DM and AD (Figure 2). This hypothesis does not 
imply that insulin signaling effects only longevity, nor that the effects of insulin signaling on 
metabolism, longevity and dementia are necessarily mediated through a single 
mechanism. Nor even that defects in IIS inevitably result in dementia. Clearly there might 
be independent mechanisms at play and indeed for such a critical signaling pathway with 
pleiotropic actions on fundamental processes of physiology it would be surprising if there 
were not independent influences on processes such as metabolism, longevity and 
dementia. However, here we postulate a linked mechanism that led us to hypothesize that 
  
15 
animals with unusual longevity would be at risk of both insulin resistance and Alzheimer’s 
disease, a hypothesis that led us to a prediction that cetaceans and cats would have AD 
pathology - a prediction for which we have provided some proof. 
 
This hypothesis has important consequences for our explanatory constructs of human 
evolution and also some testable predictions. First, in evolutionary theory there has been a 
robust debate regarding the PFLS in man with some arguing for the competitive 
advantages offered by the elder in early human societies – the so-called grandmother 
hypothesis [76]. Our proposal suggests that this theory might be arguing after the effect 
and the evolutionary driver may have been at a molecular level and theorists might 
productively search instead for a competitive advantage offered by a relatively less 
‘efficient’ or responsive insulin and IGF signaling pathway. Secondly, in terms of 
predictions that follow from our hypothesis, we would suggest that AD and T2DM would be 
relatively less common in non-human mammals and moreover pathological features of 
both diseases would occur most often in those animals with a relatively longer PFLS. 
Some aspects of AD pathology have been reported in a wide range of other animals 
although in almost all cases this is very incomplete making our report here of both neuritic 
plaque and tangle pathology in dolphin all the more remarkable. Further studies including 
large variable biomolecular studies such as those that have recently been reported in sea-
lion will be of interest in exploring the relationship between AD pathology and vulnerability 
to metabolic dysfunction in sea mammals and cats. However, testing the prediction that 
follows from our hypothesis quantitatively from such case reports from wild cetaceans is 
difficult and we would not advocate the use of captive cetaceans as experimental animals. 
So we propose a specific experiment. Recombinant inbred strain mice show both variation 
in lifespan and lifespan response to caloric restriction [77]. Our hypothesis would suggest 
  
16 
that these traits would be associated with insulin signaling phenotypes and moreover, and 
more surprisingly, with phenotypes relevant to Alzheimer’s disease such as A generation, 
tau expression and phosphorylation. Finally, a word to those individuals practicing caloric 
restriction to extend lifespan. If we are right, then it’s too late; we are already long-lived 
animals and the price we pay is Alzheimer’s disease.  
 
Acknowledgements 
Research in the author’s laboratories is supported by the NIHR, MRC, ARUK, Alzheimer’s 
Society, Wellcome Trust and the EU 
 
Competing interests 
The authors declare no competing interests. 
Display items 
Table 1: Lifespan and reproductive span across a range of animals (adapted from 
Cohen [46]) 
Cohen (1994) lists the mean Post Reproductive Life Span (PRLS, equivalent to the Post 
Fertility Lifespan, PFLS, used in the text of this paper and in this table) for a range of 
animals together with their maximum observed lifespan. Here we extract from Cohen, 
those where this data is known and have, where a range is given, have listed the mean 
value and in addition expressed the PFLS as a proportion of lifespan. We add data for 
man, and assume that 110 is a maximum lifespan, although older people have been 
recorded, and for PFLS have assumed a mean age at death of 85 years and a mean age 
of 
reproductive 
cessation 
of 
40 
years 
(see 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Age_and_female_fertility for discussion of age of fertility).  
 
  
17 
Figure 1: Alzheimer pathology in striped dolphin (Stenella coeruleoalba) brain. (A) 
Aβ42 amino acid alignment between three dolphin species and other mammals. (B) 
Amyloid plaques in cerebellum tissue from a Stenella coeruleoalba specime, AB2 (Araclon 
Biotech antibody, 1:750 specific for human beta-amyloid 40); (C) amyloid plaque in parietal 
cortex from Stenella coeruleoaba AB2 (Araclon Biotech antibody, 1:750 specific for human 
beta-amyloid 40); (D) neurofibrillary tangles in frontal cortex of Stenella coeruleoalba, 5A6 
antibody (Hybridoma Bank, 1:750); (E) neurofibrillary threads and plaques in parietal 
cortex of a single Stenella coeruleaoba specimen, 5A6 antibody (Hybridoma Bank, 1:750) 
 
Figure 2: Insulin signaling protects against Alzheimer’s disease at the cost of 
longevity 
 
We postulate that for a given stimulus the response of the insulin signaling pathway from 
generation of ligand through intracellular signaling to the effector of the pathway in the 
action of GSK3 which is inhibited by insulin signaling, varies giving a relative response that 
we characterize as ‘efficient’ or ‘inefficient’. Species level differences in the efficiency of 
response to stimulus will influence the relative lifespan, risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus 
(T2DM) and risk of Alzheimer’s disease (AD); a highly efficient response resulting in 
relatively shorter lifespan but reduced risk of T2DM and AD whereas a less efficient 
response increases post fertility lifespan (PFLS) and hence longevity but at the expense of 
risk of T2DM and AD. Note that this hypothesis emphasizes that the ‘efficiency’ of the 
insulin response system is as likely to be the actor in the evolutionary pressure resulting in 
longevity in man and Orca as the fact that we are both long lived animals.  
 
 
 
  
18 
References: 
[1] Hardy J. Has the Amyloid Cascade Hypothesis for Alzheimer's Disease been Proved? 
CurrAlzheimer Res. 2006;3:71-3. 
[2] Fleminger S, Oliver DL, Lovestone S, Rabe-Hesketh S, Giora A. Head injury as a risk 
factor for Alzheimer's disease: the evidence 10 years on; a partial replication. J Neurol 
Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2003;74:857-62. 
[3] Vagelatos NT, Eslick GD. Type 2 Diabetes as a Risk Factor for Alzheimer's Disease: 
The Confounders, Interactions, and Neuropathology Associated With This Relationship. 
Epidemiol Rev. 2013. 
[4] Xu W, Tan L, Wang HF, Jiang T, Tan MS, Tan L, et al. Meta-analysis of modifiable risk 
factors for Alzheimer's disease. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2015. 
[5] Meng XF, Yu JT, Wang HF, Tan MS, Wang C, Tan CC, et al. Midlife vascular risk 
factors and the risk of Alzheimer's disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J 
Alzheimers Dis. 2014;42:1295-310. 
[6] Lu FP, Lin KP, Kuo HK. Diabetes and the risk of multi-system aging phenotypes: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One. 2009;4:e4144. 
[7] Vagelatos NT, Eslick GD. Type 2 diabetes as a risk factor for Alzheimer's disease: the 
confounders, interactions, and neuropathology associated with this relationship. Epidemiol 
Rev. 2013;35:152-60. 
[8] Kopf D, Frolich L. Risk of incident Alzheimer's disease in diabetic patients: a systematic 
review of prospective trials. JAlzheimersDis. 2009;16:677-85. 
[9] Biessels GJ, Staekenborg S, Brunner E, Brayne C, Scheltens P. Risk of dementia in 
diabetes mellitus: a systematic review. Lancet Neurol. 2006;5:64-74. 
[10] Willette AA, Johnson SC, Birdsill AC, Sager MA, Christian B, Baker LD, et al. Insulin 
resistance predicts brain amyloid deposition in late middle-aged adults. Alzheimers 
Dement. 2015;11:504-10 e1. 
[11] Schioth HB, Craft S, Brooks SJ, Frey WH, 2nd, Benedict C. Brain insulin signaling and 
Alzheimer's disease: current evidence and future directions. Molecular neurobiology. 
2012;46:4-10. 
[12] Kullmann S, Heni M, Hallschmid M, Fritsche A, Preissl H, Haring HU. Brain Insulin 
Resistance at the Crossroads of Metabolic and Cognitive Disorders in Humans. Physiol 
Rev. 2016;96:1169-209. 
[13] Craft S. Alzheimer disease: Insulin resistance and AD--extending the translational 
path. Nat Rev Neurol. 2012;8:360-2. 
[14] Willette AA, Bendlin BB, Starks EJ, Birdsill AC, Johnson SC, Christian BT, et al. 
Association of Insulin Resistance With Cerebral Glucose Uptake in Late Middle-Aged 
Adults at Risk for Alzheimer Disease. JAMA neurology. 2015;72:1013-20. 
[15] Baker LD, Cross DJ, Minoshima S, Belongia D, Watson GS, Craft S. Insulin 
resistance and Alzheimer-like reductions in regional cerebral glucose metabolism for 
cognitively normal adults with prediabetes or early type 2 diabetes. Arch Neurol. 
2011;68:51-7. 
[16] Obici S, Feng Z, Karkanias G, Baskin DG, Rossetti L. Decreasing hypothalamic 
insulin receptors causes hyperphagia and insulin resistance in rats. Nat Neurosci. 
2002;5:566-72. 
[17] Bruning JC, Gautam D, Burks DJ, Gillette J, Schubert M, Orban PC, et al. Role of 
brain insulin receptor in control of body weight and reproduction. Science. 2000;289:2122-
5. 
  
19 
[18] Konner AC, Hess S, Tovar S, Mesaros A, Sanchez-Lasheras C, Evers N, et al. Role 
for insulin signaling in catecholaminergic neurons in control of energy homeostasis. Cell 
metabolism. 2011;13:720-8. 
[19] Taguchi A, Wartschow LM, White MF. Brain IRS2 signaling coordinates life span and 
nutrient homeostasis. Science. 2007;317:369-72. 
[20] Schubert M, Gautam D, Surjo D, Ueki K, Baudler S, Schubert D, et al. Role for 
neuronal insulin resistance in neurodegenerative diseases. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2004;101:3100-5. 
[21] Killick R, Scales G, Leroy K, Causevic M, Hooper C, Irvine EE, et al. Deletion of Irs2 
reduces amyloid deposition and rescues behavioural deficits in APP transgenic mice. 
BiochemBiophysResCommun. 2009;386:257-62. 
[22] Ruiz HH, Chi T, Shin AC, Lindtner C, Hsieh W, Ehrlich M, et al. Increased 
susceptibility to metabolic dysregulation in a mouse model of Alzheimer's disease is 
associated with impaired hypothalamic insulin signaling and elevated BCAA levels. 
Alzheimers Dement. 2016;12:851-61. 
[23] Heneka MT, Fink A, Doblhammer G. Effect of pioglitazone medication on the 
incidence of dementia. Ann Neurol. 2015;78:284-94. 
[24] Freiherr J, Hallschmid M, Frey WH, 2nd, Brunner YF, Chapman CD, Holscher C, et al. 
Intranasal insulin as a treatment for Alzheimer's disease: a review of basic research and 
clinical evidence. CNS Drugs. 2013;27:505-14. 
[25] Claxton A, Baker LD, Hanson A, Trittschuh EH, Cholerton B, Morgan A, et al. Long-
acting intranasal insulin detemir improves cognition for adults with mild cognitive 
impairment or early-stage Alzheimer's disease dementia. J Alzheimers Dis. 2015;44:897-
906. 
[26] Reger MA, Watson GS, Green PS, Baker LD, Cholerton B, Fishel MA, et al. Intranasal 
insulin administration dose-dependently modulates verbal memory and plasma amyloid-
beta in memory-impaired older adults. J Alzheimers Dis. 2008;13:323-31. 
[27] Embi N, Rylatt DB, Cohen P. Glycogen synthase kinase-3 from rabbit skeletal muscle. 
Separation from cyclic-AMP-dependent protein kinase and phosphorylase kinase. 
European journal of biochemistry / FEBS. 1980;107:519-27. 
[28] Kaidanovich O, Eldar-Finkelman H. The role of glycogen synthase kinase-3 in insulin 
resistance and type 2 diabetes. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2002;6:555-61. 
[29] MacAulay K, Woodgett JR. Targeting glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3) in the 
treatment of Type 2 diabetes. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2008;12:1265-74. 
[30] Hooper C, Killick R, Lovestone S. The GSK3 hypothesis of Alzheimer's disease. J 
Neurochem. 2008;104:1433-9. 
[31] Kremer A, Louis JV, Jaworski T, Van Leuven F. GSK3 and Alzheimer's Disease: Facts 
and Fiction. Front Mol Neurosci. 2011;4:17. 
[32] Lucas JJ, Hernandez F, Gomez-Ramos P, Moran MA, Hen R, Avila J. Decreased 
nuclear beta-catenin, tau hyperphosphorylation and neurodegeneration in GSK-3beta 
conditional transgenic mice. EMBO J. 2001;20:27-39. 
[33] Hooper C, Markevich V, Plattner F, Killick R, Schofield E, Engel T, et al. Glycogen 
synthase kinase-3 inhibition is integral to long-term potentiation. Eur J Neurosci. 
2007;25:81-6. 
[34] Peineau S, Taghibiglou C, Bradley C, Wong TP, Liu L, Lu J, et al. LTP inhibits LTD in 
the hippocampus via regulation of GSK3beta. Neuron. 2007;53:703-17. 
[35] Peineau S, Bradley C, Taghibiglou C, Doherty A, Bortolotto ZA, Wang YT, et al. The 
role of GSK-3 in synaptic plasticity. BrJPharmacol. 2008;153 Suppl 1:S428-S37. 
[36] Morfini G, Pigino G, Beffert U, Busciglio J, Brady ST. Fast axonal transport 
misregulation and Alzheimer's disease. NeuromolecularMed. 2002;2:89-99. 
  
20 
[37] Alzheimer's Association Calcium Hypothesis W. Calcium Hypothesis of Alzheimer's 
disease and brain aging: A framework for integrating new evidence into a comprehensive 
theory of pathogenesis. Alzheimers Dement. 2017;13:178-82 e17. 
[38] Kirkwood TB. Genes that shape the course of ageing. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 
2003;14:345-7. 
[39] Barbieri M, Bonafe M, Franceschi C, Paolisso G. Insulin/IGF-I-signaling pathway: an 
evolutionarily conserved mechanism of longevity from yeast to humans. AJP - 
Endocrinology and Metabolism. 2003;285:E1064-E71. 
[40] Piper MD, Selman C, McElwee JJ, Partridge L. Separating cause from effect: how 
does insulin/IGF signalling control lifespan in worms, flies and mice? Journal of internal 
medicine. 2008;263:179-91. 
[41] Partridge L, Piper MD, Mair W. Dietary restriction in Drosophila. Mechanisms of 
ageing and development. 2005;126:938-50. 
[42] Mattison JA, Roth GS, Beasley TM, Tilmont EM, Handy AM, Herbert RL, et al. Impact 
of caloric restriction on health and survival in rhesus monkeys from the NIA study. Nature. 
2012;489:318-21. 
[43] Colman RJ, Anderson RM, Johnson SC, Kastman EK, Kosmatka KJ, Beasley TM, et 
al. Caloric restriction delays disease onset and mortality in rhesus monkeys. Science. 
2009;325:201-4. 
[44] Huck JL, Biery DN, Lawler DF, Gregor TP, Runge JJ, Evans RH, et al. A longitudinal 
study of the influence of lifetime food restriction on development of osteoarthritis in the 
canine elbow. Vet Surg. 2009;38:192-8. 
[45] Lawler DF, Larson BT, Ballam JM, Smith GK, Biery DN, Evans RH, et al. Diet 
restriction and ageing in the dog: major observations over two decades. The British journal 
of nutrition. 2008;99:793-805. 
[46] Cohen AA. Female post-reproductive lifespan: a general mammalian trait. Biological 
reviews of the Cambridge Philosophical Society. 2004;79:733-50. 
[47] Hawkes K, Coxworth JE. Grandmothers and the evolution of human longevity: a 
review of findings and future directions. Evol Anthropol. 2013;22:294-302. 
[48] Brent LJ, Franks DW, Foster EA, Balcomb KC, Cant MA, Croft DP. Ecological 
knowledge, leadership, and the evolution of menopause in killer whales. Curr Biol. 
2015;25:746-50. 
[49] Foster EA, Franks DW, Mazzi S, Darden SK, Balcomb KC, Ford JK, et al. Adaptive 
prolonged postreproductive life span in killer whales. Science. 2012;337:1313. 
[50] Whitehead H. Life history evolution: what does a menopausal killer whale do? Curr 
Biol. 2015;25:R225-7. 
[51] Croft DP, Johnstone RA, Ellis S, Nattrass S, Franks DW, Brent LJ, et al. Reproductive 
Conflict and the Evolution of Menopause in Killer Whales. Curr Biol. 2017. 
[52] Venn-Watson S, Smith CR, Stevenson S, Parry C, Daniels R, Jensen E, et al. Blood-
Based Indicators of Insulin Resistance and Metabolic Syndrome in Bottlenose Dolphins 
(Tursiops truncatus). Frontiers in endocrinology. 2013;4:136. 
[53] Venn-Watson S, Carlin K, Ridgway S. Dolphins as animal models for type 2 diabetes: 
sustained, post-prandial hyperglycemia and hyperinsulinemia. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 
2011;170:193-9. 
[54] Palmiere C, Sabatasso S, Torrent C, Rey F, Werner D, Bardy D. Post-mortem 
determination of insulin using chemiluminescence enzyme immunoassay: preliminary 
results. Drug Test Anal. 2015;7:797-803. 
[55] Ojanpera I, Sajantila A, Vinogradova L, Thomas A, Schanzer W, Thevis M. Post-
mortem vitreous humour as potential specimen for detection of insulin analogues by LC-
MS/MS. Forensic science international. 2013;233:328-32. 
  
21 
[56] Neely BA, Soper JL, Gulland FM, Bell PD, Kindy M, Arthur JM, et al. Proteomic 
analysis of cerebrospinal fluid in California sea lions (Zalophus californianus) with domoic 
acid toxicosis identifies proteins associated with neurodegeneration. Proteomics. 2015. 
[57] Baird AL, Westwood S, Lovestone S. Blood-Based Proteomic Biomarkers of 
Alzheimer's Disease Pathology. Frontiers in neurology. 2015;6:236. 
[58] Aiyaz M, Lupton MK, Proitsi P, Powell JF, Lovestone S. Complement activation as a 
biomarker for Alzheimer's disease. Immunobiology. 2012;217:204-15. 
[59] Botella-Lopez A, Burgaya F, Gavin R, Garcia-Ayllon MS, Gomez-Tortosa E, Pena-
Casanova J, et al. Reelin expression and glycosylation patterns are altered in Alzheimer's 
disease. ProcNatlAcadSciUSA. 2006;103:5573-8. 
[60] Aisa B, Gil-Bea FJ, Solas M, Garcia-Alloza M, Chen CP, Lai MK, et al. Altered NCAM 
expression associated with the cholinergic system in Alzheimer's disease. J Alzheimers 
Dis. 2010;20:659-68. 
[61] Caricasole A, Copani A, Caraci F, Aronica E, Rozemuller AJ, Caruso A, et al. 
Induction of Dickkopf-1, a negative modulator of the Wnt pathway, is associated with 
neuronal degeneration in Alzheimer's brain. J Neurosci. 2004;24:6021-7. 
[62] Purro SA, Galli S, Salinas PC. Dysfunction of Wnt signaling and synaptic disassembly 
in neurodegenerative diseases. Journal of molecular cell biology. 2014;6:75-80. 
[63] Killick R, Ribe EM, Al-Shawi R, Malik B, Hooper C, Fernandes C, et al. Clusterin 
regulates beta-amyloid toxicity via Dickkopf-1-driven induction of the wnt-PCP-JNK 
pathway. Mol Psychiatry. 2014;19:88-98. 
[64] Wan W, Xia S, Kalionis B, Liu L, Li Y. The role of Wnt signaling in the development of 
Alzheimer's disease: a potential therapeutic target? BioMed research international. 
2014;2014:301575. 
[65] Bruggink KA, Kuiperij HB, Gloerich J, Otte-Holler I, Rozemuller AJ, Claassen JA, et al. 
Dickkopf-related protein 3 is a potential Abeta-associated protein in Alzheimer's Disease. J 
Neurochem. 2015. 
[66] Zenzmaier C, Marksteiner J, Kiefer A, Berger P, Humpel C. Dkk-3 is elevated in CSF 
and plasma of Alzheimer's disease patients. Journal Of Neurochemistry. 2009;110:653-61. 
[67] Youssef SA, Capucchio MT, Rofina JE, Chambers JK, Uchida K, Nakayama H, et al. 
Pathology of the Aging Brain in Domestic and Laboratory Animals, and Animal Models of 
Human Neurodegenerative Diseases. Vet Pathol. 2016;53:327-48. 
[68] Creevy KE, Austad SN, Hoffman JM, O'Neill DG, Promislow DE. The Companion Dog 
as a Model for the Longevity Dividend. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2016;6:a026633. 
[69] Hasegawa D, Yayoshi N, Fujita Y, Fujita M, Orima H. Measurement of interthalamic 
adhesion thickness as a criteria for brain atrophy in dogs with and without cognitive 
dysfunction (dementia). Vet Radiol Ultrasound. 2005;46:452-7. 
[70] Wisniewski T, Lalowski M, Bobik M, Russell M, Strosznajder J, Frangione B. Amyloid 
á 1-42 deposits do not lead to Alzheimer's neuritic plaques in aged dogs. BiochemJ. 
1996;313:575-80. 
[71] Russell MJ, White R, Patel E, Markesbery WR, Watson CR, Geddes JW. Familial 
influence on plaque formation in the beagle brain. Neuroreport. 1992;3:1093-6. 
[72] O'Brien TD. Pathogenesis of feline diabetes mellitus. Molecular and cellular 
endocrinology. 2002;197:213-9. 
[73] Gunn-Moore DA, McVee J, Bradshaw JM, Pearson GR, Head E, Gunn-Moore FJ. 
Ageing changes in cat brains demonstrated by beta-amyloid and AT8-immunoreactive 
phosphorylated tau deposits. J Feline Med Surg. 2006;8:234-42. 
[74] Gunn-Moore D, Moffat K, Christie LA, Head E. Cognitive dysfunction and the 
neurobiology of ageing in cats. J Small Anim Pract. 2007;48:546-53. 
  
22 
[75] Chambers JK, Tokuda T, Uchida K, Ishii R, Tatebe H, Takahashi E, et al. The 
domestic cat as a natural animal model of Alzheimer's disease. Acta neuropathologica 
communications. 2015;3:78. 
[76] Hawkes K. Grandmothers and the evolution of human longevity. Am J Hum Biol. 
2003;15:380-400. 
[77] Liao CY, Rikke BA, Johnson TE, Diaz V, Nelson JF. Genetic variation in the murine 
lifespan response to dietary restriction: from life extension to life shortening. Aging cell. 
2010;9:92-5. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
23 
Table 1: Lifespan and reproductive span across a range of animals (adapted from 
Cohen [46]) 
 
Order 
Scientific Name 
Common name 
Maximum 
recorded 
life span 
(years) 
Mean 
PFLS 
(years) 
PFLS as 
a % of 
maximum 
lifespan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Artiodactyla 
Bos primigenius 
Cattle 
30 
5 
16.7 
 
Cervus elaphus  
Red deer  
21 
3 
14.3 
Artiodactyla 
Carnivora 
Ovis canadensis 
Bighorn sheep  
19 
2 
10.5 
Canis domesticus 
Domestic dog 
(beagle) 
15 
3.5 
23.3 
Felis silvestris catus 
Domestic cat 
21* 
8 
38 
Carnivora 
Cetacea 
Panthera leo  
African Lion 
17 
1.8 
10.6 
Ursus maritimus  
Polar bear 
30 
4 
13.3 
Globicephalus 
macrorhyncus 
Short-finned pilot 
whale 
63 
14 
22.2 
Orcinus orcus 
Killer whale 
78 
38 
48.7 
Primates 
Callithrix jacchus 
 Common marmoset 
10 
2 
20.0 
Gorilla gorilla 
Gorilla 
30 
4.5 
15.0 
Primates 
Primates 
Lemur spp.  
Lemurs (five spp.) 
24 
3.5 
14.6 
Leontopithecus 
rosalia  
Golden lion tamarin 
12 
4 
33.3 
Macaca fuscata 
Japanese macaque 
35 
4.5 
12.9 
Macaca mulatta 
Rhesus macaque 
35 
2.5 
7.1 
Macaca nemestrina 
Pig-tailed macaque 
30 
4 
13.3 
Macaca radiata 
Bonnet macaque 
20 
6 
30.0 
Macaca sylvanu 
Barbary macaque 
28 
5 
17.9 
Pan troglodytes 
Common 
chimpanzee 
48 
9 
18.8 
Papio cynocephalus 
Olive baboon 
27 
5 
18.5 
Primates Papio 
cynocephalus 
/anubis hybrids 
Baboon 
16 
3.5 
21.9 
Saguinus fuscicollis 
Saddleback tamarin 
12 
4 
33.3 
Saimiri sciureus 
Squirrel monkey 
19 
3.5 
18.4 
 
 
 
 
 
Homo sapiens 
Man 
110 
45 
40.9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PFLS – post-fertility lifespan. 
*But very occasional much older cats have been found – e.g. 32 years of age (seen by author 
DGM). Importantly, long-lives cats are typically neutered. 
 
  
24 
 
 
