 Resource
Single-Cell Virology: On-Chip Investigation of Viral
Infection Dynamics
Graphical Abstract
Highlights
d High-throughput on-chip culturing and live-cell imaging of
single, infected cells
d Single-cell, temporal infection dynamics revealed bias of
population averaging
d Cells refractory to lysis exposed; infection thereof may lead to
viral persistence
d An antiviral agent was shown to target only a subset of the
viral population
Authors
Feng Guo, Sixing Li,
Mehmet Umut Caglar, ..., Claus O. Wilke,
Tony Jun Huang, Craig E. Cameron
Correspondence
tony.huang@duke.edu (T.J.H.),
cec9@psu.edu (C.E.C.)
In Brief
Guo et al. use a microfluidics device
installed on a fluorescence microscope to
monitor the kinetics of viral infection in
single cells. Between-cell variation in
outcomes of infection exists at all phases
of the life cycle. Cellular gene expression
governs the eclipse phase; viral genetics
govern replication rate and yield.
Guo et al., 2017, Cell Reports 21, 1692–1704
November 7, 2017 ª 2017 The Authors.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2017.10.051
 Cell Reports
Resource
Single-Cell Virology: On-Chip Investigation
of Viral Infection Dynamics
Feng Guo,1,5 Sixing Li,2,5 Mehmet Umut Caglar,3 Zhangming Mao,1 Wu Liu,4 Andrew Woodman,4 Jamie J. Arnold,4
Claus O. Wilke,3 Tony Jun Huang,1,2,6,* and Craig E. Cameron2,4,7,*
1Department of Engineering Science and Mechanics, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
2Molecular Cellular and Integrative Biosciences Graduate Program, The Huck Institutes of the Life Sciences, The Pennsylvania
State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
3Center for Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, and Department of Integrative Biology,
The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA
4Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
5These authors contributed equally
6Present address: Department of Mechanical Engineering & Materials Science, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA
7Lead Contact
*Correspondence: tony.huang@duke.edu (T.J.H.), cec9@psu.edu (C.E.C.)
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2017.10.051
SUMMARY
We have developed a high-throughput, microflui-
dics-based platform to perform kinetic analysis of
viral infections in individual cells. We have analyzed
thousands of individual poliovirus infections while
varying experimental parameters, including mul-
tiplicity of infection, cell cycle, viral genotype, and
presence of a drug. We make several unexpected
observations masked by population-based experi-
ments:
(1)
viral
and
cellular
factors
contribute
uniquely and independently to viral infection kinetics;
(2) cellular factors cause wide variation in replication
start times; and (3) infections frequently begin later
and replication occurs faster than predicted by pop-
ulation measurements. We show that mutational load
impairs interaction of the viral population with the
host, delaying replication start times and explaining
the attenuated phenotype of a mutator virus. We
show that an antiviral drug can selectively extinguish
the most-fit members of the viral population. Single-
cell virology facilitates discovery and characteriza-
tion of virulence determinants and elucidation of
mechanisms of drug action eluded by population
methods.
INTRODUCTION
RNA viruses exist as a population of genetically distinct variants,
often termed a quasispecies (Domingo and Holland, 1997; Laur-
ing and Andino, 2010). Productive infection of a cell by these
viruses requires a multitude of suitable cellular conditions,
including a cellular protein to serve as a receptor, amino acid
and nucleotide precursors for synthesis of viral proteins and
replication of viral nucleic acids, and myriad cellular factors to
permit virus multiplication. The extent to which a cellular gene
required for infection is expressed or whether and how a cell
responds to infection is stochastic (Battich et al., 2015; Domingo
and Holland, 1997; Lauring and Andino, 2010; Pelkmans, 2012;
Snijder and Pelkmans, 2011). This circumstance creates a pop-
ulation of phenotypically distinct cells in culture. The genetic vari-
ation of the RNA virus population and stochastic gene expres-
sion of the cell predict between-cell variability for the outcome
of an infection in each cell of a population. In fact, between-
cell variability in the kinetics of release of poliovirus (PV) from in-
fected cells was demonstrated decades ago (Lwoff et al., 1955).
Characterization of viral infections in cell culture continues to
rely on the measurement of the concentrations of infectious virus
using plaque assays and/or evaluation of the kinetics of infec-
tious virus production using one-step growth analysis. These
time-honored methods in molecular virology are population
methods that preclude the observation of between-cell vari-
ability. Consider the scenario in which 10% of infected cells pro-
duce 50% of viral progeny because only 10% of cells express
the full complement of host factors required for robust repli-
cation. This circumstance would complicate interpretation of
mutations in viral genes, reduced or ablated host factor gene
expression, or even drug treatment because only a 2-fold reduc-
tion to infection outcome would be observed at the population
level if all of the highest-yielding infections were eliminated.
Single-cell analysis of viral infections would not suffer this
complication. Indeed, studying viral infections on the single-cell
level should enhance our understanding of viral mutant pheno-
types, virus-host interactions, and/or antiviral therapeutic mech-
anisms. Previous studies of viral infection on the single-cell level
have been limited in the number of cells monitored, restricted to
high multiplicities of infection, unable to distinguish primary from
secondary infections, and/or unable to monitor a complete time
course of infection (Akpinar et al., 2015; Heldt et al., 2015; Schulte
and Andino, 2014; Thompson and Yin, 2010; Warrick et al., 2016).
Here, we used PV infection to determine the extent to which
studies on the single-cell level advance our understanding of vi-
rus biology beyond those performed on the population level. To
detect and characterize between-cell variation in the kinetics of
virus replication, we have assembled a multi-layer, pneumatically
1692
Cell Reports 21, 1692–1704, November 7, 2017 ª 2017 The Authors.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
 controlled, microfluidic cell-culture system with live-cell imaging.
Our single-cell approach illuminated the shortcomings of popula-
tion averaging on detection of the substantial variation in the
observed ranges for the duration of the eclipse phase, replication
speed, and virus yields. A most unexpected observation was that
as many as one-third of infections do not induce cell lysis, even
after 24 hr. We showed that both the virus and the cell cause be-
tween-cell variation and were able to construct a data-analysis
pipeline capable of assigning the contributions of each to specific
steps of the life cycle. Using this pipeline, we showed that a PV
mutant with perturbed quasispecies exhibited the greatest
defect at a cell-dependent step of the life cycle required to estab-
lish infection. Finally, we showed that an antiviral agent could
target a specific subset of infected cells, rather than targeting
the entire population in a uniform manner. We conclude that sin-
gle-cell virology represents a powerful addition to the molecular-
virology toolbox.
RESULTS
Biological System
The studies reported herein used a model RNA virus, PV, en-
coding the enhanced GFP (referred to throughout as GFP-PV,
Figure
1A).
We
used
GFP-PV
to
infect
HeLa
S3
cells
Figure 1. Isolation of Single Cells Is Essen-
tial for Interpretation of Replication Kinetics
When Monitored Using Fluorescence
(A) GFP-PV was created by inserting GFP-coding
sequence between the capsid-coding P1 region of
the genome and non-structural protein-coding P2
region. Translation of the RNA produces a poly-
protein; release of GFP is mediated by viral 2A
protease at cleavage sites flanking the protein.
(B and C) Cells were infected with GFP-PV at
a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 50 genomes per
cell and then either plated (B) or sorted into
wells (C).
(D and E) Time-lapse images of the evolution of
green fluorescence is shown. On the plate, it is not
possible to know whether the delayed kinetics of
replication is a result of the low MOI or the
requirement
for
multiple
rounds
of
infection
(D). Such ambiguity does not exist for the kinetics
of replication in single, isolated cells V.
Scale bars, 100 mm.
(Crotty et al., 2002). GFP fluorescence is
a well-established surrogate for replica-
tion of PV, as well as many other RNA vi-
ruses (Crotty et al., 2002). We did not
observe GFP fluorescence in the pres-
ence of the replication inhibitor, guani-
dine hydrochloride (Figure S1A). This
observation suggests that we observe
translation of replicated RNA but not
virion-derived RNA at the multiplicities
of infection (MOIs) used in our experi-
ments. However, we may be below the
limit of detection for the first round of
translation, which is not known. We performed all infections us-
ing a population of cells in suspension, and we monitored in-
fected cells using the methods described below. This approach
permitted us to compare outcomes of the same infections using
both population and single-cell methods (Figure S1A).
Requirement for Isolated Wells to Evaluate Infections of
Single Cells
Our initial experiments evaluated single cells in a monolayer after
infection under conditions in which fewer than 10% of cells were
infected. We used time-lapse imaging to monitor the change in
GFP fluorescence. We observed the greatest number of GFP-
positive cells at 12 hr post-infection (hpi) and longer (Figure 1B;
Movie S1). The generation time of PV at high MOI is in the 6- to
8-hr regime (Kallman et al., 1958). Therefore, this setup did not
permit us to distinguish delayed onset of replication due to the
low MOI from a second or third round of replication. An iso-
lated-well format did not suffer from this ambiguity (Figure 1C;
Movie S2). Both formats revealed between-cell differences in
the kinetics of GFP-PV replication (Figures 1D and 1E).
Microfluidic Device Design and Use
To monitor infections of single cells of sufficient statistical power
to reach meaningful conclusions, we fabricated a microfluidic
Cell Reports 21, 1692–1704, November 7, 2017
1693
 device capable of observing as many as 6,400 intracellular
events using fluorescence detection (Figure S2A). We designed
the device to accommodate as many as four independent exper-
iments by engineering four separate sample inlets, with each
inlet connected to 1,600 different wells (Figures 2A and S2A).
Once loaded, each well was isolated from the others by using
the integrated pneumatic-control lines (Figures 2A and S2A).
We demonstrated the effectiveness of the pneumatic seal by
showing that not all cells on chip could be infected, even when
a lytic infection occurred in an adjacent well (Movie S3). We
installed the device on the stage of an inverted fluorescence mi-
croscope equipped for cell culture (Figure S2B). We used a
motorized stage to monitor changes in fluorescence over time
automatically using time-lapse microscopy, with a snapshot
taken every 30 min for 24–36 hr (Figures 2B and S2). We
processed images using customized MATLAB and R codes to
produce time courses for GFP fluorescence (Figures 2B and S2).
Experimental Design, Data Acquisition, and Data-
Analysis Pipeline
Experiment
We infected HeLa S3 cells with GFP-PV at a MOI that guaranteed
infection of most cells. Note that the unit of MOI used in our
studies is genomes per cell instead of plaque-forming unit
(PFU) per cell because of the variable nature of the genome:PFU
ratio (Korboukh et al., 2014). On average, 1,000 GFP-PV ge-
nomes were required to establish a single plaque (Figure S1B).
We performed the infection off-chip and diluted infected cells
to a density that would maximize the number of wells containing
only one cell. We monitored wells for green fluorescence at
30-min intervals for a period of 24–36 hr. After accounting for
the empty wells and other events that precluded inclusion of a
well (Figure S3), 100 to 400 single cells were available for anal-
ysis. We normalized the fluorescence intensity of each cell to
the background fluorescence of its well and plotted normalized
fluorescence intensity (NFI) as a function of time post-infection
(Figure 2C). We observed substantial variation in the kinetics of
replication of GFP-PV in each cell (Figure 2C). The time in which
fluorescence could be detected, the rate at which fluorescence
intensity rose, the maximum fluorescence intensity observed,
and when the infected cell lysed, if at all, were different in each
of the cells (Figures 2C and S3). We plotted the average intensity
for each time point as a function of time, which yielded a curve
similar to a growth curve observed by population methods (Fig-
ure 2D). GFP was dispersed and diluted in the well as cells lysed,
leading to a reduction in GFP fluorescence (Figure 2D). The fluo-
rescence decay reached a plateau well above background levels
because not every cell producing GFP lysed over the 24-hr time
period monitored (Figures 2C and S3).
Data Analysis
We sorted all of the time courses of successful infections into two
classes: infection without lysis (Figures 2E and S3C) and infec-
tion with lysis (Figures 2F and S3D). We modeled the former as
a sigmoidal rise and the latter as a sigmoidal rise followed by a
sigmoidal decay. These models were sufficient to fit all of our
experimental
observations
(Figure
S3E).
We
defined
five
phenomenological parameters to describe the sigmoidal rise
that forms the foundation of our data analytics. These parame-
ters are (1) maximum, the maximum fluorescence intensity
observed; (2) midpoint, the time at which the intensity was half
of maximum; (3) slope, the change in intensity per hour
measured at the midpoint; (4) start point, the time at which fluo-
rescence was first detected; and (5) infection time, the length of
time required to go from the start point of fluorescence to the
maximum fluorescence (Figure S3). Details of the code used
for data analysis have been described (Caglar et al., 2017).
Implementation of the Pipeline
To test the ability of the single-cell experiment to identify statis-
tically significant differences in experimental outcomes caused
by an experimental variable or perturbation, we evaluated the
impact of varying the multiplicity of infection. We chose multiplic-
ity of infection because one-step-growth experiments demand
infection of all cells. The single-cell experiment does not, thus
providing an assessment of the dependence of infection
outcome on multiplicity of infection. We infected HeLa S3 cells
with 50, 500, or 5,000 genomes per cell, corresponding to MOI
of 0.05, 0.5, or 5, respectively, using PFU. We observed
93–202 individual cells that were successfully infected and
analyzed the data as described above to produce distributions
for each parameter at each MOI (Figures 2G–2K). We compared
the distributions for the maximum parameter under the three
different conditions; the curves did not completely superimpose
(Figure 2G). We were conservative in our approach to statistical
analysis. Instead of asking whether pairwise differences existed
for distributions and risking over-interpretation of the data, we
asked only whether pairwise differences existed in the mean of
the distributions (Table S1). Therefore, we used t tests to perform
statistical analysis and required p values less than 0.05 to define
a statistically significant difference between two distributions.
Using these criteria, the means of the maximum parameter
shown in Figure 2G were not different (Table S2). We observed
statistically significant differences for unique pairwise compari-
sons of the means for the slope and midpoint parameters (Fig-
ures 2H and 2I; Table S2). For the start-point parameter, 50
and 500 were different when compared to 5,000, but not when
compared to each other (Figure 2J; Table S2). For the infec-
tion-time parameter, 500 and 5,000 were different when
compared to 50, but not when compared to each other (Fig-
ure 2K; Table S2). We conclude that our pipeline is sufficient to
take a population-level evaluation of viral growth kinetics and
deconvolve this single curve into distributions of five funda-
mental parameters. Further, we conclude that we can identify
statistically significant differences between parameters caused
by an experimental variable, even a variable as insipid as multi-
plicity of infection. Importantly, we performed multiple experi-
ments with different stocks of WT virus and HeLa cells without
observing statistically significant differences for any of the
parameters (Table S3).
To determine whether the five parameters used to describe
infections on the single-cell level report on the same or different
biological properties or processes of the virus, host, and/or
interaction thereof, we performed a pairwise comparison of the
parameters (Figure 3). We reasoned that parameters governed
by the same biological properties or processes will be corre-
lated. We observed a strong correlation between the midpoint
and start-point parameters (Figure 3J) and weaker correlation
1694
Cell Reports 21, 1692–1704, November 7, 2017
 Figure 2. A Microfluidic Device and Experimental Paradigm for Single-Cell Analysis of Viral Infections
(A) We created a device that contains 6,400 wells. The use of four separate sample inlets (green) and pneumatic control lines (red) permits each well and its
contents to be sealed and therefore isolated from all other wells. Scale bar, 100 mm.
(B) The device permits real-time imaging of fluorescence in living cells. Infection of a cell by a virus expressing a fluorescent reporter should lead to a lag post-
infection (ti) that transitions into a replication phase that plateaus (tj) with an ultimate decline in fluorescence caused by lysis of the infected cell (tk).
(C) Plots of the fluorescence intensity observed in each well normalized to the background fluorescence of the well as a function of time revealed unprecedented,
between-cell variability in the outcome of infection.
(D) A plot of the average of the normalized fluorescence intensity (NFI) from the curves shown in (C) as a function of time reveals a curve similar in appearance to a
growth curve measured using population methods. Error bars indicated at each time point are from 202 individual infected cells. SEM ranged from 0.0008 to
0.0754 NFI.
(E–K) One of two models could be used to describe infection outcomes: (E) infection model; (F) infection and lysis model. Both models identify phenomenological
parameters that can be used to describe each curve. (G–K) These are maximum, slope, midpoint, start point, and infection time. The impact of MOI on
(G) maximum, (H) slope, (I) midpoint, (J) start point, and (K) infection time was determined. Statistical analysis of the distributions shown in (G)–(K) can be found in
Table S2.
(L) This experiment permits measurement of the percentage of infected cells, a parameter that can only be inferred from population methods. The impact of MOI
on the percentage of infected cells is shown. Data are represented as means ± SD for three biological replicates.
Cell Reports 21, 1692–1704, November 7, 2017
1695
 between maximum and slope parameters (Figure 3C). However,
all other pairwise comparisons were not correlated (Figure 3). We
conclude that parameters determined using the single-cell
experiment permit greater elaboration of an infection cycle
than permitted by population experiments.
Origins of the Between-Cell Variability of Infection
Outcomes
Cell Cycle Does Not Contribute to Between-Cell
Variability of Infection Outcomes
Our next goal was to determine the origin(s) of the between-cell
variability of infection outcomes and to assign parameters to
properties or processes of the virus and/or cell. The first hy-
pothesis was that between-cell variability arose, in part, based
on stages of the cell cycle. To test this hypothesis, we used fluo-
rescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) to divide cells into two
groups based on DNA content: G0/G1 and G2/M (Figure 4A).
An unsorted control was prepared by passing cells through the
FACS without sorting. We infected cells at an MOI of 500 ge-
nomes per cell. We did not observe a significant difference in
the average kinetics of the population (Figure 4B) or in any dis-
tributions describing the various parameters (Figures 4C–4G;
Table S4).
Contributions of the Virus and Cell to Between-Cell
Variability of Infection Outcomes
We conceived an alternative approach to reveal the origins of the
between-cell variability. If we infect cells with viruses expressing
reporters of different colors, then co-infected cells should exhibit
Figure 3. Independence of Parameters Describing Single-Cell Infections
Each parameter obtained by fitting time courses of GFP fluorescence was compared individually to all others: maximum to midpoint (A), start point (B), slope (C),
infection time (D), infection time to midpoint (E), start point (F), slope (G), slope to midpoint (H), start point (I), and midpoint to start point (J). With the exception of
start point and midpoint, parameters were not strongly correlated. Therefore, each parameter likely reports on different aspects of viral replication and/or the
interaction of the virus with the cell. The Pearson correlation coefficient (r) is indicated in each panel.
1696
Cell Reports 21, 1692–1704, November 7, 2017
 a strong correlation in production of the reporter if the cell is the
primary determinant of between-cell variability. Conversely,
co-infected cells should exhibit no correlation in production of
the reporter if the virus is the primary determinant of between-
cell variability. For this experiment, we substituted GFP-coding
sequence with that for mCherry to produce mCherry-PV. We
infected cells with both GFP-PV and mCherry-PV at an MOI of
2,000 genomes per cell. We selected co-infected cells for anal-
ysis. We determined each parameter for each virus in each co-in-
fected cell and plotted each parameter pair (Figure 5A). We did
not observe any correlation for the maximum, slope, or infec-
tion-time parameter, suggesting that the virus is the primary
determinant of the variability of these parameters (Figure 5A).
We observed a very strong correlation for the start-point and
midpoint parameters, suggesting that the cell is the primary
determinant of the variability of these parameters (Figure 5A).
We conclude that both the virus and the cell contribute to the
between-cell variability of infection outcomes. Importantly, our
experimental paradigm is able to separate infection outcome
into a virus component and a host component, which, in our
opinion, is a major advance to using a single-cell approach.
Determinants of Cell Lysis
In each experiment performed, we observed a fraction of in-
fected cells (15%–30%) that failed to lyse, even at time points
as long as 24 hr post-infection. To identify parameters governing
lysis, we compared distributions of each parameter for the two
infection outcomes: infection without lysis (Infection in Figure 5B)
and infection with lysis (infection and lysis in Figure 5B). We
observed statistically significant differences for the maximum,
slope, and infection-time parameters but not for the start-point
and midpoint parameters (Figure 5B; Table S5). Infections that
failed to progress to lysis replicated to lower levels, were slower,
and took a longer time to complete the replication cycle.
Because experiments above (Figure 5) link these parameters to
the virus, these results suggest that the failure to progress to lysis
may be conferred by viral genotype.
It was possible that the virus or cell dependence of the param-
eters change in cells that fail to progress to lysis. To address this
possibility, we performed an experiment in which cells were co-
infected with GFP-PV and mCherry-PV as described above.
Instead of evaluating all infections, however, we focused solely
on infections that failed to progress to lysis. We plotted the value
Figure 4. Cell Cycle Does Not Influence Outcome of Infection in Single Cells
(A) HeLa S3 cells were sorted into G0/G1 and G2/M groups by FACS as described under Experimental Procedures. Cells run through the FACS and collected
without sorting were used as unsorted control.
(B) Averaged curves of viral infection dynamics on single cells using unsorted cells, G0/G1 cells, and G2/M cells. Data are represented as means ± SEM.
(C–G) Distributions of maximum (C), slope (D), midpoint (E), start point (F), and infection time (G) revealed statistically insignificant contribution of cell cycle to the
heterogeneity of viral infection dynamics at the single-cell level (Table S4).
Cell Reports 21, 1692–1704, November 7, 2017
1697
 (legend on next page)
1698
Cell Reports 21, 1692–1704, November 7, 2017
 of each parameter for each virus pairwise. As observed previ-
ously for the entire population (Figure 5), start-point and midpoint
parameters were highly correlated (Figure 5C). Surprisingly, in
this sub-population of infections, maximum and slope parame-
ters were now also correlated (Figure 5C). If lysis were triggered
by the total amount of viral protein produced, we would expect to
see anti-correlations in these parameters in the sub-population
of cells not displaying lysis. Therefore, we conclude that whether
or not an infection fails to progress to lysis is in part determined
by cellular factors, or by viral factors unrelated to total protein
production. We will design experiments in the future to clarify
these issues.
Single-Cell Analysis Reveals Phenotypes for an
Attenuated Virus Masked by Population Methods
RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) fidelity is a well-estab-
lished virulence determinant (Arias et al., 2016; Arnold et al.,
2005; Korboukh et al., 2014; Pfeiffer and Kirkegaard, 2005; Van
Slyke et al., 2015; Vignuzzi et al., 2006; Zeng et al., 2013). Studies
with PV and its RdRp were among the first to make this connec-
tion by showing that changes in nucleotide-incorporation fidelity
of the RdRp produce viruses that are attenuated in vivo (Arnold
et al., 2005; Korboukh et al., 2014; Vignuzzi et al., 2006). How-
ever, when these same viruses were compared to wild-type
using conventional methods, a difference between the mutant
and wild-type could not be discerned (Korboukh et al., 2014;
Vignuzzi et al., 2006). This circumstance provided us with the
opportunity to determine whether single-cell analysis enables
distinction between a PV fidelity mutant and wild-type. For this
experiment, we used a PV mutant expressing a mutator RdRp,
H273R (Figure S4B) (Korboukh et al., 2014). We introduced the
H273R-encoding mutation into GFP-PV cDNA. In the context
of GFP-PV, the mutation caused only a small reduction in the
specific infectivity of the virus (Figure S1B).
We compared H273R PV to wild-type in infections using 50 or
5,000 genomes per cell. At low MOI, we observed only one sta-
tistically significant difference between the mutant and wild-type
(Figure 6; Table S6). This difference was for the start-time param-
eter (Figure 6G; Table S6). At high MOI, however, we observed
numerous differences: slope, midpoint, start point, and infection
time (Figure 6; Table S6). H273R PV exhibited a delayed start of
replication relative to wild-type (WT) PV (Figure 6H). Consistent
with biochemistry (Korboukh et al., 2014), H273R PV actually
replicates faster than WT PV (Figure 6D), leading to faster
completion of replication (Figure 6J). Because of our ability to
count the number of infections established, we observed directly
the reduced specific infectivity of H273R PV relative to WT
PV (Figure 6K). This analysis provided unprecedented, detailed
insight into the differences in growth properties of a mutant virus
relative to WT virus.
Some of the observed differences could actually explain the
attenuated phenotype. For example, delayed start point indi-
cates a sub-optimal interaction of the mutant virus with host
cell. In the context of a heightened antiviral state, a delayed start
point could produce new bottlenecks by diminishing the yield of
progeny by several logs (Figures S4C and S4D). The reduction in
the number of infections established at low MOI indicates a frailty
of the virus population to bottlenecking events. We conclude that
studies on the single-cell level will provide a more comprehen-
sive and in-depth perspective of virus biology and virus-host
interactions in cell culture that may inform our understanding
of pathogenesis in vivo.
Single-Cell Analysis Reveals More about an Antiviral
Agent Than Its Efficacy
Antiviral drug discovery and characterization represent a major
emphasis of molecular virology. Discovery and characterization
of antiviral agents are driven by the mission to minimize the IC50,
the concentration of drug required to inhibit virus multiplication
by 50%, and to maximize the CC50, the concentration of drug
required to cause cytotoxicity in 50% of treated cells. It was
apparent to us that our single-cell-analysis platform could pro-
vide information not only on the efficacy of a drug, but also on
the properties of the viruses most susceptible to drug action
as well as the fate and properties of the viruses that survive
drug action. It was also possible that we could determine
whether a drug targeted a cell-dependent and/or virus-depen-
dent aspect of the life cycle.
For this study, we chose to use 20-C-methyladenosine. Inside
of cells, this nucleoside is converted into the triphosphorylated
form, which then serves as a substrate for the viral RdRp and
leads to termination of RNA synthesis (Carroll et al., 2003). This
drug was the first in the class of non-obligate chain terminators
that paved the way for development of sofosbuvir, the antiviral
nucleoside used in combination therapy to cure hepatitis C virus
infection (Appleby et al., 2015; Carroll et al., 2003; Murakami
et al., 2010). We grew cells in the absence or presence of
50 mM 20-C-methyladenosine. Experiments performed at the
population level identified this concentration as the IC50. We
infected cells with WT PV at a MOI of 5,000 genomes per cell.
Figure 5. Contribution of Virus or Host to the Parameters Describing Viral Infection of Single Cells and Determinants of a Non-lytic Outcome
of Infection
(A) HeLa S3 cells were infected with GFP-PV and mCherry-PV at an MOI of 2,000 genomes (2 PFUs) per cell. Indicated parameters from co-infected cells were
plotted. Virus-dependent parameters will not exhibit a correlation between GFP and mCherry fluorescence; cell-dependent parameters will. The Pearson cor-
relation coefficient (r) is indicated in each panel. The virus determines the maximum, slope, and infection time, but the cell determines the start point and midpoint.
(B) Cells were infected with GFP-PV at an MOI of 500 genomes (0.5 PFU) per cell and monitored for 24 hr. We divided events into two categories: those that failed
to lyse during the 24-hr time period (Infection), and those that lysed (infection and lysis). Comparison of the distributions of all parameters is shown. Infections with
a non-lytic outcome showed a statistically significant reduction in the parameters for maximum, slope, and infection time, parameters thought to be governed by
the virus (Table S5).
(C) Cells were infected with both GFP-PV and mCherry-PV at an MOI of 2,000 genomes (2 PFUs) per cell and monitored for 24 hr. We divided events as described
above. Cells that were co-infected and failed to lyse over the 24-hr time period were analyzed for correlations as described in (A). In addition to parameters for
start point and midpoint, infected cells that failed to lyse exhibited strong correlation now in the parameters for maximum and slope, suggesting that the cell
contributes substantively to the lytic/non-lytic fate of the cell post-infection.
Cell Reports 21, 1692–1704, November 7, 2017
1699
 As expected, we observed a 50% reduction in the number of
infections established in the presence of 50 mM 20-C-methylade-
nosine (Figure 7A). Distributions for only two parameters
changed in the presence of the drug; these were for maximum
(Figure 7B) and slope (Figure 7C). The yield from replication
was reduced more than the rate of replication as might be ex-
pected for an RNA-chain terminator. A pairwise comparison of
the maximum and slope parameters in the absence and
Figure 6. Insight into the Mechanism of Attenuation of a Mutator PV
(A–J) Cells were infected at the indicated MOI with either WT PV or a mutant that exhibits a mutator phenotype, referred to here as H273R. WT was compared to
H273R at the two multiplicities indicated by evaluating the distributions for the values of the maximum (A and B), slope (C and D), midpoint (E and F), start point
(G and H), and infection time (I and J). This analysis revealed a significant delay in the start point for H273R relative to WT (Table S6).
(K) Analysis of the percentage of infected cells revealed a reduction in infections established by H273R relative to WT at low MOI. Data are represented as
means ± SD for three biological replicates.
1700
Cell Reports 21, 1692–1704, November 7, 2017
 presence of the drug revealed a selective loss of members of the
virus population exhibiting the highest values for the maximum
and slope (Figure 7G). This observation of survival of the least-
fit members of the viral population could be observed only using
a single-cell-analysis platform. We conclude that single-cell
analysis will provide greater insight into the mechanisms of
action, viral targets, and perhaps even cellular off-targets of
antiviral therapeutics.
DISCUSSION
The era of biology at the single-cell level is under way (Gawad
et al., 2016; Heath et al., 2016; Kolodziejczyk et al., 2015; Saa-
datpour et al., 2015; Symmons and Raj, 2016). Most studies
have relied on some physical method of separation to isolate
single cells followed by interrogation of individual cells for
some property: RNA, protein, etc. The major conclusion of these
studies is the existence of between-cell variability of the
measured property. This variability is often referred to as noise.
In relation to viral infection, the noisy nature of gene expression
would include between-cell differences in the expression of re-
ceptors for viral entry, pathogen recognition receptors, and any
of the many, many host factors contributing to establishment
of a productive viral infection. Therefore, it is not a surprise that
the few studies that have been performed to date evaluating vi-
rus infection at the single-cell level have succeeded in observing
Figure 7. Selective Extinction of the Most-Fit Members of the Viral Population by an Antiviral Ribonucleoside
GFP-PV was used to infect cells grown in the absence or presence of 50 mM 20-C-methyladenosine (20-C-meA), the IC50 value for this compound. Infected cells
were loaded in the device and growth continued in the absence or presence of the drug.
(A) Percentage of infected cells was reduced by roughly half in the presence of 20-C-meA. Data are represented as means ± SD for three biological replicates.
(B) The distribution of values for the maximum showed that cells with high values were preferentially eliminated by drug treatment.
(C) The distribution of values for the slope showed that cells with high values were preferentially eliminated by drug treatment.
(D–F) The distributions of values for the (D) midpoint, (E) start point, and (F) infection time were unaffected by drug treatment.
(G) A 2D analysis of values for the maximum versus values for the slope showed elimination of the most efficient replicators in the population by the drug. Area
eliminated in presence of drug is highlighted in yellow.
Cell Reports 21, 1692–1704, November 7, 2017
1701
 the noise in viral infection (Akpinar et al., 2015; Heldt et al., 2015;
Schulte and Andino, 2014; Thompson and Yin, 2010; Warrick
et al., 2016). The single-cell platform reported here permits
acquisition of complete time courses of infection for hundreds
of cells even at low multiplicity of infection (Figure 2).
The quantitative measure most often determined using a one-
step-growth experiment is virus yield. The eclipse and replication
phases tend to be used qualitatively, primarily because one-
step-growth curves are usually neither fit nor modeled. The
one-step-growth experiment also requires the use of a multiplic-
ity of infection in which every cell is infected, conditions prone to
co-infections that can mask phenotypes by genetic/phenotypic
complementation. Characterizing the behavior of a population
of infected cells based on the behavior of single, infected cells
expands substantively both the qualitative and quantitative
description of an infection without a requirement for a high mul-
tiplicity of infection.
We define
five
parameters
to
describe
each
infection:
maximum, slope, midpoint, start point, and infection time (Fig-
ure 2). These parameters relate to traditional parameters as
follows. Maximum corresponds to yield. Slope corresponds to
replication rate. Start point and midpoint correlate with eclipse
phase. Infection time corresponds to the time required to produce
the maximal amount of virus in the cell once the eclipse phase has
ended, similar to the generation time. We are able to determine
each parameter by plotting and fitting a time course of infection
for each cell (Figures 2 and S3). Next, we create a distribution for
each parameter (Figure 2).We calculate the mean ofeach distribu-
tion and the corresponding SD (Table S1). We use a t test to ascer-
tain any differences between two or more experimental conditions
(Tables S2–S7). Using this approach, we demonstrate that multi-
plicity of infection exhibits a profound effect on most parameters
(Figures 2 and S4). Infection in vivo and its associated bottlenecks
(Kuss et al., 2008) are mimicked by low multiplicity of infection, an
experimental design well suited to a single-cell platform.
We
observe a striking
difference
between
conclusions
reached when population averages are used instead of individ-
ual distributions. Consider the time course produced for the
average of the fluorescence intensity for infections of cells at a
high multiplicity of infection (Figure 2D). From this curve, one
would conclude that it takes on average to 4 hr post-infection
to start replication, another 4 hr thereafter to complete replica-
tion, and no additional replication occurs after 8 hr post-infection
(Figure 2D). The individual distributions tell a completely different
story. Only half of infections start by 5 hr post-infection (Figure 2J;
Table S1). Indeed, infections continue to begin even at 8-hr post-
infection (Figure 2J), a time in which the population average sug-
gests that replication has ended (Figure 2D). Replication is over
in nearly half of infected cells by 2.5 hr post-infection (Figure 2K).
Our studies on the single-cell level predict that similar under- and
over-estimations occur for population measurements like the
one-step-growth experiment. However, when infections are
measured in bulk on a scale of 108 PFUs/mL, a loss of half would
fall squarely within the error of the measurement. The inability of
an assay to explicitly report on as many as half of all events can
be problematic.
The PFU remains a gold standard of virology. When this
technique was pioneered for the study of bacteriophage, in
particular, measuring the concentration of bacteriophage, the
assumption was that each population of progeny virions associ-
ated with each plaque was founded by a single virion (Ellis and
Delbr€
uck, 1939). As the plaque assay came into vogue for the
study of animal viruses, similar assumptions were made (Dul-
becco, 1952; Dulbecco and Vogt, 1954). A few years ago, we
showed for PV that formation of a plaque required more than a
single genome (Korboukh et al., 2014). Similar conclusions
have been reached by others studying PV (Aguilera et al.,
2017) and vesicular stomatitis virus (Combe et al., 2015).
Together, these studies highlight the concept of an infectious
unit, the number of virions or genomes required to establish
infection of a cell. Here, we use the single-cell platform to count
the number of infected cells at any given multiplicity of infection,
multiplicity counted here as genomes per cell, thus permitting an
unambiguous calculation of an infectious unit (Figures 2L, 6K,
and 7A).
We use the single-cell platform to distinguish events that are
virus driven from those that are cell driven. Maximum and slope
parameters are correlated, suggesting that they are governed by
the same viral and/or cellular factors (Figure 3C). The same is
true for start-point and midpoint parameters (Figure 3J). All other
parameters report on unique viral and/or cellular factors (Fig-
ure 3). By co-infecting cells with viruses expressing different co-
lor reporters, we identify virus-dependent parameters as those
exhibiting no correlation of colors (maximum, slope, and infec-
tion time), and cell-dependent parameters as those exhibiting
correlation of colors (start point and midpoint) (Figure 5A). Inter-
estingly, infected cells that fail to readily lyse show a correlation
of colors for maximum and slope, suggesting that, in this
context, these parameters may now be cell driven (Figure 5C).
The ability to identify and characterize cell-dependent phenom-
ena will facilitate studies of virus-host interactions.
The single-cell platform revealed an unexpected interaction of
PV with a subset of cells, which did not support progression of
the infection to lysis over a 24-hr period (Figures 2, S2,
and S3). These infected cells limit both the rate of virus replica-
tion and yield of virus production (Figure 5B). As alluded to
above, this restriction appears to be more a property of the cell
than the virus (Figure 5C). The discovery of populations of in-
fected cells with this behavior may inform our understanding of
mechanisms of viral persistence or perhaps even mechanisms
of non-lytic viral spread. The existence of a population of in-
fected cells recalcitrant to lysis creates a challenge for experi-
ments designed to measure competitive fitness. Some of these
experiments compete two viruses at low multiplicity of infection
and measure the amount of each virus after multiple cycles of
infection and infection. Cells that restrict lysis will complicate
interpretation of experiments such as these.
Viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase fidelity as a determi-
nant of virulence represents an ever-increasing area of interest
because of the possibility to create vaccine strains by tuning po-
lymerase fidelity. Numerous examples exist of attenuated RNA
virus mutants encoding polymerases with fidelity higher or lower
than WT (Arias et al., 2016; Arnold et al., 2005; Korboukh et al.,
2014; Pfeiffer and Kirkegaard, 2005; Van Slyke et al., 2015; Vi-
gnuzzi et al., 2006; Zeng et al., 2013). However, these variants
often fail to exhibit a phenotype in cell culture. This is the case
1702
Cell Reports 21, 1692–1704, November 7, 2017
 for the mutator PV mutant, H273R PV (Korboukh et al., 2014). Us-
ing the single-cell platform, we show that H273R PV is unable to
establish infection as efficiently as WT (Figure 6). This phenotype
manifests as a delay in start point, longer midpoint, and fewer in-
fected cells at low multiplicity of infection (Figure 6). This result
suggests that WT levels of error incorporation generate a popu-
lation of virus variants essential for efficient hijacking of the cell
that maximizes start time and frequency of infection. The popu-
lation produced by the mutator is less effective at hijacking the
cell, a different perspective on the origin of the attenuated
phenotype of a fidelity mutant. Emphasis on the eclipse phase
(start point) as detected using the single-cell platform will illumi-
nate changes in the virus-host interaction that impact infection
outcomes in cell culture and may inform the pathogenic potential
of a virus variant in vivo.
Cell-based studies of antiviral therapeutics focus on efficacy
and resistance. Here, we show that the concentration of a drug
sufficient to extinguish half of a viral population is a concentration
that also antagonizes replication of survivors (Figure 7). The
parameters affected most are those that are virus dependent:
maximum and slope (Figure 7), as expected for an inhibitor
whose target is the viral polymerase. The absence of any effect
on the start point suggests that RNA synthesis during the eclipse
phase may not be required to establish infection. Perhaps trans-
lation of the infecting RNA genomes drives this early phase of the
life cycle, which might explain the requirement for so many ge-
nomes to establish infection (Korboukh et al., 2014). We show
that a polymerase inhibitor selectively eliminates members of
the virus population that replicate fastest and to the highest
levels (Figure 7G). This observation, while most unexpected, is
easy to reconcile as fast polymerases will exhibit a higher prob-
ability of drug incorporation; these same polymerases would be
expected to replicate fastest and produce highest yields. Is sur-
vival of the least-fit members of the population the outcome for
all antiviral drugs? One might expect that an inhibitor would act
equally across the population. Perhaps we have discovered an
unappreciated mechanism of action. The advantage of targeting
the most-fit members of a population is that development of
resistance requires the virus to not only develop resistance to
the drug but also restore fitness. Observations such as these
are impossible to make using population methods. The single-
cell platform will add important insight into our appreciation of
mechanisms of antiviral drug action and facilitate discovery of
antiviral drugs with a high barrier to resistance.
Virology has not witnessed an expansion of the tools used to
study the quantitative, kinetic behavior of viruses in cell culture
since the 1950s. The plaque assay and one-step-growth exper-
iment will continue to serve virology well. We view the addition of
platforms for single-cell analysis of viral infections to be as
impactful to virology as single-molecule methods have been to
enzymology and single-particle tracking has been to cell biology.
The era of single-cell virology is now.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Device Fabrication
The isolated well array microfluidic device was designed with drafting software
(AutoCAD). This device consists of four sample loading inlets (or more depend-
ing on the application) and 6,000 wells, each of which has a dimension of
120 3 120 3 100 mm (length 3 width 3 height). Designs including control layer,
flow layer, and wells layer (Figure S2A) were printed at 20,000 dots per inch
(dpi) on transparent masks. The silicon molds were fabricated with standard
photolithography techniques as described in Supplemental Experimental
Procedures.
Experimental Setup
The experimental setup of our platform for automated monitoring of single-cell
viral infections is shown in Figure S2B. The system was built on an inverted mi-
croscope (Eclipse Ti, Nikon) equipped with a motorized stage (ProScan III,
Prior Scientific) and a microscope incubation system (INUBTFP-WSKM-
GM2000A, Prior Scientific). The microfluidic device connected to a custom-
ized pneumatic valve system was placed inside the incubation chamber.
The cell/virus solutions were injected into the well array microfluidic device
through different outlets. After loading, the pneumatic valves (the pneumatic
control channels were filled with DI water) were closed by compressed nitro-
gen (30 psi) to seal single cells into each individual well and to prevent the
spread of virus into the neighboring wells. The cells were isolated in individual
wells and cultured in a 37�C humid environment with 5% CO2 level.
Data Acquisition and Processing
The time-lapse images (including bright field and fluorescence) of multiple
positions of the microfluidic device were automatically acquired with a
103 objective and a charge-coupled device (CCD) camera (CoolSNAP HQ2,
Photometrics) controlled by software (NIS-Elements AR, Nikon) every 30 min
for 21 or 33 hr starting at 3 hpi. Figure S2 shows the stitched images of wells
connected to one inlet and enlarged images of 12 wells at 4 different time
points. After data acquisition, the time-lapse images were processed with a
customized MATLAB script to extract fluorescence intensity of single infected
cells and background fluorescence intensity of the well. Additional details are
described in Supplemental Experimental Procedures.
Statistical Analysis and Data Availability
Statistical analysis was carried out in R. We used the R package sicegar
(Caglar et al., 2017) to classify observed time courses of normalized GFP inten-
sity and to extract relevant parameters such as maximum intensity, midpoint,
and slope. Mean parameter values among conditions were compared using
the R function pairwise.t.test, which performs pairwise comparisons of all con-
ditions while correcting for multiple testing. The accession number for all the
raw GFP time courses, processed data, and analysis scripts reported in this
paper is Zenodo: 1034347. These materials can be freely downloaded from
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1034347.
SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION
Supplemental Information includes Supplemental Experimental Procedures,
four figures, seven tables, and three movies and can be found with this article
online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2017.10.051.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
F.G. conceived the idea for the microfluidics platform used in the study. F.G.,
S.L., T.J.H., and C.E.C. designed the project. F.G., S.L., Z.M., W.L., and A.W.
conducted experiments, data acquisition, and/or created reagents for the
study. M.U.C. and C.O.W. created and implemented the data-analysis pipe-
line. F.G., S.L., J.J.A., C.O.W., T.J.H., and C.E.C. analyzed the data. F.G.,
S.L., J.J.A., C.O.W., T.J.H., and C.E.C. wrote the manuscript.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Prof. John Fricks for guidance on the preliminary statistical analysis,
Prof. Carl L. Hansen for a suggestion on device fabrication, and Dr. Cheri A.
Lee, Dr. Suresh Sharma, and Dr. Sravani Banerjee for guidance on the biolog-
ical aspects of the study. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the
Huck Institutes of the Life Sciences, NIH grants AI120560 (to C.E.C., T.J.H.,
Cell Reports 21, 1692–1704, November 7, 2017
1703
 and C.O.W.) and EB019785 (to T.J.H.), and the Penn State Center for Nano-
scale Science (MRSEC), which was funded by grant DMR-1420620 from the
NSF. Components of this work were conducted at the Penn State node of
the NSF-funded National Nanotechnology Infrastructure Network (NNIN).
Received: September 23, 2016
Revised: September 5, 2017
Accepted: October 13, 2017
Published: November 7, 2017
REFERENCES
Aguilera, E.R., Erickson, A.K., Jesudhasan, P.R., Robinson, C.M., and Pfeiffer,
J.K. (2017). Plaques formed by mutagenized viral populations have elevated
coinfection frequencies. MBio, Published online March 14, 2017. https://doi.
org/10.1128/mBio.02020-16.
Akpinar, F., Timm, A., and Yin, J. (2015). High-throughput single-cell kinetics of
virus infections in the presence of defective interfering particles. J. Virol. 90,
1599–1612.
Appleby, T.C., Perry, J.K., Murakami, E., Barauskas, O., Feng, J., Cho, A., Fox,
D., 3rd, Wetmore, D.R., McGrath, M.E., Ray, A.S., et al. (2015). Viral replication.
Structural basis for RNA replication by the hepatitis C virus polymerase. Sci-
ence 347, 771–775.
Arias, A., Thorne, L., Ghurburrun, E., Bailey, D., and Goodfellow, I. (2016).
Norovirus polymerase fidelity contributes to viral transmission in vivo.
MSphere, Published online October 26, 2016. https://doi.org/10.1128/
mSphere.00279-16.
Arnold, J.J., Vignuzzi, M., Stone, J.K., Andino, R., and Cameron, C.E. (2005).
Remote site control of an active site fidelity checkpoint in a viral RNA-depen-
dent RNA polymerase. J. Biol. Chem. 280, 25706–25716.
Battich, N., Stoeger, T., and Pelkmans, L. (2015). Control of transcript vari-
ability in single mammalian cells. Cell 163, 1596–1610.
Caglar, M.U., Teufel, A.I., and Wilke, C.O. (2017). Sicegar: R package for
sigmoidal and double-sigmoidal curve fitting. PeerJ Preprints 5, e3116v1.
Carroll, S.S., Tomassini, J.E., Bosserman, M., Getty, K., Stahlhut, M.W.,
Eldrup, A.B., Bhat, B., Hall, D., Simcoe, A.L., LaFemina, R., et al. (2003). Inhi-
bition of hepatitis C virus RNA replication by 20-modified nucleoside analogs.
J. Biol. Chem. 278, 11979–11984.
Combe, M., Garijo, R., Geller, R., Cuevas, J.M., and Sanjua
´ n, R. (2015). Single-
cell analysis of RNA virus infection identifies multiple genetically diverse viral
genomes within single infectious units. Cell Host Microbe 18, 424–432.
Crotty, S., Hix, L., Sigal, L.J., and Andino, R. (2002). Poliovirus pathogenesis in
a new poliovirus receptor transgenic mouse model: Age-dependent paralysis
and a mucosal route of infection. J. Gen. Virol. 83, 1707–1720.
Domingo, E., and Holland, J.J. (1997). RNA virus mutations and fitness for sur-
vival. Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 51, 151–178.
Dulbecco, R. (1952). Production of plaques in monolayer tissue cultures by sin-
gle particles of an animal virus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 38, 747–752.
Dulbecco, R., and Vogt, M. (1954). Plaque formation and isolation of pure lines
with poliomyelitis viruses. J. Exp. Med. 99, 167–182.
Ellis, E.L., and Delbr€
uck, M. (1939). The growth of bacteriophage. J. Gen.
Physiol. 22, 365–384.
Gawad, C., Koh, W., and Quake, S.R. (2016). Single-cell genome sequencing:
Current state of the science. Nat. Rev. Genet. 17, 175–188.
Heath, J.R., Ribas, A., and Mischel, P.S. (2016). Single-cell analysis tools for
drug discovery and development. Nat. Rev. Drug Discov. 15, 204–216.
Heldt, F.S., Kupke, S.Y., Dorl, S., Reichl, U., and Frensing, T. (2015). Single-cell
analysis and stochastic modelling unveil large cell-to-cell variability in influenza
A virus infection. Nat. Commun. 6, 8938.
Kallman, F., Williams, R.C., Dulbecco, R., and Vogt, M. (1958). Fine structure of
changes produced in cultured cells sampled at specified intervals during a sin-
gle growth cycle of polio virus. J. Biophys. Biochem. Cytol. 4, 301–308.
Kolodziejczyk, A.A., Kim, J.K., Svensson, V., Marioni, J.C., and Teichmann,
S.A. (2015). The technology and biology of single-cell RNA sequencing. Mol.
Cell 58, 610–620.
Korboukh, V.K., Lee, C.A., Acevedo, A., Vignuzzi, M., Xiao, Y., Arnold, J.J.,
Hemperly, S., Graci, J.D., August, A., Andino, R., and Cameron, C.E. (2014).
RNA virus population diversity, an optimum for maximal fitness and virulence.
J. Biol. Chem. 289, 29531–29544.
Kuss, S.K., Etheredge, C.A., and Pfeiffer, J.K. (2008). Multiple host barriers
restrict poliovirus trafficking in mice. PLoS Pathog. 4, e1000082.
Lauring, A.S., and Andino, R. (2010). Quasispecies theory and the behavior of
RNA viruses. PLoS Pathog. 6, e1001005.
Lwoff, A., Dulbecco, R., Vogt, M., and Lwoff, M. (1955). Kinetics of the release
of poliomyelitis virus from single cells. Virology 1, 128–139.
Murakami, E., Tolstykh, T., Bao, H., Niu, C., Steuer, H.M., Bao, D., Chang, W.,
Espiritu, C., Bansal, S., Lam, A.M., et al. (2010). Mechanism of activation of
PSI-7851 and its diastereoisomer PSI-7977. J. Biol. Chem. 285, 34337–34347.
Pelkmans, L. (2012). Cell Biology. Using cell-to-cell variability—a new era in
molecular biology. Science 336, 425–426.
Pfeiffer, J.K., and Kirkegaard, K. (2005). Increased fidelity reduces poliovirus
fitness and virulence under selective pressure in mice. PLoS Pathog. 1, e11.
Saadatpour, A., Lai, S., Guo, G., and Yuan, G.C. (2015). Single-cell analysis in
cancer genomics. Trends Genet. 31, 576–586.
Schulte, M.B., and Andino, R. (2014). Single-cell analysis uncovers extensive
biological noise in poliovirus replication. J. Virol. 88, 6205–6212.
Snijder, B., and Pelkmans, L. (2011). Origins of regulated cell-to-cell variability.
Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 12, 119–125.
Symmons, O., and Raj, A. (2016). What’s luck got to do with it: Single cells,
multiple fates, and biological nondeterminism. Mol. Cell 62, 788–802.
Thompson, K.A., and Yin, J. (2010). Population dynamics of an RNA virus and
its defective interfering particles in passage cultures. Virol. J. 7, 257.
Van Slyke, G.A., Arnold, J.J., Lugo, A.J., Griesemer, S.B., Moustafa, I.M.,
Kramer, L.D., Cameron, C.E., and Ciota, A.T. (2015). Sequence-specific fidelity
alterations associated with west nile virus attenuation in mosquitoes. PLoS
Pathog. 11, e1005009.
Vignuzzi, M., Stone, J.K., Arnold, J.J., Cameron, C.E., and Andino, R. (2006).
Quasispecies diversity determines pathogenesis through cooperative interac-
tions in a viral population. Nature 439, 344–348.
Warrick, J.W., Timm, A., Swick, A., and Yin, J. (2016). Tools for single-cell
kinetic analysis of virus-host interactions. PLoS ONE 11, e0145081.
Zeng, J., Wang, H., Xie, X., Yang, D., Zhou, G., and Yu, L. (2013). An increased
replication fidelity mutant of foot-and-mouth disease virus retains fitness
in vitro and virulence in vivo. Antiviral Res. 100, 1–7.
1704
Cell Reports 21, 1692–1704, November 7, 2017
