 ACUTE & PERIOPERATIVE PAIN SECTION
Special Article
Innovative Technology Using Virtual Reality in
the Treatment of Pain: Does It Reduce Pain via
Distraction, or Is There More to It?
Anita Gupta, DO, PharmD,* Kevin Scott, BS,*,† and
Matthew Dukewich, PharmD†
*Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International
Affairs, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ; †Drexel
University College of Medicine, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA
Correspondence to: Anita Gupta, DO, PharmD,
Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International
Affairs, Robertson Hall, Princeton University,
Princeton, NJ, 08544, USA. Tel: 844-213-7246;
email: ag29@princeton.edu
Disclosure and conflicts of interest: There are no con-
flicts of interest, funding sources, or disclosures to re-
port for Anita Gupta. There are no conflicts of interest,
funding sources, or disclosures to report for Kevin
Scott. There are no conflicts of interest, funding sour-
ces, or disclosures to report for Matthew Dukewich.
Abstract
Objective. Virtual reality (VR) is an exciting new
technology with almost endless possible uses in
medicine. One area it has shown promise is pain
management. This selective review focused on
studies that gave evidence to the distraction or non-
distraction mechanisms by which VR leads to the
treatment of pain.
Methods. The review looked at articles from 2000 to
July 29, 2016, focusing on studies concerning
mechanisms by which virtual reality can augment
pain relief. The data was collected through a
search of MEDLINE and Web of Science using the
key
words
of
“virtual
reality”
and
“pain”
or
“distraction.”
Results. Six studies were identified: four small ran-
domized controlled studies and two prospective/
pilot studies. The search results provided evidence
that distraction is a technique by which VR can
have benefits in the treatment of pain. Both adult
and pediatric populations were included in these
studies. In addition to acute pain, several studies
looked at chronic pain states such as headaches or
fibromyalgia. These studies also combined VR with
other treatment modalities such as biofeedback
mechanisms and cognitive behavioral therapy.
Conclusions. These results demonstrate that in ad-
dition to distraction, there are novel mechanisms
for VR treatment in pain, such as producing neuro-
physiologic changes related to conditioning and ex-
posure therapies. If these new mechanisms can
lead to new treatment options for patients with
chronic pain, VR may have the ability to help reduce
opioid
use
and
misuse
among
chronic
pain
patients. More studies are needed to reproduce
results from prospective/pilot studies in large ran-
domized control studies.
Key Words.
Virtual Reality; Chronic Pain; Acute
Pain; Distraction; Technology
Introduction
Virtual reality (VR) is a powerful technology, with just the
name itself evoking infinite possibilities. It has quickly
grown from a science fiction dream to a multibillion dol-
lar industry, with mass-produced and widely available
wide field-of-view VR devices requiring no more than an
advanced smartphone and adaptor headsets available
at a fraction of the previous price. In the field of pain
management, research has shown VR to be promising
in multiple treatment modalities. These include wound
care, physical therapy [1], dental pain [2], burns [3], and
ischemic pain [4].
While VR technology has been around for more than a
few decades, it took its current form very recently. Its
prominence grew when the military found use for it in
aviation simulators [5]. At first, the hardware required to
support VR technology would fill an entire room. As
V
C 2017 American Academy of Pain Medicine. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com
151
Pain Medicine 2018; 19: 151–159
doi: 10.1093/pm/pnx109
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/painmedicine/article-abstract/19/1/151/4100671 by guest on 03 June 2019
 technology has advanced, the delivery systems have
become smaller. Currently there are versions that are
desktop screen based, projectors, helmets, or goggles.
Each of these devices is designed to provide a screen
for the delivery of immersive VR. For devices such as
goggles and helmets, the VR screens are mounted
close to the user’s eyes and can restrict the field of
view to only the VR screen. The development of ad-
vanced VR helmets, those that are “high tech” vs “low
tech” in terms of field of view, blocking out reality, and
higher number of pixels, has led to greater analgesic ef-
fects. Two words often used with VR are “immersion”
and “presence.” Defining these terms can help explain
how VR functions. “Immersion” is an objective term that
describes the amount of sensory input the VR system
creates. “Presence” is a subjective value of the illusion
one experiences when using the system. While separate
values, an increase in immersion often leads to an in-
crease in presence felt by the user [6,7].
Treatment of pain has made some strides in recent
years, but there is still room for improvement. Currently
acute pain, such as pain experienced postoperatively, is
treated with pharmacologic regimens that include non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, acetaminophen, opi-
oids, and gabapentin, which can be combined with
local anesthetics and nerve blocks to produce proper
pain relief [8]. One situation where current therapies are
not sufficient for acute pain control is burn injuries,
which require additional levels of care including multiple
dressing changes and wound debridements. The com-
bination of the continuous need for pain relief, the long
course of recovery, and the severity of pain refractory to
current treatment modalities prompts the need for novel
treatment strategies to replace or act as adjunctive op-
tions to further relieve pain [9–11].
Treatment of chronic pain has recently shifted away
from the use of opioids. There are multiple reasons for
this change, ranging from the side effects of chronic
use to the incidence of tolerance, dependence, and
even cases of hyperalgesia [12]. Rates of misuse of opi-
oids in chronic pain have been estimated to be around
21% to 29%, and risk of addiction to opioids has been
estimated to be 8% to 12% [13]. For those addicted,
mortality rates are increased to up to 20 times the rate
of the general population [14]. The limited efficacy in
treating certain types of pain and the long-term side ef-
fects of the pharmacologic treatment options have put a
premium on novel nonpharmacologic treatment options
for chronic pain.
The capability of VR to reduce pain has mostly been at-
tributed to active distraction. One main rationale is that
attention is required for pain and exists in limited supply;
therefore, diverting attention can reduce the resources
available for processing pain [15,16]. This distraction
mechanism of pain reduction was used long before VR
technology. VR is thought to be more effective than tra-
ditional methods of distraction because of its immersive
property, encompassing a patient’s visual processing,
auditory processing, and even physical actions, which in
theory demand more attention [17]. The theory of dis-
traction can explain why past studies have demon-
strated decreased pain during VR treatment in the
setting of acute pain. However, this requires the VR
equipment to be active in order to provide relief, which
could be complicated, expensive, and unrealistic in
treating anything beyond acute pain in a clinic or hospi-
tal setting [17]. If new mechanisms for the impact of VR
on pain were supported, such as altered coping or neu-
rophysiologic changes, it could open the door and pro-
vide a rationale for extended use of VR in pain outside
the acute setting. In order to expand the use of VR for
the treatment of pain, other mechanisms of pain relief
besides distraction should be explored and utilized.
Although VR technology is becoming more accessible
to the average consumer, there are still barriers of cost,
equipment, technical competence, and effective VR pro-
grams. The ultimate goal of alternate mechanisms (be-
yond distraction) should be to produce lasting benefits
on pain control even when the patient is not actively us-
ing a VR device. In this selective review, we focus on
studies that support, detract, or give evidence to mech-
anisms other than distraction by which VR leads to pain
relief.
Methods
This paper looked at articles from 2000 to the present,
July 29, 2016, focusing on studies concerning mecha-
nisms by which virtual reality can augment pain relief.
The data was collected through a search of MEDLINE
and Web of Science using the key words of “virtual real-
ity” and “pain” or “distraction.” Specific articles were
chosen based upon their ability to address factors that
improve distraction with virtual reality or give insight into
other mechanisms by which VR may interact with pain.
Overall six studies were identified, four small randomized
controlled studies and two prospective/pilot studies
(studies listed in Table 1). The search results provided
evidence that distraction, as expected, is a technique
by which VR can have beneficial effects when used in
the treatment of pain. These articles focused on acute
pain in both adult and pediatric populations. There were
also articles showing evidence of new mechanisms by
which VR may interact with pain.
Mechanisms
Distraction
Distraction is a well-studied mechanism in VR and is the
prevailing belief in explaining how VR reduces acute
pain [17,20,22,23]. Studies continue to look at distrac-
tion as a mechanism for VR technology’s effectiveness
in treating pain, with these studies advancing knowl-
edge of the factors that can be manipulated to maxi-
mize this treatment effect [6,11,17,24–28]. Many of
these studies look at the ability to increase user immer-
sion, which leads to increased presence. This increase
in immersion can be influenced by increasing the quality
Gupta et al.
152
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/painmedicine/article-abstract/19/1/151/4100671 by guest on 03 June 2019
 Table 1
Studies included in review
Reference, Year
Study Type
Number of
Participant
Age
Range, y
VR and Control
Outcome Measured
Results
Limitations
Garcia-Palacios et al.
2015 [18]
RCT
61
23 to 70
Group screen
projected VR vs
treatment by
rheumatologist
Fibromyalgia Impact
Questionnaire
(FIQ), Brief Pain
Inventory, Chronic
Pain Coping
Inventory, Beck
Depression
Inventory II, Quality
of Life Index
(QLI-Sp)
Significant decrease in
FIQ and increase in
QLI-Sp, no change in
other variables
Lack of control
consisting of
current stan-
dard of care,
low education
level of
participants
Morris et al. 2015 [19]
Pilot
21
18 to 78
No VR used, fibro-
myalgia subjects
matched with
nonfibromyalgia
subjects
fMRI
Increased activation of
areas associated with
pain catastrophization in
patients with
fibromyalgia
Small sample
size, no use of
VR, proof of
concept only
Jeffs et al. 2014 [20]
RCT
30
10 to 17
Tripod-mounted
VR helmet vs
movie on screen
vs standard care
Adolescent Pediatric
Pain Tool Word
Graphic Rating
Scale
Significantly less proce-
dural pain in VR group
vs passive distraction,
no significant difference
between VR and stan-
dard of care
Small sample
size, lack of
generalizability
beyond ambula-
tory setting for
burns
Loretta-Quijada 2014
[16]
RCT
77
20 to 56
Screen projected
VR with distrac-
tion or control
software vs
blank screen
control
Pain threshold, pain
tolerance, pain
sensitivity range,
strongest pain
intensity, estimation
of time, pain
catastrophizing
scale, pain
self-efficacy
VR distraction significantly
increased pain threshold
and increased pain
tolerance vs No VR; no
significant decrease in
pain intensity; VR
control significantly
increased pain tolerance,
increased pain sensitivity,
lowered time estimation,
increased self-efficacy
tolerance, and decreased
helplessness vs No VR
Unbalanced
female to male
ratio (70:7), use
of nonimmer-
sive VR
(continued)
Virtual Reality for Treatment of Pain
153
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/painmedicine/article-abstract/19/1/151/4100671 by guest on 03 June 2019
 of the VR system [6] or through the addition of sound or
tactile feedback [25,29].
Pain secondary to burn wounds is one area where the
current standard of care for pain control is often ineffec-
tive in delivering adequate relief. This severe pain is of-
ten resistant to opioid and nonopioid analgesics [30,31].
In order to obtain sufficient pain control, large doses are
often necessary, which creates unwanted side effects
such as nausea, constipation, and drowsiness [31].
Jeffs et al. [23] used a single blinded, randomized con-
trolled study with 30 adolescents age 10 to 17 years to
compare the effects of standard care (including un-
scripted communication from nurses), passive distrac-
tion (movie on a small screen TV at the bedside with
noise-canceling
headphones)
and
VR
distraction
(SnowWorld pain control virtual environment, www.
vrpain.com) during burn wound care. Patients in this ac-
tive VR group were able to control a character moving
through the SnowWorld environment using a trackball
controller and could interact with the virtual world in
several ways, including by throwing snowballs. These
patients also received noise-canceling headphones that
limited their audio input to that generated by the VR ex-
perience. The VR distraction used a tripod-mounted hel-
met device to avoid using a head-mounted display
helmet, which enabled patients with facial burns to be
included. The tripod-mounted device allowed for close
immersion and a restricted view of reality without relying
on a head-mounted display, such as goggles, helmets,
or masks. Patients completed either the passive distrac-
tion or the active VR for the duration of their burn care
procedure.
Pain
scores
were
measured
using
the
Adolescent Pediatric Pain Tool word graphic rating scale
(APPT-WGRS),
which
includes
a
100 millimeter
line
word graphic scale to rate pain intensity and has proven
efficacious in previous studies [32]. The results showed
significantly less procedural pain in the VR group vs the
passive
distraction
group
(95%
CI
¼
2.4–45.0,
P ¼ 0.029). For VR vs standard of care, there was a de-
crease in pain intensity, but this was not statistically sig-
nificant (95% CI ¼ –9.5 to 28.9, P ¼ 0.32). The VR
treatment group was reported as the only group to have
a decrease in pain perception from preprocedural pain
to wound care procedural pain. The pain perception
statistical significance, or lack of significance, was not
shown in the results [23]. In summary, the results of this
study support the use of VR as an effective pain control
method
during
wound
care
procedures
for
burn
wounds. Beyond this, the distraction created by VR was
greater than with passive distraction, and this correlated
with increased pain reduction. Limitations of this study
include it being a single-center study with small group
sizes. There was also a difference in time from injury for
the passive distraction group, which had less total time
from injury. Although this was not statistically significant,
it could have had some effect on the results as this
group had a higher mean pain score [23].
In Jeffs et al. [23], the passive and VR-based distrac-
tions differed in the fact that the VR distraction was
Table 1
Continued
Reference, Year
Study Type
Number of
Participant
Age
Range, y
VR and Control
Outcome Measured
Results
Limitations
Shiri et al. 2013 [21]
Prospective single
arm pilot study
10
10 to 17
Screen projected
VR combined
with biofeedback
Pain visual analog
scale, Pediatric
Quality of Life
Inventory
Decreased headache se-
verity and increased
quality of life
Small sample
size, lack of
controlled or
randomized de-
sign, mixture of
headache types
Law et al. 2011 [22]
RCT
79
6 to 15
Virtual reality hel-
met with interac-
tive or passive
distraction video-
game vs helmet
without distrac-
tion, crossover
control
Pain tolerance
Significant increase in tol-
erance for interactive vs
passive distraction; older
children demonstrated
larger response
No control for
speech used in
interactive VR,
no assessment
of specific cog-
nitive functions
being used
FIQ ¼ Fibromyalgia Impact Questionnaire; fMRI ¼ functional magnetic resonance imaging; QLI-sp ¼ Quality of Life Index; RCT ¼ randomized controlled trial; VR ¼ virtual reality.
Gupta et al.
154
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/painmedicine/article-abstract/19/1/151/4100671 by guest on 03 June 2019
 delivered via a tripod-mounted helmet while a small
screen was used for the passive distraction. Law et al.
[33] used passive and interactive distractions both deliv-
ered via the same helmet, even using the same game
(Nights: Journey of Dreams, Aqua Garden level) for both
groups. The only difference between the two distrac-
tions was the passive group only watched and listened
to prerecorded sights and sounds within the videogame,
while the interactive group allowed the user to control
the game themselves. The design was a randomized
controlled trial of 79 children age six to 15 years examin-
ing whether increased demand on central cognitive pro-
cessing through distraction tasks would increase a
child’s tolerance for cold pressor pain. Each patient
underwent a baseline trial with a VR helmet but no dis-
traction followed by two counter-balanced trials of pas-
sive and interactive distraction. Pain tolerance was
measured by the time, in seconds, a child could keep
their hand in cold water (7 �C). The results showed a
significant increase from baseline in pain tolerance for
both passive and interactive distraction (P ¼ 0.001).
There was also a significant increase in tolerance during
interactive distraction when compared with passive dis-
traction (P ¼ 0.001). There was no significant order ef-
fect. As a secondary analysis, this study evaluated age
differences of six to nine years vs 10 to 15 years and
their response to distraction. There was no significant
difference for passive distraction, but in the interactive
distraction trials there was a significant increase in re-
sponse for the older group [33]. In summary, this article
provides evidence for pain tolerance increasing with ei-
ther passive or interactive VR distraction. When com-
pared with each other, interactive distraction provides a
greater increase in pain tolerance. This fits with models
of the role of attention and pain where pain engages
central attention resources [34]. Therefore, engaging
central cognitive resources with tasks can produce an
interference with pain processing [21]. This study has a
few limitations. First, the study population is restricted to
children and adolescents, making generalization to other
populations difficult without further studies. There was
also no assessment of the cognitive processes involved
in the distraction tasks to ensure that
they were, in
fact, increased with the distraction methods. Lastly, the
interactive task required the child to speak, making it
hard to rule out the possibility that speaking, indepen-
dent of VR activity, influenced the increased pain toler-
ance [33].
Neurophysiologic Changes
In addition to looking at the evidence supporting distrac-
tion as a mechanism for the reduction in pain seen with
VR technology, this selective review also looked at arti-
cles that may provide evidence for other mechanisms.
Loreto-Quijada et al. [17] used a randomized controlled
trial of 77 psychology students age 20 to 56 years to
compare two virtual environments. One treatment group
looked at distraction, while the other looked at active
participation in VR to improve perception of control over
pain, and a third control group incorporated a control
non-VR group utilizing a static screen. The VR distrac-
tion treatment consisted of an interactive virtual environ-
ment (surreal world). The VR Control Enhancement
Condition (VRC) group involved manipulation of an irreg-
ularly shaped and sharp polygon (representing pain) to a
sphere representing calm with no pain. Sounds were
used along with the shape, starting with an unpleasant
sound that could be manipulated to a pleasant sound.
Unlike the previously mentioned study by Law et al.
[33], this study went beyond measuring pain tolerance.
Measured values included pain threshold, pain toler-
ance, pain sensitivity range, strongest pain intensity,
estimation of time, pain catastrophizing, and pain self-
efficacy (perceived ability to tolerate and decrease pain).
The significant results for the VR Distraction group were
increased pain threshold vs No VR (P < 0.05) and in-
creased pain tolerance vs No VR (P < 0.05), which
agrees with the results from a previous study on pain
distraction [22]. This study found no significant decrease
in pain intensity for the VR Distraction group. The effect
of VR distraction on decreasing pain intensity has had
mixed results in previous studies [3,4,10,11]. The VRC
group showed significant results for increased pain tol-
erance vs No VR (P < 0.001), increased pain sensitivity
vs
No
VR
(P < 0.05),
and
lower
time
estimation
(P < 0.05). In
cognitive measures,
significant results
were found for increased self-efficacy tolerance vs No
VR (P < 0.05) and decreased helplessness vs No VR
(P < 0.001). For the VR Distraction group, there were no
significant differences in the cognitive variables (pain
catastrophizing and pain self-efficacy) [20]. In summary,
this article provides evidence that VR can have an effect
on decreasing pain by mechanisms other than distrac-
tion. Limitations of this study include an uneven female
to male ratio (70:7) and the use of a nonimmersive VR
system.
Shiri et al. [35] is a prospective, single-armed, open-la-
bel pilot study of 10 patients designed to present the ra-
tionale and feasibility of a novel system combining VR
and biofeedback as a treatment option for pediatric
chronic headaches. The study enrolled six patients with
migraines and four with tension headaches. This study
used a similar approach for the VR system as Loreto-
Quijada et al. [20]. Instead of using shapes and sounds,
however, this study utilized pictures of each patient with
a
spectrum
of
emotional
states
from
agony
to
happiness. The authors then utilized Galvanic Skin
Response (GSR) readings to integrate the facial expres-
sion being seen in VR by the patient. Patients were
asked to look at the screen and attempt to relax, and
when the GSR hit a prespecified cutoff point, the shown
facial expression would change and in theory lead the
patient to a more relaxed state. Results showed a signif-
icant improvement in the extent to which headaches
limited daily function at one month and three months
post-therapy. Quality of life was also significantly in-
creased during treatment and on follow-up at one and
three months. On free response sections of the follow-
up survey, it was reported that the majority of the pa-
tients reported times when they were able to relax
Virtual Reality for Treatment of Pain
155
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/painmedicine/article-abstract/19/1/151/4100671 by guest on 03 June 2019
 during a headache to the point where the pain was re-
lieved [35]. The limitations of this study include that it is
a pilot study with only 10 patients, it had two different
types of headaches in the study (migraine and tension),
it was not randomized, and it had more males than fe-
males. In summary, while this study is very limited it pro-
vides an indication that VR combined with biofeedback
has the potential to be used in treatment of chronic
pain caused by headaches in the pediatric population
utilizing a mechanism different from VR distraction.
Morris et al. looked at pain catastrophization in patients
with and without fibromyalgia using functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) to compare levels of activity in
areas associated with pain catastrophization. The prem-
ise was based on a pilot study showing the possible ef-
ficacy of imaginary exposure therapy for fibromyalgia
[36], and previous studies showing success of VR in ex-
posure therapy for treatment of other medical issues
such as anxiety and phobias [19,37]. Using VR images
of active and passive activities, the study showed signifi-
cantly more activation of the regions associated with
pain catastrophization in patients with fibromyalgia being
shown active images. Based on this, the proof-of-con-
cept study concluded that there is reason to further in-
vestigate the use of VR exposure therapy for the
treatment of fibromyalgia [38].
While the direct reduction of pain via distraction or other
mechanisms is one option, it is not the only way VR
may help in the treatment of pain. Studies looking into
the use of VR in the treatment of fibromyalgia have sug-
gested that VR may be used to help patients live with
the pain [18,38,39]. Garcia-Palacios et al. used a single
blinded, randomized controlled trial of fibromyalgia pa-
tients to compare treatment as usual (via medications
prescribed by a rheumatologist) to cognitive behavioral
therapy (CBT) treatment using VR as an adjunct. The re-
sults showed a significant decrease in impact of fibro-
myalgia
as
measured
by
the
Fibromyalgia
Impact
Questionnaire for the VR-assisted CBT group. It also re-
ported significant increases in perceived quality of life
while no significant changes were found in pain intensity
and pain interference [39]. While this study is limited by
the control group not including CBT without VR, its
stated goals were limited to showing feasibility and pre-
liminary efficacy of VR in combination with CBT for
treatment of fibromyalgia.
Discussion
Recent studies continue to provide support for the exist-
ing evidence for the ability of VR technology to reduce
acute pain through a distraction mechanism in both
adult and pediatric populations [20,23,33]. Strong evi-
dence has also shown that the quality of VR and the
amount of immersion delivered by the VR technology di-
rectly correlates with the measured quantity of analgesic
effect [6,11,25]. VR technology is advancing rapidly,
with
endless
imaginable
prospective
applications.
Medicine has the opportunity to benefit immensely from
these advances and also has the potential to contribute
to the progression of VR technology through research.
While there is a large body of evidence supporting dis-
traction as the mechanism by which VR can lead to
pain relief, studies have recently focused on other
mechanisms by which VR may affect pain. In this selec-
tive review, multiple studies suggested that there are
other mechanisms, beyond simple distraction, by which
VR may be able to reduce pain [20,35,38,39]. The stud-
ies looking at these alternate mechanisms tend to focus
on chronic pain rather than acute pain.
One of the main techniques used to explore nondistrac-
tion mechanisms is the utilization of VR programs that
differ from the programs used in distraction-based VR
technology.
Loreto-Quijada et al. [20] and Shiri et al. [35] both used
techniques that transitioned from visuals representing
feelings of pain to visuals representing feelings of calm
and comfort or happiness. Loreto-Quijada et al. used
shapes and sounds to depict the change while Shiri
et al. showed that each subject previously obtained vi-
suals of themselves making faces to represent different
feelings.
Shiri
et
al.
also
incorporated
biofeedback
mechanisms to trigger when the images would change.
This was reported to promote awareness of the pain
and the bodily reaction to it. Several patients also self-
reported the ability to stop headaches by thinking about
the VR experience or by attempting to be calm [35].
Garcia-Palacios et al. [39] used VR in a group setting
with the goal of promoting emotions and motivations to
get patients with fibromyalgia active as part of their
treatment regimen. It is a strategy not meant to treat
pain directly, but instead to overcome one of the obsta-
cles that can hurt the treatment effectiveness of patients
with chronic pain syndromes. The ability to change be-
havior or provide new behavior strategies for patients
suffering from chronic pain can provide lasting benefits
even when the VR device is removed.
If these results could be replicated in larger studies, the
implications would be far reaching. Current treatment
modalities for acute and chronic pain are not ideal or
optimal for every patient. Currently, opioid abuse is a
huge national problem, with many patients falling victim
to substance abuse beginning from an opioid pre-
scribed for legitimate pain [12]. In addition to the risk for
dependence, in many situations of chronic pain, opi-
oids do not provide sufficient relief. Even in situations
where opioids do provide initial relief, tolerance can
build and reduce this effect. Alternative or adjunctive
treatment options are necessary for a great number of
patients [40].
VR technology provides incredible flexibility, allowing vir-
tual worlds to be created that are only limited by the
creativity of their creators. Our continually expanding un-
derstanding of how pain is created, interpreted, and
acted upon by the nervous system may complement
Gupta et al.
156
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/painmedicine/article-abstract/19/1/151/4100671 by guest on 03 June 2019
 the improvements in VR to be one of the solutions to
the problems facing acute and chronic pain treatment.
In this selective review, we discussed evidence that
shows that VR is capable of reducing acute pain. If
acute pain can be more adequately controlled, patients
may require fewer opioids and fewer patients would be
likely to become opioid dependent. Chronic pain pa-
tients are at increased risk for opioid dependence and
misuse because of the persistent nature of their pain. If
VR can help relieve chronic pain, this would also have a
huge impact on the number of people at risk of becom-
ing dependent.
Beyond the ability to reduce opioid abuse, VR may be
able to help patients once they are opioid dependent.
Morris et al. [38] suggested that VR could help as part
of exposure therapy in patients with fibromyalgia to re-
duce pain catastrophization, augmenting the cognitive
reaction of these patients to their chronic pain. VR has
been studied similarly for use in drug dependence.
Many studies have looked at the ability of VR to elicit
and reduce cravings in chronic alcohol and tobacco use
disorder
patients,
reporting
good
results
[41–47].
Studies have also demonstrated early promise in opioid
use [48,49]. An additional study looked into the ability to
predict risk of future opioid misuse based upon an at-
tentional bias elicited during VR testing [50]. This sug-
gests that VR may have the ability to influence the
opioid abuse crisis from multiple mechanisms.
In summary, this selective review discussed evidence of
more than one mechanism by which VR could be used
effectively in pain management. Distraction is most suit-
able for acute pain management and has been well
studied. In terms of further research for distraction tech-
niques, larger studies are needed to show which situa-
tions call for VR and how it can be logistically integrated
into treatment plans. Evidence was also found for neu-
rophysiologic changes caused by VR, which were most
evident in the treatment of chronic pain. The evidence
for these mechanisms is not as strong as the distraction
method for the treatment of acute pain. Blinded, ran-
domized controlled studies are needed to compare
these nondistraction methods to no treatment and cur-
rent treatment options. The VR technology for these
goals exists and continues to improve. This may be one
of those rare situations where we do not have to wait
for technology to catch up to our knowledge. We have
the technology—we just need to know how to use it.
References
1 Carrougher GJ, Hoffman HG, Nakamura D, et al.
The effect of virtual reality on pain and range of mo-
tion in adults with burn injuries. J Burn Care Res
2009;30:785–91.
2 Furman E, Jasinevicius TR, Bissada NF, et al. Virtual
reality distraction for pain control during periodontal
scaling and root planing procedures. J Am Dent
Assoc 2009;140:1508–16.
3 Kipping B, Rodger S, Miller K, Kimble RM. Virtual
reality for acute pain reduction in adolescents under-
going burn wound care: A prospective randomized
controlled trial. Burns 2012;38:650–7.
4 Magora F, Cohen S, Shochina M, Dayan E. Virtual reality
immersion method of distraction to control experimental
ischemic pain. Isr Med Assoc J 2006;8:261–5.
5 Schmitt PJ, Agarwal N, Prestigiacomo CJ. From
planes to brains: Parallels between military develop-
ment of virtual reality environments and virtual neu-
rological surgery. World Neurosurg 2012;78:214–9.
6 Hoffman HG, Seibel EJ, Richards TL, et al. Virtual re-
ality helmet display quality influences the magnitude
of virtual reality analgesia. J Pain 2006;7:843–50.
7 Slater M, Wilbur S. A framework for immersive virtual
environments (FIVE): Speculations on the role of
presence in virtual environments. Presence Teleoper
Virtual Environ 1997;6:603–16.
8 Chou R, Gordon DB, de Leon-Casasola OA, et al.
Management
of
postoperative
pain:
A
clinical
practice guideline from the American Pain Society,
the American Society of Regional Anesthesia and
Pain
Medicine,
and
the
American
Society
of
Anesthesiologists’ Committee on Regional Anesthesia,
Executive Committee, and Administrative Council.
J Pain 2016;17:131–57.
9 Schmitt YS, Hoffman HG, Blough DK, et al. A ran-
domized, controlled trial of immersive virtual reality
analgesia,
during
physical
therapy
for
pediatric
burns. Burns 2011;37:61–8.
10 Maani CV, Hoffman HG, Morrow M, et al. Virtual re-
ality pain control during burn wound debridement of
combat-related burn injuries using robot-like arm
mounted VR goggles. J Trauma 2011;71:S125–30.
11 Gutierrez-Maldonado
J,
Gutierrez-Martinez
O,
Cabas-Hoyos K. Interactive and passive virtual real-
ity distraction: Effects on presence and pain inten-
sity. Stud Health Technol Inform 2011;167:69–73.
12 Trang T, Al-Hasani R, Salvemini D, et al. Pain and
poppies: The good, the bad, and the ugly of opioid
analgesics. J Neurosci 2015;35:13879–88.
13 Vowles KE, McEntee ML, Julnes PS, et al. Rates of
opioid misuse, abuse, and addiction in chronic pain:
A systematic review and data synthesis. Pain 2015;
156:569–76.
Virtual Reality for Treatment of Pain
157
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/painmedicine/article-abstract/19/1/151/4100671 by guest on 03 June 2019
 14 Hser YI, Evans E, Grella C, Ling W, Anglin D. Long-
term
course
of
opioid
addiction.
Harv
Rev
Psychiatry 2015;23:76–89.
15 Hoffman HG, Chambers GT, Meyer WJ 3rd, et al.
Virtual reality as an adjunctive non-pharmacologic
analgesic for acute burn pain during medical proce-
dures. Ann Behav Med 2011;41:183–91.
16 Li A, Montano Z, Chen VJ, Gold JI. Virtual reality
and pain management: Current trends and future di-
rections. Pain Manag 2011;1:147–57.
17 Mahrer NE, Gold JI. The use of virtual reality for pain con-
trol: A review. Curr Pain Headache Rep 2009;13:100–9.
18 Herrero R, Garcia-Palacios A, Castilla D, Molinari G,
Botella C. Virtual reality for the induction of positive
emotions in the treatment of fibromyalgia: A pilot
study over acceptability, satisfaction, and the effect
of virtual reality on mood. Cyberpsychol Behav Soc
Netw 2014;17:379–84.
19 Parsons TD, Rizzo AA. Affective outcomes of virtual
reality exposure therapy for anxiety and specific
phobias:
A
meta-analysis.
J
Behav
Ther
Exp
Psychiatry 2008;39:250–61.
20 Loreto-Quijada D, Gutierrez-Maldonado J, Nieto R,
et al. Differential effects of two virtual reality interven-
tions: Distraction versus pain control. Cyberpsychol
Behav Soc Netw 2014;17:353–8.
21 Legrain V, Damme SV, Eccleston C, et al. A neuro-
cognitive model of attention to pain: Behavioral and
neuroimaging evidence. Pain 2009;144:230–2.
22 Dahlquist LM, McKenna KD, Jones KK, et al. Active
and passive distraction using a head-mounted dis-
play helmet: Effects on cold pressor pain in children.
Health Psychol 2007;26:794–801.
23 Jeffs D, Dorman D, Brown S, et al. Effect of virtual
reality on adolescent pain during burn wound care.
J Burn Care Res 2014;35:395–408.
24 Hoffman
HG,
Richards
TL,
Coda
B,
et
al.
Modulation of thermal pain-related brain activity with
virtual
reality:
Evidence
from
fMRI.
Neuroreport
2004;15:1245–8.
25 Johnson S, Coxon M. Sound can enhance the anal-
gesic effect of virtual reality. R Soc Open Sci 2016;3:
150567.
26 Lee M, Pyun SB, Chung J, et al. A further step to
develop
patient-friendly
implementation
strategies
for virtual reality-based rehabilitation in patients with
acute stroke. Phys Ther 2016;96(10):1554–64.
27 Tong X, Gromala D, Gupta D, Squire P. Usability
comparisons
of
head-mounted
vs.
stereoscopic
desktop displays in a virtual reality environment with
pain patients. Stud Health Technol Inform 2016;220:
424–31.
28 Triberti S, Repetto C, Riva G. Psychological factors
influencing the effectiveness of virtual reality-based
analgesia: A systematic review. Cyberpsychol Behav
Soc Netw 2014;17:335–45.
29 Sano Y, Wake N, Ichinose A, et al. Tactile feed-
back for relief of deafferentation pain using virtual
reality system: A pilot study. J Neuroeng Rehabil
2016;13:61.
30 Patterson DR, Hoffman HG, Weichman SA, Jensen
MP, Sharar SR. Optimizing control of pain from se-
vere burns: A literature review. Am J Clin Hypn
2004;47:43–54.
31 Summer GJ, Puntillo KA, Miaskowski C, Green PG,
Levine JD. Burn injury pain: The continuing chal-
lenge. J Pain 2007;8:533–48.
32 Wilkie
DJ,
Holzemer
WL,
Tesler
MD,
et
al.
Measuring pain quality: Validity and reliability of chil-
dren’s and adolescents’ pain language. Pain 1990;
41:151–9.
33 Law EF, Dahlquist LM, Sil S, et al. Videogame
distraction using virtual reality technology for chil-
dren experiencing cold pressor pain: The role of
cognitive processing. J Pediatr Psychol 2011;36:
84–94.
34 Eccleston C, Crombez G. Pain demands attention:
A cognitive-affective model of the interruptive func-
tion of pain. Psychol Bull 1999;125:356–66.
35 Shiri S, Feintuch U, Weiss N, et al. A virtual reality
system combined with biofeedback for treating pe-
diatric chronic headache—a pilot study. Pain Med
2013;14:621–7.
36 Rodero B, Garcia J, Casanueva B, Sobradiel N.
Imagined exposure as treatment of catastrophizing
in fibromyalgia: A pilot study. Actas Esp Psiquiatr
2008;36:223–6.
37 Powers MB, Emmelkamp PM. Virtual reality expo-
sure therapy for anxiety disorders: A meta-analysis.
J Anxiety Disord 2008;22:561–9.
38 Morris LD, Louw QA, Grimmer KA, Meintjes E.
Targeting pain catastrophization in patients with fi-
bromyalgia using virtual reality exposure therapy: A
proof-of-concept study. J Phys Ther Sci 2015;27:
3461–7.
Gupta et al.
158
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/painmedicine/article-abstract/19/1/151/4100671 by guest on 03 June 2019
 39 Garcia-Palacios A, Herrero R, Vizcaino Y, et al.
Integrating virtual reality with activity management
for the treatment of fibromyalgia: Acceptability and
preliminary efficacy. Clin J Pain 2015;31:564–72.
40 Stempniak M. The opioid epidemic. Hosp Heallth
Netw 2016;90:22–4, 6–9.
41 Vollstadt-Klein S, Loeber S, Kirsch M, et al. Effects
of cue-exposure treatment on neural cue reactivity
in alcohol dependence: A randomized trial. Biol
Psychiatry 2011;69:1060–6.
42 Traylor AC, Parrish DE, Copp HL, Bordnick PS.
Using virtual reality to investigate complex and con-
textual cue reactivity in nicotine dependent problem
drinkers. Addict Behav 2011;36:1068–75.
43 Thewissen R, Snijders SJ, Havermans RC, van den
Hout M, Jansen A. Renewal of cue-elicited urge to
smoke: Implications for cue exposure treatment.
Behav Res Ther 2006;44:1441–9.
44 Son JH, Lee SH, Seok JW, et al. Virtual reality ther-
apy for the treatment of alcohol dependence: A pre-
liminary
investigation
with
positron
emission
tomography/computerized
tomography.
J
Stud
Alcohol Drugs 2015;76:620–7.
45 Pericot-Valverde
I,
Secades-Villa
R,
Gutierrez-
Maldonado J, Garcia-Rodriguez O. Effects of sys-
tematic cue exposure through virtual reality on
cigarette
craving.
Nicotine
Tob
Res
2014;16:
1470–7.
46 Lee JH, Kwon H, Choi J, Yang BH. Cue-exposure
therapy to decrease alcohol craving in virtual envi-
ronment. Cyberpsychol Behav 2007;10:617–23.
47 Bordnick PS, Traylor AC, Carter BL, Graap KM. A
feasibility study of virtual reality-based coping skills
training for nicotine dependence. Res Soc Work
Pract 2012;22:293–300.
48 McHugh RK, Park S, Weiss RD. Cue-induced crav-
ing in dependence upon prescription opioids and
heroin. Am J Addict 2014;23:453–8.
49 McHugh RK, Fulciniti F, Mashhoon Y, Weiss RD.
Cue-induced craving to paraphernalia and drug im-
ages in opioid dependence. Am J Addict 2016;25:
105–9.
50 Garland EL, Howard MO. Opioid attentional bias
and cue-elicited craving predict future risk of pre-
scription opioid misuse among chronic pain pa-
tients. Drug Alcohol Depend 2014;144:283–7.
Virtual Reality for Treatment of Pain
159
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/painmedicine/article-abstract/19/1/151/4100671 by guest on 03 June 2019
