 Bioengineering Human Myocardium on Native Extracellular 
Matrix
Jacques P. Guyette1,2, Jonathan M Charest1, Robert W Mills3, Bernhard J. Jank1,2, Philipp 
T. Moser1,2, Sarah E. Gilpin1,2, Joshua R. Gershlak4, Tatsuya Okamoto1, Gabriel 
Gonzalez1,2, David J. Milan3,5, Glenn R. Gaudette4, and Harald C. Ott1,2,6,7
1Center for Regenerative Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital
2Harvard Medical School
3Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital
4Department of Biomedical Engineering, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
5Division of Cardiology, Massachusetts General Hospital
6Division of Thoracic Surgery, Department of Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital
7Harvard Stem Cell Institute
Abstract
Rationale—More than 25 million individuals suffer from heart failure worldwide, with nearly 
4,000 patients currently awaiting heart transplantation in the United States. Donor organ shortage 
and allograft rejection remain major limitations with only about 2,500 hearts transplanted each 
year. As a theoretical alternative to allotransplantation, patient-derived bioartificial myocardium 
could provide functional support and ultimately impact the treatment of heart failure.
Objective—The objective of this study is to translate previous work to human scale and 
clinically relevant cells, for the bioengineering of functional myocardial tissue based on the 
combination of human cardiac matrix and human iPS-derived cardiac myocytes.
Methods and Results—To provide a clinically relevant tissue scaffold, we translated 
perfusion-decellularization to human scale and obtained biocompatible human acellular cardiac 
scaffolds with preserved extracellular matrix composition, architecture, and perfusable coronary 
vasculature. We then repopulated this native human cardiac matrix with cardiac myocytes derived 
from non-transgenic human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) and generated tissues of 
increasing three-dimensional complexity. We maintained such cardiac tissue constructs in culture 
for 120 days to demonstrate definitive sarcomeric structure, cell and matrix deformation, 
contractile force, and electrical conduction. To show that functional myocardial tissue of human 
scale can be built on this platform, we then partially recellularized human whole heart scaffolds 
Address correspondence to: Dr. Harald C. Ott, Assistant Professor in Surgery, Harvard Medical School, Division of Thoracic Surgery, 
Department of Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, 55 Fruit Street, Blake 15, Boston, MA 02114, hott@partners.org. 
DISCLOSURES
HC Ott is founder and stockholder of IVIVA Medical Inc. This relationship did not affect the content or conclusions contained in this 
manuscript.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 08.
Published in final edited form as:
Circ Res. 2016 January 8; 118(1): 56–72. doi:10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.115.306874.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 with human iPSC-derived cardiac myocytes. Under biomimetic culture, the seeded constructs 
developed force-generating human myocardial tissue, showed electrical conductivity, left 
ventricular pressure development, and metabolic function.
Conclusions—Native cardiac extracellular matrix scaffolds maintain matrix components and 
structure to support the seeding and engraftment of human iPS-derived cardiac myocytes, and 
enable the bioengineering of functional human myocardial-like tissue of multiple complexities.
Keywords
Pressure-controlled perfusion decellularization; iPS-derived cardiac myocytes; human myocardial 
tissue; extracellular matrix; cardiac regeneration; stem cell; cardiac differentiation
INTRODUCTION
More than 5 million people in the United States live with heart failure (HF), with more than 
800,000 new cases diagnosed each year1. Patients suffer from poor quality of life, and 
require frequent interventions, leading to greater than 1 million hospital discharges and a 
cost of more than $39 billion per year2. While artificial mechanical support can be offered to 
a small group of patients, heart transplantation remains the only curative treatment option 
for end-stage HF. Donor organ shortage is its major limitation, as nearly 1,500 heart 
transplant candidates will endure extended waitlist periods while facing 5-year mortality 
rates of approximately 50%2, 3. While heart transplant recipients benefit from significantly 
improved short-term survival rates, long-term survival remains limited due to chronic 
rejection and adverse effects from lifelong immunosuppression4. The engineering of 
bioartificial myocardium, and ultimately of bioartificial hearts, from patient-derived cells 
could theoretically solve both of these problems. While many hurdles remain, the creation of 
bioartificial functional human myocardium from adult-derived, genetically non-altered cells 
is the first vertical step towards this goal, and can provide new pathways for repair and 
replacement of myocardium in HF patients.
The onset of HF is preceded by myocardial necrosis, fibrosis, and extracellular matrix 
(ECM) remodeling, resulting in progressive loss of architecture and contractile 
function1, 2, 5. Partial reverse remodeling and myocardial augmentation has been 
accomplished by direct delivery of contractile cardiac myocytes and passive biomaterials6–9. 
Following similar principles, different scaffold materials and cells have been combined to 
generate tissue-engineered myocardium. In both approaches contractile graft thickness is 
limited due to poor diffusion and neovascularization that fails to meet the demand of cardiac 
myocyte metabolism10–12. Graft architecture and electromechanical integration are 
constrained by non-physiologic scaffold properties, and the altered properties of scarred 
myocardium. Successful clinical application of myocardial regeneration will depend on the 
ability to establish physiologic tissue architecture, and immediate graft perfusion upon 
implantation. Native human heart matrix provides the physiologic micro and macro 
architecture, ECM composition, and the perfusable hierarchical vascular bed, serving as a 
foundational scaffold to engineer bioartificial myocardium13, 14.
Guyette et al.
Page 2
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 By translating our previous work to human scale15, we demonstrate successful application 
of whole-organ perfusion decellularization to human hearts, and generate acellular cardiac 
scaffolds with preserved ECM material properties, structure, patent coronary conduits, with 
an immunologic profile that induces a constructive remodeling response. By comparing 
brain death and donation after cardiac death donors, we validate this new regenerative 
platform from more than 5,500 currently unused donor hearts per year3. By deriving cardiac 
myocytes from non-transgenic adult derived iPSC at clinical scale, we provide the necessary 
building blocks for clinically relevant myocardial regeneration. By repopulating native 
human heart matrix in sections, fibers, and biomimetic whole organ culture, we show the 
potential for creating functional human myocardial-like tissue from an autologous source to 
augment or replace lost myocardial function, and serve as a patient-specific development 
platform.
METHODS
All methods and associated references are included in the online data supplement.
RESULTS
Perfusion decellularization of human cadaveric hearts
In a first set of experiments, we scaled perfusion decellularization to donated human hearts 
that were recovered by the New England Organ Bank and deemed unusable for clinical 
transplantation. Between 2012 and 2015, 73human non-transplantable hearts were recovered 
for research after specific consent was obtained. Donor records (n = 73; 5 patient records 
unavailable) indicate a distribution of 36 males versus 32 females, 29 cardiac death donors 
(DCD) versus 39 brain death donors (DBD), an average age of 52.43 ± 14.29 years, an 
average height of 170.96 ± 9.53 cm, an average weight of 81.54 ± 20.53 kg, and an average 
body mass index of 27.76 ± 6.09 kg/m2. Heart identification numbers, corresponding donor 
data, and associated experimental tests are outlined in Supplemental Table I. We applied 
aseptic pressure-controlled antegrade coronary flow to 40 hearts in a custom organ chamber 
(60 mm Hg, average cold ischemia time of 455 ± 184 minutes; Supplemental Fig. I). Hearts 
were perfusion-decellularized with 1% SDS (168 hrs), deionized H2O (24 hrs), 1% Triton-
X100 (24 hrs), and PBS washes (168 hrs) following a standardized protocol (Fig. 1A)16. 
Decellularized hearts contained 346.17 ± 27.92 ng/mg wet tissue of residual double-stranded 
DNA (dsDNA), which could be removed by treatment with endonuclease (Fig. 1B). 
Subsequent perfusion of decellularized whole-hearts with 25 U/mL of endonuclease at room 
temperature for 24 hrs demonstrated a 99.05% reduction in dsDNA (3.27 ± 3.12 ng/mg wet 
tissue, p < 0.05), with thresholds meeting established criteria for decellularized 
biomaterials17. Biochemical analysis of perfusion-decellularized hearts from both DCD and 
DBD donors indicated a high retention of insoluble collagen, moderate decrease of sulfated-
glycosaminoglycans, and lower concentrations of α-elastin and soluble collagen (Fig. 1C, 
Supplemental Fig. II). Importantly, we did not detect measureable amounts of residual SDS 
in decellularized hearts (< 0.02% w/v extract; below detection limit)18.
Proteomics analysis indicated an 89.14% reduction of the cadaveric cardiac proteome (967 
proteins), with the identification of 105 unique proteins in decellularized hearts (Fig. 1D). 
Guyette et al.
Page 3
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Matrisome proteins were identified by querying our cadaveric and decellularized lists of 
unique proteins with the UniProt database for the subcellular location search terms 
“extracellular matrix” and “basement membrane”, exclusively and combined, as defined 
cellular component terms by the Gene Ontology Consortium19, 20. Acellular heart scaffolds 
showed a marked retention of 36 matrisome proteins following the perfusion 
decellularization process (Fig. 1D). Normalized relative abundances of uniquely identified 
matrisomal proteins in both cadaveric and decellularized human myocardium were further 
categorized into ECM-protein families (Fig. 1E). The four largest ECM-protein families are 
conserved across cadaveric and decellularized cardiac matrix (collagens, laminins, fibrillins, 
and proteoglycans), with the largest relative contributions to the decellularized scaffolds 
being fibrillin-1, collagen IV, heparin sulfate, and laminin gamma-1. Whole lists of unique 
proteins for both cadaveric and decellularized myocardium are provided (Supplemental 
Tables II, III). Histological evaluation confirmed the retention of collagens (I, III, and IV), 
laminin, and fibronectin within acellular human heart scaffolds (Fig. 1F, Supplemental Fig. 
III). Cardiac matrix fiber composition and architecture were maintained, showing vacant 
spacing between fibers with a loss of nuclei and the cardiac myocyte marker myosin heavy 
chain. Insoluble adipose tissue matrix and lipid molecules remain on the epicardial surface 
after decellularization (Fig. 1A), but further histological analysis confirmed the absence of 
cells and preservation of matrix structure (Supplemental Fig. IV). In evaluation of how the 
decellularization process affects the material properties of the cardiac matrix scaffold, 
equibiaxial mechanical testing of transmural samples displayed similar moduli between 
cadaveric and decellularized samples, along both the base/apex axis (376.3 ± 191.7 vs. 370.8 
± 150.9 kPa) and the septum/free-wall axis (581.4 ± 325.5 vs. 451.4 ± 257.8 kPa; Fig. 1G). 
Anisotropic elastic behavior was measured by an “anisotropy ratio” comparing the 
difference and the sum of the two orthogonal moduli within a tissue sample. A value of zero 
indicates perfect biaxial isotropy while a value approaching one indicates a high degree of 
anisotropy. Cadaveric and decellularized samples exhibited measurable anisotropic ratios 
(0.314 ± 0.196 and 0.167 ± 0.158; Fig. 1H) that were statistically different from zero (p = 
0.0027 and p = 0.0086), but not statistically different from each other (p = 0.0984).
Immunogenic profile of decellularized human cardiac matrix
Taking a critical step towards the potential use of our human cardiac scaffolds in clinical 
applications, we assessed the immunogenic profile of perfusion-decellularized myocardium 
after subcutaneous implantation in Sprague-Dawley rats for two weeks. Comparisons were 
made versus cadaveric human myocardium, as well as decellularized porcine myocardium 
that was perfusion-decellularized in the same manner as donated human hearts described 
above16. Histological evaluation of explanted material by immunofluorescence showed a 
considerable number of CD68+ mononuclear cells in all three groups. There appeared to be 
a more discernable M1-macrophage proinflammatory response by cadaveric human and 
decellularized porcine myocardium, while decellularized human myocardium presented with 
a more definitive M2-macrophage immunomodulatory response (Fig. 2A). A CellProfiler 
image processing pipeline and CellProfiler Analyst were used to quantify macrophage 
phenotype across images (Supplemental Fig. V)21, 22. From all cells counted in each high-
power field (number of fields/group: 28 ± 1; number of cells/field: 1,152.5 ± 294.2), 
cadaveric human tissue contained 70.49 ± 1.72% CD68+ cells, while decellularized human 
Guyette et al.
Page 4
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 matrix contained 79.63 ± 3.22%, and decellularized porcine matrix contained 66.44 ± 6.17% 
CD68+ cells (Fig. 2B). Co-staining with CD80 demonstrated the presence of M1 
macrophage phenotype in cadaveric human tissue (63.13 ± 9.79%), decellularized human 
matrix (52.11 ± 7.05%), and decellularized porcine matrix (67.73 ± 3.01%) from all cells 
counted per field. Co-staining for CD163 on adjacent sections revealed that cadaveric tissue 
implants elicited only 38.30 ± 7.46% M2+ cells, while decellularized human matrix 
implants elicited 69.54 ± 8.44% and decellularized porcine matrix elicited 53.52 ± 6.80% 
M2+ immunomodulatory cells (p < 0.01). A CD163/M2+ macrophage response has 
previously been shown as an indication of reconstructive remodeling described in 
decellularized matrices23. During tissue explantation at the 2-week time point, blood 
samples were also collected to analyze whole blood and serum. Whole blood analysis did 
not indicate a statistical difference between any groups with respect to total white blood cell 
components (Supplemental Fig. VI). Sera were also tested against human leukocyte antigen 
(HLA) single antigen beads, where experimental groups were normalized to the sham group, 
and antibody reactivity to beads with specific HLA alleles was determined by mean 
fluorescence intensity (MFI) using HLA Fusion software (version 3.0; One Lambda). 
Implanted decellularized human matrix showed reactivity to only 2 HLA beads, yielding 
values of <100 MFI that are well below the positive cut-off value of 500 MFI (Fig. 2C). 
Implanted cadaveric myocardium showed reactivity to >50 HLA beads, yielding values that 
ranged between 5000 and 7900 MFI, and showing high reactivity against patient-specific 
HLA types attributed to the implanted cadaveric myocardium (Fig. 2C). The single antigen 
bead assay confirmed our qualitative assessment (by immunofluorescence) that the 
decellularization process removes HLA from the cardiac matrix as cells are removed (Fig. 
2D).
Decellularized coronary vasculature
In assessment of acellular coronary vasculature, DCD hearts had slightly lower coronary 
flow (Fig. 3A) and higher vascular resistance (Fig. 3B) compared to DBD hearts during 
detergent perfusion, but achieved similar flow and resistance by the end PBS washes. This 
initial difference did not reach statistical significance. Histological evaluation by 
pentachrome stain showed decellularized vasculature retained structural blood vessel 
features, with preservation of the intima, media, adventitia, and elastic laminas (Fig. 3C). 
Scanning electron microscopy further confirmed that the decellularization process removed 
all endothelial cells, without evidence of basement membrane disruption (Fig. 3D,E). 
Cardiac computed tomography scans revealed conservation of the conductance arteries of 
the coronary tree, showing structure and patent lumens stemming from the left and right 
main coronaries (Fig. 3F). Angiography of acellular hearts from patients presenting with 
coronary artery disease confirmed the preservation of perfusable coronary vessels, but 
revealed that the decellularization process does not resolve luminal narrowing related to 
atherosclerotic plaques (Supplemental Fig. VII). To visualize perfusion of microvasculature 
within decellularized hearts, we cannulated and directly perfused epicardial conductance 
arteries with resuspended 0.2 μm-diameter fluorescent microspheres, and tracked 
microsphere movement through mid-myocardial and endocardial regions using micro-
optical coherence tomography (μOCT). Using a Z-projection tool to generate a running 
Guyette et al.
Page 5
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 average from the acquired video sequences, we confirmed bead-flow through distinct 
pathways or microvascular channels (Supplemental Video I).
To evaluate the preservation of microvasculature, we perfused cadaveric human hearts and 
decellularized human hearts with radio-opaque silicone, and performed a systematic 
comparison of full-thickness left ventricular samples by micro-computed tomography 
(μCT). Reconstructions of high-resolution μCT images were made on full-thickness samples 
from the epicardial surface to the endocardium, revealing that the decellularized cardiac 
matrix retains an intact vascular hierarchy, with branching extensions with diameters on the 
order of ~10 μm (Fig. 3G). Analyzing two-dimensional μCT images from the epi-, mid-, and 
endocardial regions for the number of vessels normalized to tissue area found similar vessel 
densities and trends between the cadaveric and decellularized hearts (Fig. 3H). In the 
subepicardial region, no statistical difference in vascular density was found between 
cadaveric myocardium (15.94 ± 3.03 vessels/mm2) and decellularized matrix (13.44 ± 1.38). 
Likewise, both mid-myocardial and subendocardial regions showed no statistical difference 
in vascular densities between cadaveric myocardium (25.93 ± 0.40 and 20.64 ± 3.52, 
respectively) and decellularized matrix (22.44 ± 2.04 and 18.30 ± 3.6, respectively). Further 
analysis of the μCT images was done to measure the minor axis of vessel cross-sections as 
an indication of vessel diameter, which confirmed similar vessel-diameter distribution 
between the cadaveric and decellularized samples in all three myocardial sub-regions (Fig. 
3I,J).
In vitro cardiac differentiation of BJ RiPS
To examine the translational value of our approach, we sought to generate a clinically 
relevant number of human cardiac myocytes from a non-transgenic cell source. We therefore 
obtained and expanded human BJ fibroblast RNA-induced pluripotent stem cells (BJ RiPS, 
clone 1.1)24. To induce cardiac differentiation, we applied temporal modulation of canonical 
Wnt/β-catenin signaling to BJ RiPS cultured in monolayer25. We then mapped gene 
expression profiles of 15 markers by RT-PCR at different developmental stages (days 0, 3, 
5, 7, 14, 30, 60, 120, and 180) to monitor and define the profile of BJ RiPS through stages of 
cardiac differentiation and maintenance, and to define checkpoints for quality control 
required at a clinically relevant scale (Fig. 4A). Prior to the onset of differentiation at day 0, 
BJ RiPS exhibited definitive expression of classic pluripotency genes OCT4, SOX2, and 
NANOG. Treatment with Gsk3 inhibitor CHIR99021 for 24 hours markedly decreased 
OCT4, SOX2, and NANOG expression by day 3, while expression of genes typically found 
in mesendoderm and mesodermal tissues were elicited (MIXL1, T, ISL1, and GATA4). 
Starting on day 3, 48-hour treatment with Wnt inhibitor IWP4 decreased MIXL1, T, and 
ISL1 by day 5, while essential early-stage cardiac genes emerged (GATA4, NKX2.5, 
MEF2C, and TBX5). By day 7 through day 14 in cardiac maintenance media, definitive late-
stage cardiac genes became expressed (MYH6, MYH7, MYL2, and TNNT2), as large areas 
of differentiated cardiac myocytes began spontaneously contracting by day 14 
(Supplemental Video II). Early- and late-stage cardiac markers tended to increase by day 30, 
and expression persisted through days 60, 120, and 180 post-differentiation. By day 180, 
most cardiac genes appeared to taper, which is consistent with observations of decreased 
contractility within culture plates. In conjunction with increased cardiac gene expression, BJ 
Guyette et al.
Page 6
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 RiPS-derived cardiac myocytes isolated between days 30 and 60 post-differentiation showed 
positive cardiac protein expression and structure for sarcomeric α-actinin, cardiac troponin 
T, and myosin heavy chain by immunofluorescence (Fig. 4B). Cardiac protein expression in 
day 30–60 cardiac myocytes was further confirmed by flow cytometry, yielding high 
populations positive for sarcomeric α-actinin and cardiac troponin T (Fig. 4C), achieving 
differentiation efficiencies of >85%. As day 30–60 cardiac myocytes appeared to be most 
robust for cardiac gene and protein expression, cells within this time frame were 
enzymatically dispersed and isolated for seeding experiments.
Recellularization of myocardial slices and fibers
To test whether perfusion-decellularized human cardiac matrix can support engraftment of 
cardiac myocytes and enable myocardial tissue formation, we reseeded matrix sections (200 
μm) with human iPS-derived cardiac myocytes in non-perfused two-dimensional culture 
(Fig. 5A). Acellular human heart matrix (Fig. 5Ai) supported the attachment, viability, and 
function of human cardiac myocytes (Fig. 5Aii) by evidence of spontaneously contracting 
slices within 4–7 days of culture. Serving as an early milestone for creating force-generating 
cardiac tissue, functional myocardial slices were robust and could be maintained for 120 
days in culture. To characterize the mechanical function, we first used high spatial-
resolution imaging (high density mapping, HDM)26 to determine the area deformation of 
small defined regions of interest (Supplemental Fig. VIII). By independently analyzing 
matrix-seeded cardiac myocytes, as well as the underlying cardiac ECM within the same 
region (20 μm below the slice surface), we confirmed stable cell-matrix interaction and 
quantified the degree to which cell contractility translated to matrix deformation. In 
spontaneously contracting slices, cardiac myocytes achieved 0.59 ± 0.26% area strain at a 
natural frequency of 1.36 ± 0.32 Hz, which translated to 0.47 ± 0.17% area strain of the 
ECM with an average natural frequency of 1.38 ± 0.43 Hz (Fig. 5B). Functional myocardial 
slices could be electrically paced at 1 Hz or 2 Hz, and data for both cells and matrix could be 
captured at consistent dominant frequencies (Fig. 5B). Area strain of myocardial matrix 
could be significantly increased to 1.55 ± 0.55% when paced at 1 Hz, and decreased to 1.02 
± 0.31% when paced at 2 Hz. The technique to measure in vitro area strain is concurrent 
with the in vivo regional cardiac functional metric of systolic area contraction27. 
Regenerated human myocardial slices achieved strain below normal adult myocardium 
(~20%), however, the integration of human cardiac myocytes with human heart matrix 
formed mechanically active tissue on the same order of magnitude as compliant ECM 
cardiac patches tested in vivo (~4%)27.
Moving to a more physiologic three-dimensional model, we reseeded non-perfused cardiac 
fibers (15 mm length, 2.5 mm diameter) cut from the left ventricular free wall of 
decellularized cardiac scaffolds (Fig. 5C). Reseeded cardiac fibers supported the attachment, 
viability, and function of human cardiac myocytes by evidence of spontaneously contracting 
tissue within 7–10 days, which could be maintained for 60+ days in culture (Supplemental 
Video III). Using micro-optical coherence tomography (μOCT) that allows for imaging 
contractility 250 μm within cardiac fibers with high spatial and temporal resolution (Fig 5C, 
Supplemental Video IV)28, we then applied HDM and post-processing analysis for strain 
Guyette et al.
Page 7
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 analysis. Areas 100–200 μm within spontaneously contracting cardiac fibers achieved 8.32 ± 
0.74% strain (Fig. 5D) at a frequency of 1.49 ± 0.06 Hz (Fig. 5E).
We measured force generation on myocardial slices by measuring deflections of contractile 
nodes using a custom setup for adhered slices (Supplemental Fig. IX,A). Force could be 
measured in spontaneously contracting cardiac tissues, and was modulated by electrical 
pacing (Fig. 5F). Spontaneously beating areas within unstimulated slices generated 
14.93±3.85 μN of contractile force, which was decreased to 10.30 ± 2.81 μN when 
electrically stimulated at 2 Hz. Force generation in human myocardial slices was orders of 
magnitude higher than single human iPS-derived cardiac myocytes29, 30, achieving 33.8% of 
native murine embryonic heart tissue (53.0±15.5 μN)31, suggesting multicellular contractile 
tissue formation.
Using a more traditional setup to measure contractile force in muscle tissue (Supplemental 
Fig. IX,B), spontaneously contracting cardiac fibers generated 102.7 ± 76.3 μN of force, 
while electrical pacing at 2 Hz could increase force generation to 124.1 ± 94.7 μN (Fig. 5G) 
by recruiting more recellularized areas to contract in synchrony as a syncytium. Force 
curves measured from both myocardial slices and cardiac fibers were further analyzed to 
assess amplitude, period, time to 50% relaxation (TTR50), and time to 90% relaxation 
(TTR90) under different pacing conditions (Fig. 5H, Supplemental Fig. X). Cardiac fibers 
generated contractile force at an order of magnitude higher than myocardial slices, while 
decreasing trends for period, TTR50, and TTR90 were similar for both constructs (Fig. 5H). 
Captured frequencies of both slices and fibers effectively correlated with pacing frequencies 
(Supplemental Fig. XI). Loading fiber-seeded cardiac myocytes with voltage-sensitive di-8-
ANEPPS dye, cardiac fibers were tested in a custom pacing and imaging chamber to 
perform voltage mapping of cardiac electrical activity. Fibers paced with 10 V at 1 Hz 
generated electrical conductivity that could be mapped across large surface-areas, with a 
conduction velocity of 32 ± 56 cm/s (Fig. 5I). Action potentials at multiple points within 
conduction areas were assessed based on relative fluorescence intensity signal, with an 
average action potential duration at 80% (APD80) of 405 ± 116 ms. Immunofluorescent 
staining of reseeded fibers for cardiac markers sarcomeric α-actinin, cardiac troponin T, and 
myosin heavy chain showed large areas of cardiac myocytes with a striated phenotype, and a 
high degree of alignment (Fig. 5J). Further analysis by transmission electron microscopy 
(TEM) confirmed cardiac myocyte elongation and myocardial tissue formation, 
demonstrated by aligned myofibrillogenesis (Fig. 5K, left panel) and definitive sarcomeric 
structures (right panel).
Whole-heart experiments
Whole-heart recellularization experiments were carried out using a custom human heart 
bioreactor capable of providing coronary perfusion and LV wall mechanical stimulation 
(Fig. 6A). Mechanical stimulation was achieved by oscillating the pressure inside a balloon 
placed within the LV to determined targets, thus imparting strain to the LV wall (Fig. 6B). 
Validation of strain delivery with oscillating balloon pressure was performed using HDM on 
the presumed reseeding area of the LV wall of a decellularized porcine heart under 
mechanical stimulation in our bioreactor (Fig. 6C, Supplemental Video V).
Guyette et al.
Page 8
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 We reseeded whole acellular human hearts with ~500 million human BJ RiPS-derived 
cardiac myocytes by making 5 intramyocardial injections into the basal anterior and mid 
anterior segments of the left ventricle (using ~500 μL/injection, for total volume of 2.5 
mLs), between the left anterior descending and left circumflex coronary arteries (Fig. 6D). 
To improve cell retention, we adopted a technique in which mattress sutures were tied at 
each injection point before needle extraction to minimize cell loss (Fig. 6E)32. LV balloons 
were implanted through the mitral valve post cell delivery to prevent balloon puncture, and 
then pre-filled to fully occupy the ventricular cavity. Recellularized human hearts were then 
mounted in the human heart bioreactor to provide antegrade perfusion to the main coronary 
arteries and cultured for 14 days, with matrix strain stimulation starting on day 7 of culture 
(Fig. 6F, Supplemental Video VI).
Metabolic function was monitored during culture by sampling perfusate from the coronary 
sinus to compare against baseline media (Table 1). Over consecutive 48-hour culture periods 
for 10 days, no significant differences were found for measures of pH, pO2, pCO2, HCO3, 
TCO2, or percent O2 saturation. However, a significant decrease of glucose suggested 
consumption (baseline: 186.33 ± 1.53 mg/dL, culture: 155.75 ± 6.70 mg/dL, p < 0.01). 
Conversely, significant lactate production was detected (baseline: 0 mmol/L, culture: 2.44 ± 
0.19 mmol/L, p < 0.01).
After 14 days in culture, we performed electromechanical functional analysis on the 
regenerated myocardium, using a bench-top perfusion setup. Electrical stimulation was 
delivered through cardiac leads placed within the anterolateral wall of the left ventricle (0.8 
Hz, 10–80 V, 5 ms). Stimulated myocardium generated visible contractions (Supplemental 
Video VII), with recordable repolarizations (Fig. 7A). Using a force transducer to measure 
force based on deflections of contracting regions on the epicardial surface, continuous 
electrical stimulation at 0.8 Hz could generate regional contractions measuring ~350 μN 
(Fig. 7B). By introducing a pressure transducer into the LV balloon and pre-filling the 
balloon to an isovolumetric pressure of 20 mmHg, stimulated myocardial contractions 
generated developed pressures of 2.4 ± 0.1 mmHg, with a dP/dt max of 139.7 ± 5.7 
mmHg/s, a dP/dt min of 41.6 ± 3.5 mmHg/s, and a calculated tau of 47.3 ± 10.6 ms (Fig. 
7C). Using an 8x8-pin plaque electrode array with pins spaced 2.54 mm apart, spontaneous 
depolarizations could be detected across the recellularized myocardium with action potential 
durations of 322 ms (Fig. 7D).
Histological analysis revealed dense regions of engrafted iPS-derived cardiac myocytes in 
the depth of the left ventricular wall, indicated by large areas of myosin heavy chain (MHC) 
positive cells in successive sections throughout recellularized volumes (Fig. 7E). By linear 
interpolation of the areas of MHC-positive signal in tissue sections across reseeded regions, 
we detected a tissue repopulation of up to 50% within the target region of 5 cm3 (Fig. 7F, 
Supplemental Table I). Coronary perfusion during whole heart culture provided sufficient 
nutrient and oxygen supply to maintain >90% viability after 14 days in culture (Fig. 7G). 
Trichrome staining of recellularized areas confirmed engraftment, with reseeded cells 
integrating with cardiac matrix (Fig. 7H). Recellularized regions of whole-heart scaffolds 
contained large areas of cardiac myocytes that expressed sarcomeric α-actinin, cardiac 
troponin T, and myosin heavy chain by immunofluorescence (Fig. 7I). Reseeded cardiac 
Guyette et al.
Page 9
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 myocytes within biomimetically stimulated hearts appeared to demonstrate a range of 
maturity, where some cardiac myocytes showed rounded immature sarcomere formation, 
while other cardiac myocytes displayed elongated and striated phenotypes.
DISCUSSION
Loss of viable myocardium leads to architectural and functional decline, and ultimately 
results in the development of heart failure. Bioengineered myocardium generated from 
patient derived cells could provide an alternative to allo-transplantation and mechanical 
support. Recent reports on the native extracellular matrix platform and robust protocols for 
directed differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells provide key building blocks that 
could be combined towards that goal. Herein, we describe regeneration of functional human 
myocardial tissue constructs based on decellularized human cardiac ECM and human iPS-
derived cardiac myocytes, and report four technical milestones that are paramount for 
bringing this technology closer to clinical relevance: the generation of biocompatible 
acellular whole organ scaffolds from discarded human donor hearts by perfusion 
decellularization, which elicit a more modulatory immunological response; the directed 
differentiation of adult derived, non-transgenic iPSC to generate cardiac myocytes at a 
clinical scale; the engraftment of human iPS derived cardiac myocytes on native ECM for 
the development of functionally contractile tissue; and the up-scaling to biomimetic organ 
culture to generate functional myocardial tissue in the context of a human heart.
Perfusion decellularization has been applied to hearts from several species15, 33–35. Through 
collaboration with the New England Organ Bank and thanks to the generous gift of organ 
donors and their families, we had access to hearts not used for transplantation. We followed 
a previously published detergent based perfusion decellularization protocol to generate 
scaffolds of reproducible characteristics15, 36, 37. In our studies, the increased warm ischemia 
time and potentially incomplete heparinization of DCD donors did not have any detectable 
detrimental effect on the decellularization process or the resulting scaffold when compared 
to hearts from DBD donors. This finding is of importance, given that approximately 1,600 
DCD donor hearts are currently available per year in the US3, 38, and this number is 
expected to increase39–41. While human donors represent a more heterogeneous pool 
compared to well-characterized porcine donor herds, current organ donation, allocation, and 
procurement infrastructures are well established, and donors undergo extensive screening to 
ensure freedom from pathogens. Furthermore, differences in anatomy and physiology 
between porcine and human hearts (e.g. shape, pulmonary venous anatomy) may prove to be 
relevant in regenerated myocardial grafts42, 43. From a regulatory perspective, perfusion 
decellularized human heart matrix could be a readily available and safe first step on a 
pathway towards clinical translation.
As has been reported in other human organs44, decellularization of hearts with structural 
disease and atherosclerotic lesions yielded scaffolds with corresponding matrix defects. In 
line with prior work15, 36, 45, we found preservation of a hierarchical network of macro- and 
microvascular channels after decellularization, providing the foundation for the formation of 
metabolically active myocardium. Our analysis revealed preserved vascular density and 
binned diameter distribution in decellularized myocardium compared to cadaveric controls 
Guyette et al.
Page 10
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 and data reported in human hearts and animal models46, 47. Using high resolution μCT 
imaging (6 μm), this finding extended to comparable lower-boundary density and 
distribution of small-diameter vessels (<80 μm) in decellularized and cadaveric hearts. 
Though there was no statistical difference found in vessel density across regions, 
decellularized hearts tended to demonstrate slightly lower densities, visibly noticeable in the 
μCT of mid- and endocardial regions. This presents a technical limitation, as the loss of 
endothelium and tissue-turgor make the recruitment of deeper vascular conduits more 
challenging. For culture of recellularized hearts, perfusion pressure must be increased 
towards the higher-end of physiological range in order to ensure media flow to reseeded 
regions. Active and passive mechanical properties of native myocardium are a result of 
mutually orthogonal fiber directions and play a key role in translating mechanical function 
from cells, to tissue, and to organ.48. In human hearts, perfusion decellularization did not 
affect the anisotropic behavior of myocardium upon passive mechanical testing, indicating 
the preservation of the native fiber framework within the myocardial matrix49. Artificial 
scaffolds designed to reproduce some of the anisotropic behavior of myocardial tissue have 
been repopulated with cardiac myocytes to create engineered myocardial tissue grafts with 
anisotropic properties50, 51. However, reproduction of the multidimensional complexity of 
native cardiac fiber architecture in a synthetic whole organ scaffold has not been 
accomplished to date. Based on our results we concluded that perfusion decellularization of 
whole human hearts captures a structural blueprint that could guide the formation of 
electrically and mechanically orthotropic myocardium.
In the present study, perfusion decellularization of human hearts resulted in acellular 
scaffolds consisting of major extracellular matrix components such as collagens, elastin, and 
glycosaminoglycans, which is in line with similar data published in other organ systems and 
species15, 36, 37, and decellularized human heart sections52. Quantitative analyses of 
extracellular matrix components were similar in DCD and DBD hearts, with preservation of 
insoluble collagen and glycosaminoglycans, and reduction of soluble collagen and elastin. 
This is consistent with a loss of mainly immature collagen, while more mature, crosslinked, 
high-strength collagen is preserved53. Histological and immunohistochemical analysis 
showed absence of nuclei and cytoplasmic components such as myosin heavy chain. Further 
compositional analysis using mass spectrometry-based label-free proteomics revealed an 
89.14% reduction of total protein content to 105 proteins and confirmed preservation of 36 
matrisome proteins, including important structural proteins such as fibrillin-1, collagen IV, 
collagen VI, and laminin. The relevance of the observed low level of intracellular cardiac 
peptides within the cardiac scaffolds for recellularization and transplantation has yet to be 
determined. The potential clinical value of any organ matrix depends on complete removal 
of cell surface xeno- or allo-antigens, and substantial reduction of residual double stranded 
DNA. Perfusion decellularized human heart matrices contained less DNA than the currently 
accepted standard for biomesh implants, and could therefore be compatible with clinical 
transplantation17. We further confirmed absence of human leukocyte antigens by 
immunostaining of decellularized hearts, and the absence of antibody induction in an 
immunocompetent animal model in vivo. While we did not observe the generation of panel 
reactive antibodies, decellularized human heart matrixes promoted a CD163 heavy 
macrophage response, consistent with reconstructive remodeling described in non-
Guyette et al.
Page 11
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 crosslinked, decellularized matrix implants23, 54–56. Notably, decellularized porcine 
myocardium showed a similar immunogenic profile as decellularized human myocardium 
by histology, although we did not examine the humoral response to porcine matrix. These 
early results hold promise from a device perspective, since in vivo remodeling and graft 
homeostasis will depend on the absence of chronic inflammation and the promotion of a 
reconstructive response57.
Since induced pluripotent stem cells were first described, the generation of human iPS-
derived cardiac myocytes holds immediate promise for cardiac applications58, 59. In cardiac 
regeneration, techniques have been developed for the delivery of human iPS-derived cardiac 
myocytes to improve cardiac function post-infarct7, 60, provide cardioprotection61, and 
enhance homing and survival in infarcted myocardium62. These approaches build on the 
extensive body of literature on ES derived cardiac myocytes, which have been recently 
reported to mediate myogenesis in a primate model of cardiac repair32. In parallel, the field 
of myocardial tissue engineering has provided a solid foundation for protocols to repopulate 
various scaffold materials with human iPS-derived cardiac myocytes and create functional 
tissue7, 34, 63–66. Our intent was to combine the techniques of directed differentiation and the 
principles of myocardial engineering to generate human myocardial grafts of clinical 
relevance, for applications in high-throughput screening and as a foundational basis for 
creating human myocardial grafts of clinically relevant scale.
With potential translation in mind, we chose to derive cardiac myocytes from a non-
genetically altered pluripotent cell source that could be generated from patient-derived 
somatic cells via repeated administration of synthetic messenger RNAs67, 68.. This method is 
characterized by lack of vector integration, high efficiency, and low rate of chromosomal 
abnormalities, and has been validated by several human reprogramming laboratories69. In 
order to generate cardiac myocytes at a clinically relevant scale, we adapted a directed 
differentiation protocol based on temporal modulation of canonical Wnt/β-catenin signaling 
to BJ RiPS cultured in monolayer25. This method yielded 5x108 cardiac myocytes with 
reasonable use of resources and workload in the setting of an academic laboratory. In vitro 
differentiation of pluripotent stem cells recapitulates the sequential stages of embryonic 
cardiac development70. Therefore, with Wnt/β-catenin signaling25, we identified definitive 
stages for the development of precardiac mesoderm (day 3), cardiac mesoderm (day 5), heart 
field specific progenitors (day 7), and iPS-derived cardiac myocytes (days 14, 30, 60, 120, 
and 180). While embryoid body methods have been applied to this cell line previously71, we 
show that this protocol is highly reproducible for the cardiac differentiation of BJ RiPS, and 
demonstrates a facile method to generate a clinical number of cardiac myocytes with a high 
efficiency.
Using three-dimensional models of increasing complexity we were then able to document 
the formation of mechanically and electrically active myocardial tissue. In slice experiments, 
we first confirmed biocompatibility, cell-mediated matrix deformation, and force generation. 
The formation of contractile tissue on myocardial slices is evidence of reestablishment of 
cell-cell adhesions, as well as cell matrix coupling, which are essential features of the 
myocardial microenvironment72. Despite being a stationary model, the observed 
development of strain and force generation in cardiac slices further confirms that native 
Guyette et al.
Page 12
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 ECM provides a physiologic microenvironment known to be beneficial to pluripotent cell-
derived cardiac myocytes and myofibers13, 73. In a second set of experiments, we scaled 
native ECM recellularization to myofibers of 15 mm in length and 2.5 mm in diameter. An 
improvement to stationary slices, but still non-perfused, the resulting tissue showed 
improved cell engraftment and orientation, increased strain and force generation, electrical 
conductivity, and improved fiber microarchitecture. This is in line with the observation that 
physiologic substrate stiffness improves contractility of neonatal and iPSC derived cardiac 
myocytes74, 75. The observed improvement in dynamic electrical and mechanical tissue 
function in fibers may further be related to improved rigidity matching and resulting cardiac 
myocytes-tissue synchronization within the native cardiac ECM76.
Generation of tissue constructs of clinical value, either as whole heart grafts or myocardial 
implants ultimately requires regeneration of human myocardium on a whole organ 
scale 32, 63, 77, 78. We therefore attempted tissue assembly in whole human heart matrices 
similar to prior reports in rat and mouse hearts15, 79. Depending on its size, nearly one 
billion cardiac myocytes are lost due to a myocardial infarction (MI)80, while several billion 
cardiac myocytes would be required to completely repopulate an acellular human heart. To 
examine the clinical feasibility of myocardial regeneration, we attempted to deliver ~500 
million cardiac myocytes to a highly vascularized ~5 cm3 volume of the left ventricle, 
between the left anterior descending and left circumflex coronary arteries. Efficient cell 
delivery with minimal matrix damage could be achieved via five injections to multiple 
depths within the ventricular wall over a square epicardial region (Fig. 6E).
To enable tissue development, we designed and built a biomimetic bioreactor system to 
accommodate whole heart scaffolds, largely based on reported isolated working heart 
models, and the well documented role of mechanical stimulation in the formation of 
myocardial tissue constructs81–84. Media perfusion via the native coronary vascular channels 
provided sufficient nutrient and oxygen supply to enable the formation of myocardial tissue 
within the context of the whole heart scaffold. After a culture period of 14 days, repopulated 
myocardial segments were metabolically active, provided contractile function, and 
responded to electrical stimulation. Myocardial tissue was immature, showing a range of 
rounded to elongated sarcomeric phenotypes, which corresponds to reported morphologic 
features of developing myocardium85, 86 and the in vivo fate of pluripotent cell derived 
cardiac myocytes87. This endpoint was chosen based on the need to analyze cell viability 
and tissue formation, however, full maturation will likely require longer culture times and 
improved biomimetic regimens.
While we believe that the present data set proves the translational value of the human 
acellular matrix platform and the ability to generate myocardial tissue of clinically relevant 
origin and platform, the present experiments did not aim to achieve full recellularization of 
the myocardium of an entire human heart. Several challenges lie ahead in bringing this 
technology to clinical scale and applications. Full recellularization of the myocardial matrix 
and valve structures are necessary for generating sustainable ventricular pump function. 
Achieving this necessitates improved recellularization techniques to enhance cell coverage 
without damaging the matrix (e.g. uni-directional or bi-directional vascular techniques). 
Additionally, biomimetic culture conditions (i.e. static or dynamic stretch, electrical 
Guyette et al.
Page 13
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 stimulation, media components) must be optimized to elicit the maturity of reseeded cardiac 
myocytes and drive tissue development. Considerations should potentially be made to donor 
matrix age and composition, for the promotion of improved cell-matrix integration. A 
larger-scale immunological study is needed for a more complete understanding host-
response to cardiac matrices over time, as well as to understand the modulatory or 
reconstructive effects on the matrix. Importantly, techniques to achieve and test for complete 
re-endothelialization are critical in clinical application for the maintenance of blood-flow 
throughout the organ (i.e. vascular recruitment) and to prevent matrix-induced blood 
coagulation. The present study provides a foundational toolset to generate grafts of human 
scale for therapeutic applications, and multiple model platforms to generate patient derived 
human myocardium of different scales for analytical purposes. Undoubtedly, many hurdles 
towards the regeneration of whole heart grafts remain, including the need for complete re-
endothelialization, repopulation of the valvular apparatus, and re-establishment of a 
functional conduction system.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We thank the New England Organ Bank and all of the explant surgeons for their continued support and 
coordination involved in organ procurement. We further thank the Program in Membrane Biology Microscopy Core 
at MGH, as well as Ann Tisdale at the MEEI, for technical support with scanning electron microscopy (supported 
by NIH grants DK43351 and DK57521). We thank Jeremy Song, MD for his contributions to decellularization 
process development. Additionally, we thank Wenpo Chuang, MD and Roger Ng, MD for their contributions to 
cardiac angiography. We thank TuKiet Lam, PhD and his team at the MS & Proteomics Resource at Yale School of 
Medicine for support with proteomics analysis, as well as James Titus and Chris Owen at MGH for support and use 
of fluoroscopy suites. We further thank John Favreau, PhD for program support involved with HDM functional 
analysis. We thank Patricia Della Pelle, Gertraude Warren, Jed Barger, and Susan Saidman, PhD for their help with 
immunogenic profiling and HLA testing. For vascular analysis, we thank Brian Ghoshhajra, MD in the Department 
of Radiology at MGH. Further, we thank Daniel Brooks, Mathew Scott, and Adriana Martinez-Betancourt in the 
Center for Advanced Orthopedic Studies at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center for their assistance with 
microcomputed tomography of microvasculature. In addition, we would like to thank Megan Scanlan for her 
assistance with transmission electron microscopy on cardiac fibers. Lastly, we want to thank Kengyeh Chu, PhD 
and Joseph Gardecki, PhD of the Wellman Center for Photomedicine at MGH, for their assistance with micro-
optical coherence tomography on cardiac fibers and microvasculature.
SOURCES OF FUNDING
The present study was supported by the US National Institutes of Health (NIH) Director’s New Innovator DP2 
OD008749-01, and by the National Heart Lung and Blood Institute R21 HL108663-2 and R01 HL115282.
Nonstandard Abbreviations and Acronyms
ECM
extracellular matrix
DCD
donation after cardiac death
DBD
donation after brain death
iPSC
induced pluripotent stem cell
BJ-RiPS
BJ fibroblast RNA-induced pluripotent stem
Guyette et al.
Page 14
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 μOCT
micro-optical coherence tomography
APD80
action potential duration at 80%
MFI
mean fluorescence intensity
HDM
high density mapping
TTRX
time to X% relaxation
μCT
micro-computed tomography
SDS
sodium dodecyl sulfate (cells)
HLA
human leukocyte antigen
References
1. Go AS, Mozaffarian D, Roger VL, Benjamin EJ, Berry JD, Blaha MJ, Dai S, Ford ES, Fox CS, 
Franco S, Fullerton HJ, Gillespie C, Hailpern SM, Heit JA, Howard VJ, Huffman MD, Judd SE, 
Kissela BM, Kittner SJ, Lackland DT, Lichtman JH, Lisabeth LD, Mackey RH, Magid DJ, Marcus 
GM, Marelli A, Matchar DB, McGuire DK, Mohler ER 3rd, Moy CS, Mussolino ME, Neumar RW, 
Nichol G, Pandey DK, Paynter NP, Reeves MJ, Sorlie PD, Stein J, Towfighi A, Turan TN, Virani 
SS, Wong ND, Woo D, Turner MB. Heart disease and stroke statistics--2014 update: A report from 
the american heart association. Circulation. 2014; 129:e28–e292. [PubMed: 24352519] 
2. Braunwald E. Heart failure. JACC. Heart failure. 2013; 1:1–20. [PubMed: 24621794] 
3. Organ procurement and transplantation network (optn) - national data reports; u.S. Department of 
health and human services, health resources services administration (hrsa). 2014
4. Tonsho M, Michel S, Ahmed Z, Alessandrini A, Madsen JC. Heart transplantation: Challenges 
facing the field. Cold Spring Harbor perspectives in medicine. 2014; 4
5. Hill JA, Olson EN. Cardiac plasticity. N Engl J Med. 2008; 358:1370–1380. [PubMed: 18367740] 
6. Chong JJ, Yang X, Don CW, Minami E, Liu YW, Weyers JJ, Mahoney WM, Van Biber B, Palpant 
NJ, Gantz JA, Fugate JA, Muskheli V, Gough GM, Vogel KW, Astley CA, Hotchkiss CE, 
Baldessari A, Pabon L, Reinecke H, Gill EA, Nelson V, Kiem HP, Laflamme MA, Murry CE. 
Human embryonic-stem-cell-derived cardiac myocytes regenerate non-human primate hearts. 
Nature. 2014
7. Kawamura M, Miyagawa S, Miki K, Saito A, Fukushima S, Higuchi T, Kawamura T, Kuratani T, 
Daimon T, Shimizu T, Okano T, Sawa Y. Feasibility, safety, and therapeutic efficacy of human 
induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiac myocyte sheets in a porcine ischemic cardiomyopathy 
model. Circulation. 2012; 126:S29–37. [PubMed: 22965990] 
8. Seif-Naraghi SB, Singelyn JM, Salvatore MA, Osborn KG, Wang JJ, Sampat U, Kwan OL, 
Strachan GM, Wong J, Schup-Magoffin PJ, Braden RL, Bartels K, DeQuach JA, Preul M, Kinsey 
AM, DeMaria AN, Dib N, Christman KL. Safety and efficacy of an injectable extracellular matrix 
hydrogel for treating myocardial infarction. Science translational medicine. 2013; 5:173ra125.
9. Leor J, Tuvia S, Guetta V, Manczur F, Castel D, Willenz U, Petnehazy O, Landa N, Feinberg MS, 
Konen E, Goitein O, Tsur-Gang O, Shaul M, Klapper L, Cohen S. Intracoronary injection of in situ 
forming alginate hydrogel reverses left ventricular remodeling after myocardial infarction in swine. 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009; 54:1014–1023. [PubMed: 19729119] 
10. Coulombe KL, Bajpai VK, Andreadis ST, Murry CE. Heart regeneration with engineered 
myocardial tissue. Annu Rev Biomed Eng. 2014
11. Zimmermann WH, Melnychenko I, Eschenhagen T. Engineered heart tissue for regeneration of 
diseased hearts. Biomaterials. 2004; 25:1639–1647. [PubMed: 14697865] 
12. Radisic M, Deen W, Langer R, Vunjak-Novakovic G. Mathematical model of oxygen distribution 
in engineered cardiac tissue with parallel channel array perfused with culture medium containing 
Guyette et al.
Page 15
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 oxygen carriers. American journal of physiology. Heart and circulatory physiology. 2005; 
288:H1278–1289. [PubMed: 15539422] 
13. Engler AJ, Carag-Krieger C, Johnson CP, Raab M, Tang HY, Speicher DW, Sanger JW, Sanger 
JM, Discher DE. Embryonic cardiac myocytes beat best on a matrix with heart-like elasticity: 
Scar-like rigidity inhibits beating. Journal of cell science. 2008; 121:3794–3802. [PubMed: 
18957515] 
14. Buckberg G, Hoffman JI, Mahajan A, Saleh S, Coghlan C. Cardiac mechanics revisited: The 
relationship of cardiac architecture to ventricular function. Circulation. 2008; 118:2571–2587. 
[PubMed: 19064692] 
15. Ott HC, Matthiesen TS, Goh SK, Black LD, Kren SM, Netoff TI, Taylor DA. Perfusion-
decellularized matrix: Using nature’s platform to engineer a bioartificial heart. Nat Med. 2008; 
14:213–221. [PubMed: 18193059] 
16. Guyette JP, Gilpin SE, Charest JM, Tapias LF, Ren X, Ott HC. Perfusion decellularization of 
whole organs. Nature protocols. 2014; 9:1451–1468. [PubMed: 24874812] 
17. Crapo PM, Gilbert TW, Badylak SF. An overview of tissue and whole organ decellularization 
processes. Biomaterials. 2011; 32:3233–3243. [PubMed: 21296410] 
18. Rusconi F, Valton E, Nguyen R, Dufourc E. Quantification of sodium dodecyl sulfate in 
microliter-volume biochemical samples by visible light spectroscopy. Analytical biochemistry. 
2001; 295:31–37. [PubMed: 11476542] 
19. Magrane M. Consortium U. Uniprot knowledgebase: A hub of integrated protein data. Database : 
the journal of biological databases and curation. 2011; 2011:bar009. [PubMed: 21447597] 
20. Ashburner M, Ball CA, Blake JA, Botstein D, Butler H, Cherry JM, Davis AP, Dolinski K, Dwight 
SS, Eppig JT, Harris MA, Hill DP, Issel-Tarver L, Kasarskis A, Lewis S, Matese JC, Richardson 
JE, Ringwald M, Rubin GM, Sherlock G. Gene ontology: Tool for the unification of biology. The 
gene ontology consortium. Nature genetics. 2000; 25:25–29. [PubMed: 10802651] 
21. Carpenter AE, Jones TR, Lamprecht MR, Clarke C, Kang IH, Friman O, Guertin DA, Chang JH, 
Lindquist RA, Moffat J, Golland P, Sabatini DM. Cellprofiler: Image analysis software for 
identifying and quantifying cell phenotypes. Genome biology. 2006; 7:R100. [PubMed: 
17076895] 
22. Jones TR, Carpenter AE, Lamprecht MR, Moffat J, Silver SJ, Grenier JK, Castoreno AB, Eggert 
US, Root DE, Golland P, Sabatini DM. Scoring diverse cellular morphologies in image-based 
screens with iterative feedback and machine learning. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009; 106:1826–
1831. [PubMed: 19188593] 
23. Badylak SF, Valentin JE, Ravindra AK, McCabe GP, Stewart-Akers AM. Macrophage phenotype 
as a determinant of biologic scaffold remodeling. Tissue Eng Part A. 2008; 14:1835–1842. 
[PubMed: 18950271] 
24. Warren L, Manos PD, Ahfeldt T, Loh YH, Li H, Lau F, Ebina W, Mandal PK, Smith ZD, Meissner 
A, Daley GQ, Brack AS, Collins JJ, Cowan C, Schlaeger TM, Rossi DJ. Highly efficient 
reprogramming to pluripotency and directed differentiation of human cells with synthetic modified 
mrna. Cell stem cell. 2010; 7:618–630. [PubMed: 20888316] 
25. Lian X, Hsiao C, Wilson G, Zhu K, Hazeltine LB, Azarin SM, Raval KK, Zhang J, Kamp TJ, 
Palecek SP. Robust cardiac myocyte differentiation from human pluripotent stem cells via 
temporal modulation of canonical wnt signaling. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012; 109:E1848–
1857. [PubMed: 22645348] 
26. Kelly DJ, Azeloglu EU, Kochupura PV, Sharma GS, Gaudette GR. Accuracy and reproducibility 
of a subpixel extended phase correlation method to determine micron level displacements in the 
heart. Med Eng Phys. 2007; 29:154–162. [PubMed: 16531092] 
27. Kochupura PV, Azeloglu EU, Kelly DJ, Doronin SV, Badylak SF, Krukenkamp IB, Cohen IS, 
Gaudette GR. Tissue-engineered myocardial patch derived from extracellular matrix provides 
regional mechanical function. Circulation. 2005; 112:I144–149. [PubMed: 16159807] 
28. Liu L, Gardecki JA, Nadkarni SK, Toussaint JD, Yagi Y, Bouma BE, Tearney GJ. Imaging the 
subcellular structure of human coronary atherosclerosis using micro-optical coherence 
tomography. Nat Med. 2011; 17:1010–1014. [PubMed: 21743452] 
Guyette et al.
Page 16
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 29. Liu J, Sun N, Bruce MA, Wu JC, Butte MJ. Atomic force mechanobiology of pluripotent stem 
cell-derived cardiac myocytes. PLoS ONE. 2012; 7:e37559. [PubMed: 22624048] 
30. Rodriguez, MLMC.; Sniadecki, NJ. Assessment of induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiac 
myocyte contractility using micropost arrays. ASME 2013 Summer Bioengineering Conference; 
SBC2013–14640; 2013. p. V01AT15A005
31. Xi J, Khalil M, Shishechian N, Hannes T, Pfannkuche K, Liang H, Fatima A, Haustein M, Suhr F, 
Bloch W, Reppel M, Saric T, Wernig M, Janisch R, Brockmeier K, Hescheler J, Pillekamp F. 
Comparison of contractile behavior of native murine ventricular tissue and cardiac myocytes 
derived from embryonic or induced pluripotent stem cells. Faseb J. 2010; 24:2739–2751. 
[PubMed: 20371616] 
32. Chong JJ, Yang X, Don CW, Minami E, Liu YW, Weyers JJ, Mahoney WM, Van Biber B, Cook 
SM, Palpant NJ, Gantz JA, Fugate JA, Muskheli V, Gough GM, Vogel KW, Astley CA, Hotchkiss 
CE, Baldessari A, Pabon L, Reinecke H, Gill EA, Nelson V, Kiem HP, Laflamme MA, Murry CE. 
Human embryonic-stem-cell-derived cardiac myocytes regenerate non-human primate hearts. 
Nature. 2014; 510:273–277. [PubMed: 24776797] 
33. Wainwright JM, Czajka CA, Patel UB, Freytes DO, Tobita K, Gilbert TW, Badylak SF. 
Preparation of cardiac extracellular matrix from an intact porcine heart. Tissue engineering. Part C, 
Methods. 2010; 16:525–532. [PubMed: 19702513] 
34. Lu TY, Lin B, Kim J, Sullivan M, Tobita K, Salama G, Yang L. Repopulation of decellularized 
mouse heart with human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiovascular progenitor cells. Nat 
Commun. 2013; 4:2307. [PubMed: 23942048] 
35. Sanchez PL, Fernandez-Santos ME, Costanza S, Climent AM, Moscoso I, Gonzalez-Nicolas MA, 
Sanz-Ruiz R, Rodriguez H, Kren SM, Garrido G, Escalante JL, Bermejo J, Elizaga J, Menarguez 
J, Yotti R, Perez del Villar C, Espinosa MA, Guillem MS, Willerson JT, Bernad A, Matesanz R, 
Taylor DA, Fernandez-Aviles F. Acellular human heart matrix: A critical step toward whole heart 
grafts. Biomaterials. 2015; 61:279–289. [PubMed: 26005766] 
36. Song JJ, Guyette JP, Gilpin SE, Gonzalez G, Vacanti JP, Ott HC. Regeneration and experimental 
orthotopic transplantation of a bioengineered kidney. Nat Med. 2013; 19:646–651. [PubMed: 
23584091] 
37. Gilpin SE, Guyette JP, Gonzalez G, Ren X, Asara JM, Mathisen DJ, Vacanti JP, Ott HC. Perfusion 
decellularization of human and porcine lungs: Bringing the matrix to clinical scale. J Heart Lung 
Transplant. 2014; 33:298–308. [PubMed: 24365767] 
38. Osaki S, Anderson JE, Johnson MR, Edwards NM, Kohmoto T. The potential of cardiac allografts 
from donors after cardiac death at the university of wisconsin organ procurement organization. Eur 
J Cardiothorac Surg. 2010; 37:74–79. [PubMed: 19695894] 
39. Zych B, Popov AF, Amrani M, Bahrami T, Redmond KC, Krueger H, Carby M, Simon AR. Lungs 
from donation after circulatory death donors: An alternative source to brain-dead donors? Midterm 
results at a single institution. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2012; 42:542–549. [PubMed: 22371518] 
40. Alvarez J, del Barrio R, Arias J, Vazquez S, Sanchez A, Iglesias J, Barra C, Ibarguren C. Non-
heart-beating donors: Estimated actual potential. Transplantation proceedings. 2001; 33:1101–
1103. [PubMed: 11267209] 
41. Garcia Saez D, Elbetanony A, Lezberg P, Hassanein A, Bowles CT, Popov AF, Zych B, 
Sabashnikov A, Mohite P, Simon AR. Ex vivo heart perfusion after cardiocirculatory death; a 
porcine model. J Surg Res. 2014
42. Crick SJ, Sheppard MN, Ho SY, Gebstein L, Anderson RH. Anatomy of the pig heart: 
Comparisons with normal human cardiac structure. J Anat. 1998; 193(Pt 1):105–119. [PubMed: 
9758141] 
43. Lelovas PP, Kostomitsopoulos NG, Xanthos TT. A comparative anatomic and physiologic 
overview of the porcine heart. Journal of the American Association for Laboratory Animal 
Science : JAALAS. 2014; 53:432–438. [PubMed: 25255064] 
44. Sokocevic D, Bonenfant NR, Wagner DE, Borg ZD, Lathrop MJ, Lam YW, Deng B, Desarno MJ, 
Ashikaga T, Loi R, Hoffman AM, Weiss DJ. The effect of age and emphysematous and fibrotic 
injury on the re-cellularization of de-cellularized lungs. Biomaterials. 2013; 34:3256–3269. 
[PubMed: 23384794] 
Guyette et al.
Page 17
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 45. Ott HC, Clippinger B, Conrad C, Schuetz C, Pomerantseva I, Ikonomou L, Kotton D, Vacanti JP. 
Regeneration and orthotopic transplantation of a bioartificial lung. Nat Med. 2010; 16:927–933. 
[PubMed: 20628374] 
46. Rodriguez-Porcel M, Lerman A, Ritman EL, Wilson SH, Best PJ, Lerman LO. Altered myocardial 
microvascular 3d architecture in experimental hypercholesterolemia. Circulation. 2000; 102:2028–
2030. [PubMed: 11044415] 
47. Sangaralingham SJ, Ritman EL, McKie PM, Ichiki T, Lerman A, Scott CG, Martin FL, Harders 
GE, Bellavia D, Burnett JC Jr. Cardiac micro-computed tomography imaging of the aging 
coronary vasculature. Circulation. Cardiovascular imaging. 2012; 5:518–524. [PubMed: 
22679058] 
48. Cansiz FB, Dal H, Kaliske M. An orthotropic viscoelastic material model for passive myocardium: 
Theory and algorithmic treatment. Computer methods in biomechanics and biomedical 
engineering. 2015; 18:1160–1172. [PubMed: 24533658] 
49. Holzapfel GA, Ogden RW. Constitutive modelling of passive myocardium: A structurally based 
framework for material characterization. Philosophical transactions. Series A, Mathematical, 
physical, and engineering sciences. 2009; 367:3445–3475.
50. Engelmayr GC Jr, Cheng M, Bettinger CJ, Borenstein JT, Langer R, Freed LE. Accordion-like 
honeycombs for tissue engineering of cardiac anisotropy. Nat Mater. 2008; 7:1003–1010. 
[PubMed: 18978786] 
51. Costa KD, Lee EJ, Holmes JW. Creating alignment and anisotropy in engineered heart tissue: Role 
of boundary conditions in a model three-dimensional culture system. Tissue Eng. 2003; 9:567–
577. [PubMed: 13678436] 
52. Oberwallner B, Brodarac A, Choi YH, Saric T, Anic P, Morawietz L, Stamm C. Preparation of 
cardiac extracellular matrix scaffolds by decellularization of human myocardium. J Biomed Mater 
Res A. 2014; 102:3263–3272. [PubMed: 24142588] 
53. Friess W. Collagen--biomaterial for drug delivery. European journal of pharmaceutics and 
biopharmaceutics : official journal of Arbeitsgemeinschaft fur Pharmazeutische Verfahrenstechnik 
e. V. 1998; 45:113–136. [PubMed: 9704909] 
54. Badylak SF, Gilbert TW. Immune response to biologic scaffold materials. Seminars in 
immunology. 2008; 20:109–116. [PubMed: 18083531] 
55. Brown BN, Londono R, Tottey S, Zhang L, Kukla KA, Wolf MT, Daly KA, Reing JE, Badylak 
SF. Macrophage phenotype as a predictor of constructive remodeling following the implantation 
of biologically derived surgical mesh materials. Acta biomaterialia. 2012; 8:978–987. [PubMed: 
22166681] 
56. Brown BN, Ratner BD, Goodman SB, Amar S, Badylak SF. Macrophage polarization: An 
opportunity for improved outcomes in biomaterials and regenerative medicine. Biomaterials. 2012; 
33:3792–3802. [PubMed: 22386919] 
57. Ariganello MB, Simionescu DT, Labow RS, Lee JM. Macrophage differentiation and polarization 
on a decellularized pericardial biomaterial. Biomaterials. 2011; 32:439–449. [PubMed: 20933269] 
58. Takahashi K, Tanabe K, Ohnuki M, Narita M, Ichisaka T, Tomoda K, Yamanaka S. Induction of 
pluripotent stem cells from adult human fibroblasts by defined factors. Cell. 2007; 131:861–872. 
[PubMed: 18035408] 
59. Zhang J, Wilson GF, Soerens AG, Koonce CH, Yu J, Palecek SP, Thomson JA, Kamp TJ. 
Functional cardiac myocytes derived from human induced pluripotent stem cells. Circ Res. 2009; 
104:e30–41. [PubMed: 19213953] 
60. Citro L, Naidu S, Hassan F, Kuppusamy ML, Kuppusamy P, Angelos MG, Khan M. Comparison 
of human induced pluripotent stem-cell derived cardiac myocytes with human mesenchymal stem 
cells following acute myocardial infarction. PLoS ONE. 2014; 9:e116281. [PubMed: 25551230] 
61. Carpenter L, Carr C, Yang CT, Stuckey DJ, Clarke K, Watt SM. Efficient differentiation of human 
induced pluripotent stem cells generates cardiac cells that provide protection following myocardial 
infarction in the rat. Stem cells and development. 2012; 21:977–986. [PubMed: 22182484] 
62. Malecki M, Putzer E, Sabo C, Foorohar A, Quach C, Stampe C, Beauchaine M, Malecki R, 
Tombokan X, Anderson M. Directed cardiomyogenesis of autologous human induced pluripotent 
Guyette et al.
Page 18
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 stem cells recruited to infarcted myocardium with bioengineered antibodies. Molecular and 
cellular therapies. 2014; 2
63. Kawamura M, Miyagawa S, Fukushima S, Saito A, Miki K, Ito E, Sougawa N, Kawamura T, 
Daimon T, Shimizu T, Okano T, Toda K, Sawa Y. Enhanced survival of transplanted human 
induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiac myocytes by the combination of cell sheets with the 
pedicled omental flap technique in a porcine heart. Circulation. 2013; 128:S87–94. [PubMed: 
24030425] 
64. Masumoto H, Ikuno T, Takeda M, Fukushima H, Marui A, Katayama S, Shimizu T, Ikeda T, 
Okano T, Sakata R, Yamashita JK. Human ips cell-engineered cardiac tissue sheets with cardiac 
myocytes and vascular cells for cardiac regeneration. Scientific reports. 2014; 4:6716. [PubMed: 
25336194] 
65. Masumoto H, Matsuo T, Yamamizu K, Uosaki H, Narazaki G, Katayama S, Marui A, Shimizu T, 
Ikeda T, Okano T, Sakata R, Yamashita JK. Pluripotent stem cell-engineered cell sheets 
reassembled with defined cardiovascular populations ameliorate reduction in infarct heart function 
through cardiac myocyte-mediated neovascularization. Stem Cells. 2012; 30:1196–1205. 
[PubMed: 22438013] 
66. Fujita J, Itabashi Y, Seki T, Tohyama S, Tamura Y, Sano M, Fukuda K. Myocardial cell sheet 
therapy and cardiac function. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2012; 303:H1169–1182. [PubMed: 
23001836] 
67. Warren L, Manos PD, Ahfeldt T, Loh Y-H, Li H, Lau F, Ebina W, Mandal PK, Smith ZD, 
Meissner A, Daley GQ, Brack AS, Collins JJ, Cowan C, Schlaeger TM, Rossi DJ. Highly efficient 
reprogramming to pluripotency and directed differentiation of human cells with synthetic modified 
mrna. Cell stem cell. 2010; 7:618–630. [PubMed: 20888316] 
68. Soares FA, Sheldon M, Rao M, Mummery C, Vallier L. International coordination of large-scale 
human induced pluripotent stem cell initiatives: Wellcome trust and isscr workshops white paper. 
Stem cell reports. 2014; 3:931–939. [PubMed: 25496616] 
69. Schlaeger TM, Daheron L, Brickler TR, Entwisle S, Chan K, Cianci A, DeVine A, Ettenger A, 
Fitzgerald K, Godfrey M, Gupta D, McPherson J, Malwadkar P, Gupta M, Bell B, Doi A, Jung N, 
Li X, Lynes MS, Brookes E, Cherry AB, Demirbas D, Tsankov AM, Zon LI, Rubin LL, Feinberg 
AP, Meissner A, Cowan CA, Daley GQ. A comparison of non-integrating reprogramming 
methods. Nat Biotechnol. 2015; 33:58–63. [PubMed: 25437882] 
70. Mummery CL, Zhang J, Ng ES, Elliott DA, Elefanty AG, Kamp TJ. Differentiation of human 
embryonic stem cells and induced pluripotent stem cells to cardiac myocytes: A methods 
overview. Circ Res. 2012; 111:344–358. [PubMed: 22821908] 
71. Mehta A, Verma V, Nandihalli M, Ramachandra CJ, Sequiera GL, Sudibyo Y, Chung Y, Sun W, 
Shim W. A systemic evaluation of cardiac differentiation from mrna reprogrammed human 
induced pluripotent stem cells. PLoS ONE. 2014; 9:e103485. [PubMed: 25068310] 
72. McCain ML, Lee H, Aratyn-Schaus Y, Kleber AG, Parker KK. Cooperative coupling of cell-
matrix and cell-cell adhesions in cardiac muscle. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012; 109:9881–
9886. [PubMed: 22675119] 
73. Engler AJ, Griffin MA, Sen S, Bonnemann CG, Sweeney HL, Discher DE. Myotubes differentiate 
optimally on substrates with tissue-like stiffness: Pathological implications for soft or stiff 
microenvironments. J Cell Biol. 2004; 166:877–887. [PubMed: 15364962] 
74. Rodriguez AG, Han SJ, Regnier M, Sniadecki NJ. Substrate stiffness increases twitch power of 
neonatal cardiac myocytes in correlation with changes in myofibril structure and intracellular 
calcium. Biophys J. 2011; 101:2455–2464. [PubMed: 22098744] 
75. Marsano A, Maidhof R, Wan LQ, Wang Y, Gao J, Tandon N, Vunjak-Novakovic G. Scaffold 
stiffness affects the contractile function of three-dimensional engineered cardiac constructs. 
Biotechnol Prog. 2010; 26:1382–1390. [PubMed: 20945492] 
76. Horning M, Kidoaki S, Kawano T, Yoshikawa K. Rigidity matching between cells and the 
extracellular matrix leads to the stabilization of cardiac conduction. Biophys J. 2012; 102:379–
387. [PubMed: 22325259] 
77. Shiba Y, Fernandes S, Zhu WZ, Filice D, Muskheli V, Kim J, Palpant NJ, Gantz J, Moyes KW, 
Reinecke H, Van Biber B, Dardas T, Mignone JL, Izawa A, Hanna R, Viswanathan M, Gold JD, 
Kotlikoff MI, Sarvazyan N, Kay MW, Murry CE, Laflamme MA. Human es-cell-derived cardiac 
Guyette et al.
Page 19
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 myocytes electrically couple and suppress arrhythmias in injured hearts. Nature. 2012; 489:322–
325. [PubMed: 22864415] 
78. Zhang F, Song G, Li X, Gu W, Shen Y, Chen M, Yang B, Qian L, Cao K. Transplantation of ipsc 
ameliorates neural remodeling and reduces ventricular arrhythmias in a post-infarcted swine 
model. J Cell Biochem. 2014; 115:531–539. [PubMed: 24122925] 
79. Lu T-Y, Lin B, Kim J, Sullivan M, Tobita K, Salama G, Yang L. Repopulation of decellularized 
mouse heart with human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiovascular progenitor cells. Nat 
Commun. 2013; 4
80. Laflamme MA, Murry CE. Regenerating the heart. Nat Biotechnol. 2005; 23:845–856. [PubMed: 
16003373] 
81. Hill AJ, Laske TG, Coles JA Jr, Sigg DC, Skadsberg ND, Vincent SA, Soule CL, Gallagher WJ, 
Iaizzo PA. In vitro studies of human hearts. Ann Thorac Surg. 2005; 79:168–177. [PubMed: 
15620938] 
82. Hulsmann J, Aubin H, Kranz A, Godehardt E, Munakata H, Kamiya H, Barth M, Lichtenberg A, 
Akhyari P. A novel customizable modular bioreactor system for whole-heart cultivation under 
controlled 3d biomechanical stimulation. Journal of artificial organs : the official journal of the 
Japanese Society for Artificial Organs. 2013; 16:294–304. [PubMed: 23588844] 
83. Wang B, Wang G, To F, Butler JR, Claude A, McLaughlin RM, Williams LN, de Jongh Curry AL, 
Liao J. Myocardial scaffold-based cardiac tissue engineering: Application of coordinated 
mechanical and electrical stimulations. Langmuir : the ACS journal of surfaces and colloids. 2013; 
29:11109–11117. [PubMed: 23923967] 
84. Vunjak-Novakovic G, Tandon N, Godier A, Maidhof R, Marsano A, Martens TP, Radisic M. 
Challenges in cardiac tissue engineering. Tissue Engineering Part B: Reviews. 2010; 16:169–187. 
[PubMed: 19698068] 
85. Du A, Sanger JM, Sanger JW. Cardiac myofibrillogenesis inside intact embryonic hearts. Dev 
Biol. 2008; 318:236–246. [PubMed: 18455713] 
86. Yang X, Pabon L, Murry CE. Engineering adolescence: Maturation of human pluripotent stem 
cell-derived cardiac myocytes. Circ Res. 2014; 114:511–523. [PubMed: 24481842] 
87. Lundy SD, Zhu WZ, Regnier M, Laflamme MA. Structural and functional maturation of cardiac 
myocytes derived from human pluripotent stem cells. Stem cells and development. 2013; 22:1991–
2002. [PubMed: 23461462] 
Guyette et al.
Page 20
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 NOVELTY AND SIGNIFICANCE
What Is Known?
•
Currently, heart transplantation remains the only curative option for replacing 
necrotic cardiac tissue and sustaining longer-term survival in patients with heart 
failure.
•
The creation of bioengineered myocardium, either in the form of a cardiac tissue 
graft or a bioartificial heart, theoretically holds the promise to improve 
contractile function to the injured heart.
What New Information Does This Article Contribute?
•
Human hearts were decellularized using aseptic pressure-controlled perfusion to 
create acellular cardiac scaffolds with preserved extracellular matrix 
components, architecture, material properties, and microvasculature.
•
Characterization of the acellular human scaffolds with thorough proteomics, 
microvasculature, and immunogenicity analyses.
•
Human cardiac myocytes were derived from a non-transgenic induced 
pluripotent stem cell line, to generate cardiac myocytes at a clinically relevant 
scale, and create force-generating human myocardial-like tissue slices, fibers, 
and ventricular segments on whole-heart scaffolds.
In a first step towards the creation of bioartificial myocardium, we sought to engineer 
myocardial tissue that combines acellular human cardiac matrix and clinically relevant 
human iPS-derived cardiac myocytes. We used a new pressure-controlled perfusion 
system to aseptically decellularize human hearts. The resulting acellular human cardiac 
scaffolds were void of cellular material, while maintaining matrisomal content and 
extracellular matrix structure. Immunogenicity studies confirmed the removal of human 
leukocyte antigens, while also eliciting a reconstructive remodeling response when 
implanted in vivo. Casting analysis determined that acellular scaffolds contained a 
preserved microvasculature, with a vessel distribution similar to cadaveric hearts. Using a 
directed cardiac differentiation protocol on a non-transgenic induced pluripotent stem 
(iPS) cell line, we generated a clinically relevant number of human cardiac myocytes. We 
then reseeded acellular human cardiac matrix with human iPS-derived cardiac myocytes 
to create force-generating myocardial-like tissues of increasing three-dimensional 
complexity. Recellularized cardiac slices and fibers could be maintained for 120 days in 
culture, showing increased sarcomeric structure and electromechanical function. We then 
upscaled these techniques to partially recellularize intact hearts, to show that functional 
myocardial tissue could be built on a whole-heart platform.
Guyette et al.
Page 21
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Biological and mechanical characterization of decellularized human myocardium
A. A human heart before (i), during (ii), and after (iii) pressure-controlled perfusion 
decellularization.
B. DNA content of decellularized myocardium pre- and post-perfusion with nuclease (n = 3 
hearts). Normalized to tissue wet weight. Error bars are standard deviation. Asterisk (*) 
indicates p < 0.05 compared to pre-perfusion with nuclease.
C. Biochemical analysis for insoluble collagen (hydroxyproline), soluble collagen, α-elastin, 
and sulfated glycosaminoglycans (s-GAGs) on normal cadaveric human myocardium (C, n 
= 5 hearts), decellularized human cardiac matrix from hearts donated after brain death (B, n 
= 4), and decellularized human cardiac matrix from hearts donated after cardiac death (D, n 
= 4). Three tissue samples were analyzed per heart per component and the average of those 
three was used as the representative value for the component in that heart. Normalized to 
tissue wet weight. Error bars are standard deviation. Asterisks (*) indicate p < 0.05 
compared to cadaveric condition.
D. Number of unique proteins identified through proteomics analysis in cadaveric (C) and 
decellularized (D) human myocardium. Total (black) represents all unique proteins 
identified. Matrisome (white) represents proteins in the total known to be part of the 
Guyette et al.
Page 22
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 extracellular matrix and/or basement membrane. Other (grey) represents non-matrisome 
proteins in the total.
E. Left: Pie charts of major components (collagens, laminins, fibrillins, and proteoglycans) 
in the cadaveric and decellularized matrisome based on normalized relative abundance. 
Right: Stacked bar charts illustrating further breakdown of the major components into 
specific identified proteins.
F. Immunohistochemical staining of decellularized human myocardium for collagens I, III, 
IV, laminin, fibronectin, and myosin heavy chain (MHC). Scale bar, 250 μm, except MHC, 
100 μm.
G. Biaxial mechanical testing of cadaveric (C, n = 8 hearts) and decellularized (D, n = 10 
hearts) human myocardium. B/A, base to apex axis. S/FW, septum to free-wall axis. Error 
bars are standard deviation.
H. Anisotropy observed in biaxial mechanical testing of cadaveric (C, n = 8 hearts) and 
decellularized (D, n = 10) human myocardium. Error bars are standard deviation.
Guyette et al.
Page 23
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Immunological characterization of decellularized myocardium
A. Staining of macrophage markers CD68, CD80, and CD163 in human cadaveric (C), 
human decellularized (D), and porcine decellularized (P) myocardium tissue samples after 
two weeks implantation in a rat model. Scale bars, 100 μm.
B. Quantification of CD68+, CD68+/CD80+, and CD68+/CD163+ cells in human cadaveric 
(C, n = 3), human decellularized (D, n = 3), and porcine decellularized (P, n = 3) explants as 
a percentage of total identified cells in the field (3–5 fields averaged per explant) after two 
weeks implantation in a rat model. Error bars are standard deviation. Asterisk (*) indicates p 
< 0.05 between groups using an ANOVA with Tukey’s post-hoc test.
Guyette et al.
Page 24
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 C. HLA single antigen bead reactivity of implanted decellularized (i) and cadaveric (ii) 
human matrix, with mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) plotted against beads with specific 
HLA alleles (generated using HLA Fusion software, version 3.0). Asterisks (*) indicate 
beads presenting donor-specific antigens. MFI values annotated for increased readability.
D. Immunofluorescence detection of HLA in cadaveric and decellularized human 
myocardium. Scale bar, 100 μm.
Guyette et al.
Page 25
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Characterization of vasculature in decellularized human myocardium
A. Mean flow rates of each solution under constant pressure perfusion for non-DCD (n = 3 
hearts) and DCD (n = 4) populations. Error bars are SEM.
B. Mean vascular resistance calculated under constant pressure perfusion for non-DCD (n = 
3 hearts) and DCD (n = 4) populations. Error bars are SEM.
C. Pentachrome staining of decellularized LAD coronary artery. Adventitia (a), tunica media 
(m), tunica intima (i), exterior elastic lamina (ext), interior elastic lamina (int). Scale bar, 
500 μm. Color indications: elastic fibers – black, collagen – yellow, fibrin – red, mucins – 
blue to green.
D. Scanning electron micrograph of cadaveric LAD coronary artery. Dotted white square 
indicates region of higher magnification. Scale bar, 500 μm (left) and 20 μm (right).
E. Scanning electron micrograph of decellularized LAD coronary artery. Dotted white 
square indicates region of higher magnification. Scale bar, 500 μm (left) and 20 μm (right).
F. Cardiac CT of a decellularized human heart. Left panel: long axis view. Right panel: 
posterior view. LCA, left coronary artery. LAD, left anterior descending coronary artery. 
OM, obtuse marginal coronary artery. LCX, left circumflex coronary artery. RCA, right 
coronary artery. AM: acute marginal coronary artery.
Guyette et al.
Page 26
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 G. Three-dimensional reconstruction of microvasculature in a left ventricular segment of 
decellularized human heart. Scale bar, 1 mm.
H. Vessel density in epicardium, mid-myocardium, and endocardium of cadaveric (C, n = 3) 
and decellularized (D, n = 7) heart samples.
I. Distribution of vessel sizes in the epicardium, mid-myocardium, and endocardium of 
cadaveric human heart samples (n = 3).
J. Distribution of vessel sizes in the epicardium, mid-myocardium, and endocardium of 
decellularized human heart samples (n = 7).
Guyette et al.
Page 27
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Generation of human iPS-derived cardiac myocytes
A. Timeline of human iPSC differentiation into late stage cardiac myocytes (days 0, 3, 5, 7, 
14, 30, 60, 120, and 180) with corresponding gene activation as measured by PCR (n = 3). 
Error bars are standard deviation. Flow chart relates culture time with media, supplement, 
and cell type.
B. Immunofluorescence staining on differentiated cells isolated between days 30–60 for 
cardiac markers α-actinin, troponin T, and myosin heavy chain (MHC). Scale bars, 50 μm.
C. Flow cytometry analysis of a representative culture of human iPS-derived cardiac 
myocytes positive for α-actinin (left) and troponin T (right), isolated between days 30–60 
post-differentiation.
Guyette et al.
Page 28
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Generation of functional tissue constructs based on decellularized human myocardium
A. Cardiac matrix slices: decellularized human cardiac matrix slice (200 μm) in a culture 
well (i), seeded with iPS-derived cardiac myocytes (ii) for 120-day culture. Ruler ticks are 1 
mm.
B. Area strain of matrix-seeded iPS-derived cardiac myocytes and underlying cardiac 
matrix, comparing spontaneous contraction (U, n = 5 beating areas) with electrical 
stimulation at 1 Hz (n = 4) and 2 Hz (n = 4). Error bars are standard deviation. Black and 
blue asterisks (*) indicate p < 0.05 compared to unstimulated cells and matrix, respectively.
C. Left: Macro image of a reseeded cardiac fiber. Scale bar, 5 mm. Right: Representative 
μOCT still-frame, depicting a longitudinal cross-section within a reseeded cardiac fiber. Red 
shading indicates example HDM region of interest. Scale bar, 100 μm.
D. HDM computed area strain under unpaced conditions (n = 4 fibers). Error bar indicates 
standard deviation.
E. HDM-captured frequencies under unpaced conditions (n = 4 fibers). Error bar indicates 
standard deviation.
F. Representative force curves of a single contractile area within a myocardial slice, 
depicting force modulation under unpaced (solid line) or paced conditions (dashed line).
G. Representative force curves of a single reseeded cardiac fiber, depicting force modulation 
under unpaced (solid line) or paced conditions (dashed line).
H. Mean amplitudes, periods, times to 50% relaxation (TTR50), and times to 90% relaxation 
(TTR90) of captured force-curves of slices (gray squares; n = 9, 9, 9, & 3 for unpaced, 1 Hz, 
2 Hz, and 3 Hz respectively) and fibers (red triangles; n = 4, 3, 4, & 2 for unpaced, 1.5 Hz, 2 
Guyette et al.
Page 29
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Hz, and 2.5 Hz respectively) under paced and unpaced (U) conditions. Error bars are 
standard deviation.
I. Conductivity map (left) and example action potential (right) from a reseeded cardiac fiber.
J. Immunofluorescence staining on reseeded cardiac fibers for cardiac markers α-actinin, 
troponin T, and myosin heavy chain (MHC). Scale bars, 25 μm.
K. Transmission electron micrographs of recellularized cardiac fibers. Dashed black box 
indicates region of higher magnification. Left panel: red arrows indicate Z-bands, mt 
indicates regions of mitochondria. Right panel: Z, I, A, H, & mt indicate Z-bands, I-bands, 
A-bands, H-bands, and mitochondria respectively. Scale bars, 2 μm and 500 nm for left and 
right panels respectively.
Guyette et al.
Page 30
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Human heart bioreactor
A. Schematic layout of the human heart bioreactor. Arrows indicate fluid flow directions.
B. Diagram of mechanical stimulation in the human heart bioreactor. μ, strain; P, pressure; 
Q, volumetric flow; MV, mitral valve.
C. Representative LV-pressure vs. matrix strain curve during mechanical stimulation in the 
human heart bioreactor (3 cycles plotted, starting with blue and ending with red), determined 
by HDM analysis on the epicardial surface of the heart (inset) through biomimetic cardiac 
cycles.
D. Recellularization of human acellular cardiac scaffolds by intramyocardial injection 
between the left anterior descending artery and the left circumflex artery.
E. Recellularized human acellular cardiac scaffold inside of the bioreactor organ chamber 
during biomimetic culture. Black arrows indicate intramyocardial injection locations. Red 
arrows indicate media perfusion into main coronary arteries. Blue arrows indicate fluid flow 
into left ventricle balloon during mechanical stimulation.
F. Example pressure (top) and flow rate (bottom) traces in the coronary arteries (red) and 
left ventricle (blue) during mechanical stimulation in the human heart bioreactor.
Guyette et al.
Page 31
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. Repopulation of decellularized human myocardium in whole hearts with human iPS-
derived cardiac myocytes
A. Electrocardiogram of a recellularized acellular cardiac scaffold during electrical 
stimulation (pacing).
B. Force trace of recellularized myocardium under electrical stimulation at 0.8 Hz.
C. Left ventricular pressure development in a recellularized human acellular cardiac scaffold 
under electrical stimulation at 0.8 Hz including corresponding mean ± SD peak pressure (P), 
max dP/dt, min dP/dt, and tau (n = 6 pressure pulses).
D. Conductivity map (top) and action potentials (bottom) taken from the epicardial surface 
of a reseeded human heart. Heat map legend labels indicate millisecond intervals.
E. Schematic of seeding volume estimation based on myosin heavy chain (MHC, red) 
staining images. Scale bar, 2 mm. LAD, left anterior descending coronary artery. LCX, left 
circumflex artery.
F. Cell coverage from base to apex of recellularized human cardiac scaffolds. Error bars are 
standard deviation of measurements taken from 2 adjacent tissue sections.
G. Fluorescent TUNEL of recellularized human cardiac scaffolds. Scale bar, 200 μm.
H. Trichrome staining of recellularized human cardiac scaffolds. Scale bar, 200 μm.
I. Immunofluorescent staining on recellularized human myocardium for cardiac markers α-
actinin, troponin T, and myosin heavy chain (MHC). Scale bars, 50 μm.
Guyette et al.
Page 32
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 08.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Guyette et al.
Page 33
TABLE 1
Metabolic measurements during whole-heart culture.
Measurement
Units
Baseline
48-hr Media Changes
p-value
Mean
SD
Mean
SD
pH
-
7.32
0.08
7.26
0.05
0.3895
pCO2
mmHg
30.00
7.26
31.75
4.85
0.7397
pO2
mmHg
164.33
22.28
187.75
38.53
0.3600
HCO3
mmol/L
15.10
0.90
14.13
0.32
0.1941
TCO2
mmol/L
16.00
1.00
15.25
0.50
0.3257
sO2%
%
99.00
0.00
99.25
0.50
0.3910
Lac
mmol/L
0.00
0.00
2.44
0.19
0.0001
Glu
mg/dL
186.33
1.53
155.75
6.70
0.0018
Circ Res. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 January 08.
