 Antiretroviral Drugs for Treatment and Prevention of HIV 
Infection in Adults:
2016 Recommendations of the International Antiviral Society–USA Panel
Huldrych F. Günthard, MD, Michael S. Saag, MD, Constance A. Benson, MD, Carlos del Rio, 
MD, Joseph J. Eron, MD, Joel E. Gallant, MD, MPH, Jennifer F. Hoy, MBBS, FRACP, Michael 
J. Mugavero, MD, MHSc, Paul E. Sax, MD, Melanie A. Thompson, MD, Rajesh T. Gandhi, 
MD, Raphael J. Landovitz, MD, Davey M. Smith, MD, Donna M. Jacobsen, BS, and Paul A. 
Volberding, MD
University Hospital Zurich and Institute of Medical Virology, University of Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland (Günthard); University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham (Saag, Mugavero); 
University of California San Diego School of Medicine, San Diego (Benson); Emory University 
Rollins School of Public Health and School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia (del Rio); University of 
North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of Medicine, Chapel Hill (Eron); Southwest CARE Center, 
Santa Fe, New Mexico (Gallant); Alfred Hospital and Monash University, Melbourne, Australia 
Corresponding Author: Huldrych F. Günthard, MD, Division of Infectious Diseases and Hospital Epidemiology, University Hospital 
Zurich, Rämistrasse 100, 8091 Zürich, Switzerland (huldrych.guenthard@usz.ch). 
Supplemental content at jama.com
Author Contributions: Dr Günthard had full access to all of the data in the study and takes responsibility for the integrity of the data 
and the accuracy of the data analysis.
Study concept and design: All authors.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data: Günthard, Saag, Benson, Del Rio, Eron, Gallant, Hoy, Mugavero, Sax, Thompson, 
Gandhi, Landovitz, Smith, Volberding.
Drafting of the manuscript: All authors.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content: Günthard, Saag, Benson, Del Rio, Eron, Gallant, Hoy, Mugavero, 
Sax, Thompson, Gandhi, Landovitz, Smith, Volberding.
Obtained funding: Volberding.
Administrative, technical, or material support: Del Rio, Hoy, Sax, Jacobsen, Volberding.
Study supervision: Günthard, Saag, Volberding.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: All authors have completed and submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of 
Interest. Dr Günthard reports receipt of grants from the Swiss National Science Foundation, Swiss HIV Cohort Study, University of 
Zurich, Yvonne Jacob Foundation, and Gilead Sciences; fees for data and safety monitoring board membership from Merck; 
consulting/advisory board membership fees from Gilead Sciences; and travel reimbursement from Gilead, Bristol-Myers Squibb, and 
Janssen. Dr Saag reports receipt of grants from Bristol-Myers Squibb, AbbVie, Merck, Gilead Sciences, Janssen, and ViiV Healthcare 
and serving as a scientific advisor to Bristol-Myers Squibb, Merck, and Gilead. Dr Benson reports data and safety membership board 
membership for GlaxoSmithKline, grants to and/or contracts with her institution from Gilead Sciences and MBio, and scientific 
advisory board membership for MBio. Dr Eron reports receipt of grants from and/or service as a consultant to Bristol-Myers Squibb, 
Janssen, ViiV Healthcare, AbbVie, Gilead Sciences, and Merck. Dr Gallant reports grants from and/or service as a consultant to 
AbbVie, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Gilead Sciences, Janssen, Merck, Sangamo Biosciences, and ViiV Healthcare/GlaxoSmithKline. Dr 
Hoy reports advisory board fees paid to her institution from Gilead Sciences, ViiV Healthcare, Merck Sharp & Dohme, and AbbVie. 
Dr Mugavero reports receipt of grants from Bristol-Myers Squibb and fees for grant review from Gilead Sciences. Dr Sax reports 
consultancy/advisory board membership for AbbVie, Bristol-Myers Squibb, GlaxoSmithKline/ViiV Healthcare, Gilead Sciences, 
Janssen, and Merck and receipt of grants from Bristol-Myers Squibb, GlaxoSmithKline/ViiV Healthcare, and Gilead. Dr Thompson 
reports institutional research contracts between the AIDS Research Consortium of Atlanta and Bristol-Myers Squibb, Gilead Sciences, 
Merck Sharp & Dohme, Pfizer, Roche Molecular Systems, Taimed, Tobira Therapeutics, and ViiV Healthcare; she received no 
payments directly from these entities. Dr Gandhi reports receipt of grants from Gilead Sciences, Merck, ViiV Healthcare, and EBSCO. 
Dr Landovitz reports service as a consultant to and nonfinancial support from Gilead Sciences. Dr Smith reports receipt of grants from 
and/or service as a consultant to ViiV Healthcare, FluxErgy, and Testing Talent Services. Dr Volberding reports scientific advisory 
board membership for Bristol-Myers Squibb and Gilead Sciences and data and safety monitoring board membership for Merck. No 
other disclosures were reported.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Published in final edited form as:
JAMA. 2016 July 12; 316(2): 191–210. doi:10.1001/jama.2016.8900.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (Hoy); Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 
(Sax); AIDS Research Consortium of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia (Thompson); Massachusetts 
General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston (Gandhi); University of California Los 
Angeles (Landovitz); University of California San Diego, La Jolla (Smith); International Antiviral 
Society–USA, San Francisco, California (Jacobsen); University of California San Francisco 
(Volberding).
Abstract
IMPORTANCE—New data and therapeutic options warrant updated recommendations for the use 
of antiretroviral drugs (ARVs) to treat or to prevent HIV infection in adults.
OBJECTIVE—To provide updated recommendations for the use of antiretroviral therapy in 
adults (aged ≥18 years) with established HIV infection, including when to start treatment, initial 
regimens, and changing regimens, along with recommendations for using ARVs for preventing 
HIV among those at risk, including preexposure and postexposure prophylaxis.
EVIDENCE REVIEW—A panel of experts in HIV research and patient care convened by the 
International Antiviral Society-USA reviewed data published in peer-reviewed journals, presented 
by regulatory agencies, or presented as conference abstracts at peer-reviewed scientific 
conferences since the 2014 report, for new data or evidence that would change previous 
recommendations or their ratings. Comprehensive literature searches were conducted in the 
PubMed and EMBASE databases through April 2016. Recommendations were by consensus, and 
each recommendation was rated by strength and quality of the evidence.
FINDINGS—Newer data support the widely accepted recommendation that antiretroviral therapy 
should be started in all individuals with HIV infection with detectable viremia regardless of CD4 
cell count. Recommended optimal initial regimens for most patients are 2 nucleoside reverse 
transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) plus an integrase strand transfer inhibitor (InSTI). Other effective 
regimens include nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors or boosted protease inhibitors with 
2 NRTIs. Recommendations for special populations and in the settings of opportunistic infections 
and concomitant conditions are provided. Reasons for switching therapy include convenience, 
tolerability, simplification, anticipation of potential new drug interactions, pregnancy or plans for 
pregnancy, elimination of food restrictions, virologic failure, or drug toxicities. Laboratory 
assessments are recommended before treatment, and monitoring during treatment is recommended 
to assess response, adverse effects, and adherence. Approaches are recommended to improve 
linkage to and retention in care are provided. Daily tenofovir disoproxil fumarate/emtricitabine is 
recommended for use as preexposure prophylaxis to prevent HIV infection in persons at high risk. 
When indicated, postexposure prophylaxis should be started as soon as possible after exposure.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE—Antiretroviral agents remain the cornerstone of HIV 
treatment and prevention. All HIV-infected individuals with detectable plasma virus should receive 
treatment with recommended initial regimens consisting of an InSTI plus 2 NRTIs. Preexposure 
prophylaxis should be considered as part of an HIV prevention strategy for at-risk individuals. 
When used effectively, currently available ARVs can sustain HIV suppression and can prevent new 
HIV infection. With these treatment regimens, survival rates among HIV-infected adults who are 
retained in care can approach those of uninfected adults.
Günthard et al.
Page 2
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 There have been substantial advances in the use of antiretroviral drugs (ARVs) for the 
treatment and prevention of HIV infection since the last version of these recommendations 
in 2014,1 warranting an update to the recommendations.
With rare exception, all HIV-infected individuals with detectable viremia, regardless of their 
CD4cell count, should begin anti-retroviral therapy (ART) as soon as possible after 
diagnosis to prevent disease progression, improve clinical outcomes, and limit transmission. 
This recommendation is strongly supported by recent large randomized clinical trials.2,3 
New drugs that combine excellent potency with greater convenience, safety, and tolerability 
make lifelong viral suppression achievable and reduce the risk of viral resistance. In HIV-
infected persons, ART is effective in preventing HIV transmission1,4,5 and provides 
individual and public health benefits. Antiretroviral therapy for individuals at risk of 
acquiring HIV infection (as postexposure prophylaxis [PEP] or preexposure prophylaxis 
[PrEP]) prevents HIV acquisition.
This revision of the recommendations discusses the latest developments in uses of ARVs, 
summarizing current knowledge on the following: when to start therapy, including optimal 
initial treatment regimens; ART for patients with opportunistic infections (OIs); when and 
how to switch ART; laboratory monitoring; engagement in care and ART adherence; and 
prevention of HIV infection.
Methods
Recommendations were developed by an international panel of 14 volunteer experts in HIV 
research and patient care appointed by the International Antiviral Society-USA. Potential 
members were screened for expertise in the field, involvement in research and care, financial 
relationships with commercial companies, and ability to work toward consensus. The panel 
convened in person and by conference calls from late 2015 to mid-2016. Teams for each 
major section, each with a lead writer, evaluated relevant evidence and drafted 
recommendations for full panel review.
Evidence used was published in the scientific literature, presented at major scientific 
conferences, or released as safety reports by regulatory agencies or data and safety 
monitoring boards since 2014.1 Literature searches in PubMed and EMBASE were designed 
by an expert in systematic reviews to capture publications relevant to ART in HIV infection 
since the 2014 iteration of the recommendations1 through April 2016. New evidence was 
considered in conjunction with evidence used for prior reports.1 Approximately 320 relevant 
citations were identified by 1 author (P.V) from an initial list of more than 3200. Relevant 
abstracts publicly presented at scientific conferences since June 2014 were identified by 
panel members. Manufacturers of ARVs provided lists of relevant scientific publications or 
abstracts presented at peer-reviewed conferences.
These recommendations are focused on adults (defined as aged ≥18 years) with or at risk of 
HIV infection in settings in which most ARVs are available (approved by regulatory bodies 
or in expanded access) or in late-stage development (new drug application filed). 
Recommendations were made by consensus and rated according to the strength of the 
Günthard et al.
Page 3
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 recommendation and the quality of the evidence (Table 1). Recommendations that have not 
changed substantially or for which few relevant data have become available since 2014 are 
included in the 2014 treatment recommendations1 along with detailed discussion and 
citations. Where appropriate, prior citations were included. Further details about the 
recommendations development process, panel selection, summary of evidence collection and 
literature search strategies, and the sponsor (International Antiviral Society–USA) and its 
policies are available in the Supplement.
When to Start
Initiation of Therapy
Recommendations for when to start ART are summarized in Box 1. ART is recommended 
for all HIV-infected patients with detectable viremia, regardless of CD4 cell count (evidence 
rating AIa). Randomized clinical trial data now further confirm previous recommendations 
for early initiation of ART in adults1,7 because of the individual-level clinical benefit 
(reduction in AIDS-related events, non–AIDS-related events, and all-cause mortality) (Table 
2)2,3,8 and a decreased risk of HIV transmission.4
Patients should understand the goals of treatment and be willing to initiate therapy. Baseline 
resistance testing is recommended for all patients, but initiating therapy prior to availability 
of the results may be appropriate in some cases. Recent data suggest little transmitted drug 
resistance to integrase strand transfer inhibitors (InSTIs) and protease inhibitors (PIs) but not 
nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs).9–11
Current Investigational Approaches to Starting Therapy
Initiation of ART is recommended as soon as possible in the setting of acute HIV infection 
(evidence rating BIII).1 Initiation prior to the development of HIV antibody positivity 
reduces the size of the latent HIV reservoir, reduces immune activation, and may protect 
against infection of central memory T cells. Benefits are maximal during the first few weeks 
after HIV infection but are apparent up to the first 6 months after infection.12–16 However, 
early therapy does not prevent the establishment of the latent HIV reservoir. Planned 
discontinuation of early ART after a specific duration of treatment is not recommended 
outside research settings; the benefits do not persist and the subsequent viral rebound is 
associated with increased clinical events and the potential for transmission (evidence rating 
AIa).16–18
Initiation of ART on the same day as diagnosis of HIV infection has been implemented in 
several cities.19,20 Evaluation of the long-term effectiveness and limitations of this strategy 
is needed.
Initiation of ART in “elite controllers” (defined as patients with confirmed HIV infection 
and persistent undetectable HIV RNA without ART) remains controversial. Elite controllers 
may still benefit from ART because they have higher levels of immune activation and an 
increased risk of cardiovascular disease and hospitalization compared with individuals 
achieving virologic suppression with ART.21 Initiation of treatment, however, is 
Günthard et al.
Page 4
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 recommended for infected persons who have persistent undetectable viral load without ART 
but have declining CD4 cell counts (evidence rating BIII).
Recommended Initial Regimens
Recommendations for initial antiretroviral regimens are summarizedin Box 2. Among 
adherent individuals, initial ART with 2 nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) 
plus a third active drug from a different class achieves and maintains similar virologic 
suppression rates in nearly all patients.22–26 Clinicians and patients have many options and 
may select a regimen based on considerations other than antiviral potency. Considerations 
include short- and long-term adverse effects, ease of administration, drug interactions, risk 
of resistance if virologic failure occurs, and cost. Patients with more than 100 000 HIV RNA 
copies/mL or fewer than 200 CD4 cells/µL remain a subset in whom ART potency is 
particularly important, as certain regimens have suboptimal virologic suppression in this 
setting.1,7,27–35
Optimal Initial Regimens
InSTI-based regimens are optimal for initial therapy. Recommended initial ART for most 
patients are (regimens are listed in alphabetic order by InSTI component; see Table 3) 
dolutegravir/abacavir/lamivudine (evidence rating AIa), dolutegravir plus tenofovir 
alafenamide (TAF)/emtricitabine (AIa), elvitegravir/cobicistat/TAF/emtricitabine (evidence 
rating AIa), and raltegravir plus TAF/emtricitabine (evidence rating AIII). (Components 
separated with a slash [/] indicate that they are available as coformulations.)
If TAF is not available, tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (TDF) is an effective and generally 
well-tolerated option. Given the limited long-termexperience with TAF, some clinicians 
mayprefer to continue using TDF pending broader experience with TAF in clinical practice.
InSTIs as Components of the Initial Regimen
In the SINGLE study, dolutegravir plus abacavir/lamivudine was superior to efavirenz/TDF/
emtricitabine.36 Similar results were observed in the FLAMINGO study (comparing 
dolutegravir with ritonavir-boosted [/r] darunavir),37 in the WAVES study (comparing 
cobicistat-boosted [/c] elvitegravir with atazanavir/r in HIV-infected women),38 and in the 
AIDS Clinical Trials Group 5257 study (comparing raltegravir with atazanavir/r or 
darunavir/r).39
No clinical trial has directly compared all 3 currently available InSTIs. In treatment-naive 
patients, dolutegravir was noninferior to raltegravir, with no resistance to dolutegravir 
observed in that treatment group.40 In treatment-experienced patients, dolutegravir was 
superior to raltegravir41 and elvitegravir was noninferior to raltegravir.42 The InSTIs differ 
in several important features that may influence treatment choice (Table 4).
Abacavir as a Component of the Initial Regimen
Abacavir is a component of the recommended regimen of dolute-gravir/abacavir/lamivudine. 
Approximately half of individuals who are positive for the HLA-B*5701 allele experience a 
Günthard et al.
Page 5
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 hypersensitivity reaction to abacavir that may be life threatening.44 HLA-B*5701 testing 
should be performed prior to abacavir use (evidence rating AIa); those who test positive 
should not be given abacavir (evidence rating AIa). Allergy to abacavir should be listed in 
the medical record.
Although some prior comparisons of abacavir/lamivudine and TDF/emtricitabine 
demonstrated an efficacy advantage of TDF/emtricitabine,45,46 these differences have not 
been observed in studies that use dolutegravir. In the SINGLE study, all patients in the 
dolutegravir-containing group used abacavir/lamivudine.36 In the SPRING-2 and 
FLAMINGO studies, a minority of dolutegravirtreated patients used abacavir/lamivudine, 
and no differences in efficacy were found based on NRTI selection.
The association between abacavir and an increased risk of myocardial infarction remains 
controversial.1,7,34,35 More studies have now been published describing the association,47–49 
but the data remain inconclusive. For now, abacavir should be used with caution in patients 
who have or who are at high risk of cardiovascular disease.
TAF as a Component of the Initial Regimen
Compared with TDF, TAF yields a lower plasma level of tenofovir and higher intracellular 
concentration of the active antiviral component tenofovir diphosphate. This results in fewer 
tenofovir associated toxic effects, such as proximal renal tubular toxicity and reductions in 
bone mineral density. One report suggested the possibility of elevated liver enzymes with 
TDF use, but the clinical significance is uncertain.50
TAF and TDF were compared in prospective clinical trials of initial therapy51,52 and in 
switch strategies from TDF in patients with virologic suppression and no history of 
resistance or treatment failure.53,54 To date, only elvitegravir/c has been used in studies of 
TAF as initial therapy, but a broader range of third drugs has been used in switch studies.
Compared with TDF, TAF has little or no effect on bone density and little or no kidney 
toxicity. Specifically, proximal tubulopathy has not been observed to date with TAF, which 
has less effect on renal tubular and overall proteinuria and estimated glomerular filtration 
rate (eGFR) than TDF. TAF reduces lipids less than TDF; however, this difference does not 
affect the ratio of total to highdensity lipoprotein cholesterol. To date, no cases of clinical 
renal disease are directly ascribed to TAF. Tolerability of TAF and TDF is comparable, as 
are rates of HIV suppression, resistance with virologic failure, and increases in CD4 cell 
count.
The daily dose of TAF (25 mg or 10 mg) is lower than that of TDF (300 mg). For HIV 
treatment, TAF is currently available only in coformulations, consisting of emtricitabine/
TAF; rilpivirine/emtricitabine/TAF; and elvitegravir/cobicistat/emtricitabine/TAF. Unlike 
TDF, TAF should not be used with rifamycins, and there are limited data on its safety and 
efficacy for pregnant women.
Günthard et al.
Page 6
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Non–InSTI-Containing (or Non–NRTI-Containing) Initial Regimens
Several non–InSTI-containing regimens suppress HIV RNA in the majority of patients who 
are adherent to therapy. These may be optimal for a given patient based on individual 
clinical characteristics, preferences, or owing to financial considerations or lack of InSTI 
availability. These regimens are acceptable therapeutic options. These options are listed in 
Table 5.
Initial therapy with 2 active drugs is under investigation. This strategy may offer cost or 
toxicity advantages over the current 3-drug regimens.56 To date, only 2 adequately powered 
randomized clinical trials have demonstrated noninferior outcomes of 2-drug therapy 
compared with 3-drug regimens. Lopinavir/r plus lamivudine was noninferior to lopinavir/r 
plus 2 NRTIs in one study,57 and darunavir/r plus raltegravir was noninferior to darunavir/r 
plus 2 NRTIs in another.58 However, these 2-drug regimens have limitations. Lopinavir/r 
induces relatively high rates of gastrointestinal adverse effects and hyperlipidemia. 
Darunavir/r plus raltegravir was associated with higher rates of treatment failure in patients 
with a CD4 cell count below 200/µL or an HIV RNA level above 100 000 copies/mL. A 
small single-group trial of dolutegravir plus lamivudine in 20 patients demonstrated 
promising results.59
Initial 2-drug regimens are recommended only in the rare situations in which a patient 
cannot take abacavir, TAF, or TDF (evidence rating BIa); [darunavir/c or darunavir/r] plus 
[raltegravir or dolutegravir] or plus [lamivudine or emtricitabine] may be considered, but the 
former strategy may be less effective in those with CD4 cell counts below 200/µL or HIV 
RNA levels above 100 000 copies/mL. Of note, there are no adequately powered studies of 
initial therapy of other listed 2-drug regimens besides darunavir/r plus raltegravir or 
lopinavir/r plus lamivudine; efficacy is assumed from other clinical trials.57,58
Special Considerations
Pregnancy—HIV-infected pregnant women should initiate ART for their own health and 
to reduce the likelihood of HIV transmission to the infant (evidence rating AIa). Nucleoside 
reverse transcriptase inhibitor options include abacavir/lamivudine (if the patient is HLA-
B*5701 negative), TDF/emtricitabine, or zidovudine/lamivudine. Zidovudine/lamivudine is 
the regimen with the longest clinical experience, but it has more toxic effects. Raltegravir is 
the recommended InSTI for use during pregnancy. Recommended boosted PIs include 
atazanavir/r (once daily) or darunavir/r (twice daily). The recommended NNRTI is efavirenz 
when initiated after the first 8 weeks of pregnancy. If an HIV-infected woman who is taking 
efavirenz becomes pregnant, the regimen may be continued; changing it risks loss of 
virologic control.
Hepatitis B Virus Coinfection—HIV-infected patients with hepatitisBvirus(HBV) 
coinfection should initiate a recommended ART regimen that contains TDF or TAF 
(evidence rating AIa), lamivudine or emtricitabine, and a third component.60–62 Lamivudine 
and emtricitabine each have substantial antiviral activity against HBV. However, there is a 
high risk of HBV resistance and viral breakthrough if these drugs are used without TDF or 
TAF, and neither is recommended alone for HBV in coinfection. Entecavir may be used to 
Günthard et al.
Page 7
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 treat HBV infection (evidence rating AIII). If HIV RNA is not suppressed, entecavir should 
be avoided because it can select for lamivudine- and emtricitabine-resistant HIV (evidence 
rating AIII).
Hepatitis C Virus Coinfection—HIV-infected patients with hepatitis C virus (HCV) 
coinfection should start an ART regimen with drugs that do not have significant drug 
interactions with HCV therapies (evidence rating AIIa). The recommended regimens that 
have the fewest drug interactions with current HCV treatments are dolutegravir/abacavir/
lamivudine and dolutegravir or raltegravir plus TAF/emtricitabine. Clinicians should consult 
current HCV treatment guidelines prior to using any other ART regimens, particularly those 
that include NNRTIs, boosted HIV PIs, or elvitegravir/c.63
Bone Disease—Osteoporosis and fractures are increased with HIV infection.64 During the 
first 1 to 2 years after initiation of ART, patients may lose 2% to 6% of their bone mineral 
density at the hip and spine. Patients who receive TDF-containing regimens have a greater 
initial decline in bone mineral density than those who take a TAF- or abacavir-containing 
regimen. For this reason, TDF is not recommended for patients with osteopenia or 
osteoporosis (evidence rating BIII).
Kidney Disease—Monitoring for development of kidney disease with eGFR, urinalysis, 
and testing for glycosuria and albuminuria or proteinuria is recommended when ART is 
initiated or changed and every 6 months (along with HIV RNA) once HIV RNA is stable 
(evidence rating BIII).65 In cohort studies, TDF (especially with a boosted PI) increased the 
risk of chronic kidney disease.66 Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate is not recommended for 
patients with an eGFR below 60 mL/min.65 The options are abacavir (which does not 
require dose adjustment in this setting) or TAF (if creatinine clearance is above 30 mL/min) 
(evidence rating AIIa). Long-term data on TAF in patients with preexisting renal disease are 
limited.67 Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate or TAF should be discontinued if renal function 
worsens, particularly if there is evidence of proximal tubular dysfunction (eg, euglycemic 
glycosuria or urinary phosphate wasting) (evidence rating AIIa). The safety of TAF in 
patients with active TDF-associated proximal tubulopathy has not been determined. If 
possible, TAF should be initiated only after tubulopathy has resolved, with monitoring for 
recurrence. HIV-infected patients with end-stage renal disease should be evaluated for 
kidney transplantation with the expectation of high rates of patient and graft survival 
(evidence rating AIIa).
Cost Considerations—In highly resourced countries, approximately 75% to 80% of 
annual HIV care expenditures are spent on medications.68 Even at full price, ART is cost-
effective.69 In the United States, drug pricing discounts are common, but the amount of 
discount remains unknown to clinicians and patients, making it difficult to use pricing as a 
component of treatment decisions.
As more drugs become available in less-expensive generic formulations, payers may begin 
to use “societal benefit” as a criterion for selection of the initial regimen. One modeling 
study showed a savings of up to $900 million annually with routine use of a generic 
efavirenz-based regimen in the United States over a branded version of the same regimen.70 
Günthard et al.
Page 8
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Although relative efficacy in viral suppression is lower with an efavirenz-based regimen than 
with InSTI-based regimens, the differences are modest and driven by tolerability rather than 
potency.71
Where resource constraints limit the ability of a health system to provide widespread 
treatment to all HIV-infected persons, a strategy of using generic formulations of 
recommended regimens first with use of more expensive drugs for those who demonstrate 
intolerance may be reasonable. Such policy decisions should be determined in consultation 
with HIV experts in the locale where the policy is being considered.
Interface of ART and OIs
When to Start ART in the Setting of Active OIs
Recommendations for ART in the setting of OIs are summarized in Box 3. ART should be 
started as soon as possible but within the first 2 weeks after diagnosis for most OIs,1 with the 
possible exception of acute cryptococcal meningitis (evidence rating AIa). In a randomized 
clinical trial of ART initiation in the setting of cryptococcal meningitis in resource-
constrained settings, mortality was higher when ART was started within the first 1 to 2 
weeks of diagnosis; mortality was lower when ART was delayed until 5 weeks after 
diagnosis.72 However, in the United States, Canada, and Europe, where there may be greater 
access to optimal antifungal therapy (eg, flucytosine),73 frequent monitoring, and 
appropriate management of high intracranial pressure and other underlying conditions, 
earlier initiation of ART, within 2 weeks of diagnosis, is preferred.74 Although a randomized 
clinical trial found no survival benefit of early initiation of ART for HIV-infected persons 
with active tuberculosis and CD4 cell counts greater than 220/µL,75 there was no increased 
harm, and the improved survival observed in the SAPiT, CAMELIA, and STRIDE trials, 
particularly for those with lower CD4 cell counts,1,76–78 supports the recommendation to 
start ART within the first 2 weeks of initiation of tuberculosis treatment for those with CD4 
cell counts of 50/µL or less and within the first 2 to 8 weeks for those with CD4 cell counts 
above 50/µL (evidence rating AIa). Of note, earlier initiation of ART in persons with active 
tuberculosis, particularly tuberculosis meningitis, may be associated with higher rates of 
immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome and may complicate management of adverse 
drug reactions,79 thus mandating careful monitoring in this setting.
Recommended Initial ART in the Setting of OIs
Drug interactions and tolerability are important considerations when choosing an initial ART 
regimen in persons with an acute OI. Azole antifungal agents and rifamycins are of 
particular concern. The choices for ART in the setting of rifamycin-based antituberculosis 
therapy have been expanded; efavirenz, 600 mg daily; raltegravir, 400 mg twice daily; or 
dolutegravir, 50 mg twice daily in combination with 2 NRTIs are acceptable, with InSTI-
based regimens recommended.76–78,80–83 Neither TAF nor elvitegravir/c is recommended 
with rifamycin drugs because of potential adverse drug interactions (evidence rating AIIb). 
A boosted PI-based regimen should be used only if an InSTI-based regimen is not an option, 
and rifabutin, 150 mg daily, should be substituted for rifampin in the antituberculosis 
regimen (evidence rating AIa).84–86
Günthard et al.
Page 9
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 A 3-month, once-weekly regimen of isoniazid and rifapentine for treatment of latent 
tuberculosis infection is as effective as 9 months of isoniazid alone in HIV-infected 
individuals.87–89 Highdose daily rifapentine can be safely administered with efavirenz, 
allowing the 3-month regimen to be administered with efavirenz-based ART.80,90 Although 
raltegravir exposure was increased when administered with once-weekly rifapentine,91 the 
regimen was well tolerated, supporting use of raltegravir-based regimens. There are no 
pharmacokinetic data on rifapentine with dolutegravir. However, extrapolation from 
available data on rifampin and the similarities between rifapentine and rifampin 
pharmacokinetics supports dolutegravir use in this context, with similar dose adjustments as 
suggested for antituberculosis therapy.
CD4 Cell Count Monitoring and Primary OI Prophylaxis
Recommendations regarding when to initiate, whether to continue, and when to stop 
prophylaxis for OIs have been based on CD4 cell counts prior to and after initiation of ART. 
With ART recommended for all HIV-infected persons regardless of CD4 cell count, the 
incidence of AIDS-associated OIs and associated mortality continues to decline. For persons 
achieving virologic suppression with ART, the incidence of Mycobacterium avium complex 
(MAC) disease has declined sufficiently that mortality is not substantially different once 
MAC disease develops for those who did vs did not receive primary MAC prophylaxis.92,93 
Thus, primary MAC prophylaxis is not recommended if effective ART is initiated 
immediately (evidence rating AIIa). Although similar trends are seen with Pneumocystis 
jirovecii pneumonia as with MAC,92,94 Pneumocystis pneumonia is the most common 
AIDS-related OI and carries a higher risk of early mortality than MAC disease.92 In the 
absence of stronger data, initiatingprimary prophylaxis for Pneumocystis pneumonia is still 
recommended for those who meet CD4 cell count criteria (evidence rating AIa).
When and How to Switch
Recommendations for when and how to switch antiretroviral regimens are summarized in 
Box 4. With improvements in ART, the need to switch therapy because of virologic failure 
and drug resistance has decreased. However, these improvements provide a rationale for 
switching therapy in some patients who have virologic suppression with older regimens that 
are less convenient or that have more adverse or toxic effects. Reasons to consider switching 
therapy in such patients include adverse effects, simplification (reducing doses or pills), 
drug-drug interactions, pregnancy or plans for pregnancy, and food restrictions.
Study data support switching from an older regimen to one of a number of single-pill 
regimens: dolutegravir/abacavir/lamivudine,95 elvitegravir/cobicistat/emtricitabine/TAF,53 
elvitegravir/cobicistat/emtricitabine/TDF,96,97 or rilpivirine/emtricitabine/TDF.98 Data also 
support a switch from suppressive TDF/emtricitabine–based regimens to TAF/emtricitabine–
based regimens.60 The lack of randomized clinical trial data does not preclude the possibility 
of a switch, provided certain caveats are considered.
Induction maintenance approaches have been evaluated in which patients with virologic 
suppression switch from a 3-drugto a 2-drugmaintenance regimen.99–102 Although trials 
Günthard et al.
Page 10
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 provide some support for this approach, it remains investigational, and induction 
maintenance strategies are not recommended at this time (evidence rating BIIa).
For patients experiencing adverse effects or drug toxicities or requesting modification or 
simplification of their regimen, the decision to switch is relatively easy. Situations exist in 
which practitioners should recommend a switch even for patients who are satisfied with their 
current regimen and appear to be doing well. These include when patients are taking 
regimens containing stavudine, didanosine, or zidovudine, largely because of long-term 
toxic effects, or older PIs that have higher pill burdens and greater metabolic toxicities than 
darunavir or atazanavir. Some drugs that are no longer recommended for initial use may 
often be safely continued for patients who are tolerating them. For example, although 
nevirapine and efavirenz have substantial early toxic effects, they are safe and tolerable in 
the long term. Patients taking efavirenz should be questioned carefully about the possibility 
of subtle neuropsychiatric adverse effects (eg, dizziness, sleep disturbances, cognitive 
changes, depression) that they may be unaware of or may not attribute to the drug (evidence 
rating BIII).
With the availability of TAF in its coformulations, it is possible to switch from TDF to TAF. 
Although the presumption of greater renal and bone safety is primarily based on surrogate 
markers (ie, bone density as a marker for fracture risk; eGFR and proteinuria for renal 
safety), these markers consistently suggest superior safety of TAF vs TDF. One exception 
may be modest lipid elevations due to the loss of the lipid-lowering effects of TDF. If there 
is no increase in the price of TAF vs that of TDF, switching from TDF to TAF is reasonable 
even if patients are not experiencing TDF-related toxic effects (evidence rating BIa).
For patients with virologic suppression, it is important to consider the possibility of drug 
resistance and whether the genetic barriers to resistance of the existing and proposed switch 
regimens are high or low. The risk of switching from a high-barrier regimen to a low-barrier 
regimen in patients with preexisting drug resistance has been well demonstrated.103 When 
possible, switches to a regimen with a lower resistance barrier should be made only after 
reviewing the treatment and resistance history(evidence rating AIa). When this information 
is not available, a proviral DNA genotype test may be helpful. The clinical utility of these 
assays has not yet been established, but they may be useful in detecting mutations that have 
been archived in resting CD4 cells but that are no longer detectable by standard commercial 
resistance assays.104,105 Results must be interpreted with caution because they can 
sometimes fail to detect existing mutations.106 Some switches in the setting of viral 
suppression may be safe regardless of resistance (eg, TDF to TAF, efavirenz to rilpivirine or 
etravirine, raltegravir or elvitegravir to dolutegravir, or lopinavir/r to boosted darunavir). 
Switching from a boosted PI to an NNRTI or an InSTI (with the possible exception of 
dolutegravir) or switching from twice-daily darunavir/r to once-daily darunavir/c is not 
advised without considering resistance history because of the reduced resistance barrier of 
the regimen (evidence rating AIII).
The drug-drug interactions that affect the choice of initial regimen also must be considered 
when switching. Whether baseline viral load should be considered before switching therapy 
is not clear; baseline HIV RNA levels above 100 000 copies/mL were not associated with 
Günthard et al.
Page 11
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 virologic failure when patients with virologic suppression with a PI-based regimen switched 
to a rilpivirine-containing regimen.98
The approach to virologic failure of an initial NNRTI-, PI-, or InSTI-based regimen has been 
addressed previously.1 Failure of initial regimens that were chosen based on baseline 
resistance test results is generally due to poor adherence or, less commonly, to drug-drug 
interactions. Thus, adherence and drug interactions must be addressed before initiating the 
new regimen.
Laboratory Monitoring
Initiation of Therapy
Recommendations for laboratory monitoring are summarized in Box 5. As close to the time 
of HIV diagnosis as possible and prior to beginning ART, CD4 cell count, plasma HIV 
RNA, serologies for hepatitis A, B, and C, serum chemistries, estimated creatinine 
clearance, complete blood cell count, and urine glucose and protein should be measured 
(evidence rating AIII). Genotypic resistance assays for reverse transcriptase and protease 
should be ordered for all patients (evidence rating AIIa). Transmitted resistance to InSTIs 
has been documented but is uncommon at present, with little increase over time107–109; thus, 
routine pretreatment screening for integrase resistance is not currently recommended unless 
there is reason to believe that the infecting virus may have come from a source in whom 
InSTI-containing treatment failed (evidence rating BIII).1 Screening for syphilis and 3-site 
(as appropriate) mucosal nucleic acid amplification testing for chlamydia and gonorrhea 
should also occur at the time of HIV diagnosis, and a fasting lipid profile should be obtained 
(evidence rating AIII). Other laboratory assessments should be individualized, in keeping 
with current guidelines.110,111 HLA-B*5701 and CC chemokine receptor 5 tropism testing 
results must be confirmed prior to initiating therapy with abacavir and maraviroc, 
respectively.1
If ART is being initiated on the first clinic visit, all laboratory specimens should be drawn 
prior to the first dose of ART; resistance testing results should be used to modify the regimen 
as necessary (evidence rating AIII). A similar process should be used for rapid ART 
initiation for acute or advanced HIV infection.
Ongoing Therapy
HIV RNA level should be monitored every 4 to 6 weeks after treatment is initiated or 
changed until it is undetectable, generally below 20 to 50 copies/mL (evidence rating AIa). 
Virologic suppression should occur within 24 weeks of ART initiation even when initiated 
during acute infection.112 Failure to achieve suppression by 24 weeks should prompt 
evaluation for virologic failure. After suppression is achieved, HIV RNA should be 
monitored every 3 months until suppression has been sustained for 1 year and at least every 
6 months thereafter for adherent patients who remain clinically stable (evidence rating AIII). 
Therapeutic drug monitoring is not recommended except in specific circumstances, as 
previously described (evidence rating BIII).1
Günthard et al.
Page 12
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 CD4 cell count is used to determine the need for OI prophylaxis. If pretreatment CD4 cell 
count is below 200/µL, reassessment is recommended every 3 to 4 months until HIV RNA is 
reliably suppressed and CD4 cell count is above 350/µL for 1 year. Thereafter, CD4 cell 
counts should be assessed at 6-month intervals until virus has been suppressed for at least 2 
years and CD4 cell count is persistently stable above 500/µL (evidence rating AIII). 
Subsequently, repeat monitoring is not recommended unless virologic failure or intercurrent 
immunosuppressive conditions occur or immunosuppressive treatments are initiated 
(evidence rating AIII).1,113 Monitoring for safety, including measures of renal and hepatic 
function and fasting lipids, should be individualized based on age, co-morbid conditions, 
and concurrent medications. Screening for sexually transmitted infections should be 
conducted according to guidelines, local prevalence, and patient risk.114
Virologic Failure
Virologic failure is defined as a confirmed plasma HIV RNA above 200 copies/mL. If the 
HIV RNA level remains above the limit of quantification by 24 weeks or if rebound above 
50 copies/mL occurs at any time, the assay should be repeated within 4 weeks to exclude 
impending virologic failure (evidence rating AIIa). The clinician should discuss adherence 
and tolerability with the patient and review the complete medication list, including 
nonprescribed supplements, to ensure that drug-drug interactions are not compromising 
therapeutic efficacy. Drug-food interactions should also be explored. Genotypic resistance 
testing should occur at the time of confirmed virologic failure, although amplification may 
not be successful for HIV RNA levels below 500 to 1000 copies/mL; proviral DNA assays 
to estimate archived resistance may be considered. With CC chemokine receptor 5 
inhibitors, tropism testing is recommended at the time of virologic failure (evidence rating 
AIa). CD4 cell count assessment is recommended in the setting of viral rebound (evidence 
rating AIIa).
Management of Low-Level Viremia
Although any detectable virus has been associated with viral rebound in some studies,115,116 
measurable HIV RNA between 20 and 50 copies/mL did not increase the risk of virologic 
failure in 1 study.117 Data are inconsistent about long-term effects of persistent HIV RNA 
between 50 and 200 copies/mL,116,118 and current data are insufficient to guide clinical 
management. Such patients should be reassessed for causes of virologic failure, evaluated 
again within 4 weeks, and monitored closely (evidence rating BIII). Decisions to change 
therapy should be individualized based on ART options, resistance history, and clinical 
circumstances. Treatment should be changed in patients with persistent HIV RNA above 200 
copies/mL.119
Viral Resistance
Although transmitted viruses with resistance mutations can revert to wild type, baseline 
resistance testing should be performed regardless of the duration of infection because many 
mutations have little effect on viral fitness and may persist for years.120–122 Nonnucleoside 
reverse transcriptase inhibitor mutations are the most common transmitted resistance 
mutations (4.5%-10%); NRTI (4.0%-4.5%) and PI mutations are less common 
(2.8%-3.4%).107,123 Virologic failure with an InSTI-containing regimen requires integrase 
Günthard et al.
Page 13
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 resistance testing, as integrase resistance has been described in up to 6.8% of patients.124 
Resistance testing is less reliable if a patient has stopped ART for longer than 1 month when 
the sample is collected. The absence of resistance mutations does not confirm absence of 
resistance in this setting.
Engagement in Care and ART Adherence
Recommendations for engagement in care and ART adherence are summarized in Box 6.
Achieving the full benefits of treatment and prevention afforded by ART requires early 
diagnosis, rapid linkage to care, continuous retention in care, and uninterrupted access and 
adherence to ART. Late diagnosis and presentation for HIV care are global challenges that 
have improved only modestly over decades.125,126 To avoid missed opportunities for earlier 
diagnosis,127 routine opt-out HIV screening is recommended in primary medical care 
settings and emergency departments and for all pregnant women (evidence rating 
AIII).128,129
Even in highly resourced settings such as the United States, roughly 90% of new HIV 
infections are attributable to individuals with undiagnosed infection (30%) or who have 
received a diagnosis but are not engaged in HIV care (61%).130 Systematic monitoring of 
time from diagnosis to care linkage, retention in care, ART adherence, and rates of viral 
suppression is recommended to identify and address barriers and to optimize individual and 
public health out-comes (evidence rating AIIa).7
Monitoring through integration of surveillance data with clinicaldata systems shows promise 
in improving health outcomes. Real time surveillance-based messaging through an HIV 
health information exchange has increased engagement rates for individuals who were no 
longer in HIV care but were receiving non-HIV medical care at nearby sites.131 
Coordination with public health surveillance data systems is important, when possible, to 
improve linkage to, retention in, and reengagement in care.7,132
Evidence-based interventions to improve engagement in care are limited and have been 
described elsewhere.133–135 Brief case management improved rates of linkage to care 
(within 6 months) and is recommended after diagnosis (evidence rating AIa).136,137 Linkage 
to and retention in care may be enhanced through expedited care entry and rapid ART 
initiation within days of diagnosis,19,20 and adequately powered intervention trials using this 
approach are planned. Patient navigation and intensive outreach can improve retention in 
care138,139 but are most appropriate for a subset of patients at greatest risk because of the 
high resource requirements and cost. A patient navigation intervention with or without 
financial incentives improved engagement in care following inpatient hospitalization but did 
not show sustained improvement of viral suppression.140 Integration of directly observed 
ART in methadone maintenance programs (evidence rating BIa)141 and as a treatment 
strategy among persons with substance use disorders (evidence rating BIa)142 and those who 
are incarcerated or released to the community (evidence rating CIII)143 is recommended to 
enhance adherence and viral suppression.134
Günthard et al.
Page 14
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Missed clinic visits predict clinical events, including mortality,144 and rapid intervention 
following a missed visit is recommended (evidence rating AIIa). Personal telephone and 
interactive short message service (SMS; text) reminders in advance of scheduled 
appointments and shortly following missed appointments (eg, 24–48 hours) improved 
retention in HIV medical care across various settings and are recommended (evidence rating 
AIa).145,146
Viral load measurement is not recommended for screening for ART adherence; clinicians 
should directly screen for adherence, ideally to identify and intervene in ART nonadherence 
prior to viral rebound. Adherence monitoring using patients’ self-reports via validated 
adherence instruments and pharmacy refill data are recommended (evidence rating AIIa).134 
Self-reports typically overestimate adherence, but degree of self-reported nonadherence 
predicts virologic failure and even mortality.147,148 Other interventions that improved ART 
adherence and some that improved viral suppression are described elsewhere.134,135
Active substance use is associated with poor adherence. Opioid substitution therapy for 
opioid-dependent patients improves retention in care and is recommended (evidence rating 
AIIa).149 Depression is associated with poor adherence, and routine screening for depression 
is recommended (evidence rating AIII).110,134 Depression treatment improved ART 
adherence150 and HIV outcomes151; however, 3 US-based randomized clinical trials of 
antidepressant treatment showed no effect on ART adherence.152–154 More intensive 
behavioral interventions integrating depression and adherence counseling showed 
improvement in both outcomes.155–157
Prevention
Recommendations for prevention of HIV infection are summarized in Box 7. Use of ARVs 
has expanded beyond treatment of HIV infection. ART for pregnant women can eliminate 
mother-to-child transmission.158–160 With “treatment as prevention,” heterosexual 
transmission can be prevented if the HIV-infected partner achieves viral 
suppression.4,161–163 An increasingly robust observational data set suggests similar benefit 
for decreasing transmission among men who have sex with men.5,164 Data are not available 
for persons who inject drugs, but the assumption is that there would be a similar benefit. In 
addition, ARVs are effective as PrEP in reducing the risk of HIV acquisition.
Treatment as Prevention
ART is recommended for all HIV-infected individuals with detectable viremia, not only 
because of individual health benefits but also because of the reduced infectiousness of ART-
treated individuals with virologic suppression (evidence rating AIa).
Preexposure Prophylaxis
PrEP is an effective HIV prevention tool that is part of a “prevention package” for HIV-
seronegative persons at risk. Detailed sexual, substance use, and medical histories are 
important for deciding whether to provide PrEP. Individuals who are candidates for PrEP 
include anyone from a population with an HIV incidence of at least 2% per year (evidence 
rating AIa) or HIV-seronegative partners of HIV-infected persons who do not have viral 
Günthard et al.
Page 15
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 suppression. Guidelines for identifying candidates for PrEP have been published.165–167 Of 
note, PrEP does not prevent other sexually transmitted infections.
Daily TDF/emtricitabine with high adherence is highly effective for HIV prevention and is 
the recommended regimen (evidence rating AIa).168–173 Intermittent, event-driven PrEP was 
effective in a single study among a highly sexually active population.174 There is evidence 
that 4 or more doses of PrEP per week confers protection against HIV infection through anal 
sex169,175,176; in the eventdriven study, the average number of doses taken was 4 per week, 
which may account for the observed success of this strategy. Less than daily dosing may not 
be effective for vaginal exposures according to pharmacologic modeling data.177,178 
Therefore, daily dosing of TDF/emtricitabine for PrEP is recommended (evidence rating 
AIa), and there are currently insufficient data to recommend intermittent dosing.
In a single randomized clinical trial of TDF alone in persons who inject drugs, 49% were 
protected against HIV infection overall but 74% were protected when drug was detected.179 
Data on efficacy of PrEP for transgender individuals are limited.169,180 Data on drug-drug 
interactions between PrEP agents and cross-sex hormone therapy and data on PrEP in 
transgender women do not exist and are needed.
Because of the TDF component, TDF-based PrEP is not recommended for those with 
osteopenia or osteoporosis (evidence rating AIII) or a creatinine clearance rate of less than 
60 mL/min (evidence rating AIIa) and should be used with caution in those with HBV 
coinfection (out of concern for flares of hepatitis or hepatic decompensation on cessation of 
treatment, particularly among patients with cirrhosis) (evidence rating BIIa).
Approximately 9%168 to 14%175 of individuals receiving PrEP experience gastrointestinal 
adverse effects, which are often self-limited. Glomerular dysfunction with decreases in 
creatinine clearance rate may occur181,182 and to date have been reversible with 
discontinuation. Rechallenge with the PrEP regimen is often possible.183,184 Tenofovir 
disoproxil fumarate–based PrEP has been associated with a 1% to 1.5% loss of bone mineral 
density at 48 weeks at the hip and spine,185–187 with return to baseline on discontinuation of 
PrEP.188 Individuals at high risk of osteopenia or osteoporosis should carefully weigh risks 
and benefits of PrEP.
HIV testing, preferably with a combination antigen-antibody assay (evidence rating AIII), 
serum creatinine, estimated creatinine clearance, and hepatitis B surface antigen must be 
performed prior to initiation of PrEP (evidence rating AIa). For high-incidence populations, 
especially those with a history of recent exposure, an HIV RNA assay may be helpful in 
excluding acute HIV infection prior to PrEP. Oral, rectal, urine, and vaginal sexually 
transmitted infection screening, including serologic testing for syphilis and nucleic acid 
amplification testing for chlamydia and gonorrhea, is recommended as appropriate, and any 
sexually transmitted infections should be treated (evidence rating BIII). Vaccination against 
hepatitis A and hepatitis B viruses is recommended for those who are not immune (evidence 
rating AIII). Vaccination is recommended for women aged 13 to 26 years and for men aged 
13 to 21 years who have not been vaccinated previously or who have not completed the 3-
Günthard et al.
Page 16
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 dose series. Men aged 22 to 26 years may be vaccinated (evidence rating AIa).189 Women 
should be screened for pregnancy.
Intervals of follow-up should be no longer than every 3 months to allow for HIV testing (by 
antigen-antibody assay unless symptoms or signs of acute HIV infection are present, in 
which case HIV RNA testing should be ordered) (evidence rating AIII) and sexually 
transmitted infection screening (evidence rating BIIb).190 Creatinine assessment may be 
performed at least every 6 months (evidence rating AIII) and perhaps more frequently for 
some patients (eg, those aged >50 years, taking hypertension or diabetes medications, or 
with eGFRs at threshold)181,191 (evidence rating CIII). Adherence is crucial to the success of 
PrEP, and ongoing discussions about adherence are important, especially in the absence of 
proven PrEP adherence interventions (evidence rating CIII).
Any positive HIV screening testresult for a patient receiving PrEP should prompt immediate 
confirmatory testing for HIV RNA and genotype testing if confirmed. Patients using PrEP 
who have suspected HIV infection, on clinical grounds or while awaiting HIV RNA 
confirmation of equivocal screening test results, should have a boosted PI (ie, boosted 
darunavir) and/or dolutegravir added to TDF/emtricitabine pending HIV RNA and resistance 
testing results (evidence rating AIII). Resistance has been observed rarely and most 
commonly (although not universally) when PrEP with TDF/emtricitabine is initiated during 
occult acute HIV infection and most commonly with M184V/I alone. Transmission of 
multiclassresistant HIV despite daily PrEP use was recently reported in a gay man in North 
America.192
Currently, there are no human data to support the efficacy of other oral HIV ARVs for PrEP. 
Despite an attractive safety profile and a promising result in an animal study,193 tenofovir 
diphosphate levels in genital compartment tissues were low following administration of a 
single dose of TAF.194 Tenofovir alafenamide/emtricitabine is not recommended for PrEP 
until effectiveness has been demonstrated in clinical trials (evidence rating AIII). Use of 
non– TDF-containing PrEP or augmentation of TDF/emtricitabine PrEP with other agents is 
not recommended (evidence rating AIII).
Postexposure Prophylaxis
PEP is an emergency intervention designed to abort HIV acquisition in the event of 
occupational (ie, needlestick or mucous membrane splash) or nonoccupational (ie, sexual or 
injecting drug use) exposure to HIV-infected blood or potentially infectious bodily fluids. A 
case-control study estimated an efficacy rate of 81% for zidovudine monoprophylaxis.167,195 
Efficacy is likely higher for combination PEP, but no data exist.195 PEP is recommended as 
soon as possible without waiting for confirmation of HIV serostatus of the source patient or 
results of HIV RNA or resistance testing (evidence rating AIII). The majority of guidelines 
recommend PEP initiation only within 72 hours of exposure.196 Baseline assessments should 
include HIV antibody testing(ideally, a combination antibody/antigen test), sexually 
transmitted infection testing, pregnancy testing for women of childbearing potential, and 
hepatitis B and C serologies. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommend 
TDF/emtricitabine plus twice-daily raltegravir or once-daily dolutegravir196; TDF/
emtricitabine with boosted darunavir or TDF/emtricitabine/cobicistat/elvitegravir are 
Günthard et al.
Page 17
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 reasonable alternatives (evidence rating AIIb). PEP should be continued for 28 days, and 
HIV serostatus should be reassessed4weeks to 6 weeks, 3 months, and 6 months after 
exposure (evidence rating AIIb), although shorter serologic follow-up (eg, at 3 or 4 months) 
may be possible if using a fourth-generation assay. Persons who repeatedly seek PEP should 
be considered for PrEP, as daily PrEP may be more protective than repeated episodes of 
PEP.165
Future Directions
Up to 96% of patients who remain in care and receive ART have un-detectable plasma 
HIVRNA levels.22–26 Newer therapies must be potent, simple, safe, and tolerable to be 
competitive or fulfill a specific niche, such as activity against multidrugresistant variants or 
availability as long-acting formulations.
Long-acting ART may allow patients who have difficulty with daily oral therapy to maintain 
suppression, allow for directly observed therapy in clinical or nontraditional settings, and 
provide treatment during periods when oral therapy is difficult (eg, surgery, travel, mental 
illness, or transitions from hospitalization to outpatient care). With a combination of a 
nanoformulated NNRTI (long-acting rilpivirine) and an InSTI (injectable cabotegravir), 
virologic suppression was maintained for 32 weeks when given intramuscularly once every 4 
weeks or 8weeks.197 Other long-acting therapies being evaluated in clude implantable 
sustained-release platforms, nanoparticles, viral vector delivery, monoclonal antibodies, and 
longer-acting oral therapy.198,199 Long-acting ART has the potential to reduce the need for 
daily adherence to oral therapy, but suboptimal adherence to long-acting ART may also have 
adverse consequences, as delayed or missed treatment could mean prolonged periods with 
subtherapeutic ART levels, increasing the risk of suboptimal drug concentrations. Therefore, 
patients at high risk of suboptimal adherence may require comprehensive treatment 
strategies to avoid delayed or missed doses. Furthermore, what makes therapies long-acting 
(eg, peptides in viral vectors, depot formulations, pharmacologic enhancers, etc) may have 
their own drug interactions or long-term toxic effects, and further evaluation is needed.
Injectable and other long-acting preparations for PrEP are currently in clinical development, 
including long-acting rilpivirine and long-acting cabotegravir200 and a vaginal ring 
containing the NNRTI dapivirine, which had a 27% to 30% efficacy in preventing HIV 
infection among women in sub-Saharan Africa.201,202
Another investigational approach for both HIV treatment and prevention is therapies using 
broadly neutralizing antibodies, which may offer a new opportunity to clear replicating 
virus,203,204 clear infected cells,205 and provide passive immunization to protect at-risk 
individuals.206 The hurdles for these therapies include the requirement for parenteral dosing, 
potential development of antiidiotypic antibodies, and potential resistance to broadly 
neutralizing antibodies in infected patients.
Ultimately, if a cure for HIV infection could be developed, the consequences of the infection 
(eg, chronic inflammation and immune damage) and the need for ART would be eliminated. 
An ideal cure would also eliminate the need for routine monitoring and the stigma of having 
Günthard et al.
Page 18
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 been infected with HIV. This target is a high bar. There are 2 potential types of cure: (1) a 
functional cure, in which an infected person controls infection without therapy and without 
the consequences of HIV-related immune activation or inflammation and (2) an eradication 
cure, in which all replication-competent virus is purged from an infected individual. The 
current search for a cure is both aspirational and necessary to build the foundation of 
knowledge to design and test cure strategies. Current strategies include reactivating latent 
virus and purging it from reservoirs (ie, “shock and kill”),207 gene therapy (knocking in 
protective genes such as fusion peptide or silencing RNA208–210 or knocking out susceptible 
genes such as CCR5211 or the provirus), and immune enhancement (eg, therapeutic vaccines 
and immune checkpoint modulators).212 Similar to ART, a successful cure strategy may 
require more than 1 agent delivered simultaneously or in a series. To gain widespread use, 
functional or eradication cure strategies must have limited risk, given the safety and 
effectiveness of current ART.
In addition, to further maximize the enormous potential benefit of ART on the global HIV 
epidemic, newer, less toxic drugs must be made available in all countries; health care 
systems must be strengthened, including increased focus on early diagnosis and timely 
linkage to and retention in care; and routine viral load monitoring must be implemented to 
identify treatment failures early and minimize the emergence of resistance. Widespread 
implementation of early diagnosis and treatment requires a global effort to reduce stigma 
and discrimination and to ensure that HIV-infected individuals seek help without 
restrictions.
Conclusions
Antiretroviral agents remain the cornerstone of HIV treatment and prevention. All HIV-
infected individuals with detectable plasma virus should receive treatment, with 
recommended initial regimens consisting of an InSTI plus 2 NRTIs. PrEP should be 
considered as part of an HIV prevention strategy for at-risk individuals. When used 
effectively, currently available ARVs can sustain HIV suppression and can prevent new HIV 
infection. With these treatment regimens, survival rates among HIV-infected adults who are 
retained in care can approach those of uninfected adults.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
Funding/Support: The work is sponsored and funded by the International Antiviral Society–USA (IAS-USA), a 
mission-based, nonmembership, 501(c)(3) not-for-profit organization. In the last 5 years, the IAS-USA has received 
grants for selected CME activities that are pooled (ie, no single company supports any single effort) from AbbVie, 
Bristol-Myers Squibb, Gilead Sciences, GlaxoSmithKline, Janssen Therapeutics, Merck, Mylan, Pfizer, Salix 
Pharmaceuticals, and ViiV Healthcare.
Role of the Sponsor/Funder: The IAS-USA determined the need to update recommendations, selected the panel 
members, and provided administrative support and oversight. The panel designed and conducted the work; 
collected, managed, analyzed, and interpreted the data; and prepared, reviewed, and approved the manuscript.
Günthard et al.
Page 19
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Additional Contributions: We thank Rachel D. Lastra, BA, IAS-USA, for administrative and editorial support, 
and Hacsi Horváth, MA, Global Health Sciences at University of California, San Francisco, for conducting the 
PubMed and EMBASE literature searches.
REFERENCES
1. Günthard HF, Aberg JA, Eron JJ, et al. International Antiviral Society-USA Panel. Antiretroviral 
treatment of adult HIV infection: 2014 recommendations of the International Antiviral Society-USA 
Panel. JAMA. 2014; 312(4):410–425. [PubMed: 25038359] 
2. Lundgren JD, Babiker AG, Gordin F, et al. INSIGHT START Study Group. Initiation of 
antiretroviral therapy in early asymptomatic HIV Infection. N Engl J Med. 2015; 373(9):795–807. 
[PubMed: 26192873] 
3. Danel C, Moh R, Gabillard D, et al. TEMPRANO ANRS 12136 Study Group. A trial of early 
antiretrovirals and isoniazid preventive therapy in Africa. N Engl J Med. 2015; 373(9):808–822. 
[PubMed: 26193126] 
4. Cohen MS, Chen YQ, McCauley M, et al. HPTN 052 Study Team. Prevention of HIV-1 infection 
with early antiretroviral therapy. N Engl J Med. 2011; 365(6):493–505. [PubMed: 21767103] 
5. Rodger, A.; Bruun, T.; Cambiano, V., et al. HIV transmission risk through condomless sex if HIV+ 
partner on suppressive ART: PARTNER study. Presented at: Conference on Retroviruses and 
Opportunistic Infections; March 3–6, 2014; Boston, MA. 
6. Canadian Task Force on the Periodic Health Examination. The periodic health examination. Can 
Med Assoc J. 1979; 121(9):1193–1254. [PubMed: 115569] 
7. Thompson MA, Aberg JA, Hoy JF, et al. Antiretroviral treatment of adult HIV infection: 2012 
recommendations of the International Antiviral Society-USA panel. JAMA. 2012; 308(4):387–402. 
[PubMed: 22820792] 
8. Grinsztejn B, Hosseinipour MC, Ribaudo HJ, et al. HPTN 052-ACTG Study Team. Effects of early 
vs delayed initiation of antiretroviral treatment on clinical outcomes of HIV-1 infection: results from 
the phase 3 HPTN 052 randomised controlled trial. Lancet Infect Dis. 2014; 14(4):281–290. 
[PubMed: 24602844] 
9. Panichsillapakit T, Smith DM, Wertheim JO, Richman DD, Little SJ, Mehta SR. Prevalence of 
transmitted HIV drug resistance among recently infected persons in San Diego, CA 1996–2013. J 
Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2016; 71(2):228–236. [PubMed: 26413846] 
10. Yang WL, Kouyos R, Scherrer AU, et al. Swiss HIV Cohort Study. Assessing the paradox between 
transmitted and acquired HIV type 1 drug resistance mutations in the Swiss HIV Cohort Study 
from 1998 to 2012. J Infect Dis. 2015; 212(1):28–38. [PubMed: 25576600] 
11. Hofstra LM, Sauvageot N, Albert J, et al. SPREAD Program. Transmission of HIV drug resistance 
and the predicted effect on current first-line regimens in Europe. Clin Infect Dis. 2016; 62(5):655–
663. [PubMed: 26620652] 
12. Buzon MJ, Martin-Gayo E, Pereyra F, et al. Long-term antiretroviral treatment initiated at primary 
HIV-1 infection affects the size, composition, and decay kinetics of the reservoir of HIV-1-infected 
CD4 T cells. J Virol. 2014; 88(17):10056–10065. [PubMed: 24965451] 
13. Ananworanich J, Schuetz A, Vandergeeten C, et al. RV254/SEARCH 010 Study Group. Impact of 
multi-targeted antiretroviral treatment on gut T cell depletion and HIV reservoir seeding during 
acute HIV infection. PLoS One. 2012; 7(3):e33948. [PubMed: 22479485] 
14. Schuetz A, Deleage C, Sereti I, et al. RV254/SEARCH 010 and RV304/SEARCH 013 Study 
Groups. Initiation of ART during early acute HIV infection preserves mucosal Th17 function and 
reverses HIV-related immune activation. PLoS Pathog. 2014; 10(12):e1004543. [PubMed: 
25503054] 
15. Laanani M, Ghosn J, Essat A, et al. Agence Nationale de Recherche sur le Sida PRIMO Cohort 
Study Group. Impact of the timing of initiation of antiretroviral therapy during primary HIV-1 
infection on the decay of cell-associated HIV-DNA. Clin Infect Dis. 2015; 60(11):1715–1721. 
[PubMed: 25737374] 
16. Chéret A, Bacchus-Souffan C, Avettand-Fenoël V, et al. OPTIPRIM ANRS-147 Study Group. 
Combined ART started during acute HIV infection protects central memory CD4 T cells and can 
induce remission. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2015; 70(7):2108–2120. [PubMed: 25900157] 
Günthard et al.
Page 20
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 17. El-Sadr WM, Lundgren J, Neaton JD, et al. Strategies for Management of Antiretroviral Therapy 
Study Group. CD4 count-guided interruption of antiretroviral treatment. N Engl J Med. 2006; 
355(22):2283–2296. [PubMed: 17135583] 
18. Marzel A, Shilaih M, Yang WL, et al. Swiss HIV Cohort Study. HIV-1 transmission during recent 
infection and during treatment interruptions as major drivers of new infections in the Swiss HIV 
Cohort Study. Clin Infect Dis. 2016; 62(1):115–122. [PubMed: 26387084] 
19. Pilcher, C.; Hatano, H.; Dasgupta, A., et al. Providing same day, observed ART to newly diagnosed 
HIV+ outpatients is associated with improved virologic suppression. Presented at: Eighth 
International AIDS Society Conference on HIV Pathogenesis, Treatment, and Prevention; July 19–
22, 2015; Vancouver, BC, Canada. Abstract WEAD0105 LB
20. Rosen, S.; Maskew, M.; Fox, MP., et al. Initiating ART at a patient’s first clinic visit: the RapIT 
randomized trial. Presented at: 23rd Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections; 
February 22–25, 2016; Boston, MA. Abstract 28
21. Crowell TA, Gebo KA, Blankson JN, et al. HIV Research Network. Hospitalization rates and 
reasons among HIV elite controllers and persons with medically controlled HIV infection. J Infect 
Dis. 2015; 211(11):1692–1702. [PubMed: 25512624] 
22. Simoni, JM.; Nance, RM.; Delaney, JA., et al. HIV viral load in US clinics over time: trends and 
predictors from CNICS. Presented at: Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections; 
February 22–25, 2016; Boston, MA. 
23. Gisslen, M.; Svedhem, V.; Lindborg, L., et al. The Swedish HIV treatement cascade. Presented at: 
Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections; February 22–25, 2016; Boston, MA. 
24. Moore, DM.; Cui, Z.; Lachowsky, NJ., et al. Recent increases in virologic suppression among HIV-
positive MSM in Vancouver, Canada. Presented at: Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic 
Infections; February 22–25, 2016; Boston, MA. 
25. Gaolathe, T.; Wirth, K.; Holme, MP., et al. Botswana is close to meeting UNAIDS 2020 goals of 
90-90-90 coverage. Presented at: Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections; 
February 22–25, 2016; Boston, MA. 
26. Kohler P, Schmidt AJ, Cavassini M, et al. Swiss HIV Cohort Study. The HIV care cascade in 
Switzerland: reaching the UNAIDS/WHO targets for patients diagnosed with HIV. AIDS. 2015; 
29(18):2509–2515. [PubMed: 26372488] 
27. Carpenter CCJ, Fischl MA, Hammer SM, et al. Antiretroviral therapy for HIV infection in 1996: 
recommendations of an international panel. JAMA. 1996; 276(2):146–154. [PubMed: 8656507] 
28. Carpenter CCJ, Fischl MA, Hammer SM, et al. Antiretroviral therapy for HIV infection in 1997: 
updated recommendations of the International AIDS Society-USA panel. JAMA. 1997; 277(24):
1962–1969. [PubMed: 9200638] 
29. Carpenter CCJ, Fischl MA, Hammer SM, et al. Antiretroviral therapy for HIV infection in 1998: 
updated recommendations of the International AIDS Society-USA panel. JAMA. 1998; 280(1):78–
86. [PubMed: 9660368] 
30. Carpenter CCJ, Cooper DA, Fischl MA, et al. Antiretroviral therapy in adults: updated 
recommendations of the International AIDS Society-USA panel. JAMA. 2000; 283(3):381–390. 
[PubMed: 10647802] 
31. Yeni PG, Hammer SM, Carpenter CCJ, et al. Antiretroviral treatment for adult HIV infection in 
2002: updated recommendations of the International AIDS Society-USA panel. JAMA. 2002; 
288(2):222–235. [PubMed: 12095387] 
32. Yeni PG, Hammer SM, Hirsch MS, et al. Treatment for adult HIV infection: 2004 
recommendations of the International AIDS Society-USA panel. JAMA. 2004; 292(2):251–265. 
[PubMed: 15249575] 
33. Hammer SM, Saag MS, Schechter M, et al. International AIDS Society-USA Panel. Treatment for 
adult HIV infection: 2006 recommendations of the International AIDS Society-USA panel. JAMA. 
2006; 296(7):827–843. [PubMed: 16905788] 
34. Hammer SM, Eron JJ Jr, Reiss P, et al. International AIDS Society-USA. Antiretroviral treatment 
of adult HIV infection: 2008 recommendations of the International AIDS Society-USA panel. 
JAMA. 2008; 300(5):555–570. [PubMed: 18677028] 
Günthard et al.
Page 21
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 35. Thompson MA, Aberg JA, Cahn P, et al. International AIDS Society-USA. Antiretroviral treatment 
of adult HIV infection: 2010 recommendations of the International AIDS Society-USA panel. 
JAMA. 2010; 304(3):321–333. [PubMed: 20639566] 
36. Walmsley SL, Antela A, Clumeck N, et al. SINGLE Investigators Dolutegravir plus abacavir-
lamivudine for the treatment of HIV-1 infection. N Engl J Med. 2013; 369(19):1807–1818. 
[PubMed: 24195548] 
37. Clotet B, Feinberg J, van Lunzen J, et al. ING114915 Study Team. Once-daily dolutegravir vs 
darunavir plus ritonavir in antiretroviral-naive adults with HIV-1 infection (FLAMINGO): 48 week 
results from the randomised open-label phase 3b study. Lancet. 2014; 383(9936):2222–2231. 
[PubMed: 24698485] 
38. Squires, K.; Kityo, C.; Hodder, S., et al. Elvitegravir (EVG)/cobicistat (COBI)/emtricitabine 
(FTC)/tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (TDF) is superior to ritonavir (RTV) boosted atazanavir 
(ATV) plus FTC/TDF in treatment naive women with HIV-1 infection (WAVES study). Presented 
at: Eighth International AIDS Society Conference on HIV Pathogenesis, Treatment, and 
Prevention; July 18–22, 2015; Vancouver, BC, Canada. Abstract MOLBPE08
39. Ofotokun I, Na LH, Landovitz RJ, et al. AIDS Clinical Trials Group A5257 Team; AIDS Clinical 
Trials Group A5257 Team. Comparison of the metabolic effects of ritonavir-boosted darunavir or 
atazanavir vs raltegravir, and the impact of ritonavir plasma exposure: ACTG 5257. Clin Infect 
Dis. 2015; 60(12):1842–1851. [PubMed: 25767256] 
40. Raffi F, Rachlis A, Stellbrink HJ, et al. SPRING-2 Study Group. Once-daily dolutegravir vs 
raltegravir in antiretroviral-naive adults with HIV-1 infection: 48 week results from the 
randomised, double-blind, non-inferiority SPRING-2 study. Lancet. 2013; 381(9868):735–743. 
[PubMed: 23306000] 
41. Cahn P, Pozniak AL, Mingrone H, et al. Extended SAILING Study Team. Dolutegravir vs 
raltegravir in antiretroviral-experienced, integrase-inhibitor-naive adults with HIV: week 48 results 
from the randomised, double-blind, non-inferiority SAILING study. Lancet. 2013; 382(9893):700–
708. [PubMed: 23830355] 
42. Elion R, Molina JM, Ramón Arribas López J, et al. Study 145 Team. A randomized phase 3 study 
comparing once-daily elvitegravir with twice-daily raltegravir in treatment-experienced subjects 
with HIV-1 infection: 96-week results. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2013; 63(4):494–497. 
[PubMed: 23807156] 
43. Raffi F, Jaeger H, Quiros-Roldan E, et al. Extended SPRING-2 Study Group. Once-daily 
dolutegravir vs twice-daily raltegravir in antiretroviral-naive adults with HIV-1 infection 
(SPRING-2 study): 96 week results from a randomised, double-blind, non-inferiority trial. Lancet 
Infect Dis. 2013; 13(11):927–935. [PubMed: 24074642] 
44. Mallal S, Phillips E, Carosi G, et al. PREDICT-1 Study Team. HLA-B*5701 screening for 
hypersensitivity to abacavir. N Engl J Med. 2008; 358(6):568–579. [PubMed: 18256392] 
45. Sax PE, Tierney C, Collier AC, et al. AIDS Clinical Trials Group Study A5202 Team. Abacavir-
lamivudine vs tenofovir-emtricitabine for initial HIV-1 therapy. N Engl J Med. 2009; 361(23):
2230–2240. [PubMed: 19952143] 
46. Post FA, Moyle GJ, Stellbrink HJ, et al. Randomized comparison of renal effects, efficacy, and 
safety with once-daily abacavir/lamivudine vs tenofovir/emtricitabine, administered with 
efavirenz, in antiretroviral-naive, HIV-1-infected adults: 48-week results from the ASSERT study. 
J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2010; 55(1):49–57. [PubMed: 20431394] 
47. Marcus JL, Neugebauer RS, Leyden WA, et al. Use of abacavir and risk of cardiovascular disease 
among HIV-infected individuals. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2016; 71(4):413–419. [PubMed: 
26536316] 
48. Young J, Xiao Y, Moodie EE, et al. Swiss HIV Cohort Study. Effect of cumulating exposure to 
abacavir on the risk of cardiovascular disease events in patients from the Swiss HIV Cohort Study. 
J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2015; 69(4):413–421. [PubMed: 25932884] 
49. Sabin CA, Reiss P, Ryom L, et al. D:A:D Study Group. Is there continued evidence for an 
association between abacavir usage and myocardial infarction risk in individuals with HIV? a 
cohort collaboration. BMC Med. 2016; 14(1):61. [PubMed: 27036962] 
50. Kovari H, Sabin CA, Ledergerber B, et al. Antiretroviral drugs and risk of chronic alanine 
aminotransferase elevation in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-monoinfected persons: the 
Günthard et al.
Page 22
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Data Collection on Adverse Events of Anti-HIV Drugs study. Open Forum Infect Dis. 2016; 3(1) 
ofw009. 
51. Sax PE, Wohl D, Yin MT, et al. GS-US-292-0104/0111 Study Team. Tenofovir alafenamide vs 
tenofovir disoproxil fumarate, coformulated with elvitegravir, cobicistat, and emtricitabine, for 
initial treatment of HIV-1 infection: two randomised, double-blind, phase 3, non-inferiority trials. 
Lancet. 2015; 385(9987):2606–2615. [PubMed: 25890673] 
52. Wohl D, Oka S, Clumeck N, et al. GS-US-292-01040111 and Study Team. Brief report: a 
randomized, double-blind comparison of tenofovir alafenamide versus tenofovir disoproxil 
fumarate, each coformulated with elvitegravir, cobicistat, and emtricitabine for initial HIV-1 
treatment: week 96 results. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2016; 72(1):58–64. [PubMed: 
26829661] 
53. Mills A, Arribas JR, Andrade-Villanueva J, et al. GS-US-292-0109 Team. Switching from 
tenofovir disoproxil fumarate to tenofovir alafenamide in antiretroviral regimens for virologically 
suppressed adults with HIV-1 infection: a randomised, active-controlled, multicentre, open-label, 
phase 3, non-inferiority study. Lancet Infect Dis. 2016; 16(1):43–52. [PubMed: 26538525] 
54. Gallant, J.; Daar, E.; Raffi, F., et al. Switching tenofovir DF to tenofovir alafenamide in 
virologically suppressed adults. Presented at: 23rd Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic 
Infections; February 22–25, 2016; Boston, MA. 
55. Mollan KR, Smurzynski M, Eron JJ, et al. Association between efavirenz as initial therapy for 
HIV-1 infection and increased risk for suicidal ideation or attempted or completed suicide: an 
analysis of trial data. Ann Intern Med. 2014; 161(1):1–10. [PubMed: 24979445] 
56. Girouard MP, Sax PE, Parker RA, et al. The cost-effectiveness and budget impact of 2-drug 
dolutegravir-lamivudine regimens for the treatment of HIV infection in the United States. Clin 
Infect Dis. 2016; 62(6):784–791. [PubMed: 26658053] 
57. Cahn P, Andrade-Villanueva J, Arribas JR, et al. GARDEL Study Group. Dual therapy with 
lopinavir and ritonavir plus lamivudine vs triple therapy with lopinavir and ritonavir plus two 
nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors in antiretroviral-therapy-naive adults with HIV-1 
infection: 48 week results of the randomised, open label, non-inferiority GARDEL trial. Lancet 
Infect Dis. 2014; 14(7):572–580. [PubMed: 24783988] 
58. Raffi F, Babiker AG, Richert L, et al. NEAT001/ANRS143 Study Group. Ritonavir-boosted 
darunavir combined with raltegravir or tenofovir-emtricitabine in antiretroviral-naive adults 
infected with HIV-1: 96 week results from the NEAT001/ANRS143 randomised non-inferiority 
trial. Lancet. 2014; 384(9958):1942–1951. [PubMed: 25103176] 
59. Figueroa, MI.; Sued, O.; Patterson, P., et al. Dolutegravir-lamivudine as initial therapy in HIV-
infected, ARV naive patients: first results of the PADDLE trial. Presented at: 15th European AIDS 
Conference; October 21–24, 2015; Barcelona, Spain. Abstract LBPS4/1
60. Gallant JE, Daar ES, Raffi F, et al. Efficacy and safety of tenofovir alafenamide versus tenofovir 
disoproxil fumarate given as fixed-dose combinations containing emtricitabine as backbones for 
treatment of HIV-1 infection in virologically suppressed adults: a randomised, double-blind, 
active-controlled phase 3 trial. Lancet HIV. 2016; 3(4):e158–e165. [PubMed: 27036991] 
61. Buti, M.; Gane, E.; Seto, WK., et al. A phase 3 study of tenofovir alafenamide compared with 
tenofovir disoproxil fumarate in patients with HBeAg-negative, chronic hepatitis B: week 48 
efficacy and safety results. Presented at: International Liver Congress; April 13–17, 2016; 
Barcelona, Spain. Abstract GS06
62. Chan, HLY.; Fung, S.; Seto, WK., et al. A phase 3 study of tenofovir alafenamide compared with 
tenofovir disoproxil fumarate in patients with HBeAg-positive chronic HBV: week 48 efficacy and 
safety results. Presented at: International Liver Congress; April 13–17, 2016; Barcelona, Spain. 
Abstract GS12
63. American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases and Infectious Diseases Society of America. 
[Accessed April 20, 2016] HCV guidance: recommendations for testing, managing, and treating 
hepatitis C. http://hcvguidelines.org/
64. Borges, AH.; Hoy, J.; Florence, E., et al. Antiretrovirals, fractures, and osteonecrosis in a large 
European HIV cohort. Presented at: 23rd Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic 
Infections; February 22–25, 2016; Boston, MA. Abstract 46
Günthard et al.
Page 23
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 65. Lucas GM, Ross MJ, Stock PG, et al. HIV Medicine Association of the Infectious Diseases Society 
of America Clinical practice guideline for the management of chronic kidney disease in patients 
infected with HIV: 2014 update by the HIV Medicine Association of the Infectious Diseases 
Society of America. Clin Infect Dis. 2014; 59(9):e96–e138. [PubMed: 25234519] 
66. Mocroft A, Lundgren JD, Ross M, et al. Data Collection on Adverse events of Anti-HIV Drugs 
(D:A:D) Study. Cumulative and current exposure to potentially nephrotoxic antiretrovirals and 
development of chronic kidney disease in HIV-positive individuals with a normal baseline 
estimated glomerular filtration rate: a prospective international cohort study. Lancet HIV. 2016; 
3(1):e23–e32. [PubMed: 26762990] 
67. Pozniak, A.; Arribas, JR.; Gupta, SK., et al. Safety of tenofovir alafenamide in renal impairment. 
Presented at: 22nd Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections; February 23–26, 
2015; Seattle, WA. 
68. Chen RY, Accortt NA, Westfall AO, et al. Distribution of health care expenditures for HIV-infected 
patients. Clin Infect Dis. 2006; 42(7):1003–1010. [PubMed: 16511767] 
69. Freedberg KA, Losina E, Weinstein MC, et al. The cost effectiveness of combination antiretroviral 
therapy for HIV disease. N Engl J Med. 2001; 344(11):824–831. [PubMed: 11248160] 
70. Walensky RP, Sax PE, Nakamura YM, et al. Economic savings vs health losses: the cost-
effectiveness of generic antiretroviral therapy in the United States. Ann Intern Med. 2013; 158(2):
84–92. [PubMed: 23318310] 
71. Walmsley S, Baumgarten A, Berenguer J, et al. Brief report: dolutegravir plus abacavir/lamivudine 
for the treatment of HIV-1 infection in antiretroviral therapy-naive patients: week 96 and week 144 
results from the SINGLE randomized clinical trial. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2015; 70(5):
515–519. [PubMed: 26262777] 
72. Boulware DR, Meya DB, Muzoora C, et al. COAT Trial Team. Timing of antiretroviral therapy 
after diagnosis of cryptococcal meningitis. N Engl J Med. 2014; 370(26):2487–2498. [PubMed: 
24963568] 
73. Perfect JR, Dismukes WE, Dromer F, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for the management of 
cryptococcal disease: 2010 update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis. 
2010; 50(3):291–322. [PubMed: 20047480] 
74. Ingle, SM.; Miro, JM.; Furrer, H., et al. Impact of ART on mortality in cryptococcal meningitis 
patients: high-income settings. Presented at: 22nd Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic 
Infections; February 23–26, 2015; Seattle, WA. 
75. Mfinanga SG, Kirenga BJ, Chanda DM, et al. Early vs delayed initiation of highly active 
antiretroviral therapy for HIV-positive adults with newly diagnosed pulmonary tuberculosis (TB-
HAART): a prospective, international, randomised, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet Infect Dis. 
2014; 14(7):563–571. [PubMed: 24810491] 
76. Blanc FX, Sok T, Laureillard D, et al. CAMELIA (ANRS 1295-CIPRA KH001) Study Team. 
Earlier vs later start of antiretroviral therapy in HIV-infected adults with tuberculosis. N Engl J 
Med. 2011; 365(16):1471–1481. [PubMed: 22010913] 
77. Havlir DV, Kendall MA, Ive P, et al. AIDS Clinical Trials Group Study. A5221 Timing of 
antiretroviral therapy for HIV-1 infection and tuberculosis. N Engl J Med. 2011; 365(16):1482–
1491. [PubMed: 22010914] 
78. Abdool Karim, S.; Naidoo, K.; Padayatchi, N., et al. Optimal timing of ART during TB therapy: 
findings of the SAPiT trial. Presented at: 18th Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic 
Infections; February 27–March 2, 2011; Boston, MA. 
79. Manzardo C, Guardo AC, Letang E, Plana M, Gatell JM, Miro JM. Opportunistic infections and 
immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome in HIV-1-infected adults in the combined 
antiretroviral therapy era: a comprehensive review. Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther. 2015; 13(6):751–
767. [PubMed: 25860288] 
80. Luetkemeyer AF, Rosenkranz SL, Lu D, et al. Adult AIDS Clinical Trials Group A5221 Study 
Team. Relationship between weight, efavirenz exposure, and virologic suppression in HIV-infected 
patients on rifampin-based tuberculosis treatment in the AIDS Clinical Trials Group A5221 
STRIDE Study. Clin Infect Dis. 2013; 57(4):586–593. [PubMed: 23592830] 
Günthard et al.
Page 24
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 81. Grinsztejn B, De Castro N, Arnold V, et al. ANRS 12 180 Reflate TB Study Group. Raltegravir for 
the treatment of patients co-infected with HIV and tuberculosis (ANRS 12 180 Reflate TB): a 
multicentre, phase 2, non-comparative, open-label, randomised trial. Lancet Infect Dis. 2014; 
14(6):459–467. [PubMed: 24726095] 
82. Dooley KE, Sayre P, Borland J, et al. Safety, tolerability, and pharmacokinetics of the HIV 
integrase inhibitor dolutegravir given twice daily with rifampin or once daily with rifabutin: results 
of a phase 1 study among healthy subjects. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2013; 62(1):21–27. 
[PubMed: 23075918] 
83. Friedland G, Khoo S, Jack C, Lalloo U. Administration of efavirenz (600 mg/day) with rifampicin 
results in highly variable levels but excellent clinical outcomes in patients treated for tuberculosis 
and HIV. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2006; 58(6):1299–1302. [PubMed: 17032686] 
84. Naiker, S.; Conolly, C.; Weisner, L., et al. Pharmacokinetic evaluation of different rifabutin dosing 
strategies in African TB patients on lopinavir/ritonavir-based ART. Presented at: 18th Conference 
on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections; February 27–March 2, 2011; Boston, MA. 
85. Boulanger C, Hollender E, Farrell K, et al. Pharmacokinetic evaluation of rifabutin in combination 
with lopinavir-ritonavir in patients with HIV infection and active tuberculosis. Clin Infect Dis. 
2009; 49(9):1305–1311. [PubMed: 19807276] 
86. Jenny-Avital ER, Joseph K. Rifamycin-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis in the highly active 
antiretroviral therapy era: a report of 3 relapses with acquired rifampin resistance following 
alternate-day rifabutin and boosted protease inhibitor therapy. Clin Infect Dis. 2009; 48(10):1471–
1474. [PubMed: 19368504] 
87. Sterling TR, Scott NA, Miro JM, et al. Tuberculosis Trials Consortium the AIDS Clinical Trials 
Group for the PREVENT TB Trial (TBTC Study 26ACTG 5259) Three months of weekly 
rifapentine and isoniazid for treatment of Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection in HIV-coinfected 
persons. AIDS. 2016; 30(10):1607–1615. [PubMed: 27243774] 
88. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Recommendations for use of an isoniazid-rifapentine 
regimen with direct observation to treat latent Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection. MMWR 
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2011; 60(48):1650–1653. [PubMed: 22157884] 
89. Sterling T, Benson C, Scott N, et al. Three months of weekly rifapentine + INH for M tuberculosis 
infection in HIV-infected persons [CROI abstract 817]. Top Antivir Med. 2014; 22(e-1):425.
90. Diacon AH, Pym A, Grobusch M, et al. The diarylquinoline TMC207 for multidrug-resistant 
tuberculosis. N Engl J Med. 2009; 360(23):2397–2405. [PubMed: 19494215] 
91. Weiner M, Egelund EF, Engle M, et al. Pharmacokinetic interaction of rifapentine and raltegravir 
in healthy volunteers. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2014; 69(4):1079–1085. [PubMed: 24343893] 
92. Djawe K, Buchacz K, Hsu L, et al. Mortality risk after AIDS-defining opportunistic illness among 
HIV-infected persons—San Francisco, 1981–2012. J Infect Dis. 2015; 212(9):1366–1375. 
[PubMed: 26044289] 
93. Yangco BG, Buchacz K, Baker R, Palella FJ, Armon C, Brooks JT. HIV Outpatient Study. 
Investigators Is primary Mycobacterium avium complex prophylaxis necessary in patients with 
CD4 <50 cells/µL who are virologically suppressed on cART? AIDS Patient Care STDS. 2014; 
28(6):280–283. [PubMed: 24833016] 
94. Mocroft A, Reiss P, Kirk O, et al. Opportunistic Infections Project Team of the Collaboration of 
Observational HIV Epidemiological Research in Europe Is it safe to discontinue primary 
Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia prophylaxis in patients with virologically suppressed HIV 
infection and a CD4 cell count <200 cells/µL? Clin Infect Dis. 2010; 51(5):611–619. [PubMed: 
20645862] 
95. Trottier, B.; Lake, J.; Logue, K., et al. Switching to abacavir/dolutegravir/lamivudine combination 
(ABC/DTG/3TC FDC) from a PI, INI or NNRTI based regimen maintains HIV suppression. 
Presented at: Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy; September 17–
21, 2015; San Diego, CA. 
96. Pozniak A, Markowitz M, Mills A, et al. Switching to coformulated elvitegravir, cobicistat, 
emtricitabine, and tenofovir vs continuation of non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor with 
emtricitabine and tenofovir in virologically suppressed adults with HIV (STRATEGY-NNRTI): 48 
week results of a randomised, open-label, phase 3b non-inferiority trial. Lancet Infect Dis. 2014; 
14(7):590–599. [PubMed: 24908550] 
Günthard et al.
Page 25
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 97. Arribas JR, Pialoux G, Gathe J, et al. Simplification to coformulated elvitegravir, cobicistat, 
emtricitabine, and tenofovir vs continuation of ritonavir-boosted protease inhibitor with 
emtricitabine and tenofovir in adults with virologically suppressed HIV (STRATEGY-PI): 48 week 
results of a randomised, open-label, phase 3b, non-inferiority trial. Lancet Infect Dis. 2014; 14(7):
581–589. [PubMed: 24908551] 
98. Palella FJ Jr, Fisher M, Tebas P, et al. Simplification to rilpivirine/emtricitabine/tenofovir 
disoproxil fumarate from ritonavir-boosted protease inhibitor antiretroviral therapy in a 
randomized trial of HIV-1 RNA-suppressed participants. AIDS. 2014; 28(3):335–344. [PubMed: 
24670520] 
99. Perez-Molina JA, Rubio R, Rivero A, et al. GESIDA 7011 Study Group. Dual treatment with 
atazanavir-ritonavir plus lamivudine vs triple treatment with atazanavir-ritonavir plus two 
nucleos(t)ides in virologically stable patients with HIV-1 (SALT): 48 week results from a 
randomised, open-label, non-inferiority trial. Lancet Infect Dis. 2015; 15(7):775–784. [PubMed: 
26062881] 
100. Arribas JR, Girard PM, Landman R, et al. OLE/RIS-EST13 Study Group. Dual treatment with 
lopinavir-ritonavir plus lamivudine vs triple treatment with lopinavir-ritonavir plus lamivudine or 
emtricitabine and a second nucleos(t)ide reverse transcriptase inhibitor for maintenance of HIV-1 
viral suppression (OLE): a randomised, open-label, non-inferiority trial. Lancet Infect Dis. 2015; 
15(7):785–792. [PubMed: 26062880] 
101. Margolis DA, Brinson CC, Smith GH, et al. LAI116482 Study Team. Cabotegravir plus 
rilpivirine, once a day, after induction with cabotegravir plus nucleoside reverse transcriptase 
inhibitors in antiretroviralnaive adults with HIV-1 infection (LATTE): a randomised, phase 2b, 
dose-ranging trial. Lancet Infect Dis. 2015; 15(10):1145–1155. [PubMed: 26201299] 
102. Calcagno A, Montrucchio C, Capetti A, et al. Raltegravir plus nevirapine as maintenance 
antiretroviral therapy in HIV-positive patients: safety, efficacy and pharmacokinetics. Curr HIV 
Res. 2016; 14(1):54–60. [PubMed: 26415700] 
103. Eron JJ, Young B, Cooper DA, et al. SWITCHMRK 1 and 2 Investigators Switch to a raltegravir-
based regimen vs continuation of a lopinavir-ritonavir-based regimen in stable HIV-infected 
patients with suppressed viraemia (SWITCHMRK 1 and 2): two multicentre, double-blind, 
randomised controlled trials. Lancet. 2010; 375(9712):396–407. [PubMed: 20074791] 
104. Derache A, Shin HS, Balamane M, et al. HIV drug resistance mutations in proviral DNA from a 
community treatment program. PLoS One. 2015; 10(1):e0117430. [PubMed: 25635815] 
105. Lübke N, Di Cristanziano V, Sierra S, et al. Proviral DNA as a target for HIV-1 resistance 
analysis. Intervirology. 2015; 58(3):184–189. [PubMed: 26139571] 
106. Toma, J.; Tan, Y.; Cai, S., et al. Drug resistance profiles derived from HIV-1 DNA in ARV 
suppressed patients correlate with historical resistance profiles obtained from HIV-1 plasma 
RNA. Presented at: Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy; 
September 17–21, 2015; San Diego, CA. 
107. Volpe, JM.; Yang, O.; Petropoulos, CJ.; Walworth, CM. Absence of integrase inhibitor resistant 
HIV-1 transmission in the California AIDS Healthcare Foundation Network. Presented at: 
Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy; September 17–21, 2015; 
San Diego, CA. 
108. Casadellà M, van Ham PM, Noguera-Julian M, et al. SPREAD Programme. Primary resistance to 
integrase strand-transfer inhibitors in Europe. J Antimicrob Chemother. 2015; 70(10):2885–2888. 
[PubMed: 26188038] 
109. Scherrer AU, Yang WL, Kouyos RD, et al. Swiss HIV Cohort Study. Successful prevention of 
transmission of integrase resistance in the Swiss HIV Cohort Study [published online April 29, 
2016]. J Infect Dis. 
110. Aberg JA, Gallant JE, Ghanem KG, Emmanuel P, Zingman BS, Horberg MA. Infectious Diseases 
Society of America Primary care guidelines for the management of persons infected with HIV: 
2013 update by the HIV Medicine Association of the Infectious Diseases Society of America. 
Clin Infect Dis. 2014; 58(1):1–10. [PubMed: 24343580] 
111. European AIDS Clinical Society. [Accessed April 8, 2016] European AIDS Clinical Society 
Guidelines 8.0. http://www.eacsociety.org/files/2015_eacsguidelines_8_0-
english_rev-20160124.pdf
Günthard et al.
Page 26
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 112. Crowell, TA.; Phanuphak, N.; Pinyakorn, S., et al. Virologic failure is uncommon after treatment 
is initiated during acute HIV infection. Presented at: Conference on Retroviruses and 
Opportunistic Infections; February 22–25, 2016; Boston, MA. 
113. Sax PE. Editorial commentary: can we break the habit of routine CD4 monitoring in HIV care? 
Clin Infect Dis. 2013; 56(9):1344–1346. [PubMed: 23315314] 
114. Workowski KA, Bolan GA. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually transmitted 
diseases treatment guidelines, 2015. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2015; 64(RR-03):1–137. [PubMed: 
26042815] 
115. Henrich TJ, Wood BR, Kuritzkes DR. Increased risk of virologic rebound in patients on antiviral 
therapy with a detectable HIV load <48 copies/mL. PLoS One. 2012; 7(11):e50065. [PubMed: 
23166820] 
116. Young J, Rickenbach M, Calmy A, et al. Swiss HIV Cohort Study. Transient detectable viremia 
and the risk of viral rebound in patients from the Swiss HIV Cohort Study. BMC Infect Dis. 
2015; 15:382. [PubMed: 26392270] 
117. Teira, R.; Munoz-Sanchez, M.; Suarez-Lozano, I., et al. Effect of viral suppression below 20 
copies of HIV-RNA per millilitre of plasma on virological outcome of treated HIV-infected 
patients. Presented at: 20th International AIDS Conference; July 20–25, 2014; Melbourne, 
Australia. 
118. Ryscavage P, Kelly S, Li JZ, Harrigan PR, Taiwo B. Significance and clinical management of 
persistent low-level viremia and very-low-level viremia in HIV-1-infected patients. Antimicrob 
Agents Chemother. 2014; 58(7):3585–3598. [PubMed: 24733471] 
119. Boillat-Blanco N, Darling KE, Schoni-Affolter F, et al. Swiss HIV Cohort Study. Virological 
outcome and management of persistent low-level viraemia in HIV-1-infected patients: 11 years of 
the Swiss HIV Cohort Study. Antivir Ther. 2015; 20(2):165–175. [PubMed: 24964403] 
120. Jain V, Sucupira MC, Bacchetti P, et al. Differential persistence of transmitted HIV-1 drug 
resistance mutation classes. J Infect Dis. 2011; 203(8):1174–1181. [PubMed: 21451005] 
121. Pingen M, Wensing AM, Fransen K, et al. SPREAD Programme. Persistence of frequently 
transmitted drug-resistant HIV-1 variants can be explained by high viral replication capacity. 
Retrovirology. 2014; 11:105. [PubMed: 25575025] 
122. Yang WL, Kouyos RD, Böni J, et al. Swiss HIV Cohort Study. Persistence of transmitted HIV-1 
drug resistance mutations associated with fitness costs and viral genetic backgrounds. PLoS 
Pathog. 2015; 11(3):e1004722. [PubMed: 25798934] 
123. Baxter JD, Dunn D, White E, et al. International Network for Strategic Initiatives in Global HIV 
Trials START Study Group. Global HIV-1 transmitted drug resistance in the INSIGHT Strategic 
Timing of AntiRetroviral Treatment (START) trial. HIV Med. 2015; 16(suppl 1):77–87. 
[PubMed: 25711326] 
124. Lepik, K.; Yip, B.; Robbins, MA., et al. Prevalence and incidence of integrase drug resistance in 
BC, Canada, 2009–2015. Presented at: Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections; 
February 22–25, 2016; Boston, MA. 
125. Lesko CR, Cole SR, Zinski A, Poole C, Mugavero MJ. A systematic review and meta-regression 
of temporal trends in adult CD4(+) cell count at presentation to HIV care, 1992–2011. Clin Infect 
Dis. 2013; 57(7):1027–1037. [PubMed: 23921882] 
126. Siedner MJ, Ng CK, Bassett IV, Katz IT, Bangsberg DR, Tsai AC. Trends in CD4 count at 
presentation to care and treatment initiation in sub-Saharan Africa, 2002–2013: a meta-analysis. 
Clin Infect Dis. 2015; 60(7):1120–1127. [PubMed: 25516189] 
127. Champenois K, Cousien A, Cuzin L, et al. Missed opportunities for HIV testing in newly HIV-
diagnosed patients: a cross sectional study. BMC Infect Dis. 2013; 13:200. [PubMed: 23638870] 
128. US Preventive Services Task Force. [Accessed April 20, 2016] Human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV) infection: screening. http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Document/
UpdateSummaryFinal/human-immunodeficiency-virus-hiv-infection-screening
129. Branson BM, Handsfield HH, Lampe MA, et al. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
Revised recommendations for HIV testing of adults, adolescents, and pregnant women in health-
care settings. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2006; 55(RR-14):1–17. [PubMed: 16988643] 
Günthard et al.
Page 27
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 130. Skarbinski J, Rosenberg E, Paz-Bailey G, et al. Human immunodeficiency virus transmission at 
each step of the care continuum in the United States. JAMA Intern Med. 2015; 175(4):588–596. 
[PubMed: 25706928] 
131. Magnus M, Herwehe J, Gruber D, et al. Improved HIV-related outcomes associated with 
implementation of a novel public health information exchange. Int J Med Inform. 2012; 
81(10):e30–e38. [PubMed: 22883431] 
132. Christopoulos KA, Scheer S, Steward WT, et al. Examining clinic-based and public health 
approaches to ascertainment of HIV care status. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2015; 69(suppl 
1):S56–S62. [PubMed: 25867779] 
133. Marks G, Gardner LI, Craw J, Crepaz N. Entry and retention in medical care among HIV-
diagnosed persons: a meta-analysis. AIDS. 2010; 24(17):2665–2678. [PubMed: 20841990] 
134. Thompson MA, Mugavero MJ, Amico KR, et al. Guidelines for improving entry into and 
retention in care and antiretroviral adherence for persons with HIV: evidence-based 
recommendations from an International Association of Physicians in AIDS Care panel. Ann 
Intern Med. 2012; 156(11):817–833. W-284-W-294. [PubMed: 22393036] 
135. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. [Accessed April 7, 2016] Compendium of evidence-
based interventions and best practices for HIV prevention. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/research/
interventionresearch/compendium/lrc/index.html
136. Gardner LI, Metsch LR, Anderson-Mahoney P, et al. Antiretroviral Treatment and Access Study 
Group. Efficacy of a brief case management intervention to link recently diagnosed HIV-infected 
persons to care. AIDS. 2005; 19(4):423–431. [PubMed: 15750396] 
137. Craw JA, Gardner LI, Marks G, et al. Brief strengths-based case management promotes entry into 
HIV medical care: results of the antiretroviral treatment access study-II. J Acquir Immune Defic 
Syndr. 2008; 47(5):597–606. [PubMed: 18285714] 
138. Bradford JB, Coleman S, Cunningham W. HIV system navigation: an emerging model to improve 
HIV care access. AIDS Patient Care STDS. 2007; 21(suppl 1):S49–S58. [PubMed: 17563290] 
139. Naar-King S, Bradford J, Coleman S, Green-Jones M, Cabral H, Tobias C. Retention in care of 
persons newly diagnosed with HIV: outcomes of the Outreach Initiative. AIDS Patient Care 
STDS. 2007; 21(suppl 1):S40–S48. [PubMed: 17563289] 
140. Metsch, LR.; Feaster, DJ.; Gooden, L., et al. A patient navigation/contingency management RCT 
for hospitalized HIV+ substance users. Presented at: Conference on Retroviruses and 
Opportunistic Infections; February 22–25, 2016; Boston, MA. 
141. Berg KM, Litwin A, Li X, Heo M, Arnsten JH. Directly observed antiretroviral therapy improves 
adherence and viral load in drug users attending methadone maintenance clinics: a randomized 
controlled trial. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2011; 113(2–3):192–199. [PubMed: 20832196] 
142. Maru DS, Bruce RD, Walton M, Springer SA, Altice FL. Persistence of virological benefits 
following directly administered antiretroviral therapy among drug users: results from a 
randomized controlled trial. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2009; 50(2):176–181. [PubMed: 
19131891] 
143. Babudieri S, Aceti A, D’Offizi GP, Carbonara S, Starnini G. Directly observed therapy to treat 
HIV infection in prisoners. JAMA. 2000; 284(2):179–180. [PubMed: 10889588] 
144. Mugavero MJ, Westfall AO, Cole SR, et al. Centers for AIDS Research Network of Integrated 
Clinical Systems. Beyond core indicators of retention in HIV care: missed clinic visits are 
independently associated with all-cause mortality. Clin Infect Dis. 2014; 59(10):1471–1479. 
[PubMed: 25091306] 
145. Lester RT, Ritvo P, Mills EJ, et al. Effects of a mobile phone short message service on 
antiretroviral treatment adherence in Kenya (WelTel Kenya1): a randomised trial. Lancet. 2010; 
376(9755):1838–1845. [PubMed: 21071074] 
146. Gardner LI, Giordano TP, Marks G, et al. Retention in Care Study Group. Enhanced personal 
contact with HIV patients improves retention in primary care: a randomized trial in 6 US HIV 
clinics. Clin Infect Dis. 2014; 59(5):725–734. [PubMed: 24837481] 
147. Glass TR, Sterne JA, Schneider MP, et al. Swiss HIV Cohort Study. Self-reported nonadherence 
to antiretroviral therapy as a predictor of viral failure and mortality. AIDS. 2015; 29(16):2195–
2200. [PubMed: 26544582] 
Günthard et al.
Page 28
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 148. Feldman BJ, Fredericksen RJ, Crane PK, et al. Evaluation of the single-item self-rating adherence 
scale for use in routine clinical care of people living with HIV. AIDS Behav. 2013; 17(1):307–
318. [PubMed: 23108721] 
149. Nosyk B, Min JE, Colley G, et al. The causal effect of opioid substitution treatment on HAART 
medication refill adherence. AIDS. 2015; 29(8):965–973. [PubMed: 25915170] 
150. Sin NL, DiMatteo MR. Depression treatment enhances adherence to antiretroviral therapy: a 
meta-analysis. Ann Behav Med. 2014; 47(3):259–269. [PubMed: 24234601] 
151. Gaynes BN, Pence BW, Atashili J, et al. Changes in HIV outcomes following depression care in a 
resource-limited setting: results from a pilot study in Bamenda, Cameroon. PLoS One. 2015; 
10(10): e0140001. [PubMed: 26469186] 
152. Pence BW, Gaynes BN, Adams JL, et al. The effect of antidepressant treatment on HIV and 
depression outcomes: results from a randomized trial. AIDS. 2015; 29(15):1975–1986. [PubMed: 
26134881] 
153. Pyne JM, Fortney JC, Curran GM, et al. Effectiveness of collaborative care for depression in 
human immunodeficiency virus clinics. Arch Intern Med. 2011; 171(1):23–31. [PubMed: 
21220657] 
154. Tsai AC, Karasic DH, Hammer GP, et al. Directly observed antidepressant medication treatment 
and HIV outcomes among homeless and marginally housed HIV-positive adults: a randomized 
controlled trial. Am J Public Health. 2013; 103(2):308–315. [PubMed: 22720766] 
155. Safren SA, O’Cleirigh C, Tan JY, et al. A randomized controlled trial of cognitive behavioral 
therapy for adherence and depression (CBT-AD) in HIV-infected individuals. Health Psychol. 
2009; 28(1):1–10. [PubMed: 19210012] 
156. Safren SA, O’Cleirigh CM, Bullis JR, Otto MW, Stein MD, Pollack MH. Cognitive behavioral 
therapy for adherence and depression (CBT-AD) in HIV-infected injection drug users: a 
randomized controlled trial. J Consult Clin Psychol. 2012; 80(3):404–415. [PubMed: 22545737] 
157. Simoni JM, Wiebe JS, Sauceda JA, et al. A preliminary RCT of CBT-AD for adherence and 
depression among HIV-positive Latinos on the U.S.-Mexico border: the Nuevo Día study. AIDS 
Behav. 2013; 17(8):2816–2829. [PubMed: 23812892] 
158. Townsend CL, Byrne L, Cortina-Borja M, et al. Earlier initiation of ART and further decline in 
mother-to-child HIV transmission rates, 2000–2011. AIDS. 2014; 28(7):1049–1057. [PubMed: 
24566097] 
159. Forbes JC, Alimenti AM, Singer J, et al. Canadian Pediatric AIDS Research Group. A national 
review of vertical HIV transmission. AIDS. 2012; 26(6):757–763. [PubMed: 22210635] 
160. Connor EM, Sperling RS, Gelber R, et al. Reduction of maternal-infant transmission of human 
immunodeficiency virus type 1 with zidovudine treatment: Pediatric AIDS Clinical Trials Group 
Protocol 076 Study Group. N Engl J Med. 1994; 331(18):1173–1180. [PubMed: 7935654] 
161. Kitahata MM, Gange SJ, Abraham AG, et al. NA-ACCORD Investigators. Effect of early vs 
deferred antiretroviral therapy for HIV on survival. N Engl J Med. 2009; 360(18):1815–1826. 
[PubMed: 19339714] 
162. Donnell D, Baeten JM, Kiarie J, et al. Partners in Prevention HSV/HIV Transmission Study 
Team. Heterosexual HIV-1 transmission after initiation of antiretroviral therapy: a prospective 
cohort analysis. Lancet. 2010; 375(9731):2092–2098. [PubMed: 20537376] 
163. Cohen, M.; Chen, Y.; McCauley, M., et al. Final results of the HPTN 052 randomized controlled 
trial: antiretroviral therapy prevents HIV transmission. Presented at: Eighth International AIDS 
Society (IAS) Conference on HIV Pathogenesis, Treatment, and Prevention; July 19–22, 2015; 
Vancouver, BC, Canada. Abstract MOAC0101LB
164. Bavinton BR, Jin F, Prestage G, et al. Opposites Attract Study Group. The Opposites Attract 
Study of viral load, HIV treatment and HIV transmission in serodiscordant homosexual male 
couples: design and methods. BMC Public Health. 2014; 14:917. [PubMed: 25190360] 
165. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. [Accessed March 10, 2016] Preexposure prophylaxis 
for the prevention of HIV infection in the United States—2014: a clinical practice guideline. 
http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/pdf/guidelines/PrEPguidelines2014.pdf
Günthard et al.
Page 29
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 166. World Health Organization. [Accessed May 10, 2016] Guideline on when to start antiretroviral 
therapy and on pre-exposure prophylaxis for HIV. http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/
10665/186275/1/9789241509565_eng.pdf
167. Marrazzo JM, del Rio C, Holtgrave DR, et al. International Antiviral Society-USA Panel. HIV 
prevention in clinical care settings: 2014 recommendations of the International Antiviral Society-
USA Panel. JAMA. 2014; 312(4):390–409. [PubMed: 25038358] 
168. Grant RM, Lama JR, Anderson PL, et al. iPrEx Study Team. Preexposure chemoprophylaxis for 
HIV prevention in men who have sex with men. N Engl J Med. 2010; 363(27):2587–2599. 
[PubMed: 21091279] 
169. Grant RM, Anderson PL, McMahan V, et al. iPrEx Study Team. Uptake of pre-exposure 
prophylaxis, sexual practices, and HIV incidence in men and transgender women who have sex 
with men: a cohort study. Lancet Infect Dis. 2014; 14(9):820–829. [PubMed: 25065857] 
170. Volk JE, Marcus JL, Phengrasamy T, et al. No new HIV infections with increasing use of HIV 
preexposure prophylaxis in a clinical practice setting. Clin Infect Dis. 2015; 61(10):1601–1603. 
[PubMed: 26334052] 
171. McCormack S, Dunn DT, Desai M, et al. Pre-exposure Prophylaxis to Prevent the Acquisition of 
HIV-1 Infection (PROUD): effectiveness results from the pilot phase of a pragmatic open-label 
randomised trial. Lancet. 2016; 387(10013):53–60. [PubMed: 26364263] 
172. Baeten JM, Donnell D, Ndase P, et al. Partners PrEP Study Team. Antiretroviral prophylaxis for 
HIV prevention in heterosexual men and women. N Engl J Med. 2012; 367(5):399–410. 
[PubMed: 22784037] 
173. Thigpen MC, Kebaabetswe PM, Paxton LA, et al. TDF2 Study Group. Antiretroviral preexposure 
prophylaxis for heterosexual HIV transmission in Botswana. N Engl J Med. 2012; 367(5):423–
434. [PubMed: 22784038] 
174. Molina, J-M.; Charreau, I.; Spire, B., et al. On demand PrEP with oral TDF-FTC in the open-label 
phase of the ANRS IPERGAY trial. Presented at: 23rd Conference on Retroviruses and 
Opportunistic Infections; February 22–25, 2016; Boston, MA. 
175. Molina JM, Capitant C, Spire B, et al. ANRS IPERGAY Study Group. On-demand preexposure 
prophylaxis in men at high risk for HIV-1 infection. N Engl J Med. 2015; 373(23):2237–2246. 
[PubMed: 26624850] 
176. Liu AY, Cohen SE, Vittinghoff E, et al. Preexposure prophylaxis for HIV infection integrated with 
municipal- and community-based sexual health services. JAMA Intern Med. 2016; 176(1):75–84. 
[PubMed: 26571482] 
177. Molina, JM. Coitally dependent TDF/FTC in MSM: updates on PrEP efficacy in IPERGAY. 
Presented at: Eighth International AIDS Society Conference on HIV Pathogenesis, Treatment, 
and Prevention; July 19–22, 2015; Vancouver, BC, Canada. 
178. Cottrell ML, Yang KH, Prince HM, et al. A translational pharmacology approach to predicting 
outcomes of preexposure prophylaxis against HIV in men and women using tenofovir disoproxil 
fumarate with or without emtricitabine. J Infect Dis. 2016; 214(1):55–64. [PubMed: 26917574] 
179. Choopanya K, Martin M, Suntharasamai P, et al. Bangkok Tenofovir Study Group. Antiretroviral 
prophylaxis for HIV infection in injecting drug users in Bangkok, Thailand (the Bangkok 
Tenofovir Study): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2013; 
381(9883):2083–2090. [PubMed: 23769234] 
180. Deutsch MB, Mendez MF. Neurocognitive features distinguishing primary central nervous system 
lymphoma from other possible causes of rapidly progressive dementia. Cogn Behav Neurol. 
2015; 28(1):1–10. [PubMed: 25812125] 
181. Gandhi, M.; Glidden, D.; Liu, AY., et al. Higher cumulative TFV/FTC levels in PrEP associated 
with decline in renal function. Presented at: Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic 
Infections; February 22–25, 2016; Boston, MA. 
182. Liu, AY.; Vittinghoff, E.; Anderson, PL., et al. Changes in renal function associated with 
TDF/FTC PrEP use in the US Demo Project. Presented at: Conference on Retroviruses and 
Opportunistic Infections; February 22–25, 2016; Boston, MA. 
Günthard et al.
Page 30
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 183. Solomon MM, Lama JR, Glidden DV, et al. iPrEx Study Team. Changes in renal function 
associated with oral emtricitabine/tenofovir disoproxil fumarate use for HIV pre-exposure 
prophylaxis. AIDS. 2014; 28(6):851–859. [PubMed: 24499951] 
184. Mugwanya KK, Wyatt C, Celum C, et al. Partners PrEP Study Team. Changes in glomerular 
kidney function among HIV-1-uninfected men and women receiving emtricitabine-tenofovir 
disoproxil fumarate preexposure prophylaxis: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern Med. 
2015; 175(2):246–254. [PubMed: 25531343] 
185. Liu AY, Vittinghoff E, Sellmeyer DE, et al. Bone mineral density in HIV-negative men 
participating in a tenofovir pre-exposure prophylaxis randomized clinical trial in San Francisco. 
PLoS One. 2011; 6(8):e23688. [PubMed: 21897852] 
186. Kasonde M, Niska RW, Rose C, et al. Bone mineral density changes among HIV-uninfected 
young adults in a randomised trial of pre-exposure prophylaxis with tenofovir-emtricitabine or 
placebo in Botswana. PLoS One. 2014; 9(3):e90111. [PubMed: 24625530] 
187. Mulligan, M.; Rutledge, B.; Kapogiannis, BG., et al. Bone changes in young men ages 18–22 
enrolled in a pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) safety and demonstration study using tenofovir 
disoproxil fumarate/emtricitabine (TDF/FTC). Presented at: 15th European AIDS Conference; 
October 21–24, 2015; Barcelona, Spain. 
188. Grant, R.; Mulligan, K.; McMahan, V., et al. Recovery of bone mineral density after stopping oral 
HIV preexposure prophylaxis. Presented at: Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic 
Infections; February 22–25, 2016; Boston, MA. 
189. Markowitz LE, Dunne EF, Saraiya M, et al. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Human 
papillomavirus vaccination: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization 
Practices (ACIP). MMWR Recomm Rep. 2014; 63(RR-05):1–30. [PubMed: 25167164] 
190. Golub, SA.; Pena, S.; Boonrai, K., et al. STI data from community-based PrEP implementation 
suggest changes to CDC guidelines. Presented at: 23rd Conference on Retroviruses and 
Opportunistic Infections; February 22–25, 2016; Boston, MA. Abstract 869
191. Liu, AY.; Vittinghoff, E.; Anderson, PL., et al. Changes in renal function associated with 
TDF/FTC PrEP use in the US Demo Project. Presented at: Conference on Retroviruses and 
Opportunistic Infections; February 22–25, 2016; Boston, MA. 
192. Knox, DC.; Tan, DH.; Harrigan, PR.; Anderson, PL. HIV-1 infection with multiclass resistance 
despite preexposure prophylaxis (PrEP). Presented at: Conference on Retroviruses and 
Opportunistic Infections; February 22–25, 2016; Boston, MA. 
193. Massud, I.; Mitchell, J.; Babusis, D., et al. Chemoprophylaxis with oral FTC/TAF protects 
macaques from rectal SHIV infection. Presented at: Conference on Retroviruses and 
Opportunistic Infections; February 22–25, 2016; Boston, MA. 
194. Garrett, KL.; Cottrell, ML.; Prince, HM., et al. Concentrations of TFV and TFVdp in female 
mucosal tissues after a single dose of TAF. Presented at: Conference on Retroviruses and 
Opportunistic Infections; February 22–25, 2016; Boston, MA. 
195. Cardo DM, Culver DH, Ciesielski CA, et al. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
Needlestick Surveillance Group. A case-control study of HIV seroconversion in health care 
workers after percutaneous exposure. N Engl J Med. 1997; 337(21):1485–1490. [PubMed: 
9366579] 
196. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. [Accessed April 22, 2016] Updated guidelines for 
antiretroviral postexposure prophylaxis after sexual, injection drug use, or other nonoccupational 
exposure to HIV—United States. 2016. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/pdf/programresources/cdc-hiv-
npep-guidelines.pdf
197. Margolis, DA.; Gonzalez-Garcia, J.; Stellbrink, HJ., et al. Cabotegravir + rilpivirine as long-acting 
maintenance therapy: LATTE-2 week 32 results. Presented at: Conference on Retroviruses and 
Opportunistic Infections; February 22–25, 2016; Boston, MA. 
198. Friedman, E.; Schuermann, D.; Rudd, DJ., et al. A single monotherapy dose of MK-8591, a novel 
NRTI, suppresses HIV for 10 days. Presented at: Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic 
Infections; February 22–25, 2016; Boston, MA. 
Günthard et al.
Page 31
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 199. Grobler, J.; Friedman, E.; Barrett, SE., et al. Long-acting oral and parenteral dosing of MK-8591 
for HIV treatment or prophylaxis. Presented at: Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic 
Infections; February 22–25, 2016; Boston, MA. 
200. Markowitz, M.; Frank, I.; Grant, R., et al. ÉCLAIR: phase 2A safety and PK study of cabotegravir 
LA in HIV-uninfected men. Presented at: 23rd Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic 
Infections; February 22–25, 2016; Boston, MA. Abstract 106
201. Baeten JM, Palanee-Phillips T, Brown ER, et al. MTN-020–ASPIRE Study Team. Use of a 
vaginal ring containing dapivirine for HIV-1 prevention in women [published online February 22, 
2016]. N Engl J Med. 
202. Nel, A.; Kapiga, S.; Bekker, LG., et al. Safety and efficacy of dapivirine vaginal ring for HIV-1 
prevention in African women. Presented at: 23rd Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic 
Infections; February 22–25, 2016; Boston, MA. Abstract 110LB
203. Lynch RM, Boritz E, Coates EE, et al. VRC 601 Study Team. Virologic effects of broadly 
neutralizing antibody VRC01 administration during chronic HIV-1 infection. Sci Transl Med. 
2015; 7(319): 319ra206. [PubMed: 26702094] 
204. Caskey M, Klein F, Lorenzi JC, et al. Viraemia suppressed in HIV-1-infected humans by broadly 
neutralizing antibody 3BNC117. Nature. 2015; 522(7557):487–491. [PubMed: 25855300] 
205. Stephenson KE, Barouch DH. Broadly neutralizing antibodies for HIV eradication. Curr HIV/
AIDS Rep. 2016; 13(1):31–37. [PubMed: 26841901] 
206. Moldt B, Le K, Carnathan DG, et al. Neutralizing antibody affords comparable protection against 
vaginal and rectal SHIV challenge in macaques [published online March 21, 2016]. AIDS. 
207. Richman DD, Margolis DM, Delaney M, Greene WC, Hazuda D, Pomerantz RJ. The challenge of 
finding a cure for HIV infection. Science. 2009; 323(5919):1304–1307. [PubMed: 19265012] 
208. Qin XF, An DS, Chen IS, Baltimore D. Inhibiting HIV-1 infection in human T cells by lentiviral-
mediated delivery of small interfering RNA against CCR5. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003; 
100(1):183–188. [PubMed: 12518064] 
209. Burke BP, Levin BR, Zhang J, et al. Engineering cellular resistance to HIV-1 infection in vivo 
using a dual therapeutic lentiviral vector. Mol Ther Nucleic Acids. 2015; 4:e236. [PubMed: 
25872029] 
210. Wolstein O, Boyd M, Millington M, et al. Preclinical safety and efficacy of an anti-HIV-1 
lentiviral vector containing a short hairpin RNA to CCR5 and the C46 fusion inhibitor. Mol Ther 
Methods Clin Dev. 2014; 1:11. [PubMed: 26015947] 
211. Tebas P, Stein D, Tang WW, et al. Gene editing of CCR5 in autologous CD4 T cells of persons 
infected with HIV. N Engl J Med. 2014; 370(10):901–910. [PubMed: 24597865] 
212. Mylvaganam GH, Silvestri G, Amara RR. HIV therapeutic vaccines: moving towards a functional 
cure. Curr Opin Immunol. 2015; 35:1–8. [PubMed: 25996629] 
Günthard et al.
Page 32
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Box 1. Recommendations for When to Start Antiretroviral Therapya
•
Antiretroviral therapy (ART) is recommended for all viremic patients 
with established HIV infection, regardless of CD4 cell count (evidence 
rating AIa).
•
Initiation of ART is recommended as soon as possible in the setting of 
acute HIV infection (evidence rating BIII).
•
Planned discontinuation of early ART after a specific duration of 
treatment is not recommended outside a research setting (evidence 
rating AIa).b
•
Initiation of ART is recommended for individuals who have persistent 
undetectable viral load without ART but have declining CD4 cell 
counts (evidence rating BIII).
a See text for essential details and cautions.
b The recommendation or the evidence rating has not changed substantially since the 
2014 report.
Günthard et al.
Page 33
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Box 2. Recommendations for Initial ART Regimensa
•
Recommended initial regimens (listed in alphabetic order by InSTI 
component):
–
Dolutegravir/abacavir/lamivudine (evidence rating AIa)
–
Dolutegravir plus TAF/emtricitabine (evidence rating 
AIa)b
–
Elvitegravir/cobicistat/TAF/emtricitabine (evidence 
rating AIa)b
–
Raltegravir plus TAF/emtricitabine (evidence rating 
AIII)
•
HLA-B*5701 testing should be performed prior to abacavir use 
(evidence rating AIa); those who test positive should not be given 
abacavir (evidence rating AIa).
•
Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate is not recommended for individuals with 
or at risk of kidney or bone disease (osteopenia or osteoporosis) 
(evidence rating BIII).
•
Recommended initial regimens for individuals in whom an InSTI is not 
an option (listed in alphabetic order by InSTI component):
•
Darunavir (boosted) plus TAF (or TDF)/emtricitabine or abacavir/
lamivudine (evidence rating AIa)b
–
Efavirenz/TDF/emtricitabine (evidence rating AIa)
–
Rilpivirine/TAF (or TDF)/emtricitabine (evidence 
rating AIa)b
•
Initial 2-drug regimens are recommended only in rare situations in 
which a patient cannot take abacavir, TAF, or TDF (evidence rating 
BIa).
•
HIV-infected pregnant women should initiate ART for their own health 
and to reduce the likelihood of HIV transmission to their infant 
(evidence rating AIa).c
•
For HIV-infected patients with hepatitis B virus coinfection should 
initiate ART that contains TDF or TAF (evidence rating AIa), 
lamivudine or emtricitabine, and a third component (evidence rating 
AIa).
•
Entecavir may be used to treat hepatitis B virus infection (evidence 
rating AIII). If HIV RNA is not suppressed, entecavir should be 
avoided because it can select for drug-resistant HIV (evidence rating 
AIII).
Günthard et al.
Page 34
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 •
HIV-infected patients with hepatitis C virus coinfection should start an 
ART regimen with drugs that do not have significant drug interactions 
with hepatitis C virus therapies (evidence rating AIIa).
•
Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate is not recommended for patients with 
osteopenia or osteoporosis (evidence rating BIII).
•
Monitoring for development of kidney disease with estimated 
glomerular filtration rate, urinalysis, and testing for glycosuria and 
albuminuria or proteinuria is recommended when ART is initiated or 
changed and every 6 months (along with HIV RNA) once HIV RNA is 
stable (evidence rating BIII).
•
Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate should be avoided or dose adjusted in 
patients with a creatinine clearance rate below 60 mL/min (evidence 
rating AIa).
•
Tenofovir alafenamide is not recommended in patients with a creatinine 
clearance rate below 30 mL/min (evidence rating AIa).
•
Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate or TAF should be discontinued if a 
patient’s renal function worsens, particularly if there is evidence of 
proximal tubular dysfunction (evidence rating AIIa).
•
HIV-infected patients with end-stage renal disease should be evaluated 
for kidney transplantation with expectation of high rates of patient and 
graft survival (evidence rating AIIa).
Abbreviations: ART, antiretroviral therapy; InSTI, integrase strand transfer; TAF, 
tenofovir alafenamide; TDF, tenofovir disoproxil fumarate.
a See text for essential details and cautions. Components separated with a slash (/) 
indicate that they are available as coformulations.
b TDF may be substituted for TAF if TAF is not available for the patient.
c The recommendation or the evidence rating has not changed substantially since the 
2014 report.
Günthard et al.
Page 35
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Box 3. ART and Opportunistic Infection Recommendationsa
•
ART should be started within the first 2 weeks after diagnosis for most 
acute opportunistic infections, with the possible exception of acute 
cryptococcal meningitis (evidence rating AIa).b
•
ART should be started within the first 2 weeks of initiation of 
tuberculosis treatment for those with CD4 cell counts of 50/µL or less 
and within the first 2 to 8 weeks for those with CD4 cell counts above 
50/µL (evidence rating AIa).
•
Neither tenofovir alafenamide nor cobicistat-boosted elvitegravir is 
recommended with rifamycin drugs (evidence rating AIIb). A boosted 
protease inhibitor–based regimen should be used only if an integrase 
strand transfer inhibitor is not an option, and rifabutin, 150 mg/d, 
should be substituted for rifampin in the antituberculosis regimen 
(evidence rating AIa).
•
Primary Mycobacterium avium complex prophylaxis is not 
recommended if effective ART is initiated immediately and viral 
suppression achieved (evidence rating AIIa).
•
Primary Pneumocystis pneumonia prophylaxis is recommended for 
patients who meet CD4 cell count criteria (evidence rating AIa), even if 
taking ART.
Abbreviation: ART, antiretroviral therapy.
a See text for essential details and cautions.
b The recommendation or the evidence rating has not changed substantially since the 
2014 report.
Günthard et al.
Page 36
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Box 4. Recommendations for When and How to Switch Antiretroviral 
Regimensa
•
Data support possible switching from an older regimen to a single-pill 
regimen in certain patients with virologic suppression (see text).b
•
Induction maintenance strategies (switching from 3- to 2-drug regimens 
in patients with virologic suppression [see text]) are not recommended 
at this time (evidence rating BIIa).
•
Patients taking efavirenz should be questioned carefully about the 
possibility of subtle neuropsychiatric adverse effects (eg, dizziness, 
sleep disturbances, cognitive changes, depression) that they may be 
unaware of or may not attribute to the drug (evidence rating BIII).
•
Review of treatment history and results of prior resistance tests is 
recommended before any treatment switches are made (evidence rating 
AIa).
•
If there is no increase in price, switching from tenofovir disoproxil 
fumarate (TDF) to tenofovir alafenamide is reasonable even if patients 
are not experiencing TDF-related toxic effects (evidence rating BIa).
•
Switching from a boosted protease inhibitor to a nonnucleoside reverse 
transcriptase inhibitor or an integrase strand transfer inhibitor (with the 
possible exception of dolutegravir) or switching from twice-daily 
ritonavir-boosted darunavir to once-daily cobicistat-boosted darunavir 
is not recommended without consideration of a patient’s viral 
resistance profile (evidence rating AIII).
a See text for essential details and cautions.
b The recommendation or the evidence rating has not changed substantially since the 
2014 report.
Günthard et al.
Page 37
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Box 5. Recommendations for Laboratory Monitoringa
•
Recommended pre-ART tests include CD4 cell count, plasma HIV-1 
RNA, serologies for hepatitis A, B, and C, serum chemistries, 
estimated creatinine clearance rate, complete blood cell count, urine 
glucose and protein, sexually transmitted infection screening, and 
fasting lipid profile (evidence rating AIII).
•
Genotypic testing for reverse transcriptase and protease resistance 
mutations is recommended prior to treatment initiation (evidence rating 
AIIa).
•
Routine screening for integrase resistance is currently not 
recommended prior to treatment initiation unless the source virus is 
suspected to have been from someone in whom treatment containing an 
integrase strand transfer inhibitor failed (evidence rating BIII).
•
Screening for syphilis and 3-site (as appropriate) mucosal nucleic acid 
amplification testing for chlamydia and gonorrhea should occur at the 
time of HIV diagnosis and a fasting lipid profile should be obtained 
(evidence rating AIII).
•
If ART is initiated on the first clinic visit, all laboratory specimens 
should be drawn prior to the first dose of ART; resistance testing results 
should be used to modify the regimen as necessary (evidence rating 
AIII).
•
HIV RNA level should be monitored every 4 to 6 weeks after treatment 
is initiated or changed until virus is undetectable (evidence rating 
AIa).b
•
Therapeutic drug monitoring is not recommended except in specific 
circumstances (evidence rating BIII).b
•
After viral suppression is achieved, HIV RNA should be monitored 
every 3 months until suppressed for 1 year and at least every 6 months 
thereafter for adherent patients who remain clinically stable (evidence 
rating AIII).
•
If pretreatment CD4 cell count is below 200/µL, reassessment is 
recommended every 3 to 4 months until viral load is reliably 
suppressed and CD4 cell count is above 350/µL for 1 year. Thereafter, 
CD4 cell counts should be assessed at 6-month intervals until virus has 
been suppressed for at least 2 years and CD4 cell count is persistently 
stable above 500/µL (evidence rating AIII).
•
When virus has been suppressed for at least 2 years and CD4 cell count 
is persistently above 500/µL, repeat monitoring of CD4 cell count is not 
recommended unless virologic failure (evidence rating AIIa) or 
Günthard et al.
Page 38
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 intercurrent immunosuppressive conditions occur or 
immunosuppressive treatments are initiated (evidence rating AIII).
•
If the HIV RNA level remains above the limit of quantification by 24 
weeks after starting new treatment or if rebound above 50 copies/mL 
occurs at any time, the assay should be repeated within 4 weeks to 
exclude impending virologic failure (evidence rating AIIa).
•
Tropism testing is recommended at the time of virologic failure of a CC 
chemokine receptor 5 inhibitor (evidence rating AIa).
•
For patients with persistent quantifiable HIV RNA between 50 and 200 
copies/mL, reassessment for causes of virologic failure, evaluation 
again within 4 weeks, and close monitoring are recommended 
(evidence rating BIII).b
Abbreviation: ART, antiretroviral therapy.
a See text for essential details and cautions.
b The recommendation or the evidence rating has not changed substantially since the 
2014 report.
Günthard et al.
Page 39
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Box 6. Recommendations for Engagement in Care and ART Adherencea
•
Routine opt-out HIV screening is recommended in primary medical 
care settings and emergency departments and for all pregnant women 
(evidence rating AIII).
•
Systematic monitoring of time to care linkage following initial HIV 
diagnosis, retention in care, ART adherence, and rates of viral 
suppression is recommended in all care settings (evidence rating AIIa).
•
Brief case management is recommended after HIV diagnosis (evidence 
rating AIa).
•
Rapid intervention following a missed clinic visit is recommended 
(evidence rating AIIa).
•
Integration of directly observed ART in methadone maintenance 
programs (evidence rating BIa) and as a treatment strategy among 
persons with substance use disorders (evidence rating BIa) and those 
who are incarcerated or released to the community (evidence rating 
CIII)is recommended to enhance adherence and viral suppression
•
Personal telephone and interactive text reminders in advance of 
scheduled appointments and shortly following missed appointments 
(eg, 24–48 hours) are recommended (evidence rating AIa).
•
Adherence monitoring using patients’ self-reports by validated 
adherence instruments and pharmacy refill data are recommended 
(evidence rating AIIa).
•
Opioid substitution therapy for opioid-dependent patients is 
recommended (evidence rating AIIa).
•
Routine screening for depression is recommended (evidence rating 
AIII).
Abbreviation: ART, antiretroviral therapy.
a See text for essential details and cautions. All recomendations are new or evidence 
ratings have changed substantially since the 2014 report.
Günthard et al.
Page 40
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Box 7. Recommendations for Prevention of HIV Infectiona
•
ART is recommended for all HIV-infected individuals with detectable 
viremia, not only because of individual health benefits but also because 
of the reduced infectiousness of individuals achieving virologic 
suppression with ART (evidence rating AIa).
•
PrEP should be considered for anyone from a population whose HIV 
incidence is at least 2% per year (evidence rating AIa) or HIV-
seronegative partners of HIV-infected persons who do not have viral 
suppression
•
Daily (rather than intermittent) TDF/emtricitabine is the recommended 
PrEP regimen (evidence rating AIa).
•
Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate–based PrEP is not recommended for 
individuals with osteopenia or osteoporosis (evidence rating AIII) or a 
creatinine clearance rate of less than 60 mL/min (evidence rating AIIa) 
and should be used with caution in patients with chronic hepatitis B 
virus infection (evidence rating BIIa).
•
Tenofovir alafenamide/emtricitabine is not recommended for PrEP 
until effectiveness has been demonstrated in clinical trials (evidence 
rating AIII). Use of non–TDF-containing PrEP or augmentation of 
TDF/emtricitabine PrEP with other agents is not recommended 
(evidence rating AIII).
•
HIV testing, preferably with a combination antigen-antibody assay 
(AIII), serum creatinine, and estimated creatinine clearance is 
recommended prior to initiation of PrEP (evidence rating AIa).
•
Oral, rectal, urine, and vaginal sexually transmitted infection screening, 
including for syphilis, chlamydia, and gonorrhea, is recommended as 
appropriate, and any sexually transmitted infections should be treated 
(evidence rating BIII).
•
Vaccination against hepatitis A and hepatitis B for those who are not 
immune and human papillomavirus vaccination are recommended 
(evidence rating AIII).
•
Vaccination is recommended for women aged 13 to 26 years and for 
men aged 13 to 21 years who have not been vaccinated previously or 
who have not completed the 3-dose series. Men aged 22 to 26 years 
may be vaccinated (evidence rating AIa).
•
Follow-up at intervals of no longer than every 3 months is 
recommended to allow for HIV testing (evidence rating AIII) and 
sexually transmitted infection screening (evidence rating BIIb).
•
Creatinine assessment may be performed at least every 6 months 
(evidence rating AIII) and perhaps more frequently for some patients 
Günthard et al.
Page 41
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (eg, aged >50 years, taking hypertension or diabetes medications, or 
with estimated glomerular filtration rates at threshold) (evidence rating 
CIII).
•
Ongoing discussions about adherence are recommended, especially in 
the absence of proven PrEP adherence interventions (evidence rating 
CIII).
•
Patients taking PrEP who have suspected HIV infection, on clinical 
grounds or while awaiting HIV RNA confirmation of equivocal 
screening test results, should have a boosted protease inhibitor (ie, 
boosted darunavir) and and/or dolutegravir added to TDF/emtricitabine 
pending HIV RNA and resistance testing results (evidence rating AIII).
•
Postexposure prophylaxis is recommended as soon as possible after 
exposure without waiting for confirmation of HIV serostatus of the 
source patient or results of HIV RNA or resistance testing (evidence 
rating AIII).
•
Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate/emtricitabine plus twice-daily raltegravir 
or once-daily dolutegravir is recommended by the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention for postexposure prophylaxis; TDF/
emtricitabine with cobicistat- or ritonavir-boosted darunavir or TDF/
emtricitabine/cobicistat/elvitegravir are reasonable regimens (evidence 
rating AIIb).
•
Postexposure prophylaxis regimens should be continued for 28 days, 
and HIV serostatus should be reassessed at 4 to 6 weeks, 3 months, and 
6 months after exposure (evidence rating AIIb); shorter follow-up (eg, 
3 or 4 months) may be possible with a fourth-generation assay.
Abbreviations: ART, antiretroviral therapy; PrEP, preexposure prophylaxis; TDF, 
tenofovir disoproxil fumarate.
a See text for essential details and cautions. All recommendations are new or evidence 
ratings have changed substantially since the 2014 report. Components separated with a 
slash (/) indicate that they are available as coformulations.
Günthard et al.
Page 42
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Günthard et al.
Page 43
Table 1
Strength of Recommendation and Quality of Evidence Rating Scalea
Rating
Definition
Strength of
recommendation
    A
Strong support for the recommendation
    B
Moderate support for the recommendation
    C
Limited support for the recommendation
Quality of
evidence
    Ia
Evidence from ≥1 randomized clinical trials published
in the peer-reviewed literature
    Ib
Evidence from ≥1 randomized clinical trials presented
in abstract form at peer-reviewed scientific meetings
    IIa
Evidence from nonrandomized clinical trials
or cohort or case-control studies published
in the peer-reviewed literature
    IIb
Evidence from nonrandomized clinical trials or cohort
or case-control studies presented in abstract form
at peer-reviewed scientific meetings
    III
Recommendation based on the panel’s analysis
of the accumulated available evidence
aAdapted in part from the Canadian Task Force on Periodic Health Examination.6
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Günthard et al.
Page 44
Table 2
Summary Results of 3 Key Randomized Clinical Trials of Immediate vs Deferred Antiretroviral Therapy (ART) in ART-Naive HIV-Infected Individuals
Source
No. of Participants
in Study (CD4 Cell
Count Parameter)
Duration of
Follow-up, mo
Study End Point
No. (%) With Outcome
in Immediate ART Group
No. (%) With Outcome
in Deferred ART Group
Hazard Ratio (95% CI)
for Immediate vs
Deferred ART
Lundgren
et al,2 2015
4685 (>500/µL)
36
Primary end point
(AIDS,
serious
non–AIDS-related
events, death)
42 (1.8)
[0.6/100 patient-years
of observation]
96 (4.1)
[1.38/100 patient-years
of observation]
0.43 (0.3–0.62)
AIDS-related events
14 (0.6)
50 (2.1)
0.28 (0.15–0.50)
Serious
non–AIDS-related
events
29 (1.3)
47 (2.0)
0.61 (0.38–0.97)
All-cause mortality
12 (0.5)
21 (0.9)
0.58 (0.28–1.17)
Danel et al,3
2015
2056
30
Primary end point
(AIDS,
non–AIDS-related
cancer or bacterial
disease, death)
64 (6.2)
[2.8/100 patient-years
of observation]
111 (10.9)
[4.9/100 patient-years
of observation]
0.56 (0.41–0.76)
AIDS-related events
33 (3.2)
65 (6.4)
Mortality
21 (2.0)
26 (2.5)
843
(Baseline >500/µL)
30
Subgroup of participants
with baseline CD4 cell
count >500/µL (primary
end point)
23 (2.2)
[2.4/100 patient-years
of observation]
38 (3.7)
[4.1/100 patient-years
of observation]
0.56 (0.33–0.94)
Grinsztejn
et al,8 2014
1763
(350/µL-550/µL)
24
Primary end point
(AIDS,
non–AIDS-related
events, severe bacterial
infections, death)
57 (6.4)
77 (8.8)
0.73 (0.52–1.03)
AIDS
40 (4.5)
61 (7.0)
0.64 (0.43–0.96)
Non–AIDS-related
events
12 (1.4)
9 (1.0)
1.35 (0.57–3.19)
Death
11 (1.2)
15 (1.7)
0.73 (0.34–1.59)
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Günthard et al.
Page 45
Table 3
Recommended Initial Antiretroviral Therapy Regimensa
Regimen
Rating
Dolutegravir/abacavir/lamivudine
AIa
Dolutegravir plus tenofovir alafenamide/emtricitabineb
AIa
Elvitegravir/cobicistat/tenofovir alafenamide/emtricitabineb
AIa
Raltegravir plus tenofovir alafenamide/emtricitabineb
AIII
aRegimens are listed in alphabetic order by integrase strand transfer inhibitor component. Components separated with a slash (/) indicate that they 
are available as coformulations.
bIn settings in which tenofovir alafenamide/emtricitabine is not available, tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (with emtricitabine or lamivudine) remains 
an effective and generally well-tolerated option. Given the limited long-term experience with tenofovir alafenamide, some clinicians may prefer to 
continue using tenofovir disoproxil fumarate pending broader experience with tenofovir alafenamide in clinical practice.
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Günthard et al.
Page 46
Table 4
Advantages and Disadvantages of Currently Available Integrase Strand Transfer Inhibitors
Dolutegravir
Elvitegravir
Raltegravir
Year of US Food 
and
Drug 
Administration
approval
2013
2012
2007
Advantages
Superior to efavirenz and ritonavir-boosted
darunavir in comparative clinical trials36,37
Once-daily dosing
Coformulated with abacavir/lamivudine as part
of a complete initial regimen
Dolutegravir (not coformulated) pill size is 
small
Lowest risk of resistance with virologic 
failure36,37,40,43
Relatively few drug interactions
Can be taken with or without food
Superior to raltegravir in treatment-experienced 
patients
Superior to ritonavir-boosted 
atazanavir
in comparative clinical trial
in HIV-infected women38
Once-daily dosing
Coformulated with tenofovir 
disoproxil
fumarate/emtricitabine or tenofovir
alafenamide/emtricitabine as
a complete regimen
Superior to ritonavir-boosted
atazanavir and
ritonavir-boosted darunavir
in comparative clinical trial39
Longest safety record
Fewest drug interactions
Can be taken with or
without food
Disadvantages
Only available coformulation is with abacavir/
lamivudine
Raises serum creatinine owing to inhibition
of tubular secretion of creatinine
Higher rates of insomnia and headache than 
comparators
in some studies36,37
Largest tablet among coformulated
single-pill regimens
Requires pharmacokinetic boosting 
with
cobicistat or ritonavir for once-daily
dosing
Most drug interactions
Cobicistat raises serum creatinine 
owing
to inhibition of tubular secretion
of creatinine
Should be taken with food
Currently must be taken twice
daily (formulation consisting
of 2 pills given once daily
in development)
Not coformulated as part
of a complete regimen
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Günthard et al.
Page 47
Table 5
Advantages and Disadvantages of Initial Antiretroviral Therapy Options for Patients in Whom InSTIs Are Not 
an Optiona
Darunavir (Boosted With 
Cobicistat
or Ritonavir) Plus TAF/
Emtricitabine,
TDF/Emtricitabine,
or Abacavir/Lamivudineb
Efavirenz/TDF/Emtricitabine
Rilpivirine/TAF (or TDF)/Emtricitabine
Advantages
Low risk of resistance with 
virologic failure,
even with intermittent 
adherence
High efficacy in patients with baseline HIV
RNA >100 000 copies/mL
Extensive experience in patients with
concomitant tuberculosis
Widely available globally
Lowest risk of rash among NNRTI-based
therapies
Low risk of metabolic adverse effects
Smallest tablet among single-pill regimens
Disadvantages
Requires pharmacokinetic 
boosting;
many drug interactions
Ritonavir-boosted darunavir 
inferior to
raltegravir and dolutegravir in 
separate
comparative clinical trials37,39
Results of comparative, fully 
powered
studies of cobicistat-boosted 
darunavir
as initial therapy are not yet 
available
Relatively high rate of rash
No single-tablet form available with TAF
High rates of neuropsychiatric adverse 
effects
Increased risk of suicidality in 1 study55;
avoid in patients with history of depression
Not recommended for patients with HIV RNA
>100 000 copies/mL or CD4 cell count
<200/µL owing to increased risk of virologic
failure
Must be taken with a meal to optimize
absorption
Should not be administered with proton pump
inhibitors; stagger dosing if given with
an H2 blocker
Abbreviations: InSTI, integrase strand transfer inhibitor; NNRTI, nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor; TAF, tenofovir alafenamide; TDF, 
tenofovir disoproxil fumarate.
aNonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor–based regimens should not be used without baseline resistance data because of the possible presence 
of transmitted NNRTI-resistant virus. In the rare circumstance in which maraviroc might be included in initial therapy, initiation should not occur 
before confirmation of CC chemokine receptor 5 tropism.
bCautions on the use of abacavir and TAF or TDF are described in the text.
JAMA. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2016 September 06.
