 RESEARCH ARTICLE
Causal language and strength of inference in
academic and media articles shared in social
media (CLAIMS): A systematic review
Noah Haber1,2*, Emily R. Smith1,3, Ellen Moscoe1,4, Kathryn Andrews1,2, Robin Audy5,
Winnie Bell6, Alana T. Brennan7,8, Alexander Breskin9, Jeremy C. Kane10,
Mahesh Karra1,11, Elizabeth S. McClure9, Elizabeth A. Suarez9, on behalf of the CLAIMS
research team¶
1 Department of Global Health and Population, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA,
United States of America, 2 Carolina Population Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, NC, United States of America, 3 Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Boston
Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, United States of America, 4 Department of Medical Ethics and Health
Policy, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States of America,
5 Unaffiliated, Philadelphia, PA, United States of America, 6 Friedman School of Nutrition Science and
Policy, Tufts University, Boston, United States of America, 7 Department of Global Health, Boston University
School of Public Health, Boston, MA, United States of America, 8 Department of Epidemiology, Boston
University School of Public Health, Boston, MA, United States of America, 9 Department of Epidemiology,
University of North Carolina Gillings School of Global Public Health, Chapel Hill, NC, United States of
America, 10 Department of Mental Health, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore,
MD, United States of America, 11 Frederick S. Pardee School of Global Studies, Boston University, Boston,
MA, United States of America
¶ Complete membership of the CLAIMS research team can be found in the acknowledgments
* nhaber@unc.edu
Abstract
Background
The pathway from evidence generation to consumption contains many steps which can lead
to overstatement or misinformation. The proliferation of internet-based health news may
encourage selection of media and academic research articles that overstate strength of
causal inference. We investigated the state of causal inference in health research as it
appears at the end of the pathway, at the point of social media consumption.
Methods
We screened the NewsWhip Insights database for the most shared media articles on Face-
book and Twitter reporting about peer-reviewed academic studies associating an exposure
with a health outcome in 2015, extracting the 50 most-shared academic articles and media
articles covering them. We designed and utilized a review tool to systematically assess and
summarize studies’ strength of causal inference, including generalizability, potential con-
founders, and methods used. These were then compared with the strength of causal lan-
guage used to describe results in both academic and media articles. Two randomly
assigned independent reviewers and one arbitrating reviewer from a pool of 21 reviewers
assessed each article.
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0196346
May 30, 2018
1 / 21
a1111111111
a1111111111
a1111111111
a1111111111
a1111111111
OPEN ACCESS
Citation: Haber N, Smith ER, Moscoe E, Andrews
K, Audy R, Bell W, et al. (2018) Causal language
and strength of inference in academic and media
articles shared in social media (CLAIMS): A
systematic review. PLoS ONE 13(5): e0196346.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0196346
Editor: Pablo Dorta-Gonza
´lez, Universidad de las
Palmas de Gran Canaria, SPAIN
Received: July 28, 2017
Accepted: April 11, 2018
Published: May 30, 2018
Copyright: This is an open access article, free of all
copyright, and may be freely reproduced,
distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or
otherwise used by anyone for any lawful purpose.
The work is made available under the Creative
Commons CC0 public domain dedication.
Data Availability Statement: All the relevant data
can be found within the paper and it’s supporting
information files.
Funding: The author(s) received no specific
funding for this work.
Competing interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist.
 Results
We accepted the most shared 64 media articles pertaining to 50 academic articles for
review, representing 68% of Facebook and 45% of Twitter shares in 2015. Thirty-four per-
cent of academic studies and 48% of media articles used language that reviewers consid-
ered too strong for their strength of causal inference. Seventy percent of academic studies
were considered low or very low strength of inference, with only 6% considered high or very
high strength of causal inference. The most severe issues with academic studies’ causal
inference were reported to be omitted confounding variables and generalizability. Fifty-eight
percent of media articles were found to have inaccurately reported the question, results,
intervention, or population of the academic study.
Conclusions
We find a large disparity between the strength of language as presented to the research
consumer and the underlying strength of causal inference among the studies most widely
shared on social media. However, because this sample was designed to be representative
of the articles selected and shared on social media, it is unlikely to be representative of all
academic and media work. More research is needed to determine how academic institu-
tions, media organizations, and social network sharing patterns impact causal inference and
language as received by the research consumer.
Introduction
Clinical practitioners, policy makers, households, and all other health decision makers make
choices based on their understanding of the evidence generated by scientific output. Many
decision makers receive that information through traditional and social media, with an esti-
mated 62% of Americans having received news through some form of social media in 2016 [1].
The pathway from research generation to consumption begins with academic research pro-
duction, followed by publication, then media reporting, and ultimately leading to distribution
on social and traditional media. Each step contains many mechanisms which could yield inac-
curate and/or overstated evidence at the point of media consumption. Because each step of
this pathway builds upon the previous one, issues with systematic selection, spin, overstate-
ment, inaccuracy, and weak evidence are likely to accumulate by the time scientific research
reaches the consumer.
Recent evidence suggests that exposure to health information in traditional and social
media may impact health behaviors [2]. An example in the UK [3] highlights the dangers of
weak and poorly-reported evidence: An estimated 200,000 patients temporarily ceased taking
statins–drugs with strong evidence for efficacy and safety for treating hypertension [4, 5]–after
press outlets reported on two studies suggesting that the medication was associated with high
rates of adverse events. The authors of both publications later made statements retracting their
conclusions, noting that they had overstated the strength of causal inference in light of the
studies’ lack of methodological rigor [3]. Further contributing to the cycle, media coverage of
specific conditions is associated with increased reporting of adverse events [6], public
announcements of celebrity illnesses are associated with surges in screening and diagnostic
tests [7, 8], and language “spin” may influence clinical decision makers’ assessment of evidence
strength [9].
Causal language and strength of inference in academic and media articles shared in social media (CLAIMS)
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0196346
May 30, 2018
2 / 21
 We hypothesize that incidents like the example of statin use in the UK are the culmina-
tion of selection and spin at each step on the pathway from research generation to research
consumption. Scientific health studies are created in academic institutions. Some are
selected for publication in scientific, peer-reviewed journals. A subset of these are reported
on by traditional media outlets, and the most popular reports are shared on social media.
Feedback may exist where the expectation of selection and spin in later stages influences
decisions at earlier steps in the pathway. Incentives for research institutions, journals,
media outlets, and consumers may combine to create an environment where inaccurate or
overstated conclusions are elevated and amplified by the time scientific research reaches the
consumer.
A scientist’s academic success is often tied to research and publications. Producing high-
impact work is crucial for career continuity and advancement, measured primarily through
the number of times it is cited and the impact factor of the journal in which it is published.
These incentives apply across the academic spectrum, from individual researchers, to research
intuitions, to press releases [10–12], and to peer reviewed publication [13, 14]. A host of factors
can render studies inaccurate [15] or not useful in practice [16]. From a methodological per-
spective, there are many challenges to making strong causal inference in human populations.
At the individual study level, internal validity may be weak due to uncontrolled confounding
variables, improper use of statistical methods, and use of cherry-picked data and methods to
achieve statistically significant results [17]. External validity may be threatened by the limited
generalizability of study populations to relevant populations or differences between the study
environment and real-world interventions [18, 19]. Publication bias [20, 21], lack of replicabil-
ity and replication [22], implication of a causal relationship even after stating that the evidence
is insufficient to reach causal conclusions [23–25], and related phenomena may also introduce
error into bodies of published literature.
Traditional and social media are changing the way many audiences consume science.
Media outlets may spin [26–28] and encourage dissemination of eye-catching, potentially
overstated, inaccurate [29], and/or misleading headlines in order to gain larger audience size
[28, 30, 31]. Media companies’ revenues rely on advertising [1, 32] which may put them at
odds with the journalistic values of media rigor and objectivity, and may incentivize the pro-
duction of potentially inaccurate health news that is not commensurate with the evidence. The
interaction between academia and media highlights some of these complexities, such as a
recent study finding that the results of over half of studies on an association between exposure
and outcome covered in the news are refuted by subsequent meta-analyses [33], and another
showing that those articles publicly critiqued in online media are more likely to be retracted
[34].
This study examines the state of causal inference in health research as it reaches the con-
sumer–the endpoint of the research pathway–by systematically reviewing the articles that are
most likely to have been shared on social media. We argue that the academic research publica-
tions comparing an exposure and health outcome and media articles covering them that reach
the public should at minimum have language that matches the strength of their causal infer-
ence, with a preference for studies demonstrating stronger causal inference.
Based on these principles, the objectives of this study were to identify the media articles and
related academic literature measuring the association between an exposure and a health out-
come most shared through social media in 2015 and assess 1) the strength of causal inference
in research articles from scientific journals, 2) concordance between strength of inference and
the use of causal language in those articles, and 3) the strength of causal language used in cor-
responding media articles.
Causal language and strength of inference in academic and media articles shared in social media (CLAIMS)
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0196346
May 30, 2018
3 / 21
 Methods
The study was designed to identify and review causal inference and language from the 50 most
shared academic articles pertaining to single studies of an exposure and a health outcome. We
used Facebook and Twitter social media sharing statistics generated from the NewsWhip
Insights platform to achieve a representative sample of the research to which the general news-
consuming public is most likely to be exposed. We reviewed the academic research articles
mentioned in the news articles for strength of causal inference followed by the appropriateness
of the causal language used in both the original academic study and the media article(s) report-
ing on that research. While this scheme generates a sample that is representative of public con-
sumption and distribution, it is neither intended nor likely to be representative of the total
literature produced by academia and media.
The final protocol for this project was developed and reported using PRISMA guidelines
for systematic review [35], and registered with PROSPERO [36] as protocol CRD42016045197
on August 5, 2016. The PROSPERO-registered protocol is attached as S2 File. The full proto-
col, which contains additional detail on the selection and review process, can be found at
https://www.metacausal.com/CLAIMS/protocol/.
Search strategy and selection criteria
We obtained a dataset of potential social media news articles for this study from the News-
Whip Insights™ platform [37]. The NewsWhip Insights platform is a privately-operated social
media crawler, which has been collecting data since 2014. The platform identifies media “sto-
ries” (article URLs) and tracks how they are distributed on social media platforms. We queried
the NewsWhip Insights dataset to generate a list of health news articles pertaining to new
research studies published in 2015 (published from January 1, 2015 to December 31, 2015),
querying the database on May 3, 2016. The search terms for this query were:
(categories:2) AND ((headline_en:"health" OR summary_en:"health") AND ((headli-
ne_en:"study" OR summary_en:"study") OR (headline_en:"research" OR
summary_en:"research")))
where categories:2 corresponds to NewsWhip’s internally curated categorization for sites con-
taining news, headline_en is the programmatically extracted headline of the article at that
URL, and summary_en is the programmatically generated content in English.
We defined the “popularity” of a media article as the number of times a URL was shared on
Twitter or Facebook, where Twitter Tweets/Retweets and Facebook posts containing the URL
are each considered a share. “Likes,” “favorites,” and comments are not considered shares for
our analysis. We generated a list of the top 1,000 most shared health article URLs in 2015 from
each social network, giving each a randomized numerical identifier, and sorting from most to
least shared on its network. We combined the Twitter and Facebook datasets into a single
merged dataset roughly equally representing each social network. We started with the most
shared media article URL on a randomly selected social network (Twitter), selecting that arti-
cle into our screening sample, and eliminating it from the Facebook list. The procedure was
then repeated starting from the remaining list of articles from Facebook (eliminating the arti-
cle from the Twitter list), and repeated, switching lists at each step.
To determine eligibility for inclusion in our study, we screened both the media article and
academic article to identify media articles reporting on a single identifiable academic study
about the relationship between an exposure and health outcome. The full inclusion criteria are
outlined in Table 1. Two independent researchers reviewed the media article and the
Causal language and strength of inference in academic and media articles shared in social media (CLAIMS)
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0196346
May 30, 2018
4 / 21
 corresponding academic article titles and abstracts to determine whether they met the criteria
for inclusion in the study. A third reviewer reconciled any disagreements between reviews and
made a final decision regarding inclusion or exclusion. We reviewed the articles in order of
number of shares, beginning with the most shared and continuing until there were 50 unique
academic articles eligible for inclusion in the study. Each academic article and its set of associ-
ated media articles were considered a single review unit for the next phase.
Data collection
Each article was reviewed by two independent, randomly-assigned, primary reviewers from
our study reviewer pool. The primary reviews were then given to a randomly-assigned arbi-
trating reviewer. The arbitrating reviewer created the final review, using the two indepen-
dent reviews as guidance. The arbitrating reviewer was given the opportunity to ask
clarifying questions to the primary reviewers using a standardized form. All reviewers
served as both primary and arbitrating reviewers. The identities of each reviewer were and
remain fully anonymous to each other and the public through a combination of the use of
random-digit identifiers and the study lead acting as the go-between administrator for all
between-reviewer communication. The reviews were performed under a strict policy of
independence. The study lead was not a reviewer of the articles, and did not answer ques-
tions or give advice pertaining to any particular review article. All reviewers were given
opportunity to recuse themselves from reviewing each assigned article in cases of perceived
financial or social conflicts of interest with article authors and/or for lack of sufficient meth-
odological or content area knowledge.
Reviewers
Twenty-one reviewers were recruited through peer reference and public notices. All reviewers
had completed at least a master’s degree and/or were currently enrolled in a doctoral degree in
a relevant health and/or quantitative sciences field, with documented coursework relating to
quantitative causal inference, with the large majority (n = 19/21) currently pursuing or having
completed a relevant doctoral degree. Reviewers performed work on a purely voluntary basis
with no financial incentives. The list of reviewers is published; however, the specific review
assignment for each article is confidential.
Table 1. Inclusion criteria.
Media article:
Academic article:
• The URL link to media article is functional at the time of
the review, leading to the main media article.
• The news media article reports primarily about the
findings from a single academic article published in a peer-
reviewed academic journal.
• The news media article reports that the academic article:
- Has a main analysis in the form exposure (dependent
variable) vs. outcome (independent variable).
- Has a health outcome as one of its main outcomes
(independent variables).
- Has related exposures/outcomes if multiple exposures/
outcomes are equally emphasized.
- Conducted the study in a human population.
- Presents results based on primary data analysis, and not a
review or meta-analysis.
- Has main results generated from a single identifiable
statistical model.
• The academic article referred to in the media article
is identifiable through academic library sources.
• The academic article
- Has a main analysis of the form exposure (dependent
variable) vs. outcome (independent variable).
- Has a health outcome as one of its main outcomes
(independent variables).
- Has related primary exposures/outcomes if multiple
exposures/outcomes are equally emphasized.
- Conducted the study in a human population.
- Presents results based on primary data analysis, and
not a review or meta-analysis.
- Has main results generated from a single identifiable
statistical model.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0196346.t001
Causal language and strength of inference in academic and media articles shared in social media (CLAIMS)
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0196346
May 30, 2018
5 / 21
 Review tool
The authors designed, tested, and implemented a review tool for this study to systematically
assess the strength of causal inference in academic articles, the strength of causal language
used by academic study authors, the strength of causal language used by media article authors,
and the accuracy of the media article’s description of the academic article. We developed this
tool using the principles outlined by the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Sys-
tematic Reviews of Interventions [38] and the Oxford Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine
Levels of Evidence [39]. Existing tools typically focus on literature from randomized controlled
trials and/or seek to summarize the strength of causal inference from a body of literature on
the same subject. The review tool used for this study instead seeks to examine the strength of
causal inference in individual studies. The full review tool questionnaire items are included in
S1 File, with the original form interface used available at metacausal.com/claims/review-tool/.
The largest section of the review tool assessed the scientific article’s strength of causal infer-
ence, focusing on risk of bias, considering both internal and external validity. The tool was
divided into several domains which assessed the primary study question(s), primary study
result(s), generalizability to a relevant population, selection bias/missing data, exposure and
outcome assessment, treatment of covariates and identification of confounders, assessment of
statistical methods, and a summary assessment. The summary assessments asked whether the
study was likely to approximate hypothetical results from an “ideal” randomized controlled
trial which would result in perfectly estimated and generalizable causal effects without practical
and ethical constraints [40]. After completing each of the previous sections, reviewers assessed
a summary measure of the severity of threats to causal inference in each of the above-listed
subsections on a 5-point scale (Very low, Low, Moderate, High, Very high severity), as well as
the expected direction of bias. The final assessment of this section summarizes the reviewer’s
overall evaluation for the strength of causal inference on the same 5-point scale (Very low,
Low, Moderate, High, Very high strength) with detailed prompts on which to base a decision.
We assessed the strength of causal language in the scientific article on a 3-point scale (Weak,
Moderate, Strong) based on the degree of certainty of causal inference implied, similar to the
scale used in Brown, et al., 2013 [41] and Sumner et al., 2014 [12]. Two elements of language
were assessed using this scale: how the authors framed their question of interest and how the
authors discussed their results. The prompts for both summary sections are shown in Fig 1. In
the media article assessment, reviewers assessed whether the media article accurately described
the same relationship as the scientific article and the strength of causal language used, using
the same research question as in the scientific article. For both academic and media articles,
reviewers were asked whether they believed the strength of causal language was too weak,
accurately descriptive, or too strong given the strength of causal inference.
The user interface for the review tool was developed using Google Forms (www.google.
com/forms) and was implemented as an online survey.
Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis is performed by descriptive statistics of the proportion of articles reaching
each category for summary measures. Statistical analysis and data management was performed
in R [42]. Two-tailed t-tests were used for statistical significance for differences in means.
Publicly available data
The review dataset (S4 File) and review tool (S1 File) are provided as supplementary attach-
ments to this study. In addition, the full protocol, review tool, screening process summary, full
dataset collected from both primary and arbitrating reviewers, R code used to generate the
Causal language and strength of inference in academic and media articles shared in social media (CLAIMS)
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0196346
May 30, 2018
6 / 21
 dataset and analyses, and data visualization tools to explore the dataset are publicly available at
metacausal.com/CLAIMS.
Results
We identified 11,349 unique URLs in the NewsWhip database, which represented 1,375,152
shares on Facebook and 423,996 shares (Tweets) on Twitter. We extracted the 1,000 most
shared articles from both platforms (n = 2,000) and consolidated them into a master article list
comprised of 1,418 non-duplicate links to articles. Two independent reviewers screened the
master list, starting from the most popular articles and continuing until 50 unique academic
articles and associated media articles were identified, which occurred on the 231st media arti-
cle. The cumulative number of shares among the 231 screened articles screened represents
68% (938,596/1,375,152) of Facebook shares and 45% (189,777/423,996) of Twitter shares (S1
Fig), suggesting that our sample is strongly representative of the articles most shared on social
media. Reviewers disagreed on whether to accept or reject in 29/231 cases, and the arbitrator
included 16 of these cases. In total, reviewers identified 50 review sets, consisting of 50 aca-
demic articles with 64 unique media articles associated with them (S2 Fig, S2 and S3 Tables).
Reviewers were randomly assigned as a primary reviewer or arbitrator to an average of 7.1
articles each, and review work was completed between August and October, 2016. Reviewers
opted to recuse themselves in nine instances; five recusals were due to conflicts of interest and
four were due to lack of familiarity with the methods used in the academic article. Arbitrators
made comments or asked for clarification from primary reviewers for 22 article sets. All results
below, unless otherwise noted, are generated from the final arbitrator reviews alone.
Of the 50 academic articles reviewed, 49 listed at least one author affiliation with at least
one primarily academic institution, 30% with a health service provider, 28% with a
Fig 1. Results of summary measures for strength of causal inference and language. Language for categories of strength of causal inference has been lightly edited for
this publication to better reflect the instructions given to the reviewers and for consistency with the rest of the manuscript. Reviewers were instructed to consider only
the causal inference aspect of the study for these measures. The original language referred to the “study” and “results,” which has been edited in the figure to “causal
inference” where appropriate for clarity. The original language and instructions are available in the attached review tool and on metacausal.com.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0196346.g001
Causal language and strength of inference in academic and media articles shared in social media (CLAIMS)
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0196346
May 30, 2018
7 / 21
 government agency, 24% with a non-profit organization, and 8% with a for-profit affiliation,
as determined by the study authors. Authors from 192 unique institutions contributed to these
50 academic articles, with researchers from Harvard University (n = 8, 16%) and Johns Hop-
kins University (n = 4, 8%) being the most common, where n refers to the number of academic
articles in which at least one author was listed as an affiliate. Academic journals in our sample
consisted of many of the highest impact factor medical journals for 2015, with impact factors
ranging from 2–60 [43]. The most commonly shared media URL domains were CBS News
(n = 6), The Guardian (n = 6), and the New York Times (n = 6) (S1 Table).
Descriptive statistics of included academic studies are shown in Table 2. 14% (n = 7) of
studies were randomized trials, while 44% (n = 22) were prospective cohorts, 26% (n = 13)
cross sectional, and 12% (n = 6) other observations designs. The median sample size was
5,143.5. The most common exposures of interest were the built urban/rural environment
(n = 5, 10%), diet (n = 5, 10%), coffee/caffeine (n = 4, 8%), medical device/treatment (n = 4,
8%), and pregnancy/childbirth (n = 4, 8%). The most common outcomes of interest were
mood or mental health (n = 10, 20%), cardiovascular disease (n = 7, 14%), cognitive function-
ing or schooling (n = 5, 10%), and mortality (n = 5, 10%).
Table 2. Academic article descriptive statistics.
Panel a: Study properties
Study type
% (n)
Methods
% (n)
Randomized controlled trial
14% (7)
Standard correlation
80% (40)
Standard RCT
86% (6)
Hierarchical/longitudinal
20% (10)
Crossover trial
14 (1)
Instrumental variable
2% (1)
Observational
82% (41)
Marginal structural model
2% (1)
Prospective cohort
54% (22)
Can’t be determined
2% (1)
Cross-sectional
31% (13)
Other
10% (5)
Case-control
5% (2)
Retrospective cohort
2% (1)
Sample size
n
Ecological
2% (1)
25th percentile
326.5
Other
5% (2)
Median
5,143.5
Other
4% (2)
75th percentile
34,849
Panel b: Exposures and outcomes
Exposures
% (n)
Outcomes
% (n)
Built environment
10% (5)
Mood / Mental health
20% (10)
Diet
10% (5)
CVD
14% (7)
Coffee / Caffeine
8% (4)
Cognitive function / Schooling
10% (5)
Medical device / Treatment
8% (4)
Mortality
10% (5)
Pregnancy / Delivery
8% (4)
Self-rated Health
8% (4)
Pet / Animal-related
6% (3)
Weight/BMI
8% (4)
Race / Ethnicity / Sex / Gender
6% (3)
Blood biomarkers (multiple)
4% (2)
Air pollution
4% (2)
Cancer
4% (2)
Marriage / Partnership / Children
4% (2)
HIV
4% (2)
Mindfulness / Meditation / Yoga
4% (2)
Other
32% (16)
Other
18% (9)
Data from panel a directly reflects the categorizations of study types and methods reviewers were given in the review tool, where the results shown are the arbitrator-
determined categorizations. Additional details on the categories are available in the review tool itself, provided as a supplement, and in the Review Tool section of this
manuscript. Panel b reflects categories determined post-hoc by the study authors, given the arbitrator-reported exposures and outcomes. The uncategorized reviewer-
listed outcomes and exposures are provided in the publicly available datasets.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0196346.t002
Causal language and strength of inference in academic and media articles shared in social media (CLAIMS)
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0196346
May 30, 2018
8 / 21
 More than half of the studies (n = 27, 54%) were rated as having “Low” strength of causal
inference, and eight studies (16%) were classified as “Very low” strength of causal inference.
Only three studies (6%) were classified as having “High” or “Very high” strength of causal
inference (Fig 1). Nearly half of the media articles (n = 28, 44%) were rated as having used
“Strong” strength of causal language compared with 20% (n = 10) of the academic articles.
Half (n = 25) of the academic articles used were rates as having “Weak” strength of causal lan-
guage, compared with only 17% (n = 11) of the media articles.
Reviewers generally gave qualitatively similar ratings for each article. Primary reviewers dif-
fered in their rating of strength of causal inference by at most one or zero categories in 96% of
cases, with 58% of all pairs of primary reviews answering with the exact same category. Mean
arbitrator reviews, treating each category as consecutive integers from 1:5, where 1 = “Very
low” and 5 = “Very high”, were only slightly lower than the mean arbitrator reviews (2.24 vs.
2.30, p-value = 0.71). 93% of primary reviewers chose within one category of each other for
strength of causal language in the academic studies, with 47% having exact matches, noting
there were only three categories for this measure.
Reviewers most commonly listed covariates, particularly failure to account for confounding
variables, as the most severe source of bias in academic articles, listing high or very high sever-
ity of issues related to covariates for 54% (n = 27) of articles, followed by generalizability for
52% (n = 26) and statistical methods for 32% (n = 16) (Fig 2). Exposure assessment, outcome
assessment, and missing data were found to be relatively minor sources of error in academic
articles.
Reviewers directly indicated that 34% (n = 17) of academic studies used causal language
which was too strong for the assessed causal inference. 48% (n = 31) of media articles were
written using causal language that was too strong given the language used in the academic
study, which were themselves rated as being overstated on average given the strength of causal
Fig 2. Summary of severity of issues in causal estimate in academic article by category.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0196346.g002
Causal language and strength of inference in academic and media articles shared in social media (CLAIMS)
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0196346
May 30, 2018
9 / 21
 inference. As a cross-check, we further examined overstatement by comparing reviewers’ rat-
ings of strength of causal language with their ratings of strength of causal inference. The top
panels of Fig 3 show an assumed set of theoretically preferred regions where language is com-
mensurate with strength of causal inference, and darker shades represent more preferred
regions. The bottom panels show the distribution of results of our study, with darker regions
indicating more articles. Using the definition in the theoretical figure regions, 42% (n = 21) of
academic studies and 67% (n = 43) of media articles were found to have language which was
stronger than the causal inference. There were 46 media articles linked to academic articles
rated as “Low” or “Very low” strength of causal inference; the large majority (n = 38, 83%) of
these studies were written about using moderate or strong causal language by the media.
Among the 35 academic articles rated as “Low” or “Very low” strength of causal inference,
45% (n = 16) were written with strong or moderate causal language. More than half of the
media articles (n = 35, 55%) had causal language that was stronger than the causal language
used in the academic article. In 39% of cases (n = 25), the strength of causal language in the
academic article matched the strength of causal language in the media article. In 6% (n = 4)
media articles, the strength of causal language was weaker than the language in the academic
article.
Discussion
This study found that among the 50 health-related academic studies assessing the relationship
between an exposure and outcome most shared in social media and their corresponding
shared media articles, 1) only a small fraction of studies demonstrated strong causal inference
Fig 3. Strength of causal inference vs. strength of causal language in academic and media articles. The upper charts represent an assumed set of theoretically
preferred regions, where we would prefer studies of the form exposure vs. outcome which reach the public to have language matching the strength of causal
inference, a slight preference towards stronger causal inference, media language matching the academic language, and a preference for understated vs. overstated
strength of causal language. The lower charts represent the empirical results of the study, where darker regions have more articles. The raw number of articles in
each box is available in supplemental S4 Table.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0196346.g003
Causal language and strength of inference in academic and media articles shared in social media (CLAIMS)
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0196346
May 30, 2018
10 / 21
 between the exposure and outcome, even among those published in high-impact journals, 2)
the language used in academic articles tended to slightly overstate their strength of causal
inference, and 3) the media articles about them were likely to overstate strength of causal infer-
ence and inaccurately report key study characteristics and/or results. Previous studies examin-
ing overstatement of causal language utilize either language comparison and/or assumed
strength of causal inference exclusively from very broad study design characteristics [12, 23,
25, 31]. This study presents two major additions to this literature: 1) a novel review tool
designed to independently assess strength of causal inference, and 2) a sampling frame devel-
oped to identify the articles most likely to be consumed in social media.
The pathway to misrepresentation of evidence has components across the research produc-
tion and dissemination spectrum, many of which we are unable to isolate in this study. We
selected articles among those that are popularly shared in social media in order to assess the
research behind popular articles that are most consumed by public audiences, and therefore
this sample is unlikely to be representative of the broader work in both academia and media.
While we can conclude that the majority of health research to which audiences are frequently
exposed does not have strong causal inference, we cannot isolate the specific roles played by
academic institutions, traditional media, social media platforms, and the public in producing
this result. Review of the strength of causal inference and language in work published by
authors at the top medical institutions as well as reviews of media articles across a range of
popularity levels is needed to better understand where and why issues occur in the research
production and dissemination pathway. While this study cannot determine whether the intent
of the academic article authors was to develop strong and highly generalizable causal inference,
we can examine to what degree they describe their question and/or results as such. Many of
the academic article authors did not intend to make a generalizable causal argument between
exposure and outcome, but in such cases our study assesses whether the language matches the
strength of the causal inference.
The practical limitations of this study most likely biased our results towards finding higher
strength of causal inference for the academic studies. We examined only the published article
itself in the review process, and did not attempt to replicate or check calculations, data, or
code, nor did we assess all possible sources of error, including cherry-picking data and results.
Causal inference is weakened by any data or methodological factor unaccounted for, and any
issues which were not discovered and documented by the reviewers would be more likely to
weaken causal identification than strengthen it. One further practical limitation is that only 50
article sets were reviewed, though noting that these articles most likely represent over half of
all social media shares in 2015.
The strength of causal inference review tool developed for this study creates a useful frame-
work for researchers and research consumers, while also highlighting the need for additional
tool development. While similar tools and frameworks have recently been proposed, most
notably the ROBINS-I [44] and related Risk of Bias 2.0 [45] tools, the CLAIMS tool differs in
several key respects in order to be most useful for research consumers and reviewers. Firstly, it
attempts to be study design-agnostic through its frame of reference. We anchored our highest
strength of causal inference on utility for decision-making by whether it approximates an
often unobtainable “ideal” scenario, setting strength of causal inference as unconditional on
study feasibility. Secondly, it attempts to incorporate both internal and external validity into
final summary measures. Finally, it attempts to review strength of causal inference in individ-
ual studies, rather than bodies of literature.
These flexibilities come at several important costs, most notably subjectivity of resulting
reviews, reduced replicability, and required resource intensity. While the former items may be
mitigated in part by multiple reviews and arbitration, the latter remains a large concern. We
Causal language and strength of inference in academic and media articles shared in social media (CLAIMS)
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0196346
May 30, 2018
11 / 21
 estimate that each reviewer took 3–6 hours to complete review for each study, with three
highly skilled reviewers per study. Further, while reviewers generally agreed with each other,
exact agreement was far from perfect, highlighting the inherent difficulty in review of causal
inference and language. Immediate improvements to the tool presented here will be focused
on clarity of language among multi-disciplinary reviewers, improvements in delineations
between study types and methods. Further larger scale review efforts of academic and media
articles can help yield data which can be used to develop review tools with lower resource
intensity requirements and greater accuracy and replicability per review, which in turn
increases the feasibility and variety of potential applications.
As popular viewership and citations are tied increasingly to measuring the success of
research and researchers, the pressure on scientists and journalists to select overstated, inaccu-
rate and/or low evidence for production and/or dissemination are likely to become stronger.
We speculate that the proliferation of social media and open access to research may increase
ties from popular preferences to research production and selection, and that increased compe-
tition for stagnant research funding [46] is likely to exacerbate incentives to have research that
stands out over that addressing areas with the highest burden of disease [47] or strength of
causal inference.
Finally, we acknowledge that the results of this study are likely to be prone to misinterpreta-
tion, following popular narratives that place fault primarily on academia, media, and/or the
public. In order to attempt to prevent this misinterpretation, we have provided Table 3, which
lists both the main study conclusions and several potential misinterperetations and overstate-
ments that those exposed to this study may have. We urge researchers to examine, critique and
replicate this work in order to better understand both the state of causal inference and methods
of examining it.
Table 3. Hypotheses supported and not assessed or supported by this study.
Study finds support for these hypotheses
Justification:
Hypotheses supported by this study:
Primary study conclusions drawn from the main
objectives, design, and results of this study. Replication,
validation, and critical review of the methods and
conclusions by independent parties are still necessary
before results should be considered conclusive.
- The academic articles assessing the relationship
between an exposure and health outcome that were most
shared on social media in 2015 have, on average:
- Relatively low strength of causal inference
- Slightly overstated strength of causal language
- The media articles that were most shared on social
media in 2015 reporting on academic articles assessing
the relationship between an exposure and health
outcome have, on average:
- Overstated strength of causal language relative to both
the language used in the academic article and
independently-assessed strength of causal inference in
that article
- Inaccurate reporting on key properties of the study.
Study DOES NOT assess or find support for these hypotheses
Justification:
Hypotheses not assessed/supported by this study:
This study DOES NOT assess these hypotheses.
Reporting any of these conclusions as a result of this
study is inaccurate and a misrepresenting the results and
conclusions of this study. At most, these hypotheses
remain plausible given the results of this study, and could
be considered hypothesis-generating. However,
additional review studies specifically designed to assess
these questions are necessary in order to add any
substantial weight to these hypotheses.
- Academic institutions, including researchers,
universities, and journals, produce mostly weak and/or
overstated evidence.
- Media institutions systematically misreport and
overstate findings and/or select low strength studies on
which to report.
- Social media and the public systematically select and
share misreported, exaggerated, and/or low strength of
causal inference findings
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0196346.t003
Causal language and strength of inference in academic and media articles shared in social media (CLAIMS)
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0196346
May 30, 2018
12 / 21
 Supporting information
S1 Fig. Summary of social media shares in sample. The x-axis shows the rank order of media
articles in the combined Facebook and Twitter popularity lists by social media shares, where
the first item (rank = 1) is the most popularly shared article, the second is the second most
popularly shared article, etc. The y-axis shows the proportion of total shares of all URLs gener-
ated from the NewsWhip Insights search for each social media network, shown on the dark
blue and red lines, respectively, where 100% is the total shares of all URLs meeting our search
criteria. The lines indicate the cumulative proportion of shares reached by each rank (i.e. the
proportion on the y axis at x = 3 for Facebook is the total proportion of Facebook shares
reached from rank 1, 2, and 3). Number of shares is generated from sharing statistics, using
the algorithm described in the Methods section to generate a popularity list order with approx-
imately equal contribution of Facebook and Twitter. The blue area represents the 231 media
articles in the combined list which were screened in order to generate the 64 media articles
(and corresponding 50 academic studies) which were entered into this study. This area
searched represents 68% of all Facebook shares and 45% of all Tweets of URLs meeting our
search criteria.
(PNG)
S2 Fig. Screening and review process summary. This diagram shows the procedure for sys-
tematically generating the review media articles and academic studies for this systematic
review, as per PRISMA guidelines. Reason(s) for rejection was assessed at each level of review
(media article title, article text, or academic article abstract, in that order), but were not
assessed comprehensively.
(PNG)
S1 Table. Domains, institutions, and journals associated with articles in sample. This table
shows the URL domains, listed academic institutions, and academic journals associated with
the media articles and academic studies in our sample. Each n represents one article with the
associated domain/institution/journal, where the percent is out of the total # of media/aca-
demic articles, respectively. For academic institutions, the n indicates the number of studies
with at least one author listed as affiliated with each institution. Affiliations were curated by
authors to be aggregated at the highest level reasonable, such as at the university, hospital, or
company level, so that multiple departments from the same university, for example, would
count as at least one affiliation with that university.
(PDF)
S2 Table. Academic articles reviewed. This table contains the citation of each academic study
reviewed in our sample, and key final summary measures generated by the arbitrator of each
article. Please note that the review process represents the subjective opinions of the randomly
selected reviewers from our pool using an experimental review tool and process. They should
be not be considered conclusive or universal rankings of any individual publication. The full
comments from reviewers of each article are included in the attached full dataset. These data,
as well as additional data including inter-reviewer communication, are available at metacausal.
com/CLAIMS.
(PDF)
S3 Table. Media articles reviewed. This table contains the authors, titles, and URL domain of
each media article reviewed in our sample, the number of shares on each social media platform
within a month of publication as determined by NewsWhip, and a summary measure of
whether the causal language in the media article matched that of the associated academic
Causal language and strength of inference in academic and media articles shared in social media (CLAIMS)
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0196346
May 30, 2018
13 / 21
 article as generated by the arbitrator. Please note that the review process represents the subjec-
tive opinions of the randomly selected reviewers from our pool using an experimental review
tool and process. They should be not be considered conclusive or universal rankings of any
individual article. The full comments from reviewers of each article are included in the
attached full dataset. These data, as well as additional data including inter-reviewer communi-
cation, are available at metacausal.com/CLAIMS.
(PDF)
S4 Table. Number of articles in each category, by summary measures. This table corre-
sponds to each panel in Fig 3, showing the number of articles/studies in each stratum, as deter-
mined by the arbitrating reviewers.
(PDF)
S1 File. CLAIMS review tool. This file contains the full questionnaire from this study, as
described in the methods section, condensed to a PDF. The full questionnaire is also available
in its original form as a Google Forms survey on metacausal.com/CLAIMS.
(PDF)
S2 File. Protocol brief registered with PROSPERO. This document contains the pre-regis-
tered protocol as registered with PROSPERO on August 5, 2016. The PROSPERO registration
can be found at http://www.crd.york.ac.uk/PROSPERO/display_record.php?ID=
CRD42016045197. The full, detailed protocol is available on metacausal.com/CLAIMS/
protocol.
(PDF)
S3 File. PRISMA checklist. This document contains a checklist of items as suggested by the
PRISMA guidelines. The page numbers in the document refer to the pdf of the full protocol,
available at metacausal.com/CLAIMS/protocol.
(PDF)
S4 File. Review dataset. This dataset contains the full results from the review process, includ-
ing both primary and arbitrator reviews of all articles selected into the sample of this study.
Additional data, including the full results from the NewsWhip Insights search, selection
screening process results, inter-reviewer communications during the review process, and man-
ually coded / author curated data are publicly available at metacausal.com/CLAIMS.
(ZIP)
Acknowledgments
Contributor roles and institutional information
CLAIMS research team
Affiliations, titles, and degrees below are listed as of the time research was conducted in late
2016-early 2017 to best represent the qualifications of the research team at the time review was
conducted. These do not necessarily reflect author affiliations, titles, and degrees at the time of
publication. For contact purposes, e-mail addresses have been updated as of the time of
publication.
Kathryn Andrews, MPH
ScD candidate
Department of Global Health and Population
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health
Causal language and strength of inference in academic and media articles shared in social media (CLAIMS)
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0196346
May 30, 2018
14 / 21
 kathryn.andrews@mail.harvard.eduRoles: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Investiga-
tion, Methodology, Writing–review & editing, Article review
Robin Audy, MSc
Consultant economist
Unafilliated
robinaudy@gmail.com
Roles: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Writing–review &
editing, Article review
Winnie Bell, MSc, MPH
PhD candidate in Food Policy and Applied Nutrition
Friedman School of Nutrition Science and Policy
Tufts University
winnie.bell@tufts.edu
Roles: Conceptualization, Investigation, Methodology, Writing–review & editing, Article
review
Alana T. Brennan, PhD
Research Scientist
Department of Global Health
School of Public Health
Boston University
abrennan@bu.edu
Roles: Investigation, Methodology, Writing–review & editing, Article review
Alexander Breskin, MPH
PhD student in Epidemiology
Gillings School of Global Public Health
Department of Epidemiology
University of North Carolina
abreskin@live.unc.edu
Roles: Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Writing–review & editing, Article review
Dani Poole, MPH
ScD candidate in Population and Family Health
Department of Global Health and Population
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health
dani@mail.harvard.edu
Roles: Investigation, Article review
Erin James, MSc
ScD candidate in Global Health in Health Systems
Department of Global Health and Population
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health
ekj605@mail.harvard.edu
Roles: Investigation, Article review
Noah Haber, MSc
ScD candidate in Health Economics
Department of Global Health and Population
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health
nhaber@unc.edu
Roles: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology,
Project administration, Supervision, Validation, Writing–original draft, Writing–review &
editing, Study lead
Causal language and strength of inference in academic and media articles shared in social media (CLAIMS)
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0196346
May 30, 2018
15 / 21
 Jeremy C. Kane, PhD, MPH
Assistant Scientist
Department of Mental Health
Bloomberg School of Public Health
Johns Hopkins University
jkane29@jhu.edu
Roles: Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Writing–review & editing, Article
review
Mahesh Karra, MSc
ScD candidate in Health Economics
Department of Global Health and Population
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health
mvkarra@bu.edu
Roles: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology,
Writing–review & editing, Article review
Jeeyon Janet Kim, MSPH
PhD candidate in Food Policy and Applied Nutrition
Friedman School of Nutrition Science and Policy
Tufts University
janet.kim@tufts.edu
Roles: Investigation, Article review
Elizabeth S. McClure, MS
PhD student in Epidemiology
Department of Epidemiology
Gillings School of Global Public Health
University of North Carolina
emcclure@unc.edu
Roles: Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Writing–review & editing, Article
review
Ellen Moscoe, MA
ScD candidate in Global Health and Population
Department of Global Health and Population
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health
ellen.moscoe@gmail.com
Roles: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Writing–review &
editing, Article review
Sarah Murray, PhD
Postdoctoral Research Fellow
Bloomberg School of Public Health
Johns Hopkins University
sarah.murray@jhu.edu
Roles: Investigation, Article review
Iryna Postolovska, BA
ScD candidate
Department of Global Health and Population
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health
ipostolovska@mail.harvard.edu
Roles: Investigation, Article review
Aaron Sarvet, SMPH
Causal language and strength of inference in academic and media articles shared in social media (CLAIMS)
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0196346
May 30, 2018
16 / 21
 Research Technician
New York State Psychiatric Institute
Department of Psychiatry
Columbia University
asarvet@gmail.com
Roles: Investigation, Article review
Akshar Saxena, MPP
ScD candidate in Health Economics
Department of Global Health and Population
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health
aks511@mail.harvard.edu
Roles: Investigation, Article review
Emily R. Smith, ScD
Clinical Research Specialist / Postdoctoral Fellow
Center for Nutrition at Boston Children’s Hospital
Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition
Research Fellow
Department of Global Health and Population
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health
ersmith@hsph.harvard.edu
Roles: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Validation, Visuali-
zation, Writing–review & editing, Article review
Paula D. Strassle, MSPH
PhD student in Epidemiology
Gillings School of Global Public Health
Department of Epidemiology
University of North Carolina
pstrass@live.unc.edu
Roles: Investigation, Article review
Elizabeth A. Suarez, MPH
PhD student in Epidemiology
Gillings School of Global Public Health
Department of Epidemiology
University of North Carolina
easuarez4@gmail.com
Roles: Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Writing–review & editing, Article review
Michael Webster-Clark, PharmD
PhD student in Epidemiology
Gillings School of Global Public Health
Department of Epidemiology
University of North Carolina
webster-clark.m@husky.neu.edu
Roles: Investigation, Article review
Rachel Zack, SM
ScD in Epidemiology
Department of Epidemiology
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health
rmzack@gmail.com
Roles: Investigation, Article review
Causal language and strength of inference in academic and media articles shared in social media (CLAIMS)
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0196346
May 30, 2018
17 / 21
 Faculty protocol reviewers
The following faculty members reviewed and commented on the protocol before the main
review process took place. As above, the affiliations represent affiliations and titles at the time
that research was conducted, and does not necessarily reflect affiliations and titles at the time
of publication.
Gu
¨nther Fink
Associate Professor of International Health Economics
Department of Global Health and Population
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health
Christopher Gill
Associate Professor of Global Health
Center for Global Health and Development
Boston University
William Masters
Professor
Friedman School of Nutrition Science & Policy
Department of Economics
Tufts University
Author Contributions
Conceptualization: Noah Haber, Emily R. Smith, Ellen Moscoe, Kathryn Andrews, Robin
Audy, Winnie Bell, Mahesh Karra.
Data curation: Noah Haber, Mahesh Karra.
Formal analysis: Noah Haber, Emily R. Smith, Ellen Moscoe, Kathryn Andrews, Robin Audy,
Alexander Breskin, Jeremy C. Kane, Mahesh Karra, Elizabeth S. McClure, Elizabeth A.
Suarez.
Investigation: Noah Haber, Emily R. Smith, Ellen Moscoe, Kathryn Andrews, Robin Audy,
Winnie Bell, Alana T. Brennan, Alexander Breskin, Jeremy C. Kane, Mahesh Karra, Eliza-
beth S. McClure, Elizabeth A. Suarez.
Methodology: Noah Haber, Emily R. Smith, Ellen Moscoe, Kathryn Andrews, Robin Audy,
Winnie Bell, Alana T. Brennan, Alexander Breskin, Jeremy C. Kane, Mahesh Karra, Eliza-
beth S. McClure, Elizabeth A. Suarez.
Project administration: Noah Haber.
Supervision: Noah Haber.
Validation: Noah Haber, Emily R. Smith.
Visualization: Emily R. Smith.
Writing – original draft: Noah Haber.
Writing – review & editing: Noah Haber, Emily R. Smith, Ellen Moscoe, Kathryn Andrews,
Robin Audy, Winnie Bell, Alana T. Brennan, Alexander Breskin, Jeremy C. Kane, Mahesh
Karra, Elizabeth S. McClure, Elizabeth A. Suarez.
References
1.
Pew Research Center. State of the News Media 2016. 2016.
Causal language and strength of inference in academic and media articles shared in social media (CLAIMS)
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0196346
May 30, 2018
18 / 21
 2.
Grilli R, Ramsay C, Minozzi S. Mass media interventions: effects on health services utilisation.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2002;(1):CD000389. Epub 2002/03/01. https://doi.org/10.1002/
14651858.CD000389 PMID: 11869574.
3.
Matthews A, Herrett E, Gasparrini A, Van Staa T, Goldacre B, Smeeth L, et al. Impact of statin related
media coverage on use of statins: interrupted time series analysis with UK primary care data. BMJ.
2016; 353:i3283. Epub 2016/06/30. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.i3283 PMID: 27353418; PubMed Cen-
tral PMCID: PMC4925917.
4.
Rysz-Gorzynska M, Gluba-Brzozka A, Sahebkar A, Serban MC, Mikhailidis DP, Ursoniu S, et al. Effi-
cacy of Statin Therapy in Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.
Sci Rep. 2016; 6:30060. Epub 2016/07/23. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep30060 PMID: 27444125;
PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4957081.
5.
Anand V, Garg S, Duval S, Thenappan T. A systematic review and meta-analysis of trials using statins
in pulmonary arterial hypertension. Pulm Circ. 2016; 6(3):295–301. Epub 2016/09/30. https://doi.org/
10.1086/687304 PMID: 27683606; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC5019082.
6.
Faasse K, Gamble G, Cundy T, Petrie KJ. Impact of television coverage on the number and type of
symptoms reported during a health scare: a retrospective pre-post observational study. BMJ Open.
2012; 2(4). Epub 2012/08/21. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2012-001607 PMID: 22904334;
PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3425900.
7.
Desai S, Jena AB. Do celebrity endorsements matter? Observational study of BRCA gene testing and
mastectomy rates after Angelina Jolie’s New York Times editorial. BMJ. 2016; 355:i6357. Epub 2016/
12/16. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.i6357 PMID: 27974323; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC5156611
8.
Kelaher M, Cawson J, Miller J, Kavanagh A, Dunt D, Studdert DM. Use of breast cancer screening and
treatment services by Australian women aged 25–44 years following Kylie Minogue’s breast cancer
diagnosis. Int J Epidemiol. 2008; 37(6):1326–32. Epub 2008/06/03. https://doi.org/10.1093/ije/dyn090
PMID: 18515324.
9.
Boutron I, Altman DG, Hopewell S, Vera-Badillo F, Tannock I, Ravaud P. Impact of spin in the abstracts
of articles reporting results of randomized controlled trials in the field of cancer: the SPIIN randomized
controlled trial. Journal of clinical oncology: official journal of the American Society of Clinical Oncology.
2014; 32(36):4120–6. Epub 2014/11/19. https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2014.56.7503 PMID: 25403215.
10.
Chapman S, Nguyen TN, White C. Press-released papers are more downloaded and cited. Tob Control.
2007; 16(1):71. Epub 2007/02/14. https://doi.org/10.1136/tc.2006.019034 PMID: 17297082; PubMed
Central PMCID: PMC2598438.
11.
Woloshin S, Schwartz LM, Casella SL, Kennedy AT, Larson RJ. Press releases by academic medical
centers: not so academic? Ann Intern Med. 2009; 150(9):613–8. Epub 2009/05/06. PMID: 19414840.
12.
Sumner P, Vivian-Griffiths S, Boivin J, Williams A, Venetis CA, Davies A, et al. The association between
exaggeration in health related science news and academic press releases: retrospective observational
study. BMJ. 2014; 349:g7015. Epub 2014/12/17. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.g7015 PMID: 25498121;
PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4262123.
13.
Horton R. Offline: What is medicine’s 5 sigma? The Lancet. 2015; 385(9976):1380. https://doi.org/10.
1016/s0140-6736(15)60696-1
14.
Marcovitch H. Editors, publishers, impact factors, and reprint income. PLoS Med. 2010; 7(10):
e1000355. Epub 2010/11/05. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1000355 PMID: 21048987; PubMed
Central PMCID: PMC2964337.
15.
Ioannidis JP. Why most published research findings are false. PLoS Med. 2005; 2(8):e124. Epub 2005/
08/03. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.0020124 PMID: 16060722; PubMed Central PMCID:
PMC1182327.
16.
Ioannidis JP. Why Most Clinical Research Is Not Useful. PLoS Med. 2016; 13(6):e1002049. Epub 2016/
06/22. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1002049 PMID: 27328301; PubMed Central PMCID:
PMC4915619.
17.
Head ML, Holman L, Lanfear R, Kahn AT, Jennions MD. The extent and consequences of p-hacking in
science. PLoS Biology. 2015; 13(3):e1002106. Epub 2015/03/15. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.
1002106 PMID: 25768323; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4359000.
18.
Lesko CR, Buchanan AL, Westreich D, Edwards JK, Hudgens MG, Cole SR. Generalizing Study
Results: A Potential Outcomes Perspective. Epidemiology. 2017; 28(4):553–61. Epub 2017/03/28.
https://doi.org/10.1097/EDE.0000000000000664 PMID: 28346267; PubMed Central PMCID:
PMC5466356.
19.
Westreich D, Edwards JK, Rogawski ET, Hudgens MG, Stuart EA, Cole SR. Causal Impact: Epidemio-
logical Approaches for a Public Health of Consequence. Am J Public Health. 2016; 106(6):1011–2.
Epub 2016/05/08. https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2016.303226 PMID: 27153017; PubMed Central
PMCID: PMC4880276.
Causal language and strength of inference in academic and media articles shared in social media (CLAIMS)
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0196346
May 30, 2018
19 / 21
 20.
Fanelli D. Negative results are disappearing from most disciplines and countries. Scientometrics. 2012;
90(3):891–904. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11192-011-0494-7
21.
Dwan K, Altman DG, Arnaiz JA, Bloom J, Chan AW, Cronin E, et al. Systematic review of the empirical
evidence of study publication bias and outcome reporting bias. PloS One. 2008; 3(8):e3081. Epub
2008/09/05. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0003081 PMID: 18769481; PubMed Central PMCID:
PMC2518111.
22.
Nosek B, Collaboration OS. Estimating the reproducibility of psychological science. Science. 2015; 349
(6251). Epub 2015/09/01. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aac4716 PMID: 26315443.
23.
Cofield SS, Corona RV, Allison DB. Use of causal language in observational studies of obesity and
nutrition. Obes Facts. 2010; 3(6):353–6. Epub 2011/01/05. https://doi.org/10.1159/000322940 PMID:
21196788; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3280017.
24.
Prasad V, Jorgenson J, Ioannidis JP, Cifu A. Observational studies often make clinical practice recom-
mendations: an empirical evaluation of authors’ attitudes. J Clin Epidemiol. 2013; 66(4):361–6 e4. Epub
2013/02/07. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclinepi.2012.11.005 PMID: 23384591.
25.
Chiu K, Grundy Q, Bero L. ’Spin’ in published biomedical literature: A methodological systematic review.
PLoS Biology. 2017; 15(9):e2002173. Epub 2017/09/12. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2002173
PMID: 28892482; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC5593172.
26.
Boutron I, Dutton S, Ravaud P, Altman DG. Reporting and interpretation of randomized controlled trials
with statistically nonsignificant results for primary outcomes. JAMA. 2010; 303(20):2058–64. Epub
2010/05/27. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2010.651 PMID: 20501928.
27.
Lockyer S, Hodgson R, Dumville JC, Cullum N. "Spin" in wound care research: the reporting and inter-
pretation of randomized controlled trials with statistically non-significant primary outcome results or
unspecified primary outcomes. Trials. 2013; 14:371. Epub 2013/11/08. https://doi.org/10.1186/1745-
6215-14-371 PMID: 24195770; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3832286.
28.
Haneef R, Lazarus C, Ravaud P, Yavchitz A, Boutron I. Interpretation of Results of Studies Evaluating
an Intervention Highlighted in Google Health News: A Cross-Sectional Study of News. PloS One. 2015;
10(10):e0140889. Epub 2015/10/17. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0140889 PMID: 26473725;
PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4608738.
29.
Schwitzer G. How do US journalists cover treatments, tests, products, and procedures? An evaluation
of 500 stories. PLoS Med. 2008; 5(5):e95. Epub 2008/05/30. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.
0050095 PMID: 18507496; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2689661.
30.
Moynihan R, Bero L, Ross-Degnan D, Henry D, Lee K, Watkins J, et al. Coverage by the news media of
the benefits and risks of medications. N Engl J Med. 2000; 342(22):1645–50. Epub 2000/06/01. https://
doi.org/10.1056/NEJM200006013422206 PMID: 10833211.
31.
Yavchitz A, Boutron I, Bafeta A, Marroun I, Charles P, Mantz J, et al. Misrepresentation of randomized
controlled trials in press releases and news coverage: a cohort study. PLoS Med. 2012; 9(9):e1001308.
Epub 2012/09/18. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001308 PMID: 22984354; PubMed Central
PMCID: PMC3439420.
32.
Nielsen RK, Cornia A, Kalogeropoulos A. Challenges and opportunities for news media and journalism
in an increasingly digital, mobile and social media environment. Oxford: Reuters Institute for the Study
of Journalism, 2016.
33.
Dumas-Mallet E, Smith A, Boraud T, Gonon F. Poor replication validity of biomedical association stud-
ies reported by newspapers. PloS One. 2017; 12(2):e0172650. Epub 2017/02/22. https://doi.org/10.
1371/journal.pone.0172650 PMID: 28222122; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC5319681.
34.
Brookes PS. Internet publicity of data problems in the bioscience literature correlates with enhanced
corrective action. PeerJ. 2014; 2:e313. Epub 2014/04/26. https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.313 PMID:
24765564; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3994617.
35.
Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J, Altman DG, Group P. Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews
and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement. PLoS Med. 2009; 6(7):e1000097. Epub 2009/07/22.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1000097 PMID: 19621072; PubMed Central PMCID:
PMC2707599.
36.
Smith E,Andrews K, Audy R, Bell W, Brennan A, Breskin A, et al. Health media review project
CRD42016045197 2016. 08/04/2016:[Available from: https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/PROSPERO/
display_record.asp?ID=CRD42016045197.
37.
NewsWhip. Insights. 2016.
38.
Higgens J, Green S. Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions: The Cochrane Col-
laboration; 2011 [updated 2011; cited 2016]. Version 5.1.0:[Available from: http://handbook.cochrane.
org/.
Causal language and strength of inference in academic and media articles shared in social media (CLAIMS)
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0196346
May 30, 2018
20 / 21
 39.
OCEBM Levels of Evidence Working Group. The Oxford 2011 Levels of Evidence. Oxford Centre for
Evidence-Based Medicine, 2011.
40.
Hernan MA, Alonso A, Logan R, Grodstein F, Michels KB, Willett WC, et al. Observational studies ana-
lyzed like randomized experiments: an application to postmenopausal hormone therapy and coronary
heart disease. Epidemiology. 2008; 19(6):766–79. Epub 2008/10/16. https://doi.org/10.1097/EDE.
0b013e3181875e61 PMID: 18854702; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3731075.
41.
Brown AW, Bohan Brown MM, Allison DB. Belief beyond the evidence: using the proposed effect of
breakfast on obesity to show 2 practices that distort scientific evidence. Am J Clin Nutr. 2013; 98
(5):1298–308. Epub 2013/09/06. https://doi.org/10.3945/ajcn.113.064410 PMID: 24004890; PubMed
Central PMCID: PMC3798081.
42.
R Core Team. R: A language and environment for statistical computing. In: R Foundation for Statistical
Computing, editor. Vienna, Austria 2016.
43.
Clarivate Analytics. Journal Citation Reports. 2015.
44.
Sterne JA, Hernan MA, Reeves BC, Savovic J, Berkman ND, Viswanathan M, et al. ROBINS-I: a tool
for assessing risk of bias in non-randomised studies of interventions. BMJ. 2016; 355:i4919. Epub
2016/10/14. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.i4919 PMID: 27733354; PubMed Central PMCID:
PMC5062054
45.
Higgins J, Sterne J, Savović J, Page M, Hro
´bjartsson A, Boutron I, et al. A revised tool for assessing risk
of bias in randomized trials. In: Chandler J, McKenzie J, Boutron I, Welch V (editors). Cochrane Meth-
ods. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016; 10(Suppl 1):29–31. https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.
CD201601
46.
National Institutes of Health. Research Project Success Rates by NIH Institute for 2015. Washington D.
C.: National Institutes of Health, 2016.
47.
Gillum LA, Gouveia C, Dorsey ER, Pletcher M, Mathers CD, McCulloch CE, et al. NIH disease funding
levels and burden of disease. PloS One. 2011; 6(2):e16837. Epub 2011/03/09. https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0016837 PMID: 21383981; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3044706.
Causal language and strength of inference in academic and media articles shared in social media (CLAIMS)
PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0196346
May 30, 2018
21 / 21
