 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rejecting Responsibility: Low Physical Involvement in Obtaining Food Promotes 
Unhealthy Eating 
 
LINDA HAGEN 
 ARADHNA KRISHNA  
BRENT MCFERRAN* 
 
(forthcoming at Journal of Marketing Research) 
* Linda Hagen (linda.hagen@marshall.usc.edu) is Assistant Professor of Marketing at the 
Marshall School of Business, University of Southern California. 701 Exposition Boulevard, Los 
Angeles, CA 90089-0443. Aradhna Krishna (aradhna@umich.edu) is Dwight F. Benton 
Professor of Marketing at the Stephen M. Ross School of Business, University of Michigan. 701 
Tappan Street, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234. Brent McFerran (brent.mcferran@sfu.ca) is 
Associate Professor of Marketing at the Beedie School of Business, Simon Fraser University. 
8888 University Drive, Burnaby, B.C. V5A 1S6. This paper is based on the first author’s 
dissertation at the University of Michigan and has benefitted greatly from valuable feedback 
provided by members of the Marketing department at the Stephen M. Ross School of Business, 
Ed O’Brien, and the JMR editorial review team. Funding support from the Rackham Graduate 
School at the University of Michigan and the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council 
of Canada is also gratefully acknowledged. 
 2 
 
Abstract 
Five experiments show that less physical involvement in obtaining food leads to less 
healthy food choices. We find that when participants are given the choice of whether or not to 
consume snacks that they perceive as relatively unhealthy, they have a greater inclination to 
consume these snacks when less (versus more) physical involvement is required to help 
themselves to the food; this is not the case for snacks that they perceive as relatively healthy. 
Further, when participants are given the opportunity to choose their portion size, they select 
larger portions of unhealthy foods when less (versus more) physical involvement is required to 
help themselves to the food; again, this is not the case for healthy foods. We suggest that this 
behavior occurs because being less physically involved in serving one’s food allows participants 
to reject responsibility for unhealthy eating and thus to feel better about themselves following 
indulgent consumption. These findings add to the research on consumers’ self-serving 
attributions and to the growing literature on factors that nudge consumers towards healthier 
eating decisions. 
 3 
 
 
Eating away from home has become pervasive, extending to all categories of dining 
establishments, including fast food places, cafeterias, and gourmet restaurants (Harris Interactive 
2012), with two-thirds of Americans dining out at least every other day (Stewart, Blisard, and 
Jolliffe 2006). Dining out brings benefits, saving the consumer time and effort. However, 
research indicates that eating away from home may be costly for people’s health: consumers tend 
to eat much more unhealthily—that is, consume more calories—when they eat out versus at 
home (Gregory, Smith, and Wendt 2011). This is likely at least in part due to the generally 
higher fat content of restaurant food (Guthrie, Lin, and Frazão 2002). However, this finding 
raises the question if other variables that are relatively more common when eating away from 
home may also be involved. One such variable is a difference in consumer physical involvement.  
When eating away from home, the consumer typically has some responsibility for her 
eating decisions, as she makes an active choice from a menu of options. However, her sense of 
responsibility may be increased or decreased through her physical involvement in the act of 
helping herself to the food. The difference in physical involvement in out-of-home eating 
contexts could affect perceived responsibility in two ways. First, the consumer could discharge 
responsibility over the assortment or range of portion sizes that are offered in the first place. 
Being less physically involved in helping oneself to food often means that a consumer’s choice is 
limited to a pre-determined portion size (e.g., a default chosen by the restaurant or party host) or 
a limited range of sizes (e.g., “small” or “large”), rather than her being able to determine a 
portion for herself from an infinite number of possible sizes (e.g., by scooping exactly as much 
or as little as she wishes of each item). Such a constrained choice is also present when food 
comes pre-packaged (e.g., snack packs of candy or nuts) or is otherwise pre-portioned (e.g., pre-
cut pastries or pizza) rather than being offered from larger containers or units (e.g., at bulk 
 4 
 
stations).  
Second, the consumer also discharges responsibility over the physical act of serving a 
portion of the food onto her plate. Being less physically involved in serving one’s own food 
means carrying out less motor activity to help oneself to it. This is the case when another person 
plates the food (e.g., in restaurants, the kitchen plates a diner’s food; at dinner parties, sometimes 
a host serves the guest’s meal) instead of the consumer serving herself. The consumer is likewise 
less physically involved than she would typically be at home when foods come pre-portioned or 
pre-packaged (e.g., in cafes, meals are boxed for the grab-and-go display; snacks come in small 
single-serve packs). In such situations, discharging responsibility over physically handling the 
food may spill over to a reduced sense of responsibility for one’s eating decision in general. 
Here, we ask the question whether less (versus more) physical involvement in helping oneself to 
food facilitates the selection of relatively unhealthy foods or larger portions of unhealthy foods, 
all else being equal, by way of reducing people’s sense of responsibility. We show evidence for 
affirmative answers to all aspects of this question as discussed below.  
We suggest that consumers are motivated to make self-serving attributions of 
responsibility for their eating, that is, to reject responsibility for unhealthy eating, in order to feel 
good about themselves. However, the latitude for relegating responsibility to others is affected 
by how physically involved they are in helping themselves to the food they eat—that is, by the 
degree of physical agency. Critically, we predict that how healthy or unhealthy the food is 
interacts with physical involvement (less versus more) to affect a consumer’s ascription of 
responsibility. As an extension of prior work on self-serving attributions, we show that the 
healthiness of food determines the necessity or motivation for self-serving attributions, as only 
unhealthy eating motivates consumers to reattribute responsibility. As a novel contribution to 
 5 
 
research on motivated reasoning and consumer self-deception, we demonstrate that how 
physically involved consumers are in helping themselves to their food determines the 
opportunity for such attribution: being uninvolved in serving the food offers a chance to deny 
responsibility. Our findings also contribute to research on vice consumption and consumption 
guilt. 
Our findings offer a suggestion for how marketers, policy makers, and consumers 
themselves may reduce the incidence and volume of unhealthy eating. While we know that the 
size of portions served in restaurants (Zlatevska, Dubelaar, and Holden 2014), the dimensions of 
serving bowls (Wansink and Cheney 2005), and the appearance of food servers (McFerran et al. 
2010a) can all impact food consumption, the important distinction between being less (versus 
more) physically involved in helping oneself to a given food has not been studied.  
First, we draw on theories of agency and self-serving attributions to derive our prediction 
that being less (versus more) physically involved in helping oneself to food increases both the 
incidence and the quantity of unhealthy eating by facilitating consumers declining to take 
responsibility. Then, five studies provide evidence that when less (versus more) physical 
involvement is required to help oneself to food, people are more likely to consume unhealthy 
foods and to select larger portions of unhealthy foods. We show that this behavior occurs 
because being less physically involved in helping oneself to food allows people to deflect 
responsibility for unhealthy eating and protect their positive self-evaluation. Lastly, we discuss 
some implications of our findings and suggestions for future research. 
 
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND 
 
Agency  
 6 
 
People tend to assume intent and agency rather than randomness as the cause of events 
(Rosset 2008), and beliefs about whether or not an action was driven by agency strongly 
influence judgments about actors and outcomes. Abundant research demonstrates that when 
individuals have a sense of self-agency, or responsibility for their own actions, their emotional 
responses to a given event they are involved in are amplified, because people associate more 
strongly with its consequences (Landman 1987). For example, consumers evaluate self-selected 
(Brehm 1956) and self-assembled (Norton, Mochon, and Ariely 2012) products more positively.  
At the same time, personal responsibility is also associated with negative emotions. For 
example, personal agency is a necessary condition for the emotion of guilt (Smith and Ellsworth 
1985). Accordingly, individuals considering their active (versus passive) behavior as the cause of 
negative consequences (e.g., opting into a vaccination that causes complications versus foregoing 
it and falling ill) judge their decision more negatively (Baron and Ritov 1994) and experience 
stronger immediate regret (Gilovich and Medvec 1995; Kahneman and Tversky 1982). In sum, 
research suggests that a sense of personal agency and responsibility for actions and outcomes 
strongly affects people’s thoughts and feelings.  
Self-serving Attributions of Agency 
People’s thoughts are also heavily shaped by ‘what one would like to be’ (Heider 1958, 
p. 121); consequently, reasoning and inferences are distorted as a function of individual goals. A 
major instantiation of motivated reasoning is the self-serving attribution, which occurs to 
preserve one’s self-concept—an important goal for all humans (Campbell and Sedikides 1999; 
Greenberg, Pyszczynski, and Solomon 1982; for a review, see Shepperd, Malone, and Sweeny 
2008). As such, attributions of responsibility are biased to position the individual in a favorable 
light in order to make her feel good (or avoid feeling bad). For instance, a large body of research 
 7 
 
demonstrates that individuals take credit for success, but overwhelmingly deny accountability for 
failures (see Fletcher and Ward 1988 for a review). Faced with favorable outcomes, people 
assume responsibility even for pure chance events (Langer and Roth 1975; Wohl and Enzle 
2002). Conversely, faced with unfavorable outcomes, they re-assign responsibility whenever 
their own agency is ambiguous (Bandura 1990; Hinrichs et al. 2012).  
Overall, the motivation to explain away negative outcomes tends to be stronger than that 
to claim positive outcomes (Bohner et al. 1988). Reactions to negative outcomes are typically 
more intense than to positive ones: negative information weighs more heavily in impression 
formation (Anderson 1965), negative events affect people longer (Sheldon, Ryan, and Reis 
1996), and negative emotions receive more attention and inspire regulatory efforts (Baumeister, 
Heatherton, and Tice 1994; for a review see Baumeister et al. 2001).  
Further, motivated reasoning, such as self-serving attributions, occurs only under 
motivational pressures (Kunda 1987). One domain where motivational pressures are high is 
eating (Chernev 2011). Food and eating behaviors are focal in today’s society. A majority of 
Americans aim to lose weight (IFICF 2014) and try to restrict their consumption of unhealthy 
foods (Vohs and Heatherton 2000; for a review see Bublitz, Peracchio, and Block 2010), and 
many view diet control as a desirable character quality (Chaiken and Pliner 1987; Stein and 
Nemeroff 1995). Against this backdrop, it is not surprising that eating is closely linked with self-
evaluative feelings (Ramanathan and Williams 2007); many people feel guilty about unhealthy 
consumption (Wansink and Chandon 2006). As in other domains of vice and emotion-laden 
consumption, consumers may employ strategies to make themselves feel better about their 
consumption choices (Khan and Dhar 2006; Mukhopadhyay and Johar 2009; Okada 2005). As 
detailed above, the tendency to make self-serving attributions tends to be stronger for negative 
 8 
 
than for positive outcomes. Thus, self-protecting attributions (e.g., for unhealthy consumption) 
may be more powerful than self-enhancing attributions (e.g., for healthy consumption). In other 
words, consumers may seek to reject responsibility for unhealthy eating, to protect their positive 
self-evaluation, or claim responsibility for healthy eating, but this effect may be weaker.  
Physical Involvement in Helping Oneself to Food and Self-serving Attributions of Agency  
Research suggests that consumers cannot make themselves believe anything they want. 
People attribute responsibility in self-serving ways, but only if they can muster some credible 
evidence to support those claims (Kunda 1990; Schlenker, Weigold, and Hallam 1990; Weary et 
al. 1982). We suggest that physical involvement in procuring food functions as a potential driver 
of motivated reasoning. Specifically, we propose that more physical involvement presents 
“irrefutable” evidence of one’s agency, forestalling alternative ascriptions of responsibility. In 
contrast, less physical involvement allows the consumer leeway for self-serving attributions, and 
may even facilitate them.  
Physical involvement can be defined as active participation in a process through bodily 
activity (cf. Merriam Webster). There are numerous ways in which consumers can be less 
(versus more) physically involved in helping themselves to food; we examine several. For 
instance, reaching for a snack pack of candy requires less physical involvement than actively 
scooping candy into a personal bowl; taking a container pre-filled with a snack from a shelf 
requires less physical involvement than taking an empty container and filling it up oneself; 
having a server serve food onto one’s plate and “saying when” requires less physical 
involvement than serving the same amount of food oneself. Each of these cases requires less 
physical involvement on the part of the consumer than would be typical at home, where 
consumers frequently serve themselves by scooping their own portion of food onto their plate. 
 9 
 
Consumer research has found that, all else equal, physically interacting with an object 
impacts people’s perceived relationship with it. For example, merely touching a product, such as 
a mug or a pencil, increases consumers’ sense of ownership (Brasel and Gips 2014; Peck, 
Barger, and Webb 2013; Peck and Shu 2009). Similarly, the more physical activity an actor 
exerts to acquire an object, the more ownership is credited to her. This effect is driven by greater 
ascribed responsibility for the possession (Palamar, Le, and Friedman 2012). Indeed, greater 
effort in any activity enhances an individual’s sense of self-agency (Demanet et al. 2013).  
We suggest that being more or less physically involved in serving food strongly affects 
consumers’ capacity to make self-serving attributions of responsibility. The diner who seizes a 
serving bowl, takes hold of a serving spoon, and scoops a helping of food onto her plate 
incriminates herself more in helping herself to the food than one who is merely handed a plate 
filled by a server or who takes a pre-packaged portion of a meal from a display shelf. Actively 
scooping, ladling, pouring, or otherwise serving one’s food may enforce attributions of 
responsibility to oneself, whereas being served by another person or merely picking up a pre-
packaged portion of food may open up the opportunity for making the most preferable attribution 
of responsibility, to self or other, depending on how virtuous the food itself seems.  
This is not to suggest that choosing one’s food has no impact; we do not test the relative 
impact of choosing versus physical involvement in helping oneself to one’s food on a 
consumer’s ability to make favorable attributions of responsibility. Rather, we propose that in the 
typical circumstance in which a consumer herself chooses her own food to eat, being more or 
less physically involved in helping herself to the food will deny or allow her to reject 
responsibility, respectively, for unhealthy eating. Given the importance of the sense of agency, 
and the influence that physical activity appears to have on it, we predict that more actively 
 10 
 
exercising her choice (i.e., actively serving her own food) will affect a consumer’s attribution of 
responsibility more strongly than merely indicating the choice by vocalizing it to a server or 
taking a prepared plate (i.e., passively taking food). Further, the finding that verbally stating 
one’s choice favors impulsive decisions (Klesse, Levav, and Goukens 2015) suggests that verbal 
choice is not necessarily associated with greater deliberation and thus the responsibility it entails.  
 We expect that such attributions of personal responsibility drive actual consumption 
behavior. Specifically, relieved of responsibility, consumers may find it more acceptable to 
indulge in unhealthy foods, and make their eating decisions accordingly. We propose that:  
H1: People are more likely to make unhealthy eating decisions (e.g., choosing to eat 
foods perceived as unhealthy versus not; choosing larger portions of food perceived as 
unhealthy1) when less (versus more) physical involvement is required to help oneself to the food. 
To explain these unhealthy food choices, we propose an attributional account, in which 
the level of physical involvement affects attribution of responsibility for food consumption, in 
turn driving how consumers feel about themselves. As detailed above, people’s sense of 
responsibility, and their self-appraisal after food consumption, should be a function of two 
factors: how healthy the food is (determining the necessity for attributing away responsibility) 
and how physically involved one is in helping herself to the food (determining the opportunity 
for attributing away responsibility). We hypothesize that when a consumer is less physically 
involved, she can take or relegate responsibility depending on what suits her better. When one is 
more physically involved, however, the margin for reassigning responsibility and alleviating 
negative feelings is much smaller. This motivated reasoning should drive consumers’ feelings 
about their food decisions, so that their feelings about themselves are impacted interactively by 
the food’s healthiness and the physical involvement required to help oneself to it. Specifically: 
 11 
 
H2: Less (versus more) physical involvement in helping oneself to food allows people 
greater latitude to reject responsibility for eating (the same) foods perceived as unhealthy, and 
thus to feel better about themselves (e.g., more positive, less guilty) for their food consumption.  
H3: Less (versus more) physical involvement in helping oneself to food has stronger 
effects on eating decisions when the food is perceived as unhealthy rather than healthy, because 
people are less likely to feel good about themselves (e.g., less positive, more guilty) after eating 
foods perceived as unhealthy.  
H1-H3 suggest a moderated mediation model (figure 1). The model includes two sub-
figures (as in Valsesia, Nunes, and Ordanini 2016) for two different types of eating situation: 
when consumers choose their portion size (panel A) and when portion size is held constant 
(panel B). The two figures are separated because we examine each process element in a separate 
study before testing the full model. The reason for this is as follows: for any particular portion 
size (i.e., people receive and consume a fixed portion of food), the level of physical involvement 
in helping oneself to the food and the healthiness of the food jointly determine people’s sense of 
responsibility, which in turn impacts their self-evaluative feelings post-consumption, given this 
particular portion size. In other words, the lowered sense of responsibility ameliorates people’s 
guilt from eating unhealthy food and thus elevates their positive self-evaluative feelings post-
consumption (panel B). However, when people can choose their portion size, feeling less (more) 
responsible for their selections when they are less (versus more) physically involved in helping 
themselves to their food leads them to choose a larger (smaller) portion size of unhealthy food 
(panel A). This occurs because they can “get away with” choosing larger portions without 
compromising their positive self-evaluative feelings. Hence, when people choose portion sizes, 
their self-evaluative feelings may be no different in the condition where they are less versus 
 12 
 
more physically involved in helping themselves to their food. This model (combining panels A 
and B) can be tested by statistically controlling for portion size choice.  
Insert figure 1 about here 
 
The reasoning above also implies unique mediation patterns for each panel. When 
consumers choose portion sizes, being less (versus more) physically involved in helping 
themselves to unhealthy food will result in lower perceived responsibility, and responsibility will 
mediate the effect of physical involvement required to help oneself to unhealthy food on portion 
size (panel A). When portion size is fixed, being less (versus more) physically involved in 
helping oneself to unhealthy food will result in lower perceived responsibility and higher self-
evaluative feelings, and perceived responsibility will mediate the effect of physical involvement 
in helping oneself to unhealthy food on self-evaluative feelings (panel B). Combining these 
steps, when consumers choose their portion size, it will be selected in such a manner as to 
maintain self-evaluative feelings (i.e., smaller portions of unhealthy food when more physical 
involvement is required), and thus responsibility will mediate the effect of physical involvement 
in helping oneself to food on self-evaluative feelings, controlling for portion size chosen. 
In the following, we first demonstrate the basic phenomenon that requiring less (versus 
more) physical involvement to help oneself to food increases consumers’ likelihood of choosing 
unhealthy foods (study 1, using pre-portioned food), and also leads to choice of larger portions of 
unhealthy foods (study 2, using pre-packaged food). Then we show that being less (versus more) 
physically involved enables rejection of responsibility, which leads to more positive self-
evaluative feelings when eating a given portion of unhealthy food (study 3, using an in-person 
server). Consolidating our previous findings, we provide evidence that requiring less (versus 
more) physical involvement in serving unhealthy food leads consumers to choose larger portions 
 13 
 
because feeling less responsible permits them to do so without causing them to feel worse (study 
4, using an in-person server). Finally, we provide some field evidence that being less (versus 
more) physically involved in serving food (using an in-person server) leads people to consume 
greater amounts of unhealthy food when servers serve industry-standard sizes (study 5).  
The Web Appendix details four additional experiments that were conducted during the 
review process of this paper but were subsequently dropped. For brevity, we do not report the 
results of (non-significant) demographics, nor non-focal measures on which data were collected, 
such as questions that were asked to maintain a cover story (e.g., “How well did you like the 
consistency of the [food]?” for the taste test cover story in study 5). 
 
 
STUDY 1: PROPENSITY TO CHOOSE (VS. FORGO) HEALTHY AND UNHEALTHY 
FOOD AS A FUNCTION OF PHYSICAL INVOLVEMENT REQUIRED 
 
In a field study, we first examined the basic idea that people may be more inclined to 
consume unhealthy food when less (versus more) physical involvement is required to help 
oneself to the food (H1), and that this will be attenuated for healthy food (H3).   
Method and Procedure 
The setting for this study was a small lobby in the business school of a large public 
university in the Midwest, where students typically wait for experimental sessions. The study ran 
over the course of two days, during which eight groups of 21 to 25 business undergraduates (N = 
189, 46% female) waited in the lobby before entering the laboratory for an unrelated 
management study. This setting ensured that each condition included unique individuals.  
We installed an innocuous small table with a letter-sized poster reading “Mmh, Fall 
 14 
 
Snack Bar – Have yourself a little snack.” On this table, we placed a fall-themed snack that was 
either healthy (mixed dried fruits) or unhealthy (Reese’s Pieces). Helping themselves to the 
respective snack required either more physical involvement (scooping the snack into a sampling 
cup) or less physical involvement (merely picking up a pre-filled sampling cup), making this a 2 
(healthiness: healthy vs. unhealthy) × 2 (physical involvement: less vs. more) between-subjects 
design. Each of the four conditions was run once earlier and once later in the day. 
Note that the snacks were selected based on a pretest in which 34 students from the same 
university had rated various snacks for their healthiness and liking on 1–7 point scales. Results 
indicated that students viewed mixed dried fruits as healthier (M = 5.62, SD = 1.39) than Reese’s 
Pieces (M = 1.44, SD = .61; t(33) = 16.85, p < .01), but liked dried fruits (M = 4.53, SD = 1.88) 
just as well as Reese’s Pieces (M = 4.85, SD = 1.76; t(33) = -.68, p > .5). Further, the Reese’s 
rating was significantly below the midpoint of the healthiness scale (t(33) = -19.60, p < .01), 
whereas the dried fruit rating was significantly above it (t(33) = 9.17, p < .01). 
In conditions that required less physical involvement, thirty 4 oz. sampling cups were set 
out on the table, each filled with 45 grams of the respective snack, and people just had to take a 
filled sampling cup. In conditions that required more physical involvement, approximately 1.7 
kilograms of the snack were set out in a large bowl with a serving spoon, several stacks of ten 4 
oz. sampling cups were placed next to it, and the participants had to scoop the snack into a 
sampling cup. Importantly, this amount filled half of the cup, allowing people in the more 
physical involvement conditions to serve more (or less) into their cups than the pre-filled 
sampling cups available in the less physical involvement, that is, making upward and downward 
deviations equally possible, albeit with a somewhat restricted range.  
Students entered the waiting room at their own leisure, typically 5 to 10 minutes before 
 15 
 
the scheduled start time. They remained uninstructed and unobserved until the experimenter who 
conducted the management study opened up the door to the laboratory room. While waiting, the 
students had the opportunity to take a cup of the snack food. The critical dependent measure was 
the total number of cups that were taken across all students in a given waiting period. Note that 
we did not observe any individual’s specific choice, but we observed the total number taken in 
each wait period, and we knew the number of people in the waiting room.  
Results and Discussion 
A chi-square test indicated a significant relationship between condition and choice, χ2 (3, 
N = 189) = 22.83, p < .01. For the unhealthy Reese’s, 0% (0 out of 46) of the waiting students 
took a cup when they themselves had to scoop the snack from the bowl, but 31.9% (15 out of 47) 
took one when it was already filled into cups. Thus, as predicted, people were significantly more 
likely to take the unhealthy snack when less versus more physical involvement was required to 
get the snack, χ2 (1, N = 93) = 17.51, p < .01. For the healthy dried fruit, however, 6.4% (3 out of 
47) took the snack when they themselves had to scoop it, and 16.3% (8 out of 48) took a cup 
when the snack was already filled into cups. This difference was not significant; people were 
similarly likely to have the healthy snack regardless of how much physical involvement was 
required, χ2 (1, N = 96) = 2.34, p > .12. Time of day did not impact this interaction pattern. 
These results support the hypothesis that requiring less physical involvement to help 
themselves to unhealthy food encourages people to take it, compared to when more physical 
involvement is required. The fact that this effect operated selectively on unhealthy food suggests 
that it did not occur because the lower physical involvement might take less effort. Scooping the 
snack into a sampling cup oneself involved equal amounts of effort in both the healthy and the 
unhealthy food conditions, but it only shifted people’s propensity to have the unhealthy snack.  
 16 
 
These results suggest that how much physical involvement is required to help oneself to 
food (less versus more) may have quite a powerful effect. On the one hand, only a minority of 
people opted to have the snack. On the other hand, a waiting room is not a meal context; people 
did not enter the situation expecting to eat anything. Thus, the measurable impact in this type of 
situation is notable and important, as much human consumption is unplanned (Wansink 2006).  
Study 1 provides initial evidence that requiring lower physical involvement in helping 
oneself to a given food may drive consumers towards unhealthy choices. While our design 
ensures that the effect does not in some way require an experimenter’s social presence, one 
limitation of this naturalistic setting is the use of aggregate data. Further, this study examined 
only the choice between taking food and forgoing it as the focal outcome, but portion size may 
be more crucial in contributing to the obesity epidemic than specific food choice (Chandon and 
Wansink 2012). We now turn to a more controlled laboratory experiment in which we collect 
responses at the individual level and measure portion choice.  
 
STUDY 2: ORDINAL PORTION SIZE DECISIONS FOR HEALTHY AND UNHEALTHY 
FOOD AS A FUNCTION OF PHYSICAL INVOLVEMENT REQUIRED 
 
Study 1 demonstrated that requiring less (versus more) physical involvement in helping 
oneself to food increases people’s likelihood of partaking of an unhealthy food (H1, H3). Study 2 
tests whether requiring less (versus more) physical involvement in helping oneself to food leads 
consumers to select larger portions (H1), and if this effect is reduced for healthy food (H3). 
Further, participants in all conditions choose from the same set of discrete portion sizes.    
Method and Procedure 
 17 
 
Seventy-five undergraduates at a large public university in the Midwest (40% female) 
participated in the study in exchange for partial course credit. The average age in the sample was 
20.77 years, with ages ranging from 19 to 47 years. 
Participants were randomly assigned to a 2 (healthiness: healthy vs. unhealthy) × 2 
(physical involvement: less vs. more) between-subjects design. Participants first imagined a 
situation in which they were about to buy a snack perceived as healthy or unhealthy from a snack 
bar with a specific serving set-up—pre-filled containers or a bulk station where people serve 
themselves, the former of which requires less physical involvement than the latter. Both types are 
common options on campus. The snacks, almonds and M&Ms, were selected based on a pretest 
in which 35 student volunteers had rated various snacks for their healthiness and liking on 1–7 
point scales. They viewed almonds as healthier (M = 6.29, SD = .99) than M&Ms (M = 1.43, SD 
= .56; t(34) = 24.11, p < .01), but liked almonds (M = 4.34, SD = 1.73) just as well as M&Ms (M 
= 4.97, SD = 1.89; t(34) = -1.34, p > .15). Further, the M&M rating was significantly below the 
midpoint of the healthiness scale (t(34) = -22.00, p < .01), while the almonds rating was 
significantly above it (t(34) = 16.69, p < .01). Participants read: 
Imagine you are getting a snack at a snack bar (e.g., in a cafeteria). You are really 
looking forward to a snack right now and you decide to go for almonds [M&Ms]. As this 
is the type of place where you serve yourself the snack into a container [the snack comes 
filled into containers] of a specified size (paid by weight), you will need to select which 
one of the available serving sizes you would like to take [get]. 
 
Next, participants chose a portion size from seven ordinal response options ranging from 
4 oz. to 16 oz. (increasing in 2 ounce increments) and a no choice option 0=none at all (adapted 
from McFerran et al. 2010b). To ensure that students across conditions understood these size 
options in the same manner, they were told:  
These are the available sizes of snack cups for the almonds [M&Ms]. 
For each size, the chart tells you the exact amount of almonds [M&Ms] that you will get 
 18 
 
if you select it. That is, you will have no less and no more almonds [M&Ms] than the 
amount specified! Please select the serving size that you would like to serve yourself of 
the [get of the pre-filled] almonds [M&Ms]: 
 
Lastly, participants reported demographics, food allergies, and dietary restrictions.  
Results and Discussion 
We conducted a 2 (healthiness: healthy vs. unhealthy) × 2 (physical involvement: less vs. 
more) ANOVA on our dependent variable, portion size choice. Seven participants indicated 
restrictions relevant to the food in their condition (e.g., nut allergy in the almond condition, 
lactose intolerance in the M&M condition) and were excluded from the data set, leaving 68 data 
points for the analysis. 
Neither the main effect for physical involvement (F(1, 64) = 1.69, p > .15) nor for the 
snack’s healthiness (F(1, 64) = .84, p > .3) were significant. However, the predicted interaction 
between healthiness and physical involvement was significant (F(1, 64) = 6.18, p < .05). 
Following up on the interaction, planned contrasts showed that when people thought 
about getting healthy almonds, they selected similar portions whether they had to serve 
themselves (M = 6.11 ounces, SD = 2.87) or the snack was already served for them (M = 5.29 
ounces, SD = 2.22; F(1, 64) = .72; p > .4). By contrast, when people thought about having 
unhealthy M&Ms, they selected significantly smaller portions when they had to serve themselves 
(M = 3.77 ounces, SD = 2.64) than when the snack was already served for them (M = 6.38 
ounces, SD = 3.52; F(1, 64) = 6.96, p = .01; see figure 2). This result supports H1 and H3. 
Insert figure 2 about here 
 
These results align with and complement those from studies 1. Less physical involvement 
in helping oneself to a snack nudged people towards unhealthy choices by encouraging them to 
select larger portions of an unhealthy snack. The detailed portion description in ounces across 
 19 
 
conditions ensured unambiguous expectations of the exact amount of food associated with every 
given size option. Again, the effect emerged selectively for the unhealthy snack; hence, the 
larger portion choice for low physical involvement participants is not attributable to lower 
required effort or fear of being served too little.  
The finding that less physical involvement in helping oneself to a snack food encouraged 
people to choose larger portions of candy (but not nuts) is suggestive of the idea that being less 
physically involved in helping oneself to food may attenuate guilt for unhealthy eating, since 
feeling guilty is a common response to eating unhealthy foods and is one factor that restrains 
consumers from overeating (Vohs and Heatherton 2000). In the next two studies, we test the 
hypothesized process: rejection of responsibility to maintain positive self-evaluative feelings. In 
study 3, we use fixed portion sizes to examine how responsibility and self-evaluative feelings 
vary by physical involvement in helping oneself to the food (less versus more) and the food’s 
healthiness. In study 4, we allow people to make their own portion decision, to examine how the 
choices observed in study 2 will eventually influence their eating-related self-evaluative feelings. 
 
STUDY 3: SENSE OF RESPONSIBILITY AS AN UNDERLYING PROCESS USING 
FIXED PORTIONS 
 
Study 3 investigates the proposed process and tests our hypotheses that people feel more 
positively about themselves when they are less (versus more) physically involved in helping 
themselves to unhealthy food, and that this is because they attribute to themselves less 
responsibility for their consumption (H2). In other words, we test a moderated mediation model 
in which less (versus more) physical involvement leads people to reject responsibility for 
unhealthy (but not healthy) eating, which in turn allows them to feel more positively about 
 20 
 
themselves (see figure 1, panel B). Unlike the first two studies, where we measured people’s 
choice of consuming versus not consuming (study 1) or choice of portion size (study 2), here we 
use a fixed, equal portion of food in both conditions, to isolate the effect on self-evaluative 
feelings. We use the context of being served by a friend (versus by oneself) as our 
operationalization of less (versus more) physical involvement.  
Method and Procedure 
One hundred and sixty US-based participants were recruited through Amazon’s 
Mechanical Turk platform (31.9% female) for nominal payment. The average age in the sample 
was 28.03 years, with ages ranging from 18 to 74 years. Participants completed the study on their 
personal computer and were randomly assigned to a 2 (healthiness: healthy vs. unhealthy) × 2 
(physical involvement: less vs. more) between-subjects design. First, they were instructed to 
imagine that friends had invited them for a meal cooked from scratch, and that they were ready 
to eat. Next, participants in the more [less] physical involvement conditions read: 
Once you have sat down at the dinner table, you serve yourself [your friend serves you] 
the food onto your plate. Imagine that you fill [your friend fills] your plate with a portion 
of the food that they cooked. After you have helped yourself [your friend has helped you] 
to the food, you start eating from your plate. This is what you served yourself [what your 
friend served you]: 
 
Participants were then shown a photograph of either a plate of healthy foods (grilled chicken, 
vegetables, wild rice, and a granola bar) or a plate of unhealthy foods (cheeseburger, French 
fries, baked beans, and a cookie). Portion size was held constant whether one served the food 
oneself or was served (see figure 3). To effectively hold portion size constant, we chose a 
hypothetical study for two reasons. First, it is unrealistic (and ethically problematic) to force people 
to consume a sizable portion of food. Second, forcing a portion size on participants without any 
choice in the matter risks impacting their sense of control in additional ways, but having them 
imagine choosing and eating any particular portion avoids these issues.  
 21 
 
Insert figure 3 about here 
 
Measures 
 
Healthiness.  Subsequently, participants rated on a 0–100 scale how healthy, nutritious, 
and wholesome they thought the food was, yielding a “healthiness index” (α = .95). They also 
estimated how many calories this meal had.  
Responsibility.  Next, respondents rated on a 0–100 scale how much responsibility they 
felt for their consumption.  
Positive self-evaluative feelings.  Then they rated on a 0–100 scale how good as well as 
how justified, guilty, and shameful they would feel about themselves after eating this meal, 
which yielded a composite index for “positive self-evaluative feelings” (α = .91).  
Lastly, as an attention check, participants were asked to recall who had served the food in 
the scenario and what kind of food it had been, and they reported demographic information.  
Results  
We conducted 2 (healthiness: healthy vs. unhealthy) × 2 (physical involvement: less vs. 
more) ANOVAs on the healthiness index, calorie estimate, positive self-evaluative feelings 
index, and responsibility.  
Manipulation checks.  For the healthiness index, the analyses yielded the predicted main 
effect for healthiness of the food (F(1, 156) = 779.57, p < .01). As anticipated, the food was 
perceived as significantly healthier in the healthy condition (M = 85.61, SD = 10.02) than in the 
unhealthy condition (M = 28.45, SD = 15.41). Neither the main effect of physical involvement 
(F(1, 156) = .26, p > .6) nor the interaction between healthiness and physical involvement (F(1, 
156) = .63, p > .4) were significant. There was a similar significant main effect for healthiness 
on calorie estimation (F(1, 154) = 78.96, p < .01), such that people expected more calories for 
 22 
 
the unhealthy meal (M = 1115.12, SD = 417.23) than the healthy meal (M = 627.35, SD = 
286.64). Moreover, the cheeseburger rating was significantly below the midpoint of the 
healthiness scale (t(76) = -12.27, p < .01), while the grilled chicken rating was significantly 
above it (t(82) = 32.39, p < .01). Thus, the healthiness manipulation was successful.  
Responsibility. For responsibility, the analysis revealed a significant main effect for 
physical involvement (F(1, 156) = 6.45, p < .05), such that people who imagined serving 
themselves assumed greater responsibility (M = 87.32, SD = 14.77) than those who imagined 
being served (M = 80.80, SD = 18.62). There was also a main effect of healthiness (F(1, 156) = 
4.39, p < .05), such that people assumed greater responsibility for healthy chicken (M = 86.72, 
SD = 14.70) than for unhealthy cheeseburgers (M = 81.02, SD = 19.03). More important, these 
two main effects were qualified by a significant interaction (F(1, 156) = 4.07, p < .05).  
Following up on this interaction, planned contrast tests showed that for healthy chicken, 
those who imagined being served by someone else assumed virtually as much responsibility (M 
= 86.02, SD = 12.73) as those who imagined serving themselves (M = 87.44, SD = 16.62; F(1, 
156) = .15, p > .6). Conversely, for unhealthy cheeseburgers, those who imagined being served 
by another person accepted much less responsibility (M = 75.33, SD = 22.12) than those who 
imagined serving themselves (M = 87.19, SD = 12.64; F(1, 156) = 9.96, p < .01; see figure 4), 
signaling a self-serving attribution. These results are consistent with H2 and H3. 
Insert figure 4 about here 
 
Positive self-evaluative feelings.  For positive self-evaluative feelings, the analysis 
yielded a main effect for healthiness of the food (F(1, 155) = 176.36, p < .01), such that those 
who imagined eating healthy chicken felt better about themselves (M = 86.28, SD = 17.77) than 
those who imagined eating unhealthy burgers (M = 48.99, SD = 17.73). This effect was qualified 
 23 
 
by a significant interaction between healthiness and physical involvement (F(1, 155) = 3.88, p = 
.05). The main effect for physical involvement was not significant (p > .2).  
Following up on the significant interaction, planned contrasts showed that for healthy 
chicken, people expressed similarly high positive self-evaluative feelings whether they imagined 
serving themselves (M = 87.36, SD = 17.86) or being served by someone else (M = 85.20, SD = 
17.82; F(1, 155) = .30, p > .5). In contrast, for unhealthy cheeseburgers, they had more positive 
(or rather, less negative) self-evaluative feelings when they imagined being served by someone 
else (M = 53.51, SD = 17.71) versus serving themselves (M = 44.47, SD = 17.76; F(1, 155) = 
4.97, p < .05; see figure 5). These results support H2 and H3.   
Insert figure 5 about here 
 
Test for mediation.  We tested a moderated mediation model in which feelings of 
responsibility for one’s consumption mediate the effects of physical involvement in helping 
oneself to the food (less versus more) on positive self-evaluative feelings, and healthiness 
moderates the effect of physical involvement on feelings of responsibility (figure 1, panel B). 
Accordingly, we submitted our data to a moderated mediation analysis employing Hayes’ (2013) 
process macro, specifically testing a model in which path a, from independent variable to 
mediator, is moderated (model 7).  
In line with our theory, a bootstrap analysis testing the indirect effect of physical 
involvement on positive self-evaluative feelings through attributions of responsibility, 
conditional on healthiness of the food, showed that for unhealthy food, responsibility mediated 
the observed effect (b = 17.76, SE = 9.26; 95% CI = 4.03 – 40.50). In contrast, for healthy food, 
responsibility did not mediate the effect (b = 1.84, SE = 5.08; 95% CI = -6.49 – 13.88).  
Discussion 
 24 
 
Study 3 shows that in order to feel better about their eating decisions, people make self-
attributions of responsibility, rejecting responsibility selectively for unhealthy eating when they 
are less physically involved in helping themselves to the food, operationalized as being served by 
a friend or serving oneself.2 In study 3, we held portion size constant to extract the impact of less 
(versus more) physical involvement on self-evaluative feelings for a given portion of food. 
Having established that less physical involvement in helping oneself to a given amount of 
unhealthy food allows people to reject responsibility and thus feel better, the next study tests the 
full model comprehensively. That is, we examine whether less physical involvement leads 
people to choose larger portions of unhealthy food because they feel less responsible and thus 
“can get away with it,” without feeling bad about themselves. Accordingly, in study 4, we let 
people choose their own portion size to test whether a lowered sense of responsibility, due to less 
(versus more) physical involvement in helping themselves to unhealthy food, allows them to 
choose larger portions without feeling any worse.  
 
STUDY 4: FULL TEST OF SENSE OF RESPONSIBILITY AS PROCESS USING 
PORTION CHOICE AS A COVARIATE  
 
Study 1 showed that requiring less physical involvement to help oneself to food 
encourages consumers to partake of unhealthy food, and study 2 that it leads them to choose 
larger portion sizes of unhealthy foods. Study 3 showed that, for a fixed portion of food, being 
less physically involved in helping oneself to the food allows consumers to reject responsibility 
for unhealthy eating, and thus to feel more positively about themselves. In line with these results, 
we hypothesized that the choice effects in study 2 occur because when consumers are less 
 25 
 
physical involved in helping themselves to a food, they can essentially “get away with” a larger 
portion without feeling any worse. Study 4 formally tests this overarching idea, unifying H1, H2, 
and H3 in one model, in the context of being served by a server. 
Method and Procedure 
One hundred and seventy-nine undergraduates at a large public university in the Midwest 
(61.5% female) participated in the study in exchange for partial course credit. The average age in 
the sample was 20.60 years, with ages ranging from 19 to 30 years. 
Participants were randomly assigned to a 2 (healthiness: healthy vs. unhealthy) × 2 
(physical involvement: less vs. more) between-subjects design. They were instructed:  
Imagine you are invited to a catered event. It is time to eat, so you walk up to the food 
station. You check out what is offered, and you decide to have some macaroni and cheese 
[roasted vegetables]. Then you serve yourself [a server serves you] the macaroni and 
cheese [roasted vegetables] onto your plate. Imagine taking the serving spoon and [the 
server] scooping macaroni and cheese [roasted vegetables] onto your plate. 
 
Measures 
 
Portion size choice.  Subsequently, participants indicated which portion size they would 
choose in this situation by selecting one of ten images, depicting a white plate with one, two, 
(…), ten, scoops of a particular food (see figure 6). This visual depiction ensured that people 
across conditions had the same understanding of the portion sizes, and it helped us eliminate any 
potential uncertainty regarding portion size, inferences about servers’ motivation to over- or 
underserve, or personal skills with respect to being able to serve oneself a desired portion size. 
Insert figure 6 about here 
 
Responsibility.  Subsequently, participants rated on a 0–100 scale how responsible they 
felt for their consumption and to what degree they felt in control over their consumption. These 
two items were combined into a “responsibility index” (r = .41, p < .001).  
 26 
 
Positive self-evaluative feelings.  They also rated on a 1 (not at all) – 9 (very much) scale 
how good, how justified, how guilty, and how shameful they would feel about themselves after 
eating this meal, yielding a composite index for “positive self-evaluative feelings” (α = .6)3.  
Healthiness.  Lastly, participants indicated on a 0–7 scale how healthy they thought the 
food in the scenario was, serving as a manipulation check. Finally, they reported demographic 
information and any dietary restrictions and food allergies.  
Results  
We conducted 2 (healthiness: healthy vs. unhealthy) × 2 (physical involvement: less vs. 
more) ANOVAs on our dependent variables; healthiness, portion choice, and the responsibility 
and positive self-evaluative feelings indices. Five participants indicated dietary restrictions 
pertaining to the food in their condition (e.g., gluten- or dairy-free diet in the macaroni and 
cheese condition) and were excluded from the data set, leaving 174 data points for the analysis. 
Manipulation check.  For the healthiness rating, the analyses yielded the predicted main 
effect for healthiness of the food (F(1, 170) = 297.90, p < .05). As anticipated, the food was 
perceived as significantly healthier in the healthy condition (M = 5.90, SD = 1.05) than in the 
unhealthy condition (M = 2.33, SD = 1.02). Neither the effect of physical involvement (F(1, 170) 
= .21, p > .7) nor the interaction between healthiness and physical involvement (F(1, 170) = 1.72, 
p > .15) were significant. Further, the macaroni and cheese rating was significantly below the 
midpoint of the scale (t(83) = -10.46, p < .01), while the vegetable rating was significantly above 
it (t(89) = 21.69, p < .01). Thus, the healthiness manipulation was successful.  
Portion choice.  For portion choice, the analyses revealed a main effect for healthiness 
(F(1, 170) = 10.44, p = .001), such that people selected larger portions of the unhealthy macaroni 
and cheese (M = 4.58, SD = 2.25) than the healthy roasted vegetables (M = 3.71, SD = 1.38). 
 27 
 
The main effect of physical involvement was also significant (F(1, 170) = 5.50, p < .05), such 
that people chose larger portions when they were served by a server (M = 4.44, SD = 2.11) than 
when they were serving themselves (M = 3.83, SD = 1.61). More importantly, the interaction 
between healthiness and physical involvement was also significant (F(1, 170) = 4.76, p < .05). 
Following up on the interaction, planned contrasts showed that for healthy vegetables, 
people selected similar portions regardless of whether they had to serve themselves (M = 3.69, 
SD = 1.49) or the food was served for them (M = 3.73, SD = 1.29; F(1, 170) = .01; p > .9). By 
contrast, for unhealthy macaroni and cheese, people selected a significantly larger portion when 
they were served by a server (M = 5.22, SD = 2.55) than when they had to serve themselves (M 
= 3.98, SD = 1.74; F(1, 170) = 9.90, p < .01; see figure 7). These results are consistent with study 
2 and with our proposed H1 and H3. 
Insert figure 7 about here 
 
Responsibility.  For responsibility, the analysis revealed a main effect of physical 
involvement (F(1, 170) = 8.28, p < .01), such that people felt less responsible when served by a 
server (M = 76.63, SD = 23.91) than when serving themselves (M = 85.34, SD = 15.70). The 
effect of healthiness was not significant (F(1, 170) = 2.37, p > .1), but critically, the interaction 
between physical involvement and healthiness was significant (F(1, 170) = 5.51, p < .05). 
Following up on the interaction, planned contrasts showed that for healthy vegetables, 
people felt similarly responsible for their consumption regardless of whether they had to serve 
themselves the food (M = 83.81, SD = 15.63) or the food was served for them (M = 82.21, SD = 
20.05; F(1, 170) = .15; p > .7). By contrast, for unhealthy macaroni and cheese they accepted 
significantly less responsibility when they were served by a server (M = 70.51, SD = 26.44), 
compared to when they had to serve themselves (M = 86.24, SD = 15.85; F(1, 170) = 13.19, p < 
 28 
 
.001; see figure 8). These results replicate study 3 and support H2 and H3. 
Insert figure 8 about here 
 
Positive self-evaluative feelings.  For positive self-evaluative feelings, there was a main 
effect of healthiness (F(1, 170) = 7.72; p < .01), such that people felt less positively about 
themselves when having unhealthy macaroni and cheese (M = 6.45, SD = 1.50) than when 
having healthy roasted vegetables (M = 7.01, SD = 1.14). However, there was no significant 
main effect for physical involvement (F(1, 170) = .24, p > .6), and no interaction between 
physical involvement and healthiness (F(1, 170) = 1.4, p > .2). This result is consistent with our 
theory: when people feel responsible for their consumption (as they do when they serve 
themselves), they should choose smaller portion sizes so that they can maintain positive self-
evaluative feelings. This proposed process (as depicted in figure 1, panel B) is tested next. 
Tests for mediation.  We tested the two moderated mediation models, corresponding to 
panels A and B, respectively, in figure 1. First, we tested the basic model depicted in figure 1, 
panel A, in which portion choice is variable and up to the consumer. We tested whether feelings 
of responsibility mediate the effect of physical involvement on portion choice, and whether 
healthiness moderates the effect of physical involvement on sense of responsibility. We 
submitted our data to a moderated mediation analysis employing Hayes’ (2013) process macro, 
testing a model in which path a, from independent variable to mediator, is moderated (model 7).  
In line with our theory, a bootstrap analysis with 10,000 iterations testing the indirect 
effect of physical involvement through feelings of responsibility on portion choice, conditional 
on healthiness, showed that for unhealthy food, responsibility mediated the observed effect (b = -
.29, SE = .14; 95% CI = -.66 – -.08). In contrast, for healthy food, responsibility did not mediate 
the effect (b = -.03, SE = .08; 95% CI = -.22 – .10). These results align with H1, H2, and H3. 
 29 
 
Next, we tested the model depicted in figure 1, panel B, in which portion choice must be 
either held constant or taken into account, because according to our theory it covaries with 
physical involvement and the food’s healthiness. That is, we tested whether feelings of 
responsibility mediate the effect of physical involvement in helping oneself to the food (less 
versus more) on positive self-evaluative feelings, contingent on the change in portion choice 
induced by physical involvement.4 We conducted a moderated mediation analysis as detailed 
previously (model 7), but took into account portion choice by using it as a covariate on path b.  
In line with our theory, a bootstrap analysis with 10,000 iterations testing the indirect 
effect of physical involvement through feelings of responsibility on self-evaluative feelings, 
conditional on healthiness and using portion choice as a covariate, showed that for unhealthy 
food, responsibility mediated the observed effect (b = .29, SE = .10; 95% CI = .13 – .52). In 
contrast, for healthy food, responsibility did not mediate (b = .03, SE = .07; 95% CI = -.12 – .18). 
Although any mediation test relies on correlation, these results are consistent with H2 and H3. 
Discussion  
Study 4 provides comprehensive evidence for the full conceptual process model that we 
propose. Being less (versus more) physically involved in helping oneself to unhealthy (versus 
healthy) food caused people to reject responsibility, leading them to choose larger portions but 
enabling them to maintain a more positive self-evaluation. Indeed, the results of a mediation 
analysis were consistent with the idea that thanks to a lower sense of responsibility people may 
allow themselves to choose larger portions of unhealthy foods without compromising their self-
evaluation. As such, study 4 supports the overall model suggested by our theory.  
 
STUDY 5: CONTINUOUS PORTION SIZE DECISIONS FOR HEALTHY AND 
 30 
 
UNHEALTHY FOOD AS A FUNCTION OF PHYSICAL INVOLVEMENT REQUIRED  
 
Studies 1 and 2 demonstrated that requiring less (versus more) physical involvement in 
helping oneself to food increases people’s likelihood of partaking of an unhealthy food and 
selecting larger portions, respectively. Studies 3 and 4 provided evidence that this may be driven 
by a reduced sense of responsibility for unhealthy decisions, protecting their self-evaluative 
feelings. Study 5 was designed to provide insight into how the dynamics studied in the previous 
experiments play out in a more externally valid setting assessing real consumption (i.e., beyond 
choice). We use being served by a server (versus serving oneself) to operationalize less (versus 
more) physical involvement, to test whether less physical involvement in helping oneself to food 
ultimately causes people to obtain and consume larger amounts of unhealthy food. 
Method and Procedure 
One hundred and eighty-four undergraduates at a Canadian university (56.8% female) 
participated in the study for partial course credit. The average age in the sample was 21.28 years, 
with ages ranging from 19 to 37 years. Participants were randomly assigned to a 2 (healthiness: 
healthy vs. unhealthy) × 2 (physical involvement: less vs. more) between-subjects design. Under 
the guise of a taste test for a cafeteria, they read that they would have the chance to sample one 
of two food options. People in the healthy [unhealthy] condition could choose between 
multigrain and flaxseed bread [cranberry-orange and banana-chocolate cake].  
Note that the foods were selected based on a pretest in which 30 students from a different 
university had rated various foods for their healthiness and liking on 1–7 point scales. Students 
viewed breads as healthier (M = 5.20, SD = 1.35) than cakes (M = 2.03, SD = 1.19; t(29) = 8.82, 
p < .01), but liked breads (M = 4.63, SD = 1.71) just as well as cakes (M = 4.80, SD = 1.47; t(29) 
= -.39, p > .7). The cakes rating was significantly below the midpoint of the healthiness scale 
 31 
 
(t(29) = -9.06, p < .01), while the bread rating was significantly above it (t(29) = 4.87, p < .01). 
They read: “When you have decided, please cut and serve yourself [let the researcher 
serve you] a slice of the bread [cake].” They also read that they would have to leave any uneaten 
food in the laboratory after the session and could only try one of the two options. Next, those in 
the more physical involvement condition cut themselves a slice of the cake [bread] they selected. 
Those in the less physical involvement conditions were served a pre-cut slice of their chosen 
cake [bread] by a research assistant. Lastly, participants completed mock taste evaluation 
questions and demographics. 
We measured the weight of the slice each participant served herself by recording the 
weight of the loaf of bread [cake] pre- and post-session. We pre-determined the weight of the 
other-served slice by mimicking popular café chains: 100g cake slices (based on Starbucks’ 100-
126g for slices of loaf cakes), and 45g bread slices (based on Panera Bread’s 55g slices of whole 
grain breads). Note that the slightly lower weights for the slices served by a server make for a 
more conservative test: if people serve themselves an amount of cake that is even smaller than 
this modest pre-selected other-served size, we can be more confident about the effect. 
Additionally, we measured the amount each participant actually consumed, subtracting 
the weight of each person’s leftovers from the amount served. The specific choice between the 
two healthy [unhealthy] options is irrelevant to the hypothesis and thus was not analyzed. 
Results and Discussion 
We conducted 2 (healthiness: healthy vs. unhealthy) × 2 (physical involvement: less vs. 
more) ANOVAs on the amount (grams) served, and the amount (grams) consumed.  
Amount served.  For amount served, the analysis yielded a main effect for healthiness of 
the food (F(1, 180) = 90.5, p < .01), such that the portions of those tasting unhealthy cake (M = 
 32 
 
73.19g, SD = 37.08) were larger than of those tasting healthy bread (M = 44.56g, SD = 16.43). 
There was also a main effect of physical involvement (F(1, 180) = 96.27, p < .01), such that the 
portions of those serving themselves (M = 43.46g, SD = 30.76) were smaller than of those served 
by the research assistant (M = 67.20g, SD = 26.72). More importantly, the predicted interaction 
between healthiness and physical involvement was significant F(1, 180) = 65.13, p < .01). 
Following up on the significant interaction, planned contrasts showed that when tasting 
healthy bread people’s portion size were about equal, whether they served themselves (M = 
41.21g, SD = 26.34) or were served by someone else (M = 46.57g, SD = 3.40; F(1, 180) = 1.68, 
p = .2). In contrast, when tasting unhealthy cake, people’s portions were significantly smaller 
when they served themselves (M = 45.65g, SD = 34.72) than when they were served by someone 
else (M = 100.72g, SD = 4.82; F(1, 180) = 145.53, p < .01). This result supports H1 and H3. 
Amount consumed.  Not surprisingly, amount served and amount consumed were strongly 
related (r(183) = .69, p < .01). For amount consumed, the analysis yielded a main effect for 
healthiness of the food (F(1, 180) = 62.91, p < .01), such that those tasting unhealthy cake (M = 
51.39g, SD = 39.39) ate larger amounts than those tasting healthy bread (M = 17.08g, SD = 
17.83). There was also a main effect of physical involvement (F(1, 180) = 4.72, p < .05), such 
that those served by the research assistant ate larger amounts (M = 33.22g, SD = 36.55) than 
those serving themselves (M = 30.37g, SD = 29.80). More importantly, the predicted interaction 
between healthiness and physical involvement was significant (F(1, 180) = 19.37, p < .01). 
Following up on the significant interaction, planned contrasts showed that when tasting 
healthy bread people ate marginally more when they served themselves (M = 22.90g, SD = 
23.20) than when they were served by someone else (M = 13.58g, SD = 12.62; F(1, 180) = 2.78, 
p = .1), suggesting a slight self-enhancement effect not present in our other studies. In contrast, 
 33 
 
when tasting unhealthy cake, they ate significantly larger amounts when served by someone else 
(M = 65.13g, SD = 40.18) than when serving themselves (M = 37.65g, SD = 33.79; F(1, 180) = 
19.67, p < .01). This result supports H1 and H3. 
Reinforcing the choice results from studies 2 and 4, these results show that consumers’ 
portion size and eating decisions depend jointly on whether the food is healthy or unhealthy and 
on the level of physical involvement required to obtain it. When the food was healthy, 
consumers’ portion and consumption amounts were less affected by who served the food (self 
versus other). When the food was unhealthy, both portion sizes and consumption amounts were 
significantly larger when participants were served by someone else than when they served 
themselves. This pattern emerged even though participants had chosen the food themselves. 
Again, the results are in line with the idea that being less physically involved in helping oneself 
to one’s food may enable a self-serving discharge of responsibility, causing consumers to 
increase the amount of unhealthy food they are served and subsequently eat.  
Although it is most ecologically valid to pre-determine the amounts served by a server 
based on actual common portions in the industry, one may be concerned that our results could 
depend on the (arbitrary) industry-set amounts being overly large. We fully acknowledge that the 
effect found here may disappear or be reversed if the pre-determined slice sizes were set 
considerably smaller. However, portion oversizing affects both healthy and unhealthy foods 
(Smiciklas-Wright et al. 2003), meaning that the focal interaction result may not be affected 
much. In addition, our results held similarly for portion choice and consumption, the latter of 
which all participants had full control over, further suggesting that the effect is not purely driven 
by the pre-determined portion sizes in the low physical involvement conditions.  
 
 
 34 
 
GENERAL DISCUSSION 
 
The findings of various studies show that eating out is associated with more extensive 
consumption and weight gain (Bezerra, Curioni, and Sichieri 2012; Todd, Mancino, and Lin 
2010), and the complex connection between eating out and obesity has been studied from a 
variety of angles. In this paper, we propose that one variable that is often associated with eating 
away from home but has been neglected thus far can contribute to obesity: the mere 
circumstance of being less, rather than more, physically involved in helping oneself to one’s 
food. We argue that two common aspects of eating away from home—being less involved in 
portion choice and the physical act of serving—can be associated with consumers abdicating 
their personal responsibility for what they eat. 
Based on the literature on self-serving attributions, we made the novel prediction that 
lower physical involvement in the process of helping oneself to food enables people to attribute 
responsibility away from themselves. As a result, less (versus more) physical involvement in 
helping oneself to unhealthy food causes consumers to feel better about themselves. We 
predicted that anticipating these effects should lead consumers to adjust their consumption, 
including their (a) decision to consume or forego unhealthy foods and (b) portion size selection.  
Five experimental laboratory studies with college student and Amazon Turk populations 
provide support for this model. First, we demonstrated the predicted effects: participants were 
indeed more likely to partake of unhealthy snacks instead of forgoing them (study 1), and they 
also chose larger portions of unhealthy snacks (study 2) when less (versus more) physical 
involvement was required to obtain those snacks. Next, we provided evidence for the 
hypothesized process: participants rejected responsibility when they were less (versus more) 
physically involved in helping themselves to a fixed portion of an unhealthy meal, and as a result 
 35 
 
they felt more positive self-evaluative feelings (study 3). Correspondingly, our data was 
consistent with the theory that larger portion choices of unhealthy foods under less physical 
involvement occur because feeling less responsible allows them to select larger portions without 
feeling bad afterwards, in spite of choosing a larger portion (study 4). Although these 
psychological mechanisms were measured in hypothetical scenario studies, the consistent pattern 
across studies, including the moderation by healthiness, provides strong process evidence. One 
limitation may be that in studies 3 and 4, participants rated their sense of responsibility before 
their self-evaluative feelings, so it is not entirely clear to what degree the impact on self-
evaluative feelings is spontaneous. However, the effect on portion choice emerged spontaneously 
when participants made their portion size choice without (studies 2 and 5) or before (study 4) 
rating their responsibility. This suggests that at least the ascription of responsibility, and likely 
the impact on self-evaluative feelings, occur extemporaneously.  
Critically, these effects of lower physical involvement in helping oneself to food on food 
and portion size choice, attributed responsibility, and self-evaluative feelings arose 
independently of making a choice, emerging even when people chose food or portion size 
themselves. This research offers theoretical insight into consumers’ eating decisions and suggests 
a new and actionable tool to nudge consumers towards healthier eating.  
The asymmetrical nature of the findings across healthy versus unhealthy food is also 
consistent with the self-serving attribution. People engage in more extensive causal reasoning for 
negative events than positive events (see Alicke and Sedikides 2009; Bohner et al. 1988), so any 
motivated reasoning should be more pronounced for unhealthy than for healthy food. In addition, 
one might argue that claiming just as much responsibility for healthy eating when one is 
passively served as when one actively serves the food, is also a self-serving attribution.  
 36 
 
In a recent review by Wansink and Chandon (2014), the authors argue that three major 
categories of factors influencing food consumption, namely sensory, emotional, and normative 
factors, operate chiefly by biasing our consumption monitoring. Further, it has been suggested 
that attention to the amount consumed is key to exerting self-control in eating (Redden and Haws 
2013). Is less (versus more) physical involvement in helping oneself to food merely another way 
to reduce monitoring or attention? While it is possible that being less physically involved reduces 
people’s attention to the precise amounts, there is reason to believe that this is not the primary 
driver underlying our findings. For instance, in studies 2 and 4, all participants selected their 
portion size. They all faced the same decision task in the same fashion and saw a description of 
the portion in ounces or as an image, respectively. Thus, their level of monitoring at this decision 
stage was most likely equivalent, yet one group chose larger portions. Further, if reduced 
monitoring was the primary driver (rather than motivated reasoning), perceived responsibility 
and portion sizes should be affected for unhealthy and healthy foods. This is not what we find. It 
is conceivable, however, that being less physically involved in helping themselves to food allows 
consumers to turn a blind eye and deliberately stop monitoring, ultimately contributing to their 
ability to reject responsibility. Future research from a cognitive angle could test if attention to 
portion size as well as to the amount consumed differs by physical involvement and healthiness, 
using techniques such as eye-tracking to quantify the role of visual monitoring.    
One limitation of our approach is its focus on foods perceived as (un)healthy, a subjective 
judgment that may in itself be subject to motivated reasoning in certain circumstances. While we 
did not find physical involvement to impact perceptions of healthiness, future research may seek 
to determine when consumers are more likely to distort their subjective inferences about the 
food, versus when they are more likely to resort to other types of motivated reasoning (such as 
 37 
 
reattribution of responsibility or licensing). Further, our laboratory studies used fairly modest 
portion sizes, and it is possible that the sizes perceived to be “right” vary more outside of the lab. 
We believe this yields a stronger test of our hypothesis, but larger portions outside the lab may 
be influenced by additional factors, such as implicit theories linking “unhealthy” with “tasty” 
(Raghunathan et al. 2006) or “healthy” with “less filling” (Finkelstein and Fishbach 2011).  
Our studies show that being more physically involved in helping oneself to unhealthy 
food leads to more negative self-evaluative feelings than being less physically involved, even if 
the foods are identical. Further, participants seem to anticipate this effect and adjust their 
consumption accordingly. What might these results mean for a person’s eating experience? How 
might this effect be implicated in the rise in obesity associated with the increase in eating out? 
First, if less physical involvement in helping oneself to a given food leads to larger portion size 
choices, it indirectly contributes to greater consumption, given that portion size is one of the best 
predictors of intake (Diliberti et al. 2004; Rozin et al. 2003). Second, if being less physically 
involved in helping oneself to food affords individuals the motivated reasoning necessary to 
protect a positive self-view, then being served a lavish meal allows them to indulge without 
feeling badly about it. Avoiding such negative self-evaluative feelings may then afford unhealthy 
eating on the next occasion. Thus, as people are usually less physically involved in helping 
themselves to food when eating away from home, doing so may increase, on average, the 
frequency and size of unhealthy choices and thereby contribute to weight gain. While our 
laboratory studies provide evidence for our basic premise and an underlying psychological 
mechanism, future research may wish to measure directly the relationship between being less 
physically involved in serving and caloric intake in restaurant settings.  
In the long run, consumption of hedonically appealing but less healthy foods may be 
 38 
 
chronically reinforced through low physical involvement in helping oneself to one’s food. High 
physical involvement in serving oneself, in contrast, may discourage unhealthy eating long-term, 
given that retrospective regret can discourage subsequent purchases (Patrick, Lancellotti, and 
Hagtvedt 2009). Not least, to the extent that eating and health are identity-relevant domains, 
more positive self-evaluation here may boost one’s overall self-esteem (Crocker et al. 2003).  
This research suggests contrasting implications for restaurateurs and policy-makers. 
Hospitality providers may benefit from enabling consumers to savor consumption experiences 
more by serving indulgent vice foods to customers and discouraging self-service in any form. 
Public entities might combat over-indulgence and obesity by implementing serve-yourself pay-
per-weight setups in certain dining environments. Likewise, consumers may leverage these 
insights to nudge themselves toward healthier decisions. For example, making it a rule to 
formally serve oneself even from a so-called single-serve package may help consumers hold 
themselves accountable for, and in turn curb their portions of, even small snacks that they 
consume during the day. Using family-style bowls so that everyone can serve their own portion 
may aid in reducing portions as well. 
There are a number of ways our research can be extended. First, it would be valuable to 
conduct large-scale field experiments to test the robustness and magnitude of the effect of being 
served on food and portion size choice outside of the laboratory, comparing intake in restaurants 
based on standard being-served and family-style serve-yourself procedures. Intervention data 
would help generalize and quantify the impact of such serving-style manipulations on the 
average meal. Second, we focused on only one specific manner in which a consumer can be 
more or less agentic with respect to food consumption, namely how physically involved 
consumers are in serving the food. Food preparation is another manifestation of agency in food 
 39 
 
consumption. Studies investigating the effect of preparing one’s own food could span a range 
from actually cooking a whole dish from raw ingredients to combining elements of a packaged 
mix. This important aspect of food consumption should certainly be studied in-depth. Further, 
our studies suggest that consumers have an intuition of how certain consumption situations will 
make them feel. Lay intuitions can strongly impact consumer decisions, regardless of whether 
they are correct or rational (Raghunathan et al. 2006). If consumers possess a strong lay theory 
that being less physically involved in helping themselves to their food will reduce their 
consumption guilt, they may actively seek out being served for unhealthy foods, or pay up for it. 
Future studies might also consider boundary conditions to the “physical involvement 
effect” (less versus more). For instance, when other situational factors assert or abdicate 
responsibility (e.g., social pressures to eat an offered food), the effect may weaken. Further, our 
studies were limited to food consumption, but other research has demonstrated that consumers 
seek justification for vice-type consumption in many domains. For example, they use their 
having expended effort to obtain the vice (Kivetz and Simonson 2002; Mukhopadhyay and Johar 
2009) or having received a special promotion for it (Khan and Dhar 2010) to legitimize vice 
purchases. Our findings might extend to these and other domains involving vice/virtue conflicts, 
such as saving versus spending. For instance, consumers may feel equally responsible for 
automated versus actively authorized deposits into their savings account, but they may feel less 
responsible for automated versus actively made credit card payments. Future research might 
explore whether our physical involvement effect extends to other domains. Lastly, it may be 
instructive to examine the interplay of satisfaction with the self and satisfaction with the product 
in the consumption process. Might dissatisfaction with the self spill over to dissatisfaction with 
the product? These and other questions await future research.   
 
 40 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Alicke, Mark D., and Constantine Sedikides (2009), “Self-enhancement and Self-protection: 
What They Are and What They Do,” European Review of Social Psychology, 20, 1-48. 
Anderson, Norman H. (1965), “Averaging versus Adding as a Stimulus-combination Rule in 
Impression Formation,” Journal of Experimental Psychology, 70 (4), 394-400. 
Bandura, Albert (1990), “Selective Activation and Disengagement of Moral Control,” Journal of 
Social Issues, 46 (1), 27-46.  
Baron, Jonathan, and Ilana Ritov (1994), “Reference Points and Omission Bias,” Organizational 
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 59 (3), 475-98. 
Baumeister, Roy F., Ellen Bratslavsky, Catrin Finkenauer, and Kathleen D. Vohs (2001), “Bad is 
Stronger Than Good,” Review of General Psychology, 5 (4), 323-70.  
———, Todd F. Heatherton, and Dianne M. Tice (1994), Losing Control: How and Why People 
Fail at Self-regulation. Waltham, MA: Academic Press. 
Bezerra, Ilana N., Cintia Curioni, and Rosely Sichieri (2012), “Association Between Eating Out 
of Home and Body Weight,” Nutrition Reviews, 70 (2), 65-79. 
Bohner, Gerd, Herbert Bless, Norbert Schwarz, and Fritz Strack (1988), “What Triggers Causal 
Attributions? The Impact of Valence and Subjective Probability,” European Journal of 
Social Psychology, 18 (4), 335-45. 
Bublitz, Melissa G., Laura A. Peracchio, and Lauren G. Block (2010), “Why Did I Eat That? 
Perspectives on Food Decision Making and Dietary Restraint,” Journal of Consumer 
Psychology, 20 (3), 239-58. 
Brasel, S. Adam, and James Gips (2014), “Tablets, Touchscreens, and Touchpads: How Varying 
Touch Interfaces Trigger Psychological Ownership and Endowment,” Journal of 
Consumer Psychology, 24 (2), 226-33. 
Brehm, Jack W. (1956), “Postdecision Changes in the Desirability of Alternatives,” The Journal 
of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 52 (3), 384-89.  
Campbell, W. Keith, and Constantine Sedikides (1999), “Self-threat Magnifies the Self-serving 
Bias: A Meta-analytic Integration,” Review of General Psychology, 3 (1), 23-43. 
Chaiken, Shelly, and Patricia Pliner (1987), “Women, But Not Men, Are What They Eat: The 
Effect of Meal Size and Gender on Perceived Femininity and Masculinity,” Personality 
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 13 (2), 166-76. 
 41 
 
Chernev, Alexander (2011), “The Dieter’s Paradox,” Journal of Consumer Psychology, 21 (2), 
178-83. 
Crocker, Jennifer, Riia K. Luthanen, M. Lynne Cooper, and Alexandra Bouvrette (2003), 
“Contingencies of Self-worth in College Students: Theory and Measurement,” Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 85 (5), 894-908. 
Demanet, Jelle, Paul S. Muhle-Karbe, Margaret T. Lynn, Iris Blotenberg, and Marcel Brass 
(2013), “Power to the Will: How Exerting Physical Effort Boosts the Sense of Agency,” 
Cognition, 129 (3), 574-78. 
Diliberti, Nicole, Peter L. Bordi, Martha T. Conklin, Liane S. Roe, and Barbara J. Rolls (2004), 
“Increased Portion Size Leads to Increased Energy Intake in a Restaurant Meal,” Obesity 
Research, 12 (3), 562-68. 
Finkelstein, Stacey R., and Ayelet Fishbach (2010), “When Healthy Food Makes You Hungry,” 
Journal of Consumer Research, 37 (3), 357-67. 
Fletcher, Garth, and Colleen Ward (1988), “Attribution Theory and Process: A Cross-cultural 
Perspective,” in The Cross-cultural Challenge to Social Psychology, Michael Bond, ed. 
Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 230-44. 
Gilovich, Thomas, and Victoria Husted Medvec (1995), “The Experience of Regret: What, 
When, and Why,” Psychological Review, 102 (2), 379-95. 
Greenberg, Jeff, Thomas A. Pyszczynski, and Sheldon Solomon (1982), “The Self-serving 
Attributional Bias: Beyond Self-presentation,” Journal of Experimental Social 
Psychology, 18 (1), 56-67. 
Gregory, Christian, Travis A. Smith, and Minh Wendt (2011), “How Americans Rate Their Diet 
Quality: An Increasingly Realistic Perspective,” USDA Economic Research Service 
Economic Information Bulletin, 83, 1-18. 
Guthrie, Joanne F., Biing-Hwan Lin, and Elizabeth Frazão (2002), “Role of Food Prepared away 
from Home in the American Diet, 1977-78 versus 1994-96: Changes and Consequences,” 
Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior, 34 (3), 140-50. 
Harris Interactive (2012), “Seven in Ten Americans Cooking More Instead of Going Out to Save 
Money,” [available at http://www.harrisinteractive.com/NewsRoom/HarrisPolls/tabid/ 
447/mid/1508/articleId/1023/ctl/ReadCustom%20Default/Default.aspx].  
Hayes, Andrew F. (2009), “Beyond Baron and Kenny: Statistical Mediation Analysis in the New 
 42 
 
Millennium,” Communication Monographs, 76, 408-20. 
——— (2013), An Introduction to Mediation, Moderation, and Conditional Process Analysis: A 
Regression-based Approach. New York: Guilford Press.  
Heider, Fritz (1958), The Psychology of Interpersonal Relations. New York: Wiley. 
Hill, James O., Holly R. Wyatt, George W. Reed, and John C. Peters (2003), “Obesity and the 
Environment: Where Do We Go from Here?,” Science, 299 (5608), 853-55.  
Hinrichs, Kim T., Lei Wang, Andrew T. Hinrichs, and Eric J. Romero (2012), “Moral 
Disengagement through Displacement of Responsibility: The Role of Leadership 
Beliefs,” Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 42 (1), 62-80. 
International Food Information Council Foundation (2014), “2014 Food & Health Survey,” 
[available at http://www.foodinsight.org/sites/default/files/2014%20Food%20and%20 
Health%20Survey%20Full%20Report.pdf]. 
Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky (1982), “The Psychology of Preferences,” Scientific 
American, 246 (1), 160-73.  
Khan, Uzma, and Ravi Dhar (2010), “Price Framing Effects on Purchase of Hedonic and 
Utilitarian Bundles,” Journal of Marketing Research, 47 (6), 1090-99. 
Kivetz, Ran, and Itamar Simonson (2002), “Earning the Right to Indulge: Effort as a 
Determinant of Customer Preferences Toward Frequency Program Rewards,” Journal of 
Marketing Research, 39 (2), 155-70.  
Klesse, Anne-Kathrin, Jonathan Levav, and Caroline Goukens (2015), “The Effect of Preference 
Expression Modality on Self-control,” Journal of Consumer Research, 42 (4), 535-50. 
Kunda, Ziva (1987), “Motivated Inference: Self-serving Generation and Evaluation of Causal 
Theories,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53 (4), 636-47. 
——— (1990), “The Case for Motivated Reasoning,” Psychological Bulletin, 108 (3), 480-98. 
Langer, Ellen J., and Jane Roth (1975), “Heads I Win, Tails It’s Chance: The Illusion of Control 
as a Function of the Sequence of Outcomes in a Purely Chance Task,” Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 32 (6), 951-55. 
Landman, Janet (1987), “Regret and Elation Following Action and Inaction: Affective 
Responses to Positive versus Negative Outcomes,” Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin, 13 (4), 524-36. 
Lee, Leonard, Michelle P. Lee, Marco Bertini, Gal Zauberman, and Dan Ariely (2015), “Money, 
 43 
 
Time, and the Stability of Consumer Preferences,” Journal of Marketing Research, 52 
(2), 184-99. 
McFerran, Brent, Darren W. Dahl, Gavan J. Fitzsimons, and Andrea C. Morales (2010a), “Might 
an Overweight Waitress Make You Eat More? How the Body Type of Others is 
Sufficient to Alter Our Food Consumption,” Journal of Consumer Psychology, 20 (2), 
146-51. 
———————————— (2010b), “I’ll Have What She’s Having: Effects of Social 
Influence and Body Type on the Food Choices of Others,” Journal of Consumer 
Research, 36 (6), 915-29. 
Mukhopadhyay, Anirban, and Gita Johar (2009), “Indulgence as Self-reward for Prior Shopping 
Restraint,” Journal of Consumer Psychology, 19 (3), 334-45. 
Okada, Erica M. (2005), “Justification Effects on Consumer Choice of Hedonic and Utilitarian 
Goods,” Journal of Marketing Research, 42 (1), 43-53. 
Palamar, Max, Doan T. Le, and Ori Friedman (2012), “Acquiring Ownership and the Attribution 
of Responsibility,” Cognition, 124, 201-08. 
Patrick, Vanessa M., Matthew Lancellotti, and Henrik Hagtvedt (2009). “Getting a Second 
Chance: The Role of Imagery in the Influence of Inaction Regret on Behavioral Intent,” 
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 37 (2), 181-90. 
Peck, Joann, Victor A. Barger, and Andrea Webb (2013), “In Search of a Surrogate for Touch: 
The Effect of Haptic Imagery on Perceived Ownership,” Journal of Consumer 
Psychology, 23 (2), 189-96. 
———, and Suzanne B. Shu (2009), “The Effect of Mere Touch on Perceived Ownership,” 
Journal of Consumer Research, 36 (3), 434-47. 
Raghunathan, Rajagopal, Rebecca Walker Naylor, and Wayne D. Hoyer (2006), “The Unhealthy 
= Tasty Intuition and Its Effects on Taste Inferences, Enjoyment, and Choice of Food 
Products,” Journal of Marketing, 70 (4), 170-84.  
Ramanathan, Suresh, and Patti Williams (2007), “Immediate and Delayed Emotional 
Consequences of Indulgence: The Moderating Influence of Personality Type on Mixed 
Emotions,” Journal of Consumer Research, 34 (2), 212-23. 
Redden, Joseph P., and Kelly L. Haws (2013), “Healthy Satiation: The Role of Decreasing 
Desire in Effective Self-control,” Journal of Consumer Research, 39 (5), 1100-14. 
 44 
 
Rosset, Evelyn (2008), “It’s No Accident: Our Bias for Intentional Explanations,” Cognition, 
108 (3), 771-80. 
Rozin, Paul, Kimberly Kabnick, Erin Pete, Claude Fischler, and Christy Shields (2003), “The 
Ecology of Eating: Part of the French Paradox Results from Lower Food Intake in French 
than Americans, Because of Smaller Portion Sizes,” Psychological Science, 14 (5), 450-
54. 
Rucker, Derek D., Kristopher J. Preacher, Zakary L. Tormala, and Richard E. Petty (2011), 
“Mediation Analysis in Social Psychology: Current Practices and New 
Recommendations,” Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 5 (6), 359-71. 
Schlenker, Barry R., Michael F. Weigold, and John R. Hallam (1990), “Self-serving Attributions 
in Social Context: Effects of Self-esteem and Social Pressure,” Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 58 (5), 855-63.  
Sheldon, Kennon M., Richard Ryan, and Harry T. Reis (1996), “What Makes for a Good Day? 
Competence and Autonomy in the Day and in the Person,” Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 22, 1270-79. 
Shepperd, James, Wendi Malone, and Kate Sweeny (2008), “Exploring Causes of the Self-
serving Bias,” Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 2 (2), 895-908. 
Smiciklas-Wright, Helen, Diane C. Mitchell, Sharon J. Mickle, Joseph D. Goldman, and Anetta 
Cook (2003), “Foods Commonly Eaten in the United States, 1989-1991 and 1994-1996: 
Are Portion Sizes Changing?,” Journal of the American Dietetic Association, 103, 41-47. 
Smith, Craig A., and Phoebe C. Ellsworth (1985), “Patterns of Cognitive Appraisal in Emotion,” 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 48 (4), 813-38. 
Spiller, Stephen A. (2011), “Opportunity Cost Consideration,” Journal of Consumer Research, 
38 (4), 595-610. 
Stein, Richard I., and Carol J. Nemeroff (1995), “Moral Overtones of Food: Judgments of Others 
Based on What They Eat,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 21 (5), 480-90. 
Stewart, Hayden, Noel Blisard, and Dean Jolliffe (2006), “Let’s Eat Out: Americans Weigh 
Taste, Convenience, and Nutrition,” Economic Information Bulletin Number 19, 1-10. 
Todd, Jessica E., Lisa Mancino, and Biing-Hwan Lin (2010), “The Impact of Food Away from 
Home on Adult Diet Quality,” Economic Research Report, 90, 1-18. 
Valsesia, Francesca, Joseph C. Nunes, and Andrea Ordanini (2016), “What Wins Awards Is Not 
 45 
 
Always What I Buy: How Creative Control Affects Authenticity And Thus Recognition 
(But Not Liking),” Journal of Consumer Research, 42 (6), 897-914. 
Vohs, Kathleen D., and Todd F. Heatherton (2000), “Self-Regulatory Failure: A Resource-
Depletion Approach,” Psychological Science, 11 (3), 249-54. 
Wansink, Brian (2006), Mindless Eating: Why We Eat More Than We Think. New York: 
Bantam-Dell. 
———, and Pierre Chandon (2006), “Can ‘Low-Fat’ Nutrition Labels Lead to Obesity?,” 
Journal of Marketing Research, 43 (4), 605-17. 
—————— (2014), “Slim by Design: Redirecting the Accidental Drivers of Mindless 
Overeating,” Journal of Consumer Psychology, 24 (3), 413-31. 
———, and Matthew M. Cheney (2005), “Super Bowls: Serving Bowl Size and Food 
Consumption,” Journal of the American Medical Association, 293 (14), 1723-728. 
Weary, Gifford, John H. Harvey, Paul Schwieger, Christopher T., Richard Perloff, and Sally 
Pritchard (1982), “Self-presentation and the Moderation of the Self-serving Bias Effect,” 
Social Cognition, 1, 140-59. 
Wilcox, Keith, Lauren G. Block, and Eric M. Eisenstein (2011), “Leave Home Without It? The 
Effects of Credit Card Debt and Available Credit on Spending,” Journal of Marketing 
Research, 48 (Special Issue), S78-S90. 
Wohl, Michael J. A., and Michael Enzle (2002), “The Deployment of Personal Luck: Illusory 
Control in Games of Pure Chance,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28 (10), 
1388-97. 
Zhao, Xinshu, John G. Lynch, and Qimei Chen (2010), “Reconsidering Baron and Kenny: Myths 
and Truths about Mediation Analysis,” Journal of Consumer Research, 37 (2), 197-206. 
Zlatevska, Natalina, Chris Dubelaar, and Stephen S. Holden (2014), “Sizing Up the Effect of 
Portion Size on Consumption: A Meta-analytic Review,” Journal of Marketing, 78 (3), 
140-54. 
 
 
 
 46 
 
FOOTNOTES 
1 Note that evaluations of healthiness are subjective and relative by nature. Much work shows 
that it is the perception that a food is (un)healthy that drives behavior (e.g., Raghunathan, 
Naylor, and Hoyer 2006), and, moreover, that food-related information is often interpreted in 
self-serving ways (Chernev 2011; Wansink and Chandon 2006). Thus, this paper focuses on 
consumers’ reactions to foods they perceive as healthy or unhealthy. For ease of reading, 
throughout the manuscript we use “healthy” and “unhealthy” to mean perceived-to-be-healthy 
and perceived-to-be-unhealthy, as established by pretests of the stimuli. 
 
2 One concern with the scenario used here is that participants may have had the perception that 
they had little choice in whether or not to take the food. It is customary not to refuse food at 
someone else’s home. In another study, we used a catered event scenario and the results were 
conceptually replicated. Details of this study are available in the Web Appendix. 
 
3 While these items are the same used with high internal consistency in study 3, here, “justified” 
appeared to fit less well with the other items. Without “justified” Cronbach’s α is .66, and the 
results remain robust with a 3-item Positive Feelings index. 
  
4 Note that there is no direct effect of physical involvement on portion choice, just as predicted 
by our model, in which the (in)ability to reject responsibility for unhealthy eating causes people 
to adjust their portion choices in order to maintain and keep constant their positive evaluation. 
As such, we are testing an indirect-only effect (Zhao, Lynch, and Chen 2010). For an overview 
of mediation without a direct effect, or “indirect-only” effects, please refer to Hayes (2009), 
Zhao et al. (2010), or examples such as Lee et al. (2015), Spiller (2011), and Wilcox, Block, and 
Eisenstein (2011). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 47 
 
FIGURES 
FIGURE 1: 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 2: 
 
 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
healthy 
unhealthy 
Portion choice (oz.) 
Food's Healthiness 
STUDY 2:  
LESS PHYSICAL INVOLVEMENT IN HELPING ONESELF 
TO UNHEALTHY FOOD LEADS TO LARGER PORTION 
CHOICES 
more phys. involvement 
less phys. involvement 
Figure 2: Portion choice as a function of both physical involvement required to help oneself to the 
food and food’s healthiness in study 2  
Note: For the healthy almonds, physical involvement had no impact on portion choice, but for the 
unhealthy M&Ms, less (versus more) physical involvement led people to choose larger portions. 
Figure 1: Conceptual Models 
 48 
 
FIGURE 3: 
FOOD IMAGES USED IN STUDY 3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 4: 
 
 
 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
healthy  
unhealthy  
Feelings of Responsibility 
Food's Healthiness 
STUDY 3: 
LESS PHYSICAL INVOLVEMENT IN HELPING ONESELF 
TO UNHEALTHY FOOD CAUSES REJECTION OF 
RESPONSIBILITY 
more phys. involvement 
less phys. involvement 
Figure 3: Stimulus material used in study 3: Plate of healthy (chicken, vegetables, wild rice) vs. 
unhealthy food (cheeseburger, fries, cookie) 
Figure 4: Perceived responsibility after eating as a function of both physical involvement in helping 
oneself to the food and food’s healthiness in study 3  
Note: For the healthy chicken, physical involvement had no impact on feelings of responsibility, but 
for the unhealthy cheeseburger, less (versus more) physical involvement led people to accept less 
responsibility. 
 49 
 
FIGURE 5: 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 6: 
FOOD IMAGES USED IN STUDY 4 
 
Figure 6: Food images used as part of the portion choice measure in study 4 (unhealthy condition: macaroni 
and cheese)  
 
 
 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
healthy  
unhealthy  
Positive Self-Evaluative Feelings 
Food's Healthiness 
STUDY 3:  
LESS PHYSICAL INVOLVEMENT IN HELPING ONESELF 
TO FOOD LEADS TO MORE POSITIVE SELF-EVALUATIVE 
FEELINGS 
more phys. involvement 
less phys. involvement 
Figure 5: Positive self-evaluative feelings after eating as a function of both physical involvement in 
helping oneself to the food and food’s healthiness in study 3  
Note: For the healthy chicken, physical involvement had no impact on self-evaluative feelings, but for 
the unhealthy cheeseburger, less (versus more) physical involvement led people to feel better about 
themselves. 
 50 
 
FIGURE 7: 
 
FIGURE 8: 
  
 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
healthy 
unhealthy 
Portion Choice (in scoops) 
Food's Healthiness 
STUDY 4: 
LESS PHYSICAL INVOLVEMENT IN HELPING ONESELF 
TO UNHEALTHY FOOD LEADS TO LARGER PORTION 
CHOICES 
self-served 
other-served 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
healthy 
unhealthy 
Responsibility Index 
Food's Healthiness 
STUDY 4: 
LESS PHYSICAL INVOLVEMENT IN HELPING ONESELF 
UNHEALTHY FOOD CAUSES REJECTION OF 
RESPONSIBILITY 
self-served 
other-served 
Figure 7: Portion size choice as a function of both physical involvement required to help oneself to 
the food and food’s healthiness in study 4 
Figure 8: Perceived responsibility after eating as a function of both physical involvement 
required to obtain the food and food’s healthiness in study 4 
