 Short Communication
Updated Reported Distribution of Aedes (Stegomyia)
aegypti and Aedes (Stegomyia) albopictus (Diptera:
Culicidae) in the United States, 1995–2016
Micah B. Hahn, Lars Eisen, Janet McAllister, Harry M. Savage, John-Paul Mutebi, and
Rebecca J. Eisen1
Division of Vector-Borne Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 3156 Rampart Road, Fort Collins, CO 80521
(xht1@cdc.gov; evp4@cdc.gov; jvm6@cdc.gov; hms1@cdc.gov; grv0@cdc.gov; dyn2@cdc.gov), and
1Corresponding author,
e-mail: dyn2@cdc.gov
The findings and conclusions in this report are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official position of the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
Subject Editor: Thomas Scott
Received 17 February 2017; Editorial decision 28 March 2017
Abstract
Aedes (Stegomyia) aegypti (L.) and Aedes (Stegomyia) albopictus (Skuse) are potential vectors of Zika, dengue, and
chikungunya viruses in the United States. A Zika virus outbreak in Florida in the summer of 2016, driven by
Ae. aegypti and resulting in> 200 locally acquired cases of human illness, underscored the need for up-to-date infor-
mation on the geographic distribution of Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus in the United States. In early 2016, we con-
ducted a survey and literature review to compile county records for presence of Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus in
the United States from 1995 to 2016. Surveillance for these vectors was intensified across the United States during
the summer and fall of 2016. At the end of 2016, we therefore conducted a follow-up survey of mosquito control
agencies, university researchers, and state and local health departments to document new collection records for
Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus. The repeated survey at the end of the year added Ae. aegypti collection records
from 38 new counties and Ae. albopictus collection records from 127 new counties, representing a 21 and 10 per-
cent increase, respectively, in the number of counties with reported presence of these mosquitoes compared with
the previous report. Moreover, through our updated survey, 40 and 183 counties, respectively, added additional
years of collection records for Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus from 1995 to 2016. Our findings underscore the contin-
ued need for systematic surveillance of Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus.
Key words: Aedes aegypti, Aedes albopictus, surveillance, United States, Zika virus
We previously reported the results of a county-level survey, distributed
by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) to vector con-
trol professionals, entomologists, and state and local health departments
in early 2016, to document the known geographical distribution in the
United States of the two primary potential mosquito vectors of Zika, yel-
low fever, dengue, and chikungunya viruses: Aedes (Stegomyia) aegypti
(L.) and Ae. (Stegomyia) albopictus (Skuse) (Hahn et al. 2016). A few
months after the survey was concluded, Miami-Dade County in south-
ern Florida experienced a local outbreak of Zika virus transmission
driven by Ae. aegypti and resulting in >200 locally acquired human
cases (Florida State Health Department 2016, Likos et al. 2016).
Because intensified surveillance for Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus across
the United States during the summer and fall of 2016 was expected to
produce new county-level mosquito collection records, we repeated the
county-level survey at the end of the year in order to update the
previously presented county-level collection record maps for these
mosquitoes. Additionally, respondents to the initial CDC survey have
had more time to mine their historical mosquito surveillance records
since the initial survey ended. Here we provide an update for county
collection records for Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus in the United
States from January 1995 through December 2016. Efforts are under-
way to use these data to create climate suitability models for these
important mosquito vectors in the continental United States.
Materials and Methods
Selection of Time Period and Criteria for Mosquito
Presence Classifications
We included collection records from 1995 to December 2016
(henceforth referred to as 2016) to identify counties that have
Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Entomological Society of America 2017.
This work is written by US Government employees and is in the public domain in the US.
1420
Journal of Medical Entomology, 54(5), 2017, 1420–1424
doi: 10.1093/jme/tjx088
Advance Access Publication Date: 19 June 2017
Short Communication
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jme/article-abstract/54/5/1420/3868585 by guest on 02 June 2019
 reported contemporary collections of Ae. aegypti or Ae. albopictus.
As in Hahn et al. (2016), Ae. aegypti or Ae. albopictus was consid-
ered “present” in a county in a given calendar year, if at least one
specimen of any life stage of the mosquito was collected, using any
collection method, during that year. Counties with reported
Ae. aegypti or Ae. albopictus were further classified based on
whether a species was collected in 1, 2, or 3 or more years, with no
distinction of whether or not collection years were consecutive. This
was done to distinguish between counties in which Ae. aegypti or
Ae. albopictus were collected in a single year and counties where
these mosquito species have been reported in multiple years between
1995–2016, indicating either established populations or introduc-
tion of the species in more than one year. A county was classified as
having “no reported records” for a species if there were no collec-
tion records for that species between 1995 and 2016. However, a
classification of no reported records for a county should not necessa-
rily be interpreted as the given species being absent in that county.
Compilation of Collection Records
All records presented in Hahn et al. (2016) were included in the
present database, and thus the maps presented here represent the
cumulative surveillance data for Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus
from 1995 to December 2016. To update collection records for
Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus to the end of 2016, we repeated the
literature review described in Hahn et al. (2016) for the period from
8 March to 16 December 2016, and we repeated the online survey
for county collection records. The link to the online survey was
widely disseminated to all respondents from the earlier survey, as
well as other stakeholders via the suite of vector control and ento-
mological professional organizations described previously by Hahn
et al. (2016). To expand response rates, survey participants were
encouraged to invite colleagues to participate in the survey.
The survey tool compiled contact information for the person
entering the records, as well as county-level records by year for Ae.
aegypti and Ae. albopictus. If no records were reported for one or
both species, respondents had the option to check a box to indicate
the absence of collection records. However, given the lack of system-
atic sampling efforts, absence data are not displayed on our maps.
The survey opened 17 November 2016 and responses were
requested by 10 December 2016, but the survey tool was available
beyond that date. Responses reported here extend through 31
December 2016.
Management of Collection Record Database
We merged the vector presence records from Hahn et al. (2016)
with the new records from the follow-up survey. No new county-
level collection records for Ae. aegypti or Ae. albopictus were found
via the literature review. We created two datasets, one that con-
tained all the Ae. aegypti collection records and one with all the Ae.
albopictus collection records. These datasets contained the county
and year of the mosquito collections. We extracted only one record
for each county in a given year for each mosquito species in order to
avoid duplicates. For this collection record update, we extracted all
records between 1995 and 2016. Finally, we calculated the number
of years of collection records reported for each county for each spe-
cies and used the resulting county-level databases of collection
records for Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus to join the county data by
FIPS codes in ArcGIS 10.3 (ESRI, Redlands, CA) and map the num-
ber of years each species as been reported by county. Full references
for each published record in the final database are included in Supp.
Tables 1 and 2 (online only).
Results and Discussion
Number of Counties and States With Reported
Occurrence of Ae. aegypti
Our county-level collection record update documented Ae. aegypti
presence in 38 counties that lacked collection records in Hahn et al.
(2016), primarily in Texas but also including counties in two states,
Illinois and Alabama, previously lacking collection records for
Ae. aegypti from 1995 to 2016 (Fig. 1, Supp. Table 1 [online only]).
The additional counties added to the Ae. aegypti database represent
a 21 percent increase in number of counties with reported presence
of this mosquito. One county, Sedgwick County, KS, was removed
from the Ae. aegypti database in this update after the survey
respondent informed us that this record was due to an entry error.
Moreover, additional years of collection records, from those docu-
mented previously by Hahn et al. (2016), were reported for 40 coun-
ties with previous records of Ae. aegypti from 1995 to 2016 (Supp.
Table 1 [online only]). These counties were primarily in Texas,
Kansas, and southern California.
Adding the new surveillance records to those published previ-
ously in Hahn et al. (2016), between 1 January 1995 and 31
December 2016, occurrence of Ae. aegypti was reported from 220
counties in 28 states and the District of Columbia (Fig. 1). During
the same time period, Ae. aegypti was collected in 3 or more years
from 101 counties from 16 states and the District of Columbia (Fig.
1). Since 1995, Ae. aegypti has been documented from all states in
the southern tier of the United States, with the most widespread
county-level distributions in southern California, Arizona, Texas,
Louisiana, and Florida. County collection records are more sporadic
throughout the southeastern United States in Arkansas, Tennessee,
and North and South Carolina as well as further north along the
Atlantic coast in Maryland, New Jersey, and Washington D.C. There
have also been collections made in eastern Kansas and Cook County,
IL (Chicago). The geographic distribution of Ae. aegypti, which
thrives in the subtropics and tropics, is constrained by temperature in
the United States (Otero et al. 2006, Eisen and Moore 2013, Brady
et al. 2014). In particular, low winter temperatures may limit the sur-
vival of overwintering eggs and prevent Ae. aegypti from establishing
at northern latitudes. However, most regions in the United States
experience summer temperatures that are conducive to Ae. aegypti
development and activity for at least some period of time.
Number of Counties and States With Reported
Occurrence of Ae. albopictus
Our county-level collection record update documented Ae. albopic-
tus records in 127 counties previously lacking collection records for
Ae. albopictus in Hahn et al. (2016), primarily in Kansas, Texas,
Mississippi, and Arkansas (Fig. 2, Supp. Table 2 [online only]). The
additional counties added to the Ae. albopictus database represent a
10 percent increase in number of counties with reported presence of
this mosquito. Moreover, additional years of collection records,
from those documented previously by Hahn et al. (2016), were
reported for 183 counties with previous records of Ae. albopictus
from 1995 to 2016 (Supp. Table 2 [online only]). These counties
were primarily in Kansas, Texas, Mississippi, Arkansas, and North
Carolina.
Adding the new surveillance records to those published previ-
ously in Hahn et al. (2016), between 1 January 1995 and December
2016, occurrence of Ae. albopictus was reported from 1,368 coun-
ties in 40 states and the District of Columbia (Fig. 2). During the
same time period, Ae. albopictus was collected in 3 or more years
from 573 counties from 34 states and the District of Columbia
Journal of Medical Entomology, 2017, Vol. 54, No. 5
1421
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jme/article-abstract/54/5/1420/3868585 by guest on 02 June 2019
 (Fig. 2). Since 1995, county-level collections for Ae. albopictus are
widespread in Southeast, South Central, and Mid-Atlantic states.
Established mosquito populations have occurred as far north as
northern Indiana, New York, and New Hampshire. Collection
records for Ae. albopictus are more sporadic in the western United
States, mostly occurring in southern California and Arizona. In addi-
tion to temperature, the distribution of this mosquito is also limited
by water availability (Alto and Juliano 2001). Although the natural con-
ditions in much of the arid southwestern United States may be harmful
for Ae. albopictus, man-made water sources such as artificial containers
and irrigation ditches have allowed the persistence of the mosquito in
southern California, Arizona, New Mexico, and western Texas.
Number of Counties With Reported Occurrence of Both
Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus
Between 1 January 1995 and December 2016, 177 counties reported
occurrence of both Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus. These counties
were located mostly in southern California, Arizona, Texas, Florida,
and Maryland.
Study Caveats
The county-level collection records presented in this update repre-
sent our best knowledge regarding the current distribution of Ae.
aegypti and Ae. albopictus in the United States. However, we cau-
tion that these data should be viewed as a compilation of existing
records based on convenience sampling rather than systematic sur-
veys. Intensified surveillance for Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus in
the summer and fall of 2016, driven by the ongoing Zika virus dis-
ease epidemic in the Americas, resulted in these species being docu-
mented
from
numerous
new
counties.
Continued
intense
surveillance for Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus in the coming years
undoubtedly will produce additional county collection records, espe-
cially in areas with suitable environmental conditions where surveil-
lance efforts for these mosquitoes have been lacking but now are
being initiated as part of new Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus surveil-
lance initiatives funded by local jurisdiction or States, or via the
CDC Epidemiology and Laboratory Capacity for Infectious Diseases
Program.
To reiterate from Hahn et al. (2016), the collection records in
this report represent presence of the mosquito in a county rather
than abundance. Moreover, a county-level mosquito presence record
does not necessarily mean that the mosquito species in question is
present throughout the county, or even that the environment is con-
ducive to its survival and establishment in all parts of the county.
Importantly, lack of Ae. aegypti or Ae. albopictus collection records
should not be interpreted as absence of these mosquitoes from a
Fig. 1. Maps showing the reported occurrence of Ae. aegypti by county between 1 January 1995 and December 2016 in the United States, representing the best
knowledge of the current distribution of this mosquito based on collection records. Counties with black dots had new surveillance records in this update.
Counties shown in white had no reported Ae. aegypti presence records within the specified time period. Counties shown in yellow had Ae. aegypti presence
records for one year within the specified time period, orange indicates those that had two years of presence records within the specified time period, and those
shown in red had three or more years of presence records within the specified time period.
1422
Journal of Medical Entomology, 2017, Vol. 54, No. 5
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jme/article-abstract/54/5/1420/3868585 by guest on 02 June 2019
 county, particularly if the mosquito species has been collected from
a nearby county. Conversely, counties with 3 or more years of pres-
ence records do not necessarily have established Ae. aegypti or Ae.
albopictus populations. For example, many of the Ae. albopictus
detections in isolated counties in Utah, Colorado, and Minnesota
are the result of repeated introductions of the mosquito in used tire
facilities.
Implications for Future Mosquito Surveillance Efforts
Based on our updated county-level distribution map, areas of inter-
est for enhanced surveillance for Ae. aegypti include states with
established populations such as California, Arizona, New Mexico,
Texas, Florida and the other Gulf Coast states, and the Mid-Atlantic
states on the northern margin of the distribution. Other areas of
interest are urban areas that have repeated introductions of the mos-
quito such as Chicago, IL. Areas of interest for enhanced surveil-
lance of Ae. albopictus include states in the Midwest and eastern
United States where there are only 1–2 yr of collection records.
Repeated surveillance in these areas is necessary to determine
whether these introduced populations have become established.
Additional areas for enhanced Ae. albopictus surveillance include
states such as Missouri, Georgia, and Florida that have fewer sur-
veillance records than expected based on reported mosquito
presence in surrounding states. It is essential that surveillance efforts
specifically targeting Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus are maintained
over time in order to monitor changes in their distribution in the
coming years and decades. More consistent surveillance methodol-
ogy in terms of collection methods used and spatial and temporal
collection schemes will allow vector control and public health offi-
cials to gain a better understanding of the threat posed by these
important arbovirus vectors in the United States. In the meantime,
modeling the distribution of these vector species using the available
presence data may be an effective tool to refine the areas for
enhanced surveillance.
Acknowledgments
We thank the large number of state and local health departments, mosquito
control agencies, and universities that submitted records to the U.S.
Stegomyia survey.
References Cited
Alto, B. W., and S. a. Juliano. 2001. Precipitation and temperature effects on
populations of Aedes albopictus (Diptera: Culicidae): Implications for range
expansion. J. Med. Entomol. 38: 646–656.
Fig. 2. Maps showing the reported occurrence of Ae. albopictus by county between 1 January 1995 and December 2016 in the United States, representing the
best knowledge of the current distribution of this mosquito based on collection records. Counties with black dots had new surveillance records in this update.
Counties shown in white had no reported Ae. albopictus presence records within the specified time period. Counties shown in yellow had Ae. albopictus pres-
ence records for one year within the specified time period, orange indicates those that had two years of presence records within the specified time period, and
those shown in red had three or more years of presence records within the specified time period.
Journal of Medical Entomology, 2017, Vol. 54, No. 5
1423
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jme/article-abstract/54/5/1420/3868585 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Brady, O. J., N. Golding, D. M. Pigott, M. U. Kraemer, J. P. Messina, R.C.J.
Reiner, T. W. Scott, D. L. Smith, P. W. Gething, and S. I. Hay. 2014. Global
temperature constraints on Aedes aegypti and Ae. albopictus persistence
and competence for dengue transmission. Parasit. Vectors. 7:
Eisen, L., and C. G. Moore. 2013. Aedes (Stegomyia) aegypti in the continen-
tal United States: A vector at the cool margin of its geographic range.
J. Med. Entomol. 50: 467–478.
Florida State Health Department 2016. Florida Arbovirus Surveillance, Week
52: December 25–31, 2016. (http://www.floridahealth.gov/diseases-and-
conditions/mosquito-borne-diseases/_documents/2016/week52Arbovirus
Report-12-31-16.pdf) (accessed 30 January 2017).
Hahn, M. B., R. J. Eisen, L. Eisen, K. A. Boegler, C. G. Moore, J. McAllister,
H. M. Savage, and J. P. Mutebi. 2016. Reported distribution of Aedes
(Stegomyia) aegypti and Aedes (Stegomyia) albopictus in the United States,
1995–2016 (Diptera: Culicidae). J. Med. Entomol. 53: 1169–1175.
Likos, A., I. Griffin, A. Bingham, D. Stanek, M. Fischer, S. White, J.
Hamilton, L. Eisenstein, D. Atrubin, P. Mulay, et al. 2016. Local mosquito-
borne transmission of Zika virus - Miami-Dade and Broward counties,
Florida, June-August 2016. Morb. Mortal. Wkly. Report. 65: 1032–1038.
Otero, M., H. G. Solari, and N. Schweigmann. 2006. A stochastic population
dynamics model for Aedes aegypti: Formulation and application to a city
with temperate climate. Bull. Math. Biol. 68: 1945–1974.
1424
Journal of Medical Entomology, 2017, Vol. 54, No. 5
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jme/article-abstract/54/5/1420/3868585 by guest on 02 June 2019
