  
Cronfa -  Swansea University Open Access Repository
   
_____________________________________________________________
   
This is an author produced version of a paper published in:
British Journal of Sports Medicine
                                         
   
Cronfa URL for this paper:
http://cronfa.swan.ac.uk/Record/cronfa34956
_____________________________________________________________
 
Paper:
Hainline, B., Derman, W., Vernec, A., Budgett, R., Deie, M., Dvoák, J., Harle, C., Herring, S., McNamee, M.,  et. al.
(2017).  International Olympic Committee consensus statement on pain management in elite athletes. British Journal
of Sports Medicine, 51(17), 1245-1258.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2017-097884
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_____________________________________________________________
  
This item is brought to you by Swansea University. Any person downloading material is agreeing to abide by the terms
of the repository licence. Copies of full text items may be used or reproduced in any format or medium, without prior
permission for personal research or study, educational or non-commercial purposes only. The copyright for any work
remains with the original author unless otherwise specified. The full-text must not be sold in any format or medium
without the formal permission of the copyright holder.
 
Permission for multiple reproductions should be obtained from the original author.
 
Authors are personally responsible for adhering to copyright and publisher restrictions when uploading content to the
repository.
 
http://www.swansea.ac.uk/iss/researchsupport/cronfa-support/ 
  
   1245
Hainline B, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:1245–1258. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2017-097884
International Olympic Committee consensus 
statement on pain management in elite athletes
Brian Hainline,1 Wayne Derman,2 Alan Vernec,3 Richard Budgett,4 Masataka Deie,5 
Jiří Dvořák,6 Chris Harle,7 Stanley A Herring,8 Mike McNamee,9 Willem Meeuwisse,10 
G Lorimer Moseley,11 Bade Omololu,12 John Orchard,13 Andrew Pipe,14 
Babette M Pluim,15 Johan Ræder,16 Christian Siebert,17 Mike Stewart,18 Mark Stuart,19 
Judith A Turner,20 Mark Ware,21 David Zideman,22 Lars Engebretsen4 
Consensus statement
To cite: Hainline B, 
Derman W, Vernec A, 
et al. Br J Sports Med 
2017;51:1245–1258.
 
► Additional material is 
published online only. To view 
please visit the journal online 
(http:// 
dx. 
doi. 
org/ 
10. 
1136/ 
bjsports- 
2017- 
097884).
For numbered affiliations see 
end of article.
Correspondence to
Dr Brian Hainline, National 
Collegiate Athletic Association 
(NCAA), Indianapolis, Indiana 
46206, US;  
bhainline@ 
ncaa. 
org
Received 5 April 2017
Revised 10 June 2017
Accepted 26 June 2017
Published Online First 
13 July 2017
AbsTrACT
Pain is a common problem among elite athletes and is 
frequently associated with sport injury. Both pain and 
injury interfere with the performance of elite athletes. 
There are currently no evidence-based or consensus-
based guidelines for the management of pain in elite 
athletes. Typically, pain management consists of the 
provision of analgesics, rest and physical therapy. 
More appropriately, a treatment strategy should 
address all contributors to pain including underlying 
pathophysiology, biomechanical abnormalities and 
psychosocial issues, and should employ therapies 
providing optimal benefit and minimal harm. To advance 
the development of a more standardised, evidence-
informed approach to pain management in elite athletes, 
an IOC Consensus Group critically evaluated the current 
state of the science and practice of pain management in 
sport and prepared recommendations for a more unified 
approach to this important topic.
bACkground
The IOC convened a consensus meeting from 2 to 
5 November 2016, at which experts reviewed the 
scientific literature addressing pain management in 
elite athletes. We searched for and analysed current 
best evidence, with the aim of reaching a consensus 
regarding the quality of the evidence in order to 
provide guidance for clinical practice and athlete 
management.
The group was charged with the following
 
►
to 
review 
the 
literature 
describing 
pharmacological 
and 
non-pharmacological 
treatments for the management of pain in elite 
athletes
 
►
to review the literature on the physiology of 
pain related to sport injury
 
►
to establish core ethical and clinical principles 
for the management of pain in elite athletes
 
►
to provide a sound rationale for the best-
practice management of pain in elite athletes
 
►
to provide a rationale for the prohibition of 
certain analgesics and the basis for appropriately 
granting Therapeutic Use Exemptions for their 
use
 
►
to provide a review of the risks and benefits 
of the use of analgesic medications in sport 
including short-term strategies to permit 
competition with optimal pain management.
This consensus paper fulfils the IOC charge by 
addressing the multifaceted aspects of pain physi-
ology and pain management in elite athletes through 
the lenses of epidemiology, sports medicine, pain 
medicine, pain psychology, pharmacology and 
ethics.
PrevAlenCe of use of PhArmACologiCAl 
And non-PhArmACologiCAl TreATmenTs 
To mAnAge PAin in eliTe AThleTes
Elite athletes commonly use prescription and over-
the-counter analgesics to prevent or relieve pain.1–18 
These have typically included: oral non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs),2 4 6 16 17 inject-
able NSAIDs,5 other non-opioid analgesics,1 4 8 9 
opioid analgesics,1 3 4 7 8 10 18 injectable and trans-
dermal anaesthetics11 and other medications and 
over-the-counter supplements.1 3 12–15
Despite the perception that the use of medica-
tions and non-pharmacological strategies to relieve 
and prevent pain is widespread in sport,8 9 12 we 
could identify no comprehensive assessment of 
the frequency and effects of such use among elite 
athletes. Accordingly, a systematic literature review 
focusing on elite athletes’ use of medications for 
pain was completed. The results are presented in 
detail in a separate article (Harle CA, Danielson 
EC, Smith L, et al. Analgesic management of 
pain in elite athletes: A systematic review. 2017, 
personal communication). A survey completed by 
team physicians during the 2016 Summer Olympics 
in Rio de Janeiro provides insight into physician 
prescribing patterns and is attached in supplemen-
tary online appendix A.
TyPes of PAin
‘Pain management’ includes a general under-
standing of pain physiology, including types of pain. 
By understanding types of pain, the clinician can 
better recommend an appropriate treatment plan. 
For a detailed discussion of core principles of pain 
physiology and pain management, the reader is 
referred to an accompanying article on this subject.
Pain is an unpleasant sensory and emotional 
experience associated with actual or potential tissue 
damage, or described in terms of such damage.19 
(See supplementary online appendix B for defini-
tions of key terminology.) Pain can be classified 
as nociceptive, neuropathic or nociplastic/algo-
pathic/nocipathic.19–22 Nociceptive pain refers to 
group.bmj.com
 on August 21, 2017 - Published by 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
 1246
Hainline B, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:1245–1258. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2017-097884
Consensus statement
pain clearly associated with tissue damage or inflammation.19 20 
 
This is the type of pain most commonly associated with sport 
injury.19 22 Inflammatory pain is a type of nociceptive pain that 
results from the activation and sensitisation of nociceptors by 
inflammatory mediators20 and is common in acute traumatic 
sport injury with associated swelling and inflammation.20 Neuro-
pathic pain results from a lesion or disease in the somatosensory 
nervous system19 and is common in Paralympic athletes with 
spinal cord injury.23 A third type of pain is common among 
individuals with chronic pain. These individuals have chronic 
pain that is neither nociceptive nor neuropathic but associated 
with clinical and psychophysical findings (hypersensitivity) that 
suggest altered nociceptive functioning (eg, as in fibromyalgia, 
non-specific low back pain). Terms proposed for this third type 
of pain include nociplastic, algopathic and nocipathic.22 Studies 
in athlete populations are lacking, but it is plausible that pain 
in the immediate aftermath of most sport injuries is nociceptive 
associated with tissue damage, and nociplastic/algopathic/nocip-
athic pain may develop after injury and may be seen in athletes 
with chronic pain.
meChAnisms And TyPes of injury
The IOC has defined sports injury as new or recurring musculo-
skeletal complaints incurred during competition or training that 
require medical attention, regardless of the potential absence 
from competition or training.24 Others have suggested that a 
definition of sports injury should require restricted activity for at 
least 1 
day.25 (See appendix B for definitions of key terminology.)
Acute traumatic injury refers to a single event that leads to a 
singular macrotrauma on previously healthy tissue.26 Acute trau-
matic injury in the athlete may be accompanied by fear, anxiety 
and heightened cognitive focus on the injury.27
Overuse injuries occur from repetitive submaximal loading of 
the musculoskeletal system when inadequate recovery has not 
allowed structural adaptation to occur.28 29 Injury, then, is the 
outcome of the difference between the volume and intensity of 
the stress or force applied to the body and the body’s ability to 
dissipate this stress or force. Injury may result from repetitive 
microtrauma imposed on otherwise healthy tissue or repeated 
application of lesser forces to already damaged tissue. In essence, 
athletes are not training at an optimal workload to build physical 
capacity and resilience to the demands of the sport.30 31
Subacute recurrent injuries and chronic degenerative condi-
tions may form a continuum with overuse injuries. A recurrent 
injury is an incident of the same type and at the same site linked 
to an index incident, which occurs after an athlete’s return to full 
function and participation from the recorded index incident.32 
Although degenerative conditions may develop independent of 
sport injury, some result from prior acute or repetitive overuse 
injuries and manifest as a chronic overuse injury.33
Core PrinCiPles of mAking A diAgnosis in eliTe 
AThleTes in PAin
Sports medicine commonly focuses on the diagnosis and 
management of sport-related injury. Pain medicine focuses 
on the diagnosis and management of pain disorders. Impor-
tantly, injury may occur without pain, and pain may present 
without evidence of injury. When performing a history and 
examination of an elite athlete in pain, the sports medicine 
clinician should discern if there is an injury that reasonably 
accounts for pain. Pain management and injury management 
are not necessarily identical, as discussed in detail in this 
paper. Supplementary online appendix C provides an over-
view of core principles of diagnosis in elite athletes in pain.
non-PhArmACologiCAl PAin mAnAgemenT sTrATegies 
in eliTe AThleTes
Non-pharmacological pain management should be considered 
in the earliest stages of pain and is essential in pain manage-
ment beyond the acute phase. Pain is a subjective experience 
dependent on complex interactions of neurobiological, cogni-
tive, affective, contextual and environmental factors. Thus, pain 
management depends on identifying contributory factors from 
biological, psychosocial and contextual domains and addressing 
them through various evidence-based techniques.34–36 Educating 
the athlete regarding the role of the central nervous system in 
pain, especially in chronic pain, can increase receptivity of the 
athlete to a biopsychosocial approach to pain management.34
Physical therapy is important for most pain problems, espe-
cially in subacute and chronic phases.37–39 In addition to therapy 
targeted at increasing strength, stamina, and endurance, and at 
correcting biomechanical contributors to pain and injury, trained 
and informed physical therapists can act as front-line clini-
cians who identify and address inaccurate conceptualisations 
of pain and injury plus psychosocial and contextual influences 
on pain.40–43 Psychological strategies, which can begin immedi-
ately after injury, also target pain management directly through 
training in skills such as muscle relaxation and imagery, as well as 
indirectly by identifying and addressing an athlete’s worries and 
concerns, any comorbid mental health disorders and environ-
mental factors relevant to recovery and return to play (RTP).44 45
modalities and massage
Various modalities and massage have traditionally been the 
mainstays of physical therapy for pain.37–39 46–49 The Rio Survey 
indicated that over 75% of physicians surveyed used physical 
therapy for pain management (appendix A). Recent studies, 
however, show that many physical therapy techniques have no 
clear benefit beyond non-specific effects and natural history, 
with some exceptions. Low-level laser therapy may be bene-
ficial in treating tendinopathy and improving acute muscle 
recovery.50–54 Although cryotherapy is commonly used, there 
is little evidence from prospective studies assessing the benefit 
of this intervention.54–56 Ultrasound therapy may have a limited 
role in managing plantar fasciitis56 but has not demonstrated 
effectiveness in other studies.57 Electrical stimulation,49 58–60 
massage therapy,48 61–63 myofascial trigger point treatments64–67 
and acupuncture68–70 have not shown reliable and consistent effi-
cacy for relief of pain resulting from musculoskeletal injury.
The effects of modalities may be manifest in an individ-
ually specific way, especially as it pertains to the skill of the 
treating clinician.61 71–75 That is, the patient’s and the clinician’s 
expectations and skill, respectively, about a particular treatment’s 
mechanism and effects are potentially powerful determinants 
of outcome.76–78 The practitioner needs to balance the relative 
weight of expectation of benefit (and therefore likely benefit) 
with potential risk.
movement, strength and conditioning
Movement and exercise may have pain-relieving effects.79 80 
Strength training and conditioning are effective as rehabilita-
tion tools after injury. They can also be helpful in managing pain 
and reversing deconditioning in individuals with chronic 
painful conditions such as osteoarthritis,81–84 fibromyalgia85–92 
and chronic musculoskeletal pain.93 94 Exercise can activate 
group.bmj.com
 on August 21, 2017 - Published by 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
 1247
Hainline B, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:1245–1258. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2017-097884
Consensus statement
endogenous opioid95 and cannabinoid systems,96 induce an 
anti-inflammatory state97 and activate antinociceptive path-
ways.95 98–101 Isometric exercise can promote intracortical 
inhibition (which downregulates brain networks that subserve 
pain) and may offer significant pain-relieving benefits beyond 
those offered by isotonic and eccentric exercises for managing 
tendinopathy.102–104 Although data from athletes are lacking, 
there is evidence in other pain populations (particularly chronic 
pain) that movement and exercise-based approaches can improve 
patient self-efficacy for managing pain and fear of (re)injury.34 44
Psychosocial interventions
Psychosocial interventions with possible efficacy in sports 
rehabilitation include skills training in goal setting, imagery, 
relaxation and positive self-statements.105 Stress inoculation 
training was shown to reduce anxiety, pain and days to recovery 
after arthroscopic surgery for meniscus injury.106 Other inter-
ventions relevant to athletes include cognitive restructuring 
(identifying and challenging negatively biased appraisals) and 
developing plans for maintaining treatment gains and coping 
with setbacks and pain flare-ups.105 These strategies are broadly 
categorised as cognitive–behavioural therapies (CBTs). CBT is 
the prevailing psychosocial treatment for chronic pain problems, 
and there is high-level evidence of its efficacy in reducing pain 
and pain-related disability in studies of non-athletes.105 107 108 
Psychologically informed physical therapy, which incorporates 
cognitive and behavioural principles and strategies (eg, tech-
niques to reduce fear-avoidance, use of graded activity and 
exposure techniques), and education about pain during phys-
ical rehabilitation, is a promising approach with some evidence 
supporting its use.34 109 Psychological assessment and interven-
tion by a specialist should be normalised by the treatment and 
coaching team, so that it can be implemented when necessary 
and without stigma.
sleep and nutrition
Disordered sleep is common among athletes, both when recov-
ering from injury and during the competition and training 
seasons.110 111 Sleep and pain have a reciprocal relationship—pain 
disturbs sleep, and poor sleep quality or duration increases pain 
levels in clinical populations and decreases pain thresholds in 
otherwise healthy people.112–118 Addressing sleep disorders could 
improve performance and the general health of the athlete.111 
Psychological strategies including CBT,119 self-hypnosis120 and 
mindfulness-based stress reduction121 show significant potential 
to improve sleep in non-athletes. CBT for insomnia has demon-
strated efficacy.122–124 Studies in athlete populations are lacking, 
but it is plausible that these results would be generalisable to 
athletes.
Persistent pain is influenced by any proinflammatory load,125 
which makes nutrition possibly relevant to managing pain in 
athletes. However, studies demonstrating benefit from nutri-
tional supplements are not methodologically sound and have 
unclear relevance to elite athletes.126–138 Furthermore, supple-
ments are poorly regulated and may contain banned substances. 
Consequently, supplements cannot currently be recommended 
as part of pain management for elite athletes.
surgery
Elective surgery has no place in the treatment of pain itself but 
may address structural damage non-responsive to non-opera-
tive treatment, or to avoid further impairment of an athlete’s 
health.139 An operation for a chronic injury and pain condition 
must aim to correct a structural problem that influences pain and 
functional limitations140–142 and should occur as part of a multi-
faceted, biopsychosocial management approach.143 Surgical 
intervention includes setting individual treatment and outcome 
goals for the athlete. The athlete must have a complete under-
standing of the risks and benefits and accurate expectations 
about postsurgical recovery and pain. When appropriate, surgery 
can be part of a multidisciplinary approach for pain reduction. 
Surgery should not be performed to treat chronic pain simply 
because all other interventions have failed but should rather be 
used when a structural problem associated with the pain has 
been identified.139
PhArmACologiCAl PAin mAnAgemenT sTrATegies in 
eliTe AThleTes
guiding principles
Appropriate and effective pain management requires a thoughtful 
and individualised approach to evaluation and care, including an 
assessment of the implications of treatment for both short-term 
and long-term health.144 The prescription, or provision, of medi-
cation is common to the management of pain in elite athletes. 
Analgesic medications should be used in accordance with rele-
vant regulations and the general guidelines for their safe and 
efficacious use.145 The core pharmacological principles of pain 
management in elite athletes include:
 
►
Medication prescription should be only one component of 
managing pain. Combining medication use with appropriate 
non-pharmacological measures limits disability and optimises 
probability of improvement.
 
►
Medications should be prescribed at the lowest effective dose 
for the shortest period of time. They should be discontinued 
if they are ineffective or not tolerated, and as the pain from 
the injury resolves.
 
►
Medications should be prescribed in a manner consistent 
with 
established, 
recognised 
pharmacological 
and 
pharmacodynamic 
principles, 
including 
route 
of 
administration, time of onset of action, effectiveness for 
pain relief and potential side effects and complications. 
Consideration of an athlete’s medical and medication history 
is essential.
 
►
Physicians prescribing analgesic medications to athletes 
should possess a complete understanding of the prevailing 
rules and regulations regarding prohibited substances and 
Therapeutic Use Exemptions specific to the governing body 
that controls the athlete’s sport.
 
►
Recording athlete-reported severity of pain (eg, with a 
numerical rating scale) can be useful in monitoring the 
effectiveness of a medication.
 
►
Prescription medications should only be provided to 
athletes by licenced healthcare providers who understand 
potential side effects or misuse of medications, and 
whose licensure includes this scope of practice. Written 
documentation of each assessment and prescription is a 
basic standard of care.
 
►
Informed consent is fundamental in medical care, including 
those situations in which medication is prescribed. This is 
also true for care of the elite athlete; however, obtaining 
such consent can be challenging in competitive situations 
when an athlete seeks same-day RTP
. At a minimum, any 
substantial risk of short-term or long-term worsening of an 
injury should be discussed and documented.
 
►
Medications should not be prescribed to athletes for pain or 
injury prevention.
group.bmj.com
 on August 21, 2017 - Published by 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
 1248
Hainline B, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:1245–1258. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2017-097884
Consensus statement
mediCATion mAnAgemenT bAsed on PAin severiTy 
And AnTiCiPATed rTP
I. Medications for managing acute pain in the elite athlete on 
the same day as the injury: on the field of play, sideline or locker 
room
Physicians providing care at a practice or game/match scenario 
should have a comprehensive emergency medical action plan, 
including provisions for acute pain management.146 Pain manage-
ment may depend on whether same-day RTP is contemplated.
no same-day rTP
A major acute injury with associated severe pain may require pain 
management on the field of play or on the sidelines (table 1). 
Extending the hospital emergency department onto the field of play 
may be necessary. The severely injured athlete must receive effective 
pain treatment as soon as possible, and certainly before any prehos-
pital treatment (eg, manipulation or splinting) is attempted.146
same-day rTP
Medications may play a central role in the management of an 
athlete with acute pain who is considered for same-day RTP
. 
Paracetamol, NSAIDs and local anaesthetics are commonly 
employed in such situations147–157 (table 2). Knowledge of 
relevant pharmacokinetics, including time to onset of action and 
plasma concentrations, is valuable. The primary determinant 
when providing analgesics in same-day RTP situations is the 
athlete’s safety.145 156 Analgesia that allows competition should 
not place the athlete at risk of worsening injury.
For mild to moderate pain, paracetamol, alone or with 
NSAIDs, will usually suffice.152 157 Paracetamol does not have an 
effect on the gastric mucosa, renal function or platelet activity–
considerations that should figure prominently in prescribing 
analgesic medication to those participating in sport.158 NSAIDs 
may be slightly more analgesic than paracetamol159 and together 
provide more pain relief than either alone.157 160 It is important 
that paracetamol be given in sufficient dosing, including a 2 
g 
loading dose and 1 
g every 4–6 
hours thereafter, as needed.161 
Intramuscular ketorolac has been widely used in certain elite 
sports because of possible greater analgesic efficacy without 
significant reported side effects,5 although concerns remain162 
and prescribing recommendations are narrow.5 163 If the injury 
develops with an ongoing haematoma, ketorolac and traditional 
NSAIDs may worsen the bleeding, whereas this is no concern 
with paracetamol or a COX-2 selective NSAID.164 Topical anaes-
thetics may provide relief of well-localised, more superficial 
conditions such as intercostal pain.156
For moderate to severe pain, paracetamol and NSAIDs remain 
an option, including paracetamol with ketorolac. Opioid use in 
an opioid-naïve individual is usually associated with cognitive, 
behavioural and reaction-time effects detrimental to individual 
performance165 166 and may theoretically place other athletes at risk 
in sports that require quick reaction time in a crowded space (cycling 
and basketball). There is no compelling evidence demonstrating 
that opioids such as tramadol and codeine provide pain relief that 
is superior to NSAIDs.154 T
ramadol can also impair reaction time in 
tramadol-naïve individuals.154 Thus, opioids have little or no role in 
same-day RTP; if anything, they are ergolytic, not ergogenic.
Injected local anaesthetics have also been used for moderate to 
severe pain and same-day RTP in elite athletes, either pregame 
or during competition.151 153 There are some limited data from a 
case series of National Rugby League players.153 Most governing 
bodies, including the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA), have 
not banned these injections.167 Intra-articular injections of local 
anaesthetic should be avoided into weight-bearing joints or as 
intratendon or intraligament injections.151 153
Corticosteroid injections have no role for same-day RTP
. 
They do not provide pain relief superior to that of local anaes-
thetics168 169 and can cause acute muscle/tendon weakening, 
thereby increasing the chance of injury.168–171 Other injections, 
such as platelet-rich plasma (PRP) and intra-articular viscosup-
plementation, are not useful for same-day RTP
.172–175
 
II. Medications for managing mild to moderate acute pain in the 
elite athlete beyond the day of injury
Medications should not be prescribed as a stand-alone treatment 
when managing acute pain beyond same-day RTP in athletes.144 
It is essential to diagnose the injury and the cause of pain and to 
begin rehabilitation that addresses both. Thus, non-pharmaco-
logical strategies should begin immediately.
Medications for acute pain should normally not be used for 
more than 5 days.150 176 177 The Rio Survey (supplementary online 
appendix A) indicated that 31% of physicians usually prescribe 
NSAIDs for 1–2 days’ duration, 42% prescribe a 3–5 
day course 
and 21% prescribe NSAIDs for longer than 7 days. Even for more 
severe injuries with associated moderate to severe pain, medi-
cations should be re-evaluated if pain persists beyond 10 days. 
The process should address the underlying injury or pathology 
Table 1 Medications for managing acute, severe pain from a severe 
injury that does not allow same-day return to play
Intravenous
 
► Morphine (10 mg)
 
► Fentanyl (100 mcg, titrated to effect)
Inhalation
 
► Entonox/Nitronox (inhaled 50:50 oxygen and nitrous oxide 
mixture)
 
► Methoxyflurane/penthrox
Intranasal
 
► Diamorphine (1600 mcg in commercially available 
administrator)
 
► Fentanyl (100 mcg administered via nasal syringe adapter)
Table 2 Medication management for acute pain and same-day 
return to play
mild to moderate pain
Paracetamol (oral)
Loading dose up to 2 g, then 325–1000 mg PO every 
4–6 hours, up to 4 g per 24 hours
NSAIDs (oral)
 
► Ibuprofen: 400–800 mg every 4–6 hours with food, up 
to 3200 mg per 24 hours
 
► Naproxen: 250–500 mg 2× daily with food
 
► Ketorolac: 10 mg every 4–6 hours with food, up to 
40 mg per 24 hours
 
► Celecoxib: 200–400 mg 2× daily
 
► Etoricoxib: 90–120 mg once daily
Topical analgesics
 
► Rubefacients: methyl salicylate; turpentine oil; 
ammonia water
 
► Cooling sensation: camphor; menthol
 
► Vasodilation: histamine dihydrochloride; methyl 
nicotinate
 
► Irritation without rebefaction: capsaicin; capsicum 
oleoresin
moderate to severe pain
NSAIDs (injection)
Ketorolac: 15–30 mg IM or IV up to 4×/day, at least 
6 hours apart, or a single 60 mg injection
Local anaesthetic 
injections
IV, intravenous; NSAIDs, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; IM, intramuscular; 
PO, oral.
group.bmj.com
 on August 21, 2017 - Published by 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
 1249
Hainline B, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:1245–1258. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2017-097884
Consensus statement
and the possibility that pain characteristics are changing (see 
below).150 177
The most appropriate medications for treating mild to 
moderate acute pain in the elite athlete beyond the day of injury 
include oral paracetamol and oral NSAIDs.150 156 157 (box 1) Both 
provide good pain relief, but the risk–benefit profile is consid-
erably different. Paracetamol is a non-specific analgesic without 
anti-inflammatory agents and usually lacks other systemic 
side-effects when used in prescription doses. Hepatotoxicity 
occurs in daily doses greater than 4 
g.158
The choice of paracetamol versus NSAIDs147 may have more 
to do with physician preference in using one medication or 
another. NSAIDs may be slightly more analgesic than parac-
etamol,159 but together provide more pain relief than either 
alone.157 160 If there is no known inflammatory contributor to 
pain, paracetamol is preferable to an NSAID because of its lower 
risk profile in the majority of people.150
Corticosteroid injections must be coordinated carefully with 
other aspects of rehabilitation, since their suppression of the 
inflammatory cascade may hinder tissue healing.172 173 Their 
pain-relieving effects may result in worsening of the injury 
if the exercise programme exceeds the capacity of the injured 
tissue.172 173 Overall, the evidence suggests that corticosteroid 
injections may provide pain relief and hasten rehabilitation but 
do not improve tissue healing.178–189 The incidence of compli-
cations of corticosteroid injection in treating athletic injuries is 
unknown.168 170 171
T
wo other types of injection therapies used are PRP therapy 
and viscosupplementation. PRP has been used to address a 
variety of conditions ranging from acute muscle injury to tend-
inopathy to osteoarthritis. The literature on the efficacy of PRP 
has been hampered by methodological limitations. Although 
some encouraging results have been reported, more large, meth-
odologically rigorous randomised, double-blinded studies are 
needed before endorsing this treatment.174 175 190–197 Viscosup-
plementation has been most studied in the treatment of knee 
osteoarthritis. The highest quality randomised controlled 
studies show only mild pain relief and functional improvement 
compared with placebo injections.198 199
 
III. Use of medications for managing severe acute pain in the elite 
athlete beyond the day of injury
When an athlete has severe acute pain, relief of pain is not only 
humane but may be necessary to facilitate early mobilisation.200 201 
The Rio Survey indicated that 71% of the Olympic team physi-
cians surveyed considered the ability to enable rehabilitation 
exercises to be an important factor when forming a treatment 
plan for an athlete (supplementary online appendix A). It is 
reasonable to begin treatment with paracetamol and/or NSAIDs, 
as indicated.147–150 202 203 Injection medications may also be 
considered.172 173
In a dose-dependent manner, opioids are the most effective 
medications for severe acute pain.204–207 However, many risks 
are associated with opioid use. Thus, before prescribing opioids, 
the physician should208–213:
 
►
make a diagnosis that includes assessment of pain and its 
relationship to the injury, including whether the athlete’s 
pain seems appropriate for the injury
 
►
establish and measure goals for pain relief and improved 
function
 
►
assess current status and personal history with respect to 
mental health and alcohol and other substance use, validate 
such history with other health professionals involved in 
the patient’s care if necessary and incorporate strategies to 
mitigate risks of opioid use
 
►
Begin first-line non-opioid therapy and evaluate adherence 
to and effectiveness of the treatment before considering 
initiation of opioid therapy unless pain is severe and clearly 
associated with an injury consistent with that level of pain
 
►
prescribe the lowest effective dose and limit prescription 
of opioids to 5 days. Ongoing use can be reconsidered but 
should rarely exceed 10 days and should be accompanied by 
informed consent regarding the risks of opioid dependence 
or addiction as well as overdose, especially if used in 
combination with alcohol or benzodiazepines.
 
►
opioid use beyond 10 days should be considered with caution. 
Opioid therapy is rarely appropriate for longer than 10 days 
after an acute painful injury. Risks increase substantially 
with the number of days opioids are used. Opioid use for 
more than 7 days after painful musculoskeletal work injury 
has been associated with increased odds of disability 1 
year 
later.214 The likelihood of chronic opioid use increases with 
each additional day of medication supplied starting with the 
third day, with the sharpest increase in chronic opioid use 
observed after the 5th day on therapy, a second prescription 
or refill and an initial 10-day or 30-day supply.215 If opioids 
are prescribed for more than 10 days, it is essential to have 
a plan in place for limiting risk of diversion and a plan and 
timeline for discontinuing opioid use.
 
IV. Medications for managing subacute and chronic pain in the 
elite athlete
Pain associated with sport injury may be acute (up to 6 weeks), 
subacute (6–12 weeks) or chronic (3 months or longer).216 
When pain has persisted beyond 6 weeks of an injury or 
inciting event, the influences on pain and disability should 
be re-explored. In most cases, there is no sound rationale 
for long-term use of NSAIDs for pain management in elite 
athletes.150 176 177 Although paracetamol may be used inter-
mittently, there is no strong rationale for using this class of 
medication beyond the acute period.150 Considerable caution 
should be used in considering the use of opioid medication to 
treat subacute or chronic pain, given the serious risks and lack of 
evidence regarding benefits associated with long-term use.208 209 
 
Importantly, individuals whose pain has not responded to 
treatment and who develop subacute and chronic pain have a 
box 1 medication management for acute pain (pain 
duration less than 4–6 weeks) beyond the day of injury
Mild to moderate pain
Oral paracetamol, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, 
topical analgesics, as per table 2.
Corticosteroid injections (equivocal evidence):
 
► Intra-articular
 
► Bursal
 
► Peritendinous
 
► Epidural
 
► Facet
 
► Sacroiliac
Severe pain commensurate with injury
Consider adding opioids:
 
► Initial prescription not to exceed 5 days
 
► No opioid prescription beyond 10 days
group.bmj.com
 on August 21, 2017 - Published by 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
 1250
Hainline B, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:1245–1258. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2017-097884
Consensus statement
higher risk profile for addiction and comorbid psychiatric condi-
tions.204 207–212
Perhaps the most important consideration in managing 
subacute and chronic pain in elite athletes is to shift the treat-
ment approach from relieving pain to improving function and 
preventing chronic pain and associated disability (table 3). 
Treatment should involve a multidisciplinary approach.217–220 
Analgesic medications used to treat acute pain in elite athletes 
should rarely be used for subacute and chronic pain. Athletes 
should be informed that analgesic medications carry risks, espe-
cially when used long term.221–224
Chronic pain may be associated with psychosocial factors, 
including mood and sleep disturbance, fear of pain and reinjury, 
avoidance of activities believed to increase pain or cause physical 
harm, concern about not achieving pre-injury level of proficiency 
and perception of being disconnected from coaches and team-
mates.40–45 225 It is especially important to address the common 
comorbid conditions of depression, anxiety and sleep disorder.221 222
Before beginning adjuvant medications for chronic pain, 
if possible the athlete should be evaluated by a clinician with 
experience in managing chronic pain.218 Consideration should 
be given to pain being driven by peripheral nociceptive acti-
vation versus neuropathic or nociplastic/algopathic/nocipathic 
pain. The most commonly used adjuvants for treating chronic, 
neuropathic or nociplastic/algopathic/nocipathic pain are anti-
convulsants and antidepressants221 226–231 (table 4). Caution must 
be applied for treating adolescent elite athletes with adjuvant 
medications. For more localised pain, second-line medications 
include capsaicin patches (8%) and lidocaine patches. Tramadol 
may have a role in some cases of chronic pain because of its dual 
mechanism of action as a weak opioid and an upregulator of the 
serotonin system, but more research is needed to increase knowl-
edge of benefits and risks.228
 
V. The special case of cannabinoids
A cannabinoid is one of a class of diverse chemical compounds 
that activates the endogenous endocannabinoid system.232 
Exogenous cannabinoids include phytocannabinoids such as 
tetrahydrocannabinol and cannabidiol, and synthetic canna-
binoids such as K2 and ‘spice’. Cannabis has been cited as 
possibly a useful substance for pain management.233–235 Indeed, 
it has been said in the popular press that cannabis is safer than 
opioids and should be used instead of opioids for managing 
chronic musculoskeletal pain in American football players.236 
However, current evidence suggests that opioids should rarely 
be prescribed for chronic musculoskeletal pain,208–212 and 
evidence is lacking concerning the benefits and risks of cannabis 
for chronic musculoskeletal pain management. Cannabis has no 
role in the management of severe acute pain, as no studies have 
demonstrated its efficacy in this situation.237
Cannabinoids have been studied for treatment of pain condi-
tions including neuropathic pain, fibromyalgia, spinal cord 
injury, spasticity from multiple sclerosis, HIV neuropathy and 
cancer pain. In general, the studies are short term and small 
and show minor or modest improvement in pain relief.238 239 
There is good evidence that cannabinoids have a modest anal-
gesic effect for some pain conditions such as, for example, 
refractory neuropathic pain.240 241 Cannabinoids are considered 
possible third-line agents for some chronic pain conditions.242 
Cannabinoids are considered ergolytic,242 and like opioids, carry 
risks, including addiction. In summary, current evidence does 
not justify the use of cannabinoids for pain management in elite 
athletes.
PAin mAnAgemenT sTrATegies when exPeCTed 
reCovery is delAyed
It should be kept in mind that pain is a conscious experience that 
can be influenced by a variety of factors, including nociceptive 
activity and cognitive and affective factors. Pain is not necessarily 
related in a linear manner to nociceptive input.23 Optimal clinical 
management continually evaluates these various influences on 
pain independent of injury. Unique considerations for the elite 
athlete in pain relate to competitive requirements and demands 
Table 4 Selected adjuvant medications for neuropathic and nociplastic/algopathic/nocipathic pain in adults*
first-line medications
Total daily dose and dose regimen
Anticonvulsants
Gabapentin
Begin at 100–300 mg 1–3×/day; may be increased to 1200–3600 mg/day in three divided doses
Pregabalin
Begin at 25 to 75 mg 1–2×/day; may be increased up to a dose of 150–600 mg/day in divided doses
Antidepressants
Serotonin–noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors: duloxetine
Begin at 20 to 30 mg 1×/day; may be increased up to 120 mg 1×/day
Serotonin–noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors: venlafaxine ER
Begin at 37.5–75 mg 1×/day; may be increased to 225 mg 1×/day or in divided doses
Tricyclic: amitriptyline or nortriptyline
Begin at 10–20 mg at night; may be increased to 150 mg at night
second-line medications
Total daily dose and dose regimen
Capsaicin 8% patches
1–4 patches to painful area for 30–60 min q 3 months
Lidocaine patches
1–3 patches to painful region 1×/day for up to 12 hours and then off for 12 hours
Tramadol
50–400 mg 2–3×/day
*There are many elite athletes who are teenagers and young adults, and an expert in managing this population should be consulted before beginning anticonvulsants or 
antidepressants for pain management.
Table 3 Acute, subacute and chronic pain: definitions and treatment implications
Pain duration
Type of pain
Treatment considerations
<6 weeks
Acute
Treatment focused on treating injury and managing pain, including identifying possible psychosocial and environmental factors 
influencing pain.
6–12 weeks
Subacute
Approach shifts from management of acute pain to improving function and preventing chronic pain and associated disability.
>12 weeks
Chronic
Identify and continue to address psychosocial/environmental factors influencing pain, disability and dysfunction. Focus should be 
on improving function.
group.bmj.com
 on August 21, 2017 - Published by 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
 1251
Hainline B, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:1245–1258. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2017-097884
Consensus statement
and relationships between the athlete and his/her professional 
and medical teams. The motivation of elite athletes to maximise 
bodily performance is another factor in pain assessment and has 
important implications for management in a clinically optimal 
and ethically appropriate manner.40–45 225
Pain management plans should be communicated openly with 
the athlete and all those involved in management of the athlete’s 
injury, recovery and RTP
. A plan for reassessment at critical 
time points should be established and clearly communicated to 
all parties, especially when athletes change their treating team 
during their recovery. This protocol should include the plan for 
injury and pain management and information about the predicted 
time course of pain, rehabilitation and key milestones.200
In the acute phase, emphasis should be on reassuring the 
athlete and providing education about realistic expectations, the 
normal course of the injury and associated pain (figure 1).27 243 
 
The athlete should understand his/her role in optimising 
recovery. Accurate injury diagnosis underpins expectations 
about the path to recovery and pain resolution. Most athletes 
will recover from injury in the predicted manner.244 However, 
monitoring recovery closely, quickly identifying any deviation 
from the predicted path (figure 1) and re-assessing if recovery is 
not occurring as predicted are all of critical importance.
There is ample literature and clinical experience regarding 
anticipated recovery from many sport injuries.244–251 Box 2 
provides a checklist that can be used clinically to evaluate need 
for further assessment. When pain fails to improve as expected, 
or changes in its distribution or quality, a prompt reevalua-
tion is indicated, with three distinct but related objectives: (1) 
determination of whether the initial diagnosis is correct; (2) 
determination of whether the injury is healing as expected; and 
(3) identification of important non-injury factors that may be 
influencing the pain. Each objective may require assessment by 
a different clinician, further imaging or other testing. In most 
cases, the physical therapist (or other treating clinician such as 
athletic trainer) should be involved in monitoring recovery mile-
stones, minimising impact of the injury and optimising return to 
performance. When the athlete’s pain interferes with recovery 
in an atypical manner, the physical therapist and other treating 
clinicians must assess and respond to possible contributors, 
including biomechanics and the kinetic chain continuum, and 
psychosocial and contextual domains.23 252 253
There are two clear triggers for involving psychological 
assessment and treatment: (1) the clinician may identify psycho-
social issues likely contributing to poor recovery and requiring 
a specialist; or (2) pain and function have not improved as 
expected within a few weeks after injury.27 246 247 250 251 A 
psychologist can assess modifiable psychosocial influences 
on pain, treatment adherence and pain-related performance 
issues, and work with the athlete to address these barriers to 
recovery. Key psychosocial factors associated with poor treat-
ment adherence and outcomes after sport injury include mood 
figure 1 Pain variation following injury based on influences of pain. Adapted with permission, Butler DS and Moseley GL: Explain Pain, 2nd Edition, 
Noigroup Publications, 2013.
box 2 Checklist to assess need for further evaluation
(Positive response indicates risk of deviation from the predicted 
path to recovery)
 
► Is the pain worsening, spreading or both?
 
► Is pain occurring at rest or during the night?
 
► Has any new pain emerged in other anatomical locations?
 
► Does the pain fluctuate in a manner not explained by 
mechanical load?
 
► Does the pain seem out of proportion to the severity of the 
injury?
 
► Is the quality of the pain changing or is the pain becoming 
more distressing?
 
► Has the athlete’s expectations of recovery changed for the 
worse?
group.bmj.com
 on August 21, 2017 - Published by 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
 1252
Hainline B, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:1245–1258. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2017-097884
Consensus statement
disturbance, fear of reinjury, concern about not achieving prein-
jury level of proficiency and feeling disconnected from coaches 
and teammates.19 23 252–255 Other more general psychosocial 
influences include anxiety, stress, catastrophising (excessively 
negative appraisals of pain and its implications), depression and 
maladaptive fear of pain and re-injury and consequent avoid-
ance of activities believed to increase pain, cause physical harm 
or both.23 41 43 225 253 Finally, other mental health problems (eg, 
eating or substance use disorders) can also impede recovery and 
require a psychologist’s intervention. The assessment must also 
evaluate the context and meaning of the prolonged pain and 
slow return to performance.251 256–258
AnTidoPing issues in PAin mAnAgemenT
‘Narcotic Analgesics’ was a category of the initial IOC ‘Prohib-
ited’ list.167 The ‘Narcotics’ section was retained in the 
‘Prohibited List’ developed by the WADA, its IOC successor (see 
table 5). Cannabis was also added to the WADA Prohibited List. 
Despite public perception that analgesic use might allow athletes 
to enhance performance, there is scant evidence to support this 
hypothesis, as noted below.
Substances or categories may be added or subtracted to the 
Prohibited List annually, via a process that includes extensive 
stakeholder feedback and deliberation by experts, based on the 
latest scientific evidence available. A substance will be consid-
ered for inclusion in the Prohibited List if it meets two out of the 
three following criteria:
 
►
Use of the substance would enhance or has the potential to 
enhance sport performance.
 
►
Use of the substance poses an actual or potential health risk.
 
►
Use of the substance would be seen as contrary to the ‘spirit 
of sport’.
Therapeutic Use Exemptions (TUEs) allow the use of a prohib-
ited substance to treat legitimate medical conditions or injury.259 
The criteria for granting a TUE include the following:
 
►
The absence of treatment would pose a significant detriment 
to the athlete’s health.
 
►
Treatment will produce no performance-enhancing effect, 
other than the return to the athlete’s normal state of health.
 
►
No reasonable permitted therapeutic alternative exists.
TUEs can also be provided retroactively, if the treatment 
was provided in an acute situation. Retroactive TUEs are also 
allowed under exceptional circumstances, such as insufficient 
opportunity to submit an application.
There is limited literature to suggest that any analgesics 
enhance performance. Small, unblinded studies typically 
involving non-elite subjects have suggested that paracetamol can 
improve time to exhaustion260 or decrease perceived exertion in a 
graded run.261 262 NSAIDs have no effect on sprinting,263 vertical 
jumping or endurance running performance but can decrease 
soreness.2 263–265 Opioids can decrease pain265 and increase 
anaerobic performance265 but not overall physical performance 
after muscle damage.265 Opioids can increase tolerance to pain 
associated with tourniquet-induced ischaemia,266 but the transla-
tion to elite athlete performance is unclear. Attenuated afferent 
feedback following opioid use may cause a greater rate of accu-
mulation of muscle metabolites and excessive development of 
peripheral muscle fatigue.267 Cannabis can reduce anxiety,242 268 
but no ergogenic effects have been demonstrated.242 269
Pain management decisions should be made carefully, 
respecting confidentiality issues and ensuring appropriate 
consent where appropriate. The use of analgesics should be 
guided by pain severity and anticipated RTP
, as noted above, 
and by the core principles described in this consensus document. 
Items on the Prohibited List should be used sparingly to globally 
regulate this important area of professional practice and allow 
individualised yet responsible treatment.
sPeCiAl ConsiderATions: PArAlymPiC AThleTes
Para-athletes can experience more pain than their able-bodied 
counterparts, perhaps because of an increased incidence of inju-
ries in their sports, or the nature of a specific impairment.270 271 
Although pain or discomfort in para-athletes can be a common 
clinical feature among those within each of the 10 recognised 
impairment categories, more severe pain can occur in those 
experiencing stump pain, phantom limb pain, spasticity-related 
pain or in those who have suffered spinal cord injuries.272
Central neuropathic pain is common in athletes following 
a spinal cord injury or stroke or in those with multiple scle-
rosis.273 One study estimated the incidence of neuropathic pain 
following a spinal cord injury to be 53% for neuropathic pain 
at the level of the lesion, and 27% for neuropathic pain below 
the level of the lesion.274 Phantom limb pain can affect up to 
80% of lower limb amputees, and pain in the stump residuum 
can occur in 55%–76% of these individuals.275 Chronic muscu-
loskeletal pain is estimated to occur in 60%–80% of individuals 
with cerebral palsy and reflects increased muscle tone, dystonia 
and spasticity.276 277 The use of pain medications, particularly 
those used to treat chronic neuropathic pain, is therefore higher 
in para-athletes than in their able-bodied counterparts.278 279
eThiCAl issues
Understanding how pain is experienced by an athlete is 
important.280 Part of the socialisation of athletes in male sport 
includes a degree of (hyper)masculinisation, leading to efforts 
to disregard or downplay pain and injury.281 Similar norms may 
exist in women’s and girls’ sports.282 More recently, the literature 
has addressed the phenomenology (felt experience) of pain283; 
pain may be an everyday experience for elite athletes, and an 
Table 5 2017 WADA Prohibited List
Prohibited at all times
Prohibited 
substances
 
► S0: Non-approved substances
 
► S1: Anabolic agents
 
► S2: Peptide hormones, growth factors, related substance 
and mimetics
 
► S3: Beta-2 agonists
 
► S4: Hormone and metabolic modulators
 
► S5: Diuretics and masking agents
Prohibited methods
 
► M1: Manipulation of blood and blood components
 
► M2: Chemical and physical manipulation
 
► M3: Gene doping
Prohibited in competition only
Prohibited 
substances in all 
sports
 
► Stimulants
 
► Narcotics
 
► Buprenorphine; dextromoramide; diamorphine (heroin); 
fentanyl and its derivatives; hydromorphone; methadone; 
morphine; nicomorphine; oxycodone; oxymorphone; 
pentazocine; pethidine
 
► Cannabinoids
 
► Glucocorticoids
Prohibited 
substances in select 
sports
 
► Alcohol
 
► Beta-blockers
WADA, World Anti-Doping Agency.
group.bmj.com
 on August 21, 2017 - Published by 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
 1253
Hainline B, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:1245–1258. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2017-097884
Consensus statement
abrupt change in pain experience may indicate a clinically rele-
vant change in biomechanical, psychological or social factors.284
Managing pain in elite athletes must account for the tension 
between ignoring or masking pain versus understanding the 
protective role of pain in the presence of injury. The IOC medical 
code is clear in this regard and asserts that ‘The health and the 
welfare of athletes are pre-eminent and prevail over competitive, 
economic, legal or political considerations’.285 This principle 
emphasises the primacy and protects the integrity of the clinical 
encounter, which is pre-eminent in ensuring appropriate pain 
management. Pain and injury mechanisms can be complex; the 
clinician must have appropriate time and space to diagnose and 
delineate treatment options.
The principle of respect for patient autonomy is codified in 
procedures for informed consent.286 These processes seek to 
assure the patient’s comprehension and his/her voluntary deci-
sion making. It is not always clear when an athlete makes an 
informed choice to ‘play through pain’ and when he/she may 
be under duress from stakeholders within their sports environ-
ment.287–289 The principle of non-maleficence (do no harm) must 
guide the clinician’s actions and recommendations to the patient 
in acute pain. In chronic pain contexts, however, there are 
broader opportunities for discussions with the patient, including 
an evaluation of short-term and long-term goals, the potential 
for emotional conflicts that may arise with prolonged suffering 
and the possibility of more pronounced external influences 
on ethical decision making.280 290 Therefore, an informed and 
well-documented discussion should occur between the clinician, 
the broader healthcare team and the athlete when considering 
approaches to the management of chronic pain.291
fuTure direCTions
Pain management in the elite athlete should always follow prin-
ciples of good medicine, be multidisciplinary and occur with the 
understanding that pain and injury are not the same. Further 
research and increased consistency in measures and methods 
across studies are needed to better understand the incidence and 
prevalence of analgesic medication use in sport, and the benefits 
and risks of various pharmacological and non-pharmacological 
treatments, and their combinations, for specific pain presenta-
tions. There is an urgent need to increase awareness of sports 
medicine physicians of recent advances in the understanding of 
pain and its management through evidence-based guidance, as 
well as for increased research on pain and its management in 
elite athletes, in order to improve treatment of this important 
problem. Given that pain is commonly self-managed by athletes 
using over-the-counter pain medications or supplements, infor-
mation specifically aimed at athletes on the safe and efficacious 
use of pain medications is also warranted.
Author affiliations
1National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA), Indianapolis, Indiana, USA
2Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch, South Africa
3World Anti-Doping Agency, Montreal, Canada
4International Olympic Committee, Lausanne, Switzerland
5Aichi Medical University, Nagakute, Japan
6Department of Neurology, Schulthess Clinic Zurich, Zürich, Switzerland
7Department of Health Policy and Management, Indiana University, Indianapolis, 
Indiana, USA
8University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA
9Swansea University, Swansea, UK
10University of Calgary, Calgary, Canada
11University of South Australia, Adelaide, South Australia
12University of Ibadan College of Medicine, Ibadan, Nigeria
13Cricket Australia, Melbourne, Australia
14University of Ottawa Heart Institute, Ottawa, Canada
15Chief Medical Adviser, Koninklijke Nederlandse Lawn Tennis Bond (KNLTB), 
Amersfoort, The Netherlands
16Oslo University, Oslo, Norway
17Hanover Medical School, Hanover, Germany
18East Kent Hospitals University NHS Foundation Trust, Canterbury, Great Britain
19Mark Stuart, Bpharm FFRPS FRPharmS, BJM, London, UK
20University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA
21MBBS MRCP, McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, Canada
22International Olympic Committee Medical and Scientific Games Group, Lausanne, 
Switzerland
disclaimer This consensus paper provides an overview of pain management issues 
in elite athletes that are important to physicians and other clinicians who treat 
elite athletes. It is not intended as a clinical practice guideline or legal standard 
of care and should not be interpreted as such. This consensus paper serves as a 
guide and, as such, is of a general nature, consistent with the reasonable practice 
of the healthcare professional. Individual treatment will depend on the facts and 
circumstances specific to each individual case.
Competing interests None declared.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of the 
article) 2017. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless otherwise 
expressly granted.
RefeRences
 1 Huang SH, Johnson K, Pipe AL. The use of dietary supplements and medications 
by Canadian athletes at the Atlanta and Sydney Olympic Games. Clin J Sport Med 
2006;16:27–33.
 2 Da Silva ER, De Rose EH, Ribeiro JP, et al. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory use in the 
XV Pan-American Games (2007). Br J Sports Med 2011;45:91–4.
 3 Tscholl P, Junge A, Dvorak J. The use of medication and nutritional supplements 
during FIFA World Cups 2002 and 2006. Br J Sports Med 2008;42:725–30.
 4 Derman EW, Schwellnus MP. Pain management in sports medicine: Use and abuse of 
anti-inflammatory and other agents. South African Family Practice 2010;52:27–32.
 5 Sawyer GA, Anderson BC, Raukar NP, et al. Intramuscular ketorolac injections in the 
athlete. Sports Health 2012;4:319–27.
 6 Warden SJ. Prophylactic use of NSAIDs by Athletes: a risk/benefit assessment. Phys 
Sportsmed 2010;38:132–8.
 7 Corrigan B, Kazlauskas R. Medication Use in Athletes selected for doping control at 
the Sydney Olympics (2000). Clinical Journal of Sport Medicine 2003;13:33–40.
 8 Alaranta A, Alaranta H, Heliövaara M, et al. Ample use of physician-prescribed 
medications in finnish elite Athletes. Int J Sports Med 2006;27:919–25.
 9 Suzic Lazic J, Dikic N, Radivojevic N, et al. Dietary supplements and medications in 
elite sport – polypharmacy or real need? Scand J Med Sci Sports 2011;21:260–7.
 10 Thuyne WV, Delbeke FT. Declared use of medication in sports. Clin J Sport Med 
2008;18:143–7.
 11 Tscholl P, Alonso JM, Dollé G, et al. The use of drugs and nutritional supplements in 
top-level track and field athletes. Am J Sports Med 2010;38:133–40.
 12 Outram SM, Stewart B. Condemning and condoning: Elite amateur 
cyclists’ perspectives on drug use and professional cycling. Int J Drug Policy 
2015;26:682–7.
 13 Tricker R. Painkilling drugs in collegiate athletics: knowledge, attitudes, and use of 
student athletes. J Drug Educ 2000;30:313–24.
 14 Taioli E. Use of permitted drugs in Italian professional soccer players. Br J Sports Med 
2007;41:439–41.
 15 Küster M, Renner B, Oppel P, et al. Consumption of analgesics before a marathon 
and the incidence of cardiovascular, gastrointestinal and renal problems: a cohort 
study. BMJ Open 2013;3:e002090.
 16 Warner DC, Schnepf G, Barrett MS, et al. Prevalence, attitudes, and behaviors related 
to the use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) in student athletes.  
J Adolesc Health 2002;30:150–3.
 17 Paoloni JA, Milne C, Orchard J, et al. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in sports 
medicine: guidelines for practical but sensible use. Br J Sports Med 2009;43:863–5.
 18 Tsitsimpikou C, Tsiokanos A, Tsarouhas K, et al. Medication use by athletes at the 
Athens 2004 Summer Olympic Games. Clin J Sport Med 2009;19:33–8.
 19 Hainline B, Turner J, Caneiro J, et al. Pain in elite athletes: neurophysiological, 
biomechanical and psychosocial considerations. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:1259–64.
 20 Loeser JD, Treede RD. The Kyoto protocol of IASP basic pain terminology. Pain 
2008;137:473–7.
 21 Vardeh D, Mannion RJ, Woolf CJ. Toward a Mechanism-Based approach to pain 
diagnosis. J Pain 2016;17(9 Suppl):T50–T69.
 22 Jensen TS, Baron R, Haanpää M, et al. A new definition of neuropathic pain. Pain 
2011;152:2204–5.
 23 Kosek E, Cohen M, Baron R, et al. Do we need a third mechanistic descriptor for 
chronic pain states? Pain 2016;157:1382–6.
group.bmj.com
 on August 21, 2017 - Published by 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
 1254
Hainline B, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:1245–1258. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2017-097884
Consensus statement
 24 Tracey I, Mantyh PW. The cerebral signature for pain perception and its modulation. 
Neuron 2007;55:377–91.
 25 Engebretsen L, Soligard T, Steffen K, et al. Sports injuries and illnesses during the 
London Summer Olympic Games 2012. Br J Sports Med 2013;47:407–14.
 26 Swenson DM, Yard EE, Fields SK, et al. Patterns of recurrent injuries among US high 
school Athletes, 2005-2008. Am J Sports Med 2009;37:1586–93.
 27 Steindler A. Kinesiology of the human body: under normal and pathological 
conditions. Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas Pub Ltd, 1955.
 28 Prien A, Mountjoy M, Miller J, et al. Injury and illness in aquatic sport: how high is 
the risk? A comparison of results from three FINA World Championships. Br J Sports 
Med 2017;51.
 29 DiFiori JP, Benjamin HJ, Brenner J, et al. Overuse injuries and burnout in youth sports: 
a position statement from the American Medical Society for Sports Medicine. Clin J 
Sport Med 2014;24:3–20.
 30 Paterno MV, Taylor-Haas JA, Myer GD, et al. Prevention of overuse sports injuries in 
the young athlete. Orthop Clin North Am 2013;44:553–64.
 31 Gabbett TJ. The training-injury prevention paradox: should athletes be training 
smarter and harder? Br J Sports Med 2016;50:273–80.
 32 Hulin BT, Gabbett TJ, Lawson DW, et al. The acute:chronic workload ratio predicts 
injury: high chronic workload may decrease injury risk in elite rugby league players. 
Br J Sports Med 2016;50:231–6.
 33 Fagher K, Jacobsson J, Timpka T, et al. The Sports-Related Injuries and Illnesses in 
Paralympic Sport Study (SRIIPSS): a study protocol for a prospective longitudinal 
study. BMC Sports Sci Med Rehabil 2016;8:28–37.
 34 Yang J, Tibbetts AS, Covassin T, et al. Epidemiology of overuse and acute injuries 
among competitive collegiate athletes. J Athl Train 2012;47:198–204.
 35 Moseley GL, Butler DS. Fifteen years of explaining pain: The Past, present, and future. 
J Pain 2015;16:807–13.
 36 Moseley GL, Vlaeyen JW. Beyond nociception: the imprecision hypothesis of chronic 
pain. Pain 2015;156:35–8.
 37 Wallwork SB, Bellan V, Catley MJ, et al. Neural representations and the cortical 
body matrix: implications for sports medicine and future directions. Br J Sports Med 
2016;50:990–6.
 38 Grant ME, Steffen K, Glasgow P, et al. The role of sports physiotherapy at the London 
2012 Olympic Games. Br J Sports Med 2014;48:63–70.
 39 Rajan P, Bellare B. Referring doctors’ perspectives about Physiotherapy management 
for chronic musculoskeletal pain. International Journal of Therapies and 
Rehabilitation Research 2013;2:15–21.
 40 Spetch LA, Kolt GS. Adherence to sport injury rehabilitation: implications for sports 
medicine providers and researchers. Physical Therapy in Sport 2001;2:80–90.
 41 Ardern CL, Webster KE, Taylor NF, et al. Return to sport following anterior cruciate 
ligament reconstruction surgery: a systematic review and meta-analysis of the state 
of play. Br J Sports Med 2011;45:596–606.
 42 Czuppon S, Racette BA, Klein SE, et al. Variables associated with return to sport 
following anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction: a systematic review. Br J Sports 
Med 2014;48:356–64.
 43 Lentz TA, Zeppieri G, George SZ, et al. Comparison of physical impairment, 
functional, and psychosocial measures based on fear of reinjury/lack of 
confidence and return-to-sport status after ACL reconstruction. Am J Sports Med 
2015;43:345–53.
 44 te Wierike SC, van der Sluis A, van den Akker-Scheek I, et al. Psychosocial factors 
influencing the recovery of athletes with anterior cruciate ligament injury: a 
systematic review. Scand J Med Sci Sports 2013;23:527–40.
 45 Forsdyke D, Smith A, Jones M, et al. Psychosocial factors associated with outcomes 
of sports injury rehabilitation in competitive athletes: a mixed studies systematic 
review. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:537–44.
 46 Podlog L, Heil J, Schulte S. Psychosocial factors in sports injury rehabilitation and 
return to play. Phys Med Rehabil Clin N Am 2014;25:915–30.
 47 Denegar CR SE, Saliba S. Therapeutic modalities for musculoskeletal injuries. 4 ed: 
Human Kinetics Publishers, 2015.
 48 Knight KKK, Draper DO. Therapeutic modalities: the Art and Science: lippincott 
Williams & Williams, 2012.
 49 Best TM, Hunter R, Wilcox A, et al. Effectiveness of sports massage for recovery of 
skeletal muscle from strenuous exercise. Clin J Sport Med 2008;18:446–60.
 50 Elboim-Gabyzon M, Rozen N, Laufer Y. Does neuromuscular electrical stimulation 
enhance the effectiveness of an exercise programme in subjects with knee 
osteoarthritis? A randomized controlled trial. Clin Rehabil 2013;27:246–57.
 51 Leal-Junior EC. Photobiomodulation therapy in skeletal muscle: from exercise 
performance to muscular dystrophies. Photomed Laser Surg 2015;33:53–4.
 52 Bjordal JM, Johnson MI, Iversen V, et al. Low-level laser therapy in acute pain: 
a systematic review of possible mechanisms of action and clinical effects in 
randomized placebo-controlled trials. Photomed Laser Surg 2006;24:158–68.
 53 Nogueira AC, Júnior MJ. The effects of laser treatment in tendinopathy: a systematic 
review. Acta Ortop Bras 2015;23:47–9.
 54 Tumilty S, Mani R, Baxter GD. Photobiomodulation and eccentric exercise for Achilles 
tendinopathy: a randomized controlled trial. Lasers Med Sci 2016;31:127–35.
 55 De Marchi T, Machado GP SVM , et al. Does photobiomodulation therapy work 
better than cryotherapy in muscle recovery after a high-intensity exercise? 
A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial. Lasers Med Sci 
2017;34:429–37.
 56 Malanga GA, Yan N, Stark J. Mechanisms and efficacy of heat and cold therapies for 
musculoskeletal injury. Postgrad Med 2015;127:57–65.
 57 Yu H, Randhawa K, Côté P, et al. The effectiveness of physical agents for Lower-Limb 
Soft tissue injuries: a systematic review. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 2016;46:523–54.
 58 Desmeules F, Boudreault J, Roy JS, et al. The efficacy of therapeutic ultrasound for 
rotator cuff tendinopathy: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Phys Ther Sport 
2015;16:276–84.
 59 Feger MA, Herb CC, Fraser JJ, et al. Supervised rehabilitation versus home exercise 
in the treatment of acute ankle sprains: a systematic review. Clin Sports Med 
2015;34:329–46.
 60 Feger MA, Goetschius J, Love H, et al. Electrical stimulation as a treatment 
intervention to improve function, edema or pain following acute lateral ankle 
sprains: a systematic review. Phys Ther Sport 2015;16:361–9.
 61 Sisk TD, Stralka SW, Deering MB, et al. Effect of electrical stimulation on quadriceps 
strength after reconstructive surgery of the anterior cruciate ligament. Am J Sports 
Med 1987;15:215–20.
 62 Brummitt J. The role of massage in sports performance and rehabilitation: current 
evidence and future direction. N Am J Sports Phys Ther 2008;3:7.
 63 Poppendieck WWM, Ferrauti A , et al. Massage and performance recovery and injury 
prevention. Sports Medicine 2016;46:183–204.
 64 Weerapong P, Hume PA, Kolt GS. The mechanisms of massage and effects on 
performance, muscle recovery and injury prevention. Sports Med 2005;35:235–56.
 65 Quintner JL, Bove GM, Cohen ML. A critical evaluation of the trigger point 
phenomenon. Rheumatology 2015;54:392–9.
 66 Mauntel TC, Clark MA, Padua DA. Effectiveness of Myofascial Release Therapies on 
Physical Performance Measurements: A Systematic Review. Athletic Training & Sports 
Health Care 2014;6:189–96.
 67 Meakins A. Soft tissue sore spots of an unknown origin. Br J Sports Med 
2015;49:348.
 68 Dommerholt J, Bron C, Franssen J. Myofascial trigger Points: an evidence-informed 
review. Journal of Manual & Manipulative Therapy 2006;14:203–21.
 69 Cox J, Varatharajan S, Côté P, et al. Are Acupuncture Therapies Effective for the 
management of musculoskeletal disorders fo the Extremeties? A systematic 
review by the Ontario Protocol for Traffic INjury Management (Optima) 
Collaboration. The Journal of Orthopaedic and Sports Physical Therapy 
2016;46:409–29.
 70 Barlas P, Robinson J, Allen J, et al. Lack of effect of acupuncture upon signs and 
symptoms of delayed onset muscle soreness. Clin Physiol 2000;20:449–56.
 71 Kleinhenz J, Streitberger K, Windeler J, et al. Randomised clinical trial comparing 
the effects of acupuncture and a newly designed placebo needle in rotator cuff 
tendinitis. Pain 1999;83:235–41.
 72 Tejero-Fernández V, Membrilla-Mesa M, Galiano-Castillo N, et al. Immunological 
effects of massage after exercise: A systematic review. Phys Ther Sport 
2015;16:187–92.
 73 Gerwin RD, Dommerholt J, Shah JP. An expansion of Simons’ integrated hypothesis 
of trigger point formation. Curr Pain Headache Rep 2004;8:468–75.
 74 Simons DG, Travell JG, Simons LS, et al. Travell & Simons’ Myofascial Pain and 
Dysfunction: The Trigger Point Manual. Volume 1. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins 1999.
 75 Mora-Relucio R, Núñez-Nagy S, Gallego-Izquierdo T, et al. Experienced versus 
Inexperienced Interexaminer Reliability on Location and Classification of Myofascial 
Trigger Point Palpation to Diagnose Lateral Epicondylalgia: An Observational Cross-
Sectional Study. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med 2016;2016:1–8.
 76 Cambron JA, Dexheimer J, Coe P. Changes in blood pressure after various 
forms of therapeutic massage: a preliminary study. J Altern Complement Med 
2006;12:65–70.
 77 Stone DA, Kerr CE, Jacobson E, et al. Patient expectations in placebo-controlled 
randomized clinical trials. J Eval Clin Pract 2005;11:77–84.
 78 Turner JA, Jensen MP, Warms CA, et al. Blinding effectiveness and association of 
pretreatment expectations with pain improvement in a double-blind randomized 
controlled trial. Pain 2002;99:91–9.
 79 Semino E. The adaptation of metaphors across genres. Review of Cognitive 
Linguistics 2011;9:130–52.
 80 Sluka KA, Skyba DA, Radhakrishnan R, et al. Joint mobilization reduces hyperalgesia 
associated with chronic muscle and joint inflammation in rats. J Pain 2006;7:602–7.
 81 Moss P, Sluka K, Wright A. The initial effects of knee joint mobilization on 
osteoarthritic hyperalgesia. Man Ther 2007;12:109–18.
 82 Bennell K, Hinman R. Exercise as a treatment for osteoarthritis. Curr Opin Rheumatol 
2005;17:634–40.
 83 Jansen MJ, Viechtbauer W, Lenssen AF, et al. Strength training alone, exercise therapy 
alone, and exercise therapy with passive manual mobilisation each reduce pain 
and disability in people with knee osteoarthritis: a systematic review. J Physiother 
2011;57:11–20.
 84 Burrows NJ, Booth J, Sturnieks DL, et al. Acute resistance exercise and pressure 
pain sensitivity in knee osteoarthritis: a randomised crossover trial. Osteoarthritis 
Cartilage 2014;22:407–14.
group.bmj.com
 on August 21, 2017 - Published by 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
 1255
Hainline B, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:1245–1258. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2017-097884
Consensus statement
 85 Tanaka R, Ozawa J, Kito N, et al. Efficacy of strengthening or aerobic exercise on 
pain relief in people with knee osteoarthritis: a systematic review and meta-analysis 
of randomized controlled trials. Clin Rehabil 2013;27:1059–71.
 86 Gusi N, Tomas-Carus P, Häkkinen A, et al. Exercise in waist-high warm water 
decreases pain and improves health-related quality of life and strength in the lower 
extremities in women with Fibromyalgia. Arthritis Rheum 2006;55:66–73.
 87 Busch AJ, Schachter CL, Overend TJ, et al. Exercise for Fibromyalgia: a systematic 
review. J Rheumatol 2008;35:1130–44.
 88 Kayo AH, Peccin MS, Sanches CM, et al. Effectiveness of physical activity in reducing 
pain in patients with Fibromyalgia: a blinded randomized clinical trial. Rheumatol Int 
2012;32:2285–92.
 89 Hooten WM, Qu W, Townsend CO, et al. Effects of strength vs aerobic exercise 
on pain severity in adults with Fibromyalgia: a randomized equivalence trial. Pain 
2012;153:915–23.
 90 Jm T. Exercise in muscle pain disorder. PM&R: The journal of injury, function and 
rehabilitation 2012;4:889–93.
 91 Busch A. Resistance exercise training for Fibromyalgia. The Cochrane Library: 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2012.
 92 Larrson APA, Löfgren M, et al. Resistance exercise improves muscle strength, health 
status and pain intensity in Fibromyalgia: a randomized controlled trial. Arthritis 
Research &Amp. Therapy 2015;17:161.
 93 Nelson NL. Muscle strengthening activities and fibromyalgia: a review of pain and 
strength outcomes. J Bodyw Mov Ther 2015;19:370–6.
 94 Ferrell BA, Josephson KR, Pollan AM, et al. A randomized trial of walking versus 
physical methods for chronic pain management. Aging 1997;9:99–105.
 95 Falla D, Jull G, Hodges P, et al. An endurance-strength training regime is effective in 
reducing myoelectric manifestations of cervical flexor muscle fatigue in females with 
chronic neck pain. Clin Neurophysiol 2006;117:828–37.
 96 Boecker H, Sprenger T, Spilker ME, et al. The runner’s high: opioidergic mechanisms 
in the human brain. Cereb Cortex 2008;18:2523–31.
 97 Fuss J, Steinle J, Bindila L, et al. A runner’s high depends on cannabinoid receptors in 
mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2015;112:13105–8.
 98 Gleeson M, Bishop NC, Stensel DJ, et al. The anti-inflammatory effects of exercise: 
mechanisms and implications for the prevention and treatment of disease. Nat Rev 
Immunol 2011;11:607–15.
 99 Pagano RL, Fonoff ET, Dale CS, et al. Motor cortex stimulation inhibits thalamic 
sensory neurons and enhances activity of PAG neurons: possible pathways for 
antinociception. Pain 2012;153:2359–69.
 
100 França NR, Toniolo EF, Franciosi AC, et al. Antinociception induced by motor cortex 
stimulation: somatotopy of behavioral response and profile of neuronal activation. 
Behav Brain Res 2013;250:211–21.
 
101 Fonoff ET, Dale CS, Pagano RL, et al. Antinociception induced by epidural motor 
cortex stimulation in naive conscious rats is mediated by the opioid system. Behav 
Brain Res 2009;196:63–70.
 
102 Rio E, Kidgell D, Purdam C, et al. Isometric exercise induces analgesia and reduces 
inhibition in patellar tendinopathy. Br J Sports Med 2015;49:1277–83.
 
103 Rio E, Kidgell D, Moseley GL, et al. Tendon neuroplastic training: changing the 
way we think about tendon rehabilitation: a narrative review. Br J Sports Med 
2016;50:209–15.
 
104 Rio E, Moseley L, Purdam C, et al. The pain of tendinopathy: physiological or 
pathophysiological? Sports Med 2014;44:9–23.
 
105 Rio E, van Ark M, Docking S, et al. Isometric contractions Are more analgesic than 
isotonic contractions for patellar tendon pain: an in-season randomized clinical trial. 
Clin J Sport Med 2017;27:253-259.
 
106 De C Williams A, Eccleston C, Morley S. Psychological therapies for the management 
of chronic pain (excluding headache) in adults: The Cochrane Library, 2012.
 
107 Ross MJ, Berger RS. Effects of stress inoculation training on athletes’ postsurgical 
pain and rehabilitation after orthopedic injury. J Consult Clin Psychol 
1996;64:406–10.
 
108 Richmond H, Hall AM, Copsey B, et al. The effectiveness of cognitive behavioural 
treatment for non-specific low back pain: a Systematic review and meta-analysis. 
PLoS One 2015;10:e0134192.
 
109 Cherkin DC, Sherman KJ, Balderson BH, et al. Effect of mindfulness-based stress 
reduction vs cognitive behavioral therapy or usual care on back pain and functional 
limitations in adults with chronic low back Pain. JAMA 2016;315:1240–9.
 
110 Nicholas MK, George SZ. Psychologically informed interventions for low back pain: 
an update for physical therapists. Phys Ther 2011;91:765–76.
 
111 Fullagar H, Skorski S, Duffield R, et al. The effect of an acute sleep hygiene 
strategy following a late-night soccer match on recovery of players. Chronobiol Int 
2016;33:490–505.
 
112 Tuomilehto H, Vuorinen VP, Penttilä E, et al. Sleep of professional athletes: 
Underexploited potential to improve health and performance. J Sports Sci 
2017;35:704–10.
 
113 Lee YC, Chibnik LB, Lu B, et al. The relationship between disease activity, sleep, 
psychiatric distress and pain sensitivity in rheumatoid arthritis: a cross-sectional 
study. Arthritis Res Ther 2009;11:R160.
 
114 Ohayon MM. Pain sensitivity, depression, and sleep deprivation: links with 
serotoninergic dysfunction. J Psychiatr Res 2009;43:1243–5.
 
115 Smith MT, Wickwire EM, Grace EG, et al. Sleep disorders and their association 
with laboratory pain sensitivity in temporomandibular joint disorder. Sleep 
2009;32:779–90.
 
116 Kelly GA, Blake C, Power CK, et al. The association between chronic low back pain 
and sleep: a systematic review. Clin J Pain 2011;27:169–81.
 
117 Okifuji A, Hare BD. Do sleep disorders contribute to pain sensitivity? Curr Rheumatol 
Rep 2011;13:528–34.
 
118 Faraut B, Léger D, Medkour T, et al. Napping reverses increased pain sensitivity due 
to sleep restriction. PLoS One 2015;10:e0117425.
 
119 Sivertsen B, Lallukka T, Petrie KJ, et al. Sleep and pain sensitivity in adults. Pain 
2015;156:1433–9.
 
120 De Niet GJ, Tiemens BG, Kloos MW, et al. Review of systematic reviews about the 
efficacy of non-pharmacological interventions to improve sleep quality in insomnia. 
Int J Evid Based Healthc 2009;7:233–42.
 
121 Mendoza ME, Capafons A, Gralow JR, et al. Randomized controlled trial of 
the Valencia model of waking hypnosis plus CBT for pain, fatigue, and sleep 
management in patients with cancer and cancer survivors. Psychooncology 2016.
 
122 Winbush NY, Gross CR, Kreitzer MJ. The effects of mindfulness-based stress 
reduction on sleep disturbance: a systematic review. Explore 2007;3:585–91.
 
123 Edinger JD, Wohlgemuth WK, Radtke RA, et al. Treatment of chronic primary 
insomnia: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2001;285:1856–64.
 
124 Vitiello MV, Rybarczyk B, Von Korff M, et al. Cognitive behavioral therapy for 
insomnia improves sleep and decreases pain in older adults with co-morbid 
insomnia and osteoarthritis. J Clin Sleep Med 2009;5:355–62.
 
125 Manber R, Bernert RA, Suh S, et al. CBT for insomnia in patients with high and low 
depressive symptom severity: adherence and clinical outcomes. J Clin Sleep Med 
2011;7:645–52.
 
126 Watkins LR, Hutchinson MR, Milligan ED, et al. “Listening” and “talking” to 
neurons: implications of immune activation for pain control and increasing the 
efficacy of opioids. Brain Res Rev 2007;56:148–69.
 
127 Magni G, Caldieron C, Rigatti-Luchini S, et al. Chronic musculoskeletal pain and 
depressive symptoms in the general population. An analysis of the 1st National 
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey data. Pain 1990;43:299–307.
 
128 Thomas J, Millot JM, Sebille S, et al. Free and total magnesium in lymphocytes of 
migraine patients - effect of magnesium-rich mineral water intake. Clin Chim Acta 
2000;295(1-2):63–75.
 
129 Trauninger A, Pfund Z, Koszegi T, et al. Oral magnesium load test in patients with 
migraine. Headache 2002;42:114–9.
 
130 Geusens P, Wouters C, Nijs J, et al. Long-term effect of omega-3 fatty acid 
supplementation in active rheumatoid arthritis. A 12-month, double-blind, controlled 
study. Arthritis Rheum 1994;37:824–9.
 
131 Gaikwad M, Vanlint S, Mittinity M, et al. Does vitamin D supplementation alleviate 
chronic nonspecific musculoskeletal pain? A systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Clin Rheumatol 2017;36:1201–8.
 
132 Straube S, Derry S, Straube C, et al. Vitamin D for the treatment of chronic painful 
conditions in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015;5:CD007771.
 
133 Goldberg RJ, Katz J. A meta-analysis of the analgesic effects of omega-3 
polyunsaturated fatty acid supplementation for inflammatory joint pain. Pain 
2007;129(1-2):210–23.
 
134 Mauro GL, Martorana U, Cataldo P, et al. Vitamin B12 in low back pain: a 
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci 
2000;4:53–8.
 
135 Brill S, Sedgwick PM, Hamann W, et al. Efficacy of intravenous magnesium in 
neuropathic pain. Br J Anaesth 2002;89:711–4.
 
136 Terry R, Posadzki P, Watson LK, et al. The use of ginger (Zingiber officinale) 
for the treatment of pain: a systematic review of clinical trials. Pain Med 
2011;12:1808–18.
 
137 Agarwal KA, Tripathi CD, Agarwal BB, et al. Efficacy of turmeric (curcumin) in pain 
and postoperative fatigue after laparoscopic cholecystectomy: a double-blind, 
randomized placebo-controlled study. Surg Endosc 2011;25:3805–10.
 
138 Henrotin Y, Priem F, Mobasheri A. Curcumin: a new paradigm and therapeutic 
opportunity for the treatment of osteoarthritis: curcumin for osteoarthritis 
management. Springerplus 2013;2:56.
 
139 Chandran B, Goel A. A randomized, pilot study to assess the efficacy and 
safety of curcumin in patients with active rheumatoid arthritis. Phytother Res 
2012;26:1719–25.
 
140 Hainline B. Back pain understood. Lenoia, NJ: Medicus Press, 2007.
 
141 Ogilvie-Harris DJ, Gilbart MK, Chorney K. Chronic pain following ankle sprains in 
athletes: the role of arthroscopic surgery. Arthroscopy 1997;13:564–74.
 
142 Paajanen H, Brinck T, Hermunen H, et al. Laparoscopic surgery for chronic groin pain 
in athletes is more effective than nonoperative treatment: a randomized clinical trial 
with magnetic resonance imaging of 60 patients with sportsman’s hernia (athletic 
pubalgia). Surgery 2011;150:99–107.
 
143 Tallon C, Coleman BD, Khan K, et al. Outcome of surgery for chronic achilles 
tendinopathy. The American Journal of Sports Medicine 2001;29:315–20.
 
144 Mirza SK, Deyo RA. Systematic review of randomized trials comparing lumbar 
fusion surgery to nonoperative care for treatment of chronic back pain. Spine 
2007;32:816–23.
group.bmj.com
 on August 21, 2017 - Published by 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
 1256
Hainline B, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:1245–1258. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2017-097884
Consensus statement
 
145 Ellerton J, Milani M, Blancher M, et al. Managing moderate and severe pain in 
mountain rescue. High Alt Med Biol 2014;15:8–14.
 
146 Ellis J. Initial management of acute pain. In: Ramamurthy SAE, Rogers JN, eds. 
Decision making in Pain Management. 2. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2006:2–4.
 
147 McDonagh DZD. The IOC Manual of Emergency Sports Medicine. Hoboken, NJ: 
Wiley-Blackwell, 2015.
 
148 Lyrtzis C, Natsis K, Papadopoulos C, et al. Efficacy of paracetamol versus diclofenac 
for Grade II ankle sprains. Foot Ankle Int 2011;32:571–5.
 
149 Paoloni JA, Orchard JW. The use of therapeutic medications for soft-tissue injuries in 
sports medicine. Med J Aust 2005;183:384–8.
 
150 Jones P, Dalziel SR, Lamdin R, et al. Oral non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs 
versus other oral analgesic agents for acute soft tissue injury. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev 2015;7:CD007789.
 
151 Mehallo CJ, Drezner JA, Bytomski JR. Practical management: nonsteroidal 
antiinflammatory drug (NSAID) use in athletic injuries. Clin J Sport Med 
2006;16:170–4.
 
152 Orchard JW. Benefits and risks of using local anaesthetic for pain relief to allow early 
return to play in professional football. Br J Sports Med 2002;36:209–13.
 
153 Raffa RB. Pharmacology of oral combination analgesics: rational therapy for pain.  
J Clin Pharm Ther 2001;26:257–64.
 
154 Orchard JW, Steet E, Massey A, et al. Long-term safety of using local anesthetic 
injections in professional rugby league. Am J Sports Med 2010;38:2259–66.
 
155 Dhillon S. Tramadol/Paracetamol Fixed-Dose Combination. Clinical Drug Investigation 
2010;30:711–38.
 
156 Veliz PT, Boyd C, McCabe SE. Playing through pain: sports participation and 
nonmedical use of opioid medications among adolescents. Am J Public Health 
2013;103:e28–e30.
 
157 Feucht CL, Patel DR. Analgesics and anti-inflammatory medications in sports: use 
and abuse. Pediatr Clin North Am 2010;57:751–74.
 
158 Moore RA, Wiffen PJ, Derry S, et al. Non-prescription (OTC) oral analgesics for 
acute pain - an overview of Cochrane reviews. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2015:CD010794.
 
159 Graham GG, Scott KF, Day RO. Tolerability of paracetamol. Drug Saf 
2005;28:227–40.
 
160 Dahl V, Dybvik T, Steen T, et al. Ibuprofen vs. acetaminophen vs. ibuprofen 
and acetaminophen after arthroscopically assisted anterior cruciate ligament 
reconstruction. Eur J Anaesthesiol 2004;21:471–5.
 
161 Derry CJ, Derry S, Moore RA. Single dose oral ibuprofen plus paracetamol 
(acetaminophen) for acute postoperative pain. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2013:CD010210.
 
162 Juhl G, Norholt S, Tonnesen E, et al. Paracetamol may be started in 2 g orally, then 
1 g bid 4 for the healthy adult > 60 kg. Eur J Pain 2006;10:371–7.
 
163 Tokish JM PE, Schlegel T , et al. Ketorolac use in the National Football League: 
prevalence, efficacy, and adverse effects. Phys Sportsmed The Physician and Sports 
Medicine 2002;30:19–24.
 
164 Matava MJ. Ethical Considerations for Analgesic Use in Sports Medicine. Clin Sports 
Med 2016;35:227–43.
 
165 Slappendel R, Weber EW, Benraad B, et al. Does ibuprofen increase perioperative 
blood loss during hip arthroplasty? Eur J Anaesthesiol 2002;19:829–31.
 
166 Fernández-Serrano MJ, Pérez-García M, Verdejo-García A. What are the specific vs. 
generalized effects of drugs of abuse on neuropsychological performance? Neurosci 
Biobehav Rev 2011;35:377–406.
 
167 Zacny JP. A review of the effects of opioids on psychomotor and cognitive 
functioning in humans. Exp Clin Psychopharmacol 1995;3:432–66.
 
168 The World Anti-Doping Code International Standard: prohibited list: WADA, 2017.
 
169 Coombes BK, Bisset L, Vicenzino B. Efficacy and safety of corticosteroid injections 
and other injections for management of tendinopathy: a systematic review of 
randomised controlled trials. Lancet 2010;376:1751–67.
 
170 Cook JL, Purdam CR. The challenge of managing tendinopathy in competing 
athletes. Br J Sports Med 2014;48:506–9.
 
171 Nichols A. Complications associated with the use of corticosteroids in the treatment 
of athletic injuries. Clinical Journal of Sports Medicine 2005;15:370–5.
 
172 Cheng J, Abdi S. Complications of joint, tendon, and muscle injections. Tech Reg 
Anesth Pain Manag 2007;11:141–7.
 
173 Nepple JJ, Matava MJ. Soft tissue injections in the athlete. Sports Health 
2009;1:396–404.
 
174 Dietzel DP, Hedlund EC. Injections and return to play. Curr Sports Med Rep 
2004;3:310–5.
 
175 Engebretsen L, Steffen K, Alsousou J, et al. IOC consensus paper on the use of 
platelet-rich plasma in sports medicine. Br J Sports Med 2010;44:1072–81.
 
176 Redler LH, Thompson SA, Hsu SH, et al. Platelet-rich plasma therapy: a systematic 
literature review and evidence for clinical use. Phys Sportsmed 2011;39:42–51.
 
177 Smith BJ, Collina SJ. Pain medications in the locker room: To dispense or not. Curr 
Sports Med Rep 2007;6:366–70.
 
178 Loveless MS, Fry AL. Pharmacologic therapies in musculoskeletal conditions. Med 
Clin North Am 2016;100:869–90.
 
179 Jüni P, Hari R, Rutjes AW, et al. Intra-articular corticosteroid for knee osteoarthritis. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015:CD005328.
 
180 McCabe PS, Maricar N, Parkes MJ, et al. The efficacy of intra-articular steroids in hip 
osteoarthritis: a systematic review. Osteoarthritis Cartilage 2016;24:1509–17.
 
181 Arroll B, Goodyear-Smith F. Corticosteroid injections for painful shoulder: a meta-
analysis. Br J Gen Pract 2005;55:224–8.
 
182 Gross C, Dhawan A, Harwood D, et al. Glenohumeral Joint Injections. Sports Health 
2013;5:153–9.
 
183 Levine WN, Bergfeld JA, Tessendorf W, et al. Intramuscular corticosteroid injection for 
hamstring injuries. Am J Sports Med 2000;28:297–300.
 
184 Gross CE, Hsu AR, Chahal J, et al. Injectable treatments for noninsertional achilles 
tendinosis: a systematic review. Foot Ankle Int 2013;34:619–28.
 
185 Krogh TP, Bartels EM, Ellingsen T, et al. Comparative effectiveness of injection 
therapies in lateral epicondylitis: a systematic review and network meta-analysis of 
randomized controlled trials. Am J Sports Med 2013;41:1435–46.
 
186 Pinto RZ, Maher CG, Ferreira ML, et al. Epidural corticosteroid injections in the 
management of sciatica: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med 
2012;157:865–77.
 
187 Shamliyan TA, Staal JB, Goldmann D, et al. Epidural steroid injections for 
radicular lumbosacral pain: a systematic review. Phys Med Rehabil Clin N Am 
2014;25:471–89.
 
188 Kreiner DS, Hwang SW, Easa JE, et al. An evidence-based clinical guideline for the 
diagnosis and treatment of lumbar disc herniation with radiculopathy. Spine J 
2014;14:180–91.
 
189 Vekaria R, Bhatt R, Ellard DR, et al. Intra-articular facet joint injections for low back 
pain: a systematic review. Eur Spine J 2016;25:1266–81.
 
190 Kennedy DJ, Engel A, Kreiner DS, et al. Fluoroscopically guided diagnostic and 
therapeutic Intra-Articular sacroiliac Joint Injections: a systematic review. Pain Med 
2015;16:1500–18.
 
191 Dragoo JL, Wasterlain AS, Braun HJ, et al. Platelet-rich plasma as a treatment for 
patellar tendinopathy: a double-blind, randomized controlled trial. Am J Sports Med 
2014;42:610–8.
 
192 Fitzpatrick J, Bulsara M, Zheng MH. Effectiveness of Platelet-Rich plasma in the 
treatment of Tendinopathy: response. Am J Sports Med 2016;44:NP55–6.
 
193 Krogh TP, Fredberg U, Stengaard-Pedersen K, et al. Treatment of lateral epicondylitis 
with platelet-rich plasma, glucocorticoid, or saline: a randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trial. Am J Sports Med 2013;41:625–35.
 
194 Lai LP, Stitik TP, Foye PM, et al. Use of platelet-rich plasma in intra-articular knee 
injections for osteoarthritis: a systematic review. Pm R 2015;7:637–48.
 
195 Laudy AB, Bakker EW, Rekers M, et al. Efficacy of platelet-rich plasma injections in 
osteoarthritis of the knee: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Sports Med 
2015;49:657–72.
 
196 Moraes VY, Lenza M, Tamaoki MJ, et al. Platelet-rich therapies for musculoskeletal 
soft tissue injuries. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014:CD010071.
 
197 Hamid MS, Yusof A, Mohamed Ali MR. Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) for acute muscle 
injury: a systematic review. PLoS One 2014;9:e90538.
 
198 Smith PA. Intra-articular autologous conditioned plasma injections provide 
safe and efficacious treatment for knee osteoarthritis: an FDA-sanctioned, 
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial. Am J Sports Med 
2016;44:884–91.
 
199 Jevsevar D, Donnelly P, Brown GA, et al. Viscosupplementation for Osteoarthritis of 
the Knee. J Bone Joint Surg Am 2015;97:2047–60.
 
200 Hunter DJ. Viscosupplementation for osteoarthritis of the knee. N Engl J Med 
2015;372:1040–7.
 
201 Brukner PKK. Clinical Sports Medicine. 5 ed. Australia: McGraw-Hill, 2016.
 
202 Brennan F, Carr DB, Cousins M. Pain management: a fundamental human right. 
Anesth Analg 2007;105:205–21.
 
203 Raffa RB. Pharmacology of oral combination analgesics: rational therapy for pain.  
J Clin Pharm Ther 2001;26:257–64.
 
204 Tayrose GA, Beutel BG, Cardone DA, et al. The masters athlete: a review of current 
exercise and treatment recommendations. Sports Health 2015;7:270–6.
 
205 Aghili RFA, Shiri M. Clinical use of Opioids. Journal of Pharmacoeconomics and 
Pharmaceutical Management 2015;1:1–5.
 
206 Dickenson AH. Mechanisms of the analgesic actions of opiates and opioids. Br Med 
Bull 1991;47:690–702.
 
207 Inturrisi CE. Clinical pharmacology of opioids for pain. Clin J Pain 2002;18:S3–13.
 
208 McQuay H. Opioids in pain management. The Lancet 1999;353:2229–32.
 
209 Chou R, Turner JA, Devine EB, et al. The effectiveness and risks of long-term opioid 
therapy for chronic pain: a systematic review for a National Institutes of Health 
Pathways to Prevention Workshop. Ann Intern Med 2015;162:276–86.
 
210 Dowell D, Haegerich TM, Chou R. CDC guideline for prescribing opioids for chronic 
Pain – United States, 2016. JAMA 2016;315:1624–45.
 
211 Kato K, Sullivan PF, Evengård B, et al. Chronic widespread pain and its comorbidities: 
a population-based study. Arch Intern Med 2006;166:1649–54.
 
212 Le Marec T, Marie-Claire C, Noble F, et al. Chronic and intermittent morphine 
treatment differently regulates opioid and dopamine systems: a role in locomotor 
sensitization. Psychopharmacology 2011;216:297–303.
 
213 Vowles KE, McEntee ML, Julnes PS, et al. Rates of opioid misuse, abuse, 
and addiction in chronic pain: a systematic review and data synthesis. Pain 
2015;156:569–76.
group.bmj.com
 on August 21, 2017 - Published by 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
 1257
Hainline B, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:1245–1258. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2017-097884
Consensus statement
 
214 CPSA Standard of Practice: prescribing drugs with potential for Misuse or Diversion. 
2017 http:// 
cpsa. 
ca/ 
standardspractice/ 
prescribing- 
drugs- 
misuse- 
diversion.
 
215 Franklin GM, Stover BD, Turner JA, et al. Disability Risk Identification Study 
Cohort. Early opioid prescription and subsequent disability among workers 
with back injuries: the disability risk identification Study cohort. Spine 
2008;33:199–204.
 
216 Shah A, Hayes CJ, Martin BC. Characteristics of initial prescription episodes and 
likelihood of Long-Term Opioid Use - United States, 2006-2015. MMWR Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep 2017;66:265–9.
 
217 Feuerstein M. Definitions of pain. Tollison C, Handbook of Chronic Pain Management 
Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1989:2–5.
 
218 Scascighini L, Toma V, Dober-Spielmann S, et al. Multidisciplinary treatment for 
chronic pain: a systematic review of interventions and outcomes. Rheumatology 
2008;47:670–8.
 
219 Flor H, Fydrich T, Turk DC. Efficacy of multidisciplinary pain treatment centers: a 
meta-analytic review. Pain 1992;49:221–30.
 
220 Jensen MP, Turner JA, Romano JM. Correlates of improvement in multidisciplinary 
treatment of chronic pain. J Consult Clin Psychol 1994;62:172–9.
 
221 Guzmán J, Esmail R, Karjalainen K, et al. Multidisciplinary rehabilitation for chronic 
low back pain: systematic review. BMJ 2001;322:1511–6.
 
222 Dworkin RH, O’Connor AB, Backonja M, et al. Pharmacologic management of 
neuropathic pain: evidence-based recommendations. Pain 2007;132:237–51.
 
223 Gourlay DL, Heit HA, Almahrezi A. Universal precautions in pain medicine: a rational 
approach to the treatment of chronic pain. Pain Med 2005;6:107–12.
 
224 Martell BA, O’Connor PG, Kerns RD, et al. Systematic review: opioid treatment for 
chronic back pain: prevalence, efficacy, and association with addiction. Ann Intern 
Med 2007;146:116–27.
 
225 Turk DC, Dworkin RH, Allen RR, et al. Core outcome domains for chronic pain clinical 
trials: immpact recommendations. Pain 2003;106:337–45.
 
226 Ardern CL, Taylor NF, Feller JA, et al. Psychological responses matter in returning to 
preinjury level of sport after anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction surgery. Am J 
Sports Med 2013;41:1549–58.
 
227 Wiffen PJ, Collins S, McQuay HJ, et al. Anticonvulsant drugs for acute and chronic 
pain. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2005.
 
228 Ettinger AB, Argoff CE. Use of antiepileptic drugs for nonepileptic conditions: 
psychiatric disorders and chronic pain. Neurotherapeutics 2007;4:75–83.
 
229 Micó JA, Ardid D, Berrocoso E, et al. Antidepressants and pain. Trends Pharmacol Sci 
2006;27:348–54.
 
230 Blier P, Abbott FV. Putative mechanisms of action of antidepressant drugs in affective 
and anxiety disorders and pain. J Psychiatry Neurosci 2001;26:37–43.
 
231 Finnerup NB, Attal N, Haroutounian S, et al. Pharmacotherapy for neuropathic pain 
in adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Neurol 2015;14:162–73.
 
232 Sindrup SH, Jensen TS. Efficacy of pharmacological treatments of neuropathic pain: 
an update and effect related to mechanism of drug action. Pain 1999;83:389–400.
 
233 Katona I, Freund TF. Endocannabinoid signaling as a synaptic circuit breaker in 
neurological disease. Nat Med 2008;14:923–30.
 
234 Lucas P. Cannabis as an adjunct to or substitute for opiates in the treatment of 
chronic pain. J Psychoactive Drugs 2012;44:125–33.
 
235 Manchikanti L, Cash KA, Damron KS, et al. Controlled substance abuse and illicit 
drug use in chronic pain patients: an evaluation of multiple variables. Pain Physician 
2006;9:215–25.
 
236 Narang S, Gibson D, Wasan AD, et al. Efficacy of dronabinol as an adjuvant 
treatment for chronic pain patients on opioid therapy. J Pain 2008;9:254–64.
 
237 Editorial: football, pain and marijuana. New York Times 2014.
 
238 Stevens AJ, Higgins MD. A systematic review of the analgesic efficacy of cannabinoid 
medications in the management of acute pain. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 
2017;61:268–80.
 
239 Campbell FA, Tramèr MR, Carroll D, et al. Are cannabinoids an effective and safe 
treatment option in the management of pain? A qualitative systematic review. BMJ 
2001;323:13.
 
240 Ueda H. Molecular mechanisms of neuropathic pain-phenotypic switch and initiation 
mechanisms. Pharmacol Ther 2006;109:57–77.
 
241 Lynch ME, Ware MA. Cannabinoids for the treatment of chronic Non-Cancer pain: 
an updated systematic review of Randomized Controlled Trials. J Neuroimmune 
Pharmacol 2015;10:293–301.
 
242 Deshpande A, Mailis-Gagnon A, Zoheiry N, et al. Efficacy and adverse effects of 
medical marijuana for chronic noncancer pain: systematic review of randomized 
controlled trials. Can Fam Physician 2015;61:e373–81.
 
243 Campos DR, Yonamine M, de Moraes Moreau RL. Marijuana as doping in sports. 
Sports Med 2003;33:395–9.
 
244 Hansen GR, Streltzer J. The psychology of pain. Emerg Med Clin North Am 
2005;23:339–48.
 
245 Orchard J, Best TM, Verrall GM. Return to play following muscle strains. Clin J Sport 
Med 2005;15:436–41.
 
246 Heiderscheit BC, Sherry MA, Silder A, et al. Hamstring strain injuries: 
recommendations for diagnosis, rehabilitation, and injury prevention. J Orthop Sports 
Phys Ther 2010;40:67–81.
 
247 Brewer B, Van Raalte JL, Cornelius AE, et al. Psychological factors, rehabilitation 
adherence, and rehabilitation outcome after anterior cruciate ligament 
reconstruction. Rehabilitation Psychology 2000;45:20–37.
 
248 Sutherland AG, Johnston AT, Hutchison JD. The new injury severity score: better 
prediction of functional recovery after musculoskeletal injury. Value Health 
2006;9:24–7.
 
249 Malliaropoulos N, Isinkaye T, Tsitas K, et al. Reinjury after acute posterior thigh 
muscle injuries in elite track and field Athletes. Am J Sports Med 2011;39:304–10.
 
250 Hägglund M, Waldén M, Ekstrand J. Previous injury as a risk factor for injury in 
elite football: a prospective study over two consecutive seasons. Br J Sports Med 
2006;40:767–72.
 
251 Warren P, Gabbe BJ, Schneider-Kolsky M, et al. Clinical predictors of time to return 
to competition and of recurrence following hamstring strain in elite australian 
footballers. Br J Sports Med 2010;44:425–9.
 
252 Ardern CL, Taylor NF, Feller JA, et al. A systematic review of the psychological 
factors associated with returning to sport following injury. Br J Sports Med 
2013;47:1120–6.
 
253 D’Mello R, Dickenson AH, D’Mello RDA. Spinal cord mechanisms of pain. Br J 
Anaesth 2008;101:8–16.
 
254 Reid E, Wallwork SB, Harvie D, et al. A New Kind of Spatial Inattention Associated 
with chronic limb pain? Ann Neurol 2016;79:701–4.
 
255 Abraira VE, Ginty DD. The sensory neurons of touch. Neuron 2013;79:618–39.
 
256 Boesch E, Bellan V, Moseley GL, et al. The effect of bodily illusions on clinical pain: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Pain 2016;157:516–29.
 
257 Wiese-bjornstal DM, Smith AM, Shaffer SM, et al. An integrated model of response 
to sport injury: Psychological and sociological dynamics. J Appl Sport Psychol 
1998;10:46–69.
 
258 Britton W. Review and critique of models of psychological adjustment to athletic 
injury. J Appl Sport Psychol 1994;6:87–100.
 
259 Wiese-Bjornstal DM. Psychology and socioculture affect injury risk, response, 
and recovery in high-intensity athletes: a consensus statement. Scand J Med Sci 
Sports;20:103–11.
 
260 World Anti-Doping Code. Montreal, Canada: Agency WA-D, 2015.
 
261 Mauger AR, Taylor L, Harding C, et al. Acute acetaminophen (paracetamol) 
ingestion improves time to exhaustion during exercise in the heat. Exp Physiol 
2014;99:164–71.
 
262 Garcin M, Mille-Hamard L, Billat V, et al. Influence of acetaminophen consumption 
on perceived exertion at the lactate concentration threshold. Percept Mot Skills 
2005;101:675–83.
 
263 Foster J, Taylor L, Chrismas BC, et al. The influence of acetaminophen on repeated 
sprint cycling performance. Eur J Appl Physiol 2014;114:41–8.
 
264 Semark A, Noakes TD, St Clair Gibson A, et al. The effect of a prophylactic dose of 
flurbiprofen on muscle soreness and sprinting performance in trained subjects. J 
Sports Sci 1999;17:197–203.
 
265 Tokmakidis SP, Kokkinidis EA, Smilios I, et al. The effects of ibuprofen on delayed 
muscle soreness and muscular performance after eccentric exercise. J Strength Cond 
Res 2003;17:53–9.
 
266 Kraemer WJ, Gómez AL, Ratamess NA, et al. Effects of Vicoprofen and 
Ibuprofen on Anaerobic Performance after Muscle damage. J Sport Rehabil 
2002;11:104–19.
 
267 Benedetti F, Pollo A, Colloca L. Opioid-mediated placebo responses boost pain 
endurance and physical performance: is it doping in sport competitions? J Neurosci 
2007;27:11934–9.
 
268 Amann M, Proctor LT, Sebranek JJ, et al. Opioid-mediated muscle afferents inhibit 
central motor drive and limit peripheral muscle fatigue development in humans. J 
Physiol 2009;587:271–83.
 
269 Lorente FO, Peretti-Watel P, Grelot L. Cannabis use to enhance sportive 
and non-sportive performances among french sport students. Addict Behav 
2005;30:1382–91.
 
270 Steadward RD, Singh M. The effects of smoking marihuana on physical performance. 
Med Sci Sports 1975;7:309–11.
 
271 Derman W, Schwellnus M, Jordaan E. Clinical characteristics of 385 illnesses of 
athletes with impairment reported on the WEB-IISS system during the London 2012 
Paralympic Games. Pm R 2014;6:S23–S30.
 
272 Derman W, Schwellnus MP, Jordaan E, et al. The incidence and patterns of illness 
at the Sochi 2014 Winter Paralympic Games: a prospective cohort study of 6564 
athlete days. Br J Sports Med 2016;50:1064–8.
 
273 Klenck C, Gebke K. Practical management: common medical problems in disabled 
athletes. Clin J Sport Med 2007;17:55–60.
 
274 Paolucci S, Martinuzzi A, Scivoletto G, et al. Italian Consensus Conference on 
Pain in Neurorehabilitation (ICCPN). Assessing and treating pain associated 
with stroke, multiple sclerosis, cerebral palsy, spinal cord injury and spasticity. 
Evidence and recommendations from the Italian Consensus Conference on Pain in 
Neurorehabilitation. Eur J Phys Rehabil Med 2016;52:827–40.
 
275 Siddall PJ, McClelland JM, Rutkowski SB, et al. A longitudinal study of the prevalence 
and characteristics of pain in the first 5 years following spinal cord injury. Pain 
2003;103:249–57.
group.bmj.com
 on August 21, 2017 - Published by 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
 1258
Hainline B, et al. Br J Sports Med 2017;51:1245–1258. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2017-097884
Consensus statement
 
276 Ephraim PL, Wegener ST, MacKenzie EJ, et al. Phantom pain, residual limb pain, 
and back pain in amputees: results of a national survey. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 
2005;86:1910–9.
 
277 Brunton L, Hall S, Passingham A, et al. The prevalence, location, severity, and daily 
impact of pain reported by youth and young adults with cerebral palsy. J Pediatr 
Rehabil Med 2016;9:177–83.
 
278 Colver A, Rapp M, Eisemann N, et al. Self-reported quality of life of adolescents 
with cerebral palsy: a cross-sectional and longitudinal analysis. Lancet 
2015;385:705–16.
 
279 Chan SC, Torok-Both GA, Billay DM, et al. Drug analysis at the 1988 Olympic Winter 
Games in Calgary. Clin Chem 1991;37:1289–96.
 
280 Aavikko A, Helenius I, Vasankari T, et al. Physician-prescribed medication use by the 
Finnish Paralympic and Olympic athletes. Clin J Sport Med 2013;23:478–82.
 
281 Cassell E. The nature of suffering and the goals of Medicine. 2 ed. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 2004.
 
282 Messner M. Masculinities and athletic careers. Gender & Society 1989;3:71–88.
 
283 Sporting Bodies, damaged selves: sociological studies of Sports-Related Injury: 
emerald Group Publishing Limited, 2004.
 
284 Hockey J, Allen-Collinson J. Digging in: The sociological phenomenology of ’doing 
endurance’ in distance-running. In: Bridel W, Markula P, Denison J, eds. Endurance 
running: a Socio-cultural examination. London: routledge, 2016:227–42.
 
285 Pike E. Doctors just say “rest and take ibuprofen.” A critical examination of 
the role of ’non-orthodox’ health care in women’s sport. Int Rev Sociol Sport 
2005;40:201–19.
 
286 Commission IMaS. Olympic Movement Medical Code: international Olympic 
Committee, 2016.
 
287 Beauchamp T. Informed Consent plato.stanford.edu2011. 2017 https:// 
plato. 
stanford. 
edu/ 
entries/ 
informed- 
consent.
 
288 Nixon HL. A social network analysis of Influences on Athletes to play with pain and 
injuries. Journal of Sport & Social Issues 1992;16:127–35.
 
289 Nixon HL. Accepting the risks of pain and injury in sport: mediated cultural 
influences on playing hurt. Sociol Sport J 1993;10:183–96.
 
290 Nixon H. Social pressure, social support, and help seeking for pain injuries in college 
sports networks. Journal of Sport and Social Issues 1994;18:340–55.
 
291 Shrier I, Safai P, Charland L. Return to play following injury: whose decision should it 
be. British Journal of Sports Medicine 2013.
group.bmj.com
 on August 21, 2017 - Published by 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
 athletes
statement on pain management in elite 
International Olympic Committee consensus
Engebretsen
Mark Stuart, Judith A Turner, Mark Ware, David Zideman and Lars
Pipe, Babette M Pluim, Johan Ræder, Christian Siebert, Mike Stewart, 
Meeuwisse, G Lorimer Moseley, Bade Omololu, John Orchard, Andrew
Deie, Jirí Dvorák, Chris Harle, Stanley A Herring, Mike McNamee, Willem 
Brian Hainline, Wayne Derman, Alan Vernec, Richard Budgett, Masataka
doi: 10.1136/bjsports-2017-097884
2017 51: 1245-1258 
Br J Sports Med 
 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/content/51/17/1245
Updated information and services can be found at: 
These include:
References
 
#BIBL
http://bjsm.bmj.com/content/51/17/1245
This article cites 262 articles, 33 of which you can access for free at: 
service
Email alerting
box at the top right corner of the online article. 
Receive free email alerts when new articles cite this article. Sign up in the
Collections
Topic
Articles on similar topics can be found in the following collections 
 (342)
Editor's choice
Notes
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions
To request permissions go to:
http://journals.bmj.com/cgi/reprintform
To order reprints go to:
http://group.bmj.com/subscribe/
To subscribe to BMJ go to:
group.bmj.com
 on August 21, 2017 - Published by 
http://bjsm.bmj.com/
Downloaded from 
