 The Florence Statement on Triclosan and Triclocarban
Rolf U. Halden,1 Avery E. Lindeman,2 Allison E. Aiello,3 David Andrews,4 William A. Arnold,5 Patricia Fair,6
Rebecca E. Fuoco,7 Laura A. Geer,8 Paula I. Johnson,9 Rainer Lohmann,10 Kristopher McNeill,11 Victoria P. Sacks,12
Ted Schettler,13 Roland Weber,14 R. Thomas Zoeller,15 and Arlene Blum16
1Biodesign Center for Environmental Security, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, USA
2Green Science Policy Institute, Berkeley, California, USA
3Department of Epidemiology, UNC Gillings School of Global Public Health, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA
4Environmental Working Group, Washington, District of Columbia, USA
5Department of Civil, Environmental, and Geo-Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA
6Medical University of South Carolina, Department of Public Health Sciences, Charleston, South Carolina, USA
7Health Research Communication Strategies, Los Angeles, California, USA
8Department of Environmental and Occupational Health Sciences, State University of New York, Downstate School of Public Health, Brooklyn, New York,
USA
9California Safe Cosmetics Program, California Department of Public Health, Richmond, California, USA
10University of Rhode Island Graduate School of Oceanography, Narragansett, Rhode Island, USA
11Institute for Biogeochemistry and Pollutant Dynamics, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
12Independent Researcher, Berkeley, California, USA
13Science and Environmental Health Network, Ames, Iowa, USA
14POPs Environmental Consulting, Schwäbisch Gmünd, Germany
15University of Massachusetts Amherst, Amherst, Massachusetts, USA
16Department of Chemistry, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, California, USA
SUMMARY: The Florence Statement on Triclosan and Triclocarban documents a consensus of more than 200 scientists and medical professionals on
the hazards of and lack of demonstrated benefit from common uses of triclosan and triclocarban. These chemicals may be used in thousands of perso-
nal care and consumer products as well as in building materials. Based on extensive peer-reviewed research, this statement concludes that triclosan
and triclocarban are environmentally persistent endocrine disruptors that bioaccumulate in and are toxic to aquatic and other organisms. Evidence of
other hazards to humans and ecosystems from triclosan and triclocarban is presented along with recommendations intended to prevent future harm
from triclosan, triclocarban, and antimicrobial substances with similar properties and effects. Because antimicrobials can have unintended adverse
health and environmental impacts, they should only be used when they provide an evidence-based health benefit. Greater transparency is needed in
product formulations, and before an antimicrobial is incorporated into a product, the long-term health and ecological impacts should be evaluated.
https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP1788
Introduction
In September 2016, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) banned nineteen antimicrobial ingredients, including tri-
closan and triclocarban, in over-the-counter consumer antiseptic
wash products based on insufficient evidence demonstrating their
safety for long-term daily use and that they reduce the spread of
illness and infection. Many of those 19 chemicals have been in
widespread use for decades, and many are still allowed in a num-
ber of other over-the-counter personal care products as well as in
consumer and building products. The FDA first indicated in a
1974 Tentative Final Monograph that there was insufficient evi-
dence to show that triclosan was effective and safe for long-term
use (Halden 2014). The FDA’s decades-long path to issuing a
final rule, and the narrow scope of the September 2016 Final
Rule (FDA 2016), indicate that existing regulatory practices are
not sufficient to protect human and ecosystem health from
adverse impacts of antimicrobial chemicals. Scientists from both
academia and nonprofit organizations coauthored The Florence
Statement in 2016 to share current scientific research on two widely
used antimicrobial chemicals and to motivate broader consideration
of the long-term impacts of antimicrobial use (see Appendix I). The
Statement was introduced at DIOXIN 2016, the 36th International
Symposium on Halogenated Persistent Organic Pollutants in Flor-
ence, Italy, and has been signed by more than 200 international sci-
entists and medical professionals (see Appendix II).
The Florence Statement on Triclosan and
Triclocarban
As scientists, medical doctors, and public health professionals,
we are concerned about the continued widespread use of the
chlorinated antimicrobials triclosan and triclocarban for the fol-
lowing reasons:
1. Triclosan and triclocarban are used as antimicrobials, a
class of chemicals present in >2,000 products includ-
ing soaps, toothpastes, detergents, clothing, toys, carpets,
plastics, and paints. In personal care products like hand
soap, there is no evidence that use of triclosan or triclo-
carban improves consumer or patient health or prevents
disease.
2. Triclosan and triclocarban used in consumer products end
up in the environment and have been detected in a wide
variety of matrices worldwide.
3. Triclosan and triclocarban persist in the environment and
are a source of toxic and carcinogenic compounds includ-
ing dioxins, chloroform, and chlorinated anilines.
4. Triclosan, triclocarban, and their transformation products
and byproducts bioaccumulate in aquatic plants and ani-
mals, and triclosan partitions into human blood and breast
milk.
5. Triclosan and triclocarban have detrimental effects on
aquatic organisms.
6. Humans are exposed to triclosan and triclocarban through
direct contact with personal care products and from other
sources including food, drinking water, and dust. Triclosan
Address Correspondence to A. E. Lindeman, Green Science Policy Institute,
P.O. Box 9127 Berkeley, CA 94709. Telephone: (510) 898-1739; E-mail:
avery@GreenSciencePolicy.org
Note to readers with disabilities: EHP strives to ensure that all journal
content is accessible to all readers. However, some figures and Supplemental
Material published in EHP articles may not conform to 508 standards due to
the complexity of the information being presented. If you need assistance
accessing journal content, please contact ehponline@niehs.nih.gov. Our staff
will work with you to assess and meet your accessibility needs within 3
working days.
Environmental Health Perspectives
064501-1
A Section 508–conformant HTML version of this article
is available at https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP1788.
Brief Communication
 has been detected in the urine of a majority of humans
tested.
7. Triclosan and triclocarban are endocrine disruptors and
are associated with reproductive and developmental
impacts in animal and in vitro studies. Potential implica-
tions for human reproduction and development are of
concern and merit further study.
8. Human epidemiology and animal studies suggest triclo-
san exposure can increase sensitivity to allergens.
9. Overuse of triclosan may contribute to antibiotic/antimi-
crobial resistance and may modify the microbiome.
10. A number of authorities, including the FDA, have re-
stricted the use of triclosan and triclocarban in certain
types of soaps. These and other antimicrobial chemicals
are generally not restricted from use in other products.
We therefore call on the international community to limit the
production and use of triclosan and triclocarban and to question
the use of other antimicrobials. We urge scientists, govern-
ments, chemical and product manufacturers, purchasing organi-
zations, retailers, and consumers to take the actions recommended
below.
Recommendations
1. Avoid the use of triclosan, triclocarban, and other antimi-
crobial chemicals except where they provide an evidence-
based health benefit (e.g., physician-prescribed toothpaste
for treating gum disease) and there is adequate evidence
demonstrating they are safe.
2. Where antimicrobials are necessary, use safer alternatives that
are not persistent and pose no risk to humans or ecosystems.
3. Label all products containing triclosan, triclocarban, and
other antimicrobials, even in cases where no health claims
are made.
4. Evaluate the safety of antimicrobials and their transforma-
tion products throughout the entire product life cycle,
including manufacture, long-term use, disposal, and envi-
ronmental release.
Appendix I: Supporting Information
1. Triclosan and triclocarban are used as antimicrobials,
a class of chemicals present in >2,000 products includ-
ing soaps, toothpastes, detergents, clothing, toys, car-
pets, plastics, and paints (Halden 2014; Smith 2013). In
personal care products like hand soap, there is no evi-
dence that use of triclosan and triclocarban improves
consumer or patient health or prevents disease [Cen-
ters for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) 2003;
FDA 2016).
Triclosan and triclocarban are not well regulated and may be
found in >2,000 consumer and building products (Halden 2014).
In 1998, the worldwide annual production of triclosan was
approximately 1,500 tons, with a majority produced in Europe
(350 tons) and the United States (450 tons) (Dhillon et al. 2015).
In 2006, an estimated 450 tons of triclosan was used within the
European Union (EU) [Scientific Committee on Consumer
Safety (SCCS) 2010]. In 2007, an estimated 85% of the total vol-
ume of triclosan in the EU was used in personal care and cos-
metic products (SCCS 2010). Triclocarban has been primarily
used in bar soaps at concentrations ranging from approximately
0.5% to 2% by weight (Halden 2014; Ye et al. 2016).
Epidemiological studies indicate that the use of triclosan and
triclocarban by the general population has no significant health
benefits for reducing common respiratory and gastrointestinal
infections (Aiello et al. 2007, 2008). A 2003 report by the U.S.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Healthcare Infection
Control Practices Advisory Committee concluded, “No evidence is
available to suggest that use of [antimicrobial-impregnated articles
and consumer items bearing antimicrobial labeling] will make con-
sumers and patients healthier or prevent disease” (CDC 2003).
According to the FDA, which is responsible for regulation of
foods, drugs, cosmetics, medical devices, and similar products,
there is no evidence that antibacterial soaps are more effective
than nonantibacterial soap and water (FDA 2016). This is likely
because the contact time during typical hand washing (an aver-
age of 6 s) is too short to deliver measurable benefits (Borchgrevink
et al. 2013) and because the antibacterial ingredient is highly
diluted during the washing process.
2. Triclosan and triclocarban used in consumer products
end up in the environment (Heidler and Halden 2009)
and have been detected in a wide variety of matrices
worldwide (Halden and Paull 2005; Singer et al. 2002).
Triclosan and triclocarban are commonly used in products
intended for washing [e.g., an estimated 96% of triclosan is used
in products that are intentionally disposed of down the drain,
such as soaps and detergents (Reiss et al. 2002)]. These substan-
ces are also used in products that may be frequently washed
(e.g., textiles, food contact materials, plastic surfaces). A large
amount of triclosan and triclocarban is therefore discharged
directly to conventional wastewater treatment plants (Bester
2005; Halden and Paull 2005). During wastewater treatment,
these chemicals partition preferentially into sewage sludge (Bes-
ter 2003, 2005; Heidler et al. 2006).
An analysis of U.S. sewage sludge found triclosan and triclo-
carban at high levels, on average in the tens of milligrams per
kilogram dry weight [Halden 2014; U.S. Environmental Protec-
tion Agency (EPA) 2009]. In the United States, ∼ 15% of sew-
age sludge is incinerated, 30% is deposited in landfills, and 55%
is deposited on land where the antimicrobial compounds and
their transformation products may enter adjacent surface waters
(Beecher et al. 2007; Buth et al. 2011). Through land applica-
tion of biosolids, antimicrobials can also end up in livestock
feed and in crops destined for human consumption (Aryal and
Reinhold 2011; Prosser et al. 2014).
Persisting fractions of triclosan and triclocarban that do not
partition into the sludge are discharged to surface waters via
effluent, where they can reach levels of thousands of nanograms
per liter (Bester 2005; Buth et al. 2011; Coogan et al. 2007;
McAvoy et al. 2002; Singer et al. 2002).
Triclosan and triclocarban have been detected in the environ-
ment throughout the world. Triclosan has been detected in both
raw and finished drinking water (Loraine and Pettigrove 2006),
in ocean water (Xie et al. 2008), and in fresh water (Kolpin et al.
2002). A nationwide survey detected triclosan in ∼ 60% of U.S.
streams (Kolpin et al. 2002). Triclocarban is expected to be simi-
larly prevalent (Halden and Paull 2005). In surface waters, even
when discharged at nanograms per liter concentrations, triclosan
and triclocarban can concentrate and accumulate in sediments
(Anger et al. 2013; Buth et al. 2010; Cantwell et al. 2010; Hig-
gins et al. 2009; Kerrigan et al. 2015; Miller et al. 2008; Venka-
tesan et al. 2012).
3. Triclosan and triclocarban persist in the environment
(Miller et al. 2008) and are a source of toxic and carci-
nogenic compounds including dioxins, chloroform, and
chlorinated anilines (Buth et al. 2010; Ding et al. 2013;
Fiss et al. 2007).
Triclosan and triclocarban are persistent in the environment.
Both compounds are predicted to have half-lives on the order of
60d in water, 120d in soil, and 540d in sediment (Halden and
Paull 2005).
Environmental Health Perspectives
064501-2
 Sediment cores indicate long-term preservation of triclosan
and triclocarban dating to approximately 1964 (when triclosan
was patented) (Anger et al. 2013; Bedoux et al. 2012; Cantwell
et al. 2010; Kerrigan et al. 2015; Miller et al. 2008; Singer et al.
2002). In biosolids-amended soils, triclocarban and triclosan can
persist for extended periods of time while exhibiting very slow
or no measurable degradation (Langdon et al. 2012; Walters
et al. 2010). Triclosan may also be transformed to methyl triclo-
san or to other products (Davis et al. 2015; Langdon et al. 2012;
Walters et al. 2010). Methyl triclosan may be more persistent
than triclosan (Balmer et al. 2004; Coogan et al. 2007), and it
has been consistently detected in surface waters and sediments
(Bester 2005; Sacks and Lohmann 2011).
Triclosan is a “pre-dioxin” and is associated with formation
of polychlorinated dioxins and furans (PCDDs/Fs) throughout its
life cycle. Triclosan contains detectable contaminant levels of
polychlorinated dioxins and furans, including toxic and carcino-
genic 2,3,7,8-substituted PCDD/Fs, which are formed in amounts
that vary with the quality of production technology [Menoutis and
Parisi 2002; United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
2013; Zheng et al. 2008; International Agency for Research on Can-
cer (IARC) 2012]. The high persistence, bioaccumulation, and tox-
icity of these dioxins and furans in the environment is well-
established (Sinkkonen and Paasivirta 2000; Van den Berg et al.
2006). Furthermore, triclosan undergoes conversion to 2,8-dibenzo-
dichloro-p-dioxin (2,8-DCDD) in water when exposed to natural
sunlight (Aranami and Readman 2007; Latch et al. 2003) and dur-
ing heating and combustion (Kanetoshi et al. 1987, 1988). In a
recent study using an artificial skin model, topically applied triclo-
san transformed into 2,8-DCDD under ultraviolet irradiation
(Alvarez-Rivera et al. 2016). Chlorinated triclosan derivatives
(formed during chlorine disinfection of wastewater and drinking
water) transform into tri- and tetra-chlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins in
sunlight-exposed surface waters (Buth et al. 2009, 2010) and upon
heating and combustion (Kanetoshi et al. 1987; Kanetoshi et al.
1988). Calculations suggest that incineration of sewage sludge con-
taining triclosan and chlorinated triclosan derivatives contributes
significantly to total dioxin emissions in the United States (Doudrick
et al. 2010).
In water disinfection processes, triclosan can react with free
chlorine to produce chloroform (Rule et al. 2005), a probable
human carcinogen (U.S. EPA 2001) that is also recognized by
the State of California as a developmental toxicant [State of Cali-
fornia Environmental Protection Agency (CalEPA) 2017]. In a
study testing household dishwashing soaps, lotions, and body
washes in chlorinated water under simulated normal household
use conditions, all of the products containing triclosan produced
either chloroform or other chlorinated byproducts (Fiss et al.
2007). The results suggest that under some conditions, the use
of triclosan in such products could potentially increase chloro-
form exposure to nearly double the background levels in tap
water.
Triclocarban degrades via aerobic biodegradation and photol-
ysis into 4-chloroaniline and 3,4-dichloroaniline (Ding et al.
2013; Miller et al. 2010). 4-Chloroaniline is recognized by the
State of California as known to cause cancer (CalEPA 2017).
4. Triclosan, triclocarban, and their transformation prod-
ucts and byproducts bioaccumulate in aquatic plants
(Coogan et al. 2007) and animals (Coogan and La Point
2008; Fair et al. 2009), and triclosan partitions into
human blood and breast milk (Allmyr et al. 2006).
Triclosan and triclocarban are highly hydrophobic and bioac-
cumulate in organisms living in aquatic systems exposed to efflu-
ent from wastewater treatment plants. Triclosan has been detected
in wild bottlenose dolphins at levels similar to those in humans
(Fair et al. 2009), and it has also been detected at high levels in
fish (Adolfsson-Erici et al. 2002; Valters et al. 2005). These levels
are potentially high enough to cause harm (Meador et al. 2016).
Triclosan was recently detected in the eggs of skimmers, seabirds
that serve as sensitive indicators of coastal health and of contami-
nant threats to fish-eating birds and animals (Millow et al. 2015).
Methyl triclosan, an even more lipophilic and stable bacterial
transformation product of triclosan, has been detected in fish at
levels considerably higher than in the surrounding water (Balmer
et al. 2004; Leiker et al. 2009). The bioaccumulation and slow
conversion of methyl triclosan in lower-level consumers such as
catfish could transfer environmental triclosan to higher-level con-
sumers in the food chain, including humans (James et al. 2012).
Triclocarban bioaccumulates in freshwater worms (Higgins et al.
2009) and fish (Schebb et al. 2011a). Triclosan, methyl triclosan,
and triclocarban all bioaccumulate rapidly in algae and snails
exposed to wastewater treatment effluent with calculated bioaccu-
mulation factors in the thousands (Coogan et al. 2007; Coogan
and La Point 2008).
In biosolids-amended soil ecosystems, triclosan, methyl tri-
closan, and triclocarban bioaccumulate in earthworms (Higgins
et al. 2011; Kinney et al. 2008; Macherius et al. 2014), the basis
of many terrestrial food webs. Phytoaccumulation of triclosan
and triclocarban has been observed in certain vegetable crops
grown in biosolids-amended soils. Calculations suggest that
potential human exposure from contaminated vegetable con-
sumption is less than exposure from personal care product use
but greater than exposure from consumption of drinking water
(Aryal and Reinhold 2011; Mathews et al. 2014).
Upon human exposure and uptake, triclosan and triclocarban
are metabolized and excreted by the body within 36–72h
(Sandborgh-Englund et al. 2006; Schebb et al. 2011b, 2012).
One study calculated a terminal plasma half-life of 21h for triclo-
san (Sandborgh-Englund et al. 2006). Blood-borne triclosan and
triclocarban can cross the placenta, and triclosan and its metabo-
lites have been detected in umbilical cord blood at birth (Allmyr
et al. 2006; Pycke et al. 2014; Shekhar et al. 2017), raising con-
cerns about prenatal exposure to the developing fetus. Triclosan,
triclocarban, and their metabolites have also been detected in
human milk samples (Adolfsson-Erici et al. 2002; Allmyr et al.
2006; Dayan 2007; Toms et al. 2011). For example, in one pop-
ulation sample (n = 151), triclosan levels were detected in
>93% of milk samples over a wide range of concentrations
(Toms et al. 2011). The ability of triclosan to partition into
human milk raises concerns about impacts from exposure on
nursing infants.
5. Triclosan and triclocarban have detrimental effects on
aquatic organisms (Chalew and Halden 2009; Tamura
et al. 2013).
The continuous exposure of aquatic organisms to triclosan
and triclocarban, coupled with their bioaccumulation potential,
have led to detectable levels of triclosan and triclocarban
throughout aquatic food chains in species such as algae, crusta-
ceans, fish, and marine mammals (Adolfsson-Erici et al. 2002;
Chalew and Halden 2009; Fair et al. 2009; Meador et al. 2016).
Highly sensitive indicator organisms, such as algae and crusta-
ceans, experience potentially harmful exposures to triclosan and
triclocarban in surface waters receiving raw and treated sewage
(Chalew and Halden 2009). Benthic organisms such as worms,
crabs, and shellfish can be exposed to triclosan and triclocarban
via particulate matter and sediments (Miller et al. 2008).
In laboratory studies of algae, crustaceans, and fish, both tri-
closan and triclocarban have been shown to exhibit acute and
subchronic toxicity at concentrations found in the environment
(Tamura et al. 2013; Xu et al. 2015). Triclosan exposure inhibits
Environmental Health Perspectives
064501-3
 algal growth (Orvos et al. 2002), which can alter aquatic ecosys-
tem dynamics. Triclosan is acutely toxic to aquatic macrobiota at
microgram per liter (lg=L) concentrations (Franz et al. 2008;
Ishibashi et al. 2004; Ricart et al. 2010; von der Ohe et al. 2012),
with acute toxicity values ranging from 1:4 lg=L to 3,000 lg=L
(von der Ohe et al. 2012).
Triclosan affects reproduction and development in some fish
(Dann and Hontela 2011) and may interfere with the action of
thyroid hormones in amphibians at environmentally relevant
concentrations (Veldhoen et al. 2006). Triclosan and triclocarban
can also affect reproduction in snails at environmentally relevant
concentrations (Geiß et al. 2016; Giudice and Young 2010).
6. Humans are exposed to triclosan and triclocarban
through direct contact with personal care products
(Queckenberg et al. 2010; Schebb et al. 2011b) and
from other sources including food, drinking water,
and dust (Aryal and Reinhold 2011). Triclosan has
been detected in the urine of a majority of humans
tested (Calafat et al. 2008).
Human exposure to triclosan occurs primarily from the topi-
cal application and use of personal care products such as lotions,
soaps, toothpastes, and mouthwashes (Bhargava and Leonard
1996; Moss et al. 2000; Queckenberg et al. 2010). Minor routes
of exposure could include contaminated food and drinking water
(Aryal and Reinhold 2011; Holling et al. 2012; Li et al. 2010;
Loraine and Pettigrove 2006; Macherius et al. 2012; Wu et al.
2010, 2013) and indoor dust (Fan et al. 2010; Geens et al. 2009).
A large U.S. national survey found triclosan in the urine of
the majority of people tested (Calafat et al. 2008). Other studies
have measured triclosan in the urine of pregnant women (Meeker
et al. 2013; Mortensen et al. 2014; Pycke et al. 2014), children
(Wolff et al. 2007), and a large sampling of people in Denmark
(Frederiksen et al. 2014). Triclosan has been detected in breast
milk (Dayan 2007; Toms et al. 2011; Allmyr et al. 2006), serum
and plasma (Allmyr et al. 2006, 2008; Sandborgh-Englund et al.
2006), cord blood (Pycke et al. 2014), amniotic fluid (Philippat
et al. 2013; Shekhar et al. 2017), and fingernails and toenails
(Yin et al. 2016).
Dermal exposure from personal care products is believed to
be the main route of human exposure to triclocarban (Ye et al.
2011). A human study showed a small but significant amount of
triclocarban was absorbed during showering for 15 min with
triclocarban-containing antibacterial soap (Schebb et al. 2011b).
In addition, minor routes of triclocarban exposure may include
contaminated food (Aryal and Reinhold 2011; Macherius et al.
2012; Wu et al. 2010, 2013). In a recent study of 209 adults
living in China, triclocarban was detected in the urine and in
the nails of 99% and 100% of study participants, respectively
(Yin et al. 2016). Triclocarban was detected in 86% of urine
samples and in 23% of cord blood samples from 181 pregnant
U.S. women between 2007 and 2009 (Pycke et al. 2014). In a
2012 study of 158 U.S. adults with no known exposure to triclo-
carban, the compound was detected in 35% of urine samples
(Zhou et al. 2012). In a smaller 2011 study, triclocarban was
detected in 50% of serum samples and in 28% of urine samples
from U.S. adults (Ye et al. 2011).
Monitoring and explorative studies of other potential sources
of triclosan and triclocarban exposure are warranted (Ginsberg
and Balk 2016).
7. Triclosan and triclocarban are endocrine disruptors
and are associated with reproductive and developmen-
tal impacts in animal and in vitro studies (Chen et al.
2008; Johnson et al. 2016; Wang and Tian 2015).
Potential implications for human reproduction and de-
velopment are of concern and merit further study.
Triclosan and triclocarban have been shown to interfere with
estrogen and androgen systems in mammalian models (Chen
et al. 2008; Duleba et al. 2011; Kumar et al. 2009; Stoker et al.
2010) and in vitro (Ahn et al. 2008; Gee et al. 2008; Henry and
Fair 2013; Huang et al. 2014). In vitro screening assays suggest
that triclosan can interact with the estrogen receptor (ER) in cer-
tain cell types at relatively low (nanomolar) concentrations (Ahn
et al. 2008). In vitro studies have shown a weak estrogenic effect
of triclosan and triclocarban in the ER reporter gene assay
(Huang et al. 2014) and in MCF7-BOS breast cancer cells
(Henry and Fair 2013). Triclosan has also shown estrogenic and
androgenic activity in vitro in breast cancer cells at environmen-
tally relevant concentrations (Gee et al. 2008). However, in vivo
studies suggest that the estrogenic effects of triclosan may not be
a result of direct binding with the estrogen receptor. Triclosan
has been shown to enhance the estrogenic activity of synthetic
estrogenic compounds (Louis et al. 2013) and to increase estra-
diol (Pollock et al. 2016) and bisphenol A (Pollock et al. 2014)
uptake in certain tissues in adult mice. In male roaches, co-
exposure to triclosan and to other anti-androgenic chemicals
enhanced the feminizing effect of the estrogen 17a-ethinylestra-
diol on reproductive duct development (Lange et al. 2015).
These studies suggest that the estrogenic effect of triclosan in
vivo may be due to inhibition of estrogen metabolism. An in
vitro study with sheep placental tissue also showed that triclosan
is a potent inhibitor of estrogen sulfotransferase (James et al.
2010).
In rodent studies, triclosan exposure has been associated with
reduced testosterone, luteinizing hormone, follicle stimulating
hormone, and sperm production (Kumar et al. 2009), as well as
with implantation failure (Crawford and DeCatanzaro 2012) and
spontaneous abortion (Wang et al. 2015).The varying results of
in vivo studies to date may result from the use of different rodent
strains and experimental procedures (Wang and Tian 2015).
The possible effects of triclosan and triclocarban on human
endocrine and reproductive systems have not been sufficiently
studied. There is emerging evidence of associations between tri-
closan exposure and reduced semen quality (Zhu et al. 2016) and
reduced inhibin B and luteinizing hormones in men (Den Hond
et al. 2015) and with longer time-to-pregnancy in a large retro-
spective study of pregnant women (Velez et al. 2015).
Triclosan can disrupt the thyroid hormone system in animal
models (Fang et al. 2015; Paul et al. 2010; Stoker et al. 2010;
Zorrilla et al. 2009). A meta-analysis of rodent data found signif-
icant and dose-dependent reductions in serum thyroxine after
early postnatal administration of triclosan (Johnson et al. 2016).
Perinatal triclosan exposure can reduce blood levels of maternal,
fetal, and neonatal thyroxine levels in rodents (Axelstad et al.
2013; Paul et al. 2013). Potential effects of prenatal exposure on
thyroxine levels should be carefully considered because even small
reductions in thyroxine in pregnant women can have adverse effects
on the neurodevelopment of children (Ghassabian et al. 2014;
Henrichs et al. 2013; Miller et al. 2009; Wise et al. 2012; Woodruff
et al. 2008).
Few human studies have examined the potential impacts of
prenatal triclosan and triclocarban exposure on fetal growth and
development. However, there is suggestive evidence that prena-
tal triclosan exposure is associated with reduced fetal growth late
in pregnancy (Philippat et al. 2014) and with smaller head cir-
cumference at birth in boys (Lassen et al. 2016; Philippat et al.
2014) and that prenatal triclocarban exposure is associated with
decreased gestational age at birth (Geer et al. 2017).
8. Human epidemiology (Spanier et al. 2014) and animal
studies (Anderson et al. 2013) suggest triclosan expo-
sure can increase sensitivity to allergens.
Environmental Health Perspectives
064501-4
 Large cross-sectional analyses of U.S. National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey(NHANES) participantshave found
positive associations between urinary triclosan concentrations in
childrenand aeroallergensensitization (Savage etal.2012; Spanier
et al. 2014), atopic asthma (Spanier et al. 2014), diagnosis of aller-
gic rhinitis or other allergies in those �18 y old (Clayton et al.
2011), and food sensitization (Savage et al. 2012). Similarly, a
large cross-sectional analysis of Norwegian children found an
association between urinary triclosan concentrations and allergic
sensitization and rhinitis (Bertelsen et al. 2013). Among both child
and adult NHANES participants with asthma, urinary triclosan
concentration was associated with increased risk of asthma exacer-
bation in the previous year (Savage et al. 2014).
Animal studies support these findings and suggest that
although triclosan may not be an allergen itself, it may act as an
adjuvant and enhance allergic responses to a known allergen
(Anderson et al. 2013). In mouse models, dermal exposure to tri-
closan at concentrations similar to those used in consumer prod-
ucts enhanced the hypersensitivity response to the egg-white
allergen ovalbumin (Anderson et al. 2013), promoted sensitiza-
tion and anaphylaxis to peanut (Tobar et al. 2016), promoted sen-
sitization to the milk allergen alpha-lactalbumin (Tobar et al. 2016),
and induced stimulation of the immune system (Anderson et al.
2016). Demonstrating a potential mechanism for this immune altera-
tion, dermal triclosan exposure changed gene expression and cytokine
levels promoting a food sensitization phenotype in mice and in a
human skin model (Marshall et al. 2015).
9. Overuse of triclosan may contribute to antibiotic/anti-
microbial resistance (Giuliano and Rybak 2015) and
may modify the microbiome (Hu et al. 2016).
Concerns about triclosan-induced cross-resistance to antibiot-
ics used in human medicine were voiced as early as 2001,
although the extent to which triclosan and triclocarban contribute
to antibiotic resistance is not yet clear (Halden 2014; Hartmann
et al. 2016; Yazdankhah et al. 2006). One large randomized con-
trolled trial that examined bacterial flora isolated from hands
showed decreased susceptibility over time to triclosan in the
studied community (Aiello et al. 2004). There is evidence that
bacteria that develop resistance to triclosan can also exhibit low-
ered susceptibilities to other antimicrobial agents (Braoudaki and
Hilton 2004). Triclosan in stream sediments has been shown to
trigger increases in triclosan resistance and changes in benthic
bacterial community composition (Drury et al. 2013). The clini-
cal significance of these observations is unclear, but a legitimate
concern remains: antimicrobials may exacerbate the problem of
bacterial resistance to antibiotics (Carey and McNamara 2015;
Hartmann et al. 2016; Pycke et al. 2010).
Recently, several animal studies have suggested that expo-
sure to triclosan modifies the microbiome, including in the gut
and intranasally (Gaulke et al. 2016; Hu et al. 2016; Syed et al.
2014). However, longer-term human studies are needed to iden-
tify the impact of triclosan and other antimicrobial substances on
the human microbiome both on the skin and in the gut.
10. A number of authorities, including the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration, have restricted the use of triclo-
san and triclocarban in certain types of soaps [Euro-
pean Commission (EC) 2016; FDA 2016]. These and
other antimicrobial chemicals are generally not re-
stricted from use in other products.
Several jurisdictions have recognized the risks from triclosan
and triclocarban and have taken steps to reduce their use. Fol-
lowing an evaluation of triclosan by the Biocidal Products Com-
mittee of the
European Chemicals Agency (ECHA), the
European Commission (EC) decided in 2016 that triclosan is not
approved for use in human hygiene biocidal products (ECHA
2015; EC 2016). Beginning in February 2017, triclosan will no
longer be available in such products in the EU. Triclosan has
also been banned from use in consumer sanitizing and cleansing
products by the state of Minnesota, effective January 2017 (State
of Minnesota 2016). In September 2016, the FDA issued a final
rule, effective in 2017, that over-the-counter consumer antiseptic
wash products containing the antibacterial active ingredients tri-
closan and triclocarban, or any of seventeen other antimicrobial
ingredients, can no longer be marketed because they “are not
generally recognized as safe and effective” (FDA 2016). In the
United States, the FDA regulates the use of antimicrobials in per-
sonal care products and medical devices, whereas the U.S. EPA
regulates the pesticidal uses of antimicrobials in other products
(Johnson et al. 2016).
Triclosan is being phased out of certain products by Procter
& Gamble, Johnson & Johnson, and other manufacturers. The use
of triclosan and triclocarban may continue in household, building,
and other products not covered under existing restrictions.
Despite regulatory restrictions on triclosan, triclocarban,
and certain other antimicrobials, the overall market for antimi-
crobial products has been predicted to grow (Halden 2014;
Smith 2013). It is not yet clear what impact the 2016 EC deci-
sion, the FDA Final Rule, and other authoritative actions may
have on market growth. Alternative antimicrobial substances
may be used in place of triclosan and triclocarban in personal
care, consumer, and building products. These replacement
substances may have little to no publicly available safety
information.
Appendix II: Signatories
Institutional affiliations are provided for identification purposes
only.
Ovokeroye Abafe, PhD, Research Scientist, Chemistry, Uni-
versity of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban, South Africa
Morteza Abbaszadegan, PhD, Professor and Director, Civil,
Environmental and Sustainable Engineering, Arizona State Uni-
versity, Tempe, AZ, USA
Amirhossein Rezaei Adaryani, PhD Student in Infrastruc-
ture and Environmental Systems, Department of Civil Engineer-
ing, University of North Carolina, Charlotte, NC, USA
Sam Adu-Kumi, PhD, Director, Chemicals Control and
Management Center, Environmental Protection Agency, Accra,
Ghana
Diana Aga, PhD, Professor, Chemistry, University at Buffalo,
Buffalo, NY, USA
C. Athena Aktipis, PhD, Assistant Professor, Psychology,
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA
Pedro Alvarez, PhD, George R. Brown Professor, Civil and
Environmental Engineering, Rice University, Houston, TX,
USA
Gangadhar Andaluri, PhD, Adjunct Professor, Civil and
Environmental Engineering, Temple University, Philadelphia,
PA, USA
Dana Armstrong, MSc, PhD Student, Marine-Estuarine-
Environmental Sciences (MEES), University of Maryland, Col-
lege Park, MD, USA
Abel Arkenbout, PhD, CEO, Toxicowatch Foundation, Harlingen,
The Netherlands
Misha Askren, MD, Partner Emeritus, Southern California
Permanente Medical Group, Family Medicine, Sierra Club,
Environmental Defense Fund, Los Angeles, CA, USA
Jannicke Bakkejord, MSc, Chief Engineer, POPs Laboratory,
National Institute of Food and Seafood Research (NIFES), Bergen,
Norway
Environmental Health Perspectives
064501-5
 Jose Luis Balcazar, PhD, Research Scientist, Water Quality
Area, Catalan Institute for Water Research (ICRA), Girona,
Spain
William Ball, PhD, Professor, Environmental Engineering,
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA
Damià Barceló, PhD, Director, Water Quality, Catalan Insti-
tute for Water Research (ICRA), Girona, Spain
Morton Barlaz, PhD, Professor and Head, Civil, Construction,
and Environmental Engineering, North Carolina State University, Ra-
leigh, NC, USA
Miriam Barlow, PhD, Associate Professor, Molecular and
Cell Biology, UC Merced, Merced, CA, USA
Zohar Barnett-Itzhaki, PhD, Mimshak Fellow, Scientific
Advisor, Public Health Services, Israeli Ministry of Health, Her-
zlyia, Israel
Kirk Barrett, PhD, Assistant Professor, Civil and Environ-
mental Engineering, Manhattan College, South Orange, NJ, USA
William Battaglin, MSc, Research Hydrologist, Colorado
Water Science Center, U.S. Geological Survey, Lakewood, CO,
USA
Peter Behnisch, PhD, Director, BioDetection Systems, Am-
sterdam, The Netherlands
Antonio Benetti, PhD, Associate Professor, Hydraulic Res-
earch Institute, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul,
Porto Alegre - RS, Brazil
Kai Bester, PhD, Professor, Department of Environmental
Science - Environmental Chemistry and Toxicology, Aarhus
University, Roskilde, Denmark
Terry Bidleman, PhD, Senior Professor, Chemistry, Umeå
University, Umeå, Sweden
Julie Billings, MD, Piedmont, CA, USA
Shyam Biswal, PhD, Professor, Environmental Health Sci-
ences, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA
Carles Borrego, PhD, Research Professor, Quality Area,
Catalan Institute for Water Research (ICRA), Girona, Spain
Charles B. Bott, PhD, PE, BCEE, Director of Water Tech-
nology and Research, Hampton Roads Sanitation District and
Adjunct Professor, Charles E. Via, Jr. Department of Civil
and Environmental Engineering, Virginia Polytechnic Institute
and State University, Blacksburg, VA, USA, and Department
of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Old Dominion Uni-
versity, Norfolk, VA, USA
Kirsten Bouman, Assistant, Lab Animal Biodiversity, Biol-
ogy, University of Leiden and Staff Member, Toxicowatch Foun-
dation, The Netherlands
Edward Bouwer, PhD, Professor, Environmental Health and
Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA
Hindrik Bouwman, PhD, Professor, Zoology, North-West
University, Potchefstroom, South Africa
Gregory Boyce, PhD, Assistant Professor, Chemistry, Flor-
ida Gulf Coast University, Fort Myers, FL, USA
Lindsay Bramwell, MSc, Research Associate and Contami-
nated Land Officer, Institute of Health and Society, Newcastle
University, Newcastle, UK
Thomas Bruton, MSE, PhD Candidate, Civil and Environ-
mental Engineering, UC Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA
Hinsby Cadillo-Quiroz, PhD, Assistant Professor, School of
Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA
Michael Carbajales-Dale, PhD, Assistant Professor, Envi-
ronmental Engineering and Earth Sciences, Clemson University,
Clemson SC, USA
Sara Castiglioni, PhD, Researcher, Environmental Health
Sciences, Mario Negri Institute, Milan, Italy
Ezra Cates, PhD, Assistant Professor, Environmental Engineer-
ing and Earth Sciences, Clemson University, Anderson, SC, USA
Tzu-Chiao Chao, PhD, Research Professor, Head, Cellular
Impacts Facility, Institute of Environmental Change and Society,
University of Regina, Regina, SK, Canada
Steven Chillrud, PhD, Senior Doherty Research Scientist,
Geochemistry Division, Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory of
Columbia University, Palisades, NY, USA
Erik Coats, PhD, Associate Professor, Civil Engineering,
University of Idaho, Moscow, ID, USA
Adrian Covaci, PhD, Professor, University of Antwerp, Wil-
rijk, Belgium
Craig Criddle, PhD, Professor, Civil and Environmental En-
gineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
Alison Cupples, PhD, Associate Professor, Michigan State
University, East Lansing, MI, USA
Viet Dang, PhD, Assistant Scientist, Physiological Sciences,
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA
Michel Dedeo, PhD, Chemist, Healthy Building Network,
Oakland, CA, USA
Deborah de Moulpied, MEd, Faculty, Environment, Anti-
cancer Lifestyle Program, Concord, NH, USA
Hale Demirtepe, MSc, Researcher, Environmental Engineer-
ing, Middle East Technical University, Ankara, Turkey
Randhir Deo, PhD, Assistant Professor, College of Science,
Engineering and Technology, Grand Canyon University, Phoe-
nix, AR, USA
Dionysios Dionysiou, PhD, UNESCO Co-Chair Professor of
“Water Access and Sustainability” and Professor of Environ-
mental Engineering, Department of Biomedical, Chemical, and
Environmental Engineering (DBCEE), University of Cincinnati,
Cincinnati, OH, USA
Hansa Done, PhD, Research Analyst, Office of Knowledge
Enterprise Development Research Analytics, Arizona State Uni-
versity, Tempe, AZ, USA
Frank Dorman, PhD, Associate Professor, Biochemistry,
Penn State University, University Park, PA, USA
Kyle Doudrick, PhD, Assistant Professor, University of
Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, USA
Jörg Drewes, PhD, Chair Professor, Chair of Urban Water
Systems Engineering, Technical University of Munich, Garch-
ing, Germany
Metin Duran, PhD, Professor, Civil and Environmental En-
gineering, Villanova University, Villanova, PA, USA
Tracey Easthope, MPH, Health Care Without Harm, Ann
Arbor, MI, USA
James Englehardt, PhD, PE, Professor, Civil, Architectural,
and Environmental Engineering, University of Miami, Coral
Gables, FL, USA
Ulrika Eriksson, PhD, School of Science and Technology,
Man-Technology-Environment research centre (MTM), Örebro
University, Örebro, Sweden
Lee Ferguson, PhD, Associate Professor, Dept. of Civil and
Environmental Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC,
USA
Martin Forter, PhD, Manager, Ärztinnen und Ärzte für
Umweltschutz (AefU), Doctors for the Environment Switzer-
land, Basel, Switzerland
Peter Fox, PhD, Professor, Environmental Engineering, Ari-
zona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA
Jessica Furrer, PhD, Assistant Professor, Physics and Engi-
neering, Benedict College, Columbia, SC, USA
Stephen Gardner, DVM, Medical Director, VCA Albany
Animal Hospital, Albany, CA, USA
Kevin
Gilmore,
PhD,
Assistant
Professor,
Civil
and
Environmental Engineering, Bucknell University, Lewisburg,
PA, USA
Environmental Health Perspectives
064501-6
 Lynn Goldman, MD, MS, MPH, Dean and Professor,
Milken Institute School of Public Health, The George Washing-
ton University, Washington, DC, USA
Jay Graham, PhD, Program Director, Global Health, Public
Health Institute, Oakland, CA, USA
Jessica Green, PhD, Professor, Biology, University of Ore-
gon, Eugene, OR, USA
Nancy Grimm, PhD, Professor, Life Sciences, Arizona State
University School of Life Sciences, Tempe, AZ, USA
Gudmundur Gudmundsson, Food Scientist, Reykjavik,
Iceland
John Gulliver, PhD, Professor, Civil, Environmental, and
Geo-Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN,
USA
Stuart Harrad, PhD, Professor of Environmental Chemistry,
School of Geography, Earth and Environmental Sciences, Uni-
versity of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK
Erica M. Hartmann, PhD, Assistant Professor, Civil and
Environmental Engineering, Northwestern University, Evanston,
IL, USA
Lee Hartwell, PhD, Professor, Arizona State University,
Tempe, AZ, USA
Bernhard Hennig, PhD, Professor, University of Kentucky,
Lexington, KY, USA
Janet Hering, PhD, Director, Eawag, Swiss Federal Institute
of Aquatic Science and Technology, Dübendorf, Switzerland
Juliane Hollender, PhD, Department Head, Environmental
Chemistry, Eawag, Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science
and Technology, Dübendorf, Switzerland
Thomas Holsen, PhD, Professor, Civil and Environmental
Engineering, Clarkson University, Potsdam, NY, USA
Keri Hornbuckle, PhD, Professor, Civil and Environmental
Engineering, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA
Kerry Howe, PhD, Professor, University of New Mexico,
Albuquerque, NM, USA
Alin Constantin Ionas, PhD, Researcher, Research Centre
for Toxic Compounds in the Environment (RECETOX), Masa-
ryk University, Brno, Czech Republic
Zainab Ismail, PhD, Professor, Environmental Engineering,
Baghdad University, Baghdad, Iraq
Anne Hope Jahren, PhD, Professor, University of Oslo,
Oslo, Norway
Veerle Jaspers, PhD, Associate Professor, Biology, Norwe-
gian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway
Megan Jehn, PhD, Associate Professor, School of Human
Evolution and Social Change, Arizona State University, Tempe,
AZ, USA
Allan Astrup Jensen, PhD, Research Director, CEO, Nordic
Institute for Product Sustainability, Environmental Chemistry
and Toxicology (NIPSECT), Copenhagen, Denmark
Jeff Jeremiason, PhD, Associate Professor of Chemistry,
Environmental Studies, Gustavus Adolphus College, St. Peter,
MN, USA
Carol Johnson, PhD, Postdoctoral Associate, Boston Uni-
versity, Boston, MA, USA
Howard Junca, PhD, Scientific Director, Div. Ecogenomics
and Holobionts, Microbiomas Foundation, Chia, Colombia
Tomasz
Kalinowski,
PhD,
Environmental
Scientist,
AECOM, Rocky Hill, CT, USA
Norma
Kanarek,
PhD,
MPH,
Faculty,
Environmental
Health and Engineering, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of
Public Health, Baltimore, MD, USA
Barbara Kasprzyk-Hordern, PhD, Reader in Environmen-
tal and Analytical Chemistry, Department of Chemistry, Univer-
sity of Bath, Bath, UK
Kay Kelterer, Consultant, Environmental Consulting, See-
vetal, Germany
Wiebke Kelterer, BSc, Hamburg, Germany
Jana Klánová, PhD, Director, Research Centre for Toxic
Compounds in the Environment (RECETOX), Masaryk Univer-
sity, Brno, Czech Republic
Wolfgang Korner, PhD, Head of Unit, Analysis of Organic
Compounds, Lab Manager, Bavarian Environment Agency
(LFU), Augsburg, Germany
Petr Kukucka, PhD, Research Assistant, Man-Technology-
Environment research centre (MTM), Örebro University, Öre-
bro, Sweden
Perihan Binnur Kurt Karakus, PhD, Associate Professor,
Environmental Engineering, Bursa Technical University, Bursa,
Turkey
Carol Kwiatkowski, PhD, Executive Director, The Endo-
crine Disruption Exchange, Paonia, CO, USA
Henrik Kylin, PhD, Professor, Thematic Studies - Environ-
mental Change, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden
Silvia Lacorte, PhD, Professor, Environmental Chemistry,
Spanish National Research Council (CSIC), Barcelona, Spain
Gisella Lamas Samanamud, PhD, Postdoc, University of
Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, USA
Laurie LaPat-Polasko, PhD, Principal Consultant, Reme-
diation, Ramboll Environ, Inc., Phoenix, AZ, USA
Jenny Lawler, PhD, Academic, Dublin City University,
Dublin, Ireland
Robert S. Lawrence, MD, MACP, Professor Emeritus,
Environmental Health and Engineering, Johns Hopkins Bloom-
berg School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD, USA
TorOve Leiknes, PhD, Direction, Professor, WDRC Water
Desalination and Reuse Center (WDRC), KAUST King Abdullah
University of Science and Technology, Thuwal, Saudi Arabia
Pamela Lein, PhD, Professor, University of California
Davis, Davis, CA, USA
Monica Lind, PhD, Associate Professor, Occupational and
Environmental Medicine, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
Lars Lind, PhD, Professor, Medicine, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden
Elena Lingas, DrPH, MPH, Associate Professor, Touro Uni-
versity California, Vallejo, CA, USA
Andreas Linge Tomren, PhD, Chief Engineer, National Insti-
tute of Food and Seafood Research (NIFES), Bergen, Norway
Jinxia Liu, PhD, Assistant Professor, McGill University,
Montreal, QC, Canada
Frank Loeffler, PhD, Governor's Chair Professor and Director,
Center for Environmental Biotechnology, Department of Microbiol-
ogy, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University
of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, USA
Bommanna Loganathan, PhD, Professor, Chemistry, Mur-
ray State University, Murray, KY, USA
Panna Lossy, MD, University of California San Francisco
Clinical Faculty, Family Medicine, Santa Rosa Residency, Santa
Rosa, CA, USA
Dave Love, PhD, MSPH, Associate Scientist, Environmental
Health and Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
MD, USA
Gregory Lowry, PhD, Professor, Civil and Environmental
Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Richard G. Luthy, PhD, Professor, Civil and Environmental
Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
Douglas Mackay, PhD, Adjunct Professor, Land, Air and
Water Resources, University of California, Davis, CA, USA
Kris Maillacheruvu, PhD, Professor, Civil Engineering and
Construction, Bradley University, Peoria, IL, USA
Environmental Health Perspectives
064501-7
 Ian Makey, MD, Physician/Assistant Professor, Cardiothora-
cic Surgery, University of Texas Health Science Center at San
Antonio, San Antonio, TX, USA
Colleen Makey, PhD, Research Fellow, Environmental
Health, Boston University, Boston, MA, USA
Bhagyashree Manivannan, PhD, Affiliated Faculty Mem-
ber, Center for Environmental Security, Arizona State Univer-
sity, Tempe, AZ, USA
Sherri Mason, PhD, Professor of Chemistry and Department
of Geology and Environmental Sciences Chair, The State Uni-
versity of New York, Fredonia, NY, USA
Andrew Maynard, PhD, Professor, School for the Future of
Innovation in Society, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA
Eugene McCall, PhD, JD, President, McCall Environmental,
PA, Greenville, SC, USA
Perry
McCarty,
ScD,
Professor
Emeritus,
Civil
and
Environmental Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA,
USA
Jason P. McDevitt, PhD, Research Scientist, William and
Mary Research Institute, Williamsburg, VA, USA
Joan McGregor, PhD, Professor, Philosophy, Arizona State
University, Tempe, AZ, USA
Patrick McNamara, PhD, Assistant Professor, Civil, Con-
struction and Environmental Engineering, Marquette University,
Milwaukee, WI, USA
Yujie Men, PhD, Assistant Professor, University of Illinois
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA
Annelle Mendez, PhD Candidate, Safety and Environmental
Technology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
Lama Mghames, MSc, Project Manager, NIP POPs Project/
PCB Management Project, Ministry of Environment, Beirut,
Lebanon
Jelena Milić, PhD, Scientific Associate, Centre of Chemis-
try, Institute of Chemistry, Technology and Metallurgy, Bel-
grade, Serbia
Shelly Miller, PhD, Professor, Mechanical Engineering, Uni-
versity of Colorado, Boulder, CO, USA
Natalie Mladenov, PhD, Assistant Professor, Department of
Civil, Construction, and Environmental Engineering, San Diego
State University, San Diego, CA, USA
Bill Mott, MESc, Director, The Ocean Project, Providence,
RI, USA
Tom Muir, MSc, Retired, Environment Canada, Burlington,
ON, Canada
Lubica Palkovicova Murinova, MD, PhD, Senior Scientist,
Environmental Medicine, Slovak Medical University, Bratislava,
Slovakia
Steven Mylon, PhD, Associate Professor, Chemistry, Lafay-
ette College, Easton, PA, USA
Keeve Nachman, PhD, MHS, Assistant Professor, Environ-
mental Health and Engineering, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg
School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD, USA
Takeshi Nakano, PhD, Guest Professor, Research Center for
Environmental Preservation, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan
Tala Navab-Daneshmand, PhD, Assistant Professor, Chem-
ical, Biological, and Environmental Engineering, Oregon State
University, Corvallis, OR, USA
Randolph Nesse, MN, Professor, School of Life Sciences,
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA
Paige Novak, PhD, Professor, Department of Civil, Environ-
mental, and Geo-Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minne-
apolis, MN, USA
Zuleica Nycz, Director, Chemical Safety and Environmental
Health, Toxisphera Environmental Health Association, Curitiba,
Paraná, Brazil
Kees Olie, PhD, Professor, Institute for Biodiversity and
Ecosystem Dynamics, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam,
Netherlands
Christoph Ort, PhD, Group Leader, Eawag, Swiss Federal
Institute of Aquatic Science and Technology, Dübendorf,
Switzerland
Jonathan Patz, MD, MPH, Professor and Director, Global
Health Institute, University of Wisconsin–Madison, Madison,
WI, USA
Daniel Paull, PhD, Assistant Professor, Chemistry, Florida
Gulf Coast University, Fort Myers, FL, USA
Graham F. Peaslee, PhD, Professor, Physics, University of
Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, USA
Diana Petitti, MD, MPH, Clinical Professor, Biomedical
Informatics, University of Arizona College of Medicine - Phoe-
nix, Phoenix, AR, USA
Jaime Plazas-Tuttle, MSc, PhD Candidate, University of
Texas, Austin, TX, USA
Anuschka Polder, PhD, Researcher, Norwegian University
of Life Sciences, Oslo, Norway
Rachel Poretsky, PhD, Assistant Professor, University of
Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
Peerapong Pornwongthong, PhD, Lecturer and Researcher,
Agro-Industrial, Food and Environmental Technology, King
Mongkut's University of Technology North Bangkok, Bangsue
Bangkok Province, Thailand
George Poste, DVM, PhD, Director, Complex Adaptive Sys-
tems, Arizona State University, Scottsdale, AZ, USA
Carsten Prasse, PhD, Postdoc, Environmental Engineering,
UC Berkeley, Berkeley, USA
Ana Prieto, PhD, Research Associate, University of Mary-
land, College Park, MD, USA
Andrew Purgiel, Chemical Engineering Student, University
of Maine, South Berwick, ME, USA
Brenda Read-Daily, PhD, Assistant Professor of Engineer-
ing, Engineering and Physics, Elizabethtown College, Elizabeth-
town, PA, USA
Fiona Regan, PhD, Director, DCU Water Institute, Chemical
Sciences, Dublin City University, Dublin, Ireland
Efstathios Reppas-Chrysovitsinos, PhD Candidate, Envi-
ronmental Science and Analytical Chemistry (ACES), Stock-
holm University, Stockholm, Sweden
Susan Richardson, PhD, Professor, Chemistry and Bio-
chemistry, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC, USA
Bruce Rittmann, PhD, Regents’ Professor of Environmental
Engineering, School of Sustainable Engineering and the Built
Environment, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA
Larry Robertson, MPH, PhD, Professor and Program Direc-
tor, Human Toxicology, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA,
USA
Chelsea Rochman, PhD, Assistant Professor, Ecology and Ev-
olutionary Biology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
Stephen Roth, PhD, Professor, University of Maryland, Col-
lege Park, MD, USA
Salim Sakaroum, Researcher, University of Birmingham,
Birmingham, Oman
Amina Salamova, PhD, Assistant Scientist, School of Public
and Environmental Affairs, Indiana University, Bloomington,
IN, USA
Christopher Sales, PhD, Assistant Professor, Civil, Archi-
tectural and Environmental Engineering, Drexel University,
Philadelphia, PA, USA
Amy Sapkota, PhD, Associate Professor, Maryland Institute
for Applied Environmental Health, University of Maryland,
School of Public Health, College Park, MD, USA
Environmental Health Perspectives
064501-8
 Amir Sapkota, PhD, Associate Professor, University of
Maryland School of Public Health, College Park, MD, USA
Roger Scholten, MD, Pediatrician, General Practice, Swed-
ish Medical Group, Seattle, WA, USA
Thomas Seager, PhD, Associate Professor, Arizona State
University, Tempe, AZ, USA
Janine Selendy, BA/BSc, Co-Chair, Founder, Publisher,
Biology, Horizon International, Yale University, New Haven,
CT, USA
Deborah Sills, PhD, Assistant Professor, Bucknell Univer-
sity, Lewisburg, PA, USA
Anna Soehl, MSc, Science & Policy Consultant, Green Sci-
ence Policy Institute, Berkeley, CA, USA
Søren Sørensen, PhD, Chemist, Division of Residues,
Danish Veterinary and Food Administration, Ringsted, Denmark
Elena Sorokin, PhD, Postdoctoral Research Fellow, Genet-
ics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
Jitka Strakova, Arnika - Toxics and Waste Programme and
IPEN - Dioxin, PCB and Waste Working Group, Prague, Czech
Republic
Rebecca Sutton, PhD, Senior Scientist, San Francisco Estu-
ary Institute, Richmond, CA, USA
Michael Switzenbaum, PhD, Professor Emeritus, Civil and
Environmental Engineering, Marquette University, Whitefish
Bay, WI, USA
Takumi Takasuga, PhD, Corporate Officer, General Man-
ager, Environment Division, Shimadzu Techno-Research Inc.,
Kyoto, Japan
Daniel Teclechiel, PhD, Organic Synthesis, AccuStandard,
Inc., New Haven, CT, USA
Andrew Tongue, PhD Candidate, Public Health, University
of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK
João
Paulo
Machado
Torres,
PhD,
Professor,
Biophysics, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil
Fabio Torres, BSc, Student, Biophysics, Federal University
of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
Tomas Trnovec, PhD, Senior Scientist, Environmental Med-
icine, Slovak Medical University, Bratislava, Slovakia
Linda Tseng, PhD, Assistant Professor, Dept. of Physics and
Astronomy and Environmental Studies Program, Colgate Uni-
versity, Hamilton, NY, USA
Anthony Tweedale, MSc, Founder, R.I.S.K. Consultancy,
Brussels, Belgium
Arjun Venkatesan, PhD, Associate Research Scientist,
School of Sustainable Engineering and the Built Environment,
Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA
Peter Vikesland, PhD, Professor, Civil and Environmental
Engineering, Virginia Polytechnic and State University, Blacks-
burg, VA, USA
Urs von Gunten, PhD, Head of Competence Centre for
Drinking Water, Eawag, Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Sci-
ence and Technology, Dübendorf, Switzerland
Polly Walker, MD, MPH, Retired, Associate Director, Johns
Hopkins Center for a Livable Future, Baltimore, MD, USA
Shane Walker, PhD, Associate Professor, Civil Engineering,
University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, TX, USA
Kristine Wammer, PhD, Associate Professor, Department
of Chemistry, University of St. Thomas, St. Paul, MN, USA
Michael Warhurst, PhD, MSc, Executive Director, CHEM
Trust, London, UK
David Warhurst, BSc, PhD, Emeritus Professor, Depart-
ment of Pathogen Molecular Biology, London School of
Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, UK
Linda Weavers, PhD, Professor, Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH, USA
Glenys Webster, PhD, Canadian Institutes for Health
Research (CIHR) Postdoctoral Fellowship, Faculty of Health
Sciences, Simon Fraser University, Victoria, BC, Canada
Tara Webster, PhD, Postdoctoral Associate, Cornell Uni-
versity, Ithaca, NY, USA
Larry Weiss, MD, Chief Medical Officer, AOBiome, LLC,
San Francisco, CA, USA
Sacoby Wilson, PhD, Assistant Professor, Maryland Institute
for Applied Environmental Health, University of Maryland, Col-
lege Park, MD, USA
Manivannan Yegambaram, PhD, Affiliated Faculty Mem-
ber, Center for Environmental Security, Arizona State Univer-
sity, Tempe, AR, USA
Thomas Young, PhD, Professor, Civil and Environmental
Engineering, University of California, Davis, Davis, CA, USA
Wen Zhang, PhD, Assistant Professor, CEE, New Jersey
Institute of Technology, Newark, NJ, USA
Acknowledgments
The content of this publication is solely the responsibility of the
authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of
their organizations or funding sources. R.U.H.'s contribution to
this project was supported in part by grant number R01ES020889
and its supplements from the National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences (NIEHS) and by grant number LTR 05/01/12
from the Virginia G. Piper Charitable Trust. A.E.A. received an
unrestricted research grant from Gojo; Gojo had no role in the
support of this research or any of A.E.A.’s research related to
triclosan. W.A.A. received a grant from the National Science
Foundation [CBET 0,967,163 (Using triclosan and polyhalogenated
dibenzo-p-dioxins to elucidate the importance of natural and
anthropogenic sources of OH-PBDEs in fresh and estuarine waters)]
that ended in 2014. The Green Science Policy Institute [a 501(c)(3)
nonprofit
organization]
received
funding
from
New
York
Community Trust that was used to support the contributions of A.
E.L., R.E.F., V.P.S., and A.B. to this project. Green Science Policy
Institute has no actual or potential competing financial interests
relating to this publication. D.A. is employed by Environmental
Working Group and has no actual or potential competing
financial interests to declare. T.S. works with Science and
Environmental Health Network and has no actual or potential
competing financial interests to declare. All other authors have
no actual or potential competing financial interests to declare.
References
Adolfsson-Erici M, Pettersson M, Parkkonen J, Sturve J. 2002. Triclosan, a com-
monly used bactericide found in human milk and in the aquatic environment in
Sweden. Chemosphere 46:1485–1489, PMID: 12002480, https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0045-6535(01)00255-7.
Ahn KC, Zhao B, Chen J, Cherednichenko G, Sanmarti E, Denison MS, et al. 2008.
In vitro biologic activities of the antimicrobials triclocarban, its analogs, and
triclosan in bioassay screens: Receptor-based bioassay screens. Environ
Health Perspect 116:1203–1210, PMID: 18795164, https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.
11200.
Aiello AE, Coulborn RM, Perez V, Larson EL. 2008. Effect of hand hygiene on infec-
tious diseases risk in the community setting: A meta-analysis. Am J Public
Health 98:1372–1381, PMID: 18556606, https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2007.124610.
Aiello AE, Larson EL, Levy SB. 2007. Consumer antibacterial soaps: effective or just
risky?. Clin Infect Dis 45: S137–S147, PMID: 17683018, https://doi.org/10.1086/
519255.
Aiello AE, Marshall B, Levy SB, Della-Latta P, Larson E. 2004. Relationship between
triclosan and susceptibilities of bacteria isolated from hands in the community.
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 48:2973–2979, PMID: 15273108, https://doi.org/10.
1128/AAC.48.8.2973-2979.2004.
Allmyr M et al. 2008. The influence of age and gender on triclosan concentrations
in Australian human blood serum. Sci Total Environ 393:162–167, PMID:
18207219, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2007.12.006.
Environmental Health Perspectives
064501-9
 Allmyr M, Adolfsson-Erici M, McLachlan MS, Sandborgh-Englund G. 2006. Triclo-
san in plasma and milk from Swedish nursing mothers and their exposure via
personal care products. Sci Total Environ 372:87–93, PMID: 17007908,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2006.08.007.
Alvarez-Rivera G, Llompart M, Garcia-Jares C, Lores M. 2016. Pressurized liquid
extraction-gas chromatography-mass spectrometry for confirming the photo-
induced generation of dioxin-like derivatives and other cosmetic preservative
photoproducts on artificial skin. J Chromatogr A 1440:37–44, PMID: 26948762,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chroma.2016.02.066.
Anderson SE, Franko J, Kashon ML, Anderson KL, Hubbs AF, Lukomska E, et al.
2013. Exposure to triclosan augments the allergic response to ovalbumin in
a
mouse model of
asthma. Toxicol Sci 132:96–106, PMID: 23192912,
https://doi.org/10.1093/toxsci/kfs328.
Anderson SE, Meade BJ, Long CM, Lukomska E, Marshall NB. 2016. Investigations
of immunotoxicity and allergic potential induced by topical application of triclo-
san in mice. J Immunotoxicol 13:165–172, PMID: 25812624, https://doi.org/10.
1016/bs.mcb.2015.01.016.
Anger CT, Sueper C, Blumentritt DJ, McNeill K, Engstrom DR, Arnold WA. 2013.
Quantification of triclosan, chlorinated triclosan derivatives, and their dioxin
photoproducts in lacustrine sediment cores. Environ Sci Technol 47:1833–1843,
PMID: 23320506, https://doi.org/10.1021/es3045289.
Aranami K, Readman JW. 2007. Photolytic degradation of triclosan in freshwater
and seawater. Chemosphere 66:1052–1056, PMID: 16930676, https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.chemosphere.2006.07.010.
Aryal N, Reinhold DM. 2011. Phytoaccumulation of antimicrobials from biosolids:
Impacts on environmental fate and relevance to human exposure. Water Res
45:5545–5552, PMID: 21903237, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2011.08.027.
Axelstad M, Boberg J, Vinggaard AM, Christiansen S, Hass U. 2013. Triclosan ex-
posure reduces thyroxine levels in pregnant and lactating rat dams and in
directly exposed offspring. Food Chem Toxicol 59:534–540, PMID: 23831729,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fct.2013.06.050.
Balmer ME, Poiger T, Droz C, Romanin K, Bergqvist PA, Müller MD, et al. 2004.
Occurrence of methyl triclosan, a transformation product of the bactericide tri-
closan, in fish from various lakes in Switzerland. Environ Sci Technol 38:390–
395, PMID: 14750712, https://doi.org/10.1021/es030068p.
Bedoux G, Roig B, Thomas O, Dupont V, Le Bot B. 2012. Occurrence and toxicity
of antimicrobial triclosan and by-products in the environment. Environ Sci
Pollut Res Int 19:1044–1065, PMID: 22057832, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-
011-0632-z.
Beecher N, Crawford K, Goldstein N, Kester G, Lono-Batura M, Dziezyk E. 2007. A
NationalBiosolids Regulation, Quality,End Use, &DisposalSurvey– Final Report.
July 20, 2007. Tamworth, NH: North East Biosolids and Residual Association
(NEBRA). https://static1.squarespace.com/static/54806478e4b0dc44e1698e88/t/
5488541fe4b03c0a9b8ee09b/1418220575693/NtlBiosolidsReport-20July07.pdf
[accessed17June2016].
BertelsenRJ,LongneckerMP,LøvikM,CalafatAM,CarlsenKH,LondonSJ,etal.2013.
Triclosan exposureandallergicsensitizationinNorwegianchildren.AllergyEurJ
AllergyClinImmunol68:84–91,PMID:23146048, https://doi.org/10.1111/all.12058.
Bester K. 2003. Triclosan in a sewage treatment process - Balances and monitor-
ing data. Water Res 37:3891–3896, PMID: 12909107, https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0043-1354(03)00335-X.
Bester K. 2005. Fate of triclosan and triclosan-methyl in sewage treatment plants
and surface waters. Arch Environ Contam Toxicol 49:9–17, PMID: 15959704,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00244-004-0155-4.
Bhargava HN, Leonard PA. 1996. Triclosan: Applications and safety. Am J Infect Con-
trol 24:209–218, PMID: 8807001, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0196-6553(96)90017-6.
Borchgrevink CP, Cha J, Kim S. 2013. Hand washing practices in a college town
environment. J Environ Health; 75:18–24, PMID: 23621052.
Braoudaki M, Hilton AC. 2004. Adaptive resistance to biocides in Salmonella enter-
ica and Escherichia coli O157 and cross-resistance to antimicrobial agents. J
Clin Microbiol 42:73–78, PMID: 14715734, https://doi.org/10.1128/JCM.42.1.73.
Buth JM, Steen PO, Sueper C, Blumentritt D, Vikesland PJ, Arnold WA, et al. 2010.
Dioxin photoproducts of triclosan and its chlorinated derivatives in sediment
cores. Environ Sci Technol 44:4545–4551, PMID: 20476764, https://doi.org/10.
1021/es1001105.
Buth JM, Grandbois M, Vikesland PJ, McNeill K, Arnold WA. 2009. Aquatic photo-
chemistry of chlorinated triclosan derivatives: potential source of polychlorodi-
benzo-p-dioxins.
Environ
Toxicol
Chem
28:2555–2563,
PMID:
19908930,
https://doi.org/10.1897/08-490.1.
Buth JM, Ross MR, McNeill K, Arnold WA. 2011. Removal and formation of chlori-
nated triclosan derivatives in wastewater treatment plants using chlorine and
UV disinfection. Chemosphere 84:1238–1243, PMID: 21652055, https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.chemosphere.2011.09.003.
Calafat AM, Ye X, Wong LY, Reidy JA, Needham LL. 2008. Urinary concentrations
of triclosan in the U.S. population: 2003-2004. Environ Health Perspect 116:303–
307, PMID: 18335095, https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.10768.
CalEPA (State of California Environmental Protection Agency). 2017. Safe Drinking
Water and Toxic Enforcement Act of 1986: Chemicals Known to the State to
Cause Cancer or Reproductive Toxicity. January 27, 2017. http://oehha.ca.gov/
proposition-65/proposition-65-list [accessed 3 February 2017].
Cantwell MG, Wilson BA, Zhu J, Wallace GT, King JW, Olsen CR, et al. 2010. Tem-
poral trends of triclosan contamination in dated sediment cores from four
urbanized estuaries: Evidence of preservation and accumulation. Chemosphere
78:347–352, PMID: 20006371, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2009.11.021.
Carey DE, McNamara PJ. 2015. The impact of triclosan on the spread of antibiotic
resistance in the environment. Front Microbiol 5:780, PMID: 25642217,
https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2014.00780.
CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention). 2003. Recommendations of CDC
and the Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC).
52(RR10). https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5210a1.htm [accessed
17June2016].
Chalew TEA, Halden RU. 2009. Environmental exposure of aquatic and terrestrial
biota to triclosan and triclocarban. J Am Water Works Assoc 45:4–13, PMID:
20046971, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1752-1688.2008.00284.x.
Chen J, Ahn KC, Gee NA, Ahmed MI, Duleba AJ, Zhao L, et al. 2008. Triclocarban
enhances testosterone action: A new type of endocrine disruptor? Endocrinology
149:1173–1179, PMID: 18048496, https://doi.org/10.1210/en.2007-1057.
Clayton EMR, Todd M, Dowd JB, Aiello AE. 2011. The impact of bisphenol A and tri-
closan on immune parameters in the U.S. population, NHANES 2003-2006. Envi-
ron Health Perspect 119:390–396, PMID: 21062687, https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.
1002883.
Coogan MA, Edziyie RE, La Point TW, Venables BJ. 2007. Algal bioaccumulation of
triclocarban, triclosan, and methyl-triclosan in a North Texas wastewater
treatment plant receiving stream. Chemosphere 67:1911–1918, PMID: 17275881,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2006.12.027.
Coogan MA, La Point TW. 2008. Snail bioaccumulation of triclocarban, triclosan,
and methyltriclosan in a North Texas, USA, stream affected by wastewater
treatment plant runoff. Environ Toxicol Chem 27:1788–1793, PMID: 18380516,
https://doi.org/10.1897/07-374.1.
Crawford BR, deCatanzaro D. 2012. Disruption of blastocyst implantation by triclo-
san in mice: Impacts of repeated and acute doses and combination with
bisphenol-A. Reprod Toxicol 34:607–613, PMID: 23059059, https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.reprotox.2012.09.008.
Dann AB, Hontela A. 2011. Triclosan: Environmental exposure, toxicity and mecha-
nisms of action. J Appl Toxicol 31:285–311, PMID: 21462230, https://doi.org/10.
1002/jat.1660.
Davis EF, Gunsch CK, Stapleton HM. 2015. Fate of flame retardants and the antimi-
crobial agent triclosan in planted and unplanted biosolid-amended soils. Envi-
ron Toxicol Chem 34:968–976, PMID: 25546022, https://doi.org/10.1002/etc.2854.
Dayan AD. 2007. Risk assessment of triclosan [Irgasan®] in human breast milk.
Food Chem Toxicol 45:125–129, PMID: 17011099, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fct.
2006.08.009.
Den Hond E, Tournaye H, De Sutter P, Ombelet W, Baeyens W, Covaci A, et al.
2015. Human exposure to endocrine disrupting chemicals and fertility: A case-
control study in male subfertility patients. Environ Int 84:154–160, PMID:
26292060, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2015.07.017.
Dhillon GS, Kaur S, Pulicharla R, Brar SK, Cledón M, Verma M, et al. 2015. Triclo-
san: Current status, occurrence, environmental risks and bioaccumulation
potential. Int J Environ Res Public Health 12:5657–5684, PMID: 26006133,
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph120505657.
Ding SL, Wang XK, Jiang WQ, Meng X, Zhao RS, Wang C, et al. 2013. Photodegra-
dation of the antimicrobial triclocarban in aqueous systems under ultraviolet
radiation.
Environ
Sci
Pollut
Res
Int
20:3195–3201,
PMID:
23054798,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-012-1239-8.
Doudrick KD, Jones DB, Kalinowski T, Hartmann EM, Halden RU. 2010. Assessment
of the contribution of triclosan to dioxin emissions from sludge incineration in
the U.S. using a mathematical model. Contaminants of Emerging Concern in
the Environment: Ecological and Human Health Considerations ACS Sympo-
sium Series, Vol. 1048. Halden RU, ed. Washington, DC: American Chemical So-
ciety, 469–481, https://doi.org/10.1021/bk-2010-1048.ch023.
DruryB,ScottJ,Rosi-MarshallEJ,KellyJJ.2013.Triclosanexposureincreasestriclo-
san resistance and influences taxonomic composition of benthic bacterial com-
munities. Environ Sci Technol 47:8923–8930, PMID: 23865377, https://doi.org/10.
1021/es401919k.
Duleba AJ, Scott J, Rosi-Marshall EJ, Kelly JJ. 2011. Effects of triclocarban on intact
immature male rat: Augmentation of androgen action. Reprod Sci 18:119–127,
PMID:20889956,https://doi.org/10.1177/1933719110382581.
EC (European Commission). 2016. Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2016/110
of 27 January 2016 not Approving Triclosan as an Existing Active Substance
for Use in Biocidal Products for Product-type 1. Official Journal of the Euro-
pean Union L 21/87. http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=
CELEX:32016D0110&from=EN [accessed 23 January 2017].
Environmental Health Perspectives
064501-10
 ECHA (European Chemicals Agency). 2015. Biocidal Products Committee (BPC):
Opinion on the Application for Approval of the Active Substance: Triclosan
Product-type: 1. ECHA/BPC/066/2015. Helsinki, Finland. https://echa.europa.eu/
documents/10162/efc985e4-8802-4ebb-8245-29708747a358 [accessed 17 June
2016].
Fair PA, Lee HB, Adams J, Darling C, Pacepavicius G, Alaee M, et al. 2009. Occur-
rence of triclosan in plasma of wild Atlantic bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops trun-
catus) and in their environment. Environ Pollut 157:2248–2254, PMID: 19410343,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2009.04.002.
Fan X, Kubwabo C, Rasmussen P, Jones-Otazo H. 2010. Simultaneous quantitation
of parabens, triclosan, and methyl triclosan in indoor house dust using solid
phase extraction and gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. J Environ
Monit 12:1891–1897, PMID: 20820626, https://doi.org/10.1039/C0EM00189A.
Fang JL, Vanlandingham MM, Juliar BE, Olson GR, Patton RE, Beland FA. 2015.
Dose–response assessment of the dermal toxicity of triclosan in B6C3F1 mice.
Toxicol Res 4:867–877, https://doi.org/10.1039/C4TX00152D.
FDA (U.S. Food and Drug Administration). 2016. 21 CFR Part 310 Safety and
Effectiveness of Consumer Antiseptics. Topical Antimicrobial Drug Products
for Over-the-Counter Human Use. Final Rule. Fed Reg 81:61106–61130.
Fiss EM, Rule KL, Vikesland PJ. 2007. Formation of chloroform and other chlori-
nated byproducts by chlorination of triclosan-containing antibacterial prod-
ucts. Environ Sci Technol 41:2387–2394, PMID: 17438791, https://doi.org/10.
1021/es062227l.
Franz S, Altenburger R, Heilmeier H, Schmitt-Jansen M. 2008. What contributes to
the sensitivity of microalgae to triclosan?. Aquat Toxicol 90:102–108, PMID:
18824267, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aquatox.2008.08.003.
Frederiksen H, Jensen TK, Jørgensen N, Kyhl HB, Husby S, Skakkebæk NE, et al.
2014. Human urinary excretion of non-persistent environmental chemicals: An
overview of Danish data collected between 2006 and 2012. Reprod Res
147:555–565, PMID: 24395915, https://doi.org/10.1530/REP-13-0522.
Gaulke CA, Barton CL, Proffitt S, Tanguay RL, Sharpton TJ. 2016. Triclosan expo-
sure is associated with rapid restructuring of the microbiome in adult zebra-
fish. PLoS One 11(5):e0154632, PMID: 27191725, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0154632.
Gee RH, Charles A, Taylor N, Darbre PD. 2008. Oestrogenic and androgenic activity
of triclosan in breast cancer cells. J Appl Toxicol 28:78–91, PMID: 17992702,
https://doi.org/10.1002/jat.1316.
Geens T, Roosens L, Neels H, Covaci A. 2009. Assessment of human exposure to
bisphenol-A, triclosan and tetrabromobisphenol-A through indoor dust intake
in Belgium. Chemosphere 76:755–760, PMID: 19535125, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chemosphere.2009.05.024.
Geer LA, Pycke BFG, Waxenbaum J, Sherer DM, Abulafia O, Halden RU. 2017.
Association of birth outcomes with fetal exposure to parabens, triclosan and
triclocarban in an immigrant population in Brooklyn, New York. J Hazard Mater
5:177–183, PMID: 27156397, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2016.03.028.
Geiß C, Ruppert K, Heidelbach T, Oehlmann J. 2016. The antimicrobial agents triclo-
carban and triclosanas potent modulators of reproduction in Potamopyrgus anti-
podarum (Mollusca: Hydrobiidae). J Environ Sci Health A Tox Hazard Subst
Environ Eng 51:1173–1179,PMID: 27459681, https://doi.org/10.1080/10934529.2016.
1206388.
Ghassabian A, El Marroun H, Peeters RP, Jaddoe VW, Hofman A, Verhulst FC, et
al. 2014. Downstream effects of maternal hypothyroxinemia in early pregnancy:
Nonverbal
IQ
and
brain
morphology
in
school-age
children.
J
Clin
Endocrinol Metab 99:2383–2390,
PMID: 24684462, https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.
2013-4281.
Ginsberg GL, Balk SJ. 2016. Consumer products as sources of chemical exposures
to children: Case study of triclosan. Curr Opin Pediatr 28:235–242, PMID:
26867165, https://doi.org/10.1097/MOP.0000000000000329.
Giudice BD, and Young TM. 2010. The antimicrobial triclocarban stimulates embryo
production in the freshwater mudsnail Potamopyrgus antipodarum. Environ
Toxicol Chem 29:966–970, PMID: 20821527, https://doi.org/10.1002/etc.105.
Giuliano CA, Rybak MJ. 2015. Efficacy of triclosan as an antimicrobial hand soap
and its potential impact on antimicrobial resistance: A focused review. Pharma-
cotherapy 35:328–336, PMID: 25809180, https://doi.org/10.1002/phar.1553.
Halden RU, Paull DH. 2005. Co-occurrence of triclocarban and triclosan in U.S.
water
resources.
Environ
Sci
Technol
39:1420–1426,
PMID:
15819193,
https://doi.org/10.1021/es049071e.
Halden RU. 2014. On the need and speed of regulating triclosan and triclocarban in
the United States. Environ Sci Technol 48:3603–3611, PMID: 24588513,
https://doi.org/10.1021/es500495p.
Hartmann EM, Hickey R, Hsu T, Betancourt Roman CM, Chen J, et al. 2016. Antimi-
crobial chemicals are associated with elevated antibiotic resistance genes in
the indoor dust microbiome. Environ Sci Technol 50(18):9807–9815, PMID:
27599587, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.6b00262.
Heidler J, Halden RU. 2009. Fate of organohalogens in US wastewater treatment
plants and estimated chemical releases to soils nationwide from biosolids
recycling. J Environ Monit 11:2207–2215, PMID: 20024018, https://doi.org/10.
1039/b914324f.
Heidler J, Sapkota A, Halden RU. 2006. Partitioning, persistence, and accumula-
tion in digested sludge of the topical antiseptic triclocarban during waste-
water treatment. Environ Sci Technol 40(11):3634–3639, PMID: 16786704,
https://doi.org/10.1021/es052245n.
Henrichs J, Ghassabian A, Peeters RP, Tiemeier H. 2013. Maternal hypothyroxine-
mia and effects on cognitive functioning in childhood: How and why?. Clin
Endocrinol (Oxf) 79:152–162, PMID: 23600900, https://doi.org/10.1111/cen.12227.
Henry ND, Fair PA. 2013. Comparison of in vitro cytotoxicity, estrogenicity, and
anti-estrogenicity of triclosan, perfluorooctane sulfonate and perfluoroocta-
noic acid. J Appl Toxicol 33:265–272, PMID: 21935973, https://doi.org/10.1002/
jat.1736.
Higgins CP, Paesani ZJ, Abbott Chalew TE, Halden RU, Hundal LS. 2011. Persist-
ence of triclocarban and triclosan in soils after land application of biosolids
and bioaccumulation in Eisenia foetida. Environ Toxicol Chem 30:556–563,
PMID: 21128266, https://doi.org/10.1002/etc.416.
Higgins CP, Paesani ZJ, Chalew TEA, Halden RU. 2009. Bioaccumulation of triclo-
carban in Lumbriculus Variegatus. Environ Toxicol Chem 28:2580–2586, PMID:
19655999, https://doi.org/10.1897/09-013.1.
Holling CS, Bailey JL, Vanden Heuvel B, Kinney CA. 2012. Uptake of human phar-
maceuticals and personal care products by cabbage (Brassica campestris)
from fortified and biosolids-amended soils. J Environ Monit 14:3029–3036,
PMID: 23051741, https://doi.org/10.1039/c2em30456b.
Hu J, Raikhel V, Gopalakrishnan K, Fernandez-Hernandez H, Lambertini L, Manservisi
F, et al. 2016. Effect of postnatal low-dose exposure to environmental chemicals
on the gut microbiome in a rodent model. Microbiome 4:26, PMID: 27301250,
https://doi.org/10.1186/s40168-016-0173-2.
Huang H, Du G, Zhang W, Hu J, Wu D, Song L, et al. 2014. The in vitro estrogenic
activities of triclosan and triclocarban. J Appl Toxicol 34:1060–1067, PMID:
24740835, https://doi.org/10.1002/jat.3012.
IARC (International Agency for Research on Cancer). 2012. Chemical Agents and
Related Occupations - Volume 100F - A Review of Human Carcinogens. Lyon,
France.
http://monographs.iarc.fr/ENG/Monographs/vol100F/mono100F.pdf
[accessed 18 August 2016].
Ishibashi H, Matsumura N, Hirano M, Matsuoka M, Shiratsuchi H, Ishibashi Y, et
al. 2004. Effects of triclosan on the early life stages and reproduction of med-
aka Oryzias latipes and induction of hepatic vitellogenin. Aquat Toxicol 67:167–
179, PMID: 15003701, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aquatox.2003.12.005.
James MO, Li W, Summerlot DP, Rowland-Faux L, Wood CE. 2010. Triclosan is a
potent inhibitor of estradiol and estrone sulfonation in sheep placenta. Environ
Int 36:942–949, PMID: 19299018, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2009.02.004.
James MO, Marth CJ, Rowland-Faux L. 2012. Slow O-demethylation of methyl tri-
closan to triclosan, which is rapidly glucuronidated and sulfonated in channel
catfish liver and intestine. Aquat Toxicol 124-125:72–82, PMID: 22926334,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aquatox.2012.07.009.
Johnson PI, Koustas E, Vesterinen HM, Sutton P, Atchley DS, Kim AN, et al. 2016.
Application of the navigation guide systematic review methodology to the evi-
dence for developmental and reproductive toxicity of triclosan. Environ Int 92-
93:716–728, PMID: 27156197, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2016.03.009.
Kanetoshi A, Ogawa H, Katsura E, Kaneshima H, Miura T. 1988. Formation of poly-
chlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins upon combustion of commercial textile products
containing 2,4,40-trichloro-20-hydroxydiphenyl ether (Irgasan® DP3000). J Chro-
matogr A 442:289–299, PMID: 3417820, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0021-9673(00)
94476-5.
Kanetoshi A, Ogawa H, Katsura E, Kaneshima H. 1987. Chlorination of Irgasan
DP300 and formation from its chlorinated derivatives. J Chromatogr 389:139–
153, PMID: 3571350, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0021-9673(01)94418-8.
Kerrigan JF, Engstrom DR, Yee D, Sueper C, Erickson PR, Grandbois M, et al. 2015.
Quantification of hydroxylated polybrominated diphenyl ethers (OH-BDEs), tri-
closan, and related compounds in freshwater and coastal systems. PLoS One
10:e0138805. PMID: 26466159, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0138805.
Kinney C, Furlong E, Kolpin D, Burkhardt M, Zaugg S. 2008. Bioaccumulation of
pharmaceuticals and other anthropogenic waste indicators in earthworms
from agricultural soil amended with biosolid or swine manure. Environ Sci
Technol 42:1863–1870, PMID: 18409605, https://doi.org/10.1021/es702304c.
Kolpin DW, Furlong E, Meyer M, Thurman EM, Zaugg S. 2002. Pharmaceuticals,
hormones, and other organic wastewater contaminants in U.S. streams, 1999 -
2000: A national reconnaissance. Environ Sci Technol 36:1202–1211, PMID:
11944670, https://doi.org/10.1021/es011055j.
Kumar V, Chakraborty A, Kural MR, Roy P. 2009. Alteration of testicular steroido-
genesis and histopathology of reproductive system in male rats treated with
triclosan. Reprod Toxicol 27:177–185, PMID: 19118620, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
reprotox.2008.12.002.
Langdon KA, Warne MSJ, Smernik RJ, Shareef A, Kookana RS. 2012. Field dissipa-
tion of 4-nonylphenol, 4-t-octylphenol, triclosan and bisphenol A following land
Environmental Health Perspectives
064501-11
 application of biosolids. Chemosphere 86:1050–1058, PMID: 22196087, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.chemosphere.2011.11.057.
Lange A, Sebire M, Rostkowski P, Mizutani T, Miyagawa S, Iguchi T, et al. 2015.
Environmental chemicals active as human antiandrogens do not activate a
stickleback androgen receptor but enhance a feminising effect of oestrogen in
roach. Aquat Toxicol 168:48–59, PMID: 26440146, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
aquatox.2015.09.014.
Lassen TH, Frederiksen H, Kyhl HB, Swan SH, Main KM, Andersson AM, et al.
2016. Prenatal triclosan exposure and anthropometric measures including ano-
genital distance in Danish infants. Environ Health Perspect 124:1261–1268,
PMID: 26908126, https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1409637.
Latch DE, Packer JL, Arnold WA, McNeill K. 2003. Photochemical conversion of tri-
closan to 2,8-dichlorodibenzo-p-dioxin in aqueous solution. J Photochem Pho-
tobiol A Chem 158:63–66, PMID: 16520937, https://doi.org/10.1016/S1010-6030
(03)00103-5.
Leiker TJ, Abney SR, Goodbred SL, Rosen MR. 2009. Identification of methyl triclo-
san and halogenated analogues in male common carp (Cyprinus carpio) from
Las Vegas Bay and semipermeable membrane devices from Las Vegas Wash,
Nevada. Sci Total Environ 407:2102–2114, PMID: 19054547, https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.scitotenv.2008.11.009.
Li X, Ying GG, Su HC, Yang XB, Wang L. 2010. Simultaneous determination and
assessment of 4-nonylphenol, bisphenol A and triclosan in tap water, bottled
water and baby bottles. Environ Int 36:557–562, PMID: 20452023, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.envint.2010.04.009.
Loraine GA, Pettigrove ME. 2006. Seasonal variations in concentrations of pharma-
ceuticals and personal care products in drinking water and reclaimed waste-
water in Southern California. Environ Sci Technol 40:687–695, PMID: 16509304,
https://doi.org/10.1021/es051380x.
Louis GW, Hallinger DR, Stoker TE. 2013. The effect of triclosan on the uterotro-
phic response to extended doses of ethinyl estradiol in the weanling rat.
Reprod Toxicol 36:71–77, PMID: 23261820, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.reprotox.
2012.12.001.
Macherius A, Eggen T, Lorenz W, Moeder M, Ondruschka J, Reemtsma T. 2012.
Metabolization of the bacteriostatic agent triclosan in edible plants and its
consequences for plant uptake assessment. Environ Sci Technol 46:10797–
10804, PMID: 22989227, https://doi.org/10.1021/es3028378.
Macherius A, Lapen DR, Reemtsma T, Römbke J, Topp E, Coors A. 2014. Triclocarban,
triclosananditstransformationproductmethyltriclosaninnativeearthwormspe-
cies four years after a commercial-scale biosolids application. Sci Total Environ
472:235–238,PMID:24291564,https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2013.10.113.
Marshall NB, Lukomska E, Long CM, Kashon ML, Sharpnack DD, Nayak AP, et al.
2015. Triclosan induces thymic stromal lymphopoietin in skin promoting Th2 al-
lergic responses. Toxicol Sci 147:127–139, PMID: 26048654, https://doi.org/10.
1093/toxsci/kfv113.
Mathews S, Henderson S, Reinhold D. 2014. Uptake and accumulation of antimi-
crobials, triclocarban and triclosan, by food crops in a hydroponic system. En-
viron Sci Pollut Res Int 21:6025–6033, PMID: 24464075, https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11356-013-2474-3.
McAvoy DC, Schatowitz B, Jacob M, Hauk A, Eckhoff WS. 2002. Measurement of
triclosan in wastewater treatment systems. Environ Toxicol Chem 21:1323–
1329, PMID: 12109730, https://doi.org/10.1002/etc.5620210701.
Meador JP, Yeh A, Young G, Gallagher EP. 2016. Contaminants of emerging con-
cern in a large temperate estuary. Environ Pollut 213:254–267, PMID: 26907702,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2016.01.088.
Meeker JD, Cantonwine DE, Rivera-González LO, Ferguson KK, Mukherjee B,
Calafat AM, et al. 2013. Distribution, variability, and predictors of urinary con-
centrations of phenols and parabens among pregnant women in Puerto Rico.
Environ Sci Technol 47:3439–3447, PMID: 23469879, https://doi.org/10.1021/
es400510g.
Menoutis J, Parisi AI. 2002. Testing for dioxin and furan contamination in triclosan.
Cosmet Toilet 117:75–78.
Miller MD, Crofton KM, Rice DC, Zoeller RT. 2009. Thyroid-disrupting chemicals:
interpreting upstream biomarkers of adverse outcomes. Environ Health Per-
spect 117:1033–1041, PMID: 19654909, https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.0800247.
Miller TR, Colquhoun DR, Halden RU. 2010. Identification of wastewater bacteria
involved in the degradation of triclocarban and its non-chlorinated congener. J
Hazard Mater 183:766–772, PMID: 20727675, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.
2010.07.092.
Miller TR, Heidler J, Chillrud SN, DeLaquil A, Ritchie JC, Mihalic JN, et al. 2008.
Fate of triclosan and evidence for reductive dechlorination of triclocarban in
estuarine sediments. Environ Sci Technol 42:4570–4576, PMID: 18605588,
https://doi.org/10.1021/es702882g.
Millow CJ, Mackintosh SA, Lewison RL, Dodder NG, Hoh E. 2015. Identifying bioac-
cumulative halogenated organic compounds using a nontargeted analytical
approach: Seabirds as sentinels. PLoS One 10:e0127205, PMID: 26020245,
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0127205.
Mortensen ME, Calafat AM, Ye X, Wong LY, Wright DJ, Pirkle JL, et al. 2014. Uri-
nary concentrations of environmental phenols in pregnant women in a pilot
study of the National Children’s Study. Environ Res 129:32–38, PMID: 24529000,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2013.12.004.
Moss T, Howes D, Williams FM. 2000. Percutaneous penetration and dermal
metabolism of triclosan (2,4,4’- trichloro-2'-hydroxydiphenyl ether). Food Chem
Toxicol 38:361–370, PMID: 10722890, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0278-6915(99)
00164-7.
Orvos D, Versteeg D, Inauen J, Capdevielle M, Rothenstein A, Cunningham V. 2002.
Aquatic toxicity of triclosan. Environ Toxicol Chem 21:1338–1349, PMID:
12109732, https://doi.org/10.1002/etc.5620210703.
Paul KB, Hedge JM, Bansal R, Zoeller RT, Peter R, DeVito MJ, et al. 2013. Develop-
mental triclosan exposure decreases maternal, fetal, and early neonatal thyro-
xine: Dynamic and kinetic evaluation of a putative mode-of-action. Toxicology
300:31–45, PMID: 22659317, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tox.2012.05.023.
Paul KB, Hedge JM, Devito MJ, Crofton KM. 2010. Short-term exposure to triclosan
decreases thyroxine in vivo via upregulation of hepatic catabolism in young
Long-Evans rats. Toxicol Sci 113:367–379, PMID: 19910387, https://doi.org/10.
1093/toxsci/kfp271.
Philippat C, Botton J, Calafat AM, Ye X, Charles MA, Slama R, et al. 2014. Prenatal
exposure to phenols and growth in boys. Epidemiology 25:625–635, PMID:
25061923, https://doi.org/10.1097/EDE.0000000000000132.
Philippat C, Wolff MS, Calafat AM, Ye X, Bausell R, Meadows M, et al. 2013. Prena-
tal exposure to environmental phenols: Concentrations in amniotic fluid and
variability in urinary concentrations during pregnancy. Environ Health Perspect
121:1225–1231, PMID: 23942273, https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1206335.
PollockT,GrevilleLJ,TangB,deCatanzaroD.2016.Triclosan elevatesestradiollevels
in serum and tissues of cycling and peri-implantation female mice. Reprod Toxi-
col65:394–401,PMID:27638325,https://doi.org/10.1016/j.reprotox.2016.09.004.
Pollock T, Tang B, deCatanzaro D. 2014. Triclosan exacerbates the presence of
14C-bisphenol A in tissues of female and male mice. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol
278:116–123, PMID: 24784443, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.taap.2014.04.017.
Prosser RS, Lissemore L, Topp E, Sibley PK. 2014. Bioaccumulation of triclosan and
triclocarban in plants grown in soils amended with municipal dewatered bio-
solids. Environ Tocixol Chem 33(5):975–984, PMID: 24375516, https://doi.org/10.
1002/etc.2505.
Pycke BFG, Crabbé A, Verstraete W, Leys N. 2010. Characterization of triclosan-re-
sistant mutants reveals multiple antimicrobial resistance mechanisms in Rho-
dospirillum rubrum S1H. Appl Environ Microbiol 76:3116–3123, PMID: 20305019,
https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.02757-09.
Pycke BFG, Geer LA, Dalloul M, Abulafia O, Jenck AM, Halden RU. 2014. Human
fetal exposure to triclosan and triclocarban in an urban population from
Brooklyn, New York. Environ Sci Technol 48:8831–8838, PMID: 24971846,
https://doi.org/10.1021/es501100w.
Queckenberg C, Meins J, Wachall B, Doroshyenko O, Tomalik-Scharte D, Bastian
B, et al. 2010. Absorption, pharmacokinetics, and safety of triclosan after der-
mal administration. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 54:570–572, PMID: 19822703,
https://doi.org/10.1128/AAC.00615-09.
Reiss R, Mackay N, Habig C, Griffin J. 2002. An ecological risk assessment for tri-
closan in lotic systems following discharge from wastewater treatment plants
in the United States. Environ Toxicol Chem 21:2483–2492, PMID: 12389930,
https://doi.org/10.1002/etc.5620211130.
Ricart M, Guasch H, Alberch M, Barceló D, Bonnineau C, Geiszinger A, et al. 2010.
Triclosan persistence through wastewater treatment plants and its potential:
Toxic effects on river biofilms. Aquat Toxicol 100:346–353, PMID: 20855117,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aquatox.2010.08.010.
Rule KL, Ebbett VR, Vikesland PJ. 2005. Formation of chloroform and chlorinated
organics by free-chlorine-mediated oxidation of triclosan. Environ Sci Technol
39:3176–3185, PMID: 15926568, https://doi.org/10.1021/es048943.
Sacks VP, Lohmann R. 2011. Development and use of polyethylene passive sam-
plers to detect triclosans and alkylphenols in an urban estuary. Environ Sci
Technol 45:2270–2277, PMID: 21341696, https://doi.org/10.1021/es1040865.
Sandborgh-Englund G, Adolfsson-Erici M, Odham G, Ekstrand J. 2006. Pharmacoki-
netics of triclosan following oral ingestion in humans. J Toxicol Environ Health
PartA 69:1861–1873,PMID:16952905,https://doi.org/10.1080/15287390600631706.
Savage JH, Johns CB, Hauser R, Litonjua AA. 2014. Urinary triclosan levels and
recent asthma exacerbations. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 112:179–183,
PMID: 24468262, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anai.2013.11.017.
Savage JH, Matsui EC, Wood RA, Keet CA. 2012. Urinary levels of triclosan and par-
abens are associated with aeroallergen and food sensitization. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 130:453–460, PMID: 22704536, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2012.05.006.
SCCS (European Commission Scientific Committee on Consumer Safety). 2010.
Opinion on Triclosan - Antimicrobial Resistance. Brussels, Begium. SCCP/1251/
09. 22 June 2010. https://doi.org/10.2772/11162. https://ec.europa.eu/health/
sites/health/files/scientific_committees/consumer_safety/docs/sccs_o_023.pdf
[accessed 21 June 2016].
Environmental Health Perspectives
064501-12
 Schebb NH, Ahn KC, Dong H, Gee SJ, Hammock BD. 2012. Whole blood is the sam-
ple matrix of choice for monitoring systemic triclocarban levels. Chemosphere
87:825–827, PMID: 22273184, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2011.12.077.
Schebb NH, Flores I, Kurobe T, Franze B, Ranganathan A, Hammock BD, et al.
2011a. Bioconcentration, metabolism and excretion of triclocarban in larval
Qurt medaka (Oryzias latipes). Aquat Toxicol 105:448–454, PMID: 21872556,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aquatox.2011.07.020.
Schebb NH, Inceoglu B, Ahn KC, Morisseau C, Gee SJ, Hammock BD. 2011b.
Investigation of human exposure to triclocarban after showering and prelimi-
nary evaluation of its biological effects. Environ Sci Technol 45:3109–3115,
PMID: 21381656, https://doi.org/10.1021/es103650m.
Shekhar S, Sood S, Showkat S, Lite C, Chandrasekhar A, Vairamani M, et al. 2017.
Detection of phenolic endocrine disrupting chemicals (EDCs) from maternal
blood plasma and amniotic fluid in Indian population. Gen Comp Endocrinol
241:100–107, PMID: 27235644, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ygcen.2016.05.025.
Singer H, Müller S, Tixier C, Pillonel L. 2002. Triclosan: Occurrence and fate of a
widely used biocide in the aquatic environment: field measurements in waste-
water treatment plants, surface waters and lake sediments. Environ Sci Tech-
nol 36:4998–5004, PMID: 12523412, https://doi.org/10.1021/es025750i CCC.
Sinkkonen S, Paasivirta J. 2000. Degradation half-life times of PCDDs, PCDFs and
PCBs for environmental fate modeling. Chemosphere 40:943–949, PMID:
10739030, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0045-6535(99)00337-9.
Smith S. 2013. U.S. Disinfectant & Antimicrobial Chemicals Market. PRWeb. http://
www.prweb.com/releases/2013/9/prweb11150188.htm[accessed8August2016].
Spanier AJ, Fausnight T, Camacho TF, Braun JM. 2014. The associations of triclo-
san and paraben exposure with allergen sensitization and wheeze in children.
Allergy Asthma Proc 35:475–481, PMID: 25584915, https://doi.org/10.2500/aap.
2014.35.3803.
State of Minnesota. 2016. Minnesota Statute 145.945 Certain Sales of Cleaning
Products Prohibited. https://www.revisor.mn.gov/statutes/?id=145.945 [accessed
16 February2017].
Stoker TE, Gibson EK, Zorrilla LM. 2010. Triclosan exposure modulates estrogen-
dependent responses in the female Wistar rat. Toxicol Sci 117:45–53, PMID:
20562219, https://doi.org/10.1093/toxsci/kfq180.
Syed AK, Ghosh S, Love NG, Boles BR. 2014. Triclosan promotes Staphylococcus
aureus nasal colonization. MBio 5:e01015–13, PMID: 24713325, https://doi.org/
10.1128/mBio.01015-13.
Tamura I, Kagota K, Yasuda Y, Yoneda S, Morita J, Nakada N, et al. 2013.
Ecotoxicity and screening level ecotoxicological risk assessment of five anti-
microbial agents: Triclosan, triclocarban, resorcinol, phenoxyethanol and p-
thymol. J Appl Toxicol 33:1222–1229, PMID: 22806922, https://doi.org/10.1002/
jat.2771.
Tobar S, Tordesillas L, Berin MC. 2016. Triclosan promotes epicutaneous sensitiza-
tion to peanut in mice. Clin Transl Allergy 6, PMID: 27051518, https://doi.org/10.
1186/s13601-016-0102-2.
Toms LM, Allmyr M, Mueller JF, Adolfsson-Erici M, McLachlan M, Murby J, et al.
2011. Triclosan in individual human milk samples from Australia. Chemosphere
85:1682–1686, PMID: 22000243, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2011.08.
009.
U.S. EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). 2001. Integrated Risk Information
System (IRIS) Chemical Assessment Summary on Chloroform, CASRN 67-66-3.
National Center for Environmental Assessment. https://cfpub.epa.gov/ncea/iris/
iris_documents/documents/subst/0025_summary.pdf [accessed 16 February
2017].
U.S. EPA. 2009. Targeted national sewage sludge survey sampling and analysis
technical report. EPA-822-R-08-016. Washington, DC: U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, Office of Water. https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/
2015-04/documents/targeted_national_sewage_sluldge_survey_sampling_
and_analysis_technical_report_0.pdf [accessed20June2016].
UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). 2013. Toolkit for Identification and
Quantification of Releases of Dioxins, Furans and Other Unintentional POPs
under Article 5 of the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants.
http://toolkit.pops.int/ [accessed 11 August 2016].
Valters K, Li H, Alaee M, D'Sa I, Marsh G, Bergman A, et al. 2005. Polybrominated
diphenyl ethers and hydroxylated and methoxylated brominated and chlori-
nated analogues in the plasma of fish from the Detroit River. Environ Sci Tech-
nol 39:5612–5619, PMID: 16124294, https://doi.org/10.1021/es0506410.
Van den Berg M, Birnbaum LS, Denison M, De Vito M, Farland W, Feeley M, et al.
2006. The 2005 World Health Organization reevaluation of human and mamma-
lian toxic equivalency factors for dioxins and dioxin-like compounds. Toxicol
Sci 93:223–241, PMID: 16829543, https://doi.org/10.1093/toxsci/kfl055.
Veldhoen N, Skirrow RC, Osachoff H, Wigmore H, Clapson DJ, Gunderson MP, et
al. 2006. The bactericidal agent triclosan modulates thyroid hormone-associated
geneexpressionanddisruptspostembryonicanurandevelopment.AquatToxicol
80:217–227,PMID:17011055,https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aquatox.2007.03.009.
Velez MP, Arbuckle TE, Fraser WD. 2015. Female exposure to phenols and phtha-
lates and time to pregnancy: The Maternal-Infant Research on Environmental
Chemicals (MIREC) study. Fertil Steril 103:1011–1020.e2, PMID: 25681860,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fertnstert.2015.01.005.
Venkatesan AK, Pycke BFG, Barber LB, Lee KE, Halden RU. 2012. Occurrence of tri-
closan, triclocarban, and its lesser chlorinated congeners in Minnesota fresh-
water sediments collected near wastewater treatment plants. J Hazard Mater
229-230:29–35, PMID: 22742731, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2012.05.049.
von der Ohe PC, Schmitt-Jansen M, Slobodnik J, Brack W. 2012. Triclosan-the for-
gotten priority substance?. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int 19:585–591, PMID:
21833630, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-011-0580-7.
Walters E, McClellan K, Halden RU. 2010. Occurrence and loss over three years of
72 pharmaceuticals and personal care products from biosolids-soil mixtures in
outdoor mesocosms. Water Res 44:6011–6020, PMID: 20728197, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.watres.2010.07.051.
Wang CF, Tian Y. 2015. Reproductive endocrine-disrupting effects of triclosan: Pop-
ulation exposure, present evidence and potential mechanisms. Environ Pollut
206:195–201, PMID: 26184583, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2015.07.001.
Wang X, Chen X, Feng X, Chang F, Chen M, Xia Y, et al. 2015. Triclosan causes
spontaneous abortion accompanied by decline of estrogen sulfotransferase
activity in humans and mice. Sci Rep 5:18252, PMID: 26666354, https://doi.org/
10.1038/srep18252.
Wise A, Parham F, Axelrad DA, Guyton KZ, Portier C, Zeise L, et al. 2012. Upstream
adverse effects in risk assessment: A model of polychlorinated biphenyls, thy-
roid hormone disruption and neurological outcomes in humans. Environ Res
117:90–99, PMID: 22770859, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2012.05.013.
Wolff MS, Teitelbaum SL, Windham G, Pinney SM, Britton JA, Chelimo C, et al. 2007.
Pilot study of urinary biomarkers of phytoestrogens, phthalates, and phenols in
girls. Environ Health Perspect 115:116–121, PMID: 17366830, https://doi.org/10.
1289/ehp.9488.
Woodruff TJ, Zeise L, Axelrad DA, Guyton KZ, Janssen S, Miller M, et al. 2008.
Meeting report: Moving upstream—Evaluating adverse upstream end points
for improved risk assessment and decision-making. Environ Health Perspect
116:1568., PMID: 19057713, https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.11516.
Wu C, Spongberg AL, Witter JD, Fang M, Czajkowski KP. 2010. Uptake of pharma-
ceutical and personal care products by soybean plants from soils applied with
biosolids and irrigated with contaminated water. Environ Sci Technol 44:6157–
6161, PMID: 20704212, https://doi.org/10.1021/es1011115.
Wu X, Ernst F, Conkle JL, Gan J. 2013. Comparativeuptakeandtranslocationofphar-
maceutical and personal care products (PPCPs) by common vegetables. Environ
Int60:15–22,PMID:23973619,https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2013.07.015.
Xie Z, Ebinghaus R, Flöser G, Caba A, Ruck W. 2008. Occurrence and distribution of
triclosan in the German Bight (North Sea). Environ Pollut 156:1190–1195, PMID:
18490092, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2008.04.008.
Xu X, Lu Y, Zhang D, Wang Y, Zhou X, Xu H, et al. 2015. Toxic assessment of triclo-
san and triclocarban on Artemia salina. Bull Environ Contam Toxicol 95:728–
733, PMID: 26310128, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00128-015-1641-2.
Yazdankhah SP, Scheie AA, Høiby EA, Lunestad BT, Heir E, Fotland TØ;, et al. 2006.
Triclosan and antimicrobial resistance in bacteria: An overview. Microb Drug
Resist 12:83–90, PMID: 16922622, https://doi.org/10.1089/mdr.2006.12.83.
Ye X, Wong LY, Dwivedi P, Zhou X, Jia T, Calafat AM. 2016. Urinary concentrations
of the antibacterial agent triclocarban in United States residents: 2013-2014
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. Environ Sci Technol
50:13548–13554, PMID: 27993070, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.6b04668.
Ye X, Zhou X, Furr J, Ahn KC, Hammock BD, Gray EL, et al. 2011. Biomarkers of ex-
posure to triclocarban in urine and serum. Toxicol 286:69–74, PMID: 21635932,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tox.2011.05.008.
Yin J, Wei L, Shi Y, Zhang J, Wu Q, Shao B. 2016. Chinese population exposure to
triclosan and triclocarban as measured via human urine and nails. Environ
Geochem Health 38:1125–1135, PMID: 26497189, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10653-
015-9777-x.
Zheng GJ, Leung AOW, Jiao LP, Wong MH. 2008. Polychlorinated dibenzo-p-diox-
ins and dibenzofurans pollution in China: Sources, environmental levels and
potential human health impacts. Environ Int 34:1050–1061, PMID: 18440070,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2008.02.011.
Zhou X, Ye X, Calafat AM. 2012. Automated on-line column-switching HPLC–MS/
MS method for the quantification of triclocarban and its oxidative metabolites
in human urine and serum. J Chromatogr B 881-882:27-33, PMID: 22192874,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jchromb.2011.11.024.
Zhu W, Zhang H, Tong C, Xie C, Fan G, Zhao S, et al. 2016. Environmental exposure
to triclosan and semen quality. Int J Environ Res Public Health 13:224, PMID:
26901211, https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph13020224.
Zorrilla LM, Gibson EK, Jeffay SC, Crofton KM, Setzer WR, Cooper RL, et al. 2009.
The effects of triclosan on puberty and thyroid hormones in male Wistar rats.
Toxicol Sci 107:56–64, PMID: 18940961, https://doi.org/10.1093/toxsci/kfn225.
Environmental Health Perspectives
064501-13
