 © The Author(s) 2017. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.
511
Family Practice, 2018, Vol. 35, No. 4, 511–516
doi:10.1093/fampra/cmx130
Advance Access publication 22 December 2017
Qualitative Research
Strategies to improve general practitioner  
well-being: findings from a focus group study
Louise H Halla,b,*, Judith Johnsona,b, Jane Heyhoeb,  
Ian Wattc, Kevin Andersond,e and Daryl B O’Connora
aSchool of Psychology, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK, bYorkshire Quality and Safety Research Group, Bradford 
Institute for Health Research, Bradford Royal Infirmary, Bradford, UK, cDepartment of Health Sciences, University of 
York, York, UK, dHaxby Group Surgeries, Hull, UK and eHull York Medical School, York, UK.
*Correspondence to Louise H. Hall, School of Psychology, University of Leeds, Lifton Place, Leeds LS2 9JT, UK; E-mail: 
L.H.Hall13@leeds.ac.uk
Abstract
Background. Primary care physicians are particularly prone to high levels of burnout and poor 
well-being. Despite this, no qualitative studies have specifically investigated the best ways to 
improve well-being and prevent burnout in primary care physicians. Previous interventions within 
primary care have been person-oriented and mainly focused on mindfulness, but there has been 
no prior research on whether general practitioners (GPs) deem this to be the best approach.
Objectives. To explore strategies that could improve GP well-being and reduce or prevent burnout, 
based on GP perceptions of the workplace factors that affect their levels of well-being and burnout.
Methods. Five focus groups were conducted, with 25 GPs (locums, salaried, trainees, and 
partners) in the UK, between September 2015 and February 2016. Focus groups took place in GP 
practices and private meeting rooms. Discussions were centered on the workplace factors that they 
perceived to influence their well-being, along with strategies that they use either personally, or as 
a practice, to try and prevent burnout. Furthermore, strategies that could feasibly be implemented 
by individuals and practices to improve well-being, as well as changes that are needed by groups 
or organizations that are external to their practice (e.g., the government) to improve the working 
conditions, were explored. 
Thematic analysis was conducted on the transcripts.
Results. Based on the contributors to burnout and workplace well-being that the participants 
identified, the following feasible strategies were suggested: compulsory daily coffee breaks, 
increasing self- and organizational awareness of the risks of burnout and mentoring or buddy 
systems. System-level organizational changes were voiced as vital, however, to improve the well-
being of all primary care physicians. Increasing resources seemed to be the ideal solution, to allow 
for more administrative staff and GPs.
Conclusion. These strategies merit further consideration by researchers, physicians, healthcare 
organizations and policy makers both in the UK and beyond. Failure to do so may result in 
healthcare staff becoming even more burntout, potentially leading to a loss of doctors from the 
workforce.
Key words:  Depression, health services research, mental health, primary care, quality of care, qualitative research/study, stress, 
work-related stress.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/fampra/article-abstract/35/4/511/4772572 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Introduction
Burnout and poor mental well-being in healthcare professionals are 
rising internationally (1–3). Burnout, ‘a state of vital exhaustion’ (4) 
can be characterized by feelings of emotional exhaustion, deperson-
alization and reduced personal accomplishment (5). Well-being is a 
broader concept, with clinicians often viewing it as a spectrum from 
low to high (6). Low well-being includes symptoms or diagnoses of 
depression and/or anxiety, and high well-being as feelings of happi-
ness and flourishing (7). Primary care physicians are at high risk of 
these ailments (8,9). Rates of burnout in UK General Practitioners 
(GPs) are particularly high compared with other European coun-
tries and similar to rates within the US and Canada (10–12), lead-
ing to concerns that UK general practice is currently ‘in crisis’ (13). 
Negative implications of burnout and poor well-being for the indi-
vidual include an unfavourable work-life balance, poorer quality of 
life, substance abuse and suicidality (12, 14). Implications of staff 
burnout and poor well-being on healthcare organizations include 
high staff turnover, increased sickness absence, poorer quality of 
care (e.g., negative attitudes towards patients and reduced patient 
satisfaction) and poorer patient safety outcomes (e.g., increased like-
lihood of making a wrong diagnosis or medication error) (15–17). 
All of these outcomes also cost healthcare organizations billions of 
pounds or dollars annually (18, 19).
Several studies have investigated the factors contributing to stress, 
burnout and depression within primary care physicians. They have 
suggested that causes include high workload, difficult patients, lack 
of support, and lack of control (8, 10, 20). The majority of research, 
however, has been survey based, lacking the depth and explanatory 
power that qualitative methods provide. In some instances, little justi-
fication was provided for why particular organizational variables were 
measured. Although one study by Fisher et al. (21) has taken a qualita-
tive approach, they focused solely on workload stressors and strategies 
to deal specifically with workload. Our study aims to build upon these 
findings and extend them by focusing on general workplace stressors 
(including but not limited to workload), along with potential strate-
gies to deal with these stressors and their effects on the individuals.
Despite similar demands amongst healthcare staff, not all prac-
titioners experience such problems. Strategies used by resilient 
physicians and practices to cope with workplace demands include 
limiting one’s practice or reducing work hours, improving commu-
nication and team functioning, having job control and seeking peer 
as well as personal support (21–23). Although these strategies have 
been found useful, they mostly rely on the physician themselves to 
ensure implementation. This requires individuals to have the rele-
vant resources (time, support, and flexibility) to make changes to 
their routines. Those who are already struggling and therefore have 
limited resources are less able to make these amendments, keeping 
them trapped in a negative feedback loop.
Regarding formal interventions to reduce physician burnout, 
both organizational and individual approaches have been success-
ful; however, no organizational interventions have been trialed in 
primary care (24). Organizational interventions are warranted so 
that (i) the responsibility for burnout reduction is shared between 
the practitioner and the organization and (ii) working conditions 
improve for all staff. Furthermore, many interventions simply aim 
to treat outcomes, without addressing the cause of the problem. 
As such, our aim was to explore potential strategies that GPs think 
could improve their well-being and reduce or prevent burnout, based 
on their perceptions of the workplace factors that affect their levels 
of well-being and burnout. To accomplish this, we took a two-part 
approach to meet the following objectives:
(i) To understand which workplace factors GPs perceive to influence 
their levels of well-being and burnout.
(ii) To explore strategies and changes that GPs think could improve 
their well-being or prevent burnout.
Methods
Participants
Five focus groups were conducted with a total of 25 practicing GPs 
who worked in the North of England. Each group consisted of three 
to six GPs. Three focus groups consisted of GPs working within the 
same practices, the other two consisted of locum GPs. Participant 
and focus group characteristics are displayed in Table 1.
Procedure
We recruited GPs via an existing network and then by a snowball-
ing method between August 2015 and February 2016. Participants 
who took part in the first focus group put the researchers in contact 
with the practice managers in their associated practices. They also 
gave the researchers contact details of their personal contacts within 
local locum groups. Potential participants were fully informed of the 
topics to be discussed during the recruitment stage. LHH conducted 
the semi-structured focus groups either in practice premises, or at 
a mutually convenient alternative location. Once written informed 
T
able 1. Focus group characteristics
Focus 
group
GP surgery/ 
Locums
Number of 
partners
Patient list 
size
Number of 
participants
Sex
Job roles
Part/full-time 
work
Mean age 
(range)
Mean no. years 
as registered GP 
(range)
1
GP surgery
2
45 
000
6
2M, 4F
2 trainees,  
2 partners, 
1 salaried,  
1 unknown
3 FT, 1 PT, 2 
unknown
35 (29–40)a
3.5 (0–11)a
2
Locums
–
–
4
2M, 2F
4 locums
4 PT
47 (36–57)
17.5 (4–28)
3
Locums
–
–
5
2M, 3F
5 locums
4 PT, 1FT
42.2 (34–56)
10.4 (0–28)
4
GP surgery
7
15 
000
6
4M, 2F
6 partners
6 FT
46 (35–55)
17.2 (8–28)
5
GP surgery
5
11 
000
4
1M, 3F
3 salaried,  
1 partner
3 PT, 1FT
38.75 (33–44)
9.5 (4–17)
M, male; F, female.
aMissing two participants’ data.
512 
Family Practice, 2018, Vol. 35, No. 4
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/fampra/article-abstract/35/4/511/4772572 by guest on 02 June 2019
 consent had been given by each participant, the questions listed in 
Box 1 were asked, with some room for emerging discussions. The 
transcripts were audio-recorded and then transcribed verbatim. 
Focus groups lasted 45 minutes to 1.5 hours.
Analysis
Thematic analysis was conducted based on the six-phase guidelines 
of Braun and Clarke (25). The transcripts were coded by hand, based 
on inductive, semantic principles, from the first author’s realist epis-
temological approach. All transcripts were coded by LHH, with 
20% double coded by JH to provide outside insight, allow discus-
sions about the emerging themes and guard against investigator bias. 
After initial coding of all the transcripts, codes were grouped into 
themes and subthemes. Any disagreements regarding themes were 
discussed with one or more additional author until a consensus was 
agreed. Once a thematic map had been generated, the authors revis-
ited the entire data set to check that the themes accurately reflected 
the majority of the data.
Results
The focus groups were heterogeneous with regards to job position 
(partner, locum, etc.), but all discussed very similar themes.
Objective 1: Contributors to well-being and burnout
When discussing which workplace factors contribute to their sense 
of well-being and levels of burnout, two distinct themes emerged: 
Those that were internal to their practice and/or the individual 
and those that were external to their practice that they had no 
control over.
Internal influencers of well-being comprised Team support, 
Variety (within their roles, practices, or patients), Control (over their 
work environment and/or timetable) and an Intense and unman-
ageable workload. The importance of working within a supportive, 
interactive team was mentioned by all focus groups as particularly 
vital for good well-being. Those who felt like they did not receive 
peer support or have the time to interact with their team described 
how it could have very negative effects on their well-being.
External influencers of well-being were discussed in negative 
terms. These consisted of Increases in pressures and workload, 
Increases in patients’ expectations and complaints, the Negative 
portrayal of general practice (in the media, by patients and the gov-
ernment) and a Lack of support (from the public, patients, the gov-
ernment and the media). An increase in the amount of administrative 
work that GPs have to do for external regulating organizations was 
described as adding to their workload, adding stress and taking 
away their time which would be better spent on direct patient care.
Objective 2: Strategies to improve well-being
Participants discussed possible strategies to improve well-being 
and prevent burnout in two similar themes to the first objective: 
Strategies that could be implemented at an individual or practice 
level, and changes needed at a higher, organizational or policy level.
Individual and practice-level strategies
GPs discussed strategies that fell under the following categories: 
Breaks, Support, Physical needs, Psychological strategies, and 
Control. There was some overlap between these subthemes, particu-
larly between Breaks and Psychological strategies and Physical needs.
Breaks
Scheduling a coffee and/or lunch break into the working day was 
viewed as a feasible strategy that would be very beneficial to their 
well-being. Having the opportunity and being encouraged to leave 
their individual and often isolated offices, interact with their col-
leagues and have a short respite from work was seen as something 
that positively affected GPs’ well-being in practices where this was 
already implemented, and something that those who did not get the 
chance to, wished they did.
M1: The coffee break in the middle of morning surgery. We try and 
get here and meet for a bit of rest and recuperation. … I’ve definitely 
recognized that it is a positive factor for our well-being and there-
fore it’s something that we need to maintain and cherish. [FG4]
Breaks served as fulfilling psychological needs by having that mental 
break from ‘being the doctor’ [M2, FG1], physical needs by having 
the chance to have a drink, some food, perhaps some fresh air, a toilet 
break and social needs through interacting with colleagues. Lunch 
breaks were not viewed as a realistic option that could be implemented; 
however, one short coffee break a day was deemed feasible. Participants 
voiced that even if GPs only briefly left their office to make a cup of 
tea and take it back to their office, this very short respite and chance of 
interaction could be enough to make a big change to their well-being.
Support (social, supervisory, workload and from patients)
Having social support within the practice, peer-to-peer and from 
both medics and nonmedics outside of their practice was found to 
be useful for preventing burnout. To improve support at the practice 
level, buddying and mentoring systems were suggested, along with 
regular meetings to ‘check in’ with how team members are doing.
F1: But I think also, looking after each other…. I think we’re quite 
good at looking over our shoulder at the other person (…) if you 
see somebody’s got a really full load, getting them a cup of tea, or 
going and seeing one of their extras, (…) is quite a positive thing 
about our team that we tend to do. [FG1]
A suggestion for improving support from patients was to commu-
nicate the state of the surgery with them and ask for their patience 
and support.
Box 1. Discussion topic guide
Questions (prompts)
• How would you define well-being?
• How would you define burnout?
• What would you consider to be the main contributors to 
well-being at work? (Positive and negative contributors)
• Do you have a way to try and minimize the impact these 
issues have on your well-being? (Personally, as a practice)
• Would you say that burnout is a worry generally among 
doctors?
• Do you do anything to try and prevent burnout occurring?
• Are you aware of any services or coping mechanisms that 
could help prevent burnout?
• Do you think that burnout and/or poor well-being is increas-
ing among doctors? (Why? What’s changed?)
• Are you encouraged to talk about your own well-being? (To 
your colleagues, professionals, family. Is it a taboo?)
• What, in your opinion, would be the best way to improve 
the well-being of GPs, and prevent burnout? (Feasible ideas, 
if the sky was the limit) 
General practitioners’ burnout coping strategies 
513
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/fampra/article-abstract/35/4/511/4772572 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Physical needs
 In addition to the physical needs within the breaks theme (food and 
drink), participants discussed the need to make time for exercise to 
support physical and psychological well-being. Exercise additionally 
served their social needs through team sports, and as a psychological 
strategy through being a form of ‘escapism’.
Psychological strategies
Strategies that participants used to deal with the emotional toll 
of patient contact included being emotionally guarded or setting 
boundaries and isolating themselves. The latter approach, how-
ever, was acknowledged to be unhealthy and did indeed worsen one 
participant’s ability to cope. Maintaining awareness of the risk of 
burnout was voiced as a useful strategy that some participants used. 
Additionally, it was mentioned that this could be implemented in 
practices through discussions and meetings, and externally at the 
training stage. It was evident that awareness was needed at the indi-
vidual, practice and external levels.
F1: I agree. Self-awareness is often the key thing. I certainly 
wasn’t taught that in a training stage. I think if trainees are taught 
or encouraged to be more self-aware so they know what their 
personal stresses are, how to manage them, how to identify them 
(…). I suppose that’s actually resilience isn’t it, it probably makes 
people feel more resilient because they’re more aware of their 
limits. [FG 2]
Control
Control over how much, where, and when they worked was seen as 
a positive strategy that some GPs (mostly locums) used to prevent 
burnout. Many had chosen this manner of work specifically to pre-
vent them from burning out. Or it was chosen as a way forward to 
protect their well-being after previously working full-time and suf-
fering from burnout or depression.
External changes
Despite the positive changes that could be implemented within prac-
tices at a team or individual level, it was evident that system-level 
changes are needed to have a larger impact on GPs’ work environ-
ment and their well-being. The need for more Support, a Reduction 
in pressures and an Increase in resources, was discussed.
Support
Participants voiced the need for support from the government, 
their patients, the healthcare organization as a whole and the wider 
public and press through a reduction in negative media portrayal. 
Additionally, a need for support from other services was discussed, 
for example, from social services, to ensure that patients only pre-
sented with medical problems and could go to social services in other 
instances. However, this may be an issue with (a lack of) funding and 
access also within those organizations.
‘F1: But wider support about if it’s an over the counter medica-
tion that you can buy from the chemist please don’t request it 
from your doctor’. [FG3]
Reduction in pressure
 Participants stated the need for a reduction in the tasks that decrease 
their time that should be spent on direct patient care, such as ad-
ministrative work, quality assessment exercises and additional work 
pushed onto them from secondary care.
F1: they [secondary care] treat us like um;
F3: yeah like can you recheck this and do that and
F1:  
they give us lots of menial, not menial tasks but things that 
they should be doing themselves they’re pushing onto us all, 
so if they stopped doing that. [FG5]
Increase in resources
 Increasing resources for primary care was seen as an ideal solution 
that would help us to improve all the previous factors mentioned, 
such as reducing pressures and enabling time for breaks. Ideally, 
having more GPs and funding to pay for more administrative staff 
would improve the well-being of the GPs and also the quality of care 
by enabling GPs to offer longer appointments. Increasing funding in 
other sectors (such as social care and mental healthcare) would also 
reduce the added pressure currently within primary care.
F1: So your options are you could increase funding in general 
practice back to the 11% it should be at, which would be a 3% or 
4% rise, and that additional resource would pay for either more 
doctors or more staff within practices to do the things actually 
you don’t need a doctor to do, and free up the doctors to then 
treat patients (...) it’s better for the doctors but it’s better for the 
patients as well. [FG3]
Additional quotes for each theme and subtheme can be found in 
Supplementary Tables S1–S4.
Discussion
Summary
Five focus groups of GPs discussed issues that they perceived con-
tributed to their well-being and levels of burnout. They also consid-
ered possible strategies to improve well-being and prevent burnout. 
Their responses fell under two main themes: those that were internal 
to the individual and practice, and those that were external to them-
selves and their practice and therefore perceived to be outside of 
their direct control. Internal influencers of well-being mainly con-
sisted of having good team support, variation within the job, job 
control, and unmanageable workloads. Individual and practice strat-
egies to improve well-being and prevent burnout tied in with these. 
In particular, participants noted strategies to look after their physical 
needs (e.g., exercising), to have control (e.g., through choosing to 
locum), having breaks, offering support and psychological strate-
gies such as increasing their self-awareness. External influencers of 
well-being were framed in negative terms and comprised perceived 
increases in pressure and workload, increasing patient expectations 
and complaints, lack of support from multiple sources and a per-
ceived negative portrayal of general practice. External changes to 
improve well-being also drew a parallel with these. Increases in sup-
port from the public, patients, media and the government; reduction 
in pressures and increases in resources (e.g., funding) were stated as 
the three main external changes that would be needed to improve 
well-being. It is important to note that control was seen as an im-
portant contributor to well-being, and yet, the changes most likely 
to have a big impact on improving all GPs’ well-being were mainly 
things outside of their control, suggesting a state of helplessness and 
vulnerability to burnout with primary care physicians.
There were no obvious differences between or within groups 
based on job role, gender or number of years working as a GP. The 
only difference was in the language used: focus groups with locum 
workers were more willing to discuss personal experiences of poor 
well-being or burnout, whereas groups run with colleagues in the 
514 
Family Practice, 2018, Vol. 35, No. 4
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/fampra/article-abstract/35/4/511/4772572 by guest on 02 June 2019
 same practices spoke about more general workplace contributors 
to stress, with fewer participants sharing their personal experiences 
of burnout or depression. This is unsurprising given the potential 
stigma attached to discussing personal mental health issues in front 
of colleagues. However, this could also be explained by their current 
roles, as many of the locum workers had chosen that line of work in 
a concerted effort to prevent burnout, or as a way to improve their 
well-being after experiencing burnout or poor well-being when pre-
viously working full-time.
Previous literature
Similar contributors to well-being have previously been reported 
across various countries, including America, Canada and the UK 
(10, 20, 26, 27). Some of these factors have also been cited as rea-
sons why UK GPs have left general practice in recent years (28). Our 
study complements their findings, giving further evidence for the lack 
of support within primary care in the UK, showing that these issues 
are widespread and geographically generalizable. Furthermore, our 
study extends these findings by shifting the focus away from strate-
gies to deal specifically with workload, and instead offering prac-
tical recommendations for individuals and practices to implement in 
the workplace to prevent burnout and improve well-being generally. 
Additionally, our findings put forward system-level changes that are 
needed to improve working conditions.
Interventions
Improving self-awareness of personal stressors and signs of stress 
was a strategy suggested by our participants. This has been success-
fully trialed within healthcare staff, through mindfulness training 
courses, as an effective way to reduce burnout (29, 30). The GPs also 
discussed the need for more self-awareness and stress management 
coaching from their education providers during the early stages of 
professional training. This could encourage practitioner awareness 
of burnout while simultaneously encouraging a wider, organiza-
tional understanding. Additionally, participants suggested various 
strategies to foster peer-support. Balint groups (a group of clinicians 
or doctors who regularly meet to discuss their difficult patient cases 
in a safe and supportive environment) could be one way of increas-
ing both peer-support while also increasing competence and are used 
by some physicians as a means to prevent burnout (31). The primary 
novel strategy suggested by the participants of this study was the 
need for regular coffee or lunch breaks. These were believed to help 
improve both physical and psychological well-being while also fos-
tering a better team culture.
Implications
There are some practical strategies that individuals and practices can 
implement to reduce burnout, such as introducing compulsory coffee 
breaks, and mentoring or buddying systems. However, it is evident 
that system-level changes may also be valuable. These could include 
training future GPs and organizations to be aware of the signs of 
burnout and evaluating the impact this has on workforce well-being. 
The changes that are likely to have the biggest impact on well-being, 
however, such as increases in funding, resources and staff, are those 
that are the most challenging to implement.
Strengths and limitations
All participants were working within UK general practice, which 
challenges the representativeness and generalizability of the sam-
ple and results. However, many of the themes discussed were 
of international relevance, particularly regarding the need for 
increases in support, resources and breaks. The primary strength 
of this study is the practical and feasible strategies that could be 
implemented within practices immediately to improve workplace 
well-being in the interim before organizational change can be 
implemented.
Conclusion
GPs identified both practice-level and organizational-level factors 
that influenced their well-being. They suggested that the best feasible 
way to reduce the negative impact of these factors on their well-being 
is through daily breaks. However, external changes were deemed 
vital to provide increases in resources to allow for more adminis-
trative staff, GPs and time for patient contact, as well as an increase 
in support from various sources. These factors all merit further con-
sideration by researchers, physicians, healthcare organizations and 
policy makers worldwide. Failure to do so may result in the primary 
care workforce becoming even more burntout, depressed, and a sub-
sequent increase in sick leave and early retirement.
Supplementary material
Supplementary material is available at Family Practice online.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully thank all the GPs who gave up their time to participate in this 
study.
Declaration
Funding: This project forms part of a PhD that is part-funded by a National 
Institute for Health Research grant. This paper presents independent 
research by the National Institute for Health Research Collaboration for 
Leadership in Applied Health Research and Care Yorkshire and Humber 
(NIHR CLAHRC YH) www.clahrc-yh.nir.ac.uk. The views and opinions 
expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National 
Health Service, the National Institute for Health Research or the Department 
of Health.
Ethical Approval: This study received ethical approval from the School of 
Psychology, University of Leeds Ethics Committee (ref #15–0075 accepted on 
06/03/15) and Health Research Authority R&D approval (IRAS ref #178501).
Conflict of interest: The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
References
 
1. Arigoni F, Bovier PA, Sappino A-P. Trend of burnout among Swiss doctors. 
Swiss Med Wkly 2010; 140: w13070.
 
2. Embriaco N, Azoulay E, Barrau K et al. High level of burnout in intensiv-
ists: prevalence and associated factors. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2007; 
175: 686–92.
 
3. Klein J, Grosse Frie K, Blum K, et al. Burnout and perceived quality of care 
among German clinicians in surgery. Int J Qual Health Care 2010; 22: 
525–30.
 
4. World Health Organization. International Statistical Classification of 
Diseases and Health Related Problems (The) ICD-10. Geneva: World 
Health Organization, 2004.
 
5. Maslach C, Jackson SE, Leiter MP. Maslach Burnout Inventory Manual. 
Mountain View, CA: CPP. Inc., and Davies-Black, 1996.
 
6. Johnson J, Wood AM. Integrating positive and clinical psychology: view-
ing human functioning as continua from positive to negative can benefit 
clinical assessment, interventions and understandings of resilience. Cognit 
Ther Res 2016:1–15.
General practitioners’ burnout coping strategies 
515
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/fampra/article-abstract/35/4/511/4772572 by guest on 02 June 2019
  
7. Dodge R, Daly AP, Huyton J, et al. The challenge of defining wellbeing. Int 
J well-being. 2012;2: 222–35.
 
8. Arigoni F, Bovier PA, Mermillod B, et al. Prevalence of burnout among 
Swiss cancer clinicians, paediatricians and general practitioners: who are 
most at risk? Support Care Cancer 2009; 17: 75–81.
 
9. Smith F, Goldacre MJ, Lambert TW. Adverse effects on health and 
wellbeing of working as a doctor: views of the UK medical gradu-
ates of 1974 and 1977 surveyed in 2014. J R Soc Med 2017: 
0141076817697489.
 
10. Lee FJ, Stewart M, Brown JB. Stress, burnout, and strategies for reducing 
them: what’s the situation among Canadian family physicians? Can Fam 
Physician 2008; 54: 234–5.
 
11. Shanafelt TD, Boone S, Tan L et al. Burnout and satisfaction with work-life 
balance among US physicians relative to the general US population. Arch 
Intern Med 2012; 172: 1377–85.
 
12. Soler JK, Yaman H, Esteva M et al.; European General Practice Research 
Network Burnout Study Group. Burnout in European family doctors: the 
EGPRN study. Fam Pract 2008; 25: 245–65.
 
13. Baird B, Charles A, Honeyman M, et al. Understanding Pressures in 
General Practice. London: Kings Fund, 2016.
 
14. Suñer‐Soler R, Grau‐Martín A, Font‐Mayolas S, et al. Burnout and quality 
of life among Spanish healthcare personnel. J Psychiatr Ment Health Nurs 
2013; 20: 305–313.
 
15. Hall LH, Johnson J, Watt I, et al. Healthcare staff wellbeing, burnout, and 
patient safety: a systematic review. PLoS One 2016; 11: e0159015.
 
16. Salyers MP, Bonfils KA, Luther L, et al. The relationship between profes-
sional burnout and quality and safety in healthcare: a meta-analysis. J Gen 
Intern Med 2016; 32: 1–8.
 
17. Hall LH, Johnson J, Heyhoe J, et al. Exploring the impact of primary care 
physician burnout and wellbeing on patient care: a focus group study. J 
Patient Saf (in press).
 
18. Van Den Bos J, Rustagi K, Gray T, et al. The $17.1 billion problem: the 
annual cost of measurable medical errors. Health Aff (Millwood) 2011; 
30: 596–603.
 
19. Department of Health. An Organisation With a Memory. UK, London: 
The Stationary Office, 2000.
 
20. Calnan M, Wainwright D, Forsythe M, et al. Mental health and stress in 
the workplace: the case of general practice in the UK. Soc Sci Med 2001; 
52: 499–507.
 
21. Fisher RF, Croxson CH, Ashdown HF, et al. GP views on strategies to cope 
with increasing workload: a qualitative interview study. Br J Gen Pract 
2017; 67: e148–56.
 
22. Sinsky CA, Willard-Grace R, Schutzbank AM, et al. In search of joy in 
practice: a report of 23 high-functioning primary care practices. Ann Fam 
Med 2013; 11: 272–8.
 
23. Stevenson AD, Phillips CB, Anderson KJ. Resilience among doctors who 
work in challenging areas: a qualitative study. Br J Gen Pract 2011; 61: 
e404–10.
 
24. West CP, Dyrbye LN, Erwin PJ, et al. Interventions to prevent and reduce 
physician burnout: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet 2016; 
388: 2272–81.
 
25. Braun V, Clarke V. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qual Res 
Psychol 2006; 3: 77–101.
 
26. Linzer M, Manwell LB, Williams ES et al.; MEMO (Minimizing Error, 
Maximizing Outcome) Investigators. Working conditions in primary care: 
physician reactions and care quality. Ann Intern Med 2009; 151: 28–36, 
W6–9.
 
27. Cheshire A, Ridge D, Hughes J, et al. Influences on GP coping and resilience: 
a qualitative study in primary care. Br J Gen Pract 2017:bjgp17X690893.
 
28. Doran N, Fox F, Taylor G, et al. Early GP Leavers Interim Report: 
Report to HEE & NHS England , University of Bath, 2015. opus.bath.
ac.uk/47271/1/Early_GP_Leavers_Interim_Report_4jun15_update_
FINAL.pdf (accessed on 8 December 2017).
 
29. Goodman MJ, Schorling JB. A mindfulness course decreases burnout and 
improves well-being among healthcare providers. Int J Psychiatry Med 
2012; 43: 119–28.
 
30. Krasner MS, Epstein RM, Beckman H et al. Association of an educational 
program in mindful communication with burnout, empathy, and attitudes 
among primary care physicians. JAMA 2009; 302: 1284–93.
 
31. Kjeldmand D, Holmström I. Balint groups as a means to increase job sat-
isfaction and prevent burnout among general practitioners. Ann Fam Med 
2008; 6: 138–45.
516 
Family Practice, 2018, Vol. 35, No. 4
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/fampra/article-abstract/35/4/511/4772572 by guest on 02 June 2019
