 1
pii: zsx116 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/sleep/zsx116
SLEEP
, Vol. 40, No. 9, 2017
Caffeine Blocks Postoperative Pain—Hambrecht-Wiedbusch et al.
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Preemptive Caffeine Administration Blocks the Increase in Postoperative 
Pain Caused by Previous Sleep Loss in the Rat: A Potential Role for Preoptic 
Adenosine A2A Receptors in Sleep–Pain Interactions
Viviane S. Hambrecht-Wiedbusch, PhD1; Maya Gabel, BS1; Linda J. Liu, BS1; John P
. Imperial, BS1; Angelo V
. Colmenero, BS1; Giancarlo Vanini, MD1 
1Department of Anesthesiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
Sleep and pain are reciprocally related, but the precise mechanisms underlying this relationship are poorly understood. This study used a rat model of surgical 
pain to examine the effect of previous sleep loss on postoperative pain and tested the hypothesis that preoptic adenosinergic mechanisms regulate sleep–
pain interactions. Relative to ad libitum sleep, 6 hours of total sleep deprivation prior to a surgical incision significantly enhanced postoperative mechanical 
hypersensitivity in the affected paw and prolonged the time to recovery from surgery. There were no sex-specific differences in these measures. There were 
also no changes in adrenocorticotropic hormone and corticosterone levels after sleep deprivation, suggesting that this effect was not mediated by the stress 
associated with the sleep perturbation. Systemic administration of the nonselective adenosine receptor antagonist caffeine at the onset of sleep deprivation 
prevented the sleep deprivation-induced increase in postoperative hypersensitivity. Microinjection of the adenosine A2A receptor antagonist ZM 241385 into 
the median preoptic nucleus (MnPO) blocked the increase in surgical pain levels and duration caused by prior sleep deprivation and eliminated the thermal 
hyperalgesia induced by sleep deprivation in a group of nonoperated (i.e., without surgical incision) rats. These data show that even a brief sleep disturbance 
prior to surgery worsens postoperative pain and are consistent with our hypothesis that adenosine A2A receptors in the MnPO contribute to regulate these sleep–
pain interactions.
Keywords: allodynia, chronic pain, Hargreaves, von Frey, nociception, insufficient sleep, sleep homeostasis, anesthesia.
INTRODUCTION
Despite important advances in the understanding of pain neu-
robiology and in the treatment of acute pain, postoperative 
pain management remains a clinical challenge in up to one 
third of surgical patients.1 Acute postoperative pain is followed 
by chronic pain in 10–50% of patients, being severe in up to 
10% of these patients.2,3 A wealth of studies identified several 
sociodemographic, clinical, psychological, and biological fac-
tors that predict or contribute to the development of chronic 
postoperative pain.3–10 Among these factors, pre- and postoper-
ative sleep disturbances strongly predict the onset of long-term 
postoperative and trauma-related pain.4,11–14 Epidemiological 
data show that, in the United States, about 70 million adults are 
affected by a diagnosed sleep disorder,15 and 30% of working 
individuals reported a significant reduction in sleep duration.16 
Furthermore, sleep disruption is also a ubiquitous problem 
in virtually all clinical settings.17–20 Congruent with human 
data,14,21 several lines of preclinical evidence support the notion 
that previous sleep disruption worsens pain and can increase the 
vulnerability for that pain to persist.9,22,23 However, the mecha-
nisms underlying the relationship between insufficient sleep and 
pain remain incompletely understood. The present study used a 
rat model of surgical pain24 to examine for the first time whether 
brief, total sleep deprivation immediately prior to surgery wors-
ens postoperative pain and prolongs recovery time (group 1 
experiments). Measures of corticosterone and adrenocortico-
tropic hormone (ACTH) were used to assess the relationship 
between sleep loss, stress response, and postoperative pain.
Adenosine is an endogenous sleep-promoting neuromodu-
lator that mediates sleepiness generated by prolonged wake-
fulness as well as the homeostatic regulation of sleep.25–27 
Caffeine, the most widely used waking stimulant, is a 
nonselective adenosine receptor antagonist that increases 
wakefulness28–30 and reverses the psychomotor impairment 
produced by sleep loss as well as the effect of central nerv-
ous system-depressant drugs.31–36 Caffeine is also an analge-
sic adjuvant for acute pain control.37–41 No previous studies 
have examined whether preemptive administration of caf-
feine can counteract the negative impact of previous sleep 
loss on postoperative pain. Therefore, this study tested the 
hypothesis that caffeine administration at the onset of sleep 
deprivation blocks the increase in postoperative pain levels 
and duration caused by previous sleep deprivation (group 2 
experiments).
The median preoptic nucleus (MnPO) is a key component 
of a neural circuit involved in sleep regulation,42–44 and neu-
rons within the MnPO project caudally to several sleep- and 
pain-related nuclei.45–51 Adenosine neurotransmission in the 
preoptic hypothalamus contributes to promote sleep homeo-
static responses after prolonged wakefulness.44 Thus, a final set 
of experiments tested the hypotheses that microinjection of an 
adenosine A2A receptor antagonist into the MnPO (1) prevents 
the increase in postoperative pain levels and duration caused 
by previous sleep deprivation (group 3 experiments) and (2) 
blocks the increase in nociception caused by sleep deprivation 
in nonoperated rats (group 4 experiments).
Statement of Significance
The mechanisms that regulate sleep–pain interactions are incompletely understood. This study demonstrates that a brief sleep disturbance prior to surgery 
worsens subsequent pain, which highlights the importance of preoperative sleep management in clinical settings. Additionally, this study is novel and 
translationally relevant in that it shows that caffeine administration at the onset of sleep deprivation can counteract the negative impact of sleep deprivation 
on surgical pain. The results also demonstrate that adenosine A2A receptors in the median preoptic nucleus contribute to regulate sleep–pain interactions. 
Further work is required to identify the preoptic neurons and downstream connections involved in pain modulation as well as to assess the relevance of our 
findings in clinical perioperative care.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/sleep/article-abstract/40/9/zsx116/4037126 by guest on 04 June 2019
 2
SLEEP
, Vol. 40, No. 9, 2017
Caffeine Blocks Postoperative Pain—Hambrecht-Wiedbusch et al.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animals, Chemicals, and Solutions
All the procedures using animals were approved by the 
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee, adhered to the 
Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (National 
Academies Press, 8th Edition, Washington, DC, 2011) and to 
ethical recommendations from the International Association 
for the Study of Pain. Adult male and female Sprague-Dawley 
(Crl:CD(SD)) rats weighing 250–350 g were purchased from 
Charles River’s Laboratories (Wilmington, MA). Rats were 
housed with free access to food and water in a 12-hour light–
dark cycle (lights on from 8:00 AM to 8:00 PM) and were 
allowed a 7-day acclimation period before use. After acclima-
tion, rats were conditioned to the testing chambers and handling 
for 10 to 14 days before the experiments.
The adenosine A2A receptor antagonist ZM 241385, caf-
feine, and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) were purchased from 
Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). ZM 241385 was dissolved 
(1000 µmol/L, pH = 6.1) in sterile saline containing DMSO. 
Solutions for intracerebral microinjections of ZM 241385 and 
systemic administration of caffeine were prepared immediately 
before each experiment.
Experimental Design
Group 1 Experiments: Sleep Deprivation and Quantification of 
Postoperative Hypersensitivity
Figure 1A illustrates the timeline used for these experiments. 
Male (n = 18) and female (n = 16) rats were conditioned for 
14 days to the testing chambers and underwent baseline test-
ing (day 15) before entering the experimental protocol. On the 
following day, rats were sleep deprived or allowed to sleep ad 
libitum for 6 hours (8:00 AM–2:00 PM). Thereafter, a surgical 
incision was made, and mechanical sensitivity was assessed 
between 1 and 2 hours after surgery and daily for the follow-
ing 6 days. These experiments used a between-subject design 
to test the hypothesis that total sleep deprivation immediately 
prior to surgery worsens postoperative pain and prolongs 
recovery time. Based on previously published studies in rats9 
and mice,52 we also hypothesized no sex differences in postop-
erative pain. Additionally, blood samples were collected under 
anesthesia prior to surgery and were used for subsequent 
analysis of hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis responses to 
sleep deprivation.
Group 2 Experiments: Intraperitoneal Caffeine Injection, 
Sleep Deprivation, and Quantification of Postoperative 
Hypersensitivity
The timeline for conditioning and baseline measurement of 
mechanical sensitivity was the same as the one described ear-
lier for group 1 experiments. Male rats (n = 12) in this group 
were used in two sets of experiments separated by 1 week. 
The first set of experiments tested whether caffeine injection 
causes prolonged antinociception. To this end, rats received an 
intraperitoneal injection of vehicle or caffeine (20 mg/kg in 
a volume of 1 mL),29,30 and measures of thermal nociception 
were obtained at 1 hours and at 1 day postinjection. The sec-
ond set of experiments used a between-subject design to test 
the hypothesis that caffeine administration blocks the increase 
in postoperative pain levels and duration caused by previous 
sleep deprivation. Figure 1B shows the timeline of the exper-
iments used to examine the effect of caffeine on postopera-
tive mechanical hypersensitivity. Rats received an injection of 
vehicle (n = 6) or caffeine (n = 6) and were sleep deprived for 
6 hours or an injection of caffeine (n = 6) followed by 6 hours 
of ad libitum sleep (8:00 AM–2:00 PM). Blood samples were 
collected under anesthesia prior to surgery and were used to 
determine whether caffeine increased neuroendocrine stress 
markers. Thereafter, a surgical incision was made and meas-
ures of mechanical sensitivity were obtained on postoperative 
days 1 to 6.
Group 3 Experiments: Intracerebral Microinjections, 
Sleep Deprivation, and Quantification of Postoperative 
Hypersensitivity
Figure 1C shows the timeline used in group 3 microinjection 
experiments. Male rats (n = 18) were surgically prepared for 
drug microinjections into the MnPO. After recovery from 
surgery, rats were conditioned to the testing chambers for 10 
days. Baseline nociceptive measures were obtained before 
microinjection experiments began. All microinjections were 
performed between 8:30 and 9:00 AM. In a between-subject 
design, rats received a microinjection of vehicle (n = 6) or 
drug (n = 6; ZM 241385; 50 pmol, 16.9 ng in 50 nl) solution 
and were sleep deprived during 6 hours or a microinjection 
of drug solution (n = 6) followed by 6 hours of ad libitum 
sleep. Thereafter, a surgical incision was made, and measures 
of mechanical sensitivity were obtained on postoperative days 
1–6. These experiments tested the hypothesis that microinjec-
tion of ZM 241385 into the MnPO prevents the increase in 
postoperative nociceptive levels and duration caused by sleep 
deprivation.
Group 4 Experiments: Intracerebral Microinjections, Sleep 
Deprivation and Quantification of Thermal Nociception
Figure 1D shows the timeline used in group 4 microinjection 
experiments. Male rats (n = 5) were surgically prepared for 
drug microinjections into the MnPO. After recovery from 
surgery, rats were conditioned to the testing chambers for 
10 days. On the day of the experiment, rats underwent baseline 
nociceptive testing before microinjection experiments began. 
All microinjections were performed between 9:00 and 10:00 
AM. Previous work demonstrated that thermal nociception 
is significantly increased after 2 hours of total sleep depri-
vation.53 In a within-subject design, rats received a microin-
jection of: (1) vehicle solution and were allowed to sleep ad 
libitum during the intervals between nociceptive testing, (2) 
vehicle solution and were sleep deprived during 3 hours of 
nociceptive testing, and (3) the adenosine A2A receptor antag-
onist ZM 241385 (50 pmol in 50 nl) and were sleep deprived 
during 3 hours of nociceptive testing. All nociceptive meas-
ures were obtained at 30, 60, 90, 120, 150 and 180 minutes 
postinjection. Intracerebral microinjections in each rat were 
separated by 1 week. These experiments tested the hypothesis 
that microinjection of ZM 241385 into the MnPO blocks the 
increase in nociception caused by sleep deprivation in intact, 
nonoperated rats.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/sleep/article-abstract/40/9/zsx116/4037126 by guest on 04 June 2019
 3
SLEEP
, Vol. 40, No. 9, 2017
Caffeine Blocks Postoperative Pain—Hambrecht-Wiedbusch et al.
Surgical Procedures
Incisional Pain Model
The surgical procedure was conducted according to the one orig-
inally described by Brennan and colleagues24 except that, in an 
effort to minimize animal suffering, the plantaris muscle was left 
intact. Rats were anesthetized with 4–5% isoflurane (Hospira, 
Lake Forest, IL) in 100% oxygen. The delivered concentra-
tion of isoflurane was continuously measured by spectrometry 
using a Cardiocap™/5 (Datex-Ohmeda, Louisville, CO). Upon 
induction of anesthesia, rats were placed on a warm water-filled 
pad connected to a heat pump (Gaymar Industries, Orchard 
Park, NY), and isoflurane (2.5% for maintenance) was deliv-
ered during the remainder of the procedure via a Model 906 rat 
anesthesia mask (David Kopf Instruments, Tujunga, CA). The 
plantar surface of a hind paw was prepared in a sterile manner 
with a 10% povidone-iodine solution and the foot was inserted 
Figure 1—Timeline, procedures, and design of experiments. (A) Group 1 experiments examined the impact of previous sleep deprivation 
on postoperative hypersensitivity. (B) Group 2 experiments tested whether a preoperative intraperitoneal (IP) injection of caffeine blocks the 
increase in postoperative hypersensitivity caused by previous sleep deprivation. The red arrow at the onset of the surgical procedure in group 1 
and group 2 experiments indicates the time of blood sample collection (BC) during anesthesia for subsequent assessment of stress hormonal 
levels. (C) Group 3 experiment tested whether microinjection of the adenosine receptor antagonist ZM 241385 in the median preoptic nucleus 
(MnPO) prevents the increase in postoperative nociception caused by previous sleep deprivation. (D) Group 4 experiments tested whether 
microinjection of ZM 241385 into the MnPO blocks thermal hyperalgesia generated by sleep deprivation in nonoperated rats. Abbreviations: 
Ad Lib sleep, ad libitum sleep; Sleep Dep, sleep deprivation.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/sleep/article-abstract/40/9/zsx116/4037126 by guest on 04 June 2019
 4
SLEEP
, Vol. 40, No. 9, 2017
Caffeine Blocks Postoperative Pain—Hambrecht-Wiedbusch et al.
through a hole in a large sterile gauze. Thereafter, a 10-mm 
longitudinal incision was made using a number 10 scalpel 
blade, through the plantar skin and fascia, starting 5 mm from 
the heel and extending toward the toes. Gentle pressure was 
applied for 30 to 60 seconds for hemostasis, the wound margins 
were coapted with two sutures of 6-0 nylon, and covered with 
an antibiotic ointment containing polymixin B, neomycin, and 
bacitracin. For consistency, all incisions within the same group 
of experiments were made by the same investigator and were 
always performed in the left paw. After surgery, the delivery 
of isoflurane was discontinued, and the rats were allowed to 
recover in their home cages. The sutures were removed under 
brief isoflurane anesthesia on day 2 after surgery, immediately 
after nociceptive testing. Recovery from surgery was defined as 
the postoperative day at which the group mechanical threshold 
was not significantly different from baseline values.
Surgical Preparation for Drug Administration into the Median 
Preoptic Nucleus
Surgical implantation of a guide cannula for intracerebral 
microinjections was performed as described previously.53,54 
Briefly, rats were anesthetized and placed in the stereotaxic 
apparatus. The skull was exposed and a microinjection guide 
cannula (8IC315GSP-CXC, Plastics One, Roanoke, VA) was 
aimed above the MnPO using the following stereotaxic coordi-
nates: 0.0 mm in the anterior–posterior axis, 0.0 mm relative to 
the midline, and −7.5 mm dorsoventral relative to bregma. The 
guide cannula and four anchor screws (MPX-0080-02PC-C, 
Small Parts, Inc., Miami Lakes, FL or Amazon.com (Small 
Parts), # 0 x 1/8 SL FLT TY A S/S, Part #B000FN89DM) 
were fixed to the skull with dental acrylic (Lang Dental 
Manufacturing Company, Inc., Wheeling, IL). The delivery of 
the anesthetic vapor was discontinued, rats were removed from 
the stereotaxic apparatus, and kept warm using a heating lamp 
until full recovery. Analgesia was maintained with carprofen (5 
mg/kg, subcutaneous) for a minimum of 48 hours after surgery. 
After recovery from surgery, rats were conditioned to being 
handled simulating a microinjection procedure and to the test-
ing chambers for 10 days before experiments began.
Blood Sample Collection and Quantification of Corticosterone 
and Adrenocorticotropic Hormone Levels
Measures of the levels of corticosterone and adrenocortico-
tropic hormone were used to assess the response of the hypotha-
lamic–pituitary–adrenal axis to sleep deprivation and caffeine 
administration. Immediately upon induction of anesthesia for a 
surgical incision, blood samples (0.10–0.20 mL) were obtained 
from the lateral tail vein. Samples were obtained between 2:00 
and 3:00 PM, after the 6-hour ad libitum sleep or sleep depri-
vation period. A group of rats was subjected to acute immobili-
zation before blood sample collection prior to euthanasia; these 
samples served as positive controls. In all cases, sample collec-
tion was completed within 90 seconds after induction of anes-
thesia. Stress hormonal levels have been reported to increase 
after 3 minutes of various handling procedures.9,55,56 Samples 
were allowed to coagulate at room temperature for 45 minutes 
and were centrifuged at 10 000 rpm, for 10 minutes at 4°C. 
The serum was pipetted out and stored at −80°C until all the 
samples were collected and processed for analysis. At that time, 
samples were thawed and prepared following a protocol for the 
Milliplex Map Rat Stress Hormone Magnetic Bead Panel Kit 
(RSHMAG-69K, EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA).
Sleep Deprivation
In group 1, 2, and 3 experiments, rats remained in their home 
cages with free access to food and water and underwent total 
sleep deprivation for the initial 6 hours after lights-on. In group 
4 experiments, rats were placed in the testing chambers and 
were sleep deprived for 3 hours after intracerebral microinjec-
tions. As described previously,23,53 wakefulness was maintained 
by gently tapping on the side of the cage and by tactile stimu-
lation of the whiskers or tail. Auditory or tactile stimuli were 
applied whenever the animal appeared drowsy or every time 
a sleep attempt was observed. Rats were not handled by the 
investigators at any time during the sleep deprivation period and 
were never stimulated during spontaneous waking behaviors.
Intracerebral Microinjections
Rats were gently restrained for the microinjection and then 
placed back in their home cages for sleep deprivation in group 
3 experiments or were placed in individual Plexiglas chambers 
and were allowed 20–30 minutes to habituate before the micro-
injection in group 4 experiments. Microinjections (50 nL) of 
vehicle control and drug solution were made using a Model 7001 
microliter syringe (Hamilton Company, Reno, NV). The syringe 
was mounted in a manual microdrive and was connected to a 
microinjector (Internal Cannula 8IC315IXXXXC; 33-gauge, 
outer diameter = 0.20 mm, inner diameter = 0.10 mm; Plastics 
One, Roanoke, VA) by a piece of polyethylene PE-20 tubing 
(Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). The injection dura-
tion was 1 min, and the microinjector (8IC315IXXXXC) was 
removed from the guide tube 1 min after the injection procedure 
was completed.
Nociceptive Testing
All nociceptive measures were obtained by an investigator 
blinded to the treatment condition. Similar to humans, rats 
develop a relatively long-lasting hypersensitivity of the incised 
area and surrounding tissue that can be evoked by movement or 
by direct mechanical stimulation. Postoperative mechanical sen-
sitivity (tactile allodynia) was assessed using the von Frey test 
(ascending method) expressed as the threshold for paw with-
drawal in grams.23,57–59 This is a reliable method used by several 
independent groups for quantification of cutaneous mechanical 
hypersensitivity in rodent models of surgical pain9,24,52,60–62 as 
well as for assessment of surgical pain in humans.63–65 Rats were 
placed in individual Plexiglas testing chambers on an IITC von 
Frey mesh stand (Life Science Inc., Woodland Hills, CA) and 
were allowed 20–30 minutes to habituate before testing began. 
Calibrated von Frey filaments (2, 4, 6, 8, 10, and 15 g of pres-
sure) were applied in ascending order perpendicularly to the 
plantar surface of the rat paw (Touch Test Sensory Evaluator, 
North Coast Medical Inc., Gilroy, CA). In the intact paw, stimuli 
were applied to the skin area near the heel. In the incised paw, 
stimuli were applied to the same skin area medial to the caudal 
end of the wound. Once the filament bent, it was held in position 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/sleep/article-abstract/40/9/zsx116/4037126 by guest on 04 June 2019
 5
SLEEP
, Vol. 40, No. 9, 2017
Caffeine Blocks Postoperative Pain—Hambrecht-Wiedbusch et al.
for 5 seconds or until a withdrawal occurred. Each filament 
was presented five times with a 1-minute interval between the 
stimuli. The same procedure was then repeated to test the con-
tralateral paw. Positive responses included a brisk withdrawal 
of the hind paw away from the stimulus or a persistent flinching 
behavior upon removal of the stimulus. The threshold to paw 
withdrawal in response to mechanical stimuli was defined by the 
lowest tension in g that elicited three of five responses.
Paw withdrawal latencies (PWL) to noxious heat stimuli 
(thermal nociception) were measured using the Hargreaves’ 
method.66 This is a reliable method for testing the effect of 
drugs53,67,68 and sleep deprivation53 on nociception in rodents. As 
described previously,23,53 rats were placed in the Plexiglas test-
ing chambers on a heated glass floor (IITC Plantar Analgesia 
Meter, Life Science Inc.). Radiant heat was applied by aiming 
a light beam through the glass floor to the plantar surface of 
a hind paw. The light was then switched from idle to active 
intensity (onset of thermal stimulus) until the paw was removed 
away from the heat source. The time in seconds between the 
onset of the thermal stimulus and paw removal corresponds to 
the paw withdrawal latency. Four latency values were obtained 
bilaterally, alternating the stimulus between hind paws. A cutoff 
time of 15 seconds was set to prevent tissue damage. Measures 
of thermal nociception were used to test whether (1) systemic 
caffeine administration had a persistent analgesic effect and (2) 
microinjection of ZM 241385 blocked the thermal hyperalgesia 
caused by sleep deprivation in non-operated rats. Responses to 
thermal nociceptive testing were expressed as paw withdrawal 
latencies in seconds for within-group comparisons (i.e., relative 
to baseline) or as percentage change from preinjection baseline 
values (percentage of maximum possible effect, %MPE69) for 
between-group comparisons. The %MPE was calculated using 
the following formula: %MPE = (postinjection PWL − base-
line PWL)/(cut-off time − baseline PWL) × 100. Positive or 
negative %MPE values reflect decreased or increased thermal 
nociception, respectively.
Histological Localization of Microinjection Sites
After the last experiment, rats were deeply anesthetized and 
decapitated. Brains were removed, frozen and 40-μm coronal 
sections containing the preoptic region were cut in a cryostat 
(Leica Microsystems, Nussloch, Germany). Sections were 
slide mounted, dried, fixed with hot paraformaldehyde vapor, 
and stained with cresyl violet. Sections containing microinjec-
tion sites were digitized and the stereotaxic coordinates were 
defined by comparison with images from a rat brain atlas.70
Statistical Analysis
Statistical tests were performed using PRISM v6.01 (Graph 
Pad Software, La Jolla, CA), with input from the University of 
Michigan Consulting for Statistics, Computing and Analytics 
Research. All data were tested for normality. Data were analyzed 
using inferential and nonparametric statistics and are reported as 
mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM). A p value less than 
.05 was considered statistically significant. Differences in post-
operative mechanical sensitivity were evaluated by a repeated 
measures two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed 
by a multiple comparisons Tukey procedure. Postoperative 
mechanical thresholds were averaged across time (across all 6 
postoperative days), and the means were assessed using a two-
tailed Mann-Whitney sum rank test or a one-way ANOVA and 
Tukey post hoc test. The effects of sleep deprivation and caffeine 
on adrenocorticotropic hormone and corticosterone levels were 
also evaluated by a two-tailed unpaired t-test with Welch’s correc-
tion. Drug effects (systemic caffeine and ZM 241385 microinjec-
tion into MnPO) on the time course of paw withdrawal latencies 
to thermal stimuli in nonoperated animals were assessed using 
a two-way ANOVA and Tukey post hoc test. Last, a repeated 
measures one-way ANOVA followed by a Tukey test adjusted 
for multiple comparisons was used to compare mean paw with-
drawal latencies to thermal stimuli (expressed as %MPE) after 
sleep deprivation and ZM 241385 administration into the MnPO.
RESULTS
Preoperative Sleep Deprivation Enhanced Mechanical 
Hypersensitivity and Prolonged Recovery Time After Surgery
Figure 2 shows the mechanical thresholds in the incised paw 
of male and female rats that were sleep deprived or allowed to 
sleep ad libitum prior to surgery. Figure 2A illustrates the time 
course of mechanical sensitivity in male rats during 6 days after 
surgery. Two-way ANOVA revealed a significant effect of treat-
ment (F = 23.78; df = 1,128; p < .0001) and time (F = 22.35; 
df = 7,128; p < .0001). There was no significant treatment by 
time interaction. Post hoc tests revealed that, relative to base-
line values, a surgical incision through skin and fascia caused 
a significant reduction in the thresholds to mechanical stimula-
tion. Relative to the ad libitum sleep group (n = 9), acute sleep 
deprivation (n = 9) significantly extended the time to recovery 
from mechanical hypersensitivity after surgery (day 2 versus 
day 5; Figure 2A). Figure 2B plots the thresholds averaged 
across postoperative days 1 to 6 for all rats and shows that sleep 
deprivation prior to surgery significantly (p = .0066) reduced 
the mechanical threshold (i.e., increased hypersensitivity). The 
time course of postoperative mechanical thresholds in female 
rats is shown in Figure 2C. Two-way ANOVA indicated a sig-
nificant effect of treatment (F = 60.72; df = 1,112; p < .0001), 
time (F = 50.51; df = 7,112; p < .0001) and treatment by time 
interaction (F = 3.64; df = 1,112; p = .0014). Relative to the ad 
libitum sleep group (n = 8), sleep deprivation (n = 8) delayed 
recovery time after surgery (day 3 versus day 5; Figure 2C). 
Figure 2D plots the mean mechanical threshold by group aver-
aged across days 1–6 and shows that sleep deprivation caused 
a significant (p = .0002) increase in surgically induced hyper-
sensitivity in females. Surgery did not alter the withdrawal 
threshold to mechanical stimulation in the paw contralateral 
to the incision in either sex (data not shown). There were no 
significant differences in basal responses to mechanical stimu-
lation as well as in hypersensitivity levels after surgery between 
males and females. In the ad libitum sleep group, the mean ± 
SEM values in males versus females (average of 6 postopera-
tive days) were: 10.80 ± 0.81 versus 10.20 ± 0.27, respectively 
(p = .7949). In the sleep deprivation group, mean ± SEM values 
of males and females (average of 6 postoperative days) were: 
7.70 ± 0.68 versus 6.70 ± 0.61, respectively (p = .3328). All the 
wounds healed completely within 4–6 days, with no differences 
between treatment conditions.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/sleep/article-abstract/40/9/zsx116/4037126 by guest on 04 June 2019
 6
SLEEP
, Vol. 40, No. 9, 2017
Caffeine Blocks Postoperative Pain—Hambrecht-Wiedbusch et al.
Acute Sleep Deprivation did not Alter Hypothalamic–Pituitary–
Adrenal Axis Responses
Figure 3 summarizes hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis 
responses after ad libitum sleep and sleep deprivation. Relative 
to ad libitum sleep, sleep deprivation did not significantly alter 
corticosterone and adrenocorticotropic hormone levels in males 
(Figure 3A and B; n = 19 versus 11 rats, p = .1011 and .537) 
and females (Figure 3C and D; n = 8 versus 7 rats, p = .1175 
and .4367). Compared to ad libitum sleep, acute immobilization 
(positive control) caused a significant increase in corticosterone 
(94.79 ± 6.84 versus 237.83 ± 44.85; p = .0323) and adrenocor-
ticotropic hormone levels (4.45 ± 1.07 versus 39.26 ± 8.90; p 
= .0168).
Preemptive Caffeine Administration Prevented the Increase in 
the Levels and Duration of Mechanical Hypersensitivity Caused 
by Prior Sleep Deprivation
This part of the study investigated whether systemic caffeine 
administration causes a persistent antinociceptive effect. Figure 
4 shows the effect of caffeine injection on the latencies to paw 
withdrawal in response to noxious thermal stimuli. Two-way 
ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of drug treatment (F 
= 10.57; df = 1,66; p = .0018) and Condition × Time interaction 
(F = 6.42; df = 2,66; p = .0028). A Tukey post hoc test showed 
that vehicle injection (n = 6) did not significantly alter paw 
withdrawal latencies. Relative to baseline, caffeine administra-
tion (n = 6) significantly (p = .0096) increased paw withdrawal 
latency at 1 hour postinjection; this increase was also signif-
icantly different (p = .0004) from the withdrawal latency at 1 
hour after vehicle injection. There was no difference (p = .4999) 
in the latencies at 1 day after vehicle and caffeine injection.
Figure 5 depicts the withdrawal thresholds in response to 
mechanical stimulation of the incised paw in male rats that 
received an injection of caffeine (n = 6) or vehicle (n = 6) and 
underwent total sleep deprivation, or an injection of caffeine (n = 
6) and were allowed to sleep ad libitum prior to surgery. Two-way 
ANOVA indicated a significant main effect of caffeine administra-
tion (F = 11.88; df = 2,10; p < .0023), time effect (F = 15.83; df = 
6,30; p < .0001) and a significant effect of treatment by time inter-
action (F = 3.89; df = 12,60; p = .0002). Caffeine administration 
Figure 2—Acute, preoperative sleep deprivation worsened cutaneous mechanical hypersensitivity after surgery. The threshold to mechanical 
non-noxious stimulation (von Frey) was assessed over the course of 6 days after a surgical incision in the left hind paw of male (A) and female 
(C) rats. Relative to control, acute sleep deprivation prior to surgery significantly prolonged the time to recovery from postoperative hypersensi-
tivity. Mean mechanical thresholds from male (B) and female (D) rats averaged across the 6-day postoperative period show that previous sleep 
deprivation significantly enhanced mechanical hypersensitivity after surgery. Asterisks (*) in panels A and C indicate significant differences 
from baseline levels, and hash symbols in C (#) indicate significance differences between sleep deprivation and control groups. Abbreviations: 
Ad Lib Sleep, ad Libitum sleep; BL, baseline; Sleep Dep, sleep deprivation.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/sleep/article-abstract/40/9/zsx116/4037126 by guest on 04 June 2019
 7
SLEEP
, Vol. 40, No. 9, 2017
Caffeine Blocks Postoperative Pain—Hambrecht-Wiedbusch et al.
reduced the time to recovery from mechanical hyperalgesia after 
surgery from 5 days in the vehicle + sleep deprivation group to 3 
days in the caffeine + sleep deprivation group (Figure 5A). Figure 
5B plots the mechanical thresholds averaged for each group across 
days 1 to 6 after surgery and shows that, relative to vehicle + sleep 
deprivation, caffeine injection significantly (p = .0143) reduced 
postoperative mechanical hypersensitivity. Relative to caffeine + 
sleep deprivation, the time to recovery (Figure 5A) and average 
hypersensitivity levels (Figure 5B) in the caffeine + ad libitum 
sleep group were not significantly different. Additionally, there 
was no significant difference (p = 0.1510) in mean threshold lev-
els (averaged across postoperative days 1–6) between caffeine + 
ad libitum sleep and the control ad libitum sleep group reported in 
Figure 2. Power calculations showed that 31 rats per group would 
be required to achieve adequate power (80%) to detect a signif-
icant difference (2 tails; α = 0.05) in mean thresholds between 
these two groups. Mean corticosterone levels in the caffeine (+ 
sleep deprivation) group were 95.40 ± 25.94 ng/mL; there was no 
significant difference relative to ad libitum sleep (p = .6434) or 
sleep deprivation (p = .3121) levels.
Microinjection of the Adenosine A2A Receptor Antagonist ZM 
241385 into the Median Preoptic Nucleus Prevented the Increase 
in Postoperative Nociception Caused by Previous Sleep 
Deprivation
Figure 6 illustrates the effect of ZM 241385 on postoperative 
mechanical hypersensitivity in rats subjected to sleep depri-
vation or allowed to sleep ad libitum prior to surgery. Three 
of the 18 rats implanted with microinjection guide tubes were 
excluded from the analysis (1 from vehicle + sleep deprivation 
group and 2 from ZM 241385 + ad libitum sleep group) because 
the microinjection sites were not localized to the MnPO. Figure 
6A shows the time course of mechanical sensitivity during 6 
days after surgery. Postoperative hypersensitivity in the vehi-
cle + sleep deprivation group resolved on day 5 (same as sleep 
deprivation groups shown in Figures 2A and 5A), contrasting 
with the 2-day recovery period after ad libitum sleep in males 
(Figure 2A). Two-way ANOVA revealed a significant effect of 
treatment (F = 18.32; df = 2,84; p < .0001), time (F = 72.72; 
df = 6,84; p < .0001) and Treatment ×Time interaction (F = 
3.334; df = 12,84; p = .0005). Post hoc tests revealed that, rel-
ative to the vehicle injection + sleep deprivation group (n = 5), 
ZM 241385 + sleep deprivation (n = 6) significantly reduced 
the time to recovery from mechanical hypersensitivity after sur-
gery (day 3 versus day 5). Figure 6B plots the thresholds aver-
aged across postoperative days 1–6 and shows that, relative to 
vehicle + sleep deprivation, ZM 241385 administration before 
sleep deprivation significantly (p = .0199) reduced mechanical 
hypersensitivity. Relative to ZM 241385 + sleep deprivation, 
the time to recovery (Figure 6A) and average hypersensitivity 
levels (Figure 6B) in the ZM 241385 + ad libitum sleep group 
(n = 4) were not significantly different. There was no significant 
difference (p = .7413) in mean threshold levels (averaged across 
postoperative days 1 to 6) between ZM 241385 + ad libitum 
sleep and the control ad libitum sleep group shown in Figure 2. 
Power calculations indicated that 617 rats per group would be 
required to achieve adequate power (80%) to detect a significant 
difference (2 tails; α = 0.05) in mean thresholds between these 
two groups.
Figure 3—Acute sleep deprivation did not cause a neuroen-
docrine stress response. Relative to control (Ad lib Sleep), 6 
hour of sleep deprivation did not significantly alter corticoster-
one and adrenocorticotropic hormone levels in male (A and B) 
and female (C and D) rats. Abbreviations: ACTH, adrenocorti-
cotropic hormone; Ad Lib Sleep, ad libitum sleep; Sleep Dep, 
sleep deprivation.
Figure 4—Caffeine injection did not cause a long-term antinocice-
ptive effect. The graph plots the mean latency (s) to paw withdrawal 
away from a noxious thermal stimulus after an intraperitoneal (IP) 
injection of vehicle (VEH) or caffeine. Relative to baseline (BL), 
caffeine significantly decreased thermal nociception at 1 hour after 
the injection. There was no significant effect on thermal nocicep-
tion at 1 day postinjection.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/sleep/article-abstract/40/9/zsx116/4037126 by guest on 04 June 2019
 8
SLEEP
, Vol. 40, No. 9, 2017
Caffeine Blocks Postoperative Pain—Hambrecht-Wiedbusch et al.
Administration of ZM 241385 into the Median Preoptic Nucleus 
Blocked Thermal Hyperalgesia Induced by Sleep Deprivation in 
Nonoperated Rats
Figure 7A shows the time course of %MPE during 3 hours after 
a microinjection of the adenosine A2A receptor antagonist ZM 
241385 into the MnPO as a function of sleep, drug, and time 
(n = 5 rats). Two-way ANOVA indicated a significant drug effect 
(F = 45.58; df = 2,162; p < .0001). There was no postinjection 
time effect or Treatment Condition ×Time interaction. Post 
hoc tests revealed that (1) relative to control (vehicle injection 
+ ad libitum sleep), sleep deprivation significantly decreased 
%MPE (i.e., increased thermal nociception) and (2) microin-
jection of ZM 241385 into the MnPO blocked the decrease in 
%MPE caused by sleep deprivation. Figure 7B plots %MPE 
values averaged across the 3-hour period after microinjection 
into the MnPO. Repeated measures one-way ANOVA revealed 
Figure 6—Microinjection of the adenosine A2A receptor antagonist ZM 241385 into the median preoptic nucleus prevented the increase in 
postoperative nociception caused by sleep deprivation. (A) Time course of mechanical hypersensitivity during 6 days after surgery. Relative to 
vehicle + sleep deprivation, administration of ZM 241385 into the median preoptic nucleus reduced the duration of postoperative mechanical 
hypersensitivity in sleep deprived rats. (B) The graph shows that administration of ZM 241385 prior to sleep deprivation significantly decreased 
the levels of mechanical hypersensitivity averaged across the 6-day postoperative period. There were no significant differences in the time 
to recovery from postoperative hypersensitivity (A) and mean threshold levels (B) between ZM 241385 + sleep deprivation and ZM 241385 + 
ad libitum sleep. Asterisks (*) indicate significant differences relative to respective baseline measures in A, or to vehicle + sleep deprivation in 
B. Color-coded hash symbols (#) indicate between-group significant differences relative to vehicle + sleep deprivation. Abbreviations: Ad Lib 
Sleep, ad libitum sleep; BL, baseline; Sleep Dep, sleep deprivation; VEH, vehicle; ZM, adenosine A2A receptor antagonist ZM 241385.
Figure 5—Caffeine blocked the effect of previous sleep deprivation on mechanical hypersensitivity after surgery. Male rats received an intra-
peritoneal injection of vehicle or caffeine and underwent 6 hours of sleep deprivation prior to a surgical incision, or an injection of caffeine and 
were allowed to sleep ad libitum for 6 hours before surgery. (A) The time course of mechanical hypersensitivity in the incised paw indicates 
that, relative to vehicle + sleep deprivation, caffeine administration reduced the time to recovery from hypersensitivity after surgery in sleep 
deprived rats. (B) The bar graph plots mean mechanical thresholds averaged across all 6 postoperative days and shows that there was a 
significant difference in the levels of postoperative mechanical hypersensitivity between vehicle and caffeine (+ sleep deprivation and + ad 
libitum sleep) groups. There were no significant differences in the time to recovery from postoperative hypersensitivity (A) and mean threshold 
levels (B) between caffeine + sleep deprivation and caffeine + ad libitum sleep. Asterisks (*) in panel A indicate significant differences from 
baseline levels, whereas in panel B indicate significant differences from vehicle + sleep deprivation. Color-coded hash symbols (#) indicate 
between-group significant differences relative to vehicle + sleep deprivation. Abbreviations: Ad Lib Sleep, ad libitum sleep; BL, baseline; Sleep 
Dep, sleep deprivation; VEH, vehicle.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/sleep/article-abstract/40/9/zsx116/4037126 by guest on 04 June 2019
 9
SLEEP
, Vol. 40, No. 9, 2017
Caffeine Blocks Postoperative Pain—Hambrecht-Wiedbusch et al.
a significant (p = .0002) effect of sleep deprivation on thermal 
nociception. Relative to control, sleep deprivation significantly 
(p = .0014) reduced the mean %MPE. Administration of ZM 
241385 into the MnPO before the onset of sleep deprivation 
prevented the thermal hyperalgesia caused by sleep deprivation 
(sleep deprivation versus ZM + sleep deprivation, p = .0019). 
All microinjection sites included in the analysis of group 3 
and group 4 experiments were within the MnPO (Figure 8). 
Histologic analysis indicated that the average stereotaxic coor-
dinates70 in mm for these microinjection sites were 0.1 ± 0.03 
anterior to bregma, 0.0 ± 0.01 from the midline, and −6.9 ± 0.12 
below the skull surface.
DISCUSSION
The present study showed that a brief period of extended wake-
fulness prior to surgery, which did not activate the hypotha-
lamic–pituitary–adrenal axis, increased the levels and duration 
of postoperative hypersensitivity in a rat model of surgical pain. 
Preemptive caffeine administration prevented the increase in 
the levels and duration of postoperative hypersensitivity caused 
by previous sleep loss. In addition, administration of an adeno-
sine A2A receptor antagonist in the MnPO blocked the increase 
in nociception induced by sleep deprivation in operated and 
nonoperated rats. These results identify a brain region, neuro-
transmitter, and receptor mechanism that might contribute to 
regulate the relationship between sleep, wakefulness, and pain.
Role of Previous Sleep Loss in Postoperative Pain
There are more than 200 million major surgeries performed 
worldwide each year,71 and postoperative pain control remains 
a serious challenge.1 Moderate to severe pain during the 
immediate postoperative period is reported in approximately 
80% of patients, the majority of whom still experience pain at 
discharge.72,73 Furthermore, 10–50% of patients report chronic 
pain after surgery,2,3 and up to 5–10% suffer severe, intractable 
chronic postsurgical pain 1 year after surgery.5 Understanding 
the factors and mechanisms that contribute to acute and chronic 
postoperative pain is a critical step toward improving acute 
pain management after surgery and for prevention of chronic 
pain derived from surgical procedures. Insufficient sleep is a 
growing public health problem15,16 and previous studies suggest 
that perioperative sleep disturbances strongly predict the onset 
of chronic postoperative and trauma-associated pain.4,11–14 The 
results obtained in this study demonstrate that a brief period of 
extended wakefulness immediately prior to surgery enhances 
postoperative nociception (Figure 2). This finding is consistent 
with abundant evidence from human74–82 and preclinical22,53,83–85 
studies showing that disrupted sleep exacerbates acute and 
chronic pain. In the current study, preoperative sleep loss 
caused a twofold increase in the time to recovery from mechan-
ical hypersensitivity after surgery (Figure 2). Accordingly, pre-
vious work demonstrated that sleep disruption that occurs prior 
to pain onset can prolong the duration of evoked nociceptive 
behaviors in rodent models of musculoskeletal22 and inflamma-
tory pain.23 Together, this evidence and the results illustrated 
in Figure 2 provide additional support to the notion that sleep 
loss increases pain and can potentially contribute to the devel-
opment of chronic pain.
Sex-related differences in pain55,86–90 and sleep91–94 are well 
known. Furthermore, human data demonstrate that women are 
more susceptible than men to develop diffuse pain symptoms 
after a brief period of sleep restriction.76 In this study, however, 
Figure 7—Microinjection of ZM 241385 into the median preoptic nucleus reversed the thermal hyperalgesia caused by sleep deprivation. 
(A) Time course of %MPE during 3 hours after microinjection of drug or vehicle solution into rat median preoptic nucleus. Sleep deprivation 
caused a significant decrease in %MPE (i.e., increase in thermal nociception) that started at 60 minutes after the onset of extended wakeful-
ness. Microinjection of an adenosine A2A receptor antagonist into the median preoptic nucleus blocked the decrease in %MPE caused by sleep 
deprivation. Time 0 on the abscissa indicates the end of the 2-min period during which drug or vehicle solutions were injected into the median 
preoptic nucleus. Asterisks (*) indicate significant differences in %MPE from values at 30 min in the vehicle + sleep deprivation group. The 
hash symbol (#) indicates significant differences between microinjection of vehicle + sleep deprivation and microinjection of drug + sleep dep-
rivation groups. (B) Mean mechanical thresholds averaged across the 3-hour microinjection period showing that sleep deprivation significantly 
decreases %MPE (*) and administration of an adenosine A2A receptor antagonist into the median preoptic nucleus prior to the onset of sleep 
deprivation suppresses the decrease in %MPE caused by extended wakefulness (#). Abbreviations: Ad Lib Sleep, ad libitum sleep; Sleep Dep, 
sleep deprivation; VEH, vehicle; ZM, adenosine A2A receptor antagonist ZM 241385; %MPE, percentage of maximum possible effect.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/sleep/article-abstract/40/9/zsx116/4037126 by guest on 04 June 2019
 10
SLEEP
, Vol. 40, No. 9, 2017
Caffeine Blocks Postoperative Pain—Hambrecht-Wiedbusch et al.
there were no sex-dependent differences in baseline mechanical 
thresholds as well as in the duration and levels of mechanical 
hypersensitivity after surgery. The underlying causes of the 
discrepancy between our results and the evidence reviewed 
above are unknown. Pain sensitivity has been shown to vary 
significantly as a function of ovarian hormone levels and the 
reproductive cycle in both humans95–99 and rodents.90,100–102 An 
acknowledged limitation of our experiments is that we did not 
assess estrous cycle stages in female rats. Thus, a between-sub-
ject asynchrony in the estrous cycle of the females used in this 
study may account for the negligible sex differences observed 
in postoperative nociceptive responses. Also, female mice sub-
jected to a chronic sleep restriction protocol had their estrous 
cycle disrupted and exhibited an anestrous phase throughout 
the protocol.90 Low estradiol levels have been suggested as 
a potential mechanism for the hyperalgesic effect of chronic 
sleep loss.90 Altered ovarian hormone production and/or 
release caused by a combination of sleep deprivation, anes-
thesia, surgery, and persistent pain cannot be ruled out in the 
present study. Importantly, previous reports also revealed no 
sex-related differences in incisional pain measures in mice52 
and rats.9 Taken together, this evidence suggests that identical 
nociceptive responses among males and females may be one 
constant feature in all rodent models of incisional pain.
Sleep disruption in mammals is a stressor. As such, sleep 
disruption induces the activation of the hypothalamic–pitu-
itary–adrenal axis (i.e., stress response) in humans103–105 and 
rodents.106,107 Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep restriction for 
3 consecutive days before surgery increases the time to recov-
ery from postoperative hypersensitivity in rats.9 Consistent 
with evidence indicating that REM sleep deprivation is a 
stressor,90,108–110 Wang et al.9 showed that REM sleep restric-
tion increases neuroendocrine and behavioral stress markers. 
Additionally, these authors9 demonstrated that corticosterone 
release worsens postsurgical hypersensitivity by reducing the 
levels of spinal opioid receptors. These data support the inter-
pretation that preoperative stressors contribute to worsen post-
surgical hypersensitivity. Several lines of evidence suggest that 
the stress response to experimental sleep disruption in rodents 
vary as a function of the method employed and the duration 
Figure 8—Microinjection sites were localized to the median preoptic nucleus of the hypothalamus. (A) Sagittal drawing of the rat brain con-
taining vertical lines that represent the anterior-posterior range of all microinjection sites. (B) Coronal schematics modified from a rat brain 
atlas70 illustrate microinjection sites (orange dots, group 3 experiments; green dots, group 4 experiments) within the median preoptic nucleus. 
Numbers on the right side of each schematic indicate the distance in mm from bregma. (C) Enlarged view of the rostral hypothalamic area indi-
cated by the red box in panel B. (D) The digitized brain section stained with cresyl violet shows the histological localization of a representative 
microinjection site (arrow) in the median preoptic nucleus. Abbreviations: aca, anterior commissure, anterior part; cc, corpus callosum; CPu, 
caudate putamen; HDB, nucleus of the horizontal limb of the diagonal band; LPO, lateral preoptic area; LV, lateral ventricle; MnPO, median 
preoptic nucleus; MPA, medial preoptic area; MS, medial septal nucleus; och, optic chiasm; SIB, substantia innominata, basal part; 3V, third 
ventricle.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/sleep/article-abstract/40/9/zsx116/4037126 by guest on 04 June 2019
 11
SLEEP
, Vol. 40, No. 9, 2017
Caffeine Blocks Postoperative Pain—Hambrecht-Wiedbusch et al.
of the deprivation period.90,110–115 In the present study, 6 hours 
of sleep deprivation did not alter corticosterone and adreno-
corticotropic hormone levels relative to the control ad libitum 
sleep condition (Figure 3). These data are consistent with stud-
ies showing that acute sleep deprivation, especially after sleep 
deprivation achieved by methods that do not include animal 
handling,112,113 does not significantly increase stress hormone 
levels. An enriched environment can also contribute to pre-
vent the increase in stress hormone levels. Biting and chew-
ing behaviors has been shown to significantly reduce plasma 
corticosterone and catecholamine levels as well as anxiety-like 
behaviors in rats.116 Free access to abundant nesting materi-
als and wooden blocks during sleep deprivation in the current 
study facilitated such stress-coping behaviors that, perhaps, 
mitigated the increase in stress hormone levels induced by 
sleep loss. The results reported here suggest that preoperative 
sleep loss can enhance postsurgical nociception via mecha-
nisms that are independent of the stress response inherent to 
virtually all sleep disturbances. The mechanisms by which 
disturbed sleep increases levels and duration of nociception 
remain to be elucidated.
Caffeine Prevented the Negative Impact of Previous Sleep Loss 
on Mechanical Hypersensitivity after Surgery
A novel finding of this study was that systemic administration 
of caffeine blocked the increase in mechanical hypersensitivity 
caused by preoperative sleep deprivation. Caffeine diminishes 
the electroencephalographic markers of sleep propensity dur-
ing extended wakefulness as well as the vigilance and motor 
impairment caused by sleep deprivation.31,36,117,118 To date, no 
previous studies have examined whether caffeine can counter-
act the deleterious effects of sleep loss on pain. The antinoci-
ceptive effect of caffeine did not persist at 24 hours after drug 
injection (Figure 4). The duration of the antinociceptive effect 
of caffeine reported here is consistent with the time course of 
its arousal-stimulating effects in rats.29,30 Preemptive caffeine 
administration prevented the increase in the levels of and time 
to recovery from mechanical hypersensitivity caused by preop-
erative sleep deprivation (Figure 5). The finding that caffeine 
did not significantly alter corticosterone levels contrasts with 
previous reports showing that caffeine increases hormonal 
stress markers in rats, albeit at higher doses than the one used 
in the current study or after prolonged administration.119–121 
Together, these data suggest that the reduction in levels and 
duration of postoperative hypersensitivity is neither due to a 
long-lasting antinociceptive effect of caffeine nor due to caf-
feine-induced changes in corticosterone levels. The consistent 
time to recovery after surgery and mean thresholds in caffeine 
+ sleep deprivation, caffeine + ad libitum sleep (Figure 5A 
and 5B), and the ad libitum sleep data shown in Figure 2 sug-
gest that caffeine can reduce postoperative pain only in those 
rats subjected to sleep deprivation prior to surgery. These data 
are congruent with the hypothesis that caffeine reduces post-
operative pain by adenosine-dependent mechanisms. Current 
research in our laboratory aims to identify specific neuronal 
mechanisms underlying the effects of caffeine on postoperative 
hypersensitivity.
Adenosine A2A Receptors in the Preoptic Hypothalamus 
Regulate the Increase in Pain Caused by Sleep Disruption in 
Operated and Pain-Free Rats
Caffeine is a nonselective adenosine receptor antagonist,122 and 
adenosine neurotransmission plays a key role in sleep regula-
tion.25–27 The preoptic hypothalamus contains neurons that regu-
late arousal states of sleep42–44,123–128 and anesthesia.129–131 During 
prolonged wakefulness, discharge rates of sleep-active neurons 
within the MnPO reflect a progressive increase in homeostatic 
sleep pressure.42,44 Microdialysis delivery of an adenosine A2A 
receptor antagonist suppresses the increase in discharge rates of 
preoptic neurons caused by sleep deprivation.44 Administration 
of an adenosine A2A receptor agonist into the ventricles, or 
directly in the lateral preoptic regions, increases sleep and acti-
vates preoptic GABAergic neurons.128,132–134 Anatomical studies 
revealed that neurons within the MnPO project caudally to sev-
eral sleep- and pain-related sites such as the ventrolateral peri-
aqueductal gray, locus coeruleus, oral pontine reticular nucleus, 
and rostral ventromedial medulla.45–51 Based on the foregoing 
evidence, we propose that a descending pathway originating in 
the MnPO can mediate, at least in part, the increase in pain 
induced by extended wakefulness or sleep deprivation. We thus 
hypothesized that adenosine A2A receptors in the MnPO are a 
potential mechanism by which caffeine prevented the increase 
in postoperative pain brought about by prior sleep deprivation 
(Figure 5). The present data showing that microinjection of ZM 
241385 into the MnPO suppressed the increase in surgical pain 
caused by sleep deprivation (Figure 6), and the homology in the 
time course of nociceptive responses after ZM 241385 and caf-
feine injection, are consistent with this hypothesis. Additional 
studies are needed to confirm whether systemically adminis-
tered caffeine reduces postsurgical pain by blocking adenosine 
A2A receptors in the MnPO. Similar to caffeine, ZM 241385 + 
sleep deprivation, ZM 241385 + ad libitum sleep (Figure 6A 
and B), and the ad libitum sleep data plotted in Figure 2 had 
the same recovery time and mean threshold levels. These data 
demonstrate that ZM 241385 exclusively reduced pain in rats 
that underwent sleep deprivation before surgery and lend addi-
tional support to the hypothesis that this effect is mediated by 
adenosine receptors in the MnPO.
Consistent with previous studies showing that sleep disrup-
tion causes thermal hyperalgesia,53,81 3 hours of sleep depriva-
tion increased thermal nociception (Figure 7). Administration 
of an adenosine A2A receptor antagonist into the MnPO blocked 
the decrease in the threshold to thermal nociception induced by 
sleep deprivation (Figure 7). These data support the interpre-
tation that adenosine A2A receptors in the MnPO mediate the 
increase in pain caused by acute sleep loss in intact, pain-free 
animals. Moreover, central adenosine A2A receptors play a role 
in neuroinflammation,135–139 and sleep disruption increases cen-
tral and peripheral inflammatory markers.80,140–143 Sleep restric-
tion increases pain ratings in adult healthy volunteers through 
elevation in plasma levels of the proinflammatory cytokine 
interleukin-6.80 Thus, future experiments are needed to test 
whether blocking adenosine A2A receptors in the MnPO reduces 
pain caused by sleep deprivation via modulation of inflamma-
tory signaling within the MnPO.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/sleep/article-abstract/40/9/zsx116/4037126 by guest on 04 June 2019
 12
SLEEP
, Vol. 40, No. 9, 2017
Caffeine Blocks Postoperative Pain—Hambrecht-Wiedbusch et al.
Limitations and Conclusions
A limitation of the present study is that we did not test if 
preemptive caffeine injection is effective in rats subjected to 
chronic caffeine intake. Future studies can address this limita-
tion as well as determine whether caffeine given immediately 
after emergence from anesthesia can counteract the effect of 
previous sleep disruption on surgical pain. Another limitation is 
that the current experiments did not examine the role of aden-
osine A1 receptors in the MnPO. Activation of A1 receptors in 
lateral preoptic regions induces wakefulness.133,144 Therefore, it 
is reasonable to assume that A1 and A2A receptors are expressed 
in different preoptic neurons (i.e., A1 receptors are likely 
expressed in wakefulness-promoting ones). Further studies are 
needed to clarify the role of MnPO A1 receptors in sleep–pain 
interactions.
The data presented here suggest that acute sleep disruption 
prior to surgery worsens pain and may contribute to persis-
tent postoperative pain. Our current results thus emphasize the 
potential relevance of preoperative sleep management in clin-
ical care. The finding that caffeine can improve pain-related 
outcomes has potential translational value and merits further 
testing and validation in preclinical and clinical studies. In 
addition, these data support the use of the rat model of surgical 
pain24 for studying the mechanisms underlying the relationship 
between sleep disturbances and surgical pain. The results also 
suggest that adenosine neurotransmission in the MnPO contrib-
utes to regulate the interaction between sleep and pain. These 
data provide novel insights by identifying one potential brain 
region and neurotransmitter mechanism by which sleep depri-
vation increases pain. The emerging results encourage future 
studies to determine whether neural circuits that regulate sleep 
homeostasis alter nociception by direct interactions with down-
stream regions (periaqueductal gray and rostral ventromedial 
medulla) involved in top-down pain modulation.
REFERENCES
1. Wu CL, Raja SN. Treatment of acute postoperative pain. Lancet. 2011; 
377(9784): 2215–2225.
2. Kehlet H, Jensen TS, Woolf CJ. Persistent postsurgical pain: risk factors 
and prevention. Lancet. 2006; 367(9522): 1618–1625.
3. Kalso E. IV
. Persistent post-surgery pain: research agenda for mecha-
nisms, prevention, and treatment. Br J Anaesth. 2013; 111(1): 9–12.
4. Mamie C, Bernstein M, Morabia A, Klopfenstein CE, Sloutskis D, 
Forster A. Are there reliable predictors of postoperative pain? Acta 
Anaesthesiol Scand. 2004; 48(2): 234–242.
5. Katz J, Poleshuck EL, Andrus CH, et al. Risk factors for acute pain and 
its persistence following breast cancer surgery. Pain. 2005; 119(1-3): 
16–25.
6. Ip HY, Abrishami A, Peng PW, Wong J, Chung F. Predictors of postop-
erative pain and analgesic consumption: a qualitative systematic review. 
Anesthesiology. 2009; 111(3): 657–677.
7. Sommer M, de Rijke JM, van Kleef M, et al. Predictors of acute postop-
erative pain after elective surgery. Clin J Pain. 2010; 26(2): 87–94.
8. Brummett CM, Janda AM, Schueller CM, et al. Survey criteria for fibro-
myalgia independently predict increased postoperative opioid consump-
tion after lower-extremity joint arthroplasty: a prospective, observational 
cohort study. Anesthesiology. 2013; 119(6): 1434–1443.
9. Wang PK, Cao J, Wang H, et al. Short-term sleep disturbance-induced 
stress does not affect basal pain perception, but does delay postsurgical 
pain recovery. J Pain. 2015; 16(11): 1186–1199.
10. Peters CM, Hayashida K, Suto T, et al. Individual differences in acute 
pain-induced endogenous analgesia predict time to resolution of postop-
erative pain in the rat. Anesthesiology. 2015; 122(4): 895–907.
11. Castillo RC, MacKenzie EJ, Wegener ST, Bosse MJ, Group LS. 
Prevalence of chronic pain seven years following limb threatening lower 
extremity trauma. Pain. 2006; 124(3): 321–329.
12. Cremeans-Smith JK, Millington K, Sledjeski E, Greene K, Delahanty 
DL. Sleep disruptions mediate the relationship between early postopera-
tive pain and later functioning following total knee replacement surgery. 
J Behav Med. 2006; 29(2): 215–222.
13. Smith MT, Klick B, Kozachik S, et al. Sleep onset insomnia symptoms 
during hospitalization for major burn injury predict chronic pain. Pain. 
2008; 138(3): 497–506.
14. Chouchou F, Khoury S, Chauny JM, Denis R, Lavigne GJ. Postoperative 
sleep disruptions: a potential catalyst of acute pain? Sleep Med Rev. 
2014; 18(3): 273–282.
15. Institute of Medicine, Committee on Sleep Medicine and Research. 
Sleep disorders and sleep deprivation: an unmet public health problem. 
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press; 2006.
16. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Short sleep duration 
among workers—United States, 2010. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 
2012; 61: 281–285.
17. Hardin KA. Sleep in the ICU: potential mechanisms and clinical impli-
cations. Chest. 2009; 136(1): 284–294.
18. Venkateshiah SB, Collop NA. Sleep and sleep disorders in the hospital. 
Chest. 2012; 141(5): 1337–1345.
19. Y
oung JS, Bourgeois JA, Hilty DM, Hardin KA. Sleep in hospitalized 
medical patients, part 1: factors affecting sleep. J Hosp Med. 2008; 3(6): 
473–482.
20. Dolan R, Huh J, Tiwari N, Sproat T, Camilleri-Brennan J. A prospective 
analysis of sleep deprivation and disturbance in surgical patients. Ann 
Med Surg (Lond). 2016; 6: 1–5.
21. Finan PH, Goodin BR, Smith MT. The association of sleep and pain: an 
update and a path forward. J Pain. 2013; 14(12): 1539–1552.
22. Sutton BC, Opp MR. Sleep fragmentation exacerbates mechanical 
hypersensitivity and alters subsequent sleep-wake behavior in a 
mouse model of musculoskeletal sensitization. Sleep. 2014; 37(3): 
515–524.
23. Vanini G. Sleep deprivation and recovery sleep prior to a noxious 
inflammatory insult influence characteristics and duration of pain. Sleep. 
2016; 39(1): 133–142.
24. Brennan TJ, Vandermeulen EP
, Gebhart GF. Characterization of a rat 
model of incisional pain. Pain. 1996; 64(3): 493–501.
25. Porkka-Heiskanen T, Strecker RE, Thakkar M, Bjorkum AA, Greene 
RW
, McCarley RW
. Adenosine: a mediator of the sleep-inducing effects 
of prolonged wakefulness. Science. 1997; 276(5316): 1265–1268.
26. Halassa MM, Florian C, Fellin T, et al. Astrocytic modulation of sleep 
homeostasis and cognitive consequences of sleep loss. Neuron. 2009; 
61(2): 213–219.
27. Bjorness TE, Kelly CL, Gao T, Poffenberger V
, Greene RW
. Control and 
function of the homeostatic sleep response by adenosine A1 receptors. J 
Neurosci. 2009; 29(5): 1267–1276.
28. Paterson LM, Wilson SJ, Nutt DJ, Hutson PH, Ivarsson M. 
Characterisation of the effects of caffeine on sleep in the rat: a potential 
model of sleep disruption. J Psychopharmacol. 2009; 23(5): 475–486.
29. Schwierin B, Borbély AA, Tobler I. Effects of N6-cyclopentyladenosine 
and caffeine on sleep regulation in the rat. Eur J Pharmacol. 1996; 
300(3): 163–171.
30. Yanik G, Glaum S, Radulovacki M. The dose-response effects of caf-
feine on sleep in rats. Brain Res. 1987; 403(1): 177–180.
31. Penetar D, McCann U, Thorne D, et al. Caffeine reversal of sleep depri-
vation effects on alertness and mood. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1993; 
112(2-3): 359–365.
32. Drake CL, Roehrs T, Turner L, Scofield HM, Roth T. Caffeine reversal of 
ethanol effects on the multiple sleep latency test, memory, and psycho-
motor performance. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2003; 28(2): 371–378.
33. Puckeridge M, Fulcher BD, Phillips AJ, Robinson PA. Incorporation 
of caffeine into a quantitative model of fatigue and sleep. J Theor Biol. 
2011; 273(1): 44–54.
34. Kim SW
, Bae KY, Shin HY, et al. Caffeine counteracts impairments in 
task-oriented psychomotor performance induced by chlorpheniramine: 
a double-blind placebo-controlled crossover study. J Psychopharmacol. 
2013; 27(1): 62–70.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/sleep/article-abstract/40/9/zsx116/4037126 by guest on 04 June 2019
 13
SLEEP
, Vol. 40, No. 9, 2017
Caffeine Blocks Postoperative Pain—Hambrecht-Wiedbusch et al.
35. Johnson LC, Spinweber CL, Gomez SA. Benzodiazepines and caffeine: 
effect on daytime sleepiness, performance, and mood. Psychopharmacol. 
1990; 101(2): 160–167.
36. Landolt HP
, Rétey JV
, Tönz K, et al. Caffeine attenuates waking and 
sleep electroencephalographic markers of sleep homeostasis in humans. 
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2004; 29(10): 1933–1939.
37. Laska EM, Sunshine A, Mueller F, Elvers WB, Siegel C, Rubin A. 
Caffeine as an analgesic adjuvant. JAMA. 1984; 251(13): 1711–1718.
38. Derry CJ, Derry S, Moore RA. Caffeine as an analgesic adjuvant for 
acute pain in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014; 12: CD009281.
39. Derry S, Wiffen PJ, Moore RA. Single dose oral ibuprofen plus caffeine 
for acute postoperative pain in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2015; 7: CD011509.
40. Mitchell A, McCrea P
, Inglis K, Porter G. A randomized, controlled trial 
comparing acetaminophen plus ibuprofen versus acetaminophen plus 
codeine plus caffeine (Tylenol 3) after outpatient breast surgery. Ann 
Surg Oncol. 2012; 19(12): 3792–3800.
41. Rashwan WA. The efficacy of acetaminophen-caffeine compared to ibu-
profen in the control of postoperative pain after periodontal surgery: a 
crossover pilot study. J Periodontol. 2009; 80(6): 945–952.
42. Suntsova N, Szymusiak R, Alam MN, Guzman-Marin R, McGinty D. 
Sleep-waking discharge patterns of median preoptic nucleus neurons in 
rats. J Physiol. 2002; 543(Pt 2): 665–677.
43. Sakai K. Sleep-waking discharge profiles of median preoptic and sur-
rounding neurons in mice. Neuroscience. 2011; 182: 144–161.
44. Alam MA, Kumar S, McGinty D, Alam MN, Szymusiak R. Neuronal 
activity in the preoptic hypothalamus during sleep deprivation and 
recovery sleep. J Neurophysiol. 2014; 111(2): 287–299.
45. Rodrigo-Angulo ML, Heredero S, Rodríguez-Veiga E, Reinoso-Suárez 
F. GABAergic and non-GABAergic thalamic, hypothalamic and basal 
forebrain projections to the ventral oral pontine reticular nucleus: their 
implication in REM sleep modulation. Brain Res. 2008; 1210: 116–125.
46. Uschakov A, Gong H, McGinty D, Szymusiak R. Efferent projections 
from the median preoptic nucleus to sleep- and arousal-regulatory nuclei 
in the rat brain. Neuroscience. 2007; 150(1): 104–120.
47. Steininger TL, Gong H, McGinty D, Szymusiak R. Subregional organiza-
tion of preoptic area/anterior hypothalamic projections to arousal-related 
monoaminergic cell groups. J Comp Neurol. 2001; 429(4): 638–653.
48. Hsieh KC, Gvilia I, Kumar S, et al. c-Fos expression in neurons project-
ing from the preoptic and lateral hypothalamic areas to the ventrolateral 
periaqueductal gray in relation to sleep states. Neuroscience. 2011; 188: 
55–67.
49. Zhang Y, Kerman IA, Laque A, et al. Leptin-receptor-expressing neu-
rons in the dorsomedial hypothalamus and median preoptic area regulate 
sympathetic brown adipose tissue circuits. J Neurosci. 2011; 31(5): 
1873–1884.
50. Y
oshida K, Li X, Cano G, Lazarus M, Saper CB. Parallel preoptic path-
ways for thermoregulation. J Neurosci. 2009; 29(38): 11954–11964.
51. Zardetto-Smith AM, Johnson AK. Chemical topography of efferent 
projections from the median preoptic nucleus to pontine monoaminergic 
cell groups in the rat. Neurosci Lett. 1995; 199(3): 215–219.
52. Banik RK, Woo YC, Park SS, Brennan TJ. Strain and sex influence on 
pain sensitivity after plantar incision in the mouse. Anesthesiology. 
2006; 105(6): 1246–1253.
53. Vanini G, Nemanis K, Baghdoyan HA, Lydic R. GABAergic transmis-
sion in rat pontine reticular formation regulates the induction phase of 
anesthesia and modulates hyperalgesia caused by sleep deprivation. Eur 
J Neurosci. 2014; 40(1): 2264–2273.
54. Vanini G, Baghdoyan HA. Extrasynaptic GABAA receptors in rat 
pontine reticular formation increase wakefulness. Sleep. 2013; 36(3): 
337–343.
55. Page GG, Opp MR, Kozachik SL. Reduced sleep, stress responsivity, 
and female sex contribute to persistent inflammation-induced mechani-
cal hypersensitivity in rats. Brain Behav Immun. 2014; 40: 244–251.
56. Vahl TP
, Ulrich-Lai YM, Ostrander MM, et al. Comparative analysis 
of ACTH and corticosterone sampling methods in rats. Am J Physiol 
Endocrinol Metab. 2005; 289(5): E823–E828.
57. Pitcher GM, Ritchie J, Henry JL. Paw withdrawal threshold in the von 
Frey hair test is influenced by the surface on which the rat stands. J 
Neurosci Methods. 1999; 87(2): 185–193.
58. Leem JW
, Willis WD, Chung JM. Cutaneous sensory receptors in the rat 
foot. J Neurophysiol. 1993; 69(5): 1684–1699.
59. Sutton BC, Opp MR. Musculoskeletal sensitization and sleep: chronic 
muscle pain fragments sleep of mice without altering its duration. Sleep. 
2014; 37(3): 505–513.
60. Zahn PK, Brennan TJ. Primary and secondary hyperalgesia in a rat 
model for human postoperative pain. Anesthesiology. 1999; 90(3): 
863–872.
61. Leys LJ, Chu KL, Xu J, et al. Disturbances in slow-wave sleep are 
induced by models of bilateral inflammation, neuropathic, and post-
operative pain, but not osteoarthritic pain in rats. Pain. 2013; 154(7): 
1092–1102.
62. Pogatzki EM, Raja SN. A mouse model of incisional pain. 
Anesthesiology. 2003; 99(4): 1023–1027.
63. Stubhaug A, Breivik H, Eide PK, Kreunen M, Foss A. Mapping of punc-
tuate hyperalgesia around a surgical incision demonstrates that ketamine 
is a powerful suppressor of central sensitization to pain following sur-
gery. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 1997; 41(9): 1124–1132.
64. Mikkelsen T, Werner MU, Lassen B, Kehlet H. Pain and sensory dys-
function 6 to 12 months after inguinal herniotomy. Anesth Analg. 2004; 
99(1): 146–151.
65. Stawowy M, Rössel P
, Bluhme C, Funch-Jensen P
, Arendt-Nielsen L, 
Drewes AM. Somatosensory changes in the referred pain area following 
acute inflammation of the appendix. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2002; 
14(10): 1079–1084.
66. Hargreaves K, Dubner R, Brown F, Flores C, Joris J. A new and sensitive 
method for measuring thermal nociception in cutaneous hyperalgesia. 
Pain. 1988; 32(1): 77–88.
67. Wang W
, Baghdoyan HA, Lydic R. Leptin replacement restores 
supraspinal cholinergic antinociception in leptin-deficient obese mice. J 
Pain. 2009; 10(8): 836–843.
68. Watson SL, Watson CJ, Baghdoyan HA, Lydic R. Adenosine A1 recep-
tors in mouse pontine reticular formation modulate nociception only in 
the presence of systemic leptin. Neuroscience. 2014; 275: 531–539.
69. Hayes RL, Katayama Y, Watkins LR, Becker DP
. Bilateral lesions of the 
dorsolateral funiculus of the cat spinal cord: effects on basal nociceptive 
reflexes and nociceptive suppression produced by cholinergic activation 
of the pontine parabrachial region. Brain Res. 1984; 311(2): 267–280.
70. Paxinos G, Watson C. The Rat Brain in Stereotaxic Coordinates, 6th Ed. 
Burlington, MA: Academic Press; 2007.
71. Weiser TG, Regenbogen SE, Thompson KD, et al. An estimation of the 
global volume of surgery: a modelling strategy based on available data. 
Lancet. 2008; 372(9633): 139–144.
72. Apfelbaum JL, Chen C, Mehta SS, Gan TJ. Postoperative pain experi-
ence: results from a national survey suggest postoperative pain continues 
to be undermanaged. Anesth Analg. 2003; 97(2): 534–540.
73. Gan TJ, Habib AS, Miller TE, White W
, Apfelbaum JL. Incidence, 
patient satisfaction, and perceptions of post-surgical pain: results from a 
US national survey. Curr Med Res Opin. 2014; 30(1): 149–160.
74. Moldofsky H, Scarisbrick P
. Induction of neurasthenic musculoskeletal 
pain syndrome by selective sleep stage deprivation. Psychosom Med. 
1976; 38(1): 35–44.
75. Onen SH, Alloui A, Gross A, Eschallier A, Dubray C. The effects of total 
sleep deprivation, selective sleep interruption and sleep recovery on pain 
tolerance thresholds in healthy subjects. J Sleep Res. 2001; 10(1): 35–42.
76. Ablin JN, Clauw DJ, Lyden AK, et al. Effects of sleep restriction and 
exercise deprivation on somatic symptoms and mood in healthy adults. 
Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2013; 31(6 Suppl 79): S53–S59.
77. Alsaadi SM, McAuley JH, Hush JM, et al. Poor sleep quality is strongly 
associated with subsequent pain intensity in patients with acute low back 
pain. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2014; 66(5): 1388–1394.
78. Azevedo E, Manzano GM, Silva A, Martins R, Andersen ML, Tufik S. 
The effects of total and REM sleep deprivation on laser-evoked potential 
threshold and pain perception. Pain. 2011; 152(9): 2052–2058.
79. Call-Schmidt TA, Richardson SJ. Prevalence of sleep disturbance and its 
relationship to pain in adults with chronic pain. Pain Manag Nurs. 2003; 
4(3): 124–133.
80. Haack M, Sanchez E, Mullington JM. Elevated inflammatory markers 
in response to prolonged sleep restriction are associated with increased 
pain experience in healthy volunteers. Sleep. 2007; 30(9): 1145–1152.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/sleep/article-abstract/40/9/zsx116/4037126 by guest on 04 June 2019
 14
SLEEP
, Vol. 40, No. 9, 2017
Caffeine Blocks Postoperative Pain—Hambrecht-Wiedbusch et al.
81. Roehrs TA, Harris E, Randall S, Roth T. Pain sensitivity and recovery 
from mild chronic sleep loss. Sleep. 2012; 35(12): 1667–1672.
82. Ødegård SS, Omland PM, Nilsen KB, Stjern M, Gravdahl GB, Sand T. 
The effect of sleep restriction on laser evoked potentials, thermal sen-
sory and pain thresholds and suprathreshold pain in healthy subjects. 
Clin Neurophysiol. 2015; 126(10): 1979–1987.
83. Hakki Onen S, Alloui A, Jourdan D, Eschalier A, Dubray C. Effects of 
rapid eye movement (REM) sleep deprivation on pain sensitivity in the 
rat. Brain Res. 2001; 900(2): 261–267.
84. Huang CT, Chiang RP
, Chen CL, Tsai YJ. Sleep deprivation aggravates 
median nerve injury-induced neuropathic pain and enhances microglial 
activation by suppressing melatonin secretion. Sleep. 2014; 37(9): 
1513–1523.
85. Muncey AR, Saulles AR, Koch LG, Britton SL, Baghdoyan HA, Lydic 
R. Disrupted sleep and delayed recovery from chronic peripheral neu-
ropathy are distinct phenotypes in a rat model of metabolic syndrome. 
Anesthesiology. 2010; 113(5): 1176–1185.
86. Stening K, Eriksson O, Wahren L, Berg G, Hammar M, Blomqvist 
A. Pain sensations to the cold pressor test in normally menstruating 
women: comparison with men and relation to menstrual phase and 
serum sex steroid levels. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 
2007; 293(4): R1711–R1716.
87. Mogil JS. Sex differences in pain and pain inhibition: multiple explanations 
of a controversial phenomenon. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2012; 13(12): 859–866.
88. Bartley EJ, Fillingim RB. Sex differences in pain: a brief review of clini-
cal and experimental findings. Br J Anaesth. 2013; 111(1): 52–58.
89. Tighe PJ, Riley JL 3rd, Fillingim RB. Sex differences in the incidence of 
severe pain events following surgery: a review of 333,000 pain scores. 
Pain Med. 2014; 15(8): 1390–1404.
90. Araujo P
, Mazaro-Costa R, Tufik S, Andersen ML. Impact of sex on 
hyperalgesia induced by sleep loss. Horm Behav. 2011; 59(1): 174–179.
91. Paul KN, Dugovic C, Turek FW, Laposky AD. Diurnal sex differences in 
the sleep-wake cycle of mice are dependent on gonadal function. Sleep. 
2006; 29(9): 1211–1223.
92. Paul KN, Laposky AD, Turek FW. Reproductive hormone replacement 
alters sleep in mice. Neurosci Lett. 2009; 463(3): 239–243.
93. Lee KA, Baker FC, Newton KM, Ancoli-Israel S. The Influence of 
reproductive status and age on women’s sleep. J Womens Health 
(Larchmt). 2008; 17(7): 1209–1214.
94. Koehl M, Battle S, Meerlo P
. Sex differences in sleep: the response 
to sleep deprivation and restraint stress in mice. Sleep. 2006; 29(9): 
1224–1231.
95. Drobek W
, Schoenaers J, De Laat A. Hormone-dependent fluctuations of 
pressure pain threshold and tactile threshold of the temporalis and mas-
seter muscle. J Oral Rehabil. 2002; 29(11): 1042–1051.
96. LeResche L, Mancl L, Sherman JJ, Gandara B, Dworkin SF. Changes 
in temporomandibular pain and other symptoms across the menstrual 
cycle. Pain. 2003; 106(3): 253–261.
97. Smith YR, Stohler CS, Nichols TE, Bueller JA, Koeppe RA, Zubieta JK. 
Pronociceptive and antinociceptive effects of estradiol through endog-
enous opioid neurotransmission in women. J Neurosci. 2006; 26(21): 
5777–5785.
98. Hellström B, Anderberg UM. Pain perception across the menstrual cycle 
phases in women with chronic pain. Percept Mot Skills. 2003; 96(1): 
201–211.
99. Alimy-Allrath T, Ricken A, Bechmann I. Expression of estrogen recep-
tors alpha and beta in the trigeminal mesencephalic nucleus of adult 
women and men. Ann Anat. 2014; 196(6): 416–422.
100. Terner JM, Lomas LM, Picker MJ. Influence of estrous cycle and 
gonadal hormone depletion on nociception and opioid antinociception 
in female rats of four strains. J Pain. 2005; 6(6): 372–383.
101. Fischer L, Torres-Chávez KE, Clemente-Napimoga JT, et al. The influ-
ence of sex and ovarian hormones on temporomandibular joint nocicep-
tion in rats. J Pain. 2008; 9(7): 630–638.
102. Liu B, Tong C, Eisenach JC. Pregnancy increases excitability of mech-
anosensitive afferents innervating the uterine cervix. Anesthesiology. 
2008; 108(6): 1087–1092.
103. Minkel J, Moreta M, Muto J, et al. Sleep deprivation potentiates HPA 
axis stress reactivity in healthy adults. Health Psychol. 2014; 33(11): 
1430–1434.
104. Vgontzas AN, Mastorakos G, Bixler EO, Kales A, Gold PW
, Chrousos 
GP
. Sleep deprivation effects on the activity of the hypothalamic-pi-
tuitary-adrenal and growth axes: potential clinical implications. Clin 
Endocrinol (Oxf). 1999; 51(2): 205–215.
105. Spiegel K, Leproult R, Van Cauter E. Impact of sleep debt on metabolic 
and endocrine function. Lancet. 1999; 354(9188): 1435–1439.
106. Hairston IS, Ruby NF, Brooke S, et al. Sleep deprivation elevates 
plasma corticosterone levels in neonatal rats. Neurosci Lett. 2001; 
315(1-2): 29–32.
107. Meerlo P
, Koehl M, van der Borght K, Turek FW
. Sleep restric-
tion alters the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal response to stress. J 
Neuroendocrinol. 2002; 14(5): 397–402.
108. Galvão Mde O, Sinigaglia-Coimbra R, Kawakami SE, Tufik S, Suchecki 
D. Paradoxical sleep deprivation activates hypothalamic nuclei that reg-
ulate food intake and stress response. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2009; 
34(8): 1176–1183.
109. Brock JW
, Farooqui SM, Ross KD, Payne S, Prasad C. Stress-related 
behavior and central norepinephrine concentrations in the REM 
sleep-deprived rat. Physiol Behav. 1994; 55(6): 997–1003.
110. Suchecki D, Lobo LL, Hipólide DC, Tufik S. Increased ACTH and cor-
ticosterone secretion induced by different methods of paradoxical sleep 
deprivation. J Sleep Res. 1998; 7(4): 276–281.
111. Tobler I, Murison R, Ursin R, Ursin H, Borbély AA. The effect of sleep 
deprivation and recovery sleep on plasma corticosterone in the rat. 
Neurosci Lett. 1983; 35(3): 297–300.
112. Gross BA, Vanderheyden WM, Urpa LM, et al. Stress-free automatic 
sleep deprivation using air puffs. J Neurosci Methods. 2015; 251: 83–91.
113. Rechtschaffen A, Bergmann BM, Gilliland MA, Bauer K. Effects of 
method, duration, and sleep stage on rebounds from sleep deprivation in 
the rat. Sleep. 1999; 22(1): 11–31.
114. Andersen ML, Ribeiro DA, Bergamaschi CT, et al. Distinct effects 
of acute and chronic sleep loss on DNA damage in rats. Prog 
Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2009; 33(3): 562–567.
115. Zager A, Andersen ML, Ruiz FS, Antunes IB, Tufik S. Effects of acute 
and chronic sleep loss on immune modulation of rats. Am J Physiol 
Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2007; 293(1): R504–R509.
116. Kubo KY, Iinuma M, Chen H. Mastication as a Stress-Coping Behavior. 
Biomed Res Int. 2015; 2015: 876409.
117. Kamimori GH, Penetar DM, Headley DB, Thorne DR, Otterstetter R, 
Belenky G. Effect of three caffeine doses on plasma catecholamines and 
alertness during prolonged wakefulness. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2000; 
56(8): 537–544.
118. De Valck E, Cluydts R. Slow-release caffeine as a countermeasure to 
driver sleepiness induced by partial sleep deprivation. J Sleep Res. 
2001; 10(3): 203–209.
119. Henry JP
, Stephens PM. Caffeine as an intensifier of stress-induced 
hormonal and pathophysiologic changes in mice. Pharmacol Biochem 
Behav. 1980; 13(5): 719–727.
120. Pollard I. Increases in plasma concentrations of steroids in the rat after 
the administration of caffeine: comparison with plasma disposition of 
caffeine. J Endocrinol. 1988; 119(2): 275–280.
121. Concas A, Porcu P
, Sogliano C, Serra M, Purdy RH, Biggio G. Caffeine-
induced increases in the brain and plasma concentrations of neuroactive 
steroids in the rat. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2000; 66(1): 39–45.
122. Fredholm BB, IJzerman AP
, Jacobson KA, Klotz KN, Linden J. 
International Union of Pharmacology. XXV
. Nomenclature and classifi-
cation of adenosine receptors. Pharmacol Rev. 2001; 53(4): 527–552.
123. Sherin JE, Elmquist JK, Torrealba F, Saper CB. Innervation of histamin-
ergic tuberomammillary neurons by GABAergic and galaninergic neu-
rons in the ventrolateral preoptic nucleus of the rat. J Neurosci. 1998; 
18(12): 4705–4721.
124. Lu J, Greco MA, Shiromani P
, Saper CB. Effect of lesions of the ven-
trolateral preoptic nucleus on NREM and REM sleep. J Neurosci. 2000; 
20(10): 3830–3842.
125. Dentico D, Amici R, Baracchi F, et al. c-Fos expression in preoptic 
nuclei as a marker of sleep rebound in the rat. Eur J Neurosci. 2009; 
30(4): 651–661.
126. Torterolo P
, Benedetto L, Lagos P
, Sampogna S, Chase MH. State-
dependent pattern of Fos protein expression in regionally-specific sites 
within the preoptic area of the cat. Brain Res. 2009; 1267: 44–56.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/sleep/article-abstract/40/9/zsx116/4037126 by guest on 04 June 2019
 15
SLEEP
, Vol. 40, No. 9, 2017
Caffeine Blocks Postoperative Pain—Hambrecht-Wiedbusch et al.
127. Modirrousta M, Mainville L, Jones BE. Gabaergic neurons with 
alpha2-adrenergic receptors in basal forebrain and preoptic area express 
c-Fos during sleep. Neuroscience. 2004; 129(3): 803–810.
128. Scammell TE, Gerashchenko DY, Mochizuki T, et al. An adenosine A2a 
agonist increases sleep and induces Fos in ventrolateral preoptic neu-
rons. Neuroscience. 2001; 107(4): 653–663.
129. Han B, McCarren HS, O’Neill D, Kelz MB. Distinctive recruitment 
of endogenous sleep-promoting neurons by volatile anesthetics and a 
nonimmobilizer. Anesthesiology. 2014; 121(5): 999–1009.
130. Moore JT, Chen J, Han B, et al. Direct activation of sleep-promoting 
VLPO neurons by volatile anesthetics contributes to anesthetic hypno-
sis. Curr Biol. 2012; 22(21): 2008–2016.
131. McCarren HS, Chalifoux MR, Han B, et al. α2-Adrenergic stimulation 
of the ventrolateral preoptic nucleus destabilizes the anesthetic state. J 
Neurosci. 2014; 34(49): 16385–16396.
132. Satoh S, Matsumura H, Koike N, Tokunaga Y, Maeda T, Hayaishi 
O. Region-dependent difference in the sleep-promoting potency of 
an adenosine A2A receptor agonist. Eur J Neurosci. 1999; 11(5): 
1587–1597.
133. Methippara MM, Kumar S, Alam MN, Szymusiak R, McGinty D. 
Effects on sleep of microdialysis of adenosine A1 and A2a receptor 
analogs into the lateral preoptic area of rats. Am J Physiol Regul Integr 
Comp Physiol. 2005; 289(6): R1715–R1723.
134. Kumar S, Rai S, Hsieh KC, McGinty D, Alam MN, Szymusiak R. 
Adenosine A(2A) receptors regulate the activity of sleep regulatory 
GABAergic neurons in the preoptic hypothalamus. Am J Physiol Regul 
Integr Comp Physiol. 2013; 305(1): R31–R41.
135. Sullivan GW, Linden J, Buster BL, Scheld WM. Neutrophil A2A 
adenosine receptor inhibits inflammation in a rat model of meningitis: 
synergy with the type IV phosphodiesterase inhibitor, rolipram. J Infect 
Dis. 1999; 180(5): 1550–1560.
136. Madeira MH, Boia R, Elvas F, et al. Selective A2A receptor antagonist 
prevents microglia-mediated neuroinflammation and protects retinal 
ganglion cells from high intraocular pressure-induced transient ischemic 
injury. Transl Res. 2016; 169: 112–128.
137. Hussey MJ, Clarke GD, Ledent C, Kitchen I, Hourani SM. Deletion of 
the adenosine A(2A) receptor in mice enhances spinal cord neurochem-
ical responses to an inflammatory nociceptive stimulus. Neurosci Lett. 
2012; 506(2): 198–202.
138. Rebola N, Simões AP
, Canas PM, et al. Adenosine A2A receptors con-
trol neuroinflammation and consequent hippocampal neuronal dysfunc-
tion. J Neurochem. 2011; 117(1): 100–111.
139. Mills JH, Kim DG, Krenz A, Chen JF, Bynoe MS. A2A adenosine 
receptor signaling in lymphocytes and the central nervous system 
regulates inflammation during experimental autoimmune encephalomy-
elitis. J Immunol. 2012; 188(11): 5713–5722.
140. Ramesh V
, Nair D, Zhang SX, et al. Disrupted sleep without sleep 
curtailment induces sleepiness and cognitive dysfunction via the tumor 
necrosis factor-α pathway. J Neuroinflammation. 2012; 9: 91.
141. Wisor JP
, Schmidt MA, Clegern WC. Evidence for neuroinflammatory 
and microglial changes in the cerebral response to sleep loss. Sleep. 
2011; 34(3): 261–272.
142. Frey DJ, Fleshner M, Wright KP Jr. The effects of 40 hours of total 
sleep deprivation on inflammatory markers in healthy young adults. 
Brain Behav Immun. 2007; 21(8): 1050–1057.
143. Vgontzas AN, Zoumakis E, Bixler EO, et al. Adverse effects of mod-
est sleep restriction on sleepiness, performance, and inflammatory 
cytokines. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2004; 89(5): 2119–2126.
144. Zhang J, Yin D, Wu F, et al. Microinjection of adenosine into the hypo-
thalamic ventrolateral preoptic area enhances wakefulness via the A1 
receptor in rats. Neurochem Res. 2013; 38(8): 1616–1623.
FUNDING
This work was supported by the Department of Anesthesiology, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
For expert assistance the authors thank Katherine LaTendresse (Research 
Lab Tech Intermediate), Mary A. Norat (Research Lab Specialist Senior) and 
Noel L. Wys (Research Lab Specialist Intermediate) from the Department of 
Anesthesiology, University of Michigan. Chris Andrews, Ph.D. (Center for 
Statistical Consultation and Research, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
MI) provided input on statistical analyses. The authors thank Dr. Daniel 
Clauw from the Department of Anesthesiology, University of Michigan for 
his thoughtful comments on the manuscript. 
SUBMISSION & CORRESPONDENCE INFORMATION
Submitted for publication February, 2017
Submitted in final revised form June, 2017
Accepted for publication July, 2017
Address correspondence to: Giancarlo Vanini, MD, 7433 Medical Science 
Building I 1150 West Medical Center Drive, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. 
Telephone: 734-615-5272; Fax: 734-764-9332; Email: gvanini@med.umich.edu
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
None disclosed.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/sleep/article-abstract/40/9/zsx116/4037126 by guest on 04 June 2019
