 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
340 
MMWR / March 23, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 11
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Fatal Yellow Fever in Travelers to Brazil, 2018
Davidson H. Hamer, MD1,2; Kristina Angelo, DO3; Eric Caumes, MD4; Perry J.J. van Genderen, MD, PhD5; Simin A. Florescu, MD, PhD6;  
Corneliu P
. Popescu, MD6; Cecilia Perret, MD7; Angela McBride, BMBS8; Anna Checkley, MBChB, DPhil8; Jenny Ryan, MBBS9;  
Martin Cetron, MD10; Patricia Schlagenhauf, PhD11
On March 16, 2018, this report was posted as an MMWR Early 
Release on the MMWR website (https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr). 
Yellow fever virus is a mosquito-borne flavivirus that causes 
yellow fever, an acute infectious disease that occurs in South 
America and sub-Saharan Africa. Most patients with yellow 
fever are asymptomatic, but among the 15% who develop 
severe illness, the case fatality rate is 20%–60%. Effective 
live-attenuated virus vaccines are available that protect against 
yellow fever (1). An outbreak of yellow fever began in Brazil in 
December 2016; since July 2017, cases in both humans and 
nonhuman primates have been reported from the states of São 
Paulo, Minas Gerais, and Rio de Janeiro, including cases occur-
ring near large urban centers in these states (2). On January 16, 
2018, the World Health Organization updated yellow fever 
vaccination recommendations for Brazil to include all persons 
traveling to or living in Espírito Santo, São Paulo, and Rio de 
Janeiro states, and certain cities in Bahia state, in addition to 
areas where vaccination had been recommended before the 
recent outbreak (3). Since January 2018, 10 travel-related 
cases of yellow fever, including four deaths, have been reported 
in international travelers returning from Brazil. None of the 
10 travelers had received yellow fever vaccination. 
Five of the 10 cases were reported by ProMED since 
January 15, including two from Argentina and three from 
Chile; two of the travelers from Chile died. In addition, 
during January 1–March 15, 2018, five confirmed cases of 
yellow fever in unvaccinated travelers returning from Brazil 
were reported by GeoSentinel (http://www.istm.org/geosen-
tinel), the global clinician-based sentinel surveillance system 
for travel-related illness among international travelers and 
migrants (4). These five yellow fever cases represent the first 
such cases identified by GeoSentinel (Table), which was initi-
ated in 1995 by the International Society of Travel Medicine 
with support from CDC and now consists of 70 specialized 
travel and tropical medicine clinical sites around the world. 
The first of the GeoSentinel-reported cases occurred in a 
Dutch man aged 46 years who traveled to São Paulo state 
for 3 weeks during December 2017–January 2018. The sec-
ond case occurred in a French woman, aged 42 years, who 
traveled to Minas Gerais state in Brazil for 4 weeks during 
December 2017–January 2018. She received a diagnosis of 
yellow fever in Brazil and was examined at a GeoSentinel 
site after returning to France to convalesce. The third and 
fourth cases occurred in a Romanian man, aged 34 years, and 
a Swiss man, aged 44 years, each of whom visited Brazil for 
approximately 2 weeks in February 2018. The fifth case was 
in a German man, aged 33 years, who spent a week in Brazil 
in late February. The Swiss and German travelers died from 
their illness (Table).
Among the 10 international travelers reported with yellow 
fever acquired in Brazil, eight acquired the disease on Ilha 
Grande, a forested island off the Rio de Janeiro coast, where 
one human and one nonhuman primate yellow fever case 
were reported in early February 2018 (5); of the eight patients 
who acquired the disease on Ilha Grande, four died. Another 
travel-related case of yellow fever was reported recently outside 
of Brazil (6).
Yellow fever is a potentially fatal illness that is preventable 
by vaccination. Yellow fever vaccination is recommended for 
all eligible persons aged ≥9 months, traveling to many areas 
in Brazil, including the states of São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro 
(especially Ilha Grande). Unvaccinated travelers should avoid 
traveling to areas where vaccination is recommended (https://
wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/notices). Travelers planning to visit areas 
in Brazil or elsewhere where yellow fever transmission is occur-
ring should receive yellow fever vaccine at least 10 days before 
travel and follow recommendations for avoiding mosquito bites 
(https://www.cdc.gov/yellowfever/prevention/index.html). 
The Food and Drug Administration–approved yellow fever 
vaccine, YF-VAX, is currently unavailable in the United States 
because of manufacturing difficulties (7). An alternative yellow 
fever vaccine, Stamaril, is available through a limited number 
of U.S. yellow fever vaccination clinics. U.S. travelers should 
therefore plan ahead to obtain Stamaril because it might take 
more time to access one of these clinics. Clinicians assessing 
returned travelers should be aware of yellow fever signs and 
symptoms and maintain vigilance regarding the possibility of 
yellow fever exposure in travelers returning from Brazil or other 
areas with ongoing transmission of yellow fever.
Acknowledgments
Marion Koopmans, Department of Viroscience, Erasmus MC, 
Rotterdam, Netherlands; Ana Maria Bispo de Filippis, Laboratorio de 
Flavivirus do Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; Cornelia 
Svetlana Ceianu, Ani Ioana Cotar, Laboratory for Vector-Borne 
Infections, Cantacuzino National Institute for Research, Bucharest, 
Romania; Mike Jacobs, Royal Free Hospital, London, United Kingdom; 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / March 23, 2018 / Vol. 67 / No. 11 
341
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
TABLE. Characteristics of five travelers to Brazil with yellow fever reported by GeoSentinel sites, January–March 2018*
Characteristic
Patient 1 (man)
Patient 2 (woman)
Patient 3 (man)
Patient 4 (man)
Patient 5 (man) 
Age (yrs)
46
42
34
44
33
Nationality
Dutch
French
Romanian
Swiss
German
Reporting site
Netherlands
France
Romania
Switzerland
United Kingdom
Area (state) of presumed 
yellow fever acquisition
Mairiporã (São Paulo)
(Minas Gerais)
Ilha Grande 
(Rio de Janeiro)
Ilha Grande 
(Rio de Janeiro)
Ilha Grande 
(Rio de Janeiro)
Signs/Symptoms
Fever, headache, 
myalgia, nausea, 
vomiting, diarrhea
Fever
Fever, rash, myalgia, 
encephalopathy
Fever, petechial rash, 
arthralgia, vomiting, 
diarrhea
Fever, malaise, 
nausea, jaundice, 
hepatomegaly
Clinical/Laboratory findings
Hepatitis
Hepatitis, 
thrombocytopenia, 
neutropenia
Renal and hepatic 
failure
Renal and hepatic 
failure
Thrombocytopenia, 
renal and hepatic 
failure
Yellow fever diagnostic 
testing
Positive RT-PCR for YFV 
(urine, whole blood, 
plasma)
Positive RT-PCR 
(blood); positive IgM 
(initial diagnosis 
made in Brazil)
Positive PCR (serum, 
urine); YF IgM positive; 
IgG titers rising days 4–8
Positive PCR (blood)
Positive RT-PCR 
(serum, urine)
Yellow fever vaccination 
status
No
No
No
No
No
Outcome
Recovered
Recovered
Condition improving as 
of March 15, 2018
Died
Died
Abbreviations: IgG = Immunoglobulin G; IgM = Immunoglobulin M; PCR = polymerase chain reaction; RT-PCR = reverse transcription–PCR; YF = yellow fever; YFV = YF virus.
* In addition to the five patients reported by GeoSentinel sites, five additional cases of yellow fever have been reported by ProMED among persons who traveled to 
Brazil from Argentina (two) and Chile (three) since January 2018. Two of the patients from Chile died.
Eleni Nastouli, University College London Hospitals, London, United 
Kingdom; Andrew Simpson, Rare and Imported Pathogens Laboratory, 
Public Health England, Wiltshire, United Kingdom; Institute of 
Intensive Care and Division of Infectious Diseases, University Hospital 
Zurich, Switzerland; Alexandra T
rkola, Institute of Medical Virology, 
University of Zurich, Switzerland; Laurent Kaiser, Virology Laboratory, 
University Hospital Geneva, Switzerland.
Conflict of Interest
No conflicts of interest were reported.
 1Department of Global Health, Boston University School of Public Health, 
Massachusetts; 2Section of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Boston 
Medical Center, Massachusetts, USA; 3Travelers’ Health Branch, Division of 
Global Migration and Quarantine, CDC; 4Department of Infectious and 
Tropical Diseases, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris Sorbonne 
University, Paris, France; 5Harbour Hospital, Rotterdam, Netherlands; 6Carol 
Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Victor Babes Clinical Hospital 
of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, Bucharest, Romania; 7Pontificia Universidad 
Catolica de Chile School of Medicine, Santiago, Chile; 8Hospital for Tropical 
Diseases, University College London Hospitals, London, United Kingdom; 
9Royal Free Hospital, London, United Kingdom; 10Office of the Director, 
Division of Global Migration and Quarantine, CDC; 11World Health 
Organization Collaborating Centre for Travellers’ Health, Epidemiology, 
Biostatistics, and Prevention Institute, University of Zürich, Switzerland.
Corresponding author: Davidson H. Hamer; dhamer@bu.edu.
References
1. CDC. Yellow fever. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human 
Services, CDC; 2018. https://www.cdc.gov/yellowfever/symptoms/index.html
2. World Health Organization. Yellow fever—Brazil. Disease outbreak news. 
Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2018. http://www.who.
int/csr/don/27-february-2018-yellow-fever-brazil/en/
3. World Health Organization. Updates on yellow fever vaccination 
recommendations for international travelers related to the current situation 
in Brazil. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2018. http://
www.who.int/ith/updates/20180116/en/
4. Harvey K, Esposito DH, Han P
, et al. Surveillance for travel-related 
disease—GeoSentinel Surveillance System, United States, 1997–2011. 
MMWR Surveill Summ 2013;62(No. SS-3).
5. Prefeitura Angra, página inicial, notícias. Atenção—febre amarela [Portuguese]. 
https://www.angra.rj.gov.br/noticia.asp?vid_noticia=53727&indexsigla=imp
6. Newman AP
, Becraft R, Dean AB, et al. Notes from the field: fatal yellow fever 
in a traveler returning from Peru—New York, 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep 2017;66:914–5. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6634a5
7. Gershman MD, Angelo KM, Ritchey J, et al. Addressing a yellow fever 
vaccine shortage—United States, 2016–2017. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep 2017;66:457–9. https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6617e2
