 Cannabis, psychosis and schizophrenia: unravelling a
complex interaction
Ian Hamilton
Department of Health Sciences, University of York, Heslington, York, UK
ABSTRACT
The relationship between cannabis and psychosis and schizophrenia has tested the field of addiction for decades, and in
some ways serves as measure of our ability to provide a credible contribution to public health. As cannabis is used widely,
many people are interested in the risks the drug poses to mental health. This paper focuses upon a seminal study
examining this, the trajectory of subsequent research findings and what this has meant for understanding and
communicating risk factor information. These studies provided evidence of a dose–response relationship between cannabis
and psychosis, and that for those individuals with schizophrenia cannabis exacerbated their symptoms. The findings fit
with a multi-causal model in which vulnerability interacts with a precipitating agent to produce a disease outcome. Even
though this is a common model in epidemiology, it has proved difficult to communicate it in this case. This may be because
at a population level the increased risk is weak and the vulnerabilities relatively rare. It may also be because people bring
strongly held preconceptions to interpreting a complex multi-causal phenomenon.
Keywords
Andréasson, cannabis, epidemiology, Hall, psychosis, public health, schizophrenia.
Correspondence to: Ian Hamilton, Department of Health Sciences, University of York, Heslington, York YO10 5DD, UK. E-mail: ian.hamilton@york.ac.uk
Submitted 11 January 2017; initial review completed 21 February 2017; final version accepted 13 March 2017
INTRODUCTION
Drug use and mental health are connected, but we still
have a limited understanding of what exactly the
relationship is and why, for some individuals, their mental
health is compromised by their drug use while for others
there appears to be no adverse effect. The role of cannabis
in psychosis and schizophrenia demonstrates neatly the
complexity of the challenge of investigating cause and
effect, and the wider social and political factors that
influence the way that knowledge on this issue has
developed. This paper explores research and opinion on
this issue that developed in the late 1960s through to the
millennium.
It is worth stating that the idea that cannabis might be
problematic
for
mental
health
is
not
a
recent
preoccupation. In 1772, Grose [1] describes the problems
he witnessed as a result of bang (cannabis) in India: ‘...it
is hard to say what pleasure can be found in the use of it,
being very disagreeable to the taste, and violent in its
operation, which produces a temporary madness, that in
some, when designedly taken for that purpose, ends in
running what they call a-muck, furiously killing everyone
they meet, without distinction, until themselves are
knocked on the head, like mad dogs’.
Although the relationship between cannabis and
psychosis has received attention for more than 100 years,
it was only when its use became more popular in many
countries during the 1960s and 1970s that there was a
serious interest in the role it might have in acute psychosis
and schizophrenia as a chronic disease.
Setting the scene
The 1960s saw a rapid increase in the use of mood-altering
drugs such as cannabis in many western countries. In the
United Kingdom, the influential Wootton report in 1969
[2] used H. M. Customs and Excise conviction data as its
proxy for cannabis use to show a huge increase in
convictions for cannabis offences in the late 1960s. The
Wootton report described the literature as ‘vast and
contradictory’, and made a number of recommendations
for the future direction of research, including to ‘investigate
possible cases of cannabis psychosis and, in particular, to
study the concomitant effect of other drugs and of the
abuse of alcohol in these cases’.
© 2017 Society for the Study of Addiction
Addiction
ADDICTION CLASSICS
doi:10.1111/add.13826
 Then, as today, information and policy decisions about
cannabis were influenced by preconceptions, but there
were also familiar-sounding methodological problems. In
a review of the evidence in relation to cannabis and
psychosis, Schofield [3] concluded that ‘…few of the reports
are specific about the dose and type of cannabis. It is a bit
like assuming beer and methylated spirits are equally
damaging’.
However, some researchers were concerned about the
mental
health
problems
associated
with
increasing
cannabis use in the population, so the 1970s saw renewed
attention paid to the connection.
Researchers,
mainly
from
the
United
States,
investigated how exposure to cannabis might have a role
in psychosis [4–8]. These were mainly small case studies
using convenience sampling. The exception was a large
cohort study (n = 36000) of American soldiers based in
Germany which, unfortunately, was unable to distinguish
between concurrent use of alcohol, tobacco and cannabis
in those participants who developed psychosis [9].
Collectively, these studies began to try to cast light on
the relationship between cannabis and psychosis, and in
particular the direction of the relationship. Spencer [4]
captured neatly one of the conundrums which would
persist for decades: was cannabis responsible for a short-
lived acute psychotic reaction, or was it a trigger for the
longer-lasting problem of schizophrenia? This was not an
easy question to answer, as cannabis use may occur in
the prodromal period of acute psychosis prior to a diagnosis
of schizophrenia.
1980s
This decade also witnessed the advent of community
mental health care, in which large institutions were
decommissioned and patients moved into their local
communities. This exposed these former patients to
substances
to which
they
had
had
limited
access
previously.
The classic paper that I wish to highlight here is the
Swedish conscript study led by Andréasson et al. [10].
The authors were ambitious in trying to establish the
causal role of cannabis in schizophrenia and take account
of confounding variables.
A constellation of events triggered Sven Andréasson’s
interest in this issue. Andréasson observed that cannabis
was used widely in Sweden at the time, and he had also
heard reports from psychiatrists who were concerned
about the use of cannabis by their patients who had
psychosis. They had noticed that these patients were
returning to hospital and that their psychoses had
deteriorated following discharge, rather than improving.
At the same time, Andréasson’s supervisor, Peter Allebeck,
mentioned a registry that had sat in a basement for
15 years and was about to be destroyed. Surprised that
no one had looked at this rich source of data, they thought
it would be a good idea to see what it revealed about the
relationship between cannabis and psychosis.
The authors used this military conscript registry to
analyse data from two questionnaires that were given to
a cohort of 45570 Swedish men at the point of their
conscription between 1969 and 1970. Seven per cent of
this cohort refused to answer questions relating to drug
use and were excluded from the study. Clearly, this 7%
could have altered the results significantly if they refused
to participate due to fear of disclosing cannabis use.
However, 4290 (9.4%) of the conscripts confirmed that
they had used cannabis on at least one occasion prior to
their conscription into the army. Andréasson was keen to
explore level of exposure to cannabis and any consequent
diagnosis
of
schizophrenia.
He
and
his
co-authors
distinguished
between
infrequent and
frequent use.
Frequent use was defined as using cannabis on 50 or more
occasions, a cut-off inherited from research into smoking
cigarettes at the time. Although level of exposure had been
explored previously it had not been investigated in a cohort
of this size. By exploring two levels of exposure to cannabis
among the conscripts, Andréasson was able to show that
there was a dose–response relationship between cannabis
use and schizophrenia. This was an important finding,
and helped to direct future research which confirmed this
association [11].
Unlike previous studies, the study by Andréasson and
colleagues tried to control for potential confounders such
as alcohol, tobacco and psychiatric diagnosis at the
point of conscription. Their stratified analysis showed
that an elevated risk of schizophrenia remained after
controlling for such confounders. They reported and
recognized the significance of the relationship between
a psychiatric diagnosis at the point of conscription in
1969/70 and developing schizophrenia at the point of
follow-up in 1983.
The study found that the relative risk of developing
schizophrenia increased with greater use of cannabis.
However, they were careful to point out that of the 274
conscripts who had a diagnosis of schizophrenia at
follow-up only 21 were frequent users of cannabis. This
led them to discuss the possibility that cannabis use
might be caused by an emerging schizophrenia in the
individual;
in
other
words,
schizophrenia
precedes
cannabis use. This vexed tangle continues to be studied
and debated today.
The
authors
made
an
additional
important
contribution when they referred to the stress vulnerability
model of Zubin & Spring [12]. They applied this model to
suggest that problems such as schizophrenia can lie
dormant until a person is exposed to a trigger such as a
psychoactive drug, which then produces the symptoms of
2
Ian Hamilton
© 2017 Society for the Study of Addiction
Addiction
 psychosis or schizophrenia. Andréasson thought that their
findings pointed to cannabis as such a trigger in a small
vulnerable group of their male sample; so although
Andréasson alerted us to this dynamic interaction among
biology, psychology and environment in the 1980s, we
have yet to apply this intelligence to people with psychosis
who use cannabis [13].
Andréasson
advanced
our
understanding
by
highlighting two distinct components of the relationship
among cannabis, psychosis and schizophrenia. First, it
was possible that cannabis could trigger psychosis in a
vulnerable group of people who would not otherwise have
had this toxic reaction. Andréasson remembers that this
was a particularly contentious part of the conclusions of
the original study. Secondly, exposure to cannabis elevated
the risk of developing schizophrenia in a dose-dependent
fashion.
It is important to note that the concept of a distinct
cannabis psychosis was contested throughout this decade
by those who viewed it as a constructed disease influenced
by race and culture, a view promoted by members of the
medical
profession
who
were
not
attending
to
environmental factors [14]. Some psychiatrists did not find
the term ‘cannabis psychosis’ useful, and even those who
did could not agree on what it meant [15].
Consequently, we leave the 1980s with evidence for an
association between cannabis and psychosis, but its nature
was still unclear. Although the Swedish conscript study
found an elevated risk of schizophrenia, Andréasson
concluded that: ‘
A statistical association between cannabis
consumption and schizophrenia does not necessarily
imply a causal association. Cannabis consumption might,
on the contrary, be caused by an emerging schizophrenia’.
To this day, Andréasson believes that these findings are
valid, although he is even more sceptical about the
observational studies and the role of confounding factors,
particularly other drugs to which participants have been
exposed.
Nonetheless,
this
study
provided
clues
about
a
connection between cannabis and schizophrenia that
helped to set the direction of future research but was
insufficient to offer credible advice to individuals or to
inform populations via public health.
1990s
Doubt about the term ‘cannabis psychosis’ and the
association between cannabis and psychosis continued
with a review by Thornicroft [16], who decided that there
was insufficient epidemiological evidence to warrant a
distinct diagnosis of cannabis psychosis.
Irrespective of whether a distinct diagnosis could be
justified, researchers continued to consider whether
cannabis use preceded psychosis or if it was the symptoms
of psychosis that led to cannabis use [17]. This revealed the
many confounding factors that interact over time, which
still make this type of inquiry challenging.
Adding to the problem of confounders was the issue of
how cannabis consumption and potency had been
measured in studies to this point. Thomas rightly alerted
us to the difficulty of comparisons between study groups
[18], a problem that persists to this day with no universally
agreed method for how such variables should be assessed
and reported in research.
In parallel, there was further debate about causation
of psychosis and the role that cannabis might play. In
the 1990s international classification indexes DSM and
ICD both recognized cannabis psychosis as a distinct
diagnostic category, but the evidence to support the
diagnosis and criteria was being debated. Gruber & Pope
reviewed the literature and surveyed more than 9000
psychiatric admissions, concluding that there was no
convincing evidence to support the syndrome [19]. The
current iterations of DSM and ICD continue to classify
cannabis psychosis, but offer more detailed subcategories
that recognize the various ways in which these two
factors might relate to each other. For example, the
DSM now recognizes that cannabis withdrawal is a
consideration.
In 1998, Wayne Hall published a seminal review,
‘Cannabis use and psychosis’, which offered an analysis of
the two dominant hypotheses providing an insight into
collective knowledge up to this point in time [20]. The first
hypothesis he reviewed was that heavy cannabis use
causes a specific cannabis psychosis, a theory that had
prevailed since the early 1970s and continues to be
unresolved up to this point. The second hypothesis was
that cannabis use precipitated schizophrenia, or at least
makes the symptoms worse.
Reflecting the scepticism of some in the previous
decade, Hall was not convinced by the idea of a distinct
cannabis psychosis. His forensic examination of the
evidence up to the time of his review points to poorly
defined features of such a phenomenon with too wide a
range of clinical features. A lack of controlled studies also
leaves the case appearing weak.
For the second hypothesis, Hall found that the qualityof
evidence
was
richer,
but
interpretation
was
not
straightforward. Hall pointed out rightly that finding a
person with schizophrenia who has only used cannabis
was rare, as most will also have used alcohol. Alcohol use
mattered as it, too, has been associated with severe mental
health problems such as psychosis [21].
I want to offer here a small but important discussion
about the role of self-medication. Hall, in my view, rightly
normalized the reasons for substance use by people with
schizophrenia. Their reasons are exactly the same as those
who do not have schizophrenia: to relieve boredom, to
Cannabis, psychosis and schizophrenia
3
© 2017 Society for the Study of Addiction
Addiction
 provide stimulation, to feel good and to socialize. Although
this aspect has received little attention since Hall’s review,
these points have been replicated [22]. Having very
ordinary reasons for using drugs not only helps us to
empathize, but is an important reminder not to pathologize
behaviour. The emphasis Hall gives this is as valid today as
it was 20 years ago.
Hall
also
discussed
how
cannabinoids
increase
dopamine release, and showed that excessive dopamine
can produce psychotic symptoms. However, the dopamine
theory has since been challenged, along with the role
cannabinoids play [23,24].
As with Andréasson, Hall pointed to the stress
vulnerability model to help explain why cannabis use could
precipitate schizophrenia without supporting the idea that
cannabis played a simple causal role. Rather, he argued
that there is a complex interplay between genetics,
environment and stress vulnerability.
Hall made the case for the lack of evidence supporting a
causal role for cannabis in schizophrenia by examining the
epidemiological data. While cannabis use increased at a
population level in the 1970s and 1980s there was no
associated increase in the incidence of schizophrenia.
However, limitations in the incidence rate data for
psychosis and schizophrenia have been highlighted [24].
One study in London found that between 1965 and
1999 the incidence of schizophrenia had doubled, and that
those who used cannabis were overly represented in this
group [25].
CONCLUSIONS
We ended the last century with some clear advice based on
the efforts of researchers during the previous three
decades: namely, that for those individuals who already
have
schizophrenia
cannabis
use
can
exacerbate
symptoms. Similarly, both Andréasson and Hall drew our
attention to the importance of the stress vulnerability
model, which emphasizes the interplay between genes,
environment and stress vulnerability in motivating people
to use cannabis prior to these same individuals developing
schizophrenia.
Demonstrating
the
way
in
which
knowledge
accumulates, Andréasson was aware of the importance of
a dose–response relationship between cannabis and
psychosis, but his research was the first to demonstrate this
in a large observational study. This helped to set the focus
and direction of research on this issue during the following
decades.
Declaration of interests
None.
Acknowledgements
I am grateful to Sven Andréasson for telling the fascinating
story behind his study. Also, many thanks to Charlie Lloyd
for reviewing a draft of this article.
References
1. Grose J. H. A Voyage to the East Indies, Vol. 2. London: S.
Hooper; 1772.
2. Home Office Advisory Committee on Drug Dependence.
Wootton report. Report of the Advisory Committee on Drug
Dependence: Cannabis. Her Majesty’s Stationery Office
(HMSO); 1969.
3. Schofield M. The Strange Case of Pot. Baltimore, MD: Penguin;
1971.
4. Spencer D. J. Cannabis induced psychosis. Br J Addict Alcohol
Other Drugs 1970; 65: 369–72.
5. Kolansky H., Moore W
. T. Effects of marihuana on adolescents
and young adults. JAMA 1971; 216: 486–92.
6. Halikas J. A., Goodwin D. W
., Guze S. B. Marihuana use
and psychiatric illness. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1972; 27:
162–5.
7. Negrete J. C. Psychological adverse effects of cannabis
smoking: a tentative classification. Can Med Assoc J 1973;
108: 195.
8. Chopra G. S., Smith J. W
. Psychotic reactions following
cannabis use in East Indians. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1974; 30:
24–7.
9. Tennant F
. S., Groesbeck C. J. Psychiatric effects of hashish.
Arch Gen Psychiatry 1972; 27: 133–6.
10. Andréasson S., Engström A., Allebeck P
., Rydberg U. Cannabis
and schizophrenia: a longitudinal studyof Swedish conscripts.
Lancet 1987; 330: 1483–6.
11. Gage S. H., Jones H. J., Burgess S., Bowden J., Smith G. D.,
Zammit S. Assessing causality in associations between
cannabis use and schizophrenia risk: a two-sample Mendelian
randomization study
. Psychol Med 2016; 47: 1–0.
12. Zubin J., Spring B. Vulnerability: a new view of schizophrenia.
J Abnorm Psychol 1977; 86: 103.
13. Hides L., Kavanagh D., Mueser K. Understanding cannabis
use in schizophrenia. In: Castle D., Murray R. M., D’Souza
D. C., editors. Marijuana and Madness. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press; 2011, pp. 218–21.
14. Ranger C. Race, culture and ‘cannabis psychosis’: the role of
social factors in the construction of a disease category
. J Ethn
Migr Stud 1989; 15: 357–69.
15. Littlewood R. Community-initiated research: a study of
psychiatrists. Psychiatr Bull 1988; 12: 486–8.
16. Thornicroft
G.
Cannabis
and
psychosis.
Is
there
epidemiological evidence for an association? Br J Psychiatry
1990; 157: 25–33.
17. Hambrecht M., Häfner H. Substance abuse and the onset of
schizophrenia. Biol Psychiatry 1996; 40: 1155–63.
18. Thomas H. Psychiatric symptoms in cannabis users. Br J
Psychiatry 1993; 163: 141–9.
19. Gruber A. J., Pope H. G. Cannabis psychotic disorder. Am J
Addict 1994; 3: 72–83.
20. Hall W
. Cannabis use and psychosis. Drug Alcohol Rev 1998;
17: 433–44.
21. Degenhardt L., Hall W
., Lynskey M. Alcohol, cannabis and
tobacco use among Australians: a comparison of their
associations with other drug use and use disorders, affective
4
Ian Hamilton
© 2017 Society for the Study of Addiction
Addiction
 and anxiety disorders, and psychosis. Addiction 2001; 96:
1603–14.
22. Gregg L., Barrowclough C., Haddock G. Reasons for increased
substance use in psychosis. Clin Psychol Rev 2007; 27:
494–510.
23. Nutt D. J., Lingford-Hughes A., Erritzoe D., Stokes P
. R. The
dopamine theory of addiction: 40 years of highs and lows.
Nat Rev Neurosci 2015; 16: 305–12.
24. Murray R. M., Quigley H., Quattrone D., Englund A., Di Forti M.
Traditional
marijuana,
high-potency
cannabis
and
synthetic cannabinoids: increasing risk for psychosis. World
Psychiatry 2016; 15: 195–204.
25. Boydell J., van Os J., Caspi A., Kennedy N., Giouroukou E.,
Fearon P
. E. et al. Trends in cannabis use prior to first
presentation with schizophrenia, in South-East London
between 1965 and 1999. Psychol Med 2006; 36: 1441–6.
Cannabis, psychosis and schizophrenia
5
© 2017 Society for the Study of Addiction
Addiction
