 Integrated Control of Predatory Hunting by the Central Nucleus 
of the Amygdala
Wenfei Han1,2,3, Luis A Tellez1,2, Miguel Rangel Jr1,2,4, Simone C Motta4, Xiaobing Zhang5, 
Isaac O Perez1, Newton S Canteras4, Sarah J Shammah-Lagnado6, Anthony N van den 
Pol5, and Ivan E de Araujo1,2,7,*
1The John B Pierce Laboratory, New Haven CT, USA
2Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven CT, USA
3School & Hospital of Stomatology, Tongji University, Shanghai Engineering Research Center of 
Tooth Restoration and Regeneration, Shanghai, 200072, China
4Department of Anatomy, Biomedical Sciences Institute, University of São Paulo, São Paulo SP
, 
Brazil
5Department of Neurosurgery, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven CT, USA
6Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Biomedical Sciences Institute, University of São 
Paulo, São Paulo SP
, Brazil
7Department of Physiology, Yale University School of Arts and Sciences, New Haven CT, USA
Abstract
Superior predatory skills led to the evolutionary triumph of jawed vertebrates. However, the 
mechanisms by which the vertebrate brain controls predation remain largely unknown. Here we 
reveal a critical role for the central nucleus of the amygdala in predatory hunting. Both optogenetic 
and chemogenetic stimulation of central amygdala of mice elicited predatory-like attacks upon 
both insect and artificial prey. Coordinated control of cervical and mandibular musculatures, which 
is necessary for accurately positioning lethal bites on prey, was mediated by a central amygdala 
projection to the reticular formation in the brainstem. In contrast, prey pursuit was mediated by 
projections to the midbrain periaqueductal gray matter. Targeted lesions to these two pathways 
separately disrupted biting attacks upon prey versus the initiation of prey pursuit. Our findings 
*LEAD CONTACT. Ivan E de Araujo, The John B. Pierce Laboratory & Yale University School of Medicine, 290 Congress Avenue, 
New Haven CT 06519, USA, Phone: +1 (203) 5629901 x204, Fax: +1 (203) 6244950, IAraujo@jbpierce.org, ivan.araujo@yale.edu. 
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
Author Contributions
I.E.d.A. conceived the study. I.E.d.A. and W.H. designed the experiments. W.H, L.A.T., M.R., and S.C.M. performed stereotaxic 
surgeries, behavioral, electromyogram and optogenetic experiments, and analyzed data. W.H., M.R., S.C.M, S.J.S.-L. and N.S.C. 
performed histological analysis and imaging. X.Z. and A.N.v.d.P. performed whole-cell patch-clamp experiments and analyzed data. 
W.H., L.A.T. and I.O.P. performed in vivo electrophysiological experiments and analyzed electromyogram and electrophysiological 
data. I.E.d.A. wrote the manuscript. All of the authors actively participated in interpreting all data and in manuscript editing.
DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY
Custom software are available. See Key Resources Table above for download details.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Published in final edited form as:
Cell. 2017 January 12; 168(1-2): 311–324.e18. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.12.027.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 delineate a neural network that integrates distinct behavioral modules, and suggest that central 
amygdala neurons instruct predatory hunting across jawed vertebrates.
Introduction
The emergence of articulated jaws was a major event in vertebrate evolution. The 
reconfiguration of the vertebrate head promoted the transition from filter feeding to active 
predation, eventually placing jawed predators at the top of the food chain (Gans and 
Northcutt, 1983; Kuratani, 2012; Mallatt, 2008). This morphological transformation was met 
with the development of novel neural networks capable of coordinating craniofacial and 
locomotor systems during active hunting (Gans and Northcutt, 1983). Dissecting the neural 
circuitry of predation may, therefore, provide unique insights into the evolution of vertebrate 
sensorimotor systems (Borghuis and Leonardo, 2015; Catania, 2012).
We hypothesized a role for the central nucleus of the amygdala (CeA) in predatory hunting. 
The hypothesis is based on the finding that hunting prey produces greater activation of CeA 
neurons than surges in food intake (Comoli et al., 2005). Moreover, CeA projects densely to 
brainstem premotor circuits involved in craniofacial control (Shammah-Lagnado et al., 1992; 
Swanson and Petrovich, 1998; Van Daele et al., 2011). Accordingly, we combined cell-
specific manipulations with an ethological assay (cricket hunting, Butler, 1973; Nikulina, 
1981) to investigate the role of CeA in promoting predation in mice.
Results
The central nucleus of the amygdala activates craniofacial musculatures and promotes 
predatory hunting
Restricted transfection of the light-sensitive depolarizing Channelrhodopsin2 (ChR2, 
Madisen et al., 2012) to the central nucleus of the amygdala (CeA) was achieved via 
stereotaxic injections of the Cre-inducible viral construct AAV-EF1a-DIO-hChR2(H134R)-
EYFP into the CeA of VGat-ires-Cre mice (Figure 1A; for details on all brain injections see 
STAR Methods, Tables 1–8). Anatomical and electrophysiological analyses of EYFP-
expressing terminals confirmed the specificity of the Cre-dependent approach (Figures 1B, 
1C and S1A–G; Swanson and Petrovich, 1998; Van Daele et al., 2011).
Coordinated action involving the neck and the jaw characterizes successful prey capturing in 
vertebrates (Finlay et al., 1980; Montuelle et al., 2009; Wainwright et al., 2008). We thus 
tested the ability of CeA neurons to concurrently control cervical-mandibular muscles. 
Optogenetic stimulation of CeA revealed a short-latency (<100ms) co-activation of the 
masseter and trapezius muscles upon laser activation (Figures 1D–F). When a non-edible 
item was placed in the cage, laser activation caused the otherwise indifferent mice to 
immediately assume a “capture-like” body posture and seize the object, which was then held 
with the forepaws and bitten. Behavior was interrupted immediately upon laser deactivation 
(Movie S1). Consistently, by employing the cricket-hunting paradigm (Butler, 1973; Finlay 
et al., 1980; Nikulina, 1981) optogenetic activation of CeA shortened the time needed for 
Han et al.
Page 2
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 mice to capture and subdue their prey (Figures 1G–I and S1H–I). Captured crickets were 
immediately eaten.
Optogenetic activation of CeA led mice to pursue, bite, and restrain moving artificial prey 
independently of internal state (Figures 1J and S1J, Movie S2). Such attacks were never 
observed when laser source was off. Stretching of the neck and the release of biting attacks, 
concomitant to “prey” restraint using the forepaws, characterized these responses to optical 
stimulation (Movie S2). CeA optical activation thus mimicked the prototypical posture 
observed during insect hunting (Finlay et al., 1980).
Enhanced predatory efficiency upon CeA stimulation was mirrored by analyses of 
electromyogram recordings. Z-scores from the electromyogram traces recorded during both 
natural hunting and CeA optical stimulation alone were plotted onto the two-dimensional 
masseter × trapezius space (Figure 1K). Unsupervised clustering algorithms assigned both 
optical activation and natural hunting to clusters located in the upper right quadrant due to 
masseter-trapezius co-activation. Interestingly, these two clusters were separated, with 
optical activation producing more robust muscle activation than natural hunting.
Generally, upon laser activation, mice readily seize, bite, and often ingest, non-edible 
objects, an effect that was modulated by internal state (Figure 1L and Movie S3). Laser 
activation also abolished natural preferences for edible over non-edible items (Figure S1K–
P). Optically stimulating the CeA of VGat-ires-Cre mice injected with the non-excitable 
Cre-inducible control construct AAV-EF1a-DIO-EYFP revealed no effects on any of the 
hunting parameters measured (Figure S1Q–S). Moreover, ChR2 transfection and optical 
stimulation of the neighboring striatal and globus pallidus areas of VGat-ires-Cre mice also 
failed to elicit any effects on hunting (Figure S1T–Y). Finally, consummatory acts towards 
non-edible items were specifically and completely abolished upon interrupting GABA 
release from CeA terminals (Figures S1Z–DD).
Chemogenetic approaches (Sternson and Roth, 2014) corroborated the optogenetic studies. 
The Cre-inducible excitatory designer receptor encoded in the construct AAV-hSyn-HA-
hM3D(Gq)-IRES-mCherry was injected into the CeA of VGat-ires-Cre mice. Administering 
the designer drug clozapine-N-oxide (CNO) increased both lethal bites unrestricted to the 
insects’ head (Figure 1M) and pursuit velocities (Figure 1N). Latencies to pursuit were 
shortened (Figure 1O), as were capture durations (Figure 1P). CNO administration also 
produced attacks on artificial prey (Figure 1Q and Movie S2). We also injected the CeA of 
VGat-ires-Cre mice with the Cre-inducible inhibitory designer receptor encoded in the 
construct AAV-hSyn-HA-hM4D(Gi)-IRES-mCherry. Consistently, in these mice CNO 
administration led to a striking decrease in hunting efficiency (Figures 1R–T).
Central amygdala activation did not induce attacks on conspecifics, greater food intake, or 
anxiety-like behaviors
We failed to observe any occurrences of attacks on conspecifics upon CeA activation (Figure 
S1EE), ruling out nonspecific aggression. Also, laser activation did not increase total 
ingestion of either of two types of food pellets presented (Figure S1FF), ruling out laser-
induced physiological need. Consistently, both chemogenetic activation and inhibition of 
Han et al.
Page 3
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 CeA failed to alter food intake (Figure S1GG–HH). Finally, open field tests failed to reveal 
any anxiogenic patterns potentially induced by either activation or inhibition of CeA (Figure 
S1II–PP).
Changes in central amygdala neuronal activity preceded prey capturing
In order to evaluate the behavior of CeA neuronal populations during active hunting, we 
performed electromyogram monitoring of the masseter muscle concomitantly to array 
neuronal recordings. Principal component analyses of the neuronal data revealed that ~40% 
of the recorded neurons increased activity during insect hunting (Figures 2A, S2), with 
hunting-excited CeA neurons maintaining activity levels throughout prey pursuit (Figure 
2C).
The delivery of bites aimed at prey was accompanied by a sharp, transient increase in 
masseter activity. Principal component analyses revealed that this was concomitant to the 
emergence of capture-excited neurons in CeA (~36%, Figure 2D–F). Finer temporal scale 
analyses confirmed that capture-excited neurons tended to increase activity just prior to the 
attempt to capture (Figures 2G–H). These patterns are consistent with the perspective that 
CeA commands prey capture, in agreement with the effects of optical stimulation. Finally, a 
significant proportion of CeA neurons increased their activity levels during the consumption 
of prey (~40%, Figure 2I).
The central nucleus of the amygdala controls cervical-mandibular systems by acting on 
inhibitory interneurons of the parvocellular reticular formation
CeA transfection in VGat-ires-Cre mice with the ChR2 construct modified to encode a 
fluorophore fused to synaptobrevin (AAV-EF1a-DIO-Synb-eGFP, Land et al., 2014) revealed 
a dense CeA terminal field in the brainstem reticular formation (Shammah-Lagnado et al., 
1992; Van Daele et al., 2011). Expression was densest throughout rostral-to-caudal levels of 
the parvocellular reticular formation (PCRt, Figures 3A–C). PCRt is known to contain a 
large population of both inhibitory (VGat-expressing) and excitatory (VGlut2-expressing) 
craniofacial premotor neurons (Stanek et al., 2014; Travers and Norgren, 1983). 
Accordingly, Cre-dependent transfection of both VGat-and VGlut2-neurons in PCRt with 
the retrograde pseudotyped rabies virus SADΔG-GFP(EnvA) (Wickersham et al., 2007) 
resulted in neuronal labeling in the medial part of CeA (Figures 3D–E. For lower 
magnification, see Figure S3A). Locations of rabies-labeled cells throughout CeA levels are 
shown in Figure S3P.
To assess the functional relevance of the CeA=>PCRt projections, VGat-ires-Cre mice were 
transfected with Cre-dependent ChR2 in CeA and optical fibers placed immediately above 
the CeA neuronal terminals in PCRt. When animals were placed on empty cages, 
stimulation of CeA=>PCRt projections induced “fictive feeding” behaviors, i.e. mice 
faithfully executed feeding-like sequences (Farr and Whishaw, 2002) in the absence of food. 
Specifically, upon laser activation, mice immediately interrupted locomotion (Figure S3B–
E), sit back on their haunches, brought elbows inward periodically as if holding food with 
the forepaws, and displayed rhythmic oral movements (Figure 3F and Movie S4). Fictive 
feeding was elicited independently of internal state (Figure 3F). Additionally, whereas 
Han et al.
Page 4
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 CeA=>PCRt activation led to sustained mastication of non-food items, it failed to increase 
overall food intake (Figure S3F–I).
According to the abovementioned rabies-based retrograde patterns, CeA neurons directly 
contact inhibitory VGat-neurons in PCRt. We thus reasoned that CeA=>PCRt activation 
might release feeding programs from inhibition. We specifically hypothesized that 
stimulating VGat-neurons in PCRt would be sufficient to disrupt the ability of CeA=>PCRt 
activation to release feeding programs. We employed a combination of optogenetics and 
chemogenetics (Sternson and Roth, 2014) to test this hypothesis. VGat-ires-Cre mice were 
ChR2-tranfected in CeA, and optical fibers placed in PCRt as above. To reversibly increase 
inhibitory tone within PCRt, the same animals were injected into PCRt with the Cre-
dependent designer receptor (Figures 3G–H). We found that administering CNO completely 
suppressed masseter and trapezius electromyogram responses to optical stimulation (Figures 
3I–J and S3J–M). Efficacy of the chemogenetic approach was confirmed in vivo (Figure 
S3N–O).
To further assess the specificity of the VGat(CeA)=>VGat(PCRt) projection in releasing 
feeding programs, we introduced the viral construct AAV-flex-taCasp3-TEVp (Yang et al., 
2013), which induces Cre-dependent caspase expression, into the PCRt of both VGat-ires-
Cre and VGlut2-ires-Cre mice (Figures 3K–L). The CeA of these same animals were 
concomitantly transfected with non-Cre-dependent AAV-ChR2. Only caspase-treated VGat-
ires-Cre animals failed to display cervical-mandibular activity in response to optical 
activation of CeA, as shown by electromyogram analyses (Figure 3M–N). In sum, CeA 
releases craniofacial activity via disinhibition of the parvocellular reticular circuitry.
The parvocellular reticular formation contains both mandibular and cervical premotor 
neurons
We investigated in greater depth the reticular circuitry mediating CeA control over 
craniofacial musculatures. The rabies construct SADΔG-GFP(EnvA) was injected into either 
the jaw-controlling motor trigeminal nucleus (“Mo5”), or the neck-controlling accessory 
motor nucleus (“11N”) of ChAT-ires-Cre × RΦGT mice (Figure S4A–H). Only PCRt – and 
to a lesser extent the immediately adjacent intermediate reticular nucleus – was found to 
contain premotor neurons to both Mo5 and 11N (Figure S4I). Conversely, VGat-neurons in 
PCRt directly targeted these motor nuclei (Figure S4J–M).
Inhibitory interneurons in PCRt bi-directionally control mandibular and cervical 
musculatures
We used optogenetics to probe the function of excitatory and inhibitory PCRt populations 
(Figures 4A–B and S4N–R). In hungry mice offered food pellets, activation of PCRt VGat-
positive neurons produced a rapid arrest in oromotor activity, which was immediately 
resumed upon laser deactivation (Figure 4C and Movie S4). Consistently, this optical 
stimulation caused an immediate suppression of electromyographic activity in both masseter 
and trapezius (Figures 4D–E and S4S).
Intriguingly, optical stimulation of PCRt VGlut2-neurons caused only minor effects in 
electromyography traces (Figures 4F and S4T). In contrast, optical inhibition of VGat-
Han et al.
Page 5
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 positive neurons in PCRt using the hyperpolarizing green light-sensitive channel 
archeorhodopsin (Madisen et al., 2012) significantly stimulated electromyographic activity 
in both masseter and trapezius (Figures 4G and S4U–V). This effect was accompanied by 
evident oromotor behaviors.
Inhibitory neurons in PCRt mediate the delivery of killing bites but not prey pursuit
Based on the above, we reasoned that both optical and tonic depolarization of PCRt VGat-
neurons should attenuate the potential for mice to successfully hunt insect prey. Activating 
designer receptors specifically in PCRt VGat-neurons completely suppressed the ability to 
kill and consume crickets (Figure 4H). CNO-treated mice incapacitated mice to deliver 
killing bites despite the fact that prey were intensively pursued and kept subdued with the 
assistance of the forepaws (Figures 4I–J and movie S5). This led to numerous pursuit events 
upon CNO treatment (Figure 4K). Similar effects were observed using optogenetic 
activation of PCRt VGat-neurons (Movie S5). In fact, VGat-neuron activation impaired 
mastication while preserving the ability to reach for pellets in a forepaw-based pellet-
reaching task (Figure S4W–Z).
Central amygdala projections to the periaqueductal gray matter control prey pursuit
The periaqueductal gray matter (PAG) is a major CeA target previously implicated in 
predatory attacks (Comoli et al., 2005; Shaikh et al., 1985). We thus hypothesized a role for 
CeA=>PAG projections in predatory hunting. Synaptobrevin expression analyses revealed a 
continuous terminal field throughout the ventrolateral and lateral aspects of PAG (VLAPAG 
and LPAG, Figure 5A). Consistently, slice electrophysiological mapping studies confirmed 
that optogenetic activation of CeA VGat-terminals robustly inhibited their PAG neuronal 
targets (Figure S5A–C). Likewise PCRt, Cre-dependent SADΔG-GFP(EnvA) rabies 
transfection of both VGat+ and VGlut2+ PAG neurons resulted in neuronal labeling in CeA 
(Figures 5B–C and S5D–E). Locations of rabies-labeled cells throughout CeA levels are 
shown in Figure S3P.
To assess the functional relevance of these CeA=>PAG projections, VGat-ires-Cre mice 
were transfected with non-Cre-dependent ChR2 in CeA and optical fibers placed 
immediately above the CeA neuronal terminals in LPAG/VLPAG. In the same animals, the 
Cre-inducible excitatory chemogenetic construct AAV-hSyn-HA-hM3D(Gq)-IRES-mCherry 
was injected into the PAG of both VGat-ires-Cre and VGlut2-ires-Cre mice (Figures S5F–
G). CeA=>PAG optical activation enhanced predatory hunting (Movie S6). Specifically, 
CeA=>PAG optical activation increased pursuit velocities (Figure 5D) and shortened both 
latency to pursue and overall hunting duration (Figures 5E–F).
To counter the inhibitory effects of CeA on PAG neurons, we combined optical stimulation 
with administration of the designer drug CNO in both VGlut2-ires-Cre and VGat-ires-Cre 
mice. We found that all of the hunting-promoting effects produced by optical stimulation 
were annulled by CNO injections in VGlut2-ires-Cre mice (Figures 5D–F). This is 
consistent with CeA terminals inhibiting their VGlut2-expressing target cells in PAG (Figure 
5G). CNO treatment in VGat-ires-Cre mice failed to significantly alter optically-induced 
Han et al.
Page 6
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 hunting (Figure S5H–J). Finally, and in contrast to CeA=>PCRt, CeA=>PAG activation 
failed to induce either fictive feeding or approach towards non-food items (Figure S5K–O).
Periaqueductal gray matter projections to the mesencephalic locomotor region gate 
predatory hunting
We investigated in greater depth the downstream targets of the hunting-controlling 
PAG[VGlut2+] neurons. Interestingly, analyses of Cre-inducible synaptobrevin expression 
revealed that VGlut2-neurons in VLPAG/LPAG project densely to dorsolateral midbrain 
(e.g. pendunculopontine and cuneiform nuclei Figure S5Q). These areas are located within 
the mesencephalic locomotor region (“MLR”, Skinner and Garcia-Rill, 1984). In contrast, 
similar synaptobrevin analyses failed to reveal terminals in MLR of VGat-ires-Cre mice 
(Figure S5R). The functionality of the PAG[VGlut2+]=>MLR pathway was further 
suggested by combining Cre-inducible synaptobrevin and retrograde labeling (Figure S5S). 
We then transfected VLPAG/LPAG of VGlut2-ires-Cre mice with Cre-dependent ChR2, and 
optical fibers were placed immediately above the PAG neuronal terminals in MLR. As 
expected, optical activation caused a significant reduction in pursuit velocity (Figure 5H), as 
well as significant increases in both latency to pursue (5I) and prey capture duration (5J).
Central amygdala controls the mesencephalic locomotor region via the periaqueductal 
gray matter
Finally, we tested the presumed functionality of the CeA=>PAG=>MLR pathway. In the 
same VGat-ires-Cre mice, we transfected the CeA with Cre-inducible ChR2, implanted 
optical fibers above CeA terminals in PAG, and transfected the MLR with the non-Cre-
dependent excitatory chemogenetic designer receptor. We hypothesized that administering 
the designer drug CNO would negate the hunting promoting effects produced by 
CeA=>PAG optical activation. In other words we predicted that this treatment would mimic 
the effects of activating PAG VGlut2-neurons during prey pursuit. Consistently, CNO 
administration completely annulled the hunt-promoting effects of CeA=>PAG activation on 
pursuit latencies and capture duration, albeit having a more modest suppressing effect on 
velocities (Figures 5K–M). Importantly, all experiments involving the PAG=>MLR pathway 
failed to influence performance on open field tests (Figure S5T–W).
Co-activation of the CeA=>PCRt and CeA=>PAG pathways is sufficient to induce robust 
hunting
From the series of studies above we inferred that different CeA downstream targets mediate 
craniofacial control vs. prey pursuit. Consistently, dual retrograde tracer injections in PAG 
and PCRt revealed that CeA neuronal groups projecting to PAG versus PCRt are largely 
segregated (Figures 6A). We then analyzed the effects of activating both pathways 
simultaneously.
In the same VGat-ires-Cre mice, we transfected the CeA with Cre-inducible ChR2, and 
implanted bilateral optical fibers above CeA terminals in both PAG and PCRt (Figures 6B 
and S6A). Although activating the CeA=>PAG pathway alone led mice to pursue artificial 
prey, only stimulation of the CeA=>PAG + CeA=>PCRt pathways combined led mice to 
robustly initiate predatory attacks on artificial prey (Figures 6C–D, S6D–G and movie S2).
Han et al.
Page 7
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The hunting of live prey involves fewer biting attacks than hunting artificial prey, as one 
lethal bite generally suffices. Thus, the significant effects of the combined stimulation on 
pursuit velocities, latencies and capture duration closely mimicked those produced by 
activating CeA=>PAG alone (Figures 6E–G). Interestingly, activation of CeA=>PCRt alone 
caused animals to engage in fictive feeding even when in the presence of prey, which 
resulted in slower velocities and longer latencies and capture durations (Figures 5E–G).
To confirm the results above, we transfected the PCRt and/or PAG of wild-type mice with a 
retrogradely transported, monosynaptic canine adenovirus carrying a Cre-GFP construct 
(CAV2-Cre, Junyent and Kremer, 2015). CeA was then transfected with Cre-inducible 
ChR2-mCherry and implanted with optical fibers (Figures 6H–I and S6H–L). Overall, the 
effects observed in these three groups of mice (CAV2-Cre injected only into PCRt, only into 
PAG, or into both PAG+PCRt) closely mimicked those produced by the multi-optical fiber 
approach described above (Figures 6J–L).
These activation studies allow for three related conclusions. First, the CeA=>PAG pathway 
controls the decision to initiate prey pursuit (via reducing latencies to initiate pursuit). 
Second, CeA=>PCRt neurons control mandibular-cervical coordination and produce fictive 
feeding. Third, the net effect of activating both pathways was to cause both a short-latency/
faster pursuit and forceful biting attacks. This consistently led to reduced hunting durations.
Pathway-defined lesions to central amygdala neurons differentially impair skilled hunting
Finally, we aimed at analyzing the effects of ablating CeA neurons projecting to PCRt or 
PAG. This was achieved by transfecting the PCRt or PAG of wild-type mice with CAV2-Cre. 
Next, CeA was transfected with the viral construct that induces Cre-dependent caspase 
expression.
CAV2-Cre transfection in target sites induced GFP expression patterns that were locally 
restricted to CeA, mainly at its rostral levels, a pattern markedly reduced by caspase 
application (Figures 7A–B and S7A–P). In contrast, caspase injections neither affected 
PCRt- or PAG-projecting neurons in hypothalamus nor overall neuronal survival in CeA 
(Figure S7Q–T).
Pathway-specific lesions revealed clear functional dissociations between the two CeA 
subpopulations. Lesions to the CeA=>PAG pathway produced a ~10-fold lengthening in the 
latencies to pursue prey; in contrast, no latency effects were observed after lesions to the 
CeA=>PCRt pathway (Figure 7C). Velocities during pursuit were only moderately affected 
by lesions to the CeA=>PAG pathway (Figure S7U; intriguingly, these patterns very closely 
match those produced by depolarizing MLR neurons upon CeA=>PAG activation, see 
Figures 5K–M). Conversely, lesions to the CeA=>PCRt pathway produced a robust 
lengthening of the time needed to successfully capture prey after pursuit was initiated 
(Figure 7D). No effects on capture duration were observed after lesions to the CeA=>PAG 
pathway, as these animals achieved capturing prey using their jaws once the delayed prey 
pursuit was initiated (Figure 7D).
Han et al.
Page 8
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The defects in capturing prey observed in CeA=>PCRt ablated mice resulted from a 
conspicuous alteration in hunting strategy. When facing insect prey, control mice 
characteristically extended the neck, oriented the head towards the prey, and rapidly captured 
prey using coordinated movements of jaws and forepaws. Mice sustaining lesions to 
CeA=>PCRt, in contrast, kept their head closer to the trunk and generally attempted to 
capture prey using the forepaws without any assistance from the jaws (Movie S7). In fact, 
mice sustaining lesions to CeA=>PCRt, but not to CeA=>PAG, frequently failed to capture 
prey using their jaws (Figure 7E and S7V). This was then paralleled by the frequent display 
of attempting prey capture only using forepaws (Figure 7F). Consistently, mice sustaining 
lesions to CeA=>PCRt, but not to CeA=>PAG, displayed debilitated incisor biting forces 
(the pair of teeth used to perforate live prey, Figure 7G and S7W).
Pathway-defined lesions to central amygdala neurons altered electromyogram markers of 
predatory hunting
Z-scores from the electromyogram patterns recorded during the hunting sessions were 
plotted onto the two-dimensional masseter × trapezius space. In both control mice and mice 
sustaining lesions to CeA=>PAG, unsupervised algorithms sharply separated hunting vs. 
non-hunting events, i.e. rarely incurred in misclassifications (Figures 7J–K). In contrast, in 
mice sustaining lesions to CeA=>PCRt, clustering was significantly less efficient, with 
~20% of hunting events being assigned to extraneous clusters (Figure 7I). In other words, 
lesions to CeA=>PCRt abolished the cervical-mandibular neuromuscular command 
deployed during predatory hunting (Figure S7X–MM).
Discussion
Our findings imply the central amygdala (CeA) as a modular command system (Ewert et al., 
1990; Kupfermann and Weiss, 1978) for predatory hunting. Via two independent set of 
descending projections, CeA controlled distinct behavioral modules associated with efficient 
predation.
From an anatomical standpoint, the CeA is ideally positioned to mediate predation in 
vertebrates. The CeA projects densely to the parvocellular reticular formation (Shammah-
Lagnado et al., 1992; Swanson and Petrovich, 1998; Van Daele et al., 2011), which 
comprises both cervical and mandibular premotor populations (Tellegen and Dubbeldam, 
1999). We found that this arrangement allows for CeA control over the delivery of lethal 
biting attacks upon prey. Interestingly, the parvocellular reticular formation also contains 
triceps muscle premotor pools (Esposito et al., 2014), implying that this reticular circuitry 
may mediate prey capture via the coordinated action of craniofacial, cervical and forelimb 
systems.
CeA also projects densely to the central grey, which we found to innervate and control the 
adjacent mesencephalic locomotor region (Skinner and Garcia-Rill, 1984). We found that 
via this innervation CeA exerts control over the decision to initiate prey pursuit – which is 
characterized by predator stalking and possibly running towards prey. These central gray 
projections to locomotor regions also constitute a descending pathway that is independent 
from projections recently found to mediate gray matter-induced freezing and flight (Tovote 
Han et al.
Page 9
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 et al., 2016). These parallel CeA projections to reticular formation and gray matter provide a 
long-sought tractable network model for the integration of locomotion with prey capture 
(Wainwright et al., 2008).
The pattern of afferent inputs to CeA also mirrors its critical role in predation. Glutamatergic 
afferents arising from cortical olfactory brain regions densely target the CeA (Shammah-
Lagnado and Santiago, 1999). Visual and auditory inputs are also critical for prey detection 
in mice (Hoy et al., 2016). CeA neurons activated by such inputs may convey prey-
associated sensory information to downstream premotor circuits. Incoming prey-specific 
sensory inputs, which are bypassed by optical and chemogenetic exogenous activations, 
must thus confer the goal-directedness nature of predation. Our model is thus consistent with 
the notion that CeA responds to incentive cues (Robinson et al., 2014) – such as the sight or 
smell of prey – which act to elicit appropriate motor actions.
The rodent CeA, including its downstream projections to the gray matter, has been 
traditionally linked to threat detection (Davis, 1998; LeDoux et al., 1988; Tovote et al., 
2016). Surprisingly, we failed to observe any occurrences of freezing upon optical 
stimulation of CeA. This was corroborated by the robust activation of the trapezius upon 
CeA stimulation, as the flattening of neck electromyogram traces is a reliable manifestation 
of freezing in mice (Steenland and Zhuo, 2009). We should note, however, that our lesions 
preserved caudal aspects of CeA, including its capsular subnucleus. Consistently, more 
caudal subnuclei of CeA contain genetically defined populations whose activation both 
suppress feeding (Cai et al., 2014) and mimic threat-induced reactions (Janak and Tye, 
2015). Moreover, and in sharp distinction to optical stimulation of medial amygdala (Hong 
et al., 2014), we failed to observe attacks towards conspecifics upon CeA stimulation. Such 
contrast is presumably due to dedicated projections to hypothalamic attack areas from the 
medial, but not the central, nucleus of the amygdala (Canteras et al., 1995; Motta et al., 
2009).
Finally, we note that morphological transition from jawless to jawed vertebrates resulted in 
the reconfiguration of craniofacial systems, including the emergence of a separate shoulder 
girdle supporting distinctive cervical muscles (Trinajstic et al., 2013). The emergence of a 
neck therefore appears as a distinct innovation inherent to jawed vertebrates (Kuratani, 2013; 
Tada and Kuratani, 2015; Trinajstic et al., 2013). Such an arrangement strongly favors 
efficient predation (Montuelle et al., 2009). We thus speculate that the emergence of jawed 
vertebrates was met with equivalent reconfigurations of amygdalar systems. Consistently, 
only the jawless lamprey appears to lack a differentiated “striatal” amygdala (Maximino et 
al., 2013), i.e. a CeA-homologous, peptide-rich structure within the amygdalar complex. 
Developmental genetic studies may determine the extent to which the emergence of a striatal 
amygdala constitutes an evolutionary novelty linked to the appearance of cervical-
mandibular muscles.
Han et al.
Page 10
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 STAR Methods
Contact for Reagents and Resource Sharing
Further information and requests for reagents should be directed to, and will be fulfilled by 
the Lead Contact Ivan E de Araujo <IAraujojbpierce.org, ivan.araujoyale.edu>.
Experimental Model and Subject Details
All experiments presented in this study were conducted according to the animal research 
guidelines from NIH and were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use 
Committee of The J.B. Pierce Laboratory.
Experimental Animals—A total of 176 adult male mice were used. Strain details and 
number of animals in each group are as follows:
85 VGat-ires-Cre (Slc32a1tm2(cre)Lowl/J (Jackson Laboratories stock #016962)
30 VGlut2-ires-Cre (Slc17a6tm2(cre)Lowl/J (Jackson Laboratories stock #016963)
14 VGat-floxed (Slc32a1tm1Lowl/J (Jackson Laboratories stock #012897)
6 Chat-ires-Cre × RΦGT = Chat-Cre (B6;129S6-Chattm2(cre)Lowl/J (Jackson 
Laboratories stock #006410) × RΦGT (B6;129P2-
Gt(ROSA)26Sortm1(CAG-RABVgp4,-TVA)Arenk/J (Jackson Laboratories stock #024708)
41 C57BL/6J (Jackson Laboratories stock #000664).
All mice used in experiments were individually housed under a 12 hr light/dark cycle. At the 
time of the experiments, animals were 8–20 weeks old. Littermates of the same sex were 
randomly assigned to experimental groups. Animals weighted approximately 25–28 grams. 
All animals were used in scientific experiments for the first time. This includes no previous 
exposures to pharmacological substances or altered diets. The only pre-experimental 
intervention was acclimation to crickets, where all mice were food restricted for two 
consecutive dark cycles (2.5gram of food chow) and presented with five crickets for hunting 
habituation. All animals captured and consumed all crickets during habituation. Health 
status was normal for all animals.
Method Details
Stereotaxic viral injections and optical fiber implantation—For all details on viral 
and tracer injections for each mouse strain, see Supplemental Tables S1–S8. In all cases, 
preoperative analgesia: 5mg/Kg Carprofen (i.p.), anesthetic: 2% Isoflurane throughout, 
postoperative analgesia: 30mg/Kg Ibuprofen (in drinking water). Injections were performed 
with a Hamilton 1.0µL Neuros Model 7001KH syringe. Tables provide details for each 
strain separately. We list the viral construct/tracer injected, the relevant stereotaxic 
coordinates, and when applicable the relevant stereotaxic coordinates for optical fiber 
implants. When optogenetic and chemogenetics and/or caspase lesions were combined, the 
relevant constructs and coordinates are also listed on the same cell. Optical fibers were 
obtained from Doric Lenses Inc., and outer diameter is 240µm; core diameter is 200µm; 
Han et al.
Page 11
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 numerical aperture is 0.22. Stereotaxic coordinates are with respect to bregma, according to 
standardized atlases of the mouse brain.
Retrograde tracing from cranial and cervical muscles
Mouse strain Chat-Cre × RΦGT: Mo5 (AP-5.1 mm, ML: 1.5mm, DV: −5.0mm) was 
injected unilaterally with SAD-ΔG-GFP 0.5µL. Appropriate location of viral injections was 
confirmed by injecting the Masseter with 1% FG 10µL, 0.5µL/min. 11N was also injected 
unilaterally with SAD-ΔG-GFP 0.5µL. To correctly target 11N, the mouse head was 
lowered; the skin open and blunt dissection of the cervical muscles exposed the cruciate 
ligament of atlas between the occipital bone and the first cervical vertebra. Ligament was 
adjusted to horizontal level. 0.5 µL SAD-ΔG-GFP was then injected 2.0mm caudal to the 
occipital bone, lateral 0.4mm from the midline, ventral 1.7mm from the ligament. 
Appropriate location of viral injections was confirmed by injecting the Trapezius: 1% FG 
10µL, 0.5µL/min. 3 mice for Mo5 and 3 mice for 11N were used.
Histological procedures—Mice were deeply anesthetized with a ketamine/xylazine mix 
(400 mg ketamine + 20 mg xylazine kg body weight−1 I.P.). All animals were perfused with 
filtered saline, followed by 4% paraformaldehyde. Following perfusion, brains were left in 
4% paraformaldehyde for 24 hours and then moved to a 20% sucrose solution in 0.02 M 
potassium phosphatebuffer (KPBS, pH 7.4) for 2 days. Brains were then frozen and cut into 
four series 40µm sections with a sliding microtome equipped with a freezing stage. To 
identify fiber and electrode locations, relevant sections were identified and mounted on 
slides. Sections were then photographed under bright field and fluorescence. For 
SynaptoBrevin visualization, 4 weeks after viral injection, mice were perfused and brains cut 
at 40µm. The GFP signal was amplified with Goat Anti-GFP antibody (FITC), (ab6662, 
Abcam, 1:500). For SynaptoBrevin experiments combined with FluoroGold muscle 
injections, seven days after muscle injections animals were perfused as above and brains 
sliced in 40µm sections. For verifying the extension of caspase-induced lesions, slices were 
incubated with Mouse Anti-Neuronal Nuclei (NeuN, MAB377, Millipore, 1:500) followed 
by TRITC-conjugated affinipure goat anti-mouse (IgG(H+L) 15-025-166, Jackson Immuno, 
1:200). For visualizing FG/CTb dual injections, eight days after the injections, perfuse and 
slices the brain for 40µm. For visualization of rabies expression, ten days after the rabies 
injections, animals were perfused and expression was observed in coronal sections at 
~160µm intervals. Visualized cells were overlaid on a mouse brain atlas template.
C-Fos measurements—For determining the effects of optical stimulation on PCRt 
neuronal activity, unilateral 20Hz stimulation was performed using 10s-long ON(0.02s on/
0.03s off cycles were used during the ON cycles)/10s-long OFF cycles for 10 minutes. For 
determining the combined effects of optically activating CeA and concomitantly 
chemogenetically activating PCRt, 10mg/Kg CNO i.p. were injected 10 mins before the CeA 
1Hz laser stimulation. Unilateral 1Hz stimulation was performed using 10s ON (0.5s on/0.5s 
off cycles were used during the ON cycles)/10s OFF cycles for 10 minutes. 90 minutes after 
the appropriate stimulation, mice were sacrificed and perfused as described before. To 
visualize Fos immunoreactivity, the ABC/DAB procedure was used. Briefly, brain sections 
was incubated with Rabbit Anti-c-Fos antibody (PC38, Calbiochem, 1:10000) 
Han et al.
Page 12
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 (Concentration 1:10000), followed with Biotinylated Goat Anti-Rabbit IgG Antibody 
(BA-1000, Vector Laboratories, 1:200), then reacted with avidin-biotin-peroxidase complex 
(“ABC” method, Vectastain Elite ABC kit, Vector Laboratories, 1:200). A nickel 
diaminobenzidine (Nickel-DAB) glucose oxidase reaction was used to visualize Fos-like 
immunoreactive cells. Fos expression was analyzed and quantified as follows: Coronal 
sections at ~160µm intervals in PCRt near the fiber implantation or Gq injection were 
photographed at 10× magnification and montaged with Adobe Photoshopto to preserve 
anatomical landmarks. Fos+ neurons were counted manually on each slice (3 slices per 
animal) and expressed as the cumulative sum of Fos+ neurons within the relevant regions for 
each animal.
Electromyogram electrodes, recordings and analyses—First, two twisted 
Formvar-Insulated Nichrome Wires (Diameter: Bare 0.002 inch. A-M system) were covered 
with polyethylene tubing (PE20, 0.15” × 0.45”, Braintree scientific). The tips of the 
nichrome wires were bared and exposed. One bare wire tip was soldered to a Male Miniature 
Pin Connector (520200, A-M Systems). The other bare wire tip was inserted through a 30G 
needle, and the tip bent and used for the implants into the trapezius or masseter muscles. For 
implants, preoperative analgesia consisted of 5mg/Kg Carprofen, anesthetic was 2% 
Isoflurane throughout and postoperative analgesia, 30mg/Kg Ibuprofen. The skin of cheek 
was shaved and open to expose the masseter, or the skin on the back of the neck was open to 
expose the trapezius. The needle was then used for insertion of the wire into the muscle, 
with the bare wire hooked into the muscle. A suture was used to fix the wire in place. Skin 
was closed and a cemented miniature screw inserted into the parietal bone for fixating the 
remaining the polyethylene. Recordings were performed using the electromyogram module 
of a multichannel acquisition processor (Tucker-Davis Technologies, 3052Hz sampling rate). 
The male pin connector was attached to the female connector, which had been soldered to a 
recording headstage. Laser pulses timestamps were synchronized to the recordings via 
external TTL pulses into the TDT system. EMG signals from masseter and trapezius were 
recorded simultaneously in the same animals.
In vivo Electrophysiological recordings—For array implantation C57BL6/J mice 
(N=5) were placed on the stereotaxic apparatus and one electrode array consisting of 16 
tungsten microwires (35-µm diameter, OMN1005, TDT systems) was implanted onto CeA 
(AP:−0.9mm ~1.4mm ML: 2.5mm ~ 2.7mm DV:−4.8mm). Locations of electrodes were 
confirmed histologically. Recordings were performed in combination with masseter 
recordings by simultaneously using the spike and EMG modules of the multichannel 
acquisition processor (Tucker-Davis Technologies). Previous to the neuronal and 
electromyogram recording sessions, mice were connected to commutators with flexible 
cables for habituation to recording conditions for one training session.
Slice electrophysiology—On the day of the experiments, VGat-Cre mice with selective 
ChR2 expression in CeA or PCRt neurons were anesthetized with isoflurane and decapitated 
for electrophysiological identification of ChR2-expressed neurons and circuit mapping. 
Brains were quickly removed and immersed in an ice-cold high-sucrose solution containing 
(in mM): 220 sucrose, 2.5 KCl, 6 MgCl2, 1 CaCl2, 1.23 NaH2PO4, 26 NaHCO3, and 10 
Han et al.
Page 13
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 glucose (gassed with 95% O2 / 5% CO2; 300–305 mOsm). Coronal brain slices 300 µm 
thick were sectioned using a vibratome. Brain slices were then transferred to an incubation 
chamber filled with an artificial CSF (ACSF) solution containing (in mM) 124 NaCl, 2.5 
KCl, 2 MgCl2, 2 CaCl2, 1.23 NaH2PO4, 26 NaHCO3, and 10 glucose (gassed with 95% 
O2 / 5% CO2; 300–305 mOsm) at room temperature (22 °C). After a 1–2 hrs recovery 
period, slices containing CeA, PCRt, or PAG were selected and transferred to a recording 
chamber mounted on a BX51WI upright microscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). The 
recording chamber was perfused with a continuous flow of gassed ACSF. A dual-channel 
heat controller (Warner Instruments, Hamden, CT) was used to control the temperature of 
recording solution at 33 ± 1 °C. Whole-cell patch-clamp recordings were performed on 
neurons in CeA, PCRt or PAG that were visualized using an infrared-differential interference 
contrast (DIC) optical system combined with a monochrome CCD camera and a monitor. 
Pipettes were pulled from thin-walled borosilicate glass capillary tubes (length 75 mm, outer 
diameter 1.5 mm, inner diameter 1.1mm, World Precision Instruments) using a P-97 
micropipette puller (Sutter Instruments, Novato, CA). Pipette solution containing (in mM) 
145 K-gluconate, 1 MgCl2, 10 HEPES, 1.1 EGTA, 2 Mg-ATP, 0.5 Na2-GTP, and 5 Na2-
phosphocreatine (pH 7.3 with KOH; 290–295 mOsm) were used for whole-cell recording. 
The pipettes of resistances ranging from 3 to 6 MΩ were used for experiment. EPC-10 
patch-clamp amplifier (HEKA Instruments, Bellmore, NY) and PatchMaster 2.20 software 
(HEKA Elektronik, Lambrecht/Pfalz, Germany) were used to acquire and analyze data. 
Pipette and cell capacitance were compensated during experiment and neurons for which the 
series resistance was >20 MΩ were excluded from the statistics. Traces were processed using 
Igor Pro 6.36 (Wavemetrics, Lake Oswego, OR). Inhibitory postsynaptic currents were 
recorded at the holding potential of −40 mV unless otherwise mentioned. A 473 nm blue 
laser (Doric Lenses) was used to evoke the stimulation for optogenetic activation of ChR2 
channels in brain slices. Continuous stimulation and stimulation of 10 ms duration with 
different frequency (1, 5, 10, 20 Hz or 1Hz, 500ms) were used in the experiment to test 
photostimulation-evoked response. For recording VGlut2+ neurons in PAG innervated by 
ChR2+ CeA afferents, VGlut2-ires-Cre mice transfected with AAV5-DIO-mCherry in PAG 
were used.
Behavioral Studies
Video scoring: All behavioral sessions were video-recorded using a high-speed (120fps) 
camera (DMC-FZ200, Panasonic). Video scoring was performed by extracting timestamps 
associated with the relevant behavioral events (which are listed below). Timestamp 
extraction made use of the CPU’s clock during video execution and was obtained using 
custom software available upon request. A number of measurements, including overall 
locomotion and displacement velocity made use of automated video analyses (EthoVision 
XT11.5, Noldus).
Cricket hunting during optogenetics experiments: Mice, either fed ad libitum or food 
restricted (“deprived” 2.5g chow/day), were placed in a clean empty cage for 30mins before 
the laser stimulation. 10 min before the laser stimulation, the cage was cleaned again, and at 
the beginning of each trial. The mouse was located on one corner of the cage whereas the 
cricket was released into the cage near the diagonally opposite corner. A stationary object or 
Han et al.
Page 14
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 an artificial moving prey also was gently placed in the diagonally opposite corner of the 
cage. Stationary objects were one of the following: wood stick cut from applicators 
(diameter 0.15cm length 1.5cm (short) or 5cm (long)); Small bottle cap (1cm diameter, 
0.6cm high); Tape roll (5cm diameter, 2.5cm high); Food pellet (3g of regular chow 5001, 
Labdiet); Soft pellet (3g of 24%Fat pellet D12451, Research Diets, Inc); Hard pellet (3g 
35% Sucrose pellet, D12450B, Research Diets, Inc). The moving artificial prey was a 
miniature battery powered robot (HEXBUG Nano obtained from Amazon.com).
Optical Stimulation regimens: Stimulation frequencies were chosen according to the 
outcome of the slice electrophysiological studies. Although we did not detect major 
differences between stimulation frequencies in terms of evoking (or failing to) behavior, we 
used the following frequencies in each case. For CeA laser stimulation: 473-nm blue laser 
(or 532-nm green laser), stimulation was performed using 1min OFF - 1min ON (1Hz, 0.5s 
on/0.5s off cycles were used during the ON period) - 1min OFF cycle totaling 3 mins.
PCRt/CeA=>PCRt or CeA=>PAG: 473-nm blue laser (or 532-nm green laser) stimulation 
was performed using 1min OFF - 1min ON (20Hz, 0.02s on/0.03s off cycles were used 
during the ON period) - 1min OFF cycle for totally 3 mins.
House crickets (Grillus domesticus) were purchased from pet food providers (PetCo.com 
and www.flukerfarms.com). All mice were habituated to hunt and eat crickets for two days 
before the test day. During habituation, the mice were 2.5g chow restricted, and presented 
with 5 crickets to hunt overnight. During the test, the mice were 2.5g chow restricted. 
Behaviors were digitally recorded with high-speed (120fps) camera (DMC-FZ200, 
Panasonic). Cricket specifications are as follows: large crickets, ~1 inch, 0.5g. Small 
crickets, ~0.5 inch, 0.1g. Experiments were performed on standard mouse home cages.
Behavioral parameters: Latency to hunt: time taken from mice fixating at the crickets until 
mice actually start the pursuit. Capture duration: time taken from mice starting to pursue the 
crickets until successfully capturing the crickets using either the fore-paws or the mouth, not 
necessarily killing the crickets. Eating duration: time taken from mice capturing the crickets 
until mice stopped eating the crickets. Attempt with mouth: Mouse tries to capture the 
cricket only using biting or biting with forepaw assistance. Attempt with forepaw: Mouse 
tries to capture the cricket using only fore-paws. In every trial, once mice stopped eating the 
crickets, any insect residuals were removed, and another live cricket was then placed into the 
cage. All the experiments were repeated 5 times per animal and averages taken.
For the hunting data specifically shown in the Results section of the manuscript, the 
experimental conditions were as follows: CeA stimulation: Mice were either fed ad libitum 
satiated or food restricted at 2.5g chow/day. 1Hz laser. One cricket per trial. All the results 
shown correspond to averages over five trials.
Chemogenetic activation: Clozapine-N-Oxide (1mg/kg) was injected i.p. 10mins before the 
start of the hunting sessions.
Han et al.
Page 15
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Food intake during optogenetics and Chemogenetic stimulation—Mice were 
single caged and 2.5g chow/day food restricted. Soft food (chow) or hard food (High sugar 
pellet: #D12450B, Research Diet, USA) was placed in their home-cage at the same time of 
the day. After 1hour free consumption, the pellets were removed and weighted. After 3 days 
of habituation with either laser cable connection or Saline i.p. injection, on the test day, the 
mice were exposed to laser (Laser cycle of 5min ON – 5min OFF for 1Hr. During the ON 
period, 473-nm blue stimulation was performed 1Hz of 0.5s on/0.5s off cycles.) or i.p 
injected with CNO (1mg/kg). The total food intake was weighted and the eating behavior 
video recorded for further analysis.
Open field tests—To assess locomotor activity in response to laser stimulation, animals 
were placed on a novel Plexiglas arena (Med Associates, 25 cm × 30 cm). The total area was 
divided into nine equal rectangular subareas (8.3 × 10 cm), demarcated with yellow tape. 
Immediately above the central subarea a 150-W lamp was activated to induce natural 
aversion to this particular location, as usually performed. Animals were tested once in this 
arena. The laser cycle was randomly chosen for 5min ON – 5min OFF or 5min OFF – 5min 
ON. During the ON period, 473-nm blue laser (or 532-nm green laser) stimulation was 
performed 1Hz of 0.5s on/0.5s off cycles. The sessions were digitally recorded with a Sony 
HDR-CX440 camera. Data were analyzed by replaying the sessions in slow motion. 
Outcomes were the number of sequential crossings over different adjacent yellow lines 
(representing total locomotor activity), and relative time spent within the illuminated central 
part of the arena.
Pellet reaching task—Mice were food-restricted to 2.5g/day. The training chamber was 
built from clear Plexiglas (4mm thickness; 30cm × 30cm × 30cm). One vertical slit (1 cm 
wide; 3-cm high) was located on the front wall of the box. Single reachable sugared food 
pellets (0.02g, BioServe) were located 1 cm away from the slit, on a platform of 1.5 cm 
height. Two photodetectors were located on either side of the platform; the centerline of the 
two photodetectors is 2mm above the pellet. After one day of habituation to the box without 
presentation of pellets outside the slit, the assay consisted of 2 phases: shaping and training. 
During the shaping phase (day 1), mice are allowed to reach for multiple pellets presented to 
them outside the box to determine the preferred limb. During the training phase (day 2–8), 
individual pellets are placed in front of the slit on the opposite side the preferred limb. When 
mice can reach 20 pellets within 10mins, we consider the mice learned the performance. For 
the test day, all the behaviors were recorded with two cameras (one in front of the slit and 
the other one beside the cage). Once the forepaw crosses the slit and touches the pellet, the 
photodetector will detect the movement and trigger the laser source via a programmed TTL 
pulse (20Hz, 0.02s on/0.03 off cycles for 5s). All mice performed 20 trials. The 
photodetector activated the laser source for every other presented pellet. The Reaching 
accuracy was determined using slow motion video surveillance according to 4 criteria: 
“miss” (no touch with the pellet during reach), “no grasp” (paw contact with pellet but no 
correct grasping), “drop” (the pellet is retrieved but falls before taking it into the mouth), 
“success” (the mouse retrieves the pellet directly to its mouth). Success rate was calculated 
as the percentage of successful reaches over total reaching attempts.
Han et al.
Page 16
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Locomotion test—Mice were either fed ad libitum satiated or food restricted at 2.5g 
chow/day, were connected to the laser cable and placed in a clean cage or home cage for 
30mins before the laser stimulation.
CeA laser stimulation: 473-nm blue laser 1min (1Hz, 0.5s on/0.5s off cycles).
CeA=>PCRt/CeA=>PAG: 473-nm blue laser 1min (20Hz, 0.02s on/0.03s off cycles).
All behaviors were videotaped from above the cages. Videos were analyzed with Ethovision 
XT11.5 (Noldus). Parameters involved defining the arena, define mouse contour vs. 
background contrast. Parameters extracted included distance covered, velocity and mobile 
frequency.
Measurement of incisor bite forces—Measurement of biting forces was obtained 
using an accurate single point load cell system (OEM Style Single Point Load Cells, 
Omega). The system was connected to a purpose-built, 3D-printed mouth piece whose 
dimensions (H=1mm × W=5mm) were based on incisor morphology of adult C57BL6/J 
mice. Output signals were digitized via a National Instruments board (NI USB-6009) and 
fed into a custom LabView v2014-based computer interface. Awake animals were restrained 
for the biting tests, as usually performed. Raw signals obtained during biting periods were 
averaged and entered into statistical analyses software. Our baseline measurements in 
control mice (~9–10N) closely match currently published values for healthy adult mice.
Quantification and Statistical Analysis
Data analyses, excluding all electromyogram/electrophysiological data, were performed 
using SPSS (v.21.0, IBM Predictive Software), Ethovision XT 11.5 (Noldus), GraphPad 
Prism 7 (GraphPad) and Matlab (v.14a, MathWorks). Animals assigned to the different 
experimental groups were experimentally naïve littermates, so that no randomization or 
other a priori criteria were adopted for group assignments. Experimental manipulations were 
analysed according to within-subject repeated-measures designs. Order of experimental 
conditions was randomly assigned across subjects. Samples sizes were chosen based on our 
previous studies employing similar optogenetic, electrophysiological and neuronal ablation 
approaches. Samples sizes adopted in our current study were sufficient for detecting strong 
effect sizes while complying with guidelines from local enforcing rules requesting minimal 
animal usage by J.B. Pierce’s Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Experimenters 
were not blind to experimental conditions. Only animals carrying signs of distress/infection/
bleeding/anorexia after the surgical procedures were excluded. Data from all animals used in 
the experiments were included in the final analyses and plots.
Analysis of Behavioral trials
For all behavioral studies, including those resulting from pathway-targeted lesions, 
optogenetics and/or chemogenetic experiments, analyses made use of standard linear models 
(Pearson correlation), as well as one- or two-way (repeated measures) ANOVAs and post-
hoc t-tests tests whenever relevant, for correcting for multiple comparisons. All data were 
reported as mean±SEM. In all cases sample sizes (N) denote number of animals used. All p-
values associated with the t-tests performed correspond to two-tailed tests, and all post-hoc 
Han et al.
Page 17
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 tests were corrected for multiple comparisons by employing Bonferroni correction. To assess 
potentially spurious results associated with non-normality, all significant effects were 
confirmed by rerunning the tests using the appropriate non-parametric test. All data are 
individually plotted (Prism 7, GraphPad), and the corresponding bar plot of the precision 
measures (mean ± SEM) were overlaid on the figure. The exact value of all N (always 
number of animals), df, T/F/ χ2, and p values are reported in the figure legends. An effect 
was considered statistically significant whenever the corresponding statistic was associated 
with a p-value (Bonferroni-corrected when appropriate) strictly less than 0.05.
Analysis of In-vivo electrophysiological data
61 single neurons displaying action potentials of signal-to-noise ratios >3:1, were analysed. 
Otherwise data were discarded. Data were pooled from five different C57BL6/J mice. The 
action potentials were isolated online by means of voltage-time threshold windows and a 
three-principal components contour templates algorithm. Spikes were resorted using the 
Offline Sorter software (Plexon). Data were then imported into Matlab (v.14a, MathWorks) 
using custom-written software. To calculate firing rates, instantaneous firing rates were 
smoothed using Matlab-based filtering with a 60s moving average using 50ms bins. For all 
neurons recorded, the firing rates of peri-event epoch (e.g. hunting or prey capture) were 
arranged in a matrix (neurons=rows and bins=columns). The rows of the matrix were 
normalized as z-scores and then plotted using the corresponding first principal component. 
To test the significance of firing rate changes, we used an individual unit analysis. A non-
parametric Wilcoxon signed-rank test was performed on each unit to determine whether the 
mean firing rate after the event (e.g. hunting or prey capture) was significantly different from 
baseline, and units were classified in three populations: Excited, Inhibited; or Neutral. 
Overall ensemble activity was calculated by averaging the firing rates of each classified 
population. The exact value of all N (always number of neurons), df, T/F/ χ2, and p values 
are reported in the figure legends. An effect was considered statistically significant whenever 
the corresponding statistic was associated with a p-value (Bonferroni-corrected when 
appropriate) strictly less than 0.05.
Analysis of In-vivo electromyogram data
To perform across-animal analyses of the signal amplitude, signals were full-wave rectified 
and root mean square (RMS)-converted within moving windows of 50-millisecond duration, 
and then standardized by calculating the z-scores. Z-scores were calculated based on the 
duration of the trials and used to: (i) estimate the relative EMG change in response to the 
presentation of different behavioral actions (i.e. hunting, pray capture and eating) and (ii) 
identify the number of EMG bursts by using a cut off of z score ≥ 2. Sample sizes (N) 
always denote number of trials pooled across six different C57BL6/J mice. To determine 
whether the mean amplitude signal after the event (e.g. hunting or prey capture) was 
significantly different from baseline, Bootstrap methods were used to randomize the 
distribution of z-scores around the event and compute the associated p-value accordingly. 
For cluster analyses, the mean post-event z-score from each animal was plotted on a two-
dimensional trapezius × masseter space, since the electromyograms were recorded 
simultaneously. An unsupervised K-means algorithm was then employed to determine the 
centroids based on the number of a priori experimental conditions involved in each case. 
Han et al.
Page 18
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 These analyses were performed using custom software programmed in Matlab (v.14a, 
MathWorks) and are available upon request. The exact value of all N (always number of 
trials), df, T/F/ χ2, and p values are reported in the figure legends. An effect was considered 
statistically significant whenever the corresponding statistic was associated with a p-value 
(Bonferroni-corrected when appropriate) strictly less than 0.05.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by US National Institutes of Health grants R01DC014859 and R01CA180030 (to 
I.E.d.A.), and R01 DK103176, DK084052 and NS48476 (to A.N.v.d.P.) and the National Natural Science 
Foundation of China 81671014 (to W.H.), Brazilian Government foundations FAPESP (to M.R., and S.C.M,), 
Capes (to N.S.C.), and CNPq (to S.C.M.).
References
Borghuis BG, Leonardo A. The Role of Motion Extrapolation in Amphibian Prey Capture. The Journal 
of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience. 2015; 35:15430–15441. 
[PubMed: 26586829] 
Butler K. Predatory behavior in laboratory mice: strain and sex comparisons. J Comp Physiol Psychol. 
1973; 85:243–249. [PubMed: 4796494] 
Cai H, Haubensak W, Anthony TE, Anderson DJ. Central amygdala PKC-delta(+) neurons mediate the 
influence of multiple anorexigenic signals. Nature neuroscience. 2014; 17:1240–1248. [PubMed: 
25064852] 
Canteras NS, Simerly RB, Swanson LW. Organization of projections from the medial nucleus of the 
amygdala: a PHAL study in the rat. The Journal of comparative neurology. 1995; 360:213–245. 
[PubMed: 8522644] 
Catania KC. Evolution of brains and behavior for optimal foraging: a tale of two predators. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2012; 109(Suppl 
1):10701–10708. [PubMed: 22723352] 
Comoli E, Ribeiro-Barbosa ER, Negrao N, Goto M, Canteras NS. Functional mapping of the 
prosencephalic systems involved in organizing predatory behavior in rats. Neuroscience. 2005; 
130:1055–1067. [PubMed: 15653000] 
Davis M. Are different parts of the extended amygdala involved in fear versus anxiety? Biological 
psychiatry. 1998; 44:1239–1247. [PubMed: 9861467] 
Esposito MS, Capelli P, Arber S. Brainstem nucleus MdV mediates skilled forelimb motor tasks. 
Nature. 2014; 508:351–356. [PubMed: 24487621] 
Ewert JP, Framing EM, Schurg-Pfeiffer E, Weerasuriya A. Responses of medullary neurons to moving 
visual stimuli in the common toad. I. Characterization of medial reticular neurons by extracellular 
recording. J Comp Physiol A. 1990; 167:495–508. [PubMed: 2124265] 
Farr TD, Whishaw IQ. Quantitative and qualitative impairments in skilled reaching in the mouse (Mus 
musculus) after a focal motor cortex stroke. Stroke. 2002; 33:1869–1875. [PubMed: 12105368] 
Finlay BL, Sengelaub DR, Berg AT, Cairns SJ. A neuroethological approach to hamster vision. 
Behavioural brain research. 1980; 1:479–496. [PubMed: 6789848] 
Gans C, Northcutt RG. Neural crest and the origin of vertebrates: a new head. Science. 1983; 220:268–
273. [PubMed: 17732898] 
Hong W, Kim DW, Anderson DJ. Antagonistic control of social versus repetitive self-grooming 
behaviors by separable amygdala neuronal subsets. Cell. 2014; 158:1348–1361. [PubMed: 
25215491] 
Han et al.
Page 19
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Hoy JL, Yavorska I, Wehr M, Niell CM. Vision Drives Accurate Approach Behavior during Prey 
Capture in Laboratory Mice. Curr Biol. 2016 In Press. 
Janak PH, Tye KM. From circuits to behaviour in the amygdala. Nature. 2015; 517:284–292. 
[PubMed: 25592533] 
Junyent F, Kremer EJ. CAV-2--why a canine virus is a neurobiologist's best friend. Curr Opin 
Pharmacol. 2015; 24:86–93. [PubMed: 26298516] 
Kupfermann I, Weiss KR. The command neuron concept. Behav Brain Sciences. 1978; 1:3–39.
Kuratani S. Evolution of the vertebrate jaw from developmental perspectives. Evol Dev. 2012; 14:76–
92. [PubMed: 23016976] 
Kuratani S. Evolution. A muscular perspective on vertebrate evolution. Science. 2013; 341:139–140. 
[PubMed: 23846897] 
Land BB, Narayanan NS, Liu RJ, Gianessi CA, Brayton CE, Grimaldi DM, Sarhan M, Guarnieri DJ, 
Deisseroth K, Aghajanian GK, et al. Medial prefrontal D1 dopamine neurons control food intake. 
Nature neuroscience. 2014; 17:248–253. [PubMed: 24441680] 
LeDoux JE, Iwata J, Cicchetti P, Reis DJ. Different projections of the central amygdaloid nucleus 
mediate autonomic and behavioral correlates of conditioned fear. The Journal of neuroscience : the 
official journal of the Society for Neuroscience. 1988; 8:2517–2529. [PubMed: 2854842] 
Madisen L, Mao T, Koch H, Zhuo JM, Berenyi A, Fujisawa S, Hsu YW, Garcia AJ 3rd, Gu X, Zanella 
S, et al. A toolbox of Cre-dependent optogenetic transgenic mice for light-induced activation and 
silencing. Nature neuroscience. 2012; 15:793–802. [PubMed: 22446880] 
Mallatt J. The origin of the vertebrate jaw: neoclassical ideas versus newer, development-based ideas. 
Zoolog Sci. 2008; 25:990–998. [PubMed: 19267635] 
Maximino C, Lima MG, Oliveira KR, Batista Ede J, Herculano AM. "Limbic associative" and 
"autonomic" amygdala in teleosts: a review of the evidence. J Chem Neuroanat. 2013:48–49. 1–13. 
[PubMed: 23517750] 
Montuelle SJ, Herrel A, Schaerlaeken V, Metzger KA, Mutuyeyezu A, Bels VL. Inertial feeding in the 
teiid lizard Tupinambis merianae: the effect of prey size on the movements of hyolingual apparatus 
and the cranio-cervical system. J Exp Biol. 2009; 212:2501–2510. [PubMed: 19648393] 
Motta SC, Goto M, Gouveia FV, Baldo MV, Canteras NS, Swanson LW. Dissecting the brain's fear 
system reveals the hypothalamus is critical for responding in subordinate conspecific intruders. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2009; 
106:4870–4875. [PubMed: 19273843] 
Nikulina EM. Manifestations of predatory aggression in mice. Zh Vyssh Nerv Deiat Im I P Pavlova. 
1981; 31:1048–1053. [PubMed: 7198344] 
Robinson MJ, Warlow SM, Berridge KC. Optogenetic excitation of central amygdala amplifies and 
narrows incentive motivation to pursue one reward above another. The Journal of neuroscience : 
the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience. 2014; 34:16567–16580. [PubMed: 25505310] 
Shaikh MB, Brutus M, Siegel HE, Siegel A. Topographically organized midbrain modulation of 
predatory and defensive aggression in the cat. Brain research. 1985; 336:308–312. [PubMed: 
4039962] 
Shammah-Lagnado SJ, Costa MS, Ricardo JA. Afferent connections of the parvocellular reticular 
formation: a horseradish peroxidase study in the rat. Neuroscience. 1992; 50:403–425. [PubMed: 
1279462] 
Shammah-Lagnado SJ, Santiago AC. Projections of the amygdalopiriform transition area (APir). A 
PHA-L study in the rat. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences. 1999; 877:655–660. 
[PubMed: 10415677] 
Skinner RD, Garcia-Rill E. The mesencephalic locomotor region (MLR) in the rat. Brain research. 
1984; 323:385–389. [PubMed: 6525525] 
Stanek, Et, Cheng, S., Takatoh, J., Han, BX., Wang, F. Monosynaptic premotor circuit tracing reveals 
neural substrates for oro-motor coordination. eLife. 2014; 3:e02511. [PubMed: 24843003] 
Steenland HW, Zhuo M. Neck electromyography is an effective measure of fear behavior. J Neurosci 
Methods. 2009; 177:355–360. [PubMed: 19010352] 
Sternson SM, Roth BL. Chemogenetic tools to interrogate brain functions. Annual review of 
neuroscience. 2014; 37:387–407.
Han et al.
Page 20
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Swanson LW, Petrovich GD. What is the amygdala? Trends Neurosci. 1998; 21:323–331. [PubMed: 
9720596] 
Tada MN, Kuratani S. Evolutionary and developmental understanding of the spinal accessory nerve. 
Zoological Lett. 2015; 1:4. [PubMed: 26605049] 
Tellegen AJ, Dubbeldam JL. Location of reticular premotor areas of a motor center innervating 
craniocervical muscles in the mallard (Anas platyrhynchos L.). The Journal of comparative 
neurology. 1999; 405:281–298. [PubMed: 10076926] 
Tovote P, Esposito MS, Botta P, Chaudun F, Fadok JP, Markovic M, Wolff SB, Ramakrishnan C, Fenno 
L, Deisseroth K, et al. Midbrain circuits for defensive behaviour. Nature. 2016 Advanced online. 
Travers JB, Norgren R. Afferent projections to the oral motor nuclei in the rat. The Journal of 
comparative neurology. 1983; 220:280–298. [PubMed: 6315785] 
Trinajstic K, Sanchez S, Dupret V, Tafforeau P, Long J, Young G, Senden T, Boisvert C, Power N, 
Ahlberg PE. Fossil musculature of the most primitive jawed vertebrates. Science. 2013; 341:160–
164. [PubMed: 23765280] 
Van Daele DJ, Fazan VP, Agassandian K, Cassell MD. Amygdala connections with jaw, tongue and 
laryngo-pharyngeal premotor neurons. Neuroscience. 2011; 177:93–113. [PubMed: 21211549] 
Wainwright PC, Mehta RS, Higham TE. Stereotypy, flexibility and coordination: key concepts in 
behavioral functional morphology. J Exp Biol. 2008; 211:3523–3528. [PubMed: 18978215] 
Wickersham IR, Finke S, Conzelmann KK, Callaway EM. Retrograde neuronal tracing with a deletion-
mutant rabies virus. Nat Methods. 2007; 4:47–49. [PubMed: 17179932] 
Yang CF, Chiang MC, Gray DC, Prabhakaran M, Alvarado M, Juntti SA, Unger EK, Wells JA, Shah 
NM. Sexually dimorphic neurons in the ventromedial hypothalamus govern mating in both sexes 
and aggression in males. Cell. 2013; 153:896–909. [PubMed: 23663785] 
Han et al.
Page 21
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Central amygdala activates craniofacial musculatures and promotes predatory hunting
A. Coronal section illustrating Cre-dependent ChR2 expression in CeA of VGat-ires-Cre 
mice. Arrows indicate expression of the ChR2-fused fluorophore on projection axons 
originating in CeM. BLA=Basolateral amygdala, CeM/CeL=CentroMedial/CentroLateral 
amygdala, opt=optic tract, cst=stria terminalis, commissural component. B. Sagittal section 
shows EYFP-expressing terminals in brainstem nuclei involved in craniofacial motor 
control. 7N=(Facial) Motor nucleus VII, Mo5=(Trigeminal) Motor nucleus V, LPB/
MPB=Lateral/medial parabrachial nucleus, RRF=Retrorubral field, Sol=Nucleus of the 
solitary tract. C. Optical depolarization of ChR2-expressing VGat-Cre CeA neurons in 
slices. 0.5s-long 473nm light at 1Hz and 10ms at1, 5, 10, 20Hz. D. CeA optogenetic 
stimulation is performed concomitantly to dual electromyogram recordings from the jaw-
closing masseter and the head-orienting trapezius muscles (blue and red traces respectively). 
E. Representative optogenetically-evoked electromyogram traces from two mice. Shaded 
blue area represents laser ON periods. F. Average onset and offset values associated with 
enhanced electromyogram signals upon laser activation (N=5, two-way RM ANOVA muscle 
effect p=0.88). G. CeA optical activation reduced the time needed for mice to successfully 
capture cricket prey of different sizes (N=5, two-way RM ANOVA main effect of laser 
F[1,4]=24.0, *p=0.008). H. CeA optical activation increased number of bites on body parts 
other than the prey’s head (N=5, F[1,4]=41.4, *p=0.003). I. Left: Latency to initiate pursuit 
of prey was unaffected by laser in either internal state (N=5, F[1,4]=5.4, p=0.08). Right: 
However, subtracting oromotor segments reveals reduced latencies in sated mice (N=5, laser 
× hunger F[1,4]=231.2, *p<0.001). J. CeA optical activation elicited predatory-like attacks 
on a moving artificial insect (%time attacking prey, N=5, F[1,4]=8.5, *p=0.04). See also 
Movie S2. K. Two-dimensional masseter × trapezius space populated with Z-scores from 
electromyogram traces. Unsupervised cluster analysis failed to discriminate between laser 
Han et al.
Page 22
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 off trials and no hunting events. In contrast, both optical activation and natural hunting were 
associated with clusters located in the upper right quadrant, indicating strong masseter-
trapezius co-activation. Black crosses represent the clusters’ centroids and green dots 
represent misclassifications. L. CeA optical activation elicited the seizing, biting and 
eventual ingestion of non-food objects, particularly strongly in hungry mice (N=5, laser 
effect, F[2,8]=179.2, *p<0.001, laser × hunger F[2,8]=224.7, p<0.001). See also Movie S3. 
BL=baseline laser off. M–P. Chemogenetic activation of CeA elicited increased number of 
bites outside the prey’s head (N=5, CNO effect t[4]=5.35, *p=0.006, panel M); faster pursuit 
(N=5, t[4]=3.6, *p=0.02, N), shorter latencies to pursuit (N=5, t[4]=4.6, *p=0.009, O) and 
more efficient hunting (N=5, t[4]=3.7, *p=0.02, P). Q. Chemogenetic activation of CeA 
elicited predatory-like attacks on a moving artificial insect, N=5, t[4]=5.7, *p=0.005,. See 
also Movie S2. R–T. Chemogenetic inhibition of CeA caused slower pursuit (N=5, t[4]=2.8, 
*p=0.04, R); increased latencies (N=5, t[4]=4.2, *p=0.01, S), and less efficient hunting 
(N=5, t[4]=2.7, *p=0.04, T). CNO=Clozapine-N-Oxide designer activator. BL=baseline 
laser off. Data reported as mean±SEM.
Han et al.
Page 23
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Neuronal dynamics in central amygdala during prey capturing
During active hunting, electromyogram monitoring of the masseter muscle was performed 
concomitantly to array neuronal recordings from CeA. A. Concurrently to enhanced 
masseter activity, approximately 40% of the recorded neurons displayed increased activity 
during insect hunting. T=0 denotes the time when insect pursuit starts. The heat map 
displays the first principal component associated with the z-scores of each neuron recorded 
during these sessions, ranked according to the z-score values (i.e. the neuron displaying the 
greatest increases in activity is shown on top, through the neuron displaying the greatest 
Han et al.
Page 24
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 drop in activity, shown at bottom). z-scores were computed as deviations from the overall 
mean firing rate throughout the hunting sessions. Neurons were deemed excited or inhibited 
by hunting based on event-related statistical analyses of the z-scores. As shown in the lower 
part of the heat map, ~16% of the neurons were inhibited during hunting. B. Computing the 
mean population activity from the subset of neurons deemed excited (red) or inhibited (blue) 
by hunting revealed that altered activity persisted throughout prey pursuit. Green trace shows 
the mean population activity extracted from the subset of neurons deemed unaffected by 
hunting. C. Analyses of individual raster plots revealed that hunting-excited (red raster) and 
hunting-inhibited (blue raster) maintained altered activity levels throughout prey pursuit. 
Representative cases are shown. Note corresponding waveform in insert. D–F. Similar 
analyses as in A–C, but this time attempts to capture a prey were defined as the event of 
interest. Note that the delivery of bites aimed at prey was accompanied by a sharp, transient 
increase in masseter electromyographic activity. G. Analyses of neuronal activity based on a 
finer temporal scale revealed that, overall, capture-excited neurons tended to increase 
activity just previous to the attempt to seize prey with jaws and forepaws. A similar, 
symmetrical effect was associated with CeA neurons whose activity declined immediately 
previous to the attempt to capture. H. First Principal Component extracted from the subset of 
neurons deemed excited (red), inhibited (blue), or unaffected (green) by attempt to capture 
prey. I. Relative proportions of neurons deemed excited (red), inhibited (blue), or unaffected 
(green) by hunting/capturing/eating prey. Data reported as mean±SEM.
Han et al.
Page 25
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. Central amygdala controls cervical-mandibular systems by acting on inhibitory 
interneurons of the parvocellular reticular formation
A–C. Cre-dependent synaptobrevin-fused eGFP transfection was induced in CeA of VGat-
ires-Cre mice. GFP-labeled punctate patterns imply putative synapses. Coronal sections 
reveal dense terminal fields in PCRt, from rostral regions adjacent to Mo5 through more 
caudal regions adjacent to 7N (A through C). No expression was observed within motor 
nuclei. 7N=Motor nucleus VII, 7n=facial nerve tract, IRt=Intermediate reticular formation, 
Mo5=Motor nucleus V, P5=Peritrigeminal zone, Pr5=Principal sensory trigeminal nucleus, 
Sp5=Spinal trigeminal nucleus, sp5=spinal trigeminal tract. D. Cre-dependent pseudotyped 
rabies virus SADΔG-GFP(EnvA) was injected in PCRt of VGat-ires-Cre mice. The panel 
shows several retrogradely labeled neurons in centromedial amygdala (CeM), revealing 
direct CeM=>PCRt(Vgat) contacts. E. Same as D. but for Vlut2-ires-Cre mice. F. Frequency 
of laser-induced fictive feeding, which was elicited in both hungry and sated states (N=5, 
two-way RM ANOVA main effect of laser F[2,8]=196.8, *p<0.001). G. Coronal section 
shows Cre-dependent designer receptor-fused mCherry expression in PCRt of VGat-ires-Cre 
mice. g7=genus of facial nerve. H. In the same mouse, CeA was transfected with 
synaptobrevin and with the designer receptor in PCRt. Panel shows VGat-neuron in PCRt 
(tagged by mCherry) targeted by CeA synapses (tagged by eGFP). I. VGat-ires-Cre mice 
were transfected with the Cre-dependent depolarizing designer receptor in PCRt and ChR2 
in CeA. Panel shows electromyogram activity of masseter (left, blue) and trapezius (right, 
red) evoked by optical stimulation of CeA=>PCRt projections. Shown are representative 
electromyogram traces, Shaded blue area represents laser on period. The lower panels (in 
Han et al.
Page 26
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 purple) reveal that administering the designer drug CNO completely abolished the ability of 
CeA to synergize the masseter and trapezius muscles. J. Z-scores from electromyogram 
patterns were plotted on the two-dimensional masseter × trapezius space. In all cases laser 
was on. Cluster separation of trials in which saline (blue cluster) versus CNO (red cluster) 
were administered. Note abolished muscle synergy in CNO trials. Black crosses represent 
the clusters’ centroids. K–L. A different cohort was unilaterally transfected with Cre-
inducible ChR2 (left hemisphere) and ChR2+Caspase (right) in PCRt of VGat-ires-Cre (K) 
and VGlut2-ires-Cre (L) mice. The panels illustrate efficacy of caspase treatment. M. Z-
scores associated with the differential electromyogram signal from masseter induced by 
optical CeA activation in VGat-ires-Cre and VGlut2-ires-Cre mice treated with Cre-
dependent caspase in PCRt. Only ablation of VGat neurons in PCRt abolished the ability of 
CeA to recruit masseter activity. Each dot represents a separate “laser ON” trial (N=45, 
F[3,56]=23.08, *p<0.001). N. The above effect observed in caspase-treated mice was due to 
high baseline masseter activity caused by inhibitory neuronal ablation. This then blunted Z-
scores associated with laser-induced activation. Representative masseter traces from control 
(upper panel) and ablated (lower) mice are shown. Note higher baseline level in ablated 
mouse. Data reported as mean±SEM.
Han et al.
Page 27
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. Inhibitory interneurons of the parvocellular reticular formation bi-directionally control 
mandibular and cervical musculatures
A. Coronal section illustrating Cre-dependent ChR2 expression in PCRt of VGat-ires-Cre 
mice. Optical fibers were stereotaxically placed into PCRt. 7N=(Facial) Motor nucleus VII, 
7n=facial nerve tract, IRt=Intermediate reticular formation, Mo5=(Trigeminal) Motor 
nucleus V, P5=Peritrigeminal zone, Pr5=Principal sensory trigeminal nucleus, sp5=spinal 
trigeminal tract. B. Representative traces showing optogenetic activation of ChR2-
expressing VGat neurons in PCRt by blue laser at 1, 5 and 20Hz. C. Optical activation of 
PCRt VGat-neurons immediately and reversibly abolished eating in hungry mice (%time 
biting pellet, two-way RM ANOVA main effect of laser N=5, F(2,8)=47.7, *p<0.001). Note 
that laser produces no effect whatsoever on control mice (Ctrl) transfected with Cre-
dependent designer receptors unresponsive to light. D. Z-scores from electromyogram 
patterns were plotted on the two-dimensional masseter × trapezius space. Unsupervised 
cluster analysis fully discriminated trials in which blue laser activated ChR2 in VGat-
neurons (blue cluster), vs. trials in which green laser activated eArch in VGat-neurons (green 
cluster), vs. trials in which blue laser activated ChR2 in VGlut2-neurons (red cluster). Black 
Han et al.
Page 28
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 crosses represent the clusters’ centroids. Note strong inhibition (lower left quadrant) and 
excitation (upper right quadrant) of masseter and trapezius produced by ChR2 and eArch 
activation in VGat-ires-Cre mice, respectively. Note also weak effects produced by PCRt 
VGlut2-neuron depolarization on muscle activity (center of graph). E–G. Illustrative 
electromyogram traces (masseter in blue, trapezius in red) are shown for each case. Blue and 
green shaded areas show periods when blue and green lasers were on, respectively. H. VGat-
ires-Cre mice were transfected with the Cre-dependent depolarizing designer receptor in 
PCRt. Administering the designer drug CNO completely abolished the ability to capture 
insects using the jaws (N=5, paired t-test t[4]=24.0, *p<0.001). I. CNO administration did 
not affect latency to hunt, as mice actively pursued crickets despite oromotor impairments 
(N=5, t[4]=0.4, p=0.7). J. CNO administration did not produce major effects on total 
number of capture attempts (all p>0.05). K. However, CNO administration significantly 
lengthened the time interval required to successfully capture crickets, with capturing 
requiring forepaws use after CNO injections (N=5, t[4]=4.1, *p=0.01). Data reported as 
mean±SEM.
Han et al.
Page 29
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. Central amygdala projections to the periaqueductal gray matter control prey pursuit
A. Cre-dependent synaptobrevin-fused eGFP was virally transfected in CeA of VGat-ires-
Cre mice. GFP-labeled punctate patterns imply putative synapses. Coronal sections reveal 
dense terminal fields in ventrolateral/lateral (VL/L) PAG, extending ventrolaterally into the 
mesencephalic reticular formation. DR=Dorsal raphe, mlf=medial longitudinal fasciculus. B. 
Cre-dependent pseudotyped rabies virus SADΔG-GFP(EnvA) was injected in VL/L PAG of 
VGlut2-ires-Cre mice. The panel shows retrogradely labeled neurons in centromedial 
amygdala (CeM), revealing direct CeM=>PAG[VGlut2] contacts. C. Same as B. but for 
VGlut-ires-Cre mice. D–F. Optical activation of CeA=>PAG projections elicited moderately 
faster prey pursuit (N=5, paired t-test **p=0.03, panel D), much shorter latencies to pursuit 
(**p=0.006, E), and more efficient hunting (**p=0.02, F). However, all these effects were 
totally annulled by chemogenetic activation of VGlut2-neurons in PAG (for panels D–F, 
two-way RM ANOVA CNO effect F[1,4]>90.0, *p<0.002). G. (Four upper panels) 
Representative traces of hyperpolarizing currents recorded fromVGlut2-neurons in PAG 
under current-clamp mode. The traces show the effects of optically stimulating CeA fibers 
terminating onto these neurons with blue laser at 1, 5, 10 and 20Hz. (Lower panel) voltage-
clamp recordings showing that photostimulation of CeA-ChR2 terminals (20 Hz) in PAG 
hyperpolarized and inhibited PAG VGlut2 neurons. H–J. Optical activation of 
PAG[VGlut2]=>MLR projections elicited slower prey pursuits (N=5, paired t-test *p=0.009, 
panel H), much longer latencies to pursuit (*p=0.006, I), and less efficient hunting 
(*p=0.001, J). K–M. On a different cohort of mice, optical activation of CeA=>PAG 
projections once again elicited faster prey pursuit (N=5, paired t-test **p=0.01, panel K), 
much shorter latencies to pursuit (**p=0.01, L), and more efficient hunting (**p=0.03, M). 
However, the enhancing effects of laser stimulation on latencies to pursuit and hunt 
efficiency were annulled by chemogenetic activation of MLR neurons (for panels L–M, 
N=5, two-way RM ANOVA CNO effect F[1,4]>60.0, *p<0.002. For panel K, F[1,4]=6.3, 
p=0.06). Data reported as mean±SEM.
Han et al.
Page 30
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. Co-activation of central amygdala terminals in the reticular formation and central gray 
is sufficient to induce predatory behavior
A. In the same animals, FluoroGold injections in PCRt and CTb injections in VL/LPAG 
resulted in labeling of neurons throughout CeA. Merging reveals that primarily separate CeA 
populations project to these two descending centromedial amygdala (CeM) targets. While 
both subpopulations densely label the centromedial amygdala (CeA), at more caudal levels 
in centrolateral amygdala (CeL) they appear as spatially segregated. The numbers below 
indicate distance from bregma. Neighboring striatum and glubus pallidus were not 
retrogradely labeled. B. In the same group of VGat-ires-Cre mice, CeA was transfected with 
Cre-inducible ChR2, and optical fibers implanted bilaterally onto CeA terminals in both 
PAG and PCRt. C. Activating the CeA=>PAG pathway alone was sufficient to cause pursuit 
of artificial prey, as shown by the time spent in the vicinity of the robot prey (N=5, two-way 
RM ANOVA laser effect F[1,4]=42.8, p*=0.003). D. However, only the combined 
CeA=>PAG+CeA=>PCRt stimulation gave rise to sustained biting attacks upon escaping 
artificial prey (laser effect F[1,4]=86.4, p*=0.001; CeA=>PAG+CeA=>PCRt versus other 
conditions, paired t-test Bonferroni all p<0.03). E–G. During hunting of live prey, optical 
activation of both CeA=>PAG alone and CeA=>PAG+CeA=>PCRt elicited faster prey 
pursuits (N=5, laser effect F[1,4]=21.6, p*=0.001, panel E), shorter latencies to pursuit 
(F[1,4]=5.0, p*=0.008, F), and more efficient hunting F[1,4]=51.4, p*=0.002, G). Generally, 
activating CeA=>PCRt alone produced detrimental effects on hunting. H. Three different 
groups of wild-type mice were transfected with the retrograde CAV2-Cre-GFP construct into 
PCRt and/or PAG. CeA was then transfected with Cre-inducible ChR2-mCherry and 
implanted with optical fibers. I. Cre-inducible expression of ChR2-mCherry in CeA of a 
mouse injected with CAV2-GFP-Cre in PCRt and PAG. J–L. During hunting of live prey, 
optical activation of both CeA=>PAG alone and CeA=>PAG+PCRt elicited faster prey 
Han et al.
Page 31
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 pursuits (N=5 per group, laser × group effect F[2,12]=11.2, p*=0.002, panel J), shorter 
latencies to pursuit (F[2,12]=83.5, p*=0.01, K), and more efficient hunting F[2,12]=70.1, 
p*<0.001, L). Again, activating CeA=>PCRt alone produced detrimental effects on hunting. 
Data reported as mean±SEM.
Han et al.
Page 32
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. Pathway-defined lesions to central amygdala neurons differentially impair hunting
Two different groups of wild-type mice were transfected with the retrograde CAV2-Cre-GFP 
construct into PCRt or PAG. CeA was then transfected with Cre-inducible AAV-caspase. 
Two groups of control mice were also injected CAV2-Cre-GFP construct into PCRt or PAG, 
but CeA then transfected with Cre-inducible AAV-mCherry. A–B. Confocal images of CeA 
after CAV2-Cre-GFP injections into PCRt in control (A) and casapse-injected mice (B). C. 
Lesions to the CeA=>PAG, but not to the CeA=>PCRt, pathway caused dramatic increases 
in latencies to start pursuit (N=5 per group, lesion × group effect F[3,16]=25.7, p<0.001; 
Han et al.
Page 33
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 CeA=>PAG Caspase group versus other groups, paired t-test Bonferroni all *p<0.001). D. 
Lesions to the CeA=>PCRt, but not to the CeA=>PAG, pathway caused decreased hunting 
efficiency (lesion × group effect F[3,16]=8.9, p<0.001; CeA=>PCRt Caspase group versus 
other groups, paired t-test Bonferroni all *p<0.02). E. Lesions to the CeA=>PCRt, but not to 
the CeA=>PAG, pathway caused fewer prey captures with mouth (F[3,16]=12.8, p<0.001; 
CeA=>PCRt Caspase group versus other groups, paired t-test Bonferroni all *p<0.01). F. 
Lesions to the CeA=>PCRt, but not to the CeA=>PAG, caused frequent attempts to capture 
with forepaws (F[3,16]=139.2, p<0.001; CeA=>PCRt Caspase group versus other groups, 
paired t-test Bonferroni all *p<0.001). G. Lesions to the CeA=>PCRt, but not to the 
CeA=>PAG, pathway caused decreased incisor bite forces (F[3,16]=31.2, p<0.001; 
CeA=>PCRt Caspase group versus other groups, paired t-test Bonferroni all *p<0.001). H–
K. Z-scores from electromyogram patterns associated with behavioral events observed 
during the hunting sessions (classified as either “hunting prey”/”eating prey”/”other 
behaviors”) were plotted on the two-dimensional masseter × trapezius space. In the two 
groups of control mice H,J), as well as in the CeA=>PAG Caspase group (K), unsupervised 
algorithms efficiently assigned events of each type to the same cluster, i.e. rarely incurring in 
misclassifications (represented by green dots). Black crosses represent centroids. I. In 
CeA=>PCRt Caspase mice, clustering was significantly less efficient, with hunting and non-
feeding behaviors being assigned to extraneous clusters (N=5 per group, proportion of 
misclassified events in CeA=>PCRt Controls vs. CeA=>PCRt Caspase mice, χ2(1)=7.58, 
Bonferroni p<0.02; for CeA=>PAG Caspase vs. CeA=>PCRt Caspase mice, χ2(1)=10.1, 
p<0.008). Data reported as mean±SEM.
Han et al.
Page 34
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Han et al.
Page 35
KEY RESOURCES TABLE
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
Antibodies
Goat Anti-GFP antibody (FITC)
Abcam
Cat# ab6662
RRID:AB_305635
Anti-NeuN, clone A60 antibody
Millipore
Cat# MAB377
RRID:AB_2298772
Anti-c-Fos (Ab-5) (4–17) Rabbit pAb antibody
Millipore
Cat# PC38
RRID:AB_2106755
Rhodamine (TRITC)-AffiniPure Goat Anti-Mouse
IgG (H+L)
Jackson ImmunoResearch
Labs
Cat# 115-025-166
RRID:AB_2338490
Biotinylated Goat Anti-Rabbit IgG antibody
Vector Laboratories
Cat# BA-1000
RRID:AB_2313606
Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins
FluoroGold (FG)
Manufacturer:
Fluorochrome Inc;
Purchased from Fisher
scientific
Cat# NC0560981
Cholera Toxin B Subunit TRITC (CTB)
Manufacturer: List
Biological Laboratories
Inc; Purchased from
Fisher scientific
Cat # 50-101-8773
Clozapine N-oxide (CNO)
Enzo Life Sciences, Inc.
Cat # BML-NS105-
0025
Critical Commercial Assays
VECTASTAIN Elite ABC HRP Kit (Peroxidase,
Standard)
Vector Laboratories
Cat# PK-6100
Experimental Models: Organisms/Strains
Mouse: C57BL/6J
The Jackson Laboratory
JAX: 000664
Mouse: Slc32a1tm2(cre)Lowl/J
The Jackson Laboratory
JAX: 016962
Mouse: Slc17a6tm2(cre)Lowl/J
The Jackson Laboratory
JAX: 016963
Mouse: Slc32a1tm1Lowl/J
The Jackson Laboratory
JAX: 012897
Mouse: B6;129S6-Chattm2(cre)Lowl/J
The Jackson Laboratory
JAX: 006410
Mouse: B6;129P2-Gt(ROSA)26Sortm1(CAG-RABVgp4,-
TVA)Arenk/J
The Jackson Laboratory
JAX: 024708
Recombinant DNA
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Han et al.
Page 36
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
AAV5-CMV-GFP
University of North
Carolina’s Vector Core
N/A
AAV5-CMV-Cre-GFP
University of North
Carolina’s Vector Core
N/A
AAV5-hSyn-hChR2(H134R)-EYFP
Dr. Karl Deisseroth-
University of North
Carolina’s Vector Core
N/A
AAV5-EF1a-DIO-hChR2(H134R)-EYFP
Dr. Karl Deisseroth-
University of North
Carolina’s Vector Core
N/A
AAV-EF1a-DIO-eArch3.0-EYFP
Dr. Karl Deisseroth-
University of North
Carolina’s Vector Core
N/A
AAV5-EF1a-DIO-EYFP
Dr. Karl Deisseroth-
University of North
Carolina’s Vector Core
N/A
AAV5-hSyn-DIO-hM3D(Gq)-mCherry
Dr. Bryan Roth - University
of North Carolina’s Vector
Core
N/A
AAV5-hSyn-DIO-hM4D(Gi)-mCherry
Dr. Bryan Roth - University
of North Carolina’s Vector
Core
N/A
AAV5-hSyn-DIO-mCherry
Dr. Bryan Roth - University
of North Carolina’s Vector
Core
N/A
AAV5-hSyn-HA-hM3D(Gq)-IRES-mCitrine
Dr. Bryan Roth - University
of North Carolina’s Vector
Core
N/A
AAV5-flex-taCasp3-TEVp
Dr. Nirao Shah - University
of North Carolina’s Vector
Core
N/A
AAV5-CA-FLEX-RG
Dr. Naoshige -
UchidaUniversity of North
Carolina’s Vector Core
N/A
AAV5-EF1a-FLEX-TVA-mCherry
Dr. Naoshige –
University of North
Carolina’s Vector Core
N/A
AAV-EF1a-DIO-Synb-eGFP
Ralph DiLeone Lab /Yale
University (Land et al., 2014)
N/A
Pseudo-typed rabies construct EnvA G-deleted
Rabies-EGFP
Salk Institute’s Gene
Transfer, Targeting and
Therapeutics Core (GT3).
N/A
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Han et al.
Page 37
REAGENT or RESOURCE
SOURCE
IDENTIFIER
(Wickersham et al., 2007)
CAV2-Cre-GFP
Institut de Génétique
Moléculaire de Montpellier,
France (Junyent and Kremer, 2015)
N/A
Software and Algorithms
Matlab R20 14a
MathWorks
http://www.mathworks.com/products/matlab/
Offline Sorter
Plexon
www.plexon.com/products/offline-sorter
PatchMaster 2.20
HEKA
http://www.heka.com/index.html
Igor Pro 6.36
WaveMetrics
https://www.wavemetrics.com/
EthoVision XT 11.5
Noldus
http://www.noldus.com/animal-behavior-research/products/ethovision-xt
LabView 2014
LabView
http://www.ni.com/download/labview-development-system-2014/4735/en/
Cell. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 January 12.
