 www.thelancet.com/diabetes-endocrinology   Published online October 12, 2016   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2213-8587(16)30108-5 
1
Series
Maternal obesity 4
Interventions to prevent maternal obesity before 
conception, during pregnancy, and post partum
Mark Hanson, Mary Barker, Jodie M Dodd, Shiriki Kumanyika, Shane Norris, Eric Steegers, Judith Stephenson, Shakila Thangaratinam, Huixia Yang
Prevention of obesity in women of reproductive age is widely recognised to be important both for their health and for 
that of their off
 spring. Weight-control interventions, including drug treatment, in pregnant women who are obese or 
overweight have not had suffi
  cient impact on pregnancy and birth outcomes, which suggests that the focus for 
intervention should include preconception or post-partum periods. Further research is needed into the long-term 
eff
 ects of nutritional and lifestyle interventions before conception. To improve preconception health, an integrated 
approach, including pregnancy prevention, planning, and preparation is needed, involving more than the primary 
health-care sector and adopting an ecological approach to risk reduction that addresses personal, societal, and cultural 
infl
 uences. Raising awareness of the importance of good health in the period before pregnancy will require a new 
social movement: combining bottom-up mobilisation of individuals and communities with a top-down approach from 
policy initiatives. Interventions to reduce or prevent obesity before conception and during pregnancy could contribute 
substantially to achievement of the global Sustainable Development Goals, in terms of health, wellbeing, productivity, 
and equity in current and future generations.
Introduction
Obesity in women of reproductive age increases their 
risk of non-communicable diseases and also increases 
this risk in their off
 spring. However, a strategy for 
prevention of obesity during pregnancy and in the 
periconceptional period to reduce these risks is not 
clearly defi
 ned. Other papers1–3 in this Series emphasise 
the adverse impact of preconception and maternal 
obesity on pregnancy outcomes, health of women during 
pregnancy and later, and transmission of obesity and risk 
of non-communicable diseases in off
 spring.4,5 In this 
paper, we address the question of how best to intervene 
to reduce such risk.
Government reports about the health consequences of 
obesity in women of reproductive age emphasise the 
importance of a whole-government approach to tackling 
the problem, coupled with a greater public awareness of 
the need for action at the level of both individuals and 
society.6 Such a combined top-down and bottom-up 
approach could make use of the substantial publicity 
surrounding the causes and consequences of obesity. 
Huang and colleagues, in their paper7 in the 2015 Lancet 
Series on obesity, articulate clearly how such a movement 
might be engineered to address the obesity crisis. In this 
paper, we build on this framework, review the nature of 
the interventions necessary, and assess what is known 
about their eff
 ectiveness during pregnancy and the 
periconceptional period. We then outline the components 
of a model for action to address unmet need in the 
prevention of obesity during the preconception period, 
with particular emphasis on linking community and 
personal action with health-policy initiatives.
To prevent non-communicable disease, for which 
obesity is a major risk factor, experts stress the 
importance of adopting a life-course perspective8 to 
address the trajectory of increasing risk. The trajectory is 
the result not only of accumulated pathological eff
 ects 
over time, but also of environmental and other processes 
operating during sensitive periods of development, when 
responses to later challenges are partly set.9 Thus, 
although health at a particular time in the life course (eg, 
at the outset of pregnancy) depends partly on the level of 
risk factors pertaining to the individual at that point, 
such as BMI, nutritional status, smoking, and alcohol 
consumption, it also depends on their responses to 
physiological challenges—such as diet, physical activity, 
and the cardiovascular and metabolic demands of 
pregnancy—which are partly set up earlier in life.10 Thus, 
the most appropriate timing and type of interventions 
might be those that optimise such responses. In light of 
contraindications to implementation of clinical weight-
loss programmes during pregnancy, prevention of 
obesity in women of reproductive age before conception 
and between pregnancies is the approach of choice to 
optimise both fetal and maternal health.11
Nature of interventions
A focus on obesity prevention in women of reproductive 
age is consistent with the current paradigm for 
interventions to address obesity more generally.12 The 
rapid increases in obesity prevalence in diverse 
populations around the globe, in both children and 
adults and across socioeconomic strata, constitute a 
public health crisis.13–15 This epidemic can be best 
understood as an inability of people to mount eff
 ective 
psychobiological or behavioural counter-responses to an 
increase in the societal forces that promote excess weight 
gain.16,17 These forces include urbanisation, technological 
changes, and evolution of food systems and physical 
living environments in ways that result in increasing 
Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2016
Published Online
October 12, 2016
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S2213-8587(16)30108-5
See Online/Series
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S2213-8587(16)30217-0, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S2213-8587(16)30278-9, and 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S2213-8587(16)30107-3
See Online/Comment
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S2213-8587(16)30098-5
This is the fourth in a Series of 
four papers about maternal 
obesity
Institute of Developmental 
Sciences (Prof M Hanson D Phil), 
and MRC Lifecourse 
Epidemiology Unit 
(M Barker PhD), University of 
Southampton, Southampton, 
UK; NIHR Southampton 
Biomedical Research Centre, 
University Hospital 
Southampton NHS Foundation 
Trust, Southampton, UK 
(Prof M Hanson, M Barker); 
Discipline of Obstetrics & 
Gynaecology and Robinson 
Research Institute, University of 
Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, 
Australia (Prof J M Dodd PhD); 
Women’s and Babies Division, 
Women’s and Children’s 
Hospital, North Adelaide, SA, 
Australia (Prof J M Dodd); 
Department of Biostatistics and 
Epidemiology, University of 
Pennsylvania Perelman School 
of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA (Prof S Kumanyika PhD); 
MRC/Wits Developmental 
Pathways for Health Research 
Unit, Department of 
Paediatrics, School of Clinical 
Medicine, Faculty of Health 
Sciences, University of the 
Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, 
South Africa (Prof S Norris PhD); 
Department of Obstetrics & 
Gynaecology, Erasmus MC, 
University Medical Center, 
Rotterdam, Netherlands 
(Prof E Steegers MD); 
Department of Reproductive
 2 
www.thelancet.com/diabetes-endocrinology   Published online October 12, 2016   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2213-8587(16)30108-5
Series
dominance 
of 
highly 
palatable 
and 
aff
 ordable 
manufactured foods high in fat and sugar, marketing 
strategies that involve widespread, intensive promotion 
of such foods, and environments and modern cultural 
norms such as sedentary jobs and dependence on cars 
that limit opportunities for routine physical activity and 
encourage sedentary behaviour.
Under such circumstances, public health approaches 
to curb and ultimately reverse the obesity epidemic—ie, 
population-based obesity prevention—should be given a 
higher priority. The numbers of people aff
 ected by 
obesity already exceed the capacity of health-care systems 
to provide eff
 ective management, even in high-income 
countries. Where treatment is available, persistent 
obesogenic environments oppose eff
 orts to facilitate 
weight loss and prevent weight regain. Although primary 
health-care providers clearly have a role in obesity 
prevention,18,19 interventions are also necessary in sectors 
outside health-care systems. These interventions need to 
involve other aspects of society and government to 
address behaviour with methods beyond one-to-one 
interactions with health-care providers. As Mann and 
colleagues20 point out, eff
 ective interventions do not rely 
solely on individual psychological capability and 
willpower; instead, they promote health rather than 
merely focusing on bodyweight.
Ecological frameworks illustrate diff
 erent levels at 
which interventions act to aff
 ect individual healthy 
eating, physical activity, and energy balance.21–23 These 
frameworks position individual behaviour as interacting 
with layers of surrounding infl
 uences, particularly 
proximal family and community characteristics, settings, 
and relationships, which are, in turn, embedded within 
and infl
 uenced by more distal social, environmental, and 
policy contexts (fi
 gure 1).
Sets of interventions at one level might not eff
 ectively 
address obesity, and similarly actions at one level might 
not be eff
 ective without support or amplifi
 cation from 
other levels.24 Viewed from a systems perspective, the 
variables and relations in ecological frameworks are 
aspects of complex adaptive systems in which elements 
are changing with time, and changes or interventions in 
one part infl
 uence and are infl
 uenced by changes or 
interventions in other parts.25 Ecological frameworks 
assist with identifi
 cation of the diff
 erent levels, types, and 
focal points for interventions that need to interact to 
mitigate obesity-promoting infl
 uences; consideration of 
how particular sets of interventions might be additive or 
mutually reinforcing; and anticipation of potential 
undesirable consequences that could reduce effi
  cacy or 
have unintended eff
 ects in other spheres.
When the goal is to prevent new cases of obesity from 
developing, types of prevention can be classifi
 ed in terms 
of whether they are directed at the entire population and 
are relevant to the layers of infl
 uence that include 
worksites, 
whole 
communities, 
government, 
and 
industry; selected individuals and demographic groups 
(eg, defi
 ned by age, ethnicity, or income as being at a 
high risk of becoming obese); or those who are already 
obese.16 In this context, the reproductive phase of the life 
course represents a missed opportunity to improve 
public health by reducing the risk of obesity both in this 
and in the next generation. We therefore focus on 
interventions during three phases of the life course: 
preconception, pregnancy, and the post-partum period.
Current interventions to prevent or reduce obesity
Lifestyle interventions
The risks associated with maternal overweight and obesity 
from a pregnancy and childbirth perspective are discussed 
in other papers in this Series, which show why interventions 
in pregnancy are important for improvement of immediate 
pregnancy outcomes in women and their children, and 
that they confer long-term benefi
 ts. Because both high pre-
pregnancy BMI and excessive gestational weight gain are 
associated with increased risk of adverse pregnancy 
outcomes,1 the focus of interventions has been on the 
antenatal period generally. For all the same reasons that 
they are important in pregnancy, these interventions need 
also to be extended or modifi
 ed for application to the 
preconception and postpartum periods. In low-income 
and middle-income countries, these interventions will 
need to target adolescents, in view of the rising prevalence 
of obesity in young people in these settings.
Lifestyle interventions for weight control can be divided 
into those that are diet-based, physical-activity-based, and a 
mixture 
of 
diet-based 
and 
physical-activity-based. 
Currently, the National Institute for Health and Care 
Excellence in the UK recommends a healthy diet, and at 
Culture and society
Industry, government
Community
Work, school, peers
Family and home
Woman of 
reproductive age
Figure 1: Simplifi
 ed ecological systems theory model
This model (adapted from Institute of Medicine,23 2005) illustrates the need for interventions at multiple levels for the 
prevention of preconception and maternal obesity. Such interventions need to involve the woman herself (innermost 
circle) but also the surrounding levels extending to culture and society. 
Health, Institute for Women’s 
Health, University College 
London, London, UK 
(Prof J Stephenson FFPH); 
Children, Young People and 
Maternal Health Programme, 
UCL Partners Academic Health 
Science Partnership, London, 
UK (Prof J Stephenson); Women’s 
Health Research Unit, Barts and 
the London School of Medicine 
and Dentistry, Queen Mary 
University of London, London, 
UK (Prof S Thangaratinam PhD); 
and Department of Obstetrics 
and Gynecology, Peking 
University First Hospital, 
Beijing, China (Prof H Yang MD)
Correspondence to: 
Prof Mark Hanson, Institute of 
Developmental Sciences, Faculty 
of Medicine, University of 
Southampton, Mailpoint 887, 
University Hospital 
Southampton, Tremona Road, 
Southampton SO16 6YD, UK 
m.hanson@soton.ac.uk
 
 www.thelancet.com/diabetes-endocrinology   Published online October 12, 2016   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2213-8587(16)30108-5 
3
Series
least half an hour of daily physical activity to prevent 
excessive gestational weight gain in pregnancy.26 Women 
with a BMI of over 35 are recommended to obtain advice 
from a dietitian.26 Physical activity plus dietary interventions 
are eff
 ective for weight management in pregnancy.27 In a 
meta-analysis28 of interventions during pregnancy in 
women who were overweight, obese, or severely obese, 
those delivered in early pregnancy had better results on 
average than did those delivered later in pregnancy.
A systematic review,29 commissioned by the UK 
National Institute for Health Research, of lifestyle 
interventions in pregnancy showed a signifi
 cant 
reduction in gestational weight gain (mean diff
 erence 
–1·42 kg, 95% CI –0·95 to –1·89 kg; I²=80%) among 
women who were provided with an intervention 
compared with those who received no intervention. The 
eff
 ect of lifestyle interventions in pregnancy on 
gestational weight gain was consistent irrespective of 
BMI category. Furthermore, there was a suggestion of 
impact on clinical outcomes including pre-eclampsia, 
gestational diabetes, caesarean section, preterm birth, 
and induction of labour.30 However, the studies included 
were mostly small, heterogeneous in terms of the 
intervention delivered, and, in many instances, outcomes 
were 
not 
reported 
by 
maternal 
BMI 
category. 
Furthermore, most studies focused on gestational weight 
gain as the primary outcome, with little reporting of 
other relevant pregnancy and birth outcomes. The results 
of subsequent reviews31,32 have cast doubt on the ability of 
lifestyle-based interventions initiated in pregnancy to 
reduce the incidence of gestational diabetes and pre-
eclampsia. However, such interventions do not take 
account of the ecological framework described previously. 
Behaviours might improve in an environment that 
provided support for them to be adopted and maintained.
The two largest randomised trials done so far—Limiting 
weight gain in overweight and obese women during 
pregnancy to improve health outcomes (LIMIT)33 and UK 
Pregnancies Better Eating and Activity Trial (UPBEAT)34—
both focused on the impact of antenatal lifestyle 
interventions on pregnant women who were overweight 
or obese (panel 1). Both trials, although carefully designed 
and run, show the limitations of diet and lifestyle 
interventions during pregnancy on pregnancy and birth 
outcomes. Other smaller assessments of interventions to 
improve diet and body composition in pregnant women 
who are obese have been done, with mixed results. In a 
high-risk group of women who had a history of 
gestational diabetes or were obese, or both, in the Finnish 
Gestational Diabetes Prevention Study (RADIEL),38 
counselling on diet, physical activity, and weight control 
was associated with a small, signifi
 cant reduction in 
gestational weight gain and a signifi
 cant reduction in the 
incidence of gestational diabetes compared with standard 
care. In both the Lifestyle in Pregnancy (LiP)39 and 
Treatment of Obese Pregnant Women (TOP)40 studies, 
signifi
 cant reductions in gestational weight gain were 
achieved with lifestyle interventions (compared with 
standard care), but the trials were not powered to detect 
diff
 erences in clinical outcomes such as decreases in 
gestational diabetes.
Overall, reviews suggest that, despite moderate 
benefi
 cial eff
 ects for diet and lifestyle interventions on 
gestational weight gain, few aggregated data from 
randomised clinical trials show signifi
 cant associations 
between reduction in gestational weight gain and rates of 
pre-eclampsia, gestational diabetes, and induction of 
labour.41 The UPBEAT study (panel 1) is an example of a 
well executed study that has not shown improvements in 
pregnancy outcomes in women who are obese, despite 
signifi
 cant reductions in gestational weight gain, 
although there might be long-term benefi
 ts or positive 
epigenetic changes for the mothers or babies. The extent 
to which an individual can change their behaviour in an 
environment that is not supportive of eating well and 
being active will inevitably be limited. Perhaps far greater 
reductions in gestational weight gain could be achieved 
in a more enabling environment.
One of the main challenges encountered in studies of 
lifestyle behaviour change has been compliance, with up 
to 25% of all women who take part in intervention studies 
not engaging with the intervention provider.42 This 
fi
 nding could be especially true of interventions 
promoting physical activity in pregnant women who are 
obese.42 Women cite physical inconvenience, the 
limitations of being pregnant, and lack of time as 
explanations for stopping exercise during pregnancy.43 
Although a substantial body of published work identifi
 es 
the components of eff
 ective diet and lifestyle inter-
ventions,44 the major challenge remains how best to 
engage pregnant women in improving their diets and 
lifestyles, and how to sustain this engagement post 
partum. One method of engagement that shows some 
promise is the use of digital platforms to promote diet 
and lifestyle improvement both during pregnancy and 
preconception.45
Pharmacological and other interventions
Women who are overweight or obese enter pregnancy in 
a state of increased insulin resistance, which raises the 
possibility that drugs such as metformin could be used 
as an adjunct therapy to improve insulin sensitivity and 
the pattern of fetal growth. In randomised trials46–48 of 
metformin in pregnant women who are obese but do not 
have pre-existing diabetes, the drug did not have a 
benefi
 cial eff
 ect on off
 spring birthweight, gestational 
weight gain, gestational diabetes, or on the combined 
fetal and neonatal outcomes of stillbirth, termination of 
pregnancy, miscarriage, and neonatal death.
Nutritional supplements such as probiotics have been 
given in pregnancy because of their potential benefi
 cial 
eff
 ects on the gut microbiome, resulting in modifi
 cation 
of lipopolysaccharides and insulin sensitivity.31 The 
results of a randomised trial suggested that probiotic 
 4 
www.thelancet.com/diabetes-endocrinology   Published online October 12, 2016   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2213-8587(16)30108-5
Series
For more on the Individual 
Patient Data meta-analysis see 
http://www.nets.nihr.ac.uk/
projects/hta/120150
administration from the fi
 rst trimester until the end of 
breastfeeding alongside dietary intervention helped to 
reduce gestational diabetes.49 However, in another study,50 
a 4 week course of probiotics during pregnancy in women 
who are obese did not improve glycaemic status 
compared with that of those who did not receive the 
intervention.
Together, these fi
 ndings suggest that provision of 
antenatal dietary and lifestyle interventions for pregnant 
women who are overweight or obese, either alone or in 
combination with drugs, is insuffi
  cient to either reduce 
gestational weight gain to the degree required to have a 
meaningful impact on pregnancy and birth outcomes, or 
to reduce gestational diabetes. However, the impact of 
such interventions on subsequent obesity in off
 spring 
remains to be determined. Both the LIMIT and UPBEAT 
trials are following up off
 spring of participants into early 
childhood. The initial outcome of these trials suggests that 
it might be most eff
 ective to intervene either before 
conception or between pregnancies to improve maternal 
and infant health in the short term and population health 
in the long term. The Individual Patient Data meta-analysis, 
which is funded by the UK National Institute for Health 
Research and coordinated by the International Weight 
Management in Pregnancy Collaborative Network, is an 
assessment of the diff
 erential eff
 ects of diet and lifestyle 
interventions in pregnancy; its results are expected to be 
published shortly.
Interventions before conception and post 
partum
Cochrane systematic reviews have been done to address 
aspects of preconception health for women in relation to 
subfertility,51 diabetes,52 reduction of post-partum weight 
retention,53 and general pre-pregnancy health promotion.54 
In the context of a preconception outpatient clinic in a 
Panel 1: LIMIT and UPBEAT lifestyle interventions with overweight and obese pregnant women
LIMIT33 and UPBEAT34 were large-scale, individually randomised 
controlled trials of the effi
  cacy of contacts with health-care 
professionals during pregnancy to deliver intervention 
programmes to improve diet and physical activity levels and 
thereby reduce gestational weight gain and diabetes-related 
outcomes in both the mother and her off
 spring.
In LIMIT, 2212 pregnant women who were overweight or obese 
were randomly assigned to receive individualised support at 
six points during pregnancy through a mixture of face-to-face 
and telephone contact with dietitians and trained research 
assistants or usual care.35 Women in the intervention group were 
encouraged to problem solve, set realistic goals, and self-monitor 
in an intervention design guided by a stages-of-change model.36 
The primary outcome—the proportion of babies born large for 
gestational age (ie, birthweight at or above the 90th centile for 
gestation and sex)—did not diff
 er signifi
 cantly between groups, 
but signifi
 cant improvements in scores on a healthy eating index 
and in other indicators of dietary quality that were sustained 
throughout pregnancy, along with an increase in total physical 
activity, were noted in the intervention group compared with the 
control group. Although no eff
 ect on gestational weight gain was 
noted, women who received the intervention were signifi
 cantly 
less likely to give birth to an infant heavier than 4 kg (a secondary 
outcome) than were those in the control group.
UPBEAT was a trial of intensive behavioural support for diet and 
lifestyle improvement in 1555 pregnant women who were 
obese, which was designed to reduce the incidence of 
gestational diabetes and of large-for-gestational-age infants. 
Control theory and social cognitive theory were used in the 
design of the intervention.37 In the intervention group, women 
were off
 ered an initial interview plus eight group or individual 
sessions delivered face to face or over the phone by a trained 
practitioner, who supported them to problem-solve, set goals, 
self-monitor, and enlist social support in attempting to develop 
a healthier pattern of eating. Dietary recommendations were 
tailored to the woman’s habitual diet, and were designed to 
reduce glycaemic load. Advice about physical activity was 
focused on incremental increases in walking, tailored 
to pre-existing activities. The control group was given standard 
care. The authors reported no diff
 erences between groups in 
incidence of gestational diabetes or babies born large for 
gestational age.34 However, reduced dietary glycaemic load, 
energy intake, carbohydrate, and total fat, and increased 
protein and fi
 bre intake and physical activity were reported in 
the intervention group compared with the control group, and a 
modest but signifi
 cant 0·6 kg reduction in gestational weight 
gain was reported in the intervention group.
Importantly, both of these large-scale trials were adequately 
powered to identify differences in clinical outcomes for 
women and their infants, although no such differences were 
detected. They did not show any change in rates of fetal 
growth restriction, and the interventions did not have a 
beneficial effect on other fetal and neonatal outcomes, such 
as large-for-gestational-age births, admission to the 
neonatal intensive-care unit, birth trauma, and 
hyperbilirubinaemia. The fact that these changes in diet and 
physical activity did not translate into improvements in the 
pregnancy outcomes led the authors of UPBEAT to conclude 
that even successful diet and lifestyle interventions in 
pregnancy might not be sufficient to reduce the likelihood of 
gestational diabetes or to improve insulin sensitivity in 
women who are already obese when they become pregnant. 
This conclusion suggests that maternal overweight and 
obesity are best addressed across the entire reproductive life 
cycle and that all women of childbearing age need to be 
encouraged to adopt healthy diets and lifestyles before and 
between conceptions. 
 www.thelancet.com/diabetes-endocrinology   Published online October 12, 2016   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2213-8587(16)30108-5 
5
Series
high-income country, the advantages of healthy diet and 
lifestyle in the preconception period have been promoted 
in terms of fertility and reducing miscarriage.55,56 However, 
few interventions in the preconception period are targeted 
at maternal obesity. Furthermore, very few eff
 ective 
interventions—largely concerning smoking cessation, 
folic 
acid 
supple 
mentation, 
diet, 
and 
off
 spring 
birthweight—have been reported for a range of outcomes 
in this period.57 In a Cochrane systematic review,58 Opray 
and colleagues focused specifi
 cally on pre-pregnancy 
interventions to promote weight loss in women who are 
overweight or obese, but did not identify any randomised 
trials, which highlights the dearth of high-quality 
information available for this aspect of preconception 
care. Other more general reviews of preconception care 
have been produced.59–63
As noted in the 2015 annual report of the Chief Medical 
Offi
  cer for England,6 published work about preconception 
health and care overlaps with that about pregnancy and 
the post-partum period.57,59–61 This work is largely 
observational, and shows adverse eff
 ects of a range of 
disease and unhealthy behaviours on pregnancy 
outcomes. For example, smoking during pregnancy is 
associated with higher rates of miscarriage, placental 
abruption, low birthweight, and preterm birth than is 
non-smoking; poor glycaemic control during pregnancy 
in women with diabetes is associated with increased risk 
of miscarriage, obstetric compli 
cations (macrosomia and 
shoulder dystocia), and major congenital abnormalities.2 
By contrast, very few studies have shown benefi
 cial eff
 ects 
of interventions to reduce risk before pregnancy on birth 
outcomes. The most well established examples are 
improved glycaemic control in women with diabetes and 
folic acid supplementation, which both reduced the 
incidence of birth defects in randomised trials.64
A 2014 systematic review65 of preconception risks and 
meta-analysis of the eff
 ectiveness of preconception 
interventions shows a potential to achieve substantial 
health gain for women and their families as a result of 
intervention during this period. Such interventions range 
from 
a 
general 
health-promotion 
approach 
(eg, 
maintenance of a healthy weight, a healthy diet, smoking 
cessation) coupled with other interventions that are more 
specifi
 c to the preconception period, such as folic acid66 
and multivitamin supplementation, to specifi
 c approaches 
for women with chronic disorders, such as optimisation 
of diabetes control,67 review of potentially harmful drugs, 
and genetic counselling. In view of the challenges of doing 
randomised trials to examine the eff
 ect of preconception 
interventions 
on 
birth 
outcomes—which 
include 
identifi
 cation, recruitment, and following up of women 
before and after they become pregnant—it is not 
surprising that very few such trials have been completed.
Few studies—variously termed applied health research, 
health-policy research, or implementation science—have 
been done of methods for implementing or delivering 
eff
 ective preconception interventions in clinical practice. 
Stephenson and colleagues concluded, in a health-policy 
review of preconception care in England,68 that the biggest 
gap in evidence related to the implementation of 
preconception interventions in practice. The issue of how 
women prepare for pregnancy69 raises the issue of who is 
responsible for provision of advice and preconception care. 
When this question was posed to a range of UK health 
professionals, most answers pointed to primary care, 
although primary care professionals felt that they were 
seldom involved in preconception care.70 In the UK and 
many other countries, health services are organised around 
prevention of unintended pregnancy in family-planning 
clinics or screening for and managing medical disorders in 
pregnancy, with little attention being given to planning and 
preparation for pregnancy and to contraception between 
conceptions. A more integrated approach or continuum of 
care 
that 
encompasses 
prevention 
of 
unintended 
pregnancy, planning, and preparation is needed.71
Slightly more interventions have targeted the post-
partum period, which for many women can represent a 
period between conceptions. Ten trials of diet or physical 
activity interventions, or both, the aims of which were to 
reduce bodyweight post partum, were identifi
 ed in two 
reviews.72,73 Overall, the authors of the reviews concluded 
that interventions were successful, with some suggestion 
that the combination of diet and physical activity, with an 
element of supervision or professional support, was the 
most eff
 ective intervention. However, the most eff
 ective 
time during the post-partum period for intervention is 
unclear, as is the point between pregnancies at which 
weight loss might be most benefi
 cial for the mother and 
her future off
 spring. In some studies,74,75 exclusive 
breastfeeding increased the probability of returning to 
pre-pregnancy weight and BMI in the post-partum 
period. 
Conclusions 
about 
the 
eff
 ectiveness 
of 
breastfeeding as a weight-loss strategy post partum, 
however, seem to depend on the timing of measurements 
and whether or not the mother breastfeeds exclusively.76
Unmet need in preconception interventions
In 2015, the Chief Medical offi
  cer for England 
recommended that the UK Government includes obesity 
in its national risk planning.6 Given the small impact of 
diet and lifestyle pregnancy interventions on obesity-
related outcomes for both the woman and her off
 spring, 
attention now needs to be refocused on the preconception 
period as a potentially more eff
 ective time to intervene. 
Policy initiatives77,78 worldwide have therefore been 
focused on adolescents79 and women of reproductive age 
as important targets for improvement of maternal health 
and the health of the next generation. This emphasis is 
important in light of increases in obesity in adolescent 
girls in low-income and middle-income countries.80
The increase in chronic disease in the face of a tide of 
health messages is powerful evidence that the 
information provided and education mandated in many 
policy initiatives are insuffi
  cient to mobilise women and 
 6 
www.thelancet.com/diabetes-endocrinology   Published online October 12, 2016   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2213-8587(16)30108-5
Series
communities to change their diets and lifestyles. As 
Huang7 and others have pointed out, for campaigns to be 
maximally eff
 ective, a top-down approach involving 
policy initiatives has to be complemented by a bottom-up 
mobilisation of communities and individuals. Figure 2 
shows an integration of Huang and colleagues’ 
conceptualisation of the processes of community 
mobilisation with the so-called COM-B model of 
individual behaviour change,81 which proposes that 
behaviour is a product of the individual having the 
Capability, Opportunity, and Motivation to perform a 
particular Behaviour, and that if any component is 
missing, then they will not behave in the expected way. 
We contend that both mobilisation of communities and 
increased individual capacity are necessary to improve 
health and nutritional status before conception. Figure 2 
illustrates how a new initiative might give individuals 
and communities the capacity to act to reduce 
preconception and maternal obesity.
Huang and colleagues’ analysis7 explains how the 
creation of policy initiatives can shape demand, but 
demand also enables policies to be put into action. They 
also suggest that consistent advocacy is necessary to 
optimise individual and community responses to 
implementation of policies. These activities involve a 
wide range of media, academic opinion leaders, 
professional bodies, non-governmental organisations 
(including charities), and patient groups. Experience 
shows that such campaigns or social movements can 
achieve policy changes at local and central government 
levels.82 If these eff
 orts are judged to lead to deliverable 
and aff
 ordable activities that accord with public pressure 
for action, then barriers to a new top-down component 
might be removed—ie, the political will to institute 
change is generated.
In many settings, the health-care, educational, and other 
components of a platform needed to supply the demand 
for the intervention are already in place, so that the 
political will drives closer integration of action rather than 
the establishment of new services. In the UK, for example, 
linking of contraception, pregnancy planning, and 
antenatal services would provide greater continuity and 
help to achieve behaviour change in adolescent and young 
women.6 Additional links between formal education, 
community-based activities outside school, and public 
health support would strengthen this advocacy coalition 
and further support the generation of a new preconception 
service, which would promote integration of existing 
services and provide opportunities for individual women 
to improve their preconception health.69,83 The value of a 
reciprocal approach between top-down and bottom-up 
approaches, 
and 
between 
individual 
actions 
and 
environmental eff
 ects was articulated clearly with respect 
to overall obesity prevention in a previous Lancet Series.84
The goal of this approach to improve preconception 
health is to move from mere provision of information 
about health issues to women of reproductive age and 
their partners, through changing attitudes and increasing 
motivation for behaviour change, to empowerment of 
individuals with the capacity to act. This kind of 
bottom-up activity to improve preconception health is 
being trialled in some low-income and middle-income 
countries, 
where, 
because 
obesity 
coexists 
with 
undernutrition, a focus on health generally as opposed to 
obesity only is important. Underweight women who 
become pregnant are also at high risk of complications. 
The Ntshembo intervention in South Africa is focused 
on adolescent health broadly, to address both underweight 
and overweight in adolescents.85 The intervention 
involves specialised community health workers trained 
to promote health literacy and behaviour change in 
individuals coupled with peer and family support within 
the context of community mobilisation.
Community mobilisation and individual action 
to improve preconception health
Discussions with groups of young women in the UK and 
USA suggest that, in high-income countries, most 
women know that they and their children need to eat a 
balanced and varied diet and to engage in regular physical 
activity.86,87 Those who struggle to make healthy choices 
for themselves and their children say that they feel out of 
control of both their diets and their lives, which are 
governed by more important priorities such as coping 
with the multiple challenges of running their households. 
Food is reported to be a particular challenge. Women say 
that their partners and children dictate what they eat, and 
that the cost of food means that they only buy what they 
know will be eaten. Given the other demands in their 
Opportunity
Integrated health 
and other sectors 
supply services
Policy 
priorities 
change
Motivation
Social movement 
creates awareness 
and demand
Capacity and 
capability
 of individuals 
to act
Behaviour change
Improved 
preconception 
health
Political will
Advocacy
Figure 2: Components of new initiative required to achieve improved preconception health
A new social movement creates awareness and demand, the motivation for a bottom-up drive to change policy 
priorities, and thus the political will to meet such demand through supply of integrated health and other sector 
services. As discussed by Huang and colleagues,7 strategies to increase popular demand include refi
 nement and 
streamlining of public information, the eff
 ective framing of obesity, stronger media advocacy for action, the 
building of citizen protest and engagement, and development of a receptive political environment. The motivation 
plus the opportunity, combined with individual capability, produce capacity for behaviour change,80 which can 
improve preconception health.
 www.thelancet.com/diabetes-endocrinology   Published online October 12, 2016   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2213-8587(16)30108-5 
7
Series
lives, they have no energy for the battle involved in 
creating good eating habits in their children and they get 
little support from their partners.88,89 If their nutritional 
status is to be improved and maternal obesity addressed, 
women of childbearing age have to be empowered to take 
control of their lives and need to have greater individual 
capacity to act, and their partners need to be enlisted in 
the initiative.90 The need to increase individual capacity to 
act and to make the immediate environment more 
supportive of that action has been recognised in 
interventions to support physical activity. The results of 
focus groups91 with adolescent girls and staff
  from their 
schools in South Africa suggest that schools need 
resources, and staff
  from schools and other school-
related organisations need training to help to empower 
the girls in relation to their body image; support from 
parents was also deemed necessary if the girls were to 
become more physically active.
Communities and individuals need to be mobilised to 
create a demand for maternal obesity prevention policies 
and for better access to good food for women of 
childbearing age. Behavioural theory suggests that 
individual capacity to act, sometimes called agency or 
self-effi
  cacy, and community empowerment have a 
reciprocal relation; empowered communities create 
empowered 
citizens 
and 
vice 
versa.92 
Increased 
self-effi
  cacy—ie, a sense of being able to achieve desired 
goals in life and behaviour—is a prerequisite for taking 
control and, conversely, taking control builds self-effi
  cacy. 
In the Wessex region of the UK, and among people who 
work in maternal and child health in New Zealand, so-
called healthy-conversation techniques have been 
harnessed by training health and social care staff
  to have 
empowering consultations and promote self-effi
  cacy as 
part of their routine interactions with young women.93,94  
Empowerment is achieved through assisted problem-
solving and goal-setting.95 A trial96 has shown that health 
and social care staff
  can have such conversations as part 
of their practice and that they could have a protective or 
even amplifying eff
 ect on women’s sense of self-effi
  cacy, 
and ultimately their capacity to act. Training health and 
social care staff
  in skills to support behaviour change has 
the capacity to reach the large number of people with 
whom these individuals have daily interactions, and 
could be adopted in any country and in any setting.
This kind of approach has been used to great eff
 ect to 
mobilise communities of women to empower them to 
take control of their health and that of their children in 
low-income and middle-income countries. For example,97 
in a programme in rural villages in Nepal, women came 
together to share their experiences, identify common 
problems in childrearing, and generate solutions that 
would work in their communities. These meetings, 
which amounted to facilitated conversations, were 
associated with a reduction of 30% in neonatal death and 
80% in maternal deaths in these villages, fi
 gures which 
have since been replicated in the same villages.98
Part of the success of the projects of Prost and colleagues98 
in improving maternal and child health came from the 
mobilisation of communities to seek solutions to problems 
that they had identifi
 ed themselves. Ways to mobilise 
communities 
that 
increase 
capacity 
and 
create 
environments that support women to make better choices 
for themselves and their families need to be found. To 
achieve this mobilisation an empowering style of 
communication needs to be directed at commercial and 
political organisations. If a community can generate 
consensus, it puts pressure on politicians to respond to 
voters and on commercial organisations to cater for their 
customers. Huang and colleagues7 propose advocacy 
coalitions in their analysis of methods of mobilising public 
support for policy actions to prevent obesity. Application of 
this analysis to the advancement of preconception health 
and prevention of maternal obesity as a social movement 
suggests a process of identifi
 cation of political opportunities 
and defi
 nition of common goals, followed by sustained 
collective action to generate a popular demand for policies 
and political actions that support preconception health and 
address the challenge of obesity.
Community mobilisation has been used specifi
 cally to 
support improvements in preconception health in the 
Netherlands (panel 2). The city of Rotterdam fi
 nanced the 
local programme Ready for a Baby,100 and the Ministry of 
Health, Welfare and Sport funded the national programme 
Healthy Pregnancy 4 All in 14 other Dutch cities.99 An 
essential component of these Dutch programmes is 
enhanced pre-pregnancy and post-partum care. The 
authors explain that it was a major challenge not only to 
raise public awareness of preconception care, but also to 
reach the most vulnerable population groups, including 
youth. The authors point out that it was important to off
 er 
preconception care in combination with public health and 
social welfare services when mobilising the community 
and supporting these groups.101
A combination of this type of bottom-up approach with 
the approaches used in the large-scale randomised 
controlled trials (panel 1) could produce an excellent and 
eff
 ective intervention to improve preconception health 
and promote health equity. Although such trials might 
not improve pregnancy outcomes, they can improve diet 
and increase physical activity of women in pregnancy. 
The controlled setting of these trials allows precise 
identifi
 cation of what is required to achieve change in 
tightly defi
 ned outcomes and the mechanisms underlying 
this change. To capitalise on their value, the results of 
these trials need to be translated into the community 
setting. Improvement of preconception health will 
therefore necessitate increasing community awareness 
of the need to improve preconception health, defi
 nition 
of outcomes that are important to the community, 
exploitation of increased community awareness to 
generate motivation to change, and co-creation of 
the structures to deliver and monitor an eff
 ective 
intervention. The potential of an approach that combines 
 8 
www.thelancet.com/diabetes-endocrinology   Published online October 12, 2016   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2213-8587(16)30108-5
Series
learning from randomised controlled trials with 
community mobilisation has yet to be realised.
Post-partum care was one of the components of the 
US national Healthy Start Program, a community-based 
initiative designed to eliminate disparities in infant 
mortality and adverse birth outcomes. Activities 
included outreach, case management, local health-
system action plans, and sustainability planning. 
Collectively, the interventions were intended to help to 
improve access to care and birth outcomes by enhancing 
health literacy, promoting healthy behaviours, and 
mobilising communities to improve perinatal health 
through delivery of social and medical services to 
support women (and their infants) between and during 
pregnancies.102 Local assessments of the programme 
have shown reductions of approximately 30% in very 
low birthweight and preterm births in disadvantaged 
communities compared with rates in women who did 
not receive the intervention.103
Policies to support improvement of 
preconception and post-partum health
Intervention in the preconception period can benefi
 t two 
generations. With the exception of folic acid supple-
mentation, rubella vaccination, genetic counselling, and 
addiction counselling, generation of support for 
preconception care in terms of nutrition and lifestyle is 
sometimes viewed as the same as for any general health-
improvement campaign. The distinction lies only in the 
specifi
 c purpose of the intervention and the target group 
at which it is aimed. The number and scope of policies 
that have potential to aff
 ect preconception health is, 
Panel 2: Ready for a Baby and Healthy Pregnancy 4 All—preconception health programmes in the Netherlands
After a public and political debate stimulated by recognition of 
the high national rates of perinatal mortality and large 
inequalities in perinatal health between poor immigrant and 
wealthier native areas, the promotion of healthy pregnancies 
has become a priority in the Netherlands. Advocacy activity was 
initiated by a university research team from the Department of 
Obstetrics and Gynaecology at Erasmus MC in Rotterdam. The 
team analysed routinely collected data and city maps to show 
the huge disparities in perinatal mortality and morbidity in 
Rotterdam, and then engaged local government offi
  cials in a 
dialogue, which led to the conclusion that action was required. 
This societal valuing of knowledge previously held in an 
academic institution led to the conviction among policy makers 
and care providers that things should be done better and new 
things should be done to improve care during the 
periconception period.
As a result, in 2008, the municipality of Rotterdam fi
 nanced a 
€1·7 million programme, Ready for a Baby, which included 
trialling the introduction of a programme of care during the 
preconception period and between pregnancies. It also 
involved holistic assessment of non-medical and medical risks 
in women at their fi
 rst visit to a pregnancy caregiver. Care was 
then tailored to the individual in a shared-care model, including 
community midwives, obstetricians, and public health 
providers. Particular eff
 orts were made to reach women of 
lower educational attainment and immigrant groups. These 
eff
 orts included involvement of local social networks and 
migrant organisations and engagement of specially trained 
peer-group educators to promote preconception health. 
Through holding peer-led education sessions in homes and in 
local places such as mosques, more than 2000 people have 
been reached so far. At the core of the programme is an offi
  ce 
staff
 ed by two project managers—one appointed by the 
municipal health-care services and one by the Erasmus MC—
several programme advisers, and a communication team. 
Stakeholders from medical, public health, and social-welfare 
domains are integral to the programme. The target is to reduce 
perinatal mortality in Rotterdam (with special focus on 
underprivileged areas) to the national average in 10 years. For 
the fi
 rst time in the Netherlands, periconception health care is 
formally part of municipal policy, and progress has to be 
reported every 5 years.
The Ready for a Baby programme was taken up by the Dutch 
Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport to address inequalities 
and improve perinatal health at a national level. Fundamental 
to this national programme, which is called Healthy Pregnancy 
4 All and was initiated in 2011, is the linking of services to 
produce a chain of preconception, antenatal, maternity, and 
child care. The Ministry committed €4·8 million in a two-stage, 
6-year project designed by the same team from Erasmus MC 
and based on epidemiological analyses of national data 
identifying municipalities in which perinatal mortality and 
morbidity were high. 14 cities were originally identifi
 ed and 
targeted for maximum eff
 ect. Local government was engaged 
through presentation of data (the same type of maps of 
perinatal mortality and morbidity as in Rotterdam were used), 
and a process of creating consensus among local policy makers 
and care providers was begun.
The project includes a prospective, community-based cohort 
study on the eff
 ectiveness of a programme of preconception 
care. Furthermore, a cluster-randomised trial99 is underway to 
study the eff
 ect of systematic risk assessment at pregnancy 
booking (including both medical and non-medical risk factors) 
followed by a shared-care approach by community midwifes 
and obstetricians in which patient-tailored multidisciplinary 
care pathways are used. In some areas, the programme is being 
extended to use the periods of antenatal and maternity care to 
identify families and children at particular social risk and 
involve children’s services, when necessary, and to use routine 
visits after the birth to off
 er inter-conception care. The research 
team are due to report on the outcomes of the studies in 2016 
and 2018. 
 www.thelancet.com/diabetes-endocrinology   Published online October 12, 2016   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2213-8587(16)30108-5 
9
Series
For more on the Sustainable 
Development Goals see 
http://www.un.org/
sustainabledevelopment/
sustainable-development-goals/
therefore, large. There is now a major international 
focus on this phase of the life course, as featured in the 
report of the Director-General of WHO’s Commission 
on Ending Childhood Obesity104 and in the Global 
Strategy on Women’s, Children’s and Adolescents’ 
Health produced under the aegis of the UN 
Secretary-General’s Every Woman Every Child initiative.90 
The UN strategy emphasises the potential health and 
economic benefi
 ts that could result from a new focus on 
adolescent health for current and future generations. 
This theme is also picked up in the UN Sustainable 
Development Goals, which refer to the importance of 
non-communicable disease prevention (target 3.4) and 
addressing the nutritional needs of adolescent girls and 
pregnant and lactating women (target 2.2). International 
professional organisations such as the International 
Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics have focused 
on this area in relation to adolescent, preconception, and 
maternal nutrition.105 At the national level, the challenge 
of obesity in the preconception, pregnancy, and lactation 
periods is highlighted in the Chief Medical Offi
  cer for 
England’s annual report 2014.6 In each of these 
documents, the need for women to be actively involved 
in the initiative (ie, bottom-up action) is endorsed, which 
requires integration of two extant movements, of which 
one (addressing obesity) is currently much more top 
down than the other (promoting women’s health).
The reproductive years of a woman’s life course off
 er 
an as yet underused opportunity to engage her and her 
partner in promotion of their health and that of their 
future children. The journey from pregnancy prevention, 
to pregnancy planning, pregnancy preparation, and 
preparing for parenthood (the four Ps in the Chief 
Medical Offi
  cer for England’s annual report6) brings the 
woman into contact with a range of health-care providers, 
including primary care doctors, nurses, pharmacists, 
community midwives, health visiting teams, and sexual 
and reproductive health specialists. Development and 
enactment of policies to ensure that professionals in 
each of these groups are trained in the skills needed to 
engage the woman and her partner with the issues, to 
off
 er support with the problem of overweight and 
obesity, and then to liaise with the other appropriate 
services, would provide sustained and integrated 
provision 
of 
preconception 
care. 
A 
large-scale 
randomised trial would be required to test the effi
  cacy of 
such a service.
Conclusion
High-quality antenatal dietary and lifestyle intervention 
trials in pregnant women who are overweight or obese, 
alone or in combination with drugs, do not limit gestational 
weight gain to the degree required to have a meaningful 
impact on pregnancy and birth outcomes, or reduce the 
incidence of gestational diabetes. This fi
 nding suggests 
that the focus for interventions should be the preconception 
or post-partum periods, which requires a broader social 
Search strategy and selection criteria
We searched MEDLINE with the terms “weight”, “weight 
management”, “preconception”, “pre-pregnancy”, 
“pregnancy”, “post partum”, “gestational weight gain”, 
“lifestyle”, and “maternal obesity” in combination with 
“intervention” or “prevention” for articles published in 
English published between Jan 1, 2000, and May 27, 2016. We 
mainly selected publications from the past 5 years, but did 
not exclude highly regarded older publications. We also 
searched the reference lists of articles identifi
 ed by this search 
strategy and other reviews and selected those we judged 
relevant. Review articles and book chapters are cited to 
provide readers with more details and more references than is 
possible in this Series paper, which is not exhaustive. 
movement that generates bottom-up mobilisation of 
communities and individuals, to create demand, coupled 
with a top-down approach from policy initiatives to provide 
supply of services. However, generation of the political will 
for policy change necessitates substantial advocacy activity, 
which again needs to be driven by public awareness and 
demand. In addition to the health benefi
 ts for women and 
their children, such an initiative would provide economic, 
humanitarian, and equity benefi
 ts, and could contribute 
substantially 
to 
achievement 
of 
the 
Sustainable 
Development Goals.
To quote David Barker (1938–2013)—the prominent 
epidemiologist whose theory about fetal origins of adult 
disease is now widely accepted—in the address he gave 
at the UK Medical Research Council’s centenary event in 
2013, “The greatest gift we could give to the next 
generation is to improve the nutrition and growth of girls 
and young women. The next generation does not have to 
suff
 er from heart disease, osteoporosis, breast cancer. 
They are unnecessary diseases, which did not exist a 
hundred years ago. We could readily prevent them had 
we the will to do so.” Intervention to prevent maternal 
obesity before conception and post partum will be a 
crucial part of such a gift.
Contributors
All authors contributed equally to the writing of this Series paper.
Declaration of interests
MH is supported by the British Heart Foundation. We declare no 
competing interests.
References
1 
Poston L, Caleyachetty R, Cnattingius S, et al. Preconceptional and 
maternal obesity: epidemiology and health consequences. 
Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2016; published online Oct 12. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/S2213-8587(16)30217-0.
2 
Ma RCW, Schmidt MI, Tam WH, McIntyre HD, Catalano PM. 
Clinical management of pregnancy in the obese mother: before 
conception, during pregnancy, and post partum. 
Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2016; published online Oct 12. http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/S2213-8587(16)30278-9.
3 
Godfrey KM, Reynolds RM, Prescott SL, et al. Infl
 uence of maternal 
obesity on the long-term health of off
 spring. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 
2016; published online Oct 12. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2213-
8587(16)30107-3.
 10 
www.thelancet.com/diabetes-endocrinology   Published online October 12, 2016   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2213-8587(16)30108-5
Series
27 
Choi J, Fukuoka Y, Lee JH. The eff
 ects of physical activity and 
physical activity plus diet interventions on body weight in 
overweight or obese women who are pregnant or in postpartum: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled 
trials. Prev Med 2013; 56: 351–64.
28 Agha M, Agha RA, Sandall J. Interventions to reduce and prevent 
obesity in pre-conceptual and pregnant women: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. PLoS One 2014; 9: e95132.
29 Thangaratinam S, Rogozinska E, Jolly K, et al. Interventions to 
reduce or prevent obesity in pregnant women: a systematic review. 
Health Technol Assess 2012; 16: 1–191.
30 Thangaratinam S, Rogozinska E, Jolly K, et al. Eff
 ects of interventions 
in pregnancy on maternal weight and obstetric outcomes: 
meta-analysis of randomised evidence. BMJ 2012; 344: e2088.
31 
Allen R, Rogozinska E, Sivarajasingam P, Khan KS, 
Thangaratinam S. Eff
 ect of diet- and lifestyle-based metabolic 
risk-modifying interventions on preeclampsia: a meta-analysis. 
Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 2014; 93: 973–85.
32 Rogozinska E, Chamillard M, Hitman GA, Khan KS, 
Thangaratinam S. Nutritional manipulation for the primary 
prevention of gestational diabetes mellitus: a meta-analysis of 
randomised studies. PLoS One 2015; 10: e0115526.
33 Dodd JM, Turnbull D, McPhee AJ, et al. Antenatal lifestyle advice 
for women who are overweight or obese: LIMIT randomised trial. 
BMJ 2014; 348: g1285.
34 
Poston L, Bell R, Croker H, et al, on behalf of the UPBEAT Trial 
Consortium. Eff
 ect of a behavioural intervention in obese pregnant 
women (the UPBEAT study): a multicentre, randomised controlled 
trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2015; 3: 767–77
.
35 Dodd JM, Cramp C, Sui Z, et al. The eff
 ects of antenatal dietary and 
lifestyle advice for women who are overweight or obese on maternal 
diet and physical activity: the LIMIT randomised trial. BMC Med 
2014; 12: 161.
36 Prochaska JO, DiClemente CC. Transtheoretical therapy: toward 
a more integrative model of change. Psychotherapy 1982; 19: 276–88.
37 
Bandura A. Self-effi
  cacy: the exercise of control. New York, 
WH Freeman and Company, 1997
.
38 Koivusalo SB, Rönö K, Klemetti MM, et al. Gestational diabetes 
mellitus can be prevented by lifestyle intervention: the Finnish 
Gestational Diabetes Prevention Study (RADIEL) a randomized 
controlled trial. Diabetes Care 2016; 39: 24–30.
39 Vinter CA, Jensen DM, Ovesen P, Beck-Nielsen H, Jorgensen JS. 
The LiP (Lifestyle in Pregnancy) study: a randomized controlled 
trial of lifestyle intervention in 360 obese pregnant women. 
Diabetes Care 2011; 34: 2502–07
.
40 
Renault KM, Norgaard K, Nilas L, et al. The Treatment of Obese 
Pregnant Women (TOP) study: a randomized controlled trial of 
the eff
 ect of physical activity intervention assessed by pedometer 
with or without dietary intervention in obese pregnant women. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol 2014; 210: e1–9.
41 
Ruifrok AE, van Poppel MN, van Wely M, et al. Association between 
weight gain during pregnancy and pregnancy outcomes after 
dietary and lifestyle interventions: a meta-analysis. Am J Perinatol 
2014; 31: 353–64.
42 
Poston L, Briley AL, Barr S et al. Developing a complex intervention 
for diet and activity behaviour change in obese pregnant women 
(the UPBEAT trial); assessment of behavioural change and process 
evaluation in a pilot randomised controlled trial. 
BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 2013; 13: 148.
43 
Oostdam N, van Poppel MN, Wouters MG, et al. No eff
 ect of the 
FitFor2 exercise programme on blood glucose, insulin sensitivity, 
and birthweight in pregnant women who were overweight and at 
risk for gestational diabetes: results of a randomised controlled trial. 
BJOG 2012; 119: 1098–107
.
44 
Michie S, Abraham SC, Whittington C, McAteer J, Gupta S. 
Eff
 ective techniques in healthy eating and physical activity 
interventions: a meta-regression. Health Psychol 2009; 28: 690–701.
45 
Van Dijk MR, Huijgen NA, Willemsen SP, Laven JS, Steegers E, 
Steegers-Theunissen RP. m-Health improves nutrition and lifestyle 
of the reproductive population. J Med Internet Res 2016 4: e53 
46 
Chiswick CA, Reynolds RM, Denison FC, et al. Effi
  cacy of 
metformin in pregnant obese women: a randomised controlled 
trial. BMJ Open 2015; 5: e006854.
4 
Heslehurst N, Rankin J, Wilkinson JR, Summerbell CD. A 
nationally representative study of maternal obesity in England, UK: 
trends in incidence and demographic inequalities in 619 323 births, 
1989–2007
. Int J Obes 2010; 34: 420–28.
5 
Health and Social Care Information Centre. Health Survey for 
England 2013. http://wwwhscic.gov.uk/catalogue/PUB16076/
HSE2013-Sum-bklet.pdf (accessed July 7, 2016).
6 
Davies SC. Annual report of the Chief Medical Offi
  cer, 2014. 
The health of the 51%: women. London: Department of Health, 2015.
7 
Huang TTK, Cawley JH, Ashe M, et al. Mobilisation of public 
support for policy actions to prevent obesity. Lancet 2015; 
385: 2422–31.
8 
Kuh D, Shlomo YB. A Life course approach to chronic diseases 
epidemiology. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004
9 
Hanson MA, Gluckman PD. Early developmental conditioning of 
later health and disease: physiology or pathophysiology? Physiol Rev 
2014; 94: 1027–76.
10 
Li Y, Ley SH, Tobias DK, et al. Birth weight and later life adherence 
to unhealthy lifestyles in predicting type 2 diabetes: prospective 
cohort study. BMJ 2015; 351: h3672.
11 
Institute of Medicine and National Research Council. Weight gain 
during pregnancy. Reexamining the guidelines. Washington, DC: 
National Academies Press, 2009.
12 
Gortmaker SL, Swinburn BA, Levy D, et al. Changing the future 
of obesity: science, policy, and action. Lancet 2011; 378: 838–47
.
13 
Finucane MM, Stevens GA, Cowan MJ, et al, on behalf of the 
Global Burden of Metabolic Risk Factors of Chronic Diseases 
Collaborating Group (Body Mass Index). National, regional, and 
global trends in body-mass index since 1980: systematic analysis of 
health examination surveys and epidemiological studies 
with 960 country-years and 9·1 million participants. Lancet 2011; 
377: 557–67
.
14 
Subramanian SV, Perkins JM, Ozaltin E, Davey Smith G. Weight of 
nations: a socioeconomic analysis of women in low- to middle-income 
countries. Am J Clin Nutr 2011; 93: 413–21.
15 
Wang Y, Lim H. The global childhood obesity epidemic and the 
association between socio-economic status and childhood obesity. 
Int Rev Psychiatry 2012; 24: 176–88.
16 
WHO. Obesity. Preventing and managing the global organization. 
Report of a WHO Consultation. WHO Technical Report Series 894. 
Geneva: World Health Organization, 2000.
17 
Kumanyika SK, Obarzanek E, Stettler N et al. Population-based 
prevention of obesity: the need for comprehensive promotion of 
healthful eating, physical activity, and energy balance: a scientifi
 c 
statement from American Heart Association Council on 
Epidemiology and Prevention, Interdisciplinary Committee for 
Prevention (formerly the expert panel on population and prevention 
science). Circulation 2008; 118: 428–64.
18 
Kushner RF, Ryan DH. Assessment and lifestyle management of 
patients with obesity: clinical recommendations from systematic 
reviews. JAMA 2014; 312: 943–52.
19 
Ard J. Obesity in the US: what is the best role for primary care? 
BMJ 2015; 350: g7846.
20 Mann T, Tomiyama AJ, Ward A. Promoting public health in the 
context of the “obesity epidemic”: false starts and promising new 
directions. Perspect Psychol Sci 2015; 10: 706–10.
21 
Booth SL, Sallis JF, Ritenbaugh C et al. Environmental and societal 
factors aff
 ect food choice and physical activity: rationale, infl
 uences, 
and leverage points. Nutr Rev 2001; 59: S21–39.
22 Wetter AC, Goldberg JP, King AC, et al. How and why do 
individuals make food and physical activity choices? Nutr Rev 2001; 
59: S11–20.
23  Institute of Medicine. Preventing childhood obesity. Health in the 
balance. Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2005.
24 
Huang TT, Drewnosksi A, Kumanyika S, Glass TA. 
A systems-oriented multilevel framework for addressing obesity in 
the 21st century. Prev Chronic Dis 2009; 6: A82.
25 Hammond RA. Complex systems modeling for obesity research. 
Prev Chronic Dis 2009; 6: A97
.
26 National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. 
Weight management before, during and after pregnancy. Public 
health guidelines. Manchester, UK: National Institute for Health 
and Care Excellence, 2010.
 www.thelancet.com/diabetes-endocrinology   Published online October 12, 2016   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2213-8587(16)30108-5 
11
Series
47 
Chiswick C, Reynolds RM, Denison F, et al. Eff
 ect of metformin on 
maternal and fetal outcomes in obese pregnant women 
(EMPOWaR): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. 
Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2015; 3: 778–86.
48 
Syngelaki A, Nicolaides KH, Balani J, et al. Metformin versus 
placebo in obese pregnant women without diabetes mellitus. 
N Engl J Med 2016; 374: 434–43.
49 
Luoto R, Laitinen K, Nermes, M, Isolauri E. Impact of maternal 
probiotic-supplemented dietary counselling on pregnancy outcome 
and prenatal and postnatal growth: a double-blind, 
placebo-controlled study. Br J Nutr 2010; 103: 1792–99.
50 Lindsay KL, Kennelly M, Culliton M, et al. Probiotics in obese 
pregnancy do not reduce maternal fasting glucose: a double-blind, 
placebo-controlled, randomized trial (Probiotics in Pregnancy 
Study). Am J Clin Nutr 2014; 99: 1432–39.
51 
Anderson K, Norman RJ, Middleton P. Preconception lifestyle 
advice for people with subfertility. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010; 
4: CD008189.
52 Tieu J, Middleton P, Crowther CA. Preconception care for diabetic 
women for improving maternal and infant health. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev 2010; 12: CD007776.
53 
Amorim Adegboye AR, Linne YM, Lourenco PMC. Diet or exercise, 
or both, for weight reduction in women after childbirth. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2007; 3: CD005627
.
54 
Whitworth M, Dowswell T. Routine pre library both, for weight 
reduction in women after childbirth. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 
2009; 4: CD007536. 
55 Hammiche F, Laven JS, van Mil N, et al. Tailored preconceptional 
dietary and lifestyle counselling in a tertiary outpatient clinic in the 
Netherlands. Hum Reprod 2011; 26: 2432–41.
56 Twigt JM, Bolhuis ME, Steegers EA, et al. The preconception diet is 
associated with the chance of ongoing pregnancy in women 
undergoing IVF/ICSI treatment. Hum Reprod 2012; 27: 2526–31.
57 
Temel S, van Voorst SF, Jack BW, Denktas S, Steegers EA. 
Evidence-based preconceptional lifestyle interventions. 
Epidemiol Rev 2014; 36: 19–30.
58 Opray N, Grivell RM, Deussen AR, Dodd JM. Directed preconception 
health programs and interventions for improving pregnancy 
outcomes for women who are overweight or obese. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015; 7: CD010932.
59 Johnson K, Posner SF, Biermann J, et al. Recommendations to 
improve preconception health and health care—United States. 
A report of the CDC/ATSDR Preconception Care Work Group and 
the Select Panel on Preconception Care. MMWR Recomm Rep 2006; 
55: 1–23.
60 Jack BW, Atrash H, Coonrod DV, Moos MK, O’Donnell J, 
Johnson K. The clinical content of preconception care: an overview 
and preparation of this supplement. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2008; 
199: S266–79.
61 
Dean SV, Imam AM, Lassi ZS, Zulfi
 qar A. Systematic review of 
preconception risks and interventions. Pakistan: Division of 
Women and Child Health, Aga Khan University, 2013.
62 Shawe J, Delbaere I, Ekstrand M et al. Preconception care policy, 
guidelines, recommendations and services across six European 
countries: Belgium (Flanders), Denmark, Italy, the Netherlands, 
Sweden and the United Kingdom. 
Eur J Contracept Reprod Health Care 2015; 20: 77–87
.
63 Temel S, van Voorst SF, de Jong-Potjer LC, et al. The Dutch national 
summit on preconception care: a summary of defi
 nitions, evidence 
and recommendations. J Community Genet 2015; 6: 107–15.
64 
Lumley J, Watson L, Watson M, Bower C. Periconceptional 
supplementation with folate and/or multivitamins for preventing 
neural tube defects. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2001; 3: CD001056.
65 Dean SV, Lassi ZS, Imam AM, Bhutta ZA. Preconception care: 
closing the gap in the continuum of care to accelerate 
improvements in maternal, newborn and child health. 
Reprod Health 2014; 11: (suppl 3): S1.
66 Van Uitert EM, Steegers-Theunissen RP. Infl
 uence of maternal 
folate status on human fetal growth parameters. Mol Nutr Food Res 
2013; 57: 582–95.
67 
Abell SK, Nankervis A, Khan KS, Teede HJ. Type 1 and type 2 
diabetes preconception and in pregnancy: health impacts, infl
 uence 
of obesity and lifestyle, and principles of management. 
Semin Reprod Med 2016; 34: 110–20.
68 Stephenson J, Patel D, Barrett G, et al. How do women prepare for 
pregnancy? Preconception experiences of women attending 
antenatal services and views of health professionals. PLoS One 2014; 
9: e103085.
69 Department of Health. Pre-pregnancy health and care in England.  
http://www.prp-ccf.org.uk/PRPFiles/SFR_April_2015/0060068%20
SFR_Judith%20Stephenson.pdf (accessed Aug 22, 2016).
70 
Shannon GD, Alberg C, Nacul L, Pashayan N. Preconception 
healthcare delivery at a population level: construction of public 
health models of preconception care. Matern Child Health J 2014; 
18: 1512–31.
71 
Hall JA, Mann S, Lewis G, Stephenson J, Morroni C. Conceptual 
framework for integrating ‘Pregnancy Planning and Prevention’ 
(P3). J Fam Plann Reprod Health Care 2016; 42: 75–76.
72 
Van der Pligt P, Willcox J, Hesketh KD, et al. Systematic review 
of lifestyle interventions to limit postpartum weight retention: 
implications for future opportunities to prevent maternal 
overweight and obesity following childbirth. Obesity Rev 2013; 
14: 792–805.
73 
Choi J, Fukuoka Y, Lee JH. The eff
 ects of physical activity and 
physical activity plus diet interventions on body weight in 
overweight or obese women who are pregnant or in postpartum: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled 
trials. Prev Med 2013; 56: 351–64.
74 
Jarlenski MP, Bennett WL, Bleich SN, Barry CL, Stuart EA. 
Eff
 ects of breastfeeding on postpartum weight loss among US 
women. Prev Med 2014; 69: 146–50.
75 
Lopez-Olmedo N, Hernandez-Cordero S, Neufeld LM, et al. 
The associations of maternal weight change with breastfeeding, 
diet and physical activity during the postpartum period. 
Matern Child Health J 2016; 20: 270–80.
76 
Neville CE, McKinley MC, Holmes VA, Spence D, Woodside JV. 
The relationship between breastfeeding and postpartum weight 
change—a systematic review and critical evaluation. Int J Obesity 
2014; 38: 577–90.
77 
Levine R, Lloyd CB, Greene M, Grown C. Girls count: a global 
investment & action agenda. Washington, DC: Center for Global 
Development, 2009.
78 
Levine R, Temin M. Start with a girl: a new agenda for global health. 
Washington, DC: Center for Global Development, 2009.
79 
Todd AS, Street SJ, Ziviani J, Byrne NM, Hills AP. Overweight and 
obese adolescent girls: the importance of promoting sensible eating 
and activity behaviors from the start of the adolescent period. 
Int J Environ Res Public Health 2015; 12: 2306–29.
80 Kimani-Murage EW, Kahn K, Pettifor JM, Tollman SM, 
Klipstein-Grobusch K, Norris SA. Predictors of adolescent weight 
status and central obesity in rural South Africa. Public Health Nutr 
2011; 14: 1114–22.
81 
Michie S, Van Stralen MM, West R. The behaviour change wheel: 
a new method for characterising and designing behaviour change 
interventions. Implement Sci 2011; 6: 42.
82 Economos CD, Brownson RC, DeAngelis MA, et al. What lessons 
have been learned from other attempts to guide social change? 
Nutr Rev 2001; 59: S40–65.
83 Grace M, Woods-Townsend K, Byrne J, et al. Science for health 
literacy: it’s never been so important. Educ Sci 2013; 252: 16–17
.
84 
Roberto CA, Swinburn B, Hawkes C, et al. Patchy progress on 
obesity prevention: emerging examples, entrenched barriers, and 
new thinking. Lancet 2015; 385: 2400–09.
85 Draper CE, Micklesfi
 eld LK, Kahn K, et al. Application of 
intervention mapping to develop a community-based health 
promotion pre-pregnancy intervention for adolescent girls in rural 
South Africa: Project Ntshembo (Hope). BMC Public Health 2014; 
14 (suppl 2): S5.
86 Barker M, Lawrence WT, Skinner TC, et al. Constraints on food 
choices of women in the UK with lower educational attainment. 
Public Health Nutr 2008; 11: 1229–37
.
87 
Hampson SE, Martin J, Jorgensen J, Barker M. A social marketing 
approach to improving the nutrition of low-income women and 
children: an initial focus group study. Public Health Nutr 2009; 
12: 1563–68.
88 Jarman M, Inskip HM, Ntani G, et al. Infl
 uences on the diet quality 
of pre-school children: importance of maternal psychological 
characteristics. Public Health Nutr 2015; 18: 2001–10.
 12 
www.thelancet.com/diabetes-endocrinology   Published online October 12, 2016   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2213-8587(16)30108-5
Series
89 Jarman M, Ogden J, Inskip H, et al. How do mothers manage their 
preschool children’s eating habits and does this change as children 
grow older? A longitudinal analysis. Appetite 2015; 95: 466–74.
90 UN. The Global strategy for women’s, children’s and adolescents’ 
health (2016–2030). http://globalstrategy.everywomaneverychild.
org/ (accessed July 7, 2016).
91 
Kinsman J, Norris SA, Kahn K, et al. A model for promoting 
physical activity among rural South African adolescent girls. 
Glob Health Action 2015; 8: 28790.
92 Bandura A. Exercise of human agency through collective effi
  cacy. 
Curr Direct Psychol Sci 2000; 9: 75–78.
93 Health Education England: Wessex Team School of Public Health.  
Making every contact count toolkit. http://www.wessexphnetwork.
org.uk/media/26776/mecc-briefi
 ng-paper.pdf (accessed July 7, 2016).
94 
Gravida Health Start Workforce Project. Healthy conversation skills 
training. http://www.healthystartworkforce.auckland.ac.nz/en/our-
education-programmes/healthyconversations.html (accessed July 7, 
2016).
95 Barker M, Baird J, Lawrence W, et al. The Southampton Initiative 
for Health: a complex intervention to improve the diets and 
increase the physical activity levels of women from disadvantaged 
communities. J Health Psychol 2011; 16: 178–91.
96 Baird J, Jarman M, Lawrence W, et al. The eff
 ect of a behaviour 
change intervention on the diets and physical activity levels of 
women attending Sure Start Children’s Centres: results from a 
complex public health intervention. BMJ Open 2014; 4: e005290.
97 
Manandhar DS, Osrin D, Shrestha BP, et al; Members of the MIRA 
Makwanpur trial team. Eff
 ect of a participatory intervention with 
women’s groups on birth outcomes in Nepal: cluster-randomised 
controlled trial. Lancet 2004; 364: 970–79.
98 Prost A, Colbourn T, Seward N, et al. Women’s groups practising 
participatory learning and action to improve maternal and newborn 
health in low-resource settings: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Lancet 2013; 381: 1736–46.
99 Denktas S, Poeran J, van Voorst SF, et al. Design and outline of the 
Healthy Pregnancy 4 all study.  BMC Prengnancy Childbirth 2014; 
14: 253.
100 Denktas S, Bonsel GJ, Van der Weg EJ, et al. An urban perinatal 
health programme of strategies to improve perinatal health. 
Matern Child Health J 2012; 16: 1553–58.
101 Steegers EA, Barker ME, Steegers-Theunissen RP, Williams MA. 
Societal valorization of new knowledge to improve perinatal health: 
time to act. Paediatr Perinat Epidemiol 2016; 30: 201–04.
102 Brand A, Walker DK, Hargreaves M, Rosenbach M. Intermediate 
outcomes, strategies, and challenges of eight healthy start projects. 
Matern Child Health J 2010; 14: 654–65.
103 Salihu HM, Mbah AK, Jeff
 ers D, Alio AP, Berry L. Healthy start 
program and feto-infant morbidity outcomes: evaluation of 
program eff
 ectiveness. Matern Child Health J 2009; 13: 56–65.
104 WHO. Consideration of the evidence on childhood obesity on 
Ending Childhood Obesity.  http://www.who.int/end-childhood-
obesity/en (accessed July 7, 2016).
105 Hanson MA, Bardsley A, De-Regil LM, et al. The International 
Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) recommendations 
on adolescent, preconception, and maternal nutrition: “Think 
Nutrition First”. Int J Gynaecol Obstet 2015; 131 (suppl 4): S213–53. 
