 Hormonal Contraception and HIV-1 Acquisition:
Biological Mechanisms
Janet P. Hapgood,1,2 Charu Kaushic,3,4 and Zdenek Hel5,6
1Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Cape Town, Cape Town 7700, South Africa;
2Institute of Infectious Disease and Molecular Medicine, University of Cape Town, Cape Town 7925, South
Africa; 3Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University, Ontario L8S 4K1, Canada;
4McMaster Immunology Research Centre, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario L8S 4K1, Canada;
5Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama 35294; and 6Center
for AIDS Research, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama 35294
ABSTRACT Access to effective affordable contraception is critical for individual and public health. A wide range of hormonal contraceptives
(HCs), which differ in composition, concentration of the progestin component, frequency of dosage, and method of administration, is
currently available globally. However, the options are rather limited in settings with restricted economic resources that frequently overlap
with areas of high HIV-1 prevalence. The predominant contraceptive used in sub-Saharan Africa is the progestin-only three-monthly
injectable depot medroxyprogesterone acetate. Determination of whether HCs affect HIV-1 acquisition has been hampered by behavioral
differences potentially confounding clinical observational data. Meta-analysis of these studies shows a significant association between depot
medroxyprogesterone acetate use and increased risk of HIV-1 acquisition, raising important concerns. No association was found for
combined oral contraceptives containing levonorgestrel, nor for the two-monthly injectable contraceptive norethisterone enanthate,
although data for norethisterone enanthate are limited. Susceptibility to HIV-1 and other sexually transmitted infections may, however, be
dependent on the type of progestin present in the formulation. Several underlying biological mechanisms that may mediate the effect of
HCs on HIV-1 and other sexually transmitted infection acquisition have been identified in clinical, animal, and ex vivo studies. A substantial
gap exists in the translation of basic research into clinical practice and public health policy. To bridge this gap, we review the current
knowledge of underlying mechanisms and biological effects of commonly used progestins. The review sheds light on issues critical for an
informed choice of progestins for the identification of safe, effective, acceptable, and affordable contraceptive methods. (Endocrine Reviews
39: 36 – 78, 2018)
R
ecent epidemiological evidence suggests that
the intramuscularly injected progestin-only
contraceptive depot medroxyprogesterone acetate
(DMPA-IM) increases HIV- acquisition by .-fold,
unlike some other forms of hormonal contraception
(HC). However, whether the results are affected by
potential confounding factors remains unresolved.
DMPA-IM is the major form of HC used in sub-
Saharan Africa, which also has the highest worldwide
HIV- prevalence, particularly in young women.
Critical evaluations of combined clinical data together
with animal and ex vivo data and the role of steroid
receptors and progestin concentrations are required
to understand the potential underlying biological
mechanisms involved in the effects of HC on HIV-
acquisition.
Access to safe contraception is a critical public
health issue. Contraception provides direct benefits to
women by providing control over their reproductive
health and reducing the number of unintended
pregnancies, as well as indirect benefits such as re-
ducing the number of abortions, decreasing maternal
and infant morbidity and mortality, and lowering the
risk of vertical HIV- transmission. Inadequate ac-
cess to effective contraceptive methods has severe
consequences for both the individual and society.
Depending on the region, up to % of unintended
pregnancies in Africa end in abortion and the vast
majority of abortions are unsafe (, ). Despite the
indisputable overall benefit of contraception for public
health, there is a growing concern that some forms of
HC may increase HIV- and sexually transmitted
ISSN Print: 0163-769X
ISSN Online: 1945-7189
Printed: in USA
Copyright © 2018
Endocrine Society
This article has been published
under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribute License
(CC BY; https://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Received: 2 May 2017
Accepted: 27 November 2017
First Published Online:
4 January 2018
36
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00103
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 infection (STI) acquisition in women. This is of
particular concern in sub-Saharan Africa where
women have limited choices for the types of contra-
ceptive and are at high risk of HIV- acquisition.
DMPA-IM is the most commonly used contraceptive
in sub-Saharan Africa (). The most recent systematic
review of epidemiological studies suggests that new
data increase the concern about a potential causal
association between DMPA-IM usage and HIV-
acquisition in women, whereas data investigating an
association with several other forms of HC examined
are limited or absent ().
The biological mechanisms whereby HCs may
modulate susceptibility to HIV- and other STIs in
women are likely to be multifactorial and may include
direct and/or indirect effects on several of the fol-
lowing mechanisms: () modulation of the structural
integrity of the female genital tract (FGT); () mod-
ulation of the permeability and barrier defense
properties of the epithelial layer in the FGT; ()
modulation of levels of soluble mediators and defense
molecules secreted by the FGT (e.g., cytokines, che-
mokines, antibodies, mucus, and antimicrobial and
antiviral factors); () effects on the activity and fre-
quency and HIV- coreceptor expression levels of
circulation immune cells, FGT tissue-resident immune
cells, and cells transmigrating into the FGT lumen
[T cells, monocytes, neutrophils, and Langerhans cells
(LCs)]; () effects on early innate immune responses in
the FGT [plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs), neu-
trophils, tissue macrophages, and natural killer cells];
() systemic effects on antigen presentation and in-
duction of adaptive immune responses (T cells and
B cells); () modulation of the replication of HIV- in
the FGT; and () modulation of the composition and
levels of vaginal microbiota and soluble factors pro-
duced by bacteria (, ). A review of available animal,
ex vivo, and biochemical data on these mechanisms
provides mechanistic insights into, and aids inter-
pretation of, the epidemiological data. In this review,
we discuss and summarize the evidence for the
mechanisms mediated by commonly used progestins.
In particular, we address the roles of progestin type
and concentration on steroid receptor–mediated bi-
ological responses, on structure and function of the
upper and lower reproductive tracts, on immune cells
and their functions, on the soluble defense mecha-
nisms in the FGT, on alterations in genital tract barrier
function, and on the composition of the vaginal
microbiota.
Clinical and Public Health Perspectives on
Contraception and HIV-1 Acquisition
Worldwide, the most prevalent forms of contraception
are intrauterine devices (IUDs) and female sterili-
zation, followed by combined oral contraceptives
(COCs), male condoms, rhythm and withdrawal, in-
jectables, and male sterilization (). In contrast to other
method mix patterns around the world, the most
common form of contraception for those with low and
middle incomes is injectables, followed by COCs. In
, . million women aged  to  who were
married or in a union were estimated to use injectables
worldwide (). The number of women using inject-
ables worldwide, including those not married or in
a union, is likely to be substantially greater. In sub-
Saharan Africa, ~% of women use some form of HC
or non-HC, but a large unmet need (%) remains ().
ESSENTIAL POINTS
· Medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) is an outlier amongst progestins, acting via the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and
exhibiting relatively potent glucocorticoid-like effects similar to cortisol, unlike norethisterone (NET) and levonorgestrel
(LNG) and luteal phase progesterone
· MPA exerts potentially negative effects at concentrations found in serum of DMPA-IM users in animal and ex vivo
models
· Current clinical, animal and ex vivo evidence supports a role for MPA in increasing the permeability of the female genital
tract and promoting HIV-1 uptake
· There is strong evidence from clinical, mouse and ex vivo studies that MPA suppresses pDC and T cell function and
suppresses select regulators of cellular and humoral systemic immunity
· Accumulated clinical and experimental data support the role of MPA in increasing the frequency of HIV-1 viral targets in
the FGT and clinical and ex vivo evidence for increasing the levels of the CCR5 co-receptor for HIV-1 entry
· MPA exerts different effects compared to NET, LNG and luteal phase progesterone concentrations in some, but not all
studies, suggesting that some of the potentially negative effects of MPA on HIV-1 acquisition are due to its glucocorticoid-
like effects
· Together, the data provide a compelling case against the continuous use of DMPA-IM or DMPA-SQ in areas of high HIV-1
prevalence
37
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00103
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 About % of all HC or non-HC users in sub-Saharan
Africa (~. million women) use injectables ().
Injectable usage is particularly high in some countries
such as South Africa where it accounted for nearly half
(%) of all contraceptive use in  (). The most
common form of injectable contraception is the three-
monthly intramuscular injection of  mg of DMPA
(Depo-Provera or DMPA-IM), whereas norethister-
one (NET) enanthate (NET-EN; also referred to as
NET oenanthate or Nur-Isterate) at a two-monthly
injection of  mg is used primarily in South Africa.
Depo-Provera is being rolled out in India () and is
increasingly being supplied in rural parts of sub-
Saharan Africa through community-based distribu-
tion. In , Pfizer announced the release of Sayana
Press, a three-monthly, injectable, lower DMPA dose
( mg), packaged in a single-use, subcutaneous,
auto-disable syringe (Uniject) (). Sayana Press, also
known as DMPA-SQ or subcutaneous injectable
contraceptive DMPA (DMPA-SC), is in the process
for piloting or introduction in Angola, Bangladesh,
Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Cˆ
ote d’Ivoire, Dem-
ocratic Republic of the Congo, Kenya, Laos, Mada-
gascar, Malawi, Mozambique, Myanmar, Niger, Nigeria,
Senegal, Uganda, and Zambia (, ). The simpler
delivery mechanism facilitates the provision of this
method by community health workers and poten-
tially by self-injection, which could have important
implications for reaching underserved populations
with contraceptive services. Thus, it is possible that
DMPA usage may increase worldwide, especially in
economically developing countries.
Sub-Saharan Africa is also the region that bears the
greatest burden of HIV- infections and AIDS. In
, there were ~ million people living with HIV in
eastern and southern Africa (). Globally there were
~. million new HIV infections in , with .% of
these occurring in sub-Saharan Africa (). Women
account for more than half of new infections ().
Although the global annual HIV incidence has
stayed relatively constant at ~. million per year
since ,  countries have experienced increases
in age-standardized rates of new HIV infections
between  and , including several in sub-
Saharan Africa, as well as in the Philippines,
Cambodia, Mexico, and Russia (). South Africa
has the greatest worldwide HIV- prevalence with
~ million HIV-–infected people in  (, ),
as well as the greatest number of new infections, with
an estimated , new HIV infections in 
(). An important global health success in the past
 years has been the scale-up of antiretroviral
therapy to prevent mother-to-child transmission, and
the expansion of antiretroviral therapy, resulting in
an increase in the number of people living with HIV
from  million in  to  million in  ().
Geographically, areas with the highest usage of
injectable contraceptives overlap with those with the
highest HIV- prevalence (). A recent meta-analysis
of epidemiological data, involving tens of thousands
of women, suggests that DMPA-IM usage may be
associated with a % (range, % to %, with %
confidence) increase in the risk of HIV- acquisition
(). This estimate is consistent with  meta-
analyses (, ), enhancing concerns about the po-
tential causal relationship between DMPA-IM use and
HIV- acquisition risk. The results suggest that an
increase in HIV- acquisition may depend on the
specific type of HC because data for NET-EN, COCs,
and levonorgestrel (LNG) implants collectively sug-
gest no significantly increased risk of HIV- acqui-
sition (), although data are somewhat limited for
NET-EN and very limited for implants. Insufficient
data are available to assess the effects of other forms
of contraception, including DMPA-SC, contraceptive
patches, rings, or hormonal IUDs, on HIV- acqui-
sition (). It has been argued that the observed as-
sociation with HIV- acquisition for DMPA-IM may
be confounded by differential condom usage between
women using DMPA vs women in the comparison
groups, although recent data suggest this is unlikely to
be the case (, , –).
In response to the accumulated epidemiological
evidence and rising concerns, the World Health
Organization has recently changed the medical eligi-
bility criteria for injectable contraceptives, including
DMPA-IM, DMPA-SC, and NET-EN, to category 
() (indicating that the benefits of the method
generally outweigh the theoretical or proven risks).
The new guidance specifically emphasizes that women
considering using these methods should be advised
about the potential relationship with HIV risk.
Furthermore, a multicenter, open-label, randomized
clinical trial comparing HIV incidence and contra-
ceptive benefits in women using DMPA-IM, an LNG
implant, and copper IUDs (Cu-IUDs), conducted by
the Evidence for Contraceptive Options and HIV
Outcomes consortium (), began in , with results
expected in . Obtaining more insight into the
effects of different progestins and the biological effects
of HC on HIV- acquisition represents a global public
health priority.
Contraceptives: Actions, Types, and
Serum Concentrations
Progestins are compounds with progestational activity,
in particular the capability to induce a secretory en-
dometrium to support gestation (). The progestin
component of contraceptives is designed to mimic the
actions of progesterone, the endogenous progestogenic
steroid hormone in all mammals. Progesterone plays
a central role in reproduction to regulate establish-
ment and maintenance of pregnancy, normal mam-
mary gland development, menstrual cycle, and sexual
38
Hapgood et al
Mechanisms: Hormonal Contraception and HIV
Endocrine Reviews, February 2018, 39(1):36–78
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 behavior. During the follicular phase of the menstrual
cycle, progesterone levels are relatively low whereas
estrogen levels peak. Levels of progesterone, secreted
by the corpus luteum, rise after ovulation to prepare
the endometrium for egg implantation, transform
estrogen-primed endometrium into secretory tissue,
prevent ovulation by abolishing peak gonadotropin
levels, inhibit follicular maturation, and thin the en-
dometrium. Higher progesterone levels also reduce
glycogen secretion and cause cervical mucus to be-
come thick and viscous to avoid sperm penetration,
fertilization, and implantation by multiple embryos.
Progestins mimic all of these actions of progesterone
to prevent pregnancy via these multiple mechanisms.
Estrogen, alternatively, induces gonadotropin release
and ovulation in addition to having many additional
beneficial effects on brain and cardiovascular function,
lipid profiles, and bone density (, ).
A wide range of HCs exists, including oral pills,
injectables, implants, rings, patches, and IUDs ().
These vary in the type and dose of a progestogenic
compound, as well as the method and frequency of
administration. Progestins are either combined with
estrogen in contraceptive formulations for better
menstrual cycle control or used alone as progestin-
only contraceptives. Progestins, all synthetic pro-
gestogenic steroids, used for HC in sub-Saharan Africa
are MPA (which is structurally related to pro-
gesterone) and NET-EN, etonogestrel (ETG), and
LNG (which are structurally related to testosterone)
(). Progestin-only injectable contraception is a
highly effective, reversible contraceptive method with
some negative transient effects on bone mineral
density and potentially on weight gain (, ).
DMPA-SC and DMPA-IM appear to be therapeuti-
cally equivalent regarding contraceptive efficacy, as
well as side effects on bone density and weight gain (,
). Long-term highly efficient and reversible methods
of contraception include ETG-releasing subdermal
implants (Implanon) and vaginal rings (NuvaRing),
and LNG-releasing implants (Jadelle, Sino-implant)
and IUDs (Mirena, Skyla, Liletta) (). In contrast to
progestins, the estrogenic component of contracep-
tives, if present, does not vary as much in dose and
composition, and usually contains low-dose ethinyl
estradiol (EE) to minimize venous thrombosis and
cardiovascular risk. Newer generation COCs contain
natural compounds such as estradiol (E) or estradiol
valerate to minimize metabolic effects and decrease the
thrombotic risk of formulations with EE (). Most
current COCs contain the progestins LNG, ETG,
nomegestrol acetate, or drospirenone (). Although
several clinical studies on COCs and HIV- acqui-
sition fail to mention the progestin or estrogenic
components, most COCs used by women in these
studies in the developing world contain LNG ().
Similarly, many studies do not discriminate between
DMPA-IM and NET-EN and refer to them collectively
as injectables. Of greater concern is that many research
articles use the term “progesterone” to refer to pro-
gestins such as MPA. The concept that progestins have
different properties compared with progesterone and
each other and therefore cannot be considered as
a single class of compounds is gaining recognition
among different disciplines (, , ). Analytical
recommendations for studies assessing the relation-
ship between HC methods and the risk of HIV ac-
quisition suggest disaggregation by specific method
type and hormonal content ().
A critical issue regarding the effects of HC on HIV-
 acquisition is the question of doses and concen-
trations, in particular for MPA. It is well known that
high doses of ~ mg per day of MPA used to treat
patients who have cancer are strongly immunosup-
pressive, resulting in, among other effects, the in-
hibition of lymphocyte proliferation and activity (,
). Furthermore, MPA is widely used to facilitate
infection of sexually transmitted diseases in mouse and
monkey experimental models, including of simian
immunodeficiency virus (SIV) in monkeys (, ).
The mechanisms underlying this increased suscepti-
bility are discussed in more detail in subsequent
sections. The critical question is thus: if MPA is im-
munosuppressive at high doses in humans and in-
creases the risk of viral infections in animal models,
do these effects occur in humans at lower doses?
Therefore, serum concentration and the relationship
to biological responses that affect HIV- acquisition
and pathogenesis become critical issues for MPA.
Serum concentrations of progestins vary widely for
different types of contraception, both in terms of peak
levels shortly after administration, and as a function of
time before the next dose. The progestin concentration
at a particular time in the serum of contraceptive users
that is available to exert a physiological response on
cells and tissues depends on many factors, including
the type of progestin, dose, method of administration,
metabolism, and pharmacokinetics (, , , ).
Additionally, individual patient physiology, health
status, and body type affect metabolism and phar-
macokinetics. The relative affinity of the progestin for
serum proteins that carry the steroids in the blood, as
well as serum protein concentrations and the con-
centrations of competing endogenous steroids, will
codetermine the amount of pharmacologically active
“free” progestin (, , ). Progestin serum con-
centrations can also vary greatly between individuals
on the same contraceptive (–). These different
concentrations of free progestins are likely to play
a key role in the determination of differential side-
effects, including on HIV- acquisition.
Serum concentrations of progestins commonly used
in HC are compared in Table  (, , –). Peak
serum concentrations (Cmax) after injection are rela-
tively high for the injectable contraceptives (DMPA-
IM and NET-EN), as well as for LNG-containing
“Different concentrations of
free progestins are likely to
play a key role…including on
HIV-1 acquisition.”
39
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00103
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 COCs. Values vary widely between reports. For DMPA-
IM, peak serum levels are reached within the first
 days, with reported levels ranging from  to  nM
(. to . ng/mL), with an average of ~ nM ( ng/
mL) (–), after which the levels slowly decline to
reach a plateau of ~. nM ( ng/mL), which is
maintained for about  months (). About half of
these studies, which span ~ years, report average
Cmax values between  and  nM (. to . ng/mL)
(, , , , , ) whereas the other half report
average Cmax values in the range  to  nM ( to
 ng/mL) (, , , , , , ). There is no trend
showing that only older studies ( to  years old)
report higher Cmax values or only more recent studies
(up to  years old) report lower Cmax values. It is not
possible to deduce from these data (, –) whether
differences in Cmax values reported for DMPA-IM
between studies are due to differences in detection
methodology, number of injections, time of measure-
ment after injection, or intrinsic factors of the study
group such as interindividual differences in meta-
bolism, lactation, body weight, size, or ethnicity. Fur-
thermore, within one study, serum concentrations at
both peak and plateau can vary between individuals by
as much as -fold or -fold (, ). Given the wide
range of reported peak serum levels for DMPA-IM, and
the fact that peak serum levels for DMPA-IM and
DMPA-SC have not been compared in parallel in the
same study, it is difficult to assess how they vary for the
two methods. Peak serum levels for DMPA-SC have
been reported in the range . to . nM (, ), which
appears to be lower than for DMPA-IM, but plateau
concentrations (C, see Table ) and contraceptive
efficacy appear to be similar (, ). MPA used
therapeutically to treat breast and endometrial cancers
by ingestion or intramuscular injection of ~ mg
daily results in serum concentrations of  to  nM
for oral administration () or  to  nM by in-
tramuscular injection (), resulting in endocrine dis-
ruption and immunosuppression (, , ). Lower
oral doses of MPA result in serum concentrations of
~ to  nM for  mg () and ~ to  nM for
 mg ().
Regarding the immunosuppressive effects of MPA,
the question is raised as to what the cut-off concen-
tration is, below which general or selected and cell-
specific immunosuppression no longer occurs, and
whether this is the same for different individuals and
different immunosuppressive responses. Regarding
other progestins, LNG is widely used in intravaginal
devices, implants, and COCs and in multipurpose
prevention technologies in development (), with
serum concentrations ranging from . (. ng/mL) to
 nM (. ng/mL). ETG, also known as -ketode-
sogestrel, is a metabolite of desogestrel and is also
administered in intravaginal devices, implants, and
Table 1. Systemic Concentrations of Progestins
Cmax (nM)
Cmax (ng/mL)
C30 d (nM)
C30 d (ng/mL)
C1 y (nM)
C1 y (ng/mL)
Reference
DMPA-IM, Depo-Proveraa
21 (3–100)
8 (1.15–38.5)
2.6
1
—
—
(46–61)
DMPA-SC, Sayana Pressb
3.3 (1.6–4.4)
1.3 (0.6–1.7)
2.1
0.8
—
—
(61–64)
LNG-IUDc
0.3–2.4
0.1–0.78
—
—
0.4–0.9
0.13–0.29
(41, 65)
LNG implantd
1–11
0.32–3.57
(66)
LNG COCe
28
9.1
—
—
—
—
(67)
NET/NET acetate f
10–50
4.1–20.6
0.6–10
0.24–4.1
—
—
(52, 68–70)
ETG/3-ketodesogestrel IUDg
3–4.6
0.9–1.4
—
—
—
—
(42)
ETG/3-ketodesogestrel implanth
2.5–2.8
0.78–0.87
—
—
0.8–1.2
0.25– 0.37
(71, 72)
ETG/3-ketodesogestrel COCi
5.5–7.5
1.7–2.3
—
—
—
—
(73)
The table summarizes approximate systemic (plasma) concentrations of progestins. High variability exists between individual users and between studies (see “Contraceptives: Actions,
Types, and Serum Concentrations). Inconsistency between studies may reflect differences in experimental techniques and methods of determination of progestin concentration. Cmax
indicates the maximum concentration (typically reached within the first 20 days after administration). C30 d and C1 y indicate data obtained at ~30 days and ~1 year after
administration (time points differ between studies). Cmax concentrations of plasma MPA after DMPA-IM and DMPA-SC administration have not been compared in a head-to-head
study, but they have been at 6 months to 2 years, where levels were measured just before the next injection (61).
aIntramuscular injection of 150 mg of MPA every 3 months.
bSubcutaneous injection of 104 mg of MPA every 3 months.
cMirena IUD, 52 mg of LNG; levels decrease to ~0.4 to 0.9 nM at 1 year.
dLNG implants: Norplant, 36 mg, 5 years; Jadelle, 75 mg, 3 years.
eLNG COC, typically 50 to 150 mg of LNG per pill in combination with ethinylestradiol.
fIntramuscular injection of 200 mg of NET-EN every 2 months.
gNuvaRing (intravaginal ring), 11.7 mg of ETG.
hImplanon, 68 mg of ETG; Nexplanon, 68 mg of ETG.
iETG COC, typically 150 mg of ETG per pill.
40
Hapgood et al
Mechanisms: Hormonal Contraception and HIV
Endocrine Reviews, February 2018, 39(1):36–78
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 COCs, with serum concentrations ranging from .
nM (. ng/mL) to . nM (. ng/mL) (, ).
These ranges for LNG and ETG depend on the type of
HC and time after administration.
It is interesting to compare the different serum
concentrations of progestins to those of endoge-
nous progesterone. The concentration of endogenous
progesterone in the serum of premenopausal women
is low during the follicular phase (. to . nM) ()
but rises to ~ to  nM during the luteal phase, and
to ~ nM during pregnancy (, –). However, it
is difficult to predict how responses would differ for
equivalent serum concentrations of progesterone as
compared with progestins because multiple factors
such as binding to serum proteins, pharmacokinetics,
affinities, potencies, and efficacies via steroid receptors
will affect the responses, as discussed in subsequent
sections.
Intracellular Mechanisms of Action
of Progestins
Central to understanding the effects of a particular
progestin on the acquisition of HIV- and other STIs
in vivo is an appreciation of what the steroid does
inside different cell types in target tissues. Note that no
information is available about tissue concentrations of
progestins, which may be different from serum con-
centrations. Once the progestin reaches the cells at
a particular concentration, it is predominantly the
intracellular actions of the progestin, the concentration
of steroid receptors, the concentration of competing
steroids, the concentration of other signaling mole-
cules, and the cell type that determines the biological
response inside the cell (, , ).
Progestins are designed to act similar to pro-
gesterone and to have similar progestogenic actions.
Progestins and progesterone are steroids that act
predominantly via changing gene expression after
binding to and activating intracellular steroid re-
ceptors [Fig. (a) and (b)]. These receptors generally
have minimal activity in the absence of the steroid,
although some ligand-independent effects do occur
(, ). Progestins have a high affinity for and are
designed to act via the progesterone receptor (PR). The
PR regulates gene expression via mechanisms com-
mon to all the steroid receptors. Other steroid re-
ceptors include the glucocorticoid (GC), androgen,
mineralocorticoid, and estrogen receptors (GR, AR,
MR, and ER, respectively). Steroid receptors can either
stimulate or repress gene expression by increasing
(transactivation) or decreasing (transrepression) the
rate of transcription initiation [Fig. (b)]. The best
described mechanism of transactivation occurs via
direct binding of the activated steroid receptor to
specific DNA sequences in the regulatory regions of
target genes, whereas the best described mechanism of
transrepression occurs via tethering of the steroid
receptor to other transcription factors bound to those
regulatory regions to change the rate of transcription
initiation [Fig. (b)]. However, note that several other
mechanisms have been described, including upregu-
lation by tethering (, ). Mechanisms of trans-
repression have been more extensively studied for the
GR than for the PR. This is largely due to the
pharmacological relevance of GCs in the treatment of
most inflammatory diseases. The immunosuppressive
activity of GCs is largely due to their ability to repress
transcription of genes that are activated by the
proinflammatory transcription factors activator pro-
tein  and nuclear factor kB (NF-kB), by the tethering
mechanism, as illustrated in Fig. (b). Regulation of
transcription by steroid receptors is a complex process
involving multiple proteins, including RNA poly-
merase and associated factors, cofactors, and chro-
matin modifying proteins, to form multiprotein
complexes on the target genes. Some of these proteins
can change the chromatin structure and reprogram the
cell to express a particular repertoire of genes. Steroids
are master regulators of total gene expression in cells
because each cell has hundreds or even thousands of
target genes for a particular steroid receptor. Notably,
steroid responses are cell and gene specific and are also
dependent on crosstalk with other signaling pathways
().
Surprisingly, we do not know the precise target
genes responsible for the progestogenic actions of
progesterone. However, what is known from micro-
array and RNA sequencing and chromatin immu-
noprecipitation sequencing analysis of all the genes
affected by progestins in a single cell type is that
progestins regulate hundreds of genes involved in
multiple cellular functions in target cells (–).
Furthermore, gene expression profiles in response to
progestins vary for different cells, can be modulated by
the presence of other hormones and transcription
factors, and vary between progesterone and other
progestins (, –). Given that progestins have
progestogenic actions via the PR similar to pro-
gesterone, why might they exhibit different biological
effects compared with progesterone, and to each
other? Key to understanding this is an appreciation of
the differential effects of progestins via other members
of the steroid receptor family of proteins. Because the
PR, AR, GR, and MR are structurally related in the
steroid-binding site, several progestins bind to vary-
ing degrees to other members of the steroid recep-
tor family of proteins besides the PR. These relative
binding affinities of some progestins are summarized
in Table  (, , , , , –) and illustrated
in Fig. (a). The extent of this crosstalk varies because
the different progestins have different relative binding
affinities for the GR, MR, and AR. Although progestins
do not appear to bind to the ER, NET has been shown
to be aromatized in women to the potent estrogen EE
41
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00103
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Figure 1. Schematic diagram illustrating steroid receptor selectivity of progestins and intracellular mechanism of regulation of
transcription by steroid receptors. (a) Binding and transcriptional activity. Solid black lines indicate high-affinity binding similar to or
greater than that of the endogenous cognate agonist ligands. These are progesterone (Prog) for the PR, cortisol (Cort) for the GR,
dihydrotestosterone (DHT) for the AR, and aldosterone (Ald) for the MR. Stippled black line indicates lower affinity (~10-fold lower),
whereas dotted black lines indicate very low relative affinity (at least 100-fold lower) compared with the endogenous agonist ligands.
Plus signs (1) indicate agonist or partial agonist activity, where four plus signs (1111) indicate full agonist activity similar to
endogenous agonist ligands and fewer plus signs indicate relative partial agonist activity. Minus signs (2) indicate antagonist activity
toward the endogenous agonist, where four minus signs (2222) indicate full antagonist activity and fewer minus signs indicate
relative partial antagonist activity. Data sources include references listed in Tables 1 and 2 and references discussed in the text. Note that
there is considerable uncertainly and/or inconsistency in some of the data as discussed in the text, especially for affinities and
transcriptional activities of LNG and ETG for GR, AR, and MR. Additionally, steroid receptor activity can be gene and cell specific, and
many of the activities in animal preclinical models may not represent activities in human tissues. (b) Mechanisms of transcriptional
regulation by MPA acting via the GR. Other progestin agonists and partial agonists can both transactivate and transrepress genes via
their cognate receptors using similar mechanisms. Green arrows indicate increase in transcription of target genes (transactivation by
direct binding of receptor to DNA) whereas red stop lines indicate inhibition (transrepression by tethering of receptor to other
transcription factors), both taking place in the nucleus. Chromatin effects are not indicated. Antagonist activity is not depicted but
involves recruitment of corepressors instead of coactivators by DNA-bound receptors, due to the conformation induced by the
antagonist bound to the receptor. Additional mechanisms of gene regulation may be involved. Ald, aldosterone; Cort, cortisol; DHT,
dihydrotestosterone; Prog, progesterone. With data from Stanczyk et al. (24) and Africander et al. (25).
42
Hapgood et al
Mechanisms: Hormonal Contraception and HIV
Endocrine Reviews, February 2018, 39(1):36–78
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 (, –), which binds to the ER. All progestins
exhibit some binding for the AR. MPA has a relatively
high affinity for binding to the GR, whereas pro-
gesterone and ETG bind to the GR with much lower
affinity. LNG and NET exhibit almost no GR binding.
Progesterone has a relatively high affinity for the MR,
whereas the affinity of LNG is uncertain and MPA,
ETG, and NET exhibit very low affinity for MR
binding. All the progestins have a high affinity for the
PR, which is higher than that of progesterone. Thus, in
terms of binding to different steroid receptors, MPA is
clearly an outlier among this group of progestins, with
a relatively high affinity for the GR, unlike pro-
gesterone and NET (equilibrium dissociation con-
stants for inhibition, or Ki values, of ., , and
 nM, respectively) (), whereas data for ETG and
LNG are not widely available. The implications of this
Ki or Kd value for MPA are that .%, .%, and
.% of GR will be occupied at , , and  nM MPA,
respectively [Ki and Kd are equivalent. Ki is often used
instead of Kd when the constant is determined using
competitive binding assays. The equilibrium dissoci-
ation constant, or Kd, is approximately the concen-
tration of steroid at which % of receptors are
occupied and is useful in determination of fractional
occupancy, or the percentage of receptor bound by
steroid. Fractional occupancy (Y) depends on Kd and
steroid concentration according to the equation Y 5
[L]/(Kd 1 [L]), where [L] indicates ligand or steroid
concentration. Note that as receptor concentration
increases a greater response will occur for the same
fractional occupancy, because the number or receptors
occupied will determine the extent of the response (see
Fig. c)]. The presence of different isoforms of steroid
receptors, such as PR-A and PR-B, has the potential to
discriminate further between biological effects of
different progestins (), although not much in-
formation is available regarding progestins.
Thus, MPA has the capability of exerting different
biological effects compared with progesterone, LNG,
and NET, in particular via the GR (Fig. ). However,
affinity is not proportional to biological activity. The
affinity will determine what percentage of a receptor is
occupied by a steroid, but the response depends on
the conformation of the receptor that is induced by
the steroid to enable it to interact more or less effi-
ciently with other proteins involved in the intracellular
pathway and on the target genes, as well as the receptor
concentration. To investigate the type of response and
the relationship between concentration and response
elicited by a progestin in a cell, dose–response analysis
is required.
Biocharacter and Dose Response to Progestins
Relevance to biological effects
A biological dose–response analysis reveals how
a biological effect changes as the dose of a progestin
changes (). Some dose–response studies have used
cells that express more than one receptor, confounding
the results, or direct head-to-head comparisons be-
tween effects of progestins have not been made by
performing experiments in the same model cell system
in parallel (, , ). Other researchers have cir-
cumvented this problem using models expressing only
a single receptor, or by use of steroid-specific antag-
onist or receptor knockdown, to show that a response
is via a particular receptor, although these types of data
have been published for only a few selected progestins
(, , –). These data can give the most reliable
measure of affinity, potency, efficacy, and biocharacter
for a progestin via a specific steroid receptor or for
a measured response. If a dose response is mediated by
a steroid receptor, the curve will typically be sigmoidal-
shaped when plotting a response to a steroid on the
Table 2. Relative Binding Affinities for Steroid Receptors and Biological Activities of Progestogen
Progestogen
PR
AR
GR
MR
ER
RBA %
Progesto-
genic
RBA %
Andro-
genic
Antiandro-
genic
RBA %
Gluco-
corticoid
RBA %
Antimineralo-
corticoid
RBA %
Estrogenic
Antiestro-
genic
Progesterone
100
+
80
6
(+)
5
6
6
+
—
2
+
MPA
65–98
++
151
6
2
74
+
0.13
6
—
2
+
LNG
23–96
++
58
+
2
1–7.5
2
17–75
6
—
2
+
NET/NET acetate
27–34
++
134
+
2
0.8
2
0.15
6
—
+
+
ETG/3-ketodesogestrel
150
++
20
(+)
2
14
6
,0.1
2
—
2
+
Relative binding affinities are expressed as a percentage relative to 100% for reference steroids, which were as follows: PR, progesterone; AR, dihydrotestosterone; GR, dexamethasone;
MR, aldosterone, as discussed in (88). Relative binding affinity and cell model biological activity data for GR, MR, and AR for progesterone, MPA, and NET acetate are from (100–104).
All other relative binding affinities and all other progestin biological activities in preclinical models were taken from references (32, 38). Biological activities determined in animals
(mostly rats and rabbits) used a range of assays as reviewed in (88). Sources of data include references (24, 25). 2, not effective; (+), weakly effective; +, effective; ++, strongly effective; 6,
literature inconsistent.
Abbreviation: RBA, relative binding affinity.
43
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00103
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 y-axis vs the log of the steroid on the x-axis (Fig. ).
This has been demonstrated for progestins regulating
gene expression in cell models expressing only a single
member of the steroid receptor family (–,
–). The shape of the curve and slope of the
steep part of this curve are determined by the laws of
mass action, usually resulting in a slope of unity (Hill
slope) when a single steroid molecule binds to a single
receptor molecule (). The % effective concen-
tration (EC), or potency, is defined as the concen-
tration of the steroid required for half of the maximal
response. A change from % response to % re-
sponse spans a range of concentrations on the x-axis of
~-fold (e.g., say from . to  nM when the EC is
 nM), corresponding to the steep part of the curve
[indicated with orange brackets in Fig. (a)]. The
maximum possible response is referred to pharma-
cologically as the efficacy, which is set at % for an
agonist. The EC occurs at the steepest part of the
curve and is the concentration around which the
greatest change in response will be observed with
changes in the steroid concentration (Fig. ). Addi-
tionally, it is clear that if the dose of a steroid changes,
but falls within the concentration range of the bottom
or top plateau of the dose–response curve, no dif-
ference in response will be detected, unlike when the
dose change falls within the steep part of the curve. A
progestin is defined as relatively potent when a low
concentration is required to induce a response, usually
relative to a reference steroid agonist, such as the
synthetic agonist R for the PR or dexamethasone
for the GR. For example, dose–response analysis has
revealed that MPA has a potency ~-fold greater
than progesterone for regulation of transcription via
the NF-kB transcription factor, with efficacies of %
vs % for MPA vs progesterone, relative to dexa-
methasone via the GR, in a cell line model (). The
greatest change in response to MPA occurs with
changes in MPA concentration of ~ nM, that is, the
EC of MPA in this particular model system. In
contrast, NET shows no response at concentra-
tions , mM ().
Figure 2. Typical sigmoidal dose–response curves for progestins acting via steroid receptors. (a) Curves depicting a stimulatory
response (such as transactivation) for a full agonist (100% efficacy) and a partial agonist (60% efficacy). The potency, or the
concentration of steroid for half-maximal response (EC50 value), of 1 nM is indicated for the full agonist by a dotted orange line. (b)
Curves depict three separate stimulatory responses with potencies or EC50 values of 0.1, 1, or 10 nM (a, b, and c, respectively). An orange
arrow illustrates how the curves shift to the left as the EC50 decreases and potency increases, which occurs with increased progestin
steroid receptor concentration. (c) The curve shows a stimulatory response for an agonist with orange dotted lines to indicate how the
percentage point response changes as the concentration of progestin changes by 0.3-fold, for different parts of the curve. (a–c) The
slopes of the sigmoidal curves are set at 1, assuming one steroid ligand binding reversibly to one receptor, the absence of cooperative
effects on ligand binding, and no spare receptors.
44
Hapgood et al
Mechanisms: Hormonal Contraception and HIV
Endocrine Reviews, February 2018, 39(1):36–78
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Whether a progestin is an agonist, a partial agonist,
or an antagonist, known as its “biocharacter,” is
a measure of the extent of the maximum response
possible relative to a reference agonist. This can also be
determined from dose–response curves, as illustrated
in Fig. (a) for agonist and partial agonist. All pro-
gestins are agonists for the PR. Progestins can also be
steroid receptor antagonists, that is, they can bind
to steroid receptors other than the PR but induce
a nonoptimal receptor conformation and hence result
in no change in a response on their own, but they can
block the effect of an agonist. Antagonist potency and
efficacy are determined by dose–response analysis
using a constant concentration of the agonist in the
presence of varying concentrations of antagonist, as
was used to show potent antagonist activity for pro-
gesterone acting via the MR (). Thus high-affinity
binding does not necessarily confer a high agonist or
partial agonist response. An antagonist such as RU
binds both the GR and PR with a relatively high af-
finity, but it is an antagonist for both receptors. Several
progestins can act as partial or full agonists for re-
ceptors other than the PR. For example, both MPA
and NET can act as agonists for the AR, with pro-
gesterone acting as a partial agonist (), whereas
MPA can act as a partial agonist or full agonist for the
GR, depending on cell and gene context. In contrast,
progesterone is a partial agonist for the GR with low
potency, whereas NET has no GR agonist activity in
cell line models (). Because steroids can either
increase or decrease responses such as gene expression,
dose–response curves can either be stimulatory (as for
transactivation), depicted in Fig. (a), or inhibitory (as
for transrepression). MPA has been shown to be
a relatively potent full agonist for transrepression and
a partial agonist for transactivation via the GR,
whereas progesterone is a relatively weak, partial ag-
onist for both via the GR (, , , ). Bio-
characters can also be cell specific and sometimes even
gene specific, such as for many synthetic selective
steroid modulators, similar to tamoxifen via the ER.
Importantly, the EC can vary depending on the
progestin receptor concentration inside the cell. Fig.
(b) shows how potency could increase from  nM
(curve c), to  nM (curve b), to . nM (curve a) just by
increasing the receptor concentration in the same cell
[Fig. (b), low receptor concentration for curve c and
high receptor concentration for curve a]. The effects of
changing receptor concentrations have been best
demonstrated for the GR, and they have also been
shown to switch the biocharacter of MPA from
a partial agonist to a full agonist via the GR (, ,
). EC also varies with the concentrations and
interactions of proteins and other molecules that
mediate the response downstream of steroid binding,
as well as the affinity of the progestin for its receptor.
Hence, progestin potency cannot be predicted and is
steroid, cell, and even gene specific.
Dose responses to progestins can be measured in
patients, animals, tissue, and cells in culture, and they
can include any response of interest such as inhibition
of ovulation, expression of specific genes and pro-
teins, apoptosis, and HIV- replication. However, very
few such analyses have been performed for different
progestins (). Nevertheless, additional clues re-
garding the steroid receptor activity of progestins have
been obtained from preclinical animal studies that
monitor typical but selected physiological effects as-
sociated with an endogenous steroid (, ). How-
ever, inconsistent terminology, such as using the term
potency when referring to efficacy, has complicated
interpretation of the contraception literature ().
Such preclinical data do not provide proof of direct
effects via a specific receptor, although they give useful
information of physiological relevance. For example,
“estrogenic” activity for a particular progestin obtained
in animal models does not prove a direct effect of the
progestin via that receptor (e.g., the ER) because effects
can be indirect. Estrogenic effects could be due to the
progestin acting via another receptor such as the PR to
regulate expression of other genes that then affect
estrogen synthesis or metabolism, or ER expression
levels, which can subsequently affect estrogen re-
sponses. Additionally, full dose–response curves are
seldom generated in preclinical studies, so the potency
and efficacy are not known in most cases. Data from
preclinical models are summarized in Table , whereas
dose–response data from cell line models are discussed
later. With the exception of estrogenic activity, the
binding, cell line dose–response, and preclinical ani-
mal model data are remarkably consistent. For ex-
ample, the preclinical animal data confirm the general
androgenic activity of MPA, LNG, and NET and the
GC activity of MPA but not NET and LNG, as well as
the anti-mineralocorticoid activity of progesterone but
not MPA or NET, without dose–response analysis to
define biocharacter more precisely.
Despite the limited data as later discussed and
shown in Tables  and , important insights have been
obtained from the evidence to date. Potency, efficacy,
and biocharacter are highly relevant to dosage, con-
centrations, and contraceptive efficacy of progestins, as
well as side effects such as effects on intracellular
actions that affect HIV- acquisition. Substantial data
show that MPA is a relatively potent partial to full
agonist via the GR, whereas progesterone is a very
weak partial GR agonist, and NET exhibits almost no
GR activity. The potency for progesterone is ~- to
-fold lower than MPA via the GR, and its efficacy is
~% to %, depending on the promoter (). Fewer
data are available for ETG and LNG, but preclinical
results to date suggest that ETG has weak GC activity
and LNG has almost no GR activity. In contrast, all of
the previous progestins have some androgenic activity.
Progesterone has potent anti-mineralocorticoid ac-
tivity, unlike MPA, ETG, and NET, whereas LNG has
45
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00103
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 some anti-MR activity. Agonist activity of the different
progestins via the PR, however, appears to be similar,
although the progestins are usually more potent than
progesterone (, ). Thus, it can be seen that none
of the progestins acts exactly the same as progesterone
by the previous criteria, whereas MPA, in particular,
appears to be an outlier, with not only a relatively high
affinity for the GR but also substantial GC-like activity
at nanomolar concentrations. Such off-target differ-
ential actions of progestins via steroid receptors other
than the PR are relevant if any of these other receptors
could cause biological effects that would increase HIV-
 acquisition or pathogenesis, in response to the
progestins, at concentrations found in women.
Relevance of contraceptive doses to acquisition of
HIV-1 and other STIs
Dose–response curves have not been determined for
most progestins in clinical settings or in animals. Thus,
thresholds for contraceptive efficacy are mostly poorly
defined or undefined (). It is apparent that the
-mg dose of DMPA-IM is more than needed for
a maximal response for inhibition of ovulation be-
cause a dose reduced by %, as in DMPA-SC, still
inhibits ovulation (). Thus, both of these doses
would fall at % response of a dose–response curve
(Fig. ) if plotted for the inhibition of ovulation. It is
tempting to speculate that lowering the dose of
DMPA-IM by % to that of DMPA-SC, still adequate
for contraceptive efficacy, will similarly reduce possible
side-effects of higher doses (, ), but based on
dose–response considerations this is unlikely. Lowering
the dose by % is only likely to lower the theoretical
response by at most about %, which occurs when the
original dose is around the EC [Fig. (c)]. This is
consistent with published dose–response data for gene
expression where sufficient points have been used to
define the top and bottom and slope of the curve with
reasonable accuracy (–, –). It is possible
that the shape and slope of a dose–response curve may
be different for other biological responses and for in vivo
effects, where the maximal change in response with
changes in dose around the EC could be .% or ,%.
However, additional data are required to investigate this
issue. Substantial ex vivo data exist for MPA on the
relationship between MPA concentrations and various
responses relevant to immune function and HIV and
STI acquisition, whereas limited data are available for
other progestins and progesterone, as discussed later.
MPA was shown decades ago to bind to the GR with
a higher affinity than cortisol, the endogenous GC in
humans (, ), and to have relatively potent GC
activity in repressing the proinflammatory interleukin
(IL)- gene with a potency of ~ nM (), with both
studies having been done in primary human lympho-
cytes. As early as , MPA was shown to repress the
proinflammatory IL- gene via the GR in a cell line
model at . nM, the plateau concentration of MPA in
DMPA-IM users (). Since then, more detailed
dose–response analyses in various cell line and primary
human cell models have revealed that MPA represses
many cytokine and chemokine genes or promoters
containing activator protein  or NF-kB transcription
factor binding sites via the tethering model (Fig. ), with
potencies (ECs) usually ranging from  to  nM, in
a gene- and cell-specific manner, acting as a partial to
full GR agonist via the GR (, , , , ) (see
previous “Relevance of biological effects” and Fig. ).
These ranges in potencies most likely reflect differences
in GR levels and promoter- and cell-specific factors, as
previously discussed in “Intracellular Mechanisms of
Action of Progestins” and “Biocharacter and Dose
Response to Progestins”. Of particular interest to ac-
quisition of HIV- and other STIs, MPA has been
shown to have a potency of ~ to  nM in changing
expression of several immune function genes in cervical
cell lines (, ), although for some cell line models
the potency appears to be much lower (). In primary
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs), potencies
of ~ to  nM have been reported for changes in
expression of immune function genes (, , ,
, ), with significant effects being observed on
expression of some genes at  nM MPA (, ,
). In some studies, dose responses of other progestins
or progesterone have been compared with MPA, with
results showing no effect by equimolar NET (, ,
, ) and little to no effect by equimolar pro-
gesterone (, , , , , ) on expression of
selected genes. For example, no effect was observed
on the anti-inflammatory GC-induced leucine zipper
(GILZ) messenger RNA (mRNA) with  nM pro-
gesterone or NET, whereas MPA showed partial agonist
activity with an increased mRNA even at  nM in an
endocervical cell line (). In the same study, MPA
repressed proinflammatory IL-, IL-, and regulated
on activation, normal T cell expressed and secreted
(RANTES) mRNA at  to  nM, with NET showing
no repression even at  mM. Similarly, progesterone
showed no repression of IL- and IL- even at  mM,
but ~% repression at  nM of RANTES mRNA,
albeit less so than MPA (). Similar results were
obtained for MPA, NET, and progesterone on IL-,
IL-, and GILZ mRNA levels in PBMCs () for re-
pression of selected immunomodulatory genes by MPA
vs progesterone in BCG-induced PBMCs (), for
MPA vs progesterone on several other proinflammatory
cytokines such as interferon (IFN)-g and tumor ne-
crosis factor-alpha (TNF-a), in PBMCs and repression
of pDCs and T cell function (, ). Limited studies
on gene expression with LNG show that it has little
effect on expression of immune function genes at
equimolar concentrations compared with MPA (,
), whereas ETG has partial activity (), consistent
with its low potency and partial GR activity. Besides
investigating effects on gene expression, different re-
searchers have investigated effects of MPA on various
46
Hapgood et al
Mechanisms: Hormonal Contraception and HIV
Endocrine Reviews, February 2018, 39(1):36–78
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 functional properties of immune cells. Results in pri-
mary PBMCs show that MPA inhibits some immune
cell functions with potencies of ~. to  nM () and
others with potencies of ~ nM (). MPA, unlike
progesterone and NET, increases apoptosis in CD+
T cells with a potency of ~ nM (). Some limited
studies have been performed with progestins and HIV
in primary cells models, with MPA shown to increase
HIV- infection in nonactivated PBMCs with a potency
of ~. nM () and ~ nM for activated PBMCs,
unlike equimolar progesterone (). MPA has also
been shown to increase HIV- transcytosis on normal
epithelial cells with a potency of ~ nM, similar to
progesterone ().
Relationships between dose and biological mech-
anism, as well as effects on HIV and other infections,
have also been investigated in mouse and monkey
models, mainly for MPA. Some studies in animals
have been performed by attempting to use MPA doses
comparable to those in women on Depo-Provera (see
later “Animal Studies Addressing the Effects of Hor-
monal Concentration on the Acquisition of Genital
Pathogens”). Such studies in mice have shown that
MPA impairs mouse defense mechanisms and de-
velopment of virus-specific immunological memory at
~ nM, that is, around the upper limit of detected
Cmax serum levels in women on DMPA-IM (, ).
A more recent study in mice, with measured serum
levels of MPA of ~ to  nM, showed decreased genital
barrier function and increased susceptibility to herpes
simplex virus (HSV)- viral infection (). Very few
researchers have investigated dose–response analysis
of progestins in animals where they describe a full
dose–response curve. One such study in pigtail ma-
caques (DMPA at . mg/kg) measured the re-
lationship between vaginal epithelial thickness and
dose response and found that the potency for this
response was ~. nM, with an approximately
sigmoidal-shaped curve, consistent with receptor theory
(). Another monkey study using a low DMPA dose
designed to resemble human contraceptive use found
that simian HIV (SHIV) infections in DMPA-treated
pigtail macaques were .-fold higher than those of
controls (). However, the authors commented that
the study lacked sufficient power to determine whether
this effect is significant. MPA serum levels in these
monkeys varied from ~ ng/mL (about  nM) after
one injection to ~ ng/mL after four injections
(~ nM). More detailed discussion of the above effects
of HC on immune function, susceptibility to infec-
tionsm and their relevance to HIV- acquisition follows
in subsequent sections.
Taken together, it can be seen from the previous
that several studies in animals and ex vivo studies have
shown that MPA, unlike equimolar progesterone (,
, , , , ), can affect not only immune
function (, , , , , , , , ,
, ) but also several other biological effects
(, , ), including HIV- replication (, ),
at concentrations within the range of serum con-
centrations in DMPA-IM and DMPA-SC users
(average spanning ~ to  nM, and possibly higher
for DMPA-IM). The sensitivity of different responses
reported above varies in a gene- and cell-specific
manner (, , , , ), but most responses
have potencies (ECs) in the range  to  nM for
MPA, where investigated, with some potencies being
even lower (, , ).
The consequence of the previous is that DMPA
used in injectable contraception, when acting via the
GR, is likely to cause effects on immune function and
hence on susceptibility to HIV- and other STIs,
unlike NET, LNG, and luteal phase progesterone
concentrations. In target tissues and cells where the
GR is the most abundant receptor, very different re-
sponses will likely be obtained for MPA as compared
with NET and LNG and physiological concentrations
of progesterone (excluding pregnancy). Off-target
effects in these cells and tissues will most likely be
mediated via the GR. GR ligands, or GCs, play a crucial
role in most physiological functions, including in
maintaining homeostasis, metabolic, bone density,
central nervous system, hematopoietic, renal, re-
productive, and immune function (, , –).
GCs are potent regulators of most aspects of immune
function, with predominantly, but not exclusively (),
immunosuppressive effects. GCs regulate all aspects of
immune function and inflammation, including im-
mune cell trafficking and differentiation, proliferation,
cytokine and chemokine secretion, cytolytic activity,
effector function, and antibody production in immune
function cells (). GCs suppress cellular immunity
and the production of T helper (Th) cytokines, as well
as stimulate humoral immunity by enhancing the
secretion of Th-type anti-inflammatory cytokines (,
–, ). An appropriate immune response relies
on a delicate balance between appropriate activation of
the immune system and prevention of chronic im-
mune activation by feedback mechanisms. GCs, acting
via the GR, are also implicated in playing an important
role in HIV- pathogenesis and transcription of the
HIV- promoter or long terminal repeat (LTR) ().
Given the ubiquitous expression of the GR in almost
all cells in the body, in contrast to the AR, MR, and PR,
MPA could exert GC-like effects on most tissues and
cells. Additionally, because steroids are master regulators
of hundreds of genes involving multiple cellular pro-
cesses, taken together with the previous, it is likely that
progestins acting via the GR will exert effects on multiple
cellular and physiological processes, in multiple cell and
tissue types, at concentrations in the range of those
found in DMPA users, the extent of which will depend
on receptor and target cell MPA concentrations. Because
several progestins exhibit androgenic activity, albeit to
varying degrees, small differences in progestin actions via
the AR are likely to occur. Because most progestins do
“Differences in anti-MR activity
are likely to be substantial for
progestins relative to
progesterone.”
47
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00103
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 not bind to the MR, unlike progesterone, which is an
MR antagonist, differences in anti-MR activity are likely
to be substantial for progestins relative to progesterone.
In subsequent sections, we discuss in more depth the
present evidence and mechanisms of biological effects of
MPA, NET, LNG, and ETG in animal and ex vivo
models, in the context of susceptibility to HIV- and
other STIs (Fig. ; Tables , , and ) (, , , ,
, , –, –, , –).
TheFGT:SusceptibilitytoHIV-1andOtherSTIs
Effects of endogenous ovarian hormones
The structure of the FGT and effects of estrogen and
progesterone on FGT physiology have previously been
comprehensively reviewed (–). We provide
a brief overview with a focus on the issues particularly
relevant to hormones, contraceptives, and suscepti-
bility to infections.
The uterine endometrium in women of repro-
ductive age is composed of the stratum functionalis
(functional layer), the upper two-thirds of which
undergo the cyclical changes of proliferation and
degeneration during the menstrual cycle. The stratum
basalis (basal layer) is not shed during menstruation
and serves as the source of stem cells required for
tissue rebuilding (). The endometrial tissue has
three main cellular components: the luminal epithe-
lium and the epithelial glands that invaginate from the
uterine lumen consisting of a single monolayer of
columnar epithelium, the stromal tissue made up of
fibroblasts, and, finally, the blood vessels that are lined
by the endothelial tissues (). All three structural
components are exquisitely regulated by the two main
female reproductive steroid hormones: estrogen and
progesterone. Prior to puberty, the endometrial tissue
is quiescent, lined by a thin epithelium and glands,
a dense stroma, and thin blood vessels. Following
menarche (initiation of the menstrual cycle), the
Figure 3. Established biological mechanisms of MPA potentially affecting acquisition of HIV-1 in the FGT. The figure depicts the
mechanisms of MPA action for which experimental evidence has been obtained (Tables 3–5). Multiple effects of MPA are consistent
with actions via steroid receptors that regulate multiple genes and biological functions. (1) Decreased levels of soluble protective
mediators on the mucosal surface, including antimicrobial and antiviral factors and antibodies. (2) Increased secretion of inflammatory
mediators that may recruit and activate HIV-1 target cells and immune function cells involved in defense. Decreased expression of some
mediators that activate immune function, causing immunosuppression. (3) Changes in the composition of vaginal microbiota and
production of soluble factors by bacteria. (4) Increased infection with other viruses such as HSV-2. (5) Increased frequency of HIV-1
target cells in vaginal lumen, including CCR5+CD4+ T cells. (6) Barrier integrity and epithelial protective function. Decreased expression
of proteins involved in barrier integrity, increased barrier permeability. (7) Transcytosis. Increased uptake and transcytosis of HIV-1 via
single-layered columnar epithelium of the endocervix and upper FGT. (8) Increased frequency of tissue-resident target cells and
elevated CCR5+ expression on CD4+ T cells. Increased frequency of macrophages and decreased frequency of regulatory T cells in
endometrium. (9) Innate immune response. Decreased early innate immune responses in FGT mediated by pDCs. (10) Adaptive
immune response. Decreased antigen presentation by professional antigen-presenting cells and decreased induction and maintenance
of T and B cell responses. (11) Increased proliferation of HIV-1 in target T cells.
48
Hapgood et al
Mechanisms: Hormonal Contraception and HIV
Endocrine Reviews, February 2018, 39(1):36–78
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 cyclical pattern of hormones establishes a monthly
cycle of endometrial tissue proliferation and differ-
entiation, followed by tissue destruction and re-
building, that is only interrupted by pregnancy. After
menopause, the endometrium undergoes a gradual
atrophy, ultimately resulting in a thin endometrium
with flat epithelium and cystic glands ().
The endometrium undergoes dramatic changes on
a cyclical basis during a woman’s reproductive years,
primarily in response to estrogen and progesterone
(). In a normal menstrual cycle, the endometrium
undergoes proliferation in response to increasing
levels of estrogen during the proliferative phase of the
cycle. During this time, the endometrial thickness
increases by .-fold due to extensive proliferation of
glands, stroma, and blood vessels. The active pro-
liferation of the endometrial epithelium results in the
glands growing and becoming tortuous (). After
ovulation, the secretion of progesterone leads to arrest
of glandular proliferation and change to complex
secretory activity. The most notable change during the
secretory phase is in the blood vessels, with the ar-
terioles undergoing proliferation and extensive coiling
to form the spiral arteries in preparation for potential
embryo implantation (, ). In the absence of
implantation, the corpus luteum wanes and there is
withdrawal of progesterone and estrogens, resulting in
stromal breakdown, disruption of blood vessels, and
shedding of the stratum functionalis.
The endometrial body in women, also known as the
fundus, narrows at the inferior end forming the cervical
canal, which projects a short distance into the vagina.
The part of the cervix superior to the vagina is called the
endocervix whereas the inferior part, facing the vagina,
is called the ectocervix (, ). The endometrium is
connected to the endocervix via the constricted internal
orifice called the internal os and the ectocervix is
connected to vagina via the external os. The cervix has
a unique morphology in that the two parts of the cervix,
the endocervix and the ectocervix, are lined by different
Table 3. Summary of Ex Vivo Data
Reported Effect
Progestin
Concentration
Model
Reference
Note
↑ HIV-1 proliferation in PBMCs
MPA
.0.01 nM
Human PBMCs
(129)
↓ Cytokine production by PBMCs and
activated T cells
MPA
.10 nM
Human PBMCs
(112, 122, 125, 126)
NET and LNG did not exert
any effect.
ETG
.1000 nM
(126)
↓ Levels of CD40 and CD80 on DCs
MPA
.0.31 nM
Human primary DCs
(127)
Consistent with animal
and clinical studies ➀.
↓ Induction of T cell proliferation by DCs
LNG
.62 nM
(144)
↓ Production of IFN-a and TNF-a
by pDCs
MPA
.10 nM
Human PBMCs
(126)
Consistent with a clinical
study (145) ➀. NET and
LNG did not exert any
effect.
ETG
.1000 nM
(126)
↑ Surface levels of CCR5 and CXCR4
on T cells
MPA
1000 nM
Human PBMCs
(122)
Direct effect of MPA may
contribute to increased
frequency of CCR5+ T
cells in DMPA-using
women ➁.
↑ Uptake and transcytosis of HIV-1 by
epithelial cells
MPA
1 nM
Human primary genital
epithelial cells
(130)
Consistent with a clinical
and an animal study ➂.
↑ IL-12 and ↓ IL-10 production by
epithelial cells
MPA
.1.5 nM
Human ectocervical
epithelial cell line
(109)
Consistent with increased
inflammation observed
in some clinical studies ➃.
↑ IL-8 and RANTES
1 nM
Primary epithelial cells
(146)
Consistent with some clinical
studies ➄.
↓ IL-6
MPA
1–25 nM
Human endocervical
epithelial cell line
and primary cells
(115, 130)
Consistent with decreased
inflammation observed
in some clinical studies ➅.
No effect with NET (115).
↓ IL-8
The numbered circles in the last columns of Tables 3, 4 and 5 indicate consistency in mechanisms between ex vivo, clinical and animal studies. Each number in a circle indicates
a particular effect consistent across the Tables.
49
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00103
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 types of mucosal epithelia. Whereas the endocervix is
lined by a monolayer of columnar epithelium, a well-
differentiated squamous epithelium lines the ectocervix.
The columnar epithelium is tall, mucin secreting, and
invaginates into the underlying stroma to form “glan-
dular-like” structures. The squamous epithelium is
stratified into three layers: () the basal cells, () the
intermediate cells, and () the superficial cells. It un-
dergoes continuous renewal through the processes
of proliferation, differentiation, and maturation ().
Differences have been noted in the response of the three
layers of cells to female sex hormones. Estrogen pri-
marily induces proliferation and maturation of all three
layers and desquamation, whereas progesterone causes
thickening of the intermediate layer. ERs are expressed
at similar levels and in all three layers of cells throughout
the menstrual cycle (, ). PRs are expressed in
intermediate cells during the secretory phase and
pregnancy () and in endocervical columnar epi-
thelial cells during the proliferative phase (). When
the progesterone-to-estrogen ratio is high, such as
during pregnancy or the secretory phase of the men-
strual cycle, the intermediate layer predominates. When
the estrogen-to-progesterone ratio is higher, such as
during the proliferative phase, superficial cells are
predominant. In the absence of hormones, the squa-
mous epithelium stays undifferentiated ().
The area of the cervix where the columnar epi-
thelium transitions to stratified squamous is known as
the “squamo-columnar transition zone” (). In adult
reproductive-aged women, this squamo-columnar
junction is usually inside the cervical canal. Under
Table 4. Summary of Data from Clinical Studies
Reported Effect
Progestin/
Form of HC
Reference
Note
↑ Surface levels of CCR5 on peripheral
T cells
DMPA-IM
(147)
May reflect increased T cell activation or a direct effect of MPA on the levels of surface
CCR5 ➁.
LNG-IUD
(147)
↑ Frequency of CCR5+ T cells in FGT
mucosa
DMPA-IM
(148)
May reflect infiltration of activated T cells or a direct effect of MPA on the
levels of surface CCR5, as shown for injectables (150) ➁.
LNG-IUD users exhibited decreased frequency of CCR5 T cells in the endometrium
and cervix (151). One study showed increased macrophages and decreased regulatory
T cells in endometrium (152).
COC
(149)
DMPA-IM or
NET-EN
(150)
↓ Production of IFN-a and TNF-a by
circulating pDCs
DMPA-IM
(153)
Consistent with ex vivo and animal studies (126, 154) ➀.
ETG
(NuvaRing)
↓ Thickness of vaginal epithelium
DMPA-IM
(155)
Significant epithelial thinning was not observed in most studies in humans
(148, 156–158).
↑ Genital mucosal permeability
DMPA-IM
(133)
Consistent with an animal model study ➂.
↓ Genital expression of DSG1a
Permeability effect consistent with ex vivo study (130). Consistent with a clinical
study ➂.
↓ Cervicovaginal levels of HBD2, SLPI, or
other antiviral factors
DMPA-IM
(159–161)
Some reports show no effect for SLPI (159, 160, 162–164) or HBD2 (163) for
DMPA-IM.
COC or LNG-
IUD
(165)
↑ Cervicovaginal levels of select
proinflammatory cytokines and
chemokines
DMPA-IM
(159, 160,
162, 166)
Consistent with increased expression of IL-12 by epithelial cells ➃. Increased IL-8 and
RANTES consistent with ex vivo study for MPA (130) ➄. Some studies show
broadly proinflammatory effects (162, 163) for DMPA-IM.
NET-EN
(162)
COC
(160)
LNG-IUD
(166)
↓ Cervicovaginal levels of select cytokines
and chemokines
DMPA-IM or
NET-EN
(167)
Decreased IL-6 consistent with ex vivo studies for MPA (115, 130) ➅. Decreased
RANTES consistent with ex vivo study for MPA (115) ➅. Some studies show
a broadly immunosuppressive effect for injectables (167).
DMPA-IM
(153)
The numbered circles in the last columns of Tables 3, 4 and 5 indicate consistency in mechanisms between ex vivo, clinical and animal studies. Each number in a circle indicates
a particular effect consistent across the Tables.
50
Hapgood et al
Mechanisms: Hormonal Contraception and HIV
Endocrine Reviews, February 2018, 39(1):36–78
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 certain physiological or pathological conditions, the
squamo-columnar zone moves toward the external os,
exposing the endocervical columnar epithelium to the
ectocervical and vaginal environment. This phenome-
non is called cervical ectopy (). The position of the
squamo-columnar junction is important because ab-
normal precancerous squamous tissue is most prev-
alent in this area. Moreover, cervical ectopy has been
correlated with increased susceptibility to some STIs in
a number of studies (–).
The vagina is a muscular tube that extends from
the cervix to the external genitalia. The vaginal wall is
composed of the mucosal lining composed of the
stratified epithelium, similar to the ectocervix, the
subepithelial stroma, and the smooth muscle layer.
The vaginal epithelium is very responsive to estrogen
levels (). Studies that have measured the thickness
of the vaginal epithelium show a maximum of . 6
. layers present in women during the follicular phase
of the menstrual cycle and decrease to  6 . layers
during the luteal phase (). Nonovulating women
had a mean of  6 . layers compared with . 6
. layers in ovulating women (). The vaginal
epithelium is covered with a mucus layer and plays an
important barrier function. A lower pH is important
for protection against pathogens. Sex hormone re-
ceptors are expressed throughout the vaginal tissue
and are particularly high in the epithelium (). ER
levels are downregulated after menopause (). PR
levels are highest when estrogen levels are high ().
Stromal cells also express ERs that are important for
vaginal cell proliferation, whereas ER expression on
both stroma and epithelium is important for differ-
entiation and maturation of the stratified squamous
epithelium (). Some researchers have suggested
that the superficial layers of the squamous epithelium
are the equivalent of “stratum corneum” found in
the epidermis consisting of terminally differentiated,
keratinized enucleated, dead and flattened cells ().
Following menopause, atrophy occurs in vaginal
mucosa, primarily as a result of the loss of estrogen.
The atrophic vaginal wall is thinner with few in-
termediate and superficial cells. The lower estrogen
levels also lead to lower glycogen levels, changes in
microflora, and increased pH ().
Modulation of immune environment by
ovarian hormones
Tightly regulated production of estrogen and pro-
gesterone in the menstrual cycle exerts a dramatic
Table 5. Summary of Data From Animal Studies
Reported Effect
Progestin
Organism/Model
Reference
Note
↑ Risk of SIV and SHIV infection following vaginal exposure
DMPA
Rhesus macaque
(37, 168, 169)
↑ SIV and SHIV plasma levels in the acute phase of infection
DMPA
Rhesus macaque
(37, 168)
↑ Viral genetic complexity and frequency of
CXCR4-using variants
DMPA
Rhesus macaque
(37)
↓ Protective effect of prior immunization against SIV
DMPA
Rhesus macaque
(168, 169)
↓ Thickness of vaginal epithelium
DMPA
Rhesus macaque
(170)
Epithelial thinning is less profound or
undetectable in humans.
DMPA
Pigtail macaque
(135, 171)
DMPA
Mouse
(172)
LNG
Pigtail macaque
(173)
↓ Control of Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection
DMPA
Mouse
(131)
Consistent with the direct effect of MPA on
immune cells ➀.
↓ Antigen-specific cytokine production
↑ Susceptibility to HSV-1 and HSV-2
DMPA
Mouse
(36, 132, 133)
Consistent with the direct effect of MPA on
immune cells ➀.
↓ Virus-specific immune response
↑ Genital mucosal permeability and invasion of endogenous
vaginal microbiota
DMPA
Mouse
(133)
Consistent with a clinical study ➂.
↓ Genital expression of DSG1a
LNG
↑ Susceptibility to C. trachomatis
LNG
Mouse
(144)
Consistent with the direct effect of MPA on
immune cells ➀.
↓ Activation and function of DCs and T cells
↑ a4b7 on CD4+ cells in endocervix
DMPA
Rhesus macaque
(174)
The numbered circles in the last columns of Tables 3, 4 and 5 indicate consistency in mechanisms between ex vivo, clinical and animal studies. Each number in a circle indicates
a particular effect consistent across the Tables.
51
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00103
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 effect on immune processes in the female reproductive
tract and other mucosal tissues, as reviewed elsewhere
(, –). The luteal phase of the ovarian cycle is
associated with decreased production of antibodies,
reduced cell-mediated cytotoxic activity, and decreased
antigen presentation capacity of professional antigen-
presenting cells (). The state of partial immune
suppression is observed in tissues of the upper (ovaries,
fallopian tubes, and uterus) and lower FGT, composed
of the endocervix, ectocervix, and vagina. Interestingly,
pregnant or postpartum women with high proges-
terone levels have been shown to be more susceptible
to HIV- (–), although whether this association
is confounded by behavioral factors is unclear. It is
thought that the evolutionary purpose of progesterone-
mediated immune regulation is the reduction of the
potentially harmful immune response to an implanting
embryo. Importantly, however, note that progesterone
can simultaneously exert stimulatory and suppressive
effects, depending on the target cell population, ac-
tivation state, and immune milieu, and that an in-
flammatory process is typically accompanied by an
anti-inflammatory regulatory reaction. In general,
progesterone shifts the focus of the immune system
from a Th response (CD+ Th cells primarily support
CD+ T cell–mediated cytotoxic mechanisms) to
a Th response (CD+ Th cells primarily support
the production of antibodies by B cells). Estrogen
exerts either a stimulatory or suppressive effect
depending on cell type, environment, and hormone
concentration ().
Mechanisms of HIV-1 acquisition in the FGT
To enter the target cell, HIV- utilizes the CD re-
ceptor and one of two chemokine coreceptors, either
C-C chemokine receptor type  (CCR) or C-X-C
chemokine receptor type  (CXCR). HIV- virions
that use the CCR coreceptor are referred to as R-
tropic and virions using the CXCR coreceptor as X-
tropic (). R-tropic viruses are more common in
the initial phase of infection; X-tropic viruses are
typically associated with an advanced disease state
characterized by rapid T cell depletion, immune
system collapse, and opportunistic infections that
mark the onset of AIDS (). Infection with HIV-
occurs by the transfer of blood, semen, vaginal fluid,
pre-ejaculate, or breast milk. In blood and body fluids,
HIV is present in the form of free virus particles and
infected immune cells. Both X and R HIV variants
are present in body fluids that are passed during sexual
intercourse. Interestingly, a selection process leads to
a predominant transmission of the R-tropic virus
(); however, the underlying mechanisms of the
selection process are unclear. A recent study suggested
that cervicovaginal inflammation may affect which
HIV- variant infects the FGT (). Typically, only
a single or a very limited number of virions are
transmitted from the donor, giving rise to the
transmitted/founder population that rapidly dissem-
inates throughout the body (). The primary cell
types that support HIV- proliferation in HIV-–-
infected individuals are CD+ T cells (Th cells) and
macrophages. However, HIV can enter other non-
target cells such as CD+ T cells, B cells, and epithelial
cells using noncanonical receptors, although whether
any viral replication can occur in these cells is unclear.
As with all lentiviruses, HIV- replicates most effec-
tively in cells that are actively proliferating. HIV-
preferentially replicates in Th cells (CD+CD+) that
express the markers of the memory T cell subset
(CCR+) and proliferation (e.g., Ki+) (, ).
However, depletion of CD+ T cells in SIV-infected
macaques leads to increased viremia due to a massive
infection of macrophages, microglia, and possibly
other cell types, indicating that CD+ T cells are not
necessarily required for SIV proliferation ().
The FGT provides multiple layers of protection
against incoming pathogens, including circulating,
tissue-resident, and transmigrating immune cells, the
mucosal epithelial barrier, and secreted molecules with
antibacterial and antiviral functions (, ). Addi-
tional protective responses are activated following the
migration of pathogen across the mucosal barrier,
including rapid innate immune responses, induction
of adaptive responses and immunological memory,
and accelerated reactivation of memory T and B cells
following reinfection. The low probability of HIV-
acquisition via heterosexual intercourse (estimated at
: to :) is a testimony to the effectiveness of
genital barrier function ().
Evaluation of the effect of different forms of HC on
HIV- acquisition is hindered by the fact that, despite
decades of intensive research, our understanding of
mechanisms of mucosal transmission of HIV- is
rather limited (, ). It is unclear whether most
heterosexual transmission events occur via free virus,
cell-associated virus (donor cells that are either pro-
ductively infected or carry membrane-associated virus
or recipient cells that are present in FGT lumen and re-
enter the mucosa following infection), specific capture
by dendritic processes of LCs protruding from the
epithelial layer to the vaginal lumen, transmigration of
virus between epithelial junctions of columnar epi-
thelium of endocervix and upper FGT, transcytosis
through columnar epithelial cells, transport of sperm-
associated virus to the upper FGT, or transmission via
the microabrasions and tears in vaginal epithelium. All
of these mechanisms have been described and are
likely to occur in vivo (, –). Furthermore, it is
unclear whether HIV- is preferentially transmitted
via the multilayer stratified squamous epithelium of
the ectocervix and vagina or single-layer columnar
epithelium of the endocervix and endometrium. It has
been argued that most heterosexual transmissions
occur through the pluristratified epithelial layer of
the vaginal and ectocervical mucosa. The combined
52
Hapgood et al
Mechanisms: Hormonal Contraception and HIV
Endocrine Reviews, February 2018, 39(1):36–78
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 surfaces of the vaginal wall and ectocervix exceeds by
-fold the surface area of the endocervix. In sup-
port of this argument, HIV- infection occurs in
female macaques after surgical removal of the uterus
(–) and in women who lack a uterus at birth
(, ). However, a recent study in macaques
exposed to an SIV-based dual reporter system dem-
onstrated that the virus rapidly disseminates across the
entire lower and upper FGT, including the vagina,
ectocervix and endocervix, ovaries, and local draining
lymph nodes, within  hours of exposure (). The
mechanisms of HIV- transmission have been reviewed
previously and are not discussed in detail in this
review (, –).
Progestins and Hypoestrogenism
Different forms of HC may have different effects on
HIV- acquisition due to indirect effects on endog-
enous levels of estradiol. A comparison between mean
circulating estradiol levels for different forms of HC
reveals that DMPA-IM users are typically hypo-
estrogenic (, , ), with estradiol levels similar
to those seen in postmenopausal women and lower
than for any other form of progestin-only HC, in-
cluding NET-EN (Fig. ) (). Women on HC have
lower estrogen levels than do those occurring in the
luteal phase, with a rank order of estrogen levels of
Mirena . Implanon = Jadelle . NET-EN . DMPA
(). Hypoestrogenism may increase HIV- acqui-
sition via effects on vaginal tract integrity, FGT
microbiota (e.g., a lactobacilli-dominated vaginal
microbiome), and immune function in the FGT
(, ). The effects of estrogen are complex and
concentration-dependent (, ). Estrogen is gener-
ally shown to have protective effects for viral infection
in mammalian FGTs (,  , –). Col-
lectively, these studies suggest that estrogen may
provide a substantial protective effect, both in pre-
venting the acquisition of HIV- and other STDs in
postmenopausal women, as well as by vaginal ad-
ministration to women on DMPA ().
Smith et al. () have demonstrated that estrogen
applied systemically in the form of subcutaneous
implants protects against the intravaginal challenge of
ovariectomized female rhesus macaques with highly
pathogenic SIVMAC. The block appears to be at the
mucosal tissue level because rechallenging the animals
by submucosal injection resulted in a productive in-
fection. In a subsequent study, the authors showed that
topical treatment with an intravaginal cream con-
taining estrogen protects animals against intravaginal
challenge (). Topical application of estrogen
resulted in a minimal increase in serum estriol or
luteinizing hormone levels. In one study,  of  control
animals but none of  estrogen-treated animals be-
came infected; in the second study, only  of  of
estrogen-treated animals, compared with  of  un-
treated controls, became infected. These studies sug-
gest that vaginally applied estrogen may represent an
inexpensive and safe method of HIV- prevention.
However, note that most studies addressing the effect
of estrogen were performed in ovariectomized ma-
caques, not in intact cycling animals; this may have an
important implication on the physiology of FGT (,
).
Potential mechanisms of estrogen-induced re-
sistance of genital mucosal tissue to HIV- infection
include increased thickness of the vaginal epithelium
resulting in a barrier blocking the access of HIV- to
parabasal and subepithelial target cells (, , ,
), change in vaginal pH (, –), change in
the production of chemokines and secretion of anti-
viral factors, and alteration of the type, frequency, and
distribution of epithelial immune cells (, , ).
An inverse correlation between epithelial layer
thickness and susceptibility to SIV in estrogen- and
progesterone-treated macaques was observed (,
, ). One study suggested that estrogen decreases
the frequency of LCs in the vaginal epithelial and
stromal tissue (); however, this observation has not
been supported by other studies and needs to be re-
evaluated (). Estrogen treatment decreases cervi-
covaginal pH, making the environment hostile to the
virus, and stimulates the growth of protective HO-
producing lactobacilli (, , , –). However,
because all of these studies were performed either in
SIV models or ex vivo, it remains to be determined
whether estrogen has similar effects in human vaginal
epithelium in vivo.
Animal Studies Addressing the Effect of HC on
the Acquisition of Genital Pathogens
Studies in nonhuman primates indicate that treatment
with DMPA enhances the risk of SIV acquisition
following vaginal exposure to the virus and significant
increases viral levels in the acute phase of infection (,
, ). DMPA was shown to enhance the genetic
complexity of the replicating virus, increase the rep-
lication of the CXCR-dependent subtypes, and slow
the induction of cellular immune response ().
DMPA also reduces the protective effect of prior
immunization with attenuated virus (, ). DMPA is
routinely used in nonhuman primate (primarily rhesus
and pigtail macaque) studies to ensure effective SIV
acquisition following vaginal exposure. The combi-
nation of a high challenge dose with DMPA treat-
ment typically results in % infection rate whereas
in the absence of DMPA the infectivity is lower. In
contrast, DMPA does not affect the course of SIV
infection following injection of SIV under the genital
mucosal barrier or following intravenous challenge
(, ).
“DMPA has been shown in
a number of rodent studies to
decrease the epithelial
thickness significantly,
consequently affecting the
susceptibility to viruses and
bacteria.”
53
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00103
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 To correctly interpret the studies in nonhuman
primates and assess their relevance for HIV- ac-
quisition in humans, it is important to consider the
differences between humans and macaques with re-
spect to the characteristic features of the menstrual
cycle, physiology of the genital tract, and the relative
effect of endogenous and exogenous hormones on the
vaginal and ectocervical epithelium. Some primates
undergo cycling associated with seasonal mating; this
can be altered in captivity. As discussed later, rhesus
and pigtail macaques respond to treatment with
DMPA or LNG by significant thinning of vaginal
epithelium (, , , ). However, the change
in epithelial thickness and number of epithelial levels
is less profound or undetectable in humans (,
–). Macaques intravaginally exposed to SIV are
less susceptible to infection when in the follicular
compared with the luteal ovarian phase (, ).
This susceptibility pattern reflects the cycling of epi-
thelial thickness and degree of keratinization that are
highest at the peak of the follicular phase around
ovulation and lowest during menses (). Because
female macaques are more likely to have intercourse
during ovulation, increased thickness and keratiniza-
tion of the epithelium represents a physiological mech-
anism preventing the traumatic effect of intercourse
and infection with pathogens introduced during the
intercourse.
In most studies, the dose of MPA per kilogram of
body weight used in macaques is higher than the dose
delivered by DMPA-IM in humans. In earlier papers,
 mg (~ to  mg/kg body weight) of MPA was used
in macaques compared with  mg (~ mg/kg) in
DMPA-IM in humans; therefore, an ~- to .-fold
higher dose per kilogram of body weight was used in
macaques. The reported Cmax of MPA in rhesus
macaques  days following injection of  mg of
DMPA is ~. ng/mL or  nM (). This is similar to
the reported average Cmax values in humans using
DMPA-IM (see “Contraceptives: Actions, Types, and
Serum Concentrations” previously). In rhesus ma-
caques, MPA concentrations decrease to ~ ng/mL
(. nM) by day , a concentration that is comparable
to humans on DMPA-IM (Table ). Further com-
plicating the interpretation of experimental data
obtained in animal models is the possibility that
substantial differences may exist between humans and
nonhuman primates in the pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics of MPA and other hormones
(, , ). Further studies are required to es-
tablish this, given the difficulty in comparing non-
equivalent doses between humans and monkeys in
nonparallel studies (), the large degree of varia-
tion in reported MPA serum concentrations between
studies and individuals on DMPA-IM in humans, as
well as the variation in apparent half-life values for the
latter due to different sampling times for the estab-
lishment of Cmax (, ). Using similar doses per
kilogram of body weight in monkeys and humans may
not result in comparable serum levels because meta-
bolism may vary between species (). Two studies
have investigated the effects of equivalent doses in
monkeys compared with women. Radzio et al. ()
have defined a -mg DMPA monthly dose (. to .
mg/kg) in pigtail macaques that suppresses ovulation
and mimics other biological effects seen in women on
DMPA-IM, and results in similar Cmax serum con-
centrations of ~ ng/mL ( nM). In this model, the
authors found a correlation between plasma MPA
concentration, epithelial thickness, and CD+ T cell
density in vaginal tissue but little or no effect on
plasma viremia following vaginal SHIV infection. In
another study in pigtail macaques, Butler et al. ()
applied . mg DMPA/kg monthly, resulting in peak
MPA serum levels from ~ ng/mL ( nM) after one
injection to ~ ng/mL ( nM) after four injections,
both within the reported wide range of DMPA-IM
Cmax values in women. DMPA-treated macaques
became infected after a median of . intravaginal
challenges with SHIV, compared with  exposures
needed in controls.
Several studies in small animal models have also
attempted to mimic MPA levels comparable to those
observed in women using DMPA-IM. In one study,
mice were injected weekly with  mg of MPA, resulting
in serum concentrations at the upper limit of detected
Cmax levels of MPA in women (~ nM) (). At
this concentration, MPA impaired the control of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis and inhibited antigen-
specific cytokine production (), raising the im-
portant question as to whether HC affects control of
M. tuberculosis in women. Importantly, MPA radically
enhances the susceptibility of mice to HSV- and
HSV- and is commonly used to facilitate the infection
in this model of sexually transmitted disease ().
Treatment of mice with  mg of DMPA changes the
susceptibility to genital HSV- infection and inhibits
local innate and adaptive immune responses ().
Injection of mice with  to  mg DMPA prior to HSV-
infection results in impaired function of DCs, T cells,
and reduction of virus-specific immunological memory
(). A recent elegant study in mice injected with  mg
of DMPA demonstrated reduced genital expression
of the desmosomal cadherin desmoglein-a (DSGa),
increased genital mucosal permeability, and increased
susceptibility to HSV- viral infection (). A DMPA-
mediated increase in mucosal permeability promoted
tissue inflammation most likely by facilitating the in-
vasion of endogenous vaginal microbiota. A similar
effect was observed with LNG (). In a murine model
of intranasal Chlamydia trachomatis infection, LNG
suppresses DC activation and function, inhibits the
formation of T cell immunity, and increases suscep-
tibility to the pathogen ().
In both nonhuman primate and rodent models,
DMPA has a profound effect on vaginal histology.
54
Hapgood et al
Mechanisms: Hormonal Contraception and HIV
Endocrine Reviews, February 2018, 39(1):36–78
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 DMPA and Norplant implant (LNG) lead to signifi-
cant thinning of vaginal epithelium in rhesus ma-
caques within  to  days of the start of treatment,
but the effect is rapidly reversed following treatment
withdrawal (). Studies done in pigtailed macaques
show a similar thinning of vaginal epithelium fol-
lowing DMPA and COC (LNG/EE) treatment ().
However, studies in untreated nonhuman primates
show that there may be changes to vaginal epithelium
thickness even during the normal menstrual cycle,
with % thinning of epithelium in pigtail macaques
during the secretory phase in pigtailed macaques ().
In rodents, the phenomenon of vaginal epithelium
thickness being regulated by sex hormones is well
documented, with estrogen leading to significant
thickening and progesterone causing thinning of
vaginal epithelium (, ). DMPA has been shown
in a number of rodent studies to decrease the epithelial
thickness significantly, consequently affecting the
susceptibility to viruses and bacteria (, , ).
Effects of HC on the Acquisition of Other
Sexually Transmitted Pathogens
The World Health Organization estimates that every
year there are  million new infections with pri-
marily one of the four bacterial STIs, that is, chlamydia,
gonorrhea, syphilis, and trichomoniasis (, ). In
addition to these,  million new HSV- infections
occur annually (). Although most of the STI
burden is borne by developing countries, bacterial STIs
represent a major problem in developed countries as
well. Women typically have more asymptomatic in-
fections compared with men and suffer dispropor-
tionately more severe consequences from bacterial
STIs, including pelvic inflammatory disease, infertility,
and ectopic pregnancy. Furthermore, STIs have been
shown to increase the risk of HIV acquisition (,
). Whether the use of HC increases the risk of STI
acquisition has very important public health impli-
cations given that almost  million women use
various forms of HC worldwide (, ); however,
a comprehensive examination of this topic is beyond
the scope of the current review. In this section we focus
primarily on evidence regarding the effect of hor-
mones and HCs on STIs that have been shown to
increase the risk of HIV acquisition, because increase
in these coinfections can indirectly enhance HIV risk.
A number of clinical studies have examined the
relationship between the use of HC and acquisition of
STIs, with no clear etiological association. Two sys-
tematic reviews (, ) examined published studies
on this topic and concluded that overall there is
a positive correlation between oral contraceptive and
chlamydial infection, but not with gonorrhea, HSV-,
trichomoniasis, syphilis, and human papillomavirus
(HPV). Both reviews cited limitations in the amount
and quality of evidence from the studies. Among the
major drawbacks cited were small sample size, in-
adequate adjustment for confounding factors, and
questionable relevance of studies conducted in high-
risk subgroups to the general population. Most of
these studies on this topic examine the association
with COCs, DMPA-IM, and IUD, with few studies on
NET-EN and other forms of progestin-only methods
and none on newer combined hormonal methods,
including patches, rings, and injectables.
Whereas the prospective and cross-sectional
studies considered in systematic reviews did not
find strong evidence linking HCs with STI acquisition,
other studies have shown a link between HC use and
conditions such as cervical ectopy, which is associated
with acquisition of chlamydia, HPV, HIV, and CMV
[reviewed in Venkatesh and Cu-Uvin ()]. Similarly,
although HCs have not been shown to directly in-
crease HPV infection, a known cause of cervical
cancer, recent results from the EPIC Cohort suggest
hormonal factors as risk factors for cervical carcino-
genesis (). In this cohort, the number of full-term
pregnancies and long-term use of oral contraceptives
was associated with increased risk of developing
cervical intraepithelial neoplasia grade  and invasive
cervical cancer. Another recent prospective study
conducted in Rakai, Uganda, in HIV-– and HSV-
–negative women showed an adjusted hazard ratio of
. for HSV- acquisition in women using DMPA-
IM compared with women not on HC (). However,
the study power was low and the authors suggested
a larger study with more frequent follow-ups.
The underlying biological mechanism of how HCs
could facilitate the acquisition of STIs is still in-
completely understood and is an active area of in-
vestigation. A number of reviews have examined
the underlying mechanisms of hormonal influence
on STIs () and individual infections, including
chlamydia (). Many of these studies have examined
the effects of the reproductive cycle and exogenous
hormones, including DMPA-IM on STIs, and in-
cluding HSV-, chlamydia, and gonorrhea in animal
models, primarily rodents. No studies in nonhuman
primate models have examined the effect of hormones
on STIs, other than SIV (, ). Rodent data indicate
that overall estradiol is protective whereas progesterone
enhances primary infection to HSV- (). In mice,
DMPA was also shown to increase susceptibility to
HSV- and decrease immune responses (, ),
whereas estradiol treatment was recently shown to
enhance protection by augmenting antiviral Th re-
sponses (). Chlamydia infection may be enhanced by
both progesterone and estradiol, depending on the
animal model used and location of primary infection
(lower or upper genital tract) (), whereas gonorrhea
infection is exacerbated by estradiol in experimental
models (). A recent systematic review reported that
bacterial vaginosis (BV) was reduced and vaginal
“More studies are needed to
confirm which of these
mechanisms are key for an
HC-related increase in
susceptibility to STIs in
women.”
55
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00103
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 candidiasis was not increased in DMPA-IM (and most
likely NET-EN) users, but COCs (progestin compo-
nent not recorded) may predispose for vaginal can-
didiasis ().
Combined information from animal studies and ex
vivo and in vitro studies suggests a number of possible
mechanisms of hormone/HC effect, including ()
increased local inflammation and chemokine pro-
duction resulting in recruitment of target cells to
the genital tract, () increased mucosal permeability
promoting inflammation, () increased cervical ectopy,
() thinning of vaginal epithelium and reduced se-
cretion of protective factors, and () a hypoestrogenic
effect resulting in decreased colonization with lacto-
bacilli, resulting in changes in pH and increased
colonization by BV-associated bacteria. More studies
are needed to confirm which of these mechanisms are
key for an HC-related increase in susceptibility to STIs
in women.
Contraceptives, Immune Function, and HIV-1
Acquisition in the FGT
Multiple lines of evidence from clinical, animal, and in
vitro studies indicate that HCs affect the function of
the immune system, both systemically and locally, by
altering the ability of the FGT to protect against in-
vading pathogens (Tables –). Several studies have
reported that MPA is immunosuppressive in vivo and
ex vivo, as outlined later.
Immunosuppression is broadly defined as a re-
duction in the capacity of the immune system to react
to a challenge, for example, by an invading pathogen.
Deliberately induced immunosuppression is used to
prevent a rejection of an organ transplant or to ame-
liorate the effect of an autoimmune disease. Non-
deliberate immunosuppression is associated with aging,
malnutrition, cancer, and several chronic infections,
including HIV-/AIDS. Immunosuppression affects
both innate and adaptive immune systems. The innate
immune system is an evolutionarily older type of
defense that protects the host in a nonspecific manner.
In contrast, the adaptive immune system, mediated
primarily by T cells and antibody-producing B cells, is
evolutionarily younger and provides antigen-specific
immunological memory after the initial response to
a pathogen, leading to an enhanced response to sub-
sequent encounters. The professional antigen-presenting
cells, such as DCs and macrophages, play a critical role in
connecting the innate immune system with the
adaptive responses. As outlined later, MPA was re-
ported to regulate several functions of both the innate
and adaptive immune systems.
Effects on the function of DCs and pDCs
DCs are professional antigen-presenting cells that are
indispensable for the initiation of adaptive immune
response. DCs uptake and degrade the antigen and
present short peptides to CD+ and CD+ T cells to
induce antigen-specific immune responses. Studies
in animal models demonstrated that DMPA-IM
suppresses DC function, reduces expansion of
virus-specific T cells, and impairs the development of
virus-specific immunologic memory (). Vicetti
Miguel et al. () reported that DMPA administered
to female mice prior to mucosal tissue infection with
HSV- suppressed DC activation and surface levels of
costimulatory molecules CD and CD. This in-
hibition of DC activation subsequently impaired ex-
pansion of virus-specific T cells and the development
of HSV-–specific immunologic memory. In a sub-
sequent study, the group demonstrated that MPA
significant reduced CD and CD expression on
human primary DCs and reduced their ability to
induce T cell proliferation at a concentration as low as
. nM ().
In addition to its effect on conventional DCs, MPA
also suppresses the function of pDCs. pDCs are a key
immune population that function as sentinel cells with
the ability to recognize early viral and bacterial in-
fections. pDCs orchestrate antiviral response by the
release of soluble factors such as IFN-a (–).
IFN-a–producing pDCs were shown to accumulate in
the genital lamina propria early in SIV infection and
are likely to contribute to the early immune response
to the virus in monkeys (). In vitro, MPA reduces
the production of IFN-a in response to Toll-like
receptor (TLR)  and  ligands at MPA concentra-
tions of ~ nM corresponding to the Cmax observed
in the serum of DMPA-IM users (, ). In vivo,
the use of DMPA-IM and NuvaRing (releasing ETG)
is associated with a decreased function of circulating
pDCs in HIV-–uninfected women (). The latter
study shows that the function of pDCs is altered by
exposure to systemic concentrations of MPA in vivo in
DMPA-IM users. These data, consistent with a study
in mice () and further supported by decreased
levels of IFN-a in plasma and cervicovaginal lavage of
DMPA-IM users (), demonstrate the in vivo im-
munosuppressive effect of DMPA-IM on this critical
innate immune cell population. Suppression of pDC
function may tip the balance between the proliferation
of a founder viral population and early immune
control during the acute phase of infection in favor of
the transmitted virus.
Less information is available on the potential effect
of other progestins on the function of DCs and pDCs.
Quispe Calla et al. () reported that LNG inhibits
the activation of human DCs, lowers the expression of
CD, CD, and CD, and reduces their capacity
to promote T cell proliferation at concentrations
of $ nM. Additionally, treatment of mice with LNG
reduces DC function, reduces the recruitment of CD+
and CD+ T cells in lungs, and delays the clearance
C. trachomatis following intranasal infection (). The
56
Hapgood et al
Mechanisms: Hormonal Contraception and HIV
Endocrine Reviews, February 2018, 39(1):36–78
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 observed decreased function of pDCs in women using
NuvaRing raises a concern that should be addressed in
future studies (). Head-to-head comparison of the
effect of various progestins on the function of human
pDCs ex vivo demonstrated that progesterone, LNG,
and NET do not substantially inhibit pDCs ex vivo
whereas ETG exerts a partial suppressive effect at 
mM concentration (). The lack of an effect with
progesterone, LNG, and NET and lower potency of
ETG compared with MPA is consistent with their
lower relative affinities for the GR (Table ), as well as
the lower relative potencies of progesterone and NET
compared with MPA for repression of gene expression
via the GR (, , ).
Collectively, a substantial degree of coherence
exists between the clinical, animal, and ex vivo studies
indicating an immunosuppressive effect of MPA on
the function of DCs and pDCs, populations that are
critical to pathogen recognition, antigen presentation,
and induction of T cell responses. The effect is sys-
temic and occurs at concentrations equivalent to or
lower than the pharmacological levels of MPA fol-
lowing the administration of DMPA-IM or DMPA-
SC. Whether the potential effect of LNG and ETG on
DCs has any clinical implications remains to be
established.
Effects on intraepithelial LCs
HC may modulate the susceptibility to SIV and HIV-
by altering the function, frequency, and availability of
target cells in the vaginal epithelium and stroma. Of
particular interest is the population of LCs, a special-
ized type of DC that resides in the skin and is abundant
in the epithelial layer of the vaginal and ectocervical
mucosa of the female lower reproductive tract.
Dendritic processes from LCs extend to the lumen of
the vagina to sample antigens and bacteria. Several
reports employing isolated human LCs and explant
models of HIV- infection suggest that LCs acquire
the virus via CD, CCR, and Langerin-dependent
binding (, , ). LCs in the epidermis express
Langerin, a specific C-type lectin receptor involved in
HIV capture and destruction. Recently, the specific
mechanism leading to this HIV restriction was dis-
covered. Nevertheless, LCs can be infected and the way
HIV escapes this restriction needs to be investigated
(, ). Although only a few LCs may become
productively infected, they are equipped to transport
the membrane-associated virus to CD+ T cells and
macrophages in the lamina propria and draining
lymph nodes (Trojan Horse theory) (, , ). It
has been reported that exogenous estrogen decreases
() whereas progesterone increases () the fre-
quency of LCs in the human vaginal epithelial and
stromal tissue. In contrast, other studies using S as
a marker for vaginal LCs have not detected any
difference between DMPA-IM users and controls
(–). In a recent study involving a detailed
analysis of immune cell frequencies and epithelial
location of relevant cell populations in users of
DMPA-IM, NuvaRing, and COC and in control
volunteers, the frequency of intraepithelial LCs was
significant decreased in both COC and NuvaRing
users compared with either DMPA-IM users or
controls (). However, no significant difference in
LC density or localization was detected between
DMPA-IM users and controls, consistent with several
previous studies (–, ). Overall the studies are
inconsistent. As it has been previously suggested that
subsets of vaginal LCs differ in their expression of S
and CD markers (), differences in experimental
approaches and population markers may account for
the differences between studies. No study has effec-
tively addressed the potential effect of HC on the
functional properties of LCs such as their ability to
bind HIV- virions and transfer them to draining
lymph nodes. Thus, a substantial research gap exists in
this area of investigation.
Effects on the function, frequency, and infectivity
of T cells
Multiple studies have reported that HC affects the
function, frequency, and state of activation of T cells,
both systemically and locally in the FGT. Additionally,
HC was shown to exert a direct effect on the rate of
HIV- proliferation inside the infected T cell and on
the expression of surface receptors facilitating HIV-
entry. T cells are broadly divided into CD+ cytotoxic
T cells with the ability to recognize and kill infected
target cells and CD+ Th cells that promote the
function of CD+ T cells, B cells, and other compo-
nents of the immune system. CD+ Th cells are further
divided into Th cells that focus the immune response
primarily to cytotoxic responses, Th cells that pro-
mote humoral responses, and Th cells that play
a critical role in maintaining mucosal permeability. To
communicate and direct the immune system, T cells
produce a plethora of cytokines and chemokines.
MPA was shown to suppress the production of several
key T cell–derived regulators of cellular and humoral
immunity involved in the induction of mouse and
human immune response to invading pathogens in-
cluding IFN-g, IL-, IL-, IL-, IL-, IL-, macro-
phage inflammatory protein (MIP)-a, and TNF-a
(, , , , ). DMPA suppresses Myco-
bacterium bovis bacillus Calmette-Gu´
erin–induced
cytokine production in human PBMCs and inhibits
the function of cytotoxic T cells in DMPA-IM users
(, , , , ). In these studies, short-term
(-hour) coincubation of T cells with MPA resulted
in a significant inhibition of T cell function at MPA
concentrations equal to or higher than the Cmax in
DMPA-IM users ($ nM or . ng/mL). However,
prolonged exposure to progestins may enhance the
effect. MPA impairs effector function of CD+ T cells
interacting with HSV- latently infected neurons,
“The presence of a GR agonist
results in a translocation of
GR-VPR complex into the
nucleus and efficient proviral
integration.”
57
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00103
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 including their ability to produce IFN-g and TNF-a,
in - to -day ex vivo trigeminal ganglia cultures at
concentrations as low as . nM (). Additionally,
long-term exposure to progestins in vivo may enhance
their effect by altering the development of lymphoid
cell lineages and homeostasis of memory cell pop-
ulations. All of these factors may affect the functional
capacity of T cells to respond to the antigenic challenge
().
Ex vivo studies with freshly prepared, untouched
T cells obtained from blood or genital mucosal tissue
provide an opportunity for head-to-head comparison
between different types of progestins that may be
instrumental for informed decisions regarding prior-
itization of HC candidates for women at risk for
HIV- and other infections. Although MPA is im-
munosuppressive for selected regulators at concen-
trations from  nM to  nM, LNG and NET do not
inhibit the production of these cytokines by activated
T cells at a concentration as high as  mM, whereas
progesterone results in variable levels of repression but
with a potency at least -fold less than MPA (,
, , , ). These data thus suggest that LNG
and NET do not inhibit immune cell function at
systemic concentrations observed in HC users (,
, ). ETG suppresses the function of T cells at
concentrations $  mM. This concentration is above
the observed levels in plasma; however, local con-
centration in ETG of HC users may be substantially
higher than the concentration in plasma. As previously
discussed, NET and LNG have relatively low affinity
for the GR and do not appear to mediate trans-
repression of the selected genes involved in immune
regulation. ETG binds GR with intermediate affinity
(, ). Because the GR regulates transcription of
a variety of genes involved in immunity and in-
flammation (–, , , ), the differential
affinity for and activity of progestins via the GR
(MPA .. ETG . LNG ' NET) is consistent with
the hypothesis that progestins exert their suppressive
effect on T cell function primarily via the GR (, ,
, , , , ). Interestingly, patients who are
infected with HIV- display GC hypersensitivity as-
sociated with reduced T cell function, possibly due to
the specific binding of the HIV- accessory protein
Vpr to the GR coactivating motif (, , , ).
Thus, the sensitivity of T cells to the effect of GR-
binding progestins may be significantly enhanced in
the context of HIV- infection ().
Importantly, MPA directly increases the rate of
viral replication of HIV- in human PBMCs, CD+
T cells, and CD+ monocytes (, ). The effect on
viral proliferation is observed at concentrations as low
as . nM (). The observed increase in HIV-
replication may be caused by several possible mech-
anisms, including increased retention of HIV- cor-
eceptors on the surface of CD+ T cells, inhibition of
production of antiviral factors, and a direct effect on
HIV-
transcription.
Because
most
proliferation
probably takes place in CD+ T cells, MPA likely
affects CD+ T cells directly, although the contribution
of an indirect effect cannot be excluded. It is possible
that the enhancement of HIV- proliferation may be
mediated by direct binding of an activated GR-MPA
complex to a GC response element half-site located
within the HIV- LTR. However, although putative
GR binding sites have been located on the HIV- LTR,
GC agonists have been shown to both activate and
repress the viral LTR (–) [reviewed in Hapgood
and Tomasicchio ()]. Importantly, activation of the
GR releases unstimulated PBMCs from an early block
in HIV- replication via a mechanism requiring Vpr
(). The presence of a GR agonist results in
a translocation of GR-VPR complex into the nucleus
and efficient proviral integration. This mechanism
may be particularly important in the early stage of
infection.
HC may also affect the expression of surface
coreceptors CCR and CXCR that, in concert with
CD, facilitate the entry of HIV- into the target cell.
The use of COCs was shown to be associated with
increased activation and elevated expression of HIV-
coreceptor CCR on intraepithelial endocervical CD+
T lymphocytes; the specific progestin used in this study
was not specified (). Sciaranghella et al. () have
demonstrated that LNG and DMPA-IM use was as-
sociated with increased peripheral blood T cell CCR
expression. Chandra et al. () have demonstrated
that  weeks following a -mg intramuscular in-
jection of DMPA-IM in women volunteers, the
numbers of CD, CD, CD, HLA-DR, and CCR-
bearing immune cells in vaginal tissues were signifi-
cantly increased compared with the follicular or luteal
phases of untreated cycles. This study found no sig-
nificant differences in immune cell populations be-
tween the follicular and luteal phases of the hormonal
cycle. A trend toward increased CD+ T cell density in
DMPA-IM users compared with controls was detected
in another recent study (). Furthermore, increased
levels of progesterone in pregnancy directly correlate
with increased CCR expression on T cells in pe-
ripheral blood and genital tissue (). However,
others report that exogenous progesterone decreases
CCR levels and increases CXCR levels in PBMCs
from HIV-–uninfected women (). It is known
that estrogen and progesterone affect the recruitment
of inflammatory T cells and macrophages through
downregulation of intracellular adhesion molecule-,
E-selectins, and vascular cell adhesion molecule-
(). The effect of progestin on T cell recruitment
may, therefore, be either direct or indirect via the
modulation of estrogen levels. A recent study of
a cohort of women in South Africa demonstrated that
the use of injectable progestin-only contraceptive was
associated with a .-fold increase in the frequency
of cervical CD+CCR+-activated T cells and an
58
Hapgood et al
Mechanisms: Hormonal Contraception and HIV
Endocrine Reviews, February 2018, 39(1):36–78
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 increased expression of CCR on CD+ cervical cells
(). A similar increase was found in the luteal phase
in women not using HC, indicating that the ovarian
cycle exerts a similar effect on the frequency of HIV-
target cells (). Ex vivo analysis demonstrated that 
mM MPA can prevent the downregulation of CXCR
and CCR on activated T cells, suggesting that this
mechanism may contribute to the observations in vivo,
although the effects of lower MPA concentrations
were not reported (). Because activated CCR+
T cells are more prone to infection and support
a higher rate of viral proliferation than do resting cells
(), increased frequency of these target cells in the
cervix may accelerate viral dissemination after expo-
sure to HIV- in the FGT. In contrast to the previous
studies, Mitchell et al. () found a decrease in the
frequency of CD+ and CD+CCR+ vaginal T cells in
long-term DMPA-IM users. A recent study by Smith-
McCune et al. () identified increased frequency of
activated T cells in the endometrium of DMPA-IM
users; however, no increase in CCR expression on
CD+ T cells was observed. Interestingly, these same
authors also identified an increased density of endo-
metrial macrophages and a decreased density of
endometrial regulatory T cells in DMPA-IM users.
Furthermore, Goode et al. () have shown that
rhesus macaques treated with DMPA for  weeks
exhibited higher expression of integrin ab, the gut-
homing receptor that is expressed on cells with in-
creased susceptibility to HIV-, on CD+ T cells in the
endocervix compared with animals treated with es-
trogen. This may be particularly important in light of
the observation that administration of an anti-ab
monoclonal antibody prior to and during acute in-
fection protects rhesus macaques from intravaginal
transmission of SIV (). Whether this occurs in
humans and whether other forms of HC affect the
frequency of activated CCR+ T cells or the level of
expression of ab on T cells in the FGT in animal and
human models are currently unknown.
A subset of T cells that may be particularly relevant
for HIV- infection are Th cells. Th cells have
been shown to be preferentially infected following SIV
vaginal transmission () and are depleted in orga-
nized lymphoid tissue early in infection (). As
these cells accumulate at the site with weakened bar-
rier function, they may represent the primary target
CCR+CD+ T cell population (). Xu et al. ()
have shown that progesterone regulates the expression
of Th-related transcription factor retinoic acid–related
orphan receptor gt (RORgt) in murine vaginal gono-
coccal infection. Estradiol enhances vaginal antiviral
immunity by induction of Th responses. Whether HC
affects the frequency and function of Th cells in
genital tissues is currently unresolved ().
In summary, although a substantial coherence
exists between ex vivo experiments using purified
human cell populations, animal studies, and clinical
observations, the potential effect of HC on T cells is
likely multifactorial and individual components are
difficult to discern. For example, the immunosup-
pressive effect of MPA on the functional response of
T cells most likely synergizes in vivo with its effect on
the capacity of DCs to present antigen and costimulate
T cell response by direct cell-to-cell interaction, in-
cluding costimulation of T cells via CD, CD, and
CD. The direct effect of progestins on T cells ap-
pears to be mediated primarily via the GR and is less
pronounced or undetectable with progestins exhibit-
ing low GR affinity.
Effects on soluble antimicrobial factors
Accumulated evidence indicates that DMPA reduces
the FGT levels of several antimicrobial factors with
HIV- inhibitory activity. Human b-defensins (HBDs)
, , and  as well as secretory leukocyte protease
inhibitor (SLPI) are essential components of an
epithelial cell–derived antimicrobial peptide complex
that functions to keep the natural microbial flora in
a steady-state (, ). HBDs inactivate HIV-
before
and
following
transepithelial
migration
(–). Mucosal expression of HBD and HBD is
increased in exposed seronegative individuals (),
and HBDs were shown to promote epithelial cell
proliferation and wound healing (–). A large
prospective study of  volunteers in Uganda and
Zimbabwe demonstrated decreased cervicovaginal
levels of HBD and higher RANTES in DMPA-IM
users and an association between low levels of these
factors and HIV- seroconversion (). Lower cer-
vical levels of HBD in DMPA-IM users were con-
firmed in a study involving  women (). In an
unrelated study, use of a COC (progestin not specified)
or an LNG IUD was associated with decreased ex-
pression of HBD and HBD (). Decreased SLPI
expression was also observed in endometrial biopsies
of new DMPA-IM users (). In contrast, no effect of
DMPA-IM (, , –) or NET-EN on SLPI
levels in FGT was observed in a cross-sectional study
in Kenya and South Africa (). Francis et al. ()
have observed increased levels of HBD but, in
contrast to other studies (–, ), they observed
a nonsignificant trend toward increased levels of
HBD and HBD in cervicovaginal lavages of women
using DMPA or COC.
Progesterone and progestins also exert a strong
immunosuppressive effect on the production and
transepithelial transport of immunoglobulin (Ig)G and
IgA, as reviewed elsewhere (, , ). DMPA-IM
treatment decreases specific IgG and IgA responses in
mice following intravaginal or intranasal immuniza-
tion with attenuated HSV- and causes failure to
develop protective responses (, , ). Progestin-
containing contraceptives have also been reported to
decrease the levels of IgG and IgA in humans (,
, ).
“Several clinical studies show
a correlation between
increased FGT inflammation
and increased HIV-1
acquisition.”
59
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00103
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Collectively, based on the documented contribu-
tion of HBDs and SLPI to anti–HIV- activity in the
FGT, it is feasible that reduced mucosal levels of these
factors may facilitate HIV- transmission. Reduction
of mucosal production of specific IgG and IgA may
contribute to infection in pre-exposed individuals. A
substantial research gap remains in our understanding
of the effect of progestins other than MPA and
whether the reduced production of mucosal antiviral
factors is a direct effect of progestins or an indirect
effect of hypoestrogenism associated, in particular,
with DMPA-IM use. The inconsistencies in reported
data regarding antimocrobial factors could be due to
a number of confounding factors, similar to those
resulting in inconsistencies in reported clinical effects
on inflammation and levels of soluble immune
modulators, as discussed in detail in the next section.
Effects on inflammation and levels of soluble
immune modulators
Several clinical studies show a correlation between
increased FGT inflammation and increased HIV-
acquisition (, ). Because several reports have
suggested an increased level of FGT inflammation in
women using DMPA-IM and other HCs, this may
represent an indirect mechanism increasing the
probability of HIV acquisition. However, the effect
of HC on the levels of proinflammatory and anti-
inflammatory cytokines and chemokines in the FGT is
a subject of substantial controversy.
Selected soluble modulators have been shown to be
regulated directly by MPA in genital tract cell models
ex vivo, both in a proinflammatory and an anti-
inflammatory manner, at concentrations spanning
the peak and plateau levels in DMPA-IM users. Using
an in vitro ectocervical cell culture model, MPA was
shown to increase the expression of the proin-
flammatory cytokine IL-, whereas the expression of
IL-, a cytokine that is generally regarded as anti-
inflammatory, was suppressed in a dose-dependent
manner via a mechanism involving GR (). A study
on primary human endometrial and endocervical
epithelial cells exposed to HIV- ex vivo reported
a broad upregulation of chemokines but not proin-
flammatory cytokines, with increased production of
IL-, monocyte chemoattractant protein  (MCP-),
IL-, RANTES, and MIP-b, and chemokine (C-X-C
motif) ligand (CXCL) and decreased production of
IL- and TNF-a in the presence of MPA ( nM) ().
Most of these genes were not similarly regulated by
 nM progesterone. MPA was also shown to in-
crease IL- levels in a human vaginal cell line at ~
nM, whereas higher concentrations increased ex-
pression of other proinflammatory cytokines such as
tumor necrosis factor (TNF), IL-, and RANTES ().
In other studies, MPA at  to  nM, but not pro-
gesterone or progestins that have no GR activity such
as NET or LNG, was shown to suppress the production
of selected proinflammatory cytokines IL-, IL-, and
RANTES and increase the expression of the anti-
inflammatory GILZ gene in a human endocervical
cell line (). Ectocervical, endocervical, and vaginal
cell lines exhibited different patterns of regulation of
selected immunomodulatory genes in response to
receptor-saturating doses of MPA, NET, and pro-
gesterone ex vivo (). Collectively, these studies
suggest that MPA exerts direct stimulatory and in-
hibitory effects on inflammation via the regulation of
expression of selected genes in genital epithelia in
a cell-specific manner.
Some clinical studies have reported no association
between injectable contraceptive usage (% on
DMPA-IM) and broad changes in inflammation in the
FGT (), whereas others have found that general
immunosuppressive effects correlated with DMPA-IM
usage (). Yet other studies have reported a corre-
lation between DMPA-IM usage and a selective but
not a broad proinflammatory effect (, ), unlike
other studies reporting a predominantly and broad
proinflammatory effect (, ). Specifically, DMPA-
IM use has been associated with increased levels in
vaginal fluids of selected proinflammatory cytokines
in the FGT, including IL-, IL-, RANTES, MIP-a,
MIP-b, and CXCL (). In the same study, NET-
EN users displayed significantly higher IL-, IL-, and
RANTES concentrations. These results are partly
consistent with a large study in Uganda and Zim-
babwe that found significant elevation in vaginal
fluids of RANTES for DMPA-IM users but no ef-
fect on IL-b, IL-, and IL-, whereas the proin-
flammatory cytokines increased for COC (containing
LNG) users and pregnant women (). The results
of these studies are particularly interesting in the
context of the results of an ex vivo study showing that
enhanced expression of inflammatory cytokines IL-
b, IL-, and CXCL was associated with increased
transcription of HIV- in ectocervical tissue explants
and neutralization of IL-b and IL- decreased viral
transcription (). Looking at the effect of HC on
antimicrobial peptides, a study in Nairobi, Kenya, has
shown that DMPA-IM use is associated with higher
concentrations of cationic polypeptides, including
HNP, HNP, HNP, LL-, and lactoferrin, possibly
indicating neutrophil infiltration and increased in-
flammation ().
In contrast to the previous studies showing
a proinflammatory environment, a cross-sectional
study in Alabama showed that women using DMPA-
IM display an altered immune environment within the
lower FGT characterized by decreased concentration
of CXCL, MCP-, granulocyte colony-stimulating
factor, and IFN-a in cervicovaginal lavages com-
pared with controls (). Another study by Ngcapu
et al. () in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa, con-
cluded that injectable HC (DMPA-IM or NET-EN)
use is associated with an immunosuppressive FGT
60
Hapgood et al
Mechanisms: Hormonal Contraception and HIV
Endocrine Reviews, February 2018, 39(1):36–78
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 innate immune profile characterized by lower levels in
vaginal fluids of IL-, IL-, and MCP-. However,
when comparing results between studies for specific
mediators, it is noteworthy that DMPA-IM usage has
been associated with a decreased effect (, ), an
increased effect (, ), and no effect () on IL-
levels; a decreased effect (), an increased effect
(), and no effect (, ) on IL-b levels; and an
increased effect (, ) and no associated changes
for RANTES levels (, ) in DMPA-IM users or
injectable users ().
The concentration of immune mediators may
differ substantially owing to population differences in
the prevalence of suboptimal microbiota and bacterial,
viral, or sexually transmitted protozoan infections. In
support of this, the levels of several inflammatory
cytokines, including IL-, were increased in HC users
with gonorrhea, chlamydia, or mycoplasma infections
(). The effects of HC on cervical immunity depend
on the genital tract microenvironment (as discussed
later in more detail in “HC, the Microbiome, and HIV-
 Acquisition”), and a weakened mucosal barrier
against HIV may be a combined result of genital tract
infections and HC use ().
The concentration of soluble mediators may also
vary depending on FGT compartment. Gene ex-
pression analysis of tissue from DMPA-IM and LNG
intrauterine system users indicated increased expres-
sion of inflammatory genes in human endometrial
tissue but not for immune function genes in cervical
transformation zone tissue (). Smith-McCune et al.
() demonstrated increased endocervical concen-
trations of MCP- and IFN-a but decreased con-
centration of IL-b and IL- in DMPA-IM users.
Differences between these and other results (, )
may be because soluble mediator concentrations differ
between endocervical and vaginal compartments.
More studies are required to determine whether this is
the case. The origin of immune mediators in the FGT
fluid is not clearly defined in most studies. Whereas
some mediators are produced by epithelial cells, others
may originate from infiltrating activated immune cells
in the lower or upper FGT. The concentration of any
factor in FGT fluid is the result of a complex interplay
between mucosal epithelium, number, type, and ac-
tivation status of infiltrating immune cells, charac-
teristics of vaginal microbiota, invading pathogens,
and other environmental factors. These factors may
result in discrepancies that are often observed between
the effect of a progestin on the production of a par-
ticular immune mediator by a well-characterized
population of cells in vitro and the effect of a con-
traceptive regimen on its concentration in the FGT.
Taken together, the reported effects of progestins
on inflammation and levels of soluble immune
modulators in the FGT exhibit a large degree of in-
consistency. This may be due to differences in FGT
compartment–specific effects or confounding factors
such as age or the presence of other STIs or the
microbiota. Despite attempts to correct for many of
these confounding factors, there are still many in-
consistencies between studies regarding quality (size,
prospective vs cross-sectional, time span between
measurements), which may contribute to the in-
consistent results regarding immune modulators.
Collectively, the data suggest that although MPA may
have direct cell-specific and gene-specific effects on
genes modulating inflammation in the FGT, the in-
flammatory profile as measured in clinical samples
from women on DMPA-IM may vary due to multiple
other indirect effects. Little information is available
about the effects of other methods of HC besides
injectables. Ex vivo studies suggest that MPA has
differential effects on inflammation compared with
NET and progesterone. Limited clinical studies sug-
gest that COCs containing LNG result in a broadly
proinflammatory environment, unlike DMPA-IM ().
Additional studies are required to determine whether
specific forms of HC result in differential effects on
inflammation in vivo, and whether these differ from
those in the luteal phase. Increased inflammation in
vivo may also be an indirect result of suppression of
host immune responses to invading pathogens and
may be observed only in specific populations. An
inflammatory response may be exacerbated by the
suppressive effect of a progestin on adaptive immune
responses. The combined effects of HC and vaginal
infection may lead to increased risk of HIV- due to
inflammatory tissue damage and recruitment and
activation of HIV- host cells ().
HC, FGT Structure, Barrier Function, and
HIV-1 Acquisition
Sex steroid hormones and HCs have a profound effect
on both structure and function of the FGT because
every cell type in the FGT expresses receptors for these
hormones. Normal physiological changes observed
during the menstrual cycle are regulated by estrogen
and progesterone and are previously described in “The
Female Genital Tract: Susceptibility to HIV- and
Other STIs”. This section focuses specifically on the
effects of HCs.
Effects on the structure of the endometrium,
cervix, and vagina
The exact effect of the exogenous hormones on the
endometrial morphology most likely depends on the
dose, duration, and type of progestin and whether it is
given in combination with estrogen (). Estradiol
alone ( mg of micronized E or . conjugated
equine estrogens) was a commonly used hormone
replacement therapy in the s, before clinical
studies showed a link between unopposed estradiol
and endometrial cancer (). Studies reported rates of
“The current formulations of
COC exert both estrogenic and
progestogenic effects on
endometrium.”
61
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00103
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 % to % incidence of endometrial hyperplasia.
Abnormal cytology and glandular structure in par-
ticular were linked to progression to carcinoma.
Administration of a low dose of progestins in com-
bination with estradiol appeared to negate this risk
(). The current formulations of COC exert both
estrogenic and progestogenic effects on endome-
trium, with the progestin effect dominating owing to
downregulation of ERs after several cycles of use ().
Consequently, in the first few cycles, characteristics of
both proliferative and secretory effects are seen fol-
lowed by atrophic changes in both glands and stroma
after several cycles. The blood vessels also become
thinner and sinusoidal with longer use. The most
common formulation contained in oral progestin is
NET and in implants it is ETG or LNG (, ),
whereas in Southern Africa most COCs contain LNG
(). The changes in histology are similar for all of
these progestins, with long-term use leading to atrophy
of the endometrium, which includes small and sparse
glands that have lost their tortuosity and are lined by
low columnar cells (, , ). The stroma has
large ovoid fibroblasts and the blood vessels are dilated
and thin-walled, which can lead to breakthrough
bleeding. In early cycles following use, endogenous
estrogen may still be secreted, whereas progesterone
secretion from the corpus luteum is shut down more
rapidly. This results in slowing down of the changes
seen in the secretory phase of the cycle, with under-
development of glands and stroma. Use of a progestin-
only formulation such as DMPA-IM alone in women
leads to altered cytology, including exaggerated
glandular hyperplasia and decidualized stroma in early
cycles following use (). Following long-term use,
the tissue histology changes to what is seen typically
with most other progestins: endometrial atrophy and
decreased density of dilated, thin-walled blood vessels,
which can lead to breakthrough bleeding.
A number of studies have examined the effect of
HC, especially COCs and DMPA-IM, on vaginal and
cervical histology, epithelial thickness, and vaginal
microflora (see “HC, the Microbiome, and HIV-
Acquisition” later) (–, ). In particular, the
effect of DMPA-IM on vaginal histology has been
examined by a number of studies because of the re-
ports that have associated increased HIV- suscepti-
bility and transmission in women using DMPA-IM
(). In most studies DMPA-IM did not affect the
thickness of epithelium or number of LCs in the
vaginal tissue, regardless of the length of use. There
was also no change in cervical ectopy in studies re-
gardless of the ethnicity of women using DMPA-IM.
Most of the information available on physical ef-
fects of HC is based mainly on COCs containing NET,
LNG, and DMPA-IM, especially in the lower genital
tract. Overall, the use of HC leads to thinning and
atrophy of the endometrium; however, the effects are
less obvious on vaginal morphology. Animal models,
both NHP and rodent, do not simulate the effects of
HC seen in women (see “Animal Studies Addressing
the Effect of HC on the Acquisition of Genital
Pathogens” previously).
Effects on epithelial cells and barrier integrity
The epithelial mucosa lining the upper and lower
genital tract provide the first barrier to the entry of
sexually transmitted pathogenic organisms (). The
upper genital tract mucosa, which lines the endo-
metrium and endocervix, is comprised of a monolayer
of columnar epithelium, wherease the lower genital
tract is lined by stratified squamous epithelium. The
structure and physiology of these different types of
epithelium were discussed earlier (see “The Female
Genital Tract: Susceptibility to HIV- and Other STIs”
previously). The columnar epithelium of the upper
genital tract is primarily held together by apically
located tight junctions, which essentially seal adjacent
cells at their apical surface, preventing intercellular
passage between cells [reviewed in Kaushic et al.
()]. Below the tight junctions, adherens junctions
are observed to maintain adhesion of adjacent cells,
and finally desmosomes are found below the adherens
junctions. The superficial layers of the pseudostratified
squamous epithelium, alternatively, do not show any
adhesion junctions, which are found primarily in the
intermediate and basal cells (). Adherens junctions
are particularly abundant in these cells. The junctional
integrity decreases progressively from basal to su-
perficial layers. This correlates with increased per-
meability as noted by dye exclusion assays as well as
the ability of labeled HIV to penetrate superficial
layers.
Not much information is available regarding the
direct effect of progestins on the mucosal barrier in the
genital tract. A study of vaginal biopsies following
 weeks of DMPA-IM use found no changes in the
epithelial tight junction and adherens junction pro-
teins by immunohistochemistry (). However, an-
other recent study that used proteomic analysis
showed that DMPA-IM use is associated with innate
immune activation and reduced epithelium repair
pathways in the FGT (). Another recent study in
mice showed that DMPA and LNG downregulated
vaginal cell-to-cell adhesion molecules, such as des-
mosomal cadherins DSGa and desmocollin , and
subsequently increased genital mucosal permeability,
leading to increased endogenous microbial invasion
from the lumen into the submucosal tissue, which was
proposed to lead to increased vaginal inflammation
when compared with untreated mice (). Interest-
ingly, administration of estrogen was able to reverse
DMPA-mediated genital barrier disruption, high-
lighting the role of sex hormones in the maintenance
of the mucosal barrier. The same study found that
women initiating DMPA-IM use displayed significant
reduced DSGa and increased expression of selected
62
Hapgood et al
Mechanisms: Hormonal Contraception and HIV
Endocrine Reviews, February 2018, 39(1):36–78
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 proinflammatory markers (IL-b, CD, and CD)
in ectocervical tissues, similar to effects seen in the
luteal phase of the menstrual cycle  month after use
(). Whether the effects seen for DMPA-IM are
similar to those of P has not been examined. Using an
ex vivo explant model, it was shown that the tissues
from luteal phase were associated with increased HIV-
acquisition (). This is supported by a recent study
where endometrial epithelial cells, cultured under
hormonal conditions designed to mimic the luteal
phase (E plus P), showed increased permeability
compared with those grown in E or vehicle alone
(). This increased leakage was implicated in
allowing HIV access to stromal fibroblasts, which were
seen to enhance HIV infection of CD+ T cells.
However, note that the progesterone levels used in this
study ( mM) are ~-fold higher than luteal phase
progesterone and more consistent with pregnancy
levels of progesterone. An association has also been
indicated from clinical studies between the luteal phase
and changes in proteins involved in tissue remodeling
and leukocyte infiltration (). These results suggest
that some of the mechanisms associated with the luteal
phase, when progesterone levels are higher during
menstrual cycle, may be similar to those seen with HC.
However, more studies are needed to confirm these
initial reports.
HC, the Microbiome, and HIV-1 Acquisition
There is increasing acknowledgment that the vaginal
microbiome plays a critical role in maintaining ho-
meostasis with the reproductive tract immune system
and this, in turn, controls susceptibility to STIs, in-
cluding HIV-. However, much less is known about
the development and maintenance of the vaginal
microbiota. The squamous epithelium of the FGT
produces a layer of glycogen under the influence of
estrogen that provides a critical nutritional resource to
the microbiota and clearly plays a critical role in shaping
microbiota composition (). The FGT is more dy-
namic than other mucosal sites because of menstrua-
tion, and consequently the vaginal microbiome is more
dynamic than other mucosal microbiota. Using culture-
independent methods (amplification and/or direct se-
quencing of marker genes such as S ribosomal RNA),
studies have successfully identified . microbial
species in the vaginal tract (–). Studies have also
shown that the upper genital tract is not sterile; rather, it
has a smaller diversity of bacterial species (). Al-
though the definition of “normal” and “healthy” vaginal
microbiota is still debatable, genital microbiota in
women can be identified into two groups based on
clinical diagnosis: () microbiota that are considered to
be healthy, and () bacteria linked to the clinical di-
agnosis of BV. Whereas a healthy microbiota is
frequently dominated by Lactobacillus species, BV is
characterized by a polymicrobial microbiota consisting
of a variety of anaerobic bacteria and Gardenella vag-
inalis. Ravel et al. () used S rRNA sequencing of
the vaginal microbiome from  asymptomatic North
American women to define five consistent bacterial
community state type. Of these, four were dominated
by lactobacilli (Lactobacillus iners, Lactobacillus crispatus,
Lactobacillus gasseri, and Lactobacillus jensenii), and
a fifth group was not dominated by lactobacilli, but
instead had mostly anaerobes and G. vaginalis. The
latter was correlated with a high Nugent score (..) in
women, typically seen in women with symptomatic BV.
Dysbiosis of vaginal microbiota, as in BV, has been
linked to a .- to -fold increased risk of acquisition of
HSV-, HIV, gonorrhea, and chlamydia (, –).
Conversely, women with clinical BV have increased
HSV- and HIV- replication and shedding (, ).
The association between BV and HIV- has been
clearly shown by a number of studies. BV is known to
increase the risk of HIV acquisition in women, and
HIV-infected BV+ women are also threefold more
likely to transmit HIV to their male partner than HIV-
infected women who do not have BV (, , ).
The underlying reason is likely due to local inflam-
matory processes that occur during BV. A recent study
reported a potential mechanism underlying the strong
in vivo relationship between high-diversity bacterial
communities lacking Lactobacillus dominance and
genital proinflammatory cytokine levels (). Tran-
scriptional analysis revealed that Prevotella-dominant
communities contribute to genital inflammation via
TLR-mediated activation of NF-kB and TNF-a
signaling and recruitment of lymphocytes by che-
mokine production. This was accompanied by in-
creased numbers of CCR+CD+ T cells in the
endocervical canal, which suggests that high microbial
diversity increases the likelihood that HIV will es-
tablish productive infection upon exposure. The ability
of high microbial diversity in the genital tract to drive
the production of inflammatory mediators also sug-
gests that it has the capacity to induce genital barrier
disruption and increase the likelihood of HIV trans-
mission across the epithelium. Another recent study
compared cervicovaginal proteome of  Rwandan
female sex workers and correlated protein abundance
based on increasing bacterial diversity, including
L. crispatus dominant (group ), L. iners dominant
(group ), moderate dysbiosis (group ), and severe
dysbiosis (group ) (). Dysbiosis was found to
correlate with increased cervicovaginal inflammation
and detrimental changes to the mucosal barrier.
There is increasing evidence that the mucosal
microbiota modulates immune responses. The gut
microbiota has been shown to regulate immune
responses locally and systemically (, ) and
modulate immune responses in allergy (, ). A
recent review concluded that probiotics boosted an-
tibody responses to oral vaccines against rotavirus,
“Use of combined COC and
a contraceptive vaginal ring
has been shown to increase
lactobacilli in the vaginal
milieu.”
63
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00103
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Salmonella, poliovirus, and Vibrio cholerae in adults
and with childhood vaccines in infants (). The
mechanisms underlying the regulation of immune
responses by microbiota are largely unknown. Even
less is understood about the regulation of genital tract
immunity by the vaginal microbiota, although it is
thought to influence innate mucosal immunity in FRT
(). Certain anaerobic bacterial short chain fatty
acids (e.g., succinate) and exoenzymes (sialidases
and proteases) have been shown to induce proin-
flammatory responses through TLR activation, DC
activation and maturation, and immune cell migration
and phagocytosis (, ). A recent study found that
Atopobium vaginae, a bacteria associated with BV,
induced proinflammatory cytokines from vaginal epi-
thelial cells, whereas L. cristpatus did not (). Clini-
cally, successful treatment of BV is associated with
decreases in both HIV target T cells in the cervix and
activated CD+ T cells in cervical cytobrush samples
(). There is a paucity of data describing clinical
links between changes in microbiota and changes in
immune cells in the genital tract. Overall, this area is
substantially underinvestigated and represents a re-
search gap.
There is clinical evidence, mostly from cross-
sectional studies, linking contraceptive use with
changes in vaginal microbiota. Two systemic reviews
and a meta-analysis reported an overall decrease in BV
with the use of HC (, ). The summary of the
systemic reviews and some of the main studies since
 are presented in Table  (, , , –).
A review of these studies shows that women using
COC consistently show decreased risk of BV (Table ).
Data regarding progestin- containing HC such as
DMPA-IM and other implantable HCs are often
unclear because studies tend to group them together,
even though they contain very different progestins
(). The systemic review by van de Wijgert et al.
(), which did compare DMPA and COC, concludes
that both COC and DMPA-IM use are associated with
a decrease in BV. However, two recent studies con-
ducted in the FRESH cohort found no association
between injectable contraceptive usage (% DMPA-
IM) and changes in microbiota in women aged  to
 years, although these studies did not specifically
examine BV status of women (, ).
Despite the reported association between HC and
reduced BV, the mechanism underlying this positive
effect is unclear. The beneficial effect of DMPA-IM on
BV remains controversial, as some studies have shown
increased inflammation associated with MPA use (,
, ). The inflammation caused by progestins
could affect the genital barrier through indirect effects.
Inflammation has been associated with increased
permeability and decreased barrier function of epi-
thelium in a number of studies. Some studies have
reported a decrease in HO-producing lactobacilli in
women using DMPA-IM (, , ). DMPA-IM
was also shown to induce hypoestrogenism and slight
thinning of glycogen-positive vaginal epithelium,
which could potentially result in changes in vaginal
microbiota away from lactobacilli-dominant to poly-
microbial microflora consistent with BV ().
Use of combined COC and a contraceptive vaginal
ring has been shown to increase lactobacilli in the
vaginal milieu (, ). In another study, following
 months of COC use, vaginal microflora remained
essentially unchanged except for a small decrease in
HO-producing lactobacilli and in women with
Ureaplasma urealyticum (). Van de Wijgert et al.
() reported an increased incidence of vaginal
candidiasis in COC users. In nonhuman primates,
similar to some clinical studies, no significant changes
were noted in vaginal microflora following COC or
DMPA-IM treatment ().
Overall, the understanding of vaginal microbiome
and its correlation with inflammation, HC, and HIV-
acquisition is an area of enormous current interest.
There is general agreement that changes in vaginal
microbiome associated with inflammation lead to
increased HIV- infection. Depending on the specific
composition of the microbiota, changes in vaginal
microflora may result in various levels of inflamma-
tion. Studies addressing the effect of HC on mucosal
immune mediators may generate different results
in populations that differ in the characteristics of
microbiota and presence of cervicovaginal infections
(). Overall, studies to date generally show a cor-
relation of HC with decreased BV. However, the
underlying mechanism on how HCs change micro-
biome and/or inflammation is not as well understood
and is an active area of investigation.
Additional Controversies or Research Gaps
Several controversies and research gaps have been
identified and discussed in previous sections. In this
section, we discuss additional unresolved issues and
important areas of investigation relevant to contra-
ception and HIV- acquisition.
Contraceptive efficacy, doses, and DMPA-IM
vs DMPA-SC
Minimum or threshold doses of contraceptives re-
quired to maintain contraceptive efficacy have to our
knowledge not been defined for most forms of HC.
This poses a particular problem regarding side effects
such as risks for HIV- acquisition. For some forms of
HC, it may be possible to decrease side effects using
lower doses while maintaining contraceptive efficacy.
However, this requires an understanding of the re-
lationship between dose and biological response for
contraception and a particular side effect. More re-
search is needed to define these relationships, in
particular for MPA.
64
Hapgood et al
Mechanisms: Hormonal Contraception and HIV
Endocrine Reviews, February 2018, 39(1):36–78
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Studies addressing the benefits of the lower dose
injectable DMPA-SC have convincingly demon-
strated its important advantages of usability due to
self-administration. DMPA-IM ( mg) contains
a higher dose of MPA than that required for con-
traceptive efficacy, because lowering the dose of MPA
by % (from  mg to  mg) maintains contra-
ceptive efficacy. Importantly, however, note that there
is no evidence of a substantial advantage provided by
the lower dose DMPA-SC over DMPA-IM (Depo-
Provera) with respect to its biological properties, ef-
fects on the immune system, and side-effect risk
profile. The assumption that lowering the dose by %
will decrease side effects () is not based on evidence
or sound theoretical considerations. It has not been
established that the Cmax serum levels of DMPA-IM
and DMPA-SC are different, because no comparisons
of these have been performed in the same study, and
studies not performed in parallel have shown a wide
degree of variability in measured Cmax serum levels. In
the one published study that did compare serum levels
in parallel, the earliest measurement was at  months
after the first administration (). In this study the
serum concentrations for DMPA-IM and DMPA-SC
were not significantly different after  months,  year,
or  years of usage, showing that the % lower dose
does not significantly affect serum concentrations at
these time points (). Both DMPA-IM and DMPA-
SC result in similar degrees of hypoestrogenism, with
typical circulation estrogen concentrations of  to 
pg/mL, which fluctuate widely in obese women for
DMPA-SC (, , , , ). GCs have a well-
established role in decreasing bone mineral density
(). Unlike other forms of HC, both DMPA-IM and
DMPA-SC result in a similar transient decrease in
bone mineral density (, ), which is likely due to the
GC-like properties of MPA, acting via the GR (,
), as well as their hypoestrogenic effects ().
Taken together, the previous facts suggest that an
increased risk of HIV- acquisition with DMPA-IM
would most likely be similar to that of DMPA-SC,
especially the underlying mechanisms that are medi-
ated via the GR. The use of MPA doses , mg used
in DMPA-SC is currently being explored in clinical
trials for contraception efficacy (). Detailed dose-
titration studies using primary immune cells and
relevant cell lines suggest that significant detectable
changes in the effect of MPA and other progestins on
immune mechanisms typically occur with - to
-fold changes in concentration (, , , ,
, , , , , ). Regrettably, although
Sayana Press provides substantially improved usability
and important public health benefits, a % decrease in
MPA dose is not likely to provide a substantial benefit
in terms of ameliorating the negative effect of MPA on
biological processes in women. Similar considerations
need to be taken into account when lowering doses of
any HC in an attempt to decrease side effects.
Inflammation and Cu-IUDs
Insertion of a Cu-IUD into the uterine cavity is as-
sociated with local inflammatory reaction and re-
cruitment of large numbers of neutrophils and
macrophages from the stroma (, ). The Cu-
IUD was shown to increase the concentration of
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor,
soluble IL- receptor (soluble CD), IL-b, TNF-a,
IL-, and other cytokines/chemokines in the FGT
fluid (–). Interestingly, a recent publication
shows a positive correlation between the levels of IL-,
MCP-, and MIP-a and anti-HIV activity in the
cervicovaginal lavage fluid of HIV-–infected women
(). Based on this, it is feasible that anti-HIV activity
is enhanced in FGT following insertion of Cu-IUD.
However, the proinflammatory effect of Cu-IUD is
also of concern as it may lead to increased recruitment
and activation of HIV- target cells to genital epi-
thelium and disruption of epithelial integrity that may
facilitate HIV- transmission. It is critical to per-
form more research on the effect of Cu-IUDs and
other types of IUDs and intravaginal implants in vivo.
The effects of inflammation on combination thera-
pies for intravaginal delivery involving antiretrovirals
and progestins need to take into account the pos-
sible combined proinflammatory effects of these
treatments.
Identification of biomarkers of increased
susceptibility to HIV-1
Identification of biomarkers indicating increased
susceptibility to viral infection as a result of contra-
ceptive use would be highly beneficial. Although ev-
idence for some potential biomarkers that indicate
changes in immune function for a particular contra-
ceptive in vivo is emerging, whether these have a causal
relationship with changes in susceptibility remains to
be established. Several potential biological markers
have been identified for effects of DMPA-IM and
other types of HC in women on soluble mediators and
antiviral factors, in both the FGT and systemically, as
discussed in “Effects on soluble antimicrobial factors”
and “Effects on inflammation and levels of soluble
immune modulators” previously. However, few of
these are consistent between clinical studies, possibly
due to multiple confounding factors. There is evidence
from parallel studies that DMPA-IM has differential
effects on some soluble mediators compared with
other forms of HC (, ). Although there is strong
evidence for an effect of MPA on the repression of
several proinflammatory cytokine genes in ex vivo and
animal models, the levels of consistency with clinical
studies is variable. A decrease in SLPI with DMPA-IM
has been observed in two clinical studies (, ),
suggesting that it may be a possible biomarker for
DMPA-IM effects. Other results suggest a decrease in
HBD may be a biomarker for DMPA-IM and oral
LNG
(,
),
although
these
results
show
“The strongest evidence for
a possible biomarker for
DMPA-IM is an increase in
CCR5 levels or frequency of
CCR5-expressing cells in the
FGT.”
65
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00103
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Table 6. Effect of Different Hormonal Contraceptives on Vaginal Microbiota
Study Details
Hormonal Exposure
Measurements
Summary of results
Reference Note
Systematic review and
reanalysis of HC-HIV
study of 36 eligible
studies
Compared COC and
DMPA-IM
BV based on Nugent score,
vaginal candidiasis, KOH
wet mount, and
microbiome analysis by
molecular techniques
Both COC and DMPA-IM
reduce BV. The HC-HIV
data show that COC and
DMPA-IM reduce
intermediate microflora.
COC, but not DMPA-IM,
increased vaginal candidiasis.
Molecular vaginal
microbiome studies
showed that high E2
enhanced domination by
Lactobacillus sp. P4 effects
were not clear.
(267)a
Systematic review and
meta-analysis to examine
association between HC
and BV in 55 eligible
studies
Examined effect of
combined HC (COC and
NuvaRing) and POC.
POC included DMPA-IM,
implants, injections, NET-
EN, Mirena
Examined BV prevalence,
incidence and recurrence
as outcomes in eligible
studies
HC was associated with both
significantly reduced odds
of prevalence and relative
risk of incident and recurrent
BV. Both combined HC
and POC reduced BV.
(349)a
Analysis did not examine effect
of DMPA-IM specifically;
combined all POCs in the
analysis
Longitudinal study that
included 32 women at
12 mo and 22 women at
24 mo after treatment
Women using DMPA-IM
for up to 2 y
Examined vaginal microbiota
and mucosal immune
populations by
immunohistochemistry
Proportion of H2O2-positive
lactobacilli decreased
significantly over 12 mo.
(293)
One hundred seventy-four
HIV-negative Rwandan
female sex workers
followed for 2 y
Oral contraceptives or
injectables
Examined STI prevalence and
incidence and vaginal
microbiota characterization
by phylogenetic microarray
Oral and injectable
contraceptive use was
associated with a number
of STIs; particularly,
injectable contraceptives
were associated with HSV-
2, hormonal status was not
correlated with Nugent
score or vaginal
microbiome clustering,
and oral contraceptive
users had lower BV-
associated bacteria
(350)
Cohort of young, black
South African women
(18–23 y) enrolled in
FRESH Study
Women on no
contraceptive (n = 48)
were compared with
women on DMPA-IM/
Nuristerat (n = 43) or
COC/non-HC (n = 9)
16S RNA sequencing to
compare vaginal bacterial
microflora
No differences were seen
between bacterial
communities in any of the
groups
(339)
Study was not primarily
designed to correlate
bacterial abundance and
community states with
immune parameters, did not
specifically determine
Nugent score or BV
Cohort study of 248 women
presenting for LNG-IUS
insertion/reinsertion
were stratified based
on their current
contraceptive method
No contraceptive, n = 72;
LNG-IUS (Mirena), n =
88; COC, n = 64; oral
progesterone-only pill/
desogesterel implant
(implanon), n = 18;
Cu-IUD, n = 6
Menstrual pattern, medical
history, vaginal microflora
examined by phase-
contrast microscopy,
aerobic cultures to detect
bacterial growth and
fungal colonization
COC and LNG-IUS users had
same vaginal microflora as
non-contraceptive users.
IUD users (hormonal and
nonhormonal) had higher
tendency for candida
colonization, Women on
progesterone-only pills/
implants had lower
candida but increased
vaginal atrophy
(351)
Study did not use commonly
used criteria, such as Nugent
score or 16S sequencing
(Continued)
66
Hapgood et al
Mechanisms: Hormonal Contraception and HIV
Endocrine Reviews, February 2018, 39(1):36–78
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 inconsistency with other studies. Besides SLPI and
HBD, there are no reliable soluble mediator bio-
markers for effects of a particular contraceptive on
soluble mediators that have been validated in more
than one clinical study for any method of HC. Some
studies suggest that decreased cytokine levels but in-
creased levels of chemokines such as RANTES and IL-
may be biomarkers for effects of DMPA-IM (,
), although other studies are inconsistent with these
data (, ). The finding that increased RANTES
expression is associated with both DMPA-IM use and
HIV- acquisition and shedding is particularly com-
pelling (). Additionally, there is evidence that
a decrease in FGT permeability is associated with
decreased expression of DSGa, representing a pos-
sible biomarker, although this needs to be corrobo-
rated by future studies ().
Potential biomarkers for the effect of DMPA-IM,
consistent in two clinical reports, include markers for
impairment of DC function, such as CD and CD
(, ). To date, the strongest evidence for a pos-
sible biomarker for DMPA-IM is an increase in CCR
levels or frequency of CCR-expressing cells in the
FGT, which has been observed in several clinical
studies (, , ), but not with an LNG-releasing
IUD (LNG-IUD) (). However, this increase was
not seen in the long-term DMPA-IM users ().
Critical assessment of the validity of individual bi-
ological markers that are modulated by HC in terms of
their predictive value of the effect on HIV- trans-
mission is hampered by the fact that our under-
standing of the heterosexual transmission of HIV- is
rather limited. Despite important progress, precise
correlates of protection against and susceptibility to
HIV- infection are not clearly defined. Therefore, it is
currently difficult to select a single biological effect of
HC that would predict the probability HIV- trans-
mission and acquisition.
Disease progression and transmission
Multiple studies have addressed whether the use of
HC during chronic HIV- infection affects the rate
of viral replication and overall disease progression.
Several studies reported a significantly higher HIV-
viral load at the set point and acquisition of more
diverse viral genotypes in women using DMPA-IM or
COC at the time of HIV- infection compared with
women without contraception (, ), consistent
with the fact that viral load is highly predictive of
HIV- disease progression (, ). However, other
studies failed to confirm a relationship between the use
of HC and acceleration of the disease (–),
consistent with results for SIV in monkeys (, ,
, ). Several recent systematic reviews have
concluded that HC methods do not appear to ac-
celerate HIV disease progression as measured by
mortality, time to initiation of antiretroviral therapy,
an increase in HIV-RNA viral load, or a decrease in
CD count (–). Although DMPA-IM is likely
to increase HIV- acquisition, the effects of damp-
ening systemic immune function on disease pro-
gression are difficult to predict and require further
investigation (). Some studies have indicated an
association between contraception (DMPA or COC)
and increased shedding of HIV- in the lower FGT
with a significant dose dependency on progestin levels
(, , ). Elevated levels of HIV- in the vaginal
fluid may be responsible for a higher probability of
women-to-men transmission, as indicated in some
studies for DMPA-IM (, ). The clinical, animal,
and ex vivo findings demonstrating the suppressive
effect of DMPA on systemic immune function (,
, , , , , ) suggest that disease
progression may be affected in some women on
DMPA-IM. The effects of dampening systemic im-
mune function () on disease progression are dif-
ficult to predict and require further investigation.
Table 6. Continued
Study Details
Hormonal Exposure
Measurements
Summary of results
Reference Note
Retrospective study of 682
women, examining16S
rRNA gene survey data
from subset of participants
from a larger microbiome
project
Women using single form of
birth control, either
condoms, COC, DMPA-
IM, or LNG-IUS
16S rRNA sequencing analysis
to determine bacterial
species, logistic regression
models to determine
H2O2-producing
lactobacilli, correlation
of lactobacilli to
contraceptive method,
age, ethnicity, STI status
Women using COC and
DMPA-IM, but not LNG-
IUS, were less likely to be
colonized with BV-
associated bacteria,
compared with women
who used condoms. COC
users were more likely to
be colonized by H2O2-
producing lactobacilli,
whereas women on
DMPA-IM and LNG-IUS
were not
(352)
Abbreviations: IUS, intrauterine system; POC, progesterone-only contraceptive.
aFor a detailed list and outcomes of studies conducted prior to 2013, please refer to systematic reviews and meta-analyses in these references.
67
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00103
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Public health
The most recent epidemiological data, together with
animal and ex vivo data on MPA, raise important
concerns about the use of DMPA in populations at
high risk for HIV- acquisition. Importantly, with-
drawal of DMPA from family planning programs
without offering an equally effective form of contra-
ception is not warranted, as it could result in a sharp
increase in unintended pregnancies, unsafe abortions,
and maternal and infant mortality and morbidity (,
, ). It is therefore critical to focus on the
identification of safe, effective, and affordable long-
term methods of contraception that could effectively
replace DMPA. Sufficient data on the effects on HIV-
acquisition are not available for other available forms
of HC, such as DMPA-SC or LNG-IUD. Replacement
of DMPA with condoms is not a solution, as it would
result in a substantial increase of unintended preg-
nancies and mortality due to high failure rates and
absence of negotiation power by women (). The
Evidence for Contraceptive Options and HIV Out-
comes trial will hopefully elucidate whether there is
a significant difference in HIV- acquisition risk be-
tween DMPA-IM, LNG-sub dermal implant, or Cu-
IUD; however it will not provide an answer regarding
the risk relative to no contraception due to the absence
of a control for no contraception. Any contraceptive
that increases HIV- acquisition by % to % (HR
.) could potentially have a major impact on the HIV-
 epidemic, particularly in Southern and Eastern
Africa (). Based on the available clinical, ex vivo, and
biochemical data, NET-EN represents a promising
alternative option to DMPA until more data are
available. There are no data suggesting NET-EN may
pose a significantly higher risk than COCs or implants
for HIV- acquisition. Furthermore, there is sub-
stantial evidence that NET exhibits differences in its
mechanisms of action compared to MPA, that are
likely to be relevant to HIV- acquisition.
Conclusions
Most high-quality clinical observational studies find
that
the
injectable
progestin-only
contraceptive
DMPA-IM increases the likelihood of HIV- acqui-
sition in women, unlike NET-EN and COCs con-
taining LNG. These observations are consistent with
the fact that individual progestins used in HC have
differential biological effects via specific steroid re-
ceptors and that estrogen may exert a protective an-
tiviral effect. They are also in accord with a large body
of clinical, animal, and ex vivo data on the biological
effects of MPA. Insufficient or no information is
available regarding the potential effect of other forms
of HC, including DMPA-SC, or non-HCs on HIV-
acquisition. Further investigation is needed in these
areas. There is substantial evidence for plausible bi-
ological mechanisms whereby MPA may increase
HIV- acquisition. Current clinical, ex vivo, and ani-
mal model evidence supports a role for MPA in in-
creasing the permeability of the FGT and promoting
HIV- uptake. There is strong evidence from clinical,
ex vivo, and mouse studies that MPA suppresses pDC
and T cell function and suppresses select regulators of
cellular and humoral systemic immunity (Fig. ; Tables
–). Similarly, there is strong clinical and experi-
mental animal data supporting a role for MPA in
increasing the frequency of HIV- viral targets in the
FGT and clinical and ex vivo evidence for increasing
the levels of the CCR coreceptor for HIV- entry.
Many of the previous mechanisms have been shown to
occur in animal and ex vivo experiments at concen-
trations in the range of peak and plateau serum
concentrations of MPA in DMPA-IM users. Although
inconsistent, the clinical data suggest that DMPA-IM
changes the expression of selected cytokines, che-
mokines, and innate defense factors in the FGT.
Most clinical studies suggest that no major changes
are exerted by DMPA-IM and other HCs on the
microbiome; however, this requires further inves-
tigation. More consistent methodology, exclusion of
possible confounding factors such as the character-
istics of microbiota, and a focus on likely regulators of
HIV- infection such as HBD, SLPI, RANTES, and
IFN-a may enhance the consistency between studies.
Some of the effects of DMPA-IM may be due to the
induction of hypoestrogenism; however, ex vivo data
indicate an important role for a direct effect of MPA.
Figure 4. Mean circulating estradiol levels in premenopausal
women on HCs. Mean circulating estradiol in (a) normal
premenopausal contracepting women (N = 78); (b–f)
premenopausal women using progestin-only contraceptives
(b, Mirena, N = 8625; c, Implanon, N = 1126; d, Jadelle, N = 8827;
e, NET-EN, N = 7323;f,DMPA,N = 31); andnormal postmenopausal
women (g, N = 1446). The graphs represent mean values with
lines showing 95% confidence intervals (225). Reproduced
with permission from Wolters Kluwer Health.
68
Hapgood et al
Mechanisms: Hormonal Contraception and HIV
Endocrine Reviews, February 2018, 39(1):36–78
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Where different progestins have been compared in
clinical and ex vivo human cell models, immuno-
suppressive effects were generally not observed with
equimolar NET, progesterone, and LNG. Collectively,
clinical, animal, and ex vivo studies are broadly con-
sistent and suggest that DMPA may increase HIV-
acquisition by increasing the permeability of the FGT,
increasing transcytosis of the virus via the FGT,
dampening select adaptive immune responses, in-
creasing the frequency and infectability of HIV-
target cells in the FGT, and increasing the rate of
HIV- replication in target cells. Some of these effects
do not occur with other progestins lacking GR activity
or with luteal phase progesterone concentrations. Ex
vivo data and receptor theory suggest that some of the
effects of MPA on HIV- acquisition are likely to
occur at MPA plateau concentrations and are not
likely to be ameliorated by administration of DMPA-
SC delivering a lower dose of MPA. The relative
contribution of different mechanisms for MPA is
unknown and requires further investigation. Taken
together, the data provide a compelling case against
the continuous use of DMPA in areas of high HIV-
prevalence provided other forms of safe, affordable,
non-HC or HC methods are readily available. Com-
bined evidence suggests that a focus on methods not
based on MPA or other progestins with GR activity
should become a priority.
References
1.
Sedgh G, Bearak J, Singh S, Bankole A, Popinchalk A,
Ganatra B, Rossier C, Gerdts C, Tunçalp ¨
O, Johnson
BR, Jr, Johnston HB, Alkema L. Abortion incidence
between 1990 and 2014: global, regional, and sub-
regional levels and trends. Lancet. 2016;388(10041):
258–267.
2.
Sedgh G, Singh S, Hussain R. Intended and
unintended pregnancies worldwide in 2012
and recent trends. Stud Fam Plann. 2014;45(3):
301–314.
3.
United Nations Department of Economic and Social
Affairs Population Division. Trends in contraceptive
use worldwide 2015. Available at: http://www.un.org/
en/development/desa/population/publications/pdf/
family/trendsContraceptiveUse2015Report.pdf.
Accessed on 31 December 2017.
4.
Polis CB, Curtis KM, Hannaford PC, Phillips SJ,
Chipato T, Kiarie JN, Westreich DJ, Steyn PS. An
updated systematic review of epidemiological evi-
dence on hormonal contraceptive methods and
HIV acquisition in women. AIDS. 2016;30(17):
2665–2683.
5.
Hel Z, Stringer E, Mestecky J. Sex steroid hormones,
hormonal contraception, and the immunobiology
of human immunodeficiency virus-1 infection.
Endocr Rev. 2010;31(1):79–97.
6.
Murphy K, Irvin SC, Herold BC. Research gaps in
defining the biological link between HIV risk and
hormonal contraception. Am J Reprod Immunol.
2014;72(2):228–235.
7.
Lipsitz R. Women in India get a new birth control
option. Available at: http://www.ourbodiesourselves.
org/2016/03/women-in-india-get-a-new-birth-control-
option/. Accessed on 31 December 2017.
8.
Schivone G, Dorflinger L, Halpern V. Injectable
contraception: updates and innovation. Curr Opin
Obstet Gynecol. 2016;28(6):504–509.
9.
Pfizer. Novel agreement expands access to Pfizer’s
contraceptive, Sayana® Press, for women most in
need in the world’s poorest countries. Available at:
http://www.familyplanning2020.org/articles/4458.
Accessed on 31 December 2017.
10.
Whipkey K, Drake J, Kade K, Balderston B. Ad-
vocacy pack for subcutaneous DMPA. Available
at: https://www.rhsupplies.org/activities-resources/
tools/advocacy-pack-for-subcutaneous-dmpa/.
Accessed on 31 December 2017.
11.
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/
AIDS (UNAIDS). Fact sheet 2016. Available
at: http://www.unaids.org/sites/default/files/media_
asset/20150901_FactSheet_2015_en.pdf. Accessed
30 December 2017.
12.
GBD 2015 HIV Collaborators. Estimates of global,
regional, and national incidence, prevalence, and
mortality of HIV, 1980-2015: the Global Burden
of Disease Study 2015. Lancet HIV. 2016;3(8):
e361–e387.
13.
Avert. HIV around the world. Available at: http://www.
avert.org/professionals/hiv-around-world. Accessed 30
December 2017.
14.
UNAIDS. South Africa: HIV and AIDS esti-
mates. Available at: http://www.unaids.org/en/
regionscountries/countries/southafrica. Accessed 30
December 2017.
15.
Butler AR, Smith JA, Polis CB, Gregson S, Stanton D,
Hallett TB. Modelling the global competing risks of
a potential interaction between injectable hor-
monal contraception and HIV risk. AIDS. 2013;27(1):
105–113.
16.
Morrison CS, Chen PL, Kwok C, Baeten JM, Brown J,
Crook AM, Van Damme L, Delany-Moretlwe S,
Francis SC, Friedland BA, Hayes RJ, Heffron R, Kapiga
S, Karim QA, Karpoff S, Kaul R, McClelland RS,
McCormack S, McGrath N, Myer L, Rees H, van der
Straten A, Watson-Jones D, van de Wijgert JH,
Stalter R, Low N. Hormonal contraception and
the risk of HIV acquisition: an individual partic-
ipant data meta-analysis. PLoS Med. 2015;12(1):
e1001778.
17.
Ralph LJ, Gollub EL, Jones HE. Hormonal contra-
ceptive use and women’s risk of HIV acquisition:
priorities emerging from recent data. Curr Opin
Obstet Gynecol. 2015;27(6):487–495.
18.
Noguchi LM, Richardson BA, Baeten JM, Hillier SL,
Balkus JE, Chirenje ZM, Bunge K, Ramjee G, Nair G,
Palanee-Phillips T, Selepe P, van der Straten A, Parikh
UM, Gomez K, Piper JM, Watts DH, Marrazzo JM;
VOICE Study Team. Risk of HIV-1 acquisition
among women who use different types of in-
jectable progestin contraception in South Africa:
a prospective cohort study. Lancet HIV. 2015;2(7):
e279–e287.
19.
Heffron R, Parikh UM, Penrose KJ, Mugo N, Donnell
D, Celum C, Mellors JW, Baeten JM; Partners PrEP
Study Team. Objective measurement of inaccurate
condom use reporting among women using depot
medroxyprogesterone acetate for contraception.
AIDS Behav. 2017;21(7):2173–2179.
20.
Smith JA, Heffron R, Butler AR, Celum C, Baeten JM,
Hallett TB. Could misreporting of condom use
explain the observed association between injectable
hormonal contraceptives and HIV acquisition risk?
Contraception. 2017;95(4):424–430.
21.
McCoy SI, Ralph LJ, Padian NS, Minnis AM. Are
hormonal contraceptive users more likely to mis-
report unprotected sex? Evidence from a biomarker
validation study in Zimbabwe. AIDS Behav. 2014;
18(12):2259–2264.
22.
World Health Organization. Can women who are at
high risk of acquiring HIV, safely use hormonal
contraception? Available at: http://www.who.int/
reproductivehealth/topics/family_planning/hormonal-
contraception-hiv/en/. Accessed 30 December 2017.
23.
ECHO. The Evidence for Contraceptive Options and
HIV Outcomes (ECHO) Study. Available at: http://
echo-consortium.com/. Accessed 30 December
2017.
24.
Stanczyk FZ, Hapgood JP, Winer S, Mishell DR, Jr.
Progestogens used in postmenopausal hormone
therapy:
differences
in
their
pharmacological
properties, intracellular actions, and clinical effects.
Endocr Rev. 2013;34(2):171–208.
25.
Africander D, Verhoog N, Hapgood JP. Molecular
mechanisms of steroid receptor-mediated actions
by synthetic progestins used in HRT and contra-
ception. Steroids. 2011;76(7):636–652.
26.
Draper BH, Morroni C, Hoffman M, Smit J, Beksinska
M, Hapgood J, Van der Merwe L. Depot medrox-
yprogesterone versus norethisterone oenanthate for
long-acting progestogenic contraception. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. 2006; (3):CD005214.
27.
Sitruk-Ware R, Nath A, Mishell DR, Jr. Contraception
technology: past, present and future. Contraception.
2013;87(3):319–330.
28.
Jacobstein R, Polis CB. Progestin-only contraception:
injectables and implants. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet
Gynaecol. 2014;28(6):795–806.
29.
Dragoman MV, Gaffield ME. The safety of sub-
cutaneously administered depot medroxyprogester-
one acetate (104 mg/0.65 mL): a systematic review.
Contraception. 2016;94(3):202–215.
30.
Sitruk-Ware R, El-Etr M. Progesterone and related
progestins: potential new health benefits. Climac-
teric. 2013;16(Suppl 1):69–78.
31.
Hapgood JP, Koubovec D, Louw A, Africander D.
Not all progestins are the same: implications for
usage. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2004;25(11):554–557.
69
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00103
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 32.
Stanczyk FZ. All progestins are not created equal.
Steroids. 2003;68(10–13):879–890.
33.
Polis CB, Westreich D, Balkus JE, Heffron R; Participants
of the 2013 HC-HIV Observational Analysis Meeting.
Assessing the effect of hormonal contraception on
HIV acquisition in observational data: challenges and
recommended analytic approaches. AIDS. 2013;
27(Suppl 1):S35–S43.
34.
Corsini G, Puppo F. Effect of medroxyprogesterone
acetate upon PHA, Con A and PWM stimu-
lated lymphocytes and on E-rosette function.
J Immunopharmacol. 1982–1983;4(3):247–253.
35.
Mallmann P, Dietrich K, Krebs D. Effect of ta-
moxifen and high-dose medroxyprogesterone ac-
etate (MPA) on cell-mediated immune functions in
breast cancer patients. Methods Find Exp Clin
Pharmacol. 1990;12(10):699–706.
36.
Gillgrass AE, Ashkar AA, Rosenthal KL, Kaushic C.
Prolonged exposure to progesterone prevents in-
duction of protective mucosal responses following
intravaginal immunization with attenuated herpes
simplex virus type 2. J Virol. 2003;77(18):9845–9851.
37.
Trunova N, Tsai L, Tung S, Schneider E, Harouse J,
Gettie A, Simon V, Blanchard J, Cheng-Mayer C.
Progestin-based contraceptive suppresses cellular
immune responses in SHIV-infected rhesus ma-
caques. Virology. 2006;352(1):169–177.
38.
Kuhl H. Pharmacology of progestogens. J Repro-
duktionsmed Endokrinol. 2011;8(1):157–176.
39.
Kuhl H. Pharmacology of estrogens and progesto-
gens: influence of different routes of administration.
Climacteric. 2005;8(Suppl 1):3–63.
40.
Cherala G, Edelman A, Dorflinger L, Stanczyk FZ.
The elusive minimum threshold concentration of
levonorgestrel for contraceptive efficacy. Contra-
ception. 2016;94(2):104–108.
41.
Hidalgo MM, Hidalgo-Regina C, Bahamondes MV,
Monteiro I, Petta CA, Bahamondes L. Serum lev-
onorgestrel levels and endometrial thickness during
extended use of the levonorgestrel-releasing in-
trauterine system. Contraception. 2009;80(1):84–89.
42.
Thomas T, Petrie K, Shim J, Abildskov KM, Westhoff
CL, Cremers S. A UPLC-MS/MS method for ther-
apeutic drug monitoring of etonogestrel. Ther Drug
Monit. 2013;35(6):844–848.
43.
Pena MA, Sanz E, Francisco S, Alonso A, Abajo Z,
Felipe I, Pascual J, Tost D, Bailac S. Randomized,
crossover and single-dose bioequivalence study of
two oral desogestrel formulations (film-coated
tablets of 75 mg) in healthy female volunteers.
Sci Pharm. 2012;80(2):419–431.
44.
Shi YE, He CH, Gu J, Fotherby K. Pharmacokinetics
of norethisterone in humans. Contraception. 1987;
35(5):465–475.
45.
Smit J, Botha J, McFadyen L, Beksinska M. Serum
medroxyprogesterone acetate levels in new and
repeat users of depot medroxyprogesterone ace-
tate at the end of the dosing interval. Contraception.
2004;69(1):3–7.
46.
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Depo-SubQ
Provera 104 (medroxyprogesterone acetate) in-
jectable suspension. New drug application no.
021583. Center for Drug Evaluation and Research
clinical pharmacology and biopharmaceutics re-
view. Available at: https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/
drugsatfda_docs/nda/2005/021584s000_depo-
subQTOC.cfm. Accessed 31 December 2017.
47.
Mathrubutham M, Fotherby K. Medroxyprogester-
one acetate in human serum. J Steroid Biochem. 1981;
14(8):783–786.
48.
Kirton KT, Cornette JC. Return of ovulatory cyclicity
following an intramuscular injection of medrox-
yprogesterone acetate (Provera). Contraception.
1974;10(1):39–45.
49.
Jeppsson S, Johansson ED. Medroxyprogesterone
acetate, estradiol, FSH and LH in peripheral blood
after intramuscular administration of Depo-Provera
to women. Contraception. 1976;14(4):461–469.
50.
Koetsawang S. Injected long-acting medrox-
yprogesterone acetate. Effect on human lacta-
tion and concentrations in milk. J Med Assoc
Thai. 1977;60(2):57–60.
51.
Shrimanker K, Saxena BN, Fotherby K. A radioim-
munoassay for serum medroxyprogesterone ace-
tate. J Steroid Biochem. 1978;9(4):359–363.
52.
Fotherby K, Saxena BN, Shrimanker K, Hingorani V,
Takker D, Diczfalusy E, Landgren BM. A preliminary
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic evalua-
tion of depot-medroxyprogesterone acetate and
norethisterone oenanthate. Fertil Steril. 1980;34(2):
131–139.
53.
Fotherby K, Koetsawang S, Mathrubutham M.
Pharmacokinetic study of different doses of Depo
Provera. Contraception. 1980;22(5):527–536.
54.
Jeppsson S, Gershagen S, Johansson ED, Rannevik G.
Plasma levels of medroxyprogesterone acetate
(MPA), sex-hormone binding globulin, gonadal
steroids, gonadotrophins and prolactin in women
during long-term use of depo-MPA (Depo-Provera)
as a contraceptive agent. Acta Endocrinol (Copenh).
1982;99(3):339–343.
55.
Fang SSD, Jiang H, Luo H. Concentration changes if
medroxyprogesterone acetate in serum and milk in
lactating women who used depo geston. J Reprod
Contraception. 2004;15:157–162.
56.
Bonny AE, Lange HL, Rogers LK, Gothard DM, Reed
MD. A pilot study of depot medroxyprogester-
one acetate pharmacokinetics and weight gain
in adolescent females. Contraception. 2014;89(5):
357–360.
57.
Nanda K, Callahan R, Taylor D, Wang M, Agot K,
Jenkins D, Van Damme L, Dorflinger L; FEM-PrEP
Study Group. Medroxyprogesterone acetate levels
among Kenyan women using depot medrox-
yprogesterone acetate in the FEM-PrEP trial. Con-
traception. 2016;94(1):40–47.
58.
Ortiz A, Hirol M, Stanczyk FZ, Goebelsmann U,
Mishell DR. Serum medroxyprogesterone acetate
(MPA) concentrations and ovarian function fol-
lowing intramuscular injection of depo-MPA. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 1977;44(1):32–38.
59.
Virutamasen P, Leepipatpaiboon S, Kriengsinyot R,
Vichaidith P, Muia PN, Sekadde-Kigondu CB,
Mati JK, Forest MG, Dikkeschei LD, Wolthers BG,
d’Arcangues C. Pharmacodynamic effects of depot-
medroxyprogesterone acetate (DMPA) adminis-
tered to lactating women on their male infants.
Contraception. 1996;54(3):153–157.
60.
Mishell DR, Jr. Pharmacokinetics of depot medrox-
yprogesterone acetate contraception. J Reprod Med.
1996;41(5, Suppl):381–390.
61.
Kaunitz AM, Darney PD, Ross D, Wolter KD, Speroff
L. Subcutaneous DMPA vs. intramuscular DMPA:
a 2-year randomized study of contraceptive efficacy
and bone mineral density. Contraception. 2009;
80(1):7–17.
62.
Jain J, Dutton C, Nicosia A, Wajszczuk C, Bode FR,
Mishell DR, Jr. Pharmacokinetics, ovulation sup-
pression and return to ovulation following a lower
dose subcutaneous formulation of Depo-Provera.
Contraception. 2004;70(1):11–18.
63.
Toh YC, Jain J, Rahnny MH, Bode FR, Ross D.
Suppression of ovulation by a new subcutaneous
depot medroxyprogesterone acetate (104 mg/0.65
mL) contraceptive formulation in Asian women.
Clin Ther. 2004;26(11):1845–1854.
64.
Halpern V, Combes SL, Dorflinger LJ, Weiner DH,
Archer DF. Pharmacokinetics of subcutaneous
depot medroxyprogesterone acetate injected in the
upper arm. Contraception. 2014;89(1):31–35.
65.
Selim MF, Hussein AF. Endothelial function in
women using levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine
system
(LNG-IUS).
Contraception.
2013;87(4):
396–403.
66.
Sivin I, L¨
ahteenm¨
aki P, Ranta S, Darney P, Klaisle C,
Wan L, Mishell DR, Jr, Lacarra M, Viegas OA,
Bilhareus P, Koetsawang S, Piya-Anant M, Diaz S,
Pavez M, Alvarez F, Brache V, LaGuardia K, Nash
H, Stern J. Levonorgestrel concentrations during
use of levonorgestrel rod (LNG ROD) implants.
Contraception. 1997;55(2):81–85.
67.
Licea-Perez H, Wang S, Bowen CL, Yang E. A semi-
automated 96-well plate method for the simul-
taneous determination of oral contraceptives
concentrations in human plasma using ultra per-
formance liquid chromatography coupled with
tandem mass spectrometry. J Chromatogr B Analyt
Technol Biomed Life Sci. 2007;852(1–2):69–76.
68.
Fotherby K, Koetsawang S. Metabolism of in-
jectable formulations of contraceptive steroids in
obese and thin women. Contraception. 1982;26(1):
51–58.
69.
Sang GW, Fotherby K, Howard G, Elder M, Bye PG.
Pharmacokinetics of norethisterone oenanthate in
humans. Contraception. 1981;24(1):15–27.
70.
Goebelsmann U, Stanczyk FZ, Brenner PF, Goe-
belsmann AE, Gentzschein EK, Mishell DR, Jr. Serum
norethindrone (NET) concentrations following in-
tramuscular NET enanthate injection. Effect upon
serum LH, FSH, estradiol and progesterone. Con-
traception. 1979;19(3):283–313.
71.
Wenzl R, van Beek A, Schnabel P, Huber J. Phar-
macokinetics of etonogestrel released from the
contraceptive implant Implanon. Contraception.
1998;58(5):283–288.
72.
Mornar S, Chan LN, Mistretta S, Neustadt A,
Martins S, Gilliam M. Pharmacokinetics of the
etonogestrel contraceptive implant in obese women.
Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2012;207(2):110.e1-6.
73.
Kuhnz W, Sch¨
utt B, Power J, Back DJ. Pharmaco-
kinetics and serum protein binding of gestodene
and 3-keto-desogestrel in women after single
oral administration of two different contraceptive
formulations.
Arzneimittelforschung.
1992;42(9):
1139–1141.
74.
Nanda K, Amaral E, Hays M, Viscola MA, Mehta N,
Bahamondes L. Pharmacokinetic interactions be-
tween depot medroxyprogesterone acetate and
combination antiretroviral therapy. Fertil Steril.
2008;90(4):965–971.
75.
K¨
arkk¨
ainen J, Vesterinen E, Stenman UH, Adlercreutz
H, Nieminen U, Widholm O. Comparison of mass
spectrometry and radioimmunoassay to mea-
sure medroxyprogesterone acetate in patients
with endometrial cancer. Eur J Cancer. 1990;26(9):
975–977.
76.
Keefe CC, Goldman MM, Zhang K, Clarke N, Reitz
RE, Welt CK. Simultaneous measurement of thir-
teen steroid hormones in women with polycystic
ovary syndrome and control women using liquid
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. PLoS
One. 2014;9(4):e93805.
77.
Mould
GP,
Read
J,
Edwards
D,
Bye
A.
A
comparison of the high-performance liquid chro-
matography and RIA measurement of medrox-
yprogesterone acetate. J Pharm Biomed Anal.
1989;7(1):119–122.
78.
Canney PA, Dowsett M, Priestman TJ. The phar-
macokinetics
of
medroxyprogesterone
acetate
following two different loading dose schedules in
advanced carcinoma of the breast. Br J Cancer. 1988;
58(1):73–76.
70
Hapgood et al
Mechanisms: Hormonal Contraception and HIV
Endocrine Reviews, February 2018, 39(1):36–78
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 79.
Miller AA, Becher R, Schmidt CG. Plasma con-
centrations of medroxyprogesterone acetate and
megesterol acetate during long-term follow-up in
patients treated for metastatic breast cancer.
J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 1988;114(2):186–190.
80.
Scambia G, Panici PB, Maccio A, Castelli P, Serri F,
Mantovani G, Massidda B, Iacobelli S, Del Giacco S,
Mancuso S. Effects of antiestrogen and progestin on
immune functions in breast cancer patients. Cancer.
1988;61(11):2214–2218.
81.
Yamashita J, Hideshima T, Shirakusa T, Ogawa M.
Medroxyprogesterone acetate treatment re-
duces serum interleukin-6 levels in patients with
metastatic breast carcinoma. Cancer. 1996;78(11):
2346–2352.
82.
Vesterinen E, Backas NE, Pesonen K, Stenman UH,
Laatikainen T. Effect of medroxyprogesterone ac-
etate on serum levels of LH, FSH, cortisol, and
estrone in patients with endometrial carcinoma.
Arch Gynecol. 1981;230(3):205–211.
83.
Hedley DW, Christie M, Weatherby RP, Caterson ID.
Lack of correlations between plasma concentration
of medroxyprogesterone acetate, hypothalamic-
pituitary function, and tumour response in
patients with advanced breast cancer. Cancer
Chemother Pharmacol. 1985;14(2):112–115.
84.
Polis CB, Phillips SJ, Hillier SL, Achilles SL. Levo-
norgestrel in contraceptives and multipurpose
prevention technologies: does this progestin in-
crease HIV risk or interact with antiretrovirals? AIDS.
2016;30(17):2571–2576.
85.
Thurman AR, Chandra N, Yousefieh N, Zalenskaya I,
Kimble T, Asin S, Rollenhagen C, Anderson SM,
Herold B, Mesquita PM, Richardson-Harman N,
Cunningham T, Schwartz JL, Doncel GF. Compar-
ison of follicular and luteal phase mucosal markers
of HIV susceptibility in healthy women. AIDS Res
Hum Retroviruses. 2016;32(6):547–560.
86.
Hafner LM, Cunningham K, Beagley KW. Ovarian
steroid hormones: effects on immune responses
and Chlamydia trachomatis infections of the fe-
male genital tract. Mucosal Immunol. 2013;6(5):
859–875.
87.
Altemus M, Redwine L, Leong YM, Yoshikawa T,
Yehuda R, Detera-Wadleigh S, Murphy DL. Reduced
sensitivity to glucocorticoid feedback and reduced
glucocorticoid receptor mRNA expression in the luteal
phase of the menstrual cycle. Neuropsychopharmacology.
1997;17(2):100–109.
88.
Hapgood JP, Africander D, Louw R, Ray RM, Rohwer
JM. Potency of progestogens used in hormonal
therapy: toward understanding differential actions.
J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2014;142:39–47.
89.
Hapgood JP, Avenant C, Moliki JM. Glucocorticoid-
independent modulation of GR activity: implica-
tions for immunotherapy. Pharmacol Ther. 2016;
165:93–113.
90.
Bennesch MA, Picard D. Minireview: tipping the
balance: ligand-independent activation of steroid
receptors. Mol Endocrinol. 2015;29(3):349–363.
91.
Levin ER, Hammes SR. Nuclear receptors outside
the nucleus: extranuclear signalling by steroid
receptors. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2016;17(12):
783–797.
92.
Cruz-Topete D, Cidlowski JA. One hormone, two
actions: anti- and pro-inflammatory effects of
glucocorticoids. Neuroimmunomodulation. 2015;
22(1–2):20–32.
93.
Mohammed H, Russell IA, Stark R, Rueda OM,
Hickey TE, Tarulli GA, Serandour AA, Birrell SN,
Bruna A, Saadi A, Menon S, Hadfield J, Pugh M, Raj
GV, Brown GD, D’Santos C, Robinson JL, Silva G,
Launchbury R, Perou CM, Stingl J, Caldas C, Tilley
WD, Carroll JS. Progesterone receptor modulates
ERa action in breast cancer. Nature. 2015;523(7560):
313–317.
94.
Dahm AE, Eilertsen AL, Goeman J, Olstad OK,
Ovstebø R, Kierulf P, Mowinckel MC, Skretting G,
Sandset PM. A microarray study on the effect of
four hormone therapy regimens on gene tran-
scription in whole blood from healthy post-
menopausal women. Thromb Res. 2012;130(1):
45–51.
95.
Kayisli UA, Basar M, Guzeloglu-Kayisli O, Semerci N,
Atkinson HC, Shapiro J, Summerfield T, Huang SJ,
Prelle K, Schatz F, Lockwood CJ. Long-acting
progestin-only contraceptives impair endometrial
vasculature by inhibiting uterine vascular smooth
muscle cell survival. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2015;
112(16):5153–5158.
96.
Guzeloglu Kayisli O, Kayisli UA, Basar M, Semerci N,
Schatz F, Lockwood CJ. Progestins upregulate
FKBP51 expression in human endometrial stromal
cells to induce functional progesterone and gluco-
corticoid withdrawal: implications for contraceptive-
associated abnormal uterine bleeding. PLoS One. 2015;
10(10):e0137855.
97.
Ghatge RP, Jacobsen BM, Schittone SA, Horwitz KB.
The progestational and androgenic properties of
medroxyprogesterone
acetate:
gene
regulatory
overlap with dihydrotestosterone in breast cancer
cells. Breast Cancer Res. 2005;7(6):R1036–R1050.
98.
Lei K, Chen L, Georgiou EX, Sooranna SR, Khanjani S,
Brosens JJ, Bennett PR, Johnson MR. Progesterone
acts via the nuclear glucocorticoid receptor to
suppress IL-1b-induced COX-2 expression in hu-
man term myometrial cells. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):
e50167.
99.
Tan H, Yi L, Rote NS, Hurd WW, Mesiano S. Pro-
gesterone receptor-A and -B have opposite effects
on proinflammatory gene expression in human
myometrial cells: implications for progesterone
actions in human pregnancy and parturition. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2012;97(5):E719–E730.
100. Ronacher K, Hadley K, Avenant C, Stubsrud E,
Simons SS, Jr, Louw A, Hapgood JP. Ligand-selective
transactivation and transrepression via the gluco-
corticoid receptor: role of cofactor interaction. Mol
Cell Endocrinol. 2009;299(2):219–231.
101. Africander D, Louw R, Hapgood JP. Investigating the
anti-mineralocorticoid
properties
of
synthetic
progestins used in hormone therapy. Biochem
Biophys Res Commun. 2013;433(3):305–310.
102. Africander DJ, Storbeck KH, Hapgood JP. A com-
parative study of the androgenic properties of pro-
gesterone and the progestins, medroxyprogesterone
acetate
(MPA)
and
norethisterone
acetate
(NET-A). J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2014;143:
404–415.
103. Koubovec D, Ronacher K, Stubsrud E, Louw A,
Hapgood JP. Synthetic progestins used in HRT have
different glucocorticoid agonist properties. Mol Cell
Endocrinol. 2005;242(1–2):23–32.
104. Koubovec D, Vanden Berghe W, Vermeulen L,
Haegeman G, Hapgood JP. Medroxyprogesterone
acetate downregulates cytokine gene expression in
mouse fibroblast cells. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2004;
221(1–2):75–85.
105. Chu MC, Zhang X, Gentzschein E, Stanczyk FZ,
Lobo RA. Formation of ethinyl estradiol in women
during treatment with norethindrone acetate. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab. 2007;92(6):2205–2207.
106. Kuhl H, Wiegratz I. Can 19-nortestosterone de-
rivatives be aromatized in the liver of adult humans?
Are there clinical implications? Climacteric. 2007;
10(4):344–353.
107. Chwalisz K, Surrey E, Stanczyk FZ. The hormonal
profile of norethindrone acetate: rationale for add-
back therapy with gonadotropin-releasing hor-
mone agonists in women with endometriosis.
Reprod Sci. 2012;19(6):563–571.
108. Kuhnz W, Heuner A, H¨
umpel M, Seifert W,
Michaelis K. In vivo conversion of norethisterone
and norethisterone acetate to ethinyl etradiol in
postmenopausal women. Contraception. 1997;56(6):
379–385.
109. Louw-du Toit R, Hapgood JP, Africander D.
Medroxyprogesterone acetate differentially regu-
lates interleukin (IL)-12 and IL-10 in a human
ectocervical epithelial cell line in a glucocorticoid
receptor (GR)-dependent manner. J Biol Chem.
2014;289(45):31136–31149.
110. Giannoukos G, Szapary D, Smith CL, Meeker JE,
Simons SS, Jr. New antiprogestins with partial ag-
onist activity: potential selective progesterone
receptor modulators (SPRMs) and probes for
receptor- and coregulator-induced changes in
progesterone receptor induction properties. Mol
Endocrinol. 2001;15(2):255–270.
111. Sasagawa S, Shimizu Y, Kami H, Takeuchi T, Mita S,
Imada K, Kato S, Mizuguchi K. Dienogest is a se-
lective progesterone receptor agonist in trans-
activation analysis with potent oral endometrial
activity due to its efficient pharmacokinetic profile.
Steroids. 2008;73(2):222–231.
112. Kleynhans L, Du Plessis N, Black GF, Loxton AG,
Kidd M, van Helden PD, Walzl G, Ronacher K.
Medroxyprogesterone acetate alters Mycobacte-
rium bovis BCG-induced cytokine production in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells of contracep-
tive users. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e24639.
113. Chow CC, Ong KM, Dougherty EJ, Simons SS, Jr.
Inferring mechanisms from dose-response curves.
Methods Enzymol. 2011;487:465–483.
114. Bamberger CM, Else T, Bamberger AM, Beil FU,
Schulte HM. Dissociative glucocorticoid activity of
medroxyprogesterone acetate in normal human
lymphocytes. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1999;84(11):
4055–4061.
115. Govender Y, Avenant C, Verhoog NJ, Ray RM,
Grantham NJ, Africander D, Hapgood JP. The
injectable-only contraceptive medroxyprogester-
one acetate, unlike norethisterone acetate and
progesterone, regulates inflammatory genes in
endocervical cells via the glucocorticoid receptor.
PLoS One. 2014;9(5):e96497.
116. Zhao Q, Pang J, Favata MF, Trzaskos JM. Receptor
density dictates the behavior of a subset of steroid
ligands in glucocorticoid receptor-mediated trans-
repression. Int Immunopharmacol. 2003;3(13–14):
1803–1817.
117. Robertson S, Rohwer JM, Hapgood JP, Louw A.
Impact of glucocorticoid receptor density on
ligand-independent dimerization, cooperative
ligand-binding and basal priming of trans-
activation: a cell culture model. PLoS One. 2013;
8(5):e64831.
118. Bray JD, Jelinsky S, Ghatge R, Bray JA, Tunkey C, Saraf
K, Jacobsen BM, Richer JK, Brown EL, Winneker RC,
Horwitz KB, Lyttle CR. Quantitative analysis of gene
regulation by seven clinically relevant progestins
suggests a highly similar mechanism of action
through progesterone receptors in T47D breast
cancer cells. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2005;97(4):
328–341.
119. Beasley A, White KO, Cremers S, Westhoff C.
Randomized clinical trial of self versus clinical ad-
ministration of subcutaneous
depot
medrox-
yprogesterone acetate. Contraception. 2014;89(5):
352–356.
120. Fuhrmann U, Slater EP, Fritzemeier KH. Charac-
terization of the novel progestin gestodene by
71
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00103
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 receptor binding studies and transactivation assays.
Contraception. 1995;51(1):45–52.
121. Kontula K, Paavonen T, Luukkainen T, Andersson
LC. Binding of progestins to the glucocorticoid
receptor. Correlation to their glucocorticoid-like
effects on in vitro functions of human mono-
nuclear leukocytes. Biochem Pharmacol. 1983;32(9):
1511–1518.
122. Huijbregts RP, Helton ES, Michel KG, Sabbaj S, Richter
HE, Goepfert PA, Hel Z. Hormonal contraception
and
HIV-1
infection:
medroxyprogesterone
acetate suppresses innate and adaptive im-
mune mechanisms. Endocrinology. 2013;154(3):
1282–1295.
123. Hapgood JP, Ray RM, Govender Y, Avenant C,
Tomasicchio M. Differential glucocorticoid receptor-
mediated effects on immunomodulatory gene ex-
pression by progestin contraceptives: implications for
HIV-1 pathogenesis. Am J Reprod Immunol. 2014;71(6):
505–512.
124. Irvin SC, Herold BC. Molecular mechanisms linking
high dose medroxyprogesterone with HIV-1 risk.
PLoS One. 2015;10(3):e0121135.
125. Hapgood JP. Immunosuppressive biological mech-
anisms support reassessment of use of the inject-
able contraceptive medroxyprogesterone acetate.
Endocrinology. 2013;154(3):985–988.
126. Huijbregts RP, Michel KG, Hel Z. Effect of progestins
on immunity: medroxyprogesterone but not nor-
ethisterone or levonorgestrel suppresses the func-
tion of T cells and pDCs. Contraception. 2014;90(2):
123–129.
127. Quispe Calla NE, Ghonime MG, Cherpes TL, Vicetti
Miguel RD. Medroxyprogesterone acetate impairs
human dendritic cell activation and function. Hum
Reprod. 2015;30(5):1169–1177.
128. Tomasicchio M, Avenant C, Du Toit A, Ray RM,
Hapgood JP. The progestin-only contraceptive
medroxyprogesterone acetate, but not norethisterone
acetate, enhances HIV-1 Vpr-mediated apoptosis in
human CD4+ T cells through the glucocorticoid re-
ceptor. PLoS One. 2013;8(5):e62895.
129. Sampah ME, Laird GM, Blankson JN, Siliciano RF,
Coleman JS. Medroxyprogesterone acetate in-
creases HIV-1 infection of unstimulated peripheral
blood mononuclear cells in vitro. AIDS. 2015;29(10):
1137–1146.
130. Ferreira VH, Dizzell S, Nazli A, Kafka JK, Mueller K,
Nguyen PV, Tremblay MJ, Cochrane A, Kaushic C.
Medroxyprogesterone acetate regulates HIV-1
uptake and transcytosis but not replication in
primary genital epithelial cells, resulting in en-
hanced T-cell infection. J Infect Dis. 2015;211(11):
1745–1756.
131. Kleynhans L, Du Plessis N, Allie N, Jacobs M, Kidd M,
van Helden PD, Walzl G, Ronacher K. The con-
traceptive depot medroxyprogesterone acetate
impairs mycobacterial control and inhibits cytokine
secretion in mice infected with Mycobacterium
tuberculosis. Infect Immun. 2013;81(4):1234–1244.
132. Vicetti Miguel RD, Hendricks RL, Aguirre AJ, Melan
MA, Harvey SA, Terry-Allison T, St Leger AJ,
Thomson AW, Cherpes TL. Dendritic cell activation
and memory cell development are impaired among
mice administered medroxyprogesterone acetate
prior to mucosal herpes simplex virus type 1 in-
fection. J Immunol. 2012;189(7):3449–3461.
133. Quispe Calla NE, Vicetti Miguel RD, Boyaka PN,
Hall-Stoodley L, Kaur B, Trout W, Pavelko SD,
Cherpes TL. Medroxyprogesterone acetate and
levonorgestrel increase genital mucosal perme-
ability and enhance susceptibility to genital herpes
simplex virus type 2 infection. Mucosal Immunol.
2016;9(6):1571–1583.
134. Radzio J, Hanley K, Mitchell J, Ellis S, Deyounks F,
Jenkins LT, Hanson D, Heneine W, Garc´
ıa-Lerma JG.
Physiologic doses of depot-medroxyprogesterone
acetate do not increase acute plasma simian HIV
viremia or mucosal virus shedding in pigtail ma-
caques. AIDS. 2014;28(10):1431–1439.
135. Butler K, Ritter JM, Ellis S, Morris MR, Hanson DL,
McNicholl JM, Kersh EN. A depot medrox-
yprogesterone acetate dose that models human
use and its effect on vaginal SHIV acquisition
risk. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2016;72(4):
363–371.
136. Baschant U, Tuckermann J. The role of the gluco-
corticoid receptor in inflammation and immunity.
J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2010;120(2–3):69–75.
137. Chinenov Y, Coppo M, Gupte R, Sacta MA,
Rogatsky I. Glucocorticoid receptor coordinates
transcription factor-dominated regulatory network
in macrophages. BMC Genomics. 2014;15(1):656.
138. Chinenov Y, Gupte R, Rogatsky I. Nuclear receptors
in inflammation control: repression by GR and
beyond. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2013;380(1–2):55–64.
139. Busillo JM, Cidlowski JA. The five Rs of glucocor-
ticoid action during inflammation: ready, reinforce,
repress, resolve, and restore. Trends Endocrinol
Metab. 2013;24(3):109–119.
140. Frenkel B, White W, Tuckermann J. Glucocorticoid-
induced osteoporosis. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2015;872:
179–215.
141. Padgett DA, Glaser R. How stress influences the
immune response. Trends Immunol. 2003;24(8):
444–448.
142. Ng SS, Li A, Pavlakis GN, Ozato K, Kino T. Viral
infection increases glucocorticoid-induced interleukin-
10 production through ERK-mediated phosphory-
lation of the glucocorticoid receptor in dendritic cells:
potential clinical implications. PLoS One. 2013;8(5):
e63587.
143. Hapgood JP, Tomasicchio M. Modulation of HIV-
1 virulence via the host glucocorticoid receptor:
towards further understanding the molecular
mechanisms of HIV-1 pathogenesis. Arch Virol.
2010;155(7):1009–1019.
144. Quispe Calla NE, Vicetti Miguel RD, Mei A, Fan S,
Gilmore JR, Cherpes TL. Dendritic cell function and
pathogen-specific T cell immunity are inhibited in
mice administered levonorgestrel prior to intranasal
Chlamydia trachomatis infection. Sci Rep. 2016;6(1):
37723.
145. Wira C, Crane-Godreau A, Grant KS. Endocrine
regulation of the mucosal immune system in the
female reproductive tract. In: Mestecky J, Lamm ME,
Strober W, Bienenstock J, McGhee JR, Mayer L, eds.
Mucosal Immunol. 3rd ed. New York, NY: Elsevier
Academic Press; 2005:1661–1676.
146. Ferreira RB, Antunes LC, Finlay BB. Should the
human microbiome be considered when de-
veloping vaccines? PLoS Pathog. 2010;6(11):
e1001190.
147. Sciaranghella G, Wang C, Hu H, Anastos K, Merhi Z,
Nowicki M, Stanczyk FZ, Greenblatt RM, Cohen M,
Golub ET, Watts DH, Alter G, Young MA, Tsibris
AM. CCR5 expression levels in HIV-uninfected
women receiving hormonal contraception. J Infect
Dis. 2015;212(9):1397–1401.
148. Chandra N, Thurman AR, Anderson S, Cunningham
TD, Yousefieh N, Mauck C, Doncel GF. Depot
medroxyprogesterone acetate increases immune
cell numbers and activation markers in human
vaginal mucosal tissues. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses.
2013;29(3):592–601.
149. Prakash M, Kapembwa MS, Gotch F, Patterson S.
Oral contraceptive use induces upregulation of the
CCR5 chemokine receptor on CD4+ T cells in the
cervical epithelium of healthy women. J Reprod
Immunol. 2002;54(1–2):117–131.
150. Byrne EH, Anahtar MN, Cohen KE, Moodley A,
Padavattan N, Ismail N, Bowman BA, Olson GS,
Mabhula A, Leslie A, Ndung’u T, Walker BD,
Ghebremichael MS, Dong KL, Kwon DS. Association
between injectable progestin-only contraceptives
and HIV acquisition and HIV target cell frequency in
the female genital tract in South African women:
a prospective cohort study. Lancet Infect Dis. 2016;
16(4):441–448.
151. Achilles SL, Creinin MD, Stoner KA, Chen BA, Meyn
L, Hillier SL. Changes in genital tract immune
cell populations after initiation of intrauterine
contraception. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2014;211(5):
489.e1-9.
152. Smith-McCune KK, Hilton JF, Shanmugasundaram
U, Critchfield JW, Greenblatt RM, Seidman D,
Averbach S, Giudice LC, Shacklett BL. Effects of
depot-medroxyprogesterone acetate on the im-
mune microenvironment of the human cervix and
endometrium: implications for HIV susceptibility.
Mucosal Immunol. 2017;10(5):1270–1278.
153. Michel KG, Huijbregts RP, Gleason JL, Richter HE,
Hel Z. Effect of hormonal contraception on the
function of plasmacytoid dendritic cells and dis-
tribution of immune cell populations in the female
reproductive tract. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr.
2015;68(5):511–518.
154. Hughes GC, Thomas S, Li C, Kaja MK, Clark EA.
Cutting edge: progesterone regulates IFN-a pro-
duction by plasmacytoid dendritic cells. J Immunol.
2008;180(4):2029–2033.
155. Miller L, Patton DL, Meier A, Thwin SS, Hooton
TM, Eschenbach DA. Depomedroxyprogesterone-
induced hypoestrogenism and changes in vaginal
flora and epithelium. Obstet Gynecol. 2000;96(3):
431–439.
156. Bahamondes MV, Castro S, Marchi NM, Marcovici
M, Andrade LA, Fernandes A, Bahamondes L. Human
vaginal histology in long-term users of the injectable
contraceptive depot-medroxyprogesterone acetate.
Contraception. 2014;90(2):117–122.
157. Mauck CK, Callahan MM, Baker J, Arbogast K,
Veazey R, Stock R, Pan Z, Morrison CS, Chen-Mok
M, Archer DF, Gabelnick HL. The effect of one
injection of Depo-Provera on the human vaginal
epithelium and cervical ectopy. Contraception. 1999;
60(1):15–24.
158. Bahamondes L, Trevisan M, Andrade L, Marchi NM,
Castro S, D´
ıaz J, Fa´
undes A. The effect upon the
human vaginal histology of the long-term use of the
injectable contraceptive Depo-Provera. Contracep-
tion. 2000;62(1):23–27.
159. Morrison C, Fichorova RN, Mauck C, Chen PL,
Kwok C, Chipato T, Salata R, Doncel GF. Cervical
inflammation and immunity associated with
hormonal contraception, pregnancy, and HIV-1
seroconversion. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr.
2014;66(2):109–117.
160. Fichorova RN, Chen PL, Morrison CS, Doncel GF,
Mendonca K, Kwok C, Chipato T, Salata R, Mauck C.
The contribution of cervicovaginal infections to the
immunomodulatory effects of hormonal contra-
ception. MBio. 2015;6(5):e00221-15.
161. Li A, Felix JC, Yang W, Jain JK. Effect of mife-
pristone on the expression of endometrial se-
cretory leukocyte protease inhibitor in new
medroxyprogesterone acetate users. Fertil Steril.
2008;90(3):872–875.
162. Deese J, Masson L, Miller W, Cohen M, Morrison C,
Wang M, Ahmed K, Agot K, Crucitti T, Abdellati S,
Van Damme L. Injectable progestin-only con-
traception is associated with increased levels of
72
Hapgood et al
Mechanisms: Hormonal Contraception and HIV
Endocrine Reviews, February 2018, 39(1):36–78
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 pro-inflammatory cytokines in the female genital
tract. Am J Reprod Immunol. 2015;74(4):357–367.
163. Francis SC, Hou Y, Baisley K, van de Wijgert J,
Watson-Jones D, Ao TT, Herrera C, Maganja K,
Andreasen A, Kapiga S, Coulton GR, Hayes RJ,
Shattock RJ. Immune activation in the female
genital tract: expression profiles of soluble proteins
in women at high risk for HIV infection. PLoS One.
2016;11(1):e0143109.
164. Roxby
AC,
Fredricks
DN,
Odem-Davis
K,
´
Asbj¨
ornsd´
ottir K, Masese L, Fiedler TL, De Rosa S,
Jaoko W, Kiarie JN, Overbaugh J, McClelland RS.
Changes in vaginal microbiota and immune
mediators in HIV-1-seronegative Kenyan women
initiating depot medroxyprogesterone acetate.
J
Acquir
Immune
Defic
Syndr.
2016;71(4):
359–366.
165. Fleming DC, King AE, Williams AR, Critchley HO,
Kelly RW. Hormonal contraception can suppress
natural antimicrobial gene transcription in human
endometrium. Fertil Steril. 2003;79(4):856–863.
166. Goldfien GA, Barragan F, Chen J, Takeda M, Irwin JC,
Perry J, Greenblatt RM, Smith-McCune KK, Giudice
LC. Progestin-containing contraceptives alter ex-
pression of host defense-related genes of the en-
dometrium and cervix. Reprod Sci. 2015;22(7):
814–828.
167. Ngcapu S, Masson L, Sibeko S, Werner L, McKinnon
LR, Mlisana K, Shey M, Samsunder N, Karim SA,
Karim QA, Passmore JA. Lower concentrations of
chemotactic cytokines and soluble innate factors in
the lower female genital tract associated with the
use of injectable hormonal contraceptive. J Reprod
Immunol. 2015;110:14–21.
168. Abel K, Rourke T, Lu D, Bost K, McChesney MB,
Miller CJ. Abrogation of attenuated lentivirus-induced
protection in rhesus macaques by administration of
Depo-Provera before intravaginal challenge with simian
immunodeficiency virus mac239. J Infect Dis. 2004;
190(9):1697–1705.
169. Genesc`
a M, Li J, Fritts L, Chohan P, Bost K, Rourke T,
Blozis SA, McChesney MB, Miller CJ. Depo-Provera
abrogates attenuated lentivirus-induced protection
in male rhesus macaques challenged intravenously
with pathogenic SIVmac239. J Med Primatol. 2007;
36(4–5):266–275.
170. Hild-Petito S, Veazey RS, Larner JM, Reel JR, Blye RP.
Effects of two progestin-only contraceptives, Depo-
Provera and Norplant-II, on the vaginal epithelium
of rhesus monkeys. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 1998;
14(Suppl 1):S125–S130.
171. Butler K, Ritter J, Ellis S, Henning TR, Montague J,
Zaki S, Garber D, McNicholl JM, Kersh EN. Analysis
of putative mucosal SHIV susceptibility factors
during repeated DMPA treatments in pigtail ma-
caques. J Med Primatol. 2015;44(5):286–295.
172. Kaushic C, Ashkar AA, Reid LA, Rosenthal KL.
Progesterone increases susceptibility and decreases
immune responses to genital herpes infection.
J Virol. 2003;77(8):4558–4565.
173. Dietz Ostergaard S, Butler K, Ritter JM, Johnson R,
Sanders J, Powell N, Lathrop G, Zaki SR, McNicholl
JM, Kersh EN. A combined oral contraceptive af-
fects mucosal SHIV susceptibility factors in a pigtail
macaque (Macaca nemestrina) model. J Med Pri-
matol. 2015;44(2):97–107.
174. Goode D, Aravantinou M, Jarl S, Truong R, Derby N,
Guerra-Perez N, Kenney J, Blanchard J, Gettie A,
Robbiani M, Martinelli E. Sex hormones selectively
impact the endocervical mucosal microenviron-
ment: implications for HIV transmission. PLoS One.
2014;9(5):e97767.
175. Deligdisch L. Hormonal pathology of the endo-
metrium. Mod Pathol. 2000;13(3):285–294.
176. Dinh A, Sriprasert I, Williams AR, Archer DF. A
review of the endometrial histologic effects of
progestins and progesterone receptor modulators
in reproductive age women. Contraception. 2015;
91(5):360–367.
177. Farage M, Maibach H. Lifetime changes in the vulva
and vagina. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2006;273(4):
195–202.
178. Ferenczy A, Wright TC. Anatomy and histology of
the cervix. In: Kurman R, ed. Blaustein’s Pathology of
the Female Genital Tract. New York, NY: Springer-
Verlag; 1994:185–201.
179. Jacobson DL, Peralta L, Graham NM, Zenilman J.
Histologic development of cervical ectopy: re-
lationship to reproductive hormones. Sex Transm
Dis. 2000;27(5):252–258.
180. Noyes RW. Normal phases of the endometrium. In:
Norris JH, Hertig AT, Abell MR, eds. The Uterus.
Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins; 1973:110–135.
181. Brenner RM, West NB. Hormonal regulation of the
reproductive tract in female mammals. Annu Rev
Physiol. 1975;37(1):273–302.
182. Ferenczy A, Bertrand G, Gelfand MM. Proliferation
kinetics of human endometrium during the normal
menstrual cycle. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1979;133(8):
859–867.
183. Moyer DL, Felix JC. The effects of progesterone and
progestins on endometrial proliferation. Contra-
ception. 1998;57(6):399–403.
184. Bergeron C. Morphological changes and protein
secretion induced by progesterone in the endo-
metrium during the luteal phase in preparation for
nidation. Hum Reprod. 2000;15(Suppl 1):119–128.
185. Nonogaki H, Fujii S, Konishi I, Nanbu Y, Ozaki S,
Ishikawa Y, Mori T. Estrogen receptor localization in
normal and neoplastic epithelium of the uterine
cervix. Cancer. 1990;66(12):2620–2627.
186. Konishi I, Fujii S, Nonogaki H, Nanbu Y, Iwai T, Mori
T. Immunohistochemical analysis of estrogen re-
ceptors, progesterone receptors, Ki-67 antigen, and
human papillomavirus DNA in normal and neo-
plastic epithelium of the uterine cervix. Cancer.
1991;68(6):1340–1350.
187. Sanborn BM, Held B, Kuo HS. Hormonal action in
human cervix—II. Specific progestogen binding
proteins in human cervix. J Steroid Biochem. 1976;
7(9):665–672.
188. Singer A. The uterine cervix from adolescence to
the menopause. Br J Obstet Gynaecol. 1975;82(2):
81–99.
189. Jacobson DL, Peralta L, Farmer M, Graham NM,
Wright TC, Zenilman J. Cervical ectopy and the
transformation zone measured by computerized
planimetry in adolescents. Int J Gynaecol Obstet.
1999;66(1):7–17.
190. Mostad SB. Prevalence and correlates of HIV type 1
shedding in the female genital tract. AIDS Res Hum
Retroviruses. 1999;14(Suppl 1):S11–S15.
191. Kyongo JK, Crucitti T, Menten J, Hardy L, Cools
P, Michiels J, Delany-Moretlwe S, Mwaura M,
Ndayisaba G, Joseph S, Fichorova R, van de Wijgert
J, Vanham G, Ari¨
en KK, Jespers V. Cross-sectional
analysis of selected genital tract immunological
markers and molecular vaginal microbiota in sub-
Saharan African women, with relevance to HIV risk
and prevention. Clin Vaccine Immunol. 2015;22(5):
526–538.
192. Myer L, Wright TC, Jr, Denny L, Kuhn L. Nested case-
control study of cervical mucosal lesions, ectopy,
and incident HIV infection among women in Cape
Town, South Africa. Sex Transm Dis. 2006;33(11):
683–687.
193. Tanton C, Weiss HA, Le Goff J, Changalucha J,
Rusizoka M, Baisley K, Everett D, Ross DA, Belec L,
Hayes RJ, Watson-Jones D. Correlates of HIV-1
genital shedding in Tanzanian women. PLoS One.
2011;6(3):e17480.
194. Buchanan DL, Kurita T, Taylor JA, Lubahn DB,
Cunha GR, Cooke PS. Role of stromal and epithelial
estrogen receptors in vaginal epithelial proliferation,
stratification, and cornification. Endocrinology. 1998;
139(10):4345–4352.
195. Patton DL, Thwin SS, Meier A, Hooton TM, Sta-
pleton AE, Eschenbach DA. Epithelial cell layer
thickness and immune cell populations in the
normal human vagina at different stages of the
menstrual cycle. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2000;183(4):
967–973.
196. Gebhart JB, Rickard DJ, Barrett TJ, Lesnick TG, Webb
MJ, Podratz KC, Spelsberg TC. Expression of es-
trogen receptor isoforms alpha and beta messenger
RNA in vaginal tissue of premenopausal and
postmenopausal women. Am J Obstet Gynecol.
2001;185(6):1325–1330.
197. Anderson DJ, Marathe J, Pudney J. The structure of
the human vaginal stratum corneum and its role in
immune defense. Am J Reprod Immunol. 2014;71(6):
618–623.
198. Nilsson K, Risberg B, Heimer G. The vaginal epi-
thelium in the postmenopause—cytology, histol-
ogy and pH as methods of assessment. Maturitas.
1995;21(1):51–56.
199. Hickey DK, Patel MV, Fahey JV, Wira CR. Innate and
adaptive immunity at mucosal surfaces of the
female reproductive tract: stratification and in-
tegration of immune protection against the
transmission of sexually transmitted infections.
J Reprod Immunol. 2011;88(2):185–194.
200. Wira CR, Fahey JV. A new strategy to understand
how HIV infects women: identification of a window
of vulnerability during the menstrual cycle. AIDS.
2008;22(15):1909–1917.
201. Wira CR, Fahey JV, Sentman CL, Pioli PA, Shen L.
Innate and adaptive immunity in female genital
tract: cellular responses and interactions. Immunol
Rev. 2005;206(1):306–335.
202. Kaushic C, Roth KL, Anipindi V, Xiu F. Increased
prevalence of sexually transmitted viral infections in
women: the role of female sex hormones in reg-
ulating
susceptibility
and
immune
responses.
J Reprod Immunol. 2011;88(2):204–209.
203. Quinn TC, Overbaugh J. HIV/AIDS in women: an
expanding
epidemic.
Science.
2005;308(5728):
1582–1583.
204. Gray RH, Li X, Kigozi G, Serwadda D, Brahmbhatt H,
Wabwire-Mangen F, Nalugoda F, Kiddugavu M,
Sewankambo N, Quinn TC, Reynolds SJ, Wawer MJ.
Increased risk of incident HIV during pregnancy in
Rakai, Uganda: a prospective study. Lancet. 2005;
366(9492):1182–1188.
205. Mugo NR, Heffron R, Donnell D, Wald A, Were EO,
Rees H, Celum C, Kiarie JN, Cohen CR, Kayintekore
K, Baeten JM; Partners in Prevention HSV/HIV
Transmission Study Team. Increased risk of HIV-1
transmission in pregnancy: a prospective study
among African HIV-1-serodiscordant couples. AIDS.
2011;25(15):1887–1895.
206. Berger EA, Doms RW, Feny¨
o EM, Korber BT, Littman
DR, Moore JP, Sattentau QJ, Schuitemaker H,
Sodroski J, Weiss RA. A new classification for HIV-1.
Nature. 1998;391(6664):240.
207. Coakley E, Petropoulos CJ, Whitcomb JM. Assessing
chemokine co-receptor usage in HIV. Curr Opin
Infect Dis. 2005;18(1):9–15.
208. Keele BF, Giorgi EE, Salazar-Gonzalez JF, Decker JM,
Pham KT, Salazar MG, Sun C, Grayson T, Wang S, Li
H, Wei X, Jiang C, Kirchherr JL, Gao F, Anderson JA,
Ping LH, Swanstrom R, Tomaras GD, Blattner WA,
73
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00103
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Goepfert PA, Kilby JM, Saag MS, Delwart EL, Busch
MP, Cohen MS, Montefiori DC, Haynes BF, Gaschen
B, Athreya GS, Lee HY, Wood N, Seoighe C, Perelson
AS, Bhattacharya T, Korber BT, Hahn BH, Shaw GM.
Identification and characterization of transmitted
and early founder virus envelopes in primary HIV-1
infection. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2008;105(21):
7552–7557.
209. Selhorst P, Masson L, Ismail SD, Samsunder N,
Garrett N, Mansoor LE, Abdool Karim Q, Abdool
Karim SS, Passmore JS, Williamson C. Cervicovaginal
inflammation facilitates acquisition of less in-
fectious HIV variants. Clin Infect Dis. 2017;64(1):
79–82.
210. Haynes BF, Shaw GM, Korber B, Kelsoe G, Sodroski J,
Hahn BH, Borrow P, McMichael AJ. HIV-host in-
teractions: implications for vaccine design. Cell Host
Microbe. 2016;19(3):292–303.
211. Douek DC, Roederer M, Koup RA. Emerging con-
cepts in the immunopathogenesis of AIDS. Annu
Rev Med. 2009;60(1):471–484.
212. Meditz AL, Haas MK, Folkvord JM, Melander K,
Young R, McCarter M, Mawhinney S, Campbell TB,
Lie Y, Coakley E, Levy DN, Connick E. HLA-DR+
CD38+ CD4+ T lymphocytes have elevated CCR5
expression and produce the majority of R5-tropic
HIV-1 RNA in vivo. J Virol. 2011;85(19):10189–10200.
213. Micci L, Alvarez X, Iriele RI, Ortiz AM, Ryan ES,
McGary CS, Deleage C, McAtee BB, He T, Apetrei C,
Easley K, Pahwa S, Collman RG, Derdeyn CA,
Davenport MP, Estes JD, Silvestri G, Lackner AA,
Paiardini M. CD4 depletion in SIV-infected ma-
caques results in macrophage and microglia in-
fection with rapid turnover of infected cells. PLoS
Pathog. 2014;10(10):e1004467.
214. Hladik F, McElrath MJ. Setting the stage: host in-
vasion by HIV. Nat Rev Immunol. 2008;8(6):447–457.
215. Xu H, Wang X, Veazey RS. Mucosal immunology of
HIV infection. Immunol Rev. 2013;254(1):10–33.
216. Hladik F, Sakchalathorn P, Ballweber L, Lentz G,
Fialkow M, Eschenbach D, McElrath MJ. Initial
events in establishing vaginal entry and infection by
human immunodeficiency virus type-1. Immunity.
2007;26(2):257–270.
217. Sagar M. Origin of the transmitted virus in HIV
infection: infected cells versus cell-free virus. J Infect
Dis. 2014;210(Suppl 3):S667–S673.
218. Hel Z, McGhee JR, Mestecky J. HIV infection: first
battle decides the war. Trends Immunol. 2006;27(6):
274–281.
219. Anderson DJ, Le Grand R. Cell-associated HIV
mucosal transmission: the neglected pathway.
J Infect Dis. 2014;210(Suppl 3):S606–S608.
220. Kell PD, Barton SE, Edmonds DK, Boag FC. HIV
infection in a patient with Meyer-Rokitansky-
K¨
uster-Hauser syndrome. J R Soc Med. 1992;85(11):
706–707.
221. Miller CJ, Alexander NJ, Vogel P, Anderson J, Marx
PA. Mechanism of genital transmission of SIV:
a hypothesis based on transmission studies and the
location of SIV in the genital tract of chronically
infected female rhesus macaques. J Med Primatol.
1992;21(2–3):64–68.
222. Ferreira VH, Kafka JK, Kaushic C. Influence of
common mucosal co-factors on HIV infection in
the female genital tract. Am J Reprod Immunol. 2014;
71(6):543–554.
223. Stieh DJ, Maric D, Kelley ZL, Anderson MR,
Hattaway HZ, Beilfuss BA, Rothwangl KB, Veazey
RS, Hope TJ. Vaginal challenge with an SIV-based
dual reporter system reveals that infection can
occur throughout the upper and lower female
reproductive tract. PLoS Pathog. 2014;10(10):
e1004440.
224. Mishell DR, Jr, Kharma KM, Thorneycroft IH,
Nakamura RM. Estrogenic activity in women re-
ceiving an injectable progestogen for contraception.
Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1972;113(3):372–376.
225. Hickey M, Marino JL, Tachedjian G. Critical review:
mechanisms of HIV transmission in Depo-Provera
users: the likely role of hypoestrogenism. J Acquir
Immune Defic Syndr. 2016;71(1):1–7.
226. Anipindi VC, Bagri P, Roth K, Dizzell SE, Nguyen PV,
Shaler CR, Chu DK, Jim´
enez-Saiz R, Liang H, Swift S,
Nazli A, Kafka JK, Bramson J, Xing Z, Jordana M, Wan Y,
Snider DP, Stampfli MR, Kaushic C. Estradiol enhances
CD4+ T-cell anti-viral immunity by priming vaginal DCs
to induce Th17 responses via an IL-1-dependent
pathway. PLoS Pathog. 2016;12(5):e1005589.
227. Wira CR, Fahey JV, Rodriguez-Garcia M, Shen Z,
Patel MV. Regulation of mucosal immunity in the
female reproductive tract: the role of sex hormones
in immune protection against sexually transmitted
pathogens. Am J Reprod Immunol. 2014;72(2):
236–258.
228. Marx PA, Spira AI, Gettie A, Dailey PJ, Veazey RS,
Lackner AA, Mahoney CJ, Miller CJ, Claypool LE, Ho
DD, Alexander NJ. Progesterone implants enhance
SIV vaginal transmission and early virus load. Nat
Med. 1996;2(10):1084–1089.
229. Smith SM, Baskin GB, Marx PA. Estrogen protects
against vaginal transmission of simian immuno-
deficiency virus. J Infect Dis. 2000;182(3):708–715.
230. Hummelen R, Macklaim JM, Bisanz JE, Hammond
JA, McMillan A, Vongsa R, Koenig D, Gloor GB, Reid
G. Vaginal microbiome and epithelial gene array in
post-menopausal women with moderate to severe
dryness. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e26602.
231. Cotreau MM, Chennathukuzhi VM, Harris HA, Han L,
Dorner AJ, Apseloff G, Varadarajan U, Hatstat E,
Zakaria M, Strahs AL, Crabtree JS, Winneker RC,
Jelinsky SA. A study of 17b-estradiol-regulated genes
in the vagina of postmenopausal women with vaginal
atrophy. Maturitas. 2007;58(4):366–376.
232. Smith SM, Mefford M, Sodora D, Klase Z, Singh M,
Alexander N, Hess D, Marx PA. Topical estrogen
protects against SIV vaginal transmission without ev-
idence of systemic effect. AIDS. 2004;18(12):1637–1643.
233. Gillgrass AE, Fernandez SA, Rosenthal KL, Kaushic C.
Estradiol regulates susceptibility following primary
exposure to genital herpes simplex virus type 2,
while progesterone induces inflammation. J Virol.
2005;79(5):3107–3116.
234. Bhavanam S, Snider DP, Kaushic C. Intranasal and
subcutaneous immunization under the effect of
estradiol leads to better protection against genital
HSV-2 challenge compared to progesterone. Vac-
cine. 2008;26(48):6165–6172.
235. Mestecky J, Moldoveanu Z, Smith PD, Hel Z,
Alexander RC. Mucosal immunology of the genital
and gastrointestinal tracts and HIV-1 infection. J Reprod
Immunol. 2009;83(1–2):196–200.
236. Molander U, Milsom I, Ekelund P, Mellstr¨
om D,
Eriksson O. Effect of oral oestriol on vaginal flora
and cytology and urogenital symptoms in the post-
menopause. Maturitas. 1990;12(2):113–120.
237. Smith P. Estrogens and the urogenital tract. Studies
on steroid hormone receptors and a clinical study
on a new estradiol-releasing vaginal ring. Acta
Obstet Gynecol Scand Suppl. 1993;157:1–26.
238. Castelo-Branco C, Cancelo MJ, Villero J, Nohales F,
Juli´
a MD. Management of post-menopausal vaginal
atrophy and atrophic vaginitis. Maturitas. 2005;
52(Suppl 1):S46–S52.
239. Wieser F, Hosmann J, Tschugguel W, Czerwenka K,
Sedivy R, Huber JC. Progesterone increases the
number of Langerhans cells in human vaginal ep-
ithelium. Fertil Steril. 2001;75(6):1234–1235.
240. Klebanoff SJ, Coombs RW. Viricidal effect of Lac-
tobacillus acidophilus on human immunodeficiency
virus type 1: possible role in heterosexual trans-
mission. J Exp Med. 1991;174(1):289–292.
241. Martin HL, Richardson BA, Nyange PM, Lavreys L,
Hillier SL, Chohan B, Mandaliya K, Ndinya-Achola
JO, Bwayo J, Kreiss J. Vaginal lactobacilli, microbial
flora, and risk of human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 and sexually transmitted disease acquisition.
J Infect Dis. 1999;180(6):1863–1868.
242. Taha TE, Hoover DR, Dallabetta GA, Kumwenda NI,
Mtimavalye LA, Yang LP, Liomba GN, Broadhead RL,
Chiphangwi JD, Miotti PG. Bacterial vaginosis and
disturbances of vaginal flora: association with
increased acquisition of HIV. AIDS. 1998;12(13):
1699–1706.
243. Atashili J, Poole C, Ndumbe PM, Adimora AA, Smith
JS. Bacterial vaginosis and HIV acquisition: a meta-
analysis of published studies. AIDS. 2008;22(12):
1493–1501.
244. Sanders-Beer B, Babas T, Mansfield K, Golightly D,
Kramer J, Bowlsbey A, Sites D, Nieves-Duran L, Lin S,
Rippeon S, Donnelly G, Rhodes L, Spano YE. Depo-
Provera does not alter disease progression in
SIVmac-infected female Chinese rhesus macaques.
AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2010;26(4):433–443.
245. Sodora DL, Gettie A, Miller CJ, Marx PA. Vaginal
transmission of SIV: assessing infectivity and hor-
monal influences in macaques inoculated with cell-
free and cell-associated viral stocks. AIDS Res Hum
Retroviruses. 1998;14(Suppl 1):S119–S123.
246. Vishwanathan SA, Guenthner PC, Lin CY, Dobard C,
Sharma S, Adams DR, Otten RA, Heneine W,
Hendry RM, McNicholl JM, Kersh EN. High sus-
ceptibility to repeated, low-dose, vaginal SHIV ex-
posure late in the luteal phase of the menstrual
cycle of pigtail macaques. J Acquir Immune Defic
Syndr. 2011;57(4):261–264.
247. Poonia B, Walter L, Dufour J, Harrison R, Marx PA,
Veazey RS. Cyclic changes in the vaginal epithelium
of normal rhesus macaques. J Endocrinol. 2006;
190(3):829–835.
248. Mora G, Johansson ED. Plasma levels of medrox-
yprogesterone acetate (MPA), estradiol and pro-
gesterone in the rhesus monkey after intramuscular
adminstration
of
Depo-Provera.
Contraception.
1976;14(3):343–350.
249. Kersh EN, Ritter J, Butler K, Ostergaard SD, Hanson
D, Ellis S, Zaki S, McNicholl JM. Relationship of
estimated SHIV acquisition time points during the
menstrual cycle and thinning of vaginal epithelial
layers in pigtail macaques. Sex Transm Dis. 2015;
42(12):694–701.
250. Parr MB, Kepple L, McDermott MR, Drew MD,
Bozzola JJ, Parr EL. A mouse model for studies of
mucosal immunity to vaginal infection by herpes
simplex virus type 2. Lab Invest. 1994;70(3):369–380.
251. World Health Organization. Global incidence and
prevalence of selected curable sexually transmitted
infections—2008. Available at: http://apps.who.int/iris/
handle/10665/75181. Accessed 31 December 2017.
252. World Health Organization. Sexually transmitted
infections (STIs). Available at: http://www.who.int/
mediacentre/factsheets/fs110/en/. Accessed 31 De-
cember 2017.
253. Looker KJ, Garnett GP, Schmid GP. An estimate of
the global prevalence and incidence of herpes
simplex virus type 2 infection. Bull World Health
Organ. 2008;86(10):805–812.
254. Sexton J, Garnett G, Røttingen JA. Metaanalysis and
metaregression in interpreting study variability in
the impact of sexually transmitted diseases on
susceptibility to HIV infection. Sex Transm Dis. 2005;
32(6):351–357.
74
Hapgood et al
Mechanisms: Hormonal Contraception and HIV
Endocrine Reviews, February 2018, 39(1):36–78
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 255. Ward H, R¨
onn M. Contribution of sexually trans-
mitted infections to the sexual transmission of HIV.
Curr Opin HIV AIDS. 2010;5(4):305–310.
256. Alkema L, Kantorova V, Menozzi C, Biddlecom A.
National, regional, and global rates and trends in
contraceptive prevalence and unmet need for
family planning between 1990 and 2015: a system-
atic and comprehensive analysis. Lancet. 2013;
381(9878):1642–1652.
257. Darroch JE, Singh S. Trends in contraceptive need
and use in developing countries in 2003, 2008, and
2012: an analysis of national surveys. Lancet. 2013;
381(9879):1756–1762.
258. Morrison CS, Turner AN, Jones LB. Highly effective
contraception and acquisition of HIV and other
sexually transmitted infections. Best Pract Res Clin
Obstet Gynaecol. 2009;23(2):263–284.
259. Mohllajee AP, Curtis KM, Martins SL, Peterson HB.
Hormonal contraceptive use and risk of sexually
transmitted infections: a systematic review. Con-
traception. 2006;73(2):154–165.
260. Venkatesh KK, Cu-Uvin S. Assessing the relationship
between cervical ectopy and HIV susceptibility:
implications for HIV prevention in women. Am J
Reprod Immunol. 2013;69(Suppl 1):68–73.
261. Roura E, Travier N, Waterboer T, de Sanjos´
e S, Bosch
FX, Pawlita M, Pala V, Weiderpass E, Margall N,
Dillner J, Gram IT, Tjønneland A, Munk C, Palli D,
Khaw KT, Overvad K, Clavel-Chapelon F, Mesrine S,
Fournier A, Fortner RT, Ose J, Steffen A, Trichopoulou
A, Lagiou P, Orfanos P, Masala G, Tumino R,
Sacerdote C, Polidoro S, Mattiello A, Lund E, Peeters
PH, Bueno-de-Mesquita HB, Quir´
os JR, S´
anchez MJ,
Navarro C, Barricarte A, Larrañaga N, Ekstr¨
om J,
Lindquist D, Idahl A, Travis RC, Merritt MA,
Gunter MJ, Rinaldi S, Tommasino M, Franceschi
S, Riboli E, Castellsagu´
e X. The influence of hormonal
factors on the risk of developing cervical cancer and
pre-cancer: results from the EPIC cohort. PLoS One.
2016;11(1):e0147029.
262. Grabowski MK, Gray RH, Makumbi F, Kagaayi J,
Redd AD, Kigozi G, Reynolds SJ, Nalugoda F, Lutalo
T, Wawer MJ, Serwadda D, Quinn TC, Tobian AAR.
Use of injectable hormonal contraception and
women’s risk of herpes simplex virus type 2 ac-
quisition: a prospective study of couples in Rakai,
Uganda. Lancet Glob Health. 2015;3(8):e478–e486.
263. Kaushic C. HIV-1 infection in the female re-
productive tract: role of interactions between HIV-1
and genital epithelial cells. Am J Reprod Immunol.
2011;65(3):253–260.
264. Morris MR, Byrareddy SN, Villinger F, Henning TC,
Butler K, Ansari AA, McNicholl JM, Kersh EN. Re-
lationship of menstrual cycle and vaginal infection
in female rhesus macaques challenged with re-
peated, low doses of SIVmac251. J Med Primatol.
2015;44(5):301–305.
265. McNicholl JM, Henning TC, Vishwanathan SA,
Kersh EN. Non-human primate models of hor-
monal contraception and HIV. Am J Reprod
Immunol. 2014;71(6):513–522.
266. Jerse AE, Wu H, Packiam M, Vonck RA, Begum AA,
Garvin LE. Estradiol-treated female mice as surro-
gate hosts for Neisseria gonorrhoeae genital tract
infections. Front Microbiol. 2011;2:107.
267. van de Wijgert JH, Verwijs MC, Turner AN, Morrison
CS. Hormonal contraception decreases bacterial
vaginosis but oral contraception may increase
candidiasis: implications for HIV transmission. AIDS.
2013;27(13):2141–2153.
268. Gilliet M, Cao W, Liu YJ. Plasmacytoid dendritic
cells: sensing nucleic acids in viral infection and
autoimmune diseases. Nat Rev Immunol. 2008;8(8):
594–606.
269. Siegal FP, Kadowaki N, Shodell M, Fitzgerald-
Bocarsly PA, Shah K, Ho S, Antonenko S, Liu YJ. The
nature of the principal type 1 interferon-producing
cells in human blood. Science. 1999;284(5421):
1835–1837.
270. Li Q, Estes JD, Schlievert PM, Duan L, Brosnahan AJ,
Southern PJ, Reilly CS, Peterson ML, Schultz-Darken
N, Brunner KG, Nephew KR, Pambuccian S, Lifson
JD, Carlis JV, Haase AT. Glycerol monolaurate
prevents mucosal SIV transmission. Nature. 2009;
458(7241):1034–1038.
271. Ballweber L, Robinson B, Kreger A, Fialkow M, Lentz
G, McElrath MJ, Hladik F. Vaginal Langerhans
cells nonproductively transporting HIV-1 medi-
ate infection of T cells. J Virol. 2011;85(24):
13443–13447.
272. van den Berg LM, Ribeiro CM, Zijlstra-Willems EM,
de Witte L, Fluitsma D, Tigchelaar W, Everts V,
Geijtenbeek TB. Caveolin-1 mediated uptake via
langerin restricts HIV-1 infection in human Lang-
erhans cells. Retrovirology. 2014;11(1):123.
273. Mayr L, Su B, Moog C. Langerhans cells: the “yin and
yang” of HIV restriction and transmission. Trends
Microbiol. 2017;25(3):170–172.
274. Ildgruben AK, Sj¨
oberg IM, Hammarstr¨
om ML. In-
fluence of hormonal contraceptives on the immune
cells and thickness of human vaginal epithelium.
Obstet Gynecol. 2003;102(3):571–582.
275. Cherpes TL, Busch JL, Sheridan BS, Harvey SA,
Hendricks RL. Medroxyprogesterone acetate in-
hibits CD8+ T cell viral-specific effector function
and induces herpes simplex virus type 1 reac-
tivation. J Immunol. 2008;181(2):969–975.
276. Schindler AE, Campagnoli C, Druckmann R, Huber J,
Pasqualini JR, Schweppe KW, Thijssen JH. Classifi-
cation and pharmacology of progestins. Maturitas.
2003;46(Suppl 1):S7–S16.
277. Herold MJ, McPherson KG, Reichardt HM. Gluco-
corticoids in T cell apoptosis and function. Cell Mol
Life Sci. 2006;63(1):60–72.
278. Zhou J, Cidlowski JA. The human glucocorticoid
receptor: one gene, multiple proteins and diverse
responses. Steroids. 2005;70(5–7):407–417.
279. Kino T, De Martino MU, Charmandari E, Mirani M,
Chrousos GP. Tissue glucocorticoid resistance/
hypersensitivity syndromes. J Steroid Biochem Mol
Biol. 2003;85(2-5):457–467.
280. Mirani M, Elenkov I, Volpi S, Hiroi N, Chrousos GP,
Kino T. HIV-1 protein Vpr suppresses IL-12 pro-
duction from human monocytes by enhancing
glucocorticoid action: potential implications of Vpr
coactivator activity for the innate and cellular
immunity deficits observed in HIV-1 infection.
J Immunol. 2002;169(11):6361–6368.
281. Ghosh D. Glucocorticoid receptor-binding site in
the human immunodeficiency virus long terminal
repeat. J Virol. 1992;66(1):586–590.
282. Kolesnitchenko V, Snart RS. Regulatory elements in
the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 long
terminal repeat LTR (HIV-1) responsive to steroid
hormone stimulation. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses.
1992;8(12):1977–1980.
283. Mitra D, Sikder SK, Laurence J. Role of glucocorticoid
receptor binding sites in the human immunode-
ficiency virus type 1 long terminal repeat in steroid-
mediated suppression of HIV gene expression.
Virology. 1995;214(2):512–521.
284. Kino T, Kopp JB, Chrousos GP. Glucocorticoids
suppress human immunodeficiency virus type-1
long terminal repeat activity in a cell type-specific,
glucocorticoid receptor-mediated fashion: direct
protective effects at variance with clinical phe-
nomenology. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2000;
75(4–5):283–290.
285. Markham PD, Salahuddin SZ, Popovic M, Patel A,
Veren K, Fladager A, Orndorff S, Gallo RC. Advances
in the isolation of HTLV-III from patients with AIDS
and AIDS-related complex and from donors at risk.
Cancer Res. 1985;45(9, Suppl):4588s–4591s.
286. Markham PD, Salahuddin SZ, Veren K, Orndorff S,
Gallo RC. Hydrocortisone and some other hor-
mones enhance the expression of HTLV-III. Int J
Cancer. 1986;37(1):67–72.
287. Soudeyns H, Geleziunas R, Shyamala G, Hiscott J,
Wainberg MA. Identification of a novel glucocor-
ticoid response element within the genome of the
human immunodeficiency virus type 1. Virology.
1993;194(2):758–768.
288. Soudeyns H, Wainberg MA. Effects of RU486 on
HIV-1 replication. Nat Med. 1997;3(12):1302–1303.
289. Wiegers K, Schwarck D, Reimer R, Bohn W. Acti-
vation of the glucocorticoid receptor releases
unstimulated PBMCs from an early block in HIV-1
replication. Virology. 2008;375(1):73–84.
290. Sheffield JS, Wendel GD, Jr, McIntire DD, Norgard
MV. The effect of progesterone levels and preg-
nancy on HIV-1 coreceptor expression. Reprod Sci.
2009;16(1):20–31.
291. Cabrera-Muñoz E, Fuentes-Romero LL, Zamora-
Ch´
avez J, Camacho-Arroyo I, Soto-Ram´
ırez LE.
Effects of progesterone on the content of CCR5
and CXCR4 coreceptors in PBMCs of seropositive
and exposed but uninfected Mexican women to
HIV-1. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2012;132(1–2):
66–72.
292. Straub RH. The complex role of estrogens in in-
flammation. Endocr Rev. 2007;28(5):521–574.
293. Mitchell
CM,
McLemore
L,
Westerberg
K,
Astronomo R, Smythe K, Gardella C, Mack M,
Magaret A, Patton D, Agnew K, McElrath MJ, Hladik
F, Eschenbach D. Long-term effect of depot
medroxyprogesterone acetate on vaginal micro-
biota, epithelial thickness and HIV target cells.
J Infect Dis. 2014;210(4):651–655.
294. Byrareddy SN, Kallam B, Arthos J, Cicala C, Nawaz F,
Hiatt J, Kersh EN, McNicholl JM, Hanson D,
Reimann KA, Brameier M, Walter L, Rogers K,
Mayne AE, Dunbar P, Villinger T, Little D, Parslow
TG, Santangelo PJ, Villinger F, Fauci AS, Ansari AA.
Targeting a4b7 integrin reduces mucosal trans-
mission of simian immunodeficiency virus and
protects gut-associated lymphoid tissue from in-
fection. Nat Med. 2014;20(12):1397–1400.
295. Stieh DJ, Matias E, Xu H, Fought AJ, Blanchard JL,
Marx PA, Veazey RS, Hope TJ. Th17 cells are pref-
erentially infected very early after vaginal trans-
mission of SIV in macaques. Cell Host Microbe. 2016;
19(4):529–540.
296. Cecchinato V, Trindade CJ, Laurence A, Heraud JM,
Brenchley JM, Ferrari MG, Zaffiri L, Tryniszewska E,
Tsai WP, Vaccari M, Parks RW, Venzon D, Douek
DC, O’Shea JJ, Franchini G. Altered balance between
Th17 and Th1 cells at mucosal sites predicts AIDS
progression in simian immunodeficiency virus-
infected macaques. Mucosal Immunol. 2008;1(4):
279–288.
297. Xu L, Dong B, Wang H, Zeng Z, Liu W, Chen N, Chen
J, Yang J, Li D, Duan Y. Progesterone suppresses
Th17 cell responses, and enhances the develop-
ment of regulatory T cells, through thymic stromal
lymphopoietin-dependent mechanisms in exper-
imental gonococcal genital tract infection. Mi-
crobes Infect. 2013;15(12):796–805.
298. Semple F, Dorin JR. b-Defensins: multifunctional
modulators of infection, inflammation and more?
J Innate Immun. 2012;4(4):337–348.
299. McCormick TS, Weinberg A. Epithelial cell-derived
antimicrobial peptides are multifunctional agents
75
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00103
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 that bridge innate and adaptive immunity. Peri-
odontol 2000. 2010;54(1):195–206.
300. Quiñones-Mateu ME, Lederman MM, Feng Z,
Chakraborty B, Weber J, Rangel HR, Marotta ML,
Mirza M, Jiang B, Kiser P, Medvik K, Sieg SF,
Weinberg A. Human epithelial b-defensins 2 and 3
inhibit HIV-1 replication. AIDS. 2003;17(16):F39–F48.
301. Weinberg A, Quiñones-Mateu ME, Lederman MM.
Role of human b-defensins in HIV infection. Adv
Dent Res. 2006;19(1):42–48.
302. Tugizov SM, Herrera R, Veluppillai P, Greenspan D,
Soros V, Greene WC, Levy JA, Palefsky JM. HIV is
inactivated after transepithelial migration via adult
oral epithelial cells but not fetal epithelial cells.
Virology. 2011;409(2):211–222.
303. Zapata W, Rodriguez B, Weber J, Estrada H,
Quiñones-Mateu ME, Zimermman PA, Lederman
MM, Rugeles MT. Increased levels of human
b-defensins mRNA in sexually HIV-1 exposed but
uninfected individuals. Curr HIV Res. 2008;6(6):
531–538.
304. Niyonsaba F, Ushio H, Nakano N, Ng W, Sayama K,
Hashimoto K, Nagaoka I, Okumura K, Ogawa H.
Antimicrobial peptides human b-defensins stimu-
late epidermal keratinocyte migration, prolifera-
tion and production of proinflammatory cytokines
and chemokines. J Invest Dermatol. 2007;127(3):
594–604.
305. Varoga D, Pufe T, Harder J, Schr¨
oder JM, Mentlein
R, Meyer-Hoffert U, Goldring MB, Tillmann B,
Hassenpflug J, Paulsen F. Human b-defensin
3 mediates tissue remodeling processes in articular
cartilage by increasing levels of metalloproteinases
and reducing levels of their endogenous inhibitors.
Arthritis Rheum. 2005;52(6):1736–1745.
306. Sørensen OE, Thapa DR, Rosenthal A, Liu L, Roberts
AA, Ganz T. Differential regulation of b-defensin
expression in human skin by microbial stimuli.
J Immunol. 2005;174(8):4870–4879.
307. Kutteh WH, Mestecky J, Wira C. Mucosal immunity
in the human female reproductive tract. In: Mes-
tecky J, Lamm ME, Strober W, Bienenstock J,
McGhee JR, Mayer L, eds. Mucosal Immunol. 3rd ed.
New York, NY: Elsevier Academic Press; 2005:
1631–1646.
308. Kutteh WH, Prince SJ, Hammond KR, Kutteh CC,
Mestecky J. Variations in immunoglobulins and IgA
subclasses of human uterine cervical secretions
around the time of ovulation. Clin Exp Immunol.
1996;104(3):538–542.
309. Bouman A, Heineman MJ, Faas MM. Sex hormones
and the immune response in humans. Hum Reprod
Update. 2005;11(4):411–423.
310. Kaushic C, Murdin AD, Underdown BJ, Wira CR.
Chlamydia trachomatis infection in the female re-
productive tract of the rat: influence of pro-
gesterone on infectivity and immune response.
Infect Immun. 1998;66(3):893–898.
311. Franklin RD, Kutteh WH. Characterization of im-
munoglobulins and cytokines in human cervical
mucus: influence of exogenous and endogenous
hormones. J Reprod Immunol. 1999;42(2):93–106.
312. Klinger G, Gr¨
aser T, Mellinger U, Moore C, Vogelsang
H, Groh A, Latterman C, Klinger G. A comparative
study of the effects of two oral contraceptives
containing dienogest or desogestrel on the human
immune system. Gynecol Endocrinol. 2000;14(1):
15–24.
313. Masson L, Passmore JA, Liebenberg LJ, Werner L,
Baxter C, Arnold KB, Williamson C, Little F, Mansoor
LE, Naranbhai V, Lauffenburger DA, Ronacher K,
Walzl G, Garrett NJ, Williams BL, Couto-Rodriguez
M, Hornig M, Lipkin WI, Grobler A, Abdool Karim
Q, Abdool Karim SS. Genital inflammation and the
risk of HIV acquisition in women. Clin Infect Dis.
2015;61(2):260–269.
314. Passmore JA, Jaspan HB, Masson L. Genital in-
flammation, immune activation and risk of sexual
HIV acquisition. Curr Opin HIV AIDS. 2016;11(2):
156–162.
315. Africander D, Louw R, Verhoog N, Noeth D,
Hapgood JP. Differential regulation of endogenous
pro-inflammatory cytokine genes by medroxy-
progesterone acetate and norethisterone acetate
in cell lines of the female genital tract. Contraception.
2011;84(4):423–435.
316. Rollenhagen C, Asin SN. Enhanced HIV-1 repli-
cation in ex vivo ectocervical tissues from post-
menopausal women correlates with increased
inflammatory responses. Mucosal Immunol. 2011;
4(6):671–681.
317. Guthrie BL, Introini A, Roxby AC, Choi RY, Bosire R,
Lohman-Payne B, Hirbod T, Farquhar C, Broliden K.
Depot medroxyprogesterone acetate use is asso-
ciated with elevated innate immune effector
molecules in cervicovaginal secretions of HIV-1-
uninfected women. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr.
2015;69(1):1–10.
318. Kurman RJ, F´
elix JC, Archer DF, Nanavati N, Arce J,
Moyer DL. Norethindrone acetate and estradiol-
induced endometrial hyperplasia. Obstet Gynecol.
2000;96(3):373–379.
319. Eschenbach DA, Patton DL, Meier A, Thwin SS, Aura
J, Stapleton A, Hooton TM. Effects of oral contra-
ceptive pill use on vaginal flora and vaginal epi-
thelium. Contraception. 2000;62(3):107–112.
320. Kaushic C, Ferreira VH, Kafka JK, Nazli A. HIV in-
fection in the female genital tract: discrete influence
of the local mucosal microenvironment. Am J
Reprod Immunol. 2010;63(6):566–575.
321. Blaskewicz CD, Pudney J, Anderson DJ. Structure
and function of intercellular junctions in human
cervical and vaginal mucosal epithelia. Biol Reprod.
2011;85(1):97–104.
322. Birse KD, Romas LM, Guthrie BL, Nilsson P, Bosire R,
Kiarie J, Farquhar C, Broliden K, Burgener AD.
Genital injury signatures and microbiome alter-
ations associated with depot medroxyprogesterone
acetate usage and intravaginal drying practices.
J Infect Dis. 2017;215(4):590–598.
323. Saba E, Origoni M, Taccagni G, Ferrari D, Doglioni C,
Nava A, Lisco A, Grivel JC, Margolis L, Poli G.
Productive HIV-1 infection of human cervical tissue
ex vivo is associated with the secretory phase of the
menstrual
cycle.
Mucosal
Immunol.
2013;6(6):
1081–1090.
324. Neidleman JA, Chen JC, Kohgadai N, M¨
uller JA,
Laustsen A, Thavachelvam K, Jang KS, St¨
urzel CM,
Jones JJ, Ochsenbauer C, Chitre A, Somsouk M,
Garcia MM, Smith JF, Greenblatt RM, M¨
unch J,
Jakobsen MR, Giudice LC, Greene WC, Roan NR.
Mucosal stromal fibroblasts markedly enhance HIV
infection of CD4+ T cells. PLoS Pathog. 2017;13(2):
e1006163.
325. Birse K, Arnold KB, Novak RM, McCorrister S, Shaw
S, Westmacott GR, Ball TB, Lauffenburger DA,
Burgener A. Molecular signatures of immune ac-
tivation and epithelial barrier remodeling are en-
hanced during the luteal phase of the menstrual
cycle: implications for HIV susceptibility. J Virol.
2015;89(17):8793–8805.
326. Mirmonsef P, Hotton AL, Gilbert D, Burgad D,
Landay A, Weber KM, Cohen M, Ravel J, Spear GT.
Free glycogen in vaginal fluids is associated with
Lactobacillus colonization and low vaginal pH. PLoS
One. 2014;9(7):e102467.
327. Hummelen R, Fernandes AD, Macklaim JM, Dickson
RJ, Changalucha J, Gloor GB, Reid G. Deep
sequencing of the vaginal microbiota of women
with HIV. PLoS One. 2010;5(8):e12078.
328. Anukam KC, Osazuwa E, Osemene GI, Ehigiagbe F,
Bruce AW, Reid G. Clinical study comparing pro-
biotic Lactobacillus GR-1 and RC-14 with metro-
nidazole vaginal gel to treat symptomatic bacterial
vaginosis. Microbes Infect. 2006;8(12–13):2772–2776.
329. Ravel J, Gajer P, Abdo Z, Schneider GM, Koenig SS,
McCulle SL, Karlebach S, Gorle R, Russell J, Tacket
CO, Brotman RM, Davis CC, Ault K, Peralta L, Forney
LJ. Vaginal microbiome of reproductive-age women.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2011;108(Suppl 1):
4680–4687.
330. Spear GT, Sikaroodi M, Zariffard MR, Landay AL,
French AL, Gillevet PM. Comparison of the diversity
of the vaginal microbiota in HIV-infected and HIV-
uninfected women with or without bacterial vag-
inosis. J Infect Dis. 2008;198(8):1131–1140.
331. Rampersaud R, Randis TM, Ratner AJ. Microbiota of
the upper and lower genital tract. Semin Fetal
Neonatal Med. 2012;17(1):51–57.
332. Watts DH, Fazzari M, Minkoff H, Hillier SL, Sha B,
Glesby M, Levine AM, Burk R, Palefsky JM, Moxley
M, Ahdieh-Grant L, Strickler HD. Effects of bacterial
vaginosis and other genital infections on the natural
history of human papillomavirus infection in HIV-1-
infected and high-risk HIV-1-uninfected women.
J Infect Dis. 2005;191(7):1129–1139.
333. Cherpes TL, Meyn LA, Krohn MA, Lurie JG, Hillier SL.
Association between acquisition of herpes simplex
virus type 2 in women and bacterial vaginosis. Clin
Infect Dis. 2003;37(3):319–325.
334. Myer L, Denny L, Telerant R, Souza M, Wright TC, Jr,
Kuhn L. Bacterial vaginosis and susceptibility to HIV
infection in South African women: a nested case-
control study. J Infect Dis. 2005;192(8):1372–1380.
335. Sha BE, Zariffard MR, Wang QJ, Chen HY, Bremer J,
Cohen MH, Spear GT. Female genital-tract HIV load
correlates inversely with Lactobacillus species but
positively with bacterial vaginosis and Mycoplasma
hominis. J Infect Dis. 2005;191(1):25–32.
336. Cherpes TL, Melan MA, Kant JA, Cosentino LA,
Meyn LA, Hillier SL. Genital tract shedding of herpes
simplex virus type 2 in women: effects of hormonal
contraception, bacterial vaginosis, and vaginal
group B Streptococcus colonization. Clin Infect Dis.
2005;40(10):1422–1428.
337. Achilles SL, Hillier SL. The complexity of contra-
ceptives: understanding their impact on genital
immune cells and vaginal microbiota. AIDS. 2013;
27(Suppl 1):S5–S15.
338. Cohen CR, Lingappa JR, Baeten JM, Ngayo MO,
Spiegel CA, Hong T, Donnell D, Celum C, Kapiga S,
Delany S, Bukusi EA. Bacterial vaginosis associated
with increased risk of female-to-male HIV-1 trans-
mission: a prospective cohort analysis among African
couples. PLoS Med. 2012;9(6):e1001251.
339. Anahtar MN, Byrne EH, Doherty KE, Bowman BA,
Yamamoto HS, Soumillon M, Padavattan N, Ismail
N, Moodley A, Sabatini ME, Ghebremichael MS,
Nusbaum C, Huttenhower C, Virgin HW, Ndung’u
T, Dong KL, Walker BD, Fichorova RN, Kwon DS.
Cervicovaginal bacteria are a major modulator of
host inflammatory responses in the female genital
tract. Immunity. 2015;42(5):965–976.
340. Borgdorff H, Gautam R, Armstrong SD, Xia D,
Ndayisaba GF, van Teijlingen NH, Geijtenbeek TB,
Wastling JM, van de Wijgert JH. Cervicovaginal
microbiome dysbiosis is associated with proteome
changes related to alterations of the cervicovaginal
mucosal barrier. Mucosal Immunol. 2016;9(3):
621–633.
341. Gareau MG, Sherman PM, Walker WA. Probiotics
and the gut microbiota in intestinal health and
76
Hapgood et al
Mechanisms: Hormonal Contraception and HIV
Endocrine Reviews, February 2018, 39(1):36–78
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 disease. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010;7(9):
503–514.
342. Gill N, Finlay BB. The gut microbiota: challenging
immunology. Nat Rev Immunol. 2011;11(10):
636–637.
343. Karimi K, Inman MD, Bienenstock J, Forsythe P.
Lactobacillus reuteri–induced regulatory T cells
protect against an allergic airway response in mice.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2009;179(3):186–193.
344. Karimi K, Kandiah N, Chau J, Bienenstock J, Forsythe
P. A Lactobacillus rhamnosus strain induces a heme
oxygenase dependent increase in Foxp3+ regulatory
T cells. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e47556.
345. Mirmonsef P, Gilbert D, Zariffard MR, Hamaker BR,
Kaur A, Landay AL, Spear GT. The effects of
commensal bacteria on innate immune responses
in the female genital tract. Am J Reprod Immunol.
2011;65(3):190–195.
346. Mirmonsef P, Zariffard MR, Gilbert D, Makinde H,
Landay AL, Spear GT. Short-chain fatty acids induce
pro-inflammatory cytokine production alone and in
combination with Toll-like receptor ligands. Am J
Reprod Immunol. 2012;67(5):391–400.
347. Doerflinger SY, Throop AL, Herbst-Kralovetz MM.
Bacteria in the vaginal microbiome alter the
innate immune response and barrier properties
of the human vaginal epithelia in a species-
specific manner. J Infect Dis. 2014;209(12):
1989–1999.
348. Rebbapragada A, Howe K, Wachihi C, Pettengell C,
Sunderji S, Huibner S, Ball TB, Plummer FA, Jaoko W,
Kaul R. Bacterial vaginosis in HIV-infected women
induces reversible alterations in the cervical im-
mune environment. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr.
2008;49(5):520–522.
349. Vodstrcil LA, Hocking JS, Law M, Walker S, Tabrizi
SN, Fairley CK, Bradshaw CS. Hormonal contra-
ception is associated with a reduced risk of bacterial
vaginosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
PLoS One. 2013;8(9):e73055.
350. Borgdorff H, Verwijs MC, Wit FW, Tsivtsivadze E,
Ndayisaba GF, Verhelst R, Schuren FH, van de
Wijgert JH. The impact of hormonal contraception
and pregnancy on sexually transmitted infections
and on cervicovaginal microbiota in african sex
workers. Sex Transm Dis. 2015;42(3):143–152.
351. Donders G, Bellen G, Janssens D, Van Bulck B, Hinoul
P, Verguts J. Influence of contraceptive choice on
vaginal bacterial and fungal microflora. Eur J Clin
Microbiol Infect Dis. 2017;36(1):43–48.
352. Brooks JP, Buck GA, Chen G, Diao L, Edwards DJ,
Fettweis JM, Huzurbazar S, Rakitin A, Satten GA,
Smirnova E, Waks Z, Wright ML, Yanover C, Zhou
YH. Changes in vaginal community state types
reflect major shifts in the microbiome. Microb Ecol
Health Dis. 2017;28(1):1303265.
353. Brooks JP, Edwards DJ, Blithe DL, Fettweis JM,
Serrano MG, Sheth NU, Strauss JF III, Buck GA,
Jefferson KK. Effects of combined oral contracep-
tives, depot medroxyprogesterone acetate and the
levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine system on the
vaginal
microbiome.
Contraception.
2017;95(4):
405–413.
354. De Seta F, Restaino S, De Santo D, Stabile G, Banco R,
Busetti M, Barbati G, Guaschino S. Effects of hor-
monal contraception on vaginal flora. Contracep-
tion. 2012;86(5):526–529.
355. van de Wijgert JH, Verwijs MC, Turner AN, Morrison
CS. P3.221 Oral and injectable hormonal contra-
ception decrease risk of bacterial vaginosis but oral
contraception may increase risk of vaginal candi-
diasis: a systematic review of published and un-
published data. Sex Transm Infect. 2013;89(Suppl 1):
A217.
356. Segall-Gutierrez P, Du J, Niu C, Ge M, Tilley I, Mizraji
K, Stanczyk FZ. Effect of subcutaneous depot-
medroxyprogesterone acetate (DMPA-SC) on se-
rum androgen markers in normal-weight, obese,
and extremely obese women. Contraception. 2012;
86(6):739–745.
357. Ishida Y, Mine T, Taguchi T. Effect of progestins with
different glucocorticoid activity on bone meta-
bolism. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2008;68(3):423–428.
358. Chi I. What we have learned from recent IUD
studies: a researcher’s perspective. Contraception.
1993;48(2):81–108.
359. Sheppard BL. Endometrial morphological changes
in IUD users: a review. Contraception. 1987;36(1):
1–10.
360. Shobokshi A, Shaarawy M. Cervical mucus gran-
ulocyte macrophage colony stimulating factor and
interleukin-2 soluble receptor in women using
copper intrauterine contraceptive devices. Contra-
ception. 2002;66(2):129–132.
361. Amm¨
al¨
a M, Nyman T, Strengell L, Rutanen EM.
Effect of intrauterine contraceptive devices on
cytokine messenger ribonucleic acid expression in
the human endometrium. Fertil Steril. 1995;63(4):
773–778.
362. Woolley JA, Seleem S, Hills FA, Salem H, el-Nashar E,
Chard T. Raised circulating levels of interleukin-6 in
women with an intrauterine contraceptive device.
Gynecol Obstet Invest. 1996;42(4):241–243.
363. Lahey T, Ghosh M, Fahey JV, Shen Z, Mukura LR,
Song Y, Cu-Uvin S, Mayer KH, Wright PF, Kappes JC,
Ochsenbauer C, Wira CR. Selective impact of HIV
disease progression on the innate immune system
in the human female reproductive tract. PLoS One.
2012;7(6):e38100.
364. Baeten JM, Lavreys L, Sagar M, Kreiss JK, Richardson
BA, Chohan B, Panteleeff D, Mandaliya K, Ndinya-
Achola JO, Overbaugh J, Farley T, Mwachari C,
Cohen C, Chipato T, Jaisamrarn U, Kiriwat O, Duerr
A. Effect of contraceptive methods on natural
history of HIV: studies from the Mombasa cohort.
J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2005;38(Suppl 1):
S18–S21.
365. Stringer EM, Kaseba C, Levy J, Sinkala M, Goldenberg
RL, Chi BH, Matongo I, Vermund SH, Mwanaha-
muntu M, Stringer JS. A randomized trial of the
intrauterine contraceptive device vs hormonal
contraception in women who are infected with the
human immunodeficiency virus. Am J Obstet
Gynecol. 2007;197(2):144.e1–144.e8.
366. Mellors JW, Rinaldo CR, Jr, Gupta P, White RM,
Todd JA, Kingsley LA. Prognosis in HIV-1 infection
predicted by the quantity of virus in plasma. Science.
1996;272(5265):1167–1170.
367. Lavreys L, Baeten JM, Chohan V, McClelland RS,
Hassan WM, Richardson BA, Mandaliya K, Ndinya-
Achola JO, Overbaugh J. Higher set point plasma
viral load and more-severe acute HIV type 1 (HIV-1)
illness predict mortality among high-risk HIV-1-
infected African women. Clin Infect Dis. 2006;
42(9):1333–1339.
368. Stringer EM, Levy J, Sinkala M, Chi BH, Matongo I,
Chintu N, Stringer JS. HIV disease progression by
hormonal contraceptive method: secondary anal-
ysis of a randomized trial. AIDS. 2009;23(11):
1377–1382.
369. Cejtin HE, Jacobson L, Springer G, Watts DH, Levine
A, Greenblatt R, Anastos K, Minkoff HL, Massad LS,
Schmidt JB. Effect of hormonal contraceptive use
on plasma HIV-1-RNA levels among HIV-infected
women. AIDS. 2003;17(11):1702–1704.
370. Mostad SB, Overbaugh J, DeVange DM, Welch MJ,
Chohan B, Mandaliya K, Nyange P, Martin HL, Jr,
Ndinya-Achola J, Bwayo JJ, Kreiss JK. Hormonal
contraception, vitamin A deficiency, and other
risk factors for shedding of HIV-1 infected cells
from the cervix and vagina. Lancet. 1997;350(9082):
922–927.
371. Phillips SJ, Polis CB, Curtis KM. The safety of hor-
monal contraceptives for women living with HIV
and their sexual partners. Contraception. 2016;93(1):
11–16.
372. Polis CB, Phillips SJ, Curtis KM. Hormonal contra-
ceptive use and female-to-male HIV transmission:
a systematic review of the epidemiologic evidence.
AIDS. 2013;27(4):493–505.
373. Phillips SJ, Curtis KM, Polis CB. Effect of hormonal
contraceptive methods on HIV disease progression:
a systematic review. AIDS. 2013;27(5):787–794.
374. Lawn SD, Butera ST, Folks TM. Contribution of
immune activation to the pathogenesis and
transmission of human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 infection. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2001;14(4):
753–777.
375. Wang CC, McClelland RS, Overbaugh J, Reilly M,
Panteleeff DD, Mandaliya K, Chohan B, Lavreys L,
Ndinya-Achola J, Kreiss JK. The effect of hormonal
contraception on genital tract shedding of HIV-1.
AIDS. 2004;18(2):205–209.
376. Clemetson DB, Moss GB, Willerford DM, Hensel M,
Emonyi W, Holmes KK, Plummer F, Ndinya-Achola
J, Roberts PL, Hillier S, et al. Detection of HIV DNA in
cervical and vaginal secretions. Prevalence and
correlates among women in Nairobi, Kenya. JAMA.
1993;269(22):2860–2864.
377. Heffron R, Donnell D, Rees H, Celum C, Mugo N,
Were E, de Bruyn G, Nakku-Joloba E, Ngure K, Kiarie
J, Coombs RW, Baeten JM; Partners in Prevention
HSV/HIV Transmission Study Team. Use of hor-
monal contraceptives and risk of HIV-1 trans-
mission: a prospective cohort study. Lancet Infect
Dis. 2012;12(1):19–26.
378. Gisselquist D, Rees H, Mugo N, Baeten JM. Use of
hormonal contraceptives and risk of HIV-1 trans-
mission. Lancet Infect Dis. 2012;12(7):510–511, au-
thor reply 510–511.
379. Jain AK. Hormonal contraception and HIV acqui-
sition risk: implications for individual users and
public policies. Contraception. 2012;86(6):645–652.
380. Rodriguez MI, Reeves MF, Caughey AB. Evaluating
the competing risks of HIV acquisition and ma-
ternal mortality in Africa: a decision analysis. BJOG.
2012;119(9):1067–1073.
Acknowledgments
We thank Charles Morrison, Chelsea Polis, and John
Woodland for critical reading of the manuscript. We thank
Alexis Bick and Mosoko Johnson for sourcing information
on serum concentrations and inflammatory markers.
Thanks also to Danielle Vitali for help in researching and
sourcing articles for the microbiome section. We are in-
debted to Karen van der Merwe for editorial aspects and
referencing.
Financial Support:
This work was supported by Na-
tional Institutes of Health Grant R01HD083026 to J.P.H. and
Z.H. C.K. is an Ontario HIV Treatment Network Applied HIV
Research Chair (AHRC 779) and her research is supported by
grants from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research
(Canadian Institutes of Health Research Operating Grants
FRN 126019 and FRN 93615) and Canadian Institutes of
Health Research Mucosal Immunology of HIV Vaccine De-
velopment Team Grant FRN 138657.
Correspondence and Reprint Requests:
Janet P. Hapgood,
PhD, Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University
of Cape Town, University Avenue, Rondebosch 7700,
Western Province, South Africa. E-mail: Janet.Hapgood@
uct.ac.za.
77
doi: 10.1210/er.2017-00103
https://academic.oup.com/edrv
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Disclosure Summary:
The authors have nothing to
disclose.
Abbreviations
AR, androgen receptor; BV, bacterial vaginosis; CCR5, C-C
chemokine receptor type 5;
Cmax, peak serum concen-
tration; COC, combined oral contraceptive; Cu-IUD,
copper IUD; CXCL, chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand;
CXCR4, C-X-C chemokine receptor type 4; DC, den-
dritic cell; DMPA, depot medroxyprogesterone acetate;
DMPA-IM, intramuscular injectable contraceptive DMPA;
DMPA-SC, subcutaneous injectable contraceptive DMPA;
DSG1a, desmoglein-1a; EC50, 50% effective concentration;
EE, ethinyl estradiol; ER, estrogen receptor; ETG, etono-
gestrel; FGT, female genital tract; GC, glucocorticoid; GILZ,
GC-induced leucine zipper; GR, GC receptor; HBD, human
b-defensin; HC, hormonal contraceptive/contraception; HPV,
human papillomavirus; HSV, herpes simplex virus; IFN, in-
terferon; Ig, immunoglobulin; IL, interleukin; IUD, intrauterine
device; LC, Langerhans cell; LNG, levonorgestrel; LNG-IUD, LNG-
releasing IUD; LTR, long terminal repeat; MCP-1, monocyte
chemoattractant protein 1; MIP, macrophage inflammatory
protein; MPA, medroxyprogesterone acetate; MR, mineralo-
corticoid receptor; mRNA, messenger RNA; NET, norethister-
one; NET-EN, NET enanthate; NF-kB, nuclear factor kB;
PBMC, peripheral blood mononuclear cell; pDC, plasma-
cytoid DC; PR, progesterone receptor; RANTES, regulated
on activation, normal T cell expressed and secreted; SHIV,
simian HIV; SIV, simian immunodeficiency virus; SLPI,
secretory
leukocyte
protease
inhibitor;
STI,
sexually
transmitted infection; Th, T helper; TLR, Toll-like receptor;
TNF, tumor necrosis factor; Vpr, HIV-1 viral accessory
protein R.
78
Hapgood et al
Mechanisms: Hormonal Contraception and HIV
Endocrine Reviews, February 2018, 39(1):36–78
REVIEW
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/edrv/article-abstract/39/1/36/4788769 by guest on 02 June 2019
