 CASE REPORT
Rare cause of acute hepatitis: a common energy
drink
Jennifer Nicole Harb,1 Zachary A Taylor,2 Vikas Khullar,3 Maryam Sattari4
1Department of Dermatology,
University of Florida College
of Medicine, Gainesville,
Florida, USA
2Department of Medicine,
University of Florida College
of Medicine, Gainesville,
Florida, USA
3Division of Gastroenterology,
Hepatology, & Nutrition,
Department of Medicine,
University of Florida College
of Medicine, Gainesville,
Florida, USA
4Division of General Internal
Medicine, Department of
Medicine, University of Florida
College of Medicine,
Gainesville, Florida, USA
Correspondence to
Dr Jennifer Nicole Harb,
jennifer.harb@medicine.ufl.edu
Accepted 14 October 2016
To cite: Harb JN, Taylor ZA,
Khullar V, et al. BMJ Case
Rep Published online:
[please include Day Month
Year] doi:10.1136/bcr-2016-
216612
SUMMARY
A previously healthy man aged 50 years presented with
malaise, anorexia, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting,
generalised jaundice, scleral icterus and dark urine.
He was not on any prescription or over-the-counter
medications, but reported drinking 4–5 energy drinks
daily for 3 weeks prior to presentation. Physical
examination revealed jaundice and right upper quadrant
abdominal tenderness. Laboratory studies were
remarkable for transaminitis and evidence of chronic
hepatitis C infection. Ultrasound scan demonstrated an
echogenic liver and diffuse gallbladder wall thickening.
Liver biopsy showed severe acute hepatitis with bridging
necrosis and marked cholestasis. The patient was treated
supportively with complete resolution of his symptoms
and marked improvement in his laboratory abnormalities.
The development of acute hepatitis in this patient was
likely secondary to excessive energy drink consumption.
Energy drinks as well as other herbal/over-the-counter
supplements should be considered by clinicians in the
workup of patients with acute hepatitis, particularly once
other aetiologies have been excluded.
BACKGROUND
Nearly 50% of cases of acute liver failure in the USA
are due to drug-induced liver injury (DILI).1 The list
of associated drugs and toxins has significantly
expanded with the recognition of dietary and herbal
supplements as offending agents. Unfortunately
, an
increasing number of Americans consume herbal sup-
plements and energy drinks on a daily basis, with the
misconception that their ‘natural ingredients’ must
render them harmless.2 It has been estimated that
∼23 000 emergency department visits each year are
due to adverse events related to dietary supplements.2
As the energy drink market continues to rapidly
expand, consumers should be aware of the poten-
tial risks of their various ingredients. Vitamins and
nutrients, such as niacin, are present in quantities
that greatly exceed the recommended daily intake,
lending to their high risk for harmful accumulation
and toxicity.3 To the best of our knowledge, only
one other case report has previously been published
in the literature describing acute hepatitis related to
energy drinks;3 herein, we report the second case.
Appreciation of this under-recognised phenomenon
in clinical practice will decrease prevalence and
potentially fatal delays in discontinuation of the
offending agent.
CASE PRESENTATION
A previously healthy man aged 50 years presented
to the emergency department with a 2-week history
of malaise, anorexia and worsening abdominal pain,
which progressed to nausea, vomiting and scleral
icterus. He initially attributed his symptoms to an
influenza-like
syndrome;
however,
he
became
alarmed when he developed dark urine and general-
ised jaundice. The patient had no known personal
or family history of liver disease. He had not seen a
primary care provider in years and was on no medi-
cations (prescription or over-the-counter) prior to
admission. He denied any changes in his diet or use
of alcohol, tobacco or illicit drugs, but endorsed
drinking 4–5 energy drinks daily for 3 weeks prior
to presentation. As a construction worker, he used
the supplemental energy drinks to help get through
his labour-intensive workday. He did get a tattoo in
his 20s, but denied any transfusions of blood pro-
ducts or high-risk sexual behaviour.
On physical examination, the patient had normal
vital signs, scleral icterus and jaundice. Abdominal
examination was remarkable for right upper quad-
rant (RUQ) tenderness, but there was no ascites,
asterixis, spider angiomata or other signs of chronic
liver disease.
INVESTIGATIONS
Laboratory studies revealed normal renal function,
elevated aminotransferases and direct hyperbilirubi-
naemia (table 1). Serum folate and vitamin B12
levels exceeded quantifiable limits.
Acetaminophen level was undetectable and urine
and
plasma
toxicology
screens
were
negative.
Investigations for infectious aetiology, including
hepatitis
A,
B,
C,
cytomegalovirus
(CMV),
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and herpes simplex virus,
only revealed a positive hepatitis C (HCV) antibody
with
HCV
RNA
PCR
of
59 592 238 IU/mL.
Autoimmune workup revealed a negative serum
antinuclear antibody, antimitochondrial antibody,
antismooth muscle antibody and anti-liver-kidney
microsomal antibody (anti-LKM-1). Serum cerulo-
plasmin and α-1-antitrypsin levels were normal.
Haemochromatosis
DNA
mutation
testing
was
negative.
RUQ ultrasound scan demonstrated an echogenic
liver without cirrhosis, common bile duct obstruc-
tion or gallstones. There was also diffuse gallblad-
der wall thickening thought to be related to
underlying hepatitis. The patient underwent a liver
biopsy which revealed severe acute hepatitis with
bridging necrosis and marked cholestasis.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
While the serum aminotransferases and alkaline
phosphatase were elevated on presentation, we
Harb JN, et al. BMJ Case Rep 2016. doi:10.1136/bcr-2016-216612
1
Unusual presentation of more common disease/injury
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://casereports.bmj.com/
BMJ Case Reports: first published as 10.1136/bcr-2016-216612 on 1 November 2016. Downloaded from 
 were able to narrow our differential diagnosis to various
possible aetiologies of hepatitis based on the predominant
hepatocellular pattern of laboratory abnormalities. W
e then
further narrowed our differential to the hepatocellular diseases
associated with elevated bilirubin and jaundice, including viral
infections (eg, hepatitis A, B, C, D and E, EBV
, CMV), toxic
(eg,
alcohol,
drugs,
environmental),
autoimmune,
Wilson
disease, ischaemia and congestive hepatopathy.
Though the patient was found to have HCV infection, we did
not think HCV was responsible for his acute hepatitis. HCV
antibody production has a window period, with serum anti-
bodies undetectable by assay until ∼10 weeks after the initial
exposure.4 Being that our patient’s symptoms only began
2 weeks prior, his positive serology was not compatible with an
acute HCV infection, but was deemed more likely a chronic
infection. In the absence of clinical signs of haemodynamic
instability, we thought ischaemic hepatic injury to be less likely.
Furthermore, ischaemic hepatitis is often accompanied by evi-
dence of other end-organ hypoperfusion, such as renal acute
tubular necrosis.5 Therefore, our patient’s normal renal function
on presentation did not favour the diagnosis of ischaemic
hepatitis.
History and examination also made aetiologies such as
alcohol, prescribed medications, illicit drugs, environmental
causes and congestive hepatopathy less likely. W
e excluded other
viral causes of hepatitis, autoimmune aetiology and Wilson
disease based on laboratory results. Biopsy findings in this case
were
non-specific
and
can
be
seen
in
drug-induced
or
toxin-induced hepatitis, and in hepatic injury related to other
causes, such as autoimmune hepatitis, Wilson disease, coeliac
disease and acute viral hepatitis. Having carefully excluded the
alternative processes with similar pathological findings, the diag-
nosis of acute hepatitis secondary to consumption of energy
drinks was rendered.
Incidentally, the patient’s high levels of serum folate and
vitamin B12 were also consistent with supplemental intake,
likely from energy drink usage as he denied any alternative sup-
plementation. The diagnosis was further supported by consider-
ation of chronological and clinical data. His liver injury was
directly subsequent to excessive consumption of energy drinks,
and resolved on discontinuation of the product.
TREATMENT
Our patient was seen in consultation by hepatology during his
hospitalisation. He was treated supportively, and the offending
agent was withdrawn. Daily liver functions tests (LFTs) and INR
were obtained to ensure that the patient did not develop liver
failure (table 2).
OUTCOME AND FOLLOW-UP
The patient’s symptoms resolved by the third day of hospitalisa-
tion, though his LFTs continued to uptrend until peaking on
hospital day 4 (table 2). He was discharged home on hospital
day 6. At the time of discharge, the patient was tolerating a
regular diet without malaise, anorexia, abdominal pain, nausea
or vomiting. Follow-up with hepatology was arranged for new
diagnosis of chronic HCV infection. His transaminitis had com-
pletely resolved at 2-week follow-up (table 1).
DISCUSSION
Nearly 50% of cases of acute liver failure in the USA are due to
DILI.1 The list of associated drugs and toxins has significantly
grown as the market for dietary and herbal supplements con-
tinues to rapidly expand. Although herbal and dietary supple-
ments have been recognised as potential hepatotoxins, this
association is commonly overlooked. To the best of our knowl-
edge, only one other case report has previously documented
acute hepatitis from overconsumption of energy drinks.3 W
e
present a second case of a patient who presented with acute
hepatitis
secondary to
energy
drink
consumption.
In
the
absence of a rechallenge, the association is probable/likely
(according to the WHO-UMC causality categories) as the trans-
aminitis occurred with a reasonable time sequence to the energy
drink intake, was unlikely to be attributed to other drugs or
concurrent
diseases
and
followed
a
clinically
reasonable
response to withdrawal.6
Energy drinks contain a mixture of B vitamins and an ‘energy
blend’.3 As listed on the manufacturer’s label, the energy blend
includes taurine, glucuronic acid, malic acid, N-acetyl l-tyrosine,
l-phenylalanine, caffeine and citicoline. The B vitamins involved
include high amounts of vitamin B12 (cyanocobalamin), B9
(folic acid), B6 (pyridoxine) and vitamin B3 (niacin). Many of
these ingredients are present in high concentrations, lending to
their risk of accumulation and adverse effects. Although several
of the ingredients are known to cause toxicity with overdose,
none of their toxicity profiles include hepatotoxicity, except
vitamin B3 (niacin).3 7 W
e therefore suspect the development of
acute hepatitis in this patient was due to the daily consumption
of high quantities of niacin-rich energy beverages.
Table 1
Laboratory results on admission
Laboratory
Value
Reference range
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST)
1802
<37 U/L
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT)
1203
<41 U/L
Total bilirubin
10.3
<1.0 mg/dL
Direct bilirubin
7.7
<0.2 mg/dL
γ-Glutamyl transferase (GGT)
301
5–61 U/L
Alkaline phosphatase (ALP)
206
35–129 U/L
Albumin
3.4
3.5–5.0 g/dL
International normalised ratio (INR)
1.1
0.9–1.2
Vitamin B12
>2000
243–894 pg/mL
Folate
>20
4.4–19.9 ng/mL
Mean corpuscular volume (MCV)
97.4
78–100 μm
Platelet count
190
150–450 thou/μmm
Lipase
62
13–60 U/L
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
1.22
0.27–4.2 mIU/L
Creatinine
0.84
0.80–1.20 mg/dL
Urea nitrogen (BUN)
12
6–20 mg/dL
Table 2
Laboratory results throughout hospitalisation
Days since admission
AST (U/L)
ALT (U/L)
Bilirubin (mg/dL)
1
1802
1203
10.3
2
1710
1112
11.5
3
2435
1368
13.4
4
4051
2073
19.3
5
2674
1629
15.7
6
1685
1224
12.0
14
35
90
2.7
18
23
36
2.2
Normal values
(0–37 U/L)
(0–41 U/L)
(0.0–1.0 mg/dL)
ALT, alanine aminotransferase; AST, aspartate aminotransferase.
2
Harb JN, et al. BMJ Case Rep 2016. doi:10.1136/bcr-2016-216612
Unusual presentation of more common disease/injury
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://casereports.bmj.com/
BMJ Case Reports: first published as 10.1136/bcr-2016-216612 on 1 November 2016. Downloaded from 
 Niacin hepatotoxicity is believed to be a dose-dependent,
direct toxic reaction. It can cause transient, asymptomatic trans-
aminitis in up to 20% of people with doses above 500 mg
daily.7 Our patient’s daily intake was ∼160–200 mg daily, which
is below the threshold expected to cause toxicity, but similar to
the previously reported energy drink-associated acute hepatitis
(around 300 mg of niacin daily).3 Hepatotoxicity could be due
to some of the other compounds within the beverage, for which
there are limited toxicity data. Furthermore, little is known
about the interactions between the different components of
these beverages. Toxicity is also likely compounded by accumu-
lative effect. Each bottle of his energy drink contained 40 mg of
niacin, or 200% of the recommended daily value and he con-
sumed 4–5 bottles daily for more than 21 days straight.
In drug-induced and toxin-induced liver injury, laboratory
results may present in a hepatocellular, cholestatic or mixed
pattern.8 Niacin toxicity primarily presents with a hepatocellular
pattern; however, cholestatic cases have also been described.7
Our patient presented with a mixed pattern, having elevated
transaminases and significantly elevated direct hyperbilirubinae-
mia. Interestingly, his AST was elevated, disproportionately
greater than the ALT (AST 4051 U/L, ALT 2073) and he denied
any acute or chronic alcohol use. This abnormal AST>ALT ratio
was
similarly
present
in
the
previously
reported
case
of
energy-drink-related hepatitis.3
Liver injury secondary to the consumption of dietary and
herbal supplements, though increasingly recognised, remains a
diagnostic challenge for clinicians due to the lack of clearly
defined diagnostic criteria. Diagnosis primarily requires exclu-
sion of alternative causes. Further suggestive features include
lack of liver injury prior to supplement exposure, liver injury
following product ingestion and resolution of liver injury on
withdrawal of the offending agent.8 Another diagnostic obstacle
that further delays diagnosis is patients’ non-disclosure of sup-
plement use either due to reluctance to discuss or failure to rec-
ognise supplements as actual medications warranting disclosure.
The primary treatment for toxin-mediated liver injury is discon-
tinuation of the offending hepatotoxin and monitoring to
ensure the liver tests normalise. Recovery will occur in the
majority of patients following withdrawal of the offending
agent.8
One limitation of our observation as well as the previous
similar case is that these reports are only suggestive but not con-
clusive evidence of a causal relationship; they are meant to
increase the awareness of healthcare providers of the possibility
of a previously unrecognised association. Based on this case and
the previous report, we suggest that patients with pre-existing
hepatic disorders should use caution when consuming energy
drinks containing niacin. With the increasing popularity of
energy drinks, clinicians should also be aware of the potential
adverse effects associated with their consumption and inquire
about energy drink intake in otherwise healthy adults who
present with unexplained acute hepatitis. By alerting physicians
to this phenomenon, we hope patients will be educated about
the potential risks of energy drink overconsumption, and thus,
many unnecessary liver injuries will be prevented, or at least
promptly identified and treated appropriately.
Learning points
▸ Drug-induced and toxin-induced liver injury is a diagnosis of
exclusion, and relies on chronological and clinical criteria.
▸ Suggestive features of toxin-induced liver injury include lack
of liver injury prior to toxin exposure, liver injury following
product ingestion, resolution of liver injury following
withdrawal of the offending agent and absence of other
known possible aetiology.
▸ Herbal and dietary supplements, including energy drinks,
should be considered in the differential diagnosis in patients
presenting with acute liver injury of unknown cause.
▸ Patients should be educated about the potential risk of
hepatotoxicity with the overconsumption of niacin-rich
energy drinks.
Contributors The authors JNH, ZAT, VK and MS have contributed sufficiently to
the project and have met all criteria to be included as authors. All authors have no
relevant financial interest in this manuscript and no activities, affiliations or
relationships to disclose. All authors have not published or submitted any related
papers from the same study.
Competing interests None declared.
Patient consent Obtained.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Open Access This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the
Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 4.0) license, which
permits others to distribute, remix, adapt, build upon this work non-commercially,
and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is
properly cited and the use is non-commercial. See: http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc/4.0/
REFERENCES
1
Bernal W, Wendon J. Acute liver failure. N Engl J Med 2013;369:2525–34.
2
Geller AI, Shehab N, Weidle NJ, et al. Emergency department visits for adverse
events related to dietary supplements. N Engl J Med 2015;373:1531.
3
Vivekanandarajah A, Ni S, Waked A. Acute hepatitis in a woman following excessive
ingestion of an energy drink: a case report. J Med Case Rep 2011;5:227.
4
Kamili S, Drobeniuc J, Araujo AC, et al. Laboratory diagnostics for hepatitis C virus
infection. Clin Infect Dis 2012;55(Suppl 1):S43–8.
5
Seeto RK, Fenn B, Rockey DC. Ischemic hepatitis: clinical presentation and
pathogenesis. Am J Med 2000;109:109–13.
6
Meyboom RH, Hekster YA, Egberts AC. Causal or casual? The role of causality
assessment in pharmacovigilance. Drug Saf 1997;17:374–89.
7
United States National Library of Medicine, and National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, eds. LiverTox. LiverTox: Clinical and Research
Information on Drug-Induced Liver Injury, Web. 1 Dec. 2015. http://livertox.nlm.nih.
gov/Niacin.htm
8
Chang CY, Schiano TD. Review article: drug hepatotoxicity. Ailment Pharmacol Ther
2007;25:1135–51.
Harb JN, et al. BMJ Case Rep 2016. doi:10.1136/bcr-2016-216612
3
Unusual presentation of more common disease/injury
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://casereports.bmj.com/
BMJ Case Reports: first published as 10.1136/bcr-2016-216612 on 1 November 2016. Downloaded from 
 Copyright 2016 BMJ Publishing Group. All rights reserved. For permission to reuse any of this content visit
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.
BMJ Case Report Fellows may re-use this article for personal use and teaching without any further permission.
Become a Fellow of BMJ Case Reports today and you can:
▸ Submit as many cases as you like
▸ Enjoy fast sympathetic peer review and rapid publication of accepted articles
▸ Access all the published articles
▸ Re-use any of the published material for personal use and teaching without further permission
For information on Institutional Fellowships contact consortiasales@bmjgroup.com
Visit casereports.bmj.com for more articles like this and to become a Fellow
4
Harb JN, et al. BMJ Case Rep 2016. doi:10.1136/bcr-2016-216612
Unusual presentation of more common disease/injury
 on 1 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://casereports.bmj.com/
BMJ Case Reports: first published as 10.1136/bcr-2016-216612 on 1 November 2016. Downloaded from 
