 SPECIAL ARTICLE
Cynthia Harden, MD
Torbjörn Tomson, MD,
PhD
David Gloss, MD,
MPH&TM
Jeffrey Buchhalter, MD,
PhD
J. Helen Cross, MB, ChB,
PhD
Elizabeth Donner, MD
Jacqueline A. French, MD
Anthony Gil-Nagel, MD,
PhD
Dale C. Hesdorffer, PhD
W. Henry Smithson, MB,
ChB, MD
Mark C. Spitz, MD
Thaddeus S. Walczak,
MD
Josemir W. Sander, MD,
PhD, FRCP
Philippe Ryvlin, MD,
PhD
Correspondence to
American Academy of Neurology:
guidelines@aan.com
Editorial, page 1598
Supplemental data
at Neurology.org
Practice guideline summary: Sudden unexpected
death in epilepsy incidence rates and risk factors
Report of the Guideline Development, Dissemination, and Implementation
Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology and the American Epilepsy
Society
ABSTRACT
Objective: To determine the incidence rates of sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) in
different epilepsy populations and address the question of whether risk factors for SUDEP have
been identified.
Methods: Systematic review of evidence; modified Grading Recommendations Assessment,
Development, and Evaluation process for developing conclusions; recommendations developed
by consensus.
Results: Findings for incidence rates based on 12 Class I studies include the following: SUDEP
risk in children with epilepsy (aged 0–17 years) is 0.22/1,000 patient-years (95% confidence
interval [CI] 0.16–0.31) (moderate confidence in evidence). SUDEP risk increases in adults to 1.2/
1,000 patient-years (95% CI 0.64–2.32) (low confidence in evidence). The major risk factor for
SUDEP is the occurrence of generalized tonic-clonic seizures (GTCS); the SUDEP risk increases
in association with increasing frequency of GTCS occurrence (high confidence in evidence).
Recommendations: Level B: Clinicians caring for young children with epilepsy should inform parents/
guardians that in 1 year, SUDEP typically affects 1 in 4,500 children; therefore, 4,499 of 4,500
children will not be affected. Clinicians should inform adult patients with epilepsy that SUDEP typ-
ically affects 1 in 1,000 adults with epilepsy per year; therefore, annually 999 of 1,000 adults will
not be affected. For persons with epilepsy who continue to experience GTCS, clinicians should con-
tinue to actively manage epilepsy therapies to reduce seizures and SUDEP risk while incorporating
patient preferences and weighing the risks and benefits of any new approach. Clinicians should
inform persons with epilepsy that seizure freedom, particularly freedom from GTCS, is strongly asso-
ciated with decreased SUDEP risk. Neurology® 2017;88:1674–1680
GLOSSARY
AAN 5 American Academy of Neurology; AED 5 antiepileptic drug; CI 5 confidence interval; GTCS 5 generalized tonic-
clonic seizures; SUDEP 5 sudden unexpected death in epilepsy.
This document summarizes information provided in
the complete guideline, available at Neurology.org.
Appendix e-6, cited in the full guideline (data supple-
ment), is available at Neurology.org.
Sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) is
a poorly understood and catastrophic risk of epilepsy.
The sensitive nature of discussions of this infrequent
but important risk with patients and families has
prompted the need for evidence-based information
about SUDEP. The goal of this practice guideline is
to examine evidence for the SUDEP incidence rate
in epilepsy populations and for prognostic factors
From the Department of Neurology (C.H.), Mount Sinai Health System, New York, NY; Department of Clinical Neuroscience (T.T.), Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; Department of Neurology (D.G.), CAMC Physicians, Charleston, WV; Departments of Pediatrics and Clinical
Neurosciences (J.B.), Alberta Children’s Hospital, University of Calgary, Canada; Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Institute of Child Health
(J.H.C.), and Institute of Neurology (J.W.S.), University College London; Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Foundation Trust
(J.H.C.), London, UK; Department of Paediatrics (E.D.), Division of Neurology, The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Canada;
Department of Neurology (J.A.F.), New York University Langone Comprehensive Epilepsy Center, New York; Department of Neurology (A.G.-
N.), Hospital Ruber Internacional, Madrid, Spain; Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center and Department of Epidemiology (D.C.H.), Columbia
University Medical Center, New York, NY; Department of General Practice (W.H.S.), University College Cork, Ireland; Anschutz Outpatient
Pavilion (M.C.S.), University of Colorado Health, Aurora; Neurology Clinic (T.S.W.), University of Minnesota, Minneapolis; Stichting Epilepsie
Instellingen Nederland (SEIN) (J.W.S.), Heemstede, the Netherlands; and the Department of Clinical Neurosciences (P.R.), CHUV, Lausanne,
Switzerland.
Approved by the Guideline Development, Dissemination, and Implementation Subcommittee on November 7, 2015; by the AAN Practice
Committee on January 17, 2016; by the AES Guidelines Committee on November 11, 2016; by the AES Council on Clinical Activities on
November 11, 2016; by the AES Executive Committee on November 14, 2016; by the AES Board of Directors on November 30, 2016; and by the
AAN Institute Board of Directors on January 11, 2017. This practice guideline was endorsed by the International Child Neurology Association on
August 27, 2016.
Go to Neurology.org for full disclosures. Funding information and disclosures deemed relevant by the authors, if any, are provided at the end of the article.
1674
© 2017 American Academy of Neurology
ª 2017 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 for SUDEP occurrence. This in turn will inform an
honest and balanced discussion when clinicians coun-
sel people about SUDEP, and provide insight into
areas where more clinical research is needed.
Two questions were asked:
1. What is the incidence rate of SUDEP in different
epilepsy populations?
2. Are there specific risk factors for SUDEP?
DESCRIPTION OF THE ANALYTIC PROCESS This
practice guideline broadly follows the process delin-
eated in the 2004 American Academy of Neurology
(AAN) guideline development process manual,1
with the exception of the processes for formulating
conclusions and recommendations, which follow the
processes explained in the 2011 AAN guideline
development process manual.2
In 2010, the AAN Guideline Development, Dis-
semination, and Implementation Subcommittee and
the Guidelines Committee of the American Epilepsy
Society convened a panel of experts to develop this
practice guideline. The guideline panel engaged
an independent medical librarian to search the
MEDLINE and Embase databases from earliest avail-
able article to November 2010. The panel then per-
formed an identical search in April 2015 to include
articles published since November 2010. The key-
words for both searches were SUDEP or (sudden
and [unexplained or unexpected] and death) combined
with the traditional medical subheadings (MeSH) for
epilepsy (epilepsy/abnormalities or epilepsy/classifica-
tion or epilepsy/complications or epilepsy/drug effects
or epilepsy/drug therapy or epilepsy/epidemiology or
epilepsy/ethnology or epilepsy/etiology or epilepsy/
genetics or epilepsy/mortality or epilepsy/physiopa-
thology or epilepsy/prevention and control or epi-
lepsy/therapy) with limits of humans, plus all child:
0–18 years or all adult: 191 years. Literature types
were limited to clinical trial; randomized controlled
trial; comparative study; controlled clinical trial; eval-
uation studies; journal article; multicenter study;
research support; NIH, extramural, research support;
NIH, intramural, research support; non–US gov’t,
research support; US gov’t, non PHS, research sup-
port; or US gov’t, PHS, validation studies. Finally,
the guideline panel specifically searched causes impli-
cated in SUDEP (i.e., cardiac arrhythmias and preictal
autonomic dysfunction), where the hypotheses were
tested.
This search yielded 1,068 abstracts, all of which
were reviewed for relevance by at least 2 panel mem-
bers working independently of each other; 744 ab-
stracts were not relevant to provide answers to the
questions. Of the remaining 324 abstracts, 2 panel
members then obtained the full articles and reviewed
them independently for inclusion. Reviewed articles
were entered into a database application through an
online questionnaire. Seventy articles had data for
inclusion, and 254 were excluded because they failed
to address the questions, employ an adequate SUDEP
definition, or use an appropriate epilepsy comparison
group in the prognostic studies. The available litera-
ture consisted of multiple Class I articles for inci-
dence, and therefore articles rated Class II or lower
were excluded because the Class II publications did
not address populations not otherwise encompassed
by the Class I articles. Several Class I and multiple
Class
II
articles
were
available
for
prognostic
questions.
Included articles were required to state that the
SUDEP definition provided by Nashef,3 Annegers,4
and Leestma et al.5 was used or to describe criteria in
accordance with these definitions. These definitions
share the following criteria, and the guideline panel
included any article that incorporated these criteria in
its SUDEP definition: (1) the patient had epilepsy by
reasonable criteria without reference to the criteria
used for epilepsy; (2) deaths by drowning, trauma,
or status epilepticus were excluded; (3) death could
have occurred after a witnessed seizure; (4) other
competing causes of death were excluded.
The guideline panel used 2 of the AAN’s evidence-
based schemes to rate articles: the screening criteria
for the incidence question and the prognostic criteria
for the risk factor question.
Question 1: What is the incidence of SUDEP in different
epilepsy populations? Twelve Class I studies provided
incidence rate data.6–17 Imprecision in study findings
resulted in moderate confidence in the evidence for
SUDEP rates in childhood and low confidence in the
evidence for SUDEP rates in adulthood and overall
(table 1). Because of imprecision in the incidence
study results with a lack of overlap of 95% confidence
interval (CIs) between several comparable study pop-
ulations, the guideline panel performed a random-
effects meta-analysis to provide summary measures
of the absolute or relative risk of SUDEP. In
addition, to explore reasons for heterogeneity in the
absolute
risk
of
SUDEP
reported,
the
panel
conducted a meta-analysis of subgroups of studies
Table 1
Conclusions for sudden unexpected
death in epilepsy (SUDEP) incidence
Population
SUDEP/1,000 patient-years
(confidence interval)
Confidence
Overall
0.58 (0.31–1.08)
Low
Childhood
0.22 (0.16–0.31)
Moderate
Adulthood
1.2 (0.64–2.32)
Low
Neurology 88
April 25, 2017
1675
ª 2017 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 including different groups of patients with epilepsy
(e.g., children vs adults). These meta-analyses have
significant
unexplained
heterogeneity,
which
may suggest the presence of other unknown or
unexplored risk factors.
Rationale for recommendations 1 and 2. Our systematic
review found that the SUDEP risk in children with
epilepsy is 0.22/1,000 patient-years (95% CI 0.16–
0.31). The SUDEP risk increases in adults to 1.2/
1,000 patient-years (95% CI 0.64–2.32). There is
considerable uncertainty regarding the estimates of
the adult risk.
People with epilepsy and their families prefer to be
informed of the individual’s risk for a catastrophic
event such as SUDEP, even when the probability of
the event is low.18 This preference is subject to cul-
tural influences. After being informed of an adverse
event, people commonly overestimate the risk of that
adverse event happening to them.19 Such overestima-
tion unduly increases anxiety related to an adverse
event. Overestimation can be lessened by presenting
the risk as the probability of both having and not
having the event,20 and by using numbers in addition
to words19 and frequencies rather than percentages to
convey the risk.21
Incidence
recommendation
1:
SUDEP
incidence
in
children. Clinicians caring for children with epilepsy
should inform the children’s parents or guardians that
(Level B for the following):
1. There is a rare risk of SUDEP.
2. In 1 year, SUDEP typically affects 1 in 4,500
children with epilepsy; in other words, annually,
4,499 of 4,500 children will not be affected by
SUDEP.
Incidence recommendation 2: SUDEP incidence in adults.
Clinicians should inform adult persons with epilepsy
that (Level B for the following):
1. There is a small risk of SUDEP.
2. In 1 year, SUDEP typically affects 1 in 1,000
adults with epilepsy; in other words, annually,
999 of 1,000 adults will not be affected by
SUDEP.
Question 2: Are there any risk factors for SUDEP? Six
Class I14,22–26 and 16 Class II articles6,7,17,23,27–38 pro-
vided evidence for this question. Table 2 summarizes
the results.
Rationale for recommendation 3. Our systematic
review found that a major risk factor for SUDEP is
the presence and frequency of generalized tonic-
clonic seizures (GTCS). For example, people with 3
or more GTCS per year have a 15-fold increased risk
of SUDEP. This relative risk increase translates to an
absolute risk of up to 18 deaths per 1,000 patient-
years for people with frequent GTCS.29
The large SUDEP risk increase from GTCS, cou-
pled with epilepsy monitoring unit evidence39 dem-
onstrating that a GTCS was always the precipitating
event of SUDEP, strongly suggests that GTCS are
not just associated with SUDEP but, rather, are in
the causal path to SUDEP. From this, it seems rea-
sonable to infer that improved control of an individ-
ual’s GTCS will result in a reduced risk of SUDEP.
Thus, a reduction in SUDEP risk is an additional
benefit to the many benefits resulting from improved
seizure control.
As with all benefits associated with improved sei-
zure control, the potential benefit of SUDEP risk
reduction needs to be balanced with the risks and
burdens associated with antiseizure therapies.
Recommendation 3. For persons with epilepsy who
continue to experience GTCS, clinicians should con-
tinue to actively manage epilepsy therapies to reduce
seizure occurrences and the risk of SUDEP while
incorporating patient preferences and weighing the
risks and benefits of any new approach (Level B).
Rationale for recommendation 4. GTCS are clear risk
factors for SUDEP, and nocturnal seizures may also
increase risk. These findings, in conjunction with
the observation that postictal respiratory depression
is a major mechanism in SUDEP,39 suggest that un-
witnessed nocturnal seizures and postictal respiratory
depression can cause SUDEP.
Moreover, the presence in the bedroom of another
individual at least 10 years of age and of normal intel-
ligence is associated with a decreased SUDEP risk.
These results imply that a bedroom observer could
detect seizures, check on the patient, and provide suf-
ficient stimulation to prevent respiratory arrest. This
association does not indicate that these interventions
directly mitigate the mechanism that causes SUDEP.
If it were in accordance with patient and family
circumstances and values, nocturnal supervision
Table 2
Conclusions for sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) risk
factors
Factor
OR (CI)
Confidence level
Presence of GTCS vs lack of
GTCS
10 (17–14)
Moderate
Frequency of GTCS
OR 5.07 (2.94–8.76) for 1–2 GTCS
per year and OR 15.46 (9.92–
24.10) for .3 GTCS per year
High
Not being seizure-free for 1–5 y
4.7 (1.4–16)
Moderate
Not adding an AED when
patients are medically
refractory
6 (2–20)
Moderate
Nocturnal supervision (risk
reduction)
0.4 (0.2–0.8)
Moderate
Use of nocturnal listening
device (risk reduction)
0.1 (0–0.3)
Moderate
Abbreviations: AED 5 antiepileptic drug; CI 5 confidence interval; GTCS 5 generalized
tonic-clonic seizure; OR 5 odds ratio.
1676
Neurology 88
April 25, 2017
ª 2017 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 could reduce SUDEP risk; however, providing night-
time observation might be overly burdensome and
intrusive.
Recommendation
4. For persons with frequent
GTCS and nocturnal seizures, clinicians may advise
selected patients and families, if permitted by their
individualized epilepsy and psychosocial circumstan-
ces, to use nocturnal supervision or other nocturnal
precautions, such as the use of a remote listening
device, to reduce SUDEP risk (Level C).
Rationale for recommendation 5. One of the most con-
sistent findings of this review is that many factors that
are indicators of uncontrolled epilepsy, including hav-
ing GTCS, having frequent GTCS, and the absence
of seizure freedom, are strongly associated with
SUDEP.
Usually, people with epilepsy and their families
prefer to be informed of factors that are associated
with an increased risk of a catastrophic event such
as SUDEP. Patients are especially interested in factors
that might reduce their risk even when a causal link
between the factor and a reduction in risk has not
been established. Knowledge of these risk factors
might suggest behaviors that could modify the risk
factors (e.g., improved therapy adherence40), increase
the person’s sense of control, and reduce the anxiety
that comes from awareness of the risk. Less severe
seizure types, such as focal seizures or myoclonic seiz-
ures, are not proven to be associated with increased
SUDEP risk, but individuals who have them often
remain at risk for GTCS in the setting of therapy
nonadherence.
Therefore,
therapy
adherence
to
maintain freedom from GTCS is important even
when an individual is not experiencing this severe
seizure type.
Recommendation 5. Clinicians should inform pa-
tients with epilepsy that seizure freedom, particularly
freedom from GTCS (which is more likely to occur
with medication adherence), is strongly associated
with a decreased risk of SUDEP (Level B).
Additional conclusions (no recommendations made). The
evidence is low that the following factors are associ-
ated with altering SUDEP risk:
1. Nocturnal seizures (associated with increased
risk)
2. Any specific antiepileptic drug (AED) (none
associated specifically with increased risk)
3. Lamotrigine use in women (associated with
increased risk)
4. Never having been treated with an AED (associ-
ated with increased risk)
5. Number of AEDs used overall (associated with
increased risk)
6. Heart
rate
variability
(not
associated
with
increased risk)
7. Extratemporal
epilepsy
(associated
with
increased risk)
8. Intellectual disability (associated with increased
risk)
9. Male sex (associated with increased risk)
10. Anxiolytic drug use (associated with increased
risk)
The evidence is very low or conflicting that the fol-
lowing factors are associated with altering SUDEP
risk:
1. Overall seizure frequency when evaluated by
using all seizure types
2. Medically refractory epilepsy vs not having well-
controlled seizures defined as no seizures in the
last year
3. Monotherapy vs polytherapy
4. Carbamazepine, phenytoin, or sodium valproate
levels that are above, below, or within the refer-
ence range
5. Psychotropic drug use
6. Mental health disorders, lung disorders, or alco-
hol use
7. Lamotrigine use in people with highly refractory
epilepsy
8. Frequent changes in AEDs
9. Therapeutic drug monitoring
10. Undergoing a resective epilepsy surgical proce-
dure (although current research does not rule
out the possibility of a beneficial effect or, fur-
ther, the potential effect of epilepsy surgery on
reducing GTCS frequency and epilepsy severity
on reducing SUDEP risk)
11. Engel outcome of epilepsy surgery (although cur-
rent research does not rule out the possibility of
a beneficial effect and, further, the potential
effect of epilepsy surgery on reducing GTCS fre-
quency
and
epilepsy
severity
on
reducing
SUDEP risk)
12. Vagus nerve stimulator use for more than 2 years
(however, current research does not rule out the
possibility of a beneficial effect and, further, the
potential effect of epilepsy surgery on reducing
GTCS frequency and epilepsy severity on reduc-
ing the risk of SUDEP)
13. Epilepsy etiology, whether idiopathic or localiza-
tion-related
14. Structural lesion on MRI
15. Duration of epilepsy
16. Age at epilepsy onset
17. Postictal EEG suppression
SUGGESTIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH
1. Systematic methods should be developed to iden-
tify and report the incidence of SUDEP in
Neurology 88
April 25, 2017
1677
ª 2017 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 different epilepsy populations in order to obtain
a better understanding of the incidence and causes
of this devastating condition.
2. Educational efforts are needed to improve the
forensic knowledge of SUDEP among professio-
nals such as medical examiners, coroners, and
pathologists in order to help determine, and doc-
ument on death certificates, the etiology in indi-
viduals, and in order to improve overall knowledge
of this condition.
3. Research to identify preventable risk factors
should be supported and encouraged so that
future clinical trials will be conducted to reduce
SUDEP occurrence. Of particular importance is
to better understand (1) the relationship between
the nature, severity, and duration of epilepsy and
the occurrence of SUDEP and (2) whether current
treatments affect the risk of developing SUDEP.
4. Because of (1) risks identified with frequent
GTCS, (2) the fact that one study shows more
SUDEP events occur in people in placebo arms
of trials, and (3) increased SUDEP risk, serious
consideration should be given to avoid assigning
people with frequent GTCS to placebo for long
periods.
DISCLAIMER Clinical practice guidelines, practice
advisories, systematic reviews and other guidance
published by the American Academy of Neurology
and
its
affiliates
are
assessments
of
current
scientific and clinical information provided as an
educational service. The information: (1) should
not
be
considered
inclusive
of
all
proper
treatments, methods of care, or as a statement of
the standard
of care;
(2)
is not continually
updated and may not reflect the most recent
evidence (new evidence may emerge between the
time information is developed and when it is
published
or
read);
(3)
addresses
only
the
questions
specifically
identified;
(4)
does
not
mandate any particular course of medical care;
and (5) is not intended to substitute for the
independent professional judgment of the treating
provider, as the information does not account for
individual variation among patients. In all cases,
the selected course of action should be considered
by the treating provider in the context of treating
the individual patient. Use of the information is
voluntary. AAN provides this information on an “as
is” basis, and makes no warranty, expressed or implied,
regarding the information. AAN specifically disclaims
any warranties of merchantability or fitness for
a particular use or purpose. AAN assumes no
responsibility for any injury or damage to persons or
property arising out of or related to any use of this
information or for any errors or omissions.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST The American Academy
of Neurology and the American Epilepsy Society
are committed to producing independent, critical,
and truthful practice guidelines. Significant efforts
are made to minimize the potential for conflicts of
interest to influence the recommendations of this
practice guideline. To the extent possible, the AAN
and
the
AES
keep
separate
those
who
have
a financial stake in the success or failure of the
products appraised in the practice guidelines and
the developers of the practice guidelines. Conflict of
interest forms were obtained from all authors and
reviewed by an oversight committee prior to project
initiation. AAN and AES limit the participation of
authors with substantial conflicts of interest. The
AAN and the AES forbid commercial participation
in, or funding of, practice guidelines projects.
Drafts of the practice guidelines have been reviewed
by at least 3 AAN committees, at least 1 AES
committee, a network of neurologists, Neurology®
peer reviewers, and representatives from related
fields. The AAN Guideline Author Conflict of
Interest Policy can be viewed at aan.com. For
complete information on this process, access the
2004 AAN process manual.1
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Dr. Harden: study concept and design, acquisition of data, analysis or
interpretation of data, drafting/revising the manuscript, critical revision
of the manuscript for important intellectual content, study supervision.
Dr. Tomson: study concept and design, acquisition of data, analysis or
interpretation of data, drafting/revising the manuscript, critical revision
of the manuscript for important intellectual content. Dr. Gloss: study
concept and design, acquisition of data, analysis or interpretation of
data, drafting/revising the manuscript, critical revision of the manu-
script for important intellectual content. Dr. Buchhalter: study concept
and design, acquisition of data, analysis or interpretation of data, drafting/
revising the manuscript, critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content. Dr. Cross: study concept and design, acquisition of
data, analysis or interpretation of data, drafting/revising the manuscript,
critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content.
Dr. Donner: study concept and design, acquisition of data, analysis or
interpretation of data, drafting/revising the manuscript, critical revision
of the manuscript for important intellectual content. Dr. French: analysis
or interpretation of data, drafting/revising the manuscript, critical revision
of the manuscript for important intellectual content. Dr. Gil-Nagel:
study concept and design, acquisition of data, analysis or interpretation
of data, drafting/revising the manuscript, critical revision of the manu-
script for important intellectual content. Dr. Hesdorffer: study concept
and design, acquisition of data, analysis or interpretation of data, draft-
ing/revising the manuscript, critical revision of the manuscript for impor-
tant intellectual content. Dr. Smithson: study concept and design,
acquisition of data, analysis or interpretation of data, drafting/revising
the manuscript, critical revision of the manuscript for important intellec-
tual content. Dr. Spitz: study concept and design, acquisition of data,
analysis or interpretation of data, drafting/revising the manuscript, critical
revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content. Dr.
Walczak: analysis or interpretation of data, drafting/revising the manu-
script, critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual con-
tent. Dr. Sander: analysis or interpretation of data, drafting/revising the
manuscript, critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual
content. Dr. Ryvlin: analysis or interpretation of data, drafting/revising
the manuscript, critical revision of the manuscript for important intellec-
tual content.
1678
Neurology 88
April 25, 2017
ª 2017 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 STUDY FUNDING
This guideline was developed with financial support from the American
Academy of Neurology. Authors who serve as AAN subcommittee mem-
bers or methodologists (C.H., D.G., J.A.F.) were reimbursed by the AAN
for expenses related to travel to subcommittee meetings where drafts of
manuscripts were reviewed.
DISCLOSURE
C. Harden has received royalties from Wiley and UpToDate and has
served as a contributing editor for Epilepsy Currents. T. Tomson has
served as the associate editor of Epilepsia; is a member of the editorial
boards of Epilepsy Research, Epileptic Disorders, and the European Journal
of Clinical Pharmacology; has received honoraria from Sun Pharmaceut-
icals, UCB, Eisai, and Bial; has served as a member of an expert panel for
sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) adjudication in clinical
trials of lamotrigine sponsored by GlaxoSmithKline; and has received
research support from UCB, GlaxoSmithKline, Bial, Eisai, Novartis,
Stockholm County Council, and Citizens United in Research for Epi-
lepsy (CURE). D. Gloss serves as an evidence-based medicine consultant
for the American Academy of Neurology (AAN) and has served as an
associate editor (risk of bias classification) for Neurology®. J. Buchhalter
has received funding for travel from the AAN; serves on an editorial
advisory board for Pediatric Neurology and Epilepsy Currents; has served
as a consultant to UCB, Upsher-Smith Laboratories, and Eisai; and has
performed clinical procedures/imaging studies related to the content of
this practice guideline, including EEG and video EEG (25%) and epi-
lepsy surgery evaluation. J. Cross has served as a member of the editorial
boards of Developmental Medicine, Child Neurology, and the European
Journal of Child Neurology; has a patent for C10 in the treatment of
epilepsy; has received royalties for a chapter on childhood epilepsy in
Brain Diseases of the Nervous System and as editor of Paediatric Epilepsy;
has received research support from the UK National Institute for Health
and Research (NIHR), the European Framework FP7, the Charles
Wolfson Foundation, Action Medical Research, and Sparks; and has
sat on advisory boards for Vitaflo, Sanofi, Eisai, Viropharma, and
Zogenix, for which remuneration is paid to her department. E. Donner
has
received
research
support
from
the
Canadian
Institutes
of
Health Research, Dravet Canada, and SUDEP Aware. J. French has
served as a consultant for Acorda, Biotie, Eisai Medical Research,
GlaxoSmithKline, Impax, Johnson & Johnson, Lewis County General
Hospital, Marinus, Novartis, Pfizer, Sunovion, SK Life Science, Supernus
Pharmaceuticals, UCB, Upsher-Smith, and Vertex; has received grants
from Eisai Medical Research, the US Epilepsy Research Foundation, the
Epilepsy Study Consortium, the Epilepsy Therapy Project of the Epilepsy
Foundation, Lundbeck, Pfizer, and UCB; and is president of the Epilepsy
Study Consortium. All consulting is done on behalf of the Consortium,
and fees are paid to the Consortium. New York University receives salary
support from the Consortium. A. Gil-Nagel has received personal com-
pensation from Bial, Eisai, GSD Pharma Consulting, UCB Pharma, and
Pfizer;
has
received
funding
for
travel
from
Bial,
Eisai,
and
GlaxoSmithKline; has served as an editor for Seizure, Neurologia, and
Revista de Neurologia; has served on speakers bureaus for Bial, Eisai,
GlaxoSmithKline, and UCB Pharma; and asserts that the information
he provides his patients in his epilepsy clinic may be influenced by the
results of this practice guideline. D. Hesdorffer is a member of the
SUDEP Institute and of the Executive Committee of the North
American SUDEP Registry; has served on scientific advisory boards for
Upsher-Smith and Acorda; has served as a consultant for Cyberonics; has
received funding for travel from the International League Against
Epilepsy; has served as an associate editor of Epilepsia; has served on
the editorial board for Epilepsy and Behavior; has served as a contributing
editor for Epilepsy Currents; and has received funding from the NIH, the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Epilepsy Consortium,
the Patient Centered Outcome Research Institute, Finding a Cure for
Epilepsy, The Epilepsy Study Consortium, and the Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai (for consulting work on an injury prevention
grant). W. Smithson has served on a scientific advisory board for the
Sanofi UK consensus guidelines on women with epilepsy, has received
travel funding for the Partners Against Mortality in Epilepsy conference
on SUDEP (Washington 2016), has received publishing royalties from
Blackwell Publishing for the ABC of Epilepsy, has received financial sup-
port in the form of funding for a general practice research infrastructure
from the NIHR (UK), and has given expert witness testimony for the Fatal
Accident Inquiry Dundee 2012 (2 cases of SUDEP). M. Spitz has received
personal compensation and honoraria for serving on an advisory board for
UCB, has received travel funding from Cyberonics (to see the site/factory),
has received financial support for a US Department of Defense Study on
closed head injury, and has given expert testimony, prepared an affidavit
for, and acted as a witness or consultant regarding a legal proceeding.
T. Walczak serves on a scientific advisory panel tracking incidence of
SUDEP in follow-up of patients treated with the NeuroPace RNS System.
Compensation goes directly to his academic department and does not
increase his salary. J. Sander is based at University College London/Uni-
versity College London Hospitals, which receives funding from the UK
Department of Health’s NIHR Biomedical Research Centres; has served
on advisory boards for UCB and Eisai; has received speaker honoraria from
GlaxoSmithKline, Eisai, UCB, Lundbeck, and Teva; serves on the editorial
board of the Lancet Neurology; and receives research support from the Dr.
Marvin Weil Epilepsy Research Fund, the Epilepsy Society (UK), the
Netherlands Epilepsy Fund, Eisai, GlaxoSmithKline, WHO, and EU
FP7. His current position is endowed by the Epilepsy Society (UK).
P. Ryvlin has served as a chair of the Scientific Advisory Committee for
the annual meeting of the French League Against Epilepsy; has received
travel funding and honoraria from GlaxoSmithKline, Eisai, Janssen Cilag
Pty. Ltd., Cyberonics, Medtronic, and UCB Pharma (in order to partic-
ipate on industry-funded advisory boards or symposia); has served as
a journal editor for Epilepsia, Epilepsy Research, Epileptic Disorders, and
Epilepsy Research and Treatment; has served on speakers bureaus for Eisai,
GlaxoSmithKline, and UCB Pharma for a symposium at the European
and International Epilepsy Congress (in order to participate on advisory
boards or symposia); and has received financial support in the form of
a European FP7 grant (EURIPIDES) and grant/research program funding
from national (French) entities, including 2 PHRC (Programme Hospital-
ier de Recherche Clinique), 1 INSERM-DHOS (Institut National de la
Santé et de la Recherche Médicale-Direction de l’Hospitalisation et de
l’Organisation des Soins) Translationnelle, and 1 Contrat d’Interface
INSERM. Go to Neurology.org for full disclosures.
Received June 24, 2016. Accepted in final form November 2, 2016.
REFERENCES
1.
American Academy of Neurology. Clinical Practice
Guideline Process Manual, 2004 ed. [online]. St. Paul:
The American Academy of Neurology. Available at: aan.
com/Guidelines/Home/Development. Accessed March
1, 2010.
2.
American Academy of Neurology. Clinical Practice Guideline
Process Manual, 2011 ed. [online]. St. Paul: The American
Academy of Neurology. Available at: aan.com/Guidelines/
Home/Development. Accessed March 1, 2010.
3.
Nashef L. Sudden unexpected death in epilepsy: terminol-
ogy and definitions. Epilepsia 1997;38(11 suppl):S6–S8.
4.
Annegers JF. United States perspective on definitions and
classifications. Epilepsia 1997;38(11 suppl):S9–S12.
5.
Leestma JE, Annegers JF, Brodie MJ, et al. Sudden unex-
plained death in epilepsy: observations from a large clinical
development program. Epilepsia 1997;38:47–55.
6.
Tennis P, Cole TB, Annegers JF, Leestma JE, McNutt M,
Rajput A. Cohort study of incidence of sudden unex-
plained death in persons with seizure disorder treated with
antiepileptic drugs in Saskatchewan, Canada. Epilepsia
1995;36:29–36.
7.
Derby LE, Tennis P, Jick H. Sudden unexplained death
among subjects with refractory epilepsy. Epilepsia 1996;
37:931–935.
8.
Langan Y, Nolan N, Hutchinson M. The incidence of
sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP) in South
Dublin and Wicklow. Seizure 1998;7:355–358.
Neurology 88
April 25, 2017
1679
ª 2017 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 9.
Langan Y, Nashef L, Sander JW. Certification of deaths
attributable to epilepsy. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry
2002;73:751–752.
10.
Edey S, Moran N, Nashef L. SUDEP and epilepsy-related
mortality in pregnancy. Epilepsia 2014;55:e72–e74.
11.
Ackers R, Besag FM, Hughes E, Squier W, Murray ML,
Wong IC. Mortality rates and causes of death in children
with epilepsy prescribed antiepileptic drugs: a retrospective
cohort study using the UK General Practice Research
Database. Drug Saf 2011;34:403–413.
12.
Berg AT, Nickels K, Wirrell EC, et al. Mortality risks in
new-onset childhood epilepsy. Pediatrics 2013;132:
124–131.
13.
Nickels KC, Grossardt BR, Wirrell EC. Epilepsy-related
mortality is low in children: a 30-year population-based
study in Olmsted County, MN. Epilepsia 2012;53:
2164–2171.
14.
Sillanpää M, Shinnar S. SUDEP and other causes of mor-
tality in childhood-onset epilepsy. Epilepsy Behav 2013;
28:249–255.
15.
Lhatoo SD, Johnson AL, Goodridge DM, MacDonald
BK, Sander JW, Shorvon SD. Mortality in epilepsy in
the first 11 to 14 years after diagnosis: multivariate analysis
of a long-term, prospective, population-based cohort. Ann
Neurol 2001;49:336–344.
16.
Holst AG, Winkel BG, Risgaard B, et al. Epilepsy and risk
of death and sudden unexpected death in the young:
a nationwide study. Epilepsia 2013;54:1613–1620.
17.
Aurlien D, Larsen JP, Gjerstad L, Taubøll E. Comorbid
and underlying diseases: major determinants of excess
mortality in epilepsy. Seizure 2012;21:573–577.
18.
Xu Z, Ayyappan S, Seneviratne U. Sudden unexpected
death in epilepsy (SUDEP): what do patients think?
Epilepsy Behav 2015;42:29–34.
19.
Knapp P, Raynor DK, Berry DC. Comparison of two
methods of presenting risk information to patients about
the side effects of medicine. Qual Saf Health Care 2004;
13:176–180.
20.
Kahneman D, Tversky A. Choices, values, and frames. Am
Psychol 1984;39:341–350.
21.
Bonner C, Newell BR. How to make a risk seem riskier:
the ratio bias versus construal level theory. Judgment Decis
Making 2008;3:411–416.
22.
Sillanpää M, Shinnar S. Long-term mortality in childhood-
onset epilepsy. N Engl J Med 2010;363:2522–2529.
23.
Racoosin JA, Feeney J, Burkhart G, Boehm G. Mortality
in antiepileptic drug development programs. Neurology
2001;56:514–519.
24.
Ryvlin P, Cucherat M, Rheims S. Risk of sudden unex-
pected death in epilepsy in patients given adjunctive anti-
epileptic treatment for refractory seizures: a meta-analysis
of placebo-controlled randomised trials. Lancet Neurol
2011;10:961–968.
25.
Tomson T, Hirsch LJ, Friedman D, et al. Sudden unex-
pected death in epilepsy in lamotrigine randomized-
controlled trials. Epilepsia 2013;54:135–140.
26.
Granbichler CA, Nashef L, Selway R, Polkey CE. Mortal-
ity and SUDEP in epilepsy patients treated with vagus
nerve stimulation. Epilepsia 2015;56:291–296.
27.
Langan Y, Nashef L, Sander JW. Case-control study of
SUDEP. Neurology 2005;64:1131–1133.
28.
Walczak TS, Leppik IE, D’Amelio M, et al. Incidence
and risk factors in sudden unexpected death in epilepsy:
a
prospective
cohort
study.
Neurology
2001;56:
519–525.
29.
Hesdorffer DC, Tomson T, Benn E, et al; ILAE Com-
mission on Epidemiology; Subcommission on Mortality.
Combined analysis of risk factors for SUDEP. Epilepsia
2011;52:1150–1159.
30.
Surges R, Adjei P, Kallis C, et al. Pathologic cardiac repo-
larization in pharmacoresistant epilepsy and its potential
role in sudden unexpected death in epilepsy: a case-control
study. Epilepsia 2010;51:233–242.
31.
Hitiris N, Suratman S, Kelly K, Stephen LJ, Sills GJ,
Brodie MJ. Sudden unexpected death in epilepsy: a search
for risk factors. Epilepsy Behav 2007;10:138–141.
32.
Lhatoo SD, Faulkner HJ, Dembny K, Trippick K,
Johnson C, Bird JM. An electroclinical case-control study
of sudden unexpected death in epilepsy. Ann Neurol
2010;68:787–796.
33.
Nilsson L, Farahmand BY, Persson PG, Thiblin I,
Tomson T. Risk factors for sudden unexpected death
in epilepsy: a case-control study. Lancet 1999;353:
888–893.
34.
Hesdorffer DC, Tomson T, Benn E, et al; ILAE Com-
mission on Epidemiology (Subcommission on Mortality).
Do antiepileptic drugs or generalized tonic-clonic seizure
frequency increase SUDEP risk? A combined analysis.
Epilepsia 2012;53:249–252.
35.
Lamberts RJ, Thijs RD, Laffan A, Langan Y, Sander JW.
Sudden unexpected death in epilepsy: people with noc-
turnal seizures may be at highest risk. Epilepsia 2012;
53:253–257.
36.
Annegers JF, Coan SP, Hauser WA, Leestma J. Epilepsy,
vagal nerve stimulation by the NCP system, all-cause mor-
tality,
and
sudden,
unexpected,
unexplained
death.
Epilepsia 2000;41:549–553.
37.
Nilsson L, Bergman U, Diwan V, Farahmand BY, Persson
PG, Tomson T. Antiepileptic drug therapy and its man-
agement in sudden unexpected death in epilepsy: a case-
control study. Epilepsia 2001;42:667–673.
38.
Surges R, Strzelczyk A, Scott CA, Walker MC, Sander JW.
Postictal generalized electroencephalographic suppression
is associated with generalized seizures. Epilepsy Behav
2011;21:271–274.
39.
Ryvlin P, Nashef L, Lhatoo SD, et al. Incidence and
mechanisms of cardiorespiratory arrests in epilepsy moni-
toring units (MORTEMUS): a retrospective study. Lancet
Neurol 2013;12:966–977.
40.
Buck D, Jacoby A, Baker GA, Chadwick DW. Factors
influencing compliance with antiepileptic drug regimes.
Seizure 1997;6:87–93.
1680
Neurology 88
April 25, 2017
ª 2017 American Academy of Neurology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.
 DOI 10.1212/WNL.0000000000003685
2017;88;1674-1680 
Neurology 
Cynthia Harden, Torbjörn Tomson, David Gloss, et al. 
Society
Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology and the American Epilepsy
risk factors: Report of the Guideline Development, Dissemination, and Implementation 
Practice guideline summary: Sudden unexpected death in epilepsy incidence rates and
This information is current as of April 24, 2017
rights reserved. Print ISSN: 0028-3878. Online ISSN: 1526-632X.
1951, it is now a weekly with 48 issues per year. Copyright © 2017 American Academy of Neurology. All 
® is the official journal of the American Academy of Neurology. Published continuously since
Neurology 
 Services
Updated Information &
 
http://n.neurology.org/content/88/17/1674.full
including high resolution figures, can be found at:
Supplementary Material
 
685.DC4
http://n.neurology.org/content/suppl/2019/04/07/WNL.0000000000003
 
685.DC3
http://n.neurology.org/content/suppl/2017/12/10/WNL.0000000000003
 
685.DC2
http://n.neurology.org/content/suppl/2017/04/24/WNL.0000000000003
 
685.DC1
http://n.neurology.org/content/suppl/2017/04/24/WNL.0000000000003
Supplementary material can be found at: 
References
 
http://n.neurology.org/content/88/17/1674.full#ref-list-1
This article cites 38 articles, 6 of which you can access for free at: 
Citations
 
http://n.neurology.org/content/88/17/1674.full##otherarticles
This article has been cited by 12 HighWire-hosted articles: 
Subspecialty Collections
 
http://n.neurology.org/cgi/collection/risk_factors_in_epidemiology
Risk factors in epidemiology
 
http://n.neurology.org/cgi/collection/incidence_studies
Incidence studies
 
http://n.neurology.org/cgi/collection/all_pediatric
All Pediatric
 
http://n.neurology.org/cgi/collection/all_epilepsy_seizures
All Epilepsy/Seizures
following collection(s): 
This article, along with others on similar topics, appears in the
  
Permissions & Licensing
 
http://www.neurology.org/about/about_the_journal#permissions
its entirety can be found online at:
Information about reproducing this article in parts (figures,tables) or in
  
Reprints
 
http://n.neurology.org/subscribers/advertise
Information about ordering reprints can be found online:
rights reserved. Print ISSN: 0028-3878. Online ISSN: 1526-632X.
1951, it is now a weekly with 48 issues per year. Copyright © 2017 American Academy of Neurology. All 
® is the official journal of the American Academy of Neurology. Published continuously since
Neurology 
