 European Journal of Heart Failure (2016) 18, 226–241
doi:10.1002/ejhf.478
Contemporary management of acute right
ventricular failure: a statement from the Heart
Failure Association and the Working Group on
Pulmonary Circulation and Right Ventricular
Function of the European Society of
Cardiology
Veli-Pekka Harjola1*, Alexandre Mebazaa2,3,4, Jelena ˇ
Celutkien˙
e5,
Dominique Bettex6, Hector Bueno7,8,9, Ovidiu Chioncel10, Maria G. Crespo-Leiro11,
Volkmar Falk12, Gerasimos Filippatos13, Simon Gibbs14, Adelino Leite-Moreira15,
Johan Lassus16, Josep Masip17, Christian Mueller18, Wilfried Mullens19,
Robert Naeije20, Anton Vonk Nordegraaf21, John Parissis22, Jillian P
. Riley14,
Arsen Ristic23, Giuseppe Rosano24,25, Alain Rudiger26, Frank Ruschitzka27,
Petar Seferovic28, Benjamin Sztrymf29, Antoine Vieillard-Baron30,
Mehmet Birhan Yilmaz31, and Stavros Konstantinides32,33
1Emergency Medicine, Helsinki University, Department of Emergency Medicine and Services, Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland; 2University Paris Diderot, Sorbonne
Paris Cité, Paris, France; 3U942 Inserm, AP-HP
, Paris, France; 4APHP, Department of Anaesthesia and Critical Care, Hôpitaux Universitaires Saint Louis-Lariboisière, Paris, France;
5Clinic of Cardiac and Vascular Diseases, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania; 6Institute of Anaesthesiology, University Hospital Zurich, Switzerland; 7Centro
Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares (CNIC); 8Instituto de Investigación i + 12 and Cardiology Department, Hospital Universitario 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain;
9Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Spain; 10University of Medicine Carol Davila/Institute of Emergency for Cardiovascular Disease, Bucharest, Romania; 11Unidad de
Insuficiencia Cardiaca Avanzada y Trasplante Cardiaco, Complexo Hospitalario Universitario A Coruna, CHUAC, La Coruna, Spain; 12Department of Cardiothoracic and Vascular
Surgery, Deutsches Herzzentrum Berlin, Berlin, Germany; 13Athens University Hospital Attikon, Athens, Greece; 14Imperial College, London, United Kingdom; 15Departamento
de Fisiologia e Cirurgia Cardiotorácica, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal; 16Cardiology, Helsinki University, Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki,
Finland; 17Hospital Sant Joan Despí Moisès Broggi and Hospital General de l’
Hospitalet, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; 18Department of Cardiology and Cardiovascular
Research Institute Basel (CRIB), University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland; 19Department of Cardiology, Ziekenhuis Oost Limburg, Genk – Biomedical Research Institute,
Faculty of Medicine and Life Sciences, Hasselt University, Diepenbeek, Belgium; 20Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Free University of Brussels, Brussels, Belgium;
21Vrije Universiteit Medisch Centrum, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; 22Attikon University Hospital, Athens, Greece; 23Department of Cardiology of the Clinical Centre of Serbia
and, Belgrade University School of Medicine, Belgrade, Serbia; 24IRCCS San Raffaele Hospital Roma, Rome, Italy; 25Cardiovascular and Cell Sciences Institute, St George’
s
University of London, London, UK; 26Cardio-surgical Intensive Care Unit, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland; 27Department of Cardiology, Heart Failure Clinic and
Transplantation, University Heart Centre Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland; 28Department of Internal Medicine, Belgrade University School of Medicine and Heart Failure Centre,
Belgrade University Medical Centre, Belgrade, Serbia; 29Réanimation polyvalente, Hôpital Antoine Béclère, Hôpitaux univeristaires Paris Sud, AP-HP
, Clamart, France; 30INSERM
U-1018, CESP
, Team 5 (EpReC, Renal and Cardiovascular Epidemiology), UVSQ, Villejuif, France, University Hospital Ambroise Paré, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris,
Boulogne-Billancourt, France; 31Department of Cardiology, Cumhuriyet University Faculty of Medicine, Sivas, Turkey; 32Centre for Thrombosis and Haemostasis (CTH),
University Medical Centre Mainz, Mainz, Germany and 33Department of Cardiology, Democritus University of Thrace, Alexandroupolis, Greece
Received 11 September 2015; revised 11 November 2015; accepted 2 December 2015
Acute right ventricular (RV) failure is a complex clinical syndrome that results from many causes. Research efforts
have disproportionately focused on the failing left ventricle, but recently the need has been recognized to achieve a
more comprehensive understanding of RV anatomy, physiology, and pathophysiology, and of management approaches.
Right ventricular mechanics and function are altered in the setting of either pressure overload or volume overload.
Failure may also result from a primary reduction of myocardial contractility owing to ischaemia, cardiomyopathy, or
arrhythmia. Dysfunction leads to impaired RV filling and increased right atrial pressures. As dysfunction progresses
*Corresponding author: Tel: +358504270163; Fax: +358947171488; E-mail: veli-pekka.harjola@hus.fi
© 2016 The Authors
European Journal of Heart Failure © 2016 European Society of Cardiology
 Contemporary management of acute RV failure
227
to overt RV failure, the RV chamber becomes more spherical and tricuspid regurgitation is aggravated, a cascade
leading to increasing venous congestion. Ventricular interdependence results in impaired left ventricular filling, a
decrease in left ventricular stroke volume, and ultimately low cardiac output and cardiogenic shock. Identification
and treatment of the underlying cause of RV failure, such as acute pulmonary embolism, acute respiratory distress
syndrome, acute decompensation of chronic pulmonary hypertension, RV infarction, or arrhythmia, is the primary
management strategy. Judicious fluid management, use of inotropes and vasopressors, assist devices, and a strategy
focusing on RV protection for mechanical ventilation if required all play a role in the clinical care of these patients.
Future research should aim to address the remaining areas of uncertainty which result from the complexity of RV
haemodynamics and lack of conclusive evidence regarding RV-specific treatment approaches.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Keywords
Right ventricular dysfunction •
Right ventricular function •
Heart failure •
Intensive care •
Cardiogenic shock
Introduction
Acute right ventricular (RV) failure can be defined as a rapidly
progressive syndrome with systemic congestion resulting from
impaired RV filling and/or reduced RV flow output. Most often it is
associated with increased RV afterload or preload and consequent
RV chamber dilatation and tricuspid regurgitation (Figure 1).1,
2
The prevalence of acute RV failure is difficult to estimate, but its
predominant causes [i.e. left-sided heart failure, acute pulmonary
embolism (PE), acute myocardial ischaemia] are common.3–5 It
is observed in 3–9% of acute heart failure admissions, and the
in-hospital mortality of patients with acute RV failure ranges from
5 to 17%.6–10
Research efforts have disproportionately focused on the fail-
ing left ventricle, but recently more attention has been placed
on understanding RV anatomy, physiology, dysfunction, and
management.11 Right ventricular failure is a heterogeneous syn-
drome, and its varied aetiologies require individualized treatment.
Recognizing the numerous aspects of RV failure, the Heart Failure
Association (HFA) and the Working Group on Pulmonary Circu-
lation and Right Ventricular Function of the European Society of
Cardiology (ESC) convened a multidisciplinary group of experts to
discuss state-of-the-art principles pertaining to RV failure and its
aetiology, clinical presentation, assessment, treatment, and areas
where focused research is needed. This paper summarizes the
dialogue and suggests priorities for research in this field.
Pathophysiology
Anatomy and mechanics of right
ventricular function
The thin-walled right ventricle pumps the entire systemic venous
return into the pulmonary circulation for gas exchange. Right
ventricular function integrates preload, afterload, contractility,
pericardial constraint, interaction with the left ventricle, and
cardiac rhythm.12–14 Venous return depends on the pressure
gradient between the peripheral vasculature where the mean sys-
temic filling pressure (although not well characterized in humans) is
approximately 7–10 mmHg, and the right atrial (or central venous)
pressure, which is usually 0 mmHg at rest.15 In contrast to the left
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
ventricle, twisting and rotational movements do not contribute
significantly to RV contraction. Instead, the most important mech-
anisms are the bellows-like inward movement of the free wall, the
contraction of the longitudinal fibres drawing the tricuspid annulus
toward the apex, and the traction on the free wall as a result of left
ventricular contraction. The contraction of the right ventricle is
sequential, starting with the trabeculated myocardium and ending
with the contraction of the infundibulum (25–50 ms delay).16
Because RV afterload is very low under normal conditions, blood
flows from the RV into the pulmonary circulation both during
systole and during the early part of diastole, leading to the absence
of isovolumetric relaxation.15
Aetiology and pathogenesis of right
ventricular failure
Right ventricular mechanics and function are altered in the setting
of either pressure overload or volume overload (Figure 1, Table 1).
Failure may also result from a primary reduction of myocardial
contractility owing to ischaemia, cardiomyopathy, or arrhythmia.
The right ventricle is not built to handle large or rapid increases
in pulmonary artery pressure. However, it possesses, like the left
ventricle, the capacity to adapt its systolic function to preserve
ventriculo-arterial coupling. During the acute response, the right
ventricle uses a homeometric or systolic functional adaptation
(Anrep’
s law of the heart) within minutes of a rise in pulmonary
artery pressure; chronically it implements a heterometric or
dimensional adaptation (Starling’
s law of the heart) to preserve
flow output. Insufficient systolic functional adaptation will limit
cardiac output and ultimately result in systemic hypotension and
cardiogenic shock; dilatation with eventual diastolic dysfunction
causes systemic congestion.
Dyssynchrony, or inhomogeneous regional contraction, occurs
early in the adaptation of the right ventricle to increased systolic
function demands. Asynchrony, or delayed RV systole (i.e. the right
ventricle is still ejecting blood while the left ventricle is already
filling), appears when the right ventricle dilates and the septum
shifts. At this stage, the left ventricle becomes underfilled, with
resultant hypotension and altered systolic ventricular interactions.
Systolic or diastolic ventricular interdependence relates to the
concept that the functioning of the left ventricle affects the
© 2016 The Authors
European Journal of Heart Failure © 2016 European Society of Cardiology
 228
V-P. Harjola et al.
RV pressure
overload 
LV preload
Arrhythmia, 
RV ischaemia,
injury, inflammation
Altered systolic or
diastolic ventricular
interdependence 
RV output
RV volume overload
Tricuspid regurgitation 
Pulmonary regurgitation 
RV dilatation 
Contractility
RV dysfunction
Cardiac Output
Hypotension 
Shock
Coronary perfusion
Oxygen demand 
RV wall tension
Systemic
congestion
Organ dysfunction 
or failure
Right atrial pressure
Central venous pressure 
Figure 1 Pathophysiology of acute right ventricular failure. LV, left ventricular; RV, right ventricular.
Table 1 Causes and differential diagnosis of acute
right ventricular failure
Acute left ventricular failure
Right ventricular ischaemia/infarction
Acute pulmonary embolism
Exacerbation of chronic lung disease and/or hypoxia
Acute lung injury or respiratory distress syndrome
Sepsis
Chronic pulmonary hypertension (groups 1–5)
Pericardial disease (tamponade)
Arrhythmias (supraventricular or ventricular tachycardia)
Congenital heart disease (e.g. atrial or ventricular septal defect,
Ebstein’
s anomaly)
Valvulopathies (e.g. tricuspid valve regurgitation, pulmonary valve
stenosis)
Cardiomyopathies (e.g. arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia,
familial, idiopathic)
Myocarditis or other inflammatory diseases
Cardiac surgery (e.g. cardiac transplant or left ventricular assist
device implantation)
Haematological disorders (e.g. acute chest syndrome in sickle cell
disease)
functioning of the right ventricle and vice versa (Figure 2). The main
anatomical determinants of ventricular interdependence include
the interventricular septum, the pericardium, and the continu-
ity between myocardial fibres of the left and right ventricle.16
Some (up to 40%) of the RV contractile force originates from left
ventricular contraction.17 Moreover, when the right ventricle
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
dilates acutely, the interventricular septum is shifted leftward, both
in systole and diastole as both ventricles ‘
compete’for space within
the pericardium. Notably, this shift occurs only in diastole when
ventricular pressures are low. Septal shift compresses the left ven-
tricle, impairs its filling, and leads to reduced left ventricular con-
tractility (see the Supplementary material online, Cases S1, S2).12,
13
By the same mechanism, acute RV dilatation also leads to increased
pericardial constraint, which in turn decreases the distensibility of
the left ventricle and reduces left ventricular filling (preload), ulti-
mately leading to a drop in stroke volume.1,
13
Consequences of right ventricular failure
The typical dilatation of the right ventricle in response to volume
overload is shown in the Supplementary material online, Case S3.
In the setting of acutely increased afterload, the right ventricle
responds in a similar manner by increasing its end-diastolic volume
and contractility, but RV failure may occur rapidly if these mech-
anisms prove unable to generate sufficient pressure to maintain
flow (e.g. past the thromboembolic obstruction in the case of
acute PE) (see the Supplementary material online, Cases S4, S5).1
In chronically evolving pulmonary hypertension from precapillary
or postcapillary causes, the right ventricle responds to increasing
afterload with progressive hypertrophy, which allows it to maintain
cardiac output at rest over long periods of time. The right ventricle
finally dilates in end-stage disease, leading to tricuspid regurgitation
and, ultimately, decreased cardiac output (see the Supplementary
material online, Cases S1, S2). Acute decompensations of chronic
pulmonary hypertension may lead to a clinical presentation barely
distinguishable from that of ‘
truly’acute RV failure as, for example,
in acute pulmonary embolism.1
© 2016 The Authors
European Journal of Heart Failure © 2016 European Society of Cardiology
 Contemporary management of acute RV failure
229
Figure 2 Ventricular interdependence in right ventricular failure. Dilatation of the right ventricle shifts the interventricular septum toward the
left, changing left ventricular geometry. Acute right ventricular distension may also lead to an increase in pericardial constraint (arrows). These
changes may contribute to low cardiac output state by decreasing left ventricular distensibility, preload, and ventricular elastance. Reprinted
with permission from Haddad F, Doyle R, Murphy DJ, Hunt SA. Right ventricular function in cardiovascular disease, part II: pathophysiology,
clinical importance, and management of right ventricular failure. Circulation 2008;117:1717–1731.
Venous congestion commonly occurs in acute RV failure. Dys-
function leads to impaired RV filling and increased right atrial
pressures.1 As RV dysfunction progresses to overt RV failure, the
RV chamber becomes more spherical and tricuspid regurgitation is
aggravated, leading to progressive venous congestion.15,
18 Venous
congestion and increased central venous pressure also lead to
impairment of renal, intestinal, and hepatic function,19–26 which
are important predictors of poor prognosis in patients with acute
RV failure.22,
23,
26–28
Clinical presentation
and assessment
Initial triage: clinical assessment
and biochemical markers
The clinical presentation of acute RV failure varies depending on
the underlying cause and presence of comorbidities (Table 2).12,
17
The primary goal of pre-hospital and emergency department
triage is to assess the acuity and urgency of the clinical situation.
The aetiology of RV failure should be sought (Table 1), and the
diagnosis or exclusion of causes requiring specific treatment (such
as PE) should be prioritized.
The initial triage is based on clinical history and physical examina-
tion. The electrocardiogram, arterial blood gases, and blood lactate
should also be assessed.29 Examples of typical electrocardiograms
in different clinical settings are shown in the Supplementary ECG
material online.
On hospital admission, focused bedside echocardiography pro-
vides rapid information on cardiac structure and function (see
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
section on Echocardiography). Chest X-ray is routinely obtained
and occasionally yields specific findings.
There are currently no biomarkers specific for RV failure.30
Consequently, the clinical utility of B-type natriuretic peptides
and cardiac troponin testing depends on the clinical context in
which acute RV failure presents. These markers possess high
sensitivity for the early detection of RV failure and myocardial
injury, respectively, in patients with confirmed acute PE;31–34 they
were also associated with poor prognosis in RV failure related to
pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH).22,
35 Novel biomarkers for
detecting acute RV failure are under evaluation.36–39
Echocardiographic assessment
Bedside focused cardiac ultrasound in the emergency department
or intensive/coronary care unit is a first-line test in the assessment
of RV size, function and load.40,
41 It can be used to exclude extrinsic
causes of acute RV failure, especially those needing immediate
treatment (such as pericardial tamponade which mimics acute
RV failure), and to estimate right atrial pressure by assessing the
diameter and the respiratory collapse of the inferior vena cava.
The quantification of pulmonary artery systolic pressure by the
trans-tricuspid pressure gradient is a reliable method compared
with invasive measurements.42 All available views of the right heart,
including apical four-chamber RV-focused (see the Supplementary
material online, Cases S1–S3) and subcostal views, should be used
to estimate accurately RV enlargement, sphericity, and degree of
RV dilation compared with left ventricular dilation.42
The latest advances in ultrasound techniques are shifting from
mostly qualitative assessment of global and segmental RV function
© 2016 The Authors
European Journal of Heart Failure © 2016 European Society of Cardiology
 230
V-P. Harjola et al.
Table 2 Clinical signs and biochemical markers of acute right ventricular (RV) failure
Clinical signs
Biochemical markers
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Hypoxaemia
Increased lactate levels
Signs of systemic congestion
Elevated natriuretic peptides (BNP or NT-proBNP)
Jugular venous distension, hepatojugular reflux
Elevated cardiac troponin I or T
Peripheral oedema, pericardial effusion, congestive
hepato/splenomegaly, ascites, anasarca*
Abnormal liver biochemistry (e.g. elevated transaminases, bilirubin, prolonged
prothrombin time)
Signs of right ventricular dysfunction
Abnormal renal function (blood urea nitrogen, creatinine)
D-dimer levels†
Third heart sound, systolic murmur of tricuspid regurgitation,
hepatic pulse, signs of concomitant left ventricular dysfunction
Paradoxical pulse
Signs of low cardiac output state
Hypotension, tachycardia, cool extremities, central nervous system
abnormalities, oliguria
BNP
, brain natriuretic peptide; NT-proBNP
, N-terminal pro brain natriuretic peptide.
*Particularly in acute decompensation of chronic RV failure.
†D-dimer testing is used in the diagnostic workup of suspected pulmonary embolism.
in the past to quantitative evaluation.43 Recently updated recom-
mendations from the American Society of Echocardiography and
the European Association of Cardiovascular Imaging44 advocate
quantitative assessment of global RV function by at least one of the
following parameters: fractional area change (FAC; Supplementary
material online, Case S2); tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion
(TAPSE; see the Supplementary material online, Cases S2, S3, S6);
Doppler tissue imaging-derived systolic S′ velocity of the tricuspid
annulus (see the Supplementary material online, Cases S2–S4); or
RV index of myocardial performance (RIMP; see the Supplemen-
tary material online, Case S2). In addition to TAPSE and S′ velocity,
RV global and regional longitudinal shortening may be estimated by
strain echocardiography.
Assessment of RV ejection fraction based on two-dimensional
echocardiography is not recommended; experienced and appro-
priately equipped centres employ three-dimensional RV volumes
and ejection faction with considerable accuracy.
Frequently utilized parameters and reference values of RV
dilation, global and segmental function, haemodynamic overload,
and ventricular interdependence are graphically represented in
Figure 3.42,
44 Typical ultrasound features of the most common clini-
cal scenarios are shown in Table 3 and in the Supplementary mate-
rial online, Cases S1–S8.42,
44 A comprehensive, more simple eval-
uation of RV function, which takes into account the effect of tidal
inflation on RV ejection flow of mechanically ventilated patients, has
been proposed in the intensive care unit and is part of advanced
critical care echocardiography.40
Invasive haemodynamic assessment
with pulmonary artery catheter
Invasive haemodynamic assessment is recommended in unex-
plained
diagnostic
or
therapy-resistant
cases;
it
provides
continuous, accurate, and valuable information about right and left
atrial pressure, cardiac output, and pulmonary vascular resistance.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
In general, invasive monitoring should be used for the shortest
possible period.
Clinical management
General overview of managing right
ventricular failure
Effective treatment of RV failure requires a skilled multidisciplinary
team45–47 to rapidly assess and triage the patient to the appropri-
ate environment (Figure 4). The ongoing monitoring varies accord-
ing to the clinical scenario, but its focus is on supporting the
RV, managing the consequences of failure, and alleviating distress-
ing physical (e.g. breathlessness, pain) and emotional (e.g. anxiety)
symptoms (Figure 4, Table 4).
Volume optimization
Patients with RV failure may be preload-dependent, but volume
loading has the potential to overdistend the RV and thereby
increase wall tension, decrease contractility, aggravate tricuspid
regurgitation, increase ventricular interdependence, impair left
ventricular filling, and ultimately reduce systemic cardiac output.48
Cautious volume loading guided by central venous pressure moni-
toring may be appropriate if low arterial pressure is combined with
the absence of elevated filling pressures.
As RV failure is often caused, associated with, or aggravated by
RV volume overload, as mentioned above, diuretics are often the
first option for most patients with RV failure who present with signs
of venous congestion along with maintained arterial blood pres-
sure. Volume redistribution in the venous system under diuretic
treatment can contribute to rapid clinical improvement (Table 4).
Vasopressor and inotrope treatment
Vasopressors and/or inotropes are indicated in acute RV failure
with haemodynamic instability (Table 4). Vasopressors such as
© 2016 The Authors
European Journal of Heart Failure © 2016 European Society of Cardiology
 Contemporary management of acute RV failure
231
Figure 3 Graphic representation of echocardiographic parameters in the assessment of right ventricular failure. Ao, aorta; DTI, Doppler
tissue imaging; EF, ejection fraction; ET, ejection time; FAC, fractional area change; IVC, inferior vena cava; IVCT, isovolumic contraction time;
IVRT, isovolumic relaxation time; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; LVEDD, left ventricular end-diastolic diameter; RA, right atrium; RIMP, right
ventricular index of myocardial performance; RV, right ventricle/ventricular; RVEDD, right ventricular end-diastolic diameter; TAPSE, tricuspid
annular plane systolic excursion; TR, tricuspid regurgitation.
© 2016 The Authors
European Journal of Heart Failure © 2016 European Society of Cardiology
 232
V-P. Harjola et al.
Table 3 Echocardiographic findings in specific clinical settings
Acute pulmonary embolism (Supplementary
material online, Cases S4, S5)
Increased RV/LV end-diastolic diameter ratio
Regional hypokinesia (McConnell’
s sign*)
Systole-diastolic septal shift (D-shaped left ventricle), paradoxical septal motion
Peak systolic velocity of TR jet 2.8–3.5 m/s
Thrombi in proximal pulmonary arteries
Chronic pulmonary hypertension (acute
decompensation)
RV hypertrophy
RV dilation, spherical shape present in advanced stages
Systolic/diastolic septal shift, paradoxical septal motion
Peak systolic velocity of TR jet often >3.5 m/s
RA enlargement (Supplementary material online, Cases S1, S2)
Cardiac tamponade (Supplementary material
online, Case S8)
Moderate to severe diffuse pericardial effusion (can be compartmentalized after surgery)
RA systolic and RV diastolic collapse
LA and LV collapse in case of localized post-surgical tamponade
Reciprocal respiratory changes (>25%) in RV and LV filling registered by pulsed Doppler
method at tricuspid and mitral valves
Normal or slightly elevated PA pressure
RV myocardial infarction (Supplementary
material online, Cases S6, S7)
RV dilation
Global and regional hypokinesia
Abnormal septal motion
Reduced TAPSE
Reduced S′ velocity
Congested IVC despite normal or low systolic RV pressure
Signs of elevated RA and diastolic RV pressure
Cardiomyopathies
DCMP: symmetric pattern of LV and RV dilation and reduced systolic function; pulmonary
artery pressures are elevated in variable degrees
ARVC: RV dilation and systolic dysfunction, small free wall aneurysms, prominent
trabeculation of the right ventricle
Chagas disease: biventricular apical aneurysms
Amyloidosis, restrictive infiltrative cardiomyopathy: increased RV wall thickness, biatrial
dilation
Takotsubo: global or focal RV apical involvement in 50% of patients
RV failure after LVAD implantation
Visually defined significant systolic RV dysfunction
RV dilation
Pronounced septal shift with collapse of LA and LV
Moderate to severe TR
ARVC, arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy; DCMP, dilated cardiomyopathy; IVC, inferior vena cava; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; PA, pulmonary artery; RA,
right atrial; RV, right ventricular; RVEF, right ventricular ejection fraction; TAPSE, tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion; TR, tricuspid regurgitation.
*Akinetic mid RV free wall segment with spared apical contractility.
noradrenaline are primarily indicated to restore blood pres-
sure and improve cerebral, coronary, and other organ perfusion.
Noradrenaline can improve systemic haemodynamics by improve-
ment of ventricular systolic interaction and coronary perfusion
without change in pulmonary vascular resistance.49 Data for vaso-
pressin are lacking in acute RV failure.
Dobutamine, levosimendan and phosphodiesterase III inhibitors
improve contractility and increase cardiac output. Dobutamine
may reduce blood pressure; in that case, a vasopressor, such
as noradrenaline, is recommended. Levosimendan may favourably
affect RV–arterial uncoupling13,
48,
50 by combining RV inotropy
and pulmonary vasodilation. Phosphodiesterase III receptors are
absent in the pulmonary vasculature. Thus, phosphodiesterase III
inhibitors exert a positive inotrope effect on the right ventricle
without the deleterious effects on pulmonary vascular resistance
that occur with catecholamines. Similar to dobutamine, these
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
drugs may aggravate arterial hypotension and should be combined
with noradrenaline if needed. Levosimendan or phosphodiesterase
III inhibitors may be preferentially indicated over dobutamine in
cardiac patients with pulmonary hypertension caused by left heart
disease.
Mechanical circulatory support
Acute mechanical circulatory support of the right ventricle may
be required in certain clinical situations such as RV myocardial
infarction (MI), acute PE, following left ventricular assist device
implantation, or primary graft failure after heart transplantation
(Table 4). The most important determinant of success is the correct
timing of implantation to avoid significant, potentially irreversible
end-organ injury. Multiorgan failure is the leading cause of death in
unsuccessful cases. Early transfer of the patient to an appropriate
© 2016 The Authors
European Journal of Heart Failure © 2016 European Society of Cardiology
 Contemporary management of acute RV failure
233
Haemodynamic monitoring
and support
(ICU or Intermediate Care Unit) 
Step 1 
Consider transfer to hospital with
possibility for ECMO/mechanical
circulatory support 
Identify and treat triggering factor(s): 
• Sepsis, arrhythmias, drug withdrawal  
Ensure cause-specific management: 
• PCI for RV infarction, reperfusion for acute high-risk PE 
Step 2 
Step 3 
Optimize fluid status: 
• IV diuretics if volume overload  
• RRT if situation insufficiently managed with diuretics 
• Cautious fluid filling if low CVP; avoid overfilling 
Step 4 
Maintain arterial pressure: 
• Norepinephrine 
Step 5 
Consider inotropes reducing cardiac filling pressures: 
• Levosimendan
• Dobutamine
• Phosphodiesterase III inhibitors 
Step 6 
Further measures for afterload reduction: 
• Inhaled NO 
• Inhaled prostacyclins 
Assess severity: 
• Clinical evaluation (arterial pressure, mental status, diuresis) 
• Imaging (echocardiography, CT scan) 
• Invasive evaluation (central venous or pulmonary artery catheter) 
• Biochemical evaluation (lactate, liver markers, renal function, BNP, troponins) 
Figure 4 Comprehensive care of patients affected by right ventricular failure. Modified from Sztrymf B et al. Acute right heart failure in
pulmonary hypertension patients. In Gaine S, Naeije R, Peacock A, eds. The Right Heart. Springer Verlag, London, 2013, pages 261–275.
BNP, B-type natriuretic peptide; CT, computed tomography; CVP, central venous pressure; ECMO, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation;
ICU, intensive care unit; IV, intravenous; NO, nitric oxide; PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention; PE, pulmonary embolism; RRT, renal
replacement therapy; RV, right ventricular.
centre is essential for success. Device selection depends on the
anticipated duration of mechanical support.
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) or life support
(ECLS) carries the potential for increasing use as short-term
mechanical support in the future. It is less expensive than other
assist devices and can be inserted quickly, even percutaneously.51
After 5–10 days, a decision should be made to wean the patient
and explant the ECMO, or switch to an intermediate or long-term
device, to avoid typical ECMO complications (e.g. infections or
formation of thrombus around the cannulae, limb hypoperfu-
sion, or local infection). Alternatively, percutaneously inserted
catheter-mounted microaxial pumps can be used, but these devices
may have limited maximum pump capacity.51
Right ventricular assist devices (RVADs) can be implanted either
surgically52 or percutaneously.53 Paracorporeal RVADs can be used
for weeks or even months,54 but they are only approved for up to
4 weeks. These devices can easily be combined with oxygenators
when needed. In rare cases, if RV function is not restored, the
insertion of implantable continuous-flow ventricular assist devices
has been effective in some reports.55
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Retrospective reports have shown good results in terms of
haemodynamic status and functional recovery enabling RVAD
explantation in 42–75% of patients.56,
57 Bleeding or thrombus for-
mation are the most common complication related to RVADs.58
Poor left ventricular function usually predicts worse outcomes as
isolated RVAD support under these circumstances is insufficient to
improve systemic perfusion.56
Despite case reports of prolonged RV support with an assist
device intended for destination therapy,59 options for long-term
mechanical circulatory support have been lacking. Thus, cardiac
transplant remains the ultimate treatment for refractory RV failure.
Clinical management in specific clinical
scenarios
Pulmonary embolism
Acute PE is one of the most frequent causes of acute RV failure
(see the Supplementary material online, Cases 4, 5). Conversely,
RV failure is the principal determinant of early mortality in the
acute phase of PE. Accordingly, and as emphasized in the recently
© 2016 The Authors
European Journal of Heart Failure © 2016 European Society of Cardiology
 234
V-P. Harjola et al.
Table 4 Overview of acute right ventricular (RV) failure treatment
Strategy
Properties and use
Caveats
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Volume optimization
Volume loading, saline or
ringer lactate,
>200 mL/15–30 min29
Consider in patients with decompensated RV failure,
normal central venous pressure, low arterial
pressure
Volume loading can overdistend the ventricles, worsen
ventricular interdependence, and reduce cardiac
output
Diuretics
In patients not receiving oral
diuretics the initial dose
should be 20–40 mg iv; for
those on chronic diuretic
therapy, initial dose of
furosemide should be at
least equivalent to the oral
dose
Intravenous loop diuretics are recommended for all
patients admitted with signs/symptoms of fluid
overload to improve symptoms
Can be given either as intermittent boli or continuous
infusion
Combination of loop-diuretic with either thiazide-type
diuretic or spironolactone may be considered in
patients with resistant oedema or insufficient
symptomatic response
May cause worsening renal function and hypokalaemia
Vasopressors and
inotropes
Noradrenaline,
0.2–1.0 μg/kg.min30
Increases RV inotropy, systemic blood pressure,
promotes positive ventricular interactions, restores
coronary perfusion gradient
Excessive vasoconstriction may worsen tissue perfusion
Dobutamine,
2–20 μg/kg.min30
Increases RV inotropy, lowers filling pressures
May aggravate arterial hypotension if used alone,
without a vasopressor, especially if left heart failure
present
May trigger or aggravate arrhythmias
Levosimendan,
0.1–0.2 μg/kg.min
(6–12 μg/kg bolus over
10 min is optional and not
recommended if SBP
<90 mmHg). Infusion can
be decreased to
0.05 μg/kg.min or increased
to 0.2 μg/kg.min)30
Combines RV inotropy and pulmonary vasodilation;
favourably affects right ventricular–arterial
uncoupling
May aggravate arterial hypotension
May trigger or aggravate arrhythmias
Mechanical circulatory
support
ECMO/ECLS
Short-term support, rapid; oxygenator can be added
Complications with use over longer periods
(>5–10 days)
Percutaneous catheter
mounted micro-axial
pumps
Limited pump capacity; ECLS preferred in severe
cardiogenic shock or where high pump flow required
Paracorporeal RVADs
Appropriate for longer term use (e.g. weeks or
months); can be combined with oxygenators when
pulmonary support also needed
ECLS, extracorporeal life support; ECMO, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; RVAD, right ventricular assist device; SBP
, systolic blood pressure.
updated (2014) ESC Guidelines on the Diagnosis and Management
of Acute Pulmonary Embolism,60 early detection of clinical, imaging
(echocardiographic, computed tomographic), and/or laboratory
(e.g. natriuretic peptides, cardiac troponins) indicators of RV dys-
function and myocardial injury is the cornerstone of a successful
risk-adjusted therapeutic approach to PE. Based on the contempo-
rary risk classification, ‘
high risk’(formerly ‘
massive’
) PE is defined
by persistent arterial hypotension or shock caused by overt RV
failure, while ‘
intermediate risk’identifies normotensive patients
with a high clinical prognostic score (such as the Pulmonary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Embolism Severity Index) accompanied by imaging or biochemical
markers of RV dysfunction, alone (i.e. ‘
intermediate-low risk’
) or
in combination (i.e. ‘
intermediate-high risk’
).60
Reperfusion treatment, mainly systemic (intravenous) throm-
bolysis, is recommended for patients who present with high-risk
PE; in contrast, the haemorrhagic risks of thrombolysis appear to
outweigh its clinical benefits in patients who are haemodynami-
cally stable at presentation.61 Among these latter normotensive
patients, those with ‘
intermediate–high-risk’PE should be clini-
cally and haemodynamically monitored over the first 2–3 days, as
© 2016 The Authors
European Journal of Heart Failure © 2016 European Society of Cardiology
 Contemporary management of acute RV failure
235
rescue thrombolysis may be necessary if RV dysfunction leads to
haemodynamic decompensation.
Surgical pulmonary embolectomy is an alternative option for
haemodynamically unstable patients with high-risk PE, particu-
larly if thrombolysis is contraindicated or has failed. It may also
be considered as a rescue procedure in intermediate high-risk
patients in whom haemodynamic decompensation appears immi-
nent and the anticipated bleeding risk under systemic fibrinol-
ysis is high.60 Catheter-directed techniques for the removal of
obstructing thrombi from the main pulmonary arteries have been
available for several years. ‘
Purely interventional’ options such
as thrombus fragmentation with pigtail or balloon catheter, rhe-
olytic thrombectomy with hydrodynamic catheter devices, suction
thrombectomy with aspiration catheters and rotational thrombec-
tomy have been reserved for patients with absolute contraindi-
cations for fibrinolysis. When ‘
high-risk’patients, or occasionally
‘
intermediate-high-risk’patients with signs of developing haemody-
namic decompensation, have relative contraindications for fibrinol-
ysis and an increased bleeding risk, conventional catheter-directed
fibrinolysis through a multi-sidehole catheter placed into the
thrombus, or pharmaco-mechanical fibrinolysis, are preferred
approaches.62
Pulmonary hypertension
Right ventricular function is the major determinant of morbid-
ity and mortality in the pulmonary hypertension population, and
signs of RV failure frequently dominate the clinical presentation
of patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension (Group 1) or
chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (Group 4; Sup-
plementary material online, Cases S1, S2). Pulmonary hyperten-
sion secondary to chronic (left) heart (Group 2; Supplementary
material online, Case S6) or lung (Group 3) disease may also
exhibit signs and symptoms of RV failure, but they usually present
with clinical features of the underlying cardiac or pulmonary
disease.
Patients with previously unknown PAH are occasionally seen
for the first time in the emergency department. If a patient
with PAH is seen on an emergency basis, echocardiography
is extremely important to assess the current status of RV
function.63,
64 A central venous catheter allows for monitoring
of SvO2 and central venous pressure in response to therapy.
Continuous and complete haemodynamic assessment might
require the placement of a pulmonary artery catheter, but the
expected benefits for patient management should be weighed
against the risk of complications, including complications with
vein access, life-threatening arrhythmias as well as infections and
thrombosis.65
Possible triggers for acute RV failure in patients with PAH should
be identified.48,
66–68 The most frequent cause is an infection, and
sepsis increases mortality significantly.67 Supraventricular arrhyth-
mias are common,69 and may require electrical cardioversion.
Anaemia is also common and may need correction. In particu-
lar, iron deficiency should trigger a search for potential reasons,
and iron replacement should be considered; oral iron absorp-
tion may be impaired in patients with PAH, therefore, intravenous
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
administration may be preferable.70 However, the threshold may
differ according to the clinical situation (e.g., right to left shunting,
Eisenmenger syndrome, cyanosis) and there are no studies to
determine the optimal value for haemoglobin or haematocrit in
patients with RV failure. Finally, non-adherence to or withdrawal
from pulmonary hypertension treatment is another major cause of
decompensation.
Hypoxia and hypercapnia, as well as acidosis and hypother-
mia, promote pulmonary vasoconstriction and further increase the
afterload of the right ventricle. Oxygen therapy should be used to
keep an arterial oxygen saturation >90%. Non-invasive ventilation
may be indicated in patients with respiratory failure and hypercap-
nia who do not respond to general measures; this may particularly
apply to those with pulmonary hypertension caused by left heart
disease. Positive pressure ventilation should generally be avoided
because it increases RV afterload and further decreases LV preload.
In addition, intubation requires sedation that may lead to systemic
hypotension.71
Diuretics should be the first option for most patients with PAH
who present with signs of venous and systemic congestion. Renal
replacement therapy may be needed in patients with diuretic resis-
tance, but it is associated with a dismal prognosis.72 Fluid status
should be closely monitored by cardiac ultrasound and, if com-
prehensive haemodynamic monitoring is necessary, by pulmonary
artery catheter.
Intravenous
prostacyclin
analogues
effectively
reduce
RV
afterload, although care must be taken to avoid systemic
hypotension.48,
66–68 Epoprostenol is the only PAH-specific drug
that has been shown to improve survival in World Health Orga-
nization (WHO) functional class IV PAH patients.73 Inhaled nitric
oxide60 or prostacyclin70 may be used in patients who do not
tolerate parenteral prostanoids because of hypotension. Nitric
oxide is frequently used in post cardiac surgery patients. It seems
especially promising in patients having right ventricular failure after
orthotopic heart transplant.74–76
Balloon atrio-septostomy decompresses the right ventricle and,
in very specific cases, improves left ventricular filling and cardiac
output. It may also improve systemic O2 transport despite arte-
rial O2 desaturation. This is a high-risk technique and it is not
recommended as an emergency procedure because the risk of
fatal complications is high in unstable patients with high RV filling
pressures (right atrial pressure >20 mmHg) or low arterial oxygen
saturation (<85% at rest on room air).70,
77 In unresponsive patients
ECMO or RVADs may be necessary as a bridge to recovery or to
lung transplant.
Right ventricular infarction
Acute RV infarction usually occurs in relation to acute inferior
wall MI caused by occlusion of the proximal right coronary artery
(see the Supplementary material online, Cases S6, S7).78 It is
an independent, strongly age-dependent predictor of short-term
mortality in patients with inferior MI.79,
80
The anatomic occlusion of the infarct-related artery and func-
tional impairment of the right ventricle are poorly correlated.
The right ventricle tolerates ischaemic injury better than the left
© 2016 The Authors
European Journal of Heart Failure © 2016 European Society of Cardiology
 236
V-P. Harjola et al.
ventricle because it has a lower oxygen demand, greater oxygen
extraction reserve capability during stress, dual anatomical sup-
ply from the right and left coronary arteries, relatively homoge-
neous transmural perfusion across the cardiac cycle, and increased
propensity to acute collateral development.81,
82
Although between 30% and 50% of patients with acute inferior
wall MI may have some degree of RV involvement, severe hypoten-
sion and low cardiac output are uncommon complications in the
reperfusion era.80 Complications such as bradycardia, high-grade
atrioventricular (AV) block, ventricular tachycardia, and rupture of
the interventricular septum are more frequent in patients with RV
infarction.80,
83,
84
Treatment of RV infarction includes early myocardial reperfusion,
preferably with primary percutaneous coronary intervention or,
alternatively, with thrombolysis.79,
85–88 Complete reperfusion of
the proximal right coronary artery and the major RV branches
may lead to immediate improvement and later complete recovery
of RV function and to a better clinical outcome. Unlike the left
ventricle, the right ventricle may remain viable for days after
an infarct.89 Therefore, late reperfusion is an option that may
be considered in patients with inferior MI complicated by RV
dysfunction.90–92
Treatments compromising RV preload (i.e. nitrates, diuretics)
may be deleterious and volume optimization must be done carefully
in order to prevent haemodynamic compromise. In non-responsive
patients, inotropic support should be used. In these cases, main-
tenance of the contribution of the atrial kick to maintain cardiac
output is also essential.
Avoidance or correction of bradycardia by atropine or amino-
phylline may become necessary.93 High-grade AV block usually
responds immediately to reperfusion. If it does not, pacing, ideally
with AV sequential pacing, may be needed.94,
95 Reversion of acute
atrial fibrillation also improves haemodynamics.
Cardiogenic shock is the most severe form of acute MI and acute
RV failure as the primary cause of cardiogenic shock has been
reported in 16% of cases in a recent registry.96 Despite younger
age, less multivessel disease, and better left ventricular ejection
fraction, prognosis is no different in cardiogenic shock patients with
or without acute RV failure.97
Tamponade
Cardiac tamponade is a clinical syndrome that mimics acute RV
failure, and it should be included in the differential diagnosis. It
is caused by rapid accumulation of fluid (transudate), pus, blood,
clots, or gas within the pericardial space that compresses the heart,
resulting in impaired diastolic filling and reduced cardiac output.98
The classical clinical picture includes distended jugular veins, an
exaggerated inspiratory decrease in arterial systolic pressure (para-
doxical pulse), arterial hypotension, and diminished heart sounds
on cardiac auscultation. These signs may be lacking in patients with
slowly accumulating pericardial fluid. Moreover, typical clinical man-
ifestations maybe absent in the case of localized tamponade after
cardiac surgery.
Acute cardiac tamponade is usually associated with low blood
pressure (<90 mmHg), but blood pressure is only slightly reduced
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
in subacute, chronic tamponade. Hypertensive patients may have
normal to mildly elevated blood pressure concomitant with cardiac
tamponade. Fever is a non-specific sign that may be associated
with infectious or immune-mediated pericarditis.
Cardiac tamponade is primarily a clinical diagnosis, and it should
be confirmed non-invasively by bedside echocardiography (see the
Supplementary material online, Case S8).99 Differential diagnosis
may include acute MI (especially with RV involvement), PE, and
aortic dissection in acute-onset cases. In patients with a subacute
onset of symptoms, the differential diagnosis should exclude con-
strictive pericarditis (see the Supplementary material online, Case
S8), congestive heart failure, and advanced liver disease with cir-
rhosis. Volume resuscitation can be deleterious, except in case of
associated hypovolaemia. A vasopressor may be needed to correct
blood pressure before urgent percutaneous or surgical pericardial
drainage.100
Acute right ventricular failure in the intensive care
setting
Acute RV failure is frequently encountered in the intensive care
unit.101,
102 The main cause is ARDS, with a reported incidence
of RV failure ranging from 25% to 50% depending on severity
and mechanical ventilation settings.101,
103,
104 Most ARDS patients
are under positive pressure ventilation. This can contribute to an
uncoupling between the pulmonary circulation and the RV, pre-
disposing to an inability to sustain sufficient blood flow, especially
if myocardial contraction is also impaired. Infection as the cause
of lung injury, plateau pressure, driving pressure, and significant
hypercapnia are reported predictors of RV failure in ARDS.102,
105
Acute RV failure is easily detected by echocardiography,106 and
transoesophageal imaging can be used for monitoring in intu-
bated patients.101 A protective ventilation strategy with focus on
maintaining plateau pressure <27 cmH2O, partial pressure of arte-
rial carbon dioxide (PaCO2) <8 kPa (60 mmHg), adapting positive
end-expiratory pressure to RV function, and considering prone
positioning for PaO2/fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) <20 kPa
(150 mmHg) has been recommended to prevent acute RV failure or
ameliorate its complications.101 How this strategy may alter prog-
nosis remains to be evaluated.
Valvular disease
Acute RV dysfunction may be seen in both left-sided and right-sided
valvular heart disease. Central venous pressure may be insuffi-
cient to maintain pulmonary arterial flow in the setting of elevated
left atrial filling pressure that occurs with left-sided valvular dis-
eases, resulting in RV failure. Right-sided valvular diseases have
a significant and independent impact on morbidity and mortality.
Tricuspid regurgitation is the most frequent right-sided valvular dis-
ease involved in pathogenesis of acute RV dysfunction. With func-
tional tricuspid regurgitation being the most common cause, this
valvular disorder produces adverse haemodynamic consequences
on RV function as result of volume overload and RV enlarge-
ment. An enlarged right ventricle is associated with increased
mortality,107 and the severity of tricuspid regurgitation correlates
© 2016 The Authors
European Journal of Heart Failure © 2016 European Society of Cardiology
 Contemporary management of acute RV failure
237
with worse survival.108 Furthermore, moderate or greater tricus-
pid regurgitation is associated with a worse prognosis, even in the
absence of ventricular dysfunction or pulmonary hypertension.108
Right-sided infective endocarditis accounts for 5–10% of all
cases of infective endocarditis.109,
110 It is the most prevalent
in intravenous drug abusers. Right-sided endocarditis may occur
on native valves, prosthetic valves, congenital heart defects, and
on implanted devices.111 Acute RV dysfunction may arise as a
consequence of tricuspid valve destruction and severe tricuspid
regurgitation with RV volume overload and dilatation. Surgery is
recommended for patients with right heart failure, severe tricuspid
regurgitation and a poor response to diuretics, difficult to eradicate
infective endocarditis, large vegetations, and recurrent emboli.112
Surgery
In non-cardiac surgery, perioperative RV failure is most often,
although not exclusively, secondary to acute pulmonary hyper-
tension (increased afterload). In cardiac surgery, RV failure is
also frequently caused by volume overload, myocardial ischaemia,
pre-existing RV dysfunction, or arrhythmias.16,
113 Right ventricu-
lar failure in the setting of adult congenital heart disease can be
observed in either cardiac or non-cardiac surgery.
Cardiac surgery should be planned anticipating RV failure, and RV
function management should focus on prevention. Delayed coro-
nary artery bypass graft surgery may be considered for stable
patients with predominant RV involvement because poor RV func-
tion worsens prognosis, but the integrity of blood supply to the
RV should be restored in patients with RV dysfunction and con-
current ischaemia.114,
115 Patients at risk of acute postoperative
RV failure such as those with previous pulmonary hypertension,
RV dysfunction, severe left ventricular dysfunction, and those with
planned long cardiopulmonary bypass periods, should be managed
by specialized multidisciplinary teams ensuring optimized contin-
ued medical and surgical care.
Right ventricular function can be jeopardized by several intra-
operative factors, such as suboptimal myocardial protection,
myocardial stunning after long durations on cardiopulmonary
bypass, air or thromboembolism to the right coronary artery,
and mechanical occlusion or kinking of the right coronary button
or bypass graft. Combined anterograde and retrograde cardio-
plegia provide superior RV myocardial protection.116 Avoiding
cardiopulmonary bypass may theoretically improve RV myocardial
protection, although no differences were observed in long-term
follow-up.117 Liberal transfusion strategies should be avoided to
prevent increased RV load and negative outcomes.118 Maintenance
of right atrial contraction and AV synchrony was experimentally
shown to be crucial preventing deterioration in RV failure.119
Although LVAD ultimately improves RV function, transient dis-
turbances in loading and geometry lead to RV failure that may
compromise late outcomes. In addition to demographic and clinical
parameters (female sex, low body surface area, renal dysfunction),
preoperative echocardiographic findings (two-dimensional RV
global longitudinal strain <9.6%; three-dimensional RV ejection
fraction <20%) have been proposed to assess the risk of RV failure
and the potential benefit of planned use of biventricular assist
devices, but accurate prediction remains challenging.120–122
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Occasionally, patients may not tolerate sternal closure after
cardiac surgery; delayed sternal closure for 24 h or more may
reduce oedema and extrinsic RV compression.123
Conclusions
Acute RV failure is a complex clinical scenario and its appropri-
ate management requires an understanding of RV anatomy and
mechanics, rapid identification and treatment of underlying causes,
and knowledge of supportive treatment measures. Many uncertain-
ties remain, and there is a need for randomized trials to investigate
the efficacy and safety of pharmacological and mechanical interven-
tions for the treatment of acute RV failure.
Supplementary Information
Additional Supporting Information may be found in the online
version of this article:
Appendix S1. Examples of ECG and echocardiography findings in
clinical cases. Supplementary ECGs for cases 1–5 and 7.
Case S1. Chronic pulmonary hypertension.
Case S2. Chronic pulmonary thromboembolic disease.
Case S3. Volume overload of right chambers in a case of ASD.
Case S4. Acute pulmonary embolism.
Case S5. Acute pulmonary embolism in patient after ASD repair.
Case S6. Ischaemic cardiomyopathy, old RV MI.
Case S7. First 72 h of acute RV MI with cardiogenic shock.
Case S8. Cardiac tamponade.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the Heart Failure Association of the
European Society of Cardiology for organizing the meeting during
which this topic was discussed. The work of S.K. was supported
by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF
01EO1003). The author is responsible for the contents of this pub-
lication. The work of J. ˇ
C. was supported by the grant MIP-049/2015
from the Research Council of Lithuania. The authors acknowledge
Wendy Gattis Stough (Campbell University College of Pharmacy
and Health Sciences), supported by the Heart Failure Association
of the European Society of Cardiology for contributions to content
development, writing, and editing the manuscript.
Funding
No funding was received for this paper.
Conflict of interest: V-P.H. has received speaker fees and has
research contracts with Novartis, Orion Pharma, and Servier. A.M.
has received personal fees from Novartis, Orion, Roche, Servier,
ZS Pharma, Cardiorentis (Steering Committee), Adrenomed
(Steering Committee), a research grant from Adrenomed, MyCar-
tis (Steering Committee), and Critical Diagnostics. J. ˇ
C. has received
speaker and investigator fees from Servier, Amgen Inc., Bayer, and
Berlin-Chemie AG. H.B. has received personal fees from Novartis,
BMS-Pfizer, Servier, AstraZeneca, Eli Lilly, Daichii-Sankyo, Menarini,
© 2016 The Authors
European Journal of Heart Failure © 2016 European Society of Cardiology
 238
V-P. Harjola et al.
Bayer, and Sanofi, Ferrer, and a research grant from AstraZeneca.
O.C. is a steering committee member for Novartis clinical trial.
V.F. has received institutional research grants from HeartWare and
Berlin Heart, speaker fees to institution from Edwards and St Jude,
and is a principal investigator of Respond Trial (Boston Scientific).
C.M. has received research grants and personal fees from several
diagnostic and therapeutic companies. S.G. has received personal
fees from Actelion, Bayer, Gilead, GSK, Novartis, and Pfizer. A.V.N.
has received personal fees from GlaxoSmithKline and speaker fees
from Actelion. J.P. has received honoraria from Orion Pharma,
Novartis, and Servier. A.R. has received personal fees from Roche
Diagnostics (advisory board), Merck Serono (advisory board),
Astra Zeneca, Servier, Krka, Berlin Chemie-Menarini, Boehringer
Ingelheim (advisory board), Genzyme, Sanofi Aventis, Hemofarm
AD, and Pfizer and a research grant from Ministry of Science
of the Republic of Serbia. A.R. has received personal fees from
Novartis, AOP Pharma AG, and Baxter (honoraria for lectures
and expert meetings). M.B.Y. has received investigator fees from
Cardiorentis, Novartis, Amgen, and Bayer. S.K has received has
received speaker fees and advisory board honoraria by Bayer
HealthCare, Boehringer Ingelheim, Pfizer – Bristol-Myers Squibb,
and Daiichi Sankyo.
D.B. A.L-M., J.L., J.M.,W.M., R.N., J.R., G.R., P.S., B.S., A.V-B., G.F.
and F.R. have nothing to disclose.
References
1. Haddad F, Doyle R, Murphy DJ, Hunt SA. Right ventricular function in cardio-
vascular disease, part II: pathophysiology, clinical importance, and management
of right ventricular failure. Circulation 2008;117:1717–1731.
2. Vonk-Noordegraaf A, Haddad F, Chin KM, Forfia PR, Kawut SM, Lumens J,
Naeije R, Newman J, Oudiz RJ, Provencher S, Torbicki A, Voelkel NF, Hassoun
PM. Right heart adaptation to pulmonary arterial hypertension: physiology and
pathobiology. J Am Coll Cardiol 2013;62:D22–D33.
3. Moran AE, Forouzanfar MH, Roth GA, Mensah GA, Ezzati M, Flaxman A, Murray
CJ, Naghavi M. The global burden of ischemic heart disease in 1990 and 2010:
the Global Burden of Disease 2010 study. Circulation 2014;129:1493–1501.
4. Belohlavek J, Dytrych V, Linhart A. Pulmonary embolism, part I: Epidemiology,
risk factors and risk stratification, pathophysiology, clinical presentation, diagno-
sis and nonthrombotic pulmonary embolism. Exp Clin Cardiol 2013;18:129–138.
5. Kinch
JW,
Ryan
TJ.
Right
ventricular
infarction.
N
Engl
J
Med
1994;330:1211–1217.
6. Chioncel O, Vinereanu D, Datcu M, Ionescu D, Capalneanu R, Brukner I,
Dorobantu M, Ambrosy A, Macarie C, Gheorghiade M. The Romanian Acute
Heart Failure Syndromes (RO-AHFS) registry. Am Heart J 2011;162:142–153.
7. Logeart D, Isnard R, Resche-Rigon M, Seronde M, de Groote P, Jondeau G,
Galinier M, Mulak G, Donal E, Delahaye F, Juilliere Y, Damy T, Jourdain P,
Bauer F, Eicher J, Neuder Y, Trochu J. Current aspects of the spectrum of acute
heart failure syndromes in a real-life setting: the OFICA study. Eur J Heart Fail
2013;15:465–476.
8. Maggioni AP, Dahlstrom U, Filippatos G, Chioncel O, Leiro MC, Drozdz J,
Fruhwald F, Gullestad L, Logeart D, Metra M, Parissis J, Persson H, Ponikowski
P, Rauchhaus M, Voors A, Nielsen OW, Zannad F, Tavazzi L. EURObservational
Research Programme: the Heart Failure Pilot Survey (ESC-HF Pilot). Eur J Heart
Fail 2010;12:1076–1084.
9. Nieminen MS, Brutsaert D, Dickstein K, Drexler H, Follath F, Harjola VP,
Hochadel M, Komajda M, Lassus J, Lopez-Sendon JL, Ponikowski P, Tavazzi L.
EuroHeart Failure Survey II (EHFS II): a survey on hospitalized acute heart failure
patients: description of population. Eur Heart J 2006;27:2725–2736.
10. Spinar J, Parenica J, Vitovec J, Widimsky P, Linhart A, Fedorco M, Malek F,
Cihalik C, Spinarova L, Miklik R, Felsoci M, Bambuch M, Dusek L, Jarkovsky
J. Baseline characteristics and hospital mortality in the Acute Heart Failure
Database (AHEAD) Main registry. Crit Care 2011;15:R291.
11. Voelkel NF, Quaife RA, Leinwand LA, Barst RJ, McGoon MD, Meldrum DR,
Dupuis J, Long CS, Rubin LJ, Smart FW, Suzuki YJ, Gladwin M, Denholm EM,
Gail DB. Right ventricular function and failure: report of a National Heart, Lung,
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
and Blood Institute working group on cellular and molecular mechanisms of right
heart failure. Circulation 2006;114:1883–1891.
12. Haddad F, Hunt SA, Rosenthal DN, Murphy DJ. Right ventricular function
in cardiovascular disease, part I: anatomy, physiology, aging, and functional
assessment of the right ventricle. Circulation 2008;117:1436–1448.
13. Naeije R, Brimioulle S, Dewachter L. Biomechanics of the right ventricle
in health and disease (2013 Grover Conference series). Pulm Circ 2014;4:
395–406.
14. Voelkel NF, Gomez-Arroyo J, Abbate A, Bogaard HJ. Mechanisms of right
heart failure—a work in progress and a plea for failure prevention. Pulm Circ
2013;3:137–143.
15. Berlin DA, Bakker J. Understanding venous return. Intensive Care Med
2014;40:1564–1566.
16. Haddad F, Couture P, Tousignant C, Denault AY. The right ventricle in cardiac
surgery, a perioperative perspective: I. Anatomy, physiology, and assessment.
Anesth Analg 2009;108:407–421.
17. Markel TA, Wairiuko GM, Lahm T, Crisostomo PR, Wang M, Herring CM,
Meldrum DR. The right heart and its distinct mechanisms of development,
function, and failure. J Surg Res 2008;146:304–313.
18. Walker LA, Buttrick PM. The right ventricle: biologic insights and response to
disease: updated. Curr Cardiol Rev 2013;9:73–81.
19. Damman K, van Deursen VM, Navis G, Voors AA, van Veldhuisen DJ, Hillege
HL. Increased central venous pressure is associated with impaired renal function
and mortality in a broad spectrum of patients with cardiovascular disease. J Am
Coll Cardiol 2009;53:582–588.
20. Mullens W, Abrahams Z, Francis GS, Sokos G, Taylor DO, Starling RC,
Young JB, Tang WH. Importance of venous congestion for worsening of renal
function in advanced decompensated heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol 2009;53:
589–596.
21. Damman K, Navis G, Smilde TD, Voors AA, van der Bij W, van Veldhuisen DJ,
Hillege HL. Decreased cardiac output, venous congestion and the association
with renal impairment in patients with cardiac dysfunction. Eur J Heart Fail
2007;9:872–878.
22. Sztrymf B, Souza R, Bertoletti L, Jais X, Sitbon O, Price LC, Simonneau G,
Humbert M. Prognostic factors of acute heart failure in patients with pulmonary
arterial hypertension. Eur Respir J 2010;35:1286–1293.
23. Abe S, Yoshihisa A, Takiguchi M, Shimizu T, Nakamura Y, Yamauchi H, Iwaya
S, Owada T, Miyata M, Sato T, Suzuki S, Oikawa M, Kobayashi A, Yamaki
T, Sugimoto K, Kunii H, Nakazato K, Suzuki H, Saitoh S, Takeishi Y. Liver
dysfunction assessed by model for end-stage liver disease excluding INR
(MELD-XI) scoring system predicts adverse prognosis in heart failure. PLoS One
2014;9:e100618.
24. Lau GT, Tan HC, Kritharides L. Type of liver dysfunction in heart fail-
ure and its relation to the severity of tricuspid regurgitation. Am J Cardiol
2002;90:1405–1409.
25. Megalla S, Holtzman D, Aronow WS, Nazari R, Korenfeld S, Schwarcz A,
Goldberg Y, Spevack DM. Predictors of cardiac hepatopathy in patients with
right heart failure. Med Sci Monit 2011;17:CR537–CR541.
26. van Deursen VM, Damman K, Hillege HL, van Beek AP, van Veldhuisen DJ, Voors
AA. Abnormal liver function in relation to hemodynamic profile in heart failure
patients. J Card Fail 2010;16:84–90.
27. Haddad F, Peterson T, Fuh E, Kudelko KT, de JP, V, Skhiri M, Vagelos R,
Schnittger I, Denault AY, Rosenthal DN, Doyle RL, Zamanian RT. Character-
istics and outcome after hospitalization for acute right heart failure in patients
with pulmonary arterial hypertension. Circ Heart Fail 2011;4:692–699.
28. Verbrugge FH, Dupont M, Steels P, Grieten L, Malbrain M, Tang WH, Mullens W.
Abdominal contributions to cardiorenal dysfunction in congestive heart failure.
J Am Coll Cardiol 2013;62:485–495.
29. Mebazaa A, Yilmaz MB, Levy P, Ponikowski P, Peacock WF, Laribi S, Ristic AD,
Lambrinou E, Masip J, Riley JP, McDonagh T, Mueller C, deFilippi C, Harjola VP,
Thiele H, Piepoli MF, Metra M, Maggioni A, McMurray J, Dickstein K, Damman K,
Seferovic PM, Ruschitzka F, Leite-Moreira AF, Bellou A, Anker SD, Filippatos G.
Recommendations on pre-hospital & early hospital management of acute heart
failure: a consensus paper from the Heart Failure Association of the European
Society of Cardiology, the European Society of Emergency Medicine and the
Society of Academic Emergency Medicine. Eur J Heart Fail 2015;17:544–558.
30. McMurray JJ, Adamopoulos S, Anker SD, Auricchio A, Bohm M, Dickstein K, Falk
V, Filippatos G, Fonseca C, Gomez-Sanchez MA, Jaarsma T, Kober L, Lip GY,
Maggioni AP, Parkhomenko A, Pieske BM, Popescu BA, Ronnevik PK, Rutten FH,
Schwitter J, Seferovic P, Stepinska J, Trindade PT, Voors AA, Zannad F, Zeiher A,
Bax JJ, Baumgartner H, Ceconi C, Dean V, Deaton C, Fagard R, Funck-Brentano
C, Hasdai D, Hoes A, Kirchhof P, Knuuti J, Kolh P, McDonagh T, Moulin C,
Popescu BA, Reiner Z, Sechtem U, Sirnes PA, Tendera M, Torbicki A, Vahanian
A, Windecker S, McDonagh T, Sechtem U, Bonet LA, Avraamides P, Ben Lamin
© 2016 The Authors
European Journal of Heart Failure © 2016 European Society of Cardiology
 Contemporary management of acute RV failure
239
HA, Brignole M, Coca A, Cowburn P, Dargie H, Elliott P, Flachskampf FA, Guida
GF, Hardman S, Iung B, Merkely B, Mueller C, Nanas JN, Nielsen OW, Orn S,
Parissis JT, Ponikowski P. ESC guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of
acute and chronic heart failure 2012: The Task Force for the Diagnosis and
Treatment of Acute and Chronic Heart Failure 2012 of the European Society
of Cardiology. Developed in collaboration with the Heart Failure Association
(HFA) of the ESC. Eur J Heart Fail 2012;14:803–869.
31. Maisel A, Mueller C, Adams K Jr, Anker SD, Aspromonte N, Cleland JG,
Cohen-Solal A, Dahlstrom U, DeMaria A, Di SS, Filippatos GS, Fonarow GC,
Jourdain P, Komajda M, Liu PP, McDonagh T, McDonald K, Mebazaa A, Nieminen
MS, Peacock WF, Tubaro M, Valle R, Vanderhyden M, Yancy CW, Zannad F,
Braunwald E. State of the art: using natriuretic peptide levels in clinical practice.
Eur J Heart Fail 2008;10:824–839.
32. Januzzi JL Jr, Filippatos G, Nieminen M, Gheorghiade M. Troponin elevation
in patients with heart failure: on behalf of the third Universal Definition of
Myocardial Infarction Global Task Force: Heart Failure Section. Eur Heart J
2012;33:2265–2271.
33. Lankeit M, Jimenez D, Kostrubiec M, Dellas C, Hasenfuss G, Pruszczyk P,
Konstantinides S. Predictive value of the high-sensitivity troponin T assay
and the simplified Pulmonary Embolism Severity Index in hemodynamically
stable patients with acute pulmonary embolism: a prospective validation study.
Circulation 2011;124:2716–2724.
34. Lankeit M, Friesen D, Aschoff J, Dellas C, Hasenfuss G, Katus H, Konstantinides
S, Giannitsis E. Highly sensitive troponin T assay in normotensive patients with
acute pulmonary embolism. Eur Heart J 2010;31:1836–1844.
35. Kurzyna M, Zylkowska J, Fijalkowska A, Florczyk M, Wieteska M, Kacprzak A,
Burakowski J, Szturmowicz M, Wawrzynska L, Torbicki A. Characteristics and
prognosis of patients with decompensated right ventricular failure during the
course of pulmonary hypertension. Kardiol Pol 2008;66:1033–1039.
36. Puls M, Dellas C, Lankeit M, Olschewski M, Binder L, Geibel A, Reiner C, Schafer
K, Hasenfuss G, Konstantinides S. Heart-type fatty acid-binding protein permits
early risk stratification of pulmonary embolism. Eur Heart J 2007;28:224–229.
37. Naito A, Tanabe N, Jujo T, Shigeta A, Sugiura T, Sakao S, Ishida K, Tatsumi
K. Pentraxin3 in chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension: a new
biomarker for screening from remitted pulmonary thromboembolism. PLoS One
2014;9:e113086.
38. Breidthardt T, Vanpoucke G, Potocki M, Mosimann T, Ziller R, Thomas G, Laroy
W, Moerman P, Socrates T, Drexler B, Mebazaa A, Kas K, Mueller C. The novel
marker LTBP2 predicts all-cause and pulmonary death in patients with acute
dyspnoea. Clin Sci (Lond) 2012;123:557–566.
39. Lankeit M, Kempf T, Dellas C, Cuny M, Tapken H, Peter T, Olschewski M,
Konstantinides S, Wollert KC. Growth differentiation factor-15 for prognostic
assessment of patients with acute pulmonary embolism. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med 2008;177:1018–1025.
40. Mayo PH, Beaulieu Y, Doelken P, Feller-Kopman D, Harrod C, Kaplan A,
Oropello J, Vieillard-Baron A, Axler O, Lichtenstein D, Maury E, Slama M,
Vignon P. American College of Chest Physicians/La Societe de Reanimation de
Langue Francaise statement on competence in critical care ultrasonography.
Chest 2009;135:1050–1060.
41. Lancellotti P, Price S, Edvardsen T, Cosyns B, Neskovic AN, Dulgheru R,
Flachskampf FA, Hassager C, Pasquet A, Gargani L, Galderisi M, Cardim N,
Haugaa KH, Ancion A, Zamorano JL, Donal E, Bueno H, Habib G. The use
of echocardiography in acute cardiovascular care: recommendations of the
European Association of Cardiovascular Imaging and the Acute Cardiovascular
Care Association. Eur Heart J Acute Cardiovasc Care 2015;16:119–146.
42. Rudski LG, Lai WW, Afilalo J, Hua L, Handschumacher MD, Chandrasekaran
K, Solomon SD, Louie EK, Schiller NB. Guidelines for the echocardiographic
assessment of the right heart in adults: a report from the American Society of
Echocardiography endorsed by the European Association of Echocardiography,
a registered branch of the European Society of Cardiology, and the Canadian
Society of Echocardiography. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2010;23:685–713.
43. Jurcut R, Giusca S, La GA, Vasile S, Ginghina C, Voigt JU. The echocardiographic
assessment of the right ventricle: what to do in 2010? Eur J Echocardiogr
2010;11:81–96.
44. Lang RM, Badano LP, Mor-Avi V, Afilalo J, Armstrong A, Ernande L, Flachskampf
FA, Foster E, Goldstein SA, Kuznetsova T, Lancellotti P, Muraru D, Picard MH,
Rietzschel ER, Rudski L, Spencer KT, Tsang W, Voigt JU. Recommendations for
cardiac chamber quantification by echocardiography in adults: an update from
the American Society of Echocardiography and the European Association of
Cardiovascular Imaging. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2015;28:1–39.
45. Aiken LH, Sloane DM, Bruyneel L, Van den Heede K, Griffiths P, Busse R,
Diomidous M, Kinnunen J, Kozka M, Lesaffre E, McHugh MD, Moreno-Casbas
MT, Rafferty AM, Schwendimann R, Scott PA, Tishelman C, van AT, Sermeus W.
Nurse staffing and education and hospital mortality in nine European countries:
a retrospective observational study. Lancet 2014;383:1824–1830.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
46. Kelly DM, Kutney-Lee A, McHugh MD, Sloane DM, Aiken LH. Impact of critical
care nursing on 30-day mortality of mechanically ventilated older adults. Crit
Care Med 2014;42:1089–1095.
47. West E, Barron DN, Harrison D, Rafferty AM, Rowan K, Sanderson C. Nurse
staffing, medical staffing and mortality in intensive care: an observational study.
Int J Nurs Stud 2014;51:781–794.
48. Green EM, Givertz MM. Management of acute right ventricular failure in the
intensive care unit. Curr Heart Fail Rep 2012;9:228–235.
49. Ghignone M, Girling L, Prewitt RM. Volume expansion versus norepinephrine
in treatment of a low cardiac output complicating an acute increase in right
ventricular afterload in dogs. Anesthesiology 1984;60:132–135.
50. Morelli A, Teboul JL, Maggiore SM, Vieillard-Baron A, Rocco M, Conti G, De
GA, Picchini U, Orecchioni A, Carbone I, Tritapepe L, Pietropaoli P, Westphal
M. Effects of levosimendan on right ventricular afterload in patients with acute
respiratory distress syndrome: a pilot study. Crit Care Med 2006;34:2287–2293.
51. Werdan K, Gielen S, Ebelt H, Hochman JS. Mechanical circulatory support in
cardiogenic shock. Eur Heart J 2014;35:156–167.
52. Chen JM, Levin HR, Rose EA, Addonizio LJ, Landry DW, Sistino JJ, Michler
RE, Oz MC. Experience with right ventricular assist devices for perioperative
right-sided circulatory failure. Ann Thorac Surg 1996;61:305–310.
53. Atiemo AD, Conte JV, Heldman AW. Resuscitation and recovery from acute
right ventricular failure using a percutaneous right ventricular assist device.
Catheter Cardiovasc Interv 2006;68:78–82.
54. Griffith KE, Jenkins E, Stulak J, Paugh T, Pagani FD. Long-term use of the
CentriMag(R) Ventricular Assist System as a right ventricular assist device: a
case report. Perfusion 2012;27:65–70.
55. Krabatsch T, Potapov E, Stepanenko A, Schweiger M, Kukucka M, Huebler M,
Hennig E, Hetzer R. Biventricular circulatory support with two miniaturized
implantable assist devices. Circulation 2011;124:S179–S186.
56. Kapur NK, Paruchuri V, Jagannathan A, Steinberg D, Chakrabarti AK, Pinto D,
Aghili N, Najjar S, Finley J, Orr NM, Tempelhof M, Mudd JO, Kiernan MS, Pham
DT, DeNofrio D. Mechanical circulatory support for right ventricular failure.
JACC Heart Fail 2013;1:127–134.
57. Cheung AW, White CW, Davis MK, Freed DH. Short-term mechanical circula-
tory support for recovery from acute right ventricular failure: clinical outcomes.
J Heart Lung Transplant 2014;33:794–799.
58. Schürner A, Wilhelm MJ, Falk V, Ruschitzka F, Bettex D, Rudiger A. Recurrent
clotting of a continuous-flow right ventricular assist device: repeated thromboly-
sis with two different protocols. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2015;29:1614–1617.
59. Deuse T, Schirmer J, Kubik M, Reichenspurner H. Isolated permanent right
ventricular assistance using the HVAD continuous-flow pump. Ann Thorac Surg
2013;95:1434–1436.
60. Konstantinides SV, Torbicki A, Agnelli G, Danchin N, Fitzmaurice D, Galie N,
Gibbs JS, Huisman MV, Humbert M, Kucher N, Lang I, Lankeit M, Lekakis
J, Maack C, Mayer E, Meneveau N, Perrier A, Pruszczyk P, Rasmussen LH,
Schindler TH, Svitil P, Vonk NA, Zamorano JL, Zompatori M. 2014 ESC
guidelines on the diagnosis and management of acute pulmonary embolism. Eur
Heart J 2014;35:3033–3069.
61. Meyer G, Vicaut E, Danays T, Agnelli G, Becattini C, Beyer-Westendorf J,
Bluhmki E, Bouvaist H, Brenner B, Couturaud F, Dellas C, Empen K, Franca
A, Galie N, Geibel A, Goldhaber SZ, Jimenez D, Kozak M, Kupatt C, Kucher N,
Lang IM, Lankeit M, Meneveau N, Pacouret G, Palazzini M, Petris A, Pruszczyk P,
Rugolotto M, Salvi A, Schellong S, Sebbane M, Sobkowicz B, Stefanovic BS, Thiele
H, Torbicki A, Verschuren F, Konstantinides SV. Fibrinolysis for patients with
intermediate-risk pulmonary embolism. N Engl J Med 2014;370:1402–1411.
62. Kucher N, Boekstegers P, Muller OJ, Kupatt C, Beyer-Westendorf J, Heitzer
T, Tebbe U, Horstkotte J, Muller R, Blessing E, Greif M, Lange P, Hoffmann
RT, Werth S, Barmeyer A, Hartel D, Grunwald H, Empen K, Baumgart-
ner I. Randomized, controlled trial of ultrasound-assisted catheter-directed
thrombolysis for acute intermediate-risk pulmonary embolism. Circulation
2014;129:479–486.
63. Ghio S, Klersy C, Magrini G, D’
Armini AM, Scelsi L, Raineri C, Pasotti M,
Serio A, Campana C, Vigano M. Prognostic relevance of the echocardiographic
assessment of right ventricular function in patients with idiopathic pulmonary
arterial hypertension. Int J Cardiol 2010;140:272–278.
64. Ayuela Azcarate JM, Clau TF, Ochagavia A, Vicho PR. [Role of echocardiog-
raphy in the hemodynamic monitorization of critical patients]. Med Intensiva
2012;36:220–232.
65. Rajaram SS, Desai NK, Kalra A, Gajera M, Cavanaugh SK, Brampton W, Young
D, Harvey S, Rowan K. Pulmonary artery catheters for adult patients in intensive
care. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013;2:CD003408.
66. Gayat E, Mebazaa A. Pulmonary hypertension in critical care. Curr Opin Crit Care
2011;17:439–448.
© 2016 The Authors
European Journal of Heart Failure © 2016 European Society of Cardiology
 240
V-P. Harjola et al.
67. Hoeper MM, Granton J. Intensive care unit management of patients with severe
pulmonary hypertension and right heart failure. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2011;184:1114–1124.
68. Ventetuolo CE, Klinger JR. Management of acute right ventricular failure in the
intensive care unit. Ann Am Thorac Soc 2014;11:811–822.
69. Rajdev A, Garan H, Biviano A. Arrhythmias in pulmonary arterial hypertension.
Prog Cardiovasc Dis 2012;55:180–186.
70. Galie N, Humbert M, Vachiery JL, Gibbs S, Lang I, Torbicki A, Simonneau G,
Peacock A, Vonk Noordegraaf A, Beghetti M, Ghofrani A, Gomez Sanchez M,
Hansmann G, Klepetko W, Lancellotti P, Matucci M, McDonagh T, Pierard LA,
Trindade PT, Zompatori M, Hoeper M. 2015 ESC/ERS Guidelines for the diag-
nosis and treatment of pulmonary hypertension. Eur Heart J 2016;37:67–119.
71. Dalabih M, Rischard F, Mosier J. What’
s new: the management of acute right
ventricular decompensation of chronic pulmonary hypertension. Intensive Care
Med 2014;40:1930–1933.
72. Sztrymf B, Prat D, Jacobs FM, Brivet FG, O’
Callaghan DS, Price LC, Jais X, Sitbon
O, Simonneau G, Humbert M. Renal replacement therapy in patients with severe
precapillary pulmonary hypertension with acute right heart failure. Respiration
2013;85:464–470.
73. McLaughlin VV, Shillington A, Rich S. Survival in primary pulmonary hyperten-
sion: the impact of epoprostenol therapy. Circulation 2002;106:1477–1482.
74. George I, Xydas S, Topkara VK, Ferdinando C, Barnwell EC, Gableman L, Sladen
RN, Naka Y, Oz MC. Clinical indication for use and outcomes after inhaled nitric
oxide therapy. Ann Thorac Surg 2006;82:2161–2169.
75. Hoeper MM, Granton J. Intensive care unit management of patients with severe
pulmonary hypertension and right heart failure. Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2011;184:1114–1124.
76. Price LC, Wort SJ, Finney SJ, Marino PS, Brett SJ. Pulmonary vascular and right
ventricular dysfunction in adult critical care: current and emerging options for
management: a systematic literature review. Crit Care 2010;14:R169.
77. Sandoval J, Torbicki A. Atrial Septostomy. In Voelkel N, Schranz D, eds. The
Right Ventricle in Health and Disease. New York: Humana Press, Springer; 2015;
p.419–437.
78. Bowers TR, O’
Neill WW, Pica M, Goldstein JA. Patterns of coronary com-
promise resulting in acute right ventricular ischemic dysfunction. Circulation
2002;106:1104–1109.
79. Zehender M, Kasper W, Kauder E, Schonthaler M, Geibel A, Olschewski M,
Just H. Right ventricular infarction as an independent predictor of prognosis
after acute inferior myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med 1993;328:981–988.
80. Bueno H, Lopez-Palop R, Perez-David E, Garcia-Garcia J, Lopez-Sendon JL,
Delcan JL. Combined effect of age and right ventricular involvement on acute
inferior myocardial infarction prognosis. Circulation 1998;98:1714–1720.
81. Laster SB, Shelton TJ, Barzilai B, Goldstein JA. Determinants of the recovery
of right ventricular performance following experimental chronic right coronary
artery occlusion. Circulation 1993;88:696–708.
82. Laster SB, Ohnishi Y, Saffitz JE, Goldstein JA. Effects of reperfusion on ischemic
right ventricular dysfunction. Disparate mechanisms of benefit related to dura-
tion of ischemia. Circulation 1994;90:1398–1409.
83. Bueno H, Lopez-Palop R, Bermejo J, Lopez-Sendon JL, Delcan JL. In-hospital
outcome of elderly patients with acute inferior myocardial infarction and right
ventricular involvement. Circulation 1997;96:436–441.
84. Mehta SR, Eikelboom JW, Natarajan MK, Diaz R, Yi C, Gibbons RJ, Yusuf S.
Impact of right ventricular involvement on mortality and morbidity in patients
with inferior myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol 2001;37:37–43.
85. Bowers TR, O’
Neill WW, Grines C, Pica MC, Safian RD, Goldstein JA. Effect
of reperfusion on biventricular function and survival after right ventricular
infarction. N Engl J Med 1998;338:933–940.
86. Kinn JW, Ajluni SC, Samyn JG, Bates ER, Grines CL, O’
Neill W. Rapid
hemodynamic improvement after reperfusion during right ventricular infarction.
J Am Coll Cardiol 1995;26:1230–1234.
87. Giannitsis E, Potratz J, Wiegand U, Stierle U, Djonlagic H, Sheikhzadeh A. Impact
of early accelerated dose tissue plasminogen activator on in-hospital patency
of the infarcted vessel in patients with acute right ventricular infarction. Heart
1997;77:512–516.
88. Zehender M, Kasper W, Kauder E, Geibel A, Schonthaler M, Olschewski M,
Just H. Eligibility for and benefit of thrombolytic therapy in inferior myocardial
infarction: focus on the prognostic importance of right ventricular infarction.
J Am Coll Cardiol 1994;24:362–369.
89. Dell’
Italia LJ, Lembo NJ, Starling MR, Crawford MH, Simmons RS, Lasher JC,
Blumhardt R, Lancaster J, O’
Rourke RA. Hemodynamically important right
ventricular infarction: follow-up evaluation of right ventricular systolic function
at rest and during exercise with radionuclide ventriculography and respiratory
gas exchange. Circulation 1987;75:996–1003.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90. Liang M, Chin J, Pasupati S. Complete heart block in late presentation of inferior
STEMI successfully treated with percutaneous coronary intervention. J Invasive
Cardiol 2011;23:E219–E221.
91. Moreyra AE, Horvitz L, Presant SB, Kostis JB. Resolution of complete
heart block after right coronary artery angioplasty. Am Heart J 1988;115:
179–181.
92. Ramamurthy S, Anandaraja S, Matthew N. Percutaneous coronary intervention
for persistent complete heart block complicating inferior myocardial infarction.
J Invasive Cardiol 2007;19:E372–E374.
93. Wesley RC, Jr., Lerman BB, DiMarco JP, Berne RM, Belardinelli L. Mechanism
of atropine-resistant atrioventricular block during inferior myocardial infarction:
possible role of adenosine. J Am Coll Cardiol 1986;8:1232–1234.
94. Goldstein JA, Barzilai B, Rosamond TL, Eisenberg PR, Jaffe AS. Determinants of
hemodynamic compromise with severe right ventricular infarction. Circulation
1990;82:359–368.
95. Topol EJ, Goldschlager N, Ports TA, Dicarlo LA, Jr, Schiller NB, Botvinick
EH, Chatterjee K. Hemodynamic benefit of atrial pacing in right ventricular
myocardial infarction. Ann Intern Med 1982;96:594–597.
96. Brodie BR, Stuckey TD, Hansen C, Bradshaw BH, Downey WE, Pulsipher
MW. Comparison of late survival in patients with cardiogenic shock due
to right ventricular infarction versus left ventricular pump failure following
primary percutaneous coronary intervention for ST-elevation acute myocardial
infarction. Am J Cardiol 2007;99:431–435.
97. Jacobs AK, Leopold JA, Bates E, Mendes LA, Sleeper LA, White H, Davidoff
R, Boland J, Modur S, Forman R, Hochman JS. Cardiogenic shock caused by
right ventricular infarction: a report from the SHOCK registry. J Am Coll Cardiol
2003;41:1273–1279.
98. Ristic AD, Imazio M, Adler Y, Anastasakis A, Badano LP, Brucato A, Caforio
AL, Dubourg O, Elliott P, Gimeno J, Helio T, Klingel K, Linhart A, Maisch B,
Mayosi B, Mogensen J, Pinto Y, Seggewiss H, Seferovic PM, Tavazzi L, Tomkowski
W, Charron P. Triage strategy for urgent management of cardiac tamponade: a
position statement of the European Society of Cardiology Working Group on
Myocardial and Pericardial Diseases. Eur Heart J 2014;35:2279–2284.
99. Chandraratna PA, Mohar DS, Sidarous PF. Role of echocardiography in the
treatment of cardiac tamponade. Echocardiography 2014;31:899–910.
100. Bodson L, Bouferrache K, Vieillard-Baron A. Cardiac tamponade. Curr Opin Crit
Care 2011;17:416–424.
101. Vieillard-Baron A, Price LC, Matthay MA. Acute cor pulmonale in ARDS.
Intensive Care Med 2013;39:1836–1838.
102. Boissier F, Katsahian S, Razazi K, Thille AW, Roche-Campo F, Leon R, Vivier E,
Brochard L, Vieillard-Baron A, Brun-Buisson C, Mekontso DA. Prevalence and
prognosis of cor pulmonale during protective ventilation for acute respiratory
distress syndrome. Intensive Care Med 2013;39:1725–1733.
103. Jardin F, Vieillard-Baron A. Is there a safe plateau pressure in ARDS? The right
heart only knows. Intensive Care Med 2007;33:444–447.
104. Vieillard-Baron A, Schmitt JM, Augarde R, Fellahi JL, Prin S, Page B, Beauchet A,
Jardin F. Acute cor pulmonale in acute respiratory distress syndrome submitted
to protective ventilation: incidence, clinical implications, and prognosis. Crit Care
Med 2001;29:1551–1555.
105. Lheritier G, Legras A, Caille A, Lherm T, Mathonnet A, Frat JP, Courte A,
Martin-Lefevre L, Gouello JP, Amiel JB, Garot D, Vignon P. Prevalence and
prognostic value of acute cor pulmonale and patent foramen ovale in ventilated
patients with early acute respiratory distress syndrome: a multicenter study.
Intensive Care Med 2013;39:1734–1742.
106. Vieillard-Baron A, Prin S, Chergui K, Dubourg O, Jardin F. Echo-Doppler
demonstration of acute cor pulmonale at the bedside in the medical intensive
care unit. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2002;166:1310–1319.
107. Lewis JF, Webber JD, Sutton LL, Chesoni S, Curry CL. Discordance in degree
of right and left ventricular dilation in patients with dilated cardiomyopathy:
recognition and clinical implications. J Am Coll Cardiol 1993;21:649–654.
108. Nath J, Foster E, Heidenreich PA. Impact of tricuspid regurgitation on long-term
survival. J Am Coll Cardiol 2004;43:405–409.
109. Heydari AA, Safari H, Sarvghad MR. Isolated tricuspid valve endocarditis. Int J
Infect Dis 2009;13:e109–e111.
110. Chan P, Ogilby JD, Segal B. Tricuspid valve endocarditis. Am Heart J
1989;117:1140–1146.
111. Habib G, Lancellotti P, Antunes MJ, Bongiorni MG, Casalta JP, Del ZF, Dulgheru
R, El KG, Erba PA, Iung B, Miro JM, Mulder BJ, Plonska-Gosciniak E, Price S,
Roos-Hesselink J, Snygg-Martin U, Thuny F, Tornos MP, Vilacosta I, Zamorano
JL, Erol C, Nihoyannopoulos P, Aboyans V, Agewall S, Athanassopoulos G,
Aytekin S, Benzer W, Bueno H, Broekhuizen L, Carerj S, Cosyns B, De BJ, De
BM, Dimopoulos K, Donal E, Drexel H, Flachskampf FA, Hall R, Halvorsen S,
Hoen B, Kirchhof P, Lainscak M, Leite-Moreira AF, Lip GY, Mestres CA, Piepoli
MF, Punjabi PP, Rapezzi C, Rosenhek R, Siebens K, Tamargo J, Walker DM.
© 2016 The Authors
European Journal of Heart Failure © 2016 European Society of Cardiology
 Contemporary management of acute RV failure
241
2015 ESC Guidelines for the management of infective endocarditis: The Task
Force for the Management of Infective Endocarditis of the European Society
of Cardiology (ESC) endorsed by: European Association for Cardio-Thoracic
Surgery (EACTS), the European Association of Nuclear Medicine (EANM). Eur
Heart J 2015;36:3075–3128.
112. Vahanian A, Alfieri O, Andreotti F, Antunes MJ, Baron-Esquivias G, Baumgartner
H, Borger MA, Carrel TP, De BM, Evangelista A, Falk V, Lung B, Lancellotti P,
Pierard L, Price S, Schafers HJ, Schuler G, Stepinska J, Swedberg K, Takkenberg
J, Von Oppell UO, Windecker S, Zamorano JL, Zembala M. Guidelines on the
management of valvular heart disease (version 2012): the Joint Task Force on the
Management of Valvular Heart Disease of the European Society of Cardiology
(ESC) and the European Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery (EACTS). Eur
J Cardiothorac Surg 2012;42:S1–44.
113. Haddad F, Couture P, Tousignant C, Denault AY. The right ventricle in cardiac
surgery, a perioperative perspective: II. Pathophysiology, clinical importance, and
management. Anesth Analg 2009;108:422–433.
114. Park SJ, Park JH, Lee HS, Kim MS, Park YK, Park Y, Kim YJ, Lee JH, Choi SW,
Jeong JO, Kwon IS, Seong IW. Impaired RV global longitudinal strain is associated
with poor long-term clinical outcomes in patients with acute inferior STEMI.
JACC Cardiovasc Imaging 2015;8:161–169.
115. Vlahakes GJ. Right ventricular failure following cardiac surgery. Coron Artery Dis
2005;16:27–30.
116. Candilio L, Malik A, Ariti C, Khan SA, Barnard M, Di SC, Lawrence DR, Hayward
MP, Yap JA, Sheikh AM, McGregor CG, Kolvekar SK, Hausenloy DJ, Yellon
DM, Roberts N. A retrospective analysis of myocardial preservation techniques
during coronary artery bypass graft surgery: are we protecting the heart?
J Cardiothorac Surg 2014;9:1484.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
117. Pegg TJ, Selvanayagam JB, Karamitsos TD, Arnold RJ, Francis JM, Neubauer S,
Taggart DP. Effects of off-pump versus on-pump coronary artery bypass grafting
on early and late right ventricular function. Circulation 2008;117:2202–2210.
118. Song HK, von HC, Jespersen CM, Karkouti K, Korte W, Levy JH, Ranucci M,
Saugstrup T, Sellke FW. Safe application of a restrictive transfusion protocol
in moderate-risk patients undergoing cardiac operations. Ann Thorac Surg
2014;97:1630–1635.
119. Goldstein JA, Harada A, Yagi Y, Barzilai B, Cox JL. Hemodynamic importance
of systolic ventricular interaction, augmented right atrial contractility and
atrioventricular synchrony in acute right ventricular dysfunction. J Am Coll Cardiol
1990;16:181–189.
120. Grant AD, Smedira NG, Starling RC, Marwick TH. Independent and incremental
role of quantitative right ventricular evaluation for the prediction of right
ventricular failure after left ventricular assist device implantation. J Am Coll Cardiol
2012;60:521–528.
121. Kiernan MS, French AL, DeNofrio D, Parmar YJ, Pham DT, Kapur NK, Pandian
NG, Patel AR. Preoperative three-dimensional echocardiography to assess risk
of right ventricular failure after left ventricular assist device surgery. J Card Fail
2015;21:189–197.
122. Marzec LN, Ambardekar AV. Preoperative evaluation and perioperative man-
agement of right ventricular failure after left ventricular assist device implanta-
tion. Semin Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2013;17:249–261.
123. Slaughter MS, Pagani FD, Rogers JG, Miller LW, Sun B, Russell SD, Starling RC,
Chen L, Boyle AJ, Chillcott S, Adamson RM, Blood MS, Camacho MT, Idrissi
KA, Petty M, Sobieski M, Wright S, Myers TJ, Farrar DJ. Clinical management of
continuous-flow left ventricular assist devices in advanced heart failure. J Heart
Lung Transplant 2010;29:S1–S39.
© 2016 The Authors
European Journal of Heart Failure © 2016 European Society of Cardiology
