 September 2016 | Volume 3 | Article 81
1
Original research
published: 16 September 2016
doi: 10.3389/fvets.2016.00081
Frontiers in Veterinary Science | www.frontiersin.org
Edited by: 
Tracy L. Webb, 
Colorado State University, USA
Reviewed by: 
Wanda J. Gordon-Evans, 
WVRC, USA 
 
Lauren Virginia Schnabel, 
North Carolina State University, USA
*Correspondence:
Robert Harman 
 
bharman@vet-stem.com
Specialty section: 
This article was submitted to 
Veterinary Regenerative Medicine, 
a section of the journal 
Frontiers in Veterinary Science
Received: 26 April 2016
Accepted: 01 September 2016
Published: 16 September 2016
Citation: 
Harman R, Carlson K, Gaynor J, 
Gustafson S, Dhupa S, Clement K, 
Hoelzler M, McCarthy T, Schwartz P 
and Adams C (2016) A Prospective, 
Randomized, Masked, and 
Placebo-Controlled Efficacy Study of 
Intraarticular Allogeneic Adipose 
Stem Cells for the Treatment of 
Osteoarthritis in Dogs. 
Front. Vet. Sci. 3:81. 
doi: 10.3389/fvets.2016.00081
a Prospective, randomized, Masked, 
and Placebo-controlled efficacy 
study of intraarticular allogeneic 
adipose stem cells for the Treatment 
of Osteoarthritis in Dogs
Robert Harman1*, Kim Carlson2, Jamie Gaynor3, Scott Gustafson4, Sarit Dhupa5,  
Keith Clement6, Michael Hoelzler7, Tim McCarthy8, Pamela Schwartz9 and Cheryl Adams10
1 
VetStem Biopharma, Inc., Poway, CA, USA, 2 
VCA Bay Area Veterinary Specialists, San Leandro, CA, USA, 3 
Peak 
Performance Veterinary Group, Frisco, CO, USA, 4 
Surgery 4 Pets, Portland, OR, USA, 5 
California Veterinary Specialists, 
Carlsbad, CA, USA, 6 
Burnt Hills Veterinary Hospital, Burnt Hills, NY, USA, 7 
Garden State Veterinary Specialists, Tinton Falls, 
NJ, USA, 8 
Cascade Veterinary Referral Center, Tigard, OR, USA, 9 
Animal Medical Center of New York, New York, NY, USA, 
10 
Integrative Sports Rehab and Wellness LLC, Foxfield, CO, USA
Osteoarthritis (OA) is a degenerative joint disease with a high prevalence in dogs. 
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have been used to treat humans, dogs, and horses with 
OA. This report describes a prospective, randomized, blinded, and placebo-controlled 
clinical efficacy study of intraarticular allogeneic adipose stem cells for the treatment of 
dogs with OA. Health assessments and measurements of pain and activity impairment 
were performed at baseline and at selected time points through day 60. The primary out-
come variable was the owner Client-Specific Outcome Measurement (CSOM) and sec-
ondary measures included veterinary pain on manipulation, veterinary global score, and 
owner global score. The dogs were treated with either a saline placebo or a single dose 
of allogeneic adipose-derived MSCs in either one or two joints. Seventy-four dogs were 
statistically analyzed for efficacy outcomes. Success in the primary outcome variable, 
CSOM, was statistically improved in the treated dogs compared to the placebo dogs 
(79.2 versus 55.4%, p = 0.029). The veterinary pain on manipulation score (92.8 versus 
50.2%, p = 0.017) and the veterinary global score (86.9 versus 30.8%, p = 0.009) were 
both statistically improved in treated dogs compared to placebo. There was no detected 
significant difference between treated and placebo dogs in the incidence of adverse 
events or negative health findings. Allogeneic adipose-derived stem cell treatment was 
shown to be efficacious compared to placebo. This large study of dogs also provides 
valuable animal clinical safety and efficacy outcome data to our colleagues developing 
human stem cell therapy.
Keywords: adult stem cells, clinical translation, dog model, mesenchymal stem cells, arthritis, adipose stem cells
 2
Harman et al.
Adipose Stem Cells Treat Osteoarthritis
Frontiers in Veterinary Science | www.frontiersin.org
September 2016 | Volume 3 | Article 81
inTrODUcTiOn
Canine osteoarthritis (OA) is a degenerative disease of all joint 
tissues, results in loss of articular cartilage, and has the hallmark 
clinical sign of pain (1). The prevalence of OA in dogs in the 
United States is estimated to be 20% (2). Although the most 
clinically obvious pathologic changes in the joint are in the 
articular cartilage, a closer evaluation shows that the pathology 
encompasses the entire joint, including the synovium, tendons, 
ligaments, bone, and neural tissues (1). The pathophysiological 
mechanisms of OA have been well described (2, 3), including 
the key role that inflammatory and regulatory cytokines play 
in homeostasis and degradation (3). Traditional multi-modal 
therapy is based primarily on reducing inflammation and pain; 
this typically includes long-term cyclo-oxygenase-inhibiting 
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) therapy, physical 
therapy, diet and weight management, and dietary supplements 
(1). Although NSAIDs are typically prescribed for a long dura-
tion, average owner compliance with prescriptions for daily 
NSAID administration may be poor (4), which leaves dogs with 
untreated clinical signs. There is a need for products with a profile 
of convenient extended relief of pain. Cell therapy relieves the 
owner of the burden of daily administration, may be associated 
with tissue regeneration, and should be investigated as a thera-
peutic solution. Autologous cell therapy is commonly used in 
veterinary practice, but the need for a surgical collection limits 
its use. Allogeneic stem cells provide lower cost and off-the-shelf 
access that can result in a broader appeal and access.
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have been characterized 
by multi-lineage differentiation (adipogenic, osteogenic, and 
chondrogenic) and by the ability to self renew (5, 6). Additionally, 
MSCs have been shown to exhibit paracrine or trophic proper-
ties of angiogenesis and immunomodulation (7). One of the 
earliest recognized theories for mechanism of action of cells with 
regenerative properties was hypothesized by Cohnheim in the 
late nineteenth century. He believed bone marrow-derived cells 
could migrate through the bloodstream to distant sites of injury 
and participate in tissue regeneration (8).
Mesenchymal stem cells are a class of adult stem cells arising 
from tissues, such as adipose, bone marrow, and many others. 
It has been demonstrated that MSC frequency in adipose tissue 
is correlated to blood vessel density (9, 10). MSCs are typically 
found in a perivascular environment and have recently been 
termed pericytes (10, 11). These pericytes are released and 
activated by injury signals. Initial investigations suggested that 
MSCs functioned by a simple lineage differentiation into various 
terminal tissue types, but their function has been proven to be 
a much more complex adaptive set of modes of action (7, 11). 
These activated MSCs take their instructions from the microen-
vironment of cells and cytokines produced in the injury site and, 
therefore, can provide an injury-specific or adaptive response 
(10). This adaptive ability of MSCs makes them unique in the 
realm of therapies as their therapeutic responses may be able to 
adapt to the real needs of the patient depending upon the specific 
injury/disease process.
Mesenchymal stem cells can be sourced from most tissues 
with blood vessels. However, adipose is perhaps a more desirable 
source due to abundance and rapid expansion rate in culture 
(7, 12, 13). Initial research and commercialization in veterinary 
regenerative medicine was focused on use in equine orthopedics, 
given the high monetary value of performance horses (14–17). 
Stem cell therapy has also been applied in canine orthopedics 
(18–22). The paracrine mechanisms of action of stem cells 
described above make them a therapeutic tool to reduce the pain 
and inflammation of OA with a potentially extended duration of 
effect.
This paper presents the results of a prospective, randomized, 
masked, placebo-controlled clinical study, designed to evalu-
ate a target dose of a novel allogeneic, adipose-derived, MSC 
preparation for safety and efficacy in client-owned dogs with 
OA of one or two joints. Considering the previously discussed 
MSC information, the hypothesis is that allogeneic stem cells 
can provide a therapeutic benefit in canine OA. The presenta-
tion of this clinical study is a necessary contribution to the field 
as it provides allogeneic MSC therapy data that have not been 
previously published. The paper describes efficacy evaluated from 
both investigator and dog-owner perspectives in a single study, 
as well as safety of characterized cells. The results of this study 
are useful in understanding veterinary use of stem cell therapy 
in OA, and by extension, may increase understanding of human 
stem cell therapy.
MaTerials anD MeThODs
clinical study Objectives
The primary objective of this study was to confirm that a single 
dose of allogeneic, adipose-derived MSCs, delivered intraarticu-
larly to either one or two joints, was significantly more effective 
than a placebo for treatment of OA in dogs. The secondary objec-
tive was to provide safety data for this cellular therapy in the target 
population – dogs with OA. The data were submitted to the Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA) to support potential regulatory 
approval of an Investigational New Animal Drug Application.
study Design
This was a prospective, randomized, masked, placebo-controlled, 
multi-site clinical study using client-owned dogs diagnosed with 
OA. In order to be enrolled, dogs must have had OA that was 
present in only one or two of the following joints: hips, elbows, 
stifles, or shoulders. The study length was 60 ± 4 days from treat-
ment to final examination. The MSC product tested, allogeneic 
adipose stem cells (aASC), is a proprietary formulation of cul-
tured stromal cells derived from adipose tissue harvested from a 
single disease-screened canine donor.
There were two groups in this study: Group A treated with 
aASC and Group B treated with placebo (saline). Each group had 
a target enrollment of 50 dogs. There were nine clinical study 
sites, all within the United States, with one investigator at each 
site. The dogs enrolled in this study were client-owned and were 
maintained in the owner’s residence location by the owners. The 
dogs were brought to the investigators site for treatment and 
evaluation at the study defined time points. Institutional Animal 
Care and Use Committee (IACUC) approval was not required 
 TaBle 2 | client-specific Outcome Measures (csOM) scoring system.
score
Description of score
0
No problem
1
Mildly problematic
2
Moderately problematic
3
Severely problematic
4
Impossible
TaBle 1 | Veterinary pain on manipulation scoring system.
score
Description of score
1
No response detectable to palpation or manipulation of the limb
2
Mild response detectable to palpation or manipulation of the limb
3
Moderate response detectable to palpation or manipulation, such 
as turns head toward limb
4
Severe response detectable to palpation or manipulation such as 
withdraws limb upon minimal movement of joints, vocalizes, or 
becomes aggressive
5
Does not allow palpation or manipulation
3
Harman et al.
Adipose Stem Cells Treat Osteoarthritis
Frontiers in Veterinary Science | www.frontiersin.org
September 2016 | Volume 3 | Article 81
because this study was conducted at private veterinary clinics 
in the United States to collect data for an Investigational New 
Animal Drug Application.
eligibility
Dogs had to be at least 9 months of age and have a body weight 
greater than 2.5 kg to be enrolled in the study. They could be 
male or female. There was no breed restriction. Any physiological 
status was allowed except pregnant, lactating, or in estrus. Study 
investigators evaluated the dogs for OA, which could be present in 
only one or two of the allowed joints: hip, elbow, stifle, or shoulder. 
Physical examination and radiographs were used to confirm OA 
diagnosis. The investigators also performed an assessment of pain 
upon manipulation of the one or two selected joints (Table 1). 
The score (1, 2, 3, 4, or 5), if only one joint was affected, must have 
been ≥3 for a dog to qualify for enrollment. If two joints were 
affected, one must have been scored ≥3 and the combined score 
must have been ≥5. To be eligible, test results for complete blood 
count, clinical chemistry, and urinalysis must have been within 
normal limits or any abnormality must have been considered not 
clinically relevant in the investigator’s opinion. Overall, except for 
OA, the dogs must have been in good health based on veterinary 
physical examination and clinical pathology results, with no 
known malignant neoplasia or interfering benign neoplasia.
The investigator assessed that there were no health conditions 
that could interfere with proper evaluation of outcome measures 
and that the dogs were in compliance with specific diet, medica-
tion, and supplements use. Therapies, such as NSAIDS, analgesics, 
and supplements, were allowed if the dog had been on the treat-
ment for at least 30 days prior to treatment and remained on the 
treatment at the same dose for the duration of the study. Steroids 
and injectable joint products were not allowed during the study 
or within 30 days before treatment. Diet must have been stable 
for 14 days before treatment and remained the same during the 
study except for joint-specific diets, which must have been started 
at least 60 days before treatment. Acupuncture, chiropractic, and 
laser therapy were not allowed within 20 days of treatment or at 
any time during the study.
In order for a dog to be enrolled, the owner had to confirm 
that the dog had persistent pain and/or lameness for at least 
3 months prior. In addition, the owner scored the dog on three 
specific measures, termed the “Client-Specific Outcome Measures 
(CSOM)” (Table 2). In this evaluation, the owner selected three 
activities for their dog that were impaired by OA. The scores (0, 1, 
2, 3, or 4) for each activity were totaled and the composite score 
must have been ≥5 for the dog to be enrolled in the study. The 
owner signed a consent form to participate and agreed to cooper-
ate with study requirements.
Treatment group assignment and 
randomization
Each study site was expected to enroll 10 patients: 5 from Group 
A and 5 from Group B. Dogs that met all the eligibility require-
ments were enrolled and allocated randomly to either Group A or 
B according to a randomization chart for exclusive use at a given 
study site. For those sites that completed their initial 10 assigned 
cases and could enroll more cases, additional randomization 
charts were provided.
cell Product Manufacturing/
characterization
The test article, aASC, was manufactured from adipose tissue col-
lected from a single donor dog that was evaluated for exposure to 
or presence of 26 canine pathogens per agreement with the FDA. 
This donor dog was a purpose-bred research dog and the collec-
tion of the adipose tissue was conducted at a USDA licensed and 
AAALAC accredited research facility under an approved IACUC 
protocol by a board-certified veterinary surgeon. The donor dog 
passed complete clinical examinations before and after the tissue 
collection process. After the adipose collection procedure, the 
dog was recovered and monitored for 30 days and then adopted 
out to a family. This donor dog was not otherwise involved in this 
clinical study. The cells were grown in tissue culture flasks, using 
a proprietary media and harvested after passage 4. The product 
was formulated in a proprietary commercial cryopreservation 
solution containing 10% dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) without any 
serum source. The test article was frozen in a 0.7 mL volume in 
a cryovial and stored in vapor phase of a liquid nitrogen dewar 
at the manufacturing site. The cells were shipped in a dry ship-
per (vapor phase liquid nitrogen) and then stored on-site at the 
investigator’s clinic in a vapor phase liquid nitrogen dewar.
The aASC cells were manufactured in accordance with rigor-
ous standard operating procedures and lot release criteria. These 
cells passed testing for sterility and endotoxin and met the identity 
(CD marker 34−, 45−, MHC Class II−, 44+, and 90+; differentia-
tion positive for adipogenesis, chondrogenesis, and osteogenesis 
as well as having a stable karyotype) and potency criteria (propri-
etary VetStem derived test). These criteria are derived from FDA 
guidelines and a key stem cell industry document that specify the 
types of criteria to identify adipose MSCs (23).
The target dose of aASC was 12 × 106 viable adipose stem cells 
in a 0.7 mL volume, which was supplied in cryovials. This target 
 4
Harman et al.
Adipose Stem Cells Treat Osteoarthritis
Frontiers in Veterinary Science | www.frontiersin.org
September 2016 | Volume 3 | Article 81
dose was derived from three sources: (1) direct experience of 
the authors in therapy of more than 5,000 clinical dogs with OA 
using autologous stem cell therapy (cultured and uncultured); 
(2) outcome data from aASC therapy of clinical canine OA cases 
in Australia by Monash University and Australian Veterinary 
Stem Cells LTD (manuscript submitted); and (3) animal and 
human adipose stem cell therapy outcomes in the literature. 
Upon thawing, the aASC product was used directly. The average 
cell viability upon thawing has been evaluated in laboratory 
testing to be 85.1% (unpublished data). The placebo (negative) 
control article was a 0.7 mL volume of saline, and was frozen 
in single-dose cryovials that appeared identical to test article 
cryovials.
Treatment Protocol
Investigators were appropriately trained, qualified veterinarians. 
They injected affected joints (maximum of 2) of animals in Group 
A with 0.7 mL of test article aASC in commercial cryopreserva-
tion solution and in Group B with 0.7 mL of the control article.
Each dog was appropriately sedated per investigator’s normal 
protocol to allow complete intraarticular injection of the assigned 
product. Group B control animals were eligible to receive test arti-
cle (for the joints under study) in the 2 weeks after they completed 
the 60-day veterinary exams and owner forms.
Exercise was restricted after intraarticular injection. The 
owners were instructed to restrict exercise to leashed walking for 
5 min twice daily for post-injection days 1–10; leashed walking 
10–15 min twice daily for days 11–30; and to wait until after day 
30 for longer leashed walks and off-leash exercise.
Masking Methodology
The investigators and staff members involved with evaluations, as 
well as the dog’s owner were masked to the identity of treatment 
group assignments. A label, masking the syringe from the veteri-
narian performing the injections, hid the identity of the contents 
of treatment syringes. Only the Sponsor’s study monitor and one 
investigator site representative had access to the group assign-
ments sheets and only the Sponsor study monitor had access to 
the treatment group designation. At the end of the treatment and 
evaluation period for each animal (Day 60 time point), after the 
last data were collected for a particular animal, the un-blinded 
investigator site representative was given the information on the 
group assignment of that animal only, for the purpose of discuss-
ing post-study treatment of an animal with test article if they were 
a control group animal.
The Sponsor representative/study report author was blinded 
to the treatment group assignment until after final review of each 
enrolled dog for protocol compliance was completed and final 
decision was made on which animals were to be removed from 
the study analysis.
Outcome Measures
The two categories of outcomes for this study were (1) the 
effectiveness, as compared to a placebo, in the treatment of OA, 
and (2) the safety of a single allogeneic intraarticular aASC 
administration.
Efficacy Outcome Variables
The primary outcome variable in this clinical study was the 
predefined owner assessment of three activities on the CSOM at 
day 60 (±4) as compared to the CSOM baseline assessment (Day 
0). At baseline, the owner selected these measurement activities 
with guidance from the clinic staff. This is a customized way to 
evaluate each individual dog’s problems using a standard scoring 
system rather than using a standard set of activities that may not 
be relevant to that particular dog. One owner for each dog, rather 
than multiple owners, provided CSOM evaluations for all time 
points. The owners indicated how problematic certain activities 
were, compared to when the dog was normal or did not have OA 
(Table 2 for scoring system). This indictor has been reported as an 
accurate measure of drug intervention outcomes in OA (24–26). 
Each dog was classified as either a treatment success or a treat-
ment failure. Treatment success of an individual dog was defined 
as a decrease of ≥2 score points in total CSOM score at Day 60 
compared to the score at baseline.
The secondary outcome efficacy variables were the veterinary 
assessment of pain on manipulation (Table 1) and the overall 
study global outcome score by the owner and by the veterinarian. 
The global scores were rated as improved, no change, or wors-
ened at Day 60 and success for an individual dog was defined as 
improved. Treatment success for veterinary pain on manipulation 
was defined as improvement at Day 60 by at least 1 score point in 
the total evaluation score from baseline, with no individual score 
(either joint if two were treated) worsening from baseline.
Safety Outcome Measures
This study was designed to evaluate safety based on the veterinary 
evaluations and owner health observations. The veterinary evalu-
ations included physical examinations and post-injection obser-
vations. The owner observations included a diary for recording 
any abnormal observations of their dog and a report of health 
that was completed either via telephone (days 15 and 45) or at 
the veterinary clinic visits (days 0, 30, and 60). Additionally, the 
owner recorded any change in medications or supplements for 
their dog. If a veterinary or owner observation was significant, 
it was reported as an adverse event (AE) and investigated by the 
attending veterinarian and the Sponsor veterinarian. In addition, 
investigators were asked to evaluate the AEs and whether or not, 
in their opinion, the AE was related to treatment. AEs are defined 
by the FDA and are categorized as serious or not serious. Serious, 
according to the following definition in FDA regulations at 21 
CFR 514.3, means an adverse event that is fatal, or life-threatening, 
or requires professional intervention, or causes an abortion, or 
stillbirth, or infertility, or congenital anomaly, or prolonged or 
permanent disability, or disfigurement. An AE is not the same as 
an adverse reaction. An adverse reaction is an AE that is related 
to, i.e., caused by, the experimental intervention administered.
statistical Methods
The individual enrolled dog was the experimental unit, with the 
initial target of 50 dogs receiving the test article, and 50 receiv-
ing the control article. The hypothesis was that the test article 
injected intraarticularly would provide a successful outcome 
 TaBle 3 | study enrollment for efficacy outcome.
enrollment
Treated
control
Total
Total enrolled in study
47
46
93
Excluded-protocol non-compliance
4
7
11
Excluded-low site enrollment
5
3
8
Total evaluated for efficacy
38
36
74
TaBle 5 | injected joint distribution for dogs successfully completing the 
study (includes dogs excluded from efficacy population).
Joints injected
# Treated
# control
Total
Both joints injected
Hip
14
14
28
Elbow
15
12
27
Stifle
2
3
5
Elbow + Shoulder
1
1
2
Hip + Elbow
1
1
2
Shoulder
1
0
1
Stifle + Hip
1
0
1
Stifle + Elbow
0
1
1
One joint injected
Elbow
5
4
9
Hip
2
1
3
Stifle
1
1
2
Shoulder
0
1
1
TOTAL
43
39
82
TaBle 4 | rationale for exclusion of each of the 11 non-compliant dogs.
Description of non-compliance
• Unapproved long-acting analgesic given at time of treatment
• Non-compliance to exercise restriction and unapproved pain supplements 
given
• Inconsistent use of Rimadyl, then stopped during study
• Tramadol added during study; incomplete CSOM
• Discontinued joint supplement; incomplete CSOM
• Incomplete CSOM
• Developed dermatology case; given antibiotics; change of diet
• Discontinued joint supplement; GI issue
• Allergies not stable; medications increased; medications added
• Previously seen inflammatory nodule reappeared and burst
• Dropped out due to death in family
5
Harman et al.
Adipose Stem Cells Treat Osteoarthritis
Frontiers in Veterinary Science | www.frontiersin.org
September 2016 | Volume 3 | Article 81
(dog classified as a treatment success based on the CSOM evalua-
tion) in a significant number of dogs in comparison to the control 
group. Significantly more treatment successes with the test article 
versus the control article based on owner assessment would 
demonstrate that a target dose of test article cells is therapeutic. 
Differences were deemed statistically significant using two-sided 
tests at alpha = 0.05.
Primary Outcomes
Treatment success based on CSOM scores on Day 60 was statisti-
cally evaluated using methods appropriate for binomial data (the 
GLIMMIX procedure in SAS, SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA). 
A binomial distribution was assumed and a logit link used. 
Treatment group was included in the model as fixed effects. The 
Kenward-Rogers adjustment of degrees of freedom was employed. 
Summary statistics included the percent success by treatment.
Secondary Outcomes
Treatment success based on (1) the veterinary assessment of clini-
cal outcomes on Day 60 and (2) pain on manipulation on Day 60, 
and (3) owner assessment of clinical outcomes on Day 60 were 
each assessed using methods appropriate for binomial data meas-
ured once (the GLIMMIX procedure). A binomial distribution 
was assumed and a logit link used. Treatment group was included 
in the model as a fixed effect. The Kenward-Rogers adjustment 
of degrees of freedom was employed. Summary statistics include 
the percent success and 95% CI by treatment for each of these 
outcomes.
resUlTs
group enrollment Distributions
The treatment and control groups were generally evenly distrib-
uted with regard to exclusions, joints treated, breed distribution, 
age, weight, and sex. The number of dogs enrolled and the 
number of dogs excluded in the study by treatment group are 
shown in Table 3. The exclusions in this analysis were due to 
non-compliance with the protocol or to low site numbers. Only 
major non-compliance issues, such as failure to substantially 
follow the exercise restriction requirements or non-disclosure of 
pre-existing health conditions, were grounds for exclusion. Due 
to an investigator site dropout before treating any dogs, a total 
of 93 dogs were treated. Eleven dogs were removed due to non-
compliance with the protocol. Due to low enrollment at sites 1, 
7, and 8 (<2 evaluable cases in either the control or test product 
groups), these three sites were excluded from the statistical 
analysis of efficacy but included in the safety assessments. Thus, 
74 dogs (36 in the control group and 38 in the test group) were 
used in the final statistical analysis.
Exclusion bias is always a risk in a clinical study. To be con-
servative, all dogs were used in evaluation of the safety analysis. 
The efficacy-exclusions method used in this study follows FDA 
guidelines wherein a fully blinded review of each enrolled dog 
for appropriate compliance with the study protocol is done 
first. In this exercise, 11 dogs were removed. Non-compliance 
was administered, if it was determined that the dog did not 
complete the study or an event occurred that would make it 
impossible to appropriately evaluate the primary outcome vari-
able, the CSOM. Table 4 lists the non-compliance reason(s) for 
blinded-review exclusions of dogs. As previously mentioned, 
additional dogs were removed from efficacy evaluation if they 
were from any clinical site where there were less than two ani-
mals in each treatment group, because statistical analysis could 
not be performed. These sites, by definition, had to be removed 
from analysis.
To demonstrate the relatively even distribution of the selected 
joints by treatment group, Table 5 presents the joint(s) injected, 
including whether one or both joints were injected. Bilateral hip 
and elbow were by far the most prominent locations treated.
The study included a variety of large and small breeds. 
Additionally, Table 6 shows the dogs enrolled in the study were 
reasonably distributed by age, weight, and sex between the treated 
and control groups.
 TaBle 7 | summary of the statistical analysis of the primary and 
secondary outcome variables success rates.
Variable
Treated (%)
control (%)
P-value
Owner CSOM (primary)
79.21
55.40
0.0290*
Veterinary pain score
92.76
50.22
0.0170*
Veterinary global score
86.89
30.75
0.0085*
Owner global score
76.57
58.81
0.2128
*Significant difference at p < 0.05.
TaBle 6 | enrolled dogs distribution of age, weight, and sex.
Parameter
Treated
control
excluded
Age (years)
Mean
7.98
8.59
7.73
SD
±3.56
±3.53
±3.13
Weight (kg)
Mean
31.43
29.39
28.06
SD
±10.75
±11.83
±5.23
Sex
# Female
26
20
6
# Male
17
19
5
Number
Total
43
39
11
6
Harman et al.
Adipose Stem Cells Treat Osteoarthritis
Frontiers in Veterinary Science | www.frontiersin.org
September 2016 | Volume 3 | Article 81
efficacy Outcome Variables
The stem cell treatment was shown to be efficacious compared to 
placebo, using the primary effectiveness criteria. The summary of 
the overall outcomes of success versus failure by group with the 
P-value for the statistical evaluation of primary and secondary 
outcomes, including owner and veterinary clinical assessment 
measures (global score and pain on manipulation) are shown 
in Table 7. On analysis, the estimate of the variance associated 
with the random effects of study site and/or the study site by 
treatment interaction were negative; site was dropped from the 
model and the site by treatment interaction variance estimate 
allowed to be negative (the “nobound” option in GLIMMIX). 
The data from Table 7 are graphed in Figure 1, which provides a 
better visual representation of the difference in efficacy between 
groups. Owner CSOM was statistically improved in the treated 
versus placebo group (79.21 versus 55.40%), which is an absolute 
effect size difference of 23.81%. In addition, the two veterinary 
assessments, veterinary score of pain on manipulation (92.76 
versus 50.22%) and the veterinary global score (86.89 versus 
30.75%), were also statistically improved in the treatment versus 
placebo group. The last efficacy measurement, the owner global 
assessment, improved numerically (76.57 versus 58.81%), but the 
difference between groups was not statistically significant.
safety Outcome Variables
No significant pattern of differences in observations was seen 
between the treatment and control dogs in veterinary or owner 
reports of AEs. For clarity, owners assessed safety every day dur-
ing the study and data were recorded in a diary. Any significant 
findings were followed up by the veterinary staff and investigated 
by the veterinarians during the routine calls and examinations 
they conducted. The owners were strongly encouraged to record 
all findings and to call immediately with any adverse health event, 
so immediate attention could be given to evaluate and treat the 
dogs, if needed.
In this study, there were a total of 15 AEs reported, 6 in the 
test group and 9 in the control group. There were two serious 
AEs reported for each group. In the treated group, the two 
serious AEs were assessed as not related to, or caused by, the 
administered cell product: one was a pre-existing degenerative 
condition (degenerative myelopathy) and the other a respiratory 
condition acquired/reported 30 days after the end of the study. 
In the control group, one serious AE was a significant post-
injection joint soreness that resolved in 10 days, and the second 
was facial nerve paralysis that was reported on the last day of 
the study. The VeDDRA LLT code (Veterinary Dictionary for 
Drug Related Affairs; Lower Level Term; European Medicines 
Agency, EMA/CVMP/PhVWP/288284/2007-Rev.8) breakout 
of reported AEs is shown in Table 8; and there is no pattern of 
treatment-related AEs.
Per protocol, any animal in the control group completing the 
study was offered the option of receiving a stem cell treatment. Of 
the 46 control animals, 43 opted to receive treatment with the test 
article after completing the 60-day evaluation period.
DiscUssiOn
In this prospective, randomized, masked, placebo-controlled 
clinical study, we explored the efficacy and safety of an allogeneic 
stem cell product in the treatment of OA in dogs. This study was 
conducted under field clinical conditions in client-owned dogs 
with OA to test the use of this product in a real-world environ-
ment. The cells were produced under controlled laboratory 
conditions and characterized to demonstrate that the product was 
a MSC product. Although there is not universal agreement on a 
single method to identify an MSC, the flow cytometry cluster of 
differentiation – CD marker results for the five markers, CD34, 
CD44, CD45, CD90, and MHC II were all within commonly 
accepted ranges and are commonly reported as standard markers 
for identification of an MSC (5, 23). The differentiation assays 
demonstrated the ability of this cell line to differentiate into 
osteogenic, adipogenic, and chondrogenic lineages.
The efficacy assessments used to evaluate the effects of stem cell 
therapy on OA in dogs, such as CSOM and pain on manipulation, 
are those commonly reported in the literature. Veterinary assess-
ment has been the dominant evaluation method historically; 
however, in recent years, the industry and the FDA have moved 
to elevate the owner evaluation methods to the primary outcome 
variable (24, 26). This may be due, in part, to the ability of the 
owner to assess the dog for longer periods of time and in a more 
natural and comfortable environment than the veterinary clinic. 
To the contrary, when a veterinarian is asked to evaluate the dog in 
an unfamiliar clinical environment, the dog’s natural protection 
mechanisms and stress reaction can mask the true status of the 
dog’s clinical signs. The two most common owner assessments 
have been the Client Specific Outcome Measure (24–27) and the 
Canine Brief Pain Inventory (28). The CSOM was selected for this 
study so that the owner, with the veterinarian’s guidance, could 
most accurately select activities for evaluation that were related 
to the dog’s specific impairment due to OA. As reference, the 
FDA does not request force plate or kinetic data as an outcome 
measure.
 TaBle 8 | summary of study adverse eventsa by disease/system 
category.
category
Treated
control
Total
Lipoma
1
2
3
Joint pain
0
3
3
Neurological signs
1
1
2
Aggressiveness
2
0
2
Bacterial skin infection
1
0
1
Weight loss
1
0
1
Glaucoma
0
1
1
Respiratory infection
0
1
1
Vomiting
0
1
1
Total
6
9
15
aIncludes data from all 93 enrolled dogs.
FigUre 1 | success in treatment versus control groups. *Significant difference p < 0.05 between treated and control groups. Bars indicate SE of the mean. 
This figure shows that the treated group was improved compared to the control group regarding owner CSOM, veterinary assessment of pain, and veterinary global 
score. See Table 7 for numerical data.
7
Harman et al.
Adipose Stem Cells Treat Osteoarthritis
Frontiers in Veterinary Science | www.frontiersin.org
September 2016 | Volume 3 | Article 81
The definition of success was applied to each dog and then 
the percentage of successes was compared between groups, for 
each assessment tool. The averages for scores were not compared 
between groups. The FDA requires a more rigorous method of 
analysis than comparing average scores between groups. Score 
averaging can buffer extreme variables in the scores of a few ani-
mals or the score of a single animal. The assessment of success or 
failure per each dog is more rigorous than comparing averages of 
scores, complies with FDA requirements, and has the advantage of 
reflecting how likely a treatment is to be effective in an individual 
patient, rather than in a group of patients (29). In this study, the 
primary variable, the owner CSOM, was statistically improved 
in the treated versus placebo group during the 60-day study 
period. In addition, the two veterinary assessments, veterinary 
assessment of pain on manipulation and the veterinary global 
assessment, were also statistically improved in the treated versus 
placebo group. The last efficacy measurement, the owner global 
assessment, improved numerically, but the difference between the 
treated and placebo groups did not reach statistical significance.
Global assessment and quality of life measurements are difficult 
in veterinary medicine, as the assessments are an interpretation 
through the eyes of the owner and/or veterinarian. There was a 
significant placebo effect in all measurements, which is commonly 
reported in veterinary OA studies (30, 31). This placebo effect is 
often termed the caregiver effect and was recently reported to be 
an average of 43.1% when veterinarians examined dogs for pain 
on manipulation of a joint and was 56.9% in an owner-reported 
lameness questionnaire (30). The placebo effects seen in this 
study were of similar magnitude. This is precisely the reason for 
the masked nature of this study. The number of subjects in each 
group was chosen to detect differences between the treatment and 
placebo groups, even with a significant placebo effect.
This study design allowed for the investigators to choose dogs 
for enrollment with OA in one or in two joints. Although it might 
have been easier to evaluate dogs with only one joint treated, the 
authors believe that allowing up to two joints more accurately 
reflects the clinical condition of dogs with OA. As can be seen in 
the distribution of dogs/joints for this study, 81.7% of the dogs 
treated were treated in two joints (Table 5).
 8
Harman et al.
Adipose Stem Cells Treat Osteoarthritis
Frontiers in Veterinary Science | www.frontiersin.org
September 2016 | Volume 3 | Article 81
The cASC product tested in this study was formulated in a 
10% DMSO cryoprotectant and injected without washing. The 
amount of DMSO solution is small (0.07 mL), but one could 
question whether this might have an anti-inflammatory effect. 
In a review of PubMed citations, there were no published stud-
ies of intraarticular use of DMSO. However, a double-blind, 
randomized study of 775 human OA patients comparing topical 
administration of diclofenac against placebo and DMSO carrier 
was published in 2009. In this study, the products were applied 
four times daily for 12 weeks and the DMSO product was no more 
effective than the saline placebo (32).
Safety was also assessed during the 60-day post-injection 
period in this study. This is the largest randomized, controlled 
canine stem cell study published and the safety data are important 
for veterinarians and owners to properly evaluate the risk/benefit 
of stem cell treatment. The data from this study indicate that there 
were no significant differences between the treated and control 
dogs in the safety parameters measured or the AEs reported. 
In fact, although the numbers are small, there were more AEs 
reported in the placebo-treated dogs than in the dogs treated with 
stem cells. To underscore the importance of randomization and 
blinding, the population of dogs with OA tends to be older and 
these dogs will have typical age-related issues, such as lipomas, 
dental disease, ophthalmologic conditions, and many others. 
Without masking and randomization, it is difficult to assess the 
meaning of the incidence of these age-related diseases in relation 
to an experimental treatment. In this study, the groups were not 
identical, but were comparable regarding the incidence of these 
types of concomitant conditions. It is important to note that this 
was a single-dose study. We did not evaluate efficacy or safety 
of multiple dosing. Repeat dosing, multiples of the target dose, 
and longer time periods will be evaluated in future safety and 
efficacy studies and these data will be submitted and reviewed 
by the FDA in its evaluation of approval for licensing, as with all 
veterinary drugs.
Why would a clinician consider the use of cell therapy? 
Therapeutic non-compliance is one reason. The serious problem 
with owner compliance for administration of chronic drugs, such 
as NSAIDS, is well known to practitioners. Industry speakers 
often quote 60–70 days as the average time of administration, 
even when long-term usage is prescribed. The most common rea-
son cited for not delivering needed medications as prescribed is 
the owner’s perception that the patient no longer needs treatment, 
followed by forgetfulness (busy lives), and safety concerns with the 
drugs (4). NSAIDS are prescribed for daily dose administration, 
over long periods of time, require prescription refills, and come 
with label warnings about possible gastrointestinal, renal, and 
hepatic AEs. Owners are also required to get periodic veterinary 
examinations and blood work in order to have their prescription 
refilled. Compounding all these elements makes NSAIDS a class 
of prescription that incurs naturally poor compliance. As shown 
in this study and others, stem cell therapy can be effective over a 
prolonged interval compared to a daily administration drug (18, 
19, 21, 22) and has the potential, like other long-acting injectable 
medications, to address compliance issues and help improve 
the overall quality and consistency of care for patients with OA. 
Several studies have shown the use of cell therapy in OA has the 
possibility of reversing arthritic pathology and even regenerating 
cartilage (33–35). A stem cell treatment cartilage-regeneration 
claim was not addressed in this study; such a claim will need to 
be substantiated by research trials in dogs.
cOnclUsiOn
efficacy
The study’s primary objective was achieved and the data confirm 
that the target dose of allogeneic adipose-derived MSCs delivered 
intraarticularly to one or two joints was statistically significantly 
more effective than a placebo in reducing clinical signs of OA 
in dogs. Both veterinarians and dog owners evaluated stem cell-
treated dogs as more often experiencing treatment success than 
placebo-treated dogs.
safety
This single-dose allogeneic stem cell therapy was shown to have 
no higher incidence of AEs than placebo-treated dogs during the 
60-day study period, indicating the potential for stem cells to 
provide a well-tolerated treatment for OA.
Overall
Although there are published canine stem cell OA studies, most 
of these suffer from small sample size, lack of randomization, 
lack of masking, and/or limited cell characterization data. In 
addition, many published studies use autologous stem cell 
sources, whereas this study used a donor-derived allogeneic stem 
cell source. This is the largest randomized, placebo-controlled 
canine stem cell study published to date and provides both safety 
and efficacy data to add to the growing information related to 
the use of veterinary cell therapy. Stem cell therapy as described 
in this study has the potential to provide an important canine 
OA treatment tool for veterinarians: the use of “off-the-shelf” 
allogenic stem cells without surgical intervention for tissue col-
lection. This large study also provides valuable animal clinical 
safety and efficacy outcome data to our colleagues developing 
human stem cell therapy.
aUThOr cOnTriBUTiOns
The authors on this paper qualify as have providing the following 
overall contributions: (1) substantial contributions to the concep-
tion or design of the work; or the acquisition, analysis, or inter-
pretation of data for the work, (2) drafting the work or revising it 
critically for important intellectual content, (3) final approval of 
the version to be published, and (4) agreement to be accountable 
for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to 
the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately 
investigated and resolved. Specifically, each authors’ contribu-
tions were as follows: RH, conception and design, administrative 
support, provision of study material or patients; data collection, 
assembly, analysis, and interpretation; manuscript drafting; and 
final approval of manuscript. KC, JG, SG, SD, KC, MH, TM, PS, 
and CA all acted as study site investigators and provided study 
design review, study material or patients, evaluation of individual 
 9
Harman et al.
Adipose Stem Cells Treat Osteoarthritis
Frontiers in Veterinary Science | www.frontiersin.org
September 2016 | Volume 3 | Article 81
patients and adverse events, editing/review of manuscript drafts, 
and final approval of manuscript.
acKnOWleDgMenTs
The authors are grateful to the staff of VetStem Biopharma for 
their efforts in the successful management of the clinical study 
and the study data. VetStem Biopharma, Inc., provided financial 
and administrative support for the conduct of this study and 
arranged for the stem cell product that was tested. The study was 
conducted as part of an FDA Investigational New Animal Drug 
Application. The authors are particularly grateful for the efforts 
of Sue Harman in the management of the investigators, study 
sites, and the owners/patients in the study. The authors thank Dr. 
Tad B. Coles of Overland Park, KS, USA, for technical assistance 
with writing and editing this manuscript. Special thanks to Dr. 
Steve Radecki for his review of the protocol and the statistical 
analysis of the outcome data set and to Dr. Duncan Lascelles for 
his consultation and training on the Client-Specific Outcome 
Measures methods.
FUnDing
VetStem Biopharma funded the study, which was also partially 
funded by a development grant from Aratana Therapeutics, 
Kansas City, KS, USA.
reFerences
1. Fox SM. Painful decisions for senior pets. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 
(2012) 42(4):727–48. doi:10.1016/j.cvsm.2012.04.010 
2. Johnston SA. Osteoarthritis. Joint anatomy, physiology, and pathobiology. 
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract (1997) 27(4):699–723. doi:10.1016/
S0195-5616(97)50076-3 
3. Houard X, Goldring MB, Berenbaum F. Homeostatic mechanisms in articular 
cartilage and role of inflammation in osteoarthritis. Curr Rheumatol Rep 
(2013) 15(11):375. doi:10.1007/s11926-013-0375-6 
4. Zoetis. Rimadyl Chewable Tablets: Compliance Unleashed. (2015). Available 
from: 
http://www.zoetisus.com/products/pages/rimadyldvm/docs/compli-
ance.pdf
5. Vieira NM, Brandalise V, Zucconi E, Secco M, Strauss BE, Zatz M. Isolation, 
characterization, and differentiation potential of canine adipose-derived stem 
cells. Cell Transplant (2010) 19(3):279–89. doi:10.3727/096368909X481764 
6. Zuk PA, Zhu M, Ashjian P, De Ugarte DA, Huang JI, Mizuno H, et al. Human 
adipose tissue is a source of multipotent stem cells. Mol Biol Cell (2002) 
13:4279–95. doi:10.1091/mbc.E02-02-0105 
7. Caplan AI, Dennis JE. Mesenchymal stem cells as trophic mediators. J Cell 
Biochem (2006) 98(5):1076–84. doi:10.1002/jcb.20886 
8. Hernigou P. Bone transplantation and tissue engineering, part IV. 
Mesenchymal stem cells: history in orthopedic surgery from Cohnheim and 
Goujon to the Nobel Prize of Yamanaka. Int Orthop (2015) 39(4):807–17. 
doi:10.1007/s00264-015-2716-8 
9. Da Silva Meirelles L, Sand TT, Harman RJ, Lennon DP, Caplan AI. MSC 
frequency correlates with blood vessel density in equine adipose tissue. Tissue 
Eng Part A (2009) 15:221–9. doi:10.1089/ten.tea.2008.0103 
10. Murphy MB, Moncivais K, Caplan AI. Mesenchymal stem cells: environmen-
tally responsive therapeutics for regenerative medicine. Exp Mol Med (2013) 
45:e54. doi:10.1038/emm.2013.94 
11. Caplan AI, Correa D. The MSC: an injury drugstore. Cell Stem Cell (2011) 
9(1):11–5. doi:10.1016/j.stem.2011.06.008 
12. Zhu Y, Liu T, Song K, Fan X, Ma X, Cui Z. Adipose-derived stem cell: a better 
stem cell than BMSC. Cell Biochem Funct (2008) 26(6):664–75. doi:10.1002/
cbf.1488 
13. Zuk PA. The adipose-derived stem cell: looking back and looking ahead. Mol 
Biol Cell (2010) 21(11):1783–7. doi:10.1091/mbc.E09-07-0589 
14. Nixon AJ, Dahlgren LA, Haupt JL, Yeager AE, Ward DL. Effect of 
 
adipose-derived nucleated cell fractions on tendon repair in horses with col-
lagenase-induced tendinitis. Am J Vet Res (2008) 69(7):928–37. doi:10.2460/
ajvr.69.7.928 
15. Smith RK. Mesenchymal stem cell therapy for equine tendinopathy. Disabil 
Rehabil (2008) 30(20–22):1752–8. doi:10.1080/09638280701788241 
16. Vidal MA, Robinson SO, Lopez MJ, Paulsen DB, Borkhsenious O, Johnson JR, 
et al. Comparison of chondrogenic potential in equine mesenchymal stro-
mal cells derived from adipose tissue and bone marrow. Vet Surg (2008) 
37(8):713–24. doi:10.1111/j.1532-950X.2008.00462.x 
17. Rich FR. Single-center study of 83 horses with suspensory injuries treated 
with adipose-derived stem and regenerative cells. Stem Cell Discov (2014) 
04(02):44–53. doi:10.4236/scd.2014.42005 
18. Black L, Gaynor J, Gahring D, Adams C, Aron D, Harman S, et al. Effect of 
adipose-derived mesenchymal stem and regenerative cells on lameness in 
dogs with chronic osteoarthritis of the coxofemoral joints: a randomized, 
double-blinded, multicenter, controlled trial. Vet Ther (2007) 8(4):272–84. 
19. Black L, Gaynor J, Adams C, Dhupa S, Sams AE, Taylor R, et al. Effect of 
intraarticular injection of autologous adipose-derived mesenchymal stem and 
regenerative cells on clinical signs of chronic osteoarthritis of the elbow joint 
in dog. Vet Ther (2008) 9(3):192–200. 
20. Brown SG, Harman RJ, Black LL. Adipose-derived stem cell therapy for severe 
muscle tears in working German shepherds: two case reports. Stem Cell Discov 
(2012) 02(02):41–4. doi:10.4236/scd.2012.22007 
21. Cuervo B, Rubio M, Sopena J, Dominguez JM, Vilar J, Morales M, et al.  
Hip osteoarthritis in dogs: a randomized study using mesenchymal stem cells 
from adipose tissue and plasma rich in growth factors. Int J Mol Sci (2014) 
15(8):13437–60. doi:10.3390/ijms150813437 
22. Vilar JM, Morales M, Santana A, Spinella G, Rubio M, Cuervo B, et al. 
Controlled, blinded force platform analysis of the effect of intraarticular 
injection of autologous adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells asso-
ciated to PRGF-Endoret in osteoarthritic dogs. Vet Res (2013) 9:131–6. 
doi:10.1186/1746-6148-9-131 
23. Bourin P, Bunnell BA, Casteilla L, Dominici M, Katz AJ, March KL, et al. 
Stromal cells from the adipose tissue-derived stromal vascular fraction and 
culture expanded adipose tissue-derived stromal/stem cells: a joint statement 
of the International Federation for Adipose Therapeutics and Science (IFATS) 
and the International Society for Cellular Therapy (ISCT). Cytotherapy (2013) 
15(6):641–8. doi:10.1016/j.jcyt.2013.02.006 
24. Cozzi EM, Spensley MS. Multicenter randomized prospective clinical evalua-
tion of meloxicam administered via transmucosal oral spray in client-owned 
dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther (2013) 36(6):609–16. doi:10.1111/jvp.12050 
25. Gingerich DA, Strobel JD. Use of client-specific outcome measures to assess 
treatment effects in geriatric, arthritic dogs: controlled clinical evaluation of a 
nutraceutical. Vet Ther (2003) 4(4):376–86. 
26. Lascelles BD, Gaynor JS, Smith ES, Roe SC, Marcellin-Little DJ, Davidson G, 
et al. Amantadine in a multimodal analgesic regimen for alleviation of 
refractory osteoarthritis pain in dogs. J Vet Intern Med (2008) 22(1):53–9. 
doi:10.1111/j.1939-1676.2007.0014.x 
27. Rialland P, Bichot S, Moreau M, Guillot M, Lussier B, Gauvin D, et al. Clinical 
validity of outcome pain measures in naturally occurring canine osteoarthri-
tis. BMC Vet Res (2012) 8:162. doi:10.1186/1746-6148-8-162 
28. Brown D, Boston R, Coyne J, Farrar J. Ability of the canine brief pain inventory 
to detect response to treatment in dogs with osteoarthritis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 
(2008) 233(8):1278–83. doi:10.2460/javma.233.8.1278 
29. Brown DC, Bell M, Rhodes L. Power of treatment success definitions when 
the canine brief pain inventory is used to evaluate carprofen treatment for the 
control of pain and inflammation in dogs with osteoarthritis. Am J Vet Res 
(2013) 74(12):1467–73. doi:10.2460/ajvr.74.12.1467 
30. Conzemius MG, Evans RB. Caregiver placebo effect for dogs with lameness 
from osteoarthritis. J Am Vet Med Assoc (2012) 241(10):1314–9. doi:10.2460/
javma.241.10.1314 
31. Roush JK, Cross AR, Renberg WC, Dodd CE, Sixby KA, Fritsch DA, et al. 
Evaluation of the effects of dietary supplementation with fish oil omega-3 fatty 
 10
Harman et al.
Adipose Stem Cells Treat Osteoarthritis
Frontiers in Veterinary Science | www.frontiersin.org
September 2016 | Volume 3 | Article 81
acids on weight bearing in dogs with osteoarthritis. J Am Vet Med Assoc (2010) 
236(1):67–73. doi:10.2460/javma.236.1.67 
32. Simon LS, Grierson LM, Naseer Z, Bookman AA, Zev Shainhouse J. Efficacy 
and safety of topical diclofenac containing dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) com-
pared with those of topical placebo, DMSO vehicle and oral diclofenac for knee 
osteoarthritis. Pain (2009) 143(3):238–45. doi:10.1016/j.pain.2009.03.008 
33. Dragoo JL, Carlson G, McCormick F, Khan-Farooqi H, Zhu M, Zuk PA, et al. 
Healing full-thickness cartilage defects using adipose-derived stem cells. 
Tissue Eng (2007) 13(7):1615–21. doi:10.1089/ten.2006.0249 
34. Jurgens WJ, Kroeze RJ, Zandieh-Doulabi B, van Dijk A, Renders GA, Smit TH, 
et al. One-step surgical procedure for the treatment of osteochondral defects 
with adipose-derived stem cells in a caprine knee defect: a pilot study. Biores 
Open Access (2013) 2(4):315–25. doi:10.1089/biores.2013.0024 
35. Lee SY, Nakagawa T, Reddi AH. Induction of chondrogenesis and expression 
of superficial zone protein (SZP)/lubricin by mesenchymal progenitors 
in the infrapatellar fat pad of the knee joint treated with TGF-beta1 and 
BMP-7. Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2008) 376(1):148–53. doi:10.1016/ 
j.bbrc.2008.08.138 
Conflict of Interest Statement: RH is an employee and shareholder of VetStem 
Biopharma. The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the 
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a 
potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2016 Harman, Carlson, Gaynor, Gustafson, Dhupa, Clement, Hoelzler, 
McCarthy, Schwartz and Adams. This is an open-access article distributed under the 
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or 
reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) or licensor 
are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance 
with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted 
which does not comply with these terms.
