 RESEARCH ARTICLE
A direct link between MITF, innate immunity,
and hair graying
Melissa L. Harris1*, Temesgen D. Fufa2, Joseph W. Palmer1, Sandeep S. Joshi3, Denise
M. Larson2, Arturo Incao2, Derek E. Gildea4, Niraj S. Trivedi4¤, Autumne N. Lee1, Chi-
Ping Day5, Helen T. Michael5, Thomas J. Hornyak3,6, Glenn Merlino5, NISC Comparative
Sequencing Program¶, William J. Pavan2
1 Department of Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, United States of
America, 2 Genetic Disease Research Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America, 3 Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, University of Maryland, School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of
America, 4 Computational and Statistical Genomics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America, 5 Laboratory of Cancer Biology
and Genetics, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland, United States of America, 6 Research & Development Service, VA Maryland Health Care System,
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America
¤ Current address: Social and Behavioral Research Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America
¶ NIH Intramural Sequencing Center, National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America
* harrisml@uab.edu
Abstract
Melanocyte stem cells (McSCs) and mouse models of hair graying serve as useful systems
to uncover mechanisms involved in stem cell self-renewal and the maintenance of regener-
ating tissues. Interested in assessing genetic variants that influence McSC maintenance,
we found previously that heterozygosity for the melanogenesis associated transcription fac-
tor, Mitf, exacerbates McSC differentiation and hair graying in mice that are predisposed for
this phenotype. Based on transcriptome and molecular analyses of Mitfmi-vga9/+ mice, we
report a novel role for MITF in the regulation of systemic innate immune gene expression.
We also demonstrate that the viral mimic poly(I:C) is sufficient to expose genetic susceptibil-
ity to hair graying. These observations point to a critical suppressor of innate immunity, the
consequences of innate immune dysregulation on pigmentation, both of which may have
implications in the autoimmune, depigmenting disease, vitiligo.
Author summary
Hair pigmentation over the course of a lifetime depends on melanocyte stem cells that
reside in the hair follicle. As old hairs fall out and new hairs grow in, melanocyte stem
cells serve as a reservoir for the melanocytes that produce the pigment that gives hair its
visible color. The loss of these stem cells leads to the growth of nonpigmented, or gray,
hairs. Evaluating mouse models of hair graying can reveal key aspects of melanocyte stem
cell biology. Using this approach, we discovered a novel role for the melanogenesis
PLOS Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2003648
May 3, 2018
1 / 27
a1111111111
a1111111111
a1111111111
a1111111111
a1111111111
OPEN ACCESS
Citation: Harris ML, Fufa TD, Palmer JW, Joshi SS,
Larson DM, Incao A, et al. (2018) A direct link
between MITF, innate immunity, and hair graying.
PLoS Biol 16(5): e2003648. https://doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pbio.2003648
Academic Editor: Yukiko Yamashita, University of
Michigan, United States of America
Received: July 17, 2017
Accepted: March 30, 2018
Published: May 3, 2018
Copyright: This is an open access article, free of all
copyright, and may be freely reproduced,
distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or
otherwise used by anyone for any lawful purpose.
The work is made available under the Creative
Commons CC0 public domain dedication.
Data Availability Statement: Data used to
generate the graphs within the paper is included in
the Supporting Information files. All RNA-seq files
are available at the NCBI GEO database (accession
number GSE102271).
Funding: NIH National Human Genome Research
Institute Intramural Research Program https://
www.genome.gov/ (grant number). The funder had
no role in study design, data collection and
analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the
manuscript. NIH National Institute on Aging https://
www.nia.nih.gov/ (grant number R00AG047128).
 associated transcription factor, MITF, in repressing the expression of innate immune
genes within cells of the melanocyte lineage. The importance of this repression is revealed
in animals that have a predisposition for hair graying. In these animals, artificial elevation
of the innate immune response, either through a genetic mechanism or via exposure to
viral mimic, results in significant melanocyte and melanocyte stem cell loss and leads to
the production of an increased number of gray hairs. These observations highlight the
negative effects of innate immune activation on melanocyte and melanocyte stem cell
physiology and suggest a connection between viral infection and hair graying.
Introduction
In the 1980s, a handful of studies reported that exposure to murine leukemia virus (MuLV),
either at mid-gestation or perinatally, is sufficient to drive premature hair graying in mice [1–
3]. Early infection with MuLV does not lead to immediate loss of hair pigmentation and
instead produces an adult-onset, progressive hypopigmentation phenotype, suggestive of a fail-
ure in melanocyte lineage regeneration. These observations suggest a role for innate immune
activation in adult hypopigmentation disorders, but how this phenomenon is mediated within
the postnatal melanocyte lineage remains unresolved. Using approaches to look for genetic
modifiers of hair graying in mice and transcriptomic analysis of melanocyte stem cells
(McSCs), we identify an exciting and unexpected link between the melanogenesis associated
transcription factor, MITF, and the suppression of a type I interferon (IFN) gene signature.
This discovery creates a unique opportunity to investigate how innate immune gene expres-
sion is regulated in postnatal melanocytes and how its dysregulation affects McSCs and the
regeneration of postnatal pigmentation during hair cycling.
During hair growth, McSCs produce the melanocyte progeny that differentiate and deposit
melanin into the hair shaft. Mouse models reveal that hair graying, both acute and age related,
is frequently preceded by a failure in McSC maintenance or dysregulated generation of mela-
nocyte progeny. Both lead to the production of nonpigmented, or gray, hair shafts. Hair gray-
ing can be elicited through a number of mechanisms—disrupting the signaling pathways
associated with the Kit receptor, Notch receptor, Endothelin receptor type B, Raf kinase,
Transforming growth factor beta, or Wnt [4–11]; loss of anti-apoptotic control [12,13]; mela-
nocyte-specific dysregulation of chromatin remodeling complexes [14]; exposure to genotoxic
stress [15,16]; changes in sex determining region Y-box 10 (SOX10) or MITF-mediated tran-
scriptional regulation [13,17]; vitiligo-like T-cell–mediated destruction of melanocytes [18];
and aging itself [13].
In particular, MITF, the gene encoding the micropthalmia-associated transcription factor,
is essential at multiple stages of the melanocyte life cycle. Across species, MITF is required for
the specification and survival of the melanocyte precursors, or melanoblasts, during early neu-
ral crest migration [19–21]. Loss of Mitf expression results in the near-complete depletion of
embryonic melanoblasts, and this leads to mice born with a fully white coat [22]. During mela-
nogenesis, MITF transcriptionally regulates a number of pigmentation genes involved in the
biosynthesis of melanin and the trafficking of melanosomes. Regulation of MITF activity levels
also influences the dynamic transition between the states of melanocyte migration, prolifera-
tion, and differentiation [23–25].
Our interest in the role of MITF in hair graying was spurred by our previous observation
that a genetic interaction exists between Mitf and the Sox10 transgene, Tg(Dct-Sox10) [17]. Tg
(DctSox10) mice conditionally overexpress Sox10 within the melanocyte lineage, and this leads
MITF and innate immunity
PLOS Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2003648
May 3, 2018
2 / 27
MH. The funder had no role in study design, data
collection and analysis, decision to publish, or
preparation of the manuscript.
Competing interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist.
Abbreviations: Actb, actin beta; CC3, cleaved
caspase 3; CD, cluster of differentiation; ChIP,
chromatin immunoprecipitation; ChIP-qPCR,
chromatin immunoprecipitation quantitative
polymerase chain reaction; ChIP-seq, chromatin
immunoprecipitation sequencing; DAMP, damage-
associated molecular pattern; DCT, dopachrome
tautomerase; DEG, differentially expressed gene;
FACS, fluorescence-activated cell sorting; IFN,
interferon; IgG, immunoglobulin G; Ifih1, interferon
induced with helicase C domain 1; IRF, interferon
regulatory factor; ISG, IFN-stimulated gene; Mc1r,
melanocortin 1 receptor gene; McSC, melanocyte
stem cell; Mitf, melanogenesis associated
transcription factor; MDA5, melanoma
differentiation-associated gene 5; MuLV, murine
leukemia virus; mm9, mus musculus 9 genome
build; NLRP1, NLR family pyrin domain containing
1; P, postnatal day; PAMP, pathogen-associated
molecular pattern; poly(I:C), polyinosinic:
polycytidylic acid; PRR, pattern recognition
receptor; qRT-PCR, quantitative reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction; RNA-seq,
RNA sequencing; SG, sebaceous gland; siNC1,
negative control siRNA; siRNA, small interfering
RNA; SOX10, sex determining region Y-box 10;
TICAM1, toll like receptor adaptor molecule 1.
 to the premature differentiation of McSCs, eventual McSC depletion, and progressive hair
graying. Because SOX10 transcriptionally activates the Mitf gene and the MITF protein pro-
motes melanocyte differentiation, we anticipated that reducing Mitf expression might alleviate
Tg(DctSox10)-mediated hair graying. We tested this using the Mitf-null allele, Mitfmi-vga9,
which in the heterozygous state does not lead to apparent McSC dysfunction or hair graying.
However, in contrast to our expectations, Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0; Mitfmi-vga9/+ mice exhibit sparsely
distributed yet noticeable nonpigmented or “gray” hairs throughout their coat prior to their
Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0 littermates (Fig 1A). Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0; Mitfmi-vga9/+ mice also show increased
differentiation of McSCs, as indicated by excessive ectopic pigmentation within the stem cell
niche (hair bulge) of their hair follicles. Intensified adult-onset hair graying associated with
Mitfmi-vga9 is particularly evident when the Tg(Dct-Sox10) transgene is homozygous and ani-
mals are imaged over time (Fig 1B). We interpreted this outcome as contrary to the canonical
role of MITF, in which high levels of MITF activity, rather than low, are associated with cell
cycle arrest and melanocyte differentiation [26]. This interpretation is reinforced further by
the fact that McSCs in Mitfvit/vit mice, which carry a hypomorphic mutation of Mitf, also
exhibit premature McSC differentiation and hair graying even in the absence of Tg(Dct-
Sox10) [13]. This suggests a novel contribution of MITF to the regulation of McSC mainte-
nance and melanocyte lineage regeneration postnatally.
With this in mind, we performed genomic analysis of wild-type and Mitfmi-vga9/+ McSCs
and discovered that haploinsufficiency for Mitf results in a marked and chronic up-regulation
of a type I IFN gene signature in this stem cell population. To better understand the contribu-
tion of innate immune suppression in postnatal melanogenesis, we further validated this
immune signature in the skin and melanoblasts (the melanocyte precursors) of Mitfmi-vga9/+
mice. We evaluate the possibility that MITF acts as negative transcriptional regulator of innate
immune target genes, and we assess the consequence of innate immune pathway activation on
the regeneration of the melanocyte lineage during hair cycling.
Results
Mitf haploinsufficiency is associated with an up-regulation of a type I IFN–
regulated gene expression signature in McSCs and melanoblasts
In order to assess the effects of Mitf mi-vga9/+ on gene expression in vivo, McSCs were isolated
from the dermis of adult mice at 8 weeks of age. At this time point, hairs across the body of the
mouse are synchronized in the hair stage of telogen [27]. During telogen, the hair follicle does
not have a hair bulb or differentiated melanocytes, and McSCs are the only melanocytic cells
present within the hair. They can be identified by their expression of the melanogenic enzyme
dopachrome tautomerase (DCT) and the transmembrane receptor KIT, and they are observed
in the hair bulge (the upper region of the telogen-stage hair that lies at the insertion point of
the arrector pili muscle) and secondary hair germ (the lower region of the telogen-stage hair
nearest the dermal papilla; Fig 2A). In order to isolate these McSCs from telogen hairs, the der-
mis of Mitf mi-vga9/+ and wild-type mice was dissociated and immunolabeled with two cell-sur-
face markers, KIT and cluster of differentiation 45 (CD45). Fluorescence-activated cell sorting
(FACS) was then used to distinguish McSCs (KIT+/CD45−) from mast cells (KIT+/CD45+;
Fig 2B). When assessed in vitro 1, 3, or 5 days after sorting, greater than 92% of the KIT+/
CD45− population of cells express the melanocytic protein DCT and begin to produce pig-
ment at 5 days (Fig 2C and 2D). Additionally, because MITF is a known transcriptional regu-
lator of the Kit gene [20,28], we compared the population percentages within each FACS gate
between the wild-type and Mitf mi-vga9/+ dermal cell suspensions. No significant difference is
observed in the percent of KIT+/CD45− dermal cells between wild-type and Mitf mi-vga9/+
MITF and innate immunity
PLOS Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2003648
May 3, 2018
3 / 27
 animals, suggesting that the Mitf mi-vga9 mutation does not change the ability of this FACS
strategy to identify the McSC population (Fig 2E). This suggests that this sorting strategy is
adequate to produce a highly enriched pool of McSCs for transcriptomic analysis. RNA iso-
lated from the KIT+/CD45− McSC populations obtained from the dermis of wild-type and
Mitf mi-vga9/+ mice was then subjected to RNA sequencing (RNA-seq).
Fig 1. Increased hair graying and McSC differentiation occurs in Tg(Dct-Sox10) animals that are haploinsufficient for
Mitfmi-vga9/+. (A) Dorsal images of two female littermates taken at P110. At this age, the coat of Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0 mice appears
solid black, while the coat of Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0; Mitfmi-vga9/+ mice exhibits a small number of gray hairs along its back. Bright-
field images of histological sections of the skins from these mice reveal increased ectopic pigmentation (arrows) within the hair
bulge (region between the dotted lines) of hairs from Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0; Mitfmi-vga9/+ animals in comparison to Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0
animals. (B) Dorsal images of two female littermates taken at P37 and P110. At P37, Tg(Dct-Sox10)/Tg(Dct-Sox10) mice
exhibit a black coat with congenital white spotting on the belly and back. These mice experience progressive hair graying and
by P110 exhibit a “salt and pepper” coat color in regions of the back fur that were originally black. In comparison to Tg(Dct-
Sox10)/Tg(Dct-Sox10) mice, hair graying in Tg(Dct-Sox10)/Tg(Dct-Sox10); Mitfmi-vga9/+ mice at P110 is more severe, with a
majority of the back fur exhibiting gray hairs. The images for this figure were generated in the original study presented in [17].
McSC, melanocyte stem cell; P, postnatal day; SG, sebaceous gland.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2003648.g001
MITF and innate immunity
PLOS Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2003648
May 3, 2018
4 / 27
 Using a 1.5-fold cutoff, differential gene expression analysis of the RNA-seq reads obtained
from Mitfmi-vga9/+ and wild-type McSCs demonstrated that, as expected, Mitfmi-vga9/+ McSCs
exhibit the reduced expression of pigmentation-related genes known to be positively regulated
by MITF (S2 Data). This includes Dct, Gpnmb, Gpr143, Irf4, Kit, Mlana, Met, Rab27a, Slc45a2,
Tbx2, and Tyr. However, this analysis also uncovered an unanticipated enrichment of DEGs
up-regulated in Mitfmi-vga9/+ McSCs that are involved in innate immunity (S2 Data). Out of
the 411 genes with a greater than 1.5-fold up-regulation in Mitfmi-vga9/+ cells, at least 55 are
known for their involvement in type I innate immune signaling (DAVID Functional Annota-
tion Tool [29,30] and interferome.org [31]). These include cytoplasmic pattern recognition
receptors (PRRs; Ddx58, Ifih1), transcriptional regulators (Irf7, Stat1), and IFN-stimulated
genes (ISGs) that execute the antiviral response (Ifit1, Ifit3, Isg15, Mx1, Oas1a; Fig 3A, S3
Data). Up-regulation of this particular subset of genes is known as the “IFN signature” and is
often associated with viral infection and autoimmune disorders [32]. To rule out the possibility
that this ISG signature was due to a microbial infection of our Mitfmi-vga9 line at the time that
McSCs were harvested for FACS, we assessed ISG expression by quantitative reverse
Fig 2. FACS isolation of adult McSCs. (A) Immunolabeling for KIT protein in mouse skin at 8 weeks of age. At this time point, the majority of hairs exist in the telogen
hair stage, and McSCs that are positive for both KIT (green) and DCT (red) are observed in the hair bulge (arrow) and secondary hair germ (arrowheads). The dotted white
lines outline the hair follicles. (B) FACS of dermal cells from 8-week-old mice produces two KIT+ populations. McSCs are CD45− and mast cells are CD45+. The FACS
gating strategy (center fluorescence plot) used to isolate McSCs successfully separates each of these cell types and is confirmed by visualizing their distinct morphologies;
McSCs are small and often bipolar (left phase images), while mast cells are large and rough looking (right phase image). (C) KIT+/CD45− cells isolated by FACS were
placed in culture and assessed for their expression of KIT and DCT by immunolabeling over a 5-day period. Total cells were identified by the nuclear marker DAPI. The
table shows the percentage and total number (in parentheses) of cells exhibiting the indicated staining pattern. This FACS protocol produces a relatively pure McSC
population, with >92% of cells being DCT+ 1 day after sorting. (D) FACS-isolated KIT+/CD45− McSCs remain positive for the melanocyte markers KIT (green) and DCT
(red) and exhibit melanocyte-like traits while in tissue culture. These cells progress from being round at 1 day, to slightly spread at 3 days, to dendritic and pigmented over 5
days. (E) Evaluation of the indicated gates (boxes) on FACS fluorescence plots confirms that there is no significant difference by t test when comparing the percentage of
each cell population between wild-type (left plot) and Mitfmi-vga9/+ (right plot) dermal cell suspensions (KIT+/CD45−, p = 0.85; KIT+/CD45+, p = 0.14; KIT−/CD45+,
p = 0.28). Percentages are represented as the mean ± standard deviation, with n = 3 sorts per genotype. The raw data used to generate these graphs are available in S1 Data.
APC, allophycocyanin; CD45, cluster of differentiation 45; DCT, dopachrome tautomerase; FACS, fluorescence-activated cell sorting; FITC, fluorescein; McSC, melanocyte
stem cell; Mitf, melanogenesis associated transcription factor; Neg, negative; PIG, pigment.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2003648.g002
MITF and innate immunity
PLOS Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2003648
May 3, 2018
5 / 27
 Fig 3. Mitfmi-vga9/+ McSCs and melanoblasts exhibit an elevated type I interferon gene expression signature and Mitfmi-vga9/+ melanoblasts show increased sensitivity
to viral mimic. (A) Heatmap of scaled and clustered, rlog-transformed read count values obtained from RNA-seq analysis of Mitfmi-vga9/+ and wild-type McSCs. Fifty-five
of the four hundred eleven genes that demonstrated a statistically significant, greater than 1.5-fold increase in expression in Mitfmi-vga9/+ McSCs over wild-type McSCs
participate in innate immune signaling and are presented here (padjusted < 0.05, Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted p-value). (B) Immunolabeling for KIT protein in mouse skin
at P1.5. At this time point, KIT+ (green), DCT+ (red) melanoblasts are observed migrating into the developing hair follicles. The dotted white lines outline the hair follicles
and the solid line indicates the position of the epidermis. (C) qRT-PCR analysis of Mitf and ISG expression (Ifih1, Ifit3, Irf7, Isg15, and Stat1) in primary melanoblasts
isolated from Mitfmi-vga9/+ and wild-type littermate pups at P1.5. Each circle indicates the expression of cells from an individual primary melanoblast cell line generated from
an individual pup. The horizontal bars represent the mean, and the asterisks indicate gene expression changes with a q-value of <0.05 using the two-stage linear step-up
procedure of Benjamini, Krieger, and Yekutieli, with Q = 5%. (D) qRT-PCR analysis of type I interferon gene expression (Ifna4 and Ifnb1) in primary melanoblast cell lines
(isolated as described in [C]). Melanoblast cell lines were treated for 9 hours with lipofectamine only (lipo only) or lipofectamine and poly(I:C) (lipo + poly(I:C)). The
horizontal bars represent the mean, and the asterisks indicate gene expression changes with a q-value of <0.05 using the two-stage linear step-up procedure of Benjamini,
Krieger, and Yekutieli, with Q = 5%. The data presented here are representative of two independent experiments testing poly(I:C) treatment of primary melanoblast cell
lines at two different cell passages. The raw data used to generate the graphs in (C) and (D) are available in S1 Data. DCT, dopachrome tautomerase; ISG, IFN-stimulated
gene; lipo + poly(I:C), lipofectamine and poly(I:C); lipo only, lipofectamine only; Mitf, melanogenesis associated transcription factor; McSC, melanocyte stem cell; P,
postnatal day; qRT-PCR, quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction; RNA-seq, RNA sequencing.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2003648.g003
MITF and innate immunity
PLOS Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2003648
May 3, 2018
6 / 27
 transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) in skins obtained from mice at postnatal
day 32 (P32) that were housed in an unrelated facility and that have been genetically isolated
from our Mitf mi-vga9 line for several generations. Consistent with our RNA-seq data, skins
from these Mitf mi-vga9/+ mice show clear up-regulation of the five ISGs evaluated, Ifih1, Ifit3,
Irf7, Isg15, and Stat1, in comparison to animals that do not carry this mutation (S1 Fig).
Type I innate immune signaling is comprised of a two-part signaling cascade. First, in an
infected cell, viral DNA or RNA is recognized by PRRs, and downstream signaling results in
the phosphorylation of interferon regulatory factors (IRFs). Active IRFs enter the nucleus and
transcriptionally up-regulate the type I IFN genes to produce the chemokines IFN-α and -β.
Via autocrine and paracrine signaling, IFNs bind IFN receptors and activate a second signaling
cascade that results in a broad and robust ISG program. These ISGs mediate the antiviral
response in both the infected and neighboring cells [33–36]. Based on this, we reasoned that
Mitf mi-vga9/+ McSCs should more readily up-regulate Ifn gene expression in response to virus
in comparison to wild-type McSCs if the IFN signature associated with Mitfmi-vga9 is indeed
genuine. To test this, viral infection can be mimicked by delivering synthetic dsRNA into the
cell cytoplasm via lipofectamine-based transfection. Polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (poly(I:C))
is one type of dsRNA, an agonist for the cytoplasmic PRR, melanoma differentiation-associ-
ated gene 5 (MDA5, encoded by the Ifih1 gene), and is sufficient to mediate type I IFN
responses in vitro and in vivo [37].
Techniques for expanding McSCs in culture for in vitro analysis are not well established, so we
instead evaluated primary melanoblasts for their response to viral mimic. Primary melanoblasts
refer to the highly proliferative, KIT+, melanocyte precursors that invade the developing hair folli-
cle and give rise to either McSCs or differentiated melanocytes during perinatal hair morphogene-
sis (Fig 3B). Using the same FACS strategy as presented above (Fig 2B), KIT+/CD45− primary
melanoblasts can be isolated from the whole skin of pups on P1.5 and passaged readily in tissue
culture. Comparing cells isolated from wild-type and Mitfmi-vga9/+ littermates, we first confirmed
that Mitfmi-vga9/+ melanoblasts exhibit an IFN signature similar to adult McSCs. By qRT-PCR we
assessed the ISGs Ifih1, Ifit3, Irf7, Isg15, and Stat1 and demonstrated that Mitfmi-vga9/+ melanoblasts
show a significant up-regulation of several of these ISGs, namely Ifih1, Ifit3, Irf7, and Isg15 (Fig
3C). Despite this IFN signature, basal Ifn gene expression in Mitfmi-vga9/+ and wild-type melano-
blasts is equivalent and nearly undetectable (Fig 3D, lipo only). However, transient transfection of
these melanoblasts with poly(I:C) induces the expression of Ifna4 and Ifnb1 in both cell types,
with Mitfmi-vga9/+ melanoblasts expressing 2- to 3-fold higher Ifn mRNA levels than wild-type
melanoblasts (Fig 3D, lipo + poly(I:C)). ISG expression in perinatal melanoblasts demonstrates
that the IFN signature observed in Mitfmi-vga9/+ animals is not exclusive to the McSC or the adult
time point. The similarity in basal Ifn expression between wild-type and Mitfmi-vga9/+ melanoblasts
also suggests that the IFN signature observed in Mitfmi-vga9/+ melanoblasts is not due to the con-
stant production of IFN by melanoblasts. Furthermore, the enhanced Ifn expression exhibited by
Mitfmi-vga9/+ melanoblasts after exposure to viral mimic suggests that haploinsufficiency for Mitf
primes these melanoblasts for the antiviral response.
MITF binds the promotor of several ISGs and transcriptionally represses
ISG expression in vitro
MITF is a transcription factor that promotes the direct and indirect regulation of a number of
genes essential for melanocyte development, differentiation, proliferation, and survival [38].
Thus, we investigated whether the IFN signature observed in Mitfmi-vga9/+ McSCs and melano-
blasts may be dependent on MITF’s role as a transcription factor. To determine whether
reduction of Mitf is sufficient to lead to a direct change in ISG expression autonomous to the
MITF and innate immunity
PLOS Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2003648
May 3, 2018
7 / 27
 melanocyte, we knocked down Mitf in the immortalized mouse melanocyte cell line melan-a
using a small interfering RNA (siRNA) approach. Intracellular delivery of siRNAs can elicit a
nonspecific innate immune response that can be mitigated by incorporating 20-O-methyl-uri-
dine or guanosine nucleosides into at least one strand of the siRNA duplex [39]. Thus, we gen-
erated two siRNAs—a standard siRNA against Mitf (siMitf [40]) and a modified Mitf siRNA
with an identical sequence but synthesized to include three 20-O-methyl groups along each
strand of siRNA (siMitf-OM). In line with MITF repression of ISG expression, knockdown of
Mitf with either siMitf or siMitf-OM leads to robust up-regulation of the ISGs Ifih1, Ifit3, Irf7,
Isg15, and Stat1 within 48 hours of transfection in comparison to a scrambled siRNA control
(siMitf-scram; Fig 4A). These data support the premise that the IFN signature observed in
Mitfmi-vga9/+ mice may be due to MITF-mediated gene regulation of ISGs.
Among the genes differentially expressed in Mitfmi-vga9/+ McSCs, we were particularly inter-
ested in IFN regulatory factor 4, Irf4. In human melanocytes, MITF binds and activates Irf4 via
an intronic enhancer [42], and in turn, IRF4 can transcriptionally regulate IFN signaling by
repressing the master regulatory factor for IFN gene expression, Irf7 [43,44]. A genome-wide
association study of Latin Americans also identified Irf4 as a locus associated with hair graying
[45]. Because Irf4 and Irf7 exhibit a reciprocal relationship in Mitfmi-vga9/+ McSCs (Irf4 is down
and Irf7 is up; S2 Data), we asked whether Irf4 may be indirectly responsible for the up-regula-
tion of ISGs in Mitfmi-vga9/+ melanocytes. However, within the 48-hour time frame that is suffi-
cient for Mitf knockdown to result in ISG up-regulation, we did not observe consistent down-
regulation of Irf4 between the two Mitf siRNAs (Fig 4A). As a control, we further confirmed
that cells being treated with either siMitf or siMitf-OM results in the predictable down-regula-
tion of the melanosomal gene Pmel17, which MITF is known to transcriptionally activate (Fig
4A; [46]). Based on these observations, we anticipated that the up-regulation of ISGs observed
with Mitf knockdown cannot be IRF4 dependent. Indeed, using two unique Irf4 siRNAs
(siIrf4_a and siIrf4_b), Irf4 gene expression can be significantly reduced in comparison to a
negative control siRNA (siNC1). However, when considering the results of both Irf4 siRNAs,
Irf4 knockdown does not lead to the consistent up-regulation or Irf7 or any of the other ISGs
analyzed (Fig 4B). Altogether, these results support a novel role for MITF in suppressing the
basal IFN signature in melanocytes in vitro and indicate that MITF does not mediate this
response through Irf4.
An alternate mechanism by which MITF may participate in regulation of innate immune
genes is through a direct interaction with their cis-regulatory regions, as is the case with many
pigmentation genes [46–49]. To investigate this, we screened a previously published MITF
chromation immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) dataset for binding of MITF to regu-
latory regions of innate immune genes [41]. The genomic coordinates of the MITF ChIP-seq
peaks found in human primary melanocytes and COLO829 melanoma cells, reported in Web-
ster et al. 2014 [41], were converted from genome build GRCh37/hg19 to NCBI37/mm9 (Gal-
axy Liftover), and putative target genes were identified using GREAT, version 3.0.0 [50]. For
the set of genes that exhibit MITF ChIP-seq peaks within 5 kb of their transcription start site
in either direction (6,771), we found 108 genes that are also differentially expressed by greater
than 1.5-fold in Mitfmi-vga9/+ McSCs (Fig 4C, S4 Data). This overlap is under enriched by
1.22-fold compared to expectations (hypergeometric test; p-value = 0.0065), suggesting that
the majority of gene expression changes observed in Mitfmi-vga9/+ McSCs are indirect. Thus, we
further intersected the 108 DEGs with two additional gene lists—one comprising genes
reported to be involved in pigmentation (curated from Online Mendelian Inheritiance in
Man, Mouse Genome Informatics, and Gene Set Enrichment Analysis) and the second com-
prising the 55 ISGs identified above in Fig 3A. This comparison validates that, as expected,
some DEGs in Mitfmi-vga9/+ McSCs represent known MITF targets involved in pigmentation
MITF and innate immunity
PLOS Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2003648
May 3, 2018
8 / 27
 but also reveals a number of innate immune genes that may also be under MITF transcrip-
tional control (Fig 4C). Of the nine innate immune DEGs, seven exhibit an MITF ChIP-seq
peak that spans their transcription start site and is congruent with a role for MITF in the direct
Fig 4. MITF binds to the promoter of innate immune target genes and acts as a transcriptional repressor. (A, B) Relative gene expression in melan-a cells 48 hours after
transfection with siRNA. In (A), cells were transfected with siRNAs targeting Mitf (siMitf and siMitf-OM) or an analogous scrambled control siRNA (siMitf-scram). In (B),
cells were transfected with one of two siRNAs targeting Irf4 (siIrf4_a, siIrf4_b) or siNC1. The bars represent the mean ± standard deviation, and the asterisks indicate gene
expression changes with a q-value of <0.05 using the two-stage linear step-up procedure of Benjamini, Krieger, and Yekutieli, with Q = 5%. Data presented in A and B are
representative of two independent knockdown experiments performed in melan-a cells at two different cell passages. (C) Venn diagrams demonstrating the intersection of
gene lists. The left diagram represents the genes exhibiting a 1.5-fold or greater difference in expression in Mitfmi-vga9/+ over wild-type McSCs (Mitfmi-vga9/+DEGs, top circle)
overlapped with the list of genes associated with MITF ChIP-seq peaks reported by Webster et al. 2014 (MITF ChIP-seq genes, bottom circle) [41] and are considered
potential direct targets of MITF. These 108 direct targets are provided in S4 Data. Direct target genes were further identified by comparing them with a list of known
pigmentation genes in the upper right diagram and with the list of 55 innate immune-related genes up-regulated in Mitfmi-vga9/+ McSCs (as defined in Fig 3A) in the lower
right diagram. (D) MITF ChIP-qPCR performed in melan-a cells and assayed for enrichment at the indicated gene loci (Dct, Ifih1, Ifit3, Stat1). A centromeric DNA sequence
was amplified as a negative control (neg con). Error bars indicate mean ± standard deviation of two independent ChIP pulldowns. The raw data used to generate the graphs in
(A), (B), and (D) are available in S1 Data. Actb, actin beta; ChIP, chromatin immunoprecipitation; ChIP-qPCR, chromatin immunoprecipitation quantitative polymerase
chain reaction; ChIP-seq, chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing; DEG, differentially expressed gene; IgG, immunoglobulin G; McSC, melanocyte stem cell; MITF,
melanogenesis associated transcription factor; neg con, negative control; siNC1, nontargeting control siRNA; siRNA, small interfering RNA.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2003648.g004
MITF and innate immunity
PLOS Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2003648
May 3, 2018
9 / 27
 regulation of these genes at their promotor (Table 1). In order to confirm that MITF binds to
these loci in mouse melanocytes, we assessed MITF occupancy using chromatin immunopre-
cipitation quantitative polymerase chain reaction (ChIP-qPCR) for three of the seven ISGs in
melan-a cells. Significant chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) enrichment of MITF was
observed at the promoter regions of all three of the ISGs predicted to be MITF targets (Ifih1,
Ifit3, and Stat1) as well as at the promoter region of a known MITF target gene, Dct (Fig 4D).
No MITF enrichment was observed for the negative control region, a sequence within the cen-
tromere. These observations support a direct regulatory role for MITF in the repression of at
least some ISGs within melanocytes.
Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0; Mitfmi-vga9/+ mice exhibit up-regulated ISG expression
but no change in the density of immune cells within the skin
While it is interesting that Mitfmi-vga9/+ mice exhibit an IFN signature and that MITF transcrip-
tionally inhibits some of these genes, the real impetus of this study stemmed from previous
observations that Mitfmi-vga9/+ causes increased McSC differentiation and hair graying in combi-
nation with the transgene Tg(Dct-Sox10) [17]. In order to investigate whether aberrant innate
immune signaling might explain hair graying in Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0; Mitfmi-vga9/+ animals, we first
evaluated the expression of Mitf and ISGs in the skin of adult littermates generated by mating
Mitfmi-vga9/+ and Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0 animals. Interestingly, qRT-PCR analysis reveals that skins
from Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0 mice exhibit Mitf levels similar to that of wild-type, and skins from Tg
(Dct-Sox10)/0; Mitfmi-vga9/+mice exhibit reduced levels of Mitf that are indistinguishable from
Mitfmi-vga9/+ mice (Fig 5A). This is in contrast to the expectation that the Tg(Dct-Sox10) trans-
gene would increase Mitf expression due to the ability of SOX10 to up-regulate Mitf transcrip-
tionally [51]. However, in correlation with these low Mitf expression levels, skins from both
Mitfmi-vga9/+ and Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0; Mitfmi-vga9/+ mice show a significant up-regulation of the
ISGs Ifih1, Irf7, Isg15, and Stat1, with Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0; Mitfmi-vga9/+ skins showing the addi-
tional up-regulation of Ifit3 (Fig 5A0). Because Mitfmi-vga9/+ mice do not exhibit hair graying
themselves [17], these observations suggest that it may be the unique combination of melano-
cyte dysregulation via Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0 and innate immune dysregulation via Mitfmi-vga9/+ that
leads to the exacerbated hair graying observed in Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0; Mitfmi-vga9/+ and Tg(Dct-
Sox10)/ Tg(Dct-Sox10); Mitfmi-vga9/+mice.
Table 1. Relationship of MITF ChIP-seq peaks to the transcription start site (TSS) of innate immune genes.
gene symbol
gene TSS coordinates (mm9)
ChIP-seq peak coordinates (mm9)�
relationship to TSS
RefSeq ID
B2m
chr2: 121973422
chr2: 121972955–121973785
overlapping
NM_009735
Ddx60
chr8: 64406885
chr8: 64406846–64407510
overlapping
NM_001081215
H2-T23
chr17: 36169646
chr17: 36169193–36169773
overlapping
NM_010398
Ifih1
chr2: 62484312
chr2: 62483483–62484952
overlapping
NM_027835
Ifit3
chr19: 34658018
chr19: 34657775–34658283
overlapping
NM_010501
Isg15
chr4: 155574927
chr4: 155576305–155577331
flanking
NM_015783
Lgals9
chr11: 78798426
chr11: 78796426–78797244
flanking
NM_010708
Stat1
chr1: 52176281
chr1: 52175488–52176824
overlapping
NM_009283
Tap1
chr17: 34324500
chr17: 34324057–34325430
overlapping
NM_013683
�ChIP-seq peak coordinates reported by Webster et al. 2014 and converted from genomic build GRCh37/hg19 to NCBI37/mm9 using Galaxy Liftover function.
Abbreviations: ChIP-seq, chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing; MITF, melanogenesis associated transcription factor; mm9, mus musculus 9 genome build;
RefSeq, Reference Sequence database; TSS, transcription start site.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2003648.t001
MITF and innate immunity
PLOS Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2003648
May 3, 2018
10 / 27
 An IFN signature is commonly detected in affected tissues of patients afflicted with autoim-
mune disease. Using the same mice as in Fig 5A, we assessed whether changes in resident and
infiltrating immune cell populations could provide an etiology for hair graying within Tg(Dct-
Sox10)/0; Mitfmi-vga9/+ mice. On cryosections of skin, we quantified mast cells (toluidine blue
histologic stain), T cells (CD4+, CD8+, CD3ε+), macrophages, and dendritic cells (CD11b).
Previous studies report a partial depletion of skin mast cells in Mitfmi-vga9 homozygotes [52];
however, a similar reduction is not observed in Mitfmi-vga9/+ or Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0; Mitfmi-vga9/+
animals. Moreover, immunolabeling for CD3ε, CD4, CD8, and CD11b indicates no overt
change in the density of these immune cell populations (Fig 5B, S2 Fig). Thus, the increased
hair graying associated with Mitfmi-vga9/+ is likely not the result of immune cell-mediated
destruction of melanocytes.
Reduction of Ifih1 is not sufficient to rescue Mitfmi-vga9-mediated hair
graying
Recent genome-wide association studies have led to the identification of function-reducing
mutations in interferon induced with helicase C domain 1 (Ifih1) as protective against vitiligo
in humans [53]. Ifih1 is one of the direct transcriptional targets of MITF identified above (Fig
4) and encodes for the protein MDA5. MDA5 sits at the top of the type I innate immune sig-
naling cascade and functions as a cytoplasmic PRR that responds to pathogen-associated
molecular patterns (PAMPs) like viral RNA [54]. Gain-of-function mutations of Ifih1 in
humans or overexpression of Ifih1 in mice is associated with a sustained IFN gene signature
and makes it a reasonable candidate for mediating a similar effect downstream of Mitfmi-vga9/+
[55,56]. Thus, we were interested to evaluate whether Ifih1 haploinsufficiency would be suffi-
cient to reduce the hair graying caused by Mitfmi-vga9 in the context of Tg(Dct-Sox10).
Hair graying associated with Tg(Dct-Sox10) is most readily visible in mice that are homozy-
gous for the transgene, with Tg(Dct-Sox10)/Tg(Dct-Sox10); Mitfmi-vga9/+ animals exhibiting
robust graying at 110 days (Fig 1). Comparing Tg(Dct-Sox10)/Tg(Dct-Sox10); Mitfmi-vga9/+
mice to their littermates, we find that additional heterozygosity for Ifih1 (Ifih tm1.1Cln/+) does
not reverse hair graying to the levels observed in Tg(Dct-Sox10)/Tg(Dct-Sox10) mice (Fig 6,
S3 Fig). At most, and in a qualitative sense, Ifih tm1.1Cln/+ appears to produce a small reduction
in the existing congenital white belly spot. These observations suggest that while MITF may
repress Ifih1 in melanocytes in vitro, reduction of Ifih1 in vivo is insufficient to reverse hair
graying associated with Mitfmi-vga9/+. This may indicate that the influence of MITF in innate
immune regulation extends beyond the regulation of an individual gene, which is consistent
with the fact that Ifih1 is not the only innate immune target gene directly downstream of
MITF (as shown in Fig 4).
Systemic poly(I:C) administration exacerbates hair graying in genetically
susceptible mice
Up to this point, it is still unclear whether the innate immune dysregulation associated with
Mitfmi-vga9 contributes to elevated hair graying in Tg(Dct-Sox10) mice or whether these two
phenomena are merely correlated. To investigate if the activation of innate immune signaling
is sufficient to mediate changes in McSC maintenance and hair graying independent of Mitf,
we asked if hair graying can be induced in mice exposed systemically to the viral mimic poly(I:
C). Poly(I:C) administered in vivo by intraperitoneal injection induces type I IFN production,
which is detectable in the blood serum and lymphoid system [37,57]. This in turn initiates the
antiviral response via up-regulation of ISGs to limit viral replication [58]. To mimic the combi-
nation of Mitfmi-vga9 and Tg(DctSox10) that leads to exacerbated hair graying, we examined
MITF and innate immunity
PLOS Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2003648
May 3, 2018
11 / 27
 Poly(I:C)-mediated innate immune activation on the Tg(Dct-Sox10) background and com-
pared it to wild-type.
To assess the effects of poly(I:C) on hair pigmentation, hairs along the lower back of each
mouse were plucked to synchronize and activate the hair cycle, and the mice were injected with
poly(I:C) for 3 days sequentially, beginning at 4 days post plucking. The presence of nonpig-
mented, gray hairs is detected by visual inspection once the hairs have emerged from the skin.
Notably, treatment with this viral mimic is sufficient to increase the amount of gray hairs pres-
ent in the plucked area in Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0 mice but not adequate to induce hair graying on the
wild-type background (Fig 7A). By immunolabeling for the melanocyte marker DCT on skin
sections from these mice, we demonstrate that this hair graying phenotype is the result of the
quantitative reduction of McSCs (DCT+ cells in the hair bulge) and melanocytes (Dct+ cells in
the hair bulb; Fig 7B and 7C). This same cell loss is not observed in wild-type animals that are
treated with poly(I:C). Taken together, these results suggest that proper regulation of innate
immune signaling during active hair growth is essential to both McSCs and differentiating
Fig 5. Mitfmi-vga9/+ and Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0; Mitfmi-vga9/+ animals exhibit elevated ISG expression but no change in the density of immune populations within the
skin. (A, A0) qRT-PCR analysis of Mitf and ISG expression in skin isolated from adult wild-type, Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0, Mitfmi-vga9/+, and Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0; Mitfmi-vga9/+
littermates. Each point on the graph represents the expression value from skin of an individual animal. The horizontal bars represent the mean, and the asterisks
indicate gene expression changes with a q-value of <0.05 using the two-stage linear step-up procedure of Benjamini, Krieger, and Yekutieli, with Q = 5%. (B) Number of
immune-related cells per a 15 mm2 area of skin from the same animals as described in (A) harvested at mid-anagen. Mast cells were detected using toluidine blue
staining, and other immune cells were detected by immunofluorescence for the indicated markers. Representative images of histological sections used for cell counts are
provided in S2 Fig. Each point on the graph represents cell counts from an individual animal, and the horizontal bar represents the mean. t tests confirmed no
statistically significant differences in the density of immune cells when comparing wild-type animals to Mitfmi-vga9/+ or Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0; Mitfmi-vga9/+ animals. The raw
data used to generate the graphs in (A), (A0), and (B) are available in S1 Data. Actb, actin beta; CD, cluster of differentiation; ISG, IFN-stimulated gene; Mitf,
melanogenesis associated transcription factor; qRT-PCR, quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2003648.g005
MITF and innate immunity
PLOS Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2003648
May 3, 2018
12 / 27
 melanocytes and that this effect is unmasked by the Tg(Dct-Sox10) genetic background. Akin
to Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0; Mitfmi-vga9/+ animals, treating Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0 mice with poly(I:C) leads to
increased hair graying.
In order to investigate the cellular mechanism responsible for the loss of McSCs and mela-
nocytes in Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0 mice treated with poly(I:C), we performed further histological
analysis to assess for T-cell infiltration and apoptosis. Using immunolabeling and the pan T-
cell marker CD3ε, we found no qualitative difference in T-cell localization or density within
the skins of Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0 mice injected with poly(I:C) or the vehicle control (S4 Fig). Dou-
ble labeling for DCT and the apoptotic marker, cleaved caspase 3 (CC3), also revealed no
apparent CC3+ cells within the hair follicles where McSCs or melanocytes reside (S4 Fig).
Interestingly, however, closer examination of the differentiation state of the McSCs in Tg(Dct-
Sox10)/0 mice treated with poly(I:C) revealed a significant reduction in the percentage of
ectopically pigmented McSCs within the hair. Previously, we established that about half of the
McSCs in Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0 mice exhibit a differentiated phenotype in comparison to wild-
type [17]. However, the proportion of ectopically pigmented McSCs in Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0 mice
treated with poly(I:C) is significantly lower than in Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0 mice given the vehicle
control (Fig 7D). We surmise that the drop in overall McSC numbers observed in poly(I:C)-
treated Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0 mice (shown in Fig 7B) is due to the specific loss of McSCs that have
inappropriately differentiated, and that the loss of the these McSCs either occurred at an earlier
time point or via a mechanism that does not involve T-cell infiltration or CC3-associated apo-
ptosis. Interestingly, hair graying in Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0; Mitfmi-vga9/+ mice is more progressive
than the acute graying observed in Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0 mice treated with poly(I:C) [17], and hair
graying in Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0; Mitfmi-vga9/+ mice is preceded by excessive McSC differentiation,
a phenotype that we do not observe in the Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0 mice treated with poly(I:C). In the
Fig 6. Ifih1tm1.1Cln/+ does not affect hair graying in Tg(Dct-Sox10)/Tg(Dct-Sox10); Mitfmi-vga9/+ mice. (A, B) Images of Tg(Dct-Sox10)/Tg(Dct-
Sox10); Mitfmi-vga9/+ and Tg(Dct-Sox10)/Tg(Dct-Sox10); Mitfmi-vga9/+; Ifih tm1.1Cln/+ littermates imaged at postnatal day 95. (A) Tg(Dct-Sox10)/Tg(Dct-
Sox10); Mitfmi-vga9/+ animals exhibit a white belly spot at birth and premature hair graying as they age. (B) Tg(Dct-Sox10)/Tg(Dct-Sox10); Mitfmi-vga9/+;
Ifih tm1.1Cln/+ animals also exhibit hair graying and a belly spot that is slightly reduced in size. Images shown here are representative of five biological
replicates for each genotype, with additional images provided in S3 Fig. Ifih1; interferon induced with helicase C domain 1; Mitf, melanogenesis
associated transcription factor.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2003648.g006
MITF and innate immunity
PLOS Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2003648
May 3, 2018
13 / 27
 MITF and innate immunity
PLOS Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2003648
May 3, 2018
14 / 27
 future, it will be important to evaluate whether lower dosages of poly(I:C) can drive McSC dif-
ferentiation or whether these two hair graying models represent distinct cellular pathologies.
Discussion
By assessing McSCs and melanoblasts in vivo and melanocytes in vitro, we identify a novel
role for MITF in the transcriptional repression of target genes involved in type I innate
immune signaling. Accordingly, we demonstrate that haploinsufficiency for Mitf incites a
heightened and sustained IFN gene signature in McSCs, melanoblasts, and whole skin, and
that Mitfmi-vga9/+ melanoblasts have an enhanced ability to respond to viral mimic. We show
through siRNA knockdown and ChIP analysis in vitro that MITF transcriptionally represses
several ISGs and that for some of these ISGs, this response may be through the direct binding
of MITF to their gene promoter. Furthermore, we establish that postnatal melanocytes and
McSCs are negatively affected by systemic activation of innate immune signaling in vivo and
that this contributes to the pathogenesis of hair graying when considered in the context of a
genetic background that is already at risk for this phenotype.
The participation of MITF in the regulation of innate immune target genes within the mela-
nocyte lineage is unanticipated but is reported within other genomic datasets. For instance,
RNA-seq analysis of human melanoma COLO829 cells transfected with MITF short hairpin
RNA (shRNA) demonstrates an up-regulation of over 17 of the same 55 innate immune DEGs
identified in Mitfmi-vga9/+ McSCs, including Ifih1, Ifit3, Irf7, Parp9, and Stat1 (GSE50686 [41]).
Differential regulation of 15 of the 55 Mitfmi-vga9/+ innate immune DEGs is also observed after
transient knockdown of MITF in the immortalized, human melanocytes Hermes 3A, although
the direction of expression varies in comparison to our observations [59]. Interestingly, ani-
mals that are homozygous for a loss-of-function mutation in the melanocortin 1 receptor gene
(Mc1re/e) also exhibit differential expression of ISGs in skin and spleen [60]. MC1R and MITF
exist in a positive feedback regulatory loop, in which MC1R activation leads to cAMP/CREB-
dependent up-regulation of Mitf [61], and MITF acts as a transcriptional activator of Mc1R
gene expression [47,62]. These observations further highlight a link between key melanocyte
proteins and the expression of genes involved in the innate immune response.
The involvement of MITF in ISG regulation and hair graying is particularly relevant in light
of the increasing number of studies indicating an innate immune component to vitiligo [63].
In humans, association studies identified IFIH1 as well as the innate immune genes, NLR fam-
ily pyrin domain containing 1 (NLRP1) and toll like receptor adaptor molecule 1 (TICAM1), as
Fig 7. Treatment with the viral mimic poly(I:C) worsens hair graying in Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0 susceptible mice. (A) Wild-
type (left) and Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0 (right) mice were plucked along their lower back (the plucked region is indicated by the
dashed boxes) to synchronize and initiate the hair cycle in this area. Starting on the fourth day after plucking, mice received
an intraperitoneal injection on three consecutive days of 100 μL of physiological water alone (vehicle) or physiological water
containing 100 μg of poly(I:C). Hair regrowth was allowed to proceed normally and the mice were imaged within the same
hair cycle, approximately 21 days after the initial plucking. Images shown here are representative of 3–5 animals for each
genotype and treatment. (B, C) Histograms of the percent of hairs exhibiting DCT+ McSCs in the hair bulge (B) or DCT+
melanocytes in the hair bulb (C) of mice treated similarly to those described in (A). For this experiment, skins were harvested
on the seventh day after plucking, sectioned, and immunolabeled for DCT. For the wild-type mice, each histogram represents
75 hairs evaluated across 3 animals for each anatomic location. For the Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0 mice, each histogram represents
>190 hairs evaluated across 6 animals for each anatomic location. Histogram distributions were assessed for significance using
the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. (D) Quantification of pigmented and not pigmented DCT+ McSCs within the hair bulge of
mice treated and prepared similarly to those described in (B). For the Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0 mice injected with the vehicle control,
256 McSCs were assessed across 3 animals. For the Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0 mice injected with poly(I:C), 260 McSCs were assessed
across 5 animals. The difference in the proportion of pigmented and not pigmented DCT+ McSCs between treatments was
tested for significance using the Fisher’s exact test (p = 0.001). The raw data used to generate the graphs in (B), (C), and (D) are
available in S1 Data. DCT, dopachrome tautomerase; McSC, melanocyte stem cell; poly(I:C); polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2003648.g007
MITF and innate immunity
PLOS Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2003648
May 3, 2018
15 / 27
 susceptibility loci associated with generalized vitiligo [53,64–66]. NLRP1 and TICAM1 encode
the proteins for a PAMP receptor involved in microbial sensing and an adapter molecule
involved in innate immune Toll-like receptor signaling, respectively. Infiltrations of active nat-
ural killer cells and inflammatory dendritic cells, both innate immune effector cells, are also
observed in the lesional skin of vitiligo patients [67,68]. In the Smyth line chickens, an avian
model of spontaneous vitiligo, global gene expression changes associated with the innate
immune pathway are observed during both the onset and progression of vitiliginous disease
[69]. Additionally, vaccination of these birds with live turkey herpesvirus greatly increases the
incidence of hypopigmentation in this susceptible avian line [70,71]. Further investigation into
the molecular mechanisms that drive the hair graying phenotypes associated with McSC and
melanocyte loss in Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0; Mitfmi-vga9/+ mice or Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0 mice treated with
poly(I:C) may provide new insight into the role of innate immune regulation in hypopigmen-
tary disease.
We do not yet understand why only the Tg(Dct-Sox10) mice are sensitive to poly(I:C).
Some have speculated that melanocytes produce byproducts that act as endogenous damage-
associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) in response to cellular stress [72]. DAMPs, like
PAMPs, have the capacity to initiate PRR activation but do so in the absence of virus in a pro-
cess known as sterile inflammation. Within Tg(Dct-Sox10) mice, overexpression of Sox10
drives the production of aberrant pigmentation with the McSCs [17], and we can now use the
Tg(Dct-Sox10) line as a model to ask whether this process leads to the triggering of damage-
associated innate immune effectors.
Few reports describe loss of hair pigmentation or vitiligo-like symptoms in mammalian
model systems or human patients after exposure to virus, viral mimic, or elevated type I IFN.
In a set of case reports of IFN-α-induced vitiligo after treatment of hepatitis C, it is postulated
that the reason hair graying is infrequently observed in hepatitis C patients is because IFN
treatment is “only sufficient to unmask vitiligo in susceptible individuals” [73]. This idea is
encouraged by our observations that neither Mitfmi-vga9/+ nor poly(I:C) treatment on its own is
sufficient to induce changes in postnatal pigmentation in mice, but both can modify hair gray-
ing when combined with the susceptible Tg(Dct-Sox10) background. Other examples demon-
strate that even with an elevated basal IFN signature, additional environmental or genetic
factors are often required to unmask autoimmune disorders, suggesting that this phenomenon
is not limited to melanocyte pathologies. For instance, mice expressing multiple copies of an
Ifih1 transgene spontaneously generate type I IFN and exhibit no overt phenotype, but
increase disease severity when crossed with a lupus-prone strain [55]. Genetic variations in
Ifih1 in humans are also associated with increased type I IFN signaling and an increased risk
for the development of a number of autoimmune disorders, including Aicardi-Goutieres syn-
drome, systemic lupus erythematosus, and type I diabetes [56,74,75].
Finally, it is important to mention that while this study has focused on assessing the poten-
tial role of MITF in the regulation of ISGs autonomous to the melanocyte, these data do not
exclude the possibility that a nonautonomous source of IFN also contributes to the ISG signa-
ture observed in the melanoblasts and McSCs isolated from Mitfmi-vga9/+ animals. For instance,
in addition to melanocytes, MITF is also indispensable for proper mast cell development.
Beyond their well-known role in the allergic response, mast cells are also recognized as effec-
tors and modulators of the innate immune response [76,77]. While we did not observe a
change in the number of mast cells in Mitfmi-vga9/+ mice (Fig 5B), other studies have reported
that animals that are homozygous for Mitfmi-vga9 show significantly reduced mast cell numbers,
defects in mast cell differentiation and proliferation, and a reduced ability to resist bacterial
infection [52,78,79]. Conditional rescue of Mitf expression within the melanocyte lineage of
Mitfmi-vga9/+ mice would help determine whether nonautonomous mechanisms contribute to
MITF and innate immunity
PLOS Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2003648
May 3, 2018
16 / 27
 ISG expression in melanocytic cells and would further refine our understanding of the inter-
play between melanocyte biology and innate immune signaling.
In summary, we describe a negative regulatory role for MITF in the expression of innate
immune genes in melanocytes in vitro and establish the Mitfmi-vga9/+ mouse line as one in
which the McSCs, melanoblasts, and whole skin exhibit a chronically elevated IFN signature.
This finding describes a new mechanism by which melanocytes can intrinsically regulate their
innate immune response, the implications of which are relevant to both melanocyte physiology
and disease. Our data also highlight poly(I:C)-treated, Tg(Dct-Sox10) mice as one of very few
examples of an in vivo, innate immune-related, hair graying mouse model. The fact that genet-
ically distinct mice respond differently to poly(I:C) is noteworthy and may help to explain
anecdotal stories in humans of spontaneous hair graying after viral infection.
Materials and methods
Ethics statement
All research completed in the manuscript was performed under the guidance of the UAB
IACUC or NIH IACUC and is associated with the following animal protocols: UAB 20382 (to
MLH); NCI-Frederick 17–031 (to GM); NHGRI G-94-7 (to WJP).
Animals, mouse crosses, genotyping
Mitfmi-vga9 mice on a mixed C57BL/6 × C3H genetic background were received as a gift (H.
Arnheiter [80]) and rederived on C57BL/6J. Mitfmi-vga9 mice were maintained by intercross
and backcross to C57BL/6J. To generate the Mitfmi-vga9/+ mice for RNA-seq analysis (Fig 3, S2
Data), Mitfmi-vga9 homozygotes were backcrossed to C57BL/6J mice. To generate the wild-type
mice for RNA-seq analysis, C57BL/6J mice were intercrossed. The wild-type and Mitfmi-vga9/+
mice used for the qRT-PCR of skin in S1 Fig were generated as part of an unrelated study and
are also homozygous for the Dct-rtTA transgene [81]. The Dct-rtTA transgene is used for
doxycycline-induced expression of tetracycline responsive elements in the presence of doxycy-
cline. These animals were age-matched control animals and as part of this unrelated experi-
ment were not treated with doxycycline. The +/+; rtTA/rtTA animals were generated by
mating +/+; rtTA/rtTA and +/+; rtTA/rtTA animals. The Mitfmi-vga9/+; rtTA/rtTA animals
were generated by using Mitfmi-vga9/ mi-vga9; rtTA/rtTA animals that were also heterozygous for
a tetracycline inducible Mitf transgene and mating them with +/+; rtTA/rtTA animals. To gen-
erate the Mitfmi-vga9/+ and wild-type animals used for primary melanoblast isolation (Fig 3),
Mitfmi-vga9/+ mice were backcrossed to C57BL/6J mice and the littermates were used for
analysis.
The Tg(Dct-Sox10) transgenic line was generated on the FVB/N background and main-
tained through a combination of backcrossing to C57BL/6J and by intercross (Tg(Dct-Sox10)
CF1-10Pav [82]). To generate the double and single mutants used for the analysis of gene
expression in skin (Fig 5), Mitfmi-vga9/+ mice were crossed to Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0 mice and the lit-
termates used for analysis. To generate the Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0 for treatment with poly(I:C) (Fig
7), Tg(Dct-Sox10) homozygotes were backcrossed to C57BL/6J mice.
Ifih tm1.1Cln homozygote mice were obtained from JAX (015812, [37]) and crossed to Tg
(Dct-Sox10)/0 mice. The Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0; Ifih tm1.1Cln/+ progeny from this cross were mated
further with Tg(Dct-Sox10)/Tg(Dct-Sox10); Mitfmi-vga9/+ mice to assess Ifih tm1.1Cln rescue
(Fig 6).
All mice were genotyped using DNA isolated from tail tips and PCR analysis. Primers and
cycling conditions for the Mitfmi-vga9 and Tg(Dct-Sox10) alleles were described previously [17].
The Ifih tm1.1Cln allele was amplified under standard PCR conditions (30 cycles of 45 seconds at
MITF and innate immunity
PLOS Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2003648
May 3, 2018
17 / 27
 94˚C, 45 seconds at 65˚C, and 60 seconds at 72˚C), using the genotyping primers described at
JAX: Ifih1_common_reverse, CTTCTGTTCTTCCTGGGAGACC; Ifih1_wildtype_forward,
GGGACTATTGACAGTCGAAGAC; and Ifih1_mutant_forward, CCCCGGTCAAAGCTG
AATAAAT.
FACS isolation of McSCs and melanoblasts
Single cell dermal isolations were generated from P1.5 or 8-week-old mice and sorted by
FACS to obtain melanoblasts or McSCs, respectively. Cells of the melanocyte lineage were
identified by their surface expression of the receptor KIT. Both melanoblasts and McSCs reside
in the hair follicle at these respective time points and exhibit KIT+ immunolabeling (Figs 2
and 3). This isolation method was adapted from previously published protocols [83][84]. In
brief, trunk skin was incubated in 0.25% Trypsin-EDTA to separate the dermis from the epi-
dermis. The dermis was further dissociated by enzymatic treatment with 0.3 mg/mL Liberase
TL (Roche) and then physically disrupted by passing the dermal cell solution forcefully
through a syringe-type, 70 uM Filcon filter (BD Biosciences). Dermal cells were labeled with
the cell surface markers, KIT (CD117, BD Pharmingen) and CD45.2 (BD Pharmingen), and
assessed for fluorescence on a FACSAria (Becton Dickinson). Cells of the melanocyte lineage
were positively selected for by gating on the KIT+, CD45.2− cell population. Mast cells were
negatively selected away by removing any double positive cells (KIT+, CD45.2+) (Fig 2). Anal-
ysis of the cell populations within FACS gates was performed using FlowJo software.
RNA isolation and qRT-PCR
Cells and tissues for qRT-PCR analysis were harvested in TRIzol reagent (ThermoFisher) and
tissues homogenized using a BeadBlaster (Benchmark). Total RNA from tissue, FACS cells, or
tissue culture cells was purified using the Directzol RNA MiniPrep Kit (Zymo) and quantified
on a Qubit fluorometer or Biotek spectrophotometer. For qRT-PCR analysis, 1–2 ug of RNA
was reverse transcribed using the High Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (ABI). qRT-
PCR was performed on this cDNA using Taqman gene expression assays and Taqman Fast
Universal PCR Master Mix. The gene expression assays used here include: Actb, mm00607
939_s1; Ifih1, mm00459183_m1; Ifit3, mm01704846_s1; Ifna4, mm00833969_s1; Ifnb1, mm00
439552_s1; Irf4, mm00516431_m1; Irf7, mm00516793_g1; Isg15, mm01705338_s1; Mitf,
Mm00434954_m1; Pmel, mm00498996_m1; Stat1, Mm00439531_m1.
RNA-seq and differential gene expression analysis
McSCs from approximately ten 8-week-old animals were pooled to generate enough RNA to
serve as one biological replicate. RNA quality for RNA-seq was assessed by Bioanalyzer (Agi-
lent), and only samples with RIN scores >7.5 were used. mRNA libraries were constructed
from about 200 ng total RNA using the Illumina TruSeq RNA Sample Prep Kits, version 2.
The resulting cDNA was fragmented using a Covaris E210. Library amplification was per-
formed using 16 cycles. Unique barcode adapters were applied to each library. Libraries were
pooled in equimolar ratio and sequenced together on a HiSeq 2000 with version 3 flow cells
and sequencing reagents. At least 54 million 101-base read pairs were generated for each indi-
vidual library. Data were processed using RTA 1.13.48 and CASAVA 1.8.2.
RNA from each sample was sequenced on two separate lanes, obtaining paired-end reads
that were 101 bp in length. RNA-seq reads that passed the Illumina platform quality check
were used for downstream analyses. RNA-seq reads were aligned to the mouse mm9 reference
genome sequence with the STAR (v. 2.3.0e) software using default parameters. RNA-seq reads
that mapped to genomic locations for known rRNAs (obtained from the UCSC genome
MITF and innate immunity
PLOS Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2003648
May 3, 2018
18 / 27
 browser) were filtered using split_bam.py included in the RSeQC package (v. 2.3.7). RNA-seq
read counts were calculated with the htseq_count (v. 0.5.3p3) software using annotations for
protein coding genes obtained from Ensembl (release 67), thus obtaining counts for RNA-seq
reads that mapped unambiguously to Ensembl gene models. These RNA-seq counts were used
for differential gene expression analysis performed with DESeq2. For the differential gene
expression analysis, a comparison of RNA-seq reads counts between two experimental condi-
tions was done, with each condition containing RNA-seq data collected from three biological
replicates. The RNA-seq data produced in this study are available at NCBI GEO under acces-
sion GSE102271.
To make the heatmap, a regularized log transformation was applied (rlog) to the DESeq2
results data frame (DEseq2). These values for the genes of interest were loaded into the heat-
map R package and scaled and clustered by row to generate the heatmap.
Cell culture and siRNA transfection
Primary melanoblasts obtained from FACS were grown in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented
with 10% fetal bovine serum (not heat inactivated, Gemcell), 200 nM 12-O-tetradecanoylphor-
bol 13-acetate (TPA, Sigma-Aldrich), 10 ng/mL stem cell factor (Gibco), 0.6 ng/mL basic fibro-
blast growth factor (Stemgent), 2 mM glutamine, 100 U/mL penicillin, and 100 ug/mL
streptomycin. Cells from the immortalized, mouse melanocyte cell line, melan-a (melan-
Ink4a-Arf-1 [85]) were grown in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine
serum (Gibco), 200 nM TPA (Sigma-Aldrich), 200 pM cholera toxin (Sigma- Aldrich), 2 mM
glutamine, 100 U/mL penicillin, and 100 ug/mL streptomycin. Primary and immortalized cells
were incubated at 37˚C in humidified air with 10% CO2.
siRNA-mediated gene knockdown was performed over 48 hours using Lipofectamine
RNAiMAX (Invitrogen) and the following duplex siRNAs (IDT and IDT TriFECTa): siMitf-
scram (50-UAUCUUUAACCGUUCGUCCAGUGC-30, 30-TTAUAGAAAUUGGCAAGCAG
GUCACG-50); siMitf (50-GGUGAAUCGGAUCAUCAAGCAAGATT-30, 30-CCACUUAGCC
UAGUAGUUCGUUCU-50); siMitf-OM (same sequence as siMITF with 3, 20-O-methyl-modi-
fied uridines along each siRNA); siIrf4_a (50-CUUGGAAGACAAGAUUACGAUGUGC-30,
30-AUGAACCUUCUGUUCUAAUGCUACACG-50); siIrf4_b (50-GGGCAUUGUUUAAAG
GAAGUUCCG-30, 30-AACCCGUAACAAAUUUCCGUUCAAGGC-50) and siNC1 (negative
control #1, Thermofisher).
ChIP assay
ChIP assay was performed on chromatin lysates extracted from melan-a cells. Two million
cells were cross-linked at room temperature for 10 minutes using 1% formaldehyde (final con-
centration), and chromatin lysates were prepared according to a previously described protocol
[86]. The ChIP reaction was carried out by incubating chromatin lysates with anti-MITF anti-
body (HPA003259; Sigma-Aldrich, Inc., St. Louis, MO). IgG ChIP was performed with a non-
specific antibody control. DNA coprecipitating with anti-MITF and anti-IgG antibodies was
recovered on magnetic beads (Dynabeads, Invitrogen), de–cross-linked, and purified using the
phenol:chloroform:isoamyl alcohol DNA extraction method. DNA obtained from ChIP as well
as input (lysates with no antibody added) was quantified by RT-PCR using primer sets for pro-
moter regions of Stat1, Ifit3, Ifih1, Dct, and a negative control region. DNA sequences for the
primer sets used in the experiment are as follows: Stat1 (Forward, GACCAAGTGTCCGGGA
CTAA; Reverse, TGCTTTCTTCCAAGTGTCACAG); Ifit3 (Forward, CAGTGATGCACAT
GTTACCAA; Reverse, CCAGCTTTTAATGACTACGTCCA); Ifih1(Forward, ACAGGGACC
TTGCATACTGG; Reverse, GGCCTGCCTAATGACAGATG); Dct (Forward, CCTGACACA
MITF and innate immunity
PLOS Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2003648
May 3, 2018
19 / 27
 AAGCCAGACAC; Reverse, GAAGCCATCATTAAGGGGATT); negative control region
(Catalog#: 71018; Active Motif). Quantitative RT-PCR reaction was performed using the
SYBR Green dye protocol (Invitrogen) and data were analyzed using the relative Ct method
(2(−ΔCт)), as described in the Applied Biosystems user manual. ChIP enrichment signals are
presented as percent input (input normalization). All ChIP data are from two independent
biological replicate experiments.
Poly(I:C) administration
Poly(I:C) (high molecular weight, InvivoGen) for in vitro transfection was first complexed
with Lipofectamine 2000 (375 ng poly(I:C)/uL lipofectamine reagent). This complex was
added to cell culture growth medium to achieve a final concentration of 250 ng/mL poly(I:C).
Primary melanoblasts transfected with this complex were harvested after 9 hours.
Animals treated with poly(I:C) first had a small region of hair removed from their lower
back via hand plucking. Four days after plucking, animals were administered an intraperito-
neal injection of 100 uL of physiological water with or without 100 μg of poly(I:C). Skin for
immunolabeling was harvested from the plucked region of these animals on 7 days post pluck-
ing, and animals for live imaging were photographed at approximately 21 days post plucking.
Histological staining and immunofluorescence
Skin isolated from the lower back of plucked mice was immersed in 2% formaldehyde for 30
minutes on ice. Skins were cryoprotected in 10% sucrose overnight, embedded in NEG-50
(Thermo Scientific), frozen, and sectioned with a cryostat (8–10 μm).
For identifying mast cells, skin sections were stained for 2 minutes in toluidine blue solu-
tion (18.7 mM toluidine blue, 166 mM urea, 30% ethanol), washed in water, dehydrated in
50% ethanol, and then mounted with Permount. For immunofluorescence, sections were
washed in PBS with 0.1% Tween 20, optionally blocked in 1% BSA, and incubated in primary
antibody overnight at 4˚C. After washing, the sections were incubated in the appropriate sec-
ondary antibody (1:2,000; AlexaFluor, Invitrogen) for 2 hours at room temperature.
Immune cells were detected using primary antibodies against CD3ε (1:50, KT3, Thermo-
fisher), CD4 (1:200, GK1.5, Thermofisher), CD8 (1:200, 53–6.7, Thermofisher), and CD11b
(1:1,000, M1/70, Abcam). Quantitation of immune cells was performed by taking five images
along a length of skin at 7 dpp (about 5.25 mm total imaged length, see representative images
in S2 Fig) and counting the number of positive cells within the epidermis, dermis, and subcutis
(about 15 mm2 total area).
Melanocytes and McSCs were detected using a primary antibody against DCT (1:300;
TRP2, Santa Cruz Bio). McSCs and melanocytes were defined as those DCT+ cells residing in
the hair bulge (near the border between the dermis and the subcutis) and the hair bulb (sur-
rounding the hair matrix), respectively. Quantitation of DCT+ cells per hair was performed on
every fourth section of sequentially obtained skin sections. Apoptotic cells were identified
using a primary antibody against CC3 (1:100, Cell Signaling).
Bright-field and fluorescence microscopy and imaging were performed either on an
Observer.D1 microscope with an Axiocam Hrc camera (Zeiss) or on an EVOS FL Cell Imaging
System (Thermofisher). Images were post processed using Adobe Photoshop.
Supporting information
S1 Data. Raw data and statistical analysis used to generate graphs.
(XLSX)
MITF and innate immunity
PLOS Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2003648
May 3, 2018
20 / 27
 S2 Data. List of genes that are differentially expressed (>1.5-fold) in wild-type and Mitfmi-vga9/+
McSCs based on RNA-seq analysis. BaseMean represents the average of the normalized count
values, dividing by size factors, taken over all six samples within the dataset. Log2(fold change) rep-
resents the binary logarithm of wild-type over Mitfmi-vga9/+ gene expression values, and lfcSE repre-
sents the log2(fold change) standard error. Stat refers to the Wald statistic used to determine the
p-value. Both the unadjusted (pvalue) and Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted (padj) p-values are pro-
vided, with significant genes being those with a padj <0.05. lfcSE, log2(fold change) standard error;
McSC, melanocyte stem cell; Mitf, melanogenesis associated transcription factor; padj, Benjamini-
Hochberg adjusted p-value; pvalue, unadjusted p-value; RNA-seq, RNA sequencing.
(XLSX)
S3 Data. DAVID Functional Annotation Cluster results using a list of genes that are up-
regulated (>1.5-fold) in Mitfmi-vga9/+ McSCs (spreadsheets “DAVID on 1.5-fold up genes,”
“gene list from cluster1,” “gene list from cluster2”). Sixty-five unique genes from annotation
clusters 1 and 2 were combined (spreadsheet “65 genes in cluster 1+2”). These 65 genes were
queried at interferome.org for their designation as IFN-regulated genes (“55 IRGs interferome.
org”). Fifty-five of the sixty-five genes identified by DAVID exhibit a greater than 2-fold gene
expression change in mice or mouse cells in response to IFN-α or IFN-β (spreadsheets “55
IRGs interferome.org data,” “55 IRGs list”). IFN, interferon; McSC, melanocyte stem cell; Mitf,
melanogenesis associated transcription factor.
(XLSX)
S4 Data. List of “MITF direct target” genes. These are genes that are differentially regulated
(>1.5-fold) in Mitfmi-vga9/+ McSCs in comparison to wild-type McSCs and exhibit an MITF
ChIP-seq peak. MITF ChIP-seq peaks (Webster et al. 2014) were associated with nearby genes
using GREAT (peaks that land ± 5 kb from the transcription start site). ChIP-seq, chromatin
immunoprecipitation sequencing; GREAT, genomic regions enrichment of annotations tool;
McSC, melanocyte stem cell; MITF, melanogenesis associated transcription factor.
(XLSX)
S1 Fig. qRT-PCR analysis of Mitf and ISG expression (Ifih1, Ifit3, Irf7, Isg15, and Stat1) in
skins of +/+; rtTA/rtTA and Mitfmi-vga9/+; rtTA/rtTA mice isolated at P32. These mice were
housed in the animal facility independent from those where the remainder of this study was
performed. Each point on the graph represents the expression value from skin of an individual
animal. The horizontal bars represent the mean, and the asterisks indicate gene expression
changes with a q-value of <0.05 using the two-stage linear step-up procedure of Benjamini,
Krieger and Yekutieli, with Q = 5%. ISG, interferon stimulated gene; Mitf, melanogenesis asso-
ciated transcription factor; P, postnatal day; qRT-PCR, quantitative reverse transcriptase poly-
merase chain reaction; rtTA, reverse tetracycline-controlled transactivator.
(TIF)
S2 Fig. Histological and immunofluorescent staining of immune cell populations in mid-
anagen skin isolated from wild-type (left), Mitfmi-vga9/+ (center), and Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0;
Mitfmi-vga9/+ (right) animals. (A) Mast cells were detected using toluidine blue and were
found dispersed throughout the dermis. (B–D) Antibodies to CD3ε, CD4, and CD8 were used
to identify T cells within the epidermis and the dermis. (E) Antibodies against CD11b were
used to detect macrophages and Langerhan’s cells and these were distributed within dermis
and subcutis. Scale bar represents 400 μm. CD, cluster of differnatiation; Mitf, melanogenesis
associated transcription factor.
(TIF)
MITF and innate immunity
PLOS Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2003648
May 3, 2018
21 / 27
 S3 Fig. Additional images of the biological replicates described in Fig 6. (A) Tg(Dct-
Sox10)/Tg(Dct-Sox10); Mitfmi-vga9/+ animals. (B) Tg(Dct-Sox10)/Tg(Dct-Sox10); Mitfmi-vga9/+;
Ifih tm1.1Cln/+ animals. Ifih1, interferon induced with helicase C domain 1; Mitf, melanogenesis
associated transcription factor.
(TIF)
S4 Fig. Immunofluorescent staining of mid-anagen skin isolated from Tg(Dct-Sox10)/0
animals injected with vehicle (water) or 100 μg of poly(I:C), as described in Fig 7. (A–B)
Skins were double labeled for DCT (red) and CD3ε (green) or DCT and CC3 (green). Nuclei
are stained with DAPI (blue). Brackets and arrows indicate the region of the hair bulge and
hair bulb, respectively. (C) Reactivity of the CC3 antibody was confirmed by staining late cata-
gen hairs that exhibit apoptotic cells within the regressing hair (arrowheads). CC3, cleaved cas-
pase 3; CD, cluster of differentiation; DCT, dopachrome tautomerase; poly(I:C), polyinosinic:
polycytidylic acid.
(TIF)
Acknowledgments
Many thanks to Laura Baxter and Stacie Loftus for providing the curated list of pigmentation
genes, to Stacie Anderson and Martha Kirby in the NHGRI Flow Cytometry Core for their
assistance in developing the FACS protocol, and to Dot Bennett for providing the melan-a
cells (gift to W. Pavan). We also acknowledge the NIH Intramural Sequencing Center for their
high throughput sequencing services, and this includes Beatrice B. Barnabas, Gerard G. Bouf-
fard, Shelise Y. Brooks, Holly Coleman, Lyudmila Dekhtyar, Xiaobin Guan, Joel Han, Shi-ling
Ho, Richelle Legaspi, Quino L. Maduro, Catherine A. Masiello, Jennifer C. McDowell, Casan-
dra Montemayor, James C. Mullikin, Morgan Park, Nancy L. Riebow, Karen Schandler, Brian
Schmidt, Christina Sison, Raymond Smith, Sirintorn Stantripop, James W. Thomas, Pamela J.
Thomas, Meghana Vemulapalli, and Alice C. Young.
Author Contributions
Conceptualization: Melissa L. Harris, Sandeep S. Joshi, Chi-Ping Day, Helen T. Michael, Wil-
liam J. Pavan.
Data curation: Melissa L. Harris, Temesgen D. Fufa, Denise M. Larson, Arturo Incao,
Autumne N. Lee.
Formal analysis: Melissa L. Harris, Temesgen D. Fufa, Joseph W. Palmer, Denise M. Larson,
Arturo Incao, Derek E. Gildea, Niraj S. Trivedi, Autumne N. Lee.
Funding acquisition: Melissa L. Harris, William J. Pavan.
Investigation: Melissa L. Harris, Temesgen D. Fufa, Denise M. Larson, Arturo Incao, Derek E.
Gildea, Niraj S. Trivedi, Autumne N. Lee, Chi-Ping Day, Helen T. Michael.
Methodology: Melissa L. Harris, Temesgen D. Fufa, Joseph W. Palmer, Sandeep S. Joshi,
Denise M. Larson, Arturo Incao, Derek E. Gildea, Niraj S. Trivedi, Autumne N. Lee,
Thomas J. Hornyak.
Project administration: Melissa L. Harris.
Resources: Melissa L. Harris, Chi-Ping Day, Helen T. Michael, Glenn Merlino, William J.
Pavan.
Software: Derek E. Gildea, Niraj S. Trivedi.
MITF and innate immunity
PLOS Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2003648
May 3, 2018
22 / 27
 Supervision: Melissa L. Harris, Glenn Merlino, William J. Pavan.
Validation: Melissa L. Harris, Temesgen D. Fufa, Joseph W. Palmer.
Visualization: Melissa L. Harris.
Writing – original draft: Melissa L. Harris, Temesgen D. Fufa.
Writing – review & editing: Melissa L. Harris, Temesgen D. Fufa, Joseph W. Palmer, Sandeep
S. Joshi, Denise M. Larson, Derek E. Gildea, Thomas J. Hornyak, William J. Pavan.
References
1.
Jaenisch R. Retroviruses and embryogenesis: Microinjection of Moloney leukemia virus into midgesta-
tion mouse embryos. Cell. 1980; 19: 181–188. https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(80)90399-2 PMID:
7357600
2.
Jaenisch R, Ja
¨hner D, Nobis P, Simon I, Lo
¨hler J, Harbers K, et al. Chromosomal position and activation
of retroviral genomes inserted into the germ line of mice. Cell. 1981; 24: 519–529. https://doi.org/10.
1016/0092-8674(81)90343-3 PMID: 7237558
3.
Morse HC III, Yetter RA, Stimpfling JH, Pitts OM, Fredrickson TN, Hartley JW. Greying with age in
mice: relation to expression of murine leukemia viruses. Cell. 1985; 41: 439–448. https://doi.org/10.
1016/S0092-8674(85)80017-9 PMID: 2985278
4.
Aubin-Houzelstein G, Djian-Zaouche J, Bernex F, Gadin S, Delmas V, Larue L, et al. Melanoblasts’
Proper Location and Timed Differentiation Depend on Notch/RBP-J Signaling in Postnatal Hair Folli-
cles. J Invest Dermatol. 2008; 128: 2686–2695. https://doi.org/10.1038/jid.2008.120 PMID: 18463680
5.
Botchkareva NV, Khlgatian M, Longley BJ, Botchkarev VA, Gilchrest BA. SCF/c-kit signaling is required
for cyclic regeneration of the hair pigmentation unit. FASEB J. 2001; 15: 645–658. https://doi.org/10.
1096/fj.00-0368com PMID: 11259383
6.
Nishimura EK, Suzuki M, Igras V, Du J, Lonning S, Miyachi Y, et al. Key Roles for Transforming Growth
Factor β in Melanocyte Stem Cell Maintenance. Cell Stem Cell. 2010; 6: 130–140. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.stem.2009.12.010 PMID: 20144786
7.
Rabbani P, Takeo M, Chou W, Myung P, Bosenberg M, Chin L, et al. Coordinated Activation of Wnt in
Epithelial and Melanocyte Stem Cells Initiates Pigmented Hair Regeneration. Cell. 2011; 145: 941–955.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2011.05.004 PMID: 21663796
8.
Schouwey K, Larue L, Radtke F, Delmas V, Beermann F. Transgenic expression of Notch in melano-
cytes demonstrates RBP-Jκ-dependent signaling: Letter to the Editor. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res.
2010; 23: 134–136. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1755-148X.2009.00651.x PMID: 19895548
9.
Takeo M, Lee W, Rabbani P, Sun Q, Hu H, Lim CH, et al. EdnrB Governs Regenerative Response of
Melanocyte Stem Cells by Crosstalk with Wnt Signaling. Cell Rep. 2016; 15: 1291–1302. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.celrep.2016.04.006 PMID: 27134165
10.
Tanimura S, Tadokoro Y, Inomata K, Binh NT, Nishie W, Yamazaki S, et al. Hair Follicle Stem Cells Pro-
vide a Functional Niche for Melanocyte Stem Cells. Cell Stem Cell. 2011; 8: 177–187. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.stem.2010.11.029 PMID: 21295274
11.
Valluet A, Druillennec S, Barbotin C, Dorard C, Monsoro-Burq AH, Larcher M, et al. B-Raf and C-Raf
Are Required for Melanocyte Stem Cell Self-Maintenance. Cell Rep. 2012; 2: 774–780. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.celrep.2012.08.020 PMID: 23022482
12.
Mak S-S, Moriyama M, Nishioka E, Osawa M, Nishikawa S-I. Indispensable role of Bcl2 in the develop-
ment of the melanocyte stem cell. Dev Biol. 2006; 291: 144–153. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2005.
12.025 PMID: 16427619
13.
Nishimura EK, Granter SR, Fisher DE. Mechanisms of Hair Graying: Incomplete Melanocyte Stem Cell
Maintenance in the Niche. Science. 2005; 307: 720–724. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1099593
PMID: 15618488
14.
Koludrovic D, Laurette P, Strub T, Keime C, Le Coz M, Coassolo S, et al. Chromatin-Remodelling Com-
plex NURF Is Essential for Differentiation of Adult Melanocyte Stem Cells. PLoS Genet. 2015; 11.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1005555 PMID: 26440048
15.
Inomata K, Aoto T, Binh NT, Okamoto N, Tanimura S, Wakayama T, et al. Genotoxic Stress Abrogates
Renewal of Melanocyte Stem Cells by Triggering Their Differentiation. Cell. 2009; 137: 1088–1099.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2009.03.037 PMID: 19524511
MITF and innate immunity
PLOS Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2003648
May 3, 2018
23 / 27
 16.
Ueno M, Aoto T, Mohri Y, Yokozeki H, Nishimura EK. Coupling of the radiosensitivity of melanocyte
stem cells to their dormancy during the hair cycle. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2014; 27: 540–551.
https://doi.org/10.1111/pcmr.12251 PMID: 24730534
17.
Harris ML, Buac K, Shakhova O, Hakami RM, Wegner M, Sommer L, et al. A Dual Role for SOX10 in
the Maintenance of the Postnatal Melanocyte Lineage and the Differentiation of Melanocyte Stem Cell
Progenitors. Steingrimsson E, editor. PLoS Genet. 2013; 9: e1003644. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pgen.1003644 PMID: 23935512
18.
Essien KI, Harris JE. Animal models of vitiligo: Matching the model to the question. Dermatol Sin. 2014;
32: 240–247. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dsi.2014.09.008
19.
Lister JA, Robertson CP, Lepage T, Johnson SL, Raible DW. nacre encodes a zebrafish microphthal-
mia-related protein that regulates neural-crest-derived pigment cell fate. Development. 1999; 126:
3757–3767. PMID: 10433906
20.
Opdecamp K, Nakayama A, Nguyen MT, Hodgkinson CA, Pavan WJ, Arnheiter H. Melanocyte develop-
ment in vivo and in neural crest cell cultures: crucial dependence on the Mitf basic-helix-loop-helix-zip-
per transcription factor. Development. 1997; 124: 2377–2386. PMID: 9199364
21.
Thomas AJ, Erickson CA. FOXD3 regulates the lineage switch between neural crest-derived glial cells
and pigment cells by repressing MITF through a non-canonical mechanism. Development. 2009; 136:
1849–1858. https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.031989 PMID: 19403660
22.
Steingrı
´msson E, Arnheiter H, Hallsson JH, Lamoreux ML, Copeland NG, Jenkins NA. Interallelic com-
plementation at the mouse Mitf locus. Genetics. 2003; 163: 267–276. PMID: 12586714
23.
Cheli Y, Ohanna M, Ballotti R, Bertolotto C. Fifteen-year quest for microphthalmia-associated transcrip-
tion factor target genes. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2010; 23: 27–40. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1755-
148X.2009.00653.x PMID: 19995375
24.
Steingrı
´msson E, Copeland NG, Jenkins NA. Melanocytes and the microphthalmia transcription factor
network. Annu Rev Genet. 2004; 38: 365–411. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.genet.38.072902.
092717 PMID: 15568981
25.
Vachtenheim J, Borovansky
´ J. “Transcription physiology” of pigment formation in melanocytes: central
role of MITF. Exp Dermatol. 2010; 19: 617–627. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0625.2009.01053.x
PMID: 20201954
26.
Carreira S, Goodall J, Denat L, Rodriguez M, Nuciforo P, Hoek KS, et al. Mitf regulation of Dia1 controls
melanoma proliferation and invasiveness. Genes Dev. 2006; 20: 3426–3439. https://doi.org/10.1101/
gad.406406 PMID: 17182868
27.
Mu
¨ller-Ro
¨ver S, Foitzik K, Paus R, Handjiski B, van der Veen C, Eichmu
¨ller S, et al. A Comprehensive
Guide for the Accurate Classification of Murine Hair Follicles in Distinct Hair Cycle Stages. J Invest Der-
matol. 2001; 117: 3–15. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.0022-202x.2001.01377.x PMID: 11442744
28.
Tsujimura T, Morii E, Nozaki M, Hashimoto K, Moriyama Y, Takebayashi K, et al. Involvement of tran-
scription factor encoded by the mi locus in the expression of c-kit receptor tyrosine kinase in cultured
mast cells of mice. Blood. 1996; 88: 1225–1233. PMID: 8695840
29.
Huang DW, Sherman BT, Lempicki RA. Bioinformatics enrichment tools: paths toward the comprehen-
sive functional analysis of large gene lists. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009; 37: 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1093/
nar/gkn923 PMID: 19033363
30.
Huang DW, Sherman BT, Lempicki RA. Systematic and integrative analysis of large gene lists using
DAVID bioinformatics resources. Nat Protoc. 2009; 4: 44–57. https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2008.211
PMID: 19131956
31.
Rusinova I, Forster S, Yu S, Kannan A, Masse M, Cumming H, et al. INTERFEROME v2.0: an updated
database of annotated interferon-regulated genes. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013; 41: D1040–D1046. https://
doi.org/10.1093/nar/gks1215 PMID: 23203888
32.
Forster S. Interferon signatures in immune disorders and disease. Immunol Cell Biol. 2012; 90: 520–
527. https://doi.org/10.1038/icb.2012.12 PMID: 22491066
33.
Seth RB, Sun L, Chen ZJ. Antiviral innate immunity pathways. Cell Res. 2006; 16: 141–147. https://doi.
org/10.1038/sj.cr.7310019 PMID: 16474426
34.
Takeuchi O, Akira S. Innate immunity to virus infection. Immunol Rev. 2009; 227: 75–86. https://doi.org/
10.1111/j.1600-065X.2008.00737.x PMID: 19120477
35.
Thompson AJV, Locarnini SA. Toll-like receptors, RIG-I-like RNA helicases and the antiviral innate
immune response. Immunol Cell Biol. 2007; 85: 435–445. https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.icb.7100100 PMID:
17667934
36.
Haller O, Kochs G, Weber F. The interferon response circuit: Induction and suppression by pathogenic
viruses. Virology. 2006; 344: 119–130. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.virol.2005.09.024 PMID: 16364743
MITF and innate immunity
PLOS Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2003648
May 3, 2018
24 / 27
 37.
Gitlin L, Barchet W, Gilfillan S, Cella M, Beutler B, Flavell RA, et al. Essential role of mda-5 in type I IFN
responses to polyriboinosinic: polyribocytidylic acid and encephalomyocarditis picornavirus. Proc Natl
Acad Sci. 2006; 103: 8459–8464. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0603082103 PMID: 16714379
38.
Levy C, Khaled M, Fisher DE. MITF: master regulator of melanocyte development and melanoma onco-
gene. Trends Mol Med. 2006; 12: 406–414. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molmed.2006.07.008 PMID:
16899407
39.
Judge AD, Bola G, Lee ACH, MacLachlan I. Design of Noninflammatory Synthetic siRNA Mediating
Potent Gene Silencing in Vivo. Mol Ther. 2006; 13: 494–505. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymthe.2005.11.
002 PMID: 16343994
40.
Larribere L, Hilmi C, Khaled M, Gaggioli C, Bille K, Auberger P, et al. The cleavage of microphthalmia-
associated transcription factor, MITF, by caspases plays an essential role in melanocyte and melanoma
cell apoptosis. Genes Dev. 2005; 19: 1980–1985. https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.335905 PMID: 16140982
41.
Webster DE, Barajas B, Bussat RT, Yan KJ, Neela PH, Flockhart RJ, et al. Enhancer-targeted genome
editing selectively blocks innate resistance to oncokinase inhibition. Genome Res. 2014; 24: 751–760.
https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.166231.113 PMID: 24443471
42.
Praetorius C, Grill C, Stacey SN, Metcalf AM, Gorkin DU, Robinson KC, et al. A Polymorphism in IRF4
Affects Human Pigmentation through a Tyrosinase-Dependent MITF/TFAP2A Pathway. Cell. 2013;
155: 1022–1033. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2013.10.022 PMID: 24267888
43.
Yang Y, Shaffer AL, Emre NCT, Ceribelli M, Zhang M, Wright G, et al. Exploiting Synthetic Lethality for
the Therapy of ABC Diffuse Large B Cell Lymphoma. Cancer Cell. 2012; 21: 723–737. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ccr.2012.05.024 PMID: 22698399
44.
Ueno N, Ueno S, Endo S, Nishimura N, Tatetsu H, Hirata S, et al. PU.1-Induced IRF4 Down-Regulation
and Subsequent IRF7 up-Regulation in Myeloma Cells. Blood. 2015; 126: 2957–2957.
45.
Adhikari K, Fontanil T, Cal S, Mendoza-Revilla J, Fuentes-Guajardo M, Chaco
´n-Duque J-C, et al. A
genome-wide association scan in admixed Latin Americans identifies loci influencing facial and scalp
hair features. Nat Commun. 2016; 7: 10815. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms10815 PMID: 26926045
46.
Du J, Miller AJ, Widlund HR, Horstmann MA, Ramaswamy S, Fisher DE. MLANA/MART1 and SILV/
PMEL17/GP100 are transcriptionally regulated by MITF in melanocytes and melanoma. Am J Pathol.
2003; 163: 333–343. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0002-9440(10)63657-7 PMID: 12819038
47.
Aoki H, Moro O. Involvement of microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF) in expression of
human melanocortin-1 receptor (MC1R). Life Sci. 2002; 71: 2171–2179. PMID: 12204775
48.
Bentley NJ, Eisen T, Goding CR. Melanocyte-specific expression of the human tyrosinase promoter:
activation by the microphthalmia gene product and role of the initiator. Mol Cell Biol. 1994; 14: 7996–
8006. https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.14.12.7996 PMID: 7969139
49.
Yasumoto K, Yokoyama K, Takahashi K, Tomita Y, Shibahara S. Functional Analysis of Microphthal-
mia-associated Transcription Factor in Pigment Cell-specific Transcription of the Human Tyrosinase
Family Genes. J Biol Chem. 1997; 272: 503–509. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.272.1.503 PMID: 8995290
50.
McLean CY, Bristor D, Hiller M, Clarke SL, Schaar BT, Lowe CB, et al. GREAT improves functional
interpretation of cis-regulatory regions. Nat Biotechnol. 2010; 28: 495–501. https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.
1630 PMID: 20436461
51.
Potterf SB, Furumura M, Dunn KJ, Arnheiter H, Pavan WJ. Transcription factor hierarchy in Waarden-
burg syndrome: regulation of MITF expression by SOX10 and PAX3. Hum Genet. 2000; 107: 1–6.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s004390000328 PMID: 10982026
52.
Morii E, Ogihara H, Kim D-K, Ito A, Oboki K, Lee Y-M, et al. Importance of leucine zipper domain of
mitranscription factor (MITF) for differentiation of mast cells demonstrated using mice/mice mutant mice
of which MITF lacks the zipper domain. Blood. 2001; 97: 2038–2044. https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.
V97.7.2038 PMID: 11264169
53.
Jin Y, Andersen GHL, Santorico SA, Spritz RA. Multiple Functional Variants of IFIH1, a Gene Involved
in Triggering Innate Immune Responses, Protect against Vitiligo. J Invest Dermatol. 2017; 137: 522–
524. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jid.2016.09.021 PMID: 27720759
54.
Kawai T, Akira S. Toll-like Receptor and RIG-1-like Receptor Signaling. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2008; 1143:
1–20. https://doi.org/10.1196/annals.1443.020 PMID: 19076341
55.
Crampton SP, Deane JA, Feigenbaum L, Bolland S. Ifih1 Gene Dose Effect Reveals MDA5-Mediated
Chronic Type I IFN Gene Signature, Viral Resistance, and Accelerated Autoimmunity. J Immunol.
2012; 188: 1451–1459. https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.1102705 PMID: 22205024
56.
Rice GI, del Toro Duany Y, Jenkinson EM, Forte GMA, Anderson BH, Ariaudo G, et al. Gain-of-function
mutations in IFIH1 cause a spectrum of human disease phenotypes associated with upregulated type I
interferon signaling. Nat Genet. 2014; 46: 503–509. https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.2933 PMID: 24686847
MITF and innate immunity
PLOS Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2003648
May 3, 2018
25 / 27
 57.
De
´moulins T, Baron M-L, Kettaf N, Abdallah A, Sharif-Askari E, Se
´kaly R-P. Poly (I:C) induced immune
response in lymphoid tissues involves three sequential waves of type I IFN expression. Virology. 2009;
386: 225–236. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.virol.2009.01.024 PMID: 19232663
58.
Gantier MP, Williams BRG. The response of mammalian cells to double-stranded RNA. Cytokine
Growth Factor Rev. 2007; 18: 363–371. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cytogfr.2007.06.016 PMID: 17698400
59.
Laurette P, Strub T, Koludrovic D, Keime C, Gras SL, Seberg H, et al. Transcription factor MITF and
remodeller BRG1 define chromatin organisation at regulatory elements in melanoma cells. eLife. 2015;
4: e06857. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.06857 PMID: 25803486
60.
Hong LZ, Li J, Schmidt-Ku
¨ntzel A, Warren WC, Barsh GS. Digital gene expression for non-model organ-
isms. Genome Res. 2011; 21: 1905–1915. https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.122135.111 PMID: 21844123
61.
Price ER, Horstmann MA, Wells AG, Weilbaecher KN, Takemoto CM, Landis MW, et al. α-Melanocyte-
stimulating Hormone Signaling Regulates Expression of microphthalmia, a Gene Deficient in Waarden-
burg Syndrome. J Biol Chem. 1998; 273: 33042–33047. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.273.49.33042
PMID: 9830058
62.
Hoek KS, Schlegel NC, Eichhoff OM, Widmer DS, Praetorius C, Einarsson SO, et al. Novel MITF tar-
gets identified using a two-step DNA microarray strategy. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2008; 21: 665–
676. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1755-148X.2008.00505.x PMID: 19067971
63.
Rodrigues M, Ezzedine K, Hamzavi I, Pandya AG, Harris JE. New discoveries in the pathogenesis and
classification of vitiligo. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2017; 77: 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2016.10.
048 PMID: 28619550
64.
Jin Y, Mailloux CM, Gowan K, Riccardi SL, LaBerge G, Bennett DC, et al. NALP1 in Vitiligo-Associated
Multiple Autoimmune Disease. N Engl J Med. 2007; 356: 1216–1225. https://doi.org/10.1056/
NEJMoa061592 PMID: 17377159
65.
Jin Y, Riccardi SL, Gowan K, Fain PR, Spritz RA. Fine-Mapping of Vitiligo Susceptibility Loci on Chro-
mosomes 7 and 9 and Interactions with NLRP1 (NALP1). J Invest Dermatol. 2010; 130: 774–783.
https://doi.org/10.1038/jid.2009.273 PMID: 19727120
66.
Jin Y, Birlea SA, Fain PR, Ferrara TM, Ben S, Riccardi SL, et al. Genome-wide association analyses
identify 13 new susceptibility loci for generalized vitiligo. Nat Genet. 2012; 44: 676–680. https://doi.org/
10.1038/ng.2272 PMID: 22561518
67.
Yu R, Broady R, Huang Y, Wang Y, Yu J, Gao M, et al. Transcriptome Analysis Reveals Markers of
Aberrantly Activated Innate Immunity in Vitiligo Lesional and Non-Lesional Skin. PLoS ONE. 2012; 7:
e51040. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0051040 PMID: 23251420
68.
Mosenson JA, Zloza A, Nieland JD, Garrett-Mayer E, Eby JM, Huelsmann EJ, et al. Mutant HSP70
Reverses Autoimmune Depigmentation in Vitiligo. Sci Transl Med. 2013; 5: 174ra28. https://doi.org/10.
1126/scitranslmed.3005127 PMID: 23447019
69.
Shi F, Kong B-W, Song JJ, Lee JY, Dienglewicz RL, Erf GF. Understanding mechanisms of vitiligo
development in Smyth line of chickens by transcriptomic microarray analysis of evolving autoimmune
lesions. BMC Immunol. 2012; 13: 18. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2172-13-18 PMID: 22500953
70.
Erf GF, Bersi TK, Wang X, Sreekumar GP, Smyth JR Jr. Herpesvirus Connection in the Expression of
Autoimmune Vitiligo in Smyth Line Chickens. Pigment Cell Res. 2001; 14: 40–46. https://doi.org/10.
1034/j.1600-0749.2001.140107.x PMID: 11277493
71.
Wick G, Andersson L, Hala K, Gershwin ME, Selmi CF, Erf GF, et al. Avian models with spontaneous
autoimmune diseases. Adv Immunol. 2006; 92: 71–117. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0065-2776(06)
92002-1 PMID: 17145302
72.
Richmond JM, Frisoli ML, Harris JE. Innate immune mechanisms in vitiligo: danger from within. Curr
Opin Immunol. 2013; 25: 676–682. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coi.2013.10.010 PMID: 24238922
73.
Hamadah I, Binamer Y, Sanai FM, Abdo AA, Alajlan A. Interferon-induced vitiligo in hepatitis C patients:
a case series. Int J Dermatol. 2010; 49: 829–833. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-4632.2009.04443.x
PMID: 20618507
74.
Ferreira RC, Guo H, Coulson RMR, Smyth DJ, Pekalski ML, Burren OS, et al. A Type I Interferon Tran-
scriptional Signature Precedes Autoimmunity in Children Genetically at Risk for Type 1 Diabetes. Dia-
betes. 2014; 63: 2538–2550. https://doi.org/10.2337/db13-1777 PMID: 24561305
75.
Robinson T, Kariuki SN, Franek BS, Kumabe M, Kumar AA, Badaracco M, et al. Autoimmune Disease
Risk Variant of IFIH1 Is Associated with Increased Sensitivity to IFN-α and Serologic Autoimmunity in
Lupus Patients. J Immunol. 2011; 187: 1298–1303. https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.1100857 PMID:
21705624
76.
St John AL, Abraham SN. Innate Immunity and its Regulation by Mast Cells. J Immunol Baltim Md
1950. 2013; 190: 4458–4463. https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.1203420 PMID: 23606723
MITF and innate immunity
PLOS Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2003648
May 3, 2018
26 / 27
 77.
Galli SJ, Nakae S, Tsai M. Mast cells in the development of adaptive immune responses. Nat Immunol.
2005; 6: 135–142. https://doi.org/10.1038/ni1158 PMID: 15662442
78.
Morii E. Roles of MITF for development of mast cells in mice: effects on both precursors and tissue envi-
ronments. Blood. 2004; 104: 1656–1661. https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2004-01-0247 PMID: 15172970
79.
Jippo T, Morii E, Ito A, Kitamura Y. Effect of Anatomical Distribution of Mast Cells on Their Defense
Function against Bacterial Infections: Demonstration Using Partially Mast Cell–deficient tg/tg Mice. J
Exp Med. 2003; 197: 1417–1425. https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20022157 PMID: 12771178
80.
Tachibana M, Hara Y, Vyas D, Hodgkinson C, Fex J, Grundfast K, et al. Cochlear disorder associated
with melanocyte anomaly in mice with a transgenic insertional mutation. Mol Cell Neurosci. 1992; 3:
433–445. PMID: 19912887
81.
Zaidi MR, Davis S, Noonan FP, Graff-Cherry C, Hawley TS, Walker RL, et al. Interferon-γ links ultravio-
let radiation to melanomagenesis in mice. Nature. 2011; 469: 548–553. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nature09666 PMID: 21248750
82.
Hakami RM, Hou L, Baxter LL, Loftus SK, Southard-Smith EM, Incao A, et al. Genetic evidence does
not support direct regulation of EDNRB by SOX10 in migratory neural crest and the melanocyte lineage.
Mech Dev. 2006; 123: 124–134. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mod.2005.11.004 PMID: 16412618
83.
Diwakar G, Zhang D, Jiang S, Hornyak TJ. Neurofibromin as a regulator of melanocyte development
and differentiation. J Cell Sci. 2008; 121: 167–177. https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.013912 PMID: 18089649
84.
Zaidi MR, Day C-P, Merlino G. Fluorescent Protein-Assisted Purification for Gene Expression Profiling.
In: Hawley TS, Hawley RG, editors. Flow Cytometry Protocols. Totowa, NJ: Humana Press; 2011. pp.
393–405. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-61737-950-5_19
85.
Sviderskaya EV, Hill SP, Evans-Whipp TJ, Chin L, Orlow SJ, Easty DJ, et al. p16Ink4a in melanocyte
senescence and differentiation. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2002; 94: 446–454. PMID: 11904317
86.
Fufa TD, Harris ML, Watkins-Chow DE, Levy D, Gorkin DU, Gildea DE, et al. Genomic analysis reveals
distinct mechanisms and functional classes of SOX10-regulated genes in melanocytes. Hum Mol
Genet. 2015; 24: 5433–5450. https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddv267 PMID: 26206884
MITF and innate immunity
PLOS Biology | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.2003648
May 3, 2018
27 / 27
