 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Multicenter Feasibility Study of Tumor Molecular Profiling
to Inform Therapeutic Decisions in Advanced Pediatric
Solid Tumors
The Individualized Cancer Therapy (iCat) Study
Marian H. Harris, MD, PhD; Steven G. DuBois, MD, MPH; Julia L. Glade Bender, MD; AeRang Kim, MD, PhD;
Brian D. Crompton, MD; Erin Parker, BA; Ian P. Dumont, BA; Andrew L. Hong, MD; Dongjing Guo, MPH;
Alanna Church, MD; Kimberly Stegmaier, MD; Charles W. M. Roberts, MD, PhD; Suzanne Shusterman, MD;
Wendy B. London, PhD; Laura E. MacConaill, PhD; Neal I. Lindeman, MD; Lisa Diller, MD;
Carlos Rodriguez-Galindo, MD; Katherine A. Janeway, MD, MSc
IMPORTANCE Pediatric cancers represent a unique case with respect to cancer genomics and
precision medicine, as the mutation frequency is low, and targeted therapies are less
available. Consequently, it is unknown whether clinical sequencing can be of benefit.
OBJECTIVE To assess the feasibility of identifying actionable alterations and making
individualized cancer therapy (iCat) recommendations in pediatric patients with extracranial
solid tumors.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS Clinical sequencing study at 4 academic medical centers
enrolling patients between September 5, 2012, and November 19, 2013, with 1 year of clinical
follow-up. Participants were 30 years or younger with high-risk, recurrent, or refractory
extracranial solid tumors. The data analysis was performed October 28, 2014.
INTERVENTIONS Tumor profiling performed on archived clinically acquired specimens
consisted of mutation detection by a Sequenom assay or targeted next-generation
sequencing and copy number assessment by array comparative genomic hybridization.
Results were reviewed by a multidisciplinary expert panel, and iCat recommendations were
made if an actionable alteration was present, and an appropriate drug was available.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES Feasibility was assessed using a 2-stage design based on
the proportion of patients with recommendations.
RESULTS Of 100 participants (60 male; median [range] age, 13.4 [0.8-29.8] years), profiling
was technically successful in 89 (89% [95% CI, 83%-95%]). Median (range) follow-up was
6.8 (2.0-23.6) months. Overall, 31 (31% [95% CI, 23%-41%]) patients received an iCat
recommendation and 3 received matched therapy. The most common actionable alterations
leading to an iCat recommendation were cancer-associated signaling pathway gene
mutations (n = 10) and copy number alterations in MYC/MYCN (n = 6) and cell cycle genes
(n = 11). Additional alterations with implications for clinical care but not resulting in iCat
recommendations were identified, including mutations indicating the possible presence of a
cancer predisposition syndrome and translocations suggesting a change in diagnosis. In total,
43 (43% [95% CI, 33%-53%]) participants had results with potential clinical significance.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE A multi-institution clinical genomics study in pediatric
oncology is feasible and a substantial proportion of relapsed or refractory pediatric solid
tumors have actionable alterations.
TRIAL REGISTRATION clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT01853345
JAMA Oncol. doi:10.1001/jamaoncol.2015.5689
Published online January 28, 2016.
Editorial
Author Audio Interview at
jamaoncology.com
Related article
Supplemental content at
jamaoncology.com
Author Affiliations: Author
affiliations are listed at the end of this
article.
Corresponding Author: Katherine A.
Janeway, MD, MSc, Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, 450 Brookline Ave,
Dana 3, Boston, MA 02176
(katherine_janeway@dfci.harvard.edu).
Research
Original Investigation
(Reprinted)
E1
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://oncology.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of California - San Diego User  on 01/30/2016
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
I
n many diseases, molecularly targeted therapies have im-
provedoutcomesanddecreasedtreatment-relatedtoxicef-
fects. In oncology, examples such as ERBB2-positive breast
cancer1 and EGFR-mutant lung cancer2 have led to excite-
ment about the promise of precision cancer medicine. These
and other similar treatment advances typically occurred af-
ter years of investigation during which (1) a genomic altera-
tion was identified in a reasonable proportion of patients with
a particular diagnosis; (2) the alteration was validated to be a
centraloncogenicevent;(3)theactivityoftargetedtherapywas
studiedinpreclinicalmodelsandtheninearly-phasetrials;and
(4) clinical trials demonstrated activity of the targeted agent
onlyincancersubtypeswithspecificmolecularalterations.The
essential nature of most pathogenic variants has, therefore,
been established only in the context of specific disease sub-
sets. Nevertheless, some oncologists have adopted a preci-
sion medicine approach for their patients with recurrent or re-
fractory cancers based on the premise that receipt of matched
targeted therapy will have superior clinical activity, regard-
less of diagnosis or patient characteristics.
The implementation of precision cancer medicine in pe-
diatric oncology faces unique challenges. The total number of
nucleotidevariantspertumorismuchsmallerforpediatricthan
for adult cancers.3 In addition, unmet needs in medical on-
cology drive the current developmental therapeutics environ-
ment such that the availability, formulation, and accessibility
of drugs for children may be limited. In general, pediatric can-
ceriscomparativelyrare,andmostpatientsarecuredwithstan-
dard therapies, necessitating multicenter collaboration to ob-
tain meaningful cohorts for study. Finally, regulations
governing research in children make it difficult to obtain bi-
opsy samples for research purposes.
To evaluate the feasibility of a precision cancer medicine
approach in pediatric extracranial solid tumors, we con-
ducted a multicenter molecular profiling cohort study in
children with advanced solid tumors (NCT01853345) (see
trial protocol in Supplement 1). We sought to determine
whether, in the pediatric setting, it is feasible to identify
actionable alterations and make an individualized cancer
therapy, or iCat, recommendation using currently available
clinical genomic technologies.
Methods
Patients
Patients were eligible if they were 30 years or younger at
enrollment and had a recurrent, refractory, or high-risk
extracranial solid tumor. Refractory was defined as progres-
sion during receipt of standard first-line therapy, and high
risk was defined as overall survival for a patient group with
the same diagnosis, grade, and stage estimated to be no
more than 25%. Patients needed to have sufficient tumor
specimen for submission, in the judgment of the enrolling
investigator. The institutional review board at each partici-
pating site approved the research protocol, and all partici-
pants and/or their parent or legal guardian provided written
informed consent.
Sample Collection and Tumor Profiling
Submission of 15 to 60 unstained slides containing viable tu-
mor, a paraffin-embedded block, or 0.25 cm3 fresh-frozen tis-
sue was required. All samples were obtained as part of rou-
tine clinical care; the protocol did not mandate biopsy for
research purposes. Decalcified specimens were considered in-
adequate for tumor profiling. Tumor tissue obtained follow-
ing administration of neoadjuvant chemotherapy was permit-
ted if viable tumor was present, although tissue obtained prior
to chemotherapy was preferred. Submission of tumor tissue
from diagnosis and from recurrence was encouraged. All tu-
mor specimens were reviewed by a single molecular patholo-
gist (M.H.H.) who determined the percent viable tumor nu-
clei and adequacy for profiling.
Mutation detection was performed initially with a Seque-
nom assay, OncoMap, detecting 471 recurrent mutations in 41
cancer-related genes.4 Once available, mutation detection was
performed by targeted next-generation sequencing (NGS),
OncoPanel,5 using Agilent SureSelect for target capture and Il-
luminaHiSeqforsequencing.TheOncoPanelassaysurveysex-
onic DNA sequences of 275 cancer genes and 91 introns across
30 genes for rearrangement detection. OncoMap and Onco-
Panel were performed in a Clinical Laboratory Improvement
Amendments (CLIA)-certified laboratory, the Center for Ad-
vanced Molecular Diagnostics at the Brigham and Women’
s
Hospital. Blood samples were collected and germline DNA was
extracted and banked for future research; however, Onco-
Panel testing was performed only on tumor DNA. When suf-
ficient tissue was available, copy number assessment was per-
formed with array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH),
using Agilent SurePrint G3 CGH and single-nucleotide poly-
morphism (SNP) Cancer Microarray 4×180, using Agilent ref-
erence DNA as reference. The aCGH analysis was performed
in CLIA-certified laboratories at Boston Children’
s Hospital and
Claritas Genomics. Analysis of aCGH data was focused on re-
gions of interest determined prior to study initiation (eTable
1 in Supplement 2). OncoMap, OncoPanel, and aCGH were in-
terpretedandreportedbymolecularpathologists(M.H.H.,A.C.,
N.I.L.).
Key Points
Question Is it feasible to identify actionable alterations in
pediatric extracranial solid tumors and to make an individualized
therapeutic recommendation using currently available clinical
genomic technologies?
Findings Tumor profiling from archival paraffin-embedded
specimens from clinically indicated procedures resulted in 89 of
100 enrolled patients with adequate somatic DNA for tumor
profiling to be performed. Among enrolled children, 31% had an
actionable alteration indicating potential activity of a matched
targeted therapy.
Meaning In children with high-risk, recurrent, or refractory
extracranial solid tumors, there is the potential for tumor
sequencing to have clinical implications, but there are barriers
to receipt of matched targeted therapy.
Research Original Investigation
Molecular Profiling in Pediatric Tumors
E2
JAMA Oncology
Published online January 28, 2016
(Reprinted)
jamaoncology.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://oncology.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of California - San Diego User  on 01/30/2016
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Expert Panel Review and Return of Results
Profiling results were reviewed by a multidisciplinary expert
panel with the goal of identifying clinically significant re-
sults. In reviewing results, the term actionable alteration was
used for a genomic change indicating the potential for activ-
ity of a targeted therapy. The term targeted therapy was used
in reference to a drug with a specific, limited, and known
mechanism of action counteracting an oncogenic process. An
iCat recommendation was made if an actionable alteration was
present and a matched targeted therapy was available via a
clinical trial or as an FDA-approved drug with an age-
appropriate dose and formulation, and the patient had not pre-
viously been treated with the proposed targeted agent or a bio-
similar. More than 1 recommendation could be made per
patient. Each recommendation was tiered from 1 (strongest)
to 5 (weakest) based on strength of supporting evidence. Tiers
1 and 2 corresponded to evidence from clinical studies, tiers 3
and 4 to preclinical evidence, and tier 5 to consensus opinion
(eTable 2 in Supplement 2). If more than 1 iCat recommenda-
tion was made, the expert panel made no attempt to rank rec-
ommendations; each actionable alteration was evaluated and
tiered independently. In some cases, immunohistochemical
analysis was performed for validation of genetic findings. Vari-
ants of unknown significance (VUS) were evaluated for poten-
tial pathologic significance using functional prediction mod-
els such as PolyPhen6 or the Sorting Tolerant From Intolerant
algorithm (SIFT)7 and/or the medical literature. The expert
panel also reviewed identified variants for clinical implica-
tions outside the iCat recommendation. In particular, vari-
ants suggesting a change in diagnosis or the possible pres-
ence of a cancer predisposition syndrome (if also found in the
germline) were discussed.
After expert panel review and panel consensus was
reached, the lead reviewer for the case authored a letter to the
patient’
s primary oncologist (iCat letter). The iCat letter re-
ported the specimen(s) tested, technical performance of pro-
filing tests, and results with clinical implications for diagno-
sis or that indicated the possible presence of a cancer
predisposition syndrome. If the patient had recurrent or re-
fractory disease, the iCat letter also reported the iCat recom-
mendation with tier.
Clinical Data Collection
Clinical and demographic data were collected at the time of
patient enrollment and included age, diagnosis, and disease
status (newly diagnosed, or refractory or recurrent). If the iCat
letter included an iCat recommendation, the primary oncolo-
gist was surveyed regarding vital status and initiation of treat-
ment according to the iCat recommendation. In addition, data
were collected from the electronic medical record on clinical
response to therapy based on iCat recommendations and mo-
leculardiagnostictestingperformedoutsidethecontextofthis
study.
Statistical Design
Feasibility was defined prior to the study opening as an abil-
ity to make an iCat recommendation in 14% of enrolled pa-
tients based on published technical failure rates and reported
alteration frequencies available at the time of study design.8
A Simon 2-stage design was used to evaluate for early futility.
In stage 1, 60 eligible participants were enrolled; if fewer than
6 participants received an iCat recommendation, then ac-
crual would be halted and the approach considered infea-
sible. If 6 or more received an iCat recommendation, then ac-
crual continued to stage 2, with an additional 40 eligible
participants for a total of 100 patients. If at least 14 of 100 par-
ticipants received an iCat recommendation, then the ap-
proach would be considered feasible. This design has a type 1
error of 6.3% and 92% power to test the null hypothesis that
the proportion of patients who received an iCat recommen-
dationwas9%orlessvsthealternativethatitwas19%ormore.
The rate of accrual was predicted to be 4.2 patients per month,
or 100 patients in 2 years. The 95% CIs were constructed on
the proportions using the customary normal approximation
interval formula.
Exploratory Sequencing
Cases with sufficient tumor specimen remaining after sub-
mission for tumor profiling were evaluated for inclusion in ex-
ploratory sequencing studies. Cases were submitted for RNA
sequencingifsufficientfresh-frozentumorspecimenwasavail-
able. RNA sequencing data were analyzed using PRADA.9 The
list of fusions identified by RNA sequencing was reviewed and
fusions with potential clinical significance were validated by
targeted NGS in a CLIA-certified laboratory.
Results
Patients and Specimens
Patients were enrolled between between September 5, 2012,
and November 19, 2013, and clinical follow-up was collected
until November 2014 (median [range] follow-up, 6.8 [2.0-
23.6] months). Accrual was more rapid than predicted (eFig-
ure in Supplement 2), with 101 patients enrolling in 14 months.
One enrolled patient was excluded because the minimum tu-
mor specimen requirement could not be met. The most com-
mon diagnosis was nonrhabdomyosarcoma soft-tissue sar-
coma (Table 1 and eTable 3 in Supplement 2). Distribution of
the remaining diagnoses corresponded to the most fre-
quently occurring pediatric solid tumors. Additional clinical
and demographic features are presented in Table 1.
Thirty-one enrolled patients had specimen submitted
only from diagnosis and 40 only from recurrence. Eighteen
patients had paired specimens from both diagnosis and
recurrence. The remaining 11 patients had specimens from
local control surgical procedures submitted, 6 of whom had
an additional sample submitted from either diagnosis or
recurrence.
Tumor Profiling and iCat Recommendations
In 5 patients, the required samples were submitted but were
determined to be inadequate by central review. In 6 other pa-
tients, all profiling tests attempted were technical failures. A
total of 89 enrolled patients had at least 1 successfully com-
pleted profiling test. Of the 89 patients with technically suc-
Molecular Profiling in Pediatric Tumors
Original Investigation Research
jamaoncology.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Oncology
Published online January 28, 2016
E3
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://oncology.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of California - San Diego User  on 01/30/2016
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
cessful tumor profiling tests, 13 patients had OncoMap as their
only mutation detection test, 27 had both OncoMap and aCGH,
25 had OncoPanel and aCGH, and the remaining 24 had On-
coPanel only. The 6 technical failures for all attempted profil-
ing tests were due to inability to isolate adequate DNA. In 3
cases (in 2 cases of Ewing sarcoma and 1 case of osteosar-
coma) this was likely due to prior decalcification that was not
recognized at the time of tissue sample submission. In most
cases, aCGH was not possible due to insufficient tissue sample.
The expert panel rendered an iCat recommendation in 31
patients (31% [95% CI, 23%-41%]), exceeding the 14 patients
required to conclude feasibility. There were a total of 39 iCat
recommendations in these 31 patients (3 recommendations
[n = 1]; 2 recommendations [n = 6]; and 1 recommendation
[n = 24]). Using the highest tier per patient (see eTable 2 in
Supplement 2 for tier definitions), 1 patient had a tier 1 recom-
mendation, 2 had tier 2 recommendations, and the majority
had tier 3 or 4 recommendations. None of the following fac-
tors made it more likely to receive an iCat recommendation:
age, type of testing (OncoMap, OncoPanel, or aCGH), or month
of enrollment.
The most common actionable alteration leading to an iCat
recommendation was a copy number alteration, followed by
knownorsuspecteddeleteriousmutations(Table2andeWork-
sheets 1-3 in Supplement 3). Most copy number alterations re-
sulting in an iCat recommendation were related to alterations
of MYC/MYCN or cell cycle–related genes. MYCN high copy
number gain occurred in neuroblastoma, and MYC high copy
number gain occurred in osteosarcoma and undifferentiated
sarcoma. Ten known or suspected deleterious mutations were
detected in 8 genes (Figure). In most patients tested with On-
coPanel, results included VUS. The expert panel made an iCat
recommendation on the basis of a VUS in only 6 instances. In
these 6 instances, PolyPhen6 or SIFT7 and/or the medical lit-
erature indicated that the variant was likely pathogenic and
in 2 cases, the variant would have qualified the patient for a
clinical trial.
Receipt of iCat Recommended Therapy
Three patients, Nos. 4, 18, and 81, received a targeted therapy
matched to the iCat recommendation. Patient 4, a child with
refractory, unresectable sialoblastoma with a p.C382R FGFR2
Table 1. Patient Characteristics
Characteristic
No. (n = 100)
Diagnosis
Nonrhabdomyosarcoma soft-tissue sarcoma
27
Rare tumorsa
17
Neuroblastoma
14
Ewing sarcoma
12
Osteosarcoma
11
Rhabdomyosarcoma
11
Wilms tumor
8
Age, y
0-4
21
5-8
10
9-12
17
13-17
27
≥18
25
Sex
Male
60
Female
40
Disease status (at enrollment)
Recurrent
72
Newly diagnosed high risk
19
Refractory
9
Tumor material submitted
Recurrence only
40
Diagnosis only
31
Diagnosis and recurrence
18
Local control surgery only
5
Local control surgery and recurrence
2
Local control surgery and diagnosis
2
Local control surgery, recurrence, and diagnosis
2
Enrolling institution
Dana-Farber/Boston Children’
s
58
University of California–San Francisco
16
Columbia University Medical Center
15
Children’
s National Medical Center
11
a Includes adrenal cortical carcinoma, congenital mesoblastic nephroma,
germ cell tumor, glomus tumor, hepatoblastoma, hepatocellular carcinoma,
melanoma, nasopharyngeal adenocarcinoma, plexiform schwannoma, renal
cell carcinoma, renal medullary carcinoma, rhabdoid tumor of the liver,
sialoblastoma.
Table 2. Outcome of Molecular Profiling and Features of 39
Individualized Cancer Therapy (iCat) Recommendations in 31 Patientsa
Parameter
Patients, No. (% [95% CI])
Outcome of specimen profiling
and expert panel review
No iCat recommendation made
58 (58 [48-68])
iCat recommendation made
31 (31 [23-41])
Technical failure/inadequate specimen
11 (11 [5-17])
Total
100
Tier of iCat recommendation
1
1 (3 [0-9])
2
2 (6 [0-14])
3
8 (26 [11-41])
4
16 (52 [34-70])
5
4 (13 [1-25])
Total
31
Type of actionable alteration
Focal copy number alteration
20 (51 [35-67])
Mutation
Known or suspected deleterious
10 (26 [12-40])
Variant of uncertain significance
6 (15 [4-26])
Expressed target
2 (5 [0-12])
Translocation
1 (3 [0-8])
Total
39
a Outcome of specimen profiling reported for all patients. Tiers reported for 31
patients receiving an iCat recommendation as the highest tier per patient.
Type of actionable alteration on which the iCat recommendation was based
reported per iCat recommendation.
Research Original Investigation
Molecular Profiling in Pediatric Tumors
E4
JAMA Oncology
Published online January 28, 2016
(Reprinted)
jamaoncology.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://oncology.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of California - San Diego User  on 01/30/2016
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
mutation identified in the diagnostic specimen, had a tier 4
iCat recommendation and received off-label pazopanib hy-
drochloride. Patient 18, a child with embryonal rhabdomyo-
sarcoma with a p.E454K PIK3CA mutation identified in 1 di-
agnostic and 2 recurrent specimens, had a tier 3 iCat
recommendationandreceivedthepan-PI3KinhibitorBKM120,
via a compassionate access protocol. Patient 18 also had a
p.T727K PIK3CA mutation identified in the diagnostic speci-
Figure. Relationship of Individualized Cancer Therapy (iCat) Recommendations and Additional Profiling Results
in the 43 Patients in Whom Genomic Alterations Had Potential Clinical Significance
iCat Recommendation
Possible Cancer
Predisposition
Change
Diagnosis
Alteration 
Gene
ALK
BRAF
FGFR4
HRAS
NRAS
PIK3CA
ATM
CTNNB1
p.F1174L (c.3520T>C)
p.R1275Q (c.3824G>A)
p.V600E (c.1799T>A)
p.V550L (c.1648G>T)
p.Q61K (c.181C>A)
p.Q61K (c.181C>A)
p.E545K (c.1633G>A)
p.V410A (c.1229T>C)
p.G2023R (c.6067G>A)
p.S45F (c.134C>T)
Diagnosis 
Tier 
NBL
NBL
DFSP
ERMS
ERMS
ERMS
ERMS
ERMS
ERMS
ACC
3
1
2
3
5
2
4
5
5
4
Known or likely deleterious mutation 
Alteration 
Gene
NTRK3
EML4-NTRK3
Diagnosis 
Tier 
US
5
Translocation
Alteration 
Gene
SMARCB1
CDKN2A/B
2 Copy deletion 
Expression
Met
Loss p16 expression
Diagnosis 
Tier 
ES
RCC
US
4
3
4
Other
Alteration 
Gene
MYCN
MYC
High CN gain
High CN gain
MYC
High CN gain
Diagnosis 
Tier 
NBL (n = 2) 
OST
US
3
4
4
Copy number alterations (MYC/MYCN)
Alteration 
Gene
FGFR2
MET 
p.C382R (c.1144T>C) 
p.R1113C (c.3337C>T) 
PTCH1
p.T1010I (c.3029C>T) 
Diagnosis 
Tier 
Sialoblastoma 
ARMS
CCS
4
4
4
MAPK1 
p.D251N (c.751G>A) 
OST
5
Variant of uncertain significance
Alteration 
Gene
CDKN2A/B
CCND1
CDK4
CDK6
2 Copy deletion 
CN gain
High CN gain
High CN gain
High CN gain
CCNE1
Diagnosis 
Tier 
SS
EWS
MPNST
CMN
ERMS
EWS
NBL
NBL
OST
4
4
4
4
4
4
3
4
3
Copy number alterations (cell cycle)
Actionable alteration without matching
therapy (eTable 5) 
Possible cancer predisposition (eTable 6) 
Other
Copy number alterations (cell cycle)
Variant of uncertain significance
Copy number alterations (MYC/MYCN)
Translocation
Known or likely deleterious mutation 
Change diagnosis (Table 3) 
Molecular bases of iCat
recommendations are shown. For
patients with more than 1 iCat
recommendation, only 1 molecular
basis for the iCat recommendation is
displayed. (A complete list of
molecular alterations leading to an
iCat recommendation is provided in
eTable 4 in Supplement 2.) Two
patients who had both an iCat
recommendation and an actionable
alteration without matching therapy
are shown as iCat recommendation
only. ACC indicates adrenocortical
carcinoma; ARMS, alveolar
rhabdomyosarcoma; CCS, clear-cell
sarcoma; CMN, congenital
mesoblastic nephroma;
DFSP, dermatofibrosarcoma
protuberans; ERMS, embryonal
rhabdomyosarcoma; ES, epithelioid
sarcoma; EWS, Ewing sarcoma;
MPNST, malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumor; NBL, neuroblastoma;
OST, osteosarcoma; RCC, renal cell
carcinoma; SS, synovial sarcoma;
US, undifferentiated sarcoma.
Molecular Profiling in Pediatric Tumors
Original Investigation Research
jamaoncology.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Oncology
Published online January 28, 2016
E5
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://oncology.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of California - San Diego User  on 01/30/2016
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
menonlyandap.V550LFGFR4mutationidentifiedinalltested
specimens. Patient 81, a child with recurrent neuroblastoma
with a p.R1275Q ALK mutation and MYCN high copy number
gain identified in a recurrent specimen, had a tier 1 iCat rec-
ommendation and received crizotinib monotherapy. None of
these patients had an objective response.
The primary oncologists of all 31 patients who received
an iCat recommendation were surveyed regarding whether
treatment according to an iCat recommendation was deliv-
ered and if not, why not. Among the 19 responses, reasons
for not delivering iCat recommended therapy included dis-
ease too advanced or patient is deceased (n = 3 [16%]); no
active disease, disease well controlled with use of other
therapy, or attempting third-line therapy first (n = 8 [42%]);
and clinical status not appropriate for iCat therapy with rea-
son not specified (n = 4 [21%]). Four of the responses (21%)
indicated that iCat recommended therapy could not be
obtained because a trial was not available or the patient did
not meet trial eligibility. The lack of a suitable clinical trial
occurred in these 4 patients who received an iCat recom-
mendation despite the fact that the expert panel made an
iCat recommendation only if they were of the opinion that
matched targeted therapy was available via a clinical trial or
as a US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved drug
with an age-appropriate dose and formulation.
Additional Profiling Results With Potential Clinical Impact
Six patients had an actionable alteration but there was no
matching targeted therapy available via a clinical trial or as an
FDA-approved therapy with an age-appropriate dose and for-
mulation (eTable 5 in Supplement 2) and so an iCat recom-
mendation was not made.
Eleven of 89 patients had alterations identified by testing
the tumor specimen that, if present in the germline, would in-
dicate the possibility of a cancer predisposition syndrome
(eTable 6 in Supplement 2). These results were returned to the
primary oncologist with a suggestion for referral to a genetic
counselor.
Profiling identified translocations with diagnostic impli-
cations in 3 patients (Table 3). Patient 20 had a diagnosis of
Ewing sarcoma, but RNA sequencing of the diagnostic speci-
men, confirmed with targeted NGS of the diagnostic speci-
men, demonstrated an EWSR1-CREB1 fusion, raising the pos-
sibility of primary pulmonary myxoid sarcoma,10 a diagnosis
that would better fit this patient’
s clinical presentation. Pa-
tient 64 had a diagnosis of stage III malignant melanoma, but
RNA sequencing of the first recurrence, confirmed with tar-
geted NGS of the fourth recurrence, revealed an EWSR1-ATF1
fusion previously reported in cutaneous clear-cell sarcoma.11
In a third patient, patient 80, a novel translocation between
exon 2 of EML4 (NM_019063.3) and exon 13 of NTRK3
(NM_001012338.1) was suggested by aCGH of the diagnostic
specimen and confirmed with reverse transcription poly-
merase chain reaction from the same specimen.
Therefore,12additionaluniquepatientshadmolecularpro-
filing results of potential clinical significance independent of
the 31 patients with iCat recommendations. Thus, a total of 43
patients had results with potential clinical significance.
Discussion
Results of the iCat study demonstrate that clinical tumor pro-
filing to identify actionable alterations in pediatric solid tu-
mors and make an individualized cancer therapy recommen-
dation is feasible in the context of a multi-institution research
protocol. We found potentially actionable alterations in 43%
of high-risk, relapsed, or refractory pediatric solid tumors, a
prevalence that may justify incorporating return of results into
future genomics research projects in pediatric solid tumors.
The actionable alterations identified in this study highlight the
drug classes in which there is a high priority to develop early-
phase clinical trials with integrated genomic characterization
for children with recurrent or refractory solid tumors (Table 4),
animportantstudyoutcomegiventhelimitednumberofthese
children available to enroll in early-phase clinical trials, and
the large number of novel targeted therapies not yet studied
in children. The specific genomic variants identified and the
frequencies of actionable alterations are generally similar to
thosereportedinpriorstudiescharacterizingthegenomicland-
scapes of pediatric solid tumors.12-16 Most sequencing stud-
ies of pediatric cancers are underpowered to detect muta-
tions occurring in less than 5% to 10% of cases,17 and many rare
pediatric solid tumors have not been sequenced. Therefore,
Table 3. Identified Translocations With Diagnostic and Therapeutic Implications
Patient No.
Clinical Presentation
Initial Diagnosis
Molecular Testing
at Initial Diagnosis
Identified Translocation
Diagnosis Suggested
Test
Result
20
Lung mass and
femur lesion
Ewing sarcoma
CD99 IHC
Positive
EWSR1-CREB1
Primary pulmonary
myxoid sarcoma
EWSR1
break-apart
FISH
Positive
64
Occipital mass,
adenopathy
Stage III melanoma
S100 IHC
Positive
EWSR1-ATF1
Cutaneous clear-cell
sarcoma
Melan-A IHC
Positive
80
Forearm mass,
recurrence lung
Intermediate-grade
spindle-cell sarcoma
ETV6
break-apart
FISH
Negative
EML4-NTRK3
Infantile fibrosarcoma
Abbreviations: FISH, fluorescence in situ hybridization; IHC, immunohistochemical analysis.
Research Original Investigation
Molecular Profiling in Pediatric Tumors
E6
JAMA Oncology
Published online January 28, 2016
(Reprinted)
jamaoncology.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://oncology.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of California - San Diego User  on 01/30/2016
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
it is not surprising that some actionable alterations seen in this
cohort have not previously been reported to occur in the di-
agnoses in which we observed them.
Barriers to the administration of matched targeted therapy
in this patient population were identified. Only 3 of the 31 pa-
tients who had an iCat recommendation received matched tar-
geted therapy. In our survey of patients’treating oncologists,
lack of an available clinical trial or inability to enroll in a clini-
cal trial were among the reasons provided for not prescribing
therapy matched to the iCat recommendation. These results
emphasize the need for more clinical trials of targeted thera-
pies in pediatric patients with cancer. A number of primary on-
cologists treating patients who received an iCat recommen-
dation cited the patient’
s clinical status (either disease too
advanced or well controlled) as a reason for not administer-
ing matched targeted therapy. This may have been both be-
cause we focused on profiling patients who often had ad-
vanced cancers and also because follow-up data were collected
for a relatively short period of time, and thus some patients’
cancers had not yet progressed. This result suggests that pro-
filing tumors earlier in the disease course may increase the
numberofpatientstreatedwithmatchedtargetedtherapy.The
identification of translocations with diagnostic implications
in this study also supports profiling early in the disease course
when clarification of diagnosis may lead to a change in thera-
peutic approach.
Severalquestionsremaintobeansweredbeforeclinicaltu-
mor profiling is incorporated into routine care of children with
recurrent or refractory and high-risk solid tumors. Our study
did not assess which tumor profiling assays optimally bal-
ance the competing factors of minimal tissue requirement,
comprehensive genomic assessment, and rapid reporting. The
rapid pace of technology development, a challenge to ongo-
ing consistency, complicates this task. This issue of evolving
technology presented itself even in the context of this rela-
tively short pilot study and is a limitation of our study. Al-
though we report outcome data of 3 patients who received tar-
geted therapy matched to an iCat recommendation, this study
was not designed primarily to assess the impact of receipt of
matched targeted therapy on outcome. Additional limita-
tions of this study include the small patient numbers; exclu-
sionofpatientswithcentralnervoussystemtumors,whomake
up a substantial proportion of pediatric patients with cancer
with recurrent disease; and the inability to obtain profiling re-
sults in 11 of the 100 subjects due to lack of available tissue or
technical failure. Continuing to perform genomic tumor pro-
filing as part of a research protocol will enable assessment of
theseremainingquestionsthroughlargemulti-institutionstud-
ies. Additional benefits of prospective clinical genomic stud-
ies in pediatric cancers include discovery of rare recurrent vari-
ants and clarity regarding the drug classes to be prioritized for
clinical trials.
Conclusions
Inchildrenwithhigh-risk,recurrent,orrefractorysolidtumors,
there is the potential for tumor profiling results to have clinical
implicationsbuttherearebarrierstoreceiptofmatchedtargeted
therapy. Continuing to perform tumor profiling in the context
of clinical genomics research protocols permits further inves-
tigation of barriers to receipt of matched targeted therapy and
assessmentoftheclinicalimpactofaprecisioncancermedicine
approach and makes additional sequencing data from pediat-
ric solid tumors available to the research community.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Accepted for Publication: November 12, 2015.
Published Online: January 28, 2016.
doi:10.1001/jamaoncol.2015.5689.
Open Access: This article is published under JAMA
Oncology’
s open access model and is free to read on
the day of publication.
Author Affiliations: Department of Pathology,
Boston Children’
s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
(Harris, Church); Division of Pediatric Hematology
Oncology, University of California–San Francisco
Benioff Children’
s Hospital (DuBois); Division of
Pediatric Hematology/Oncology/Stem Cell
Transplantation, NewYork–Presbyterian Morgan
Stanley Children’
s Hospital, New York (Glade
Bender); Center for Cancer and Blood Disorders,
Children’
s National Medical Center, Washington, DC
(Kim); Dana-Farber/Boston Children’
s Cancer and
Blood Disorders Center, Boston, Massachusetts
(Crompton, Parker, Dumont, Hong, Guo, Stegmaier,
Roberts, Shusterman, London, Diller,
Rodriguez-Galindo, Janeway); Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts (Stegmaier,
Roberts, Shusterman, London, Lindeman, Diller,
Rodriguez-Galindo, Janeway); Center for Cancer
Genome Discovery, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, Massachusetts (MacConaill); Department
of Pathology, Brigham and Women’
s Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts (MacConaill, Lindeman).
Author Contributions: Dr Janeway had full access
to all of the data in the study and takes
responsibility for the integrity of the data and the
accuracy of the data analysis.
Study concept and design: Harris, Roberts, London,
Lindeman, Diller, Rodriguez-Galindo, Janeway.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data:
Harris, DuBois, Glade Bender, Kim, Crompton,
Parker, Dumont, Hong, Guo, Church, Stegmaier,
Shusterman, London, MacConail, Lindeman, Diller,
Rodriguez-Galindo, Janeway.
Drafting of the manuscript: DuBois, Kim, Stegmaier,
Lindeman, Janeway.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content: Harris, DuBois, Glade Bender,
Kim, Crompton, Parker, Dumont, Hong, Guo,
Church, Roberts, Shusterman, London, MacConail,
Lindeman, Diller, Rodriguez-Galindo, Janeway.
Statistical analysis: Guo, London.
Obtained funding: Glade Bender, Roberts,
Lindeman, Diller, Rodriguez-Galindo, Janeway.
Administrative, technical, or material support:
Harris, Glade Bender, Kim, Crompton, Parker,
Table 4. Most Common Drug Classes Implicated by Molecular
Characterization in Children With Solid Tumorsa
Target Inhibited by
Drug
Targeted Genes Altered
in Enrolled Patients
Patients With
Alteration, No.
CDK4/6
CDKN2A/B, CCND1, CDK4, CDK6
11
BET bromodomain
MYC, MYCN
6
BRAF/MEK/ERK
HRAS, NRAS, BRAF
3
ALK
ALK
3
PARP
ATM
2
FGFR
FGFR2, FGFR4
2
MDM2
MDM2
2
NTRK
NTRK3
1
PI3K/mTOR
PIK3CA
1
a Alterations based on variants of uncertain significance are not included.
Returned known or suspected pathogenic variants without individualized
cancer therapy recommendation included if the reason for no
recommendation was no drug available in pediatrics.
Molecular Profiling in Pediatric Tumors
Original Investigation Research
jamaoncology.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA Oncology
Published online January 28, 2016
E7
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://oncology.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of California - San Diego User  on 01/30/2016
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Dumont, Church, London, MacConail, Lindeman,
Janeway.
Study supervision: Glade Bender, Stegmaier,
Roberts, London, MacConail, Lindeman, Diller,
Rodriguez-Galindo, Janeway.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None reported.
Funding/Support: This study was supported by
Hyundai Hope on Wheels (Drs Glade Bender and
Janeway), the Friends for Life Foundation (Dr
Janeway), and the Gillmore Fund (Dr Janeway).
Role of the Funder/Sponsor: The funders had no
role in the design and conduct of the study;
collection, management, analysis, and
interpretation of the data; preparation, review, or
approval of the manuscript; and decision to submit
the manuscript for publication.
REFERENCES
1. Romond EH, Perez EA, Bryant J, et al.
Trastuzumab plus adjuvant chemotherapy for
operable HER2-positive breast cancer. N Engl J Med.
2005;353(16):1673-1684.
2. Paez JG, Jänne PA, Lee JC, et al. EGFR mutations
in lung cancer: correlation with clinical response to
gefitinib therapy. Science. 2004;304(5676):
1497-1500.
3. Vogelstein B, Papadopoulos N, Velculescu VE,
Zhou S, Diaz LA Jr, Kinzler KW. Cancer genome
landscapes. Science. 2013;339(6127):1546-1558.
4. MacConaill LE, Garcia E, Shivdasani P, et al.
Prospective enterprise-level molecular genotyping
of a cohort of cancer patients. J Mol Diagn. 2014;
16(6):660-672.
5. Wagle N, Berger MF, Davis MJ, et al.
High-throughput detection of actionable genomic
alterations in clinical tumor samples by targeted,
massively parallel sequencing. Cancer Discov. 2012;
2(1):82-93.
6. Adzhubei IA, Schmidt S, Peshkin L, et al.
A method and server for predicting damaging
missense mutations. Nat Methods. 2010;7(4):
248-249.
7. Kumar P, Henikoff S, Ng PC. Predicting the
effects of coding non-synonymous variants on
protein function using the SIFT algorithm. Nat Protoc.
2009;4(7):1073-1081.
8. MacConaill LE, Campbell CD, Kehoe SM, et al.
Profiling critical cancer gene mutations in clinical
tumor samples. PLoS One. 2009;4(11):e7887.
9. Torres-García W, Zheng S, Sivachenko A, et al.
PRADA: pipeline for RNA sequencing data analysis.
Bioinformatics. 2014;30(15):2224-2226.
10. Thway K, Nicholson AG, Lawson K, et al.
Primary pulmonary myxoid sarcoma with
EWSR1-CREB1 fusion: a new tumor entity. Am J Surg
Pathol. 2011;35(11):1722-1732.
11. Falconieri G, Bacchi CE, Luzar B. Cutaneous clear
cell sarcoma: report of three cases of a potentially
underestimated mimicker of spindle cell melanoma.
Am J Dermatopathol. 2012;34(6):619-625.
12. Shern JF, Chen L, Chmielecki J, et al.
Comprehensive genomic analysis of
rhabdomyosarcoma reveals a landscape of
alterations affecting a common genetic axis in
fusion-positive and fusion-negative tumors. Cancer
Discov. 2014;4(2):216-231.
13. Crompton BD, Stewart C, Taylor-Weiner A, et al.
The genomic landscape of pediatric Ewing sarcoma.
Cancer Discov. 2014;4(11):1326-1341.
14. Perry JA, Kiezun A, Tonzi P, et al.
Complementary genomic approaches highlight the
PI3K/mTOR pathway as a common vulnerability in
osteosarcoma. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014;111(51):
E5564-E5573.
15. Pugh TJ, Morozova O, Attiyeh EF, et al.
The genetic landscape of high-risk neuroblastoma.
Nat Genet. 2013;45(3):279-284.
16. Hawryluk MJ, Wang K, Chmielecki J, et al.
Comprehensive next-generation sequencing-based
genomic profiling identifies actionable genomic
alterations in diverse pediatric tumor types: the
Foundation Medicine (FMI) experience. Cancer Res.
2014;74:Abstract 23.
17. Lawrence MS, Stojanov P, Mermel CH, et al.
Discovery and saturation analysis of cancer genes
across 21 tumour types. Nature. 2014;505
(7484):495-501.
Research Original Investigation
Molecular Profiling in Pediatric Tumors
E8
JAMA Oncology
Published online January 28, 2016
(Reprinted)
jamaoncology.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://oncology.jamanetwork.com/ by a University of California - San Diego User  on 01/30/2016
