 Nociceptive brain activity as a measure of analgesic efficacy in 
infants
C. Hartley1, E. P. Duff#2, G. Green#1, G. Schmidt Mellado1, A. Worley3, R. Rogers4, and R. 
Slater1,*
1Department of Paediatrics, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX3 9DU, UK
2Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the Brain Centre, Nuffield Department of Clinical 
Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX3 9DU, UK
3Department of Clinical Neurophysiology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, London, 
WC1N 3JH, UK
4Nuffield Department of Anaesthetics, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, OX3 9DU, UK
# These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract
Pain in infants is under-treated and poorly understood, representing a significant clinical problem. 
In part, this is due to our inability to objectively measure pain in non-verbal populations. Here, we 
present an EEG-based measure of infant nociceptive brain activity that is evoked following acute 
noxious stimulation and is sensitive to analgesic modulation. This measure will be valuable for 
both mechanistic investigations and for testing analgesic efficacy in the infant population.
Introduction
The implicit challenges associated with the measurement of infant pain have led to poor 
analgesic provision in infants (1). As pain exposure in early life is associated with both 
short-term and long-term negative consequences (2), re-evaluation of analgesic provision is 
urgently required, and crucial in infants receiving intensive care who are exposed to a high 
burden of pain (1). However, analgesics that are effective in adults may not be suitable for 
use in infants, and even when adult analgesics are efficacious, dose scaling remains a 
significant, non-trivial issue due to differences in pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics, 
resulting from differences in absorption, clearance, body composition and receptor 
expression (3).
It is therefore imperative that a developmentally sensitive approach is used to assess 
analgesic efficacy and dosing requirements in infants. However, as infants cannot describe 
their pain, its measurement is reliant on observing indirect noxious-evoked changes in 
* rebeccah.slater@paediatrics.ox.ac.uk. 
Author contributions: R.S., C.H., R.R., and A.W. designed the study; G.G, G.S.M., and C.H. performed the experiments; C.H., E.D., 
R.S., and R.R. analyzed and interpreted the data; C.H. and R.S. wrote the paper. All authors critically revised the manuscript.
Competing interests: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 04.
Published in final edited form as:
Sci Transl Med. 2017 May 03; 9(388): . doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.aah6122.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 behavior and physiology, such as changes in facial expression, crying and heart rate (4). 
While these observations may be useful in clinical practice, their utility as an outcome 
measure in clinical trials and research investigations is limited as these physiological and 
behavioral observations are not uniquely evoked by nociceptive input (4).
More recently, changes in infant electrophysiological and hemodynamic brain activity have 
been identified and characterized in response to noxious stimulation (5, 6). As the perception 
of pain manifests in the brain, it is plausible that in the absence of language, brain-derived 
approaches may provide the best surrogate measures of infant pain and be more directly 
linked to pain experience (7). In adults, noxious-evoked changes in brain activity are 
correlated with individual subjective pain intensity and can be modulated by analgesic 
administration (8, 9). Brain-derived approaches have therefore been proposed as key 
methods to optimize drug discovery (10) and to identify targeted analgesic treatments (8, 9).
The potential utility of developing brain-derived measures in pre-verbal infants is 
considerable. Here, using EEG (electroencephalography) recordings we aim to identify and 
validate a template of nociceptive brain activity that is sensitive to analgesic administration 
and suitable for use in clinical trials and research investigations. To this end, a total of 72 
infants were included across five studies. The template was derived in Study 1 and then 
subsequently validated in four independent samples of infants. In Study 2 the specificity of 
the template was examined in response to noxious, visual, auditory and tactile stimuli in 
term infants; in Study 3 the applicability of the template to preterm infants aged 34 – 36 
weeks’ gestation was investigated; in Study 4 the relationship between noxious-evoked brain 
activity characterized by the template and pain-related behaviour was established; and in 
Study 5 the sensitivity of the template to analgesic modulation was assessed.
Results
Study 1: Deriving a template of nociceptive brain activity
We identified the template by contrasting the patterns of brain activity, evoked by noxious 
(clinically-required heel lance and experimental noxious stimulation) and non-noxious 
stimulation (heel lance control procedure and tactile stimulation) in 18 term infants. The 
topography and time-course of the response was established by considering activity across 
all electrodes in the 1000 ms post-stimulation period. Noxious-evoked activity was maximal 
at Cz, and, at this electrode site, significantly different from the activity evoked by the non-
noxious stimuli in the time-window 446 - 611 ms post-stimulation (p=0.003, cluster-
corrected non-parametric test (11); Figure 1A,B). To obtain a representative waveform of the 
noxious-evoked brain activity, Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was applied in this time 
window (400 – 700 ms post-stimulation) at Cz. A principal component was identified that 
was significantly greater in response to the noxious stimuli compared with the non-noxious 
stimuli and background activity (p<0.01, Figure 1C). This principal component is 
comparable to that identified in previous research investigating noxious-evoked brain 
activity in infants (6, 12–16) and was defined as the template of nociceptive brain activity. 
The template is scaled so that a magnitude of 1 represents the average response evoked by a 
stimulus of equivalent intensity to a heel lance performed in a term infant. Activity evoked 
Hartley et al.
Page 2
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 following experimental noxious stimuli (up to a maximum force of 128 mN) and in younger 
infants is expected to be smaller in magnitude (13, 14).
The morphology of the noxious-evoked brain activity was not dependent on the modality of 
the noxious stimulus. This was demonstrated by independently calculating the noxious-
evoked brain activity following the clinically-required heel lance and the experimental 
noxious stimuli. The principal components relating to the noxious-evoked brain activity in 
response to the heel lance and the experimental noxious stimuli were highly correlated with 
each other (r2=0.88, p<0.001), and both were highly correlated with the template of 
nociceptive brain activity (experimental noxious stimuli: r2=0.99, p<0.001; clinical heel 
lance: r2=0.91, p<0.001, Figure S1). This provides confirmation that the morphology of the 
noxious-evoked brain activity characterized by the template is common to both the clinical 
and the experimental noxious stimulus modalities.
Study 2: Testing template specificity
In Study 2 the nociceptive specificity of the template was tested in an independent sample of 
14 term infants. For each infant, the template was projected onto the activity evoked by 
experimental noxious, visual, auditory and tactile stimulation, and onto background activity 
(Figure 2A). Visual, auditory and tactile stimulation did not evoke a pattern of activity, 
characterized by the template, which was significantly greater than background activity 
(p>0.05, Figure 2B). Whereas, activity evoked by the experimental noxious stimulation was 
significantly greater than that observed in the background and in response to all non-noxious 
stimuli (p<0.01, Figure 2B). This cannot be attributed to the non-noxious stimuli being too 
low intensity as all stimuli evoked shorter latency vertex responses that were significantly 
different from background (Figure 2A, p<0.005 cluster-corrected non-parametric test (11)), 
which in infants have been attributed to an arousal response (6), and may relate to stimulus 
saliency as proposed in adults (17).
It is plausible that application of the experimental noxious stimuli is more arousing than the 
auditory, visual or tactile stimuli. The experimental noxious stimulation evoked an increase 
in heart rate of 5.8±9.3 beats per minute (bpm), which is significantly higher than the change 
observed in the background activity (p<0.001). While this change in heart rate is relatively 
small compared with that evoked by a clinically-required heel lance, which on average 
evoked an increase in heart rate of 15.6±13.4 bpm (p<0.001, n=11), it is significantly greater 
than that evoked by the other non-noxious stimulus modalities (p<0.001; average evoked 
change in heart rate: tactile: 1.6±8.8 bpm; auditory: -1.3±10.8 bpm; visual: -0.4±8.5 bpm). 
However, the increase in heart rate evoked by the tactile stimulation was also significantly 
greater than background activity (p=0.018), even though concomitant noxious brain activity 
was not evoked (Figure 2B).
Importantly, when only considering the evoked brain activity following the most 
physiologically arousing stimuli, where the change in heart rate was greater than the average 
heart rate change evoked by the experimental noxious stimuli (n=140 of 513 stimuli; 22 
auditory, 23 visual, 35 tactile and 60 experimental noxious), only the experimental noxious 
stimulation evoked nociceptive brain activity that was significantly greater than background 
activity (p<0.001). The non-noxious stimuli that evoked a comparable change in heart rate 
Hartley et al.
Page 3
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 did not evoke noxious brain activity that was significantly different to background activity 
(p=0.85, Figure 2C,D). This suggests that the differences in the morphology of the brain 
activity evoked by the noxious and non-noxious stimuli is not related to differences in 
physiological arousal associated with the different stimulus modalities.
Study 3: Testing the validity of the template in premature infants
Patterns of brain activity evoked by noxious stimulation change across the preterm period 
(14), with infants younger than 34 weeks’ gestation more likely to exhibit non-specific 
neuronal bursts than nociceptive-specific activity (12). The suitability of the template for 
premature infants aged from 34 – 36 weeks’ gestation was demonstrated in a sample of 12 
infants in Study 3. Projecting the template onto activity evoked by a noxious procedure 
(clinically-required heel lance) showed a significantly greater response compared with 
activity evoked by a non-noxious control procedure (control heel lance, p=0.008) or during 
background activity (p=0.006, Figure 2E,F).
Study 4: Investigating the relationship between noxious-evoked brain activity 
characterized by the template and pain-related behaviour
Clinical pain assessment tools, which primarily rely on pain-related changes in behavior, are 
the current standard method used to quantify pain in infants. In Study 4, we considered how 
the magnitude of the noxious-evoked brain activity characterized by the template compared 
with the evoked changes in pain-related behavior in a sample of 28 infants aged from 34 – 
42 weeks’ gestation where a clinically-required heel lance was performed (the 12 preterm 
infants in Study 3 were included in this analysis). There was a significant correlation 
between the magnitude of noxious-evoked brain activity and pain-related facial grimacing 
(p=0.038, r=0.39, Figure 3A). However, similar to previous observations (18), in 5 of 11 
infants (45 %) where pain-related behavioral changes were not observed there was still a 
significant increase in noxious-evoked brain activity (Figure 3B). Overall, 11 of the 12 
preterm infants had a significant increase in noxious-evoked brain activity. Pain-related 
behavioral changes were recorded in 9 of these infants.
Study 5: Testing template sensitivity to analgesic modulation
The aim of Study 5 was to determine whether the noxious-evoked brain activity 
characterized by the template was sensitive to analgesic modulation. This was investigated in 
12 infants who underwent venipuncture to obtain a clinically-required blood sample. In 
accordance with the clinical protocol, topical local anesthetic (4% Tetracaine gel) was 
applied to the dorsal surface of one foot. Experimental noxious stimuli were then applied to 
each foot (prior to venipuncture) and the evoked brain activity measured. When the 
experimental noxious stimuli were applied to the untreated foot the noxious evoked activity 
was significantly greater than background activity (p<0.001, Figure 3C). Whereas, when the 
experimental noxious stimuli were applied to the foot treated with local anesthetic the 
evoked activity was not significantly different from the background activity (p=0.26), and 
was significantly lower than the activity evoked in the untreated foot (p=0.002). In all but 
one infant the magnitude of the noxious-evoked brain activity was greater when the stimuli 
were applied to the untreated foot compared with the foot treated with local anesthetic. 
Hartley et al.
Page 4
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure S2 shows the noxious-evoked brain activity following stimulation on the treated foot 
and untreated foot for each individual infant included in the study.
Sensitivity and specificity
While the template has the ability to identify group differences, it is also of interest to 
consider the sensitivity and specificity of the measure to characterize noxious-evoked 
activity within individual infants. For the infants requiring a clinical heel lance (Studies 3 
and 4), the magnitude of the noxious-evoked brain activity was compared with background 
brain activity. 18 of the 28 infants had a response to the heel lance that was higher than 
threshold (threshold derived from the 80th percentile of the background activity, see 
Materials and Methods), demonstrating 64 % sensitivity. In comparison 17 out of 26 infants 
had a response to the control heel lance that was less than threshold, demonstrating 65 % 
specificity. When the lower intensity experimental noxious stimuli were applied to the 
infants in Study 2 the sensitivity was 57 % (8 of the 14 infants had an average evoked 
response that was above threshold), and the specificity was 68 % (27 out of 40 non-noxious 
stimuli evoked average responses below the threshold). The receiver operating characteristic 
(ROC) curve calculated across all stimulus modalities supports this observation (Figure S3).
Discussion
Here, a template representing the temporal pattern of nociceptive brain activity in infants has 
been characterized at the Cz electrode site and validated across a range of studies. The 
template was derived using Principal Component Analysis, which is an approach that has 
previously been used in multiple publications to characterize infant nociceptive brain activity 
(6, 12–16). Predefining a template has several important advantages over current 
methodology. Firstly, it provides a more robust analytical approach due to the independence 
of the data sample. This avoids previous study limitations where noxious-evoked brain 
activity has been characterized and evaluated within the same population (12, 15), and is 
particularly important in randomized controlled trials where the precedent is to predefine 
outcome measures. Secondly, using a predefined template prevents the need for the evoked 
activity to be re-characterized in a subset of data within each new study. This will directly 
benefit smaller scale investigations where there is less power to robustly characterize the 
evoked activity across a range of infant demographics and stimulus conditions. Moreover, 
using all the available data to address questions pertaining to infant pain is of particular 
importance due to practical and ethical considerations, whereby data collection primarily 
relies on the need for clinically essential painful procedures to be performed in study 
participants. Thirdly, defining a template of nociceptive activity allows for a standardized 
approach to be adopted and will facilitate comparisons between future research 
investigations and study populations.
To date, the analgesic efficacy of topical local anesthetics in infants for acute tissue breaking 
clinical procedures has been investigated using a variety of clinical pain assessment tools 
(19). While some studies conclude that application of topical local anesthetics is effective 
(20–22), conflicting reports suggest a lack of analgesic efficacy for intramuscular injections 
(23, 24), heel lancing (25, 26), peripherally inserted central catheters (27–29), and 
Hartley et al.
Page 5
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 venipuncture (30). Here we demonstrate that application of topical local anesthetic in infants 
does significantly reduce the peripheral afferent nociceptive input transmitted to the brain 
following the application of a mildly noxious acute experimental stimulus. While it is clear 
that further studies using these brain-derived measures are warranted during clinical 
procedures, numerous factors may explain the apparent lack of analgesic efficacy that has 
previously been reported. In some clinical procedures, the tissues affected by the nociceptive 
input will be deeper than the superficial anesthesia provided by topical local anesthetic. For 
example, following an injection, the nociceptive input caused by the needle prick may be 
alleviated, but not the subsequent pain associated with the injection of fluid into the muscle. 
For heel lancing, where there is substantial evidence for the lack of analgesic efficacy (25, 
26) it is plausible that the vasoconstriction caused by some topical local anesthetics (31, 32), 
may lead to more vigorous squeezing of the limb to obtain an adequate blood sample, 
conversely resulting in increased nociceptive input in the treated infants compared with the 
untreated infants. In addition, behavioural measures may not be sensitive enough to 
discriminate between pain and distress, and so, the reported lack of analgesic efficacy may 
arise because of unpleasant features associated with the clinical procedure that are not 
necessarily related to the nociceptive input. For example, the need to physically restrain the 
limb during clinical procedures may be distressing and evoke a behavioural response even in 
the absence of nociceptive input. Moreover, even in this study where the nociceptive input 
was comparatively mild, the local anesthetic only partially reduced the noxious-evoked brain 
activity in some participants.
The template derived here will be used to characterize evoked nociceptive activity in infants 
from 34 to 42 weeks’ gestation in a randomised controlled trial that will test the analgesic 
efficacy of morphine for procedural pain in infants (33, 34). The Procedural Pain in 
Premature Infants (Poppi) Trial Protocol, which has been published as an Accepted Protocol 
Summary in The Lancet (33), provides a direct example of how these measures can be used 
to assess analgesic efficacy in the clinical setting. The advantage of characterizing activity at 
a single site is that the template can be used when only a single recording electrode is 
applied, for example, where excess handling in critically ill patients may not be appropriate 
or in situations where time is limited. While the highest amplitude activity was recorded at 
the Cz electrode site, this does not imply that noxious-evoked activity cannot be recorded 
elsewhere. Indeed, if these methods were to be developed such that they could be used to 
characterize an individual infant’s nociceptive sensitivity it would be important to consider 
the temporal and spatial activity across the other electrode sites. This study has demonstrated 
that the template can characterize noxious-evoked brain activity in infants from 34 – 42 
weeks’ gestation. However, the template does not take into account that there is an increased 
likelihood that noxious stimulation may evoke non-modality specific bursts of neuronal 
activity in younger infants (12). The brain undergoes rapid functional and structural 
development during this period (35), and further refinement of the template could also take 
additional developmentally relevant information into account. For example, changes in the 
magnitude or latency of the noxious-evoked activity are known to occur with gestational age 
(14, 36), and there is evidence that infants born prematurely who reach term-age have 
greater magnitude noxious-evoked brain activity compared with age-matched term-born 
infants following the same nociceptive input (16).
Hartley et al.
Page 6
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 The evoked brain activity characterized by the template cannot be interpreted as a direct 
measure of infant pain but rather it quantifies the degree of the noxious input that is reaching 
the infant’s brain. Various factors will contribute to the experience of pain (37) and the 
template does not reflect all nociceptive activity that takes place across the infant brain (5). 
Furthermore, genetic and environmental differences will contribute towards an individual’s 
nociceptive sensitivity and may explain why noxious-evoked brain activity and behavioral 
changes were not observed in all participants. Previous research has suggested that lack of 
pain-related facial grimacing may be related to factors such as postnatal-age and time since 
the last painful procedure (38). While the occurrence of pain-related facial grimacing and 
the likelihood of observing noxious-evoked brain activity increases with gestational age, 
lack of response, across both modalities, can occur in infants of any gestational age (12, 39), 
which is consistent with the results of this study. Further work is needed to understand why 
noxious-evoked brain activity and pain-related behavior is not observed in some infants.
While the specificity and sensitivity of the template is reasonably high, these brain-derived 
methods have not been developed to quantify an individual infant’s nociceptive brain 
activity, but rather to consider differences in nociceptive-evoked activity at the group level. 
The measures presented here could potentially provide the first step towards the 
development of a validated tool that may be useful for individual pain assessment, but in the 
current form the template cannot be used for this purpose. Nevertheless, this nociceptive 
response is validated here in several independent samples, has been observed across a 
number of previous research studies (6, 12–16), is strongly correlated with the degree of 
noxious input (13), is correlated with clinical measures of pain-related behavior and likely 
reflects a key component of acute nociceptive processing in infants. The validity of the 
template in older infants and across a range of stimulus modalities, for example, following 
cannulation or following more prolonged noxious procedures, is still to be established. 
Studies of this type will require careful consideration of latency differences that will arise 
between studies, for example, as a result of differences in stimulus location, time-locking 
approaches and the participants’ age.
In future investigations analytical approaches similar to those described in Study 1 can be 
used to appropriately identify the time window of interest. Age-dependent differences in the 
latency and morphology of noxious-evoked brain activity have been observed (12, 14), 
which means it cannot be assumed that the template derived here is appropriate for use in 
infants of different ages. Indeed, while similar noxious-evoked brain activity has been 
observed in both infants and adults, temporal and spatial differences in the patterns of 
activity also exist (5, 40, 41). Importantly, the template cannot be projected onto EEG 
activity in different time windows without characterizing the morphology of the evoked 
activity and confirming that it is related to the noxious input. Failure to apply the template 
appropriately could, for example, lead to the erroneous conclusions that non-noxious stimuli 
are perceived as nociceptive or that potentially effective treatments are not analgesic.
In summary, a template of nociceptive brain activity that is sensitive to the administration of 
analgesics has been identified in infants. The template provides an objective method to 
quantify infant nociceptive brain activity following acute procedural pain. In the absence of 
language this represents an essential surrogate measure of infant pain, which may 
Hartley et al.
Page 7
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 complement other pain-related behavioural and physiological observations. This 
methodology can be used in future research studies of infant nociceptive processing. It 
provides a new approach to assess analgesic efficacy and may help to establish dose 
response curves of effective analgesics, thus identifying minimum effective analgesic doses 
and lowering the risk of adverse side effects (3). Rigorous analgesic assessment is essential 
if we are to help provide effective pain relief in the infant population.
Materials and Methods
Study Design
72 infants were included in five observational studies. Electrophysiological brain activity 
was recorded and characterized in response to noxious and non-noxious stimuli in order to 
derive and validate a template of nociceptive brain activity. The template was validated in 
term and preterm infants (from 34 weeks’ gestation), compared with clinical pain 
assessment scores, and demonstrated to be sensitive to analgesic modulation.
Participants
Infants were recruited from the Maternity Unit, Special Care Baby Unit and Neonatal 
Outpatients Clinics at the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford University Hospitals NHS 
Foundation Trust. Infants were eligible for inclusion in the study if they had no history of 
neurological problems and were clinically stable and not receiving any analgesics at the time 
of study (except for topical local anesthetic as described in Study 5). Infant demographic 
characteristics and experimental details are described in Table 1.
Research Governance
Studies were carried out in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and Good Clinical 
Practice Guidelines. Ethical approval was obtained from the National Research Ethics 
Service (reference: 12/SC/0447 & 11/LO/0350) and informed written parental consent was 
obtained prior to each study.
Experimental Design
Study 1: Deriving a template of nociceptive brain activity—EEG activity was 
recorded in 18 term infants in response to noxious and non-noxious stimuli. Clinically-
required heel lance (n=8 infants) and experimental noxious stimuli (n=9) were compared 
with background activity and activity recorded in response to non-noxious stimuli (control 
heel lance (n=8) and experimental tactile stimuli (n=6)). Some infants received more than 
one stimulus type, see Table S1.
Using a nonparametric statistical approach described by Maris and Oostenveld (11), time 
courses evoked by the noxious and non-noxious stimuli were compared across all electrodes 
and significant differences in the evoked activity identified. The morphology of the noxious-
evoked activity was then characterized in the time window of interest (identified from the 
nonparametric test) using Principal Component Analysis, and a template of nociceptive 
brain activity was defined.
Hartley et al.
Page 8
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 A previous paper that demonstrates that noxious-evoked brain activity is correlated with the 
magnitude of spinal reflex withdrawal activity and graded with stimulus intensity (13) 
reports data from 17 infants that are used to characterize the nociceptive activity in Study 1.
Nonparametric statistical analysis: Using the nonparametric statistical analysis described 
by Maris and Oostenveld (11), time periods with significant differences in the response to 
noxious and non-noxious stimuli were identified. Briefly, a t-statistic was calculated at each 
time point for each electrode site, which represented the statistical difference in the brain 
activity evoked by the noxious and non-noxious stimuli. When the t-statistic was above 
threshold (set at 97.5 percentile of the t-distribution), clusters of significant activity were 
identified based on temporal and spatial adjacency of the activity. As EEG activity was only 
recorded in 8 electrodes, all electrodes were considered as neighbours. A single cluster 
therefore included any electrode sites where above threshold activity was concurrently 
recorded. The start of the activity cluster was defined as the earliest time point (in any 
electrode site) where an above-threshold t-statistic was identified. The end of the cluster was 
defined as the time point when no electrodes were identified with an above-threshold t-
statistic. The cluster-based test statistic was calculated from 1000 random permutations of 
the data and the threshold for cluster significance was set as the 97.5 percentile of the 
permuted data.
Using this approach across all electrodes, significant activity, that was maximal at the Cz 
electrode site, was identified in the time-window from 400 – 852 ms post-stimulation. When 
considering only the Cz electrode site, significant activity was identified 446 - 611 ms post-
stimulation (Figure 1A). Consistent with previous studies (6, 12–16), subsequent analysis 
was conducted at the Cz electrode site in the 400 – 700 ms post-stimulus time window. The 
scalp map in Figure 1B was produced using the ‘topoplot’ function in EEGLAB (Swartz 
Center for Computational Neuroscience, University of California San Diego).
Principal Component Analysis: To characterize the nociceptive brain activity waveform, 
Principal Component Analysis was conducted on the activity evoked by noxious and non-
noxious stimulation, and on the background data. The first two principal components 
accounted for 89 % of the variance in the data and were therefore the only components 
considered. Noxious-evoked brain activity was identified as the component with 
significantly higher weights in response to the noxious stimuli compared with the non-
noxious stimuli and background. The first principal component was not nociceptive-specific 
as the weight of the component evoked by the noxious stimulation was not significantly 
greater than the background activity (p=0.06). In contrast, the second principal component 
weight was significantly greater following noxious stimulation compared with non-noxious 
stimulation and background activity (Figure 1C), and was therefore considered to 
characterize the activity generated by the nociceptive stimulation.
To define the template of nociceptive brain activity, the second principal component was 
scaled so that the mean weight in response to the noxious heel lance in term infants was 1. 
This template of nociceptive brain activity in infants is available as a downloadable file in 
the Supplementary Material.
Hartley et al.
Page 9
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 To confirm that the morphology of the template was not dependent on the modality of the 
noxious stimulus, principal component analysis was also conducted with the responses to the 
clinical heel lance and the experimental noxious stimulation separately, and the components 
compared with the template.
Study 2 : Testing template specificity—The aim of Study 2 was to determine whether 
nociceptive brain activity characterized using the template was specific to noxious 
stimulation in an independent sample of infants, i.e. whether the magnitude of the template 
activity in EEG data evoked by noxious stimulation was significantly greater than activity 
evoked by other sensory modalities. EEG activity was recorded in 14 term infants during a 
period of background activity and in response to a train of approximately 10 auditory, visual, 
tactile and experimental noxious stimuli (which were applied in a randomized order). In two 
infants either the visual or the tactile stimuli were not applied due to technical difficulties. 
Following rejection of epochs with gross movement artefact (see EEG data preparation), a 
total of 131 auditory, 126 visual, 123 tactile and 133 experimental noxious stimuli were 
analysed across the 14 infants (an average of 9.5 ± 1.2 stimuli per train). The template was 
projected onto the individual trials at the Cz electrode site in the 400 – 700 ms post-
stimulation time window. The magnitude of the template was calculated for each trial and 
compared across stimulus modality.
Checking stimulus saliency: To test whether the non-noxious stimuli were sufficiently 
salient to evoke event-related patterns of brain activity the nonparametric statistical analysis 
approach described above was used (11). Differences in the activity evoked by each non-
noxious stimulus modality at the Cz electrode site were compared with the background 
activity. As the activity evoked by the tactile stimulation crossed zero, t-statistics were 
calculated on the amplitude envelopes (the absolute value of the Hilbert transform). Evoked 
responses (significant clusters) with a latency less than 400 ms were identified at the Cz 
electrode in response to all non-noxious stimuli compared with background activity (visual: 
p=0.009, auditory: p=0.002, tactile: p<0.001).
Physiological arousal: To investigate whether the stimuli were equally physiologically 
arousing, evoked changes in heart rate were examined. R-R intervals were identified from 
the ECG trace in the 5 seconds before and after each individual stimulus (42), and the 
change in heart rate between the two periods calculated. Changes in heart rate evoked by the 
experimental stimuli were compared with the evoked change in heart rate recorded following 
a medically essential heel lance.
Study 3: Testing the validity of the template in premature infants—The aim of 
Study 3 was to determine whether the template could identify noxious-evoked activity in 
younger premature infants who were aged 34 to 36 weeks’ gestation at the time of study. 
This age range was chosen because previous data suggests that after approximately 34 
weeks’ gestation noxious-specific evoked activity is likely to be generated (12).
EEG activity was recorded in a period of background activity, and in response to a medically 
required heel lance and a control heel lance in 12 infants. The nociceptive template was 
projected onto individual trials at the Cz electrode 400 – 700 ms post-stimulus. To determine 
Hartley et al.
Page 10
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 whether the weight was significantly greater following the noxious heel lance stimulation 
the magnitude of the template was calculated for each trial and compared between the 
noxious and non-noxious stimuli and background activity.
Study 4: Investigating the relationship between noxious-evoked brain activity 
characterized by the template and pain-related behaviour—The aim of Study 4 
was to investigate the relationship between noxious-evoked brain activity and pain-related 
behaviour in infants’ aged 34 – 42 weeks’ gestation. EEG activity and changes in facial 
expression were recorded in response to a clinically-required heel lance in 28 infants. The 12 
preterm infants in Study 3 were also included in this study. The magnitude of the noxious-
evoked brain activity was characterized by the template and correlated with the facial 
expression scores, as these behavioural measures are often used to quantify pain experience 
in the clinical setting (4).
Study 5: Testing template sensitivity to analgesic modulation—Study 5 aimed to 
test the sensitivity of the template to analgesic modulation. Term-born neonates (infants with 
a maximum post-natal age of 28 days) were eligible for inclusion in the study if they 
required topical local anesthetic to be applied to the dorsal surface of either the left or right 
foot prior to medically-required venipuncture. Topical local anesthetic (tetracaine 4% w/w – 
Ametop Gel; Smith and Nephew Healthcare, UK) was applied to the infant’s foot (and two 
other sites) as required by the clinical team and removed after approximately 30 minutes. 
EEG electrodes were positioned on the head and a train of approximately 10 experimental 
noxious stimuli were applied to each foot. The stimulus order (i.e. right verses left foot) was 
randomly selected. The template was projected onto individual trials at the Cz electrode and 
the magnitude of the projected template was calculated and compared in each foot and with 
the background activity.
To determine the sample size required in Study 5, a power calculation was performed using 
the data from Study 1. We anticipated that application of the local anesthetic would reduce 
the magnitude of the noxious-evoked brain activity to a magnitude equivalent to that 
observed in the background data. A sample size of 12 infants would be required to observe a 
reduction in the noxious-evoked brain activity of this order of magnitude for a power of 
95 % at a two-sided significance level of 5 %.
Projecting the template of nociceptive brain activity onto new EEG data
The magnitude of the evoked nociceptive template activity was calculated by projecting the 
template onto the EEG data using singular value decomposition (12–14).
Let X0 be the template. The singular value decomposition of X0 is given by:
X0 = U0 Γ0 V0
T
Given a new data set, X1, the corresponding weights, U1, are given by:
Hartley et al.
Page 11
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 U1 = X1V0 Γ0
−1
Thus, the corresponding weight for each new EEG trace was obtained, which represents the 
magnitude of the noxious-evoked brain activity. The MATLAB code to project the template 
onto new EEG data is available as a downloadable file within the Supplementary Material.
Filtered EEG signal
To ensure that the template provided the best morphological representation of the evoked 
responses in the individual trials, the EEG traces in Study 1 were Woody filtered in the 0 – 
1000 ms interval post-stimulation with a maximum jitter of ±50 ms. Maximum correlation 
between the individual traces within subjects and the data average was achieved. In addition, 
once the time window of interest was identified (400 – 700 ms post-stimulation), the 
individual traces were also Woody filtered within this window to maximise the alignment 
with the data average.
Due to the wider age range of the participants included in Studies 4 and 5, individual 
responses were first Woody filtered with a maximum jitter of ±50 ms in the region 400 – 700 
ms after the stimulus to achieve maximum correlation with the template. This approach 
accounts for the expected increase in latency variation that will be present in study 
participants with a greater gestational age range. As the age range in Studies 2 and 3 was 
comparatively small, Woody filtering was not applied to the data for these studies presented 
in the main paper. Nevertheless, to establish whether the results in Studies 2 and 3 would be 
affected if the data were corrected for individual latency variation, Woody filtering was 
applied to the data and the template was reapplied. The data was Woody filtered in the 
region 400 – 700 ms after stimulus onset, with a maximum jitter of ±50 ms, optimising the 
correlation with the template response. Allowing for this latency variation did not alter the 
results reported for the validation studies.
Comparison of the template with current standard analysis
The current standard analytical approach that would be used to analyse noxious-evoked 
brain activity would be to perform Principal Component Analysis (PCA). The template 
defined in Study 1 is no less sensitive than the standard approach (Figure S4), but has the 
benefit of being independent from the acquired data.
Sensitivity and specificity analysis
To investigate the sensitivity and specificity of the template response the magnitude of the 
response to the experimental and clinical stimuli was compared to a threshold set at 80 % of 
the distribution of background weights (i.e. the magnitude of the template response within 
the background data, 80 % of the distribution is equal to a magnitude of 0.48). The 
distribution of background data included data from all infants in Studies 2 and 4, which in 
total consisted of 175 background samples. The number of background samples included in 
the analysis was equivalent to the number of noxious stimuli applied in each participant. 
Therefore, for infants where trains of approximately 10 experimental noxious stimuli were 
Hartley et al.
Page 12
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 applied, 10 background samples were included in the analysis. For the infants where a single 
clinically-required heel lance was performed, a single background sample was included in 
the analysis. An infant’s average response to individual stimuli were then defined as 
nociceptive if the magnitude was above this threshold. Sensitivity could therefore be 
assessed as the number of evoked responses defined as nociceptive when the stimulus 
applied was noxious (experimental noxious or heel lance), and specificity was assessed as 
the number of evoked responses that were correctly identified as below threshold when a 
non-noxious stimulus (control heel lance, auditory, visual or tactile) was applied. In addition, 
the threshold was varied between -2 and 2 (in increments of 0.001) and the sensitivity and 
specificity assessed using a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve. To maximise the 
alignment of the data with the template, the data (including the background brain activity) 
was Woody filtered for sensitivity and specificity analysis.
Stimulation Techniques
EEG activity was recorded in response to clinically-required heel lancing or experimental 
stimulation. All experimental stimuli (noxious, auditory, tactile, visual) were applied in 
trains of approximately 10 stimuli with a minimum inter-stimulus interval of 10 seconds. 
The inter-stimulus interval was extended if the infant was unsettled. During stimulus 
presentation infants were lying supine in an open cot or on an examination table. Studies 
took place in the Newborn Care Unit, Postnatal Ward (in a private room) or for Study 5, in 
an outpatient clinic. 2 of the 12 infants in Study 5 were held by their mother following 
parental request. All infants were asleep or quietly awake during stimulus presentation and 
during the background recording.
Clinical heel lancing and control heel lance—A single heel lance was performed in 
each infant to obtain a clinically-required blood sample, as part of the infants’ routine 
clinical care. The foot chosen for heel lancing was based on clinical judgment and not 
controlled during the experiment. Heel lances were performed on the medial or lateral 
plantar surface of the heel. In term infants, a BD Microtainer Quikheel Infant Lancet 
(Becton, Dickinson and Company, New Jersey, USA) with a penetration depth of 1.0 mm 
was used, and in preterm infants, a BD Quikheel Preemie Lancet with a penetration depth of 
0.85 mm was used. Each infant was studied during a single heel lance performed in order to 
get the required blood sample. Heel lances were only performed if clinically required and 
the procedure was not performed for the purpose of the study. None of the infants were 
studied on more than one occasion. Consistent with previous reports, we anticipated that 
noxious-evoked brain activity would be recorded within the first 1000 ms following the 
application of the stimulus (6, 12–16). Release of the lancet blade was time-locked to the 
EEG recordings using event-detection interfaces that have been previously described (14, 
43). A control heel lance was performed prior to heel lancing - the lancet was rotated by 90° 
and held against the infant’s foot, so that when the blade was released it did not make 
contact with the infant’s foot.
Experimental Noxious stimulation—Acute experimental noxious stimuli (PinPrick, 
MRC Systems, Germany) were applied perpendicular to the infant’s foot at a force of 128 
mN. The stimulator is a weighted device that was used to apply a pre-specified force (128 
Hartley et al.
Page 13
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 mN) to the surface of the foot. It does not pierce or damage the skin and, in adults it is 
described as mildly painful (5). In Studies 1 and 2 the stimuli were applied to the infant’s 
heel, whilst in Study 5 the stimuli were applied to the dorsal surface of the infant’s foot.
In Studies 1 and 2 the experimental noxious stimuli were time-locked to the EEG recordings 
using a high-speed camera (220 frames per second, Firefly MV, Point Grey Research Inc.) 
that was directly linked to the recordings at the time of acquisition (42). The video 
recordings were reviewed post-acquisition and the time of stimulation manually event-
marked as the point where the barrel of the stimulator was first depressed (13). In Study 5 
the experimental noxious stimuli were time-locked using a contact trigger device (MRC 
Systems, Germany), which was directly linked to the EEG recordings allowing the point of 
stimulation to be marked on the recordings during acquisition.
Experimental tactile stimulation—Tactile stimuli were applied to the heel of the 
infant’s foot. Stimuli were applied using a modified tendon hammer with a built-in force 
transducer (Brüel & Kjær, Denmark) that sent a trigger pulse that event-marked the EEG 
recordings at the point of stimulation (43).
Visual stimulation—Flash stimulation was delivered to infants using an LED light 
(Maxima-84 Hybrid, Manfotto, Italy). The flash was held 50 cm behind the infant’s head 
and approximately 45° up from the cot, pointing towards the infant. Stimuli were initiated by 
a push-button that also event-marked the EEG recordings within 1 ms of the point of 
stimulation. Infant eye gaze was not controlled during the study.
Auditory stimulation—Single tones (500 Hz, 100 ms, approximately 80 dB) were 
delivered to infants using a MP3 player (Zen Style M300, Creative, Singapore) and speakers 
(X-mini Max 2 Portable Speakers, XMI, Singapore). The speakers were positioned 
approximately 5 cm away from the infant’s ears. An output trigger pulse from the MP3 
player event-marked the EEG recordings within 1 ms of the point of stimulation.
Background activity—Background EEG activity was recorded in all infants prior to 
stimulation. During this period the experimenter gently held the infant’s foot but no stimuli 
were applied. Periods of background EEG activity were manually event marked by the 
experimenter at the time of recording.
Electrophysiological recordings and analysis
EEG and ECG recordings—Electrophysiological activity from DC to 400 Hz was 
acquired with a SynAmps RT 64-channel EEG/EP system (Compumedics Neuroscan). 
Activity was sampled at 2 kHz with a resolution of 24 bit. CURRYscan7 neuroimaging suite 
(Compumedics Neuroscan) was used to record the activity.
Reference and ground electrodes were placed at Fz and on the forehead respectively. For 3 
infants the reference electrode was placed at Fpz and re-referenced to Fz post-acquisition. In 
Studies 1, 2, 3 and 4, EEG recording electrodes (Ambu Neuroline disposable Ag/AgCl cup 
electrodes) were placed on the surface of the scalp at Cz, CPz, C3, C4, T3, T4, FCz, and Oz. 
To limit the study time to approximately 15 minutes a reduced electrode montage, which 
Hartley et al.
Page 14
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 always included the Cz electrode, was used in all infants in Study 5 and in 3 infants in Study 
1. To optimise contact with the scalp the skin was gently rubbed with EEG preparation gel 
(NuPrep gel, D.O. Weaver and Co.) prior to electrode placement and EEG conductive paste 
(Elefix EEG paste, Nihon Kohden) was used. ECG activity was recorded using an ECG 
electrode (Ambu Neuroline 700 solid gel surface electrodes) that was placed on the chest.
EEG data preparation—To construct the template (Study 1) the EEG signals were 
filtered from 0.5 – 8 Hz. For all other studies the EEG signals were filtered 0.5 – 70 Hz, with 
a notch filter at 50 Hz. All signals were extracted from the recordings in 1500 ms epochs, 
with 500 ms before the stimulus. Epochs were baseline corrected to the pre-stimulus mean. 
EEG epochs with gross movement artefact were rejected from the analysis.
Facial expression scores
Infant’s facial expression was recorded using a video camera for 15 seconds before and 30 
seconds after the heel lance and control heel lance procedures. An LED was synchronised to 
flash when the experimenter pressed a foot pedal at the point of stimulation. Videos were 
reviewed after the procedures and the facial expression component of the Premature Infant 
Pain Profile (PIPP) was calculated in the 30 seconds after the procedure, by identifying the 
presence of nasolabial furrow, brow bulge and eye squeeze (44, 45). This gave a maximum 
total facial expression score of 9. The researcher who viewed the videos and calculated the 
PIPP scores was blinded to the stimulation and did not know the magnitude of the noxious-
evoked brain activity.
Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was carried out using R (The R Project for Statistical Computing). For 
comparisons of the brain activity across different stimulus modalities, the data was fit with 
linear mixed-effects models (using the nlme R package) with stimulus modality set as a 
fixed effect and individual subjects taken as random effects. Comparisons were made 
between the noxious stimulation and all other stimulus modalities. Linear correlations and 
Pearson’s correlation coefficients were calculated to compare the noxious-evoked brain 
activity and facial expression score in Study 4, and to compare the morphology of the 
template activity with principal components derived from the responses to the clinical heel 
lance and the experimental noxious stimuli in Study 1.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Amy Hoskin, Sezgi Goksan, Fiona Moultrie, and Ravi Poorun, Eleri Adams and Pam 
Whitehead for help conducting this study. We would also like to thank the children and their parents for taking part 
in this study.
Funding: Supported by The Wellcome Trust, UK.
Hartley et al.
Page 15
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 References
1. Roofthooft DW, Simons SH, Anand KJ, Tibboel D, van Dijk M. Eight years later, are we still 
hurting newborn infants? Neonatology. 2014; 105:218–226. [PubMed: 24503902] 
2. Grunau RE. Neonatal pain in very preterm infants: long-term effects on brain, neurodevelopment 
and pain reactivity. Rambam Maimonides Med J. 2013; 4:e0025. [PubMed: 24228168] 
3. Kearns GL, Abdel-Rahman SM, Alander SW, Blowey DL, Leeder JS, Kauffman RE. Developmental 
pharmacology--drug disposition, action, and therapy in infants and children. N Engl J Med. 2003; 
349:1157–1167. [PubMed: 13679531] 
4. Ranger M, Johnston CC, Anand KJS. Current controversies regarding pain assessment in neonates. 
Semin Perinatol. 2007; 31:283–288. [PubMed: 17905182] 
5. Goksan S, Hartley C, Emery F, Cockrill N, Poorun R, Moultrie F, Rogers R, Campbell J, Sanders M, 
Adams E, Clare S, et al. fMRI reveals neural activity overlap between adult and infant pain. eLife. 
2015; 4doi: 10.7554/eLife.06356
6. Slater R, Worley A, Fabrizi L, Roberts S, Meek J, Boyd S, Fitzgerald M. Evoked potentials 
generated by noxious stimulation in the human infant brain. Eur J Pain. 2010; 14:321–326. 
[PubMed: 19481484] 
7. Hartley C, Slater R. Neurophysiological measures of nociceptive brain activity in the newborn 
infant--the next steps. Acta Paediatr. 2014; 103:238–242. [PubMed: 24180281] 
8. Truini A, Panuccio G, Galeotti F, Maluccio MR, Sartucci F, Avoli M, Cruccu G. Laser-evoked 
potentials as a tool for assessing the efficacy of antinociceptive drugs. Eur J Pain. 2010; 14:222–
225. [PubMed: 19477145] 
9. Wager TD, Atlas LY, Lindquist MA, Roy M, Woo CW, Kross E. An fMRI-based neurologic 
signature of physical pain. N Engl J Med. 2013; 368:1388–1397. [PubMed: 23574118] 
10. Duff EP, Vennart W, Wise RG, Howard MA, Harris RE, Lee M, Wartolowska K, Wanigasekera V, 
Wilson FJ, Whitlock M, Tracey I, et al. Learning to identify CNS drug action and efficacy using 
multistudy fMRI data. Sci Transl Med. 2015; 7:274ra216.
11. Maris E, Oostenveld R. Nonparametric statistical testing of EEG- and MEG-data. J Neurosci 
Methods. 2007; 164:177–190. [PubMed: 17517438] 
12. Fabrizi L, Slater R, Worley A, Meek J, Boyd S, Olhede S, Fitzgerald M. A shift in sensory 
processing that enables the developing human brain to discriminate touch from pain. Curr Biol. 
2011; 21:1552–1558. [PubMed: 21906948] 
13. Hartley C, Goksan S, Poorun R, Brotherhood K, Schmidt Mellado G, Moultrie F, Rogers R, Adams 
E, Slater R. The relationship between nociceptive brain activity, spinal reflex withdrawal and 
behaviour in newborn infants. Sci Rep. 2015; 5:12519. [PubMed: 26228435] 
14. Hartley C, Moultrie F, Gursul D, Hoskin A, Adams E, Rogers R, Slater R. Changing Balance of 
Spinal Cord Excitability and Nociceptive Brain Activity in Early Human Development. Curr Biol. 
2016; 26:1998–2002. [PubMed: 27374336] 
15. Slater R, Cornelissen L, Fabrizi L, Patten D, Yoxen J, Worley A, Boyd S, Meek J, Fitzgerald M. 
Oral sucrose as an analgesic drug for procedural pain in newborn infants: a randomised controlled 
trial. Lancet. 2010; 376:1225–1232. [PubMed: 20817247] 
16. Slater R, Fabrizi L, Worley A, Meek J, Boyd S, Fitzgerald M. Premature infants display increased 
noxious-evoked neuronal activity in the brain compared to healthy age-matched term-born infants. 
NeuroImage. 2010; 52:583–589. [PubMed: 20438855] 
17. Mouraux A, Iannetti GD. Nociceptive laser-evoked brain potentials do not reflect nociceptive-
specific neural activity. J Neurophysiol. 2009; 101:3258–3269. [PubMed: 19339457] 
18. Slater R, Cantarella A, Franck L, Meek J, Fitzgerald M. How well do clinical pain assessment tools 
reflect pain in infants? Plos Med. 2008; 5:928–933.
19. Lehr VT, Taddio A. Topical anesthesia in neonates: Clinical practices and practical considerations. 
Semin Perinatol. 2007; 31:323–329. [PubMed: 17905188] 
20. Jain A, Rutter N. Does topical amethocaine gel reduce the pain of venepuncture in newborn 
infants? A randomised double blind controlled trial. Arch Dis Child. 2000; 83:F207–F210.
Hartley et al.
Page 16
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 21. Long CP, McCafferty DF, Sittlington NM, Halliday HL, Woolfson AD, Jones DS. Randomized 
trial of novel tetracaine patch to provide local anaesthesia in neonates undergoing venepuncture. 
Brit J Anaesth. 2003; 91:514–518. [PubMed: 14504152] 
22. Moore J. No more tears: a randomized controlled double-blind trial of Amethocaine gel vs. placebo 
in the management of procedural pain in neonates. J Adv Nurs. 2001; 34:475–482. [PubMed: 
11380714] 
23. Newby B, Faschoway G, Soukoroff C. Tetracaine (ametop) compared to placebo for reducing pain 
associated with intramuscular injection of palivizumab (synagis). J Pediatr. 2009; 24:529–533.
24. Shah VS, Taddio A, Hancock R, Shah P, Ohlsson A. Topical amethocaine gel 4% for intramuscular 
injection in term neonates: A double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized trial. Clin Ther. 2008; 
30:166–174. [PubMed: 18343253] 
25. Jain A, Rutter N, Ratnayaka M. Topical amethocaine gel for pain relief of heel prick blood 
sampling: a randomised double blind controlled trial. Arch Dis Child. 2001; 84:F56–F59.
26. Larsson BA, Jylli L, Lagercrantz H, Olsson GL. Does a Local-Anesthetic Cream (Emla) Alleviate 
Pain from Heel-Lancing in Neonates. Acta Anaesth Scand. 1995; 39:1028–1031. [PubMed: 
8607303] 
27. Ballantyne M, McNair C, Ung E, Gibbins S, Stevens B. A randomized controlled trial evaluating 
the efficacy of tetracaine gel for pain relief from peripherally inserted central catheters in infants. 
Adv Neonatal Care. 2003; 3:297–307. [PubMed: 14695501] 
28. Lemyre B, Sherlock R, Hogan D, Gaboury I, Blanchard C, Moher D. How effective is tetracaine 
4% gel, before a peripherally inserted central catheter, in reducing procedural pain in infants: a 
randomized double-blind placebo controlled trial [ISRCTN75884221]. BMC Med. 2006; 4:11. 
[PubMed: 16672064] 
29. Taddio A, Lee C, Yip A, Parvez B, McNamara PJ, Shah V. Intravenous morphine and topical 
tetracaine for treatment of pain in preterm neonates undergoing central line placement. JAMA. 
2006; 295:793–800. [PubMed: 16478902] 
30. Lemyre B, Hogan D, Gaboury I, Sherlock R, Blanchard C, Moher D. How effective is tetracaine 
4% gel, before a venipuncture, in reducing procedural pain in infants: a randomized double-blind 
placebo controlled trial. BMC Pediatr. 2007; 7:7. [PubMed: 17288611] 
31. Bjerring P, Andersen PH, Arendt-Nielsen L. Vascular response of human skin after analgesia with 
EMLA cream. Br J Anaesth. 1989; 63:655–660. [PubMed: 2532919] 
32. Mcintosh N, Vanveen L, Brameyer H. Alleviation of the Pain of Heel Prick in Preterm Infants. 
Arch Dis Child. 1994; 70:F177–F181.
33. Hartley C, Moultrie F, Juszczak E, Adams E, Slater R. Protocol 15PRT/5747:A blinded 
randomised placebo-controlled trial investigating the efficacy of morphine analgesia for procedural 
pain in infants - ISRCTN82342359. Lancet. 2016 http://www.thelancet.com/doi/story/10.1016/
html.2016.1001.1019.2536. 
34. Slater R, Hartley C, Moultrie F, Adams E, Juszczak E, Rogers R, Norman J, Patel C, Stanbury K, 
Hoskin A, Green G, et al. A blinded randomised placebo-controlled trial investigating the efficacy 
of morphine analgesia for procedural pain in infants: Trial protocol. Wellcome Open Res. 2016; 
1:7. [PubMed: 28066825] 
35. Kostovic I, Jovanov-Milosevic N. The development of cerebral connections during the first 20-45 
weeks' gestation. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med. 2006; 11:415–422. [PubMed: 16962836] 
36. Slater R, Cantarella A, Gallella S, Worley A, Boyd S, Meek J, Fitzgerald M. Cortical pain 
responses in human infants. J Neurosci. 2006; 26:3662–3666. DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.
0348-06.2006) [PubMed: 16597720] 
37. Tracey I, Mantyh PW. The cerebral signature for pain perception and its modulation. Neuron. 
2007; 55:377–391. [PubMed: 17678852] 
38. Johnston CC, Stevens BJ, Franck LS, Jack A, Stremler R, Platt R. Factors explaining lack of 
response to heel stick in preterm newborns. J Obstet Gynecol Neonatal Nurs. 1999; 28:587–594.
39. Slater R, Cantarella A, Yoxen J, Patten D, Potts H, Meek J, Fitzgerald M. Latency to facial 
expression change following noxious stimulation in infants is dependent on postmenstrual age. 
Pain. 2009; 146:177–182. [PubMed: 19682794] 
Hartley et al.
Page 17
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 40. Fabrizi L, Verriotis M, Williams G, Lee A, Meek J, Olhede S, Fitzgerald M. Encoding of 
mechanical nociception differs in the adult and infant brain. Sci Rep. 2016; 6:28642. [PubMed: 
27345331] 
41. Fabrizi L, Williams G, Lee A, Meek J, Slater R, Olhede S, Fitzgerald M. Cortical activity evoked 
by an acute painful tissue-damaging stimulus in healthy adult volunteers. J Neurophysiol. 2013; 
109:2393–2403. [PubMed: 23427303] 
42. Hartley C, Poorun R, Goksan S, Worley A, Boyd S, Rogers R, Ali T, Slater R. Noxious stimulation 
in children receiving general anaesthesia evokes an increase in delta frequency brain activity. Pain. 
2014; 155:2368–2376. [PubMed: 25218826] 
43. Worley A, Fabrizi L, Boyd S, Slater R. Multi-modal pain measurements in infants. J Neurosci 
Methods. 2012; 205:252–257. [PubMed: 22285660] 
44. Stevens B, Johnston C, Petryshen P, Taddio A. Premature Infant Pain Profile: development and 
initial validation. Clin J Pain. 1996; 12:13–22. [PubMed: 8722730] 
45. Stevens BJ, Gibbins S, Yamada J, Dionne K, Lee G, Johnston C, Taddio A. The Premature Infant 
Pain Profile-Revised (PIPP-R) Initial Validation and Feasibility. Clin J Pain. 2014; 30:238–243. 
[PubMed: 24503979] 
Hartley et al.
Page 18
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 One Sentence Summary
A measure of nociceptive brain activity that can be used to assess analgesic efficacy in 
infants is derived and validated.
Hartley et al.
Page 19
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Fig 1. Deriving the template of nociceptive brain activity.
(A) Time course of the t-statistics in the 1000 ms period post-stimulation at the Cz electrode 
comparing the response to noxious (medically required heel lance and experimental noxious 
stimuli) and non-noxious (control heel lance and tactile) stimulation in 18 term infants. 
Dashed lines indicate the t-statistic threshold, equal to an uncorrected α of 0.05. The grey 
bars indicate time points that are above the t-statistic threshold and the time points that 
remain significant after cluster-based correction (11). A significant difference in response 
between non-noxious and noxious stimuli is identified by the grey shaded region. (B) Scalp 
map showing the topography of the mean amplitude response following noxious stimulation 
in the time-window from 400 – 852 ms post-stimulation. This time-window represents the 
time where significant differences in response to noxious and non-noxious stimulation were 
identified. (C) Principal component analysis was conducted at the Cz electrode 400 – 700 
ms post stimulus (pink boxes) to derive the nociceptive template, by comparing background 
brain activity with activity evoked by noxious and non-noxious stimulation. The (Woody) 
filtered EEG is shown overlaid with the template (in red). The magnitude of template 
activity was significantly higher following noxious, compared with non-noxious stimulation 
and background activity and was therefore considered to be evoked by the noxious 
stimulation (**: p < 0.01, error bars indicate mean ± standard error of the mean).
Hartley et al.
Page 20
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Fig 2. Template validation.
(A) Average background EEG activity and the average evoked activity following visual, 
tactile, auditory and experimental noxious stimulation at the Cz electrode in 14 term infants. 
(B) Magnitude of the nociceptive brain activity characterized by the template during the 
background activity and in response to each experimental stimulus modality (visual, tactile, 
auditory and experimental noxious stimulation). (C) Average background EEG activity and 
the average evoked activity following experimental noxious and non-noxious stimulation for 
all stimuli that evoked a change in heart rate that was greater than the average change in 
heart rate evoked by the experimental noxious stimulation. (D) Magnitude of the nociceptive 
brain activity during background activity and following the experimental noxious and non-
noxious stimulation that evoked larger than average changes in heart rate. (E) Average 
background EEG activity at the Cz electrode in 12 preterm infants (from 34 – 36 weeks’ 
gestation) and the average evoked activity following control heel lance stimulation and a 
medically required heel lance. (F) Magnitude of the nociceptive brain activity during the 
background activity and in response to control heel lance stimulation and a medically 
required heel lance. In panels (A,C,E) average EEG activity is overlaid with the template (in 
Hartley et al.
Page 21
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 red). (B,D,F) The magnitude of the projected template is shown for each condition with 
mean ± standard error of the mean (**: p < 0.01).
Hartley et al.
Page 22
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Figure 3. Magnitude of noxious-evoked brain activity is correlated with pain-related behavior 
and sensitive to analgesic modulation
(A) The magnitude of the noxious-evoked brain activity was significantly correlated with the 
facial expression score in response to a clinically-required heel lance (r = 0.39, p = 0.038, n 
= 28) (preterm infants: blue; term infants: black). (B) Clinically-required heel lancing did 
not evoke a change in facial expression in 39 % of infants, yet significant nociceptive brain 
activity was recorded in 45 % of these infants. (C) Average background EEG activity and 
noxious-evoked brain activity recorded at the Cz electrode in 12 infants. In each infant the 
experimental noxious stimuli were applied to each foot – one that was treated with topical 
local anesthetic and one that was untreated. The (Woody) filtered EEG is shown overlaid 
with the template (in red). The magnitude of the noxious-evoked brain activity in response to 
experimental noxious stimuli applied to the untreated foot was significantly higher than the 
response evoked when the stimuli were applied to the treated foot and in the background 
activity (**: p < 0.01, error bars indicate mean ± standard error of the mean).
Hartley et al.
Page 23
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
  Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Hartley et al.
Page 24
Table 1
Infant demographics. Values given are median (lower quartile, upper quartile). * All the prematurely-born 
infants included in Study 4 (n=12) were also included in Study 3. The term infants in Study 4 were an 
independent sample of infants not included in the other studies (n=16). **Infants did not receive morphine for 
a minimum of 12 days prior to inclusion in the study.
Study 1
Deriving the 
template
Study 2
Testing specificity
Study 3
Validation in 
preterm infants
Study 4
Comparison with 
facial expression
Study 5
Analgesic modulation
Number of infants
18
14
12*
28*
12
Gestational age at time of 
study (weeks)
39.9
(37.9, 41.7)
39.8
(37.8, 41.3)
36.1
(35.1, 36.6)
38.6
(36.4, 40.9)
42.1
(41.1, 43.6)
Gestational age at birth 
(weeks)
39.3
(37.5, 41.4)
39.6
(37.2, 41.2)
33.0
(31.9, 36.1)
36.1
(31.7, 40.4)
38.7
(38.0, 39.8)
Postnatal age at time of 
study (days)
3
(2, 5)
2
(1, 2)
18
(2.8, 25)
4.5
(1.8, 25.3)
24.5
(21.5, 27.3)
Birthweight (g)
3437
(3236, 3638)
3127
(2532, 3649)
2001
(1772, 2478)
2595
(1622,3808)
3330
(3125, 3488)
Number of males
11
3
7
16
5
Number of infants who 
have previously received 
morphine**
0
0
4
7
0
Applied stimuli
Heel lance, 
Control heel lance,
Experimental 
noxious,
Tactile
Experimental noxious,
Visual,
Auditory,
Tactile
Heel lance,
Control heel 
lance
Heel lance,
Control heel lance
Experimental noxious
Sci Transl Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 April 04.
