  
 
 
 
 
warwick.ac.uk/lib-publications 
 
 
 
 
 
Original citation: 
Hartvigsen, Jan, Hancock, Mark J., Kongsted, Alice, Louw, Quinette, Ferreira, Manuela L, 
Genevay, Stéphane, Hoy, Damian, Karppinen, Jaro, Pransky, Glenn, Sieper, Joachim et al. 
(2018) What low back pain is and why we need to pay attention. The Lancet . 
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(18)30480-X  
 
Permanent WRAP URL: 
http://wrap.warwick.ac.uk/100476 
 
Copyright and reuse: 
The Warwick Research Archive Portal (WRAP) makes this work by researchers of the 
University of Warwick available open access under the following conditions. Copyright © 
and all moral rights to the version of the paper presented here belong to the individual 
author(s) and/or other copyright owners. To the extent reasonable and practicable the 
material made available in WRAP has been checked for eligibility before being made 
available. 
 
Copies of full items can be used for personal research or study, educational, or not-for-profit 
purposes without prior permission or charge. Provided that the authors, title and full 
bibliographic details are credited, a hyperlink and/or URL is given for the original metadata 
page and the content is not changed in any way. 
 
Copyright Lancet Publishing Group.  
Published version: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(18)30480-X 
 
A note on versions: 
The version presented here may differ from the published version or, version of record, if 
you wish to cite this item you are advised to consult the publisher’s version. Please see the 
‘permanent WRAP URL’ above for details on accessing the published version and note that 
access may require a subscription. 
 
For more information, please contact the WRAP Team at: wrap@warwick.ac.uk 
 
 1 
 
What is low back pain and why we need to pay attention 
 
Jan Hartvigsen PhDa 
Professor, Department of Sports Science and Clinical Biomechanics, University of Southern 
Denmark, Odense, Denmark 
Senior Researcher, Nordic Institute of Chiropractic and Clinical Biomechanics, Odense, 
Denmark. 
Email: jhartvigsen@health.sdu.dk  
 
Mark Hancock PhDa 
Associate Professor, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, 
Australia 
Email: mark.hancock@mq.edu.au 
 
Alice Kongsted PhD 
Associate Professor, Department of Sports Science and Clinical Biomechanics, University of 
Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark 
Senior Researcher, Nordic Institute of Chiropractic and Clinical Biomechanics, Odense, 
Denmark  
Email a.kongsted@nikkb.dk  
 
Quinette Louw PhD 
Professor, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Physiotherapy Division/Department of 
Health and Rehabilitation Sciences, Stellenbosch University, Tygerberg, South Africa. 
 2 
 
Email: qalouw@sun.ac.za  
 
Manuela L Ferreira PhD 
Associate Professor and Principal Research Fellow, Institute of Bone and Joint Research, 
Sydney Medical School, The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia  
Email: manuela.ferreira@sydney.edu.au 
 
Stéphane Genevay MD 
Head multidisciplinary back pain clinic, Division of Rheumatology, University Hospitals of 
Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland 
Email: stephane.genevay@hcuge.ch 
 
Damian Hoy PhD 
University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia. 
Email: damehoy@yahoo.com.au 
 
Jaro Karppinen PhD 
Professor, Center for Life Course Health Research, University of Oulu and Oulu University 
Hospital, Oulu, Finland   
Finnish Institute of Occupational Health, Oulu, Finland 
Email: jaro.karppinen@ttl.fi 
 
Glenn Pransky MD 
 3 
 
Associate professor, Department of Family Medicine and Community Health, University of 
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA  
  
Email: Glenn.Pransky@umassmed.edu  
 
Joachim Sieper MD 
Rheumatology, Charité, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Berlin, Germany 
Email: joachim.sieper@charite.de 
 
Rob Smeets PhD 
Professor, Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Maastricht University, Maastricht, the 
Netherlands  
Libra Rehabilitation and Audiology, Eindhoven, the Netherlands. 
Email: r.smeets@maastrichtuniversity.nl 
  
Martin Underwood MD (Corresponding author) 
Warwick Clinical Trials Unit, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK 
Email: m.underwood@warwick.ac.uk  
 
for the Lancet Low Back Pain Series Working Group* 
a Joint First Authors 
 
 
 4 
 
Summary 
Low back pain is a very common symptom. It occurs in high-, middle-, and low-income 
countries and all age groups from children to the elderly. Globally, years lived with disability 
caused by low back pain increased by 54% between 1990 and 2015, primarily due to 
population increase and ageing, with the biggest increase seen in low- and middle-income 
countries. It is now the leading cause of disability worldwide. For the vast majority of people 
with low back pain, it is not possible to accurately identify the specific nociceptive source 
and only a small proportion have a well-understood pathological cause, for example, a 
vertebral fracture, malignancy or infection. People with physically demanding jobs, physical 
and mental comorbidities, smokers and obese individuals are at greater risk of reporting low 
back pain. Disabling low back pain is overrepresented among people with lower 
socioeconomic status. Most people with new episodes of low back pain recover quickly; 
however, recurrence is common and in a small proportion of people low back pain becomes 
persistent and disabling. Initial high pain intensity, psychological distress and accompanying 
pain at multiple body sites increases the risk of persistent disabling low back pain. There is 
increasing evidence that central pain-modulating mechanisms and pain cognitions play 
important roles in the development of persistent disabling low back pain. Cost, health care 
utilization, and disability from low back pain vary substantially among countries and are 
influenced by local culture and social systems, as well as beliefs about cause and effect. 
Disability and costs attributed to low back pain are projected to increase in coming decades 
in particular in low- and middle-income countries, where health and other systems are often 
fragile and not equipped to cope with this growing burden. Intensified research efforts and 
global initiatives are clearly needed to address the burden of low back pain as a public 
health problem.  
 
 5 
 
Key points 
 Low back pain is an extremely common symptom in populations around the world and 
occurs in all age groups from children to the elderly   
 Low back pain was responsible for 60·1 million disability-adjusted life years in 2015, an 
increase of 54% since 1990, with the biggest increase seen in low- and-middle income 
countries 
 Disability from low back pain is highest in working age groups worldwide, which is 
particularly concerning in low- and middle-income countries where informal 
employment is common and possibilities for job modification are limited 
 Most episodes of low back pain are short-lasting with little or no consequence, but 
recurrent episodes are common and low back pain is increasingly understood as a long-
lasting condition with a variable course rather than episodes of unrelated occurrences 
 Low back pain is a complex condition with multiple contributors to both the pain and 
associated disability, including psychological factors, social factors, biophysical factors, 
comorbidities, and pain-processing mechanisms  
 For the vast majority of people with low back pain it is currently not possible to 
accurately identify the specific nociceptive source 
 Lifestyle factors such as smoking, obesity, and low levels of physical activity that relate 
to poorer general health are also associated with occurrence of low back pain episodes  
 Costs associated with health care and work disability attributed to low back pain vary 
considerably among countries, and are influenced by social norms, health-care 
approaches, and legislation 
 The global burden of low back pain is projected to increase even further in coming 
decades, particularly in low- and middle-income countries  
 
 6 
 
Introduction 
Low back pain is an extremely common symptom and experienced by people of all ages.1-3 
In 2015, the global point prevalence of activity-limiting low back was 7·3%, implying that 
540 million people were affected at any one point in time. Low back pain is now  also the 
number one cause of disability globally.4 The largest apparent increases in disability caused 
by low back pain in recent decades occurred in low- and middle-income countries including 
Asia, Africa, and the Middle East5, where health and social systems are poorly equipped to 
deal with this growing burden in addition to other priorities such as infectious diseases. 
 
Rarely can a specific cause of low back pain be identified; thus, most low back pain is 
termed non-specific. It is well-accepted that low back pain is characterised by a range of 
biophysical, psychological, and social dimensions that impair function, societal participation, 
and personal financial prosperity. The financial impact of low back pain is cross-sectoral as it 
increases costs in both healthcare and social supports systems.6 Disability attributed to low 
back pain varies considerably among countries, and is influenced by social norms, local 
health care approaches, and legislation.7 In low and middle income countries formal and 
informal social-support systems are negatively affected. Whilst in high income countries the 
concern is that the prevalent health care approaches for low back pain contribute to the 
overall burden and cost rather than reducing it.8 Spreading high-cost health-care models to 
low- and middle-income countries will compound rather than alleviate the burden. Low 
back pain is therefore an urgent global public health concern. 
 
Against this backdrop, we present a series of three papers. The aim of this paper is to 
present a current understanding of what low back pain is, its burden and global impact as 
 7 
 
well as an overview of causes and the course of low back pain. The evidence for the 
effectiveness of currently used treatments and promising new directions for managing low 
back pain is presented in paper two,9 and paper three is a worldwide call to action.10   
 
The approach for this series involved the constitution of a team of leading international 
experts on back pain from different professional backgrounds and from countries around 
the globe who convened for a workshop in Buxton, UK in June 2016 to outline the structure 
of each paper. For this paper, we have identified scientific studies using broad search terms 
in MEDLINE (PubMed) and Scopus. To identify potentially relevant papers from low- and 
middle-income countries, we have also searched Google Scholar and the African Index 
Medicus Database. In an attempt to minimize selection bias and to ensure high-quality 
evidence was selected, systematic reviews were preferred and sought where possible. 
However, we also used information from large population-based cohorts, international 
clinical guidelines, and the Global Burden of Disease 2015 study. Primary research from low- 
and middle-income regions excluded from systematic reviews was also referenced where 
appropriate. 
 
What is low back pain? 
Low back pain is a symptom not a disease, and can result from several different known or 
unknown pathologies or diseases. It is defined by the location of pain, typically between the 
lower rib margins and the buttock creases.11 Low back pain is commonly accompanied by 
pain in one or both legs and some people with low back pain have associated neurological 
symptoms in the lower extremities. 
 8 
 
 
For the vast majority of people presenting with low back pain, it is not possible to identify 
the specific nociceptive source and those affected are then classified as having ‘non-specific’ 
low back pain.12 There are some serious causes of low back pain (malignancy, vertebral 
fracture, infection or inflammatory disorders such as axial spondyloarthritis) that require 
identification and specific management targeting the pathology, but these account for a 
small proportion of cases. People with low back pain often experience concurrent pain in 
other body sites, as well as more general physical and mental health problems, compared to 
people not reporting low back pain.13 The combined effect on individuals of low back pain 
and comorbidity is often more than the effect of the low back pain or the comorbidity alone 
and results in more care, yet typically a poorer response to a range of treatments.13 Thus, 
many people living with low back pain have diverse problems in which psychological, social, 
and biophysical factors as well as comorbidities and pain processing mechanisms impact on 
both the pain experience and the associated disability (Figure 1). 
 
Potential nociceptive sources of non-specific low back pain 
Although clinical tests are unable to accurately identify the tissue source of most low back 
pain, several structures are innervated and have been shown to produce pain when 
stimulated. In some cases local anaesthetic relieves the pain (Table1).14,15  
 
Many imaging (X-ray, CT Scan and MRI) findings identified in people with low back pain are 
also common in people without low back pain, and their importance in diagnosis is a matter 
of substantial debate.16 Nevertheless, at least in people aged <50 years, some MRI 
abnormalities are more common in people with low back pain than in those without. A 
 9 
 
systematic review (14 case-control studies; 3097 participants) found several MRI findings 
had a reasonably strong association with low back pain including Modic type 1 change (OR 
4·0 [95% CI 1·1–14·6]), disc bulge (OR 7.5 [1.3-44.6]), disc extrusion (OR 4·4 [2·0–9·7]) and 
spondylolysis (OR 5·1 [1·7–15·5]) (Table 2).17 However, there is insufficient evidence to know 
whether MRI findings predict the future onset, or the course, of low back pain.18 
Importantly, there is no evidence that imaging improves patient outcomes19 and guidelines 
consistently recommend against the routine use of imaging for people with low back pain.20-
23  
 
Neurological symptoms associated with low back pain 
Radicular pain and radiculopathy 
Radicular pain occurs when there is nerve-root involvement; this is commonly termed 
sciatica. The term sciatica is used inconsistently, by clinicians and patients  for different 
types of leg/back pain and should be avoided.24 The diagnosis of radicular pain relies on 
clinical findings including a history of dermatomal leg pain, leg pain worse than back pain, 
worsening of leg pain during coughing, sneezing or straining 25 and straight leg raise test. 
Radiculopathy is characterised by the presence of weakness, loss of sensation, and or loss of 
reflexes associated with a particular nerve root, and can co-exist with radicular pain. People 
with low back pain and radicular pain or radiculopathy are reported to be more severely 
affected and have poorer outcomes as compared to patients with low back pain only.26 Disc 
herniation in conjunction with local inflammation is the most common cause of radicular 
pain and radiculopathy. Disc herniation is, however, a frequent finding on imaging in the 
asymptomatic population,16 and disc herniations often resolve or disappear over time 
independent of resolution of pain.27  
 10 
 
 
Central lumbar spinal stenosis 
Lumbar spinal stenosis is clinically characterised by pain or other discomfort with walking or 
prolonged standing that radiates into one or both lower extremities and is typically relieved 
by rest or lumbar flexion (neurogenic claudication).28 It is typically caused by narrowing of 
the spinal canal or foramina due to a combination of degenerative changes such as facet 
osteoarthritis, ligamentum flavum hypertrophy, and bulging discs. There is expert consensus 
that the diagnosis of the clinical syndrome of lumbar spinal stenosis requires both the 
presence of characteristic symptoms and signs as well as imaging confirmation of narrowing 
of the lumbar spinal canal or foramina.29 Symptoms of central lumbar spinal stenosis are 
thought to result from the venous congestion or ischemia of the nerve roots in the cauda 
equina due to compression.28  
 
Specific pathological causes of low back pain 
Potential causes of low back pain that may require specific treatment include vertebral 
fractures, inflammatory disorders such as axial spondyloarthritis, malignancy, infections, 
and intra-abdominal causes (Table 3). A study of 1,172 new presentations of acute (< two 
weeks) episodes of low back pain in primary care in Australia found specific causes of back 
pain in 0·9% of participants, with fracture being by far the most common (8/11), followed by 
inflammatory disorders (2/11).30 A Ugandan review of 204 patients referred to a hospital 
orthopaedic clinic with a primary complaint of low back pain showed that 4% had serious 
spinal pathology due to tuberculosis, 3·5% had vertebral compression fractures, 1% 
brucellosis, and 1% had malignancy.31 These differences in the patterns of specific 
pathological causes may reflect the ongoing burden of infectious diseases and their 
 11 
 
manifestations as low back pain in low income countries. ‘Red flags’ are case history or 
clinical findings believed to increase the risk of a serious pathology, however, 80% of people 
with acute low back pain have at least one ‘red flag’ despite <1% having a serious disorder.30 
Nearly all recommended individual ‘red flags’ are uninformative and do not substantially 
change post-test probabilities of a serious pathology.32 The very low specificity of most red 
flags contributes to unnecessary specialist referrals and imaging.33 Clinicians do, however, 
need to consider if the overall clinical picture might indicate a serious cause for the pain, 
remembering that the picture can develop over time.33 The US guideline for imaging advises 
deferral of imaging pending a trial of therapy when there are weaker risk factors for cancer 
or axial spondyloarthritis.34 
 
How common is low back pain? 
Low back pain is uncommon in the first decade of life, but prevalence increases steeply 
during the teenage years; around 40% of 9-18-year olds in both high-, medium-, and low-
income countries report having experienced low back pain.35,36 Most adults will experience 
low back pain at some point.37 The median one-year period prevalence globally in the adult 
population is around 37%, it peaks in mid-life and is more common in females (Figure 2).1 
Low back pain that is accompanied by activity limitation increases with age.38 The mean 
prevalence in high-income countries is higher than in middle- and low-income countries 
(32·9% (SD 19·0) vs 25·4% (SD 25·4) vs 16.7% (SD 16·7)), but globally there is no difference 
between rural and urban areas.1 Jackson pooled results from 40 publications dealing with 
prevalence of persistent low back pain in 28 countries from Africa, Asia, the Middle East, 
and South America (n = 80,076) and found that chronic low back pain was 2·5 (95% CI 1·21-
 12 
 
4·10) times more prevalent among workers relative to non-working populations for reasons 
that are not clear.39 The gender pattern in low- and middle-income regions may also differ 
from that of high-income countries and even differ among low-income regions. For 
example, males seem to report low back pain more often than females in Africa.36 This was 
not the case in Latin America,40 which may reflect African culture where males often 
perform hard physical labour as well as gender inequalities, which may result in women 
underreporting their low back pain.  
 
Burden and impact of Low Back Pain  
Overall disability 
The Global Burden of Disease (GBD) 2015 study calculated disease burden for 315 causes in 
195 countries and territories from 1990 to 2015 and provides a comprehensive assessment 
of the patterns and levels of acute and chronic diseases and burden and disability of those 
across the globe.41 Low back pain was responsible for around 60·1 million years lived with 
disability (YLD) in 2015, an increase of 54% since 1990.4 It is the number one cause of 
disability globally, as well as in 14 of the 21 GBD world regions.4 Less than 28% of prevalent 
cases (n = 151 million) fell in the severe and most severe categories, however these 
accounted for 77% of all disability caused by low back pain (46·5 million YLDs).42 Thus, the 
majority of people experiencing low back pain have low levels of disability but the additive 
effect of those, combined with high disability in a substantial minority, result in the very 
high societal burden. In high-income countries, disabling back pain is linked to 
socioeconomic status, job satisfaction, and the potential for monetary compensation (Table 
4).43 The overall increase in the global burden of low back pain is almost entirely due to 
 13 
 
population increase and ageing in both high-income and low- and middle-income countries, 
as opposed to increased prevalence.1,44  
 
Work disability 
Disability from low back pain is highest in working age groups worldwide (Figure 3),4,41 
which is particularly concerning in low- and middle-income countries where informal 
employment is common and possibilities for job modification are almost completely absent. 
Furthermore, occupational musculoskeletal health policies such as regulations for heavy 
physical work and lifting are often absent or poorly monitored.45 A survey of 10,839 
residents of an urban black community in Zimbabwe found that low back pain was among 
the top five reported primary health complaints, and reasons for activity limitation46. A 
survey among 500 farmers in rural Nigeria revealed that over half reduced their farming 
workload because of low back pain.47 Thus disability associated with low back pain may 
contribute to the cycle of poverty in poorer regions of the world. 
In high-income countries, differences in social compensation systems, not differences in 
occupational exposure or individual factors, are largely responsible for national differences 
in the rates and extent of work disability attributed to low back pain.7 In Europe low back 
pain is the most common cause of medically certified sick leave and early retirement.48 
However work disability due to low back pain varies considerably among European 
countries. For example, in Norway and Sweden in 2000 short-term sickness absence rates in 
people with back pain were similar (5·1% & 6·4% respectively), but the rate of longer-term 
medically certified sickness absence was very different (22% and 15% respectively).49 In the 
 14 
 
US, low back pain accounts for more lost workdays than any other occupational 
musculoskeletal condition,50 but while 58 out of 10,000 US workers filed a back-related 
claim in 1999, the comparable figure from Japan during the same year was only 1 out of 
10,000.51  
 
Social identity and inequality 
The impact of low back pain on social identity and inequality is substantial all over the 
world. Ethnographic interviews of villagers in Botswana revealed that low back pain and 
other musculoskeletal symptoms resulted in both economic and subsistence consequences 
as well as loss of independence and social identity because of inability to fulfil traditional 
and expected social roles in a society with harsh living conditions.52  
Froud, reviewing 42 qualitative studies all from high income countries, found that many 
people living with low back pain struggled to meet their social expectations and obligations 
and that achieving these might then threaten the credibility of their suffering, with disability 
claims being threatened. Although those with back pain seek to achieve pre-morbid levels of 
health, many find with time that this is unrealistic and live with reduced expectations.53 
Likewise MacNeela reviewed 38 separate qualitative studies also from high income 
countries and found that worry and fear about the social consequences of chronic low back 
pain, hopelessness, family strain, social withdrawal, loss of job and lack of money, 
disappointment with health care encounters (in particular with general practitioners), 
coming to terms with the pain, and learning self-management strategies were common 
themes.54  
 15 
 
Globally, low back pain contributes to inequality. In low- and middle-income countries, 
poverty and inequality may increase as participation in work is affected. Further, formal 
return-to-work systems are often not in place, and workers may be retrenched, placing 
more strain on family and community livelihoods.45 In Australia, Schofield demonstrated 
that individuals who exit the workforce early as a result of their low back pain, have 
substantially less wealth by the age of 65 years, even after adjusting for education.55 The 
median value of accumulated wealth for those who retire early due to low back pain is only 
$5,038 by the time they reach 65 years of age, compared to $339,121 for those who remain 
in the workforce.55 
 
Cost of low back pain    
No relevant studies on costs associated with low back pain from low- and middle-income 
countries were found. Costs associated with low back pain are generally reported as direct 
medical (health care) costs, and indirect (work absenteeism/productivity loss) costs. Only a 
few studies have reported on other direct nonmedical costs such as costs from 
transportation to appointments, visits to complementary and alternative practitioners, and 
informal help not captured by the health care system, which means that most studies 
underestimate the total costs of low back pain (Table S1). The economic impact related to 
low back pain is comparable to other prevalent, high-cost conditions such as cardiovascular 
disease, cancer, mental health and autoimmune diseases.6 Replacement wages account for 
80-90% of total costs, and consistently a relatively small percentage of cases account for 
these.56 Some of the observed variation in costs for low back pain over time may be 
explained by changes in disability legislation and health care practices. For example, in the 
 16 
 
Netherlands costs associated with low back pain were substantially reduced between 1991 
and 2007 following a change in legislation that reduced disability pensions and applied 
evidence-based criteria for medical practices. 7,57 
Estimates of direct medical costs associated with low back pain are also all from high-
income countries, with the US having the highest costs due to a more medically intensive 
approach and higher rates of surgery compared to other high-income countries (Table 
S2).8,58 In the UK in 2006, one in seven of all recorded consultations with general 
practitioners were for musculoskeletal problems with complaints of back pain being the 
most common (417 consultations per year for low back pain per 10,000 registered 
persons),59 and in South Africa low back pain is the sixth most common complaint seen in 
primary health care.60 In addition to conventional medicine, complementary and alternative 
medical approaches are popular with people who have low back pain. In the US for 
example, 44% of the population used at least one complementary or alternative health care 
therapy in 1997;61 and the most common reason was low back pain.62  
 
Natural history of low back pain 
Low back pain is increasingly understood as a long-lasting condition with a variable course 
rather than episodes of unrelated occurrences.63 Around half of the people seen with low 
back pain in primary care have a trajectory of ongoing or fluctuating low- to moderate-
intensity pain, some recover, and some have persistent severe low back pain.64 A systematic 
review (33 cohorts; 11,166 participants) provides strong evidence that most episodes of low 
back pain improve substantially within six weeks and by 12 months average pain levels are 
low (6 points on a 100-point scale; 95% CI 3–10).65 However, two thirds of patients still 
 17 
 
report some pain at three months; 67% (95% CI 50–83%) and 12 months; 65% (95% CI 54–
75%).65,66 Recurrences of low back pain are common but a 2017 systematic review (7 
studies; 1,780 participants) found the available research does not provide robust estimates 
of the risk of LBP recurrence. The best available evidence suggests around 33% of people 
will have a recurrence within one year of recovering from a previous episode.67  
 
Risk factors and triggers for episodes of LBP 
While the impact of low back pain in low- and middle-income countries on systems and 
people differ from high-income countries, there appear to be fewer fundamental 
differences in the aetiological pathways among regions. A systematic review (eight cohorts; 
5,165 participants) found consistent evidence that people who have had previous episodes 
of low back pain are at increased risk of a new episode.68 Likewise, people with other 
chronic conditions including asthma, headache and diabetes are more likely to report low 
back pain than people in good health (pooled ORs 1·6 to 4·2).69 People with poor mental 
health are also at increased risk. For example, a UK cohort study (5,781 participants) found 
psychological distress at age 23 predicted incident low back pain ten years later (OR 2·52 
[95% CI 1·65–3·86].70 The Canadian National Population Health Survey with 9,909 
participants found that pain-free individuals with depression were more likely to develop 
low back pain within two years when compared to people without depression (OR 2·9 [95% 
CI 1·2–7·0]).71 Mechanisms behind the co-existence of low back pain and other chronic 
diseases are not known but systematic reviews of cohort studies indicate that lifestyle 
factors such as smoking,72 obesity,73,74 and low levels of physical activity,75 that relate to 
poorer general health are also associated with occurrence of low back pain episodes or 
 18 
 
development of persistent low back pain, although independent associations remain 
uncertain.  
A systematic review (seven twin studies; 35,547 participants) found the genetic influence on 
the liability to develop low back pain ranged from 21% to 67% with the genetic component 
being higher for more chronic and disabling low back pain than for inconsequential low back 
pain.69 A comprehensive genetic epidemiologic analysis including 15,328 Danish twins (44% 
monozygotic and 56% dizygotic) found that heritability estimates for pain in different spinal 
regions were quite similar and there is a moderate to high genetic correlation between the 
phenotypes, which may indicate a common genetic basis for a high proportion of spinal 
pain.76  
An Australian case-crossover study (999 participants) found that awkward postures (OR 8·0 
[95% CI 5·5–11·8]), heavy manual tasks (OR 5·0 [95% CI 3·3–7·4]), feeling tired (OR 3·7 [95% 
CI 2·2–6·3]) or being distracted during an activity (OR 25·0 [95% CI 3·4–184·5]) were all 
associated with incidence of an episode of low back pain.77 Similarly, work exposures of 
lifting, bending, awkward postures and tasks considered physically demanding were also 
associated with an increased risk of developing low back pain, which is also the case in low- 
and middle income countries.36,40 A systematic review (25 cohorts) found that the effect of 
heavy workload on onset of low back pain ranged from OR 1·61 (95% CI 1·08–2·39) to OR 
4·1 (2·7–6·4).78 The existence of a causal pathway between these risk factors and low back 
pain, however, remains unclear.79 
We found no data on risk factors and triggers for episodes of low back pain from low- and 
middle-income countries. It is unclear if risk factors in low- and middle income are 
substantially different from high-income countries. 
 
 19 
 
Multifactorial contributors to persistent disabling low back pain  
Over recent decades the biopsychosocial model has been applied as a framework for 
understanding the complexity of low back pain in preference to a purely biomedical 
approach. Many factors including biophysical, psychological, social and genetic factors, and 
comorbidities (Figure 1) can contribute to disabling low back pain (Table 4). However, there 
are not firm boundaries among these and they all interact with each other. Thus, it is clear 
that persistent disabling low back pain is not simply a result of nociceptive input. While 
there are substantially fewer data from low- and middle-income countries the available data 
suggest similar multifactorial contributors seem to be important as in high income 
countries.80  
 
Biophysical factors  
While the role of biophysical impairments in the development of disabling low back pain is 
not fully understood, impairments are demonstrable in people with persistent low back 
pain. One example is that some people with persistent low back pain may have alterations 
in muscle size,81 composition,82 and coordination83 that differ from those without pain. 
These changes may be more than merely a consequence of pain and are only partly 
influenced by psychological factors.84  
 
Psychological factors   
Psychological factors are often investigated separately, but there is a substantial overlap of 
constructs such as depression, anxiety, catastrophizing, and self-efficacy. The presence of 
these factors in people who present with low back pain is associated with increased risk of 
developing disability even though the mechanisms are not fully understood (Table 4). For 
 20 
 
example, in a UK cohort study including 531 participants, pain-related distress explained 
15% and 28% of the variance in pain and disability respectively.85 The fear-avoidance model 
of chronic pain (including low back pain), which describes how fear of pain leads to the 
avoidance of activities and thus to disability, is well established. This has more recently been 
expanded to capture the influence of maladaptive learning processes and disabling beliefs 
on pain perception and on behaviours, suggesting that pain cognitions play a central role in 
the development and maintenance of disability, and more so than the pain itself.86 A 
systematic review including 12 mediation studies identified self-efficacy, psychological 
distress, and fear as intermediate factors explaining some of the pathway between 
experiencing neck or back pain and developing disability.87 The potential importance of self-
efficacy is supported by a systematic review (83 studies; 15,616 participants) of chronic pain 
conditions (23 low back pain studies) that found self-efficacy to be consistently associated 
with impairment and disability, affective distress and pain severity.88 Therefore some 
chronic pain treatments have shifted away from aiming to directly alleviate pain to aiming at 
changing beliefs and behaviours.89 
 
Social and societal factors 
Chronic disabling low back pain affects people with low income and short education 
disproportionally. In a UK study of 2,533 people, life-time socio-economic status predicted 
disability due to any pain condition in older age (independent of comorbid conditions, 
psychological indicators and BMI) (OR 2·04 [95% CI 1·55–2·68).90 Cross-sectional data from 
the USA (National Health Interview Survey 2009-2010, 5,103 people) found that those with 
persistent low back pain were more likely to have had less than high school education (OR 
2·27 [95% CI 1·53–3·38]) and had annual household income < $20,000 (OR 2·29 [1·46–
 21 
 
3·58).91 Suggested mechanisms for the effect of low education on back pain include 
environmental and lifestyle exposures in lower socio-economic groups, lower health 
literacy, and health care not being available or adequately targeted to people with low 
education.92 Also, being in routine and manual occupations, having less satisfying work, or 
having higher physical workloads is associated with disabling low back pain after one year 
(Table 4).43 
 
Central pain processing/modulation 
Nociceptive input is processed throughout the nervous system including modulation within 
the spinal cord and supra-spinal centers. In chronic pain, supra-spinal centers can show 
varying levels of activation and can be recruited for activation (or not) in a dynamic fashion 
contingent on nociceptive drive, context, cognition and emotion. If any of these factors 
change, the same nociceptive input can produce a different cerebral signature in the same 
subject.93 A systematic review (27 studies; 1,037 participants) found moderate evidence 
that chronic low back pain patients show structural brain differences in specific cortical and 
subcortical areas, and altered functional connectivity in pain-related areas following painful 
stimulation.94 The clinical implication of these findings remains to be clarified.93  
 
Multivariable Predictive models 
Pain intensity, psychological distress, and accompanying pain in the leg or at multiple body 
sites are identified as predictors across externally validated multivariable predictive models 
developed to identify people at particular risk of developing disabling low back pain, (Table 
S3). In a systematic review (50 studies; 33,089 participants) the average amount of variance 
 22 
 
explained in seven development samples was 43%, indicating that most of the variation 
between individuals is due to unknown or unmeasured factors.95  
 
Limitations  
Despite advances in many aspects of understanding low back pain including the burden, 
course, risk factors, and causes, some important limitations exist. The vast majority of 
existing evidence comes from high-income countries, and may or may not generalise to low- 
and middle-income countries. While many factors are associated with both the 
development of low back pain and the transition to persistent disabling pain, the underlying 
mechanisms, including the influence of co-occurring non-communicable diseases, are poorly 
understood. Despite the burden of low back pain, research is often not considered a priority 
in low- and-middle income countries, and thus the consequences of low back pain in these 
settings are largely unknown. The functional domains used in GBD 2015 do not take into 
account broader aspects of life such as participation, wellbeing, social identity, carer 
burden, use of healthcare resources, and work disability costs. In cost studies, a top down 
approach is most often used and those may not capture all costs as seen from the individual 
point of view in specific contexts.  
 
Conclusion 
Low back pain is now the number one cause of disability globally. The burden from low back 
pain is increasing particularly in low- and middle-income countries, and this is straining 
health care and social systems that are already overburdened. Low back pain is most 
 23 
 
prevalent and burdensome in working populations, and in older people low back pain is 
associated with greater activity limitation. Most cases of low back pain are short-lasting and 
a specific nociceptive source cannot be identified. Recurrences are, however, common and 
a small minority of cases end up with persistent disabling pain influenced by a range of 
biophysical, psychological, and social factors. Costs associated with health care and work 
disability attributed to low back pain are enormous but vary considerably among countries, 
and are influenced by social norms, health care approaches, and legislation. While there are 
several global initiatives to address the global burden of low back pain as a public health 
problem, there is a need for further research to identify cost-effective and context-specific 
strategies for managing LBP in order to mitigate the consequences of the current and 
projected future burden. 
 
 
List of Figures and Tables 
Figure 1: Conceptual model 
Figure 2: Prevalence 
Figure 3: GBD 1990-2015 
 
Table 1: Nociceptive sources 
Table 2: Imaging findings 
Table 3 Specific pathological causes of low back pain 
Table 4: Predictors of disability 
Table S1: Cost of illness 
 24 
 
Table S2: Health care costs 
Table S3: Predictive models 
 
 
Contributors 
JH and MU was part of team that developed the original proposal for the series and co-
ordinated production of papers. JH and MH led the drafting of this paper in collaboration 
with the other authors. AK, QL, and MU closely revised many sections. Thereafter all authors 
have contributed to all sections of the paper and have edited it for key intellectual content. 
JH, MH, AK, JK, MF, SG, RS, QL, GP and MU participated in the authors’ meeting, drafted 
different sections of the paper and took part in discussions during the drafting process.  All 
other authors have read and provided substantive intellectual comments to the draft and 
approved the final version of the paper. 
 
*The Lancet Low Back Pain Series Working Group 
Steering Group: Rachelle Buchbinder (Chair), Jan Hartvigsen (Deputy Chair), Dan Cherkin, 
Nadine E Foster, Chris Maher, Martin Underwood, Maurits van Tulder. Members: Johannes 
R Anema, Roger Chou, Stephen P Cohen, Lucíola Menezes Costa, Peter Croft, Manuela 
Ferreira, Paulo Ferreira, Julie Fritz, Stéphane Genevay, Douglas P Gross, Mark Hancock, 
Damian Hoy, Jaro Karppinen, Bart Koes, Alice Kongsted, Quinette Louw, Birgitta Öberg, 
Wilco Peul, Glenn Pransky, Mark Schoene, Joachim Sieper, Rob Smeets, Judith A Turner, 
Anthony Woolf 
 
 25 
 
Declarations of Interest 
Johannes R. Anema is chief investigator, or co-investigator on multiple previous and current 
(personal) research grants from government research agencies in the Netherlands (eg, 
Netherlands Organisation for Health Research & Development) and Canada (eg, IRSST). His 
research has also received funding from philanthropy and quasi-governmental agencies 
(Dutch Social Security Agency, Institute GAK) and charities linked to professional body 
membership (Dutch Foundation of Occupational Medicine). Prof Anema and his research 
team received a grant from Pfizer to write a report on depression and anxiety disorders 
based on a secondary analysis of data collected with funding from government research 
agencies. His travel expenses have been covered when he has been an invited speaker at 
conferences and he has received honoraria for talks and reviewing grants. Prof Anema was 
an invited co-opted member of the guideline development group for the Dutch 
Occupational Medicine guideline for low back pain and the Dutch national Insurance 
Medicine protocol for lumbosacral syndrome. He is President of the Work Disability 
Prevention and Integration Committee of the International Commission on Occupational 
Health (ICOH). He has published multiple papers on low back pain, some of which may be 
referenced in the series. He is editor of the International Handbook of Work Disability which 
is referenced in the series. Prof Anema is stockholder and senior consultant of Evalua 
Netherlands Ltd. His chair in Insurance Medicine is paid by the Dutch Social Security Agency. 
 
Rachelle Buchbinder is chief investigator or associate investigator on multiple previous and 
current research grants from government research agencies from Australia (eg, NHMRC, 
ARC), and overseas (eg, ZonMW in the Netherlands and PCORI in the USA). Her research has 
 26 
 
also received funding from philanthropy (eg, Arthritis Australia) and government agencies 
(eg, NSW WorkCover). She has been funded by research fellowships from NHMRC since 
2005. She has received travel expenses for speaking at conferences from the professional 
organisations hosting the conferences. She chaired the back pain expert group for the 2010 
Global Burden of Diseases, Injuries, and Risk Factors (GBD) Study. She was appointed to the 
Australian Medical Services Advisory Committee in May 2016. She has published multiple 
papers on low back pain some of which may be referenced in the series. 
 
Dan Cherkin is chief investigator, or co-investigator on multiple previous and current 
research grants from government-related research agencies in the USA (eg, NIH and PCORI). 
His travel expenses have been covered when he has been an invited speaker at conferences 
and he has received honoraria for talks, reviewing grants and theses (no honoraria or travel 
expenses from pharmaceutical or device companies). Dr. Cherkin has published multiple 
papers on low back pain some of which may be referenced in the series. 
 
Roger Chou has received funding from the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality and 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to conduct systematic reviews on low back 
pain treatments, was an author on the 2016 CDC guideline, receives royalties from 
UpToDate as an author on low back pain topics, has had travel expenses covered when he 
has been an invited speaker at conferences and has received honoraria for talks (no 
honoraria or travel expenses from pharmaceutical or device companies). 
 
 27 
 
Stephen P. Cohen is Principal Investigator for multiple clinical trials evaluating interventions 
for low back pain funded by the U.S. Department of Defense (Congressionally Mandated 
Research Programs).  He serves on the Advisory Boards of a company that make 
radiofrequency equipment (Halyard) and another one working with the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) to design a steroid approved for epidural injection (Semnur).  He was 
the lead speaker on the effectiveness of epidural steroid injections at the FDA-convened 
panel on the procedure following the fungal meningitis outbreak.  He serves on several 
National Institutes of Health task forces, including one for pain education and another for 
research priorities for chronic pain.  He is a member of the American Society of Regional 
Anesthesia and Pain Medicine (ASRA) Board of Directors.  He was a “stakeholder” for ASRA 
and the Dept. of Defense for the recent U.S. Drug Enforcement guidelines on opioids for 
chronic pain. He has published numerous studies on low back pain, some of which are 
referenced in this series. 
 
Luciola Menez Costa is chief investigator or associate investigator on multiple previous and 
current research grants from government research agencies FAPESP and CNPq from Brazil. 
She has published multiple papers on low back pain some of which may be referenced in the 
series. 
 
Peter Croft has been chief investigator or co-investigator on multiple previous research 
grants for musculoskeletal pain research from UK government agencies (including National 
Institute for Health Research and the Medical Research Council) and UK charitable 
 28 
 
organisations (Arthritis Research UK and the Wellcome Trust), but none from industry. His 
travel expenses have been covered by the organising professional organisations (including 
rheumatology, pain specialists, physical therapy, primary care) when he has been an invited 
speaker at conferences. He has received honoraria for reviewing grant proposals from 
government organisations in Canada, Norway and Sweden. PC’s department has received 
payment for two reports to the UK Committee on Advertising Practice. He has published 
multiple papers on low back pain some of which may be referenced in the series.  
 
Manuela Ferreira holds a Sydney Medical Foundation Fellowship/Sydney Medical School 
and is chief investigator, or co-investigator on multiple previous and current research grants 
from government research agencies in Australia (NHMRC) and Brazil (eg, CAPES/CNPQ), 
philanthropy (eg, Arthritis Australia), industry (eg, Medibank Research Fund)  and 
institutional research funds (eg, International Research and Research Training Fund/The 
University of Melbourne). Her travel expenses have been covered when she has been 
invited speaker at conferences and she has received honoraria for talks, reviewing grants 
and theses. She has published multiple papers on low back pain some of which may be cited 
in this series. 
 
Paulo Ferreira is chief investigator, or associate investigator on multiple previous & current 
research grants from government research agencies from Australia (eg, NHMRC, Arthritis 
Australia), USA (eg, MDT Research Foundation), Spain (e.g. MAPFRE foundation), and Brazil 
(eg, CNPQ, FAPESP). The University of Sydney funds his salary. His travel expenses have 
 29 
 
been covered when he has been an invited speaker at conferences or through his research 
funding (no honoraria or travel expenses from pharmaceutical or device companies). He has 
received industry related funding from competitive peer-reviewed schemes (eg, Medibank 
Private Research Foundation – Australia) for a trial investigating the effects of physical 
activity for recurrent low back pain (IMPACT). IMPACT is currently in its pilot stages.  He has 
published multiple papers on low back pain some of which may be referenced in the series. 
 
Nadine E. Foster is chief investigator, or co-investigator on multiple previous and current 
research grants from government research agencies in the UK (eg, NIHR), USA (e.g. PCORI) 
and Australia (eg, NMHRC). For 10 years her salary has been covered by research 
fellowships from the UK’s National Institute for Health Research (NIHR). Her research has 
also received funding from philanthropy (e.g Arthritis Research UK, Medical Research 
Council) and charities linked to professional body membership (eg, Chartered Society of 
Physiotherapy’s Charitable Trust). Her travel expenses have been covered when she has 
been an invited speaker at conferences and she has received honoraria for talks, reviewing 
grants and theses (no honoraria or travel expenses from pharmaceutical or device 
companies). Prof Foster was an invited co-opted member of the guideline development 
group for the UK’s National Clinical Guideline on low back pain and sciatica. She is the 
President of the Society of Back Pain Research in the UK and has published multiple papers 
on low back pain some of which may be referenced in the series. 
 
 30 
 
Julie Fritz is chief investigator, or co-investigator on multiple previous and current research 
grants from government research agencies in the United States including NIH, AHRQ, DOD 
and PCORI. Her research has also received funding from Foundations in the USA including 
the Foundation for Physical Therapy and National Athletic Trainers Association Research 
Foundation. Her travel expenses have been covered when she has been an invited speaker 
at conferences and she has received honoraria for talks and reviewing grants (no honoraria 
or travel expenses from pharmaceutical or device companies). Dr. Fritz has received 
payment as a journal editor (Journal of Orthopaedic and Sports Physical Therapy). She is an 
author or co-author on multiple papers on low back pain some of which may be referenced 
in the series. 
 
Stéphane Genevay is principal investigator or associate investigator on multiple previous 
and current research grants from Swiss research foundation (e.g. HUG). His research has 
also received funding from philanthropy (eg, Rheumasearch, Centre de Recherches 
Médicales Carlos & Elsie de Reuter, Eugenio Litta). He has received funding from 
pharmaceutical companies (Abbvie, MSD, Pfizer) for investigator-initiated trials. He has 
received travel expenses and honorariums for speaking at conferences from the 
professional organisations hosting the conferences. He has papers on low back pain some of 
which may be referenced in the series. 
 
Douglas P. Gross is chief investigator, or co-investigator on multiple previous and current 
research grants from government research agencies in Canada (eg, Canadian Institutes for 
 31 
 
Health Research, Alberta Innovates Health Solutions) and the Netherlands (eg, 
TechForFuture Centre of Expertise HTSM Oost). His research has also received funding from 
philanthropy and quasi-governmental agencies (eg, Workers’ Compensation Board of 
Alberta, Workers’ Compensation Board of Manitoba, WorkSafeBC, Institute for Health 
Economics, Canadian Hemophilia Society) and charities linked to professional body 
membership (eg, Physiotherapy Foundation of Canada, Canadian Occupational Therapy 
Foundation). He has received funding from pharmaceutical companies (Bayer Hemophilia 
Awards Program) to undertake investigator-initiated research. His travel expenses have 
been covered when he has been an invited speaker at conferences and he has received 
honoraria for talks, reviewing grants and theses (no honoraria or travel expenses from 
pharmaceutical or device companies). Prof Gross was an invited co-opted member of the 
guideline development group for the Ontario Ministry of Government Services Community 
Research Award, “Development of a Minor Injury Treatment Protocol”. He has published 
multiple papers on low back pain, some of which may be referenced in the series. 
 
Mark Hancock is chief investigator, or associate investigator on previous and current 
research grants from government agencies (e.g. NHMRC and WorkCover) and from 
philanthropy (e.g., Arthritis NSW and International Mechanical Diagnosis and Therapy 
Research Foundation). His travel expenses have been covered when he has been an invited 
speaker at conferences. He is chief investigator on two investigator-initiated NHMRC-funded 
trials that have received supplementary industry funding. The first trial, PACE, was published 
in Lancet in 2014 and had co-funding from GSK. PACE demonstrated that paracetamol was 
ineffective for acute low back pain. The second NHMRC-funded trial, PRECISE, is evaluating 
 32 
 
pregabalin for sciatica. Pfizer provided the study medicine at no cost but provided no other 
funding. PRECISE is currently under review. He has published multiple papers on low back 
pain some of which may be referenced in the series.  
 
Jan Hartvigsen is chief investigator, or co-investigator on multiple previous and current 
research grants from government research agencies in Denmark (e.g. the Danish Ministry of 
Science and Innovation), and the USA (e.g. Health Resources and Service Administration). He 
holds tenured positions at the University of Southern Denmark and the Nordic Institute of 
Chiropractic and Clinical Biomechanics, which cover his full salary. His research has also 
received funding from philanthropy (e.g. Danish League against Rheumatism) and charities 
linked to professional bodies (e.g. the Danish Chiropractors Research Fund). His travel 
expenses have been covered when he has been invited speaker at conferences and he has 
received honoraria for talks, reviewing grants and theses. He has received honoraria for 
speaking from one pharmaceutical company (Nycomed 2002) but no device companies. Prof 
Hartvigsen was invited member of the expert groups that in 2014-16 developed Danish 
National Guidelines commissioned by the Danish Health and Medicines Authority for the 
management of low back pain, lumbar radiculopathy, and cervical radiculopathy. He has 
published multiple papers on low back pain some of which may be cited in this series. 
 
Damian Hoy is the principal epidemiologist for the Pacific Community. This work involves 
dealing with all conditions in the Pacific that cause burden. It is funded by multiple donors, 
including the Governments of Australia, New Zealand, and France. It has included funding to 
 33 
 
travel to one research conference on surveillance. He is a member of the Global Burden of 
Diseases, Injuries, and Risk Factors (GBD) Study Musculoskeletal Expert Group, and is co-
deputy chair of the Global Alliance for Musculoskeletal Diseases Surveillance Taskforce. He 
has published multiple papers on low back pain some of which may be referenced in the 
series. 
 
Jaro Karppinen is chief investigator or associate investigator on multiple previous and 
current research grants from Finnish government research agency (Finnish Academy). He 
has received travel expenses for speaking at conferences from the professional 
organisations hosting the conferences. He was nominated as a member of the European 
Academy of Rehabilitation Medicine in 2012. He has published multiple papers on low back 
pain some of which may be referenced in the series. 
 
Bart Koes is chief investigator or associate investigator on multiple previous and current 
research grants from government research agencies from the Netherlands (eg ZonMW, 
NWO) and overseas (eg, NHMRC, Australia). His research has also received funding from 
philanthropy (eg, Dutch Arthritis Foundation). He has received travel expenses for speaking 
at conferences from the professional organisations hosting the conferences. He has 
published multiple papers on low back pain some of which may be referenced in the series. 
 
Alice Kongsted’s position at University of Southern Denmark is financially supported by The 
Foundation for Advancement of Chiropractic Research and Postgraduate Education, 
 34 
 
Denmark. She was the content area expert in the development of Danish national clinical 
guidelines for treatment of neck pain for which she received a fee. She has received funding 
from The Foundation for Advancement of Chiropractic Research and Postgraduate 
Education and “IMK Almene Fond” to conduct observational cohort studies in Danish 
general practice and chiropractic practice.  Her travel expenses have been covered when 
she has been invited as a speaker at conferences. She has published multiple papers on low 
back pain some of which may be referenced in the series. 
 
Quinette Louw is the principal or associate investigator on grants from South African 
government research agencies, including the Medical Research Council and National 
Research Foundation. She has published multiple papers on low back pain some of which 
may be referenced in the series. She received travel expenses when she was an invited 
speaker at conferences or workshops and has received honoraria for talks and theses (no 
honoraria or travel expenses from pharmaceutical or device companies). Prof Louw was 
invited to assist with the South African Physiotherapy Society’s low back pain clinical 
practice guidelines.  
 
Chris Maher is chief investigator, or associate investigator on multiple previous & current 
research grants from government research agencies from Australia (eg, NHMRC), Brazil (eg, 
FAPESP) and the Netherlands (eg, ZonMW). For the past 10 years his salary has been 
covered by research fellowships from Australia’s National Health and Medical Research 
Council and The Australian Research Council. His research has also received funding from 
 35 
 
philanthropy (eg, Arthritis Australia) and government agencies (eg, NSW WorkCover). He 
has received travel expenses for speaking at conferences from the professional associations 
hosting the conferences, and has received honoraria for talks from professional associations 
and industry hosting the talks, honoraria for reviewing grants from government grant 
agencies and honoraria for marking theses from the relevant university. Prof Maher has 
received supplementary industry funding for two investigator-initiated NHMRC-funded 
trials. The first trial had co-funding from GlaxoSmithKline. Pfizer provided the study 
medicine for the second trial, PRECISE, at no cost, but provided no other funding. He has 
published multiple papers on low back pain some of which may be referenced in the series.  
 
Birgitta Öberg is head of research at the division and responsible for research previous and 
ongoing research funded by government research agencies in Sweden. She has received 
travel expenses for speaking at conferences from the professional organisations hosting the 
conferences. She chaired the Scientific Council of Medicine and Health 2013-2016 and been 
a member 2010-2012.  
 
Wilco Peul has no conflicts of interest to disclose. 
 
Glenn Pransky is chief investigator or co-investigator on multiple previous and current 
research studies, primarily funded by his employer, the Liberty Mutual Research Institute.  
He has also collaborated on studies funded by the US National Institute of Health, the 
National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health, the Canadian Institute of Health 
 36 
 
Research, and others.   He has received travel expenses for speaking at conferences from 
the professional organizations hosting the conferences, and support for conference travel 
from his employer. He chaired the Work Disability Prevention and Integration section of the 
International Commission on Occupational Health from 2010- 2015. He has published 
multiple papers on low back pain and work disability, some of which are referenced in this 
series. 
 
Mark Schoene receives the majority of his funding from the publishing company Wolters 
Kluwer for writing/editing an international newsletter on spine/back pain research (The 
BackLetter). He authors all the articles and shares editorial control with the executive editor 
(a researcher, academic spine surgeon, and Chairman, Dept of Orthopaedics at Georgetown 
University Medical Center). Neither has any conflicts of interest with drug or device 
companies. MS has co-authored several editorials for journals owned by publishers (The 
Spine Journal, Spine—owned respectively by Elsevier and Wolters Kluwer). The editorials 
concerned the inadequacy of the evidence base for regulated surgical devices or 
drugs/biologics. He received nothing of value for those editorials. The remainder of his 
funding comes from the non-profit Sports Health and Safety Institute at the University of 
Washington for research, writing, and editing in the concussion area. He was previously a 
paid consultant for the non-profit Informed Medical Decisions Foundation in Boston, 
involved in the preparation of Decision Aids and Shared Decision Making materials. He 
occasionally receives travel funding from professional societies to take part in symposia 
sponsored by those societies. MS has been an unpaid editorial board member and 
Consumer Representative at the Cochrane Collaboration Back and Neck Group since 1999.  
 37 
 
 
Joachim Sieper has no conflict of interested as related to these manuscripts. Outside the 
submitted manuscripts he reports grants and personal fees from Abbvie, personal fees from 
Boehringer Ingelheim, grants from Eli-Lilly, personal fees from Galapagos, grants and 
personal fees from Janssen, grants and personal fees from Merck, personal fees from 
Novartis, grants and personal fees from Pfizer, personal fees from Roche, personal fees from 
UCB. 
 
Rob Smeets is chief investigator or associate investigator on multiple previous and current 
research grants from government research agencies from the Netherlands (ZonMW), and 
overseas (eg, NHMRC in Australia and Swedish Research Council). His research has also 
received funding from philanthropy (eg, Eurospine, Revalidatiefonds, Stichting Annadal) and 
health care insurance companies (eg, CZ and VGZ) and government agencies (eg, Province of 
Limburg). He has received travel expenses for speaking at conferences from the professional 
organisations hosting the conferences. He chaired the IASP Special Interest Group Pain, 
Mind and Movement and was member of the governmental working group protocol 
lumbosacral radicular syndrome for insurance medicine (Gezondheidsraad) and is member 
of the project group Dutch Quality Care Standard Chronic pain.  He has published multiple 
papers on low back pain some of which may be referenced in the series. 
 
Judith A. Turner is co-investigator on multiple previous and current research grants from US 
government agencies, including NIH, AHRQ, and PCORI. She is President of the International 
 38 
 
Association for the Study of Pain.  Her travel expenses have been covered when she has 
been an invited speaker at conferences and she has received honoraria for talks (no 
honoraria or travel expenses from pharmaceutical or device companies). She is an author on 
multiple articles on low back pain, some of which may be referenced in this series. She 
receives royalties from PAR, Inc. for questionnaires not referenced in this series. 
 
Martin Underwood was Chair of the NICE accreditation advisory committee until March 
2017 for which he received a fee. He was chair of the guideline development group that 
produced the 2009 NICE back pain guidelines. He is chief investigator or co-investigator on 
multiple previous and current research grants from the UK National Institute for Health 
Research, Arthritis Research UK and is a co-investigator on grants funded by Arthritis 
Australia and Australian NHMRC. He has completed trials of manual therapy, group exercise, 
and a cognitive behavioural approach as treatments for low back pain. He has received 
travel and subsistence to attend meeting by the EU Joint Research Centre. He is a director 
and shareholder of Clinvivo Ltd that provides electronic data collection for health services 
research. He is an editor of the NIHR journal series for which he receives a fee. He has 
published multiple papers on low back pain some of which may be referenced in the series.   
 
Maurits van Tulder is chief investigator, or co-investigator on multiple previous and current 
research grants from government research agencies in the Netherlands (ZONMW; the Dutch 
Health Insurance Council) and Australia (NMHRC). His research has also received funding 
from professional organisations (eg, the Royal Dutch Association for Physiotherapy; the 
 39 
 
Netherlands National Chiropractic Association and the European Chiropractic Union). His 
travel expenses have been covered by the organizing professional organizations when he 
has been an invited speaker at conferences. He has received honoraria for reviewing grant 
proposals from the Swedish Medical Research Council and VINNOVA (Sweden’s innovation 
agency). He has not received any honoraria or travel expenses from the industry. Prof van 
Tulder was chairman of the Netherlands National Multidisciplinary Guideline on Low Back 
Pain. He has published multiple papers on low back pain some of which may be referenced 
in the series. 
 
Anthony Woolf has been chief investigator or co-investigator on projects to identify burden 
of musculoskeletal conditions and to develop strategies for their control. He has been an 
expert advisor to the World Health Organisation (WHO).  He is chair of the Global Alliance 
for Musculoskeletal Health.  The European Community, professional bodies and research 
agencies have supported his work.  Professional bodies or organisers of scientific meetings 
have supported his travel expenses.  He has not received any funding from the private 
sector. 
 
Acknowledgements 
There were no sources of funding for this paper. 
 
 
 40 
 
Table 1: Potential nociceptive contributors to low back pain that have undergone investigation 
Potential nociceptive contributor  
Description 
Intervertebral disc  
While some imaging and clinical findings increase the likelihood that pain is arising from the 
intervertebral disc (using the reference standard of discography), there is no investigation that is 
able to accurately identify a disc problem as contributing to an individual’s pain.14 There is no 
widely accepted reference standard for discogenic pain. 
Facet joint  
Injecting facet joints with local anaesthetic can cause temporary relief of pain.15 However the 
Framingham Heart Study (3,529 participants) found no relationship between radiological 
osteoarthritis of facet joints and presence of low back pain.96 It is not possible to identify 
clinically those individuals whose facet joints are contributing to their pain.97  
Vertebral Endplates (Modic changes) 
Modic changes are vertebral endplate abnormalities seen on MRI with specific subchondral and 
vertebral bone marrow features that can be classified according to different signal intensities 
into type 1, type 2 and type 3. Endplate defects and disc herniation may predispose to the 
development of Modic changes. One theory is that the pro-inflammatory response, caused by 
structural damage to the disc or endplate, may allow microbial infiltration and/or autoimmune 
reactions that intensify and prolong nociceptor stimulation by chemical or mechanical stimuli.98 
A low-grade infection by Propionibacterium acnes may promote the development of Modic 
changes.99 The relevance of these finding to clinical practice is, however, unclear. 
A systematic review concluded that Modic type 1 changes are associated with low back pain 
(Table 2).17 A subsequent study including 1,142 people found that Modic type 2 changes were 
associated with disability (OR 1·56 [95% CI 1·06–2·31), but not pain (OR 1·36 [0·88–2·09]).100 It is 
not possible to identify individuals in whom Modic changes are contributing to their pain. 
  
 41 
 
 
Table 2: Strength of association between MRI findings and LBP in younger adults. Modified from Brinjikji et al 201517 
Imaging finding 
No. of studies 
OR (95% CI) 
Prevalence 
asymptomatic 
(95% CI) 
Prevalence 
symptomatic  
(95% CI) 
P-
value 
Heterogeneity 
Intervertebral disc degeneration related outcomes 
Disc degeneration 
12 
2.2 (1.2-4.2) 
34% (32%-38%) 
57% (55%-60%) 
.01 
High 
 
Modic change 
5 
1.6 (0.5-5.4) 
12% (10%-15%) 
23% (22%-27%) 
.43 
High 
Modic type 1 change 
2 
4.0 (1.1-14.6) 
3% (0.7%-9%) 
7% (5%-9%) 
.04 
Low 
Internal disc rupture related outcomes 
Annular fissure 
6 
1.8 (0.97-3.3) 
11% (9%-14%) 
20% (18%-23%) 
.06 
High 
High Intensity Zone 
4 
2.1 (0.7-6.0) 
10% (7%-13%) 
10% (8-13%) 
.17 
High 
Disc displacement related outcomes 
Disc bulge 
3 
7.5 (1.3-44.6) 
6% (4%-9%) 
43% (38%-48%) 
.03 
High 
Disc protrusion 
9 
2.7 (1.5-4.6) 
19% (17%-22%) 
42% (39%-45%) 
.00 
High 
Disc extrusion 
4 
4.4 (2.0-9.7) 
2% (0.1%-4%) 
7% (5%-9%) 
<.01 
Low 
Other outcomes 
Spondylolysis 
2 
5.1 (1.7-15.5) 
2% (0%-5%) 
9% (7%-12%) 
<.01 
Low 
Spondylolisthesis 
4 
1.6 (0.8-3.2) 
3% (2%-6%) 
6% (4%-9%) 
.20 
Low 
Central spinal canal 
stenosis 
2 
20.6 (0.1-799) 
14% (10%-19%) 
60% (55%-64%) 
.17 
High 
OR=odds ratio, CI=confidence interval, Heterogeneity (I2) was graded ‘low’ only for ‘0’ values as no CI for I2 was presented  
Prevalence data presented for reference only 
 42 
 
Table 3 Specific pathological causes of low back pain 
Specific pathological causes of 
low back pain 
Description 
Vertebral fracture 
Symptomatic minimal trauma vertebral fractures due to osteoporosis are rare under the age of 50 years 
but the incidence increases rapidly with age.101 Although age-specific incidence is not changing, with an 
ageing population, the population burden is increasing. A systematic review (14 studies) found post-test 
probability for having a symptomatic vertebral fracture was 9% (95% CI 3–25%) for those who were older 
(men aged >65, women aged >75), 33% (CI 10–67%) for those with a history of prolonged corticosteroid 
use, and 62% (49–74%) when a contusion or abrasion was present. The probability of a minimal trauma 
vertebral fracture being present when multiple risk factors (at least three of female, age >70, severe 
trauma, and prolonged use of glucocorticoids) were present was 90% (95% CI 34–99%).32 The predictive 
value of such a decision rule is, however, not greatly different from clinical assessment.30 Symptomatic 
minimal trauma vertebral fractures have been shown in some studies to have a major health impact with 
a mean of 158 days of limited activity and a third of those affected still have significant back pain after 
two years 101 In some studies, minimal trauma vertebral fractures are also associated with a two to eight 
fold increased risk of mortality.101  
Axial spondyloarthritis 
Axial spondyloarthritis is a chronic inflammatory disease that primarily affects the axial skeleton in young 
people (peak of onset 20–40 years). Although traditionally considered to be a disease of young men there 
is only a slight male predominance in population studies.102 The term axial spondyloarthritis covers both 
people who have already developed structural damage in the sacroiliac joints and/or spine visible on x-
rays (radiographic axial spondyloarthritis; also termed ankylosing spondylitis) and those who have not yet 
developed such structural damage (non-radiographic spondyloarthritis).103 Non-radiographic 
spondyloarthritis is a prodrome of axial spondyloarthritis that might subsequently produce structural 
bony damage in the axial skeleton.104 The prevalence of radiological disease is between 0.3 and 0.8% in 
Western countries and is dependent on the HLA-B27 prevalence in a given population.102 
 
The typical presentation of axial spondyloarthritis includes morning stiffness, mostly in the lower back, 
with improvement observed with exercise but not with rest. In a Danish cohort of 759 people aged 18–40 
years with chronic low back pain, the discriminative value of inflammatory back pain symptoms for axial 
 43 
 
spondyloarthritis was low with sensitivity and specificity ranging between 50% and 80% depending on the 
criteria being used.105 However, around 30% of those referred to secondary care with symptoms of 
inflammatory back pain receive a final diagnosis of axial spondyloarthritis.106 Around 5% of Europeans 
presenting with chronic low back pain in primary care may have axial spondyloarthritis.107 There is often a 
delay between the onset of (back pain) symptoms and making a diagnosis of axial spondyloarthritis of five 
years or longer. People with axial spondyloarthritis are commonly misdiagnosed with non-specific low 
back pain. Since there are now effective treatments for axial spondyloarthritis, a specialist rheumatology 
referral is advised for people who are suspected of having an axial spondyloarthritis. 
Malignancy 
Back pain is a common symptom in people with metastatic cancer; vertebral metastases occur in 3-5% of 
people with cancer, and 97% of spinal tumours are metastatic disease.108 Nevertheless malignancy is an 
uncommon cause of low back pain. Past history of malignancy is the most useful indicator for identifying 
malignancy in people presenting with low back pain; however it only increases the post-test probability to 
7% (95% CI 3- 16%) in primary care, and to 33% (95% CI 22-46%) in the emergency setting.32 The common 
solid tumours metastasising to the spine are adenocarcinomas, i.e., breast, lung, prostate, thyroid and 
gastrointestinal. A past history of other tumours is less important. Myeloma typically presents as 
persistent bone pain in people aged ≥60. 
Infections 
Spinal infections include spondylodiscitis, vertebral osteomyelitis, epidural abscess and rarely facet joint 
infection. Bacterial infections are divided into pyogenic (e.g. Staphylococcus aureus and Staphylococcus 
epidermidis) and granulomatous diseases (e.g. tuberculosis, brucellosis). Although rare, these disorders 
are associated with a substantial mortality; up to 3% for epidural abscesses, 6% for spinal osteomyelitis, 
and possibly as high as 11% for pyogenic spondylodiscitis.109-111 
 
In high-income countries, granulomatous diseases are mainly encountered in immigrant populations; 
pyogenic infections are seen largely in older patients (mean age 59–69 years).112 In low-income countries 
tuberculosis affects a broader span of ages (mean age 27–76 years), and may represent up to a third of 
spinal infections.112 People with chronic comorbidities, particularly immunosuppressive disorders, and 
intravenous drug users, are at higher risk of spinal infections. Recent increases in the incidence of spinal 
infection are attributed to an ageing population with inherent comorbidities plus improved case 
ascertainment related to the availability of modern imaging techniques.111,113 
 44 
 
Cauda Equina syndrome 
While not strictly a cause of low back pain, cauda equina compression, which mainly arises due to disc 
herniation, can have catastrophic consequences. It is rare and most primary care clinicians will not see a 
true case in a working lifetime.114 Early diagnosis and surgical treatment are probably helpful therefore 
there needs to be a low threshold for further assessment when there has been a new onset of perianal 
sensory change or bladder symptoms, or bilateral severe radicular pain with low back pain of any 
duration.114 The cardinal clinical features are urinary retention and overflow incontinence (sensitivity 
90%, specificity 95%).115  
 
 
 45 
 
Table 4: Overview of selected predictors and their association with dichotomous outcomes of low back pain disability based on review by 
Chou et al43  
Predictor 
 
Outcome/s  
Predictor scale:  Association with low 
back pain disability 
Source of evidence  
Symptom related 
 
 
Previous episodes  
 
Chronic disabling pain* at 3–6 months 
More versus less episodes: Median LR 
(range) = 1·0 (0·9–1·2) 
Chronic disabling pain* at 12 months 
More versus less episodes: Median LR 
(range) = 1·1 (0·95–1·2) 
Systematic review 
including 9 longitudinal 
studies43 
 
Back pain intensity 
 
Chronic disabling pain* at 3–6 months  
High intensity pain versus non-high: 
Median LR (range) = 1·7 (1·1–3·7) 
Chronic disabling pain* at 12 months  
High intensity pain versus non-high: 
Median LR (range) = 1·3 (1·2–2·0) 
Systematic review 
including 8 longitudinal 
studies43 
 
 
 
Leg pain 
 
Chronic disabling pain* at 3–6 months  
Leg pain or radiculopathy versus no leg 
pain: Median LR(range) = 1.4 (1.1-1.7) 
Chronic disabling pain* at 12 months  
Leg pain or radiculopathy versus no leg 
pain: Median LR (range) = 1·4 (1·2–2·4) 
Systematic review 
including 10 
longitudinal studies 43 
Lifestyle factors 
Body mass  
 
 
Chronic disabling pain* at 3–6 months  
BMI >25 or >27 vs lower BMI:  
Median LR (range) = 0·91 (0·72–1·2) 
Chronic disabling pain* at 12 months  
Systematic review 
including 3 longitudinal 
studies43 
 
 46 
 
BMI >25 or >27 vs lower BMI: Median 
LR (range) = 0·84 (0·73–0·97) 
Smoking 
 
 
Chronic disabling pain* at 3–6 months  
Current smoker versus not:  
Median LR (range) = 1·2 (1·0–1·6) 
Systematic review 
including 3 longitudinal 
studies43 
Physical activity 
Disability 1–5 years 
Significant association in 1/5 studies (no 
effect size reported) 
Systematic review 
including 5 longitudinal 
studies116  
Psychological factors 
Depression 
Mixed outcomes 
Significant associations with poor 
outcome in 8/13 cohorts 
OR (range) = 1·04–2·47 
Systematic review 
including 13 
longitudinal studies117  
Catastrophising 
 
Disability at 3–12 months 
Significant association in 9/13 studies 
High catastrophizing:  
OR (95% CI) = 1·56 (1·05–2·33) 
0–6 scale: OR (95% CI) = 7·63 (3·70–
15·74)  
0–52 scale: OR (95% CI) = 1·05 (1·02–
1·08)  
Contribution to explained variance: 0–
23% 
Systematic review 
including 13 
longitudinal studies118  
Fear avoidance 
beliefs 
 
 
Pain or activity limitation at 3–12 
months 
No pooled estimates. 
No systematic association between fear 
avoidance and outcome. 
Poor work-related outcome at 3-12 
months  
Systematic review 
including 21 
longitudinal studies119 
 
 
 
 
 47 
 
Elevated fear avoidance: OR (range) = 
1·05 (95% CI 1·02–1·09) to 4·64 (95% CI 
1·57–13·71) (From four studies 
conducted by disability insurance 
companies) 
Chronic disabling pain* at 3-6 months  
High versus no fear avoidance: Median 
LR(range) = 2.2 (1.5-4.9) 
Chronic disabling pain* at 12 months  
Median LR (range) = 2.5(2·2–2·8) 
 
 
 
 
 
Systematic review 
including 4 longitudinal 
studies43 
Social factors 
Physical work loads 
 
Chronic disabling pain* at 3–6 months  
Higher versus lower physical work 
demands: Median LR (range) = 1·2 (1·1–
1·6) 
Chronic disabling pain* at 12 months  
Higher versus lower physical work 
demands: Median LR (range) = 1·4 (1·2 
–1·7) 
 
Systematic review 
including 4 longitudinal 
studies43 
 
Education 
 
Chronic disabling pain* at 3–6 months  
No college education or not college 
graduate vs more education: Median LR 
(range) = 1·0 (0.97–1·3) 
Chronic disabling pain* at 12 months  
No college education or not college 
graduate vs more education: Median LR 
(range) = 1.1 (1.1 –1·2) 
 
Systematic review 
including 10 
longitudinal studies43 
 
 
 
 48 
 
Compensation 
 
Chronic disabling pain* at 3–6 months  
Compensated work injury or sick leave 
vs not compensated work injury or sick 
leave: Median LR (range) = 1·3 (0.97–
2·7) 
Chronic disabling pain* at 12 months  
Compensated work injury or sick leave 
vs not compensated work injury or sick 
leave: Median LR (range) = 1.4 (1·2 –
1·8) 
 
Systematic review 
including 7 longitudinal 
studies43 
 
 
 
Work satisfaction 
 
Chronic disabling pain* at 3–6 months  
Less vs more work satisfaction: Median 
LR (range) = 1·1 (0.64–1·8) 
Chronic disabling pain* at 12 months  
Less vs more work satisfaction: Median 
LR (range) = 1.5 (1.3 –1.8) 
 
Systematic review 
including 5 longitudinal 
studies43 
 
 
 
LR: positive likelihood ratio, OR: odds ratio, HR: hazard ratio, CI: Confidence interval 
The information provided in the table provides a broad overview and was not based on a 
systematic review of the literature.  
 
 
 
 49 
 
Table S1. Estimates of total costs, direct medical costs, and indirect societal costs, as well 
as cost per person in the population expressed in 2015 USD*  
First authors, 
country 
Year 
Method 
Total 
societal 
cost 
(billion) 
Direct 
medical 
cot, % 
Indirect 
societal 
cost, %  
Total 
cost per 
person 
Direct 
cost per 
person 
Indirect 
cost per 
person 
Maniadakis, 
UK6 
1998 
Top down 
26.40 
15 
85 
449 
68 
381 
Rizzo;120Lou,121
USA 
1998 
Top down 
81.24 
47 
53 
308 
145 
163 
van Zundert,122 
Belgium 
1999 
Top down 
1.93 
16 
84 
189 
30 
159 
Ekman123, 
Sweden 
2001 
Top down 
2.93 
16 
84 
336 
54 
282 
Walker124, 
Australia 
2001 
Top down 
11.24 
11 
89 
583 
64 
518 
Weiser125, 
Switzerland  
2005 
Bottom 
up 
8.92 
38 
62 
1199 
455 
743 
Lambeek,57 
Netherlands 
2007 
Top down 
4.88 
12 
88 
300 
36 
264 
 
* For each study the reported total societal costs were inflation-adjusted to 2015 US dollars 
based on World Bank data, divided by the total population at time of data collection, to 
derive the total per person cost. Based on the reported fraction of direct and indirect costs, 
per-person direct and indirect costs were developed. 
 
 
 50 
 
Table S2. Relative percentage of health care costs across studies  
First author, 
country 
Year 
Inpatient 
care 
Diagnostic 
evaluations 
Outpatient 
care 
Physical 
therapy 
chiropractic, 
massage 
Prescription 
medication 
Rizzo,120 Lou,121  
USA 
1998 
38 
NR* 
56·0 
NR 
4·0 
Ekman,123 
Sweden 
2001 
12·0 
NR 
25·0 
55·0 
6·0 
Walker124, 
Australia 
2001 
20·0 
6·7 
17·4 
48·2 
7·5 
Weiser,125 
Switzerland  
2005 
37·0 
5·5 
24·9 
31·9 
1·5 
Labeek57, 
Netherlands 
2007 
21·0 
1·0 
25·0 
49·0 
4·0 
* Not reported 
 51 
 
Table S3. Performance and extent of validation of four low back pain prediction models 
Model name  
(Country of 
development, 
year) 
Örebro Musculoskeletal Pain 
Screening Questionnaire126 
(Sweden, 1998) 
STarT Back Screening Tool127 
(UK, 2008) 
The ‘Hancock Rule’ 128 
(Australia, 2009) 
PICKUP129 
(Australia, 2016) 
Number of items 
21 
9 
3 
5 
Concepts covered 
by predictors 
Pain intensity 
Pain frequency  
Episode duration  
Multi-site pain 
Activity limitation  
Perceived pain control 
Perceived risk of persistency  
Fear of movement 
Fear avoidance beliefs Anxiety 
Depression  
Sick leave 
Physical work exposures 
Work expectations 
Work satisfaction 
Sleep disturbed by pain 
Bothersome pain  
Leg pain  
Multi-site pain 
Activity limitation  
Fear avoidance beliefs  
Anxiety 
Depression  
Catastrophizing 
 
 
Pain intensity 
Episode duration  
Previous episodes 
Pain intensity  
Leg pain  
Depression 
Perceived risk  
Disability compensation 
Primary outcome 
in development 
sample 
Sick leave days during 6 months 
(0, 1-30, >30). 
 
High disability after 6 months 
(at least 7 points on the Roland 
Morris Disability Scale). 
Days to recovery from pain. 
Discrimination based on 
recovery status at 11 weeks.  
Non-recovery from pain after 3 
months (‘3 Mild’ to ‘6 Very 
Severe’ on a 6-point Likert 
scale). 
Predictive 
performance in 
development 
sample 
Cut-point 105 (scale 0–210): 
Specificity (identification of no 
sick leave): 0·75 
Sensitivity (1–30 days): 0·86 
Sensitivity (>30 days): 0·88 
No overall performance 
measure reported 
Sum scale (no cut-point): 
AUC (95% CI) =  0·92 (0·88–
0·97) 
AUC (95% CI) = 0·68 (0·57–0·79) 
AUC = 0·67 
Predictive 
performance in 
narrow validation 
sample* 
 
Cut-point 105 (scale 0-210): 
Specificity (identification of no 
sick leave): 0·81 
Sensitivity (1–30 days): 0·40 
Sensitivity (>30 days): 0·67 
AUC (95% CI) = 0·74 (0·64–0·84)  
 
Sum scale (no cut-point): 
AUC (95% CI) = 0·90 (0·88–0·93) 
AUC (95% CI) for 1 week 
recovery = 0·65 (0·60–0·70) 
 
AUC (95% CI) for 12 week 
recovery = 0·60 (0·56–0·64) 
AUC (95% CI) = 0·66 (0·63– 
0·69) 
Additional 
external 
validation of 
predictive 
performance 
External validations have been 
performed in: 
Australia, Canada, The 
Netherlands, Norway, New 
Zealand, France (2012)130 
Sweden (2012)131 
External validations have been 
performed in: 
 
UK (2012)134  
USA (2013)135Denmark (2013) 
Primary care136 
N/A 
N/A 
 52 
 
Country 
(publication year) 
China (2013)132 
Belgium (2012)130 
Switzerland (2016)133 
Turkey (2016)80 
 
[Additional translations and 
psychometric testing exist] 
Denmark (2014) secondary 
care137  
Canada (2015)138 
Denmark (2016) chiropractic 
care 139 
[Additional translations and 
psychometric testing exist] 
Predictive 
performance in 
external 
validation 
samples 
reporting Area 
Under the Curve 
Area Under the 
ROC Curve (95% 
CI) 
 
Cut-point 113: 
AUC (95%CI)= 0·66 (0·52–0·81) 
(6 months outcome, Turkey)  
Sum score: 
AUC (95%CI)= 0.80 (0·66–0·93) 
(6 months outcome, Norway) 
AUC (95%CI)= 0·72 (0·57–0·86) 
(12 months outcome, Norway) 
AUC (95%CI)= 0·69 (0·62–0·.76) 
(12-months outcome, China) 
AUC = 0·83 (6-months outcome, 
Belgium) 
 
Sum score: 
AUC (95%CI)= 0·69 (0·66–0·73)  
(6 months outcome, secondary 
care Denmark) 
AUC (95%CI) = 0·71 (0·66–0·77)  
(6 months outcome, primary 
care Denmark) 
Three risk group: 
AUC (95%CI)= 0·84 (0·69–1·00)  
(6 months outcome, Canada) 
AUC (95%CI)= 0·59 (0·55–0·63)  
(3-months outcome, Denmark 
chiropractic care) 
AUC (95%CI)= 0·.60 (0·56–0·64)  
(12months outcome, Denmark 
chiropractic care) 
N/A 
N/A 
*validation performed by the same research team and in the same setting or in a very 
similar setting in the same country 
 
 
 
 
 
 53 
 
 
Figure 1: Contributors to low back pain and disability 
The model includes key contributors to low back pain and disability but does not attempt 
to represent the complex interactions between different contributors. *Nociceptive input 
includes non-identifiable sources in non-specific low back pain, neurological sources (eg, 
radicular pain) and specific pathology (eg, fractures). 
 
 
   
 
Figure 2. Median prevalence of low back pain, with interquartile range, according to 
sex and midpoint of age group (reprinted with permission from Hoy et al).1  
 54 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 55 
 
Figure 3: Global burden of low back pain, in Disability-Adjusted Life Years (DALYs), by age 
group, for 1990 and 2015 (GBD 2015).41  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 56 
 
References 
 
1. 
Hoy D, Bain C, Williams G, March L, Brooks P, Blyth F, Woolf A, Vos T, Buchbinder R. 
 A systematic review of the global prevalence of low back pain. Arthritis Rheum 2012; 64: 2028-37. 
2. 
Kamper SJ, Henschke N, Hestbaek L, Dunn KM, Williams CM. Musculoskeletal pain in 
children and adolescents. Braz J Phys Ther 2016; 16: 10. 
3. 
Hartvigsen J, Christensen K, Frederiksen H. Back pain remains a common symptom in old 
age. a population-based study of 4486 Danish twins aged 70-102. Eur Spine J 2003; 12: 528-34. 
4. 
Global Burden of Disease, Injury Incidence, Prevalence Collaborators. Global, regional, and 
national incidence, prevalence, and years lived with disability for 310 diseases and injuries, 1990-
2015: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2015. Lancet 2016; 388: 1545-
602. 
5. 
Hoy DG, Smith E, Cross M, Sanchez-Riera L, Blyth FM, Buchbinder R, Woolf AD, Driscoll T, 
Brooks P, March LM. Reflecting on the global burden of musculoskeletal conditions: lessons learnt 
from the global burden of disease 2010 study and the next steps forward. Ann Rheum Dis 2015; 74: 
4-7. 
6. 
Maniadakis N, Gray A. The economic burden of back pain in the UK. Pain 2000; 84: 95-103. 
7. 
Anema JR, Schellart AJ, Cassidy JD, Loisel P, Veerman TJ, van der Beek AJ. Can cross country 
differences in return-to-work after chronic occupational back pain be explained? An exploratory 
analysis on disability policies in a six country cohort study. J Occup Rehabil 2009; 19: 419-26. 
8. 
Deyo RA, Mirza SK, Turner JA, Martin BI. Overtreating chronic back pain: time to back off? J 
Am Board Fam Med 2009; 22: 62-8. 
9. 
Foster N, Maher C, Anema JR, Cherkin D, Chou R, Cohen SP, Gross DP, Ferreira P, Fritz J, Koes 
B, Peul WC, Turner JA. Prevention and treatment of low back pain: evidence, challenges, and 
promising directions. Lancet 20xx; xx: xx-xx. 
10. 
Buchbinder R, van Tulder M, Öberg B, Costa LM, Woolf, A, Schoene M, Croft P. Low back 
pain: A call for action. Lancet 20xx;xx: xx-xx. 
11. 
Dionne CE, Dunn KM, Croft PR, Nachemson AL, Buchbinder R, Walker BF, Wyatt M, Cassidy 
JD, Rossignol M, Leboeuf-Yde C, Hartvigsen J, Leino-Arjas P, Latza U, Reis S, Gil Del Real MT, Kovacs 
FM, Oberg B, Cedraschi C, Bouter LM, Koes BW, Picavet HS, van Tulder MW, Burton K, Foster NE, 
Macfarlane GJ, Thomas E, Underwood M, Waddell G, Shekelle P, Volinn E, Von Korff M. A consensus 
approach toward the standardization of back pain definitions for use in prevalence studies. Spine 
2008; 33: 95-103. 
12. 
Maher C, Underwood M, Buchbinder R. Non-specific low back pain. Lancet 2017; 389: 736-
47. 
13. 
Hartvigsen J, Natvig B, Ferreira M. Is it all about a pain in the back? Best Pract Res Clin 
Rheum 2013; 27: 613-23. 
14. 
Hancock MJ, Maher CG, Latimer J, Spindler MF, McAuley JH, Laslett M, Bogduk N. Systematic 
review of tests to identify the disc, SIJ or facet joint as the source of low back pain. Eur Spine J 2007; 
16: 1539-50. 
15. 
Maas ET, Ostelo RW, Niemisto L, Jousimaa J, Hurri H, Malmivaara A, van Tulder M. 
Radiofrequency denervation for chronic low back pain. The Cochrane database of systematic reviews 
2015; (10): CD008572. 
16. 
Brinjikji W, Luetmer PH, Comstock B, Bresnahan BW, Chen LE, Deyo RA, Halabi S, Turner JA, 
Avins AL, James K, Wald JT, Kallmes DF, Jarvik JG. Systematic literature review of imaging features of 
spinal degeneration in asymptomatic populations. Am J Neuroradiol 2015; 36: 811-6. 
17. 
Brinjikji W, Diehn FE, Jarvik JG, Carr CM, Mallmes DF, Murad MH, Luetmer PH. MRI Findings 
of Disc Degeneration are More Prevalent in Adults with Low Back Pain than in Asymptomatic 
Controls: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Am J Neuroradio 2015; 36: 2394-9. 
18. 
Steffens D, Hancock MJ, Maher CG, Williams C, Jensen TS, Latimer J. Does magnetic 
resonance imaging predict future low back pain? A systematic review. Eur J Pain 2014; 18: 755-65. 
 57 
 
19. 
Jarvik JG, Gold LS, Comstock BA, Heagerty PJ, Rundell SD, Turner JA, Avins AL, Bauer Z, 
Bresnahan, BW, Friedly JL, James K, Kessler L, Nedeljkovic SS, Nerenz DR, Shi X, Sullivan SD, Chan L, 
Schwalb JM, Deyo RA. . Association of early imaging for back pain with clinical outcomes in older 
adults. J Am Med Ass 2015; 313: 1143-53. 
20. 
Wong JJ, Cote P, Sutton DA, Randhawa K, Yu H, Varatharajan S, Goldgrub R, Nordin M, Gross 
DP, Shearer HM, Carroll LJ, Stern PJ, Ameis A, Southerst D, Mior S, Stupar M, Varatharajan T, Taylor-
Vaisey, A. Clinical practice guidelines for the noninvasive management of low back pain: A 
systematic review by the Ontario Protocol for Traffic Injury Management (OPTIMa) Collaboration. 
Eur J Pain 2016; 21: 201-16. 
21. 
Stochkendahl MJ, Kjaer P, Hartvigsen J, Kongsted A, Aaboe J, Andersen M, Andersen MØ, 
Fournier G, Højgaard B, Jensen MB, Jensen LD, Karbo T, Kirkeskov L, Melbye M, Morsel-Carlsen L, 
Nordsteen J, Palsson TS, Rasti Z, Silbye PF, Steiness MZ, Tarp S, Vaagholt M. National Clinical 
Guidelines for non-surgical treatment of patients with recent onset low back pain or lumbar 
radiculopathy. Eur Spine J 2017; Epub ahead of print 
22. 
Bernstein IA, Malik Q, Carville S, Ward S. Low back pain and sciatica: summary of NICE 
guidance. BMJ 2017; 356: i6748. 
23. 
Qaseem A, Wilt TJ, McLean RM, Forciea MA, Clinical Guidelines Committee of the American 
College of P. Noninvasive Treatments for Acute, Subacute, and Chronic Low Back Pain: A Clinical 
Practice Guideline From the American College of Physicians. Ann Intern Med 2017; 166: 514-30. 
24. 
Lin CW, Verwoerd AJ, Maher CG, Verhagen AP, Pinto RZ, Luijsterburg PA, Hancock, M. J. How 
is radiating leg pain defined in randomized controlled trials of conservative treatments in primary 
care? A systematic review. Eur J Pain 2014; 18: 455-64. 
25. 
Verwoerd AJ, Mens J, El Barzouhi A, Peul WC, Koes BW, Verhagen AP. A diagnostic study in 
patients with sciatica establishing the importance of localization of worsening of pain during 
coughing, sneezing and straining to assess nerve root compression on MRI. Eur Spine J; 25: 1389-92. 
26. 
Kongsted A, Kent P, Jensen TS, Albert H, Manniche C. Prognostic implications of the Quebec 
Task Force classification of back-related leg pain: an analysis of longitudinal routine clinical data. 
BMC Musculoskelet Dis 2013; 14: 171. 
27. 
Chiu CC, Chuang TY, Chang KH, Wu CH, Lin PW, Hsu WY. The probability of spontaneous 
regression of lumbar herniated disc: a systematic review. Clin Rehabil 2015; 29: 184-95. 
28. 
Chad DA. Lumbar spinal stenosis. Neurol Clin 2007; 25: 407-18. 
29. 
Tomkins-Lane C, Melloh M, Lurie J, et al. Consensus on the Clinical Diagnosis of Lumbar 
Spinal Stenosis: Results of an International Delphi Study. Spine 2016; 41: 1239-46. 
30. 
Henschke N, Maher CG, Refshauge KM, Herbert RD, Cumming RG, Bleasel J, York J, Das A, 
McAuley JH. Prevalence of and screening for serious spinal pathology in patients presenting to 
primary care settings with acute low back pain. Arthritis Rheum 2009; 60: 3072-80. 
31. 
Galukande M, Muwazi S, Mugisa DB. Aetiology of low back pain in Mulago Hospital, Uganda. 
Afr Health Sci 2005; 5: 164-7. 
32. 
Downie A, Williams CM, Henschke N, et al. Red flags to screen for malignancy and fracture in 
patients with low back pain: systematic review. BMJ 2013; 347: f7095. 
33. 
Underwood M, Buchbinder R. Red flags for back pain. BMJ 2013; 347: f7432. 
34. 
Amarican Academy of Family Physicians. Imaging for Low Back Pain 2017. 
http://www.aafp.org/patient-care/clinical-recommendations/all/cw-back-pain.html. Accessed 1st 
November 2017.  
35. 
Calvo-Munoz I, Gomez-Conesa A, Sanchez-Meca J. Prevalence of low back pain in children 
and adolescents: a meta-analysis. BMC Pediatrics 2013; 13: 14. 
36. 
Louw QA, Morris LD, Grimmer-Somers K. The prevalence of low back pain in Africa: a 
systematic review. BMC Musculoskelet Disord 2007; 8: 105. 
37. 
Lemeunier N, Leboeuf-Yde C, Gagey O. The natural course of low back pain: a systematic 
critical literature review. Chiropract Man Ther 2012; 20: 33. 
 58 
 
38. 
Hoy D, March L, Brooks P, Blyth F, Woolf A, Bain C, Williams G, Smith E, Vos T, Barendregt J, 
Murray C, Burstein R, Buchbinder R. . The global burden of low back pain: estimates from the Global 
Burden of Disease 2010 study. Ann Rheum Dis 2014; 73: 968-74. 
39. 
Jackson T, Thomas S, Stabile V, Shotwell M, Han X, McQueen K. A Systematic Review and 
Meta-Analysis of the Global Burden of Chronic Pain Without Clear Etiology in Low- and Middle-
Income Countries: Trends in Heterogeneous Data and a Proposal for New Assessment Methods. 
Anesth Analg 2016; 123: 739-48. 
40. 
Garcia JB, Hernandez-Castro JJ, Nunez RG, Pazos MA, Aguirre JO, Jreige A, Delgado W, 
Serpentegui M, Berenguel M, Cantemir C. Prevalence of low back pain in Latin America: a systematic 
literature review. Pain Phys 2014; 17: 379-91. 
41. 
Global Burden of Disease 2015 DALYs and HALE Collaborators. Global, regional, and national 
disability-adjusted life-years (DALYs) for 315 diseases and injuries and healthy life expectancy (HALE), 
1990-2015: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2015. Lancet 2016; 388: 
1603-58. 
42. 
Global Burden of Disease 2015 DALYs and HALE Collaborators. Global, regional, and national 
disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) for 306 diseases and injuries and healthy life expectancy (HALE) 
for 188 countries, 1990-2013: quantifying the epidemiological transition. Lancet 2015; 386: 2145-91. 
43. 
Chou R, Shekelle P. Will this patient develop persistent disabling low back pain? JAMA 2010; 
303: 1295-302. 
44. 
Hoy D, March L, Brooks P, Woolf A, Blyth F, Vos T, Buchbinder R. Measuring the global 
burden of low back pain. Best Pract Res Clin Rheum 2010; 24: 155-65. 
45. 
Lucchini RG, London L. Global occupational health: current challenges and the need for 
urgent action. Ann Glob Health 2014; 80: 251-6. 
46. 
Jelsma J, Mielke J, Powell G, De Weerdt W, De Cock P. Disability in an urban black 
community in Zimbabwe. Disabil Rehabil 2002; 24: 851-9. 
47. 
Fabunmi AA, Aba SO, Odunaiya NA. Prevalence of low back pain among peasant farmers in a 
rural community in South West Nigeria. Afr J Med Med Sci 2005; 34: 259-62. 
48. 
Bevan S, Quadrello T, McGee R, Mahdon M, Vavrovsky A, Barham L. Fit For Work? 
Musculoskeletal Disorders in the European Workforce: Fit For Work Europe.: The Work Foundation; 
2009. 
49. 
Ihlebaek C, Hansson TH, Laerum E, et al. Prevalence of low back pain and sickness absence: a 
"borderline" study in Norway and Sweden. Scand J Public Health 2006; 34: 555-8. 
50. 
US Bone & Joint Initiative. The Burden of Musculoskeletal Diseases in the United States. 
2014. http://www.boneandjointburden.org/about/rights (accessed 1st November 2017). 
51. 
Volinn E, Nishikitani M, Volinn W, Nakamura Y, Yano E. Back pain claim rates in Japan and 
the United States: framing the puzzle. Spine 2005; 30: 697-704.. 
52. 
Hondras M, Hartvigsen J, Myburgh C, Johannessen H. Everyday burden of musculoskeletal 
conditions among villagers in rural Botswana: A focused ethnography. J Rehabil Med 2016; 48: 449-
55. 
53. 
Froud R, Patterson S, Eldridge S, et al. A systematic review and meta-synthesis of the impact 
of low back pain on people's lives. BMC Musculoskelet Disord 2014; 15: 50. 
54. 
MacNeela P, Doyle C, O'Gorman D, Ruane N, McGuire BE. Experiences of chronic low back 
pain: a meta-ethnography of qualitative research. Health Psychol Rev 2015; 9: 63-82. 
55. 
Schofield D, Kelly S, Shrestha R, Callander E, Passey M, Percival R. The impact of back 
problems on retirement wealth. Pain 2012; 153: 203-10. 
56. 
Hashemi L, Webster BS, Clancy EA. Trends in disability duration and cost of workers' 
compensation low back pain claims (1988-1996). J Occup Environ Med 1998; 40: 1110-9. 
57. 
Lambeek LC, van Tulder MW, Swinkels IC, Koppes LL, Anema JR, van Mechelen W. The trend 
in total cost of back pain in The Netherlands in the period 2002 to 2007. Spine 2011; 36: 1050-8. 
 59 
 
58. 
Hansson TH, Hansson EK. The effects of common medical interventions on pain, back 
function, and work resumption in patients with chronic low back pain: A prospective 2-year cohort 
study in six countries. Spine 2000; 25: 3055-64. 
59. 
Jordan KP, Kadam UT, Hayward R, Porcheret M, Young C, Croft P. Annual consultation 
prevalence of regional musculoskeletal problems in primary care: an observational study. BMC 
Musculoskelet Disord 2010; 11: 144 
60. 
Mash B, Fairall L, Adejayan O, et al. A morbidity survey of South African primary care. PLoS 
One 2012; 7: e32358. 
61. 
Wolsko P, Ware L, Kutner J, et al. Alternative/complementary medicine: wider usage than 
generally appreciated. J Altern Complement Med 2000; 6: 321-6. 
62. 
Wolsko PM, Eisenberg DM, Davis RB, Kessler R, Phillips RS. Patterns and perceptions of care 
for treatment of back and neck pain: results of a national survey. Spine 2003; 28: 292-7. 
63. 
Dunn KM, Hestbaek L, Cassidy JD. Low back pain across the life course. Best Pract Res Clin 
Rheum 2013; 27: 591-600. 
64. 
Kongsted A, Kent P, Axen I, Downie AS, Dunn KM. What have we learned from ten years of 
trajectory research in low back pain? BMC Musculoskelet Dis 2016; 17: 220. 
65. 
da C Menezes Costa L, Maher CG, Hancock MJ, McAuley JH, Herbert RD, Costa LO. The 
prognosis of acute and persistent low-back pain: a meta-analysis. CMAJ 2012; 184: E613-24. 
66. 
Itz CJ, Geurts JW, van Kleef M, Nelemans P. Clinical course of non-specific low back pain: a 
systematic review of prospective cohort studies set in primary care. Eur J Pain 2013; 17: 5-15. 
67. 
da Silva T, Mills K, Brown BT, Herbert RD, Maher CG, Hancock MJ. Risk of Recurrence of Low 
Back Pain: A Systematic Review. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 2017; 47: 305-13. 
68. 
Taylor JB, Goode AP, George SZ, Cook CE. Incidence and risk factors for first-time incident 
low back pain: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Spine J 2014; 14: 2299-319. 
69. 
Ferreira PH, Beckenkamp P, Maher CG, Hopper JL, Ferreira ML. Nature or nurture in low 
back pain? Results of a systematic review of studies based on twin samples. Eur J Pain 2013; 17: 957-
71. 
70. 
Power C, Frank J, Hertzman C, Schierhout G, Li L. Predictors of low back pain onset in a 
prospective British study. Am J Public Health 2001; 91: 1671-8. 
71. 
Currie SR, Wang J. More data on major depression as an antecedent risk factor for first onset 
of chronic back pain. Psychol Med 2005; 35: 1275-82. 
72. 
Shiri R, Karppinen J, Leino-Arjas P, Solovieva S, Viikari-Juntura E. The association between 
smoking and low back pain: a meta-analysis. Am J Med 2010; 123: 87 e7-35. 
73. 
Zhang TT, Liu Z, Liu YL, Zhao JJ, Liu DW, Tian QB. Obesity as a Risk Factor for Low Back Pain: A 
Meta-Analysis. Clin Spine Surg 2016: Epub ahead of print. 
74. 
Shiri R, Karppinen J, Leino-Arjas P, Solovieva S, Viikari-Juntura E. The association between 
obesity and low back pain: a meta-analysis. Am J Epidemiol 2010; 171: 135-54. 
75. 
Shiri R, Falah-Hassani K. Does leisure time physical activity protect against low back pain? 
Systematic review and meta-analysis of 36 prospective cohort studies. Br J sports Med 2017; 51: 
1410-18. 
76. 
Hartvigsen J, Nielsen J, Kyvik KO, et al. Heritability of spinal pain and consequences of spinal 
pain: a comprehensive genetic epidemiologic analysis using a population-based sample of 15,328 
twins ages 20-71 years. Arthritis Rheum 2009; 61: 1343-51. 
77. 
Steffens D, Ferreira ML, Latimer J, et al. What triggers an episode of acute low back pain? A 
case-crossover study. Arthritis Care Res 2015; 67: 403-10. 
78. 
Heneweer H, Staes F, Aufdemkampe G, van Rijn M, Vanhees L. Physical activity and low back 
pain: a systematic review of recent literature. Eur Spine J 2011; 20: 826-45. 
79. 
Kwon BK, Roffey DM, Bishop PB, Dagenais S, Wai EK. Systematic review: occupational 
physical activity and low back pain. Occup Med 2011; 61: 541-8. 
 60 
 
80. 
Oncu J, Iliser R, Kuran B. Cross-cultural adaptation of the Orebro Musculoskeletal Pain 
Questionnaire among Turkish workers with low back pain. J Back Musculoskelet Rehabil 2016; 29: 
135-43. 
81. 
Goubert D, Oosterwijck JV, Meeus M, Danneels L. Structural Changes of Lumbar Muscles in 
Non-specific Low Back Pain: A Systematic Review. Pain Phys 2016; 19: E985-E1000. 
82. 
Sions JM, Elliott JM, Pohlig RT, Hicks GE. Trunk Muscle Characteristics of the Multifidi, 
Erector Spinae, Psoas, and Quadratus Lumborum in Older Adults With and Without Chronic Low 
Back Pain. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 2017; 47: 173-9. 
83. 
Hodges PW, Richardson CA. Inefficient muscular stabilization of the lumbar spine associated 
with low back pain. A motor control evaluation of transversus abdominis. Spine 1996; 21: 2640-50. 
84. 
Dubois JD, Abboud J, St-Pierre C, Piche M, Descarreaux M. Neuromuscular adaptations 
predict functional disability independently of clinical pain and psychological factors in patients with 
chronic non-specific low back pain. J Electromyogra Kinesiol 2014; 24: 550-7. 
85. 
Campbell P, Bishop A, Dunn KM, Main CJ, Thomas E, Foster NE. Conceptual overlap of 
psychological constructs in low back pain. Pain 2013; 154: 1783-91. 
86. 
Crombez G, Eccleston C, Van Damme S, Vlaeyen JW, Karoly P. Fear-avoidance model of 
chronic pain: the next generation. Clinical J Pain 2012; 28: 475-83. 
87. 
Lee H, Hubscher M, Moseley GL, et al. How does pain lead to disability? A systematic review 
and meta-analysis of mediation studies in people with back and neck pain. Pain 2015; 156: 988-97. 
88. 
Jackson T, Wang Y, Wang Y, Fan H. Self-efficacy and chronic pain outcomes: a meta-analytic 
review. J Pain 2014; 15: 800-14. 
89. 
Frost H, Klaber Moffett JA, Moser JS, Fairbank JC. Randomised controlled trial for evaluation 
of fitness programme for patients with chronic low back pain. BMJ 1995; 310: 151-4. 
90. 
Lacey RJ, Belcher J, Croft PR. Does life course socio-economic position influence chronic 
disabling pain in older adults? A general population study. Eur J Public Health 2013; 23: 534-40. 
91. 
Shmagel A, Foley R, Ibrahim H. Epidemiology of chronic low back pain in US adults: National 
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 2009-2010. Arthritis Care Res 2016; 68: 1688-94. 
92. 
Dionne CE, Von Korff M, Koepsell TD, Deyo RA, Barlow WE, Checkoway H. Formal education 
and back pain: a review. J Epidemiol Community health 2001; 55: 455-68. 
93. 
Roussel NA, Nijs J, Meeus M, Mylius V, Fayt C, Oostendorp R. Central sensitization and 
altered central pain processing in chronic low back pain: fact or myth? Clin J Pain 2013; 29: 625-38. 
94. 
Kregel J, Meeus M, Malfliet A, et al. Structural and functional brain abnormalities in chronic 
low back pain: A systematic review. Semin Arthritis Rheum 2015; 45: 229-37. 
95. 
Kent PM, Keating JL. Can we predict poor recovery from recent-onset nonspecific low back 
pain? A systematic review. Man Ther 2008; 13: 12-28. 
96. 
Kalichman L, Li L, Kim DH, et al. Facet joint osteoarthritis and low back pain in the 
community-based population. Spine 2008; 33: 2560-5. 
97. 
Maas ET, Juch JN, Ostelo RW, et al. Systematic review of patient history and physical 
examination to diagnose chronic low back pain originating from the facet joints. Eur J Pain 2017; 21: 
403-14. 
98. 
Dudli S, Fields AJ, Samartzis D, Karppinen J, Lotz JC. Pathobiology of Modic changes. Eur 
Spine J 2016; 25: 3723-34. 
99. 
Dudli S, Liebenberg E, Magnitsky S, Miller S, Demir-Deviren S, Lotz JC. Propionibacterium 
acnes infected intervertebral discs cause vertebral bone marrow lesions consistent with Modic 
changes. J Orthop Res 2016; 34: 1427-55. 
100. 
Maatta JH, Karppinen J, Paananen M, et al. Refined Phenotyping of Modic Changes: Imaging 
Biomarkers of Prolonged Severe Low Back Pain and Disability. Medicine 2016; 95: e3495. 
101. 
Schousboe JT. Epidemiology of Vertebral Fractures. J Clin Densitom 2016; 19: 8-22. 
102. 
Stolwijk C, van Onna M, Boonen A, van Tubergen A. The global prevalence of 
spondyloarthritis: A systematic review and meta-regression analysis. Arthritis Care Res 2015; 68: 
1320-31. 
 61 
 
103. 
Rudwaleit M, van der Heijde D, Landewe R, et al. The development of Assessment of 
SpondyloArthritis international Society classification criteria for axial spondyloarthritis (part II): 
validation and final selection. Ann Rheum Dis 2009; 68: 777-83. 
104. 
Sieper J, van der Heijde D. Review: Nonradiographic axial spondyloarthritis: new definition of 
an old disease? Arthritis Rheum 2013; 65: 543-51. 
105. 
Arnbak B, Hendricks O, Horslev-Petersen K, et al. The discriminative value of inflammatory 
back pain in patients with persistent low back pain. Scand J Rheumatol 2016; 45: 321-8. 
106. 
Poddubnyy D, van Tubergen A, Landewe R, Sieper J, van der Heijde D. Defining an optimal 
referral strategy for patients with a suspicion of axial spondyloarthritis: what is really important? 
Ann Rheum Dis 2015; 74: e69. 
107. 
van Hoeven L, Luime J, Han H, Vergouwe Y, Weel A. Identifying axial spondyloarthritis in 
Dutch primary care patients, ages 20-45 years, with chronic low back pain. Arthritis Care Res 2014; 
66: 446-53. 
108. 
Lewandrowski K, Anderson M, McLain R. Tumors of the Spine. In: Herkowitz H, Garfin S, 
Eismont F, Bell G, Balderston R, eds. Rothman-Simeone the spine. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier 
Sounders; 2011: 1480–512. 
109. 
Schoenfeld AJ, Wahlquist TC. Mortality, complication risk, and total charges after the 
treatment of epidural abscess. Spine J 2015; 15: 249-55. 
110. 
Fantoni M, Trecarichi EM, Rossi B, Mazzotta V, Di Giacomo G, Nasto LA, Di Meco E, Pola E. 
Epidemiological and clinical features of pyogenic spondylodiscitis. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci 2012; 
16 Suppl 2: 2-7. 
111. 
Akiyama T, Chikuda H, Yasunaga H, Horiguchi H, Fushimi K, Saita K. Incidence and risk factors 
for mortality of vertebral osteomyelitis: a retrospective analysis using the Japanese diagnosis 
procedure combination database. BMJ Open 2013; 3: e002412. 
112. 
Trecarichi EM, Di Meco E, Mazzotta V, Fantoni M. Tuberculous spondylodiscitis: 
epidemiology, clinical features, treatment, and outcome. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci 2012; 16 Suppl 
2: 58-72. 
113. 
Kehrer M, Pedersen C, Jensen TG, Lassen AT. Increasing incidence of pyogenic 
spondylodiscitis: a 14-year population-based study. J Infect 2014; 68: 313-20. 
114. 
Lavy C, James A, Wilson-MacDonald J, Fairbank J. Cauda equina syndrome. BMJ 2009; 338: 
b936. 
115. 
Abrahm JL. Assessment and treatment of patients with malignant spinal cord compression. J 
Support Oncol 2004; 2: 377: 88-91. 
116. 
Hendrick P, Milosavljevic S, Hale L, et al. The relationship between physical activity and low 
back pain outcomes: a systematic review of observational studies. Eur Spine J 2011; 20: 464-74. 
117. 
Pinheiro MB, Ferreira ML, Refshauge K, Maher CG, Ordonana JR, Andrade TB, Tsathas A, 
Ferreira PH. Symptoms of depression as a prognostic factor for low back pain: a systematic review. 
Spine J 2016; 16: 105-16. 
118. 
Wertli MM, Eugster R, Held U, Steurer J, Kofmehl R, Weiser S. Catastrophizing-a prognostic 
factor for outcome in patients with low back pain: a systematic review. Spine J 2014; 14: 2639-57. 
119. 
Wertli MM, Rasmussen-Barr E, Weiser S, Bachmann LM, Brunner F. The role of fear 
avoidance beliefs as a prognostic factor for outcome in patients with nonspecific low back pain: a 
systematic review. Spine J 2014; 14: 816-36 e4. 
120. 
Rizzo JA, Abbott TA, 3rd, Berger ML. The labor productivity effects of chronic backache in the 
United States. Med Care 1998; 36: 1471-88. 
121. 
Luo X, Pietrobon R, Sun SX, Liu GG, Hey L. Estimates and patterns of direct health care 
expenditures among individuals with back pain in the United States. Spine 2004; 29: 79-86. 
122. 
van Zundert J, van Kleef M. Low back pain: from algorithm to cost-effectiveness? Pain Pract 
2005; 5: 179-89. 
123. 
Ekman M, Johnell O, Lidgren L. The economic cost of low back pain in Sweden in 2001. Acta 
Orthop 2005; 76: 275-84. 
 62 
 
124. 
Walker BF, Muller R, Grant WD. Low back pain in Australian adults: the economic burden. 
Asia Pac J Public Health 2003; 15: 79-87. 
125. 
Wieser S, Horisberger B, Schmidhauser S, et al. Cost of low back pain in Switzerland in 2005. 
Eur J Health Econ 2011; 12: 455-67. 
126. 
Linton SJ, Hallden K. Can we screen for problematic back pain? A screening questionnaire for 
predicting outcome in acute and subacute back pain. Clin J Pain 1998; 14: 209-15. 
127. 
Hill JC, Dunn KM, Lewis M, et al. A primary care back pain screening tool: identifying patient 
subgroups for initial treatment. Arthritis Rheum 2008; 59: 632-41. 
128. 
Hancock MJ, Maher CG, Latimer J, Herbert RD, McAuley JH. Can rate of recovery be 
predicted in patients with acute low back pain? Development of a clinical prediction rule. Eur J Pain 
2009; 13: 51-5. 
129. 
Traeger AC, Henschke N, Hubscher M, et al. Estimating the Risk of Chronic Pain: 
Development and Validation of a Prognostic Model (PICKUP) for Patients with Acute Low Back Pain. 
PLoS medicine 2016; 13: e1002019. 
130. 
Nonclercq O, Berquin A. Predicting chronicity in acute back pain: validation of a French 
translation of the Orebro Musculoskeletal Pain Screening Questionnaire. Ann Phys Rehabil Med 
2012; 55: 263-78 
131. 
Sattelmayer M, Lorenz T, Roder C, Hilfiker R. Predictive value of the Acute Low Back Pain 
Screening Questionnaire and the Orebro Musculoskeletal Pain Screening Questionnaire for 
persisting problems. Eur Spine J 2012; 21 Suppl 6: S773-84. 
132. 
Law RK, Lee EW, Law SW, Chan BK, Chen PP, Szeto GP. The predictive validity of OMPQ on 
the rehabilitation outcomes for patients with acute and subacute non-specific LBP in a Chinese 
population. J Occup Rehabil 2013; 23: 361-70. 
133. 
Hilfiker R, Knutti IA, Raval-Roland B, Rivier G, Crombez G, Opsommer E. Validity and 
responsiveness of the French version of the Orebro Musculoskeletal Pain Screening Questionnaire in 
chronic low back pain. Eur Spine J 2016; 25; 2741-9. 
134. 
Field J, Newell D. Relationship between STarT Back Screening Tool and prognosis for low 
back pain patients receiving spinal manipulative therapy. Chiropr Man Therap 2012; 20: 17. 
135. 
Beneciuk JM, Bishop MD, Fritz JM, et al. The STarT back screening tool and individual 
psychological measures: evaluation of prognostic capabilities for low back pain clinical outcomes in 
outpatient physical therapy settings. Phys Ther 2013; 93: 321-33. 
136. 
Morso L, Kent P, Albert HB, Hill JC, Kongsted A, Manniche C. The predictive and external 
validity of the STarT Back Tool in Danish primary care. Eur Spine J 2013; 22: 1859-67. 
137. 
Morso L, Kent P, Manniche C, Albert HB. The predictive ability of the STarT Back Screening 
Tool in a Danish secondary care setting. Eur Spine J 2014; 23: 120-8. 
138. 
Page I, Abboud J, J OS, Laurencelle L, Descarreaux M. Chronic low back pain clinical 
outcomes present higher associations with the STarT Back Screening Tool than with physiologic 
measures: a 12-month cohort study. BMC Musculoskel Dis 2015; 16: 201. 
139. 
Kongsted A, Andersen CH, Hansen MM, Hestbaek L. Prediction of outcome in patients with 
low back pain--A prospective cohort study comparing clinicians' predictions with those of the Start 
Back Tool. Man Ther 2016; 21: 120-7. 
 
