 Personal Viewpoint
Liver Allocation to Non-U.S. Citizen Non-U.S.
Residents: An Ethical Framework for a Last-in-Line
Approach
J. A. Hartsock1,2,3, S. S. Ivy2,3 and
P. R. Helft2,3,4,5,*
1Indiana University School of Liberal Arts, Indianapolis, IN
2Indiana University Health, Indianapolis, IN
3Charles Warren Fairbanks Center for Medical Ethics,
Indianapolis, IN
4Indiana University-Purdue University at Indianapolis,
Indianapolis, IN
5Department of Medicine, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN
*Corresponding author: Paul R. Helft, phelft@iu.edu
The incidence of non-U.S. citizen non-U.S. resident
patients coming to the United States specifically for
deceased donor liver transplantation raises com-
pelling ethical questions that require careful consid-
eration. The inclusion of these often financially and/
or socially privileged patients in the pool of potential
candidates for an absolutely scarce and life-saving
liver transplant may exacerbate disparities already
existing in deceased donor liver allocation. In addi-
tion, their inclusion on organ transplant waiting lists
conflicts with recognized ethical principles of justice
and reciprocity. Moreover, preliminary data suggest
that public awareness of this practice could discour-
age organ donation, thereby worsening an already
profound supply–demand gulf. Finally, U.S. organ
allocation policies and statutes are out of step with
recently promulgated international transplant guide-
lines, which prioritize self-sufficiency of organ pro-
grams. This article analyzes each of these ethical
conflicts within the context of deceased donor liver
transplantation and recommends policy changes that
align the United States with international practices
that discourage this scenario.
Abbreviations: DDL, deceased donor liver; DDLT, de-
ceased donor liver transplantation; MELD, Model for
End-Stage
Liver
Disease;
NCNR,
non-U.S.
citizen
non-U.S. resident; NCNRtx, non-U.S. citizen non-U.S.
resident in the United States solely for purposes of
transplantation; NOTA, National Organ Transplant
Act of 1984; NRA, nonresident alien; OPTN, Organ
Procurement and Transplantation Network; UNOS,
United Network for Organ Sharing
Received 21 April 2015, revised 06 November 2015
and accepted for publication 22 November 2015
Introduction
The practice of providing organ transplant services to
patients coming to the United States solely for deceased
donor liver transplantation (DDLT) raises intriguing and
consequential ethical questions. These patients would
often otherwise lack access to transplantation services
for reasons such as the poverty of their home countries
or deeply held cultural or religious beliefs regarding organ
donation. The provision of care to these patients con-
forms to long-established U.S. norms of international
medical relief and accommodation of individual ethnic
and religious practices. At the same time, the supply of
donor organs in the United States, particularly deceased
donor livers (DDLs), is a mere fraction of that required to
meet the needs of U.S. residents awaiting transplanta-
tion, raising ethical questions about the practice.
The Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network
(OPTN) has not ignored this troubling dilemma. In March
2012, OPTN restructured its citizenship data classifica-
tions as part of an effort to better understand those
patients coming to the United States solely for purposes
of transplantation (1). To do this, OPTN created two new
citizenship categories: “Non-US Citizen/Non-US Resident,
Patient was in the US for a reason other than a trans-
plant” and “Non-US Citizen/Non-US Resident, Patient
was in the US specifically for the purpose of a trans-
plant” (NCNRtx) (1).
This reclassification was followed by the September
2012 revision to former OPTN Policy 6.0 (now Policy 17)
on international organ transplantation. Policy 17 removes
the 5% audit trigger pertaining to organ transplants per-
formed in patients who are neither citizens nor residents
of the United States (non-U.S. citizen non-U.S. residents
[NCNRs]) (2); however, it requires transplant centers to
report deceased donor transplants performed in NCNRs,
including NCNRtx patients (1,2). Although the data are
scant, owing to the recent implementation of the policy
revisions, the past 2 years (along with examinations of
the broader data regarding the prior classification of non-
resident alien [NRA] patients) have revealed a small, gen-
erally socioeconomically advantaged group of persons
traveling to the United States solely to obtain organ
transplantation (3–5).
1681
© Copyright 2016 The American Society of Transplantation
and the American Society of Transplant Surgeons
doi: 10.1111/ajt.13674
American Journal of Transplantation 2016; 16: 1681–1687
Wiley Periodicals Inc.
 This paper reexamines existing U.S. transplantation poli-
cies and law pertaining specifically to the allocation of
DDLT to NCNRtx patients and identifies conflicts with
both accepted ethical principles and recent international
recommendations. The authors limit this discussion pri-
marily to DDLT for three reasons: (i) Among NCNR
patients who received deceased donor transplantation in
the United States between 2013 and 2014 (the first
2 years after the policy revisions), a significantly higher
number were in the United States for the sole purpose
of obtaining a transplant (6); (ii) a higher number and per-
centage of NCNRtx patients are waiting for DDLT than
for other organs (7); and (iii) at nearly 20% (8), the 2013
waitlist mortality rate for DDLT candidates is the second
highest of any organ waitlisted (9). Consequently, DDLT
presents a picture of absolute scarcity of available DDLs
such that patients die waiting for organs. Accordingly,
although similarities undoubtedly exist across other organ
transplant scenarios, an examination of NCNRtx patients
seeking DDLT is particularly important.
In this paper, we argue for last-in-line allocation of DDLT
to NCNRtx patients, premised on three important consid-
erations. First, the inclusion of NCNRtx patients in the
pool of DDLT recipients may augment existing disparities
within the U.S. organ transplantation system. Second,
ethical principles of reciprocity and justice are not ade-
quately served by current policies and practices. Third,
practical considerations, including the potential conse-
quences for public willingness to donate organs if the
public becomes aware of NCNRtx patients receiving life-
saving organs first, weigh against inclusion of NCNRtx
patients in the general recipient pool. We will discuss
each of these considerations in turn.
Ethical Concerns Arising From Inclusion of
NCNRs in DDLT
Exacerbation of existing disparities
As of the end of May 2015, >15 000 persons were wait-
ing for liver transplants in the United States (10). Approxi-
mately 200–400 persons obtain living donor livers each
year (11). The remaining patients—an average of >6000
per year over the past 10 years—require DDLT (11).
Since 2006, there has been an overall gradual and consis-
tent decrease in the rate of liver transplants performed
(12). OPTN attributes this to a worsening donor shortage
(12), reflected at least in part by waiting times for adults,
which increased from an average of 12.9 mo in 2009 to
18.5 mo in 2012 (12).
Despite the apparent and profound shortage, a small
number of DDLs are allocated each year to NCNRtx
patients. Such patients do not obtain these livers in
secret or by illegal means. In fact, many see OPTN Pol-
icy 17 as an attempt to increase transparency of the allo-
cation of organs to NCNR patients. Moreover, existing
U.S. transplant policy and, arguably, Section 371 of the
National Organ Transplant Act of 1984 (NOTA; which
specifies that medical criteria serve as the basis for
organ allocation) (13) require that NCNRtx patients be
allocated donor organs according to the same criteria as
U.S. residents; however, NCNRtx patients appear more
easily able to leverage the unintentional inequities in the
allocation infrastructure.
Specifically, an unfortunate reality of the U.S. liver alloca-
tion system—one that OPTN and transplant advocates
have consistently attempted to remedy—is that patients
with means appear to have increased access to available
donor
livers.
A
recent
examination
of
the
interplay
between geography and socioeconomic disparity in the
context of DDLT indicates that patients with financial
means experience shorter waiting times and higher
transplant rates likely secondary to the ability to “region
shop” and travel (3,5,14). After controlling for Medicaid
status, patients who received transplants in regions other
than their home region had significantly higher median
incomes than those who died on the waitlist (14). Most
striking was a direct correlation between income and
mortality, with patients having median incomes below
$60 244 more likely to die on the waitlist than those with
incomes greater than that amount (14).
Accordingly, NCNRtx patients enter a system of liver allo-
cation that, albeit unintentionally, already favors patients
with financial means. Furthermore, as noted both in the
literature and anecdotally within the transplant commu-
nity, a portion of the formerly identified NRA transplant
population comprises “highly affluent foreign nationals
seeking top of the line care without economic barriers”
(3,4). This is borne out by the sheer number of NRA
patients who self-pay: 38% compared with <1% of U.S.
citizens (3,5).
In addition, because they are not confined by insurance
network distinctions, NCNRtx patients engage in region
shopping, predominantly traveling to a small, strategic
number of transplant centers for transplantation (7).
These patients either list in United Network for Organ
Sharing (UNOS) Regions with low list-to-transplant wait
times or list in multiple UNOS Regions and then travel to
the region with the first available liver (5,7). When com-
bined with their relatively low list-to-transplant wait times
(3, 5), low Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD)
scores (5) and likelihood of receiving exception points (3),
it is apparent that NCNRtx patients are able to benefit
from unintentional existing inequities in the distribution
of DDLT.
Aggregate numbers of patients transplanted still favor
U.S. residents by a large margin. Nevertheless, the pos-
sibility that NCNRtx patients receive organs while corre-
sponding U.S. residents die raises significant ethical
questions that deserve further careful reflection.
1682
American Journal of Transplantation 2016; 16: 1681–1687
Hartsock et al
 Justice
Justice is demonstrated through avoidance of the alloca-
tive inequity and unfairness that can result from factors
outside of the patient’s direct control. Historically, the
algorithm used to allocate livers led to serious disparities
in wait times and, consequently, mortality for reasons
that were largely coincidental to where the patient hap-
pened to reside. Attempts to ameliorate such inequities
were most recently made through the OPTN implemen-
tation of the Share 35 policy in 2013. This policy was pro-
mulgated with the intent of narrowing the disparity in
MELD scores at time of transplantation among regions
(15). Under this new allocation system, DDLs are first
offered regionally to patients with a MELD score >35,
regardless of the patients’ local service area, and are
offered locally only if there is no regional match with a
MELD score >35 (15). Although Share 35 addresses part
of the discrepancy between regional outcomes, it fails to
address the pattern of multilisting or region shopping,
noted above, that favors NCNRtx patients and others
who are able to make use of this strategy.
A more equitable approach to DDLT allocation—one that
would indirectly discourage the donation of organs to
NCNRtx patients—would be adoption of a survival benefit–
based liver allocation system such as that outlined by Keller
et al in a recent paper (16). Under this approach, beyond
MELD scoring, patients would be assessed for factors such
as quality-adjusted life-years and age (with higher quality
organs going to younger waitlist candidates) (16).
Implicit in the proposal by Keller et al is an examination
of which DDL match will maximize the use of the donor
liver. Although Keller et al do not advocate for the adop-
tion of “organ stewardship” as a criteria for receipt of
donor livers, their model sets the stage for such consid-
erations by including ethical criteria in the analysis of liver
allocation. Furthermore, the authors suggest that the
anticipated life of the liver should be factored into alloca-
tion determinations, and they specifically advocate for
incorporation of posttransplant outcomes as a part of
allocation determinations (16).
At present, OPTN does not maintain data on the individ-
ual countries from which NCNRtx patients originate. Nev-
ertheless, it can be surmised that a sizable proportion of
these persons come from countries with notably inferior
domestic transplant infrastructure (5), such as Saudi Ara-
bia, Egypt (17), and Japan (18). Assuming this scenario
to be accurate, it would be permissible under a survival
benefit–based model to include considerations of the
patient’s ability to adhere to accepted posttransplant care
and treatment once they return to their home country.
This would include having access to appropriate medica-
tions and medical supervision and physicians available to
address postoperative or later complications (e.g. rejec-
tion, infection) that may arise after the patient has left
the United States.
To our knowledge, transplant programs currently have no
systematic approach to assessing posttransplant supervi-
sory
capacity
or
long-term
outcomes
for
NCNRtx
patients. If capacity for appropriate organ stewardship
cannot be established, such patients should not be
placed on the UNOS waitlist because their posttransplant
outcomes can be neither surveilled nor ensured. This
concern was echoed in the 2013 OPTN/UNOS Interna-
tional Relations Committee Report, in which several
committee members commented that assisting countries
in developing their own domestic transplant programs is
the “most compassionate way” to address NCNRtx
patients in light of the fact that they may not have ade-
quate posttransplant care in their country of origin (1).
It is worth reflecting on whether justice is actually served
by refusing transplants to patients from wealthy coun-
tries such as Japan whose cultural norms are in conflict
with organ donation. The Japanese opposition to organ
donation stems from centuries-old customs and practices
that are incompatible with the comparatively new con-
cept of “brain death” (18). Notably, Japanese funeral and
“deathbed” customs cannot be adequately preserved if
organs are procured from the body, regardless of a dec-
laration of brain death (18). For people who reside in
such countries, whether or not they share the prevailing
beliefs, they must look to other countries for access to
transplantation.
Conversely, an injustice also occurs when the inclusion
of NCNRtx patients as transplant candidates in the Uni-
ted States disincentivizes the governments of foreign
countries from establishing self-sustaining organ donation
programs. Moreover, those who may have the most
influence and power, who are the most enfranchised,
may opt out of activism in their countries of origin in
favor of obtaining a transplant abroad. Indeed, it was the
result of external pressures (i.e. the recommendations
put forth in the Declaration of Istanbul and by the World
Health Organization) that led Japan to recognize brain
death as legal death and to revise existing law to permit
organ donation by decedents who had not previously
opted out and whose family consented to the donation
(18).
For patients from countries such as Japan or Egypt who
do not have the resources to travel to a country with
advanced transplant infrastructure, there is no chance at
all of obtaining a life-saving organ. Their only opportunity
for access to organ transplantation will result from exter-
nal pressures placed on their governments by the larger
international transplant community.
Reciprocity, investment, and participation
Reciprocity in the context of DDLT suggests that an ethi-
cal allocation of livers would reflect the proportionate par-
ticipation of the individual patient in the overall transplant
infrastructure. For U.S. residents, this translates most
American Journal of Transplantation 2016; 16: 1681–1687
1683
Liver Allocation to Non-U.S. Citizen Non-U.S. Residents
 obviously to an assumed investment and participation in
the donor pool, tax base or larger organ transplant infras-
tructure,
something
arguably
lacking
from
NCNRtx
patients.
Admittedly, the question of whether donor registration
should determine one’s ability to subsequently receive a
donated
organ
presents
conflicts
for
U.S.
residents
because many U.S. residents are not registered organ
donors themselves (19). Nevertheless, the act of regis-
tering as a donor is not the only way that U.S. residents
become organ donors and thus should not be considered
the only indicator of reciprocity among U.S. residents.
The United States, for example, allows the agent of a
decedent to donate the organs of the deceased loved
one, so long as that decedent has not taken steps to
expressly prohibit the use of his or her organs (20). Fur-
thermore, persons who wish to become donors and who
have not registered to do so may indicate their desire to
be donors in a will or by making certain verbal or written
statements before witnesses (20). Although the United
States does not use an opt-out framework, affirmative
registration as a donor is a facilitator of organ donation,
not a prerequisite, and thus should not be unduly empha-
sized in evaluating the public’s participation in organ
donation.
As a final matter, even those persons who would
oppose donation of their own organs indirectly support
the U.S. transplant infrastructure through taxes that
fund
Medicaid
and
Medicare
and/or
participation
in
insurance risk pools that then provide coverage for
others who receive organ transplantation. Although pay-
ing of taxes does not always translate to feelings of
goodwill toward government programs, it is neverthe-
less participation in the system on which such a person
may one day draw.
Notwithstanding indirect participation by U.S. residents,
more aggressive measures premised on reciprocity prin-
ciples have been implemented successfully in other
countries. Among such countries is Israel, which insti-
tuted policies in 2012 that prioritized registered organ
donors ahead of those who had not registered in the
event that a person subsequently required an organ
transplant (21,22). These reforms have resulted in a sig-
nificant increase in donor registrations (22,23). Still, the
success of these policies remains unclear because physi-
cians have reported finding it difficult to overcome the
wishes of a decedent’s family members who object to
donation (22). Although similar measures could be used
to improve donation rates in the United States, some dis-
parity between organ supply and demand would remain,
and thus the critical question of how to prioritize NCNRtx
patients would not be resolved.
The access given to NCNRtx patients highlights the addi-
tional ethical irony existing for unauthorized immigrants.
Unauthorized immigrants have long been barred from
receiving a number of publicly funded services, including
publicly financed health care (i.e. Medicaid) (24); how-
ever, these persons, who compose 3.3% of deceased
donors (7) (proportional to their overall presence in the
U.S. population) (25), are an indisputable part of the
donor pool. Furthermore, they are active participants in
the larger economy, as both taxpayers and consumers.
Current U.S. policy and law result in inclusion of a group
of DDLT recipients with little to no potential for direct or
indirect reciprocal participation in the U.S. transplant
infrastructure while excluding a group with actual demon-
strated participation. It is important to carefully consider
the extent to which this disparity respects issues of
reciprocity and the equitable treatment of all groups.
To address the issue of individual reciprocity, some have
argued for a system of organ allocation that embraces
transnational reciprocity (4). In one of the exceedingly
few in-depth examinations of ethical conflicts in which
NCNRtx patients are implicated, Cohen acknowledges
the inherent unfairness we have discussed: allowing a
group of persons to draw on a system into which they
invest only minimally or not at all (4). Cohen suggests
this inequity could be recalibrated if the United States
allowed for a more international approach to organ shar-
ing in which U.S. residents were listed as transplant can-
didates in those countries from which NCNRtx patients
are traveling (4).
Cohen acknowledges his concept is largely theoretical,
but it raises interesting questions of what should count
as reciprocity and whether true reciprocity is even possi-
ble. For practical reasons largely tied to where transplant
technology is today, Cohen’s suggestion is unworkable
despite the advancements that have occurred over the
past several years (26). Transplant medicine is not yet at
a stage at which a DDL could make a trans-Atlantic jour-
ney without significant risk to the viability of the organ
and thus to the overall success of the transplant. The
possibility that organs could be shared nationally through-
out the United States is just beginning to be explored
(14,26).
More compelling is the potential for reciprocity with
those very small, poor countries that rely on the United
States to provide tertiary care. These patients have at
least the potential to serve as organ donors in the United
States. This would seem to satisfy the reciprocal ele-
ment missing for many other NCNRtx patients. Unfortu-
nately, the very thing that brings them to the United
States for medical care (their own small, impoverished
country) may hinder their ability to establish access to
appropriate posttransplant care. If so, they would be
unable to adequately satisfy their ethical obligation of
organ stewardship. When examined closely, it seems
there is no avenue for entirely avoiding the ethical
1684
American Journal of Transplantation 2016; 16: 1681–1687
Hartsock et al
 obstacles implicit in allocating an absolutely scarce, life-
saving liver to an NCNRtx patient.
Potential for donor deterrence
The most effective way to improve organ transplant
rates is to increase the rate of voluntary organ donation;
however, the task of encouraging persons to register as
donors or to willingly donate the organs of a deceased
loved one has proven challenging. Extensive debates
have swirled around increasing the incentives to potential
donors through a wide variety of possibilities including
monetary compensation (27,28) and analogizing donors
to firefighters and police officers (29). Conversely, events
that undermine public perceptions of fairness and trust in
the transplant system clearly can have a negative impact
on willingness to donate (30). This public trust is a bed-
rock on which the entire transplant system rests.
There is very little research on whether the public is
aware that NCNRtx patients are included in the U.S.
organ allocation system or what effect their inclusion
would have on the public’s willingness to donate organs.
In the only survey of which we are aware that attempted
to quantify public attitudes about NCNRtx patients, nearly
one-third of respondents indicated that people should not
be allowed to travel to the United States for the express
purpose of receiving a transplant (31). An additional 28%
of respondents indicated that the practice should be lim-
ited to several selected circumstances such as that no
U.S. resident could use the organ (exactly the approach
endorsed in this paper) or that the transplant was being
performed on an NCNR child (31). Importantly, of those
persons who would be willing to donate their own
organs, 33% responded they would or might be less
likely to donate if they knew those organs were available
to people coming from other countries (31).
Although it seems unlikely that the public is aware that
NCNRtx patients regularly receive organs in U.S. trans-
plant programs, knowledge of the practice might have a
negative effect on donation rates. In addition, it is possi-
ble that antiforeigner sentiments, which are relatively
common in the United States (32), may exacerbate any
such effect.
Legal and policy considerations
Present OPTN policies regarding care to NCNR patients
were drafted to avoid inadvertently wading into political
waters and to ensure that organs were allocated to the
sickest patients. Recent discussions regarding policy
revisions and the examination of NCNR patients have
cautioned that politics should be put aside when consid-
ering this issue, with focus instead on presenting data
that can be easily cataloged and considered (1). Conse-
quently, OPTN policies and U.S. law are not only blind to
questions of citizenship and residency, they expressly
prohibit such considerations in making determinations of
allocation.
NOTA Section 371(b)(2)(E) states that the organ procure-
ment
organizations
established
pursuant
to
NOTA’s
authority shall “have a system to allocate donated organs
among transplant centers and patients according to
established medical criteria” (13). In addition, OPTN Pol-
icy 5.4.A expressly forbids the consideration of either citi-
zenship or residency status (2). In doing so, the policies
and law avoid the political minefields of whether to pro-
vide access to unauthorized immigrants and whether cer-
tain countries that Americans may view unfavorably
should be excluded while other countries are provided
continued access. Furthermore, the policies allow individ-
ual transplant centers to independently decide whether
to accept such patients when deciding whether to list
them. In short, the policies encourage autonomy of
transplant centers and fairness to patients in the form of
equal allocation criteria for any patient waitlisted.
The
movement
toward
international
collaboration
on
transplant policies, the worsening of the organ supply–
demand gulf in the United States (12) and emerging data
regarding the connection between socioeconomic status
and access to transplantation suggest that the implemen-
tation of these policies, particularly within the DDLT sce-
nario, does not always result in fairness and conflicts
with international policy. The World Health Organization’s
Guiding Principles on Human Cell, Tissue and Organ
Transplantation are explicit that excessive fees and finan-
cial considerations should have no effect on allocation of
organs (33). The Declaration of Istanbul, which has been
endorsed in the United States by UNOS’s board of direc-
tors (34), prioritizes self-sufficiency and states that “treat-
ment of patients from outside the country or jurisdiction
is only acceptable if it does not undermine a country’s
ability to provide transplant services for its own popula-
tion” (35).
The pattern and practice of socioeconomically advan-
taged patients traveling to the United States or other
First
World
countries
to
obtain
organs
is
uniformly
frowned on by the international transplant community
but is indirectly permitted under U.S. policy and law. It is
our position that U.S. policy should be revised to align
with international norms, particularly if those norms
advance clearly stated ethical goals such as establishing
self-sufficiency
of
organ
programs
and
discouraging
potential for exploitative use of organs for financial gain.
Discussion and Recommendations
We wish to acknowledge several of the most compelling
arguments against our position: the view that all human
beings deserve equal opportunities for life-saving treat-
ments regardless of artificial boundaries such as geogra-
phy
(a
human
rights
viewpoint);
the
position
that
transplants among NCNRtx patients attract funds that
might be used for other purposes within transplant
American Journal of Transplantation 2016; 16: 1681–1687
1685
Liver Allocation to Non-U.S. Citizen Non-U.S. Residents
 programs, such as innovation and research; education
and awareness aimed at increasing the rate of organ
donation;
or
to
subsidize
unfunded
or
underfunded
patients. We are compelled by each of these arguments;
however, in the context of the U.S. transplant system, in
which literally thousands of U.S. residents die each year
waiting for livers and with no dramatic change in the sup-
ply of organs anywhere on the near horizon, we currently
cannot provide enough DDLs even for those patients
already in the United States, to whom we believe we
owe our primary obligation.
For the reasons outlined above, it is our position NCNRtx
patients on the UNOS liver transplant waitlist should be
reserved
to
a
last-in-line
status
whereby
they
may
receive a DDL only to the extent that the liver is not
acceptable to a U.S. resident (citizen or not) on the list.
In addition, it is our position that NOTA and OPTN Policy
5.4.A should be repealed or amended because they, in
connection with the newly promulgated Policy 17, not
only allow for but expressly prescribe that NCNRtx
patients be accorded equal treatment with residents in
organ allocation. Additional revisions to the existing DDLT
system of allocation, including the consideration of sur-
vival benefit criteria and movement toward national organ
sharing, should also be implemented.
Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank the Richard M. Fairbanks Foundation (Indi-
anapolis, IN) and the Methodist Health Foundation (Indianapolis, IN) for
funding of the Charles Warren Fairbanks Center for Medical Ethics.
Disclosure
The authors of this manuscript have no conflicts of inter-
est to disclose as described by the American Journal of
Transplantation.
References
1. OPTN/UNOS Ad Hoc International Relations Committee “Report
to the Board of Directors.” June 24–25, 2013.
2. Organ Procurement and Transplant Network Policies. [updated
2016 Jan 11; cited 2015 Nov 4]. Available from: http://optn.
transplant.hrsa.gov/ContentDocuments/OPTN_Policies.pdf.
3. Schold JD, Meier-Kriesche HU, Duncan RP, Reed I. Deceased
donor kidney and liver transplantation to nonresident aliens in
the United States. Transplantation 2007; 84: 1548–1556.
4. Coehn IG. Organs without borders? allocating transplant organs,
foreigners, and the importance of the Nation-State (?). Law Con-
temp Probl 2014; 77: 175–215.
5. Crippin JS. Kidney and liver transplantation in nonresident aliens:
How open is the door? Transplantation 2007; 84: 1557–1558.
6. OPTN Data: Transplant: Citizenship by Transplant Year (2013–
2014). [updated 2016 Jan 8; cited 2015 Jul 25]. Available from:
http://optn.transplant.hrsa.gov/converge/latestData/rptData.asp.
7. Glazier AK, Danovitch GM, Delmonico FL. Organ transplantation
for nonresidents of the United States: A policy for transparency.
Am J Transplant 2014; 14: 1740–1743.
8. Kim WR, Lake JR, Smith JM, et al. OPTN/SRTR Annual Data
Report 2013: Liver. Am J Transplant 2015; 15: 1–28.
9. Valapour M, Skeans MA, Heubner BM, et al. OPTN/SRTR Annual
Data Report 2013: Lung. Am J Transplant 2015; 15: 1–28.
10. OPTN: Data. “Waiting list candidates as of today.” 2015 [cited
2015 Apr 20]. Available from: http://optn.transplant.hrsa.gov/
converge/data/.
11. OPTN Data: Transplants Donor Type: Liver. Years 1988–2015.
[cited 2015 May 19]. Available from: http://optn.transplant.hrsa.
gov/converge/latestData/rptData.asp.
12. Kim WR, Smith JM, Skeans MA, et al. OPTN/SRTR Report
2012: Liver. Am J Transplant 2014 [cited 2015 Apr 20]; 14: 69–
96. Available from: http://srtr.transplant.hrsa.gov/annual_reports/
2012/pdf/03_liver_13.pdf.
13. National Organ Transplant Act, Pub. L. No. 98-507, 42 USC 201
et seq., 1984.
14. Schwartz A, Schiano T, Kim-Schluger L, Florman S. Geographic
disparity: The dilemma of lower socioeconomic status, multiple
listing, and death on the liver transplant waiting list. Clin Trans-
plant 2014; 28: 1075–1079.
15. Massie AB, Chow EKH, Wickliffe CE, Luo X, Gentry SE, Mulli-
gan DC. Early changes in liver distribution following implementa-
tion of share 35. Am J Transplant 2015; 15: 659–667.
16. Keller EJ, Kwo PY, Helft PR. Ethical considerations surrounding
survival benefit-based liver allocation. Liver Transpl 2014; 20:
140–146.
17. Allam N, Al Saghier M, El Sheikh Y, et al. Clinical outcomes
for Saudi and Egyptian patients receiving deceased donor liver
transplantation in China. Am J Transplant 2010; 10: 1834–
1841.
18. Asai A, Kadooka Y, Aizawa K. Arguments against promoting
organ transplants from brain-dead donors, and views of contem-
porary Japanese on life and death. Bioethics 2012; 26(4): 215–
223.
19. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2012 National
Survey of Organ Donation Attitudes and Behaviors. Health
Resources
&
Servies
Administration,
Healthcare
Systems
Bureau, Division of Transplantation; September 2013.
20. Revised Uniform Anatomical Gift Act of 2006. 2008.
21. Lavee J, Ashkenazi T, Gunman G, Steinberg D. A new law for
allocation of donor organs in Israel. The Lancet 2010; 375:
1131–1133.
22. Ofri D. In Israel, a new approach to organ donation. The New
York Times 2012 Feb 16 [cited 2015 Jul 25]. Available from:
http://nyti.ms/1eFnDpy
23. Sack K. A clash of religion and bioethics complicates organ
donation in Israel. The New York Times 2014 Aug 17 [cited
2015 Jul 25]. Available from: http://nyti.ms/1t6V9f9.
24. Kullgren JT. Restrictions on undocumented immigrants’ access
to health services: The public health implications of welfare
reform. Am J Public Health 2003; 93: 1630–1633.
25. Manuel Krogstad J, Passel JS. 5 facts about illegal immigration
in the U.S. Pew Research Center. November 18, 2014. Available
from: www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2014/11/18/5-facts-about-
illegal-immigration-in-the-u-s/.
26. Lai JC, Roberts JP, Vittinghoff E, Terrault NA, Feng S. Patient,
center and geographic characteristics of nationally placed livers.
Am J Transplant 2012; 12: 947–953.
27. Epstein RA. The Human and Economic Dimensions of Altruism:
The Case of Organ Transplantation. John M. Olin Law & Eco-
1686
American Journal of Transplantation 2016; 16: 1681–1687
Hartsock et al
 nomics Working Paper No. 385 (2nd Series). The Law School of
The University of Chicago, January 2008.
28. Cohen LR. Increasing the supply of transplant organs: The vir-
tues of a futures market. Geo Wash Int’l L Rev 1989; 58: 1–51.
29. Beard T, Osterkamp R. The organ crisis: A disaster of our own
making. Eur J Health Econ 2014; 15: 1–5.
30. Boulware LE, Troll MU, Wang NY, Powe NR. Perceived trans-
parency and fairness of the organ allocation system and willing-
ness to donate organs: A national study. Am J Transplant 2007;
7: 1778–1787.
31. Volk ML, Warren GJW, Anspach RR, Couper MP, Merion RM,
Ubel PA. Foreigners traveling to the U.S. for transplantation may
adversely affect organ donation: A national survey. Am J Trans-
plant 2010; 10: 1468–1472.
32. Stokes B. Which countries Americans like. . . and don’t. Pew
Research Center. December 30, 2013. Available from: http://
www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2013/12/30/which-countries-
americans-like-and-dont/.
33. WHO Guiding Principles on Human Cell, Tissue & Organ Trans-
plantation Nos. 8, 9, and 11. 2010.
34. Executive Summary of the Minutes, OPTN/UNOS Board of
Directors Meeting. March 2–3, 2009.
35. Declaration of Istanbul on Organ Trafficking and Transplant Tour-
ism. 2008. Principle 5(b).
American Journal of Transplantation 2016; 16: 1681–1687
1687
Liver Allocation to Non-U.S. Citizen Non-U.S. Residents
