 Cancer progression by reprogrammed BCAA metabolism in 
myeloid leukemia
Ayuna Hattori1,2, Makoto Tsunoda7, Takaaki Konuma8, Masayuki Kobayashi8, Tamas 
Nagy6, John Glushka4, Fariba Tayyari1,4, Daniel McSkimming1,5, Natarajan Kannan1,2,5, 
Arinobu Tojo8, Arthur S. Edison1,3,4,5, and Takahiro Ito1,2
1Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Georgia, Athens, GA 
30602
2UGA Cancer Center, The University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602
3Department of Genetics, The University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602
4Complex Carbohydrate Research Center, The University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602
5Institute of Bioinformatics, The University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602
6Department of Pathology, The University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602
7Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo, Tokyo 113-0033, 
Japan
8Department of Hematology and Oncology, The Institute of Medical Science, The University of 
Tokyo, Minato, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan
Summary
Reprogrammed cellular metabolism is a common characteristic observed in various cancers1,2. 
However, whether metabolic changes directly regulate cancer development and progression 
remains poorly understood. Here we show that BCAT1, a cytosolic aminotransferase for the 
branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs), is aberrantly activated and functionally required for 
chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). BCAT1 is up-regulated during CML progression and promotes 
BCAA production in leukemia cells by aminating the branched-chain keto acids. Blocking BCAT1 
expression or enzymatic activity induces cellular differentiation and impairs the propagation of 
blast crisis CML (BC-CML) both in vitro and in vivo. Stable isotope tracer experiments combined 
with NMR-based metabolic analysis demonstrate the intracellular production of BCAAs by 
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Author Contributions
A.H. designed the studies, performed all experiments, analyzed the data and wrote the manuscript. M.T. designed and performed 
experiments related to quantitative analysis of amino and keto acids. T.K., M.K. and A.T. provided and performed experiments with 
human primary samples. T.N. performed histological and cytological analysis. J.G. F.T. and A.S.E. designed and conducted NMR-
based metabolic analysis. D.M. and N.K. performed bioinformatics analysis of gene expression datasets. T.I. conceived and supervised 
the project and wrote the manuscript.
Author Information
Competing financial interests. T.I. and A.H. are named inventors of a provisional patent application number 62/413,028. 
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to T.I. (ito@bmb.uga.edu).
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Published in final edited form as:
Nature. 2017 May 25; 545(7655): 500–504. doi:10.1038/nature22314.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 BCAT1. Direct supplementation with BCAAs ameliorates the defects caused by BCAT1 
knockdown, indicating that BCAT1 exerts its oncogenic function via BCAA production in BC-
CML cells. Importantly, BCAT1 expression not only is activated in human BC-CML and de novo 
acute myeloid leukemia but also predicts disease outcome in patients. As an upstream regulator of 
BCAT1 expression, we identified Musashi2 (MSI2), an oncogenic RNA binding protein that is 
required for BC-CML. MSI2 is physically associated with the BCAT1 transcript and positively 
regulates its protein expression in leukemia. Taken together, this work reveals that altered BCAA 
metabolism activated through the MSI2-BCAT1 axis drives cancer progression in myeloid 
leukemia.
To understand the contribution of α-amino acid (AA) metabolism to the cancer progression 
of CML, we analyzed blood AA levels in murine models that recapitulate the chronic and 
blast crisis phases of human CML3,4. Using amine-specific fluorescent labeling coupled 
with high-performance liquid chromatography, sixteen AAs were quantified in the blood 
plasma from leukemic mice (Extended Data Fig. 1a–d). Mice bearing BC-CML showed 
moderate but significant elevations of plasma glutamate, alanine and the branched-chain 
amino acids (BCAAs; namely, valine, leucine and isoleucine) compared to CP-CML mice, 
indicating hyperaminoacidemia (Extended Data Fig. 1e). Intracellular levels of BCAAs and 
proline were higher in BC-CML, whereas intracellular glutamate and alanine were 
comparable in the two disease phases (Fig. 1a). These results suggest that increased BCAA 
uptake or metabolism may contribute to CML progression. We analyzed the gene expression 
and found no significant up-regulation of known BCAA transporters in BC-CML compared 
with CP-CML (data not shown). Leucine import into BC-CML cells was not greater than 
into CP-CML cells (Extended Data Fig. 1f), indicating that increased BCAA uptake does not 
explain the higher BCAA levels in BC-CML. To examine the possibility of altered 
intracellular BCAA metabolism, we next analyzed the expression of genes encoding AA 
metabolic enzymes and found that the branched-chain amino acid aminotransferase 1 
(Bcat1) was more highly expressed in BC-CML than in CP-CML at both the mRNA and 
protein levels (Fig. 1b–c, Extended Data Fig. 1g–h). In contrast, normal hematopoietic stem/
progenitor cells (HSPCs) from healthy mice had very low levels of Bcat1 expression (Lin− 
Sca-1+ cKit+ (LSK) population; Fig. 1b), and normal tissues did not show detectable Bcat1 
expression except for the brain and testis (Extended Data Fig. 1i). Bcat1 encodes an 
evolutionarily conserved cytoplasmic aminotransferase for glutamate and BCAAs, 
constituting a regulatory component of cytoplasmic amino and keto acid metabolism5 (Fig. 
1d). Bcat2, a paralog encoding the mitochondrial BCAA aminotransferase, and alanine and 
aspartate aminotransferases did not show differential expression between CP- and BC-CML 
(Extended Data Fig. 1g–l).
Although BCAT1 catalyzes transamination in both directions, the breakdown of BCAAs is 
the predominant reaction in most cell types6. In order for BCAT1 to generate BCAAs via the 
reverse reaction, the corresponding branched-chain keto acids (BCKAs), as well as 
glutamate, must be present as substrates. We found all three BCKAs, keto-isovalerate (KIV), 
keto-isocaproate (KIC) and keto-methylvalerate (KMV), were present in both the blood 
plasma and leukemia cells (Extended Data Fig. 2a–d). In BC-CML cells, BCKAs were 
present at concentrations equivalent to 22–55% of the corresponding BCAAs, suggesting 
Hattori et al.
Page 2
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 that intracellular BCKAs can serve as substrates for BCAA production (Extended Data Fig. 
2e). Next, we examined whether BCAAs are produced through BCAT1 transamination 
reactions in leukemia cells by stable-isotope tracer experiments with 13C-valine or 13C-KIV. 
Intracellular 13C-labeled metabolites in K562 human BC-CML cells were analyzed using 
one- (1D) and two-dimensional (2D) 1H-13C heteronuclear single bond correlation (HSQC) 
analysis by high-field NMR spectroscopy (Fig. 1e–h, Extended Data Fig. 3). HSQC analysis 
detects only metabolites that have incorporated 13C. To determine whether KIV is converted 
to valine, cells were cultured in media supplemented with uniformly-labeled [(U)-13C] KIV 
and non-labeled valine at physiological concentrations (30 and 170μM, respectively) and 
analyzed for intracellular 13C-metabolites. After 15 min of labeling, the generation of 13C-
valine was clearly observed, indicating the efficient intracellular production of valine from 
KIV (Fig. 1f, h). In contrast, 13C-KIV formation was barely detectable in the cells cultured 
with non-labeled KIV and [(U)-13C]-valine (Fig. 1e, g). Our observation of intracellular 13C-
valine signals indicates its transport into BC-CML cells. We also detected robust signals 
for 13C-KIV when present (Extended Data Fig. 3d, f). The formation of valine from KIV, but 
not the breakdown of valine to KIV, was also observed when we used equal concentrations 
of KIV and Val in the labeling media (170μM each; Fig.1g–h). We did not detect KIC 
formation from 13C-leucine either (Extended Data Fig. 3g–i). These results indicate that 
little, if any, BCAAs are catabolized to BCKAs in leukemia cells. To further provide 
evidence for the intracellular BCAA production through transamination, we performed 
alternative labeling experiments to track the fate of the amine group of glutamate. We 
cultured K562 cells with 15N-amine-labeled glutamine, which is metabolized to 15N-amine-
glutamate by glutaminase upon cellular intake, and analyzed the subsequent labeling of 
BCAAs via 1H NMR and 1H-15N heteronuclear multiple bond correlation (HMBC) analysis. 
HMBC analysis detects only metabolites that have incorporated 15N, whereas 1H NMR 
detects any compounds containing protons (Extended Data Fig. 4a–f). At 29–72 h post-
labeling, we detected 15N-amine-labeled BCAAs, indicating transamination from glutamine 
to BCAAs (Fig. 1i). By 72 h, the 15N-amine-labeled BCAAs had accumulated to fractional 
abundances ranging from 24 to 39% (Extended Data Fig. 4g), indicating a significant 
contribution of transamination to the intracellular BCAA pool. Lentiviral BCAT1 
knockdown resulted in greater than a 50% decrease in the amount of intracellular BCAAs 
produced (Fig. 1j). These data demonstrate that BCKA transamination by BCAT1 
contributes to the BCAA pool in leukemia cells.
Given that Bcat1 is highly expressed and augments intracellular BCAAs in BC-CML, Bcat1 
may functionally contribute to the acute properties of BC-CML. To test this possibility, we 
inhibited Bcat1 expression using a short hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated gene knockdown 
approach. We sorted the immature lineage-negative (Lin−) cells from primary BC-CML 
samples, a population that contains the leukemia-initiating cells of this cancer, and 
introduced two independent retroviral shRNA constructs (Extended Data Fig. 1j; shBcat1-a 
and shBcat1-b). Both constructs inhibited Bcat1 expression in BC-CML compared with a 
non-targeting negative control shRNA (shCtrl) (Extended Data Fig. 5a–c). Bcat1 knockdown 
resulted in significantly smaller colonies and a 40–60% reduction in the colony-forming 
ability relative to a control (Fig. 2a). The co-introduction of a shRNA-resistant Bcat1 cDNA 
rescued the reduced clonogenic potential (Extended Data Fig. 5d). As an alternative 
Hattori et al.
Page 3
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 approach to gene knockdown, we treated BC-CML cells with gabapentin (Gbp), a chemical 
inhibitor of BCAT1. Gbp is a structural analog of leucine and specifically and competitively 
inhibit the transaminase activity of BCAT1 but not that of BCAT27. BC-CML cells plated 
with Gbp formed smaller colonies and showed a dose-dependent impairment in clonogenic 
growth (Fig. 2b). In contrast, normal HSPCs were only minimally affected by gene 
knockdown or Gbp treatment (Extended Data Fig. 5e–f). These data suggest that BCAT1 
inhibition may selectively impair the propagation of leukemia without affecting normal 
hematopoiesis.
To examine whether Bcat1 loss affects the propagation of BC-CML in vivo, Lin− cells 
expressing shBcat1 were transplanted into conditioned recipient mice. Whereas 75% of the 
recipients transplanted with control cells succumbed to the disease within 30 days, only 47% 
(shBcat1-a) and 31% (shBcat1-b) of the mice transplanted with Bcat1-knockdown cells 
developed the disease, and more than half of these mice survived even when followed out to 
60 days (Fig. 2c). Among the mice that developed disease with Bcat1 knockdown, most had 
leukemia that was characterized by differentiated granulocytes and lower levels of immature 
myeloblasts (Fig. 2d, Extended Data Fig. 4g). They also displayed a lower frequency of 
immature Lin− cells than control leukemia (Extended Data Fig. 5h), indicating that the loss 
of Bcat1 induced differentiation and impaired the leukemia-initiating cell activity. Consistent 
with these phenotypes, serial transplantation of the leukemia cells revealed that while all the 
control leukemia propagated the disease, none of the mice transplanted with Bcat1-
knockdown leukemia cells succumbed to the disease (1k; Fig. 2e). In addition, we 
established a doxycycline (Dox)-inducible Bcat1 knockdown system (i-shBcat1) and 
examined the impact of Bcat1 loss on the disease maintenance. Ten days post-
transplantation with BC-CML cells infected with i-shBcat1, leukemic engraftment was 
assessed in each recipient, and Dox treatment was initiated (Extended Data Fig. 5i–j). While 
almost all the mice that were transplanted with control cells and the non-Dox-treated mice 
developed leukemia, more than half of the Dox-treated i-shBcat1 mice remained disease-free 
(Extended Data Fig. 5k), indicating that Bcat1 is required for the continuous propagation of 
BC-CML. At the cellular level, we did not observe enhanced apoptosis or a decrease in 
actively cycling cells by Bcat1 knockdown (Extended Data Fig. 5l–m). These results 
demonstrate that Bcat1 is critical for the sustained growth and maintenance of leukemia-
initiating cells in BC-CML.
We next examined whether the enforced expression of Bcat1 could drive blastic 
transformation in hematopoietic cells. Although we observed a significant increase in Bcat1 
expression compared with the vector control, Bcat1 expression alone did not enhance the 
colony-forming ability of either LSK or Lin− c-Kit+ hematopoietic cells isolated from 
normal bone marrow (Extended Data Fig. 6a–b). To determine whether BCR-ABL1 
cooperates with Bcat1 overexpression to confer an aggressive growth phenotype, we 
transduced normal HSPCs with Bcat1 and BCR-ABL1. Compared with the vector control, 
the combinatorial expression promoted clonogenic growth in vitro (Extended Data Fig. 6c), 
and the transplantation of the cells led to significantly elevated leukemia burdens (Extended 
Data Fig. 6d–e), splenomegaly and increased mortality in the recipient mice (Fig. 2f), with a 
concomitant increase in plasma BCAA levels (Extended Data Fig. 6f). Accordingly, 
leukemia that developed in response to Bcat1 overexpression exhibited a highly immature 
Hattori et al.
Page 4
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 myeloblastic morphology compared to the control (Fig. 2g, Extended Data Fig. 6g). These 
data indicate that activated Bcat1 mediates the blastic transformation of CP-CML cells.
Our results demonstrate that Bcat1 is essential for the development of BC-CML in mice, 
while normal bone marrow HSPCs show a very limited dependence on this metabolic 
enzyme. To investigate the contribution of BCAT1 to human leukemia, we looked at a panel 
of 13 peripheral blood samples from healthy and leukemic subjects and found human 
BCAT1 expression was higher in BC-CML than in either normal or CP-CML cells (Fig. 3a). 
To determine whether this expression pattern reflects a general trend in human CML, we 
analyzed BCAT1 levels in a GEO dataset of 113 CML patient samples8. This focused 
analysis revealed a significant elevation in BCAT1 expression as the disease progresses from 
the chronic to the accelerated phase and then to the blast crisis phase (Fig. 3b). On average, 
BCAT1 expression was 15-fold higher in BC-CML than in CP-CML. We did not find 
significant changes in BCAT2 expression, which is consistent with the results from the 
mouse models (Fig. 3c, Extended Data Fig. 1g). These data indicate that activation of 
BCAT1 is a shared characteristic in the progression of human CML. Lentiviral BCAT1 
knockdown or Gbp treatment markedly inhibited the colony-forming ability of K562 human 
BC-CML (Extended Data Fig. 7a–d) and patient-derived primary leukemia cells (Fig. 3d–e, 
Extended Data Fig. 7e–f). Interestingly, we observed BCAT1 activation in primary human 
acute myeloid leukemia as well (AML; Fig. 3f), and Gbp effectively inhibited the clonal 
growth of human AML cell lines and primary de novo AML cells (Fig. 3g, Extended Data 
Fig. 7g–i). Moreover, BCAT1 expression levels predict disease outcome in patient cohorts. 
Cases from the TCGA AML dataset were divided into quartiles based on BCAT1 expression 
levels (Extended Data Fig. 7j), and we found that the median survival time was 46% shorter 
in the BCAT1-high group (427 vs. 792 days; Fig. 3h). These results demonstrate an essential 
role for BCAT1 in the pathogenesis of a wide array of human myeloid malignancies.
To understand how the BCAT1-driven change in metabolism promotes leukemia growth, we 
analyzed intracellular AA concentrations upon BCAT1 inhibition and found that all three 
BCAAs were significantly reduced by shBCAT1 or Gbp treatment compared with the 
controls (Extended Data Fig. 8a–b). Interestingly, the addition of BCAAs, but not alanyl-
glutamine (GlutaMax), functionally suppressed the reduction of colony-forming ability 
caused by BCAT1 knockdown (Fig. 3i), suggesting that BCAT1 enhances clonogenic growth 
through BCAA production via BCKA reamination. BCAAs, particularly leucine, activate the 
mTORC1 pathway via cytosolic leucine sensor proteins, which integrate multiple signals 
from nutrient sensing and growth factor stimuli to promote cell growth9–12. Thus, we 
examined whether reduced BCAA production by BCAT1 inhibition results in the attenuation 
of the mTORC1 signal. Indeed, BCAT1 blockade by either shRNA or Gbp treatment 
significantly reduced the phosphorylation of S6 kinase (pS6K), a downstream target of 
mTORC1 kinase (Fig. 3j), suggesting BCAT1 activation of the mTORC1 pathway. We 
observed no apparent changes in the levels of phosphorylated AKT upon BCAT1 inhibition, 
suggesting a predominant contribution of BCAA nutrient signals to the activation of 
mTORC1 (Extended Data Fig. 8c). Consistently, the mTORC1 inhibitor rapamycin reversed 
the BCAA-induced suppression of colony formation (Fig. 3i) and the BCAA-induced 
increase in pS6K (Fig. 3k).
Hattori et al.
Page 5
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 To further investigate the BCAT1-mediated regulation of CML progression, we performed 
gene correlation analyses using tumor gene expression datasets available in the GEO and 
TCGA databases. We found that BCAT1 and MSI2 are often co-expressed in several types 
of cancer, including leukemias, colorectal and breast cancers (Extended Data Fig. 9a–b). 
MSI2 is a member of the evolutionarily conserved Musashi RNA binding protein family, 
which regulates cell fates during development and in multiple adult stem cell systems in 
metazoans13–15. At the molecular level, Musashi proteins bind to r(G/A)U1-3AGU 
sequences (MSI binding elements, MBEs) and post-transcriptionally regulate gene 
expression via mRNA binding16,17. Importantly, MSI genes are aberrantly activated in 
human malignancies, such as gliomas and breast and colorectal cancers18,19. In human BC-
CML, the MSI2 gene is up-regulated and functionally required for the progression of this 
leukemia20,21. To determine whether BCAT1 is a direct target of the MSI2 RNA binding 
protein, we analyzed the BCAT1 mRNA sequence and found 40 putative MBEs in the 3′-
untranslated region (3′-UTR; Extended Data Fig. 9c). To test whether MSI2 binds to the 
BCAT1 transcripts, we expressed a FLAG-tagged MSI2 protein in K562 cells and performed 
RNA immunoprecipitation (RIP). FLAG-MSI2 co-precipitated the BCAT1 transcripts with a 
>1,500-fold enrichment relative to the vector control (Fig. 4a). In contrast, when RIP was 
performed with a mutant MSI2 protein in which three phenylalanine residues essential for 
RNA binding were replaced with leucine16, the amount of the BCAT1 mRNA recovered was 
markedly diminished (Fig. 4a, RBD), indicating that the co-precipitation of BCAT1 
transcript requires the RNA binding activity of MSI2. The transcripts for beta-2-
microglobulin (B2M) or c-Myc oncogene (MYC) contain only one copy of a putative MBE 
in their 3′-UTRs (data not shown), and MSI2 RIP did not enrich B2M or MYC mRNAs as 
efficiently as BCAT1 (Fig. 4a). Furthermore, RIP with an anti-MSI2 antibody showed that 
endogenous MSI2 proteins bound to BCAT1 transcripts, while B2M or MYC mRNAs 
exhibited minimal enrichment relative to that of an IgG control (Fig. 4b), indicating that 
MSI2 is specifically associated with the BCAT1 transcripts. Because MSI2 knockdown 
reduced the levels of BCAT1 protein and phospho-S6K (Extended Data Fig. 9d), the binding 
of MSI2 to BCAT1 mRNA positively regulates BCAT1 translation and mTORC1 activation. 
Importantly, BCAT1 over-expression (Fig. 4c) and BCAA supplementation (Fig. 4d) 
effectively suppressed the attenuation of the colony-forming ability caused by MSI2 
knockdown, with a concomitant increase in pS6K levels in a rapamycin-sensitive manner 
(Fig. 4e). The levels of AKT phosphorylation were unaffected by shMSI2 (Extended Data 
Fig. 8c). Collectively, our work presented here demonstrates an essential role for the MSI2-
BCAT1 axis in myeloid leukemia and provides a proof-of-principle for inhibiting the BCAA 
metabolic pathway to regulate CML progression (Fig. 4f).
The up-regulation and functional requirements of BCAT1 have been reported in 
glioblastoma and in colorectal and breast tumors22,23. Interestingly, Musashi proteins also 
regulate the same spectrum of cancers including myeloid leukemia18–21,24,25, suggesting a 
highly conserved role for the MSI-BCAT1 pathway in multiple cancer types. Despite the 
conservation of this pathway, the metabolic role of BCAT1 seems distinct and dependent on 
the tissue of origin; in the brain, BCAT1 catalyzes BCAA breakdown and glutamate 
production to enhance tumor growth in glioblastoma23, whereas BCAT1 promotes BCAA 
production in leukemia. Mayers et al. recently showed that two different types of tumors, 
Hattori et al.
Page 6
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 specifically pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and non-small cell lung carcinoma 
(NSCLC)26, exhibit different usages of BCAAs. Despite the same initiating events of Kras 
activation and p53 deletion, NSCLC cells actively utilize BCAAs by enhancing their uptake 
and oxidative breakdown to BCKAs, whereas PDAC cells display decreased uptake and thus 
little dependency on BCAAs. Consistently, BCAT1 and BCAT2 are required for tumor 
formation in NSCLC but not in PDAC. Although BCAT1 is functionally required for tumor 
growth in a broad range of malignancies, these reports and our studies highlight the context-
dependent role of the BCAT1 metabolic pathway in cancer.
Methods
Mice
C57BL6/J mice were from the Jackson Laboratory. Mice were bred and maintained in the 
facility of the University Research Animal Resources at University of Georgia. All mice 
were 8–16 weeks old, age- and sex-matched and randomly chosen for experimental use. No 
statistical methods were used for sample size estimates. All animal experiments were 
performed according to protocols approved by the University of Georgia Institutional 
Animal Care and Use Committee.
Cell isolation, analysis and sorting
Cells were suspended for cell sorting in Hanks’ balanced salt solution (HBSS) containing 
5%(vol/vol) fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 2 mM EDTA as previously described27. The 
following antibodies were used to define lineage positive cells: 145-2C11 (CD3ε), GK1.5 
(CD4), 53–6.7 (CD8), RB6-8C5 (Ly-6G/Gr1), M1/70 (CD11b/Mac-1), TER119 (Ly-76/
TER119), 6B2 (CD45R/B220), and eBio1D3 (CD19). Red blood cells were lysed with RBC 
Lysis Buffer (eBioscience) before staining for lineage markers. For the Lin− Sca-1+ cKit+ 
(LSK) bone marrow cell sorting, the antibodies 2B8 (cKit/CD117) and D7 (Sca-1/Ly-6A/E) 
antibodies were also used. To determine donor-derived chimerism in the transplantation-
based assays, peripheral blood from the recipients was obtained by the submandibular 
bleeding method and prepared for analysis as previously described20. All antibodies were 
purchased from eBioscience. Apoptosis assays were performed by staining cells with 
Annexin V and 7-AAD (BioLegend). Cell cycle status was analyzed by staining cells with 
2.5 μg/ml PI containing 0.1% BSA and 2 μg/ml RNase after fixation with 70% ethanol. Flow 
cytometric analysis and cell sorting were carried out on the Moflo XDP, Cyan ADP 
(Beckman Coulter) or S3 (Bio-Rad), and the data were analyzed with FlowJo software (Tree 
Star Inc.).
Viral constructs and production
Retroviral BCR-ABL1 and NUP98-HOXA9 vectors and lentiviral FG12-UbiC-GFP vector 
were obtained from Addgene. Mouse Bcat1 cDNA (IMAGE clone ID 30063465) was cloned 
into MSCV-IRES-GFP and Human BCAT1 cDNA (NITE clone ID AK056255) was cloned 
into FG12-Ubc-hCD2. The short hairpin RNA constructs against Bcat1 (shBcat1) were 
designed and cloned in MSCV-LTRmiR30-PIG (LMP) vector from Open Biosystems or 
TtRMPVIR from Addgene according to their instructions. The target sequences are 5′-
CCCAGTCTCTGATATTCTGTAC-3′ for shBcat1-a, 5′- 
Hattori et al.
Page 7
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 TCCGCGCCGTTTGCTGGAGAAA-3′ for shBcat1-b and 5′-
CTGTGCCAGAGTCCTTCGATAG-3′ for luciferase as a negative control (shCtrl). 
Lentiviral short hairpin RNA (shRNA) constructs were cloned in FG12 essentially as 
described previously28. The target sequences are 5′-CGCAGAGTGTACCGGAGA-3′ for 
shBCAT1-c, 5′-TGCCCAATGTGAAGCAGT-3′ for shBcat1-d and 5′-
TGCGCTGCTGGTGCCAAC-3′ for luciferase as a negative control. Virus was produced in 
293FT cells transfected using polyethylenimine with viral constructs along with VSV-G and 
gag-pol. For lentivirus production Rev was also co-transfected. Viral supernatants were 
collected for two days followed by ultracentrifugal concentration at 50,000× g for 2h.
Cell culture and colony formation assays
The human BC-CML cell line K562, the human acute leukemia cell lines MV4-11 and U937 
were maintained in Roswell Park Memorial Institute 1640 medium (RPMI-1640) with 10% 
FBS, 100 IU/ml penicillin and 100 μg/ml streptomycin. The human acute promyelocytic 
leukemia cell line HL60 was maintained in RPMI supplemented with 20% FBS. All human 
cell lines were obtained from ATCC, and cell line authentication testing was performed by 
ATCC-standardized STR analysis to verify their identity in July 2016. For the colony 
forming assays, the cells were transduced with lentiviral shRNA and plated in triplicate in 
1.2% methylcellulose medium (R&D systems) supplemented with 100IU/ml penicillin and 
100μg/ml streptomycin, 10% FBS. Where indicated, either BCAAs (L-Leucine, L-Valine, L-
Isoleucine, 4 mM each, Sigma-Aldrich), L-alanyl-L-glutamine (4 mM, GlutaMax™, Life 
Technologies), rapamycin (50 nM, Tocris) or gabapentin (Gbp; Tokyo Chemical Industry 
Co.) was added to the medium. Gbp was freshly dissolved in PBS before use. Colonies were 
scored on days 9 to 14. For liquid culture of murine cells, freshly isolated adult LSK cells or 
Lin− BC-CML cells were plated into a 96-well U bottom plate in X-Vivo15 (with 
Gentamicin and Phenol Red; Lonza) supplemented with 50 μM 2-mercaptoethanol, 10% 
FBS, 100 ng/ml stem cell factor (SCF, eBioscience) and 20 ng/ml thrombopoietin (TPO, 
Peprotech). For the BC-CML and LSK colony formation assays, BCR-ABL+ NUP98-
HOXA9+ or infected construct-positive cells were sorted and plated in triplicate in Iscove’s 
modified medium (IMDM)-based methylcellulose medium (Methocult M3434, StemCell 
Technologies). Colonies were scored on days 7 to 10.
Generation and analysis of leukemic mice
Mice bearing CP- and BC-CML were generated essentially as previously described3,4,29–31. 
In brief, CP-CML was modeled by transducing the oncogene BCR-ABL1 into 
hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (HSPCs) defined by the LSK surface marker phenotype 
from normal bone marrow, which were transplanted into conditioned recipient mice. BC-
CML was modeled by transplanting LSK cells infected with two oncogenes, BCR-ABL1 
and NUP98-HOXA9, which are associated with myeloid BC-CML in humans. LSK cells 
were sorted from healthy C57BL6/J bone marrow and cultured in X-Vivo15 media 
supplemented with 50 μM 2-mercaptoethanol, 10% FBS, 100 ng/ml SCF and 20 ng/ml TPO. 
After incubation overnight, cells were infected with retroviruses carrying the oncogenes. 
Viruses used were as follows: MSCV-BCR-ABL-IRES-YFP to generate CP-CML, or 
MSCV-BCR-ABL-IRES-YFP and MSCV-NUP98-HOXA9-IRES-tNGFR to generate BC-
CML. Cells were harvested 48 h after infection and transplanted retro-orbitally into groups 
Hattori et al.
Page 8
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 of C57BL6/J mice. Recipients were lethally irradiated (9.5 Gy) for CP-CML and sublethally 
(6 Gy) for BC-CML. For Bcat1 overexpression, LSK cells were infected with MSCV-BCR-
ABL-IRES-YFP and MSCV-Bcat1-IRES-GFP, and doubly infected cells were FACS-
purified and transplanted into recipients that were sublethally irradiated. For Bcat1 
knockdown by retroviral shRNA transduction, the Lin− population from BC-CML cells was 
sorted and infected with either control shCtrl (against luciferase) or shBcat1-a/b (against 
Bcat1) retrovirus for 48 h. Infected cells were sorted based on GFP expression, and 1,000 or 
2,000 cells were transplanted in sublethally irradiated C57BL6/J recipients. For conditional 
Bcat1 knockdown by a Dox-inducible shRNA system, animals were analyzed for donor 
chimerism at day 10 post-transplantation, and then Dox treatment was initiated by feeding 
Dox-containing rodent chow (0.2 mg/g diet; S3888, BioServ). After transplantation, 
recipient mice were maintained on antibiotic water (sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim) and 
evaluated daily for signs of morbidity, weight loss, failure to groom, and splenomegaly. 
Premorbid animals were sacrificed, and relevant tissues were harvested and analyzed by 
flow cytometry and histopathology. For secondary BC-CML transplantations, cells 
recovered from terminally ill primary recipients were sorted for Lin− donor cells and 
transplanted into secondary recipients. Where indicated, sorted live BC-CML cells from the 
spleen were cytospun and stained with Wright’s stain solution (Harleco) for cytopathologic 
evaluation by a board-certified veterinary pathologist (T. N.).
Primary human leukemia samples
Patient blood samples were obtained at the Institute of Medical Science, the University of 
Tokyo (IMSUT) Hospital with written informed consent according to the procedures 
approved by the Institutional Review Board. Mononuclear cells from the subjects were 
viably frozen and stored in liquid nitrogen. For in vitro colony formation with BCAT1 
knockdown, primary hCD34+ cells sorted from patient bone marrow samples were cultured 
in IMDM supplemented with 10% FBS, 100 IU/ml penicillin and 100 μg/ml streptomycin, 
55 μM 2-mercaptoethanol, SCF, IL-3, IL-6, FLT3L and TPO. After 24 h of culture, the cells 
were transduced with lentiviral shRNA (cloned in FG12-UbiC-GFP), and the GFP-positive 
infected cells were sorted at 48 h, and 5,000 - 50,000 cells were plated in complete 
methylcellulose medium (Methocult H4435, StemCell Technologies). For the colony 
forming assays with Gbp, sorted hCD34+ cells from the primary patient specimens were 
cultured in complete methylcellulose medium with the indicated concentrations of Gbp. 
Colonies were scored on days 9 to 14.
Bioinformatic analysis of human gene expression
For the focused gene expression analysis of BCAT1, BCAT2 and MSI2 in human CML 
progression, the GEO dataset GSE4170 was retrieved and analyzed using Python v2.7 and 
the SciPy statistical toolkit (http://www.scipy.org/). Pearson correlation coefficients were 
used to find patterns of coexpression. For coexpression analysis of BCAT1 and MSI2 across 
multiple cancer types, the GEO datasets GSE14671 (CML), GSE10327 (medulloblastoma), 
GSE20916 (colorectal), GSE14548 (breast) and TCGA datasets LAML (AML) and LUAD 
(lung adenocarcinoma) were collected and analyzed in a similar fashion.
Hattori et al.
Page 9
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Realtime and standard RT-PCR analysis
Total cellular RNAs were isolated using RNAqueous-Micro kit (Ambion) and cDNAs were 
prepared from equal amounts of RNAs using Superscript III reverse transcriptase (Life 
Technologies). For standard PCRs, the reactions were performed with DreamTaq PCR 
Master Mix (Life Technologies), cDNA and 0.5 μM of each primer. PCR conditions were as 
follows: 1 min at 94°C, followed by 35 cycles at 94°C for 30 s, 58°C for 30 s, and 72°C for 
30 s. PCR primer sequences are as follows. B2m-F1, 5′ –
GTAGCCTCTGCCATAGGTTGC-3′; B2m-R2, 5′ –
CCATACTGGCATGCTTAACTCTG-3′; Bcat1-F1, 5′ –
TGTGGCTGTACGGCAAGGACAAC-3′; Bcat1-R2, 5′ -
GTAGCTCGATTGTCCAGTCACT-3′. Quantitative real-time PCRs were performed using 
EvaGreen® qPCR Master Mix (Bio-Rad) on an iQ5 (Bio-Rad), or using TaqMan Gene 
Expression Assays on an Applied Biosystems® 7500 Real-Time PCR Systems (Life 
Technologies). Results were normalized to the level of β-2-microglobulin. PCR primer 
sequences are as follows. mB2m-F, 5′ –ACCGGCCTGTATGCTATCCAGAA-3′ ; mB2m-
R, 5′ –AATGTGAGGCGGGTGGAACTGT-3′; hB2M-F, 5′ –
ATGAGTATGCCTGCCGTGTGA-3′; hB2M-R, 5′ –GGCATCTTCAAACCTCCATG-3′; 
hBCAT1-F, 5′ –TGGAGAATGGTCCTAAGCTG-3′; hBCAT1-R, 5′ –
GCACAATTGTCCAGTCGCTC-3′; hMYC-F, 5′ –GAGCAAGGACGCGACTCTCC-3′; 
hMYC-R, 5′ –GCACCGAGTCGTAGTCGAGG-3′. Following genes were analyzed with 
TaqMan Gene Expression Assays: Bcat1 (Mm00500289_m1), Bcat2 (Mm00802192_m1), 
Gpt1 (Mm00805379_g1), Gpt2 (Mm00558028_m1), Got1 (Mm00494698_m1), Got2 
(Mm00494703_m1).
Amino acid and keto acid quantification
Leukemia cells or peripheral blood samples drawn from mice bearing myeloid leukemia 
were used for amino acid and keto acid analysis by high-performance liquid chromatography 
(HPLC)-fluorescence detection, as described32–34. In brief, two hundred thousand live 
leukemia cells per sample were sorted and washed twice with ice-cold PBS to remove media 
components prior to amino acid extraction. The blood plasma was prepared by 
centrifugation of the peripheral blood samples at 2,000 × g at 4°C for 10 min. Plasma 
fractions were then treated with 45% methanol/45% acetonitrile containing 6-aminocaproic 
acid (internal standard for amino acid analysis) or α-ketovalerate (internal standard for keto 
acid analysis) on ice for 10 min. Cell samples were treated with 80% methanol instead of 
45% methanol/acetonitrile mixture. After removing the insoluble particles by centrifugation, 
the supernatants were collected and dried using a SpeedVac at 30–45°C. For amino acid 
quantification, the dried samples were treated with the amine-reactive 4-fluoro-7-nitro-2,1,3-
benzoxadizole (NBD-F) to derivatize the amino acids. HPLC separation of NBD-amino 
acids was carried out on an Inertsil ODS-4 column (3.0 × 250 mm, 5 μm, GL Sciences, 
Tokyo, Japan) at a flow rate of 0.6 ml min−1. We used two types of mobile phase conditions 
for the separation of 16 amino acids. The mobile phases included (A) 25 mM citrate buffer 
containing 25 mM sodium perchlorate (pH 6.2) and (B) water/acetonitrile (50/50, v/v). The 
gradient conditions were as follows: t=0 min, 10% B; t=20 min, 50% B; and t=30 min, 
100% B. For NBD-Asn, Ser, Thr, Gln and Phe analysis, 25 mM citrate buffer containing 25 
mM sodium perchlorate (pH 4.4) was used as the mobile phase A. NBD-amino acids were 
Hattori et al.
Page 10
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 detected with excitation and emission wavelengths of 470 and 530 nm, respectively. For keto 
acid quantification, dried samples were treated with o-phenylenediamine (OPD) to derivatize 
alpha-keto acids, followed by liquid-liquid extraction with ethyl acetate. HPLC separation of 
OPD-keto acids was carried out on an Inertsil ODS-4 column (3.0 × 250 mm, 5 μm) at a 
flow rate of 0.6 ml min−1. Mobile phase was water/methanol (55/45, v/v). The fluorescence 
detection was carried out at the emission wavelength of 410 nm with excitation of 350 nm.
Measurement of leucine uptake in primary mouse leukemia cells
Primary mouse leukemia cells from the spleens of the mice bearing myeloid leukemia were 
used for the analysis of leucine uptake essentially as described previously35,36. In brief, live 
leukemia cells were sorted and washed with HBSS to remove media components. The cells 
were incubated at 37°C for 1–3 min with pre-warmed HBSS containing 10 μM [(U)-14C]-L-
leucine (Moravek Inc., specific activity, 328 mCi/mmol). The cells were subseuently washed 
twice with cold HBSS and lysed using 100 mM NaOH. The solubilized cell lysates were 
mixed with the EcoLume liquid scintillation cocktail (MP Biomedicals), and radioactivity 
was measured using an LS6500 liquid scintillation counter (Beckman Coulter). Leucine 
uptake was quantified using a calibration curve of [14C]-L-leucine reference standard 
samples.
NMR-based metabolic analysis
Cells were cultured and labeled in media supplemented with either 170 μM [(U)-13C]-L-
valine, 30 or 170 μM [(U)-13C]-ketoisovalerate (KIV) sodium salt (for 13C tracer 
experiments; Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) or 2 mM [amine-15N]-L-glutamine (for 15N 
tracer experiments; Cambridge Isotope Laboratories). The concentrations are based on the 
standard RPMI-1640 media formulation. At the time of collection, the cells were washed 
twice with ice-cold PBS and extracted with 80% methanol on ice for 10 min. After removing 
the insoluble particles by centrifugation, the supernatants were collected and dried using a 
SpeedVac at 30°C. The cell extracts were dissolved in a total volume of 90 μL 99.96% D2O 
containing 0.1mM DSS-d6 and transferred to 3-mm NMR tubes (Shigemi Inc.). Calibration 
samples (150–250 mM) were prepared from 98% 15N-enriched glutamine, glutamic acid, 
valine, leucine, isoleucine and alanine (Isotec Inc.) and 13C-enriched KIV and 13C,15N-
enriched valine (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) in D2O containing 0.1 mM DSS. All 
signals were identified either with authentic samples or by reference to literature values. 
Two-dimensional proton correlated spectra (COSY and TOCSY) were also collected in 
some cases to confirm assignments. The data were collected at 25°C on Agilent DD2 
spectrometers at 600 or 900 MHz equipped with cryogenically cooled probes. The 1H data 
were collected with a 20-sec relaxation delay for accurate integration. The 15N data were 
acquired with a two-dimensional heteronuclear multiple bond correlation experiment 
(gNhmbc) derived from the Agilent pulse program library with the transfer delay set for 
a 15N-1H coupling value of 4 Hz. Typically, data sets were 2000 × 64 complex points with 
the 15N dimension set between 30 and 46 ppm, and 64 scans per point. The 13C data were 
acquired with a two-dimensional heteronuclear single bond correlation experiment 
(HSQCAD) from the Agilent pulse program library, and the datasets were 1202 × 64 
complex points with the 13C dimension set between 10 and 80 ppm with 16 scans per point. 
One-dimentional spectra were also collected using the same heteronuclear correlation 
Hattori et al.
Page 11
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 experiments for 15N and 13C. The data were processed using MestReNova software 
(Mestrelab Research S.L.). One-dimensional proton data were processed with 0.3 Hz line 
broadening and polynomial baseline correction. The gNhmbc and HSQC data were 
processed with linear prediction and zero-filling in the 15N and 13C dimensions. Integration 
was achieved by summing over peak areas with the contribution of noise subtracted in 
the 15N spectra. To calculate the concentrations in the 15N tracer experiments, the 1H and 
gNhmbc spectra of the calibration samples were integrated, and a scaling factor was derived 
from the ratio of the known concentration of each 98% enriched 15N-amino acid and the 
integral values from the gNhmbc data. These factors are a function of the 3-bond coupling 
between the 15N-amine and β-protons as well as the number of those protons. Therefore, the 
concentrations of each amino acid in cell extracts can be estimated from their integral values 
by applying the respective scaling factor. For quantification of 13C-labeled compounds, the 
methyl groups in the 1H and HSQC spectra of the calibration references were integrated, and 
a scaling factor was derived essentially as described above and used to calculate 
concentrations from the HSQC data of each sample.
Antibodies
Anti-FLAG monoclonal antibody M2 (Sigma-Aldrich), anti-MSI2 monoclonal antibody 
EP1305Y (Abcam) and normal Rabbit IgG PP64B (Millipore) were used for 
immunoprecipitation. For Western blotting the following antibodies were used: mouse 
monoclonal BCAT1 (clone ECA39, BD Transduction Laboratories) and Bcat1 OTI3F5 
(OriGene), rabbit monoclonal S6K (#9202 and #2708), pS6K (#9234), AKT (#4691), pAKT, 
T308 (#13038) and pAKT, S473 (#4060) from Cell Signaling, rabbit monoclonal MSI2 
EP1305Y, mouse monoclonal HSP90 F-8 (Santa Cruz Biotech) and mouse monoclonal β-
tubulin BT7R (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
RNA immunoprecipitation assays
K562 cells were lysed in 50 mM Tris/HCl (pH 7.5) containing 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 
1% NP-40, and the Halt Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Fisher 
Scientific). We performed immunoprecipitations with anti-FLAG, anti-MSI2 or rabbit 
normal IgG and protein G magnetic beads (Life Technologies) for 1 h at 4°C. The 
immunoprecipitated protein-RNA complexes were washed three times with low- and high-
salt wash buffers (300 mM or 550 mM NaCl, respectively), followed by three washes in 
PBS. Total RNAs were purified from the washed beads using the RNAqueous-Micro kit 
(Ambion) and subjected to RT-qPCR analysis for quantification. The fold enrichment of the 
transcript amount in the RIP fraction over the amount present in the input sample before RIP 
(RIP/input) was calculated for each sample.
Statistical analysis
Statistical analyses were carried out using GraphPad Prism software version6.0f (GraphPad 
Software Inc.). Data are shown as the mean ± the s.e.m. Two-tailed unpaired Student’s t-
tests or Mann-Whitney U tests were used to determine statistical significance. For Kaplan 
Meier survival analysis, log-rank tests were used for statistical significance (*p<0.05, 
**p<0.01, ***p<0.001).
Hattori et al.
Page 12
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Data availability
Source gel images and source data from animal models are included in Supplementary 
Information files. All NMR spectral data from metabolic analyses are deposited under the 
Project ID PR000423 in Metabolomics Workbench37. All other relevant data are available 
from the corresponding author upon request.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Extended Data
Extended Data Figure 1. Change in the amino acid metabolism in leukemic mice
Hattori et al.
Page 13
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 a–d, Representative chromatograms of (a, c) CP-CML and (b, d) BC-CML plasma samples 
derivatized with the amine-specific fluorescent labeling agent NBD-F and analyzed in 
mobile phases at (a, b) pH 6.2 or (c, d) pH 4.4. Each NBD-amino acid peak is assigned as 
indicated. IS, internal standard (NBD-6-aminocaproic acid). e, Plasma amino acid levels in 
mice with CP- and BC-CML. Blood plasma samples were prepared from mice with CP- and 
BC-CML, methanol-extracted and dried under a vacuum. The dried extracts were analyzed 
for quantification. Open and closed bars indicate CP-CML (n=5) and BC-CML (n=7) 
specimens, respectively. Two-tailed t-test. †p<0.06, *p<0.05, **p<0.01. f, Leucine transport 
in primary CP- and BC-CML cells. BCR-ABL1-YFP+PI− live leukemia cells (5 × 105) were 
sorted from premorbid animals and placed in a pre-warmed uptake media containing 10 μM 
[(U)-14C]-labeled L-leucine. After incubation at 37°C for the indicated times, the cells were 
washed with cold HBSS and lysed with 0.1 M sodium hydroxide, and the radioactivity was 
measured using a scintillation counter. The gray and blue lines indicate the average leucine 
uptake in CP- and BC-CML samples, (n= 5 and 3, respectively). Error bars indicate s.e.m. 
*p<0.05. NS, not statistically significant (p>0.05). g, RT-qPCR analysis of Bcat1 and Bcat2 
expression in CP- and BC-CML cells (n=4 each). The expression levels are normalized and 
displayed relative to the control beta-2-microglobulin gene expression. Error bars indicate 
s.e.m.; ***p<0.001, NS, not statistically significant (p>0.05). h, BCAT1 protein expression 
in mouse primary CP- and BC-CML cells. This graph shows BCAT1 protein expression 
levels normalized relative to the HSP90 loading control (CP-CML, n=7; BC-CML, n=9). 
Error bars indicate s.e.m. *p<0.05. i, Tissue-specific expression of mouse Bcat1. The 
expression was detectable in the myeloid cell line M1, primary mouse BC-CML cells, 
olfactory bulb (Olf bulb), whole brain and testis. B2m, beta-2-microglobulin. j, Schematics 
of the structures of human and mouse BCAT1 proteins. The shaded boxes represent 
aminotransferase domains. K, a Lys residue for the binding of the pyridoxal phosphate 
cofactor. CVVC, a conserved redox-sensitive CXXC motif. Regions targeted with shRNAs 
in this study are shown as thick bars (shBcat1-a and -b, and shBCAT1-c and -d). k, l, 
Alanine and aspartate transaminase gene expression in CP- and BC-CML. RT-qPCR 
analysis of (k) Gpt1 and Gpt2, and (l) Got1 and Got2 expression in CP- and BC-CML 
samples (n=4 each). The expression levels are normalized and displayed relative to the 
expression of the B2m control. Error bars indicate s.e.m.; NS, not statistically significant 
(p>0.05).
Hattori et al.
Page 14
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 2. Keto acid metabolism in leukemic mice
a, b, Representative chromatograms of (a) CP- and (b) BC-CML plasma samples derivatized 
with the keto acid-reactive o-phenylenediamine (OPD). Each OPD-keto acid peak is 
assigned as indicated. KG, alpha-ketoglutarate; PYR, pyruvate; KIV, keto-isovalerate; KIC, 
keto-isocaproate; KMV, keto-methylvalerate. IS, internal standard for keto acid analysis 
(OPD-alpha-ketovalerate). c, d, Plasma and intracellular branched-chain keto acid levels in 
CP- and BC-CML. (c) Blood plasma fractions from leukemic mice or (d) FACS-purified live 
leukemia cells (5 × 106) were methanol-extracted and dried under a vacuum. The dried 
extracts were labeled with OPD, extracted with ethyl acetate and analyzed using an HPLC 
system equipped with a fluorescence detector. Open and closed bars indicate CP-CML 
(plasma, n=9; intracellular, n=5) and BC-CML (plasma, n=10; intracellular, n=6) specimens, 
respectively. BCKAs, total branched-chain keto acids. *p<0.05. Error bars indicate s.e.m. e, 
Molar amount of intracellular BCAAs and BCKAs in primary mouse BC-CML cells. The 
amount of each organic acid per one million cells is estimated using calibration curves 
obtained with reference standards for each compound. “%KA/AA” shows the amount of a 
BCKA relative to the corresponding BCAA species.
Hattori et al.
Page 15
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 3. Intracellular BCAA production from BCKA in human K562 BC-CML 
cells
a–f, Regions of HSQC spectra of 13C-labeled metabolites. K562 cells were cultured in 
media supplemented with (a, c) 170 μM 13C-Val and 30 μM non-labeled KIV, or (b, d) 170 
μM non-labeled Val and 30 μM 13C-KIV. After labeling for 15 min, the cells were collected, 
washed with PBS and methanol-extracted for HSQC analysis by high-field NMR 
spectroscopy. Each panel shows the regions of 1D and 2D HSQC spectra for the (a, b) 
intracellular fraction, (c, d) culture supernatant, and (e, f) labeling media alone, respectively. 
Panels a and b are the same as shown in Fig. 1e and f, respectively. g–i, Absence of 
detectable intracellular KIC generation by Leu breakdown. K562 cells were cultured in the 
labeling medium supplemented with 170 μM 13C-Leu and 30 μM non-labeled KIC for 15 
min, and the intracellular 13C-labeled metabolites were analyzed by HSQC analysis. Each 
panel shows region of the 2D spectrum showing 1H-13C HSQC signals for beta, gamma and 
delta carbons of Leu and KIC. (g) intracellular fraction, (h) KIC reference standard (HSQC 
signals derived from natural abundance 13C-KIC), (i) overlay of the spectra g (black) and h 
(red). Note the absence of KIC signals in (g).
Hattori et al.
Page 16
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 4. Intracellular BCAA production via transamination
a–c, Regions of 600 MHz 2D HMBC spectra showing crosspeaks between the amine 
nitrogen and the beta carbon protons. Only those amino acids that have incorporated a 
significant amount of 15N-amine show crosspeak signals. d–f, Regions of 600 MHz 1D 1H 
spectra. Each proton peak is assigned as indicated. DSS, 2,2-dimethyl-2-silapentane-5-
sulfonate. (a, d) Mixture of reference standards of the indicated amino acids, (b, e) K562 
cell sample cultured in the medium containing (amine-15N)-glutamine and (c, f) K562 cell 
sample cultured in the non-labeled standard medium. g, Percentage of newly 
synthesized 15N-labeled BCAAs within total intracellular pool at 72 h after post-labeling for 
each amino acid indicated. “Total BCAAs” shows the percentage including all three BCAA 
species.
Hattori et al.
Page 17
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 5. Roles of Bcat1 in differentiation, proliferation and leukemia 
development in vivo
a, RT-qPCR analysis of Bcat1 expression. Lin− cells from NUP98-HOXA9/BCR-ABL-
induced BC-CML were infected with shCtrl or Bcat1 shRNA (shBcat1-a and shBcat1-b) for 
3 days and resorted for analysis of Bcat1 expression. The expression levels are normalized to 
the level of B2m expression and displayed relative to the control, which was arbitrarily set at 
1. Error bars represent s.e.m. of triplicate PCRs. **p<0.01. b, RT-qPCR analysis of Bcat1 
expression in leukemia cells isolated from diseased mice transplanted with shCtrl- or 
Hattori et al.
Page 18
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 shBcat1-expressing BC-CML cells. The expression levels are normalized and displayed 
relative to the B2m control. ***p<0.001. c, Bcat2 expression in shBcat1-expressing cells. 
Lin− cells from NUP98-HOXA9/BCR-ABL-induced BC-CML were infected with shCtrl or 
Bcat1 shRNA (shBcat1-a and shBcat1-b) for 3 days and resorted for analysis of Bcat2 
expression. The expression levels are normalized to the level of B2m and are displayed 
relative to the control arbitrarily set at 1. Error bars represent the s.e.m. of triplicate PCRs. 
NS, not statistically significant (p>0.05). d, Functional rescue of the shBcat1-induced 
reduction in colony-forming ability with the expression of shRNA-resistant mutant Bcat1 
cDNA. Primary Lin− BC-CML cells transduced with the vector or shRNA-resistant Bcat1 
gene together with the indicated shRNA constructs. **p<0.01 compared with the vector and 
shBcat1-b. e, f, Colony-forming ability of primary HSPCs. (e) Normal HSPCs purified from 
bone marrow based on their LSK phenotype were transduced with the Bcat1 shRNAs 
(shBcat1-a and shBcat1-b) and plated for colony formation. NS, not statistically significant 
(p>0.05). (f) Normal HSPCs were plated for colony formation with the indicated 
concentrations of gabapentin or PBS (-). NS, not statistically significant (p>0.05). **p<0.01 
compared with the PBS control. Photomicrographs showing representative colonies formed 
under each condition. Scale bar, 500 μm. 300 LSK cells were plated per well in triplicate for 
the evaluation of colony-forming activity. Error bars indicate s.e.m. g, Hematoxylin and 
eosin staining of sections of the liver, lung and spleen at the time of onset of clinical signs 
(top 6 rows) and of tissue sections from a disease-free survivor (bottom 2 rows). White 
arrows indicate immature myeloid cells. Portal triad (PT), hemorrhagic necrosis (N), central 
veins (CV), arteriolar profiles (A), bile ducts (B), veins (V), white pulp (WP) and red pulp 
(RP) are indicated. Scale bars, 100 μm for images at 10x and 20 μm for images at 40x 
magnification. h, Representative flow cytometry plots showing lineage marker expression in 
leukemia cells from mice transplanted with the shRNA-infected BC-CML cells. Leukemia 
cells were analyzed for their frequency of the Lin− population. i–k, Effect of conditional 
Bcat1 knockdown on BC-CML maintenance in vivo. (i) Lin− BC-CML cells were infected 
with doxycycline-inducible shRNAs against shBcat1-b or a control (shCtrl) and transplanted 
into recipients (1,500 cells per recipient). After ten days of the transplantation with leukemia 
cells expressing the indicated constructs, (j) donor-derived chimerisms were analyzed. Mice 
were then fed with chow containing doxycycline to induce shRNA expression, and (k) 
survival was monitored. The data shown are from two independent experiments. n=4 for 
shCtrl with no Dox (DOX-); n=7 for shBcat1-b, DOX-; and n=9 each for shCtrl with Dox 
(DOX+) and shBcat1-b, DOX+. **p<0.01 (shCtrl vs shBcat1-b, DOX+). NS, not 
statistically significant (p>0.05). l, Cell cycle distribution of the shRNA-infected leukemia 
cells. Live leukemia cells were isolated from mice transplanted with shRNA-infected BC-
CML cells, fixed and stained with propidium iodide for analysis of cell cycle distribution via 
flow cytometry. m, Apoptotic cells from leukemic mice transplanted with shRNA-infected 
BC-CML cells were analyzed via flow cytometry using Annexin V and 7-aminoactinomycin 
D (7-AAD) staining.
Hattori et al.
Page 19
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 6. BCAT1 cooperates with BCR-ABL1 in blastic transformation in vivo
a, RT-qPCR analysis of Bcat1 expression in normal LSK or Lin− c-Kit+ HSPCs transduced 
with either the vector or Bcat1 retroviruses. The expression levels are normalized and 
displayed relative to the control B2m expression. ***p<0.001. b, Normal LSK or Lin− c-
Kit+ HSPCs were purified from healthy bone marrow and transduced with the indicated 
retroviruses, and the infected cells were plated in triplicate to assess colony formation after 
10 days. Error bars indicate s.e.m. NS, not statistically significant (p>0.05). c, Colony-
forming ability of normal HSPCs expressing BCR-ABL1 and Bcat1. LSK cells were 
purified from healthy bone marrow and transduced with either the control vector or Bcat1 
together with BCR-ABL1 (B/A) retroviruses, and double-positive cells were plated in 
triplicate to assess colony formation after 10 days (plated at a density of 150 cells/well). 
Photomicrographs showing representative colonies formed in each group. Scale bar, 500 μm. 
Error bars indicate s.e.m. ***p<0.001. d, Chimerism of donor–derived cells after 
transplantation with LSK cells expressing the indicated constructs. n=15 for each group. 
*p<0.05. e, Hematoxylin and eosin staining of liver, lung and spleen sections from mice 
transplanted with LSK cells expressing BCR-ABL1 and vector or Bcat1. White arrows 
indicate immature myeloid cells. Scale bars, 100 μm for 10x images and 20 μm for 40x 
images. f, Plasma α-amino acid levels in mice transplanted with LSK cells infected with 
BCR-ABL1 and the vector or Bcat1. Blood plasma fractions were prepared from peripheral 
blood samples, methanol-extracted and dried under a vacuum. The dried extracts were 
labeled with NBD-F and analyzed using an HPLC equipped with a fluorescence detector. 
Open and closed bars indicate vector-control (n=17) and Bcat1 (n=18) specimens, 
respectively. *p<0.05, **p<0.01. g, Representative flow cytometry plots showing lineage 
marker expression in leukemia cells from mice transplanted with LSK cells infected with 
Hattori et al.
Page 20
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 either the control vector or Bcat1 together with BCR-ABL1. Leukemia cells were analyzed 
for their frequency of the Lin− population.
Extended Data Figure 7. BCAT1 is required for human myeloid leukemia
a, RT-qPCR analysis of BCAT1 expression in the human K562 BC-CML cell line 
transduced with lentiviral shCtrl or BCAT1 shRNA (shBCAT1-c and shBCAT1-d). The 
expression levels are normalized and displayed relative to the expression of the B2M 
control. **p<0.01. b, Western blot analysis of BCAT1 protein levels in K562 cells infected 
with the indicated lentiviral shRNA constructs. Human β-tubulin protein (β-Tub) was used 
as the loading control. β-Tub image is the same as shown in Fig. 3j. c, d, Colony-forming 
ability of (c) K562 cells transduced with control (shCtrl) or BCAT1 shRNAs (shBCAT1-c 
and shBCAT1-d) and (d) K562 cells cultured with the indicated concentrations of Gbp. One 
hundred cells were plated per well in triplicate. Photomicrographs show representative 
colonies formed. Scale bar, 200 μm. Error bars indicate s.e.m. **p<0.01, ***p<0.001. e, RT-
qPCR analysis of BCAT1 expression in the samples from the BC-CML patient used in the 
data presented in Fig. 3d that were transduced with control (shCtrl) or BCAT1 shRNA 
(shBCAT1-d). ***p<0.001. f, Colony-forming ability of primary human CD34+ BC-CML 
cells from another patient specimen treated with Gbp. Error bars indicate s.e.m. **p<0.01. 
g–i, Colony-forming ability of (g) MV4-11, (h) U937 and (i) HL60 human AML cells 
treated with the indicated concentrations of Gbp. MV4-11, HL60 cells (300/well) or U937 
(100/well) were plated in triplicate. Photomicrographs show representative colonies formed. 
Scale bars, 200 μm. Error bars indicate s.e.m. *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001. j, BCAT1 
expression in human de novo AML patients. Data for BCAT1 expression levels from the 
TCGA AML dataset were divided into quartiles and were compared. On average, top 
quartile cohort showed 1.6-fold higher expression level than the bottom quartile. **p<0.01.
Hattori et al.
Page 21
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Extended Data Figure 8. Impact of BCAT1 knockdown in K562 cells
a, b, Effect of (a) BCAT1 knockdown or (b) Gbp treatment on the intracellular 
concentrations of glutamate and BCAAs in K562 cells. The shCtrl or PBS control values 
were set as 100%. Error bars indicate s.e.m. n=10 each for (a) and n=3 each for (b). 
**p<0.01. c, AKT activation status in BCAT1- or MSI2-knockdown K562 cells. K562 cells 
treated with shCtrl, shBCAT1 or shMSI2 were analyzed by Western blotting for phospho-
AKT (at Thr308 or Ser473), total AKT, hBCAT1, hMSI2 and HSP90 levels. d, Effect of 
alpha-ketoglutarate supplementation on the colony-forming ability of BCAT1-knockdown 
cells. K562 cells transduced with shCtrl (-) or shBCAT1-d (+) were plated in triplicate with 
or without 1 mM dimethyl-alpha-ketoglutarate (KG) and/or 4 mM BCAAs as indicated. n=3 
technical replicates. Error bars indicate s.e.m. *p<0.05, **p<0.01. NS, not statistically 
significant (p>0.05).
Extended Data Figure 9. MSI2 and BCAT1 expression in human cancer
a, Microarray data analysis of MSI2 expression in human CML. Gene expression data of 
chronic (gray, n=57), accelerated (pink, n=15) and blast crisis (blue, n=41) phase patients 
were retrieved from the NCBI GEO database (GSE4170). The bar represents the normalized 
expression value in each specimen. b, Co-expression analysis of the BCAT1 and MSI2 genes 
in human cancer. Pearson correlation coefficients were used to evaluate the extent of co-
Hattori et al.
Page 22
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 expression patterns. c, Schematic of the human BCAT1 transcript. The bars represent the 
putative MSI binding elements (MBEs; r(G/A)U1-3AGU). Forty MBEs were identified 
within the 3′-UTR of BCAT1. CDS, coding sequence for hBCAT1 protein. d, K562 cells 
infected with lentiviral shRNA against MSI2 (shMSI2) or shCtrl (-) were analyzed by 
Western blotting for phospho-S6 kinase (at Thr389; pS6K), total S6K, hMSI2 and HSP90 
levels. Note that MSI2 knockdown reduced the levels of BCAT1 protein and phospho-S6K.
Acknowledgments
We thank Drs. Warren Pear, David Baltimore and Scott Lowe for plasmids and Drs. Stephen Dalton, Craig Jordan, 
Bryan Zimdahl, Jun Ninomiya-Tsuji, Kazuhito Sai, Kunihiro Matsumoto, Hiroshi Hanafusa, Tomoaki Mizuno, 
Yachiyo Kuwatsuka, Yosuke Minami and Matthew Merritt for discussions and comments on the manuscript. We 
also thank Dr. Julie Nelson at the CTEGD Cytometry Shared Resource Lab for assistance in cell sorting, Drs. 
Kazuhisa Sekimizu, Christopher West, Msano Mandalasi and Hanke van der Wel for advice on radioisotope use, 
and Kristen MacKeil, Jamie Nist and Kazutomo Ogata for technical help. This work was supported by grants from 
the University of Georgia Research Foundation and the Heather Wright Cancer Research Fund (T.I.); by the Japan 
Society for the Promotion of Science Bilateral Open Partnership Joint Research Projects Program (M.T.); A.S.E. 
and the CCRC NMR facility were partially supported by the Southeast Center for Integrated Metabolomics, NIH 
U24DK097209 and the Georgia Research Alliance.
References
1. Vander Heiden MG. Targeting cancer metabolism: a therapeutic window opens. Nat Rev Drug 
Discov. 2011; 10:671–684. [PubMed: 21878982] 
2. DeBerardinis RJ, Thompson CB. Cellular metabolism and disease: what do metabolic outliers teach 
us? Cell. 2012; 148:1132–1144. [PubMed: 22424225] 
3. Daley G, Van Etten R, Baltimore D. Induction of chronic myelogenous leukemia in mice by the 
P210bcr/abl gene of the Philadelphia chromosome. Science. 1990; 247:824–830. [PubMed: 
2406902] 
4. Dash AB, et al. A murine model of CML blast crisis induced by cooperation between BCR/ABL 
and NUP98/HOXA9. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2002; 99:7622–7627. [PubMed: 12032333] 
5. Brosnan JT, Brosnan ME. Branched-chain amino acids: enzyme and substrate regulation. J Nutr. 
2006; 136:207S–11S. [PubMed: 16365084] 
6. Hutson SM, Sweatt AJ, Lanoue KF. Branched-chain amino acid metabolism: implications for 
establishing safe intakes. J Nutr. 2005; 135:1557S–64S. [PubMed: 15930469] 
7. Hutson SM, et al. Role of branched-chain aminotransferase isoenzymes and gabapentin in 
neurotransmitter metabolism. J Neurochem. 1998; 71:863–874. [PubMed: 9681479] 
8. Radich JP, et al. Gene expression changes associated with progression and response in chronic 
myeloid leukemia. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2006; 103:2794–2799. [PubMed: 16477019] 
9. Wolfson RL, et al. Sestrin2 is a leucine sensor for the mTORC1 pathway. Science. 2016; 351:43–48. 
[PubMed: 26449471] 
10. Han JM, et al. Leucyl-tRNA synthetase is an intracellular leucine sensor for the mTORC1-
signaling pathway. Cell. 2012; 149:410–424. [PubMed: 22424946] 
11. Bar-Peled L, Sabatini DM. Regulation of mTORC1 by amino acids. Trends Cell Biol. 2014; 
24:400–406. [PubMed: 24698685] 
12. Jewell JL, Russell RC, Guan KL. Amino acid signalling upstream of mTOR. Nat Rev Mol Cell 
Biol. 2013; 14:133–139. [PubMed: 23361334] 
13. Okano H, Imai T, Okabe M. Musashi: a translational regulator of cell fate. J Cell Sci. 2002; 
115:1355–1359. [PubMed: 11896183] 
14. Sutherland JM, McLaughlin EA, Hime GR, Siddall NA. The Musashi family of RNA binding 
proteins: master regulators of multiple stem cell populations. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2013; 786:233–
245. [PubMed: 23696360] 
15. Rentas S, et al. Musashi-2 attenuates AHR signalling to expand human haematopoietic stem cells. 
2016; 532:508–511.
Hattori et al.
Page 23
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 16. Imai T, et al. The neural RNA-binding protein Musashi1 translationally regulates mammalian 
numb gene expression by interacting with its mRNA. Mol Cell Biol. 2001; 21:3888–3900. 
[PubMed: 11359897] 
17. Cragle C, MacNicol AM. Musashi protein-directed translational activation of target mRNAs is 
mediated by the poly(A) polymerase, germ line development defective-2. J Biol Chem. 2014; 
289:14239–14251. [PubMed: 24644291] 
18. Wang XY, et al. Musashi1 regulates breast tumor cell proliferation and is a prognostic indicator of 
poor survival. Mol Cancer. 2010; 9:221. [PubMed: 20727204] 
19. Muto J, et al. RNA-Binding Protein Musashi1 Modulates Glioma Cell Growth through the Post-
Transcriptional Regulation of Notch and PI3 Kinase/Akt Signaling Pathways. PLoS ONE. 2012; 
7:e33431. [PubMed: 22428049] 
20. Ito T, et al. Regulation of myeloid leukaemia by the cell-fate determinant Musashi. Nature. 2010; 
466:765–768. [PubMed: 20639863] 
21. Kharas MG, et al. Musashi-2 regulates normal hematopoiesis and promotes aggressive myeloid 
leukemia. Nat Med. 2010; 16:903–908. [PubMed: 20616797] 
22. Yoshikawa R, et al. ECA39 is a novel distant metastasis-related biomarker in colorectal cancer. 
World J Gastroenterol. 2006; 12:5884–5889. [PubMed: 17007058] 
23. Tönjes M, et al. BCAT1 promotes cell proliferation through amino acid catabolism in gliomas 
carrying wild-type IDH1. Nat Med. 2013; 19:901–908. [PubMed: 23793099] 
24. Lagadec C, et al. The RNA-binding protein Musashi-1 regulates proteasome subunit expression in 
breast cancer- and glioma-initiating cells. Stem Cells. 2014; 32:135–144. [PubMed: 24022895] 
25. Li N, et al. The Msi Family of RNA-Binding Proteins Function Redundantly as Intestinal 
Oncoproteins. Cell Rep. 2015; 13:2440–2455. [PubMed: 26673327] 
26. Mayers JR, et al. Tissue of origin dictates branched-chain amino acid metabolism in mutant Kras-
driven cancers. Science. 2016; 353:1161–1165. [PubMed: 27609895] 
References - Methods
27. Domen J, Cheshier SH, Weissman IL. The role of apoptosis in the regulation of hematopoietic 
stem cells: Overexpression of Bcl-2 increases both their number and repopulation potential. J Exp 
Med. 2000; 191:253–264. [PubMed: 10637270] 
28. Qin XF, An DS, Chen IS, Baltimore D. Inhibiting HIV-1 infection in human T cells by lentiviral-
mediated delivery of small interfering RNA against CCR5. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2003; 
100:183–188. [PubMed: 12518064] 
29. Mayotte N, Roy DC, Yao J, Kroon E, Sauvageau G. Oncogenic interaction between BCR-ABL and 
NUP98-HOXA9 demonstrated by the use of an in vitro purging culture system. Blood. 2002; 
100:4177–4184. [PubMed: 12393433] 
30. Neering SJ, et al. Leukemia stem cells in a genetically defined murine model of blast-crisis CML. 
Blood. 2007; 110:2578–2585. [PubMed: 17601986] 
31. Ashton JM, et al. Gene Sets Identified with Oncogene Cooperativity Analysis Regulate In Vivo 
Growth and Survival of Leukemia Stem Cells. Cell Stem Cell. 2012; 11:359–372. [PubMed: 
22863534] 
32. Song Y, Funatsu T, Tsunoda M. Amino acids analysis using a monolithic silica column after 
derivatization with 4-fluoro-7-nitro-2,1,3-benzoxadiazole (NBD-F). J Chromatogr B Analyt 
Technol Biomed Life Sci. 2011; 879:335–340.
33. Song Y, Funatsu T, Tsunoda M. Rapid determination of amino acids in biological samples using a 
monolithic silica column. Amino Acids. 2012; 42:1897–1902. [PubMed: 21505823] 
34. Pailla K, Blonde-Cynober F, Aussel C, De Bandt JP, Cynober L. Branched-chain keto-acids and 
pyruvate in blood: measurement by HPLC with fluorimetric detection and changes in older 
subjects. Clin Chem. 2000; 46:848–853. [PubMed: 10839775] 
35. Segawa H, et al. Identification and functional characterization of a Na+-independent neutral amino 
acid transporter with broad substrate selectivity. J Biol Chem. 1999; 274:19745–19751. [PubMed: 
10391916] 
Hattori et al.
Page 24
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 36. Morimoto E, et al. Establishment and Characterization of Mammalian Cell Lines Stably 
Expressing Human L-Type Amino Acid Transporters. J Pharmacol Sci. 2008; 108:505–516. 
[PubMed: 19075510] 
37. Sud M, et al. Metabolomics Workbench: An international repository for metabolomics data and 
metadata, metabolite standards, protocols, tutorials and training, and analysis tools. Nucleic Acids 
Res. 2016; 44:D463–70. [PubMed: 26467476] 
Hattori et al.
Page 25
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. Activated BCAA production by BCAT1 in BC-CML
a, Intracellular amino acid levels in CP-CML (n=7, open bars) and BC-CML (n=9, closed 
bars). Amounts per 2 × 105 cells. b, Bcat1 expression in normal and leukemic hematopoietic 
cells. Serial cDNA dilutions were used for RT-PCR analysis. Normal LSK cells, CP- and 
BC-CML cells, M1 myeloid cells and no reverse transcriptase (-RT) and water controls are 
shown. B2m, beta-2-microglobulin. c, BCAT1 protein expression in primary mouse 
leukemia (n=3 each). d, Schematics of the reaction catalyzed by BCAT1. KG, alpha-
ketoglutarate. e–h, Intracellular Val production from KIV captured by 1H-13C HSQC 
analysis. (e, f) 1D (top) and 2D (bottom) HSQC spectra. The amounts of (g) 13C-KIV and 
(h) 13C-Val produced per one million cells are shown (n=3 each). i, 15N-amine incorporation 
into BCAAs. The amounts per one million cells. n=3 per time point. j, BCAT1-dependent 
production of BCAAs. The amounts of 15N-BCAAs produced are normalized with that 
of 15N-Glu/Gln. n=3 each. *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001 by two-tailed t-test. All data are 
mean ± s.e.m.
Hattori et al.
Page 26
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. Bcat1 is essential for BC-CML propagation and differentiation arrest
a, b, Colony-forming ability of primary Lin− BC-CML cells (a) transduced with the 
indicated shRNAs, or (b) plated with the indicated concentrations of gabapentin or vehicle 
(-). 1,000 cells/well (n=3). Photomicrographs show representative colonies formed under 
each condition. Scale bar, 500 μm. c, Bcat1 knockdown impaired BC-CML development in 
vivo. BC-CML cells expressing the indicated constructs were transplanted, and the survival 
of the recipients was monitored. shCtrl, n=20; shBcat1-a, n=19; shBcat1-b, n=16. d, g, 
Percentage of immature myeloblasts in leukemic mice. Photomicrographs of Wright’s 
stained leukemia cells. Arrowheads, immature myeloblasts; arrows, differentiating 
myelocytes and mature band cells. Scale bar, 10 μm. e, Survival curve of mice serially 
transplanted with Lin− cells from primary shRNA-expressing leukemias. 1,000 cells/mouse 
(1k), n=10 for shCtrl, n=8 for shBcat1-a; and 3,000 cells/mouse (3k), n=9 for shCtrl, n=10 
for shBcat1-a. f, Survival curve of mice transplanted with LSK cells infected with BCR-
ABL1 and the vector-control or Bcat1. n=17 each. Inset, spleens from the indicated groups. 
Error bars indicate s.e.m. *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001 by two-tailed t-test (d, g) or log-
rank test (c, e, f).
Hattori et al.
Page 27
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. BCAT1 activation and requirement in human myeloid leukemia
a, BCAT1 expression in healthy subjects (n=5) and in patients with chronic and blast crisis 
CML (n=4 each) at IMSUT Hospital, the University of Tokyo. b–c, Microarray data analysis 
of (b) BCAT1 and (c) BCAT2 expression in 57 chronic (gray), 15 accelerated (pink) and 41 
blast crisis (blue) phase patients. The bars represent the normalized expression in each 
specimen. d, e, Colony-forming ability of primary human BC-CML cells treated with (d) 
shBCAT1 or (e) Gbp. n=3 each. Two independent patient specimens were tested. f, BCAT1 
expression in healthy subjects and de novo AML patients at IMSUT Hospital (n=5). g, 
Colony-forming ability of Gbp-treated primary human AML cells. h, Kaplan-Meier analysis 
of overall survival in the AML patient cohorts with low (bottom quartile) or high (top 
quartile) BCAT1 expression. n=93 in each cohort. i, BCAA supplementation augmented the 
colony-forming ability of BCAT1-knockdown K562 cells (n=3). j, Western blotting for the 
indicated proteins. K562 cells treated with shBCAT1-d or 20 mM Gbp for 24 h. (-), shCtrl or 
vehicle controls. k, Effect of BCAA on mTORC1 pathway activation in BCAT1-knockdown 
K562 cells. Cells were treated with or without BCAA or rapamycin, and analyzed at 24 h 
post-treatment. Error bars indicate s.e.m. NS, not statistically significant (p>0.05). *p<0.05, 
**p<0.01, ***p<0.001 by two-tailed t-test (d, e, g, i) or log-rank test (h).
Hattori et al.
Page 28
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. RNA binding protein MSI2 mediates BCAT1 activation in BC-CML
a, b, RNA immunoprecipitation (RIP) with (a) anti-FLAG antibody from K562 cells 
expressing empty vector, FLAG-tagged MSI2 (WT) or FLAG-MSI2 with defective RNA 
binding domains (RBD), or (b) RIP with anti-MSI2 (αMSI2) or a control IgG (nIgG) from 
K562 cells. Co-immunoprecipitated RNAs were analyzed for the enrichment of BCAT1, 
beta-2-microglobulin (B2M) and c-MYC transcripts. n=3 each. c, d, Effect of (c) BCAT1 
overexpression and (d) BCAA supplementation on the colony-forming ability of MSI2-
knockdown K562 cells (n=3). (-), shCtrl or vehicle controls. e, Effect of nutrient 
supplementation on mTORC1 pathway activation in MSI2-knockdown K562 cells. f, 
Schematic model of the MSI2-BCAT1-BCAA axis in BC-CML. Error bars indicate s.e.m. 
*p<0.05, **p<0.01, by two-tailed t-test.
Hattori et al.
Page 29
Nature. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 November 17.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
