 SPECIAL ARTICLE
2015 American Thyroid Association Management
Guidelines for Adult Patients with Thyroid Nodules
and Differentiated Thyroid Cancer
The American Thyroid Association Guidelines Task Force
on Thyroid Nodules and Differentiated Thyroid Cancer
Bryan R. Haugen,
1,* Erik K. Alexander,2 Keith C. Bible,3 Gerard M. Doherty,4 Susan J. Mandel,5
Yuri E. Nikiforov,6 Furio Pacini,7 Gregory W. Randolph,8 Anna M. Sawka,9 Martin Schlumberger,
10
Kathryn G. Schuff,
1
1 Steven I. Sherman,
12 Julie Ann Sosa,
13 David L. Steward,
14
R. Michael Tuttle,
15 and Leonard Wartofsky16
Background: Thyroid nodules are a common clinical problem, and differentiated thyroid cancer is becoming
increasingly prevalent. Since the American Thyroid Association’s (ATA’s) guidelines for the management of
these disorders were revised in 2009, significant scientific advances have occurred in the field. The aim of these
guidelines is to inform clinicians, patients, researchers, and health policy makers on published evidence relating
to the diagnosis and management of thyroid nodules and differentiated thyroid cancer.
Methods: The specific clinical questions addressed in these guidelines were based on prior versions of the
guidelines, stakeholder input, and input of task force members. Task force panel members were educated on
knowledge synthesis methods, including electronic database searching, review and selection of relevant cita-
tions, and critical appraisal of selected studies. Published English language articles on adults were eligible for
inclusion. The American College of Physicians Guideline Grading System was used for critical appraisal of
evidence and grading strength of recommendations for therapeutic interventions. We developed a similarly
formatted system to appraise the quality of such studies and resultant recommendations. The guideline panel
had complete editorial independence from the ATA. Competing interests of guideline task force members were
regularly updated, managed, and communicated to the ATA and task force members.
Results: The revised guidelines for the management of thyroid nodules include recommendations regarding
initial evaluation, clinical and ultrasound criteria for fine-needle aspiration biopsy, interpretation of fine-needle
aspiration biopsy results, use of molecular markers, and management of benign thyroid nodules. Re-
commendations regarding the initial management of thyroid cancer include those relating to screening for
thyroid cancer, staging and risk assessment, surgical management, radioiodine remnant ablation and therapy,
and thyrotropin suppression therapy using levothyroxine. Recommendations related to long-term management
1University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado.
2Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
3The Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
4Boston Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts.
5Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
6University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
7The University of Siena, Siena, Italy.
8Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
9University Health Network, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
10Institute Gustave Roussy and University Paris Sud, Villejuif, France.
11Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, Oregon.
12University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.
13Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North Carolina.
14University of Cincinnati Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio.
15Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York.
16MedStar Washington Hospital Center, Washington, DC.
*Chair.
Authors are listed in alphabetical order and were appointed by ATA to independently formulate the content of this manuscript. None of
the scientific or medical content of the manuscript was dictated by the ATA.
THYROID
Volume 26, Number 1, 2016
ª American Thyroid Association
ª Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.
DOI: 10.1089/thy.2015.0020
1
 of differentiated thyroid cancer include those related to surveillance for recurrent disease using imaging and
serum thyroglobulin, thyroid hormone therapy, management of recurrent and metastatic disease, consideration
for clinical trials and targeted therapy, as well as directions for future research.
Conclusions: We have developed evidence-based recommendations to inform clinical decision-making in the
management of thyroid nodules and differentiated thyroid cancer. They represent, in our opinion, contemporary
optimal care for patients with these disorders.
INTRODUCTION
T
hyroid nodules are a common clinical problem.
Epidemiologic studies have shown the prevalence of
palpable thyroid nodules to be approximately 5% in women
and 1% in men living in iodine-sufficient parts of the world
(1,2). In contrast, high-resolution ultrasound (US) can detect
thyroid nodules in 19%–68% of randomly selected individ-
uals, with higher frequencies in women and the elderly (3,4).
The clinical importance of thyroid nodules rests with the need
to exclude thyroid cancer, which occurs in 7%–15% of cases
depending on age, sex, radiation exposure history, family
history, and other factors (5,6). Differentiated thyroid cancer
(DTC), which includes papillary and follicular cancer, com-
prises the vast majority (>90%) of all thyroid cancers (7). In
the United States, approximately 63,000 new cases of thyroid
cancer were predicted to be diagnosed in 2014 (8) compared
with 37,200 in 2009 when the last ATA guidelines were
published. The yearly incidence has nearly tripled from 4.9 per
100,000 in 1975 to 14.3 per 100,000 in 2009 (9). Almost the
entire change has been attributed to an increase in the inci-
dence of papillary thyroid cancer (PTC). Moreover, 25% of the
new thyroid cancers diagnosed in 1988–1989 were £1 cm
compared with 39% of the new thyroid cancer diagnoses in
2008–2009 (9). This tumor shift may be due to the increasing
use of neck ultrasonography or other imaging and early diag-
nosis and treatment (10), trends that are changing the initial
treatment and follow-up for many patients with thyroid cancer.
A recent population-based study from Olmsted County re-
ported the doubling of thyroid cancer incidence from 2000 to
2012 compared to the prior decade as entirely attributable to
clinically occult cancers detected incidentally on imaging or
pathology (11). By 2019, one study predicts that PTC will
become the third most common cancer in women at a cost of
$19–21 billion in the United States (12). Optimization of long-
term health outcomes and education about potential prognosis
for individuals with thyroid neoplasms is critically important.
In 1996, the American Thyroid Association (ATA) pub-
lished treatment guidelines for patients with thyroid nodules
and DTC (13). Over the last 15–20 years, there have been
many advances in the diagnosis and therapy of both thyroid
nodules and DTC, but clinical controversy exists in many
areas. A long history of insufficient peer-reviewed research
funding for high-quality clinical trials in the field of thyroid
neoplasia may be an important contributing factor to existing
clinical uncertainties (12). Methodologic limitations or con-
flicting findings of older studies present a significant chal-
lenge to modern-day medical decision-making in many
aspects of thyroid neoplasia. Although they are not a specific
focus of these guidelines, we recognize that feasibility and cost
considerations of various diagnostic and therapeutic options
also present important clinical challenges in many clinical
practice settings.
AIM AND TARGET AUDIENCE
Our objective in these guidelines is to inform clinicians,
patients, researchers, and health policy makers about the best
available evidence (and its limitations), relating to the dia-
gnosis and treatment of adult patients with thyroid nodules
and DTC. These guidelines should not be applied to children
(<18–20 years old); recent ATA guidelines for children with
thyroid nodules and DTC were published in 2015 (14). This
document is intended to inform clinical decision-making. A
major goal of these guidelines is to minimize potential harm
from overtreatment in a majority of patients at low risk for
disease-specific mortality and morbidity, while appropriately
treating and monitoring those patients at higher risk. These
guidelines should not be interpreted as a replacement for
clinical judgement and should be used to complement in-
formed, shared patient–health care provider deliberation on
complex issues. It is important to note that national clinical
practice guidelines may not necessarily constitute a legal
standard of care in all jurisdictions (15). If important differ-
ences in practice settings present barriers to meaningful im-
plementation of the recommendations of these guidelines,
interested physicians or groups (in or outside of the United
States) may consider adapting the guidelines using estab-
lished methods (16,17) (ADAPTE Collaboration, 2009;
www.g-i-n.net). The ADAPTE Collaboration is an interna-
tional group of researchers, guideline developers, and guide-
line implementers who aim to promote the development and
use of clinical practice guidelines through the adaption of
existing guidelines. Because our primary focus was review-
ing the quality of evidence related to health outcomes and
diagnostic testing, we decided a priori not to focus on eco-
nomic resource implications in these guidelines. As part of
our review, we identified some knowledge gaps in the field,
with associated future research priorities.
Other groups have previously developed clinical practice
guidelines, including the American Association of Clinical
Endocrinologists, Associazione Medici Endocrinologi, and
the European Thyroid Association (18), the British Thyroid
Association and The Royal College of Physicians (19), and
the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (www.nccn
.org). The European Thyroid Association has published con-
sensus guidelines for postoperative US in the management of
DTC (20). The Society for Nuclear Medicine and Molecular
Imaging (21) and the European Association of Nuclear Med-
icine have also published guidelines for radioiodine (RAI)
therapy of DTC (22). The Japanese Society of Thyroid Sur-
geons and the Japanese Association of Endocrine Surgeons
2
HAUGEN ET AL.
 have recently revised guidelines on treatment of patients with
thyroid tumors (23). Given the existing controversies in the
field, differences in critical appraisal approaches for existing
evidence, and differences in clinical practice patterns across
geographic regions and physician specialties, it should not be
surprising that the organizational guidelines are not in com-
plete agreement for all issues. Such differences highlight the
importance of clarifying evidence uncertainties with future
high quality clinical research.
METHODS
ATA Thyroid Nodules and Differentiated Thyroid Cancer
guidelines were published in 2006 (24) and revised in 2009
(25). Because of the rapid growth of the literature on this
topic, plans for revising the guidelines within approximately
4 years of publication were made at the inception of the
project. A task force chair was appointed by the ATA Pre-
sident with approval of the Board. A task force of specialists
with complementary expertise (endocrinology, surgery, nu-
clear medicine, radiology, pathology, oncology, molecular
diagnostics, and epidemiology) was appointed. In order to
have broad specialty and geographic representation, as well
as fresh perspectives, one-third of the task force is replaced
for each iteration of the guidelines, per ATA policy. Upon
discussion among the panel members and the Chair with other
Chairs of other ATA guideline committees, the American
College of Physicians’ (ACP) Grading System was adopted
Table 1. Interpretation of the American College of Physicians’ Guideline Grading
System (for Therapeutic Interventions)
Recommendation
Clarity of risk/benefit
Implications
Strong recommendation Benefits clearly outweigh
harms and burdens,
or vice versa.
Patients: Most would want course of action; a person should
request discussion if an intervention is not offered.
Clinicians: Most patients should receive the recommended
course of action.
Policymakers: The recommendation can be adopted as policy
in most circumstances.
Weak recommendation
Benefits closely balanced
with harms and burdens.
Patients: Many would want course of action, but some may
not; the decision may depend on individual circumstances.
Clinicians: Different choices will be appropriate for different
patients; the management decision should be consistent
with patients’ preferences and circumstances.
Policymakers: Policymaking will require careful consideration
and stakeholder input.
No recommendation
Balance of benefits and
risks cannot be determined.
Decisions based on evidence cannot be made.
Table 2. Recommendations (for Therapeutic Interventions) Based on Strength of Evidence
Recommendation
and evidence quality
Description of supporting evidencea
Interpretation
Strong recommendation
High-quality evidence
RCT without important limitations
or overwhelming evidence from
observational studies
Can apply to most patients in most
circumstances without reservation
Moderate-quality evidence
RCT with important limitations
or strong evidence from
observational studies
Can apply to most patients in most
circumstances without reservation
Low-quality evidence
Observational studies/case studies
May change when higher-quality
evidence becomes available
Weak recommendation
High-quality evidence
RCT without important limitations
or overwhelming evidence from
observational studies
Best action may differ based on
circumstances or patients’ values
Moderate-quality evidence
RCT with important limitations
or strong evidence from observational
studies
Best action may differ based on
circumstances or patients’ values
Low-quality evidence
Observational studies/case studies
Other alternatives may be equally
reasonable
Insufficient
Evidence is conflicting, of poor
quality, or lacking
Insufficient evidence to recommend
for or against
aThis description of supporting evidence refers to therapy, therapeutic strategy, or prevention studies. The description of supporting
evidence is different for diagnostic accuracy studies.
RCT, randomized controlled trial.
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
3
 for use in these guidelines, relating to critical appraisal and
recommendations on therapeutic interventions (26) (Tables 1
and 2). An important component of these guidelines was
judged to be critical appraisal of studies of diagnostic tests;
however, the ACP Guideline Grading System is not designed
for this purpose. We reviewed a number of appraisal systems
for diagnostic tests, but some of the complexity and the time-
consuming nature of some systems limited their feasibility
for implementation in our group (27–31). We drafted, re-
vised, and piloted the use of a newly developed diagnostic
test appraisal system that was acceptable to panel members.
This
system
included
consideration
of
the
following
Table 3. Interpretation of the American Thyroid Association Guideline Grading
System for Diagnostic Tests
Recommendation
Accuracy of diagnostic
information versus risks
and burden of testinga
Implications
Strong
recommendation
Knowledge of the diagnostic
test result clearly outweighs
risks and burden of testing
or vice versa.
Patients: In the case of an accurate test for which benefits
outweigh risks/burden, most would want the diagnostic to
be offered (with appropriate counseling). A patient should
request discussion of the test if it is not offered. In contrast,
for a test in which risks and burden outweigh the benefits,
most patients should not expect the test to be offered.
Clinicians: In the case of an accurate test for which
benefits outweigh risks/burden, most patients should
be offered the diagnostic test (and provided relevant
counseling). Counseling about the test should include a
discussion of the risks, benefits, and uncertainties related
to testing (as applicable), as well as the implications of the
test result. In contrast, for a test in which risks and burden
outweigh the perceived benefits, most patients should not
be offered the test, or if the test is discussed, the rationale
against the test should, for the particular clinical situation,
be explained.
Policymakers: In the case of an accurate test for which
benefits outweigh risks/burden, availability of the
diagnostic test should be adopted in health policy.
In contrast, for a test in which risks and burden
outweigh the perceived benefits, some restrictions on
circumstances for test use may need to be considered.
Weak
recommendation
Knowledge of the diagnostic
test result is closely balanced
with risks and burden of testing.
Patients: Most would want to be informed about the
diagnostic test, but some would not want to seriously
consider undergoing the test; a decision may depend
on the individual circumstances (e.g., risk of disease,
comorbidities, or other), the practice environment,
feasibility of optimal execution of the test, and
consideration of other available options.
Clinicians: Different choices will be appropriate for
different patients, and counseling about the test (if
being considered) should include a discussion of the
risks, benefits, and uncertainties related to testing (as
applicable), as well as the implications of the test
result. The decision to perform the test should include
consideration of the patients’ values, preferences,
feasibility, and the specific circumstances. Counseling
the patient on why the test may be helpful or not, in
her/his specific circumstance, may be very valuable in
the decision-making process.
Policymakers: Policymaking decisions on the avail-
ability of the test will require discussion and stake-
holder involvement.
No recommendation
Balance of knowledge of the
diagnostic test result cannot
be determined.
Decisions on the use of the test based on evidence from
scientific studies cannot be made.
aFrequently in these guidelines, the accuracy of the diagnosis of thyroid cancer (relative to a histologic gold standard) was the diagnostic
outcome unless otherwise specified. However, prognostic, disease staging, or risk stratification studies were also included in the grading
scheme of diagnostic studies. For disease staging systems, the implication for use would be on the part of the clinician, in reporting results
in the medical record and communicating them to the patient (at the applicable time point in disease or follow-up trajectory), as opposed to
offering a specific choice of staging/risk stratification system to the patient.
4
HAUGEN ET AL.
 methodologic elements: consecutive recruitment of patients
representative of clinical practice, use of an appropriate ref-
erence gold standard, directness of evidence (e.g., target
population of interest, testing procedures representative of
clinical practice, and relevant outcomes), precision of diag-
nostic accuracy measures (e.g., width of confidence intervals
for estimates such as sensitivity, specificity), and consistency
of results among studies using the same test (Tables 3 and 4).
In the majority of circumstances (unless otherwise specified),
the outcome of interest for the diagnostic test was the diag-
nosis of thyroid cancer (relative to a histologic gold stan-
dard). However, prognostic studies were also graded using
the diagnostic study critical appraisal framework. In terms of
strength of recommendation for use of diagnostic studies, we
modeled our approach on the ACP system for therapeutic
studies, as previously described, but the target outcome was
the accuracy in establishing a definitive diagnosis, largely
relating to the diagnosis of new or recurrent malignancy
(unless otherwise specified). Diagnostic tests or risk stratifi-
cation systems used for estimation of prognosis were also
appraised using the diagnostic test grading system. An im-
portant limitation of our diagnostic test appraisal system is
that it does not specifically examine the clinical utility of a
test in improving long-term health outcomes by execution of
the test as part of an intended therapeutic strategy (unless
specifically noted). However, as much as possible, we tried to
separate recommendations on the diagnostic accuracy of a
test from therapeutic management based on the test result,
with the latter grading being more rigorous and based on
longer term outcomes (whenever possible). It is important to
note that according to our diagnostic test grading system, a
body of well-executed nonrandomized diagnostic accuracy
Table 4. Recommendations (for Diagnostic Interventions) Based on Strength of Evidence
Recommendation and
evidence quality
Methodologic quality of supporting evidence
Interpretation
Strong recommendation
High-quality evidence
Evidence from one or more well-designed
nonrandomized diagnostic accuracy studies
(i.e., observational—cross-sectional or cohort)
or systematic reviews/meta-analyses of such
observational studies (with no concern about
internal validity or external generalizability
of the results)
Implies the test can be offered
to most patients in most
applicable circumstances
without reservation.
Moderate-quality evidence
Evidence from nonrandomized diagnostic accuracy
studies (cross-sectional or cohort), with one or more
possible limitations causing minor concern about
internal validity or external generalizability of the
results
Implies the test can be offered
to most patients in most
applicable circumstances
without reservation.
Low-quality evidence
Evidence from nonrandomized diagnostic accuracy
studies with one or more important limitations
causing serious concern about internal validity
or external generalizability of the results
Implies the test can be offered
to most patients in most
applicable circumstances,
but the utilization of the
test may change when
higher-quality evidence
becomes available.
Weak recommendation
High-quality evidence
Evidence from one or more well-designed nonrando-
mized diagnostic accuracy studies
(i.e., observational—cross-sectional or cohort)
or systematic reviews/meta-analyses of such ob-
servational studies (with no concern about internal
validity or external generalizability of the results)
The degree to which the di-
agnostic test is seriously
considered may differ de-
pending on circumstances
or patients’ or societal
values.
Moderate-quality evidence
Evidence from nonrandomized diagnostic accuracy
studies (cross-sectional or cohort), with one or more
possible limitations causing minor concern about
internal validity or external generalizability of the
results
The degree to which the diag-
nostic test is seriously con-
sidered may differ depending
on individual patients’/
practice circumstances or
patients’ or societal values.
Low-quality evidence
Evidence from nonrandomized diagnostic accuracy
studies with one or more important limitations
causing serious concern about internal validity or
external generalizability of the results.
Alternative options may be
equally reasonable.
Insufficient
Evidence may be of such poor quality, conflicting,
lacking (i.e., studies not done), or not externally
generalizable to the target clinical population such
that the estimate of the true effect of the test is
uncertain and does not permit a reasonable
conclusion to be made.
Insufficient evidence exists to
recommend for or against
routinely offering the diag-
nostic test.
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
5
 studies could be considered high-quality evidence; yet, a
therapeutic strategy incorporating the use of the diagnostic
test would require one or more well-executed randomized
controlled trials (RCTs) to be considered high-quality evi-
dence. In developing and applying our diagnostic test critical
appraisal system, we considered American societal values,
relating to the importance of informing patients about po-
tentially helpful tests developed for their clinical situation
(with counseling on relevant limitations) and the role of
patients in informed, shared decision-making relating to
diagnostic and therapeutic strategies. Such input was based
on thoughtful consideration of stakeholder input, including
input from physician stakeholders who were committee
members. Because this was a preliminary pilot utilization of
this diagnostic test critical appraisal system by our group, we
have labeled recommendations using this system in the
manuscript (diagnostic test recommendation). Moreover, we
anticipate that the future iterations of these guidelines will
likely incorporate further refinements to the system, or even
possible adoption of another system, if it is superior and
feasible to execute by contributing physicians.
Prior to initiating the reviews, all task force members were
provided written and verbal group advice on conducting
electronic literature searches, critical appraisal of articles,
and rationale for formulating strength of recommendations
from a panel member with epidemiology and systematic re-
view expertise (via e-mail documents, a teleconference
meeting on February 21, 2012). For each question, a primary
reviewer performed a literature search, appraised relevant
literature, generated recommendations, accompanying text,
and a relevant bibliography. This was then reviewed by the
secondary reviewer, revised as needed, and presented for
review by the entire panel. Feedback and suggestions for
revisions from the Chair and panel members were obtained
via e-mail, regularly scheduled teleconferences, and face-to-
face meetings held in conjunction with scientific meetings.
Once the manuscript was drafted, all suggestions for revi-
sions were regularly reviewed by all panel members in the
form of a tracked changes draft manuscript and teleconfer-
ences. The draft document continued to be revised until no
further suggestions for further revisions were requested by
any panel members. Thus, general consensus on acceptability
of recommendations and manuscript text was achieved, with
the fundamental understanding that not all recommendations
may be feasible in all practice settings.
Formal stakeholder input in development of these guide-
lines was sought from ATA membership in an online survey
distributed in October 2011. Thyroid cancer survivor group
leadership input was sought from three North American
thyroid cancer groups via e-mail correspondence in January
to March of 2012. We also reviewed any letters, editorials, or
reviews of the 2009 iteration of the guidelines (25) that
were collected by the current Chair of the committee. Pre-
publication verbal feedback on some of the key guideline
recommendations was received at a formal Satellite Sym-
posium held in conjunction with the Endocrine Society
meeting in Chicago on June 19, 2014. The guideline man-
uscript was reviewed and approved by the ATA Board
of Directors, then made available to the ATA membership
for review and comments in September 2014. Substantive
comments were received from 33 members representing
endocrinology, surgery, pathology, and nuclear medicine.
Feedback and suggestions were formally discussed by the
panel, and revisions were made to the manuscript prior to
journal submission. The organization of management guide-
line recommendations is shown in Table 5.
The medical opinions expressed here are those of the au-
thors, and the committee had complete editorial indepen-
dence from the ATA in writing the guidelines. No funding
was received by individual committee members from the
ATA or industry for work on these guidelines. Competing
interests of all committee members were reviewed at incep-
tion of the group, yearly, and upon completion of the
guidelines and are included with this document.
Table 5. Organization of the 2015 ATA Guidelines for Thyroid Nodules
and Differentiated Thyroid Cancer
Page
Location key
Sections and subsections
Itema
10
[A1]
THYROID NODULE GUIDELINES
10
[A2]
What is the role of thyroid cancer screening in people with
familial follicular cell–derived DTC?b
R1b
10
[A3]
What is the appropriate laboratory and imaging evaluation for
patients with clinically or incidentally discovered thyroid
nodules?
10
[A4]
Serum thyrotropin measurement
R2
11
[A5]
Serum thyroglobulin measurement
R3
11
[A6]
Serum calcitonin measurement
R4
11
[A7]
[18F]Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomographyb
R5b
12
[A8]
Thyroid sonography
R6
12
[A9]
US for FNA decision-making
R7
12
[A10]
Recommendations for diagnostic FNA of a thyroid nodule based on
sonographic patternc
R8c F1c, F2c, T6c
16
[A11]
What is the role of FNA, cytology interpretation, and molecular
testing in patients with thyroid nodules?c
R9c, F1c, T7c
17
[A12]
Nondiagnostic cytology
R10
17
[A13]
Benign cytology
R11
18
[A14]
Malignant cytology
R12
19
[A15]
Indeterminate cytology (AUS/FLUS, FN, SUSP)c
(continued)
6
HAUGEN ET AL.
 Table 5. (Continued)
Page
Location key
Sections and subsections
Itema
19
[A16]
What are the principles of the molecular testing of FNA
samples?b
R13–14
21
[A17]
AUS/FLUS cytologyc
R15c
22
[A18]
Follicular neoplasm/suspicious for follicular neoplasm cytology c
R16c
23
[A19]
Suspicious for malignancy cytologyc
R17c
23
[A20]
What is the utility of 18FDG -PET scanning to predict malignant
or benign disease when FNA cytology is indeterminate (AUS/
FLUS, FN, SUSP)?b
R18b
23
[A21]
What is the appropriate operation for cytologically indeterminate
thyroid nodules?c
R19–20c
25
[A22]
How should multinodular thyroid glands (i.e., two or more
clinically relevant nodules) be evaluated for malignancy?
R21–22
25
[A23]
What are the best methods for long-term follow-up of patients
with thyroid nodules?
25
[A24]
Recommendations for initial follow-up of nodules with benign FNA
cytologyc
R23A–Cc
25
[A25]
Recommendation for follow-up of nodules with two benign FNA
cytology resultsb
R23Db
26
[A26]
Follow-up for nodules that do not meet FNA criteriab
R24b
27
[A27]
What is the role of medical or surgical therapy for benign thyroid
nodules?
R25–29
27
[A28]
How should thyroid nodules in pregnant women be managed?
27
[A29]
FNA for thyroid nodules discovered during pregnancy
R30
28
[A30]
Approaches to pregnant patients with malignant or indeterminate
cytology
R31
28
[B1]
DIFFERENTIATED THYROID CANCER: INITIAL
MANAGEMENT GUIDELINES
29
[B2]
Goals of initial therapy of DTC
29
[B3]
What is the role of preoperative staging with diagnostic imaging
and laboratory tests?
29
[B4]
Neck imaging—ultrasound
R32 F3, T6, T8b
30
[B5]
Neck imaging—CT/MRI/PETc
R33c
31
[B6]
Measurement of serum Tg and anti-Tg antibodies
R34
31
[B7]
Operative approach for a biopsy diagnostic for follicular cell–derived
malignancyc
R35c
33
[B8]
Lymph node dissection
R36–37, F3
35
[B9]
Completion thyroidectomy
R38
35
[B10]
What is the appropriate perioperative approach to voice and
parathyroid issues?b
35
[B11]
Preoperative care communicationb
R39b
35
[B12]
Preoperative voice assessmentb
R40–41b, T9b
36
[B13]
Intraoperative voice and parathyroid managementb
R42–43b
37
[B14]
Postoperative careb
R44–45b
37
[B15]
What are the basic principles of histopathologic evaluation of
thyroidectomy samples?b
R46b
40
[B16]
What is the role of postoperative staging systems and risk
stratification in the management of DTC?
40
[B17]
Postoperative staging
R47
40
[B18]
AJCC/UICC TNM staging
T10
41
[B19]
What initial stratification system should be used to estimate
the risk of persistent/recurrent disease?c
R48c, T11b, T12c
43
[B20]
Potential impact of specific clinico-pathologic features on the risk
estimates in PTCb
44
[B21]
Potential impact of BRAFV600E and other mutations on risk of
estimates in PTCb
45
[B22]
Potential impact of postoperative serum Tg on risk estimatesb
46
[B23]
Proposed modifications to the 2009 ATA initial risk stratification
systemb
T12c
46
[B24]
Risk of recurrence as a continuum of riskb
F4b
46
[B25]
How should initial risk estimates be modified over time?b
R49
47
[B26]
Proposed terminology to classify response to therapy and clinical
(continued)
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
7
 Table 5. (Continued)
Page
Location key
Sections and subsections
Itema
implicationsb
47
[B27]
Excellent response: no clinical, biochemical, or structural evidence of
disease after initial therapy (remission, NED)b
T13b
50
[B28]
Biochemical incomplete response: abnormal Tg values in the absence
of localizable diseaseb
T13b
51
[B29]
Structural incomplete response: persistent or newly identified loco-
regional or distant metastasesb
T13b
52
[B30]
Indeterminate response: biochemical or structural findings that
cannot be classified as either benign or malignant (acceptable
response)b
T13b
52
[B31]
Using risk stratification to guide disease surveillance and therapeutic
management decisionsb
53
[B32]
Should postoperative disease status be considered in decision-
making for RAI therapy for patients with DTC?
R50
53
[B33]
Utility of postoperative serum Tg in clinical decision-making
54
[B34]
Potential role of postoperative US in conjunction with postoperative
serum Tg in clinical decision-making
54
[B35]
Role of postoperative radioisotope diagnostic scanning in clinical
decision-making
55
[B36]
What is the role of RAI (including remnant ablation, adjuvant
therapy, or therapy persistent disease) after thyroidectomy in
the primary management of differentiated thyroid cancer?
R51
T14
58
[B37]
What is the role of molecular marker status in therapeutic RAI
decision-making?b
R52b
58
[B38]
How long does thyroid hormone need to be withdrawn in
preparation for RAI remnant ablation/treatment or diagnostic
scanning?
R53
59
[B39]
Can rhTSH (Thyrogen) be used as an alternative to thyroxine
withdrawal for remnant ablation or adjuvant therapy in
patients who have undergone near-total or total
thyroidectomy?
R54
60
[B40]
What activity of 131I should be used for remnant ablation or
adjuvant therapy?c
R55–56c
63
[B41]
Is a low-iodine diet necessary before remnant ablation?
R57
63
[B42]
Should a posttherapy scan be performed following remnant
ablation or adjuvant therapy?
R58
64
[B43]
Early management of DTC after initial therapy
64
[B44]
What is the appropriate degree of initial TSH suppression?
R59
65
[B45]
Is there a role for adjunctive external beam radiation or
chemotherapy?
65
[B46]
External beam radiation
R60
65
[B47]
Systemic adjuvant therapy
R61
65
[C1]
DTC: LONG-TERM MANAGEMENT AND ADVANCED
CANCER MANAGEMENT GUIDELINES
65
[C2]
What are the appropriate features of long-term management?
66
[C3]
What are the criteria for absence of persistent tumor (excellent
response)?
66
[C4]
What are the appropriate methods for following patients after
initial therapy?
66
[C5]
Whatisthe roleofserumTgmeasurement inthe follow-upofDTC?c
R62–63c
66
[C6]
Serum Tg measurement and clinical utility
68
[C7]
Anti-Tg antibodies
68
[C8]
What is the role of serum Tg measurement in patients who have
not undergone RAI remnant ablation?
R64
69
[C9]
What is the role of US and other imaging techniques (RAI
SPECT/CT, CT, MRI, PET-CT) during follow-up?
69
[C10]
Cervical ultrasonography
R65
69
[C11]
Diagnostic whole-body RAI scans
R66–67
70
[C12]
18FDG-PET scanning
R68
71
[C13]
CT and MRIb
R69b
72
[C14]
Using ongoing risk stratification (response to therapy) to guide
disease long-term surveillance and therapeutic management
decisionsb
(continued)
8
HAUGEN ET AL.
 Table 5. (Continued)
Page
Location key
Sections and subsections
Itema
72
[C15]
What is the role of TSH suppression during thyroid hormone
therapy in the long-term follow-up of DTC?c
R70c
T15b
74
[C16]
What is the most appropriate management of DTC patients with
metastatic disease?
74
[C17]
What is the optimal directed approach to patients with suspected
structural neck recurrence?
R71
74
[C18]
Nodal size threshold
75
[C19]
Extent of nodal surgery
75
[C20]
Ethanol injectionb
75
[C21]
Radiofrequency or laser ablationb
75
[C22]
Other therapeutic optionsb
76
[C23]
What is the surgical management of aerodigestive invasion?
R72
76
[C24]
How should RAI therapy be considered for loco-regional or
distant metastatic disease?
76
[C25]
Administered activity of 131I for loco-regional or metastatic diseasec
R73c
77
[C26]
Use of rhTSH (Thyrogen) to prepare patients for 131I therapy for
loco-regional or metastatic disease
R74–75
77
[C27]
Use of lithium in 131I therapy
R76
77
[C28]
How should distant metastatic disease to various organs be
treated?
78
[C29]
Treatment of pulmonary metastases
R77–78
78
[C30]
RAI treatment of bone metastases
R79
79
[C31]
When should empiric RAI therapy be considered for Tg-positive,
RAI diagnostic scan–negative patients?
R80–82
79
[C32]
What is the management of complications of RAI therapy?
R83–85
80
[C33]
How should patients who have received RAI therapy be
monitored for risk of secondary malignancies?
R86
80
[C34]
What other testing should patients receiving RAI therapy undergo?
R87
80
[C35]
How should patients be counseled about RAI therapy and
pregnancy, breastfeeding, and gonadal function?
R88–90
81
[C36]
How is RAI-refractory DTC classified?b
R91b
82
[C37]
Which patients with metastatic thyroid cancer can be followed
without additional therapy?b
R92b
82
[C38]
What is the role for directed therapy in advanced thyroid cancer?c
R93c
84
[C39]
Treatment of brain metastases
R94
84
[C40]
Who should be considered for clinical trials?b
R95b
84
[C41]
What is the role of systemic therapy (kinase inhibitors, other
selective therapies, conventional chemotherapy,
bisphosphonates) in treating metastatic DTC?c
85
[C42]
Kinase inhibitorsb
R96b, T16b
87
[C43]
Patients for whom first-line kinase inhibitor therapy failsb
R97b
87
[C44]
Management of toxicities from kinase inhibitor therapyb
R98b, T17b
87
[C45]
Other novel agentsb
R99
87
[C46]
Cytotoxic chemotherapy
R100
88
[C47]
Bone-directed agentsc
R101c
89
[D1]
DIRECTIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH
89
[D2]
Optimizing molecular markers for diagnosis, prognosis, and
therapeutic targets
89
[D3]
Active surveillance of DTC primary tumors
90
[D4]
Improved risk stratification
90
[D5]
Improving our understanding of the risks and benefits of DTC
treatments and optimal implementation/utilization
90
[D6]
Issues with measurement of Tg and anti-Tg antibodies
90
[D7]
Management of metastatic cervical adenopathy detected on US
91
[D8]
Novel therapies for systemic RAI-refractory disease
91
[D9]
Survivorship care
aF, figure; R, recommendation; T, table.
bNew section/recommendation.
cSubstantially changed recommendation compared with 2009.
ATA, American Thyroid Association; AUS/FLUS, atypia of undetermined significance/follicular lesion of undetermined significance;
CT, computed tomography; DTC, differentiated thyroid cancer; FN, follicular neoplasm; FNA, fine-needle aspiration; 18FDG-PET,
[18F]fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; NED, no evidence of disease; PET, positron
emission tomography; RAI, radioactive iodine (radioiodine); rhTSH, recombinant human thyrotropin; SPECT/CT, single photon emission
computed tomography–computed tomography; SUSP, suspicious for malignancy; Tg, thyroglobulin; TSH, thyrotropin; US, ultrasound.
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
9
 [A1] THYROID NODULE GUIDELINES
A thyroid nodule is a discrete lesion within the thyroid gland
that is radiologically distinct from the surrounding thyroid pa-
renchyma. Some palpable lesions may not correspond to distinct
radiologic abnormalities (32). Such abnormalities do not meet
the strict definition for thyroid nodules. Nonpalpable nodules
detected on US or other anatomic imaging studies are termed
incidentally discovered nodules or ‘‘incidentalomas.’’ Non-
palpable nodules have the same risk of malignancy as do so-
nographically confirmed palpable nodules of the same size (33).
Generally, only nodules >1cm should be evaluated, since they
have a greater potential to be clinically significant cancers.
Occasionally, there may be nodules <1cm that require further
evaluation because of clinical symptoms or associated lymph-
adenopathy. In very rare cases, some nodules <1cm lack these
sonographic and clinical warning signs yet may nonetheless
cause future morbidity and mortality. This remains highly un-
likely, and given the unfavorable cost/benefit considerations,
attempts to diagnose and treat all such small thyroid cancers in
an effort to prevent exceedingly rare outcomes is deemed to
cause more harm than good. In general, the guiding clinical
strategy acknowledges that most thyroid nodules are low risk,
and many thyroid cancers pose minimal risk to human health
and can be effectively treated.
[A2] What is the role of thyroid cancer screening
in people with familial follicular cell–derived DTC?
& RECOMMENDATION 1
Screening people with familial follicular cell–derived
DTC may lead to an earlier diagnosis of thyroid cancer, but
the panel cannot recommend for or against US screening
since there is no evidence that this would lead to reduced
morbidity or mortality.
(No recommendation, Insufficient evidence)
Screening programs for patients at risk of oncological
disease are usually advocated based on the following evi-
dence: (a) a clear demonstration that the patient is indeed at
risk; (b) demonstration that screening allows the detection
of the disease at an earlier stage; (c) early diagnosis has
an impact on subsequent outcome, both recurrence and
survival.
Family members of patients with nonmedullary DTC may be
considered at risk based on epidemiological evidence showing
that 5%–10% of DTCs have a familial occurrence. However, in
most of the pedigrees only two members are affected. There is
controversy on whether two family members are sufficient to
define a real familial disease rather than a fortuitous association.
The probability estimates reported by Charkes (34) suggests that
when only two first-degree family members are affected, the
probability that the disease is sporadic is 62%. This probability
decreases when the number of affected family members is three
or more. In contrast, the study by Capezzone et al. (35), which
was statistically adjusted to minimize risk of ‘‘insufficient
follow-up bias,’’ demonstrates that even when only two family
members are affected, the disease displays the features of ‘‘ge-
netic anticipation’’ (occurrence of the disease at an earlier age
and with more aggressive presentation in the subsequent gener-
ation compared with the first generation), which is considered
good evidence for a distinct clinical entity possibly representing
true familial disease. Appearance of the disease at an earlier age
has also been found by Moses et al. (36). More advanced disease
at presentation and slightly worse outcomes have been reported
in familial cases by Capezzone et al. (35). More frequent mul-
ticentricity has been reported by Ito et al. (37), but disease-free
and overall survival were similar to sporadic cases. In the study
by Park et al. (38), familial follicular cell–derived DTC patients
with parent–offspring relationship were found to have a higher
recurrence rate compared with sporadic cases and the second
generation had even higher rates compared with the first gen-
eration. Mazeh et al. (39) found that familial DTC patients had
more aggressive disease compared with sporadic cases re-
gardless of the number of family members affected. In contrast,
Robenshtok et al. (40) found that staging at diagnosis and out-
comes were not different in familial DTC patients compared
with sporadic DTC patients. Syndromes associated with DTC
(e.g., PTEN [phosphatase and tensin homolog] hamartoma tu-
mor syndrome [Cowden’s disease], familial adenomatous
polyposis [FAP], Carney complex, multiple endocrine neopla-
sia [MEN] 2, Werner syndrome/progeria) in a first-degree rel-
ative, warrant screening based on various components of that
syndrome (41).
It is not possible to speculate on the impact of screening in
preventing or reducing recurrence and deaths, since no in-
terventional screening programs have ever been reported in
at-risk family members. Patients with familial DTC should
have a careful history and directed neck examination as a part
of routine health maintenance. One should also consider
thyroid cancer syndromes as noted above (41).
[A3] What is the appropriate laboratory and imaging
evaluation for patients with clinically or incidentally
discovered thyroid nodules?
[A4] Serum thyrotropin measurement
& RECOMMENDATION 2
(A) Serum thyrotropin (TSH) should be measured during
the initial evaluation of a patient with a thyroid nodule.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(B) If the serum TSH is subnormal, a radionuclide (pref-
erably 123I) thyroid scan should be performed. (Strong
recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(C) If the serum TSH is normal or elevated, a radionuclide
scanshouldnotbeperformedastheinitialimagingevaluation.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
With the discovery of a thyroid nodule, a complete history
and physical examination focusing on the thyroid gland and
adjacent cervical lymph nodes should be performed. Perti-
nent historical factors predicting malignancy include a his-
tory of childhood head and neck radiation therapy, total body
radiation for bone marrow transplantation (42), exposure to
ionizing radiation from fallout in childhood or adolescence
(43), familial thyroid carcinoma, or thyroid cancer syndrome
(e.g., PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome [Cowden’s dis-
ease], FAP, Carney complex, Werner syndrome/progeria, or
MEN 2, a risk for medullary thyroid cancer [MTC]) in a first-
degree relative, rapid nodule growth, and/or hoarseness.
10
HAUGEN ET AL.
 Pertinent physical findings suggesting possible malignancy
include vocal cord paralysis, cervical lymphadenopathy, and
fixation of the nodule to surrounding tissue.
With the discovery of a thyroid nodule >1 cm in any di-
ameter, a serum TSH level should be obtained. If the serum
TSH is subnormal, a radionuclide thyroid scan should be
obtained to document whether the nodule is hyperfunctioning
(‘‘hot,’’ i.e., tracer uptake is greater than the surrounding
normal thyroid), isofunctioning (‘‘warm,’’ i.e., tracer uptake
is equal to the surrounding thyroid), or nonfunctioning
(‘‘cold,’’ i.e., has uptake less than the surrounding thyroid
tissue) (44). Since hyperfunctioning nodules rarely harbor
malignancy, if one is found that corresponds to the nodule in
question, no cytologic evaluation is necessary. If overt or
subclinical hyperthyroidism is present, additional evaluation
is required. A higher serum TSH level, even within the upper
part of the reference range, is associated with increased risk
of malignancy in a thyroid nodule, as well as more advanced
stage thyroid cancer (45,46).
[A5] Serum thyroglobulin measurement
& RECOMMENDATION 3
Routine measurement of serum thyroglobulin (Tg) for
initial evaluation of thyroid nodules is not recommended.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
Serum Tg levels can be elevated in most thyroid diseases
and are an insensitive and nonspecific test for thyroid cancer
(47–49).
[A6] Serum calcitonin measurement
& RECOMMENDATION 4
The panel cannot recommend either for or against routine
measurement of serum calcitonin in patients with thyroid
nodules.
(No recommendation, Insufficient evidence)
The utility of serum calcitonin has been evaluated in a
series of prospective, nonrandomized studies (50–54). These
data suggest that the use of routine serum calcitonin for
screening may detect C-cell hyperplasia and MTC at an
earlier stage, and overall survival consequently may be
improved. However, most studies relied on pentagastrin
stimulation testing to increase specificity. This drug is not
available in the United States, Canada, and some other
countries, and there remain unresolved issues of sensitivity,
specificity, assay performance, cut-offs using calcium stim-
ulation (55), and cost effectiveness. Two retrospective stud-
ies have shown improved survival in patients diagnosed with
MTC after routine calcitonin testing compared with historical
controls (53,56), but they were unable to show a decreased
number of MTC-related deaths. A cost-effectiveness analysis
suggested that calcitonin screening would be cost effective in
the United States (57). However, prevalence estimates of
MTC in this analysis included patients with C-cell hyper-
plasia and microMTC, which have uncertain clinical signif-
icance. Based on the retrospective nature of the survival data,
unresolved issues of assay performance, lack of availability
of pentagastrin in North America, and potential biases in the
cost-effective analysis, the task force cannot recommend for
or against the routine measurement of serum calcitonin as a
screening test in patients with thyroid nodules, although there
was not uniform agreement on this recommendation. There
was, however, agreement that serum calcitonin may be
considered in the subgroup of patients in whom an elevated
calcitonin may change the diagnostic or surgical approach
(i.e., patients considered for less than total thyroidectomy,
patients with suspicious cytology not consistent with PTC). If
the unstimulated serum calcitonin determination has been
obtained and the level is greater than 50–100pg/mL, a diag-
nosis of MTC is common (58).
There is emerging evidence that a calcitonin measure-
ment from a thyroid nodule fine-needle aspiration (FNA)
washout may be helpful in the preoperative evaluation of
patients with a modestly elevated basal serum calcitonin
(20–100 pg/mL) (59).
[A7] [18F]Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission
tomography scan
& RECOMMENDATION 5
(A) Focal [18F]fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission to-
mography (18FDG-PET) uptake within a sonographically
confirmed thyroid nodule conveys an increased risk of
thyroid cancer, and FNA is recommended for those nod-
ules ‡1 cm.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
B) Diffuse 18FDG-PET uptake, in conjunction with so-
nographic and clinical evidence of chronic lymphocytic
thyroiditis, does not require further imaging or FNA.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
18FDG-PET is increasingly performed during the evalua-
tion of patients with both malignant and nonmalignant ill-
ness. While 18FDG-PET imaging is not recommended for the
evaluation of patients with newly detected thyroid nodules
or thyroidal illness, the incidental detection of abnormal
thyroid uptake may nonetheless be encountered. Importantly,
incidental 18FDG-PET uptake in the thyroid gland can be
either focal or diffuse. Focal 18FDG-PET uptake in the thy-
roid is incidentally detected in 1%–2% of patients, while an
additional 2% of patients demonstrate diffuse thyroid uptake
(60–62).
Focal thyroid uptake most often corresponds to a clinically
relevant thyroid nodule, and US examination is thus rec-
ommended to define thyroid anatomy. Importantly, focal
18FDG-PET uptake increases malignancy risk in an affected
nodule, and therefore clinical evaluation and FNA of nodules
‡1 cm is recommended. 18FDG-PET positive thyroid nodules
<1 cm that do not meet FNA criteria (see Recommendation 8)
can be monitored similarly to thyroid nodules with high-risk
sonographic patterns that do not meet FNA criteria (see Rec-
ommendation 24A). A recent meta-analysis confirmed that
approximately one in three (*35%) 18FDG-PET positive
thyroid nodules proved to be cancerous (60), with higher
mean maximum standardized uptake value in malignant
compared to benign nodules (6.9 vs. 4.8, p < 0.001). In con-
trast, diffuse thyroid uptake most often represents benign
disease corresponding to inflammatory uptake in the setting
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
11
 of Hashimoto’s disease or other diffuse thyroidal illness.
However, if detected, diffuse 18FDG-PET uptake in the
thyroid should also prompt sonographic examination to en-
sure there is no evidence of clinically relevant nodularity.
Most patients with diffuse 18FDG-PET uptake demonstrate
diffuse heterogeneity on sonographic examination, and no
further intervention or FNA is required. It is appropriate to
evaluate thyroid function in these patients.
[A8] Thyroid sonography
& RECOMMENDATION 6
Thyroid sonography with survey of the cervical lymph
nodes should be performed in all patients with known or
suspected thyroid nodules.
(Strong recommendation, High-quality evidence)
Diagnostic thyroid/neck US should be performed in all
patients with a suspected thyroid nodule, nodular goiter, or
radiographic abnormality suggesting a thyroid nodule inci-
dentally detected on another imaging study (e.g., computed
tomography [CT] or magnetic resonance imaging [MRI]
or thyroidal uptake on 18FDG-PET scan) (www.aium.org/
resources/guidelines/thyroid.pdf). Thyroid US can answer
the following questions: Is there truly a nodule that corre-
sponds to an identified abnormality? How large is the nodule?
What is the nodule’s pattern of US imaging characteristics? Is
suspicious cervical lymphadenopathy present? Is the nodule
greater than 50% cystic? Is the nodule located posteriorly in
the thyroid gland? These last two features might decrease the
accuracy of FNA biopsy performed with palpation (63,64).
Ultrasound should evaluate the following: thyroid paren-
chyma (homogeneous or heterogeneous) and gland size; size,
location, zand sonographic characteristics of any nodule(s);
the presence or absence of any suspicious cervical lymph
nodes in the central or lateral compartments. The US report
should convey nodule size (in three dimensions) and location
(e.g., right upper lobe) and a description of the nodule’s so-
nographic features including composition (solid, cystic pro-
portion, or spongiform), echogenicity, margins, presence and
type of calcifications, and shape if taller than wide, and
vascularity. The pattern of sonographic features associated
with a nodule confers a risk of malignancy, and combined
with nodule size, guides FNA decision-making (65,66) (see
Recommendation 8).
In the subset of patients with low serum TSH levels who have
undergone radionuclide thyroid scintigraphy suggesting nodu-
larity, US should also be performed to evaluate both the pres-
ence of nodules concordant with the hyperfunctioning areas on
the scan, which do not require FNA, as well as other nonfunc-
tioning nodules that meet sonographic criteria for FNA (67).
[A9] US for FNA decision-making
& RECOMMENDATION 7
FNA is the procedure of choice in the evaluation of thyroid
nodules, when clinically indicated.
(Strong recommendation, High-quality evidence)
FNA is the most accurate and cost-effective method for
evaluating thyroid nodules. Retrospective studies have reported
lower rates of both nondiagnostic and false-negative cytology
from FNA procedures performed using US guidance compared
to palpation (68,69). Therefore, for nodules with a higher
likelihood of either a nondiagnostic cytology (>25%–50%
cystic component) (64) or sampling error (difficult to palpate or
posteriorly located nodules), US-guided FNA is preferred. If
the diagnostic US confirms the presence of a predominantly
solid nodule corresponding to what is palpated, the FNA may
be performed using palpation or US guidance.
[A10] Recommendations for diagnostic FNA of a thyroid
nodule based on sonographic pattern
Figure 1 provides an algorithm for evaluation and man-
agement of patients with thyroid nodules based on sono-
graphic pattern and FNA cytology, which is discussed in
subsequent sections.
& RECOMMENDATION 8
I. Thyroid nodule diagnostic FNA is recommended for
(Fig. 2, Table 6):
(A) Nodules ‡1 cm in greatest dimension with high sus-
picion sonographic pattern.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(B) Nodules ‡1 cm in greatest dimension with intermedi-
ate suspicion sonographic pattern.
(Strong recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
(C) Nodules ‡1.5 cm in greatest dimension with low sus-
picion sonographic pattern.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
II. Thyroid nodule diagnostic FNA may be considered for
(Fig. 2, Table 6):
(D) Nodules ‡2 cm in greatest dimension with very low
suspicion sonographic pattern (e.g., spongiform). Ob-
servation without FNA is also a reasonable option.
(Weak recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
III. Thyroid nodule diagnostic FNA is not required for
(Fig. 2, Table 6):
(E) Nodules that do not meet the above criteria.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(F) Nodules that are purely cystic.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
Thyroid US has been widely used to stratify the risk of
malignancy in thyroid nodules, and aid decision-making
about whether FNA is indicated. Studies consistently report
that several US gray scale features in multivariate analyses
are associated with thyroid cancer, the majority of which are
PTC. These include the presence of microcalcifications,
nodule hypoechogenicity compared with the surrounding
thyroid or strap muscles, irregular margins (defined as either
infiltrative, microlobulated, or spiculated), and a shape taller
than wide measured on a transverse view. Features with the
highest specificities (median >90%) for thyroid cancer are
microcalcifications,
irregular
margins,
and
tall
shape,
12
HAUGEN ET AL.
 although the sensitivities are significantly lower for any single
feature (70–77). It is important to note that poorly defined
margins, meaning the sonographic interface between the nod-
ule and the surrounding thyroid parenchyma is difficult to de-
lineate, are not equivalent to irregular margins. An irregular
margin indicates the demarcation between nodule and paren-
chyma is clearly visible but demonstrates an irregular, infil-
trative or spiculated course. Up to 55% of benign nodules are
hypoechoic compared to thyroid parenchyma, making nodule
hypoechogenicity less specific. In addition, subcentimeter be-
nign nodules are more likely to be hypoechoic than larger
nodules (71). Multivariable analyses confirm that the proba-
bility of cancer is higher for nodules with either microlobulated
margins or microcalcifications than for hypoechoic solid nod-
ules lacking these features (70). Macrocalcifications within a
nodule, if combined with microcalcifications, confer the same
malignancy risk as microcalcifications alone (70,74). However,
the presence of this type of intranodular macrocalcification
alone is not consistently associated with thyroid cancer (78). On
the other hand, a nodule that has interrupted peripheral calci-
fications, in association with a soft tissue rim outside the cal-
cification, is highly likely to be malignant, and the associated
pathology may demonstrate tumor invasion in the area of dis-
rupted calcification (79,80).
In a recent study where 98% of the cancers were PTC,
intranodular vascularity did not have independent predictive
value for malignancy in multivariate logistic regression model
including gray-scale features (72). Two other studies and a
meta-analysis with higher proportions of follicular thyroid
cancer (FTC) (10%–22%) have shown that intranodular vas-
cularity was correlated with malignancy (66,74,81). FTC ex-
hibits other differences in sonographic features compared to
PTC. These tumors are more likely to be iso- to hyperechoic,
noncalcified, round (width greater than anterioposterior di-
mension) nodules with regular smooth margins (82). Similarly,
the follicular variant of papillary cancer (FVPTC) is also more
likely than conventional PTC to have this same appearance as
FTC (79). Distant metastases are rarely observed arising from
follicular cancers <2 cm in diameter, which therefore justifies a
higher size cutoff for hyperechoic nodules (83).
The vast majority (82%–91%) of thyroid cancers are solid
(70,73,75,77,84). Of 360 consecutively surgically removed
thyroid cancers at the Mayo clinic, 88% were solid or mini-
mally cystic (<5%), 9% were <50% cystic, and only 3% were
more than 50% cystic (85). Therefore, FNA decision-making
for partially cystic thyroid nodules must be tempered by
their lower malignant risk. In addition, evidence linking
sonographic features with malignancy in this subgroup of
nodules is less robust, originating from univariate rather
than multivariate analyses. However, an eccentric rather
than concentric position of the solid component along the
cyst wall, an acute rather than obtuse angle interface of the
FIG. 1.
Algorithm for evaluation and management of patients with thyroid nodules based on US pattern and FNA
cytology. R, recommendation in text.
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
13
 FIG. 2.
ATA nodule sonographic patterns and risk of malignancy.
Table 6. Sonographic Patterns, Estimated Risk of Malignancy, and Fine-Needle Aspiration
Guidance for Thyroid Nodules
Sonographic pattern
US features
Estimated risk
of malignancy, %
FNA size cutoff
(largest dimension)
High suspicion
Solid hypoechoic nodule or solid hypoechoic
component of a partially cystic nodule
with one or more of the following features:
irregular margins (infiltrative, microlobu-
lated), microcalcifications, taller than wide
shape, rim calcifications with small extru-
sive soft tissue component, evidence
of ETE
>70–90a
Recommend FNA at ‡1 cm
Intermediate suspicion
Hypoechoic solid nodule with smooth mar-
gins without microcalcifications, ETE,
or taller than wide shape
10–20
Recommend FNA at ‡1 cm
Low suspicion
Isoechoic or hyperechoic solid nodule, or
partially cystic nodule with eccentric solid
areas, without microcalcification, irregular
margin or ETE, or taller than wide shape.
5–10
Recommend FNA at ‡1.5 cm
Very low suspicion
Spongiform or partially cystic nodules with-
out any of the sonographic features de-
scribed in low, intermediate, or high
suspicion patterns
<3
Consider FNA at ‡2 cm
Observation without FNA
is also a reasonable option
Benign
Purely cystic nodules (no solid component)
<1
No biopsyb
US-guided FNA is recommended for cervical lymph nodes that are sonographically suspicious for thyroid cancer (see Table 7).
aThe estimate is derived from high volume centers, the overall risk of malignancy may be lower given the interobserver variability in
sonography.
bAspiration of the cyst may be considered for symptomatic or cosmetic drainage.
ETE, extrathyroidal extension.
14
 solid component and cyst, and the presence of micro-
calcifications consistently confer a higher risk of malignancy
(85–87). Other findings such as lobulated margins or increased
vascularity of the solid portion are risk factors that are not as
robust (86,87). However, a spongiform appearance of mixed
cystic solid nodules is strongly correlated with benignity
(66,70,71,88). A spongiform appearance is defined as the ag-
gregation of multiple microcystic components in more than
50% of the volume of the nodule (71). Spongiform and other
mixed cystic solid nodules may exhibit bright reflectors on US
imaging, caused by colloid crystals or posterior acoustic en-
hancement of the back wall of a microcystic area. These may
be confused with microcalcifications by less proficient sono-
graphers, and a recent meta-analysis confirmed that operator
experience is correlated with accurate evaluation of internal
calcifications (66). Therefore, because of potential for mis-
classification, FNA may still be considered for nodules inter-
preted as spongiform, but with a higher size cutoff. Lastly, pure
cysts, although rare (<2% of thyroid lesions), are highly likely
to be benign (66,89,90).
Given the nuances in sonographic appearances of different
thyroid cancer histologies, as well as the challenges posed by
partially cystic nodules, some authors have suggested risk
stratification based upon a constellation of sonographic fea-
tures (89–91). In the absence of sonographically suspicious
cervical lymph nodes, features associated with the highest
risk for thyroid cancer can be used to triage smaller nodules
for fine-needle biopsy, whereas nodules with sonographic
appearance suggesting lower risk might be considered for
fine-needle biopsy at a larger size as determined by maximal
diameter (Figs. 1 and 2, Table 6). The sonographic appearance
for the vast majority of thyroid nodules can be generally
classified in the following categories of US patterns, which
combine several individual sonographic characteristics. Since
the interobserver variability in reporting individual charac-
teristics is moderate even within controlled studies (72), the
use of patterns exhibiting correlated sonographic features is
more robust. Two recent studies have reported substantial
interobserver correlation for identification for nodule sono-
graphic patterns (multirater kappa statistics >0.6) (92,93).
High suspicion [malignancy risk >70%–90% (89,90,94)].
High suspicion of malignancy is warranted with a solid hy-
poechoic nodule or a solid hypoechoic component in a par-
tially cystic nodule with one or more of the following
features: irregular margins (specifically defined as infiltra-
tive, microlobulated, or spiculated), microcalcifications, tal-
ler than wide shape, disrupted rim calcifications with small
extrusive hypoechoic soft tissue component, or evidence of
extrathyroidal extension (Fig. 2, Table 6). A nodule demon-
strating this US pattern is highly likely to be a PTC. Nodules
with the high suspicion pattern and measuring ‡1 cm should
undergo diagnostic fine-needle biopsy to refute or confirm
malignancy. However, in the absence of evidence of extra-
thyroidal extension, metastatic cervical lymph nodes, or
distant metastases, micropapillary thyroid cancers (<1 cm)
often have an indolent course, but this may depend upon
patient age (95). Although no distant metastases or deaths
occurred in a recent observational series of 1235 Japanese
patients with biopsy-proven PTC, tumor growth and new
appearance of lymph node metastases occurred more fre-
quently in patients younger than 40 years of age compared
with those over age 60 (5.9% vs. 2.2% for size increase; 5.3%
vs. 0.4% for new nodal metastases, p < 0.05). Thus although a
sonographically suspicious subcentimeter thyroid nodule
without evidence of extrathyroidal extension or sono-
graphically suspicious lymph nodes may be observed with
close sonographic follow-up of the nodule and cervical
lymph nodes, rather than pursuing immediate FNA, patient
age and preference may modify decision-making (95).
Intermediate suspicion [malignancy risk 10%–20%
(89,90,94)].
Intermediate suspicion of malignancy is at-
tached to a hypoechoic solid nodule with a smooth regular
margin, but without microcalcifications, extrathyroidal ex-
tension, or taller than wide shape (Fig. 2, Table 6). This
appearance has the highest sensitivity (60%–80%) for PTC,
but a lower specificity than the preceding high suspicion
pattern, and fine-needle biopsy should be considered for these
nodules ‡1 cm to refute malignancy.
Low suspicion [malignancy risk 5%–10% (89,90,94)].
Isoechoic or hyperechoic solid nodule, or partially cystic
nodule with eccentric uniformly solid areas without micro-
calcifications, irregular margin or extrathyroidal extension,
or taller than wide shape prompts low suspicion for malig-
nancy (Fig. 2, Table 6). Only about 15%–20% of thyroid
cancers are iso- or hyperechoic on US, and these are generally
the follicular variant of PTC or FTCs (71). Fewer than 20% of
these nodules are partially cystic. Therefore, these appear-
ances are associated with a lower probability of malignancy
and observation may be warranted until the size is ‡1.5 cm.
Very low suspicion [£3% (66,89,90,94)].
Spongiform or
partially cystic nodules without any of the sonographic features
described in the low, intermediate, or high suspicion patterns
have a low risk of malignancy (<3%). If FNA is performed, the
nodule should be at least 2 cm. Observation without FNA may
also be considered for nodules ‡2 cm (Fig. 2, Table 6).
Benign [£1% (89,90,94)].
Purely cystic nodules are very
unlikely to be malignant, and fine-needle biopsy is not indi-
cated for diagnostic purposes (Fig. 2, Table 6). Aspiration
with or without ethanol ablation may be considered as a
therapeutic intervention if a cyst is large and symptomatic;
cytology should be performed if aspiration is done.
Sonographic evaluation of the anterior cervical lymph
node compartments (central and lateral) should be performed
whenever thyroid nodules are detected. If US detects cervical
lymph nodes that are sonographically suspicious for thyroid
cancer (Table 7), FNA of the suspicious lymph node should
be performed for cytology and washout for Tg measurement
if indicated. In addition, this scenario also warrants US-
guided FNA of a subcentimeter nodule that is likely to rep-
resent the primary tumor based upon sonographic features.
Although there are several known clinical risk factors for
thyroid cancer in patients with thyroid nodules including
immobility with swallowing, pain, cough, voice change,
growth, lymphadenopathy, and a history of childhood radi-
ation therapy (either therapeutic, such as cranial radiation in
childhood leukemia, or for benign conditions, such as en-
larged thymus or tonsils) or familial thyroid cancer (96),
these have not been incrementally included in multivariate
analyses of gray-scale sonographic features and thyroid
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
15
 cancer risk. However, given the higher pretest likelihood of
thyroid cancer associated with these clinical risk factors,
FNA can be considered at lower size cutoffs for all of the
sonographic appearances described above.
Ultrasound elastography (USE) has similarly been investi-
gated for its ability to modify thyroid cancer risk assessment
among clinically relevant thyroid nodules. Elastography is a
measurement of tissue stiffness. Performance requires an US
machine, as well as an elastography computational module
that most often must be purchased separately. An initial pro-
spective study of 92 selected, nonrandomized patients sug-
gested positive and negative predictive values (NPVs) near
100% (97). However, more recently, larger trials have reported
substantially different results. Moon and colleagues retro-
spectively studied 703 thyroid nodules in comparison to gray-
scale US (78). Performance of USE was inferior to that of
gray-scale US assessment. The largest prospective study of
706 patients with 912 thyroid nodules was recently published
by Azizi et al. (98). In this study, the positive predictive value
(PPV) of USE was only 36%, comparable to that of micro-
calcifications. The NPV of USE was 97% in a population with
cancer prevalence of 9%. Thus, while USE holds promise as a
means by which to noninvasively assess cancer risk, its per-
formance is highly variable and operator dependent. Perhaps
most importantly, USE can only be effectively applied to solid
nodules, thus excluding its utility for cystic or partially cystic
nodules. Furthermore, to be amenable to direct pressure and
determination of tissue strain, the index nodule must not
overlap with other nodules in the anterioposterior plane. Obese
patients, those with multinodular goiters and coalescent nod-
ules, or patients in whom the nodule is posterior or inferior are
not candidates for USE. Thus, at present, USE cannot be
widely applied to all thyroid nodules in a similar fashion to
gray-scale or Doppler US examination. The committee
therefore believes USE (when available) may prove to be a
helpful tool for preoperative risk assessment in those patients
in whom accurate assessment can be performed. However, the
committee cannot presently recommend its universal use or
widespread adoption. Importantly, the ability to perform (or
not perform) USE should not modify the recommendation for
traditional gray-scale sonographic evaluation.
Finally, while most thyroid nodules meeting the preceding
sonographic patterns and sizes should undergo FNA, we
acknowledge that a conservative approach of active surveil-
lance management may be appropriate as an alternative to
FNA in selected patients. These may include patients with
very low-risk tumors (e.g., no clinical or radiographic evi-
dence of invasion or metastases), patients at high surgical
risk, or those with a relatively short life span expectancy in
whom the benefits of intervention may be unrealized.
[A11] What is the role of FNA, cytology
interpretation, and molecular testing in patients
with thyroid nodules?
& RECOMMENDATION 9
Thyroid nodule FNA cytology should be reported using
diagnostic groups outlined in the Bethesda System for
Reporting Thyroid Cytopathology.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
To address a significant variability in the reporting of cy-
tological findings in thyroid FNA samples, the 2007 National
Cancer Institute Thyroid Fine-Needle Aspiration State of
the Science Conference provided consensus recommenda-
tions known as the Bethesda System for Reporting Thyroid
Cytopathology (99,100). The Bethesda system recognizes six
diagnostic categories and provides an estimation of cancer risk
within each category based upon literature review and expert
Table 7. Ultrasound Features of Lymph Nodes
Predictive of Malignant Involvementa
Sign
Reported
sensitivity, %
Reported
specificity, %
Microcalcifications
5–69
93–100
Cystic aspect
10–34
91–100
Peripheral vascularity
40–86
57–93
Hyperechogenicity
30–87
43–95
Round shape
37
70
aAdapted with permission from the European Thyroid Associa-
tion guidelines for cervical ultrasound (20).
Table 8. The Bethesda System for Reporting
Thyroid Cytopathology: Diagnostic Categories
and Risk of Malignancya
Diagnostic category
Estimated/predicted risk
of malignancy by the
Bethesda system, %a
Actual risk of malignancy
in nodules surgically excised,
% median (range)b
Nondiagnostic or unsatisfactory
1–4
20 (9–32)
Benign
0–3
2.5 (1–10)
Atypia of undetermined significance
or follicular lesion of undetermined
significance
5–15
14 (6–48)
Follicular neoplasm or suspicious for
a follicular neoplasm
15–30
25 (14–34)
Suspicious for malignancy
60–75
70 (53–97)
Malignant
97–99
99 (94–100)
aAs reported in The Bethesda System by Cibas and Ali (1076).
bBased on the meta-analysis of eight studies reported by Bongiovanni et al. (103). The risk was calculated based on the portion of nodules
in each diagnostic category that underwent surgical excision and likely is not representative of the entire population, particularly of
nondiagnostic and benign diagnostic categories.
16
HAUGEN ET AL.
 opinion (Fig. 1, Table 8). These categories are (i) nondiagnostic/
unsatisfactory; (ii) benign; (iii) atypia of undetermined signifi-
cance/follicular lesion of undetermined significance (AUS/
FLUS); (iv) follicular neoplasm/suspicious for follicular neo-
plasm (FN/SFN), a category that also encompasses the diag-
nosis of Hu
¨rthle cell neoplasm/suspicious for Hu
¨rthle cell
neoplasm; (v) suspicious for malignancy (SUSP), and (vi)
malignant. Recent studies that applied the criteria and termi-
nology of the Bethesda System to a large series of patients have
shown a relatively good concordance in reporting FNA cytol-
ogy, with 89%–95% of samples being satisfactory for inter-
pretation and 55%–74% reported as definitively benign and
2%–5% as definitively malignant (101–104). The remaining
samples are cytologically indeterminate, including AUS/FLUS
in 2%–18% of nodules, FN in 2%–25%, and SUSP in 1%–6%.
In these studies, the probability of malignancy for each Be-
thesda category demonstrated significant variability, but was
overall compatible with the range predicted by the Bethesda
System, with the exception of the AUS/FLUS diagnosis, for
which the risk of malignant outcome in some studies was sig-
nificantly higher than predicted (Table 8) (103,105). Recently, a
blinded prospective evaluation of inter-observer concordance
using Bethesda classification was performed. These data con-
firm an inherent limitation to the reproducibility of interpreting
any cytology specimen (106). Specimens diagnosed as AUS/
FLUS and SUSP were associated with the highest discordance
rates. Some studies suggest that the AUS/FLUS category should
be further subdivided into AUS with cytologic atypia (higher
risk for malignancy) and FLUS with architectural atypia (lower
risk for malignancy), but this has not yet been widely adopted
(107). Nonetheless, classification using the Bethesda system has
proven highly beneficial, allowing practitioners to speak with
the same terminology and better convey malignant risk. The
risk of malignancy in each of the six diagnostic categories
should be independently defined at each cytology center or
institution to guide clinicians on risk estimates and help choose
appropriate molecular testing for patients with indeterminate
cytology.
[A12] Nondiagnostic cytology
& RECOMMENDATION 10
(A) For a nodule with an initial nondiagnostic cytology
result, FNA should be repeated with US guidance and, if
available, on-site cytologic evaluation
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(B) Repeatedly nondiagnostic nodules without a high
suspicion sonographic pattern require close observation or
surgical excision for histopathologic diagnosis
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
(C) Surgery should be considered for histopathologic di-
agnosis if the cytologically nondiagnostic nodule has a
high suspicion sonographic pattern, growth of the nodule
(>20% in two dimensions) is detected during US surveil-
lance, or clinical risk factors for malignancy are present
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
Nondiagnostic or unsatisfactory FNA biopsies are those
that fail to meet the established quantitative or qualitative
criteria for cytologic adequacy (i.e., the presence of at least
six groups of well-visualized follicular cells, each group
containing at least 10 well-preserved epithelial cells, pref-
erably on a single slide) (99,108). Although an FNA speci-
men found to have abundant colloid and few epithelial cells
may be considered nondiagnostic by the above criteria, this is
also likely a benign biopsy. After an initial nondiagnostic
cytology result, repeat FNA with US guidance and, if avail-
able, on-site cytologic evaluation, will substantially increase
the rate of specimen adequacy (109–113). It has been sug-
gested that repeat FNA should be performed no sooner than 3
months after the initial FNA to prevent false-positive inter-
pretation due to biopsy-induced reactive/reparative changes
(114). Two recent studies have questioned the necessity for a
3-month waiting period after the first FNA because they did
not find a correlation between the diagnostic yield/accuracy of
repeated FNA and the waiting time between the procedures
(115,116). A 3-month waiting period after a nondiagnostic
biopsy is likely not necessary. If clinical and US features are
suspicious for malignancy, a shorter waiting period may be
appropriate. Repeat FNA with US guidance will yield a di-
agnostic cytology specimen in 60%–80% of nodules, partic-
ularly when the cystic component is <50% (64,112,117).
Nodules with larger cystic portion have a higher chance to
yield nondiagnostic samples on the initial and repeated FNA.
Most nodules with a nondiagnostic cytology interpretation
are benign. In large series of patients classified based on the
Bethesda System, nondiagnostic samples constituted 2%–16%
of all FNA samples, of which 7%–26% were eventually resected
(101–103). The frequency of malignancy among all initially
nondiagnostic samples was 2%–4% and among those non-
diagnostic samples that were eventually resected was 9%–32%.
Sonographic features are also useful for identifying which
nodules with repeat nondiagnostic FNA cytology results are
more likely to be malignant. Of 104 nodules with two non-
diagnostic cytology results, thyroid cancer was found in 25%
of those with microcalcifications, irregular margins, a taller
than wide shape, or hypoechogenicity, but in only 4% lacking
these features (118).
In some studies, the use of thyroid core-needle biopsy (119)
and molecular testing for BRAF (120,121) or a panel of muta-
tions (122) helped to facilitate appropriate management of these
patients, although the full clinical impact of these approaches
for nodules with nondiagnostic cytology remains unknown.
Some studies have found that core biopsy offers a higher ade-
quacy rate, but may be less sensitive for the detection of pap-
illary cancer (123,124). Mutational testing may be informative
in samples considered inadequate by qualitative criteria (i.e.,
due to poor preparation or poor staining of cells) but is unlikely
to be contributory in samples with insufficient quantity of cells.
[A13] Benign cytology
& RECOMMENDATION 11
If the nodule is benign on cytology, further immediate
diagnostic studies or treatment are not required
(Strong recommendation, High-quality evidence)
Accurate FNA cytology diagnosis depends upon a num-
ber of factors including the skill of the operator, FNA tech-
nique, specimen preparation, and cytology interpretation.
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
17
 Ultrasound-guided FNA with real-time visualization of needle
placement in the target nodule decreases the false-negative rate
of a benign cytology diagnosis (68,69,126,128). Although pro-
spective studies are lacking, malignancy rates of only 1%–2%
have been reported in large retrospective series that analyzed the
utility of systematic repeat FNA in nodules with prior benign
cytology results (129–133). A pooled analysis of 12 studies by
Tee et al. (134) showed that of 4055 patients with benign cy-
tologywhounderwentsurgery,therateofmalignancywas3.2%.
Studies have also attempted to correlate nodule size with
accuracy of FNA cytology. Several surgical series have re-
ported higher malignancy rates in nodules >3–4 cm, but these
suffer from both selection bias (only a subset of patients un-
derwent preoperative FNA) and potential sampling error (FNA
performed by palpation) (135,136). A recent study evaluated
the accuracy of FNA and US features in patients with thyroid
nodules ‡4 cm (137). This was a single-center study in which
the practice is to offer thyroidectomy or lobectomy to all pa-
tients with nodules ‡4 cm. The investigators identified thyroid
cancer in 22% of 382 nodules. A subset of thyroid nodules
underwent preoperative FNA, and of the 125 cytologically
benign nodules, 10.4% were malignant on final histopathology.
The investigators further showed that individual US char-
acteristics were not predictive for malignancy, although
they did not look at sonographic patterns. Two other recent
reports of consecutive US-guided FNA evaluations in over
1400 nodules >3 cm with initial benign cytology followed
for a mean of 3 years confirmed a lower false-negative rate
of <1.5% (138,139). Interestingly, in both these studies 66%
of the missed cancers were found in nodules with high
suspicion sonographic pattern, despite initial benign cytol-
ogy. A recent retrospective study analyzed the long-term
follow-up of 2010 cytologically benign nodules from 1369
patients. Over a mean follow-up of 8.5 years 18 false-
negative malignancies were detected. However, no deaths
attributable to thyroid cancer were identified in this cohort.
These data confirm that an initially benign FNA confers
negligible mortality risk during long-term follow-up despite
a low but real risk of false negatives in this cytologic cate-
gory (140). Based on the evidence, it is still unclear if pa-
tients with thyroid nodules ‡4 cm and benign cytology carry
a higher risk of malignancy and should be managed differ-
ently than those with smaller nodules.
Follow-up for patients with benign cytology is discussed in
section [A24] and Recommendation 23.
[A14] Malignant cytology
& RECOMMENDATION 12
If a cytology result is diagnostic for primary thyroid ma-
lignancy, surgery is generally recommended.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
A cytology diagnostic for a primary thyroid malignancy
will almost always lead to thyroid surgery. However, an ac-
tive surveillance management approach can be considered as
an alternative to immediate surgery in
(A) patients with very low risk tumors (e.g., papillary
microcarcinomas without clinically evident metasta-
ses or local invasion, and no convincing cytologic
evidence of aggressive disease),
(B) patients at high surgical risk because of comorbid
conditions,
(C) patients expected to have a relatively short remaining
life span (e.g., serious cardiopulmonary disease, other
malignancies, very advanced age), or
(D) patients with concurrent medical or surgical issues that
need to be addressed prior to thyroid surgery.
Following thyroid surgery for papillary thyroid micro-
carcinoma (PTMC), defined as a tumor 1 cm or less in size,
disease-specific mortality rates have been reported to be
<1%, loco-regional recurrence rates are 2%–6%, and distant
recurrence rates are 1%–2% (141,142). It is quite likely that
these excellent outcomes are more related to the indolent
nature of the disease rather than to the effectiveness of
treatment, since two prospective clinical studies of active
surveillance from Japan reported similar clinical outcomes in
1465 patients with biopsy-proven PTMC that were not sur-
gically removed and were followed for up to 15 years (av-
erage 5–6 years, range 1–17 years) (95,143). In the study by
Ito et al. (95), observation was offered to 1235 patients with
PTMC that did not have (i) location adjacent to the trachea or
on the dorsal surface of the lobe close to the recurrent la-
ryngeal nerve, (ii) FNA findings suggestive of high-grade
malignancy; (iii) presence of regional lymph node metasta-
ses; or (iv) signs of progression during follow-up. Of those,
most patients showed stable tumor size on average follow-up
of 60 months (range 18–227 months), whereas 5% showed
tumor enlargement (>3 mm) by US on 5-year follow-up, and
8% on 10-year follow-up. Furthermore, 1.7% and 3.8% of
patients at 5-year and 10-year follow-up showed evidence for
lymph node metastases. Of 1235 patients, 191 underwent
surgical treatment after observation, including those with
tumor enlargement and new lymph node metastases. These
patients have been followed an average of 75 months (range
1–246 months) after the surgical intervention. Only one of the
patients treated with surgery after observation developed
tumor recurrence. In the study by Sugitani et al. (143), 230
patients with asymptomatic PTMC were followed for 5 years
on average. Of those patients, tumor size enlargement was
observed in 7%, and 1% developed apparent lymph node
metastasis. Seven percent of patients underwent surgery after
1–12 years of follow-up, and no recurrences were identified
in those on limited follow-up, suggesting that the delayed
surgery did not affect the outcome. A more recent study by
Ito and colleagues followed 1235 patients with PTMC under
active surveillance for an average of 60 months (95). Only 43
patients (3.5%) had clinical progression of disease by their
stated criteria (tumor growing to >12 mm or appearance of
new lymph node metastases). Interestingly, the younger pa-
tients (<40 years old) had an 8.9% rate of clinical progres-
sion, while those 40–60 years old had a 3.5% rate of
progression and those >60 years old had the lowest rate of
clinical progression (1.6%).
Despite the evidence that cautious observation is a safe and
effective alternative to immediate surgical resection, very few
PTMC patients outside of those two centers in Japan are given
the option of an active surveillance approach. This is in part due
to reports in the literature of a small percentage of patients with
PTMC presenting with clinically significant regional or distant
metastases (141,142,144). Unfortunately, no clinical features
(145–151) can reliably differentiate the relatively small number
18
HAUGEN ET AL.
 of PTMC patients destined to develop clinically significant
progression from the larger population of people that harbor
indolent PTMCs that will not cause significant disease.
Similarly, well-known thyroid cancer oncogenes, such as
BRAF, when taken in isolation, are not able to specifically
identify the microcarcinomas that will progress and spread
outside of the thyroid. The prevalence of BRAFV600E muta-
tions in PTMC with lymph node metastases and tumor re-
currence is higher than PTMC without LN metastases or
recurrence, and in some studies the presence of a BRAF mu-
tation was associated with lymph node metastasis from PTMC
on multivariate analysis (150,152,153). These studies showed
that although the presence of a BRAFV600E mutation identifies
65%–77% of patients with PTMC that develop lymph node
metastases, the BRAF status taken in isolation has a low PPV
for detecting PTMC with extrathyroidal spread and therefore
has a limited role for guiding patient management. However,
recent data suggest that specific molecular profiles, such as the
coexistence of BRAF with other oncogenic mutations (such as
PIK3CA, AKT1), TERT promoter, or TP53 mutations may
serve as more specific markers of less favorable outcome of
PTC. Therefore, it is likely that finding of one of these genetic
profiles in a small tumor would suggest that it represents an
early stage of a clinically relevant PTC (154–157). Future
studies are expected to establish the impact of molecular pro-
filing involving multiple mutations or other genetic alterations
on clinical management of patients with PTMC.
[A15] Indeterminate cytology (AUS/FLUS, FN, SUSP)*
[A16] What are the principles of the molecular
testing of FNA samples?
Molecular markers may be classified according to intended
use; that is, diagnostic (classification of a disease state),
prognostic, or predictive purposes (providing information on
the estimated probability of therapeutic benefit or harm of a
specific therapy) (158). Furthermore, companion use of pre-
dictive molecular markers involves the identification of patient
subgroups in which a therapeutic intervention is proven to be
either beneficial or harmful, with intended implications for
appropriate clinical stratification of therapies (158). Validation
studies of molecular marker tests may include examination of
(a) analytic validity (including test accuracy and reproduc-
ibility in ascertaining the molecular event), (b) clinical validity
(the performance of the test in distinguishing different groups
of patients, based on biology or expected disease outcome,
including measures of sensitivity and specificity or predictive
values), and (c) clinical utility (examination of the test’s ability
to improve outcomes, with direct clinical decision-making
implications) (158). Furthermore, an NCCN Tumor Marker
Task Force has indicated that the clinical utility of a molecular
test should be founded in strong evidence proving that use of
the marker ‘‘improves patient outcomes sufficiently to justify
its incorporation into routine clinical practice.’’{
The principal proposed use of molecular markers in
indeterminate thyroid FNA specimens is diagnostic
(ruling out or in the presence of thyroid malignancy),
with the implication of a companion use to inform
decision-making on primary surgical treatment (i.e., the
decision to perform surgery and if so, the extent of
surgery). However, the focus of this section is restricted
to the clinical validity of molecular testing of indeter-
minate FNA specimens. It is important to note that long-
term outcome data on companion use of molecular
marker status to guide therapeutic decision-making is
currently lacking, and therefore we do not know if im-
plementation of molecular marker use in routine clinical
practice would result in a significant overall benefit in
health outcomes in patients with thyroid nodules. Sur-
gical decision-making on indeterminate FNA specimens is
reviewed in another section of these guidelines, with some
reference to molecular marker testing (if performed). As
summarized in a Disease State Commentary from the
AACE Thyroid Scientific Committee and a consensus
statement from the ATA Surgical Affairs Committee, use
of molecular marker testing on indeterminate FNA spec-
imens should not be intended to replace other sources of
information or clinical judgment (159,160). The pretest
probability of malignancy (based on clinical risk factors,
cytology, US findings), feasibility considerations, and
patient preferences are some additional factors that need
to be considered in decision-making related to molecular
marker testing of FNA specimens. Because this is a rap-
idly evolving field of investigation, it will be important to
perform interval evaluations of the published evidence to
ensure that recommendations remain contemporary.
A number of molecular approaches have been studied in
the clinical setting of indeterminate FNA cytologic inter-
pretation (161). One could surmise that an ideal ‘‘rule-in’’
test would have a PPV for histopathologically proven ma-
lignancy similar to a malignant cytologic diagnosis (98.6%),
and an ideal ‘‘rule-out’’ test would have a NPV similar to a
benign cytologic diagnosis (96.3%) (predictive value esti-
mates based on a recent meta-analysis of performance of the
Bethesda system) (103), and these would hold true with a
reasonable degree of precision and reproducibility.
& RECOMMENDATION 13
If molecular testing is being considered, patients should be
counseled regarding the potential benefits and limitations
of testing and about the possible uncertainties in the
therapeutic and long-term clinical implications of results.
(Strong recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
The largest studies of preoperative molecular markers in
patients with indeterminate FNA cytology have respectively
evaluated a seven-gene panel of genetic mutations and re-
arrangements (BRAF, RAS, RET/PTC, PAX8/PPARc) (162),
a gene expression classifier (167 GEC; mRNA expression
of 167 genes) (163), and galectin-3 immunohistochemistry
(cell blocks) (164). These respective studies have been sub-
ject to various degrees of blinding of outcome assessment
(162–164).
Mutational testing has been proposed for use as a rule-in test
because of relatively high reported specificity (86%–100%)
*The final draft for the sections (A15–A19) and recommenda-
tions (13–17) were revised and approved by a subgroup of seven
members of the task force with no perceived conflicts or competing
interests in this area.
{From the NCCN Biomarkers Compendium (www.nccn.org/
professionals/biomarkers/default.aspx).
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
19
 and PPV (84%–100%) (105,122,162,165–168). Although
BRAFV600E single mutation testing has been estimated to have
a specificity of approximately 99% (pooled data from 1117
nodules with histopathologic confirmation from multiple
studies), the sensitivity has been deemed to be too low to
reliably rule out the presence of malignancy (169). Therefore,
mutational panels have been expanded to include multiple
mutations/translocations including BRAF, NRAS, HRAS, and
KRAS point mutations, as well as RET/PTC1 and RET/PTC3,
with or without PAX8/PPARc rearrangements (105,122,162,
165–168) and other gene rearrangements (170). In indeter-
minate cytology thyroid nodules, the sensitivity of the seven-
gene mutational panel testing is variable, with reports ranging
from 44% to 100% (162,165,167). The reported variability in
sensitivity of mutational analysis with the seven-gene panel in
indeterminate nodules suggests that traditional limited muta-
tion panels may not reliably rule out malignancy with a neg-
ative test in this population. Next-generation sequencing of an
expanded panel of point mutations, single base insertions/de-
letions (indels), and gene rearrangements has been reported to
have a sensitivity of 90% for FN/SFN FNA cytology speci-
mens from a single-center study (170). A limitation was that
the pathologists evaluating the gold standard surgical pathol-
ogy specimens were aware of the results of earlier generation
molecular tests previously conducted on the FNAs (170). It is
not known to what extent differences in techniques used to
perform mutational testing by various groups (162,167,170)
may affect test performance, and direct, head-to-head compar-
isons of these tests within the same population are lacking. The
currently available seven-gene mutational panels have been
proposed to be most useful when surgery is favored. However,
this is based on the assumption that the surgical approach would
be altered with a positive test, and long-term outcome data
proving the overall benefit of this therapeutic strategy are nee-
ded. It is important to acknowledge that algorithms employing
seven-gene mutational testing as a means to inform decision-
making on extent of primary thyroid surgery (i.e., lobectomy or
total thyroidectomy) (162) were developed at a time when the
ATA guidelines favored total thyroidectomy for most PTCs
>1cm in diameter (25). However, this does not reflect recom-
mendations in these guidelines (see Recommendation 35 on
surgical management of malignant cytology nodules). Fur-
thermore, long-term outcome data from a strategy of using
molecular markers in indeterminate FNA specimens to stratify
surgical approach are currently lacking.
Use of a 167 GEC has been proposed as a rule-out test
due to relatively high sensitivity (92%) and NPV (93%), as
reported in a prospective multicenter study (163). The
relatively low specificity of the 167 GEC test (mean values
48%–53% in indeterminate nodules subject to histopatho-
logic confirmation) suggests that the test cannot defini-
tively rule-in malignancy in indeterminate nodules. In a
retrospective analysis of 167 GEC results from five insti-
tutions, Alexander et al. (171) reported that the prevalence
of 167 GEC benign readings by institution varied up to
29%, which was not statistically significant. The distribu-
tion of recruitment from each of the five study sites was
highly variable (total n = 339 nodules), with two sites
contributing only 30 and 37 patients, and the other three
sites accounting for the majority of the study population.
The prevalence of malignancy confirmed by histopathology in
167 GEC ‘‘suspicious’’ nodules ranged from 33% to 80% in
the 48 nodules in the AUS/FLUS group across institutions (no
95% confidence interval [95% CI] reported, p = 0.11), and
from 33% to 67% in the 65 nodules in the FN cytology group
(no 95% CI reported, p = 0.87) (171). For the 174 patients with
167 GEC ‘‘benign’’ readings, four patients were advised to
undergo surgery (2%), and 41% (71 patients) of this group had
short documented follow-up for a mean of 8.5 months (me-
dian 8 months, range 1–24 months); ultimately, 6% of patients
in this group (11/174) had surgery, with one histopatho-
logically confirmed malignancy (171). The reproducibility
of 167 GEC NPV measures in different populations of pa-
tients with indeterminate cytology thyroid nodules has re-
cently been questioned in three smaller, independent,
unblinded studies (172–174). None of these studies reported
any degree of blinding. Furthermore, 95% CI of predictive
estimates in indeterminate cytology nodules were not re-
ported in two single-center studies (172,173), and one
multi-center study was reported to be a retrospective anal-
ysis (174), making it difficult to interpret the findings.
However, such data highlight the need for additional inde-
pendent research examining the reproducibility of diag-
nostic efficacy of the 167 GEC in more institutions, and the
importance of reporting precision estimates for diagnostic
accuracy measures. Furthermore, as in the case of other
molecular-based diagnostic tests in the field, long-term
outcome data from clinical utility studies are needed to in-
form potential future clinical practice implications of the
167 GEC.
Immunohistochemical stains such as galectin-3 and
HBME-1 have been examined in multiple studies of histo-
logically confirmed thyroid FNA samples with indeterminate
cytology, with reports of relatively high rates of specificity,
but low sensitivity, for cancer detection (164,175,176). Two
of these studies were reported to be prospective (164,175),
but only one of the studies reported any degree of blinding
(blind central histopathologic review) (164). Immuno-
histochemical stains require the availability of a cell block to
perform the staining. Additional diagnostic molecular marker
strategies are also under development. Specifically, mRNA
markers (177–179), as well as miRNA markers (180–185),
have shown initial diagnostic utility in FNA samples with in-
determinate cytological diagnoses, but they have not been
thoroughly validated. A recent study combining seven-gene
mutational testing with expression of a set of 10 miRNA genes
on preoperative FNA sampling from 109 patients with AUS/
FLUS or FN cytology, showed 89% sensitivity, 85% speci-
ficity, with a 73% PPV and 94% NPV on this group with a 32%
prevalence of malignancy (186). Finally, peripheral blood TSH
receptor mRNA assay has been reported to have a 90% PPV
and 39% NPV in FNA-based assessment of thyroid nodules
with atypical or suspicious cytology in a single-center, pro-
spective validation study (187).
In summary, there is currently no single optimal molecular
test that can definitively rule in or rule out malignancy in all
cases of indeterminate cytology, and long-term outcome data
proving clinical utility are needed.
& RECOMMENDATION 14
If intended for clinical use, molecular testing should be per-
formed in Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments/
College of American Pathologists (CLIA/CAP)-certified
molecular laboratories, or the international equivalent,
20
HAUGEN ET AL.
 because reported quality assurance practices may be superior
compared to other settings.
(Strong recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
Many molecular marker tests are available in hospital-based
molecular pathology laboratories and in reference laboratories.
Importantly, all molecular marker tests intended for clinical use
should be performed only in CLIA/CAP-certified molecular
laboratories after appropriate analytical and clinical validation
of all assays in each laboratory (158). In a survey of American
molecular genetic testing laboratory directors, laboratory pro-
cess quality assurance score (for multiple relevant domains)
was associated with the presence of CLIA certification (188). In
a large, international survey of medical genetic testing labo-
ratory directors, accreditation of the laboratory was associated
with a higher quality assurance index score (189).
[A17] AUS/FLUS cytology
& RECOMMENDATION 15
(A) For nodules with AUS/FLUS cytology, after consider-
ation of worrisome clinical and sonographic features, in-
vestigations such as repeat FNA or molecular testing may be
used to supplement malignancy risk assessment in lieu of
proceeding directly with a strategy of either surveillance or
diagnostic surgery. Informed patient preference and feasi-
bility should be considered in clinical decision-making.
(Weak recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(B) If repeat FNA cytology, molecular testing, or both are
not performed or inconclusive, either surveillance or di-
agnostic surgical excision may be performed for an AUS/
FLUS thyroid nodule, depending on clinical risk factors,
sonographic pattern, and patient preference.
(Strong recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
Based on the Bethesda System, this diagnostic category is
reserved for specimens that contain cells with architectural and/or
nuclear atypia that is more pronounced than expected for benign
changes but not sufficient to be placed in one of the higher risk
diagnostic categories (99,190). Although this diagnostic category
has been recommended for limited use and has an expected
frequency in the range of 7%, recent reports based on the Be-
thesda System have found this cytologic diagnosis to be used in
1%–27% of all thyroid FNA samples (105,191). In studies that
utilized the criteria established by the Bethesda System, the risk
of cancer for patients with AUS/FLUS nodules who underwent
surgery was 6%–48%, with a mean risk of 16% (191).
A second opinion review of the cytopathology slides by a
high-volume cytopathologist may be considered for patients
with AUS/FLUS cytology. There is some evidence that this
approach may reclassify many of these patients into the be-
nign and nondiagnostic categories (106,192). Furthermore, the
overall diagnostic accuracy may be improved. Unfortunately,
there is a relatively high intra-observer variability in this dif-
ficult diagnostic category (106).
A repeat FNA yields a more definitive cytologic diagnosis
in many cases, whereas 10%–30% of nodules are repeatedly
AUS/FLUS (104,193–195). The rate of malignancy on sur-
gical follow-up has been shown to be similar for patients with
a single AUS/FLUS diagnosis (37/90, 41%), two successive
AUS/FLUS diagnoses (22/51, 43%), and patients with a be-
nign cytologic interpretation following the initial AUS/FLUS
diagnosis (2/7, 29%) (196). Use of thyroid core-needle bi-
opsy was reported by some to be more informative than re-
peated FNA for sampling nodules that were AUS/FLUS on
initial FNA (119), and it is reasonably well-tolerated (197).
The refinement of risk stratification of nodules with AUS/
FLUS cytology using molecular testing has been examined in
multiple studies. The interpretation of molecular testing is
complex, however, and its utility is strongly influenced by the
prevalence of cancer in the tested population of nodules. Only
two molecular tests have been separately evaluated and val-
idated for the individual AUS/FLUS, FN, and SUSP cate-
gories. Mutational testing for BRAF in AUS/FLUS samples
has high specificity for cancer, but low sensitivity (198,199).
Testing for a panel of mutations (BRAF, NRAS, HRAS, KRAS,
RET/PTC1, RET/PTC3, PAX8/PPARc) offers a significantly
higher sensitivity of 63%–80% (162,165). In the largest
prospective study to date of nodules with AUS/FLUS cytol-
ogy (653 consecutive nodules, of which 247 had surgical
follow-up) from a single institution, detection of any of these
mutations using RT-PCR with fluorescent melting curve
analysis was reported to convey an 88% risk of cancer among
nodules with surgical follow-up; 63% of cancers on final
histopathology were identified with a positive mutation pre-
operatively (22 of 35), and 94% of nodules that were negative
on mutation analysis had a benign final histopathology (209
of 222) (162). Positive testing for BRAF, RET/PTC or PAX8/
PPARc was specific for a malignant outcome in 100% of cases,
whereas RAS mutations had an 84% risk of cancer and a 16%
chance of benign follicular adenoma. A recent study utilizing
RT-PCR with liquid bead array flow cytometry with the seven-
gene mutation panel reported on 11 AUS/FLUS cytology
nodules that had malignant histopathologic confirmation, of
which seven had a negative molecular test and four had a
positive test (167). There were also 11 AUS/FLUS cytology
nodules, which were benign on histopathologic evaluation; 9
of 11 had a negative molecular test result and 2 of 11 had a
positive result. Interpretation of results from the AUS/FLUS
subgroup is limited by the small reported sample size (167).
Molecular testing using the 167 GEC has been studied for
its diagnostic use in nodules with AUS/FLUS cytology. A
multi-institutional study of 129 FNA samples with AUS/
FLUS cytology and surgical follow-up reported a 90% sen-
sitivity [95% CI 74%–98%] and 95% NPV [95% CI 85%–
99%], but only a 53% specificity [95% CI 43%–63%] and
38% PPV [95% CI 27%–50%] for cancer (163). Although the
specificity of the 167 GEC was low (53% [95% CI 43%–
63%]), the negative test result was reported to decrease the
risk estimate of malignancy in AUS/FLUS nodules in this
study from 24% to 5%. This observation has led to a clinical
extrapolation suggesting that nodules that have a negative
167 GEC test results may be followed without surgery (163).
In a recent single-center retrospective study including 68
cases of AUS/FLUS nodules, 16 AUS/FLUS cases were re-
ported to have a 167 GEC suspicious result, and the PPV was
61% (11 of 18) for those with surgical pathology confirma-
tion (200). There were insufficient data to confirm the NPV of
the 167 GEC test for AUS/FLUS cytology, since the vast
majority of patients with a benign 167 GEC test did not undergo
surgery, and no long-term follow-up of such cases was reported
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
21
 (200). In three other recent studies, there were insufficient data
for analysis in the AUS/FLUS subgroup to draw any mean-
ingful conclusion on 167 GEC test performance in that sub-
group (172–174). In addition, published follow-up for the 167
GEC is currently limited to a mean of 8.5 months in a subgroup
of 71 patients (171), hence long-term outcome data are needed
to ensure durability of benign 167 GEC findings with corre-
lation to clinical and histologic outcomes.
Several recent studies (201–205) have examined the feasi-
bility of using sonographic features to estimate risk of malig-
nancy in nodules with AUS/FLUS cytology. The PPV of
suspicious sonographic features has been estimated to range
from 60% to 100% depending on the pretest probability of
malignancy of AUS/FLUS cytology and the specific sono-
graphic criteria selected in respective studies. A limitation of all
of these studies is that a gold-standard surgical excisional di-
agnosis was not required for confirmation of malignancy and
long-term follow-up data were generally lacking. The preva-
lence of suspicious sonographic features among studies of AUS/
FLUS cytology nodules ranged from 18% to 50%, assuming
that one or more suspicious features were deemed to be suffi-
cient to be categorized as a sonographically suspicious nodule.
The findings of these studies must be interpreted in the context
of each study’s overall risk of malignancy for this cytology
classification because of its effect on the PPVs obtained by
subsequent application of sonographic features to cytologically
AUS/FLUS nodules. From the four Korean studies (overall
malignancy rate 40%–55%), the reported cancer risk in AUS/
FLUS nodules with the high suspicion sonographic pattern is
90%–100% (201–204), and the presence of even one suspi-
cious US feature (irregular margins, taller than wide shape,
marked hypoechogenicity or microcalcifications) increases the
cancer risk to 60%–90%. However, when the reported cancer
rate in AUS/FLUS nodules is lower [e.g., 23% in a study from
Brazil (205)], the high suspicion sonographic pattern still raises
the risk of malignancy, but the PPV is lower at 70%. None-
theless, the incidence of cancer in AUS/FLUS nodules with
either the high suspicion pattern US or just one suspicious US
feature is significantly higher than that generally accepted for
this cytology category. In a secondary analysis of a retro-
spective single-center study of indeterminate FNA specimens
subject to 167 GEC testing, Lastra et al. studied whether re-
examining US characteristics could assist in distinguishing
malignancy in indeterminate cytology nodules with a 167
GEC suspicious result (200). The presence of ‘‘nodular cal-
cifications’’ or hyper- versus hypo-echogenicity did not alter
the prediction of malignancy. It is unclear whether this study
was adequately powered because the analysis was limited to a
subgroup of 48 cases for analysis of microcalcifications and
20 cases for analysis of echogenicity (200). Further research
is needed to examine the impact of considering clinical and
sonographic features on the potential utility and interpreta-
tion of molecular testing of FNA specimens.
[A18] Follicular neoplasm/suspicious for follicular neo-
plasm cytology
& RECOMMENDATION 16
(A) Diagnostic surgical excision is the long-established
standard of care for the management of FN/SFN cytology
nodules. However, after consideration of clinical and
sonographic features, molecular testing may be used to
supplement malignancy risk assessment data in lieu of
proceeding directly with surgery. Informed patient pref-
erence and feasibility should be considered in clinical
decision-making.
(Weak recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(B) If molecular testing is either not performed or incon-
clusive, surgical excision may be considered for removal
and definitive diagnosis of an FN/SFN thyroid nodule.
(Strong recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
This diagnostic category of the Bethesda System is used
for cellular aspirates (i) comprised of follicular cells arranged
in an altered architectural pattern characterized by cell
crowding and/or microfollicle formation and lacking nuclear
features of papillary carcinoma or (ii) comprised almost ex-
clusively of oncocytic (Hu
¨rthle) cells (99,206,207). This is an
intermediate risk category in the Bethesda System, with a
15%–30% estimated risk of malignancy. Studies that applied
the Bethesda System reported the use of this diagnostic cat-
egory in 1%–25% (mean, 10%) of all thyroid FNA samples,
with the risk of cancer on surgery found to range from 14% to
33% (mean, 26%) (191).
The refinement of risk stratification of nodules with FN/
SFN/Hu
¨rthle cell neoplasm cytology has been examined using
ancillary molecular testing. Testing for a seven-gene panel of
mutations (including BRAF, RAS, RET/PTC, and/PPARc) in
nodules with follicular or Hu
¨rthle cell neoplasm or SFN has
been reported to be associated with a sensitivity of 57%–75%,
specificity of 97%–100%, PPV of 87%–100%, and NPV of
79%–86% (162,165). Many of these benign tumors are follic-
ular adenomas driven by oncogenic RAS mutation with un-
certain malignant potential (208). Nodules lacking all of these
mutations still have a substantial cancer risk, which is due to the
presence of a subset of tumors that lack any of the mutations
tested by this seven-gene panel (162). Expansion of the current
panels to include additional mutations and gene rearrangements
with this next-generation sequencing assay was associated with
a sensitivity of 90% [95% CI 80%–99%], specificity of 93%
[95% CI 88%–98%], PPV of 83% [95% CI 72%–95%], and
NPV of 96% [95% CI 92%–100%] in a recent single-center
study of 143 consecutive FN/SFN FNA specimens with known
surgical outcomes. In this study (170), retrospective (n = 91)
and prospective data (n = 52) were combined. A limitation was
that the pathologists reviewing the surgical specimens were
aware of earlier generation molecular marker seven-gene panel
test results, although they were blinded to results of the next-
generation mutation panel (162,170). Given the overlap of
some of the markers detected in earlier and later generation
assays, there is a potential for bias (170), and the results need to
be replicated in other studies.
Molecular testing using the GEC was reported to have a
94% NPV [95% CI 79%–99%], and a 37% PPV [95% CI
23%–52%] in the FN/SFN/Hu
¨rthle cell neoplasm Bethesda
subgroup (163). A recent unblinded study from the Mayo
Clinic utilizing a prospective patient registry reported the
following diagnostic accuracy estimates in a subgroup of 31
indeterminate nodules from the same Bethesda subgroup that
were subject to histopathologic confirmation: sensitivity 80%
(four of five nodules), specificity 12% (3 of 26 nodules), PPV
22
HAUGEN ET AL.
 15% (4 of 27), and NPV 75% (three of four) (173). In a single-
center retrospective study including 64 nodules subjected to
167 GEC testing and a cytology read as FN/FN with oncocytic
features, the PPV for a suspicious GEC result was 37% (11 of
30), although the PPV was significantly higher in the FN
group (53%) compared with the FN with oncocytic features
group (15%) (200). There were insufficient numbers of pa-
tients with benign 167 GEC results who underwent surgery to
draw conclusions on NPV; moreover, no long-term follow-up
data were reported (200). The relatively small number of in-
determinate nodules is an important limitation. Furthermore,
precision estimates (95% CIs) for the diagnostic accuracy
measures were not reported but could be assumed to be rel-
atively wide given the small sample size (173,200).
[A19] Suspicious for malignancy cytology
& RECOMMENDATION 17
(A) If the cytology is reported as suspicious for papillary
carcinoma (SUSP), surgical management should be simi-
lar to that of malignant cytology, depending on clinical risk
factors, sonographic features, patient preference, and
possibly results of mutational testing (if performed).
(Strong recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
(B) After consideration of clinical and sonographic
features, mutational testing for BRAF or the seven-gene
mutation marker panel (BRAF, RAS, RET/PTC, PAX8/
PPARc) may be considered in nodules with SUSP cytology
if such data would be expected to alter surgical decision-
making.
(Weak recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
This diagnostic category of the Bethesda System is reserved
for aspirates with cytologic features that raise a strong suspi-
cion for malignancy (mainly for PTC) but are not sufficient for
a conclusive diagnosis (99,209). This is the highest risk cate-
gory of indeterminate cytology in the Bethesda System, with
an estimated cancer risk of 60%–75% (209). Studies that uti-
lize the Bethesda System have reported this cytologic diag-
nosis in 1%–6% of thyroid FNAs and found malignancy after
surgery in 53%–87% (mean, 75%) of these nodules (191). Due
to the high risk of cancer, the diagnosis of suspicious for
papillary carcinoma is an indication for surgery.
Mutational testing has been proposed to refine risk prior to
surgery, assuming that surgical management would change
based on a positive test result. BRAF mutations have been
reported to confer close to 100% probability of malignancy
(162,198,210,211). Testing for BRAF mutations in nodules
suspicious for malignancy has been reported to have a sen-
sitivity of 36% (10 of 28) and specificity of 100% (24 of 24) in
a single-center retrospective study (162). In another single
center retrospective study in which FNA slides deemed to be
suspicious for PTC were tested after surgery, the sensitivity of
BRAF testing for PTC was 45.5% (15 of 33), and specificity
was 85.7% (12 of 14) (212). Testing for a seven-gene panel of
mutations (including BRAF, RAS, RET/PTC, with or without
PAX8/PPARc) in nodules with cytology suspicious for ma-
lignancy is associated with a sensitivity of 50%–68%, speci-
ficity of 86%–96%, PPV of 80%–95%, and NPV of 72%–75%
in respective single-center studies (162,165,168). Molecular
testing using the 167 GEC has a PPV that is similar to cytol-
ogy alone (76%) and a NPV of 85% (163), and it is therefore
not indicated in patients with this cytologic diagnosis.
[A20] What is the utility of 18FDG-PET scanning
to predict malignant or benign disease when FNA
cytology is indeterminate (AUS/FLUS, FN, SUSP)?
& RECOMMENDATION 18
18FDG-PET imaging is not routinely recommended for the
evaluation of thyroid nodules with indeterminate cytology.
(Weak recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
Eight studies have been performed and are the subject of
two meta-analyses (213–222). While early data suggested a
high NPV for 18FDG-PET in this setting, most studies failed
to use the Bethesda System for Reporting Thyroid Cyto-
pathology and included numerous small nodules <1 cm in
diameter (221). A recent meta-analysis included seven
studies, of which five were prospective (222). The cancer
prevalence was 26% inclusive of all combined data, con-
firming a typical study cohort. Sensitivity and specificity
of 18FDG-PET were 89% and 55%, respectively, resulting in
a 41% PPV and 93% NPV, which is similar to the perfor-
mance of the 167 GEC. Vriens et al. (223) performed a cost-
effectiveness analysis using 18FDG-PET performance data
from their own meta-analysis and 2012 reimbursement rates
of the Dutch system. They showed that 18FDG-PET was more
cost effective than surgery, the 167 GEC, or mutational testing.
A recent prospective analysis of 56 nodules with indetermi-
nate FNA cytology used both 18FDG-PET and thyroid US
to further evaluate the nodules (220). In a multivariate analy-
sis, the authors demonstrated no additional diagnostic benefit
or improved risk assessment when adding 18FDG-PET to that
already obtained from thyroid US, bringing into question the
incremental benefit of PET imaging in patients with cytolog-
ically indeterminate thyroid nodules.
[A21] What is the appropriate operation
for cytologically indeterminate thyroid nodules?
& RECOMMENDATION 19
When surgery is considered for patients with a solitary,
cytologically indeterminate nodule, thyroid lobectomy is
the recommended initial surgical approach. This approach
may be modified based on clinical or sonographic char-
acteristics, patient preference, and/or molecular testing
when performed (see Recommendations 13–16).
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
& RECOMMENDATION 20
(A) Because of increased risk for malignancy, total
thyroidectomy may be preferred in patients with indeter-
minate nodules that are cytologically suspicious for ma-
lignancy, positive for known mutations specific for
carcinoma, sonographically suspicious, or large (>4 cm),
or in patients with familial thyroid carcinoma or history of
radiation exposure, if completion thyroidectomy would be
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
23
 recommended based on the indeterminate nodule being
malignant following lobectomy.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(B) Patients with indeterminate nodules who have bilateral
nodular disease, those with significant medical co-
morbidities, or those who prefer to undergo bilateral thy-
roidectomy to avoid the possibility of requiring a future
surgery on the contralateral lobe, may undergo total or
near-total thyroidectomy, assuming completion thyroid-
ectomy would be recommended if the indeterminate
nodule proved malignant following lobectomy.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
The primary goal of thyroid surgery for a thyroid nodule
that is cytologically indeterminate (AUS/FLUS or FN or
SUSP) is to establish a histological diagnosis and definitive
removal, while reducing the risks associated with remedial
surgery in the previously operated field if the nodule proves to
be malignant. Surgical options to address the nodule should be
limited to lobectomy (hemithyroidectomy) with or without
isthmusectomy, near-total thyroidectomy (removal of all
grossly visible thyroid tissue, leaving only a small amount
[<1 g] of tissue adjacent to the recurrent laryngeal nerve near
the ligament of Berry), or total thyroidectomy (removal of all
grossly visible thyroid tissue). Removal of the nodule alone,
partial lobectomy, and subtotal thyroidectomy, leaving >1 g
of tissue with the posterior capsule on the uninvolved side, are
inappropriate operations for possible thyroid cancer (224).
Decisions regarding the extent of surgery for indeterminate
thyroid nodules are influenced by several factors (225), in-
cluding the estimated presurgical likelihood of malignancy
based upon clinical risk factors (>4 cm, family history, and/or
history of radiation) (226–229), sonographic pattern (Table 6,
Fig. 2) (202–203), cytologic category (Table 8), and ancillary
test findings (see molecular testing section [A15–19]). These
risk factors, as well as patient preference, presence of con-
tralateral nodularity or coexistent hyperthyroidism, and
medical comorbidities, impact decisions regarding thyroid
lobectomy with the possible need for subsequent completion
thyroidectomy versus total thyroidectomy up front.
Nodules that are cytologically classified as AUS/FLUS or
FN and benign using the 167 GEC, or AUS/FLUS and neg-
ative using the seven-gene mutation panel have an estimated
5%–6% risk of malignancy (162,163). Nodules that are cyto-
logically classified as FN and negative using the seven-gene
mutation panel have an estimated 14% risk of malignancy,
which is slightly lower than the risk based upon the Bethesda
classification alone (162).
Nodules that are cytologically classified as AUS/FLUS or
FN and as suspicious using the 167 GEC have an estimated
37%–44% risk of malignancy, which is slightly higher than
the risk based upon the Bethesda classification alone (Table
8) (163,171).
Nodules that are cytologically classified as SUSP cytology
and benign using the 167 GEC or negative using the mutation
seven-gene panel, also have an estimated 15%–28% risk of
malignancy.
In contrast, nodules that are cytologically classified as
AUS/FLUS or FN and that are positive for known RAS mu-
tations associated with thyroid carcinoma have an estimated
84% risk of malignancy and should be considered in a similar
risk category to cytologically suspicious for malignancy
(Table 8) (103,230). Nodules that are cytologically classified
as AUS/FLUS or FN or SUSP and that are positive for known
BRAFV600E, RET/PTC, or PAX8/PPARc mutations have an
estimated risk of malignancy of >95% and should be con-
sidered in a similar category to cytologically diagnosed
thyroid carcinoma (198,210,211).
Sonographic pattern of nodules with AUS/FLUS cytology
may aid in risk stratification and management. In one study,
sonographically benign or seemingly very low risk nodules
with AUS/FLUS cytology were noted to be malignant in
only 8% of cases, compared to 58% when sonographic sus-
picious was low or intermediate, and 100% when sono-
graphic suspicion of malignancy was high (203). Another
study supported this finding with sonographic findings highly
suspicious for malignancy (taller than wide shape, irregular
borders, and/or marked hypoechogenicity) having >90%
specificity and PPV for malignancy (202).
The risks of total thyroidectomy are significantly greater
than that for thyroid lobectomy, with a recent meta-analysis
suggesting a pooled relative risk (RR) significantly greater
for all complications, including recurrent laryngeal nerve in-
jury (transient RR= 1.7, permanent RR= 1.9), hypocalcemia
(transient RR= 10.7, permanent RR= 3.2), and hemorrhage/
hematoma (RR = 2.6) (231). Further, total thyroidectomy is
associated with the rare but potential risk of bilateral recurrent
laryngeal nerve injury necessitating tracheostomy. Surgeon
experience likely influences the risks of thyroidectomy, with
higher volume surgeons having lower complication rates
(232,233).
Total thyroidectomy necessitates thyroid hormone re-
placement, while lobectomy is associated with an incidence
of postoperative biochemical hypothyroidism estimated at
22%, with clinical or overt hypothyroidism estimated at 4%
(234). A significantly increased risk of hypothyroidism fol-
lowing lobectomy has been reported in the presence of auto-
immune thyroid disease (e.g., as reflected by the presence of
thyroid antibodies) or high normal/elevated TSH (231,234).
Hypothyroidism is not an indication for thyroidectomy, and
its use as justification for total thyroidectomy over lobectomy
should be weighed against the higher risks associated with
total thyroidectomy. In contrast, coexistent hyperthyroidism
may be an indication for total thyroidectomy depending upon
the etiology.
Thyroid lobectomy (hemithyroidectomy) provides defini-
tive histological diagnosis and complete tumor removal for
cytologically indeterminate nodules with a lower risk of
complications compared to total thyroidectomy and may be
sufficient for smaller, solitary intrathyroidal nodules that ul-
timately prove malignant. As the likelihood of malignancy
increases, the potential need for a second operation also in-
creases, if the cytologically indeterminate nodule ultimately
proves malignant and if completion thyroidectomy would
be recommended. Intraoperative evaluation, with or without
frozen section, can occasionally confirm malignancy at the
time of lobectomy allowing for conversion to total thyroid-
ectomy if indicated. Frozen section is most helpful if the
histopathologic diagnosis is classic PTC, whereas its impact
is low in follicular variant of PTC and FTC. The individual
patient must weigh the relative advantages and disadvantages
of thyroid lobectomy with possible total thyroidectomy or
24
HAUGEN ET AL.
 subsequent completion thyroidectomy versus initial total
thyroidectomy.
[A22] How should multinodular thyroid glands
(i.e., two or more clinically relevant nodules)
be evaluated for malignancy?
& RECOMMENDATION 21
(A) Patients with multiple thyroid nodules ‡1 cm should be
evaluated in the same fashion as patients with a solitary
nodule ‡1 cm, excepting that each nodule that is >1 cm
carries an independent risk of malignancy and therefore
multiple nodules may require FNA.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(B) When multiple nodules ‡1 cm are present, FNA should
be performed preferentially based upon nodule sono-
graphic pattern and respective size cutoff (Table 6, Fig. 2).
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(C) If none of the nodules has a high or moderate suspicion
sonographic pattern, and multiple sonographically similar
very low or low suspicion pattern nodules coalesce with no
intervening normal parenchyma, the likelihood of malig-
nancy is low and it is reasonable to aspirate the largest
nodules (‡2 cm) or continue surveillance without FNA.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
& RECOMMENDATION 22
A low or low-normal serum TSH concentration in patients
with multiple nodules may suggest that some nodule(s)
may be autonomous. In such cases, a radionuclide (pref-
erably 123I) thyroid scan should be considered and directly
compared to the US images to determine functionality of
each nodule ‡1 cm. FNA should then be considered only
for those isofunctioning or nonfunctioning nodules, among
which those with high suspicion sonographic pattern
should be aspirated preferentially.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
Patients with multiple thyroid nodules have the same risk
of malignancy as those with solitary nodules (32,74). How-
ever, when evaluating the risk of cancer per individual nod-
ule, one large study found that a solitary nodule had a higher
likelihood of malignancy than did a nonsolitary nodule
( p < 0.01), although in agreement with the other studies the
risk of malignancy per patient was the same and independent
of the number of nodules (77). A recent systematic review
and meta-analysis confirmed the slightly higher risk of ma-
lignancy in a solitary nodule compared with an individual
nodule in a MNG. However, this appeared to hold true mostly
outside of the United States and in iodine-deficient popula-
tions (235). A diagnostic US should be performed to evaluate
the sonographic risk pattern of each nodule, but if only the
‘‘dominant’’ or largest nodule is aspirated, the thyroid cancer
may be missed (74). Therefore, multiple thyroid nodules
‡1 cm may require aspiration, based on sonographic pattern
(Recommendation 8, Table 6, Fig. 2) to fully exclude clini-
cally relevant thyroid cancer. Radionuclide scanning may
also be considered in patients with multiple thyroid nodules
with the goal of identifying and aspirating appropriate hy-
pofunctioning nodules. Such imaging may prove especially
useful when the serum TSH is below or in the low-normal
range. Similarly, sonographic risk assessment of each nodule
can assist in identifying those nodules with the highest like-
lihood of cancer (see section [A10]).
[A23] What are the best methods for long-term
follow-up of patients with thyroid nodules?
[A24] Recommendations for initial follow-up of nodules
with benign FNA cytology
& RECOMMENDATION 23
Given the low false-negative rate of US-guided FNA cy-
tology and the higher yield of missed malignancies based
upon nodule sonographic pattern rather than growth, the
follow-up of thyroid nodules with benign cytology diag-
noses should be determined by risk stratification based
upon US pattern.
(A) Nodules with high suspicion US pattern: repeat US and
US-guided FNA within 12 months.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(B) Nodules with low to intermediate suspicion US pat-
tern: repeat US at 12–24 months. If sonographic evidence
of growth (20% increase in at least two nodule dimensions
with a minimal increase of 2 mm or more than a 50%
change in volume) or development of new suspicious so-
nographic features, the FNA could be repeated or obser-
vation continued with repeat US, with repeat FNA in case
of continued growth.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
(C) Nodules with very low suspicion US pattern (including
spongiform nodules): the utility of surveillance US and
assessment of nodule growth as an indicator for repeat
FNA to detect a missed malignancy is limited. If US is
repeated, it should be done at ‡24 months.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
[A25] Recommendation for follow-up of nodules with two
benign FNA cytology results
(D) If a nodule has undergone repeat US-guided FNA with a
second benign cytology result, US surveillance for this nod-
ule for continued risk of malignancy is no longer indicated.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
Given that there is a low but discrete false-negative rate for
nodules with benign FNA cytology results, is there an opti-
mal way to identify these missed malignancies? Although the
risk of malignancy after two benign cytology results is vir-
tually zero (129–133,236), routine rebiopsy is not a viable or
cost-effective option because of the low false-negative rate of
an US-guided FNA benign cytology result. Prior guidelines
have recommended repeat FNA for nodules that grow during
serial sonographic observation. However, nodule growth
can be variably defined. Because of interobserver variation,
Brauer et al. (237) reported a 50% increase in nodule volume
as the minimally significant reproducibly recorded change in
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
25
 nodule size, which is equivalent to a 20% increase in two of
the three nodule dimensions. If a 50% volume increase
cutoff is applied, only 4%–10% of nodules were reported
to be larger at a mean of 18 months (133,238). However,
using cutoffs of a 15% volume increase based upon inter-
nally assessed interobserver coefficients of variation, pub-
lished series report that 32%–50% of nodules increase in
size over a 4–5 year period (239,240). Because of the
stringent methodology of these studies, adoption of a 15%
volume increase as statistically significant is not practically
applicable.
A recent 5-year prospective multicenter study evaluated
outcomes of 1597 nodules from 992 patients with either cy-
tologically or sonographically benign nodules (241). Nodules
1 cm or larger underwent US-guided FNA and subcentimeter
nodules were defined as sonographically benign based upon
imaging characteristics equivalent to the ATA low or very
low suspicion US patterns. All nodules were followed by
annual US exams. The false-negative rate of a benign cy-
tology diagnosis was 1.1%. Of the four missed cancers, on
baseline US imaging three were hypoechoic and solid and
one was isoechoic with microcalcifications; none was spon-
giform or mixed cystic solid and noncalcified (ATA very low
suspicion pattern). During sonographic surveillance, repeat
FNA was prompted by either growth (two nodules) or de-
velopment of a new suspicious sonographic feature (two
nodules). In addition, the shortest time interval to detect
change and repeat the FNA was 2 years. Another critical
observation from this study was that only one cancer was
detected in 5 years among the 852 subcentimeter nodules
classified as sonographicially benign at baseline. This cancer
was identified on the 5-year follow-up US, when its com-
position changed from mixed cystic/solid to hypoechoic solid
with irregular margins prompting FNA (241). Currently,
there are no follow-up studies of nodule growth that extend
observation beyond 5 years to help inform decision-making
about long-term surveillance. Additional research would be
valuable because indefinite follow-up of nodules with benign
cytology is costly and may be unnecessary.
Recent investigations of repeat US-guided FNA in nodules
with initial benign cytology show higher detection rates for
missed malignancy for those nodules with a high suspicion so-
nographic pattern rather than size increase (236,242). Kwak et al.
(236) reported a significantly higher malignancy rate of 20.4% in
nodules with benign cytology that exhibited either marked hy-
poechogenicity, irregular borders, microcalcifications, or a taller
than wide shape versus a 1.4% risk in those that exhibited a 15%
volume increase but lacked these US features. Importantly, the
low risk of malignancy did not differ between US negative
nodules that grew and those that demonstrated no interval size
change (1.4% vs. 0.5%, p=0.18). Similarly, Rosario et al. (242)
detected cancer in 17.4% of nodules with benign cytologic di-
agnoses and suspicious US features versus 1.3% of those without
suspicious characteristic that grew, using criteria of a 50% vol-
ume increase. These studies indicate that the use of suspi-
cious US characteristics rather than nodule growth should
be the indication for repeat FNA despite an initial benign
cytology diagnosis. Repeat US and FNA should be repeated
within 12 months as guided by clinical judgement. Given
the low false-negative rate of US-guided FNA cytology and
the higher yield of missed malignancies based upon nodule
sonographic pattern rather than growth, the follow-up of
thyroid nodules with benign cytology diagnoses should be
determined by risk stratification based upon US pattern as
defined in Recommendation 8. If follow-up US for surveil-
lance is performed and the nodule size is stable, the utility of
subsequent US imaging for detection of potential malignancy
by nodule growth assessment is very low and if performed, the
time interval for any additional US exam should be at least as
long that between the initial benign FNA cytology result and
first follow-up. However, even if a repeat US is not indicated
based on a benign cytology, US pattern, or stability in nodule
size, larger nodules may require monitoring for growth that
could result in symptoms and thus prompt surgical interven-
tion despite benign cytology.
One recent study evaluated the long-term consequences of
a false-negative benign cytology (140). A total of 1369 pa-
tients with 2010 cytologically benign thyroid nodules were
followed for a mean of 8.5 years. Eighteen false-negative
cases were identified, although only a subset of patients un-
derwent repeat FNA or thyroid surgery. Thirty deaths were
documented in the entire cohort over this time period and
none were attributable to thyroid cancer. These data sup-
port that an initial benign cytology conveys an overall ex-
cellent prognosis and a conservative follow-up strategy is
reasonable.
[A26] Follow-up for nodules that do not meet FNA criteria
& RECOMMENDATION 24
Nodules may be detected on US that do not meet criteria
for FNA at initial imaging (Recommendation 8). The
strategy for sonographic follow-up of these nodules should
be based upon the nodule’s sonographic pattern.
(A) Nodules with high suspicion US pattern: repeat US
in 6–12 months.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
(B) Nodules with low to intermediate suspicion US pat-
tern: consider repeat US at 12–24 months.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
(C) Nodules >1 cm with very low suspicion US pattern
(including spongiform nodules) and pure cyst: the utility
and time interval of surveillance US for risk of malignancy
is not known. If US is repeated, it should be at ‡24 months.
(No recommendation, Insufficient evidence)
(D) Nodules £1 cm with very low suspicion US pattern
(including spongiform nodules) and pure cysts do not re-
quire routine sonographic follow-up.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
Ultrasound studies demonstrate that up to 50% of adults have
thyroid nodules. The vast majority of these are subcentimeter,
and FNA evaluation is generally not indicated. In addition,
based upon both sonographic pattern and size cutoffs (Re-
commendation 8), many nodules >1 cm may also be followed
without FNA. Although no prospective studies address the
optimal cost-effective surveillance strategy for these nodules
that have not undergone FNA, a recent study by Durante et al.
(241) confirms that subcentimeter thyroid nodules corre-
sponding to the ATA very low suspicion risk pattern are highly
26
HAUGEN ET AL.
 unlikely to change during 5-year sonographic follow-up, and
the risk of malignancy is exceedingly low. The findings from
studies correlating sonographic features and malignancy risk in
aspirated nodules can be extrapolated to inform a follow-up
strategy for this group of nodules that do not meet FNA criteria
at the time of their initial detection. For example, the interval
for follow-up sonography for a nodule that is hypoechoic and
taller than wide should be shorter than that for an isoechoic
solid nodule with smooth borders.
US-guided FNA should be performed based upon follow-
up US imaging if the nodule subsequently meets criteria
based upon Recommendation 8.
[A27] What is the role of medical or surgical
therapy for benign thyroid nodules?
& RECOMMENDATION 25
Routine TSH suppression therapy for benign thyroid nod-
ules in iodine sufficient populations is not recommended.
Though modest responses to therapy can be detected, the
potential harm outweighs benefit for most patients.
(Strong recommendation, High-quality evidence)
& RECOMMENDATION 26
Individual patients with benign, solid, or mostly solid
nodules should have adequate iodine intake. If inadequate
dietary intake is found or suspected, a daily supplement
(containing 150 lg iodine) is recommended.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
& RECOMMENDATION 27
(A) Surgery may be considered for growing nodules that
are benign after repeat FNA if they are large (>4 cm),
causing compressive or structural symptoms, or based
upon clinical concern.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
(B) Patients with growing nodules that are benign after
FNA should be regularly monitored. Most asymptomatic
nodules demonstrating modest growth should be followed
without intervention.
(Strong recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
& RECOMMENDATION 28
Recurrent cystic thyroid nodules with benign cytology
should be considered for surgical removal or percutaneous
ethanol injection (PEI) based on compressive symptoms
and cosmetic concerns. Asymptomatic cystic nodules may
be followed conservatively.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
& RECOMMENDATION 29
There are no data to guide recommendations on the use of
thyroid hormone therapy in patients with growing nodules
that are benign on cytology.
(No recommendation, Insufficient evidence)
Evidence from multiple prospective, RCTs, and from three
meta-analyses suggest that thyroid hormone supplementation
in doses that suppress the serum TSH to subnormal levels
may result in a decrease in nodule size and may prevent the
appearance of new nodules in regions of the world with
borderline low iodine intake (239,243–245). However, the
effect is modest, with most studies suggesting an average
5%–15% reduction in nodule volume when treated with
suppressive levothyroxine (LT4) therapy for 6–18 months.
Two high-quality meta-analyses confirm that six to eight pa-
tients will require suppressive LT4 therapy to achieve one
successful treatment response (246,247). The extent of TSH
suppression achieved in high-quality studies is variable, though
the majority suppressed TSH to <0.2 mIU/L, with many to <0.1
mIU/L. Hyperthyroidism to this degree has been significantly
associated with an increased risk of cardiac arrhythmias and
osteoporosis, as well as adverse symptomatology. Together,
these data confirm that LT4 suppressive therapy demonstrates
modest (though usually clinically insignificant) efficacy in
nodule volume reduction, but increases the risk of adverse
consequences related to iatrogenic thyrotoxicosis. One large
prospective, randomized trial demonstrated that sufficient die-
tary iodine intake (150lg daily) also reduced nodule size
slightly more than placebo (248). The consumption of adequate
dietary iodine is recommended for all adults and is without harm
when not excessive. Data supporting LT4 therapy in non–TSH-
suppressive doses for prevention of thyroid nodule growth
are incomplete. One recent cohort analysis suggested non-
suppressive doses of LT4 therapy conferred protection from
nodule growth over time (249). However, the nonblinded, non-
randomized nature of the trial precludes broad translation of the
data, and the efficacy of nonsuppressive LT4 remains unproven.
Cystic nodules that are cytologically benign can be monitored
for recurrence (fluid reaccumulation), which can be seen in
60%–90% of patients (250,251). For those patients with subse-
quent recurrent symptomatic cystic fluid accumulation, surgical
removal, generally by hemithyroidectomy, or PEI are both rea-
sonable strategies. Four controlled studies demonstrated a 75%–
85% success rate after PEI compared with a 7%–38% success
rate in controls treated by simple cyst evacuation or saline in-
jection. Success was achieved after an average of two PEI
treatments. Complications included mild to moderate local pain,
flushing, dizziness, and dysphonia (250–253). Surgery may be
considered for growing solid nodules that are benign on repeat
cytology if they are large (>4cm), causing compressive or
structural symptoms, or based upon clinical concern (254,255).
[A28] How should thyroid nodules in pregnant
women be managed?
[A29] FNA for thyroid nodules discovered during preg-
nancy
& RECOMMENDATION 30
(A) FNA of clinically relevant thyroid nodules (refer to
section [A10]) should be performed in euthyroid and hy-
pothyroid pregnant women.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(B) For women with suppressed serum TSH levels that
persist beyond 16 weeks gestation, FNA may be deferred
until after pregnancy and cessation of lactation. At that
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
27
 time, a radionuclide scan can be performed to evaluate
nodule function if the serum TSH remains suppressed.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
It is uncertain if thyroid nodules discovered in pregnant
women are more likely to be malignant than those found in
nonpregnant women, since there are no population-based
studies to address this question. Pregnancy does not appear to
modify microscopic cellular appearance, thus standard diag-
nostic criteria should be applied for cytologic evaluation (256).
Serial evaluation of nodules throughout pregnancy has dem-
onstrated that thyroid nodules will enlarge slightly throughout
gestation, though this does not imply malignant transformation
(257). The recommended evaluation of a clinically relevant
nodule in a pregnant patient is thus the same as for a non-
pregnant patient, with the exception that a radionuclide scan is
contraindicated. In addition, for patients with nodules diag-
nosed as DTC by FNA during pregnancy, delaying surgery
until after delivery does not affect outcome (258). Surgery
performed during pregnancy is associated with greater risk of
complications, longer hospital stays, and higher costs (259).
[A30] Approaches to pregnant patients with malignant
or indeterminate cytology
& RECOMMENDATION 31
PTC discovered by cytology in early pregnancy should
be monitored sonographically. If it grows substantially
(as defined in section [A24]) before 24–26 weeks ges-
tation, or if US reveals cervical lymph nodes that are
suspicious for metastatic disease, surgery should be
considered during pregnancy. However, if the disease
remains stable by midgestation, or if it is diagnosed
in the second half of pregnancy, surgery may be de-
ferred until after delivery.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
If FNA cytology is consistent with PTC, surgery is gener-
ally recommended. However, the decision to perform
such surgery either during pregnancy or after delivery must be
individualized. If surgery is not performed, the utility of
thyroid hormone therapy targeted to lower serum TSH levels
to improve the prognosis of thyroid cancer diagnosed during
gestation is not known. Because higher serum TSH levels may
be correlated with a more advanced stage of cancer at surgery
(260), if the patient’s serum TSH is >2 mU/L, it may be rea-
sonable to initiate thyroid hormone therapy to maintain the
TSH between 0.3 to 2.0 mU/L for the remainder of gestation.
Most data confirm that the prognosis of women with well-
differentiated thyroid cancer identified but not treated during
pregnancy is similar to that of nonpregnant patients. Because
of this, surgery in most pregnant patients is deferred until
postpartum (258,261), and no further testing is required.
However, some studies differ from these findings. Two Ital-
ian cohort studies have investigated women diagnosed with
DTC in relation to the timing of pregnancy. Messuti et al.
(262) noted a statistically higher rate of persistence/recur-
rence when DTC was diagnosed during pregnancy or within 2
years postpartum. However, the stimulated Tg was found to
be >10 ng/mL during 131I ablation in many cases, suggesting
the extent of thyroidectomy and/or tumor resection may have
been limited in this cohort and therefore contributed to bio-
chemical persistence of disease. Vannucchi et al. (263) fol-
lowed a small cohort of 10 patients with DTC during
pregnancy or within 1 year post partum, again noting a large
rate of persistent disease (60%) compared to nonpregnant
controls (4.2%–13.1%). Similarly, the majority of cases with
persistent disease were attributable to biochemical elevations
in Tg or anti-Tg antibodies, again raising the question of
whether the extent of initial resection was limited in com-
parison to nonpregnant controls. Given the likelihood that
biochemical persistence could be attributable to an increased
size of remnant tissue or incomplete surgical resection in both
studies, these data should not refute previous, larger analyses
showing no increased recurrence rates when DTC is diag-
nosed during pregnancy.
Theoretically, molecular marker analysis could be helpful
in the evaluation of DTC or clinically relevant, cytologically
indeterminate thyroid nodules detected during pregnancy.
However, the application of molecular testing in pregnant
women with indeterminate cytology remains uncertain.
There are no published data validating the performance of
any molecular marker in this population. Therefore, the
committee cannot recommend for or against their use in
pregnant women. However, it is theoretically possible that
changes in a nodule’s RNA expression may occur during
gestation altering performance of the 167 GEC while the
seven-gene mutational panel (BRAF, RAS, PAX8/PPARc,
RET/PTC) would be more likely to demonstrate similar
performance to that of a nonpregnant population.
When surgery is advised during pregnancy, it is most
often because of high-risk clinical or sonographic findings,
nodule growth, or change over short duration follow-up or it
is based upon physician judgement. To minimize the risk of
miscarriage, surgery during pregnancy should be done in the
second trimester before 24 weeks gestation (264). However,
PTC discovered during pregnancy does not behave more
aggressively than that diagnosed in a similar-aged group of
nonpregnant women (258,265). A retrospective study of
pregnant women with DTC found no difference in either
recurrence or survival rates between women operated dur-
ing or after pregnancy (258). Further, retrospective data
suggest that treatment delays of <1 year from the time of
thyroid cancer discovery do not adversely affect patient
outcome (266). A separate study reported a higher rate of
complications in pregnant women undergoing thyroid sur-
gery compared with nonpregnant women (267). If FNA
cytology is indeterminate, monitoring may be considered
with further evaluation may be delayed until after delivery.
Some experts recommend thyroid hormone suppression
therapy for pregnant women with FNA suspicious for or
diagnostic of PTC, if surgery is deferred until the postpar-
tum period (259).
[B1] DIFFERENTIATED THYROID CANCER:
INITIAL MANAGEMENT GUIDELINES
Differentiated thyroid cancer, arising from thyroid follic-
ular epithelial cells, accounts for the vast majority of thyroid
cancers. Of the differentiated cancers, papillary cancer
comprises about 85% of cases compared to about 12% that
have follicular histology, including conventional and onco-
cytic (Hu
¨rthle cell) carcinomas, and <3% that are poorly
28
HAUGEN ET AL.
 differentiated tumors (268). In general, stage for stage, the
prognoses of PTC and follicular cancer are similar (266,269).
[B2] Goals of initial therapy of DTC
The basic goals of initial therapy for patients with DTC are
to improve overall and disease-specific survival, reduce the
risk of persistent/recurrent disease and associated morbidity,
and permit accurate disease staging and risk stratification,
while minimizing treatment-related morbidity and unneces-
sary therapy. The specific goals of initial therapy are to
1. Remove the primary tumor, disease that has extended
beyond the thyroid capsule, and clinically significant
lymph node metastases. Completeness of surgical re-
section is an important determinant of outcome, while
residual metastatic lymph nodes represent the most com-
mon site of disease persistence/recurrence (270–272).
2. Minimize the risk of disease recurrence and metastatic
spread. Adequate surgery is the most important treat-
ment variable influencing prognosis, while RAI treat-
ment, TSH suppression, and other treatments each play
adjunctive roles in at least some patients (273–275).
3. Facilitate postoperative treatment with RAI, where
appropriate. For patients undergoing RAI remnant
ablation, or RAI treatment of presumed (adjuvant
therapy) or known (therapy) residual or metastatic
disease, removal of all normal thyroid tissue is an
important element of initial surgery (276).
4. Permit accurate staging and risk stratification of the
disease. Because disease staging and risk stratification
should be used to guide initial prognostication, disease
management, and follow-up strategies, accurate post-
operative risk assessment is a crucial element in the
management of patients with DTC (277,278).
5. Permit accurate long-term surveillance for disease re-
currence.
6. Minimize treatment-related morbidity. The extent of
surgery and the experience of the surgeon both play
important roles in determining the risk of surgical
complications (232,233,279,280).
[B3] What is the role of preoperative staging
with diagnostic imaging and laboratory tests?
[B4] Neck imaging—ultrasound
& RECOMMENDATION 32
(A) Preoperative neck US for cervical (central and especially
lateral neck compartments) lymph nodes is recommended
for all patients undergoing thyroidectomy for malignant or
suspicious for malignancy cytologic or molecular findings.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(B) US-guided FNA of sonographically suspicious lymph
nodes ‡8–10 mm in the smallest diameter should be per-
formed to confirm malignancy if this would change man-
agement.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(C) The addition of FNA-Tg washout in the evaluation of
suspicious cervical lymph nodes is appropriate in select
patients, but interpretation may be difficult in patients with
an intact thyroid gland.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
Differentiated thyroid carcinoma (particularly papillary car-
cinoma) involves cervical lymph node metastases in 20%–50%
of patients in most series using standard pathologic techniques
(84,145,281–283), and it may be present even when the primary
tumor is small and intrathyroidal (284). The frequency of mi-
crometastases (<2mm) may approach 90%, depending on the
sensitivity of the detection method (285,286). However, the
clinical implications of micrometastases are likely less signifi-
cant compared to macrometastases. Preoperative US identifies
suspicious cervical adenopathy in 20%–31% of cases, poten-
tially altering the surgical approach (287,288) in as many as
20% of patients (289–291). However, preoperative US identifies
only half of the lymph nodes found at surgery, due to the
presence of the overlying thyroid gland (292).
Sonographic features suggestive of abnormal metastatic
lymph nodes include enlargement, loss of the fatty hilum, a
rounded rather than oval shape, hyperechogenicity, cystic
change, calcifications, and peripheral vascularity (Table 7).
No single sonographic feature is adequately sensitive for
detection of lymph nodes with metastatic thyroid cancer. One
study correlated the sonographic features acquired 4 days
preoperatively directly with the histology of 56 cervical
lymph nodes identified in 19 patients. Some of the most
specific criteria were short axis >5 mm (96%), presence of
cystic areas (100%), presence of hyperechogenic punctua-
tions representing either colloid or microcalcifications
(100%), and peripheral vascularity (82%). Of these, the only
one with sufficient sensitivity was peripheral vascularity
(86%). The others had sensitivities of <60% and would not be
adequate to use as a single criterion for identification of
malignant involvement (292). As shown by earlier studies
(293,294), the ultrasonographic feature with the highest
sensitivity is absence of a hilum (100%), but this has a low
specificity of 29%. Microcalcifications have the highest
specificity; any lymph nodes with microcalcifications should
be considered abnormal (292) (Table 7).
The location of the lymph nodes may also be useful for
decision-making. Malignant lymph nodes are much more
likely to occur in levels III, IV, and VI than in level II (Fig. 3)
(292,294), although this may not be true for PTC tumors
arising in the upper pole of the thyroid, which have a higher
propensity to demonstrate skip metastases to levels III and II
(295). Figure 3 illustrates the delineation of cervical lymph
node levels I through VI.
Confirmation of malignancy in lymph nodes with a sus-
picious sonographic appearance is achieved by US-guided
FNA aspiration for cytology and/or measurement of Tg in the
needle washout. A Tg concentration <1 ng/mL is reassuring,
and the probability of N1 disease increases with higher Tg
levels (296). This FNA measurement of Tg is likely valid
even in patients with circulating anti-Tg autoantibodies
(297,298), although one study challenges the validity of this
measurement in patients with anti-Tg autoantibodies (299).
Tg washout may be helpful, particularly in cases in which
the lymph nodes are cystic, cytologic evaluation of the
lymph node is inadequate, or the cytologic and sonographic
evaluations are divergent (i.e., normal cytologic biopsy of
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
29
 a large lymph node with microcalcifications) (300). In a
retrospective study of 241 lymph nodes in 220 patients who
underwent US-guided FNA with Tg in FNA (FNA-Tg)
washout fluid measurements for suspicious lymph nodes,
additional FNA-Tg helped to diagnose a metastatic lymph
node with one or two suspicious US features but did not offer
incremental benefit for those lymph nodes with highly sus-
picious US features in which FNA alone was sufficient for
diagnosis. Two recent systematic reviews showed that false-
positive Tg washout may occur, particularly in lymph nodes
in the central compartment when the thyroid gland is still
present (301,302). The review by Pak et al. (302) suggests
that an FNA-Tg cutoff of 32 ng/mL has the best sensitivity
and specificity in patients with an intact thyroid gland. Others
have suggested interpreting the FNA-Tg in context of the
serum Tg and TSH in these patients (303,304). There is no
standardization of FNA-Tg procedures or assays to date,
which makes this additional diagnostic tool sometimes dif-
ficult to interpret (305). Future standardization including
matrix type (phosphate-buffered saline, Tg-free serum, etc.)
and volume of diluent matrix would help with interpretation
of a Tg washout.
Accurate staging is important in determining the prognosis
and tailoring treatment for patients with DTC. However,
unlike many tumor types, the presence of metastatic disease
does not obviate the need for surgical excision of the primary
tumor in DTC (306). Because metastatic disease may respond
to RAI therapy, removal of the thyroid as well as the primary
tumor and accessible loco-regional disease remains an im-
portant component of initial treatment even in most patients
with metastatic disease.
[B5] Neck imaging—CT/MRI/PET
& RECOMMENDATION 33
(A) Preoperative use of cross-sectional imaging studies
(CT, MRI) with intravenous (IV) contrast is recommended
as an adjunct to US for patients with clinical suspicion for
advanced disease, including invasive primary tumor, or
clinically apparent multiple or bulky lymph node involve-
ment.
(Strong recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
(B) Routine preoperative 18FDG-PET scanning is not rec-
ommended.
(Strong recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
Since US evaluation is operator dependent and cannot al-
ways adequately image deep anatomic structures and those
acoustically shadowed by bone or air, alternative imaging
procedures may be preferable or useful as an adjunct in
FIG. 3.
Lymph node compartments separated into levels and sublevels. Level VI contains the thyroid gland, and the
adjacent nodes bordered superiorly by the hyoid bone, inferiorly by the innominate (brachiocephalic) artery, and laterally on
each side by the carotid sheaths. The level II, III, and IV nodes are arrayed along the jugular veins on each side, bordered
anteromedially by level VI and laterally by the posterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. The level III nodes are
bounded superiorly by the level of the hyoid bone and inferiorly by the cricoid cartilage; levels II and IV are above and
below level III, respectively. The level I node compartment includes the submental and submandibular nodes, above the
hyoid bone, and anterior to the posterior edge of the submandibular gland. Finally, the level V nodes are in the posterior
triangle, lateral to the lateral edge of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. Levels I, II, and V can be further subdivided as noted
in the figure. The inferior extent of level VI is defined as the suprasternal notch. Many authors also include the pretracheal
and paratracheal superior mediastinal lymph nodes above the level of the innominate artery (sometimes referred to as level
VII) in central neck dissection (341).
30
HAUGEN ET AL.
 some clinical settings. Patients displaying bulky or widely
distributed nodal disease on initial US examination may
present with involvement of nodal regions beyond typical
cervical regions, some of which maybe difficult to visualize
on routine preoperative US, including the mediastinum, infra-
clavicular, retropharyngeal, and parapharyngeal regions. In a
study of 37 consecutive patients who had preoperative CT
and US and subsequently underwent total thyroidectomy and
neck dissection, the sensitivity of CT was better than US for
the evaluation central and lateral compartment lymph nodes
examined together (77% vs 62%, p = 0.002), but there were
no differences between the two imaging modalities when the
central and lateral compartments were examined separately
(307). In a series of 299 consecutively registered patients
with pathologically proven PTC who underwent preoperative
CT and US, US was more accurate than CT in predicting
extrathyroidal tumor extension and multifocal bilobar dis-
ease ( p < 0.05). The accuracy of staging was better overall
with US ( p < 0.01), and US had greater sensitivity than CT at
predicting lateral compartment metastases ( p = 0.041) (308).
However, another study showed that combined preopera-
tive mapping with US and CT was superior to US alone in
the preoperative detection of nodal disease, especially in the
central neck (309). The sensitivities of MRI and PET for
the detection of cervical lymph node metastases are relatively
low (30%–40%) (310). PET can also detect inflammatory
lymph nodes, which reduces the specificity of this test in
many patients with DTC. MRI can be used in the detection of
cervical nodal metastasis. MRI is affected by respiratory
artifacts and may be more difficult to interpret than CT
scanning by surgeons in the operating room for low-volume
nodal disease (311).
Invasive DTC has been reported to occur in 10%–15% of
patients at the time of diagnosis (312). For this group of
patients, cross-sectional imaging can also be a useful sup-
plement for preoperative planning to accurately delineate the
extent of laryngeal, tracheal, esophageal, or vascular in-
volvement (309,313). Endoscopy of the trachea and or
esophagus, with or without ultrasonography, at the beginning
of the initial operation looking for evidence of intraluminal
extension can also be helpful in cases of suspected areodi-
gestive tract invasion.
Locally invasive primary tumors may be associated with
characteristic signs and symptoms including progressive
dysphagia, respiratory compromise, hemoptysis, rapid tumor
enlargement, significant voice change or the finding of vocal
cord paralysis, and mass fixation to the airway or neck
structures. Certain sonographic features of the primary tu-
mor, including extrathyroidal extension especially with
posterior capsular extension and extension into the medias-
tinum, may also prompt axial imaging (307). Chest CT is
useful in defining the inferior border of disease and in de-
termining the extent to which mediastinal structures are in-
volved in cases with significant caudal spread. CT findings
may influence management by indicating the need for ster-
notomy and/or tracheal or laryngeal resection/reconstruction,
which would likely require assembling additional resources
and personnel in preparation for surgery. Neck CT with
contrast can therefore be useful in delineating the extent of
laryngeal, tracheal, and/or esophageal involvement in tumors
displaying aggressive local invasion, as well as delineating
bulky nodal disease, which may harbor significant extranodal
extension that involves muscle and/or blood vessels. Pre-
operative knowledge of these features of the primary tumor
or metastases could significantly influence the surgical plan
(314). 18FDG-PET scanning may be sensitive in some pa-
tients for neck or mediastinal involvement and may reveal
distant metastases as well.
When cross-sectional imaging is performed, use of IV
contrast is an important adjunct because it helps to delineate
the anatomic relationship between the primary tumor or
metastatic disease and these other structures. Iodine is gen-
erally cleared within 4–8 weeks in most patients, so concern
about iodine burden from IV contrast causing a clinically
significant delay in subsequent whole-body scans (WBSs) or
RAI treatment after the imaging followed by surgery is gen-
erally unfounded (315). The benefit gained from improved
anatomic imaging generally outweighs any potential risk of a
several week delay in RAI imaging or therapy. When there is
concern, a urinary iodine to creatinine ratio can be measured.
[B6] Measurement of serum Tg and anti-Tg antibodies
& RECOMMENDATION 34
Routine preoperative measurement of serum Tg or anti-Tg
antibodies is not recommended.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
Data from a systematic review and meta-analysis sug-
gested that high preoperative concentrations of serum Tg
may predict a higher sensitivity for postoperative surveil-
lance with serum Tg (316). Preoperative anti-Tg antibodies
do not appear to be an independent preoperative predictor of
stage in patients with DTC, but the evidence is limited. In a
cross-sectional analysis of 1770 patients with perioperative
anti-Tg antibodies status data in the National Thyroid Cancer
Treatment Cooperative Study (a large thyroid cancer registry
that included 11 North American centers and enrolled pa-
tients between 1987 and 2011), serum anti-Tg antibody status
was not significantly associated with stage of disease on
multivariate analysis, or with disease-free or overall survival
on univariate or multivariate analyses (317). Evidence that
preoperative measurement of serum Tg impacts patient
management or outcomes is not yet available.
[B7] Operative approach for a biopsy diagnostic for follic-
ular cell–derived malignancy
& RECOMMENDATION 35
(A) For patients with thyroid cancer >4 cm, or with gross
extrathyroidal extension (clinical T4), or clinically appar-
ent metastatic disease to nodes (clinical N1) or distant sites
(clinical M1), the initial surgical procedure should include
a near-total or total thyroidectomy and gross removal of all
primary tumor unless there are contraindications to this
procedure.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(B) For patients with thyroid cancer >1 cm and <4 cm
without extrathyroidal extension, and without clinical evi-
dence of any lymph node metastases (cN0), the initial
surgical procedure can be either a bilateral procedure (near-
total or total thyroidectomy) or a unilateral procedure
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
31
 (lobectomy). Thyroid lobectomy alone may be sufficient
initial treatment for low-risk papillary and follicular car-
cinomas; however, the treatment team may choose total
thyroidectomy to enable RAI therapy or to enhance follow-
up based upon disease features and/or patient preferences.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(C) If surgery is chosen for patients with thyroid cancer
<1 cm without extrathyroidal extension and cN0, the initial
surgical procedure should be a thyroid lobectomy unless
there are clear indications to remove the contralateral lobe.
Thyroid lobectomy alone is sufficient treatment for small,
unifocal, intrathyroidal carcinomas in the absence of prior
head and neck radiation, familial thyroid carcinoma, or
clinically detectable cervical nodal metastases.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
Surgery for thyroid cancer is an important element of a
multifaceted treatment approach. The operation must be
compatible with the overall treatment strategy and follow-up
plan recommended by the managing team. Consideration
should be given to referring patients with high-risk features
(clinical N1 disease, concern for recurrent laryngeal nerve
[RLN] involvement, or grossly invasive disease) to experi-
enced surgeons, as both completeness of surgery and expe-
rience of the surgeon can have a significant impact on clinical
outcomes and complication rates (232,233,279,280). Pre-
vious guidelines have endorsed total thyroidectomy as the
primary initial surgical treatment option for nearly all DTCs
>1 cm with or without evidence of loco-regional or distant
metastases (25). This was based on retrospective data sug-
gesting that a bilateral surgical procedure would improve
survival (318), decrease recurrence rates (319–321), allow
for routine use of RAI remnant ablation, and facilitate de-
tection of recurrent/persistent disease during follow-up.
However, recent data have demonstrated that in properly
selected patients, clinical outcomes are very similar follow-
ing unilateral or bilateral thyroid surgery (322–326). Fur-
thermore, since the requirement for routine use of RAI
ablation was one of the major reasons given in support of total
thyroidectomy in low to intermediate risk patients, our cur-
rent more selective approach to RAI ablation in these patients
requires a critical reassessment of this indication. In some
patients, the presence of the remaining lobe of the gland may
obviate the lifelong need for exogenous thyroid hormone
therapy. Finally, as our follow-up management paradigm has
moved away from diagnostic whole body RAI scanning and
toward a greater reliance on neck ultrasonography and serial
serum Tg measurements (even in patients that did not receive
RAI remnant ablation), we must also question whether total
thyroidectomy and RAI remnant ablation is required to fa-
cilitate follow-up in low to intermediate risk patients.
In an analysis of 52,173 PTC patients diagnosed between
1985 and 1998 from the National Cancer Data Base (43,227
receiving total thyroidectomy, 8946 undergoing lobectomy),
Bilimoria et al. (318) demonstrated a slightly higher 10-year
relative overall survival for total thyroidectomy as opposed to
thyroid lobectomy (98.4% vs. 97.1%, respectively, p < 0.05)
and a slightly lower 10-year recurrence rate (7.7% vs. 9.8%,
respectively, p < 0.05). When analyzed by size of the primary
tumor, statistically significant differences in survival and
recurrence were seen for all sizes >1 cm based on the extent
of initial surgery. However, data on extrathyroidal extension,
completeness of resection, and other comorbid conditions,
which could have had a major impact on survival and re-
currence risk, were not available. Therefore, it is unclear how
often lobectomy was done based on proper selection of low to
intermediate risk patients versus how often lobectomy was
done in high-risk patients because of comorbid conditions,
inability to obtain a complete resection, or status of the
contralateral RLN. This is an important distinction because
thyroid lobectomy patients were found to have extrathyroidal
extension in 7% of cases (325), underwent external beam
radiation therapy (EBRT) in 1%–2% (324), and RAI therapy
in 12%–18% (318,325), and high-risk features were present
in 8% (325). Given the small magnitude of differences re-
ported for survival and recurrence between the total thyroid-
ectomy and the lobectomy patients, it is quite possible that the
slightly poorer outcomes seen in the lobectomy group could
have been influenced by lobectomy patients with concurrent
high risk features. Adam et al. (327) performed an updated
analysis of 61,775 patients in the National Cancer Database
who underwent thyroid surgery between 1998 and 2006. The
researchers demonstrated that the overall survival advantage
seen for patients with 1–4 cm PTC who underwent thyroid-
ectomy in the study by Bilimoria et al. (318) disappeared
when further adjustment was made for additional variables
related to complexity and severity of illness. This lack of
overall survival advantage was also seen when the group was
subdivided into patients with 1–2 cm and 2–4cm PTC.
Previously, Haigh et al. (325) had analyzed 5432 PTC
patients from the SEER database (4612 receiving total thy-
roidectomy and 820 undergoing lobectomy) and found no
difference in 10-year overall survival between total thyroid-
ectomy and thyroid lobectomy when risk stratified by the
AMES classification system. Interestingly, patients selected
for thyroid lobectomy included 7% with extrathyroidal ex-
tension, 1% with distant metastases, and 5% with primary
tumors >5 cm, and 8% were classified as having high risk
based on AMES.
More recently, two additional studies have analyzed the
SEER database, and both have failed to demonstrate a sig-
nificant difference in survival when comparing total thy-
roidectomy with thyroid lobectomy (323,324). Barney et al.
(323) included 23,605 DTC patients diagnosed between 1983
and 2002 (12,598 with total thyroidectomy, 3266 with lo-
bectomy) and found no difference in 10-year overall survival
(90.4% for total thyroidectomy vs. 90.8% for lobectomy) or
10-year cause-specific survival (96.8% for total thyroidec-
tomy vs. 98.6% for lobectomy). Furthermore, in a multivar-
iate analysis that included age, T, N, M, sex, year of
diagnosis, extent of surgery, and RAI use, no difference in
overall survival or cause specific survival was seen with re-
spect to the extent of initial surgery. Mendelsohn et al. (324)
analyzed 22,724 PTC patients diagnosed between 1998 and
2001 (16,760 with total thyroidectomy, 5964 with lobecto-
my) and found no differences in overall survival or disease-
specific survival in a comparison of total thyroidectomy with
lobectomy. Interestingly, of the patients that had lobectomy,
1.6% received external beam radiation therapy, 16% had
extrathryoidal extension, 9% of tumors were >4 cm, and 20%
received RAI ablation (once again indicating that lobectomy
was done in some high-risk patients).
32
HAUGEN ET AL.
 Consistent with the SEER data analyses, two single-center
studies also confirmed that lobectomy is associated with
excellent survival in properly selected patients (322,326).
After a median follow-up of 8 years, only one disease-
specific death was seen in a cohort of 889 PTC patients with
T1–T2 tumors treated with either total thyroidectomy
(n = 528) or lobectomy (n = 361) (326). Furthermore, Mat-
suzu et al. (322) reported a cause-specific survival rate of
98% after a median of 17 years of follow-up in properly select
PTC patients treated with lobectomy and ipsilateral neck
dissection.
Given the propensity for PTC to be multifocal (often in-
volving both lobes), it is not surprising that some studies have
demonstrated a lower risk of loco-regional disease recurrence
following total thyroidectomy as compared to thyroid lo-
bectomy (319–321). However, with proper patient selection,
loco-regional recurrence rates of less than 1%–4% and
completion thyroidectomy rates of <10% can be achieved
following thyroid lobectomy (326,328). Furthermore, the few
recurrences that develop during long-term follow-up are
readily detected and appropriately treated with no impact on
survival (322,326,328).
Therefore, we conclude that in properly selected low- to
intermediate-risk patients (patients with unifocal tumors
<4 cm, and no evidence of extrathyroidal extension or
lymph node metastases by examination or imaging), the
extent of initial thyroid surgery probably has little impact on
disease-specific survival. While recurrence rates can be
quite low in these patients, it is likely that the lowest rates of
recurrence during long-term follow-up would be associated
with a total thyroidectomy. But since salvage therapy is
quite effective in the few patients that recur after thyroid
lobectomy, a conservative management approach to com-
pletion surgery, accepting a slightly higher risk of loco-
regional recurrence, is a reasonable management strategy.
Finally, a more selective use of RAI coupled with a greater
reliance on neck US and serial serum Tg measurements for
detection of recurrent disease is likely to significantly de-
crease the mandate for total thyroidectomies in low- and
intermediate-risk patients done solely to facilitate RAI
remnant ablation and follow-up.
Near-total or total thyroidectomy is necessary if the overall
strategy is to include RAI therapy postoperatively, and thus is
recommended if the primary thyroid carcinoma is >4 cm, if
there is gross extrathyroidal extension, or if regional or dis-
tant metastases are clinically present. For tumors that are
between 1 and 4 cm in size, either a bilateral thyroidectomy
(total or near-total) or a unilateral procedure (thyroid lobec-
tomy) may be suitable as treatment plan. Older age (>45
years), contralateral thyroid nodules, a personal history of
radiation therapy to the head and neck, and familial DTC may
be criteria for recommending a bilateral procedure because of
plans for RAI therapy or to facilitate follow-up strategies or
address suspicions of bilateral disease (270,278,322,326).
The relationship between surgeon volume and patient
outcomes has been studied extensively over the last 20 years.
Institutional studies examining outcomes following thy-
roidectomy by high-volume surgeons have been published
demonstrating overall safety. In one of the first studies ex-
amining the relationship between surgeon volume and thy-
roidectomy outcomes at a state level, Sosa et al. (232) found a
strong association between higher surgeon volume and
favorable patient outcomes, especially with regard to RLN
injury and wound complications. This was especially pro-
nounced for patients undergoing total thyroidectomy for thyroid
cancer. Others have made similar observations (233,329,330).
In a recent study of patients undergoing thyroidectomy in the
Health Care Utilization Project Nationwide Inpatient Sample
(HCUP-NIS), surgeons were divided into categories of low (<10
cases/year; encompassing 6072 surgeons), intermediate (10–
100 cases/year; 11,544 surgeons), and high volume (>100 cases/
year; 4009 surgeons) (331). Over 80% of thyroid resections
were performed by low- and intermediate-volume surgeons. On
average, high-volume surgeons had the lowest complication
rates for patients who underwent total thyroidectomy for cancer
at 7.5%; intermediate-volume surgeons had a rate of 13.4%, and
low-volume surgeons, 18.9% (p<0.001).
From robust population-level data such as these, it can be
concluded that referral of patients to high-volume thyroid
surgeons is associated, on average, with superior outcomes.
However, such referral is not always possible, given the
relative scarcity of high-volume surgeons and their geo-
graphic distribution. In addition, there are some data sug-
gesting that other factors, such as surgeon age, should be
considered (332). Therefore, conclusions at a population le-
vel cannot always be applied to individual surgeons and pa-
tient circumstances. It may, however, be reasonable to
consider sending patients with more extensive disease and
concern for grossly invasive disease to a high-volume sur-
geon experienced in the management of advanced thyroid
cancer.
It is worth noting that even high-volume surgeons have a
higher overall postoperative complication rate when per-
forming total thyroidectomy compared with lobectomy
(333). Using the HCUP-NIS, these authors found that high-
volume thyroid surgeons had a complication rate of 7.6%
following thyroid lobectomy but a rate of 14.5% following
total thyroidectomy. For low-volume surgeons, the compli-
cation rates were 11.8% and 24.1%, respectively. Therefore,
patients should carefully weigh the relative benefits and risks
of total thyroidectomy versus thyroid lobectomy, even when
surgery is performed by high-volume surgeons.
[B8] Lymph node dissection
& RECOMMENDATION 36
(A) Therapeutic central-compartment (level VI) neck
dissection for patients with clinically involved central
nodes should accompany total thyroidectomy to provide
clearance of disease from the central neck.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(B) Prophylactic central-compartment neck dissection
(ipsilateral or bilateral) should be considered in patients
with papillary thyroid carcinoma with clinically unin-
volved central neck lymph nodes (cN0) who have ad-
vanced primary tumors (T3 or T4) or clinically involved
lateral neck nodes (cN1b), or if the information will be
used to plan further steps in therapy.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
(C) Thyroidectomy without prophylactic central neck
dissection is appropriate for small (T1 or T2), noninvasive,
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
33
 clinically
node-negative
PTC
(cN0)
and
for
most
follicular cancers.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
& RECOMMENDATION 37
Therapeutic lateral neck compartmental lymph node dis-
section should be performed for patients with biopsy-proven
metastatic lateral cervical lymphadenopathy.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
Regional lymph node metastases are present at the time of
diagnosis in a majority of patients with papillary carcinomas
and a lesser proportion of patients with follicular carcinomas
(290,334,335). Although PTC lymph node metastases are
reported by some to have no clinically important effect on
outcome in low risk patients, a study of the SEER database
found, among 9904 patients with PTC, that lymph node
metastases, age >45 years, distant metastasis, and large tumor
size significantly predicted poor overall survival outcome in a
multivariate analysis (336). All-cause survival at 14 years
was 82% for PTC without lymph node metastases and 79%
with nodal metastases ( p < 0.05). Another SEER registry
study concluded that cervical lymph node metastases con-
ferred an independent risk of decreased survival, but only in
patients with follicular cancer and patients with papillary
cancer over age 45 years (337). However, characteristics of the
lymph node metastases can further discriminate the risk of
recurrence to the patient, especially in patients with clinically
evident metastasis, multiple metastases, larger metastases,
and/or extracapsular nodal extension (338,339), compared
with those with more limited microscopic nodal disease (335).
A recent comprehensive analysis of the National Cancer Data
Base and SEER, however, showed a small but significantly
increased risk of death for patients younger than 45 years with
lymph node metastases compared with younger patients
without involved lymph nodes, and that having incrementally
more metastatic lymph nodes up to six involved nodes confers
additional mortality risk in this age group (340). This study
underlines the importance of rigorous preoperative screening
for nodal metastases and potentially raises questions about
current thyroid cancer staging systems. Common to all of
these studies is the conclusion that the effect of the presence or
absence of lymph node metastases on overall survival, if
present, is small.
The cervical node sites are well-defined (341), and the
most common site of nodal metastases is in the central neck,
which is cervical level VI (Fig. 3). A recent consensus con-
ference statement describes the relevant anatomy of the
central neck compartment, delineates the nodal subgroups
within the central compartment commonly involved with
thyroid cancer, and defines the terminology relevant to cen-
tral compartment neck dissection (342). In many patients,
lymph node metastases in this area do not appear abnormal on
preoperative imaging (289,334,343–345) or by inspection at
the time of surgery (335), defining a cN0 group.
The role of therapeutic lymph node dissection for treatment
of thyroid cancer nodal metastases is well accepted for cN1
disease (336,346–348). However, the value of routine pro-
phylactic level VI (central) neck dissection for cN0 disease
remains unclear. Central compartment dissection (therapeutic
or prophylactic) can be achieved with low morbidity by ex-
perienced thyroid surgeons (349–351). The value for an in-
dividual patient depends upon the utility of the staging
information to the treatment team in specific patient cir-
cumstances (351,352). Based on limited and imperfect
data, prophylactic dissection has been suggested to improve
disease-specific survival (353), local recurrence (345,354),
and post-treatment Tg levels (345,355). It has also been used
to inform the use of adjuvant RAI (344,347,350,356) and
improve the accuracy of the estimates of risk of recurrence
(356–358). However, in several studies, prophylactic dis-
section has shown no improvement in long-term patient
outcome, while increasing the likelihood of temporary mor-
bidity, including hypocalcemia, although prophylactic dis-
section may decrease the need for repeated RAI treatments
(334,346,347,349,359–364).
The removal of cN0 level VI lymph nodes detects a sub-
stantial number of patients with pN1 disease; however, the
direct effect of this on long-term outcome is small at best
(365,366). The use of staging information for the planning of
adjuvant therapy depends upon whether this information will
affect the team-based decision-making for the individual
patient. For these reasons, groups may elect to include pro-
phylactic dissection for patients with some prognostic fea-
tures associated with an increased risk of metastasis and
recurrence (older or very young age, larger tumor size,
multifocal disease, extrathyroidal extension, known lateral
node metastases) to contribute to decision-making and dis-
ease control (345,351,355). Alternatively, some groups may
apply prophylactic level VI dissection to patients with better
prognostic features if the patient is to have a bilateral thy-
roidectomy, and if the nodal staging information will be used
to inform the decision regarding use of adjuvant therapy
(344,350,356). Finally, for some groups it appears reasonable
to use a selective approach that applies level VI lymph node
dissection at the time of initial operation only to patients with
clinically evident disease based on preoperative physical
exam, preoperative radiographic evaluation, or intraoperative
demonstration of detectable disease (cN1) (335,359,367).
The information from prophylactic central neck dissection
must be used cautiously for staging information. Since mi-
croscopic nodal positivity occurs frequently, prophylactic
dissection often converts patients from clinical N0 to path-
ologic N1a, upstaging many patients over age 45 from
American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) stage I to stage
III (334,344–347). However, microscopic nodal positivity
does not carry the recurrence risk of macroscopic clinically
detectable disease (335). Thus microscopic nodal upstaging
may lead to excess RAI utilization and patient follow-up.
Alternatively, the demonstration of uninvolved lymph nodes
by prophylactic dissection may decrease the use of RAI for
some groups (344,350,356). These effects may account for
some of the existing extreme variability in utilization of RAI
for thyroid cancer (368).
Studies of the BRAFV600E mutation have suggested an
association between presence of the mutation and the risk of
nodal disease (369–371), although results across all patients
with papillary thyroid carcinoma are mixed (372–375).
However, the presence of a BRAFV600E mutation has a limited
PPV for recurrence and therefore, BRAFV600E mutation status
in the primary tumor should not impact the decision for
prophylactic central neck dissection (376).
34
HAUGEN ET AL.
 The preceding recommendations should be interpreted in
light of available surgical expertise. For patients with small,
noninvasive, cN0 tumors, the balance of risk and benefit may
favor thyroid lobectomy and close intraoperative inspection
of the central compartment, with the plan adjusted to total
thyroidectomy with compartmental dissection only in the
presence of involved lymph nodes.
Lymph nodes in the lateral neck (compartments II–V, Fig.
3), level VII (anterior mediastinum), and rarely in level I may
also be involved by thyroid cancer (282,335,377,378). For
patients in whom nodal disease is evident clinically on pre-
operative US and nodal FNA cytology or Tg washout mea-
surement or at the time of surgery, surgical resection by
compartmental node dissection may reduce the risk of re-
currence and possibly mortality (379–381).
[B9] Completion thyroidectomy
& RECOMMENDATION 38
(A) Completion thyroidectomy should be offered to pa-
tients for whom a bilateral thyroidectomy would have been
recommended had the diagnosis been available before the
initial surgery. Therapeutic central neck lymph node dis-
section should be included if the lymph nodes are clinically
involved. Thyroid lobectomy alone may be sufficient
treatment for low-risk papillary and follicular carcinomas.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(B) RAI ablation in lieu of completion thyroidectomy is
not recommended routinely; however, it may be used to
ablate the remnant lobe in selected cases.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
Completion thyroidectomy may be necessary when the
diagnosis of malignancy is made following lobectomy
for an indeterminate or nondiagnostic biopsy. In addition,
some patients with malignancy may require completion
thyroidectomy to provide complete resection of multicentric
disease and to allow for efficient RAI therapy. However, since
intrathyroidal PTC or low-risk FTC can be managed with
either lobectomy or total thyroidectomy (see Recommenda-
tion 35B), a completion thyroidectomy is not always required.
The surgical risks of two-stage thyroidectomy (lobectomy
followed by completion thyroidectomy) are similar to those of
a near-total or total thyroidectomy (382–384). The marginal
utility of prophylactic lymph node dissection for cN0 disease
argues against its application in re-operations.
Ablation of the remaining lobe with RAI has been used
as an alternative to completion thyroidectomy (385,386).
There are limited data regarding the long-term outcomes
of this approach. The data suggest similar clinical out-
comes with a slightly higher proportion of patients with
persistent detectable Tg. This approach may be helpful in
patients for whom completion thyroidectomy carries some
increased risk and for whom a delay in the length of time
required to achieve destruction of the normal thyroid,
which follows RAI (as opposed to surgical resection), is
acceptable. In one unblinded, multicenter, randomized
controlled equivalence trial comparing dose activities in
achieving successful ablation of a remaining lobe in pa-
tients with T1b or T2 primary tumors, who had surgical
contraindications or declined completion thyroidectomy,
the remnant ablation success rate was significantly higher
using 100 mCi (75% success rate; 1 mCi = 37 MBq),
compared with 30 mCi (54%), although mild to moderate
short-term neck pain was more frequently reported in the
high-dose group (66%) compared with the low-dose group
(51%) (387). Prednisone treatment for neck pain was used
more frequently in the high-dose group (36% of patients)
than in the low-dose group.
[B10] What is the appropriate perioperative
approach to voice and parathyroid issues?
[B11] Preoperative care communication
& RECOMMENDATION 39
Prior to surgery, the surgeon should communicate with
the patient regarding surgical risks, including nerve and
parathyroid injury, through the informed consent process
and communicate with associated physicians, including
anesthesia personnel, regarding important findings elicited
during the preoperative workup.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
The preoperative consent process should include explicit
discussion of the potential for temporary or permanent nerve
injury (and its clinical sequelae, including voice change,
swallowing disability, risk of aspiration, and tracheostomy)
as well as hypoparathyroidism, bleeding, scarring, disease
recurrence, need for additional postoperative treatment, and
need for thyroid hormone and surveillance thyroid function
tests. The conversation should be informed by the operating
surgeon’s own rates of complications. Results of the preop-
erative evaluation regarding extent of disease, risk stratifi-
cation, and integrity of the airway should include results from
imaging, cytology, and physical examination (388–392).
[B12] Preoperative voice assessment
& RECOMMENDATION 40
All patients undergoing thyroid surgery should have preop-
erative voice assessment as part of their preoperative physical
examination. This should include the patient’s description of
vocal changes, as well as the physician’s assessment of voice.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
& RECOMMENDATION 41
Preoperative laryngeal exam should be performed in all
patients with
(A) Preoperative voice abnormalities
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(B) History of cervical or upper chest surgery, which
places the RLN or vagus nerve at risk
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(C) Known thyroid cancer with posterior extrathyroidal
extension or extensive central nodal metastases
(Strong recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
35
 Voice alteration is an important complication of thyroid
surgery affecting patients’ quality of life (with regard to
voice, swallowing, and airway domains), and it can have
medico-legal and cost implications (393–401).
Preoperative assessment provides a necessary baseline
reference from which to establish perioperative expectations
(402). Also, preoperative voice assessment may lead one to
identify preoperative vocal cord paralysis or paresis, which
provides presumptive evidence of invasive thyroid malig-
nancy and is important in planning the extent of surgery and
in perioperative airway management (403–405). Contralateral
nerve injury at surgery in such patients could cause bilateral
cord paralysis with airway implications.
Preoperative voice assessment should include the patient’s
historical subjective response to questions regarding voice
abnormalities or changes, as well as the physician’s objective
assessment of voice, and should be documented in the medical
record (Table 9) (406). Voice and laryngeal function may be
further assessed through laryngoscopy, and the application of
validated quality of life and auditory perceptual assessment
voice instruments (402). It is important to appreciate that vocal
cord paralysis, especially when chronic, may not be associated
with significant vocal symptoms due to a variety of mecha-
nisms, including contralateral vocal cord compensation. Voice
assessment alone may not identify such individuals (402).
Incidence rates for preoperative vocal cord paresis or pa-
ralysis for patients with benign thyroid disease at preoperative
laryngoscopy range from 0% to 3.5% and up to 8% in patients
with thyroid cancer (407–411). Finding vocal cord paralysis
on preoperative examination strongly suggests the presence of
locally invasive disease. Approximately 10%–15% of thyroid
cancers present with extrathyroidal extension, with the most
common structures involved including strap muscle (53%),
the RLN (47%), trachea (30%), esophagus (21%), and larynx
(12%) (405,412–414).
Undiagnosed preoperative laryngeal nerve dysfunction
conveys greater risk during total thyroidectomy of postop-
erative bilateral nerve paralysis, respiratory distress, and need
for tracheostomy. Also, preoperative identification of vocal
cord paralysis is important because surgical algorithms in the
management of the invaded nerve incorporate nerve func-
tional status (415).
A laryngeal exam should be performed if the voice is ab-
normal during preoperative evaluation. In addition, a patient
should have a laryngeal exam even if the voice is normal if he
or she has a history of neck surgery that placed at risk either
the RLN (such as past thyroid or parathyroid surgery) or the
vagus nerve (such as carotid endarterectomy, cervical eso-
phagectomy, and anterior approach to the cervical spine) or a
history of prior external beam radiation to the neck. Correlation
between vocal symptoms and actual vocal cord function is poor
given the potential for variation in paralytic cord position, de-
gree of partial nerve function, and contralateral cord function/
compensation; therefore, vocal symptoms may be absent in
patients with vocal cord paralysis. Vocal cord paralysis may be
present in 1.5% to 30% of such postsurgical patients; it can be
asymptomatic in up to one-third (403,416–422).
A laryngeal exam is recommended in patients with the
preoperative diagnosis of thyroid cancer if there is evidence
for gross extrathyroidal extension of cancer posteriorly or
extensive nodal involvement, even if the voice is normal. The
laryngeal exam should be performed in the previously noted
high-risk settings, but it can be performed in other patients
based on the surgeon’s judgment.
[B13] Intraoperative voice and parathyroid management
& RECOMMENDATION 42
(A) Visual identification of the RLN during dissection is
required in all cases. Steps should also be taken to preserve
the external branch of the superior laryngeal nerve (EBSLN)
during dissection of the superior pole of the thyroid gland.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(B) Intraoperative neural stimulation (with or without
monitoring) may be considered to facilitate nerve identi-
fication and confirm neural function.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
& RECOMMENDATION 43
The parathyroid glands and their blood supply should be
preserved during thyroid surgery.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
RLN injury rates are lower when the nerve is routinely
visualized in comparison with surgeries in which the nerve is
simply avoided (402,416,423). If the EBSLN can be visu-
alized and preserved, that is ideal. If the EBSLN cannot be
visually identified, steps should be taken to avoid the nerve;
this can be done by staying close to the thyroid capsule at the
superior pole and by skeletonizing the superior vascular
pedicle. Intraoperative nerve monitoring can be used to fa-
cilitate this dissection (419). Studies with or without in-
traoperative nerve monitoring demonstrate similar patient
outcomes with regard to nerve injury rates (420), but studies
likely have been underpowered to detect statistically sig-
nificant differences (413,424). A recent systematic meta-
analysis of 20 randomized and nonrandomized prospective
and retrospective studies suggested no statistically signifi-
cant benefit of intraoperative neuromonitoring compared to
visualization alone during thyroidectomy for the outcomes
of overall, transient, or permanent RLN palsy when analyzed
per nerve at risk or per patient (425). However, second-
ary subgroup analyses of high-risk patients (including those
Table 9. Preoperative Factors Which May
Be Associated with Laryngeal Nerve Dysfunction
Factor
Symptoms/signs
History
Voice abnormality, dysphagia,
airway symptoms, hemoptysis,
pain, rapid progression, prior
operation in neck or upper chest
Physical exam
Extensive, firm mass fixed to the
larynx or trachea
Imaging
Mass extending to/beyond periphery
of thyroid lobe posteriorly and/or
tracheoesophageal infiltration, or
bulky cervical adenopathy along
the course of the RLN or vagus
nerve
36
HAUGEN ET AL.
 with thyroid cancer) suggested statistically significant het-
erogeneity (variability) in treatment effect for overall and
transient RLN injury, when analyzed per nerve at risk.
Several studies show that intraoperative nerve monitoring is
more commonly utilized by higher volume surgeons to fa-
cilitate nerve management, and several studies show im-
proved rates of nerve paralysis with the use of neural
monitoring in reoperative and complex thyroid surgery
(401,426–430). Neural stimulation at the completion of lo-
bectomy can be used as a test to determine the safety of
contralateral surgery with avoidance of bilateral vocal cord
paralysis, and it has been associated with a reduction of bi-
lateral paralysis when loss of signal occurs on the first side
(428,431–433). Given the complexity of monitoring sys-
tems, training and observation of existing monitoring stan-
dards are important to provide optimal benefit (424,434).
Typically, parathyroid gland preservation is optimized by
gland identification via meticulous dissection (435,436). If
the parathyroid(s) cannot be located, the surgeon should at-
tempt to dissect on the thyroid capsule and ligate the inferior
thyroid artery very close to the thyroid, since the majority of
parathyroid glands receive their blood supply from this ves-
sel. There are exceptions to this rule; for example, superior
glands in particular may receive blood supply from the su-
perior thyroid artery. If the parathyroid glands are inadver-
tently or unavoidably removed (e.g., they are intrathyroidal,
or require removal during a central lymph node dissection) or
devascularized, confirmation of cancer-free parathyroid tis-
sue should be performed, and then the glands can be auto-
transplanted into the strap or sternocleidomastoid muscles. It
is important to inspect the thyroidectomy and/or central
lymphadenectomy specimen when removed and before
sending it to pathology to look for parathyroid glands that can
be rescued.
[B14] Postoperative care
& RECOMMENDATION 44
Patients should have their voice assessed in the postoper-
ative period. Formal laryngeal exam should be performed
if the voice is abnormal
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
& RECOMMENDATION 45
Important intraoperative findings and details of postoper-
ative care should be communicated by the surgeon to
the patient and other physicians who are important in the
patient’s postoperative care.
(Strong recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
Voice assessment should occur after surgery and should be
based on the patient’s subjective report and physician’s ob-
jective assessment of voice in the office (409). Typically this
assessment can be performed at 2 weeks to 2 months after
surgery. Early detection of vocal cord motion abnormalities
after thyroidectomy is important for facilitating prompt in-
tervention (typically through early injection vocal cord
medialization), which is associated with better long-term
outcome, including a lower rate of formal open thyroplasty
repair (437–439). Many options exist for the management of
RLN paralysis, including voice therapy, vocal cord injection
techniques, and open vocal cord medialization. Rates of vo-
cal cord paralysis after thyroid surgery can only be assessed
by laryngeal exam postoperatively.
Communication of intraoperative findings and postopera-
tive care from the surgeon to other members of the patient’s
thyroid cancer care team is critical to subsequent therapy and
monitoring approaches. Important elements of communica-
tion include (i) surgical anatomic findings, including RLN
and parathyroid status (including nerve monitoring loss of
signal information if monitoring is employed); (ii) surgical
disease findings, including evidence for extrathyroidal
spread, completeness of tumor resection, presence and dis-
tribution of nodal disease; and (iii) postoperative status, in-
cluding voice/laryngeal exam, laboratory data regarding
calcium/parathyroid hormone levels and need for calcium
and/or vitamin D supplementation, and the surgical pathol-
ogy report (440). The surgeon should remain engaged in the
patient’s pursuant care to facilitate appropriate communica-
tion and may remain engaged subsequent to endocrinologic
consultation depending on regional practice patterns.
[B15] What are the basic principles of histopathologic
evaluation of thyroidectomy samples?
& RECOMMENDATION 46
(A) In addition to the basic tumor features required for
AJCC/UICC thyroid cancer staging including status of
resection margins, pathology reports should contain ad-
ditional information helpful for risk assessment, such as
the presence of vascular invasion and the number of in-
vaded vessels, number of lymph nodes examined and in-
volved with tumor, size of the largest metastatic focus to
the lymph node, and presence or absence of extranodal
extension of the metastatic tumor.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(B) Histopathologic variants of thyroid carcinoma associated
with more unfavorable outcomes (e.g., tall cell, columnar
cell, and hobnail variants of PTC; widely invasive FTC;
poorly differentiated carcinoma) or more favorable out-
comes (e.g., encapsulated follicular variant of PTC without
invasion, minimally invasive FTC) should be identified
during histopathologic examination and reported.
(Strong recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
(C) Histopathologic variants associated with familial
syndromes (cribriform-morular variant of papillary carci-
noma often associated with FAP, follicular or papillary
carcinoma associated with PTEN-hamartoma tumor syn-
drome) should be identified during histopathologic ex-
amination and reported.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
Pathologic examination of thyroid samples establishes
the diagnosis and provides important information for risk
stratification of cancer and postsurgical patient manage-
ment. Histopathologically, papillary carcinoma is a well-
differentiated malignant tumor of thyroid follicular cells that
demonstrates characteristic microscopic nuclear features.
Although a papillary growth pattern is frequently seen, it is
not required for the diagnosis. Follicular carcinoma is a
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
37
 well-differentiated malignant tumor of thyroid follicular cells
that shows transcapsular and/or vascular invasion and lacks the
diagnostic nuclear features of papillary carcinoma. Oncocytic
(Hu
¨rthle cell) follicular carcinoma shows the follicular growth
pattern but is composed of cells with abundant granular eosin-
ophilic cytoplasm, which has this appearance because of accu-
mulation of innumerable mitochondria. This tumor is currently
designated by the World Health Organization as a histopatho-
logic variant of follicular carcinoma (441). However, oncocytic
follicular carcinoma tumors have some differences in biological
behavior as compared to the conventional type follicular carci-
noma, such as the ability to metastasize to lymph nodes and a
possibly higher rate of recurrence and tumor-related mortality
(269,442,443). Moreover, a growing body of genetic evidence
suggests that oncocytic tumors develop via unique molecular
mechanisms and therefore represent a distinct type of well-
differentiated thyroid cancer (444).
Traditionally, follicular carcinomas have been sub-
divided into minimally invasive (encapsulated) and widely
invasive. In this classification scheme, minimally invasive
carcinomas are fully encapsulated tumors with microscop-
ically identifiable foci of capsular or vascular invasion, whereas
widely invasive carcinomas are tumors with extensive vascular
and/or extrathyroidal, invasion. More recent approaches con-
sider encapsulated tumors with only microscopic capsular in-
vasion as minimally invasive, whereas angioinvasive tumors are
placed into a separate category (445–447). Such an approach is
preferable because it distinguishes encapsulated tumors with
capsular invasion and no vascular invasion, which are highly
indolent tumors with a mortality <5%, from angioinvasive fol-
licular carcinomas, which have a mortality ranging from 5% to
30%, depending on the number of invaded blood vessels (448).
In addition to establishing a diagnosis for each nodule in a
thyroidectomy or lobectomy specimen, the pathology report
must provide characteristics required for AJCC/UICC TNM
staging, such as tumor size and presence of extrathyroidal
extension and lymph node metastasis. Extrathyroidal exten-
sion is defined as tumor extension into the adjacent tissues. It
is subdivided into minimal, which is invasion into immediate
perithyroidal soft tissues or sternothyroid muscle typically
detected only microscopically (T3 tumors), and extensive,
which is tumor invasion into subcutaneous soft tissues, lar-
ynx, trachea, esophagus, or RLN (T4a tumors). The status of
the resection (inked) margins should be reported as ‘‘in-
volved’’ or ‘‘uninvolved’’ with tumor, since positive margins
are generally associated with intermediate or high risk for
recurrence.
The size of the metastatic focus in a lymph node (335) and
tumor extension beyond the capsule of a lymph node
(338,449,450) affect cancer risk. Therefore, the pathology
report should indicate the size of the largest metastatic focus
to the lymph node and the presence or absence of extranodal
tumor extension, as well as the number of examined and
involved lymph nodes.
Additionally, the presence of vascular (blood vessel) in-
vasion is an unfavorable prognostic factor (451–453) and
should be evaluated and reported. Vascular invasion is di-
agnosed as direct tumor extension into the blood vessel lu-
men or a tumor aggregate present within the vessel lumen,
typically attached to the wall and covered by a layer of en-
dothelial cells. More rigid criteria for vascular invasion
proposed by some authors also require the presence of a fibrin
thrombus attached to the intravascular tumor cells (453). The
invaded blood vessels should not be located within the tumor
nodule parenchyma, but rather in the tumor capsule or outside
of it. Invasion of multiple (four or more) blood vessels ap-
pears to entail poorer outcomes, particularly in follicular
carcinomas (454–456). Therefore, the number of invaded
blood vessels (less than four or more) should be stated in the
pathology report.
More than 10 microscopic variants of papillary carcinoma
have been documented (457). Some of them are associated
with more aggressive or conversely more indolent tumor
behavior and can contribute to risk stratification. The vari-
ants with more unfavorable outcomes are the tall cell, co-
lumnar cell, and hobnail variants. The tall cell variant is
characterized by predominance (>50%) of tall columnar tu-
mor cells whose height is at least three times their width.
These tumors present at an older age and more advanced
stage than classic papillary carcinoma (458–461) and dem-
onstrate a higher recurrence rate and decreased disease-
specific survival (458–460,462,463). Some studies found a
higher rate of lymph node metastasis and poorer survival in
patients with tall cell variant as compared to classic papillary
carcinoma even in tumors without extrathyroidal extension,
and this was independent of patient age and tumor size and
stage (464,465). The BRAFV600E mutation is found in *80%
of these tumors (156,466).
The columnar cell variant of papillary carcinoma is char-
acterized by predominance of columnar cells with pro-
nounced nuclear stratification (467,468). These tumors have
a higher risk of distant metastases and tumor-related mor-
tality, the latter seen mostly in patients with an advanced
disease stage at presentation (467–470). The BRAFV600E
mutation is found in one-third of these tumors (467).
Papillary carcinoma with prominent hobnail features is a
rare, recently described variant characterized by the pre-
dominance of cells with a hobnail appearance with apically
placed nuclei and bulging of the apical cell surface (471,472).
The BRAFV600E mutation is frequently found in these tumors
(471,473). This variant of papillary carcinoma appears to be
associated with frequent distant metastases (typically to lung)
and increased risk of tumor-related death (471).
Other variants of papillary carcinoma, such as the solid
variant and diffuse sclerosing variant, may be associated with
a less favorable outcome, although the data remain conflict-
ing. The solid variant tumors appear to be more frequently
associated with distant metastases that are present in about
15% of cases, and with a slightly higher mortality rate, which
was 10%–12% in two studies with 10 and 19 years mean
follow-up (474,475). However, among children and adoles-
cents with post-Chernobyl papillary carcinomas, which fre-
quently were of the solid variant, the mortality was very low
(<1%) during the first 10 years of follow-up (476,477). Im-
portantly, the solid variant of papillary carcinoma should be
distinguished from poorly differentiated thyroid carcinoma,
with which it shares the insular, solid, and trabecular growth
patterns. The distinction is based primarily on the preserva-
tion of nuclear features and lack of necrosis and high mitotic
activity in the solid variant, as outlined by the Turin diag-
nostic criteria for poorly differentiated thyroid carcinoma
(478). It is important to make the distinction because poorly
differentiated thyroid carcinoma has a much poorer progno-
sis, with the 5-year survival of 72% and 10-year survival of
38
HAUGEN ET AL.
 46% in a series of 152 patients diagnosed using the Turin
criteria (479).
The prognostic implication of the diffuse sclerosing variant
of papillary cancer remains controversial. This variant is
characterized by diffuse involvement of the thyroid gland and a
higher rate of local and distant metastases at presentation, and it
has lower disease-free survival than classic papillary carcinoma
(480–482). The frequency of distant metastases, predominantly
affecting the lung, varies between reported series and is
10%–15% based on almost 100 published cases summa-
rized by Lam and Lo in 2006 (483) and more recent reports.
Nevertheless, the overall mortality appears to be low, with a
disease-specific survival of approximately 93% at 10 years of
follow-up. The diffuse sclerosing variant tends to be found in
younger patients in whom response to treatment is high.
The encapsulated follicular variant of papillary carcinoma
is, in contrast, associated with a low risk of recurrence, par-
ticularly in the absence of capsular or vascular invasion. This
variant is characterized by a follicular growth pattern with no
papillae formation and total tumor encapsulation, and the
diagnosis rests on the finding of characteristic nuclear fea-
tures of papillary carcinoma. Although the encapsulated
follicular variant of PTC shares the follicular growth pattern
with the infiltrative, nonencapsulated follicular variant of
PTC, these tumors differ in their molecular profiles and
biological properties. The encapsulated follicular variant
tumors frequently have RAS mutations, whereas nonencap-
sulated follicular variants frequently harbor BRAFV600E mu-
tations, similar to classic papillary carcinomas (484,485).
Most of the encapsulated follicular variant papillary carci-
nomas show no invasive growth, whereas in about one-third
of cases tumor capsule invasion, vascular invasion, or both
are found (486,487). Whereas in the past the encapsulated
follicular variant was relatively rare, at the present time half
to two-thirds of all follicular variant papillary carcinomas
belong to this subtype (488). The behavior of these tumors is
usually quite indolent. A summary of six studies that reported
107 cases of encapsulated follicular variant revealed 25%
with lymph node metastases and 1% with distant metastases
(489). Among these 107 patients, one died of disease and two
were alive with disease, whereas the rest (97%) of the patients
were alive and well with various follow-up periods. In a study
of 61 cases of encapsulated follicular variant, lymph node
metastases were observed in 5%, and there was no distant
metastasis (486). With median follow-up of 11 years, one
patient developed tumor recurrence, and this tumor had in-
vasion. No adverse events were found in any of the encap-
sulated and noninvasive tumors, including 31 patients treated
with lobectomy only. Similarly, no evidence of recurrence
was found in 61 out of 62 encapsulated or well-circumscribed
follicular variant of PTC in another series of patients with a
median follow-up of 9.2 years, and the only case that de-
veloped recurrence had a positive resection margin after
initial surgery (490). In another study of a cohort of thyroid
tumors followed on average for 12 years, none of 66 patients
with encapsulated follicular variant of papillary carcinoma
died of disease (487). Despite a low probability, some pa-
tients with encapsulated follicular variants may present with
distant metastases, particularly to the bones, or develop me-
tastasis on follow-up (491,492). Tumors prone to metastatic
behavior often have a thick capsule and significant in-
tratumoral fibrosis, and virtually all of them reveal vascular
invasion or invasion of the tumor capsule. Therefore, path-
ologic evaluation of these tumors should include microscopic
examination of the entire tumor capsule to rule out invasion,
as well as careful evaluation of the tumor to rule out the
presence of poorly differentiated carcinoma areas or other
unfavorable diagnostic features such as tumor necrosis or
high (‡3 per 10 high-power fields) mitotic activity (493). In
the absence of these features, a completely excised nonin-
vasive encapsulated follicular variant of papillary carcinoma
is expected to have a very low risk of recurrence or extra-
thyroidal spread, even in patients treated by lobectomy.
Similarly, excellent clinical outcomes are seen in FTCs
that manifest only capsular invasion without vascular inva-
sion (494–496). When vascular invasion is present, the tumor
should no longer be designated as minimally invasive.
However, some studies (456,494,497–500), although not all
(496,501), suggest that only those follicular carcinomas that
have a greater extent of vascular invasion (more than four
foci of vascular invasion, or extracapsular vascular invasion)
are associated with poorer outcomes.
Some histopathologic variants of thyroid carcinomas are
important to recognize because of their association with fa-
milial tumor syndromes (41,502). The cribriform-morular
variant of papillary carcinoma is frequently seen in patients
with FAP due to a germline mutation in the adenomatous
polyposis coli (APC) gene (503,504). It is characterized by a
prominent cribriform architecture and formation of whorls or
morules composed of spindle cells. The presence of aberrant
b-catenin immunoreactivity provides a strong evidence for
this tumor variant (505–507). Approximately 40% of patients
with this variant of papillary carcinoma are found to have
FAP, whereas the rest have no evidence of the inherited
disease (505,508). Although no microscopic tumor features
can distinguish between familial and sporadic disease, tumor
multifocality is more common in the setting of the familial
disease (505,508). Since many patients with the cribriform-
morular variant have FAP, and thyroid cancer can precede
clinically detectable colonic abnormalities in *40% of pa-
tients (508), this diagnosis should raise the possibility of the
familial disease and prompt consideration for colonic ex-
amination and genetic counseling.
Follicular carcinoma may develop as a manifestation of the
PTEN hamartoma tumor syndrome, which is caused by a
germline mutation in the PTEN gene (509–511). The histo-
pathologic appearance of thyroid glands in these patients is
very characteristic and should allow pathologists to suspect
this syndrome (510,511). The glands typically have numer-
ous sharply delineated, frequently encapsulated thyroid
nodules that microscopically are well-delineated and cellular
and have variable growth patterns (510–513). Individuals
affected by this syndrome also have a high risk for benign and
malignant tumors of the breast and endometrium, colon ha-
martomas, and others, and in light of the characteristic ap-
pearance of the thyroid gland in these patients, genetic
counseling should be recommended.
Well-differentiated papillary and follicular cancers should
be histologically distinguished from poorly differentiated
carcinoma. Poorly differentiated carcinoma is an aggressive
thyroid tumor characterized by a partial loss of the features
of thyroid differentiation that occupies morphologically
and behaviorally an intermediate position between well-
differentiated papillary and follicular carcinomas and fully
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
39
 dedifferentiated anaplastic carcinoma. Another term used in
the past for this tumor was ‘‘insular carcinoma.’’ Diagnostic
criteria for poorly differentiated carcinoma are based on the
consensus Turin proposal and include the following three
features: (i) solid/trabecular/insular microscopic growth
pattern, (ii) lack of well-developed nuclear features of pap-
illary carcinoma, and (iii) convoluted nuclei (evidence for
partial loss of differentiation in papillary cancer), tumor ne-
crosis, or three or more mitoses per 10 high-power fields
(514). Poorly differentiated carcinomas have significantly
worse outcome as compared to well-differentiated PTC
and FTC, with a 10-year survival of *50% (514–516). Pa-
tient age over 45 years, larger tumor size, presence of ne-
crosis, and high mitotic activity are additional factors that
may influence a more unfavorable outcome in patients with
poorly differentiated thyroid cancer (514,517). It is not clear
if the proportion of poorly differentiated carcinoma areas
within the cancer nodule directly correlates with prognosis.
Several studies have reported similarly decreased survival in
patients with poorly differentiated carcinoma constituting
more than 50% of the tumor and in those in whom it was
observed as a minor component (518,519). Tumors with in-
sular, solid, or trabecular architecture, but lacking other di-
agnostic features of poorly differentiated carcinoma, do not
demonstrate such an aggressive behavior and therefore should
not be considered as poorly differentiated. On the other hand,
some studies suggest that the presence of a high mitotic rate
(‡5 mitoses/10 high-power fields or Ki-67 labeling index
‡4%) or tumor necrosis predicts a less favorable outcome
irrespective of the presence of the solid/trabecular/insular
growth pattern (520,521).
[B16] What is the role of postoperative staging
systems and risk stratification in the management
of DTC?
[B17] Postoperative staging
& RECOMMENDATION 47
AJCC/UICC staging is recommended for all patients with
DTC, based on its utility in predicting disease mortality,
and its requirement for cancer registries.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
Postoperative staging for thyroid cancer, as for other cancer
types, is used (i) to provide prognostic information, which is of
value when considering disease surveillance and therapeutic
strategies, and (ii) to enable risk-stratified description of pa-
tients for communication among health care professionals,
tracking by cancer registries, and research purposes.
Accurate initial staging requires a detailed understanding
of all pertinent risk stratification data, whether they were ob-
tained as part of preoperative testing, during the operation(s),
or as part of postoperative follow-up. It is also important to
emphasize that in many cases the written pathology report of
the surgical specimen does not convey critical risk factors such
as preoperative vocal cord paralysis, extent of gross extra-
thyroidal invasion, completeness of resection, or remaining
gross residual disease. Without these critical pieces of infor-
mation, it is likely that initial risk stratification will be inac-
curate and potentially misleading. Details and suggestions for
effectively communicating specific risk factors between health
care providers are outlined in a recent publication of the Sur-
gical Affairs Committee of the ATA (440).
It is important to emphasize that the identification of a
clinico-pathologic or molecular predictor of recurrence or
mortality does not necessarily imply that more aggressive
therapies (such as more extensive surgery, RAI therapy,
aggressive thyroid hormone therapy with TSH suppres-
sion, targeted therapies) will have a significant impact on
clinical outcomes. Similarly, the absence of a risk factor does
not mean that more aggressive therapies are not indicated.
Intervention studies are required to determine which at-risk-
patients may benefit from additional therapies or a more
conservative management approach. Until appropriate treat-
ment intervention studies are completed, the risk stratification
information associated with a clinico-pathologic risk factor or
with a molecular profiling can be used as a prognostic factor to
guide follow-up management decisions such as the type and
frequency of imaging and biochemical testing.
[B18] AJCC/UICC TNM staging
Over the years, multiple staging systems have been de-
veloped to predict the risk of mortality in patients with DTC
(522). Each of the systems uses some combination of age at
diagnosis, size of the primary tumor, specific tumor histol-
ogy, and extrathyroidal spread of the tumor (direct extension
of the tumor outside the thyroid gland, loco-regional metas-
tases, and/or distant metastases) to stratify patients into one of
several categories with differing risks of death from thyroid
cancer. Recently, a nomogram was developed and validated
using the SEER data base, which provides a mathematical
approach to integrating these important clinical predictive
features into a specific mortality risk estimate for an indi-
vidual patient (523). Using an approach similar to the MACIS
system from the Mayo Clinic (270), a quantitative approach
based on histology, age, lymph node metastases, tumor size,
and extrathyroidal extension utilizing TNM staging has re-
cently been proposed and validated (524,525)
While none of the staging systems has been shown to be
clearly superior to the other systems, several studies have
demonstrated that the AJCC/UICC TNM system (Table 10)
and the MACIS system consistently provide the highest
proportion of variance explained (PVE, a statistical measure
of how well a staging system can predict the outcome of
interest) when applied to a broad range of patient cohorts
(277,501,526–530), and they have been validated in retro-
spective studies as well as prospectively in clinical practice.
Unfortunately, none of the staging systems designed to
predict mortality from thyroid cancer can account for more
than a small proportion (5%–30%, corresponding to PVE
values of 0.05–0.30) of the uncertainty associated with
eventual death from thyroid cancer (277,501,526–530). This
relative inability to accurately predict the risk of death from
thyroid cancer for an individual patient may be related to
the failure of current staging systems to adequately integrate
the risk associated with other potentially important clinico-
pathologic features such as the specific histology (well-
differentiated thyroid cancer versus poorly differentiated
thyroid cancer), molecular profile, size and location of distant
metastases (pulmonary metastases versus bone metastases
versus brain metastases), functional status of the metastases
(RAI avid versus 18FDG-PET avid), and effectiveness of
initial therapy (completeness of resection, effectiveness of
40
HAUGEN ET AL.
 RAI, external beam radiation therapy or other systemic
therapies). Furthermore, recent studies have questioned the
use of the age of 45 years as a cutoff to upstage patients using
the AJCC/UICC TNM system (340,531–533).
Even though the various staging systems designed to predict
mortality from thyroid cancer were developed and validated
using cohorts that were either exclusively or predominantly
PTC patients, several small studies have demonstrated that
MACIS and AJCC/UICC TNM staging systems were also
predictive in patients with FTC (501,534,535).
Currently, none of the mortality risk systems incorporate
molecular testing results. This may need to be re-evaluated as
studies emerge using molecular testing including BRAFV600E,
TERT, and TP53 or combinations of markers. For example, in
one study that analyzed more than 400 DTCs, the presence of
a TERT mutation was found to be an independent predictor of
mortality (hazard ratio [HR] 10.35 [95% CI 2.01–53.24]) for
all differentiated cancers and for papillary carcinomas (154).
These potential prognostic markers are promising, but re-
quire further study.
[B19] What initial stratification system should be
used to estimate the risk of persistent/recurrent
disease?
& RECOMMENDATION 48
(A) The 2009 ATA Initial Risk Stratification System is
recommended for DTC patients treated with thyroidec-
tomy, based on its utility in predicting risk of disease re-
currence and/or persistence.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(B) Additional prognostic variables (such as the extent of
lymph node involvement, mutational status, and/or the
degree of vascular invasion in FTC), not included in the
2009 ATA Initial Risk Stratification system may be used to
further refine risk stratification for DTC as described in the
following text (and in Fig. 4) in the Modified Initial Risk
Stratification system. However, the incremental benefit of
adding these specific prognostic variables to the 2009 In-
itial Risk Stratification system has not been established.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
(C) While not routinely recommended for initial postop-
erative risk stratification in DTC, the mutational status of
BRAF, and potentially other mutations such as TERT, have
the potential to refine risk estimates when interpreted in the
context of other clinico-pathologic risk factors.
(Weak recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
Because the AJCC/TNM risk of mortality staging system
does not adequately predict the risk of recurrence in DTC
(536–539), the 2009 version of the ATA thyroid cancer
guidelines proposed a three-tiered clinico-pathologic risk
stratification system that classified patients as having low,
intermediate, or high risk of recurrence (25). Low-risk pa-
tients were defined as having intrathyroidal DTC with no
evidence of extrathyroidal extension, vascular invasion, or
metastases. Intermediate-risk patients demonstrated either
microscopic extrathyroidal extension, cervical lymph node
metastases, RAI-avid disease in the neck outside the thyroid
Table 10. AJCC 7th Edition/TNM Classification
System for Differentiated Thyroid Carcinoma
Definition
T0
No evidence of primary tumor
T1a
Tumor £1 cm, without extrathyroidal extension
T1b
Tumor >1 cm but £2 cm in greatest dimension,
without extrathyroidal extension
T2
Tumor >2 cm but £4 cm in greatest dimension,
without extrathyroidal extension.
T3
Tumor >4 cm in greatest dimension limited to
the thyroid
or
Any size tumor with minimal extrathyroidal
extension (e.g., extension into sternothyroid
muscle or perithyroidal soft tissues).
T4a
Tumor of any size extending beyond the thyroid
capsule to invade subcutaneous soft tissues,
larynx, trachea, esophagus, or recurrent
laryngeal nerve.
T4b
Tumor of any size invading prevertebral fascia
or encasing carotid artery or mediastinal vessels
N0
No metastatic nodes
N1a
Metastases to level VI (pretracheal, paratracheal,
and prelaryngeal/Delphian lymph nodes).
N1b
Metastases to unilateral, bilateral, or contralateral
cervical (levels I, II III, IV, or V) or
retropharyngeal or superior mediastinal
lymph nodes (level VII)
M0
No distant metastases
M1
Distant metastases
Patient age <45 years old at diagnosis
I
Any T
Any N
M0
II
Any T
Any N
M1
Patient age ‡45 years old at diagnosis
I
T1a
N0
M0
T1b
N0
M0
II
T2
N0
M0
III
T1a
N1a
M0
T1b
N1a
M0
T2
N1a
M0
T3
N0
M0
T3
N1a
M0
IVa
T1a
N1b
M0
T1b
N1b
M0
T2
N1b
M0
T3
N1b
M0
T4a
N0
M0
T4a
N1a
M0
T4a
N1b
M0
IVb
T4b
Any N
M0
IVc
Any T
Any N
M1
Used with the permission of the American Joint Committee on
Cancer (AJCC), Chicago, Illinois. The original source for this
material is the AJCC Cancer Staging Manual, Seventh Edition
(1077) published by Springer Science and Business Media LLC
(http://www.springer.com).
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
41
 bed, vascular invasion, or aggressive tumor histology. High-
risk patients had gross extrathyroidal extension, incomplete
tumor resection, distant metastases, or inappropriate post-
operative serum Tg values (Table 11).
The 2009 ATA risk stratification system was somewhat
different than staging systems proposed by a European
Consensus conference (540) and the Latin American Thyroid
Society (LATS) (541) which classify patients as either being
at very low risk (unifocal, intrathyroidal T1aN0M0), low risk
(T1b N0M0, T2N0M0, or multifocal T1N0M0,), or high risk
(any T3 or T4, any N1, or any M1). The European and LATS
very low risk and low risk categories would be classified as
ATA low risk, while the ETA high risk category would be
subdivided between ATA intermediate risk (minor extra-
thyroidal extension, N1 disease) and ATA high risk (gross
extrathyroidal extension, M1, incomplete tumor resection).
Subsequent studies have retrospectively validated the 2009
ATA risk of recurrence staging system through analysis of
independent datasets originating from three respective con-
tinents (Table 12). These studies have reported the estimates
of patients who subsequently had no evidence of disease
(NED) in each ATA Risk Category after total thyroidectomy
and RAI remnant ablation: (a) low risk, 78%–91% NED, (b)
intermediate risk, 52%–64% NED, and (c) high risk, 31%–
32% NED (538,539,542,543). In these datasets, NED was
defined as a stimulated Tg <1 ng/mL with no other radio-
logical or clinical evidence of disease. Prospectively col-
lected validation data for the ATA initial risk stratification
system are needed.
Three additional studies, in which the ATA risk classifi-
cation system was retrospectively evaluated, have also sug-
gested that the ATA risk of recurrence model may be applied
in low- and intermediate-risk patients in the absence of RAI
remnant ablation (328,544,545). Over a median follow-up
period that ranged from 5 to 10 years, structural disease re-
currence was identified in less than 1%–2% of ATA low-risk
patients and 8% of ATA intermediate-risk patients who un-
derwent thyroid surgery without RAI ablation as the initial
therapy (328,544,545).
The type of persistent disease also varies according to
ATA initial risk stratification, with 70%–80% of the persis-
tent disease in ATA low-risk patients manifested by abnor-
mal serum Tg levels (suppressed or stimulated Tg >1 ng/mL)
without structurally identifiable disease, while only 29%–
51% of the ATA intermediate-risk patients and 19%–21% of
ATA high-risk patients are classified as having persistent
disease only on the basis of biochemical abnormalities
(538,539,543). With increasing ATA risk level, the RR of
having structural persistent/recurrent disease increases. Thus,
the ATA low-risk patients appear to have the highest RR of
FIG. 4.
Risk of structural disease recurrence in patients without structurally identifiable disease after initial therapy. The
risk of structural disease recurrence associated with selected clinico-pathological features are shown as a continuum of risk
with percentages (ranges, approximate values) presented to reflect our best estimates based on the published literature
reviewed in the text. In the left hand column, the three-tiered risk system proposed as the Modified Initial Risk Stratification
System is also presented to demonstrate how the continuum of risk estimates informed our modifications of the 2009 ATA
Initial Risk System (see Recommendation 48). *While analysis of BRAF and/or TERT status is not routinely recommended
for initial risk stratification, we have included these findings to assist clinicians in proper risk stratification in cases where
this information is available. FTC, follicular thyroid cancer; FV, follicular variant; LN, lymph node; PTMC, papillary
thyroid microcarcinoma; PTC, papillary thyroid cancer.
42
HAUGEN ET AL.
 isolated thyroglobulinemia, which may be of less clinical
significance than structural disease persistence or recurrence.
Similar to what was seen with the staging systems designed
to predict risk of mortality from thyroid cancer (see section
[B18] above), the PVE by the ATA risk of recurrence system
was suboptimal, ranging from 19% to 34% (538,542). More
recently, a novel mathematical clinico-pathologic staging
system from the University of Yonsei yielded similar results
with a PVE of 11.9% in predicting disease recurrence (546).
[B20] Potential impact of specific clinico-pathologic fea-
tures on the risk estimates in PTC
As originally conceived, the ATA initial risk stratification
system was a three-tiered system in which clinico-pathologic
features available at the time of initial treatment were used to
classify DTC patients as having either low, intermediate, or
high risk of either recurrence or persistent disease. However,
as with any categorical staging system, the risk of recurrence
within the individual risk categories (low, intermediate, and
Table 11. ATA 2009 Risk Stratification System with Proposed Modifications
ATA low risk
Papillary thyroid cancer (with all of the following):
� No local or distant metastases;
� All macroscopic tumor has been resected
� No tumor invasion of loco-regional tissues or structures
� The tumor does not have aggressive histology (e.g., tall cell, hobnail variant,
columnar cell carcinoma)
� If 131I is given, there are no RAI-avid metastatic foci outside the thyroid bed on
the first posttreatment whole-body RAI scan
� No vascular invasion
� Clinical N0 or £5 pathologic N1 micrometastases (<0.2 cm in largest dimension)a
Intrathyroidal, encapsulated follicular variant of papillary thyroid cancera
Intrathyroidal, well differentiated follicular thyroid cancer with capsular invasion and
no or minimal (<4 foci) vascular invasiona
Intrathyroidal, papillary microcarcinoma, unifocal or multifocal, including BRAFV600E
mutated (if known)a
ATA intermediate
risk
Microscopic invasion of tumor into the perithyroidal soft tissues
RAI-avid metastatic foci in the neck on the first posttreatment whole-body RAI scan
Aggressive histology (e.g., tall cell, hobnail variant, columnar cell carcinoma)
Papillary thyroid cancer with vascular invasion
Clinical N1 or >5 pathologic N1 with all involved lymph nodes <3 cm in largest dimensiona
Multifocal papillary microcarcinoma with ETE and BRAFV600E mutated (if known)a
ATA high risk
Macroscopic invasion of tumor into the perithyroidal soft tissues (gross ETE)
Incomplete tumor resection
Distant metastases
Postoperative serum thyroglobulin suggestive of distant metastases
Pathologic N1 with any metastatic lymph node ‡3 cm in largest dimensiona
Follicular thyroid cancer with extensive vascular invasion (> 4 foci of vascular invasion)a
aProposed modifications, not present in the original 2009 initial risk stratification system. See sections [B19]–[B23] and Recommendation
48B.
Table 12. American Thyroid Association Risk Stratification System: Clinical Outcomes Following Total
Thyroidectomy and Radioiodine Remnant Ablation or Adjuvant Therapy
ATA risk
Study
NED, %
Biochemical
incomplete, %b
Structural
incomplete, %c
Low
Tuttle et al. (538)
86
11
3
Castagna et al. (542)
91
NDa
NDa
Vaisman et al. (539)
88
10
2
Pitoia et al. (543)
78
15
7
Intermediatea
Tuttle et al. (538)
57
22
21
Vaisman et al. (539)
63
16
21
Pitoia et al. (543)
52
14
34
High
Tuttle et al. (538)
14
14
72
Vaisman et al. (539)
16
12
72
Pitoia et al. (543)
31
13
56
aBecause the ATA intermediate- and high-risk groups were merged into a single ‘‘high-risk’’ group in the series by Castagna et al. (542),
risk of persistent/recurrent disease for these subgroups is not presented.
bProportion of patients with a biochemical incomplete response. Definition: suppressed Tg >1 ng/mL, TSH-stimulated Tg >10 ng/mL, or
rising anti-Tg antibody levels in the absence of structural disease.
cProportion of patients with persistent/recurrent disease that is structural. Definition: structural disease that is either biopsy-proven or
highly suspicious for disease with or without abnormal serum Tg.
ND, not determined.
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
43
 high) can vary depending on the specific clinical features
of individual patients (Fig. 4). In addition, the three-tiered
system did not specifically address the risk of recurrence
associated with specific DTC histologies, multifocality, ge-
notype, extent of vascular invasion, or extent of metastatic
lymph node involvement.
For example, while intrathyroidal PTCs of all sizes are
included in the ATA low-risk category, the risk of structural
disease recurrence can vary from 1%–2% in unifocal papil-
lary microcarcinomas, to 4%–6% in multifocal papil-
lary microcarcinomas (141,147), to 5%–6% in 2–4 cm
intrathyroidal PTC (547), and 8%–10% in intrathyroidal PTC
>4 cm (547). Similarly, while all DTC patients with loco-
regional lymph node metastases were classified as having
intermediate risk in the 2009 ATA risk stratification system,
the risk of structural disease recurrence can vary from 4% in
patients with fewer than five metastatic lymph nodes, to 5% if
all involved lymph nodes are <0.2 cm, to 19% if more than
five lymph nodes are involved, to 21% if more than 10 lymph
nodes are involved, to 22% if macroscopic lymph node me-
tastases are clinically evident (clinical N1 disease), and 27%–
32% if any metastatic lymph node is >3 cm (335,548). These
risk estimates apply to both N1a and N1b disease because
there are insufficient data to determine risk based on location
within the neck independent of size, number of involved
nodes, and extranodal extension. It is very likely that these
risk estimates could vary depending on the types and extent
of nodal dissections done in individual patients. As defined
by the ATA surgical affairs committee task force on thyroid
cancer nodal surgery, £5 pN1 micrometastases (<0.2 cm in
largest dimension) are classified as lower risk N1 disease
(<5% risk of recurrence) (335). Clinical N1 disease, more
than five metastatic lymph nodes, or any metastatic lymph
node >3 cm in largest dimension are classified as higher risk
N1 disease (>20% risk of recurrence) (335). Identification of
extranodal extension of the tumor through the metastatic
lymph node capsule has also been associated with an in-
creased risk of recurrent/persistent disease (338,450). It is
difficult to estimate the risk associated with extension of the
tumor through the capsule of involved lymph nodes because
this histologic finding is tightly linked with both the number
of involved lymph nodes (338,450) and invasion of the tumor
through the thyroid capsule (450,549).
It is also important to differentiate the clinical significance
of minor extrathyroidal extension (ATA intermediate risk)
from gross extrathyroidal invasion of surrounding structures
(ATA high risk). The risk of recurrence associated with
minor extrathyroidal extension (pT3 disease manifest by
minimal extrathyroidal extension) ranges from 3% to 9%
(550–554), while the risk of recurrence in patients with gross
extrathyroidal extension (pT4a disease involving the subcu-
taneous soft tissues, larynx, trachea, esophagus, or RLN)
ranges from 23% to 40% (537,550,552–555).
The encapsulated follicular variant of papillary thyroid
carcinoma also appears to be associated with a low 10-year
risk of recurrence (486,490,556). Only two recurrences were
reported in the 152 patients (1.3% risk of recurrence) de-
scribed in these three reports. No recurrences were described
in the 42 patients that had encapsulated FVPTC without
capsular or lymphovascular invasion in the series by Liu et al.
(486). However, the study by Baloch et al. (556) included a
single patient with encapsulated FVPTC that developed bone
metastasis despite not having lymphovascular invasion or
lymph node metastases identified at the time of diagnosis.
Therefore, intrathyroidal FVPTC is best classified as a low-
risk tumor that is unlikely to recur or metastasize.
Well-differentiated FTCs demonstrating only capsular in-
vasion (without vascular invasion) usually have an excellent
prognosis with recurrence rates of 0%–7% and can be classi-
fied as low-risk tumors (494–496). Encapsulated, minimally
invasive FTC with only minor vascular invasion (small number
of foci confined to intracapsular vessels) also appears to have
a low recurrence rate of approximately 0%–5% (456,500).
Furthermore, some studies (456,494,497–500), but not all
(496,501), suggest a greater extent of vascular invasion (more
than four foci of vascular invasion, or extracapsular vascular
invasion) is associated with poorer outcomes even in en-
capsulated FTCs. However, FTC is considered ATA high risk
if extensive vascular invasion is present because the risk of
the development of newly identified distant metastases is as
high as 30%–55% (455,494,497,500).
In PTC, most (451–453,558–561), but not all (562) studies
demonstrate that vascular invasion is associated with worse
clinical outcomes. Recurrence rates were significantly higher
if vascular invasion was present in the studies by Gardner et al.
(16%–20% with vascular invasion, 3%–6% without), Nishida
et al. (28% with vascular invasion, 15% without), and Falvo
et al. (30% with vascular invasion, 5% without), but not in the
studies by Furlan et al. (562) or Akslen et al. (559). Vascular
invasion in PTC was also associated with higher rates of dis-
tant metastases (453,561) and disease-specific mortality
(559,560).
[B21] Potential impact of BRAFV600E and other mutations
on risk estimates in PTC
In a pooled univariate analysis of 1849 PTC patients, the
presence of a BRAFV600E mutation was associated with in-
creased disease-specific mortality, although this was not
significantly associated with mortality in a multivariate
analysis (370). However, a significant interaction between
BRAFV600E mutation and several conventional clinico-
pathological risk factors was seen, such that the risk of
mortality was higher in patients with BRAF mutation com-
pared to those with wild-type BRAF in the setting of lymph
node metastases (11.1% vs. 2.6%, p < 0.001), distant metas-
tases (51.5% vs. 18.2%, p < 0.001), AJCC stage IV disease
(31.4% vs. 13%, p0.004), and age ‡45 years at diagnosis (8%
vs. 1.9%, p < 0.001). In a systematic review and meta-
analysis of 14 publications that included 2470 PTC patients
from nine different countries, the BRAFV600E mutation was
associated with a significantly higher risk of recurrence than
BRAF wild-type tumors (24.9% vs. 12.6%, p < 0.00001 [95%
CI 1.61–2.32]) (563). In the studies included in this meta-
analysis, the risk of recurrence in BRAFV600E-positive tumors
ranged from 11% to 40% (median 26.5%), while the risk of
recurrence in BRAF wild-type tumors ranged from 2% to
36% (median 9.5%). Because the BRAFV600E mutation is
tightly linked with the presence of aggressive histologic
phenotypes, lymph node metastases, and extrathyroidal ex-
tension, it is difficult to determine the proportion of risk that
is attributable to the BRAF mutation versus that attributable
to the other clinico-pathologic features. Some studies
(564,565), but not all (566–568), have demonstrated that the
BRAFV600E mutation is an independent predictor of risk of
44
HAUGEN ET AL.
 recurrence in multivariate analysis. Furthermore, a recent
publication demonstrated a small, but statistically signifi-
cant improvement in risk stratification if BRAF status was
used in conjunction with the 2009 ATA initial risk stratifi-
cation system (569). In a meta-analysis of 2167 patients, the
presence of a BRAFV600E mutation had a sensitivity of 65%
in identifying those tumors that subsequently recurred, but
had a PPV of only 25% in predicting the risk of recur-
rence (563). Unlike previous studies that were often small
and primarily single-institution reports, a large multicen-
ter pooled-data evaluation of 2099 patients (1615 women,
484 men, median age 45 years) demonstrated that the
BRAFV600E mutation was significantly associated with the
risk of recurrence in both classical PTC (20.7% vs. 12.4%,
HR 1.46 [95% CI 1.08–1.99] after adjustment for multi-
ple clinico-pathological features), and FVPTC (21.3% vs.
7.0%, HR 3.20 [95% CI 1.46–7.02] after adjustment for
multiple clinico-pathological features). Based on these data, it
appears that the BRAF status in isolation is not sufficient to
substantially contribute to risk stratification in most patients.
However, an incremental improvement in risk stratification
can be achieved if the BRAF mutational status is considered in
the context of other standard clinico-pathological risk factors.
Since the clinical implications of this incremental improve-
ment in risk stratification are not clear, we are not routinely
recommending BRAF mutational evaluation for initial post-
operative risk stratification in DTC.
The potential role of BRAF status in isolation as an aid to
risk stratification in patients clinico-pathologically classi-
fied as having ATA low risk is currently being evaluated. In
a cohort of low-risk patients with intrathyroidal PTC
(<4 cm, N0, M0; 33% with BRAF mutation), the overall risk
of having structural disease recurrence over 5 years of
follow up was 3% (565). However, BRAFV600E-mutated
tumors had a recurrence rate of 8% (8 of 106) compared
with only 1% (2 of 213) in BRAF wild-type tumors
( p = 0.003, Fisher’s exact). Furthermore, in multivariate
analysis, the only clinico-pathological significant predictor
of persistent disease after 5 years of follow-up was the
presence of a BRAFV600E mutation. If these findings are
verified in additional studies, it is possible that BRAF
testing could be used to help further risk stratify patients
with intrathyroidal PTC as having very low risk of recur-
rence (BRAF wild-type) or intermediate risk of recurrence
(BRAFV600E mutation).
The impact of BRAF status on the risk of recurrence in the
very low-risk patients (intrathyroidal unifocal papillary mi-
crocarcinomas <1 cm) appears to be small. Even though BRAF
mutation is present in 30%–67% of papillary microcarcinomas
(152,153,156,566,570–576), the overall clinical recurrence
rate is quite low, ranging from 1% to 6% (274,566). In a series
of 99 papillary microcarcinoma patients with an overall re-
currence rate of 7%, no recurrences were detected in the pa-
tients with a BRAFV600E mutation and intrathyroidal, unifocal
tumors. Conversely, BRAFV600E-mutated multifocal PTMC
with extrathyroidal extension demonstrated a 20% recurrence
rate (150). Therefore, in the absence of data demonstrating that
the BRAFV600E mutation is associated with increased structural
recurrence in very low-risk tumors, we have classified in-
trathyroidal papillary microcarcinomas (T1a, N0, M0) har-
boring BRAFV600E mutations with no other worrisome features
(such as extrathyroidal extension, aggressive histology, vas-
cular invasion, or lymph node metastases) as ATA low-risk
tumors. The few patients (about 10% of PTMC patients) that
demonstrate multifocal PTMC with extrathyroidal invasion
and a BRAFV600E mutation would be considered as having
ATA intermediate risk for recurrence. Based on these data,
there appears to be little role for BRAF mutational testing as an
aid to risk stratification in PTMC tumors that do not demon-
strate other worrisome clinico-pathologic features.
More recent data suggest that aggressive behavior of a
given thyroid carcinoma, including high probability of tumor
recurrence, is likely when it harbors more than one known
oncogenic mutation, and specifically a BRAF mutation co-
occurring with a TERT promoter, PIK3CA, TP53, or AKT1
mutation (155–157,577). Such a combination of several
mutations is seen in a much smaller fraction of PTC as
compared with a 40%–45% incidence of BRAF mutations
and is expected to serve as a more specific marker of unfa-
vorable outcomes of PTC.
Two other molecular markers that appear to confer an
increased risk of tumor recurrence and tumor-related
mortality are TP53 and TERT mutations. TP53 mutations
have been known to occur mostly in poorly differentiated
and anaplastic thyroid cancers. However, more recent
broad mutational analyses identified TP53 mutations in 2
of 57 (3.5%) well-differentiated PTC and 4 of 36 (11%) of
well-differentiated FTC (578). Both PTCs in this series
that were positive for TP53 mutations also showed muta-
tions in BRAF (or BRAF and PIK3CA) and developed lung
metastases. All four TP53-positive FTC (with no other
coexisting mutations) were oncocytic, and three out of four
of those were widely invasive FTC.
Finally, recent studies identified TERT promoter muta-
tions as a likely predictor of more unfavorable outcomes for
patients with thyroid cancer. TERT mutations were found in
7%–22% of PTC and 14%–17% of FTC, but with a signif-
icantly higher prevalence in dedifferentiated thyroid can-
cers (154,579–581). In some (154,579), but not all (580)
reports, TERT mutations were found more often in PTC
carrying a BRAF mutation. In the largest reported series
(332 PTC and 70 FTC followed on average for 8 years), a
TERT mutation was an independent predictor of disease-
free survival (odds ratio [OR] 4.68 [95% CI 1.54–14.27])
and mortality (HR 10.35 [95% CI 2.01–53.24]) for well-
differentiated thyroid cancer (154). Furthermore, the com-
bination of a TERT mutation and a BRAF mutation within
the same tumor was associated with a high risk of structural
disease recurrence (155). These results, although pending
confirmation in other studies, suggest that these molecular
markers, alone or in combination, may be helpful for risk
stratification of thyroid cancer and provide significantly
more accurate risk assessment than BRAF mutational status
taken in isolation.
[B22] Potential impact of postoperative serum Tg on risk
estimates
Several studies have demonstrated the clinical utility of a
serum Tg measurement (either TSH stimulated or non-
stimulated) obtained a few weeks after total thyroidectomy
(postoperative Tg) and before RAI remnant ablation as a tool
to aid in initial risk stratification and adjuvant therapy
decision-making (See Recommendations 50B and 50C).
Please see section [C6] for discussion of Tg measurements.
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
45
 [B23] Proposed modifications to the 2009 ATA initial risk
stratification system
While the 2009 risk stratification system has proven to be a
valuable tool for initial risk stratification in PTC, modifica-
tions are required to better incorporate our new understanding
regarding the risks associated with the extent of lymph node
involvement, mutational status, and specific FTC histologies
(Table 11). While the modified 2009 risk stratification system
continues to classify intrathyroidal PTC without vascular
invasion as low risk, the category was expanded to include
patients with small-volume lymph node metastases (clinical
N0 or £5 pathologic N1 micrometastases, <0.2 cm in largest
dimension), intrathyroidal encapsulated follicular variant of
PTC, intrathyroidal well-differentiated follicular cancer with
capsular or minor vascular invasion (<4 vessels involved),
and intrathyroidal papillary microcarcinomas that are either
BRAF wild-type or BRAF mutated. Similarly, the modified
2009 intermediate-risk category continues to include patients
with microscopic invasion of the tumor into perithyroidal soft
tissues, vascular invasion, uptake outside the thyroid bed at
the time of remnant ablation, and aggressive histologies, but
it has been modified to include only a subset of patients with
lymph node metastases (clinical N1 or >5 pathologic N1 with
all involved lymph nodes <3 cm in largest dimension and
multifocal papillary microcarcinoma with extrathyroidal
extension and BRAF mutated (if known). Finally, the high-
risk category continues to include patients with macroscopic
extrathyroidal extension, incomplete tumor resection, distant
metastases, and postoperative serum Tg suggestive of distant
metastases, but it has been expanded to include patients with
large-volume lymph node involvement (any metastatic
lymph node ‡3 cm in largest dimension), and FTC with ex-
tensive vascular invasion (>4 foci of vascular invasion or
extracapsular vascular invasion). While these modifications
are based on our current literature review of the impact of the
individual risk factors, future studies will be required to
validate this proposed modification to determine if the ad-
ditional modifying factors provide significant incremental
improvement in risk stratification.
[B24] Risk of recurrence as a continuum of risk
While the ATA initial risk stratification system provides
a meaningful and valuable tool for predicting risk of recur-
rence when used as a three-tiered categorical staging system,
additional insights can be gained if one appreciates that the
risk of structural disease recurrence is a continuum of risk
that ranges from <1% in very low-risk patients to >50% in
high-risk patients (see Fig. 4). Therefore, individualized
management recommendations should be based not only
on the categorical risk of recurrence estimate, but also on a
more individualized estimate of risk in which the ATA low-
and intermediate-risk categories are further characterized on
the basis of respective clinical or pathologic features, such as
the size of the primary tumor, number and size of loco-
regional lymph node metastases (as well as extranodal ex-
tension), specific histologic variant, vascular invasion, extent
of extrathyroidal extension, or other potentially important
factors.
While the risk estimates presented in this section may be
useful in guiding initial treatment selections (extent of initial
surgery, need for RAI ablation), it is important to recognize
that these risk estimates likely reflect not only the tumor
biology, but also the impact of initial therapy, which varies
from thyroid lobectomy to total thyroidectomy with varying
extents of lymph node dissection, either with or without RAI
ablation, across the various studies. Additional studies are
needed to better define the risk of recurrence in most of these
clinical scenarios in patients randomized to receive one of
several initial treatment options (lobectomy versus total
thyroidectomy, extent of lymph node dissection, with or
without RAI ablation).
[B25] How should initial risk estimates be modified
over time?
& RECOMMENDATION 49
Initial recurrence risk estimates should be continually
modified during follow-up, because the risk of recurrence
and disease-specific mortality can change over time as a
function of the clinical course of the disease and the re-
sponse to therapy.
(Strong recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
While initial staging systems provide important insights
into an individual patient’s risk of recurrence and disease-
specific mortality, they provide static, single-point estimates
of risk based only on data available at the time of initial
therapy. None of the currently available initial staging sys-
tems are capable of using new data obtained during the course
of follow-up to modify the initial risk estimate. For example,
an ATA low-risk patient that demonstrates a rising serum Tg
associated with cervical lymphadenopathy highly suspicious
for recurrent disease at some point during follow-up would
still be classified as ATA low risk despite the presence of
clinical data demonstrating a high risk of recurrence. Con-
versely, an ATA high-risk patient that remains NED over
30 years of appropriate follow-up would still be classified as
ATA high risk despite having a risk of recurrence that is
significantly lower than would have been predicted at the
time of initial therapy.
Therefore, while the initial staging systems can be infor-
mative in guiding therapeutic and early diagnostic follow-up
strategy decisions, a risk stratification system that incorpo-
rates individual response to therapy into a real-time, dynamic
risk stratification scheme is needed to provide an individu-
alized approach to ongoing management (582,583). One
approach that has been proposed is to use the risk estimates
from the initial staging systems to guide initial management
recommendations and then to incorporate a response-to-
therapy assessment during follow-up to modify these initial
risk estimates in an ongoing, dynamic process (584).
Multiple studies have now shown that many patients ini-
tially classified as intermediate or high risk of recurrence
using initial staging systems can be reclassified as having a
subsequent low risk of recurrence based on having an ex-
cellent response to initial therapy (538,539,542,586–601).
Furthermore, the PVE values associated with staging sys-
tems that incorporated response-to-therapy variables into
revised risk estimates were significantly higher (62%–84%)
than those seen with initial staging systems (<30%)
(538,542). These data indicate that long-term outcomes can
be more reliably predicted using systems that adjust to new
data over time.
46
HAUGEN ET AL.
 [B26] Proposed terminology to classify response to ther-
apy and clinical implications
All clinical, biochemical, imaging (structural and func-
tional), and cytopathologic findings obtained during follow-
up should be used to redefine the clinical status of the patient
and to assess their individual response to therapy. Ideally, the
global consideration of the composite findings of such an
assessment would allow for the disease status to be classified
into one of several discrete response to therapy risk strata as
proposed by Tuttle et al. (538,582). Potential challenges in
applying this specific system in routine clinical practice in-
clude lack of validation in specific subgroups of patients
(such as those who had less than total thyroidectomy or those
not treated with RAI), the lack of published prospective data
utilizing this system in clinical care, and some inconsistency
with other authors in classifying the significance of varying
levels of detectable Tg levels or imaging findings.
The response to therapy restaging system was also not
designed or specifically tested by developers to guide specific
therapeutic decisions on primary therapy (such as use of
adjuvant treatment) because it has been designed for use after
primary therapy is completed. Prospective studies of the
value of this system for guiding extent of primary treatment,
including adjuvant treatment decisions, are needed. How-
ever, given that there is emerging evidence that such a re-
classification system has potential to be of great importance
in ongoing clinical care of DTC patients after primary
treatment, the details are described herein.
It is acknowledged that appropriate clinical application
of such a system is highly dependent on the availability of
high-quality biochemical testing and structural, and func-
tional imaging with appropriate interpretation (e.g., stan-
dardized radiologic reporting). Therefore, applicability may
be limited in settings where these procedures are not avail-
able or feasible.
The concept and initial validation of the four response-to-
therapy categories presented here were described by Tuttle
et al. (538) and modified in Vaisman et al. (328). As origi-
nally conceived, these clinical outcomes described the best
response to initial therapy during the first 2 years of follow-up
(538,582), but they are now being used to describe the clin-
ical status at any point during follow-up.
� Excellent
response:
no
clinical,
biochemical,
or
structural evidence of disease
� Biochemical incomplete response: abnormal Tg or
rising anti-Tg antibody levels in the absence of local-
izable disease. Please see section [C6] for discussion of
Tg measurements.
� Structural incomplete response: persistent or newly
identified loco-regional or distant metastases
� Indeterminate response: nonspecific biochemical or
structural findings that cannot be confidently classified
as either benign or malignant. This includes patients
with stable or declining anti-Tg antibody levels without
definitive structural evidence of disease.
The majority of published studies examining response to
therapy in DTC have been performed in populations of pa-
tients whose primary treatment consisted of total thyroidec-
tomy and RAI ablation. While the following sections will
provide the details of multiple studies examining response to
therapy, a simplified overview of the clinical implications of
the response-to-therapy reclassification system in patients
treated with total thyroidectomy and RAI ablation, based on
the research from Tuttle et al. (538,539) and supported by
other studies, is described in Table 13. Specific suggestions
with regard to the application of response-to-therapy as-
sessments in patients treated with total thyroidectomy with-
out RAI ablation or with thyroid lobectomy have recently
been published by Momesso et al. (602).
[B27] Excellent response: no clinical, biochemical, or
structural evidence of disease after initial therapy (remission,
NED)
These patients have no clinical, biochemical, or structural
evidence of disease identified on risk-appropriate follow-up
studies (Table 13). If a total thyroidectomy and RAI abla-
tion were done, an excellent response was usually defined as a
TSH-stimulated Tg of <1 ng/mL in the absence of struc-
tural or functional evidence of disease (and in the absence of
anti-Tg antibodies) (538,539,542,586–601). An excellent
response to initial therapy is achieved in 86%–91% of
ATA low-risk patients, 57%–63% of ATA intermediate-risk
patients,
and
14%–16%
of
ATA
high-risk
patients
(538,539,542).
In 20 retrospective studies, the risk of recurrence over 5–10
years of follow-up ranged from 1% to 4% (median 1.8%) in
patients who had an excellent response to therapy by 6–18
months after total thyroidectomy and RAI remnant ablation
(538,539,542,586–601,603).
The potential impact of this reclassification is the most
dramatic in the two-thirds of ATA intermediate-risk patients
who achieve an excellent response and therefore have their
risk of having recurrent/persistent disease decreased from
36%–43% (predicted by initial ATA risk stratification) to 1%–
2%
(predicted
by
response-to-therapy
reclassification)
(538,539). Because of the very low risk of structural disease
recurrence in ATA low risk patients (1%–3%), reclassification
based on an excellent response to therapy has less practical
implications than in the intermediate- and high-risk patients.
While many of the studies reviewed primarily low-risk
DTC patients (586,588,595–598,601), the same low risk of
recurrence following achievement of excellent response to
therapy was seen in other studies that had substantial numbers
of intermediate-risk patients (538,539,542,587,591,592,604).
Furthermore, most studies also demonstrate that the few
high-risk patients that achieve an excellent response to
therapy also have subsequent recurrence rates in the 1%–
2% range (542,593,594,600). The one exception is the 14%
risk of recurrence seen in the few ATA high-risk patients
that achieved remission in a series from Memorial Sloan-
Kettering Cancer Center (538), which is likely due to the
known referral bias of unusual and very high-risk cases.
Nonetheless, high-risk patients that achieve an excellent
response to therapy may require somewhat more intense
follow-up than ATA low- and intermediate-risk patients
demonstrating an excellent response to therapy. It is im-
portant to note that patients at intermediate to high risk of
recurrence may require additional structural or functional
imaging to rule out disease that may not be detected by US
and Tg measurements prior to being classified as having an
excellent response (602). The details for choice of follow-up
tests are found in another section of these guidelines [C4–
C13], (Figs. 5–8).
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
47
 While most studies have assessed response to therapy using
TSH-stimulated Tg values obtained 6–18 months after initial
therapy (538,539,542,586,588–590,593–595,597–600), at least
15 other studies have evaluated the response to surgical therapy
using a stimulated Tg obtained at the time of RAI remnant
ablation (605). Patients demonstrating an excellent response to
therapy at this very early time point have a very low risk of
disease recurrence (605).
Four additional studies used nonstimulated sensitive Tg
assays to define an excellent response to therapy at various
time points after initial therapy with total thyroidectomy and
RAI remnant ablation (587,595,601,606). A recurrence rate of
1.5% was seen in a cohort of 589 DTC patients who had a
nonstimulated Tg <0.27ng/mL at 3 months after initial therapy
(595). Malandrino et al. (587) reported recurrence rates of 0%
in low-risk patients, 1% in intermediate-risk patients, and 2.7%
in high-risk patients who demonstrated nonstimulated Tg
values <0.15ng/mL at 9–18 months after initial therapy.
Smallridge et al. (606) described a 4.3% recurrence rate in 163
low- to intermediate-risk DTC patients with nonstimulated Tg
<0.1 ng/mL, measured a median of 1.8 years after initial sur-
gery. Finally, Giovanella et al. (601) reported a 1.6% recur-
rence rate over 5–6 years of follow-up in 185 low-risk patients
who had a nonstimulated Tg of <0.2 ng/mL and normal post-
operative neck US 6 months after remnant ablation.
Further studies are needed to refine the precise Tg value
cutoff used to define what should be an excellent response to
therapy in patients treated with total thyroidectomy with or
without RAI remnant ablation. In addition to determining
whether TSH-stimulated Tg values are clinically helpful in
Table 13. Clinical Implications of Response to Therapy Reclassification in Patients with Differentiated
Thyroid Cancer Treated with Total Thyroidectomy and Radioiodine Remnant Ablation
Category
Definitionsa
Clinical outcomes
Management implications
Excellent
response
Negative imaging
and either
Suppressed Tg <0.2 ng/mLb
or
TSH-stimulated Tg <1 ng/mLb
1%–4% recurrencec
<1% disease specific deathc
An excellent response to therapy
should lead to an early
decrease in the intensity and
frequency of follow up and
the degree of TSH suppression
Biochemical
incomplete
response
Negative imaging
and
Suppressed Tg ‡1 ng/mLb
or
Stimulated Tg ‡10 ng/mLb
or
Rising anti-Tg antibody levels
At least 30% spontaneously
evolve to NEDd
20% achieve NED after
additional therapya
20% develop structural diseasea
<1% disease specific deatha
If associated with stable or
declining serum Tg values, a
biochemical incomplete
response should lead to
continued observation with
ongoing TSH suppression in
most patients. Rising Tg or
anti-Tg antibody values should
prompt additional investigations
and potentially additional
therapies.
Structural
incomplete
response
Structural or functional
evidence of disease
With any Tg level
With or without anti-Tg
antibodies
50%–85% continue to have
persistent disease despite
additional therapye
Disease specific death rates as
high as 11% with loco-regional
metastases and 50% with
structural distant metastasesa
A structural incomplete response
may lead to additional treatments
or ongoing observation depending
on multiple clinico-pathologic
factors including the size,
location, rate of growth, RAI
avidity, 18FDG avidity, and
specific pathology of the
structural lesions.
Indeterminate
response
Nonspecific findings on
imaging studies
Faint uptake in thyroid bed
on RAI scanning
Nonstimulated Tg detectable,
but <1 ng/mL
Stimulated Tg detectable,
but <10 ng/mL
or
Anti-Tg antibodies stable or
declining in the absence
of structural or functional
disease
15%–20% will have structural
disease identified during
follow-upa
In the remainder, the nonspecific
changes are either stable,
or resolvea
<1% disease specific deatha
An indeterminate response should
lead to continued observation
with appropriate serial imaging
of the nonspecific lesions and
serum Tg monitoring.
Nonspecific findings that
become suspicious over time
can be further evaluated with
additional imaging or biopsy.
NED denotes a patient as having no evidence of disease at final follow-up.
aReferences (538,539).
bIn the absence of anti-Tg antibodies.
cReferences (538,539,542,586–593,595–601,1078).
dReferences (598,599,617–621).
eReferences (328,607,626,627,898).
48
HAUGEN ET AL.
 FIG. 5.
Clinical decision-
making and management
recommendations in ATA
low-risk DTC patients that
have undergone total thy-
roidectomy. R, recommen-
dation in text.
FIG. 6.
Clinical decision-
making and management
recommendations in ATA low
risk DTC patients that have
undergone less than total
thyroidectomy (lobectomy or
lobectomy with isthmu-
sectomy). R, recommenda-
tion in text.
49
 patients at very low risk for recurrence, Tg cut points need to be
defined for patients whose primary treatment consisted of thy-
roid lobectomy or total thyroidectomy without RAI ablation.
In summary, once a patient achieves an excellent response
to therapy, the initial risk of recurrence estimate should be
modified and the patient reclassified as having a subsequent
very low risk of recurrence. This reclassification into a very
low risk of recurrence status can occur as early as several
weeks (or several months) after initial therapy and is appli-
cable to all DTC patients initially stratified as ATA low or
intermediate risk of recurrence and to the few ATA high-risk
patients that achieve an excellent response to therapy. Ap-
propriate reclassification into the excellent response category
with its very low risk of recurrence should lead to re-
evaluation of intensity of diagnostic surveillance procedures
and treatment, as discussed in other sections of these clinical
practice guidelines [C4–C13] (Figs. 5–8).
[B28] Biochemical incomplete response: abnormal Tg
values in the absence of localizable disease
These patients have persistently abnormal suppressed and/
or stimulated Tg values or rising anti-Tg antibodies without
structural evidence of disease that can be detected using risk-
appropriate structural and functional imaging (Table 13).
Please see section [C6] for discussion of Tg measurements.
Previous studies have used nonstimulated Tg values of >1ng/mL
or TSH-stimulated Tg values of >10 ng/mL to define a bio-
chemical incomplete response to therapy in patients treated
with total thyroidectomy and RAI ablation (538,539,542).
These studies used Tg assays with variable functional sen-
sitivities, so this definition may change over time, especially
for the nonstimulated Tg values.
A biochemical incomplete response is not an uncommon
outcome and is seen in 11%–19% of ATA low-risk patients,
21%–22% of ATA intermediate-risk patients, and 16%–18%
of ATA high-risk patients (538,539).
Clinical outcomes in these patients are usually very good,
with as many as 56%–68% being classified as having NED at
final follow-up, while 19%–27% continue to have persis-
tently abnormal Tg values without structural correlate, and
only 8%–17% developing structurally identifiable disease
over 5–10 years follow-up (538,539,607). No deaths have
been reported in patients with a biochemical incomplete re-
sponse to therapy followed for up to 10 years (539,607).
FIG. 7.
Clinical decision-making
and management recommendations
in ATA intermediate risk DTC pa-
tients that have undergone total
thyroidectomy. R, recommendation
in text.
50
HAUGEN ET AL.
 Anti-Tg antibody levels measured over time in the same
assay can provide clinically useful information (608). Rising
anti-Tg antibody titers (or new appearance of anti-Tg anti-
bodies) are associated with an increased risk of disease re-
currence (609–614). Conversely, patients rendered free of
disease with initial therapy will usually demonstrate a decline
in anti-Tg antibody titers over several years (611,615,616).
Vaisman et al. (607) further demonstrated that the transi-
tion to NED status occurred without any additional RAI or
surgical therapy (beyond LT4 suppressive therapy) in 34% of
patients classified as having a biochemical incomplete re-
sponse to initial therapy. These observations are consistent
with several previous studies that have demonstrated that
abnormal serum Tg values can gradually decline over time
without additional RAI or surgical therapy, in the absence of
structurally identifiable disease (598,599,617,617–621).
A small percentage of patients with a biochemical in-
complete response to therapy will demonstrate progressive
increases in the nonstimulated Tg values over time. In pa-
tients treated with total thyroidectomy and RAI remnant
ablation, clinically significant increases in unstimulated se-
rum Tg values over time as described by Tg doubling times
(<1 year, 1–3 years, or >3 years) (622) or rate of rise in
unstimulated Tg of ‡0.3 ng/mL/year over time (623), identify
patients at increased risk of developing structurally identifi-
able loco-regional or distant metastases.
Just as with the excellent response to therapy category,
additional studies are needed to more precisely define what
Tg levels define an incomplete biochemical response to
therapy. The specific cut point that defines an ‘‘abnormal Tg’’
is dependent on the corresponding TSH value, the amount of
residual normal thyroid tissue after thyroidectomy, whether
or not RAI ablation was performed, and the duration of time
since ablation, because Tg values often decline for months to
years after ablation. To define a biochemical incomplete re-
sponse, previous studies have used nonstimulated Tg values
of >5 ng/mL at 6 months (624), nonstimulated Tg values
>1 ng/mL more than 12 months after ablation (538,539,542),
or TSH-stimulated Tg values >10ng/mL more than 1 year
after ablation (538,539). The precise Tg value for defining a
biochemical incomplete response to therapy in patients treated
with lobectomy or total thyroidectomy without ablation has
not been adequately defined. In addition, some studies also
classified patients with persistent or rising anti-Tg antibodies
in the absence of structurally identifiable disease as having a
biochemical incomplete response to therapy (538,539,625).
In summary, a biochemical incomplete response is seen
in approximately 15%–20% of DTC patients. Fortunately,
many of these patients are eventually reclassified as having
NED at final follow-up, often without any additional RAI or
surgical treatments.
[B29] Structural incomplete response: persistent or newly
identified loco-regional or distant metastases
These patients have structural or functional (RAI scan,
18FDG-PET) evidence of loco-regional or distant metastases
FIG. 8.
Clinical decision-
making and management
recommendations in ATA
high risk DTC patients that
have undergone total thy-
roidectomy and have no
gross residual disease re-
maining in the neck. R, rec-
ommendation in text.
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
51
 (538,539,607). This category includes both patients with
biopsy-proven disease and also patients in whom structural or
functional disease is identified, which is highly likely to be
metastatic disease based on the clinical scenario (Table 13).
A structural incomplete response to initial therapy is seen
in 2%–6% of ATA low-risk patients, 19%–28% of ATA
intermediate-risk patients, and 67%–75% of ATA high-risk
patients (538,539).
Despite additional treatments, the majority of patients
classified as having a structural incomplete response will
have persistent structural and/or biochemical evidence of
persistent disease at final follow-up (539,607). Depending on
the definition used to describe patients as free from disease,
higher rates of remission (29%–51%) have been described
following surgical intervention for patients with persistent/
recurrent loco-regional disease (626–628). While no deaths
were reported over a follow-up period that extended to 15
years in patients with biochemical incomplete response to
therapy, death from disease was seen in 11% of patients with
a loco-regional incomplete response and in 57% of patients
with structurally identifiable distant metastases (539,607).
In summary, a structural incomplete response to initial
therapy identifies a cohort of DTC patients that may not be
cured with additional therapies and consequently demon-
strate the highest risk of disease-specific mortality of any of
the response-to-therapy categories. Persistent/recurrent loco-
regional structural disease may have a higher likelihood of
responding to additional treatments and has significantly
lower disease-specific mortality rates than persistent/recur-
rent distant metastases.
[B30] Indeterminate response: biochemical or structural
findings that cannot be classified as either benign or malig-
nant (acceptable response)
Patients with an indeterminate response have biochemical,
structural, or functional findings that cannot be confidently
classified as either excellent response or persistent disease
(328,538,539,606,629) (Table 13). Rather than forcing these
patients into either the excellent or incomplete response-to-
therapy categories, some investigators have recommended a
separate category for these patients so that they can be con-
tinued to be carefully observed, with selected patients iden-
tified for further evaluation with testing designed to establish
the presence or absence of disease (538,539).
For example, this category includes patients with sub-
centimeter avascular thyroid bed nodules or atypical cervical
lymph nodes that have not been biopsied, faint uptake in the
thyroid bed with undetectable stimulated Tg on follow-up
imaging, or nonspecific abnormalities on functional or cross-
sectional imaging. Also included in this category are patients
with nonstimulated Tg values that are detectable but <1 ng/
mL, TSH-stimulated Tg values between 1 and 10 ng/mL, and
stable or declining Tg antibodies in the same assay over time
in the absence of structural disease (538,539).
This issue was exemplified in a recent study evaluating the
prognostic value of a highly sensitive Tg assay in which the
response to therapy could not be definitively established in 16
patients that had small indeterminate pulmonary micro-
nodules without other evidence for persistent disease (606).
A similar situation arises when trying to determine the re-
sponse to therapy in the 34% of patients that demonstrated
nonspecific subcentimeter thyroid bed nodules after total
thyroidectomy (629). Similarly, it is often difficult to be
certain whether or not very low-level detectable Tg values
represent persistent disease or simply remnant normal thyroid
cells remaining after initial therapy.
An indeterminate response to initial therapy is seen in 12%–
29% of ATA low-risk patients, 8%–23% of ATA intermediate-
risk patients, and 0%–4% of ATA high-risk patients (538,539).
The clinical outcomes in patients with an indeterminate re-
sponse to therapy are intermediate between patients with an
excellent response and those with incomplete responses. Two
series have demonstrated that only 13%–20% of patients with
an indeterminate response to therapy are reclassified as per-
sistent/recurrent disease over approximately 10 years of follow-
up. In the remaining 80%–90% of patients, the nonspecific
findings either remain stable or resolve with observation alone.
In summary, the majority of patients with an indeterminate
response to therapy remain disease-free during prolonged
follow-up. However, up to 20% of these patients will even-
tually have biochemical, functional, or structural evidence of
disease progression and may require additional therapies.
[B31] Using risk stratification to guide disease surveillance
and therapeutic management decisions
Risk stratification is the cornerstone of individualized
thyroid cancer management. Initial risk estimates are useful
to guide the wide variety of clinical management decisions
that need to be made around the time of initial diagnosis and
treatment. As described in this document, initial manage-
ment decisions are largely made by balancing the estimates
of the risk of recurrence and the risk of disease-specific
mortality with the potential benefits and risks of proposed
therapies. However, in clinical practice many other risk
estimates can also significantly influence surveillance and
therapeutic decision-making, including the risk of failing
initial therapy, the risk of having non–RAI-avid disease, the
risk of disease recurring without making appreciable
amounts of serum Tg, the risk of adjuvant RAI therapy, the
risk of additional thyroid surgery, the risk of additional
lymph node surgery, the risk of external beam radiation
therapy, and the risk of systemic therapy. Individual manage-
ment recommendations require that the risks and benefits of
potential surveillance and therapeutic management decisions
be carefully evaluated in the context of the specific clinico-
pathologic features of each patient.
Nonetheless, initial risk estimates can be used to guide rec-
ommendations with regard to the extent of thyroid surgery,
the need for and extent of cervical lymph node dissection,
the need for and the dose of administered activities of RAI, the
need for and degree of TSH suppression, the need for and
details of external beam radiation therapy, the need for and
types of systemic therapy, the need for and types of studies
required for initial staging, and the intensity and type of follow-
up studies required for evaluating response to therapy in the
early years following initial therapy. This approach tailors the
aggressiveness of intervention and follow-up to the specific
risks associated with the tumor in an individual patient.
In summary, this risk-adapted management approach uti-
lizes initial risk estimates to guide early surveillance and
therapeutic management decisions. These initial manage-
ment plans are then modified over time as additional data
accumulate and allow for restratification based on individ-
ual response to therapy. This system tailors the extent and
52
HAUGEN ET AL.
 intensity of therapy and follow-up studies to real-time risk
estimates that evolve over time for individual patients.
[B32] Should postoperative disease status
be considered in decision-making for RAI therapy
for patients with DTC?
& RECOMMENDATION 50
(A) Postoperative disease status (i.e., the presence or ab-
sence of persistent disease) should be considered in de-
ciding whether additional treatment (e.g., RAI, surgery, or
other treatment) may be needed.
(Strong recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
(B) Postoperative serum Tg (on thyroid hormone therapy
or after TSH stimulation) can help in assessing the per-
sistence of disease or thyroid remnant and predicting po-
tential future disease recurrence. The Tg should reach its
nadir by 3–4 weeks postoperatively in most patients.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(C) The optimal cutoff value for postoperative serum Tg or
state in which it is measured (on thyroid hormone therapy
or after TSH stimulation) to guide decision-making re-
garding RAI administration is not known.
(No recommendation, Insufficient evidence)
(D) Postoperative diagnostic RAI WBSs may be useful
when the extent of the thyroid remnant or residual disease
cannot be accurately ascertained from the surgical report
or neck ultrasonography, and when the results may alter
the decision to treat or the activity of RAI that is to be
administered. Identification and localization of uptake foci
may be enhanced by concomitant single photon emission
computed tomography–computed tomography (SPECT/
CT). When performed, pretherapy diagnostic scans should
utilize 123I (1.5–3 mCi) or a low activity of 131I (1–3 mCi),
with the therapeutic activity optimally administered within
72 hours of the diagnostic activity.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
Postoperative disease status is a relevant consideration in
postoperative treatment decision-making after initial con-
sideration of clinic-pathologic stage. Evaluation of postop-
erative disease status may be performed by a number of
means including serum Tg, neck ultrasonography, and iodine
radioisotope scanning. There are currently no RCTs com-
paring any particular postoperative diagnostic strategy with
the intention of modulating decision-making on RAI remnant
ablation or RAI treatment for DTC.
[B33] Utility of postoperative serum Tg in clinical decision-
making
Serum Tg measurements (with anti-Tg antibodies), with or
without neck US, are frequently performed as part of the early
postoperative evaluation. Please see section [C6] for dis-
cussion of Tg measurements. The predictive value of the
postoperative Tg value will be significantly influenced by a
wide variety of factors including the amount of residual thyroid
cancer and/or normal thyroid tissue, the TSH level at the time
of Tg measurement, the functional sensitivity of the Tg assay,
the Tg cutoff used for analysis, the individual risk of having
RAI-avid loco-regional or distant metastasis, the time elapsed
since total thyroidectomy, and/or the sensitivity of the post-
therapy scanning technique (SPECT/CT vs. planar imaging).
Multiple studies have confirmed an increase risk of re-
currence following total thyroidectomy and RAI remnant
ablation in patients that had a postoperative TSH-stimulated
Tg >1–2 ng/mL at the time of ablation (596,605,630–637). In
multivariate analysis, the postoperative Tg is often found to
be an independent predictor of persistent or recurrent disease
(596,630,631,636,637). Furthermore, the risk of having re-
current or persistent disease increases as the postoperative Tg
rises (634,636). Using receiver operator curve analyses,
thyroid hormone withdrawal postoperative Tg values be-
tween 20 and 30 ng/mL achieve the optimal balance of sen-
sitivity and specificity for predicting recurrent or persistent
disease (638–640). Furthermore, high postoperative stimu-
lated Tg values (>10–30 ng/mL) are also associated with
poorer survival (636,639,641). Conversely, postoperative
stimulated Tg values less than 1–2 ng/mL are strong predic-
tors of remission (634,636). Even in ATA low- and
intermediate-risk patients that did not receive RAI remnant
ablation, a nonstimulated postoperative Tg <1 ng/mL was
associated with excellent clinical outcomes and recurrence
rates <1% (642). The median follow-up in this study was 62
months (2–116 months). Therefore, a postoperative serum Tg
can provide valuable information with regard to the likeli-
hood of achieving remission or having persistent or recurrent
disease in response to an initial therapy.
A postoperative Tg <10 ng/mL may not distinguish be-
tween nodal disease and thyroid remnant, when evaluated
using concurrent RAI scans with SPECT/CT (643). In one
of the prospective studies mentioned previously, a postop-
erative Tg threshold of >5 ng/mL was suggested as an in-
dication for RAI treatment (633). However, in a recent
retrospective review of consecutive low-risk patients trea-
ted with total thyroidectomy without RAI, an unstimulated
Tg of ‡2 ng/mL with a concomitant median TSH level of
0.48 mIU/L was reported to detect all patients with disease
recurrence (76 patients followed for a median of 2.5 years)
(644). Thus, there is some uncertainty as to what degree of
postoperative stimulated or unstimulated thyroglobulinemia
(with or without neck US interpretation) may be appropriate
to prompt RAI treatment. Moreover, detection of unex-
plained inappropriate thyroglobulinemia may prompt con-
sideration of further investigation for its cause (e.g.,
imaging studies).
The postoperative Tg can also be used to predict the
likelihood of identifying RAI-avid metastatic thyroid cancer
outside the thyroid bed on the posttherapy scan at the time of
remnant ablation. No uptake outside the thyroid bed was
identified in 63 low-risk patients with a nonstimulated post-
operative Tg of <0.4 ng/mL (630) or in 132 low-risk patients
with a thyroid hormone withdrawal Tg of <1 ng/mL (645).
However, RAI-avid metastatic foci outside the thyroid bed
were detected in 12% of intermediate-risk patients with a
suppressed Tg of <0.6 ng/mL (646), 5.6% of intermediate/
high risk patients with a suppressed Tg of <1 .0 ng/mL (647),
and 6.3% of intermediate/high-risk patients with a thyroid
hormone withdrawal stimulated Tg of <2 ng/mL (648). The
likelihood of finding RAI-avid metastatic disease on the post-
therapy scan is substantially lower (2.8%) if the postoperative
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
53
 Tg is undetectable in three different Tg assays than if it
is undetectable only in a single assay (30%) (649). Con-
versely, the likelihood of identifying either loco-regional
or distant metastases on the posttherapy scan increases as
either the suppressed or stimulated Tg values rise above
5–10 ng/mL (631,646,647,650). Therefore, neither a stim-
ulated or suppressed postoperative Tg of <1 ng/mL can
completely eliminate the possibility that a posttherapy RAI
scan will identify metastatic foci outside the thyroid bed.
However, postoperative Tg values greater than 5–10 ng/mL
increase the likelihood of identifying RAI-avid metastatic
disease on the posttherapy scan.
The postoperative serum Tg value can also be used to
predict the likelihood of successful remnant ablation. Post-
operative thyroid hormone withdrawal stimulated Tg values
>5–6 ng/mL were associated with higher rates of failed ab-
lation after administered activities of both 30 mCi (651) and
100 mCi (652). A TSH-stimulated Tg >6 ng/mL was asso-
ciated with a 5-fold greater risk of failing ablation after an
activity of 30 mCi administered after preparation with thy-
roid hormone withdrawal (651).
It does appear that a postoperative Tg value (either TSH-
stimulated or nonstimulated) is an important prognostic
factor that can be used to guide clinical management. Given a
disappearance half-life of 1–3 days (653–658), the postop-
erative Tg should reach its nadir by 3–4 weeks postopera-
tively in nearly all patients. In low-risk patients, a suppressed
or stimulated Tg <1 ng/mL is very reassuring and further
confirms classification of the patients as being at low risk. In
intermediate-risk patients, postoperative Tg values <1 ng/mL
are reassuring, but do not completely rule out the presence of
small-volume RAI-avid metastatic disease. However, even
without RAI ablation, many intermediate risk patients have
excellent clinical outcomes. Therefore, it is not clear that
additional therapy is required in these intermediate-risk pa-
tients with postoperative Tg values <1 ng/mL even though
small-volume RAI-avid disease may still be present after
thyroidectomy.
On the other hand, postoperative Tg values (stimulated or
nonstimulated) greater than 10–30 ng/mL increase the like-
lihood of having persistent or recurrent disease, failing initial
RAI ablation, having distant metastases, and dying of thyroid
cancer. Therefore, postoperative Tg values >10 ng/mL will
likely lead to additional evaluations and possibly even ad-
ditional therapies.
With regard to decision-making on the need for RAI
remnant ablation, it appears that the postoperative serum Tg
value will be more helpful in identifying patients that may
benefit from RAI ablation rather than in identifying patients
that do not require ablation. For example, a postoperative Tg
value >5–10 ng/mL may lead to selection of RAI ablation in
an ATA low-risk patient or ATA intermediate-risk patient that
otherwise would not have required RAI ablation (selective
use) in order to improve initial staging and facilitate follow-
up. Conversely, in high-risk patients, a postoperative Tg value
<1 ng/mL does not rule out RAI-avid disease and therefore is
unlikely to alter the decision to proceed with RAI ablation.
[B34] Potential role of postoperative US in conjunction with
postoperative serum Tg in clinical decision-making
In a prospective study of 218 DTC patients, Lee et al. (659)
reported that a stimulated Tg <2 ng/mL after thyroid hormone
withdrawal (with goal TSH of >30 mIU/L), at the time of
administration of 100–200 mCi of 131I (for remnant ablation
or treatment), was associated with the following NPVs for
biochemical or structural recurrence at 6–12 months: 98.4%
for ATA low-risk patients, 94.1% for ATA intermediate-risk
patients, and 50% in the ATA high-risk group. They further
reported that the NPVs increased to 97.2%, and 100% for
ATA intermediate- and high-risk patients, respectively, when
the stimulated Tg values were combined with negative neck
US findings at baseline (with no change in low-risk patients).
Similar significant decreases in the risk of recurrence were
seen when ATA intermediate- and high-risk patients had a
normal postoperative neck US (660).
[B35] Role of postoperative radioisotope diagnostic scan-
ning in clinical decision-making
Iodine radioisotope diagnostic testing may include 131I or
123I diagnostic imaging with or without SPECT-CT, and/or
RAI uptake measurements. Postoperative RAI planar imaging
(123I or 131I, with or without SPECT-CT) has been reported to
yield information that could alter clinical management (such as
altering disease status assessment) in 25%–53% of patients, as
reported in single-center, retrospective studies (643,661,662).
However, in a multivariate analysis of retrospective data, Hu
et al. (663) reported that the use of 5 mCi of 131I between 4 and
11 days prior to remnant ablation was independently associated
with an increased risk of remnant ablation failure. In contrast, in
a smaller retrospective study, the administration of 3–5 mCi of
131I for scanning 2–5 days prior to ablation in 37 patients was
not associated with any significant reduction in remnant abla-
tion success, compared to no pretherapy scanning in 63 patients
(131I therapeutic activity of 100–200 mCi used in both groups)
(664). A possible relationship between 131I diagnostic scan
activity on remnant ablation success was suggested in another
retrospective study, in which success was lower following the
use of 3 mCi as compared to 1 mCi of 131I, 9 days before
therapeutic administration of 100 mCi (665). In two small
RCTs, there was no significant impact of 131I scanning
compared to 123I scanning on the rate of successful remnant
ablation (666,667). The timing of whole-body diagnostic
scans following administration of radioisotopes in reviewed
studies ranged from about 24 to 72 hours for 131I (643,662,
663,665–667) and was 24 hours for 123I (661,662,666). The
tailoring of RAI therapeutic activity according to RAI
neck uptake (measured 24 hours after administration of 1
mCi of 131I) was associated with a lower rate of remnant
ablation success than fixed dosing, in another single-center
retrospective observational study (668). Furthermore, in a
multivariate analysis of retrospective data (adjusted for rel-
evant risk factors), Verburg et al. (669) reported that the use
of 1 mCi of 131I for calculation of RAI neck uptake 2 days
before remnant ablation was independently associated with
an increased risk of remnant ablation failure, although Yap
and Murby showed that 1.1 mCi 131I diagnostic scans did not
adversely affect the success of ablation or recurrence rate at
3 years (670).
There continues to be discussion on the utility of postoper-
ative iodine radioisotope diagnostic scanning (with or without
SPECT/CT) in guiding RAI therapeutic decision-making.
Valuable information on disease status, remnant uptake, and
the presence of residual RAI-avid disease may be obtained by
such testing, which could alter management and potentially
54
HAUGEN ET AL.
 benefit outcome. Questions regarding the potentially negative
impact of such scans with 131I on RAI therapeutic efficacy for
successful remnant ablation (‘‘stunning’’) may be mitigated or
avoided by the use of either low-activity 131I (1–3 mCi) or
alternative isotopes such as 123I.
[B36] What is the role of RAI (including remnant
ablation, adjuvant therapy, or therapy
for persistent disease) after thyroidectomy
in the primary management of DTC?
& RECOMMENDATION 51 (details in Table 14)
(A) RAI remnant ablation is not routinely recommended
after thyroidectomy for ATA low-risk DTC patients.
Consideration of specific features of the individual patient
that could modulate recurrence risk, disease follow-up
implications, and patient preferences are relevant to RAI
decision-making.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
(B) RAI remnant ablation is not routinely recommended
after lobectomy or total thyroidectomy for patients with
unifocal papillary microcarcinoma, in the absence of other
adverse features.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(C) RAI remnant ablation is not routinely recommended
after thyroidectomy for patients with multifocal papillary
microcarcinoma in absence of other adverse features.
Consideration of specific features of the individual patient
that could modulate recurrence risk, disease follow-up
implications, and patient preferences are relevant to RAI
decision-making.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
(D) RAI adjuvant therapy should be considered after
total thyroidectomy in ATA intermediate-risk level DTC
patients.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
(E) RAI adjuvant therapy is routinely recommended after
total thyroidectomy for ATA high risk DTC patients
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
Depending on the postoperative risk stratification of the
individual patient, the primary goal of postoperative admin-
istration of RAI after total thyroidectomy may include (i)
RAI remnant ablation (to facilitate detection of recurrent
disease and initial staging by tests such as Tg measurements
or whole-body RAI scans), (ii) RAI adjuvant therapy (in-
tended to improve disease-free survival by theoretically
destroying suspected, but unproven residual disease, es-
pecially in patients at increased risk of disease recurrence),
or (iii) RAI therapy (intended to improve disease-specific
and disease-free survival by treating persistent disease in
higher risk patients). Additional considerations in RAI
decision-making may include patient comorbidities (and
the potential impact of therapeutic doses of RAI or prepa-
ration for the procedure), feasible or preferred disease
surveillance procedures, patient preferences (the latter be-
ing particularly important when clear data on therapeutic
efficacy are lacking), or others. It is important to note that in
patients with low-risk DTC, disease surveillance may be
accomplished without RAI ablation using neck US and Tg
with Tg antibody measurements while on thyroid hormone
therapy.
We categorized the results of our review according to the
ATA Risk of Recurrence Risk stratification (outlined in a
preceding section of these guidelines). However, given that
the ATA risk classification is relatively new and the majority
of studies examining therapeutic efficacy of postsurgical RAI
remnant ablation or therapy (adjuvant or for persistent dis-
ease) have been performed with attention to traditional
mortality risk stratification systems such as the AJCC/TNM
system, MACIS, National Thyroid Cancer Treatment Co-
operative Study Group (NTCTCSG), or others, it was nec-
essary to extrapolate the results of many studies according to
estimated ATA risk level. We have also categorized some of
the results of our evidence review according to the AJCC/
TNM risk of mortality stratification system because this
system has been in use longer in our field (Table 14). Eva-
luation of postoperative disease status and recommendations
for RAI remnant ablation and adjuvant therapy can be found
in algorithms in Figs. 5–8.
ATA low risk.
Studies examining the impact of RAI
remnant ablation/adjuvant therapy on long-term thyroid
cancer outcomes in ATA low-risk patients are subject to
limitations due to their observational nature (and potential for
bias), as well as limited statistical power to detect relatively
uncommon events (such as disease-related mortality). By
definition, the risk of disease-specific mortality is low, the
risk of persistent/recurrent disease is low (around 3%), and
there is no evidence that delayed discovery and treatment of
persistent disease may decrease the chance of cure in these
patients. In a retrospective multicenter registry study, 1298
DTC patients categorized as being in the ATA low-risk
level, were followed for a median of 10.3 years, and there was
no significant effect of RAI adjuvant therapy on overall
or disease-free survival, using respective multivariate and
stratified propensity analysis techniques (544). Prospective
data from the NTCTCSG suggest that overall disease-specific
and disease-free survival are not improved by RAI treatment
in NTCTCSG stage I and II patients (i.e., patients aged <45
years with no distant metastases or patients aged ‡45 years
with a primary tumor <4 cm in diameter, no extrathyroidal
extension, and no nodal metastases), also using multivariate
analyses and propensity analyses (671,672). In two system-
atic reviews examining results of multivariate adjusted ana-
lyses, with a focus on low-risk DTC using classic clinic-
pathologic staging systems such as TNM/AJCC, the majority
of studies did not show a significant effect of RAI adjuvant
therapy in reducing thyroid cancer–related death, and con-
flicting findings of studies relating to outcomes of disease
recurrence (673,674). A more recent systematic review of
the literature supported the findings of the earlier systematic
reviews (675). It is important to note that in the studies
summarized in this section on ATA low-risk disease (or
equivalent), patients with multifocal PTC were generally
included (if no other adverse features meeting criteria for
upstaging were noted). To date, there is little evidence to
suggest that RAI may improve disease-specific mortality in
low-risk DTC patients, and there is some conflicting evidence
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
55
 Table 14. Characteristics According to the American Thyroid Association Risk Stratification System
and AJCC/TNM Staging System That May Impact Postoperative Radioiodine Decision-Making
ATA risk
Staging (TNM)
Description
Body of evidence
suggests RAI im-
proves disease-
specific survival?
Body of evidence
suggests RAI im-
proves disease-
free survival?
Postsurgical RAI indicated?
ATA low risk
T1a
N0,Nx
M0,Mx
Tumor size £1 cm
(uni-or multi-
focal)
No
No
No
ATA low risk
T1b,T2
N0, Nx
M0,Mx
Tumor size
>1–4 cm
No
Conflicting
observational
data
Not routineb—May be considered for
patients with aggressive histology or
vascular invasion (ATA intermedi-
ate risk).
ATA low to in-
termediate risk
T3
N0,Nx
M0,Mx
Tumor size >4 cm
Conflicting data
Conflicting
observational
data
Considerb—Need to consider presence
of other adverse features. Advancing
age may favor RAI use in some
cases, but specific age and tumor
size cutoffs subject to some
uncertainty.a
ATA low to in-
termediate risk
T3
N0,Nx
M0,Mx
Microscopic
ETE, any
tumor size
No
Conflicting
observational
data
Considerb—Generally favored based
on risk of recurrent disease. Smaller
tumors with microscopic ETE may
not require RAI.
ATA low to in-
termediate risk
T1-3
N1a
M0,Mx
Central compart-
ment neck
lymph node
metastases
No, except possi-
bly in subgroup
of patients ‡45
years of age
(NTCTCSG
Stage III)
Conflicting
observational
data
Considerb—Generally favored, due to
somewhat higher risk of persistent
or recurrent disease, especially with
increasing number of large
(>2–3 cm) or clinically evident
lymph nodes or presence of extra-
nodal extension. Advancing age may
also favor RAI use.a However, there
is insufficient data to mandate RAI
use in patients with few (<5)
microscopic nodal metastases in
central compartment in absence of
other adverse features.
ATA low to in-
termediate risk
T1-3
N1b
M0,Mx
Lateral neck or
mediastinal
lymph node
metastases
No, except possi-
bly in subgroup
of patients ‡45
years of age
Conflicting
observational
data
Considerb—Generally favored, due to
higher risk of persistent or recurrent
disease, especially with increasing
number of macroscopic or clinically
evident lymph nodes or presence of
extranodal extension. Advancing
age may also favor RAI use.a
ATA high risk
T4
Any N
Any M
Any size,
gross ETE
Yes,
observational
data
Yes,
observational
data
Yes
ATA high risk
M1
Any T
Any N
Distant metastases
Yes,
observational
data
Yes,
observational
data
Yes
aRecent data from the NTCTCSG (National Thyroid Cancer Treatment Cooperative Study Group) have suggested that a more appropriate
prognostic age cutoff for their and other classification systems could be 55 years, rather than 45 years, particularly for women.
bIn addition to standard clinicopathologic features, local factors such as the quality of preoperative and postoperative US evaluations,
availability and quality of Tg measurements, experience of the operating surgeon, and clinical concerns of the local disease management
team may also be considerations in postoperative RAI decision-making.
56
HAUGEN ET AL.
 on effect on recurrence, with newer data using the ATA risk
system suggesting the lack of a significant effect. Further-
more, the majority of the best available observational evi-
dence suggests that RAI adjuvant therapy is unlikely to
improve disease-specific or disease-free survival in papillary
microcarcinoma (<1 cm, uni- or multifocal), in the absence of
other higher risk features (146,676–680). In a recent retro-
spective analysis of 704 papillary microcarcinoma patients
whose initial risk level was ATA low or intermediate who
were followed for a median of 64 months, there was no sig-
nificant reduction in recurrence rates in patients treated with
RAI compared to those not treated with RAI using a pro-
pensity score analysis (677). With respect to microcarcinomas
of follicular cancer and Hu
¨rthle cell cancer, a recent SEER
registry secondary data analysis suggested no disease-specific
survival benefit in patients treated with RAI in a multivariate
analysis adjusted for age, histology, disease extent, type of
surgery, and external beam radiation therapy (the total num-
ber of patients in this study was 564) (681). A limitation of
interpreting these data on follicular and Hu
¨rthle cell micro-
carcinomas is that some of the patients in the study had some
adverse features and were not all considered low risk; how-
ever, the authors adjusted for relevant variables in their
multivariate analysis (681). The role of RAI adjuvant therapy
in ATA low-risk DTC should be clarified in the future, fol-
lowing completion of RCTs, such as the Iodine or Not (IoN)
trial for low- and intermediate-risk patients (682) and ESTI-
MABL2 for low-risk patients.
ATA intermediate risk.
Multivariate adjusted analyses
from SEER suggest that postsurgical RAI treatment is as-
sociated with improved overall survival for aggressive PTC
histologies such as tall cell, diffuse sclerosing, and insular
variants (683,684). Furthermore, multivariate adjusted an-
alyses from SEER suggest that RAI treatment is associated
with improved overall survival in node-positive adult pa-
tients with PTC or pT3 node-negative PTC, in which the
primary tumor is >4 cm or there is evidence of microscopic
extrathyroidal extension (685). It is important to note,
however, that in this SEER study the overall survival rate
was very high in node-positive or pT3-node negative PTC
patients aged <45 years, such that 99% and 98% of such
individuals were alive after a median follow-up period of
6.8 years, with or without RAI treatment, respectively. The
clinical significance of this approximately 1% absolute risk
difference could be questioned. In contrast, in the same
study, for individuals aged ‡65 years, assuming the same
median study follow-up period of 6.8 years, 73% of T3-node
negative or node-positive PTC patients treated with RAI
and 69% of those not treated with RAI were alive (685); in
this older subgroup, the absolute risk difference would be
estimated to be about 4%.
There is some supportive evidence from multivariate and
propensity analyses that there may be a benefit of adjuvant
RAI treatment in improving overall and disease-specific
survival as well as disease-free survival in patients with nodal
metastases aged ‡45 years, as such patients would be in-
cluded in the NTCTCSG stage III category (671). Further-
more, in a single-center retrospective study from Hong Kong
examining data from a subgroup of 421 patients with node-
positive PTC, lymph node failure-free survival was improved
with postsurgical RAI treatment, with the greatest treatment
benefits observed in patients with N1b disease, as well as with
lymph nodes >1 cm in diameter (686). RAI therapeutic effi-
cacy in patients <45 years of age with nodal metastases are
unclear because such patients are categorized as stage I by the
NTCTCSG system and no significant benefit of RAI treat-
ment was observed for the stage I group in that study, with no
specific subgroup analysis reported according to node posi-
tivity (671). A single-center retrospective study from the
Mayo Clinic examining 20-year cause-specific mortality
and recurrence rate, suggested no significant benefit in PTC
patients with a MACIS score of <6 who had positive lymph
nodes, using respective univariate analyses (278). Given
that age is incorporated in the MACIS score, it is possible
that age was a contributing factor in the results of that
analysis. In a subgroup of 352 patients with microscopic
extrathyroidal extension from a single-center retrospective
study, postsurgical RAI treatment was associated with a
reduction in rate of local relapse (686). However, in the
NTCTCSG study, microscopic extraglandular invasion
would be classified as NTCTCSG stage I for patients <45
years of age and II for those ‡45 years of age, and those
stages were associated with lack of clear benefit of RAI. In a
recent systematic review, Lamartina et al. (675) reported
conflicting results on the impact of RAI treatment on disease
recurrence, specifically indicating that 11 nonrandomized
studies suggested a benefit, whereas 13 studies did not show a
significant benefit. For patients with ATA intermediate-risk
DTC, limited risk-group specific data examining RAI efficacy
is available, but existing data suggest that the greatest po-
tential benefit may be observed with adverse thyroid cancer
histologies, increasing volume of nodal disease, lymph node
disease outside the central neck, and advancing patient age.
Benefits regarding survival or recurrence can be expected pri-
marily in patients with higher risk of recurrent or persis-
tent disease that is iodine avid. More studies are needed,
including RCTs, to characterize RAI treatment efficacy in ATA
intermediate-risk patients. The adjuvant therapeutic efficacy of
RAI treatment in improving long-term thyroid cancer outcomes
in the situation of isolated microscopic central neck nodal dis-
ease in the absence of other adverse features is unknown, so the
relatively good overall prognosis of this group (as outlined in
the preceding section of these guidelines) as well as the un-
certain RAI therapeutic efficacy for this subgroup, are important
considerations in RAI decision-making. Clearly more research
is needed to understand the therapeutic efficacy in various
subgroups of patients in the ATA intermediate-risk category.
ATA high risk.
A prospective multicenter study reported a
significant improvement in overall and disease-specific mor-
tality, as well as disease-free survival in NTCTCSG stage III
and IV patients, after statistical adjustment using multivariate
and propensity stratified analyses (671). Furthermore, pro-
spectively collected data from the SEER cancer registry sug-
gest that postsurgical RAI therapy is associated with improved
overall survival in patients with PTC with distant metastases
(when distant metastases were combined with age >45 years,
tumor size >2 cm, and positive lymph nodes at primary diag-
nosis) (687). Data from SEER also suggest that overall sur-
vival in patients with FTC with distant metastases more than
doubled
in
patients
receiving
postsurgical
RAI
treat-
ment (687). Thus, routine postsurgical RAI treatment is re-
commended in patients with ATA high-risk DTC.
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
57
 [B37] What is the role of molecular marker status
in therapeutic RAI decision-making?
& RECOMMENDATION 52
The role of molecular testing in guiding postoperative RAI
use has yet to be established; therefore, no molecular test-
ing to guide postoperative RAI use can be recommended at
this time.
(No recommendation, Insufficient evidence)
Preclinical studies show that the presence of the BRAFV600E
mutation significantly reduces sodium-iodide symporter
expression and RAI uptake (688). There are currently in-
sufficient clinical data, however, to know whether the pres-
ence or absence of the BRAFV600E mutation or other genetic
alterations in PTC may impact the success of adjuvant
therapy or remnant ablation in PTC, or if adjustments in
administered activity are warranted for any planned treat-
ments. In a recent subgroup analysis of 134 PTC patients
with T1aN0M0 disease, the rate of macroscopic structural
disease recurrence was 0% in the no RAI group (24% of
whom were BRAF positive), 2.6% in 39 BRAF-positive pa-
tients who received RAI, and 1.7% in BRAF-negative pa-
tients who received RAI (mean follow-up of 5.3 years for the
entire study) (565). Of the 97 T1aN0M0 patients who re-
ceived postoperative RAI, the rate of biochemical persis-
tence of disease (defined by a stimulated Tg of >1 ng/mL),
was 13% in the 39 BRAF-positive patients and 1.7% in the
BRAF-negative patients; the standard activity for remnant
ablation in this study was 30 mCi in most cases (565). The
relatively small number of patients who did not receive
postoperative RAI and the relatively small number of
structural disease recurrences in the T1aN0M0 subgroup of
PTC patients and lack of randomization in this study may
preclude meaningful analysis of RAI therapeutic efficacy.
The ESTIMABL2 study will analyze the relevance of BRAF
status on outcome (registration number NCT01837745).
There are no studies examining therapeutic efficacy of RAI
in ATA high-risk patients, but the presence or absence of a
BRAFV600E mutation in that situation would be unlikely to
alter RAI decision-making at present. Thus, the role of mo-
lecular testing in guiding postoperative RAI use has yet to be
established, and more research in this area is clearly needed.
Moreover, in general, RCTs examining RAI therapeutic ef-
ficacy are needed, and ideally these should be appropriately
stratified for ATA recurrence risk level and other important
prognostic variables.
[B38] How long does thyroid hormone need to be
withdrawn in preparation for RAI remnant ablation/
treatment or diagnostic scanning?
& RECOMMENDATION 53
(A) If thyroid hormone withdrawal is planned prior to RAI
therapy or diagnostic testing, LT4 should be withdrawn for
3–4 weeks. Liothyronine (LT3) may be substituted for LT4
in the initial weeks if LT4 is withdrawn for 4 or more
weeks, and in such circumstances, LT3 should be with-
drawn for at least 2 weeks. Serum TSH should be measured
prior to radioisotope administration to evaluate the degree
of TSH elevation.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(B) A goal TSH of >30 mIU/L has been generally adopted
in preparation for RAI therapy or diagnostic testing, but
there is uncertainty relating to the optimum TSH level
associated with improvement in long-term outcomes.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
Thyrotropin stimulation before RAI remnant ablation/
therapy or scanning has been a long-established standard of
care because early observational research suggested that a
TSH >30 mIU/L was required for incompletely resected
thyroid tumors to significantly concentrate 131I (689). There
have been two RCTs comparing various thyroid hormone
withdrawal protocols prior to therapeutic or diagnostic iodine
radioisotope administration (690,691). Lee et al. (691) re-
ported on an open-label, single-center study, in which 291
patients with well-differentiated thyroid cancer (TNM stage
T1–T3, N0/N1a,M0) were randomized to either (a) with-
drawal LT4 for 4 weeks (n = 89), (b) withdrawal of LT4 for 4
weeks with substitution of LT3 for the first 2 weeks (n = 133),
or (c) recombinant human TSH (rhTSH; with withdrawal of
LT4 for a few days from the time of the first rhTSH injection
to radioisotope administration) (n = 69) (691). In this trial, all
patients received 30 mCi of 131I for remnant ablation and
were prescribed a 2-week low-iodine diet (LID) pre-ablation.
Although the randomization method was unclear, the base-
line characteristics (including pre-ablation urinary iodine
measurements) were well balanced among groups. Further-
more, the pre-ablation TSH was >30 in all patients in all
groups in this trial, with no significant difference in mean pre-
ablation TSH levels. Moreover, the primary outcome, which
was the rate of successful remnant ablation at 12 months, was
not significantly different among groups (range 91.0%–
91.7% among groups). Upon administration of question-
naires in a double-blind fashion, there was no significant
difference in quality of life during preparation for RAI ab-
lation, between the LT4 withdrawal group and the LT4
withdrawal with LT3 substitution group; however, quality of
life in both withdrawal groups prior to remnant ablation was
significantly worse than after rhTSH preparation (691).
Long-term outcome data from this trial were not reported. In
a single-center trial, Leboeuf et al. (690) randomized 20 in-
dividuals with well-differentiated thyroid cancer awaiting
RAI remnant ablation or diagnostic scanning to LT4 with-
drawal and either (a) substitution of LT3 (50 lg/d, divided as
two capsules) for 21 days, followed by 2 weeks off LT3, or
(b) identical-appearing placebo for LT3 (two pills per day) for
21 days. In both groups, either the LT3 or placebo was with-
drawn for another 2 weeks, and weekly measurements were
performed for serum TSH, free thyroxine, and free triiodothy-
ronine (690). The primary outcome was the hypothyroidism
symptom score (Billewicz scale), which was ascertained in a
double-blind fashion at time of LT4 withdrawal and every 2
weeks until the end of the study. The randomization method was
a computer-generated number sequence; the LT3 group was
significantly older than the placebo group (mean age 64 com-
pared to 46), suggesting imbalance in the randomization (690).
Disease stage of participants was not reported. Approximately
15% of participants withdrew from this trial (two in the placebo
group and one in the LT3 group). Leboeuf et al. (690) reported
no significant differences between the two thyroid hormone
58
HAUGEN ET AL.
 withdrawal protocol groups for hypothyroid symptom scores at
any time point in the trial in a protocol-based analysis. At the
time of ablation or whole-body scanning, the mean TSH was not
significantly different between groups. In summary, available
evidence from recent RCTs suggests that either direct LT4
withdrawal or LT4 withdrawal with substitution of LT3 in initial
weeks is associated with similar short-term quality of life and
hypothyroidism symptom scores; moreover, the remnant abla-
tion success rate appears comparable.
There is some conflicting observational evidence on whether
any specific pre-RAI administration TSH level is associated
with success of remnant ablation (692–696). For example, in a
secondary analysis of a RAI remnant ablation activity RCT,
Fallahi et al. (692) reported that a pre-RAI TSH of >25 fol-
lowing (LT4 and LT3) thyroid hormone withdrawal was sig-
nificantly associated with increased likelihood of successful
remnant ablation (odds ratio 2.36, [95% CI 1.28–4.35],
p = 0.006), after adjustment for RAI activity, baseline serum
Tg, on-LT4 TSH level, sex, age, histology, baseline RAI up-
take, and extent of surgery). In two retrospective studies, each
including several hundred DTC patients who underwent thy-
roid hormone withdrawal, no significant association was ob-
served between pre-RAI TSH and rate of successful remnant
ablation, in respective multivariate analyses adjusted for rele-
vant variables such as disease extent, 131I activity, and sex
(695,696). However, results of these two studies may not
necessarily be extrapolated to TSH levels below 30mU/L, gi-
ven that patients with such TSH thresholds were not generally
considered eligible for RAI ablation in these studies. Pre–RAI
ablation TSH was not a significant predictor of becoming dis-
ease free without further treatment in a secondary subgroup
analysis of 50 patients who underwent thyroid hormone with-
drawal, but the small number of patients in this subgroup may
have limited the statistical power for a multivariate analysis
(694). In summary, there is some uncertainty on the optimal
level pre–RAI treatment TSH following thyroid hormone
withdrawal in considering long-term outcome effects.
[B39] Can rhTSH (Thyrogen) be used as an
alternative to thyroxine withdrawal for remnant
ablation or adjuvant therapy in patients who have
undergone near-total or total thyroidectomy?
& RECOMMENDATION 54
(A) In patients with ATA low-risk and ATA intermediate-
risk DTC without extensive lymph node involvement (i.e.,
T1–T3, N0/Nx/N1a, M0), in whom RAI remnant ablation or
adjuvant therapy is planned, preparation with rhTSH stimu-
lation is an acceptable alternative to thyroid hormone with-
drawal for achieving remnant ablation, based on evidence of
superior short-term quality of life, noninferiority of remnant
ablation efficacy, and multiple consistent observations sug-
gesting no significant difference in long-term outcomes.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(B) In patients with ATA intermediate-risk DTC who have
extensive lymph node disease (multiple clinically involved
LN) in the absence of distant metastases, preparation with
rhTSH stimulation may be considered as an alternative to
thyroid hormone withdrawal prior to adjuvant RAI treatment.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
(C) In patients with ATA high-risk DTC with attendant
higher risks of disease-related mortality and morbidity,
more controlled data from long-term outcome studies are
needed before rhTSH preparation for RAI adjuvant treat-
ment can be recommended.
(No recommendation, Insufficient evidence)
(D) In patients with DTC of any risk level with signifi-
cant comorbidity that may preclude thyroid hormone
withdrawal prior to iodine RAI administration, rhTSH
preparation should be considered. Significant comorbidity
may include (a) a significant medical or psychiatric con-
dition that could be acutely exacerbated with hypothy-
roidism, leading to a serious adverse event, or (b) inability
to mount an adequate endogenous TSH response with
thyroid hormone withdrawal.
(Strong recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
Recombinant human thyrotropin (trade name Thyrogen) is
currently approved by many international authorities including
the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and
Health Canada for use in preparation for RAI remnant ablation
in patients who have undergone a near-total or total thyroid-
ectomy for well-differentiated thyroid cancer and who do not
have evidence of distant metastases (FDA, www.accessdata.
fda.gov; Health Canada, http://webprod.hc-sc.gc.ca). Data
from a compassionate use observational study suggest that
rhTSH raises serum TSH measurements in patients who are
unable to mount an endogenous TSH rise and appears to re-
duce the risk of hypothyroid-related complications in patients
with significant medical or psychiatric comorbidity (697).
Some of the complications that were reported to be avoided
by use of rhTSH included worsening of psychiatric illness,
respiratory compromise, central nervous system (CNS) com-
promise, aggravation of congestive heart failure, and aggra-
vation of coronary artery disease (697).
Multiple RCTs have focused on short-term remnant abla-
tion outcomes in low and intermediate risk DTC with lower
risk features, using rhTSH compared to thyroid hormone
withdrawal. In six RCTs of patients with well-differentiated
thyroid cancer without distant metastases undergoing RAI
remnant ablation (T1–T3, N1 or N0, all M0), the rate of
successful remnant ablation, was not significantly different
after rhTSH preparation compared to thyroid hormone
withdrawal, using 131I dose activities ranging from 30 to 100
mCi (691,698–702). Patients with resected cervical lymph
node metastases were included in five of these trials
(691,699–702), and these may be assumed to be confined to
the central neck, given the extent of primary surgery de-
scribed in these studies. In one trial, a further inclusion re-
striction was fewer than five positive nodes at the time of the
primary surgery (702). Some potential limitations of the ex-
isting RCTs in this area include lack of blinding of patients
and treating physicians (because it was not feasible). In five
of the RCTs that examined health-related quality of life
around the time of remnant ablation, this outcome was sig-
nificantly worse in patients who underwent thyroid hormone
withdrawal compared to rhTSH preparation, and this was
attributed to hypothyroid symptoms (691,699–702). How-
ever, in three of these RCTs, which examined longer term
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
59
 quality of life, there was no significant difference in mea-
surements between patients who had received rhTSH com-
pared to those who had thyroid hormone withdrawal
preparation, 3 or more months after RAI remnant ablation
(699,701,702). A smaller RCT including a total of 25 indi-
viduals who had incidentally discovered PTC in the course of
thyroidectomy for multinodular goiter, showed that mean Tg
measurements were similar at various time points out to
about 20 months in 13 individuals who were prepared for
remnant ablation using rhTSH within a week after thyroid-
ectomy, compared to those prepared by LT4 withdrawal for
4–6 weeks postoperatively (703). A meta-analysis pooling
data from 1535 patients in all seven trials described herein,
suggested that the rates of remnant ablation success were not
significantly different using rhTSH compared to thyroid
hormone withdrawal (risk ratio 0.97 [95% CI 0.94–1.01])
(704). Furthermore, a pooled analysis suggested that quality-
of-life measures were superior on the day of remnant ablation
in the rhTSH group, with no significant difference between
groups 3 months later (704). Another meta-analysis including
six of the previously mentioned RCTs, also suggested that the
success of remnant ablation was not significantly different
between patients prepared with rhTSH or thyroid hormone
withdrawal, and this result was robust using a variety of
definitions of remnant ablation success (705). In summary,
the use of rhTSH for preparation for remnant ablation is as-
sociated with superior short-term quality of life and similar
rates of successful remnant ablation compared to traditional
thyroid hormone withdrawal.
There are some limited long-term outcome data following
rhTSH preparation for RAI treatment compared to thyroid
hormone withdrawal. In one aforementioned RCT in ATA
low- and intermediate-risk patients (700), follow-up data
were reported at a median of 3.7 years later for 51 of the
original 63 patients, and rates of reoperation for cervical neck
recurrence were essentially identical between groups (4% of
patients), with no deaths (706). In the same study, repeat
treatment with 131I for detectable Tg or imaging evidence of
disease was performed in 4 of the 28 patients in the rhTSH
group and 5 of the 23 patients in the hypothyroid group in this
study (706). The low number of thyroid cancer–related
deaths and recurrences in this small trial limit the ability to
make meaningful statistical comparisons of long-term out-
comes. In another RCT including 44 mixed risk–level DTC
patients, who were subjected to either rhTSH preparation
(n = 24) for RAI treatment within a week after surgery or 4–6
weeks of LT4 withdrawal (n = 20), after a mean follow-up
period of about 52 months, only one individual in the rhTSH
group was histologically proven to have recurrent disease
(lymph nodes and bone) (707). However, this study was
likely underpowered to detect meaningful differences in this
outcome, and the final data analysis would be limited by lack
of data available at the final follow-up (i.e., in progress) for
18% of the trial participants (707). In one prospective (694)
and two retrospective (708,709) observational studies in-
cluding largely ATA low- and intermediate-risk DTC pa-
tients, no significant difference was observed in the long-term
presence of clinically significant disease, regardless of whe-
ther rhTSH or thyroid hormone withdrawal was used in
preparing for therapeutic RAI for DTC patients). In a sub-
group analysis of 183 DTC patients with level N1b nodal
disease from one of the aforementioned retrospective studies,
the rate of NED at last follow-up was not significantly dif-
ferent in patients prepared with thyroid hormone withdrawal
(26.8%) compared to those prepared with rhTSH (33.7%)
(708). In a smaller retrospective, multicenter study, Pitoia
et al. (710) reported that in 45 consecutive Tg antibody-
negative patients with T3-T4 /N1-Nx/M0 disease, the ab-
sence of persistence or recurrence of disease after a mean
follow-up of about 3 years was 72% in patients pretreated
with rhTSH and 59% in those pretreated with thyroid hor-
mone withdrawal ( p = 0.03). In a multicenter retrospec-
tive analysis of patients with T4 disease with or without
nodal or distant metastases (T4, N0/N1, M0/M1), the rate of
stimulated Tg <2 ng/mL Tg among antibody-negative pa-
tients was 67.7% (42 of 62) in patients prepared for RAI
treatment with rhTSH, compared to 57.8% (37 of 64) in those
prepared with thyroid hormone withdrawal (6-month follow-
up) (711). In a retrospective analysis of 175 patients with
RAI-avid metastatic disease to lungs and/or bone, the authors
observed no significant difference in overall survival after a
mean follow-up period of 5.5 years, among patients prepared
prior to RAI treatment with rhTSH alone for all RAI treat-
ments, thyroid hormone withdrawal for all RAI treatments, or
thyroid hormone withdrawal for initial treatments followed
by rhTSH for subsequent treatment(s) (712). In this study,
whole-body and blood dosimetry studies were performed in
all patients; therefore, the results may not be extrapolated to
RAI fixed dosing. Some important differences among groups
in this study that could have impacted the findings included
differences in cumulative RAI activities received and longer
follow-up in groups who had thyroid hormone withdrawal
(712). Although the authors performed a multivariable analysis
examining for predictors of overall survival, and method of
TSH stimulation was not significant, this model did not adjust
for these variables. In a two-center retrospective analysis
comparing responses to treatment using RECIST 1.1 criteria in
56 patients with distant metastatic disease pretreated with ei-
ther rhTSH or thyroid hormone withdrawal prior to RAI, there
were no differences in outcomes between groups after a mean
follow-up period of about 6 years (713). Also in this study,
there were important baseline differences among groups, such
as rates of use of dosimetry and mean cumulative RAI activity.
Rates of xerostomia, leukopenia, or thrombocytopenia were
not significantly different between treatment groups in this
study. The overall mortality rate was 20% in the rhTSH group
(3 of 15) and 7.3% in the thyroid hormone withdrawal group (3
of 41) ( p = 0.188) (713), although the study was likely not
sufficiently large to examine differences in this important
outcome. The findings of the latter study cannot be readily
extrapolated to fixed-dosing RAI treatment regimens because
80% of the individuals in the rhTSH group and 46% in the
thyroid hormone withdrawal group had dosimetry-based RAI
treatment. RCTs comparing rhTSH to thyroid hormone with-
drawal preparation pre–RAI treatment, are clearly needed to
guide clinical care in higher risk DTC patients.
[B40] What activity of 131I should be used
for remnant ablation or adjuvant therapy?
& RECOMMENDATION 55
(A) If RAI remnant ablation is performed after total
thyroidectomy
for
ATA
low-risk
thyroid
cancer
or
intermediate-risk disease with lower risk features (i.e., low-
60
HAUGEN ET AL.
 volume central neck nodal metastases with no other known
gross residual disease or any other adverse features), a low
administered activity of approximately of 30 mCi is gener-
ally favored over higher administered activities.
(Strong recommendation, High-quality evidence)
(B) Higher administered activities may need to be con-
sidered for patients receiving less than a total or near-total
thyroidectomy in which a larger remnant is suspected or in
which adjuvant therapy is intended.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
& RECOMMENDATION 56
When RAI is intended for initial adjuvant therapy to treat
suspected microscopic residual disease, administered ac-
tivities above those used for remnant ablation up to 150 mCi
are generally recommended (in absence of known distant
metastases). It is uncertain whether routine use of higher
administered activities (>150 mCi) in this setting will re-
duce structural disease recurrence for T3 and N1 disease.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
Successful remnant ablation can be defined by an undetect-
able stimulated serum Tg, in the absence of interfering Tg an-
tibodies, with or without confirmatory nuclear or other imaging
studies. An alternative definition in cases in which Tg antibodies
are present is the absence of visible RAI uptake on a subsequent
diagnostic RAI scan. In this section, we only included published
original RCTs or systematic reviews/meta-analyses of such
studies examining the impact of various 131I dose activities on
the rate of successful remnant ablation or thyroid cancer out-
comes (including thyroid cancer–related deaths or recurrences)
in adult patients with well-differentiated thyroid carcinoma who
had been treated with total or near-total thyroidectomy and who
were not known to have any gross residual disease following
surgery. Our search yielded six RCTs (692,699,701,714–716),
the majority of which had had no blinding of patients and health
care providers (699,701,714–717).
In the trial by Fallahi et al. (692), the randomization pro-
gram was prepared and executed by a technologist in the
laboratory where the 131I activities were prepared for dis-
pensing in coded vials, without revealing the administered
activity to participants and health care providers. The path-
ologic stage of disease of patients included was TNM stage
pT1 to pT3 in four trials (699,714,715,717), whereas only
pT1 or pT2 patients were eligible in one trial (701), and
primary tumor size or tumor size staging was not reported in
two trials (692,716). Some patients with known small-
volume lymph node disease were included in five of the trials
(699,701,714,715,717), but patients with known lymph node
disease were excluded from one trial (692), and lymph node
staging was not reported in another trial (716). Although the
specific levels and size of lymph node metastases at baseline
were not clearly reported, data reported on surgical extent
suggested that these were consistent with relatively nonbulky
central neck nodal metastases resected in the course of thy-
roidectomy with or without central neck dissection (699,701,
714,715,717).
The 131I activities compared were as follows: 30 mCi
compared to 100 mCi in four trials (692,699,701,714), 50
mCi compared to 100 mCi in two trials (715,716), or 30 mCi
compared to 60 mCi or 100 mCi in one study comprising
pooled long-term outcome data from two staged smaller trials
from the same group (717).
The rate of successful remnant ablation was reported to
be not inferior using an administered activity of 30 mCi as
compared to 100 mCi in three trials after preparation with
thyroid hormone withdrawal (699,701,714) and in two trials
after preparation with rhTSH (699,701), including data from
the two large factorial design trials in both comparisons
(699,701). Pilli et al. (715) reported that an administered
activity of 50 mCi was not inferior to 100 mCi in achieving
successful remnant ablation, following preparation with
rhTSH. In contrast, Zaman et al. (716) suggested that 100
mCi may be superior to 50 mCi following thyroid hormone
withdrawal, but the small size (40 patients) and lack of re-
porting of statistical comparisons are important limitations
of this study. The third largest trial (341 patients random-
ized) by Fallahi et al. (692) reported that an administered
activity of 100 mCi was superior to 30 mCi in achieving
successful remnant ablation after thyroid hormone with-
drawal. The rate of initial successful remnant ablation (as
defined by the primary authors) was highly variable among
trials, and the following rates were reported following initial
administration of 100 mCi of 131I: 64% in the trial from
Fallahi et al. (692), 56% in the trial from Maenpaa et al.
(714), 89% in the trial from Mallick et al. (699), 67% in the
trial from Pilli et al. (715), 94% in the trial from Schlum-
berger et al. (701), and 60% in the trial from Zaman et al.
(716). The reasons explaining variability in the rates of
successful RAI remnant ablation among trials are not
completely understood but could potentially be due to dif-
ferences in study populations, completeness of surgery
(including size of the remaining remnant), or sensitivity of
techniques used to evaluate outcomes (such as Tg assays or
diagnostic imaging studies).
Short-term side effects in the weeks following remnant
ablation have been reported to be more frequent in patients
treated with 100 mCi as compared to 30 mCi activities by
Mallick et al. (699), and a similar trend was reported by
Maenpaa et al. (714). Repeat treatment with additional 131I
has been reported to be more frequent in patients treated with
30 mCi as compared to higher activities in three trials
(692,699,717), but not in one trial (714). Long-term outcome
data from randomized trials in this area are limited by rela-
tively low event rates, potentially underpowering statistical
analyses. Kukulska et al. (717) followed 390 patients that had
been randomized to either 30, 60, or 100 mCi administered
activities for remnant ablation, and reported the following event
rates after a median period of 10 years following treatment:
local relapse in 2% following an initial 30 mCi activity com-
pared to 3% for initial administered activities of 60 or 100 mCi
(reported to be not significantly different), and distant meta-
static recurrence in 0% of the patients in all of the treatment
groups. Maenpaa et al. (714) followed 160 patients who were
randomized to either 30 or 100 mCi for a median of 51 months,
and they reported the following outcomes: reoperation for re-
section of thyroid cancer in lymph nodes in 7% and 8% of
patients who were treated with activities of 30 and 100 mCi,
respectively; distant metastatic recurrence in 0% and 4% of
patients treated with activities of 30 and 100 mCi, respectively;
and no thyroid cancer–related deaths in any of the treatment
groups.
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
61
 Overall, the rate of successful remnant ablation in patients
who have undergone total or near-total thyroidectomy ap-
pears to be not inferior in patients treated with 30 mCi
compared to 100 mCi in the majority of studies comparing
these activities and particularly in studies achieving the
highest successful ablation rates. Rates of short-term adverse
effects may be higher after administration of 100 mCi 131I
compared to 30 mCi, in a small number of trials examining
these outcomes. Limited long-term RCT data on the impact
of various activities for remnant ablation or adjuvant therapy
are available, but thyroid cancer–related recurrences or
deaths do not appear to be higher with the use of lower initial
activities for remnant ablation, compared to higher admin-
istered activities. Four recent systematic reviews and meta-
analyses reported results that are supportive of these con-
clusions (718–721), although some of the predefined study
inclusion criteria in these reviews were generally not as strict
as defined in our review (particularly for variables such as the
extent of primary surgery or the stringency of Tg threshold in
the definition of success of remnant ablation); it is also im-
portant to note that in some of these meta-analyses, statisti-
cally significant heterogeneity (variability) of treatment
effect was noted for the pooled analyses on successful rem-
nant ablation (718,720,721). A recent retrospective database
analysis by Verburg et al. (722) with longer follow-up than
most earlier studies adds a note of caution for the use of lower
administered activities in older low-risk patients. They fol-
lowed 698 patients with low-risk DTC (pT1 or pT2 and no
involved LN) for at least 5 years. There were no long-term
(10–15 year) overall survival or disease-specific survival
differences in younger patients (<45 years old) who received
lower administered activities of 131I (£54 mCi) compared
with those receiving higher administered activities. The
older patients (‡45 years old), however, who received lower
administered activities of 131I (£54 mCi) did have a lower
disease-specific survival compared with those receiving
higher administered activities. Disease was defined as ab-
normal structural or functional imaging or a detectable serum
Tg after TSH stimulation. The absolute disease-specific
survival remained high even in the patients receiving lower
administered activities of 131I, and there were no differences
in overall survival in these older patients.
In 2009, the ATA guidelines task force recommended a
fixed administered activity of between 100 and 200 mCi for
adjuvant RAI treatment if residual microscopic disease is
suspected) or if an aggressive histologic variant of DTC
was present (25). Since that time, at least five retrospective,
single institution studies have compared clinical outcomes
following various adjuvant RAI fixed activities in ATA
intermediate-risk and ATA higher risk patients, without
distant metastases (723–726). In comparing rates of disease
persistence or recurrence in 225 ATA intermediate-risk DTC
patients treated with 30 to 50 mCi compared to ‡100 mCi of
adjuvant RAI, Castagna et al. (723) reported no significant
difference in rates of successful remnant ablation or in long-
term disease persistence/recurrence between groups. How-
ever, there were some statistically significant differences
between the treatment groups that may have influenced these
results, including higher numbers of men and individuals
with lateral neck nodal disease and a longer follow-up period
(which may increase the rate of detection) in the higher ad-
ministered activity group of this study (723). In another study
including 176 DTC patients with a primary tumor size £2 cm
in diameter and microscopic extrathyroidal extension, no
significant differences were found in a comparison of rates of
successful remnant ablation and long-term recurrences in
patients treated with 30 mCi 131I compared with 149 mCi
(724). In this study, no recurrences were noted in either group
after a median follow-up of 7.2 years. Although the mean
primary tumor size was higher in the group treated with
higher activities compared with the lower activity group
in this study ( p < 0.001), the difference in mean tumor di-
ameter was only 2 mm, so it may be of questionable clinical
significance (724). Kruijff et al. (725) reported the results of
multiple secondary subgroup analyses on data from 341 pa-
tients with T3 PTC, in which a postsurgical 131I administered
activity of £75 mCi was compared to >75 mCi. In this study,
the respective rates of disease recurrence, mortality, and
stimulated Tg >2 ng/mL were not significantly different in
the lower administered activity group (i.e., 7%, 3%, 72%),
compared to the higher activity group (12%, 1.7%, 64%)
(respective p-values of 0.55, 0.43, 0.40). Furthermore, in this
study, a multivariate analysis using data from 1171 mixed-
risk DTC patients without distant metastases suggested that
there was no significant difference in risk of disease recur-
rence with the use of >75 mCi of 131I postoperatively com-
pared to £75 mCi (higher administered activity hazard ratio
1.57 ([95% CI 0.61–3.98], p = 0.341), after adjustment for
age, sex, primary tumor size, presence of vascular invasion,
multifocality, and lymph node positivity, with a mean follow-
up period of 60 months) (725). In another study comparing
rates of disease structural recurrence/persistence in 181 pa-
tients with positive N1b lymph nodes, Sabra et al. (726) re-
ported no statistically significant difference between the
following approximate fixed administered activity cate-
gories: 75–139 mCi with a median of 102 mCi (31%), 140–
169 mCi with a median of 150 mCi (32%), and 170–468 mCi
with a median of 202 mCi (23%) ( p = 0.17). Consistent with
this finding, no significant correlation between RAI activity
and best clinical response was observed in this study. In re-
spective secondary subgroup analyses, a dose response was
apparent in individuals ‡45 years of age, but not younger
individuals, and the authors cautioned about the use of fixed
RAI activities exceeding 150 mCi because of concerns about
potential toxicity in the context of renal impairment (726). In
the three studies utilizing either thyroid hormone withdrawal
or rhTSH for RAI treatment preparation (723,725,726), in-
sufficient data were reported to make any meaningful inter-
pretation on any relationship between administered activity
in the context of preparation method. In one study, RAI ad-
juvant treatment was performed postoperatively, presumably
without initiation of thyroid hormone because rhTSH was not
reported to be used (724). None of the aforementioned studies
(723–726) reported on RAI toxicity or quality of life out-
comes; furthermore, T4 disease was not included in these
studies. Overall, there is little evidence to suggest that in-
creasing administered activities of adjuvant RAI is neces-
sarily associated with improvement of clinical outcomes for
patients with ATA intermediate- and high-risk disease
without evidence of persistent disease. There is an important
unmet need for RCTs examining thyroid cancer–related
outcomes, quality of life, and toxicities in patients with ATA
intermediate or higher level thyroid cancer, in the absence of
gross residual disease or distant metastases.
62
HAUGEN ET AL.
 [B41] Is a low-iodine diet necessary before
remnant ablation?
& RECOMMENDATION 57
A low iodine diet (LID) for approximately 1–2 weeks
should be considered for patients undergoing RAI remnant
ablation or treatment.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
It is important for health care providers to inquire about a
history of possible high-dose iodine exposure (e.g., IV con-
trast, amiodarone, or others) in considering timing of
scheduling RAI therapy or imaging. There are no studies
examining whether the use of a LID in preparation for RAI
remnant ablation or treatment impacts long-term disease-
related recurrence or mortality rates. In a recent systematic
review of observational studies in this area, the most com-
monly studied LIDs allowed for £50 lg/d of iodine for 1–2
weeks and that the use of LIDs appeared to be associated with
reduction in urinary iodine excretion as well as increase in
131I uptake, compared to no LID (727). There is conflicting
evidence on the impact of a LID on the outcome of remnant
ablation success (727), with the best available evidence lar-
gely restricted to retrospective analyses, using historical
controls (728,729). In a study including a total of 120 pa-
tients, the use of a 4-day LID (with seafood restriction for 1
week) was associated with a higher rate of remnant ablation
success (defined by absent neck activity and stimulated Tg
<2 ng/mL) compared to no LID (728). In a study including a
total of 94 patients, comparing a more stringent LID to a less
stringent diet of restricted salt/vitamins/seafood, each for 10
to 14 days, there was no significant difference in rate of
successful remnant ablation, using a visually negative 131I
scan to define that outcome (729). The optimal stringency and
duration of LID (if any) prior to therapeutic RAI is not
known. In a RCT including 46 patients, the increase in 131I
uptake and reduction in urinary iodine excretion was not
significantly different between patients who followed a LID
for 2 weeks compared to 3 weeks prior to RAI scanning
(730), suggesting that there may be little reason to extend the
LID past 2 weeks. However, a lack of association between
urinary iodine excretion and rate of successful thyroid abla-
tion has been reported in patients not specifically prescribed a
LID (731); the absence of a specific LID comparison group in
this study may limit the generalizability of the findings to
situations in which a specific LID is prescribed. Such findings
may suggest, however, that the routine measurement of uri-
nary iodine excretion, outside of possibly a research setting
or suspected iodine contamination, may not be necessary.
Although LIDs may be cumbersome or unpalatable, serious
side effects are relatively infrequent (727), with case re-
ports of potentially life-threatening hyponatremia occur-
ring largely in elderly patients who were subject to thyroid
hormone withdrawal, often in the presence of metastatic
disease, sometimes concurrently treated with thiazide di-
uretics, and with a LID duration of longer than a week in the
majority of cases (732). It is important to avoid restriction
of noniodized salt during the LID, since this may be asso-
ciated with hyponatremia, especially in patients undergo-
ing thyroid hormone withdrawal. Some examples of LID
descriptions for patients, may be found at the following
websites: ATA (www.thyroid.org/faq-low-iodine-diet/),
ThyCa: Thyroid Cancer Survivors’ Association, Inc. (http://
thyca.org/rai.htm#diet), Light of Life Foundation (www
.checkyourneck.com/About-Thyroid-Cancer/Low-Iodine-
Cookbook), and Thyroid Cancer Canada (www.thyroid
cancercanada.org/userfiles/files/LID_English_Aug_2013_
final.pdf).
[B42] Should a posttherapy scan be performed
following remnant ablation or adjuvant therapy?
& RECOMMENDATION 58
A posttherapy WBS (with or without SPECT/CT) is rec-
ommended after RAI remnant ablation or treatment, to
inform disease staging and document the RAI avidity of
any structural disease.
(Strong recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
The literature on the utility of posttherapy RAI scans
is largely based on single-center retrospective studies
(643,733–736), many of which included a relatively large
proportion of ATA intermediate- and high-risk DTC patients
(643,733,734). In a comparison of the results of pretherapy
131I scans to posttherapy scans, the rate of newly discovered
lesions on posttherapy scans was reported to be between 6%
and 13%. In a study examining post–remnant ablation scans
in 60 DTC patients, the disease stage was altered in 8.3% of
individuals (735). In older literature, it had been reported that
posttherapy scanning demonstrated new findings in 31% of
39 cases studied, but the detection of thyroid foci was in-
cluded in that outcome, whereas almost a third of the patients
(12 of 39) had a sizeable portion of their thyroid remaining
following primary surgery (736). In the recent posttherapy
scan literature, the 131I activities ranged from 30 to 300 mCi
(733–735), and the timing of scans was between 2 and 12
days following therapeutic RAI (643,733–735,737,738), with
some studies prescribing a preparatory LID (643,735,738)
and others not prescribing such a diet (733,734). In one study,
posttherapy scan images were compared on the third and
seventh day following ablative or therapeutic RAI adminis-
tration for mixed-risk DTC (following thyroid hormone
withdrawal) (738). The authors of this study reported that the
concordance of lesions detected on both scans was 80.5%
(108 of 135 patients), with 7.5% of early scans providing
more information than late scans, and 12% of late scans
providing more information than early scans (738). A limi-
tation in interpreting the posttherapy scan literature is that all
of the lesions identified on posttherapy scans were not always
confirmed to represent structural disease (i.e., using cross-
sectional imaging, histopathology, or long-term outcome
data), and readers of posttherapy scans were generally not
specifically blinded to the results of other investigations, such
as pretherapy RAI scans.
The potential utility of the combination of RAI post-
therapy scanning in conjunction with SPECT/CT has been
examined in multiple prospective (737,739,740) and retro-
spective studies (741–743). The majority of these studies
(737,739–742) have independently confirmed the presence
of disease by means such as alternative imaging studies,
histopathology, or clinical follow-up. In a single-center
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
63
 study
of
170
patients
with
mixed
risk
level
well-
differentiated thyroid cancer, the combination RAI post-
therapy scanning and neck/thorax SPECT/CT, was esti-
mated to have a sensitivity of 78% [95% CI 60%–90%],
with a specificity of 100% (negative or indeterminate scans
were grouped as negative), for the outcome of persistent/
recurrent disease (median study follow-up period of 29
months) (737). Furthermore, in a multivariate analysis re-
ported in this study, posttherapy RAI scanning with SPECT/
CT significantly independently predicted an increased risk
of future disease persistence/recurrence (HR 65.2 [95% CI
26.0–163.4) (737). In a single-center study of 81 DTC pa-
tients who underwent 131I posttherapy scanning in con-
junction with SPECT-spiral CT of the neck, 1.6% of the 61
patients with negative cervical scintigraphy–SPECT/CT had
evidence of abnormal cervical scintigraphy 5 months later,
whereas 3 of the 20 patients (15%) with positive or in-
determinate cervical posttherapy scintigraphy–SPECT/CT,
had abnormal cervical scintigraphy 5 months later (741).
The incremental value of SPECT/CT in impacting thera-
peutic planning appears to be greatest in studies in which
its use was reserved for situations of posttherapy scan
diagnostic uncertainty (impacted therapy in 24.4% [8 of
33] of cases, all of which went on to surgery) (739), or
when disease was advanced and WBS was inconclusive
(impacted management in 35% [8 of 23] of such patients
in another study) (740). The routine addition of neck/chest
SPECT/CT to all posttherapy scans was estimated to alter
postsurgical ATA recurrence risk estimate in 6.4% (7 of
109) of patients (743), impact therapeutic planning in
about 2% of cases (742), and reduce the need for addi-
tional cross-sectional imaging in 20% of cases (29 of
148). In one study examining the use of routine cervical/
thoracic SPECT/CT in conjunction with posttherapy
scanning, the SPECT/CT portion identified non–iodine
avid lesions in 22% of patients (32 of 148), although the
underlying pathologic diagnosis or long-term clinical
significance of these lesions was not clearly reported (i.e.,
‘‘tiny’’ lung nodules in 19 patients, mediastinal lymph
nodes <5 mm in 10 patients, and osteolytic bone metas-
tases in three patients) (743). In situations in which
SPECT/CT may not be feasible to perform in conjunction
with a posttherapy RAI scan, clinical judgment needs to
prevail on the utility of alternative cross-sectional imag-
ing studies, considering factors such as clinical-pathologic
stage, the completeness of surgery, inappropriate thyr-
oglobulinemia, and, if performed, the posttherapy RAI
scan result.
[B43] Early management of DTC after initial therapy
[B44] What is the appropriate degree of initial
TSH suppression?
& RECOMMENDATION 59
(A) For high-risk thyroid cancer patients, initial TSH
suppression to below 0.1 mU/L is recommended.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(B) For intermediate-risk thyroid cancer patients, initial
TSH suppression to 0.1– 0.5 mU/L is recommended.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
(C) For low-risk patients who have undergone remnant ab-
lation and have undetectable serum Tg levels, TSH may be
maintained at the lower end of the reference range (0.5–
2mU/L) while continuing surveillance for recurrence. Si-
milar recommendations hold for low-risk patients who have
not undergone remnant ablation and have undetectable serum
Tg levels.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
(D) For low-risk patients who have undergone remnant
ablation and have low-level serum Tg levels, TSH may be
maintained at or slightly below the lower limit of normal
(0.1–0.5 mU/L) while surveillance for recurrence is con-
tinued. Similar recommendations hold for low-risk pa-
tients who have not undergone remnant ablation, although
serum Tg levels may be measurably higher and continued
surveillance for recurrence applies.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
(E) For low-risk patients who have undergone lobectomy,
TSH may be maintained in the mid to lower reference
range (0.5–2 mU/L) while surveillance for recurrence is
continued. Thyroid hormone therapy may not be needed if
patients can maintain their serum TSH in this target range.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
DTC expresses the TSH receptor on the cell membrane and
responds to TSH stimulation by increasing the expression of
several thyroid specific proteins (Tg, sodium-iodide symporter)
and by increasing the rates of cell growth (744). Suppression of
TSH,usingsupraphysiologicdosesofLT4,isusedcommonlyto
treat patients with thyroid cancer in an effort to decrease the risk
of recurrence (275,671,745–747). A meta-analysis supported
the efficacy of TSH suppression therapy in preventing major
adverse clinical events (RR = 0.73 [CI= 0.60–0.88], p < 0.05)
(745). A large RCT from Japan (748) showed that disease-free
survival was equivalent in patients with normal TSH (0.4–
5 mU/L)comparedwiththoseonLT4suppressiontherapy(TSH
<0.01 mU/L). Extent of residual disease is uncertain in these
patients inthatmostdid not undergo total thyroidectomy or RAI
ablation and Tg levels were not monitored or reported, making
direct comparisons to a North American approach difficult.
Retrospective and prospective studies have demonstrated
that TSH suppression to below 0.1 mU/L may improve out-
comes in high-risk thyroid cancer patients (275,749), though no
such evidence of benefit has been documented in low-risk pa-
tients. Higher degrees of suppression to <0.03 mU/L may offer
no additional benefit (746). A prospective, nonrandomized co-
hort study (671) of 2936 patients found that overall survival
improved significantly when the TSH was suppressed to un-
detectable levels in patients with NTCTCSG stage III or IV
disease and suppressed to the subnormal to undetectable range
in patients with NTCTCSG stage II disease; however, in the
latter group there was no incremental benefit from suppressing
TSH to undetectable levels. Patients in the NTCTCSG stage II
classification are somewhat different from AJCC/UICC stage II
patients. Suppression of TSH was not beneficial in patients with
NTCTCSGstageIdisease.Inanotherstudy,therewasapositive
association between serum TSH levels and the risk for recurrent
64
HAUGEN ET AL.
 disease and cancer-related mortality (750). Adverse effects of
TSH suppression may include the known consequences of
subclinical thyrotoxicosis, including exacerbation of angina
in patients with ischemic heart disease, increased risk for atrial
fibrillation in older patients (751), and increased risk of osteo-
porosis in postmenopausal women (748,752–754). Therefore,
optimal TSH goals for individual patients must balance the
potential benefit of TSH suppression with the possible harm
from subclinical thyrotoxicosis especially in patients with
medical conditions that can be exacerbated with aggressive
TSH suppression.
There is little evidence to guide TSH targets or the use of
thyroid hormone in ATA low-risk patients who have undergone
lobectomy. Most of the studies evaluating lobectomy for these
patients do not discuss TSH targets or the use of thyroid hor-
mone therapy or note that these data were unavailable in the
databases studied (318,323–327). Vaisman et al. (328) noted
that ‘‘levothyroxine was often not given after lobectomy if the
patient maintained thyroid function tests within the reference
range,’’ while Matsuzu et al. (322) noted that ‘‘TSH suppression
therapy was performed in most of the cases postoperatively, but
the patients’ TSH levels were not analyzed in this study.’’ A
recent study by Ebina et al. (755) retrospectively analyzed low-
risk patients who had undergone lobectomy and had not re-
ceived thyroid hormone therapy. After a mean follow-up of 8.3
years, only 13% of the 674 patients undergoing lobectomy be-
came overtly hypothyroid. The 10-year cause-specific and
disease-specific survivals were not different between the pa-
tients who underwent thyroidectomy versus a lesser operation,
although it was common for the patients undergoing lobectomy
to also receive an ipsilateral central neck dissection. More re-
search is needed in this area to help guide management of those
patients undergoing lobectomy for low-risk DTC.
[B45] Is there a role for adjunctive external beam
radiation therapy or chemotherapy?
[B46] External beam radiation therapy
& RECOMMENDATION 60
There is no role for routine adjuvant EBRT to the neck in
patients with DTC after initial complete surgical removal
of the tumor.
(Strong recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
The application of adjuvant neck/thyroid bed/loco-regional
radiation therapy in DTC patients remains controversial. In
particular, the use of radiation therapy within the context of
initial/primary surgery/thyroidectomy has no meaningful liter-
ature support. There are reports of responses among patients
with locally advanced disease (756,757) and improved relapse-
free and cause-specific survival in patients over age 60 with
extrathyroidal extension but no gross residual disease (758),
and selective use can be considered in these patients. It remains
unknown whether external beam radiation therapy might re-
duce the risk for recurrence in the neck following adequate
primary surgery and/or RAI treatment in patients with ag-
gressive histologic subtypes (759). However, in the context of
certain individual patients undergoing multiple and frequent
serial neck re-operations for palliation of loco-regionally re-
current disease, adjuvant EBRT may be considered. In such
contexts, the risks of anticipated additional serial re-operations
versus the risks of EBRT must be carefully weighed to arrive at
optimal decisions for individual patients. The approach to pa-
tients with gross incomplete surgical resection of disease is
addressed in another section (Recommendation 72).
[B47] Systemic adjuvant therapy
& RECOMMENDATION 61
There is no role for routine systemic adjuvant therapy in
patients with DTC (beyond RAI and/or TSH suppressive
therapy using LT4).
(Strong recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
There are no clinical trial data to indicate that any adjuvant
therapy beyond RAI and/or TSH suppressive therapy using
LT4 has a net beneficial role in DTC patients. Furthermore, as
the prognosis of DTC patients in complete remission and
without any indication of active systemic disease is very
good—and as toxicities, and even the risk of death, from use
of kinase inhibitor therapies are appreciable—toxicities/risks
have strong potential to exceed expected therapeutic benefit
in the adjuvant context in most patients with DTC.
Whether populations of DTC patients might be identifiable
who have sufficiently great future risks from recurrent dis-
ease to justify the corresponding risks attendant to the ap-
plication of adjuvant systemic therapy (beyond RAI and/or
TSH suppressive therapy using LT4) remains uncertain.
Doxorubicin may act as a radiation sensitizer in some tumors
of thyroid origin (760) and could be considered for patients
with locally advanced disease undergoing external beam ra-
diation therapy. It is unproven whether patients with rising Tg
in the setting of no identifiable progression of anatomical
disease have sufficiently high future risks from disease to
justify the application of adjuvant systemic therapy beyond
RAI and/or TSH suppressive therapy using LT4.
[C1] DTC: LONG-TERM MANAGEMENT AND ADVANCED
CANCER MANAGEMENT GUIDELINES
[C2] What are the appropriate features of long-term
management?
Accurate surveillance for possible recurrence in patients
thought to be free of disease is a major goal of long-term
follow-up. Tests with high specificity allow identification of
patients unlikely to experience disease recurrence, so that less
aggressive management strategies can be used that may be
more cost effective and safe. Similarly, patients with a higher
risk of recurrence are monitored more aggressively because it
is believed that early detection of recurrent disease offers the
best opportunity for effective treatment. A large study (761)
found that the residual life span in disease-free patients treated
with total or near-total thyroidectomy, 131I for remnant abla-
tion, and in some cases high-dose 131I for residual disease was
similar to that in the general Dutch population. In contrast, the
life expectancy for patients with persistent disease was re-
duced to 60% of that in the general population but varied
widely depending upon tumor features. Age was not a factor
in disease-specific mortality in a comparison of patients with
age-matched individuals in the Dutch population. Treatment
thus appears safe and does not shorten life expectancy. Al-
though an increased incidence of second tumors in thyroid
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
65
 cancer patients has been recognized after the administration of
high cumulative activities of 131I (762,763), this elevated risk
was not found to be associated with the use of 131I in another
study (764). RAI therapy in low-risk patients did not affect
median overall survival in one study (765), but did increase
second primary malignancies in another study (766). This risk
of second primary malignancies after RAI therapy is dis-
cussed in more detail in section C33. Patients with persistent
or recurrent disease are offered treatment to cure or to delay
future morbidity or mortality. In the absence of such options,
therapies to palliate by substantially reducing tumor burden or
preventing tumor growth are utilized, with special attention
paid to tumors threatening critical structures.
A second goal of long-term follow-up is to monitor thy-
roxine suppression or replacement therapy to avoid under-
replacement or overly aggressive therapy (767).
[C3] What are the criteria for absence of persistent
tumor (excellent response)?
In patients who have undergone total or near-total thy-
roidectomy and RAI treatment (remnant ablation, adjuvant
therapy or therapy), disease-free status comprises all of the
following (summarized in Table 13):
1. No clinical evidence of tumor
2. No imaging evidence of tumor by RAI imaging (no
uptake outside the thyroid bed on the initial posttreat-
ment WBS if performed, or if uptake outside the thyroid
bed had been present, no imaging evidence of tumor on
a recent diagnostic or posttherapy WBS) and/or neck US
3. Low serum Tg levels during TSH suppression (Tg
<0.2 ng/mL) or after stimulation (Tg <1 ng/mL) in the
absence of interfering antibodies
[C4] What are the appropriate methods
for following patients after initial therapy?
[C5] What is the role of serum Tg measurement
in the follow-up of DTC?
& RECOMMENDATION 62
(A) Serum Tg should be measured by an assay that is
calibrated against the CRM457 standard. Thyroglobulin
antibodies should be quantitatively assessed with every
measurement of serum Tg. Ideally, serum Tg and anti-Tg
antibodies should be assessed longitudinally in the same
laboratory and using the same assay for a given patient.
(Strong recommendation, High-quality evidence)
(B) During initial follow-up, serum Tg on thyroxine therapy
should be measured every 6–12 months. More frequent Tg
measurements may be appropriate for ATA high-risk patients.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(C) In ATA low- and intermediate-risk patients that achieve
an excellent response to therapy, the utility of subsequent Tg
testing is not established. The time interval between serum Tg
measurements can be lengthened to at least 12–24 months.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
(D) Serum TSH should be measured at least every 12
months in all patients on thyroid hormone therapy.
(Strong recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
(E) ATA high-risk patients (regardless of response to
therapy) and all patients with biochemical incomplete,
structural incomplete, or indeterminate response should
continue to have Tg measured at least every 6–12 months
for several years.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
& RECOMMENDATION 63
(A) In ATA low-risk and intermediate-risk patients who
have had remnant ablation or adjuvant therapy and nega-
tive cervical US, serum Tg should be measured at 6–18
months on thyroxine therapy with a sensitive Tg assay
(<0.2 ng/mL) or after TSH stimulation to verify absence of
disease (excellent response).
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(B) Repeat TSH-stimulated Tg testing is not recommended
for low- and intermediate-risk patients with an excellent
response to therapy.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
(C) Subsequent TSH-stimulated Tg testing may be con-
sidered in patients with an indeterminate, biochemical
incomplete, or structural incomplete response following
either additional therapies or a spontaneous decline in Tg
values on thyroid hormone therapy over time in order to
reassess response to therapy.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
Subsequent stimulated testing is rarely needed for those
with NED, because there are rarely benefits seen in this pa-
tient population from repeated TSH-stimulated Tg testing
(590,594,597,768). The use of sensitive methods for serum
Tg may obviate the need for rhTSH stimulation in low-risk
patients with a Tg on LT4 treatment below 0.1–0.2 ng/mL
(393,587,595,601,606,769).
[C6] Serum Tg measurement and clinical utility
Measurement of serum Tg levels is an important modality
to monitor patients for residual or recurrent disease. Most
laboratories currently use immunometric assays to measure
serum Tg, and it is important that these assays are calibrated
against the CRM-457 international standard. Despite im-
provements in standardization of Tg assays, there is still a
two-fold difference between some assays (316,770), leading
to the recommendation that measurements in individual pa-
tients be performed with the same assay over time. Im-
munometric assays are prone to interference from anti-Tg
autoantibodies, which commonly cause falsely low serum Tg
measurements. Moreover, variability in Tg autoantibody as-
says may result in falsely negative antibody levels associated
with a misleadingly undetectable serum Tg due to the anti-
bodies that are present but not detected (771). Assays for anti-
Tg autoantibodies suffer from a similar variance and lack of
concordance as do Tg assays (608,772), and both Tg and Tg
autoantibody assays may be affected by heterophilic anti-
bodies (773,774). The presence of Tg autoantibodies should
be suspected when the surgical pathology indicates the pres-
ence of background Hashimoto thyroiditis (775). While there
66
HAUGEN ET AL.
 is no method that reliably eliminates Tg antibody interfer-
ence, radioimmunoassays for Tg may be less prone to anti-
body interference, which can occasionally result in falsely
elevated Tg levels (776–778). However, radioimmunoassays
for Tg are not as widely available, may be less sensitive than
immunometric assays in detecting small amounts of residual
tumor, and their role in the clinical care of patients is un-
certain. In the absence of antibody interference, serum Tg has
a high degree of sensitivity and specificity to detect thyroid
cancer, especially after total thyroidectomy and remnant
ablation. In patients with low risk for recurrence, serum Tg
measurement at the time of remnant ablation/adjuvant ther-
apy may be useful for prediction of subsequent disease-free
status (605).
Most data come from studies using methods with a func-
tional sensitivity of 1 ng/mL. Functional sensitivity of many
contemporary assays is £0.1 ng/mL, which may lead to
greater reliance of Tg on thyroid hormone therapy instead of
performing Tg determination following TSH stimulation.
Because TSH stimulation generally increases basal serum Tg
by 5- to 10-fold, significant serum Tg levels (>1–2 ng/mL)
found after TSH stimulation when using an assay with a
functional sensitivity of 0.5–1 ng/mL may already be pre-
dicted in patients on LT4 treatment without TSH stimulation
by a highly sensitive Tg assay when Tg levels are above
0.2 ng/mL.
The highest degrees of sensitivity for serum Tg are noted
following thyroid hormone withdrawal or stimulation us-
ing rhTSH (779). Serum Tg measurements obtained during
thyroid hormone suppression of TSH and less commonly
following TSH stimulation may fail to identify patients
with relatively small amounts of residual tumor (583,649,
780,781). These minimal amounts of residual disease are
often located in the neck, and performing neck US in these
patients offers the best opportunity to recognize or exclude
neoplastic disease even when serum Tg is undetectable
(297,782,783). Conversely, even TSH-stimulated Tg mea-
surement may fail to identify patients with clinically signif-
icant tumor because of anti-Tg antibodies or less commonly
because of defective or absent production and secretion of
immunoreactive Tg by tumor cells (649,780). Tg levels
should be interpreted in light of the pretest probability of
clinically significant residual tumor. An aggressive or poorly
differentiated tumor may be present despite low basal or
stimulated Tg; in contrast, a minimally elevated stimulated
Tg may occur in patients at low risk for clinically significant
morbidity (784). Nevertheless, a single rhTSH-stimulated
serum Tg <0.5–1.0 ng/mL in the absence of anti-Tg
antibody has an approximately 98%–99.5% likelihood of
identifying patients completely free of tumor on follow-up
(590,591,593,597,768).
Repeating
rhTSH-stimulated
Tg
measurements may not be necessary in most cases when
surveillance includes an undetectable basal serum Tg and
negative ultrasonography (604,617). However, 0.5%–3% of
patients may manifest clinical or biochemical recurrence in
spite of an initial rhTSH-stimulated Tg of <0.5 ng/mL (592).
Initial follow-up for low-risk patients (about 85% of
postoperative patients) who have undergone total or near-
total thyroidectomy and 131I remnant ablation should be
based mainly on TSH-suppressed Tg and cervical US, fol-
lowed by TSH-stimulated serum Tg measurements if the
TSH-suppressed Tg testing is undetectable (583,785). How-
ever, a Tg assay with a functional sensitivity of 0.1–0.2 ng/
mL may reduce the need to perform TSH-stimulated Tg
measurements during the initial and long-term follow-up of
some patients. In one study using such an assay, a T4-
suppressed serum Tg <0.1 ng/mL was only rarely (2%) as-
sociated with an rhTSH-stimulated Tg >2 ng/mL; however,
42% of the patients had baseline rhTSH-stimulated Tg ele-
vation >0.1 ng/mL, but only one patient was found to have
residual tumor (606). In another study using the same assay
(787), a TSH-suppressed serum Tg level was >0.1 ng/mL in
14% of patients, but the false-positive rate was 35% using an
rhTSH-stimulated Tg cutoff of >2 ng/mL, raising the possi-
bility of unnecessary testing and treatment. In low-risk pa-
tients not undergoing ablation, an ultrasensitive Tg was
<1 ng/mL in 91% and <2 ng/mL in 96% of patients at 9
months after thyroidectomy (644). In a second-generation
assay, a cutoff of 0.15 ng/mL was shown to have a NPV of
98.6% and 91% specificity for residual disease or poten-
tial recurrence (587). The only prospective study also docu-
mented increased sensitivity of detection of disease at the
expense of reduced specificity (770), and receiver operating
curves have shown that a Tg level on thyroid hormone
therapy around 0.2–0.3 ng/mL portends the best sensitivity
and specificity for detecting persistent disease. With the use
of these sensitive Tg assays, it was concluded that an annual
serum Tg on LT4 treatment with periodic neck US is adequate
for detection of recurrence without need for rhTSH stimu-
lation testing in those patients with a serum Tg <0.2–0.3 ng/
mL on thyroid hormone therapy (606). In patients at low to
intermediate risk of recurrence, the utility of an undetectable
postoperative nonstimulated Tg level is uncertain and may
depend upon the functional sensitivity of the Tg assay, with
some studies (632,646) observing RAI-avid metastatic foci
(usually in neck lymph nodes) in 8.5%–12% of such patients,
while another study (630) noted negative scans in 63 of 63
patients when the baseline Tg was <0.2 ng/mL. The different
results likely relate to both the degree of intermediate versus
higher risk patients in the respective cohorts, the amount of
residual thyroid tissue, the elapsed time since surgery, the
cutoff for functional sensitivity of the Tg assays, as well as
the sensitivity of the post-RAI imaging techniques.
Approximately 20% of patients who are clinically free of
disease with serum Tg levels <1 ng/mL during thyroid hor-
mone suppression of TSH (785) will have a serum Tg level
>2 ng/mL after rhTSH or thyroid hormone withdrawal at 12
months after initial therapy with surgery and RAI. In this
patient population, one-third will have identification of per-
sistent or recurrent disease and of increasing Tg levels, and
the other two-thirds will remain free of clinical disease and
will have stable or decreasing stimulated serum Tg lev-
els over time (618,624). However, there may be a low like-
lihood of a rise in serum Tg to >2 ng/mL when the basal
serum Tg is <0.1 ng/mL if a second-generation Tg im-
munochemiluminometric assay (ICMA) with a functional
sensitivity of 0.05 ng/mL is employed (788). There is good
evidence that a Tg cutoff level above 2 ng/mL following
rhTSH stimulation is highly sensitive in identifying patients
with persistent tumor (785,789–794). However, the results of
serum Tg measurements made on the same serum specimen
differ among assay methods (316). Therefore, the Tg cutoff
may differ significantly among medical centers and labora-
tories. Further, the clinical significance of minimally
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
67
 detectable Tg levels is unclear, especially if only detected
following TSH stimulation. However, receiver operating
curves have shown that a Tg level on thyroid hormone around
0.2–0.3 ng/mL portends the best sensitivity and specificity for
detecting persistent disease. In these patients, the trend in se-
rum Tg over time will typically identify patients with clinically
significant residual disease. A rising unstimulated or stimu-
lated serum Tg indicates disease that is likely to become
clinically apparent (618,795). Thyroglobulin doubling time
may have utility as a predictor of recurrence, analogous to the
use of calcitonin doubling time for MTC (622,796).
[C7] Anti-Tg antibodies
The presence of anti-Tg antibodies, which occur in ap-
proximately 25% of thyroid cancer patients (797) and 10% of
the general population (798), will falsely lower serum Tg
determinations in immunometric assays (799). The use of
recovery assays in this setting to detect significant interfer-
ence is controversial (799,800). Serum anti-Tg antibody
should be measured in conjunction with serum Tg assay by an
immunometric method. Although assay standardization
against the International Reference Preparation 65/93 has
been recommended (608), wide-ranging variability in assay
results and analytical sensitivity of the assay remains
(801,802). Use of recovery methods for anti-Tg antibody may
suffer variable interferences (608). Anti-Tg antibody may
rise transiently postoperatively as an apparent immune re-
action to the surgery itself and may also rise after ablation
therapy (611). Anti-Tg antibodies should be measured in a
different assay if the routine anti-Tg antibody assay is neg-
ative in a patient with surgically proven Hashimoto thy-
roiditis (775). It may be useful to measure anti-Tg antibodies
shortly after thyroidectomy and prior to ablation because
high levels may herald the likelihood of recurrence in patients
without Hashimoto thyroiditis (801). Similarly, recurrent or
progressive disease is suggested in those patients initially
positive for anti-Tg antibodies who then become negative but
subsequently have rising levels of anti-Tg antibodies. Falling
levels of anti-Tg antibodies may indicate successful therapy
(614,801). Thus, serial serum anti-Tg antibody quantification
using the same methodology may serve as an imprecise
surrogate marker of residual normal thyroid tissue, Ha-
shimoto thyroiditis, or tumor (608,609,615). Following total
thyroidectomy and RAI remnant ablation, anti-Tg antibodies
usually disappear over a median of about 3 years in patients
without evidence of persistent disease (611,615,616). Several
studies demonstrate an increased risk of recurrence/persistent
disease associated either with a new appearance of anti-Tg
antibodies or rising titers (609–614). From a clinical per-
spective, anti-Tg antibody levels that are declining over time
are considered a good prognostic sign, while rising antibody
levels, in the absence of an acute injury to the thyroid (release
of antigen by surgery or RAI treatment), significantly in-
creases the risk that the patient will subsequently be diag-
nosed with persistent or recurrent thyroid cancer.
The recent development of liquid chromatography-tandem
mass spectrometry assay of Tg holds promise for accurate Tg
measurement in the presence of Tg autoantibodies (803–
805), but further studies will be required to validate the assays
in terms of functional sensitivity, correlations with immu-
noassay results, and patient outcomes, reflecting either ex-
cellent response or persistent disease (806).
[C8] What is the role of serum Tg measurement
in patients who have not undergone RAI
remnant ablation?
& RECOMMENDATION 64
Periodic serum Tg measurements on thyroid hormone
therapy should be considered during follow-up of patients
with DTC who have undergone less than total thyroidec-
tomy and in patients who have had a total thyroidectomy
but not RAI ablation. While specific cutoff levels of Tg
that optimally distinguish normal residual thyroid tissue
from persistent thyroid cancer are unknown, rising Tg
values over time are suspicious for growing thyroid tissue
or cancer.
(Strong recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
In low- and intermediate-risk patients who underwent a
total thyroidectomy without remnant ablation or adjuvant
therapy, the same strategy of follow-up is used, based on
serum Tg determination on LT4 treatment and on neck US at
9–12 months. In most of these patients, neck US does not
reveal any suspicious findings and the serum Tg is <1 ng/mL
on LT4 treatment, is low (<2 ng/mL) and will remain at a low
level, or will decrease without any additional therapy over
time (545). There is no need for rhTSH stimulation because
Tg will increase to a value above 1 ng/mL in 50% of the
cases, even in individuals without residual cancer, with the
magnitude of increase being related to the size of normal
thyroid remnants (783). These patients are followed on an
annual basis with serum TSH and Tg determination.
In the few patients with a serum Tg that remains elevated
over time, especially for those with a rising Tg, remnant ab-
lation or adjuvant therapy with 131I may be considered with a
posttherapy WBS if neck US is negative. There is no evidence
in these low-risk patients that a delayed treatment over the
postoperative treatment may adversely affect the outcome.
A cohort of 80 consecutive patients with very low-risk
PTMC who had undergone near-total thyroidectomy without
postoperative RAI treatment were studied over 5 years (783).
The rhTSH-stimulated serum Tg levels were £1 ng/mL in 45
patients (56%) and >1 ng/mL in 35 (44%) patients in whom
rhTSH-stimulated Tg levels were as high as 25 ng/mL. The
diagnostic WBS revealed uptake in the thyroid bed but
showed no pathological uptake in any patient, and thyroid bed
uptake correlated with the rhTSH-stimulated serum Tg levels
( p < 0.0001). Neck ultrasonography identified lymph node
metastases in both Tg-positive and Tg-negative patients. The
authors concluded that for follow-up of this group of patients:
(i) diagnostic WBS was ineffective at detecting metastases;
(ii) neck ultrasonography as the main surveillance tool was
highly sensitive in detecting lymph node metastases; and (iii)
detectable rhTSH-stimulated serum Tg levels mainly de-
pended upon the size of thyroid remnants, which suggests that
serum Tg determination should be performed primarily on
thyroid hormone therapy when using a sensitive Tg assay
(functional sensitivity £0.2 ng/mL). In a series of 290 low-risk
patients who had not undergone remnant ablation (545), se-
rum Tg levels on LT4 became undetectable (<1 ng/mL) within
5–7 years in 95% of the cohort and was <0.1 ng/mL in 80% of
a subset of these patients, using a sensitive assay to confirm
the utility of Tg measurements on thyroid hormone treatment
68
HAUGEN ET AL.
 for routine follow-up. The frequency of follow-up is uncertain
in patients who have not received RAI ablation and have
sufficient residual thyroid tissue to produce measurable levels
of serum Tg, the magnitude of which will depend upon the
mass of residual tissue and the degree of TSH suppression. It
appears reasonable to consider periodic measurements of Tg
as surveillance for a trend in rising values.
[C9] What is the role of US and other imaging
techniques (RAI SPECT/CT, CT, MRI, PET-CT)
during follow-up?
[C10] Cervical ultrasonography
& RECOMMENDATION 65
(A) Following surgery, cervical US to evaluate the thyroid
bed and central and lateral cervical nodal compartments
should be performed at 6–12 months and then periodically,
depending on the patient’s risk for recurrent disease and Tg
status.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(B) If a positive result would change management, ultra-
sonographically suspicious lymph nodes ‡8–10 mm (see
Recommendation 71) in the smallest diameter should be
biopsied for cytology with Tg measurement in the needle
washout fluid.
(Strong recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
(C) Suspicious lymph nodes less than 8–10 mm in smallest
diameter may be followed without biopsy with consider-
ation for FNA or intervention if there is growth or if the
node threatens vital structures.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
(D) Low-risk patients who have had remnant ablation,
negative cervical US, and a low serum Tg on thyroid
hormone therapy in a sensitive assay (<0.2 ng/mL) or after
TSH stimulation (Tg <1 ng/mL) can be followed primarily
with clinical examination and Tg measurements on thyroid
hormone replacement.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
Cervical ultrasonography is performed with a high-
frequency probe (‡10 MHz) and is highly sensitive in the
detection of cervical metastases in patients with DTC
(290,783,807). These studies primarily evaluate patients with
PTC, and the utility of neck US for monitoring patients with
low-risk FTC is not well-established. Neck US should in-
terrogate all lymph node compartments and the thyroid bed.
Frequently, US does not distinguish thyroid bed recurrences
from benign nodules (629,808). When an abnormality is
found during the year after surgery in patients without any
other suspicious findings, including low serum Tg on thyroid
hormone therapy, follow-up may be performed with neck US.
A correlation performed between US findings and pathology
at surgery (292) has shown for lymph nodes >7mm in the
smallest diameter that a cystic appearance or hyperechoic
punctuations in a context of thyroid cancer should be considered
as malignant; lymph nodes with a hyperechoic hilum are re-
assuring; the type of vascularization (central: reassuring; pe-
ripheral: concerning) has a high sensitivity/specificity; a round
shape, a hypoechoic appearance or the loss of the hyperechoic
hilum by themselves does not justify a FNA biopsy (FNAB).
Interpretation of neck US should take into account all other
clinical and biological data. In fact, the risk of recurrence is
closely related to the initial lymph node status: most lymph
node recurrences occur in already involved compartments;
the risk increases with a higher number of N1 and a higher
number of N1 with extracapsular extension (338) and with
macroscopic rather than microscopic lymph node metastases
(335,809).
In low- and intermediate-risk patients, the risk of lymph node
recurrence is low (<2%) in patients with undetectable serum Tg
and is much higher in those with detectable/elevated serum Tg.
In fact, 1 g of neoplastic thyroid tissue will increase the serum
Tg by *1 ng/mL during LT4 treatment and by approximately
2–10 ng/mL following TSH stimulation (788,800). Neck US
can detect N1 as small as 2–3 mm in diameter (in patients in
whom serum Tg may be low or undetectable), but benefits of
their early discovery (<8–10 mm) is not demonstrated.
FNAB for cytology and Tg measurement in the aspirate fluid
is performed for suspicious lymph nodes ‡8–10mm in their
smallest diameter. US guidance may improve the results of
FNAB, in particular for small lymph nodes and those located
deep in the neck. However, FNAB cytology misses thyroid
cancer in a significant proportion (up to 20%) of patients. The
combination of cytology and serum Tg determination in the
aspirate fluid increases sensitivity (303,810,811). In cases of
lymph node metastases, the Tg concentration in the aspirate fluid
is often elevated (>10ng/mL), and concentrations above this
level are highly suspicious (296,298,301). A Tg concentration in
the aspirate fluid between 1 and 10ng/mL is moderately suspi-
cious for malignancy, and comparison of the Tg measurement in
the aspirate fluid and the serum should be considered in these
patients. Also, up to half of the FNAB performed for suspicious
US findings are benign, demonstrating that selection of patients
for FNAB needs to be improved (296,298,812). Nonsuspicious
and small nodes (<8–10mm in the smallest diameter) can be
monitored with neck US.
[C11] Diagnostic whole-body RAI scans
& RECOMMENDATION 66
After the first posttreatment WBS performed following
RAI remnant ablation or adjuvant therapy, low-risk and
intermediate-risk patients (lower risk features) with an
undetectable Tg on thyroid hormone with negative anti-
Tg antibodies and a negative US (excellent response to ther-
apy) do not require routine diagnostic WBS during follow-up.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
& RECOMMENDATION 67
(A) Diagnostic WBS, either following thyroid hormone
withdrawal or rhTSH, 6–12 months after adjuvant RAI
therapy can be useful in the follow-up of patients with high
or intermediate risk (higher risk features) of persistent
disease (see risk stratification system, section [B19]) and
should be done with 123I or low activity 131I.
(Strong recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
B) SPECT/CT RAI imaging is preferred over planar im-
aging in patients with uptake on planar imaging to better
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
69
 anatomically localize the RAI uptake and distinguish be-
tween likely tumors and nonspecific uptake
(Weak recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
Following RAI ablation or adjuvant therapy, when the
posttherapy scan does not reveal uptake outside the thyroid bed,
subsequent diagnostic WBSs have low sensitivity and are usu-
ally not necessary in low-risk patients who are clinically free of
residual tumor and have an undetectable serum Tg level on
thyroid hormone and negative cervical US (583,785,813,814).
A diagnostic WBS may be indicated in three primary
clinical settings: (i) patients with abnormal uptake outside the
thyroid bed on posttherapy WBS, (ii) patients with poorly
informative postablation WBS because of large thyroid
remnants with high uptake of 131I (>2% of the administered
activity at the time of WBS) that may hamper the visuali-
zation of lower uptake in neck lymph nodes, and (iii) patients
with Tg antibodies, at risk of false-negative Tg measurement,
even when neck US does not show any suspicious findings.
Iodine 123 is preferred over 131I in these rare indications for
diagnostic WBS, because it delivers lower radiation doses to
the body and provides better quality images.
Iodine 131 or 123I whole-body scintigraphy includes planar
images or images using a dual-head SPECT gamma camera of
the whole body and spot images of the neck, mediastinum, and
on any abnormal focus of RAI uptake. It may be performed
after the administration of either a diagnostic (usually 2–5 mCi)
or a therapeutic activity (30–150 mCi) of RAI. Because of the
lack of anatomical landmarks on planar images, it is often
difficult to differentiate uptake in normal thyroid remnants
from lymph node metastases (especially when thyroid rem-
nants are large), uptake in lung metastases from rib lesions, or
accumulation of RAI in intestine or bladder from a pelvic bone
lesion. Hybrid cameras combine a dual-head SPECT gamma
camera with a CT scanner in one gantry. This allows direct
superimposition of functional and anatomical imaging. The
radiation dose delivered to the patient by the low-dose CT scan
is 2–5 mSv, a dose that is much lower than the dose delivered
by the administration of 100 mCi of 131I (around 50 mSv).
Whole-body SPECT/CT performed after the administra-
tion of a diagnostic or a therapeutic activity (30 mCi or more)
of RAI is associated with (i) an increased number of patients
with a diagnosis of metastatic lymph node and (ii) a de-
creased frequency of equivocal findings (739,743,815–818).
Furthermore, the CT portion of the SPECT/CT provides ad-
ditional information on non–iodine-avid lesions; SPECT-CT
changed tumor risk classifications in 25% of the patients
according to the International Union Against Cancer classi-
fication and in 6% of the patients according to the ATA risk of
recurrence classification; the SPECT-CT changed treatment
management in 24 to 35% of patients, by decreasing the rate
of equivocal findings. Finally, SPECT-CT avoids the need for
further cross-sectional imaging studies such as contrast CT or
MRI. Neoplastic lesions with low uptake of RAI or without
any uptake may be a cause of false negative SPECT-CT.
Iodine 124 emits positrons, allowing PET/CT imaging in DTC
patients. It is used as a dosimetric and also as a diagnostic tool
to localize disease. In fact, for each neoplastic focus 124I PET/CT
permits an accurate measurement of its volume as well as the
uptake and half-life of 124I in it, therefore allowing a reliable
individual dosimetric assessment for each neoplastic focus.
The sensitivity of 124I-PET for the detection of residual
thyroid tissue and/or metastatic DTC was reported to be
higher than that of a diagnostic 131I planar WBS (99% vs.
66%) (819–821). Iodine 124 PET/CT has not yet been
compared with 131I SPECT/CT in a large series of patients
with DTC. Furthermore, 124I is not yet widely available for
clinical use and is primarily a research tool at this time.
[C12] 18FDG-PET scanning
& RECOMMENDATION 68
(A) 18FDG-PET scanning should be considered in high-
risk DTC patients with elevated serum Tg (generally
>10 ng/mL) with negative RAI imaging
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(B) 18FDG-PET scanning may also be considered as (i) a
part of initial staging in poorly differentiated thyroid
cancers and invasive Hu
¨rthle cell carcinomas, especially
those with other evidence of disease on imaging or because
of elevated serum Tg levels, (ii) a prognostic tool in pa-
tients with metastatic disease to identify lesions and pa-
tients at highest risk for rapid disease progression and
disease-specific mortality, and (iii) an evaluation of post-
treatment response following systemic or local therapy of
metastatic or locally invasive disease.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
18FDG-PET/CT is primarily considered in high-risk DTC
patients with elevated serum Tg (generally >10 ng/mL) with
negative RAI imaging. In a meta-analysis of 25 studies that
included 789 patients, the sensitivity of 18FDG-PET/CT was
83% (ranging from 50% to 100%) and the specificity was
84% (ranging from 42% to 100%) in non–131I-avid DTC
(822). Factors influencing 18FDG-PET/CT sensitivity in-
cluded tumor dedifferentiation, larger tumor burden, and to a
lesser extent, TSH stimulation.
18FDG-PET is more sensitive in patients with an aggres-
sive histological subtype, including poorly differentiated, tall
cell, and Hu
¨rthle cell thyroid cancer. 18FDG uptake on PET in
metastatic DTC patients is a major negative predictive factor
for response to RAI treatment and an independent prognostic
factor for survival (823,824). It can also identify lesions
with high 18FDG uptake (standardized uptake value) that may
be more aggressive and should be targeted for therapy or close
monitoring. It is complementary to 131I WBS, even in the
presence of detectable 131I uptake in metastases, because 18FDG
uptake may be present in neoplastic foci with no 131I uptake.
In patients with a TSH-stimulated Tg £10 ng/mL, the
sensitivity of 18FDG is low, ranging from <10% to 30%. It is
therefore recommended to consider 18FDG-PET only in DTC
patients with a stimulated Tg level ‡10 ng/mL. Of course, this
level needs to be adapted and lowered in case of aggressive
pathological variant of thyroid cancer that may produce low
amounts of serum Tg. Furthermore, in patients with unde-
tectable Tg levels but with persistent Tg antibodies the level
of serum Tg cannot be reliably assessed and 18FDG-PET may
localize disease in some of these patients.
The sensitivity of 18FDG-PET scanning may be slightly in-
creased with TSH stimulation. A multicentric prospective study
on 63 patients showed an increase in the number of lesions
70
HAUGEN ET AL.
 detected on the 18FDG-PET/CT performed after rhTSH
stimulation compared to the 18FDG-PET/CT performed on
thyroid hormone treatment and without TSH stimulation
(825). However, the sensitivity for detecting patients with at
least one tumor site was not improved by the rhTSH stim-
ulation. In this study, the lesions found only by rhTSH-PET
contributed adequately to an altered therapeutic plan in four
patients (6%), and the clinical benefit of identifying these
additional small foci remains to be proven. Its clinical
benefit might be higher in patients with normal neck and
chest CT scan and normal neck ultrasonography. A meta-
analysis on seven studies including the previous study and
comprising 168 patients confirmed these results and showed
that 18FDG-PET/CT performed following TSH stimulation
altered clinical management in only 9% of patients. Fur-
thermore, false positives can be seen with 18FDG-PET im-
aging with or without TSH stimulation (825).
Results of 18FDG-PET/CT might alter the indications for
131I treatment or the decision for surgical removal of small
tumor foci with 18FDG uptake. The frequency of false-
positive lesions varies among series from 0% to 39%, and this
high number justifies a FNAB with cytology and Tg mea-
surement in the aspirate fluid in cases in which surgery is
planned, based on 18FDG-PET results. The higher sensitivity
of neck ultrasonography for the detection of small metastatic
lymph nodes should be noted, with 18FDG-PET being more
sensitive for some locations such as the retropharyngeal or
the retro-clavicular regions (825).
To date, there is no evidence that TSH stimulation im-
proves the prognostic value of 18FDG-PET imaging.
[C13] CT and MRI
& RECOMMENDATION 69
(A) Cross-sectional imaging of the neck and upper chest (CT,
MRI) with IV contrast should be considered (i) in the setting
of bulky and widely distributed recurrent nodal disease where
US may not completely delineate disease, (ii) in the assess-
ment of possible invasive recurrent disease where potential
aerodigestive tract invasion requires complete assessment, or
(iii) when neck US is felt to be inadequately visualizing
possible neck nodal disease (high Tg, negative neck US).
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(B) CT imaging of the chest without IV contrast (imag-
ing pulmonary parenchyma) or with IV contrast (to in-
clude the mediastinum) should be considered in high risk
DTC patients with elevated serum Tg (generally >10 ng/
mL) or rising Tg antibodies with or without negative RAI
imaging.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(C) Imaging of other organs including MRI brain, MR
skeletal survey, and/or CT or MRI of the abdomen should
be considered in high-risk DTC patients with elevated
serum Tg (generally >10 ng/mL) and negative neck and
chest imaging who have symptoms referable to those or-
gans or who are being prepared for TSH-stimulated RAI
therapy (withdrawal or rhTSH) and may be at risk for
complications of tumor swelling.
(Strong recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
In patients with elevated or rising Tg or anti-Tg antibodies
and NED on neck US or RAI imaging (if performed), CT
imaging of the neck and chest should be considered. The
frequency of positive anatomic imaging increases with higher
serum Tg levels above 10 ng/mL. CT is the most frequently
recommended first-line technique to search for lymph node
metastases in patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the
head and neck, and an injection of contrast medium is man-
datory for the analysis of the neck and mediastinum (826).
Radioiodine can be administered 4–8 weeks following the
injection of contrast medium, because at that time a majority
of the iodine contamination has disappeared in most patients
(315). If there is a concern, a random urine iodine (and cre-
atinine) prior to initiation of a LID and RAI testing or treat-
ment can be measured to make sure the urine iodine is not
high. Diagnostic CT scan may complement neck US for the
detection of macrometastases in the central compartment, in
the mediastinum, and behind the trachea (307–309), and it is
the most sensitive tool for the detection of micrometastases in
the lungs. Before revision surgery is contemplated, pre-
sumptive recurrent neck targets must be defined by high-
resolution radiographic anatomic studies such as US or spiral
axial CT scan to complement 18FDG-PET/CT or RAI im-
aging and must be carefully defined to allow for adequate
preoperative mapping and definitive surgical localization.
In addition to nodal assessment axial scanning, including
CT scan with contrast has utility in the evaluation of locally
recurrent invasive disease and relationships with vessels.
Such patients may present with hoarseness, vocal cord pa-
ralysis on laryngeal exam, progressive dysphagia or mass
fixation to surrounding structures, respiratory symptoms
including stridor or hemoptysis, and lesions with rapid pro-
gression/enlargement. Such lesions are incompletely evalu-
ated with US alone, and axial CT scanning with contrast
medium is indicated.
The use of MRI has also been advocated for imaging the
neck and the mediastinum. It is performed with and without
injection of gadolinium chelate as a contrast medium and does
not require any injection of iodine contrast medium. The
performance of MRI for imaging the neck and mediastinum
has not been directly compared with CT on large numbers of
thyroid cancer patients (827–829). Compared to CT scan, it
may better delineate any involvement of the aerodigestive
tract (830,831). It is often used as second-line imaging tech-
nique in patients with demonstrated or suspicious lesions on
CT scan in order to better delineate these lesions. In the lower
part of the neck, movements of the aerodigestive axis during
the procedure that may last several minutes will decrease the
quality of images (414). Endoscopy of the trachea and or
esophagus, with or without ultrasonography, looking for ev-
idence of intraluminal extension can also be helpful in cases of
suspected aerodigestive tract invasion. MRI is less sensitive
than CT scan for the detection of lung micronodules.
Finally, whether these imaging techniques (CT and MRI)
should be performed for diagnostic purposes or whether an
18FDG-PET/CT scan should be performed as the first-line
imaging procedure for diagnosis is still a matter of debate. In
the past, CT scan with injection of contrast medium was more
sensitive for the detection of lymph node metastases (832),
but with modern PET/CT equipment, the CT scan of the PET/
CT is as reliable as a CT scan used for radiology, and many
lesions can be found on 18FDG-PET/CT scanning, even if no
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
71
 injection of contrast medium has been performed (833,834).
Delineation between lymph node metastases or local recur-
rence and vessels or the aerodigestive axis is often not well
visualized on 18FDG-PET/CT in the absence of contrast in-
jection, and if necessary other imaging techniques (CT and
MRI with contrast medium) may be performed especially for
a preoperative work-up. As a result, most patients with ex-
tensive disease should be considered for 18FDG-PET/CT and
CT imaging with contrast, and some patients will also be
considered for MRI.
This imaging strategy is applied in patients with elevated
serum Tg (>5–10 ng/mL) and no other evidence of disease
(neck and chest imaging), starting with a 18FDG-PET/CT
(822,833). In the past an empiric treatment was used in such
patients, but recent studies have shown that 18FDG-PET/CT
imaging is more sensitive and should be performed as the
first-line approach, with empiric RAI treatment being con-
sidered only for those patients with no detectable 18FDG
uptake (833).
[C14] Using ongoing risk stratification (response to thera-
py) to guide disease long-term surveillance and therapeutic
management decisions
Ongoing risk stratification allows the clinician to continue
to provide individualized management recommendations as
the risk estimates evolve over time. While the specific details
of how surveillance and therapeutic strategies should be
modified over time as a function of response to therapy re-
classification within each ATA risk category remains to be
defined, we do endorse the following concepts (more details
in Table 13).
Excellent response: An excellent response to therapy
should lead to a decrease in the intensity and frequency of
follow-up and the degree of TSH suppression (this change in
management will be most apparent in ATA intermediate- and
high-risk patients).
Biochemical incomplete response: If associated with
stable or declining serum Tg values, a biochemical incom-
plete response should lead to continued observation with
ongoing TSH suppression in most patients. Rising Tg or anti-
Tg antibody values should prompt additional imaging and
potentially additional therapies.
Structural incomplete response: A structural incomplete
response may lead to additional treatments or ongoing ob-
servation depending on multiple clinico-pathologic factors
including the size, location, rate of growth, RAI avidity,
18FDG avidity, and specific pathology of the structural lesions.
Indeterminate response: An indeterminate response
should lead to continued observation with appropriate serial
imaging of the nonspecific lesions and serum Tg monitoring.
Nonspecific findings that become suspicious over time or
rising Tg or anti-Tg antibody levels can be further evaluated
with additional imaging or biopsy.
[C15] What is the role of TSH suppression during
thyroid hormone therapy in the long-term follow-up
of DTC?
& RECOMMENDATION 70
(A) In patients with a structural incomplete response to
therapy, the serum TSH should be maintained below
0.1 mU/L indefinitely in the absence of specific contrain-
dications.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(B) In patients with a biochemical incomplete response to
therapy, the serum TSH should be maintained between 0.1
and 0.5 mU/L, taking into account the initial ATA risk
classification, Tg level, Tg trend over time, and risk of
TSH suppression.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
(C) In patients who presented with high-risk disease but
have an excellent (clinically and biochemically free of
disease) or indeterminate response to therapy, consider-
ation should be given to maintaining thyroid hormone
therapy to achieve serum TSH levels of 0.1–0.5 mU/L for
up to 5 years after which the degree of TSH suppression
can by reduced with continued surveillance for recurrence.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
(D) In patients with an excellent (clinically and bio-
chemically free of disease) or indeterminate response to
therapy, especially those at low risk for recurrence, the
serum TSH may be kept within the low reference range
(0.5–2 mU/L).
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(E) In patients who have not undergone remnant ablation
or adjuvant therapy who demonstrate an excellent or in-
determinate response to therapy with a normal neck US,
and low or undetectable suppressed serum Tg, and Tg or
anti-Tg antibodies that are not rising, the serum TSH can
be allowed to rise to the low reference range (0.5–2 mU/L).
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
A meta-analysis has suggested an association between
thyroid hormone suppression therapy and reduction of major
adverse clinical events (745). The appropriate degree of TSH
suppression by thyroid hormone therapy is still unknown, es-
pecially in high-risk patients rendered free of disease. A con-
stantly suppressed TSH (0.05 mU/L) was found in one study to
be associated with a longer relapse-free survival than when
serum TSH levels were always 1 mU/L or greater, and the
degree of TSH suppression was an independent predictor of
recurrence in multivariate analysis (749). Conversely, another
large study found that disease stage, patient age, and 131I
therapy independently predicted disease progression, but the
degree of TSH suppression did not (275). A third study showed
that during LT4 therapy the mean Tg levels were significantly
higher when TSH levels were normal than when TSH levels
were suppressed (<0.5 mU/L) but only in patients with local or
distant recurrence (835). A fourth study of 2936 patients found
that overall survival improved significantly when the TSH was
suppressed to <0.1 mU/L in patients with NTCTCSG stage III
or IV disease and to a range of 0.1 mU/L to about 0.5 mU/L in
patients with NTCTCSG stage II disease; however, there was
no incremental benefit from suppressing TSH to undetectable
levels in stage II patients, and suppression of TSH was of no
benefit in patients with stage I disease (671), and higher de-
grees of suppression to TSH of <0.03mU/L provided no ad-
ditional benefit (746). Another study found that a serum TSH
72
HAUGEN ET AL.
 threshold of 2 mU/L differentiated best between patients free
of disease and those with relapse or cancer-related mortality,
which remained significant when age and tumor stage were
included in a multivariate analysis (750). A prospective study
showed that disease-free survival for low-risk patients without
TSH suppression was not inferior to patients with TSH sup-
pression (836). No prospective studies have been performed
examining the risk of recurrence and death from thyroid cancer
associated with varying serum TSH levels, based on the cri-
teria outlined above in [C14] for the absence of tumor at 6–12
months post surgery and RAI ablation.
A recent observational study demonstrated increased risk of
all-cause and cardiovascular mortality in DTC patients com-
pared to a control population (837). The authors also showed
that survival in the DTC patients was lower when the serum
TSH was <0.02 mU/L, which is particularly relevant in patients
with an excellent response to therapy in whom overtreatment
should be avoided. An approach to balancing the risks of thy-
roxine suppression against the risks of tumor recurrence or
progression has been presented in a recent review (747). This
review helped to define patients at low, intermediate, and high
risk of complications from TSH suppression therapy. Table 15
provides recommendations for TSH ranges based on response
to thyroid cancer therapy weighed against risks of LT4 therapy,
which is adapted from the review by Biondi and Cooper (747).
In patients at high risk of adverse effects on heart and bone by
TSH suppression therapy, the benefits of TSH suppression
should be weighed against the potential risks. In peri- and
postmenopausal women at risk for bone loss, adjunctive ther-
apy with calcium supplements, vitamin D, and other bone-
enhancing agents (bisphosphonates, denosumab, etc.) should
be considered. b-Adrenergic blocking drugs may be considered
in older patients to obviate increases in left ventricular mass and
tachycardia (838,839).
There are inadequate data to make a strong recommendation
regarding the intensity and duration of TSH suppression in the
biochemical incomplete response to therapy category. This
category encompasses a variety of patients with low serum Tg
levels (median nonstimulated Tg 3.6 ng/mL) having been
initially classified as ATA low risk (16%–24%), ATA inter-
mediate risk (47%–64%), or ATA high risk (18%–21%)
(539,607). Furthermore, the risk of development of structurally
identifiable disease within this cohort is not uniform but rather
is related to the ongoing behavior of residual disease as re-
flected by both the magnitude of the Tg elevation and to the
rate of rise of the serum Tg or anti-Tg antibodies. Based on
weak data and expert opinion, we recommend a goal TSH of
0.1–0.5 mIU/L for the majority of patients with a biochemical
Table 15. Thyrotropin Targets for Long-Term Thyroid Hormone Therapy
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
73
 incomplete response, recognizing that less intense TSH sup-
pression (0.5–2.0 mIU/L) may be appropriate for ATA low-
risk patients with stable nonstimulated Tg values near the
threshold for excellent response (e.g., nonstimulated Tg values
in the 1–2 ng/mL range), while more intense TSH suppression
(<0.1 mIU/L) may be desired in the setting of more elevated or
rapidly rising Tg values.
[C16] What is the most appropriate management
of DTC patients with metastatic disease?
Metastases may be discovered at the time of initial disease
staging or may be identified during longitudinal follow-up. If
metastases are found following initial therapy, some patients
may subsequently experience a reduction in tumor burden with
additional treatments that may offer a survival or palliative
benefit (840–844). The preferred hierarchy of treatment for
metastatic disease (in order) is surgical excision of loco-
regional disease in potentially curable patients, 131I therapy for
RAI-responsive disease, external beam radiation therapy or
other directed treatment modalities such as thermal ablation,
TSH-suppressive thyroid hormone therapy for patients with
stable or slowly progressive asymptomatic disease, and sys-
temic therapy with kinase inhibitors (preferably by use of
FDA-approved drugs or participation in clinical trials), espe-
cially for patients with significantly progressive macroscopic
refractory disease. Clinical trials or kinase inhibitor therapy
may be tried before external beam radiation therapy in special
circumstances, in part because of the morbidity of external
beam radiation and its relative lack of efficacy. However, lo-
calized treatments with thermal (radiofrequency or cryo-) ab-
lation (845), ethanol ablation (846), or chemo-embolization
(847) may be beneficial in patients with a single or a few
metastases and in those with metastases at high risk of local
complications; the treatments should be performed in such
patients before the initiation of any systemic treatment. These
modalities may control treated metastases, may avoid local
complications, and may delay initiation of systemic treatment.
Additionally, surgical therapy in selected incurable patients is
important to prevent complications in targeted areas, such as
the CNS and central neck compartment. Conversely, conser-
vative intervention with TSH-suppressive thyroid hormone
therapy may be appropriate for selected patients with stable
asymptomatic local metastatic disease and most patients with
stable asymptomatic non-CNS distant metastatic disease.
[C17] What is the optimal directed approach
to patients with suspected structural
neck recurrence?
& RECOMMENDATION 71
Therapeutic compartmental central and/or lateral neck dis-
section in a previously operated compartment, sparing unin-
volved vital structures, should be performed for patients with
biopsy-proven persistent or recurrent disease for central neck
nodes ‡8mm and lateral neck nodes ‡10mm in the smallest
dimension that can be localized on anatomic imaging.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
Persistent or recurrent nodal disease may result in local
invasion and is the source of considerable patient and phy-
sician anxiety (848). However, several observational studies
suggest that low-volume recurrent nodal disease can be in-
dolent and can be managed through active surveillance, al-
though not all lesions in these series are documented as
malignant (629,849). Bulky or invasive recurrent disease is
best treated surgically (319,850–853).
The judgment to offer surgery for recurrent nodal disease
in the neck is made with equipoise in two opposing decision
elements: (i) the risks of revision surgery (which are typically
higher than primary surgery due to scarring from previous
surgery (854) balanced with (ii) the fact that surgical resec-
tion generally represents the optimal treatment of macro-
scopic gross nodal disease over other treatment options. An
important element in this decision-making process is the
availability of surgical expertise specifically in the perfor-
mance of revision thyroid cancer nodal surgery, which is a
discrete surgical skill set. The decision to treat cervical nodal
recurrence surgically should be made with an appreciation of
distant disease presence and progression but may be under-
taken even in the setting of known distant metastasis for
palliation of symptoms and prevention of aerodigestive tract
obstruction. The decision for treatment and surgery specifi-
cally is best derived through collaborative team approach
involving surgery, endocrinology, and importantly the pa-
tient and family (855). Therefore, cytologic confirmation of
disease can be deferred if the findings of the FNA will not
lead to additional evaluation or treatment. While we gener-
ally recommend cytologic confirmation of abnormal radio-
graphic findings prior to surgical resection, we recognize that
this may not be necessary (or possible) in every case (e.g.,
radiographic findings with a very high likelihood of malig-
nancy, or the specific location of the lymph node makes it
difficult/impossible to biopsy).
[C18] Nodal size threshold
Surgery is considered with the recognition of clinically
apparent, macroscopic nodal disease through radiographic
analysis including US (Table 7) and/or axial (CT) scanning
rather than through isolated Tg elevation (309,335,856).
Given the risks of revision nodal surgery, a clearly defined
preoperative radiographic target is mandatory. The risks of
surgery relate in part to the exact location of the target
node(s) and whether the compartment in question has been
previously dissected such as recurrent central neck nodes
after primary thyroidectomy. This target must be defined by
high-resolution radiographic anatomic studies such as US or
spiral CT scan with contrast, as a complement to 18FDG-PET/
CT or RAI-SPECT/CT when performed, to allow for ade-
quate preoperative mapping and definitive surgical localiza-
tion (309,856). Ultrasound-guided FNA for cytology with Tg
measurement in the aspiration sample can be performed in
the setting of radiographically suspicious nodal recurrence
keeping in mind that Tg rinsing may be positive with thyroid
bed persistent benign thyroid remnant tissue if the patient has
not been treated with RAI. Charcoal tattooing under US
guidance may help the surgeon to localize the lymph node to
be removed during surgery (344).
Malignant central neck nodes ‡8 mm and lateral neck
nodes ‡10 mm in the smallest dimension that have undergone
FNAB and can be localized on anatomic imaging (US with or
without axial CT) can be considered surgical targets
74
HAUGEN ET AL.
 (309,857–859). Short-axis nodal diameter measurement is
optimally employed in surgical decision-making for nodal
malignancy. Smaller lesions are probably best managed with
active surveillance (observation) with serial cross-sectional
imaging, reserving FNA and subsequent intervention for
documented structural disease progression. However, multi-
ple factors in addition to size should be taken into account
when considering surgical options, including proximity of
given malignant nodes to adjacent vital structures and the
functional status of the vocal cords. Patient comorbidities,
motivation, and emotional concerns should also be taken
into account along with primary tumor factors (high-grade
histology, Tg doubling time, RAI avidity, 18FDG-PET avidity,
and presence of molecular markers associated with aggressive
behavior). Through thorough patient and multidisciplinary
collaborative discussions, metastatic nodes >8–10mm can be
carefully observed in properly selected patients with serial
clinical and radiographic follow-up, with surgery being of-
fered if they progress during follow-up and conservative
follow-up being maintained if they are stable over time.
[C19] Extent of nodal surgery
Because of the increased risk of recurrence with focal
‘‘berry-picking’’ techniques, compartmental surgery is rec-
ommended (860,861). Planned compartmental dissection
should be adjusted and be more limited depending on the
surgeon’s judgment of procedural safety as it relates to
scarring/distortion of anatomy (from prior surgery and/or
past radiation therapy) and the perception of impending
complications. Typical revision lateral neck dissection in-
volves levels II, III, and IV, while revision central neck dis-
section includes at least one paratracheal region with
prelaryngeal and pretracheal subcompartments. Bilateral
central neck dissection is offered only when dictated by
disease distribution because of the risks of bilateral nerve
injury and permanent hypoparathyroidism.
Basal Tg decreases by 60%–90% after compartmental
dissection for recurrent nodal disease in modern series, but
only 30%–50% of patients have unmeasurable basal Tg after
such surgery, and it is difficult to predict who will respond
to surgery with Tg reduction (627,628,634,858,862–876).
However, most series suggest surgery results in a high
clearance rate of structural disease in over 80% of patients
(859,875).
[C20] Ethanol injection
Percutaneous ethanol injection for patients with metastatic
lymph nodes is gaining interest as a nonsurgical directed
therapy for patients with recurrent DTC. Most of the studies
limited PEI to patients who had undergone previous neck
dissections and RAI treatment, those who had FNA-proven
DTC in the lymph node, and those with no known distant
metastases.
One of the first studies examining the effectiveness of
local metastatic lymph node control by PEI treated 14 pa-
tients with 29 lymph nodes (846). Twelve of the 14 patients
had good loco-regional control in this study with short-term
follow-up (mean 18 months). The largest study to date
treated 63 patients with 109 metastatic lymph nodes be-
tween the years 2004 and 2009 (878). Ninety-two lymph
nodes (84%) were successfully ablated in this retrospective
study with a mean follow-up of 38 months, and most re-
quired one to three treatment sessions. Minor complications
included brief discomfort at the PEI site, and there were no
major complications.
A recent study retrospectively reviewed 25 patients who
had 37 lymph nodes ablated between the years 1994 and
2012, with a relatively long follow-up of a mean of 65
months (879). All lymph nodes were successfully ablated
in one to five treatment sessions by lack of flow on US.
Most of the lymph nodes decreased in size and 46%
completely disappeared. Serum Tg levels were reduced in
most patients and brought into an acceptable range
(<2.4 ng/mL) in 82% of patients with negative anti-Tg
antibodies. There were no serious or long-term complica-
tions. Another recent study also demonstrated safety and
efficacy of PEI in 21 patients with 41 metastatic lymph
nodes (880). These investigators treated patients with only
one session, and 24% of patients had a recurrence at the site
of the injection.
Limitations of many of the studies included small numbers
of patients, relatively short-term follow-up, and many pa-
tients with small lymph nodes (<5–8 mm).
A general consensus from studies and reviews is that PEI
should be considered in patients who are poor surgical can-
didates. Many patients will likely need more than one treat-
ment session and lymph nodes >2 cm may be difficult to treat
with PEI. Focal PEI treatment does represent a nonsurgical
form of berry picking. Formal neck compartmental dissection
is still the first-line therapy in DTC patients with clinically
apparent or progressive lymph node metastases. When de-
ciding for the optimal strategy of care for a patient’s lymph
node metastases, previous treatment modalities should also
be taken into consideration.
[C21] Radiofrequency or laser ablation
The use of radiofrequency ablation (RFA) with local anes-
thesia in the treatment of recurrent thyroid cancer has been
associated with a mean volume reduction that ranges between
approximately 55% and 95% (881,882) and complete disap-
pearance of the metastatic foci in 40%–60% of the cases
(845,882,883). As with alcohol ablation, multiple treatment
sessions are often required. Complications include discomfort,
pain, skin burn, and changes in the voice (884). Similar to
alcohol ablation techniques, it appears that RFA may be most
useful in high-risk surgical patients or in patients refusing
additional surgery, rather than as a standard alternative to
surgical resection of metastatic disease (883–885). More re-
cently, preliminary findings using US-guided laser ablation for
treatment of cervical lymph node metastases have been re-
ported (886).
[C22] Other therapeutic options
Empiric RAI therapy for structurally identifiable disease
that is not RAI avid by diagnostic scanning is very unlikely to
have a significant tumoricidal effect and is therefore not
generally recommended (887). Stereotactic radiotherapy
(SBRT) can be successfully used to treat isolated metastatic
disease foci, but it has no role in most patients with resectable
lymph node metastases. EBRT using modern techniques such
as intensity modulated radiotherapy and sterotactic radiation,
is considered for loco-regional recurrence that is not surgi-
cally resectable or with extranodal extension or involvement
of soft tissues, particularly in patients with no evidence of
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
75
 distant disease. Efficacy has been suggested only in retro-
spective studies on limited numbers of patients (888,889).
Likewise, systemic therapies (such as cytotoxic chemother-
apy or kinase inhibitors) for loco-regional disease are con-
sidered only after all surgical and radiation therapy options
have been exhausted.
[C23] What is the surgical management
of aerodigestive invasion?
& RECOMMENDATION 72
When technically feasible, surgery for aerodigestive in-
vasive disease is recommended in combination with RAI
and/or EBRT.
(Strong Recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
For tumors that invade the upper aerodigestive tract, surgery
combined with additional therapy such as 131I and/or external
beam radiation therapy is generally advised (890,891). Patient
outcome is related to complete resection of all gross disease
with the preservation of function, with techniques ranging
from shaving a tumor off the trachea or esophagus for super-
ficial invasion, to more aggressive techniques when the trachea
is more deeply invaded (e.g., direct intraluminal invasion),
including tracheal resection and anastomosis or laryngophar-
yngoesophagectomy (892–894). Surgical decision-making can
be complex and must balance oncologic surgical completeness
with preservation of upper aerodigestive track head and neck
function. In some circumstances such surgery represents a
possible attempt for cure, and in other circumstances it offers
significant regional neck palliation in patients with distant
metastasis with impending asphyxiation or significant he-
moptysis (414,891).
[C24] How should RAI therapy be considered
for loco-regional or distant metastatic disease?
For regional nodal metastases discovered on diagnostic
WBS, RAI may be employed in patients with low-volume
disease or in combination with surgery, although surgery is
typically preferred in the presence of bulky disease or disease
amenable to surgery. Radioiodine is also used adjunctively
following surgery for regional nodal disease or aerodigestive
invasion if residual RAI-avid disease is present or suspected.
Significant variation exists nationally in the United States in
regard to RAI use, irrespective of the degree of disease or risk
of recurrence (895,896). However, there are no randomized,
controlled clinical trials demonstrating better patient out-
comes after RAI therapy. One retrospective analysis indi-
cated that a delay in RAI therapy of 6 months or more was
associated with disease progression and reduced survival
(897). In one study of 45 patients with persistent serum Tg
elevation after reoperation for loco-regional recurrence, ad-
juvant RAI therapy demonstrated no benefit (898).
[C25] Administered activity of
131I for loco-regional or
metastatic disease
& RECOMMENDATION 73
(A) Although there are theoretical advantages to dosi-
metric approaches to the treatment of loco-regional or
metastatic disease, no recommendation can be made about
the superiority of one method of RAI administration over
another (empiric high activity versus blood and/or body
dosimetry versus lesional dosimetry).
(No recommendation, Insufficient evidence)
(B) Empirically administered amounts of 131I exceeding 150
mCi that often potentially exceed the maximum tolerable
tissue dose should be avoided in patients over age 70 years.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
Despite the apparent effectiveness of 131I therapy in many
patients, the optimal therapeutic activity remains uncertain
and controversial (895,899). There are three approaches to
131I therapy: empiric fixed amounts, therapy determined by
the upper limit of blood and body dosimetry (900–907), and
quantitative tumor or lesional dosimetry (908,909). Dosi-
metric methods are often reserved for patients with distant
metastases or unusual situations such as renal insufficiency
(910,911), children (912,913), the elderly, and those with
extensive pulmonary metastases (914). Comparison of out-
comes among these methods from published series is difficult
(895,897,900). No prospective randomized trial to address
the optimal therapeutic approach has been published. One
retrospective study concluded that patients with loco-
regional disease were more likely to respond after dosimetric
therapy than after empiric treatment (915). Another study
demonstrated improved efficacy of administration of dosi-
metric maximal activity after failure of empiric dosage (916).
Arguments in favor of higher activities cite a positive rela-
tionship between the total 131I uptake per tumor mass and
outcome (908), while others have not confirmed this rela-
tionship (917). In the future, the use of 123I or 131I with
modern SPECT/CT or 124I PET-based dosimetry may facil-
itate whole-body and lesional dosimetry (918–920). In cer-
tain settings (e.g., in the patients with radiation-induced
thyroid cancer seen after the Chernobyl accident), RAI
treatment may be associated with good outcomes even in
high-risk patients with metastatic disease (921).
The efficacy of RAI therapy is related to the mean radiation
dose delivered to neoplastic foci and also to the radiosensi-
tivity of tumor tissue (922). The radiosensitivity is higher in
patients who are younger, with small metastases from well-
differentiated papillary or follicular carcinoma and with up-
take of RAI but no or low 18FDG uptake.
The maximum tolerated radiation absorbed dose (MTRD),
commonly defined as 200 rads (cGy) to the blood, is poten-
tially exceeded in a significant number of patients undergoing
empiric treatment with various amounts of 131I. In one study
(923) 1%–22% of patients treated with 131I according to
dosimetry calculations would have theoretically exceeded
the MTRD had they been empirically treated with 100–300
mCi of 131I. Another study (924) found that an empirically
administered 131I activity of 200 mCi would exceed the
MTRD in 8%–15% of patients younger than age 70 and 22%–
38% of patients aged 70 years and older. Administering 250 mCi
empirically would have exceeded the MTRD in 22% of patients
younger than 70 and 50% of patients 70 and older. These esti-
mates imply the need for caution in administering empiric ac-
tivities higher than 100–150 mCi in certain populations such as
elderly patients and patients with renal insufficiency.
76
HAUGEN ET AL.
 [C26] Use of rhTSH (Thyrogen) to prepare patients for 131I
therapy for loco-regional or metastatic disease
& RECOMMENDATION 74
There are currently insufficient outcome data to recom-
mend rhTSH-mediated therapy for all patients with distant
metastatic disease being treated with 131I.
(No Recommendation, Insufficient evidence)
& RECOMMENDATION 75
Recombinant human TSH–mediated therapy may be indi-
cated in selected patients with underlying comorbidities
making iatrogenic hypothyroidism potentially risky, in pa-
tients with pituitary disease whose serum TSH cannot be
raised, or in patients in whom a delay in therapy might be
deleterious. Such patients should be given the same or higher
activity that would have been given had they been prepared
with hypothyroidism or a dosimetrically determined activity.
(Strong Recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
No randomized trial comparing thyroid hormone with-
drawal therapy to rhTSH-mediated therapy for treatment of
distant metastatic disease has been reported, but there is a
growing body of nonrandomized studies exploring the use of
rhTSH to prepare patients for therapy of metastatic disease
(713,925–934). One small comparative study showed that the
radiation dose to metastatic foci is lower with rhTSH than
that following withdrawal (935). Many of these case reports
and series report disease stabilization or improvement in
some patients following rhTSH-mediated 131I therapy, but
whether the efficacy of this preparation is comparable to
thyroid hormone withdrawal is unknown. Extreme or pro-
longed elevations of TSH from either thyroid hormone
withdrawal or rhTSH may acutely stimulate tumor growth
and mass of metastases (930,936–938). With metastatic
deposits in the brain or in close relation to the spinal cord or
the superior vena cava, such swelling may severely com-
promise neurologic function or produce a superior vena
cava syndrome, respectively. When distant metastases are
evident, MRI of the brain and spine is recommended to
detect the presence of critical metastases prior to treatment
(see sections [C28] and [C39]). When metastases are de-
tected, institution of temporary high-dose corticosteroid
therapy is recommended for trying to limit the risk of acute
tumor swelling and compromised function. Dexamethasone
has been employed in doses of 2–4 mg every 8 hours starting
6–12 hours prior to rhTSH and RAI dosing or after 10–12
days of thyroid hormone withdrawal, with the steroids
continued in a tapering dosage schedule for 1 week post
therapy, for 48–72 hours after rhTSH administration, or for
72 hours after re-institution of thyroxine therapy when
thyroid hormone withdrawal was employed (927). In pa-
tients with these critical metastases, consideration should be
given to preparation with either a reduced dose of rhTSH or
to attenuating the degree and duration of endogenous TSH
elevation after thyroid hormone withdrawal while moni-
toring serum TSH levels. This can be achieved by the
temporary addition of LT3 therapy to thyroxine replace-
ment. Satisfactory RAI treatment with either empiric or
dosimetric activities should be feasible after achieving TSH
levels of 30–50 mU/L. When thyroid hormone withdrawal
has been employed, LT4 therapy should recommence once
the dose of RAI is administered in order to reduce the du-
ration of TSH elevation.
[C27] Use of lithium in 131I therapy
& RECOMMENDATION 76
Since there are no outcome data that demonstrate a better
outcome of patients treated with lithium as an adjunct to
131I therapy, the data are insufficient to recommend lithium
therapy.
(No recommendation, Insufficient evidence)
Lithium inhibits iodine release from the thyroid without
impairing iodine uptake, thus enhancing 131I retention in
normal thyroid and tumor cells (939). One study (940) found
that lithium increased the estimated 131I radiation dose in
metastatic tumors on average by more than 2-fold, but pri-
marily in those tumors that rapidly cleared iodine. On the
other hand, a different study was unable to document any
clinical advantage of lithium therapy on outcome in patients
with metastatic disease, despite an increase in RAI uptake in
tumor deposits (941). Lithium use may be associated with
adverse events and needs to be precisely managed.
[C28] How should distant metastatic disease
to various organs be treated?
The overall approach to treatment of distant metastatic
thyroid cancer is based upon the following observations and
oncologic principles:
1. Morbidity and mortality are increased in patients with
distant metastases, but individual prognosis depends
upon factors including histology of the primary tumor,
distribution and number of sites of metastasis (e.g., brain,
bone, lung), tumor burden, age at diagnosis of metasta-
ses, and 18FDG and RAI avidity (842,933,942–948).
2. Improved survival is associated with responsiveness to
directed therapy (surgery, EBRT, thermal ablation,
etc.) and/or RAI (842,933,942–948).
3. In the absence of demonstrated survival benefit, cer-
tain interventions can provide significant palliation or
reduce morbidity (847,949–951).
4. Treatment of a specific metastatic area must be con-
sidered in light of the patient’s performance status and
other sites of disease; for example, 5%–20% of pa-
tients with distant metastases die from progressive
cervical disease (948,952).
5. Longitudinal re-evaluation of patient status and con-
tinuing reassessment of potential benefit and risk of
intervention are required.
6. In the setting of overall poor anticipated outcome of
patients with radiographically evident or symptomatic
metastases that do not respond to RAI, the complexity
of multidisciplinary treatment considerations and the
availability of prospective clinical trials should en-
courage the clinician to refer such patients to tertiary
centers with particular expertise.
7. Mutation profiling of metastatic tumor (to detect abnor-
malities in genes such as BRAF, TERT, RAS, or PAX8/
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
77
 PPARc) has not yet definitively proven to be of value for
estimating patient prognosis or for predicting response to
treatments such as anti-angiogenic kinase inhibitors,
although the presence of certain mutations such as
BRAFV600E or PAX8/PPARc are required for some clinical
trials. Thus, routine mutation profiling cannot be rec-
ommended at this time outside of research settings.
There is little if any benefit derived from the treatment
of RAI-refractory DTC with RAI (953). Although RAI-
refractory tumors often may harbor BRAFV600E mutations
and RAI-avid tumors are overrepresented with RAS muta-
tions, RAI therapy has not been shown to be more effective in
patients with RAS mutations (954).
[C29] Treatment of pulmonary metastases
& RECOMMENDATION 77
(A) Pulmonary micrometastases should be treated with
RAI therapy and RAI therapy should be repeated every 6–
12 months as long as disease continues to concentrate RAI
and respond clinically because the highest rates of com-
plete remission are reported in these subgroups.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(B) The selection of RAI activity to administer for
pulmonary micrometastases can be empiric (100–200
mCi, or 100–150 mCi for patients ‡70 years old) or
estimated by dosimetry to limit whole-body retention to
80 mCi at 48 hours and 200 cGy to the bone marrow.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
& RECOMMENDATION 78
Radioiodine-avid macronodular metastases may be treated
with RAI and treatment may be repeated when objective
benefit is demonstrated (decrease in the size of the lesions,
decreasing Tg), but complete remission is not common and
survival remains poor. The selection of RAI activity to
administer can be made empirically (100–200 mCi) or by
lesional dosimetry or whole-body dosimetry if available in
order to limit whole-body retention to 80 mCi at 48 hours
and 200 cGy to the bone marrow.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
In the management of the patient with pulmonary metastases,
key criteria for therapeutic decisions include (i) size of meta-
static lesions (macronodular typically detected by chest radi-
ography, micronodular typically detected by CT, lesions beneath
the resolution of CT); (ii) avidity for RAI and, if applicable,
response to prior RAI therapy; and (iii) stability (or lack thereof)
of metastatic lesions. Pulmonary pneumonitis and fibrosis are
rare complications of high-dose RAI treatment. Dosimetric ap-
proaches to therapy with a limit of 80 mCi whole-body retention
at 48 hours and 200 cGy to the bone marrow should be con-
sidered in patients with diffuse 131I pulmonary uptake (955). If
pulmonary fibrosis is suspected, then appropriate periodic pul-
monary function testing and consultation should be obtained.
The presence of pulmonary fibrosis may limit the ability to
further treat metastatic disease with RAI (956).
Patients with pulmonary micrometastases (<2 mm, gener-
ally not seen on anatomic imaging) that are RAI avid have the
highest rates of complete remission after treatment with RAI
(942,947,957,958). These patients should be treated with
RAI therapy repeatedly every 6–12 months as long as disease
continues to concentrate RAI and respond clinically.
A precise definition of ‘‘responding clinically’’ is not fea-
sible given the wide variation in disease presentation and re-
sponse to therapy. A meaningful response to RAI treatment is
generally associated with a significant reduction in serum Tg
and/or in the size or rate of growth of metastases or struc-
turally apparent disease. In contrast, a reduction in serum Tg
and in RAI uptake with no concomitant decrease or with an
increase in tumor size suggests refractoriness to RAI therapy.
In the presence of widespread metastases, especially when in
bone, additional RAI may temporarily stabilize progression,
but it is unlikely to result in cure. The risks of bone marrow
suppression or pulmonary fibrosis should generate caution
when repeated doses of RAI are being considered. Absolute
neutrophil count and platelet counts are the usual markers of
bone marrow suppression, and pulmonary function testing
including diffusing capacity of the lungs for carbon monoxide
can be markers of pulmonary toxicity. Other approaches (see
sections [C36–C41]) should be considered once maximal
cumulative tolerable radiation doses have been administered.
Macronodular pulmonary metastases may also be treated with
RAI if demonstrated to be iodine avid. How many doses of RAI
to give and how often to give RAI is a decision that must be
individualized based on the disease response to treatment, age of
the patient, and the presence or absence of other metastatic le-
sions (942,947). The presence of significant side effects includ-
ing bone marrow suppression and salivary gland damage may
temper enthusiasm for additional RAI therapy (959), and risk of
second malignancies after RAI treatment remains controversial
(766,960,961).PatientswithsolitarypulmonaryDTCmetastases
may be considered for surgical resection, although the potential
benefit weighed against the risk of surgery is unclear.
The likelihood of significant long-term benefit of
131I
treatment in patients with elevated Tg and negative diagnostic
RAI scans is very low. (962,963). While some reduction in
serum Tg may be observed after such empiric therapy, one
analysis concluded that there was no good evidence either for
or against such treatment (964). In one small retrospective
series of patients with structural disease but negative diag-
nostic 131I WBSs, additional RAI therapy was associated with
stability of disease in 44%, but progression of structural dis-
ease occurred in 56% of the patients (887).
[C30] RAI treatment of bone metastases
& RECOMMENDATION 79
(A) RAI therapy of iodine-avid bone metastases has been
associated with improved survival and should be em-
ployed, although RAI is rarely curative.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(B) The RAI activity administered can be given empiri-
cally (100–200 mCi) or determined by dosimetry.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
RAI therapy for patients with bone metastases is rarely
curative, but some patients with RAI-avid bone metastases
may benefit from this therapy (842,947). A dosimetrically
78
HAUGEN ET AL.
 determined administered dose of RAI may be beneficial for
patients with bone metastases (908), although this is not
proven in controlled studies. Patients undergoing RAI ther-
apy for bone metastases should also be considered for di-
rected therapy of bone metastases that are visible on
anatomical imaging (section [C38]). This may include sur-
gery, external beam radiation therapy, and other focal treat-
ment modalities. These patients should also be considered for
systemic therapy with bone-directed agents (section [C47]).
[C31] When should empiric RAI therapy
be considered for Tg-positive, RAI diagnostic
scan–negative patients?
& RECOMMENDATION 80
In the absence of structurally evident disease, patients with
stimulated serum Tg <10 ng/mL with thyroid hormone
withdrawal or <5 ng/mL with rhTSH (indeterminate re-
sponse) can be followed without empiric RAI therapy on
continued thyroid hormone therapy alone, reserving addi-
tional therapies for those with rising serum Tg levels over
time or other evidence of structural disease progression.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
& RECOMMENDATION 81
Empiric (100–200 mCi) or dosimetrically determined RAI
therapy may be considered in patients with more signifi-
cantly elevated serum Tg levels (see Recommendation 80),
rapidly rising serum Tg levels, or rising ant-Tg antibody
levels, in whom imaging (anatomic neck/chest imaging and/
or 18FDG-PET/CT) has failed to reveal a tumor source that
is amenable to directed therapy. The risk of high cumulative
administered activities of RAI must be balanced against
uncertain long-term benefits. If empiric RAI therapy is gi-
ven and the posttherapy scan is negative, the patient should
be considered to have RAI-refractory disease and no further
RAI therapy should be administered.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
& RECOMMENDATION 82
If persistent nonresectable disease is localized after an
empiric dose of RAI, and there is objective evidence of
significant tumor reduction, then consideration can be
made for RAI therapy to be repeated until the tumor has
been eradicated or the tumor no longer responds to treat-
ment. The risk of repeated therapeutic doses of RAI must
be balanced against uncertain long-term benefits.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
Factors to consider when selecting patients for empiric
RAI therapy include the level of serum Tg elevation and the
results of 18FDG-PET scanning, if performed. Since tumors
that are 18FDG-PET positive generally do not concentrate
RAI (965), RAI therapy is much less likely to be efficacious
(965,966) and it is unlikely to alter the poorer outcome in
such patients (823). Because of this, it is reasonable to per-
form
18FDG-PET/CT scanning prior to consideration of
empiric RAI therapy (967).
The cutoff value of serum Tg above which a patient should
be treated with an empiric dose of RAI is not clear. Most studies
have reported primarily on patients with Tg levels after T4
withdrawal of 10ng/mL or higher; it has been suggested that a
corresponding level after rhTSH stimulation would be 5 ng/mL
(321,782,962,968,969). Patients with a suppressed (624) or
stimulated (970) serum Tg of 5 ng/mL or higher are unlikely to
demonstrate a decline without therapy, and they have higher
rates of subsequent structural recurrence than those with lower
serum Tg levels (970). In addition, a rising serum Tg indicates
disease that is likely to become clinically apparent, particularly
if it is rapidly rising (622,971,972).
If serum Tg levels suggest residual or recurrent disease, but
diagnostic RAI WBS imaging is negative and structural imag-
ing does not reveal disease that is amenable to directed therapy
(surgical, thermal ablation, EBRT, alcohol ablation, see section
[C17 and C38]), then empiric therapy with RAI (100–200 mCi)
or dosimetrically determined RAI activities can be considered
for two purposes: (i) to aid in disease localization, and/or (ii) as
therapy for nonsurgical disease. This approach may identify the
location of persistent disease in approximately 50% of patients
(968,973,974), although the reported range of success is wide.
From a therapeutic perspective, over half of patients experi-
ence a fall in serum Tg after empiric RAI therapy in patients
with negative diagnostic WBS (963,969,975,976); however,
there is no evidence for improved survival with empiric therapy
in this setting (782,962,968). Further, there is evidence that Tg
levels may decline without specific therapy in a significant
proportion of patients with Tg levels <10 ng/mL (539,618–
620,624,782,970–972,975,977–979). The most compelling ev-
idence for benefit from empiric RAI therapy is for pulmonary
metastases, which are not amenable to surgical management or
EBRT (782,844,980).
[C32] What is the management of complications
of RAI therapy?
& RECOMMENDATION 83
The evidence is insufficient to recommend for or against
the routine use of measures to prevent salivary gland
damage after RAI therapy.
(No recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
& RECOMMENDATION 84
Patients with xerostomia are at increased risk of dental
caries and should discuss preventive strategies with their
dental/oral health professional.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
& RECOMMENDATION 85
Surgical correction should be considered for nasolacrimal
outflow obstruction, which often presents as excessive
tearing (epiphora) but also predisposes to infection.
(Strong recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
While RAI appears to be a reasonably safe therapy, it is
associated with a cumulative dose-related low risk of early- and
late-onset complications such as salivary gland damage, dental
caries (981), nasolacrimal duct obstruction (982), and secondary
malignancies (762,763,961,983,984), and it may likely con-
tribute to long-term dysphagia (985). Therefore, it is important
to ensure that the benefits of RAI therapy, especially repeated
courses, outweigh the potential risks. There is probably no dose
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
79
 of RAI that is completely safe, nor is there any maximum cu-
mulative dose that could not be used in selected situations.
However, with higher individual and cumulative doses there are
increased risks of side effects as discussed previously.
For acute transient loss of taste or change in taste and
sialadentitis, recommended measures to prevent damage to
the salivary glands have included hydration, sour candies,
amifostine, and cholinergic agents (986), but evidence is
insufficient to recommend for or against these modalities.
One study suggested sour candy may actually increase sali-
vary gland damage when given within 1 hour of RAI therapy,
as compared to its use until 24 hours post therapy (987).
Another study showed that the use of lemon slices within
20 min of 124I administration resulted in increased radiation
absorbed dose to the salivary glands (988). A different study
suggested that early use and multiple administered doses of
lemon juice transiently decreased radiation exposure to the
parotid glands (989), so the exact role and details of use of
sialagogues to prevent salivary gland damage remains un-
certain. Patients with painful sialadenitis may receive pain
relief from local application of ice. For chronic salivary gland
complications, such as dry mouth and dental caries, cholin-
ergic agents may increase salivary flow (986). Interventional
sialendoscopy has been shown in a number of small studies to
be an effective treatment in patients with RAI-induced sia-
ladenitis that is unresponsive to medical therapy (990–992).
[C33] How should patients who have received RAI
therapy be monitored for risk of secondary
malignancies?
& RECOMMENDATION 86
Although patients should be counseled on the risks of
second primary malignancy with RAI treatment for DTC,
the absolute increase in risk of developing a second pri-
mary malignancy attributable to RAI treatment is consid-
ered small and does not warrant specific screening to any
extent greater than age-appropriate general population
health screening.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
Most long-term follow-up studies variably report a very low
risk of secondary malignancies (bone and soft tissue malig-
nancies, including breast, colorectal, kidney, and salivary
cancers, and leukemia) in long-term survivors (762,763). A
meta-analysis of two large multicenter studies showed that the
RR of second malignancies was significantly increased at 1.19
([95% CI 1.04–1.36], p < 0.010), relative to thyroid cancer
survivors not treated with RAI, although the absolute increase
in second primary malignancy risk attributable to RAI is con-
sidered to be small (961). The risk of leukemia was also sig-
nificantly increased in thyroid cancer survivors treated with
RAI, with a RR of 2.5 ([95% CI 1.13–5.53], p < 0.024) (961).
Studies on T1N0 PTC from the SEER registry suggested that
the excess risk of leukemia after RAI treatment was greater in
young individuals compared with older individuals. The excess
risk of leukemia was significantly greater in patients aged <45
years (standardized incidence rate of 5.32 [95% CI 2.75–9.30]
for those aged <45 years versus 2.26 [95% CI 1.43–3.39] in
older individuals) (766). The risk of secondary malignancies is
dose related (763), with an excess absolute risk of 14.4 solid
cancers and of 0.8 leukemias per gigabecquerel (1 GBq= 27
mCi) of 131I at 10,000 person-years of follow-up. Cumulative
131I activities above 500–600 mCi are associated with a sig-
nificant increase in risk. In theory, the risk of second primary
malignancies increases with higher administered activities.
There is no direct evidence of increased risk of secondary
malignancies after a single administration of 30–100 mCi in
comparison to the observed risk of second primary cancer in
thyroid cancer patients who have not been treated with 131I. The
risk is clearly increased in patients who have been treated with a
large cumulative activity that is higher than 600 mCi (763),
which suggests a dose–effect relationship. This is an argument
for using the minimal activity necessary to treat each patient.
There appears to be an increased risk of breast cancer in women
with thyroid cancer (762,983,993). It is unclear whether this is
due to screening bias, RAI therapy, or other factors. An ele-
vated risk of breast cancer with 131I was not observed in another
study (764). The use of laxatives may decrease radiation ex-
posure of the bowel, particularly in patients treated after pro-
longed withdrawal of thyroid hormone, and vigorous oral
hydration will reduce exposure of the bladder and gonads (22).
[C34] What other testing should patients receiving
RAI therapy undergo?
& RECOMMENDATION 87
Patients receiving therapeutic doses of RAI should have
baseline complete blood count and assessment of renal
function.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
Published data indicate that when administered activities
are selected to remain below 200 cGy to the bone marrow,
minimal transient effects are noted in white blood cell and
platelet counts (955). However, persistent mild decrements in
white blood cell count and/or platelets are seen in some pa-
tients who have received multiple RAI therapies. Further,
radiation to the bone marrow is impacted by several factors,
including renal function. The kidneys are a major means of
iodine excretion from the body, and physiologic radioisotope
study research in nonthyroidectomized individuals has
shown that renal impairment significantly reduces RAI ex-
cretion (994).
[C35] How should patients be counseled about
RAI therapy and pregnancy, breastfeeding,
and gonadal function?
& RECOMMENDATION 88
Women of childbearing age receiving RAI therapy should
have a negative screening evaluation for pregnancy prior
to RAI administration and avoid pregnancy for 6–12
months after receiving RAI.
(Strong recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
& RECOMMENDATION 89
Radioactive iodine should not be given to nursing women.
Depending on the clinical situation, RAI therapy could be
deferred until lactating women have stopped breastfeeding or
pumping for at least 3 months. A diagnostic 123I or low-dose
131I scan should be considered in recently lactating women to
detect breast uptake that may warrant deferral of therapy.
80
HAUGEN ET AL.
 (Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
& RECOMMENDATION 90
Men receiving cumulative RAI activities ‡400 mCi should
be counseled on potential risks of infertility.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
Women about to receive RAI therapy should first undergo
pregnancy testing. Gonadal tissue is exposed to radiation from
RAI in the blood, urine, and feces. Temporary amenorrhea/
oligomenorrhea lasting 4–10 months occurs in 20%–27% of
menstruating women after 131I therapy for thyroid cancer. Al-
though the numbers of patients studied are small, long-term
rates of infertility, miscarriage, and fetal malformation do not
appear to be elevated in women after RAI therapy (995–997).
One recent large retrospective cohort study showed that use of
RAI was associated with delayed childbearing and decreased
birthrate in later years, although it is unclear if this is due to
reproductive choice or reproductive health (998). Another large
retrospective study suggested that pregnancy should be post-
poned for 1 year after therapy because of an increase in mis-
carriage rate (999), although this was not confirmed in a
subsequent study (1000). Ovarian damage from RAI therapy
may result in menopause occurring approximately 1 year ear-
lier than in the general population, but this result was not as-
sociated with cumulative dose administered or the age at which
the therapy was given (1001). Radioiodine is also significantly
concentrated in lactating breast tissue (1002). Therefore, RAI
should not be given to women who are breastfeeding (1003). A
diagnostic 123I or low-dose 131I scan can be employed in re-
cently lactating women to detect breast uptake that may warrant
deferral of therapy (662). Dopaminergic agents might be useful
in decreasing breast exposure in recently lactating women, al-
though caution should be exercised given the risk of serious,
albeit rare, side effects associated with their routine use to
suppress postpartum lactation (1003,1004).
In men, RAI therapy may be associated with a temporary
reduction in sperm counts and elevated serum follicle-
stimulating hormone levels (1005,1006). Higher cumulative
activities (500–800 mCi) in men are associated with an
increased risk of persistent elevation of serum follicle-
stimulating hormone levels, but fertility and risks of
miscarriage or congenital abnormalities in subsequent preg-
nancies are not changed with moderate RAI activities (*200
mCi) (1007,1008). Permanent male infertility is unlikely with
a single ablative activity of RAI, but theoretically there could
be cumulative damage with multiple treatments. It has been
suggested that sperm banking be considered in men who may
receive cumulative RAI activities ‡400 mCi (1006). Gonadal
radiation exposure is reduced with good hydration, frequent
micturition to empty the bladder, and avoidance of con-
stipation (1009). Some specialists recommend that men wait
3 months (or one full sperm cycle) to avoid the potential for
transient chromosomal abnormalities.
[C36] How is RAI-refractory DTC classified?
& RECOMMENDATION 91
Radioiodine-refractory structurally evident DTC is clas-
sified in patients with appropriate TSH stimulation and
iodine preparation in four basic ways: (i) the malignant/
metastatic tissue does not ever concentrate RAI (no uptake
outside the thyroid bed at the first therapeutic WBS), (ii)
the tumor tissue loses the ability to concentrate RAI after
previous evidence of RAI-avid disease (in the absence of
stable iodine contamination), (iii) RAI is concentrated in
some lesions but not in others; and (iv) metastatic disease
progresses despite significant concentration of RAI.
When a patient with DTC is classified as refractory to
RAI, there is no indication for further RAI treatment.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
The prognosis of patients with DTC is usually favorable, even
when metastatic RAI-avid disease is present. For this reason,
131I is considered the gold standard in the treatment of metastatic
disease. However, many DTC patients with advanced disease do
not respond or become refractory to 131I, with some of these
patients dying within 3–5 years, but there are also long-term
survivors with very slowly progressive disease.
Iodine 131 refractory DTC includes four categories of
patients (1010). In the first category, the malignant/metastatic
tissue does not concentrate 131I outside the thyroid bed at the
first therapeutic WBS. There is no evidence in these patients
that further treatment with RAI may be of any benefit. Fur-
thermore, patients with measurable disease with an absence
of 131I uptake on subsequent diagnostic WBS may also be
considered refractory because even when uptake is seen on
posttherapy scan, it will likely have limited benefit. In the
second category, the tumor tissue loses the ability to con-
centrate 131I (in the absence of stable iodine contamination)
after previous evidence of uptake. This often occurs in pa-
tients with large and multiple metastases and is due to the
eradication by 131I treatment of differentiated cells able to
concentrate RAI but not of poorly differentiated cells that do
not concentrate 131I and that generally will progress. In the
third category, 131I uptake is retained in some lesions but not
in others; this pattern is frequent in patients with multiple
large metastases as shown by 124I studies on PET scan (918)
and by comparing results of 18FDG-PET scan with 131I WBS.
In these patients, progression is likely to occur in metastases
without uptake (in particular when 18FDG uptake is present),
and RAI treatment will not be beneficial on the overall out-
come of the disease. Some patients may have predominantly
RAI-avid disease with only a few lesions that do not con-
centrate RAI. While these patients technically meet the def-
inition of RAI-refractory disease, they may benefit from a
combination of RAI therapy for the majority of the lesions
and directed therapy (section [C38]; Recommendation 93)
for those few lesions that do not concentrate RAI. In the
fourth category, metastatic disease progresses despite sig-
nificant uptake of 131I (new lesions, progressive growth of
lesions, continual rise in serum Tg within months of RAI
therapy). The definition of any of these possibilities depends
on imaging modalities, including a posttherapy 131I WBS
combined with other imaging modalities, such as CT scan,
MRI, or 18FDG PET/CT. The criteria for RAI-refractory
disease remain somewhat controversial. Future studies will
hopefully help to refine this definition.
Predictive factors for tumor response to RAI treatment are
indeed the presence of 131I uptake by tumor, and among those
patients with RAI uptake, younger age, well-differentiated his-
totype, small metastases, and low 18FDG uptake. Indeed these
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
81
 parameters are closely interrelated (823,824,844) and may per-
mit predicting the outcome of RAI treatment at the time of the
discovery of the metastases. About two-thirds of patients with
metastases demonstrate 131I uptake in their metastases, and only
half of them will be cured with repeated courses of 131I treatment.
Less clear is the case of patients with visible RAI uptake in all
the known lesions, who are not cured despite several treatment
courses but whose disease remains stable and does not progress
according to RECIST criteria. It is controversial whether these
patients should be considered 131I refractory and whether RAI
treatment should be abandoned in favor of other treatment mo-
dalities. The probability to obtain a cure with further treatments
is low and side effects may increase, including the risk of sec-
ondary cancers and leukemias (762,763,844,961). Several pa-
rameters should then be taken into consideration for the decision
to continue treatment with RAI, including response to previous
treatment courses, high or significant 131I uptake after previous
treatment courses, low 18FDG uptake in tumor foci, and limited
side effects from the RAI therapy.
[C37] Which patients with metastatic thyroid
cancer can be followed without additional
therapy?
& RECOMMENDATION 92
(A) Patients with 131I-refractory metastatic DTC that is
asymptomatic, stable, or minimally progressive who are
not likely to develop rapidly progressive, clinically sig-
nificant complications and do not have indications for di-
rected therapy can be monitored on TSH-suppressive
thyroid hormone therapy with serial radiographic imaging
every 3–12 months.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
(B) BRAF or other mutational testing is not routinely rec-
ommended for prognostic purposes in patients with RAI-
refractory, progressive, locally advanced, or metastatic DTC.
(Weak recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
Patients with 131I-refractory metastatic DTC often have an
indolent clinical course, with no apparent symptoms or ad-
verse impact from their disease burden for many years. In the
absence of tolerable therapies with significant likelihood of
inducing durable complete remission or improving overall
survival, treatment should be limited to interventions that
prevent morbidity or palliate symptoms. Thus, once 131I re-
fractory metastatic disease is identified, attention should be
directed toward (i) determining the extent of metastatic dis-
ease by staging imaging studies such as CT, 18FDG PET/CT,
or MRI as described in sections [C9–C13]; (ii) assessing
degree of current or potential symptoms from the disease;
(iii) understanding the comorbidities that might influence the
choice of therapies for the metastatic disease; and (iv) de-
termining the rate of progression of radiographically evident
lesions. Serial assessment of the size and development of
metastatic lesions can be enhanced by applying criteria
similar to RECIST, as commonly used to assess tumor re-
sponse in clinical trials (1011). Representative soft tissue
metastatic lesions, typically >1 cm, are identified as ‘‘tar-
gets’’ on cross-sectional imaging, with the longest diameter
of each lesion measured. Disease extent can be considered
to be stable or minimally progressive if the sum of the
longest diameters of the target lesions increases <20% in the
absence of new metastatic foci on sequential imaging over
12–15 months of follow-up. No study has identified an ap-
propriate frequency for repeat imaging, but it is reasonable
to repeat the staging imaging studies within 3–12 months
based on the disease burden and locations of lesions
(953,1012). More frequent assessment could be considered
once metastatic disease is identified and/or in response to
intercurrent patient symptoms, and less frequent imaging
performed once a pattern of stability is identified. The
development of progressive disease, either by RECIST
assessment identifying at least 20% increase in sum of
longest diameters of target lesions, the appearance of
significant new metastatic lesions, or development of
disease-related symptoms should warrant consideration of
appropriate systemic therapies (section [C41]) beyond
TSH-suppressive thyroid hormone and/or directed thera-
pies (sections [C15] and [C38]). Although serum Tg levels
should be measured as biomarkers of the disease extent,
patients should not be identified as having progressive
disease and requiring more aggressive therapy solely on
the basis of rising levels of Tg; accelerating increases in Tg
levels should, however, lead to consideration of more
frequent and comprehensive imaging in efforts to identify
previously occult structural correlates.
In each of two recent international, randomized phase III
trials of kinase inhibitors for therapy of progressive, RAI-
refractory, metastatic DTC, patients whose tumors contained
the BRAFV600E mutation who were randomized to the pla-
cebo treatment arms experienced similar progression-free
survival compared with those whose tumors did not harbor a
BRAF mutation (1013,1014). Thus, BRAF mutation status
does not appear to be of prognostic value once patients reach
this degree of advanced disease that would have qualified
them for these clinical trials, that is, RAI-refractory, locally
advanced, or metastatic DTC that has progressed by RECIST
within 13 or 14 months.
[C38] What is the role for directed therapy
in advanced thyroid cancer?
& RECOMMENDATION 93
(A) Both stereotactic radiation and thermal ablation (RFA
and cryoablation) show a high efficacy in treating indi-
vidual distant metastases with relatively few side effects
and may be considered as valid alternatives to surgery.
(Weak recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(B) Stereotactic radiation or thermal ablation should be
considered prior to initiation of systemic treatment when
the individual distant metastases are symptomatic or at
high risk of local complications.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
Several local treatment modalities other than surgery may
be used to treat brain, lung, liver, and bone lesions from
thyroid carcinoma. These local treatment modalities should
be considered prior to initiation of systemic treatment when
the individual distant metastases are symptomatic or at high
risk of local complications. They may also be helpful in case
82
HAUGEN ET AL.
 of progression in a single lesion in patients with otherwise
controlled disease during systemic treatment. In these pa-
tients, benefits can be achieved in preventing local compli-
cations, in improving symptoms such as pain, in delaying the
initiation of systemic treatments, and even in improving
survival. These techniques can be a less aggressive alterna-
tive to surgery and may be indicated in cases of lung me-
tastases associated with insufficient respiratory reserve, poor
patient clinical status, or after multiple previous surgical re-
sections, local recurrence at the site of previous surgery, or
refusal of additional surgery.
In selected patients, the techniques may be an alternative to
surgery as first-line treatment, and they may induce local
tumor control with a similar efficacy to surgical resection. Of
interest, long-term benefits in terms of disease control have
been reported in patients with a single or few metastases and
in whom the disease is slowly progressive.
Interventional radiology (thermal ablation and cement in-
jections), SBRT, or intensity modulated radiotherapy are the
most frequently used techniques. The main principle of these
techniques is to selectively treat the lesion, be minimally
invasive, and be well tolerated with relatively few side ef-
fects. The indications and the feasibility of each technique
depend on the location and the size of the lesion to be treated.
Experience with metastases from thyroid cancer is scarce,
and most available data have been obtained in patients with
metastases from nonthyroid cancers.
SBRT allows for delivering high radiation doses in few
fractions to the target tumoral lesion with a high degree of
precision, minimizing the radiation of normal surrounding
tissue. It has been used in several trials to treat brain, liver,
lung, and bone metastases.
For patients with few (one to three) brain metastases,
SBRT is as effective as surgery and can be repeated in case of
appearance of new brain lesions. It is usually well tolerated,
and brain necrosis that occurred in less than 10% of cases is
usually limited and had no clinical consequences. The patient
outcome depends mostly on the progression rate of extra-
cerebral lesions (1015).
Data on lung and liver metastases are available only in ret-
rospective studies on low numbers of patients and with a me-
dian follow-up of less than 1 year in most cases and in one
prospective study (1016). This study included patients with
many different primary tumors, including 10% of the patients
having thyroid cancer. They showed a local control rate ranging
from 63% to 98% in lung lesions and from 57% to 100% in
liver lesions, with a cumulative dose delivered ranging from 20
to 75 Gy in 5–15 fractions. The local tumor control seems to be
long lasting with complete response ranging from 70% to 90%
at 2–3 years. Furthermore, rare (<3%) grade 3–4 toxicities
(pneumonitis, pleural effusion, intestinal complications) were
reported (1017). These toxicities are much less common that
those associated with percutaneous treatment modalities. The
local control rate seems to be dose-related, but the optimal
protocol for SBRT is still not established.
Concerning bone lesions, radiotherapy plays an important
role because it can complement surgery in case of incomplete
resection or be used alone for pain relief or palliation. In
many cases, usual radiotherapy can be given. However, the
major limitation of radiotherapy in spine lesions is the cu-
mulative dose to the spinal cord. SBRT compared to standard
radiotherapy demonstrated a higher efficacy on tumor control
and for limiting radiation to the spinal cord, especially in
patients who need to be re-irradiated. A local tumor control
rate of bone lesions for SBRT ranging from 88% to 100% was
reported especially for lesions that were previously surgically
resected, with a pain relief rate of 30%–83%. SBRT protocols
differed among studies, with a maximum of 30 Gy admin-
istrated in one to five fractions but a single dose of 12.5–15
Gy seems to achieve similar results (1018). Spinal myelop-
athy or vertebral fractures are the most important side effects,
especially in case of large-volume lesions.
Percutaneous thermal ablation is aimed at destroying tumor
foci by increasing (RFA) or decreasing (cryoablation) tem-
peratures sufficiently to induce irreversible cellular damages.
RFA is performed for liver, lung, and bone tumor foci.
Clinical trials showed high efficacy of RFA for liver lesions,
especially from colorectal cancer with long-term local disease
control ranging from 40% to 80%, depending on lesion size,
and a prolonged overall survival in treated patients (1019,1020).
In a total of 100 lung lesions including primary lung tu-
mors and metastases, RFA was both efficient and well tol-
erated, with a complete tumor control rate of 93% at 18
months (1021). A multicenter prospective trial on 183 lung
metastases from cancer other than colorectal showed a
complete response rate of 88% at 1 year and an overall sur-
vival of 92% and 64% at 1 year and at 2 years, respectively
(1022). Recurrence occurs more frequently in lesions >3 cm
and can be detected early after ablation (within 3 months) by
18FDG PET/CT (824,1016). Cases of delayed recurrence
have also been reported, and long-term follow-up is needed.
RFA may be considered for lung lesions <3 cm of diameter,
without soft tissue or mediastinum invasion and without
contact with large vessels. Furthermore, repeated treatments
can be performed on the same lesion and multiple lesions can
be treated in the same patient.
RFA or cryoablation of bone lesions showed promising
results with rapid (1–7 days) and long-lasting pain control
(1023,1024). Cryoablation is a safe technique to treat or to
stabilize bone lesions, is frequently associated with ce-
mentoplasty to consolidate the bone and avoid subsequent
complications, and can treat larger lesions than RFA.
Local disease control was achieved in the few reported
cases of lung and bone metastases from thyroid cancer treated
by thermal ablation (883,1016,1025). The association of
cryoablation and cementoplasty seems promising in purely
lytic bone metastases from thyroid cancer. Furthermore, in
three patients with liver metastases from thyroid cancer (two
MTC and one FTC) RFA was feasible and reduced local
symptoms (1026). Multidisciplinary treatment for metasta-
ses from thyroid cancer especially for bone metastases—
including, for example, thermal ablation (RFA or cryoabla-
tion) and/or cementoplasty associated with systemic treatment
(RAI, bone-directed agents, or chemotherapy)—can improve
the patient’s quality of life by reducing pain and prolonging
time to skeletal events, delaying initiation of systemic treat-
ment, and even improving patient survival (1027).
The toxicity of thermal ablation is generally low, but
pneumothorax or pleural effusion was observed in up to 50%
of RFA procedures for lung lesions, but it rarely required
further treatments. Local pain or transient neurological deficit
or vertebral fracture can occur in case of ablation of bone
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
83
 lesions (5%–6%), and intestinal perforation, abdominal pain,
or intraperitoneal bleeding was observed following ablation
of liver lesions (1021,1028).
Published experience using thermal ablation and stereo-
tactic radiation in thyroid cancer patients is limited, and
recommendations are currently based on more robust evi-
dence in other solid tumors. Randomized prospective studies
comparing the efficacy and tolerability of these different
techniques are lacking, and their choice in clinical practice is
based on local experience, lesion location as well as patient
status and preference.
[C39] Treatment of brain metastases
& RECOMMENDATION 94
While surgical resection and stereotactic EBRT are the
mainstays of therapy for CNS metastases, RAI can be
considered if CNS metastases concentrate RAI. If RAI is
being considered, stereotactic EBRT and concomitant glu-
cocorticoid therapy are recommended prior to RAI therapy
to minimize the effects of a potential TSH-induced increase
in tumor size and RAI-induced inflammatory response.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
Brain metastases typically occur in older patients with
more advanced disease and are associated with a poor
prognosis (933). Surgical resection and stereotactic EBRT
are the mainstays of therapy (933,1029,1030). There are few
data showing efficacy of RAI. Stereotactic radiation therapy
is preferred to whole-brain radiation because life expectancy
in patients with brain metastases may be prolonged, and
stereotactic radiation induces less short- and long-term tox-
icity compared with whole-brain radiation (fatigue, head-
ache, cognitive decline, and behavioral changes), and it may
be effective even in patients with multiple brain lesions.
[C40] Who should be considered for clinical trials?
& RECOMMENDATION 95
Patients should be considered for referral to participate in
prospective therapeutic clinical trials based upon specific
eligibility requirements for given studies and the likeli-
hood that the patient may or may not benefit from study
participation. Clinicians considering referral of patients for
trials should review available treatment options and eli-
gibility criteria, preferably through discussions with trial
center personnel and review of trial materials at the web-
site www.clinicaltrials.org.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
A therapeutic clinical trial is a systematic investigation of
the effectiveness and safety of a potential new or modified
treatment or combination of treatments, potentially including
medications, surgery, radiation therapy, and/or other novel or
revised approaches. A broad variety of such trials may exist at
any given time, which can generally be identified through
online databases such as www.clinicaltrials.org, best supple-
mented with direct contact with the institutions conducting
trials of particular interest so as to ensure trial availability and
patient eligibility. There is limited evidence that enrollment
into clinical trials is associated with lower overall cancer-
specific mortality for patients with common cancers, even
within contexts in which approved and ‘‘standard of care’’
therapies already exist (1031). The reasons for this association
are unclear, but there is no evidence to suggest that trial par-
ticipation is deleterious to patient outcomes, and it may be
beneficial. Participation in a clinical trial should be considered
in any situation wherein there exists no effective or proven
standard of care, or when a standard of care is being compared
with a promising new or investigational therapy. Adjuvant
therapy trials may be appropriate for patients at high risk for
disease recurrence following primary treatment who wish to
pursue aggressive therapy. For patients with RAI-refractory
carcinoma that is locally advanced or metastatic, clinical trials
may be appropriate in the setting of disease that is considered
progressive by RECIST criteria, especially if progression oc-
curred after use of an approved kinase inhibitor such as len-
vatinib or sorafenib, and/or if approved therapies are otherwise
unaffordable to a specific patient. Patients demonstrated to
have specific therapeutically targetable tumor alterations, such
as BRAF mutations or PAX8/PPARc or ALK rearrangements,
can also be considered for trials testing therapies specifically
targeting these alterations. However, given the indolent nature
of metastatic disease in most patients, therapeutic clinical trial
participation should not be considered for patients with stable,
asymptomatic metastatic disease unless agents with significant
likelihood of complete remission, prolongation of survival, or
biologic impact such as redifferentiation that could sensitize to
definitive therapy are available (see section [C37]).
[C41] What is the role of systemic therapy (kinase
inhibitors, other selective therapies, conventional
chemotherapy, bisphosphonates, denosumab)
in treating metastatic DTC?
Systemic therapeutics of several types in selected clinical
contexts appear to provide clinical benefit in treating meta-
static DTC (1032). Benefit has been demonstrated in the form
of improved progression-free survival (delay in time to dis-
ease progression or death) in three randomized, double-
blinded, placebo-controlled clinical trials: vandetanib (1033),
sorafenib (1013), and lenvatinib (1034). Benefit has also been
demonstrated in the form of induced durable tumor regres-
sion (1035–1037).
However, randomized clinical trial data are not yet avail-
able to address many additional critical questions, including
effects of systemic therapies of various types on survival and
quality of life, or to address critical issues of optimal patient
selection/inclusion/exclusion criteria for therapy and dura-
tion of treatment.
To date, no clinical trial has demonstrated an overall survival
advantage or improved quality of life from use of any therapy
in RAI-refractory DTC (1013,1034). Consequently, thera-
peutic decisions are presently based upon the convergence of
expert opinion and patient preference/philosophy, thus em-
phasizing the critical need to address the above questions de-
finitively through clinical trials. It is therefore important to
involve highly skilled clinicians familiar with RAI-refractory
disease and these systemic therapies in decision-making until
definitive guidelines can be developed based upon more rig-
orous data. As a guide, evidence-based recommendations with
expert consensus have been recently published (953).
It should also be highlighted that, broadly construed, sys-
temic therapy encompasses not only more recently emerging
84
HAUGEN ET AL.
 ‘‘targeted’’ approaches, but also historical ‘‘mainstay’’
therapies including TSH suppression and RAI. Although
more ‘‘novel’’ approaches have attracted attention recently, it
is important to optimally apply fundamental approaches. In
this regard, therapeutic RAI should also be used to optimal
effect prior to the initiation of more recent/novel therapies.
To accomplish this requires attention to detail, including
ensuring adequate TSH stimulation, patient adherence to
low-iodine pre-RAI therapy dietary restrictions, and avoid-
ance of proximal preceding iodine contamination from IV
contrast agents, with verification by urinary iodine concen-
tration measurements in selected cases. In this context, oc-
casional patients previously declared ‘‘RAI-refractory’’ can
instead be found to have RAI-responsive disease when such
details are attended to if previously neglected.
Also important is the consideration of alternatives to the
use of systemic therapy, such as the application of surgery or
other localized approaches (including radiation therapy or
thermal ablation approaches). In patients in whom the threats
imposed by cancer are more localized, directed approaches
may have greater potential to control localized disease and
symptoms compared to systemic therapies, especially given
the absence of data to indicate survival benefit or improved
quality of life from the application of systemic therapies in
advanced RAI-refractory DTC.
It is also critically important to ensure that the disease
prompting therapy represents metastatic thyroid cancer. In
particular, because pulmonary nodules attributable to benign
causes are common, the presence of pulmonary nodules does
not in and of itself justify the application of systemic therapy.
Thus, in cases of diagnostic uncertainty in which the result
would have definitive therapeutic implications, biopsy is re-
quired, especially when Tg levels are low/unhelpful (such as
in the presence of anti-Tg antibodies). Conversely, stable,
asymptomatic pulmonary nodules of a few millimeters in size
likely do not justify invasive assessment or systemic therapy.
The introduction of systemic therapy requires that both the
clinician and the patient agree that clinical benefits are ex-
pected to exceed risks for that individual patient. The prob-
lem in this determination, however, is that it is often very
difficult to precisely define such risks and benefits because
they vary greatly depending upon patient context and they are
often poorly articulated in the literature. It is also critical to
weigh not just risks of death and injury, but also risks of
systemic therapies on quality of life, especially as viewed by
a particular patient considering treatment. Hence, the deci-
sion is not based solely on benefits and risks of therapy, but
also on patient value judgments. Issues of risks and benefits
are reviewed in this context in conjunction with each thera-
peutic modality below. Finally, it is important that the in-
volved care team (physicians, physician assistants, nurse
practitioners, nurses) be experienced in the use and man-
agement of toxicities associated with these therapies.
[C42] Kinase inhibitors
& RECOMMENDATION 96
(A) Kinase inhibitor therapy should be considered in RAI-
refractory DTC patients with metastatic, rapidly progressive,
symptomatic, and/or imminently threatening disease not
otherwise amenable to local control using other approaches.
Kinase inhibitors that are FDA approved for differentiated
thyroid carcinoma or other available kinase inhibitors (pref-
erably within the context of therapeutic clinical trials) can be
considered since the impact of these agents on overall sur-
vival and quality of life remains to be defined.
(Weak recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
(B) Patients who are candidates for kinase inhibitor ther-
apy should be thoroughly counseled on the potential risks
and benefits of this therapy as well as alternative thera-
peutic approaches including best supportive care. Appro-
priate
informed
consent
should
be
obtained
and
documented in the medical record prior to initiation of any
therapy, regardless of whether the patient is being treated
in the context of a clinical trial.
(Strong recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
Cytotoxic chemotherapy has historically produced disap-
pointing results in patients with DTC (1038). Kinase inhibi-
tors, many of which share the common target of the VEGF
receptor (VEGFR) (e.g., sorafenib, pazopanib, sunitinib,
lenvatinib, axitinib, cabozantinib, and vandetanib), have re-
cently emerged as highly promising therapies for metastatic
RAI-refractory DTC (1032). Kinase inhibitors, however, are
associated with numerous adverse effects including diarrhea,
fatigue, induced hypertension (requiring initiation of anti-
hypertensive therapy in about half of all previously normo-
tensive individuals), hepatotoxicity, skin changes, nausea,
increased LT4 dosage requirement, changes in taste, and
weight loss. These potential side effects have high proba-
bility of negatively impacting quality of life and/or neces-
sitating dosage reductions in many patients and treatment
discontinuation in up to 20% of patients. Furthermore, these
agents are also associated with more serious and potentially
fatal risks including of thrombosis, bleeding, heart failure,
hepatotoxicity, gastrointestinal tract fistula formation, and
intestinal perforation (1039). Overall, the risk of therapy-
related death in cancer patients treated with oral kinase in-
hibitors is about 1.5%–2% (RR = 2.23, p < 0.023, compared
with randomized placebo treated control cancer patients)
based upon meta-analysis of results from 10 recently pub-
lished randomized trials conducted in several cancers
(1039). In the setting of thyroid cancer, lenvatinib (now
approved in the United States for use in RAI-refractory
DTC) was associated with severe toxicities in 75% of pa-
tients and therapy-attributed mortality in 2.3% of patients
(1034). While risk of drug-related death is relatively low,
the knowledge of potentially fatal therapeutic outcomes
should prompt considerable restraint in the use of kinase
inhibitors, especially in patients who are asymptomatic and/
or with stable or slowly progressive disease and in patients
who can otherwise be effectively treated using directed
therapies.
Three randomized placebo-controlled clinical trials (phase
2, vandetanib; phase 3, sorafenib and lenvatinib) had been
published by the time of the writing of these guidelines, each
demonstrating delayed time to disease progression among
kinase inhibitor–treated patients relative to those treated with
a placebo (1013,1033,1034). On this basis, sorafenib and
lenvatinib were approved for use in the United States and the
European Union for patients with advanced RAI-refractory
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
85
 DTC. Sorafenib or vandetanib treatment were each associ-
ated with progression-free survival prolonged by 5 months,
with <15% objective response rates, but with no improve-
ment on overall survival demonstrated to date. Assessments
comparing sorafenib to placebo outcomes demonstrated
overall lower quality of life among sorafenib-treated patients
relative to those treated with placebo, despite improved
progression-free survival. Lenvatinib therapy was associated
with longer prolonged median progression-free survival by
14.7 months compared with placebo, with a RECIST re-
sponse rate of 65%, with some complete responses also re-
ported. Despite these very encouraging results and regulatory
approval, however, no statistically significant impact of
lenvatinib (or any other kinase inhibitor) therapy on overall
survival has yet been observed (1034). However, survival
data in this context, where all three randomized and placebo-
controlled DTC trials allowed crossover of placebo-treated
patients to kinase inhibitor, must be interpreted with great
caution. The crossover trial designs effectively ‘‘contami-
nated’’ overall survival data, with many placebo-treated pa-
tients later crossing over to receive open-label kinase
inhibitor. Hence, the absence of a proven effect of kinase
inhibitors on overall survival in these trials can best be in-
terpreted as indicating that, among study populations, a delay
in initiation of kinase inhibitor therapy until observation of
RECIST disease progression among initially placebo-treated
patients did not adversely affect overall survival.
Additional VEGFR-directed kinase inhibitors including
axitinib, pazopanib, cabozantinib, and sunitinib also have
activity in metastatic DTC based upon phase 2 therapeutic
trials (1035–1037). No multi-arm comparison ‘‘superiority’’
phase 3 trial data in DTC are available to inform decision-
making with regard to selection among available and mostly
similarly targeted kinase inhibitors. Recent regulatory ap-
proval in DTC and more abundant outcome data in response
to lenvatinib and sorafenib therapy in DTC (1013,1034,
1040–1043) prompt prominent consideration of either len-
vatinib or sorafenib as a first-line therapy.
Despite encouraging trial results, the extent to which any
kinase inhibitor may prolong overall survival and in which
contexts remains undefined. In some situations, however, the
decision to initiate kinase inhibitor therapy is straightfor-
ward. For example, patients with oxygen dependence at-
tributable to DTC lung metastases are not only adversely
affected by their cancers, but also imminently threatened.
Such patients have potential to gain symptomatic bene-
fit even in the absence of definite extension of life. At
the other extreme, many patients with metastatic DTC are
asymptomatic from their cancers and are not expected to be
threatened by their cancers in the foreseeable future. These
patients should remain on TSH-suppressive treatment as their
primary therapeutic intervention rather than be exposed to
kinase inhibitor therapy. For patients with disease between
these two extremes, it is critical that risks and benefits of
therapy, anticipated side effects, goals, patient context, and
the therapeutic philosophy of each particular patient be
thoroughly vetted so as to best individualize therapy. This
decision is ideally made within the context of specialized
centers with comprehensive knowledge of the natural his-
tory of the disease and of the effects of available therapies.
As a general ‘‘expert consensus’’ guideline, structurally
progressive, symptomatic, and/or imminently threatening
DTC (wherein disease progression is expected to require
intervention and/or to produce morbidity or mortality in <6
months) that is RAI refractory and not amenable to satis-
factory control using directed approaches (e.g., surgery,
radiation therapy, thermal ablation) should prompt consid-
eration of kinase inhibitor therapy. Specific characteristics
impacting decision-making for starting such therapy are
outlined in Table 16.
Patients who are candidates for kinase inhibitor ther-
apy should be thoroughly counseled with regard not only to
Table 16. Factors to Review When Considering Kinase Inhibitor Therapya
Factors favoring kinase inhibitor therapy
Factors discouraging kinase inhibitor therapy
Imminently threatening disease progression expected to
require intervention and/or to produce morbidity or
mortality in <6 months (e.g., pulmonary lesions or
lymphadenopathy likely to rapidly invade airways,
produce dyspnea, or cause bronchial obstruction).
Symptomatic disease (e.g., exertional dyspnea, painful
unresectable adenopathy), not adequately addressable
using directed therapy.
Diffuse disease progression as opposed to focal pro-
gression (e.g., in multiple lung metastases, as opposed
to a few growing lesions)
Comorbidity including
� Active or recent intestinal disease (e.g., diverticu-
litis, inflammatory bowel disease, recent bowel
resection)
� Liver disease
� Recent bleeding (e.g., ulcer/GI bleed) or coagulo-
pathy
� Recent cardiovascular event(s) (e.g., CVA, MI)
� Recent tracheal radiation therapy (this is associated
with increased risks of aerodigestive fistula with
kinase inhibitor therapy)
� Cachexia/low weight/poor nutrition
� Poorly controlled hypertension
� Prolonged QTc interval/history of significant ar-
rhythmia (includes ventricular and bradyarrhythmias)
� Untreated brain metastases (controversial)
� Recent suicidal ideation (suicide has been reported in
depressed patients receiving TKIs)
Life expectancy based upon other comorbidities estimated
to be too brief to justify systemic therapy
aBone metastases are often poorly responsive to kinase inhibitor therapy (see Bone-Directed Agents in section [C47]).
GI, gastrointestinal; CVA, cerebrovascular accident; MI, myocardial infarction; TKI, tyrosine kinase inhibitor.
86
HAUGEN ET AL.
 potential benefits, but also about potential side effects and
risks of therapy and alternative therapeutic approaches in-
cluding best supportive care, as should be the case with any
medical therapeutic decision-making (1044). Such extensive
and comprehensive discussions are particularly important to
undertake in the context of kinase inhibitor therapy because
of the high probability of side effects of these agents and
because of their presently uncertain effects on patient overall
survival and quality of life (1045).
Another critical and complex question often faced in
treating patients with kinase inhibitor therapy centers on
when treatment should be discontinued once initiated. In
general, therapy should be continued so long as net benefit
exceeds net detriment. In case of slow RECIST disease
progression after significant tumor response, treatment may
be maintained so long as overall disease control is maintained
providing that toxicities are manageable. Progression rate
should be taken into account, and when global progression is
rapid, therapy should be discontinued. However, there are
times when focal/oligometastatic disease progression ame-
nable to directed therapies is noted. In such instances, su-
perimposed
loco-regional
therapies
in
the
setting
of
maintained systemic therapy can sometimes be in the best
interest of a particular patient. For instance, in the setting of
regressed lung metastases and yet progression at a solitary
bone site, maintained systemic therapy with superimposed
directed radiation therapy may be reasonable.
[C43] Patients for whom first-line kinase inhibitor therapy
fails
& RECOMMENDATION 97
Patients who have disease progression while on initial
kinase inhibitor therapy without prohibitive adverse ef-
fects should be considered for second-line kinase inhibitor
therapy. Ideally, such therapy should be undertaken within
the context of therapeutic clinical trials.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
DTC patients who progress through first-line line kinase
inhibitor therapy commonly respond to a second similarly
targeted agent, and thus they should be considered candidates
for second-line kinase inhibitor therapy (1014,1046). Hence,
the selection of an agent for initial therapy may be less critical
in some senses because many patient will go on to receive
several kinase inhibitors over their disease courses. In the
near future, other treatment modalities, such as RAI re-
sensitization therapy, immunotherapy, or drugs directed to
other targets, may also offer additional therapeutic options.
[C44] Management of toxicities from kinase inhibitor therapy
& RECOMMENDATION 98
Proactive monitoring and timely intervention in response
to emergent toxicities are critical components of man-
agement in patients receiving kinase inhibitor therapy.
(Strong recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
Patients treated with kinase inhibitors are subject to many
potential toxicities that can negatively impact quality of life
or even be fatal; as a consequence, great care must be taken
not only in selecting appropriate patients for therapy, but also
in monitoring patients once they are receiving kinase inhib-
itor therapy (1044). Some toxicities (e.g., fatigue, diarrhea,
gastrointestinal symptoms, cutaneous effects) will be symp-
tomatic and can be more easily addressed upon close com-
munication with patients. However, there are also more
serious potential toxicities that might not be expected to
immediately lead to patient symptoms (e.g., hepatotoxicity,
prolonged QTc) that require proactive screening (Table 17).
Hypertension and hepatotoxicity are especially important to
serially monitor and rapidly address. Cardiotoxicity is also im-
portant to be aware of and to monitor according to patient risk
factors, agent used, and induced symptoms/signs. In particular,
sunitinib induces a decreased cardiac ejection fraction in about
20% of treated patients (1047). Furthermore, kinase inhibitors
can induce QTc prolongation that should prompt careful con-
sideration of coadministered drugs and periodic electrocardi-
ography. Also important is that kinase inhibitor half-life is long;
consequently, severe toxicities should prompt complete cessa-
tion of kinase inhibitor therapy for an adequate amount of time to
allow drug levels to decline before resumption at a lower dosage.
Serum TSH level frequently increases during kinase in-
hibitor therapy; this should lead to frequent TSH assessment
in conjunction with therapy initiation and upon therapy ces-
sation, with responsive modifications thyroid hormone ther-
apy where indicated.
[C45] Other novel agents
& RECOMMENDATION 99
Agents without established efficacy in DTC should be used
primarily within the context of therapeutic clinical trials.
(Strong recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
A variety of novel agents have been and/or are being tested
as candidate therapeutics in progressive metastatic RAI-
refractory DTC (1032,1048). At the time of the writing of these
guidelines, however, only kinase inhibitors have shown suf-
ficient promise to consider use other than within the context of
therapeutic clinical trials. Agents of particular interest for
further testing include BRAF kinase inhibitors because PTC
frequently harbors the constitutively activating BRAFV600E
mutation and the inhibitors have already shown efficacy and
been approved for use in BRAF mutant melanoma (1049–
1051). Inhibitors of MEK kinase and other signaling pathways
are also of considerable investigational interest. In addition,
promising initial results in response to use of kinase inhibition
to ‘‘resensitize’’ RAI-refractory tumors to RAI have been re-
ported (1052). Data developed to date, however, do not yet
favor the use of these novel approaches over use of VEGFR-
directed kinase inhibitors unless within the context of thera-
peutic clinical trials or alternatively when used as ‘‘salvage’’
therapies after disease progression has occurred despite prior
VEGFR-directed kinase inhibitor therapy.
[C46] Cytotoxic chemotherapy
& RECOMMENDATION 100
Cytotoxic chemotherapy can be considered in RAI-
refractory DTC patients with metastatic, rapidly progressive,
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
87
 symptomatic, and/or imminently threatening disease not
otherwise amenable to control through other approaches,
including kinase inhibitors. Too few data exist to recom-
mend specific cytotoxic regimens, and use within the context
of a therapeutic clinical trial is preferred.
(Weak recommendation, Low-quality evidence)
Although doxorubicin was approved for use in thyroid
cancer by the US FDA in 1974 and has some utility in ana-
plastic thyroid cancer, cytotoxic chemotherapy has histori-
cally produced disappointing results when used to treat RAI-
refractory DTC (1038). Cytotoxic chemotherapy, however,
may have selective benefit in patients unresponsive to kinase
inhibitors and perhaps also in some patients with poorly
differentiated thyroid cancer (1053). Data are limited and
primarily anecdotal.
[C47] Bone-directed agents
& RECOMMENDATION 101
Bisphosphonate or denosumab therapy should be consid-
ered in patients with diffuse and/or symptomatic bone
metastases from RAI-refractory DTC, either alone or
concomitantly with other systemic therapies. Adequate
renal function (bisphosphonates) and calcium level (bi-
sphosphonates and denosumab) should be documented
prior to each dose, and dental evaluation should take place
before initial use.
(Strong recommendation, Moderate-quality evidence)
Metastatic bone disease represents a particularly chal-
lenging clinical problem in patients with RAI-refractory
DTC, especially given the high rate of multiple skeletal-
related events in patients following detection of an initial
bone lesion (1054). Patients with a small number of threat-
ening and/or symptomatic bone lesions are generally best
treated with focal approaches such as radiation therapy and/
or surgery and/or thermoablation. Many patients, however,
suffer from diffuse progression of bone metastases that are
not amenable to effective control using focal therapies alone.
In such patients, focal therapy to symptomatic lesions or le-
sions at high risk of complications may be beneficial and
should be performed before initiation of systemic treatment.
Unfortunately, kinase inhibitors appear to be less effective
in controlling bone metastatic disease in comparison to dis-
ease at other soft tissue sites such as lungs and lymph nodes.
Progression of bone metastases while on kinase inhibitor
therapy commonly occurs despite maintained benefit with
respect to disease at other metastatic sites. Hence, kinase
inhibitor therapy cannot be relied upon to control diffuse
bone metastases in many patients with RAI-refractory DTC.
In other solid tumors, bone-directed therapeutics including
bisphosphonates (especially zoledronic acid) and the RANK
ligand–directed agent denosumab have been shown to delay
time to occurrence of subsequent skeletal-related adverse
events (fracture, pain, neurologic complications) and to improve
symptoms, and these agents may provide benefits for patients
Table 17. Potential Toxicities and Recommended Screening or Monitoring Approaches
in Patients Started on Kinase Inhibitor Therapy
Toxicity
Recommended screening/monitoring
Hypertension
Frequent blood pressure monitoring, most critical during the first 8 weeks of
therapy; if hypertension is induced, therapy should be individualized to patient
response
� Note: effective and expeditious management of hypertension is critical - and
may reduce potential for cardiotoxicity. If antihypertensive therapy is
needed, calcium channel blockers (e.g., amlodipine) may be most effective.
Cutaneous/mucocutaneous toxicities
Careful patient reporting of rash/mouth sores, patient awareness and education
related to increased potential for photosentization/sunburn.
Hepatotoxicity
Serial assessment of alanine serum transferase (AST), alkaline phosphatase and
bilirubin - most critical during the first 8 weeks of therapy
� Note: dose reduction of kinase inhibitor therapy is commonly required due to
hepatic toxicity
Cardiotoxicity
ECG pretherapy and frequently during therapy
� Hold (or do not initiate) kinase inhibitor therapy if QTc >480 ms
Echocardiogram: elective, but recommended in any patient with cardiac
history and especially important in patient with hypertension, symptoms
consistent with congestive heart failure or coronary artery disease and in
patients receiving sunitinib
Hypothyroidism
TSH should be assessed frequently, with levothyroxine dosage altered in response
to rising TSH if observed
Nephrotoxicity
Serial serum creatinine, urine analysis with protein determination,
Hematological toxicities
Serial CBC/diff
Pancreatitis
Serial amylase
Teratogenicity
Pretherapy pregnancy testing and effective contraception in women and men of
childbearing potential
CBC, complete blood count; ECG, electrocardiography.
88
HAUGEN ET AL.
 with diffuse bone metastases (1055,1056). The determination of
benefits across several tumor types suggests that they may be
broadly generalizable, prompting FDA approval for their gen-
eral use in patients with solid tumor bone metastases. Two small
studies have suggested benefit from bisphosphonates specifi-
cally within the context of DTC bone metastases (951,1057).
Risks of bisphosphonates and RANK ligand–directed
agents include hypocalcemia, which can be severe, prompt-
ing the recommended concomitant use of supplemental cal-
cium and vitamin D therapy. Moreover, these agents also
moderately increase the risk of nonhealing oral lesions and
jaw osteonecrosis; thus, candidates for this therapy should
undergo dental/oral surgical evaluation prior to their initia-
tion so as to minimize these risks (1055).
Recent studies have overall shown equivalence or superi-
ority of denosumab to zoledronic acid in delaying bone-
related adverse events in several solid tumors, with similar
risk of jaw osteonecrosis, greater incidence of hypocalcemia,
and less nephrotoxicity (1058). However, no thyroid-specific
data related to the efficacy of denosumab have yet been
published. If the patient’s renal function is impaired, there is
sometimes justification for beginning with RANK ligand–
directed/denosumab therapy because this agent seems to
produce fewer adverse renal effects, albeit the oral/jaw ef-
fects are similar to bisphosphonates in magnitude.
Expert consensus is that bone-directed therapy should be
strongly considered in patients with multiple progressing
and/or symptomatic bone metastases, likely best beginning
with bisphosphonate/zoledronic acid (assuming calcium and
renal function permit). Candidates for such therapy should be
cleared by their dentist/oral surgeon prior to therapy initia-
tion; in addition, calcium and vitamin D therapy should be
ongoing in conjunction with any intended bone-directed ther-
apeutic. In general, there is consensus that the administration of
zoledronic acid therapy every 3 months (rather than every
month) is a reasonable initial approach in terms of dosing in-
terval, but randomized trial data are unavailable to definitively
clarify this issue. Expert consensus is that bone-directed ther-
apy should be used in the setting of diffuse bone metastases
even if kinase inhibitor therapy is intended or ongoing.
[D1] DIRECTIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH
[D2] Optimizing molecular markers for diagnosis, progno-
sis, and therapeutic targets
Significant progress has been made over the last several
years in understanding the genetic mechanisms of thyroid
cancer and creating molecular tests for cancer diagnosis in
thyroid nodules. This process is currently going through an
accelerated phase, which is expected to continue into the
future. The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and work from
multiple research laboratories led to the identification of
mutations and other driver genetic alterations in more than
90% of thyroid cancers, making it one of the best charac-
terized human cancers from a genetic standpoint (1059). The
TCGA focused only on PTC. Moreover, next-generation
sequencing technologies may allow detection of most of
these alterations in a limited cell sample obtained by FNA.
Progress in identifying mutational, other genetic (gene ex-
pression, miRNA), and epigenetic markers of thyroid cancer
is expected to result in a significantly improved accuracy of
cancer detection in thyroid nodules as compared to the cur-
rently available clinical tests. If such progress continues, it is
expected that future molecular tests will be able to predict the
risk of cancer in thyroid nodules with high accuracy, dra-
matically reducing the uncertainty of indeterminate FNA
cytology. Furthermore, as the cost of next-generation se-
quencing of human DNA continues to decrease and the an-
alytical tools become more efficient, it should be expected
that the cost of molecular testing will decrease, enabling cost-
efficient utilization of testing.
Molecular markers are expected to have a significant im-
pact on cancer prognostication. While the BRAF status can
be considered as a relatively sensitive prognostic marker
for papillary cancer, it cannot be used in isolation for tumor
prognostication. However, recent results obtained by broad
tumor genotyping show that several specific molecular sig-
natures (such as presence of several driver mutations, TP53
mutation, TERT mutation in isolation or in combination with
BRAF) are found in a small fraction of well-differentiated
papillary and follicular cancers and appear to be associated
with more aggressive tumor behavior. It is expected that these
molecular signatures will be confirmed and perhaps further
improved in additional studies and will offer a more specific
detection of well-differentiated thyroid cancers that have
high risks of tumor recurrence and cancer-related mortality.
Furthermore, research may identify how such data may in-
form therapeutic decision-making (e.g., surgical extent [if
any], treatment with multi-kinase and specific kinase inhib-
itors or their combination). Discoveries of new gene muta-
tions/rearrangements involved in the pathogenesis of thyroid
cancer, such as those of ALK and NTRK3, are expected to
offer new effective therapeutic targets. Finally, new thera-
peutic approaches to target genes commonly mutated in
thyroid cancer, such as the RAS genes, are in development
and expected to enter clinical trials in the future. Prospective
long-term outcome studies, ideally in the form of RCTs, will
be needed to define the optimal surgical and postsurgical
management of patients based on these molecular signatures.
Such research may enable personalized, evidence-based care
of patients with thyroid cancer across the disease trajectory.
[D3] Active surveillance of DTC primary tumors
Our Japanese colleagues have provided compelling data
that an active surveillance management approach to papil-
lary microcarcinoma is a safe and effective alternative to
immediate surgical resection in properly selected patients
(143,149).
Unfortunately, no clinical features or molecular abnor-
mality in isolation can reliably differentiate the relatively
small number of PTMC patients destined to develop clini-
cally significant progression from the larger population of
people that harbor indolent PTMCs that will not cause sig-
nificant disease. Therefore, additional studies are needed to
identify specific risk factors that would favor surgical re-
section over active surveillance.
Furthermore, additional studies are needed to define
important management issues that arise during an active
surveillance follow-up approach. These issues include the
frequency of US evaluations required during follow-up, op-
timal TSH goals, the potential role of serum Tg in follow-up,
and specific indications for surgical intervention (e.g., what
measurements should be used to define a clinically significant
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
89
 increase in the size of the primary tumor, what constitutes
clinically significant lymph node metastases).
Finally, studies that examine decision-making and ac-
ceptability of an active surveillance approach to thyroid
cancer in patients, family members, and clinicians are re-
quired to better understand how to implement this novel
management approach outside of Japan. These studies should
ideally be performed in the context of an Institutional Review
Board–approved clinical trial.
[D4] Improved risk stratification
While the AJCC/UICC TNM staging provides valuable
information with regard to disease-specific mortality, studies
are needed to determine if inclusion of additional prognostic
variables into the AJCC staging system could improve its
predictive ability. Potential variables for consideration in-
clude the specific histology (well-differentiated thyroid
cancer versus poorly differentiated thyroid cancer), molecu-
lar profile, size and location of distant metastases (pulmonary
metastases versus bone metastases versus brain metastases),
functional status of the metastases (RAI avid versus 18FDG-
PET avid), and effectiveness of initial therapy (completeness
of resection; effectiveness of RAI, external beam radiation,
or other systemic therapies).
Furthermore, additional studies will be required to deter-
mine if there is any significant incremental benefit of adding
these specific prognostic variables to the 2009 Initial Risk
Stratification system.
Since the response to therapy dynamic (ongoing) risk
stratification systems were primarily optimized and validated
on DTC patientsthat had total thyroidectomy and RAI remnant
ablation or adjuvant therapy, additional studies are needed to
refine the definitions of excellent, biochemical incomplete,
structural incomplete, and indeterminate responses in patients
treated with total thyroidectomy without RAI ablation and in
patients treated with less than total thyroidectomy (602). Fur-
thermore, additional studies are needed to define what types of
cross-sectional/functional imaging are required to rule out
structural disease in order to classify a patient as having a
biochemical incomplete response to therapy (based on initial
risk, serum Tg, signs/symptoms, or other imaging results).
Another area of significant research interest centers on iden-
tifying specific clinical situations in which the molecular find-
ings provide clinically meaningful information that goes beyond
what is predicted by standard clinico-pathological staging.
Molecular findings that provide these types of prognostic in-
formation or guide optimal initial/ongoing treatment decisions
have the potential to significantly alter clinical management.
[D5] Improving our understanding of the risks and benefits
of DTC treatments and optimal implementation/utilization
In achieving a better understanding of the risks and ben-
efits of DTC treatments (such as extent of primary surgery or
secondary surgery for recurrence, RAI ablation/treatment,
and thyroid hormone suppressive therapy), more prospective
long-term outcome research is needed, and in particular,
RCTs. In the case of relatively uncommon adverse effects of
treatments, prospective surveillance research is also needed.
Vaisman and colleagues (633) are conducting a prospective,
nonrandomized study to determine which patients with low-
to intermediate-risk DTC should receive RAI remnant abla-
tion based on the postoperative stimulated serum Tg level.
Longer-term follow-up and randomized multicenter studies
are needed to determine how this commonly used biomarker
can be applied to decision-making in a majority of patients
with low- to intermediate-risk DTC. Prospective collection of
data on quality of life and related outcomes (when relevant) is
also needed in DTC trials. Using an evidence-based approach
to knowledge synthesis (systematic reviews, meta-analyses,
and clinical practice guidelines) of data can also enable
evidence-informed clinical practice. Barriers to dissemination
and implementation of clinical practice guideline recommen-
dations need to be overcome. Evidence-based guidelines may
need to be formally adapted to various practice settings
to enable their implementation. Important gaps in patient-
directed knowledge translation have been recently identified
by thyroid cancer patients and survivors (1060,1061). The
development of plain language educational materials, in-
cluding decision aids or other decision support tools would be
helpful for use as adjuncts in physician counseling of patients
about diagnostic and treatment options. Decision aids and
other decision support have been associated with improve-
ment in patients’ medical knowledge and reducing decisional
conflict, in general oncology (1062,1063), with a recent RCT
demonstrating benefits of a decision aid in thyroid cancer
survivors considering RAI remnant ablation (1064).
[D6] Issues with measurement of Tg and anti-Tg anti-
bodies
Current methodologies for both Tg and anti-Tg antibodies
remain problematic in many ways that hopefully will be
overcome in the future. For Tg assays, these include interfer-
ence with Tg measurement by the presence of anti-Tg and
heterophile antibodies and the use of a host of different
methods with varying results in terms of sensitivity or detec-
tion limits. Assay calibration or standardization may be suc-
cessful only if the same certified reference standard is
employed, which currently is CRM-457. While more ‘‘ultra-
sensitive’’ Tg assays have been developed, we need to deter-
mine the true clinical significance or utility of measurable
levels below 0.2 ng/mL (either on suppression or after TSH
stimulation) as indicating evidence of residual disease or out-
come. Recently developed mass spectrometry–based assays
have offered some promise, but are yet to be validated (806).
Competitive immunoassays have not provided an alternative in
view of their unpredictability (771). In regard to anti-Tg an-
tibodies, we need to better characterize the various epitopes of
interfering antibodies to better understand their effect in dif-
ferent sera in order to interpret the associated spectrum of
results obtained for measurable Tg. We will need to do better
than approximating Tg levels by the ratio of ICMA Tg to Tg
measured by competitive immunoassay (1065). Authoritative
bodies such as the National Academy of Clinical Biochemistry
should consider mandating specific methodology rather than
recommending general guidance. It remains to be seen whether
the future standard might entail adoption of a modified ICMA,
radioimmunoassay, or mass spectrometry methodology.
[D7] Management of metastatic cervical adenopathy de-
tected on US
With the advent of improved technology, increased utili-
zation, and specialized operator experience, US imaging can
identify small-volume metastatic cervical lymph nodes.
From the surgical pathology literature analyzing specimens
90
HAUGEN ET AL.
 from prophylactic lateral and central neck dissections with
normal preoperative cervical lymph node sonography, up to
90% of patients with papillary cancers <1 cm have metastatic
level VI lymph nodes and up to 40% have metastatic lateral
neck lymph nodes (359,1066,1067). Yet, in the absence of
these dissections, this is not the observed clinical loco-
regional recurrence rate for these patients. It should not be
surprising then, that during extended surveillance, US will be
able to detect small-volume metastatic disease that may
represent a stable reservoir of residual cancer. On the other
hand, grossly involved metastatic lymph nodes were at one
time minimally invaded by metastatic thyroid cancer. The
challenge is to differentiate between low-volume metastatic
disease that progresses with potential clinical consequences,
and that which remains stable. To date, only one study has
addressed this question, and no sonographic, pathologic, de-
mographic, or molecular feature predicted outcome (849). In
addition, it is unclear if growth itself is a harbinger of de-
creased survival. Therefore, observational studies using stan-
dardized US scanning protocols are first required to define the
magnitude of this scenario and define predictors of disease
progression. Subsequently, randomized controlled interven-
tional trials could be designed to address change in outcome,
such as development of additional loco-regional disease, ap-
pearance of distant metastases, or disease-specific survival.
[D8] Novel therapies for systemic RAI-refractory disease
Over the years, a wide variety of agents have been used
in preclinical (valproic acid, trichostatin, depsipeptide, 5-
azacytidine, arsenic tri-oxide) and clinical (retinoids, thiazoli-
dinediones) models to ‘‘redifferentiate’’ thyroid cancer cells in
order torestore RAI avidity. While these agentsshowed limited
clinicaleffectiveness, the observationthat oncogenic activation
of the MAP kinase pathway was associated with down-
regulation of the genes involved in iodine metabolism sug-
gested an alternative, targeted approach to redifferentiation
therapy. Recently, two proof-of-principle pilot clinical trials
have confirmed that targeted blockade of the MAP kinase
pathway can result in clinically relevant restoration of RAI
avidity in a substantial percentage of RAI-refractory thyroid
cancer patients (1052,1068). In the first trial, 1 month of the
MEK inhibitor selumetinib increased RAI uptake in 12 of 20
iodine-refractory thyroid cancer patients, with structural tumor
shrinkage seeninfiveoftheeight patientsthat achievedlesional
dosimetry high enough to warrant RAI therapy (1052). In the
secondtrial,1monthoftheBRAFinhibitordabrabenibrestored
RAI avidity on diagnostic WBS in 6 of 10 RAI-refractory pa-
tients, resulting in structural responses in two patients and a
decrease in serum Tg in four patients (1068). While the primary
focus of current redifferentiation trials has been in the setting of
RAI-refractory distant metastases, future studies are needed to
define the role of redifferentiation therapy in the high-risk ad-
juvant therapy setting and in the RAI-responsive metastatic
disease setting in an effort to enhance the tumoricidal effect of
RAI before the tumors become RAI refractory.
Efforts to develop additional and further improved sys-
temic therapeutic approaches to RAI-refractory metastatic
DTC presently involve a wide a variety of approaches. First,
the question arises as to whether kinase inhibitors with al-
ready demonstrated clinical activity in DTC can be made
more effective as single agents. For example, based upon data
indicating strong correlation between achieved pazopanib
levels and extent of clinical response in DTC, indicating
absence of response to pazopanib therapy in the lowest
quintile of pazopanib drug levels, one clinical trial is pres-
ently examining the feasibility and potential benefits of in-
dividualization of pazopanib therapy with the goal of
achieving target drug levels in the highest achievable fraction
of patients, in hopes of improving the fraction of patients
benefiting (NCT01552356). Another study is examining the
differential impacts of continuous versus intermittent pazo-
panib dosing in thyroid cancer (NCT01813136).
Generally predicated upon identification of synergistic
interactions in preclinical models, several studies are exam-
ining the question of whether therapy combining several
agents may improve outcomes in thyroid cancer. Although
the majority of combinatorial studies assess effects of mul-
tiple coadministered small molecule therapeutics, several are
using kinase inhibitors in combination with RAI in efforts to
enhance RAI avidity and clinical efficacy in the context of
RAI-refractory disease (e.g., NCT00970359). Still other tri-
als are focusing on novel nontraditional therapies, including
engineered candidate virotherapeutics (e.g., NCT01229865).
Alternatively, another active area of investigation involves
efforts to therapeutically target specific alterations (mutations,
translocation) found in thyroid cancers to individualize ther-
apy and thereby potentially improve outcomes in the process;
one such recent example is the use of the BRAFV600E inhibitor
vemurafenib in BRAFV600E PTC (NCT01286753), with many
additional mutation-specific therapeutic trials under devel-
opment or underway.
Finally, immunotherapy including checkpoint inhibitors
(e.g., PD-1/PD-L1) has shown promise in other cancers
(1069–1071) and is being investigated in advanced RAI-
refractory thyroid cancer.
[D9] Survivorship care
The American Cancer Society estimates that there will be
62,450 new cases of thyroid cancer diagnosed in 2015, but
only 1950 deaths from thyroid cancer (www.cancer.org/cancer/
thyroidcancer/detailedguide/thyroid-cancer-key-statistics). Ac-
cording to SEER database statistics, there are more than
600,000 people living with thyroid cancer in the United States
alone (seer.cancer.gov/statfacts/html/thyro.html). Despite these
large numbers of patients living with thyroid cancer, there is
only a modest amount of peer-reviewed literature studying
thyroid cancer survivors.
The majority of the literature involving thyroid cancer
survivors relates directly to the short- and long-term effects of
thyroid cancer therapies: surgery, RAI, and lifetime thyroid
hormone therapy. There is very little information regarding the
impact of the diagnosis itself or the effect of living with per-
sistent disease such as Tg-positive, scan-negative thyroid
cancer. A thoughtful and comprehensive analysis of thyroid
cancer survivors will likely require both qualitative studies
with in-depth interviews of survivors that will represent as
many demographics of thyroid cancer patients as possible.
Additionally, or as a next step, the development and/or utili-
zation of a validated survey type instrument needs to be de-
veloped. This instrument would be designed to assess the
quality of life of thyroid cancer survivors in a more quantita-
tive manner, allowing for rigorous statistical analyses, and will
help identifying areas to target that may improve the lives of
thyroid cancer survivors (1072).
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
91
 Further research also needs to be performed in addressing
patient and survivor care needs throughout the active treat-
ment and survivorship trajectory, including issues such as
identification and management of treatment-related side ef-
fects (1060,1061), psychosocial distress (1060,1061), per-
sistent fatigue (1073,1074), financial impact (12), and
cancer-related worry (1075).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The task force wishes to thank Ms. Bobbi Smith, Executive
Director, ATA, and Ms. Sharleene Cano, Assistant to the
Taskforce, for their constant help and support, as well as Ms.
Vicki Wright (Division of Endocrinology, University of Color-
ado School of Medicine) for her assistance in manuscript
preparation. We thank Dr. Joshua Klopper (Division of En-
docrinology, University of Colorado School of Medicine) on
behalf of the CAC Quality Of Life Task Force for the contri-
bution of the Survivorship Care section [D9]. We also thank Dr.
Irwin Klein (North Shore University Hospital, Manhasset, New
York) for his input on TSH targets for long-term thyroid hor-
mone therapy (Table 15). We would like to thank the ATA
members who responded to our survey in preparation for this
iteration of the guidelines as well as manuscript review prior to
journal submission, and the leadership of ThyCa: Thyroid
Cancer Survivors’ Association, Inc. and Thyroid Cancer Canada
who provided written feedback on our survey. A.M.S. holds a
Cancer Care Ontario Health Services Research Chair, which
enabled protected time for research and contribution to these
guidelines. These guidelines were funded by the ATA without
support from any commercial sources. The patient organization,
ThyCa: Thyroid Cancer Survivors’ Association, Inc.,contributed
an unrestricted educational grant toward the development of the
thyroid nodules and differentiated thyroid cancer guidelines.
The following groups reviewed and endorsed the final
document: American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists;
American Association of Endocrine Surgeons; American Head
and Neck Society; Asia Oceania Thyroid Association (AOTA);
British Society of Nuclear Medicine; Canadian Association of
Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery; The Endocrine So-
ciety; Endocrine Society of Australia; European Thyroid As-
sociation; International Association of Endocrine Surgeons;
International Federation of Head and Neck Oncologic Societie;
Japanese Thyroid Association; Latin American Thyroid So-
ciety; Society of Surgical Oncology; Ukrainian Association of
Endocrine Surgeons.
DISCLAIMER
It is our goal in formulating these guidelines, and the ATA’s
goal in providing support for the development of these
guidelines, that they assist in the clinical care of patients and
share what we believe is current, rational, and optimal medical
practice. In some circumstances, it may be apparent that the
level of care recommended may be best provided in limited
centers with specific expertise. Finally, it is not the intent of
these guidelines to replace individual decision-making, the
wishes of the patient or family, or clinical judgment.
AUTHOR DISCLOSURE STATEMENT
These guidelines were funded by the ATA without support
from any commercial sources.
K.C.B., G.M.D., F.P., G.A.R., A.M.S., and K.S. have no
significant financial or competing interests to disclose.
B.R.H. has received grant/research support from Veracyte
and Genzyme, as well as a one-time speaker honorarium from
Genzyme. E.K.A. has received research support from Asura-
gen, Veracyte, and Novo Nordisk. He has been a consultant for
NPS Pharmaceuticals, Genzyme, and Veracyte as well as on
the Scientific Advisory Board for Asuragen. S.J.M. has re-
ceived grant/research support from Veracyte and Asuragen.
She has been on the scientific advisory committee for Asuragen
and has been a CME speaker for Genzyme. Y.N. has been a
consultant for Quest Diagnostics. His institution, UPMC, has a
service agreement with CBLPath to provide molecular testing
for various tumors. M.S. has received grant/research support
from Genzyme, Bayer, AstraZeneca, Exelixis, and Eisai. He
has been a consultant for Genzyme, Bayer, AstraZeneca, Ex-
elixis, and Eisai. S.I.S. has received grant/research support
from Genzyme and the National Cancer Institute. He is a
consultant for Veracyte, Exelixis, Bayer, AstraZeneca, Eisai,
Genzyme, Novo Nordisk, and Eli Lilly. He has received hon-
oraria from Onyx, and he has fiduciary responsibility as
Chairman of International Thyroid Oncology Group. J.A.S. has
received one-time speaker honorarium from Exelixis and is a
member/ATA representative on the Data Monitoring Com-
mittee for the Medullary Thyroid Cancer Registry called for by
the FDA and funded by NovoNordisk, Astra Zeneca, Glax-
oSmithKline, and Eli Lilly. D.L.S. has received grant/research
support from Astra-Zeneca. R.M.T. is a consultant for Gen-
zyme, Novo Nordisk, AstraZeneca, Bayer/Onyx, and Veracyte.
L.W. has been a consultant for Asuragen, Interpace Diag-
nostics, Eisei, and IBSA. He has received speaker honoraria
from Genzyme.
E.K.A. and R.M.T. received consulting payments through
stock options from Veracyte. This has been reviewed and
discussed with the Ethics Committee and reviewed by the
ATA Board. E.K.A. and R.M.T. were recused from review
and approval of the molecular markers sections. They di-
vested these stock options prior to submission of this docu-
ment for journal review.
REFERENCES
1. Vander JB, Gaston EA, Dawber TR 1968 The signifi-
cance of nontoxic thyroid nodules. Final report of a 15-
year study of the incidence of thyroid malignancy. Ann
Intern Med 69:537–540.
2. Tunbridge WM, Evered DC, Hall R, Appleton D, Brewis
M, Clark F, Evans JG, Young E, Bird T, Smith PA 1977
The spectrum of thyroid disease in a community: the
Whickham survey. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 7:481–493.
3. Tan GH, Gharib H 1997 Thyroid incidentalomas: man-
agement approaches to nonpalpable nodules discovered
incidentally on thyroid imaging. Ann Intern Med 126:
226–231.
4. Guth S, Theune U, Aberle J, Galach A, Bamberger CM
2009 Very high prevalence of thyroid nodules detected
by high frequency (13 MHz) ultrasound examination. Eur
J Clin Invest 39:699–706.
5. Hegedus L 2004 Clinical practice. The thyroid nodule. N
Engl J Med 351:1764–1771.
6. Mandel SJ 2004 A 64-year-old woman with a thyroid
nodule. JAMA 292:2632–2642.
7. Sherman SI 2003 Thyroid carcinoma. Lancet 361:501–511.
92
HAUGEN ET AL.
 8. Siegel R, Ma J, Zou Z, Jemal A 2014 Cancer statistics,
2014. CA Cancer J Clin 64:9–29.
9. Davies L, Welch HG 2014 Current thyroid cancer trends
in the United States. JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
140:317–322.
10. Leenhardt L, Bernier MO, Boin-Pineau MH, Conte DB,
Mare
´chaud R, Niccoli-Sire P, Nocaudie M, Orgiazzi J,
Schlumberger M, We
´meau JL, Cherie-Challine L, De
Vathaire F 2004 Advances in diagnostic practices affect
thyroid cancer incidence in France. Eur J Endocrinol
150:133–139.
11. Brito JP, Al Nofal A, Montori V, Hay ID, Morris JC III
2015 The impact of subclinical disease and mechanism
of detection on the rise in thyroid cancer incidence: a
population-based study in Olmsted County, Minnesota
during 1935 through 2012. Thyroid 25:999–1007.
12. Aschebrook-Kilfoy B, Schechter RB, Shih YC, Kaplan
EL, Chiu BC, Angelos P, Grogan RH 2013 The clinical
and economic burden of a sustained increase in thyroid
cancer incidence. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev
22:1252–1259.
13. Singer PA, Cooper DS, Daniels GH, Ladenson PW,
Greenspan FS, Levy EG, Braverman LE, Clark OH,
McDougall IR, Ain KV, Dorfman SG 1996 Treatment
guidelines for patients with thyroid nodules and well-
differentiated thyroid cancer. American Thyroid Asso-
ciation. Arch Intern Med 156:2165–2172.
14. Francis GL, Waguespack SG, Bauer AJ, Angelos P,
Benvenga S, Cerutti JM, Dinauer CA, Hamilton J, Hay
ID, Luster M, Parisi MT, Rachmiel M, Thompson GB,
Yamashita S 2015 Management guidelines for children
with thyroid nodules and differentiated thyroid cancer.
Thyroid 25:716–759.
15. Lewis MH, Gohagan JK, Merenstein DJ 2007 The lo-
cality rule and the physician’s dilemma: local medical
practices vs the national standard of care. JAMA
297:2633–2637.
16. Harrison MB, Graham ID, van den Hoek J, Dogherty EJ,
Carley ME, Angus V 2013 Guideline adaptation and
implementation planning: a prospective observational
study. Implement Sci 8:49–63.
17. Carlson RW, Larsen JK, McClure J, Fitzgerald CL,
Venook AP, Benson AB III, Anderson BO 2014 Inter-
national adaptations of NCCN Clinical Practice Guide-
lines in Oncology. J Natl Compr Canc Netw 12:643–648.
18. Gharib H, Papini E, Paschke R, Duick DS, Valcavi R,
Hegedus L, Vitti P 2010 American Association of
Clinical Endocrinologists, Associazione Medici En-
docrinologi, and European Thyroid Association Medical
guidelines for clinical practice for the diagnosis and
management of thyroid nodules: executive summary of
recommendations. Endocr Pract 16:468–475.
19. Perros P, Boelaert K, Colley S, Evans C, Evans RM,
Gerrard BG, Gilbert J, Harrison B, Johnson SJ, Giles TE,
Moss L, Lewington V, Newbold K, Taylor J, Thakker
RV, Watkinson J, Williams GR 2014 Guidelines for the
management of thyroid cancer. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 81
Suppl 1:1–122.
20. Leenhardt L, Erdogan MF, Hegedus L, Mandel SJ,
Paschke R, Rago T, Russ G 2013 2013 European Thy-
roid Association guidelines for cervical ultrasound scan
and ultrasound-guided techniques in the postoperative
management of patients with thyroid cancer. Eur Thyroid
J 2:147–159.
21. Silberstein EB, Alavi A, Balon HR, Clarke SE, Divgi C,
Gelfand MJ, Goldsmith SJ, Jadvar H, Marcus CS, Martin
WH, Parker JA, Royal HD, Sarkar SD, Stabin M, Waxman
AD 2012 The SNMMI practice guideline for therapy of
thyroid disease with 131I 3.0. J Nucl Med 53:1633–1651.
22. Luster M, Clarke SE, Dietlein M, Lassmann M, Lind P,
Oyen WJ, Tennvall J, Bombardieri E 2008 Guidelines
for radioiodine therapy of differentiated thyroid cancer.
Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging 35:1941–1959.
23. Takami H, Ito Y, Okamoto T, Onoda N, Noguchi H,
Yoshida A 2014 Revisiting the guidelines issued by the
Japanese Society of Thyroid Surgeons and Japan Asso-
ciation of Endocrine Surgeons: a gradual move towards
consensus between Japanese and Western practice in the
management
of
thyroid
carcinoma.
World
J
Surg
38:2002–2010.
24. Cooper DS, Doherty GM, Haugen BR, Kloos RT, Lee
SL, Mandel SJ, Mazzaferri EL, McIver B, Sherman SI,
Tuttle RM 2006 Management guidelines for patients
with thyroid nodules and differentiated thyroid cancer.
Thyroid 16:109–142.
25. Cooper DS, Doherty GM, Haugen BR, Kloos RT, Lee
SL, Mandel SJ, Mazzaferri EL, McIver B, Pacini F,
Schlumberger M, Sherman SI, Steward DL, Tuttle RM
2009 Revised American Thyroid Association man-
agement guidelines for patients with thyroid nodules
and differentiated thyroid cancer. Thyroid 19:1167–
1214.
26. Qaseem A, Snow V, Owens DK, Shekelle P 2010 The
development of clinical practice guidelines and guidance
statements of the American College of Physicians:
summary of methods. Ann Intern Med 153:194–199.
27. Schunemann HJ, Oxman AD, Brozek J, Glasziou P,
Jaeschke R, Vist GE, Williams JW Jr, Kunz R, Craig J,
Montori VM, Bossuyt P, Guyatt GH 2008 Grading
quality of evidence and strength of recommendations for
diagnostic tests and strategies. BMJ 336:1106–1110.
28. Brozek JL, Akl EA, Jaeschke R, Lang DM, Bossuyt P,
Glasziou P, Helfand M, Ueffing E, Alonso-Coello P,
Meerpohl J, Phillips B, Horvath AR, Bousquet J, Guyatt
GH, Schunemann HJ 2009 Grading quality of evidence
and strength of recommendations in clinical practice
guidelines: part 2 of 3. The GRADE approach to grading
quality of evidence about diagnostic tests and strategies.
Allergy 64:1109–1116.
29. Bossuyt PM, Reitsma JB, Bruns DE, Gatsonis CA,
Glasziou PP, Irwig LM, Lijmer JG, Moher D, Rennie D,
de Vet HC 2003 Towards complete and accurate re-
porting of studies of diagnostic accuracy: the STARD
Initiative. Ann Intern Med 138:40–44.
30. Leung AN, Bull TM, Jaeschke R, Lockwood CJ, Boiselle
PM, Hurwitz LM, James AH, McCullough LB, Menda
Y, Paidas MJ, Royal HD, Tapson VF, Winer-Muram HT,
Chervenak FA, Cody DD, McNitt-Gray MF, Stave CD,
Tuttle BD 2011 An official American Thoracic So-
ciety/Society of Thoracic Radiology clinical practice
guideline: evaluation of suspected pulmonary embo-
lism in pregnancy. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 184:
1200–1208.
31. Whiting PF, Rutjes AW, Westwood ME, Mallett S,
Deeks JJ, Reitsma JB, Leeflang MM, Sterne JA, Bossuyt
PM 2011 QUADAS-2: a revised tool for the quality as-
sessment of diagnostic accuracy studies. Ann Intern Med
155:529–536.
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
93
 32. Marqusee E, Benson CB, Frates MC, Doubilet PM,
Larsen PR, Cibas ES, Mandel SJ 2000 Usefulness of
ultrasonography in the management of nodular thyroid
disease. Ann Intern Med 133:696–700.
33. Hagag P, Strauss S, Weiss M 1998 Role of ultrasound-
guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy in evaluation of
nonpalpable thyroid nodules. Thyroid 8:989–995.
34. Charkes ND 2006 On the prevalence of familial non-
medullary thyroid cancer in multiply affected kindreds.
Thyroid 16:181–186.
35. Capezzone M, Marchisotta S, Cantara S, Busonero G,
Brilli L, Pazaitou-Panayiotou K, Carli AF, Caruso G,
Toti P, Capitani S, Pammolli A, Pacini F 2008 Familial
non-medullary thyroid carcinoma displays the features of
clinical anticipation suggestive of a distinct biological
entity. Endocr Relat Cancer 15:1075–1081.
36. Moses W, Weng J, Kebebew E 2011 Prevalence, clini-
copathologic features, and somatic genetic mutation
profile in familial versus sporadic nonmedullary thyroid
cancer. Thyroid 21:367–371.
37. Ito Y, Kakudo K, Hirokawa M, Fukushima M, Yabuta T,
Tomoda C, Inoue H, Kihara M, Higashiyama T, Uruno T,
Takamura Y, Miya A, Kobayashi K, Matsuzuka F,
Miyauchi A 2009 Biological behavior and prognosis of
familial papillary thyroid carcinoma. Surgery 145:100–105.
38. Park YJ, Ahn HY, Choi HS, Kim KW, Park do J, Cho BY
2012 The long-term outcomes of the second generation of
familial nonmedullary thyroid carcinoma are more ag-
gressive than sporadic cases. Thyroid 22:356–362.
39. Mazeh H, Benavidez J, Poehls JL, Youngwirth L, Chen
H, Sippel RS 2012 In patients with thyroid cancer of
follicular cell origin, a family history of nonmedullary
thyroid cancer in one first-degree relative is associated
with more aggressive disease. Thyroid 22:3–8.
40. Robenshtok E, Tzvetov G, Grozinsky-Glasberg S, Shraga-
Slutzky I, Weinstein R, Lazar L, Serov S, Singer J, Hirsch
D, Shimon I, Benbassat C 2011 Clinical characteristics
and outcome of familial nonmedullary thyroid cancer: a
retrospective controlled study. Thyroid 21:43–48.
41. Richards ML 2010 Familial syndromes associated with
thyroid cancer in the era of personalized medicine.
Thyroid 20:707–713.
42. Curtis RE, Rowlings PA, Deeg HJ, Shriner DA, Socie G,
Travis LB, Horowitz MM, Witherspoon RP, Hoover RN,
Sobocinski KA, Fraumeni JF Jr, Boice JD Jr 1997 Solid
cancers after bone marrow transplantation. N Engl J Med
336:897–904.
43. Pacini F, Vorontsova T, Demidchik EP, Molinaro E,
Agate L, Romei C, Shavrova E, Cherstvoy ED, Ivash-
kevitch Y, Kuchinskaya E, Schlumberger M, Ronga G,
Filesi M, Pinchera A 1997 Post-Chernobyl thyroid car-
cinoma in Belarus children and adolescents: comparison
with naturally occurring thyroid carcinoma in Italy and
France. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 82:3563–3569.
44. Gharib H, Papini E 2007 Thyroid nodules: clinical im-
portance, assessment, and treatment. Endocrinol Metab
Clin North Am 36:707–35, vi.
45. Boelaert K, Horacek J, Holder RL, Watkinson JC,
Sheppard MC, Franklyn JA 2006 Serum thyrotropin
concentration as a novel predictor of malignancy in
thyroid nodules investigated by fine-needle aspiration. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 91:4295–4301.
46. Haymart MR, Repplinger DJ, Leverson GE, Elson DF,
Sippel RS, Jaume JC, Chen H 2008 Higher serum thyroid
stimulating hormone level in thyroid nodule patients is
associated with greater risks of differentiated thyroid
cancer and advanced tumor stage. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 93:809–814.
47. Repplinger D, Bargren A, Zhang YW, Adler JT, Haymart
M, Chen H 2008 Is Hashimoto’s thyroiditis a risk factor
for papillary thyroid cancer? J Surg Res 150:49–52.
48. Suh I, Vriens MR, Guerrero MA, Griffin A, Shen WT,
Duh QY, Clark OH, Kebebew E 2010 Serum thyro-
globulin is a poor diagnostic biomarker of malignancy in
follicular and Hu
¨rthle-cell neoplasms of the thyroid. Am
J Surg 200:41–46.
49. Lee EK, Chung KW, Min HS, Kim TS, Kim TH, Ryu JS,
Jung YS, Kim SK, Lee YJ 2012 Preoperative serum
thyroglobulin as a useful predictive marker to differen-
tiate follicular thyroid cancer from benign nodules in
indeterminate nodules. J Korean Med Sci 27:1014–1018.
50. Elisei R, Bottici V, Luchetti F, Di Coscio G, Romei C,
Grasso L, Miccoli P, Iacconi P, Basolo F, Pinchera A,
Pacini F 2004 Impact of routine measurement of serum
calcitonin on the diagnosis and outcome of medullary
thyroid cancer: experience in 10,864 patients with nodular
thyroid disorders. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 89:163–168.
51. Hahm JR, Lee MS, Min YK, Lee MK, Kim KW, Nam
SJ, Yang JH, Chung JH 2001 Routine measurement of
serum calcitonin is useful for early detection of medul-
lary thyroid carcinoma in patients with nodular thyroid
diseases. Thyroid 11:73–80.
52. Niccoli P, Wion-Barbot N, Caron P, Henry JF, de Micco
C, Saint Andre JP, Bigorgne JC, Modigliani E, Conte-
Devolx B 1997 Interest of routine measurement of serum
calcitonin: study in a large series of thyroidectomized
patients. The French Medullary Study Group. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 82:338–341.
53. Costante G, Meringolo D, Durante C, Bianchi D, Nocera
M, Tumino S, Crocetti U, Attard M, Maranghi M, Tor-
lontano M, Filetti S 2007 Predictive value of serum
calcitonin levels for preoperative diagnosis of medullary
thyroid carcinoma in a cohort of 5817 consecutive pa-
tients with thyroid nodules. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
92:450–455.
54. Chambon G, Alovisetti C, Idoux-Louche C, Reynaud C,
Rodier M, Guedj AM, Chapuis H, Lallemant JG, Lalle-
mant B 2011 The use of preoperative routine measurement
of basal serum thyrocalcitonin in candidates for thyroid-
ectomy due to nodular thyroid disorders: results from 2733
consecutive patients. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 96:75–81.
55. Colombo C, Verga U, Mian C, Ferrero S, Perrino M,
Vicentini L, Dazzi D, Opocher G, Pelizzo MR, Beck-
Peccoz P, Fugazzola L 2012 Comparison of calcium and
pentagastrin tests for the diagnosis and follow-up of
medullary thyroid cancer. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 97:
905–913.
56. Karga H, Giagourta I, Papaioannou G, Doumouchtsis K,
Polymeris A, Thanou S, Papamichael K, Zerva C 2011
Changes in risk factors and Tumor Node Metastasis stage
of sporadic medullary thyroid carcinoma over 41 years,
before and after the routine measurements of serum
calcitonin. Metabolism 60:604–608.
57. Cheung K, Roman SA, Wang TS, Walker HD, Sosa JA
2008 Calcitonin measurement in the evaluation of thy-
roid nodules in the United States: a cost-effectiveness
and decision analysis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 93:
2173–2180.
94
HAUGEN ET AL.
 58. Gagel RF, Hoff AO, Cote GE 2005 Medullary thyroid
carcinoma. In: Braverman L, Utiger R (eds) Werner and
Ingbar’s The Thyroid. Lippincott Williams and Wilkins,
Philadelphia, PA, pp 967–988.
59. Diazzi C, Madeo B, Taliani E, Zirilli L, Romano S,
Granata AR, De Santis MC, Simoni M, Cioni K, Carani
C, Rochira V 2013 The diagnostic value of calcitonin
measurement in wash-out fluid from fine-needle aspira-
tion of thyroid nodules in the diagnosis of medullary
thyroid cancer. Endocr Pract 19:769–779.
60. Soelberg KK, Bonnema SJ, Brix TH, Hegedus L 2012
Risk of malignancy in thyroid incidentalomas detected
by 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomogra-
phy: a systematic review. Thyroid 22:918–925.
61. Chen W, Parsons M, Torigian DA, Zhuang H, Alavi A
2009 Evaluation of thyroid FDG uptake incidentally
identified on FDG-PET/CT imaging. Nucl Med Commun
30:240–244.
62. Nishimori H, Tabah R, Hickeson M, How J 2011 In-
cidental thyroid ‘‘PETomas’’: clinical significance and
novel description of the self-resolving variant of focal
FDG-PET thyroid uptake. Can J Surg 54:83–88.
63. Hall TL, Layfield LJ, Philippe A, Rosenthal DL 1989
Sources of diagnostic error in fine needle aspiration of
the thyroid. Cancer 63:718–725.
64. Alexander EK, Heering JP, Benson CB, Frates MC,
Doubilet PM, Cibas ES, Marqusee E 2002 Assessment
of nondiagnostic ultrasound-guided fine needle aspira-
tions of thyroid nodules. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 87:
4924–4927.
65. Smith-Bindman R, Lebda P, Feldstein VA, Sellami D,
Goldstein RB, Brasic N, Jin C, Kornak J 2013 Risk of
thyroid cancer based on thyroid ultrasound imaging char-
acteristics: results of a population-based study. JAMA In-
tern Med 173:1788–1796.
66. Brito JP, Gionfriddo MR, Al NA, Boehmer KR, Leppin
AL, Reading C, Callstrom M, Elraiyah TA, Prokop LJ,
Stan MN, Murad MH, Morris JC, Montori VM 2014 The
accuracy of thyroid nodule ultrasound to predict thyroid
cancer: systematic review and meta-analysis. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 99:1253–1263.
67. Langer JE, Agarwal R, Zhuang H, Huang SS, Mandel SJ
2011 Correlation of findings from iodine 123 scan and
ultrasonography in the recommendation for thyroid fine-
needle aspiration biopsy. Endocr Pract 17:699–706.
68. Danese D, Sciacchitano S, Farsetti A, Andreoli M,
Pontecorvi A 1998 Diagnostic accuracy of conventional
versus sonography-guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy
of thyroid nodules. Thyroid 8:15–21.
69. Carmeci C, Jeffrey RB, McDougall IR, Nowels KW,
Weigel RJ 1998 Ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspira-
tion biopsy of thyroid masses. Thyroid 8:283–289.
70. Kwak JY, Han KH, Yoon JH, Moon HJ, Son EJ, Park
SH, Jung HK, Choi JS, Kim BM, Kim EK 2011 Thyroid
imaging reporting and data system for US features of
nodules: a step in establishing better stratification of
cancer risk. Radiology 260:892–899.
71. Moon WJ, Jung SL, Lee JH, Na DG, Baek JH, Lee YH,
Kim J, Kim HS, Byun JS, Lee DH 2008 Benign and
malignant thyroid nodules: US differentiation—mul-
ticenter retrospective study. Radiology 247:762–770.
72. Moon HJ, Kwak JY, Kim MJ, Son EJ, Kim EK 2010 Can
vascularity at power Doppler US help predict thyroid
malignancy? Radiology 255:260–269.
73. Salmaslioglu A, Erbil Y, Dural C, Issever H, Kapran Y,
Ozarmagan S, Tezelman S 2008 Predictive value of so-
nographic features in preoperative evaluation of malig-
nant thyroid nodules in a multinodular goiter. World J
Surg 32:1948–1954.
74. Papini E, Guglielmi R, Bianchini A, Crescenzi A, Tac-
cogna S, Nardi F, Panunzi C, Rinaldi R, Toscano V, Pa-
cella CM 2002 Risk of malignancy in nonpalpable thyroid
nodules: predictive value of ultrasound and color-Doppler
features. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 87:1941–1946.
75. Gul K, Ersoy R, Dirikoc A, Korukluoglu B, Ersoy PE,
Aydin R, Ugras SN, Belenli OK, Cakir B 2009 Ultra-
sonographic evaluation of thyroid nodules: comparison
of ultrasonographic, cytological, and histopathological
findings. Endocrine 36:464–472.
76. Cappelli C, Pirola I, Cumetti D, Micheletti L, Tironi A,
Gandossi E, Martino E, Cherubini L, Agosti B, Castellano
M, Mattanza C, Rosei EA 2005 Is the anteroposterior and
transverse diameter ratio of nonpalpable thyroid nodules a
sonographic criteria for recommending fine-needle aspi-
ration cytology? Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 63:689–693.
77. Frates MC, Benson CB, Doubilet PM, Kunreuther E,
Contreras M, Cibas ES, Orcutt J, Moore FD Jr, Larsen
PR, Marqusee E, Alexander EK 2006 Prevalence and
distribution of carcinoma in patients with solitary and
multiple thyroid nodules on sonography. J Clin En-
docrinol Metab 91:3411–3417.
78. Moon HJ, Sung JM, Kim EK, Yoon JH, Youk JH, Kwak
JY 2012 Diagnostic performance of gray-scale US and
elastography in solid thyroid nodules. Radiology 262:
1002–1013.
79. Kim DS, Kim JH, Na DG, Park SH, Kim E, Chang KH,
Sohn CH, Choi YH 2009 Sonographic features of fol-
licular variant papillary thyroid carcinomas in compari-
son with conventional papillary thyroid carcinomas. J
Ultrasound Med 28:1685–1692.
80. Park YJ, Kim JA, Son EJ, Youk JH, Kim EK, Kwak JY,
Park CS 2014 Thyroid nodules with macrocalcification:
sonographic findings predictive of malignancy. Yonsei
Med J 55:339–344.
81. Cappelli C, Castellano M, Pirola I, Cumetti D, Agosti B,
Gandossi E, Agabiti Rosei E 2007 The predictive value
of ultrasound findings in the management of thyroid
nodules. QJM 100:29–35.
82. Jeh SK, Jung SL, Kim BS, Lee YS 2007 Evaluating the
degree of conformity of papillary carcinoma and follic-
ular carcinoma to the reported ultrasonographic findings
of malignant thyroid tumor. Korean J Radiol 8:192–197.
83. Machens A, Holzhausen HJ, Dralle H 2005 The prog-
nostic value of primary tumor size in papillary and fol-
licular thyroid carcinoma. Cancer 103:2269–2273.
84. Nam-Goong IS, Kim HY, Gong G, Lee HK, Hong SJ,
Kim WB, Shong YK 2004 Ultrasonography-guided fine-
needle aspiration of thyroid incidentaloma: correlation
with pathological findings. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 60:
21–28.
85. Henrichsen TL, Reading CC, Charboneau JW, Donovan
DJ, Sebo TJ, Hay ID 2010 Cystic change in thyroid
carcinoma: prevalence and estimated volume in 360
carcinomas. J Clin Ultrasound 38:361–366.
86. Lee MJ, Kim EK, Kwak JY, Kim MJ 2009 Partially
cystic thyroid nodules on ultrasound: probability of
malignancy and sonographic differentiation. Thyroid 19:
341–346.
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
95
 87. Kim DW, Lee EJ, In HS, Kim SJ 2010 Sonographic dif-
ferentiation of partially cystic thyroid nodules: a pro-
spective study. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 31:1961–1966.
88. Bonavita JA, Mayo J, Babb J, Bennett G, Oweity T,
Macari M, Yee J 2009 Pattern recognition of benign
nodules at ultrasound of the thyroid: which nodules can
be left alone? AJR Am J Roentgenol 193:207–213.
89. Horvath E, Majlis S, Rossi R, Franco C, Niedmann JP,
Castro A, Dominguez M 2009 An ultrasonogram re-
porting system for thyroid nodules stratifying cancer risk
for clinical management. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 94:
1748–1751.
90. Tae HJ, Lim DJ, Baek KH, Park WC, Lee YS, Choi
JE, Lee JM, Kang MI, Cha BY, Son HY, Lee KW, Kang
SK 2007 Diagnostic value of ultrasonography to distin-
guish between benign and malignant lesions in the
management of thyroid nodules. Thyroid 17:461–466.
91. Shimura H, Haraguchi K, Hiejima Y, Fukunari N, Fuji-
moto Y, Katagiri M, Koyanagi N, Kurita T, Miyakawa
M, Miyamoto Y, Suzuki N, Suzuki S, Kanbe M, Kato Y,
Murakami T, Tohno E, Tsunoda-Shimizu H, Yamada K,
Ueno E, Kobayashi K, Kobayashi T, Yokozawa T, Ki-
taoka M 2005 Distinct diagnostic criteria for ultrasono-
graphic examination of papillary thyroid carcinoma: a
multicenter study. Thyroid 15:251–258.
92. Russ G, Royer B, Bigorgne C, Rouxel A, Bienvenu-
Perrard M, Leenhardt L 2013 Prospective evaluation of
thyroid imaging reporting and data system on 4550
nodules with and without elastography. Eur J Endocrinol
168:649–655.
93. Cheng SP, Lee JJ, Lin JL, Chuang SM, Chien MN, Liu
CL 2013 Characterization of thyroid nodules using the
proposed thyroid imaging reporting and data system (TI-
RADS). Head Neck 35:541–547.
94. Ito Y, Amino N, Yokozawa T, Ota H, Ohshita M, Murata
N, Morita S, Kobayashi K, Miyauchi A 2007 Ultra-
sonographic evaluation of thyroid nodules in 900 pa-
tients: comparison among ultrasonographic, cytological,
and histological findings. Thyroid 17:1269–1276.
95. Ito Y, Miyauchi A, Kihara M, Higashiyama T, Ko-
bayashi K, Miya A 2014 Patient age is significantly re-
lated to the progression of papillary microcarcinoma of
the thyroid under observation. Thyroid 24:27–34.
96. Hamming JF, Goslings BM, van Steenis GJ, van Ra-
venswaay CH, Hermans J, van de Velde CJ 1990 The
value of fine-needle aspiration biopsy in patients with
nodular thyroid disease divided into groups of suspicion
of malignant neoplasms on clinical grounds. Arch Intern
Med 150:113–116.
97. Rago T, Santini F, Scutari M, Pinchera A, Vitti P 2007
Elastography: new developments in ultrasound for pre-
dicting malignancy in thyroid nodules. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 92:2917–2922.
98. Azizi G, Keller J, Lewis M, Puett D, Rivenbark K,
Malchoff C 2013 Performance of elastography for the
evaluation of thyroid nodules: a prospective study.
Thyroid 23:734–740.
99. Baloch ZW, LiVolsi VA, Asa SL, Rosai J, Merino MJ,
Randolph G, Vielh P, DeMay RM, Sidawy MK, Frable
WJ 2008 Diagnostic terminology and morphologic cri-
teria for cytologic diagnosis of thyroid lesions: a syn-
opsis of the National Cancer Institute Thyroid Fine-
Needle Aspiration State of the Science Conference. Di-
agn Cytopathol 36:425–437.
100. Crippa S, Mazzucchelli L, Cibas ES, Ali SZ 2010 The
Bethesda System for reporting thyroid fine-needle aspi-
ration specimens. Am J Clin Pathol 134:343–344.
101. Theoharis CG, Schofield KM, Hammers L, Udelsman R,
Chhieng DC 2009 The Bethesda thyroid fine-needle as-
piration classification system: year 1 at an academic in-
stitution. Thyroid 19:1215–1223.
102. Luu MH, Fischer AH, Pisharodi L, Owens CL 2011
Improved preoperative definitive diagnosis of papillary
thyroid carcinoma in FNAs prepared with both ThinPrep
and conventional smears compared with FNAs prepared
with ThinPrep alone. Cancer Cytopathol 119:68–73.
103. Bongiovanni M, Spitale A, Faquin WC, Mazzucchelli L,
Baloch ZW 2012 The Bethesda System for Reporting
Thyroid Cytopathology: a meta-analysis. Acta Cytol 56:
333–339.
104. Nayar R, Ivanovic M 2009 The indeterminate thyroid
fine-needle aspiration: experience from an academic
center using terminology similar to that proposed in the
2007 National Cancer Institute Thyroid Fine Needle
Aspiration State of the Science Conference. Cancer 117:
195–202.
105. Ohori NP, Schoedel KE 2011 Variability in the atypia of
undetermined significance/follicular lesion of undeter-
mined significance diagnosis in the Bethesda System for
Reporting Thyroid Cytopathology: sources and recom-
mendations. Acta Cytol 55:492–498.
106. Cibas ES, Baloch ZW, Fellegara G, LiVolsi VA, Raab
SS, Rosai J, Diggans J, Friedman L, Kennedy GC, Kloos
RT, Lanman RB, Mandel SJ, Sindy N, Steward DL,
Zeiger MA, Haugen BR, Alexander EK 2013 A pro-
spective assessment defining the limitations of thyroid
nodule pathologic evaluation. Ann Intern Med 159:
325–332.
107. Nishino M, Wang HH 2014 Should the thyroid AUS/
FLUS category be further stratified by malignancy risk?
Cancer Cytopathol 122:481–483.
108. Crothers BA, Henry MR, Firat P 2010 Nondiagnostic/
unsatisfactory. In: Ali SZ, Cibas ES (eds) The Bethesda
System for Reporting Thyroid Cytopathology. Springer,
pp 5–14.
109. Baloch ZW, Tam D, Langer J, Mandel S, LiVolsi VA,
Gupta PK 2000 Ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration
biopsy of the thyroid: role of on-site assessment and
multiple cytologic preparations. Diagn Cytopathol 23:
425–429.
110. Braga M, Cavalcanti TC, Collaco LM, Graf H 2001
Efficacy of ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration bi-
opsy in the diagnosis of complex thyroid nodules. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 86:4089–4091.
111. Redman R, Zalaznick H, Mazzaferri EL, Massoll NA
2006 The impact of assessing specimen adequacy and
number of needle passes for fine-needle aspiration biopsy
of thyroid nodules. Thyroid 16:55–60.
112. Orija IB, Pineyro M, Biscotti C, Reddy SS, Hamrahian
AH 2007 Value of repeating a nondiagnostic thyroid
fine-needle aspiration biopsy. Endocr Pract 13:735–742.
113. Wu HH, Rose C, Elsheikh TM 2012 The Bethesda sys-
tem for reporting thyroid cytopathology: an experience
of 1,382 cases in a community practice setting with the
implication for risk of neoplasm and risk of malignancy.
Diagn Cytopathol 40:399–403.
114. Layfield LJ, Abrams J, Cochand-Priollet B, Evans D,
Gharib H, Greenspan F, Henry M, LiVolsi V, Merino M,
96
HAUGEN ET AL.
 Michael CW, Wang H, Wells SA 2008 Post-thyroid FNA
testing and treatment options: a synopsis of the National
Cancer Institute Thyroid Fine Needle Aspiration State of
the Science Conference. Diagn Cytopathol 36:442–448.
115. Singh RS, Wang HH 2011 Timing of repeat thyroid fine-
needle aspiration in the management of thyroid nodules.
Acta Cytol 55:544–548.
116. Lubitz CC, Nagarkatti SS, Faquin WC, Samir AE,
Hassan MC, Barbesino G, Ross DS, Randolph GW, Gaz
RD, Stephen AE, Hodin RA, Daniels GH, Parangi S
2012 Diagnostic yield of nondiagnostic thyroid nodules
is not altered by timing of repeat biopsy. Thyroid 22:
590–594.
117. Choi YS, Hong SW, Kwak JY, Moon HJ, Kim EK
2012 Clinical and ultrasonographic findings affecting
nondiagnostic results upon the second fine needle as-
piration for thyroid nodules. Ann Surg Oncol 19:
2304–2309.
118. Moon HJ, Kwak JY, Choi YS, Kim EK 2012 How to
manage thyroid nodules with two consecutive non-
diagnostic results on ultrasonography-guided fine-needle
aspiration. World J Surg 36:586–592.
119. Na DG, Kim JH, Sung JY, Baek JH, Jung KC, Lee H,
Yoo H 2012 Core-needle biopsy is more useful than
repeat fine-needle aspiration in thyroid nodules read as
nondiagnostic or atypia of undetermined significance by
the Bethesda system for reporting thyroid cytopathology.
Thyroid 22:468–475.
120. Nam SY, Han BK, Ko EY, Kang SS, Hahn SY, Hwang
JY, Nam MY, Kim JW, Chung JH, Oh YL, Shin JH 2010
BRAFV600E mutation analysis of thyroid nodules needle
aspirates in relation to their ultrasongraphic classifica-
tion: a potential guide for selection of samples for mo-
lecular analysis. Thyroid 20:273–279.
121. Yip L, Nikiforova MN, Carty SE, Yim JH, Stang MT,
Tublin MJ, LeBeau SO, Hodak SP, Ogilvie JB, Niki-
forov YE 2009 Optimizing surgical treatment of papil-
lary thyroid carcinoma associated with BRAF mutation.
Surgery 146:1215–1223.
122. Cantara S, Capezzone M, Marchisotta S, Capuano S,
Busonero G, Toti P, Di SA, Caruso G, Carli AF, Brilli L,
Montanaro A, Pacini F 2010 Impact of proto-oncogene
mutation detection in cytological specimens from thyroid
nodules improves the diagnostic accuracy of cytology. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 95:1365–1369.
123. Renshaw AA, Pinnar N 2007 Comparison of thyroid
fine-needle aspiration and core needle biopsy. Am J Clin
Pathol 128:370–374.
124. Yeon JS, Baek JH, Lim HK, Ha EJ, Kim JK, Song DE,
Kim TY, Lee JH 2013 Thyroid nodules with initially
nondiagnostic cytologic results: the role of core-needle
biopsy. Radiology 268:274–280.
125. Deleted.
126. Hatada T, Okada K, Ishii H, Ichii S, Utsunomiya J 1998
Evaluation of ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration
biopsy for thyroid nodules. Am J Surg 175:133–136.
127. Deleted.
128. Cesur M, Corapcioglu D, Bulut S, Gursoy A, Yilmaz AE,
Erdogan N, Kamel N 2006 Comparison of palpation-
guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy to ultrasound-
guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy in the evaluation of
thyroid nodules. Thyroid 16:555–561.
129. Chehade JM, Silverberg AB, Kim J, Case C, Mooradian
AD 2001 Role of repeated fine-needle aspiration of
thyroid nodules with benign cytologic features. Endocr
Pract 7:237–243.
130. Orlandi A, Puscar A, Capriata E, Fideleff H 2005 Re-
peated fine-needle aspiration of the thyroid in benign
nodular thyroid disease: critical evaluation of long-term
follow-up. Thyroid 15:274–278.
131. Oertel YC, Miyahara-Felipe L, Mendoza MG, Yu K
2007 Value of repeated fine needle aspirations of the
thyroid: an analysis of over ten thousand FNAs. Thyroid
17:1061–1066.
132. Erdogan MF, Kamel N, Aras D, Akdogan A, Baskal N,
Erdogan G 1998 Value of re-aspirations in benign nod-
ular thyroid disease. Thyroid 8:1087–1090.
133. Illouz F, Rodien P, Saint-Andre JP, Triau S, Laboureau-
Soares S, Dubois S, Vielle B, Hamy A, Rohmer V 2007
Usefulness of repeated fine-needle cytology in the
follow-up of non-operated thyroid nodules. Eur J En-
docrinol 156:303–308.
134. Tee YY, Lowe AJ, Brand CA, Judson RT 2007 Fine-
needle aspiration may miss a third of all malignancy in
palpable thyroid nodules: a comprehensive literature re-
view. Ann Surg 246:714–720.
135. Pinchot SN, Al-Wagih H, Schaefer S, Sippel R, Chen H
2009 Accuracy of fine-needle aspiration biopsy for pre-
dicting neoplasm or carcinoma in thyroid nodules 4 cm
or larger. Arch Surg 144:649–655.
136. Kuru B, Gulcelik NE, Gulcelik MA, Dincer H 2010 The
false-negative rate of fine-needle aspiration cytology for
diagnosing thyroid carcinoma in thyroid nodules. Lan-
genbecks Arch Surg 395:127–132.
137. Wharry LI, McCoy KL, Stang MT, Armstrong MJ, Le-
Beau SO, Tublin ME, Sholosh B, Silbermann A, Ohori
NP, Nikiforov YE, Hodak SP, Carty SE, Yip L 2014
Thyroid nodules (>/ = 4 cm): can ultrasound and cytology
reliably exclude cancer? World J Surg 38:614–621.
138. Yoon JH, Kwak JY, Moon HJ, Kim MJ, Kim EK 2011
The diagnostic accuracy of ultrasound-guided fine-
needle aspiration biopsy and the sonographic differences
between benign and malignant thyroid nodules 3 cm or
larger. Thyroid 21:993–1000.
139. Porterfield JR Jr, Grant CS, Dean DS, Thompson GB,
Farley DR, Richards ML, Reading CC, Charboneau JW,
Vollrath BK, Sebo TJ 2008 Reliability of benign fine
needle aspiration cytology of large thyroid nodules.
Surgery 144:963–968.
140. Nou E, Kwong N, Alexander LK, Cibas ES, Marqusee E,
Alexander EK 2014 Determination of the optimal time
interval for repeat evaluation after a benign thyroid
nodule aspiration. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 99:510–516.
141. Mazzaferri EL 2007 Management of low-risk differen-
tiated thyroid cancer. Endocr Pract 13:498–512.
142. Hay ID 2007 Management of patients with low-risk
papillary thyroid carcinoma. Endocr Pract 13:521–533.
143. Sugitani I, Toda K, Yamada K, Yamamoto N, Ikenaga
M, Fujimoto Y 2010 Three distinctly different kinds of
papillary thyroid microcarcinoma should be recognized:
our treatment strategies and outcomes. World J Surg 34:
1222–1231.
144. Yu XM, Wan Y, Sippel RS, Chen H 2011 Should all
papillary thyroid microcarcinomas be aggressively trea-
ted? An analysis of 18,445 cases. Ann Surg 254:653–
660.
145. Chow SM, Law SC, Chan JK, Au SK, Yau S, Lau WH
2003 Papillary microcarcinoma of the thyroid—prog-
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
97
 nostic significance of lymph node metastasis and multi-
focality. Cancer 98:31–40.
146. Hay ID, Hutchinson ME, Gonzalez-Losada T, McIver B,
Reinalda ME, Grant CS, Thompson GB, Sebo TJ,
Goellner JR 2008 Papillary thyroid microcarcinoma: a
study of 900 cases observed in a 60-year period. Surgery
144:980–987.
147. Roti E, degli Uberti EC, Bondanelli M, Braverman LE
2008 Thyroid papillary microcarcinoma: a descrip-
tive and meta-analysis study. Eur J Endocrinol 159:
659–673.
148. Giordano D, Gradoni P, Oretti G, Molina E, Ferri T 2010
Treatment and prognostic factors of papillary thyroid
microcarcinoma. Clin Otolaryngol 35:118–124.
149. Ito Y, Miyauchi A, Inoue H, Fukushima M, Kihara M,
Higashiyama T, Tomoda C, Takamura Y, Kobayashi K,
Miya A 2010 An observational trial for papillary thyroid
microcarcinoma in Japanese patients. World J Surg 34:
28–35.
150. Niemeier LA, Kuffner AH, Song C, Carty SE, Hodak SP,
Yip L, Ferris RL, Tseng GC, Seethala RR, LeBeau SO,
Stang MT, Coyne C, Johnson JT, Stewart AF, Nikiforov
YE 2012 A combined molecular-pathologic score im-
proves risk stratification of thyroid papillary micro-
carcinoma. Cancer 118:2069–2077.
151. Roh JL, Kim JM, Park CI 2008 Central cervical nodal
metastasis from papillary thyroid microcarcinoma: pat-
tern and factors predictive of nodal metastasis. Ann Surg
Oncol 15:2482–2486.
152. Lin KL, Wang OC, Zhang XH, Dai XX, Hu XQ, Qu JM
2010 The BRAF mutation is predictive of aggressive
clinicopathological characteristics in papillary thyroid
microcarcinoma. Ann Surg Oncol 17:3294–3300.
153. Zheng X, Wei S, Han Y, Li Y, Yu Y, Yun X, Ren X, Gao
M 2013 Papillary microcarcinoma of the thyroid: clinical
characteristics and BRAF(V600E) mutational status of
977 cases. Ann Surg Oncol 20:2266–2273.
154. Melo M, da Rocha AG, Vinagre J, Batista R, Peixoto J,
Tavares C, Celestino R, Almeida A, Salgado C, Eloy C,
Castro P, Prazeres H, Lima J, Amaro T, Lobo C, Martins
MJ, Moura M, Cavaco B, Leite V, Cameselle-Teijeiro JM,
Carrilho F, Carvalheiro M, Maximo V, Sobrinho-Simoes
M, Soares P 2014 TERT promoter mutations are a major
indicator of poor outcome in differentiated thyroid carci-
nomas. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 99:E754-E765.
155. Xing M, Liu R, Liu X, Murugan AK, Zhu G, Zeiger MA,
Pai S, Bishop J 2014 BRAFV600E and TERT promoter
mutations cooperatively identify the most aggressive
papillary thyroid cancer with highest recurrence. J Clin
Oncol 32:2718–2726.
156. Nikiforova MN, Kimura ET, Gandhi M, Biddinger PW,
Knauf JA, Basolo F, Zhu Z, Giannini R, Salvatore G,
Fusco A, Santoro M, Fagin JA, Nikiforov YE 2003
BRAF mutations in thyroid tumors are restricted to
papillary carcinomas and anaplastic or poorly differen-
tiated carcinomas arising from papillary carcinomas. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 88:5399–5404.
157. Ricarte-Filho JC, Ryder M, Chitale DA, Rivera M, He-
guy A, Ladanyi M, Janakiraman M, Solit D, Knauf JA,
Tuttle RM, Ghossein RA, Fagin JA 2009 Mutational
profile of advanced primary and metastatic radioactive
iodine-refractory thyroid cancers reveals distinct patho-
genetic roles for BRAF, PIK3CA, and AKT1. Cancer
Res 69:4885–4893.
158. Febbo PG, Ladanyi M, Aldape KD, De Marzo AM,
Hammond ME, Hayes DF, Iafrate AJ, Kelley RK, Mar-
cucci G, Ogino S, Pao W, Sgroi DC, Birkeland ML 2011
NCCN Task Force report: Evaluating the clinical utility
of tumor markers in oncology. J Natl Compr Canc Netw
9(Suppl 5):S1–S32.
159. Bernet V, Hupart KH, Parangi S, Woeber KA 2014
AACE/ACE disease state commentary: molecular diag-
nostic testing of thyroid nodules with indeterminate cy-
topathology. Endocr Pract 20:360–363.
160. Ferris RL, Baloch Z, Bernet V, Chen A, Fahey TJ III,
Ganly I, Hodak SP, Kebebew E, Patel KN, Shaha A,
Steward DL, Tufano RP, Wiseman SM, Carty SE;
American Thyroid Association Surgical Affairs Com-
mittee 2015 American Thyroid Association Statement on
Surgical Application of Molecular Profiling for Thyroid
Nodules: Current Impact on Perioperative Decision
Making. Thyroid 25:760–768.
161. Xing M, Haugen BR, Schlumberger M 2013 Progress in
molecular-based management of differentiated thyroid
cancer. Lancet 381:1058–1069.
162. Nikiforov YE, Ohori NP, Hodak SP, Carty SE, LeBeau
SO, Ferris RL, Yip L, Seethala RR, Tublin ME, Stang
MT, Coyne C, Johnson JT, Stewart AF, Nikiforova
MN 2011 Impact of mutational testing on the diag-
nosis and management of patients with cytologically
indeterminate thyroid nodules: a prospective analysis
of 1056 FNA samples. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 96:
3390–3397.
163. Alexander EK, Kennedy GC, Baloch ZW, Cibas ES,
Chudova D, Diggans J, Friedman L, Kloos RT, LiVolsi
VA, Mandel SJ, Raab SS, Rosai J, Steward DL, Walsh
PS, Wilde JI, Zeiger MA, Lanman RB, Haugen BR 2012
Preoperative diagnosis of benign thyroid nodules with
indeterminate cytology. N Engl J Med 367:705–715.
164. Bartolazzi A, Orlandi F, Saggiorato E, Volante M,
Arecco F, Rossetto R, Palestini N, Ghigo E, Papotti M,
Bussolati G, Martegani MP, Pantellini F, Carpi A, Gio-
vagnoli MR, Monti S, Toscano V, Sciacchitano S, Pen-
nelli GM, Mian C, Pelizzo MR, Rugge M, Troncone G,
Palombini L, Chiappetta G, Botti G, Vecchione A, Bel-
locco R 2008 Galectin-3-expression analysis in the sur-
gical
selection
of
follicular
thyroid
nodules
with
indeterminate fine-needle aspiration cytology: a pro-
spective multicentre study. Lancet Oncol 9:543–549.
165. Nikiforov YE, Steward DL, Robinson-Smith TM, Hau-
gen BR, Klopper JP, Zhu Z, Fagin JA, Falciglia M,
Weber K, Nikiforova MN 2009 Molecular testing for
mutations in improving the fine-needle aspiration diag-
nosis of thyroid nodules. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 94:
2092–2098.
166. Moses W, Weng J, Sansano I, Peng M, Khanafshar E,
Ljung BM, Duh QY, Clark OH, Kebebew E 2010 Mo-
lecular testing for somatic mutations improves the ac-
curacy of thyroid fine-needle aspiration biopsy. World J
Surg 34:2589–2594.
167. Beaudenon-Huibregtse S, Alexander EK, Guttler RB,
Hershman JM, Babu V, Blevins TC, Moore P, Andruss
B, Labourier E 2014 Centralized molecular testing for
oncogenic gene mutations complements the local cyto-
pathologic diagnosis of thyroid nodules. Thyroid 24:
1479–1487.
168. Liu S, Gao A, Zhang B, Zhang Z, Zhao Y, Chen P, Ji M,
Hou P, Shi B 2014 Assessment of molecular testing in
98
HAUGEN ET AL.
 fine-needle aspiration biopsy samples: an experience in a
Chinese population. Exp Mol Pathol 97:292–297.
169. Nikiforov YE, Nikiforova MN 2011 Molecular genetics
and diagnosis of thyroid cancer. Nat Rev Endocrinol 7:
569–580.
170. Nikiforov YE, Carty SE, Chiosea SI, Coyne C, Duvvuri
U, Ferris RL, Gooding WE, Hodak SP, LeBeau SO,
Ohori NP, Seethala RR, Tublin ME, Yip L, Nikiforova
MN 2014 Highly accurate diagnosis of cancer in thyroid
nodules with follicular neoplasm/suspicious for a follic-
ular neoplasm cytology by ThyroSeq v2 next-generation
sequencing assay. Cancer 120:3627–3634.
171. Alexander EK, Schorr M, Klopper J, Kim C, Sipos J,
Nabhan F, Parker C, Steward DL, Mandel SJ, Haugen
BR 2014 Multicenter clinical experience with the Afirma
gene expression classifier. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 99:
119–125.
172. Harrell RM, Bimston DN 2014 Surgical utility of Afir-
ma: effects of high cancer prevalence and oncocytic cell
types in patients with indeterminate thyroid cytology.
Endocr Pract 20:364–369.
173. McIver B, Castro MR, Morris JC, Bernet V, Smallridge
R, Henry M, Kosok L, Reddi H 2014 An independent
study of a gene expression classifier (Afirma) in the
evaluation of cytologically indeterminate thyroid nod-
ules. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 99:4069–4077.
174. Marti JL, Avadhani V, Donatelli LA, Niyogi S, Wang B,
Wong RJ, Shaha AR, Ghossein RA, Lin O, Morris LG,
Ho AS 2015 Wide inter-institutional variation in per-
formance of a molecular classifier for indeterminate
thyroid nodules. Ann Surg Oncol 22:3996–4001.
175. Franco C, Martinez V, Allamand JP, Medina F, Glasi-
novic A, Osorio M, Schachter D 2009 Molecular markers
in thyroid fine-needle aspiration biopsy: a prospective
study. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol 17:211–
215.
176. Fadda G, Rossi ED, Raffaelli M, Pontecorvi A, Sioletic
S, Morassi F, Lombardi CP, Zannoni GF, Rindi G 2011
Follicular thyroid neoplasms can be classified as low-
and high-risk according to HBME-1 and Galectin-3 ex-
pression on liquid-based fine-needle cytology. Eur J
Endocrinol 165:447–453.
177. Lubitz CC, Fahey TJ III 2005 The differentiation of
benign and malignant thyroid nodules. Adv Surg 39:
355–377.
178. Prasad NB, Somervell H, Tufano RP, Dackiw AP,
Marohn MR, Califano JA, Wang Y, Westra WH, Clark
DP, Umbricht CB, Libutti SK, Zeiger MA 2008 Identi-
fication of genes differentially expressed in benign ver-
sus malignant thyroid tumors. Clin Cancer Res 14:3327–
3337.
179. Lappinga PJ, Kip NS, Jin L, Lloyd RV, Henry MR,
Zhang J, Nassar A 2010 HMGA2 gene expression
analysis performed on cytologic smears to distinguish
benign from malignant thyroid nodules. Cancer Cyto-
pathol 118:287–297.
180. Chen YT, Kitabayashi N, Zhou XK, Fahey TJ III,
Scognamiglio T 2008 MicroRNA analysis as a potential
diagnostic tool for papillary thyroid carcinoma. Mod
Pathol 21:1139–1146.
181. Nikiforova MN, Tseng GC, Steward D, Diorio D, Niki-
forov YE 2008 MicroRNA expression profiling of thy-
roid tumors: biological significance and diagnostic
utility. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 93:1600–1608.
182. Mazeh H, Mizrahi I, Halle D, Ilyayev N, Stojadinovic A,
Trink B, Mitrani-Rosenbaum S, Roistacher M, Ariel I,
Eid A, Freund HR, Nissan A 2011 Development of a
microRNA-based molecular assay for the detection of
papillary thyroid carcinoma in aspiration biopsy samples.
Thyroid 21:111–118.
183. Shen R, Liyanarachchi S, Li W, Wakely PE Jr, Saji M,
Huang J, Nagy R, Farrell T, Ringel MD, de la Chapelle
A, Kloos RT, He H 2012 MicroRNA signature in
thyroid fine needle aspiration cytology applied to
‘‘atypia of undetermined significance’’ cases. Thyroid
22:9–16.
184. Keutgen XM, Filicori F, Crowley MJ, Wang Y, Scog-
namiglio T, Hoda R, Buitrago D, Cooper D, Zeiger MA,
Zarnegar R, Elemento O, Fahey TJ III 2012 A panel of
four miRNAs accurately differentiates malignant from
benign indeterminate thyroid lesions on fine needle as-
piration. Clin Cancer Res 18:2032–2038.
185. Agretti P, Ferrarini E, Rago T, Candelieri A, De
Marco G, Dimida A, Niccolai F, Molinaro A, Di
Coscio G, Pinchera A, Vitti P, Tonacchera M 2012
MicroRNA expression profile helps to distinguish
benign nodules from papillary thyroid carcinomas
starting from cells of fine-needle aspiration. Eur J
Endocrinol 167:393–400.
186. Labourier E, Shifrin A, Busseniers AE, Lupo MA, Man-
ganelli ML, Andruss B, Wylie D, Beaudenon-Huibregtse
S 2015 Molecular testing for miRNA, mRNA, and DNA
on fine-needle aspiration improves the preoperative diag-
nosis of thyroid nodules with indeterminate cytology. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 100:2743–2750.
187. Milas M, Shin J, Gupta M, Novosel T, Nasr C, Brainard
J, Mitchell J, Berber E, Siperstein A 2010 Circulating
thyrotropin receptor mRNA as a novel marker of thyroid
cancer: clinical applications learned from 1758 samples.
Ann Surg 252:643–651.
188. McGovern MM, Benach MO, Wallenstein S, Desnick
RJ, Keenlyside R 1999 Quality assurance in molecular
genetic testing laboratories. JAMA 281:835–840.
189. McGovern MM, Elles R, Beretta I, Somerville MJ,
Hoefler G, Keinanen M, Barton D, Carson N, Dequeker
E, Brdicka R, Blazkova A, Ayme S, Schnieders B,
Muller CR, Dalen V, Martinez AA, Kristoffersson U,
Ozguc M, Mueller H, Boone J, Lubin IM, Sequeiros J,
Taruscio D, Williamson B, Mainland L, Yoshikura H,
Ronchi E 2007 Report of an international survey of
molecular genetic testing laboratories. Community Genet
10:123–131.
190. Krane JF, Nayar R, Renshaw AA 2010 Atypia of unde-
termined significance/follicular lesion of undetermined
significance. In: Ali SZ, Cibas ES (eds) The Bethesda
System for Reporting Thyroid Cytopathology. Springer,
pp 37–49.
191. Bongiovanni M, Crippa S, Baloch Z, Piana S, Spitale A,
Pagni F, Mazzucchelli L, Di BC, Faquin W 2012 Com-
parison of 5-tiered and 6-tiered diagnostic systems for
the
reporting
of
thyroid
cytopathology:
a
multi-
institutional study. Cancer Cytopathol 120:117–125.
192. Davidov T, Trooskin SZ, Shanker BA, Yip D, Eng O,
Crystal J, Hu J, Chernyavsky VS, Deen MF, May M,
Artymyshyn RL 2010 Routine second-opinion cyto-
pathology review of thyroid fine needle aspiration bi-
opsies reduces diagnostic thyroidectomy. Surgery 148:
1294–1299.
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
99
 193. Baloch Z, LiVolsi VA, Jain P, Jain R, Aljada I, Mandel
S, Langer JE, Gupta PK 2003 Role of repeat fine-needle
aspiration biopsy (FNAB) in the management of thyroid
nodules. Diagn Cytopathol 29:203–206.
194. Yassa L, Cibas ES, Benson CB, Frates MC, Doubilet
PM, Gawande AA, Moore FD Jr, Kim BW, Nose V,
Marqusee E, Larsen PR, Alexander EK 2007 Long-term
assessment of a multidisciplinary approach to thyroid
nodule diagnostic evaluation. Cancer 111:508–516.
195. Yang J, Schnadig V, Logrono R, Wasserman PG 2007
Fine-needle aspiration of thyroid nodules: a study of
4703 patients with histologic and clinical correlations.
Cancer 111:306–315.
196. Vanderlaan PA, Marqusee E, Krane JF 2011 Clinical
outcome for atypia of undetermined significance in thyroid
fine-needle aspirations: should repeated fna be the pre-
ferred initial approach? Am J Clin Pathol 135:770–775.
197. Nasrollah N, Trimboli P, Rossi F, Amendola S, Guidobaldi
L, Ventura C, Maglio R, Nigri G, Romanelli F, Valabrega
S, Crescenzi A 2014 Patient’s comfort with and tolera-
bility of thyroid core needle biopsy. Endocrine 45:79–83.
198. Kim SK, Hwang TS, Yoo YB, Han HS, Kim DL, Song
KH, Lim SD, Kim WS, Paik NS 2011 Surgical results of
thyroid nodules according to a management guideline
based on the BRAF(V600E) mutation status. J Clin En-
docrinol Metab 96:658–664.
199. Adeniran AJ, Hui P, Chhieng DC, Prasad ML, Schofield
K, Theoharis C 2011 BRAF mutation testing of thyroid
fine-needle aspiration specimens enhances the predict-
ability of malignancy in thyroid follicular lesions of
undetermined significance. Acta Cytol 55:570–575.
200. Lastra RR, Pramick MR, Crammer CJ, LiVolsi VA,
Baloch ZW 2014 Implications of a suspicious afirma test
result in thyroid fine-needle aspiration cytology: an in-
stitutional experience. Cancer Cytopathol 122:737–744.
201. Jeong SH, Hong HS, Lee EH, Cha JG, Park JS, Kwak JJ
2013 Outcome of thyroid nodules characterized as atypia
of undetermined significance or follicular lesion of un-
determined significance and correlation with ultrasound
features and BRAF(V600E) mutation analysis. AJR Am
J Roentgenol 201:W854–W860.
202. Yoo WS, Choi HS, Cho SW, Moon JH, Kim KW, Park
HJ, Park SY, Choi SI, Choi SH, Lim S, Yi KH, Park do J,
Jang HC, Park YJ 2014 The role of ultrasound findings in
the management of thyroid nodules with atypia or fol-
licular lesions of undetermined significance. Clin En-
docrinol (Oxf) 80:735–742.
203. Gweon HM, Son EJ, Youk JH, Kim JA 2013 Thyroid
nodules with Bethesda system III cytology: can ultraso-
nography guide the next step? Ann Surg Oncol 20:3083–
3088.
204. Kim DW, Lee EJ, Jung SJ, Ryu JH, Kim YM 2011 Role
of sonographic diagnosis in managing Bethesda class III
nodules. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 32:2136–2141.
205. Rosario PW 2014 Thyroid nodules with atypia or fol-
licular lesions of undetermined significance (Bethesda
Category III): importance of ultrasonography and cyto-
logical subcategory. Thyroid 24:1115–1120.
206. Henry MR, DeMay RM, Berezowski K 2010 Follicular
neoplasm/suspicious for a follicular neoplasm. In: Ali
SZ, Cibas ES (eds) The Bethesda System for Reporting
Thyroid Cytopathology. Springer, pp 51–58.
207. Faquin WC, Michael CW, Renshaw AA 2010 Follicular
neoplasm, Hu
¨rthle cell type/suspicious for a follicular
neoplasm, Hu
¨rthle cell type. In: Ali SZ, Cibas ES (eds)
The Bethesda System for Reporting Thyroid Cyto-
pathology. Springer, pp 59–73.
208. Gupta N, Dasyam AK, Carty SE, Nikiforova MN, Ohori
NP, Armstrong M, Yip L, LeBeau SO, McCoy KL,
Coyne C, Stang MT, Johnson J, Ferris RL, Seethala R,
Nikiforov YE, Hodak SP 2013 RAS mutations in thyroid
FNA specimens are highly predictive of predominantly
low-risk follicular-pattern cancers. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 98:E914–E922.
209. Wang HH, Filie AC, Clark DP 2010 Suspicious for
malignancy. In: Ali SZ, Cibas ES (eds) The Bethesda
System for Reporting Thyroid Cytopathology. Springer,
pp 75–89.
210. Moon HJ, Kwak JY, Kim EK, Choi JR, Hong SW, Kim
MJ, Son EJ 2009 The role of BRAFV600E mutation and
ultrasonography for the surgical management of a thy-
roid nodule suspicious for papillary thyroid carcinoma on
cytology. Ann Surg Oncol 16:3125–3131.
211. Adeniran AJ, Theoharis C, Hui P, Prasad ML, Hammers
L, Carling T, Udelsman R, Chhieng DC 2011 Reflex
BRAF testing in thyroid fine-needle aspiration biopsy
with equivocal and positive interpretation: a prospective
study. Thyroid 21:717–723.
212. Jara SM, Bhatnagar R, Guan H, Gocke CD, Ali SZ,
Tufano RP 2014 Utility of BRAF mutation detection in
fine-needle aspiration biopsy samples read as ‘‘suspi-
cious for papillary thyroid carcinoma’’. Head Neck doi:
10.1002/hed.23829. [Epub ahead of print].
213. de Geus-Oei LF, Pieters GF, Bonenkamp JJ, Mudde AH,
Bleeker-Rovers CP, Corstens FH, Oyen WJ 2006 18F-
FDG PET reduces unnecessary hemithyroidectomies for
thyroid nodules with inconclusive cytologic results. J
Nucl Med 47:770–775.
214. Kresnik E, Gallowitsch HJ, Mikosch P, Stettner H, Igerc
I, Gomez I, Kumnig G, Lind P 2003 Fluorine-18-
fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography in the
preoperative assessment of thyroid nodules in an en-
demic goiter area. Surgery 133:294–299.
215. Kim JM, Ryu JS, Kim TY, Kim WB, Kwon GY, Gong
G, Moon DH, Kim SC, Hong SJ, Shong YK 2007 18F-
fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography does
not predict malignancy in thyroid nodules cytologically
diagnosed as follicular neoplasm. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 92:1630–1634.
216. Sebastianes FM, Cerci JJ, Zanoni PH, Soares J Jr, Chi-
bana LK, Tomimori EK, de Camargo RY, Izaki M,
Giorgi MC, Eluf-Neto J, Meneghetti JC, Pereira MA
2007 Role of 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission
tomography in preoperative assessment of cytologically
indeterminate thyroid nodules. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
92:4485–4488.
217. Hales NW, Krempl GA, Medina JE 2008 Is there a role
for fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/
computed tomography in cytologically indeterminate
thyroid nodules? Am J Otolaryngol 29:113–118.
218. Traugott AL, Dehdashti F, Trinkaus K, Cohen M, Fialk-
owski E, Quayle F, Hussain H, Davila R, Ylagan L, Moley
JF 2010 Exclusion of malignancy in thyroid nodules with
indeterminate fine-needle aspiration cytology after nega-
tive 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomogra-
phy: interim analysis. World J Surg 34:1247–1253.
219. Smith RB, Robinson RA, Hoffman HT, Graham MM
2008 Preoperative FDG-PET imaging to assess the ma-
100
HAUGEN ET AL.
 lignant potential of follicular neoplasms of the thyroid.
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 138:101–106.
220. Deandreis D, Al Ghuzlan A, Auperin A, Vielh P, Caillou
B, Chami L, Lumbroso J, Travagli JP, Hartl D, Baudin
E, Schlumberger M, Leboulleux S 2012 Is (18)F-
fluorodeoxyglucose-PET/CT useful for the presurgical
characterization of thyroid nodules with indeterminate
fine needle aspiration cytology? Thyroid 22:165–172.
221. Vriens D, de Wilt JH, van der Wilt GJ, Netea-Maier RT,
Oyen WJ, de Geus-Oei LF 2011 The role of [18F]-2-
fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose-positron emission tomography
in thyroid nodules with indeterminate fine-needle aspi-
ration biopsy: systematic review and meta-analysis of the
literature. Cancer 117:4582–4594.
222. Wang N, Zhai H, Lu Y 2013 Is fluorine-18 fluorodeox-
yglucose positron emission tomography useful for the
thyroid nodules with indeterminate fine needle aspiration
biopsy? A meta-analysis of the literature. J Otolaryngol
Head Neck Surg 42:38–45.
223. Vriens D, Adang EM, Netea-Maier RT, Smit JW, de Wilt
JH, Oyen WJ, de Geus-Oei LF 2014 Cost-effectiveness
of FDG-PET/CT for cytologically indeterminate thyroid
nodules: a decision analytic approach. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 99:3263–3274.
224. Duren M, Yavuz N, Bukey Y, Ozyegin MA, Gundogdu
S, Acbay O, Hatemi H, Uslu I, Onsel C, Aksoy F, Oz F,
Unal G, Duren E 2000 Impact of initial surgical treat-
ment on survival of patients with differentiated thyroid
cancer: experience of an endocrine surgery center in an
iodine-deficient region. World J Surg 24:1290–1294.
225. Stojadinovic A, Peoples GE, Libutti SK, Henry LR,
Eberhardt J, Howard RS, Gur D, Elster EA, Nissan A
2009 Development of a clinical decision model for thy-
roid nodules. BMC Surg 9:12.
226. Tuttle RM, Lemar H, Burch HB 1998 Clinical features
associated with an increased risk of thyroid malignancy
in patients with follicular neoplasia by fine-needle aspi-
ration. Thyroid 8:377–383.
227. Goldstein RE, Netterville JL, Burkey B, Johnson JE 2002
Implications of follicular neoplasms, atypia, and lesions
suspicious for malignancy diagnosed by fine-needle aspi-
ration of thyroid nodules. Ann Surg 235:656–662.
228. Schlinkert RT, van Heerden JA, Goellner JR, Gharib H,
Smith SL, Rosales RF, Weaver AL 1997 Factors that
predict malignant thyroid lesions when fine-needle as-
piration is ‘‘suspicious for follicular neoplasm’’. Mayo
Clin Proc 72:913–916.
229. Mehta RS, Carty SE, Ohori NP, Hodak SP, Coyne C,
LeBeau SO, Tublin ME, Stang MT, Johnson JT, McCoy
KL, Nikiforova MN, Nikiforov YE, Yip L 2013 Nodule
size is an independent predictor of malignancy in
mutation-negative nodules with follicular lesion of un-
determined significance cytology. Surgery 154:730–736.
230. McCoy KL, Carty SE, Armstrong MJ, Seethala RR,
Ohori NP, Kabaker AS, Stang MT, Hodak SP, Nikiforov
YE, Yip L 2012 Intraoperative pathologic examination in
the era of molecular testing for differentiated thyroid
cancer. J Am Coll Surg 215:546–554.
231. Kandil E, Krishnan B, Noureldine SI, Yao L, Tufano RP
2013 Hemithyroidectomy: a meta-analysis of postoper-
ative need for hormone replacement and complications.
ORL J Otorhinolaryngol Relat Spec 75:6–17.
232. Sosa JA, Bowman HM, Tielsch JM, Powe NR, Gordon
TA, Udelsman R 1998 The importance of surgeon ex-
perience for clinical and economic outcomes from thy-
roidectomy. Ann Surg 228:320–330.
233. Loyo M, Tufano RP, Gourin CG 2013 National trends in
thyroid surgery and the effect of volume on short-term
outcomes. Laryngoscope 123:2056–2063.
234. Verloop H, Louwerens M, Schoones JW, Kievit J, Smit
JW, Dekkers OM 2012 Risk of hypothyroidism follow-
ing hemithyroidectomy: systematic review and meta-
analysis of prognostic studies. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
97:2243–2255.
235. Brito JP, Yarur AJ, Prokop LJ, McIver B, Murad MH,
Montori VM 2013 Prevalence of thyroid cancer in
multinodular goiter versus single nodule: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Thyroid 23:449–455.
236. Kwak JY, Koo H, Youk JH, Kim MJ, Moon HJ, Son EJ,
Kim EK 2010 Value of US correlation of a thyroid
nodule with initially benign cytologic results. Radiology
254:292–300.
237. Brauer VF, Eder P, Miehle K, Wiesner TD, Hasenclever
H, Paschke R 2005 Interobserver variation for ultrasound
determination of thyroid nodule volumes. Thyroid 15:
1169–1175.
238. Alexander EK, Hurwitz S, Heering JP, Benson CB,
Frates MC, Doubilet PM, Cibas ES, Larsen PR, Mar-
qusee E 2003 Natural history of benign solid and cystic
thyroid nodules. Ann Intern Med 138:315–318.
239. Papini E, Petrucci L, Guglielmi R, Panunzi C, Rinaldi R,
Bacci V, Crescenzi A, Nardi F, Fabbrini R, Pacella CM
1998 Long-term changes in nodular goiter: a 5-year
prospective randomized trial of levothyroxine suppres-
sive therapy for benign cold thyroid nodules. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 83:780–783.
240. Erdogan MF, Gursoy A, Erdogan G 2006 Natural course
of benign thyroid nodules in a moderately iodine-
deficient area. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 65:767–771.
241. Durante C, Costante G, Lucisano G, Bruno R, Meringolo
D, Paciaroni A, Puxeddu E, Torlontano M, Tumino S,
Attard M, Lamartina L, Nicolucci A, Filetti S 2015 The
natural history of benign thyroid nodules. JAMA 313:
926–935.
242. Rosario PW, Purisch S 2010 Ultrasonographic charac-
teristics as a criterion for repeat cytology in benign
thyroid nodules. Arq Bras Endocrinol Metabol 54:
52–55.
243. Zelmanovitz F, Genro S, Gross JL 1998 Suppressive
therapy with levothyroxine for solitary thyroid nodules: a
double-blind controlled clinical study and cumulative
meta-analyses. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 83:3881–3885.
244. Wemeau JL, Caron P, Schvartz C, Schlienger JL, Or-
giazzi J, Cousty C, Vlaeminck-Guillem V 2002 Effects
of thyroid-stimulating hormone suppression with le-
vothyroxine in reducing the volume of solitary thyroid
nodules and improving extranodular nonpalpable chan-
ges: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
by the French Thyroid Research Group. J Clin En-
docrinol Metab 87:4928–4934.
245. Castro MR, Caraballo PJ, Morris JC 2002 Effectiveness
of thyroid hormone suppressive therapy in benign soli-
tary thyroid nodules: a meta-analysis. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 87:4154–4159.
246. Yousef A, Clark J, Doi SA 2010 Thyroxine suppression
therapy for benign, non-functioning solitary thyroid
nodules: a quality-effects meta-analysis. Clin Med Res
8:150–158.
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
101
 247. Sdano MT, Falciglia M, Welge JA, Steward DL 2005
Efficacy of thyroid hormone suppression for benign
thyroid nodules: meta-analysis of randomized trials.
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 133:391–396.
248. Grussendorf M, Reiners C, Paschke R, Wegscheider K
2011 Reduction of thyroid nodule volume by levothyr-
oxine and iodine alone and in combination: a random-
ized, placebo-controlled trial. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
96:2786–2795.
249. Puzziello A, Carrano M, Angrisani E, Marotta V, Fag-
giano A, Zeppa P, Vitale M 2014 Evolution of benign
thyroid nodules under levothyroxine non-suppressive
therapy. J Endocrinol Invest 37:1181–1186.
250. Bennedbaek FN, Hegedus L 2003 Treatment of recurrent
thyroid cysts with ethanol: a randomized double-blind
controlled trial. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 88:5773–5777.
251. Valcavi R, Frasoldati A 2004 Ultrasound-guided percu-
taneous ethanol injection therapy in thyroid cystic nod-
ules. Endocr Pract 10:269–275.
252. Antonelli A, Campatelli A, Di VA, Alberti B, Baldi V,
Salvioni G, Fallahi P, Baschieri L 1994 Comparison
between ethanol sclerotherapy and emptying with in-
jection of saline in treatment of thyroid cysts. Clin In-
vestig 72:971–974.
253. Verde G, Papini E, Pacella CM, Gallotti C, Delpiano S,
Strada S, Fabbrini R, Bizzarri G, Rinaldi R, Panunzi C
1994 Ultrasound guided percutaneous ethanol injection
in the treatment of cystic thyroid nodules. Clin En-
docrinol (Oxf) 41:719–724.
254. Chen AY, Bernet VJ, Carty SE, Davies TF, Ganly I,
Inabnet WB III, Shaha AR 2014 American Thyroid
Association statement on optimal surgical management
of goiter. Thyroid 24:181–189.
255. Shin JJ, Caragacianu D, Randolph GW 2015 Impact of
thyroid nodule size on prevalence and post-test proba-
bility of malignancy: a systematic review. Laryngoscope
125:263–272.
256. Marley EF, Oertel YC 1997 Fine-needle aspiration of
thyroid lesions in 57 pregnant and postpartum women.
Diagn Cytopathol 16:122–125.
257. Kung AW, Chau MT, Lao TT, Tam SC, Low LC 2002
The effect of pregnancy on thyroid nodule formation. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 87:1010–1014.
258. Moosa M, Mazzaferri EL 1997 Outcome of differenti-
ated thyroid cancer diagnosed in pregnant women. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 82:2862–2866.
259. Rosen IB, Korman M, Walfish PG 1997 Thyroid nodular
disease in pregnancy: current diagnosis and manage-
ment. Clin Obstet Gynecol 40:81–89.
260. McLeod DS, Watters KF, Carpenter AD, Ladenson PW,
Cooper DS, Ding EL 2012 Thyrotropin and thyroid
cancer
diagnosis:
a
systematic
review
and
dose-
response meta-analysis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 97:
2682–2692.
261. Karger S, Schotz S, Stumvoll M, Berger F, Fuhrer D
2010 Impact of pregnancy on prevalence of goitre and
nodular thyroid disease in women living in a region of
borderline sufficient iodine supply. Horm Metab Res 42:
137–142.
262. Messuti I, Corvisieri S, Bardesono F, Rapa I, Giorcelli J,
Pellerito R, Volante M, Orlandi F 2014 Impact of
pregnancy on prognosis of differentiated thyroid cancer:
clinical and molecular features. Eur J Endocrinol 170:
659–666.
263. Vannucchi G, Perrino M, Rossi S, Colombo C, Vicentini
L, Dazzi D, Beck-Peccoz P, Fugazzola L 2010 Clinical and
molecular features of differentiated thyroid cancer diag-
nosed during pregnancy. Eur J Endocrinol 162:145–151.
264. Mestman JH, Goodwin TM, Montoro MM 1995 Thyroid
disorders of pregnancy. Endocrinol Metab Clin North
Am 24:41–71.
265. Herzon FS, Morris DM, Segal MN, Rauch G, Parnell T
1994 Coexistent thyroid cancer and pregnancy. Arch
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 120:1191–1193.
266. Mazzaferri EL, Jhiang SM 1994 Long-term impact of
initial surgical and medical therapy on papillary and
follicular thyroid cancer. Am J Med 97:418–428.
267. Kuy S, Roman SA, Desai R, Sosa JA 2009 Outcomes
following thyroid and parathyroid surgery in pregnant
women. Arch Surg 144:399–406.
268. Aschebrook-Kilfoy B, Ward MH, Sabra MM, Devesa SS
2011 Thyroid cancer incidence patterns in the United States
by histologic type, 1992–2006. Thyroid 21:125–134.
269. Hundahl SA, Fleming ID, Fremgen AM, Menck HR
1998 A National Cancer Data Base report on 53,856
cases of thyroid carcinoma treated in the U.S., 1985–
1995 [see commetns]. Cancer 83:2638–2648.
270. Hay ID, Bergstralh EJ, Goellner JR, Ebersold JR, Grant
CS 1993 Predicting outcome in papillary thyroid carci-
noma: development of a reliable prognostic scoring
system in a cohort of 1779 patients surgically treated at
one institution during 1940 through 1989. Surgery 114:
1050–1057.
271. Shah MD, Hall FT, Eski SJ, Witterick IJ, Walfish PG,
Freeman JL 2003 Clinical course of thyroid carcinoma
after neck dissection. Laryngoscope 113:2102–2107.
272. Wang TS, Dubner S, Sznyter LA, Heller KS 2004 In-
cidence of metastatic well-differentiated thyroid cancer
in cervical lymph nodes. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck
Surg 130:110–113.
273. Mazzaferri EL 1999 An overview of the management of
papillary and follicular thyroid carcinoma. Thyroid
9:421–427.
274. Mazzaferri EL 2000 Long-term outcome of patients with
differentiated thyroid carcinoma: effect of therapy. En-
docr Pract 6:469–476.
275. Cooper DS, Specker B, Ho M, Sperling M, Ladenson
PW, Ross DS, Ain KB, Bigos ST, Brierley JD, Haugen
BR, Klein I, Robbins J, Sherman SI, Taylor T, Maxon
HR III 1998 Thyrotropin suppression and disease pro-
gression in patients with differentiated thyroid cancer:
results from the National Thyroid Cancer Treatment
Cooperative Registry. Thyroid 8:737–744.
276. Lin JD, Chao TC, Huang MJ, Weng HF, Tzen KY 1998
Use of radioactive iodine for thyroid remnant ablation in
well-differentiated thyroid carcinoma to replace thyroid
reoperation. Am J Clin Oncol 21:77–81.
277. Brierley JD, Panzarella T, Tsang RW, Gospodarowicz
MK, O’Sullivan B 1997 A comparison of different
staging systems predictability of patient outcome. Thy-
roid carcinoma as an example. Cancer 79:2414–2423.
278. Hay ID, Thompson GB, Grant CS, Bergstralh EJ, Dvorak
CE, Gorman CA, Maurer MS, McIver B, Mullan BP,
Oberg AL, Powell CC, van Heerden JA, Goellner JR
2002 Papillary thyroid carcinoma managed at the Mayo
Clinic during six decades (1940–1999): temporal trends
in initial therapy and long-term outcome in 2444 con-
secutively treated patients. World J Surg 26:879–885.
102
HAUGEN ET AL.
 279. Gourin CG, Tufano RP, Forastiere AA, Koch WM,
Pawlik TM, Bristow RE 2010 Volume-based trends in
thyroid surgery. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
136:1191–1198.
280. Stavrakis AI, Ituarte PH, Ko CY, Yeh MW 2007 Surgeon
volume as a predictor of outcomes in inpatient and out-
patient endocrine surgery. Surgery 142:887–899.
281. Grebe SK, Hay ID 1996 Thyroid cancer nodal metasta-
ses: biologic significance and therapeutic considerations.
Surg Oncol Clin N Am 5:43–63.
282. Scheumann GF, Gimm O, Wegener G, Hundeshagen H,
Dralle H 1994 Prognostic significance and surgical
management of locoregional lymph node metastases in
papillary thyroid cancer. World J Surg 18:559–567.
283. Ito Y, Uruno T, Nakano K, Takamura Y, Miya A, Ko-
bayashi K, Yokozawa T, Matsuzuka F, Kuma S, Kuma
K, Miyauchi A 2003 An observation trial without sur-
gical treatment in patients with papillary microcarcinoma
of the thyroid. Thyroid 13:381–387.
284. Hay ID, Grant CS, van Heerden JA, Goellner JR, Eber-
sold JR, Bergstralh EJ 1992 Papillary thyroid micro-
carcinoma: a study of 535 cases observed in a 50-year
period. Surgery 112:1139–1146.
285. Qubain SW, Nakano S, Baba M, Takao S, Aikou T
2002 Distribution of lymph node micrometastasis in pN0
well-differentiated thyroid carcinoma. Surgery 131:249–
256.
286. Arturi F, Russo D, Giuffrida D, Ippolito A, Perrotti N,
Vigneri R, Filetti S 1997 Early diagnosis by genetic anal-
ysis of differentiated thyroid cancer metastases in small
lymph nodes. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 82:1638–1641.
287. Solorzano CC, Carneiro DM, Ramirez M, Lee TM, Irvin
GL, III 2004 Surgeon-performed ultrasound in the man-
agement of thyroid malignancy. Am Surg 70:576–580.
288. Shimamoto K, Satake H, Sawaki A, Ishigaki T, Funa-
hashi H, Imai T 1998 Preoperative staging of thyroid
papillary carcinoma with ultrasonography. Eur J Radiol
29:4–10.
289. Stulak JM, Grant CS, Farley DR, Thompson GB, van
Heerden JA, Hay ID, Reading CC, Charboneau JW 2006
Value of preoperative ultrasonography in the surgical
management of initial and reoperative papillary thyroid
cancer. Arch Surg 141:489–494.
290. Kouvaraki MA, Shapiro SE, Fornage BD, Edeiken-
Monro BS, Sherman SI, Vassilopoulou-Sellin R, Lee JE,
Evans DB 2003 Role of preoperative ultrasonography in
the surgical management of patients with thyroid cancer.
Surgery 134:946–954.
291. O’Connell K, Yen TW, Quiroz F, Evans DB, Wang TS
2013 The utility of routine preoperative cervical ultra-
sonography in patients undergoing thyroidectomy for
differentiated thyroid cancer. Surgery 154:697–701.
292. Leboulleux S, Girard E, Rose M, Travagli JP, Sabbah N,
Caillou B, Hartl DM, Lassau N, Baudin E, Schlumberger
M 2007 Ultrasound criteria of malignancy for cervical
lymph nodes in patients followed up for differentiated
thyroid cancer. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 92:3590–3594.
293. Frasoldati A, Valcavi R 2004 Challenges in neck ultra-
sonography: lymphadenopathy and parathyroid glands.
Endocr Pract 10:261–268.
294. Kuna SK, Bracic I, Tesic V, Kuna K, Herceg GH, Dodig
D 2006 Ultrasonographic differentiation of benign from
malignant neck lymphadenopathy in thyroid cancer. J
Ultrasound Med 25:1531–1537.
295. Park JH, Lee YS, Kim BW, Chang HS, Park CS 2012
Skip lateral neck node metastases in papillary thyroid
carcinoma. World J Surg 36:743–747.
296. Snozek CL, Chambers EP, Reading CC, Sebo TJ, Sis-
trunk JW, Singh RJ, Grebe SK 2007 Serum thyroglob-
ulin,
high-resolution
ultrasound,
and
lymph
node
thyroglobulin in diagnosis of differentiated thyroid car-
cinoma nodal metastases. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 92:
4278–4281.
297. Frasoldati A, Pesenti M, Gallo M, Caroggio A, Salvo
D, Valcavi R 2003 Diagnosis of neck recurrences in
patients with differentiated thyroid carcinoma. Cancer
97:90–96.
298. Boi F, Baghino G, Atzeni F, Lai ML, Faa G, Mariotti S
2006 The diagnostic value for differentiated thyroid
carcinoma metastases of thyroglobulin (Tg) measure-
ment in washout fluid from fine-needle aspiration biopsy
of neck lymph nodes is maintained in the presence of
circulating anti-Tg antibodies. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
91:1364–1369.
299. Jeon MJ, Park JW, Han JM, Yim JH, Song DE, Gong G,
Kim TY, Baek JH, Lee JH, Shong YK, Kim WB 2013
Serum antithyroglobulin antibodies interfere with thy-
roglobulin detection in fine-needle aspirates of metastatic
neck nodes in papillary thyroid carcinoma. J Clin En-
docrinol Metab 98:153–160.
300. Chung J, Kim EK, Lim H, Son EJ, Yoon JH, Youk JH,
Kim JA, Moon HJ, Kwak JY 2014 Optimal indication of
thyroglobulin measurement in fine-needle aspiration for
detecting lateral metastatic lymph nodes in patients with
papillary thyroid carcinoma. Head Neck 36:795–801.
301. Grani G, Fumarola A 2014 Thyroglobulin in lymph node
fine-needle aspiration wash-out: a systematic review and
meta-analysis of diagnostic accuracy. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 99:1970–1982.
302. Pak K, Suh S, Hong H, Cheon GJ, Hahn SK, Kang KW,
Kim EE, Lee DS, Chung JK 2015 Diagnostic values of
thyroglobulin measurement in fine-needle aspiration of
lymph nodes in patients with thyroid cancer. Endocrine
49:70–77.
303. Pacini F, Fugazzola L, Lippi F, Ceccarelli C, Centoni R,
Miccoli P, Elisei R, Pinchera A 1992 Detection of thy-
roglobulin in fine needle aspirates of nonthyroidal neck
masses: a clue to the diagnosis of metastatic differentiated
thyroid cancer. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 74:1401–1404.
304. Moon JH, Kim YI, Lim JA, Choi HS, Cho SW, Kim
KW, Park HJ, Paeng JC, Park YJ, Yi KH, Park do J, Kim
SE, Chung JK 2013 Thyroglobulin in washout fluid from
lymph node fine-needle aspiration biopsy in papillary
thyroid cancer: large-scale validation of the cutoff value
to determine malignancy and evaluation of discrepant
results. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 98:1061–1068.
305. Giovanella L, Bongiovanni M, Trimboli P 2013 Diag-
nostic value of thyroglobulin assay in cervical lymph
node fine-needle aspirations for metastatic differentiated
thyroid cancer. Curr Opin Oncol 25:6–13.
306. Stephenson BM, Wheeler MH, Clark OH 1994 The role
of total thyroidectomy in the management of differenti-
ated thyroid cancer. Curr Opin Gen Surg 2:53–59.
307. Ahn JE, Lee JH, Yi JS, Shong YK, Hong SJ, Lee DH,
Choi CG, Kim SJ 2008 Diagnostic accuracy of CT and
ultrasonography for evaluating metastatic cervical lymph
nodes in patients with thyroid cancer. World J Surg 32:
1552–1558.
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
103
 308. Choi JS, Kim J, Kwak JY, Kim MJ, Chang HS, Kim EK
2009 Preoperative staging of papillary thyroid carcino-
ma: comparison of ultrasound imaging and CT. AJR Am
J Roentgenol 193:871–878.
309. Lesnik D, Cunnane ME, Zurakowski D, Acar GO, Ecevit
C, Mace A, Kamani D, Randolph GW 2014 Papillary
thyroid carcinoma nodal surgery directed by a preoperative
radiographic map utilizing CT scan and ultrasound in all
primary and reoperative patients. Head Neck 36:191–202.
310. Jeong HS, Baek CH, Son YI, Choi JY, Kim HJ, Ko YH,
Chung JH, Baek HJ 2006 Integrated 18F-FDG PET/CT
for the initial evaluation of cervical node level of patients
with papillary thyroid carcinoma: comparison with ul-
trasound and contrast-enhanced CT. Clin Endocrinol
(Oxf) 65:402–407.
311. Kaplan SL, Mandel SJ, Muller R, Baloch ZW, Thaler ER,
Loevner LA 2009 The role of MR imaging in detecting
nodal disease in thyroidectomy patients with rising thy-
roglobulin levels. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 30:608–612.
312. Andersen PE, Kinsella J, Loree TR, Shaha AR, Shah JP
1995 Differentiated carcinoma of the thyroid with ex-
trathyroidal extension. Am J Surg 170:467–470.
313. Kim E, Park JS, Son KR, Kim JH, Jeon SJ, Na DG 2008
Preoperative diagnosis of cervical metastatic lymph
nodes in papillary thyroid carcinoma: comparison of
ultrasound, computed tomography, and combined ultra-
sound with computed tomography. Thyroid 18:411–418.
314. Yeh MW, Bauer AJ, Bernet VA, Ferris RL, Loevner LA,
Mandel SJ, Orloff LA, Randolph GW, Steward DL 2015
American Thyroid Association statement on preoperative
imaging for thyroid cancer surgery. Thyroid 25:3–14.
315. Padovani RP, Kasamatsu TS, Nakabashi CC, Camacho
CP, Andreoni DM, Malouf EZ, Marone MM, Maciel
RM, Biscolla RP 2012 One month is sufficient for
urinary iodine to return to its baseline value after the
use of water-soluble iodinated contrast agents in post-
thyroidectomy patients requiring radioiodine therapy.
Thyroid 22:926–930.
316. Spencer CA, Bergoglio LM, Kazarosyan M, Fatemi S,
LoPresti JS 2005 Clinical impact of thyroglobulin (Tg)
and Tg autoantibody method differences on the man-
agement of patients with differentiated thyroid carcino-
mas. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 90:5566–5575.
317. McLeod DS, Cooper DS, Ladenson PW, Ain KB,
Brierley JD, Fein HG, Haugen BR, Jonklaas J, Magner J,
Ross DS, Skarulis MC, Steward DL, Maxon HR, Sher-
man SI; for the National Thyroid Cancer Treatment
Cooperative Study Group 2014 Prognosis of differenti-
ated thyroid cancer in relation to serum thyrotropin and
thyroglobulin antibody status at time of diagnosis. Thy-
roid 24:35–42.
318. Bilimoria KY, Bentrem DJ, Ko CY, Stewart AK, Win-
chester DP, Talamonti MS, Sturgeon C 2007 Extent of
surgery affects survival for papillary thyroid cancer. Ann
Surg 246:375–381.
319. Grant CS, Hay ID, Gough IR, Bergstralh EJ, Goellner
JR, McConahey WM 1988 Local recurrence in papillary
thyroid carcinoma: is extent of surgical resection im-
portant? Surgery 104:954–962.
320. Hay ID, Grant CS, Bergstralh EJ, Thompson GB, van
Heerden JA, Goellner JR 1998 Unilateral total lobecto-
my: is it sufficient surgical treatment for patients with
AMES low-risk papillary thyroid carcinoma? Surgery
124:958–964.
321. Mazzaferri EL, Kloos RT 2001 Clinical review 128:
Current approaches to primary therapy for papillary and
follicular thyroid cancer. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 86:
1447–1463.
322. Matsuzu K, Sugino K, Masudo K, Nagahama M, Kita-
gawa W, Shibuya H, Ohkuwa K, Uruno T, Suzuki A,
Magoshi S, Akaishi J, Masaki C, Kawano M, Suganuma
N, Rino Y, Masuda M, Kameyama K, Takami H, Ito K
2014 Thyroid lobectomy for papillary thyroid cancer:
long-term follow-up study of 1,088 cases. World J Surg
38:68–79.
323. Barney BM, Hitchcock YJ, Sharma P, Shrieve DC,
Tward JD 2011 Overall and cause-specific survival for
patients undergoing lobectomy, near-total, or total thy-
roidectomy for differentiated thyroid cancer. Head Neck
33:645–649.
324. Mendelsohn AH, Elashoff DA, Abemayor E, St John
MA 2010 Surgery for papillary thyroid carcinoma: is
lobectomy enough? Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
136:1055–1061.
325. Haigh PI, Urbach DR, Rotstein LE 2005 Extent of thy-
roidectomy is not a major determinant of survival in low-
or high-risk papillary thyroid cancer. Ann Surg Oncol
12:81–89.
326. Nixon IJ, Ganly I, Patel SG, Palmer FL, Whitcher MM,
Tuttle RM, Shaha A, Shah JP 2012 Thyroid lobectomy
for treatment of well differentiated intrathyroid malig-
nancy. Surgery 151:571–579.
327. Adam MA, Pura J, Gu L, Dinan MA, Tyler DS, Reed
SD, Scheri R, Roman SA, Sosa JA 2014 Extent of sur-
gery for papillary thyroid cancer is not associated with
survival: an analysis of 61,775 patients. Ann Surg 260:
601–605.
328. Vaisman F, Shaha A, Fish S, Michael TR 2011 Initial
therapy with either thyroid lobectomy or total thyroid-
ectomy without radioactive iodine remnant ablation is
associated with very low rates of structural disease re-
currence in properly selected patients with differentiated
thyroid cancer. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 75:112–119.
329. Tuggle CT, Roman S, Udelsman R, Sosa JA 2011 Same-
day thyroidectomy: a review of practice patterns and
outcomes for 1,168 procedures in New York State. Ann
Surg Oncol 18:1035–1040.
330. Tuggle CT, Roman SA, Wang TS, Boudourakis L,
Thomas DC, Udelsman R, Ann SJ 2008 Pediatric en-
docrine surgery: who is operating on our children? Sur-
gery 144:869–877.
331. Kandil E, Noureldine SI, Abbas A, Tufano RP 2013 The
impact of surgical volume on patient outcomes following
thyroid surgery. Surgery 154:1346–1352.
332. Duclos A, Peix JL, Colin C, Kraimps JL, Menegaux F,
Pattou F, Sebag F, Touzet S, Bourdy S, Voirin N, Lifante
JC 2012 Influence of experience on performance of in-
dividual surgeons in thyroid surgery: prospective cross
sectional multicentre study. BMJ 344:d8041.
333. Hauch A, Al-Qurayshi Z, Randolph G, Kandil E 2014
Total thyroidectomy is associated with increased risk of
complications for low- and high-volume surgeons. Ann
Surg Oncol 21:3844–3852.
334. Hughes DT, White ML, Miller BS, Gauger PG, Burney
RE, Doherty GM 2010 Influence of prophylactic central
lymph node dissection on postoperative thyroglobulin
levels and radioiodine treatment in papillary thyroid
cancer. Surgery 148:1100–1106.
104
HAUGEN ET AL.
 335. Randolph GW, Duh QY, Heller KS, LiVolsi VA, Mandel
SJ, Steward DL, Tufano RP, Tuttle RM 2012 The
prognostic significance of nodal metastases from papil-
lary thyroid carcinoma can be stratified based on the size
and number of metastatic lymph nodes, as well as the
presence of extranodal extension. Thyroid 22:1144–
1152.
336. Podnos YD, Smith D, Wagman LD, Ellenhorn JD 2005
The implication of lymph node metastasis on survival in
patients with well-differentiated thyroid cancer. Am Surg
71:731–734.
337. Zaydfudim V, Feurer ID, Griffin MR, Phay JE 2008 The
impact of lymph node involvement on survival in pa-
tients with papillary and follicular thyroid carcinoma.
Surgery 144:1070–1077.
338. Leboulleux S, Rubino C, Baudin E, Caillou B, Hartl DM,
Bidart JM, Travagli JP, Schlumberger M 2005 Prog-
nostic factors for persistent or recurrent disease of
papillary thyroid carcinoma with neck lymph node me-
tastases and/or tumor extension beyond the thyroid
capsule at initial diagnosis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
90:5723–5729.
339. Sugitani I, Kasai N, Fujimoto Y, Yanagisawa A 2004 A
novel classification system for patients with PTC: addi-
tion of the new variables of large (3 cm or greater) nodal
metastases and reclassification during the follow-up pe-
riod. Surgery 135:139–148.
340. Adam MA, Pura J, Goffredo P, Dinan MA, Reed SD,
Scheri RP, Hyslop T, Roman SA, Sosa JA 2015 Presence
and number of lymph node metastases are associated
with compromised survival for patients younger than age
45 years with papillary thyroid cancer. J Clin Oncol 33:
2370–2375.
341. Robbins KT, Shaha AR, Medina JE, Califano JA, Wolf
GT, Ferlito A, Som PM, Day TA 2008 Consensus
statement on the classification and terminology of neck
dissection. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 134:
536–538.
342. Hwang HS, Orloff LA 2011 Efficacy of preoperative
neck ultrasound in the detection of cervical lymph node
metastasis from thyroid cancer. Laryngoscope 121:
487–491.
343. Mulla M, Schulte KM 2012 Central cervical lymph node
metastases in papillary thyroid cancer: a systematic re-
view of imaging-guided and prophylactic removal of the
central compartment. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 76:131–136.
344. Hartl DM, Leboulleux S, Al Ghuzlan A, Baudin E,
Chami L, Schlumberger M, Travagli JP 2012 Optimi-
zation of staging of the neck with prophylactic central
and lateral neck dissection for papillary thyroid carci-
noma. Ann Surg 255:777–783.
345. Popadich A, Levin O, Lee JC, Smooke-Praw S, Ro K,
Fazel M, Arora A, Tolley NS, Palazzo F, Learoyd DL,
Sidhu S, Delbridge L, Sywak M, Yeh MW 2011 A
multicenter cohort study of total thyroidectomy and
routine central lymph node dissection for cN0 papillary
thyroid cancer. Surgery 150:1048–1057.
346. Lang BH, Wong KP, Wan KY, Lo CY 2012 Impact of
routine unilateral central neck dissection on preablative
and postablative stimulated thyroglobulin levels after
total thyroidectomy in papillary thyroid carcinoma. Ann
Surg Oncol 19:60–67.
347. Wang TS, Evans DB, Fareau GG, Carroll T, Yen TW
2012 Effect of prophylactic central compartment neck
dissection on serum thyroglobulin and recommendations
for adjuvant radioactive iodine in patients with differ-
entiated thyroid cancer. Ann Surg Oncol 19:4217–4222.
348. Carty SE, Cooper DS, Doherty GM, Duh QY, Kloos RT,
Mandel SJ, Randolph GW, Stack BC Jr, Steward DL,
Terris DJ, Thompson GB, Tufano RP, Tuttle RM,
Udelsman R 2009 Consensus statement on the termi-
nology and classification of central neck dissection for
thyroid cancer. Thyroid 19:1153–1158.
349. Chisholm EJ, Kulinskaya E, Tolley NS 2009 Systematic
review and meta-analysis of the adverse effects of thy-
roidectomy combined with central neck dissection as
compared
with
thyroidectomy
alone.
Laryngoscope
119:1135–1139.
350. Bonnet S, Hartl D, Leboulleux S, Baudin E, Lumbroso
JD, Al Ghuzlan A, Chami L, Schlumberger M, Travagli
JP 2009 Prophylactic lymph node dissection for papillary
thyroid cancer less than 2 cm: implications for radio-
iodine treatment. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 94:1162–
1167.
351. Sancho JJ, Lennard TW, Paunovic I, Triponez F, Sitges-
Serra A 2014 Prophylactic central neck disection in
papillary thyroid cancer: a consensus report of the Eu-
ropean Society of Endocrine Surgeons (ESES). Lan-
genbecks Arch Surg 399:155–163.
352. Zetoune T, Keutgen X, Buitrago D, Aldailami H, Shao
H, Mazumdar M, Fahey TJ III, Zarnegar R 2010 Pro-
phylactic central neck dissection and local recurrence in
papillary thyroid cancer: a meta-analysis. Ann Surg
Oncol 17:3287–3293.
353. Barczynski M, Konturek A, Stopa M, Nowak W 2013
Prophylactic central neck dissection for papillary thyroid
cancer. Br J Surg 100:410–418.
354. Hartl DM, Mamelle E, Borget I, Leboulleux S, Mirghani
H, Schlumberger M 2013 Influence of prophylactic neck
dissection on rate of retreatment for papillary thyroid
carcinoma. World J Surg 37:1951–1958.
355. Sywak M, Cornford L, Roach P, Stalberg P, Sidhu S,
Delbridge L 2006 Routine ipsilateral level VI lympha-
denectomy reduces postoperative thyroglobulin levels in
papillary thyroid cancer. Surgery 140:1000–1005.
356. Laird AM, Gauger PG, Miller BS, Doherty GM 2012
Evaluation of postoperative radioactive iodine scans in
patients who underwent prophylactic central lymph node
dissection. World J Surg 36:1268–1273.
357. Costa S, Giugliano G, Santoro L, Ywata De Carvalho A,
Massaro MA, Gibelli B, De Fiori E, Grosso E, Ansarin
M, Calabrese L 2009 Role of prophylactic central neck
dissection in cN0 papillary thyroid cancer. Acta Otor-
hinolaryngol Ital 29:61–69.
358. Ryu IS, Song CI, Choi SH, Roh JL, Nam SY, Kim SY
2014 Lymph node ratio of the central compartment is a
significant predictor for locoregional recurrence after
prophylactic central neck dissection in patients with thy-
roid papillary carcinoma. Ann Surg Oncol 21:277–283.
359. Moreno MA, Edeiken-Monroe BS, Siegel ER, Sherman
SI, Clayman GL 2012 In papillary thyroid cancer, pre-
operative central neck ultrasound detects only macro-
scopic surgical disease, but negative findings predict
excellent long-term regional control and survival. Thy-
roid 22:347–355.
360. Yoo D, Ajmal S, Gowda S, Machan J, Monchik J,
Mazzaglia P 2012 Level VI lymph node dissection does
not decrease radioiodine uptake in patients undergoing
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
105
 radioiodine ablation for differentiated thyroid cancer.
World J Surg 36:1255–1261.
361. Roh JL, Park JY, Park CI 2007 Total thyroidectomy plus
neck dissection in differentiated papillary thyroid carci-
noma patients: pattern of nodal metastasis, morbidity,
recurrence, and postoperative levels of serum parathy-
roid hormone. Ann Surg 245:604–610.
362. Cavicchi O, Piccin O, Caliceti U, De Cataldis A, Pas-
quali R, Ceroni AR 2007 Transient hypoparathyroidism
following thyroidectomy: a prospective study and mul-
tivariate analysis of 604 consecutive patients. Otolar-
yngol Head Neck Surg 137:654–658.
363. Raffaelli M, De Crea C, Sessa L, Giustacchini P, Revelli L,
Bellantone C, Lombardi CP 2012 Prospective evaluation of
total thyroidectomy versus ipsilateral versus bilateral central
neck dissection in patients with clinically node-negative
papillary thyroid carcinoma. Surgery 152:957–964.
364. Viola D, Materazzi G, Valerio L, Molinaro E, Agate L,
Faviana P, Seccia V, Sensi E, Romei C, Piaggi P, Tor-
regrossa L, Sellari-Franceschini S, Basolo F, Vitti P,
Elisei R, Miccoli P 2015 Prophylactic central compart-
ment lymph node dissection in papillary thyroid carci-
noma: clinical
implications derived
from the first
prospective randomized controlled single institution
study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 100:1316–1324.
365. Lang BH, Ng SH, Lau LL, Cowling BJ, Wong KP, Wan
KY 2013 A systematic review and meta-analysis of pro-
phylactic central neck dissection on short-term loco-
regional recurrence in papillary thyroid carcinoma after
total thyroidectomy. Thyroid 23:1087–1098.
366. Wang TS, Cheung K, Farrokhyar F, Roman SA, Sosa JA
2013 A meta-analysis of the effect of prophylactic cen-
tral compartment neck dissection on locoregional recur-
rence rates in patients with papillary thyroid cancer. Ann
Surg Oncol 20:3477–3483.
367. Gyorki DE, Untch B, Tuttle RM, Shaha AR 2013 Pro-
phylactic central neck dissection in differentiated thyroid
cancer: an assessment of the evidence. Ann Surg Oncol
20:2285–2289.
368. Haymart MR, Banerjee M, Stewart AK, Koenig RJ,
Birkmeyer JD, Griggs JJ 2011 Use of radioactive iodine
for thyroid cancer. JAMA 306:721–728.
369. Howell GM, Nikiforova MN, Carty SE, Armstrong MJ,
Hodak SP, Stang MT, McCoy KL, Nikiforov YE, Yip L
2013 BRAFV600E mutation independently predicts central
compartment lymph node metastasis in patients with
papillary thyroid cancer. Ann Surg Oncol 20:47–52.
370. Xing M, Alzahrani AS, Carson KA, Viola D, Elisei R,
Bendlova B, Yip L, Mian C, Vianello F, Tuttle RM,
Robenshtok E, Fagin JA, Puxeddu E, Fugazzola L,
Czarniecka A, Jarzab B, O’Neill CJ, Sywak MS, Lam
AK, Riesco-Eizaguirre G, Santisteban P, Nakayama H,
Tufano RP, Pai SI, Zeiger MA, Westra WH, Clark DP,
Clifton-Bligh R, Sidransky D, Ladenson PW, Sykorova
V 2013 Association between BRAFV600E mutation and
mortality in patients with papillary thyroid cancer.
JAMA 309:1493–1501.
371. Kim TH, Park YJ, Lim JA, Ahn HY, Lee EK, Lee YJ, Kim
KW, Hahn SK, Youn YK, Kim KH, Cho BY, Park do J
2012 The association of the BRAF(V600E) mutation with
prognostic factors and poor clinical outcome in papillary
thyroid cancer: a meta-analysis. Cancer 118:1764–1773.
372. Ito Y, Yoshida H, Kihara M, Kobayashi K, Miya A,
Miyauchi A 2014 BRAF(V600E) mutation analysis in
papillary thyroid carcinoma: is it useful for all patients?
World J Surg 38:679–687.
373. Gouveia C, Can NT, Bostrom A, Grenert JP, van Zante
A, Orloff LA 2013 Lack of association of BRAF muta-
tion with negative prognostic indicators in papillary
thyroid carcinoma: the University of California, San
Francisco, experience. JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck
Surg 139:1164–1170.
374. Dutenhefner SE, Marui S, Santos AB, de Lima EU, In-
oue M, Neto JS, Shiang C, Fukushima JT, Cernea CR,
Friguglietti CU 2013 BRAF: a tool in the decision to
perform elective neck dissection? Thyroid 23:1541–
1546.
375. Lee KC, Li C, Schneider EB, Wang Y, Somervell H,
Krafft M, Umbricht CB, Zeiger MA 2012 Is BRAF
mutation associated with lymph node metastasis in
patients with papillary thyroid cancer? Surgery 152:
977–983.
376. Xing M 2010 Prognostic utility of BRAF mutation in
papillary thyroid cancer. Mol Cell Endocrinol 321:
86–93.
377. Sugitani I, Fujimoto Y, Yamada K, Yamamoto N 2008
Prospective outcomes of selective lymph node dissection
for papillary thyroid carcinoma based on preoperative
ultrasonography. World J Surg 32:2494–2502.
378. Ito Y, Miyauchi A 2007 Lateral and mediastinal lymph
node dissection in differentiated thyroid carcinoma: in-
dications, benefits, and risks. World J Surg 31:905–915.
379. Gemsenjager E, Perren A, Seifert B, Schuler G, Schweizer
I, Heitz PU 2003 Lymph node surgery in papillary thyroid
carcinoma. J Am Coll Surg 197:182–190.
380. Kouvaraki MA, Lee JE, Shapiro SE, Sherman SI, Evans
DB 2004 Preventable reoperations for persistent and
recurrent papillary thyroid carcinoma. Surgery 136:
1183–1191.
381. Ito Y, Tomoda C, Uruno T, Takamura Y, Miya A, Ko-
bayashi K, Matsuzuka F, Kuma K, Miyauchi A 2004
Preoperative ultrasonographic examination for lymph
node metastasis: usefulness when designing lymph node
dissection for papillary microcarcinoma of the thyroid.
World J Surg 28:498–501.
382. Erdem E, Gulcelik MA, Kuru B, Alagol H 2003 Com-
parison of completion thyroidectomy and primary sur-
gery for differentiated thyroid carcinoma. Eur J Surg
Oncol 29:747–749.
383. Tan MP, Agarwal G, Reeve TS, Barraclough BH, Del-
bridge LW 2002 Impact of timing on completion thy-
roidectomy for thyroid cancer. Br J Surg 89:802–804.
384. Untch BR, Palmer FL, Ganly I, Patel SG, Michael
TR, Shah JP, Shaha AA 2014 Oncologic outcomes af-
ter completion thyroidectomy for patients with well-
differentiated thyroid carcinoma. Ann Surg Oncol 21:
1374–1378.
385. Barbesino G, Goldfarb M, Parangi S, Yang J, Ross DS,
Daniels GH 2012 Thyroid lobe ablation with radioactive
iodine as an alternative to completion thyroidectomy after
hemithyroidectomy in patients with follicular thyroid
carcinoma: long-term follow-up. Thyroid 22:369–376.
386. Santra A, Bal S, Mahargan S, Bal C 2011 Long-term
outcome of lobar ablation versus completion thyroidec-
tomy in differentiated thyroid cancer. Nucl Med Com-
mun 32:52–58.
387. Giovanella L, Piccardo A, Paone G, Foppiani L, Treglia
G, Ceriani L 2013 Thyroid lobe ablation with iodine-131I
106
HAUGEN ET AL.
 in patients with differentiated thyroid carcinoma: a ran-
domized comparison between 1.1 and 3.7 GBq activities.
Nucl Med Commun 34:767–770.
388. O’Connor AM, Bennett CL, Stacey D, Barry M, Col NF,
Eden KB, Entwistle VA, Fiset V, Holmes-Rovner M,
Khangura S, Llewellyn-Thomas H, Rovner D 2009 De-
cision aids for people facing health treatment or
screening decisions. Cochrane Database Syst Rev (3):
CD001431.
389. Feldman-Stewart D, Capirci C, Brennenstuhl S, Tong C,
Abacioglu U, Gawkowska-Suwinska M, van Gils F,
Heyda A, Igdem S, Macias V, Grillo IM, Moynihan C,
Pijls-Johannesma M, Parker C, Pimentel N, Wo
¨rdehoff H
2011 Information for decision making by patients with
early-stage prostate cancer: a comparison across 9
countries. Med Decis Making 31:754–766.
390. Haynes RB, McKibbon KA, Kanani R 1996 Systematic
review of randomised trials of interventions to assist
patients to follow prescriptions for medications. Lancet
348:383–386.
391. Weiss SM, Wengert PA Jr, Martinez EM, Sewall W,
Kopp E 1996 Patient satisfaction with decision-
making for breast cancer therapy. Ann Surg Oncol
3:285–289.
392. Street RL Jr, Voigt B 1997 Patient participation in de-
ciding breast cancer treatment and subsequent quality of
life. Med Decis Making 17:298–306.
393. Abdul-Sater L, Henry M, Majdan A, Mijovic T, Franklin
JH, Brandt MG, Black MJ, Hier MP, Payne RJ 2011
What are thyroidectomy patients really concerned about?
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 144:685–690.
394. Husson O, Haak HR, Oranje WA, Mols F, Reemst PH,
van de Poll-Franse LV 2011 Health-related quality of life
among thyroid cancer survivors: a systematic review.
Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 75:544–554.
395. Stojadinovic A, Shaha AR, Orlikoff RF, Nissan A,
Kornak MF, Singh B, Boyle JO, Shah JP, Brennan MF,
Kraus DH 2002 Prospective functional voice assessment
in patients undergoing thyroid surgery. Ann Surg 236:
823–832.
396. Soylu L, Ozbas S, Uslu HY, Kocak S 2007 The evalu-
ation of the causes of subjective voice disturbances after
thyroid surgery. Am J Surg 194:317–322.
397. Wilson JA, Deary IJ, Millar A, Mackenzie K 2002 The
quality of life impact of dysphonia. Clin Otolaryngol
Allied Sci 27:179–182.
398. Jones SM, Carding PN, Drinnan MJ 2006 Exploring the
relationship between severity of dysphonia and voice-
related quality of life. Clin Otolaryngol 31:411–417.
399. Munch S, deKryger L 2001 A piece of my mind. Moral
wounds: complicated complications. JAMA 285:1131–
1132.
400. Cohen SM, Kim J, Roy N, Asche C, Courey M 2012
Prevalence and causes of dysphonia in a large treatment-
seeking population. Laryngoscope 122:343–348.
401. Singer MC, Iverson KC, Terris DJ 2012 Thyroidectomy-
related malpractice claims. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
146:358–361.
402. Chandrasekhar
SS,
Randolph
GW,
Seidman
MD,
Rosenfeld RM, Angelos P, Barkmeier-Kraemer J, Ben-
ninger MS, Blumin JH, Dennis G, Hanks J, Haymart
MR, Kloos RT, Seals B, Schreibstein JM, Thomas
MA, Waddington C, Warren B, Robertson PJ 2013
Clinical practice guideline: improving voice outcomes
after thyroid surgery. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 148:
S1–37.
403. Farrag TY, Samlan RA, Lin FR, Tufano RP 2006 The
utility of evaluating true vocal fold motion before thyroid
surgery. Laryngoscope 116:235–238.
404. Roh JL, Yoon YH, Park CI 2009 Recurrent laryngeal
nerve paralysis in patients with papillary thyroid carci-
nomas: evaluation and management of resulting vocal
dysfunction. Am J Surg 197:459–465.
405. Randolph GW, Kamani D 2006 The importance of pre-
operative laryngoscopy in patients undergoing thyroid-
ectomy: voice, vocal cord function, and the preoperative
detection of invasive thyroid malignancy. Surgery 139:
357–362.
406. Eadie TL, Kapsner M, Rosenzweig J, Waugh P, Hillel A,
Merati A 2010 The role of experience on judgments of
dysphonia. J Voice 24:564–573.
407. Rowe-Jones JM, Rosswick RP, Leighton SE 1993 Be-
nign thyroid disease and vocal cord palsy. Ann R Coll
Surg Engl 75:241–244.
408. Shin JJ, Grillo HC, Mathisen D, Katlic MR, Zurakowski
D, Kamani D, Randolph GW 2011 The surgical man-
agement of goiter: Part I. Preoperative evaluation. Lar-
yngoscope 121:60–67.
409. Bergenfelz A, Jansson S, Kristoffersson A, Martensson
H, Reihner E, Wallin G, Lausen I 2008 Complications to
thyroid surgery: results as reported in a database from a
multicenter audit comprising 3,660 patients. Langen-
becks Arch Surg 393:667–673.
410. Green KM, de Carpentier JP 1999 Are pre-operative
vocal fold checks necessary? J Laryngol Otol 113:642–
644.
411. Cheng SP, Lee JJ, Liu TP, Lee KS, Liu CL 2012 Pre-
operative ultrasonography assessment of vocal cord
movement during thyroid and parathyroid surgery.
World J Surg 36:2509–2515.
412. Terris DJ, Snyder S, Carneiro-Pla D, Inabnet WB III,
Kandil E, Orloff L, Shindo M, Tufano RP, Tuttle RM,
Urken M, Yeh MW 2013 American Thyroid Association
statement on outpatient thyroidectomy. Thyroid 23:
1193–1202.
413. Dralle H, Sekulla C, Haerting J, Timmermann W, Neu-
mann HJ, Kruse E, Grond S, Muhlig HP, Richter C, Voss
J, Thomusch O, Lippert H, Gastinger I, Brauckhoff M,
Gimm O 2004 Risk factors of paralysis and functional
outcome after recurrent laryngeal nerve monitoring in
thyroid surgery. Surgery 136:1310–1322.
414. Shindo ML, Caruana S, Kandil E, McCaffrey JC, Orloff
L, Porterfield JR, Randolph G, Shaha A, Shin J, Terris D
2014 Management of invasive well-differentiated thyroid
cancer an American Head and Neck Society consensus
statement. Head Neck 36:1379–1390.
415. Falk SA, McCaffrey TV 1995 Management of the re-
current laryngeal nerve in suspected and proven thyroid
cancer. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 113:42–48.
416. Jatzko GR, Lisborg PH, Muller MG, Wette VM 1994
Recurrent nerve palsy after thyroid operations—principal
nerve identification and a literature review. Surgery
115:139–144.
417. Lo CY, Kwok KF, Yuen PW 2000 A prospective eval-
uation of recurrent laryngeal nerve paralysis during
thyroidectomy. Arch Surg 135:204–207.
418. Curran AJ, Smyth D, Sheehan SJ, Joyce W, Hayes DB,
Walsh MA 1997 Recurrent laryngeal nerve dysfunction
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
107
 following carotid endarterectomy. J R Coll Surg Edinb
42:168–170.
419. Rosenthal LH, Benninger MS, Deeb RH 2007 Vocal fold
immobility: a longitudinal analysis of etiology over 20
years. Laryngoscope 117:1864–1870.
420. Kriskovich MD, Apfelbaum RI, Haller JR 2000 Vocal
fold paralysis after anterior cervical spine surgery: inci-
dence, mechanism, and prevention of injury. Laryngo-
scope 110:1467–1473.
421. Benninger MS, Crumley RL, Ford CN, Gould WJ,
Hanson DG, Ossoff RH, Sataloff RT 1994 Evaluation
and treatment of the unilateral paralyzed vocal fold.
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 111:497–508.
422. Grundfast KM, Harley E 1989 Vocal cord paralysis.
Otolaryngol Clin North Am 22:569–597.
423. Hermann M, Alk G, Roka R, Glaser K, Freissmuth M
2002 Laryngeal recurrent nerve injury in surgery for
benign thyroid diseases: effect of nerve dissection and
impact of individual surgeon in more than 27,000 nerves
at risk. Ann Surg 235:261–268.
424. Randolph GW, Dralle H, Abdullah H, Barczynski M,
Bellantone R, Brauckhoff M, Carnaille B, Cherenko S,
Chiang FY, Dionigi G, Finck C, Hartl D, Kamani
D, Lorenz K, Miccolli P, Mihai R, Miyauchi A, Orloff
L, Perrier N, Poveda MD, Romanchishen A, Serpell
J, Sitges-Serra A, Sloan T, Van SS, Snyder S, Takami
H, Volpi E, Woodson G 2011 Electrophysiologic
recurrent laryngeal nerve monitoring during thyroid
and
parathyroid
surgery:
international
standards
guideline statement. Laryngoscope 121(Suppl 1):S1–
S16.
425. Pisanu A, Porceddu G, Podda M, Cois A, Uccheddu A
2014 Systematic review with meta-analysis of studies
comparing intraoperative neuromonitoring of recurrent
laryngeal nerves versus visualization alone during thy-
roidectomy. J Surg Res 188:152–161.
426. Barczynski M, Konturek A, Stopa M, Honowska A,
Nowak W 2012 Randomized controlled trial of visuali-
zation versus neuromonitoring of the external branch
of the superior laryngeal nerve during thyroidectomy.
World J Surg 36:1340–1347.
427. Chan WF, Lang BH, Lo CY 2006 The role of in-
traoperative
neuromonitoring
of
recurrent
laryngeal
nerve during thyroidectomy: a comparative study on
1000 nerves at risk. Surgery 140:866–872.
428. Musholt TJ, Clerici T, Dralle H, Frilling A, Goretzki PE,
Hermann MM, Kussmann J, Lorenz K, Nies C, Schab-
ram J, Schabram P, Scheuba C, Simon D, Steinmuller T,
Trupka AW, Wahl RA, Zielke A, Bockisch A, Karges
W, Luster M, Schmid KW 2011 German Association of
Endocrine Surgeons practice guidelines for the surgical
treatment of benign thyroid disease. Langenbecks Arch
Surg 396:639–649.
429. Sturgeon C, Sturgeon T, Angelos P 2009 Neuromoni-
toring in thyroid surgery: attitudes, usage patterns, and
predictors of use among endocrine surgeons. World J
Surg 33:417–425.
430. Horne SK, Gal TJ, Brennan JA 2007 Prevalence and
patterns of intraoperative nerve monitoring for thyroid-
ectomy. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 136:952–956.
431. Sadowski SM, Soardo P, Leuchter I, Robert JH, Triponez
F 2013 Systematic use of recurrent laryngeal nerve
neuromonitoring changes the operative strategy in plan-
ned bilateral thyroidectomy. Thyroid 23:329–333.
432. Goretzki PE, Schwarz K, Brinkmann J, Wirowski D,
Lammers BJ 2010 The impact of intraoperative neuro-
monitoring (IONM) on surgical strategy in bilateral
thyroid diseases: is it worth the effort? World J Surg
34:1274–1284.
433. Melin M, Schwarz K, Lammers BJ, Goretzki PE 2013
IONM-guided goiter surgery leading to two-stage thy-
roidectomy—indication and results. Langenbecks Arch
Surg 398:411–418.
434. Barczynski M, Randolph GW, Cernea CR, Dralle H,
Dionigi G, Alesina PF, Mihai R, Finck C, Lombardi D,
Hartl DM, Miyauchi A, Serpell J, Snyder S, Volpi E,
Woodson G, Kraimps JL, Hisham AN 2013 External
branch of the superior laryngeal nerve monitoring during
thyroid and parathyroid surgery: International Neural
Monitoring Study Group standards guideline statement.
Laryngoscope 123(Suppl 4):S1–S14.
435. Randolph GW, Clark OH 2013 Principles in thyroid
surgery. In: Randolph GW (ed) Surgery of the Thyroid
and Parathyroid Glands. 2nd edition. Elsevier, Philadel-
phia, PA, pp 273–293.
436. Lorente-Poch L, Sancho JJ, Ruiz S, Sitges-Serra A 2015
Importance of in situ preservation of parathyroid glands
during total thyroidectomy. Br J Surg 102:359–367.
437. Friedman AD, Burns JA, Heaton JT, Zeitels SM 2010
Early versus late injection medialization for unilateral
vocal cord paralysis. Laryngoscope 120:2042–2046.
438. Arviso LC, Johns MM III, Mathison CC, Klein AM 2010
Long-term outcomes of injection laryngoplasty in pa-
tients with potentially recoverable vocal fold paralysis.
Laryngoscope 120:2237–2240.
439. Yung KC, Likhterov I, Courey MS 2011 Effect of tem-
porary vocal fold injection medialization on the rate of
permanent medialization laryngoplasty in unilateral vocal
fold paralysis patients. Laryngoscope 121:2191–2194.
440. Carty SE, Doherty GM, Inabnet WB III, Pasieka JL,
Randolph GW, Shaha AR, Terris DJ, Tufano RP, Tuttle
RM 2012 American Thyroid Association statement on
the essential elements of interdisciplinary communica-
tion of perioperative information for patients undergoing
thyroid cancer surgery. Thyroid 22:395–399.
441. DeLellis RA, Lloyd RV, Heitz PU, Eng C 2004 World
Health Organization Classification of Tumours. Pathol-
ogy and Genetics of Tumours of Endocrine Organs.
IARC Press, Lyon.
442. Haigh PI, Urbach DR 2005 The treatment and prognosis
of Hu
¨rthle cell follicular thyroid carcinoma compared
with its non-Hu
¨rthle cell counterpart. Surgery 138:1152–
1157.
443. Shaha AR, Loree TR, Shah JP 1995 Prognostic factors
and risk group analysis in follicular carcinoma of the
thyroid. Surgery 118:1131–1136.
444. Ganly I, Ricarte FJ, Eng S, Ghossein R, Morris LG,
Liang Y, Socci N, Kannan K, Mo Q, Fagin JA, Chan TA
2013 Genomic dissection of Hu
¨rthle cell carcinoma re-
veals a unique class of thyroid malignancy. J Clin En-
docrinol Metab 98:E962–E972.
445. Baloch ZW, LiVolsi VA 2002 Follicular-patterned le-
sions of the thyroid: the bane of the pathologist. Am J
Clin Pathol 117:143–150.
446. D’Avanzo A, Treseler P, Ituarte PH, Wong M, Streja L,
Greenspan FS, Siperstein AE, Duh QY, Clark OH 2004
Follicular thyroid carcinoma: histology and prognosis.
Cancer 100:1123–1129.
108
HAUGEN ET AL.
 447. Rosai J 2005 Handling of thyroid follicular patterned
lesions. Endocr Pathol 16:279–283.
448. Nikiforov YE, Ohori NP 2012 Follicular carcinoma. In:
Nikiforov YE, Biddinger PW, Thompson LDR (eds) Di-
agnostic Pathology and Molecular Genetics of the Thyroid.
1st edition. Lippincott, Philadelphia, PA, pp 152–182.
449. Yamashita H, Noguchi S, Murakami N, Kawamoto H,
Watanabe S 1997 Extracapsular invasion of lymph node
metastasis is an indicator of distant metastasis and poor
prognosis in patients with thyroid papillary carcinoma.
Cancer 80:2268–2272.
450. Lango M, Flieder D, Arrangoiz R, Veloski C, Yu JQ, Li
T, Burtness B, Mehra R, Galloway T, Ridge JA 2013
Extranodal extension of metastatic papillary thyroid
carcinoma: correlation with biochemical endpoints, no-
dal persistence, and systemic disease progression. Thy-
roid 23:1099–1105.
451. Falvo L, Catania A, D’Andrea V, Marzullo A, Giusti-
niani MC, De Antoni E 2005 Prognostic importance of
histologic vascular invasion in papillary thyroid carci-
noma. Ann Surg 241:640–646.
452. Gardner RE, Tuttle RM, Burman KD, Haddady S, Tru-
man C, Sparling YH, Wartofsky L, Sessions RB, Ringel
MD 2000 Prognostic importance of vascular invasion in
papillary thyroid carcinoma. Arch Otolaryngol Head
Neck Surg 126:309–312.
453. Mete O, Asa SL 2011 Pathological definition and clinical
significance of vascular invasion in thyroid carcinomas
of follicular epithelial derivation. Mod Pathol 24:1545–
1552.
454. Brennan MD, Bergstralh EJ, van Heerden JA, McCo-
nahey WM 1991 Follicular thyroid cancer treated at the
Mayo Clinic, 1946 through 1970: initial manifestations,
pathologic findings, therapy, and outcome. Mayo Clin
Proc 66:11–22.
455. Collini P, Sampietro G, Pilotti S 2004 Extensive vascular
invasion is a marker of risk of relapse in encapsulated
non-Hu
¨rthle cell follicular carcinoma of the thyroid
gland: a clinicopathological study of 18 consecutive
cases from a single institution with a 11-year median
follow-up. Histopathology 44:35–39.
456. Lang W, Choritz H, Hundeshagen H 1986 Risk factors in
follicular thyroid carcinomas. A retrospective follow-up
study covering a 14-year period with emphasis on mor-
phological findings. Am J Surg Pathol 10:246–255.
457. Nikiforov YE, Ohori NP 2012 Papillary carcinoma. In:
Nikiforov YE, Biddinger PW, Thompson LDR (eds) Di-
agnostic Pathology and Molecular Genetics of the Thyroid.
1st edition. Lippincott, Philadelphia, PA, pp 183–262.
458. Hawk WA, Hazard JB 1976 The many appearances
of papillary carcinoma of the thyroid. Cleve Clin Q 43:
207–215.
459. Leung AK, Chow SM, Law SC 2008 Clinical features
and outcome of the tall cell variant of papillary thyroid
carcinoma. Laryngoscope 118:32–38.
460. Moreno EA, Rodriguez Gonzalez JM, Sola PJ, Soria CT,
Parrilla PP 1993 Prognostic value of the tall cell variety
of papillary cancer of the thyroid. Eur J Surg Oncol 19:
517–521.
461. Ostrowski ML, Merino MJ 1996 Tall cell variant of
papillary thyroid carcinoma: a reassessment and immu-
nohistochemical study with comparison to the usual type
of papillary carcinoma of the thyroid. Am J Surg Pathol
20:964–974.
462. Johnson TL, Lloyd RV, Thompson NW, Beierwaltes
WH, Sisson JC 1988 Prognostic implications of the tall
cell variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma. Am J Surg
Pathol 12:22–27.
463. Michels JJ, Jacques M, Henry-Amar M, Bardet S 2007
Prevalence and prognostic significance of tall cell variant
of papillary thyroid carcinoma. Hum Pathol 38:212–219.
464. Ghossein RA, Leboeuf R, Patel KN, Rivera M, Katabi N,
Carlson DL, Tallini G, Shaha A, Singh B, Tuttle RM
2007 Tall cell variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma
without extrathyroid extension: biologic behavior and
clinical implications. Thyroid 17:655–661.
465. Morris LG, Shaha AR, Tuttle RM, Sikora AG, Ganly I
2010 Tall-cell variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma: a
matched-pair analysis of survival. Thyroid 20:153–158.
466. Xing M 2005 BRAF mutation in thyroid cancer. Endocr
Relat Cancer 12:245–262.
467. Chen JH, Faquin WC, Lloyd RV, Nose V 2011 Clin-
icopathological and molecular characterization of nine
cases of columnar cell variant of papillary thyroid car-
cinoma. Mod Pathol 24:739–749.
468. Evans HL 1986 Columnar-cell carcinoma of the thyroid.
A report of two cases of an aggressive variant of thyroid
carcinoma. Am J Clin Pathol 85:77–80.
469. Evans HL 1996 Encapsulated columnar-cell neoplasms
of the thyroid. A report of four cases suggesting a fa-
vorable prognosis. Am J Surg Pathol 20:1205–1211.
470. Wenig BM, Thompson LD, Adair CF, Shmookler B,
Heffess CS 1998 Thyroid papillary carcinoma of co-
lumnar cell type: a clinicopathologic study of 16 cases.
Cancer 82:740–753.
471. Asioli S, Erickson LA, Sebo TJ, Zhang J, Jin L,
Thompson GB, Lloyd RV 2010 Papillary thyroid carci-
noma with prominent hobnail features: a new aggressive
variant of moderately differentiated papillary carcinoma.
A clinicopathologic, immunohistochemical, and molec-
ular study of eight cases. Am J Surg Pathol 34:44–52.
472. Motosugi U, Murata S, Nagata K, Yasuda M, Shimizu M
2009 Thyroid papillary carcinoma with micropapillary
and hobnail growth pattern: a histological variant with
intermediate malignancy? Thyroid 19:535–537.
473. Lubitz CC, Economopoulos KP, Pawlak AC, Lynch K,
Dias-Santagata D, Faquin WC, Sadow PM 2014 Hobnail
variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma: an institutional
case series and molecular profile. Thyroid 24:958–965.
474. Mizukami Y, Noguchi M, Michigishi T, Nonomura A,
Hashimoto T, Otakes S, Nakamura S, Matsubara F 1992
Papillary thyroid carcinoma in Kanazawa, Japan: prog-
nostic
significance
of
histological
subtypes.
Histo-
pathology 20:243–250.
475. Nikiforov YE, Erickson LA, Nikiforova MN, Caudill
CM, Lloyd RV 2001 Solid variant of papillary thyroid
carcinoma: incidence, clinical-pathologic characteristics,
molecular analysis, and biologic behavior. Am J Surg
Pathol 25:1478–1484.
476. Cardis E, Howe G, Ron E, Bebeshko V, Bogdanova T,
Bouville A, Carr Z, Chumak V, Davis S, Demidchik Y,
Drozdovitch V, Gentner N, Gudzenko N, Hatch M,
Ivanov V, Jacob P, Kapitonova E, Kenigsberg Y, Kes-
miniene A, Kopecky KJ, Kryuchkov V, Loos A, Pinch-
era A, Reiners C, Repacholi M, Shibata Y, Shore RE,
Thomas G, Tirmarche M, Yamashita S, Zvonova I 2006
Cancer consequences of the Chernobyl accident: 20
years on. J Radiol Prot 26:127–140.
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
109
 477. Nikiforov YE 2006 Radiation-induced thyroid cancer:
what we have learned from Chernobyl. Endocr Pathol
17:307–317.
478. Volante M, Collini P, Nikiforov YE, Sakamoto A, Ka-
kudo K, Katoh R, Lloyd RV, LiVolsi VA, Papotti M,
Sobrinho-Simoes M, Bussolati G, Rosai J 2007 Poorly
differentiated thyroid carcinoma: the Turin proposal for
the use of uniform diagnostic criteria and an algorithmic
diagnostic approach. Am J Surg Pathol 31:1256–1264.
479. Asioli S, Erickson LA, Righi A, Jin L, Volante M, Jen-
kins S, Papotti M, Bussolati G, Lloyd RV 2010 Poorly
differentiated carcinoma of the thyroid: validation of the
Turin proposal and analysis of IMP3 expression. Mod
Pathol 23:1269–1278.
480. Fukushima M, Ito Y, Hirokawa M, Akasu H, Shimizu K,
Miyauchi A 2009 Clinicopathologic characteristics and
prognosis of diffuse sclerosing variant of papillary thy-
roid carcinoma in Japan: an 18-year experience at a
single institution. World J Surg 33:958–962.
481. Koo JS, Hong S, Park CS 2009 Diffuse sclerosing variant
is a major subtype of papillary thyroid carcinoma in the
young. Thyroid 19:1225–1231.
482. Regalbuto C, Malandrino P, Tumminia A, Le Moli R,
Vigneri R, Pezzino V 2011 A diffuse sclerosing variant
of papillary thyroid carcinoma: clinical and pathologic
features and outcomes of 34 consecutive cases. Thyroid
21:383–389.
483. Lam AK, Lo CY 2006 Diffuse sclerosing variant of
papillary carcinoma of the thyroid: a 35-year compara-
tive study at a single institution. Ann Surg Oncol 13:
176–181.
484. Rivera M, Ricarte-Filho J, Knauf J, Shaha A, Tuttle M,
Fagin JA, Ghossein RA 2010 Molecular genotyping of
papillary thyroid carcinoma follicular variant according
to its histological subtypes (encapsulated vs infiltrative)
reveals distinct BRAF and RAS mutation patterns. Mod
Pathol 23:1191–1200.
485. Howitt BE, Jia Y, Sholl LM, Barletta JA 2013 Molecular
alterations in partially-encapsulated or well-circumscribed
follicular variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma. Thyroid
23:1256–1262.
486. Liu J, Singh B, Tallini G, Carlson DL, Katabi N, Shaha
A, Tuttle RM, Ghossein RA 2006 Follicular variant of
papillary thyroid carcinoma: a clinicopathologic study of
a problematic entity. Cancer 107:1255–1264.
487. Piana S, Frasoldati A, Di Felice E, Gardini G, Tallini G,
Rosai J 2010 Encapsulated well-differentiated follicular-
patterned thyroid carcinomas do not play a significant
role in the fatality rates from thyroid carcinoma. Am J
Surg Pathol 34:868–872.
488. Proietti A, Giannini R, Ugolini C, Miccoli M, Fontanini
G, Di Coscio G, Romani R, Berti P, Miccoli P, Basolo F
2010 BRAF status of follicular variant of papillary thy-
roid carcinoma and its relationship to its clinical and
cytological features. Thyroid 20:1263–1270.
489. Chan J 2002 Strict criteria should be applied in the di-
agnosis of encapsulated follicular variant of papillary
thyroid carcinoma. Am J Clin Pathol 117:16–18.
490. Vivero M, Kraft S, Barletta JA 2013 Risk stratification of
follicular variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma. Thyroid
23:273–279.
491. Baloch ZW, LiVolsi VA 2000 Encapsulated follicular
variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma with bone me-
tastases. Mod Pathol 13:861–865.
492. Hunt JL, Dacic S, Barnes EL, Bures JC 2002 En-
capsulated follicular variant of papillary thyroid carci-
noma. Am J Clin Pathol 118:602–603.
493. Rivera M, Ricarte-Filho J, Patel S, Tuttle M, Shaha A,
Shah JP, Fagin JA, Ghossein RA 2010 Encapsulated
thyroid tumors of follicular cell origin with high grade
features (high mitotic rate/tumor necrosis): a clinicopath-
ologic and molecular study. Hum Pathol 41:172–180.
494. O’Neill CJ, Vaughan L, Learoyd DL, Sidhu SB, Del-
bridge LW, Sywak MS 2011 Management of follicular
thyroid carcinoma should be individualised based on
degree of capsular and vascular invasion. Eur J Surg
Oncol 37:181–185.
495. van Heerden JA, Hay ID, Goellner JR, Salomao D,
Ebersold JR, Bergstralh EJ, Grant CS 1992 Follicular
thyroid carcinoma with capsular invasion alone: a non-
threatening malignancy. Surgery 112:1130–1136.
496. Goldstein NS, Czako P, Neill JS 2000 Metastatic mini-
mally invasive (encapsulated) follicular and Hu
¨rthle cell
thyroid carcinoma: a study of 34 patients. Mod Pathol
13:123–130.
497. Sugino K, Ito K, Nagahama M, Kitagawa W, Shibuya H,
Ohkuwa K, Yano Y, Uruno T, Akaishi J, Kameyama K,
Ito K 2011 Prognosis and prognostic factors for distant
metastases and tumor mortality in follicular thyroid
carcinoma. Thyroid 21:751–757.
498. Sugino K, Kameyama K, Ito K, Nagahama M, Kitagawa
W, Shibuya H, Ohkuwa K, Yano Y, Uruno T, Akaishi J,
Suzuki A, Masaki C, Ito K 2012 Outcomes and prog-
nostic factors of 251 patients with minimally invasive
follicular thyroid carcinoma. Thyroid 22:798–804.
499. Ghossein RA, Hiltzik DH, Carlson DL, Patel S, Shaha A,
Shah JP, Tuttle RM, Singh B 2006 Prognostic factors of
recurrence in encapsulated Hu
¨rthle cell carcinoma of the
thyroid gland: a clinicopathologic study of 50 cases.
Cancer 106:1669–1676.
500. Huang CC, Hsueh C, Liu FH, Chao TC, Lin JD 2011
Diagnostic and therapeutic strategies for minimally and
widely invasive follicular thyroid carcinomas. Surg On-
col 20:1–6.
501. Lo CY, Chan WF, Lam KY, Wan KY 2005 Follicular
thyroid carcinoma: the role of histology and staging
systems in predicting survival. Ann Surg 242:708–715.
502. Slade I, Bacchelli C, Davies H, Murray A, Abbaszadeh
F, Hanks S, Barfoot R, Burke A, Chisholm J, Hewitt M,
Jenkinson H, King D, Morland B, Pizer B, Prescott K,
Saggar A, Side L, Traunecker H, Vaidya S, Ward P,
Futreal PA, Vujanic G, Nicholson AG, Sebire N, Turn-
bull C, Priest JR, Pritchard-Jones K, Houlston R, Stiller
C, Stratton MR, Douglas J, Rahman N 2011 DICER1
syndrome: clarifying the diagnosis, clinical features and
management implications of a pleiotropic tumour pre-
disposition syndrome. J Med Genet 48:273–278.
503. Cetta F, Montalto G, Gori M, Curia MC, Cama A,
Olschwang S 2000 Germline mutations of the APC gene
in
patients
with
familial
adenomatous
polyposis-
associated thyroid carcinoma: results from a European
cooperative study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 85:286–292.
504. Harach HR, Williams GT, Williams ED 1994 Familial
adenomatous polyposis associated thyroid carcinoma: a
distinct type of follicular cell neoplasm. Histopathology
25:549–561.
505. Hirokawa M, Maekawa M, Kuma S, Miyauchi A 2010
Cribriform-morular variant of papillary thyroid carcino-
110
HAUGEN ET AL.
 ma—cytological and immunocytochemical findings of
18 cases. Diagn Cytopathol 38:890–896.
506. Jung CK, Choi YJ, Lee KY, Bae JS, Kim HJ, Yoon SK,
Son YI, Chung JH, Oh YL 2009 The cytological, clinical,
and pathological features of the cribriform-morular variant
of papillary thyroid carcinoma and mutation analysis of
CTNNB1 and BRAF genes. Thyroid 19:905–913.
507. Koo JS, Jung W, Hong SW 2011 Cytologic character-
istics and beta-catenin immunocytochemistry on smear
slide of cribriform-morular variant of papillary thyroid
carcinoma. Acta Cytol 55:13–18.
508. Ito Y, Miyauchi A, Ishikawa H, Hirokawa M, Kudo T,
Tomoda C, Miya A 2011 Our experience of treat-
ment of cribriform morular variant of papillary thyroid
carcinoma; difference in clinicopathological features of
FAP-associated and sporadic patients. Endocr J 58:
685–689.
509. Hollander MC, Blumenthal GM, Dennis PA 2011 PTEN
loss in the continuum of common cancers, rare syn-
dromes and mouse models. Nat Rev Cancer 11:289–301.
510. Laury AR, Bongiovanni M, Tille JC, Kozakewich H,
Nose V 2011 Thyroid pathology in PTEN-hamartoma
tumor syndrome: characteristic findings of a distinct
entity. Thyroid 21:135–144.
511. Nose V 2011 Familial thyroid cancer: a review. Mod
Pathol 24(Suppl 2):S19–S33.
512. Harach HR, Soubeyran I, Brown A, Bonneau D, Longy
M 1999 Thyroid pathologic findings in patients with
Cowden disease. Ann Diagn Pathol 3:331–340.
513. Hemmings CT 2003 Thyroid pathology in four patients
with Cowden’s disease. Pathology 35:311–314.
514. Volante M, Landolfi S, Chiusa L, Palestini N, Motta M,
Codegone A, Torchio B, Papotti MG 2004 Poorly dif-
ferentiated carcinomas of the thyroid with trabecular,
insular, and solid patterns: a clinicopathologic study of
183 patients. Cancer 100:950–957.
515. Sakamoto A, Kasai N, Sugano H 1983 Poorly differen-
tiated carcinoma of the thyroid. A clinicopathologic en-
tity for a high-risk group of papillary and follicular
carcinomas. Cancer 52:1849–1855.
516. Carcangiu ML, Zampi G, Rosai J 1984 Poorly differ-
entiated (‘‘insular’’) thyroid carcinoma. A reinterpreta-
tion of Langhans’ ‘‘wuchernde Struma’’. Am J Surg
Pathol 8:655–668.
517. Pulcrano M, Boukheris H, Talbot M, Caillou B, Dupuy
C, Virion A, De Vathaire F, Schlumberger M 2007
Poorly differentiated follicular thyroid carcinoma: prog-
nostic factors and relevance of histological classification.
Thyroid 17:639–646.
518. Papotti M, Botto MF, Favero A, Palestini N, Bussolati G
1993 Poorly differentiated thyroid carcinomas with pri-
mordial cell component. A group of aggressive lesions
sharing insular, trabecular, and solid patterns. Am J Surg
Pathol 17:291–301.
519. Decaussin M, Bernard MH, Adeleine P, Treilleux I, Peix
JL, Pugeat M, Tourniaire J, Berger N 2002 Thyroid
carcinomas with distant metastases: a review of 111
cases with emphasis on the prognostic significance of an
insular component. Am J Surg Pathol 26:1007–1015.
520. Hiltzik D, Carlson DL, Tuttle RM, Chuai S, Ishill N,
Shaha A, Shah JP, Singh B, Ghossein RA 2006 Poorly
differentiated thyroid carcinomas defined on the basis of
mitosis and necrosis: a clinicopathologic study of 58
patients. Cancer 106:1286–1295.
521. Gnemmi V, Renaud F, Do Cao C, Salleron J, Lion G,
Wemeau JL, Copin MC, Carnaille B, Leteurtre E, Pattou
F, Aubert S 2014 Poorly differentiated thyroid carcino-
mas: application of the Turin proposal provides prog-
nostic results similar to those from the assessment of
high-grade features. Histopathology 64:263–273.
522. Sherman SI 1999 Toward a standard clinicopathologic
staging approach for differentiated thyroid carcinoma.
Semin Surg Oncol 16:12–15.
523. Yang L, Shen W, Sakamoto N 2013 Population-based
study evaluating and predicting the probability of
death resulting from thyroid cancer and other causes
among patients with thyroid cancer. J Clin Oncol 31:
468–474.
524. Onitilo AA, Engel JM, Lundgren CI, Hall P, Thalib L,
Doi SA 2009 Simplifying the TNM system for clinical
use in differentiated thyroid cancer. J Clin Oncol
27:1872–1878.
525. Mankarios D, Baade P, Youl P, Mortimer RH, Onitilo
AA, Russell A, Doi SA 2013 Validation of the QTNM
staging system for cancer-specific survival in patients with
differentiated thyroid cancer. Endocrine 46:300–308.
526. Sherman SI, Brierley JD, Sperling M, Ain KB, Bigos ST,
Cooper DS, Haugen BR, Ho M, Klein I, Ladenson PW,
Robbins J, Ross DS, Specker B, Taylor T, Maxon HR III
1998 Prospective multicenter study of thyroiscarcinoma
treatment: initial analysis of staging and outcome. Na-
tional Thyroid Cancer Treatment Cooperative Study
Registry Group. Cancer 83:1012–1021.
527. Lang BH, Chow SM, Lo CY, Law SC, Lam KY 2007
Staging systems for papillary thyroid carcinoma: a study
of 2 tertiary referral centers. Ann Surg 246:114–121.
528. Lang BH, Lo CY, Chan WF, Lam KY, Wan KY 2007
Staging systems for papillary thyroid carcinoma: a re-
view and comparison. Ann Surg 245:366–378.
529. Voutilainen PE, Siironen P, Franssila KO, Sivula A,
Haapiainen RK, Haglund CH 2003 AMES, MACIS and
TNM prognostic classifications in papillary thyroid car-
cinoma. Anticancer Res 23:4283–4288.
530. Yildirim E 2005 A model for predicting outcomes in
patients with differentiated thyroid cancer and model
performance in comparison with other classification
systems. J Am Coll Surg 200:378–392.
531. Jonklaas J, Nogueras-Gonzalez G, Munsell M, Litofsky
D, Ain KB, Bigos ST, Brierley JD, Cooper DS, Haugen
BR, Ladenson PW, Magner J, Robbins J, Ross DS,
Skarulis MC, Steward DL, Maxon HR, Sherman SI 2012
The impact of age and gender on papillary thyroid cancer
survival. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 97:E878–E887.
532. Bischoff LA, Curry J, Ahmed I, Pribitkin E, Miller JL
2013 Is above age 45 appropriate for upstaging well-
differentiated papillary thyroid cancer? Endocr Pract 19:
995–997.
533. Ganly I, Nixon IJ, Wang LY, Palmer FL, Migliacci JC,
Aniss A, Sywak M, Eskander A, Freeman JL, Campbell
MJ, Shen WT, Vaisman F, Momesso D, Corbo R,
Vaisman M, Shaha AM, Tuttle RM, Shah JP, Patel SG
2015 Survival from differentiated thyroid cancer: what
has age got to do with it? Thyroid 25:1106–1114.
534. D’Avanzo A, Ituarte P, Treseler P, Kebebew E, Wu J,
Wong M, Duh QY, Siperstein AE, Clark OH 2004
Prognostic scoring systems in patients with follicular
thyroid cancer: a comparison of different staging systems
in predicting the patient outcome. Thyroid 14:453–458.
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
111
 535. Lang BH, Lo CY, Chan WF, Lam KY, Wan KY 2007
Staging systems for follicular thyroid carcinoma: appli-
cation to 171 consecutive patients treated in a tertiary
referral centre. Endocr Relat Cancer 14:29–42.
536. Orlov S, Orlov D, Shaytzag M, Dowar M, Tabatabaie V,
Dwek P, Yip J, Hu C, Freeman JL, Walfish PG 2009
Influence of age and primary tumor size on the risk for
residual/recurrent well-differentiated thyroid carcinoma.
Head Neck 31:782–788.
537. Baek SK, Jung KY, Kang SM, Kwon SY, Woo JS, Cho
SH, Chung EJ 2010 Clinical risk factors associated with
cervical lymph node recurrence in papillary thyroid
carcinoma. Thyroid 20:147–152.
538. Tuttle RM, Tala H, Shah J, Leboeuf R, Ghossein R,
Gonen M, Brokhin M, Omry G, Fagin JA, Shaha A 2010
Estimating risk of recurrence in differentiated thyroid
cancer after total thyroidectomy and radioactive iodine
remnant ablation: using response to therapy variables to
modify the initial risk estimates predicted by the new
American Thyroid Association staging system. Thyroid
20:1341–1349.
539. Vaisman F, Momesso D, Bulzico DA, Pessoa CH, Dias
F, Corbo R, Vaisman M, Tuttle RM 2012 Spontaneous
remission in thyroid cancer patients after biochemical
incomplete response to initial therapy. Clin Endocrinol
(Oxf) 77:132–138.
540. Pacini F, Schlumberger M, Dralle H, Elisei R, Smit JW,
Wiersinga W 2006 European consensus for the manage-
ment of patients with differentiated thyroid carcinoma of
the follicular epithelium. Eur J Endocrinol 154:787–803.
541. Camargo R, Corigliano S, Friguglietti C, Gauna A,
Harach R, Munizaga F, Niepomniszcze H, Pitoia F,
Pretell E, Vaisman M, Ward LS, Wohllk N, Tomimori E
2009 Latin American Thyroid Society recommendations
for the management of thyroid nodules. Arq Bras En-
docrinol Metabol 53:1167–1175.
542. Castagna MG, Maino F, Cipri C, Belardini V, Theo-
doropoulou A, Cevenini G, Pacini F 2011 Delayed risk
stratification, to include the response to initial treatment
(surgery and radioiodine ablation), has better outcome
predictivity in differentiated thyroid cancer patients. Eur
J Endocrinol 165:441–446.
543. Pitoia F, Bueno F, Urciuoli C, Abelleira E, Cross G,
Tuttle RM 2013 Outcomes of patients with differentiated
thyroid cancer risk-stratified according to the American
Thyroid Association and Latin American Thyroid So-
ciety risk of recurrence classification systems. Thyroid
23:1401–1407.
544. Schvartz C, Bonnetain F, Dabakuyo S, Gauthier M,
Cueff A, Fieffe S, Pochart JM, Cochet I, Crevisy E,
Dalac A, Papathanassiou D, Toubeau M 2012 Impact on
overall survival of radioactive iodine in low-risk differ-
entiated thyroid cancer patients. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
97:1526–1535.
545. Durante C, Montesano T, Attard M, Torlontano M,
Monzani F, Costante G, Meringolo D, Ferdeghini M,
Tumino S, Lamartina L, Paciaroni A, Massa M, Giaco-
melli L, Ronga G, Filetti S 2012 Long-term surveillance
of papillary thyroid cancer patients who do not undergo
postoperative radioiodine remnant ablation: is there a
role for serum thyroglobulin measurement? J Clin En-
docrinol Metab 97:2748–2753.
546. Kim KM, Park JB, Bae KS, Kim CB, Kang DR, Kang SJ
2013 Clinical prognostic index for recurrence of papil-
lary thyroid carcinoma including intraoperative findings.
Endocr J 60:291–297.
547. Ito Y, Kudo T, Kihara M, Takamura Y, Kobayashi K,
Miya A, Miyauchi A 2012 Prognosis of low-risk papil-
lary thyroid carcinoma patients: its relationship with the
size of primary tumors. Endocr J 59:119–125.
548. Lee J, Song Y, Soh EY 2014 Prognostic significance of
the number of metastatic lymph nodes to stratify the risk
of recurrence. World J Surg 38:858–862.
549. Clain JB, Scherl S, Dos RL, Turk A, Wenig BM, Mehra
S, Karle WE, Urken ML 2014 Extrathyroidal extension
predicts extranodal extension in patients with positive
lymph nodes: an important association that may affect
clinical management. Thyroid 24:951–957.
550. Riemann B, Kramer JA, Schmid KW, Dralle H, Dietlein
M, Schicha H, Sauerland C, Frankewitsch T, Schober O
2010 Risk stratification of patients with locally aggres-
sive differentiated thyroid cancer. Results of the MSDS
trial. Nuklearmedizin 49:79–84.
551. Nixon IJ, Ganly I, Patel S, Palmer FL, Whitcher MM,
Tuttle RM, Shaha AR, Shah JP 2011 The impact of
microscopic extrathyroid extension on outcome in pa-
tients with clinical T1 and T2 well-differentiated thyroid
cancer. Surgery 150:1242–1249.
552. Jukkola A, Bloigu R, Ebeling T, Salmela P, Blanco G
2004 Prognostic factors in differentiated thyroid carci-
nomas and their implications for current staging classi-
fications. Endocr Relat Cancer 11:571–579.
553. Ito Y, Tomoda C, Uruno T, Takamura Y, Miya A, Ko-
bayashi K, Matsuzuka F, Kuma K, Miyauchi A 2006
Prognostic significance of extrathyroid extension of
papillary thyroid carcinoma: massive but not minimal
extension affects the relapse-free survival. World J Surg
30:780–786.
554. Radowsky JS, Howard RS, Burch HB, Stojadinovic A
2014 Impact of degree of extrathyroidal extension of
disease on papillary thyroid cancer outcome. Thyroid 24:
241–244.
555. Fukushima M, Ito Y, Hirokawa M, Miya A, Shimizu K,
Miyauchi A 2010 Prognostic impact of extrathyroid ex-
tension and clinical lymph node metastasis in papillary
thyroid carcinoma depend on carcinoma size. World J
Surg 34:3007–3014.
556. Baloch ZW, Shafique K, Flannagan M, LiVolsi VA 2010
Encapsulated classic and follicular variants of papillary
thyroid carcinoma: comparative clinicopathologic study.
Endocr Pract 16:952–959.
557. Deleted.
558. Nishida T, Katayama S, Tsujimoto M 2002 The clinico-
pathological significance of histologic vascular invasion in
differentiated thyroid carcinoma. Am J Surg 183:80–86.
559. Akslen LA, Myking AO, Salvesen H, Varhaug JE 1992
Prognostic importance of various clinicopathological
features in papillary thyroid carcinoma. Eur J Cancer
29A:44–51.
560. Simpson WJ, McKinney SE, Carruthers JS, Gospodar-
owicz MK, Sutcliffe SB, Panzarella T 1987 Papillary and
follicular thyroid cancer. Prognostic factors in 1,578
patients. Am J Med 83:479–488.
561. Mai KT, Khanna P, Yazdi HM, Perkins DG, Veinot JP,
Thomas J, Lamba M, Nair BD 2002 Differentiated thy-
roid carcinomas with vascular invasion: a comparative
study of follicular, Hurthle cell and papillary thyroid
carcinoma. Pathology 34:239–244.
112
HAUGEN ET AL.
 562. Furlan JC, Bedard YC, Rosen IB 2004 Clinicopathologic
significance of histologic vascular invasion in papillary
and follicular thyroid carcinomas. J Am Coll Surg 198:
341–348.
563. Tufano RP, Teixeira GV, Bishop J, Carson KA, Xing M
2012 BRAF mutation in papillary thyroid cancer and its
value in tailoring initial treatment: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Medicine (Baltimore) 91:274–286.
564. Xing M, Westra WH, Tufano RP, Cohen Y, Rosenbaum
E, Rhoden KJ, Carson KA, Vasko V, Larin A, Tallini G,
Tolaney S, Holt EH, Hui P, Umbricht CB, Basaria S,
Ewertz M, Tufaro AP, Califano JA, Ringel MD, Zeiger
MA, Sidransky D, Ladenson PW 2005 BRAF mutation
predicts a poorer clinical prognosis for papillary thyroid
cancer. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 90:6373–6379.
565. Elisei R, Viola D, Torregrossa L, Giannini R, Romei C,
Ugolini C, Molinaro E, Agate L, Biagini A, Lupi C,
Valerio L, Materazzi G, Miccoli P, Piaggi P, Pinchera A,
Vitti P, Basolo F 2012 The BRAF(V600E) mutation is an
independent, poor prognostic factor for the outcome of
patients with low-risk intrathyroid papillary thyroid
carcinoma: single-institution results from a large cohort
study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 97:4390–4398.
566. Kim TY, Kim WB, Rhee YS, Song JY, Kim JM, Gong G,
Lee S, Kim SY, Kim SC, Hong SJ, Shong YK 2006 The
BRAF mutation is useful for prediction of clinical recur-
rence in low-risk patients with conventional papillary
thyroid carcinoma. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 65:364–368.
567. Li C, Lee KC, Schneider EB, Zeiger MA 2012
BRAFV600E mutation and its association with clinico-
pathological features of papillary thyroid cancer: a meta-
analysis. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 97:4559–4570.
568. Fernandez IJ, Piccin O, Sciascia S, Cavicchi O, Repaci
A, Vicennati V, Fiorentino M 2013 Clinical significance
of BRAF mutation in thyroid papillary cancer. Otolar-
yngol Head Neck Surg 148:919–925.
569. Prescott JD, Sadow PM, Hodin RA, Le LP, Gaz RD,
Randolph GW, Stephen AE, Parangi S, Daniels GH,
Lubitz CC 2012 BRAFV600E status adds incremental va-
lue to current risk classification systems in predicting
papillary thyroid carcinoma recurrence. Surgery 152:
984–990.
570. Sedliarou I, Saenko V, Lantsov D, Rogounovitch T,
Namba H, Abrosimov A, Lushnikov E, Kumagai A,
Nakashima M, Meirmanov S, Mine M, Hayashi T, Ya-
mashita S 2004 The BRAFT1796A transversion is a
prevalent mutational event in human thyroid micro-
carcinoma. Int J Oncol 25:1729–1735.
571. Xing M 2007 BRAF mutation in papillary thyroid can-
cer: pathogenic role, molecular bases, and clinical im-
plications. Endocr Rev 28:742–762.
572. Park YJ, Kim YA, Lee YJ, Kim SH, Park SY, Kim KW,
Chung JK, Youn YK, Kim KH, Park do J, Cho BY 2010
Papillary microcarcinoma in comparison with larger
papillary thyroid carcinoma in BRAF(V600E) mutation,
clinicopathological features, and immunohistochemical
findings. Head Neck 32:38–45.
573. Namba H, Nakashima M, Hayashi T, Hayashida N,
Maeda S, Rogounovitch TI, Ohtsuru A, Saenko VA,
Kanematsu T, Yamashita S 2003 Clinical implication of
hot spot BRAF mutation, V599E, in papillary thyroid
cancers. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 88:4393–4397.
574. Kwak JY, Kim EK, Chung WY, Moon HJ, Kim MJ,
Choi JR 2009 Association of BRAFV600E mutation
with poor clinical prognostic factors and US features in
Korean patients with papillary thyroid microcarcinoma.
Radiology 253:854–860.
575. Rodolico V, Cabibi D, Pizzolanti G, Richiusa P, Gebbia
N, Martorana A, Russo A, Amato MC, Galluzzo A,
Giordano C 2007 BRAFV600E mutation and p27 kip1
expression in papillary carcinomas of the thyroid <or =
1 cm and their paired lymph node metastases. Cancer
110:1218–1226.
576. Kimura ET, Nikiforova MN, Zhu Z, Knauf JA, Nikiforov
YE, Fagin JA 2003 High prevalence of BRAF mutations
in thyroid cancer: genetic evidence for constitutive ac-
tivation of the RET/PTC-RAS-BRAF signaling pathway
in papillary thyroid carcinoma. Cancer Res 63:1454–
1457.
577. Henderson YC, Shellenberger TD, Williams MD, El-
Naggar AK, Fredrick MJ, Cieply KM, Clayman GL 2009
High rate of BRAF and RET/PTC dual mutations asso-
ciated with recurrent papillary thyroid carcinoma. Clin
Cancer Res 15:485–491.
578. Nikiforova MN, Wald AI, Roy S, Durso MB, Nikiforov
YE 2013 Targeted next-generation sequencing panel
(ThyroSeq) for detection of mutations in thyroid cancer.
J Clin Endocrinol Metab 98:E1852-E1860.
579. Liu X, Bishop J, Shan Y, Pai S, Liu D, Murugan AK, Sun
H, El-Naggar AK, Xing M 2013 Highly prevalent TERT
promoter mutations in aggressive thyroid cancers. En-
docr Relat Cancer 20:603–610.
580. Landa I, Ganly I, Chan TA, Mitsutake N, Matsuse M,
Ibrahimpasic T, Ghossein RA, Fagin JA 2013 Frequent
somatic TERT promoter mutations in thyroid cancer:
higher prevalence in advanced forms of the disease. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 98:E1562–E1566.
581. Liu X, Qu S, Liu R, Sheng C, Shi X, Zhu G, Murugan
AK, Guan H, Yu H, Wang Y, Sun H, Shan Z, Teng W,
Xing M 2014 TERT promoter mutations and their as-
sociation with BRAFV600E mutation and aggressive
clinicopathological characteristics of thyroid cancer. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 99:E1130–E1136.
582. Tuttle RM, Leboeuf R 2008 Follow up approaches in
thyroid cancer: a risk adapted paradigm. Endocrinol
Metab Clin North Am 37:419–435, ix–x.
583. Schlumberger M, Berg G, Cohen O, Duntas L, Jamar
F, Jarzab B, Limbert E, Lind P, Pacini F, Reiners C,
Sanchez FF, Toft A, Wiersinga WM 2004 Follow-up
of low-risk patients with differentiated thyroid carcinoma:
a European perspective. Eur J Endocrinol 150:105–112.
584. Tuttle RM 2008 Risk-adapted management of thyroid
cancer. Endocr Pract 14:764–774.
585. Deleted.
586. Berger F, Friedrich U, Knesewitsch P, Hahn K 2011
Diagnostic 131I whole-body scintigraphy 1 year after
thyroablative therapy in patients with differentiated
thyroid cancer: correlation of results to the individual
risk profile and long-term follow-up. Eur J Nucl Med
Mol Imaging 38:451–458.
587. Malandrino P, Latina A, Marescalco S, Spadaro A, Re-
galbuto C, Fulco RA, Scollo C, Vigneri R, Pellegriti G
2011 Risk-adapted management of differentiated thyroid
cancer assessed by a sensitive measurement of basal
serum thyroglobulin. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 96:1703–
1709.
588. Soyluk O, Boztepe H, Aral F, Alagol F, Ozbey NC 2011
Papillary thyroid carcinoma patients assessed to be at
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
113
 low or intermediary risk after primary treatment are at
greater risk of long term recurrence if they are thyro-
globulin antibody positive or do not have distinctly low
thyroglobulin at initial assessment. Thyroid 21:1301–
1308.
589. Piccardo A, Arecco F, Morbelli S, Bianchi P, Barbera F,
Finessi M, Corvisieri S, Pestarino E, Foppiani L, Villa-
vecchia G, Cabria M, Orlandi F 2010 Low thyroglobulin
concentrations after thyroidectomy increase the prog-
nostic value of undetectable thyroglobulin levels on
levo-thyroxine suppressive treatment in low-risk differ-
entiated thyroid cancer. J Endocrinol Invest 33:83–87.
590. Castagna MG, Brilli L, Pilli T, Montanaro A, Cipri C,
Fioravanti C, Sestini F, Capezzone M, Pacini F 2008
Limited value of repeat recombinant human thyrotropin
(rhTSH)-stimulated thyroglobulin testing in differentiated
thyroid carcinoma patients with previous negative rhTSH-
stimulated thyroglobulin and undetectable basal serum
thyroglobulin levels. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 93:76–81.
591. Kloos RT, Mazzaferri EL 2005 A single recombinant
human thyrotropin-stimulated serum thyroglobulin mea-
surement predicts differentiated thyroid carcinoma me-
tastases three to five years later. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
90:5047–5057.
592. Kloos RT 2010 Thyroid cancer recurrence in patients
clinically free of disease with undetectable or very low
serum thyroglobulin values. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
95:5241–5248.
593. Han JM, Kim WB, Yim JH, Kim WG, Kim TY, Ryu JS,
Gong G, Sung TY, Yoon JH, Hong SJ, Kim EY, Shong
YK 2012 Long-term clinical outcome of differentiated
thyroid cancer patients with undetectable stimulated
thyroglobulin level one year after initial treatment.
Thyroid 22:784–790.
594. Rosario PW, Furtado MS, Mineiro Filho AF, Lacerda
RX, Calsolari MR 2012 Value of repeat stimulated thy-
roglobulin testing in patients with differentiated thyroid
carcinoma considered to be free of disease in the first
year after ablation. Thyroid 22:482–486.
595. Brassard M, Borget I, Edet-Sanson A, Giraudet AL,
Mundler O, Toubeau M, Bonichon F, Borson-Chazot F,
Leenhardt L, Schvartz C, Dejax C, Brenot-Rossi I,
Toubert ME, Torlontano M, Benhamou E, Schlumberger
M 2011 Long-term follow-up of patients with papillary
and follicular thyroid cancer: a prospective study on 715
patients. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 96:1352–1359.
596. Pelttari H, Valimaki MJ, Loyttyniemi E, Schalin-Jantti C
2010 Post-ablative serum thyroglobulin is an indepen-
dent predictor of recurrence in low-risk differentiated
thyroid carcinoma: a 16-year follow-up study. Eur J
Endocrinol 163:757–763.
597. Klubo-Gwiezdzinska J, Burman KD, Van Nostrand D,
Wartofsky L 2011 Does an undetectable rhTSH-stimulated
Tg level 12 months after initial treatment of thyroid
cancer indicate remission? Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 74:111–
117.
598. Crocetti U, Durante C, Attard M, Maniglia A, Tumino S,
Bruno R, Bonfitto N, Dicembrino F, Varraso A, Mer-
ingolo D, Filetti S, Trischitta V, Torlontano M 2008
Predictive value of recombinant human TSH stimulation
and neck ultrasonography in differentiated thyroid cancer
patients. Thyroid 18:1049–1053.
599. Torlontano M, Attard M, Crocetti U, Tumino S, Bruno
R, Costante G, D’Azzo G, Meringolo D, Ferretti E,
Sacco R, Arturi F, Filetti S 2004 Follow-up of low risk
patients with papillary thyroid cancer: role of neck ul-
trasonography in detecting lymph node metastases. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 89:3402–3407.
600. Verburg FA, Stokkel MP, Duren C, Verkooijen RB,
Mader U, van Isselt JW, Marlowe RJ, Smit JW, Reiners
C, Luster M 2010 No survival difference after successful
(131)I ablation between patients with initially low-risk
and high-risk differentiated thyroid cancer. Eur J Nucl
Med Mol Imaging 37:276–283.
601. Giovanella L, Maffioli M, Ceriani L, De PD, Spriano G
2009 Unstimulated high sensitive thyroglobulin mea-
surement predicts outcome of differentiated thyroid
carcinoma. Clin Chem Lab Med 47:1001–1004.
602. Momesso DP, Tuttle RM 2014 Update on differentiated
thyroid cancer staging. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am
43:401–421.
603. Lemb J, Hufner M, Meller B, Homayounfar K, Sahlmann
C, Meller J 2013 How reliable is secondary risk strati-
fication with stimulated thyroglobulin in patients with
differentiated thyroid carcinoma? Results from a retro-
spective study. Nuklearmedizin 52:88–96.
604. Nascimento C, Borget I, Al Ghuzlan A, Deandreis D,
Chami L, Travagli JP, Hartl D, Lumbroso J, Chougnet C,
Lacroix L, Baudin E, Schlumberger M, Leboulleux S
2011 Persistent disease and recurrence in differentiated
thyroid cancer patients with undetectable postoperative
stimulated thyroglobulin level. Endocr Relat Cancer
18:R29–R40.
605. Webb RC, Howard RS, Stojadinovic A, Gaitonde DY,
Wallace MK, Ahmed J, Burch HB 2012 The utility
of serum thyroglobulin measurement at the time of
remnant ablation for predicting disease-free status in
patients with differentiated thyroid cancer: a meta-
analysis involving 3947 patients. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 97:2754–2763.
606. Chindris AM, Diehl NN, Crook JE, Fatourechi V, Small-
ridge RC 2012 Undetectable sensitive serum thyroglobulin
(<0.1 ng/mL) in 163 patients with follicular cell-derived
thyroid cancer: results of rhTSH stimulation and neck ul-
trasonography and long-term biochemical and clinical
follow-up. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 97:2714–2723.
607. Vaisman F, Tala H, Grewal R, Tuttle RM 2011 In dif-
ferentiated thyroid cancer, an incomplete structural re-
sponse to therapy is associated with significantly worse
clinical outcomes than only an incomplete thyroglobulin
response. Thyroid 21:1317–1322.
608. Verburg FA, Luster M, Cupini C, Chiovato L, Duntas L,
Elisei R, Feldt-Rasmussen U, Rimmele H, Seregni E,
Smit JW, Theimer C, Giovanella L 2013 Implications of
thyroglobulin antibody positivity in patients with dif-
ferentiated thyroid cancer: a clinical position statement.
Thyroid 23:1211–1225.
609. Spencer CA, Takeuchi M, Kazarosyan M, Wang CC,
Guttler RB, Singer PA, Fatemi S, LoPresti JS, Nicoloff JT
1998 Serum thyroglobulin autoantibodies: prevalence, in-
fluence on serum thyroglobulin measurement, and prog-
nostic significance in patients with differentiated thyroid
carcinoma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 83:1121–1127.
610. Chung JK, Park YJ, Kim TY, So Y, Kim SK, Park DJ,
Lee DS, Lee MC, Cho BY 2002 Clinical significance of
elevated level of serum antithyroglobulin antibody in
patients with differentiated thyroid cancer after thyroid
ablation. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 57:215–221.
114
HAUGEN ET AL.
 611. Gorges R, Maniecki M, Jentzen W, Sheu SN, Mann K,
Bockisch A, Janssen OE 2005 Development and clinical
impact of thyroglobulin antibodies in patients with dif-
ferentiated thyroid carcinoma during the first 3 years
after thyroidectomy. Eur J Endocrinol 153:49–55.
612. Seo JH, Lee SW, Ahn BC, Lee J 2010 Recurrence de-
tection in differentiated thyroid cancer patients with el-
evated serum level of antithyroglobulin antibody: special
emphasis on using (18)F-FDG PET/CT. Clin Endocrinol
(Oxf) 72:558–563.
613. Adil A, Jafri RA, Waqar A, Abbasi SA, Matiul H, As-
ghar AH, Jilani A, Naz I 2003 Frequency and clinical
importance of anti-Tg auto-antibodies (ATG). J Coll
Physicians Surg Pak 13:504–506.
614. Kim WG, Yoon JH, Kim WB, Kim TY, Kim EY, Kim
JM, Ryu JS, Gong G, Hong SJ, Shong YK 2008 Change
of serum antithyroglobulin antibody levels is useful for
prediction
of
clinical
recurrence
in
thyroglobulin-
negative patients with differentiated thyroid carcinoma. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 93:4683–4689.
615. Chiovato L, Latrofa F, Braverman LE, Pacini F, Ca-
pezzone M, Masserini L, Grasso L, Pinchera A 2003
Disappearance of humoral thyroid autoimmunity after
complete removal of thyroid antigens. Ann Intern Med
139:346–351.
616. Thomas D, Liakos V, Vassiliou E, Hatzimarkou F,
Tsatsoulis A, Kaldrimides P 2007 Possible reasons for
different pattern disappearance of thyroglobulin and
thyroid peroxidase autoantibodies in patients with dif-
ferentiated thyroid carcinoma following total thyroidec-
tomy and iodine-131 ablation. J Endocrinol Invest 30:
173–180.
617. Castagna MG, Tala Jury HP, Cipri C, Belardini V,
Fioravanti C, Pasqui L, Sestini F, Theodoropoulou A,
Pacini F 2011 The use of ultrasensitive thyroglobulin
assays reduces but does not abolish the need for TSH
stimulation in patients with differentiated thyroid carci-
noma. J Endocrinol Invest 34:e219-e223.
618. Baudin E, Do Cao C, Cailleux AF, Leboulleux S, Tra-
vagli JP, Schlumberger M 2003 Positive predictive value
of serum thyroglobulin levels, measured during the first
year of follow-up after thyroid hormone withdrawal, in
thyroid cancer patients. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 88:
1107–1111.
619. Pineda JD, Lee T, Ain K, Reynolds JC, Robbins J 1995
Iodine-131 therapy for thyroid cancer patients with ele-
vated thyroglobulin and negative diagnostic scan. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 80:1488–1492.
620. Alzahrani AS, Mohamed G, Al Shammary A, Aldasouqi
S, Abdal Salam S, Shoukri M 2005 Long-term course
and predictive factors of elevated serum thyroglobulin
and negative diagnostic radioiodine whole body scan
in differentiated thyroid cancer. J Endocrinol Invest
28:540–546.
621. Valadao MM, Rosario PW, Borges MA, Costa GB, Re-
zende LL, Padrao EL, Barroso AL, Purisch S 2006 Po-
sitive predictive value of detectable stimulated tg during
the first year after therapy of thyroid cancer and the value
of comparison with Tg-ablation and Tg measured after
24 months. Thyroid 16:1145–1149.
622. Miyauchi A, Kudo T, Miya A, Kobayashi K, Ito Y,
Takamura Y, Higashiyama T, Fukushima M, Kihara M,
Inoue H, Tomoda C, Yabuta T, Masuoka H 2011 Prog-
nostic impact of serum thyroglobulin doubling-time un-
der thyrotropin suppression in patients with papillary
thyroid carcinoma who underwent total thyroidectomy.
Thyroid 21:707–716.
623. Wong H, Wong KP, Yau T, Tang V, Leung R, Chiu J,
Lang BH 2012 Is there a role for unstimulated thyro-
globulin velocity in predicting recurrence in papillary
thyroid carcinoma patients with detectable thyroglobulin
after radioiodine ablation? Ann Surg Oncol 19:3479–3485.
624. Padovani RP, Robenshtok E, Brokhin M, Tuttle RM
2012 Even without additional therapy, serum thyro-
globulin concentrations often decline for years after total
thyroidectomy and radioactive remnant ablation in pa-
tients with differentiated thyroid cancer. Thyroid 22:
778–783.
625. Hsieh CJ, Wang PW 2014 Sequential changes of serum
antithyroglobulin antibody levels are a good predictor of
disease activity in thyroglobulin-negative patients with
papillary thyroid carcinoma. Thyroid 24:488–493.
626. Schuff KG, Weber SM, Givi B, Samuels MH, Andersen
PE, Cohen JI 2008 Efficacy of nodal dissection for
treatment of persistent/recurrent papillary thyroid cancer.
Laryngoscope 118:768–775.
627. Al-Saif O, Farrar WB, Bloomston M, Porter K, Ringel
MD, Kloos RT 2010 Long-term efficacy of lymph node
reoperation for persistent papillary thyroid cancer. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 95:2187–2194.
628. Yim JH, Kim WB, Kim EY, Kim WG, Kim TY, Ryu JS,
Gong G, Hong SJ, Shong YK 2011 The outcomes of first
reoperation for locoregionally recurrent/persistent papil-
lary thyroid carcinoma in patients who initially under-
went total thyroidectomy and remnant ablation. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 96:2049–2056.
629. Rondeau G, Fish S, Hann LE, Fagin JA, Tuttle RM 2011
Ultrasonographically detected small thyroid bed nodules
identified after total thyroidectomy for differentiated
thyroid cancer seldom show clinically significant struc-
tural progression. Thyroid 21:845–853.
630. Giovanella L, Ceriani L, Suriano S, Ghelfo A, Maffioli
M 2008 Thyroglobulin measurement before rhTSH-
aided 131I ablation in detecting metastases from differ-
entiated thyroid carcinoma. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf)
69:659–663.
631. Giovanella L, Ceriani L, Ghelfo A, Keller F 2005
Thyroglobulin assay 4 weeks after thyroidectomy pre-
dicts outcome in low-risk papillary thyroid carcinoma.
Clin Chem Lab Med 43:843–847.
632. Phan HT, Jager PL, van der Wal JE, Sluiter WJ, Plukker
JT, Dierckx RA, Wolffenbuttel BH, Links TP 2008 The
follow-up of patients with differentiated thyroid cancer
and undetectable thyroglobulin (Tg) and Tg antibodies
during ablation. Eur J Endocrinol 158:77–83.
633. Vaisman A, Orlov S, Yip J, Hu C, Lim T, Dowar M,
Freeman JL, Walfish PG 2010 Application of post-
surgical stimulated thyroglobulin for radioiodine rem-
nant ablation selection in low-risk papillary thyroid
carcinoma. Head Neck 32:689–698.
634. Kim TY, Kim WB, Kim ES, Ryu JS, Yeo JS, Kim SC,
Hong SJ, Shong YK 2005 Serum thyroglobulin levels at
the time of 131I remnant ablation just after thyroidec-
tomy are useful for early prediction of clinical recurrence
in low-risk patients with differentiated thyroid carci-
noma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 90:1440–1445.
635. Toubeau M, Touzery C, Arveux P, Chaplain G, Vaillant
G, Berriolo A, Riedinger JM, Boichot C, Cochet A,
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
115
 Brunotte F 2004 Predictive value for disease progression
of serum thyroglobulin levels measured in the postop-
erative period and after (131)I ablation therapy in pa-
tients with differentiated thyroid cancer. J Nucl Med
45:988–994.
636. Piccardo A, Arecco F, Puntoni M, Foppiani L, Cabria M,
Corvisieri S, Arlandini A, Altrinetti V, Bandelloni R,
Orlandi F 2013 Focus on high-risk DTC patients: high
postoperative serum thyroglobulin level is a strong pre-
dictor of disease persistence and is associated to
progression-free survival and overall survival. Clin Nucl
Med 38:18–24.
637. Polachek A, Hirsch D, Tzvetov G, Grozinsky-Glasberg
S, Slutski I, Singer J, Weinstein R, Shimon I, Benbassat
CA 2011 Prognostic value of post-thyroidectomy thy-
roglobulin levels in patients with differentiated thyroid
cancer. J Endocrinol Invest 34:855–860.
638. Hall FT, Beasley NJ, Eski SJ, Witterick IJ, Walfish PG,
Freeman JL 2003 Predictive value of serum thyroglob-
ulin after surgery for thyroid carcinoma. Laryngoscope
113:77–81.
639. Heemstra KA, Liu YY, Stokkel M, Kievit J, Corssmit E,
Pereira AM, Romijn JA, Smit JW 2007 Serum thyro-
globulin concentrations predict disease-free remission
and death in differentiated thyroid carcinoma. Clin En-
docrinol (Oxf) 66:58–64.
640. Ronga G, Filesi M, Ventroni G, Vestri AR, Signore A
1999 Value of the first serum thyroglobulin level after
total thyroidectomy for the diagnosis of metastases from
differentiated thyroid carcinoma. Eur J Nucl Med
26:1448–1452.
641. Lin JD, Huang MJ, Hsu BR, Chao TC, Hsueh C, Liu
FH, Liou MJ, Weng HF 2002 Significance of postopera-
tive serum thyroglobulin levels in patients with papillary
and follicular thyroid carcinomas. J Surg Oncol 80:45–51.
642. Ibrahimpasic T, Nixon IJ, Palmer FL, Whitcher MM,
Tuttle RM, Shaha A, Patel SG, Shah JP, Ganly I 2012
Undetectable thyroglobulin after total thyroidectomy in
patients with low- and intermediate-risk papillary thyroid
cancer—is there a need for radioactive iodine therapy?
Surgery 152:1096–1105.
643. Avram AM, Fig LM, Frey KA, Gross MD, Wong KK
2013 Preablation 131-I scans with SPECT/CT in post-
operative thyroid cancer patients: what is the impact on
staging? J Clin Endocrinol Metab 98:1163–1171.
644. Nascimento C, Borget I, Troalen F, Al Ghuzlan A,
Deandreis D, Hartl D, Lumbroso J, Chougnet CN, Bau-
din E, Schlumberger M, Leboulleux S 2013 Ultra-
sensitive serum thyroglobulin measurement is useful for
the follow-up of patients treated with total thyroidectomy
without radioactive iodine ablation. Eur J Endocrinol
169:689–693.
645. Rosario PW, Xavier AC, Calsolari MR 2011 Value of
postoperative thyroglobulin and ultrasonography for the
indication of ablation and 131I activity in patients with
thyroid cancer and low risk of recurrence. Thyroid
21:49–53.
646. Robenshtok E, Grewal RK, Fish S, Sabra M, Tuttle RM
2013 A low postoperative nonstimulated serum thyro-
globulin level does not exclude the presence of radioactive
iodine avid metastatic foci in intermediate-risk differen-
tiated thyroid cancer patients. Thyroid 23:436–442.
647. de Rosario PW, Guimaraes VC, Maia FF, Fagundes TA,
Purisch S, Padrao EL, Rezende LL, Barroso AL 2005
Thyroglobulin before ablation and correlation with
posttreatment scanning. Laryngoscope 115:264–267.
648. Park EK, Chung JK, Lim IH, Park do J, Lee DS, Lee
MC, Cho BY 2009 Recurrent/metastatic thyroid carci-
nomas false negative for serum thyroglobulin but posi-
tive by posttherapy I-131 whole body scans. Eur J Nucl
Med Mol Imaging 36:172–179.
649. Giovanella L, Suriano S, Ceriani L, Verburg FA 2011
Undetectable thyroglobulin in patients with differenti-
ated thyroid carcinoma and residual radioiodine uptake
on a postablation whole-body scan. Clin Nucl Med
36:109–112.
650. Oyen WJ, Verhagen C, Saris E, van den Broek WJ,
Pieters GF, Corsten FH 2000 Follow-up regimen of
differentiated thyroid carcinoma in thyroidectomized
patients after thyroid hormone withdrawal. J Nucl Med
41:643–646.
651. Tamilia M, Al-Kahtani N, Rochon L, Hier MP, Payne
RJ, Holcroft CA, Black MJ 2011 Serum thyroglobulin
predicts thyroid remnant ablation failure with 30 mCi
iodine-131 treatment in patients with papillary thyroid
carcinoma. Nucl Med Commun 32:212–220.
652. Bernier MO, Morel O, Rodien P, Muratet JP, Giraud P,
Rohmer V, Jeanguillaume C, Bigorgne JC, Jallet P 2005
Prognostic value of an increase in the serum thyroglob-
ulin level at the time of the first ablative radioiodine
treatment in patients with differentiated thyroid cancer.
Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging 32:1418–1421.
653. Feldt-Rasmussen U, Petersen PH, Date J, Madsen CM
1982 Serum thyroglobulin in patients undergoing sub-
total thyroidectomy for toxic and nontoxic goiter. J En-
docrinol Invest 5:161–164.
654. Feldt-Rasmussen U, Petersen PH, Nielsen H, Date J,
Madsen CM 1978 Thyroglobulin of varying molecular
sizes with different disappearance rates in plasma fol-
lowing subtotal thyroidectomy. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf)
9:205–214.
655. Izumi M, Kubo I, Taura M, Yamashita S, Morimoto I,
Ohtakara S, Okamoto S, Kumagai LF, Nagataki S 1986
Kinetic study of immunoreactive human thyroglobulin. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 62:410–412.
656. Hocevar M, Auersperg M, Stanovnik L 1997 The dy-
namics of serum thyroglobulin elimination from the body
after thyroid surgery. Eur J Surg Oncol 23:208–210.
657. Gerfo PL, Colacchio T, Colacchio D, Feind C 1978
Serum clearance rates of immunologically reactive thy-
roglobulin. Cancer 42:164–166.
658. Giovanella L, Ceriani L, Maffioli M 2010 Postsurgery
serum thyroglobulin disappearance kinetic in patients
with differentiated thyroid carcinoma. Head Neck 32:
568–571.
659. Lee JI, Chung YJ, Cho BY, Chong S, Seok JW, Park SJ
2013
Postoperative-stimulated
serum
thyroglobulin
measured at the time of 131I ablation is useful for the
prediction of disease status in patients with differentiated
thyroid carcinoma. Surgery 153:828–835.
660. Lepoutre-Lussey C, Maddah D, Golmard JL, Russ G,
Tissier F, Tresallet C, Menegaux F, Aurengo A, Leen-
hardt L 2014 Post-operative neck ultrasound and risk
stratification in differentiated thyroid cancer patients
with initial lymph node involvement. Eur J Endocrinol
170:837–846.
661. Chen MK, Yasrebi M, Samii J, Staib LH, Doddamane I,
Cheng DW 2012 The utility of I-123 pretherapy scan in
116
HAUGEN ET AL.
 I-131 radioiodine therapy for thyroid cancer. Thyroid
22:304–309.
662. Van Nostrand D, Aiken M, Atkins F, Moreau S, Garcia
C, Acio E, Burman K, Wartofsky L 2009 The utility of
radioiodine scans prior to iodine 131 ablation in patients
with well-differentiated thyroid cancer. Thyroid 19:849–
855.
663. Hu YH, Wang PW, Wang ST, Lee CH, Chen HY, Chou
FF, Huang YE, Huang HH 2004 Influence of 131I di-
agnostic dose on subsequent ablation in patients with
differentiated thyroid carcinoma: discrepancy between
the presence of visually apparent stunning and the im-
pairment of successful ablation. Nucl Med Commun
25:793–797.
664. Morris LF, Waxman AD, Braunstein GD 2001 The
nonimpact of thyroid stunning: remnant ablation rates in
131I-scanned and nonscanned individuals. J Clin En-
docrinol Metab 86:3507–3511.
665. Muratet JP, Daver A, Minier JF, Larra F 1998 Influence of
scanning doses of iodine-131 on subsequent first ablative
treatment outcome in patients operated on for differenti-
ated thyroid carcinoma. J Nucl Med 39:1546–1550.
666. Silberstein EB 2007 Comparison of outcomes after
(123)I versus (131)I pre-ablation imaging before radio-
iodine ablation in differentiated thyroid carcinoma. J
Nucl Med 48:1043–1046.
667. Leger FA, Izembart M, Dagousset F, Barritault L, Baillet
G, Chevalier A, Clerc J 1998 Decreased uptake of
therapeutic doses of iodine-131 after 185-MBq iodine-
131 diagnostic imaging for thyroid remnants in differ-
entiated thyroid carcinoma. Eur J Nucl Med 25:242–246.
668. Verkooijen RB, Verburg FA, van Isselt JW, Lips CJ,
Smit JW, Stokkel MP 2008 The success rate of I-131
ablation in differentiated thyroid cancer: comparison of
uptake-related and fixed-dose strategies. Eur J En-
docrinol 159:301–307.
669. Verburg FA, Verkooijen RB, Stokkel MP, van Isselt JW
2009 The success of 131I ablation in thyroid cancer
patients is significantly reduced after a diagnostic activ-
ity of 40 MBq 131I. Nuklearmedizin 48:138–142.
670. Yap BK, Murby B 2014 No adverse affect in clinical
outcome using low preablation diagnostic (131)I activity
in
differentiated
thyroid
cancer:
refuting
thyroid-
stunning effect. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 99:2433–2440.
671. Jonklaas J, Sarlis NJ, Litofsky D, Ain KB, Bigos ST,
Brierley JD, Cooper DS, Haugen BR, Ladenson PW,
Magner J, Robbins J, Ross DS, Skarulis M, Maxon HR,
Sherman SI 2006 Outcomes of patients with differenti-
ated thyroid carcinoma following initial therapy. Thyroid
16:1229–1242.
672. Jonklaas J, Cooper DS, Ain KB, Bigos T, Brierley JD,
Haugen BR, Ladenson PW, Magner J, Ross DS, Skarulis
MC, Steward DL, Maxon HR, Sherman SI 2010
Radioiodine therapy in patients with stage I differenti-
ated thyroid cancer. Thyroid 20:1423–1424.
673. Sacks W, Fung CH, Chang JT, Waxman A, Braunstein
GD 2010 The effectiveness of radioactive iodine for
treatment of low-risk thyroid cancer: a systematic anal-
ysis of the peer-reviewed literature from 1966 to April
2008. Thyroid 20:1235–1245.
674. Sawka AM, Brierley JD, Tsang RW, Thabane L, Rot-
stein L, Gafni A, Straus S, Goldstein DP 2008 An up-
dated systematic review and commentary examining the
effectiveness of radioactive iodine remnant ablation in
well-differentiated thyroid cancer. Endocrinol Metab
Clin North Am 37:457–480.
675. Lamartina L, Durante C, Filetti S, Cooper DS 2015 Low-
risk differentiated thyroid cancer and radioiodine rem-
nant ablation: a systematic review of the literature. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 100:1748–1761.
676. Ross DS, Litofsky D, Ain KB, Bigos T, Brierley JD,
Cooper DS, Haugen BR, Jonklaas J, Ladenson PW,
Magner J, Robbins J, Skarulis MC, Steward DL, Maxon
HR, Sherman SI 2009 Recurrence after treatment of
micropapillary thyroid cancer. Thyroid 19:1043–1048.
677. Kim HJ, Kim NK, Choi JH, Kim SW, Jin SM, Suh S,
Bae JC, Min YK, Chung JH, Kim SW 2013 Radioactive
iodine ablation does not prevent recurrences in patients
with papillary thyroid microcarcinoma. Clin Endocrinol
(Oxf) 78:614–620.
678. Baudin E, Travagli JP, Ropers J, Mancusi F, Bruno-
Bossio G, Caillou B, Cailleux AF, Lumbroso JD, Par-
mentier C, Schlumberger M 1998 Microcarcinoma of the
thyroid gland: the Gustave-Roussy Institute experience.
Cancer 83:553–559.
679. Creach KM, Siegel BA, Nussenbaum B, Grigsby PW 2012
Radioactive iodine therapy decreases recurrence in thyroid
papillary microcarcinoma. ISRN Endocrinol 2012:816386.
680. Lin HW, Bhattacharyya N 2009 Survival impact of
treatment options for papillary microcarcinoma of the
thyroid. Laryngoscope 119:1983–1987.
681. Kuo EJ, Roman SA, Sosa JA 2013 Patients with follic-
ular and Hurthle cell microcarcinomas have compro-
mised survival: a population level study of 22,738
patients. Surgery 154:1246–1253.
682. Mallick U, Harmer C, Hackshaw A, Moss L 2012 Iodine or
Not (IoN) for low-risk differentiated thyroid cancer: the next
UK National Cancer Research Network randomised trial
following HiLo. Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol ) 24:159–161.
683. Kazaure HS, Roman SA, Sosa JA 2012 Aggressive
variants of papillary thyroid cancer: incidence, charac-
teristics and predictors of survival among 43,738 pa-
tients. Ann Surg Oncol 19:1874–1880.
684. Kazaure HS, Roman SA, Sosa JA 2012 Insular thyroid
cancer: a population-level analysis of patient character-
istics and predictors of survival. Cancer 118:3260–3267.
685. Ruel E, Thomas S, Dinan M, Perkins JM, Roman SA,
Sosa JA 2015 Adjuvant radioactive iodine therapy is
associated with improved survival for patients with
intermediate-risk papillary thyroid cancer. J Clin En-
docrinol Metab 100:1529–1536.
686. Chow SM, Yau S, Kwan CK, Poon PC, Law SC 2006
Local and regional control in patients with papillary thy-
roid carcinoma: specific indications of external radiother-
apy and radioactive iodine according to T and N categories
in AJCC 6th edition. Endocr Relat Cancer 13:1159–1172.
687. Podnos YD, Smith DD, Wagman LD, Ellenhorn JD 2007
Survival in patients with papillary thyroid cancer is not
affected by the use of radioactive isotope. J Surg Oncol
96:3–7.
688. Chakravarty D, Santos E, Ryder M, Knauf JA, Liao XH,
West BL, Bollag G, Kolesnick R, Thin TH, Rosen N,
Zanzonico P, Larson SM, Refetoff S, Ghossein R, Fagin
JA 2011 Small-molecule MAPK inhibitors restore radio-
iodine incorporation in mouse thyroid cancers with con-
ditional BRAF activation. J Clin Invest 121:4700–4711.
689. Edmonds CJ, Hayes S, Kermode JC, Thompson BD 1977
Measurement of serum TSH and thyroid hormones in the
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
117
 management of treatment of thyroid carcinoma with
radioiodine. Br J Radiol 50:799–807.
690. Leboeuf R, Perron P, Carpentier AC, Verreault J, Lan-
glois MF 2007 L-T3 preparation for whole-body scin-
tigraphy: a randomized-controlled trial. Clin Endocrinol
(Oxf) 67:839–844.
691. Lee J, Yun MJ, Nam KH, Chung WY, Soh EY, Park CS
2010 Quality of life and effectiveness comparisons of
thyroxine withdrawal, triiodothyronine withdrawal, and
recombinant thyroid-stimulating hormone administration
for low-dose radioiodine remnant ablation of differenti-
ated thyroid carcinoma. Thyroid 20:173–179.
692. Fallahi B, Beiki D, Takavar A, Fard-Esfahani A, Gilani
KA, Saghari M, Eftekhari M 2012 Low versus high
radioiodine dose in postoperative ablation of residual
thyroid tissue in patients with differentiated thyroid
carcinoma: a large randomized clinical trial. Nucl Med
Commun 33:275–282.
693. Goropoulos A, Karamoshos K, Christodoulou A, Ntitsias
T, Paulou K, Samaras A, Xirou P, Efstratiou I 2004
Value of the cervical compartments in the surgical
treatment of papillary thyroid carcinoma. World J Surg
28:1275–1281.
694. Molinaro E, Giani C, Agate L, Biagini A, Pieruzzi L,
Bianchi F, Brozzi F, Ceccarelli C, Viola D, Piaggi P,
Vitti P, Pacini F, Elisei R 2013 Patients with differenti-
ated thyroid cancer who underwent radioiodine thyroid
remnant ablation with low-activity 131I after either re-
combinant human TSH or thyroid hormone therapy
withdrawal showed the same outcome after a 10-year
follow-up. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 98:2693–2700.
695. Prpic M, Dabelic N, Stanicic J, Jukic T, Milosevic M,
Kusic Z 2012 Adjuvant thyroid remnant ablation in pa-
tients with differentiated thyroid carcinoma confined to
the thyroid: a comparison of ablation success with dif-
ferent activities of radioiodine (I-131). Ann Nucl Med
26:744–751.
696. Karam M, Gianoukakis A, Feustel PJ, Cheema A, Postal
ES, Cooper JA 2003 Influence of diagnostic and thera-
peutic doses on thyroid remnant ablation rates. Nucl Med
Commun 24:489–495.
697. Robbins RJ, Driedger A, Magner J 2006 Recombinant
human thyrotropin-assisted radioiodine therapy for pa-
tients with metastatic thyroid cancer who could not ele-
vate endogenous thyrotropin or be withdrawn from
thyroxine. Thyroid 16:1121–1130.
698. Chianelli M, Todino V, Graziano FM, Panunzi C, Pace
D, Guglielmi R, Signore A, Papini E 2009 Low-activity
(2.0 GBq; 54 mCi) radioiodine post-surgical remnant
ablation in thyroid cancer: comparison between hormone
withdrawal and use of rhTSH in low-risk patients. Eur J
Endocrinol 160:431–436.
699. Mallick U, Harmer C, Yap B, Wadsley J, Clarke S, Moss
L, Nicol A, Clark PM, Farnell K, McCready R, Smellie
J, Franklyn JA, John R, Nutting CM, Newbold K, Lemon
C, Gerrard G, Abdel-Hamid A, Hardman J, Macias E,
Roques T, Whitaker S, Vijayan R, Alvarez P, Beare S,
Forsyth S, Kadalayil L, Hackshaw A 2012 Ablation with
low-dose radioiodine and thyrotropin alfa in thyroid
cancer. N Engl J Med 366:1674–1685.
700. Pacini F, Ladenson PW, Schlumberger M, Driedger A,
Luster M, Kloos RT, Sherman S, Haugen B, Corone C,
Molinaro E, Elisei R, Ceccarelli C, Pinchera A, Wahl
RL, Leboulleux S, Ricard M, Yoo J, Busaidy NL, Del-
passand E, Hanscheid H, Felbinger R, Lassmann M,
Reiners C 2006 Radioiodine ablation of thyroid remnants
after preparation with recombinant human thyrotropin in
differentiated thyroid carcinoma: results of an interna-
tional, randomized, controlled study. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 91:926–932.
701. Schlumberger M, Catargi B, Borget I, Deandreis D,
Zerdoud S, Bridji B, Bardet S, Leenhardt L, Bastie D,
Schvartz C, Vera P, Morel O, Benisvy D, Bournaud C,
Bonichon F, Dejax C, Toubert ME, Leboulleux S, Ricard
M, Benhamou E 2012 Strategies of radioiodine ablation
in patients with low-risk thyroid cancer. N Engl J Med
366:1663–1673.
702. Taieb D, Sebag F, Cherenko M, Baumstarck-Barrau K,
Fortanier C, Farman-Ara B, de Micco C, Vaillant J,
Thomas S, Conte-Devolx B, Loundou A, Auquier P,
Henry JF, Mundler O 2009 Quality of life changes and
clinical outcomes in thyroid cancer patients undergoing
radioiodine remnant ablation (RRA) with recombinant
human TSH (rhTSH): a randomized controlled study.
Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 71:115–123.
703. Emmanouilidis N, Muller JA, Jager MD, Kaaden S,
Helfritz FA, Guner Z, Kespohl H, Knitsch W, Knapp
WH, Klempnauer J, Scheumann GF 2009 Surgery and
radioablation therapy combined: introducing a 1-week-
condensed procedure bonding total thyroidectomy and
radioablation therapy with recombinant human TSH. Eur
J Endocrinol 161:763–769.
704. Tu J, Wang S, Huo Z, Lin Y, Li X, Wang S 2014 Re-
combinant human thyrotropin-aided versus thyroid hor-
mone
withdrawal-aided
radioiodine
treatment
for
differentiated thyroid cancer after total thyroidectomy: a
meta-analysis. Radiother Oncol 110:25–30.
705. Pak K, Cheon GJ, Kang KW, Kim SJ, Kim IJ, Kim EE,
Lee DS, Chung JK 2014 The effectiveness of recombi-
nant human thyroid-stimulating hormone versus thyroid
hormone withdrawal prior to radioiodine remnant abla-
tion in thyroid cancer: a meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials. J Korean Med Sci 29:811–817.
706. Elisei R, Schlumberger M, Driedger A, Reiners C, Kloos
RT, Sherman SI, Haugen B, Corone C, Molinaro E,
Grasso L, Leboulleux S, Rachinsky I, Luster M, Lass-
mann M, Busaidy NL, Wahl RL, Pacini F, Cho SY,
Magner J, Pinchera A, Ladenson PW 2009 Follow-up of
low-risk differentiated thyroid cancer patients who un-
derwent radioiodine ablation of postsurgical thyroid
remnants after either recombinant human thyrotropin or
thyroid hormone withdrawal. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
94:4171–4179.
707. Emmanouilidis N, Schrem H, Winkler M, Klempnauer J,
Scheumann GF 2013 Long-term results after treatment of
very low-, low-, and high-risk thyroid cancers in a
combined setting of thyroidectomy and radio ablation
therapy in euthyroidism. Int J Endocrinol 2013:769473.
708. Hugo J, Robenshtok E, Grewal R, Larson S, Tuttle RM
2012 Recombinant human thyroid stimulating hormone-
assisted radioactive iodine remnant ablation in thyroid
cancer patients at intermediate to high risk of recurrence.
Thyroid 22:1007–1015.
709. Rosario PW, Mineiro Filho AF, Lacerda RX, Calsolari
MR 2012 Long-term follow-up of at least five years after
recombinant human thyrotropin compared to levothyr-
oxine withdrawal for thyroid remnant ablation with ra-
dioactive iodine. Thyroid 22:332–333.
118
HAUGEN ET AL.
 710. Pitoia F, Marlowe RJ, Abelleira E, Faure EN, Bueno F,
Schwarzstein D, Lutfi RJ, Niepomniszcze H 2012
Radioiodine thyroid remnant ablation after recombinant
human thyrotropin or thyroid hormone withdrawal in
patients with high-risk differentiated thyroid cancer. J
Thyroid Res 2012:481568.
711. Bartenstein P, Calabuig EC, Maini CL, Mazzarotto R,
Muros de Fuentes MA, Petrich T, Rodrigues FJ, Vallejo
Casas JA, Vianello F, Basso M, Balaguer MG, Haug A,
Monari F, Vano RS, Sciuto R, Magner J 2014 High-risk
patients with differentiated thyroid cancer T4 primary
tumors achieve remnant ablation equally well using
rhTSH or thyroid hormone withdrawal. Thyroid 24:480–
487.
712. Tala H, Robbins R, Fagin JA, Larson SM, Tuttle RM
2011 Five-year survival is similar in thyroid cancer pa-
tients with distant metastases prepared for radioactive
iodine therapy with either thyroid hormone withdrawal
or recombinant human TSH. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
96:2105–2111.
713. Klubo-Gwiezdzinska J, Burman KD, Van Nostrand D,
Mete M, Jonklaas J, Wartofsky L 2012 Radioiodine
treatment of metastatic thyroid cancer: relative efficacy
and side effect profile of preparation by thyroid hormone
withdrawal
versus
recombinant
human
thyrotropin.
Thyroid 22:310–317.
714. Maenpaa HO, Heikkonen J, Vaalavirta L, Tenhunen M,
Joensuu H 2008 Low vs. high radioiodine activity to
ablate the thyroid after thyroidectomy for cancer: a
randomized study. PLoS One 3:e1885.
715. Pilli T, Brianzoni E, Capoccetti F, Castagna MG, Fattori
S, Poggiu A, Rossi G, Ferretti F, Guarino E, Burroni L,
Vattimo A, Cipri C, Pacini F 2007 A comparison of 1850
(50 mCi) and 3700 MBq (100 mCi) 131-iodine admin-
istered doses for recombinant thyrotropin-stimulated
postoperative thyroid remnant ablation in differentiated
thyroid cancer. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 92:3542–3546.
716. Zaman M, Toor R, Kamal S, Maqbool M, Habib S, Niaz
K 2006 A randomized clinical trial comparing 50mCi
and 100mCi of iodine-131 for ablation of differentiated
thyroid cancers. J Pak Med Assoc 56:353–356.
717. Kukulska A, Krajewska J, Gawkowska-Suwinska M,
Puch Z, Paliczka-Cieslik E, Roskosz J, Handkiewicz-
Junak D, Jarzab M, Gubala E, Jarzab B 2010 Radioiodine
thyroid remnant ablation in patients with differentiated
thyroid carcinoma (DTC): prospective comparison of
long-term outcomes of treatment with 30, 60 and 100
mCi. Thyroid Res 3:9.
718. Fang Y, Ding Y, Guo Q, Xing J, Long Y, Zong Z 2013
Radioiodine therapy for patients with differentiated
thyroid cancer after thyroidectomy: direct comparison
and network meta-analyses. J Endocrinol Invest 36:896–
902.
719. Ma C, Tang L, Fu H, Li J, Wang H 2013 rhTSH-aided
low-activity versus high-activity regimens of radioiodine
in residual ablation for differentiated thyroid cancer: a
meta-analysis. Nucl Med Commun 34:1150–1156.
720. Cheng W, Ma C, Fu H, Li J, Chen S, Wu S, Wang H
2013 Low- or high-dose radioiodine remnant ablation for
differentiated thyroid carcinoma: a meta-analysis. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 98:1353–1360.
721. Valachis A, Nearchou A 2013 High versus low radio-
iodine activity in patients with differentiated thyroid
cancer: a meta-analysis. Acta Oncol 52:1055–1061.
722. Verburg FA, Mader U, Reiners C, Hanscheid H 2014
Long term survival in DTC is worse after low-activity
initial post-surgical I-131 therapy in both high and low
risk patients. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 99:4487–4496.
723. Castagna MG, Cevenini G, Theodoropoulou A, Maino F,
Memmo S, Claudia C, Belardini V, Brianzoni E, Pacini F
2013 Post-surgical thyroid ablation with low or high
radioiodine activities results in similar outcomes in in-
termediate risk differentiated thyroid cancer patients. Eur
J Endocrinol 169:23–29.
724. Han JM, Kim WG, Kim TY, Jeon MJ, Ryu JS, Song DE,
Hong SJ, Shong YK, Kim WB 2014 Effects of low-dose
and high-dose postoperative radioiodine therapy on the
clinical outcome in patients with small differentiated
thyroid cancer having microscopic extrathyroidal exten-
sion. Thyroid 24:820–825.
725. Kruijff S, Aniss AM, Chen P, Sidhu SB, Delbridge LW,
Robinson B, Clifton-Bligh RJ, Roach P, Gill AJ, Learoyd
D, Sywak MS 2013 Decreasing the dose of radioiodine
for remnant ablation does not increase structural recur-
rence rates in papillary thyroid carcinoma. Surgery 154:
1337–1344.
726. Sabra M, Grewal R, Ghossein RM, Tuttle RM 2014 Higher
administered activities of radioactive iodine are associated
with less structural persistent response in older, but not
younger, papillary thyroid cancer patients with lateral neck
lymph node metastases. Thyroid 24:1088–1095.
727. Sawka AM, Ibrahim-Zada I, Galacgac P, Tsang RW,
Brierley JD, Ezzat S, Goldstein DP 2010 Dietary iodine
restriction in preparation for radioactive iodine treatment
or scanning in well-differentiated thyroid cancer: a sys-
tematic review. Thyroid 20:1129–1138.
728. Pluijmen MJ, Eustatia-Rutten C, Goslings BM, Stokkel
MP, Arias AM, Diamant M, Romijn JA, Smit JW 2003
Effects of low-iodide diet on postsurgical radioiodide
ablation therapy in patients with differentiated thyroid
carcinoma. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 58:428–435.
729. Morris LF, Wilder MS, Waxman AD, Braunstein GD
2001 Reevaluation of the impact of a stringent low-
iodine diet on ablation rates in radioiodine treatment of
thyroid carcinoma. Thyroid 11:749–755.
730. Morsch EP, Vanacor R, Furlanetto TW, Schmid H 2011
Two weeks of a low-iodine diet are equivalent to 3
weeks for lowering urinary iodine and increasing thyroid
radioactive iodine uptake. Thyroid 21:61–67.
731. Tala Jury HP, Castagna MG, Fioravanti C, Cipri C,
Brianzoni E, Pacini F 2010 Lack of association between
urinary iodine excretion and successful thyroid ablation
in thyroid cancer patients. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
95:230–237.
732. Al Nozha OM, Vautour L, How J 2011 Life-threatening
hyponatremia following a low-iodine diet: a case report and
review of all reported cases. Endocr Pract 17:e113-e117.
733. Sherman SI, Tielens ET, Sostre S, Wharam MD Jr, La-
denson PW 1994 Clinical utility of posttreatment radio-
iodine scans in the management of patients with thyroid
carcinoma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 78:629–634.
734. Fatourechi V, Hay ID, Mullan BP, Wiseman GA,
Eghbali-Fatourechi GZ, Thorson LM, Gorman CA 2000
Are posttherapy radioiodine scans informative and do
they influence subsequent therapy of patients with dif-
ferentiated thyroid cancer? Thyroid 10:573–577.
735. Souza Rosario PW, Barroso AL, Rezende LL, Padrao
EL, Fagundes TA, Penna GC, Purisch S 2004 Post I-131
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
119
 therapy scanning in patients with thyroid carcinoma
metastases: an unnecessary cost or a relevant contribu-
tion? Clin Nucl Med 29:795–798.
736. Spies WG, Wojtowicz CH, Spies SM, Shah AY, Zimmer
AM 1989 Value of post-therapy whole-body I-131 im-
aging in the evaluation of patients with thyroid carci-
noma having undergone high-dose I-131 therapy. Clin
Nucl Med 14:793–800.
737. Ciappuccini R, Heutte N, Trzepla G, Rame JP, Vaur D,
Aide N, Bardet S 2011 Postablation (131)I scintigraphy
with neck and thorax SPECT-CT and stimulated serum
thyroglobulin level predict the outcome of patients with
differentiated thyroid cancer. Eur J Endocrinol 164:961–
969.
738. Salvatori M, Perotti G, Villani MF, Mazza R, Maussier
ML, Indovina L, Sigismondi A, Dottorini ME, Giordano A
2013 Determining the appropriate time of execution of an
I-131 post-therapy whole-body scan: comparison between
early and late imaging. Nucl Med Commun 34:900–908.
739. Kohlfuerst S, Igerc I, Lobnig M, Gallowitsch HJ,
Gomez-Segovia I, Matschnig S, Mayr J, Mikosch P,
Beheshti M, Lind P 2009 Posttherapeutic (131)I SPECT-
CT offers high diagnostic accuracy when the findings on
conventional planar imaging are inconclusive and allows
a tailored patient treatment regimen. Eur J Nucl Med
Mol Imaging 36:886–893.
740. Chen L, Luo Q, Shen Y, Yu Y, Yuan Z, Lu H, Zhu R
2008 Incremental value of 131I SPECT/CT in the man-
agement of patients with differentiated thyroid carci-
noma. J Nucl Med 49:1952–1957.
741. Schmidt D, Linke R, Uder M, Kuwert T 2010 Five
months’ follow-up of patients with and without iodine-
positive lymph node metastases of thyroid carcinoma as
disclosed by (131)I-SPECT/CT at the first radioablation.
Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging 37:699–705.
742. Maruoka Y, Abe K, Baba S, Isoda T, Sawamoto H,
Tanabe Y, Sasaki M, Honda H 2012 Incremental diag-
nostic value of SPECT/CT with 131I scintigraphy after
radioiodine therapy in patients with well-differentiated
thyroid carcinoma. Radiology 265:902–909.
743. Grewal RK, Tuttle RM, Fox J, Borkar S, Chou JF, Gonen
M, Strauss HW, Larson SM, Schoder H 2010 The effect
of posttherapy 131I SPECT/CT on risk classification and
management of patients with differentiated thyroid can-
cer. J Nucl Med 51:1361–1367.
744. Brabant G 2008 Thyrotropin suppressive therapy in
thyroid carcinoma: what are the targets? J Clin En-
docrinol Metab 93:1167–1169.
745. McGriff NJ, Csako G, Gourgiotis L, Lori CG, Pucino F,
Sarlis NJ 2002 Effects of thyroid hormone suppression
therapy on adverse clinical outcomes in thyroid cancer.
Ann Med 34:554–564.
746. Diessl S, Holzberger B, Mader U, Grelle I, Smit JW,
Buck AK, Reiners C, Verburg FA 2012 Impact of
moderate vs stringent TSH suppression on survival in
advanced differentiated thyroid carcinoma. Clin En-
docrinol (Oxf) 76:586–592.
747. Biondi B, Cooper DS 2010 Benefits of thyrotropin sup-
pression versus the risks of adverse effects in differen-
tiated thyroid cancer. Thyroid 20:135–146.
748. Sugitani I, Fujimoto Y 2011 Effect of postoperative
thyrotropin suppressive therapy on bone mineral density
in patients with papillary thyroid carcinoma: a prospec-
tive controlled study. Surgery 150:1250–1257.
749. Pujol P, Daures JP, Nsakala N, Baldet L, Bringer J,
Jaffiol C 1996 Degree of thyrotropin suppression as a
prognostic determinant in differentiated thyroid cancer. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 81:4318–4323.
750. Hovens GC, Stokkel MP, Kievit J, Corssmit EP, Pereira
AM, Romijn JA, Smit JW 2007 Associations of serum
thyrotropin concentrations with recurrence and death in
differentiated thyroid cancer. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
92:2610–2615.
751. Sawin CT, Geller A, Wolf PA, Belanger AJ, Baker E,
Bacharach P, Wilson PW, Benjamin EJ, D’Agostino RB
1994 Low serum thyrotropin concentrations as a risk
factor for atrial fibrillation in older persons. N Engl J
Med 331:1249–1252.
752. Toft AD 2001 Clinical practice. Subclinical hyperthy-
roidism. N Engl J Med 345:512–516.
753. Chen CH, Chen JF, Yang BY, Liu RT, Tung SC, Chien
WY, Lu YC, Kuo MC, Hsieh CJ, Wang PW 2004 Bone
mineral density in women receiving thyroxine suppres-
sive therapy for differentiated thyroid carcinoma. J
Formos Med Assoc 103:442–447.
754. Panico A, Lupoli GA, Fonderico F, Marciello F, Marti-
nelli A, Assante R, Lupoli G 2009 Osteoporosis and
thyrotropin-suppressive therapy: reduced effectiveness
of alendronate. Thyroid 19:437–442.
755. Ebina A, Sugitani I, Fujimoto Y, Yamada K 2014 Risk-
adapted management of papillary thyroid carcinoma
according to our own risk group classification system: is
thyroid lobectomy the treatment of choice for low-risk
patients? Surgery 156:1579–1588.
756. Ford D, Giridharan S, McConkey C, Hartley A, Bram-
mer C, Watkinson JC, Glaholm J 2003 External beam
radiotherapy in the management of differentiated thyroid
cancer. Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol ) 15:337–341.
757. Terezakis SA, Lee KS, Ghossein RA, Rivera M, Tuttle
RM, Wolden SL, Zelefsky MJ, Wong RJ, Patel SG,
Pfister DG, Shaha AR, Lee NY 2009 Role of external
beam radiotherapy in patients with advanced or recurrent
nonanaplastic thyroid cancer: Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center experience. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
73:795–801.
758. Brierley J, Tsang R, Panzarella T, Bana N 2005 Prog-
nostic factors and the effect of treatment with radioactive
iodine and external beam radiation on patients with dif-
ferentiated thyroid cancer seen at a single institution over
40 years. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 63:418–427.
759. Sanders EM Jr, LiVolsi VA, Brierley J, Shin J, Randolph
GW 2007 An evidence-based review of poorly differ-
entiated thyroid cancer. World J Surg 31:934–945.
760. Kim JH, Leeper RD 1987 Treatment of locally advanced
thyroid carcinoma with combination doxorubicin and
radiation therapy. Cancer 60:2372–2375.
761. Links TP, van Tol KM, Jager PL, Plukker JT, Piers DA,
Boezen HM, Dullaart RP, de Vries EG, Sluiter WJ 2005
Life expectancy in differentiated thyroid cancer: a novel
approach to survival analysis. Endocr Relat Cancer 12:
273–280.
762. Brown AP, Chen J, Hitchcock YJ, Szabo A, Shrieve
DC, Tward JD 2008 The risk of second primary ma-
lignancies up to three decades after the treatment of
differentiated thyroid cancer. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
93:504–515.
763. Rubino C, de Vathaire F, Dottorini ME, Hall P, Schvartz
C, Couette JE, Dondon MG, Abbas MT, Langlois C,
120
HAUGEN ET AL.
 Schlumberger M 2003 Second primary malignancies in
thyroid cancer patients. Br J Cancer 89:1638–1644.
764. Berthe E, Henry-Amar M, Michels JJ, Rame JP, Berthet
P, Babin E, Icard P, Samama G, Galateau-Salle F, Ma-
houdeau J, Bardet S 2004 Risk of second primary cancer
following differentiated thyroid cancer. Eur J Nucl Med
Mol Imaging 31:685–691.
765. Kim S, Wei JP, Braveman JM, Brams DM 2004 Pre-
dicting outcome and directing therapy for papillary thy-
roid carcinoma. Arch Surg 139:390–394.
766. Iyer NG, Morris LG, Tuttle RM, Shaha AR, Ganly I
2011 Rising incidence of second cancers in patients with
low-risk (T1N0) thyroid cancer who receive radioactive
iodine therapy. Cancer 117:4439–4446.
767. Biondi B, Filetti S, Schlumberger M 2005 Thyroid-
hormone therapy and thyroid cancer: a reassessment. Nat
Clin Pract Endocrinol Metab 1:32–40.
768. Diaz-Soto G, Puig-Domingo M, Martinez-Pino I, Mar-
tinez de Osaba MJ, Mora M, Rivera-Fillat F, Halperin I
2011 Do thyroid cancer patients with basal undetectable
Tg measured by current immunoassays require rhTSH
testing? Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes 119:348–352.
769. Smallridge RC, Meek SE, Morgan MA, Gates GS, Fox
TP, Grebe S, Fatourechi V 2007 Monitoring thyroglob-
ulin in a sensitive immunoassay has comparable sensitivity
to recombinant human TSH-stimulated thyroglobulin in
follow-up of thyroid cancer patients. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 92:82–87.
770. Schlumberger M, Hitzel A, Toubert ME, Corone C,
Troalen F, Schlageter MH, Claustrat F, Koscielny S,
Taieb D, Toubeau M, Bonichon F, Borson-Chazot F,
Leenhardt L, Schvartz C, Dejax C, Brenot-Rossi I,
Torlontano M, Tenenbaum F, Bardet S, Bussiere F,
Girard JJ, Morel O, Schneegans O, Schlienger JL, Prost
A, So D, Archambeaud F, Ricard M, Benhamou E 2007
Comparison of seven serum thyroglobulin assays in the
follow-up of papillary and follicular thyroid cancer pa-
tients. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 92:2487–2495.
771. Spencer CA 2011 Clinical review: Clinical utility of
thyroglobulin antibody (TgAb) measurements for pa-
tients with differentiated thyroid cancers (DTC). J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 96:3615–3627.
772. Taylor KP, Parkington D, Bradbury S, Simpson HL,
Jefferies SJ, Halsall DJ 2011 Concordance between
thyroglobulin antibody assays. Ann Clin Biochem 48:
367–369.
773. Giovanella L, Keller F, Ceriani L, Tozzoli R 2009 Het-
erophile antibodies may falsely increase or decrease thy-
roglobulin measurement in patients with differentiated
thyroid carcinoma. Clin Chem Lab Med 47:952–954.
774. Verburg FA, Waschle K, Reiners C, Giovanella L,
Lentjes EG 2010 Heterophile antibodies rarely influence
the measurement of thyroglobulin and thyroglobulin
antibodies in differentiated thyroid cancer patients. Horm
Metab Res 42:736–739.
775. Latrofa F, Ricci D, Montanelli L, Rocchi R, Piaggi P,
Sisti E, Grasso L, Basolo F, Ugolini C, Pinchera A, Vitti
P 2012 Lymphocytic thyroiditis on histology correlates
with serum thyroglobulin autoantibodies in patients with
papillary thyroid carcinoma: impact on detection of se-
rum thyroglobulin. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 97:2380–
2387.
776. Giovanella L, Ceriani L 2011 Comparison of thyro-
globulin antibody interference in first- and second-
generation thyroglobulin immunoassays. Clin Chem Lab
Med 49:1025–1027.
777. Stanojevic M, Savin S, Cvejic D, Djukic A, Jeremic M,
Zivancevic SS 2009 Comparison of the influence of
thyroglobulin antibodies on serum thyroglobulin values
from two different immunoassays in post surgical dif-
ferentiated thyroid carcinoma patients. J Clin Lab Anal
23:341–346.
778. Stanojevic M, Savin S, Cvejic D, Dukic A, Zivancevic
SS 2009 Correlation of thyroglobulin concentrations
measured by radioimmunoassay and immunoradiometric
assay and the influence of thyroglobulin antibody. J
Immunoassay Immunochem 30:197–207.
779. Eustatia-Rutten CF, Smit JW, Romijn JA, van der Kleij-
Corssmit EP, Pereira AM, Stokkel MP, Kievit J 2004
Diagnostic value of serum thyroglobulin measurements
in the follow-up of differentiated thyroid carcinoma, a
structured meta-analysis. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 61:
61–74.
780. Bachelot A, Leboulleux S, Baudin E, Hartl DM, Caillou
B, Travagli JP, Schlumberger M 2005 Neck recurrence
from thyroid carcinoma: serum thyroglobulin and high-
dose total body scan are not reliable criteria for cure after
radioiodine treatment. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 62:376–
379.
781. Cherk MH, Francis P, Topliss DJ, Bailey M, Kalff V
2012 Incidence and implications of negative serum thy-
roglobulin but positive I-131 whole-body scans in pa-
tients with well-differentiated thyroid cancer prepared
with rhTSH or thyroid hormone withdrawal. Clin En-
docrinol (Oxf) 76:734–740.
782. Pacini F, Agate L, Elisei R, Capezzone M, Ceccarelli C,
Lippi F, Molinaro E, Pinchera A 2001 Outcome of dif-
ferentiated thyroid cancer with detectable serum Tg and
negative diagnostic (131)I whole body scan: comparison
of patients treated with high (131)I activities versus un-
treated patients. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 86:4092–4097.
783. Torlontano M, Crocetti U, Augello G, D’Aloiso L,
Bonfitto N, Varraso A, Dicembrino F, Modoni S, Frus-
ciante V, Di GA, Bruno R, Filetti S, Trischitta V 2006
Comparative
evaluation
of
recombinant
human
thyrotropin-stimulated thyroglobulin levels, 131I whole-
body scintigraphy, and neck ultrasonography in the
follow-up of patients with papillary thyroid micro-
carcinoma who have not undergone radioiodine therapy.
J Clin Endocrinol Metab 91:60–63.
784. Robbins RJ, Srivastava S, Shaha A, Ghossein R, Larson
SM, Fleisher M, Tuttle RM 2004 Factors influencing the
basal and recombinant human thyrotropin-stimulated
serum thyroglobulin in patients with metastatic thyroid
carcinoma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 89:6010–6016.
785. Mazzaferri EL, Robbins RJ, Spencer CA, Braverman LE,
Pacini F, Wartofsky L, Haugen BR, Sherman SI, Cooper
DS, Braunstein GD, Lee S, Davies TF, Arafah BM,
Ladenson PW, Pinchera A 2003 A consensus report of
the role of serum thyroglobulin as a monitoring method
for low-risk patients with papillary thyroid carcinoma. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 88:1433–1441.
786. Deleted.
787. Iervasi A, Iervasi G, Ferdeghini M, Solimeo C, Bottoni
A, Rossi L, Colato C, Zucchelli GC 2007 Clinical rele-
vance of highly sensitive Tg assay in monitoring patients
treated for differentiated thyroid cancer. Clin Endocrinol
(Oxf) 67:434–441.
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
121
 788. Spencer C, Fatemi S, Singer P, Nicoloff J, Lopresti J
2010 Serum basal thyroglobulin measured by a second-
generation assay correlates with the recombinant human
thyrotropin-stimulated thyroglobulin response in patients
treated for differentiated thyroid cancer. Thyroid 20:
587–595.
789. Haugen BR, Pacini F, Reiners C, Schlumberger M, La-
denson PW, Sherman SI, Cooper DS, Graham KE,
Braverman LE, Skarulis MC, Davies TF, DeGroot LJ,
Mazzaferri EL, Daniels GH, Ross DS, Luster M, Sam-
uels MH, Becker DV, Maxon HR III, Cavalieri RR,
Spencer CA, McEllin K, Weintraub BD, Ridgway EC
1999 A comparison of recombinant human thyrotropin
and thyroid hormone withdrawal for the detection of
thyroid remnant or cancer. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 84:
3877–3885.
790. David A, Blotta A, Bondanelli M, Rossi R, Roti E,
Braverman LE, Busutti L, degli Uberti EC 2001 Serum
thyroglobulin concentrations and (131)I whole-body scan
results in patients with differentiated thyroid carcinoma
after administration of recombinant human thyroid-
stimulating hormone. J Nucl Med 42:1470–1475.
791. Mazzaferri EL, Kloos RT 2002 Is diagnostic iodine-131
scanning with recombinant human TSH useful in the
follow-up of differentiated thyroid cancer after thyroid
ablation? J Clin Endocrinol Metab 87:1490–1498.
792. Haugen BR, Ridgway EC, McLaughlin BA, McDermott
MT 2002 Clinical comparison of whole-body radioiodine
scan and serum thyroglobulin after stimulation with re-
combinant human thyrotropin. Thyroid 12:37–43.
793. Lima N, Cavaliere H, Tomimori E, Knobel M, Medeiros-
Neto G 2002 Prognostic value of serial serum thyro-
globulin determinations after total thyroidectomy for
differentiated thyroid cancer. J Endocrinol Invest 25:
110–115.
794. Wartofsky L 2002 Management of low-risk well-
differentiated thyroid cancer based only on thyroglobulin
measurement
after
recombinant
human
thyrotropin.
Thyroid 12:583–590.
795. Schaap J, Eustatia-Rutten CF, Stokkel M, Links TP,
Diamant M, van der Velde EA, Romijn JA, Smit JW
2002 Does radioiodine therapy have disadvantageous
effects in non-iodine accumulating differentiated thyroid
carcinoma? Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 57:117–124.
796. Pacini F, Sabra MM, Tuttle RM 2011 Clinical relevance
of thyroglobulin doubling time in the management of
patients with differentiated thyroid cancer. Thyroid 21:
691–692.
797. Spencer CA, LoPresti JS, Fatemi S, Nicoloff JT 1999
Detection of residual and recurrent differentiated thyroid
carcinoma by serum thyroglobulin measurement. Thy-
roid 9:435–441.
798. Hollowell JG, Staehling NW, Flanders WD, Hannon
WH, Gunter EW, Spencer CA, Braverman LE 2002
Serum TSH, T(4), and thyroid antibodies in the United
States population (1988 to 1994): National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES III). J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 87:489–499.
799. Spencer CA 2004 Challenges of serum thyroglobulin
(Tg) measurement in the presence of Tg autoantibodies. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 89:3702–3704.
800. Bachelot A, Cailleux AF, Klain M, Baudin E, Ricard M,
Bellon N, Caillou B, Travagli JP, Schlumberger M 2002
Relationship between tumor burden and serum thyro-
globulin level in patients with papillary and follicular
thyroid carcinoma. Thyroid 12:707–711.
801. Spencer C, Fatemi S 2013 Thyroglobulin antibody
(TgAb) methods—strengths, pitfalls and clinical utility
for monitoring TgAb-positive patients with differentiated
thyroid cancer. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab
27:701–712.
802. Nygaard B, Bentzen J, Laurberg P, Pedersen SM, Bas-
tholt L, Handberg A, Rytter C, Godballe C, Faber J 2012
Large discrepancy in the results of sensitive measure-
ments of thyroglobulin antibodies in the follow-up on
thyroid cancer: a diagnostic dilemma. Eur Thyroid J 1:
193–197.
803. Hoofnagle AN, Becker JO, Wener MH, Heinecke JW
2008 Quantification of thyroglobulin, a low-abundance
serum protein, by immunoaffinity peptide enrichment
and tandem mass spectrometry. Clin Chem 54:1796–
1804.
804. Clarke NJ, Zhang Y, Reitz RE 2012 A novel mass
spectrometry-based assay for the accurate measurement
of thyroglobulin from patient samples containing an-
tithyroglobulin autoantibodies. J Investig Med 60:1157–
1163.
805. Kushnir MM, Rockwood AL, Roberts WL, Abraham D,
Hoofnagle AN, Meikle AW 2013 Measurement of
thyroglobulin by liquid chromatography-tandem mass
spectrometry in serum and plasma in the presence of an-
tithyroglobulin autoantibodies. Clin Chem 59:982–990.
806. Hoofnagle AN, Roth MY 2013 Clinical review: im-
proving the measurement of serum thyroglobulin with
mass spectrometry. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 98:1343–
1352.
807. Pacini F, Molinaro E, Castagna MG, Agate L, Elisei R,
Ceccarelli C, Lippi F, Taddei D, Grasso L, Pinchera A
2003 Recombinant human thyrotropin-stimulated serum
thyroglobulin combined with neck ultrasonography has
the highest sensitivity in monitoring differentiated thy-
roid carcinoma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 88:3668–3673.
808. Shin JH, Han BK, Ko EY, Kang SS 2007 Sonographic
findings in the surgical bed after thyroidectomy: com-
parison of recurrent tumors and nonrecurrent lesions. J
Ultrasound Med 26:1359–1366.
809. Bardet S, Malville E, Rame JP, Babin E, Samama G, De
RD, Michels JJ, Reznik Y, Henry-Amar M 2008 Mac-
roscopic lymph-node involvement and neck dissection
predict lymph-node recurrence in papillary thyroid car-
cinoma. Eur J Endocrinol 158:551–560.
810. Torres MR, Nobrega Neto SH, Rosas RJ, Martins AL,
Ramos AL, da Cruz TR 2014 Thyroglobulin in the
washout fluid of lymph-node biopsy: what is its role in
the follow-up of differentiated thyroid carcinoma? Thy-
roid 24:7–18.
811. Frasoldati A, Toschi E, Zini M, Flora M, Caroggio A,
Dotti C, Valcavi R 1999 Role of thyroglobulin mea-
surement in fine-needle aspiration biopsies of cervical
lymph nodes in patients with differentiated thyroid can-
cer. Thyroid 9:105–111.
812. Baloch ZW, Barroeta JE, Walsh J, Gupta PK, LiVolsi
VA, Langer JE, Mandel SJ 2008 Utility of thyroglobulin
measurement in fine-needle aspiration biopsy specimens
of lymph nodes in the diagnosis of recurrent thyroid
carcinoma. Cytojournal 5:1–8.
813. Pacini F, Capezzone M, Elisei R, Ceccarelli C, Taddei D,
Pinchera A 2002 Diagnostic 131-iodine whole-body scan
122
HAUGEN ET AL.
 may be avoided in thyroid cancer patients who have
undetectable stimulated serum Tg levels after initial
treatment. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 87:1499–1501.
814. Torlontano M, Crocetti U, D’Aloiso L, Bonfitto N, Di
GA, Modoni S, Valle G, Frusciante V, Bisceglia M,
Filetti S, Schlumberger M, Trischitta V 2003 Serum
thyroglobulin and 131I whole body scan after recombi-
nant human TSH stimulation in the follow-up of low-risk
patients with differentiated thyroid cancer. Eur J En-
docrinol 148:19–24.
815. Aide N, Heutte N, Rame JP, Rousseau E, Loiseau C,
Henry-Amar M, Bardet S 2009 Clinical relevance of
single-photon emission computed tomography/computed
tomography of the neck and thorax in postablation (131)I
scintigraphy for thyroid cancer. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
94:2075–2084.
816. Schmidt D, Szikszai A, Linke R, Bautz W, Kuwert T
2009 Impact of 131I SPECT/spiral CT on nodal staging
of differentiated thyroid carcinoma at the first radio-
ablation. J Nucl Med 50:18–23.
817. Jeong SY, Lee SW, Kim HW, Song BI, Ahn BC, Lee J
2014 Clinical applications of SPECT/CT after first I-131
ablation in patients with differentiated thyroid cancer.
Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 81:445–451.
818. Tharp K, Israel O, Hausmann J, Bettman L, Martin WH,
Daitzchman M, Sandler MP, Delbeke D 2004 Impact of
131I-SPECT/CT images obtained with an integrated
system in the follow-up of patients with thyroid carci-
noma. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging 31:1435–1442.
819. Freudenberg LS, Jentzen W, Stahl A, Bockisch A,
Rosenbaum-Krumme SJ 2011 Clinical applications of
124I-PET/CT in patients with differentiated thyroid
cancer. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging 38(Suppl 1):S48–
S56.
820. Van Nostrand D, Moreau S, Bandaru VV, Atkins F,
Chennupati S, Mete M, Burman K, Wartofsky L 2010
(124)I positron emission tomography versus (131)I
planar imaging in the identification of residual thyroid
tissue and/or metastasis in patients who have well-
differentiated thyroid cancer. Thyroid 20:879–883.
821. Phan HT, Jager PL, Paans AM, Plukker JT, Sturkenboom
MG, Sluiter WJ, Wolffenbuttel BH, Dierckx RA, Links
TP 2008 The diagnostic value of 124I-PET in patients
with differentiated thyroid cancer. Eur J Nucl Med Mol
Imaging 35:958–965.
822. Leboulleux S, Schroeder PR, Schlumberger M, Ladenson
PW 2007 The role of PET in follow-up of patients
treated for differentiated epithelial thyroid cancers. Nat
Clin Pract Endocrinol Metab 3:112–121.
823. Robbins RJ, Wan Q, Grewal RK, Reibke R, Gonen
M, Strauss HW, Tuttle RM, Drucker W, Larson SM 2006
Real-time prognosis for metastatic thyroid carcinoma
based
on
2-[18F]fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose-positron
emission tomography scanning. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
91:498–505.
824. Deandreis D, Al Ghuzlan A, Leboulleux S, Lacroix L,
Garsi JP, Talbot M, Lumbroso J, Baudin E, Caillou B,
Bidart JM, Schlumberger M 2011 Do histological, im-
munohistochemical, and metabolic (radioiodine and
fluorodeoxyglucose uptakes) patterns of metastatic thy-
roid cancer correlate with patient outcome? Endocr Relat
Cancer 18:159–169.
825. Leboulleux S, Schroeder PR, Busaidy NL, Auperin A,
Corone C, Jacene HA, Ewertz ME, Bournaud C, Wahl
RL, Sherman SI, Ladenson PW, Schlumberger M 2009
Assessment of the incremental value of recombinant
thyrotropin stimulation before 2-[18F]-fluoro-2-deoxy-
D-glucose positron emission tomography/computed
tomography imaging to localize residual differentiated
thyroid cancer. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 94:1310–
1316.
826. Yoon DY, Hwang HS, Chang SK, Rho YS, Ahn HY,
Kim JH, Lee IJ 2009 CT, MR, US,18F-FDG PET/CT,
and their combined use for the assessment of cervical
lymph node metastases in squamous cell carcinoma of
the head and neck. Eur Radiol 19:634–642.
827. Takashima S, Sone S, Takayama F, Wang Q, Kobayashi
T, Horii A, Yoshida JI 1998 Papillary thyroid carcinoma:
MR diagnosis of lymph node metastasis. AJNR Am J
Neuroradiol 19:509–513.
828. Gross ND, Weissman JL, Talbot JM, Andersen PE, Wax
MK, Cohen JI 2001 MRI detection of cervical metastasis
from differentiated thyroid carcinoma. Laryngoscope
111:1905–1909.
829. Toubert ME, Cyna-Gorse F, Zagdanski AM, Noel-
Wekstein S, Cattan P, Billotey C, Sarfati E, Rain JD
1999 Cervicomediastinal magnetic resonance imaging in
persistent or recurrent papillary thyroid carcinoma:
clinical use and limits. Thyroid 9:591–597.
830. Wang JC, Takashima S, Takayama F, Kawakami S, Saito
A, Matsushita T, Matsuba H, Kobayashi S 2001 Tracheal
invasion by thyroid carcinoma: prediction using MR
imaging. AJR Am J Roentgenol 177:929–936.
831. Wang J, Takashima S, Matsushita T, Takayama F, Ko-
bayashi T, Kadoya M 2003 Esophageal invasion by
thyroid carcinomas: prediction using magnetic resonance
imaging. J Comput Assist Tomogr 27:18–25.
832. Lee DH, Kang WJ, Seo HS, Kim E, Kim JH, Son KR,
Na DG 2009 Detection of metastatic cervical lymph nodes
in recurrent papillary thyroid carcinoma: computed to-
mography versus positron emission tomography-computed
tomography. J Comput Assist Tomogr 33:805–810.
833. Rosario PW, Mourao GF, dos Santos JB, Calsolari MR
2014 Is empirical radioactive iodine therapy still a valid
approach to patients with thyroid cancer and elevated
thyroglobulin? Thyroid 24:533–536.
834. Leboulleux S, El Bez I, I, Borget I, Elleuch M, De
´andreis
D, Al Ghuzlan A, Chougnet C, Bidault F, Mirghani H,
Lumbroso J, Hartl D, Baudin E, Schlumberger M 2012
Postradioiodine treatment whole-body scan in the era of
18-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography
for differentiated thyroid carcinoma with elevated serum
thyroglobulin levels. Thyroid 22:832–838.
835. Wang PW, Wang ST, Liu RT, Chien WY, Tung SC, Lu
YC, Chen HY, Lee CH 1999 Levothyroxine suppression
of thyroglobulin in patients with differentiated thyroid
carcinoma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 84:4549–4553.
836. Sugitani I, Fujimoto Y 2010 Does postoperative thyro-
tropin suppression therapy truly decrease recurrence in
papillary thyroid carcinoma? A randomized controlled
trial. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 95:4576–4583.
837. Klein Hesselink EN, Klein Hesselink MS, de Bock GH,
Gansevoort RT, Bakker SJ, Vredeveld EJ, van der Horst-
Schrivers AN, van der Horst IC, Kamphuisen PW,
Plukker JT, Links TP, Lefrandt JD 2013 Long-term
cardiovascular mortality in patients with differentiated
thyroid carcinoma: an observational study. J Clin Oncol
31:4046–4053.
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
123
 838. Shargorodsky M, Serov S, Gavish D, Leibovitz E, Harpaz
D,
Zimlichman
R
2006
Long-term
thyrotropin-
suppressive therapy with levothyroxine impairs small and
large artery elasticity and increases left ventricular mass in
patients with thyroid carcinoma. Thyroid 16:381–386.
839. Taillard V, Sardinoux M, Oudot C, Fesler P, Rugale C,
Raingeard I, Renard E, Ribstein J, du CG 2011 Early
detection of isolated left ventricular diastolic dysfunction
in high-risk differentiated thyroid carcinoma patients on
TSH-suppressive therapy. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 75:
709–714.
840. Leeper RD 1973 The effect of 131 I therapy on survival
of patients with metastatic papillary or follicular thyroid
carcinoma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 36:1143–1152.
841. Beierwaltes WH, Nishiyama RH, Thompson NW, Copp
JE, Kubo A 1982 Survival time and ‘‘cure’’ in papillary
and follicular thyroid carcinoma with distant metastases:
statistics following University of Michigan therapy. J
Nucl Med 23:561–568.
842. Bernier MO, Leenhardt L, Hoang C, Aurengo A, Mary
JY, Menegaux F, Enkaoua E, Turpin G, Chiras J, Saillant
G, Hejblum G 2001 Survival and therapeutic modalities
in patients with bone metastases of differentiated thyroid
carcinomas. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 86:1568–1573.
843. Sampson E, Brierley JD, Le LW, Rotstein L, Tsang RW
2007 Clinical management and outcome of papillary and
follicular (differentiated) thyroid cancer presenting with
distant metastasis at diagnosis. Cancer 110:1451–1456.
844. Durante C, Haddy N, Baudin E, Leboulleux S, Hartl D,
Travagli JP, Caillou B, Ricard M, Lumbroso JD, De
Vathaire F, Schlumberger M 2006 Long-term outcome
of 444 patients with distant metastases from papillary
and follicular thyroid carcinoma: benefits and limits of
radioiodine therapy. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 91:2892–
2899.
845. Dupuy DE, Monchik JM, Decrea C, Pisharodi L 2001
Radiofrequency ablation of regional recurrence from well-
differentiated thyroid malignancy. Surgery 130:971–977.
846. Lewis BD, Hay ID, Charboneau JW, McIver B, Reading
CC, Goellner JR 2002 Percutaneous ethanol injection for
treatment of cervical lymph node metastases in patients
with papillary thyroid carcinoma. AJR Am J Roentgenol
178:699–704.
847. Eustatia-Rutten CF, Romijn JA, Guijt MJ, Vielvoye GJ,
van den Berg R, Corssmit EP, Pereira AM, Smit JW
2003 Outcome of palliative embolization of bone me-
tastases in differentiated thyroid carcinoma. J Clin En-
docrinol Metab 88:3184–3189.
848. Misra S, Meiyappan S, Heus L, Freeman J, Rotstein L,
Brierley JD, Tsang RW, Rodin G, Ezzat S, Goldstein DP,
Sawka AM 2013 Patients’ experiences following local-
regional recurrence of thyroid cancer: a qualitative study.
J Surg Oncol 108:47–51.
849. Robenshtok E, Fish S, Bach A, Dominguez JM, Shaha A,
Tuttle RM 2012 Suspicious cervical lymph nodes de-
tected after thyroidectomy for papillary thyroid cancer
usually remain stable over years in properly selected
patients. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 97:2706–2713.
850. Ito Y, Higashiyama T, Takamura Y, Kobayashi K, Miya
A, Miyauchi A 2011 Prognosis of patients with papillary
thyroid carcinoma showing postoperative recurrence to
the central neck. World J Surg 35:767–772.
851. Uchida H, Imai T, Kikumori T, Hayashi H, Sato S, Noda
S, Idota A, Kiuchi T 2013 Long-term results of surgery
for papillary thyroid carcinoma with local recurrence.
Surg Today 43:848–853.
852. Newman KD, Black T, Heller G, Azizkhan RG, Hol-
comb GW III, Sklar C, Vlamis V, Haase GM, La
Quaglia MP 1998 Differentiated thyroid cancer: deter-
minants of disease progression in patients <21 years of
age at diagnosis: a report from the Surgical Discipline
Committee of the Children’s Cancer Group. Ann Surg
227:533–541.
853. Robie DK, Dinauer CW, Tuttle RM, Ward DT, Parry R,
McClellan D, Svec R, Adair C, Francis G 1998 The
impact of initial surgical management on outcome in
young patients with differentiated thyroid cancer. J Pe-
diatr Surg 33:1134–1138.
854. Chadwick D, Kinsman R, Walton P 2012 The British
Association of Endocrine and Thyroid Surgeons 2012.
4th edition. Dendrite Clinical Systems, Ltd, Oxfordshire,
United Kingdom, pp 3–188.
855. Rosenthal MS, Angelos P, Cooper DS, Fassler C, Finder
SG, Hays MT, Tendler B, Braunstein GD 2013 Clinical
and professional ethics guidelines for the practice of
thyroidology. Thyroid 23:1203–1210.
856. Yeh M, Bernet V, Ferris R, Loevner L, Mandel S, Orloff
L, Randolph G, Steward D 2015 American Thyroid
Association statement on preoperative imaging for thy-
roid cancer surgery. Thyroid 25:3–14.
857. Tufano RP, Clayman G, Heller KS, Inabnet WB, Ke-
bebew E, Shaha A, Steward DL, Tuttle RM 2014 Man-
agement of recurrent/persistent nodal disease in patients
with differentiated thyroid cancer: a critical review of the
risks and benefits of surgical intervention versus active
surveillance. Thyroid 25:15–27.
858. Phelan E, Kamani D, Shin J, Randolph GW 2013 Neural
monitored revision thyroid cancer surgery: surgical
safety and thyroglobulin response. Otolaryngol Head
Neck Surg 149:47–52.
859. Urken ML, Milas M, Randolph GW, Tufano R, Bergman
D, Bernet V, Brett EM, Brierley JD, Cobin R, Doherty G,
Klopper J, Lee S, Machac J, Mechanick JI, Orloff LA,
Ross D, Smallridge RC, Terris DJ, Clain JB, Tuttle M
2015 A review of the management of recurrent and
persistent metastatic lymph nodes in well differentiated
thyroid cancer: a multifactorial decision making guide
created for the Thyroid Cancer Care Collaborative. Head
Neck 37:605–614.
860. Merdad M, Eskander A, Kroeker T, Freeman JL 2012
Predictors of level II and Vb neck disease in metastatic
papillary thyroid cancer. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck
Surg 138:1030–1033.
861. Eskander A, Merdad M, Freeman JL, Witterick IJ 2013
Pattern of spread to the lateral neck in metastatic well-
differentiated thyroid cancer: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Thyroid 23:583–592.
862. Schuff KG 2011 Management of recurrent/persistent
papillary thyroid carcinoma: efficacy of the surgical
option. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 96:2038–2039.
863. McCoy KL, Yim JH, Tublin ME, Burmeister LA, Ogil-
vie JB, Carty SE 2007 Same-day ultrasound guidance in
reoperation for locally recurrent papillary thyroid cancer.
Surgery 142:965–972.
864. Hughes DT, Laird AM, Miller BS, Gauger PG, Doherty
GM 2012 Reoperative lymph node dissection for recur-
rent papillary thyroid cancer and effect on serum thyro-
globulin. Ann Surg Oncol 19:2951–2957.
124
HAUGEN ET AL.
 865. Roh JL, Kim JM, Park CI 2011 Central compartment
reoperation for recurrent/persistent differentiated thyroid
cancer: patterns of recurrence, morbidity, and prediction
of
postoperative
hypocalcemia.
Ann
Surg
Oncol
18:1312–1318.
866. Shaha AR 2012 Recurrent differentiated thyroid cancer.
Endocr Pract 18:600–603.
867. Palme CE, Waseem Z, Raza SN, Eski S, Walfish P,
Freeman JL 2004 Management and outcome of recurrent
well-differentiated thyroid carcinoma. Arch Otolaryngol
Head Neck Surg 130:819–824.
868. Clayman GL, Agarwal G, Edeiken BS, Waguespack SG,
Roberts DB, Sherman SI 2011 Long-term outcome of
comprehensive central compartment dissection in pa-
tients with recurrent/persistent papillary thyroid carci-
noma. Thyroid 21:1309–1316.
869. Clayman GL, Shellenberger TD, Ginsberg LE, Edeiken
BS, El-Naggar AK, Sellin RV, Waguespack SG, Roberts
DB, Mishra A, Sherman SI 2009 Approach and safety of
comprehensive central compartment dissection in pa-
tients with recurrent papillary thyroid carcinoma. Head
Neck 31:1152–1163.
870. Chao TC, Jeng LB, Lin JD, Chen MF 1997 Reoperative
thyroid surgery. World J Surg 21:644–647.
871. Erbil Y, Sari S, Agcaoglu O, Ersoz F, Bayraktar A,
Salmaslioglu A, Gozkun O, Adalet I, Ozarmagan S
2010 Radio-guided excision of metastatic lymph nodes
in thyroid carcinoma: a safe technique for previously
operated neck compartments. World J Surg 34:2581–
2588.
872. Alzahrani AS, Raef H, Sultan A, Al Sobhi S, In-
gemansson S, Ahmed M, Al Mahfouz A 2002 Impact of
cervical lymph node dissection on serum TG and the
course of disease in TG-positive, radioactive iodine
whole body scan-negative recurrent/persistent papillary
thyroid cancer. J Endocrinol Invest 25:526–531.
873. Travagli JP, Cailleux AF, Ricard M, Baudin E, Caillou
B, Parmentier C, Schlumberger M 1998 Combination of
radioiodine (131I) and probe-guided surgery for persis-
tent or recurrent thyroid carcinoma. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 83:2675–2680.
874. Lee L, Steward DL 2008 Sonographically-directed neck
dissection for recurrent thyroid carcinoma. Laryngo-
scope 118:991–994.
875. Steward DL 2012 Update in utility of secondary node
dissection for papillary thyroid cancer. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 97:3393–3398.
876. Rubello D, Salvatori M, Casara D, Piotto A, Toniato A,
Gross MD, Al-Nahhas A, Muzzio PC, Pelizzo MR 2007
99mTc-sestamibi radio-guided surgery of loco-regional
131Iodine-negative recurrent thyroid cancer. Eur J Surg
Oncol 33:902–906.
877. Deleted.
878. Heilo A, Sigstad E, Fagerlid KH, Haskjold OI, Groholt
KK, Berner A, Bjoro T, Jorgensen LH 2011 Efficacy of
ultrasound-guided percutaneous ethanol injection treat-
ment in patients with a limited number of metastatic
cervical lymph nodes from papillary thyroid carcinoma. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 96:2750–2755.
879. Hay ID, Lee RA, Davidge-Pitts C, Reading CC, Char-
boneau JW 2013 Long-term outcome of ultrasound-
guided percutaneous ethanol ablation of selected ‘‘re-
current’’ neck nodal metastases in 25 patients with TNM
stages III or IVA papillary thyroid carcinoma previously
treated by surgery and 131I therapy. Surgery 154:1448–
1454.
880. Guenette JP, Monchik JM, Dupuy DE 2013 Image-
guided ablation of postsurgical locoregional recurrence
of biopsy-proven well-differentiated thyroid carcinoma.
J Vasc Interv Radiol 24:672–679.
881. Park KW, Shin JH, Han BK, Ko EY, Chung JH 2011
Inoperable symptomatic recurrent thyroid cancers: pre-
liminary result of radiofrequency ablation. Ann Surg
Oncol 18:2564–2568.
882. Baek JH, Kim YS, Sung JY, Choi H, Lee JH 2011 Lo-
coregional
control
of
metastatic
well-differentiated
thyroid cancer by ultrasound-guided radiofrequency ab-
lation. AJR Am J Roentgenol 197:W331-W336.
883. Monchik JM, Donatini G, Iannuccilli J, Dupuy DE 2006
Radiofrequency ablation and percutaneous ethanol injec-
tion treatment for recurrent local and distant well-
differentiated thyroid carcinoma. Ann Surg 244:296–304.
884. Shin JE, Baek JH, Lee JH 2013 Radiofrequency and
ethanol ablation for the treatment of recurrent thyroid
cancers: current status and challenges. Curr Opin Oncol
25:14–19.
885. Na DG, Lee JH, Jung SL, Kim JH, Sung JY, Shin JH,
Kim EK, Lee JH, Kim DW, Park JS, Kim KS, Baek SM,
Lee Y, Chong S, Sim JS, Huh JY, Bae JI, Kim KT, Han
SY, Bae MY, Kim YS, Baek JH 2012 Radiofrequency
ablation of benign thyroid nodules and recurrent thyroid
cancers: consensus statement and recommendations.
Korean J Radiol 13:117–125.
886. Papini E, Bizzarri G, Bianchini A, Valle D, Misischi I,
Guglielmi R, Salvatori M, Solbiati L, Crescenzi A, Pa-
cella CM, Gharib H 2013 Percutaneous ultrasound-
guided laser ablation is effective for treating selected
nodal metastases in papillary thyroid cancer. J Clin En-
docrinol Metab 98:E92–E97.
887. Sabra MM, Grewal RK, Tala H, Larson SM, Tuttle RM
2012 Clinical outcomes following empiric radioiodine
therapy in patients with structurally identifiable meta-
static follicular cell-derived thyroid carcinoma with
negative
diagnostic
but
positive
post-therapy
131I
whole-body scans. Thyroid 22:877–883.
888. Schwartz DL, Lobo MJ, Ang KK, Morrison WH, Ro-
senthal DI, Ahamad A, Evans DB, Clayman G, Sherman
SI, Garden AS 2009 Postoperative external beam radio-
therapy for differentiated thyroid cancer: outcomes and
morbidity with conformal treatment. Int J Radiat Oncol
Biol Phys 74:1083–1091.
889. Romesser PB, Sherman EJ, Shaha AR, Lian M, Wong
RJ, Sabra M, Rao SS, Fagin JA, Tuttle RM, Lee NY
2014 External beam radiotherapy with or without con-
current chemotherapy in advanced or recurrent non-
anaplastic non-medullary thyroid cancer. J Surg Oncol
110:375–382.
890. Ge JH, Zhao RL, Hu JL, Zhou WA 2004 Surgical
treatment of advanced thyroid carcinoma with aero-
digestive invasion. Zhonghua Er Bi Yan Hou Ke Za Zhi
39:237–240. (In Chinese.)
891. Avenia N, Ragusa M, Monacelli M, Calzolari F, Daddi
N, Di CL, Semeraro A, Puma F 2004 Locally advanced
thyroid cancer: therapeutic options. Chir Ital 56:501–
508.
892. McCaffrey JC 2000 Evaluation and treatment of aero-
digestive tract invasion by well-differentiated thyroid
carcinoma. Cancer Control 7:246–252.
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
125
 893. Musholt TJ, Musholt PB, Behrend M, Raab R, Scheu-
mann GF, Klempnauer J 1999 Invasive differentiated
thyroid carcinoma: tracheal resection and reconstruction
procedures in the hands of the endocrine surgeon. Sur-
gery 126:1078–1087.
894. Czaja JM, McCaffrey TV 1997 The surgical manage-
ment of laryngotracheal invasion by well-differentiated
papillary thyroid carcinoma. Arch Otolaryngol Head
Neck Surg 123:484–490.
895. Haymart MR, Muenz DG, Stewart AK, Griggs JJ,
Banerjee M 2013 Disease severity and radioactive iodine
use for thyroid cancer. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 98:678–
686.
896. Van Nostrand D 2009 The benefits and risks of I-131
therapy in patients with well-differentiated thyroid can-
cer. Thyroid 19:1381–1391.
897. Higashi T, Nishii R, Yamada S, Nakamoto Y, Ishizu K,
Kawase S, Togashi K, Itasaka S, Hiraoka M, Misaki T,
Konishi J 2011 Delayed initial radioactive iodine therapy
resulted in poor survival in patients with metastatic dif-
ferentiated thyroid carcinoma: a retrospective statistical
analysis of 198 cases. J Nucl Med 52:683–689.
898. Yim JH, Kim WB, Kim EY, Kim WG, Kim TY, Ryu JS,
Moon DH, Sung TY, Yoon JH, Kim SC, Hong SJ, Shong
YK 2011 Adjuvant radioactive therapy after reoperation
for locoregionally recurrent papillary thyroid cancer in
patients who initially underwent total thyroidectomy and
high-dose remnant ablation. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
96:3695–3700.
899. Van Nostrand D, Wartofsky L 2007 Radioiodine in the
treatment of thyroid cancer. Endocrinol Metab Clin
North Am 36:807–822, vii–viii.
900. Van Nostrand D, Atkins F, Yeganeh F, Acio E, Bursaw
R, Wartofsky L 2002 Dosimetrically determined doses of
radioiodine for the treatment of metastatic thyroid car-
cinoma. Thyroid 12:121–134.
901. Chiesa C, Castellani MR, Vellani C, Orunesu E, Negri A,
Azzeroni R, Botta F, Maccauro M, Aliberti G, Seregni E,
Lassmann M, Bombardieri E 2009 Individualized do-
simetry in the management of metastatic differentiated
thyroid cancer. Q J Nucl Med Mol Imaging 53:546–561.
902. Lassmann M, Reiners C, Luster M 2010 Dosimetry and
thyroid cancer: the individual dosage of radioiodine.
Endocr Relat Cancer 17:R161-R172.
903. Verburg FA, Hanscheid H, Biko J, Hategan MC, Lass-
mann M, Kreissl MC, Reiners C, Luster M 2010
Dosimetry-guided high-activity (131)I therapy in patients
with advanced differentiated thyroid carcinoma: initial
experience. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging 37:896–903.
904. Lassmann M, Hanscheid H, Chiesa C, Hindorf C, Flux
G, Luster M 2008 EANM Dosimetry Committee series
on standard operational procedures for pre-therapeutic
dosimetry I: blood and bone marrow dosimetry in dif-
ferentiated thyroid cancer therapy. Eur J Nucl Med Mol
Imaging 35:1405–1412.
905. Robbins RJ, Schlumberger MJ 2005 The evolving role of
(131)I for the treatment of differentiated thyroid carci-
noma. J Nucl Med 46 Suppl 1:28S-37S.
906. Van Nostrand D, Atkins F, Moreau S, Aiken M, Kulkarni
K, Wu JS, Burman KD, Wartofsky L 2009 Utility of the
radioiodine whole-body retention at 48 hours for modi-
fying empiric activity of 131-iodine for the treatment of
metastatic well-differentiated thyroid carcinoma. Thy-
roid 19:1093–1098.
907. Dorn R, Kopp J, Vogt H, Heidenreich P, Carroll RG,
Gulec SA 2003 Dosimetry-guided radioactive iodine
treatment in patients with metastatic differentiated thy-
roid cancer: largest safe dose using a risk-adapted ap-
proach. J Nucl Med 44:451–456.
908. Maxon HR, Thomas SR, Hertzberg VS, Kereiakes JG,
Chen IW, Sperling MI, Saenger EL 1983 Relation be-
tween effective radiation dose and outcome of radio-
iodine therapy for thyroid cancer. N Engl J Med 309:
937–941.
909. Thomas SR, Maxon HR, Kereiakes JG 1976 In vivo
quantitation
of
lesion
radioactivity
using
external
counting methods. Med Phys 03:253–255.
910. Holst JP, Burman KD, Atkins F, Umans JG, Jonklaas J
2005 Radioiodine therapy for thyroid cancer and hy-
perthyroidism in patients with end-stage renal disease on
hemodialysis. Thyroid 15:1321–1331.
911. Driedger AA, Quirk S, McDonald TJ, Ledger S, Gray D,
Wall W, Yoo J 2006 A pragmatic protocol for I-131
rhTSH-stimulated ablation therapy in patients with renal
failure. Clin Nucl Med 31:454–457.
912. Jarzab B, Handkiewicz-Junak D, Wloch J 2005 Juvenile
differentiated thyroid carcinoma and the role of radio-
iodine in its treatment: a qualitative review. Endocr Relat
Cancer 12:773–803.
913. Verburg FA, Biko J, Diessl S, Demidchik Y, Drozd V,
Rivkees SA, Reiners C, Hanscheid H 2011 I-131 activ-
ities as high as safely administrable (AHASA) for the
treatment of children and adolescents with advanced
differentiated thyroid cancer. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
96:E1268–E1271.
914. Ma C, Xie J, Liu W, Wang G, Zuo S, Wang X, Wu F
2010 Recombinant human thyrotropin (rhTSH) aided
radioiodine treatment for residual or metastatic differ-
entiated thyroid cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
(11):CD008302.
915. Klubo-Gwiezdzinska J, Van Nostrand D, Atkins F,
Burman K, Jonklaas J, Mete M, Wartofsky L 2011 Ef-
ficacy of dosimetric versus empiric prescribed activity of
131I for therapy of differentiated thyroid cancer. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 96:3217–3225.
916. Lee JJ, Chung JK, Kim SE, Kang WJ, Park do J, Lee DS,
Cho BY, Lee MC 2008 Maximal safe dose of I-131 after
failure of standard fixed dose therapy in patients with
differentiated thyroid carcinoma. Ann Nucl Med 22:
727–734.
917. Samuel AM, Rajashekharrao B, Shah DH 1998 Pulmon-
ary metastases in children and adolescents with well-
differentiated thyroid cancer. J Nucl Med 39:1531–1536.
918. Sgouros G, Kolbert KS, Sheikh A, Pentlow KS, Mun EF,
Barth A, Robbins RJ, Larson SM 2004 Patient-specific do-
simetry for 131I thyroid cancer therapy using 124I PET and
3-dimensional-internal dosimetry (3D-ID) software. J Nucl
Med 45:1366–1372.
919. Jentzen W, Freudenberg L, Eising EG, Sonnenschein W,
Knust J, Bockisch A 2008 Optimized 124I PET dosim-
etry protocol for radioiodine therapy of differentiated
thyroid cancer. J Nucl Med 49:1017–1023.
920. Pettinato C, Monari F, Nanni C, Allegri V, Marcatili S,
Civollani S, Cima S, Spezi E, Mazzarotto R, Fanti S
2012 Usefulness of 124I PET/CT imaging to predict
absorbed doses in patients affected by metastatic thyroid
cancer and treated with 131I. Q J Nucl Med Mol Imaging
56:509–514.
126
HAUGEN ET AL.
 921. Reiners C, Biko J, Haenscheid H, Hebestreit H, Kirinjuk
S, Baranowski O, Marlowe RJ, Demidchik E, Drozd V,
Demidchik Y 2013 Twenty-five years after Chernobyl:
outcome of radioiodine treatment in children and ado-
lescents with very high-risk radiation-induced differen-
tiated thyroid carcinoma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 98:
3039–3048.
922. Schlumberger M, Lacroix L, Russo D, Filetti S, Bidart
JM 2007 Defects in iodide metabolism in thyroid cancer
and implications for the follow-up and treatment of pa-
tients. Nat Clin Pract Endocrinol Metab 3:260–269.
923. Kulkarni K, Van Nostrand D, Atkins F, Aiken M, Bur-
man K, Wartofsky L 2006 The relative frequency in
which empiric dosages of radioiodine would potentially
overtreat or undertreat patients who have metastatic
well-differentiated thyroid cancer. Thyroid 16:1019–
1023.
924. Tuttle RM, Leboeuf R, Robbins RJ, Qualey R, Pentlow
K, Larson SM, Chan CY 2006 Empiric radioactive io-
dine dosing regimens frequently exceed maximum tol-
erated activity levels in elderly patients with thyroid
cancer. J Nucl Med 47:1587–1591.
925. Rudavsky AZ, Freeman LM 1997 Treatment of scan-
negative, thyroglobulin-positive metastatic thyroid can-
cer using radioiodine 131I and recombinant human thy-
roid stimulating hormone. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 82:
11–14.
926. Ringel MD, Ladenson PW 1996 Diagnostic accuracy
of 131I scanning with recombinant human thyrotropin
versus thyroid hormone withdrawal in a patient with
metastatic thyroid carcinoma and hypopituitarism. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 81:1724–1725.
927. Luster M, Lassmann M, Haenscheid H, Michalowski U,
Incerti C, Reiners C 2000 Use of recombinant human
thyrotropin before radioiodine therapy in patients with
advanced differentiated thyroid carcinoma. J Clin En-
docrinol Metab 85:3640–3645.
928. Mariani G, Ferdeghini M, Augeri C, Villa G, Taddei GZ,
Scopinaro G, Boni G, Bodei L, Rabitti C, Molinari E,
Bianchi R 2000 Clinical experience with recombinant
human thyrotrophin (rhTSH) in the management of pa-
tients with differentiated thyroid cancer. Cancer Biother
Radiopharm 15:211–217.
929. Perros P 1999 Recombinant human thyroid-stimulating
hormone(rhTSH)intheradioablationofwell-differentiated
thyroid cancer: preliminary therapeutic experience. J En-
docrinol Invest 22:30–34.
930. Lippi F, Capezzone M, Angelini F, Taddei D, Molinaro
E, Pinchera A, Pacini F 2001 Radioiodine treatment of
metastatic differentiated thyroid cancer in patients on L-
thyroxine, using recombinant human TSH. Eur J En-
docrinol 144:5–11.
931. Pellegriti G, Scollo C, Giuffrida D, Vigneri R, Squatrito
S, Pezzino V 2001 Usefulness of recombinant human
thyrotropin in the radiometabolic treatment of selected
patients with thyroid cancer. Thyroid 11:1025–1030.
932. Adler ML, Macapinlac HA, Robbins RJ 1998 Radio-
iodine treatment of thyroid cancer with the aid of re-
combinant human thyrotropin. Endocr Pract 4:282–286.
933. Chiu AC, Delpassand ES, Sherman SI 1997 Prognosis
and treatment of brain metastases in thyroid carcinoma. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 82:3637–3642.
934. Lau WF, Zacharin MR, Waters K, Wheeler G, Johnston
V, Hicks RJ 2006 Management of paediatric thyroid
carcinoma: recent experience with recombinant human
thyroid stimulating hormone in preparation for radio-
iodine therapy. Intern Med J 36:564–570.
935. Potzi C, Moameni A, Karanikas G, Preitfellner J, Be-
cherer A, Pirich C, Dudczak R 2006 Comparison of io-
dine uptake in tumour and nontumour tissue under
thyroid hormone deprivation and with recombinant hu-
man thyrotropin in thyroid cancer patients. Clin En-
docrinol (Oxf) 65:519–523.
936. Vargas GE, Uy H, Bazan C, Guise TA, Bruder JM 1999
Hemiplegia after thyrotropin alfa in a hypothyroid pa-
tient with thyroid carcinoma metastatic to the brain. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 84:3867–3871.
937. Robbins RJ, Voelker E, Wang W, Macapinlac HA,
Larson SM 2000 Compassionate use of recombinant
human thyrotropin to facilitate radioiodine therapy: case
report and review of literature. Endocr Pract 6:460–464.
938. Braga M, Ringel MD, Cooper DS 2001 Sudden en-
largement of local recurrent thyroid tumor after recom-
binant human TSH administration. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 86:5148–5151.
939. Pons F, Carrio I, Estorch M, Ginjaume M, Pons J, Milian
R 1987 Lithium as an adjuvant of iodine-131 uptake
when treating patients with well-differentiated thyroid
carcinoma. Clin Nucl Med 12:644–647.
940. Koong SS, Reynolds JC, Movius EG, Keenan AM, Ain
KB, Lakshmanan MC, Robbins J 1999 Lithium as a
potential adjuvant to 131I therapy of metastatic, well
differentiated thyroid carcinoma. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 84:912–916.
941. Liu YY, van der Pluijm G, Karperien M, Stokkel MP,
Pereira AM, Morreau J, Kievit J, Romijn JA, Smit JW
2006 Lithium as adjuvant to radioiodine therapy in dif-
ferentiated thyroid carcinoma: clinical and in vitro
studies. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 64:617–624.
942. Ronga G, Filesi M, Montesano T, Di Nicola AD, Pace C,
Travascio L, Ventroni G, Antonaci A, Vestri AR 2004
Lung metastases from differentiated thyroid carcinoma.
A 40 years’ experience. Q J Nucl Med Mol Imaging 48:
12–19.
943. Lin JD, Chao TC, Chou SC, Hsueh C 2004 Papillary
thyroid carcinomas with lung metastases. Thyroid 14:
1091–1096.
944. Shoup M, Stojadinovic A, Nissan A, Ghossein RA,
Freedman S, Brennan MF, Shah JP, Shaha AR 2003
Prognostic indicators of outcomes in patients with distant
metastases from differentiated thyroid carcinoma. J Am
Coll Surg 197:191–197.
945. Zettinig G, Fueger BJ, Passler C, Kaserer K, Pirich C,
Dudczak R, Niederle B 2002 Long-term follow-up of
patients with bone metastases from differentiated thyroid
carcinoma—surgery or conventional therapy? Clin En-
docrinol (Oxf) 56:377–382.
946. Pittas AG, Adler M, Fazzari M, Tickoo S, Rosai J,
Larson SM, Robbins RJ 2000 Bone metastases from
thyroid carcinoma: clinical characteristics and prognostic
variables in one hundred forty-six patients. Thyroid 10:
261–268.
947. Schlumberger M, Challeton C, De Vathaire F, Travagli
JP, Gardet P, Lumbroso JD, Francese C, Fontaine F,
Ricard M, Parmentier C 1996 Radioactive iodine treat-
ment and external radiotherapy for lung and bone me-
tastases from thyroid carcinoma. J Nucl Med 37:598–
605.
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
127
 948. Dinneen SF, Valimaki MJ, Bergstralh EJ, Goellner JR,
Gorman CA, Hay ID 1995 Distant metastases in papil-
lary thyroid carcinoma: 100 cases observed at one in-
stitution during 5 decades. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 80:
2041–2045.
949. Foote RL, Brown PD, Garces YI, McIver B, Kasperbauer
JL 2003 Is there a role for radiation therapy in the
management of Hu
¨rthle cell carcinoma? Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 56:1067–1072.
950. Pak H, Gourgiotis L, Chang WI, Guthrie LC, Skarulis
MC, Reynolds JC, Merino MJ, Schrump DS, Libutti SK,
Alexander HR Jr, Sarlis NJ 2003 Role of metastasectomy
in the management of thyroid carcinoma: the NIH ex-
perience. J Surg Oncol 82:10–18.
951. Vitale G, Fonderico F, Martignetti A, Caraglia M, Cic-
carelli A, Nuzzo V, Abbruzzese A, Lupoli G 2001 Pa-
midronate improves the quality of life and induces
clinical remission of bone metastases in patients with
thyroid cancer. Br J Cancer 84:1586–1590.
952. Kitamura Y, Shimizu K, Nagahama M, Sugino K, Ozaki
O, Mimura T, Ito K, Ito K, Tanaka S 1999 Immediate
causes of death in thyroid carcinoma: clinicopathological
analysis of 161 fatal cases. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 84:
4043–4049.
953. Brose MS, Smit J, Capdevila J, Elisei R, Nutting C, Pi-
toia F, Robinson B, Schlumberger M, Shong YK, Ta-
kami H 2012 Regional approaches to the management of
patients with advanced, radioactive iodine-refractory
differentiated thyroid carcinoma. Expert Rev Anticancer
Ther 12:1137–1147.
954. Sabra MM, Dominguez JM, Grewal RK, Larson SM,
Ghossein RA, Tuttle RM, Fagin JA 2013 Clinical out-
comes and molecular profile of differentiated thyroid
cancers with radioiodine-avid distant metastases. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 98:E829–E836.
955. Benua RS, Cicale NR, Sonenberg M, Rawson RW 1962
The relation of radioiodine dosimetry to results and com-
plications in the treatment of metastatic thyroid cancer. Am
J Roentgenol Radium Ther Nucl Med 87:171–182.
956. Hebestreit H, Biko J, Drozd V, Demidchik Y, Burkhardt
A, Trusen A, Beer M, Reiners C 2011 Pulmonary fibrosis
in youth treated with radioiodine for juvenile thyroid
cancer and lung metastases after Chernobyl. Eur J Nucl
Med Mol Imaging 38:1683–1690.
957. Ilgan S, Karacalioglu AO, Pabuscu Y, Atac GK, Arslan
N, Ozturk E, Gunalp B, Ozguven MA 2004 Iodine-131
treatment and high-resolution CT: results in patients with
lung metastases from differentiated thyroid carcinoma.
Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging 31:825–830.
958. Hod N, Hagag P, Baumer M, Sandbank J, Horne T 2005
Differentiated thyroid carcinoma in children and young
adults: evaluation of response to treatment. Clin Nucl
Med 30:387–390.
959. Van Nostrand D, Freitas J 2006 Side effects of 131I for
ablation and treatment of well differentiated thyroid car-
cinoma. In: Wartofsky L, Van Nostrand D (eds) Thyroid
Cancer: A Comprehensive Guide to Clinical Management.
2nd edition. Humana Press, Totowa, NJ, pp 459–485.
960. Lang BH, Wong IO, Wong KP, Cowling BJ, Wan KY
2012 Risk of second primary malignancy in differenti-
ated thyroid carcinoma treated with radioactive iodine
therapy. Surgery 151:844–850.
961. Sawka AM, Thabane L, Parlea L, Ibrahim-Zada I, Tsang
RW, Brierley JD, Straus S, Ezzat S, Goldstein DP 2009
Second primary malignancy risk after radioactive iodine
treatment for thyroid cancer: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Thyroid 19:451–457.
962. Fatourechi V, Hay ID, Javedan H, Wiseman GA, Mullan
BP, Gorman CA 2002 Lack of impact of radioiodine
therapy in tg-positive, diagnostic whole-body scan-
negative patients with follicular cell-derived thyroid
cancer. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 87:1521–1526.
963. Koh JM, Kim ES, Ryu JS, Hong SJ, Kim WB, Shong YK
2003 Effects of therapeutic doses of 131I in thyroid
papillary carcinoma patients with elevated thyroglobulin
level and negative 131I whole-body scan: comparative
study. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 58:421–427.
964. Ma C, Kuang A, Xie J 2009 Radioiodine therapy for
differentiated
thyroid
carcinoma
with
thyroglobulin
positive and radioactive iodine negative metastases.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev1–38.
965. Wang W, Larson SM, Tuttle RM, Kalaigian H, Kolbert
K, Sonenberg M, Robbins RJ 2001 Resistance of [18f]-
fluorodeoxyglucose-avid metastatic thyroid cancer le-
sions to treatment with high-dose radioactive iodine.
Thyroid 11:1169–1175.
966. Salvatore B, Paone G, Klain M, Storto G, Nicolai E,
D’Amico D, Della Morte AM, Pace L, Salvatore M 2008
Fluorodeoxyglucose PET/CT in patients with differenti-
ated thyroid cancer and elevated thyroglobulin after total
thyroidectomy and (131)I ablation. Q J Nucl Med Mol
Imaging 52:2–8.
967. Kloos RT 2008 Approach to the patient with a positive
serum thyroglobulin and a negative radioiodine scan
after initial therapy for differentiated thyroid cancer. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 93:1519–1525.
968. van Tol KM, Jager PL, de Vries EG, Piers DA, Boezen
HM, Sluiter WJ, Dullaart RP, Links TP 2003 Outcome in
patients with differentiated thyroid cancer with negative
diagnostic whole-body scanning and detectable stimu-
lated thyroglobulin. Eur J Endocrinol 148:589–596.
969. Kabasakal L, Selcuk NA, Shafipour H, Ozmen O, Onsel C,
Uslu I 2004 Treatment of iodine-negative thyroglobulin-
positive thyroid cancer: differences in outcome in patients
with macrometastases and patients with micrometastases.
Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging 31:1500–1504.
970. Yim JH, Kim EY, Bae KW, Kim WG, Kim TY, Ryu JS,
Gong G, Hong SJ, Yoon JH, Shong YK 2013 Long-term
consequence of elevated thyroglobulin in differentiated
thyroid cancer. Thyroid 23:58–63.
971. Black EG, Sheppard MC, Hoffenberg R 1987 Serial se-
rum thyroglobulin measurements in the management of
differentiated thyroid carcinoma. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf)
27:115–120.
972. Huang SH, Wang PW, Huang YE, Chou FF, Liu RT,
Tung SC, Chen JF, Kuo MC, Hsieh JR, Hsieh HH 2006
Sequential follow-up of serum thyroglobulin and whole
body scan in thyroid cancer patients without initial me-
tastasis. Thyroid 16:1273–1278.
973. Schlumberger M, Mancusi F, Baudin E, Pacini F 1997
131I therapy for elevated thyroglobulin levels. Thyroid
7:273–276.
974. Ma C, Xie J, Kuang A 2005 Is empiric 131I therapy
justified for patients with positive thyroglobulin and
negative 131I whole-body scanning results? J Nucl Med
46:1164–1170.
975. Chao M 2010 Management of differentiated thyroid
cancer with rising thyroglobulin and negative diagnostic
128
HAUGEN ET AL.
 radioiodine whole body scan. Clin Oncol (R Coll Radiol)
22:438–447.
976. Sinha P, Conrad GR, West HC 2011 Response of thyro-
globulin to radioiodine therapy in thyroglobulin-elevated
negative iodine scintigraphy (TENIS) syndrome. Antic-
ancer Res 31:2109–2112.
977. Ozata M, Suzuki S, Miyamoto T, Liu RT, Fierro-Renoy
F, DeGroot LJ 1994 Serum thyroglobulin in the follow-
up of patients with treated differentiated thyroid cancer. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 79:98–105.
978. Kim WG, Ryu JS, Kim EY, Lee JH, Baek JH, Yoon JH,
Hong SJ, Kim ES, Kim TY, Kim WB, Shong YK 2010
Empiric high-dose 131-iodine therapy lacks efficacy for
treated papillary thyroid cancer patients with detectable
serum thyroglobulin, but negative cervical sonography
and 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomog-
raphy scan. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 95:1169–1173.
979. Biko J, Reiners C, Kreissl MC, Verburg FA, Demidchik
Y, Drozd V 2011 Favourable course of disease after in-
complete remission on (131)I therapy in children with
pulmonary metastases of papillary thyroid carcinoma: 10
years follow-up. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging 38:651–
655.
980. Schlumberger M, Arcangioli O, Piekarski JD, Tubiana
M, Parmentier C 1988 Detection and treatment of lung
metastases of differentiated thyroid carcinoma in patients
with normal chest X-rays. J Nucl Med 29:1790–1794.
981. Walter MA, Turtschi CP, Schindler C, Minnig P, Muller-
Brand J, Muller B 2007 The dental safety profile of high-
dose radioiodine therapy for thyroid cancer: long-term
results of a longitudinal cohort study. J Nucl Med
48:1620–1625.
982. Kloos RT, Duvuuri V, Jhiang SM, Cahill KV, Foster JA,
Burns JA 2002 Nasolacrimal drainage system obstruc-
tion from radioactive iodine therapy for thyroid carci-
noma. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 87:5817–5820.
983. Sandeep TC, Strachan MW, Reynolds RM, Brewster
DH, Scelo G, Pukkala E, Hemminki K, Anderson A,
Tracey E, Friis S, McBride ML, Kee-Seng C, Pompe-
Kirn V, Kliewer EV, Tonita JM, Jonasson JG, Martos C,
Boffetta P, Brennan P 2006 Second primary cancers in
thyroid cancer patients: a multinational record linkage
study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 91:1819–1825.
984. Subramanian S, Goldstein DP, Parlea L, Thabane L,
Ezzat S, Ibrahim-Zada I, Straus S, Brierley JD, Tsang
RW, Gafni A, Rotstein L, Sawka AM 2007 Second
primary malignancy risk in thyroid cancer survivors: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Thyroid 17:1277–
1288.
985. Almeida JP, Sanabria AE, Lima EN, Kowalski LP 2011
Late side effects of radioactive iodine on salivary gland
function in patients with thyroid cancer. Head Neck
33:686–690.
986. Mandel SJ, Mandel L 2003 Radioactive iodine and the
salivary glands. Thyroid 13:265–271.
987. Nakada K, Ishibashi T, Takei T, Hirata K, Shinohara K,
Katoh S, Zhao S, Tamaki N, Noguchi Y, Noguchi S 2005
Does lemon candy decrease salivary gland damage after
radioiodine therapy for thyroid cancer? J Nucl Med
46:261–266.
988. Jentzen W, Balschuweit D, Schmitz J, Freudenberg L,
Eising E, Hilbel T, Bockisch A, Stahl A 2010 The in-
fluence of saliva flow stimulation on the absorbed radi-
ation dose to the salivary glands during radioiodine
therapy of thyroid cancer using 124I PET(/CT) imaging.
Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging 37:2298–2306.
989. Van Nostrand D, Bandaru V, Chennupati S, Wexler J,
Kulkarni K, Atkins F, Mete M, Gadwale G 2010
Radiopharmacokinetics of radioiodine in the parotid
glands after the administration of lemon juice. Thyroid
20:1113–1119.
990. Bomeli SR, Schaitkin B, Carrau RL, Walvekar RR 2009
Interventional sialendoscopy for treatment of radioiodine-
induced sialadenitis. Laryngoscope 119:864–867.
991. Prendes BL, Orloff LA, Eisele DW 2012 Therapeutic
sialendoscopy for the management of radioiodine siala-
denitis. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 138:15–19.
992. Bhayani MK, Acharya V, Kongkiatkamon S, Farah S,
Roberts DB, Sterba J, Chambers MS, Lai SY 2015 Sia-
lendoscopy for patients with radioiodine-induced siala-
denitis and xerostomia. Thyroid 25:834–838.
993. Chen AY, Levy L, Goepfert H, Brown BW, Spitz MR,
Vassilopoulou-Sellin R 2001 The development of breast
carcinoma in women with thyroid carcinoma. Cancer
92:225–231.
994. Perry WF, Hughes JF 1952 The urinary excretion and
thyroid uptake of iodine in renal disease. J Clin Invest
31:457–463.
995. Vini L, Hyer S, Al-Saadi A, Pratt B, Harmer C 2002
Prognosis for fertility and ovarian function after treat-
ment with radioiodine for thyroid cancer. Postgrad Med J
78:92–93.
996. Dottorini ME, Lomuscio G, Mazzucchelli L, Vignati A,
Colombo L 1995 Assessment of female fertility and
carcinogenesis after iodine-131 therapy for differentiated
thyroid carcinoma. J Nucl Med 36:21–27.
997. Sawka AM, Lakra DC, Lea J, Alshehri B, Tsang RW,
Brierley JD, Straus S, Thabane L, Gafni A, Ezzat S,
George SR, Goldstein DP 2008 A systematic review
examining the effects of therapeutic radioactive iodine
on ovarian function and future pregnancy in female
thyroid cancer survivors. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 69:479–
490.
998. Wu JX, Young S, Ro K, Li N, Leung AM, Chiu HK,
Harari A, Yeh MW 2015 Reproductive outcomes and
nononcologic complications after radioactive iodine ab-
lation for well-differentiated thyroid cancer. Thyroid
25:133–138.
999. Schlumberger M, De Vathaire F, Ceccarelli C, Delisle
MJ, Francese C, Couette JE, Pinchera A, Parmentier C
1996 Exposure to radioactive iodine-131 for scintigraphy
or therapy does not preclude pregnancy in thyroid cancer
patients. J Nucl Med 37:606–612.
1000. Garsi JP, Schlumberger M, Rubino C, Ricard M, Labbe
M, Ceccarelli C, Schvartz C, Henri-Amar M, Bardet S,
De Vathaire F 2008 Therapeutic administration of 131I
for differentiated thyroid cancer: radiation dose to ova-
ries and outcome of pregnancies. J Nucl Med 49:845–
852.
1001. Ceccarelli C, Bencivelli W, Morciano D, Pinchera A,
Pacini F 2001 131I therapy for differentiated thyroid
cancer leads to an earlier onset of menopause: results of a
retrospective study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 86:3512–
3515.
1002. Bakheet SM, Powe J, Hammami MM 1998 Unilateral
radioiodine breast uptake. Clin Nucl Med 23:170–171.
1003. Sisson JC, Freitas J, McDougall IR, Dauer LT, Hurley
JR, Brierley JD, Edinboro CH, Rosenthal D, Thomas MJ,
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
129
 Wexler JA, Asamoah E, Avram AM, Milas M, Greenlee
C 2011 Radiation safety in the treatment of patients with
thyroid diseases by radioiodine 131I : practice recom-
mendations of the American Thyroid Association. Thy-
roid 21:335–346.
1004. Bernard N, Jantzem H, Becker M, Pecriaux C, Benard-
Laribiere A, Montastruc JL, Descotes J, Vial T 2015 Severe
adverse effects of bromocriptine in lactation inhibition: a
pharmacovigilance survey. BJOG 122:1244–1251.
1005. Wichers M, Benz E, Palmedo H, Biersack HJ, Grunwald
F, Klingmuller D 2000 Testicular function after radio-
iodine therapy for thyroid carcinoma. Eur J Nucl Med
27:503–507.
1006. Hyer S, Vini L, O’Connell M, Pratt B, Harmer C 2002
Testicular dose and fertility in men following I(131)
therapy for thyroid cancer. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 56:
755–758.
1007. Lushbaugh CC, Casarett GW 1976 The effects of go-
nadal irradiation in clinical radiation therapy: a review.
Cancer 37:1111–1125.
1008. Sarkar SD, Beierwaltes WH, Gill SP, Cowley BJ 1976
Subsequent fertility and birth histories of children and
adolescents treated with 131I for thyroid cancer. J Nucl
Med 17:460–464.
1009. Mazzaferri EL 2002 Gonadal damage from 131I therapy
for thyroid cancer. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 57:313–314.
1010. Schlumberger M, Brose M, Elisei R, Leboulleux S,
Luster M, Pitoia F, Pacini F 2014 Definition and man-
agement of radioactive iodine-refractory differentiated
thyroid cancer. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2:356–358.
1011. Eisenhauer EA, Therasse P, Bogaerts J, Schwartz LH,
Sargent D, Ford R, Dancey J, Arbuck S, Gwyther S,
Mooney M, Rubinstein L, Shankar L, Dodd L, Kaplan R,
Lacombe D, Verweij J 2009 New response evaluation
criteria in solid tumours: revised RECIST guideline
(version 1.1). Eur J Cancer 45:228–247.
1012. Schlumberger M, Sherman SI 2012 Approach to the
patient with advanced differentiated thyroid cancer. Eur J
Endocrinol 166:5–11.
1013. Brose MS, Nutting CM, Jarzab B, Elisei R, Siena S,
Bastholt L, de la Fouchardiere C, Pacini F, Paschke R,
Shong YK, Sherman SI, Smit JW, Chung J, Kappeler C,
Pena C, Molnar I, Schlumberger MJ 2014 Sorafenib in
radioactive iodine-refractory, locally advanced or meta-
static
differentiated
thyroid
cancer:
a
randomised,
double-blind, phase 3 trial. Lancet 384:319–328.
1014. Schlumberger M, Tahara M, Wirth LJ, Robinson B,
Brose MS, Elisei R, Dutcus CE, de las Heras B, Zhu J,
Habra MA, Newbold K, Shah MH, Hoff AO, Gianou-
kakis AG, Kiyota N, Hiram M, Kim SB, Krzyzanowska
MK, Sherman SI 2014 A phase 3, multicenter, double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial of lenvatinib (E7080) in
patients with 131I-refractory differentiated thyroid can-
cer (SELECT). J Clin Oncol 32:5S. (Abstract.).
1015. Kocher M, Soffietti R, Abacioglu U, Villa S, Fauchon F,
Baumert BG, Fariselli L, Tzuk-Shina T, Kortmann RD,
Carrie C, Ben HM, Kouri M, Valeinis E, van den Berge D,
Collette S, Collette L, Mueller RP 2011 Adjuvant whole-
brain radiotherapy versus observation after radiosurgery
or surgical resection of one to three cerebral metastases:
results of the EORTC 22952-26001 study. J Clin Oncol
29:134–141.
1016. Bonichon F, Palussie
`re J, Godbert Y, Pulido M, Descat
E, Devillers A, Meunier C, Leboulleux S, de Bae
`re T,
Galy-Lacour C, Lagoarde-Segot L, Cazeau AL 2013
Diagnostic accuracy of 18F-FDG PET/CT for assessing
response to radiofrequency ablation treatment in lung
metastases: a multicentre prospective study. Eur J Nucl
Med Mol Imaging 40:1817–1827.
1017. Lo SS, Fakiris AJ, Chang EL, Mayr NA, Wang JZ, Pa-
piez L, Teh BS, lgarry RC, Cardenes HR, Timmerman
RD 2010 Stereotactic body radiation therapy: a novel
treatment modality. Nat Rev Clin Oncol 7:44–54.
1018. Lo SS, Fakiris AJ, Teh BS, Cardenes HR, Henderson
MA, Forquer JA, Papiez L, lgarry RC, Wang JZ, Li K,
Mayr NA, Timmerman RD 2009 Stereotactic body ra-
diation therapy for oligometastases. Expert Rev Antic-
ancer Ther 9:621–635.
1019. de Baere T, Elias D, Dromain C, Din MG, Kuoch V,
Ducreux M, Boige V, Lassau N, Marteau V, Lasser P,
Roche A 2000 Radiofrequency ablation of 100 hepatic
metastases with a mean follow-up of more than 1 year.
AJR Am J Roentgenol 175:1619–1625.
1020. Solbiati L, Livraghi T, Goldberg SN, Ierace T, Meloni F,
Dellanoce M, Cova L, Halpern EF, Gazelle GS 2001
Percutaneous radio-frequency ablation of hepatic me-
tastases from colorectal cancer: long-term results in 117
patients. Radiology 221:159–166.
1021. de Baere T, Palussiere J, Auperin A, Hakime A, Abdel-
Rehim M, Kind M, Dromain C, Ravaud A, Tebboune N,
Boige V, Malka D, Lafont C, Ducreux M 2006 Midterm
local efficacy and survival after radiofrequency ablation
of lung tumors with minimum follow-up of 1 year:
prospective evaluation. Radiology 240:587–596.
1022. Lencioni R, Crocetti L, Cioni R, Suh R, Glenn D, Regge
D, Helmberger T, Gillams AR, Frilling A, Ambrogi M,
Bartolozzi C, Mussi A 2008 Response to radiofrequency
ablation of pulmonary tumours: a prospective, intention-
to-treat, multicentre clinical trial (the RAPTURE study).
Lancet Oncol 9:621–628.
1023. Goetz MP, Callstrom MR, Charboneau JW, Farrell MA,
Maus TP, Welch TJ, Wong GY, Sloan JA, Novotny PJ,
Petersen IA, Beres RA, Regge D, Capanna R, Saker MB,
Gronemeyer DH, Gevargez A, Ahrar K, Choti MA, de
Baere TJ, Rubin J 2004 Percutaneous image-guided
radiofrequency ablation of painful metastases involving
bone: a multicenter study. J Clin Oncol 22:300–306.
1024. Dupuy DE, Liu D, Hartfeil D, Hanna L, Blume JD, Ahrar
K, Lopez R, Safran H, DiPetrillo T 2010 Percutaneous
radiofrequency ablation of painful osseous metastases: a
multicenter American College of Radiology Imaging
Network trial. Cancer 116:989–997.
1025. Deandreis D, Leboulleux S, Dromain C, Auperin A,
Coulot J, Lumbroso J, Deschamps F, Rao P, Schlum-
berger M, de Baere T 2011 Role of FDG PET/CT and
chest CT in the follow-up of lung lesions treated with
radiofrequency ablation. Radiology 258:270–276.
1026. Wertenbroek MW, Links TP, Prins TR, Plukker JT, van
der Jagt EJ, de Jong KP 2008 Radiofrequency ablation of
hepatic metastases from thyroid carcinoma. Thyroid
18:1105–1110.
1027. Quan GM, Pointillart V, Palussiere J, Bonichon F 2012
Multidisciplinary treatment and survival of patients with
vertebral metastases from thyroid carcinoma. Thyroid
22:125–130.
1028. Kurup AN, Callstrom MR 2010 Ablation of skeletal
metastases: current status. J Vasc Interv Radiol 21:S242-
S250.
130
HAUGEN ET AL.
 1029. McWilliams RR, Giannini C, Hay ID, Atkinson JL,
Stafford SL, Buckner JC 2003 Management of brain
metastases from thyroid carcinoma: a study of 16 path-
ologically confirmed cases over 25 years. Cancer 98:
356–362.
1030. Henriques de Figueiredo B, Godbert Y, Soubeyran I,
Carrat X, Lagarde P, Cazeau AL, Italiano A, Sargos P,
Kantor G, Loiseau H, Bonichon F 2014 Brain metastases
from thyroid carcinoma: a retrospective study of 21 pa-
tients. Thyroid 24:270–276.
1031. Chow CJ, Habermann EB, Abraham A, Zhu Y, Vickers
SM, Rothenberger DA, Al-Refaie WB 2013 Does en-
rollment in cancer trials improve survival? J Am Coll
Surg 216:774–780.
1032. Anderson RT, Linnehan JE, Tongbram V, Keating K,
Wirth LJ 2013 Clinical, safety, and economic evidence
in radioactive iodine-refractory differentiated thyroid
cancer: a systematic literature review. Thyroid 23:392–
407.
1033. Leboulleux S, Bastholt L, Krause T, de la Fouchardiere
C, Tennvall J, Awada A, Gomez JM, Bonichon F,
Leenhardt L, Soufflet C, Licour M, Schlumberger MJ
2012 Vandetanib in locally advanced or metastatic dif-
ferentiated thyroid cancer: a randomised, double-blind,
phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol 13:897–905.
1034. Schlumberger M, Tahara M, Wirth LJ, Robinson B,
Brose MS, Elisei R, Habra MA, Newbold K, Shah MH,
Hoff AO, Gianoukakis AG, Kiyota N, Taylor MH, Kim
SB, Krzyzanowska MK, Dutcus CE, de las Heras B, Zhu
J, Sherman SI 2015 Lenvatinib versus placebo in
radioiodine-refractory thyroid cancer. N Engl J Med
372:621–630.
1035. Cohen EE, Rosen LS, Vokes EE, Kies MS, Forastiere
AA, Worden FP, Kane MA, Sherman E, Kim S, Bycott
P, Tortorici M, Shalinsky DR, Liau KF, Cohen RB 2008
Axitinib is an active treatment for all histologic subtypes
of advanced thyroid cancer: results from a phase II study.
J Clin Oncol 26:4708–4713.
1036. Bible KC, Suman VJ, Molina JR, Smallridge RC, Maples
WJ, Menefee ME, Rubin J, Sideras K, Morris JC III,
McIver B, Burton JK, Webster KP, Bieber C, Traynor
AM, Flynn PJ, Goh BC, Tang H, Ivy SP, Erlichman C
2010 Efficacy of pazopanib in progressive, radioiodine-
refractory, metastatic differentiated thyroid cancers: re-
sults of a phase 2 consortium study. Lancet Oncol
11:962–972.
1037. Carr LL, Mankoff DA, Goulart BH, Eaton KD, Capell
PT, Kell EM, Bauman JE, Martins RG 2010 Phase II
study of daily sunitinib in FDG-PET-positive, iodine-
refractory differentiated thyroid cancer and metastatic
medullary carcinoma of the thyroid with functional im-
aging correlation. Clin Cancer Res 16:5260–5268.
1038. Droz JP, Schlumberger M, Rougier P, Ghosn M, Gardet
P, Parmentier C 1990 Chemotherapy in metastatic non-
anaplastic thyroid cancer: experience at the Institut
Gustave-Roussy. Tumori 76:480–483.
1039. Schutz FA, Je Y, Richards CJ, Choueiri TK 2012 Meta-
analysis of randomized controlled trials for the incidence
and risk of treatment-related mortality in patients with
cancer treated with vascular endothelial growth factor
tyrosine kinase inhibitors. J Clin Oncol 30:871–877.
1040. Schneider TC, Abdulrahman RM, Corssmit EP, Morreau
H, Smit JW, Kapiteijn E 2012 Long-term analysis of the
efficacy and tolerability of sorafenib in advanced radio-
iodine refractory differentiated thyroid carcinoma: final
results of a phase II trial. Eur J Endocrinol 167:643–650.
1041. Ahmed M, Barbachano Y, Riddell A, Hickey J, Newbold
KL, Viros A, Harrington KJ, Marais R, Nutting CM 2011
Analysis of the efficacy and toxicity of sorafenib in
thyroid cancer: a phase II study in a UK based popula-
tion. Eur J Endocrinol 165:315–322.
1042. Kloos RT, Ringel MD, Knopp MV, Hall NC, King M,
Stevens R, Liang J, Wakely PE Jr, Vasko VV, Saji M,
Rittenberry J, Wei L, Arbogast D, Collamore M, Wright
JJ, Grever M, Shah MH 2009 Phase II trial of sorafenib
in metastatic thyroid cancer. J Clin Oncol 27:1675–1684.
1043. Gupta-Abramson V, Troxel AB, Nellore A, Puttaswamy
K, Redlinger M, Ransone K, Mandel SJ, Flaherty KT,
Loevner LA, O’Dwyer PJ, Brose MS 2008 Phase II trial
of sorafenib in advanced thyroid cancer. J Clin Oncol
26:4714–4719.
1044. Carhill AA, Cabanillas ME, Jimenez C, Waguespack SG,
Habra MA, Hu M, Ying A, Vassilopoulou-Sellin R,
Gagel RF, Sherman SI, Busaidy NL 2013 The non-
investigational use of tyrosine kinase inhibitors in thy-
roid cancer: establishing a standard for patient safety and
monitoring. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 98:31–42.
1045. Bible KC, Ain KB, Rosenthal MS 2014 Protein kinase
inhibitor therapy in advanced thyroid cancer: ethical
challenges and potential solutions. Int J Endocr Oncol
1:145–151.
1046. Massicotte MH, Brassard M, Claude-Desroches M,
Borget I, Bonichon F, Giraudet AL, Do Cao C, Chougnet
CN, Leboulleux S, Baudin E, Schlumberger M, de la
Fouchardiere C 2014 Tyrosine kinase inhibitor treat-
ments in patients with metastatic thyroid carcinomas: a
retrospective study of the TUTHYREF network. Eur J
Endocrinol 170:575–582.
1047. Di Lorenzo G, Autorino R, Bruni G, Carteni G, Ricevuto
E, Tudini M, Ficorella C, Romano C, Aieta M, Giordano
A, Giuliano M, Gonnella A, De Nunzio C, Rizzo M,
Montesarchio V, Ewer M, De Placido S 2009 Cardio-
vascular toxicity following sunitinib therapy in meta-
static renal cell carcinoma: a multicenter analysis. Ann
Oncol 20:1535–1542.
1048. Harris PJ, Bible KC 2011 Emerging therapeutics
for advanced thyroid malignancies: rationale and tar-
geted approaches. Expert Opin Investig Drugs 20:
1357–1375.
1049. Hauschild A, Grob JJ, Demidov LV, Jouary T, Gutzmer
R, Millward M, Rutkowski P, Blank CU, Miller WH Jr,
Kaempgen E, Martin-Algarra S, Karaszewska B, Mauch
C, Chiarion-Sileni V, Martin AM, Swann S, Haney P,
Mirakhur B, Guckert ME, Goodman V, Chapman PB
2012 Dabrafenib in BRAF-mutated metastatic melano-
ma: a multicentre, open-label, phase 3 randomised con-
trolled trial. Lancet 380:358–365.
1050. Falchook GS, Long GV, Kurzrock R, Kim KB, Arkenau
TH, Brown MP, Hamid O, Infante JR, Millward M,
Pavlick AC, O’Day SJ, Blackman SC, Curtis CM, Le-
bowitz P, Ma B, Ouellet D, Kefford RF 2012 Dabrafenib
in patients with melanoma, untreated brain metastases,
and other solid tumours: a phase 1 dose-escalation trial.
Lancet 379:1893–1901.
1051. Kudchadkar R, Paraiso KH, Smalley KS 2012 Targeting
mutant BRAF in melanoma: current status and future
development of combination therapy strategies. Cancer J
18:124–131.
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
131
 1052. Ho AL, Grewal RK, Leboeuf R, Sherman EJ, Pfister DG,
Deandreis D, Pentlow KS, Zanzonico PB, Haque S,
Gavane S, Ghossein RA, Ricarte-Filho JC, Dominguez
JM, Shen R, Tuttle RM, Larson SM, Fagin JA 2013
Selumetinib-enhanced radioiodine uptake in advanced
thyroid cancer. N Engl J Med 368:623–632.
1053. Spano JP, Vano Y, Vignot S, De La Motte RT, Hassani
L, Mouawad R, Menegaux F, Khayat D, Leenhardt L
2012 GEMOX regimen in the treatment of metastatic
differentiated refractory thyroid carcinoma. Med Oncol
29:1421–1428.
1054. Farooki A, Leung V, Tala H, Tuttle RM 2012 Skeletal-
related events due to bone metastases from differen-
tiated thyroid cancer. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 97:
2433–2439.
1055. Coleman R, Woodward E, Brown J, Cameron D, Bell R,
Dodwell D, Keane M, Gil M, Davies C, Burkinshaw R,
Houston SJ, Grieve RJ, Barrett-Lee PJ, Thorpe H 2011
Safety of zoledronic acid and incidence of osteonecrosis
of the jaw (ONJ) during adjuvant therapy in a randomised
phase III trial (AZURE: BIG 01-04) for women with stage
II/III breast cancer. Breast Cancer Res Treat 127:429–438.
1056. Wardley A, Davidson N, Barrett-Lee P, Hong A, Mansi
J, Dodwell D, Murphy R, Mason T, Cameron D 2005
Zoledronic acid significantly improves pain scores and
quality of life in breast cancer patients with bone me-
tastases: a randomised, crossover study of community vs
hospital bisphosphonate administration. Br J Cancer
92:1869–1876.
1057. Orita Y, Sugitani I, Toda K, Manabe J, Fujimoto Y 2011
Zoledronic acid in the treatment of bone metastases from
differentiated thyroid carcinoma. Thyroid 21:31–35.
1058. Lipton A, Fizazi K, Stopeck AT, Henry DH, Brown JE,
Yardley DA, Richardson GE, Siena S, Maroto P,
Clemens M, Bilynskyy B, Charu V, Beuzeboc P, Rader
M, Viniegra M, Saad F, Ke C, Braun A, Jun S 2012
Superiority of denosumab to zoledronic acid for pre-
vention of skeletal-related events: a combined analysis of
3 pivotal, randomised, phase 3 trials. Eur J Cancer
48:3082–3092.
1059. Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network 2014 In-
tegrated genomic characterization of papillary thyroid
carcinoma. Cell 159:676–690.
1060. Goldfarb M, Casillas J 2014 Unmet information and
support needs in newly diagnosed thyroid cancer: com-
parison of adolescents/young adults (AYA) and older
patients. J Cancer Surviv 8:394–401.
1061. Banach R, Bartes B, Farnell K, Rimmele H, Shey J,
Singer S, Verburg FA, Luster M 2013 Results of the
Thyroid Cancer Alliance international patient/survivor
survey: Psychosocial/informational support needs, treat-
ment side effects and international differences in care.
Hormones (Athens) 12:428–438.
1062. O’Brien MA, Whelan TJ, Villasis-Keever M, Gafni A,
Charles C, Roberts R, Schiff S, Cai W 2009 Are cancer-
related decision aids effective? A systematic review and
meta-analysis. J Clin Oncol 27:974–985.
1063. Spiegle G, Al-Sukhni E, Schmocker S, Gagliardi AR,
Victor JC, Baxter NN, Kennedy ED 2013 Patient deci-
sion aids for cancer treatment: are there any alternatives?
Cancer 119:189–200.
1064. Sawka AM, Straus S, Rotstein L, Brierley JD, Tsang
RW, Asa S, Segal P, Kelly C, Zahedi A, Freeman J,
Solomon P, Anderson J, Thorpe KE, Gafni A, Rodin G,
Goldstein DP 2012 Randomized controlled trial of a
computerized decision aid on adjuvant radioactive iodine
treatment for patients with early-stage papillary thyroid
cancer. J Clin Oncol 30:2906–2911.
1065. Spencer C, Petrovic I, Fatemi S 2011 Current thyro-
globulin autoantibody (TgAb) assays often fail to detect
interfering TgAb that can result in the reporting of fal-
sely low/undetectable serum Tg IMA values for patients
with differentiated thyroid cancer. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 96:1283–1291.
1066. Ito Y, Tomoda C, Uruno T, Takamura Y, Miya A, Ko-
bayashi K, Matsuzuka F, Kuma K, Miyauchi A 2005
Ultrasonographically and anatomopathologically detect-
able node metastases in the lateral compartment as in-
dicators of worse relapse-free survival in patients with
papillary thyroid carcinoma. World J Surg 29:917–920.
1067. Ito Y, Tomoda C, Uruno T, Takamura Y, Miya A, Ko-
bayashi K, Matsuzuka F, Kuma K, Miyauchi A 2006
Clinical significance of metastasis to the central com-
partment from papillary microcarcinoma of the thyroid.
World J Surg 30:91–99.
1068. Rothenberg SM, McFadden DG, Palmer EL, Daniels
GH, Wirth LJ 2015 Redifferentiation of iodine-refractory
BRAFV600E-mutant metastatic papillary thyroid cancer
with dabrafenib. Clin Cancer Res 21:1028–1035.
1069. Topalian SL, Hodi FS, Brahmer JR, Gettinger SN, Smith
DC, McDermott DF, Powderly JD, Carvajal RD, Sosman
JA, Atkins MB, Leming PD, Spigel DR, Antonia SJ,
Horn L, Drake CG, Pardoll DM, Chen L, Sharfman WH,
Anders RA, Taube JM, McMiller TL, Xu H, Korman AJ,
Jure-Kunkel M, Agrawal S, McDonald D, Kollia GD,
Gupta A, Wigginton JM, Sznol M 2012 Safety, activity,
and immune correlates of anti-PD-1 antibody in cancer.
N Engl J Med 366:2443–2454.
1070. Brahmer JR, Tykodi SS, Chow LQ, Hwu WJ, Topalian
SL, Hwu P, Drake CG, Camacho LH, Kauh J, Odunsi K,
Pitot HC, Hamid O, Bhatia S, Martins R, Eaton K, Chen
S, Salay TM, Alaparthy S, Grosso JF, Korman AJ, Parker
SM, Agrawal S, Goldberg SM, Pardoll DM, Gupta A,
Wigginton JM 2012 Safety and activity of anti-PD-L1
antibody in patients with advanced cancer. N Engl J Med
366:2455–2465.
1071. Hamid O, Robert C, Daud A, Hodi FS, Hwu WJ, Kefford
R, Wolchok JD, Hersey P, Joseph RW, Weber JS,
Dronca R, Gangadhar TC, Patnaik A, Zarour H, Joshua
AM, Gergich K, Elassaiss-Schaap J, Algazi A, Mateus C,
Boasberg P, Tumeh PC, Chmielowski B, Ebbinghaus
SW, Li XN, Kang SP, Ribas A 2013 Safety and tumor
responses with lambrolizumab (anti-PD-1) in melanoma.
N Engl J Med 369:134–144.
1072. Husson O, Haak HR, Mols F, Nieuwenhuijzen GA,
Nieuwlaat WA, Reemst PH, Huysmans DA, Toorians
AW, van de Poll-Franse LV 2013 Development of a
disease-specific health-related quality of life question-
naire (THYCA-QoL) for thyroid cancer survivors. Acta
Oncol 52:447–454.
1073. Sawka AM, Naeem A, Jones J, Lowe J, Segal P, Goguen
J, Gilbert J, Zahedi A, Kelly C, Ezzat S 2014 Persistent
posttreatment fatigue in thyroid cancer survivors: a
scoping review. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 43:
475–494.
1074. To J, Goldberg AS, Jones J, Zhang J, Lowe J, Ezzat S,
Gilbert J, Zahedi A, Segal P, Sawka AM 2014 A sys-
tematic review of randomized controlled trials for man-
132
HAUGEN ET AL.
 agement of persistent post-treatment fatigue in thyroid
cancer survivors. Thyroid 25:198–210.
1075. Bresner L, Banach R, Rodin G, Thabane L, Ezzat S,
Sawka AM 2015 Cancer-related worry in Canadian thyroid
cancer survivors. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 100:977–985.
1076. Cibas ES, Ali SZ 2009 The Bethesda System For Re-
porting Thyroid Cytopathology. Am J Clin Pathol 132:
658–665.
1077. Edge SB, Byrd DR, Compton CC, Fritz AG, Greene FL,
Trotti A 2010 Thyroid cancer staging. In: Edge SB, Byrd
DR, Compton CC, Fritz AG, Greene FL, Trotti A (eds)
AJCC Cancer Staging Manual. 7th edition. Springer-
Verlag, New York, pp 59–64.
1078. Rosario PW, Mineiro Filho AF, Prates BS, Silva LC,
Calsolari MR 2012 Postoperative stimulated thyroglob-
ulin of less than 1 ng/mL as a criterion to spare low-risk
patients with papillary thyroid cancer from radioactive
iodine ablation. Thyroid 22:1140–1143.
Address correspondence to:
Bryan R. Haugen, MD
University of Colorado School of Medicine
Aurora, CO
E-mail: bryan.haugen@ucdenver.edu
ATA THYROID NODULE/DTC GUIDELINES
133
