 Accepted Manuscript
Dangerous arachnids—Fake news or reality?
Tobias J. Hauke, Volker Herzig
PII:
S0041-0101(17)30269-6
DOI:
10.1016/j.toxicon.2017.08.024
Reference:
TOXCON 5708
To appear in:
Toxicon
Received Date: 22 June 2017
Revised Date:
28 July 2017
Accepted Date: 27 August 2017
Please cite this article as: Hauke, T.J., Herzig, V., Dangerous arachnids—Fake news or reality?, Toxicon
(2017), doi: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2017.08.024.
This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to
our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo
copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please
note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all
legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
1 
 
Highlights 
 
• The increasing popularity of arachnids as pets urges some governments to take protective 
action to prevent serious envenomations 
• A literature review was carried out to assess which arachnids can be classified as potentially 
dangerous 
• About 0.5% of all spider and 23% of all scorpion species were classified as potentially 
dangerous 
• Even envenomations from the most dangerous arachnids have a low percentage of serious or 
even fatal consequences 
• We conclude that the public threat from pet arachnid envenomations has been overrated 
 
 
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
2 
Review 
Dangerous arachnids—fake news or reality? 
 
Tobias J. Hauke1, Volker Herzig2 
 
 
1 Department of Pharmacy – Center of Drug Research, Ludwig‐Maximilians‐Universität 
München, 81377 Munich, Germany  
2 Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, St. Lucia QLD 4072, 
Australia 
 
 
Running head: Medically important arachnids 
 
*Address correspondence to: Volker Herzig, Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The 
University of Queensland, St. Lucia QLD 4072, Australia; Phone: +61 7 3346 2018, Fax: +61 
7 3346 2101, Email: v.herzig@uq.edu.au 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
3 
Abstract 
The public perception of spiders and scorpions is skewed towards the potential harm they can 
inflict in humans, despite recent scientific evidence that arachnid venom components might 
be useful as bioinsecticides or even human therapeutics. Nevertheless, arachnids are 
becoming more popular as pets in Europe, America and Asia, raising the question for 
regulatory agencies in these regions as to whether they need to take measurements to protect 
their citizens. In order to decide upon the necessary regulatory steps, they first need to 
determine which arachnids are actually dangerous to humans. This review therefore provides 
an overview of the current literature on verified bites and stings from spiders and scorpions 
with the aim of assessing their potential danger for human health. As a guideline, we also 
provide a list of those arachnid genera that we consider as potentially dangerous, which 
includes 10 spider and 11 scorpion genera. The arachnid genera classified as dangerous 
comprise less than a quarter of all extant scorpion species and only 0.5% of all spiders 
species, with the actual number most likely being much lower than that, as not all species in 
those genera might turn out to pose an actual threat for humans. In conclusion, we found that 
only a small percentage of scorpions and a minute percentage of all spiders can be considered 
as potentially dangerous to humans. While in some countries of origin the high incidence of 
envenomations by dangerous arachnids can result in a serious problem to the health system, 
we assessed the risk that the same species pose when kept as pets under controlled 
maintenance conditions as significantly lower. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Keywords 
arachnid, spider, scorpion, pet, venom, toxin, lethal, envenomation, bite, sting 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
4 
1. Introduction 
The general public usually perceives spiders and scorpions as aggressive, dangerous and 
lethal (Stuber and Nentwig, 2016), a view that is constantly reinforced by Hollywood movies. 
However, in recent years, other media outlets also published reports about the positive 
potential of arachnid venom peptides that are being developed as bioinsecticides (Windley et 
al., 2012; King and Hardy, 2013) or as potential therapeutics for human disorders such as 
pain, atrial fibrillation, erectile dysfunction, irritable bowel syndrome, stroke, and bacterial, 
fungal or protozoan infections (Saez et al., 2010; Smith et al., 2013; Osteen et al., 2016; 
Chassagnon et al., 2017). Furthermore, with a growing worldwide pet trade, keeping exotic 
"pet" spiders or scorpions is becoming an increasingly popular hobby in Europe, America and 
Asia. Thus, a question that arises for regulatory authorities in various countries is whether 
they need to take action to protect their citizens from potentially dangerous arachnids. 
However, authorities first need to determine which species are actually potentially dangerous 
to human health. Unfortunately, based on our experience with German authorities (Hauke et 
al., 2015), this information is often obtained from older scientific literature or textbooks or 
even from non-scientific sources (e.g. Internet). Hence, this review provides an update on the 
scientific literature on venomous arachnids focussing on those species that could potentially 
harm humans and it could therefore serve as a guideline for regulatory agencies. 
 
Although arachnids comprise other venomous orders such as Pseudoscorpiones (von 
Reumont et al., 2014) and recently also certain Acari were suggested to be considered as 
venomous animals (Cabezas-Cruz and Valdes, 2014) we focussed this review on spiders 
(order Araneae) and scorpions (Scorpiones) as they are the primary arachnids kept as exotic 
pets. In order to determine which arachnids might be dangerous, we mainly investigated more 
recent scientific literature. In older literature, the taxonomic identification is often missing, 
unclear, some species could have been misidentified or single species could later be split up 
into several new species. This makes it difficult in retrospect to determine the actual species 
responsible for any reported adverse effects. We therefore preferably used (if available) 
articles studying verified (definite, confirmed) rather than presumed bites and stings based on 
the criteria defined by Isbister and White (2004). Ideally, correct taxonomic identification 
should be carried out by an expert taxonomist. The reason why proper identification is 
essential is exemplified in the case of bites by spiders of the genus Loxosceles, which were 
blamed for necrotic effects in geographical areas where they don't even exist (Vetter, 2005). 
Furthermore, a recent study examining 134 medical case studies found that only 22% fulfilled 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
5 
the criteria for a verified spider bite, questioning the scientific value of many studies in this 
field (Stuber and Nentwig, 2016). Finally, studies examining large numbers of bites and 
stings were preferred to single case reports, as they allow for statistical analysis and an 
estimation of the incidence of various envenomation symptoms. Good examples of these 
larger studies include the prospective study of 750 definite bites by Australian spiders 
(Isbister and Gray, 2002) and the Brazilian clinico-epidemiological studies on 422 bites by 
Phoneutria spiders (Bucaretchi et al., 2000) and 1327 stings by Tityus scorpions (Bucaretchi 
et al., 2014). Overall, recent clinical studies provide a clear picture that only a very small 
percentage of arachnid bites or stings cause serious adverse or even lethal effects (Welton et 
al., 2017). However, the high incidence of accidental envenomations by certain arachnids still 
causes a massive problem for the health system in some countries (Chippaux and Goyffon, 
2008). In addition to clinical studies, recent technical advances in the fields of biochemistry 
and molecular biology have rapidly increased our knowledge about the composition of 
arachnid venoms, leading to a clearer understanding of the mode of action of toxins and other 
venom components (Kuhn-Nentwig et al., 2011; Quintero-Hernandez et al., 2013). These 
studies have provided a better molecular-level understanding of the activity of venoms, 
enabling a judgement whether a proposed clinical symptom might be explained by any of the 
components contained in the venom. 
 
Based on evidence in the scientific literature, the public perception of venomous arachnids is 
biased towards their negative effects. With the present review, we aim to provide a more 
objective evidence-based assessment of the danger that arachnids pose for human health. We 
therefore first provide an overview of all arachnids that are considered medically important, 
before discussing those species with questionable potential to cause human harm. We then 
assess the potential danger of arachnids for human health before proposing a list of arachnid 
genera that we consider as potentially dangerous to humans. 
 
2. Potentially dangerous arachnids  
Herein we consider “potentially dangerous” arachnids as those whose bite or sting was 
demonstrated (i.e. in primary literature) to cause severe (i.e. systemic and/or long-lasting) 
envenomation symptoms or even death. Although all scorpions (about 2,300 described 
species) and about 99% of all spiders (~47,000 described species) need to be considered 
“venomous” (all known spiders with the exception of those in the family Uloboridae possess 
venom glands (Foelix, 2011)), only few them pose a threat to humans. Their venom has 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
6 
evolved primarily to immobilize potential prey (typically invertebrates such as insects 
(Windley et al., 2012)), although some venom components might also be used for defensive 
purposes (Inceoglu et al., 2003; Siemens et al., 2006; Osteen et al., 2016). The potentially 
dangerous arachnid families/genera are listed below in alphabetical order. 
 
2.1 Spiders (order Araneae): 
2.1.1 Genus Missulena (family Actinopodidae; Fig. 1): Bites by mouse spiders (Missulena 
spp.) are typically considered harmless and mostly result in only mild symptoms (Herzig et 
al., 2008). However, according to one case report, a child aged 19-months developed severe 
systemic symptoms including hypertension, muscle spasms and unconsciousness after being 
bitten by Missulena bradleyi. The symptoms were treated with antivenom originally 
developed against Atrax and Hadronyche bites (Isbister, 2004a). Toxinological studies 
revealed that Missulena venom contains components with high similarity to the lethal δ-
hexatoxins found in the venom of Australian funnel-web spiders (Gunning et al., 2003; 
Herzig et al., 2011). Recently, a close phylogenetic relationship between Missulena, Atrax 
and Hadronyche was demonstrated (Hedin and Bond, 2006; Bond et al., 2012). Due to these 
toxinological and phylogenetic findings, we regard it as highly likely that the severe systemic 
symptoms described by Isbister (2004a) were a direct consequence of envenomation and not 
caused by other circumstances. Thus, we consider spiders of the genus Missulena as 
potentially dangerous although there is just one verified bite with severe manifestations 
reported from literature. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Potentially dangerous Actinopodidae: Missulena spec. (Photograph by Michael 
Gray). 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
7 
 
2.1.2 Genus Phoneutria (family Ctenidae; Fig. 2): Phoneutria species are distributed in 
Central and South America and are considered of medical relevance (Isbister and Fan, 2011). 
Most bites are reported from Brazil. Bite symptoms can be classified as mild (~90% of all 
cases), moderate (8.5%) or severe (0.5%), while about 1% of the patients do not show signs 
of envenomation. In severe envenomations, patients developed acute pulmonary oedema with 
one fatal outcome described. However, severe envenomations were restricted to small 
children of the age of nine months and three years, respectively (Bucaretchi et al., 2000). 
Several peptidic toxins were isolated from Phoneutria venoms that act on ion channels 
(Gomez et al., 2002), which might be responsible for the neurotoxic envenomation 
symptoms. 
 
 
Figure 2. Potentially dangerous Ctenidae: Phoneutria nigriventer (Photograph by Bastian 
Rast). 
 
2.1.3 Genera Atrax, Hadronyche, and Illawarra (family Hexathelidae; Fig. 3): Australian 
funnel-web spiders are considered medically important for humans in south-eastern Australia. 
The symptoms after bites include local effects such as severe pain, fang marks/bleeding and 
redness, regional effects like paraesthesia, fasciculations or diaphoresis, and severe systemic 
effects such as autonomic or cardiovascular effects and pulmonary oedema. Severe systemic 
effects occur in about 13% of all bites and are considered typical for funnel-web spider 
envenoming in comparison with other mygalomorph spiders (Isbister and Gray, 2004b). 
However, no fatalities from funnel-web spider bites have been recorded since the 1980s, 
which is attributed to the development of an effective antivenom (Hartman and Sutherland, 
1984; Isbister et al., 2005). The dangerous funnel-web spiders belong to the hexathelid 
subfamily Atracinae, which comprises the genera Atrax, Hadronyche and Illawarra. Most 
incidents are caused by male Sydney funnel-web Atrax robustus, but incidents with severe 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
8 
envenoming are also frequently reported from Hadronyche cerberea and H. formidabilis 
(Isbister et al., 2005). Toxinological studies imply that the venom components responsible for 
the symptoms in humans (i.e. the so-called δ-hexatoxins that act on voltage-gated sodium 
channels), initially isolated and characterized from Atrax and Hadronyche venoms, are also 
present in the venoms of Illawarra species (Herzig et al., 2011). Thus, we expect similar 
effects from bites by Illawarra as reported for Atrax and Hadronyche bites. As the genus 
Illawarra was only established in 2010 (Gray, 2010), this might explain why no bite reports 
have yet been published. 
 
 
Figure 3. Potentially dangerous Hexathelidae: (A) Atrax robustus, (B) Hadronyche infensa 
(Photographs by Volker Herzig (A) & Bastian Rast (B)). 
 
2.1.4 Genera Hexophthalma, Loxosceles, and Sicarius (family Sicariidae; Fig. 4): A 
comprehensive study examined the necrotizing potential of venoms from 45 spider species in 
20 different families (Foradori et al., 2005). It was found that only venoms from the family 
Sicariidae contain phospholipases D (also referred to as sphingomyelinase D, with the later 
term being less favourable (Dantas et al., 2016)), which is considered to be the causative 
agent of necrosis and erythrocyte lysis (Foradori et al., 2005; Kuhn-Nentwig et al., 2011). 
Phospholipase D is present and active in the venoms of different Hexophthalma, Loxosceles 
and Sicarius species and it can cause haemolysis and keratinocyte cell death (Lopes et al., 
2013; Planas et al., 2015; Magalhaes et al., 2017). Medically relevant incidents are mostly 
A
B
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
9 
reported from the Americas and caused by Loxosceles species, also known as recluse spiders, 
violin spiders or brown spiders (Wright et al., 1997; Malaque et al., 2002; Isbister and Fan, 
2011). This could be due to the fact that some of the larger Loxosceles species live there in 
close proximity to humans and therefore bites are more likely to occur compared to other 
sicariid spiders that live in more remote places. The symptoms of Loxosceles bites can be 
classified as unremarkable, mild, dermonecrotic and systemic or viscerocutaneous (Vetter, 
2008). In most cases, only unremarkable or mild manifestations are recorded. Necrotic 
wounds occur in about 30–60% of all cases, but are typically self-healing and do not leave 
scars even without medical treatment (Vetter, 2008). Systemic effects involve the vascular 
system and acute intravascular haemolytic anaemia is considered a hallmark feature of 
systemic envenomations (Isbister and Fan, 2011). In the most severe cases, acute renal failure 
can occur and can result in a fatal outcome. However, systemic symptoms are rare with an 
incidence of <1–10% of all Loxosceles bites (Vetter, 2008; Isbister and Fan, 2011). 
Dermonecrosis is often misdiagnosed and Loxosceles bites are frequently blamed for skin 
alterations that have other causes (e.g. bacterial infections). Thus many reports of supposed 
Loxosceles envenomations are not reliable and Loxosceles bites might be less harmful than 
often described (Nentwig et al., 2017). 
 
 
Figure 4. Potentially dangerous Sicariidae: (A) Loxosceles reclusa, (B) Sicarius 
thomisoides (Photographs by Bastian Rast). 
A
B
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
10 
 
2.1.5 Genus Poecilotheria (family Theraphosidae; Fig. 5): Theraphosid spiders, also 
known as tarantulas, bird spiders or bird-eating spiders, are the most popular arachnid pets 
and they are generally considered harmless to humans (Lucas et al., 1994; Isbister et al., 
2003a). However, members of the Indian and Sri Lankan genus Poecilotheria were recently 
suggested to be of underestimated medical importance (Fuchs et al., 2014). Bites by 
Poecilotheria species can lead to severe, long lasting muscle cramps. Such symptoms 
typically occur several hours after the bite, last for one week on average, and are recorded in 
58% of all bites (Fuchs et al., 2014). It is unknown why Poecilotheria bites lead to systemic 
symptoms more often than bites from other theraphosids. This might be simply due to a 
larger amount of injected venom as Poecilotheria species possess relatively large amounts of 
venom (Herzig, 2010). Poecilotheria venoms might also contain a higher proportion of 
toxin(s) responsible for systemic symptoms or such toxins could simply be absent in the 
venoms of other theraphosids. 
 
Ahmed et al. (2009) suggested that other theraphosids might also be medically important. 
However, their conclusions are based on single case reports or non-verified, anecdotal reports 
from older literature (with some identities of the suspected spiders remaining unclear, see 
also Ahmed et al., 2010), rather than on studies examining larger numbers of verified bites; 
thus, we did not include this study in our assessment. 
 
 
Figure 5. Potentially dangerous Theraphosidae: Poecilotheria ornata (Photograph by 
Tobias Hauke). 
 
2.1.6 Genus Latrodectus (family Theridiidae; Fig. 6): The so-called black-widow spiders of 
the cosmopolitan genus Latrodectus are of medical importance, particularly in warmer 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
11 
regions of the world. Typically in about 50% of all Latrodectus bites severe pain is observed 
that lasts for two days on average. Other local effects such as redness or diaphoresis are also 
common. Systemic effects such as nausea, vomiting or headache are reported for about one 
third of bites. However, life-threatening symptoms are rare and affect only small children or 
elderly people (Müller, 1993; Isbister and Gray, 2003a; Isbister and Fan, 2011). In the USA, 
where members of the genus Latrodectus are widely distributed, about 23,000 incidents with 
Latrodectus species were reported to a national database during an observation period of 
eight years (Monte et al., 2011). Envenomation symptoms only occurred in about 42% of 
these cases and only 1.4% were considered severe with no fatalities being observed. We are 
aware that data from poison control centres are generated in part from the general public and 
therefore probably contain an inherent portion of misdiagnosis (Vetter and Furbee, 2006). 
Nevertheless, this study (Monte et al., 2011) still exemplifies that the great majority of 
Latrodectus bites are far less dangerous than their public reputation. The neurotoxic venom 
component α-latrotoxin, a large protein, is considered to be responsible for the symptoms 
observed in vertebrates. Interestingly related compounds were isolated from other spiders of 
the family Theridiidae as well, in particular from the genus Steatoda (Kuhn-Nentwig et al., 
2011). Bites of these spiders (as well as of Cryptachaea and Parasteatoda species, which 
were previously in the genus Achaearanea) were found to cause similar effects to 
Latrodectus species. However, the symptoms are less severe in occurrence (Isbister and Gray, 
2003b) and we therefore do not consider other theridiid genera besides Latrodectus as 
dangerous spiders. 
 
 
Figure 6. Potentially dangerous Theridiidae: Latrodectus tredecimguttatus (Photograph by 
Bastian Rast). 
 
2.2 Scorpions (order Scorpiones): 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
12 
2.2.1 Genera Androctonus, Buthacus, Buthus, Centruroides, Hottentotta, Leiurus, 
Mesobuthus, Parabuthus, and Tityus (family Buthidae; Fig. 7): According to secondary 
literature (Keegan, 1980; Kleber et al., 1999), several genera of the family Buthidae are 
considered dangerous as their stings can lead to severe systemic symptoms with effects on the 
cardiovascular or nervous system. Androctonus, Buthus, Leiurus and Mesobuthus are of 
medical importance in northern Africa and the Near and Middle East, Hottentotta in south 
Asia, Parabuthus in southern Africa, Centruroides in the southern USA, Mexico and Central 
America, and Tityus in South America (Berg and Tarantino, 1991; Dehesa-Davila and 
Possani, 1994; Bergman, 1997; Otero et al., 2004; Chowell et al., 2006; Chippaux and 
Goyffon, 2008; Ozkan et al., 2008; Cesaretli and Ozkan, 2010; Dehghani and Fathi, 2012; 
Bucaretchi et al., 2014; Kularatne et al., 2015; Seiter et al., 2016). 
 
Small peptide toxins that target ion channels, especially voltage-gated sodium channels, are 
considered the main active components in the venoms of these scorpions (Quintero-
Hernandez et al., 2013). These toxins lead to neuronal excitation stimulating particularly 
autonomic centres. In cases of severe envenomations, the sympathetic excitation and release 
of catecholamine in plasma mediate severe systemic effects such as myocardial injury, 
pulmonary oedema or cardiogenic shock (Chippaux, 2012; Isbister and Bawaskar, 2014). 
 
Envenomation symptoms caused by Tityus species are well studied with more than 1,300 
recorded incidents in Brazil in the region of Campinas. Typically, in about 80% of all stings, 
the symptoms are classified as only mild with local effects (e.g. pain or erythema). In ~3% of 
cases, no envenomation symptoms are observed and these are considered to be “dry” stings. 
Systemic effects occurred in 17% of all cases and 1.8% of these were classified as severe 
with possibly life-threatening manifestations (e.g. shock, cardiac or respiratory failure). One 
patient died due to a sting from Tityus serrulatus. Life-threatening manifestations or fatalities 
occurred only in children younger than 15 years old (Bucaretchi et al., 2014).  
 
The genus Buthacus is also reported as being responsible for severe envenomation symptoms 
(Kleber et al., 1999), although there are apparently no definite incidents described in the 
literature (Chippaux and Goyffon, 2008). However, a peptide isolated from the venom of 
Buthacus macrocentrus was found to have close sequence homology to the dangerous toxins 
of Leiurus quinquestriatus and was also shown to be lethal to mice (Caliskan et al., 2012). 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
13 
We therefore consider it plausible that Buthacus stings might lead to severe envenomation 
symptoms. 
 
 
Figure 7. Potentially dangerous Buthidae: (A) Androctonus australis, (B) Buthacus 
yotvatensis, (C) Buthus elmoutaouakili, (D) Centruroides sculpturatus, (E) Hottentotta 
judaicus, (F) Leiurus jordanensis, (G) Mesobuthus nigrocinctus, (H) Parabuthus villosus, (I) 
Tityus serrulatus (Photographs by Tobias Hauke). 
A
G
E
C
B
D
F
H
I
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
14 
 
2.2.2 Genus Hemiscorpius (family Hemiscorpiidae; Fig. 8): Members of the genus 
Hemiscorpius are considered the most dangerous scorpions in Iran and Iraq (Chippaux and 
Goyffon, 2008; Shahi et al., 2015). Hemiscorpius lepturus is responsible for most fatal 
scorpion stings in Iran (Pipelzadeh et al., 2007) and a fatal envenomation of a 15-year old 
male as consequence of a Hemiscorpius acanthocercus sting has been described (Shahi et al., 
2015). Chippaux and Goyffon (2008) mention Hemiscorpius as the only medical relevant 
scorpions apart from those of the family Buthidae. The venom is cytotoxic and can lead to 
pathological changes in blood and tissue (Mirakabbadi et al., 2007; Dehghani and Fathi, 
2012). Recently a phospholipase D was isolated from the venom of H. lepturus. It was shown 
to be highly active and, as in sicariid spiders, it is considered the lethal dermonecrotic toxin in 
Hemiscorpius venom (Torabi et al., 2017). 
 
 
Figure 8. Potentially dangerous Hemiscorpiidae: Hemiscorpius falcifer (Photograph by 
Tobias Hauke). 
 
2.2.3 Genus Nebo (family Scorpionidae; Fig. 9): Data for envenomations by scorpions from 
the genus Nebo are scarce and contradictory. In adults, only mild symptoms were reported 
following two provoked stings of N. hierichonticus in man (Rosin, 1969). In contrast, 
Annobil (1993) assigned severe manifestations with intravascular coagulopathy and 
intracranial haemorrhages or pulmonary oedema and death in two children to stings of 
N. hierichonticus. Thus, we consider the genus Nebo as potentially dangerous. However, as 
the data are scarce and the described symptoms unusual for scorpion envenomations, we 
suggest treating this status with caution until further insights are published. 
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
15 
 
Figure 9. Potentially dangerous Scorpionidae: Nebo omanensis (Photograph by Tobias 
Hauke). 
 
3. Arachnids wrongly accused of being dangerous or with questionable status 
In addition to the aforementioned taxa, public media or certain text books (Bücherl, 1971; 
Habermehl, 1987) often list further arachnids as being potentially dangerous although there is 
no proof that these arachnids were actually involved in dangerous incidents with humans. 
Clinical studies have demonstrated that some of the wrongly accused genera are relatively 
harmless to humans. Herein we give an overview of some arachnids that are either wrongly 
accused as dangerous or that have a questionable status. 
 
3.1 Spiders (order Araneae): 
3.1.1 Genera Actinopus (family Actinopodidae) and Trechona (family Dipluridae): 
Several mygalomorph genera, often referred to as trapdoor spiders, are occasionally 
described as potentially dangerous despite a lack of data to support such contentions. For 
example, Bücherl (1971) lists Actinopus and Trechona as dangerous spiders. However, 
recently published clinical studies found these genera to be harmless to humans with only 
relatively mild symptoms (e.g. local pain, minor oedema or erythema) attributed to bites by 
Actinopus or Trechona (Lucas et al., 1994). For several other mygalomorph trapdoor spiders 
it was also demonstrated that they only cause minor manifestations following human 
envenomations (Isbister and Gray, 2004b). 
 
3.1.2 Genus Eratigena (family Agelenidae): The so-called hobo spider, Eratigena agrestis 
(former Tegenaria agrestis), originally distributed in Asia and Europe, was introduced to 
North America where it was suspected of causing necrotic wounds. However, recent studies 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
16 
could not identify E. agrestis as a spider of medical concern in the USA and concluded that 
envenomations by this species do not cause necrotic lesions (Gaver-Wainwright et al., 2011; 
McKeown et al., 2014). It should be noted that although spiders of the genus Eratigena are 
widespread, and are particularly common in and around homes even in urban environments, 
there is not a single verified bite that confirms E. agrestis or other members of this genus as 
dangerous to humans (Vetter and Isbister, 2004; Nentwig et al., 2013). 
 
3.1.3 Genus Badumna (family Desidae): Black house spiders of the genus Badumna, 
originally distributed in Australia and Asia but now introduced to other continents (Kielhorn 
and Rödel, 2011), were also suspected as a cause of necrotic wounds. However, a study 
comprising 25 verified Badumna bites in Australia concluded that they are unlikely to cause 
necrosis. Local effects such as pain, puncture marks or erythema were found to be typical 
manifestations following Badumna bites (Isbister and Gray, 2004a). 
 
3.1.4 Genus Cheiracanthium (family Eutichuridae): Bites by “yellow sac spiders” 
(Cheiracanthium spp.) are regularly noted as a cause of severe necrosis (Divito et al., 2009). 
However, such claims are not based on verified spider bites and the link between 
Cheiracanthium bites and dermonecrosis is dubious. In contrast, more comprehensive clinical 
studies (including verified spider bites) from Australia, Europe and North America did not 
reveal any signs of severe dermonecrosis following bites by Cheiracanthium species. 
Envenomations by spiders of the genus Cheiracanthium typically result in only local 
symptoms (e.g. pain, swelling, redness) (Vetter et al., 2006; Gnädinger et al., 2013; Nentwig 
et al., 2013; McKeown et al., 2014; Varl et al., 2017). These local symptoms can be 
compared to the effects of wasp stings, as they are often more pronounced than in many other 
harmless spiders, which might be explained by a relatively high concentration of histamine in 
the venom of Cheiracanthium species (Nentwig et al., 2013). It needs to be emphasized here 
that phospholipase D, which is considered the causative agent of necrotic spider 
envenomations, is absent in the venoms of Cheiracanthium species (Foradori et al., 2005). 
 
3.1.5 Genus Macrothele (family Hexathelidae): Spiders of the genus Macrothele are 
occasionally discussed as being potentially dangerous, although there are no studies available 
on envenomations caused by these spiders. Thus, this might only represent a precautionary 
view, as Macrothele is currently placed in the same family (i.e. Hexathelidae) as the 
dangerous funnel-web spiders of the genera Atrax, Hadronyche and Illawarra. However, 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
17 
phylogenetic studies indicate that the family Hexathelidae is non-monophyletic and that 
Macrothele is actually not more closely related to Atrax, Hadronyche and Illawarra than to 
many other mygalomorph spiders (Hedin and Bond, 2006; Bond et al., 2012). Hence, we 
concur with other authors (Isbister and Fan, 2011) that Macrothele should not be considered 
potentially dangerous until contrary insights are published. 
 
3.1.6 Genus Lampona (family Lamponidae): White-tailed spiders of the genus Lampona 
received – and still receive today – much media attention in Australia as a presumed cause of 
severe dermonectrotic wounds. However, studies comprising more than 130 definite 
Lampona bites clearly debunked this perception as an urban myth. Actual envenomations by 
white-tailed spiders result in mostly minor local effects similar to those recorded from wolf 
spiders (family Lycosidae; under 3.1.7) (Isbister and Gray, 2003c; White and Weinstein, 
2014). 
 
3.1.7 Genus Lycosa, Hogna (both family Lycosidae): Some wolf spiders (family 
Lycosidae), particularly those in the genera Lycosa or Hogna, were considered dangerous in 
older literature (Bücherl, 1971) and they were occasionally blamed for necrotic wounds in the 
absence of verified bites to support such claims. Newer literature from South America and 
Australia examining the clinical effects of lycosid bites in humans has proved these 
assumptions incorrect (Ribeiro et al., 1990; Isbister and Framenau, 2004). Mostly local 
symptoms such as pain or redness – but not necrosis – were seen after bites by members of 
the family Lycosidae, with only 7% of patients showing minor systemic effects (e.g. nausea) 
(Isbister and Framenau, 2004). The effects can be explained by mechanical injury rather than 
actual envenomation (Isbister and Framenau, 2004). More severe effects formerly attributed 
to lycosid bites, including necrosis, are likely due to misdiagnosed Loxosceles bites (Ribeiro 
et al., 1990). 
 
3.2 Scorpions (order Scorpiones): 
3.2.1 Genus Bothriurus (family Bothriuridae): Kleber et al. (1999) mention stings by the 
genus Bothriurus as a cause of severe envenomations with effects on the cardiovascular 
system, while others do not consider these scorpions medically important (Chippaux and 
Goyffon, 2008). To our knowledge, no studies exist that evaluated the effects of Bothriurus 
envenomations and found these scorpions to be potentially dangerous. A recent study from 
Argentina suggests that Bothriurus are not medically important and it assigns dangerous 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
18 
envenomations in this country exclusively to scorpions of the genus Tityus (de Roodt, 2014), 
although there are several known species of Bothriurus distributed in Argentina. Thus, we 
assume that more serious manifestations following scorpion stings, formerly assigned to 
Bothriurus in older literature, might in fact be due to misidentified Tityus stings. Notably, 
other members of the family Bothriuridae (e.g. Cercophonius squama in Australia) do not 
cause severe envenomations (Isbister et al., 2003b). 
 
3.2.2 Genera Apistobuthus, Compsobuthus, Lychas, Microtityus, Odontobuthus, 
Orthochirus, Rhopalurus, etc. (family Buthidae): Most dangerous scorpions belong to the 
family Buthidae, whose members often have thin, forceps-like pedipalps ("pincers") and 
thick, strong metasomas ("tails"). However, this ”pedipalp-metasoma-ratio” cannot be used 
as a general rule to distinguish between potentially dangerous and harmless scorpions, 
particularly since scorpions of the genera Hemiscorpius and Nebo do not show these body 
proportions and, conversely, not all buthids are considered dangerous. In fact, the potentially 
dangerous genera listed under 2.2.1 represent only a fraction of the Buthidae, the most 
species-rich and diverse scorpion family, while most other genera are not considered 
medically important (Chippaux and Goyffon, 2008). For example, one of the smallest known 
scorpion species belongs to this family (e.g. Microtityus minimus), reaching only about 10 
mm in total length; it has an aculeus (“stinger”) length of 0.6–0.7 mm (Kovařík and Teruel, 
2014) and thus is probably too small to cause severe envenomations in humans (Chippaux 
and Goyffon, 2008). In Iran, a species of the genus Compsobuthus (i.e. Compsobuthus 
matthiesseni) was identified as a scorpion that regularly stings humans (Dehghani et al., 
2009), but no data are available on typical envenomation symptoms, leading to the 
conclusion that stings by these scorpions lead to mild or inconspicuous manifestations. In 
South America, stings by scorpions of the genus Rhopalurus are scarcely registered but 
available cases classified only mild manifestations (Fuentes-Silva et al., 2014). A 
comprehensive study on scorpion envenomations in Australia comprised several stings 
caused by Lychas species. Mostly local symptoms and pain were recorded as typical 
manifestations of Lychas stings and it was concluded that these scorpions cannot cause severe 
or life-threatening envenomations in humans (Isbister et al., 2003b). 
 
However, there are some buthid genera with a questionable status. For example, a study from 
Saudi Arabia identified Apistobuthus pterygocercus as a scorpion that regularly stings 
humans and this species was considered of medical importance (Al-Sadoon and Jarrar, 2003). 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
19 
However, no concrete envenomation symptoms were assigned to stings of this scorpion and 
hence it is dubious whether members of the genus Apistobuthus might cause severe 
envenomations in humans. In a single case report, severe systemic symptoms including 
pulmonary oedema were attributed to a sting of Odontobuthus doriae (Razi and Malekanrad, 
2008), but this publication does not contain information on whether it was a verified scorpion 
sting or not. A review of scorpion stings in Iran mentions one unpublished death assigned to a 
sting of Orthochirus scrobiculosus (Dehghani and Fathi, 2012) but again no further 
information is provided in regards to proper identification of the scorpion. Due to their small 
body size and reluctance to sting (own observations; Dehghani and Fathi, 2012) we consider 
scorpions of the genus Orthochirus unlikely to cause severe envenomations in humans. 
 
4. Assessment of the potential danger from arachnid envenomation 
Spiders and scorpions mainly prey on other arthropods and therefore the majority of their 
venom components do not target humans, which are not among their natural prey. However, 
some arachnids also prey on small vertebrates (Herzig and King, 2013), some have evolved 
toxins for defensive purposes (Inceoglu et al., 2003; Siemens et al., 2006; Osteen et al., 
2016), and in some cases the molecular target of an arachnid toxin is similar in invertebrates 
and humans (Nicholson et al., 1998). This has lead to the evolution of a small number of 
arachnid toxins that might cause severe envenomation effects in humans if injected in 
sufficient amounts. Although spider and scorpion venoms are a complex cocktail of diverse 
chemical compounds, in most cases small peptides that target ion channels are the main 
active components (with the large neurotoxic α-latrotoxins in the venoms of Latrodectus 
species and phospholipases D in sicariid spiders and the genus Hemiscorpius being notable 
exceptions) (Kuhn-Nentwig et al., 2011; Quintero-Hernandez et al., 2013). Thus, arachnid 
venoms typically exhibit a neurotoxic mode of action. In contrast, necrotic wounds following 
definitive spider bites or scorpion stings have only been recorded for genera containing high 
levels of active phospholipase D in their venoms (i.e., sicariid spiders and scorpions of the 
genus Hemiscorpius). Thus, phospholipase D activity seems to be a prerequisite for necrotic 
arachnidism. While pathogenic bacteria vectored by arachnids have also been discussed as a 
potential cause of necrosis associated with arachnid envenomations, a causal connection is 
unreasonable and unlikely (Vetter et al., 2015). 
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
20 
Given the small size of most arachnids (e.g., compared to venomous snakes), their venom 
glands and corresponding venom yields are comparatively small. Furthermore, only arachnids 
with fangs or stingers large enough to penetrate human skin can cause serious envenomation. 
Consequently, their small size renders most arachnids harmless to humans. Even large 
arachnids with venom toxins that could potentially harm humans often pose no threat, as their 
venom is used sparingly because of its high metabolic cost (Nisani et al., 2012; Morgenstern 
and King, 2013). For example, widow spiders of the genus Latrodectus only bite when 
massively threatened or accidentally squeezed (Nelsen et al., 2014); their preferred option is 
fleeing from the potential threat. Other means of defense in arachnids include playing dead, 
using their pincers (in the case of scorpions), striking with the front legs, producing hissing 
sounds, spreading of urticating hairs (e.g. theraphosid spiders), and even dry bites or stings. 
In the case of Latrodectus hesperus, up to 50% of all bites are “dry” (i.e. bites without venom 
injection) (Nelsen et al., 2014). Besides the presence of vertebrate-active venom components 
and the injected venom amount, other factors can play an important role towards the severity 
of envenomation symptoms as indicated in Table 1. 
 
 
Variable factors 
Arachnid 
Toxicity for vertebrates 
Injected venom amount 
Size 
Sex 
Age 
Geographical location 
Season 
Victim 
Size/weight 
Sex 
Age 
Health condition 
Route of injection (i.v., i.m., etc.) 
 
Table 1: Summary of variable factors (adapted from Pucca et al., 2015) within the arachnid 
and the victim that can determine the severity of envenomation symptoms. 
 
 
As evidenced by extensive clinical studies, only a low percentage of bites and stings from 
arachnids that are considered extremely dangerous result in severe systemic effects 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
21 
(Bucaretchi et al., 2000; Isbister and Gray, 2003a; Bucaretchi et al., 2014; Isbister and 
Bawaskar, 2014). In most cases, only local manifestations (pain, redness, etc.) or no 
symptoms at all are recorded (e.g. >90% of all Phoneutria bites (Bucaretchi et al., 2000)). 
Severe systemic effects are mainly observed in children, presumably due to their lower body 
weight or due to their immune system not being fully developed (Bucaretchi et al., 2000; 
Bucaretchi et al., 2014). While after spider bites only very small children are typically 
affected by the most severe symptoms, scorpion envenomations can frequently lead to severe 
effects even in larger children up to an age of 15 years (Bucaretchi et al., 2014; Pucca et al., 
2015; Shahi et al., 2015). Interestingly, in case of spider bites larger children were found to 
have fewer systemic envenomations than adults and the average duration of the clinical 
symptoms was also reduced (Isbister, 2004b). For many arachnids that cause severe human 
envenomations, antivenoms are available. However, due to potentially severe side effects 
such as allergic reactions, antivenom should only be applied as a last resort if conventional 
treatment of the symptoms is not sufficient. In regards to Latrodectus antivenom there is an 
ongoing scientific debate about its efficacy. Some authors have questioned the efficacy 
(Isbister et al., 2014; Ryan et al., 2017) while others still regard it as the most efficacious 
therapy available based on symptom resolution, need for subsequent therapy, and hospital 
admission rates (Monte, 2012; White, 2017). In a modern clinical setting, antivenom therapy 
is rarely used for arachnid envenomations; for example, only 2% of all Phoneutria bites were 
treated with antivenom (Bucaretchi et al., 2000). 
 
However, besides the percentage of serious envenomations, the incidence of bites and stings 
is also important for assessing the potential danger of arachnids. In their countries of origin, 
most bites and stings only happen when humans actively pick up the arachnids or 
accidentally get in contact with them (e.g. during garden work or when putting on clothing, in 
which arachnids have been hiding). Not surprisingly, the majority of arachnid bites and stings 
target the extremities (Bucaretchi et al., 2000). In the case of Phoneutria and Australian 
funnel-web spiders, most bite incidents are caused during mating season by wandering males 
(Bucaretchi et al., 2000; Isbister and Gray, 2004b). The numbers of lethal envenomations by 
arachnids are dwarfed by the global death toll from snake bites and anaphylaxis caused by 
hymenopteran stings (Arnold, 2016; Welton et al., 2017). Nevertheless, in some cases 
arachnids can be quite abundant in densely populated areas, which increases the likelihood 
for accidental contact with humans. Thus there are regions such as northern Africa, the Near 
and Middle-East, Mexico, the Amazonian basin or southern Brazil with many human 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
22 
encounters particularly with dangerous scorpions, resulting in a relatively high total number 
of envenomations. Worldwide, the estimated number of scorpion stings exceeds 1.2 million 
leading to more than 3250 deaths annually (Chippaux and Goyffon, 2008). While this study 
confirms the low percentage of fatal envenomations (i.e. 0.27%), it also clearly exemplifies 
that a high total number of encounters in combination with a low percentage of serious or 
fatal envenomations can still result in a significant problem for the health system in the 
countries of origin. However, it is assumed that by an improvement of the therapeutic 
management in those regions the lethality could be reduced very significantly (Chippaux and 
Goyffon, 2008). The situation for arachnids that are kept as pets is yet entirely different to the 
situation in their countries of origin. The majority of arachnid pet owners are reasonably well 
educated regarding the risks of keeping arachnids and therefore avoid direct contact. Pet 
arachnids are usually kept under controlled conditions in enclosed containers, minimising the 
risk of accidental contact. Furthermore, the surprise factor is eliminated as the owners are 
aware of the potentially dangerous arachnids they keep. All of these factors combined result 
in a fairly low incidence for envenomations from pet arachnids. According to our knowledge, 
there has not been a single documented case of a fatal envenomation by a pet arachnid, 
despite the continuous growth of the arachnid pet scene in Europe, America and Asia in the 
last few decades. 
 
In attempting to compile a catalogue of potentially dangerous arachnids, we decided to base 
the list on the genus rather than species level. The reason for this is that closely related 
species most likely have closely related toxins, so if one species from a certain genus has a 
toxin that causes severe effects in humans, a related species from the same genus is likely to 
contain either the same or a closely related toxin with similar activity. Hence, even if only 
one or a few species from a genus have a clinical track record for severe envenomations, we 
have still included the entire genus in the list as a precaution. Absence of evidence is not 
evidence of absence, so if there are no serious incidents recorded for a certain species, it does 
not mean that this species does not have the potential to cause severe effects. It could, for 
example, reside in a remote geographic area and rarely come into contact with humans. 
However, we are aware that basing our list on the genus level might lead to an overestimate 
of the total number of dangerous arachnids, as some species within a genus classified as 
dangerous might be too small to produce a sufficient amount of the toxin responsible for 
adverse effects in humans or their fangs might be too small to penetrate human skin or they 
could simply lack toxins that are active in humans. Our proposed list of "dangerous 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
23 
arachnids" that have the potential to cause severe envenomation in humans includes the 
following genera: 
 
Spiders: Missulena (family Actinopodidae), Phoneutria (Ctenidae), Atrax, Hadronyche, 
Illawarra (all Hexathelidae), Hexophthalma, Loxosceles, Sicarius (all Sicariidae), 
Poecilotheria (Theraphosidae), Latrodectus (Theridiidae). 
 
Scorpions: Androctonus, Buthacus, Buthus, Centruroides, Hottentotta, Leiurus, Mesobuthus, 
Parabuthus, Tityus (all family Buthidae), Hemiscorpius (Hemiscorpiidae), Nebo 
(Scorpionidae).  
 
Note that dangerous arachnids are spread across several different families and thus no general 
rule of thumb can be given for differentiating dangerous from harmless spiders and scorpions. 
In case of doubt we suggest consulting an expert with taxonomic knowledge to identify the 
arachnid in question. 
 
Spider family 
Dangerous genera 
Number of species 
Actinopodidae 
Missulena 
17 
Ctenidae 
Phoneutria 
8 
Hexathelidae 
Atrax 
3 
Hadronyche 
31 
Illawarra 
1 
Sicariidae 
Hexophthalma 
6 
Loxosceles 
116 
Sicarius 
21 
Theraphosidae 
Poecilotheria  
14 
Theridiidae 
Latrodectus 
31 
Total dangerous spider species 
248 
Total spider species 
46,778 
Potentially dangerous spiders 
0.5% 
  
  
  
Scorpion family 
Dangerous genera 
Number of species 
Buthidae 
Androctonus 
28 
Buthacus 
24 
Buthus 
51 
Centruroides 
91 
Hottentotta 
49 
Leiurus 
11 
Mesobuthus 
14 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
24 
Parabuthus 
33 
Tityus 
212 
Hemiscorpiidae 
Hemiscorpius 
15 
Scorpionidae 
Nebo 
9 
Total dangerous scorpion species 
537 
Total scorpion species 
2,322 
Potentially dangerous scorpions 
23.1% 
 
Table 2: Summary of the number of arachnid species within spider and scorpion genera (in 
alphabetical order based on family/genus) that are considered potentially dangerous. The data 
was extracted from the World Spider Catalog (2017; http://www.wsc.nmbe.ch/) and The 
Scorpion Files (Rein, 2017; https://www.ntnu.no/ub/scorpion-files/index.php; both accessed 
on 25. July 2017). 
 
5. Conclusions 
In summary, due to various reasons such as their small size, lack of vertebrate-active toxins, 
or their cryptic way of life, the great majority of arachnids are not capable of causing severe 
envenomations in humans. Even those few species of scorpions and spiders that are capable 
of causing severe effects in humans only induce minor local symptoms in the majority of 
cases. While some countries of origin of potentially dangerous arachnids still have high total 
numbers of envenomations, the situation with pet arachnids is quite different. We propose 
that the combination of a low total number and a low percentage of serious envenomations 
will only result in a minor risk caused by pet arachnids. And due to modern medical care, 
lethal envenomations by arachnids are rare (Isbister and Fan, 2011). We conclude that the 
problem of arachnid envenomation is exaggerated in the public media. However, even a 
single lethal case is too much if it is preventable. We have therefore compiled a list of 
dangerous arachnids that have the potential to cause severe envenomations in humans. This 
list includes 10 spider and 11 scorpion genera and should serve as a guideline for regulatory 
authorities that want to take action to protect their citizens. As indicated in Table 2, there are 
currently 248 spider and 537 scorpion species listed within those genera, comprising 0.5% of 
all extant spiders and 23.1% of all scorpion species (Rein, 2017; World Spider Catalog, 
2017). Nevertheless, the actual number of dangerous arachnid species is probably much 
lower, as many species are only listed as a precaution based on their close taxonomic 
relationship to potentially dangerous species, despite a lack of concrete reports on severe 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
25 
envenomations. In conclusion, only a small percentage of scorpions and a minute percentage 
of all spiders can be considered potentially dangerous to humans. 
 
Disclosure statement 
Parts of this review were previously published in German in the journal Arachne as an expert 
opinion for the government of North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany (Hauke et al., 2015). 
 
Acknowledgements 
The authors thank Volker von Wirth (Deutsche Arachnologische Gesellschaft e.V., Zülpich, 
Germany) for his contribution to the expert opinion about dangerous arachnids for the 
government of North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany (Hauke et al., 2015), Samantha Nixon 
(Brisbane, Australia) for comments on the manuscript, Bastian Rast (Tägerig, Switzerland) 
and Michael Gray (Australian Museum, Sydney, Australia) for outstanding photographs of 
arachnid specimens, and Alexander Ullrich (Munich, Germany) for providing scorpions for 
photography. 
 
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
26 
References 
Ahmed, N., Pinkham, M., and Warrell, D.A., 2009. Symptom in search of a toxin: muscle 
spasms following bites by Old World tarantula spiders (Lampropelma nigerrimum, 
Pterinochilus murinus, Poecilotheria regalis) with review. Qjm-Int. J. Med. 102, 851-857. 
Ahmed, N., Pinkham, M., Warrell, D.A., and Verdez, J.M., 2010. Corrigendum: Symptom in 
search of a toxin: muscle spasms following bites by Old World tarantula spiders 
(Lampropelma nigerrimum, Pterinochilus murinus, Poecilotheria regalis) with review 
(vol 102, pg 851, 2009). Qjm-Int. J. Med. 103, 203-204. 
Al-Sadoon, M.K., and Jarrar, B.M., 2003. Epidemiological study of scorpion stings in Saudi 
Arabia between 1993 and 1997. J. Venom. Anim. Toxins Incl. Trop. Dis. 9, 54-64. 
Annobil, S.H., 1993. Scorpion stings in children in the Asir province of Saudi-Arabia. J. 
Wilderness Med. 4, 241-251. 
Arnold, C., 2016. Vipers, mambas and taipans: the escalating health crisis over snakebites. 
Nature 537, 26-28. 
Berg, R.A., and Tarantino, M.D., 1991. Envenomation by the scorpion Centruroides 
exilicauda (C. sculpturatus) - severe and unusual manifestations. Pediatrics 87, 930-933. 
Bergman, N.J., 1997. Clinical description of Parabuthus transvaalicus scorpionism in 
Zimbabwe. Toxicon 35, 759-771. 
Bond, J.E., Hendrixson, B.E., Hamilton, C.A., and Hedin, M., 2012. A reconsideration of the 
classification of the spider infraorder Mygalomorphae (Arachnida: Araneae) based on 
three nuclear genes and morphology. PloS One 7, e38753. 
Bucaretchi, F., Deus Reinaldo, C.R., Hyslop, S., Madureira, P.R., De Capitani, E.M., and 
Vieira, R.J., 2000. A clinico-epidemiological study of bites by spiders of the genus 
Phoneutria. Rev. Inst. Med. Trop. Sao Paulo 42, 17-21. 
Bucaretchi, F., Fernandes, L.C., Fernandes, C.B., Branco, M.M., Prado, C.C., Vieira, R.J., De 
Capitani, E.M., and Hyslop, S., 2014. Clinical consequences of Tityus bahiensis and Tityus 
serrulatus scorpion stings in the region of Campinas, southeastern Brazil. Toxicon 89, 17-
25. 
Bücherl, W., 1971. Spiders. In: Bücherl, W. and Buckley, E. (Eds), Venomous animals and 
their venoms III., Academic Press, New York. 
Cabezas-Cruz, A., and Valdes, J.J., 2014. Are ticks venomous animals? Frontiers in Zoology 
11, 1-18. 
Caliskan, F., Quintero-Hernandez, V., Restano-Cassulini, R., Batista, C.V.F., Zarnudio, F.Z., 
Coronas, F.I., and Possani, L.D., 2012. Turkish scorpion Buthacus macrocentrus: General 
characterization of the venom and description of Bu1, a potent mammalian Na+-channel 
α-toxin. Toxicon 59, 408-415. 
Cesaretli, Y., and Ozkan, O., 2010. Scorpion stings in Turkey: Epidemiological and clinical 
aspects between the years 1995 and 2004. Rev. Inst. Med. Trop. Sao Paulo 52, 215-220. 
Chassagnon, I.R., McCarthy, C.A., Chin, Y.K., Pineda, S.S., Keramidas, A., Mobli, M., 
Pham, V., De Silva, T.M., Lynch, J.W., Widdop, R.E., Rash, L.D., and King, G.F., 2017. 
Potent neuroprotection after stroke afforded by a double-knot spider-venom peptide that 
inhibits acid-sensing ion channel 1a. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 114, 3750-3755. 
Chippaux, J.P., and Goyffon, M., 2008. Epidemiology of scorpionism: A global appraisal. 
Acta Tropica 107, 71-79. 
Chippaux, J.P., 2012. Emerging options for the management of scorpion stings. Drug Des. 
Dev. Ther. 6, 165-173. 
Chowell, G., Diaz-Duenas, P., Bustos-Saldana, R., Mireles, A.A., and Fet, V., 2006. 
Epidemiological and clinical characteristics of scorpionism in Colima, Mexico (2000-
2001). Toxicon 47, 753-758. 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
27 
Dantas, A.E., Carmo, A.O., Horta, C.C., Leal, H.G., Oliveira-Mendes, B.B., Martins, A.P., 
Chavez-Olortegui, C., and Kalapothakis, E., 2016. Description of Loxtox protein family 
and identification of a new group of Phospholipases D from Loxosceles similis venom 
gland. Toxicon 120, 97-106. 
de Roodt, A.R., 2014. Comments on environmental and sanitary aspects of the scorpionism 
by Tityus trivittatus in Buenos Aires city, Argentina. Toxins (Basel) 6, 1434-1452. 
Dehesa-Davila, M., and Possani, L.D., 1994. Scorpionism and serotherapy in Mexico. 
Toxicon 32, 1015-1018. 
Dehghani, R., Djadid, N.D., Shahbazzadeh, D., and Bigdelli, S., 2009. Introducing 
Compsobuthus matthiesseni (Birula, 1905) scorpion as one of the major stinging scorpions 
in Khuzestan, Iran. Toxicon 54, 272-275. 
Dehghani, R., and Fathi, B., 2012. Scorpion sting in Iran: A review. Toxicon 60, 919-933. 
Divito, S.J., Haught, J.M., English, J.C., and Ferris, L.K., 2009. An extensive case of 
dermonecrotic arachnidism. J. Clin. Aesthetic Dermatol. 2, 40-43. 
Foelix, R., 2011. Biology of spiders. Oxford University Press, New York. 
Foradori, M.J., Smith, S.C., Smith, E., and Wells, R.E., 2005. Survey for potentially 
necrotizing spider venoms, with special emphasis on Cheiracanthium mildei. Comp. 
Biochem. Physiol. C Toxicol. Pharmacol. 141, 32-39. 
Fuchs, J., von Dechend, M., Mordasini, R., Ceschi, A., and Nentwig, W., 2014. A verified 
spider bite and a review of the literature confirm Indian ornamental tree spiders 
(Poecilotheria species) as underestimated theraphosids of medical importance. Toxicon 
77, 73-77. 
Fuentes-Silva, D., Santos, A.P., and Oliveira, J.S., 2014. Envenomation caused by 
Rhopalurus amazonicus Lourenco, 1986 (Scorpiones, Buthidae) in Para State, Brazil. J. 
Venom. Anim. Toxins 20, 1-4. 
Gaver-Wainwright, M.M., Zack, R.S., Foradori, M.J., and Lavine, L.C., 2011. Misdiagnosis 
of spider bites: bacterial associates, mechanical pathogen transfer, and hemolytic potential 
of venom from the hobo spider, Tegenaria agrestis (Araneae: Agelenidae). J. Med. 
Entomol. 48, 382-388. 
Gnädinger, M., Nentwig, W., Fuchs, J., and Ceschi, A., 2013. Swiss prospective study on 
spider bites. Swiss Medical Weekly 143, w13877. 
Gomez, M.V., Kalapothakis, E., Guatimosim, C., and Prado, M.A., 2002. Phoneutria 
nigriventer venom: a cocktail of toxins that affect ion channels. Cell. Mol. Neurobiol. 22, 
579-588. 
Gray, M.R., 2010. A revision of the Australian funnel-web spiders (Hexathelidae: Atracinae). 
Records Austr. Museum 62, 285-392. 
Gunning, S.J., Chong, Y., Khalife, A.A., Hains, P.G., Broady, K.W., and Nicholson, G.M., 
2003. Isolation of δ-missulenatoxin-Mb1a, the major vertebrate-active spider delta-toxin 
from the venom of Missulena bradleyi (Actinopodidae). FEBS Lett. 554, 211-218. 
Habermehl, G., 1987. Gift-Tiere und ihre Waffen. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg. 
Hartman, L.J., and Sutherland, S.K., 1984. Funnel-web spider (Atrax robustus) antivenom in 
the treatment of human envenomation. Med. J. Aust. 141, 796-799. 
Hauke, T., von Wirth, V., and Herzig, V., 2015. Wie gefährlich sind Spinnentiere für den 
Menschen? – Ein Gutachten zur Beurteilung medizinisch-relevanter Spinnentiere zum 
Entwurf eines Gefahrtiergesetzes der Landesregierung Nordrhein-Westfalen. Arachne 20, 
26-37. 
Hedin, M., and Bond, J.E., 2006. Molecular phylogenetics of the spider infraorder 
Mygalomorphae using nuclear rRNA genes (18S and 28S): Conflict and agreement with 
the current system of classification. Mol. Phylogenet. Evol. 41, 454-471. 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
28 
Herzig, V., Khalife, A.A., Chong, Y., Isbister, G.K., Currie, B.J., Churchill, T.B., Horner, S., 
Escoubas, P., Nicholson, G.M., and Hodgson, W.C., 2008. Intersexual variations in 
Northern (Missulena pruinosa) and Eastern (M. bradleyi) mouse spider venom. Toxicon 
51, 1167-1177. 
Herzig, V., 2010. Update zum DeArGe-Spinnengiftprojekt. Arachne 15, 26-31. 
Herzig, V., Wood, D.L.A., Newell, F., Chaumeil, P.-A., Kaas, Q., Binford, G.J., Nicholson, 
G.M., Gorse, D., and King, G.F., 2011. ArachnoServer 2.0, an updated online resource for 
spider toxin sequences and structures. Nucleic Acids Res., D653-D657. 
Herzig, V., and King, G.F., 2013. The neurotoxic mode of action of venoms from the spider 
family Theraphosidae. In: Nentwig, W. (Eds), Spider ecophysiology Springer, Heidelberg, 
pp. 203-215. 
Inceoglu, B., Lango, J., Jing, J., Chen, L., Doymaz, F., Pessah, I.N., and Hammock, B.D., 
2003. One scorpion, two venoms: prevenom of Parabuthus transvaalicus acts as an 
alternative type of venom with distinct mechanism of action. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 
100, 922-927. 
Isbister, G.K., and Gray, M.R., 2002. A prospective study of 750 definite spider bites, with 
expert spider identification. Q. J. Med. 95, 723-731. 
Isbister, G.K., and Gray, M.R., 2003a. Latrodectism: a prospective cohort study of bites by 
formally identified redback spiders. Med. J. Aust. 179, 88-91. 
Isbister, G.K., and Gray, M.R., 2003b. Effects of envenoming by comb-footed spiders of the 
genera Steatoda and Achaearanea (Family Theridiidae: Araneae) in Australia. J. Toxicol.- 
Clin.Toxicol. 41, 809-819. 
Isbister, G.K., and Gray, M.R., 2003c. White-tail spider bite: a prospective study of 130 
definite bites by Lampona species. Med. J. Aust. 179, 199-202. 
Isbister, G.K., Seymour, J.E., Gray, M.R., and Raven, R.J., 2003a. Bites by spiders of the 
family Theraphosidae in humans and canines. Toxicon 41, 519-524. 
Isbister, G.K., Volschenk, E.S., Balit, C.R., and Harvey, M.S., 2003b. Australian scorpion 
stings: a prospective study of definite stings. Toxicon 41, 877-883. 
Isbister, G.K., 2004a. Mouse spider bites (Missulena spp.) and their medical importance. A 
systematic review. Med. J. Aust. 180, 225-227. 
Isbister, G.K., 2004b. Prospective cohort study of definite spider bites in Australian children. 
J. Paediatr. Child Health 40, 360-364. 
Isbister, G.K., and Framenau, V.W., 2004. Australian wolf spider bites (Lycosidae): Clinical 
effects and influence of species on bite circumstances. J. Toxicol.- Clin.Toxicol. 42, 153-
161. 
Isbister, G.K., and Gray, M.R., 2004a. Black house spiders are unlikely culprits in necrotic 
arachnidism: a prospective study. Internal Med. J. 34, 287-289. 
Isbister, G.K., and Gray, M.R., 2004b. Bites by Australian mygalomorph spiders (Araneae, 
Mygalomorphae), including funnel-web spiders (Atracinae) and mouse spiders 
(Actinopodidae: Missulena spp). Toxicon 43, 133-140. 
Isbister, G.K., and White, J., 2004. Clinical consequences of spider bites: recent advances in 
our understanding. Toxicon 43, 477-492. 
Isbister, G.K., Gray, M.R., Balit, C.R., Raven, R.J., Stokes, B.J., Porges, K., Tankel, A.S., 
Turner, E., White, J., and Fisher, M.M., 2005. Funnel-web spider bite: a systematic review 
of recorded clinical cases. Med. J. Aust. 182, 407-411. 
Isbister, G.K., and Fan, H.W., 2011. Spider bite. Lancet 378, 2039-2047. 
Isbister, G.K., and Bawaskar, H.S., 2014. Scorpion envenomation. New Engl. J. Med. 371, 
457-463. 
Isbister, G.K., Page, C.B., Buckley, N.A., Fatovich, D.M., Pascu, O., MacDonald, S.P., 
Calver, L.A., Brown, S.G., and Investigators, R., 2014. Randomized controlled trial of 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
29 
intravenous antivenom versus placebo for latrodectism: the second Redback Antivenom 
Evaluation (RAVE-II) study. Ann. Emerg. Med. 64, 620-628. 
Keegan, H.L., 1980. Scorpions of medical importance. Fitzgerald Publishing, London. 
Kielhorn, K.-H., and Rödel, I., 2011. Badumna longinqua nach Europa eingeschleppt 
(Araneae: Desidae). Arachnologische Mitteilungen / Arachnology Letters 42, 1-4. 
King, G.F., and Hardy, M.C., 2013. Spider-venom peptides: structure, pharmacology, and 
potential for control of insect pests. Annu. Rev. Entomol. 58, 475–496. 
Kleber, J.J., Wagner, P., Felgenhauer, N., Kunze, M., and Zilker, T., 1999. Vergiftung durch 
Skorpionstiche. Dt. Ärztebl. 96, 1710-1715. 
Kovařík, F., and Teruel, R., 2014. Three new scorpion species from the Dominican Republic, 
Greater Antilles (Scorpiones: Buthidae, Scorpionidae). Euscorpius 187, 1-27. 
Kuhn-Nentwig, L., Stöcklin, R., and Nentwig, W., 2011. Venom composition and strategies 
in spiders: Is everything possible? In: Jérôme, C. (Eds), Advances in Insect Physiology, 
Vol. Volume 40, Academic Press, pp. 1-86. 
Kularatne, S.A.M., Dinamithra, N.P., Sivansuthan, S., Weerakoon, K.G.A.D., Thillaimpalam, 
B., Kalyanasundram, V., and Ranawana, K.B., 2015. Clinico-epidemiology of stings and 
envenoming of Hottentotta tamulus (Scorpiones: Buthidae), the Indian red scorpion from 
Jaffna Peninsula in northern Sri Lanka. Toxicon 93, 85-89. 
Lopes, P.H., Bertani, R., Goncalves-de-Andrade, R.M., Nagahama, R.H., van den Berg, 
C.W., and Tambourgi, D.V., 2013. Venom of the Brazilian spider Sicarius ornatus 
(Araneae, Sicariidae) contains active sphingomyelinase D: potential for toxicity after 
envenomation. PLoS Negl. Trop. Dis. 7, e2394. 
Lucas, S.M., Da Silva, P.I., Jr., Bertani, R., and Cardoso, J.L.C., 1994. Mygalomorph spider 
bites: A report on 91 cases in the state of Sao Paulo, Brazil. Toxicon 32, 1211-1215. 
Magalhaes, I.L.F., Brescovit, A.D., and Santos, A.J., 2017. Phylogeny of Sicariidae spiders 
(Araneae: Haplogynae), with a monograph on Neotropical Sicarius. Zool. J. Linn. Soc. 
179, 767-864. 
Malaque, C.M., Castro-Valencia, J.E., Cardoso, J.L., Francca, F.O., Barbaro, K.C., and Fan, 
H.W., 2002. Clinical and epidemiological features of definitive and presumed loxoscelism 
in Sao Paulo, Brazil. Rev. Inst. Med. Trop. Sao Paulo 44, 139-143. 
McKeown, N., Vetter, R.S., and Hendrickson, R.G., 2014. Verified spider bites in Oregon 
(USA) with the intent to assess hobo spider venom toxicity. Toxicon 84, 51-55. 
Mirakabbadi, A.Z., Zolfagharian, H., Hedayat, A., and Jalali, A., 2007. Clinical and 
biochemical manifestations produced by scorpion (Hemiscorpius lepturus) venom in 
experimental animals. J. Venom. Anim. Toxins 13, 758-765. 
Monte, A.A., Bucher-Bartelson, B., and Heard, K.J., 2011. A US perspective of symptomatic 
Latrodectus spp. envenomation and treatment: a National Poison Data System review. 
Annals Pharmacother. 45, 1491-1498. 
Monte, A.A., 2012. Black widow spider (Latrodectus mactans) antivenom in clinical 
practice. Curr. Pharm. Biotechnol. 13, 1935-1939. 
Morgenstern, D., and King, G.F., 2013. The venom optimization hypothesis revisited. 
Toxicon 63, 120-128. 
Müller, G.J., 1993. Black and brown widow spider bites in South Africa. A series of 45 cases. 
S. Afr. Med. J. 83, 399-405. 
Nelsen, D.R., Kelln, W., and Hayes, W.K., 2014. Poke but don't pinch: risk assessment and 
venom metering in the western black widow spider, Latrodectus hesperus. Anim. Behav. 
89, 107-114. 
Nentwig, W., Gnadinger, M., Fuchs, J., and Ceschi, A., 2013. A two year study of verified 
spider bites in Switzerland and a review of the European spider bite literature. Toxicon 73, 
104-110. 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
30 
Nentwig, W., Pantini, P., and Vetter, R.S., 2017. Distribution and medical aspects of 
Loxosceles rufescens, one of the most invasive spiders of the world (Araneae: Sicariidae). 
Toxicon 132, 19-28. 
Nicholson, G.M., Walsh, R., Little, M.J., and Tyler, M.I., 1998. Characterisation of the 
effects of robustoxin, the lethal neurotoxin from the Sydney funnel-web spider Atrax 
robustus, on sodium channel activation and inactivation. Pflügers Archiv 436, 117-126. 
Nisani, Z., Boskovic, D.S., Dunbar, S.G., Kelln, W., and Hayes, W.K., 2012. Investigating 
the chemical profile of regenerated scorpion (Parabuthus transvaalicus) venom in relation 
to metabolic cost and toxicity. Toxicon 60, 315-323. 
Osteen, J.D., Herzig, V., Gilchrist, J., Emrick, J.J., Zhang, C., Wang, X., Castro, J., Garcia-
Caraballo, S., Grundy, L., Rychkov, G.Y., Weyer, A.D., Dekan, Z., Undheim, E.A., 
Alewood, P., Stucky, C.L., Brierley, S.M., Basbaum, A.I., Bosmans, F., King, G.F., and 
Julius, D., 2016. Selective spider toxins reveal a role for the Nav1.1 channel in mechanical 
pain. Nature 534, 494-499. 
Otero, R., Navio, E., Cespedes, F.A., Nunez, M.J., Lozano, L., Moscoso, E.R., Matallana, C., 
Arsuza, N.B., Garcia, J., Fernandez, D., Rodas, J.H., Rodriguez, O.J., Zuleta, J.E., Gomez, 
J.P., Saldarriaga, M., Quintana, J.C., Nunez, V., Cardenas, S., Barona, J., Valderrama, R., 
Paz, N., Diaz, A., Rodriguez, O.L., Martinez, M.D., Maturana, R., Beltran, L.E., Mesa, 
M.B., Paniagua, J., Florez, E., and Lourenco, W.R., 2004. Scorpion envenoming in two 
regions of Colombia: clinical, epidemiological and therapeutic aspects. Trans. Roy. Soc. 
Trop. Med. Hyg. 98, 742-750. 
Ozkan, O., Uzun, R., Adiguzel, S., Cesaretli, Y., and Ertek, M., 2008. Evaluation of scorpion 
sting incidence in Turkey. J . Venom. Anim. Toxins 14, 128-140. 
Pipelzadeh, M.H., Jalali, A., Taraz, M., Pourabbas, R., and Zaremirakabadi, A., 2007. An 
epidemiological and a clinical study on scorpionism by the Iranian scorpion Hemiscorpius 
lepturus. Toxicon 50, 984-992. 
Planas, E., Zobel-Thropp, P.A., Ribera, C., and Binford, G., 2015. Not as docile as it looks? 
Loxosceles venom variation and loxoscelism in the Mediterranean Basin and the Canary 
Islands. Toxicon 93, 11-19. 
Pucca, M.B., Cerni, F.A., Pinheiro Junior, E.L., Bordon Kde, C., Amorim, F.G., Cordeiro, 
F.A., Longhim, H.T., Cremonez, C.M., Oliveira, G.H., and Arantes, E.C., 2015. Tityus 
serrulatus venom - A lethal cocktail. Toxicon 108, 272-284. 
Quintero-Hernandez, V., Jimenez-Vargas, J.M., Gurrola, G.B., Valdivia, H.H., and Possani, 
L.D., 2013. Scorpion venom components that affect ion-channels function. Toxicon 76, 
328-342. 
Razi, E., and Malekanrad, E., 2008. Asymmetric pulmonary edema after scorpion sting: a 
case report. Rev. Inst. Med. Trop. Sao Paulo 50, 347-350. 
Rein, J.O., 2017. The Scorpion Files (http://www.ntnu.no/ub/scorpion-files). 
Ribeiro, L.A., Jorge, M.T., Piesco, R.V., and Nishioka, S.D., 1990. Wolf spider bites in Sao 
Paulo, Brazil - a clinical and epidemiologic study of 515 cases. Toxicon 28, 715-717. 
Rosin, R., 1969. Sting of scorpion Nebo hierichonticus in man. Toxicon 7, 75. 
Ryan, N.M., Buckley, N.A., and Graudins, A., 2017. Treatments for latrodectism - a 
systematic review on their clinical effectiveness. Toxins (Basel) 9, 1-20. 
Saez, N.J., Senff, S., Jensen, J.E., Er, S.Y., Herzig, V., Rash, L.D., and King, G.F., 2010. 
Spider-venom peptides as therapeutics. Toxins 2, 2851-2871. 
Seiter, M., Koç, H., Ullrich, A., and Yağmur, E.A., 2016. The case history of a toxic sting of 
a Leiurus abdullahbayrami scorpion in Turkey. Arachnologische Mitteilungen / 
Arachnology Letters 51, 64-66. 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
 
31 
Shahi, M., Rafinejad, J., Az-Khosravi, L., and Moosavy, S.H., 2015. First report of death due 
to Hemiscorpius acanthocercus envenomation in Iran: Case report. Electron. Physician 7, 
1234-1238. 
Siemens, J., Zhou, S., Piskorowski, R., Nikai, T., Lumpkin, E.A., Basbaum, A.I., King, D., 
and Julius, D., 2006. Spider toxins activate the capsaicin receptor to produce inflammatory 
pain. Nature 444, 208-212. 
Smith, J.J., Herzig, V., King, G.F., and Alewood, P.F., 2013. The insecticidal potential of 
venom peptides. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 70, 3665–3693. 
Stuber, M., and Nentwig, W., 2016. How informative are case studies of spider bites in the 
medical literature? Toxicon 114, 40-44. 
Torabi, E., Behdani, M., Chafi, M.H., Moazzami, R., Sabatier, J.M., Khalaj, V., 
Shahbazzadeh, D., and Bagheri, K.P., 2017. Characteristics and lethality of a novel 
recombinant dermonecrotic venom phospholipase D from Hemiscorpius lepturus. Toxins 
9, 1-17. 
Varl, T., Grenc, D., Kostanjsek, R., and Brvar, M., 2017. Yellow sac spider (Cheiracanthium 
punctorium) bites in Slovenia: case series and review. Wien. Klin. Wochenschr. 
Vetter, R.S., and Isbister, G.K., 2004. Do hobo spider bites cause dermonecrotic injuries? 
Ann. Emerg. Med. 44, 605-607. 
Vetter, R.S., 2005. Arachnids submitted as suspected brown recluse spiders (Araneae: 
Sicariidae): Loxosceles spiders are virtually restricted to their known distributions but are 
perceived to exist throughout the United States. J. Med. Entomol. 42, 512-521. 
Vetter, R.S., and Furbee, R.B., 2006. Caveats in interpreting poison control centre data in 
spider bite epidemiology studies. Public Health 120, 179-181. 
Vetter, R.S., Isbister, G.K., Bush, S.P., and Boutin, L.J., 2006. Verified bites by yellow sac 
spiders (Genus Cheiracanthium) in the United States and Australia: Where is the necrosis? 
Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 74, 1043-1048. 
Vetter, R.S., 2008. Spiders of the genus Loxosceles (Araneae, Sicariidae): a review of 
biological, medical and psychological aspects regarding envenomations. J. Arachnol. 36, 
150-163. 
Vetter, R.S., Swanson, D.L., Weinstein, S.A., and White, J., 2015. Do spiders vector bacteria 
during bites? The evidence indicates otherwise. Toxicon 93, 171-174. 
von Reumont, B.M., Campbell, L.I., and Jenner, R.A., 2014. Quo vadis venomics? A 
roadmap to neglected venomous invertebrates. Toxins 6, 3488-3551. 
Welton, R.E., Williams, D.J., and Liew, D., 2017. Injury trends from envenoming in 
Australia, 2000-2013. Intern. Med. J. 47, 170-176. 
White, J., and Weinstein, S.A., 2014. A phoenix of clinical toxinology: White-tailed spider 
(Lampona spp.) bites. A case report and review of medical significance. Toxicon 87, 76-
80. 
White, J., 2017. Overview of spider envenoming. In: Brent, J. (Eds), Critical care toxicology, 
Springer, pp. 2551-2563. 
Windley, M.J., Herzig, V., Dziemborowicz, S.A., Hardy, M.C., King, G.F., and Nicholson, 
G.M., 2012. Spider-venom peptides as bioinsecticides. Toxins 4, 191–227. 
World Spider Catalog, 2017. World Spider Catalog (http://wsc.nmbe.ch), Vol. 2016. Natural 
History Museum Bern. 
Wright, S.W., Wrenn, K.D., Murray, L., and Seger, D., 1997. Clinical presentation and 
outcome of brown recluse spider bite. Ann. Emerg. Med. 30, 28-32. 
 
 MANUSCRIPT
 
ACCEPTED
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Ethical Statement 
This work reported in this manuscript complied with all institutional, state, and national 
policies governing the ethical treatment of the experimental subjects. Moreover, we wish to 
acknowledge that: 
 
(i) the material has not been published in whole or in part elsewhere; 
 
(ii) the paper is not currently being considered for publication elsewhere;  
 
(iii) all authors have been personally and actively involved in substantive work leading to the 
paper, and will hold themselves jointly and individually responsible for its content. 
 
Tobias J. Hauke 
Volker Herzig 
