 nutrients
Review
Regulation of Muscle Glycogen Metabolism during
Exercise: Implications for Endurance Performance
and Training Adaptations
Mark A. Hearris, Kelly M. Hammond, J. Marc Fell and James P. Morton *
Research Institute for Sport & Exercise Sciences, Liverpool John Moores University, Liverpool L3 3AF, UK;
M.Hearris@2014.ljmu.ac.uk (M.A.H.); K.M.Hammond@2009.ljmu.ac.uk (K.M.H.);
J.M.Fell@2015.ljmu.ac.uk (J.M.F.)
* Correspondence: J.P.Morton@ljmu.ac.uk; Tel.: +44-151-904-6233
Received: 9 January 2018; Accepted: 27 February 2018; Published: 2 March 2018
Abstract: Since the introduction of the muscle biopsy technique in the late 1960s, our understanding
of the regulation of muscle glycogen storage and metabolism has advanced considerably.
Muscle glycogenolysis and rates of carbohydrate (CHO) oxidation are affected by factors such
as exercise intensity, duration, training status and substrate availability. Such changes to the global
exercise stimulus exert regulatory effects on key enzymes and transport proteins via both hormonal
control and local allosteric regulation. Given the well-documented effects of high CHO availability on
promoting exercise performance, elite endurance athletes are typically advised to ensure high CHO
availability before, during and after high-intensity training sessions or competition. Nonetheless,
in recognition that the glycogen granule is more than a simple fuel store, it is now also accepted that
glycogen is a potent regulator of the molecular cell signaling pathways that regulate the oxidative
phenotype. Accordingly, the concept of deliberately training with low CHO availability has now
gained increased popularity amongst athletic circles. In this review, we present an overview of the
regulatory control of CHO metabolism during exercise (with a specific emphasis on muscle glycogen
utilization) in order to discuss the effects of both high and low CHO availability on modulating
exercise performance and training adaptations, respectively.
Keywords: muscle glycogen; glucose; athletes; train-low
1. Introduction
The study of carbohydrate (CHO) metabolism in relation to the field of sport and exercise is an area
of investigation that is now over 100 years old. Almost a century ago, Krogh and Lindhard [1] reported
the efficiency of CHO as a fuel source during exercise and demonstrated that fatigue occurs earlier when
subjects consume a low CHO diet (as compared with a high CHO diet) in the days preceding an exercise
bout undertaken at a fixed workload. Levine et al. [2] also observed that runners who completed
the 1923 Boston marathon exhibited hypoglycemia (<4 mmol·L−1) immediately post-exercise, thus
suggesting that low CHO availability may be linked to fatigue. These early studies provided the initial
evidence that CHO was an important fuel source for sustaining exercise performance.
Nonetheless, much of the foundation of our understanding of CHO metabolism was developed by
Scandinavian researchers in the late 1960s with the introduction of the muscle biopsy technique [3–6].
These researchers provided the platform for modern day sports nutrition practice in a series of studies
that collectively demonstrated that (1) muscle glycogen is depleted during exercise in an intensity
dependent manner; (2) high CHO diets increase muscle glycogen storage and subsequently improve
exercise capacity and (3) muscle glycogen storage is acutely enhanced following prior glycogen
depletion (i.e., the super-compensation effect), the magnitude of which is dependent on high CHO
Nutrients 2018, 10, 298; doi:10.3390/nu10030298
www.mdpi.com/journal/nutrients
 Nutrients 2018, 10, 298
2 of 21
availability [4]. This body of work remains some of the most highly cited papers in the field and is
referenced accordingly in the most recent sport nutrition guidelines [7].
The field continued to develop throughout the 1980s and 1990s with the consistent finding that
CHO feeding during exercise also improved exercise performance and capacity [8–12]. Such studies
relied on the use of stable isotope methodology (to quantify exogenous CHO oxidation) as well as
magnetic resonance imaging to quantify liver glycogen depletion during exercise [13]. As such, it is
now generally accepted that liver glycogen depletion is also a major contributing cause of fatigue
during endurance exercise. It is noteworthy, however, that CHO feeding can also improve physical
performance via non-metabolic effects through modulating regions of the brain associated with reward
and motor control [14,15].
In addition to a simple “fuel store”, our understanding of CHO metabolism has advanced
considerably in recent years with the use of more sophisticated molecular biology techniques. In this
regard, it is now accepted that glycogen is more than a store [16], acting as a regulator of many key
cell signaling pathways related to promoting the oxidative phenotype, insulin sensitivity, contractile
processes, protein degradation and autophagic processes [16,17]. When considered this way, it is
remarkable that whole body storage of only 500 g of substrate can exert such profound effects on
multiple tissues, organs and systems, the results of which have considerable effects on human health
and performance.
The aim of this review is to, therefore, present a contemporary discussion of our understanding
of CHO metabolism (focusing on muscle glycogen metabolism) with specific reference to sport and
exercise. We begin by presenting an overview of CHO storage followed by outlining regulatory steps
in the control of both muscle glycogen metabolism and muscle glucose uptake. We then proceed
to discuss how manipulating substrate availability (i.e., CHO availability itself) and alterations to
specifics of the exercise protocol (e.g., intensity, duration) and training status of the athlete can all
affect the magnitude of CHO utilized during exercise. The previous section, therefore, provides the
platform to discuss the well-documented effects of both endogenous (i.e., liver and muscle glycogen)
and exogenous (i.e., CHO feeding during exercise) CHO availability on exercise performance. Finally,
we close by discussing the role of CHO availability on modulating aspects of training adaptation,
a field of research that has grown rapidly in the last decade.
2. Overview of CHO Storage
Carbohydrate is predominantly stored as glycogen in both the liver (approximately 100 g) and
muscle (approximately 400 g) with 5 g also circulating in the blood stream as glucose. In skeletal
muscle, glycogen is typically expressed as mmol·kg−1 of dry muscle (d.w.) where concentrations in
whole muscle homogenate can vary from 50 to 800 mmol·kg−1 d.w., depending on training status,
fatigue status and dietary CHO intake (see Figure 1). Muscle glycogen can also be expressed as
mmol·kg−1 of wet muscle (ww), as commonly reported in the early classical literature, where values
range between 10 to 180 mmol·kg−1 ww [3–6].
The glycogen granule itself is essentially a tiered assembly of glucose units (i.e., polymers)
that is formed in a branch-like structure via 1:4 and 1:6 α-glycosidic bonds. Glycogen granules are
formed on the protein, glycogenin, and can be as large as 42 nm in diameter as well as potentially
having 12 tiers. At its maximal size, the granule can consist of as much as 55,000 glucosyl units [18].
Nonetheless, the majority of glycogen granules in human skeletal muscle are reported to be 25 nm
in diameter with approximately eight tiers [19]. Although muscle glycogen has traditionally been
quantified through acid hydrolysis in whole muscle homogenate, it is, of course, apparent that
glycogen is expressed and utilized in fibre type specific patterns as well as being located in specific
intracellular locations within muscle cells themselves. Using histochemical techniques, it has typically
been reported that resting glycogen content is not apparently different between type I and type II
fibres [20–22]. Nonetheless, using biochemical quantification (a more quantitative measure), it has
been reported that type II fibres may contain 50–100 mmol·kg−1 d.w. more glycogen than type I
 Nutrients 2018, 10, 298
3 of 21
fibres [9,23]. Regardless of method of quantification, glycogen depletion during exercise is dependent
on fibre type recruitment patterns, according to the specifics of the exercise protocol. For example,
during prolonged steady state type protocols, type I fibres show preferential depletion, whereas during
near maximal or supra-maximal type activity, type II fibres become recruited and show considerable
glycogen depletion [24]. In activities involving high-intensity intermittent exercise (e.g., a soccer
match), considerable glycogen depletion is observed in both muscle fibre types (54% and 46% of type I
and II fibres classed as completely or almost empty, respectively) thus reflecting recruitment patterns
to support both moderate and high-intensity running speeds [25].
The use of transmission electron microscopy (TEM) has also revealed that glycogen is stored in
three distinct sub-cellular pools contained in the myofibrils (intra-myofibrillar glycogen, 5–15% of
total glycogen pool), between myofibrils (inter-myofibrallar glycogen, 75% of total glycogen pool)
and beneath the sarcolemmal region (sub-sarcolemmal glycogen, 5–15% of total glycogen pool).
In endurance trained athletes, it appears that both intra-myofibrillar and sub-sarcolemmal glycogen
stores are greater in type I fibres compared with type II fibres, whereas inter-myofibrillar glycogen
storage is greater in type II fibres [26]. In relation to acute exercise itself, it is also apparent that
intra-myofibrillar glycogen stores show preferential depletion [27], and the failure to restore this
specific pool in the immediate hours after exercise is associated with impaired Ca2+ release from the
sarcoplasmic reticulum [28,29]. Clearly, our understanding of muscle glycogen storage has advanced
considerably in recent years, and there remains a definitive need to further quantify intracellular
glycogen utilization in a variety of exercise settings, according to training status, age and gender.
Nutrients 2018, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW  
3 of 21 
 
Regardless of method of quantification, glycogen depletion during exercise is dependent on fibre 
type recruitment patterns, according to the specifics of the exercise protocol. For example, during 
prolonged steady state type protocols, type I fibres show preferential depletion, whereas during near 
maximal or supra-maximal type activity, type II fibres become recruited and show considerable 
glycogen depletion [24]. In activities involving high-intensity intermittent exercise (e.g., a soccer 
match), considerable glycogen depletion is observed in both muscle fibre types (54% and 46% of type 
I and II fibres classed as completely or almost empty, respectively) thus reflecting recruitment 
patterns to support both moderate and high-intensity running speeds [25]. 
The use of transmission electron microscopy (TEM) has also revealed that glycogen is stored in 
three distinct sub-cellular pools contained in the myofibrils (intra-myofibrillar glycogen, 5–15% of 
total glycogen pool), between myofibrils (inter-myofibrallar glycogen, 75% of total glycogen pool) 
and beneath the sarcolemmal region (sub-sarcolemmal glycogen, 5–15% of total glycogen pool). In 
endurance trained athletes, it appears that both intra-myofibrillar and sub-sarcolemmal glycogen 
stores are greater in type I fibres compared with type II fibres, whereas inter-myofibrillar glycogen 
storage is greater in type II fibres [26]. In relation to acute exercise itself, it is also apparent that intra-
myofibrillar glycogen stores show preferential depletion [27], and the failure to restore this specific 
pool in the immediate hours after exercise is associated with impaired Ca2+ release from the 
sarcoplasmic reticulum [28,29]. Clearly, our understanding of muscle glycogen storage has advanced 
considerably in recent years, and there remains a definitive need to further quantify intracellular 
glycogen utilization in a variety of exercise settings, according to training status, age and gender. 
 
Figure 1. Variations in muscle glycogen storage according to fatigue status, training status and dietary 
carbohydrate (CHO) intake (data are compiled from males only and from several studies including 
Taylor et al. [30]; Bartlett et al. [31]; Arkinstall et al. [32]; Gollnick et al. [24]; Coyle et al. [8]). 
3. Regulation of CHO Metabolism 
There are a number of potential sites of control that can regulate the interaction of CHO and 
lipid metabolism during endurance exercise (see Figure 2). These include the availability of intra-
muscular and extra-muscular substrate (controlled by diet and the action of key hormones such as 
the catecholamines and insulin), the abundance of transport proteins involved in transporting 
substrates across both the plasma and mitochondrial membranes and, of course, the activity of the 
key regulatory enzymes involved in the metabolic pathways. The activity of regulatory enzymes can 
be modified acutely through covalent modification (i.e., phosphorylation and dephosphorylation, 
largely under hormonal control) and/or allosteric regulation via important signalling molecules that 
Figure 1. Variations in muscle glycogen storage according to fatigue status, training status and dietary
carbohydrate (CHO) intake (data are compiled from males only and from several studies including
Taylor et al. [30]; Bartlett et al. [31]; Arkinstall et al. [32]; Gollnick et al. [24]; Coyle et al. [8]).
3. Regulation of CHO Metabolism
There are a number of potential sites of control that can regulate the interaction of CHO and lipid
metabolism during endurance exercise (see Figure 2). These include the availability of intra-muscular
and extra-muscular substrate (controlled by diet and the action of key hormones such as the
catecholamines and insulin), the abundance of transport proteins involved in transporting substrates
across both the plasma and mitochondrial membranes and, of course, the activity of the key regulatory
enzymes involved in the metabolic pathways. The activity of regulatory enzymes can be modified
acutely through covalent modification (i.e., phosphorylation and dephosphorylation, largely under
hormonal control) and/or allosteric regulation via important signalling molecules that are produced
 Nutrients 2018, 10, 298
4 of 21
in the muscle as a result of contraction (e.g., adenosine diphosphate (ADP), adenosine monophosphate
(AMP), inosine monophosphate (IMP), inorganic phosphate (Pi), calcium (Ca2+), hydrogen ion (H+).
Enzyme activity can also be modified through substrate activation or product inhibition such that
increasing the substrate concentration increases catalysis, whereas increased product concentration
may inhibit the reaction. Finally, enzyme activity can be regulated chronically through increasing
the muscle cell’s content of the actual enzyme protein (i.e., more of the enzyme is actually present)
as would occur with endurance training. Clearly, muscle cells possess a highly coordinated and
regulatory network of signalling and feedback pathways which function to ensure ATP demand is
matched by ATP synthesis. From a physiological perspective, key factors, such as exercise intensity,
duration, nutritional status, training status etc., can all regulate substrate utilization during exercise,
largely through influencing the potential regulatory control points discussed above. This section
will outline the regulation of CHO utilization during endurance exercise, where we pay particular
attention to what are currently considered the predominant sites of regulation that are relevant to the
specific situation.
Nutrients 2018, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW  
4 of 21 
 
are produced in the muscle as a result of contraction (e.g., adenosine diphosphate (ADP), adenosine 
monophosphate (AMP), inosine monophosphate (IMP), inorganic phosphate (Pi), calcium (Ca2+), 
hydrogen ion (H+). Enzyme activity can also be modified through substrate activation or product 
inhibition such that increasing the substrate concentration increases catalysis, whereas increased 
product concentration may inhibit the reaction. Finally, enzyme activity can be regulated chronically 
through increasing the muscle cell’s content of the actual enzyme protein (i.e., more of the enzyme is 
actually present) as would occur with endurance training. Clearly, muscle cells possess a highly 
coordinated and regulatory network of signalling and feedback pathways which function to ensure 
ATP demand is matched by ATP synthesis. From a physiological perspective, key factors, such as 
exercise intensity, duration, nutritional status, training status etc., can all regulate substrate 
utilization during exercise, largely through influencing the potential regulatory control points 
discussed above. This section will outline the regulation of CHO utilization during endurance 
exercise, where we pay particular attention to what are currently considered the predominant sites 
of regulation that are relevant to the specific situation.  
 
Figure 2. Overview of CHO metabolism and main control points. Key regulatory enzymes are well 
recognized as phosphorylase (PHOS), hexokinase (HK), phosphofructokinase (PFK), lactate 
dehydrogenase (LDH) and pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH). Additionally, the rate of muscle glucose 
uptake can also determine the flux through glycolysis. Abbreviations: ADP, Adenosine diphosphate; 
AK, Adenylate kinase; AKT, Protein kinase B; AMP, Adenosine monophosphate; ATP, Adenosine 
triphosphate; Ca2+, Calcium; CHO, Carbohydrate; CK, Creatine kinase; Cr, Creatine; CS, Citrate 
synthase; ETC, Electron transport chain; G-1-P, Glucose-1-phosphate; G-6-P, Glucose-6-phosphate; 
Glu, Gluose; GLUT4, Glucose transporter 4; H+, Hydrogen ion; H2O, water; IRS-1, Insulin receptor 
substrate 1; HK, Hexokinase; LDH, Lactate dehydrogenase; O2, Oxygen; NAD, Nicotinamide adenine 
dinucleotide; TCA cycle, Tricarboxylic acid cycle; Pi, phosphate; PCr, Phosphocreatine; PFK, 
Phosphofructokinase; PhK, Phosphorylase kinase; PHOS, Glycogen phosphorylase; PI3-K, 
Phosphoinositide 3-kinase. 
3.1. Effects of Exercise Intensity and Duration 
As exercise intensity progresses from moderate (i.e., 65% VO2max) to high-intensity (85% VO2max), 
muscle glycogenolysis, liver glycogenolysis and glucose uptake increase such that CHO metabolism 
predominates [33,34]. In contrast, there is a reduction in whole body lipid oxidation due to a 
reduction in both plasma free fatty acids (FFA) and intramuscular triglyceride oxidation. Maximal 
rates of lipid oxidation are considered to occur around 65% VO2max, though this is dependent on a 
number of other factors, such as training status, gender and diet [35]. 
Figure 2. Overview of CHO metabolism and main control points. Key regulatory enzymes are well
recognized as phosphorylase (PHOS), hexokinase (HK), phosphofructokinase (PFK), lactate dehydrogenase
(LDH) and pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH). Additionally, the rate of muscle glucose uptake can also
determine the flux through glycolysis. Abbreviations: ADP, Adenosine diphosphate; AK, Adenylate
kinase; AKT, Protein kinase B; AMP, Adenosine monophosphate; ATP, Adenosine triphosphate;
Ca2+, Calcium; CHO, Carbohydrate; CK, Creatine kinase; Cr, Creatine; CS, Citrate synthase;
ETC, Electron transport chain; G-1-P, Glucose-1-phosphate; G-6-P, Glucose-6-phosphate; Glu, Gluose;
GLUT4, Glucose transporter 4; H+, Hydrogen ion; H2O, water; IRS-1, Insulin receptor substrate 1;
HK, Hexokinase; LDH, Lactate dehydrogenase; O2, Oxygen; NAD, Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide;
TCA cycle, Tricarboxylic acid cycle; Pi, phosphate; PCr, Phosphocreatine; PFK, Phosphofructokinase;
PhK, Phosphorylase kinase; PHOS, Glycogen phosphorylase; PI3-K, Phosphoinositide 3-kinase.
3.1. Effects of Exercise Intensity and Duration
As exercise intensity progresses from moderate (i.e., 65% VO2max) to high-intensity (85% VO2max),
muscle glycogenolysis, liver glycogenolysis and glucose uptake increase such that CHO metabolism
predominates [33,34]. In contrast, there is a reduction in whole body lipid oxidation due to a reduction
in both plasma free fatty acids (FFA) and intramuscular triglyceride oxidation. Maximal rates of lipid
oxidation are considered to occur around 65% VO2max, though this is dependent on a number of other
factors, such as training status, gender and diet [35].
 Nutrients 2018, 10, 298
5 of 21
The breakdown of muscle glycogen to glucose-1-phosphate is under the control of glycogen
phosphorylase, and this reaction requires both glycogen and Pi as substrates. Phosphorylase, in turn,
exists as a more active a form (which is under the control of phosphorylation by phosphorylase kinase)
and also as a more inactive b form (which exists in a dephosphorylated form due to the action of
protein phosphatase 1). Given that phosphorylase can be transformed via covalent modification (i.e.,
phosphorylation by phosphorylase kinase) mediated through epinephrine, it would be reasonable
to expect that greater phosphorylase transformation from b to a may be one mechanism to explain
the increased glycogenolysis evident with increasing exercise intensity. This would also be logical
given that sarcoplasmic Ca2+ levels would be increased with high-intensity exercise (given the
need for more rapid cross-bridge cycling) and that Ca2+ is a potent positive allosteric regulator
of phosphorylase kinase through binding to the calmodulin subunit [36]. However, the percentage
of phosphorylase in the more active a form does not appear to be increased with exercise intensity
and, in actual fact, is decreased after only 10 min of high intensity exercise, which may be related
to the reduced pH associated with intense exercise [37]. Whereas this mechanism of transformation
(mediated by Ca2+ signalling) may be in operation within seconds of the onset of contraction [38],
it appears that post-transformational mechanisms are in operation during more prolonged periods
of high-intensity exercise given that glycogenolysis still occurs despite reduced transformation.
In this regard, vital signals related to the energy status of the cell play more prominent roles. Indeed,
as exercise intensity progresses from moderate to high-intensity exercise, the rate of ATP hydrolysis
increases so much that there is a greater accumulation of ADP, AMP and Pi. In this way, the increased
accumulation of Pi as a result of increased ATP hydrolysis can increase glycogenolysis, as it provides
the increased substrate required for the reaction. Furthermore, greater accumulations of free ADP and
AMP can also subsequently fine-tune the activity of phosphorylase a through allosteric regulation [37].
In addition to muscle glycogen, the contribution of plasma glucose to ATP production also
increases with exercise intensity. The most likely explanation for this is due to increased muscle
blood flow (and hence substrate delivery) in addition to increased muscle fibre recruitment [39].
The delivery of glucose to the contracting muscle is, of course, also a reflection of increased rates of
liver glycogenolysis in accordance with increases in exercise intensity [40]. The regulation of liver
metabolism during exercise is beyond the scope of the present review, and the reader is directed to the
comprehensive review by Gonzalez et al. [34]. Although glucose uptake is also regulated by GLUT4
content, GLUT4 is unlikely to play a role in this situation given that GLUT4 translocation to the plasma
membrane is not increased with exercise intensity [41]. Once glucose is transported into the cytosol,
it is phosphorylated to glucose-6-phosphate under the control of hexokinase. Evidence suggests that
hexokinase activity is also not limiting given that patients with type 2 diabetes (who have reduced
maximal hexokinase activity) display normal patterns of exercise-induced glucose uptake likely due to
normal perfusion and GLUT4 translocation [42]. In contrast, during intense exercise at near maximal
or supra-maximal intensity, glucose phosphorylation may be rate limiting to glucose utilization given
that high rates of glucose-6-phosphate, secondary to muscle glycogen breakdown, can directly inhibit
hexokinase activity [43]. Once glucose enters the glycolytic pathway, the rate limiting enzyme to
glycolysis is considered to be phosphofructokinase (PFK). PFK is allosterically activated by ADP,
AMP and Pi, and this mechanism is likely to explain high rates of glycolysis during intense exercise
even in the face of metabolic acidosis when PFK could be inhibited.
In contrast to high intensity exercise, prolonged steady state exercise lasting several hours is
characterized by a shift towards increased lipid oxidation and reduced CHO oxidation rates [44].
This shift in oxidation rates is accompanied by an increased contribution of plasma FFA towards
energy expenditure and a decreased reliance on both muscle glycogen and intramuscular triglycerides
(IMTGs) [44]. Studies examining the regulatory mechanisms underpinning this shift in substrate
utilization have suggested that a reduction in muscle glycogen availability (due to progressive
glycogen depletion and hence a reduced glycolytic flux) down-regulate pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH)
activity, thereby leading to reduced CHO oxidation. In addition, progressive increases in plasma FFA
 Nutrients 2018, 10, 298
6 of 21
availability (due to continual lipolysis in adipose tissue) stimulate lipid oxidation. The down-regulation
of PDH activity as exercise duration progresses may be due to reduced pyruvate flux, therefore,
reducing the substrate production required for the PDH reaction [44]. In addition, more recent data
demonstrate an up-regulation of PDH kinase activity during exercise which would, therefore, directly
inhibit PDH activity [45]. Taken together, these data are consistent with the many observations that
increasing or decreasing substrate availability is one of the most potent regulators of fuel utilization
patterns during exercise, and this concept is discussed in the next section.
3.2. Effects of Substrate Availability
Modifying substrate availability through dietary manipulation (such as loading regimens,
pre-exercise meals or providing enhanced substrate availability during exercise) has been consistently
shown to alter metabolic regulation during endurance exercise through various control points.
Increasing muscle glycogen concentration enhances glycogenolysis during exercise [46] by enhancing
phosphorylase activity given that glycogen is a substrate for phosphorylase. The enhanced glycogenolysis
with elevated glycogen stores does not appear to affect muscle glucose uptake [46,47]. In addition to
glycogenolysis, muscle glycogen also appears to be a potent regulator of PDH activity (and thus CHO
oxidation) during exercise. Indeed, commencing exercise with reduced muscle glycogen attenuates the
exercise-induced increase in PDH activity and vice versa [48], likely due to reduced glycolytic flux as
well as an increased resting content of pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4 (PDK4, the kinase responsible
for deactivating PDH) when glycogen concentrations are low. PDH regulation appears particularly
sensitive to nutritional status, even at rest. In fact, just 3 days of a low CHO (but increased fat) diet
up-regulates PDH kinase activity and down-regulates PDH activity [49].
Although the effects of exercise intensity on substrate utilization were discussed previously,
it appears that muscle glycogen availability can influence fuel metabolism over and above that of
exercise intensity. Indeed, Arkinstall et al. [47] observed that glycogen utilization was enhanced during
exercise at 45% VO2max that was commenced with high glycogen (591 mmol·kg−1 d.w.) as opposed to
exercise at 70% VO2max commenced with low glycogen concentration (223 mmol·kg−1 d.w.), despite the
higher intensity. In contrast to glycogen utilization and CHO oxidation rates, lipid oxidation was
highest when exercise was commenced with reduced glycogen stores. The shift towards fat oxidation
when pre-exercise muscle glycogen is low is likely mediated by a number of contributing factors. Firstly,
a reduced glycogen availability is associated with an increased epinephrine concentration and plasma
FFA availability, thus favoring conditions for augmented lipolysis and lipid oxidation, respectively,
compared with conditions of high glycogen concentration [47]. However, when a pre-exercise meal is
ingested, and glucose is infused during glycogen depleted exercise such that minimal differences exist
between plasma FFA and epinephrine, lipid oxidation is still augmented [50]. In such circumstances,
available evidence points to regulation within the muscle cell itself and more specifically, a carnitine
mediated increase in lipid oxidation. Carnitine is important given its role as a substrate for carnitine
palmitoyltransferase 1 (CPT-1) activity, the rate limiting enzyme that facilitates long chain fatty acid
entry to the mitochondria. Indeed, these researchers observed lower PDH activity and acetyl CoA
and acetyl carnitine content, and an increased free carnitine concentration during glycogen depleted
exercise when compared with glycogen loaded conditions. Interestingly, acetyl CoA carboxylase (ACC)
phosphorylation increased and malonyl CoA decreased similarly in both conditions, despite higher
AMP activated protein kinase (AMPK) activity when glycogen was reduced. Such data provide
further support for a critical role of carnitine in regulating the interaction between CHO and lipid
utilization [51] and suggest that malonyl CoA (as an allosteric inhibitor of CPT-1 activity) does not play
a major role in fine-tuning fat oxidation in human skeletal muscle. Nonetheless, it is acknowledged
that the apparent disconnect between malonyl CoA, CPT-1 activity and in vivo lipid oxidation may be
dependent on palmitoyl-CoA concentrations [52].
In addition to muscle glycogen availability, consuming CHO in a pre-exercise meal and/or
during exercise also induces potent effects on the regulation of CHO and lipid metabolism during
 Nutrients 2018, 10, 298
7 of 21
exercise. Indeed, CHO ingestion during exercise appears to suppress or even abolish hepatic glucose
output during exercise, thus attenuating the decline in liver glycogen content [53]. In relation to
lipid metabolism, CHO feeding attenuates lipolysis in adipose tissue (as mediated via anti-lipolytic
effects of insulin) such that plasma FFA availability is reduced during exercise undertaken in CHO fed
conditions [54]. Horowitz et al. [54] studied male participants during 60 min of exercise at 45% VO2max
in fasted conditions, or 1 h after consuming 0.8 g·kg−1 of glucose (to induce a high insulin response)
or 0.8 g·kg−1 fructose (to induce a low insulin response), or in an additional glucose trial during
which intralipid and heparin were infused so as to maintain plasma FFA availability in the face of high
insulin. In accordance with the insulin response in CHO fed conditions, lipolysis (as indicated by rate of
appearance of glycerol), FFA availability and lipid oxidation were reduced. However, when intralipid
and heparin were infused during the additional glucose trial, lipid oxidation rates were enhanced by
30% (4.0 µmol·kg−1·min−1) compared with the glucose only trial (3.1 µmol·kg−1·min−1) but were still
not restored to levels occurring during fasted exercise (6.1 µmol·kg−1·min−1). Taken together, whilst
these data suggest that only small elevations in insulin can attenuate lipolysis (i.e., 10–30 µU/mL),
they also demonstrate a limitation within the muscle cell itself during CHO fed conditions.
In an effort to ascertain the source of limitation to lipid oxidation within the muscle following
CHO feeding, Coyle et al. [55] infused octanoate (a medium chain fatty acid, MCFA) or palmitate
(a long chain fatty acid, LCFA) during 40 min of exercise at 50% VO2max after an overnight fast or
60 min after ingesting 1.4 g·kg−1 of glucose. As expected (based on the previously discussed study),
plasma FFA and lipid oxidation were higher in the fasted trials whilst CHO oxidation was lower
compared with the glucose trials. However, the major finding of this study was that the percentage
of palmitate oxidized during the glucose trial was reduced compared with fasting (70% vs. 86%,
respectively) whereas octanoate was unaffected (99% vs. 98%, respectively). These data, therefore,
suggest that LCFA uptake into the mitochondria is reduced with CHO feeding. When taken in the
context of previous sections, it becomes apparent that any condition which accelerates glycolytic flux
(e.g., increased intensity, muscle glycogen, glucose feeding) can down-regulate intramuscular lipid
metabolism. Furthermore, the increased insulin and decreased epinephrine levels which accompany
glucose ingestion during exercise appear to result in the attenuation of intra-muscular hormone
sensitive lipase (HSL) activity [56], thus highlighting an additional point of control.
3.3. Effects of Training Status
Endurance training results in a number of profound physiological and metabolic adaptations
which function to reduce the degree of perturbations to homeostasis for a given exercise intensity
and ultimately, delay the onset of fatigue. Adaptations to endurance training are most recognized
functionally by an increase in maximal oxygen uptake as well as a rightward shift in the lactate
threshold. From a metabolic perspective, the most prominent adaptation is an increase in the size and
number of mitochondria (i.e., mitochondrial biogenesis), which essentially permits a closer matching
between ATP requirements and production via oxidative metabolism. The adaptive response of muscle
mitochondria is also accompanied by increases in capillary density, substrate transport proteins and
increased activity of the enzymes involved in the main metabolic pathways. In addition, endurance
training increases the capacity for skeletal muscle, but not liver [34], to store glycogen and triglycerides,
thereby increasing substrate availability. In relation to substrate utilization during exercise following
endurance training, the most notable response is a reduction in CHO utilization with a concomitant
increase in lipid oxidation [57].
For a given exercise intensity, glycogen utilization is reduced with exercise training [58], an effect
that is confined locally to the actual muscles that were trained [59]. The reduced glycogenolysis
observed after training is not due to any change in phosphorylation transformation but rather,
allosteric mechanisms [60,61]. Indeed, exercise in the trained state is associated with reduced contents
of ADP, AMP and Pi, thereby providing a mechanism leading to reduced phosphorylase activity.
Le Blanc et al. [61] also observed reduced pyruvate and lactate production during exercise undertaken
 Nutrients 2018, 10, 298
8 of 21
in the trained state as well as reduced PDH activity. As a result of the reduced CHO flux, it is, therefore,
likely that the attenuated pyruvate production (in addition to reduced ADP accumulation) may
have attenuated PDH activity. In addition to training-induced reductions in muscle glycogenolysis,
several investigators have observed that training reduces exercise-induced liver glycogenolysis [34].
In this way, trained individuals will have more liver glycogen available late in exercise to thereby
maintain the plasma glucose concentration and hence, support maintenance of the desired exercise
intensity. There is some evidence that endurance training also increases gluconeogenesis following
training [62]. In accordance with reduced rates of glucose production, muscle glucose uptake is
reduced when exercise is undertaken at the same absolute workload following a period of endurance
training [63].
Despite the fact that training increases total muscle GLUT4, the reduction in exercise-induced
muscle glucose uptake is likely caused by a reduced translocation of GLUT4 to the sarcolemma
following training, thereby reducing the capacity to transport glucose [64]. One particular study
utilized a knee extensor training and exercise model where only one limb was trained but yet both limbs
performed the exercise protocol before and after training. In this way, training-induced alterations
in hormonal and cardiovascular status were minimized and the reduced glucose uptake and GLUT4
translocation were likely mediated by local contractile factors. In summarizing the link between liver
glucose production and muscle glucose uptake, it is generally accepted that training-induced changes
in hormone concentrations such as epinephrine, insulin and glucagon are unable to explain all of the
effects [65]. Rather, it is possible that the actual rate of muscle glucose uptake acts as a feedback signal
to regulate glucose output from the liver [65].
4. CHO and Exercise Performance
Given the effects of exercise intensity, duration and training status on muscle glycogen utilization,
it follows that glycogen depletion (in both muscle and liver) is a major cause of fatigue in both
endurance and high-intensity (intermittent) type activities. As such, traditional nutritional advice for
these types of activities (whether it is competitive situations or training sessions) is to ensure high daily
CHO intake before, during and after the activity so as to promote both performance and recovery.
4.1. Muscle Glycogen and CHO Loading
The basic principles of CHO loading were developed in the late 1960s where it was identified
that a period of exhaustive exercise followed by several days of high dietary CHO intake induces
a super-compensation effect so that glycogen storage is augmented [3,4]. A less extreme form of CHO
loading was developed in the 1980s where Sherman et al. [66] observed that a simple exercise taper in
conjunction with several days of increased dietary CHO intake was also sufficient to increase glycogen
storage. It is now generally accepted that trained athletes can increase glycogen storage in both type I
and II fibres within 24–48 h of increased CHO intake [67]. In relation to practical application, it is also
suggested that high glycemic foods are superior to low glycemic foods [68] in augmenting glycogen
storage and that dietary intakes of 8–12 g·kg−1 per day are likely required to “maximize” glycogen
storage [7]. The general consensus from the wealth of studies undertaken in the last 40 years is that
CHO loading can improve performance and capacity when the exercise is greater than 90 min in
duration [69]. The enhanced performance effect is likely initially mediated by a delay in the time-point
at which energy availability becomes limiting to the maintenance of the desired workload, which,
in the case of race pace, is dependent on sustained and high rates of CHO oxidation [70,71]. Indeed,
in reviewing the literature, Hawley et al. [69] cited that CHO loading can improve exercise capacity
by approximately 20%, and time trial performance can increase by 2–3%. In addition to providing
substrate availability for ATP production, it is now recognized that glycogen availability (especially
the intramyofibrillar storage pool) can directly modulate contractile function. Indeed, a series of
studies from Ørtenblad and colleagues [28,29,72] have collectively shown preferential utilization of
this storage pool during exercise in a manner that also correlates with impaired Ca2+ release from the
 Nutrients 2018, 10, 298
9 of 21
sarcoplasmic reticulum. Such impaired excitation–contraction coupling is likely to be of particular
importance during situations where higher power outputs and sprint finishes are required in the very
late and finishing stages of races.
4.2. Pre-Exercise CHO Availability
Whereas the 1960s and 1970s focused on CHO loading studies, research in the next two decades
examined the effects of pre-exercise feeding as well as consuming additional CHO during exercise.
Pre-exercise feeding (i.e., 3–4 h before competition) is not only advantageous as it can lead to further
elevations in muscle glycogen content [73] but can also restore liver glycogen content, which is usually
depleted after an overnight fast. The latter is particularly important given that liver glycogen content
is also related to exercise capacity [13]. Sherman et al. [74] observed that time trial performance
after 90 min of steady state exercise at 70% VO2max was greater when 150 g of CHO was consumed
before exercise compared with 75 g of CHO, both of which were greater than no meal. The enhanced
performance effect was associated with the maintenance of blood glucose concentration late into
exercise, which is important because liver glucose production and muscle glucose uptake and oxidation
become more important when muscle glycogen concentrations begin to decline. In a further study,
the same authors also observed that performance can be further increased when CHO is ingested
during exercise in addition to a pre-exercise meal [75]. As such, current CHO guidelines for pre-exercise
feeding advise an intake of 1–4 g·kg−1 body mass, 3–4 h prior to exercise [7].
4.3. CHO Feeding during Exercise
In addition to high endogenous pre-exercise muscle and liver glycogen stores, it is widely accepted
that exogenous CHO feeding during exercise also improves physical elements of performance [76].
Whereas it was generally accepted that exogenous CHO oxidation rates were limited at approximately
1 g·min−1 due to saturation of intestinal glucose transporters, it is now known that exogenous CHO
oxidation rates can increase to 1.8 g·min−1 with the addition of sucrose or fructose to the CHO
blend [77]. When taken together, it is currently thought that CHO feeding during exercise may,
therefore, augment exercise performance via multiple mechanisms, consisting of muscle glycogen
sparing [22], liver glycogen sparing [53] and maintenance of plasma glucose and CHO oxidation
rates [8]. The role of CHO feeding in reducing liver glycogen breakdown as a performance enhancing
mechanism is gaining increasing recognition [78]. In simple terms, a liver glycogen sparing effect
ensures that more liver glycogen is, therefore, available late in exercise, thereby maintaining plasma
glucose availability and delivery to the muscle to meet the CHO oxidation rates necessary to sustain
the required workload.
It is noteworthy that exogenous CHO feeding during exercise also improves performance [11]
when exercise duration is <60 min (i.e., where muscle and liver glycogen availability is not likely
limiting), an effect that is not apparent when glucose is directly infused to the bloodstream during
exercise [79]. Such data suggest that CHO feeding may also improve exercise performance via
non-metabolic effects but through direct effects on the central nervous system [14]. To this end,
the last decade of research has resulted in a growing body of literature demonstrating that simply
“rinsing” CHO in the oral cavity (for 10-s periods every 5–10 min during exercise) is also ergogenic
to performance [80], an effect that is independent of sweetness [15] and that is especially apparent in
the absence of a pre-exercise CHO meal [81] and low pre-exercise muscle glycogen [82], although this
effect is not always evident [83].
The conventional approach to CHO fueling during exercise is to consume 6–8% CHO beverages,
although relying solely on this approach does not allow for flexibility in terms of individual variations
in body mass or actual fluid requirements given variations in ambient conditions [84]. As such,
many athletes rely on a CHO fueling approach that is based on a combination of solids (e.g., bars),
semi-solids (e.g., gels) and fluids (e.g., sports drinks) so as to collectively meet their personalized
exogenous CHO targets, typically in the region of 30–90 g·h−1, depending on exercise duration.
 Nutrients 2018, 10, 298
10 of 21
Nevertheless, although there is little difference in exogenous CHO oxidation rates (albeit in fluid
matched conditions) between the aforementioned sources [85,86], it is noteworthy that many athletes
experience gastrointestinal discomfort when attempting to hit these targets, possibly related to extreme
differences in osmolality between commercially available CHO gels [87] as well as the presence of
fibre, fat and protein in energy bars [88]. As such, it is now advised that athletes should clearly practice
their approach to in-competition fueling during training sessions of a similar intensity and duration as
competition. As a general rule of thumb, it is suggested that 30–60 g·h−1 of CHO (glucose polymers
e.g., maltodextrin) is consumed during events lasting < 60–150 min [78], whereas in events > 2.5–3 h,
60–90 g·h−1 (glucose/fructose blends) is the recommended rate [7]. Whilst beyond the scope of the
present review, it is noteworthy that CHO ingestion (in either drink or gel format) during team sport
type activity (i.e., <90 min duration) can also improve performance of technical skills (see reference [89]
for an extensive review on this topic), thus providing further evidence for the ergogenic properties of
CHO feeding during exercise.
5. CHO and Training Adaptations
5.1. Overview of Molecular Regulation of Training Adaptations
Skeletal muscle is a highly malleable tissue that has the ability to undergo major adaptations
and alter its phenotype in response to exercise stimuli.
In relation to endurance training,
prominent adaptations include increased mitochondrial biogenesis, lipid oxidation and angiogenesis,
recognized functionally by a rightward shift of the lactate threshold curve [90]. Upon the onset
of muscle contraction, the accumulation of multiple metabolic signals generated during exercise
(i.e., increased AMP/ATP ratio, Ca2+ flux, lactate, hypoxia and energy availability) initiates a cascade
of events that activate or suppress specific signalling pathways that regulate gene expression and
protein translation [91–94]. The dynamic fluctuation in content and subcellular location of metabolites
activates regulatory cell signalling kinases that converge on nuclear and mitochondrial transcription
factors, and co-activators to induce a co-ordinated up-regulation of both nuclear and mitochondrial
genomes [95]. It is the combination of transient increases in gene expression and protein content
that ultimately form the molecular basis of training adaptations. Many exercise regulated signalling
pathways are also sensitive to nutrient availability [17], and a schematic overview of the potential
exercise and nutrient interactions that modify the early signalling events regulating mitochondrial
biogenesis is displayed in Figure 3.
As previously discussed, the principle of promoting high CHO availability before, during and after
exercise is the foundation on which traditional sports nutrition guidelines are based. Although this is
essential for promoting competition performance and ensuring adequate recovery, accumulating data
now suggest that restricting CHO before, during, and in recovery from endurance-based exercise
augments the cell signaling and gene expression responses associated with oxidative adaptations in
human skeletal muscle. Indeed, both acute and training based studies have collectively observed that
the reduction of both endogenous and/or exogenous CHO promotes an increase in mitochondrial
enzyme activity and protein content, increases both whole body [96] and intramuscular [97] lipid
metabolism and can improve both exercise capacity [98] and performance [99]. This approach to
CHO periodization has been termed “train-low, compete-high”, a model which promotes carefully
scheduled periods of CHO restricted training for augmenting adaptation, but ensures high CHO
availability prior to and during competition in order to promote maximal performance.
 Nutrients 2018, 10, 298
11 of 21
Nutrients 2018, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW  
11 of 21 
 
 
Figure 3. Schematic overview of the potential exercise-nutrient sensitive cell signalling pathways 
regulating the enhanced mitochondrial adaptations associated with training with low CHO 
availability. Reduced muscle glycogen and exogenous glucose availability enhance both AMPK and 
p38MAPK phosphorylation which results in activation and translocation of PGC-1α and p53 to the 
mitochondria and nucleus. Upon entry into the nucleus, PGC-1α co-activates additional transcription 
factors, (i.e., NRF1/2) to increase the expression of COX subunits and Tfam as well as auto-regulating 
its own expression. In the mitochondria, PGC-1α co-activates Tfam to coordinate the regulation of 
mtDNA and induces expression of key mitochondrial proteins of the electron transport chain, e.g., 
COX subunits. Similar to PGC-1α, p53 also translocates to the mitochondria to modulate Tfam activity 
and mtDNA expression and to the nucleus where it functions to increase the expression of proteins 
involved in mitochondrial fission and fusion (DRP-1 and MFN-2) and electron transport chain protein 
proteins. Exercising in conditions of reduced CHO availability increases adipose tissue and 
intramuscular lipolysis via increased circulating epinephrine concentrations. The resulting elevation 
in FFA activates the nuclear transcription factor, PPARδ, to increase expression of proteins involved 
in lipid metabolism, such as CPT-1, PDK4, CD36 and HSL. However, consuming pre-exercise meals 
rich in CHO and/or CHO during exercise can down-regulate lipolysis (thereby negating FFA 
mediated signalling) as well as reducing both AMPK and p38MAPK activity, thus having negative 
implications for downstream regulators. High fat feeding can also modulate PPARδ signalling and 
up-regulate genes with regulatory roles in lipid metabolism (and down-regulate CHO metabolism), 
though high fat diets may also reduce muscle protein synthesis via impaired mTOR-p70S6K 
signalling, despite feeding leucine rich protein. Abbreviations: 4EBP1; eukaryotic translation 
initiation factor 4E-binding protein 1, AMPK; AMP-activated protein kinase, CHO; carbohydrate, 
COX; cytochrome c oxidase, CPT-1; carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1, Drp1; dynamin-related protein 
1, FA; fatty acid, FABP; fatty acid binding protein, GLU; glucose, HSL; hormone sensitive lipase, 
IMTG; intramuscular triglycerides, Mfn2; mitofusion-2, mTORC1; mammalian target of rapamycin 
complex 1, p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase, p70S6K; ribosomal protein S6 kinase, PDK4; 
pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4, PGC-1α; peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma 
coactivator 1-alpha, PPARδ; peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor, Tfam; mitochondrial 
transcription factor A. 
Figure 3. Schematic overview of the potential exercise-nutrient sensitive cell signalling pathways
regulating the enhanced mitochondrial adaptations associated with training with low CHO availability.
Reduced muscle glycogen and exogenous glucose availability enhance both AMPK and p38MAPK
phosphorylation which results in activation and translocation of PGC-1α and p53 to the mitochondria
and nucleus. Upon entry into the nucleus, PGC-1α co-activates additional transcription factors,
(i.e., NRF1/2) to increase the expression of COX subunits and Tfam as well as auto-regulating its
own expression. In the mitochondria, PGC-1α co-activates Tfam to coordinate the regulation of
mtDNA and induces expression of key mitochondrial proteins of the electron transport chain, e.g.,
COX subunits. Similar to PGC-1α, p53 also translocates to the mitochondria to modulate Tfam
activity and mtDNA expression and to the nucleus where it functions to increase the expression of
proteins involved in mitochondrial fission and fusion (DRP-1 and MFN-2) and electron transport chain
protein proteins. Exercising in conditions of reduced CHO availability increases adipose tissue and
intramuscular lipolysis via increased circulating epinephrine concentrations. The resulting elevation in
FFA activates the nuclear transcription factor, PPARδ, to increase expression of proteins involved in
lipid metabolism, such as CPT-1, PDK4, CD36 and HSL. However, consuming pre-exercise meals rich
in CHO and/or CHO during exercise can down-regulate lipolysis (thereby negating FFA mediated
signalling) as well as reducing both AMPK and p38MAPK activity, thus having negative implications
for downstream regulators. High fat feeding can also modulate PPARδ signalling and up-regulate
genes with regulatory roles in lipid metabolism (and down-regulate CHO metabolism), though high fat
diets may also reduce muscle protein synthesis via impaired mTOR-p70S6K signalling, despite feeding
leucine rich protein. Abbreviations: 4EBP1; eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E-binding protein
1, AMPK; AMP-activated protein kinase, CHO; carbohydrate, COX; cytochrome c oxidase, CPT-1;
carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1, Drp1; dynamin-related protein 1, FA; fatty acid, FABP; fatty acid
binding protein, GLU; glucose, HSL; hormone sensitive lipase, IMTG; intramuscular triglycerides,
Mfn2; mitofusion-2, mTORC1; mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1, p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinase, p70S6K; ribosomal protein S6 kinase, PDK4; pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4,
PGC-1α; peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1-alpha, PPARδ; peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor, Tfam; mitochondrial transcription factor A.
 Nutrients 2018, 10, 298
12 of 21
5.2. Low Muscle Glycogen Availability and Twice per Day Training Models
The altered metabolic milieu created through exercising with low glycogen availability has
a direct impact on molecular signalling events controlling muscular adaptations. The notion that
CHO restriction augments markers of training adaptation emerged from an initial investigation
from Pilegaard et al. [100] who observed an enhanced expression of genes involved in
mitochondrial biogenesis and substrate utilization when exercise was undertaken with reduced
muscle glycogen. Indeed, exercise induced PDK4 and UCP3 gene expression were both augmented
with low (240 ± 38 mmol·kg−1 d.w.) pre-exercise muscle glycogen when compared to normal
(398 ± 52 mmol·kg−1 d.w.) glycogen levels. On the basis of the molecular evidence derived from
acute studies, initial training studies adopted a “training twice every second day versus once daily”
model. Using this model, Hansen et al. [98] subjected seven untrained males to 10 weeks of knee
extensor exercise training under conditions of either high or low muscle glycogen. Subjects trained
both legs according to two different schedules, whereby one leg was trained every day (HIGH) whilst
the contralateral leg was trained twice a day, every other day (LOW). Exercise during the twice per day
sessions was interspersed with 2 h of recovery, during which time CHO intake was restricted. As such,
one leg (LOW) commenced 50% of training sessions under conditions of low glycogen, while the other
leg performed each session under conditions of high muscle glycogen (HIGH), whilst allowing the
matching of total work done between legs. Following 10 weeks of training, the leg that commenced 50%
of training sessions with low muscle glycogen demonstrated a superior increase in the maximal activity
of both citrate synthase (CS) and β-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase (β-HAD) when compared with
the contralateral leg. Furthermore, the LOW leg also demonstrated an almost two-fold increase in
exercise capacity when compared with the HIGH leg, thus demonstrating a potent effect of altering
substrate availability on exercise-induced adaptation and subsequent performance.
Yeo and colleagues [96] subsequently adopted a “real world” design more applicable to elite
athletes. Using well trained male cyclists completing a 3-week training block, cyclists trained six times
per week, either once every day with high muscle glycogen availability or twice every other day,
so the second session was undertaken with reduced levels of muscle glycogen. In the “high” group,
cyclists alternated between steady-state and high-intensity training (HIT) each day, whereas in the
“low” group, steady-state exercise was performed in the morning and HIT exercise was performed
after a 1–2 h recovery period during which time CHO was restricted. Before and after this training
block, muscle biopsies were obtained to assess markers of adaptation, and a time trial was completed
to examine performance improvements in each group. Despite significant increases in CS and β-HAD
activity, cytochrome c oxidase subunit IV (COXIV) protein content and rates of fat oxidation in the “low”
group following training, training-induced improvements in time trial performance were comparable
between groups. Interestingly, the enhanced adaptive responses occurred in the “low” group despite
cyclists having to reduce exercise intensity during the HIT training session. These findings suggest
that even when overall training intensity is reduced, reduced CHO availability is associated with
an adaptive response. In a similar study design, Hulston and colleagues [97] reported greater increases
in intra-muscular lipid oxidation and the expression of CD36 and β-HAD activity following “training
low” compared with “training high”.
5.3. Fasted Training
Performing endurance training in the fasted state represents a simpler model of “training low”
where exercise is performed prior to breakfast. Although pre-exercise muscle glycogen is not altered
as a result of the overnight fast, liver glycogen remains lower whilst FFA availability is increased [54]
compared with when breakfast is fed. Exercising in the fasted state increases post-exercise AMPK
activity [101] and mRNA of genes controlling substrate utilization (PDK4, GLUT4, CD36, CPT-1)
and mitochondrial function (UCP3) [102,103] compared with when CHO is fed before and during
exercise. Accordingly, chronic periods of fasted training elicit similar adaptations to those observed
when training with low muscle glycogen. Nybo et al. [104] demonstrated that 8 weeks of endurance
 Nutrients 2018, 10, 298
13 of 21
training (50–90 min of high-intensity intervals at 70–85% VO2max) in the fasted state enhanced training
induced increases in β-HAD activity and basal muscle glycogen content compared with when CHO
was fed before and during training. Similarly, Van Proeyen et al. [105] observed augmented CS and
β-HAD activity when regular steady state (1–1.5 h cycling at 70% VO2max) cycling was performed
in the fasted state compared to when breakfast was fed. Nonetheless, the augmented biochemical
adaptations did not translate to improved exercise performance.
5.4. Post-Exercise CHO Restriction
In addition to restricting CHO prior to endurance exercise training, data also demonstrate
beneficial adaptive responses when restricting CHO during the post-exercise recovery period. Indeed,
Pilegaard et al. [106] explored this idea with participants completing 75 min of cycling at 75%
VO2max followed by the consumption of a diet either high or low in CHO for the next 24 h.
These authors observed that although the mRNA expression of pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase
4 (PDK4), lipoprotein lipase (LPL), uncoupling protein 3 (UCP3), and carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1
(CPT1) increased in response to exercise, expression levels were sustained at 24 h post-exercise in the
low CHO group only. In a twice per day, 6-week training study, it was also observed that when glucose
is consumed during recovery from the first session, the enhanced oxidative adaptations are blunted
compared to when CHO is restricted, despite reduced levels of muscle glycogen [107]. When taken
together, data from these studies suggest that reducing CHO availability in the recovery period also
modulates the muscle adaptive process.
5.5. Sleep-Low, Train-Low Models
More recent train-low investigations have adopted a “sleep-low, train-low” model, whereby
participants perform an evening training session, restrict CHO overnight and complete a training
session the subsequent morning under levels of low muscle glycogen availability. Acute studies
using whole body exercise [31] demonstrate that commencing HIT running with low muscle glycogen
(as a result of glycogen depleting exercise the prior evening) leads to significant phosphorylation
of both ACC and p53 alongside enhanced gene expression of PGC-1α, COXIV, Tfam and PDK4.
In contrast, when exercise was commenced with high muscle glycogen and exogenous CHO was
provided before, during and after exercise, the aforementioned activation of signalling kinases and
gene expression were completely abolished. In a subsequent study, Lane et al. [108] manipulated
the timing of daily CHO ingestion to elicit sleeping with reduced muscle glycogen. In this way,
subjects consumed either 8 g·kg−1 CHO prior to a bout of evening HIT (and subsequently restricted
CHO intake overnight) or consumed 4 g·kg−1 CHO prior to the evening HIT and 4 g·kg−1 CHO
post-exercise in order to replenish muscle glycogen. Although fat oxidation during morning exercise
and post-exercise PDK4 mRNA expression were significantly greater in the sleep-low group, the genes
involved in the regulation of mitochondrial biogenesis displayed similar exercise induced increases in
both groups [108]. Using a similar sleep-low model as Lane and colleagues [108], Marquet et al. [99]
observed that 3 weeks of sleep-low training in elite triathletes and cyclists improved cycling efficiency
(3.1%), 20 km cycling time trial performance (3.2%) and 10 km running performance (2.9%) compared
with traditional high CHO approaches.
While the mechanisms underpinning the aforementioned adaptive responses to both acute and
chronic exercise are still not fully understood, they are likely mediated by upstream signalling kinases.
Indeed, AMPK has the capacity to be modulated by the glycogen status of the muscle through
a glycogen-binding domain on the β-subunit [109]. Wojtaszewski et al. [92] demonstrated that when
pre-exercise muscle glycogen levels are reduced, AMPKα2 activity and ACCSer221 phosphorylation
are significantly elevated following steady state cycling compared to when muscle glycogen is high.
In a subsequent study, Chan et al. [110] also observed a significantly greater nuclear abundance
of p38MAPK, both pre and post exercise, when muscle glycogen levels were low. In a twice per
day, train-low model, Cochran et al. [93] also reported significantly greater elevations in p38MAPK
 Nutrients 2018, 10, 298
14 of 21
phosphorylation following the second exercise session when participants consumed no CHO during
recovery. These data are highly suggestive of both AMPK and p38MAPK being nutrient sensitive,
and thus likely regulating the downstream events (e.g., p53 and PGC-1α activation) that co-ordinate
mitochondrial biogenesis.
5.6. Critical Limitations of Train-Low Models
Despite the theoretical rationale for train-low protocols, it is noteworthy that the augmented cell
signalling responses, enzymatic changes and improved performance outcomes are not always apparent
or consistent between studies (see Impey et al. [111] for an extensive review of this topic). Indeed,
recent work from Gejl et al. [112] observed no additional benefit when elite triathletes performed
selected training sessions with low CHO availability on both CS and β-HAD maximal activity when
compared with traditional high CHO availability approaches. Similarly, Burke et al. [113] observed
that periodising CHO availability (to incorporate train low sessions) offered no additional benefit
to 10 km race walking performance in Olympic standard race walkers when compared with high
CHO availability. However, given that the enhanced training response associated with train-low is
potentially mediated by muscle glycogen availability, close examination of the available glycogen data
between studies may explain the lack of molecular, biochemical and performance changes reported
within some train-low studies. In this regard, we recently suggested the concept of a glycogen threshold,
whereby the beneficial adaptations associated with train-low paradigms are especially apparent when
the exercise session is commenced with muscle glycogen concentrations < 300 mmol·kg−1 d.w. [111].
To this end, there is, therefore, a definitive need to better understand the exercise and nutrient
conditions that truly constitute train-low conditions.
5.7. Practical Applications
There are also a number of potential limitations to this type of training that can make it difficult for
exercise physiologists and nutritionists to optimally periodise this type of training into an elite athlete’s
training schedule. For example, reduced CHO availability impairs acute training intensity [96,97] and
hence, if performed long-term, may actually lead to a de-training effect. Additionally, given the role of
CHO in preventing immunosuppression, it has been suggested that repeated high intensity training
under conditions of low CHO increases susceptibility to illness and infection [114]. Nonetheless,
proxy markers of immunity and the incidence of upper respiratory tract infections (URTI) appear to be
unaltered by 3 weeks of sleep-low training [115]. Restriction of CHO availability has also been shown
to increase muscle protein breakdown [116], an effect that, if performed chronically, may lead to muscle
mass loss, especially in conditions of both calorie and CHO restriction. Finally, data also demonstrate
a reduced ability to oxidize exogenous CHO following regular training with low CHO, which could
lead to a negative effect on competition performance [117]. Taking the above limitations into account,
it is important to recognize that training with low CHO availability should be carefully periodised
in an athlete’s training programme. In practice, this approach could represent an amalgamation
of train-low paradigms and is perhaps best communicated by the principle of “fuel for the work
required” [111]. In this way, athletes could strategically reduce CHO availability prior to completing
pre-determined training workloads that can be readily performed with reduced CHO availability,
thereby inducing a “work-efficient” approach to training [118]. Alternatively, when the goals of
the training session are to complete the highest workload possible over more prolonged durations,
then adequate CHO should be provided in the 24 h period prior to and during the specific training
session. Careful day-to-day periodization in a meal-by-meal manner (as opposed to chronic periods
of CHO restriction) is likely to maintain metabolic flexibility and still allow for the completion of
high-intensity and prolonged duration workloads on heavy training days, e.g., interval type workouts
undertaken above lactate threshold. Intuitively, train-low sessions may be best left to training sessions
that are not CHO dependent and in which the intensity and duration of the session are not likely to
be compromised by reduced CHO availability, e.g., steady-state type training sessions performed at
 Nutrients 2018, 10, 298
15 of 21
intensities below the lactate threshold. Clearly, more studies are required to investigate the optimal
practical approach for which to integrate periods of train-low into an elite athlete’s training programme.
6. Summary and Future Directions
Despite over 100 years of research, carbohydrate metabolism continues to intrigue muscle
biologists and exercise scientists. From its early recognition as a simple fuel store, it is now apparent
that the glycogen granule regulates many cell-signaling processes related to both health and human
performance. Nonetheless, it is clear that many of the original questions posed in our field are
still relevant today, though the array of biochemical tools now at our disposal ensure we are better
equipped to answer those questions with greater precision. For example, the storage of the glycogen
granule in specific intracellular pools remains a highly active research area. As a related point,
the magnitude of exercise-induced utilization of specific storage pools remains to be documented using
“real-world” exercise protocols that are relevant to both training and competition scenarios. Whilst the
specific regulatory control points of CHO metabolism are now well documented, the precise molecular
mechanisms underpinning the regulation of CHO transport, storage and utilization are not yet fully
known. Finally, the identification of the glycogen granule as a regulator of training adaptation has
opened a new field of study that is likely to dominate the applied nature of sport nutrition research
in the coming decade. From the early studies from the pioneers in the field (e.g., Krogh, Lindhard,
Bergstrom, Saltin, etc.), it is clear that our field remains as exciting as ever.
Acknowledgments: The authors received no direct funding for preparation of this manuscript. Experimental data
on glycogen metabolism from the authors’ laboratory have been funded by GlaxoSmithKline, Lucozade Ribena
Suntory and Science in Sport.
Author Contributions: All authors contributed equally to the drafting and writing of the paper and all approved
the final manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1.
Krogh, A.; Lindhard, J. The relative value of fat and carbohydrate as sources of muscular energy: With
appendices on the correlation between standard metabolism and the respiratory quotient during rest and
work. Biochem. J. 1920, 14, 290–363. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2.
Levine, S.A.; Gordon, B.; Derick, C.L. Some changes in the chemical constituents of the blood following
a marathon race. J. Am. Med. Assoc. 1924, 82, 1778–1779. [CrossRef]
3.
Bergstrom, J.; Hermansen, L.; Hultman, E.; Saltin, B. Diet, muscle glycogen and physical performance.
Acta Physiol. Scand. 1967, 71, 140–150. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4.
Bergstrom, J.; Hultman, E. Muscle glycogen synthesis after exercise: An enhancing factor localized to the
muscle cells in man. Nature 1966, 210, 309–310. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5.
Bergstrom, J.; Hultman, E. The effect of exercise on muscle glycogen and electrolytes in normals. Scand. J.
Clin. Lab. Investig. 1966, 18, 16–20. [CrossRef]
6.
Hermansen, L.; Hultman, E.; Saltin, B. Muscle glycogen during prolonged severe exercise. Acta Physiol. Scand.
1967, 71, 129–139. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7.
Thomas, D.T.; Erdman, K.A.; Burke, L.M. Position of the academy of nutrition and dietetics, dietitians of
Canada, and the American College of sports medicine: Nutrition and athletic performance. J. Acad. Nutr. Diet.
2016, 116, 501–528. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8.
Coyle, E.F.; Coggan, A.R.; Hemmert, M.K.; Ivy, J.L. Muscle glycogen utilization during prolonged strenuous
exercise when fed carbohydrate. J. Appl. Physiol. 1986, 61, 165–172. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9.
Tsinztas, K.; Williams, C.; Boobis, L.; Greenhaff, P. Carbohydrate ingestion and glycogen utilization in
different muscle fibre types in man. J. Physiol. 1995, 489, 243–250.
10.
Bosch, A.N.; Dennis, S.C.; Noakes, T.D. Influence of carbohydrate ingestion on fuel substrate turnover and
oxidation during prolonged exercise. J. Appl. Physiol. 1994, 76, 2364–2372. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Nutrients 2018, 10, 298
16 of 21
11.
Jeukendrup, A.; Brouns, F.; Wagenmakers, A.J.; Saris, W.H. Carbohydrate-electrolyte feedings improve 1 h
time trial cycling performance. Int. J. Sports Med. 1997, 18, 125–129. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12.
Jeukendrup, A.E.; Jentjens, R. Oxidation of carbohydrate feedings during prolonged exercise: Current
thoughts, guidelines and directions of future research. Sports Med. 2000, 29, 407–424. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13.
Casey, A.; Mann, R.; Banister, K.; Fox, J.; Morris, P.G.; Macdonald, I.A.; Greenhaff, P.L. Effect of carbohydrate
ingestion on glycogen resynthesis in human liver and skeletal muscle, measured by (13) C MRS.
Am. J. Physiol. 2000, 278, E65–E75. [CrossRef]
14.
Carter, J.M.; Jeukendrup, A.E.; Jones, D.A. The effect of carbohydrate mouth rinse on 1-h cycle time trial
performance. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2004, 36, 2107–2111. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15.
Chambers, E.S.; Bridge, M.W.; Jones, D.A. Carbohydrate sensing in the human mouth: Effects on exercise
performance and brain activity. J. Physiol. 2009, 587, 1779–1794. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16.
Philp, A.; Hargreaves, M.; Baar, K. More than a store: Regulatory roles for glycogen in skeletal muscle
adaptation to exercise. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 2012, 302, E1343–E1351. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17.
Bartlett, J.D.; Hawley, J.A.; Morton, J.P. Carbohydrate availability and exercise training adaptation: Too much
of a good thing? Eur. J. Sport Sci. 2015, 15, 3–12. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18.
Graham, T.E.; Yuan, Z.; Hill, A.K.; Wilson, R.J. The regulation of muscle glycogen: The granule and its
proteins. Acta Physiol. 2010, 199, 489–499. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
19.
Marchand, I.; Chorneyko, K.; Tarnopolsky, M.; Hamilton, S.; Shearer, J.; Potvin, J.; Graham, T.E. Quantification
of subcellular glycogen in resting human muscle: Granule size, number, and location. J. Appl. Physiol. 2002,
93, 1598–1607. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20.
Essen, B.; Henriksson, J. Glycogen content of individual muscle fibres in man. Acta Physiol. Scand. 1974, 90,
645–647. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
21.
Essen, B.; Jansson, E.; Henriksson, J.; Taylor, AW.; Saltin, B. Metabolic characteristics of fibre types in human
skeletal muscle. Acta Physiol. Scand. 1975, 95, 153–165. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22.
Stellingwerff, T.; Boon, H.; Gijsen, A.P.; Stegen, J.H.; Kuipers, H.; van Loon, L.J. Carbohydrate
supplementation during prolonged cycling exercise spares muscle glycogen but does not affect
intramyocellular lipid use. Pflug. Arch. 2007, 454, 635–647. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23.
Tsintzas, O.K.; Williams, C.; Boobis, L.; Greenhaff, P. Carbohydrate ingestion and single muscle fibre glycogen
metabolism during prolonged running in men. J. Appl. Physiol. 1996, 81, 801–809. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.
Gollnick, P.D.; Piehl, K.; Saltin, B. Selective glycogen depletion pattern in human muscle fibres after exercise
of varying intensity and at varying pedalling rates. J. Physiol. 1974, 24, 45–57. [CrossRef]
25.
Krustrup, P.; Mohr, M.; Steensberg, A.; Bencke, J.; Kjaer, M.; Bangsbo, J. Muscle and blood metabolites during
a soccer game: Implications for sprint performance. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2006, 38, 1165–1174. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
26.
Nielsen, J.; Holmberg, H.C.; Schroder, H.D.; Saltin, B.; Ortenblad, N. Human skeletal muscle glycogen
utilization in exhaustive exercise: Role of subcellular localization and fiber type. J. Physiol. 2011, 589,
2871–2885. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27.
Marchand, I.; Tarnopolsky, M.; Adamo, K.B.; Bourgeois, J.M.; Chorneyko, K.; Graham, T.E. Quantitative
assessment of human muscle glycogen granules size and number in subcellular locations during recovery
from prolonged exercise. J. Physiol. 2007, 580, 617–628. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
28.
Ortenblad, N.; Nielsen, J.; Saltin, B.; Holmberger, H.C. Role of glycogen availability in sarcoplasmic reticulum
Ca2+ kinetics in human skeletal muscle. J. Physiol. 2011, 589, 711–725. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29.
Gejl, K.D.; Hvid, L.O.; Frandsen, U.; Jensen, K.; Sahlin, K.; Ortenblad, N. Muscle glycogen content modifies
SR Ca2+ release rate in elite endurance athletes. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2014, 46, 496–505. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
30.
Taylor, C.; Bartlett, J.D.; van de Graaf, C.S.; Louhelainen, J.; Coyne, V.; Iqbal, Z.; MacLaren, D.P.; Gregson, W.;
Close, G.L.; Morton, J.P. Protein ingestion does not impair exercise-induced AMPK signalling when in
a glycogen-depleted state: Implications for train-low compete-high. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 2013, 113,
1457–1468. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
31.
Bartlett, J.D.; Louhelainen, J.; Iqbal, Z.; Cochran, A.J.; Gibala, M.J.; Gregson, W.; Close, G.L.; Drust, B.;
Morton, J.P. Reduced carbohydrate availability enhances exercise-induced p53 signalling in human skeletal
muscle: Implications for mitochondrial biogenesis. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 2013, 304,
450–458. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Nutrients 2018, 10, 298
17 of 21
32.
Arkinstall, M.J.; Bruce, C.R.; Nikolopoulos, V.; Garnham, A.P.; Hawley, J.A. Effect of carbohydrate ingestion
of metabolism during running and cycling. J. Appl. Physiol. 2001, 91, 2125–2134. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33.
Van Loon, L.J.; Greenhaff, P.L.; Constantin-Teodosiu, D.; Saris, W.H.; Wagenmakers, A.J. The effects of
increasing exercise intensity on muscle fuel utilisation in humans. J. Physiol. 2001, 536, 295–304. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
34.
Gonzales, J.T.; Fuchs, C.J.; Betts, J.A.; van Loon, L.J. Liver glycogen metabolism during and after prolonged
endurance-type exercise. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 2016, 311, E543–E553. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35.
Achten, J.; Jeukendrup, A. Optimising fat oxidation through exercise and diet. Nutrition 2004, 20, 716–727.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
36.
Picton, C.; Klee, C.B.; Cohen, P. The regulation of muscle phosphorylase kinase by calcium ions, calmodulin
and troponin-C. Cell Calcium 1981, 2, 281–294. [CrossRef]
37.
Howlett, R.A.; Parolin, M.L.; Dyck, D.J.; Jones, N.L.; Heigenhauser, G.J.; Spriet, L.L. Regulation of skeletal
muscle glycogen phosphorylase and PDH at varying exercise power outputs. Am. J. Physiol. 1998, 275,
R418–R425. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
38.
Parolin, M.L.; Chesley, A.; Matsos, M.P.; Spriet, L.L.; Jones, N.L.; Heigenhauser, G.J.F. Regulation of skeletal
muscle glycogen phosphorylase and PDH during maximal intermittent exercise. Am. J. Physiol. 1999, 277,
E890–E900. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
39.
Rose, A.J.; Richter, E.A. Skeletal muscle glucose uptake during exercise: How is it regulated. J. Physiol. 2005,
20, 260–270. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
40.
Trimmer, J.K.; Schwarz, J.M.; Casazza, G.A.; Horning, M.A.; Rodriguez, N.; Brooks, G.A. Measurement
of gluconeogenesis in exercising men by mass isotopomer distribution analysis. J. Appl. Physiol. 2002, 93,
233–241. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
41.
Kraniou, G.N.; Cameron-Smith, D.; Hargreaves, M. Acute exercise and GLUT4 expression in human skeletal
muscle: Influence of exercise intensity. J. Appl. Physiol. 2006, 101, 934–937. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42.
Martin, I.K.; Katz, A.; Wahren, J. Splanchnic and muscle metabolism during exercise in NIDDM patients.
Am. J. Physiol. 1995, 269, E583–E590. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43.
Katz, A.; Broberg, S.; Sahlin, K.; Wahren, J. Leg glucose uptake during maximal dynamic exercise in humans.
Am. J. Physiol. 1986, 251, E65–E70. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44.
Watt, M.J.; Heigenhauser, G.J.; Dyck, D.J.; Spriet, L.L. Intramuscular triacglycerol, glycogen, and acetyl group
metabolism during 4 h of moderate exercise in man. J. Physiol. 2002, 541, 969–978. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45.
Watt, M.J.; Heigenhauser, G.J.; LeBlanc, P.J.; Inglis, J.G.; Spriet, L.L.; Peters, S.J. Rapid upregulation of
pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase activity in human skeletal muscle during prolonged exercise. J. Appl. Physiol.
2004, 97, 1261–1267. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
46.
Hargreaves, M.; McConell, G.; Proletto, J. Influence of muscle glycogen on glycogenolysis and glucose
uptake during exercise in humans. J. Appl. Physiol. 1995, 78, 288–292. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
47.
Arkinstall, M.J.; Bruce, C.R.; Clark, S.A.; Rickards, C.A.; Burke, L.M.; Hawley, J.A. Regulation of fuel
metabolism by pre-exercise muscle glycogen content and exercise intensity. J. Appl. Physiol. 2004, 97,
2275–2283. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
48.
Kiilerich, K.; Gudmundsson, M.; Birk, J.B.; Lundby, C.; Taudorf, S.; Plomgard, P.; Saltin, B.; Pedersen, P.A.;
Wojtaszewski, J.F.P.; Pilegaard, H. Low muscle glycogen and elevated plasma free fatty acid modify but do
not prevent exercise-induced PDH activation in human skeletal muscle. Diabetes 2010, 59, 26–32. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
49.
Peters, S.J.; St Amand, T.A.; Howlett, R.A.; Heigenhauser, G.J.F.; Spriet, L.L. Human skeletal muscle pyruvate
dehydrogenase kinase activity increases after a low carbohydrate diet. Am. J. Physiol. 1998, 275, E980–E986.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
50.
Roepstorff, C.; Halberg, N.; Hillig, T.; Saha, A.K.; Ruderman, N.B.; Wojtaszewski, J.F.P.; Richter, E.A.;
Kiens, B. Malonyl CoA and carnitine in regulation of fat oxidation in human skeletal muscle during exercise.
Am. J. Physiol. 2005, 288, E133–E142. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
51.
Wall, B.T.; Stephens, F.B.; Constantin-Teodosiu, D.; Marimuthu, K.; Macdonald, I.A.; Greenhaff, P.L. Chronic
oral ingestion of L-carnitine and carbohydrate increases muscle carnitine content and alters muscle fuel
metabolism during exercise in humans. J. Physiol. 2011, 589, 963–973. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Nutrients 2018, 10, 298
18 of 21
52.
Smith, B.K.; Perry, C.G.R.; Koves, T.R.; Wright, D.C.; Smith, J.C.; Neufer, D.P.; Muoio, D.M.; Holloway, G.P.
Identification of a novel malonyl-CoA IC50 for CPT-1: Implications for predicting in vivo fatty acid oxidation
rates. Biochem. J. 2012, 448, 13–20. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
53.
Gonzales, J.T.; Fuchs, C.J.; Smith, F.E.; Thelwall, P.E.; Taylor, R.; Stevenson, E.J.; Trenell, M.I.; Cermak, N.M.;
Van Loon, L.J. Ingestion of glucose or sucrose prevents liver but not muscle glycogen depletion during
prolonged endurance-type exercise in trained cyclists. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 2015, 309,
E1032–E1039. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
54.
Horowitz, J.F.; Mora-Rodriguez, R.; Byerley, L.O.; Coyle, E.F. Lipolytic suppression following carbohydrate
ingestion limits fat oxidation during exercise. Am. J. Physiol. 1997, 273, E768–E775. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
55.
Coyle, E.F.; Jeukendrup, A.; Wagenmakers, A.J.; Saris, W.H. Fatty acid oxidation is directly regulated by
carbohydrate metabolism during exercise. Am. J. Physiol. 1997, 273, E268–E275. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
56.
Watt, M.J.; Steinberg, G.R.; Chan, S.; Garnham, A.; Kemp, B.E.; Febbraio, M.A. Beta-adrenergic stimulation
of skeletal muscle HSL can be overridden by AMPK signalling. FASEB J. 2004, 18, 1445–1446. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
57.
Henriksson, J. Training induced adaptation of skeletal muscle and metabolism during submaximal exercise.
J. Physiol. 1977, 270, 661–675. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
58.
Karlsson, J.; Nordesjö, L.O.; Saltin, B. Muscle glycogen utilization during exercise after physical training.
Acta Physiol. 1974, 90, 210–217. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
59.
Saltin, B.; Nazar, K.; Costill, D.L.; Stein, E.; Jansson, E.; Essen, B.; Gollnick, P.D. The nature of the training
response: Peripheral and central adaptations of one-legged exercise. Acta Physiol. Scand. 1976, 96, 289–305.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
60.
Chesley, A.; Heigenhauser, G.J.; Spriet, L.L. Regulation of glycogen phosphorylase activity following short
term endurance training. Am. J. Physiol. 1996, 270, E328–E335. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
61.
Leblanc, P.J.; Howarth, K.R.; Gibala, M.J.; Heigenhauser, G.J. Effects of 7 weeks of endurance training on
human skeletal muscle metabolism during submaximal exercise. J. Appl. Physiol. 2004, 97, 2148–2153.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
62.
Bergman, B.C.; Horning, M.A.; Casazza, G.A.; Wolfel, E.E.; Butterfiled, G.E.; Brooks, G.A. Endurance training
increases gluconeogenesis during rest and exercise in men. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 2000, 278,
E244–E251. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
63.
Bergman, B.C.; Butterfield, G.E.; Wolfel, E.E.; Lopaschuk, G.D.; Casazza, G.A.; Horning, M.A.; Brooks, G.A.
Muscle net glucose uptake and glucose kinetics after endurance training in men. Am. J. Physiol. 1999, 277,
E81–E92. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
64.
Richter, E.A.; Jensen, P.; Kiens, B.; Kristiansen, S. Sarcolemmal glucose transport and GLUT4 translocation
during exercise are diminished by endurance training. Am. J. Physiol. 1998, 274, E89–E95. [PubMed]
65.
Phillips, S.M.; Green, H.J.; Tarnapolsky, M.A.; Heigenhauser, G.J.; Hill, R.E.; Grant, S.M. Effects of training
duration on substrate turnover and oxidation during exercise. J. Appl. Physiol. 1996, 81, 2182–2191. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
66.
Sherman, W.M.; Costill, D.L.; Fink, W.J.; Miller, J.M. Effect of exercise-diet manipulation on muscle glycogen
and its subsequent utilisation during performance. Int. J. Sports Med. 1981, 2, 114–118. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
67.
Bussau, V.A.; Fairchild, T.J.; Rao, A.; Steele, P.; Fournier, P.A. Carbohydrate loading in human muscle: An
improved 1 day protocol. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 2002, 87, 290–295. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
68.
Burke, L.M.; Collier, G.R.; Hargreaves, M. Muscle glycogen storage after prolonged exercise: Effect of the
glycemic index of carbohydrate feedings. J. Appl. Physiol. 1993, 75, 1019–1023. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
69.
Hawley, J.A.; Schabort, E.J.; Noakes, T.D.; Dennis, S.C. Carbohydrate loading and exercise performance.
Sports Med. 1997, 24, 73–81. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
70.
O’Brien, M.J.; Viguie, C.A.; Mazzeo, R.S.; Brooks, G.A. Carbohydrate dependence during marathon running.
Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 1993, 25, 1009–1017. [PubMed]
71.
Leckey, J.J.; Burke, L.M.; Morton, J.P.; Hawley, J.A. Altering fatty acid availability does not impair prolonged,
continuous running to fatigue: Evidence for carbohydrate dependence. J. Appl. Physiol. 2016, 120, 107–113.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
72.
Ortenblad, N.; Westerblad, H.; Nielsen, J. Muscle glycogen stores and fatigue. J. Physiol. 2013, 591, 4405–4413.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Nutrients 2018, 10, 298
19 of 21
73.
Wee, L.-S.; Williams, C.; Tsintzas, K.; Boobis, L. Ingestion of a high glycemic index meal increases muscle
glycogen storage at rest but augments its utilization during subsequent exercise. J. Appl. Physiol. 2005, 99,
707–714. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
74.
Sherman, W.M.; Peden, M.C.; Wright, D.A. Carbohydrate feedings 1 h before exercise improves cycling
performance. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 1991, 54, 866–870. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
75.
Wright, D.A.; Sherman, W.M.; Dernbach, A.R. Carbohydrate feedings before, during or in combination
improve cycling endurance performance. J. Appl. Physiol. 1991, 71, 1082–1088. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
76.
Stellingwerff, T.; Cox, G.R. Systematic review: Carbohydrate supplementation on exercise performance or
capacity of varying durations. Appl. Physiol. Nutr. Metab. 2014, 39, 998–1011. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
77.
Jeukendrup, A. A step towards personalized sports nutrition: Carbohydrate intake during exercise.
Sports Med. 2014, 44, S25–S33. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
78.
Newell, M.L.; Wallis, G.A.; Hunter, A.M.; Tipton, K.D.; Galloway, S.D.R. Metabolic responses to carbohydrate
ingestion during exercise: Associations between carbohydrate dose and endurance performance. Nutrients
2018, 10, 37. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
79.
Carter, J.M.; Jeukendrup, A.E.; Mann, C.H.; Jones, D.A. The effect of glucose infusion on glucose kinetics
during a 1-h time trial. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2004, 36, 1543–1550. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
80.
Burke, L.M.; Maughan, R.J. The Governor has a sweet tooth-mouth sensing of nutrients to enhance sports
performance. Eur. J. Sport Sci. 2015, 15, 29–40. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
81.
Lane, S.C.; Bird, S.R.; Burke, L.M.; Hawley, J.A. Effect of a carbohydrate mouth rinse on simulated cycling
time-trial performance commenced in a fed or fasted state. Appl. Physiol. Nutr. Metab. 2013, 38, 134–139.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
82.
Kasper, A.M.; Cocking, S.; Cockayne, M.; Barnard, M.; Tench, J.; Parker, L.; McAndrew, J.; Langan-Evans, C.;
Close, G.L.; Morton, J.P. Carbohydrate mouth rinse and caffeine improves high-intensity interval running
capacity when carbohydrate restricted. Eur. J. Sport Sci. 2015, 16, 560–568. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
83.
Ali, A.; Yoo, M.J.; Moss, C.; Breier, B.H. Carbohydrate mouth rinsing has no effect on power output during
cycling in a glycogen-reduced state. J. Int. Soc. Sports Nutr. 2016, 23, 13–19. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
84.
Lee, M.J.; Hammond, K.M.; Vasdev, A.; Poole, K.L.; Impey, S.G.; Close, G.L.; Morton, J.P. Self-selecting fluid
intake while maintaining high carbohydrate availability does not impair half-marathon performance. Int. J.
Sports Med. 2014, 35, 1216–1222. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
85.
Pfeiffer, B.; Stellingwerff, T.; Zaltas, E.; Jeukendrup, A.E. CHO oxidation from a CHO gel compared with
a drink during exercise. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2010, 42, 2038–2045. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
86.
Pfeiffer, B.; Stellingwerff, T.; Zaltas, E.; Jeukendrup, A.E. Oxidation of solid versus liquid CHO sources
during exercise. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2010, 42, 2030–2037. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
87.
Zhang, X.; O’Kennedy, N.; Morton, J.P. Extreme Variation of Nutritional Composition and Osmolality of
Commercially Available Carbohydrate Energy Gels. Int. J. Sport Nutr. Exerc. Metab. 2015, 25, 504–509.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
88.
Pfeiffer, B.; Stellingwerff, T.; Hodgson, A.B.; Randell, R.; Pottgen, K.; Res, P.; Jeukendrup, A.E. Nutritional
intake and gastrointestinal problems during competitive endurance events. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2012, 44,
344–355. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
89.
Hills, S.P.; Russell, M. Carbohydrates for soccer: A focus on skilled actions and half-time practices. Nutrients
2018, 10, 22. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
90.
Holloszy, J.O.; Coyle, E.F. Adaptations of skeletal muscle to endurance exercise and their metabolic
consequences. J. Appl. Physiol. 1984, 56, 831–838. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
91.
Egan, B.; Zierath, J.B. Exercise metabolism and the molecular regulation of skeletal muscle adaptation.
Cell Metab. 2013, 17, 162–184. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
92.
Wojtaszewski, J.F.; MacDonald, C.; Nielsen, J.N.; Hellsten, Y.; Hardie, D.G.; Kemp, B.E.; Kiens, B.; Richter, E.A.
Regulation of 5�AMP-activated protein kinase activity and substrate utilization in exercising human skeletal
muscle. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab. 2003, 284, 813–822. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
93.
Cochran, A.J.; Little, J.P.; Tarnopolsky, M.A.; Gibala, M.J. Carbohydrate feeding during recovery alters
the skeletal muscle metabolic response to repeated sessions of high-intensity interval exercise in humans.
J. Appl. Physiol. 2010, 108, 628–636. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Nutrients 2018, 10, 298
20 of 21
94.
Rose, A.J.; Frøsig, C.; Kiens, B.; Wojtaszewski, J.F.P.; Richter, E. Effect of endurance exercise training on Ca2+
calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II expression and signalling in skeletal muscle of humans. J. Physiol.
2007, 583, 785–795. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
95.
Perry, C.G.; Lally, J.; Holloway, G.P.; Heigenhauser, G.J.; Bonen, A.; Spriet, L.L. Repeated transient mRNA
bursts precede increases in transcriptional and mitochondrial proteins during training in human skeletal
muscle. J. Physiol. 2010, 588, 4795–4810. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
96.
Yeo, W.K.; Paton, C.D.; Garnham, A.P.; Burke, L.M.; Carey, A.L.; Hawley, J.A. Skeletal muscle adaptation and
performance responses to once versus twice every second day endurance training regimens. J. Appl. Physiol.
2008, 105, 1462–1470. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
97.
Hulston, C.J.; Venables, M.C.; Mann, C.H.; Martin, C.; Philp, A.; Baar, K.; Jeukendrup, A.E. Training with low
muscle glycogen enhances fat metabolism in well-trained cyclists. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2010, 42, 2046–2055.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
98.
Hansen, A.K.; Fischer, C.P.; Plomgaard, P.; Andersen, J.L.; Saltin, B.; Pedersen, B.K. Skeletal muscle adaptation:
Training twice every second day vs. training once daily. J. Appl. Physiol. 2005, 98, 93–99. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
99.
Marquet, L.A.; Brisswalter, J.; Louis, J.; Tiollier, E.; Burke, L.M.; Hawley, J.A.; Hausswirth, C. Enhanced
endurance performance by periodization of carbohydrate intake: “Sleep low” strategy. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc.
2016, 48, 663–672. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
100. Pilegaard, H.; Keller, C.; Steensberg, A.; Helge, J.W.; Pedersen, B.K.; Saltin, B.; Neufer, P.D. Influence of
pre-exercise muscle glycogen content on exercise-induced transcriptional regulation of metabolic genes.
J. Physiol. 2002, 541, 261–271. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
101. Akerstrom, T.C.A.; Birk, J.B.; Klein, D.K.; Erikstrup, C.; Plomgaard, P.; Pedersen, B.K.; Wojtaszewski, J.
Oral glucose ingestion attenuates exercise-induced activation of 5�-AMP-activated protein kinase in human
skeletal muscle. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2006, 342, 949–955. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
102. Civitarese, A.E.; Hesselink, M.K.; Russell, A.P.; Ravussin, E.; Schrauwen, P. Glucose ingestion during exercise
blunts exercise-induced gene expression of skeletal muscle fat oxidative genes. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol.
Metab. 2005, 289, 1023–1029. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
103. Cluberton, L.J.; McGee, S.L.; Murphy, R.M.; Hargreaves, M. Effect of carbohydrate ingestion on
exercise-induced alterations in metabolic gene expression. J. Appl. Physiol. 2005, 99, 1359–1363. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
104. Nybo, L.; Pedersen, K.; Christensen, B.; Aagaard, P.; Brandt, N.; Kiens, B. Impact of carbohydrate
supplementation during endurance training on glycogen storage and performance. Acta Physiol. 2009,
197, 117–127. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
105. Van Proeyen, K.; Szlufcik, K.; Nielens, H.; Ramaekers, M.; Hespel, P. Beneficial metabolic adaptations due to
endurance exercise training in the fasted state. J. Appl. Physiol. 2011, 110, 236–245. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
106. Pilegaard, H.; Osada, T.; Andersen, L.T.; Helge, J.W.; Saltin, B.; Neufer, P.D. Substrate availability and
transcriptional regulation of metabolic genes in human skeletal muscle during recovery from exercise.
Metabolism 2005, 54, 1048–1055. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
107. Morton, J.P.; Croft, L.; Bartlett, J.D.; Maclaren, D.P.; Reilly, T.; Evans, L.; McArdle, A.; Drust, B. Reduced
carbohydrate availability does not modulate training-induced heat shock protein adaptations but does
up regulate oxidative enzyme activity in human skeletal muscle. J. Appl. Physiol. 2009, 106, 1513–1521.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
108. Lane, S.C.; Camera, D.M.; Lassiter, D.G.; Areta, J.L.; Bird, S.R.; Yeo, W.K.; Jeacocke, N.A.; Krook, A.;
Zierath, J.R.; Burke, L.M.; et al. Effects of sleeping with reduced carbohydrate availability on acute training
responses. J. Appl. Physiol. 2015, 119, 643–655. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
109. McBride, A.; Ghilagaber, S.; Nikolaev, A.; Hardie, D.G. The glycogen-binding domain on the AMPK beta
subunit allows the kinase to act as a glycogen sensor. Cell Metab. 2009, 9, 23–34. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
110. Chan, S.; McGee, S.L.; Watt, M.J.; Hargreaves, M.; Febbraio, M.A. Altering dietary nutrient intake that
reduces glycogen content leads to phosphorylation of nuclear p38 MAP kinase in human skeletal muscle:
Association with IL-6 gene transcription during contraction. FASEB J. 2004, 18, 1785–1787. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
111. Impey, S.G.; Hearris, M.A.; Hammond, K.M.; Bartlett, J.D.; Louis, J.; Close, G.L.; Morton, J.P. Fuel for the work
required: A theoretical framework for carbohydrate periodization and the glycogen threshold hypothesis.
Sports Med. 2018. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
 Nutrients 2018, 10, 298
21 of 21
112. Gejl, K.D.; Tharns, L.B.; Hansen, M.; Rokkedal-Lausch, T.; Plomgaard, P.; Nybo, L.; Larsen, F.J.;
Cardinale, D.A.; Jensen, K.; Holmberg, H.C.; et al. No superior adaptations to carbohydrate periodization in
elite endurance athletes. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2017, 49, 2486–2497. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
113. Burke, L.M.; Ross, M.L.; Garvican-Lewis, L.A.; Welvaert, M.; Heikura, I.A.; Forbes, S.G.; Mirtschin, J.G.;
Cato, L.E.; Strobel, N.; Sharma, A.P.; et al. Low carbohydrate, high fat diet impairs exercise economy and
negates performance benefit from intensified training in elite race walkers. J. Physiol. 2017, 595, 2785–2807.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
114. Gleeson, M.; Nieman, D.C.; Pedersen, B.K. Exercise, nutrition and immune function. J. Sports Sci. 2004, 22,
115–125. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
115. Louis, J.; Marquet, L.A.; Tiollier, E.; Bernon, S.; Hausswirth, C.; Brisswalter, J. The impact of sleeping with
reduced glycogen stores on immunity and sleep in triathletes. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 2016, 116, 1941–1954.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
116. Howarth, K.R.; Phillips, S.M.; MacDonald, M.J.; Richards, D.; Moreau, N.A.; Gibala, M.J. Effect of glycogen
availability on human skeletal muscle protein turnover during exercise and recovery. J. Appl. Physiol. 2010,
109, 431–438. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
117. Cox, G.R.; Clark, S.A.; Cox, A.J.; Halson, S.L.; Hargreaves, M.; Hawley, J.A.; Burke, L.M. Daily training
with high carbohydrate availability increases exogenous carbohydrate oxidation during endurance cycling.
J. Appl. Physiol. 2010, 109, 126–134. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
118. Impey, S.G.; Hammond, K.M.; Shepherd, S.O.; Sharples, A.P.; Stewart, C.; Limb, M.; Smith, K.; Jeromson, S.;
Hamilton, D.L.; Close, G.L.; et al. Fuel for the work required: A practical approach to amalgamating train-low
paradigms for endurance athletes. Physiol. Rep. 2016, 4, e12803. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
© 2018 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
