 guidelines
Fourth edition
TreaTmenT of Tuberculosis
  Treatment of tuberculosis
Guidelines
Fourth edition
 WHO Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data:
Treatment of tuberculosis: guidelines – 4th ed.
WHO/HTM/TB/2009.420
1.Antitubercular agents – administration and dosage. 2.Tuberculosis,  
Pulmonary – drug therapy. 3.National health programs. 4.Patient compliance. 
5.Guidelines. I.World Health Organization. Stop TB Dept.
ISBN 978 92 4 154783 3 
(NLM classification: WF 360)
© World Health Organization 2010
All rights reserved. Publications of the World Health Organization can be obtained from WHO Press, 
World Health Organization, 20 Avenue Appia, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland (tel: +41 22 791 4857; e-mail: 
bookorders@who.int). Requests for permission to reproduce or translate WHO publications – whether 
for sale or for noncommercial distribution – should be addressed to WHO Press, at the above address 
(fax: +41 22 791 4806; e-mail: permissions@who.int).
The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the 
expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the World Health Organization concerning the 
legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of 
its frontiers or boundaries. Dotted lines on maps represent approximate border lines for which there may 
not yet be full agreement.
The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers’ products does not imply that they are 
endorsed or recommended by the World Health Organization in preference to others of a similar nature 
that are not mentioned. Errors and omissions excepted, the names of proprietary products are distin-
guished by initial capital letters.
All reasonable precautions have been taken by the World Health Organization to verify the information 
contained in this publication. However, the published material is being distributed without warranty of 
any kind, either expressed or implied. The responsibility for the interpretation and use of the material 
lies with the reader. In no event shall the World Health Organization be liable for damages arising from 
its use.
Designed by minimum graphics
Printed in ….
 iii
: :
Contents
Abbreviations 
vii
Acknowledgements 
viii
Foreword  
ix
Executive summary 
1
1. Introduction 
15
 
1.1 
Chapter objectives 
15
 
1.2 
Purpose of the guidelines 
15
 
1.3 
Target audience 
15
 
1.4 
scope 
15
 
1.5 
Why a new edition? 
15
 
1.6 
Methodology 
18
 
1.7 
international standards for Tuberculosis Care 
21
 
1.8 
expiry date 
21
2. Case definitions 
23
 
2.1 
Chapter objectives  
23
 
2.2 
Purposes of defining a TB case 
23
 
2.3 
Case definitions 
23
 
2.4 
Anatomical site of TB disease 
24
 
2.5 
Bacteriological results 
25
 
2.6 
History of previous treatment: patient registration group 
26
 
2.7 
HiV status 
28
3. Standard treatment regimens 
29
 
3.1 
Chapter objectives 
29
 
3.2 
Aims of treatment 
29
 
3.3 
essential anti-TB drugs 
29
 
3.4 
standard regimens for defined patient groups 
31
 
3.5 
new patients 
32
 
3.6 
Previously treated patients and multidrug resistance 
36
 
3.7 
standard regimens for previously treated patients 
38
 
3.8 
Overall considerations in selecting a country’s standard regimens 
42
 iv
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
4. monitoring during treatment 
53
 
4.1 
Chapter objectives 
53
 
4.2 
Monitoring the patient 
53
 
4.3 
Assessing treatment response in new and previously treated pulmonary 
 
 
TB patients, and acting on the results 
53
 
4.4 
extrapulmonary TB 
57
 
4.5 
Recording standardized treatment outcomes 
57
 
4.6 
Cohort analysis of treatment outcomes 
57
 
4.7 
Management of treatment interruption 
59
 
4.8 
Prevention of adverse effects of drugs 
59
 
4.9 
Monitoring and recording adverse effects 
60
 
4.10 symptom-based approach to managing side-effects of anti-TB drugs 
60
5. Co-management of HIV and active Tb disease 
65
 
5.1 
Chapter objectives 
65
 
5.2 
HiV testing and counselling for all patients known or suspected to have TB 
65
 
5.3 
HiV prevention in TB patients 
67
 
5.4 
TB treatment in people living with HiV 
67
 
5.5 
Co-trimoxazole preventive therapy 
69
 
5.6 
Antiretroviral therapy 
69
 
5.7 
drug susceptibility testing 
71
 
5.8 
Patient monitoring during TB treatment 
71
 
5.9 
Considerations when TB is diagnosed in people living with HiV who are  
 
 
already receiving antiretroviral therapy 
72
 
5.10 HiV-related prevention, treatment, care and support 
72
6. Supervision and patient support 
75
 
6.1 
Chapter objectives 
75
 
6.2 
Roles of the patient, TB programme staff, the community and other providers 
75
 
6.3 
supervised treatment 
77
 
6.4 
using a patient-centred approach to care and treatment delivery 
78
 
6.5 
Prevention of treatment interruption 
80
7. Treatment of drug-resistant tuberculosis 
83
 
7.1 
Chapter objectives 
83
 
7.2 
Green light Committee initiative 
83
 
7.3 
Groups of drugs to treat MdR-TB 
84
 
7.4 
General principles in designing an MdR-TB treatment regimen 
86
 v
 
7.5 
Programmatic strategies for treatment of MdR-TB 
86
 
7.6 
selection of the country’s standard MdR-TB treatment regimen 
89
 
7.7 
selection of individualized MdR-TB regimens 
89
 
7.8 
Monitoring the MdR-TB patient 
91
 
7.9 
duration of treatment for MdR-TB 
91
 
7.10 Treating TB with resistance patterns other than MdR 
92
 
7.11 Recording and reporting drug-resistant TB cases, evaluation of outcomes 
92
8. Treatment of extrapulmonary Tb and of Tb in special situations 
95
 
8.1 
Chapter objectives 
95
 
8.2 
Treatment of extrapulmonary TB 
95
 
8.3 
important drug interactions 
96
 
8.4 
Treatment regimens in special situations 
97
annexes  
101
1. essential first-line antituberculosis drugs 
103
2. summary of evidence and considerations underlying the recommendations 
115
3. TB treatment outcomes 
131
4. implementation and evaluation of the fourth edition 
133
5. suggestions for future research 
141
6. Members of the Guidelines Group 
145
ConTEnTS
  vii
AFB 
acid-fast bacilli
AIDS 
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
ART 
antiretroviral therapy
DOT 
directly observed treatment
DOTS 
the internationally agreed strategy for TB control
DRS 
drug resistance surveillance 
DST 
drug susceptibility testing
E 
ethambutol
EPTB 
extrapulmonary tuberculosis
EQA 
external quality assurance
FDC 
fixed-dose combination
GLC 
Green Light Committee
H 
isoniazid
HIV 
human immunodeficiency virus
ISTC 
International Standards for Tuberculosis Care
MDR 
multidrug resistance
MDR-TB 
multidrug-resistant tuberculosis
NNRTI 
non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor
NRTI 
nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor
NTP 
national tuberculosis control programme
PTB 
pulmonary tuberculosis
R 
rifampicin
S 
streptomycin
TB 
tuberculosis
TB/HIV 
HIV-related TB
XDR-TB 
extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis
Z 
pyrazinamide
: :
Abbreviations
 viii
The Stop TB Department of the World Health Organization gratefully acknowledges 
the members of the Guidelines Group (listed in Annex 6), including Jeremiah Muh-
wa Chakaya, the Chairperson. 
Richard Menzies (McGill University, Montreal, Canada), Karen Steingart and Phil-
lip Hopewell (University of California, San Francisco, USA) and Andrew Nunn and 
Patrick Phillips (British Medical Research Council) led the teams that compiled, syn-
thesized and evaluated the evidence underlying each recommendation. 
Suzanne Hill and Holger Schünemann facilitated the meeting of the Guidelines 
Group.
Useful feedback was obtained from the External Review Group (also listed in An-
nex 6).
Additional feedback and support were provided by the Guidelines Review Commit-
tee (Chair, Suzanne Hill; Secretariat, Faith McLellan).
Publication of the guidelines was supported in part by a financial contribution from 
the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria.
The document was prepared by Sarah Royce and Malgorzata Grzemska.
Dorris Ortega provided secretarial support.
: :
Acknowledgements
 ix
: :
Foreword
The World Health Organization’s Stop TB Department has prepared this fourth 
 
edition of Treatment of tuberculosis: guidelines, adhering fully to the new WHO proc-
ess for evidence-based guidelines. Several important recommendations are being 
promoted in this new edition.
First, the recommendation to discontinue the regimen based on just 2 months of 
rifampicin (2HRZE/6HE) and change to the regimen based on a full 6 months of 
rifampicin (2HRZE/4HR) will reduce the number of relapses and failures. This will 
alleviate patient suffering resulting from a second episode of tuberculosis (TB) and 
conserve patient and programme resources. 
Second, this fourth edition confirms prior WHO recommendations for drug suscep-
tibility testing (DST) at the start of therapy for all previously treated patients. Finding 
and treating multidrug-resistant TB (MDR-TB) in previously treated patients will 
help to improve the very poor outcomes in these patients. New recommendations 
for the prompt detection and appropriate treatment of (MDR-TB) cases will also 
 
improve access to life-saving care. The retreatment regimen with first-line drugs 
 
(formerly called “Category 2” regimen) is ineffective in MDR-TB; it is therefore criti-
cal to detect MDR-TB promptly so that an effective regimen can be started. 
Third, detecting MDR-TB will require expansion of DST capacity within the context 
of country-specific, comprehensive plans for laboratory strengthening. This fourth 
edition provides guidance for treatment approaches in the light of advances in lab-
oratory technology and the country’s progress in building laboratory capacity. In 
countries that use the new rapid molecular-based tests, DST results for rifampicin/
isoniazid will be available within 1‒2 days and can be used in deciding which regimen 
should be started for the individual patient. Rapid tests eliminate the need to treat “in 
the dark” during the long wait for results of DST by other methods (weeks for liquid 
media methods or months for solid media methods). 
Because of the delays in obtaining results, this new edition recommends that coun-
tries using conventional DST methods should start treatment with an empirical regi-
men. If there is a high likelihood of MDR-TB, empirical treatment with an MDR 
regimen is recommended until DST results are available. Drug resistance surveil-
lance (DRS) data or surveys will be required to identify subgroups of TB patients 
with the highest prevalence of MDR-TB, such as those whose prior treatment has 
failed. Implementation of these recommendations will require every country to in-
clude an MDR-TB regimen in its standards for treatment in collaboration with the 
Green Light Committee Initiative. 
 x
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
Fourth, diagnosing MDR-TB cases among previously treated patients and providing 
effective treatment will greatly help in halting the spread of MDR-TB. This edition 
 
also addresses the prevention of acquired MDR-TB, especially among new TB patients 
who already have isoniazid-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis when they start 
treat 
ment. The meta-analyses that form the evidence base for this revision revealed 
that new patients with isoniazid-resistant TB have a greatly increased risk of acquiring 
 
additional drug resistance. To prevent amplification of existing drug resistance, this 
edition includes the option of adding ethambutol to the continuation phase of treat-
ment for new patients in populations with high prevalence of isoniazid resistance. 
In addition, the daily dosing recommended for the intensive phase may also help in 
reducing acquired drug resistance, especially in patients with pretreatment isoniazid 
resistance. 
Finally, this edition strongly reaffirms prior recommendations for supervised treat-
ment, as well as the use of fixed-dose combinations of anti-TB drugs and patient kits 
as further measures for preventing the acquisition of drug resistance. 
Use of the new WHO process for evidence-based guidelines revealed many key un-
answered questions. What is the best way to treat isoniazid-resistant TB and pre-
vent MDR? What is the optimal duration of TB treatment in HIV-positive patients? 
Which patients are most likely to relapse and how can they be detected and treated? 
Identification of such crucial questions for the future research agenda is an important 
outcome of this revision and will require careful follow-up to ensure that answers 
will be provided to further strengthen TB care practices. 
As new studies help to fill these gaps in knowledge, new laboratory technology is 
introduced, and new drugs are discovered, these guidelines will be updated and 
 
revised. In the meantime, WHO pledges its full support to helping countries to im-
plement and evaluate this fourth edition of Treatment of tuberculosis: guidelines and 
to use the lessons learnt to improve access to high-quality, life-saving TB care. 
Dr Mario Raviglione
Director
Stop TB Department
 1
Major progress in global tuberculosis (TB) control followed the widespread imple-
mentation of the DOTS strategy. The Stop TB Strategy, launched in 2006, builds upon 
and enhances the achievements of DOTS. New objectives include universal access to 
 
patient-centred treatment and protection of populations from TB/HIV and multi-
drug-resistant TB (MDR-TB). The Stop TB Strategy and the Global Plan to imple-
ment the new strategy make it necessary to revise the third edition of Treatment of 
tuberculosis: guidelines for national programmes, published in 2003. 
Creation of the fourth edition follows new WHO procedures for guidelines develop-
ment. With input from a group of external experts – the Guidelines Group – WHO 
identified seven key questions, and systematic reviews were conducted for each ques-
tion. The Guidelines Group based its recommendations on the quality of the evidence 
(assessed according to the GRADE methodology), patient values, and costs, as well 
judgements about trade-offs between benefits and harms. Recommendations were 
rated as “strong” or “conditional”. 
The evidence and considerations underlying each recommendation are summarized 
in Annex 2.
A strong recommendation is one for which desirable effects of adherence to the rec-
ommendation clearly outweigh the undesirable effects. The strong recommendations 
in this edition use the words “should” or “should not”. No alternatives are listed.
A conditional recommendation is one for which the desirable effects of adherence to 
the recommendation probably outweigh the undesirable effects but the trade-offs are 
uncertain. 
Reasons for uncertainty can include:
— lack of high-quality evidence to support the recommendation;
— limited benefits of implementing the recommendation;
— costs not justified by the benefits;
— imprecise estimates of benefit.
A weak recommendation is one for which there is insufficient evidence and it is based 
on field application and expert opinion. Recommendations for which the quality of 
evidence was not assessed in line with the GRADE methodology are not rated.
Conditional and weak recommendations use the words “may”. For several of the con-
ditional recommendations, alternatives are listed. 
: :
executive summary
 2
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
The recommendations that address each of the seven questions are listed below, 
and also appear in bold text in Chapter 3 (Standard treatment regimens), Chapter 4 
(Monitoring during treatment) and Chapter 5 (Co-management of HIV and active 
TB). Areas outside the scope of the seven questions, as well as the remaining chapters, 
have been updated with current WHO TB policies and recent references but were 
not the subject of systematic literature reviews or of new recommendations by the 
Guidelines Group.
Question 1. duration of rifampicin in new patients 
Should new pulmonary TB patients be treated with the 6-month rifampicin regimen 
(2HRZE/4HR) or the 2-month rifampicin regimen (2HRZE/6HE)?
L Recommendation 1.1
New patients with pulmonary TB should receive a regimen containing 6 months 
of rifampicin: 2HRZE/4HR
(Strong/High grade of evidence)
Remark a: Recommendation 1.1 also applies to extrapulmonary TB, except TB of 
the central nervous system, bone or joint for which some expert groups suggest 
longer therapy (see Chapter 8).
Remark b: WHO recommends that national TB control programmes ensure that 
supervision and support are provided for all TB patients in order to achieve com-
pletion of the full course of therapy. 
Remark c: WHO recommends drug resistance surveys (or surveillance) for moni-
toring the impact of the treatment programme as well as for designing standard 
regimens. 
L Recommendation 1.2
The 2HRZE/6HE treatment regimen should be phased out
(Strong/High grade of evidence)
Question 2. dosing frequency in new patients
When a country selects 2HRZE/4HR, should patients be treated with a daily or three 
times weekly intensive phase?
L Recommendation 2.1
Wherever feasible, the optimal dosing frequency for new patients with pulmo-
nary TB is daily throughout the course of therapy
(Strong/High grade of evidence)
There are two alternatives to Recommendation 2.1: 
 3
ExECuTIVE Summary
L Recommendation 2.1A
New patients with pulmonary TB may receive a daily intensive phase 
 
followed by a three times weekly continuation phase [2HRZE/4(HR)3], pro-
vided that each dose is directly observed
(Conditional/High and moderate grade of evidence)
L Recommendation 2.1B
Three times weekly dosing throughout therapy [2(HRZE)3/4(HR)3] may be 
used as another alternative to Recommendation 2.1, provided that every 
dose is directly observed and the patient is NOT living with HIV or living in 
an HIV-prevalent setting
(Conditional/High and moderate grade of evidence)
Remark a: Treatment regimens for TB patients living with HIV or living in 
HIV-prevalent settings are discussed in Recommendation 4 and Chapter 5.
Remark b: In terms of dosing frequency for HIV-negative patients, the system-
atic review found little evidence of differences in failure or relapse rates with 
daily or three times weekly regimens (see Annex 2). However, rates of acquired 
drug resistance were higher among patients receiving three times weekly dosing 
throughout therapy than among patients who received daily drug administra-
tion throughout treatment. Moreover, in patients with pretreatment isoniazid 
resistance, three times weekly dosing during the intensive phase was associ-
ated with significantly higher risks of failure and acquired drug resistance than 
daily dosing during the intensive phase.
L Recommendation 2.2
New patients with TB should not receive twice weekly dosing for the full course 
of treatment unless this is done in the context of formal research
(Strong/High grade of evidence) 
Remark: The available evidence showed equivalent efficacy of daily intensive-
phase dosing followed by two times weekly continuation phase. However, twice 
weekly dosing is not recommended on operational grounds, since missing one 
dose means the patient receives only half the regimen. 
Question 3. Initial regimen in countries with high levels of isoniazid 
resistance
In countries with high levels of isoniazid resistance in new TB patients, should the 
continuation phase (containing isoniazid and rifampicin) be changed in the stan-
dard treatment of all new patients, in order to prevent the development of multidrug 
resistance?1 
1 This question applies to countries where isoniazid susceptibility testing in new patients is not done (or 
results are not available) before the continuation phase begins. 
 4
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
L Recommendation 3
In populations with known or suspected high levels of isoniazid resistance, new 
TB patients may receive HRE as therapy in the continuation phase as an accept-
able alternative to HR
(Weak/Insufficient evidence, expert opinion)
Remark a: While there is a pressing need to prevent multidrug resistance (MDR), 
the most effective regimen for the treatment of isoniazid-resistant TB is not known. 
There is inadequate evidence to quantify the ability of ethambutol to “protect 
 
rifampicin” in patients with pretreatment isoniazid resistance. The evidence for 
ocular toxicity from ethambutol was not systematically reviewed for this revision, 
but the risk of permanent blindness exists. Thus, further research (see Annex 5) is 
urgently needed to define the level of isoniazid resistance that would warrant the 
addition of ethambutol (or other drugs) to the continuation phase of the standard 
new patient regimen in TB programmes where isoniazid drug susceptibility test-
ing is not done (or results are unavailable) before the continuation phase begins. 
Remark b: Daily (rather than three times weekly) intensive-phase dosing may also 
help prevent acquired drug resistance in TB patients starting treatment with iso-
niazid resistance. The systematic review (Annex 2) found that patients with isoni-
azid resistance treated with a three times weekly intensive phase had significantly 
higher risks of failure and acquired drug resistance than those treated with daily 
dosing during the intensive phase.
Question 4. Tb treatment in persons living with HIV
Should intermittent regimens be used for persons living with HIV? What should be 
the duration of TB treatment in people living with HIV? 
Remark: Current WHO recommendations promoting the use of antiretroviral thera-
py in TB patients living with HIV should be put rapidly into practice. 
L Recommendation 4.1
TB patients with known positive HIV status and all TB patients living in HIV-
prevalent settings should receive daily TB treatment at least during the inten-
sive phase
(Strong/High grade of evidence)
Remark: HIV-prevalent settings are defined as countries, subnational administra-
tive units, or selected facilities where the HIV prevalence among adult pregnant 
women is ≥1% or among TB patients is ≥5%. 
L Recommendation 4.2
For the continuation phase, the optimal dosing frequency is also daily for these 
patients
(Strong/High grade of evidence)
 5
L Recommendation 4.3
If a daily continuation phase is not possible for these patients, three times 
weekly dosing during the continuation phase is an acceptable alternative
(Conditional/High and moderate grade of evidence) 
L Recommendation 4.4
It is recommended that TB patients who are living with HIV should receive at least 
the same duration of TB treatment as HIV-negative TB patients
(Strong/High grade of evidence)
Remark a: Some experts recommend prolonging TB treatment in persons living 
with HIV (see Chapter 5).
Remark b: Previously treated TB patients who are living with HIV should receive 
the same retreatment regimens as HIV-negative TB patients. 
Recommendations 1–4 (as they relate to new patients) are summarized in Table A 
below, and shown in Tables 3.2 and 3.3 in Chapter 3.
Table A STAndArd regimen And doSing frequency for new TB pATienTS 
Intensive phase 
Continuation phase
Comments
2 months of HrZea
4 months of Hr 
2 months of HrZe
4 months of Hre
Applies only in countries with high levels of 
isoniazid resistance in new TB patients, and 
where isoniazid drug susceptibility testing 
in new patients is not done (or results are 
unavailable) before the continuation phase 
begins 
a wHo no longer recommends omission of ethambutol during the intensive phase of treatment for 
 
patients with non-cavitary, smear-negative pulmonary TB or extrapulmonary disease who are known 
to be HiV-negative.
dosing frequency
Comments
Intensive phase 
Continuation phase
daily 
daily 
optimal
daily
3 times per week
Acceptable alternative for any new TB patient 
receiving directly observed therapy
3 times per week
3 times per week
Acceptable alternative provided that the 
patient is receiving directly observed therapy 
and is noT living with HiV or living in an HiV-
prevalent setting (see chapter 5)
Note: daily (rather than three times weekly) intensive-phase dosing may help to prevent acquired drug 
resistance in TB patients starting treatment with isoniazid resistance (see Annex 2).
ExECuTIVE Summary
 6
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
Question 5. Sputum monitoring during Tb treatment of smear-positive 
pulmonary Tb patients
In pulmonary TB patients who are initially smear positive, how effective is moni-
toring sputum specimens for predicting relapse, failure and pretreatment isoniazid 
resistance? 
Figures 4.1 and 4.2 in Chapter 4 illustrate Recommendations 5.1–5.3.
L Recommendation 5.1
For smear-positive pulmonary TB patients treated with first-line drugs, sputum 
smear microscopy may be performed at completion of the intensive phase of 
treatment
(Conditional/High and moderate grade of evidence)
Remark a: This recommendation applies both to new patients treated with regimens 
containing 6 months of rifampicin, and to patients returning after default or relapse 
and now receiving the 8-month retreatment regimen (2HRZES/1HRZE/5HRE). 
Note that the end of the intensive phase may be at 2 months or 3 months, depend-
ing on the regimen. 
Remark b: Available evidence showed that smear status at the end of the intensive 
phase is a poor predictor of relapse, failure and pretreatment isoniazid resistance. 
Nonetheless, WHO continues to recommend performing smear microscopy at 
this stage because a positive smear should trigger an assessment of the patient, 
as well as additional sputum monitoring (see Recommendations 5.2 and 5.3). 
 
Sputum smear conversion at the end of the intensive phase is also an indicator of 
TB programme performance.
L Recommendation 5.2
In new patients, if the specimen obtained at the end of the intensive phase 
(month 2) is smear-positive, sputum smear microscopy should be obtained at 
the end of the third month
(Strong/High grade of evidence)
L Recommendation 5.3
In new patients, if the specimen obtained at the end of month 3 is smear-positive, 
sputum culture and drug susceptibility testing (DST) should be performed
(Strong/High grade of evidence)
Remark: National TB control programmes (NTPs) should continue to follow 
the current WHO recommendation to obtain sputum specimens for smear mi-
croscopy at the end of months 5 and 6 for all new pulmonary TB patients who 
were smear-positive at the start of treatment. Patients whose sputum smears are 
positive at month 5 or 6 (or who are found to harbour MDR-TB strains at any 
 7
time) will be re-registered as having failed treatment and be treated according to 
 
Recommendation 7 below.
L Recommendation 5.4
In previously treated patients, if the specimen obtained at the end of the inten-
sive phase (month 3) is smear-positive, sputum culture and drug susceptibility 
testing (DST) should be performed
(Strong/High grade of evidence)
Question 6. Treatment extension in new pulmonary Tb patients
In new pulmonary TB patients, how effective is extension of treatment for preventing 
failure or relapse?
L Recommendation 6
In patients treated with the regimen containing rifampicin throughout treat-
ment, if a positive sputum smear is found at completion of the intensive phase, 
the extension of the intensive phase is not recommended
(Strong/High grade of evidence) 
Remark: WHO recommends that a positive sputum smear at completion of the 
intensive phase should trigger a careful review of the quality of patient support 
and supervision, with prompt intervention if needed (see Chapter 4). It should also 
trigger additional sputum monitoring, as per Recommendations 5.2, 5.3 and 5.4.
Question 7. Previously treated patients
Which (if any) groups of patients should receive a retreatment regimen with first-line 
drugs?
Table 3.5 in Chapter 3 shows Recommendations 7.1–7.4.
L Recommendation 7.1
Specimens for culture and drug susceptibility testing (DST) should be obtained 
from all previously treated TB patients at or before the start of treatment. DST 
should be performed for at least isoniazid and rifampicin
Remark a: DST may be carried out by rapid molecular-based methods or by con-
ventional methods. Sputum should be obtained, as well as appropriate specimens 
for extrapulmonary TB, depending on the site of disease. 
Remark b: Obtaining specimens for culture and DST should not delay the start of 
treatment. Empirical therapy should be started promptly, especially if the patient 
is seriously ill or the disease is progressing rapidly. 
ExECuTIVE Summary
 8
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
L Recommendation 7.2
In settings where rapid molecular-based DST is available, the results should 
guide the choice of regimen
L Recommendation 7.3
In settings where rapid molecular-based DST results are not routinely available 
to guide the management of individual patients, empirical1 treatment should be 
started as follows:
L Recommendation 7.3.1
TB patients whose treatment has failed2 or other patient groups with high 
likelihood of multidrug-resistant TB (MDR-TB) should be started on an em-
pirical MDR regimen
Remark a: In the absence of culture and DST results, the patient should be clini-
cally evaluated before the MDR regimen is administered.
Remark b: Other examples of patients with high likelihood of MDR-TB are 
those relapsing or defaulting after their second or subsequent course of treat-
ment. See also section 3.8.2.
L Recommendation 7.3.2
TB patients returning after defaulting or relapsing from their first treat-
ment course may receive the retreatment regimen containing first-line drugs 
2HRZES/1HRZE/5HRE if country-specific data show low or medium levels 
of MDR in these patients or if such data are unavailable
Remark: When DST results become available, regimens should be adjusted 
 
appropriately. 
L Recommendation 7.4
In settings where DST results are not yet routinely available to guide the man-
agement of individual patients, the empirical regimens will continue through-
out the course of treatment 
L Recommendation 7.5
National TB control programmes should obtain and use their country-specific 
drug resistance data on failure, relapse and default patient groups to determine 
the levels of MDR.
1 In these guidelines, empirical means providing treatment before (or without) knowing whether the 
patient’s TB organisms are MDR or not.
2 Failures in a well-run NTP should be infrequent in the absence of MDR-TB. If they do occur, they are 
due either to MDR-TB or to programme factors such as poor DOT or poor drug quality. If drug resis-
tance data from failure patients are available and show low or medium levels of MDR, patients should 
receive the retreatment regimen outlined in section 7.3.2., and every effort should be made to address 
the underlying programmatic issues.
 9
Remark: Country-specific drug resistance data should include data stratified by 
type of regimen given for the patient’s first course of TB treatment (i.e. 2 vs 6 
months of rifampicin).
Table B below lists key changes in this fourth edition, compared to the 2004 update 
of the third edition.1 
Table B Key cHAngeS Since THe THird ediTion
Chapter 1. IntroduCtIon
• The scope is now limited to treatment of TB in adults. The fourth edition no longer 
covers:
— TB case detection and diagnosis; 
— diagnosis and treatment of TB in children (WHO has published a separate 
guideline on management of childhood TB);
— drug supply management.
• Instead of “Diagnostic categories I–IV”, this edition uses the same patient regis-
tration groups used for recording and reporting, which differentiate new patients 
from those with prior treatment and specify reasons for retreatment.
• Each applicable standard from the International Standards for TB Care is cross-
referenced.
• An expiry date is provided.
Chapter 2. Case defInItIons
• The recent WHO case definition for sputum smear-positive pulmonary TB2 has 
been applied to a definite case of TB, so that now a patient with one positive AFB 
smear is considered a definite case in countries with a functional external quality 
assurance (EQA) system. (In the third edition, two positive smears were required 
before a patient could be considered a definite case.)
• Bacteriology now includes culture and new methods for identification of M. tuber-
culosis.
• New WHO data elements for recording and reporting, such as HIV status and 
MDR-TB, are included.
• Severity of disease is no longer included as a feature of the case definition.
• In the definition for smear-negative TB, this edition incorporates WHO policy 
reducing the number of specimens from three to two for screening patients sus-
pected to have TB. This policy applies only in settings where a well-functioning 
EQA system exists, the workload is very high, and human resources are limited.3 
1 
 http://www.who.int/tb/publications/cds_tb_2003_313/en/index.html 
2 
 http://www.who.int/tb/dots/laboratory/policy/en/index1.html 
3 
 http://www.who.int/tb/dots/laboratory/policy/en/index2.html 
ExECuTIVE Summary
 10
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
• In settings with an HIV prevalence >1% in pregnant women or ≥5% in TB patients, 
sputum culture for Mycobacterium tuberculosis should be performed in patients 
who are sputum smear-negative to confirm the diagnosis of TB.
• A trial of broad-spectrum antibiotics is no longer recommended to be used as a 
diagnostic aid for smear-negative pulmonary TB in persons living with HIV.
• For HIV-negative patients, the fourth edition specifies that, if broad-spectrum 
 
antibiotics are used in the diagnosis of smear-negative pulmonary TB, anti-TB 
drugs and fluoroquinolones should be avoided.
• Pulmonary TB cases without smear results are no longer classified as smear- 
negative. Instead, they are labelled “smear not done” on the TB register and in the 
annual WHO survey of countries. 
• Consistent with Standard 3 of the International Standards for TB Care, culture and 
histopathological examination are recommended for specimens from suspected 
extrapulmonary sites of TB. Examination of sputum and a chest radiograph are 
also suggested, in case patients have concomitant pulmonary involvement. 
• The patient registration group “Other” no longer includes “chronic”. Instead, 
 
patients whose sputum is smear-positive at the end of (or returning from) a sec-
ond or subsequent course of treatment are classified by the outcome of their most 
recent retreatment course: relapsed, defaulted or failed.
Chapter 3. standard treatment regImens
• Additional dosage information is provided for isoniazid (maximum daily dose for 
three times per week) and streptomycin (maximum dose, and adjustments in per-
sons aged over 60 years or weighing less than 50 kg). Thioacetazone is no longer 
included among the first-line drugs.
• A new section on TB patient kits has been added.
• The recommended new patient regimen contains 6 months of rifampicin; the 
 
regimen with 2 months of rifampicin (with the 6-month continuation phase of 
isoniazid and ethambutol) is no longer an option. 
• In this edition, three times weekly dosing throughout therapy is an alternative only 
for patients who are receiving directly observed therapy of every dose and who are 
not HIV-positive or living in an HIV-prevalent setting. Three times weekly dosing 
during the intensive phase is no longer an option for HIV-positive TB patients or 
TB patients living in HIV-prevalent settings.
• WHO now recommends against twice weekly dosing for the full course of treat-
ment for new patients (unless done in the context of formal research).The third 
edition included the option to omit ethambutol during the intensive phase of 
treatment for patients with non-cavitary, smear-negative pulmonary TB or extra-
 11
pulmonary disease who are known to be HIV-negative. In the fourth edition, the 
omission of ethambutol is no longer recommended.
• This fourth edition includes an alternative continuation phase of ethambutol, 
 
rifampicin, and isoniazid for new patients in populations with high levels of isoni-
azid resistance. This conditional recommendation applies where isoniazid suscep-
tibility testing in new patients is not done (or results are not available) before the 
continuation phase begins.
• DST before or at the start of therapy is strongly recommended for all previously 
treated patients.
• Previously treated patients are defined by their likelihood of MDR-TB, and rec-
ommendations for treatment regimen depend on reason for retreatment (failure, 
versus relapse and default).
• Laboratory tests (liquid media, line probe assays) to meet the needs for the prompt 
identification of M. tuberculosis and DST are discussed, based on country-specific, 
comprehensive plans for laboratory strengthening.
• Guidance for starting therapy is provided for previously treated patients, based 
on whether the country has access to new rapid molecular-based tests, access to 
conventional DST, or no routine access to DST results to guide management of 
individual patients.
• In countries using conventional DST, a standard empirical MDR regimen is rec-
ommended for patients with high likelihood of MDR, while awaiting DST results. 
When DST results become available, regimens should be adjusted appropriately.
• An MDR regimen is now recommended as one of each country’s standard regi-
mens, for use in confirmed MDR-TB cases as well as in patients with a high likeli-
hood of MDR while awaiting DST results. This edition also gives interim guidance 
to countries where DST is not yet routinely available for individual retreatment 
patients.
• Given the availability of funding from international financial mechanisms, lack of 
resources for MDR treatment is no longer an acceptable rationale for providing a 
retreatment regimen of first-line drugs (formerly called the “Category 2 regimen”) 
to patients with a high likelihood of MDR.
• The previous edition recommended the 8-month retreatment regimen with first-
line drugs for all TB patients returning after defaulting or relapsing. By contrast, 
this edition allows for the possibility that, in some countries, these patients may 
have levels of MDR-TB that are high enough to warrant an MDR regimen while 
awaiting results of DST.
• WHO does not intend to establish thresholds for low, moderate, or high likeli-
hoods or levels of MDR. NTPs will define “low,” “moderate” and “high” for their 
ExECuTIVE Summary
 12
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
own countries, based on levels of MDR in specific patient groups, as well as other 
factors such as MDR treatment resources available during scale-up, and frequency 
of concomitant conditions (such as HIV) that increase the short-term risk of dying 
from MDR-TB.
• Country drug resistance surveys, WHO estimates of MDR levels, and other data 
sources are recommended to inform decisions on each country’s standard treat-
ment regimens for defined patient groups.
• Intermittent dosing is no longer an option for previously treated patients receiving 
the 8-month retreatment regimen with first-line drugs. 
Chapter 4. monItorIng durIng treatment
• The performance of sputum smear microscopy at the completion of the inten-
sive phase of treatment is a conditional, rather than a strong, recommendation, 
given the evidence that a positive smear at this stage has a very poor ability to pre-
dict relapse or pretreatment isoniazid resistance (Annex 2). However, its utility in 
 
detecting problems with patient supervision and for monitoring programme per-
formance is reaffirmed.
• In addition, this edition recommends that a positive sputum smear at the end of 
the intensive phase in new patients should trigger sputum smear microscopy at 
the end of the third month. If the latter is positive, culture and DST should be 
performed. 
• This edition no longer recommends extension of the intensive phase for patients 
who have a positive sputum smear at the end of the second month of treatment. 
• In previously treated patients, if the specimen obtained at the end of the intensive 
phase (month 3) is smear-positive, this edition recommends that sputum culture 
and DST be performed then, rather than waiting until month 5 (which was recom-
mended in the third edition). 
• The outcome of cure now encompasses culture results. 
• Patients found to harbour an MDR-TB strain at any point during treatment are 
now classified as “treatment failure”. They are re-registered and begin an MDR 
regimen.
• For MDR-TB patients, this edition recommends the use of the MDR-TB register 
and cohort analysis.
• The symptom-based approach to side-effects of anti-TB drugs has been revised.
 13
Chapter 5. Co-management of hIV and aCtIVe tB dIsease
• Provider-initiated HIV testing for all patients with known or suspected TB is now 
recommended, regardless of the stage of the country’s HIV epidemic. 
• This edition includes current WHO recommendations to start co-trimoxazole as 
soon as possible when a person living with HIV is diagnosed with TB. 
• Daily dosing is strongly recommended during the intensive phase for TB patients 
with known positive HIV status, and all new patients living in HIV-prevalent 
settings. Three times per week dosing during the intensive phase is no longer an 
 
acceptable alternative.
• Current WHO recommendations for antiretroviral therapy and timing of initia-
tion are incorporated.
• Drug susceptibility testing is now recommended at the start of TB therapy in all 
people living with HIV.
Chapter 6. superVIsIon and patIent support
• Roles of the patient, TB programme staff, the community, and other providers 
are described in assuring adherence to treatment. A treatment supporter must be 
identified for each TB patient, which may be a health worker, or a trained and 
 
supervised member of the community or family.
• Treatment supervision is defined in the context of a larger support package to 
 
address patients’ needs.
Chapter 7. treatment of drug-resIstant tB
• This chapter has been extensively revised to reflect recent WHO recommendations 
for the programmatic management of drug-resistant TB.
Chapter 8. tB treatment of extrapulmonary dIsease and of tB In 
speCIal sItuatIons
• While WHO continues to recommend the same regimens for extrapulmonary 
and pulmonary disease, this fourth edition references other guidelines suggesting 
longer treatment for TB meningitis and for bone or joint TB.
• For TB patients with pre-existing liver disease, this fourth edition includes regi-
mens with one, two and no hepatotoxic drugs. A 9-month regimen of rifampicin 
and ethambutol is no longer included as an option. 
• For TB patients with renal failure, this edition recommends the 6-month regimen 
with isoniazid, rifampicin, ethambutol and pyrazinamide, whereas the prior edi-
tion omitted pyrazinamide. This edition recommends administering ethambutol 
(15 mg/kg) and pyrazinamide (25 mg/kg) three times per week. This edition now 
discourages the use of streptomycin in patients with renal failure; however, if it 
must be used, 15 mg/kg should be administered two to three times per week, with 
monitoring of drug levels.
ExECuTIVE Summary
 14
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
annexes
annex 1
• Rifampicin: includes a list of drugs which interact with rifampicin.
• Streptomycin: dosage adjustments for the elderly and adults weighing less than 
50 kg are provided.
• Ethambutol: creatinine clearance <50 ml/min is no longer listed as a contraindica-
tion. Dosage adjustment in renal failure is provided.
annex 2
• This new annex describes the evidence base and issues that were considered in 
making recommendations.
annex 3
• This annex describes the most critical treatment outcomes considered.
annex 4
• In this new annex, steps for implementing and evaluating the strong recommen-
dations are described.
annex 5
• This annex provides suggestions for future research under each of the seven ques-
tions.
annex 6
• This new annex lists the members of the Guidelines Group and the External 
 
Review Group.
 15
1
introduction
1.1 Chapter objectives
This chapter defines the purpose, target audience, scope and development of this 
fourth edition of the guidelines. It also explains why a new edition was needed and 
projects a date for the next revision.
1.2 Purpose of the guidelines
The principal purpose of these guidelines is to help national TB control programmes 
(NTPs) in setting TB treatment policy to optimize patient cure: curing patients will 
prevent death, relapse, acquired drug resistance, and the spread of TB in the commu-
nity. Their further purpose is to guide clinicians working in both public and private 
sectors.
1.3 Target audience
The primary target audience for the guidelines is the managers and staff of NTPs, 
together with other TB service providers working in public and private health care 
facilities at the central and peripheral levels.
Use of the term “NTP manager” in these guidelines refers to the official within, or 
designated by, the ministry of health who is responsible for the TB programme or to 
that official’s designee. 
1.4 Scope
These guidelines address the treatment of active TB disease in adults. They exclude 
many related topics that have already been covered in detail in other publications: 
diagnosis, laboratory standards for smear microscopy, protocols for use of rapid drug 
susceptibility tests, paediatric TB, drug procurement and supply management, in-
fection control, intensified case-finding in persons living with HIV, and isoniazid 
preventive therapy.
1.5 Why a new edition? 
Major progress in global TB control followed the widespread implementation of the 
DOTS strategy. The Stop TB Strategy, launched in 2006, builds upon and enhances 
the achievements of DOTS (1): new objectives include universal access to patient-
centred treatment, and protection of populations from TB/HIV coinfection and 
multidrug-resistant TB (MDR-TB). The Stop TB Strategy and the Global Plan (2) to 
 16
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
implement the new strategy made it necessary to revise the existing guidelines (3) 
and develop this fourth edition.
Historically, the greatest emphasis of TB control activities has been on the most in-
fectious patients – those who have sputum smear-positive pulmonary tuberculosis 
(3). This changed with the Stop TB Strategy’s emphasis on universal access for all 
persons with TB to high-quality, patient-centred treatment (1). However, highly in-
fectious, smear-positive patients remain the primary focus for other aspects of TB 
control, including contact tracing and infection control. The Patients’ Charter for TB 
Care specifies that all TB patients have “the right to free and equitable access to TB 
care, from diagnosis through treatment completion” (4).
This fourth edition of the guidelines has therefore abandoned Categories I–IV, which 
were used to prioritize patients for treatment.1 According to this prior categorization, 
smear-negative TB patients were assigned third priority and MDR-TB patients fourth 
priority. For treatment decisions it no longer makes sense to assign third priority 
to smear-negative patients given their high mortality if they are living with HIV. 
Equally, MDR-TB patients should not be assigned fourth priority, given their high 
mortality and the urgent need to prevent the spread of these deadliest TB strains.
To replace Categories I–IV, this fourth edition groups patients (and standard regi-
mens recommended for each group) according to the likelihood of their having 
drug resistance. Drug resistance is a critical determinant of treatment success, and 
 
prior TB treatment confers an increased risk (5, 6). This edition uses the same patient 
 
registration groups as those used for recording and reporting, which differentiate 
new patients from those who have had prior treatment (7). Registration groups for 
previously treated patients are based on the outcome of their prior treatment course: 
failure, relapse, and default.
The fourth edition integrates detection and treatment of both HIV infection and 
MDR-TB, and thus should contribute towards achievement of the Stop TB Strategy’s 
universal access to high-quality MDR-TB and HIV care. 
With regard to HIV detection, this edition incorporates recent WHO recommenda-
tions for provider-initiated HIV testing of all persons with diagnosed or suspected 
TB, in all types of HIV epidemics (low-level, concentrated or generalized) (8). For 
treatment of TB in persons living with HIV, new recommendations on the dura-
tion of therapy and the role of intermittent regimens have emerged from systematic 
 
reviews (see Chapter 5). The new edition also includes recent WHO recommenda-
tions for DST at the start of TB therapy in all people living with HIV (9), as well as 
recommendations on the timing and type of antiretroviral therapy (ART) regimens 
(10).
1 Also, the original one-to-one correspondence between patient group and treatment regimens was lost 
as Categories I–IV were redefined over the years. The same treatment regimen came to be recommend-
ed for patients in Categories I and III; after 2004, different treatment regimens were recommended for 
patients in Category II depending on factors such as programme performance and drug resistance.
 17
New developments in MDR-TB also contributed to the need for this revision. Build-
ing on the principle of universal access to MDR-TB diagnosis and care, The MDR-TB 
and XDR-TB response plan 2007–2008 (11) calls for the diagnosis and treatment of 
MDR-TB in all countries by 2015. Even countries with low overall levels of multidrug 
resistance (MDR) are faced with TB patients who have been previously treated – a 
group that is five times more likely to have MDR-TB than new patients (see section 
3.6).
In terms of ensuring universal access to MDR-TB diagnosis, this fourth edition reaf-
firms existing WHO recommendations (2) that all previously treated patients should 
have access to culture and DST at the beginning of treatment, in order to identify 
MDR-TB as early as possible.1 It also incorporates the WHO recommendation that 
treatment failure be confirmed by culture and DST (9). In order to detect MDR soon-
er than the end of the fifth month of treatment, this edition includes the existing 
WHO recommendation (9) for culture and DST if patients still have smear-positive 
sputum at the end of the third month of treatment.
Chapters 2–5 of this new edition discuss the critical role of the identification of Myco-
bacterium tuberculosis and of DST. This is in contrast to the previous edition, which 
relied almost exclusively on smear microscopy for case definition, assignment of stand-
ard regimens, and monitoring of treatment response. Line probe assays can identify 
MDR-TB within hours and liquid media can do so within weeks (rather than months 
when solid media are used) (12). These techniques should be introduced in line with 
comprehensive, country-specific plans for laboratory capacity strengthening.
To move towards universal access to MDR-TB treatment, the fourth edition includes 
a new recommendation for every country to include an MDR regimen in its stand-
ard regimens. This is essential while awaiting DST results for patients with a high 
likelihood of MDR (such as those whose prior treatment with a 6-month rifampicin 
regimen has failed), and for patients in whom resistance to isoniazid and rifampicin is 
confirmed. With the availability of funding from international financial partners,2 lack 
of resources for MDR-TB treatment is no longer an acceptable rationale for providing 
the 8-month retreatment regimen with first-line drugs (formerly called the “Category 
II regimen”) to patients with a high likelihood of MDR; this regimen is ineffective in 
treating MDR-TB and may result in amplification of drug resistance (5, 13). 
Use of rapid DST methods will eventually render the 8-month retreatment regimen 
of first-line drugs obsolete. In the meantime, the regimen is retained in this fourth 
edition in only two circumstances. In countries with access to routine DST using 
conventional methods, the 8-month retreatment regimen with first-line drugs is 
recommended while awaiting DST results from patients who have relapsed or are 
returning after default (if country-specific data show they have a medium likelihood 
1 This recommendation is consistent with the International Standards for Tuberculosis Care and resolu-
tions endorsed by the World Health Assembly in 2007 which call for universal access to DST by 2015.
2 Such as UNITAID and the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria.
1. InTroduCTIon
 18
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
of MDR-TB, or if such data are unavailable). In countries that do not yet have DST 
routinely available at the start of treatment for all previously treated patients (see sec-
tion 3.7.3), the 8-month retreatment regimen with first-line drugs will be used for the 
duration of treatment on an interim basis until laboratory capacity is available.
In principle, MDR treatment should be introduced only in well-performing DOTS 
programmes. Before focusing on curing MDR-TB cases, it is critical to “turn off the 
tap”, i.e. to strengthen poor programmes so that they stop giving rise to MDR-TB. 
Following this principle, the 2004 revision of the treatment chapter1 listed adequate 
performance of a country’s overall TB programme as a requirement for the use of 
MDR regimens in patients with a high likelihood of MDR. This is no longer a pre-
requisite in the fourth edition. In some countries with limited DOTS coverage, there 
may be an appropriate setting for an MDR pilot project that, once established, can 
provide a model and an impetus for the expansion of basic DOTS into more areas. 
In most countries, however, conditions for initiating an MDR component in most 
NTPs are not met until the overall NTP has the essential elements of DOTS firmly 
in place.
1.6 methodology 
Development of the fourth edition of the guidelines followed new WHO procedures. 
WHO defined the scope of revision and convened a guidelines group of external 
 
experts. All members of the group completed a Declaration for the Conflict of Inter-
est; there were no conflicts declared. With input from the Guidelines Group, WHO 
identified seven key questions on the treatment of TB (see Annex 2) covering the 
following topics: 
— duration of rifampicin in new patients;
— dosing frequency in new patients;
— initial regimen for new TB patients in countries with high levels of isoniazid 
resistance;
— TB treatment in persons living with HIV;
— sputum monitoring during TB treatment;
— treatment extension;
— retreatment.
Systematic literature reviews were conducted for each question and the evidence was 
synthesized2 (see Annex 2). 
Input from the Guidelines Group to the revision of guidelines was made by e-mail, in 
conference calls and at a 3-day meeting (21–23 October 2008) during which the final 
treatment recommendations were established once consensus had been reached by 
1 Treatment of tuberculosis: guidelines for national programmes, 3rd ed. Chapter 4, Standard treatment 
regimens, was revised in June 2004 and the new version was posted on the WHO web site.
2 At the time of publication of this fourth edition, evidence gathered through some of the systematic 
reviews had not been published.
 19
the Guidelines Group. The recommendations are based on the quality of the evidence, 
values, and costs, as well as judgements about trade-offs between benefits and harm. 
The group graded the strength of each recommendation, reflecting the degree of con-
fidence that the desirable effects of adherence to a recommendation outweigh the 
undesirable effects. Although the degree of confidence is necessarily a continuum, 
three categories are used – strong, conditional and weak. The quality of the evidence 
was assessed according to the GRADE methodology (14). 
Moderate/low quality of evidence means that the estimate of effect of the interven-
tion is very uncertain and further research is likely to have an important impact on 
confidence in the estimate. For high-quality evidence, by contrast, further research 
is unlikely to change confidence in the estimate of effect.
A strong recommendation means that the desirable effects of adherence to the rec-
ommendation clearly outweigh the undesirable effects. Strong recommendations use 
the words “should” or “should not”. No alternatives are listed.
A conditional recommendation means that the desirable effects of adherence to the 
recommendation probably outweigh the undesirable effects, but the trade-offs are 
uncertain. Reasons for lack of certainty include:
— high-quality evidence to support the recommendation is lacking;
— benefits of implementing the recommendation are small;
— benefits may not justify the costs;
— it was not possible to arrive at precise estimates of benefit.
A weak recommendation means that there is insufficient evidence; the recommenda-
tion is therefore based on field application and expert opinion. 
Conditional and weak recommendations use the word “may”. Alternatives are listed 
for several of the conditional recommendations. 
Table 1.1 shows how strong and conditional recommendations differ in terms both 
of wording and of the factors used to judge their strength. Strong and conditional 
recommendations also have different implications for policy-makers, patients, and 
health care providers; these are summarized in the table.
A plan for implementing and evaluating the strong recommendations is outlined in 
Annex 4. To address the gaps in the evidence critical for decision-making, the Guide-
lines Group developed a series of questions as a basis for future research; these are 
detailed in Annex 5. Members of the Guidelines Group are listed in Annex 6.
The recommendations that address the seven key questions appear in the context 
of guidance on standard treatment (Chapter 3), monitoring (Chapter 4) and HIV 
(Chapter 5). Areas outside the scope of those questions have been updated with cur-
rent references and WHO TB policies but were not the subject of systematic literature 
reviews or of new recommendations by the Guidelines Group.
1. InTroduCTIon
 20
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
Table 1.1 
STrong VerSuS condiTionAl recommendATionS
recommendation strength
Strong
Conditional
Phrasing of the 
recommendation
“Should” or “should not”. 
no alternatives are presented
“optimal is”, “may”, or “it 
is (not) recommended”. 
Alternatives are often listed
factors used to judge strength
quality of evidence
High-quality evidence
low-quality evidence
Balance between 
desirable and undesirable 
effects on patient and 
public health
large, certain net benefit and/or 
difference between benefits and 
harms or burdens 
Small and/or uncertain 
gradient
resource allocation
low cost (or little uncertainty 
about whether the intervention 
represents a wise use of 
resources)
High cost (or high 
uncertainty)
uncertainty in values and 
preferences; variability 
across patients
Small amount of uncertainty or 
variability
large amount of uncertainty 
or variability
Implications
for policy-makers 
(including nTp 
managers) 
The recommendation should 
unequivocally be used for 
setting policy
policy-making will require 
extensive debate 
for patients
most individuals would want the 
recommended course of action 
The recommended course 
of action can be adjusted on 
the basis of feasibility and 
acceptability
for health care 
providers
most patients should be treated 
according to the recommended 
course of action. Adherence 
to this recommendation is a 
reasonable measure of good 
quality care
 21
The draft guidelines were circulated to the external review group (whose members 
are listed in Annex 6), made up of NTP managers from high-burden countries, mem-
bers of the WHO Strategic, Technical and Advisory Group on TB (STAG-TB), six 
regional TB Advisers and TB medical officers working in high-burden countries. 
Comments received from the external review group were appropriately addressed 
and the few disagreements between the external reviewers and the Guidelines Group 
were resolved by e-mail consultation.
1.7 International Standards for Tuberculosis Care
The International Standards for Tuberculosis Care (ISTC) (15) describe a widely ac-
cepted level of TB care that all practitioners should seek to achieve. Cross-referencing 
the applicable ISTC standards in this new edition should help providers in both pub-
lic and private sectors to ensure their implementation.
1.8 Expiry date
The WHO Stop TB Department will review and update these guidelines after 3–5 
years or as needed when new evidence, treatment regimens or diagnostic tests 
 
become available.
references
Raviglione MC, Uplekar MW. WHO’s new stop TB strategy. 
1. 
Lancet, 2006, 367:952–
955.
The global plan to stop TB, 2006–2015
2. 
. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2006 
(WHO/HTM/STB/2006.35).
Treatment of tuberculosis: guidelines for national programmes
3. 
, 3rd ed. Geneva, World 
Health Organization, 2003 (WHO/CDS/TB/2003.313).
Patients’ charter for tuberculosis care: patients’ rights and responsibilities
4. 
. Geneva, 
World Care Council, 2006 (available at: www.who.int/tb/publications/2006/patients_
charter.pdf).
Espinal MA et al. Standard short-course chemotherapy for drug-resistant tuberculo-
5. 
sis: treatment outcomes in 6 countries. Journal of the American Medical Association, 
2000, 283:2537–2545.
Aziz MA et al. Epidemiology of antituberculosis drug resistance (the Global Project 
6. 
on Anti-tuberculosis Drug Resistance Surveillance): an updated analysis. Lancet, 
2006, 368:2142–2154.
Revised TB recording and reporting forms and registers – version 2006
7. 
. Geneva, World 
Health Organization, 2006 (WHO/HTM/TB/2006.373; available at: www.who.int/
tb/dots/r_and_r_forms/en/index.html).
Guidance on provider-initiated HIV testing and counselling in health facilities
8. 
. 
Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007.
Guidelines for the programmatic management of drug-resistant tuberculosis: emer-
9. 
gency update 2008. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2008 (WHO/HTM/TB/ 
2008.402).
1. InTroduCTIon
 22
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
Antiretroviral therapy for HIV infection in adults and adolescents in resource-limited 
10. 
settings: recommendations for a public health approach. Geneva, World Health Or-
ganization, 2006. 
The global MDR-TB & XDR-TB response plan 2007–2008
11. 
. Geneva, World Health Or-
ganization, 2007 (WHO/HTM/TB/2007.387).
Molecular line probe assays for rapid screening of patients at risk of MDR TB: policy 
12. 
statement. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2008 (available at: www.who.int/tb/
features_archive/policy_statement.pdf).
Espinal MA. Time to abandon the standard retreatment regimen with first-line 
13. 
drugs for failures of standard treatment. International Journal of Tuberculosis and 
Lung Disease, 2003, 7:607–608.
Guyatt GH et al. GRADE: an emerging consensus on rating quality of evidence and 
14. 
strength of recommendations. British Medical Journal, 2008, 336:924–926. 
International Standards for Tuberculosis Care (ISTC)
15. 
, 2nd ed. The Hague, Tuberculo-
sis Coalition for Technical Assistance, 2009.
 23
2
Case definitions
2.1 Chapter objectives
This chapter describes
— the purpose of having case definitions for tuberculosis;
— the definition of a case of TB, as well as of suspected and confirmed cases;
— additional features of TB cases important for the treatment of individual pa-
tients, as well as for evaluating TB programmes and monitoring the epidemic.
The diagnosis of TB refers to the recognition by health workers (medical officer, 
nurse, paramedic or other) of an active case, i.e. a patient with current disease due to 
M. tuberculosis. The role of NTPs is different: they are responsible for ensuring that 
diagnosed cases are notified (1), meet the definition for case or definite case, and are 
treated appropriately, and that outcomes are evaluated.1
All providers must report both new and retreatment TB cases and their treatment 
outcomes to local public health authorities, in conformance with applicable legal re-
quirements (Standard 21 of the ISTC (5)). NTPs ensure that critical features of the TB 
case are recorded and reported so that treatment is appropriate and feedback is pro-
vided to the treating clinician (6). Analysis of these reports also helps the NTP man-
ager to monitor trends and evaluate the effectiveness of TB activities at all levels. 
2.2 Purposes of defining a Tb case
Uniform criteria to define a TB case are needed for: 
— proper patient registration and case notification;
— selecting appropriate standard treatment regimens (see Chapter 3);
— standardizing the process of data collection for TB control;
— evaluating the proportion of cases according to site, bacteriology and treat-
ment history;
— cohort analysis of treatment outcomes;
— accurate monitoring of trends and evaluation of the effectiveness of TB pro-
grammes within and across districts, countries and global regions.
2.3 Case definitions
The TB case definitions below are based on the level of certainty of the diagnosis and 
on whether or not laboratory confirmation is available. 
1 NTP programmes also facilitate the detection of cases via sputum screening of suspects with cough 
attending health facilities (2), as well as screening of contacts (3) and screening of persons living with 
HIV/AIDS (4).
 24
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
• Tuberculosis suspect. Any person who presents with symptoms or signs sugges-
tive of TB. The most common symptom of pulmonary TB is a productive cough for 
more than 2 weeks,1 which may be accompanied by other respiratory symptoms 
(shortness of breath, chest pains, haemoptysis) and/or constitutional symptoms 
(loss of appetite, weight loss, fever, night sweats, and fatigue).2 
• Case of tuberculosis. A definite case of TB (defined below) or one in which a 
health worker (clinician or other medical practitioner) has diagnosed TB and has 
decided to treat the patient with a full course of TB treatment.
 
Note. Any person given treatment for TB should be recorded as a case. Incomplete 
“trial” TB treatment should not be given as a method for diagnosis.
• Definite case of tuberculosis. A patient with Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex 
identified from a clinical specimen, either by culture or by a newer method such 
as molecular line probe assay. In countries that lack the laboratory capacity to 
routinely identify M. tuberculosis, a pulmonary case with one or more initial spu-
tum smear examinations positive for acid-fast bacilli (AFB) is also considered to 
be a “definite” case, provided that there is a functional external quality assurance 
(EQA) system with blind rechecking.3
Cases of TB are also classified according to the:
— anatomical site of disease;
— bacteriological results (including drug resistance);
— history of previous treatment;
— HIV status of the patient.
Each of these key features of TB cases is discussed below.
2.4 anatomical site of Tb disease 
In general, recommended treatment regimens are similar, irrespective of site (see sec-
tion 8.2). Defining the site is important for recording and reporting purposes and to 
identify the more infectious patients – those with pulmonary involvement (who will 
be further subdivided by smear status – see section 2.5 below).
Pulmonary tuberculosis (PTB) refers to a case of TB (defined above) involving the 
lung parenchyma. Miliary tuberculosis is classified as pulmonary TB because there 
are lesions in the lungs. Tuberculous intrathoracic lymphadenopathy (mediastinal 
and/or hilar) or tuberculous pleural effusion, without radiographic abnormalities in 
the lungs, constitutes a case of extrapulmonary TB. A patient with both pulmonary 
and extrapulmonary TB should be classified as a case of pulmonary TB.
1 Standard 1 of the International Standards for TB Care (5) states that all persons with otherwise unex-
plained productive cough lasting 2–3 weeks or more should be evaluated for TB. 
2 The definition of a “TB suspect” depends on other local factors, including the patient’s age and HIV 
status, HIV prevalence in the population, TB prevalence in the population, etc.
3 See: www.who.int/tb/dots/laboratory/policy/en/index1.html.
 25
2. CaSE dEfInITIonS
Extrapulmonary tuberculosis (EPTB) refers to a case of TB (defined above) involv-
ing organs other than the lungs, e.g. pleura, lymph nodes, abdomen, genitourinary 
tract, skin, joints and bones, meninges. Diagnosis should be based on at least one 
specimen with confirmed M. tuberculosis or histological or strong clinical evidence 
consistent with active EPTB, followed by a decision by a clinician to treat with a full 
course of tuberculosis chemotherapy. The case definition of an EPTB case with sev-
eral sites affected depends on the site representing the most severe form of disease. 
Unless a case of EPTB is confirmed by culture as caused by M. tuberculosis, it cannot 
meet the “definite case” definition given in section 2.3 above.
2.5 bacteriological results 
Bacteriology refers to the smear status of pulmonary cases and the identification of 
M. tuberculosis for any case by culture or newer methods. Culture and drug suscep-
tibility testing are discussed in section 3.8.1. For definitions of MDR-TB cases, see 
reference 7. 
Standard 2 of the ISTC (5) states that all patients suspected of having pulmonary TB 
should submit at least two sputum specimens for microscopic examination in a qual-
ity-assured laboratory. When possible, at least one early-morning specimen should 
be obtained, as sputum collected at this time has the highest yield. ISTC Standard 4 
states that all persons with chest radiographic findings suggestive of TB should sub-
mit sputum specimens for microbiological examination (5).
Smear-positive cases are the most infectious and most likely to transmit their dis-
ease in their surroundings; they are the focus for infection control measures (2) and 
contact investigations (3). Bacteriological monitoring of treatment progress is most 
feasible and practicable in these patients (see Chapter 4).
It is also important to identify smear-negative cases, especially in persons living with 
HIV for whom mortality is higher than in smear-positive pulmonary TB cases (4). For 
diagnostic algorithms for smear-negative persons living with HIV, see reference 4.
A case of pulmonary TB is considered to be smear-positive if one or more sputum 
smear specimens at the start of treatment are positive for AFB (provided that there is 
a functional EQA system with blind rechecking1). 
The definition of a new sputum smear-positive pulmonary TB case is based on the 
presence of at least one acid fast bacillus (AFB+) in at least one sputum sample in 
countries with a well functioning EQA system. (See www.who.int/tb/dots/laboratory/
policy/en/index1.html.) 
1 In countries without functional EQA, the definition from the third edition of these guidelines applies: 
a smear-positive pulmonary TB case was defined as one with: 
a. two or more initial sputum smear examinations positive for AFB, or
b. one sputum smear examination positive for AFB plus radiographic abnormalities consistent with 
active PTB as determined by a clinician, or
c. one sputum smear positive for AFB plus sputum culture-positive for M. tuberculosis.
 26
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
Smear-negative PTB cases should either: 
A. have sputum that is smear-negative but culture-positive for M. tuberculosis:
• a case of pulmonary TB is considered to be smear-negative if at least two 
 
sputum specimens at the start of treatment are negative for AFB1 in countries 
with a functional EQA system, where the workload is very high and human 
resources are limited (see http:///www.who.int/tb/dots/laboratory/policy/en/
index2.html);
• in all settings with an HIV prevalence of >1% in pregnant women or ≥5% in TB 
patients, sputum culture for M. tuberculosis should be performed in patients 
who are sputum smear-negative to confirm the diagnosis of TB (4).
OR
B. meet the following diagnostic criteria: (6–8) 
• decision by a clinician to treat with a full course of anti-TB therapy; and
• radiographic abnormalities consistent with active pulmonary TB and
 
either:
— laboratory or strong clinical evidence of HIV infection
 
or: 
— if HIV-negative (or unknown HIV status living in an area of low HIV preva-
lence), no improvement in response to a course of broad-spectrum antibiot-
ics (excluding anti-TB drugs and fluoroquinolones and aminoglycosides).
Pulmonary TB cases without smear results are no longer classified as smear-negative 
(4); instead, they are recorded as “smear not done” on the TB register (6) and on the 
annual WHO survey of countries. 
For patients suspected of having EPTB, specimens should be obtained from the sus-
pected sites of involvement (Standard 3 of the ISTC (5)). Where available, culture 
and histopathological examination should also be carried out. Additionally, a chest 
X-ray and examination of sputum may be useful, especially in persons with HIV 
infection. 
2.6 History of previous treatment: patient registration group
At the time of registration, each patient meeting the case definition is also classified 
according to whether or not he or she has previously received TB treatment and, if so, 
the outcome (if known). It is important to identify previously treated patients because 
they are at increased risk of drug resistance, including MDR-TB (see section 3.6). 
At the start of therapy, specimens should be obtained for culture and DST from all 
previously treated patients. Treatment depends on whether the patient has relapsed 
1 And no specimen is smear-positive.
 27
or is returning after default or after prior treatment has failed (see section 3.7). The 
distinctions between new and previously treated patients, and among the subgroups 
of previously treated patients, are also essential for monitoring the TB epidemic and 
programme performance.
New patients have never had treatment for TB, or have taken anti-TB drugs for less 
than 1 month. New patients may have positive or negative bacteriology and may have 
disease at any anatomical site. 
Previously treated patients have received 1 month or more of anti-TB drugs in the 
past, may have positive or negative bacteriology and may have disease at any ana-
tomical site. They are further classified by the outcome of their most recent course of 
treatment as shown in Table 2.1 below. 
Patients whose sputum is smear-positive at the end of (or returning from) a second 
or subsequent course of treatment are no longer defined as “chronic”. Instead, they 
should be classified by the outcome of their most recent retreatment course: relapsed, 
defaulted or failed. 
2. CaSE dEfInITIonS
Table 2.1 
regiSTrATion group By ouTcome of moST recenT  
TB TreATmenT 
registration group 
(any site of disease)
bacteriologya
outcome of most recent prior treatment 
(defined in Table 4.1) 
new
+ or –
–
Previously treated
relapse
+
cured
Treatment completed
failure
+
Treatment failed
default
+ 
defaulted
Transfer in: A patient who has 
been transferred from another TB 
register to continue treatment
+ or –
Still on treatment
other
+ or –
All cases that do not fit the above 
definitions, such as patients 
• for whom it is not known whether 
they have been previously treated;
• who were previously treated but with 
unknown outcome of that previous 
treatmentb (3, 8); and/or 
• who have returned to treatment 
with smear-negative pTB or 
bacteriologically negative epTBb (3)
a +  indicates positive smear, culture or other newer means of identifying M. tuberculosis
 
–  indicates that any specimens tested were negative.
b defined as “other retreatment” in other wHo documents cited above.
 28
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
2.7 HIV status
Determining and recording the patient’s HIV status is critical for treatment decisions 
(see Chapters 3 and 5) as well as for monitoring trends and assessing programme 
 
performance. WHO’s revised TB Treatment Card and TB Register include dates of 
HIV testing, starting co-trimoxazole, and starting ART. These important interven-
tions are discussed more fully in Chapter 5. 
references
Engaging all health care providers in TB control: guidance on implementing public-
1. 
private mix approaches. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2006 (WHO/HTM/
TB/2006.360).
WHO policy on TB infection control in health care facilities, congregate settings and 
2. 
households. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2009 (WHO/HTM/TB/2009.419).
Implementing the WHO Stop TB Strategy: a handbook for national tuberculosis control 
3. 
programmes. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2008 (WHO/HTM/TB/2008.40).
Improving the diagnosis and treatment of smear-negative pulmonary and extrapulmo-
4. 
nary tuberculosis among adults and adolescents: recommendations for HIV-prevalent 
and resource-constrained settings. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007 (WHO/
HTM/TB/2007.379; WHO/HIV/2007.1).
International Standards for Tuberculosis Care (ISTC)
5. 
, 2nd ed. The Hague, Tuberculo-
sis Coalition for Technical Assistance, 2009.
Revised TB recording and reporting forms and registers – version 2006
6. 
. Geneva, World 
Health Organization, 2006 (WHO/HTM/TB/2006.373; available at: www.who.int/
tb/dots/r_and_r_forms/en/index.html).
Guidelines for the programmatic management of drug-resistant tuberculosis: emer-
7. 
gency update 2008. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2008 (WHO/HTM/TB/ 
2008.402).
Global tuberculosis control 2009: epidemiology, strategy, financing. WHO report 2009
8. 
. 
Geneva, World Health Organization, 2009 (WHO/HTM/TB/2009.411).
 29
3
standard treatment regimens
3.1 Chapter objectives
This chapter describes: 
— the aims of treatment; 
— the recommended doses of first-line anti-TB drugs for adults;
— regimens for new and previously treated patients;
— considerations in selecting regimens for defined patient groups;
— evidence base for the selected regimens in defined patient groups.
The choice of TB regimens in special situations (pregnancy, concurrent use of oral 
contraceptives, liver disease, and renal failure) is covered in Chapter 8; TB treatment 
for persons living with HIV is discussed in Chapter 5. 
3.2 aims of treatment
The aims of treatment of tuberculosis are:
— to cure the patient and restore quality of life and productivity;
— to prevent death from active TB or its late effects;
— to prevent relapse of TB;
— to reduce transmission of TB to others;
— to prevent the development and transmission of drug resistance.
3.3 Essential antituberculosis drugs
Table 3.1 shows the essential anti-TB drugs and their recommended dosages based 
on the patient’s weight. 
The WHO-recommended formulations of anti-TB drugs and fixed-dose combina-
tions (FDCs) of drugs appear in the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines (available 
at www.who.int/medicines/publications/essentialmedicines/en). The formulations 
and combinations of anti-TB drugs available in each country should conform to this 
list. (See also the WHO Model Formulary at www.who.int/selection_medicines/list/
en.)
To facilitate procurement, distribution and administration of treatment to patients, 
the daily dosage may be standardized for three or four body weight bands – for 
 
instance 30–39 kg, 40–54 kg, 55–70 kg and over 70 kg, as is done with the Global 
Drug Facility patient kits. (See also reference 1.)
 30
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
All anti-TB drugs should be quality-assured, and management of anti-TB drugs 
should be incorporated into the management of other essential medicines by the 
ministry of health. 
Annex 1 provides additional information on the essential anti-TB drugs, including 
contraindications, precautions, use in pregnancy, adverse effects, and drug inter-
actions. Intermittent dosing schedules are discussed in section 3.5.1 below. 
3.3.1 fixed-dose combinations of anti-TB drugs
While evidence on fixed-dose combinations (FDCs) of anti-TB drugs was not system-
atically reviewed for this fourth edition, WHO continues to recommend their use, 
as does Standard 8 of the ISTC (3). FDCs are thought to prevent acquisition of drug 
resistance due to monotherapy, which may occur with separate (“loose”) drugs. With 
FDCs, patients cannot be selective in the choice of drugs to ingest. Prescription errors 
are likely to be less frequent because dosage recommendations are more straightfor-
ward, and adjustment of dosage according to patient weight is easier. The number of 
tablets to ingest is smaller and may thus encourage patient adherence. 
While there is ecological evidence of the benefits of FDCs in relation to drug re-
sistance in early studies of DOTS programmes, there is limited direct evidence of 
improved adherence with FDCs (4). A recent multicentre trial found FDCs to have 
equivalent efficacy to single pills and to be more acceptable to patients (5). However, 
assessment of cure and relapses was based on smear microscopy and not on culture. 
A multicentre trial (The Union Study C) evaluating the efficacy, acceptability and 
toxicity of a four-drug FDC compared with loose pills given in the intensive phase 
Table 3.1 
recommended doSeS of firST-line AnTiTuBerculoSiS drugS 
for AdulTS
drug
recommended dose
daily
3 times per week
dose and range 
(mg/kg body 
weight)
maximum 
(mg)
dose and range 
(mg/kg body 
weight)
daily maximum 
(mg)
isoniazid
5 (4–6)
300
10 (8–12)
900 
rifampicin
10 (8–12)
600
10 (8–12)
600 
pyrazinamide
25 (20–30)
–
35 (30–40)
–
ethambutol
15 (15–20)
–
30 (25–35)
–
Streptomycina
15 (12–18)
15 (12–18)
1000 
a patients aged over 60 years may not be able to tolerate more than 500–750 mg daily, so some guide-
lines recommend reduction of the dose to 10 mg/kg per day in patients in this age group (2). patients 
weighing less than 50 kg may not tolerate doses above 500–750 mg daily (WHO Model Formulary 2008, 
www.who.int/selection_medicines/list/en/).
 31
3. STandard TrEaTmEnT rEGImEnS
of treatment has just been completed and results should soon be available. Another 
multicentre study including pharmacokinetic assessment is soon to be completed by 
WHO/TDR.
Quality assurance is essential to ensure adequate bioavailability of the compo-
nent drugs of FDCs.1 Using FDCs does not obviate the need for separate drugs for 
 
patients who develop drug toxicity or intolerance or for those with contraindications 
 
to specific component drugs.
3.3.2 patient kits
A TB patient kit contains the full course of treatment for a single patient and thus as-
sures the TB patient that his or her medicines will be available throughout treatment. 
The kit provides health workers with a container that has all required medicines in 
the necessary strengths and quantities. This helps limit confusion and wastage, and 
makes it easier to monitor the regularity of treatment; avoiding stock-outs also helps 
to maintain patient confidence in the health system. In addition, the patient may feel 
a sense of “ownership” of the patient kit and enhanced motivation to complete the 
full course of treatment – during visits to the health centre he or she can actually see 
the quantity of medicines that must be taken to achieve cure (1). 
It should be noted that the TB patient kit does not eliminate the need for directly 
observed treatment (DOT). 
3.4 Standard regimens for defined patient groups
Standardized treatment means that all patients in a defined group receive the same 
treatment regimen. Standard regimens have the following advantages over individu-
alized prescription of drugs:
— errors in prescription – and thus the risk of development of drug resistance – 
are reduced;
— estimating drug needs, purchasing, distribution and monitoring are facilitat-
ed;
— staff training is facilitated;
— costs are reduced;
— maintaining a regular drug supply when patients move from one area to an-
other is made easier;
— outcome evaluation is convenient and results are comparable.
For assigning standard regimens, patients are grouped by the same patient regis-
tration groups used for recording and reporting, which differentiate new patients 
from those who have had prior treatment. Registration groups for previously treated 
 
patients are based on the outcome of their prior treatment course: failure, relapse and 
default (see Chapter 2).
1 See Global Drug Facility, www.stoptb.org/gdf/drugsupply/quality_sourcing_process.asp.
 32
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
Recommended regimens for different patient registration groups are shown in Tables 
3.2, 3.3 and 3.4. More details on the evidence and judgements underlying the recom-
mended regimens are described in Annex 2. 
3.5 new patients
New patients are defined as those who have no history of prior TB treatment or who 
received less than 1 month of anti-TB drugs (regardless of whether their smear or 
culture results are positive or not) (see section 2.6). 
3.5.1 new patients presumed or known to have drug-susceptible TB 
New patients are presumed to have drug-susceptible TB with two exceptions: 
• Where there is a high prevalence of isoniazid resistance in new patients (see sec-
tion 3.5.2). 
 
or
•  If they have developed active TB after known contact with a patient documented 
to have drug-resistant TB; they are likely to have a similar drug resistance pattern 
to the source case (6), and DST should be carried out at the start of treatment. 
While DST results of the patient are awaited, a regimen based on the DST of the 
presumed source case should be started.
The 2-month rifampicin regimen (2HRZE/6HE) is associated with more relapses and 
deaths than the 6-month rifampicin regimen (2HRZE/4HR) (7). WHO therefore rec-
ommends the following for new patients presumed or known to have drug-suscepti-
ble TB. (See also Standard 8 of the ISTC (3).)
L Recommendation 1.1
New patients with pulmonary TB should receive a regimen containing 6 months 
of rifampicin: 2HRZE/4HR
(Strong/High grade of evidence)
Remark a: Recommendation 1.1 also applies to extrapulmonary TB except TB of 
the central nervous system, bone or joint for which some expert groups suggest 
longer therapy (see Chapter 8).
Remark b: WHO recommends that national TB control programmes provide su-
pervision and support for all TB patients in order to ensure completion of the full 
course of therapy. 
Remark c: WHO recommends drug resistance surveys (or surveillance) for moni-
toring the impact of the treatment programme, as well as for designing standard 
regimens.
 33
L Recommendation 1.2
The 2HRZE/6HE treatment regimen should be phased out
(Strong/High grade of evidence)
In terms of dosing frequency for HIV-negative patients, the systematic review found 
little evidence of differences in failure or relapse rates with daily or three times week-
ly regimens (7). However, patients receiving three times weekly dosing throughout 
therapy had higher rates of acquired drug resistance than patients who received 
drugs daily throughout treatment. In patients with pre-treatment isoniazid resist-
ance, three times weekly dosing during the intensive phase was associated with 
significantly higher risks of failure and acquired drug resistance than daily dosing 
during the intensive phase. (Treatment regimens for TB patients living with HIV are 
discussed in detail in Chapter 5.) 
L Recommendation 2.1
Wherever feasible, the optimal dosing frequency for new patients with pulmo-
nary TB is daily throughout the course of therapy
(Strong/High grade of evidence)
There are two alternatives to Recommendation 2.1: 
L Recommendation 2.1A
New patients with pulmonary TB may receive a daily intensive phase fol-
lowed by three times weekly continuation phase [2HRZE/4(HR)3] provided 
that each dose is directly observed
(Conditional/High or moderate grade of evidence))
L Recommendation 2.1B
Three times weekly dosing throughout therapy [2(HRZE)3/4(HR)3] is anoth-
er alternative to Recommendation 2.1, provided that every dose is directly 
observed and the patient is NOT living with HIV or living in an HIV-prev-
alent setting
(Conditional/High or moderate grade of evidence))
Remark a: Treatment regimens for TB patients living with HIV or living in 
HIV-prevalent settings are discussed in Recommendation 4 and Chapter 5.
Remark b: In terms of dosing frequency for HIV-negative patients, the sys-
tematic review found little evidence of differences in failure or relapse rates 
with daily or three times weekly regimens (7). However, rates of acquired drug 
resistance were higher among patients receiving three times weekly dosing 
throughout therapy than among patients who received daily drug administra-
tion throughout treatment. Moreover, in patients with pretreatment isoniazid 
resistance, three times weekly dosing during the intensive phase was associ-
3. STandard TrEaTmEnT rEGImEnS
 34
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
ated with significantly higher risks of failure and acquired drug resistance than 
daily dosing during the intensive phase.
There is insufficient evidence to support the efficacy of twice weekly dosing through-
out therapy (7). 
L Recommendation 2.2
New patients with TB should not receive twice weekly dosing for the full course 
of treatment unless this is done in the context of formal research
(Strong/High grade of evidence) 
Remark: The available evidence showed equivalent efficacy of daily intensive-
phase dosing followed by two times weekly continuation phase (7). However, twice 
weekly dosing is not recommended on operational grounds, since missing one 
dose means the patient receives only half the regimen. 
Tables 3.2a and 3.2b present standard treatment regimen and dosing frequency for 
new TB patients.
Table 3.2a STAndArd regimenS for new TB pATienTS  
(presumed, or known, to have drug-susceptible TB)
Intensive phase treatment
Continuation phase
2 months of HrZea
4 months of Hr
 
a wHo no longer recommends omission of ethambutol during the intensive phase of treatment for 
 
patients with non-cavitary, smear-negative pTB or epTB who are known to be HiV-negative. in tuber-
culous meningitis, ethambutol should be replaced by streptomycin.
H = isoniazid, r = rifampicin, Z = pyrazinamide, e = ethambutol, S = streptomycin
Table 3.2b doSing frequency for new TB pATienTS
dosing frequency
Comment
daily 
daily
optimal
daily
Three times per week
Acceptable alternative for any new TB patient 
receiving directly observed therapy
Three times per week
Three times per week
Acceptable alternative provided that the 
patient is receiving directly observed therapy 
and is not living with HiV or living in an HiV-
prevalent setting (See chapter 5)
Note: daily (rather than three times weekly) intensive-phase dosing may help to prevent acquired drug 
resistance in TB patients starting treatment with isoniazid resistance (see section 3.5.2).
 35
3.5.2 Settings with high levels of isoniazid resistance in new patients
When new patients with isoniazid-resistant TB start their treatment, outcomes 
are worse than for patients with isoniazid-susceptible TB, even with the 6-month 
 
rifampicin regimen (7). The global weighted mean of any isoniazid resistance (ex-
cluding MDR) is 7.4% in new patients (8). Thus, a significant proportion of the 
new TB cases in many regions of the world have a risk of poor treatment outcomes 
 
because of their pretreatment isoniazid resistance.
The following weak recommendation applies to countries where isoniazid suscep-
tibility testing in new patients is not done (or results are not available) before the 
continuation phase begins.
L Recommendation 3
In populations with known or suspected high levels of isoniazid resistance, new 
TB patients may receive HRE as therapy in the continuation phase as an accept-
able alternative to HR
(Weak/Insufficient evidence, expert opinion)
Given the potential benefit (9) and low risk of toxicity from ethambutol, the pressing 
need to prevent MDR warrants this recommendation. However, the recommenda-
tion is conditional, for the reasons explained in more detail in Annex 2. The most 
effective regimen for the treatment of isoniazid-resistant TB is not known. There is 
inadequate evidence to quantify the ability of ethambutol to “protect rifampicin” 
in patients with pre-treatment isoniazid resistance. The evidence for ocular toxic-
ity from ethambutol was not systematically reviewed for this revision, but the risk 
of permanent blindness exists. Further research (see Annex 5) is therefore urgently 
needed to define the level of isoniazid resistance that would warrant the addition of 
ethambutol (or other drugs) to the continuation phase of the standard new patient 
regimen in TB programmes where isoniazid drug susceptibility testing is not done 
(or results are not available) before the continuation phase begins. 
Daily (rather than three times weekly) intensive-phase dosing may also help to pre-
vent acquired drug resistance in TB patients starting treatment with isoniazid resist-
ance. The systematic review (7) found that patients with isoniazid resistance treated 
with a three times weekly intensive phase had significantly higher risks of failure and 
acquired drug resistance than those treated with daily dosing during the intensive 
phase.
Table 3.3 presents standard treatment regimens for new patients in settings with high 
isoniazid resistance. 
3. STandard TrEaTmEnT rEGImEnS
 36
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
Table 3.3 
STAndArd regimenS for new TB pATienTS 
(in settings where the level of isoniazid resistance among new TB cases 
is high and isoniazid susceptibility testing is not done (or results are not 
available) before the continuation phase begins)
Intensive phase treatment
Continuation phase
2 months of HrZe
4 months of Hre
3.6 Previously treated patients and multidrug resistance
Previous TB treatment is a strong determinant of drug resistance (10), and previously 
treated patients comprise a significant proportion (13%) of the global TB notifica-
tions in 2007.
Of all the forms of drug resistance, it is most critical to detect multidrug resistance 
(MDR) because it makes regimens with first-line drugs much less effective (11) and 
resistance can be further amplified (12). Prompt identification of MDR and initiation 
of MDR treatment with second-line drugs gives a better chance of cure and prevents 
the development and spread of further resistance. Because of its clinical significance, 
MDR (rather than any drug resistance) is used to describe the retreatment patient 
groups below.
At the global level, 15% of previously treated patients have MDR (8), which is five 
times higher than the global average of 3% in new patients (Figure 3.1). Even in Afri-
ca, the WHO region thought to have the lowest level of MDR in retreatment patients, 
a significant proportion (6%) of retreatment patients have MDR-TB (8).1 If their MDR 
is not detected and treated with second-line drugs, these patients will suffer poor 
outcomes and spread MDR in their communities. 
WHO surveillance data from 10 countries found the level of MDR to be 32% in 
 
patients returning after defaulting or relapsing and significantly higher (49%) in 
 
patients whose prior treatment has failed (Figure 3.2).2 Other studies show MDR levels 
of up to 80–90% in patients whose prior treatment courses have failed (10–16). Mod-
elling described in Annex 2 predicts that, when a first course of treatment contain-
ing 6 months of rifampicin fails, 50–94% of patients have MDR-TB (compared with 
4–56% of patients upon failure of a regimen containing 2 months of rifampicin).
Many factors influence the level of MDR in previously treated patients, and levels 
are likely to vary widely by setting. Assignment of the retreatment patient groups to 
medium vs high likelihood of MDR may therefore need to be modified according to 
country-specific data on similar groups of patients, as well as other factors discussed 
in section 3.8 below.
1 Of 46 countries in Africa, 6 have reported drug resistance data since 2002; 22 countries (representing 
72% of the region’s cases) have reported data since 1994 (5, p. 90). 
2 These are the only 10 countries that reported drug resistance surveillance data by subcategory of re-
treatment cases since 1997.
 37
3. STandard TrEaTmEnT rEGImEnS
figure 3.1 weigHTed meAn of mdr-TB in new And reTreATmenT TB cASeS 
from drug reSiSTAnce SurVeyS, 1994–2007a
a Source: Anti-tuberculosis drug resistance in the world: fourth global report. geneva, world Health orga-
nization (2008) (8). 
b data from 105 countries or 127 settings.
c data from 94 countries or 109 settings.
New
92 085 casesb
Retreatment
18 873 casesc
2.9%
15.3%
Not MDR
MDR
0
20
40
60
80
100
Per cent
figure 3.2 mdr in reTreATmenT TB cASeS from drug reSiSTAnce SurVeyS 
And  SurVeillAnce in 10 counTrieS, 1997–2007a
a Source: van gemert w et al. MDR among sub-categories of previously treated TB cases: an analysis 
in 12 settings. presented at: 40th world conference on lung Health, 3–7 december 2009, cancun, 
mexico.
b data from 12 settings in 10 countries.
283 casesb
208 casesb
Not MDR
MDR
Relapses
Failures
206 casesb
Defaulters
32%
49%
32%
Per cent
0
20
40
60
80
100
 38
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
3.7 Standard regimens for previously treated patients
The Global Plan to Stop TB 2006–2015 sets a target of all previously treated patients 
having access to DST at the beginning of treatment by 2015 (17). The purpose is to 
identify MDR as early as possible so that appropriate treatment can be given. (See 
also Standard 11 of the ISTC (3).)
L Recommendation 7.1
Specimens for culture and drug susceptibility testing (DST) should be obtained 
from all previously treated TB patients at or before the start of treatment. DST 
should be performed for at least isoniazid and rifampicin
The approach to the initiation of retreatment depends on the country’s laboratory 
 
capacity, specifically when (or if) DST results are routinely available for the individ-
ual patient. Countries using rapid molecular-based DST (18, 19) will have results for 
rifampicin/isoniazid available within 1–2 days; these results can be used in deciding 
which regimen to start for the individual patient (section 3.7.1). 
Using conventional DST methods yields results within weeks (for liquid media) or 
months (for solid media). Because of this delay, countries using conventional meth-
ods will need to start an empirical regimen while DST results are awaited. The choice 
of empirical retreatment regimens is discussed in section 3.7.2 below.
Where DST is not yet routinely available for individual retreatment patients, an in-
terim approach could be implemented while the country is strengthening its labora-
tory system. 
For many countries, drug resistance surveillance or surveys show that patients whose 
prior course of therapy has failed have a high likelihood of MDR (especially if the 
regimen contained 6 months of rifampicin, as described in Annex 2). Patients whose 
prior course of therapy has failed should therefore receive an empirical MDR regi-
men. Drug resistance surveillance or surveys often show that those relapsing or re-
turning after default have a medium or low likelihood of MDR; such patients can 
receive the retreatment regimen of first-line drugs. However, levels of MDR in differ-
ent patient registration groups vary by setting.1 
It must be noted, however, that the retreatment regimen using first-line drugs is not 
supported by evidence deriving from clinical trials. It was designed primarily for use 
in settings with low prevalence of initial drug resistance and in patients previously 
treated with a regimen that included rifampicin for the first 2 months (20). 
The assumption that patients whose treatment has failed have a high likelihood of 
MDR (and relapse or defaulting patients have a medium likelihood of MDR) may 
1 If drug resistance surveys show that patients relapsing or returning after default have high levels of 
MDR, they will need an MDR regimen instead. Similarly, if the country data show that levels of MDR 
are low in patients who failed their previous treatment, the NTP may decide to administer retreatment 
regimens with first-line drugs. See section 3.8 for further details.
 39
need to be modified according to both the level of MDR found in these patient regis-
tration groups and the considerations discussed in section 3.8 (below).
Several other considerations (also described in section 3.8) will have an impact on the 
level of MDR the NTP designates as “high” in a given country. (See also Standard 12 
of the ISTC (3).)
Countries will need to use a mix of approaches if they are in transition, where some 
areas of the country do not yet have DST results routinely available and others do, or 
some laboratories use rapid and others conventional DST methods.
3.7.1 previously treated patients in settings with rapid dST 
With line probe assays, MDR can be essentially confirmed1 or excluded within 1–2 
days,2 which allows the results to guide the regimen at the start of therapy. 
L Recommendation 7.2
In settings where rapid molecular-based DST is available, the results should 
guide the choice of regimen
The use of rapid molecular-based tests is discussed in more detail in section 3.8.1 
below.
3.7.2 previously treated patients in settings where conventional dST results are 
routinely available for individual patients 
Obtaining specimens for conventional culture and DST should not delay the start of 
therapy. Empirical regimens, often based on drug-resistance surveillance data, are 
used while the results of conventional DST (liquid or solid media) are awaited, and 
should be started promptly.3 This is especially important if the patient is seriously ill 
or the disease is progressing rapidly. Placing a patient on an empiric regimen pend-
ing DST is done to avoid clinical deterioration. Also, once empiric therapy begins to 
render the patient less infectious, the risk of transmission to contacts decreases. 
While awaiting the results of conventional DST, WHO recommends administering 
an empiric MDR regimen4 for patient groups with a high likelihood of MDR, and the 
retreatment regimen with first line drug regimen for patient groups with medium or 
low likelihood of MDR (Table 3.4).
1 Line probe assays detect resistance to rifampicin alone or in combination with isoniazid resistance. 
Overall high accuracy for detection of MDR is retained when rifampicin resistance alone is used as a 
marker for MDR (19).
2 From sputum samples or from bacterial cultures derived from those specimens.
3 In some individual patients who have been treated multiple times, waiting to start treatment until DST 
results are available may be prudent provided that the patients are clinically stable and transmission to 
contacts is prevented. In most countries, however, adequate infection control measures are not yet in 
place. 
4 Guidance on designing a country’s standard MDR regimen is provided in Chapter 7 of this document, 
and in Chapter 7 of Guidelines for the programmatic management of drug-resistant TB (6). 
3. STandard TrEaTmEnT rEGImEnS
 40
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
L Recommendation 7.3
In settings where rapid molecular-based DST results are not routinely available 
to guide the management of individual patients, empiric treatment should be 
started as follows:
L Recommendation 7.3.1
TB patients whose treatment has failed1 or other patient groups with high 
likelihood of multidrug-resistant TB (MDR) should be started on an empiri-
cal MDR regimen
Remark a: In the absence of culture and DST results, the patient should be clini-
cally evaluated before the MDR regimen is administered.
Remark b: Other examples of patients with high likelihood of MDR-TB are 
those relapsing or defaulting after their second or subsequent course of treat-
ment. See also section 3.8.2.
L Recommendation 7.3.2
TB patients returning after defaulting or relapsing from their first treat-
ment course may receive the retreatment regimen containing first-line drugs 
2HRZES/1HRZE/5HRE if country-specific data show low or medium levels 
of MDR in these patients or if such data are not available
Remark: When DST results become available, regimens should be adjusted 
 
appropriately. 
3.7.3 previously treated patients in settings where dST is not routinely available for 
individual patients 
In the many countries that still lack the laboratory capacity to routinely conduct DST 
for each previously treated patient (or where results arrive too late to guide thera-
py), it is urgent to strengthen laboratory capacity. For countries without sufficient 
 
domestic funding, financial assistance is available from the Global Fund to Fight 
AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, as well as from UNITAID or other international 
financing mechanisms. Technical assistance in laboratory strengthening is available 
from WHO, Global Laboratory Initiative and other partners.
Even though DST is not yet routinely available for individual patient management 
in these countries, the NTP may be able to collect or access some information on 
levels of MDR-TB in previously treated patients, by using data from a drug resistance 
survey, from a national or supranational reference laboratory, or from a referral or 
research centre (see section 3.8.2). These data are critical for ascertaining the level of 
1 Failures in a well-run NTP should be infrequent in the absence of MDR-TB. If they do occur, they are 
due either to MDR-TB or to programme factors such as poor DOT or poor drug quality. If drug resist-
ance data from failure patients are available and these show low or medium levels of MDR, patients 
should receive the retreatment regimen outlined in 7.3.2, and every effort should be made to address 
the underlying programmatic issues.
 41
MDR in retreatment patients.1 For example, the results of representative drug resist-
ance surveys may identify a group of patients among whom a very high percentage 
have MDR, which could justify the use of MDR regimens in all patients in the group 
(even if individual DST is not available) (6). The NTP manager is encouraged to 
 
obtain technical assistance from the Green Light Committee (see section 3.8.3).
If a very high level of MDR is documented in a specific group (such as patients who 
have failed a retreatment regimen), the NTP manager should urgently seek means to 
routinely obtain DST on all such patients at the start of treatment, in order to confirm 
or exclude MDR. If this cannot yet be achieved with any in-country laboratory, NTPs 
should make arrangements to send the specimens from these patients to a suprana-
tional reference or other international laboratory for DST while the country rapidly 
builds domestic laboratory capacity. 
A country may face a short delay before a domestic or an international laboratory can 
perform DST on specimens from patients who are members of a group shown to have 
very high levels of MDR-TB. In these exceptional circumstances, an NTP may con-
sider a short-term policy of directly starting such patients on an empirical MDR-TB 
regimen while awaiting confirmation of isoniazid and rifampicin resistance (last row 
of Table 3.4) (6). This is a temporary measure that can be implemented only if culture 
and DST can be arranged in the first few months of MDR treatment in each enrolled 
patient. It is essential to confirm the presence of MDR, and to monitor the response 
to treatment. (Groups of patients whose likelihood of MDR is medium or low will 
receive the 8-month retreatment regimen with first-line drugs.)
L Recommendation 7.4
In settings where DST results are not yet routinely available to guide the man-
agement of individual patients, the empirical regimens will continue through-
out the course of treatment
Remark: If DST results become available, regimens should be adjusted appropri-
ately. 
L Recommendation 7.5
NTPs should obtain and use their country-specific drug resistance data on fail-
ure, relapse and default patient groups to determine the levels of MDR
Remark: Country-specific drug resistance data should include data stratified 
by type of regimen given for the patient’s first course of TB treatment (i.e. 2 vs 
6 months of rifampicin).
1 This information is also needed to determine the patterns of MDR, so that a standard MDR regimen 
can be chosen for empirical treatment of patients with high likelihood of having MDR.
3. STandard TrEaTmEnT rEGImEnS
 42
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
3.8 overall considerations in selecting a country’s standard regimens 
National TB control programmes will need three standard regimens: 
— “new patient regimen”: the regimen containing 6 months of rifampicin: 
2HRZE/4HR1
— “retreatment regimen with first-line drugs”: 2HRZES/1HRZE/5HRE2 
— “MDR regimen”.
To implement these regimens in the country, the NTP needs to consider the follow-
ing factors: 
— availability of results of conventional or rapid molecular-based DST to guide 
management of individual patients;
— level of drug resistance in the country’s new and previously treated patients;
— number of MDR-TB patients the programme has the capacity to enrol and 
treat;
— the short-term risk of dying from MDR-TB due to concomitant conditions 
 
(especially HIV, discussed in Chapter 5);
— availability of patient support and supervision (discussed in Chapter 6).
Many of these factors depend on available resources in the country, particularly the 
availability of DST and MDR-TB treatment. Because these essential elements of the 
Stop TB Strategy are not yet fully in place throughout the world, this chapter provides 
guidance on interim approaches.
Table 3.4 below presents suggestions for how the NTP manager can take account of 
these factors when selecting the standard regimens for defined patient groups. 
3.8.1 Availability of dST results to guide management of individual patients: 
conventional and rapid methods
Ideally, DST is done for all patients at the start of treatment, so that the most 
appropriate therapy for each individual can be determined. However, the goal of 
universal access to DST has not yet been realized for most of the world’s TB patients. 
While countries are expanding laboratory capacity and implementing new rapid 
tests (see below), WHO recommends that sputum specimens for testing susceptibil-
ity to isoniazid and rifampicin be obtained from the following patient groups at the 
start of treatment:
• All previously treated patients (17, 21, 22). The highest levels of MDR are found in 
patients whose prior course of therapy has failed (6). 
• All persons living with HIV who are diagnosed with active TB, especially if they 
live in areas of moderate or high MDR prevalence. It is essential to detect MDR 
as soon as possible in persons living with HIV, given their high risk of mortality 
1 With or without ethambutol in the continuation phase (see section 3.5.2).
2 Countries with rapid molecular-based DST will not need this regimen.
 43
3. STandard TrEaTmEnT rEGImEnS
Table 3.4 
STAndArd regimenS for preViouSly TreATed pATienTS
 
depending on the availability of routine dST to guide the therapy of 
individual retreatment patients
dST
likelihood of mdr (patient registration groupa)
routinely available for 
previously treated patients
High (failureb)
medium or low (relapse, 
default)
rapid molecular-based 
method
dST results available in 1–2 days confirm or exclude mdr to 
guide the choice of regimen 
conventional method
while awaiting dST results:c
empirical mdr regimen
Regimen should be modified 
once DST results are available.
2HrZeS/HrZe/5Hre 
Regimen should be modified 
once DST results are available.
none (interim)
empirical mdr regimen
Regimen should be modified 
once DST results or DRS data 
are available.
2HrZeS/HrZe/5Hre for full 
course of treatment. 
Regimen should be modified 
once DST results or DRS data 
are available.
a The assumption that failure patients have a high likelihood of mdr (and relapse or defaulting patients a 
medium likelihood) may need to be modified according to the level of mdr in these patient registration 
groups, as well considerations discussed in section 3.8.
b And other patients in groups with high levels of mdr. one example is patients who develop active TB 
after known contact with a patient with documented mdr-TB. patients who are relapsing or returning 
after defaulting from their second or subsequent course of treatment probably also have a high likeli-
hood of mdr.
c regimen may be modified once dST results are available (up to 2–3 months after the start of treat-
ment).
Notes: 
1. A country’s standard mdr regimen is based on country-specific dST data from similar groups of pa-
tients (see chapter 7).
2. in the country’s standard regimens, the 8-month retreatment regimen should not be “augmented” by a 
fluoroquinolone or an injectable second-line drug; this practice jeopardizes second-line drugs that are 
critical treatment options for mdr patients. Second-line drugs should be used only for mdr regimens 
and only if quality-assured drugs can be provided by doT for the whole course of therapy. in addition, 
there must be laboratory capacity for cultures to monitor treatment response, as well as a system for 
detecting and treating adverse reactions (see section 3.8.3 on the green light committee initiative) 
before embarking on mdr-TB treatment.
should they have MDR-TB. Some programmes recommend DST for HIV-infected 
TB patients with CD4 counts below 200 cells/mm3 (6).
• Persons who develop active TB after known exposure to a patient with document-
ed MDR-TB.
• All new patients in countries where the level of MDR-TB in new patients is >3% 
(23). 
 44
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
In addition to the indications listed above for DST at the start of treatment (or re-
treatment), WHO recommends that DST be performing during treatment in the fol-
lowing situation: 
• New and previously treated patients who remain sputum smear-positive at the end 
of the intensive phase should submit another specimen for smear microscopy the 
following month. If that specimen is also smear-positive, culture and DST should 
be undertaken (see Recommendation 5.3 in Chapter 4). This will allow a result to 
be available earlier than the fifth month of treatment. 
Comprehensive systems for managing the quality of laboratory services, including 
internal quality control and external quality assurance, are mandatory. Laboratories 
should follow standardized protocols for good laboratory practice, technical proce-
dures and biosafety, in compliance with international standards (6). Documentary 
proof of sustained technical proficiency in DST is essential, and links with suprana-
tional TB reference laboratories to ensure DST quality are strongly encouraged. It is 
also important that appropriate specimens be obtained and rapidly transported to 
the laboratory. Because laboratory errors or discrepant results may occur, the clinical 
situation must be taken into account in interpreting the results of in vitro DST. 
Conventional DST
WHO has endorsed the use of liquid culture and rapid species identification as pref-
erable to solid culture-based methods alone. Liquid culture and rapid species iden-
tification should be based on a country-specific comprehensive plan for laboratory 
capacity strengthening and implemented in a step-wise manner. Liquid systems are 
more sensitive for detecting mycobacteria and may increase the case yield by 10% 
compared with solid media. Liquid systems may also yield DST results in as little as 
10 days, compared with 28‒42 days using conventional solid media.1
Longer delays in receiving DST results mean longer empirical treatment, which has 
significant disadvantages:
• With empirical use of the retreatment regimen with first-line drugs, patients 
whose DST eventually confirms MDR will have been inadequately treated while 
awaiting DST results. Consequences could include continued spread of MDR and 
amplification of resistance to include ethambutol. 
• With empirical use of MDR regimens, patients whose DST eventually rules out 
MDR will have been exposed to toxic drugs they did not need while awaiting DST 
results. Consequences could include adverse drug effects and an increased risk of 
defaulting from treatment.
1 See www.who.int/tb/dots/laboratory/policy/en/index3.html
 45
Rapid DST
In contrast to conventional methods, molecular-amplification assays such as line 
probe assays allow detection of rifampicin resistance (alone or in combination with 
isoniazid) within days of sputum specimens being obtained from the patient (and can 
also be used on cultures obtained from rapid liquid culture systems). Patients with 
MDR-TB can avoid delays in starting an MDR regimen, and TB patients without 
MDR will avoid unnecessary second-line drug treatment. WHO strongly encourages 
the use of rapid molecular (and culture-based) DST in smear-positive persons living 
with HIV (6). 
WHO recommends that ministries of health decide on line probe assays for rapid de-
tection of MDR-TB within the context of country plans for appropriate management 
of MDR-TB patients; plans should also include the development of country-specific 
screening algorithms and timely access to quality-assured second-line anti-TB drugs 
(24). 
Line probe assays have been adequately validated in direct testing of sputum smear-
positive specimens, as well as on isolates of M. tuberculosis complex grown from 
smear-negative and smear-positive specimens. Direct use of line probe assays on 
smear-negative clinical specimens is not recommended. Adoption of line probe as-
says does not eliminate the need for conventional culture and DST capability; culture 
remains necessary for definitive diagnosis of TB in smear-negative patients, while 
conventional DST is required to determine drug susceptibility to drugs other than 
rifampicin and isoniazid. Additional guidance on selecting and implementing rap-
id drug susceptibility tests can be found on the WHO web site at: www.who.int/tb/ 
features_archive/mdrtb_rapid_tests/en/index.html 
3.8.2 level of drug resistance in the country’s new and previously treated patients 
Countries reporting approximately half the world’s TB cases have conducted at least 
one drug resistance survey since 1994 (8). These results, together with estimates of 
MDR-TB levels in all countries, are available on the WHO web site at: www.who.int/
tb/features_archive/drsreport_launch_26feb08/en/index.html
New patients
Drug resistance information is critical for managing new patients and selecting the 
country’s standard regimen for new patients:
• If country data (or WHO estimates) show that more than 3% of new patients have 
MDR, DST should be obtained at the start of therapy for all new patients (see sec-
tion 3.8.1).
• Many countries have a high level of isoniazid resistance in new patients but do 
not have drug susceptibility results for isoniazid by the time of the continuation 
phase. In these countries, the NTP may select an isoniazid/rifampicin/ethambutol 
3. STandard TrEaTmEnT rEGImEnS
 46
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
continuation phase for the standard regimen to be used for all new patients, as 
discussed in section 3.5.2. 
Previously treated patients
As discussed in section 3.6 above, the NTP needs to review country-specific data to 
verify, or modify, the assignment of failure patients to high likelihood of MDR (Table 
3.4) and patients returning after relapse or default to medium or low likelihood of 
MDR. Boxes 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3 provide examples of how these data may be used.
While WHO recommends that DST be performed on all previously treated cases (22), 
systems that will yield this critical information are not yet in place in most countries. 
Until countries have finished establishing the needed laboratory and surveillance ca-
pacity, information on the level of MDR in previously treated patients is available 
from a few other sources. 
The Global Drug Resistance Surveillance project includes actual and estimated levels 
of MDR in previously treated patients as a whole, although sample sizes were usually 
too small to yield very precise estimates (8). Moreover, only 10 countries have meas-
ured MDR levels in subgroups of previously treated patients since 1994 (Figure 3.2). 
Alternative sources of data are in-country laboratories, supranational reference labo-
ratories, hospitals, treatment centres and research projects. The results must be in-
terpreted with caution, as they represent only those patients who have accessed the 
specific services and those institutions where the testing is done. For example, the 
level of MDR found in a hospital-based survey in a capital city accepting referrals 
of the most difficult cases is likely to be higher than the level that would be found in 
unselected patients in a remote area. 
Box 3.1 
An exAmple of reASSigning pATienT groupS BASed on  
counTry-Specific drug reSiSTAnce SurVey reSulTS
in country A, a nationwide survey of all previously treated patients showed the following 
levels of mdr in patients:
• whose prior treatment failed: 
90%
• who have relapsed: 
 
85%
• returning after default:   
30% 
Because relapsing patients have nearly as high a level of mdr as those whose treatment 
has failed, country A decides that relapsing patients (while awaiting their dST results) 
will receive the country’s standard empirical mdr regimen. in the national version of 
Table 3.4 in its nTp manual, country A moves relapse patients from medium to high 
likelihood of mdr so they are managed the same way as patients whose prior treatment 
has failed (while patients returning after default are treated with the 8-month retreat-
ment regimen with first-line drugs).
 47
Note on other patient-specific risk factors for MDR
By assigning registration groups of previously treated patients to high and medium 
likelihood of MDR, Table 3.4 incorporates Standard 11 of the ISTC (3). This standard 
recommends that an assessment of the likelihood of drug resistance be obtained for 
all patients at the start of treatment. 
The most critical patient-specific risk factor for MDR-TB is prior TB treatment (13, 
14).
Known contact with a proven MDR case is another important determinant and 
can be ascertained by TB programmes at the time of patient registration. Other TB 
 
patients observed to have elevated MDR levels in certain settings are those (6): 
— treated in a programme that operates poorly;
— with a history of using anti-TB drugs of poor or unknown quality;
— who remain sputum smear-positive at month 2 or 3 of treatment (see Chapter 
4);
— whose private-sector treatment has failed;
— exposed in institutions with an MDR outbreak or a high prevalence of MDR 
(such as certain prisons or mines);
— with co-morbid conditions associated with malabsorption or rapid-transit 
 
diarrhoea;
— living with HIV (in some settings);
— whose prior course of therapy included rifampicin throughout (Annex 2);
— have type 2 diabetes mellitus (25).
NTPs may be able to collect samples for DST from some of the patient groups listed 
above to determine their levels of MDR.
3.8.3 number of mdr-TB patients the programme has the capacity to enrol 
The Green Light Committee (GLC) Initiative helps countries to gain access to quality-
assured second-line drugs1 at considerably less than market prices. The GLC provides 
countries with high-level expertise in setting up and running MDR-TB programmes, 
integrated with routine TB control activities. Information about the GLC application 
process can be found online at: www.who.int/tb/challenges/mdr/greenlightcommittee/ 
en/index.html
Projects intending to treat fewer than 50 patients can use a fast-track option to mini-
mize the time required for the GLC application process. Countries with limited do-
mestic resources for MDR detection and treatment can apply to the Global Fund to 
Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria or other donors for funding. 
1 If second-line drugs are used, the NTP must ensure that they are quality-assured and can be provided 
by DOT throughout the entire 18–24 months it takes to treat MDR TB. In addition, laboratory capacity 
to monitor response to treatment and a system for detecting and treating adverse reactions must be in 
place. 
3. STandard TrEaTmEnT rEGImEnS
 48
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
As sufficient funding becomes available, countries will provide universal access to 
MDR-TB treatment. The stage of implementation has a bearing on the level of MDR 
that the country will use to define “high”, “medium” and “low” likelihood of MDR. 
At the beginning of an MDR programme, when the availability of MDR treatment is 
very limited, the NTP may chose to include only the very highest risk patients in the 
“high likelihood of MDR” group for empirical MDR treatment while DST results are 
awaited. As the programme is scaled up, the NTP manager can include more patients 
who need MDR treatment. Thus, there are no absolute thresholds for low, moderate, 
or high likelihood or levels of MDR: NTP managers will define them for their own 
country and will need to redefine them as progress is made towards universal access 
to MDR-TB treatment. 
Box 3.2
An exAmple of ASSigning THe pATienT group wiTH  
THe HigHeST mdr leVelS To receiVe empiricAl mdr TreATmenT,  
And lATer Adding A pATienT group wiTH THe nexT HigHeST mdr 
leVelS, during ScAle-up of mdr-TB TreATmenT
Based on a special survey in one province, country B finds an mdr level of 90% in TB 
patients whose treatment failed after two or more prior courses. for patients whose first 
treatment course failed, the level is 60%. The TB patients in this province are roughly 
representative of the whole country’s TB patients. in country B, dST of isoniazid and 
rifampicin is done routinely for individual patients whose previous treatment has failed 
but results are typically not available for 4 months. 
country B has just begun a green light committee initiative project and has the  
capacity to treat a very limited number of mdr-TB patients. it recommends that patients 
whose second or subsequent course of treatment has failed be managed as patients 
with a high likelihood of mdr (as recommended in Table 3.4) and receive an empirical 
regimen for mdr while dST results are awaited. until the mdr programme is scaled up 
further, patients whose first treatment course has failed will be managed as those with a  
medium likelihood of mdr. empirically, they all start the retreatment regimen with first-
line drugs. when dST results are available 4 months later, those confirmed as having 
mdr-TB are changed to the mdr regimen. 
Two years later, another drug resistance survey continues to show that 60% of patients 
whose first treatment failed have mdr, and their outcomes have been poor when treated 
empirically with the retreatment regimen of first-line drugs for the 4 months it takes to 
obtain dST results. By contrast, treatment with the country’s standard mdr regimen is 
having good success in the patients in whom two or more prior treatment courses have 
failed. The country applies for and receives additional support from the global fund to 
now use empirical mdr regimens (while awaiting dST results) for patients whose first 
treatment course has failed. 
 49
3. STandard TrEaTmEnT rEGImEnS
Box 3.3
An exAmple of weigHing THe HArmS And BenefiTS of empiricAl mdr 
TreATmenT in A SeTTing of HigH HiV preVAlence
in country c, 80% of all TB patients are living with HiV, and 30% of relapse patients 
have mdr. while the country is planning to implement rapid dST, it takes an average of 
2 months to obtain results using the current conventional methods. The nTp is decid-
ing which empirical regimen to include in the nTp manual for relapse patients for the 
2 months it takes to obtain dST results. 
given the high level of HiV and the attendant risks of early death from untreated mdr-
TB, the nTp decides to recommend that all relapse patients be treated with the country’s 
empirical mdr regimen while dST results are awaited. The benefit of preventing early 
deaths in the 30% of relapse patients who do have mdr is judged to be greater than the 
possible harmsa of mdr treatment (during the 2 months awaiting dST results) in the 
70% of relapse patients who will prove to not have mdr. 
a possible harms include drug toxicity, increased likelihood of patient default, and burden on 
patient and programme resources.
3.8.4 Short-term risk of death from mdr-TB
Clinicians faced with a very ill TB patient suspected of having MDR-TB will initi-
ate an MDR regimen while DST results are pending, even if the likelihood of MDR 
may be intermediate rather than high. The clinician judges that the risk of toxicity 
of the MDR regimen is outweighed by the possible life-saving benefit of the MDR 
regimen. 
Similar judgements apply to regimen decisions at the level of the NTP. If previously 
treated patients as a group have frequent concomitant conditions (such as HIV) that 
increase the risk of short-term death from MDR-TB, the NTP will want to recom-
mend an empirical MDR regimen for more retreatment patients while DST results 
are awaited. (WHO also recommends the use of rapid molecular-based tests in 
smear-positive persons found to be living with HIV, as well as culture-based DST to 
determine additional drug susceptibility (6).)
3.8.5 Availability of patient support and supervision
The availability of good quality patient support and supervision is essential to im-
plementation of the regimens recommended in this chapter. The importance of the 
 
capacity of TB programmes to provide patient-centred care is discussed in Chapter 
6.
 50
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
references
Rational Pharmaceutical Management Plus Program. 
1. 
Managing pharmaceuticals 
and commodities for tuberculosis: a guide for national tuberculosis programs. Arling-
ton, VA, Management Sciences for Health, 2005. 
American Thoracic Society, CDC, Infectious Diseases Society of America. Treat-
2. 
ment of tuberculosis. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report: Recommendations and 
 
Reports, 2003, 52(RR-11):1–77.
International Standards for Tuberculosis Care (ISTC)
3. 
, 2nd ed. The Hague, Tuberculo-
sis Coalition for Technical Assistance, 2009.
Connor J, Rafter N, Rodgers A. Do fixed-dose combination pills or unit-of-use pack-
4. 
aging improve adherence? A systematic review. Bulletin of the World Health Organi-
zation, 2004, 82:935–939.
Bartacek A et al. Comparison of a four-drug fixed-dose combination regimen with a 
5. 
single tablet regimen in smear-positive pulmonary tuberculosis. International Jour-
nal of Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, 2009, 13:760–766. 
Guidelines for the programmatic management of drug-resistant tuberculosis: emer-
6. 
gency update 2008. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2008 (WHO/HTM/
TB/2008.402). 
Menzies D et al. Effect of duration and intermittency of rifampin on tuberculosis 
7. 
treatment outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. PloS Medicine, 2009, 
6:e1000146.
Anti-tuberculosis drug resistance in the world: fourth global report
8. 
. Geneva, World 
Health Organization, 2008 (WHO/HTM/TB/2008.394).
Mitchison DA. Basic mechanisms of chemotherapy. 
9. 
Chest, 1979, 76(6 Suppl.): 771–
781.
Espinal MA et al. Determinants of drug-resistant tuberculosis: analysis of 11 coun-
10. 
tries. International Journal of Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, 2001, 5:887–893.
Espinal MA et al. Standard short-course chemotherapy for drug-resistant tuberculo-
11. 
sis: treatment outcomes in 6 countries. Journal of the American Medical Association, 
2000, 283:2537–2545.
Quy HT et al. Drug resistance among failure and relapse cases of tuberculosis: is the 
12. 
standard re-treatment regimen adequate? International Journal of Tuberculosis and 
Lung Disease, 2003, 7:631–636.
Saravia JC et al. Retreatment management strategies when first-line tuberculosis 
13. 
therapy fails. International Journal of Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, 2005, 9:421–
429.
Yoshiyama T et al. Development of acquired drug resistance in recurrent tubercu-
14. 
losis patients with various previous treatment outcomes. International Journal of 
 
Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, 2004, 8:31–38.
Drobniewski F et al. Drug-resistant tuberculosis, clinical virulence, and the domi-
15. 
nance of the Beijing strain family in Russia. Journal of the American Medical Associa-
tion, 2005, 293:2726–2731.
Faustini A, Hall AJ, Perucci CA. Risk factors for multidrug resistant tuberculosis in 
16. 
Europe: a systematic review. Thorax, 2006, 61:158–163.
 51
The Global Plan to Stop TB, 2006–2015
17. 
. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2006 
(WHO/HTM/STB/2006.35).
Barnard M et al. Rapid molecular screening for multidrug-resistant tuberculosis in a 
18. 
high-volume public health laboratory in South Africa. American Journal of Respira-
tory and Critical Care Medicine, 2008, 177:787–792.
Sam IC et al. Mycobacterium tuberculosis and rifampin resistance, United Kingdom. 
19. 
Emerging Infectious Diseases, 2006, 12:752–759.
Menzies D et al. Standardized treatment of active tuberculosis in patients with pre-
20. 
vious treatment and/or with mono-resistance to isoniazid: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. PloS Medicine, 2009, 6:e1000150. 
The global MDR-TB & XDR-TB response plan 2007–2008
21. 
. Geneva, World Health 
 
Organization, 2007 (WHO/HTM/TB/2007.387).
Guidelines for the surveillance of drug resistance in tuberculosis
22. 
, 4th ed. Geneva, 
World Health Organization, 2009 (WHO/HTM/TB/2009.422).
Espinal M, Raviglione MC. From threat to reality: the real face of multidrug-resist-
23. 
ant tuberculosis. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, 2008, 
178:216–217.
Molecular line probe assays for rapid screening of patients at risk of MDR TB: policy 
24. 
statement. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2008 (available at: www.who.int/tb/
features_archive/policy_statement.pdf).
Fisher-Hoch SP et al. Type 2 diabetes and multidrug-resistant tuberculosis. 
25. 
Scandi-
navian Journal of Infectious Diseases, 2008, 40:888–893. 
3. STandard TrEaTmEnT rEGImEnS
  53
4
Monitoring during treatment
4.1 Chapter objectives 
This chapter describes how to: 
— monitor and record the response to treatment, and decide on actions to take in 
response to monitoring results;
— use cohort analysis to evaluate treatment outcomes;
— manage treatment interruption;
— detect and manage drug-induced toxicity.
4.2 monitoring the patient
All patients should be monitored to assess their response to therapy (Standard 10 of 
the ISTC (1)). Regular monitoring of patients also facilitates treatment completion 
and allows the identification and management of adverse drug reactions. All patients, 
their treatment supporters and health workers should be instructed to report the 
persistence or reappearance of symptoms of TB (including weight loss), symptoms of 
adverse drug reactions, or treatment interruptions. 
Patient weight should be monitored each month, and dosages should be adjusted 
if weight changes. Additional monitoring and the actions it triggers are discussed 
 
below for pulmonary and extrapulmonary cases treated with first-line drugs. For 
monitoring of patients receiving second-line drugs, see Chapter 7. 
A written record of all medications given, bacteriological response and adverse reac-
tions should be maintained for every patients on the TB Treatment Card (2) (Stan-
dard 13 of the ISTC (1)).
4.3 assessing treatment response in new and previously treated 
pulmonary Tb patients, and acting on the results
Response to treatment in pulmonary TB patients is monitored by sputum smear ex-
amination (see Figures 4.1 and 4.2 below).
L Recommendation 5.1
For smear-positive pulmonary TB patients treated with first-line drugs, spu-
tum smear microscopy may be performed at completion of the intensive phase 
of treatment
(Conditional/High or moderate grade of evidence)
 54
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
figure 4.1 SpuTum moniToring By SmeAr microScopy in new pulmonAry 
TB pATienTS
Note: if a patient is found to harbour a multidrug-resistant strain of TB at any time during therapy, treat-
ment is declared a failure and the patient is re-registered and should be referred to an mdr-TB treatment 
programme. 
months of treatment
1
2
3
4
5
6
[========
========]
•
[---------------
----------------
----------------- 
• 
a
 if sm +, obtain 
culture, dSTb
---------------]
• 
a
 if sm +, obtain 
culture, dSTb
 
 
 
 
if smear-positive at month 2, obtain sputum again at month 3. if smear-positive at month 3, 
obtain culture and dST.
[========
========]
•
 (sm +)
[---------------
•
 if sm +, obtain 
culture, dST
----------------
-----------------
•
 if sm +, obtain 
culture, dSTb
----------------]
•
 if sm +, obtain 
culture, dSTb
Key: 
[========]  intensive phase of treatment (HrZe)
[------------]  continuation phase (Hr)
• 
Sputum smear examination 
sm +  
Smear-positive
a omit if patient was smear-negative at the start of treatment and at 2 months. 
b Smear- or culture-positivity at the fifth month or later (or detection of mdr-TB at any point) is defined 
as treatment failure and necessitates re-registration and change of treatment as described in section 
3.7. 
figure 4.2 SpuTum moniToring of pulmonAry TB pATienTS receiVing THe 
8-monTH reTreATmenT regimen wiTH firST-line drugS
months of treatment
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
[========
========
========]
• 
if sm +, 
obtain 
culture, 
dST
[--------------
---------------
• 
if sm +, 
obtain 
culture, 
dSTa
--------------- --------------- --------------]
• 
if sm +, 
obtain 
culture, 
dSTa
Key: 
[========] intensive phase: 2 months of HrZeS followed by 1 month of HrZe
[------------] continuation phase with 5 months of Hre
• 
Sputum smear examination 
sm + 
Smear-positive
a Smear- or culture-positivity at the fifth month or later (or detection of mdr-TB at any point) is defined 
as treatment failure and necessitates reregistration and change of treatment as described in section 
3.7. 
 55
This recommendation applies both to new patients treated with regimens containing 
6 months of rifampicin (2HRZE/4HR) and to previously treated patients receiving 
the 8-month retreatment regimen with first-line drugs (2HRZES/1HRZE/5HRE). 
Sputum should be collected when the patient is given the last dose of the intensive-
phase treatment. The end of the intensive phase is at 2 months in new patients and 
3 months in previously treated patients receiving the 8-month regimen of first-line 
drugs. This recommendation also applies to smear-negative patients. 
Sputum specimens should be collected for smear examination at each follow-up spu-
tum check. They should be collected without interrupting treatment and transported 
to the laboratory as soon as possible thereafter; if a delay is unavoidable, specimens 
should be refrigerated or kept in as cool a place as possible.
Smear status at the end of the intensive phase is a poor predictor of which new 
 
patients will relapse.1 However, detection of a positive sputum smear remains impor-
tant as a trigger for the patient assessment outlined below as well as for additional 
sputum monitoring described in sections 4.3.1 and 4.3.2. The proportion of smear-
positive patients with sputum smear conversion at the end of the intensive phase is 
also an indicator of TB programme performance.
A positive sputum smear at the end of the intensive phase may indicate any of the 
following:
— the initial phase of therapy was poorly supervised and patient adherence was 
poor;
— poor quality of anti-TB drugs;
— doses of anti-TB drugs are below the recommended range;
— resolution is slow because the patient had extensive cavitation and a heavy ini-
tial bacillary load;
— there are co-morbid conditions that interfere either with adherence or with 
response;
— the patient may have drug-resistant M. tuberculosis that is not responding to 
first-line treatment;
— non-viable bacteria remain visible by microscopy (3).
The programme should carefully review the quality of the patient’s support and 
 
supervision and intervene promptly if necessary. Patient treatment records should be 
reviewed with the responsible health care worker, and reasons for any interruptions 
should be explored and addressed (4). 
It is unnecessary, unreliable and wasteful of resources to monitor the patient by chest 
radiography.
1 Systematic review was not published by the time of publication of this document. GRADE tables are 
available from WHO upon request.
4. monITorInG durInG TrEaTmEnT
 56
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
4.3.1 new pulmonary TB patients
Additional sputum monitoring is needed for new patients whose sputum smear is 
positive at the end of the intensive phase (Standard 10 of the ISTC (1)).
L Recommendation 5.2
In new patients, if the specimen obtained at the end of the intensive phase 
(month 2) is smear-positive, sputum smear microscopy should be obtained at 
the end of the third month
(Strong/High grade of evidence)
L Recommendation 5.3
In new patients, if the specimen obtained at the end of month 3 is smear-positive, 
sputum culture and drug susceptibility testing (DST) should be performed
(Strong/High grade of evidence)
The main purpose of obtaining cultures at this stage is to detect drug resistance with-
out waiting until the fifth month to change to appropriate therapy.1 (Note that treat-
ment is declared a failure if a patient is found to harbour MDR-TB at any point in 
time during treatment; see Table 4.1.)
If the country does not yet have sufficient laboratory capacity for culture and DST, 
additional monitoring of patients who are still smear-positive at month 3 will be only 
by sputum smear microscopy during the fifth month and during the final month of 
treatment. If either result is positive, treatment has failed, the patient is reregistered 
and treatment is changed as described in Chapter 3. 
New pulmonary TB patients with positive sputum smears at the start of treatment
These patients should be monitored by sputum smear microscopy at the end of the 
fifth and sixth months. If results at the fifth or sixth month are positive, a sputum 
specimen should be obtained for culture and DST. Treatment has failed, the TB Treat-
ment Card is closed (Outcome = treatment failure) and a new one is opened (Type of 
patient = treatment after failure). Treatment should follow the recommendations in 
Chapter 3. If a patient is found to harbour a multidrug-resistant strain of TB at any 
point of time during therapy, treatment is also declared a failure. See Figure 4.1 for a 
monitoring scheme with sputum smear microscopy.
New pulmonary TB patients whose sputum smear microscopy was negative  
(or not done) at the start of treatment
It is important to recheck a sputum specimen at the end of the intensive phase in 
case of disease progression (due to non-adherence or drug resistance) or an error 
at the time of initial diagnosis (i.e. a true smear-positive patient was misdiagnosed 
1 Even if there is eventually full susceptibility, a positive culture confirms poor response to treatment, 
which necessitates investigation and intervention.
 57
as smear-negative).1 Pulmonary TB patients whose sputum smear microscopy was 
negative (or not done) before treatment and whose sputum smears are negative at 
2 months need no further sputum monitoring. They should be monitored clinically; 
body weight is a useful progress indicator. 
4.3.2 previously treated sputum smear-positive pulmonary TB patients receiving 
first-line anti-TB drugs
Sputum smear examination is performed at the end of the intensive phase of treat-
ment (the 3rd month), at the end of the fifth month and at the end of treatment (the 
eighth month). If the country has already developed sufficient laboratory capacity, 
culture and DST should be performed at the start of treatment and, if smears are 
positive, at any of these points in time. See Figure 4.2 for a monitoring scheme with 
sputum smear microscopy.
L Recommendation 5.4
In previously treated patients, if the specimen obtained at the end of the inten-
sive phase (month 3) is smear-positive, sputum culture and drug susceptibility 
testing (DST) should be performed
(Strong/High grade of evidence)
4.4 Extrapulmonary Tb
For patients with extrapulmonary TB, clinical monitoring is the usual way of assess-
ing the response to treatment (Standard 10 of the ISTC (1)). As in pulmonary smear-
negative disease, the weight of the patient is a useful indicator.
4.5 recording standardized treatment outcomes 
At the end of the treatment course for each individual patient, the District TB Officer 
records the treatment outcome in the District TB Register. Table 4.1 shows the defini-
tions of standardized treatment outcomes.
4.6 Cohort analysis of treatment outcomes 
A cohort is a group of patients diagnosed and registered for treatment during a spe-
cific time period (usually one-quarter of a year). Evaluation of treatment outcome in 
new pulmonary smear-positive patients is used as a major indicator of programme 
quality. Outcomes in other patients (retreatment, pulmonary smear-negative, extra-
pulmonary) are analysed in separate cohorts. (For guidance on cohort analysis of 
MDR-TB patients, see reference 5.) 
Cohort analysis is the key management tool used to evaluate the effectiveness of the 
national TB control programme. It enables the identification of problems, so that the 
1 If the sputum is found to be smear-positive, see Recommendations 5.2 and 5.3 above. 
4. monITorInG durInG TrEaTmEnT
 58
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
programme managers and staff can institute appropriate action to overcome them 
and improve programme performance. Evaluation of the outcomes of treatment and 
trends must be done at peripheral, district, regional and national levels to allow any 
necessary corrective action to be taken. It can also identify districts or units that are 
performing well and allows for positive feedback to be provided to staff; successful 
practices can then be replicated elsewhere. 
Table 4.1 
definiTionS of TreATmenT ouTcomeSa 
outcome
definition
cure 
A patient whose sputum smear or culture was positive at the beginning 
of the treatment but who was smear- or culture-negative in the last 
month of treatment and on at least one previous occasion.
Treatment 
completed
A patient who completed treatment but who does not have a negative 
sputum smear or culture result in the last month of treatment and on at 
least one previous occasionb
Treatment failure
A patient whose sputum smear or culture is positive at 5 months or later 
during treatment. Also included in this definition are patients found to 
harbour a multidrug-resistant (mdr) strain at any point of time during 
the treatment, whether they are smear-negative or -positive. 
died
A patient who dies for any reason during the course of treatment.
default 
A patient whose treatment was interrupted for 2 consecutive months or 
more.
Transfer out
A patient who has been transferred to another recording and reporting 
unit and whose treatment outcome is unknown.
Treatment success
A sum of cured and completed treatmentc
 
a These definitions apply to pulmonary smear-positive and smear-negative patients, and to patients with 
extrapulmonary disease. outcomes in these patients need to be evaluated separately.
b The sputum examination may not have been done or the results may not be available.
c for smear- or culture-positive patients only. 
The district/local TB officer should perform cohort analysis of treatment outcome 
every quarter-year and at the end of every year. A typical cohort consists of all TB 
patients registered during a quarter. New patients and subcategories of previously 
treated patients (relapses, return after default, failures) should be analysed as separate 
cohorts because they have different characteristics and expected results. Evaluation 
of outcome at the end of treatment should be undertaken as soon as possible after the 
last patient in the cohort completes treatment.1 
This information is transmitted in quarterly reports. After local review, district re-
1 Outcomes are routinely evaluated at the beginning of the quarter following the completion of treat-
ment by the last patient in that cohort. 
 59
ports on treatment outcome are forwarded to the region each quarter. The regional/
intermediate TB officer should verify that district reports are correct, complete and 
consistent, compile cohort analysis reports on the sputum smear-positive patients 
in the region, and submit the report to the central unit of the NTP. The NTP com-
piles cohort analysis reports on the smear-positive TB patients registered nationally, 
evaluates, and provides feedback to the programme staff.
4.7 management of treatment interruption 
Supporting patients to prevent treatment interruption is discussed in Chapter 6; this 
section covers what to do if treatment is interrupted. 
If a patient misses an arranged appointment to receive treatment, the NTP should 
ensure that the patient is contacted within a day after missing treatment during the 
initial phase, and within a week during the continuation phase. The patient can be 
traced using the locating information previously obtained (see section 6.5) (6). It is 
important to find out the cause of the patient’s absence so that appropriate action can 
be taken and treatment can continue. 
The management of patients who have interrupted treatment takes into consideration 
several factors, each of which, if present, will necessitate further caution and prob-
ably additional treatment (7): 
• The patient is found to be smear- or culture-positive upon returning from de-
fault.
• Interruption occurs in the intensive, rather than the continuation, phase.
• Interruption occurs early (rather than later) in the continuation phase.
• The interruption is of long duration.
• The patient is immunocompromised (living with HIV or another condition).
• The patient had poor response to treatment before the interruption.
• Drug-resistant disease is known or suspected. 
Culture and DST should be performed upon return of patients who meet the defini-
tion in Table 4.1 for default (interrupted treatment for at least 2 consecutive months). 
If laboratory capacity permits, specimens for culture and DST should also be ob-
tained from other patients returning after treatment interruption.
4.8 Prevention of adverse effects of drugs
Health personnel can prevent some drug-induced side-effects, for example isoniaz-
id-induced peripheral neuropathy. This usually presents as numbness or a tingling 
or burning sensation of the hands or feet and occurs more commonly in pregnant 
 
women and in people with the following conditions: HIV infection, alcohol depen-
dency, malnutrition, diabetes, chronic liver disease, renal failure. These patients 
should receive preventive treatment with pyridoxine, 10 mg/day along with their 
anti-TB drugs. (Other guidelines recommend 25 mg/day (7).) 
4. monITorInG durInG TrEaTmEnT
 60
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
4.9 monitoring and recording adverse effects
Most TB patients complete their treatment without any significant adverse drug ef-
fects. However, a few patients do experience adverse effects. It is therefore important 
that patients be clinically monitored during treatment so that adverse effects can 
be detected promptly and managed properly. Routine laboratory monitoring is not 
 
necessary.
Health personnel can monitor adverse drug effects by teaching patients how to rec-
ognize the symptoms of common effects, urging them to report if they develop such 
symptoms, and by asking about symptoms when patients come to collect drugs. 
Adverse reactions to drugs should be recorded on the TB Treatment Card under 
 
“Observations”. 
Monitoring of patients receiving second-line drugs is covered in Chapter 7.
4.10 Symptom-based approach to managing side-effects of anti-Tb drugs
The adverse effects of essential anti-TB drugs are described in Annex 1. Table 4.2 
shows a symptom-based approach to the management of the most common ad-
verse effects, which effects are classified as major or minor. In general, a patient who 
 
develops minor adverse effects should continue the TB treatment and be given symp-
tomatic treatment. If a patient develops a major side-effect, the treatment or the 
 
responsible drug is stopped; the patient should be urgently referred to a clinician or 
health care facility for further assessment and treatment. Patients with major adverse 
reactions should be managed in a hospital.
4.10.1  management of cutaneous reactions
If a patient develops itching without a rash and there is no other obvious cause, the 
recommended approach is to try symptomatic treatment with antihistamines and 
skin moisturizing, and continue TB treatment while observing the patient closely. If 
a skin rash develops, however, all anti-TB drugs must be stopped. 
Once the reaction has resolved, anti-TB drugs are reintroduced one by one, starting 
with the drug least likely to be responsible for the reaction (rifampicin or isoniazid) 
at a small challenge dose, such as 50 mg isoniazid (3). The dose is gradually increased 
over 3 days. This procedure is repeated, adding in one drug at a time. A reaction after 
adding in a particular drug identifies that drug as the one responsible for the reac-
tion. The alternative regimens listed in section 4.10.2 below are also applicable when a 
particular drug cannot be used because it was implicated as the cause of a cutaneous 
reaction.
4.10.2 management of drug-induced hepatitis
This section covers hepatitis presumed to be induced by TB treatment. (For a discus-
sion of TB treatment in patients with underlying liver disease, see Chapter 8.) 
 61
4. monITorInG durInG TrEaTmEnT
Table 4.2  SympTom-BASed ApproAcH To mAnAging Side-effecTS  
of AnTi-TB drugS
Side-effects
drug(s) probably 
responsible
management
Major
Stop responsible drug(s) and refer to 
clinician urgently
Skin rash with or without 
itching
Streptomycin, 
isoniazid, 
rifampicin, 
pyrazinamide
Stop anti-TB drugs
deafness (no wax on 
otoscopy)
Streptomycin
Stop streptomycin
dizziness (vertigo and 
nystagmus)
Streptomycin
Stop streptomycin
Jaundice (other causes 
excluded), hepatitis
isoniazid, 
pyrazinamide, 
rifampicin
Stop anti-TB drugs
confusion (suspect drug-
induced acute liver failure if 
there is jaundice)
most anti-TB 
drugs
Stop anti-TB drugs
Visual impairment (other 
causes excluded)
ethambutol
Stop ethambutol
Shock, purpura, acute renal 
failure
rifampicin
Stop rifampicin
decreased urine output
Streptomycin
Stop streptomycin
Minor
Continue anti-TB drugs, check drug doses
Anorexia, nausea, abdominal 
pain
pyrazinamide, 
rifampicin, 
isoniazid
give drugs with small meals or just 
before bedtime, and advise patient to 
swallow pills slowly with small sips of 
water. if symptoms persist or worsen, or 
there is protracted vomiting or any sign 
of bleeding, consider the side-effect to be 
major and refer to clinician urgently.
Joint pains
pyrazinamide
Aspirin or non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drug, or paracetamol
Burning, numbness or tingling 
sensation in the hands or feet
isoniazid
pyridoxine 50–75 mg daily (3)
drowsiness
isoniazid
reassurance. give drugs before bedtime
orange/red urine
rifampicin
reassurance. patients should be told 
when starting treatment that this may 
happen and is normal
flu syndrome (fever, chills, 
malaise, headache, bone pain)
intermittent 
dosing of 
rifampicin
change from intermittent to daily 
rifampicin administration (3)
 62
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
Of the first-line anti-TB drugs, isoniazid, pyrazinamide and rifampicin can all cause 
liver damage (drug-induced hepatitis). In addition, rifampicin can cause asymptom-
atic jaundice without evidence of hepatitis. It is important to try to rule out other 
possible causes before deciding that the hepatitis is induced by the TB regimen. 
The management of hepatitis induced by TB treatment depends on: 
— whether the patient is in the intensive or continuation phase of TB treatment;
— the severity of the liver disease;
— the severity of the TB; and
— the capacity of the health unit to manage the side-effects of TB treatment. 
If it is thought that the liver disease is caused by the anti-TB drugs, all drugs should 
be stopped. If the patient is severely ill with TB and it is considered unsafe to stop TB 
treatment, a non-hepatotoxic regimen consisting of streptomycin, ethambutol and a 
fluoroquinolone should be started. 
If TB treatment has been stopped, it is necessary to wait for liver function tests to 
revert to normal and clinical symptoms (nausea, abdominal pain) to resolve before 
reintroducing the anti-TB drugs. If it is not possible to perform liver function tests, it 
is advisable to wait an extra 2 weeks after resolution of jaundice and upper abdominal 
tenderness before restarting TB treatment. If the signs and symptoms do not resolve 
and the liver disease is severe, the non-hepatotoxic regimen consisting of streptomy-
cin, ethambutol and a fluoroquinolone should be started (or continued) for a total of 
18–24 months (7). 
Once drug-induced hepatitis has resolved, the drugs are reintroduced one at a time. 
If symptoms recur or liver function tests become abnormal as the drugs are reintro-
duced, the last drug added should be stopped. Some advise starting with rifampicin 
because it is less likely than isoniazid or pyrazinamide to cause hepatotoxicity and 
is the most effective agent (7, 8). After 3–7 days, isoniazid may be reintroduced. In 
patients who have experienced jaundice but tolerate the reintroduction of rifampicin 
and isoniazid, it is advisable to avoid pyrazinamide. 
Alternative regimens depend on which drug is implicated as the cause of the hepa-
titis. 
If rifampicin is implicated, a suggested regimen without rifampicin is 2 months of 
isoniazid, ethambutol and streptomycin followed by 10 months of isoniazid and 
ethambutol.
If isoniazid cannot be used, 6–9 months of rifampicin, pyrazinamide and ethambutol 
can be considered. 
If pyrazinamide is discontinued before the patient has completed the intensive phase, 
the total duration of isoniazid and rifampicin therapy may be extended to 9 months 
(7).
 63
If neither isoniazid nor rifampicin can be used, the non-hepatotoxic regimen con-
sisting of streptomycin, ethambutol and a fluoroquinolone should be continued for a 
total of 18–24 months. 
Reintroducing one drug at a time is the optimal approach, especially if the patient’s 
hepatitis was severe. National TB control programmes using FDC tablets should 
therefore stock limited quantities of single anti-TB drugs for use in such cases. How-
ever, if the country’s health units do not yet have single anti-TB drugs, clinical expe-
rience in resource-limited settings has been successful with the following approach, 
which depends on whether the hepatitis with jaundice occurred during the intensive 
or the continuation phase.
• When hepatitis with jaundice occurs during the intensive phase of TB treatment 
with isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide and ethambutol: once hepatitis has re-
solved, restart the same drugs EXCEPT replace pyrazinamide with streptomycin 
to complete the 2-month course of initial therapy, followed by rifampicin and iso-
niazid for the 6-month continuation phase.
• When hepatitis with jaundice occurs during the continuation phase: once hepatitis 
has resolved, restart isoniazid and rifampicin to complete the 4-month continua-
tion phase of therapy.
references
International Standards for Tuberculosis Care (ISTC)
1. 
, 2nd ed. The Hague, Tuberculo-
sis Coalition for Technical Assistance, 2009.
Revised TB recording and reporting forms and registers – version 2006
2. 
. Geneva, World 
Health Organization, 2006 (WHO/HTM/TB/2006.373; available at: http://www.
who.int/tb/dots/r_and_r_forms/en/index.html).
Toman K. 
3. 
Toman’s tuberculosis. Case detection, treatment, and monitoring: questions 
and answers, 2nd ed. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2004.
Williams G et al. 
4. 
Best practice of the care for patients with tuberculosis: a guide for low 
income countries. Paris, International Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, 
2007.
Guidelines for the programmatic management of drug-resistant tuberculosis: emer-
5. 
gency update 2008. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2008 (WHO/HTM/
TB/2008.402).
Williams G et al. Care during the intensive phase: promotion of adherence. 
6. 
Interna-
tional Journal of Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, 2008, 12:601–605.
American Thoracic Society, CDC, Infectious Diseases Society of America. Treatment 
7. 
of tuberculosis. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report: Recommendations and Re-
ports, 2003,52(RR-11):1–77.
Saukkonen JJ et al. An official ATS statement: hepatotoxicity of antituberculosis 
8. 
therapy. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, 2006, 174:935–
952.
4. monITorInG durInG TrEaTmEnT
  65
5
Co-management of HiV and  
active TB disease
5.1 Chapter objectives 
This chapter describes WHO recommendations for: 
— HIV testing and counselling of all patients known or suspected to have TB;
— HIV prevention for TB patients;
— treatment of TB in people living with HIV;
— providing co-trimoxazole preventive therapy to all HIV-positive TB patients;
— when to start antiretroviral therapy (ART) and what antiretroviral agents to 
use;
— drug susceptibility testing and patient monitoring;
— ensuring comprehensive HIV care and support services.
Implementing these recommendations requires collaboration between TB and HIV/
AIDS programmes at all levels (1, 2) and will help to reduce the burden of HIV in 
people diagnosed with TB. Similarly, collaboration is essential to reduce the burden 
of TB in people living with HIV. (While outside the scope of this chapter, see: Three 
I’s for reducing the burden of TB in persons living with HIV: Intensified case-finding 
(ICF), Isoniazid preventive therapy (IPT) and TB Infection control (IC) for people 
living with HIV (3).)
People living with HIV are more likely to present with extrapulmonary or sputum 
smear-negative TB, especially as immunosuppression advances (4, 5). This can result 
in misdiagnosis or delays in diagnosis and, in turn, higher morbidity and mortality. 
Implementation of the WHO-recommended algorithms to diagnose pulmonary and 
extrapulmonary TB in HIV-prevalent settings is therefore crucial (6). (The treatment 
of extrapulmonary TB is discussed in Chapter 8.)
5.2 HIV testing and counselling for all patients known or  
suspected to have Tb 
Irrespective of epidemic setting, WHO recommends HIV testing for patients of all 
ages who present with signs or symptoms that suggest tuberculosis (7), whether TB is 
suspected or already confirmed. (See also Standard 14 of the ISTC (8).) TB is often the 
first clinical indication that a person has underlying HIV infection, and TB services 
can be an extremely important entry point to HIV prevention, care and treatment (1). 
In addition, the HIV status of TB patients makes a difference to their TB treatment. 
(See section 5.4, which includes the new recommendation for daily intensive-phase 
dosing of anti-TB drugs for HIV-positive TB patients.)
 66
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
Detecting HIV infection in a TB patient is also critical for the TB patient’s household 
members: HIV-positive TB patients may have household members who are also living 
with HIV. Testing and counselling should be recommended for children and other 
immediate family members of all people living with HIV, in cases where horizon-
tal or vertical transmission may have occurred. Within a family-centred approach 
to HIV testing, once a family member is identified as having HIV, health workers 
should encourage and actively facilitate HIV testing for other family members. This 
could be done, where possible and appropriate, through couples or family testing 
and counselling services (9).1 Serodiscordant partnerships (in which one partner is 
HIV-positive and the other is HIV-negative) provide an important opportunity for 
prevention of HIV transmission (10, 11).
Household contacts of an infectious TB case are a high priority for TB screening and 
treatment, especially if they are living with HIV (2, 12, 13), and those who are found 
to have active TB disease need prompt treatment. Among household contacts, people 
living with HIV (and children, regardless of their HIV status) who do not have active 
TB are candidates for isoniazid treatment to prevent the development of active TB (3). 
(See also Standards 16, 18 and 19 of the ISTC (8).)
WHO recommends “provider-initiated” testing, which means that the health care 
provider recommends HIV testing and counselling as a standard component of care 
(7). For patients known or suspected to have TB, provider-initiated HIV testing can 
be done at the same time the sputum samples or chest radiographs are obtained. This 
is more efficient, and more likely to result in patients learning their HIV status, than 
referring them elsewhere for HIV testing and counselling (12). 
As in the case of client-initiated HIV testing, informed consent, counselling and con-
fidentiality are essential. WHO recommends that providers use “opt-out” approaches 
(7), meaning that individuals must specifically decline the HIV test after receiving 
pretest information if they do not want the test to be performed. 
The provision of HIV testing by the same health worker who provides the TB 
treatment (or the provision of HIV testing in the same facility) has been shown to 
 
facilitate HIV testing for TB patients (14, 15). If this is not possible, NTPs should take 
responsibility for ensuring that any referred individual actually goes for a test. 
An HIV testing service using rapid assays offers several programmatic advantages. 
Rapid assays are easy to use and can be carried out by any health care worker who 
has received appropriate training. Most rapid HIV test kits can be stored at room 
temperature (up to 30 ºC) and can be used for a single test without compromising 
the integrity of the remaining part of the test kit. Moreover, the diagnostic perform-
ance of high-quality rapid assays is comparable to that of traditional enzyme immu-
noassays, and the short turnaround time ensures that individuals receive their test 
results quickly. These rapid assays do not require specialized equipment and can be 
1 http://www.who.int/hiv/pub/priority_interventions_web.pdf 
 67
5. Co-manaGEmEnT of HIV and aCTIVE Tb dISEaSE
performed outside the traditional laboratory setting (7). The visibility of the test (to 
the person being tested) and its speed increase confidence in results and help to avoid 
clerical errors. 
As with conventional HIV assays, a reactive result from the first, highly sensitive, 
rapid assay requires confirmation by a second, more specific test, typically another 
rapid assay. If the second test yields non-reactive or indeterminate results, a third 
test may be performed; if the result is reactive, follow-up HIV testing should be per-
formed on a specimen collected 4 weeks after the initial test. The follow-up testing 
would rule out possible seroconversion at the time of the initial test as the cause of 
discrepant testing results and would reveal most technical or clerical errors. The use 
of rapid assay should be undertaken only with functional quality assurance in place 
and conducted according to the country’s nationally validated testing algorithm. 
 
Appropriate post-test counselling should be ensured, with a strong focus on HIV 
prevention; this will also help prevent the spread of TB.
For more information, see WHO’s Scaling up HIV testing and counselling services: a 
toolkit for programme managers (2005), which is available online at: www.who.int/
hiv/topics/vct/toolkit/en/ 
5.3 HIV prevention in Tb patients
National TB control programmes should develop and implement comprehensive 
HIV prevention strategies for their patients. Appropriate prevention messages and 
methods should be provided to patients with confirmed or suspected TB, according 
to their HIV status and local knowledge of the modes of transmission or assessment 
of risk (1). Harm-reduction measures for TB patients who are injecting drug users 
should be provided, either by NTPs or through referral linkages to HIV programmes 
(2).
5.4 Tb treatment in people living with HIV
Among treated TB patients, death rates are higher in HIV-positive than in HIV-nega-
tive patients. Case-fatality is higher in people living with HIV with smear-negative 
pulmonary and extrapulmonary TB, as these patients are generally more immuno-
suppressed than those with smear-positive TB (6). The case-fatality rate is reduced in 
patients who receive concurrent ART (see section 5.6 below). 
The first priority for HIV-positive TB patients is to initiate TB treatment, followed by 
co-trimoxazole and ART (16) (see sections 5.5 and 5.6 below). For TB diagnosed in a 
person already taking ART, see section 5.9.
New TB patients1 living with HIV should be treated with the regimens given in 
 
Tables 3.2 and 3.3. However, the three times weekly intensive phase is no longer an 
1 New TB patients are those who have had no prior TB treatment or who have been receiving TB treat-
ment for less than 1 month.
 68
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
option. This new recommendation is based on a systematic review showing that the 
incidence of relapse and failure among HIV-positive TB patients who were treated 
with intermittent TB therapy throughout treatment was 2–3 times higher than that 
in patients who received a daily intensive phase (17). In addition, a study in India 
showed that HIV-positive patients with pulmonary TB are at higher risk of acquired 
rifampicin resistance, when failing a three times weekly short-course intermittent 
regimen (18). 
L Recommendation 4.1
TB patients with known positive HIV status and all TB patients living in HIV-
prevalent settings1 should receive daily TB treatment at least during the inten-
sive phase
(Strong/High grade of evidence)
L Recommendation 4.2
For the continuation phase, the optimal dosing frequency is also daily for these 
patients
(Strong/High grade of evidence)
L Recommendation 4.3
If a daily continuation phase is not possible for these patients, three times 
weekly dosing during the continuation phase is an acceptable alternative
(Conditional/High or moderate grade of evidence) 
In terms of duration of therapy, some experts recommend prolonging TB treat-
ment in persons living with HIV in certain circumstances (19). A systematic review 
found lower relapse rates in people living with HIV treated with 8 or more months 
of rifampicin-containing regimens compared with the current recommendation of 
6 months. However, the data quality of the studies included in the review was low, 
and different durations of TB treatment for HIV-positive and HIV-negative indi-
viduals would be operationally difficult in resource-constrained and HIV-prevalent 
 
settings (17). 
L Recommendation 4.4
It is recommended that TB patients who are living with HIV should receive at 
least the same duration of TB treatment as HIV-negative TB patients
(Strong/High grade of evidence)
HIV-positive TB patients who have been previously treated for TB should receive the 
same retreatment regimens as HIV-negative TB patients (see Table 3.5).
1 Countries, subnational administrative units, or selected facilities where the HIV prevalence among 
adult pregnant women is ≥1% or among TB patients is ≥5%.
 69
Rifampicin induces the activity of hepatic enzymes, leading to sub-therapeutic con-
centrations of some antiretroviral drugs. This is discussed in section 5.6.1 below. 
5.5 Co-trimoxazole preventive therapy 
In all HIV-positive TB patients, co-trimoxazole preventive therapy should be initi-
ated as soon as possible and given throughout TB treatment. (See also Standard 15 
of the ISTC (8).) Co-trimoxazole preventive therapy substantially reduces mortality 
in HIV-positive TB patients (16, 20). The exact mode of activity is not clear but co-
trimoxazole is known to prevent Pneumocystis jirovecii and malaria and is likely to 
have an impact on a range of bacterial infections in HIV-positive TB patients. 
A system for providing co-trimoxazole preventive therapy to all people living with 
HIV who have active TB should be established by TB and HIV programmes. Con-
tinuation after TB treatment is completed should be considered in accordance with 
national guidelines.
For co-trimoxazole dosages, contraindications, and side-effects and their manage-
ment, see reference 20.
5.6 antiretroviral therapy
Antiretroviral therapy improves survival in HIV-positive patients (16). In addition, 
antiretroviral therapy reduces TB rates by up to 90% at an individual level, by 60% 
at a population level and it reduces TB recurrence rates by 50% (21–22). ART should 
be initiated for all people living with HIV with active TB disease irrespective of CD4 
cell count. TB treatment should be started first, followed by ART as soon as possible 
and within the first 8 weeks of starting TB treatment (23). 
5.6.1 what ArT regimens to start?
Standardized, simplified ART regimens are used to support HIV treatment pro-
grammes so they can reach as many people living with HIV as possible. For the most 
up-to-date WHO guidance on ART regimens, reference should be made to www.
who.int/hiv/pub/guidelines/en
WHO recommends that the first-line ART regimen contain two nucleoside reverse 
transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) plus one non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase in-
hibitor (NNRTI). These are efficacious, relatively less expensive, have generic and 
FDC formulations, do not require a cold chain, and preserve a potent new class of 
agents (protease inhibitors) for second-line regimens. The preferred NRTI backbone 
is zidovudine (AZT) or tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (TDF), combined with either 
lamivudine (3TC) or emtricitabine (FTC). For the NNRTI, WHO recommends either 
efavirenz (EFV) or nevirapine (NVP) (23).
The recommended first-line ART regimens for TB patients are those that contain 
efavirenz (EFV), since interactions with anti-TB drugs are minimal. In several cohort 
5. Co-manaGEmEnT of HIV and aCTIVE Tb dISEaSE
 70
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
studies, ART with standard-dose efavirenz and two nucleosides was well tolerated 
and highly efficacious in achieving complete viral suppression among patients re-
ceiving concomitant rifampicin-based TB treatment (24). 
Because of concerns related to teratogenicity, efavirenz should not be used in women 
of childbearing potential without adequate contraception, nor should it be used for 
women who are in the first trimester of pregnancy. Alternatives are also needed for 
patients who are intolerant to efavirenz or are infected with a strain of HIV that is 
resistant to NNRTIs. For those who are unable to tolerate EFV or who have contrain-
dications to an EFV-based regimen, AZT +3TC + NVP or TDF +3TC or FTC + NVP 
or a triple NRTI regimen (AZT+3TC+ABC or AZT+3TC+TDF) is recommended; the 
choice of regimen should be based on available regimens within countries. In coun-
tries where rifampicin is available, the lead-in dose of nevirapine is not necessary. 
In individuals who need TB treatment and who require an ART regimen containing 
a boosted protease inhibitor (PI), it is recommended to give a rifabutin-based TB 
treatment. If rifabutin is not available, the use of rifampicin and a boosted antiretro-
viral regimen containing lopinavir or saquinavir with additional ritonavir dosing is 
recommended; this regimen should be closely monitored. 
5.6.2 when to start ArT?
While the optimal time to start ART in relation to the start of TB therapy is not 
yet clear, one randomized controlled trial provides some evidence for early initia-
tion of antiretroviral therapy in terms of reduced all-cause mortality, improved TB 
outcomes and reduced incidence of immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome 
(IRIS) (25). The recommendations of WHO in 2009 are that TB treatment should be 
commenced first and ART subsequently commenced, as soon as possible and within 
the first 8 weeks of starting TB treatment. In this rapidly evolving field, updated in-
formation and guidance on antiretroviral therapy is provided by WHO (see: http://
www.who.int/hiv/pub guidelines/en).
The rationale for starting ART soon after TB diagnosis is that case-fatality among 
HIV-TB patients occurs mainly in the first 2 months of TB treatment (16). However, 
early initiation of ART (within a few weeks of starting TB treatment) means a large 
number of tablets to ingest, which may discourage treatment adherence; there may 
also be complications – adverse effects, drug–drug interactions and IRIS. 
Mild to moderate IRIS is relatively common in patients with TB started on ART: 
it has been reported in up to one-third of patients in some studies. However, it is 
relatively rare in its severe forms (24, 26). The syndrome can present as fever, enlarg-
ing lymph nodes, worsening pulmonary infiltrates, or exacerbation of inflammatory 
changes at other sites. It generally presents within 3 months of the start of ART and 
is more common when CD4 cell count is low (<50 cells/mm3). Most cases resolve 
without intervention and ART can be safely continued (24).
 71
IRIS is a diagnosis of exclusion. Patients with advanced AIDS may show clinical de-
terioration for a number of other reasons. New opportunistic infections or previously 
subclinical infections may be unmasked following immune reconstitution and cause 
clinical worsening. IRIS can also be confused with TB treatment failure. In addition, 
HIV-positive TB patients may be demonstrating progression of TB disease due to TB 
drug-resistance. IRIS is not a reason to switch patients to second-line ART, although 
the ART treatment regimen may need to be adjusted to ensure compatibility with the 
TB treatment (6). 
5.7 drug susceptibility testing 
High mortality rates have been reported among people living with HIV who have 
drug resistant-TB (26), and rates can exceed 90% in patients coinfected with exten-
sively drug-resistant TB (XDR-TB) and HIV (27, 28). Prompt initiation of appropriate 
TB treatment (and subsequent initiation of ART) can reduce mortality among people 
living with HIV who have drug-resistant TB (28).
WHO recommends that NTPs undertake DST at the start of TB therapy in all HIV-
positive TB patients, to avoid mortality due to unrecognized drug-resistant TB (25), 
and strongly encourages the use of rapid DST in sputum smear-positive persons 
 
living with HIV (26). 
If the country is introducing DST, but does not yet have the resources to test all HIV-
positive TB patients, initial NTP policy should be to target DST at the start of TB 
treatment for patients with previously treated TB, who are very likely to be multid-
rug-resistant (see section 3.8.1). This group includes patients whose prior TB treat-
ment has failed, who have relapsed or who are returning from default. NTP managers 
may also chose to target DST for those HIV-positive TB patients with lower CD4 
counts (e.g. less than 200 cells/mm3) given their very high risk of death due to unrec-
ognized drug-resistant TB (26).
5.8 Patient monitoring during Tb treatment 
(See also Chapter 4.)
Adverse drug effects are common in HIV-positive TB patients, and some toxicities 
are common to both ART and TB drugs (16). Overlapping toxicities between ART, 
TB therapy and co-trimoxazole include rash (and, more rarely, hepatic dysfunction), 
and vigilant monitoring of side-effects is therefore essential (20, 26).
5.9 Considerations when Tb is diagnosed in people living with HIV who 
are already receiving antiretroviral therapy
When TB is diagnosed in patients already receiving ART, TB treatment should be 
started immediately. There are two issues to consider in such cases: whether ART 
needs to be modified because of drug–drug interactions or to reduce the potential for 
5. Co-manaGEmEnT of HIV and aCTIVE Tb dISEaSE
 72
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
overlapping toxicities, and whether the presentation of active TB in a patient on ART 
constitutes ART failure that requires a change in the ART regimen. Diagnosis and 
management of ART failure are covered in another WHO document (29).
5.10 HIV-related prevention, treatment, care and support 
The recommended package of HIV-related prevention, treatment, care and support 
services and support for people living with HIV should be provided either by TB 
programmes or by referral to HIV/AIDS programmes (12, 16). To improve treatment 
success, the special needs of particular groups (e.g. drug users, prisoners, migrant 
populations, other marginalized groups) should be assessed and addressed; their 
care should be integrated with other services. 
A comprehensive AIDS care strategy includes clinical management (prophylaxis, 
early diagnosis, treatment and follow-up care for opportunistic infections), nursing 
care (including hygiene promotion and nutritional support), palliative care, home 
care (including education for care providers and patients’ relatives, promoting uni-
versal precautions), counselling and social support (1, 9). This package of care in-
cludes a core set of effective interventions, listed below, that are simple and relatively 
inexpensive, can improve the quality of life, prevent further transmission of HIV 
and, in some cases, delay progression of HIV disease and prevent mortality. In addi-
tion to ART, these interventions promote health, reduce the risk of HIV transmission 
to others, and address diseases that most impact the quality and duration of life of 
adults and adolescents with HIV (3):
— reducing the burden of TB via intensified TB case-finding, infection control, 
and isoniazid preventive therapy;
— psychosocial counselling and support; 
— disclosure of HIV status, partner notification and testing and counselling; 
— co-trimoxazole prophylaxis; 
— preventing fungal infections; 
— preventing sexually transmitted and other reproductive tract infections; 
— preventing malaria; 
— providing selected vaccines (hepatitis B, pneumococcal, influenza, and yellow 
fever); 
— nutrition; 
— family planning; 
— preventing mother-to-child transmission of HIV; 
— needle/syringe programmes and opioid substitution therapy; and water, 
 
sanitation and hygiene.
 73
references
Interim policy on collaborative TB/HIV activities
1. 
. Geneva, World Health Organiza-
tion, 2004 (WHO/HTM/TB/2004.330, WHO/HTM/HIV/2004.1).
Implementing the WHO Stop TB strategy: a handbook for national tuberculosis con-
2. 
trol programmes. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2008 (WHO/HTM/TB/ 
2008.401).
WHO Three I’s Meeting: Intensified case finding (ICF), Isoniazid preventive therapy 
3. 
(IPT) and TB Infection control (IC) for people living with HIV. Report of a joint World 
Health Organization HIV/AIDS and TB department meeting. Geneva, World Health 
Organization, 2008 (available at: http://www.who.int/hiv/pub/meetingreports/
WHO_3Is_meeting_report.pdf).
TB/HIV: a clinical manual
4. 
, 2nd ed. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2004 
(WHO/HTM/TB/2004.329). 
Getahun H et al. Diagnosis of smear-negative pulmonary tuberculosis in people with 
5. 
HIV infection or AIDS in resource-constrained settings: informing urgent policy 
changes. Lancet, 2007, 369:2042–2049. 
Improving the diagnosis and treatment of smear-negative pulmonary and extrapulmo-
6. 
nary tuberculosis among adults and adolescents: recommendations for HIV-prevalent 
and resource-constrained settings. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007 (WHO/
HTM/TB/2007.379; WHO/HIV/2007.1). 
WHO, UNAIDS. 
7. 
Guidance on provider-initiated HIV testing and counselling in 
health facilities. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007. 
International Standards for Tuberculosis Care (ISTC)
8. 
, 2nd ed. The Hague, Tuberculo-
sis Coalition for Technical Assistance, 2009.
Towards universal access: priority interventions for HIV
9. 
. Geneva, World Health Or-
ganization, 2008.
Dunkle KL et al. New heterosexually transmitted HIV infections in married or co-
10. 
habiting couples in urban Zambia and Rwanda: an analysis of survey and clinical 
data. Lancet, 2008, 371:2183–2191.
Opening up the HIV/AIDS epidemic: guidance on encouraging beneficial disclosure, 
11. 
ethical partner counselling & appropriate use of HIV case-reporting. Geneva, United 
Nations Joint Programme on HIV/AIDS, 2000 (available at: http://www.who.int/ 
ethics/topics/opening_up_ethics_and_disclosure_en_2000.pdf ).
Tuberculosis care with TB-HIV co-management: integrated management of adoles-
12. 
cent and adult illness (IMAI). Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007.
Havlir DV et al. Opportunities and challenges for HIV care in overlapping HIV and 
13. 
TB epidemics. Journal of the American Medical Association, 2008, 300:423–430.
Nunn P, De Cock K. Measuring progress towards integrated TB-HIV treatment and 
14. 
care services: are countries doing what needs to be done? International Journal of 
Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, 2008, 12(3 Suppl. 1):1.
Gasana M et al. Integrating tuberculosis and HIV care in rural Rwanda. 
15. 
Interna-
tional Journal of Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, 2008, 12(3 Suppl. 1):39–43.
Harries AD, Zachariah R, Lawn SD. Providing HIV care for co-infected tuberculosis 
16. 
patients: a perspective from sub-Saharan Africa. International Journal of Tuberculo-
sis and Lung Disease, 2009, 13:6–16. 
5. Co-manaGEmEnT of HIV and aCTIVE Tb dISEaSE
 74
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
Khan FA et al. Treatment of active tuberculosis in HIV co-infected patients: a sys-
17. 
tematic review and meta-analysis. Clinical Infectious Diseases, 2010 (in press). 
Swaminathan S et al. 
18. 
Acquired rifampicin resistance in HIV-infected and uninfected 
patients with tuberculosis treated with a thrice-weekly short-course regimen. Poster 
presented at Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections (CROI), 
Montreal, 2009 (available at: http://www.retroconference.org/2009/Abstracts/35234.
htm).
American Thoracic Society, CDC, Infectious Diseases Society of America. Treat-
19. 
ment of tuberculosis. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report: Recommendations and 
 
Reports, 2003, 52(RR-11):1–77.
Guidelines on co-trimoxazole prophylaxis for HIV-related infections among children, 
20. 
adolescents and adults in resource-limited settings: recommendations for a public 
health approach. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2006.
Lawn SD, Churchyard G. Epidemiology of HIV-associated tuberculosis. 
21. 
Current 
Opinion in HIV and AIDS, 2009, 4:325–333.
Golub JE et al. Long-term effectiveness of diagnosing and treating latent tuberculo-
22. 
sis infection in a cohort of HIV-infected and at risk injection drug users. Journal of 
 
Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes, 2008, 49(5):532–537.
Rapid advice for antiretroviral therapy for HIV infection in adults and adolescents
23. 
. 
Geneva, World Health Organization, 2009 (available at http://www.who.int/hiv/pub/
arv/rapid_advice_art.pdf).
Managing drug interactions in the treatment of HIV-related tuberculosis
24. 
. Atlanta, GA, 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2007 (available at: www.cdc.gov/tb/pub-
lications/guidelines/TB_HIV_Drugs/PDF/tbhiv.pdf).
Karim SA et al. Initiating ART during TB treatment significantly increases survival: 
25. 
results of a randomized controlled clinical trial in TB/HIV-co-infected patients in 
South Africa. Paper presented at Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic In-
fections (CROI), Montreal, 2009 (available at: http://www.retroconference.org/2009/
Abstracts/34255.htm).
Guidelines for the programmatic management of drug-resistant tuberculosis: emer-
26. 
gency update 2008. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2008 (WHO/HTM/TB/ 
2008.402).
Gandhi NR et al. Extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis as a cause of death in pa-
27. 
tients co-infected with tuberculosis and HIV in a rural area of South Africa. Lancet, 
2006, 368:1575–1580.
Wells CD et al. HIV infection and multidrug-resistant tuberculosis: the perfect 
28. 
storm. Journal of Infectious Diseases, 2007, 196(Suppl. 1):S86–S107.
Essential prevention and care interventions for adults and adolescents living with HIV 
29. 
in resource-limited settings. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2008.
 75
6
supervision and patient support
6.1 Chapter objectives
This chapter describes:
— the role of the patient, the TB programme, other providers, and the commu-
nity in the cure of TB;
— treatment supervision and directly observed therapy;
— patient-centred care;
— measures to prevent interruption of treatment.
Adherence to TB treatment is crucial to achieving cure while avoiding the emer-
gence of drug resistance. Regular and complete medication intake gives individual 
TB patients the best chance of cure and also protects the community from the spread 
of TB. The emergence and spread of MDR- and XDR-TB further reinforces the ab-
solute necessity of helping a TB patient to not miss any drug doses. In the Stop TB 
Strategy, supervision and patient support remain the cornerstone of DOTS and help 
programmes to achieve the treatment success target of 85% (1).
6.2 roles of the patient, Tb programme staff, the community  
and other providers
Cure can be achieved only if the patient and the health service staff work together (2). 
Other health care providers and the community also have important roles to play. 
6.2.1 patient as partner
According to the Patients’ Charter for TB Care, patients are not passive recipients 
of services but active partners (3). They have the right to care, dignity, information, 
privacy, food supplements and/or other types of support and incentives, if needed. 
They also have the right to participate in TB programme development, implemen-
tation and evaluation. Patients have the responsibility of sharing information with 
the health provider, following treatment, contributing to community health, and 
showing solidarity by passing expertise gained during treatment to others in the 
community. Because of their first-hand TB experience, their involvement in stigma-
reduction activities in the community and supporting treatment completion of other 
patients can be highly effective.
 76
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
6.2.2 role of the nTp and its staff
Because TB is a public health problem and its transmission poses a risk to the com-
munity, ensuring regular intake of all the drugs by the patient is a responsibility of 
the health staff and of the NTP. To facilitate patient adherence, NTPs need to estab-
lish and maintain systems that maximize patient access to care, and train and super-
vise health workers to provide patient-centred care. Factors such as the type of drug 
regimen (daily or intermittent), the type of drug formulation (fixed-dose combina-
tions or separate drugs) as well as the circumstances and characteristics of the patient 
should be considered in organizing patient supervision (see section 6.4).
To support patient adherence, it is critical for the NTP to implement two additional 
components of the Stop TB Strategy: engaging other care providers and involving 
communities (1).
6.2.3 engaging providers outside the TB programme
WHO has developed guidance on engaging all health care providers to take on TB 
tasks according to their capacity (4). For example, public and private practitioners 
can successfully provide DOTS in collaboration with the NTP. At a minimum, any 
practitioner treating a patient for TB must be capable of (5):
— discussing the condition and the treatment being given to the patient;
— recognizing and managing adverse effects of medications, and making refer-
rals if necessary;
— assessing the patient’s adherence to the regimen and addressing poor adher-
ence when it occurs (ISTC Standard 7 (6));
— completing the appropriate documentation;
— collaborating with the local public health services;
— ensuring that the patient accepts the proposed care.
6.2.4 community involvement
Another component of the Stop TB Strategy is to empower communities (1). Com-
munity involvement refers to partnership and shared responsibility with health ser-
vices (7). Social mobilization can create demand for quality-assured TB services and 
help the community to avail itself of these services. 
In community-based care, a TB treatment supporter shares with the TB patient re-
sponsibility for the successful completion of treatment; he or she provides therapy 
under supervision as well as social and psychological support (8). Community-based 
care can help to expand access to care but requires a strong reporting system, access 
to laboratory facilities, and a secure drug supply. Treatment supporters need regular 
contact with NTP staff to ensure that motivation and successful outcomes are main-
tained. Community based TB care is a sign of commitment by the NTP to partner-
ship with the community.
 77
6. SuPErVISIon and PaTIEnT SuPPorT
6.3 Supervised treatment 
Supervised treatment refers to helping patients to take their TB medications regu-
larly and to complete TB treatment. It is also meant to ensure that the providers give 
proper care and are able to detect treatment interruption. One example of treatment 
supervision is recording each dose of anti-TB drugs on the patient’s treatment card.
Directly observed therapy (DOT), a recommended method of supervision, should 
be seen as a part of a support package that addresses patients’ needs. This package 
should help to ensure that DOT is sensitive to, and supportive of, the patient’s needs. 
A treatment supporter observing intake of every dose ensures that a TB patient takes 
the right anti-TB drugs, in the right doses, at the right intervals. Regular supervision 
and support help to maintain frequent communication between the patient and a 
health worker or treatment observer; this provides more opportunities for TB educa-
tion, identification and resolution of obstacles to treatment, and early identification 
of non-adherence – allowing interventions to return the patient to the prescribed 
treatment. Regular supervision also allows the prompt detection and management of 
adverse drug reactions and clinical worsening of TB. 
As a method of supervision recommended by WHO, DOT has been the subject of 
much debate (9). A systematic review of six controlled trials comparing DOT with 
self-administered therapy concluded that DOT did not improve outcomes (10). How-
ever, this review took no account of the patient support services provided in addi-
tion to the routine “supervised swallowing” or of the impact of DOT in preventing 
the emergence of drug resistance (11). Other reviews found DOT to be associated 
with high cure and treatment completion rates (9, 12). The highest success rates were 
achieved in programmes that used DOT in the context of a full support package, with 
components such as incentives and enablers (discussed in section 6.4 below) (13, 14).
Direct observation of each dose of drugs is most critical in the intensive phase, when 
intermittent dosing is used during either phase, and in the treatment of, for example, 
psychologically handicapped patients, prison inmates, or patients receiving second-
line anti-TB drugs. Supervised treatment should be carried out in a context-specific 
and patient-friendly manner. There must be flexibility in how DOT is applied, with 
adaptation to different settings that are convenient to the patient. The whole purpose 
of treatment observation would be defeated if it were to limit access to care, turn pa-
tients away from treatment, or add to their hardships. 
Depending on the local conditions, supervision may be undertaken at a health facil-
ity, in the workplace, in the community or at home. A treatment supporter must be 
identified for each TB patient; he or she should be a person acceptable to, and chosen 
with, the patient. For TB patients who live close to a health facility, the treatment 
supporter will be one of the staff in the health facility, and this is the ideal choice if 
convenient to the patient. Collaboration with other programmes allows the identifi-
cation of staff from these programmes who may observe TB treatment. 
 78
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
For TB patients who live far away from a health facility the treatment observer will be 
a community health worker or a trained and supervised local community member. 
With suitable training and monitoring, HIV/AIDS community care providers can 
observe TB treatment. Cured TB patients may be successful DOT providers, as can 
traditional healers, friends, co-workers, family members, neighbours, religious lead-
ers, etc. (15); in fact, any willing person who is acceptable to the patient and answer-
able to the health system can be a treatment supporter.
The NTP is responsible for training and monitoring the non-medical treatment 
observers. There must be a clearly defined line of accountability from NTP staff to 
general health services staff and the treatment supporter. It is important to ensure 
confidentiality and the acceptability of supervised treatment to the patient. The drugs 
should remain with the treatment supporter and be given to the patient only at the 
time of ingestion.
There may be an incentive for community members to become observers of TB treat-
ment. Incentives for volunteers and patients may be considered, bearing in mind the 
advantages and disadvantages of incentive schemes (16).
Detailed instructions for informing the patient and family about TB and its treat-
ment and for arranging supervised treatment (including identifying and preparing a 
community TB treatment supporter) are contained in WHO’s training modules for 
health facility staff (17).
6.4 using a patient-centred approach to care and treatment delivery 
Many NTPs now have considerable experience in implementing adherence promo-
tion strategies that work and in tailoring DOT to a given context. Locally appropri-
ate measures should be taken to identify and address physical, financial, social and 
cultural (as well as health system) obstacles to accessing TB treatment services (18). 
Particular attention should be paid to the poorest and most vulnerable groups. Also 
useful are explicit efforts to address gender issues, improve staff attitudes, and en-
hance communication. It is essential that these approaches be based on ethical prin-
ciples regarding the needs, rights, capabilities and responsibilities of patients, their 
families and their communities. (See also Standards 7, 9 and 17 of the ISTC (6).)
For any chosen method of supervision and administration of treatment, a programme 
must show high sputum smear conversion and cure rates, under routine conditions, 
in both rural and urban areas. If evaluation shows suboptimal results, the method of 
supervision and administration of the regimen should be altered and tested in dem-
onstration and training districts.
In addition to supervised treatment (or DOT), measures to support patient adher-
ence to regular and complete treatment include:
 79
• A regular supply of drugs 
— provided free of charge;
— allocated in patient kits, to ensure that drugs for the full course of treatment 
are reserved for the patient at the outset of treatment;
— in fixed-dose combinations and blister packs, to help reduce medication error 
as well as facilitating adherence. 
• Accessible, high-quality, continuous ambulatory TB care (if treatment is health 
facility-based)
— expanding treatment outlets in the poorest rural and urban settings and in-
volving providers who practise close to where patients live (thus reducing trav-
el costs and loss of time and wages); 
— convenient clinic hours with minimal waiting times;
— adequate numbers of motivated health workers with managerial support;
— flexibility to make appropriate arrangements for transfer to another facility 
(19);
— ability to make arrangements upon release from prison or hospital to continue 
care on an ambulatory basis in the patient’s community.
• Positive action to remove barriers to treatment and care
— ensuring that all services provided are affordable (if not free), and eliminating 
cost of care;
— appropriate patient education, including information regarding the regimen, 
duration and possible treatment outcomes, provided repeatedly by well-trained 
and considerate staff;
— prompt detection and management of adverse drug reactions;
— availability of other forms of treatment support (such as community, work-
place, or other) are available when facility-based treatment poses an obstacle 
for the patient;
— provision or financing of transportation, and other treatment enablers that can 
compensate patients for the indirect costs of care;
— provision of incentives such as food or hygienic packages for patients and their 
families, if appropriate for the context and for the patient;
— patient and peer support groups, which may help also reduce stigma;
— referrals for psychological, social and legal support and other services includ-
ing substance abuse treatment; joint (integrated) support for TB patients with 
addictive behaviours;
— ready availability of concomitant HIV treatment.
• Availability of hospitalization 
Hospitalization is essential for severely ill patients and for those with complications 
or associated conditions requiring closer clinical monitoring. It might also be an 
alternative, especially during the initial phase of treatment, for a small number of 
6. SuPErVISIon and PaTIEnT SuPPorT
 80
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
patients for whom other means of ensuring treatment adherence and support are 
not available. However, hospitalization per se does not ensure regular drug intake 
or completion of the treatment. Patient-centred support and supervision are just as 
important to success in an inpatient setting as in the community.
6.5 Prevention of treatment interruption 
Globally, 5% of new smear-positive cases treated under DOTS in 2006 defaulted, 
but this ranges from <1% to 13% in the world’s 22 high-burden countries. Default 
includes patients who have interrupted treatment but also patients who have died 
or transferred out and whose outcomes are unknown to the NTP treatment staff. 
The true status of the “defaulting patient” must be ascertained: if defaulting is due 
to treatment interruption, and if it could be prevented, additional countries would 
be able to achieve the global TB control target of 85% treatment success. Treatment 
interruption can be prevented – or limited so that a patient does not default entirely 
from therapy (20). Promoting adherence through a patient-centred approach is prob-
ably more effective in preventing treatment interruption than devoting resources to 
tracing patients who default.
Among the major factors that influence treatment interruption are comorbid condi-
tions such as substance abuse or mental illness, access to treatment (distance, cost 
of transport) (21), time and wages lost, quality and speed of drug delivery, extent of 
knowledge about TB and the need to complete treatment, and flexibility for transfer 
to another facility. 
As described in section 6.4, supervised treatment can help prevent interruptions. 
When patients self-administer treatment, they often take drugs irregularly, and trac-
ing is difficult and often unproductive; there is also a much longer delay between 
interruption of treatment and action by the health system.
Whenever the patient visits the health facility, the need for regular and complete 
intake of treatment should be reinforced and any problems that may cause inter-
ruption should be identified. At registration, sufficient time should be set aside for 
meeting with the patient (and preferably also the patient’s family members or a desig-
nated treatment supporter). This initial meeting provides an important opportunity 
to inform the patient about the duration of treatment. During the meeting, it is vital 
to record the patient’s address and other relevant addresses (e.g. partner or spouse, 
parents, place of work or study, or private doctor who may be consulted) as well as 
explain the need to consult ahead of time in case of a change of address. This maxi-
mizes the likelihood of locating patients who interrupt treatment. Recording mobile 
telephone numbers for the patient and family has proved valuable in many settings. 
Where resources permit, it is helpful for a health staff member to accompany the pa-
tient to his or her residence. This allows verification of the patient’s exact address and 
provides an opportunity to arrange for screening of household contacts, especially 
 81
children under 5 years of age and those of any age who may have TB symptoms or be 
living with HIV.
In the meeting with the patient at the end of the initial phase of treatment, the health 
worker should reassess his or her needs and enquire about plans (work, family, mov-
ing to another location) that may affect the continuation phase of treatment (19). Any 
changes in the regimen should be discussed and all concerns should be addressed.
references
The Stop TB Strategy: building on and enhancing DOTS to meet the TB-related Millen-
1. 
nium Development Goals. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2006 (WHO/HTM/
TB/2006.368).
Williams G et al. Care during the intensive phase: promotion of adherence. 
2. 
Interna-
tional Journal of Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, 2008, 12:601–605.
Patients’ charter for tuberculosis care: patients’ rights and responsibilities
3. 
. Geneva, 
World Care Council, 2006.
Engaging all health care providers in TB control: guidance on implementing public-
4. 
private mix approaches. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2006 (WHO/HTM/
TB/2006.360).
TB guidelines for nurses in the care and control of tuberculosis and multi-drug resis-
5. 
tant tuberculosis. Geneva, International Council of Nurses, 2008. 
International Standards for Tuberculosis Care (ISTC)
6. 
, 2nd ed. The Hague, Tuberculo-
sis Coalition for Technical Assistance, 2009.
Community involvement in tuberculosis care and prevention. Towards partnerships 
7. 
for health: guiding principles and recommendations based on a WHO review. Geneva, 
World Health Organization, 2008 (WHO/HTM/TB/2008.397).
Raviglione M, ed. 
8. 
Reichman and Hershfield’s tuberculosis: a comprehensive, interna-
tional approach, 3rd ed. New York, Informa Healthcare, 2006.
Frieden TR, Sbarbaro JA. Promoting adherence to treatment for tuberculosis: the 
9. 
importance of direct observation. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 2007, 
85:407–409.
Volmink J, Garner P. Directly observed therapy for treating tuberculosis. 
10. 
Cochrane 
Database of Systematic Reviews, 2007, (4)(4):CD003343.
Rusen ID et al. Cochrane systematic review of directly observed therapy for treating 
11. 
tuberculosis: good analysis of the wrong outcome. International Journal of Tubercu-
losis and Lung Disease, 2007, 11:120–121.
Hopewell PC et al. International standards for tuberculosis care. 
12. 
Lancet Infectious 
Diseases, 2006, 6:710–725.
Suarez PG et al. The dynamics of tuberculosis in response to 10 years of intensive 
13. 
control effort in Peru. Journal of Infectious Diseases, 2001, 184:473–478.
Chaulk CP, Kazandjian VA. Directly observed therapy for treatment completion 
14. 
of pulmonary tuberculosis: consensus statement of the public health tuberculosis 
guidelines panel. Journal of the American Medical Association, 1998, 279:943–948.
Pungrassami P et al. Practice of directly observed treatment (DOT) for tuberculosis 
15. 
in southern Thailand: comparison between different types of DOT observers. Inter-
national Journal of Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, 2002, 6:389–395.
6. SuPErVISIon and PaTIEnT SuPPorT
 82
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
Beith A, Eichler R, Weil D. Performance-based incentives for health: a way to im-
16. 
prove tuberculosis detection and treatment completion? Washington, DC, Center for 
Global Development, 2007 (CGD Working Paper, no. 122).
Management of tuberculosis: training for health facility staff
17. 
. Geneva, World Health 
Organization, 2003 (WHO/CDS/TB/2003.314).
Munro SA et al. Patient adherence to tuberculosis treatment: a systematic review of 
18. 
qualitative research. PLoS Medicine, 2007, 4:e238.
Williams G et al. Care during the continuation phase. 
19. 
International Journal of Tuber-
culosis and Lung Disease, 2008, 2:731–735.
Williams G et al. 
20. 
Best practice of the care for patients with tuberculosis: a guide for low 
income countries. Paris, International Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, 
2007.
Shargie EB, Lindtjorn B. Determinants of treatment adherence among smear-positive 
21. 
pulmonary tuberculosis patients in southern Ethiopia. PLoS Medicine, 2007, 4:e37.
 83
7
Treatment of drug-resistant tuberculosis
7.1 Chapter objectives
This chapter describes: 
— the Green Light Committee – one of the sources of support to countries estab-
lishing a drug-resistant TB component and integrating it into their NTP;
— groups of drugs used to treat MDR-TB, and the principles for constructing an 
MDR-TB regimen;
— programmatic strategies for MDR-TB treatment – how to select the standard 
MDR-TB regimen (and considerations for an individualized approach once 
DST results are available);
— how to monitor MDR-TB patients, determine when to stop the injectable agent, 
and decide when treatment is completed;
— how to treat TB with resistance patterns other than MDR;
— recording and reporting of drug-resistant TB cases.
This chapter highlights key concepts for treating drug-resistant TB – preventing the 
development of drug resistance, and detecting it promptly when it does occur, are 
discussed in Chapters 3 to 6. 
This chapter is intended to serve as a brief overview. Managers of NTPs who are es-
tablishing a drug-resistant component and integrating it into their programmes are 
strongly urged to seek expert consultation (see section 7.2 below) and to review the 
2008 or subsequent editions of the WHO Guidelines for the programmatic manage-
ment of drug resistant TB (1).1 (See also Standard 12 of the ISTC (2).) 
7.2 Green light Committee Initiative
In designing the country’s MDR-TB treatment component and integrating it into the 
national programme, NTP managers are strongly encouraged to make full use of the 
Green Light Committee (GLC; www.who.int/tb/challenges/mdr/greenlightcommittee). 
The GLC is a subgroup of the MDR-TB Working Group of the Stop TB Partnership, 
and an advisory body of WHO that promotes access to (and monitors the use of) 
quality-assured, life-saving MDR-TB treatment. 
1 That publication also provides in-depth guidance on the many facets of MDR-TB management, in-
cluding management of side-effects and indications for surgery. 
 84
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
Through the GLC Initiative, NTPs have access to: 
— expertise in programmatic management of drug-resistant TB based on best 
available evidence and collective experience; 
— high-quality drugs to treat drug-resistant TB at concessional prices;
— support through a wide network of technical partners; 
— peer support and knowledge-sharing with other GLC-approved programmes; 
 
— independent external monitoring and evaluation.
7.3 Groups of drugs to treat mdr-Tb
For MDR treatment, anti-TB drugs are grouped according to efficacy, experience of 
use and drug class (Table 7.1). All the first-line anti-TB drugs are in Group 1, except 
streptomycin, which is classified with the other injectable agents in Group 2. All the 
drugs in Groups 2–5 (except streptomycin) are second-line, or reserve, drugs. The 
features of the drugs within each group, including cross-resistance, are discussed in 
more detail below. Cross-resistance means that resistance mutations (in M. tuberculo-
sis bacteria) to one anti-TB drug may confer resistance to some or all of the members 
of the drug family and, less commonly, to members of different drug families (1).
Group 1. Group 1 drugs are the most potent and best tolerated. If there is good labo-
ratory evidence and clinical history that suggests that a drug from this group is ef-
fective, it should be used. If a Group 1 drug was used in a previous regimen that 
failed, its efficacy should be questioned even if the DST result suggests susceptibility. 
The newer rifamycins, such as rifabutin, have very high rates of cross-resistance to 
rifampicin. 
Group 2. All patients should receive a Group 2 injectable agent if susceptibility is 
documented or suspected. Among aminoglycosides, kanamycin or amikacin is the 
first choice of an injectable agent, given the high rates of streptomycin resistance in 
drug-resistant TB. In addition, both these agents are inexpensive, cause less otox-
icity than streptomycin, and have been used extensively for the treatment of drug-
resistant TB. Amikacin and kanamycin are considered to be very similar and have a 
high frequency of cross-resistance. If an isolate is resistant to both streptomycin and 
kanamycin, or if DRS data show high rates of resistance to amikacin and kanamycin, 
capreomycin (a polypeptide) should be used. 
Group 3. All patients should receive a Group 3 medication if the M. tuberculosis 
strain is susceptible or if the agent is thought to have efficacy. One of the higher gen-
eration fluoroquinolones, such as levofloxacin or moxifloxacin, is the fluoroquinolo-
ne of choice. Ciprofloxacin is no longer recommended to treat drug-susceptible or 
drug-resistant TB. 
Group 4. Ethionamide (or protionamide) is often added to the treatment regimen 
because of its low cost. If cost is not a constraint, p-aminosalicylic acid (PAS) may be 
added first, given that the enteric-coated formulas are relatively well tolerated and that 
 85
7. TrEaTmEnT of druG-rESISTanT TubErCuloSIS
there is no cross-resistance to other agents. When two agents are needed, cycloserine 
can be added. Since the combination of ethionamide (or protionamide) and PAS of-
ten causes a high incidence of gastrointestinal side-effects and hypothyroidism, these 
agents are usually used together only when three Group 4 agents are needed: ethion-
amide (or protionamide), cycloserine and PAS. Terizidone can be used instead of 
 
cycloserine and is assumed to be equally efficacious. 
Group 5. Group 5 drugs are not recommended by WHO for routine use in drug- 
resistant TB treatment because their contribution to the efficacy of multidrug regi-
mens is unclear. They can be used in cases where it is impossible to design adequate 
regimens with the medicines from Groups 1–4, such as in patients with XDR-TB. 
They should be used in consultation with an expert in the treatment of drug-resistant 
TB. 
Table 7.1 
groupS of drugS To TreAT mdr-TBa 
Group
drugs (abbreviations)
Group 1: 
first-line oral agents
• pyrazinamide (Z)
• ethambutol (e) 
• rifabutin (rfb)
Group 2: 
injectable agents
• kanamycin (Km)
• amikacin (Am)
• capreomycin (cm) 
• streptomycin (S) 
Group 3: 
fluoroquinolones
• levofloxacin (lfx) 
• moxifloxacin (mfx) 
• ofloxacin (ofx)
Group 4: 
oral bacteriostatic second-line 
agents
• para-aminosalicylic acid (pAS)
• cycloserine (cs)
• terizidone (Trd)
• ethionamide (eto) 
• protionamide (pto)
Group 5: 
Agents with unclear role in 
treatment of drug resistant-TB
• clofazimine (cfz)
• linezolid (lzd)
• amoxicillin/clavulanate (Amx/clv)
• thioacetazone (Thz)
• imipenem/cilastatin (ipm/cln)
• high-dose isoniazid (high-dose H)b 
• clarithromycin (clr)
a Adapted from Table 7.1 and figure 7.2 of reference 1.
b High-dose isoniazid is defined as 16–20 mg/kg/day. Some experts recommend using high-dose 
 
isoniazid in the presence of resistance to low concentrations of isoniazid (>1% of bacilli resistant to 
0.2 µg/ml but susceptible to 1 µg/ml of isoniazid), whereas isoniazid is not recommended for high-
dose resistance (>1% of bacilli resistant to 1 µg/ml of isoniazid) (1).
 86
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
7.4 General principles in designing an mdr-Tb treatment regimen 
The general principles in Table 7.2 apply whether an NTP manager is selecting an 
empirical or standard MDR-TB regimen for the country1 or a clinician is construct-
ing a regimen for an individual patient. These principles also apply to XDR-TB cases. 
(Individual patient-specific information, which is part of the clinician’s evaluation of 
each patient before starting the MDR regimen, is given in parentheses in the table.)
Treatment regimens should consist of at least four drugs with either certain, or al-
most certain, effectiveness. Where evidence about the effectiveness of a certain drug 
is unclear, the drug can be part of the regimen but it should not be depended upon 
for success. Often, more than four drugs may be started if the susceptibility pattern is 
unknown or the effectiveness of one or more agents is questionable.
Susceptibility testing for isoniazid, rifampicin, the fluoroquinolones, and the inject-
able agents is fairly reliable. For other agents it is less reliable, and basing individual-
ized treatments on DST for these agents should be avoided. The clinical effectiveness 
or ineffectiveness of a drug cannot be predicted by DST with 100% certainty.
Each dose in an MDR regimen is given as DOT throughout the treatment. See refer-
ence 1 for detailed information on each drug, including adverse effects, contraindica-
tions, monitoring, and dosing based on weight bands.
7.5 Programmatic strategies for treatment of mdr-Tb
Programmatic approaches to MDR-TB treatment depend in part on the type of labo-
ratory method used to confirm MDR (see Figure 7.1). Once MDR-TB is confirmed (by 
either type of laboratory method), patients can be treated with:
— a standard MDR regimen (standardized approach); or
— an individually tailored regimen, based on DST of additional drugs.
For NTPs using conventional DST methods, there is often a delay of months before 
results are available to confirm or exclude MDR. These countries need to consider 
MDR treatment at two stages: when MDR is suspected but laboratory confirmation 
is pending, and once MDR is confirmed. While awaiting results, patients who are 
highly likely to have MDR-TB (such as those whose prior treatment has failed) need 
an empirical MDR regimen. If MDR is confirmed, this regimen may be continued, 
or it may be tailored on the basis of susceptibility to drugs other than isoniazid and 
rifampicin, as discussed in section 7.7. 
NTPs using rapid molecular-based DST will be able to confirm MDR-TB within 1–2 
days,2 and then can initiate treatment with a standard MDR regimen immediately, or 
1 Programmatic strategies for MDR-TB treatment (standardized or individualized approaches) are 
 
described in section 7.5.
2 Line probe assays detect resistance to rifampicin alone or in combination with isoniazid resistance. 
Overall high accuracy for detection of MDR is retained when rifampicin resistance alone is used as a 
marker for MDR (3, 4).
 87
may tailor the regimen later when DST results for second-line drugs become avail-
able, as discussed in section 7.7.
Standardized and individualized approaches each have advantages. Standard MDR-
TB regimens (5) make it easier to estimate drug needs, to order, manage and dis-
tribute drug stocks, and to train personnel in the treatment of MDR-TB patients. 
Even when standard regimens are used throughout treatment, patients experiencing 
severe adverse effects will need to have their MDR treatment individualized. Thus all 
programmes need some capacity to individualize treatment.
7. TrEaTmEnT of druG-rESISTanT TubErCuloSIS
Table 7.2  
generAl principleS for deSigning mdr-TB TreATmenT 
regimenSa 
Principles
Comments
1. use at least 4 drugs certain 
to be effective
The more of the following factors are present, the more likely 
it is that the drug will be effective:
• resistance to these drugs is known from surveys to be 
rare in similar patients.
• dST results show susceptibility to drugs for which there 
is good laboratory reliability: injectable agents and 
fluoroquinolones.
• The drug is not commonly used in the area. 
• (for decisions about an individual patient – no prior 
history of treatment failure with the drug; no known close 
contacts with resistance to the drug.)
2. do not use drugs for which 
there is the possibility of 
cross-resistance
• many antituberculosis agents exhibit cross-resistance 
both within and across drug classes (see section 7.3). 
3. eliminate drugs that are not 
safe 
• quality of the drug is unknown.
• (for decisions about an individual patient – known severe 
allergy or unmanageable intolerance; high risk of severe 
adverse drug effects such as renal failure, deafness, 
hepatitis, depression and/or psychosis.)
4. include drugs from groups 
1–5 in a hierarchical order 
based on potency (see 
Table 7.1 and section 7.3)
• use any of the first-line oral agents (group 1) that are 
likely to be effective.
•  use an effective aminoglycoside or polypeptide by 
injection (group 2).b
•  use a fluoroquinolone (group 3).
•  use the remaining group 4 drugs to complete a regimen of 
at least four effective drugs. 
•  for regimens with fewer than four effective drugs, 
consider adding two group 5 drugs. The total number 
of drugs will depend on the degree of uncertainty, and 
regimens often contain five to seven.
a Adapted from Table 7.3 of reference 1.
b Avoid streptomycin even if dST suggests susceptibility because of high rates of resistance with resis-
tant TB strains and higher incidence of ototoxicity.
 88
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
Changing to an individualized regimen (once DST results are available for additional 
drugs beyond isoniazid and rifampicin) is advantageous because it: 
• Allows clinicians to design a regimen with knowledge of resistance to particular 
injectables and fluoroquinolones, which is especially important if patients have 
received second-line drugs in the past. This knowledge helps in avoiding the use 
of toxic and expensive drugs to which the patient’s M. tuberculosis is found to be 
resistant.
• Allows clinicians to tailor the regimen in settings with high rates of resistance to 
second-line drugs where it may be difficult to find a standard regimen that is ap-
propriate for all patients. 
• Provides flexibility if patients experience adverse effects related to one drug.
In some settings, individualized regimens may achieve higher cure rates than stand-
ard MDR regimens (6).
figure 7.1 diAgrAm of mdr TreATmenT STrATegieS depending on 
lABorATory meTHod To confirm mdr
Treatment timeline (time since Tb diagnosis)
Tb diagnosis -------/--------/-------/-------/-------/-------/-------/-------/-------/-------/----
Countries using conventional methods to detect MDR:
While awaiting dST results for isoniazid, 
rifampicin;
mdr-Tb is suspected
once mdr is confirmed
Empirical treatment with mdr regimen
continue standard mdr regimen 
or 
change to individualized mdr regimen 
(once susceptibility testing for second-line 
drugs is available)
Countries using rapid method to detect MDR:
once mdr is confirmeda
Standard mdr regimen
or
Individualized mdr regimen (once susceptibility testing for second-line drugs is available)
a little waiting; takes approximately 1–2 days to detect mdr.
 89
7.6 Selection of the country’s standard mdr-Tb regimen
A country’s standard MDR regimen can be used while confirmation of MDR is 
awaited (i.e. empirically) or once MDR is confirmed. In selecting the standard MDR 
regimen, NTP managers are strongly urged to seek expert consultation (see section 
7.2 above) and to review planned regimens (1). The discussion below provides a gen-
eral overview only.
The standard MDR regimen is constructed using the principles outlined in section 
7.5 and Table 7.2. To identify the drugs that are likely to be effective, the NTP man-
ager needs to gather information about the level of MDR in the patients to be treated, 
as well as the pattern of resistance to other Group 1 drugs, injectable agents (Group 
2) and fluoroquinolones (Group 3). Ideally, drug resistance data will be available from 
patients who have similar histories of previous treatment to the patients who will 
actually be treated. The data should:
— include a large enough number of patients to give confidence in the results; 
— be based on reliable laboratory methods for DST;
— accurately describe the patients’ treatment history to distinguish between those 
in whom the first or subsequent treatment failed, those who have relapsed, and 
those who are returning after defaulting. 
As described in section 3.8.2, the NTP manager should access any drug resistance 
surveys or available surveillance data. If data show very different drug resistance pat-
terns across groups of previously treated patients, there may need to be more than 
one standard MDR regimen. 
The NTP manager also needs to assess the use and quality of anti-TB drugs in the 
country. The following information, if available, will be helpful: 
• Current and past NTP standard regimens for new and previously treated patients.
• History of drug availability and sales in pharmacies. Some second line anti-TB 
drugs may have been used only rarely and will probably be effective in MDR regi-
mens. Those that have been used extensively are highly likely to be ineffective. 
• Quality assurance of drugs used within and outside the NTP.
Box 7.1 provides an example of how to design a standard regimen. 
7.7 Selection of individualized mdr-Tb regimens
Individually designed regimens are based on the patient’s history of past drug use 
and on DST of isoniazid, rifampicin, the second-line injectable agents and a fluoro-
quinolone. Every effort should be made to supplement the patient’s memory of treat-
ment with objective records from previous health care providers. A detailed clinical 
history can help suggest which drugs are likely to be ineffective. Although resistance 
can develop in less than 1 month, if a patient has used a drug for more than 1 month 
7. TrEaTmEnT of druG-rESISTanT TubErCuloSIS
 90
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
with persistently positive smears or cultures, the strain should – as a general rule – be 
considered as “probably resistant” to that drug, even if DST results indicate that it is 
susceptible.
DST results should complement, rather than invalidate, other sources of data on the 
likely effectiveness of a specific drug. For example, if a history of prior anti-TB drug 
use suggests that a drug is likely to be ineffective, that drug should not be relied on 
as one of the four core drugs in the regimen, even if DST shows the strain to be sus-
ceptible. Alternatively, if the patient has never taken a particular drug and resistance 
to that drug is extremely uncommon in the community, DST results that indicate 
resistance may be the result case of a laboratory error or of the limited specificity of 
DST for some second-line drugs.1
1 Since a fluoroquinolone and an injectable agent form the backbone of MDR treatment, they should be 
used even if the patient’s M. tuberculosis demonstrates resistance to all available drugs in these two 
classes (7, 8).
Box 7.1 
exAmplea
Survey data from 93 consecutively enrolled relapsed patients from a resource- 
constrained area show that 11% have mdr-TB. of these mdr-TB cases, 45% are resis-
tant to ethambutol and 29% are resistant to streptomycin. resistance to other drugs is 
unknown; however, there is virtually no use of any of the second-line drugs in the area. 
what retreatment strategy is recommended in this group of relapse patients?
given the relatively low rate of mdr-TB in this group, the following strategy is planned: 
• All relapse patients will be started on isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide, ethambutol 
and streptomycin, i.e. the retreatment regimen using first-line drugs.
• dST of isoniazid and rifampicin will be done at the start of treatment to identify the 
11% of mdr-TB patients who will not do well on the retreatment regimen of first-line 
drugs. 
• Those patients identified with mdr-TB will be switched to the standard regimen: 
— 8 months of pyrazinamide, kanamycin, ofloxacin, protionamide, and cycloserine, 
followed by 12 months of ofloxacin, protionamide, and cycloserine. 
— The regimen contains four drugs rarely used in the area and is also relatively inex-
pensive. 
• A small dST survey is planned to document the prevalence of resistance to the regi-
men’s five drugs in 30 relapse patients found to have mdr-TB. if this survey shows 
high resistance to any of the proposed drugs, redesign of the regimen will be consid-
ered. 
Note: The regimen proposed in this answer is only one example of an adequate regimen.
a reproduced from Guidelines for the programmatic management of drug-resistant tuberculosis: 
emergency update 2008 (1).
 91
Another important limitation is the turnaround time for DST results: the patient may 
have already received months of treatment by the time DST results become available 
from the laboratory. The possibility of further acquired resistance developing dur-
ing this time must be considered. If there is a high probability of acquired resistance 
to a particular drug after collection of the specimen for DST, that drug should not 
be counted as one of the four drugs in the core regimen (but can be included as an 
adjunctive agent).
7.8 monitoring the mdr-Tb patient 
Close monitoring is essential during treatment of MDR-TB patients. To assess treat-
ment response, sputum smears and cultures should be performed monthly until 
smear and culture conversion. (Conversion is defined as two consecutive negative 
smears and cultures taken 30 days apart.) After conversion, the minimum frequency 
recommended for bacteriological monitoring is monthly for smears and quarterly for 
cultures. Monitoring of MDR-TB patients by a clinician should be at least monthly 
until sputum conversion, then every 2–3 months. Each patient’s weight should be 
monitored monthly. 
Second-line drugs have many more adverse effects than the first-line anti-TB drugs, 
but management of these adverse effects is possible even in resource-poor settings. At 
every DOT and clinician encounter, the patient should be screened for side-effects of 
medication. It is also essential for patients to be aware of possible side-effects and to 
have access to clinical and laboratory services to help detect side-effects, and medica-
tions to treat adverse effects when they occur. For more details on patient monitoring, 
see reference 1. Timely and intensive monitoring for, and management of, adverse 
 
effects caused by second-line drugs are essential for MDR-TB treatment. 
7.9 duration of treatment for mdr-Tb
In MDR-TB treatment, the intensive phase is defined by the duration of treatment 
with the injectable agent. The injectable agent should be continued for a minimum 
of 6 months, and for at least 4 months after the patient first becomes and remains 
smear- or culture-negative. Review of the patient’s cultures, smears, X-rays and clini-
cal status may also aid in deciding whether or not to continue an injectable agent 
longer than the above recommendation, particularly in the case of patients for whom 
the susceptibility pattern is unknown, effectiveness of one or more agents is question-
able, or extensive or bilateral pulmonary disease is present.
Culture conversion also determines the overall duration of MDR treatment. These 
guidelines recommend continuing therapy for a minimum of 18 months after culture 
conversion. Extension of therapy to 24 months may be indicated in chronic cases 
with extensive pulmonary damage.
7. TrEaTmEnT of druG-rESISTanT TubErCuloSIS
 92
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
7.10 Treating Tb with resistance patterns other than mdr
Cases with drug resistance patterns other than MDR will be detected by DST. The 
design of regimens for mono- and poly-resistant cases of TB is recommended for 
programmes with good infrastructure that are capable of treating MDR-TB. Indi-
vidually designed treatments for mono- and poly-resistance are often determined by 
a review panel that meets periodically. The panel reviews treatment history, DST pat-
terns and the possibility of strains of M. tuberculosis having acquired new resistance, 
and then determines the regimen. For suggested regimens according to the pattern 
of drug resistance, see reference 1. 
It is essential to remember that the DST result reflects the bacterial population at the 
time the sputum was collected and not necessarily the bacterial population in the pa-
tient at the time the result is reported. During the interval between collection of the 
specimen and receipt of the results, the M. tuberculosis bacteria may have acquired 
further resistance if the patient was being treated with the functional equivalent of 
only one drug for a significant period of time (usually considered to be 1 month or 
more). Depending on the drugs concerned, resistance sometimes develops if the 
patient was receiving the functional equivalent of two drugs. For example, pyrazi-
namide is not considered a good companion drug to prevent resistance (1, 9). If a 
patient was functionally receiving only rifampicin and pyrazinamide in the initial 
phase (because of resistance to isoniazid and ethambutol), resistance to rifampicin 
may develop. 
7.11 recording and reporting drug-resistant Tb cases,  
evaluation of outcomes
Recording and reporting activities assist in the management of individual patients 
and enable managers to evaluate and improve the treatment outcomes of the pro-
gramme as a whole. A system other than the standard one for drug-susceptible TB 
is recommended for drug-resistant TB cases. For registration of patients with drug 
resistance and for reporting treatment outcome for MDR patients, the reader is re-
ferred to reference 1. 
references
Guidelines for the programmatic management of drug-resistant tuberculosis: emer-
1. 
gency update 2008. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2008 (WHO/HTM/
TB/2008.402).
International Standards for Tuberculosis Care (ISTC)
2. 
, 2nd ed. The Hague, Tuberculo-
sis Coalition for Technical Assistance, 2009.
Molecular line probe assays for rapid screening of patients at risk of MDR-TB: policy 
3. 
statement. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2008 (available at: www.who.int/tb/
features_archive/policy_statement.pdf).
Sam IC et al. Mycobacterium tuberculosis and rifampin resistance, United Kingdom. 
4. 
Emerging Infectious Diseases, 2006, 12:752–759.
 93
Suarez PG et al. Feasibility and cost-effectiveness of standardized second-line drug 
5. 
treatment for chronic tuberculosis patients: a national cohort study in Peru. Lancet, 
2002, 359:1980–1989.
Resch SC et al. Cost-effectiveness of treating multidrug-resistant tuberculosis. 
6. 
PLoS 
Medicine, 2006, 3(7):e241.
Keshavjee S et al. Treatment of extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis in Tomsk, 
7. 
Russia: a retrospective cohort study. Lancet, 2008, 372:1403–1409.
Mitnick CD et al. Comprehensive treatment of extensively drug-resistant tuberculo-
8. 
sis. New England Journal of Medicine, 2008, 359:563–574.
Mitchison DA. Basic mechanisms of chemotherapy. 
9. 
Chest, 1979, 76(6 Suppl.):771– 
781.
7. TrEaTmEnT of druG-rESISTanT TubErCuloSIS
  95
8
Treatment of extrapulmonary TB  
and of TB in special situations
8.1 Chapter objectives
This chapter describes:
— the treatment of extrapulmonary TB;
— important drug interactions;
— the treatment of TB in pregnancy and breastfeeding;
— the treatment of patients with pre-existing liver disease, renal failure or renal 
insufficiency.
8.2 Treatment of extrapulmonary Tb
Although TB most commonly affects the lungs, any organ or tissue can be involved. 
In countries with comprehensive diagnostic and reporting systems, extrapulmonary 
TB accounts for 20–25% of reported cases. Globally, extrapulmonary cases (without 
concurrent pulmonary involvement) comprised 14% of notified cases (new and re-
lapse) in 2007. Of specific forms of EPTB, lymphatic, pleural, and bone or joint dis-
ease are the most common, while pericardial, meningeal and disseminated (miliary) 
forms are more likely to result in a fatal outcome. 
As discussed in Chapter 5, provider-initiated HIV testing is recommended as part 
of the evaluation of all TB patients and patients in whom the disease is suspected. 
HIV testing is especially important in persons with or suspected of having EPTB 
because of the increased frequency of extrapulmonary involvement in persons with 
immunosuppression. Extrapulmonary TB is considered to be WHO clinical stage 4 
HIV disease (1). (More details on the treatment of TB in persons living with HIV are 
provided in Chapter 5.)
For WHO guidance on the prompt diagnosis of EPTB, see reference 1.
Pulmonary and extrapulmonary disease should be treated with the same regimens 
(see Chapter 3).1 Note that some experts recommend 9–12 months of treatment for 
TB meningitis (2, 3) given the serious risk of disability and mortality, and 9 months 
of treatment for TB of bones or joints because of the difficulties of assessing treatment 
response (3). Unless drug resistance is suspected, adjuvant corticosteroid treatment 
is recommended for TB meningitis and pericarditis (1–4). In tuberculous meningitis, 
ethambutol should be replaced by streptomycin.
1 This fourth edition no longer includes the option of omitting ethambutol during the intensive phase of 
treatment for patients with extrapulmonary disease who are known to be HIV-negative.
 96
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
Although sometimes required for diagnosis, surgery plays little role in the treatment 
of extrapulmonary TB. It is reserved for management of late complications of disease 
such as hydrocephalus, obstructive uropathy, constrictive pericarditis and neuro-
logical involvement from Pott’s disease (spinal TB). For large, fluctuant lymph nodes 
that appear to be about to drain spontaneously, aspiration or incision and drainage 
 
appear beneficial (3).
8.3 Important drug interactions
Many TB patients have concomitant illnesses. At the start of TB treatment, all pa-
tients should be asked about medicines they are currently taking. The most important 
interactions with anti-TB drugs are due to rifampicin. Rifampicin induces pathways 
that metabolize other drugs, thereby reducing the concentration and effect of those 
drugs. To maintain a therapeutic effect, dosages of the other drug(s) may need to be 
increased. When rifampicin is discontinued, its metabolism-inducing effect resolves 
within about 2 weeks, and dosages of the other drug(s) will need to be reduced (3).
More information on TB drug interactions is available in Annex 1 and on the web 
sites of the Global Drug Facility and the WHO Essential Medicines Library (www.
stoptb.org/gdf/drugsupply/drugs_available.asp and www.who.int/emlib/Medicines.
aspx).
Rifampicin substantially reduces the concentration and effect of the following drugs 
(for recommendations on dosage adjustment and on clinical or therapeutic drug 
monitoring, see reference 3):
— anti-infectives (including certain antiretroviral drugs discussed in section 5.6.1, 
mefloquine, azole antifungal agents, clarithromycin, erythromycin, doxy 
cycline, 
atovaquone, chloramphenicol);
— hormone therapy,1 including ethinylestradiol, norethindrone, tamoxifen, 
levothyroxine;
— methadone;
— warfarin;
— cyclosporin;
— corticosteroids;
— anticonvulsants (including phenytoin);
— cardiovascular agents including digoxin (among patients with renal insuffi-
ciency), digitoxin, verapamil, nifedipine, diltiazem, propranolol, metoprorol, 
enalapril, losartan, quinidine, mexiletine, tocainide, propafenone;
— theophylline;
— sulfonylurea hypoglycaemics;
1 Rifampicin interacts with oral contraceptive medications leading to lowered protective efficacy. A 
woman receiving oral contraception may choose between two options while receiving treatment with 
rifampicin: following consultation with a clinician, an oral contraceptive pill containing a higher es-
trogen dose (50 µg), or another form of contraception.
 97
8. TrEaTmEnT of ExTraPulmonary Tb and of Tb In SPECIal SITuaTIonS
— hypolipidaemics including simvastatin and fluvastatin;
— nortriptyline, haloperidol, quetiapine, benzodiazepines (including diazepam, 
triazolam), zolpidem, buspirone.
8.4 Treatment regimens in special situations 
The treatment of TB in pregnancy and breastfeeding, liver disorders, and renal fail-
ure is discussed below.
8.4.1 pregnancy and breastfeeding
Women of childbearing age should be asked about current or planned pregnancy 
before starting TB treatment. A pregnant woman should be advised that successful 
treatment of TB with the standard regimen is important for successful outcome of 
pregnancy. With the exception of streptomycin, the first line anti-TB drugs are safe 
for use in pregnancy: streptomycin is ototoxic to the fetus and should not be used 
during pregnancy. 
A breastfeeding woman who has TB should receive a full course of TB treatment. 
Timely and properly applied chemotherapy is the best way to prevent transmission of 
tubercle bacilli to the baby. Mother and baby should stay together and the baby should 
continue to breastfeed. After active TB in the baby is ruled out, the baby should be 
given 6 months of isoniazid preventive therapy, followed by BCG vaccination (5).
Pyridoxine supplementation is recommended for all pregnant or breastfeeding wom-
en taking isoniazid (see section 4.8).
8.4.2 liver disorders
This section covers TB treatment in patients with pre-existing liver disease; for detec-
tion and management of hepatitis induced by anti-TB drugs, see section 4.10.2.
Patients with the following conditions can receive the usual TB regimens provided 
that there is no clinical evidence of chronic liver disease: hepatitis virus carriage, 
a past history of acute hepatitis, current excessive alcohol consumption. However, 
hepatotoxic reactions to anti-TB drugs may be more common among these patients 
and should therefore be anticipated (see section 4.10.2).
In patients with unstable or advanced liver disease, liver function tests should be 
done at the start of treatment, if possible. If the serum alanine aminotransferase level 
(6) is more than 3 times normal before the initiation of treatment,1 the following 
regimens should be considered (also discussed in section 4.10.2).2 The more unstable 
or severe the liver disease is, the fewer hepatotoxic drugs should be used. 
1 Note that TB itself may involve the liver and cause abnormal liver function.
2 In some cases of concurrent acute (i.e. viral) hepatitis not related to TB or TB treatment, it may be pos-
sible to defer TB treatment until the acute hepatitis has resolved. 
 98
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
Possible regimens include:
• Two hepatotoxic drugs (rather than the three in the standard regimen):
— 9 months of isoniazid and rifampicin, plus ethambutol (until or unless isoni-
azid susceptibility is documented);
— 2 months of isoniazid, rifampicin, streptomycin and ethambutol, followed by 
6 months of isoniazid and rifampicin;
— 6–9 months of rifampicin, pyrazinamide and ethambutol.
• One hepatotoxic drug:
— 2 months of isoniazid, ethambutol and streptomycin, followed by 10 months of 
isoniazid and ethambutol.
• No hepatotoxic drugs:
— 18–24 months of streptomycin, ethambutol and a fluoroquinolone. 
Expert consultation is advisable in treating patients with advanced or unstable liver 
disease. 
Clinical monitoring (and liver function tests, if possible) of all patients with pre-
existing liver disease should be performed during treatment. 
8.4.3 renal failure and severe renal insufficiency
The recommended initial TB treatment regimen for patients with renal failure or 
severe renal insufficiency is 2 months of isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide and 
ethambutol, followed by 4 months of isoniazid and rifampicin. Isoniazid and ri-
fampicin are eliminated by biliary excretion, so no change in dosing is necessary. 
There is significant renal excretion of ethambutol and metabolites of pyrazinamide, 
and doses should therefore be adjusted. Three times per week administration of these 
two drugs at the following doses is recommended: pyrazinamide (25 mg/kg), and 
ethambutol (15 mg/kg) (3, 7). These are the same mg/kg doses as those listed under 
Daily in Table 3.1.
While receiving isoniazid, patients with severe renal insufficiency or failure should 
also be given pyridoxine in order to prevent peripheral neuropathy (see section 4.8). 
Because of an increased risk of nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity, streptomycin should 
be avoided in patients with renal failure. If streptomycin must be used, the dosage is 
15 mg/kg, two or three times per week, to a maximum of 1 gram per dose, and serum 
levels of the drug should be monitored.
 99
references
Essential prevention and care interventions for adults and adolescents living with HIV 
1. 
in resource-limited settings. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2008.
National Collaborating Centre for Chronic Conditions. 
2. 
Tuberculosis: clinical diag-
nosis and management of tuberculosis, and measures for its prevention and control. 
London, Royal College of Physicians, NICE (National Institute for Health and Clini-
cal Excellence), 2006.
American Thoracic Society, CDC, Infectious Diseases Society of America. Treatment 
3. 
of tuberculosis. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report: Recommendations and Re-
ports, 2003, 52(RR-11):1–77.
Thwaites GE et al. Dexamethasone for the treatment of tuberculous meningitis in 
4. 
adolescents and adults. New England Journal of Medicine, 2004, 351:1741–1751.
Guidance for national tuberculosis programmes on the management of tuberculosis 
5. 
in children. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2006 (WHO/HTM/TB/2006.371; 
WHO/FCH/CAH/2006.7).
Saukkonen JJ et al. An official ATS statement: hepatotoxicity of antituberculo-
6. 
sis therapy. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, 2006, 
 
174:935–952.
Guidelines for the programmatic management of drug-resistant tuberculosis: emer-
7. 
gency update 2008. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2008 (WHO/HTM/
TB/2008.402).
8. TrEaTmEnT of ExTraPulmonary Tb and of Tb In SPECIal SITuaTIonS
  : :
Annexes
  103
a1
essential first-line  
antituberculosis drugs1
Isoniazid
general information
Isoniazid, the hydrazide of isonicotinic acid, is highly bactericidal against replicating 
tubercle bacilli.
It is rapidly absorbed and diffuses readily into all fluids and tissues. The plasma half-
life, which is genetically determined, varies from less than 1 hour in fast acetylators 
to more than 3 hours in slow acetylators. Isoniazid is largely excreted in the urine 
within 24 hours, mostly as inactive metabolites.
clinical information
Administration and dosage
Isoniazid is normally taken orally but may be administered intramuscularly or intra-
venously to critically ill patients.
Adults: 
 
5 mg/kg (4–6 mg/kg) daily, maximum 300 mg
 
10 mg/kg (8–12 mg/kg) three times weekly, maximum 900 mg (1).
Contraindications
• Known hypersensitivity.
• Active, unstable hepatic disease (with jaundice) – see section 8.4.2.
Precautions
Clinical monitoring (and liver function tests, if possible) should be performed dur-
ing treatment of patients with pre-existing liver disease. Patients at risk of peripheral 
neuropathy, as a result of malnutrition, chronic alcohol dependence, HIV infection, 
pregnancy, breastfeeding, renal failure or diabetes, should additionally receive pyri-
doxine, 10 mg daily. Where the standard of health in the community is low, pyridox-
ine should be offered routinely. (Note that other guidelines (1) recommend a dose of 
25 mg/day to prevent peripheral neuropathy). For established peripheral neuropathy, 
pyridoxine should be given at a larger dose of 50–75 mg daily (2).
1 For drug preparations (include fixed-dose combinations) and costs, see the Global Drug Facility web 
site:
 
www.stoptb.org/gdf/drugsupply/drugs_available.asp. See also WHO Model Formulary 2008:
 
www.who.int/selection_medicines/list/en/
 104
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
Since isoniazid interacts with anticonvulsants used for epilepsy, it may be necessary 
to reduce the dosage of these drugs during treatment with isoniazid. If possible, se-
rum concentrations of phenytoin and carbamazepine should be measured in patients 
receiving isoniazid with or without rifampicin (see Drug interactions below).
Use in pregnancy
Isoniazid is not known to be harmful in pregnancy (3). Pyridoxine supplementation 
is recommended for all pregnant (or breastfeeding) women taking isoniazid.
Adverse effects
Isoniazid is generally well tolerated at recommended doses.
Systemic or cutaneous hypersensitivity reactions occasionally occur during the first 
weeks of treatment.
Sleepiness or lethargy can be managed by reassurance or adjustment of the timing of 
administration.
The risk of peripheral neuropathy is excluded if vulnerable patients receive daily sup-
plements of pyridoxine. Other less common forms of neurological disturbance, in-
cluding optic neuritis, toxic psychosis and generalized convulsions, can develop in 
susceptible individuals, particularly in the later stages of treatment, and occasionally 
necessitate the withdrawal of isoniazid.
Symptomatic hepatitis is an uncommon but potentially serious reaction that can 
usually be averted by prompt withdrawal of treatment. More often, however, an 
asymptomatic rise in serum concentrations of hepatic transaminases at the outset of 
treatment is of no clinical significance and usually resolves spontaneously as treat-
ment continues.
A lupus-like syndrome, pellagra, anaemia, and arthralgias are other rare adverse ef-
fects (2). Monoamine poisoning has been reported to occur after ingestion of foods 
and beverages with high monoamine content, but this is also rare (1).
Drug interactions
Isoniazid inhibits the metabolism of certain drugs, which can increase their plasma 
concentration to the point of toxicity. Rifampicin, however, has the opposite effect 
for many of these drugs. For example, the available data indicate that administering 
both rifampicin and isoniazid causes a reduction in plasma levels of phenytoin and 
diazepam (1).
Isoniazid may increase the toxicity of carbamazepine, benzodiazepines metabolized 
by oxidation (such as triazolam), acetaminophen, valproate, serotonergic antidepres-
sants, disulfiram, warfarin and theophylline.
 105
annEx 1. ESSEnTIal fIrST-lInE anTITubErCuloSIS druGS
Overdosage
Nausea, vomiting, dizziness, blurred vision and slurring of speech occur within 30 
minutes to 3 hours of overdosage. Massive poisoning results in coma preceded by 
respiratory depression and stupor. Severe intractable seizures may occur. Emesis and 
gastric lavage, activated charcoal, antiepileptics and IV sodium bicarbonate can be of 
value if instituted within a few hours of ingestion. Subsequently, haemodialysis may 
be of value. High doses of pyridoxine must be administered to prevent seizures.
Storage
Tablets should be kept in well-closed containers, protected from light. Solution for 
injection should be stored in ampoules, protected from light.
rifampicin
general information
A semisynthetic derivative of rifamycin, rifampicin is a complex macrocyclic antibi-
otic that inhibits ribonucleic acid synthesis in a broad range of microbial pathogens. 
It has bactericidal action and a potent sterilizing effect against tubercle bacilli in both 
cellular and extracellular locations.
Rifampicin is lipid-soluble. Following oral administration, it is rapidly absorbed and 
distributed throughout the cellular tissues and body fluids; if the meninges are in-
flamed, significant amounts enter the cerebrospinal fluid. A single dose of 600 mg 
produces a peak serum concentration of about 10 µg/ml in 2–4 hours, which subse-
quently decays with a half-life of 2–3 hours. It is extensively recycled in the enterohe-
patic circulation, and metabolites formed by deacetylation in the liver are eventually 
excreted in the faeces.
Since resistance readily develops, rifampicin must always be administered in combi-
nation with other effective antimycobacterial agents.
clinical information
Administration and dosage 
Rifampicin should preferably be given at least 30 minutes before meals, since absorp-
tion is reduced when it is taken with food. However, this may not be clinically signifi-
cant, and food can reduce intolerance to drugs. Rifampicin should always be given 
in combination with other effective antimycobacterial agents. It is also available for 
intravenous administration in critically ill patients (1).
Adults: 
 
10 mg/kg (8–12 mg/kg) daily or 3 times weekly, maximum 600 mg.
 106
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
Contraindications
• Known hypersensitivity to rifamycins.
• Active, unstable hepatic disease (with jaundice) – see section 8.4.2.
Precautions
Serious immunological reactions resulting in renal impairment, haemolysis or 
thrombocytopenia are on record in patients who resume taking rifampicin after a 
prolonged lapse of treatment. In this rare situation, rifampicin should be immedi-
ately and permanently withdrawn.
Clinical monitoring (and liver function tests, if possible) should be performed during 
treatment of all patients with pre-existing liver disease, who are at increased risk of 
further liver damage.
Patients should be warned that treatment may cause reddish coloration of all body 
secretions (urine, tears, saliva, sweat, semen and sputum), and that contact lenses and 
clothing may be irreversibly stained.
Use in pregnancy
Vitamin K should be administered at birth to the infant of a mother taking rifampicin 
because of the risk of postnatal haemorrhage.
Adverse effects
Rifampicin is well tolerated by most patients at currently recommended doses but 
may cause gastrointestinal reactions (abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting) and pruri-
tus with or without rash (1).
Other adverse effects (fever, influenza-like syndrome and thrombocytopenia) are 
more likely to occur with intermittent administration.
Exfoliative dermatitis is more frequent in HIV-positive TB patients.
Temporary oliguria, dyspnoea and haemolytic anaemia have also been reported in 
patients taking the drug 3 times weekly; these reactions usually subside if the regi-
men is changed to daily dosage.
Moderate rises in serum concentrations of bilirubin and transaminases, which are 
common at the outset of treatment, are often transient and without clinical signifi-
cance. However, dose-related hepatitis can occur and is potentially fatal: it is there-
fore important not to exceed the maximum recommended daily dose of 600 mg.
 107
Drug interactions 
Rifampicin induces hepatic enzymes, and may increase the dosage requirements of 
drugs metabolized in the liver (1), including:
— anti-infectives (including certain antiretroviral drugs discussed below and in 
section 5.6.1, mefloquine, azole antifungal agents, clarithromycin, erythromy-
cin, doxycycline, atovaquone, chloramphenicol);
— hormone therapy, including ethinylestradiol, norethindrone, tamoxifen, 
levothyroxine;
— methadone;
— warfarin;
— cyclosporine;
— corticosteroids;
— anticonvulsants (including phenytoin);
— cardiovascular agents including digoxin (in patients with renal insufficiency), 
digitoxin, verapamil, nifedipine, diltiazem, propranolol, metoprorol, enalapril, 
losartan, quinidine, mexiletine, tocainide, propafenone;
— theophylline;
— sulfonylurea hypoglycaemics;
— hypolipidaemics including simvastatin and fluvastatin;
— nortriptyline, haloperidol, quetiapine, benzodiazepines (including diazepam, 
triazolam), zolpidem, buspirone.
Since rifampicin reduces the effectiveness of oral contraceptives, women should be 
advised to choose between one of two options for contraception. Following consul-
tation with a clinician, the patient may use an oral contraceptive pill containing a 
higher dose of estrogen (50 μg); alternatively, a nonhormonal method of contracep-
tion may be used throughout rifampicin treatment and for at least one month sub-
sequently.
Current antiretroviral drugs (non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors and 
protease inhibitors) interact with rifampicin (see section 5.6.1). This may result in 
ineffectiveness of antiretroviral drugs, ineffective treatment of TB or an increased 
risk of drug toxicity.
Biliary excretion of radiocontrast media and sulfobromophthalein sodium may be 
reduced and microbiological assays for folic acid and vitamin B12 disturbed.
Overdosage
Gastric lavage may be of value if undertaken within a few hours of ingestion. Very 
large doses of rifampicin may depress central nervous function. There is no specific 
antidote and treatment is supportive.
annEx 1. ESSEnTIal fIrST-lInE anTITubErCuloSIS druGS
 108
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
Storage
Capsules and tablets should be kept in tightly closed containers, protected from 
light.
Pyrazinamide
general information
Pyrazinamide is a synthetic analogue of nicotinamide that is only weakly bactericidal 
against M. tuberculosis but has potent sterilizing activity, particularly in the relatively 
acidic intracellular environment of macrophages and in areas of acute inflammation. 
It is highly effective during the first 2 months of treatment while acute inflammatory 
changes persist. Its use has enabled treatment regimens to be shortened and the risk 
of relapse to be reduced.
It is readily absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract and is rapidly distributed 
throughout all tissues and fluids. Peak plasma concentrations are attained in 2 hours 
and the plasma half-life is about 10 hours. It is metabolized mainly in the liver and 
excreted largely in the urine.
clinical information
Administration and dosage
Pyrazinamide is administered orally.
Adults (usually for the first 2 or 3 months of TB treatment):
 
25 mg/kg (20–30 mg/kg) daily
 
35 mg/kg (30–40 mg/kg) 3 times weekly.
Contraindications
• Known hypersensitivity.
• Active, unstable hepatic disease (with jaundice) – see Section 8.4.2.
• Porphyria.
Precautions
Patients with diabetes should be carefully monitored since blood glucose concentra-
tions may become labile. Gout may be exacerbated. Clinical monitoring (and liver 
function tests, if possible) should be performed during treatment of patients with 
pre-existing liver disease. In patients with renal failure, pyrazinamide should be ad-
ministered three times per week, rather than daily (see section 8.4.3 for doses).
Use in pregnancy
The 6-month regimen based upon isoniazid, rifampicin and pyrazinamide should 
be used whenever possible. Although detailed teratogenicity data are not available, 
pyrazinamide can probably be used safely during pregnancy (1).
 109
Adverse effects
Pyrazinamide may cause gastrointestinal intolerance.
Hypersensitivity reactions are rare, but some patients complain of slight flushing of 
the skin.
Moderate rises in serum transaminase concentrations are common during the early 
phases of treatment. Severe hepatotoxicity is rare.
As a result of inhibition of renal tubular secretion, a degree of hyperuricaemia usu-
ally occurs, but this is often asymptomatic. Gout requiring treatment with allopuri-
nol occasionally develops. Arthralgia, particularly of the shoulders, may occur and 
is responsive to simple analgesics (especially aspirin). Both hyperuricaemia and ar-
thralgia may be reduced by prescribing regimens with intermittent administration 
of pyrazinamide.
Rare adverse events include sideroblastic anaemia (2) and photosensitive dermatitis 
(1).
Overdosage
Little has been recorded on the management of pyrazinamide overdose. Acute liver 
damage and hyperuricaemia have been reported. Treatment is essentially sympto-
matic. Emesis and gastric lavage may be of value if undertaken within a few hours of 
ingestion. There is no specific antidote and treatment is supportive.
Storage
Tablets should be stored in tightly closed containers, protected from light.
Streptomycin
general information
Streptomycin is an aminoglycoside antibiotic derived from Streptomyces griseus that 
is used in the treatment of TB and sensitive Gram-negative infections.
Streptomycin is not absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract but, after intramuscu-
lar administration, it diffuses readily into the extracellular component of most body 
tissues and attains bactericidal concentrations, particularly in tuberculous cavities. 
Little normally enters the cerebrospinal fluid, although penetration increases when 
the meninges are inflamed. The plasma half-life, which is normally 2–3 hours, is con-
siderably extended in the newborn, the elderly and patients with severe renal impair-
ment. Streptomycin is excreted unchanged in the urine.
annEx 1. ESSEnTIal fIrST-lInE anTITubErCuloSIS druGS
 110
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
clinical information
Administration and dosage
Streptomycin must be administered by deep intramuscular injection. Syringes and 
needles should be adequately sterilized to exclude any risk of transmitting viral path-
ogens. It is also available for intravenous administration (1).
Adults: 
 
15 mg/kg (12–18 mg/kg) daily, or 2 or 3 times weekly; 
 
maximum daily dose is 1000 mg.
Patients aged over 60 years may not be able to tolerate more than 500–750 mg daily, 
so some guidelines recommend reducing the dose to 10 mg/kg per day for patients 
in this age group (1). Patients weighing less than 50 kg may not tolerate doses above 
500–750 mg daily.1 
Contraindications
• Known hypersensitivity.
• Auditory nerve impairment.
• Myasthenia gravis.
• Pregnancy.
Precautions
Hypersensitivity reactions are rare. If they do occur (usually during the first weeks 
of treatment), streptomycin should be withdrawn immediately. Once fever and skin 
rash have resolved, desensitization may be attempted.
Both the elderly and patients with renal impairment are vulnerable to dose-related 
toxic effects resulting from accumulation. Streptomycin should be used with caution 
in patients with renal insufficiency, because of the increased risk of nephrotoxicity 
and ototoxicity. The dose should be maintained at 12‒15 mg/kg but at a reduced fre-
quency of 2–3 times per week (1). Where possible, serum levels should be monitored 
periodically and dosage adjusted appropriately to ensure that plasma concentrations, 
as measured when the next dose is due, do not exceed 4 μg/ml.
Protective gloves should be worn when streptomycin injections are administered, to 
avoid sensitization dermatitis.
Use in pregnancy
Streptomycin should not be used in pregnancy: it crosses the placenta and can cause 
auditory nerve impairment and nephrotoxicity in the fetus.
1 WHO Essential Medicines Library  
(http://apps.who.int/emlib/MedicineDisplay.aspx?Language=EN&MedIDName=310%40streptomycin; 
accessed January 2010).
 111
Adverse effects
Streptomycin injections are painful. Rash, induration, or sterile abscesses can form 
at injection sites.
Numbness and tingling around the mouth occur immediately after injection. 
Cutaneous hypersensitivity reactions can occur.
Impairment of vestibular function is uncommon with currently recommended doses. 
Hearing loss is less common than vertigo. Manifestations of damage to the 8th cra-
nial (auditory) nerve include ringing in the ears, ataxia, vertigo and deafness; dam-
age usually occurs in the first 2 months of treatment and is reversible if the dosage is 
reduced or the drug is stopped (2).
Streptomycin is less nephrotoxic than other aminoglycoside antibiotics. If urinary 
output falls, albuminuria occurs or tubular casts are detected in the urine, strepto-
mycin should be stopped and renal function should be evaluated.
Haemolytic anaemia, aplastic anaemia, agranulocytosis, thrombocytopenia and 
lupoid reactions are rare adverse effects.
Drug interactions
Other ototoxic or nephrotoxic drugs should not be administered to patients receiving 
streptomycin. These include other aminoglycoside antibiotics, amphotericin B, cefa-
losporins, etacrynic acid, cyclosporin, cisplatin, furosemide and vancomycin.
Streptomycin may potentiate the effect of neuromuscular blocking agents adminis-
tered during anaesthesia.
Overdosage
Haemodialysis can be beneficial. There is no specific antidote and treatment is sup-
portive.
Storage
Solutions retain their potency for 48 hours after reconstitution at room temperature 
and for up to 14 days when refrigerated. Powder for injection should be stored in 
tightly closed containers, protected from light.
Ethambutol
general information
A synthetic congener of 1,2-ethanediamine, ethambutol is active against M. tuber-
culosis, M. bovis and some nonspecific mycobacteria. It is used in combination with 
other anti-TB drugs to prevent or delay the emergence of resistant strains.
It is readily absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. Plasma concentrations peak in 
2–4 hours and decay with a half-life of 3–4 hours. Ethambutol is excreted in the 
annEx 1. ESSEnTIal fIrST-lInE anTITubErCuloSIS druGS
 112
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
urine both unchanged and as inactive hepatic metabolites. About 20% is excreted 
unchanged in the faeces.
clinical information
Administration and dosage 
Ethambutol is administered orally.
Adults:  
 
15 mg/kg (15–20 mg/kg) daily
 
30 mg/kg (25–35 mg/kg) 3 times weekly. 
Dosage must always be carefully calculated on a weight basis to avoid toxicity, and 
the dose or the dosing interval should be adjusted in patients with impaired renal 
function (creatinine clearance <70 ml/min). If creatinine clearance is less than 30 ml/
minute, ethambutol should be administered 3 times per week (see section 8.4.3) (1).
Contraindications
• Known hypersensitivity.
• Pre-existing optic neuritis from any cause.
Precautions
Patients should be advised to discontinue treatment immediately and to report to 
a clinician if their sight or perception of colour deteriorates. Ocular examination is 
recommended before and during treatment (3). Whenever possible, renal function 
should be assessed before treatment. Plasma ethambutol concentration should be 
monitored if creatinine clearance is less than 30 ml/min.
Use in pregnancy
Ethambutol is not known to be harmful in pregnancy (3).
Adverse effects
Dose-dependent optic neuritis can result in impairment of visual acuity and colour 
vision in one or both eyes. Early changes are usually reversible, but blindness can 
occur if treatment is not discontinued promptly. Ocular toxicity is rare when etham-
butol is used for 2–3 months at recommended doses.
Signs of peripheral neuritis occasionally develop in the legs. 
Other rare adverse events include generalized cutaneous reaction, arthralgia and, 
very rarely, hepatitis.
 113
Overdosage
Emesis and gastric lavage may be of value if undertaken within a few hours of inges-
tion. Subsequently, dialysis may be of value. There is no specific antidote and treat-
ment is supportive.
Storage
Tablets should be stored in tightly closed containers.
references
American Thoracic Society, CDC, Infectious Diseases Society of America. Treatment 
1. 
of tuberculosis. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report: Recommendations and Re-
ports, 2003,52(RR-11):1–77.
Toman K. 
2. 
Toman’s tuberculosis. Case detection, treatment, and monitoring: questions 
and answers, 2nd ed. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2004.
WHO Model Formulary 2008
3. 
. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2009 (available 
at www.who.int/selection_medicines/list/WMF2008.pdf).
annEx 1. ESSEnTIal fIrST-lInE anTITubErCuloSIS druGS
  115
a2
summary of evidence and considerations 
underlying the recommendations
With input from the Guidelines Group, WHO finalized a list of seven key questions 
on the treatment of TB. Systematic literature reviews were conducted for each ques-
tion and the evidence was synthesized. 
The evidence is summarized for each question and is followed by a description of the 
benefits, harms, and other considerations used in developing the recommendations 
and rating them as strong or conditional using the GRADE system (See Chapter 1, 
section 1.6 for a description of the methodology, including definitions of “strong”, 
“conditional” and “weak”). At the time of publication of this fourth edition, evidence 
gathered through some of the systematic reviews had not been published.1 
Some of the remarks listed in the Executive Summary under each recommendation 
are included in the Other considerations section for each question below. Where evi-
dence is lacking, future research is suggested (Annex 5).
Question 1. duration of rifampicin
Should new pulmonary TB patients be treated with the 6-month or the 2-month 
 
rifampicin regimen?
Summary of evidence
A systematic review and meta-analysis included 21 472 participants in 312 arms of 57 
randomized controlled trials (RCTs) conducted in various regions of the world since 
1965 (1). In three of the 57 trials, patients were randomly assigned to either a 2-month 
rifampicin or a 6-month rifampicin arm; rates of failure, relapse and acquired drug 
resistance were compared “head-to-head” across the two study arms. In a multivari-
ate regression analysis, each arm of the 57 RCTs was treated as a separate cohort, and 
results were adjusted for potentially confounding patient and treatment factors.
Benefits and harms of changing to the 6-month rifampicin regimen
The three studies with head-to-head comparisons showed that the risk of relapse 
 
after a 6-month rifampicin regimen was significantly lower than that after a 2-month 
rifampicin regimen. If a country were to change from a 2-month to a 6-month 
 
rifampicin regimen, the benefit would be an estimated 112 relapses averted per 1000 
TB patients.
1 
 GRADE tables for unpublished evidence are available from WHO upon request.
 116
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
Regression analysis suggests that changing to a 6-month regimen would significantly 
reduce failure and acquired drug resistance rates, in addition to relapse rates.1 This 
analysis found that regimens with 5–7 months of rifampicin have 0.43 times the 
failure rate of those with 1–2 months of rifampicin, and 0.32 times the relapse rate. 
Among the failures and relapses from regimens with 5–7 months of rifampicin, the 
rate of acquired drug resistance is 0.28 times that of the regimens with 1–2 months 
of rifampicin.
Patients with isoniazid resistance would realize major benefits if the 2-month 
 
rifampicin regimen were replaced with a 6-month regimen. Among patients with 
isoniazid mono-resistance at the start of treatment, 38% relapsed after treatment with 
2-month rifampicin regimens, which is significantly higher than the 5.5% relapse rate 
after treatment with 6-month rifampicin regimens. Thus, changing to the 6-month 
rifampicin regimen would avert 325 relapses per 1000 patients2 who start treatment 
with isoniazid resistance.
Even for patients with pan-susceptible TB, the proportion who relapsed after the 
2-month rifampicin regimen was 8.2%, significantly higher than the 3.1% for the 
6-month rifampicin regimen.
When the first course of therapy is considered along with retreatment for patients 
who fail or relapse, it is estimated that the 6-month rifampicin regimen would avert 
between 3 and 12 deaths per 1000 compared with the 2-month rifampicin regimen 
across 7 countries modelled with a range of drug resistance among new patients. In 
addition, 0.6–4.4 failures and relapses with drug resistance other than MDR would 
be averted per 1000 TB patients, but an additional 0.6–1.3 MDR-TB cases would be 
generated. 
Among patients who failed or relapsed after their first course of treatment contain-
ing 6 months of rifampicin, regression analysis found a reduction in overall acquired 
drug resistance; however, the pattern of acquired drug resistance was different from 
that in patients who received the 2-month rifampicin regimen. The risk of acquiring 
drug resistance other than MDR is higher with the 2-month rifampicin regimen, but 
the risk of acquiring MDR is higher with the 6-month rifampicin regimen. Among 
failures, the proportion with MDR is predicted to be 4–56% after initial treatment 
with the 2-month rifampicin regimen but 50–94% after initial treatment with the 
regimen containing 6 months of rifampicin.
other considerations
To help minimize the acquisition of MDR, it is critically important that NTPs en-
sure adequate supervision of rifampicin. Implementing patient supervision for the 
4-month continuation phase will require additional resources in areas where the 
1 The difference in failure and acquired drug resistance was not statistically significant in these three 
RCTs.
2 38 minus 5.5 per 100 = 325 per 1000.
 117
annEx 2. Summary of EVIdEnCE and ConSIdEraTIonS undErlyInG THE rECommEndaTIonS
continuation phase has been self-administered – an investment that may be offset 
by the savings from relapses (and therefore retreatments) averted. In 2008, 23 coun-
tries (including 4 that are considered high-burden) still used the 2-month rifampicin 
regimen for their new patients. These countries reported 706 905 new cases in 2007, 
or 13% of the global new TB notifications that year. Another resource consideration 
is the fact that when purchased through the Global Drug Facility, a 2HRZE/4HR 
 
patient kit is US$ 4–10 less expensive than a 2HRZE/6HE kit.
The interactions of rifampicin with antiretroviral therapy (ART) are of concern. 
Switching to the 6-month rifampicin regimen means that these drug interactions 
must be taken into account for the full 6 months rather than for just the first 2 months 
of therapy. However, the 6-month rifampicin regimen has marked benefits for per-
sons living with HIV (see Question 4 below), and the drug interactions can be man-
aged (see section 5.6.1). Moreover, ART is often initiated during the first 2 months of 
TB therapy when treatment regimens include rifampicin.
It was assumed that all patients prefer a regimen that saves lives.
conclusion
Recommendations 1.1 and 1.2 place high value on saving lives. Given both the high 
quality of evidence for this benefit and the fact that the potential harm of acquired 
MDR can be mitigated by supervision of treatment (and possibly with a modified 
regimen for new patients in areas with high levels of isoniazid resistance), these are 
both strong recommendations. Periodic drug resistance surveys (or ongoing surveil-
lance) in each country are essential for monitoring the impact of the regimen and the 
overall treatment programme.
L Recommendation 1.1
New patients with pulmonary TB should receive a regimen containing 6 months 
of rifampicin: 2HRZE/4HR
(Strong/High grade of evidence)
L Recommendation 1.2
The 2HRZE/6HE treatment regimen should be phased out
(Strong/High grade of evidence)
Question 2. frequency of dosing in new patients
When a country selects 2HRZE/4HR, should patients be treated daily or three times 
weekly during the intensive phase? 
Summary of evidence
A systematic review and meta-analysis included 21 472 participants in 312 arms of 57 
randomized controlled trials (RCTs) conducted in various regions of the world since 
 118
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
1965 (1). In a multivariate regression analysis, each arm of the 57 RCTs was treated as 
a separate cohort, and results were adjusted for potentially confounding patient and 
treatment factors. Only one study of 223 patients evaluated a rifampicin-containing 
regimen administered twice weekly throughout therapy; this study was not included 
in the meta-analyses.
Benefits and harms of intermittent dosing
No significant increase in failure, relapse or acquired drug resistance was found when 
daily dosing throughout therapy was compared with the following intermittent regi-
mens in new TB patients overall:
— daily then three times weekly; 
— daily then twice weekly; or
— three times weekly throughout therapy.
However, the regression analysis showed that patients being treated three times weekly 
throughout therapy rates of acquired drug resistance that were 3.3 times higher than 
those in patients who received daily drug administration throughout treatment.
The meta-analysis revealed no difference in rates of failure, relapse or acquired drug 
resistance in pan-susceptible new patients being treated with these dosing schedules. 
However, use of a three times weekly intensive phase schedule in patients with pre-
treatment isoniazid resistance was associated with a significantly higher risk of fail-
ure and acquired drug resistance in another meta-analysis (see Question 3). 
other considerations
When based in a health facility, daily administration of therapy places a larger burden 
on TB programmes and patients than intermittent therapy. Intermittent regimens re-
quire stronger programmes with higher quality patient supervision, but all regimens 
should be provided with full patient supervision and support (see Chapter 6). 
Studies of patients’ preferences for dosing schedules were not systematically re-
viewed. 
The higher isoniazid dose used in intermittent therapy was not considered to have 
an increased incidence of adverse effects. (The rifampicin dosage is unchanged when 
using intermittent therapy.)
In an international, multicentre, randomized trial (Union Study A), Jindani, Nunn 
& Enarson found three times weekly dosing resulted in significantly lower culture 
conversion rates at 2 months (2). In developing recommendations, this end-point was 
ranked as important but not critical for decision-making (Annex 3), and was not part 
of the systematic review. 
 119
conclusion
For new patients without HIV infection, high-quality evidence demonstrated no sig-
nificant difference in regimens that were administered daily throughout, daily ini-
tially then intermittently in the continuation phase, or three times weekly throughout 
treatment. 
Daily1 dosing is optimal because it probably achieves better adherence under pro-
gramme conditions. In addition, meta-analyses showed the superiority of daily 
(compared with three times weekly) intensive-phase dosing for patients with pre-
treatment isoniazid resistance and for preventing acquired drug resistance in pa-
tients overall. 
Given the above considerations of these schedules, Recommendation 2 for daily dos-
ing throughout therapy is strong; three times weekly intermittent regimens, which 
were found to be equally efficacious,2 are listed as alternatives to daily treatment 
throughout therapy. 
There are insufficient data to support the use of regimens that are given twice weekly 
throughout therapy. On operational grounds, twice weekly dosing is not recom-
mended since missing one dose means the patient receives only half the regimen. The 
recommendation against the use of this regimen is therefore rated as strong.
L Recommendation 2.1
Wherever feasible, the optimal dosing frequency for new patients with pulmo-
nary TB is daily throughout the course of therapy
(Strong/High grade of evidence)
There are two alternatives to Recommendation 2.1: 
L Recommendation 2.1A
New patients with pulmonary TB may receive a daily intensive phase fol-
lowed by three times weekly continuation phase [2HRZE/4(HR)3], provided 
that each dose is directly observed
(Conditional/High or moderate grade of evidence))
L Recommendation 2.1B
Three times weekly dosing throughout therapy [2(HRZE)3/4(HR)3], provid-
ed that every dose is directly observed therapy and the patient is NOT living 
with HIV or living in an HIV-prevalent setting
(Conditional/High or moderate grade of evidence)
1 While the definition of the term varies across countries, “daily” is considered to mean at least five 
times per week. 
2 Three times per week regimens are delivered in a variety of schedules across countries.
annEx 2. Summary of EVIdEnCE and ConSIdEraTIonS undErlyInG THE rECommEndaTIonS
 120
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
L Recommendation 2.2
New patients with TB should not receive twice weekly dosing for the full course 
of treatment unless this is done in the context of formal research
(Strong/High grade of evidence) 
Question 3. Initial regimen in countries with high levels of  
isoniazid resistance
In countries with high levels of isoniazid resistance in new TB patients, should the 
continuation phase (containing isoniazid and rifampicin) be changed in the stand-
ard treatment of all new patients, in order to prevent the development of multidrug 
resistance? (This question applies to countries where isoniazid susceptibility testing 
in new patients is not done – or results are not available – before the continuation 
phase begins.)
Summary of evidence
The systematic review described in Questions 1 and 2 revealed that, when receiving a 
regimen including 5‒7 months of rifampicin, patients with pretreatment isoniazid re-
sistance (but susceptibility to rifampicin and streptomycin) were 22 times more likely 
to acquire drug resistance than patients who started treatment with drug-susceptible 
disease (1). 
A systematic review and meta-analysis was conducted of 33 trials involving 1907 
new and previously treated patients with isoniazid monoresistance.1 The use of at 
least three effective drugs during the continuation phase was associated with a sig-
nificantly lower risk of failure, and the use of four or more effective drugs during 
the intensive phase was associated with a significantly lower risk of failure, relapse 
and acquired drug resistance. The use of a daily intensive phase was associated with 
a significantly lower risk of failure and acquired drug resistance. The use of strep-
tomycin was associated with a significantly lower risk of failure and acquired drug 
resistance. The risk of relapse was significantly lower with the use of 6 months of 
rifampicin compared with 2 months, and 5 months of pyrazinamide compared with 
no pyrazinamide. 
Benefits and harms of adding ethambutol to the continuation phase
The addition of ethambutol was considered as an intervention to avoid what would, 
in effect, be monotherapy in the continuation phase of new patients with isoniazid 
resistance (3). Surveillance data show that only 0.6% of new patients have resistance 
to both ethambutol and isoniazid, indicating that the regimen has potential efficacy 
(4).
1 Manuscript was submitted, but not published at the time of publication of this document. GRADE 
tables are available from WHO upon request.
 121
A few potential harms are associated with the addition of ethambutol to the con-
tinuation phase of rifampicin and isoniazid. In countries where the level of isoniazid 
resistance in new patients equals the global weighted mean of 7.4%, 74 TB patients 
per 1000 will have isoniazid resistance. This means that for every 1000 new TB pa-
tients, 926 patients with isoniazid-susceptible TB will receive ethambutol unneces-
sarily in order to treat the 74 with isoniazid resistance. The risk of ocular toxicity due 
to ethambutol was not systematically reviewed for this edition. 
While widespread use of ethambutol could increase the risk of acquired ethambutol 
resistance, ethambutol is not as critical as the injectables or fluoroquinolones for the 
treatment of MDR-TB. The acquisition of ethambutol resistance is less harmful than 
the acquisition of resistance to the two classes of drugs that form the backbone of 
MDR-TB regimens. However, loss of a less toxic drug (if the MDR strain retains sus-
ceptibility) may jeopardize the ability to cure MDR-TB.
other considerations
The existence of a fixed-dose combination of isoniazid, ethambutol and rifampicin 
makes the addition of ethambutol operationally feasible. Countries can use their 
drug resistance survey data in new patients to determine whether the level of isoni-
azid resistance in new patients warrants the addition of ethambutol.1 However, about 
50% of countries (including four high-burden countries) have no drug resistance sur-
veillance data, even at a subnational level (4).2
Several alternatives to ethambutol were considered, but rejected, as means to “protect 
rifampicin” in patients with pre-treatment isoniazid resistance: 
• The meta-analysis showed that treatment for 5 or more months with pyrazin-
amide is associated with a significant decrease in relapse but is not associated with 
a lower risk of acquired drug resistance. Although data on adverse effects were 
not systematically reviewed, pyrazinamide can cause hepatotoxicity (particularly 
when administered with antiretroviral therapy). Pyrazinamide-associated joint 
pain can lead to poor adherence. 
• While likely to be effective in preventing acquired drug resistance, the use of a 
fluoroquinolone in the continuation phase for all new patients would jeopardize 
this critical class of drugs for MDR-TB patients. 
• A sputum smear obtained after the second month of treatment is not helpful for 
detecting pretreatment isoniazid resistance (Question 5). 
1 Annex 1 (p. 121) of the 4th WHO/IUATLD Anti-TB Drug Resistance Project displays each country 
s most recent drug resistance survey results in new patients. To determine the level of any isoniazid 
resistance (excluding MDR), countries will need to do the following calculation: % any isoniazid re-
sistance (column 12) minus % MDR (column 30). This annex is available at: www.who.int/tb/features_
archive/drsreport_launch_26feb08/en/index.html.
2 Sample sizes in WHO-sponsored drug resistance surveys are sufficiently large to allow precise 
 
countrywide estimates, but not estimates for subregions or populations (unless they were specifically 
sampled).
annEx 2. Summary of EVIdEnCE and ConSIdEraTIonS undErlyInG THE rECommEndaTIonS
 122
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
conclusion
This recommendation places a high value on preventing the development of MDR 
in areas where isoniazid resistance is prevalent among new cases and isoniazid sus-
ceptibility testing in new patients is not done (or results are not available) before 
the continuation phase begins. It is a conditional recommendation for the following 
reasons. 
The most effective regimen for the treatment of isoniazid-resistant TB is not known. 
There is inadequate evidence to quantify the ability of ethambutol to “protect 
 
rifampicin” in patients with pre-treatment isoniazid resistance. There is a risk of per-
manent blindness, although evidence for ocular toxicity from ethambutol was not 
systematically reviewed for this edition.
Further research (see Annex 5) is thus needed to define the level of isoniazid resistance 
that would warrant the addition of ethambutol (or other drugs) to the continuation 
phase of the standard regimen for new patients in TB programmes where isoniazid 
susceptibility testing in new patients is not done (or results are not available) before 
the continuation phase begins. 
See also Question 2: In patients with pretreatment isoniazid resistance, daily dosing 
during the intensive phase was associated with significantly lower risks of failure and 
acquired drug resistance than three times weekly dosing during the intensive phase. 
L Recommendation 3
In populations with known or suspected high levels of isoniazid resistance, new 
TB patients may receive HRE as therapy in the continuation phase as an accept-
able alternative to HR
(Weak/Insufficient evidence, expert opinion)
Question 4. Tb treatment in persons living with HIV
Should intermittent regimens be used for persons living with HIV? What should be 
the duration of TB treatment in people living with HIV? 
Summary of evidence
A systematic review and meta-analysis of 6 randomized controlled trials and 23 co-
hort studies provided pooled estimates of failure, relapse and death by duration of 
rifampicin, and daily intensive phase vs intermittent throughout (5). The systematic 
review revealed a marked and significant reduction in failure and relapse in the arms 
where some or all patients received ART.
 123
Benefits and harms of intermittent intensive phase, and of extending  
the duration of therapy
In a regression model, treatment failure or relapse was 1.8–2.5 times more likely with 
intermittent rather than daily dosing in the intensive phase.
Compared with 8 or more months of rifampicin, 2-month rifampicin regimens car-
ried a 3-fold higher risk of relapse and 6-month regimens a 2.2 -fold higher risk. 
other considerations and conclusions
Because most of the data in the systematic review are from cohort studies, the data 
quality is considered low. Nonetheless, daily dosing during the intensive phase is a 
strong recommendation for people living with HIV for the following reasons:
• The investment in changing from intermittent to daily therapy during the inten-
sive phase represents a wise use of resources given the potential benefit.
• Patients are assumed to prefer a regimen with lower failure and relapse, even if 
they have to come to a health facility for daily dosing. 
The meta-analysis of TB patients living with HIV contained no data comparing a 
daily with a three times weekly continuation phase. For this reason, and for consist-
ency with Recommendation 2.1, Recommendations 4.2 and 4.3 are conditional. 
Extending treatment beyond 6 months is recommended by some expert groups in 
certain persons living with HIV (6) and the meta-analysis showed that this is associ-
ated with significantly lower relapse rates (5). However, several other considerations 
are given greater weight. Separate regimens for TB patients living with or without 
HIV would be operationally very challenging and could add stigma. Other potential 
harms of extending treatment are acquired rifampicin resistance, and a longer period 
during which antiretroviral therapy options are limited (because of ART–rifampicin 
interactions). 
L Recommendation 4.1
TB patients with known positive HIV status and all TB patients living in HIV-
prevalent settings1 should receive daily TB treatment at least during the inten-
sive phase
(Strong/High grade of evidence)
L Recommendation 4.2
For the continuation phase, the optimal dosing frequency is also daily for these 
patients
(Strong/High grade of evidence)
1 HIV-prevalent settings are defined as countries, subnational administrative units, or selected facilities 
where the HIV prevalence among adult pregnant women is ≥1% or HIV prevalence among TB patients 
is ≥5% (7).
annEx 2. Summary of EVIdEnCE and ConSIdEraTIonS undErlyInG THE rECommEndaTIonS
 124
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
L Recommendation 4.3
If a daily continuation phase is not possible for these patients, three times 
weekly dosing during the continuation phase is an acceptable alternative
(Conditional/High or moderate grade of evidence)
L Recommendation 4.4
It is recommended that TB patients who are living with HIV receive the same 
duration of TB treatment as HIV-negative TB patients
(Strong/High grade of evidence)
Question 5. Sputum monitoring during Tb treatment of smear-positive 
pulmonary Tb patients
In pulmonary TB patients who are initially smear-positive, how effective are sputum 
specimens for predicting relapse, failure and pretreatment isoniazid resistance? 
Summary of findings
To determine the ability of sputum smears at months 2 or 3 of treatment to predict 
relapse, results of randomized controlled trials conducted by the British Medical 
 
Research Council (MRC) involving approximately 1900 patients from the 1970s and 
80s across Asia and east Africa were reanalysed.1 All patients received a 6-month 
regimen with at least four drugs in the initial 2 months. The sensitivity of the smear 
at either month 2 or month 3 in identifying patients who will relapse is less than 40%; 
less than one-quarter of the patients with positive smears will relapse (assuming a 7% 
relapse rate). 
A separate systematic review2 also found that sputum smear at month 2 or 3 of treat-
ment has limited utility in predicting relapse. For evaluating a diagnostic test (7), the 
MRC reanalysis and the systematic review are considered moderate- and low-quality 
evidence, respectively. 
It is not possible to determine the ability of the smear to predict failure for the fol-
lowing reasons:
• In the MRC trials, there were few treatment failures observed and it was therefore 
impossible to carry out a meaningful analysis. 
• In the systematic review, the quality of evidence in most studies that assessed fail-
ure is very low.
1 The original published results from these studies were based on analyses using per-protocol popula-
tions. The reanalysis was based on individual patient, intention-to-treat data. All cultures were done 
on solid media.
2 Manuscript was not published at the time of publication of this document. GRADE tables are available 
from WHO upon request.
 125
Benefits and harms of obtaining a smear at 3 months and, if positive,  
obtaining culture and dST
The main rationale for recommending the addition of a 3-month sputum smear is to 
detect poor response to therapy earlier than the fifth month (the current algorithm). 
High value was placed on the need to detect MDR as soon as possible, even though 
the MRC reanalysis showed that smear or culture results at month 1, 2, 3 or 4 are not 
predictive of pretreatment isoniazid resistance. (The MRC studies were done before 
the emergence of rifampicin resistance and are therefore not directly relevant to the 
ability of sputum monitoring to detect MDR-TB.)
The alternative of using the 2-month smear for triggering a culture was also consid-
ered. The advantage would be earlier detection of MDR-TB (since most will have had 
no DST at the start of therapy). However, there are programmatic benefits from using 
the 3-month (rather than the 2-month) smear as a trigger for culture and DST. For 
every 1000 TB patients who are smear-positive at the start of treatment, 183 are ex-
pected to remain smear-positive at 2 months and only 83 at 3 months. By intervening 
with culture and DST on the basis of the 3-month, rather than the 2-month, sputum 
smear result, national TB programmes will have 100 fewer patients needing these 
more complex laboratory tests for every 1000 TB patients who start therapy. 
other considerations and conclusion
These recommendations retain the original purpose of sputum monitoring, which 
was to assess programme performance. High value is placed on the need to detect 
treatment failure due to MDR-TB earlier in the course of treatment than the fifth 
month (as per the previous WHO algorithm). Given the moderate to low quality of 
evidence and operational concerns arising from the poor ability of the smear to pre-
dict relapse, this is a conditional recommendation.
L Recommendation 5.1
For smear-positive pulmonary TB patients treated with first-line drugs, spu-
tum smear microscopy may be performed at completion of the intensive phase 
of treatment
(Conditional/High or moderate grade of evidence)
L Recommendation 5.2
In new patients, if the specimen obtained at the end of the intensive phase 
(month 2) is smear-positive, sputum smear microscopy should optimally be 
obtained at the end of the month 3
(Strong/High grade of evidence)
annEx 2. Summary of EVIdEnCE and ConSIdEraTIonS undErlyInG THE rECommEndaTIonS
 126
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
L Recommendation 5.3
In new patients, if the specimen obtained at the end of month 3 is smear-positive, 
sputum culture and drug susceptibility testing (DST) should be performed
(Strong/High grade of evidence)
L Recommendation 5.4
In previously treated patients, if the specimen obtained at the end of the inten-
sive phase (month 3) is smear-positive, sputum culture and drug susceptibility 
testing (DST) should be performed
(Strong/High grade of evidence)
Question 6. Treatment extension in new pulmonary Tb patients
In new pulmonary TB patients, how effective is extension of treatment for preventing 
failure or relapse? 
Summary of findings
The systematic review identified only one relevant study.1A study currently under way 
in Bangladesh of a 6-month rifampicin-containing regimen randomized 3775 new 
smear-positive patients who remained positive at 2 months to either the 1-month ex-
tension arm (extension of the intensive phase by 1 month) or the no-extension arm.
Benefits and risks of extending treatment for patients who are  
smear-positive at 2 months
Preliminary results at 1 year of follow-up showed that patients in the 1-month exten-
sion arm had a significantly lower relapse rate (relative risk 0.37, 95% CI 0.21, 0.66) 
than patients in the no-extension arm. A smaller decrease in failure in the 1-month 
extension arm was not statistically significant. Given the preliminary nature of the 
results and passive follow up of patients, the evidence from the Bangladesh study was 
graded moderate quality. 
In 1000 TB patients with a 7% risk of relapse, the Bangladesh study predicts that 
extending the treatment of 183 patients who are smear-positive at 2 months would 
avert 16 of the 70 expected relapses.2 However, to achieve this 23% reduction in re-
lapses, 158 patients per 1000 would be incorrectly predicted to relapse; their treat-
ment would be extended unnecessarily. 
1 GRADE tables are available from WHO upon request.
2 Estimates from Question 5 shows that the 2-month smear will correctly identify 25 patients who will 
relapse after treatment and incorrectly identify 158 patients who will not relapse) If the intensive phase 
is extended for these 25 patients whose positive smear at 2 months correctly predicts that they will 
relapse, the Bangladesh study predicts that they will have a 37% reduction in relapse. Instead of all 25 
relapsing, only 9 per 1000 would relapse (0.37 x 25); that is, 16 relapses would be prevented. Hence, 
instead of the 70 expected relapses in the cohort of 1000, obtaining sputum smears at 2 months and 
extending treatment for those who are smear-positive would result in 54 relapses, a 23% reduction.
 127
other considerations and conclusion
While extending rifampicin beyond 6 months reduces the risk of relapse,1 there is 
insufficient evidence to determine which patients are most likely to benefit. Histori-
cally, when the new patient regimen included only 2 months of rifampicin, the ex-
tension of the intensive phase meant an extra month of supervised rifampicin. This 
extra month is less important now, when the recommended regimen is 6 months of 
supervised rifampicin. Given these considerations, together with preliminary results 
from one moderate-quality study that showed only modest benefit, a conditional rec-
ommendation was made not to extend treatment on the basis of a positive smear at 
2 months. 
L Recommendation 6
In patients treated with the regimen containing rifampicin throughout treat-
ment, if a positive sputum smear is found at completion of the intensive phase, 
extension of the intensive phase is not recommended
(Strong/High grade of evidence) 
Question 7. Previously treated patients
Which (if any) groups of patients should receive a retreatment regimen with first-line 
drugs?
Summary of findings
The systematic review found no randomized controlled trial of the 8-month retreat-
ment regimen with first-line drugs. Six cohort studies of this regimen in previously 
treated patients included 898 with pan-susceptible strains and 124 with isoniazid 
monoresistance. Failure rates ranged from 1% to 27% in patients with pan-suscepti-
ble disease and from 18% to 44% in those with isoniazid monoresistance (8).
In developing recommendations, the retreatment regimen of first-line drugs was 
considered only for empirical therapy, while awaiting DST results, previously treated 
patients at medium to low likelihood of MDR.2 However, the recommendations are 
not rated since the quality of evidence was not evaluated according to GRADE meth-
odology.
1 The head-to-head comparison described in Question 1 showed a 4% difference between the propor-
tion relapsing after 6 months of rifampicin-containing treatment and the proportion relapsing after 9 
months of rifampicin-containing treatment.
2 Countries that adopt rapid DST (such as the line probe assay) will be able to confirm or exclude MDR 
within hours to days. This allows the results to guide the choice of regimen right at the start of treat-
ment. These countries do not need the retreatment regimen with first-line drugs. Countries using 
conventional DST will need an empirical MDR regimen for previously treated patients with a high 
likelihood of having MDR, while awaiting DST results. For those with a medium or low likelihood of 
having MDR-TB, the benefits and harms of using of the 8-month retreatment regimen with first-line 
drugs (while awaiting DST results) are as discussed in the text.
annEx 2. Summary of EVIdEnCE and ConSIdEraTIonS undErlyInG THE rECommEndaTIonS
 128
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
Benefits and harms of using a retreatment regimen with first-line drugs for patients 
with low to medium likelihood of having mdr
For retreatment of patients who do not have MDR, the first-line drug retreatment 
regimen avoids exposure to a prolonged regimen of toxic second-line drugs. Other 
benefits for non-MDR patients are savings in patient time and resources and, prob-
ably, a diminished risk of defaulting. By using only first-line drugs, the WHO re-
treatment regimen conserves programme resources and preserves the activity of 
fluoroquinolones and injectables (amikacin and kanamycin) for patients who truly 
need these drugs (i.e. those with documented MDR). 
On a global level, 65% of previously treated patients have M. tuberculosis organisms 
that are still fully susceptible (4). For these patients, the first-line retreatment regi-
men provides the benefit of the two best anti-TB drugs, isoniazid and rifampicin. For 
the 12.4% of previously treated patients at the global level whose M. tuberculosis is 
isoniazid-resistant but not MDR, the retreatment regimen of first-line drugs is of un-
proven efficacy; however, the data in Question 3 suggest that the use of streptomycin, 
a daily intensive phase, and four effective drugs in the intensive phase may improve 
outcomes.
The main harm of the 8-month retreatment regimen with first-line drugs is that pre-
viously treated patients who do have MDR (15.3% at the global level) will receive 
inadequate treatment during the weeks to months of waiting for DST results. Patients 
may become more ill and wasted, spread MDR-TB to others, and seek care from pro-
viders not linked to the NTP who may not follow NTP treatment guidelines. Use of 
the retreatment first-line drug regimen in MDR patients may also result in acquired 
ethambutol resistance. 
other considerations
For retreatment patients at medium to low likelihood of MDR, the following alterna-
tives to the first-line drug retreatment regimen were considered and rejected: 
• 6HRZE may be effective against isoniazid-resistant M. tuberculosis (see Question 
3), but toxicity is a concern when pyrazinamide is used throughout therapy.
• 2HRZE/4HRE is recommended for use in new patients with high levels of iso-
niazid resistance (see Question 3), but 10.3% of previously treated patients have 
ethambutol resistance (compared with 2.5% of new patients) (4), which would ren-
der this regimen less effective.
• Omission of streptomycin from the retreatment regimen was rejected given that 
this injectable may strengthen this regimen (see Question 3) and does not compro-
mise amikacin or kanamycin for use in MDR patients. 
• Using the same 6-month regimen as is used for new patients was also rejected. For 
the 15.3% of previously treated patients who do have MDR, the 4-month isoniazid 
 129
and rifampicin continuation phase would theoretically not jeopardize ethambutol 
to the same extent as the 8-month regimen with its 5HRE continuation phase. 
For the 12.4% of previously treated patients who have isoniazid resistance but not 
MDR, the isoniazid and rifampicin continuation phase could lead to acquired 
MDR. Thus the possible benefit of using the new patient regimen to preserve 
ethambutol in MDR patients is probably outweighed by the risk of acquiring ri-
fampicin resistance in the scenario of pre-existing isoniazid resistance. 
• The option of augmenting the 8-month retreatment regimen with a fluoroquinolo-
ne or an injectable other than streptomycin was rejected in order to preserve these 
two classes of drugs, which form the backbone of MDR-TB treatment. 
conclusion
When compared with the alternative of providing an MDR regimen to all previ-
ously treated patients, the risks (toxicity, cost and development of resistance to im-
portant MDR drugs) outweigh the benefits. There was no other alternative found to 
the 8-month retreatment regimen with first-line drugs. Since the evidence for this 
regimen is of very low quality, this is a conditional recommendation.
L Recommendation 7.1
Specimens for culture and drug susceptibility testing (DST) should be obtained 
from all previously treated TB patients at or before the start of treatment. DST 
should be performed for at least isoniazid and rifampicin
L Recommendation 7.2
In settings where rapid DST is available, the results should guide the choice of 
regimen
L Recommendation 7.3
In settings where rapid DST results are not routinely available to guide the 
management of individual patients, empirical treatment should be started as 
follows:
L Recommendation 7.3.1
TB patients whose treatment has failed or other patient groups with high 
likelihood of multidrug-resistant TB (MDR) should be started on an empiri-
cal MDR regimen
L Recommendation 7.3.2
TB patients returning after defaulting or relapsing from their first treat-
ment course may receive the retreatment regimen containing first-line drugs 
2HRZES/1HRZE/5HRE if country-specific data show low or medium levels 
of MDR in these patients or if such data are unavailable
annEx 2. Summary of EVIdEnCE and ConSIdEraTIonS undErlyInG THE rECommEndaTIonS
 130
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
L Recommendation 7.4
In settings where DST results are not yet routinely available to guide the man-
agement of individual patients, the empirical regimens will continue through-
out the course of treatment
L Recommendation 7.5
National TB control programmes (NTPs) should obtain and use their country-
specific drug resistance data on failure, relapse and default patient groups to 
determine the levels of MDR
references
Menzies D et al. Effect of duration and intermittency of rifampin on tuberculosis 
1. 
treatment outcomes – a systematic review and meta-analysis. PloS Medicine, 2009, 
6:e1000146.
Jindani A, Nunn AJ, Enarson DA. Two 8-month regimens of chemotherapy for treat-
2. 
ment of newly diagnosed pulmonary tuberculosis: international multicentre ran-
domised trial. Lancet, 2004, 364:1244–1251.
Mitchison DA. Basic mechanisms of chemotherapy.
3. 
 Chest, 1979, 76(6 Suppl.): 771–
781.
Anti-tuberculosis drug resistance in the world: fourth global report
4. 
. Geneva, World 
Health Organization, 2008 (WHO/HTM/TB/2008.394).
Khan FA et al. Treatment of active tuberculosis in HIV co-infected patients: a sys-
5. 
tematic review and meta-analysis. Clinical Infectious Diseases, 2010 (in press).
American Thoracic Society, CDC, Infectious Diseases Society of America. Treat-
6. 
ment of tuberculosis. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report: Recommendations and 
 
Reports, 2003, 52(RR-11):1–77.
Schünemann HJ et al. Grading quality of evidence and strength of recommendations 
7. 
for diagnostic tests and strategies. British Medical Journal, 2008, 336:1106–1110.
Menzies D et al. Standardized treatment of active tuberculosis in previously treated 
8. 
patients, and/or with mono-resistance to isoniazid – a systematic review and meta-
analysis. PloS Medicine, 2009, 6:e1000150.
 131
a3
TB treatment outcomes 
For the meeting in October 2008, members of the Guidelines Group scored the TB 
treatment outcomes that they considered to be the most critical for the choice of TB 
treatment regimens. They were asked to take the point of view of NTP managers – the 
target audience for this publication. Of the 19 members who attended that meeting, 
15 (79%) responded; the results are shown below. 
Score   Relative importance
1–3 
 Not important for making recommendations on TB regimen
4–6 
 Important but not critical for making recommendations on TB regimen
7–9 
 Critical for making recommendations on TB regimen
what are the most important beneficial outcomes to consider when making 
decisions on TB treatment regimens? 
outcomes
relative 
importance
reducing emergence of mdr-TB, prevent drug resistance
Survival 
Staying disease-free (avoiding relapse) 
Halting transmission of TB, a TB-free community
Bacteriological cure
negative sputum smears at 2 months
relief of TB symptoms
cost savings 
8
8
8
8
6
6
5
5
what are the most significant risks to consider when making decisions on  
TB treatment regimens? 
outcomes
relative 
importance 
Acquired drug resistance
failure
relapse
infecting health care workers and the community
default
loss of efficacy of HiV medicines due to poorly managed drug interactions
drug toxicity
interaction with non-TB medications
financial burden
8
8
8
7
7
7
7
6
5
  133
a4
implementation and evaluation  
of the fourth edition
A strategy for effective uptake requires definition of the key messages, the audiences 
and the actions for them to take. The key messages of this fourth edition are the eight 
strong recommendations listed in Table A4.1. By designating them as “strong”, the 
Guidelines Group is confident that their implementation will yield significant health 
benefits, outweighing any potential harms.1 
Table A4.1 STrong recommendATionS
no.
recommendation
new patients
1.1
1.2
replace 6He in the continuation phase with 4Hr
2.1
implement daily treatment throughout the course of therapy
2.4
discontinue regimens using twice weekly dosing throughout therapy
HIV-positive Tb patients, whether their Tb is new or previously treated
4.1
4.2
TB patients living with HiV, and all patients living in HiV-prevalent settings, 
should receive daily TB treatment at least during the intensive phase 
(optimally, also in the continuation phase)
4.4
for TB patients living with HiV, implement at least the same duration of daily 
treatment as for HiV-negative patients
Sputum monitoring during Tb treatment (new and previously treated)
5.2
perform additional sputum examination at month 3 if sputum smear is positive 
at month 2 (in new patients)
5.3
5.4
obtain specimen for culture and dST if sputum smear-positive at month 3 (in 
new and previously treated patients)
Treatment extension
6
no need for extending the intensive phase of treatment. That recommendation 
will require changes in training and drug supply systems
Key audiences for these recommendations are members of international TB organi-
zations, WHO regional offices, and national TB control programmes (especially in 
countries with high TB burdens, high levels of MDR-TB and/or TB/HIV). Target 
audiences within countries include other TB service providers working in public and 
1 Because the rest of the recommendations are conditional, they are lower priority for implementation 
and evaluation.
 134
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
private health care facilities at the central and peripheral levels (see section 1.3). The 
actions for all the target audiences are to implement these eight recommendations in 
the context of their overall TB priorities. 
Monitoring and evaluation should be built into implementation, in order to provide 
important lessons for uptake and continued implementation (1). In the framework 
presented in Table A4.2, these eight strong recommendations are inputs that should 
improve the processes of TB treatment and reporting, which in turn should improve 
the outcomes of treatment success and reduced drug resistance, and finally have an 
impact on reducing TB prevalence, incidence and death. 
Table A4.2 frAmeworK for eVAluATing THe impAcT of THe fourTH ediTiona
Indicator types 
Indicators
input
Activities (such as nTp manual revised to adopt new recommendations)
process
improve TB management (such as proportion of previously treated 
patients with culture and dST performed on sputum specimens at the 
start of therapy)
outcome
improve treatment success (such as proportion of previously treated 
patients who are cured)
impact
reduce TB prevalence, incidence and death (mdg 6)
reduce poverty (mdg 1)b
a Adapted from: DOTS Expansion Working Group Strategic Plan 2006–2015. geneva, world Health orga-
nization, 2006 (wHo/HTm/TB?2006.370), p. 6.
b mdg = millennium development goal.
necessary steps for implementation of specific recommendations; 
corresponding evaluation indicators 
The necessary steps (prerequisites) for implementing each recommendation are listed 
below. For all eight recommendations, information on the following outcome and 
impact indicators is already routinely collected (or estimated): 
• Outcome indicators: cure, treatment success, default (recording and reporting 
forms, WHO’s annual Global tuberculosis control report), level of drug resistance 
(drug resistance surveys).
• Impact indicators: TB incidence and mortality (WHO’s Global tuberculosis control 
report (2)).
Specific process indicators for evaluating each recommendation are listed below. 
recommendation 1.1
New patients with pulmonary TB should receive a regimen containing 6 months’ 
rifampicin: 2HRZE/4HR. 
 135
annEx 4. ImPlEmEnTaTIon and EValuaTIon of THE fourTH EdITIon
recommendation 1.2
The 2HRZE/6HE treatment regimen should be phased out.
Prerequisites: 
• In countries that have been using a self-administered continuation phase, expand 
supervised treatment to allow rifampicin to be given safely throughout therapy.
Process indicators for evaluation (WHO’s Global tuberculosis control report (2), GDF 
data): 
— number1 of countries changing to the 4-month isoniazid and rifampicin con-
tinuation phase;
— number of new patients receiving the 6 months’ rifampicin regimen;
— number of patients with supervised treatment throughout therapy.
recommendation 2.2
New patients with TB should not receive twice weekly dosing for the full course of 
treatment unless this is done in the context of formal research.
recommendation 4.1
TB patients with known positive HIV status and all TB patients living in HIV-preva-
lent settings should receive daily TB treatment at least during the intensive phase. 
Prerequisites: 
• Expand treatment supervision in countries that have been using twice weekly 
 
dosing for any TB patients, or three times weekly intensive-phase dosing for TB 
patients who are HIV-positive or living in an HIV-prevalent setting.
Process indicators for evaluation (WHO’s Global tuberculosis control report (2), 
 
Global Drug Facility data): 
— number of countries eliminating twice weekly dosing schedules;
— number of countries in which NTP guidelines change to recommend daily 
intensive-phase treatment of HIV-positive TB patients; 
— number of HIV-positive patients receiving daily intensive-phase treatment.
Global level actions for implementation and evaluation 
At the global level, implementation and evaluation of these eight recommendations 
will necessitate: 
• WHO and partners assisting countries to establish drug resistance surveys of new 
patients, and ongoing surveillance of DST of all previously treated patients. This 
will require strengthened laboratory capacity.
1 
 Other calculations (such as proportions) will also be useful.
 136
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
• WHO and partners assisting countries to ensure treatment supervision through-
out therapy.
• WHO and partners identifying, and assisting in the updating of, existing training 
materials and other technical tools (such as guidance for Global Fund applica-
tions, district and health facility training modules), and fostering their uptake and 
use.
• WHO updating instructions and forms for recording and reporting and assisting 
countries with implementation.
• WHO adjusting indicators (3, 4) to capture the data needed to evaluate these rec-
ommendations (i.e. proportion of failure, relapse and default patients with culture 
and DST performed at the start of therapy).
• The Global Drug Facility (GDF) re-forecasting drug needs, providing guidance to 
countries on the transition from old to new regimens, and proposing a phase-out 
plan for existing stocks in public and private sectors (5).
• The MDR-TB treatment programmes scaling up (including availability of quality-
assured second-line drugs) now that an MDR regimen is recommended as part of 
each country  s standard regimens.
The recommendations in these guidelines support the Global Plan to Stop TB (4) and 
the Stop TB Strategy (6). Implementation of the four recommendations for previously 
treated patients is already part of the programme of work of the WHO Stop TB De-
partment and the MDR-TB Working Group (MDR-TB WG) of the Stop TB Partner-
ship. The other recommendations represent changes to standardized treatment under 
the DOTS component of the Global Plan to Stop TB, for which the WHO Stop TB 
Department – in partnership with the DOTS Expansion Working Group (DEWG) – 
is responsible. The latter includes the Global Laboratory Initiative (GLI), which is in 
the process of expanding capacity for culture and DST. The HIV/TB Working Group 
(TB/HIV WG) could foster implementation of daily intensive-phase dosing for TB 
patients who are HIV-positive or living in HIV-prevalent settings. 
A broad group of stakeholders from NTPs, international organizations providing TB 
technical assistance (including WHO regional and country offices), members of the 
WHO Strategic, Technical and Advisory Group (STAG TB), and patient representa-
tives were engaged as members of the Guidelines Group in the development of this 
fourth edition (Annex 6). The involvement of these members of the target audience 
throughout the development process should increase buy-in and facilitate implemen-
tation. Synchronization of this revision with updates to the International standards 
for tuberculosis care (7) should help pave the way towards adoption by private practi-
tioners working at the country level. 
WHO and international partners can incorporate these new recommendations in 
their ongoing technical support and capacity-building efforts in countries. Existing 
 137
mechanisms for technical assistance also include TBTEAM, the Green Light Com-
mittee (GLC) Initiative, and the GDF. International partners can also help countries 
to incorporate these recommendations into their country-specific TB plans and to 
mobilize funding from domestic sources or international financing mechanisms 
(such as the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria). As the recom-
mendations are implemented, evaluation of a number of indicators is already built in 
to routine monitoring of progress towards targets and Global Plan implementation.
Additional global level actions could include:
• Develop, budget and implement a communication and dissemination plan includ-
ing presentations at international meetings and working group meetings.
• Prepare multiple formats (information products) such as:
— placing the guidelines on the WHO web site;
— translating into official WHO languages;
— summary of recommendations;
— policy briefs for international and country use;
— inclusion in WHO Technical Report Series indexed on Medline (with ISBN).
• Plan for and assist with regional/country implementation:
— work with technical partners and with WHO regional and country offices 
to determine which recommendations are priorities for implementation and 
evaluation in which regions;
— analyse capacity of health systems in high-burden countries to adopt and eval-
uate the new recommendations.
regional and country level actions
Regions and countries will need to select the recommendations that have the highest 
priority for implementation in the context of regional and national TB plans, local 
epidemiology and health systems. For example, introduction of liquid media for cul-
ture and DST should be based on comprehensive country-specific plans for labora-
tory capacity-strengthening. A country with high error rates in smear microscopy 
will first strengthen external quality assurance of microscopy before introducing cul-
ture. Similarly, the recommendations for treatment regimens must be implemented 
in the context of the country  s drug management and supply systems. A country 
with frequent stock outs of first-line drugs will address this problem before changing 
continuation phase-drugs to implement Recommendation 1. 
Additional country and regional level actions could include:
• Translating the fourth edition into appropriate languages as needed.
• Evaluating surveillance data to target particular countries for implementation 
and evaluation of specific recommendations. For example, the 2009 WHO Global 
annEx 4. ImPlEmEnTaTIon and EValuaTIon of THE fourTH EdITIon
 138
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
tuberculosis control report showed that 23 countries were still using the 6HE con-
tinuation phase. 
• Assisting countries in securing funding for, planning, implementing and evaluat-
ing these recommendations.
• Convening stakeholders (including professional associations) to:
— analyse the need for the change at regional or country level and the risks and 
benefits of implementing the recommendation;
— analyse the capacity (public and private sector) of the region or country to 
implement the change;
— identify and quantify factors that may constrain or facilitate successful imple-
mentation;
— develop regional or country policy and obtain endorsement.
• Develop a plan for implementation and evaluation, including:
— key inputs and budget;
— sequencing of key tasks (which may include a feasibility study or demonstra-
tion projects) and how the change will be phased in gradually (or rolled out all 
at once);
— training of health workers and community partners, coordinated with supply 
and infrastructure changes;
— revision of recording and reporting forms;
— develop, field test, and disseminate an operational guide and toolkit to assist 
countries and decision-makers to implement and evaluate the new recommen-
dations.
• Develop a communication plan, including briefing decision-makers in the min-
istry of health, professional associations, and donors. Ensure consistent messages 
are communicated to health care workers, community partners providing care, 
and the public. This could include developing a pocket card and wall poster com-
bining Tables 3.2, 3.3 and 3.4 (to replace categories I–IV). Include names for the 
“new patient”, “retreatment with first-line drugs”, and “MDR” regimens to replace 
the familiar nicknames of the previous treatment scheme: “categories 1, 2”, etc. 
• Assist national TB control programmes in updating national TB guidelines and 
manuals, laboratory standard operating procedures, TB section of HIV guide-
lines, drug supply management systems.
 139
references
New technologies for tuberculosis control: a framework for their adoption, introduc-
1. 
tion and implementation. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007 (WHO/HTM/
STB/2007.40).
Anti-tuberculosis drug resistance in the world: fourth global report
2. 
. Geneva, World 
Health Organization, 2008 (WHO/HTM/TB/2008.394).
Monitoring and evaluation toolkit: HIV/AIDS, TB, malaria, and health systems 
3. 
strengthening, 3rd ed. Geneva, The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and 
Malaria, 2009 (available at http://www.theglobalfund.org).
The Global Plan to Stop TB, 2006–2015
4. 
. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2006 
(WHO/HTM/STB/2006.35).
Compendium of indicators for monitoring and evaluating national tuberculosis pro-
5. 
grammes. Geneva, World Health Organization( WHO/HTM/TB/2004.344; (avail-
able at: http://whqlibdoc.who.int/hq/2004/WHO_HTM_TB_2004.344.pdf).
Phanouvong S. 
6. 
Operational guide for national tuberculosis control programmes on the 
introduction and use of fixed-dose combination drugs. Geneva, World Health Organi-
zation, 2002 (WHO/CDS/TB/2002.308).
International standards for tuberculosis care
7. 
, 2nd ed. The Hague, Tuberculosis Coali-
tion for Technical Assistance, 2009.
annEx 4. ImPlEmEnTaTIon and EValuaTIon of THE fourTH EdITIon
  141
a5
suggestions for future research 
At many points during the process of revising the third edition, future research needs 
were identified. There was often no evidence available to allow the formulation of rec-
ommendations for specific issues; sometimes the only available evidence was judged 
to be of low quality. While seven questions are the focus of this fourth edition, ad-
ditional questions emerged. 
Gaps in the evidence and additional questions are summarized below as suggestions 
for future research. A few may be amenable to systematic reviews, but others will 
require clinical trials, large cohort studies, epidemiological studies, or behavioural 
research. The suggestions are listed (in no order of priority) under each of the seven 
questions. 
1. duration of rifampicin in HIV-negative Tb patients
• For various forms of drug resistance (other than MDR), and balanced against tol-
erability and costs, what is the minimum number of effective drugs for the inten-
sive and continuation phases?
• In particular countries followed prospectively, what is the cost and impact of 
changing from a 6HE to a 4HR continuation phase? 
• In new cases of TB meningitis (and other forms of extrapulmonary TB), what is 
the optimal duration of treatment?
2. Intermittent dosing
• In new pulmonary TB patients, does daily treatment throughout the course of 
therapy, compared with a twice weekly or 3 times weekly intermittent regimen 
throughout the course of therapy, reduce relapse, failure and acquired drug resis-
tance? 
• What is the impact of drug resistance on outcomes after intermittent regimens?
• What is the impact on adherence of three times weekly dosing, for example when 
provided by a family member after a daily intensive phase? 
• How important is earlier culture conversion (associated with a daily intensive 
phase) to patient outcomes and TB transmission?
 142
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
3. Treatment of new patients where isoniazid resistance is high
• In new patients with smear-positive pulmonary TB, does HRE in the continuation 
phase for 4 months reduce failure, relapse and acquired drug resistance compared 
with HR? 
• What is the efficacy of ethambutol in preventing acquisition of rifampicin resis-
tance in patients with pretreatment isoniazid resistance?
• What other efficacious and tolerable regimens exist for isoniazid-resistant TB? 
• What is the incidence of ocular toxicity due to ethambutol?
• Do new patients with isoniazid resistance respond differently from previously 
treated patients with the same drug resistance profile?
4. HIV-related Tb
• In new HIV-positive patients with smear-positive pulmonary TB who are given 
ART, does a 9-month rifampicin-based TB treatment regimen, compared with a 
6-month rifampicin-based regimen, increase treatment success rate and reduce 
recurrent TB at the end of treatment and for the first 12 months after successful 
completion of treatment? 
• In patients on ART, what is the impact of three times weekly treatment compared 
with daily treatment during the continuation phase on mortality, failure, relapse 
and acquired drug resistance?
5. Sputum monitoring
• Using data from Union Study A and C, determine how well positive bacteriologi-
cal results at various months of treatment predict failure and relapse, compared 
with negative bacteriological results.
• Reanalyse data from the British Medical Research Council to study patients who 
are smear-positive during 2 consecutive months. Of those patients who are smear-
positive at 2 months, how many are still smear-positive at 3 months? Of these, 
how many are culture-positive? What is the ability to predict treatment outcomes? 
(Repeat with other pairs of months.) 
• How well can sputum monitoring predict pretreatment or acquired MDR-TB?
• How useful is the monitoring of smear conversion as an indicator of TB control 
programme performance?
• How often does persistent smear-positivity at the second month of treatment trig-
ger patient or programmatic interventions? 
 143
annEx 5. SuGGESTIonS for fuTurE rESEarCH
6. Extension of treatment
• For preventing relapse, which patients stand to benefit most from treatment ex-
tension? Other than positive smear microscopy, what risk factors (such as patient 
weight) predict poor outcomes, and can feasibly be ascertained in resource-limited 
settings?
• Should the intensive phase or the continuation phase be extended, by how long, 
and with which drugs?
• In adults with pulmonary TB, does performing smear microscopy at the end of 
the intensive phase and, if sputum is smear-positive, extending this phase reduce 
failure, relapse or acquired drug resistance?
7. Previously treated patients
• In new smear-positive pulmonary TB patients who have failed first-line TB treat-
ment does an empirical MDR-TB regimen, compared with the standard WHO 
retreatment regimen with first-line drugs, increase treatment success rate and re-
duce failure at the end of this second course of TB treatment?
• What is the level of MDR in subgroups of previously treated patients (failed first 
vs. subsequent course of therapy; returned after defaulting; relapsed)?
  145
a6 
Members of the Guidelines Group 
(Technical development Group)
Solange Cavalcante
TB Control Program Coordinator, Rio de Janeiro Municipality, Almirante 
Alexandrino 3780 Bloco E3 302, Santa Tereza cep, 20241-262 – Rio de Janeiro, RJ, 
Brazil
Jeremiah Muhwa Chakaya (Chairperson)
Technical Expert, National Leprosy and TB Programme, Kenya Medical Research 
Institute, PO Box 20781, 00202 Nairobi, Kenya
Saidi M. Egwaga
Programme Manager, National TB and Leprosy Programme, Ministry of Health 
and Social Welfare, P.O. Box 9083, Dar es Salaam, United Republic of Tanzania
Robert Gie
Professor of Medicine, Department of Paediatrics & Child Health, University of 
Stellenbosch, Faculty of Medicine, PO Box 19063, 7505 Tygerberg, South Africa
Peter Gondrie
Executive Director, KNCV Tuberculosis Foundation, PO Box 146, Parkstraat 17 
(Hofstaete Building), 2501 CC The Hague, Netherlands
Anthony D. Harries
Senior Consultant, International Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, 
Old Inn Cottage, Vears Lane, Colden Common, Winchester, Hants, England
Phillip Hopewell
Professor of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary & Critical Care, San Francisco 
General Hospital, Building NH, SFGH Rm 5H5, University of California San 
Francisco (UCSF), San Francisco, CA 94143-0841, USA
Blessina Kumar
Flat B-13, Lakeview Apartment, Plot 886, Ward 8, Mehrauli, New Delhi 110030, 
India
Kitty Lambregts-van Weezenbeck
Senior Consultant, KNCV Tuberculosis Foundation, PO Box 146, Parkstraat 17 
(Hofstaete Building), 2501 CC The Hague, Netherlands
 146
TrEaTmEnT of TubErCuloSIS: GuIdElInES
Sundari Mase
Division of TB Elimination National Centre for HIV, STD and TB, Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, 1600 Clifton Road NE, MS E-10 Corporate Square 
Building, Bldg 10, Atlanta, GA 30333, USA
Richard Menzies
Director, Respiratory Division, MUHC and McGill University, Room K1.24, 
Montreal Chest Institute, 3650 St Urbain Street, Montreal, PQ, Canada
Anna Nakanwagi Mukwaya
Chief of Party, TBCAP Program, International Union Against Tuberculosis and 
Lung Disease, Plot 2 Loudel Road, Nakasero, PO BOX 16094, Wandegeya, Uganda 
Mahshid Nasehi
National TB Programme Manager, Centre for Disease Control & Prevention, 
Ministry of Health and Medical Education, 68 Iranshahr Street, Ferdowsi Square, 
11344 Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran
Andrew Nunn
Professor of Epidemiology, Associate Director, MRC Clinical Trials Unit, 222 
Euston Road, London NW1 2DA, England
Madhukar Pai
Assistant Professor, Department of Epidemiology, Biostatistics & Occupational 
Health, McGill University, 1020 Pine Avenue West, Montreal, PQ H3A 1A2, Canada
Holger Schünemann 
Methodologist, Chair, McMaster University Medical Centre, Clinical Epidemiology 
and Biostatistics, Health Sciences Centre 2C10B, 1200 W. Main Street, Hamilton, 
ON L8N 3Z5, Canada
Zarir F. Udwadia
Private Practitioner and Consultant Physician, Hinduja Hospital and Research 
Centre, Mumbai, India
Andrew Vernon
Division of TB Elimination, National Centre for HIV, STD and TB, Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, 1600 Clifton Road NE, MS E-10 Corporate Square 
Building, Building 10, Atlanta, GA 30333, USA
Rozalind G. Vianzon
National TB Programme Manager, National Center for Disease Control and 
Prevention, Department of Health, 4th Floor, Building 13, San Lazaro Compound, 
Santa Cruz, Manila, Philippines
Virginia Williams
TB Project Director, International Council of Nurses, Gardeners Barn, Cock Road, 
Eye, Suffolk IP23 7NS, England
 147
annEx 6. mEmbErS of THE GuIdElInES GrouP (TECHnICal dEVEloPmEnT GrouP)
External review Group
Olayide Akanni, Nigeria
Margareth Pretti Dalcolmo, Brazil
Francis Drobniewski, United Kingdom
Paula Fujiwara, USA
Salmaan Keshavjee, USA
G.R. Khatri, India
Michail Perelman, Russian Federation
Charles Sandy, Zimbabwe
Pedro Guillermo Suarez, Peru
Marieke van der Werf, Netherlands
Wang Lixia, China 
Nadia Wiweko, Indonesia
Mohamed Abdel Aziz, The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria
Daniel Kibuga, WHO Regional Office for Africa
Giampaolo Mezzabotta, WHO Viet Nam
Jamhoih Tonsing, Family Health International Cambodia
Richard Zaleskis, WHO Regional Office for Europe
 Stop TB Department
World Health Organization
20 Avenue Appia, 1211-Geneva-27, Switzerland
Web site: www.who.int/tb
Information Resource Centre HTM/STB: tbdocs@who.int
ISBN 978 92 4 154783 3
