 Open Forum Infectious Diseases
M A J O R A R T I C L E
Implementation of an Infectious Disease Fellow-Managed
Penicillin Allergy Skin Testing Service
Emily L. Heil,1 Jacqueline T. Bork,2 Sarah A. Schmalzle,3 Michael Kleinberg,3 Anupama Kewalramani,4 Bruce L. Gilliam,3 and Ulrike K. Buchwald3,a
1Department of Pharmacy Practice and Science, University of Maryland School of Pharmacy, 2Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, 3Department
of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, and 4Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pulmonology and Allergy, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore
Background.
A large percentage of patients presenting to acute care facilities report penicillin allergies that are associated with
suboptimal antibiotic therapy. Penicillin skin testing (PST) can clarify allergy histories but is often limited by access to testing. We
aimed to implement an infectious diseases (ID) fellow-managed PST program and to assess the need for PST via national survey.
Methods.
We conducted a prospective observational study of the implementation of an ID fellow-managed penicillin allergy
skin testing service. The primary outcome of the study was to assess the feasibility and acceptability of an ID fellow-managed
PST service and its impact on the optimization of antibiotic selection. In addition, a survey of PST practices was sent out to all
ID fellowship program directors in the United States.
Results.
In the first 11 months of the program, 90 patients were assessed for PST and 76 patients were tested. Of the valid tests,
96% were negative, and 84% with a negative test had antibiotic changes; 63% received a narrower spectrum antibiotic, 80% received
more effective therapy, and 61% received more cost-effective therapy. The majority of survey of respondents (n = 50) indicated that
overreporting of penicillin allergy is a problem in their practice that affects antibiotic selection but listed inadequate personnel and
time as the main barriers to PST.
Conclusions.
Inpatient PST can be successfully managed by ID fellows, thereby promoting optimal antibiotic use in patients
reporting penicillin allergies. This model can increase access to PST at institutions without adequate access to allergists while also
providing an important educational experience to ID trainees.
Keywords.
allergy; β-lactam; penicillin.
Up to 15% of inpatients report an allergy to penicillin antibiot-
ics [1]. Type I immunoglobulin (Ig)E-mediated hypersensitivity
reactions (urticaria and anaphylaxis) are potentially life threat-
ening; identification of patients at high risk for these reactions is
critical in preventing avoidable morbidity and mortality. In con-
trast, patient self-report of antibiotic allergy has been associated
with antimicrobial resistance, increased length of stay (LOS), in-
creased cost, intensive care unit (ICU) admission, and death [2,
3]. Identifying those patients with reported penicillin allergy
who are actually at low risk for IgE-mediated reactions allows
for optimized antimicrobial therapy.
The penicillin skin test (PST) assesses local reactions to mi-
nute doses of penicillin metabolites, which include major and
minor determinants, responsible for >80% and <10% of type
I reactions, respectively. The major determinants are penicilloyl
haptens, commercially available as benzylpenicilloyl polylysine
([PPL] Pre-pen; ALK-Abello, Inc., Round Rock, TX). Minor de-
terminants are penicillenyl and penicillamine haptens, found in
injectable penicillin G (PCN G) [4].
The penicillin skin test has a negative predictive value of
97%–99% for IgE-mediated reactions, and the risk for such re-
actions in patients with a negative test corresponds to that of the
general population [5, 6]. Multiple studies have demonstrated a
positive impact of PST on antibiotic utilization and cost-effec-
tiveness in various settings and populations [7, 8]. However, in
clinical practice, PST is often not readily available. A survey of
the Infectious Disease Society of America Emerging Infections
Network found that of 744 members who responded (53% re-
sponse rate), only 60% had PST available at their institutions. Of
those, 90% indicated that testing was performed by allergy and/
or immunology physicians [9]. Allergists mainly offer assess-
ment and testing for outpatients, and therefore the unavailabil-
ity of PST is a particular problem for acute inpatient care and
hospital antibiotic stewardship. Therefore, we were interested
in evaluating the integration of PST into infectious diseases
(ID) practice and training, providing a model to optimize anti-
biotic use in the hospital.
In addition, ID as a specialty is struggling under the current
procedure-oriented, fee-for-service reimbursement system [10].
Received 13 May 2016; accepted 19 July 2016.
aPresent Affiliation: Merck & Co., Inc., Kenilworth, New Jersey.
Correspondence: E. Heil, Assistant Professor, Department of Pharmacy Practice and Science,
University of Maryland School of Pharmacy, 20 N Pine St, N413, Baltimore, MD 21201 (eheil@
rx.umaryland.edu).
Open Forum Infectious Diseases®
© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Infectious Diseases
Society of America. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs licence (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc-nd/4.0/), which permits non-commercial reproduction and distribution of the work, in any
medium, provided the original work is not altered or transformed in any way, and that the work
is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com.
DOI: 10.1093/ofid/ofw155
ID-Managed Penicillin Skin Testing • OFID • 1
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ofid/article-abstract/3/3/ofw155/2593297 by guest on 01 June 2019
 A decreasing interest in ID fellowship training, as evidenced by
117 of 335 ID fellowship positions remaining unfilled this year,
might be related and is of concern [11, 12]. However, responsi-
bilities for antimicrobial stewardship and hospital infection
control are growing areas for ID-trained physicians [10]. An ac-
ademic hospital with an ID training program might be a prom-
ising setting for integrating PST into ID practice by engaging ID
fellows in antimicrobial stewardship and training them in a
novel procedure. Incorporating PST into an ID fellowship cur-
riculum could also increase access to PST on a larger scale as
program graduates go out into the community to practice.
At the University of Maryland Medical Center (UMMC), a 1-
year pilot of PST in the Medical Intensive Care Unit (MICU)
was completed under management of the MICU ID consult
team. Given its success, a more sustainable model for testing
was desired so the service was formalized into a hospital-wide
penicillin allergy consult service for adult patients. The objec-
tives of this manuscript are to describe the implementation of
an ID fellow-managed penicillin allergy consult service and as-
sess the perceived need for such a service with a national survey
of ID fellowship program directors.
METHODS
A prospective observational study of the implementation of an
ID fellow-managed penicillin allergy service was conducted at
UMMC. The UMMC is a 757-bed academic medical center of-
fering 6 ID consult services (general, surgical, solid organ trans-
plant, cancer and hematopoietic stem cell transplant, medical
intensive care, and trauma) and 1 primary internal medicine
service, which cares for patients with human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) and other infections. The adult ID fellowship is a 2-
year accredited training program with 7 fellows per year. The
study was recognized by the Institutional Review Board (IRB)
as a Quality Assessment Project.
Training
At the beginning of the academic year, ID fellows and interested
ID faculty received education and training on PST, including
practical preparation and a didactic lecture. Initial training
was given onsite by representatives from ALK-Abello with sub-
sequent trainings and refresher courses led by “super-users”.
Training included hands-on demonstration using actual testing
supplies and volunteers with reported penicillin allergy from
department staff. Super-users were 3 ID faculty who had re-
ceived training from ALK-Abello and had the most experience
with testing. Competency was assessed via a checklist that was
evaluated by one of the super-users. All providers also had ac-
cess to web-based videos, a slide presentation, and suggested lit-
erature. Individualized follow-up training sessions for the
fellows before their scheduled penicillin allergy service month
were also provided. The most flexible scheduling for an ID fel-
low to perform the penicillin allergy consults was during the
rotation on the internal medicine ID/HIV service, where their
primary role is teaching.
Testing
Recruitment of patients had 3 pathways: (1) the antimicrobial
stewardship team through the daily antibiotic and chart reviews,
(2) ID consult service, or (3) the primary team requesting a con-
sult via dedicated pager. The availability of the penicillin allergy
service was advertised broadly among the different inpatient
services, and the ID fellow covering the service carried a dedi-
cated penicillin allergy service pager. After a request for consul-
tation, fellows performed detailed drug allergy histories and
determined appropriateness for PST. Patients were excluded
from PST if their allergy history revealed an anaphylactic reac-
tion to a penicillin within 5 years, if they had tolerated the de-
sired post-PST antibiotic in the past, or if there was a history of
any serious non-Type 1 adverse reaction to a penicillin, cepha-
losporin, or carbapenem. Serious adverse reactions included
Type 2, 3, and 4 drug reactions, which are contraindications
to PST or rechallenge [5]. Penicillin skin test eligibility was ul-
timately determined by the ID fellow and ID attending physi-
cian based on the allergy history and on consideration on
how test results may influence further therapy. For example, if
the history of a patient with a reported penicillin allergy re-
vealed that the patient had tolerated a cephalosporin in the
past, and a cephalosporin was an appropriate treatment option
for the patient, the team would not have pursued testing for that
patient. However, if the target antibiotic therapy for that same
patient was nafcillin, the team would have pursued PST because
tolerance of ceftriaxone does not indicate the patient would tol-
erate nafcillin. Patients who were eligible and consented to PST
had the skin test performed by the fellow with ID attending
physician supervision.
The test kit was dispensed from the pharmacy and included
PPL, PCN G potassium diluted to a concentration of 10 000
units/mL, histamine control (positive control), preservative-
free sodium chloride 0.9% (negative control), and 1 amoxicillin
250 mg capsule. The preliminary prick test was performed with
the Duotip-test II applicator device (Lincoln Diagnostics, Inc.,
Decatur, IL) using the PPL, PCN G, positive control, and neg-
ative control. Appearance of erythema and a wheal diameter of
≥3 mm greater than the negative control was indicative of a
positive test. A negative reaction to the histamine control was
considered an indeterminate test. If the prick tests were negative
or equivocal, intradermal testing was done by applying dupli-
cate 3 mm blebs of PPL and PCN G and 1 bleb of sodium chlo-
ride 0.9% and examining them after 15 minutes. If there was no
response, defined as no increase in size of original bleb and no
reaction greater than the control site, the test was considered
negative [5]. Negative tests were followed with a single oral
dose of amoxicillin 250 mg or the definitive non-aztreonam
β-lactam therapy. A core group of ID attending physicians
2 • OFID • Heil et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ofid/article-abstract/3/3/ofw155/2593297 by guest on 01 June 2019
 with expertise in PST provided supervision on an alternating
basis. Additional ID attending physicians who were comfortable
with the procedure and had prior training supervised fellow-
directed PST for their own patients while on a consult service.
Recommendations for definitive antibiotic therapy based on
PST result were made by the responsible ID consult service/at-
tending. If patients had not been seen by one of the ID consult
teams until PST, the appropriate service was asked to evaluate
and follow the patient for antibiotic recommendations.
Documentation of PST testing and result was done in the pa-
tient chart on a dedicated consult form. The ID fellows were re-
sponsible for updating the allergy section of the electronic
medical record. Patients were also given take-home pocket
cards with their test results to share with their primary care phy-
sician and future healthcare providers.
Outcome Evaluation
The primary outcome of the study was to assess the feasibility
and acceptability of an ID fellow-managed PST consult service.
In addition, we sought to assess the impact of the PST service on
the optimization of antibiotic selection. For this, patient data
were collected retrospectively by 3 study team members at the
end of the first year of the program; they included demograph-
ics, details of reported penicillin allergy, PST results, clinical and
microbiological indication for antibiotic use, antibiotic receipt
before and after testing, length of hospital stay, and information
on re-admissions. Optimization was assessed by the study in-
vestigators as changes in antibiotic therapy to narrower spec-
trum antibiotics, more effective therapy based on national
guideline recommendations (eg, vancomycin to nafcillin for
methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus [MSSA] bacteremia
[13, 14]), and more cost-effective therapy based on current an-
tibiotic costs at UMMC (eg, aztreonam vs piperacillin/tazobac-
tam [15]).
At our institution, patients with a reported penicillin allergy
are often receiving aztreonam as empiric therapy for infections
with concern for involvement of Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
However, the greater than 60% of local Pseudomonas isolates
with aztreonam resistance and the 10-fold higher cost of aztreo-
nam compared with alternative agents such as piperacillin/tazo-
bactam at UMMC make this choice problematic. Therefore, we
evaluated change in aggregate aztreonam use as a secondary
outcome. Change in aggregate aztreonam use was evaluated
as days of therapy (DOT) and defined daily dose (DDD) per
1000 patient days (PD) 1 year before and the year after PST
implementation and was compared with the Mann–Whitney
U test. Where indicated, clinical variables between patients
were compared with the χ2 test.
Survey
Fellows completed a questionnaire regarding their knowledge of
and experiences with PST at the beginning of the study and after
9 months. In addition, a survey of PST practices was sent out to
all ID fellowship program directors (n = 156) in the United
States; this was exempt from IRB approval based in federal reg-
ulations 45 CFR46. Descriptive statistics were used to analyze
the study and survey results. All statistical analysis was per-
formed with Stata 13 (StataCorp LP, College Station, TX).
RESULTS
Primary Outcome: Increase in Penicillin Skin Test (PST) With Infectious
Diseases Fellow-Run PST Service
Implementation of the PST service was well received by both
hospital practitioners and the ID fellows participating in the
service. In the year before establishing the formal PST service,
only 21 patients received penicillin skin testing. In comparison,
during the first 11 months of the service, 90 patients were as-
sessed for penicillin allergy testing and 76 patients underwent
penicillin skin testing (Figure 1). The ID fellows appreciated
the opportunity to learn this additional skill and reported in-
creased comfort with assessing patient allergy, determining pa-
tient eligibility for PST, and performance of PST based on the
pre- and postsurvey. In addition, all of the fellows reported on
the postsurvey that they believe PST is useful to their everyday
practice.
The most commonly reported reaction to penicillin was
hives, and the timing of the reaction was unknown in most
cases (Table 1). The vast majority of patients had a negative
skin test (64% or 84%), 9 (12%) had invalid tests, and 3 (4%)
had positive tests. Of the valid tests, 96% were negative and
84% with a negative test had antibiotic changes. All patients
with negative tests received either a 250-mg amoxicillin oral
challenge or the definitive non-aztreonam β-lactam therapy.
Most patients were switched to a penicillin (55%), followed by
a cephalosporin (40%) or a carbapenem (5%).
No patient experienced any serious adverse effects related to
non-aztreonam β-lactam antibiotics; 3 patients had a delayed
mild rash after switch to a β-lactam (nafcillin, ertapenem, and
cefepime, respectively). Of 14 patients who had negative skin
tests and were re-admitted within the first year, 9 received
β-lactams (5 received penicillins and 4 received a cephalospo-
rin) during their subsequent admissions, all without complica-
tion. The allergy history in the electronic medical record was
appropriately updated for 88% of patients.
Clinical Impact of Penicillin Skin Testing
Bone and joint were the most frequent sites of infection (17 of
64; 26.5%) in patients with a negative PST; 10 of the 17 patients
were tested with the aim to optimize definitive antibiotic ther-
apy. Definitive treatment for gastrointestinal (10.9%), endovas-
cular (9.4%), and lung (7.8%) infections and empiric treatment
for skin/soft tissue infections (7.8%) were the next most com-
mon indications. Eleven of 64 (17%) infections in patients
with negative PST were due to MSSA, 10 due to Streptococcus
spp, and 9 were due to ampicillin-sensitive Enterococcus spp.
ID-Managed Penicillin Skin Testing • OFID • 3
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ofid/article-abstract/3/3/ofw155/2593297 by guest on 01 June 2019
 Vancomycin was the most commonly used antibiotic in 23%
of patients before PST and aztreonam in 22%. Other antibiotics
used before testing included fluoroquinolones, tetracyclines,
and clindamycin. Twenty patients were switched from aztreo-
nam to alternate agents based on results of the skin test. Aztreo-
nam use decreased from a mean ± standard deviations of
4.2 ± 2.6 DDD/1000 PD to 2.3 ± 1.3DDD/1000 PD (P = .01)
and from 3.4 ± 0.9 DOT/1000 PD to 1.9 ± 0.9DOT/1000 PD
(P = .0015) after PST implementation, translating into approx-
imately $26 000 in savings per year. Overall, 63% of patients re-
ceived a narrower spectrum antibiotic, 80% received more
effective therapy, and 61% received more cost-effective therapy
as a result of PST testing (Table 2).
A negative histamine control leading to an invalid PST oc-
curred in 9 patients (12%), 7 of whom underwent testing
while in the ICU. Intensive care unit stay was associated with
an odds ratio of 23.45 (95% confidence interval, 3.57–246.13)
of a negative histamine response (P < .001). However, 10 pa-
tients tested while in the ICU had a valid test result; there was
no difference in age, LOS, time of consult to admission, steroid
use, administration of antihistamine within 48 hours of the test,
or the presence of renal insufficiency between the 7 ICU
patients with an invalid histamine test and the 10 ICU patients
with a valid histamine test.
Infectious Diseases Fellowship Program Director Survey
Of 156 ID fellowship program directors surveyed, 50 responded
(32% response rate). Sixty percent of respondents had PST
available at their institution, which was performed by allergy/
immunology consult services in 94%, pharmacy in 3%, and out-
patient only in 3%. The vast majority (92%) of respondents in-
dicated that overreporting of penicillin allergy is a problem in
their practice that affects antibiotic selection but listed inade-
quate personnel and time as the main barriers to PST imple-
mentation at their institution. Fifty-six percent of responding
program directors thought their fellows could be involved in
an inpatient PST service, and 70% thought that an inpatient
PST service involving their ID fellows would benefit patient
care and antibiotic stewardship in their hospital.
DISCUSSION
The frequent overreporting of penicillin allergy has been shown
to lead to suboptimal antibiotic use and patient outcomes. The
PST is a valuable tool in patients reporting penicillin allergy, but
Figure 1.
Flowchart of patients assessed by penicillin allergy consult team.
4 • OFID • Heil et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ofid/article-abstract/3/3/ofw155/2593297 by guest on 01 June 2019
 its use in inpatients, where its immediate benefit is probably
highest, is often limited by resource availability. This pilot
study demonstrated that a successful PST program can be suc-
cessfully implemented in a large urban tertiary medical center
by ID physicians with fellow support. The program had an im-
portant positive impact on patient care at our institution with
84% of patients with negative tests having their antibiotic ther-
apy changed based on the test results. One reason for an ab-
sence of change of antibiotic therapy was that patients were
tested preemptively while not receiving antibiotics (eg, a bone
marrow transplant patient being tested before transplant to
facilitate optimal antibiotic therapy for subsequent episodes
of febrile neutropenia or antibiotic prophylaxis). For other
patients, antibiotic therapy was not adjusted due to a change
in circumstances after testing (eg, maintaining the patient on
linezolid posttesting to facilitate intravenous to oral therapy
conversions for discharge).
Two surveys from the Emerging Infections Network plus our
own survey of the ID fellowship program directors indicate that
appropriate elimination of penicillin allergy from a patient’s re-
cord can impact antimicrobial stewardship at their own institu-
tions [9, 16]. Infectious diseases physicians are frequently
consulted to evaluate patients reporting a penicillin allergy
and play an important role in the management of these patients.
Exclusion of antibiotic allergies can lead to more appropriate
antibiotic selection, improved antibiotic stewardship, and safer
administration of antibiotics [16]. Limitations identified to in-
corporating PST most often cited were inadequate personnel
and inadequate time. A PST service incorporating ID fellow
trainees not only offers personnel to administer test but also a
valuable learning experience to the trainees. In addition to the
national survey, we performed an interval survey of the UMMC
fellows before the start of the program and on completion of the
program. Most fellows reported increased confidence in their
ability to assess a patient’s allergy history, to determine when
a PST is indicated for a patient, and in their ability to perform
the PST. All fellows surveyed agreed that PST was useful to their
practice.
Allergy skin testing has traditionally been done exclusively by
allergists, generally in the outpatient setting. A survey assessing
how allergists vs nonallergists manage patients with a penicillin
allergy found a difference in the willingness of nonallergists to
administer penicillins after a negative skin test [17]. Physicians
without exposure to allergy skin testing are unfamiliar and un-
comfortable with requesting, administering, and interpreting
test results, and they may be less likely to use those results in
subsequent clinical decisions. A study of the management of
patients reporting a penicillin allergy in a large Canadian tertia-
ry-care academic hospital without allergists on staff found that
allergy documentation was poor and patients with alleged pen-
icillin allergies had increased antibiotic-related costs [18].
Although the ideal scenario would be to have allergists available
Table 1.
Demographic Information of Penicillin Allergy Consult Patients
(n = 90)
Number of Patients (%)
Gender
Male
28 (31)
Female
62 (69)
Hospital Location
Medical/Surgical Floors
61 (68)
Intermediate Care Unit
8 (9)
Intensive Care Unit
21 (23)
Penicillin Allergy History
Reaction
Rash
16 (18)
Hives
28 (31)
Swelling
11 (12)
Anaphylaxis
14 (16)
Unknown
21 (23)
Timing of Reaction
Unknown
50 (56)
Childhood
17 (19)
>10 yrs ago
17 (19)
5–10 yrs ago
3 (3)
<5 yrs ago
3 (3)
Antibiotic Indication
Bacteremia
7 (8)
Bone/Joint Infection
18 (20)
Endovascular Infection
6 (7)
Gastrointestinal Infection
15 (16)
Neutropenic Fever
2 (2)
Pneumonia
13 (14)
Skin and Soft Tissue Infection
17 (19)
Sepsis of Unknown Origin
6 (7)
Surgical Prophylaxis
1 (1)
Urinary Tract Infection
5 (6)
Testing Information
Source of Penicillin Allergy Consult Request
Infectious Diseases Consult Service
72 (80)
Primary Care Team
10 (11)
Antimicrobial Stewardship Team
8 (9)
Penicillin Skin Test Performed
Yes
76 (84)
No
14 (16)
Table 2.
Penicillin Skin Test Results and Antibiotic Management
Number of Patients (%)
Penicillin Skin Test Results
Positive
3 (4)
Negative
64 (84)
Invalid
9 (12)
Antibiotic Management for Patients With Valid Skin Tests
Change in antibiotic therapy
54/67 (81)
Narrower spectrum
34/54 (63)
Clinically more effective therapy
43/54 (80)
More cost-effective therapy
33/54 (61)
Patient’s allergy list updated to reflect test results
59 (88)
ID-Managed Penicillin Skin Testing • OFID • 5
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ofid/article-abstract/3/3/ofw155/2593297 by guest on 01 June 2019
 to assess penicillin allergies for inpatients, in reality, the number
of certified allergists is not sufficient to manage this commonly
reported allergy with approximately 5900 board certified aller-
gists in the United States who mostly practice in an outpatient
setting [19]. The PST is a relatively straightforward test that can
be administered by physicians, nurses, and, in some states, med-
ical assistants and pharmacists. Novel successful models of PST
have been demonstrated in the emergency department (ED)
setting by ED physicians [20] and in a tertiary care center by
pharmacists [21]. It is important to increase access to this test
by using nonallergist practitioners with proper training when
allergists are not available. One advantage of an ID-managed in-
patient PST program is that ID providers are often the ones who
first recognize the need for testing and can quickly perform the
test and act on the results. In addition, by providing this training
to ID fellows, upon graduation they are well positioned to im-
plement PST in their future practices, expanding overall access
to testing. Inpatient PST testing can be counted towards antibi-
otic stewardship and antibiotic cost-savings activities. In one
institution, the annual savings from successful transitions to
β-lactam agents after negative PSTs was $82 000 [8]. In the out-
patient setting, up to 9 Current Procedural Terminology (CPT)
codes are applied to 1 PST based on number of pricks/injec-
tions, with a total reimbursement of approximately $180 000
with an additional CPT code for an oral challenge.
In our study, of the patients with valid tests, 96% tested neg-
ative, similar to reports in the literature [22], and led to antibi-
otic changes in most of the patients. These changes included
narrower, more clinically effective, and/or more cost-effective
antibiotics. Establishment of an ID fellow-managed program
increased access to testing, allowed for optimization of antibiot-
ic therapy for an increased number of patients, and helped to
train ID specialists who can bring PST experience to their future
practices.
Two high-impact areas for antibiotic optimization in penicil-
lin allergic patients are invasive MSSA and enterococcal infec-
tions. Our study demonstrated multiple patients with MSSA
bacteremia with antibiotic changes from vancomycin to nafcil-
lin or cefazolin after negative PST, which has repeatedly been
shown to be superior therapy [13, 14]. Likewise, improved out-
comes are seen for patients with Enterococcus faecalis endocar-
ditis changed from vancomycin, daptomycin, or linezolid to
ampicillin [24, 25]. In a recent study, a model was published
simulating 3 strategies for patients with MSSA bacteremia and
a reported penicillin allergy: (1) no allergy evaluation and
patient receives vancomycin; (2) allergy history-guided
treatment—if history excludes anaphylaxis, give cefazolin; and
(3) allergy evaluation with PST—if negative, give cefazolin.
The model demonstrated improvements in rates of MSSA
cure, recurrence, and death in patients with negative PST and
subsequent cefazolin therapy (84.5%/8.9%/6.6% with negative
PST and cefazolin vs 67.3%/14.8%/17.9% with vancomycin) [23].
Although improvements were best in the negative PST group,
they were only marginally better than the allergy history-guided
treatment group, which had 83.4% cure, 9.3% recurrence, and
7.3% death. This reinforces the importance of thorough allergy
histories, which was part of our penicillin allergy service be-
cause we often found that PST was not needed when a thorough
allergy history was done. Of note, PST cannot fully assess ceph-
alosporin or carbapenem allergy, and use of these agents after
penicillin skin testing would have to be guided by physician’s
discretion.
Another area where we found testing to be beneficial is before
bone marrow or solid organ transplant to remove the allergy
from patient records in anticipation of future antibiotic needs.
Although the patients tested did not require antibiotics at the
time, clarification of their allergies before transplant allowed
for better antibiotic options in the setting of febrile neutropenia
or infection posttransplant and more optimal surgical prophy-
laxis per our institutional guidelines for the solid organ
transplants.
One major challenge in this PST program was the rate of in-
valid tests due to a negative histamine control (12%), which has
been reported to be as high as 20% in the literature [26]. A re-
cent analysis of 52 cases of patients with a negative histamine
response in the absence of antihistamine (H1 receptor blocker)
therapy for 72 hours before testing identified ICU status regard-
less of age to be associated with a negative histamine response.
In addition, systemic corticosteroids, older age, and receipt of an
H2 receptor blocker (eg, ranitidine, famotidine) were associated
with a lack of histamine response [27]. Our results support the
observation that ICU admission might increase the risk of a
negative histamine test. This could be a consideration when
evaluating patients for skin testing. In our experience, attempts
to retest patients with invalid tests have added significant mate-
rial and time resource requirements.
Another challenge in our study was to ensure the optimal
documentation of test results. Because this was a real-world im-
plementation study, it was noted during the retrospective chart
review that the patient allergy history in the chart was updated
for only 88% of tested patients. For optimal impact of a PST
program, communication of results to future providers is of
the utmost importance. Therefore, patients were given a take-
home wallet card with their test results and were advised to
share it with their outpatient providers or at any future hospi-
talizations. However, suboptimal documentation in the medical
charts of our hospital or other hospitals and clinics may still im-
pede future antibiotic therapy. Shared access to electronic med-
ical records across the healthcare continuum may improve this
in the future.
Our study has several limitations. The study was observation-
al in nature and we could not control for patient selection bias.
In addition, a formal cost analysis of antibiotic savings was not
completed. However, aztreonam use declined over the course of
6 • OFID • Heil et al
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ofid/article-abstract/3/3/ofw155/2593297 by guest on 01 June 2019
 the intervention and suggested cost savings for our hospital—
although we cannot formally exclude other reasons for the de-
cline. In addition, our program may not be generalizable to ID
programs that train fewer fellows or hospitals that have no fellow-
ship program and hence lack the necessary personnel resources.
CONCLUSIONS
In conclusion, we evaluated a durable model for inpatient pen-
icillin skin testing managed by ID fellows. This model could in-
crease access to PST at institutions without adequate access to
allergists while also providing an important educational experi-
ence to ID trainees.
Acknowledgments
We acknowledge the infectious disease fellows from the University of
Maryland for their continued efforts in our penicillin skin testing initiatives.
Financial support.
This work was supported by an education grant
from ALK-Abello, Inc. E. L. H. and J. T. B. received support for travel
from ALK-Abello to present the results of this work.
Potential conflicts of interest.
All authors: No reported conflicts. All
authors have submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential Con-
flicts of Interest.
References
1. Lee CE, Zembower TR, Fotis MA, et al. The incidence of antimicrobial allergies in
hospitalized patients: implications regarding prescribing patterns and emerging
bacterial resistance. Arch Intern Med 2000; 160:2819–22.
2. Charneski L, Deshpande G, Smith SW. Impact of an antimicrobial allergy label in
the medical record on clinical outcomes in hospitalized patients. Pharmacothera-
py 2011; 31:742–7.
3. MacLaughlin EJ, Saseen JJ, Malone DC. Costs of beta-lactam allergies: selection
and costs of antibiotics for patients with a reported beta-lactam allergy. Arch
Fam Med 2000; 9:722–6.
4. Unger NR, Gauthier TP, Cheung LW. Penicillin skin testing: potential implications
for antimicrobial stewardship. Pharmacotherapy 2013; 33:856–67.
5. PREPEN [product information]. Round Rock, TX: ALK-Abello, Inc.; 2009.
6. Sogn DD, Evans R, Sheperd GM, et al. Results of the National Institute of Allergy
and Infectious Diseases collaborative clinical trial to test the predictive value of
skin testing with major and minor penicillin derivatives in hospitalized adults.
Arch Intern Med 1992; 152:1025–32.
7. Harris AD, Sauberman L, Kabbash L, et al. Penicillin skin testing: a way to opti-
mize antibiotic utilization. Am J Med 1999; 107:166–8.
8. Rimawi RH, Cook PP, Gooch M, et al. The impact of penicillin skin testing on
clinical practice and antimicrobial stewardship. J Hosp Med 2013; 8:341–5.
9. Abbo LM, Beekmann SE, Hooton TM, et al. Management of antimicrobial aller-
gies by infectious diseases physicians. JAMA Intern Med 2013; 173:1376–7.
10. Chandrasekar P, Havlichek D, Johnson LB. Infectious diseases subspecialty: de-
clining demand challenges and opportunities. Clin Infect Dis 2014; 59:1593–8.
11. Chandrasekar PH. Bad news to worse news: 2015 infectious diseases fellowship
match results. Clin Infect Dis 2015; 60:1438.
12. The Match. Match Results Statistics. Medical Specialties Matching Program-2015.
Appointment Year 2016, pp 16. Available at: www.nrmp.org. Accessed 29 April
2016.
13. Schweizer ML, Furuno JP, Harris AD, et al. Comparative effectiveness of nafcillin
or cefazolin versus vancomycin in methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus
bacteremia. BMC Infect Dis 2011; 11:279.
14. Kim SH, Kim KH, Kim HB, et al. Outcome of vancomycin treatment in patients
with methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia. Antimicrob Agents
Chemother 2008; 52:192–7.
15. Red Book Online [database online]. Greenwood Village, CO: Truven Health
Analytics, Inc. Updated periodically. Available at: https://www.micromedex
solutions.com/micromedex2/librarian/ssl/true. Accessed 20 November 2015.
16. Infectious Diseases Society of America Emerging Infections Network Report for
Query “Antibiotic Allergy Practices”, 2015. Available at: http://ein.idsociety.org/.
Accessed 6 August 2016.
17. Suetrong N, Klaewsongkram J. The differences and similarities between
allergists and non-allergists for penicillin allergy management. J Allergy (Cairo)
2014; doi:10.1155/2014/214183.
18. Picard M, Begin P, Bouchard H, et al. Treatment of patients with a history of pen-
icillin allergy in a large tertiary-care academic hospital. J Allergy Clin Immunol
Pract 2013; 1:252–7.
19. American Board of Allergy and Immunology. Diplomate Statistics as of October
2015. Available at: https://www.abai.org/statistics_diplomates.asp. Accessed 26
November 2015.
20. Raja AS, Lindsell CJ, Bernstein JA, et al. The use of penicillin skin testing to assess
the prevalence of penicillin allergy in an emergency department setting. Ann
Emerg Med 2009; 54:72–7.
21. Wall GC, Peters L, Leaders CB, Wille JA. Pharmacist-managed service providing
penicillin allergy skin tests. Am J Health Syst Pharm 2004; 61:1271–5.
22. Salkind AR, Cuddy PG, Foxworth JW. Is this patient allergic to penicillin? JAMA
2001; 285:2498–505.
23. Blumenthal KG, Parker RA, Shenoy ES, Walensky RP. Improving clinical out-
comes in patients with methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia
and reported penicillin allergy. Clin Infect Dis 2015; 61:741–9.
24. Ceron I, Munoz P, Marin M, et al. Efficacy of daptomycin in the treatment of en-
terococcal endocarditis: a 5 year comparison with conventional therapy. J Antimi-
cro Chemother 2014; 69:1669–74.
25. Baddour LM, Wilson WR, Bayer AS, et al. Infective endocarditis in adults: diag-
nosis, antimicrobial therapy, and management of complications. Circulation 2015;
132:1–53.
26. Lin E, Saxon A, Ridel M. Penicillin allergy: value of including amoxicillin as
a determinant in penicillin skin testing. Int Arch Allergy Immunol 2010;
152:313–8.
27. Geng B, Thakor A, Clayton E, et al. Factors associated with negative histamine
control for penicillin allergy skin testing in the inpatient setting. Ann Allergy Asth-
ma Immunol 2015; 115:33–8.
ID-Managed Penicillin Skin Testing • OFID • 7
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ofid/article-abstract/3/3/ofw155/2593297 by guest on 01 June 2019
