 Research Paper
Premalignant SOX2 overexpression in the fallopian tubes of ovarian
cancer patients: Discovery and validation studies
Karin Hellner a,b,1, Fabrizio Miranda a,b,1, Donatien Fotso Chedom a,b,o,1, Sandra Herrero-Gonzalez a,b,1,
Daniel M. Hayden c,1, Rick Tearle c,1, Mara Artibani a,b,d, Mohammad KaramiNejadRanjbar a,b, Ruth Williams d,
Kezia Gaitskell a,b, Samar Elorbany a,b, Ruoyan Xu a,b, Alex Laios a,b, Petronela Buiga a,b, Karim Ahmed e,
Sunanda Dhar f, Rebecca Yu Zhang c, Leticia Campo g, Kevin A. Myers g, María Lozano h, María Ruiz-Miró i,
Sónia Gatius j, Alba Mota k,l, Gema Moreno-Bueno k,l, Xavier Matias-Guiu j, Javier Benítez m,n, Lorna Witty o,
Gil McVean o, Simon Leedham o, Ian Tomlinson o, Radoje Drmanac c,p, Jean-Baptiste Cazier g,q, Robert Klein c,
Kevin Dunne c, Robert C. Bast Jr r, Stephen H. Kennedy b, Bassim Hassan s, Stefano Lise o, María José Garcia m,n,
Brock A. Peters c,p, Christopher Yau o,t, Tatjana Sauka-Spengler d, Ahmed Ashour Ahmed a,b,⁎
a Ovarian Cancer Cell Laboratory, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Headington, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK
b Nuffield Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Oxford, Women's Centre, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK
c Complete Genomics, Inc., 2071 Stierlin Ct., Mountain View, CA 94043, United States
d University of Oxford, Gene Regulatory Networks in Development and Disease Laboratory, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, Radcliffe Department of Medicine, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK
e Trinity College, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1TQ, UK
f Department of Histopathology, Oxford University Hospitals, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK
g Department of Oncology, University of Oxford, Old Road Campus Research Building, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7DQ, UK
h Histopathology Core Unit, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain
i Biobank, Institut de Recerca Biomèdica Lleida (IRBLLEIDA), Lleida, Spain
j Department of Pathology and Molecular Genetics, Hospital Universitari Arnau de Vilanova, University of Lleida, IRBLLEIDA, Lleida, Spain
k Department of Biochemistry, Universidad Autonoma de Madrid (UAM), Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas “Alberto Sols” (CSIC-UAM), IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain
l MD Anderson international Foundation, Madrid, Spain
m Human Genetics Group, Spanish National Cancer Research Center (CNIO), Madrid, Spain
n Biomedical Network Research Centre on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Spain
o Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, NIHR Biomedical Research Centre, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK
p BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China
q Centre for Computational Biology, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston B15 2TT, UK
r Department of Experimental Therapeutics, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, University of Texas, USA
s Tumor Growth Control Group, Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3RE, UK
t Department of Statistics, 1 South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3TG, UK
a b s t r a c t
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 31 May 2016
Received in revised form 30 June 2016
Accepted 30 June 2016
Available online 2 July 2016
Current screening methods for ovarian cancer can only detect advanced disease. Earlier detection has proved dif-
ficult because the molecular precursors involved in the natural history of the disease are unknown. To identify
early driver mutations in ovarian cancer cells, we used dense whole genome sequencing of micrometastases
and microscopic residual disease collected at three time points over three years from a single patient during
treatment for high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC). The functional and clinical significance of the identified
mutations was examined using a combination of population-based whole genome sequencing, targeted deep se-
quencing, multi-center analysis of protein expression, loss of function experiments in an in-vivo reporter assay
and mammalian models, and gain of function experiments in primary cultured fallopian tube epithelial (FTE)
cells. We identified frequent mutations involving a 40 kb distal repressor region for the key stem cell differenti-
ation gene SOX2. In the apparently normal FTE, the region was also mutated. This was associated with a profound
increase in SOX2 expression (p b 2−16), which was not found in patients without cancer (n = 108). Importantly,
we show that SOX2 overexpression in FTE is nearly ubiquitous in patients with HGSOCs (n = 100), and common
in BRCA1-BRCA2 mutation carriers (n = 71) who underwent prophylactic salpingo-oophorectomy. We propose
Keywords:
Ovarian cancer
Fallopian tube
BRCA mutations
SOX2
Screening
Precancer
EBioMedicine 10 (2016) 137–149
⁎ Corresponding author at: Ovarian Cancer Cell Laboratory, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Headington, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK.
E-mail address: ahmed.ahmed@obs-gyn.ox.ac.uk (A.A. Ahmed).
1 These authors contributed equally to this work.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2016.06.048
2352-3964/© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
EBioMedicine
journal homepage: www.ebiomedicine.com
 that the finding of SOX2 overexpression in FTE could be exploited to develop biomarkers for detecting disease at a
premalignant stage, which would reduce mortality from this devastating disease.
© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
1. Introduction
Because of late presentation and chemotherapy resistance ovarian
cancer is the deadliest amongst all gynecological malignancies. Over
80% of ovarian tumors are high-grade serous ovarian cancers (HGSOCs),
which is a particularly fatal type due to its initial asymptomatic but ag-
gressive growth behavior. Current methods of detection have been suc-
cessfully implemented for detection and possible reduction of mortality
from ovarian cancer (Menon et al., 2015; Drescher et al., 2013). Howev-
er, such methods are only capable of the detection of established inva-
sive cancers. Understanding the natural history of the disease and the
discovery of novel markers for detection at a premalignant stage will
enable the effective control of ovarian cancer.
In this work, we prospectively analyzed the genomic composition of
a single tumor over a three-year period to identify driver mutations that
may have contributed to the initiation of the tumor. We identified non-
coding mutations that cluster near genes involved in stem cell regula-
tion. We established that one mutation is located in a previously unrec-
ognized repressor element of SOX2, an important stem cell gene, and is
associated with induction of SOX2 expression. We demonstrate that the
expansion of SOX2-expressing cells within the fallopian tube epitheli-
um is a common feature of HGSOCs, a crucial finding that opens new av-
enues for early disease detection prior to clinical presentation.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Overall Description of the Study Design
The clinical samples for this translational study were obtained from
patients recruited to the Gynecological Oncology Targeted Therapy
Study 01 (GO-Target-01) and the Oxford Ovarian Cancer Predict Che-
motherapy Response Trial (OXO-PCR-01) under research ethics approv-
al number 11-SC-0014 and 12-SC-0404, respectively. We performed
intraoperative video recording to document sampling sites (Supple-
mentary video). Strict standard operating procedures were used to di-
minish the risk of DNA cross-contamination during sample collection
and processing. Whole genome sequencing (WGS) of laser capture mi-
crodissected tumor islets (n = 30, Supplementary Fig. S1A) and bulk tis-
sue samples of a single HGSOC (patient study ID: 11152). We obtained
WGS data from 39 samples from three independent data sets and a
tumor recurrence set (Supplementary Fig. S1B). Samples were obtained
from different locations before chemotherapy, after neoadjuvant che-
motherapy and approximately two and half years later at the time of
first recurrence (Fig. 1, Supplementary Table 1). Complete macroscopic
clearance at all sites (Supplementary video) as well as microscopic
clearance of the peritoneal implants at sites A and B were documented
following chemotherapy. Microscopic residual chemoresistant disease
Fig. 1. An ovarian cancer model for investigating primary chemotherapy resistance. A diagram illustrating the sites from which the biopsies were obtained in patient 11152 and the
corresponding intra-operative images of the biopsy sites. The sub-diaphragmatic peritoneum (site A), the para-cecal peritoneum (site B) and the omentum (site C) were sampled in
the primary tumor. A para-rectal mass (Recur A) and a pelvic node (Recur B) were sampled at presentation of disease recurrence. Note the complete macroscopic resolution of the
tumor following chemotherapy (also see Supplementary video). TP53 immunohistochemical staining of a tumor islet from MRCD is also presented.
138
K. Hellner et al. / EBioMedicine 10 (2016) 137–149
 (MRCD) was only detected at the omentum in position C. Sequencing of
tumor islets was performed using long fragment read (LFR) WGS
(Peters et al., 2012) of 30 tumor islets (typically comprising only tens
of cancer cells). A table of variants was generated and filtered using
“cgatools” and custom scripts. GREAT software (McLean et al., 2010)
was used for gene ontology analysis. Targeted sequencing was carried
out for validation of mutations using 100 bp paired-end sequencing
and read mapping was performed using STAMPY software (Lunter
and Goodson, 2011), whilst variants were identified using PLATYPUS
(Rimmer et al., 2014). Digital PCR was performed using the Droplet
Reader (BioRad) and analyzed with the QuantaLife software (BioRad).
For the in-vivo studies, fertilized chicken eggs were electroporated
with enhancer constructs and analyzed as previously described
(Betancur et al., 2010; Simoes-Costa et al., 2012). Targeted deletion of
the BB5 region was performed using Clustered Regularly Interspaced
Short Palindromic Repeats (CRISPR) (Cong et al., 2013). Chromatin im-
munoprecipitation (ChIP) assays were carried out in primary fallopian
tube epithelial cells (Cong et al., 2013) and a fraction of the products
was used for either real-time PCR reactions or high throughput se-
quencing. Immunohistochemistry studies were carried out on the
Leica Bond Max staining system including the appropriate positive
and negative controls. Detailed materials and methods are available in
the Supplementary methods section.
2.2. Translational Studies
2.2.1. Ethical Approval
Tumor islets and blood samples for whole genome sequencing were
obtained from case 11152 who provided written consent to participate
in the prospective biomarker validation study Gynecological Oncology
Targeted Therapy Study 01 (GO-Target-01) under research ethics ap-
proval number 11/SC/0014. Targeted sequencing was performed on
samples from patients who participated in the same study and patients
who participated in the prospective Oxford Ovarian Cancer Predict Che-
motherapy Response Trial (OXO-PCR-01), under research ethics ap-
proval number 12/SC/0404. Necessary informed consents from study
participants were obtained as appropriate.
2.2.2. Clinical History and Sample Collection of Patient 11152
Patient 11152 presented with radiological evidence of at least stage
IIIC ovarian cancer with evidence of multiple omental and peritoneal
nodules, subcapsular splenic nodules and left paracardiac lymph node
enlargement and elevated CA125 tumor marker. The patient had a diag-
nostic laparoscopy and biopsy to confirm the diagnosis of HGSOC. On
the day of the procedure, tissue samples were retrieved, split in halves
and either saved in cryovials and immersed in dry ice within minutes
from obtaining the biopsy in theatre or formalin fixed for standard his-
tological diagnosis. Research samples were stored in −80 °C. In addi-
tion, a blood sample was obtained in theatre and saved in sterile
EDTA-collection tubes. The patient received three cycles of paclitaxel
and carboplatin and had near complete response. Following ten weeks
from the first laparoscopy, the patient underwent a diagnostic laparos-
copy to evaluate chemotherapy response, prior to proceeding, in the
same session, to standard debulking surgery. Guided by the first
video-laparoscopy, samples were obtained from the same sites from
which the initial biopsies were taken.
2.2.3. Precautions for Tissue Handling to Diminish the Risk of Cross Contam-
ination of DNA
Samples were collected from −80 °C to a box of dry ice and
transported within the same building to the cryostat room. Individual
cryovials were obtained from the dry-ice box and immediately placed
within a pre-cooled cryostat stage at −25 °C. The cryostat (CryoStar
70X, Thermo Scientific) was not previously used for routine diagnostic
or research work. The cryostat stage and dissection board were cleaned
by ethanol prior to use for individual samples, and gloves were changed
before cutting each new tissue biopsy. For each sample, a single dissec-
tion blade (MB DynaSharp Microtome Blade, Thermo Scientific) and
single sterile forceps (that was cleaned, individually wrapped and
autoclaved prior to use) were used. Samples were obtained from the
cryovials and placed on a sterile dish and cut using disposal single-use
blades to obtain a piece of tissue for processing. These tissue pieces
were then placed on individual new dissection discs for snap freezing
in optimal cutting temperature (OCT) compound (NEG-50, Richard-
Allan Scientific) prior to microtome cutting.
2.2.4. Section Processing for Laser Capture Microdissection
The first tissue section was mounted onto regular glass slides
(SuperFrost Plus, VWR International) for hematoxylin (Hematoxylin so-
lution, Gill No. 3, Sigma) and eosin (Eosin Y solution, Sigma) staining
(H&E), according to manufacturer's instructions, followed by six to ten
sequential tissue sections at 6 μm thickness onto polyethylene
naphthalate membrane (PEN) glass slides (MembraneSlide 1.0 PEN,
Zeiss) that were pre-exposed to UV light for 30 min. Slides were imme-
diately stored at −80 °C. Nuclease-free technique was used throughout
the procedure and buffers and alcohol solutions were cooled to 4 °C and
used fresh each time. Each H&E slide was reviewed by a gynecological
oncology pathologist (SD) to confirm the presence of cancer cells and
delineate their location. PEN slides were dipped in 50% ethanol for fixa-
tion and rinsed in H2O to remove excess OCT compound. The slides
were stained with cresyl violet (Sigma Aldrich) at a concentration of
0.1% (weight/volume) in 50% ethanol for 15 s, rinsed in 50% ethanol
and immediately used for microdissection. For formalin-fixed, paraffin
embedded (FFPE) material, 6 μm sections were cut onto activated PEN
slides and dried at 56 °C overnight, then dewaxed in Xylene (Sigma)
and rehydrated through graded alcohols to water, then briefly dipped
in 1% methyl green (Sigma), washed in H2O. The slides were dried at
37 °C for 1 h and then used for microdissection. Laser capture microdis-
section was performed on a PALM Laser Microdissection System (Zeiss)
and the cut tissue was catapulted into 200 μl membrane caps
(AdhesiveCap 200 opaque, Zeiss, Jena, Germany) and immediately
stored on dry ice. Images of empty caps as well as target area in 5×,
10× and 20× magnification were obtained prior to microdissection
for documentation. To maintain DNA integrity, slides were kept on dry
ice until microdissection and microdissection was performed for no lon-
ger than 45 min per slide. Caps were stored at −80 °C until sequencing.
2.2.5. Macrodissection of FTE
Serial unstained FFPE tissue sections (10 μm) were aligned with the
corresponding H&E stained section in which the location of the FTE was
pen marked. With a sterile, single-use scalpel blade tip the FTE tissue
was scrapped off the glass slide and mounted onto 200 μl a membrane
cap (AdhesiveCap 200 opaque, Zeiss, Jena, Germany). To avoid cross
contamination, the slides and caps were placed in sterile tissue culture
dishes. DNA extraction and amplification was performed using the
REPLIg FFPE kit (Qiagen). For macrodissection of the p53 signature
from FFPE immuno-stained sections the slides were incubated over-
night in Xylene at 37 °C. The coverslip was lifted and the slide soaked
in Xylene for 30 min, then washed in gradient ethanol. The tissue was
macrodissected using a scalpel blade tip. DNA was extracted with the
Arcturus® PicoPure® DNA isolation kit (Life technologies) and ampli-
fied using the REPLIg mini kit (Qiagen) according to manufacturer's in-
structions. DNA was quantified as described below.
2.3. DNA Extraction
For DNA extraction from frozen tissues 10 to 20 scrolls of tissue were
cut at 60 μm thickness using a cryostat as described above. For FFPE
samples, 10 to 20 scrolls of 20 μm thick sections were dewaxed with Xy-
lene and washed with 100% ethanol. DNA was extracted using the
DNeasy blood and tissue kit (Qiagen) according to manufacturers in-
structions. DNA concentrations were quantified using the PicoGreen
139
K. Hellner et al. / EBioMedicine 10 (2016) 137–149
 (Quant-iT™ PicoGreen® dsDNA Assay Kit, Life technologies), A260/280
ratio and absorption spectra were generated using a spectrophotometer
(Nanodrop ND-1000, Thermo Scientific) and broad range Qubit system
(Invitrogen) and quality was checked using a 1% agarose E-gel
(Invitrogen).
2.4. Sequencing
2.4.1. Targeted Sequencing
LFR sequencing and whole genome sequencing were performed as
previously described (Dean et al., 2002; Drmanac et al., 2010). A sum-
mary of the clinical characteristics of patients for whom targeted se-
quencing was performed is presented in Supplementary Table 2. For
sequencing the 2 Mb flanking the SOX2 gene, the online NimbleDesign
tool (http://www.nimblegen.com/products/nimbledesign/index.html)
was used to design capture primers (Roche). For sequencing of the
test set the TruSeq® DNA HT Sample Preparation Kit (Illumina) was
used to allow for multiplexing and captured using the Seq Cap EZ Choice
Library (Roche). Both kits were used according to manufacturer's in-
structions. Library quality control was carried out using the broad
range Qubit system (Invitrogen) and the 2200 TapeStation (Agilent).
Sequencing was carried out on a HiSeq2500 (Illumina) using TruSeq®
Rapid SBS 100 bp paired end sequencing. For sequencing the validation
set of matched tumor/normal DNA pairs, a more focused library of cap-
ture primers was designed targeting ~1.6 Mb flanking SOX2 (chr3:
180,806,202–182,429,714). DNA from paired samples and ChIP prod-
ucts were fragmented (S2, Covaris) and sample libraries were con-
structed and multiplexed using Seq Cap EZ kit (Roche) according to
manufacturer's instructions. Capture was performed as described
above. Quality control was carried out on a 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent)
and library concentrations were measured with the high sensitivity
Qubit system (Invitrogen). Sequencing was performed on a MiSeq plat-
form (Illumina) using v3 MiSeq chemistry. To increase coverage, the li-
braries for the blood sample and the microdissected tubal epithelium of
case 11152 were recaptured and sequenced using v2 MiSeq chemistry,
100 bp paired end.
2.4.2. Sanger Sequencing
For DNA sequencing using dye-terminator method, TP53 exon 8 was
amplified and sequenced using primers TP53-forward ‘GGGTGCAGTTA
TGCCTCAGATT’ and TP53-reverse ‘CGGCATTTTGAGTGTTAGACTGG’ as
previously described (Ahmed et al., 2010). SOX2 BB5 was amplified
and sequenced using the BB5-forward ‘CACCCATGTGAATCATCTCG’
and BB5-reverse ‘ACCAGGTGTCCGAGAGTACG’ primers. PCR was per-
formed using the high fidelity DNA Phusion polymerase (NEB) as per
manufacturer's instructions. Sequencing was performed for the rare
variants identified in patients (Supplementary Table 3) using the
primers listed in Supplementary Table 4.
2.4.3. Digital Droplet PCR
Digital droplet polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed
on duplicate samples. Primers 5833217_F; 5′-ACCTACTAGACCCCA
GGCAAG-3′ and 5833217_R; 5′-GGCGCAGGAGGAGACC-3′ were used
to amplify a 60 bp amplicon containing the BB5 nucleotide and either
detected using 5833217_V; 5′-CCTGGGACCCAAACC-3′ VIC-labeled
probe for wild type or 5833217_M; 5′-CTGGCACCCAAACC-3′ FAM-la-
beled probe for mutant amplicons (TaqMan® SNP Genotyping Assays,
custom design, Roche Molecular Systems). TP53 mutation was quanti-
fied using primers 22410689_F; 5′-CTGTGCGCCGGTCTCT-3′ and
22410689_R; 5′-TGGGACGGAACAGCTTTGAG-3′ to amplify a 64 bp
amplicon and detected using 22410689_V 5′-TGCGTGTTTGTGCCTG-3′
VIC-tagged
probe
for
wild
type
and
22410689_M;
5′-
TGCGTGTTTTTGCCTG-3′ FAM-tagged probe for mutant amplicons. Re-
actions were prepared using droplet digital PCR Super Mix (BioRad)
and standard PCR performed according to manufacturer's instructions.
Amplification events were detected with a digital PCR plate reader
(QX100 Droplet Reader, BioRad) and data was analyzed using the
QuantaSoft Software (Version 1.3.2.0, BioRad). Average droplet count
was 11,728 per sample. Samples with b7000 droplets were excluded
from the analysis.
2.5. Sequencing Analysis
2.5.1. Whole Genome Sequencing
Reads were mapped to the reference genome (GRCh37) and variants
were called by local de novo assembly as previously described
(Carnevali et al., 2012). A table of variants across the various tumor
and normal genome assemblies was generated and filtered using the
Complete Genomics cgatools program and custom scripts. Sequence
data were deposited in the European Genome-Phenome Archive
(EGA) with the following accession number: EGAS00001001909.
2.5.2. Performing Gene Ontology Enrichment Analysis
The functional prediction of cis-regulatory regions was performed
using the Genomic Region Enrichment of Annotation Tool (GREAT) as
previously described (McLean et al., 2010). In brief, GREAT assigns reg-
ulatory domains for each gene that consists of a basal domain (5 kb up-
stream and 1 kb downstream of transcription start site [TSS]) plus
extension of up to 1 Mb, but not beyond 1 Mb, in both directions to
the nearest gene basal domain. The enrichment for a particular biologi-
cal process gene ontology (which consists of a number of genes) was
computed by obtaining the ratio of the fraction of foreground (FG) var-
iants (i.e. the ancestor variants) that mapped to genes of a gene ontolo-
gy x to the fraction of background (BG) variants (e.g. progeny variants)
that mapped to the same gene ontology. To be regarded as a gene ontol-
ogy hit, we required that a gene ontology had a false discovery rate “Q
value” of b0.01 and a number of genes supporting a particular ontology
of more than ten. The BG was defined as either the progeny variants
(variants present in two or more tumor sites), the whole genome or
the number of germline variants as indicated in the text. Permutation
analysis was based on the assumption that random samples from the
background of equal size to the FG should not give higher enrichment
the one observed for the true FG. To test this, we obtained 10,000 sam-
ples of 750 variants from the BG and computed the enrichment for each
and counted the number of times in which that enrichment was higher
than the one observed by the true FG and presented the result (p-value)
as the fraction of the count from the total number of random samples.
The number of genes that GREAT assigned to the gene ontology
“stem cell differentiation” was 73 and this was the basis of the
analysis described above. We repeated the above analysis using the
total number of human genes (283) assigned to the same gene ontology
“GO:0048863” at the Gene Ontology data base (http://amigo.
geneontology.org/cgi-bin/amigo/go.cgi) and by using a subset of genes
(n = 81) that had an experimentally verified link to stem cell differen-
tiation by selecting the human genes that satisfied any of the following
terms: IDA; inferred from direct assay, IEP; inferred from expression
pattern, IGI; inferred from genetic interactions, IMP; inferred from mu-
tant phenotype.
2.5.3. Analysis of Targeted Sequencing Data
Reads were mapped to the reference genome (GRCh37) using
STAMPY software (Lunter and Goodson, 2011) and variants were iden-
tified using an in-house developed software, PLATYPUS (Rimmer et al.,
2014). Downstream analysis was performed using in-house developed
scripts. There were a total of 37,291 variants identified by sequencing.
Further analysis focused on single nucleotide substitutions in cancer
samples (n = 18,456 in 33 samples). To identify high quality rare vari-
ants, the analysis was restricted to variants that were present in less
than five samples, were not called in the 1000 Genomes Project
(Abecasis et al., 2012), and had a high quality score (i.e. flagged as
“pass” or “allele bias” by PLATYPUS). Only 861 variants met these
criteria and these are shown in Supplementary Table 5. In order to
140
K. Hellner et al. / EBioMedicine 10 (2016) 137–149
 compute whether the observed rare variants displayed regional enrich-
ment in the ovarian cancer set we adopted a simulation approach. First,
we obtained minor allele frequencies (MAF) for common SNPs (defined
as having MAF N 5%) from the 1000 Genomes Project in the 2 Mb region
flanking SOX2. We then simulated genotypes, based on those minor al-
lele frequencies, for samples consisting of 33 individuals (we ignore
linkage effects) and counted the number of heterozygotes or non-refer-
ence homozygotes observed across the 33 simulated profiles. This pro-
cess was repeated 1000 times in order to obtain an average profile of
common SNP density across the region. We then examined 40 kb win-
dows, spaced at overlapping intervals of 100 bp, and counted the num-
ber of rare variants observed across the 33 ovarian cancers. For each
window, we then computed the test statistic (observed number of
rare variants in ovarian cancers/expected number of common SNPs).
In order to assess whether the calculated ratios were significantly
enriched, we randomly sampled 100 subsets of 33 individuals from
the wellderly (well elderly individuals) dataset and computed the
same statistic for each subset by counting rare variants falling in any
particular window. We then computed a p-value from the order-statis-
tic of the observed test statistic in the ovarian cancers compared to
those of the wellderly data.
In addition, the 861 variants were annotated using data from the En-
cyclopedia of DNA Elements (ENCODE) (Bernstein et al., 2012) to iden-
tify those that were within regulatory regions as reported by digital
genomic footprint (Neph et al., 2012) downloaded from (ftp://ftp.ebi.
ac.uk/pub/databases/ensembl/encode/integration_data_jan2011/
byDataType/footprints//jan2011/),
by
DNAseI
hypersensitivity
(Thurman et al., 2012) downloaded from (http://hgdownload.cse.ucsc.
edu/goldenPath/hg19/encodeDCC/wgEncodeRegDnaseClustered/) or
by ChIP-Seq (Yip et al., 2012) experiments downloaded from (http://
hgdownload.cse.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/hg19/encodeDCC/
wgEncodeRegTfbsClustered/). In order to assess the degree of local en-
richment of variants we first computed the global rate of variant occur-
rence over the 2 Mb region (113 variants/2,000,000 bp). We then
considered a series of 40 kb overlapping windows spaced at 100 bp in-
tervals spanning the 2 Mb. For each window, we counted the number of
variants observed in the tumors and computed the probability of ob-
serving (at least) this many variants under the null hypothesis of uni-
form variant occurrence. We assumed that, under the null hypothesis,
the number of observed variants follows a Poisson distribution with a
rate parameter given by the global rate over the region.
2.5.4. Analysis of ChIP-sequence Tracks
Following the ENCODE guidelines (Landt et al., 2012), read quality
was first assessed using FastQC (v.0.10.1; http://www.bioinformatics.
babraham.ac.uk). Low quality reads were filtered by using Trim galore
(v 0.3.1; http://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk) for paired reads.
The 3′ and 5′ adapters were trimmed using the Cutadapt program im-
plemented in Trim galore. Only reads with a length N 60 bp after trim-
ming were retained. Reads were then mapped against the human
reference genome (build hg19) using bowtie (Langmead and Salzberg,
2012). Only non-duplicated aligned reads were retained. Multiple align-
ment of read was not allowed. To identify enriched regions, peaks were
called on the immune-precipitated samples versus their input controls
using Model-Based Analysis of ChIP-seq 2 (Feng et al., 2012) (MACS2
version 2.0.10) with a p-value threshold of 0.001 and default parame-
ters. Signal track was built following the guideline at https://github.
com/taoliu/MACS/wiki/Build-Signal-Track. Exploratory analysis and
generation of figures was performed in R using custom scripts.
2.5.5. Motif Analysis for the BB5 Variant
The motif UW.Motif.0169 overlapping the BB5 variant was discov-
ered from digital footprints data. The logo plot in Supplementary Fig.
S6A was generated using the webLogo3 software (http://weblogo.
threeplusone.com/).
2.6. Fallopian Tubes Primary Epithelial Cell Culture
Patients scheduled to undergo surgical procedures provided written
consent, prior to surgery, agreeing to participate in the study. The infun-
dibular region of the fallopian tube was isolated, dissected and opened to
reveal the lumen. Fallopian tubes were incubated in 15 ml conical tubes
containing 0.5% trypsin and 0.1% DNaseII in MEM for 1 h at 37 °C, with
shaking. The supernatant, containing the epithelial cells, was removed
and mixed with 10% FBS in DMEM. Fallopian tube epithelial cells (FTEC)
were centrifuged and plated in 10% DMEM. The purity of epithelial cells
was checked by immunofluorescence. Optional purification using CD326
microbeads (Miltenyi Biotech) was if further purification was required.
2.7. Viral Transduction
pLx302-SOX2 was generated using Gateway system (Invitrogen) ac-
cording to the manufacturer's instructions. SOX2 was cloned into
pDONOR221 (Invitrogen) from pMXs-Sox2 (Addgene) plasmid by BP
Gateway clonase (Invitrogen) to generate entry clones. Using LR Gateway
clonase (Invitrogen) SOX2 was cloned into the destination vector pLx302
(a gift from Dr. David Root (Yang et al., 2011); Addgene plasmid 25896).
Packaging cells (HEK-293T) were co-transfected with the packaging vec-
tor p8.91, the envelope plasmid pMDG (gifts from Dr. Didier Trono, Uni-
versity of Geneva, Switzerland) and pLX302-SOX2 as previously
described (Besnier et al., 2002). Following 72 h the HEK293-T medium
containing the virus was collected, filtered through a 0.45 μm Minisart
NML Syringe Filter (Sartorius) and stored at −80 °C for later transduction.
2.8. Cloning, Mutant Generation and Chicken Embryo Transfection
The 1 kb regions flanking the BB5 SNP was cloned from Human ge-
nomic blood DNA by PCR amplification using Phusion high fidelity poly-
merase (NEB) according to the manufacturer's instructions using
the following primers BB5_F; ‘TTTTTTCGTCTCgccaggTTACTCCAATA
TGAGAGATAAGAGCA’ and BB5_R; ‘TTTTTTCGTCTCcaacagCGCTCACACG
GTGATTAGAA’, Test1_F; ‘TTTTTTCGTCTCgccaggCATTACTGGCAGCTGA
GGGG’ and Test1_R; ‘TTTTTTCGTCTCcaacagTGATTTTCCCTGGGCAGACA’,
Test2_F;
‘TTTTTTCGTCTCgccaggCTACTAGACCCCAGGCAAGG’
and
Test2_R; ‘TTTTTTCGTCTCcaacagTGATTTTCCCTGGGCAGACA’, Test3_F;
‘TTTTTTCGTCTCgccaggTCCCTGTTCCTCACTCCTCT’
and
Test3_R;
‘TTTTTTCGTCTCcaacagTGATTTTCCCTGGGCAGACA’.
Products
were
cloned into a ptk citrine – BsmBI vector. Restriction digestion of the
PCR products and the vector was performed using BsmBI enzyme
(NEB) and the digested product was inserted into the vector using a
T4 ligase (NEB). Point mutants were generated using QuikChange® II
Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit (Stratagene) as per manufacturer's in-
structions using the citrine vector containing each region and the prim-
er sets SOX2_BB5mut_F; ‘ACCTGGGCCTGGCACCCAAACCCTT’ and
SOX2_BB5mut_R ‘AAGGGTTTGGGTGCCAGGCCCAGGT’. DNA sequences
of all cloned PCR products were verified with direct sequencing.
Fertilized chicken (Gallus gallus) eggs (Henry Stewart & Co. Ltd,
Louth, UK) were incubated at 37 to 38 °C for approximately 20 to 24 h
prior to electroporation. In the UK no license is required at the embryo
stage used for this work. The entire epiblast of stage four chicken em-
bryos (staged according to Hamburger and Hamilton (Hamburger and
Hamilton, 1992)) was electroporated with enhancer constructs, cul-
tured using modified new culture (Sauka-Spengler and Barembaum,
2008) and analyzed as previously described (Betancur et al., 2010;
Simoes-Costa et al., 2012) (n = 10 to 15 per group). Neither randomiza-
tion nor blinding was carried out. Non-vital or damaged embryos were
excluded from further analysis. Immunofluorescence for detection of
endogenous Sox2 expression and co-localization with citrine expres-
sion was carried out as previously described (Betancur et al., 2010;
Simoes-Costa et al., 2012) using anti-Sox2 antibody (ab97959, Abcam)
or anti-GFP antibody (MAB3580, Millipore) and detected using alexa-
488 conjugated and alexa-568 conjugated secondary antibodies
141
K. Hellner et al. / EBioMedicine 10 (2016) 137–149
 (Invitrogen) and observed using an inverted confocal microscope (LSA
510 META, Zeiss).
2.9. Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) Assay
ChIP was performed on FTEC and HEK293T cells (purchased from
ATCC, mycoplasma tested) using the commercially available ChIP-IT ex-
press enzymatic kit (Active Motif) according to manufacturer's instruc-
tions and the following antibodies: H3K27ac (C15410174 lot: A.7071-
001P; Diagenode) and EZH2 (C15410039; lot: 003; Diagenode). Briefly,
one million cells were cross-linked using formaldehyde 1% for 10 min
and the reaction was stopped by adding glycine for 5 min at room tem-
perature. Cells were then washed twice with ice cold PBS containing 1×
PMSF, and then resuspended in cell lysis buffer containing 1× protease
inhibitor cocktail and PMSF and rotated at 4 °C for 30 min. Nuclei were
extracted using a Dounce homogenizer (pestle B) and treated with an
enzymatic shearing cocktail at 37 °C for 20 min. Digested chromatin
was immunoprecipitated at 4 °C overnight by adding protein G magnet-
ic beads and rabbit IgG (cat. N. 12-370; lot. N. 1969696; Millipore) as a
negative control. Following washes, reverse cross-linking and protein-
ase K treatment the DNA was purified using the Chromatin IP DNA pu-
rification kit (Active Motif). Sequencing of ChIP material was performed
as described above. Real-time PCR was performed in a 96-well plate
qPCR machine (ABI 7000, Applied Biosystems). Reactions were set up
using SybrGreen (Applied Biosystems) according to the manufacturer's
protocols using 1 μl of each ChIP reaction or 1: 100 to 200 dilution of the
input fraction. The ΔΔCt method was used for quantification and calcu-
lations performed according to ChIP-qPCR data analysis instructions
(Supper-Array, Bioscience Corporation). The following primers for the
BB5 region were used: 5833217_F 5′-ACCTACTAGACCCCAGGCAAG-3′
and 5833217_R 5′-GGCGCAGGAGGAGACC-3′. For EZH2 inhibition, cell
were treated for 96 h with 5 μM of UNC1999 (Sigma) before chromatin
extraction.
2.10. CRISPR Vector Construction, Cell Culture and Transfection
Vector px330 was used as previously described (Cong et al., 2013). A
pair
of
oligonucleotides
(CRISPR-BB5-F;
5′-CACCGAGGGTTTGG
GTCCCAGGCCC-3′
and
CRISPR-BB5-R;
5′-AAACGGGCCTGGGACCC
AAACCCTC-3′) encompassing the BB5 nucleotide (underlined) and ex-
tending up to a protospacer adjacent motif [AGG] (not shown) were
annealed, phosphorylated, and ligated to the linearized vector.
HEK293 cells (ATCC) were maintained in DMEM (Invitrogen) sup-
plemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 100 U/ml penicillin/strep-
tomycin and incubated at 37 °C and 5% CO2. HEK293 cells were
transfected with the construct px330-BB5 using FUGENE HD (Promega)
according to the manufacturer's instructions. After two weeks, the DNA
for each clone was extracted using DNeasy blood and tissue kit (Qiagen)
and the region flanking the BB5 nucleotide was amplified using the fol-
lowing pair of primers: SH-BB5-01-F; 5′-TCCAATATGAGAGATAA
GAGCAC-3′ and SH-BB5-01-R; 5′-GCTGAAAAGACCAAACTTAAAAC-3′.
HEK293T cells were transfected and two days later single cells were
plated in 96-well plates and harvested for DNA collection on the indicat-
ed dates. The number of positive clones carrying bi-allelic mutations
(nominated as homozygous), the number of clones carrying mono-
allelic mutation (nominated as heterozygous) and clones with no dele-
tions (nominated as negative) are reported in Supplementary Table 6.
2.11. Immunofluorescence
FTEC or SKOv3 cells were fixed with 4% (w/v) formaldehyde in PBS
for 4 min and then permeabilized overnight with 100% ethanol at
−20 °C. Cells were then blocked with 1.5% BSA in TBS for 1 h and incu-
bated with primary mouse antibody against pan-cytokeratin (ab7753,
Abcam), primary rabbit antibody against MYC (9402S, Cell Signaling
Technology), primary rabbit antibody against SOX2 (3579, Cell
signaling Technology), primary mouse antibody against SOX2 (4900,
Cell Signaling Technology) or primary rabbit antibody against PAX8
(10336, Proteintech) for 1 h. Cells were washed using washing buffer
(TBS + Triton 0.2% + SDS 0.04%) and then incubated with donkey
anti-mouse or donkey anti-rabbit conjugated with Alexa Fluor 488 or
Alexa Fluor 546 secondary antibodies (Invitrogen), respectively. After
three washes cells were mounted using DAPI-containing mounting
media (Vector Laboratories).
2.12. Immunohistochemistry
A summary of patients from both groups (discovery set and validation
sets) for whom SOX2 IHC was performed is presented in Supplementary
Table 7. Power calculations were performed to determine the minimum
specimen number for the validation set based on the data from the dis-
covery set (mean % for benign: 3, s.d.: 4; mean % for HGSOCs: 14, s.d.:
10, difference between means: 11%) assuming a desire for 90% power
and a 5% significance level. To identify the difference in 3+ staining inten-
sity for the above scenario we estimated a group size of ten cases.
Tissue sections of 2.5 μm or 4 μm thickness were cut from FFPE
tumor or control samples. Automated staining was carried out with
the Leica Bond Max autostainer (Leica Microsystems) or Autostainer
plus Link 48 (Dako®). In short, antigen retrieval at 100 °C for 20 min
was followed by primary antibody incubation with the rabbit anti-
SOX2 (3579, Cell Signaling Technology) or IgG control for up to 1 h
then detection using the BOND™ Polymer Refine Detection System
(DS9800, Leica Biosystems) as per manufacturer's instructions. Double
staining was achieved using the BOND™ Polymer Refine Detection Sys-
tem and the BOND™ Polymer Refine Red Detection System (DS9390,
Leica Biosystems) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Stained
slides were scanned at 20× and 40× magnification on the Aperio slide
scanner (Aperio) or Mirax scan (Zeiss) fitted with a 40×/0.95 Plan
Apochromat objective lens (Zeiss) for the second validation set (CNIO;
Spanish National Cancer Research Centre). The ImageScope software
(v11.2.0.780, Aperio) was used for quantification of nuclear staining
for the discovery set and the first validation set. For scoring of SOX2 pos-
itivity in fallopian tubes, only the tubal epithelium was marked by using
the “negative pen tool” to exclude stroma. The marked FTE was ana-
lyzed with the program algorithm “nuclear v9” which scored the stain-
ing of all nuclei within the marked area and assigned scores of 0 for not
detectable signal, +1 for weak staining, +2 for moderate staining and
+3 for strong staining. Nuclear positivity was confirmed on selected
areas using the “deconvolution” algorithm to subtract SOX2 from un-
derlying hematoxylin staining. The diagnosis and clinical details are
provided in Supplementary Table 7. For scoring of SOX2 expression in
HGSOCs tumor foci were marked and benign tissue excluded and the
procedure completed as described above. For scoring the second valida-
tion set (CNIO), the AxioVision 4.6.3 software (Zeiss) pattern recogni-
tion training software was used. Algorithm parameters were set by
using the AxioVision Wizard so that threshold and filter conditions
(size, diameter and perimeter of different spots) were established to
train the application in a noise reduction method that determines the
different positive activation signals: 0 for no signal, +1 for weak stain-
ing, +2 for moderate staining and +3 for strong staining. Immunohis-
tochemistry for other proteins was conducted in a similar manner to the
method described above using anti-p53 (Clone DO-7, Dako) and anti-
WT1 (Clone WT1-562, Leica) antibodies, anti-TUBB4 (T7941, Sigma),
anti-MYC (ab32072, Abcam), anti-EZH2 (Clone 6A10, Leica).
3. Results
3.1. Laparoscopy-guided Prospective Multi-region Sampling in an Ovarian
Cancer Patient
We set out to discover early (root) driver mutations in a single high-
grade serous ovarian tumor that may have contributed to its genesis.
142
K. Hellner et al. / EBioMedicine 10 (2016) 137–149
 We hypothesized that such early mutations would be present in all can-
cer cells irrespective of their location, time of presentation or biological
behavior (e.g. chemotherapy response). To account for these three var-
iables, we utilized intraoperative video recording to document the site
of sampling before and after chemotherapy and at recurrence and to ob-
tain a direct visual evaluation of chemotherapy response. LFR WGS tech-
nology enabled the accurate sequencing of very low (picogram)
quantities of DNA (Peters et al., 2015) which is not currently possible
by standard WGS or other methods of long fragment sequencing
(Kuleshov et al., 2014). Since post-chemotherapy samples only had mi-
croscopic residual disease, using this technique on laser-capture micro-
dissected cancer islets was essential.
We identified 750 unique mutations that were present in practically
all tumor islet samples in our discovery set (≥90% of tumor islets) irre-
spective of space, tumor site or biological behavior. These mutations
were extensively confirmed using standard WGS and targeted sequenc-
ing (Supplementary Fig. S2A). The variants included two synonymous
mutations, eight non-synonymous mutations in protein-coding regions,
and 740 mutations in non-coding regions (Supplementary Table 8). One
mutation, detected in exon 8 of TP53, was shared between all tumor is-
lets but was not present in normal stroma samples from patient 11152.
This result was consistent with the previous finding by Ahmed et al.
(2010) and Anon (2011) of ubiquitous TP53 mutations in HGSOCs and
has, therefore, validated our approach of discovering potential driver
mutations.
3.2. Non-coding Mutations Cluster at Potential cis Regulatory Elements of
Genetic Drivers of Stem Cell Differentiation
We mapped the 750 mutations to the nearest transcription start
sites of genes and performed pathway-enrichment analyses of the iden-
tified genes as previously described (McLean et al., 2010). This analysis
revealed five significantly enriched ontologies of biological processes
(Supplementary Fig. S2B, Supplementary Tables 9 and 10) that were
all related to embryonic and stem cell differentiation. Furthermore,
the stem cell differentiation ontology was supported by 23 mutations
that mapped to 15 genes (e.g., SOX2, PAX7, WNT7A). This finding was
confirmed by several iterations of analysis (Supplementary Fig. S3)
and multiple rounds of further sequencing (Supplementary Fig. S1A).
The identification of SOX2, a key driver of stem cell differentiation
(Takahashi and Yamanaka, 2006) that was recently implicated in skin
cancer tumor initiation (Boumahdi et al., 2014), was particularly nota-
ble in our analysis because of the proximity of a total number of six mu-
tations to the SOX2 gene locus. We termed the nucleotides, in which the
mutations mapping near SOX2 occurred, BB1 to BB6.
3.3. The BB5 Mutation Occurred at the Pre-neoplastic Lesion of the Tumor
and Marked a Region That Was Frequently Mutated in HGSOCs
We next performed deep-targeted sequencing of the 2 Mb region
flanking the SOX2 gene locus and BB1 to BB6 on tumor samples from
33 patients with HGSOCs, including case 11152 (Table 1, Supplementa-
ry Table 2), and identified 861 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
in this region (Supplementary Table 5) that were not previously report-
ed in the 1000 Genomes Project (median = 21, range = 11 to 97 per
cancer sample). Comparing the frequency of occurrence of these SNPs
with those previously identified in the 1000 Genomes Project or with
SNPs identified from whole genome sequencing analysis of a new set
of 597 healthy elderly volunteers combined with deep whole genome
re-sequencing of DNA from 436 individuals from the 1000 Genomes
Project identified a 40 kb region flanking the BB5 nucleotide (Fig. 2A),
that was significantly enriched in rare SNPs (p b 0.01, permutation anal-
ysis). These mutations significantly targeted biochemically active sites
(implying that they were active regulatory elements) as determined
by mining the ENCODE data for DNaseI hypersensitivity or transcription
factor binding activity (Supplementary Fig. S4). We therefore chose to
characterize this 40 kb region, referred to as the BB5 region, further.
Sequencing results from tumor and normal tissue revealed that the
BB5 region (chr3: 182,189,714–182,229,714) included 21 single nucle-
otide substitutions in HGSOCs from 16 patients (48.5% of all patients), of
which nine variants from seven patients (21.2%) were somatic muta-
tions (Supplementary Table 3). Independent validation by deep-
targeted sequencing of a 1.6 Mb region flanking SOX2 in tumor-normal
tissue pairs of 16 additional patients with HGSOCs identified two further
mutations in the BB5 region in two patients.
Examining the fallopian tube as a potential tissue of origin of
HGSOCs (Crum, 2009; Lee et al., 2007; Kurman and Shih Ie, 2011;
Karst et al., 2011) led to the identification of the p53 signature (Lee et
al., 2007), indicated by p53 nuclear overexpression in fallopian tube ep-
ithelium (FTE), in patient 11152 (Fig. 2b–c). A subpopulation of the cells
at the signature also expressed high levels of nuclear SOX2 (Fig. 2d–e).
Using a combination of deep-targeted sequencing, droplet-digital PCR
and Sanger sequencing, we confirmed that both, the BB5 nucleotide
and TP53, were already mutated in the p53 signature and the adjacent
FTE (Fig. 2f–g). Importantly, in two additional patients for whom DNA
extraction from the paraffin-embedded FTE was possible, we showed
that the mutations occurring in the fully established HGSOCS were
also present in the FTE (Supplementary Fig. S5).
3.4. Expansion of FTE Cells Strongly Expressing SOX2 is a Feature of HGSOCs
The profound increase in the number of SOX2-expressing cells in the
FTE of our index patient was in sharp contrast to the rare SOX2 expres-
sion in the FTE of patients with benign conditions. Paradoxically, SOX2
Table 1
Patient baseline data for targeted sequencing analysis.
The clinical details of patients who donated samples used for targeted se-
quencing are presented in this table.
Patients for targeted sequencing
49
Age at surgery
Mean (median)
65.3 (66)
Min–max
40–82
b60 years
20.4%
N60 years
79.6%
Site of primary disease
Ovary
29 (59%)
Tube
10 (20%)
Peritoneum
8 (16%)
Othera
2 (4%)
Tumor status
Primary
19 (39%)
IDS
15 (31%)
Post-NACT
12 (24%)
Recurrence
3 (6%)
Biopsy site
Ovary
17
Peritoneumb
15
Omentum
17
Otherc
4
Normal tissue or bloodd
24
Tumor stagee
I–II
10 (20%)
III–IV
39 (80%)
Data are n (%). Disease stages I and II indicate early disease, stages III and IV in-
dicate advanced disease. NACT = neoadjuvant chemotherapy. IDS = interval
debulking surgery (e.g. after three or four cycles of NACT).
a Ambivalent histology includes one case of tubal or ovarian origin and a
case of ovarian or endometrial origin.
b Peritoneum includes diaphragmatic peritoneum and small bowel serosa
and mesentery.
c Other biopsy sites include spleen, parasacral tumor and falciform
ligament.
d Normal tissue includes primary cell lines generated from normal fallopian
tube epithelium.
e For staging we used the FIGO classification valid at time of initial
diagnosis.
143
K. Hellner et al. / EBioMedicine 10 (2016) 137–149
 expression in tumor cells was almost absent (Supplementary Figs. S5
and S6). The increase in SOX2 expression in potential precursor cells is
particularly intriguing since it is one of only four factors required for ac-
quisition of stem cell properties by terminally differentiated cells
(Takahashi and Yamanaka, 2006) with important implication for acqui-
sition of pluripotency, the ability of a cell to differentiate into different
cell types, and susceptibility to tumor formation.
We next compared SOX2 expression in the nuclei of normal FTE of
patients with benign conditions and patients with endometrial cancer
(age-matched cases) and the normal FTE and corresponding ovarian tu-
mors from patients diagnosed with HGSOC (Table 2, Supplementary
Table 7). Automated image analysis of these samples demonstrated
that the median SOX2 expression (intensity score of 3+) in the normal
appearing FTE from patients with HGSOCs was 17-fold higher than that
Fig. 2. A 40 kb region is frequently mutated in HGSOCs and consists of a distal SOX2 repressor. a. To determine whether any of the six mutations (BB1 to BB6) mapping near the SOX2 gene
locus marked regions that were sites of frequent occurrence of private variants or mutations in HGSOCs, we performed deep-targeted sequencing of the 2 Mb region flanking SOX2 on 33
HGSOCs (Supplementary Table 2). A total of 861 single nucleotide substitutions (Supplementary Table 5) were identified that were not previously reported in the 1000 Genomes Project
(median = 21, range = 11 to 97). Because functionally important genomic regions tend to be significantly less susceptible to genomic variation within a population, we determined
whether the identified rare variants accumulated in specific areas within the 2 Mb region that were less susceptible to genomic alterations on a population scale. To test this
hypothesis, we constructed overlapping moving windows of 40 kb size and compared the observed frequency of rare mutations (not previously described in the 1000 Genomes
Project) in our group of patients. The expected frequency of SNPs in the same windows was based on 1000 sets of simulated cohorts of 33 individuals from the previously reported
1000 Genomes Project data. Upper panel: shown is the ratio of the observed number of variants in 40 kb “moving” windows in the cancer set to the expected number of variants in
the equivalent windows based on 1000 permutations of simulated 1000 Genomes Project data. Based on this analysis, a peak observed/expected ratio (enrichment statistic) was
identified in a 40 kb region flanking the BB5 nucleotide referred to as the BB5 region. Lower panel: To test whether this observation was higher than what would be expected by
chance, we sequenced germline DNA from 597 healthy elderly volunteers and sequenced germline DNA from 436 individuals from the 1000 Genomes Project at higher depth. We
then identified rare variants in the elderly set and repeated the above analysis. Comparing the enrichment statistic in the BB5 region in the cancer set to that obtained from 100
permutations of 33 individuals from the elderly set confirmed the significant enrichment of rare variants in the ovarian cancer set (p b 0.01). b–e. Immunohistochemical staining of
p53 and SOX2 at low (B and D, scale bar = 300 μm) and high (c and e, scale bar = 50 μm) magnification in normal FTE and the p53 signature in patient 11152. Note the strong focal
p53 staining at the multi-layered epithelium (p53 signature). f. The fraction of mutant reads relative to the total number of reads of the BB5 and TP53 mutations in germline DNA, the
FTE, the p53 signature (p53 sig) and the tumor of the index case (n = 4 repeats). g. Sequencing trace indicating the BB5 mutation.
144
K. Hellner et al. / EBioMedicine 10 (2016) 137–149
 in the normal FTE from patients with benign conditions (p b 2−16, one-
way analysis of variance [ANOVA] followed by Tukey's test). The median
SOX2 expression significantly decreased in the corresponding, fully
established ovarian tumors (p b 2−16, one-way ANOVA followed by
Tukey's test, Fig. 3a–b). We validated this observation on an indepen-
dent set of fallopian tubes from 88 women with either HGSOCs (n =
42) or benign gynecological conditions (n = 46) and confirmed that a
significant expansion of cells strongly expressing SOX2 was present in
the benign FTE of women with HGSOCs (p b 2−16, one-way ANOVA
followed by Tukey's test, Fig. 3c). The magnitude of SOX2 overexpres-
sion was not significantly influenced by tumor stage (early versus
late) or by whether or not the patient had chemotherapy prior to surgi-
cal excision (data not shown). In addition, fitting a binomial general lin-
ear model on the entire dataset revealed that strong SOX2 expression
accurately predicted whether the fallopian tube was from an HGSOC pa-
tient or from a patient with benign pathology (p = 9.95−8, logistic re-
gression model). Fitting a receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
curve to the data from the logistic regression analysis confirmed the
high predictive power of strong SOX2 expression (Fig. 3d, area under
the curve [AUC] = 0.87). This ubiquitous feature of the FTE of patients
with HGSOCs has not been previously described. Furthermore, only
eight out of 28 cases stained for p53 also showed a p53 signature indi-
cating that SOX2 overexpression may occur prior to p53 dysregulation.
To test whether the expansion of SOX2-expressing cells occurred
prior to HGSOC development, we analyzed the fallopian tubes of 48
women at high risk of developing ovarian cancer because they were
BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene mutation carriers and therefore underwent pro-
phylactic salpingo-oophorectomy (Fig. 3c, Table 2). This analysis
showed that a significant expansion of cells strongly expressing SOX2
was present in the benign FTE of women who were BRCA1 or BRCA2
mutation carriers (p b 0.001, one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey's test).
Finally, to confirm the above findings, we repeated the analysis on an
additional cohort of 98 patients from three independent institutes (Fig.
3e, Table 2 and Supplementary Table 7). This analysis further confirmed
that a significant expansion of cells strongly expressing SOX2 occurred
in the benign FTE of women who are BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation carriers
and in women who had HGSOCs (p = 0.018 and p b 0.001, respectively,
one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey's test). Expression of SOX2 in the
normal FTE of BRCA gene mutation carriers was independent of age
and whether the mutation was present in the BRCA1 or BRCA2 (data
not shown). History of prior breast cancer was available for 43 cases
who were either BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation carriers. Of those only 15
patients had history of prior breast cancer. There was no significant dif-
ference in SOX2 expression between cases that either had or did not
have breast cancer.
3.5. The BB5 Region Is a Repressor of SOX2 Expression
Specific sequences of non-coding regions in the genome are capable
of regulating the expression of neighboring genes. Several lines of evi-
dence strongly suggested that the BB5 region acted as a repressor of
SOX2 expression. First, the BB5 mutation occurred in a 12-nucleotide
DNA sequence (Supplementary Fig. S7A) that matched the previously
reported regulatory motif model UW.0169 that was discovered by ge-
nomic DNaseI footprinting (Neph et al., 2012). We used an in-vivo re-
porter assay to test whether this motif changed the expression of a
fluorescent protein and, therefore, was potentially functional (Supple-
mentary Fig. S7B–E). Such standard reporter assays are traditionally
performed in cultured cells. In this study we conducted the assay in
live chicken embryos to gain additional information about the time
and location of the activity of the BB5 region in regulating fluorescent
protein (the reporter) expression. This analysis confirmed that the
motif consisting of the BB5 nucleotide acted as a repressor and that mu-
tation of the BB5 nucleotide significantly relieved this repressor activity
(Supplementary Fig. S7B–E). Importantly, the protein fluorescence par-
tially co-localized with cells that strongly expressed endogenous Sox2
in the chicken embryo and, therefore, implied that the element was
plausible for regulating Sox2 expression. Second, we performed
CRISPR-Cas9-mediated genome deletion, a method to remove a number
of nucleotides from a target sequence in the genome, and deleted mul-
tiple essential nucleotides included in the motif model UW.0169 (Sup-
plementary Fig. S7F) (Ran et al., 2013) in a human cell model. This
induced a significant reduction in H3K27 acetylation, an indicator of
open chromatin, and a significant and sustained increase in SOX2 ex-
pression in human cells (Supplementary Fig. S7G, Supplementary
Table 6). Thus, this unequivocally confirmed that the element acted as
a repressor of SOX2 expression in a human cell model. Third, mining
the ENCODE data for potential transcription factor binding at this ele-
ment revealed several factors that are known to be involved in regulat-
ing the stem cell state, such as YY1, NANOG, OCT4 and EZH2
(Supplementary Fig. S7F). Since EZH2, the catalytic subunit of the
Polycomb repressor complex 2, is known to be involved in repressing
gene expression by inducing H3K27 trimethylation at regulatory ele-
ments, we performed ChIP-sequencing on primary cultured fallopian
tube epithelial cells to test whether EZH2 occupied the BB5 element or
other elements that were sites of somatic mutations in other HGSOCs.
This analysis confirmed that EZH2 occupied the BB5 element and sever-
al others (Supplementary Fig. S8A, Supplementary Table 11). In addi-
tion, the enzymatic inhibition of EZH2 resulted in a significant
reduction in H3K27 tri-methylation (Supplementary Fig. S8B) indicat-
ing that the localization of the EZH2 at the BB5 element was indeed
functional. In summary, the above data confirmed that the BB5 region
is a repressor of SOX2 expression and, when mutated, releases SOX2
repression.
As previously mentioned, SOX2 is part of the four essential stem cells
transcription factors (SOX2, OCT4, c-Myc, KLF4), also known as
Yamanaka factors (Takahashi et al., 2007), which are highly expressed
in embryonic stem cells and that are sufficient to induce pluripotency
in human somatic cells. We, therefore, investigated the expression of
the Yamanaka factors in the FTE and observed a mutually exclusive ex-
pression pattern of SOX2 and MYC. In the FTE of benign cases, MYC ap-
peared to be exclusively and ubiquitously expressed in non-ciliated cells
whilst SOX2 was only expressed at low levels in a minor population of
Table 2
Patient characteristics for immunohistochemistry studies.
The clinical details of patients who donated the samples used for SOX2 immunohisto-
chemistry are presented.
Patients for IHC staining
n = 279
Benign
HGSOC
BRCA mutation carrier
Patient cohort
108
100
71
Discovery cohort
16
22a
Validation cohort
92
78
71
Age at surgery
Mean (median)
48.0 (48)
62.7 (63)
50.7 (48)
Min–max
28–81
32–94
29–81
Site of primary disease
Ovary
79 (79%)
Tube
10 (10%)
Peritoneum
5 (5%)
Otherb
6 (6%)
Tumor status
Primary
60 (60%)
IDS
15 (15%)
Post-NACT
19 (19)
Tumor stagec
I–II
26 (26%)
III–IV
69 (69%)
Data are n (%) or mean (median), unless otherwise indicated. Disease stages I and II indi-
cate early disease, stages III and IV indicate advanced disease. IDS = Interval debulking
surgery (e.g. after three or four cycles of NACT). NACT = neoadjuvant chemotherapy.
a These patients were also included in targeted sequencing study.
b Ambivalent histology cohort includes four cases of ovarian or tubal origin and two
cases of ovarian or peritoneal origin.
c For staging we used the FIGO classification valid at time of initial diagnosis.
145
K. Hellner et al. / EBioMedicine 10 (2016) 137–149
 ciliated cells (Fig. 4). In contrast, in the FTE from HGSOC cases MYC
maintained a similar expression pattern in non-ciliated cells, whereas
SOX2 was strongly expressed in the majority of ciliated cells (Fig. 4, Sup-
plementary Fig. S9A–B). Furthermore, the analysis of 209 HGSOCs re-
vealed that MYC over-expression was accompanied by the loss of
SOX2 expression and vice versa (p b 0.001, Fisher Exact test, Supple-
mentary Fig. S9C). Thus, SOX2 may repress MYC in differentiating FTE
cells and in a fraction of SOX2-expressing tumors. Consistent with our
proposed role of SOX2 in FTE cells, its ectopic expression significantly
reduced expression of MYC and PAX8, an important transcription factor
Fig. 3. Overexpression of SOX2 is a biomarker for pre-neoplastic detection of HGSOC. a. Representative SOX2 immunohistochemistry images for the FTE of the indicated samples are
presented. Scale bars = 100 μm. b. Percentages (y-axis), median percentage (horizontal black bars) and intensity (x-axis) of SOX2 staining in the normal FTE of women with benign
conditions, endometrial cancer or HGSOCs and in the paired HGSOC tumors. Solid circles represent the FTE from cancers harboring rare variants and mutations in the BB5 region. The
black arrow indicates a case of high-grade serous endometrial cancer. c. Power calculations were used to determine the required case number for the validation set based on the data
from the discovery set (see Supplementary methods). Data from an independent set of 88 cases as well as an additional 48 BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation carriers who underwent
prophylactic excision of the fallopian tubes are presented. d. The receiver operating characteristics (ROC) curve is presented for the combined data presented in panels b and c. e. Data
from a further independent set of cases from a second institute (CNIO) are presented. Data are presented as fold change relative to benign cases. A y-axis break was added to facilitate
comparison with the data presented in b and c.
146
K. Hellner et al. / EBioMedicine 10 (2016) 137–149
 during embryogenesis of Müllerian tissues, in primary cultured FTE cells
and SKOv3 ovarian cancer cells to undetectable levels by immunostain-
ing (Supplementary Fig. S10). These findings are consistent with the
known role of SOX2 in inducing pluripotency and may have important
implications in understanding the genesis of epithelial ovarian cancers.
4. Discussion
Less than a third of ovarian cancer patients are diagnosed at an early,
hence potentially curable, stage. The currently available detection op-
tions are patient driven symptom awareness and screening using com-
bination of a serum marker (CA125) and imaging by ultrasound
methods. Advances have been made to divert from the single threshold
rule for CA125 to more complex algorithms in order to improve perfor-
mance and facilitate early treatment. Jacobs et al. (2016) recently re-
ported results of the UK Collaborative Trial of Ovarian Cancer
Screening (UKCTOCS), a study in which over 200,000 postmenopausal
women were enrolled to assess whether screening is effective for im-
proving early ovarian cancer diagnosis and survival. Results indicated
a limited mortality reduction in the primary analysis (Jacobs et al.,
2016). This, again, underscores the need for effective biomarkers for
early detection.
Recent work strongly suggests that the FTE is a common site of a
large fraction of high-grade serous pelvic cancers (Perets et al., 2013).
Inducing mutations in TP53, BRCA1-BRCA2, and PTEN in secretory cells
in the FTE of mice resulted in the development of HGSOCs (Perets et
al., 2013). However, there continues to be a need for novel molecular
markers of premalignant transformation that could be used for early de-
tection. Current screening methods only enable the detection of
established invasive ovarian cancers. Mathematical modeling of tumor
occurrence in BRCA1-BRCA2 mutations carriers suggests that tumors re-
main occult for up to four years (Brown and Palmer, 2009). This dura-
tion represents an unutilized opportunity for premalignant or early
stage disease detection because of the limitations of existing markers.
In addition, patients with a family history of ovarian cancer who don't
have affected living relatives are not eligible for BRCA1-BRCA2 mutation
testing. Furthermore, in many cases of familial ovarian malignancies
BRCA testing is negative. Subsequently, these patients are ineligible for
risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy.
Lack of specificity of TP53 overexpression (the so called p53 signa-
ture) in the fallopian tube (Lee et al., 2007) undermines its potential
use in early detection. In contrast, we have shown that SOX2 overex-
pression has high specificity and sensitivity as evidenced by the high
AUC in our ROC analysis. In addition, unlike the p53 signature which
only involves a limited number of cells, SOX2 overexpression occupies
a large surface area of the fallopian tube. This makes SOX2 overexpres-
sion amenable for detection. Safe screening methods that exploit such
feature would need to be developed in both BRCA mutation carriers
and patients with HGSOC. The use of cell-penetrating peptides or anti-
bodies that specifically recognize SOX2 could be labeled with PET imag-
ing tracers to enable early, non-invasive detection in patients. In
addition, fallopian tube catheterization for obtaining cytobrush speci-
mens for quantifying SOX2 expression is also possible. Such methods
could be tested in clinical trials for early detection in young women
with BRCA1-BRCA2 mutations who do not wish to undergo prophylactic
excision of both tubes and ovaries. Finally, as SOX2 is a potent transcrip-
tion factor, it is highly likely that its aberrant expression is associated
with co-expression of secreted proteins. The future discovery of such
proteins could enable biomarker screening using blood sampling.
In summary, in this study we demonstrated that SOX2 overexpres-
sion occurs in a fraction of women with BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations
prior to ovarian cancer initiation and in the majority of patients with
HGSOCs irrespective of tumor stage. These findings could be exploited
for filling the current gap in early detection strategies for ovarian cancer.
We believe that this is the first report of the expansion of SOX2-express-
ing cells in the FTE of HGSOCs. This finding has important implications,
as it provides a potentially powerful tool for screening for HGSOCs. Uti-
lizing our findings as potential biomarker should take high priority.
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2016.06.048.
Funding Sources
This work is funded by the Medical Research Council (H8RSRS00),
Ovarian Cancer Action (HER00070), the Oxford Biomedical Research
Centre, the National Institute for Health Research (HJRWAC05) and
the Experimental Cancer Medicine Centre. MJG is recipient of a research
contract from the Instituto de Salud Carlos III of the Ministerio Español
de Sanidad y Consumo (Miguel Servet tipo II Program, CPII 13-00047).
C.Y. acknowledges the support of an MRC New Investigator Research
Grant (Ref No. MR-L001411-1) and the Wellcome Trust Core Award
Grant Number 090532-Z-09-Z.
Conflicts of Interests
R.T., B.A.P., R.D., D.M.H., R.Y.Z., R,K., and K.D. own stock in Complete
Genomics, Inc. All other authors have no conflict of interest to declare.
Contributions
A.A.A. conceived the project. All other authors designed and con-
ducted experiments. A.A.A., K.H., F.M., S.H.G., and C.Y. wrote the manu-
script. All authors contributed to the final manuscript.
Fig. 4. SOX2 represses MYC and PAX8 expression at the secretory-ciliated FTE cell interface. Representative immunohistochemistry images of FTE double stained with the indicated
antibodies (n = 10). TUBB4 was used as a marker for ciliated cells. Scale bars = 10 μm. Arrows indicate cells that are presented in higher magnifications.
147
K. Hellner et al. / EBioMedicine 10 (2016) 137–149
 Acknowledgements
We thank the Gynecological Oncology Multidisciplinary Team at Ox-
ford, the Early Phase Clinical Trials Unit and the Oncology Clinical Trials
Office at Oxford for help in recruiting patients to clinical trials. We thank
the High-Throughput Genomics Group at the Wellcome Trust Centre for
Human Genetics (funded by Wellcome Trust grant reference 090532-Z-
09-Z and MRC Hub grant G0900747 91070) for their help with targeted
sequencing and Stephen Hague for assistance with droplet digital PCR.
We thank the Oxford Centre for Histopathology Research for their tech-
nical work and Hayley Davis for assisting with laser capture microdis-
section. We would like to acknowledge the support of all Complete
Genomics employees who worked on the generation of libraries, re-
agents, and whole genome sequencing data for this project. We thank
the CNIO Histopathology Core Unit for technical work. We thank the
biobanks in CNIO (Ref. B.000848), MD Anderson (Ref. B.0000745) and
IRBLleida (Ref. B.0000682) and the Spanish National Biobank Network
Platform (Instituto de Salud Carlos III) for coordinating sample and clin-
ical data retrieval.
References
Abecasis, G.R., Auton, A., Brooks, L.D., Depristo, M.A., Durbin, R.M., Handsaker, R.E., Kang,
H.M., Marth, G.T., Mcvean, G.A., 2012. An integrated map of genetic variation from
1,092 human genomes. Nature 491, 56–65.
Ahmed, A.A., Etemadmoghadam, D., Temple, J., Lynch, A.G., Riad, M., Sharma, R., Stewart,
C., Fereday, S., CALDAS, C., Defazio, A., Bowtell, D., Brenton, J.D., 2010. Driver muta-
tions in TP53 are ubiquitous in high grade serous carcinoma of the ovary. J. Pathol.
221, 49–56.
Anon, 2011. Integrated genomic analyses of ovarian carcinoma. Nature 474, 609–615.
Bernstein, B.E., Birney, E., Dunham, I., Green, E.D., Gunter, C., Snyder, M., 2012. An inte-
grated encyclopedia of DNA elements in the human genome. Nature 489, 57–74.
Besnier, C., Takeuchi, Y., Towers, G., 2002. Restriction of lentivirus in monkeys. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 99, 11920–11925.
Betancur, P., Bronner-Fraser, M., Sauka-Spengler, T., 2010. Genomic code for Sox10 activa-
tion reveals a key regulatory enhancer for cranial neural crest. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.
S. A. 107, 3570–3575.
Boumahdi, S., Driessens, G., Lapouge, G., Rorive, S., Nassar, D., Le Mercier, M., Delatte, B.,
Caauwe, A., Lenglez, S., Nkusi, E., Brohee, S., Salmon, I., Dubois, C., Del Marmol, V.,
Fuks, F., Beck, B., Blanpain, C., 2014. SOX2 controls tumour initiation and cancer
stem-cell functions in squamous-cell carcinoma. Nature 511, 246–250.
Brown, P.O., Palmer, C., 2009. The preclinical natural history of serous ovarian cancer: de-
fining the target for early detection. PLoS Med. 6, e1000114.
Carnevali, P., Baccash, J., Halpern, A.L., Nazarenko, I., Nilsen, G.B., Pant, K.P., Ebert, J.C.,
Brownley, A., Morenzoni, M., Karpinchyk, V., Martin, B., Ballinger, D.G., Drmanac, R.,
2012. Computational techniques for human genome resequencing using mated
gapped reads. J. Comput. Biol. 19, 279–292.
Cong, L., Ran, F.A., Cox, D., Lin, S., Barretto, R., Habib, N., Hsu, P.D., Wu, X., Jiang, W.,
Marraffini, L.A., Zhang, F., 2013. Multiplex genome engineering using CRISPR/Cas sys-
tems. Science 339, 819–823.
Crum, C.P., 2009. Intercepting pelvic cancer in the distal fallopian tube: theories and real-
ities. Mol. Oncol. 3, 165–170.
Dean, F.B., Hosono, S., Fang, L., Wu, X., Faruqi, A.F., Bray-Ward, P., Sun, Z., Zong, Q., Du, Y.,
Du, J., Driscoll, M., Song, W., Kingsmore, S.F., Egholm, M., Lasken, R.S., 2002. Compre-
hensive human genome amplification using multiple displacement amplification.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 99, 5261–5266.
Drescher, C.W., Shah, C., Thorpe, J., O'Briant, K., Anderson, G.L., Berg, C.D., Urban, N.,
McIntosh, M.W., 2013. Longitudinal screening algorithm that incorporates change
over time in CA125 levels identifies ovarian cancer earlier than a single-threshold
rule. J. Clin. Oncol. 31, 387–392.
Drmanac, R., Sparks, A.B., Callow, M.J., Halpern, A.L., Burns, N.L., Kermani, B.G., Carnevali,
P., Nazarenko, I., Nilsen, G.B., Yeung, G., Dahl, F., Fernandez, A., Staker, B., Pant, K.P.,
Baccash, J., Borcherding, A.P., Brownley, A., Cedeno, R., Chen, L., Chernikoff, D.,
Cheung, A., Chirita, R., Curson, B., Ebert, J.C., Hacker, C.R., Hartlage, R., Hauser, B.,
Huang, S., Jiang, Y., Karpinchyk, V., Koenig, M., KONG, C., Landers, T., Le, C., Liu, J.,
McBride, C.E., Morenzoni, M., Morey, R.E., Mutch, K., Perazich, H., Perry, K., Peters,
B.A., Peterson, J., Pethiyagoda, C.L., Pothuraju, K., Richter, C., Rosenbaum, A.M., Roy,
S., Shafto, J., Sharanhovich, U., Shannon, K.W., Sheppy, C.G., Sun, M., Thakuria, J.V.,
Tran, A., Vu, D., Zaranek, A.W., Wu, X., Drmanac, S., Oliphant, A.R., Banyai, W.C.,
Martin, B., Ballinger, D.G., Church, G.M., Reid, C.A., 2010. Human genome sequencing
using unchained base reads on self-assembling DNA nanoarrays. Science 327, 78–81.
Feng, J., Liu, T., Qin, B., Zhang, Y., Liu, X.S., 2012. Identifying ChIP-seq enrichment using
MACS. Nat. Protoc. 7, 1728–1740.
Hamburger, V., Hamilton, H.L., 1992. A series of normal stages in the development of the
chick embryo. 1951. Dev. Dyn. 195, 231–272.
Jacobs, I.J., Menon, U., Ryan, A., Gentry-Maharaj, A., Burnell, M., Kalsi, J.K., Amso, N.N.,
Apostolidou, S., Benjamin, E., Cruickshank, D., Crump, D.N., Davies, S.K., Dawnay, A.,
Dobbs, S., Fletcher, G., Ford, J., Godfrey, K., Gunu, R., Habib, M., Hallett, R., Herod, J.,
Jenkins, H., Karpinskyj, C., Leeson, S., Lewis, S.J., Liston, W.R., Lopes, A., Mould, T.,
Murdoch, J., Oram, D., Rabideau, D.J., Reynolds, K., Scott, I., Seif, M.W., Sharma, A.,
Singh, N., Taylor, J., Warburton, F., Widschwendter, M., Williamson, K., Woolas, R.,
Fallowfield, L., McGuire, A.J., Campbell, S., Parmar, M., Skates, S.J., 2016. Ovarian can-
cer screening and mortality in the UK Collaborative Trial of Ovarian Cancer Screening
(UKCTOCS): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 387, 945–956.
Karst, A.M., Levanon, K., Drapkin, R., 2011. Modeling high-grade serous ovarian carcino-
genesis from the fallopian tube. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 108, 7547–7552.
Kuleshov, V., Xie, D., Chen, R., Pushkarev, D., Ma, Z., Blauwkamp, T., Kertesz, M., Snyder,
M., 2014. Whole-genome haplotyping using long reads and statistical methods. Nat.
Biotechnol. 32, 261–266.
Kurman, R.J., Shih Ie, M., 2011. Molecular pathogenesis and extraovarian origin of epithe-
lial ovarian cancer—shifting the paradigm. Hum. Pathol. 42, 918–931.
Landt, S.G., Marinov, G.K., Kundaje, A., Kheradpour, P., Pauli, F., Batzoglou, S., Bernstein,
B.E., Bickel, P., Brown, J.B., Cayting, P., Chen, Y., Desalvo, G., Epstein, C., Fisher-Aylor,
K.I., Euskirchen, G., Gerstein, M., Gertz, J., Hartemink, A.J., Hoffman, M.M., Iyer, V.R.,
Jung, Y.L., Karmakar, S., Kellis, M., Kharchenko, P.V., Li, Q., Liu, T., Liu, X.S., Ma, L.,
Milosavljevic, A., Myers, R.M., Park, P.J., Pazin, M.J., Perry, M.D., Raha, D., Reddy, T.E.,
Rozowsky, J., Shoresh, N., Sidow, A., Slattery, M., Stamatoyannopoulos, J.A.,
Tolstorukov, M.Y., White, K.P., Xi, S., Farnham, P.J., Lieb, J.D., Wold, B.J., Snyder, M.,
2012. ChIP-seq guidelines and practices of the ENCODE and modENCODE consortia.
Genome Res. 22, 1813–1831.
Langmead, B., Salzberg, S.L., 2012. Fast gapped-read alignment with Bowtie 2. Nat.
Methods 9, 357–359.
Lee, Y., Miron, A., Drapkin, R., Nucci, M.R., Medeiros, F., Saleemuddin, A., Garber, J., Birch,
C., Mou, H., Gordon, R.W., Cramer, D.W., McKeon, F.D., Crum, C.P., 2007. A candidate
precursor to serous carcinoma that originates in the distal fallopian tube. J. Pathol.
211, 26–35.
Lunter, G., Goodson, M., 2011. Stampy: a statistical algorithm for sensitive and fast map-
ping of Illumina sequence reads. Genome Res. 21, 936–939.
McLean, C.Y., Bristor, D., Hiller, M., Clarke, S.L., Schaar, B.T., Lowe, C.B., Wenger, A.M.,
Bejerano, G., 2010. GREAT improves functional interpretation of cis-regulatory re-
gions. Nat. Biotechnol. 28, 495–501.
Menon, U., Ryan, A., Kalsi, J., Gentry-Maharaj, A., Dawnay, A., Habib, M., Apostolidou, S.,
Singh, N., Benjamin, E., Burnell, M., Davies, S., Sharma, A., Gunu, R., Godfrey, K.,
Lopes, A., Oram, D., Herod, J., Williamson, K., Seif, M.W., Jenkins, H., Mould, T.,
Woolas, R., Murdoch, J.B., Dobbs, S., Amso, N.N., Leeson, S., Cruickshank, D., Scott, I.,
Fallowfield, L., Widschwendter, M., Reynolds, K., McGuire, A., Campbell, S., Parmar,
M., Skates, S.J., Jacobs, I., 2015. Risk algorithm using serial biomarker measurements
doubles the number of screen-detected cancers compared with a single-threshold
rule in the united kingdom collaborative trial of ovarian cancer screening. J. Clin.
Oncol. 33, 2062–2071.
Neph, S., Vierstra, J., Stergachis, A.B., Reynolds, A.P., Haugen, E., Vernot, B., Thurman, R.E.,
John, S., Sandstrom, R., Johnson, A.K., Maurano, M.T., Humbert, R., Rynes, E., Wang, H.,
Vong, S., Lee, K., Bates, D., Diegel, M., Roach, V., Dunn, D., Neri, J., Schafer, A., Hansen,
R.S., Kutyavin, T., Giste, E., Weaver, M., Canfield, T., Sabo, P., Zhang, M., Balasundaram,
G., Byron, R., Maccoss, M.J., Akey, J.M., Bender, M.A., Groudine, M., Kaul, R.,
Stamatoyannopoulos, J.A., 2012. An expansive human regulatory lexicon encoded in
transcription factor footprints. Nature 489, 83–90.
Perets, R., Wyant, G.A., Muto, K.W., Bijron, J.G., Poole, B.B., Chin, K.T., Chen, J.Y., Ohman,
A.W., Stepule, C.D., Kwak, S., Karst, A.M., Hirsch, M.S., Setlur, S.R., Crum, C.P.,
Dinulescu, D.M., DRAPKIN, R., 2013. Transformation of the fallopian tube secretory
epithelium leads to high-grade serous ovarian cancer in Brca;Tp53;Pten models. Can-
cer Cell 24, 751–765.
Peters, B.A., Kermani, B.G., Sparks, A.B., Alferov, O., Hong, P., Alexeev, A., Jiang, Y., Dahl, F.,
Tang, Y.T., Haas, J., Robasky, K., Zaranek, A.W., Lee, J.H., Ball, M.P., Peterson, J.E.,
Perazich, H., Yeung, G., Liu, J., Chen, L., Kennemer, M.I., Pothuraju, K., Konvicka, K.,
Tsoupko-Sitnikov, M., Pant, K.P., Ebert, J.C., Nilsen, G.B., Baccash, J., Halpern, A.L.,
Church, G.M., Drmanac, R., 2012. Accurate whole-genome sequencing and
haplotyping from 10 to 20 human cells. Nature 487, 190–195.
Peters, B.A., Kermani, B.G., Alferov, O., Agarwal, M.R., McElwain, M.A., Gulbahce, N.,
Hayden, D.M., Tang, Y.T., Zhang, R.Y., Tearle, R., Crain, B., Prates, R., Berkeley, A.,
Munne, S., Drmanac, R., 2015. Detection and phasing of single base de novo muta-
tions in biopsies from human in vitro fertilized embryos by advanced whole-genome
sequencing. Genome Res. 25, 426–434.
Ran, F.A., Hsu, P.D., Wright, J., Agarwala, V., SCOTT, D.A., Zhang, F., 2013. Genome engi-
neering using the CRISPR-Cas9 system. Nat. Protoc. 8, 2281–2308.
Rimmer, A., Phan, H., Mathieson, I., Iqbal, Z., Twigg, S.R., Consortium, W. G. S., Wilkie, A.O.,
McVean, G., Lunter, G., 2014. Integrating mapping-, assembly- and haplotype-based
approaches for calling variants in clinical sequencing applications. Nat. Genet. 46,
912–918.
Sauka-Spengler, T., Barembaum, M., 2008. Gain- and loss-of-function approaches in the
chick embryo. Methods Cell Biol. 87, 237–256.
Simoes-Costa, M.S., McKeown, S.J., Tan-Cabugao, J., Sauka-Spengler, T., Bronner, M.E.,
2012. Dynamic and differential regulation of stem cell factor FoxD3 in the neural
crest is encrypted in the genome. PLoS Genet. 8, e1003142.
Takahashi, K., Yamanaka, S., 2006. Induction of pluripotent stem cells from mouse embry-
onic and adult fibroblast cultures by defined factors. Cell 126, 663–676.
Takahashi, K., Tanabe, K., Ohnuki, M., Narita, M., Ichisaka, T., Tomoda, K., Yamanaka, S.,
2007. Induction of pluripotent stem cells from adult human fibroblasts by defined
factors. Cell 131, 861–872.
Thurman, R.E., Rynes, E., Humbert, R., Vierstra, J., Maurano, M.T., Haugen, E., Sheffield, N.C.,
Stergachis, A.B., Wang, H., Vernot, B., Garg, K., John, S., Sandstrom, R., Bates, D.,
Boatman, L., Canfield, T.K., Diegel, M., Dunn, D., Ebersol, A.K., Frum, T., Giste, E.,
Johnson, A.K., Johnson, E.M., Kutyavin, T., Lajoie, B., Lee, B.K., Lee, K., London, D.,
Lotakis, D., Neph, S., Neri, F., Nguyen, E.D., Qu, H., Reynolds, A.P., Roach, V., Safi, A.,
Sanchez, M.E., Sanyal, A., Shafer, A., Simon, J.M., Song, L., Vong, S., Weaver, M., Yan,
148
K. Hellner et al. / EBioMedicine 10 (2016) 137–149
 Y., Zhang, Z., Lenhard, B., Tewari, M., Dorschner, M.O., Hansen, R.S., Navas, P.A.,
Stamatoyannopoulos, G., Iyer, V.R., Lieb, J.D., Sunyaev, S.R., Akey, J.M., Sabo, P.J.,
Kaul, R., Furey, T.S., Dekker, J., Crawford, G.E., Stamatoyannopoulos, J.A., 2012. The ac-
cessible chromatin landscape of the human genome. Nature 489, 75–82.
Yang, X., Boehm, J.S., Salehi-Ashtiani, K., Hao, T., Shen, Y., Lubonja, R., Thomas, S.R., Alkan,
O., Bhimdi, T., Green, T.M., Johannessen, C.M., Silver, S.J., Nguyen, C., Murray, R.R.,
Hieronymus, H., Balcha, D., Fan, C., Lin, C., Ghamsari, L., Vidal, M., Hahn, W.C., Hill,
D.E., Root, D.E., 2011. A public genome-scale lentiviral expression library of human
ORFs. Nat. Methods 8, 659–661.
Yip, K.Y., Cheng, C., Bhardwaj, N., Brown, J.B., Leng, J., Kundaje, A., Rozowsky, J., Birney, E.,
Bickel, P., Snyder, M., Gerstein, M., 2012. Classification of human genomic regions
based on experimentally determined binding sites of more than 100 transcription-re-
lated factors. Genome Biol. 13, R48.
149
K. Hellner et al. / EBioMedicine 10 (2016) 137–149
