 Respiratory syncytial virus infection enhances
Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilm growth through
dysregulation of nutritional immunity
Matthew R. Hendricksa, Lauren P. Lashuaa, Douglas K. Fischera, Becca A. Flittera, Katherine M. Eichingerb,
Joan E. Durbinc, Saumendra N. Sarkara,d, Carolyn B. Coynea, Kerry M. Empeyb, and Jennifer M. Bombergera,1
aDepartment of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15219; bDepartment of Pharmacy and
Therapeutics, University of Pittsburgh School of Pharmacy, Pittsburgh, PA 15261; cDepartment of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Rutgers-New Jersey
Medical School, Newark, NJ 07101; and dCancer Virology Program, University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
Edited by Peter Palese, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, and approved December 9, 2015 (received for review August 25, 2015)
Clinical observations link respiratory virus infection and Pseudomonas
aeruginosa colonization in chronic lung disease, including cystic fibro-
sis (CF) and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The development
of P. aeruginosa into highly antibiotic-resistant biofilm communities
promotes airway colonization and accounts for disease progression in
patients. Although clinical studies show a strong correlation between
CF patients’ acquisition of chronic P. aeruginosa infections and respi-
ratory virus infection, little is known about the mechanism by which
chronic P. aeruginosa infections are initiated in the host. Using a co-
culture model to study the formation of bacterial biofilm formation
associated with the airway epithelium, we show that respiratory viral
infections and the induction of antiviral interferons promote robust
secondary P. aeruginosa biofilm formation. We report that the induc-
tion of antiviral IFN signaling in response to respiratory syncytial virus
(RSV) infection induces bacterial biofilm formation through a mecha-
nism of dysregulated iron homeostasis of the airway epithelium.
Moreover, increased apical release of the host iron-binding protein
transferrin during RSV infection promotes P. aeruginosa biofilm de-
velopment in vitro and in vivo. Thus, nutritional immunity pathways
that are disrupted during respiratory viral infection create an environ-
ment that favors secondary bacterial infection and may provide pre-
viously unidentified targets to combat bacterial biofilm formation.
respiratory syncytial virus | nutritional immunity | cystic fibrosis |
Pseudomonas aeruginosa | biofilm
V
iral–bacterial interactions impact the development and
evolution of chronic infections at many mucosal sites, including
the airway (1–3). In the lung disease cystic fibrosis (CF), viral in-
fections are linked to pulmonary function decline, antibiotic use,
prolonged hospitalizations, and increased respiratory symptoms (4).
Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is one of the most common viral
copathogens in CF and is a culprit in disease progression, pro-
moting early respiratory tract morbidity and reductions in lung
function (5, 6). Moreover, beyond the morbidity associated with
viral infections alone, RSV has been linked in clinical studies to the
development of Pseudomonas aeruginosa coinfections and to the
conversion to chronic P. aeruginosa colonization in CF patients (6–
10). Although clinical associations between viral infection and the
acquisition of colonizing P. aeruginosa are clear, the basic biology of
this interaction is not understood.
The transition of acute bacterial infections to chronic infections
often involves the development of bacterial aggregates, or biofilms.
The combination of an up-regulation of antibiotic resistance genes
and the production of a polymeric matrix surrounding the biofilm
serves to protect bacteria from the hostile environment in the host
(11). The development of biofilm in human disease has been
studied intensely for its involvement in disease progression in CF.
Biofilm development at a mucosal surface requires initial attach-
ment of bacteria to a surface, followed by the formation and growth
of microcolonies, resulting in the development of bacterial biofilms,
which can undergo regulated dispersal and ultimately seed a new
surface (12, 13). Our present understanding of bacterial biofilm
development is largely limited to single-organism infections. Al-
though we have long known of polymicrobial communities colo-
nizing human tissues, there is a surprising gap in our understanding
of how these communities develop, how they impact human disease,
and how host defense mechanisms influence polymicrobial infec-
tions. Because our current antimicrobial approaches have limited
success for chronic infections, elucidating the mechanism by which
biofilms develop during polymicrobial infections may identify new
therapeutic targets to combat biofilm persistence.
Many environmental cues have been described as contributing to
the conversion of P. aeruginosa to a biofilm mode of growth; one such
cue is iron. Nutrient iron is tightly regulated in the host through
complex interactions among uptake, storage, and use in the cell.
Nutritional immunity postulates that, because iron is required for
microbial growth, respiration, and metabolism, the host employs
many regulatory pathways to sequester free iron (14). In CF, elevated
levels of iron in the airways of infected patients are correlated with
frequency of exacerbation and have been proposed to play a role in
airway colonization (15, 16). The sputum of CF patients contains
elevated levels of ferrous iron, and these levels correlate with disease
severity (17). Although increased iron in sputum is associated with
CF lung disease severity, it still is unknown how iron homeostasis is
altered in CF and how this alteration relates to airway infection.
Significance
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is the major respiratory pathogen that
promotes disease progression in chronic lung diseases such as
cystic fibrosis (CF) and resides in antibiotic-resistant biofilm com-
munities in the lungs of patients. Little is known about host fac-
tors that contribute to the development of bacterial biofilms in
the lung. We have observed that respiratory virus coinfection and
the antiviral immune response aid in the transition of P. aerugi-
nosa to a biofilm mode of growth through inappropriate release
of the nutrient iron. Defining molecular mechanisms by which
P. aeruginosa biofilms develop in the lung affords a better oppor-
tunity to target therapies to eliminate life-threatening infections
in CF and in other chronic lung diseases.
Author contributions: M.R.H., L.P.L., D.K.F., B.A.F., S.N.S., C.B.C., K. M. Empey, and J.M.B.
designed research; M.R.H., L.P.L., D.K.F., B.A.F., K. M. Eichinger, and J.M.B. performed
research; J.E.D. and C.B.C. contributed new reagents/analytic tools; M.R.H., L.P.L., D.K.F.,
B.A.F., K. M. Empey, and J.M.B. analyzed data; and M.R.H. and J.M.B. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
See Commentary on page 1480.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: jbomb@pitt.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1516979113/-/DCSupplemental.
1642–1647
|
PNAS
|
February 9, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 6
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1516979113
 Using CF lung disease as a model to understand viral–bacterial
interactions at a mucosal surface, we use a coculture system for
bacterial biofilm development in association with the airway epi-
thelium. Using RSV, we demonstrate that virus coinfection and the
subsequent antiviral IFN response dramatically enhance the growth
of P. aeruginosa biofilm in association with the airway epithelium. In
addition, we show that virus infection impairs nutritional immunity,
allowing the apical release of transferrin and thus increasing bio-
availability of iron to promote the growth of P. aeruginosa biofilm.
These findings offer new insight into the complex interaction among
two pathogens and the host during polymicrobial infections and
suggest a mechanism by which nutritional immunity plays a critical
role in regulating pathogen persistence in the airway.
Results
Respiratory Virus Infections Promote P. aeruginosa Biofilm Growth on
Airway Epithelial Cells. To determine if respiratory virus infections
promote the growth of P. aeruginosa biofilm on airway epithelial
cells, human ΔF508/ΔF508 cystic fibrosis bronchial epithelial cells
(CFBE41o-, hereafter called “AECs”) were grown as a polarized
monolayer and were infected with RSV, followed by infection with
GFP-tagged P. aeruginosa (strain PAO1) in a flow chamber. Biofilm
growth was analyzed by live-cell microscopy, as described previously
(Fig. 1 A and B) (18, 19). Surprisingly, RSV coinfection significantly
enhanced the growth of P. aeruginosa biofilm on the surface of
AECs in a time-dependent manner, peaking at 72 h after RSV
infection, as measured in a static coculture biofilm model (Fig. 1C)
(19). We also found that RSV infection induced biofilm growth of
three CF clinical isolate strains of P. aeruginosa (Fig. S1A) and on
primary CF and non-CF human bronchial epithelial (HBE) cells
(Fig. 1D and Fig. S1A).
Using an abiotic biofilm growth assay in a 96-well microtiter dish
(20), we found no differences in biofilm formation in P. aeruginosa
biofilms grown in the presence or absence of RSV (Fig. S2A). In
addition, although bacterial attachment was increased when cells
were infected simultaneously with RSV and P. aeruginosa (Fig. S2B),
as has been shown previously (21), P. aeruginosa attachment was not
increased on cells infected with RSV before bacterial infection,
whereas biofilm formation was greatly increased (Fig. S2C). More-
over, biofilm growth on the apical surface of AECs infected with
RFP-tagged RSV (RSV-RFP) showed a random distribution (Pear-
son correlation coefficient of 0.072 ± 0.021) (Fig. S2D), demon-
strating that biofilms did not form specifically on virus-infected cells.
Stimulation of Bacterial Biofilm Formation Is Induced by Infection of
AECs by Disparate Viruses. To examine whether virus-enhanced
P. aeruginosa biofilm formation was specific for RSV coinfection, we
infected AECs with human rhinovirus-14 (hRV14) or adenovirus-5
(Ad5), two additional respiratory viral pathogens commonly found in
CF patients (4), before bacterial infection. Coinfection with hRV14
or Ad5 also increased the growth of P. aeruginosa biofilm on AECs
(Fig. 1E). Importantly, cytotoxicity was not detected for RSV, hRV,
or adenovirus infections, as measured by lactate dehydrogenase re-
lease and transepithelial electrical resistance, a measure of epithelial
barrier integrity (Fig. S3). Taken together, these results indicate that
several respiratory viruses relevant to CF lung disease can stimulate
the growth of P. aeruginosa biofilm on AECs.
Antiviral IFN Signaling Increases the Growth of P. aeruginosa Biofilm.
Host cells commonly respond to viral infections through the in-
duction of antiviral IFNs. Because we observed an enhancement of
bacterial biofilm growth by diverse respiratory viruses, we focused
Fig. 1.
Respiratory viral infection promotes the growth of P. aeruginosa biofilm on AECs. (A) The setup for live-cell biotic biofilm imaging and a cross-
sectional view of the micro-observation chamber. (B, Right) P. aeruginosa (GFP) biofilms imaged by live-cell microscopy after 6 h of growth. AEC cell nuclei are
shown with Hoechst (blue) staining. (Left) Biofilm biomass was quantified using COMSTAT (black bars, left y axis). RSV RNA was measured by quantitative
RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) to assess RSV infection (red bar, right y axis). (C) RSV-enhanced biofilm growth is time dependent. In a static coculture biofilm assay, AECs
were infected with RSV (striped bars) or were mock-infected [Eagle’s minimal essential media (MEM) control; black bars] for the indicated times followed by
P. aeruginosa infection. P. aeruginosa biofilm was assessed by cfu enumeration (Left y axis). RSV RNA was measured by qRT-PCR to assess RSV infection (red bars,
right y axis). (D) RSV stimulates the growth of P. aeruginosa biofilm on well-differentiated CF HBEs. P. aeruginosa biofilms were grown on primary CF HBEs using
the static coculture biofilm assay and were quantified by cfu enumeration. (E) Other respiratory viruses enhance the growth of P. aeruginosa biofilm on AECs.
P. aeruginosa biofilms were grown in a static coculture biofilm assay on AECs infected with hRV or AdV or were mock-infected (MEM control). Biofilms were
quantified by cfu enumeration (black bars, left y axis). Viral RNA was measured by qRT-PCR to assess virus infection (red bars, right y axis). RSV, RSV-infected AECs.
For all experiments n ≥ 3. Data are presented as mean ± SD; *P < 0.05 versus control.
Hendricks et al.
PNAS
|
February 9, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 6
|
1643
MICROBIOLOGY
SEE COMMENTARY
 on common pathways that might be induced in infected cells in
response to virus infection. To do so, we first measured IFN-λ (IL-
29/28B) production during the course of RSV infection and ob-
served that IFN-λ levels in the apical airway surface liquid peaked
72 h post-RSV infection (see Fig. 3A). Consistent with previous
studies (22), type I IFN production (IFN-β) also was produced by
AECs during RSV infection, but to a lesser extent than IFN-λ (Fig.
S4 A and B). Treatment of AECs with purified IFN-λ1 (IL-29,
100 ng/mL) (Fig. 2 B and C) enhanced the growth of P. aeruginosa
biofilm on the surfaces of AECs. To confirm that signaling through
the IFN-λ receptor was required for IFN-stimulated biofilm growth,
we targeted both components of the heterodimeric IFN-λ receptor,
IL-28Rα and IL-10Rβ. RNAi-mediated knockdown of IL-28Rα
(Fig. S5A) reduced IFN-λ–stimulated biofilm growth on AECs (Fig.
2D). In addition, using a neutralizing antibody against IL-10Rβ
during RSV infection, we observed reduced P. aeruginosa biofilm
growth (Fig. S5B). IFN-β signaling through the IFN α/β receptor
(IFNAR) also induced biofilm growth (1,000 U/mL) (Fig. S4 C–F).
Taken together, these data support the conclusion that IFN sig-
naling in response to respiratory viral infection is necessary and
sufficient to enhance the growth of P. aeruginosa biofilm.
Iron Released from RSV-Infected AECs Stimulates Biofilm Growth.
Because IFNs are secreted factors, we next determined whether
the apical airway surface liquid [hereafter termed “conditioned
medium” (CM)] from RSV-infected cells was capable of enhancing
biofilm growth in the absence of AECs. We found that the CM
from RSV-infected cells increased biofilm growth on abiotic sur-
faces, as assessed by microscopy (Fig. 3A) and a 96-well microtiter
biofilm assay (Fig. 3B). Importantly, treatment of P. aeruginosa
under cell-free conditions with purified IFN-λ1 (100 ng/mL) had no
effect on biofilm growth (Fig. S6). Because we observed that CM
from RSV-infected cells stimulated biofilm growth, we hypothesized
that RSV infection and subsequent IFN signaling induced the se-
cretion of a biofilm stimulatory factor. Iron is an essential nutrient
for many bacteria and is required for the formation of P. aeruginosa
biofilm on both abiotic and biotic surfaces (18, 23, 24). To de-
termine if iron homeostasis is altered during RSV infection, we
measured total iron levels in CM from mock- or RSV-infected cells.
RSV infection resulted in a time-dependent and dose-dependent
increase in extracellular iron in the CM from CF AECs and primary
CF HBEs (Fig. 3C and Fig. S7 A and B) as well as in the CM from
primary non-CF HBEs (Fig. S7C). Importantly, the presence of iron
in CM was required for the enhancement of biofilm growth in re-
sponse to RSV infection, because an iron-chelating agent (Chelex-
100) dramatically decreased CM-induced biofilm growth (Fig. 3D).
When exogenous iron (FeCl3) was added to CM from RSV-
infected cells after treatment with Chelex-100, biofilm growth
was restored (Fig. 3D). Collectively, these results indicate that
RSV infection enhances iron release by AECs, thus increasing
iron availability and biofilm formation by P. aeruginosa.
Transferrin Is Apically Released in Response to RSV Infection. To
examine the mechanism by which RSV infection promotes apical
iron release, we investigated whether the abundance of iron trans-
porters and iron-binding proteins in AECs was altered by virus in-
fection. We did not observe a significant difference in the abundance
of the iron transporters ferroportin or divalent metal-ion transporter
1 (DMT1) during RSV infection (Fig. S8A). Similarly, the abun-
dance of iron-binding proteins, including transferrin, ferritin, and
lactoferrin, was not changed by RSV infection (Fig. S8A).
Because we observed increased iron levels in CM from RSV-
infected cells (Fig. 3C), with no corresponding change in the ex-
pression of iron transporters, we next examined whether RSV
infection alters the release of iron-binding proteins into the CM.
Indeed, we found increased abundance of transferrin in the CM
from RSV-infected AECs (Fig. 4A). Transferrin is a host iron-
binding protein that can be used as a source of iron and can support
the growth of multiple bacterial species, including P. aeruginosa (25–
27). Notably, transferrin promotes biofilm growth by P. aeruginosa
Fig. 2.
Type III IFN (IFN-λ) signaling stimulates the growth of P. aeruginosa biofilm. (A) RSV infection induces IFN-λ secretion from AECs. Cells were infected
with RSV for the indicated number of hours (hpi), and IFN-λ1/3 (IL-29/28B) release was measured by ELISA. (B and C) IFN-λ treatment stimulates the growth of
P. aeruginosa biofilm on AECs. P. aeruginosa biofilm growth increased on AECs treated for 12 h with IFN-λ1 (100 ng/mL), as assessed by live-cell microscopy
(B) or a static coculture biofilm assay (C). Epithelial cell nuclei are shown with Hoechst (blue) staining. The P. aeruginosa biofilm (GFP, green) biomass was
calculated for each condition using COMSTAT (B). P. aeruginosa biofilm was assessed by cfu enumeration (black bars, left y axis) (C). IFN-λ1 signaling was
confirmed with ISG56 induction by qRT-PCR (green bars, right y axis) (C). (D) Signaling via IL-28Rα is required for biofilm growth during IFN-λ treatment. AECs
were transfected with scrambled siRNA (siNeg) or siRNA targeting IL-28Rα (siIL28Rα) and were treated with IFN-λ1 (100 ng/mL) for 12 h, and P. aeruginosa
biofilms were grown in a static coculture biofilm assay. P. aeruginosa biofilm growth was quantified by cfu enumeration and displayed as fold change
compared with siNeg-transfected cells. IFN-λ, IFN-λ–treated AECs. For all experiments n ≥ 3. Data are presented as mean ± SD; *P < 0.05.
1644
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1516979113
Hendricks et al.
 in a dose-dependent manner (18). To determine whether trans-
ferrin is necessary for the stimulation of biofilm growth by CM from
RSV-infected cells, we grew P. aeruginosa in transferrin-depleted
CM (Fig. S8B) and found that a significant reduction in biofilm
growth when CM from RSV-infected cells was depleted of trans-
ferrin (Fig. 4B). Collectively, these data suggest that RSV infection
stimulates the apical release of transferrin from AECs to promote
the formation of P. aeruginosa biofilms.
RSV Infection Increases the Availability of Airway Iron in Vivo. To
extend our in vitro findings to what might occur in vivo, we used
a neonatal mouse model of RSV infection (28) and measured
iron levels in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) up to 1 wk
postinfection. RSV infection increased iron concentrations in the
airways significantly, compared with mock-infected controls (Fig.
4C and Fig. S9A). In agreement with the increased abundance of
iron, BALF from RSV-infected mice was able to support in vitro
P. aeruginosa biofilm growth (Fig. S9B). Although RSV infection
resulted in increased inflammation, there was no evidence of
severe bronchiolar epithelial damage or of sloughing or rupture
of the epithelial barrier, which could account for the increase of
iron in the airways (Fig. S9 C and D). In addition, consistent with
our finding in polarized human AECs, transferrin abundance was
increased in the BALF of RSV-infected mice (Fig. 4D), further
supporting a role for iron release as a key mediator of biofilm
formation in response to RSV infection of AECs.
Discussion
Respiratory viral infections trigger exacerbations in chronic lung
disease such as CF and predispose patients to bacterial colonization,
but identifying the molecular mechanism(s) underlying viral–bac-
terial interactions has been elusive (7, 10, 29). Because of the
paucity of animal models to study the development of chronic
bacterial infections, we used a unique coculture model in which the
early stages of P. aeruginosa biofilm development in association with
polarized human AECs can be observed by high-resolution, live-cell
imaging. We demonstrate that respiratory virus infection of CF
and non-CF AECs and the subsequent induction of IFN signaling
pathways results in the increased formation of bacterial biofilm.
Moreover, we show that biofilm growth is increased through a
dysregulation of host nutritional immunity mechanisms, resulting in
the increased release of iron-bound transferrin during virus
infection. This release of iron-bound transferrin promotes the
transition of P. aeruginosa to a biofilm mode of growth (Fig. S10).
Importantly, our findings propose a molecular mechanism underlying
the common clinical observation that respiratory virus infection in
patients with chronic lung disease promotes chronic bacterial col-
onization and disease progression (7, 10, 29). Our studies have
important implications, beyond CF pathogenesis, for under-
standing how complex microbial communities interact during
disease in the lung.
Few studies have investigated the interaction between viruses and
P. aeruginosa in the airways. It has been shown that P. aeruginosa
may modulate the antiviral response, although the consequences of
these interactions on the progression of P. aeruginosa infection re-
main unclear (30, 31). Previous studies have shown that RSV
coinfection promotes bacterial adherence to nonpolarized AECs
(21, 32). In our model using well-differentiated AECs, we show that
preceding RSV infection decreased P. aeruginosa adherence to
AECs while greatly enhancing the development of bacterial biofilm.
We interpret these results, coupled with abiotic biofilm assays that
are not altered with virus exposure, as indicating that a direct in-
teraction between virus and bacteria is not responsible for en-
hancement of chronic P. aeruginosa infections during respiratory
viral infection. Instead, using a coculture model of biofilm devel-
opment in association with the airway epithelium, our data suggest a
mechanism by which the host innate immune response to the viral
pathogen creates a local environment at the mucosal surface that
promotes chronic bacterial infection.
Although the antiviral effects of IFNs are well recognized (33),
studies now suggest that an appropriate antiviral IFN response
to respiratory viral infection has unfavorable effects on secondary
bacterial infections. For example, in acute models of influenza–
bacterial coinfection, the increased bacterial load in the airways of
mice after influenza challenge has been attributed to the antiviral
IFN response to the virus (34–36). Little is known about how IFN
Fig. 3.
RSV infection enhances iron release from AECs to stimu-
late biofilm growth. (A and B) RSV infection stimulates the release
of a biofilm-stimulatory factor that promotes P. aeruginosa for-
mation. AECs were infected with RSV or were mock-infected
(MEM control) for 72 h, and the apical CM was collected.
(A) P. aeruginosa (GFP) was grown in the presence of CM in static
abiotic biofilm assays. Epifluorescence microscopy was used to
measure the growth of P. aeruginosa biofilm (GFP, green), and
biomass was quantified using Nikon Elements (grid unit = 9 μm).
(B) P. aeruginosa biofilms were grown in CM for 24 h in a 96-well
microtiter biofilm assay. (C) Total iron was increased in apical CM
collected from AECs infected with RSV or mock-infected (MEM
control) for the indicated number of hours postinfection. (D) Iron
in RSV CM is required for the growth of P. aeruginosa biofilm.
Ninety-six–well microtiter biofilm assays were performed to mea-
sure the growth of P. aeruginosa in CM. Divalent metal cations
were chelated with Chelex-100 (labeled “Chelex” in the figure),
and iron was added back with FeCl3 (8 μM) after Chelex-100
treatment. RSV, RSV-infected AECs. For all experiments n ≥ 3.
Data are presented as mean ± SD; *P < 0.05.
Hendricks et al.
PNAS
|
February 9, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 6
|
1645
MICROBIOLOGY
SEE COMMENTARY
 induction or signaling pathways influence chronic bacterial in-
fection. In acute models of P. aeruginosa infection, the ability to
clear P. aeruginosa infection is improved significantly in mice lacking
IL-28Rα, indicating that IFN-λ signaling may contribute adversely
to pulmonary P. aeruginosa infections in vivo (37). Our data extend
previous findings to suggest that IFN signaling also promotes the
growth of P. aeruginosa biofilm and chronic infections.
Our study suggests the dysregulation of nutritional immunity,
specifically iron homeostasis, as a primary mechanism by which
RSV promotes the transition of P. aeruginosa to a biofilm mode of
growth. Iron plays an essential role in the development of biofilms
both on abiotic surfaces and in association with AECs for P. aeruginosa
and other bacterial species (18, 23, 24, 38). A strong positive cor-
relation has been reported among increased iron levels, P. aeruginosa
load, and disease severity in the CF lung, but the effect of re-
spiratory viral infection on iron levels has not been investigated (15,
17, 39). In our studies we found that, during the course of infection,
RSV increased apical iron release from the airway epithelium and
that iron chelation dramatically reduced biofilm growth, implying
that iron chelation is effective in counteracting virus-mediated iron
release and biofilm growth. Although P. aeruginosa biofilms grown
on AECs display significantly higher antibiotic resistance than bio-
films formed on abiotic surfaces, the use of iron chelation com-
pounds significantly increases antibiotic-mediated disruption of
biofilms on cells (40). Moreover, it has been demonstrated recently
that P. aeruginosa dispersed from biofilms by chemical induction is
highly sensitive to iron stress (41). This high sensitivity to iron
limitation suggests that iron chelation compounds may play a role in
preventing the spread of bacteria to new infection sites. A novel
approach to inhibiting P. aeruginosa growth and biofilm formation
uses the transition metal gallium (Ga3+) to disrupt P. aeruginosa
iron metabolism (42, 43). Therefore, the coadministration of iron
chelators that can prevent bacterial iron acquisition and compounds
that disrupt bacterial iron metabolism may be an important thera-
peutic strategy during respiratory virus seasons to prevent the de-
velopment and spread of chronic bacterial infections in CF patients.
Iron is a critical nutrient for many cellular processes in humans,
but the quantity and location of iron must be regulated tightly to
prevent infection (14). Even in the absence of infection, extracellular
iron is bound to high-affinity iron-binding proteins, such as trans-
ferrin, to maintain extremely low levels of free iron. We found that
RSV infection promoted the apical release of transferrin from AECs
and that transferrin contributed significantly to the formation of
P. aeruginosa biofilms. The mechanism(s) by which P. aeruginosa
responds to the environmental conditions imposed by RSV infection,
including the presence of transferrin, are important to consider. One
mechanism by which P. aeruginosa overcomes iron sequestration is
through the siderophore pyoverdine, which facilitates iron acquisi-
tion from transferrin and is important for bacterial growth and bio-
film formation (24, 44). The presence of pyoverdine in CF sputum
suggests the importance of pyoverdine-mediated iron uptake by
P. aeruginosa in the CF lung (45). Taken together, these studies
suggest that pyoverdine-mediated acquisition of iron from transferrin
may be an important mechanism by which chronic P. aeruginosa
infections initially develop in the CF lung and that respiratory viral
infection may instigate such a microenvironment. In support of this
hypothesis, longitudinal analyses of CF clinical isolates suggest that
P. aeruginosa pyoverdine production is high early in infection (46, 47).
In summary, many clinical studies in patients with chronic lung
disease report viral–bacterial interactions that result in poor
bacterial clearance and disease progression. In the current study,
we demonstrate that respiratory viral infections dysregulate host
iron homeostasis mechanisms, promoting harmful secondary
bacterial infections. By improving our mechanistic understanding
of viral–bacterial coinfections, these studies aid in the develop-
ment of new treatments to target complex infectious diseases.
Moreover, because mounting clinical evidence suggests that
many infectious diseases are polymicrobial in nature, our studies
likely have implications for studying complex microbial com-
munities during other disease processes.
Fig. 4.
Transferrin release increases in response to virus infection in vitro and in vivo. (A and B) AECs were infected with RSV or were mock-infected (MEM control) for
72 h and then apical CM was collected. (A) RSV infection increases transferrin abundance in apical CM, as measured by Western blot analysis. (B) Transferrin depletion
reduces the growth of P. aeruginosa biofilm in RSV CM. Apical CM was collected from RSV-infected AECs depleted of transferrin by immunoprecipitation (RSV-Tfn IP).
P. aeruginosa (GFP) biofilms were grown in transferrin-replete and -depleted RSV CM in static abiotic biofilm assays. Biofilm biomass was quantified using Nikon
Elements (grid unit = 8.5 μm). (C and D) Total iron (C) and transferrin abundance (D) were increased in BALF recovered from neonatal mice infected with RSV or mock-
infected (PBS control) for the indicated number of days postinfection (dpi), as measured by iron assay or Western blot analysis, respectively. Horizontal lines indicate
mean values. Alb, albumin; RSV, RSV infection; Tfn, transferrin. All experiments were repeated, with at least four mice per group; *P < 0.05.
1646
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1516979113
Hendricks et al.
 Materials and Methods
Cell Lines, Virus Infection, and Bacterial Strains. The immortalized human CF
bronchial epithelial cell line CFBE41o- (referred to herein as “AECs”) was isolated
from a ΔF508/ΔF508 patient, cultured on Transwell filters, and grown at the air–
liquid interface for 7–10 d. Primary HBE cells were obtained (with informed consent
under the protocol approved by the Institutional Review Board at the University of
Pittsburgh, as described in ref. 19) from explanted lungs of CF patients and were
cultured on Transwell inserts under air–liquid conditions Cells were infected with
the purified human A2 strain of RSV [multiplicity of infection (MOI) of seeded
cells = 1], hrV14 (MOI = 1), or human Ad5 (MOI = 1) for 72 h. The P. aeruginosa
strain PAO1 constitutively expressing GFP was used as previously described (19, 40).
Coculture Biofilm Experiments. Live-cell imaging was used to image bacterial
biofilms grown on epithelial cells in the presence or absence of virus infection,
as described in refs. 18, 19, and 40). P. aeruginosa static coculture biofilm
experiments were performed as described previously (19, 40).
Iron Analysis. CM was collected from AECs, cell debris was removed by cen-
trifugation at 1,400 × g, and the CM was stored at 4 °C. Total iron in CM was
measured using with the QuantiChrom Iron Assay Kit (BioAssay Systems).
In Vivo RSV Infection Studies. In vivo RSV infection studies were carried out in
strict accordance with the recommendations in the NIH Guide for the Care
and Use of Laboratory Animals (48) and were approved by the University of
Pittsburgh Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) (protocol
number 14023340). Mice were handled according to IACUC guidelines, and
all efforts were made to minimize animal suffering. Mice were housed at the
University of Pittsburgh Division of Laboratory Animal Resources. Neonatal
mice (pups) from BALB/cJ mice were intranasally inoculated with 5 × 105 pfu/g
body weight of RSV line 19 or PBS, as previously described (28). BALF was
harvested for analysis by iron assay, and transferrin abundance was assessed
by Western blot.
Statistical Analysis. GraphPad Prism version 6.0 (GraphPad) was used for
statistical analysis. Means were compared using Student’s t test or, for multiple
comparisons, ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc test. P < 0.05 was considered
significant.
Additional methods can be found in SI Materials and Methods.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Mark Peeples (Nationwide Children’s Hospi-
tal) and Peter Collins (NIH) for the RFP-RSV used in the study, Joseph Pilewski
(University of Pittsburgh Medical Center) for primary airway epithelial cells, and
Jeffrey Melvin (University of Pittsburgh) for technical assistance and helpful
discussions. This work was supported by the NIH Grants R00HL098342,
R01HL123771, and P30DK072506 (to J.M.B.) and T32AI060525 (to M.R.H.
and B.A.F.) and by Grant BOMBER14G0 from the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation.
1. Tang AC, et al. (2014) Current concepts: Host-pathogen interactions in cystic fibrosis
airways disease. Eur Respir Rev 23(133):320–332.
2. Suárez-Arrabal MC, et al. (2015) Nasopharyngeal bacterial burden and antibiotics:
Influence on inflammatory markers and disease severity in infants with respiratory
syncytial virus bronchiolitis. J Infect 71(4):458–469.
3. Varkey JB, Varkey B (2008) Viral infections in patients with chronic obstructive pul-
monary disease. Curr Opin Pulm Med 14(2):89–94.
4. van Ewijk BE, van der Zalm MM, Wolfs TF, van der Ent CK (2005) Viral respiratory
infections in cystic fibrosis. J Cyst Fibros 4(Suppl 2):31–36.
5. Wat D, et al. (2008) The role of respiratory viruses in cystic fibrosis. J Cyst Fibros 7(4):320–328.
6. Smyth AR, Smyth RL, Tong CY, Hart CA, Heaf DP (1995) Effect of respiratory virus infections
including rhinovirus on clinical status in cystic fibrosis. Arch Dis Child 73(2):117–120.
7. Collinson J, et al. (1996) Effects of upper respiratory tract infections in patients with
cystic fibrosis. Thorax 51(11):1115–1122.
8. Hiatt PW, et al. (1999) Effects of viral lower respiratory tract infection on lung
function in infants with cystic fibrosis. Pediatrics 103(3):619–626.
9. Brownlee JW, Turner RB (2008) New developments in the epidemiology and clinical
spectrum of rhinovirus infections. Curr Opin Pediatr 20(1):67–71.
10. Petersen NT, et al. (1981) Respiratory infections in cystic fibrosis patients caused by
virus, chlamydia and mycoplasma–possible synergism with Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
Acta Paediatr Scand 70(5):623–628.
11. Costerton JW (2001) Cystic fibrosis pathogenesis and the role of biofilms in persistent
infection. Trends Microbiol 9(2):50–52.
12. Costerton JW, Stewart PS, Greenberg EP (1999) Bacterial biofilms: A common cause of
persistent infections. Science 284(5418):1318–1322.
13. Harmsen M, Yang L, Pamp SJ, Tolker-Nielsen T (2010) An update on Pseudomonas
aeruginosa biofilm formation, tolerance, and dispersal. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol
59(3):253–268.
14. Cassat JE, Skaar EP (2013) Iron in infection and immunity. Cell Host Microbe 13(5):509–519.
15. Reid DW, Lam QT, Schneider H, Walters EH (2004) Airway iron and iron-regulatory
cytokines in cystic fibrosis. Eur Respir J 24(2):286–291.
16. Gifford AH, et al. (2012) Iron homeostasis during cystic fibrosis pulmonary exacer-
bation. Clin Transl Sci 5(4):368–373.
17. Hunter RC, et al. (2013) Ferrous iron is a significant component of bioavailable iron in
cystic fibrosis airways. MBio 4(4):e00557-13.
18. Moreau-Marquis S, et al. (2008) The DeltaF508-CFTR mutation results in increased
biofilm formation by Pseudomonas aeruginosa by increasing iron availability. Am J
Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 295(1):L25–L37.
19. Zemke AC, et al. (2014) Nitrite modulates bacterial antibiotic susceptibility and biofilm
formation in association with airway epithelial cells. Free Radic Biol Med 77:307–316.
20. O’Toole GA, Kolter R (1998) Initiation of biofilm formation in Pseudomonas fluo-
rescens WCS365 proceeds via multiple, convergent signalling pathways: A genetic
analysis. Mol Microbiol 28(3):449–461.
21. Van Ewijk BE, et al. (2007) RSV mediates Pseudomonas aeruginosa binding to cystic
fibrosis and normal epithelial cells. Pediatr Res 61(4):398–403.
22. Mordstein M, et al. (2010) Lambda interferon renders epithelial cells of the respiratory
and gastrointestinal tracts resistant to viral infections. J Virol 84(11):5670–5677.
23. Singh PK, Parsek MR, Greenberg EP, Welsh MJ (2002) A component of innate im-
munity prevents bacterial biofilm development. Nature 417(6888):552–555.
24. Banin E, Vasil ML, Greenberg EP (2005) Iron and Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilm
formation. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102(31):11076–11081.
25. Mickelsen PA, Sparling PF (1981) Ability of Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Neisseria menin-
gitidis, and commensal Neisseria species to obtain iron from transferrin and iron
compounds. Infect Immun 33(2):555–564.
26. Herrington DA, Sparling PF (1985) Haemophilus influenzae can use human transferrin
as a sole source for required iron. Infect Immun 48(1):248–251.
27. Senkovich O, Ceaser S, McGee DJ, Testerman TL (2010) Unique host iron utilization
mechanisms of Helicobacter pylori revealed with iron-deficient chemically defined
media. Infect Immun 78(5):1841–1849.
28. Empey KM, et al. (2012) Stimulation of immature lung macrophages with intranasal
interferon gamma in a novel neonatal mouse model of respiratory syncytial virus
infection. PLoS One 7(7):e40499.
29. Johansen HK, Høiby N (1992) Seasonal onset of initial colonisation and chronic in-
fection with Pseudomonas aeruginosa in patients with cystic fibrosis in Denmark.
Thorax 47(2):109–111.
30. Chattoraj SS, et al. (2011) Pseudomonas aeruginosa suppresses interferon response to
rhinovirus infection in cystic fibrosis but not in normal bronchial epithelial cells. Infect
Immun 79(10):4131–4145.
31. Bomberger JM, et al. (2014) Pseudomonas aeruginosa Cif protein enhances the
ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation of the transporter associated with an-
tigen processing (TAP) and reduces major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I
antigen presentation. J Biol Chem 289(1):152–162.
32. Hament JM, et al. (2004) Enhanced adherence of Streptococcus pneumoniae to human
epithelial cells infected with respiratory syncytial virus. Pediatr Res 55(6):972–978.
33. Durbin RK, Kotenko SV, Durbin JE (2013) Interferon induction and function at the
mucosal surface. Immunol Rev 255(1):25–39.
34. Nakamura S, Davis KM, Weiser JN (2011) Synergistic stimulation of type I interferons
during influenza virus coinfection promotes Streptococcus pneumoniae colonization
in mice. J Clin Invest 121(9):3657–3665.
35. Kudva A, et al. (2011) Influenza A inhibits Th17-mediated host defense against bac-
terial pneumonia in mice. J Immunol 186(3):1666–1674.
36. Shahangian A, et al. (2009) Type I IFNs mediate development of postinfluenza bac-
terial pneumonia in mice. J Clin Invest 119(7):1910–1920.
37. Cohen TS, Prince AS (2013) Bacterial pathogens activate a common inflammatory
pathway through IFNλ regulation of PDCD4. PLoS Pathog 9(10):e1003682.
38. Patriquin GM, et al. (2008) Influence of quorum sensing and iron on twitching motility
and biofilm formation in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. J Bacteriol 190(2):662–671.
39. Reid DW, Carroll V, O’May C, Champion A, Kirov SM (2007) Increased airway iron as a
potential factor in the persistence of Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection in cystic fi-
brosis. Eur Respir J 30(2):286–292.
40. Moreau-Marquis S, O’Toole GA, Stanton BA (2009) Tobramycin and FDA-approved
iron chelators eliminate Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilms on cystic fibrosis cells. Am J
Respir Cell Mol Biol 41(3):305–313.
41. Chua SL, et al. (2014) Dispersed cells represent a distinct stage in the transition from
bacterial biofilm to planktonic lifestyles. Nat Commun 5:4462.
42. Kaneko Y, Thoendel M, Olakanmi O, Britigan BE, Singh PK (2007) The transition metal
gallium disrupts Pseudomonas aeruginosa iron metabolism and has antimicrobial and
antibiofilm activity. J Clin Invest 117(4):877–888.
43. Banin E, et al. (2008) The potential of desferrioxamine-gallium as an anti-Pseudo-
monas therapeutic agent. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105(43):16761–16766.
44. Sriyosachati S, Cox CD (1986) Siderophore-mediated iron acquisition from transferrin
by Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Infect Immun 52(3):885–891.
45. Martin LW, Reid DW, Sharples KJ, Lamont IL (2011) Pseudomonas siderophores in the
sputum of patients with cystic fibrosis. Biometals 24(6):1059–1067.
46. Marvig RL, et al. (2014) Within-host evolution of Pseudomonas aeruginosa reveals
adaptation toward iron acquisition from hemoglobin. MBio 5(3):e00966–e14.
47. Nguyen AT, et al. (2014) Adaptation of iron homeostasis pathways by a Pseudomonas
aeruginosa pyoverdine mutant in the cystic fibrosis lung. J Bacteriol 196(12):2265–2276.
48. Committee on Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (1996) Guide for the Care and Use of
Laboratory Animals (Natl Inst Health, Bethesda), DHHS Publ No (NIH) 85-23, pp 1–13.
49. Bomberger JM, et al. (2011) A Pseudomonas aeruginosa toxin that hijacks the host
ubiquitin proteolytic system. PLoS Pathog 7(3):e1001325.
Hendricks et al.
PNAS
|
February 9, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 6
|
1647
MICROBIOLOGY
SEE COMMENTARY
