 www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Published online September 17, 2016   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(16)30148-1 
1
Series
Lancet Psychiatry 2016
Published Online
September 17, 2016
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S2215-0366(16)30148-1
This is the second in a Series of 
two papers about maternal 
depression and child outcomes 
in low-income and 
middle-income countries
Department of Psychology, 
Université du Québec à 
Montréal, Montréal, QC, 
Canada (C M Herba PhD);  CHU 
Sainte-Justine Research Center, 
Montréal, QC, Canada 
(C M Herba); Institute of 
Reproductive and 
Developmental Biology, 
Imperial College London, 
London, UK (Prof V Glover DSc); 
Centre for Mental Health, 
Imperial College London, 
London, UK 
(P G Ramchandani DPhil); and 
Mental Health and Psychiatry 
Unit, Department of Medicine, 
Cayetano Heredia Peruvian 
University, Lima, Peru 
(M B Rondon MD)
Correspondence to:
Dr Catherine M Herba, 
Université du Québec à Montréal, 
Montréal, QC H2X 3P2, Canada
herba.catherine@uqam.ca
Maternal depression 2
Maternal depression and mental health in early childhood: 
an examination of underlying mechanisms in low-income 
and middle-income countries
Catherine M Herba, Vivette Glover, Paul G Ramchandani, Marta B Rondon
Studies examining mechanisms underlying associations between maternal depression and adverse child outcomes 
(including behaviour, socioemotional adjustment, and emotion regulation) indicate that during pregnancy, maternal 
depression could aff
 ect child outcomes through altered placental function, epigenetic changes in the child, and stress 
reactivity. Infection and dietary defi
 ciencies in the mother and the child, together with the child’s genetic vulnerability, 
might also aff
 ect outcome. Postnatally, associations between maternal depression and child outcome are infl
 uenced 
by altered mother–child interactions, sociodemographic or environmental infl
 uences, and social support. Knowledge 
is scarce on mechanisms in low-income and middle-income countries where maternal depression is highly prevalent, 
and stressful factors that infl
 uence the development of perinatal maternal depression and adverse child outcome (eg, 
food insecurity, perinatal infections, crowded or rural living conditions, and interpersonal violence) are both more 
intense and more common than in high-income countries. We reviewed evidence and use the biopsychosocial model 
to illustrate risk factors, mediators and moderators underlying associations between maternal depression and child 
outcomes in low-income and middle-income countries.
Introduction
Depression is a leading cause of disability worldwide.1 
Since women are more likely to be aff
 ected than men,2–4 
particularly during the childbearing years,5 maternal 
depression is highlighted as a global public health 
issue.6 Maternal depression in the perinatal period is 
linked to a wide range of adverse child outcomes, 
including 
compromised 
physical 
and 
cognitive 
development, behavioural diffi
  culties, and increased 
risk for later common mental disorders in the 
off
 spring.7–9 A growing body of evidence points to 
common mental disorders (such as depression, anxiety, 
and stress) during pregnancy as conferring a specifi
 c 
risk to the developing fetus and aff
 ecting later child 
development, including associations with negative child 
temperament, anxiety, oppositional behaviour, and 
symptoms of attentional defi
 cits.10,11 Yet, to date, much of 
what is known on the links between perinatal depression 
(both prenatal and postnatal) and child outcome tends 
to come from studies done in high-income countries,12,13 
and much less is known about low-income and 
middle-income countries,12,14 where most children live 
worldwide.5 Prevalences of common perinatal mental 
disorders including depression and anxiety are 
substantially higher in low-income and middle-income 
countries, 
particularly 
in 
poorer 
rural 
areas.12 
Prevalences of maternal depression have been shown to 
vary among these settings, yet they are estimated to be 
two-to-three times higher than in high-income 
countries,13 ranging from 5% in Ethiopia to up to 35% in 
South Africa.15 In fi
 ve low-income and middle-income 
countries (Ethiopia, India, Nepal, South Africa, and 
Uganda), prevalence during pregnancy was higher than 
reported postnatally.15 Diff
 erences in prevalence might 
be partly because of the diversity in screening methods, 
lack of formal validation of these methods in the country 
or language against a gold standard (to establish 
appropriate cutoff
  scores for detecting symptoms 
meeting diagnostic criteria in that setting), cultural 
infl
 uences, and whether information is gathered from 
rural or urban settings.12 There is increased exposure to 
known risk factors for depression in low-income and 
middle-income countries, namely, exposure to violence, 
particularly intimate partner violence; war; disasters; 
food 
insecurity; 
child 
maltreatment; 
sanitation 
defi
 ciencies; shortage of accessible good quality 
health-care services, including diffi
  cult access to 
contraception (therefore contributing to unwanted 
pregnancy); and high prevalence of diseases such as 
tuberculosis, malaria, and HIV and other sexually 
transmitted diseases.16–20 Although recent years have 
witnessed an increase in the number of studies 
examining maternal depression in low-income and 
middle-income countries, many of these studies have 
focused on outcomes pertaining to child physical health 
(ie, growth, stunting, birth complications),21,22 or have 
examined risk factors for maternal antenatal and 
postnatal depression.12,19,23–30 There is little information 
linking maternal depression with subsequent child 
behaviour and mental health.31 We focused this report 
on the mechanisms that might explain associations 
between maternal depression and child outcome in 
low-income and middle-income countries within the 
fi
 rst 5 years of the child’s life. We focused on these early 
years given the child’s increased dependence on the 
mother; however, we also drew from relevant studies of 
 2 
www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Published online September 17, 2016   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(16)30148-1
Series
older children including follow-up studies or those that 
are informative of mechanisms. Although maternal 
depression was the main exposure of interest, we 
acknowledge that anxiety disorders have not been as 
widely studied in low-income and middle-income 
countries as depression, despite high comorbidity, and 
not all psychological morbidity cited can be accurately 
construed as depression for the reasons we have 
mentioned. Thus, we used the term maternal depression 
more broadly to cover all of these conditions. The main 
child outcome of interest was mental health, yet given 
the focus on age 0–5 years, this outcome consists of 
more 
developmentally 
appropriate 
indices 
of 
temperament, behavioural diffi
  culties, socioemotional 
development, attachment, and emotion regulation. 
When relevant to understanding mechanisms, we also 
refer to studies that include child cognitive outcome, 
given the rapid neurodevelopment during the fi
 rst years 
of life and links between neurodevelopment and child 
mental health.
We used a biopsychosocial model to explain the 
intergenerational transfer of risk (fi
 gure), adapted to the 
context of low-income and middle-income countries. 
Although we expect that many of these mechanisms are 
likely to operate in a similar way in countries of all income 
levels, it is the context within which the depression occurs, 
including exposure to a multitude of risk factors at once, 
which is likely to diff
 erentiate high-income countries from 
low-income and middle-income countries. Knowledge of 
mechanisms is important for informing on the most 
appropriate and eff
 ective interventions that could be 
administered in such resource-constrained countries.
Potential mechanisms linking maternal 
depression in the prenatal period and child 
mental health
Fetal programming
There is considerable evidence from high-income 
countries that prenatal maternal depression and other 
forms of stress are associated with a range of adverse 
mental health outcomes for the child, including an 
increased risk of anxiety, depression, attention defi
 cit 
hyperactivity disorder, and conduct disorder.32 Although 
there is less research from low-income and middle-income 
countries, there are now several studies that show similar 
associations between prenatal maternal stress or 
depression and increased rates of adverse child 
outcomes.30,33–36 These associations, found in large 
population studies that have taken into account a wide 
range of possible confounders such as smoking, alcohol 
consumption, paternal prenatal mood, and postnatal 
maternal mood and parenting, are likely to be partly due 
to fetal programming. The term fetal programming 
suggests that environmental infl
 uences during sensitive 
periods of gestation might alter the development of the 
fetus with long-lasting eff
 ects on the off
 spring. In one UK 
population cohort study,37 if the mother was in the top 15% 
for symptoms of depression, following adjustment for 
confounders, her child had double the risk of a probable 
mental disorder at age 13 years. The eff
 ects were additive 
with those of postnatal depression. Fetal programming 
does not imply that the trajectory, started in utero, cannot 
be changed later. There is considerable evidence38 that 
sensitive mothering can buff
 er the eff
 ects of prenatal 
stress, at least for some outcomes, and that insecure 
Figure: Model of mechanisms linking maternal depression and child mental health outcome: a focus on low-income and middle-income countries
Mechanisms underlying associations between maternal depression and child mental health outcomes are likely to be similar in high-income countries, and in 
low-income and middle-income countries. However, the context in which maternal depression occurs is likely to be diff
 erent, with risk factors increased in low-income 
and middle-income countries. We expect such contextual risk factors might have both additive and interactive eff
 ects. Some risk factors could also be considered as 
both biological and psychosocial (eg, illness could have a biological and psychosocial eff
 ect on wellbeing). BDNF=brain derived neurotrophic factor. *For example, 
iodine or iron defi
 ciency. †Include HIV, tuberculosis, malaria. ‡Includes war, natural disasters, and political and interpersonal violence. §Includes food insecurity and 
unmet needs. ¶Includes views of mental illness, family structure, gender roles, and maternal education.
Context
Biological 
•  Nutritional deficits*
•  Microbiome
•  Genetic predisposition
•  Illness†
Psychosocial
•  Illness
•  Trauma‡
•  Intimate partner violence
•  Poverty and difficult living 
    conditions§
•  Socio-cultural influences¶
•  Childhood maltreatment
•  Unplanned pregnancy
Placenta: glucocorticoid 
system (↓11-BHSD2, 
↑GR) epigenetic changes
Maternal:
↑cortisol, ↑cytokines
Prenatal maternal 
depression
Chronic stress
Postnatal maternal 
depression
Potential mediators
Biological
•  Epigenetic effects
•  Stunted growth in fetus or child
•  Microbiome (fetus or child)
•  ↑cortisol, ↑serotonin
•  ↓BDNF in fetus or newborn baby
Psychosocial
• Compromised mother–
child interactions
•  Parenting stress
Child development (brain 
development, cognitive 
and mental health)
•  Sex differences in vulnerability
•  Ethnic origin
 www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Published online September 17, 2016   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(16)30148-1 
3
Series
attachment can exacerbate prenatal eff
 ects. Many of the 
studies have made use of diff
 erent methods for measuring 
prenatal maternal mood; some have measured symptoms 
of depression, some anxiety, pregnancy-related anxiety, 
life events, or acute disasters such as a Canadian ice 
storm,39 and few have made a clinical diagnosis of 
depression. We do not yet know whether these diff
 erent 
types of mood change have diff
 erent eff
 ects on child 
outcome, 
or 
whether 
they 
operate 
by 
diff
 erent 
mechanisms. Post-traumatic stress disorder for example, 
can be associated with reduced cortisol output,40 whereas 
other forms of anxiety, depression, and stress are often 
associated with increased cortisol concentrations.
The biological mechanisms underlying the fetal 
programming eff
 ects of prenatal maternal mood 
disturbance are just starting to be uncovered. The changes 
in the mother that induce changes in the development of 
the fetal brain are not clear. There is evidence that 
exposure to increased in-utero cortisol can aff
 ect fetal 
brain development in both rodent animal models and 
human beings.38,41 However, in women, as pregnancy 
develops, the placenta produces large quantities of 
cortisol, and the mother’s hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal 
(HPA) axis becomes less sensitive to her own depression 
or external stress.42 Prenatal stress and depression can still 
cause the fetus to be exposed to more cortisol, via 
alterations in the function of the placenta. Several studies 
have now revealed that there is altered expression of 
HPA-related genes in the placenta in association with 
maternal prenatal distress, including downregulation of 
the gene for 11-beta-HSD2,43 the enzyme that metabolises 
cortisol, and upregulation of the gene for the glucocorticoid 
receptor NR3C1.44 Several other biological systems are also 
likely to be involved. The placenta, for instance, is rich in 
serotonin and increased concentrations have been shown 
to alter fetal brain development.45 There is considerable 
interest in the cytokines too, since several studies46,47 have 
revealed that prenatal maternal depression, or a maternal 
history of early trauma, are associated with raised 
concentrations of prenatal maternal cytokines.
Genetic infl
 uences and gene–environment interactions
We know that not all children are aff
 ected by prenatal 
depression or other forms of stress, and those who are can 
be aff
 ected in diff
 erent ways. This eff
 ect is partly due to 
the nature of the postnatal care, but also to the genetic 
make-up of the individual child, and gene–environment 
interactions.48 Changes in the child are likely to be due, at 
least partly, to epigenetic changes. High pregnancy-specifi
 c 
anxiety has been associated with epigenetic changes in the 
promoter for the glucocorticoid receptor in the newborn 
baby.49 Maternal exposure to intimate partner violence has 
been associated with epigenetic changes in the promoter 
for the same receptor in the blood of their adolescent 
children.50 Increased exposure to trauma might also 
increase stress reactivity and lead to epigenetic changes in 
mothers and off
 spring. For instance, a study of 25 pregnant 
women exposed to the Tutsi genocide compared with 
25 unexposed women reported increased methylation of 
the NR3C1 receptor and alterations of the HPA axis in 
mothers and their children,34 which contributed to 
increased risk for off
 spring depression and post-traumatic 
stress disorder 20 years later.
Diff
 erent genetic patterns in diff
 erent populations could 
also alter the programming eff
 ects of prenatal depression. 
Teh and colleagues51 have shown how the eff
 ects of the 
in-utero environment, including the eff
 ects of prenatal 
depression on the epigenetic pattern in the child, also 
depend on the genetic make-up of the child. The GUSTO 
cohort is comprised of the three major Singaporean ethnic 
groups, Chinese, Malay, and Indian. Analysis of the 
genotypes and DNA methylation patterns of neonates 
showed that approximately 25% of the variably methylated 
regions were explained by genotype, with the remaining 
75% explained by the interaction of the genotype with 
diff
 erent in-utero environments, including maternal 
smoking, maternal body mass index, infant birthweight, 
gestational age, birth order, and maternal depression.51
Environmental and nutritional infl
 uences
There are few studies of the possible mechanisms that 
could underlie the eff
 ects of prenatal maternal depression 
on child mental health in low-income and middle-income 
countries. However, there is evidence concerning several 
factors that are probably relevant, including social and 
environmental factors, which can contribute to maternal 
depression in these countries, and also the several 
biological factors such as nutrition, infection, and 
genetics, which could alter or exacerbate the eff
 ects on 
the fetus and the child. A review52 of 31 studies in Latin 
America and the Caribbean examined the eff
 ect of 
intimate partner violence during pregnancy, and reported 
an increased risk for prenatal depression, unwanted 
pregnancy, 
obstetrical 
com 
plications, 
and 
stress 
reactivity. Similarly, in rural Vietnam,53 partner violence 
was associated with prenatal maternal depression. Some, 
but not all, of the evidence on mechanisms from studies 
in high-income countries might apply or guide thinking 
regarding 
mechanisms 
in 
low-income 
and 
middle-income countries.10,14 However, key diff
 erences 
are likely to exist. In Vietnam, many pregnant women 
have low concentrations of vitamin D,54 iron,36 or iodine,55 
and these in turn can aff
 ect fetal and child 
neurodevelopment. An increased load of infection and 
diff
 erent diets might also change the maternal 
microbiome (the pattern of bacteria, especially in the 
intestine), which is increasingly being related to health, 
including mental health.56 One study57 has indicated how 
prenatal stress can alter the pattern of the microbiome in 
the newborn baby. This pattern could potentially 
infl
 uence child neuro 
development and later mental 
health.58 Disruption of the microbiome in early life has 
the potential to infl
 uence neurodevelopment and mental 
health outcomes in the long term, particularly through 
 4 
www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Published online September 17, 2016   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(16)30148-1
Series
its interaction with the immune system and the gut–brain 
axis, which can involve both serotonin and cytokines.59 
The pattern of the vaginal microbiome has been found to 
diff
 er between white and non-white women.60
Prenatal infl
 uences on the developing 
hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis
Some of the eff
 ects of prenatal depression or stress on 
the child could be mediated by an alteration of the 
function of the HPA axis. In a study in India, Fernandes 
and colleagues61 showed an association between maternal 
prenatal depression and alterations in cortisol reactivity 
in the infant, with a U-shaped pattern of response. 
However, there might also be ethnic group diff
 erences in 
the function or reprogramming of the HPA axis. A study 
by Ward and colleagues62 suggests that, compared with 
white populations, participants of south Asian origin are 
more likely to display HPA axis hyperactivity as a result 
of sensitivity to the eff
 ects of glucocorticoids, an eff
 ect 
amplifi
 ed by adiposity. It is well established that the 
content and distribution of body fat is markedly diff
 erent 
in diff
 erent ethnic groups.63
Potential mechanisms linking maternal 
depression in the postnatal period and child 
mental health
Studies from high-income countries have indicated 
associations between maternal depression in the 
postnatal period and a range of adverse childhood 
outcomes.8,11 Within the context of low-income and 
middle-income countries, there is a larger body of 
literature examining maternal depression postnatally 
compared with the prenatal period. Postnatal maternal 
depression might be aff
 ected by continuity of earlier 
depression, in addition to new challenges associated with 
parenting. Many of the studies examining postnatal 
maternal depression and child outcome in low-income 
and middle-income countries have tended to focus on 
child growth and morbidity. Far fewer studies have linked 
maternal depression with indices of child mental health 
such as temperament, socioemotional development, 
emotion regulation, or behaviour.31 One examination64 of 
child adversities and mental health in 21 countries from 
the World Health Survey (including 12 low-income and 
middle-income countries) indicated that childhood 
adversity and later common mental disorders are likely 
to be linked through more general mechanisms, and 
maladaptive family functioning (including parent mental 
disorders) was the strongest predictor of common mental 
disorders in off
 spring. Within a study of fi
 ve low-income 
and middle-income countries, economic and social 
adversity, including marital and interpersonal diffi
  culties 
and poverty, were highlighted to play an important role.15
The early caregiving environment
Many studies, from countries of all income levels, have 
pointed to the early mother–infant relationship, 
including parenting and mother–child interactions, as a 
key mechanism underlying the association between 
maternal depression and child outcome. An investigation 
in Vietnam35 followed up women from the second 
trimester of pregnancy until 6 months post partum and 
examined the infl
 uence of mental health diffi
  culties such 
as maternal depression on child socioemotional 
development at age 6 months. Results indicated that 
neither antenatal nor postnatal (at 6 weeks) depression 
were associated directly with infant socioemotional 
development at 6 months, but rather this association was 
mediated by parental effi
  cacy and early parenting 
practices. Other work from South Africa65,66 has 
highlighted how mother–child interactions (such as 
maternal intrusiveness and coerciveness) mediate 
associations between maternal postnatal depression and 
early childhood attachment. Similarly, a longitudinal 
study in Bangladesh67 has indicated how the caregiving 
environment (assessed with the Home Observation 
Scale) 
mediates 
associations 
between 
maternal 
depression scores and irritable infant temperament and 
cognitive development between 6 and 12 months of age. 
Implications of such fi
 ndings for developing and 
targeting interventions are discussed later.
Child maltreatment, physical punishment, and the 
familial context
The familial context has been shown to aff
 ect both 
maternal depression and child development, and familial 
adversity has been linked to later child mental health 
problems across 21 countries in the World Health Survey.64 
Research from various low-income and middle-income 
countries identifi
 es intimate partner violence as an 
important factor contributing to maternal depression in 
the perinatal period.12,25,68–70 Another study71 has revealed 
links between antenatal and postnatal maternal depression 
(but not necessarily anxiety) and increased parenting 
stress. A study72 in children aged 13–55 months and their 
mothers in Uruguay indicated that parenting stress, 
particularly 
parental 
distress 
and 
dysfunctional 
parent–child interactions, was associated with high 
depression scores in mothers. Although child behaviours 
were not specifi
 cally assessed, fi
 ndings indicated the 
importance of considering that multiple risk factors could 
work together. Depression has also been linked to a more 
stressful living environment. A study73 in 370 children 
aged 5–10 years living in an urban slum in India reported 
that maternal depression was associated with child 
emotional and behavioural problems, but that odds ratios 
for maternal depression were smaller than the infl
 uence 
of having an alcoholic father or confl
 icts in the family. 
Another potential mechanism could work through 
parenting methods, more specifi
 cally, harsh punishment.74 
Research in high-income settings has shown that 
depressed mothers might be less sensitive to their child 
and could be more likely to resort to harsh parenting.75,76 
Both intimate partner violence and maternal depression 
 www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Published online September 17, 2016   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(16)30148-1 
5
Series
have been linked to harsh maternal parenting practices.77 
A study in Brazil78 assessed data from 480 participants 
aged 6–17 years, and showed that maternal depression 
was a risk factor for child internalising problems, but not 
necessarily externalising problems. This association was 
altered by exposure to harsh physical punishment and the 
presence of a father fi
 gure.78 A follow-up of these children 
5 years later79 indicated that both physical punishment, 
and to a slightly lesser extent maternal depression and 
anxiety, contributed to mental health problems in 
adolescents. Another study80 from Brazil examined the 
longitudinal associations between maternal depression 
and child mental health assessed at age 6 years. Both 
antenatal and postnatal depression at 3 months were 
associated with increased odds of a child psychiatric 
disorder at age 6 years. This odds ratio was reduced 
slightly once the authors tested for mediation by duration 
of breastfeeding or admission to hospital in the fi
 rst year 
of life. Another longitudinal study81 assessed maternal 
anxiety and depression and anxiety in off
 spring as they 
transitioned into adulthood. The authors reported that 
female off
 spring were particularly susceptible to the 
eff
 ects of maternal depression, and suggested that during 
the transition to adulthood, girls might be more likely to 
turn toward their mothers for support, which could be 
compromised in the case of increased symptoms of 
maternal depression.
Infant and child growth
Some studies have revealed associations between 
maternal depression and compromised child growth and 
physical development in low-income and middle-income 
countries,21,82 and one investigation21 reported that this 
eff
 ect persisted to age 8 years in India and Vietnam. 
There is evidence that the association between maternal 
depression and poorer child growth could operate 
through the caregiving environment. An investigation in 
Bangladesh22 found that maternal depression was 
associated with stunted growth between 6–12 months of 
age, with eff
 ects partly mediated by the caregiving 
environment. The authors cautioned that it was diffi
  cult 
to establish whether maternal depression preceded 
stunted growth.
Child growth, particularly in the fi
 rst years of life 
characterised by rapid neurodevelopment, can have 
implications for child behavioural and socioemotional 
development. A study from Ethiopia83 indicated that 
stunting was associated with decreased developmental 
scores in 437 children aged 3–24 months, yet once stunting 
was taken into account, symptoms of maternal depression, 
more 
than 
anxiety, 
were 
associated 
with 
child 
developmental outcome. Although this study did not 
explicitly examine mechanisms, it was suggested that 
factors such as poverty and food insecurity might 
contribute to maternal depression and anxiety, which in 
turn could partly mediate associations between child 
developmental outcome and insecurities of poverty and 
food acquisition. A study in Soweto-Johannesburg, South 
Africa,84 examined symptoms of maternal depression at 
6 months post partum and child behaviour at 2 years in 
635 mother–infant dyads participating in the Birth to 
Twenty cohort. Maternal depression was associated with a 
range of child behaviour diffi
  culties at an age of 2 years 
(including sleep and eating diffi
  culties, hyperactivity, 
temper tantrums, and relational diffi
  culties), after 
adjusting 
for 
socioeconomic 
status 
and 
child 
characteristics such as gender and preterm delivery. 
However, the contribution of maternal depression did not 
reach signifi
 cance once stunted growth was taken into 
account. This fi
 nding suggests that child stunting might 
mediate the association between maternal depression 
and child outcome. Longitudinal cohort studies, with 
measures started prenatally, are necessary to elucidate 
these associations.
As indicated earlier, nutritional factors such as iron 
defi
 ciency and anaemia might be tightly linked to child 
neurodevelopment and behaviour,85 as well as to 
symptoms of maternal depression. An investigation in the 
deprived South African community of Khayelitsha86 
indicated that iron defi
 ciency in mothers could contribute 
to poorer mother–infant interactions. More specifi
 cally, 
fatigue, irritability, and depressive symptoms associated 
with iron defi
 ciency could contribute to the mother being 
less emotionally available to her baby and the infant being 
less responsive to its mother as a result. Importantly, these 
interactions improved following iron therapy, highlighting 
that knowledge of the specifi
 c mechanisms underlying an 
association can produce successful interventions.
Illness
Many low-income and middle-income countries face the 
additional threat of increased prevalence of infections 
such as HIV and other communicable diseases such as 
tuberculosis.2 Prevalence of HIV varies greatly across 
these countries, and HIV remains a leading cause of 
death among pregnant women of reproductive age.15,87 
HIV is associated with depression88 and increased risk 
for postnatal depression. A study of 83 South African 
women with HIV and their infants,89 found that 42·2% of 
mothers met criteria for depression and 31·3% of babies 
were socially withdrawn at 10–12 months of age. Results 
did not support a direct link between maternal depression 
and infant social withdrawal, although the authors 
suggested that maternal depression might be associated 
with mothers’ immunity and HIV disease progression, 
which could in turn negatively infl
 uence mother–child 
interactions and subsequent behaviour of the baby. 
A study from China90 recruited 754 parent–child dyads in 
which a parent was diagnosed with HIV. Parenting stress 
mediated associations between caregiver distress (ie, 
depression) and child wellbeing (assessing loneliness, 
depression, and self-esteem). However, this study did not 
stipulate the number of mothers versus fathers who were 
included or record the identity of the parent completing 
 6 
www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Published online September 17, 2016   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(16)30148-1
Series
the questionnaire. Consistent with this work, a study 
from South Africa91 has indicated that parents and 
caregivers with HIV or AIDS might have diffi
  culty 
engaging in positive interactions with their child.
There is accumulating evidence of a consistent and 
strong association between maternal depression and an 
increased risk of a range of adverse child outcomes in 
low-income and middle-income countries. There are also 
plausible psychological, social, and biological pathways 
through which eff
 ects of maternal depression can aff
 ect 
various aspects of child development. However, two 
challenges still present themselves. The fi
 rst is that the 
link between maternal depression and child outcome is 
not necessarily entirely causal. Other, sometimes 
unmeasured, confounders (eg, socioeconomic factors and 
family confl
 ict),92 are likely to account for at least some of 
the association. Most intervention studies to date have not 
established that an improvement in maternal perinatal 
depression leads to an improvement in child outcome,33,93 
raising questions as to the extent of confounding. Few 
suffi
  ciently powered intervention trials have been done to 
date, so there is still much to establish. The second 
challenge is the disentangling of the complex interacting 
nature of depression and related risk factors such as 
nutritional defi
 ciencies, serious infections like HIV, and 
other psychosocial adversities. The same factor might act 
as a moderator of the risk of depression, as a potential 
confounder, and could also lie on the causal pathway 
between maternal depression and child outcome. This 
complexity has to be considered when focusing on 
implications for treatment intervention—who might 
benefi
 t from which intervention, and at what point in 
pregnancy or the postnatal period?
Strategies for interventions
A better understanding of the mechanisms underlying 
associations between maternal depression and child 
outcome can contribute valuable information to the 
development of more eff
 ective intervention programmes. 
There is still a substantial shortage of research on eff
 ective 
interventions 
for 
maternal 
depression 
and 
child 
development 
in 
low-income 
and 
middle-income 
countries.18 A handful of randomised trials done in 
deprived areas have revealed benefi
 ts for mothers or 
children. The constructs targeted by interventions tested in 
these trials are varied, ranging from the mother–child 
interaction and maternal sensitivity, to specifi
 c symptoms 
of maternal depression targeted by use of principles of 
cognitive behavioural therapy. Although the direct 
comparison of these trials is diffi
  cult because of diff
 erences 
in the intervention, the age at which the child was assessed, 
the specifi
 c outcome assessed, and the measures used,94 
intervention-specifi
 c benefi
 ts are seen for the mother or 
child in relation to outcomes. For instance, a pilot study,95 
targeting 64 mother–child dyads found that among dyads 
in the intervention group, mothers revealed more positive 
aff
 ect and sensitivity during free play and feeding with 
infants aged 6 months, although symptoms of maternal 
depression were not specifi
 cally reduced. A randomised 
trial96 in a deprived area of South Africa tested an 
intervention aimed at improving mother–child interaction. 
441 women were recruited in their fi
 nal trimester of 
pregnancy, mother–baby interactions were fi
 lmed and 
coded at 12 months, and attachment was assessed at 
18 months. Mother–baby dyads that received the 
intervention, compared with those who did not, showed 
improved maternal sensitivity, lower coerciveness, and 
more secure attachment. However, the intervention did 
not reduce maternal depression symptoms. Similarly, a 
randomised trial97 done in Bangladesh on 322 malnourished 
children aged 6–24 months assessed the eff
 ect of a 
psychosocial stimulation intervention in addition to food 
supplementation, and reported that although the 
intervention benefi
 ted the children in terms of growth and 
development, there was no signifi
 cant benefi
 t for the 
mothers’ depression symptoms 6 months later.98 A 
randomised trial99 in rural Uganda tested the eff
 ects of a 
parenting intervention for 291 mother–infant dyads. 
Mothers were recruited when their child was aged 
12–36 months. 12 group sessions and two home visits were 
done within a 10-month period. The intervention aimed to 
improve maternal psychological wellbeing and child 
development through targeting psychosocial stimulation, 
dietary diversity, hygiene, and mothers’ relationships. This 
study included various measures of child development and 
examined mediators in the association between the 
intervention and outcomes, including the involvement of 
fathers in the study. Mothers in the intervention group 
reported fewer depression symptoms than reported in the 
control group, and after 3 months, children’s cognitive and 
receptive language scores were higher in the intervention 
group than in the control group. The caregiving 
environment and stimulation partly mediated the 
association between the intervention and child outcome, 
perceived positive social support and active coping partly 
mediated the association between the intervention and 
maternal depressive symptoms. These results suggest that 
the intervention improved the stimulation provided to the 
child as well as the mothers’ functioning, which partly 
explained the eff
 ect on child outcome and mothers’ 
depression symptoms. A similar parenting intervention 
provided in Bangladesh100 found that an intervention 
targeting parenting abilities (including dietary and hygiene 
in young children aged 6–12 months and 12–24 months, 
promotion of positive interactions, and reduced harsh 
discipline) was associated with benefi
 ts for child language 
and cognitive development. This study also tested whether 
the modality of intervention delivery (ie, at home or within 
a group based in the community) aff
 ected outcome. There 
was an advantage of the group-based delivery for reducing 
maternal depression symptoms.
The Healthy Thinking Programme in Pakistan,101 has 
administered, through community health-care workers, 
sessions targeting cognitive behavioural principles such 
 www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Published online September 17, 2016   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(16)30148-1 
7
Series
as listening, questioning thought processes, and 
homework, and recruited women in their fi
 nal trimester 
of pregnancy. Mothers and their babies in intervention 
and control groups were evaluated at 6 months and 
12 months postnatally. The intervention did not 
specifi
 cally aff
 ect children’s growth, although less 
stunting was seen at 12 months of age in the intervention 
group than in the control group.101 Furthermore, children 
of mothers in the intervention group had fewer diarrhoeal 
episodes 2 weeks before the 12-month evaluation and 
were more likely to have been vaccinated. Mothers also 
had fewer symptoms of depression at follow-up. These 
results suggest that the intervention targeting maternal 
depression helped to reduce the mothers’ depression 
while potentially aiding in their ability to care for the 
child. However, a follow-up study33 of these participants 
when children were aged 7 years indicated that initial 
benefi
 ts did not continue long term; the intervention 
group showed no benefi
 ts in children’s cognitive and 
behavioural diffi
  culties, and even slightly worse (although 
not signifi
 cant) scores on anxiety than did the control 
group. The authors noted that increased relapse rates of 
maternal depression could have accounted for the 
absence of a positive eff
 ect in the long term, but also 
questioned whether one targeted intervention is enough 
to have long-term eff
 ects on child development.
Qualitative work, including interviews with depressed 
women and their families, has pointed to the primary 
importance of having culturally sensitive interventions.102 
Investigations102–104 have examined whether women’s 
groups or interventions led by trained women from the 
community could be acceptable and eff
 ective. These 
studies generally point to the benefi
 ts of having 
community-based 
health-care 
workers: 
important 
characteristics included being local, trustworthy, and 
integrated within the health-care system. Other 
research105 has highlighted that, in order not to 
overburden services, interventions should target specifi
 c 
issues. However, no one intervention is likely to aff
 ect 
child development and maternal depression long term,33 
and developmentally appropriate booster sessions might 
be necessary as the child develops. The Programme for 
Improving Mental Health Care, a WHO research 
consortium of fi
 ve low-income and middle-income 
countries (Ethiopia, India, Nepal, South Africa, and 
Uganda), is a 6-year programme that aims to generate 
evidence-based knowledge on implementing mental 
health treatment programmes in resource-constrained 
areas.106 Across these countries, the context of pregnancy, 
childbirth, and postnatal care varies widely, thus plans to 
integrate mental health into these primary care settings 
need to adapt the services to fi
 t the context of care more 
closely.15 Rahman and colleagues highlighted, in a 
meta-analysis of intervention studies,94 the importance 
for psychological and educational components of the 
intervention to be well adapted to the living circumstances 
and cultural background of the participating women.
Challenges to studying mechanisms in 
low-income and middle-income countries
There remain large gaps in the knowledge of long-term 
eff
 ects and mechanisms underlying these associations 
despite valuable work done in the past 10–15 years 
(panel). Low-income and middle-income countries 
present additional challenges that make it diffi
  cult to 
study these kinds of mechanisms, including few 
resources for research, diffi
  culties in following up people 
over time, and cultural infl
 uences on how mental health 
is viewed. Migration patterns, as seen in South Africa,107,108 
contribute 
to 
diffi
  culties 
in 
following 
families 
longi 
tudinally.108,109 Furthermore, both the design and 
running of studies in areas facing severe deprivation 
(devastating eff
 ects of communicable diseases such as 
HIV and AIDS, food insecurity, war or political violence, 
and eff
 ects of climate change) raise logistical and ethical 
challenges.107 Health-care workers are overburdened and 
face a crisis in which basic physical health issues might 
not be met, leaving little capacity or few resources for 
dealing with mental disorders,102,105 including maternal 
depression. Delivery of treatment of maternal depression 
becomes an even greater challenge where resources are 
scarce and maternal depression could have wide-reaching 
eff
 ects for the mother and the child.110 Hence, there is a 
need for integration of mental health care and shifting of 
tasks from professionals to trained health-care workers 
with fewer qualifi
 cations.102,111
Conclusions
Maternal depression is a global public health issue that 
must be addressed to break an inter-generational cycle of 
transmission. We have used a biopsychosocial model to 
explain 
the 
mechanisms 
underlying 
associations 
between maternal depression and child mental health 
outcome, and suggest that although the mechanisms are 
broadly similar in countries of all income levels, it is 
likely that the context within which the depression occurs 
is 
especially 
problematic 
in 
low-income 
and 
middle-income countries. Results of intervention studies 
Panel: Key challenges and research questions 
• 
Longitudinal studies in low-income and middle-income countries that incorporate 
both biological and psychosocial data are needed to understand the underlying 
mechanisms that link perinatal maternal depression and child outcome in these 
countries
• 
Better understanding of which factors (biological or psychosocial) are particularly 
important or specifi
 c to some low-income and middle-income countries is needed to 
inform policies to target those most at risk
• 
More detailed knowledge of the factors and mechanisms implicated will inform more 
eff
 ective intervention strategies
• 
Intervention studies should be done across diff
 erent low-income and middle-income 
countries to develop feasible and eff
 ective interventions that can also take account of 
the sociocultural factors that are likely to be diff
 erent in diff
 erent contexts 
 8 
www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Published online September 17, 2016   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(16)30148-1
Series
to date are consistent with some of the mechanisms that 
we present, although further research is necessary to 
better understand how risks to children of depressed 
mothers might be mitigated. As previously suggested, 
strategies to address the global burden of maternal 
depression are likely to need a multi-faceted social 
approach that can address child development, poverty, 
prevention of violence, education, and health. The 
integration of mental health into primary health-care 
settings is of central importance in this endeavour. 
Contributors
CMH and VG contributed to the literature search for this report for this 
paper in the maternal depression Series. CMH drafted the following 
sections: introduction, postnatal mechanisms, strategies for 
intervention, and conclusion. VG drafted the section about prenatal 
maternal depression and mechanisms. PGR and MBR contributed 
feedback and discussions on various drafts of the manuscript. All 
authors contributed to the conceptualisation of the bio-psychosocial 
model presented in the fi
 gure.
Declaration of interests
We declare no competing interests.
Acknowledgments
CMH holds a salary award from the Fonds de Recherche du 
Québec -Santé (FRQS). We thank Dr Jane Fisher and Dr Linda Booij for 
their helpful comments on the draft manuscript.
References
1 
Murray CJ, Barber RM, Foreman KJ, et al. Global, regional, and 
national disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) for 306 diseases and 
injuries and healthy life expectancy (HALE) for 188 countries, 
1990–2013: quantifying the epidemiological transition. Lancet 2015; 
386: 2145–91.
2 
Prince M, Patel V, Saxena S, et al. No health without mental health. 
Lancet 2007; 370: 859–77
.
3 
Kuehner C. Gender diff
 erences in unipolar depression: an update 
of epidemiological fi
 ndings and possible explanations. 
Acta Psychiatr Scand 2003; 108: 163–74.
4 
Seedat S, Scott KM, Angermeyer MC, et al. Cross-national 
associations between gender and mental disorders in the World 
Health Organization World Mental Health Surveys. 
Arch Gen Psychiatry 2009; 66: 785–95.
5 
Parsons CE, Young KS, Rochat TJ, Kringelbach ML, Stein A. 
Postnatal depression and its eff
 ects on child development: a review of 
evidence from low- and middle-income countries. Br Med Bull 2012; 
101: 57–79.
6 
Almond P. Postnatal depression: a global public health perspective. 
Perspect Public Health 2009; 129: 221–27
.
7 
Beardslee WR, Versage EM, Gladstone TR. Children of aff
 ectively 
ill parents: a review of the past 10 years. 
J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 1998; 37: 1134–41.
8 
Goodman SH, Rouse MH, Connell AM, Broth MR, Hall CM, 
Heyward D. Maternal depression and child psychopathology: 
a meta-analytic review. Clin Child Fam Psychol Rev 2011; 14: 1–27
.
9 
Weissman MM, Wickramaratne P, Nomura Y, Warner V, 
Pilowsky D, Verdeli H. Off
 spring of depressed parents: 20 years 
later. Am J Psychiatry 2006; 163: 1001–08.
10 
O’Connor TG, Monk C, Fitelson EM. Practitioner review: maternal 
mood in pregnancy and child development—implications for child 
psychology and psychiatry. J Child Psychol Psychiatry 2014; 55: 99–111.
11 
Sanger C, Iles JE, Andrew CS, Ramchandani PG. Associations 
between postnatal maternal depression and psychological outcomes 
in adolescent off
 spring: a systematic review. 
Arch Womens Ment Health 2015; 18: 147–62.
12 
Fisher J, Cabral de Mello M, Patel V, et al. Prevalence and 
determinants of common perinatal mental disorders in women in 
low- and lower-middle-income countries: a systematic review. 
Bull World Health Organ 2012; 90: 139G–49G.
13 
Fisher JR, Cabral de Mello M, Izutsu T, Tran T. The Ha Noi 
Expert Statement: recognition of maternal mental health in 
resource-constrained settings is essential for achieving the 
Millennium Development Goals. Int J Ment Health Syst 2011; 5: 2.
14 
Stein A, Pearson RM, Goodman SH, et al. Eff
 ects of perinatal 
mental disorders on the fetus and child. Lancet 2014; 384: 1800–19.
15 
Baron EC, Hanlon C, Mall S, et al. Maternal mental health in 
primary care in fi
 ve low- and middle-income countries: a situational 
analysis. BMC Health Serv Res 2016; 16: 53.
16 
Wachs TD, Black MM, Engle PL. Maternal depression: a global 
threat to children’s health, development, and behavior and to 
human rights. Child Dev Perspect 2009; 3: 51–59.
17 
Wosu AC, Gelaye B, Williams MA. History of childhood sexual 
abuse and risk of prenatal and postpartum depression or depressive 
symptoms: an epidemiologic review. Arch Womens Ment Health 
2015; 18: 659–71.
18 
Patel V, Flisher AJ, Nikapota A, Malhotra S. Promoting child and 
adolescent mental health in low and middle income countries. 
J Child Psychol Psychiatry 2008; 49: 313–34.
19 
Biratu A, Haile D. Prevalence of antenatal depression and 
associated factors among pregnant women in Addis Ababa, 
Ethiopia: a cross-sectional study. Reprod Health 2015; 12: 99.
20 Lara MA, Navarrete L, Nieto L. Prenatal predictors of postpartum 
depression and postpartum depressive symptoms in Mexican 
mothers: a longitudinal study. Arch Womens Ment Health 2016; 
published online March 11. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00797-016-0623-7
.
21 
Bennett IM, Schott W, Krutikova S, Behrman JR. Maternal mental 
health, and child growth and development, in four low-income and 
middle-income countries. J Epidemiol Community Health 2016; 
70: 168–73.
22 Black MM, Baqui AH, Zaman K, El Arifeen S, Black RE. 
Maternal depressive symptoms and infant growth in rural 
Bangladesh. Am J Clin Nutr 2009; 89: 951S–57S.
23 Coast E, Leone T, Hirose A, Jones E. Poverty and postnatal 
depression: a systematic mapping of the evidence from low and 
lower middle income countries. Health Place 2012; 18: 1188–97
.
24 
Fisher J, Tran T, Tran TD, et al. Prevalence and risk factors for 
symptoms of common mental disorders in early and late pregnancy 
in Vietnamese women: a prospective population-based study. 
J Aff
 ect Disord 2013; 146: 213–19.
25 Fisher J, Tran TD, Biggs B, Dang TH, Nguyen TT, Tran T. 
Intimate partner violence and perinatal common mental disorders 
among women in rural Vietnam. Int Health 2013; 5: 29–37
.
26 Fisher JR, Morrow MM, Ngoc NT, Anh LT. Prevalence, nature, 
severity and correlates of postpartum depressive symptoms in 
Vietnam. BJOG 2004; 111: 1353–60.
27 
Hadley C, Tegegn A, Tessema F, Cowan JA, Asefa M, Galea S. 
Food insecurity, stressful life events and symptoms of anxiety and 
depression in east Africa: evidence from the Gilgel Gibe growth and 
development study. J Epidemiol Community Health 2008; 62: 980–86.
28 Husain N, Bevc I, Husain M, Chaudhry IB, Atif N, Rahman A. 
Prevalence and social correlates of postnatal depression in a low 
income country. Arch Womens Ment Health 2006; 9: 197–202.
Search strategy and selection criteria
We searched PubMed, Google-based search engines such as Google Scholar, Scopus, 
MEDLINE, and PsycINFO with the search terms “maternal depression”, “child mental 
health”, “child behaviour”, “mechanisms”, “prenatal depression”, “postnatal depression”, 
“antenatal depression”, “postpartum depression”, “intervention studies”, and “low- and 
middle-income” or “developing country”. We further consulted websites including the 
UN, WHO, and UNICEF websites for reports relevant to maternal and child health. We 
considered countries to be low and middle income according to the World Bank list. We 
searched for studies including cohort studies that were identifi
 ed in relevant articles or 
reviews and searched for studies from particular low-income and middle-income 
countries (eg, Bangladesh, Brazil, India, Jamaica, Nepal, Pakistan, Uganda, Uruguay, and 
Vietnam). Searches were done between February and April, 2016, and repeated 
June 8–14, 2016, and there were no restrictions on studies included. Studies included 
were in English.
 www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Published online September 17, 2016   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(16)30148-1 
9
Series
29 Husain N, Parveen A, Husain M, et al. Prevalence and psychosocial 
correlates of perinatal depression: a cohort study from urban 
Pakistan. Arch Womens Ment Health 2011; 14: 395–403.
30 Ramchandani PG, Richter LM, Stein A, Norris SA. Predictors of 
postnatal depression in an urban South African cohort. 
J Aff
 ect Disord 2009; 113: 279–84.
31 
Tinajero AR, Cohen NJ, Ametorwo S. No data, no problem, no 
action: parenting programs in low-income countries. Making the 
social-emotional outcomes more visible. Child Care Health Dev 
2016; 42: 117–24.
32 Glover V. Prenatal stress and its eff
 ects on the fetus and the child: 
possible underlying biological mechanisms. Adv Neurobiol 2015; 
10: 269–83.
33 Maselko J, Sikander S, Bhalotra S, et al. Eff
 ect of an early perinatal 
depression intervention on long-term child development outcomes: 
follow-up of the Thinking Healthy Programme randomised 
controlled trial. Lancet Psychiatry 2015; 2: 609–17
.
34 
Perroud N, Rutembesa E, Paoloni-Giacobino A, et al. The Tutsi 
genocide and transgenerational transmission of maternal stress: 
epigenetics and biology of the HPA axis. World J Biol Psychiatry 
2014; 15: 334–45.
35 Tran TD, Biggs BA, Tran T, et al. Perinatal common mental 
disorders among women and the social and emotional 
development of their infants in rural Vietnam. J Aff
 ect Disord 2014; 
160: 104–12.
36 Tran TD, Tran T, Simpson JA, et al. Infant motor development in 
rural Vietnam and intrauterine exposures to anaemia, iron 
defi
 ciency and common mental disorders: a prospective 
community-based study. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 2014; 14: 8.
37 
O’Donnell KJ, Glover V, Barker ED, O’Connor TG. The persisting 
eff
 ect of maternal mood in pregnancy on childhood 
psychopathology. Dev Psychopathol 2014; 26: 393–403.
38 Bergman K, Sarkar P, Glover V, O’Connor TG. Maternal prenatal 
cortisol and infant cognitive development: moderation by 
infant-mother attachment. Biol Psychiatry 2010; 67: 1026–32.
39 King S, Dancause K, Turcotte-Tremblay A-M, Veru F, Laplante DP. 
Using natural disasters to study the eff
 ects of prenatal 
maternal stress on child health and development. 
Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today 2012; 96: 273–88.
40 
Daskalakis NP, Lehrner A, Yehuda R. Endocrine aspects of 
post-traumatic stress disorder and implications for diagnosis and 
treatment. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 2013; 42: 503–13.
41 
Brunton PJ. Eff
 ects of maternal exposure to social stress during 
pregnancy: consequences for mother and off
 spring. Reproduction 
2013; 146: R175–89.
42 
Glover V, O’Connor TG, O’Donnell K. Prenatal stress and the 
programming of the HPA axis. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2010; 
35: 17–22.
43 
O’Donnell KJ, Bugge Jensen A, Freeman L, Khalife N, 
O’Connor TG, Glover V. Maternal prenatal anxiety and 
downregulation of placental 11β-HSD2. Psychoneuroendocrinology 
2012; 37: 818–26.
44 
Reynolds RM, Pesonen AK, O’Reilly JR, et al. Maternal depressive 
symptoms throughout pregnancy are associated with increased 
placental glucocorticoid sensitivity. Psychol Med 2015; 45: 2023–30.
45 
Bonnin A, Levitt P. Fetal, maternal, and placental sources of 
serotonin and new implications for developmental programming of 
the brain. Neuroscience 2011; 197: 1–7
.
46 
Blackmore ER, Moynihan JA, Rubinow DR, Pressman EK, 
Gilchrist M, O’Connor TG. Psychiatric symptoms and 
proinfl
 ammatory cytokines in pregnancy. Psychosom Med 2011; 
73: 656–63.
47 
Osborne LM, Monk C. Perinatal depression—the fourth 
infl
 ammatory morbidity of pregnancy? Psychoneuroendocrinology 
2013; 38: 1929–52.
48 
O’Donnell KJ, Glover V, Holbrook JD, O’Connor TG. 
Maternal prenatal anxiety and child brain-derived neurotrophic 
factor (BDNF) genotype: eff
 ects on internalizing symptoms from 
4 to 15 years of age. Dev Psychopathol 2014; 26: 1255–66.
49 
Hompes T, Izzi B, Gellens E, et al. Investigating the infl
 uence of 
maternal cortisol and emotional state during pregnancy on the 
DNA methylation status of the glucocorticoid receptor gene 
(NR3C1) promoter region in cord blood. J Psychiatr Res 2013; 
47: 880–91.
50 Radtke KM, Ruf M, Gunter HM, et al. Transgenerational impact of 
intimate partner violence on methylation in the promoter of the 
glucocorticoid receptor. Transl Psychiatry 2011; 1: e21.
51 
Teh AL, Pan H, Chen L, et al. The eff
 ect of genotype and in utero 
environment on interindividual variation in neonate DNA 
methylomes. Genome Res 2014; 24: 1064–74.
52 Han A, Stewart DE. Maternal and fetal outcomes of intimate 
partner violence associated with pregnancy in the Latin American 
and Caribbean region. Int J Gynecol Obstet 2014; 124: 6–11.
53 Hong Le MT, Tran TD, Nguyen HT, Fisher J. Early marriage and 
intimate partner violence among adolescents and young adults in 
Viet Nam. J Interpers Violence 2014; 29: 889–910.
54 
Hanieh S, Ha TT, Simpson JA, et al. Maternal vitamin D status and 
infant outcomes in rural Vietnam: a prospective cohort study. 
PLoS One 2014; 9: e99005.
55 Fisher J, Tran T, Biggs B, et al. Iodine status in late pregnancy and 
psychosocial determinants of iodized salt use in rural northern 
Viet Nam. Bull World Health Organ 2011; 89: 813–20.
56 O’Mahony SM, Clarke G, Dinan TG, Cryan JF. Early-life adversity 
and brain development: is the microbiome a missing piece of the 
puzzle? Neuroscience 2015; published online Oct 1. 
DOI:/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.09.068.
57 
Zijlmans MA, Korpela K, Riksen-Walraven JM, de Vos WM, 
de Weerth C. Maternal prenatal stress is associated with the infant 
intestinal microbiota. Psychoneuroendocrinology 2015; 53: 233–45.
58 Borre YE, O’Keeff
 e GW, Clarke G, Stanton C, Dinan TG, Cryan JF. 
Microbiota and neurodevelopmental windows: implications for 
brain disorders. Trends Mol Med 2014; 20: 509–18.
59 Rogers GB, Keating DJ, Young RL, Wong ML, Licinio J, Wesselingh S. 
From gut dysbiosis to altered brain function and mental illness: 
mechanisms and pathways. Mol Psychiatry 2016; 21: 738–48.
60 Dutt R, Raker C, Anderson BL. Ethnic variations in cervical cytokine 
concentrations and vaginal fl
 ora during pregnancy. 
Am J Reprod Immunol 2015; 73: 141–50.
61 
Fernandes M, Stein A, Srinivasan K, Menezes G, Ramchandani PG. 
Foetal exposure to maternal depression predicts cortisol responses 
in infants: fi
 ndings from rural South India. Child Care Health Dev 
2015; 41: 677–86.
62 Ward AM, Fall CH, Stein CE, et al. Cortisol and the metabolic 
syndrome in South Asians. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 2003; 58: 500–05.
63 Haldar S, Chia SC, Henry CJ. Body composition in Asians and 
Caucasians: comparative analyses and infl
 uences on 
cardiometabolic outcomes. Adv Food Nutr Res 2015; 75: 97–154.
64 
Kessler RC, McLaughlin KA, Green JG, et al. Childhood adversities 
and adult psychopathology in the WHO World Mental Health 
Surveys. Br J Psychiatry 2010; 197: 378–85.
65 Cooper PJ, Tomlinson M, Swartz L, Woolgar M, Murray L, 
Molteno C. Post-partum depression and the mother-infant 
relationship in a South African peri-urban settlement. 
Br J Psychiatry 1999; 175: 554–58.
66 Tomlinson M, Cooper P, Murray L. The mother-infant relationship 
and infant attachment in a South African peri-urban settlement. 
Child Dev 2005; 76: 1044–54.
67 
Black MM, Baqui AH, Zaman K, et al. Depressive symptoms 
among rural Bangladeshi mothers: implications for infant 
development. J Child Psychol Psychiatry 2007; 48: 764–72.
68 Faisal-Cury A, Menezes PR, d’Oliveira AF, Schraiber LB, Lopes CS. 
Temporal relationship between intimate partner violence and 
postpartum depression in a sample of low income women. 
Matern Child Health J 2013; 17: 1297–303.
69 Hartley M, Tomlinson M, Greco E, et al. Depressed mood in 
pregnancy: prevalence and correlates in two Cape Town peri-urban 
settlements. Reprod Health 2011; 8: 9.
70 
Kabir ZN, Nasreen HE, Edhborg M. Intimate partner violence and 
its association with maternal depressive symptoms 6–8 months after 
childbirth in rural Bangladesh. Glob Health Action 2014; 7: 24725.
71 
Guo N, Bindt C, Te Bonle M, et al. Mental health related 
determinants of parenting stress among urban mothers of young 
children—results from a birth-cohort study in Ghana and Cote 
d’Ivoire. BMC Psychiatry 2014; 14: 156.
72 
Ardoino GI, Queirolo EI, Barg G, Ciccariello DA, Kordas K. 
The relationship among depression, parenting stress, and partner 
support in low-income women from Montevideo, Uruguay. 
Health Care Women Int 2015; 36: 392–408.
 10 
www.thelancet.com/psychiatry   Published online September 17, 2016   http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(16)30148-1
Series
73 
Bele SD, Bodhare TN, Valsangkar S, Saraf A. An epidemiological 
study of emotional and behavioral disorders among children in an 
urban slum. Psychol Health Med 2013; 18: 223–32.
74 
Martoccio TL, Brophy-Herb HE, Maupin AN, Robinson JL. 
Longitudinal pathways from early maternal depression to children’s 
dysregulated representations: a moderated mediation analysis of 
harsh parenting and gender. Attach Hum Dev 2016; 18: 46–68.
75 
McLearn KT, Minkovitz CS, Strobino DM, Marks E, Hou W. 
The timing of maternal depressive symptoms and mothers’ 
parenting practices with young children: implications for pediatric 
practice. Pediatrics 2006; 118: e174–82.
76 
Field T. Postpartum depression eff
 ects on early interactions, parenting, 
and safety practices: a review. Infant Behav Dev 2010; 33: 1–6.
77 
Gustafsson HC, Cox MJ. Relations among intimate partner 
violence, maternal depressive symptoms, and maternal parenting 
behaviors. J Marriage Fam 2012; 74: 1005–20.
78 
Bordin IA, Duarte CS, Peres CA, Nascimento R, Curto BM, 
Paula CS. Severe physical punishment: risk of mental health 
problems for poor urban children in Brazil. 
Bull World Health Organ 2009; 87: 336–44.
79 
Fatori D, Bordin IA, Curto BM, de Paula CS. Infl
 uence of 
psychosocial risk factors on the trajectory of mental health 
problems from childhood to adolescence: a longitudinal study. 
BMC Psychiatry 2013; 13: 31.
80 Santos IS, Matijasevich A, Barros AJ, Barros FC. Antenatal and 
postnatal maternal mood symptoms and psychiatric disorders in 
pre-school children from the 2004 Pelotas Birth Cohort. 
J Aff
 ect Disord 2014; 164: 112–17
.
81 
Gonçalves H, Pearson RM, Horta BL, et al. Maternal depression 
and anxiety predicts the pattern of off
 spring symptoms during their 
transition to adulthood. Psychol Med 2016; 46: 415–24.
82 Surkan PJ, Kennedy CE, Hurley KM, Black MM. 
Maternal depression and early childhood growth in developing 
countries: systematic review and meta-analysis. Bull World Health 
Organ 2011; 89: 608–15.
83 Hadley C, Tegegn A, Tessema F, Asefa M, Galea S. 
Parental symptoms of common mental disorders and children’s 
social, motor, and language development in sub-Saharan Africa. 
Ann Hum Biol 2008; 35: 259–75.
84 
Avan B, Richter LM, Ramchandani PG, Norris SA, Stein A. 
Maternal postnatal depression and children’s growth and behaviour 
during the early years of life: exploring the interaction between 
physical and mental health. Arch Dis Child 2010; 95: 690–95.
85 Murray-Kolb LE. Iron and brain functions. 
Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care 2013; 16: 703–07
.
86 Murray-Kolb LE, Beard JL. Iron defi
 ciency and child and maternal 
health. Am J Clin Nutr 2009; 89 (suppl): 946–50.
87 
UNAIDS. The gap report. Geneva: United Nations Programme on 
HIV
/AIDS, 2014.
88 Patel V. Mental health in low- and middle-income countries. 
Br Med Bull 2007; 81–82: 81–96.
89 Hartley C, Pretorius K, Mohamed A, et al. Maternal postpartum 
depression and infant social withdrawal among human 
immunodefi
 ciency virus (HIV) positive mother-infant dyads. 
Psychol Health Med 2010; 15: 278–87
.
90 Chi P, Li X, Tam CC, Du H, Zhao G, Zhao J. Parenting mediates 
the impact of caregivers’ distress on children’s well-being in 
families aff
 ected by HIV
/AIDS. AIDS Behav 2015; 19: 2130–39.
91 
Lachman JM, Cluver LD, Boyes ME, Kuo C, Casale M. 
Positive parenting for positive parents: HIV/AIDS, poverty, 
caregiver depression, child behavior, and parenting in South Africa. 
AIDS Care 2014; 26: 304–13.
92 Van Batenburg-Eddes T, Brion MJ, Henrichs J, et al. 
Parental depressive and anxiety symptoms during pregnancy and 
attention problems in children: a cross-cohort consistency study. 
J Child Psychol Psychiatry 2013; 54: 591–600.
93 Forman DR, O’Hara MW, Stuart S, Gorman LL, Larsen KE, Coy KC. 
Eff
 ective treatment for postpartum depression is not suffi
  cient to 
improve the developing mother-child relationship. Dev Psychopathol 
2007; 19: 585–602.
94 
Rahman A, Fisher J, Bower P, et al. Interventions for common 
perinatal mental disorders in women in low- and middle-income 
countries: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Bull World Health Organ 2013; 91: 593–601I.
95 Cooper PJ, Landman M, Tomlinson M, Molteno C, Swartz L, 
Murray L. Impact of a mother-infant intervention in an indigent 
peri-urban South African context: pilot study. Br J Psychiatry 2002; 
180: 76–81.
96 Cooper PJ, Tomlinson M, Swartz L, et al. Improving quality of 
mother-infant relationship and infant attachment in 
socioeconomically deprived community in South Africa: 
randomised controlled trial. BMJ 2009; 338: b974.
97 
Nahar B, Hossain MI, Hamadani JD, et al. Eff
 ects of a 
community-based approach of food and psychosocial stimulation 
on growth and development of severely malnourished children in 
Bangladesh: a randomised trial. Eur J Clin Nutr 2012; 66: 701–09.
98 Nahar B, Hossain I, Hamadani JD, Ahmed T, 
Grantham-McGregor S, Persson LA. Eff
 ect of a food 
supplementation and psychosocial stimulation trial for severely 
malnourished children on the level of maternal depressive 
symptoms in Bangladesh. Child Care Health Dev 2015; 41: 483–93.
99 Singla DR, Kumbakumba E, Aboud FE. Eff
 ects of a parenting 
intervention to address maternal psychological wellbeing and child 
development and growth in rural Uganda: a community-based, 
cluster randomised trial. Lancet Glob Health 2015; 3: e458–69.
100 Aboud FE, Singla DR, Nahil MI, Borisova I. Eff
 ectiveness of a 
parenting program in Bangladesh to address early childhood health, 
growth and development. Soc Sci Med 2013; 97: 250–58.
101 Rahman A, Malik A, Sikander S, Roberts C, Creed F. 
Cognitive behaviour therapy-based intervention by community 
health workers for mothers with depression and their infants in 
rural Pakistan: a cluster-randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2008; 
372: 902–09.
102 Atif N, Lovell K, Husain N, Sikander S, Patel V, Rahman A. 
Barefoot therapists: barriers and facilitators to delivering maternal 
mental health care through peer volunteers in Pakistan: 
a qualitative study. Int J Ment Health Syst 2016; 10: 24.
103 Chowdhary N, Sikander S, Atif N, et al. The content and delivery of 
psychological interventions for perinatal depression by 
non-specialist health workers in low and middle income countries: 
a systematic review. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 2014; 
28: 113–33.
104 Rahman A. Challenges and opportunities in developing a 
psychological intervention for perinatal depression in rural 
Pakistan—a multi-method study. Arch Womens Ment Health 2007; 
10: 211.
105 Gilmore B, McAuliff
 e E. Eff
 ectiveness of community health workers 
delivering preventive interventions for maternal and child health in 
low- and middle-income countries: a systematic review. 
BMC Public Health 2013; 13: 847
.
106 Breuer E, De Silva MJ, Fekadu A, et al. Using workshops to develop 
theories of change in fi
 ve low and middle income countries: lessons 
from the programme for improving mental health care (PRIME). 
Int J Ment Health Syst 2014; 8: 15.
107 Nama N, Swartz L. Ethical and social dilemmas in 
community-based controlled trials in situations of poverty: a view 
from a South African project. J Community Appl Soc Psychol 2002; 
12: 286–97
.
108 Verkuijl NE, Richter L, Norris SA, Stein A, Avan B, 
Ramchandani PG. Postnatal depressive symptoms and child 
psychological development at 10 years: a prospective study of 
longitudinal data from the South African Birth to Twenty cohort. 
Lancet Psychiatry 2014; 1: 454–60.
109 Batty G, Alves J, Correia J, Lawlor D. Examining life-course 
infl
 uences on chronic disease: the importance of birth cohort 
studies from low-and middle-income countries. An overview. 
Braz J Med Biol Res 2007; 40: 1277–86.
110 Tripathy P, Nair N, Barnett S, et al. Eff
 ect of a participatory 
intervention with women’s groups on birth outcomes and maternal 
depression in Jharkhand and Orissa, India: a cluster-randomised 
controlled trial. Lancet 2010; 375: 1182–92.
111 Petersen I, Lund C, Bhana A, et al. A task shifting approach to 
primary mental health care for adults in South Africa: human 
resource requirements and costs for rural settings. 
Health Policy Plan 2012; 27: 42–51.
