 Volume 11, Number 5, 2005
THE NEUROSCIENTIST
417
Copyright © 2005 Sage Publications
ISSN 1073-8584
Autism is a developmental disorder defined behavioral-
ly by a triad of abnormalities involving language, social
interaction, and a marked lack of flexibility that may
include repetitive or ritualistic behaviors (American
Psychiatric Association, 1994); full criteria must be met
by the age of three. The behavioral features of autism
appear to be continuously distributed, and autism is part
of a spectrum that also includes more mildly affected
individuals (Dawson and others 2002).
Given that the atypical behaviors defining autism
appear specifically characterizable, there has naturally
been the expectation that we will find anatomical corre-
lates for each feature of the behavioral phenotype.
Indeed, there are findings in the limbic system and cere-
bellum (parts of the brain subserving functions that
include some impaired in autism) that have been com-
mon (Cody and others 2002), yet they are troublingly not
consistently encountered. Instead, the most replicated
finding in autism, and one that has been found in multi-
ple reliably characterized cohorts and artifact-free sam-
ples, has been that the brains are on average unusually
large. This finding has had a paradoxical impact. On one
hand, the consistency of an anatomical measure was an
encouraging sign of convergence upon unraveling the
neurobiology of this disorder. On the other hand, large
brains did not make sense in terms of neural systems
models of autism or brain-behavior correlations. How
would such a generalized phenomenon relate to a disor-
der characterized by three specific classes of atypical
behaviors? This conundrum has been sitting in the cen-
ter of the autism field almost like a zen koan, awaiting a
mental frame shift that would allow its obscure signifi-
cance to become clear.
In the past few years, a series of discoveries about the
autistic brain are appearing to converge toward a model
that integrates biological, processing, and behavioral
levels in autism. These discoveries potentially shed light
on large brains regarding both underlying mechanisms
and functional consequences. Moreover, these findings
point toward a disease model that departs from earlier
formulations of autism in having several new 
levels of potential treatment implications. The recent
findings prominently include identification of pervasive
volume scaling alterations, widespread reductions in
connectivity and perfusion, and neuroinflammation and
microgliosis that had previously been unappreciated.
Identification of these features of the autistic brain for
the most part was driven by investigation of tissue and
processing in autism and not by seeking specific corre-
lates for specific behaviors, at the level of either brain or
gene. Nevertheless, these features hold implications for
Large Brains in Autism: 
The Challenge of Pervasive Abnormality
MARTHA R. HERBERT
Pediatric Neurology, Center for Morphometric Analysis
Massachusetts General Hospital
The most replicated finding in autism neuroanatomy—a tendency to unusually large brains—has seemed
paradoxical in relation to the specificity of the abnormalities in three behavioral domains that define autism.
We now know a range of things about this phenomenon, including that brains in autism have a growth spurt
shortly after birth and then slow in growth a few short years afterward, that only younger but not older
brains are larger in autism than in controls, that white matter contributes disproportionately to this volume
increase and in a nonuniform pattern suggesting postnatal pathology, that functional connectivity among
regions of autistic brains is diminished, and that neuroinflammation (including microgliosis and astrogliosis)
appears to be present in autistic brain tissue from childhood through adulthood. Alongside these pervasive
brain tissue and functional abnormalities, there have arisen theories of pervasive or widespread neural 
information processing or signal coordination abnormalities (such as weak central coherence, impaired
complex processing, and underconnectivity), which are argued to underlie the specific observable behav-
ioral features of autism. This convergence of findings and models suggests that a systems- and chronic 
disease–based reformulation of function and pathophysiology in autism needs to be considered, and 
it opens the possibility for new treatment targets. NEUROSCIENTIST 11(5):417–440; 2005. DOI:
10.1177/0091270005278866
KEY WORDS Autism, Macrocephaly, Connectivity, Neuroinflammation, Complex processing, Brain
This work was supported by the Cure Autism Now Foundation. Lisa
McCoy contributed in research assistance.
Address correspondence to: Martha R. Herbert, Pediatric Neurology,
Center for Morphometric Analysis, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, 149 13th Street, Room 6012, Charlestown,
MA 02129 (e-mail: mherbert1@partners.org).
REVIEW I
 at Bobst Library, New York University on February 14, 2015
nro.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 418
THE NEUROSCIENTIST
Large Brains in Autism
underlying gene and gene-environment mechanisms as
well as for understanding the resulting behavioral and
medical abnormalities. Alongside these empirical find-
ings, models have emerged of more generalized deficits
or disturbances in autism, at the level of processing
(weak central coherence [Hill and Frith 2003], impaired
complex processing [Minshew and others 1997], net-
work abnormalities [McClelland 2000; Brock and others
2002; Cohen in press], disordered information process-
ing [Belmonte and others 2004]) and at the neurochem-
ical level (models of increased excitation-inhibition
ratios [Rubenstein and Merzenich 2003]), that have been
argued to underlie the specific behaviors we observe.
With these new findings and models, the phenomenon
of large brains in autism has been joined by a set of other
pervasive abnormalities. On one hand, this means there
are yet more widespread phenomena that somehow par-
adoxically have to make sense in relation to a disorder
that has been defined as a set of specific behaviors. But
on the other hand, these pervasive findings flesh out
details and suggest linkages between functional,
macroanatomical, and pathophysiological levels. They
do not displace prior regional findings, but on the other
hand, they provide a framework within which previous
observations can be viewed in a fresh light, as we will
see below.
To date, investigations of pervasive phenomena in
autism have been weighted toward gathering various
classes of data, particularly in the domain of brain size
measurement (largely MRI volumetrics and head cir-
cumference studies), that increase the level of nuance at
which we are able to describe the regionally differentiat-
ed macroscopic neuroanatomy and the temporal trajec-
tory of autistic brain enlargement, as will be described
below. The more recent developments in the field sug-
gest that further methodologies will need to be used for
characterizing the hitherto less well-studied dimensions
of brain structure and function—such as tissue charac-
terization, neuroimmunological and neurometabolic
measures, and functional connectivity—that have taken
on new relevance more recently.
Brains Are on Average Larger
Although there is a strong trend toward bigger brains in
autism, this phenomenon by no means constitutes a bio-
marker for the disorder. Frank macrocephaly is defined
as a head circumference greater than the 97th percentile,
which by definition means that it is found in 3% of the
population. Given a U.S. population of approximately
300 million, certainly the vast majority of the 9 million
individuals with macrocephaly are not autistic. What is
more interesting is that among autistic individuals, the
percentage with macrocephaly is not 3% but more in the
range of 20% (Steg and Rapoport 1975; Walker 1977;
Bailey and others 1993; Rapin 1996; Lainhart and others
1997; Stevenson and others 1997; Fombonne and others
1999; Aylward and others 2002; Deutsch and Joseph
2003; Dementieva and others 2005), with an overall
upward shift in head circumference distribution even for
those who do not meet criteria for macrocephaly (Gillber
and de Souza 2002; Deutsch and Joseph 2003;
Dementieva and others 2005). Thus, although not a bio-
marker, macrocephaly appears to be a phenomenon, or
an endophenotype, that provocatively suggests the exis-
tence of a relevant underlying pathophysiology. Y
et even
here, the pathophysiology leading to macrocephaly in
autistic individuals does not seem in itself sufficient for
autism because macrocephaly is also common in their
first-degree (and unaffected) relatives (Fidler and others
2000). Macrocephaly also does not appear to be specif-
ic to autism, also being found in pervasive developmen-
tal disorder (Woodhouse and others 1996), attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder (Ghaziuddin and others
1999), and developmental language disorder (Herbert,
Ziegler, Makris, and others 2003). Nor is it specific for
any one autism phenotypic subgroup (Miles and others
2000), although individuals with Asperger syndrome
were found to have larger mean head circumferences
than those with autism (Gillberg and de Souza 2002).
Over the past decade and a half, volumetric neu-
roimaging has been contributing considerably more
detail to the characterization of increased brain volume
in autism (Table 1). Large brain volume was early
reported by Filipek and others (1992) in a sample in
which high-functioning autistic school-age children had
larger brain volumes than did lower functioning (non-
verbal IQ <80) children and controls. Piven and others
(1995) studied 20 male autistic subjects who were found
to have larger brains due to enlarged tissue and lateral
ventricle volume, with a follow-up study showing the
enlargement in males but not in females and in temporal,
parietal, and occipital but not in frontal lobes (Piven and
others 1996). Enlargement of gray and white matter in
the cerebrum and cerebellum was found in 2- to 3-year-
olds by Courchesne and others (2001), whereas cerebral
but not cerebellar enlargement was found in 3- to 4-year-
olds by Sparks and others (2002). Brain volume was
larger than controls for autistic subjects younger than 12
years (Aylward and others 2002). For school-age boys
with high-functioning autism, brain enlargement bor-
dered on significance (Herbert, Ziegler, Deutsch, and
others 2003). In a study comparing high-functioning and
low-functioning autism and Asperger syndrome with
controls in mid-childhood through adolescence, cerebral
gray matter but not white matter enlargement was found
(Lotspeich and others 2004).
Brain Growth Trajectories Are Atypical
Some of the earliest observations of increased brain size
were in postmortem brain weight measures (Bauman
and Kemper 1985). Although neuropathological investi-
gations are complicated by limited control over subject
ascertainment, comorbidities, conditions of death, and
postmortem interval and may involve confounds such as
edema that may affect brain weight, these measures are
nevertheless of interest. Postmortem studies have not
(Text continues on page 427)
 at Bobst Library, New York University on February 14, 2015
nro.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 Volume 11, Number 5, 2005
THE NEUROSCIENTIST
419
Table 1. Studies of Brain Size in Autism
Author(s) 
Key
(Year)
Question
N
Methods
Measures
Findings
Interpretation
Davidovitch
Is there a correlation
148 autistic
HC measured and divided
HC
27/148 (18.2%) were at or above
There may be a correlation 
(1996)
between large HC 
into two groups: above   
the 98th percentile; height and
between large HC and
and autism?
and below and autism? 
weights were also significantly
autism.
98th percentile for HC. 
greater in this group.
Woodhouse
Is macrocephaly a
89 autistic
HC measured from 
HC
No difference between PDD and
Both autism and general 
and others
phenotype of 
1 year’s worth of new   
autism cases for macrocephaly.
PDDs are associated with
(1996)
autism?
cases in autism and 
For PDD group, 29.7% had 
macrocephaly; therefore,
PDDs.
macrocephaly; 48.7% had head 
macrocephaly may be an
circumference greater than 90th 
indicator of heterogeneity 
percentile.
or an indicator of disease 
severity. Macrocephaly
may be a distinct subgroup
of autism.
Lainhart and
What is the frequency 91 autistic; 
HC measured at birth 
HC
14% of subjects had 
Macrocephaly does not
others (1997)
and onset of 
70 males,
and throughout the life
macrocephaly; 11% male, 24%
characterize a homoge-
macrocephaly in 
21 females; 
cycle in children and 
female. Mostly not present at
neous subgroup of autistic 
autism and how is it
age range, 
adults with autism.
birth but began during early 
individuals according to
related to clinical 
3–38 y;
childhood as a result of 
clinical features and may
features?
mean age, 
increased rate of head growth. 
change throughout the life 
13.8 y; no 
Core features of autism tended 
cycle.
controls
to be less severe in autistic 
subjects with relatively large 
head sizes for their age and 
gender. Neither macrocephaly 
nor HC were associated with 
nonverbal IQ, verbal status, 
seizure disorder, neurological 
soft signs, or minor physical 
abnormalities.
Ghaziuddin
Is megalencephaly
20 autistic; 
Measure HC.
HC
4 subjects (all purely autistic) and 
Megalencephaly may not be 
and others
specific to autism?
20 males; 
5 controls had megalencephaly
specific to autism. These 
(1999)
mean age, 
(2 SD > mean). The 4 subjects 
findings suggest that both 
10.9 y 
with autism also had hyperactivity autism and ADHD are
(included 
and impulsivity.
associated with
autism and 
megalencephaly.
general PDD); 
20 controls 
(ADHD)
(continued)
 at Bobst Library, New York University on February 14, 2015
nro.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 420
THE NEUROSCIENTIST
Large Brains in Autism
Table 1. (continued)
Author(s) 
Key
(Year)
Question
N
Methods
Measures
Findings
Interpretation
Fombonne
What is the rate of
126 autistic; 
Measure HC.
HC
Macrocephaly (HC > 97th 
Results suggest an 
and others 
macrocephaly in 
age range, 
percentile) in 16.7% of autistic 
increased rate of
(1999)
autism?
2–16 y, 
population. Associated with
macrocephaly in autism.
mean age,
increased age but not other 
7.9 y
variables such as gender or 
severity.
Fidler and 
Is the prevalence of
41 autistic; 
Familiality of HC assessed
HC
Rates of macrocephaly were 
Macrocephaly may be a 
others
macrocephaly 
mean age, 
from measurements of
significantly higher in probands 
familial risk factor in the
(2000)
greater in autism 
13.5 y; 133 
first-degree relatives.
with autism (12.2%) and their
pathogenesis of autism
than in the general 
first-degree
first-degree relatives (15.5%) 
due to the increased 
population?
relatives; 
than in published normative 
prevalence of macro-
21 controls
sample. HC and extreme 
cephaly in relatives of
macrocephaly found to be
children with autism 
heritable (H2 = 0.47).
compared with control 
children.
Miles and 
Is head size a 
137 autistic; 
Measure HC.
HC
The HC in the autism group was 
Because HC increased 
others
phenotypic variable
115 males,  
significantly larger than in the 
significantly even within 
(2000)
that will define 
22 females; 
normal population. No differences
subgroups, macrocephaly
genetically distinct 
age range, 
in age, gender, or other related 
is an independent clinical 
autism subgroups?
1–41.2 y; 
variables. Within subgroups 
trait in autism.
mean age, 
(phenotypic status, type of onset, 
9.4 y
seizure history, IQ), all had 
significantly higher than normal 
mean HC measurement. 
Macrocephaly is familial, with 
45% in autism group having at 
least one macrocephalic parent.
Gillberg and
Is macrocephaly 
50 autistic: 
HC measured at two time
HC
Autistic and control groups had 
Macrocephaly appears to be 
de Souza
associated with 
45 males,
points: at birth and at or  
mean HC at birth larger than 
more common in higher
(2002)
high-functioning 
5 females;
after 16 mo of age.
normal values. Asperger group
functioning levels of autism 
autism, and is it 
age range, 
had greater HC than autistic 
such as Asperger 
seen in similar 
1.3–13.7 y; 
group did. Autism group at birth 
syndrome and is not as
disorders such 
mean age, 
had 4/42 macrocephalic at birth
common in “classic” lower 
as ASP and ADHD?
8.3 y; 100 
(P < 0.01) and 4/42 (ns) after 
functioning autism 
controls (50 
16 mo of age. All groups also had classes. At birth, the
ASP
, 50 ADHD): 
mean HC greater than age and
mean HC was high in all
90 males, 
gender norms when examined 
groups but lower at or
10 females; 
after 16 mo of age. At 16 mo of 
after 16 mo. In addition, 
age range, 
age, the Asperger group was 
“new” cases emerged at 
 at Bobst Library, New York University on February 14, 2015
nro.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 Volume 11, Number 5, 2005
THE NEUROSCIENTIST
421
1.5–16 y; mean 
significantly greater than the 
the later time points that 
age, 8.6 y
ADHD group but not the autism 
were not present at birth.
group.
This study suggests that 
macrocephaly might not be
as clinically useful as 
previously thought.
Deutsch 
What are the 
63 autistic; 
HC measured and studied
HC
Macrocephaly occurred in
Convergence of physical 
and Joseph
frequency and
54 males
with several variables: 
autism subset at significantly
and cognitive features may 
(2003)
cognitive 
9 females; 
verbal and nonverbal 
higher frequency than in normal 
indicate an etiologically
correlates of 
age range, 
cognitive ability, language
reference sample. HC not 
significant subtype of
enlarged head 
4–14 y
level, executive function,
correlated to variables studied
autism.
circumference?
and symptom severity.
but correlated with discrepancies
between verbal or nonverbal IQ 
scores, with nonverbal IQ > 
verbal IQ, independent of the 
absolute level of verbal ability.
Courchesne 
Does pathological 
48 autistic: 
HC, body length, and BW 
HC
Birth HC in autistic infants was
Two phases of brain growth 
and others 
brain overgrowth
age range, 
measurements during first
significantly smaller (z = –0.66,
abnormalities appear to 
(2003)
precede the first 
2–5 y;
year obtained from medical
P < .001). After birth, HC  
precede the clinical emer-
clinical signs of 
51 controls: 
records in children who had
increased 1.67 SDs, and mean 
gence of autism: 1) a 
autism? Is the 
26 males,
participated in previous
HC was 84% at 6–14 mo. 
reduced head size at birth 
rate of overgrowth
25 females
MRI studies.
Birth HC related to CRBLR-GMV
then 2) a sudden and 
during the first 
at 2–5 y, although the excessive
excessive increase in head 
year related to 
increase in HC between birth
size between 1–2 mo and
neuroanatomical 
and 6–14 mo was related to
6–14 mo. This abnormally
and clinical 
increased CCTXV at 2–5 y.
accelerated rate of growth 
outcome in early 
Compared to infants with 
may represent a clinically
childhood?
PDD-NOS, every subject in the 
sound, early risk sign for
autism group had a greater 
autism.
increase in HC between birth and
6–14 mo (respectively, (mean 
[SD], 0.58 [0.35] vs. 2.19 [0.98]). 
Of autism group, 59% had 
accelerated growth trajectories 
(>2.0 SD) in a longitudinal study 
compared to 6% in the healthy 
group from birth to 6–14 mo.
(continued)
 at Bobst Library, New York University on February 14, 2015
nro.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 422
THE NEUROSCIENTIST
Large Brains in Autism
Table 1. (continued)
Author(s) 
Key
(Year)
Question
N
Methods
Measures
Findings
Interpretation
Dementieva 
Is abnormal 
251 autistic; 
HC measured in 82 multiplex
HC
19% of the original 251 had
Study supports presence of 
and others 
acceleration in 
183 males, 
and 113 sporadic families
macrocephaly, 66% males,
abnormal acceleration of
(2005)
head growth 
68 females;
with autism, with longitudinal
34% females. From the 
head growth during 
during early 
M:F = 2.7:1; 
(records for more than 2 HC
longitudinal group, 35% had 
months 1 and 2 of life in a
development, 
mean age, 
measurements) mean for 79. 
abnormal increases in HC. 
subgroup of individuals
rather than 
8.15 y, 
Abnormal acceleration in 
Those with abnormal growth 
with autism. Findings
macrocephaly, 
SD = 4.43 y;
head growth definition: 
in early childhood had higher 
show that macrocephaly
associated with 
longitudinal 
>25th percentile HC growth
levels of adaptive functioning 
appears to be of 
autism risk?
= 79
between two consecutive 
and less social impairment. 
secondary importance in
measurements.
37/79 had serial measurements 
relation to abnormal
starting at birth, 24/39 (65%) 
acceleration in head 
showed abnormal acceleration 
growth at the earliest 
of head growth. Found a 
stages of postnatal 
significant association between 
development. May be a 
HC percentile and age at the
risk factor associated 
time of head measurement,
with autism.
F(18, 145) = 4.06, P < 0.0001. 
Further adjustments showed that  
the significant (adjusted P value = 
0.005) difference in the least  
squared means occurred between  
the first (0–1 mo) and second 
(1–12 mo) age classes and none 
between other age classes. 
42/79 had HC measurements
in the first time period (0–1 mo) 
and showed that the mean 
HC % = 48th percentile, SD = 29, 
with 2/79 having macrocephaly, 
with both having a family history 
of macrocephaly. 17/42 had
measurements in the second time
period (1–2 mo) = 79th percentile, 
SD = 20, showing abnormal head 
growth acceleration. 17/17 had 
measurements in the third time 
period (2–6 mo) = 77th percentile,
SD = 25.7, 3 macrocephalic.
 at Bobst Library, New York University on February 14, 2015
nro.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 Volume 11, Number 5, 2005
THE NEUROSCIENTIST
423
Piven and
What is the volume
22 autistic males; SMRI: TBV, total brain 
SMRI
Autistic subjects had significantly
Findings suggested that the
others 
of the brain in
20 male
tissue volume, TTLVEN.
greater TBV, total brain tissue
brain enlargement was a 
(1995)
subjects with 
controls
volume measurements, 
result of greater BTV and
autism and how 
and TTLVEN.
greater TTLVEN.
is it different than
in normal 
individuals?
Piven and 
Is increased brain
35 autistic: 
SMRI, TBV, and CCTX
SMRI
Significant diagnosis × gender
Findings support brain size 
others 
volume in autism 
26 males, 
lobe volume, controlled 
effect, F = 7.4, P = .009,  
increase in autism; differ-
(1996)
the result of 
9 females; 
for height and nonverbal
for TBV. An analysis of lobe 
ences between normal and 
general or regional
36 controls
IQ.
sizes showed significant
autistic brains appears to 
brain size 
enlargement in autistic subjects
be the result of a pattern of
differences, and 
in the temporal, parietal, and
enlargement with increases
is there an effect
occipital lobes but not the
in the size of specific
of gender on brain
frontal lobes.
cortical lobes, not a 
size and the 
generalized phenomenon.
pattern of 
enlargement?
Courchesne 
What are the 
60 autistic males: SMRI: TBV, CCTX, 
HC and
14/15 normal HC at birth. By
Abnormal regulation of brain 
and others
developmental 
age range,  
CRBLM, and HC.
SMRI
2–4 y of age, 90% had TBV 
growth in autism consists 
(2001)
abnormalities in the
2–16 y; 52 male 
larger than normal average, 
of two phases: 
neuroanatomical 
controls: age 
and 37% met criteria for
abnormally early over
structure and 
range, 2–16 y
developmental macroencephaly,
growth followed by a later
volume of the 
Autistic 2- to 3-year-olds had 
phase of abnormally 
CCTX and CRBLM 
18% more CCTX WM, 39% 
slowed growth.
in subjects with 
more CRBLR WM, and 12% 
autism?
more CCTX GM than controls 
did, whereas older autistic 
children and adolescents did 
not have enlarged gray and 
white matter volumes. In CRBLM,
autistic boys had less gray 
matter decreased ratio of 
gray-white matter and smaller 
vermis lobules VI-VII than 
controls did.
(continued)
 at Bobst Library, New York University on February 14, 2015
nro.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 424
THE NEUROSCIENTIST
Large Brains in Autism
Table 1. (continued)
Author(s) 
Key
(Year)
Question
N
Methods
Measures
Findings
Interpretation
Hadan and 
Is TBV increased 
16 autistic
SMRI: TBV, IC, vent.
SMRI
Increased TBV and third vent 
The findings of increased 
others 
in non–mentally
males: mean 
after controlling for intracranial
brain volume in non–
(2001)
retarded individuals
age, 22.2 y; 
volume.
mentally retarded
with autism, as 
19 male 
individuals is consistent
has been reported 
controls: 
with previous reports of
in previous studies 
mean age, 
lower functioning autism,
of LFA individuals?
22.2 y
providing further support 
for the significant of 
enlarged brain volume.
Alyward and
Does brain volume
67 autistic:
SMRI: TBV and HC.
HC and 
Greater TBV seen only in cases 
Abnormal brain develop-
others 
differ between
58 males;
SMRI
younger than 13 y. No 
ment and growth patterns. 
(2002)
individuals with
mean age,
significance detected when 
Accelerated early growth 
autism and control
18.8 y; 83 
they took the TBV of group as 
and enlarged brain and HC 
subjects (BV), 
controls: 
a whole, regardless of age.
followed by a slowed
and are these 
76 males; 
Increased HC in all autistic 
growth in adulthood that
differences 
mean age,
subjects regardless of age.
causes brain to appear 
affected by age?
18.9 y
normal, but in fact, it 
decreases from its initial 
enlarged state.
Sparks and 
What are the 
45 autistic: 
SMRI: cerebrum, 
SMRI
Autism group had significantly
The structural abnormalities 
others 
neuroanatomical 
38 males, 
CRBLM, hippocampus, 
increased cerebral volumes. 
suggest that the abnormal 
(2002)
abnormalities 
7 females;
amygdala.
Relative increases in volume
brain developmental prob-
associated with 
age range,
were also seen in the CRBLM 
ems seen in autism are 
autism in young 
3–4 y, mean 
and bilaterally in the amygdala
lmanifested during early 
children?
age, 47.4 mo;
and hippocampus, though these
childhood.
26 controls: 
increases were proportional
DD 14
to the overall increase in 
cerebral volume. Similar 
findings seen between genders.
Large brain size is constitut-
Herbert and 
What is the
17 autistic: 
SMRI: TBV, CCTX, CWM,
SMRI
TBV close to significantly larger.
ed by tissue changes that 
others 
comprehensive
age range, 
CRBLM, caud, lent, 
Three factors: cerebral white
affect brain structures in a 
(2003a)
morphometric 
7–11 y; 
thalamus/hypothalamus,
matter both absolutely and
nonuniform fashion with
profile of large 
15 controls: 
HPAM, BS. Gray-white
relatively larger, cerebral cortex
white matter increases 
brain structures
age range, 
segmentation of major 
and hippocampus-amygdala
predominantly driving
in autism?
7–11 y
brain regions. Volumes, 
absolutely same but propor-
volume increase in this age
adjusted volumes
tionately smaller, remainder 
group.
(adjustment for total 
absolutely same or slightly
brain volume), and 
larger but proportionately 
factor analysis.
no different than controls.
 at Bobst Library, New York University on February 14, 2015
nro.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 Volume 11, Number 5, 2005
THE NEUROSCIENTIST
425
Lotspeich 
Are there 
LFA 13, HFA 18,
SMRI: total, white, and 
SMRI
Intersite differences seen for 
CGM volumes suggest that 
and others 
neuroanatomical
ASP 21, 
gray matter for cerebrum 
the age, IQ, and CRBLM 
ASP is on the mild end of 
(2004)
differences 
controls 21; 
and CRBLM.
measure of the subject. 
the autism spectrum and is
between low-
all males,
CGM-V was enlarged in HFA 
different from HFA. Age,
functioning and 
7.8–17.9 y
(P = 0.009) and LFA (P = 0.04) 
IQ, and CRBLM
high-functioning 
compared to controls, in ASP
measures are relevant.
autism (LFA, HFA)
intermediate between HFA 
and ASP
, and 
and controls but not significant.
what are these 
Negative correlation between
specifically?
CGM-V and performance IQ 
within HFA but not ASP
. 
Positive correlation between 
CWM-V and performance IQ 
within ASP but not HFA.
Williams 
Can the neuro-
4 autistic; 
Postmortem brains 
TBW
At the time of autopsy, brain
There were not consistent
and others
pathologic 
3 males; 
weighed and sectioned 
weights were within 2 SDs of
findings between cases to
(1980)
abnormalities in 
age range, 
for neuropathologic 
normal for the appropriate age.
provide clues as to the
the autistic brain
4–33 y; 
examination.
Neuropathologic examination 
cause of the pathoanatom-
provide clues 
mean age,
revealed nerve cell loss and
cal result. More studies are 
for the etiology 
19.5 y
gliosis in atrophic orbitofrontal 
needed.
of autism?
and temporal regions. Smaller 
neurons were observed in the 
CA4 region. Decreased Punkinje
cell packing density in the 
4-year-old case.
Kemper and
What are the
19 autistic
Brain weight obtained. 
TBW
8/11 brains <12 y of age showed
There is an age-related
Bauman 
neuropathological
Then used gapless 
a significant increase in weight
volume change, and
(1998)
abnormalities in 
sections of the whole 
as compared with controls. 
cellular changes appear to 
the autistic brain?
brain to compare an 
6/8 > 18 y of age had brain
suggest an ongoing 
autistic adult with an 
weight less than expected, but
process.
age- and gender-
the differences did not reach
matched control.
statistical significance. Cells 
in several regions were larger 
and more abundant in younger
brains but smaller and fewer 
in older brains.
Bailey and 
What is the 
4 autistic; 
Measure total brain 
TBW
All significantly greater than
Some cases of autism are 
others 
underlying
age range, 
weight of postmortem
normal range for brain weight 
associated with abnormal 
(1993)
pathology to the 
4–27 y; 
brains.
for age bracket. Average brain
brain development.
genetic basis of 
mean age,
weight = 1.6 kg, normal range 
autism?
19.25 y
(average for 2 age groups) = 
1.32–1.42 kg.
(continued)
 at Bobst Library, New York University on February 14, 2015
nro.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 426
THE NEUROSCIENTIST
Large Brains in Autism
Table 1. (continued)
Author(s) 
Key
(Year)
Question
N
Methods
Measures
Findings
Interpretation
Guerin and 
What causes the
1 autistic; 
Direct microscopic
TBW
Low brain weight, a thin CC, 
This case does not lend any
others
neuroanatomical
1 female; 
observation of the 
and increased size of ventricles
insight into the etiological
(1996)
abnormalities seen
age, 16 y
whole brain.
was found. No microscopic
origin of the neuro-
in autism?
abnormalities were found.
anatomical abnormalities 
found.
Bailey and 
Are neuropathological 6 autistic: 
Brains weighed intact,
TBW
4/6 brains megalencephalic. 
Findings do not support
others 
abnormalities (Nab)
6 males; 
then BS and CRBLM 
Pathological, developmental
previous claims of localized 
(1998)
more extensive 
age range,
separated and weighed. 
abnormalities found in CCTX: 
neurodevelopmental
than previously 
4–27 y; 
One CRBLM hemisphere 
4/6 cortical dysgenesis and 5/6
abnormalities, but
supposed? 
mean age, 
sliced, fixed, stained, 
abnormalities in the underlying 
increased brain size and
Evaluate the 
20 y; 
embedded. CCTX, 
white matter: increased number 
other findings point to
previous 
7 controls: 
hippocampus, and 
of white matter neurons and 
involvement of CCTX in
observations.
5 males, 
CRBLM compared 
some gliosis; BS: 4/6 olivary
autism.
2 females; 
histologically vs. 
dysplasia, neuronal ectopia,
age range, 
matched controls.
and others. CRBLM: 5/6 
4–27 y; 
Immunohistochemistry. 
decreased Purkinje cells, 3/6
mean age, 25 y
Morphometry: neuronal 
increases in GFAP
, and 4/6
counts from parts of 
Bergmann glia (2, 3, 5, 6).
superior frontal gyrus 
ACC; CA1, 2, 4 of 
hippocampus; Purkinje 
cells.
Courchesne 
Is megalencephaly
21 autistic, 
TBW postmortem of 16
TBW
17/21 cases have normal BW,
Brain weight is usually
and others 
common in autism?
6 controls
previously published 
3 megalencephalic, 
normal in postmortem 
(1999)
and 5 new cases 
1 microencephalic.
cases of autism, although 
compared with normal 
there are occasional cases 
brain weights from 6 
of megalencephaly and
autopsy studies.
rarely microencephaly.
HC = head circumference; PDD = pervasive developmental disorder; ADHD = attention deficit hyperactivity disorder; ASP = Asperger syndrome; ns = nonsignificant; BW = brain weight;
CRBLR-GMV = cerebellar gray matter volume; CCTXV = cerebral cortex volume; PDD-NOS = pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified; SMRI = structural MRI; TBV =
total brain volume; TTLVEN = total ventricles; BTV = bilateral total ventricles; CCTX = cerebral cortex; CRBLM = cerebellum; LFA = low-functioning autism; IC = internal capsule; vent =
ventricle; BV = bilateral ventricles; DD = developmentally delayed; CWM = cerebral white matter; HPAM = hippocampus-amygdala; BS = brain stem; HFA = high-functioning autism;
CGM-V = cerebral gray matter volume; TBW = total brain weight; CC = corpus callosum; ACC = anterior cingulate cortex; GFAP = glial fibrillary acidic protein.
 at Bobst Library, New York University on February 14, 2015
nro.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 Volume 11, Number 5, 2005
THE NEUROSCIENTIST
427
consistently reported total brain weight, but when
reported, it tended to be markedly above average, partic-
ularly in younger subjects. The early sample of Williams
and others (1980) included 4 brains all with brain
weights within 2 standard deviations of the mean for
age, but 3 of the subjects were older than 12 years at the
time of death. Kemper and Bauman (1998) reported that
of 19 brains for which weight was available, 8 of the 11
brains of subjects who were younger than 12 years were
increased compared to controls, whereas 6 of 8 brains
from individuals older than 18 years weighed less than
expected. Of the 6 brains in the Bailey and others (1998)
sample, 4 (including a 4-year-old and 3 individuals in
their 20s) were frankly above the normal range derived
from Dekaban and Sadowsky (1978), whereas the
remaining 2 (also in their 20s) were near the upper limit
of that range (Bailey and others 1998). Courchesne and
others (1999) observed that a problematic error term in
the Dekaban and Sadowsky (1978) data complicates its
use as a source of norms for these comparisons.
Larger brains in younger but not in older subjects has
also been found in brain imaging. Aylward and others
(2002) measured both head circumference and brain vol-
ume and found that both measures were larger in autistic
children younger than 12, whereas only head circumfer-
ence was larger in older autistic individuals, suggesting
an early rapid brain growth with the volume initially
achieved not being maintained through the life course.
Brain volume was enlarged in 2- to 4-year-olds but not
in teenagers studied by Courchesne and others (2001).
The failure of Lotspeich and others (2004) to replicate
many prior findings of brain enlargement may be due to
the ages of their subject pool straddling a wide range,
from 7.8 to 18.9 years, an interval that overlaps with
both younger subjects in whom brain enlargement has
been discerned and an older group in whom brain
enlargement has not been found. Of note, volumetric
studies to date have been cross-sectional; at the current
time, the longitudinal study of autism, which would gen-
erate more meaningful data, is just getting under way.
It is of particular interest to study brain growth trajec-
tories in autism from birth (Redcay and Courchesne
2005). To date, several retrospective head circumference
studies have been performed. A small minority of chil-
dren in these studies manifested macrocephaly at birth
(Mason-Brothers and others 1990; Lainhart and others
1997; Gillberg and de Souza 2002; Courchesne and oth-
ers 2003), but for the most part, across studies, autistic
children did not exceed the 97th percentile at birth
(Lainhart and others 1997; Stevenson and others 1997;
Hultman and others 2002; Courchesne and others
2003). Lainhart and others (1997) reported that head cir-
cumference increased toward macrocephaly in early to
mid-childhood, whereas Courchesne and others (2003)
found that the bulk of the unusual growth trajectory—an
increase of 2 standard deviations—was accomplished by
14 months of age, with a marked slowing of growth rate
thereafter. Dementieva and others (2005), with a much
larger sample, showed, as did Courchesne and others’
(2003) study, an abnormal brain size increase beginning
in the first 2 months of life but continuing for several
years (Fig. 1), demonstrating that many individuals who
did not become macrocephalic nevertheless manifested
this abnormal early postnatal burst of brain growth
(Dementieva and others 2005). In Courchesne and oth-
ers’ (2003) neuroimaging samples, in which the age
range of subjects cut through much of childhood, the
early rapid brain growth was followed by a much slower
rate of growth relative to controls in subsequent years of
childhood (Carper and others 2002).
The extremely desirable information about aberra-
tions in brain development during the period of most
rapid brain growth (and during the period when the brain
enlarges atypically) that could be derived from prospec-
tive brain imaging data is difficult to acquire. Given the
lack of biomarkers that would identify autistic individu-
als at birth or in early infancy, and given that the diag-
nosis is made on the basis of behaviors such as language
and socialization that are not well-defined for the first
few years, the available alternative is to study infants and
young toddlers at risk for autism due to the diagnosis of
an older sibling in the family. But serious ethical con-
straints apply to the study of undiagnosed individuals
this young, including the inappropriateness of using
sedation agents that complicated the achievement of
stillness requisite for MRI scanning; this leaves the
option of patiently waiting and then maintaining sponta-
neous sleep. The first such study reports that in two year
olds with autism there is generalized enlargement of
gray and white matter cerebral but not cerebellar vol-
umes, that may have its onset post-natally in the latter
part of the first year of life (Hazlett, Poe, Gerig and oth-
ers forthcoming). 
White Matter Contributes Disproportionately 
to Brain Volume Enlargement
Several studies found that increased brain volume in
young autistic individuals appears to be largely driven by
an increase in white matter, although in a diminishing
fashion as development progresses and overall brain
enlargement relative to controls disappears. In
Courchesne and others’ (2001) study of 2- to 16-year-
olds, white matter enlargement (18% more cerebral and
38% more cerebellar white matter) was found in 2- to 3-
year-old autistic children accompanied by cerebral cor-
tex enlargement, whereas 12-to 16-year-old autistic chil-
dren in this study had less white matter than controls did
(Courchesne and others 2001). In a comprehensive vol-
umetric profile of high-functioning autistic boys inter-
mediate in age between Courchesne and others’ younger
and older subjects, Herbert, Ziegler, Deutsch, and others
(2003) reported that white matter was 15% larger in 6-
to 12-year-old autistic boys than in age-matched con-
trols, making up less than a third of cerebral volume but
accounting for 65% of the volume increase in autism
over controls (Fig. 2); while at the same time, the cere-
bral cortex and hippocampus-amygdala were propor-
 at Bobst Library, New York University on February 14, 2015
nro.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 428
THE NEUROSCIENTIST
Large Brains in Autism
tionately smaller than in controls and the remaining
major brain structures were absolutely larger but not
larger once overall size increase was taken into account
(Herbert and others 2003a; Fig. 3). In older autistic indi-
viduals, voxel-based methods have shown less white
matter concentration (a different measure than volume)
than in age-matched controls (Chung and others 2004;
Waiter and others 2005).
Regionalization of White Matter Volume Increase
Herbert’s group performed a further analysis to charac-
terize regional biases in this white matter volume
increase, using a method of topographical white matter
parcellation based on the neuroanatomy of white matter
tracts (Makris and others 1999; Meyer and others 1999).
The results were that the volume increase is confined to
the radiate zone, that is, the subcortical white matter pri-
marily composed of corona radiata and U-fibers but also
including the origins and terminations of projection and
sensory fibers. In this study, the deeper white matter,
including major sagittal tracts, internal capsule, and cor-
pus callosum, showed no volume increase over controls
(Herbert and others 2004). The frontal lobe white matter
showed the greatest enlargement over controls (27%),
with frontal lobe predominance also previously reported
by Carper and others (2002) and with prefrontal white
matter even more strongly affected (36% larger than
controls; Herbert and others 2004; Fig. 4). Herbert and
others (2004) reported a further regression analysis that
combined temporal and spatial considerations, address-
ing regional white matter volumes in relation to the
timetable of brain myelination in development (Yakovlev
and Lecours 1967; Kinney and others 1988),
and showed that the later a white matter region complet-
ed myelination or the longer it took to myelinate, the gre-
ater was that region’s volume increase over controls 
(Herbert and others 2004; Fig. 5). Greater volume
changes in later-myelinating white matter suggest a rela-
tionship with postnatal brain volume enlargement dis-
cussed above.
A lack of volume increase or even a relative reduction
in the midsagittal area of the corpus callosum has been a
consistent finding in autism, although regional bias has
varied regarding which part of this structure is most
affected (Egaas and others 1995; Piven and others 1997;
Manes and others 1999; Hardan and others 2000;
Herbert and others 2004). This means that the corpus
callosum is disproportionately smaller than would be
predicted given volume increases in more peripheral
white matter (Jancke and others 1997), which may con-
tribute to a reduction in interhemispheric connectivity
and thus an increased tendency to lateralize functions
(Lewis and others 2004). Indeed, a widespread increase
in cortical asymmetry, predominantly in a rightward
direction, has been documented (Chiron and others
1995; Herbert and others 2005).
Neurobehavioral Correlates
Insofar as its clinical impact has been assessed  in some
studies, large brain size has not appeared to have clinical
correlates (Lainhart and others 1997; Miles and others
2000), whereas in others, it has appeared to be more
common in higher-functioning individuals (Gillberg and
de Souza 2002; Dementieva and others 2005). Brain
enlargement is not always considered in studies of brain-
behavior relationships, although mentioned in introduc-
tions to articles, it is often left aside at the point of
model-building or hypothesis design, not finding its
way, for example, onto lists of potential brain correlates
of behavioral endophenotypes (Dawson and others
2002). There have been two reports of a relationship of
large-scale brain size measures to cognitive and diag-
nostic variables. Deutsch and Joseph (2003) found that
head circumference was not associated with language or
executive functioning and was also not related to either
verbal or nonverbal IQ taken individually. However, it
did correlate with a discrepancy between nonverbal and
verbal IQ, where the nonverbal score was higher
(Deutsch and Joseph 2003). Akshoomoff and others
(2004) found that four volumetric variables (cerebellar
white matter volume, area of anterior and of posterior
cerebellar vermis, and cerebral white matter) contributed
to two discriminant functions that separated high-
functioning autism, low-functioning autism, and con-
trols (with a mean age of 6 years) from each other.
Large brains, even if the volume increase has nonuni-
form features, represent a pervasive rather than regional-
ly localized abnormality. As such, they invite association
with more generalized processing abnormalities that
have been modeled as underlying the observed and
defining behaviors, such as weak central coherence
(Shah and Frith 1993), the idea that autism is a disorder
of late or complex information processing (Minshew and
others 1997), underconnectivity (Just and others 2004),
and the framing of autism as a neural information pro-
cessing disorder (Happe and others 2001; Belmonte and
others 2004). However, these constructs have not to date
been evaluated directly in relation to large brain size or
Fig. 1. In a sample of autistic individuals, Dementieva and oth-
ers (2005) showed a continuous increase in head circumference
percentile from birth through 3 years, with a linear regression
between mean head circumference percentile and age, by
month of age from 0 through 36 months.  (There was only one
child between 10 and 11 months and one between 13 and 14
months.) 
 at Bobst Library, New York University on February 14, 2015
nro.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 Volume 11, Number 5, 2005
THE NEUROSCIENTIST
429
to major components of this size increase such as white
matter.
Genetics, Environment, and Large Brains
At the current time, we can only speculate about the role
genes may play in autism macrocephaly, as no specific
genetic mechanisms for autism have been identified at
this time. There are a variety of genetic syndromes
whose phenotype includes macrocephaly, but although it
is conceivable that these syndromes may involve mecha-
nisms related to those underlying autism, only a few
(e.g., neurofibromatosis 1 and Sotos syndrome) have
both macrocephaly and autism as part of their phenotyp-
ic profile, whereas for the most part, genetic syndromes
that involve an increased incidence of autism are not
known to feature macrocephaly (McCaffery and
Deutsch, “Macrocephaly and the Control of Brain
Fig. 2.  In the pie chart on the left, total brain volume is divided by the percentage contribution of each major brain structure to the
overall volume.  In the pie chart on the right, the volume differences between autism and controls are broken out by contribution of
each structure. Whereas cerebral cortex comprises 52% of total brain volume in autism, it contributes only 18% to the brain volume
increase over controls. On the other hand, whereas cerebral white matter comprises 30% of total brain volume, it contributes 65% of
the volume increase over controls. The scaling of brain volumes in autism is thus nonuniform in comparison with controls. 
Fig. 3. Radiate but not deep (sagittal or bridging) white matter volume (see Fig. 4) is increased in a group of high-functioning autistic
boys and of boys with developmental language disorder (DLD). Volumes are shown as a percentage of control volume. Solid bars are
statistically significant; speckled bars are not statistically significant. Radiate white matter in all four lobes is significantly larger in
autism than controls, whereas in DLD, three lobes (sparing parietal) are similarly affected. Prefrontal white matter has an even greater
enlargement over controls than frontal lobe white matter in both groups. In the deeper sagittal and bridging, white matter volumes are
with one exception not larger than controls, and basal forebrain is smaller for both groups (Herbert and others 2004).
 at Bobst Library, New York University on February 14, 2015
nro.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 430
THE NEUROSCIENTIST
Large Brains in Autism
Growth in Autistic Disorders,” unpublished manuscript).
Nevertheless, it is worth exploring whether some of the
more common autism-associated genetic syndromes
could have hitherto unappreciated macrocephalic fea-
tures or even comparable altered proportionality of brain
tissue compartments; the neuroanatomy of many of
these syndromes is not well characterized at the level of
what we now know about autism. At the same time,
given growing numbers of reports documenting increas-
es in the numbers of autistic individuals, with no con-
clusive explanation for these increases (Fombonne 2003;
Blaxill 2004; Newschaffer and others 2005; Palmer and
others 2005), it is prudent to include environmental as
well as genetic factors as potentially implicated in this
endophenotype.
Underlying Tissue Changes
The finding of regional differentiation in white matter
volumetrics has raised the question of what tissue
changes might be driving this phenomenon. Some infer-
ences can be made from volumes yielded by gray versus
white matter tissue classifications. The dissociation of
white matter from gray matter volumetric patterns
(Herbert, Ziegler, Deutsch, and others 2003) and trajec-
tories over time, with white matter enlargement being
initially greater and persisting longer than cerebral or
cerebellar cortical involvement, suggests that the white
matter enlargement is less likely to be a function of an
increase in neuronal number and more likely to be a con-
sequence of changes intrinsic to white matter, such as
increased myelination. Although this is only an infer-
ence, it is further supported by magnetic resonance spec-
troscopy data showing less rather than more n-acetylas-
partate (NAA) in autistic brains (Friedman and others
2003); because NAA is associated with neurons, a
reduction of this metabolite suggests less rather than
more neurons and axons.
Although diffusion tensor data have the potential to
shed some light on white matter in autism, at the current
time, there are limited data in this modality. These stud-
ies measure fractional anisotropy (FA), which relates to
the extent to which diffusion of water is directionally
constrained. Although myelin can constrain water diffu-
sion directionally, FA is not specific for myelin, and cau-
tion must be used in interpreting FA data. In 2- to 4-year-
olds, Piven’s group reported that fractional anisotropy
appears to be similar to what is found in control subjects
several years older (Cascio and others 2005), whereas in
another study involving teenagers, multiple clusters
were noted of reduced fractional anisotropy in white
matter adjacent to ventromedial prefrontal cortices, in
anterior cingulate, in temporoparietal junctions, near the
amygdala, in occipitotemporal tracts, and in the corpus
callosum (Barnea-Goraly and others 2004).
Although studies are currently underway, at the cur-
rent time, there is no neuropathological documentation
of the microscopic changes associated with white matter
enlargement, so although we can make circumstantial
inferences, we cannot yet confidently attribute it to
increases in myelination, axonal density, increased vas-
cularization, or any other particular change.
Minicolumns
Casanova and others (2002) have published several
reports of increased numbers of minicolumns with
greater cell dispersion in autism. These data were
derived from an analysis of digitized images of lamina
III in several Brodman areas. Minicolumns, defined as
vertical clusters of large neurons delimited by cell-
sparse areas on either side, were detected using a com-
Fig. 4. In the figure on the right, radiate white matter, whose enlargement is graphed in Figure 3, is shaded yellow, while sagittal and
bridging matter are shaded white. In addition, deep gray matter structures, shaded blue, are absolutely the same or slightly larger than
but proportionately no different from controls (cerebellum and brain stem also fall into this category, but they are not visible on this
slice). In the figure on the right, cerebral cortex and hippocampus-amygdala, which are shaded red, are absolutely no different from
but relatively smaller than controls (Herbert and others 2003; Herbert and others 2004).
 at Bobst Library, New York University on February 14, 2015
nro.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 Volume 11, Number 5, 2005
THE NEUROSCIENTIST
431
Fig. 5. A, Myelination has different times of onset duration and completion by brain region. This figure illustrates regions with neu-
ropathological data regarding a myelination timetable whose structures could be discerned using white matter parcellation. Weeks are
indicated postconceptionally. Figures 5B and C illustrate regression analysis to indicate the relationship of timing and duration of
myelination with the extent of volume increase over controls. The longer myelination takes (Fig. 5B, “mean maturity interval”) and the
later the presence of mature myelin is noted (Fig. 5C, “presence of mature myelin”), the greater is the volume increase (shown as mean
Z score) compared with controls. This relationship was found for both autism and developmental language disorder (DLD) subjects
(Herbert and others 2004).
A
B
C
 at Bobst Library, New York University on February 14, 2015
nro.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 432
THE NEUROSCIENTIST
Large Brains in Autism
puterized column detection routine. Out of the nine
autistic cases, four had brain weights greater than 2 stan-
dard deviations above the mean (though one of these had
edema), but increased brain weight did not appear corre-
lated to the width of minicolumns, although the analysis
was limited as brain weights were available for only one
control. However, implications of an increased number
of narrower columns also exist for connectivity related
both to interneurons as they are affected by columnar
alterations (Casanova and others 2003) and to an altered
number and proportion of short- and long-range con-
necting fibers in the brain (Casanova 2004). Although
the number of minicolumns is determined early in gesta-
tion, there is considerable architectural resculpting in
subsequent periods of development, and nitric oxide
insufficiency has been proposed as one potential causal
mechanism for autism that could cause narrow mini-
columns postnatally (Gustafsson 2004).
Neuroinflammation
For years, it had been assumed that autism did not
involve inflammatory processes, as there was no evi-
dence of consistent inflammation or gliosis on neu-
ropathological examination (Kemper and Bauman 1998)
and MRI images were typically clinically (if not volu-
metrically) normal. Scattered neuropathological find-
ings of inflammatory changes and gliosis (Guerin and
others 1996; Bailey and others 1998) were not subject to
detailed analysis to further characterize these changes.
Recently, however, using immunocytochemistry,
cytokine protein arrays, and enzyme-linked immunosor-
bent assays, neuroinflammation has been demonstrated
in a series of autistic brains as well as in CSF from autis-
tic individuals (Vargas and others 2005; Fig. 6). This
inflammation was found in individuals ranging from 5 to
44 years of age. It appeared to reflect involvement of the
CNS innate but not adaptive immune system, as it
involved activation of microglia and astroglia but not
lymphocytes; whereas cytokine profiling showed eleva-
tions in a number of cytokines, particularly macrophage
chemoattractant protein–1 and tumor growth factor–β1.
The measures by which this inflammation was estab-
lished may be questioned due to conditions of death and
to imperfect matching of subjects with controls.
Nevertheless, the consistent trend across measures and
the prior context of multiple studies detecting peripheral
immune abnormalities in autism suggest that this is a
phenomenon deserving of reflection and further exami-
nation. The neuroinflammation appears to be of a char-
acter quite similar to that found in Alzheimer disease.
The failure to detect this abnormality on MRI in autism
is thus paralleled by the insensitivity of MRI to the
microscopic changes documented in Alzheimer disease
at the other end of the life course.
It also appears that accompanying these neuroinflam-
matory findings are signs of oxidative damage (C.
Pardo, personal communication, November 2004), signs
of which are also being discerned in studies of autistic
brain tissue by other investigators (Perry and others
2005), as well as in peripheral tissue samples (Chauhan
and others 2004; James and others 2004). Taken togeth-
er, these findings represent pathophysiology of a chron-
ic and persistent type, a different class of abnormality
than the type of fixed alteration in cellular organization
in tissue that is immunologically quiescent that has hith-
erto been assumed.
With the neuropathological documentation of neu-
roinflammation in autistic brains and CSF, the field of
interest has considerably widened regarding potential
relevant alterations in tissue composition. This finding
adds several further dimensions to the axes along which
brain changes need to be mapped in autism. The issue is
no longer simply a developmental alteration in propor-
tions of gray and white matter tissue compartments in
intrinsically healthy tissue, as has been an unstated but
implicit assumption in the bulk of volumetric discourse.
Now, additional consideration needs to be given to the
possible roles played by metabolic alterations of inflam-
mation and oxidative stress, the as yet unidentified driv-
ers of these metabolic alterations, and the extent to
which microglial and astroglial activation and inflamma-
tory cytokines and chemokines might alter both brain
structure and brain function.
At the current time, the study of brain inflammation in
autism is just beginning, and its relationship to brain vol-
ume has not yet been investigated. Because documenta-
tion of neuroinflammation was accomplished in brain
sections rather than whole brains and across a range of
ages, even had brain weights been reported, the sample
would have been insufficient to make a judgment about
the correlation of inflammation and macrocephaly. And
as noted, although we have established that white matter
contributes disproportionately (though not exclusively)
to brain enlargement, the underlying tissue changes con-
tributing to this enlargement have not yet been specified
microscopically. However, it is likely that macrocephaly
and neuroinflammation co-occur, given that some
degree of neuroinflammation was found in every autistic
tissue specimen examined and given that macrocephaly,
although not universal, is quite common. The question
thus arises as to whether these are coincidental comor-
bidities or whether there is some intrinsic relationship
between the two phenomena regarding underlying 
mechanisms.
In anticipation of studies to come, one might consider
a variety of potential ways that neuroinflammation could
contribute to overall and white matter volume increase.
The simplest is directly by an increase in cell size or by
swelling. If activated microglia and astroglia take up
more space and there is a sufficient number of them, this
could contribute to a subtle but measurable volume
increase. Such a volume increase might be enhanced by
associated increases in tissue water or other inflamma-
tion-associated tissue changes or by a compensatory
increase in vascularization to overcome possible 
inflammation-related impairment of perfusion. All such
changes would need to be fairly subtle and diffuse—
 at Bobst Library, New York University on February 14, 2015
nro.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 Volume 11, Number 5, 2005
THE NEUROSCIENTIST
433
enough to be detected in neuropathological investigation
but not pronounced enough to be detected by standard
MRI neuroimaging protocols.
A second potential route of influence of neuroinflam-
mation on brain volume is through cytokine or
chemokine alterations in signaling pathways modulating
development (Hamilton and Rome 1994; Ambrosini and
Aloisi 2004; Cartier and others 2005). Other signaling
pathways modulating development could conceivably
also be altered by whatever underlying condition might
be triggering the neuroinflammation, which is presum-
ably itself a secondary rather than a primary process.
A further possibility is that neuroinflammation and
associated increased oxidative stress could alter the
chemical milieu of the brain, leading, for example, to
increased excitotoxicity that in turn would increase cor-
tical arousal. There are some suggestions in the literature
that increased neuronal and axonal activity is associated
with increased oligodendrocyte activity (Barres and Raff
1993). This cascade of effects could conceivably lead to
an increase in myelination.
Could neuroinflammation be a type of pathophysiolo-
gy that early in development might lead to brain enlarge-
ment but at a later developmental time might contribute
to a slowing of brain growth? It could be that neuroin-
flammation leads to a set of tendencies in development
that are countervailing in relation to each other.
Although mechanisms such as those listed above could
early on increase volume, persistent inflammation and
oxidative stress could over time lead to impaired cell
health or apoptosis. This may be an explanation for the
observation of Bauman and Kemper that cytological
findings differed by age, with younger subjects having
larger cells whereas older subjects had smaller cells in
portions of the inferior olive and cerebellar nuclei
(Kemper and Bauman 1998). That these cell size
changes between younger and older subjects were found
only locally and not pervasively in these postmortem
specimens suggests that they might not be implicated in
global volumetric trends, but it could relate to regional-
ly enhanced vulnerability to this class of pathophysiolo-
gy (Boulanger and Shatz 2004).
Neuroinflammation and microgliosis are complex in
both cause and function and have adaptive as well as
maladaptive features (Wyss-Coray and Mucke 2002). In
degenerative disorders, they can arise as a response to
cellular debris related to progressive failure in a compo-
nent of cell metabolism disrupted by the genetic error
that underlies the disorder. But aside from distinct genet-
ic variants such as Rett syndrome, we are not seeing
compelling evidence of cumulative progress of an
inborn genetically based metabolic error in autism.
Although the decrease in relative volume and the
decrease in cell size in certain regions with increasing
age suggests a process that involves some losses in cell
volume and/or number over time, these changes are mild
compared with those in degenerative disorders, so that
other mechanisms need to be considered. Various class-
es of environmental factors are candidate contributors to
this picture. Oxidative stress, brain inflammation, and
microgliosis have been much documented in association
with toxic exposures including various heavy metals,
Fig. 6. Neuroinflammation in autism. A, Microglial
activation in cerebellar folia. B, Marked Purkinje
cell layer and granular cell layer neuronal loss. C,
Activated microglia in the granular cell layer. D,
Perivascular macrophages and microglia  (Vargas
and others 2005).
 at Bobst Library, New York University on February 14, 2015
nro.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 434
THE NEUROSCIENTIST
Large Brains in Autism
pesticides, and air pollution (Kim and others 2002;
Zurich and others 2002; Campbell 2004; Ling and oth-
ers 2004; Shanker and others 2004; Filipov and others
2005). The burgeoning research domain of low-dose
persistent toxic exposures may well prove relevant here
(Welshons and others 2003). A number of investigators
are studying how autism and other developmental disor-
ders could also be mediated by immune or infectious
factors, either chronic subclinical infection or the seque-
lae of infection in the past (Hornig and Lipkin 2001;
Patterson 2002; Dalton and others 2003; Shi and others
2003). For example, a mouse model of in utero influen-
za viral infection is associated with the postnatal devel-
opment of macrocephaly, although the longer-term brain
size trajectory is not documented in this study
(Fatemi and others 2002). In these settings, genetics
might play a role in modulating the threshold for vulner-
ability (Pletnikov and others 2002; Hornig and others
2004). Volumetric changes from such factors might
involve a combination of local and scaling alterations
(Herbert and Ziegler 2005). Further research is needed
here.
Energy Metabolism and Perfusion 
Abnormalities in a New Light?
In the setting of this new class of tissue data in autism, it
may be worth revisiting earlier findings regarding abnor-
mal energy metabolism and perfusion in autism. The
early 31P-MRI spectroscopy finding of Minshew and
others (1993) showing evidence suggesting increased
membrane degradation and decreased high-energy phos-
phate compounds in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, as
well as the increase in lactate found by Chugani and oth-
ers (1999), may be related in some way to the patho-
physiological abnormalities or underlying triggers also
associated with neuroinflammation and oxidative stress,
as may be the increased choline/creatine ratio found by
Sokol and others (2002), which may be associated with
membrane degeneration or increased cellular prolifera-
tion. The many reports of brain hypoperfusion, reviewed
elsewhere but too numerous to enumerate here
(Starkstein and others 2000), could conceivably also rest
on an underlying inflammatory pathophysiology, such as
the perivascular microgliosis documented by Vargas and
others (2005) or conceivably by disturbed energy metab-
olism. Interestingly, although almost all studies reported
hypoperfusion and none reported hyperperfusion, these
articles focused only on correlating the localization of
hypoperfusion with neuropsychological deficits but not
on disease mechanisms; now, emerging questions 
bring to the fore the issue of underlying tissue 
pathophysiology.
Functional Effects: Reduced Brain 
Integration or Connectivity
One possible effect of brain enlargement might be a per-
vasive decrement in brain integration. The phenomenon
of large brains had not yet been identified in autism
when the pervasive finding of reduced covariance of
brain regions with each other was reported; this was in
fact one of the earliest neuroimaging findings in autism.
An early positron emission tomographic study by
Horwitz and others (1988) showed reduced correlations
of resting cerebral metabolic rates among regions in
autistic brains. Although only 4 of 31 regional cerebral
metabolic rates for glucose differed between groups,
70% of the 861 possible correlations had lower values in
the group with autism; moreover, there were significant-
ly fewer robust correlations in the group with autism
than in the control group (Horwitz and others 1988).
Following Horwitz, Starkstein and others (2000), in a
single-photon emission computed tomography study
demonstrating low perfusion in mentally retarded autis-
tic subjects, calculated a correlation matrix with 42 cor-
relations and found that the control group had 26 of 42
correlations (62%) above this r value, as compared to
only 8 of 42 correlations (19%) for the autistic group.
This approach has recently been expanded from rest-
ing brain activity to studies of functional brain activa-
tion. Two recent functional MRI studies, one of sentence
comprehension (Just and others 2004) and one of work-
ing memory (Koshino and others 2005), showed a
reduced degree of synchronization of the time series of
functional activation between the various participating
cortical areas. In the first of these articles, Just and oth-
ers (2004) reported consistently lower functional con-
nectivity in autism as compared with controls, with this
measure tracking parallel in autism to controls but at a
lower level (Fig. 7). Just and others placed this phenom-
enon in the framework of “underconnectivity theory,”
which is a formulation of processing abnormalities in
autism, such as earlier “weak central coherence” or
“impaired complex processing” models, but one whose
formulation more clearly links brain function with
behavioral function. This linkage strongly suggests a
connection to underlying pervasive brain structural, per-
fusion, or chemical alterations, which calls for further
exploration.
Although Just and others’ (2004) experimental design
and formulation were novel, when one reads between the
lines of many functional neuroimaging studies in autism,
one sees that although the attempt to illuminate the
specificity of neural systems’ impairment underlying the
features of autism has yielded equivocal results (e.g.,
inconsistent results regarding ventral temporal activation
in relation to face processing, e.g., Schultz and others
2000; Pierce and others 2001; Hadjikhani and others
2004; Dalton and others 2005), the data themselves sug-
gest atypically distributed activations and reduced
covariation or abnormal interregional coordination
(Belmonte and Yurgelun-Todd 2003; Herbert 2004).
Perfusion altered consistently in the direction of reduc-
tion could be a tissue-level facet of the same overall phe-
nomenon. The frameshift of seeing coordination proper-
ties as figure rather than background to specific neural
systems functioning makes it possible to bring these
commonalities to light.
 at Bobst Library, New York University on February 14, 2015
nro.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 Volume 11, Number 5, 2005
THE NEUROSCIENTIST
435
Connectivity and Systems Vulnerability
At this early stage in the development of the research
pursuit of pervasive abnormalities in autism, it becomes
helpful to turn to modeling for guidance in hypothesis
formation. A common thread among the pervasive
deficit-oriented models already cited (e.g., weak central
coherence [Shah and Frith 1993], impaired complex pro-
cessing [Minshew and others 1997], underconnectivity
[Just and others 2004], disordered neural information
processing [Belmonte and others 2004], and neural net-
work abnormalities [McClelland 2000; Cohen in press] )
is a systems approach to the analysis of brain function-
ing. The idea that a pervasive impairment in connectivi-
ty or brain integration could underlie the autism behav-
ioral phenotype is based on the idea that altered systems
properties can produce specific and not just pervasive
changes in features. In this model, the behaviors that
define the autism phenotype are not independently
aggregated components but rather interrelated features
of altered systems output that emerge as a consequence
of these processing and connectivity problems. From
this point of view, the domains of functioning most dra-
matically affected will be those that are most dependent
on highly coordinated associational processing (Fig. 8).
Nuanced and pragmatically subtle language and social
interaction, as well as the capacity for behavioral flexi-
bility, which are the domains hit hardest in autism and
whose impairment has constituted the definition of the
disorder, will certainly suffer more strikingly. This
impairment of integration has been formulated or mod-
eled as a systems issue by a number of investigators.
Cohen (in press) has proposed a neural network model in
which either too many or too few neuronal connections,
as documented in the neuropathological literature, would
lead to overemphasis on specific details but an inferior
capacity for generalization. Brock and others (2002)
proposed that a reduction in the integration of special-
ized local neural networks in the brain caused by a
deficit in temporal binding would lead to abnormal pro-
cessing consistent with “weak central coherence.”
McClelland (2000) has proposed that hyperspecificity in
autism derives from abnormalities in neural nets. These
formulations bear substantial resemblance to lines of
thought emerging in other disorders such as schizophre-
nia and Alzheimer disease and in cognitive neuroscience
more generally, in which the notion is being explored
that the manifestations of neurobehavioral disorders may
derive from impaired cortical coordination dynamics
(Bressler and Kelso 2001).
Implications of a Systems Formulation
This systems formulation of the cognitive neuroscience
of autism has a number of implications. First, in addition
to functions most highly vulnerable to reduced brain
integration, many other functions will also suffer decre-
ments, if in more subtle ways. The research program of
Minshew, Just, and colleagues, pursuing this perspec-
tive, includes investigation of multiple domains to eval-
uate the evidence for impairments in complex process-
ing, and they have interpreted impairments in working
memory, abstract reasoning, postural control, and other
complex functions in this manner (Minshew and others
2002; Minshew and others 2004; Koshino and others
2005).
Second, although traits may be specifically character-
ized, they may not be independently determined. From
this perspective, the core impairment is regarded not as
at the level of a set of independent traits with independ-
ent brain loci, biologies, and genes (Silverman and oth-
ers 2002) but rather as at the level of an underlying pro-
cessing or computational abnormality that has multiple
functional consequences. The argument can be made
that this is a more parsimonious approach to cognitive
neuroscience and potentially also to the genes and envi-
ronmental factors implicated in underlying etiology of
the disorder.
Third, the processing impairment is based on underly-
ing tissue abnormalities whose pathophysiology under-
lies underconnectivity. Here it is important to comment
that pervasive tissue and processing changes can easily
coexist with localized abnormalities, for instance, if a
relevant receptor is more highly expressed in certain
regions, as is the MHCI receptor in limbic system and
cerebellum (Boulanger and Shatz 2004). Moreover, as
the heterogeneity of such tissue and related metabolic
pathophysiology is better characterized, it may prove
more useful than behaviors in identifying autism clinical
and genetic subgroups.
Fourth, once the physicality of the underlying tissue
abnormalities is considered, there is no reason to pre-
sume that the pathophysiology is confined to the brain.
Although there is a great deal of heterogeneity to the
Fig. 7. “Underconnectivity” in autism. Functional connectivity
between 10 region-of-interest pairs is consistently lower in
autism than in controls but shows the same rank order (Just
and others 2004).
 at Bobst Library, New York University on February 14, 2015
nro.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 436
THE NEUROSCIENTIST
Large Brains in Autism
medical complaints that frequently accompany autism,
there are common threads that may indicate common or
related molecular and cellular mechanisms between
body and brain. For instance, the pathophysiologies of
inflammation, oxidative stress, and excitotoxicity are
greatly linked, and it appears these types of mechanisms
are implicated in the brain as well as in some of the sen-
sory and sleep regulation, epilepsy, immune, and gas-
trointestinal complaints commonly seen in autism.
Fifth, some of the tissue pathophysiology and conse-
quent processing abnormalities now being identified in
autism are final common pathways that may eventuate
from a broad range of genetic, metabolic, toxicological,
immune, infectious, and even stress-related triggers. The
systems-perturbation-derived specificity of autistic
behaviors can thus plausibly rest on a great heterogene-
ity of origins. It is thus no wonder that it has been so dif-
ficult to find either genetic or metabolic biomarkers for
autism.
Sixth, the dynamics described above are not likely to
be confined to the syndrome of behaviors we now call
autism. Hebert and others have documented brain size
(Herbert, Ziegler, Makris, and others 2003), overall and
radiate white matter enlargement (Herbert and oth-
ers 2004; Figs. 2, 3, 4, and 9), and widespread asymme-
try shifts (Herbert and others 2005) that are highly sim-
ilar in high-functioning autism and developmental lan-
guage disorder (DLD) or specific language impairment
(SLI; Fig. 8). Neither total brain volume nor anatomical
abnormalities had been addressed in DLD/SLI in earlier
studies due to an a priori assumption that relevant abnor-
malities in a language disorder would be confined to 
language-associated areas of the brain. But theories of
pervasively slow processing have emerged in DLD/SLI
that bear a suggestive similarity to underconnectivity
theories in autism, and both theories imply an anatomi-
cal association with more widespread brain abnormali-
ties. Moreover, a growing body of literature has docu-
mented that DLD/SLI is in fact not specific but involves
more subtle impairments across the board (Hill 2001;
Webster and Shevell 2004). In addition, a connection to
immune system abnormalities has been a persistent sub-
theme in childhood language disorder research (Behan
and Geschwind 1985; Benasich 2002; Dalton and oth-
ers 2003). Finally, there appears to be both functional
and genetic overlap between these two groups
(Kjelgaard and Tager-Flusberg 2001). Intriguingly, simi-
lar lines of thought about overlap are also emerging in
relation to other disorders such as Tourette syndrome
(Becker and others 2003; Plessen and others 2004).
Seventh, both the newly appreciated chronicity of
some of the underlying pathophysiology and the perva-
siveness of the connectivity abnormalities open new
horizons for seeking potential treatment targets.
Inflammation, oxidative stress, excitotoxicity, and other
neurochemical changes and their triggers open a range
of possibilities for research into potential treatment tar-
gets. Characterizing the connectivity abnormalities
underlying behavioral manifestations may allow a sharp-
ening of behavioral therapies. More fundamentally, the
awareness that the brain as well as medical conditions of
children with autism may be conditioned by chronic bio-
Fig. 8. Poor-quality connections disrupt coordinated timing more severely in interconnected networks. Functions involving connec-
tions among a small number of nearby areas are less vulnerable to impaired connectivity than are functions that integrate information
across many areas that are widely distributed throughout the brain.
 at Bobst Library, New York University on February 14, 2015
nro.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 Volume 11, Number 5, 2005
THE NEUROSCIENTIST
437
medical abnormalities such as inflammation opens the
possibility that meaningful biomedical interventions
may be possible well past the window of maximal neu-
roplasticity in early childhood because the basis for
assuming that all deficits can be attributed to fixed early
developmental alterations in neural architecture has now
been undermined.
Conclusion
The conundrum of large brains in autism thus appears to
be giving up its mystery and instead is leading us toward
convergence upon a fruitful reformulation of both patho-
physiology and function in autism. This reformulation
points toward more coordinated interdisciplinary
research agendas and raises hopes of more integrated
understanding. It also opens prospects of prevention and
particularly of ameliorative intervention. Thus, under-
standing may reasonably soon be translated into impact,
which is the ultimate goal of the biomedical enterprise.
References
Akshoomoff N, Lord C, Lincoln AJ, Courchesne RY, Caper RA,
Townsend J, and others. 2004. Outcome classification of preschool
children with autism spectrum disorders using MRI brain meas-
ures. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 43:349–57.
Ambrosini E, Aloisi F. 2004. Chemokines and glial cells: a complex
network in the central nervous system. Neurochem Res
29:1017–38.
American Psychiatric Association. 1994. Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders. 4th ed. Washington, DC: American
Psychiatric Association.
Aylward EH, Minshew NJ, Field K, Sparks BF, Singh N. 2002. Effects
of age on brain volume and head circumference in autism.
Neurology 59:175–83.
Bailey A, Luthert P, Bolton P, LeCouteur A, Rutter M. 1993. Autism
and megalencephaly. Lancet 34:1225–6.
Bailey A, Luthert P, Dean A, Harding B, Janota I, Montgomery M, and
others. 1998. A clinicopathological study of autism. Brain
121:889–905.
Barnea-Goraly N, Kwon H, Menon V, Eliez S, Lotspeich L, Reiss AL.
2004. White matter structure in autism: preliminary evidence from
diffusion tensor imaging. Biol Psychiatry 55:323–6.
Barres BA, Raff MC. 1993. Proliferation of oligodendrocyte precursor
cells depends on electrical activity in axons. Nature 361:258–60.
Bauman ML, Kemper TL. 1985. Histoanatomic observations of the
brain in early infantile autism. Neurology 35:866–74.
Becker K, Friedlin B, Simon RM. 2003. Comparative genomics of
autism, Tourette syndrome and autoimmune/inflammatory disor-
ders. Available from: http://www.grc.nia.nih.gov/branches/
rrb/dna/pubs/cgoatad.pdf.
Behan P, Geschwind N. 1985. Dyslexia, congenital anomalies, and
immune disorders: the role of the fetal environment. Ann N Y Acad
Sci 457:13–8.
Belmonte MK, Cook EH, Anderson GM, Rubenstein JL, Greenough
WT, Beckel-Mitchener A, and others. 2004. Autism as a disorder
of neural information processing: directions for research and tar-
gets for therapy. Mol Psychiatry 9:646–63.
Belmonte MK, Yurgelun-Todd DA. 2003. Functional anatomy of
impaired selective attention and compensatory processing in
autism. Brain Res Cogn Brain Res 17:651–64.
Benasich AA. 2002. Impaired processing of brief, rapidly presented
auditory cues in infants with a family history of autoimmune dis-
order. Dev Neuropsychol 22:351–72.
Blaxill MF. 2004. What’s going on? The question of time trends in
autism. Public Health Rep 119:536–51.
Boulanger LM, Shatz CJ. 2004. Immune signalling in neural develop-
ment, synaptic plasticity and disease. Nat Rev Neurosci 5:521–31.
Bressler SL, Kelso JA. 2001. Cortical coordination dynamics and cog-
nition. Trends Cogn Sci 5:26–36.
Brock J, Brown CC, Boucher J, Rippon G. 2002. The temporal binding
deficit hypothesis of autism. Dev Psychopathol 14:209–24.
Campbell A. 2004. Inflammation, neurodegenerative diseases, and
environmental exposures. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1035:117–32.
Carper RA, Moses P, Tigue ZD, Courchesne E. 2002. Cerebral lobes in
autism: early hyperplasia and abnormal age effects. Neuroimage
16:1038–51.
Cartier L, Hartley O, Dubois-Dauphin M, Krause KH. 2005.
Chemokine receptors in the central nervous system: role in brain
inflammation and neurodegenerative diseases. Brain Res Brain Res
Rev 48:16–42.
Casanova MF. 2004. White matter volume increase and minicolumns
in autism. Ann Neurol 56:453.
Casanova MF, Buxhoeveden D, Gomez J. 2003. Disruption in the
inhibitory architecture of the cell minicolumn: implications for
autism. Neuroscientist 9:496–507.
Casanova MF, Buxhoeveden DP, Switala AE, Roy E. 2002.
Minicolumnar pathology in autism. Neurology 58:428–32.
Cascio C, Jomier M, Poe M, Smith H, Gerig G, Piven J. 2005.
Diffusion tensor imaging suggests early maturation of global white
matter and corpus callosum in young children with autism. IMFAR
Abstract.
Chauhan A, Chauhan V, Brown WT, Cohen I. 2004. Oxidative stress in
autism: increased lipid peroxidation and reduced serum levels of
ceruloplasmin and transferring—the antioxidant proteins. Life Sci
75:2539–49.
Chiron C, Leboyer M, Leon F, Jambaque I, Nuttin C, Syrota A. 1995.
SPECT of the brain in childhood autism: evidence for a lack of
normal hemispheric asymmetry. Dev Med Child Neurol
37:849–60.
Chugani DC, Sundram BS, Behen M, Lee ML, Moore GJ. 1999.
Evidence of altered energy metabolism in autistic children. Prog
Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 23:635–41.
Fig. 9. Autism and developmental language disorder (DLD)
brains are similar to each other but different from controls. In
the three bars on the left, the proportions of cerebral cortex,
white matter, cerebellum, and other smaller brain structures are
illustrated for the whole brain, similar to the pie chart for autism
in Figure 2. In the three bars on the right, the contribution of
each brain structure to the volume increase of autism over con-
trols (left bar of this group) and DLD over controls (middle bar
of this group) are shown to be nonuniform with respect to con-
trols: white matter disproportionately accounts for bigger brains
in autism (65%) and even more so in DLD (88%), where the
overall volume increase is less. In the rightmost bar, which ana-
lyzes the contribution of each structure to autism’s size
increase over DLD, the volume increase in autism is uniform
with respect to DLD; that is, all parts of the autistic brain are (on
average) larger than in the DLD brain proportionately (i.e., to the
same degree) in both groups (Herbert and Ziegler 2005).
 at Bobst Library, New York University on February 14, 2015
nro.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 438
THE NEUROSCIENTIST
Large Brains in Autism
Chung MK, Dalton KM, Alexander AL, Davidson RJ. 2004. Less
white matter concentration in autism: 2D voxel-based morphome-
try. Neuroimage 23:242–51.
Cody H, Pelphrey K, Piven J. 2002. Structural and functional magnet-
ic resonance imaging of autism. Int J Dev Neurosci 20:421–38.
Cohen IL. In press. A neural network model of autism: implications for
theory and treatment. In: Mareschal D, Sirois S, Westermann G,
Johnson MH, editors. Neuroconstructivism, volume 2: perspec-
tives and prospects. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Courchesne E, Carper R, Akshoomoff N. 2003. Evidence of brain
overgrowth in the first year of life in autism. JAMA 290:337–44.
Courchesne E, Karns CM, Davis HR, Ziccardi R, Carper RA, Tigue
ZD, and others. 2001. Unusual brain growth patterns in early life in
patients with autistic disorder: an MRI study. Neurology
57:245–54.
Courchesne E, Muller RA, Saitoh O. 1999. Brain weight in autism:
normal in the majority of cases, megalencephalic in rare cases.
Neurology 52:1057–9.
Dalton KM, Nacewicz BM, Johnstone T, Schaefer AS, Gernsbacher
MA, Goldsmith HH, and others. 2005. Gaze fixation and the neu-
ral circuitry of face processing in autism. Nat Neurosci 8:519–26.
Dalton P, Deacon R, Blamire A, Pike M, McKinlay I, Stein J, and oth-
ers. 2003. Maternal neuronal antibodies associated with autism and
a language disorder. Ann Neurol 53:533–7.
Dawson G, Webb S, Schellenberg GD, Dager S, Friedman S, Aylward
E, and others. 2002. Defining the broader phenotype of autism:
genetic, brain, and behavioral perspectives. Dev Psychopathol
14:581–611.
Davidovitch M, Patterson B, Gartside P. 1996. Head circumference
measurements in children with autism. J Child Neurol 11:389–93.
Dekaban A, Sadowsky D. 1978. Changes in brain weight during the
span of human life: relation of brain weights to body heights and
weights. Ann Neurol 4:345–56.
Dementieva YA, Vance DD, Donnelly SL, Elston LA, Wolpert CM,
Ravan SA, and others. 2005. Accelerated head growth in early
development of individuals with autism. Pediatr Neurol 32:102–8.
Deutsch CK, Joseph RM. 2003. Brief report: cognitive correlates of
enlarged head circumference in children with autism. J Autism Dev
Disord 33:209–15.
Egaas B, Courchesne E, Saitoh O. 1995. Reduced size of corpus callo-
sum in autism. Arch Neurol 52:794–801.
Fatemi SH, Earle J, Kanodia R, Kist D, Emamian ES, Patterson PH,
and others. 2002. Prenatal viral infection leads to pyramidal cell
atrophy and macrocephaly in adulthood: implications for genesis
of autism and schizophrenia. Cell Mol Neurobiol 22:25–33.
Fidler DJ, Bailey JN, Smalley SL. 2000. Macrocephaly in autism and
other pervasive developmental disorders. Dev Med Child Neurol
42:737–40.
Filipek PA, Richelme C, Kennedy DN, Rademacher J, Pitcher DA,
Zidel S, and others. 1992. Morphometric analysis of the brain in
developmental language disorders and autism [abstract]. Ann
Neurol 32:475.
Filipov NM, Seegal RF, Lawrence DA. 2005. Manganese potentiates in
vitro production of proinflammatory cytokines and nitric oxide by
microglia through a nuclear factor kappa B-dependent mechanism.
Toxicol Sci 84:139–48.
Fombonne E. 2003. Epidemiological surveys of autism and other per-
vasive developmental disorders: an update. J Autism Dev Disord
33:365–82.
Fombonne E, Roge B, Claverie J, Courty S, Fremolle J. 1999.
Microcephaly and macrocephaly in autism. J Autism Dev Disord
29:113–9.
Friedman SD, Shaw DW, Artru AA, Richards TL, Gardner J, Dawson
G, and others. 2003. Regional brain chemical alterations in young
children with autism spectrum disorder. Neurology 60:100–7.
Ghaziuddin M, Zaccagnini J, Tsai L, Elardo S. 1999. Is megalen-
cephaly specific to autism? J Intellect Disabil Res 43(pt 4):279–82.
Gillberg C, de Souza L. 2002. Head circumference in autism, Asperger
syndrome, and ADHD: a comparative study. Dev Med Child
Neurol 44:296–300.
Guerin P, Lyon G, Barthelemy C, Sostak E, Chevrollier V, Garreau B,
and others. 1996. Neuropathological study of a case of autistic syn-
drome with severe mental retardation. Dev Med Child Neurol
38:203–11.
Gustafsson L. 2004. Comment on “Disruption in the inhibitory archi-
tecture of the cell minicolumn: implications for autism.”
Neuroscientist 10:189–91.
Hadjikhani N, Joseph RM, Snyder J, Chabris CS, Clark J, Steele S, and
others. 2004. Activation of the fusiform gyrus when individuals
with autism spectrum disorder view faces. Neuroimage
22:1141–50.
Hamilton SP, Rome LH. 1994. Stimulation of in vitro myelin synthesis
by microglia. Glia 11:326–35.
Happe F, Briskman J, Frith U. 2001. Exploring the cognitive phenotype
of autism: weak “central coherence” in parents and siblings of chil-
dren with autism: I. Experimental tests. J Child Psychol Psychiatry
42:299–307.
Hardan AY, Minshew NJ, Keshavan MS. 2000. Corpus callosum size
in autism. Neurology 55:1033–6.
Hardan AY, Minshew NJ, Mallikarjuhn M, Keshavan MS. 2001. Brain
volume in autism. J Child Neurol 16:421–4.
Hazlett HC, Poe M, Gerig G, Smith RG, Provenzale J, Ross A, and oth-
ers. An MRI and head circumference study of brain size in autism:
Birth through age two years. Arch Gen Psychiatry. Forthcoming.
Herbert MR. 2004. Neuroimaging in disorders of social and emotion-
al functioning: what is the question? J Child Neurol 19:772–84.
Herbert M, Ziegler D. 2005. Volumetric neuroimaging and low-dose
early-life exposures: loose coupling of pathogenesis-brain-behav-
ior links. Neurotoxicology. Forthcoming.
Herbert MR, Ziegler DA, Deutsch CK, O’Brien LM, Kennedy DN,
Filipek DA, and others. 2005. Brain asymmetries in autism and
developmental language disorder: a nested whole-brain analysis.
Brain 128:213–26.
Herbert MR, Ziegler DA, Deutsch CK, O’Brien LM, Lange N,
Bakardjiev A, and others. 2003. Dissociations of cerebral cortex,
subcortical and cerebral white matter volumes in autistic boys.
Brain 126:1182–92.
Herbert MR, Ziegler DA, Makris N, Bakardjiev A, Hodgson J, Adrien
KT, and others. 2003. Larger brain and white matter volumes in
children with developmental language disorder. Dev Sci 6:F11–22.
Herbert MR, Ziegler DA, Makris N, Filipek PA, Kemper TL,
Normandin JJ, and others. 2004. Localization of white matter vol-
ume increase in autism and developmental language disorder. Ann
Neurol 55:530–40.
Hill EL. 2001. Non-specific nature of specific language impairment: a
review of the literature with regard to concomitant motor impair-
ments. Int J Lang Commun Disord 36:149–71.
Hill EL, Frith U. 2003. Understanding autism: insights from mind and
brain. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 358:281–9.
Hornig M, Chian D, Lipkin WI. 2004. Neurotoxic effects of postnatal
thimerosal are mouse strain dependent. Mol Psychiatry 9:833–45.
Hornig M, Lipkin WI. 2001. Infectious and immune factors in the
pathogenesis of neurodevelopmental disorders: epidemiology,
hypotheses, and animal models. Ment Retard Dev Disabil Res Rev
7:200–10.
Horwitz B, Rumsey JM, Grady CL, Rapoport SI. 1988. The cerebral
metabolic landscape in autism: intercorrelations of regional glu-
cose utilization. Arch Neurol 45:749–55.
Hultman CM, Sparen P, Cnattingius S. 2002. Perinatal risk factors for
infantile autism. Epidemiology 13:417–23.
James SJ, Cutler P, Melnyk S, Jernigan S, Janak L, Gaylor DW, and
others. 2004. Metabolic biomarkers of increased oxidative stress
and impaired methylation capacity in children with autism. Am J
Clin Nutr 80:1611–7.
Jancke L, Staiger JF, Schlaug G, Huang Y, Steinmetz H. 1997. The
relationship between corpus callosum size and forebrain volume.
Cereb Cortex 7:48–56.
Just MA, Cherkassky VL, Keller TA, Minshew NJ. 2004. Cortical acti-
vation and synchronization during sentence comprehension in
high-functioning autism: evidence of underconnectivity. Brain
127:1811–21.
Kemper TL, Bauman M. 1998. Neuropathology of infantile autism. J
Neuropathol Exp Neurol 57:645–52.
 at Bobst Library, New York University on February 14, 2015
nro.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 Volume 11, Number 5, 2005
THE NEUROSCIENTIST
439
Kim SH, Johnson VJ, Sharma RP. 2002. Mercury inhibits nitric oxide
production but activates proinflammatory cytokine expression in
murine macrophage: differential modulation of NF-kappaB and
p38 MAPK signaling pathways. Nitric Oxide 7:67–74.
Kinney HC, Brody BA, Kloman AS, Gilles FH. 1988. Sequence of
central nervous system myelination in human infancy. II: patterns
of myelination in autopsied infants. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol
47:217–34.
Kjelgaard MM, Tager-Flusberg H. 2001. An investigation of language
impairment in autism: implications for genetic subgroups.
Language and Cognitive Processes 16:287–308.
Koshino H, Carpenter PA, Minshew NJ, Cherkassky VL, Keller TA,
Just MA. 2005. Functional connectivity in an fMRI working mem-
ory task in high-functioning autism. Neuroimage 24:810–21.
Lainhart JE, Piven J, Wzorek M, Landa R, Santangelo SL, Coon H, and
others. 1997. Macrocephaly in children and adults with autism. J
Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 36:282–90.
Lewis J, Courchesne E, Elman J. 2004. Growth trajectories and corti-
co-cortical connections. Paper presented at the 37th annual
Gatlinburg Conference on Research and Theory in Intellectual and
Developmental Disabilities, San Diego, CA.
Ling Z, Chang QA, Tong CW, Leurgans SE, Lipton JW, Carvey PM.
2004. Rotenone potentiates dopamine neuron loss in animals
exposed to lipopolysaccharide prenatally. Exp Neurol 190:373–83.
Lotspeich LJ, Kwon H, Schumann CM, Fryer SL, Goodlin-Jones BL,
Buonocore MH, and others. 2004. Investigation of neuroanatomi-
cal differences between autism and Asperger syndrome. Arch Gen
Psychiatry 61:291–8.
Makris N, Meyer JW, Bates JF, Yeterian EH, Kennedy DN, Caviness
VS. 1999. MRI-based topographic parcellation of human cerebral
white matter and nuclei II. Rationale and applications with sys-
tematics of cerebral connectivity. Neuroimage 9:18–45.
Manes F, Piven J, Vrancic D, Nanclares V, Plebst C, Starkstein SE.
1999. An MRI study of the corpus callosum and cerebellum in
mentally retarded autistic individuals. J Neuropsychiatry Clin
Neurosci 11:470–4.
Mason-Brothers A, Ritvo ER, Pingree C, Petersen PB, Jenson WR,
McMahon WM, and others. 1990. The UCLA-University of Utah
epidemiologic survey of autism: prenatal, perinatal, and postnatal
factors. Pediatrics 86:514–9.
McClelland JL. 2000. The basis of hyperspecificity in autism: a pre-
liminary suggestion based on properties of neural nets. J Autism
Dev Disord 30:497–502.
Meyer J, Makris N, Bates J, Caviness V, Kennedy D. 1999. Parcellation
of the human cerebral white matter: an MRI-based computational
system. Part I: technical foundations . Neuroimage 9:1–17.
Miles JH, Hadden LL, Takahashi TN, Hillman RE. 2000. Head cir-
cumference is an independent clinical finding associated with
autism. Am J Med Genet 95:339–50.
Minshew NJ, Goldstein G, Dombrowski SM, Panchalingam K,
Pettegrew JW. 1993. A preliminary 31P MRS study of autism: evi-
dence for undersynthesis and increased degradation of brain mem-
branes. Biol Psychiatry 33:762–73.
Minshew NJ, Goldstein G, Siegel D. 1997. Neuropsychologic func-
tioning in autism: profile of a complex informational processing
disorder. J Int Neuropsychol Soc 3:303–16.
Minshew NJ, Meyer J, Goldstein G. 2002. Abstract reasoning in
autism: a dissociation between concept formation and concept
identification. Neuropsychology 16:327–34.
Minshew 
NJ, 
Sung 
K, 
Jones 
BL, 
Furman 
JM. 
2004.
Underdevelopment of the postural control system in autism.
Neurology 63:2056–61.
Newschaffer CJ, Falb MD, Gurney JG. 2005. National autism preva-
lence trends from United States special education data. Pediatrics
115:e277–82.
Palmer RF, Blanchard S, Stein Z, Mandell D, Miller C. 2005.
Environmental mercury release, special education rates, and
autism disorder: an ecological study of Texas. Health and Place.
Forthcoming.
Patterson PH. 2002. Maternal infection: window on neuroimmune
interactions in fetal brain development and mental illness. Curr
Opin Neurobiol 12:115–8.
Perry G, Nunomura A, Harris P, Siedlak S, Smith M, Salomon R. 2005.
Is autism a disease of oxidative stress? Paper presented at the
Oxidative Stress in Autism Symposium, New York State Institute
for Basic Research in Developmental Disabilities; Staten Island,
NY; June 16, 2005.
Pierce K, Muller RA, Ambrose J, Allen G, Courchesne E. 2001. Face
processing occurs outside the fusiform “face area” in autism: evi-
dence from functional MRI. Brain 124:2059–73.
Piven J, Arndt S, Bailey J, Andreasen N. 1996. Regional brain enlarge-
ment in autism: a magnetic resonance imaging study. J Am Acad
Child Adolesc Psychiatry 35:530–6.
Piven J, Arndt S, Bailey J, Havercamp S, Andreasen NC, Palmer P.
1995. An MRI study of brain size in autism. Am J Psychiatry
152:1145–9.
Piven J, Bailey J, Ranson BJ, Arndt S. 1997. An MRI study of the cor-
pus callosum in autism. Am J Psychiatry 154:1051–6.
Plessen KJ, Wentzel-Larsen T, Hugdahl K, Feineigle P, Klein J, Staib
LH, and others. 2004. Altered interhemispheric connectivity in
individuals with Tourette’s disorder. Am J Psychiatry 161:2028–37.
Pletnikov MV, Rubin SA, Vogel MW, Moran TH, Carbone KM. 2002.
Effects of genetic background on neonatal Borna disease virus
infection-induced neurodevelopmental damage. II. Neurochemical
alterations and responses to pharmacological treatments. Brain Res
944:108–23.
Rapin I, editor. 1996. Preschool children with inadequate communica-
tion: developmental language disorder, autism, low IQ. London:
Mac Keith Press.
Redcay E, Courchesne E. 2005. When is the Brain Enlarged in
Autism? A Meta-Analysis of All Brain Size Reports. Biol
Psychiatry 58:1-9.
Rubenstein JL, Merzenich MM. 2003. Model of autism: increased
ratio of excitation/inhibition in key neural systems. Genes Brain
Behav 2:255–67.
Schultz RT, Gauthier I, Klin A, Fulbright RK, Anderson AW, Volkmar
F, and others. 2000. Abnormal ventral temporal cortical activity
during face discrimination among individuals with autism and
Asperger syndrome. Arch Gen Psychiatry 57:331–40.
Shah A, Frith U. 1993a. Why do autistic individuals show superior per-
formance on the block design task? J Child Psychol Psychiatry
34:1351–64.
Shanker G, Aschner JL, Syversen T, Aschner M. 2004. Free radical
formation in cerebral cortical astrocytes in culture induced by
methylmercury. Brain Res Mol Brain Res 128:48–57.
Shi L, Fatemi SH, Sidwell RW, Patterson PH. 2003. Maternal influen-
za infection causes marked behavioral and pharmacological
changes in the offspring. J Neurosci 23:297–302.
Silverman JM, Smith CJ, Schmeidler J, Hollander E, Lawlor BA,
Fitzgerald M, and others. 2002. Symptom domains in autism and
related conditions: evidence for familiality. Am J Med Genet
114:64–73.
Sokol DK, Dunn DW, Edwards-Brown M, Feinberg J. 2002. Hydrogen
proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy in autism: preliminary
evidence of elevated choline/creatine ratio. J Child Neurol
17:245–9.
Sparks BF, Friedman SD, Shaw DW, Aylward EH, Echelard D, Artru
AA, and others. 2002. Brain structural abnormalities in young chil-
dren with autism spectrum disorder. Neurology 59:184–92.
Starkstein SE, Vazquez S, Vrancic D, Nanclares V, Manes F, Piven J,
and others. 2000. SPECT findings in mentally retarded autistic
individuals. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci 12:370–5.
Steg J, Rapoport J. 1975. Minor physical anomalies in normal, neurot-
ic, learning disabled, and severely disturbed children. J Autism
Child Schizophr 5:299–307.
Stevenson RE, Schroer RJ, Skinner C, Fender D, Simensen RJ. 1997.
Autism and macrocephaly. Lancet 349:1744–5.
Vargas DL, Nascimbene C, Krishnan C, Zimmerman AW, Pardo CA.
2005. Neuroglial activation and neuroinflammation in the brain of
patients with autism. Ann Neurol 57:67–81.
Waiter GD, Williams JH, Murray AD, Gilchrist A, Perrett DI, Whiten
A. 2005. Structural white matter deficits in high-functioning indi-
viduals with autistic spectrum disorder: a voxel-based investiga-
tion. Neuroimage 24:455–61.
 at Bobst Library, New York University on February 14, 2015
nro.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 440
THE NEUROSCIENTIST
Large Brains in Autism
Walker H. 1977. Incidence of minor physical anomaly in autism. J
Autism Child Schizophr 7:165–76.
Webster RI, Shevell MI. 2004. Neurobiology of specific language
impairment. J Child Neurol 19:471–81.
Welshons WV, Thayer KA, Judy BM, Taylor JA, Curran EM, vom Saal
FS. 2003. Large effects from small exposures. I. Mechanisms for
endocrine-disrupting chemicals with estrogenic activity. Environ
Health Perspect 111:994–1006.
Williams RS, Hauser SL, Purpura DP, DeLong GR, Swisher CN. 1980.
Autism and mental retardation: neuropathologic studies performed
in four retarded persons with autistic behavior. Arch Neurol
37:749–53.
Woodhouse W, Bailey A, Rutter M, Bolton P, Baird G, Le Couteur A.
1996. Head circumference in autism and other pervasive develop-
mental disorders. J Child Psychol Psychiatry 37:665–71.
Wyss-Coray T, Mucke L. 2002. Inflammation in neurodegenerative
disease—a double-edged sword. Neuron 35:419–32.
Yakovlev PI, Lecours A-R. 1967. The myelogenetic cycles of regional
maturation of the brain. In: Minkowski A, editor. Regional devel-
opment of the brain in early life. Oxford, UK: Blackwell Scientific
Publications. p 3–70.
Zurich MG, Eskes C, Honegger P, Berode M, Monnet-Tschudi F. 2002.
Maturation-dependent neurotoxicity of lead acetate in vitro: impli-
cation of glial reactions. J Neurosci Res 70:108–16.
 at Bobst Library, New York University on February 14, 2015
nro.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
