 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
C L I N I C A L  M E D I C I N E
6 9 5
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
Introduction
The pandemic of obesity, type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and non-
alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) has frequently been associated 
with dietary intake of saturated fats (1) and specifically with dietary 
palm oil (PO) (2). According to current paradigms, chronic insulin 
resistance is the common feature of these diseases (3, 4) and relates 
to intracellular concentrations of triglycerides (TG) and lipotoxins 
(5). There is evidence that a chronic high-fat diet in mice and humans 
leads to insulin resistance via similar mechanisms (6, 7). Chronic 
insulin resistance comprises not only impaired muscle insulin action 
but also increased rates of endogenous glucose production (EGP) 
and gluconeogenesis (GNG) in obese and T2DM patients (8–10).
Still, only a few studies have addressed the initial effects of 
high-fat loading using either intravenous or enteral administration 
of lipids. These studies mainly focused on the role of skeletal mus-
cle by assessing intramyocellular TG content (11), substrate oxi-
dation, glycogen synthesis (12), or glucose disposal (13–17). Stud-
ies using parenteral administration of unsaturated lipids (18) or 
high-calorie mixed meals yielded conflicting results with regard to 
hepatic energy metabolism. One mixed-meal study found greater 
de novo lipogenesis without affecting hepatic glycogen metabo-
lism (12), while an intravenous lipid infusion study failed to detect 
any effect on hepatic insulin sensitivity (19). Another study com-
BACKGROUND. Dietary intake of saturated fat is a likely contributor to nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) and insulin 
resistance, but the mechanisms that initiate these abnormalities in humans remain unclear. We examined the effects of a 
single oral saturated fat load on insulin sensitivity, hepatic glucose metabolism, and lipid metabolism in humans. Similarly, 
initiating mechanisms were examined after an equivalent challenge in mice. 
METHODS. Fourteen lean, healthy individuals randomly received either palm oil (PO) or vehicle (VCL). Hepatic metabolism 
was analyzed using in vivo 13C/31P/1H and ex vivo 2H magnetic resonance spectroscopy before and during hyperinsulinemic-
euglycemic clamps with isotope dilution. Mice underwent identical clamp procedures and hepatic transcriptome analyses.
RESULTS. PO administration decreased whole-body, hepatic, and adipose tissue insulin sensitivity by 25%, 15%, and 34%, 
respectively. Hepatic triglyceride and ATP content rose by 35% and 16%, respectively. Hepatic gluconeogenesis increased 
by 70%, and net glycogenolysis declined by 20%. Mouse transcriptomics revealed that PO differentially regulates predicted 
upstream regulators and pathways, including LPS, members of the TLR and PPAR families, NF-κB, and TNF-related weak 
inducer of apoptosis (TWEAK). 
CONCLUSION. Saturated fat ingestion rapidly increases hepatic lipid storage, energy metabolism, and insulin resistance. This is 
accompanied by regulation of hepatic gene expression and signaling that may contribute to development of NAFLD. 
REGISTRATION. ClinicalTrials.gov NCT01736202. 
FUNDING. Germany: Ministry of Innovation, Science, and Research North Rhine–Westfalia, German Federal Ministry of Health, 
Federal Ministry of Education and Research, German Center for Diabetes Research, German Research Foundation, and German 
Diabetes Association. Portugal: Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology, FEDER – European Regional Development 
Fund, Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology, and Rede Nacional de Ressonância Magnética Nuclear.
Acute dietary fat intake initiates alterations in  
energy metabolism and insulin resistance
Elisa Álvarez Hernández,1,2 Sabine Kahl,1,2,3 Anett Seelig,4 Paul Begovatz,1,2 Martin Irmler,5 Yuliya Kupriyanova,1,2  
Bettina Nowotny,1,2,3 Peter Nowotny,1,2 Christian Herder,1,2 Cristina Barosa,6 Filipa Carvalho,6 Jan Rozman,4,5 Susanne Neschen,2,4,5 
John G. Jones,6,7 Johannes Beckers,2,5,8 Martin Hrabě de Angelis,2,5,8 and Michael Roden1,2,3
1Institute for Clinical Diabetology, German Diabetes Center, Leibniz Center for Diabetes Research at Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany. 2German Center for Diabetes Research, Munich-Neuherberg, 
Germany. 3Department of Endocrinology and Diabetology, Medical Faculty, Heinrich-Heine University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany. 4Helmholtz Zentrum Munich, German Research Center for Environmental 
Health (GmbH), Neuherberg, Germany. 5Institute of Experimental Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum Munich, German Research Center for Environmental Health (GmbH), Neuherberg, Germany. 6Center for 
Neurosciences and Cell Biology, UC Biotech, Cantanhede, Portugal. 7Portuguese Diabetes Association (APDP), Lisbon, Portugal. 8Technische Universität Munich, Chair of Experimental Genetics, Freising, Germany.
     Related Commentary: p. 454
Authorship note: E. Álvarez Hernández, S. Kahl, A. Seelig, and P
. Begovatz contributed 
equally to this work.
Conflict of interest: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists.
Submitted: July 27, 2016; Accepted: November 10, 2016.
Reference information: J Clin Invest. 2017;127(2):695–708.  
https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI89444.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
C L I N I C A L  M E D I C I N E
6 9 6
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
PO results in increased circulating TG, glucagon, and incretins. 
After PO administration, TG in plasma rose by 59% (area under 
the time curve [AUC], P < 0.001) and by 156% in chylomicrons 
(AUC, P = 0.009) (Figure 2A). The AUC for plasma free fatty acids 
(FFA) (Figure 2B) and insulin concentrations (Figure 2C) was 
unchanged, while the AUC for plasma C-peptide was 28% high-
er after PO ingestion versus VCL (P < 0.005, Figure 2D). Of note, 
FFA were increased at 300, 420, and 480 minutes. Blood glucose 
levels were not different between PO- and VCL-treated groups 
(Figure 2E). Plasma glucagon rose by 41% (AUC, P < 0.0001) 
only after PO ingestion (Figure 2F). Also, glucagon-like peptide 1 
(GLP-1) and gastric inhibitory polypeptide (GIP) levels were mark-
edly increased and remained elevated after PO ingestion (both 
 
P < 0.005) (Supplemental Figure 2; supplemental materi-
al available online with this article; https:/
/doi.org/10.1172/
JCI89444DS1). Circulating levels of TNF-α, IL-6, fetuin-A, chem-
erin, omentin, and cortisol were not different between PO and 
VCL groups (P > 0.5 for all) (Supplemental Table 1).
PO induces insulin resistance at whole-body, liver, and adipose 
tissue levels. Insulin sensitivity was measured using hyperinsu-
linemic-euglycemic clamp tests in healthy humans. Steady state 
was reached (Supplemental Figure 1), and pertinent parameters 
were analyzed during this time. PO ingestion reduced WBIS by 
25% compared with VCL treatment (P = 0.0005, Figure 3A). Fur-
thermore, after PO, volunteers also showed a decrease of 22% 
 
(P = 0.002) in the rate of glucose disappearance (Rd), mostly due 
to a 33% (P = 0.01) reduction in glucose oxidation (GOX), while 
the rate of nonoxidative glucose disposal remained unchanged 
paring subacute oral ingestion of fatty acids with different com-
positions found an increase in the glucose infusion rate only after 
polyunsaturated fatty acid ingestion (20).
To overcome possible limitations of the previous studies, such 
as the use of nonphysiological routes of lipid administration or 
mixed meals, which introduce protein and carbohydrates as con-
founders, we designed a translational study concept comprising a 
clinical trial involving healthy humans and a corresponding study 
involving nonobese nondiabetic mice. The randomized crossover 
clinical trial examined the effects of a single oral challenge with 
PO, which is mainly composed of saturated fatty acids (2), versus 
vehicle (VCL) ingestion on whole-body insulin sensitivity (WBIS) 
and hepatic insulin sensitivity. Moreover, the contributions of 
hepatic glucose fluxes, i.e., GNG, net glycogenolysis (GLYnet), 
and the futile exchange between glycogenogenic and glycogeno-
lytic pathways (glycogen cycling) to EGP as well as the effects of 
these fluxes on hepatocellular lipids (HCL) and phosphorous- 
containing metabolites were analyzed using combined in vivo 
multinuclear 13C/31P/1H and stable isotope tracers to assess plasma 
glucose appearance rates and sources of EGP. In the mouse study, 
we examined the effects of a similar oral saturated fat challenge on 
insulin sensitivity and hepatic transcriptome changes.
Results
Studies in humans. A total of 14 young, lean, insulin-sensitive male 
volunteers (Figure 1 and Table 1) received either an oral dose of PO 
(~1.18 g/kg BW) or an identical volume of VCL on 2 occasions in 
random order, spaced by an 8-week interval.
Figure 1. CONSORT flow diagram. Forty-four 
patients underwent screening, which included a 
medical history, BMI analyses, and bioimpedance 
and an oral glucose tolerance tests. Of the 44 
participants, 19 did not meet the inclusion crite-
ria, 2 declined to participate, and 2 were excluded 
for other reasons. Twenty-one participants were 
allocated to receive the intervention, two of 
whom did not receive the allocated intervention. 
An additional 5 volunteers were excluded due 
to changes in inclusion and exclusion criteria 
(n = 2), as well as changes in the experimental 
procedure, which yielded data that could not be 
compared with subsequently acquired data  
(n = 3). Ultimately, data from 14 individuals were 
analyzed, except for hepatic lipid and energy 
analyses (n = 12) and some hepatic glucose flux 
measurements (n = 9).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
C L I N I C A L  M E D I C I N E
6 9 7
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
by 45% (AUC, P = 0.004), while TG levels were not significantly 
different (AUC, P = 0.08) after PO (Figure 6, A and B). The post- 
intervention AUC for blood glucose and insulin was comparable 
between groups (Figure 6, C and D).
PO preferably induces hepatic insulin resistance. Insulin sensitiv-
ity was measured using hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp tests 
in unrestrained mice. WBIS in mice trended toward a reduction 
 
(P = 0.07) (Figure 7A). Whole-body glucose uptake, given by Rd, 
was not different between interventions (Figure 7B). Residual EGP 
during the clamp tended to be higher (P = 0.06) (Figure 7C), and 
insulin-mediated suppression of EGP was 25% lower (P = 0.04) 
after PO (Figure 7D), reflecting marked hepatic insulin resistance. 
PO ingestion did not affect insulin-induced FFA suppression 
(Figure 7E) but reduced insulin-induced TG suppression by 83% 
 
(P = 0.0039) (Figure 7F). Of note, glucose uptake in the gastrocne-
mius muscle (Supplemental Figure 3A) and white adipose tissue 
(Supplemental Figure 3B) as well as rates of glycolysis did not dif-
fer between the PO- and VCL-treated groups (Supplemental Fig-
ure 3C). Interestingly, PO administration did not change hepatic 
TG content in mice (Supplemental Figure 3D).
PO causes changes in the expression of hepatic transcription 
factors. Livers from both mouse cohorts were used for analysis 
on Affymetrix Gene 2.1 ST microarrays. A total of 273 and 327 
differentially regulated probe sets were obtained from each 
cohort. Array data were deposited in the NCBI’s Gene Expres-
sion Omnibus (GEO) database (GEO GSE80259). Canonical 
pathways predicted to be differentially regulated by Ingenuity 
software after PO included TNF-like weak inducer of apop-
tosis (TWEAK) and aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) under 
insulin-stimulated and noninsulin-stimulated conditions; phos-
pholipase and D-myoinositol-5 phosphate signaling under insu-
lin-stimulated conditions; and p38 MAPK, NF-κB, PPARα, and 
OX40 under noninsulin-stimulated conditions (Figure 8, A and 
B, all P < 0.05). Several upstream regulators involved in hepat-
ic fatty acid metabolism and inflammatory processes were pre-
dicted by Ingenuity software to be regulated by PO ingestion. 
These upstream regulators included LPS, which was activated 
with the most certainty, with a Z score of 1.9 and 2.3 under insu-
lin- and noninsulin-stimulated conditions, respectively, TLR 
family members (TLR9 and TLR3 under insulin-stimulated 
conditions as well as TLR4 under noninsulin-stimulated condi-
tions), PPARα, and FOXO1 (all P < 0.01) (Figure 8, C and D). 
(Figure 3B). EGP increased by 10% (P = 0.03) at 240 minutes and 
by 82% (P = 0.008) at 480 minutes after PO compared with VCL 
treatment (Figure 3C). After PO, insulin-stimulated suppression of 
EGP was 15% lower than that detected after VCL (P < 0.01, Fig-
ure 3D). Finally, insulin-stimulated suppression of FFA (Figure 3E) 
and TG (Figure 3F) was 30% (P = 0.0001) and 80% (P = 0.026) 
lower after PO than after VCL treatment.
PO augments the contribution of GNG to EGP. In order to fur-
ther analyze the PO-induced increase in EGP, we measured the 
contributions of gluconeogenic and glycogenolytic fluxes. We 
found that GNG increased by approximately 70% (P = 0.01), while 
GLYnet decreased by approximately 20% (P < 0.05) after PO. Gly-
cogen phosphorylase (GP) flux tended to be lower in the PO arm 
 
(P = 0.085). The contribution of glycogen cycling to total GP flux 
was negligible in both study arms (Figure 4).
PO increases lipid oxidation rates. The respiratory quotient 
(RQ), defined as the rate of CO2 production/O2 consumption, 
was comparable in the period after PO or VCL ingestion but was 
reduced during the clamp only after PO (Figure 5A). Resting ener-
gy expenditure (REE) and lipid oxidation (LOX) rates increased 
markedly at 300 minutes after PO ingestion and remained elevat-
ed into the clamp (at 420 min) after PO (Figure 5, B and C). GOX 
decreased during the clamp following PO ingestion compared 
with GOX after VCL ingestion (Figure 5D).
PO raises hepatic ATP and lipid content. HCL and hepatic γATP 
increased by 33% (P < 0.01) and 16% (P = 0.009) from –120 min-
utes to 240 minutes after PO, respectively. At 240 minutes, γATP 
tended to be higher in the VCL arm (P = 0.06), while HCL lev-
els did not differ between PO and VCL arms. Hepatic inorganic 
phosphate (Pi) and γATP/Pi did not change after PO or VCL (Table 
2). When comparing the mean difference between –120 and 240 
minutes after PO or VCL between interventions, only the change 
in HCL levels tended to be increased (Δ % HCL PO vs. VCL, 
 
P = 0.085; Δ γATP, P = 0.57; Δ Pi, P = 0.14; Δ γATP/Pi, P = 0.22).
Studies in mice. Two mouse cohorts received PO or VCL via 
gavage. One cohort then underwent hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic 
 
clamp tests under unrestrained conditions, whereas tissue and 
blood sample analysis was done for the other cohort.
PO increases circulating lipid levels. Plasma FFA levels increased 
Table 1. Anthropometric and blood parameters of study participants
Parameter
Mean ± SEM
n (men/women)
14 (14/0)
Age (yr)
25.8 ± 1.4
BMI (kg/m2)
22.5 ± 0.3
Waist circumference (cm)
79.5 ± 1.4
Lean BW (kg)
59.2 ± 2.1
TG (mg/dl)
78.4 ± 9.8
FFA (μmol/l)
386.9 ± 32.9
ALT (U/l)
24.4 ± 3.2
AST (U/l)
26.0 ± 2.5
Fasting blood glucose (mg/dl)
76.1 ± 2.0
2-hour postprandial blood glucose (mg/dl)
76.4 ± 4.7
HCL (% H2O)
0.60 ± 0.09
ALT, alanine aminotransferase; AST, aspartate.
Table 2. Hepatocellular lipids and hepatic phosphorus- 
containing metabolites
Time (min)
–120
240
 Group
VCL
PO
VCL
PO
HCL (% H2O)
0.97 ± 0.20
0.93 ± 0.23
1.04 ± 0.21
1.26 ± 0.32A,D
γATP (mmol/l)
2.86 ± 0.17
2.79 ± 0.14
3.17 ± 0.16C
3.25 ± 0.16B
Pi (mmol/l)
2.35 ± 0.04
2.61 ± 0.07
2.61 ± 0.15
2.65 ± 0.20
γATP/Pi
1.21 ± 0.07
1.07 ± 0.04
1.26 ± 0.10
1.35 ± 0.17
Data represent the mean ± SEM. n = 12. AP < 0.01, BP < 0.05, and CP = 0.066, 
for –120 minutes compared with 240 minutes; DP = 0.085, for the mean 
difference from –120 to 240 minutes between groups.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
C L I N I C A L  M E D I C I N E
6 9 8
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
expression and signaling, which could contribute to the 
promotion of NAFLD.
PO induced a marked increase in plasma FFA con-
centrations in both humans and mice, but no alterations 
in circulating inflammatory markers or adipokines, such 
as TNF-α, IL-6, fetuin A, chemerin, and omentin. This 
finding indicates that the acute effects of PO are medi-
ated by metabolic rather than endocrine changes and is 
partly in line with findings obtained after intravenous 
infusion of soybean oil, which showed no changes in 
circulating cytokines (19), or after ingestion of cream, 
which resulted in increased expression of TNF-α but not 
IL-6 (28). Interspecies differences could also be due to 
the administration of emulsified versus pure PO.
Notably, a single dose of PO markedly altered 
hepatic glucose fluxes and resulted in increased rates 
of GNG, reduced GLYnet, and a corresponding trend 
toward reduced GP flux. This finding extends our pre-
vious results on the effects of parenteral administration 
of polyunsaturated lipids (29). The present study also 
provides a comprehensive analysis of in vivo hepatic 
glucose and glycogen fluxes in humans that includes an 
assessment of glycogen cycling, which ensured correct 
estimation of GLY and GNG contributions to EGP (30). 
In chronic insulin-resistant states, such as occurs in 
T2DM or type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM), elevation of 
GNG and EGP coexists with enhanced glycogen cycling 
(30). Surprisingly, oral lipid loading stimulated GNG 
and hepatic insulin resistance without affecting glyco-
gen cycling, which remained negligible, as was report-
ed for healthy humans in the fasted state (30, 31). This 
indicates that healthy humans can rapidly downreg-
ulate GLY under conditions of elevated GNG to avoid 
futile cycling. The absence of any effect on glycogen 
cycling might be due to the prevailing euglycemia and 
basal peripheral insulinemia compared with the hyper-
glycemic hypoinsulinemic conditions in the aforementioned 
study. Consequently, the augmented glycogen cycling observed 
in insulin-resistant states reflects chronically abnormal hepat-
ic energy metabolism rather than an immediate physiologi-
cal response to changes in dietary lipid supply. Of note, these 
changes occur in the presence of higher glucagon concentra-
tions, which are likely due to FFA-induced glucagon stimula-
tion (32). Specifically, the increase in GNG and the decrease in 
GLYnet upon PO administration could, at least in part, result 
from the increase in circulating glucagon. Even small changes in 
plasma glucagon can modify GLYnet independently of insulin in 
healthy humans (33).
Interestingly, ingestion of PO increased hepatic γATP and 
HCL concentrations, along with the induction of LOX and insulin 
resistance. Recently, we reported that a test involving ingestion of a 
mixed-meal with 35% fat content increases hepatic γATP exclusive-
ly in insulin-resistant obese humans but not in lean, nondiabetic or 
T2DM individuals (34). This suggests that the stimulatory effect of 
saturated fat on hepatic energy metabolism is dose dependent and 
may be linked to the onset of insulin resistance, but not the insulin 
sensitivity state per se. In line with this, recent studies report the 
Except for LPS, the analysis did not reveal whether the pathways 
and upstream regulators were activated or inhibited.
Under insulin- and noninsulin-stimulated conditions, PO 
resulted in upregulation of the following transcripts: miR1970, 
LPS-regulated genes (Ifit3, Clec4a3, Slc22a3, and C3ar1) (21–24), 
G0s2, and Ar16, while Tweak gene expression was downregulated. 
Opposing regulatory transcripts, i.e., those that were upregulated 
under insulin-stimulated conditions and downregulated under 
noninsulin-stimulated conditions, were also found and includ-
ed, for example, transcripts involved in cell growth (Map3k13 and 
Slc30af) (25, 26) and FFA metabolism and development of NAFLD 
(fatty acid–binding protein 5 or Fabp5) (27), as well as the predict-
ed pseudogenes Gm3601 and H2-K2 (Figure 8E).
Discussion
This study demonstrates that a single oral dose of saturated fat 
increases hepatic TG accumulation, insulin resistance, GNG, and 
ATP concentrations in the human liver. Ingestion of saturated fat 
also induces peripheral insulin resistance in skeletal muscle and 
adipose tissue. In mice, a single saturated fat load preferentially 
induces hepatic insulin resistance and also affects hepatic gene 
Figure 2. Time courses of circulating metabolites and hormones in humans. VCL 
(gray triangles) or PO (black circles) was administered at 0 minutes to lean, healthy 
men, and the hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp was started at 360 minutes. TG cir-
culating in plasma (solid line) and in chylomicrons (dashed line). The AUC was 59% and 
156% higher after PO ingestion, respectively (A). Circulating FFA (B). Time courses for 
insulin (C), C-peptide (AUC 28% higher after PO) (D), blood glucose (E), and glucagon 
(AUC 41% higher after PO) (F). Values represent the mean ± SEM. n = 14; chylomicron 
TG n = 6. ***P < 0.001, **P < 0.005, and *P < 0.05, by paired, 2-tailed t test. Large 
asterisks refer to AUC differences; small asterisks refer to differences per time point.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
C L I N I C A L  M E D I C I N E
6 9 9
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
insulin resistance. This may have resulted from spe-
cies differences in insulin-sensitive tissues and lip-
id flux–buffering capacities of adipose tissue. Under 
physiological conditions, adipose tissue can buffer 
fatty acid flux into the bloodstream, thereby avoiding 
excessive exposure to lipotoxic stimuli. This is accom-
plished by suppression of FFA and TG release as well 
as increased clearance of circulating TG (37). Under 
the present experimental conditions, the high-dose PO 
likely impaired all 3 mechanisms in humans and to some 
extent in mice. The higher plasma TG concentrations 
observed in our study could have been due to higher rates 
of intestinal lipid absorption, altered hepatic lipid han-
dling, or lower insulin sensitivity of the adipose tissue, 
as reflected by reduced insulin-induced suppression of 
FFA. Humans and mice both featured impaired insulin- 
induced TG suppression after PO ingestion. This is part-
ly in line with findings in humans after a fat-free test 
meal, in which T2DM patients were also unable to sup-
press plasma TG in contrast to lean, healthy men (38). 
The inability of our cohort to suppress TG secretion may 
have therefore at least partly resulted from an altered 
apolipoprotein metabolism associated with insulin- 
resistant states and with decreased insulin-mediated 
fatty acid trapping by adipose tissue (37). In order to 
maintain low levels of HCL, the liver can only make use 
of either LOX or of lipid export of apolipoproteins (39). 
Here, we show that a single dose of PO induces both 
mechanisms, but nonetheless leads to increased HCL 
content. Of note, these changes occurred in the face of 
increased C-peptide, but unchanged insulin concen-
trations. The mismatch between insulin and C-peptide 
concentrations is likely explained by increased insulin 
clearance and turnover. While lower concentrations 
of palmitate decrease receptor-mediated insulin deg-
radation in rat hepatocytes, higher concentrations of 
palmitate concentrations enhance this degradation 
(40). This can also explain the lack of increased insulin 
concentrations in the face of increased GLP-1 and GIP. 
In humans, most studies on insulin extraction used infusions of 
mainly polyunsaturated lipids, which revealed either unchanged or 
lower splanchnic insulin extraction (17, 41). Likewise, oral intake of 
soybean oil containing 61% polyunsaturated fatty acids resulted in 
increased concentrations of both insulin and C-peptide (19).
The marked alterations in hepatic glucose fluxes in humans 
and the predominant hepatic insulin resistance in mice raise inter-
est in the effects of saturated fatty acids on hepatic gene expres-
sion, which has been previously examined mostly upon exposure 
to polyunsaturated fatty acids (42). The present study showed that 
a single dose of PO differentially regulated the canonical path-
ways TWEAK and AHR. The AHR pathway promotes NAFLD via 
upregulation of fatty acid transport (42), which is in line with the 
observed upregulation of Fabp5 and increase in HCL content in 
humans. The TNF-related TWEAK is known to promote cell turn-
over homeostasis through the NF-κB and p38 MAPK pathways and 
could serve as a biomarker of obesity and T2DM (43). TWEAK was 
also found to be associated with reduced TG accumulation in pal-
upregulation of hepatic mitochondrial capacity in obese, insulin- 
resistant, but not nondiabetic, humans in the absence of progressive 
NAFLD (35) and that T2DM patients have decreased ATP turnover 
associated with increased HCL (36). Collectively, these data suggest 
that an acute rise in lipid availability and oxidation can upregulate 
γATP production and HCL deposition in young, healthy individu-
als with conserved mitochondrial plasticity, even after the develop-
ment of acute insulin resistance. The minor increase in HCL has to 
be considered in the context of lean, insulin-sensitive individuals. 
In this case, it is reasonable to assume that an increase in HCL after 
just 1 dose of PO probably contributes to altered hepatic metabo-
lism. Furthermore, PO, like meal ingestion, probably induced indi-
vidual time courses of increases, so that maximum γATP increases 
may have been missed in the absence of continuous magnetic res-
onance spectroscopy (MRS) monitoring, which would have been 
impossible, given the current experimental design.
Upon PO ingestion, human volunteers developed generalized 
insulin resistance, while mice responded primarily with hepatic 
Figure 3. Parameters of insulin resistance in human volunteers after VCL or PO during 
clamp experiments. VCL, white bars; PO, black bars. (A) WBIS, reflected by the M value. 
(B) Rd and its components GOX and nonoxidative glucose disposal (NOXGD). (C) EGP 
denoting hepatic insulin sensitivity at baseline (–180 min), after PO or VCL ingestion 
(240 min), and under insulin-stimulated conditions during the clamp (480 min). (D) 
Insulin-induced EGP suppression as an indicator of hepatic insulin sensitivity. (E) 
Insulin-induced FFA suppression reflecting adipose tissue insulin sensitivity and (F) the 
percentage of insulin-induced TG suppression. Data shown represent the mean ± SEM. 
n = 14. ****P = 0.0005, **P < 0.01, and *P < 0.05; #P < 0.05, for GOX PO versus VCL.  
P values were determined by 2-tailed t test and ANOVA.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
C L I N I C A L  M E D I C I N E
7 0 0
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
mitic acid–treated hepatocytes and may be involved in hepatic tis-
sue repair (44). The present study cannot prove the activation sta-
tus of TWEAK, thus making it difficult to interpret the observed 
downregulation of the Tweak gene and its receptor (Tnfrsf12a). 
However, recent findings of decreased circulating TWEAK con-
centrations correlating with obesity and concomitant NAFLD 
(45) could suggest that inhibition of the TWEAK pathway might 
increase susceptibility to hepatic injury.
The expression analyses further predicted PO-induced acti-
vation of LPS with or without insulin stimulation. This study also 
found upregulation of Ifit3, Clec4a3, Slc22a3, and C3ar1, genes 
regulated by LPS-stimulated macrophages. These data are in line 
with the reported increase in LPS concentrations upon high-fat 
ingestion (28, 46) resulting from lipid-induced disruption of the 
intestinal barrier (28). Interestingly, LPS is also known to decrease 
TWEAK signaling (47).
Downstream from LPS, NF-κB was found to be differentially 
regulated by PO. Generally known for its proinflammatory proper-
ties, NF-κB is also an important antiapoptotic factor (48, 49). LPS 
activation and TNF collectively lead to increased TLR4 expres-
sion, proinflammatory cytokine production, and inflammation, 
on the one hand, and NF-κB activation and cytoprotection on the 
other (48). NF-κB activation leads to modest and short-lived JNK 
activation, in turn inducing antiapoptotic genes, such as c-FLIP 
(a caspase 8 inhibitor) and X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis (48). 
As a result, the active NF-κB pathway is critical for LPS-induced 
resistance to hepatotoxicity (50). Additionally, a high-fat diet and 
obesity are associated with prolonged JNK activation and TNF- 
induced cell death (51, 52). This alludes to an adaptation, which is 
lost upon repeated and/or sustained exposure to hepatotoxic stim-
uli leading to NAFLD and steatohepatitis. Furthermore, the consti-
tutive activation of NF-κB has been associated with severe hepatic 
and moderate peripheral insulin resistance (53). The present data 
suggest that a single PO challenge promotes pathways of LPS- 
and TLR4-mediated inflammation and cytotoxicity, which are 
buffered by the activation of NF-κB, which in turn contributes to 
insulin resistance. This study also found altered regulation of other 
putative cytoprotective mechanisms including the phospholipase 
C4 pathway, which is important for hepatic regeneration (54), and 
PPARα, which serves as both a canonical pathway and an upstream 
regulator protecting against NAFLD progression (29).
Our analyses of the differential regulation of single genes by 
saturated fat revealed several genes of interest. The observed 
upregulation of G0s2 may contribute to decreased TG clearance, 
thereby promoting NAFLD (55). The observed greater expression of 
Arl6 in the present study may also serve to protect against NAFLD, 
Figure 5. Time course of parame-
ters of energy metabolism in lean, 
healthy volunteers after VCL and 
PO. VCL, white bars; PO, black bars. 
Parameters were obtained by perform-
ing an indirect calorimetry. The time 
points indicated are basal (–5 min), 
300 minutes after intervention, and 
420 minutes under insulin-stimulated 
conditions. Effects on RQ (A), REE (B), 
LOX (C), and GOX (D). Data represent 
the mean ± SEM. n = 14. ***P < 0.001, 
**P < 0.005, and *P < 0.05, by ANOVA.
Figure 4. Hepatic glucose fluxes in humans. The rates of GNG, GP 
flux, glycogen cycling (cycling), and GLYnet were analyzed using in vivo 
13C/31P/1H and ex vivo 2H MRS combined with 2H2O ingestion, after either 
VCL (white bars) or PO (black bars) treatment, in lean, insulin-sensitive, 
male volunteers. Data represent the mean ± SEM. n = 14; GP and cycling  
n = 9. *P < 0.05 and #P = 0.085, by 2-tailed t test.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
C L I N I C A L  M E D I C I N E
7 0 1
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
because loss of function of this gene has been implicated in obesity, 
NAFLD, and diabetes in Bardet-Biedl syndrome (56). Of note, the 
descriptive nature of the transcriptome analyses and expression 
profiling carried out in our study does not allow final conclusions 
to be drawn as to causality. That is to say, given the results of this 
study, it is impossible to single out 1 gene, transcription factor, or 
pathway that is activated by acute exposure to PO and that can be 
causally linked to either insulin resistance or steatosis.
This study offers the advantages of the translational approach 
in mice and humans, the use of near-physiologic administration 
of saturated fat, and the comprehensive phenotyping of in vivo 
hepatic glucose and energy metabolism. This study’s limitations 
include the relatively small number of humans and mice, which 
might have prevented the detection of discrete effects of an acute 
lipid challenge. Nevertheless, the results demonstrate marked 
metabolic and transcriptional changes associated with PO treat-
ment, even in these small groups. Another caveat of this study is 
that the hepatic expression data obtained in mice are not neces-
sarily transferable to humans, as we could not obtain liver speci-
mens from our human participants for ethical reasons. The lack of 
proteomic analysis of the targets identified by Ingenuity software 
constitutes another limitation of this study. Each pathway and reg-
ulator necessitates a thorough study of their role in the pathogen-
esis of insulin resistance and NAFLD, a task that must be tackled 
in subsequent studies.
The practical implication of this work is that the PO challenge 
used in this study most likely resembles the effects of ingestion of 
a meal rich in saturated fat, e.g., an 8-slice pepperoni pizza, con-
taining approximately 16.72 g of saturated fat/110 g (57) or a meal 
consisting of a 110-g cheeseburger and a large portion of French 
fries, containing 18–25 g and 7–14 g per 1,000 kcal of saturated fat, 
respectively (58). One such meal would probably be sufficient to 
induce transient insulin resistance and impair hepatic metabo-
lism, which necessitates the activation of hepatic defense mecha-
nisms. Other simultaneously ingested biomacromolecules would 
exacerbate this metabolic challenge (59). The amount and types 
of fatty acids and carbohydrates in one such meal are in contrast to 
the diet recommendations of the American Diabetes Association 
(ADA). In this diet, daily intake of saturated fatty acids should not 
exceed 10% of total caloric intake. Furthermore, intake of mono-
unsaturated fatty acids and carbohydrates from vegetables, fruits, 
whole grains, and legumes is recommended (60). We presume 
that lean, healthy individuals are able to compensate adequately 
for excessive intake of saturated fatty acids, however, sustained 
and repeated exposure to such nutrients will ultimately lead to 
chronic insulin resistance and NAFLD. Recent studies have shown 
hepatic energy metabolism alterations and induction of insulin 
resistance in obese and lean patients after ingestion of a simple 
hypercaloric mixed meal containing 24 g of fat or a drink con-
taining 1 g/kg BW of a mixture of palmitate and soybean oil (34, 
61, 62). These results suggest that even lower doses of fatty acids 
are capable of inducing alterations similar to those observed with 
ingestion of pure PO.
In conclusion, the initial effects of ingestion of saturated fat 
include (a) augmented hepatic energy metabolism and lipid stor-
age; (b) impaired hepatic insulin sensitivity, along with increased 
GNG flux; and (c) altered hepatic expression of genes regulating 
inflammatory and protective pathways, which predispose to and 
protect against the development of NAFLD.
Methods
Studies in humans
Volunteers. Fourteen lean, young male volunteers were enrolled in this 
randomized, controlled crossover trial (Figure 1 and Figure 9). Partic-
ipants were recruited from March 2012 through December 2013. The 
sample size calculation was based on a 2-sided, paired t test, assum-
ing a mean difference of EGP of 0.1 and a standard deviation of 0.11, 
resulting in a sample size of 12 to reach a power of 80%. The random 
allocation sequence was generated using SAS software (SAS Institute) 
by our in-house statistician. The possible order of treatments was 
randomly permuted in 2 blocks, with 1 extra block being generated 
to account for dropouts. Allocation was not concealed. Participants 
were enrolled and assigned to their treatment order by the study phy-
Figure 6. Circulating metabolites and hormones in mice. VCL 
(white bars) or PO (black bars) was administered via gavage 
to identical mouse cohorts at minute 0, after a 6-hour fast. 
Hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp experiments were per-
formed from 120 to 240 minutes. (A) The TG AUC tended to be 
higher after PO than after VCL. (B) The FFA AUC was increased 
after PO administration. Blood glucose (C) and insulin (D) 
levels were not different between groups. Data represent the 
mean ± SEM. n = 6–10. **P < 0.005 and #P = 0.08, by 2-tailed 
t test.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
C L I N I C A L  M E D I C I N E
7 0 2
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
sician. Inclusion criteria were age between 20 and 40 years and a BMI 
between 20 and 25 kg/m2. Exclusion criteria included dysglycemia, 
a family history of T2DM, acute, or chronic diseases, and the use 
of pharmacological agents known to affect insulin sensitivity, lipid 
metabolism, or immunological function. All participants underwent 
screening that included recording of clinical history, physical exam-
ination, bioimpedance assessment of lean body mass, routine labo-
ratory tests, and a 75-g oral glucose tolerance test. Upon inclusion, 
participants were instructed to maintain their usual physical activity 
during the study period and to ingest a carbohydrate-rich diet for 3 
days before each study day. They were then randomly assigned to 1 
intervention and 8 weeks later to the other intervention. Basal hepatic 
ATP and HCL values from the study by Gancheva et al. were used as 
part of the control group data (63). 
Experimental design. Participants arrived at the Clinical Research 
Center at 5 pm and received a standardized dinner containing approxi-
mately 684 kcal at 5:30 pm. At 8:00 pm, 10:00 pm, and 12:00 am, vol-
unteers drank 1.6 g/kg body water of 2H2O (99.9%; Sigma-Aldrich), up 
to a total dose of 5 g/kg body water in order to assess GNG (19) (Figure 
9). Body water was assumed to be 60% in all of our male study cohort 
participants (30). Starting at 5:00 am (defined as time point 
–180 minutes) of the next day, participants drank 200 ml 
of water containing 0.5% 2H2O every 60 minutes through-
out the experiment to maintain an isotopic equilibrium of 
body water. At –180, 200, and 400 minutes, participants 
received an oral dose of acetaminophen (500 mg). For EGP 
calculation, participants received a 5-minute priming bolus 
(0.36 mg/kg BW/min × fasting plasma glucose [mg/dl]) of 
 
D-[6,6-2H2]glucose (99% enriched in 2H glucose; Cam-
bridge Isotope Laboratories) at –180 minutes, followed by 
a continuous infusion (0.036 mg/kg BW/min) (64). At zero 
time, participants drank either VCL or PO within 10 min-
utes. Patients with more than 70 kg BW drank 92 g, and 
those with less than 70 kg BW drank 80 g of PO (~1.18g/kg 
BW; Biopalm; Landkrone) (65). To facilitate ingestion, PO 
was heated to 60°C, mixed with 1.84 g or 1.6 g emulsifier 
(Glice, Texturas; Albert y Ferran Adria), 9 or 8 g sugar-free 
vanilla syrup (Torani), and 81.2 or 70.4 ml bottled still water, 
for a PO mix of 92 g and 80 g, respectively. Oil test drinks 
were stirred constantly and served hot. For VCL administra-
tion, PO was substituted with 173.2 ml or 150.4 ml bottled 
still water, respectively. At 360 minutes, a hyperinsulinemic- 
euglycemic clamp began (10-min insulin bolus: 40 U/hour; 
continuous insulin infusion: 40 mU/m2/min; Insuman Rap-
id; Sanofi). Blood glucose concentration was adjusted to 90 
mg/dl by adapting the glucose infusion rate (GIR) using 20% 
glucose (B. Braun AG) enriched with 2% D-[6,6-2H2]glucose, 
as described previously (19). Urine was sampled from –120 
to 0 minutes, from 270 to 375 minutes, and from 390 to 510 
minutes for the quantification of GNG and GLY. Blood was 
sampled at –60 and 360 minutes for assessment of GNG.
Indirect calorimetry. Indirect calorimetry (IC) was 
performed in the canopy mode using Vmax Encore 29n 
(CareFusion), as described previously (19), during base-
line (at –170 min), intervention (at 200 min), and steady-
state clamp conditions (at 450 min) for 20 minutes after a 
10-minute adaptation period. RQ, REE, and substrate oxi-
dation rates were calculated as reported previously (19). Nonoxidative 
glucose disposal was calculated from the difference between rates of 
glucose disappearance and carbohydrate oxidation. 
Metabolites and hormones. Blood samples were immediately 
chilled, centrifuged, and the supernatants stored at either –20°C or 
–80°C until analysis. Venous blood glucose concentration was mea-
sured immediately using the glucose oxidase method (EKF Biosen 
C-Line glucose analyzer; EKF Diagnostics) (19). TG concentration 
was analyzed enzymatically on a Roche Cobas c 311 Analyzer (Roche 
Diagnostics). Serum chylomicron content was determined from the 
TG concentration in the first fraction of density-gradient ultracentrif-
ugation (66). FFA were assayed enzymatically (Wako) using orlistat to 
prevent in vitro lipolysis (19). Serum C-peptide, insulin, and plasma 
glucagon levels were measured by radioimmunoassay (EMD Milli-
pore). Cortisol levels in serum samples were measured by immunoas-
say using a Siemens Immulite 2000XPi Analyzer (67). GLP-1 and GIP 
were measured by ELISA (TECOmedical; EMD Millipore) (64). ELISA 
was used to measure plasma concentrations of  IL-6, TNF-α, fetuin-A 
(all using Quantikine HS ELISA kits from R&D Systems), omentin, 
and chemerin (19) (both using ELISA kits from BioVendor). Intra- 
Figure 7. Parameters of insulin resistance in mice. VCL (white bars) or PO (black bars) 
was administered via gavage to identical mouse cohorts at minute 0, after a 6-hour 
fast. Hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp experiments were performed from 120 to 
240 minutes. The M value trended toward a reduction after PO (A), while the Rd was 
unchanged (B). EGP at basal (0 min) and at clamp steady state (210–240 min) (C). EGP 
suppression was impaired after PO (D). Insulin-induced FFA suppression (E) and TG 
suppression (F) are also shown. Data represent the mean ± SEM. n = 9–10. **P < 0.005, 
*P < 0.05, and #P = 0.07, by 2-tailed t test.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
C L I N I C A L  M E D I C I N E
7 0 3
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
Gas chromatography–mass spectrometry. Determination of atom 
percentage enrichment (APE) of 2H in blood glucose was done after 
deproteinization and derivatization to the aldonitrile-pentaacetate. 
The analyses were performed on a Hewlett-Packard 6890 gas chro-
matograph equipped with a 25 m/0.25 mm/0.12 μm CPSil5CB capil-
lary column (Chrompack; Varian) and interfaced with a Hewlett Pack-
ard 5975 mass selective detector. Selected ion monitoring was used to 
determine enrichments of fragments C3 to C6 (Supplemental Figure 
1, A and B). Average mass units were 187 for endogenous glucose and 
189 for D-[6,6-2H2]glucose as described previously (19). 
MRS. All measurements were conducted with the volunteers lying 
in a supine position within a whole-body 3.0 T Achieva MRI machine 
(Philips Healthcare). Twelve volunteers were studied, including all par-
ticipants for whom flux measurements were obtained. The effects of PO 
or VCL on HCL and hepatic ATP concentrations were assessed at base-
line and 360 minutes after intervention. For hepatic 1H MRS, a Q-body 
coil was used for shimming and HCL acquisition. Clinical T2-weighted 
 
turbo spin-echo (TSE) images were obtained in the transverse and cor-
onal planes for localization and repositioning of the voxels used for 
HCL and ATP measurements. Respiratory-triggered 1H spectra were 
acquired with a single-voxel (30 × 30 × 20 mm3) stimulated echo acqui-
sition mode (STEAM) sequence. The variables were as follow: repetition 
time (TR) 3,000 ms, echo time 10 ms, and signal averages 16. To accu-
assay and interassay coefficients of variation (CV) for all cytokines 
were 2% to 7.2% and 4% to 14.4%, respectively. 
Glucose and glucuronide 2H enrichment measurements by ex vivo 2H 
MRS. The positional enrichment of urinary acetaminophen glucuron-
ide and plasma glucose, resulting from ingestion of 2H2O and acetamin-
ophen at the level of glucose 6-phosphate (G6P), was assessed as previ-
ously described (30) to estimate the contributions of GNG and GLY to 
EGP. Plasma glucose was derivatized to monoacetone glucose (MAG), 
while urinary acetaminophen glucuronide was converted into 5-O- 
acetyl monoacetone glucuronic lactone (MAGLA) (68). When plasma 
glucose enrichment was inadequate, urinary glucuronide enrichment 
was analyzed instead, since both methods yield identical estimates of 
EGP contributions (68, 69). In total, 9 participants yielded sufficient 
data for NMR analysis, 5 of them for glucuronide. 2H spectra were 
obtained with a Bruker Avance III HD 500 spectrometer equipped 
with a 2H-selective 5-mm probe incorporating a 19F lock channel. For 
MAGLA samples, 5,000–10,000 free-induction decays (FIDs) were 
collected. For MAG samples, 20,000–40,000 FIDs were collected. 
Positional 2H enrichments of MAG and MAGLA derived from plasma 
glucose and urinary anion gap (AG) were determined using the methyl 
signals as an intramolecular standard (30). All spectra were analyzed 
using the curve-fitting routine supplied with the NUTS PC-based NMR 
Spectral Analysis Program (Acorn NMR). 
Figure 8. Transcriptome analysis after PO in murine 
hepatic tissue. Tissue was harvested from clamped and 
nonclamped murine cohorts. (A) Relevant canonical 
pathways predicted by Ingenuity software in hepatic 
samples from mice after PO under insulin- (black bars) and 
noninsulin-stimulated (gray bars) conditions. (B) Predicted 
canonical pathways with a P value of less than 0.05 during 
insulin-stimulated (turquoise) and noninsulin-stimulated 
conditions (blue). (C) Noteworthy predicted upstream 
regulators and (D) predicted upstream regulators with a  
P value of less than 0.01 (asterisk denotes an activation  
Z score above 1.9). (E) Genes that were upregulated in both 
cohorts (green), downregulated in both cohorts (yellow), 
and downregulated under insulin-stimulated, but upregu-
lated under noninsulin-stimulated, conditions (green and 
yellow, respectively) after PO treatment, with a P value 
of less than 0.05, a fold change greater than 1.3, and an 
average expression in at least 1 group of greater than 4  
(n = 9–10, 273, and 327 probe sets, respectively).
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
C L I N I C A L  M E D I C I N E
7 0 4
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
Calculations. Total AUC were calculated using the trapezoidal 
method. FFA and TG suppression was calculated from 100 – (clamp 
FFA or TG concentrations × 100)/basal FFA or TG concentrations, 
respectively. Glycogen cycling, i.e., simultaneous fluxes through gly-
cogen synthase (GS) and GP, was assessed. In order to measure glyco-
gen cycling, isotopic tracer measurements of EGP, GNG, and GP fluxes 
must be supplemented by a measurement of GLYnet (in this case, 13C 
MRS) (71). GLYnet was calculated from the linear regression of hepatic 
glycogen content at –2, 0, 2, and 4 hours of PO or VCL ingestion using 
the least mean squares method. Rates of GLYnet were normalized to 
liver volume and BW and are expressed in μmol/kg/min (61).
Whole-body glucose disposal (M value) was calculated from glu-
cose infusion rates during the clamp steady state. The rates of EGP 
(in μmol/kg/min) were calculated by dividing the tracer infusion 
rate of D-[6,6-2H2]glucose times its enrichment to the hydrogens 
bound to carbon 6, by the mean percentage of enrichment of plas-
ma D-[6,6-2H2]glucose and then subtracting the tracer infusion rate 
(19). To account for the incorporation of 2H from 2H2O by GNG during 
the overnight fast, background D-[6,6-2H2]glucose was determined 
before administration of 2H2O as well as at –185 minutes on the day 
of the study. Consequently, for determination of basal EGP and EGP 
at the end of the intervention, the background D-[6,6-2H2]glucose 
enrichment from the –185-minute time point was used for calcula-
tions, whereas, during clamp conditions, with GNG being close to 
zero, the D-[6,6-2H2] value before administration of 2H2O was used. 
GNG (in μmol/kg/min) was calculated from the difference between 
EGP and GLYnet. The fractional GP flux contribution to EGP, i.e., 
the fraction of EGP originating from GLY, was calculated as 1 – (H5/
H2); where H5/H2 is the ratio of glucuronide position 5 to position 
2 enrichment from 2H2O, keeping in mind that glucose derived from 
GLY is enriched with 2H in position 2, while glucose derived from 
GNG is enriched in positions 5 and 2. Absolute GP flux (in μmol/kg/
min) was calculated from the equation: GP = EGP × (1 – H5/H2). Gly-
cogen cycling was then calculated as: GP – GLYnet. 
rately assess hepatic lipid volume, sets of non–water-suppressed and 
water-suppressed 1H spectra were acquired, using a STEAM sequence 
(TR 3,000 ms, echo time 10 ms, signal averages 16 ms) and variable 
power and optimization relaxation (VAPOR) STEAM sequences (TR, 
echo time, and signal averages 3,000, 10, and 16 ms, respectively). 
Water and lipid peaks were fitted and quantified using the NUTS soft-
ware package (Acorn NMR), and lipid was expressed as the summa-
tion of the methyl and methylene fat peaks relative to water content 
using the equations described in ref. 70. For hepatic 31P MRS, a 14-cm 
31P circular surface coil (Philips Healthcare) was placed over the liver 
for the acquisition of hepatic 31P spectra. Afterwards, 31P-MRS proton- 
decoupled liver ATP measurements were conducted with a 3D image- 
selected in vivo spectroscopy (3D-ISIS) localized sequence (voxel: 
 
60 × 60 × 60 mm3, TR: 6,000 ms, averages: 128, decoupling: WALTZ-4 
[wideband alternating-phase low-power technique for zero-residual 
splitting –4], time: 13 min). Absolute concentrations of γATP (CV = 9%) 
and Pi (CV = 7%) were quantified using the jMRUI v4.0 software pack-
age (EC Human Capital and Mobility Networks, France), as described 
previously (19). Liver volume measurements were made from the cor-
onal plane T2-weighted TSE images. For liver glycogen measurements, 
13C spectra were obtained with a 7-cm dual-tuned 13C/1H coil (PulseTeq 
Ltd.) (68), via a proton-decoupled pulse acquisition sequence (TR: 230 
ms; bandwidth: 8 KHz, averages: 2 × 4,000; data points: 256; decou-
pling: continuous wave; time: 30 min). Liver glycogen spectra were 
acquired with a block pulse (333 μs) that produced an Ernst angle at a 
distance of 35 mm. Coil loading was corrected via integration of the 
right-most peak of a 13C-enriched sample of formic acid placed within 
the coil housing. Glycogen concentrations were determined from the 
integration of the C1-glycogen resonance (zero filling: 4k, effective line 
broadening: 20 Hz) after the addition of 2 scans and baseline correc-
tion within NUTS software (Acorn NMR Inc.). The glycogen signal was 
corrected for distance and quantified via aqueous glycogen phantom 
measurements of 70 and 140 mmol/l measured at a distances of 15 to 
37 mm. The CV from repeated hepatic glycogen measurements was 6%.
Figure 9. Human study design. Lean, healthy male adults randomly received either PO or VCL on 2 occasions. Hepatic metabolism was measured using 
in vivo 13C, 31P, 1H and ex vivo 2H MRS combined with 2H2O and acetaminophen ingestion before and during hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamps with 
D-[6,6-2H2]glucose–labeled 20% glucose infusion.
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
C L I N I C A L  M E D I C I N E
7 0 5
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
deoxyglucose-6-phosphate was separated from 2-[14C]deoxyglucose 
via ion-exchange columns (Poly-Prep AG1-X8; Bio-Rad) as previ-
ously described (72). Glucose uptake was calculated by multiplying 
the mean plasma glucose levels between 120 and 140 minutes of the 
clamp (mmol/ml) by 2-[14C]deoxyglucose tissue content (dpm/100 g 
tissue), divided by the 2-[14C]deoxyglucose plasma AUC in the same 
time frame. Radioisotopes were purchased from PerkinElmer and 
samples measured in an Ultima-Gold Scintillation Cocktail (Tri- 
Carb2910TR; PerkinElmer) (Figure 10). Whole-body glucose dispos-
al (M value) was calculated from the tracer infusion rate, the specific 
activity of [3-3H]glucose, and BW.
Biochemical analyses. Blood glucose concentrations were assessed 
using a Contour hand-held glucometer (Bayer Vital). Plasma TG lev-
els were determined by a colorimetric assay (Cayman Chemical), and 
plasma FFA levels were assessed with the FFA-HR(2)-Test (Wako). 
Hepatic TG levels were measured in whole-liver homogenates bio-
chemically with the BioVision Assay.
Experiments under noninsulin-stimulated conditions. C57BL/6NTac 
mice (n = 20) with characteristics identical to those described above 
were fasted for 10 hours and given 2 g/kg BM PO (Landkrone) or 
water (VCL) per gavage. Lateral tail vein blood samples were obtained 
prior to treatment and 2 hours afterward. Six hours after treatment, 
mice were euthanized with isoflurane, and a vena cava blood sample 
was collected and centrifuged at 4°C, and plasma aliquots were imme-
diately frozen in liquid nitrogen. Liver was dissected and immediately 
snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen (Figure 10).
RNA isolation
Snap-frozen liver samples from both cohorts were processed after 
administration of PO. Total RNA was isolated using the mRNeasy 
Mini Kit (QIAGEN). The Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer was used to assess 
Figure 10. Mouse study design. Lean, adult male C57BL/6NTac mice were matched for BM and littermates and then divided into 2 cohorts. One cohort 
underwent hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamps after receiving either PO or vehicle via gavage (A), whereas another identical cohort underwent analysis of 
tissue and blood samples (B).
Studies in mice
Animals. Studies were conducted in lean, male, 14 week-old 
C57BL/6NTac mice (Taconic). Animals had ad libitum access to water 
and a standard chow diet. Mice were kept on a low-fat (LF) diet (13% of 
calories derived from fat, 17 kJ/g, Standard Diet 1310; Altromin), and 
were matched for body mass (BM) and littermates. BM and compo-
sition (MiniSpec LF50; Bruker Optics) were measured 1 day prior to 
the start of the experiment. Animals were bred and housed in a tem-
perature- and humidity-controlled environment including a 12-hour 
light/12-hour dark cycle, in compliance with the Federation of Euro-
pean Laboratory Animal Science Associations protocols.
Experiments under insulin-stimulated conditions. A permanent jug-
ular vein catheter was placed under ketamine/xylazine anesthesia into 
a cohort of 19 mice with the aforementioned characteristics. Six to 
seven days later, the mice were fasted for 10 hours and then received 
 
2 g/kg BM PO or VCL via gavage. Six hours later, unrestrained, con-
scious mice underwent hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamps.
After 110 minutes of primed-continuous [3-3H]glucose infusion 
(1.85 kBq/min), a blood sample was collected to determine plasma 
insulin, glucose, and [3-3H]glucose concentrations for the calcula-
tion of basal EGP. A [3-3H]glucose infusion (3.7 kBq/min) containing 
insulin (15 pmol/kg/min; HumulinR; Lilly) was started. Blood glucose 
concentrations were measured every 10 minutes and target glycemia 
established by adjusting the GIR. At minute 120, 2-[14C]deoxyglucose 
(370 kBq) was injected intravenously to assess tissue-specific Rg rates. 
At the end of the experimental procedure, mice were euthanized by 
means of an intravenous ketamine/xylazine injection. Livers were 
collected, immediately snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at 
–80°C. Blood was collected at culling, and plasma 3H and 14C radioac-
tivity was determined in deproteinized plasma before and after 3H2O 
evaporation to estimate glycolysis rates. In hepatic lysates, 2-[14C]
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
C L I N I C A L  M E D I C I N E
7 0 6
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
study, obtained MRS data, and reviewed and edited the manuscript. 
EÁH, SK, AS, and PB contributed equally to this project. YK inter-
preted MRS data. BN researched the clinical data and reviewed and 
edited the manuscript. CB and FC performed derivatization exper-
iments and enrichment analysis for 2H-MRS. JGJ performed the 
2H-MRS analyses and reviewed and edited the manuscript. PN con-
ducted analyses and reviewed and edited the manuscript. CH con-
ducted laboratory analyses and reviewed and edited the manuscript. 
SN and JR supervised the mouse studies and edited and reviewed 
the manuscript. MI analyzed transcriptomics data and edited and 
reviewed the manuscript. JB and MHdA supervised transcriptome 
analyses and edited and reviewed the manuscript. All authors gave 
final approval of the version to be published.
Acknowledgments
We thank Ulrike Partke and Anika Morcinietz at the German Diabe-
tes Center (Düsseldorf, Germany) as well as Anke Bettenbrock, Jür-
gen Schultheiß, Moya Wu, and Anne Junker at the Helmholtz Cen-
ter (Munich, Germany) for their excellent technical support. We 
also thank Alessandra Bierwagen at the German Diabetes Center 
for her guidance with MRS data analysis. This study was supported 
in part by the Ministry of Innovation, Science, and Research North 
Rhine–Westphalia (MIWF NRW); the German Federal Ministry of 
Health (BMG); as well as by a grant from the Federal Ministry of 
Education and Research (BMBF) to the German Center for Diabe-
tes Research (DZD e.V.; DZD grant 2012), and by grants from the 
Helmholtz portfolio theme: Metabolic Dysfunction and Common 
Diseases, and the Helmholtz Alliance to Universities: Imaging and 
Curing Environmental Metabolic Diseases (ICEMED); the Ger-
man Research Foundation (DFG; SFB 1116); the German Diabetes 
Association (DDG); and the Schmutzler-Stiftung. Financial sup-
port was also provided by the Portuguese Foundation for Science 
and Technology (research grant EXCL/DTP/0069/2012). Struc-
tural funding for the Center for Neurosciences and the UC-NMR 
facility was provided in part by the FEDER – European Regional 
Development Fund through the COMPETE Program; by grants 
from the Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology 
(PEst-C/SAU/LA0001/2011, REEQ/481/QUI/2006, RECI/QEQ-
QFI/0168/2012, and CENTRO-07-CT62-FEDER-002012); and 
by the Rede Nacional de Ressonância Magnética Nuclear.
Address correspondence to: Michael Roden, Auf’m Henneka-
mp 65, 40225, Düsseldorf, Germany. Phone: 49.0.211.33.82.201; 
E-mail: michael.roden@ddz.uni-duesseldorf.de.
BN’s present address is: Clinical Research Services GmbH, 
Mönchengladbach, Germany.
SN’S present address is: Sanofi-Aventis Deutschland GmbH, 
R&D Diabetes Research & Translational Medicine, Frankfurt am 
Main, Germany.
RNA quality, and only high-quality RNA (RNA integrity number [RIN] 
>7) was used for microarray analysis.
Expression profiling
Total RNA (~30 ng) was amplified using the Ovation PicoSL WTA 
System V2 in combination with the Encore Biotin Module (both from 
NuGEN). Amplified cDNA was hybridized on Affymetrix Mouse Gene 
2.1 ST array plates containing approximately 35,000 probe sets. Stain-
ing and scanning (GeneChip Scanner 3000 7G; Affymetrix) were per-
formed according to the Affymetrix Gene Titan expression protocol 
and modified according to NuGEN’s Encore Biotin protocol.
Statistical transcriptome analysis
Expression Console software (version 1.3.0.187; Affymetrix) was used 
for quality control and to obtain annotated normalized robust multiar-
ray average (RMA) gene-level data (standard settings included median 
polish and sketch-quantile normalization). Statistical analyses were 
performed using the statistical programming environment R imple-
mented in CARMAweb (https:/
/carmaweb.genome.tugraz.at/carma/). 
Genewise testing for differential expression was done using the limma t 
test, and a P value of less than 0.05 was set as the threshold to define sets 
of regulated genes. Filters for a fold change greater than 1.3 times and a 
linear average expression greater than 4 were applied. Pathway analy-
ses were generated using the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (QIAGEN; 
www.qiagen.com/ingenuity), where the overlapping P value identifies 
transcriptional regulators that can explain observed gene expression 
changes. The activation Z score helps infer activation states of predicted 
transcriptional regulators, with values of 2 or more indicating activation 
and values of –2 or less indicating inhibition.
General statistical analyses
Results are presented as the mean ± SEM and were compared using a 
2-tailed Student t test or ANOVA adjusted for repeated measures, with 
Bonferroni’s testing as appropriate. Calculations were performed using 
GraphPad Prism, version 6.02 (GraphPad Software). A P value of less than 
0.05 was considered statistically significant, unless otherwise indicated.
Study approval
All participants provided written informed consent before inclusion in 
the study, which was performed according to the Declaration of Hel-
sinki of 2013 and approved by the ethics board of the Heinrich Heine 
University Düsseldorf. All animal experiments were approved by the 
Upper Bavarian district government (AZ 55.2.1.54-2532-4-11).
Author contributions
MR initiated the investigation, led the clinical experiments and 
wrote, reviewed, and edited the manuscript. EÁH obtained and 
analyzed the data and wrote, edited, and reviewed the manuscript. 
SK obtained and analyzed the data, aided in designing the clinical 
study, and edited and reviewed the manuscript. AS obtained data 
and edited and reviewed the manuscript. PB designed the MRS 
 1. van Dam RM, Willett WC, Rimm EB, Stampfer 
MJ, Hu FB. Dietary fat and meat intake in relation 
to risk of type 2 diabetes in men. Diabetes Care. 
2002;25(3):417–424.
 2. Mancini A, et al. Biological and Nutritional Prop-
erties of Palm Oil and Palmitic Acid: Effects on 
Health. Molecules. 2015;20(9):17339–17361.
 3. Szendroedi J, et al. Abnormal hepatic energy 
homeostasis in type 2 diabetes. Hepatology. 
2009;50(4):1079–1086.
 4. Koliaki C, Roden M. Hepatic energy metabolism 
in human diabetes mellitus, obesity and non- 
alcoholic fatty liver disease. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 
2013;379(1-2):35–42.
 5. Erion DM, Shulman GI. Diacylglycerol-mediated 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation   
C L I N I C A L  M E D I C I N E
7 0 7
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
insulin resistance. Nat Med. 2010;16(4):400–402.
 6. Magkos F, et al. Effects of Moderate and Sub-
sequent Progressive Weight Loss on Metabolic 
Function and Adipose Tissue Biology in Humans 
with Obesity. Cell Metab. 2016;23(4):591–601.
 
7. Winzell MS, Ahrén B. The high-fat diet-fed 
mouse: a model for studying mechanisms and 
treatment of impaired glucose tolerance and type 
2 diabetes. Diabetes. 2004;53 Suppl 3:S215–S219.
 8. Gastaldelli A, et al. Influence of obesity and 
type 2 diabetes on gluconeogenesis and glucose 
output in humans: a quantitative study. Diabetes. 
2000;49(8):1367–1373.
 9. Groop LC, et al. Glucose and free fatty acid 
metabolism in non-insulin-dependent diabetes 
mellitus. Evidence for multiple sites of insulin 
resistance. J Clin Invest. 1989;84(1):205–213.
 10. Lewis GF, Carpentier A, Vranic M, Giacca A. 
Resistance to insulin’s acute direct hepatic effect 
in suppressing steady-state glucose production 
in individuals with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes. 
1999;48(3):570–576.
 11. Bachmann OP, et al. Effects of intravenous and 
dietary lipid challenge on intramyocellular lipid 
content and the relation with insulin sensitivity 
in humans. Diabetes. 2001;50(11):2579–2584.
 12. Roden M, et al. Mechanism of free fatty acid- 
induced insulin resistance in humans. J Clin 
Invest. 1996;97(12):2859–2865.
 13. Szendroedi J, et al. Lipid-induced insulin resis-
tance is not mediated by impaired transcapillary 
transport of insulin and glucose in humans. Dia-
betes. 2012;61(12):3176–3180.
 14. Itani SI, Ruderman NB, Schmieder F, Boden G. 
Lipid-induced insulin resistance in human mus-
cle is associated with changes in diacylglycerol, 
protein kinase C, and IkappaB-alpha. Diabetes. 
2002;51(7):2005–2011.
 15. Kashyap SR, et al. Discordant effects of a chronic 
physiological increase in plasma FFA on insulin 
signaling in healthy subjects with or without a 
family history of type 2 diabetes. Am J Physiol 
Endocrinol Metab. 2004;287(3):E537–E546.
 16. Boden G, et al. Effects of fat on insulin- 
stimulated carbohydrate metabolism in normal 
men.  J Clin Invest. 1991;88(3):960–966.
 17. Shah P, et al. Effects of free fatty acids and glycer-
ol on splanchnic glucose metabolism and insulin 
extraction in nondiabetic humans. Diabetes. 
2002;51(2):301–310.
 18. Clore JN, Stillman JS, Li J, O’Keefe SJ, Levy JR. 
Differential effect of saturated and polyunsatu-
rated fatty acids on hepatic glucose metabolism 
in humans. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 
2004;287(2):E358–E365.
 19. Nowotny B, et al. Mechanisms underlying 
the onset of oral lipid-induced skeletal mus-
cle insulin resistance in humans. Diabetes. 
2013;62(7):2240–2248.
 20. Xiao C, Giacca A, Carpentier A, Lewis GF. 
Differential effects of monounsaturated, poly-
unsaturated and saturated fat ingestion on glu-
cose-stimulated insulin secretion, sensitivity and 
clearance in overweight and obese, non-diabetic 
humans. Diabetologia. 2006;49(6):1371–1379.
 21. Lee CG, Demarquoy J, Jackson MJ, O’Brien 
WE. Molecular cloning and characterization 
of a murine LPS-inducible cDNA. J Immunol. 
1994;152(12):5758–5767.
 22. Ban JY, Kim BS, Kim SC, Kim DH, Chung JH. 
Microarray Analysis of Gene Expression Profiles 
in Response to Treatment with Melatonin in 
Lipopolysaccharide Activated RAW 264.7 Cells. 
Korean J Physiol Pharmacol. 2011;15(1):23–29.
 23. Li L, et al. A solute carrier family 22 member 3 
variant rs3088442 G→A associated with coro-
nary heart disease inhibits lipopolysaccharide-in-
duced inflammatory response. J Biol Chem. 
2015;290(9):5328–5340.
 24. Sivapalaratnam S, et al. Identification of can-
didate genes linking systemic inflammation to 
atherosclerosis; results of a human in vivo LPS 
infusion study. BMC Med Genomics. 2011;4:64.
 25. Masaki M, Ikeda A, Shiraki E, Oka S, Kawasaki 
T. Mixed lineage kinase LZK and antioxidant 
protein-1 activate NF-kappaB synergistically. Eur 
J Biochem. 2003;270(1):76–83.
 26. Noh H, Paik HY, Kim J, Chung J. The alteration 
of zinc transporter gene expression is associated 
with inflammatory markers in obese women. Biol 
Trace Elem Res. 2014;158(1):1–8.
 27. Westerbacka J, et al. Genes involved in fatty acid 
partitioning and binding, lipolysis, monocyte/
macrophage recruitment, and inflammation are 
overexpressed in the human fatty liver of insulin- 
resistant subjects. Diabetes. 2007;56(11):2759–2765.
 28. Deopurkar R, et al. Differential effects of cream, 
glucose, and orange juice on inflammation, 
endotoxin, and the expression of Toll-like recep-
tor-4 and suppressor of cytokine signaling-3. 
Diabetes Care. 2010;33(5):991–997.
 29. Roden M, et al. Effects of free fatty acid elevation 
on postabsorptive endogenous glucose produc-
tion and gluconeogenesis in humans. Diabetes. 
2000;49(5):701–707.
 30. Kacerovsky M, et al. Postprandial and fasting 
hepatic glucose fluxes in long-standing type 1 
diabetes. Diabetes. 2011;60(6):1752–1758.
 31. Hundal RS, et al. Mechanism by which metformin 
reduces glucose production in type 2 diabetes. 
Diabetes. 2000;49(12):2063–2069.
 32. Wang L, et al. Acute stimulation of glucagon 
secretion by linoleic acid results from GPR40 
activation and [Ca2+]i increase in pancreatic islet 
{alpha}-cells. J Endocrinol. 2011;210(2):173–179.
 33. Roden M, et al. The roles of insulin and glu-
cagon in the regulation of hepatic glycogen 
synthesis and turnover in humans. J Clin Invest. 
1996;97(3):642–648.
 34. Fritsch M, et al. Time course of postprandial 
hepatic phosphorus metabolites in lean, obese, 
and type 2 diabetes patients. Am J Clin Nutr. 
2015;102(5):1051–1058.
 35. Koliaki C, et al. Adaptation of hepatic mitochon-
drial function in humans with non-alcoholic 
fatty liver is lost in steatohepatitis. Cell Metab. 
2015;21(5):739–746.
 36. Schmid AI, Szendroedi J, Chmelik M, Krssák M, 
Moser E, Roden M. Liver ATP synthesis is lower 
and relates to insulin sensitivity in patients with 
type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2011;34(2):448–453.
 37. Frayn KN. Adipose tissue as a buffer for daily 
lipid flux. Diabetologia. 2002;45(9):1201–1210.
 38. Søndergaard E, Sørensen LP, Rahbek I, Gormsen 
LC, Christiansen JS, Nielsen S. Postprandial 
VLDL-triacylglycerol secretion is not suppressed 
in obese type 2 diabetic men. Diabetologia. 
2012;55(10):2733–2740.
 39. Perry RJ, Samuel VT, Petersen KF, Shulman 
GI. The role of hepatic lipids in hepatic insu-
lin resistance and type 2 diabetes. Nature. 
2014;510(7503):84–91.
 40. Hennes MM, Shrago E, Kissebah AH. Receptor 
and postreceptor effects of free fatty acids (FFA) 
on hepatocyte insulin dynamics. Int J Obes. 
1990;14(10):831–841.
 41. Wiesenthal SR, et al. Free fatty acids impair 
hepatic insulin extraction in vivo. Diabetes. 
1999;48(4):766–774.
 42. Vallim T, Salter AM. Regulation of hepatic gene 
expression by saturated fatty acids. Prostaglandins 
Leukot Essent Fatty Acids. 2010;82(4-6):211–218.
 43. Maecker H, et al. TWEAK attenuates the tran-
sition from innate to adaptive immunity. Cell. 
2005;123(5):931–944.
 44. Burkly LC. TWEAK/Fn14 axis: the current 
paradigm of tissue injury-inducible function 
in the midst of complexities. Semin Immunol. 
2014;26(3):229–236.
 45. Lozano-Bartolomé J, et al. Reduced circulating 
levels of sTWEAK are associated with NAFLD 
and may affect hepatocyte triglyceride accumu-
lation. Int J Obes (Lond). 2016;40(9):1337–1345.
 46. Cani PD, et al. Metabolic endotoxemia initi-
ates obesity and insulin resistance. Diabetes. 
2007;56(7):1761–1772.
 47. Chicheportiche Y, Fossati-Jimack L, Moll S, 
Ibnou-Zekri N, Izui S. Down-regulated expres-
sion of TWEAK mRNA in acute and chronic 
inflammatory pathologies. Biochem Biophys Res 
Commun. 2000;279(1):162–165.
 48. Wullaert A, van Loo G, Heyninck K, Beyaert 
R. Hepatic tumor necrosis factor signaling and 
nuclear factor-kappaB: effects on liver homeosta-
sis and beyond. Endocr Rev. 2007;28(4):365–386.
 49. Chang G, et al. Hepatic TLR4 signaling is 
activated by LPS from digestive tract during 
SARA, and epigenetic mechanisms contribute 
to enforced TLR4 expression. Oncotarget. 
2015;6(36):38578–38590.
 50. Tang F, Tang G, Xiang J, Dai Q, Rosner MR, Lin A. 
The absence of NF-kappaB-mediated inhibition 
of c-Jun N-terminal kinase activation contributes 
to tumor necrosis factor alpha-induced apopto-
sis. Mol Cell Biol. 2002;22(24):8571–8579.
 51. Cai D, et al. Local and systemic insulin resistance 
resulting from hepatic activation of IKK-beta and 
NF-kappaB. Nat Med. 2005;11(2):183–190.
 52. Jelenik T, et al. Tissue-specific differences 
in the development of insulin resistance in 
a mouse model for type 1 diabetes. Diabetes. 
2014;63(11):3856–3867.
 53. Santos SH, et al. Oral Angiotensin-(1-7) prevented 
obesity and hepatic inflammation by inhibition 
of resistin/TLR4/MAPK/NF-κB in rats fed with 
high-fat diet. Peptides. 2013;46:47–52.
 54. Marion V, et al. BBS-induced ciliary defect 
enhances adipogenesis, causing paradoxical 
higher-insulin sensitivity, glucose usage, and 
decreased inflammatory response. Cell Metab. 
2012;16(3):363–377.
 55. Zhang X, Xie X, Heckmann BL, Saarinen AM, 
Czyzyk TA, Liu J. Targeted disruption of G0/
G1 switch gene 2 enhances adipose lipolysis, 
 The Journal of Clinical Investigation 
 
C L I N I C A L  M E D I C I N E
7 0 8
jci.org   Volume 127   Number 2   February 2017
alters hepatic energy balance, and alleviates 
high-fat diet-induced liver steatosis. Diabetes. 
2014;63(3):934–946.
 56. Fan Y, et al. Mutations in a member of the Ras 
superfamily of small GTP-binding proteins 
causes Bardet-Biedl syndrome. Nat Genet. 
2004;36(9):989–993.
 57. Haytowitz DB, Pehrsson PR, Holden JM. The 
National Food and Nutrient Analysis Program: 
A decade of progress. J Food Compost Anal. 
2008;21(S1):S94–S102.
 58. Urban LE, Roberts SB, Fierstein JL, Gary CE, 
Lichtenstein AH. Sodium, saturated fat, 
and trans fat content per 1,000 kilocalories: 
temporal trends in fast-food restaurants, 
United States, 2000-2013. Prev Chronic Dis. 
2014;11:E228.
 59. Teff KL, et al. Endocrine and metabolic effects 
of consuming fructose- and glucose-sweetened 
beverages with meals in obese men and women: 
influence of insulin resistance on plasma tri-
glyceride responses. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 
2009;94(5):1562–1569.
 60. American Diabetes Association. 3. Foundations 
of Care and Comprehensive Medical Evaluation. 
Diabetes Care. 2016;39 Suppl 1:S23–S35.
 61. Krssak M, et al. Alterations in postprandial hepat-
ic glycogen metabolism in type 2 diabetes. Diabe-
tes. 2004;53(12):3048–3056.
 62. Beaudoin MS, Robinson LE, Graham TE. An oral 
lipid challenge and acute intake of caffeinated 
coffee additively decrease glucose tolerance in 
healthy men. J Nutr. 2011;141(4):574–581.
 63. Gancheva S, et al. Variants in Genes Con-
trolling Oxidative Metabolism Contribute 
to Lower Hepatic ATP Independent of Liver 
Fat Content in Type 1 Diabetes. Diabetes. 
2016;65(7):1849–1857.
 64. Jones JG, et al. NMR derivatives for quantifica-
tion of 2H and 13C–enrichment of human glucuro-
nide from metabolic tracers. J Carbohydr Chem. 
2006;25(2-3):203–217.
 65. Nowotny B, Nowotny PJ, Strassburger K, Roden 
M. Precision and accuracy of blood glucose 
measurements using three different instruments. 
Diabet Med. 2012;29(2):260–265.
 66. Herder C, et al. Adiponectin may mediate the 
association between omentin, circulating lipids 
and insulin sensitivity: results from the KORA F4 
study. Eur J Endocrinol. 2015;172(4):423–432.
 67. Brehm A, Krssak M, Schmid AI, Nowotny 
P, Waldhäusl W, Roden M. Increased lipid 
availability impairs insulin-stimulated ATP 
synthesis in human skeletal muscle. Diabetes. 
2006;55(1):136–140.
 68. Jones J, Kahl S, Carvalho F, Barosa C, Roden M. 
Simplified analysis of acetaminophen glucu-
ronide for quantifying gluconeogenesis and 
glycogenolysis using deuterated water. Anal 
Biochem. 2015;479:37–39.
 69. Barosa C, Jones JG, Rizza R, Basu A, Basu R. 
Acetaminophen glucuronide and plasma glucose 
report identical estimates of gluconeogenesis 
and glycogenolysis for healthy and prediabetic 
subjects using the deuterated water method. 
Magn Reson Med. 2013;70(2):315–319.
 70. Bischof MG, et al. Hepatic glycogen metabolism 
in type 1 diabetes after long-term near normogly-
cemia. Diabetes. 2002;51(1):49–54.
 71. Kraegen EW, James DE, Jenkins AB, Chisholm 
DJ. Dose-response curves for in vivo insulin sen-
sitivity in individual tissues in rats. Am J Physiol. 
1985;248(3 Pt 1):E353–E362.
 72.  Neschen S, et al. Prevention of hepatic ste-
atosis and hepatic insulin resistance in mito-
chondrial acyl-CoA:glycerol-sn-3-phosphate 
acyltransferase 1 knockout mice. Cell Metab. 
2005;2(1):55–65.
