 Democratic and Republican physicians provide
different care on politicized health issues
Eitan D. Hersha,b,1 and Matthew N. Goldenbergc
aDepartment of Political Science, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520; bInstitution for Social and Policy Studies, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520;
and cDepartment of Psychiatry, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510
Edited by Theda Skocpol, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, and approved August 9, 2016 (received for review April 25, 2016)
Physicians frequently interact with patients about politically salient
health issues, such as drug use, firearm safety, and sexual behavior.
We investigate whether physicians’ own political views affect their
treatment decisions on these issues. We linked the records of over
20,000 primary care physicians in 29 US states to a voter registration
database, obtaining the physicians’ political party affiliations. We
then surveyed a sample of Democratic and Republican primary care
physicians. Respondents evaluated nine patient vignettes, three of
which addressed especially politicized health issues (marijuana,
abortion, and firearm storage). Physicians rated the seriousness
of the issue presented in each vignette and their likelihood of en-
gaging in specific management options. On the politicized health
issues—and only on such issues—Democratic and Republican physi-
cians differed substantially in their expressed concern and their rec-
ommended treatment plan. We control for physician demographics
(like age, gender, and religiosity), patient population, and geogra-
phy. Physician partisan bias can lead to unwarranted variation
in patient care. Awareness of how a physician’s political atti-
tudes might affect patient care is important to physicians and
patients alike.
primary care | physicians | partisanship | politics | health care
I
n 2015, the US Federal Court of Appeals upheld a Florida
state law that forbids physicians from discussing firearms with
patients unless doing so is directly relevant to patient care (1).
Firearms are hardly the only politicized issue in clinical medi-
cine. When primary care physicians (PCPs) conduct patient in-
terviews, they often engage patients in conversations that touch
upon a range of politically sensitive issues, including sexuality,
reproduction, and drugs. Because these issues bear directly on
health and well-being, they are inextricably tied to a physician’s
routine work.
Two important bodies of research, one from medicine and the
other from the social sciences, raise the possibility that physi-
cians’ political views may influence their clinical practice. Re-
search on clinical practice has revealed substantial variation in
patient care by region and at the level of the individual provider
(2). Physicians of different genders, for example, have been
found to provide different care (3). Physicians have also been
found to provide different care to patients based on the patients’
demographic characteristics, like race and ethnicity (4). Just as
with other biases, a political or ideological bias might influence
medical treatment, particularly on politically salient issues.
From the social sciences, there is recent and growing evidence
that, for citizens who identify strongly as partisans, political be-
liefs can spill over into nonpolitical domains. For instance,
whether one’s favored party wins an election significantly affects
one’s happiness (5) as well as one’s consumer spending habits
(6). Political ideology affects one’s evaluation of potential ro-
mantic partners (7) and job candidates (8).
Patient advocates and professional organizations seem to ac-
knowledge that doctors with different ideological orientations
will provide different care. For instance, the Human Rights
Campaign, the largest gay rights organization in America, rec-
ommends patients seek referrals for lesbian, gay, bisexual, and
transgender (LGBT)-friendly doctors or consult an online di-
rectory where such providers are listed (9). The American As-
sociation of Pro-Life Obstetricians and Gynecologists provides
an online tool enabling patients to find prolife providers (10).
Scholarly research has also demonstrated a high level of politi-
cization in the medical profession, with sharp differences between
Democratic and Republican physicians in their evaluation of the
Affordable Care Act (11) and a 350% increase in physicians con-
tributing political donations since the early 1990s (12, 13).
Altogether, the existing evidence leads us to investigate how
physicians of different political worldviews engage with patients
on politically sensitive issues. We focused on PCPs, who often
take a patient’s social history in the context of a new patient
interview. Based on information gleaned from a history, practi-
tioners may provide verbal counsel as well as particular treat-
ment options when they learn about health risk behaviors.
Counseling patients about a range of behaviors, including to-
bacco use, firearm storage, and obesity, results in real changes in
patient behavior (14–16). We used clinical vignettes to evaluate
physicians’ clinical management, a technique validated by prior
research (17).
We hypothesized that Republican and Democratic physicians’
evaluations of the seriousness of the issue presented in the vi-
gnettes and the choices of treatment options will differ in ways
consistent with political bias. We expected to see differences in
evaluation and treatment on politicized issues but not on issues
with less political salience.
A detailed accounting of our methodology can be found below
and in Supporting Information. Our methodology consists of two
main components: (i) identifying the voter registration records of
PCPs, and (ii) conducting a survey of a stratified random sample
of these physicians.
Significance
Political beliefs have been shown to spill over into nonpolitical
domains, such as consumer spending, choice of romantic part-
ner, and job hiring. Our evidence suggests that political beliefs
predict the professional decisions of primary care physicians. On
politicized health issues, like marijuana and abortion, physicians’
partisan identity is highly correlated with their treatment deci-
sions. Because physicians regularly interact with patients on
politically sensitive health issues and because the medical pro-
fession is increasingly politicized (e.g., state governments are
regulating politicized aspects of medicine), it is necessary to
understand how doctors’ own political worldviews may impact
their actions in the medical examination room.
Author contributions: E.D.H. and M.N.G. designed research, performed research, analyzed
data, and wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
1To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: eitan.hersh@yale.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1606609113/-/DCSupplemental.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1606609113
PNAS
|
October 18, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 42
|
11811–11816
POLITICAL
SCIENCES
MEDICAL SCIENCES
 There are several reasons why we linked physician records to
voter registration records before conducting a survey. First, we
were particularly sensitive to the idea that physicians’ survey
responses might be influenced by the population of patients they
regularly see. Physicians with different ideological worldviews
might sort into different practices and thus encounter different
patient populations. To control for these possibilities, we not
only asked the physicians about their patient population, but we
also oversampled Democratic and Republican doctors who
were in practice with one another (and were thus assumed to
see a similar patient population). To oversample this group,
we needed to determine their political affiliation ahead of
the survey.
Second, linking the records enabled us to focus the study on
Democrats and Republicans. We opted not to study political
independents for the sake of efficiency: if there are partisan
differences in clinical practice, we expected that they would be
most apparent in the comparison between Democrats and Re-
publicans. Third, linking the records enabled us to contact phy-
sicians at their home addresses as listed on voter registration
files, rather than their work addresses where gatekeepers (e.g.,
administrative staff) may filter inessential mail that comes
their way.
Finally, by using the public record of party affiliation, we did
not need to ask physicians about their political affiliation. We
purposefully designed the survey to not appear as a political
study. For instance, all communications originated from the
School of Medicine, not the Department of Political Science.
Although at the end of the survey, in a series of demographic
questions, we did ask physicians about their ideology, we did not
also need to ask directly about partisanship. (We did not end up
using the ideology measure in our analysis below because
ideology and party are so closely connected in contemporary
politics. Of all the Republican respondents to our survey, only
three identified as liberal or very liberal. Of all the Democratic
ones, only four identified as conservative or very conservative.)
Results
Perceptions of Seriousness. The central feature of the survey was
a series of nine clinical vignettes. The vignettes covered a range
of scenarios, some of which were not thought to be especially
aligned with political partisanship (alcohol use, tobacco use,
helmets, obesity, and depression), others of which were sus-
pected to be more politically salient (marijuana use, elective
abortion, firearm storage, and engagement with sex workers).
The marijuana, abortion, and firearm vignettes were suspected
of being particularly political because there is a sharp partisan
divide on these issues in the United States. The nine vignettes
are summarized in Table 1.
Following the presentation of each vignette, our survey asked
physicians to rate the seriousness of the problem presented by
the vignette, on a 10-point scale. Table 1 shows the mean and SD
of this 10-point response. The survey offered several manage-
ment options based on the particular details of each vignette,
and asked how likely the physicians would be to engage in each
option, also on a 10-point scale. The survey instrument, which is
available for review, also asked several other questions related to
medical practice, physician attitudes, and demographics.
Fig. 1 shows two detailed views of physicians’ ratings of seri-
ousness. Fig. 1A illustrates the responses of Democratic versus
Republican physicians. On some vignettes, like those relating to
alcohol, obesity, and helmets, Republican and Democratic phy-
sicians rated the seriousness similarly. However, Democratic
physicians rated vignettes related to marijuana, firearms, and
abortion substantially differently than Republican physicians.
Fig. 1B shows the average difference in seriousness rating
between Democratic and Republican physicians based on the
regression analysis. Democratic physicians rated the firearms
vignette as more concerning, and Republican physicians rated
the marijuana and abortion vignettes as more concerning. These
differences are based on a 10-point scale, and the SD of these
items is 2.2–2.5. Accordingly, these effect sizes are quite large,
and they only appear on the politically salient vignettes.
These effects do not appear to be the result of confounding by
demographic factors or physician sorting. For the three vignettes
that exhibited the strongest partisan differences—marijuana,
abortion, and firearms—the partisan differences remain even
when respondents are stratified by sex, church attendance, and
patient socioeconomic status (SES) (Fig. 2).
Table 1.
Patient vignettes
Issue
A healthy-appearing, 38-y-old male [28-y-old female] patient comes to your office for a physical. This is his [her]
first appointment with you. He [She] does not have any known prior chronic medical issues. During the
patient interview, the patient...
How serious of
a problem, on a
1–10 scale?
Alcohol
...acknowledges consuming about 20 alcoholic beverages in a typical week but denies any related
physical concerns.
7.8 (1.6)
Marijuana
...acknowledges using recreational marijuana approximately three times per week but denies any related
physical concerns.
5.7 (2.3)
Tobacco
...acknowledges engaging in social smoking, consuming ∼15–20 cigarettes per week (2–3 per day), a habit
that began at age 18. The patient denies any related physical concerns.
8.2 (1.7)
Sex worker
...acknowledges having had sexual intercourse with sex workers several times in the last year. The patient
denies any physical symptoms related to sexual behavior.
8.4 (1.8)
Depression
...acknowledges having intermittent bouts of depression. He completed a PHQ-9 screening tool in your office
and scored a 10. He denies suicidal thoughts.
8.2 (1.5)
Firearms
..., who is a parent with two small children at home, acknowledges having several firearms at home.
7.4 (2.5)
Obesity
..., who has a BMI of 31, acknowledges having no regular exercise. The patient denies any physical complaints
related to his weight.
7.8 (1.5)
Abortion*
...acknowledges having had two elective abortions in the last 5 y. She denies any physical complaints or
complications associated with these procedures. She is not currently pregnant.
5.7 (2.5)
Helmets
...acknowledges commuting to work by motorcycle. He acknowledges rarely wearing a helmet but that he is a
safe driver and has never been in a serious collision.
8.4 (1.9)
Italics identify more politicized issues. The rightmost column shows unweighted overall means and SDs on a 10-point scale on which respondents indicated
the seriousness of the problem presented in the vignette. Number of observations range from 231 to 233 per item. BMI, body mass index; PHQ-9, Patient
Health Questionnaire 9.
*Indicates a vignette with a female patient rather than a male patient.
11812
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1606609113
Hersh and Goldenberg
 On the marijuana and firearms vignettes, Republicans and
Democrats exhibit similar differences across gender and re-
ligious categories. On the abortion vignette, the partisan effect
is stronger among men (1.8-point difference for men compared
with a 0.8-point difference for women) and similar among re-
ligious attendees and nonattendees. Even though Republican
physicians are more likely to be male and religious than
Democratic physicians, and even though male and religious
physicians might treat patients differently than female and
nonreligious physicians, Fig. 2 and the regression coefficients in
Fig. 1 demonstrate that the partisan effect is independent of
these cohort differences.
As with physician demographics, we show that patient pop-
ulation does not appear to explain the partisan differences that
we observe. The lower part of Fig. 2 illustrates that doctors who
see the lowest SES populations do not exhibit partisan differ-
ences on the firearms item, but otherwise there are no notable
trends by patient population. In Supporting Information, we
address two other ways to account for physician sorting and
patient population. First, we compare physicians in mixed-
partisan practices versus physicians in the general sample.
Second, we estimate a model that employs practice-level fixed
effects, analyzing just those practices for which we have multiple
respondents.
Management/Treatment Plans. Fig. 3 shows the various treatment
options offered in the survey for the four more politicized is-
sues. Republicans are more likely to discuss health risks of
marijuana, urge the patient to cut down, and discuss legal risks.
Republicans are more likely to discuss the mental health as-
pects of abortion and to encourage the patient not to have
more abortions. Although Democratic and Republican physi-
cians did not differ on the judgment of seriousness of using sex
workers (a vignette that reflects a moral issue but not one that
corresponds to a sharp partisan division), Republican physi-
cians are more likely to discuss legal risks and discuss the im-
pact on personal relationships. Democratic physicians may be
more likely to urge patients not to store firearms at home, but
Republican physicians are significantly more likely to ask about
the safe storage of the weapons.
Fig. 1.
Perceptions of seriousness, by party affiliation. (A) Histograms for each vignette by party affiliation. Red represents Republicans; blue represents
Democrats. (B) Circles represent coefficients from regressions, with 95% CIs.
Hersh and Goldenberg
PNAS
|
October 18, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 42
|
11813
POLITICAL
SCIENCES
MEDICAL SCIENCES
 Republicans, in general, were more likely to say that they
would engage in active treatment options than Democrats.
However, the degree of difference varies by the politicization of
the issue. As Fig. 4 shows, on the less politicized issues of alcohol
and cigarettes, Republican physicians appear only slightly more
likely to discuss health risks than Democratic physicians. On the
marijuana vignette, the difference is over three times larger.
Discussion
Our findings suggest that Republican and Democratic physicians
differently assess the seriousness of patient health issues that are
politically salient. Republican physicians also differ from Dem-
ocratic physicians in the treatments offered to patients who
present with those health issues. The direction of the differences
is consistent with expected political leanings (Democratic phy-
sicians are more concerned about guns in the home; Republicans
are more concerned about patient drug use and a patient having
had abortions). The data analysis suggests these differences
cannot be otherwise explained by demographic traits of physi-
cians or by the patient populations they encounter.
Of course, party identification may be a surrogate measure of
some other, unmeasured characteristic (e.g., a personality trait,
ideology, socialization) that is correlated both with political al-
legiance and with treatment approach. Evidence like that pre-
sented in Fig. 4 leads us to believe that whatever is driving our
results is closely related to politics. The figure shows that Re-
publican physicians are not just generally more assertive in
treatment than Democrats (which might be attributable to a
personality difference), but that they are particularly more as-
sertive on the marijuana vignette, an issue with political salience
but with a lower associated health risk (18).
To be clear, we cannot say with any certainty what the root
cause of partisan differences in treatment is. However, regardless
of the underlying mechanism that affects physician judgment, the
evidence suggests a clear effect from the patient’s perspective. If
we assume that a patient selects a physician based on the phy-
sician’s practice location, gender, age, and so forth (i.e., control
variables in our models), but not on other factors correlated with
political party, which is a reasonable assumption, then we expect
patients to get different medical care depending on whether they
happen to have selected a Republican or Democratic physician.
This study demonstrates the connection between provider
political orientation and medical care. Our initial findings should
compel further research seeking to replicate and extend our
work. Our survey achieved a reasonable response rate given the
lack of financial incentives offered to respondents, and although
a substantial body of work suggests that response rates in this
range do not generate biased responses (19), this topic merits
financial support and attention to extend the work.
Future research could include examinations of partisan dif-
ferences in actual clinical care, not just in survey responses.
Researchers could accomplish this either by using public records
of reimbursements or by linking party affiliation data to internal
records of partnering provider networks. Although our initial
study focused on politicized issues related to abortion, mari-
juana, and firearms, future studies that use clinical records might
examine other politically sensitive topics, such as end-of-life care
in Medicare patients and treatments related to LGBT health.
Our study faces a familiar set of limitations that should be
acknowledged. We only solicited 1,529 physicians in 29 states
and, without offering respondents incentives, achieved a re-
sponse rate of 20%. As we report in Supporting Information,
comparisons between the sample and population on observable
variables are encouraging, but the respondents are not perfectly
representative. Specifically, Democrats were more likely to re-
spond to our solicitation than Republicans. As another matter,
our method of linking physicians to voter registration records
provided us with important tools in pursuing the research
question. However, we were not able to match all physicians to
public records, and this too may result in unknown biases. Fi-
nally, although survey vignettes have been validated as strong
indicators of actual clinical practice, our study is limited by the
potential for misreporting bias to affect the results. By not
alerting physicians to the political nature of the study, we hope to
have avoided one important set of concerns about misreporting
bias, but the problem remains that responses may not perfectly
convey the true professional judgments of the respondents.
Conclusion
Having acknowledged these limitations, our study suggests the
following conclusions. For patients, our study suggests that they
may need to be aware of their physician’s political worldview,
especially if they need medical counsel on politically sensitive
issues. As mentioned, advocacy groups like the Human Rights
Campaign already attend to this regarding LGBT patients, and
our evidence suggests that such sensitivity is warranted. Just as a
patient may seek out a physician of a certain gender to feel more
comfortable, the evidence suggests that a patient may need to
make the same calculation regarding political ideology.
For physicians, the evidence calls for heightened awareness
and training surrounding treatment on politically salient issues.
Given the politicization of certain health issues, it is imperative
that physicians consider how their own political views may im-
pact their professional judgments.
Methods
Survey Sample. We downloaded the National Provider Identification (NPI) file
of US physicians and identified physicians in the primary care specialties of
internal medicine, family medicine, general practice, and adult medicine.
(The NPI file is a comprehensive listing of physicians who are covered by the
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act. Some physicians who do
not use electronic systems and do not accept insurance may not have an NPI
number.) We restricted our attention to physicians practicing in the 29 US
states in which registered voters are listed in the public record according to
their party affiliation. Previous research has shown that these states are
representative of the nation as a whole (20, 21). We drew a 50% simple
Fig. 2.
Perceptions of seriousness, by subgroup. Difference of means with
95% confidence intervals are shown. The lower plot uses quartiles of a
principal-components factor analysis based on a physicians’ perceptions of
their patient population.
11814
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1606609113
Hersh and Goldenberg
 random sample of PCPs in these states (42,861 physicians) who were listed
with their name, gender, and work address.
We transmitted the identifying information from the NPI record to
Catalist, a political data firm that aggregates voter registration records and
vends these data to political organizations, researchers, and government
agencies (22, 23). Based on the name, gender, and work address, we were
able to match 57% of the physicians to a unique record on the public voter
file. (Physicians would not match to a unique record either because they
are not registered voters or because their name and location linked to
multiple plausible matches on the voter file.) [Overall, in the United States,
approximately 71% of citizens are registered (24). Among physicians who
are citizens, we would expect a higher rate of registration because
registration is positively correlated with SES, but, of course, many of the
practicing physicians listed in the NPI file are not American citizens.] All
comparisons were among physicians who were matched. On covariates
available in the NPI file (e.g., gender, specialty, physicians per practice ad-
dress), the matched records appeared nearly identical to the records origi-
nally transmitted to Catalist (Figs. S1–S3 and Table S1). Among physicians
who matched to voter registration records, 35.9% were Democrats, 31.5%
were Republicans, and the remaining 32.6% were independents or third-
party registrants. Among the partisans, 53% were Democrats, and 47% were
Republican. Because of this nearly even split, we did not stratify the sample
based on individual physician partisanship.
Fig. 3.
Partisan differences in treatment plans on politicized issues. Points represent coefficients from regression, with 95% CIs. Positive values indicate that
Republicans are more likely to include a particular item in a treatment plan; negative values indicate that Democrats are more likely to do so.
Fig. 4.
Partisan differences are especially pronounced on politicized issues.
Note: Points represent coefficients from regression, with 95% CIs.
Hersh and Goldenberg
PNAS
|
October 18, 2016
|
vol. 113
|
no. 42
|
11815
POLITICAL
SCIENCES
MEDICAL SCIENCES
 Altogether, we solicited 1,529 physicians.
Survey Administration. In September 2015, we sent an introductory postcard
to the physicians, alerting them to a larger packet of materials forthcoming in
the mail. Two weeks later, we mailed a packet that included a consent
document, survey instructions, a paper version of the survey, and a prepaid
return envelope. All correspondence went by mail to physicians’ home ad-
dresses, which we obtained from the voter file. Respondents were invited to
take the survey online or on paper. In December 2015, we resolicited indi-
viduals from whom we had not yet heard. We offered no incentives for
participation, financial or otherwise.
Our study was approved by the Yale University Human Subjects Com-
mittee, Protocol 1506016032. Respondents were shown an “informed
consent” script as part of the survey materials, which explained that par-
ticipation in the study was voluntary and that completion of the survey
implied consent.
We achieved a response rate of 20%, a rate consistent with contemporary
surveys of professional elites (like physicians) that offer no incentives. [For
example, a 2009 survey of scientists conducted by Pew generated a response
rate of 25% (25).] As detailed in Supporting Information, respondents did
not differ significantly from those solicited on characteristics including
gender, medical specialty, block-group median household income, or in the
proportion in the oversample of mixed-partisan practices. The respondents
were slightly older (mean age: 53 vs. 49) and were more Democratic (63% vs.
53%) than the nonrespondents (Tables S2–S5). Although Democrats were
more likely to respond than Republicans, the survey instrument (which can
be reviewed in the replication materials) offered no obvious indication of
this being a politically oriented study.
Given the relatively small number of physicians solicited and the response
rate, our sample size is not large. For our key dependent variables, our sample
size is 231–233 physicians. Despite the sample size, we witness strong and
consistent support for our hypotheses. As indicated above, the relationship
between partisanship and medical treatment persists even within subgroups
of our sample, such as gender and religiosity cohorts, and among Democratic
and Republican physicians in practice with one another. Although we ap-
proach small samples with caution, such caution here is balanced against the
consistency and strength of the evidence.
Statistical Analysis. In addition to simple histograms and differences of means,
we used regression analysis. The dependent variable was either the physician’s
rating of the seriousness of the issue or the physician’s assessment of their
likelihood of choosing a specific management plan. The key independent
variable was a binary indicator that distinguishes Republicans (1) from Dem-
ocrats (0). We included controls for physician age, gender, and religious at-
tendance, and an indicator that distinguishes physicians in the oversample of
mixed-partisan practices from physicians in the general sample.
We controlled for patient population by using a scale generated from
respondents’ estimates of the percentage of their patients who are college
educated, on Medicaid, generally healthy, black/African American, and non-
English speaking. These items were combined using principal-components
analysis to generate a single continuous scale indicative of the patient
population’s SES.
In addition to controlling for patient population of the individual physi-
cian, our regression analysis employs state fixed effects, such that average
state differences in responses are accounted for. Our model also employs
robust SEs clustered at the physician’s practice address.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. For outstanding research assistance, we thank Jane
Strauch. For helpful advice, we thank Peter Aronow, Adam Bonica, Zach
Cooper, Deborah Erlich, Mark Friedberg, Shira Fischer, Jacob Hacker, Ben
Hagopian, John Henderson, Dan Hopkins, Greg Huber, and Kelly Rader. E.D.H.
thanks Yale University’s Institution for Social and Policy Studies for
financial support. M.N.G. thanks Yale University’s Department of Psychiatry
for financial support.
1. Wollschlaeger v. Governor of Florida, 797 F. 3d 859 (US Ct. App., 11th Cir. 2015).
2. Wennberg JE (2002) Unwarranted variations in healthcare delivery: Implications for
academic medical centres. BMJ 325(7370):961–964.
3. Krähenmann-Müller S, et al. (2014) Patient and physician gender concordance in
preventive care in university primary care settings. Prev Med 67:242–247.
4. Hall WJ, et al. (2015) Implicit racial/ethnic bias among health care professionals and its
influence on health care outcomes. Am J Public Health 105(12):e60–e76.
5. Pierce L, Rogers T, Snyder JA (2015) Losing hearts: The happiness impact of partisan
electoral loss. J Exp Pol Sci 3(1):44–59.
6. Gerber AS, Huber GA (2009) Partisanship and economic behavior. Am Polit Sci Rev
103(3):407–426.
7. Anderson A, Goel S, Huber G, Malhotra N, Watts DJ (2014) Political ideology and racial
preferences in online dating. Sociol Sci 1:28–40.
8. Iyengar S, Westwood SJ (2015) Fear and loathing across party lines. Am J Pol Sci 59(3):
690–707.
9. Human Rights Campaign (2015) Coming Out to Your Doctor. Available at www.hrc.
org/resources/coming-out-to-your-doctor. Accessed December 28, 2015.
10. American Association of Pro-Life Obstetricians and Gynecologists (2016) Pro-Life OB/
GYN Directory. Available at aaplog.wildapricot.org/directory. Accessed January 5,
2016.
11. Kaiser Family Foundation; The Commonwealth Fund (2015) Experiences and Attitudes
of Primary Care Providers Under the First Year of ACA Coverage Expansion. Issue Brief
(The Commonwealth Fund, New York), Publication 1823, Vol 17, pp 1–21.
12. Bonica A, Rosenthal H, Rothman DJ (2014) The political polarization of physicians in
the United States: An analysis of campaign contributions to federal elections, 1991
through 2012. JAMA Intern Med 174(8):1308–1317.
13. Frank E, Carrera J, Dharamsi S (2007) Political self-characterization of U.S. medical
students. J Gen Intern Med 22(4):514–517.
14. Stead LF, Bergson G, Lancaster T (2008) Physician advice for smoking cessation.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2(2):CD000165.
15. Post RE, et al. (2011) The influence of physician acknowledgment of patients’ weight
status on patient perceptions of overweight and obesity in the United States. Arch
Intern Med 171(4):316–321.
16. Albright TL, Burge SK (2003) Improving firearm storage habits: Impact of brief office
counseling by family physicians. J Am Board Fam Pract 16(1):40–46.
17. Peabody JW, et al. (2004) Measuring the quality of physician practice by using clinical
vignettes: A prospective validation study. Ann Intern Med 141(10):771–780.
18. Lachenmeier DW, Rehm J (2015) Comparative risk assessment of alcohol, tobacco,
cannabis and other illicit drugs using the margin of exposure approach. Sci Rep
5:8126.
19. Langer G (2003) About response rates. Public Perspective 2003(May/June):16–18.
20. McGhee E, Krimm D (2009) Party registration and the geography of party polariza-
tion. Polity 41(3):345–367.
21. Hersh ED, Nall C (2015) The primacy of race in the geography of income-based voting.
Am J Pol Sci 60(2):289–303.
22. Hersh ED (2015) Hacking the Electorate (Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge, UK).
23. Hersh ED (2013) Long-term effect of September 11 on the political behavior of vic-
tims’ families and neighbors. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110(52):20959–20963.
24. US Census Bureau (2012) Reported voting and registration, by sex and single years of
age, November 2012. Voting and Registration. Available at www.census.gov/hhes/
www/socdemo/voting/publications/p20/2012/tables.html. Accessed September 15, 2016.
25. Pew Research Center (2009) Scientific Achievements Less Prominent Than a Decade
Ago (Pew Research Center, Washington, DC), pp 1–98.
26. Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence (2015) The Brady Campaign State Score-
card, March 2015. Available at www.crimadvisor.com/data/Brady-State-Scorecard-
2014.pdf. Accessed August 1, 2016.
11816
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1606609113
Hersh and Goldenberg
