 Behaviors, movements, and transmission of
droplet-mediated respiratory diseases during
transcontinental airline flights
Vicki Stover Hertzberga,1,2, Howard Weissb,1, Lisa Elonc, Wenpei Sid, Sharon L. Norrise,
and The FlyHealthy Research Team3
aNell Hodgson Woodruff School of Nursing, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322; bSchool of Mathematics, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA
30313; cDepartment of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322; dDepartment of Mathematics and Computer Science, Emory
University, Atlanta, GA 30322; and eBoeing Commercial Airplanes, The Boeing Company, Bellevue, WA 98004
Edited by Burton H. Singer, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, and approved February 13, 2018 (received for review June 30, 2017)
With over 3 billion airline passengers annually, the inflight trans-
mission of infectious diseases is an important global health
concern. Over a dozen cases of inflight transmission of serious
infections have been documented, and air travel can serve as a
conduit for the rapid spread of newly emerging infections and
pandemics. Despite sensational media stories and anecdotes, the
risks of transmission of respiratory viruses in an airplane cabin are
unknown. Movements of passengers and crew may facilitate
disease transmission. On 10 transcontinental US flights, we
chronicled behaviors and movements of individuals in the econ-
omy cabin on single-aisle aircraft. We simulated transmission
during flight based on these data. Our results indicate there is
low probability of direct transmission to passengers not seated in
close proximity to an infectious passenger. This data-driven, dy-
namic network transmission model of droplet-mediated respira-
tory disease is unique. To measure the true pathogen burden,
our team collected 229 environmental samples during the flights.
Although eight flights were during Influenza season, all qPCR as-
says for 18 common respiratory viruses were negative.
airplane transportation | infectious disease transmission | influenza |
SARS | pandemic
W
ith over 3 billion airline passengers annually, the inflight
transmission of infectious diseases is an important global
health concern (1). Over a dozen cases of inflight transmission
have been documented, and studies of severe acute respiratory
syndrome (SARS) (2) and pandemic Influenza (H1N1p) (3) trans-
mission on airplanes indicate that air travel can serve as a conduit
for the rapid spread of newly emerging infections and pandemics.
In 2014 a passenger infected with Ebola flew from Cleveland to
Dallas the night before being admitted to a hospital; luckily, she
did not infect anybody during that trip.
Despite the media stories and anecdotes, the risks of trans-
mission are unknown. According to the World Health Organiza-
tion, the main transmission route for diseases such as influenza and
SARS are respiratory droplets (≥5 μ) that are propelled short
distances (≤1 m) (4) when an infectious person sneezes, coughs,
talks, or even breathes (4–9). These large droplets are mostly im-
pervious to airflow (4). Direct transmission occurs when pathogen-
containing droplets fall onto a susceptible traveler’s conjunctiva or
mucosa or are inhaled. A passenger can have close (≤1 m) contact
with others in three ways: they could be in nearby seats, she or he
could move past both seated and moving individuals, or while
seated an individual who is moving could pass near him or her.
According to public health agencies, the primary risk factor is
sitting within two rows of an infectious passenger (10, 11). This
guidance does not directly take into account the physical and bi-
ological bases of droplet transmission, the movement of passengers
and crew, and indirect contact via fomites. Of note, five case reports
of illness tracing from transmissions on airplanes (one case of SARS
and four cases of influenza) found that 40% of the transmission
occurred outside of the two-row zone, suggesting that move-
ment may be an important factor in disease transmission (12).
Despite evidence of the role that air transportation plays in the
spread of epidemics (13), current computational models of spread
only account for the spread due to displacement of an infectious
person from one area to another (13, 14). Specifically, they do not
account for the spread due to transmission while in route, the evi-
dence cited above notwithstanding. Recently, a model has been pro-
posed that allows for transmission among passengers (15). However,
this model assumes that passengers mix randomly. Very little is known
about how passengers and crew (flight attendants) mix on airplanes,
enabling infection transmission. Given the restraints of time periods
when passengers and crew must be seated and the physical restraints
of seating in an airplane, it is difficult to believe that random mixing of
passengers occurs. We report here on our study of behaviors and
movement of passengers and crew on 10 transcontinental flights on
Significance
With over 3 billion airline passengers annually, the inflight
transmission of infectious diseases is an important global
health concern. Over a dozen cases of inflight transmission of
serious infections have been documented, and air travel can
serve as a conduit for the rapid spread of newly emerging in-
fections and pandemics. Despite sensational media stories,
risks of transmission of respiratory viruses in an airplane cabin
are unknown. Movements of passengers and crew may facili-
tate disease transmission. On 10 transcontinental US flights,
we chronicled behaviors and movements of individuals in the
economy cabin on single-aisle aircraft. We simulated trans-
mission during flight based on these data. This data-driven,
dynamic network transmission model of droplet-mediated re-
spiratory disease is unique.
Author contributions: V.S.H., H.W., S.N., and the F.R.T. designed research; V.S.H., H.W., and the
F.R.T. performed research; V.S.H., H.W., L.E., and W.S. contributed new analytic tools; V.S.H.,
L.E., W.S., and the F.R.T. analyzed data; and V.S.H., H.W., and L.E. wrote the paper.
Conflict of interest statement: The authors received support from The Boeing Company
(H.W.) by way of a subcontract to the Georgia Institute of Technology (V.S.H.). S.L.N. is an
employee of Boeing.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
This open access article is distributed under Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
NoDerivatives License 4.0 (CC BY-NC-ND).
Data deposition: Data and software for the simulations are available at dx.doi.org/10.
15139/S3/OOYETQ.
1V.S.H. and H.W. contributed equally to this work.
2To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: vhertzb@emory.edu.
3A complete list of the FlyHealthy Research Team can be found in the Supporting
Information.
This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.
1073/pnas.1711611115/-/DCSupplemental.
Published online March 19, 2018.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1711611115
PNAS
|
April 3, 2018
|
vol. 115
|
no. 14
|
3623–3627
SOCIAL SCIENCES
APPLIED BIOLOGICAL
SCIENCES
 single-aisle aircraft in the United States. We develop a network model
of contacts that would enable infection transmission by large re-
spiratory droplets, and we use a simulation model to determine the
spread of a disease on this network. We also report on the prevalence
of respiratory viral pathogens measured on these flights, and
discuss the implications for disease transmission.
Results
Observations of Passenger and Crew Shedding. Our study team flew
on 10 transcontinental flights, departing in the morning or af-
ternoon, and of duration between 211 and 313 min. Seven flights
had no unoccupied seats, while the others had 2, 3, and 17 un-
occupied seats. On each flight our 10-member research team
recorded the behaviors and movements of passengers seated and
crew serving in the economy class cabin on single-aisle aircraft.
Only one passenger on one flight was observed to be coughing
moderately and no passenger (of 1,540) was observed to be
coughing severely. No crew member (of 41) was observed to
be coughing.
Passenger and Crew Behaviors, Movements, and Close Proximity
Contacts. We observed that 38% of passengers never left their
seats during flight, 38% left once, 13% left twice, and 11% left
more than two times. The median amount of time spent out of
seat for each passenger who moved was 5.4 min, with an inter-
quartile range (IQR) of 3.3–8.9. The proportion leaving their seat
at least once varied by seating: 43% of passengers seated by a
window (range: 29–62%), 62% of passengers seated in a middle
seat (range: 47–72%), and 80% of passengers seated in the aisle
(range: 75–85%) moved at least once during the flight. Half of the
passengers did not use a lavatory during flight (range: 42–58%),
38% used it once (range: 34–53%), 9% used it twice (range: 4–
13%), and 3% used it more than two times (range: 1–6%).
The most common behaviors for passengers were waiting for,
using, or exiting a lavatory [825 passengers, average time
4.3 min (IQR: 2.7–7.0)], and checking the overhead bin
[135 passengers, average time 1 min (IQR: 0.4–2.0)]. The wait
for the front lavatory was nearly twice as long as for the back
lavatories (3.1 vs. 1.7 min) (IQR: 1.7–4.9 and 1.0–3.2). Over the
course of an average flight (238 min of observation) (range:
196–290), each crew member was in contact with passengers for
67 min (IQR: 43–80) and spent 155 min (IQR: 128–178) on
average in the galley.
Of the 1,296 passengers (84%) having close contact with an
individual seated beyond a 1-m radius from them (due to
movement), the median number of contacts was 44 (IQR: 30–60)
and the median total duration of contact was 47 person-minutes
(IQR: 18–98). The median duration for each of these individual
contacts was 0.4 min (IQR: 0.2–1.7). Crew were in contact an
average of 206 person-minutes (IQR: 164–239) with other crew
and 1,149 person-minutes (IQR: 851–1,391) with passengers.
Fig. 1 shows a typical example of the distribution of the
number of contacts by seating position. In the figure, notice
the declining number of contacts to the right as distance from the
aisle increases. In particular, the average number of contacts is
greatest for those in aisle seats (64, IQR: 50–77), less so in
middle seats (58, IQR: 45–73), and least in window seats (12,
IQR: 11–34). Passengers seated midcabin have more contacts if
they leave their seats. Duration (minutes) of contact (Fig. S1)
does not follow this pattern; rather, it tends to be slightly higher
for passengers seated toward the front of the plane. The number
of contacts increases linearly with observation period (which is
very close to length of flight) for all movement–seat combina-
tions, except for passengers in window seats who never move
(Fig. 2).
Network-Based Transmission Model and Simulations. Based on these
data and using the previously discussed 1-m transmission zone,
we construct a dynamic-network model with which we simulate
direct influenza transmission during flight. We consider two
scenarios: the index passenger seated midcabin in 14C (14th row,
aisle seat) and an infectious crew member.
For the infectious passengers, we use the conservatively high
transmission rate of 0.018 per minute of contact, which is four
times the transmission rate we estimate (16), which describes an
incident in 1977 in which 38 of 54 passengers and crew became
infected with influenza-like illness after waiting in an airplane on
an airport tarmac for 4.5 h with no air circulation. This rate has
been used in other transmission studies; see, for example, a sim-
ulation of influenza transmission in a high school in which contacts
among students, faculty, and visitors were carefully quantified
(17). In (Fig. 3) we present heat maps illustrating the probability
that each passenger will have close contact with the infectious
index passenger and the probability that an infectious index pas-
senger will infect each of the other passengers. The 11 nearest
neighbors have a high probability of becoming infected. However,
the probability of transmission to each of the remaining passen-
gers is quite low, less than 0.03. On average, this manifests as
0.7 additional infected passengers per flight (IQR: 0.4–1.5). The
results of simulations for other seats indicate, on average, at most
two additional infected passengers per flight.
A crew member is not likely to come to work while being
extremely sick. Even if she or he came to work, she or he would
be more likely to take medication to reduce or eliminate
coughing. For an infectious crew member, we use the conser-
vatively low transmission rate of 0.0045, which is a quarter of
what we used for infectious passengers. In Fig. 4 we present a
heat map illustrating the probability that an infectious crew
member will infect each of the passengers. An infectious crew
member will infect 4.6 passengers (IQR: 3.2–5.7).
Assays for Respiratory Viruses. Our team collected 229 environ-
mental samples (air and surfaces) during the flights. All qPCR
assays for 18 common respiratory viruses were negative.
Discussion
We present the results of a study to track behaviors, movements,
and contacts between all individuals in the economy cabin on
10 transcontinental flights. We employ these data to quantify the
likelihood of direct transmission of droplet-mediated respiratory
infectious diseases during flight. We also present the results of
qPCR panels assaying for 18 common respiratory viruses for
228 samples collected from the air and hard surfaces, and taken
before, during, and after the 10 flights. Although eight flights
were during influenza season in the northern hemisphere, all
results were negative.
Fig. 1.
Percent of contacts by seating position across all flights. Note the
declining number of contacts to the right as distance from the aisle increases.
3624
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1711611115
Hertzberg et al.
 We documented many movements on each flight, leading to
many close contacts beyond those induced by close seatmates
(tribes). Most nontribe contacts were very brief. Our simulations
using these data, unique in explicitly examining the role of
movement of passengers and crew, indicate that a droplet-
mediated respiratory infectious disease is unlikely to be directly
transmitted beyond 1 m from the infectious passenger. Thus,
transmission is limited to one row in front of or in back of an
infectious passenger. This is more conservative than current
public health guidance, calling for surveillance of passengers
within two rows of an infectious passenger. Our simulations also
indicate that an infectious flight attendant can generate several
infections; thus, it is imperative that flight attendants not fly
when they are ill.
Then how can we explain case reports documenting the over
40% of transmission of influenza and SARS to nontribe pas-
sengers? Some transmissions may have occurred while waiting in
the airport, while boarding, or while deplaning. Alternatively,
some passengers may have been infected by other sources before
or after the flight. Three of the five flights in these case reports
range from 9.5 to 14 h, providing many more opportunities for
transmission. Other transmissions may have occurred via
fomites. Flyers can protect themselves from fomite transmission
by exercising careful hand hygiene. Finally, our model assumes
that droplets are the main transmission route for influenza and
SARS. This assumption is based on general public health agency
guidance to health care providers, but it may not be true: sig-
nificant transmission may also occur via smaller virus-laden
particles (the smallest being aerosols), which have larger
dispersion distances.
Unlike droplets that fall to the ground quickly, aerosols could
remain suspended in cabin air until they are breathed or drawn
into the heating, ventilation, and air conditioning system and
putatively trapped by high-efficiency particulate air filters.
Transmission via aerosols could also occur during the period
between when the cabin door closes and take-off. Our model is
not applicable to other aerosol-transmitted diseases, such as
tuberculosis (18), varicella, and measles (19). Our model as-
sumes omnidirectional transmission and does not take into ac-
count seat backs as barriers. Thus, our simulation results may be
overestimating risk of direct droplet-mediated transmission.
The movement of aerosols over long periods of time in an
empty cabin, even without gaspers (the adjustable air outlet sit-
uated above each passenger seat), is extremely difficult to sim-
ulate with the fastest supercomputers. Such models require
Fig. 3.
(A) This seating heat map shows the probability of the passenger seated in 14C (triangle) being in contact with each infection target [other passengers
(square) and crew members (circle)], as calculated by our simulation program. Contact is defined as being within a 1-m radius at least once during a flight. For
each target, the probability of contact is calculated as number of flights with a contact per 1,000 flights. Only crew and passengers within two seats laterally
or one row fore to aft are likely to be in contact with this passenger, and all other passengers are much less likely to have contact. Although we use seat 14C to
illustrate this finding, outcomes are similar for an infectious passenger seated in any aisle seat except in the first or last row, for which no passengers forward
or aft, respectively, are in contact. (B) This seating heat map shows the probability of the passenger seated in 14C (triangle) infecting each of the other
passengers (squares) and crew members (circle) when the probability of infection is set at 0.018 per 1 min of contact. In this example, passengers seated within
a 1-m radius are at highest risk, followed by crew members. Nonseatmates in window seats have the least risk of infection from this passenger. Although we
use seat 14C to illustrate this finding, outcomes are similar for an infectious passenger seated in any aisle seat, except in the first or last row, for which no
passengers forward or aft, respectively, are infected.
Fig. 2.
The number of nontribe contacts by row, for aisle, middle, and win-
dow seats for the Seattle outbound flight. Number of nontribe contacts in-
creases with increasing length of observation period (which is very close to
length of flight) for passengers who moved during the flight, regardless of
their seat position. Similarly, the number of nontribe contacts increases with
increasing length of observation period for passengers in aisle or middle seats
who do not move during the observation period. There is no association be-
tween the number of nontribe contacts and length of observation for pas-
sengers in window seats who do not move during the observation period.
Hertzberg et al.
PNAS
|
April 3, 2018
|
vol. 115
|
no. 14
|
3625
SOCIAL SCIENCES
APPLIED BIOLOGICAL
SCIENCES
 simulations using a 3D Navier–Stokes equation. According to
Boeing engineers, airflow in an empty cabin lies on the
“boundary of turbulence,” which is the hardest cabin airflow
regime to simulate over long time periods. Previous transmission
models have employed approximations to the 3D Navier–Stokes
equation (20–23) (perhaps valid for short time intervals) or as-
sumed that the “droplets” or aerosols are well-mixed in cabin air.
In no case have previous investigators considered the effects of
cabin occupancy or gasper use in Navier–Stokes models. One
group conducted numerical simulations to study the effect of
vortices generated by the continuous movement of a crew
member on the local dispersal of aerosols in a cabin (24). As-
suming that the cabin airflow is at steady state, they found a
decreased infection rate to the passengers but an increased in-
fection rate to the crew member.
Previous studies have employed cameras or real-time location-
sensing systems using technology, such as radio-frequency iden-
tification, ultrasound, and infrared, to quantify behaviors,
movements, and close contacts of individuals in various types of
buildings [schools (17), hospitals (25), and so forth]. However,
these devices cannot be employed in an airplane cabin during
flight. We tested extensively our observational protocol, which
uses paired observers seated every five rows, each using an iPad
app, and later aggregating these local zone-wise observations to
chronicle all movements. We found that a pair of trained ob-
servers could reliably determine and document (e.g., time-
stamp) the behaviors and movements of passengers and crew
within their row and the four to five rows in front of them. The
observers’ chronicling of times, which we used to reconstruct the
durations of movements and close contacts, were accurate to
within an order of seconds.
All 228 qPCR panels were negative for 18 common respiratory
viruses. There are two possible explanations. Of the 1,540 passengers
and 41 flight attendants, only one was observed to be coughing.
Thus, there was no obvious virus shedding into the cabin. Further-
more, the airline’s cabin-cleaning policy is to disinfect all hard sur-
faces whenever the plane “overnights,” and all surface samples were
taken from hard surfaces. Not all flights were the first of the day for
that plane. We chose to sample seat-belt buckles, believing that these
would be the most likely items to be touched and the least likely to
be thoroughly disinfected.
We caution about extrapolating these findings to short-hop
domestic flights, international flights, or flights on other airlines.
On our study flights, half of the passengers never left their seats
during flight. On short-hop flights, the amount of movement may
be much less. Conversely, on longer international flights, there
will be substantially more movement of passengers and crew,
leading to many additional close contacts. Our results also can-
not be extrapolated from single-aisle cabins to double-aisle
cabins commonly used for international flights. Different air-
lines will have different cabin-disinfection protocols and super-
vise their cabin-cleaning staff in different ways.
Methods
Data and Samples Collected on the Plane.
Passenger and crew movements. Our study team flew on 10 flights, mostly on
Boeing 757 aircraft, of 3.5- to 5-h duration between Atlanta and five des-
tinations on the US West Coast. Eight of the 10 flights occurred during the
traditionally recognized annual influenza season (October 2012 to March
2013), while two other flights occurred in May 2013. On each flight, 10 public
health and nursing graduate students recorded all movements of passengers
and crew in the economy cabin using a specially designed iPad app. The
graduate student researchers sat in paired aisle seats and were responsible for
recording the movement in their “virtual zone,” which consisted of their row
and the four rows in front of them. The Emory University Institutional
Review Board (IRB) determined that IRB review of this study was not
necessary.
Environmental sampling. Another member of our research team operated two
air-sampling pumps that sampled the cabin air in the back of the plane (the
“dirtiest air in the cabin” according to a Boeing engineer). One pump op-
erated continuously and the other operated during five 30-min intervals
(including boarding and deplaning). Both pumps sampled at 3.5 L/s, the
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health protocol for stationary
sampling and approximately the normal breathing rate of adults. Other
members of our research team took swabs of the door handles (inside and
outside) of a randomly chosen aft lavatory, as well as swabs of the tray table
(both sides) and seat-belt buckle in two randomly chosen seats. All samples
were taken before passenger boarding and again after all passengers
had deplaned.
Movement Reconstruction. After each flight, the movement observations
were collated from the separate observation zones. Research assistants then
aggregated, cleaned, and prepared the data for analysis of behaviors,
movements, and ultimately time-delimited contact networks.
Laboratory Analysis. Environmental samples were sent to a highly qualified
molecular biology laboratory, which performed on all air samples a com-
prehensive qPCR respiratory virus panel assay for a broad range of respiratory
viruses and subtypes representing the majority of circulating respiratory
disease-causing pathogens. The panel consisted of tests for influenza A, in-
fluenza B, influenza A subtype H5N1, respiratory syncytial virus A, respiratory
syncytial virus B, parainfluenza virus 1, parainfluenza virus 2, parainfluenza
virus 3, parainfluenza virus 4, rhinovirus F1, rhinovirus F2, coronavirus 229E,
coronavirus OC43, coronavirus NL63, human metapneumovirus, adenovirus
F1, and adenovirus F2.
More detail on the methods are given in SI Methods. Data and software
for the simulations are available at dx.doi.org/10.15139/S3/OOYETQ.
1. Mangili A, Gendreau MA (2005) Transmission of infectious diseases during commer-
cial air travel. Lancet 365:989–996.
2. Olsen SJ, et al. (2003) Transmission of the severe acute respiratory syndrome on air-
craft. N Engl J Med 349:2416–2422.
3. Baker MG, et al. (2010) Transmission of pandemic A/H1N1 2009 influenza on pas-
senger aircraft: Retrospective cohort study. BMJ 340:c2424.
4. Atkinson J (2009) Natural Ventilation for Infection Control in Health-Care Settings
(WHO, Geneva).
5. Fiore AE, et al.; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC); Advisory Com-
mittee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) (2008) Prevention and control of influenza:
Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP),
2008. MMWR Recomm Rep 57:1–60.
Fig. 4.
This seating heat map shows the probability of an infectious crew
member infecting each of the other passengers (square) and crew members
(circle) when the probability of infection is set at 0.0045 per 1 min of contact.
In this example, other crew members are at highest risk, followed by pas-
sengers seated in aisle and middle seats.
3626
|
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1711611115
Hertzberg et al.
 6. Garner JS, Simmons BP (1983) Guideline for isolation precautions in hospitals. Infect
Control 4(4 Suppl):245–325.
7. Siegel JD, Rhinehart E, Jackson M, Chiarello L; Health Care Infection Control Practices
Advisory Committee (2007) 2007 Guideline for isolation precautions: Preventing
transmission of infectious agents in health care settings. Am J Infect Control 35(10
Suppl 2):S65–S164.
8. World Health Organization (2009) Infection Prevention and Control in Health Care
for Confirmed or Suspected Cases of Pandemic (H1N1) 2009 and Influenza-Like Ill-
nesses (WHO, Geneva).
9. Tellier R (2009) Aerosol transmission of influenza A virus: A review of new studies. J R
Soc Interface 6(Suppl 6):S783–S790.
10. World
Health
Organization
(2003)
Prevention
and
Control
of
Severe Acute
Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) (WHO, Geneva).
11. World Health Organization (2009) WHO Technical Advice for Case Management of
Influenza A(H1N1) in Air Transport (WHO, Geneva).
12. Hertzberg VS, Weiss H (2016) On the 2-row rule for infectious disease transmission on
aircraft. Ann Glob Health 82:819–823.
13. Zhang Q, et al. (2017) Spread of Zika virus in the Americas. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 114:
E4334–E4343.
14. Gonçalves B, Balcan D, Vespignani A (2013) Human mobility and the worldwide im-
pact of intentional localized highly pathogenic virus release. Sci Rep 3:810.
15. Namilae S, Derjany P, Mubayi A, Scotch M, Srinivasan A (2017) Multiscale model for
pedestrian and infection dynamics during air travel. Phys Rev E 95:052320.
16. Moser MR, et al. (1979) An outbreak of influenza aboard a commercial airliner. Am J
Epidemiol 110:1–6.
17. Salathé M, et al. (2010) A high-resolution human contact network for infectious
disease transmission. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107:22020–22025.
18. Kotila S, Payne HL, Jansen N, Helbling P, Abubakar I (2016) Systematic review on
tuberculosis transmission on aircraft and update of the European Centre for Disease
Prevention and Control risk assessment guidelines for tuberculosis transmitted on
aircraft (RAGIDA-TB). Euro Surveill, 10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2016.21.4.30114.
19. de Barros FR, et al. (2006) Measles transmission during commercial air travel in Brazil.
J Clin Virol 36:235–236.
20. Lin CH, et al. (2005) Numerical simulation of airflow and airborne pathogen transport
in aircraft cabins–Part I: Numerical simulation of the flow field. ASHRAE Trans 111:
755–763.
21. Lin CH, et al. (2005) Numerical simulation of airflow and airborne pathogen transport
in aircraft cabins–Part 2: Numerical simulation airborne pathogen transport. ASHRAE
Trans 111:764–768.
22. Liu W, et al. (2012) State-of-the-art methods for studying air distributions in com-
mercial airliner cabins. Build Environ 47:5–12.
23. Wan MP, Sze To GN, Chao CYH, Fang L, Melikov A (2009) Modeling the fate of ex-
piratory aerosols and the associated infection risk in an aircraft cabin environment.
Aerosol Sci Technol 43:322–343.
24. Han Z, et al. (2014) Effect of human movement on airborne disease transmission in an
airplane cabin: Study using numerical modeling and quantitative risk analysis. BMC
Infect Dis 14:434.
25. Lowery-North DW, et al. (2013) Measuring social contacts in the emergency
department. PLoS One 8:e70854.
Hertzberg et al.
PNAS
|
April 3, 2018
|
vol. 115
|
no. 14
|
3627
SOCIAL SCIENCES
APPLIED BIOLOGICAL
SCIENCES
