 Rev Environ Health 2017; 32(3): 291–299
Gunnar Heuser* and Sylvia A. Heuser
Functional brain MRI in patients complaining of 
electrohypersensitivity after long term exposure 
to electromagnetic fields
DOI 10.1515/reveh-2017-0014
Received April 3, 2017; accepted May 25, 2017; previously published 
online July 5, 2017
Abstract
Introduction: Ten adult patients with electromagnetic 
hypersensitivity underwent functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (fMRI) brain scans. All scans were abnormal with 
abnormalities which were consistent and similar. It is pro-
posed that fMRI brain scans be used as a diagnostic aid for 
determining whether or not a patient has electromagnetic 
hypersensitivity. Over the years we have seen an increasing 
number of patients who had developed multi system com-
plaints after long term repeated exposure to electromag-
netic fields (EMFs). These complaints included headaches, 
intermittent cognitive and memory problems, intermit-
tent disorientation, and also sensitivity to EMF exposure. 
Regular laboratory tests were within normal limits in these 
patients. The patients refused to be exposed to radioactiv-
ity. This of course ruled out positron emission tomography 
(PET) and single-photon emission computed tomography 
(SPECT) brain scanning. This is why we ordered fMRI brain 
scans on these patients. We hoped that we could document 
objective abnormalities in these patients who had often 
been labeled as psychiatric cases.
Materials and methods: Ten patients first underwent a 
regular magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain scan, 
using a 3 Tesla Siemens Verio MRI open system. A func-
tional MRI study was then performed in the resting state 
using the following sequences:
1. 
A three-dimensional, T1-weighted, gradient-echo 
(MPRAGE)
2. 
Resting state network. The echo-planar imaging (EPI) 
sequences for this resting state blood oxygenation level 
dependent (BOLD) scan were then post processed on a 
3D workstation and the independent component analy-
sis was performed separating out the various networks.
3. 
Arterial spin labeling.
4. Tractography and fractional anisotropy.
Results: All ten patients had abnormal functional MRI 
brain scans. The abnormality was often described as hyper 
connectivity of the anterior component of the default 
mode in the medial orbitofrontal area. Other abnormali-
ties were usually found. Regular MRI studies of the brain 
were mostly unremarkable in these patients.
Conclusion: We propose that functional MRI studies should 
become a diagnostic aid when evaluating a patient who 
claims electrohypersensitivity (EHS) and has otherwise 
normal studies. Interestingly, the differential diagnosis for 
the abnormalities seen on the fMRI includes head injury. It 
turns out that many of our patients indeed had a history of 
head injury which was then followed sometime later by the 
development of EHS. Many of our patients also had a his-
tory of exposure to potentially neurotoxic chemicals, espe-
cially mold. Head injury and neurotoxic chemical exposure 
may make a patient more vulnerable to develop EHS.
Keywords: electrohypersensitivity (EHS); electromagnetic 
field (EMF); fMRI; multiple chemical sensitivity (MCS).
Introduction
In the past the senior author (G.H.) practiced clinical toxi-
cology and in that capacity saw more than 1000 patients 
who had suffered exposure to toxic chemicals. Their 
impairment was often neurologic with loss of memory 
function, headaches, intermittent confusion, problems 
with balance, and other symptoms. This impairment had 
persisted, at times for years after exposure to these toxic 
chemicals had ceased. Some of these patients had devel-
oped sensitivity to even small amounts of chemicals result-
ing in multiple chemical sensitivity (MCS). More than 60 
patients were eventually studied and the results were pub-
lished in a peer reviewed journal [1]. All of these patients 
had single-photon emission computed tomography 
*Corresponding author: Gunnar Heuser, MD, PhD, Formerly  
UCLA Medical Center, Department of Medicine, PO Box 5066, 
El Dorado Hills, Los Angeles, CA 95762, USA,  
Phone: +(310) 500-0041, E-mail: toxguns@netscape.net,  
Website: emfdoc.com; Emeritus Cedars Sinai Medical Center, 
Department of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, USA; Former Member of 
Brain Research Institute, UCLA Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA
Sylvia A. Heuser: Environmental, Medical, Research and Information 
Center (EMRIC), Santa Barbara, CA, USA
Brought to you by | La Trobe University
Authenticated
Download Date | 10/16/17 12:10 PM
 292      Heuser and Heuser: Functional brain MRI in patients complaining of electrohypersensitivity
(SPECT) brain scans all of which were abnormal. Addi-
tional studies were then performed and published [2, 3].
More recently we began to see patients who reported 
significant reactions to even small amounts of electro-
magnetic fields (EMFs). Some of these patients had in the 
past been seen for problems with chemical exposure and 
had now developed electrohypersensitivity (EHS). Some 
of these patients also gave a history of head injury.
Electrohypersensitivity has since been acknowledged 
by the medical profession since it demands more and 
more attention and evaluation [4–7]. The syndrome has 
now been called EHS.
Patients with EHS develop multi-system complaints 
on exposure to currents emitted by cell phones, cell phone 
towers, smart meters, power-lines and other sources of EMFs.
In this paper we present patients with EHS who had 
undergone functional brain MRI studies because of their 
complaints which were mostly neurological after expo-
sure: memory and cognitive impairment, attention deficit 
disorder, changes in behavior, and other symptoms. They 
presented with a history of long term exposure to EMFs 
followed by development of EHS.
Every patient included in this paper reported signifi-
cant symptomatology which served to arrive at a diagnosis 
of EHS. Symptoms developed upon exposure and usually 
diminished or disappeared when removed from EMF 
source. Multi-symptoms included headaches, impairment 
of cognitive function, tremors, weakness, and others. 
Multi-system complaints were triggered by exposure to 
cell phones, cell phone towers, smart meters, wi-fi, and 
other sources (see description of individual cases).
A careful and thorough lab evaluation ruled out dis-
eases which often cause multi system complaints e.g. 
thyroid problems, diabetes, autoimmune disease, chronic 
infections and other conditions. Patients often provided 
pictures of nearby cell phone towers, smart meters and 
other sources of EMFs to document their claim.
Methodology
All patients signed a release form allowing us to publish the results of 
their study. Our control population consisted of 60 volunteers of both 
sexes, ages 15–70. They were not on drugs, had no known diseases 
and were otherwise in perfect health. Our study group consisted of 
10 patients all of whom experienced long term EMF exposure and 
developed EHS.
All patients had regular magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
brain scans using a 3 Tesla Siemens Verio MRI Open system. This was 
followed by an fMRI study, using the following sequences:
1. 
A three-dimensional, T1-weighted, gradient-echo (MPRAGE).
2. 
Resting state network. The echo-planar imaging (EPI) sequences 
for this resting state blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) 
scan were then post processed on a 3D workstation and the 
independent component analysis was performed separating out 
the various networks.
3. 
Arterial spin labeling.
4. 
Tractography and fractional anisotropy (Table 1).
Results
Case 1. This right handed patient was in her early sixties 
when she was evaluated. Whenever exposed to EMFs she 
developed cognitive and memory problems as well as a 
sense of malaise to the point of inability to function. Her 
EHS developed over the years. Her history includes mul-
tiple head injuries and also exposure to toxic chemicals, 
including mold, eventually resulting in multiple chemical 
sensitivity (MCS)
The fMRI showed severely abnormal default mode 
network (DMN) with hyper connectivity of the anterior 
component in the medial orbitofrontal area, also decrease 
of white matter tracts within the right frontal lobe, and 
finally decreased flow and/or metabolism within bifrontal 
lobes (Figure 1).
Case 2. This right handed patient was in his forties when 
evaluated. Several years before he had an abnormal 
SPECT brain scan and an abnormal neuropsychological 
test result suggesting attention deficit disorder (ADD). 
For approximately 11 years he had worked as an air con-
ditioning expert, working on the roofs of many commer-
cial buildings, thus being exposed to EMFs. He developed 
cognitive and memory problems, impaired coordination 
and balance, insomnia, chronic fatigue, and finally EHS. 
In addition he was diagnosed to have bi-lateral cataracts 
impairing his vision. His history is negative for head injury 
and toxic chemical exposure.
The fMRI showed abnormality of the DMN with 
increased hyperconnectivity of the anterior component. 
Table 1: Patient population.
Case number
Age
Gender
Head injury
Chem. Ex.
Case #1
60’s
Female
Yes
Yes
Case#2
40’s
Male
No
No
Case #3
60’s
Male
Yes
Yes
Case #4
50’s
Female
No
Yes
Case #5
50’s
Female
No
Yes
Case #6
60’s
Female
No
Yes
Case #7
70’s
Male
No
Yes
Case #8
60’s
Female
Yes
Yes
Case #9
60’s
Female
Yes
Yes
Case #10
60’s
Male
Yes
Yes
Brought to you by | La Trobe University
Authenticated
Download Date | 10/16/17 12:10 PM
 Heuser and Heuser: Functional brain MRI in patients complaining of electrohypersensitivity      293
Fractional anisotropy was found to be decreased in the 
corpus callosum (Figure 2).
Case 3. This right handed patient was in his sixties 
when being evaluated. He had worked in a high voltage 
environment as a journeyman lineman for more than 
30 years, evaluating and treating problems in that 
environment.
Eventually, he developed a seizure disorder with loss 
of consciousness. His seizures subsided when he was off 
work and returned when he returned to work.
He had a concussion in his teenage years. He had not 
been exposed to mold.
The fMRI showed fragmentation of the anterior com-
ponent of the DMN, also decreased fractional anisotropy, 
predominantly in the corpus callosum (Figure 3).
Case 4. This right handed patient was in her early fifties 
when tested. Exposure to chemicals started in childhood 
when she developed double pneumonia, allergies, and 
eventually asthma 
For years before our testing she worked as an air traffic 
controller, surrounded by cell phone towers at work. In 
that setting she developed EHS.
Her history is negative for head injury. Her past history 
includes exposure to mold.
The fMRI showed abnormal DMN with hyper connec-
tivity and fragmentation of the anterior component. There 
was also hyper connectivity of the posterior component. 
Finally there was decreased flow and/or metabolism in 
the bifrontal lobes (Figure 4).
Case 5. This left handed female was in her early fifties 
when tested. About 15 years earlier she was exposed to 
chemicals and eventually developed MCS. About 9 years 
earlier she got into the habit of holding her cell phone 
to her left ear in which she eventually developed pain, 
whenever she was using the phone. Additional symptoms 
Figure 1: Lateral view of case no. 1.
Figure 2: Lateral view of case no. 2.
Figure 3: Lateral view of case no. 3.
Brought to you by | La Trobe University
Authenticated
Download Date | 10/16/17 12:10 PM
 294      Heuser and Heuser: Functional brain MRI in patients complaining of electrohypersensitivity
eventually developed and included impaired cognitive 
function, intermittent confusion, headaches, nausea, and 
generalized weakness, all of these eventually developing 
into EHS. Her history is negative for head injury and for 
mold exposure.
The fMRI showed markedly hyperconnected medial 
orbitofrontal component in the resting state network. 
Diminished marked asymmetry of blood flow with 
diminished flow in the right frontal temporal region was 
also found (Figure 5).
Case 6. This left handed patient was in her sixties when 
evaluated. Just a few years before, AT&T constructed a cell 
phone tower about 500 yards from her home. She devel-
oped impaired memory, speech pressure, insomnia, dry 
eyes and eventually EHS.
Her history is negative for head injury and positive for 
mold exposure.
The fMRI showed severely abnormal DMN with hyper 
connectivity of the anterior component (Figure 6).
Case 7. This right handed male was in his seventies when 
tested. In his work area he had been exposed to EMFs, 
being surrounded by cell phone towers, many computers, 
and electrical equipment. He had developed memory and 
cognitive problems, together with headaches and eventu-
ally EHS. Years ago he had been exposed to diesel fumes 
and more recently to mold. The history is negative for 
head injury.
The fMRI showed abnormal DMN with fragmenta-
tion of the anterior component in the medial orbitofrontal 
area. It also showed decreased flow and/or metabolism 
within the bilateral posterior parietal lobes. Finally dif-
fusely decreased white matter tracts in the left cerebral 
hemisphere were found (Figure 7).
Case 8. This right handed patient was in her sixties when 
testing was done. EMF exposure started around 2005 and 
Figure 5: Lateral view of case no. 5.
Figure 6: Lateral view of case no. 6.
Figure 4: Lateral view of case no. 4.
Brought to you by | La Trobe University
Authenticated
Download Date | 10/16/17 12:10 PM
 Heuser and Heuser: Functional brain MRI in patients complaining of electrohypersensitivity      295
continued ever since. This continual exposure eventu-
ally resulted in the development of EHS. Her complaints 
included headaches, insomnia, blurred vision, and 
impairment of speech. Her medical history includes aller-
gies including asthma, mold exposure, and head injuries 
at ages 10 and 21.
The fMRI showed abnormal DMN with hyper connec-
tivity of the anterior component of the medial orbitofron-
tal area. Also found was mildly decreased flow and/or 
metabolism in the bifrontal lobes (arterial spin labeling). 
Finally there was symmetric loss of white matter tracts in 
the left posterior parietal lobe (Figure 8).
Case 9. This right handed patient was in her early sixties 
when evaluated. For more than 20 years she had tested 
and repaired batteries and was therefore exposed to toxic 
metals and EMFs on every working day. She was also 
exposed to a nearby cell phone tower at work.
She developed cognitive and memory impairment, 
numbness, and eventually EHS and a seizure disorder. 
Additional medical history included an industrial acci-
dent with “electrocution” and also exposure to mold, first 
at work then at home. Finally her history is positive for 
head injury.
The fMRI showed a hyperconnected anterior compo-
nent of the DMN in the medial orbitofrontal area. Also 
found was decreased fractional anisotropy in the body of 
the corpus callosum. Finally there was diminished flow 
within the bifrontal lobes (Figure 9).
Figure 7: Lateral views of case no. 7.
Figure 8: Lateral view of case no. 8.
Figure 9: Lateral view of case no. 9. (A) Sample MRI report for case 
no. 9. (B) Sample fMRI report for case no. 9.
Brought to you by | La Trobe University
Authenticated
Download Date | 10/16/17 12:10 PM
 296      Heuser and Heuser: Functional brain MRI in patients complaining of electrohypersensitivity
MRI OF THE BRAIN
HISTORY
Name: DOB: 12/28/1954 Female
Exam Date: 9/8/14
Referring Phys.: GunnarHeuser,M.D.
This is a 59-year-old female with exposure to mold and mercury. The patient has symptoms of seizures, memory loss, and numbness in hands and left arm.
PROCEDURE
Using a 3 Tesla Siemens Verio MRI Open system, the following sequences were obtained:
1) Localizer.
2) T1 3D sagittal MPRAGE.
3) T2 FLAIR sagittal.
4) DWI axial.
5) SWI axial.
6) T2 FLAIR axial. 7) T2 TSE axial.
FINDINGS
No cavum septum pellucidum is seen. No blood products are visualized. There is no diffusion restriction.
There is no focal or global volume loss.
The posterior fossa is normal.
The sella and parasellar regions are normal. The flow voids of the vessels of the skull base are identified and normal.
The mastoid air cells, paranasal sinuses, and orbits are normal.
There are scattered foci of T2/FLAIR hyperintensity within the supratentorial subcortical white matter located in bifrontal lobes.
Scattered foci of T2/FLAIR hyperintensity in the supratentorial subcortical white matter representing gliosis. This can be seen in the setting of prior head trauma, 
 chronic migraine headaches, less likely chronic small vessel ischemic disease given distribution.
A
FUNCTIONAL MRI (fMRI) OF THE BRAIN
B
HISTORY DOB: 12/28/1954 Female
Exam Date: 9/8/14
Referring Phys.: GunnarHeuser, M.D.
This is a 59-year-old female with exposure to mold and mercury, has symptoms of blackout, seizure, memory loss, head trauma to the left side of brain.
PROCEDURE
Using a 3 Tesla Siemens Verio MRI Open bore system, a functional MRI study was performed using the followings equences:
1) MPRAGE.
2) Resting state network. The EPI sequences for this resting state BOLD scan were then post processed on a
3D workstation and the independent component analysis performed separating out the various networks.
3) Arterial spin labeling.
4) Tractography and fractional anisotropy.
FINDINGS
There is a markedly abnormal default mode network with hyperconnectivity of the anterior component of the default mode. This can be seen in the setting of OCD,
chronicpain, post-traumatic brain injury and/ordrug abuse.
The fractional anisotropy is low within the body of the corpus callosum with a minimal value of 0.22 in the anterior body .Diffusion tensor imaging is within normal.
The arterial spin labeling demonstrates symmetric diminished flow within bifrontal lobes.
IMPRESSION
1. Abnormal functional MRI with hyperconnected anterior component of the default mode network in the medial orbitofrontal area. This can be seen in the setting 
of traumatic brain injury, chronic pain, substance abuse and/or OCD.
2. Decreased fractional anisotropy within the body of the corpus callosum with a minimal value of 0.22 in th eanterior body. This is a sign of disorganization of fibers
 
3. There is diminished flow within bifrontal regions which is consistent with hypometabolic activity. This can be seen in the setting of traumatic brain injury.
which can be seen in the setting of traumatic brain injury.
IMPRESSION
Figure 9 (continued)
Case 10. This right handed patient was in his sixties 
when testing was done. Over the years he had been 
exposed to pesticides and to mold. He had experienced 
a concussion about 10 years earlier. He gradually devel-
oped EHS.
The fMRI showed abnormal DMN with fragmenta-
tion and hyper connectivity of the anterior component of 
the default mode in the medial orbitofrontal area. There 
was borderline decreased flow and/or metabolism within 
bifrontal lobes (Figure 10).
Brought to you by | La Trobe University
Authenticated
Download Date | 10/16/17 12:10 PM
 Heuser and Heuser: Functional brain MRI in patients complaining of electrohypersensitivity      297
Discussion
More than 30 years ago we became interested in the 
effects of toxic chemical exposure on the brain. We 
selected more than 70 patients who had developed multi 
system complaints after long-term exposure to poten-
tially neurotoxic chemicals. All patients underwent 
functional brain scans of the SPECT type. They were all 
abnormal and statistically analyzed. The results were 
published [1] in a peer reviewed journal with the con-
clusion that neurotoxic chemical exposure can lead to 
long-term effects including abnormalities in brain func-
tion. The abnormalities seen were still present years after 
toxic exposure had ceased. The potentially neurotoxic 
effects of chemicals were further discussed in a German 
publication [3].
Since some of our patients had developed exquisite 
sensitivity to even small amounts of chemicals we decided 
to document brain function in these patients with multi-
ple chemical sensitivity (MCS). For this study we chose 
positron emission tomography (PET) scanning of the 
brain and found definite objective abnormalities in these 
patients. The results were published with the conclusion 
that patients with MCS have objective abnormalities in 
brain function [2]. It should be noted that a number of 
PET studies were published by other authors but did not 
address MCS [4–7].
Of interest was the fact that PET brain scans in MCS 
patients showed increased activity in the amygdala [2]. 
This structure is known to control emotions. This is why 
some patients with MCS develop an emotional disorder 
which can be explained on the basis of a “hot” amyg-
dala. In view of this past finding with our MCS patients 
we believe that EHS patients should be studied with PET 
scans so as to find out whether their amygdalae are also 
hyperactive.
MCS was further discussed in a consensus paper in 
which GH was a co-author [8].
In more recent years we started seeing patients who 
claimed exquisite sensitivity to electromagnetic fields 
(electrohypersensitivity, commonly recognized as EHS). 
It was very interesting to find that the complaints these 
patients had developed were similar to the complaints 
patients had who were exposed to and sensitive to chemi-
cals: headaches, cognitive and memory problems, inter-
mittent problems with balance, and intermittent tremor. 
This syndrome has been described by Carpenter and 
others [9–12].
The late Dr. Ross Adey [13] found that chemicals and 
EMFs can interact and aggravate each others’ effects. This 
became a finding we confirmed in our patients.
We suggested to some of our patients with EHS 
that they undergo a functional brain scan to document 
potential abnormalities. They agreed but did not want 
to have any radioactive material used for the scan. This 
of course excluded PET and SPECT scanning of the 
brain. Since these patients had significant complaints 
and were at times disabled we felt that it was important 
to obtain a functional MRI (fMRI) to document poten-
tial abnormalities of brain function. In the beginning 
this was considered as medically necessary and was 
not a research project and therefore not funded by any 
agency. Since insurance coverage is not yet available 
for fMRI, patients had to cover the cost of the whole 
 
evaluation. While fMRI studies look at functional con-
nections between some brain areas, no studies in the 
literature specifically addressed functional connectiv-
ity after exposure to EMF. However, some studies in the 
literature refer to connections between specific areas 
of the brain by measuring EEG and related activities. 
None of these studies have addressed patients with EHS 
[14–16].
Figure 10: Lateral views of case no. 10.
Brought to you by | La Trobe University
Authenticated
Download Date | 10/16/17 12:10 PM
 298      Heuser and Heuser: Functional brain MRI in patients complaining of electrohypersensitivity
Conclusion
All fMRI brain scans were abnormal in our patients. Their 
abnormalities were very similar in all of them.
The study of fMRI created a new language which had 
to be learned. We have included some references which 
help the reader to understand this new terminology 
[17–21].
The question now arises whether the same abnor-
malities seen in all 10 patients can become a diagnostic 
aid or biomarker for determining whether or not a patient 
has electrohypersensitivity (EHS). Some researchers have 
claimed that a diagnosis of EHS should really be a psychi-
atric diagnosis [22]. Other researchers have attempted to 
measure EHS [23]. The possible psychiatric aspects of EHS 
remind us of the history of medicine when epilepsy was 
considered to be a diagnosis of possession by the devil 
[24]. It was only the discovery of the EEG which helped to 
find epilepsy to be a real disease with objective findings. 
We hope that fMRI will play the role of the EEG in EHS.
In the context of the above paragraph we should 
mention the articles by Belpomme et al. [25] and De Luca 
et al. [26] which suggest a long list of biomarkers for the 
diagnosis of EHS. This list does not include functional 
brain scans as potential biomarkers.
The treatment of EHS is very difficult. It was reviewed 
in a recent publication [27]. We have found that hyper-
baric oxygen is at times helpful [28]. We have proposed 
that every patient with EHS should be checked for mast 
cell disease since mast cell abnormalities were found by 
Gangi and Johansson [29]. We described mast cell disor-
der in patients with MCS [30]. Also we found mast cell 
disorder in some of our patients with EHS [31]. Finally we 
believe that mold and mold toxin (mycotoxin) exposure 
can trigger EHS. Mast cell disease and mold problems are 
treatable. Their treatment may decrease EHS. Otherwise 
treatment consists basically of avoidance.
A final point of interest is the fact that the abnormal-
ity seen on the fMRI can also be seen after head injury 
[32, 33]. Indeed, many of our patients complaining of EHS 
have a history of head injury (see our case reports).
Since neurotoxic chemicals as well as head injury 
and EMF exposure are known to impair the blood brain 
barrier, it is almost to be expected that singly or in com-
bination they make a given patient more vulnerable to 
impaired brain function (including seizures).
In the past we studied patients who had developed 
multi system complaints after exposure to a number of 
neurotoxins. The only patients who developed a seizure 
disorder were the ones who gave a history of past head 
injury [31]. Two of our patients (#3 and 9) developed a well 
documented seizure disorder. This can be understood as 
having been “kindled” by repeated exposures to EMFs.
Our study needs to be enlarged and also duplicated 
by others. The subject will be of increasing importance in 
our society in which we and our children are all exposed 
to more and more EMFs.
Acknowledgements: Medical Imaging of Southern Califor-
nia graciously made their studies (MRI and fMRI) avail-
able at a significant discount. We also acknowledge Brea 
Blevins who helped to retrieve and to display the images 
published in this paper. Most patients were either self 
referred or referred by their physician. Some were referred 
by The Peoples Initiative Foundation which was formed 
and is directed by Elizabeth Barris.
Author Statement
Research funding: No funds for this study were avail-
able from any foundation or other financial entity for 
this study. Partial payment was received for two patient 
studies by a charitable foundation (The Peoples Initiative 
Foundation). Patients paid for their own consultations 
and testing. No insurance reimbursements were available 
for the fMRI study. Conflict of interest: Authors state no 
conflict of interest. Informed consent: Informed consent 
has been obtained from all individuals. Ethical approval: 
Ethical approval was not applicable.
References
1. Heuser G, Mena I. Neurospect in neurotoxic chemical exposure. 
Demonstration of long-term functional abnormalities. Toxicol Ind 
Health 1998;14(6):813–27.
2. Heuser G, Wu JC. Deep subcortical (including limbic) hypermetab-
olism in patients with chemical intolerance: human PET studies. 
Ann N Y Acad Sci 2001;933:319–22.
3. Heuser G. Functional brain Imaging with SPECT and PET after neu-
rotoxic exposure: two and three-diimensional displays. Zeitschrift 
fur Umweltmedizin 1999;8:284–5.
4. Huber R, Treyer V, Schuderer J, Berthold T, Buck A, et al. 
 
Exposure to pulse-modulated radio frequency electromag-
netic fields affects regional cerebral blood flow. Eur J Neurosci 
2005;21(4):1000–6.
5. Aalto S, Haarala C, Brück A, Sipilä H, Hämäläinen H, et al. Mobile 
phone affects cerebral blood flow in humans. J Cereb Blood Flow 
Metab 2006;26(7):885–90.
6. Haarala C, Aalto S, Hautzel H, Julkunen L, Rinne JO, et al. Effects 
of a 902 MHz mobile phone on cerebral blood flow in humans: a 
PET study. Neuroreport. 2003;14(16):2019–23.
7. Huber R, Treyer V, Borbély AA, Schuderer J, Gottselig JM, et al. 
Electromagnetic fields, such as those from mobile phones, alter 
regional cerebral blood flow and sleep and waking EEG. J Sleep 
Res 2002;11(4):289–95.
Brought to you by | La Trobe University
Authenticated
Download Date | 10/16/17 12:10 PM
 Heuser and Heuser: Functional brain MRI in patients complaining of electrohypersensitivity      299
8. Bartha L. Multiple chemical sensitivity: a 1999 consensus. Arch 
Environ Health 1999;54(3):147–9.
9. Carpenter DO. The microwave syndrome or electro-
hypersensitivity: historical background. Rev Environ Health 
2015;30(4):217–22.
10. Hedendahl L, Carlberg M, Hardell L. Electromagnetic hypersen-
sitivity – an increasing challenge to the medical profession. Rev 
Environ Health 2015;30(4):209–15.
11. Genuis SJ, Lipp CT. Electromagnetic hypersensitivity: fact or 
 
fiction? Sci Total Environ 2012;414:103–12.
12. McCarty DE, Carrubba S, Chesson AL, Frilot C, Gonzalez-Toledo 
E, et al. Electromagnetic hypersensitivity: evidence for a novel 
neurological syndrome. Int J Neurosci 2011;121(12):670–6.
13. Adey WR. Joint actions of environmental nonionizing electro-
magnetic fields and chemical pollution in cancer promotion. 
Environ Health Perspect 1990;86:297–305.
14. Haarala C, Takio F, Rintee T, Laine M, Koivisto M, et al. Pulsed 
and continuous wave mobile phone exposure over left versus 
right hemisphere: effects on human cognitive function. Bioelec-
tromagnetics 2007;28(4):289–95.
15. Vecchio F, Babiloni C, Ferreri F, Curcio G, Fini R, et al. Mobile 
phone emission modulates interhemispheric functional cou-
pling of EEG alpha rhythms. Eur J Neurosci 2007;25(6):1908–13.
16. Yang L, Chen Q, Lv B, Wu T. Long-Term evolution electromagnetic 
fields exposure modulates the resting state EEG on alpha and 
beta bands. Clin EEG Neurosci 2017;48(3):168–75.
17. van den Heuvel MP, Hulshoff Pol HE. Exploring the brain net-
work: a review on resting-state fMRI functional connectivity. Eur 
Neuropsychopharmacol 2010;20(8):519–34.
18. Horn A, Dirk O, Reisert M, Blankenburg F. Default Mode Network. 
[revised 2016 August]. In: Wikipedia [Internet]. San Francisco, 
CA: NeuroImage; 2006 September. 10 pages. Available from: 
www.wikipedia.com. DOI: 10.1016.
19. Liston C, Chen AC, Zebley BD, Drysdale AT, Gordon R, et al. 
Default mode network mechanisms of transcranial magnetic 
stimulation in depression. Biol Psychiatry 2014;76(7):517–26.
20. Smith SM, Vidaurre D, Beckmann CF, Glasser MF, Jenkinson M, 
et al. Functional connectomics from resting-state fMRI. Trends 
Cogn Sci 2013;17(12):666–82.
21. Lee MH, Smyser CD, Shimony JS. Resting-state fMRI: a review 
of methods and clinical applications. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 
2013;34(10):1866–72.
22. Rubin GJ, Hillert L, Nieto-Hernandez R, van Rongen E,  
Oftedal G. Do people with idiopathic environmental intolerance 
attributed to electromagnetic fields display physiological  
effects when exposed to electromagnetic fields? A system-
atic review of provocation studies. Bioelectromagnetics 
2011;32(8):593–609.
23. Tuengler A, von Klitzing L. Hypothesis on how to measure 
electromagnetic hypersensitivity. Electromagn Biol Med 
2013;32(3):281–90.
24. Espí Forcén C, Espí Forcén F. Demonic possessions 
and mental illness: discussion of selected cases in 
late medieval hagiographical literature. Early Sci Med 
2014;19(3):258–79.
25. Belpomme D, Campagnac C, Irigaray P. Reliable disease 
biomarkers characterizing and identifying electrohypersensi-
tivity and multiple chemical sensitivity as two etiopathogenic 
aspects of a unique pathological disorder. Rev Environ Health 
2015;30(4):251–71.
26. De Luca C, Chung Sheun Thai J, Raskovic D, Cesareo E, Caccamo 
D, et al. Metabolic and genetic screening of electromagnetic 
hypersensitive subjects as a feasible tool for diagnostics and 
intervention. Mediators Inflamm 2014;2014:924184.
27. Rubin GJ, Das Munshi J, Wessely S. A systematic review of 
treatments for electromagnetic hypersensitivity. Psychother Psy-
chosom 2006;75(1):12–8.
28. Heuser G, Uszler JM. Hyperbaric oxygenation for cerebral palsy. 
Lancet 2001;357(9273):2053–4. Erratum in: Lancet 2001 Nov 
24;358(9295):1820.
29. Gangi S, Johansson O. A theoretical model based upon mast 
cells and histamine to explain the recently proclaimed sensitiv-
ity to electric and/or magnetic fields in humans. Med Hypoth-
eses 2000;54(4):663–71.
30. Heuser G. Mast cell disorder to be ruled out in MCS. Arch Envi-
ron Health 2000;55(4):284–5.
31. Unpublished observations by authors.
32. Mishra AM, Bai X, Sanganahalli BG, Waxman SG,  
Shatillo O, et al. Decreased resting functional connec-
tivity after traumatic brain injury in the rat. Plos One 
2014;09(4):e95280.
33. Zhou Y, Milham M, Lui Y, Zhou Y, Milham MP, et al. Default-mode 
network disruption in mild traumatic brain injury. Radiology 
2012;265(3):882–92.
Brought to you by | La Trobe University
Authenticated
Download Date | 10/16/17 12:10 PM
