 Mechanisms, Prediction, and Prevention of ACL Injuries: Cut Risk With
Three Sharpened and Validated Tools
Timothy E. Hewett,1,2 Gregory D. Myer,3,4,5,6,7,8 Kevin R. Ford,9 Mark V. Paterno,7,10 Carmen E. Quatman1,7
1Departments of Orthopedics, Mayo Clinic Biomechanics Laboratories and Sports Medicine Research Center, Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation and Physiology & Biomedical Engineering, Mayo Clinic, 200 First Street SW, RO_Gu_01_28BIOM Rochester and Minneapolis,
Minnesota 55905, 2The Ohio State University, Sports Medicine, Biomedical Engineering, Columbus, Ohio 45229, 3Division of Sports Medicine,
Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, 4Departments of Pediatrics and Orthopaedic Surgery, University of
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, 5The Micheli Center for Sports Injury Prevention, Waltham, Massachusetts, 6Department of Orthopaedics,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 7Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Sports Medicine Biodynamics Center
and Human Performance Laboratory, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229,
8Departments of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Orthopaedic Surgery, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, 9Department of Physical Therapy, Highpoint University, Highpoint, North Carolina, 10Department
of Occupational Therapy and Physical Therapy, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229
Received 22 December 2015; accepted 25 August 2016
Published online 19 September 2016 in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com). DOI 10.1002/jor.23414
ABSTRACT:
Economic and societal pressures influence modern medical practice to develop and implement prevention strategies. Anterior
cruciate ligament (ACL) injury devastates the knee joint leading to short term disability and long term sequelae. Due to the high risk of
long term osteoarthritis in all treatment populations following ACL injury, prevention is the only effective intervention for this life-
altering disruption in knee health. The “Sequence of Prevention” Model provides a framework to monitor progress towards the ultimate
goal of preventing ACL injuries. Utilizing this model, our multidisciplinary collaborative research team has spent the last decade working
to delineate injury mechanisms, identify injury risk factors, predict which athletes are at-risk for injury, and develop ACL injury
prevention programs. Within this model of injury prevention, modifiable factors (biomechanical and neuromuscular) related to injury
mechanisms likely provide the best opportunity for intervention strategies aimed to decrease the risk of ACL injury, particularly in female
athletes. Knowledge advancements have led to the development of potential solutions that allow athletes to compete with lowered risk of
ACL injury. Design and integration of personalized clinical assessment tools and targeted prevention strategies for athletes at high risk
for ACL injury may transform current prevention practices and ultimately significantly reduce ACL injury incidence. This 2016 OREF
Clinical Research Award focuses on the authors’ work and contributions to the field. The author’s acknowledge the many research groups
who have contributed to the current state of knowledge in the fields of ACL injury mechanisms, injury risk screening and injury
prevention strategies. � 2016 Orthopaedic Research Society. Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. J Orthop Res 34:1843–1855, 2016.
Keywords:
tendon and ligament; biomaterials
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE EXTENT OF THE ACL
INJURY PROBLEM
Anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) injury in a young
athlete leads to short term disability, possible loss of
scholarship funding and often results in knee articular
cartilage destruction and osteoarthritis as early as 10
years after the initial injury insult. 1–8 Since 1980, it is
estimated that more than 1.5 million ACL reconstruc-
tions were performed in the United States with the
expectation that reestablishment of knee joint stability
would prevent risk of further joint degeneration. 9,10
With estimated costs for treatment in ACL injured
patients in the United States over three billion dollars
annually, the physical, emotional and financial con-
sequences for patients, families, and the orthopaedic
community are profound.9–11
Adolescent and mature females who participate in
pivoting and jumping sports suffer anterior cruciate
ligament (ACL) injuries at a 2- to 10-fold greater rate
than male athletes participating in the same high-risk
cutting and landing sports.12–17 The combination of this
greater susceptibility and a 10-fold increase in the
female sports population since the inception of Title IX
has resulted in a dramatic increase in the number of
ACL
injuries
in
females.16
In
the
United
States,
100,000–250,000 ACL injuries occur each year. 11,18 The
costs exceed $650 million annually in female varsity
athletics alone.19 Neuromuscular control deficits at the
hip and trunk may contribute to decreased active
neuromuscular control of the lower extremity (LE) that
may lead to increased knee abduction loads and strain
on the knee ligaments.20–23 The costs associated with
ACL injury do not end with the ACL reconstruction and
rehabilitation. There is a strong association between
ACL injury and development of posttraumatic knee
osteoarthritis at a relatively young age, which also
occurs with much greater incidence in females than
males.7,24 It is estimated that between 50% and 100% of
women with an ACL injury will show significant pain,
functional limitations, and radiographic signs of knee
osteoarthritis within 12–20 years of the index injury.5,7
Although surgical techniques and rehabilitation pro-
grams have significantly improved over the past two
decades, long-term follow-up studies indicate that resto-
ration of knee joint laxity does not appear to correlate
This article is a 2016 OREF Clinical Research Award recipient.
Grant sponsor: National Institutes of Health/NIAMS; Grant
numbers: R01-AR049735, R01-AR056259, R01-AR055563, R03-
AR057551, R21-AR065068-01A1, U01-AR067997; Grant sponsor:
Orthopaedic Research and Education Foundation (OREF); Grant
sponsor: Orthopaedic Research Society (the 2016 OREF Clinical
Research Award); Grant sponsor: National Football League
Charities; Grant sponsor: American College of Sports Medicine
Foundation Plus One Active Research Grant; Grant sponsor:
Ohio State University Sports Health and Performance Institute;
Grant sponsor: Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Research Founda-
tion.
Correspondence to: Timothy E. Hewett (T: 507-538-1717; F: 507-
284-5392; E-mail: hewett.timothy@mayo.edu)
JOURNAL OF ORTHOPAEDIC RESEARCH NOVEMBER 2016
1843
 with clinical outcomes. ACL injured patients exhibit
osteoarthritis symptoms and radiographic evidence of
knee joint degeneration, irrespective of surgical inter-
vention.4,5 Thus, the initial joint trauma suffered
during the ACL injury event may serve as a major
precursor to joint degeneration that may not be avoided
despite ACL reconstruction. 5 In order for many young
adults to safely participate and enjoy the health
benefits of sports and physical activity, prevention of
ACL injury may be the most effective intervention.
Many intrinsic and extrinsic risk factors have been
theorized to place certain athletes at risk for ACL
injury. Even though an athlete exhibits predisposing
factors that may place them at high risk for ACL
injury, this does not guarantee they will tear their
ACL. An inciting event (mechanism of injury) must
occur that leads to the ACL injury. To achieve the
ultimate goal of ACL injury reduction in high-risk
populations, it is important to both identify the risk
factors that predispose an athlete to injury and clearly
define what occurs during an inciting ACL injury
event in order to develop the best intervention strate-
gies for targeted treatments of risk factors.
Coronal plane knee motion and moments and trunk
displacement predict ACL injury risk in female ath-
letes. Knee abduction loads and neuromuscular control
of the trunk both predict ACL injury risk with high
sensitivity and specificity. Knee abduction load pre-
dicted ACL injury risk with 78% sensitivity and 73%
specificity.22 Trunk displacement predicted risk of
knee, knee ligament and ACL injuries with high
sensitivity and specificity in female, but not male,
athletes.25 A logistic regression model that incorpo-
rated lateral trunk motion predicted ACL injury risk
in females with 83% sensitivity and 76% specificity,
but did not predict knee or ACL injury risk in males.
The mechanism of ACL injury may differ in females
and males, especially with respect to the dynamic
positioning
of
the
knee,
as
females
demonstrate
greater valgus collapse of the LE primarily in the
coronal plane.26 Most ACL injuries in females occur by
non-contact mechanisms during landing and lateral
pivoting.27 The mechanism of non-contact ACL inju-
ries as observed on video has several common compo-
nents in female athletes: high knee abduction, lateral
trunk motion with the body shifted over one leg and
the plantar surface of the foot fixed flat on the playing
surface, displaced away from the trunk and low knee
flexion.26–29 Unanticipated perturbation of the trunk is
another common component of the mechanism.26
In 1992, van Mechelen and colleagues provided a
framework to monitor progress in musculoskeletal
injury prevention via the ‘Sequence of Prevention’
Model (Fig. 1).30 Within this model of injury preven-
tion, our work over the past 15 years has focused on
utilizing this model to target the most modifiable risk
factors (biomechanical and neuromuscular) related to
ACL injuries with the goal to provide the most
effective interventions for the orthopaedic community.
Specifically, we have focused on defining what are the
underlying risk factors for ACL injury, who are the
athletes at risk for ACL injury, and determination of
when those athletes become most vulnerable to injury.
In addition, we have targeted how to prevent ACL
injury by identifying which prevention strategies are
most effective and when implementation of these
strategies offer the greatest benefit to young athletes.
The current manuscript summarizes the findings of
over 100 reports related to sequence of ACL injury
prevention published by our research team from 1996
to 2016 presented in various orthopaedic, sports medi-
cine, and biomechanic related peer-reviewed journals
(Fig. 2). Our research was collectively funded by
numerous institutions including the National Insti-
tutes of Health/NIAMS, The Orthopaedic Research
and Education Foundation (OREF), National Football
League Charities, American College of Sports Medi-
cine, The Ohio State University Sports Health and
Performance Institute, and the Cincinnati Children’s
Hospital Research Foundation.
ESTABLISH THE ETIOLOGY AND MODIFIABLE
MECHANISMS OF ACL INJURIES
Risk Factors
Female athletes have a 2–8 fold greater ACL injury
rate compared to male athletes and it is estimated
that 5% of female high school varsity athletes per year
sustain a primary ACL injury.11,13,15,31 However, prior
to puberty, ACL injuries are relatively rare and no
sex-related differences in ACL ruptures are observed
in pre-pubertal athletes.32,33 Females and males dem-
onstrate important anatomical, hormonal, and neuro-
muscular factors differences after the onset of puberty
which potentially influences the divergence in ACL
injury rates between the sexes after puberty.34–36 It is
theorized that males and females may even have
different mechanisms of ACL injury.37,38
Sex and Hormonal Risk Factors
The sex differences in anatomy, hormones, neuromus-
cular control and biomechanics likely contribute to
ACL injury rate disparity and have been explored
extensively in our laboratory.35,39–51 Non-contact ACL
injuries during sports likely occur within 30–100 ms
from initial contact of the foot onto the ground during
sports movements.38,52 Safe attenuation of landing
forces and efficient neuromuscular control (recruit-
ment of muscular restraints to resist perturbations
and control dangerous external loads to the lower
Figure 1.
The Sequence of Prevention Model30 as described by
van Mechelen et al.
1844
HEWETT ET AL.
JOURNAL OF ORTHOPAEDIC RESEARCH NOVEMBER 2016
 extremity) is essential for the prevention of injury
during sports. Post-pubertal females exhibit greater
landing forces and force loading rates, lower ham-
strings to quadriceps torque ratios at high angular
velocities
and
altered
quadriceps
and
hamstrings
activation strategies compared to males. Females may
preferentially rely on higher activations of quadriceps
muscles relative to hamstrings muscles with incre-
mental increases in landing intensities.53 These neuro-
muscular differences in females may increase frontal
plane
knee
motions
and
loads
during
sports
movements.35,40–42,46,48–51,54–56 Post-pubertal females
also demonstrate altered hip recruitment strategies
for controlling landing with significantly greater hip
moments, higher knee to hip moment ratios, decreased
gluteus maximus activation, increased rectus femoris
activation, and greater hip adduction angles and
moments compared to males.39,47,49,57
A large systematic review performed by our group
demonstrated that males and females differ in trunk
and hip neuromuscular control and biomechanics in
all planes of motion (sagittal, coronal, and transverse).
Females show greater lateral trunk displacement,
altered trunk and hip flexion angles, and greater
ranges of trunk motion compared to males.58 The s
ex differences in landing strategies combined with
Figure 2.
The Sequence of Prevention Model30 applied to ACL injury prevention measures explored in our laboratory. Published
manuscripts available from our laboratory are categorized within the model.
ACL INJURY PREVENTION
1845
JOURNAL OF ORTHOPAEDIC RESEARCH NOVEMBER 2016
 decreased torsional stiffness and increased joint laxity
in
females
may
increase
females
risk
for
ACL
injury.41,45,47,59
After the onset of puberty, the sexes differ signifi-
cantly in hormonal milieu. It has been postulated that
the cyclic fluctuations of hormones during the follicu-
lar and ovulatory stages of the menstrual cycle may
affect the mechanical properties of the ACL.42,60–64
Systematic reviews performed in our laboratory sup-
port the theory that the menstrual cycle may be
associated with increased knee laxity and ACL in-
jury.42,60,65,66 However, we found no effect of either the
menstrual cycle or hormone stabilization (oral contra-
ceptives) on knee or hip joint loading during high risk
sport maneuvers.43 Currently, the downstream effects
of female hormones associated with the menstrual
cycle on ACL injury risk and the ability to modify
these effects remain unclear.
Laxity
Evidence indicates that there may be a link between
ACL injury and knee joint laxity and generalized joint
laxity.59,67 The ovulatory phase of the menstrual cycle
has been associated with increased knee joint laxity
while the pre-ovulatory phase may be the phase
during the cycle when females may be most at risk for
ACL injury.65 Studies in our laboratory indicate that
after the onset of puberty, females have significantly
higher generalized joint laxity compared to males.45
Athletes with increased generalized joint laxity also
demonstrate increased midfoot loading that may affect
lower extremity biomechanics and potentially increase
ACL injury risk.68 The associations between laxity and
hormones, coupled with increased generalized joint
laxity may contribute to the increased risk of ACL
injury
in
female
athletes
after
puberty.42,59,65
Although laxity may increase the risk for ACL injury,
particularly in females, the ability to modify joint
laxity
presents
a
challenge.
However,
it
may
be
possible to indirectly overcome the effects of joint
laxity with increased muscular strength and height-
ened neuromuscular control.
Maturation
The rapid anatomic, hormonal, neuromuscular and
biomechanical changes that occur during maturation
differ significantly between the sexes and may partially
explain the divergence in ACL injury rates between the
sexes after puberty.35,50,69 Although often at different
rates and chronological ages, both males and females
undergo rapid increases in height and body mass that
result in a higher center of mass and longer levers
(femur and tibia) in the lower extremity. In contrast,
our laboratory demonstrated that the sexes have signif-
icantly
different
neuromuscular
and
biomechanical
changes that accompany puberty.39,40,44,70 Neuromus-
cular function appears to dynamically change through-
out the adolescent time period and some individuals
experience delays or even regressions in neuromuscular
function.36,71 In addition, the importance and function
of co-contraction of the hamstrings and quadriceps
muscles related to age and skill development varies in
the literature due to technical and practical consider-
ations. However, adequate dynamic knee joint stability
and efficient movement patterns during adolescence
appear to be a necessary component for all functional
movements and likely helps resist against excessive
knee joint loads.71 Functional deficits in neuromuscular
control have been associated with increased ACL injury
risk in female athletes.40,47,72
Pre-pubertal children do not appear to demonstrate
measurable sex differences in lower extremity bio-
mechanical and neuromuscular differences are detect-
able
between
the
sexes.50,69,73
In
contrast,
after
puberty females exhibit measurable quadriceps domi-
nance, ligament dominance, leg dominance (lower
extremity asymmetry) and trunk dominance compared
to
males.51,74–77
Post-pubertal
females
also
have
higher coronal plane knee motions, knee abduction
angles and moments and decreased active knee joint
stiffness compared to mature males. 40,50,70 Males and
females demonstrate increases in active stiffness at
the knee after puberty. However, males have greater
magnitudes of knee, ankle and hip stiffness through-
out
the
adolescent
growth
spurt
compared
to
females.39
In contrast to females, males experience increases in
power,
strength
and
coordination
(neuromuscular
spurt) coincident with the anthropomorphic and hor-
monal
changes
that
accompany
puberty.35,50,57
A longitudinal study from our laboratory demonstrated
that males exhibit increases in neuromuscular mea-
sures such as vertical jump height and ability to
attenuate landing forces.35 A longitudinal study of 351
athletes found that males exhibit significant increases
in normative hip abduction strength as they mature
while females do not.57 For females, the absence of a
neuromuscular spurt potentially increases knee injury
risk due to possible deficiencies in neuromuscular
control and the ability to adapt to perturbations to the
longer bony levers and greater mass that accompanies
the maturation process.35,44,50,70 Fortunately, evidence
from our laboratory demonstrates that a neuromuscu-
lar spurt can be induced in females with neuromuscular
training programs. Neuromuscular and biomechanical
ACL injury risk factors such as poor landing mechanics,
inadequate force attenuation abilities and inefficient
muscle recruitment can be modified and neuromuscular
training
programs
that
target
improvements
in
strength, power and coordination appear to reduce the
risk of ACL injury.11,47,75,78,79
Biomechanical and Neuromuscular
Biomechanical and neuromuscular ACL injury risk
factors have been extensively explored in our labora-
tory over the past 15 years. In contrast to anatomic
risk factors, neuromuscular and biomechanical deficits
can be addressed with intervention strategies.60,74,80
1846
HEWETT ET AL.
JOURNAL OF ORTHOPAEDIC RESEARCH NOVEMBER 2016
 Core body control and lower extremity proprioception
are modifiable risk factors and are important for
attenuating and adapting to perturbations during
sports tasks.81 Decreased ability to control trunk
displacement after rapid perturbations, is a highly
sensitive for predictor of knee, ligament and ACL
injury.81 Deficits in the ability to control the body’s
core during external perturbations predict knee injury
with 90% sensitivity and 56% specificity.81 Single-leg
postural control deficits following ACL reconstruction
place an athlete at risk for a second ACL injury.72
Muscle strength, activation and synergistic coordi-
nation are important to overall neuromuscular func-
tion, may enhance proprioception and performance
and are likely important factors that could be modifi-
able for ACL injury prevention tactics.
82 Studies
performed in our laboratory demonstrate that males
and females exhibit different hip and knee joint
muscular
activation
and
recruitment
strategies.
Females
who
have
decreased
relative
hamstring
strength but high relative quadriceps strength may be
at greater risk for ACL injury. 83 Females also adopt
different hip muscular recruitment strategies than
males, which appears to predispose the females to
lower
extremity
postures
(e.g.,
knee
abduction
motions, angles, and moments) associated with in-
creased risk for ACL injury. 39,47,49,58,84
Large scale biomechanical evaluations in our labo-
ratory have identified knee abduction, hip external
rotation and asymmetries between lower extremities
as strong predictors for ACL injury. 22,72 We prospec-
tively measured 3-dimensional kinematics of female
athletes (N ¼ 205) during a landing task. Compared to
their team controls, the athletes that subsequently
sustained an ACL injury after screening exhibited
eight degrees greater knee abduction angles and 2.5
times greater knee abduction moments during land-
ing. In addition the athletes that went on to subse-
quent ACL injury had 20% higher ground reaction
forces at landing compared to control teammates.22
Coronal plane motions at the hip significantly contrib-
ute to increased knee abduction and likely increase
ACL injury risk.85 Reduction of coronal plane hip
motion via neuromuscular training that targets the
hip and trunk may be necessary to decrease high risk
knee abduction postures and ultimately reduce ACL
injury risk. 85
Previous Injury
Previous ACL injury significantly increases the odds of
sustaining another ACL injury.86–88 Healthy athletes
reportedly have a 1 in 60 to 1 in 100 chance of
sustaining a primary ACL injury. Return to high
activity levels after ACL injury can lead to a 15–25
times greater chance of subsequent re-injury or con-
tralateral ACL injury.89–91 A recent study in our
laboratory found that females are four times more
likely to suffer a second ACL injury and six times
more likely to suffer a contralateral ACL injury than
males.91 A systematic review of the literature indicates
that female patients who have had ACL reconstruction
with a hamstring autograft exhibit greater anterior-
posterior knee laxity measures compared to males
with hamstring autograft reconstruction.92 Deficits in
postural control and knee and hip neuromuscular
function strongly predict second ACL injury risk after
return to sport from ACL reconstruction.93
ACL
reconstructed
patients
often
demonstrate
asymmetric loading of the lower extremities during
sports
tasks.94
Specifically,
ACL
reconstructed
patients cleared to return back to sports frequently
exhibit patterns of favoring their uninjured contralat-
eral limb and this deficit may persist even after 2
years post-operatively.72,93,94 This asymmetric loading
of the contralateral limb may place athletes at further
risk for second ACL injury as limb loading asymmetry
has been identified as a potential ACL injury risk
factor.51 Identification of asymmetry is an important
component for safe reintegration of patients back to
sports activities. However, bipedal tasks may not be
sensitive enough to identify asymmetries in lower
extremity loading. Instead, incorporation of single
limb tests such as single leg hopping may be important
to identify limb asymmetries in strength, landing and
movement patterns.95 In addition, after ACL recon-
struction, evaluation of ACL integrity of contralateral
limbs and alterations of laxity in reconstructed limbs
can be difficult. Our laboratory demonstrated that
curve shapes from knee arthrometry can serve as a
simple and accurate diagnostic tool for individuals
without a healthy contralateral limb.96 Persistent
lower extremity asymmetries during functional activi-
ties may further increase and ACL reconstructed
athlete’s chance for sustaining a second ACL injury
(contralateral or ipsilateral). Rehabilitation programs
that target reduction in functional asymmetries prior
to the return to sports after ACL reconstruction may
be necessary to more safely reintegrate these patients
back to sports.
Genetics
It is speculated that genetics may play a role in the
risk for ACL injury. Genetics influence laxity as
demonstrated by inheritable collagen disorders such
as Ehlers Danlos and Marfan’s Syndrome. Although
limited
information
is
currently
available
in
the
literature about the genetic factors that may increase
ACL injury risk, it is probable that ACL injury risk
factors may be partially influenced by genetics.97–99
We tested fraternal twin sisters prior to their sports
seasons and both went on to subsequent ACL inju-
ries. Both sisters demonstrated multiple potential
ACL injury risk factors including increased knee
abduction
angles,
decreased
knee
flexion
angles,
increased generalized joint laxity, decreased ham-
strings/quadriceps torque ratios and smaller femoral
condylar notch widths.100 The genetic traits that may
predispose athletes to ACL injury are not clear at
ACL INJURY PREVENTION
1847
JOURNAL OF ORTHOPAEDIC RESEARCH NOVEMBER 2016
 this time. However, a pleiotropic genetic predisposi-
tion is likely and identification of such genetic traits
may potentially help clinicians identify at risk ath-
letes and target specific risk factors within family
members to minimize ACL injury risk.
Mechanisms of ACL Injury
The
knee joint
potentially
translates
and
rotates
within all three planes (sagittal, frontal and trans-
verse). The majority of motion occurs in the sagittal
plane (knee flexion/extension) and motion beyond the
normal physiologic ranges in any plane may result in
ligamentous injury. A systematic review by our labora-
tory demonstrated that ACL injuries are more likely to
occur
during
multi-planar
rather
than
uni-planar
mechanisms.
Evaluation
of
videos
of
ACL
injury
events provide evidence that during the injury athletes
have increased lateral trunk motion, greater knee
abduction motions, flatfoot position at initial ground
contact and increased hip flexion compared to non-
injury
conditions.38,101,102
Males
and
females
also
demonstrate
differences
in
mechanisms
of
in-
jury. 34,37,38,102 Females often demonstrate the same
knee valgus collapse ACL injury mechanism as males,
but they often had significantly higher knee and hip
flexion during injury compared to males.38
Although many techniques exist to study ACL
injury mechanisms such as athlete interviews, arthro-
scopic studies, video analyses, cadaveric studies, in
vivo laboratory studies and mathematical modeling,
the inherent limitations of each technique makes it
challenging to make clearly define ACL injury mecha-
nisms.102 In order to address this problem, our labora-
tory has developed a new research paradigm (in sim)
that integrates in vivo, in vitro (cadaveric), and in
silico (computer modeling methods).103 The goal of the
in sim approach is to provide a more comprehensive
understanding of the complex joint biomechanics that
lead to ACL injury. Our laboratories have utilized the
in sim approach to evaluate ACL injury mechanisms
and tibio-femoral cartilage pressure distributions with
comparisons to in vivo bone bruise patterns (occurs in
over 80% of patients with acute ACL injury).104,105
Landing data from young female athletes that went on
to subsequent ACL injury was used as input into a
validated finite element model and normal landing
and injury conditions were simulated in silico. In vivo
video data of female athletes during an ACL injury
event was used to provide input for simulated ACL
injury conditions.38,52 The results supported a valgus
collapse mechanism with potential multi-planar loads
of
tibial
abduction
combined
with
anterior
tibial
translation or external or internal tibial rotations.104
Many ACL injury mechanism studies demonstrate
lower extremity biomechanical loading patterns that
may be avoided with neuromuscular training pro-
grams. Modification of landing techniques and educa-
tion of dangerous knee postures may be important
injury prevention strategies in the future.
Prediction of Risk
Over the past two decades we have prescreened
biomechanical, anatomical and neuromuscular mea-
sures on over 3,000 athletes prior to their athletic
seasons and tracked them to determine who sustained
subsequent ACL injury.10,46,74,77,78 Our biomechanical
epidemiologic studies indicate that high knee abduc-
tion moments and knee abduction angles and ground
reaction forces during a jump landing task are impor-
tant predictors for ACL injury risk (78% sensitivity
and 73% specificity).22 Athletes that went on to subse-
quent ACL injury also demonstrated a 16% shorter
stance time and high ground reaction forces at landing
compared to uninjured teammates.22 Side-to-side dif-
ferences
in
anterior-posterior
knee
displacement
(1.3 mm or greater) and positive knee hyperextension
increased the odds of ACL injury, fourfold and fivefold,
respectively.59 Decreased hamstring strength but simi-
lar quadriceps strength to males was often exhibited
by females that went on to subsequent ACL injury. In
contrast, females that did not suffer an ACL injury
demonstrated decreased quadriceps strength relative
to males.83
Deficits in the ability to control the body’s core
appears to be important predictor for knee injuries in
female athletes.81 Deficits in core stability predicted
knee injury with 90% sensitivity and 56% specificity in
females, while no similar associations were apparent
in male athletes.81 Athletes that exhibited large lateral
trunk excursions after sudden perturbation often went
on to sustain knee
injuries. Trunk displacement,
proprioception and history of low back pain was highly
predictive of ACL injury risk in females (91% accu-
racy) and ligamentous injury of the knee (91% sensi-
tivity and 68% specificity).81
Athletes that have sustained a previous ACL injury
are at high risk of second ACL injury if they return to
sport.72 In a cohort of athletes that returned to sport
after ACL reconstruction, net hip torque impulse,
frontal knee plane range of motion during landing,
asymmetries in sagittal plane knee moments during
landing and deficits and postural stability predicted
second ACL injury risk with 92% sensitivity and 88%
specificity.93 Identification of the specific deficits that
can be addressed during the rehabilitation stage may
be a critical step in reduction of up to a 25% chance of
second ACL injury in young athletes that return to
sport.
Clinical Assessment Tools to Identify At-Risk Athletes
Development of clinical assessment tools to identify
athletes at risk for ACL injury would aid clinicians to
target the populations that will benefit most from
intervention. Although we have identified important
predictors of ACL injury that are potentially modifiable
like measures of high knee abduction moment during
landing tasks, these measurements utilized expensive
measurement tools (e.g., motion analysis systems,
force plates) and labor-intensive data collection and
1848
HEWETT ET AL.
JOURNAL OF ORTHOPAEDIC RESEARCH NOVEMBER 2016
 reduction techniques to identify important biomechani-
cal risk factors.22 Our research has helped us develop
inexpensive; less labor intensive assessment tools that
can be performed relatively quickly and easily in the
clinical setting and have been shown to identify high
knee abduction moments with 73% sensitivity and 70%
specificity.77,106–110 Clinical correlates to laboratory-
based measures identify, stratify and can used to
target subjects at increased risk for highly effective
interventions.109 Identification of athletes with high
knee abduction moments is possible with less expen-
sive equipment and time because measures that can be
performed without a motion analysis system of knee
abduction motion, knee flexion range of motion, body
mass, tibial length and quadriceps to hamstring ratio
account for nearly 80% of the measured variance in
knee abduction moment during landing.107 These
clinical prediction tools show moderate to high inter-
rater reliability (intra-class correlation co-efficiencies
0.60–0.97) and we have continued to simplify and
optimize the screening tools to include a calibrated
physician’s scale, a standard measuring tape, stan-
dard camcorder, ImageJ software, and an isokinetic
dynamometer.
These
optimized
measures
predict
high
knee
abduction
moments
status
with
84%
sensitivity
and
67%
specificity.108,111
A
clinician-
friendly nomogram tool demonstrates over 75% pre-
diction
accuracy
for
identification
of
high
knee
abduction moments in individual athletes.108,111 Cre-
ation of clinician-friendly, inexpensive techniques to
identify and subsequently enroll athletes into appro-
priate injury prevention programs may help reduce
ACL injuries in athletes.
PREVENTION TECHNIQUES
Overview of Prevention Techniques
Identification
of
risk
factors
and
mechanisms
of
injury that are modifiable through neuromuscular
based injury prevention programs would allow many
athletes to continue sports participation and reduce
risk for ACL injury.112 Detection and treatment of
quantifiable neuromuscular control deficits and func-
tional movements that significantly increase risk for
ACL injury has been a high priority in our laboratory
because these are likely the most modifiable risk
factors.11,21,60,74–76,78,80,84,94,106,110–120
We define deficits in muscle strength, power, coordi-
nation or activation patterns that potentially increase
injury risk due to increased joint loads as neuromuscu-
lar
control
deficits.115
Females
often
demonstrate
neuromuscular control deficits that likely play a role
in ACL injury risk.115 One neuromuscular deficit,
which is operationally termed “ligament dominance,”
can be defined as an imbalance between the neuro-
muscular and ligamentous control of dynamic knee
joint stability.121 This control imbalance is demon-
strated by an inability to control lower extremity
frontal plane motion during landing and cutting. A
second modifiable neuromuscular control deficit often
observed in female athletes, which is termed “quadri-
ceps dominance,” can be defined as an imbalance
between knee extensor and flexor strength, recruit-
ment
and
coordination.121
A
third
neuromuscular
control deficit, often observed in female athletes is “leg
dominance,” which can be defined as an imbalance
between the two lower extremities in strength, coordi-
nation and control.121 The fourth neuromuscular con-
trol deficit, often observed in female athletes is “trunk
dominance”
or
“‘core’
dysfunction,”
which
can
be
defined as an imbalance between the inertial demands
of the trunk and control and coordination to resist it.
Deficits in control of the body’s core during sports
tasks make it difficult to dissipate external perturba-
tions and lead to excessive frontal plane trunk dis-
placements, high ground reaction forces and large
knee abduction loads.77,122
The adolescent phase is a critical stage for neuro-
muscular control development during which children
may overcome certain deficits or develop new ones. If
not addressed, neuromuscular deficits may continue
into adulthood and increase an athlete’s risk for ACL
injury.22,35,39,40,50 There is clear evidence that neuro-
muscular
training
programs
can
enhance
athletic
performance through increased strength, power and
coordination as well as address neuromuscular defi-
cits.75,78,114 We have demonstrated that it is possible
to induce a neuromuscular spurt and improve neuro-
muscular deficits in females with training. 112,114 Neu-
romuscular training potentially reduces ACL injury
risk by approximately 50% and enhances athletic
performance measures in females.11,112,114
Studies of Prevention Techniques
Integrated
neuromuscular
training
programs
(bio-
mechanical,
neuromuscular
control,
and
strength
training techniques) have effectively improved perfor-
mance and decreased risk for ACL injury. 11,112,114,117
Current neuromuscular training programs necessitate
integrated, somewhat comprehensive protocols with a
combination of power, strength and coordination train-
ing since single neuromuscular component interven-
tions have failed to significantly impact knee injury
rates in females.123,124 Compliance to training pro-
grams is crucial for prevention techniques to success-
fully work. Unfortunately, comprehensive ACL injury
prevention programs often require extensive commit-
ments
in
time
and
involvement
for
players
and
coaches, which has impeded widespread acceptance
and utilization by athletes and teams to implement
the training necessary to reduce ACL injury risk. In
order to address this challenge, our laboratory has
focused on creating more efficient and effective train-
ing protocols to address neuromuscular deficits and
high risk landing biomechanics.125,126 We have con-
ducted comparative studies of plyometric training
versus dynamic stabilization as well as evaluated the
effects of targeted training of the trunk, hip and knee
on power, strength, coordination, limb asymmetries,
ACL INJURY PREVENTION
1849
JOURNAL OF ORTHOPAEDIC RESEARCH NOVEMBER 2016
 ground reaction forces at landing, and knee abduction
measures.78,79,112–114,117,127
Plyometric and balance training both appear to
reduce high-risk knee abduction and flexion mea-
sures.112,114,117 Targeted core muscular (trunk) train-
ing
can
increase
hip
abduction
strength
and
potentially improve neuromuscular control of lower
limb alignment during sports activities.113 Studies
from our lab show that targeted core training and
improvements
in
lower
extremity
strength
can
improve single-limb postural stability and neuromus-
cular control.79,127
The optimal length of training necessary to reduce
ACL injury risk and whether it can be incorporated
with
in
season
sports
training
remains
unclear.
Females that demonstrate high knee abduction mea-
sures appear to be more responsive to neuromuscular
training than athletes with lower knee abduction
measures. However, despite 4–7 weeks of training,
their reduced knee abduction measures were not
reduced to levels consistent with their control team-
mates.114 There is some evidence that isolated pre-
season or in-season training in short doses may not
provide the training dosage necessary to reduce ACL
injury risk in females.114,128 Collectively, our research
indicates that comprehensive protocols that incorpo-
rate plyometric, strength and balance exercises may
provide the most effective ACL injury prevention
strategies.
Timing of Intervention
Preadolescence or early puberty seems to be a critical
phase related to the increased ACL injury risk in
female athletes. After the onset of puberty, the sexes
demonstrate differences in laxity and neuromuscular
control in addition to a divergence in ACL injury
rates.35,36,39,40,45 With the increased obesity problem
in children, there has been a greater promotion of
physical activity and interest in strength and condi-
tioning programs. However, there is concern about the
optimal age to safely incorporate strength training
programs.129–131 In the past, high school female ath-
lete participation in weightlifting activities was signifi-
cantly less than males with access, desire or available
resources likely limiting the incorporation of strength
training measures into their sports programs.132
Integrative neuromuscular training can lead to
significant improvements in health and motor skill
performance fitness components in children and can
be
successfully
integrated
into
physical
education
activities.133 Given the evidence that neuromuscular
training programs that incorporate strength training
may help reduce ACL injury risk, introduction and
participation in such programs even at an early age
may be important for preventing ACL injuries. Resis-
tance training can be safely effectively implemented
provided that the training is supervised by qualified
professionals
and
age
appropriate
techniques
and
safety guidelines are followed.107,111,129,134
Preliminary data indicate integrative neuromuscu-
lar training protocols implemented in pre-adolescent
(Tanner [1] and early adolescent (Tanner [2] stages
may artificially induce the “neuromuscular spurt”).78
Induction of a neuromuscular spurt, particularly in
females has the potential to reduce the risk of sports-
related injury.11,75,135,136 The optimal time to provide
injury prevention is not fully delineated. However,
introduction of integrative neuromuscular training at
any age and maintained throughout childhood into
adulthood promotes positive health outcomes, has the
potential to enhance sports performance and reduce
the risk of sports-related and more specifically, ACL
injury in young athletes.78,107,111,137
ASSESS THE EFFECTIVENESS OF INTERVENTION
The development of clinical assessment tools that
reliably and accurately assess high risk neuromuscular
deficits are important to provide clinicians with objec-
tive, inexpensive feedback about the effectiveness of
neuromuscular training programs.77 Common assess-
ment tools such as the star excursion balance test,
functional hop tests, strength measures, balance and
stability measures and dynamometry, in addition to
development of new techniques to help identify lower
extremity asymmetry and high risk landing and cutting
techniques are paramount to evaluating our effective-
ness of neuromuscular training.79,106,109,110,127,128,134
Development of real-time assessment tools provides
clinicians with the ability to offer immediate biofeed-
back and targeted directions for neuromuscular train-
ing programs.111 These assessment tools as well as
standard performance tests (e.g., power cleans, bench
press, leg press) have been used to identify biomechani-
cal and neuromuscular risk factors for ACL injury and
provide measures of athletic performance.128 Assess-
ments of the reliability of the assessment tools and
performance measures have helped evaluate and opti-
mize intervention strategies.138 In order to provide
immediate, objective feedback that can be systemati-
cally tracked and used to evaluate intervention effec-
tiveness, we have developed a tuck jump assessment
tool that measures limb symmetry, foot positioning,
knee abduction, technique degradation, coordination
and landing forces during a high-level effort move-
ment.106,128 In addition, we have developed techniques
to assess frontal and sagittal plane biomechanics using
inexpensive tools that can be used for individual assess-
ments as well as large-scale screening techniques
similar to what occurs during NFL combine test-
ing.94,109,110,134,139
Clinical assessment tools such as the tuck jump
assessment and nomogram that predicts high knee
abduction measures may also help rehabilitation spe-
cialists working with athletes to monitor functional
deficits and determine level of readiness to meet the
functional demands of sports with minimal risk of re-
injury. History of previous ACL injury is one of the
highest predictive risk factors for future ACL injury
1850
HEWETT ET AL.
JOURNAL OF ORTHOPAEDIC RESEARCH NOVEMBER 2016
 risk and of the athletes that return to sport after ACL
reconstruction nearly 25% may experience a second
ACL injury.72 It is paramount that we identify clinical
assessment tools that help improve functional deficits
during the rehabilitation phases after ACL reconstruc-
tion and evaluate functional readiness to return to
sport safely. Future work in our laboratory will focus
on development of new clinical assessment tools of
function and evaluation of the effectiveness and pre-
dictive ability of these tools on ACL injury risk.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
There is strong, nearly unequivocal evidence that
neuromuscular training reduces biomechanical risk
factors for ACL injury and decreases ACL injury
incidence in athletes. Assessment of relative injury
risk using widespread neuromuscular screening tech-
niques should be further employed. Development of
more specific injury prevention protocols that are
designed to decrease risk in high risk athletes and
more precise determination of the most efficacious
timing of intervention is important. Pre- or early
adolescent athletes may have the greatest potential for
both the development of optimal biomechanical move-
ments and decreased injury risk during sports partici-
pation. Neuromuscular training is currently the only
effective tool for lowering the incidence rate of ACL
injuries which, in turn, has a direct link to reduction
in the rate of post traumatic osteoarthritis associated
with severe joint trauma associated with participation
in sport and activity. This post traumatic osteoarthri-
tis occurs with or without surgical reconstruction. We
have made significant strides toward these goals, but
we must ontinue until strong epidemiological evidence
shows that ACL injury risk is unequivocally decreased
in young athletes.
The findings of the authors’ studies outlined above
were the first to identify the mechanisms that underlie
increased risk of ACL injury in high risk athletes,
especially in female athletes, to develop validated ACL
injury risk screening approaches and to direct athletes
into neuromuscular training designed for and targeted
to those specific injury mechanisms. Athletes who are
in the higher percentiles for specific risk factors can be
identified for neuromuscular training prior to partici-
pation. Education and public awareness of the high
occurrence and mechanisms of ACL injury has been
shown to decrease injuries in skiers by greater than
50%.140 Critical analysis and verbal, visual, or bio-
feedback regarding technique may decrease reaction
forces and lead to a reduction of ACL injuries.141
Questions remain to be answered, including: (i) when
interventions should be instituted and (ii) whether a
“neuromuscular spurt” to increase lower extremity
neuromuscular control can be induced with training at
the proper age.
In conclusion, the summarized findings have led to
advances in the understanding of the mechanisms and
prevention of ACL injuries in female athletes, who are
at a 2- to 10-fold increased risk of ACL injury than
males. Finally, our objectives were to determine the
mechanisms by which athletes become more suscepti-
ble to ACL injury, to develop screening tools to
quantify risk levels and to optimize the effectiveness of
interventions designed to prevent ACL injuries. Pro-
phylactic interventions to reduce the risk of suffering
ACL injury could prevent a significant percentage of
the 100,000–250,000 injuries that occur each year in
the United States and likely greater than 350,000
worldwide.11,18 The President’s council on physical
fitness recommends that women, both young and old,
remain active to maintain optimal health.142 Reduc-
tion of female injury rates from five times to equal
males’ would potentially allow females annually to
continue the health benefits of sports participation
and avoid the long-term complications of osteoarthri-
tis, which occurs with a 10–100-fold greater incidence
in ACL-injured than in uninjured athletes.5,7
AUTHORS’ CONTRIBUTIONS
All authors contributed to the study design, data
collection, data analysis, and reporting for this manu-
script. All authors have read and approved the final
submitted manuscript.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This comprehensive body of research was the result of a
large team of individuals that have helped contribute to the
data collection. We would like to thank all co-authors and
colleagues at both the mayo Clinic Biomechanics Laborato-
ries and the Ohio State and Cincinnati Children’s Sports
Medicine Biodynamics Labs for their help with the solutions
to this important and devastating ACL injury dilemma. The
authors’ would also like to reiterate an acknowledgement to
the many research groups who have contributed to the
current state of knowledge in the fields of ACL injury
mechanisms, ACL injury risk screening and ACL injury
prevention strategies.
REFERENCES
1. Freedman KB, Glasgow MT, Glasgow SG, et al. 1998.
Anterior cruciate ligament injury and reconstruction among
university students. Clin Orthop Related Res 356:208–212.
2. Hewett TE, Ford KR, Xu YY, et al. 2016. Utilization of ACL
injury biomechanical and neuromuscular risk profile analy-
sis to determine the effectiveness of neuromuscular train-
ing. Am J Sports Med doi:10.1177. [Epub ahead of print].
3. Ruiz AL, Kelly M, Nutton RW. 2002. Arthroscopic ACL
reconstruction: a 5–9 year follow-up. Knee 9:197–200.
4. Lohmander LS, Englund PM, Dahl LL, et al. 2007. The long-
term consequence of anterior cruciate ligament and menis-
cus injuries: osteoarthritis. Am J Sports Med 35:1756–1769.
5. Myklebust G, Bahr R. 2005. Return to play guidelines after
anterior cruciate ligament surgery. Br J Sports Med 39:
127–131.
6. Gillquist J, Messner K. 1999. Anterior cruciate ligament
reconstruction and the long-term incidence of gonarthrosis.
Sports Med 27:143–156.
7. Lohmander LS, Ostenberg A, Englund M, et al. 2004. High
prevalence of knee osteoarthritis, pain, and functional limi-
tations in female soccer players twelve years after anterior
cruciate ligament injury. Arthritis Rheum 50:3145–3152.
ACL INJURY PREVENTION
1851
JOURNAL OF ORTHOPAEDIC RESEARCH NOVEMBER 2016
 8. Gray J, Taunton JE, McKenzie DC, et al. 1985. A survey of
injuries to the anterior cruciate ligament of the knee in
female basketball players. Int J Sports Med 6:314–316.
9. Miyasaka KC, Daniel DM, Stone ML. 1991. The incidence
of knee ligament injuries in the general popluation. Am J
Knee Surg 43:43–48.
10. Kim S, Bosque J, Meehan JP, et al. 2011. Increase in
outpatient knee arthroscopy in the united states: a compar-
ison of national surveys of ambulatory surgery, 1996 and
2006. J Bone Joint Surg Am 93:994–1000.
11. Hewett TE, Lindenfeld TN, Riccobene JV, et al. 1999. The
effect of neuromuscular training on the incidence of knee
injury in female athletes. A prospective study. Am J Sports
Med 27:699–706.
12. Zelisko JA, Noble HB, Porter M. 1982. A comparison of
men’s and women’s professional basketball injuries. Am J
Sport Med 10:297–299.
13. Chandy TA, Grana WA. 1985. Secondary school athletic
injury in boys and girls: a three-year comparison. Phys
Sports Med 13:106–111.
14. Malone TR,
Hardaker
WT,
Garrett
WE,
et
al.
1993.
Relationship of gender to anterior cruciate ligament injuries
in intercollegiate basketball players. J Southern Orthop
Assoc 2:36–39.
15. Arendt E, Dick R. 1995. Knee injury patterns among men
and women in collegiate basketball and soccer. NCAA data
and review of literature. Am J Sports Med 23:694–701.
16. NCAA. 2002. NCAA injury surveillance system summary.
Indianapolis: National Collegiate Athletic Association.
17. Deitch JR, Starkey C, Walters SL, et al. 2006. Injury risk
in professional basketball players: a comparison of Wom-
en’s National Basketball Association and National Basket-
ball Association Athletes. Am J Sports Med 34:1077–1083.
18. Toth AP, Cordasco FA. 2001. Anterior cruciate ligament
injuries in the female athlete. J Gend Specif Med 4:25–34.
19. Myer GD, Ford KR, Hewett TE. 2004. Rationale and clinical
techniques for anterior cruciate ligament injury prevention
among female athletes. J Athl Train 39:352–364.
20. Bendjaballah MZ, Shirazi-Adl A, Zukor DJ. 1997. Finite
element analysis of human knee joint in varus-valgus. Clin
Biomech (Bristol, Avon) 12:139–148.
21. Hewett TE, Myer GD, Ford KR. 2005. Reducing knee and
anterior cruciate ligament injuries among female athletes:
a systematic review of neuromuscular training interven-
tions. J Knee Surg 18:82–88.
22. Hewett TE, Myer GD, Ford KR, et al. 2005. Biomechanical
measures of neuromuscular control and valgus loading of
the knee predict anterior cruciate ligament injury risk in
female athletes: a prospective study. Am J Sports Med
33:492–501.
23. Markolf KL, Burchfield DM, Shapiro MM, et al. 1995.
Combined knee loading states that generate high anterior
cruciate ligament forces. J Orthop Res 13:930–935.
24. von Porat A, Roos EM, Roos H. 2004. High prevalence of
osteoarthritis 14 years after an anterior cruciate ligament
tear in male soccer players: a study of radiographic and
patient relevant outcomes. Ann Rheum Dis 63:269–273.
25. Zazulak BT, Hewett TE, Reeves NP, et al. 2007. Factors
related to core stability predict knee ligament injury risk.
Am J Sport Med 35:1123–1130.
26. Krosshaug T, Nakamae A, Boden BP, et al. 2006. Mecha-
nisms of anterior cruciate ligament injury in basketball:
video analysis of 39 cases. Am J Sports Med 35:359–367.
27. Olsen OE, Myklebust G, Engebretsen L, et al. 2004. Injury
mechanisms for anterior cruciate ligament injuries in team
handball: a systematic video analysis. Am J Sports Med
32:1002–1012.
28. Griffin LY. 2001. The henning program. In: Griffin LY,
editor. Prevention of noncontact ACL injuries. Rosemont,
IL: American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons. p 93–96.
29. Ireland ML. 2002. The female ACL: why is it more prone to
injury? Orthop Clin North Am 33:637–651.
30. van Mechelen W, Hlobil H, Kemper HC. 1992. Incidence,
severity, aetiology and prevention of sports injuries. A
review of concepts. Sports Med 14:82–99.
31. Malone TR, Hardaker WT, Garrett WE, et al. 1993.
Relationship of gender to anterior cruciate ligament inju-
ries in intercollegiate basketball players. J South Orthop
Assoc 2:36–39.
32. Andrish JT. 2001. Anterior cruciate ligament injuries in
the skeletally immature patient. Am J Orthop 30:103–110.
33. Gallagher SS, Finison K, Guyer B, et al. 1984. The
incidence of injuries among 87,000 massachusetts children
and adolescents: results of the 1980–81 statewide childhood
injury prevention program surveillance system. Am J
Public Health 74:1340–1347.
34. Hewett TE, Myer GD, Ford KR. 2006. Anterior cruciate
ligament injuries in female athletes: part 1, mechanisms
and risk factors. Am J Sports Med 34:299–311.
35. Quatman CE, Ford KR, Myer GD, et al. 2006. Maturation
leads to gender differences in landing force and vertical
jump performance: a longitudinal study. Am J Sports Med
34:806–813.
36. Quatman-Yates CC, Quatman CE, Meszaros AJ, et al.
2011. A systematic review of sensorimotor function during
adolescence: a developmental stage of increased motor
awkwardness? Br J Sports Med 46:649–655.
37. Quatman CE, Hewett TE. 2009. The anterior cruciate
ligament injury controversy: is “valgus collapse” a sex-
specific mechanism? Br J Sports Med 43:328–335.
38. Krosshaug T, Nakamae A, Boden BP, et al. 2007. Mecha-
nisms of anterior cruciate ligament injury in basketball:
video analysis of 39 cases. Am J Sports Med 35:359–367.
39. Ford KR, Myer GD, Hewett TE. 2010. Longitudinal effects
of maturation on lower extremity joint stiffness in adoles-
cent athletes. Am J Sports Med 38:1829–1837.
40. Ford KR, Shapiro R, Myer GD, et al. 2010. Longitudinal
sex differences during landing in knee abduction in young
athletes. Med Sci Sports Exerc 42:1923–1931.
41. Harrison AD, Ford KR, Myer GD, et al. 2011. Sex differ-
ences in force attenuation: a clinical assessment of single-
leg hop performance on a portable force plate. Br J Sports
Med 45:198–202.
42. Hewett TE, Myer GD, Zazulak BT. 2006. Hamstring to
quadriceps peak torque ratios diverge with increasing
isokinetic angular velocity in females and males. J Sci Med
Sport 11:452–459.
43. Chaudhari AM, Lindenfeld TN, Andriacchi TP, et al. 2007.
Knee and hip loading patterns At different periods In the
menstrual cycle and their implications for the ACL injury
disparity between women & men. Am J Sports Med
35:793–800.
44. Hewett TE, Myer GD, Ford KR, et al. 2006. Preparticipa-
tion physical exam using a box drop vertical jump test in
young athletes: the effects of puberty and sex. Clin J Sport
Med 16:298–304.
45. Quatman CE, Ford KR, Myer GD, et al. 2008. The effects
of gender and pubertal status on generalized joint laxity in
young athletes. J Sci Med Sport 11:257–263.
46. Ford KR, Myer GD, Smith RL, et al. 2006. A comparison of
dynamic coronal plane excursion between matched male
and female athletes when performing single leg landings.
Clin Biomech 21:33–40.
1852
HEWETT ET AL.
JOURNAL OF ORTHOPAEDIC RESEARCH NOVEMBER 2016
 47. Zazulak BT, Ponce PL, Straub SJ, et al. 2005. Gender
comparison of hip muscle activity during single-leg landing.
J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 35:292–299.
48. Myer GD, Ford KR, Hewett TE. 2005. The effects of gender
on quadriceps muscle activation strategies during a maneu-
ver
that
mimics
a
high
ACL
injury
risk
position.
J Electromyogr Kinesiol 15:181–189.
49. Ford KR, Myer GD, Toms HE, et al. 2005. Gender differ-
ences in the kinematics of unanticipated cutting in young
athletes. Med Sci Sports Exerc 37:124–129.
50. Hewett TE, Myer GD, Ford KR. 2004. Decrease in neuro-
muscular control about the knee with maturation in female
athletes. J Bone Joint Surg Am 86-A:1601–1608.
51. Ford KR, Myer GD, Hewett TE. 2003. Valgus knee motion
during landing in high school female and male basketball
players. Med Sci Sports Exerc 35:1745–1750.
52. Koga H, Nakamae A, Shima Y, et al. 2010. Mechanisms for
noncontact anterior cruciate ligament injuries: knee joint
kinematics
in
10
injury
situations
from
female
team
handball and basketball. Am J Sports Med 38:2218–2225.
53. Ford KR, Myer GD, Schmitt LC, et al. 2011. Preferential
quadriceps activation in female athletes with incremental
increases in landing intensity. J Appl Biomech 27:215–222.
54. Shultz SJ, Shimokochi Y, Nguyen AD, et al. 2007. Mea-
surement of varus-valgus and internal-external rotational
knee laxities in vivo? Part II: relationship with anterior-
posterior and general joint laxity in males and females.
J Orthopaedic Res 25:989–996.
55. Hsu WH, Fisk JA, Yamamoto Y, et al. 2006. Differences in
torsional joint stiffness of the knee between genders: a
human cadaveric study. Am J Sports Med 34:765–770.
56. Ahmad CS, Clark AM, Heilmann N, et al. 2006. Effect of
gender and maturity on quadriceps-to-hamstring strength
ratio and anterior cruciate ligament laxity. Am J Sports
Med 34:370–374.
57. Brent J, Myer GD, Ford KR, et al. 2012. The effect of sex
and age on isokinetic hip abduction torques. J Sport
Rehabil 22:41–46.
58. Mendiguchia J, Ford KR, Quatman CE, et al. 2011. Sex
differences in proximal control of the knee joint. Sports
Med 41:541–557.
59. Myer GD, Ford KR, Paterno MV, et al. 2008. The effects of
generalized joint laxity on risk of anterior cruciate ligament
injury
in
young
female
athletes.
Am
J
Sports
Med
36:1073–1080.
60. Hewett TE. 2000. Neuromuscular and hormonal factors
associated with knee injuries in female athletes: strategies
for intervention. Sports Med 29:313–327.
61. Slauterbeck JR, Hardy DM. 2001. Sex hormones and knee
ligament injuries in female athletes. Am J Med Sci 322:
196–199.
62. Wojtys EM, Ashton-Miller JA, Huston LJ. 2002. A gender-
related difference in the contribution of the knee muscula-
ture to sagittal-plane shear stiffness in subjects with
similar knee laxity. J Bone Joint Surg Am 84-A:10–16.
63. Arendt EA, Bershadsky B, Agel J. 2002. Periodicity of
noncontact anterior cruciate ligament injuries during the
menstrual cycle. J Gend Specif Med 5:19–26.
64. Wojtys EM, Huston LJ, Lindenfeld TN, et al. 1998. Associa-
tion between the menstrual cycle and anterior cruciate
ligament injuries in female athletes. Am J Sport Med
26:614–619.
65. Hewett TE, Zazulak BT, Myer GD. 2006. The effects of the
menstrual cycle on ACL injury risk: a systematic review.
Am J Sports Med 35:659–668.
66. Hewett TE, Zazulak BT, Myer GD. 2007. Effects of the
menstrual cycle on anterior cruciate ligament injury risk: a
systematic review. Am J Sports Med 35:659–668.
67. Rozzi S, Lephardt S, Gear W, et al. 1999. Knee joint laxity
characteristics of male and female soccer and basketball
players. Am J Sports Med 27:312–319.
68. Foss KD, Ford KR, Myer GD, et al. 2009. Generalized joint
laxity associated with increased medial foot loading in
female athletes. J Athl Train 44:356–362.
69. Beunen G, Malina RM. 1988. Growth and physical perfor-
mance relative to the timing of the adolescent spurt. Exerc
Sport Sci Rev 16:503–540.
70. Myer GD, Ford KR, Divine JG, et al. 2009. Longitudinal
assessment of noncontact anterior cruciate ligament injury
risk factors during maturation in a female athlete: a case
report. J Athl Train 44:101–109.
71. Ford KR, van den Bogert J, Myer GD, et al. 2008. The
effects of age and skill level on knee musculature co-
contraction during functional activities: a systematic re-
view. Br J Sports Med 42:561–566.
72. Paterno MV, Schmitt LC, Ford KR, et al. 2010. Biomechan-
ical measures during landing and postural stability predict
second anterior cruciate ligament injury after anterior
cruciate ligament reconstruction and return to sport. Am J
Sports Med 38:1968–1978.
73. Malina RM, Bouchard C. 1991. Timing and sequence of
changes in growth, maturation, and performance during
adolescence. In: Bouchard MA, editor. Growth, maturation,
and physical activity. Champaign, Il: Human Kinetics. p
267–272.
74. Hewett TE, Paterno MV, Myer GD. 2002. Strategies for
enhancing proprioception and neuromuscular control of the
knee. Clin Orthop 402:76–94.
75. Hewett TE, Stroupe AL, Nance TA, et al. 1996. Plyometric
training in female athletes. Decreased impact forces and
increased hamstring torques. Am J Sports Med 24:765–773.
76. Hewett TE, Ford KR, Hoogenboom BJ, et al. 2010. Under-
standing and preventing ACL injuries: current biomechani-
cal and epidemiologic considerations—update 2010. N Am
J Sports Phys Ther 5:234–251.
77. Myer GD, Brent JL, Ford KR, et al. 2011. Real-time
assessment and neuromuscular training feedback techni-
ques to prevent ACL injury in female athletes. Strength
Cond J 33:21–35.
78. Myer GD, Brunner HI, Melson PG, et al. 2005. Specialized
neuromuscular training to improve neuromuscular function
and biomechanics in a patient with quiescent juvenile
rheumatoid arthritis. Phys Ther 85:791–802.
79. Paterno MV, Myer GD, Ford KR, et al. 2004. Neuromuscu-
lar training improves single-limb stability in young female
athletes. J Orthopaedic Sports Phys Ther 34:305–316.
80. Hewett TE, Myer GD, Ford KR. 2001. Prevention of
anterior cruciate ligament injuries. Curr Women Health
Rep 1:218–224.
81. Zazulak BT, Hewett TE, Reeves NP, et al. 2007. The effects
of core proprioception on knee ligament injury: a prospec-
tive biomechanical-epidemiological study. San Diego, Cal-
ifornia: Accepted AOSSM Specialty Day.
82. Hewett TE, Zazulak BT, Myer GD, et al. 2005. A review of
electromyographic activation levels, timing differences, and
increased anterior cruciate ligament injury incidence in
female athletes. Br J Sports Med 39:347–350.
83. Myer GD, Ford KR, Barber Foss KD, et al. 2009. The
relationship of hamstrings and quadriceps strength to
anterior cruciate ligament injury in female athletes. Clin J
Sport Med 19:3–8.
84. Myer GD, Chu DA, Brent JL, et al. 2008. Trunk and hip
control neuromuscular training for the prevention of knee
joint injury. Clin Sports Med 27:425–448.
85. Imwalle LE, Myer GD, Ford KR, et al. 2009. Relationship
between hip and knee kinematics in athletic women during
ACL INJURY PREVENTION
1853
JOURNAL OF ORTHOPAEDIC RESEARCH NOVEMBER 2016
 cutting maneuvers: a possible link to noncontact anterior
cruciate ligament injury and prevention. J Strength Cond
Res 23:2223–2230.
86. Pinczewski LA, Lyman J, Salmon LJ, et al. 2007. A 10-year
comparison of anterior cruciate ligament reconstructions
with hamstring tendon and patellar tendon autograft: a
controlled, prospective trial. Am J Sports Med 35:564–574.
87. Salmon L, Russell V, Musgrove T, et al. 2005. Incidence
and risk factors for graft rupture and contralateral rupture
after anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction. Arthros-
copy 21:948–957.
88. Wright RW, Dunn WR, Amendola A, et al. 2007. Risk of
tearing the intact anterior cruciate ligament in the contra-
lateral knee and rupturing the anterior cruciate ligament
graft during the first 2 years after anterior cruciate
ligament reconstruction: a prospective MOON cohort study.
Am J Sports Med 35:1131–1134.
89. Messina DF, Farney WC, DeLee JC. 1999. The incidence of
injury in Texas high school basketball. A prospective study
among male and
female athletes.
Am J Sports Med
27:294–299.
90. Gomez E, DeLee JC, Farney WC. 1996. Incidence of injury
in Texas girls’ high school basketball. Am J Sports Med
24:684–687.
91. Paterno MV, Rauh MJ, Schmitt LC, et al. 2012. Incidence
of contralateral and ipsilateral anterior cruciate ligament
(ACL) injury after primary ACL reconstruction and return
to sport. Clin J Sport Med 22:116–121.
92. Paterno MV, Weed AM, Hewett TE. 2012. A between sex
comparison of anterior-posterior knee laxity after anterior
cruciate ligament reconstruction with patellar tendon or
hamstrings autograft: a systematic review. Sports Med
42:135–152.
93. Paterno MV, Ford KR, Myer GD, et al. 2007. Limb
asymmetries in landing and jumping 2 years following
anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction. Clin J Sport Med
17:258–262.
94. Paterno MV, Schmitt LC, Ford KR, et al. 2011. 2011.
effects of sex on compensatory landing strategies upon
return to sport after anterior cruciate ligament reconstruc-
tion. J Orthop Sports Phys The 41:553–559.
95. Myer GD, Schmitt LC, Brent JL, et al. 2011. Utilization of
modified NFL combine testing to identify functional deficits
in athletes following ACL reconstruction. J Orthop Sports
Phys Ther 41:377–387.
96. Wordeman SC, Paterno MV, Quatman CE, et al. 2012.
Arthrometric curve-shape variables to assess anterior cru-
ciate ligament deficiency. Clin Biomech 27:830–836.
97. Posthumus M, September AV, O’Cuinneagain D, et al.
2009. The COL5A1 gene is associated with increased risk
of anterior cruciate ligament ruptures in female partici-
pants. Am J Sports Med 37:2234–2240.
98. Posthumus M, September AV, O’Cuinneagain D, et al. 2010.
The association between the COL12A1 gene and anterior
cruciate ligament ruptures. Br J Sports Med 44:1160–1165.
99. Flynn RK, Pedersen CL, Birmingham TB, et al. 2005. The
familial predisposition toward tearing the anterior cruciate
ligament: a case control study. Am J Sports Med 33:23–28.
100. Hewett TE, Lynch TR, Myer GD, et al. 2010. Multiple risk
factors related to familial predisposition to anterior cruci-
ate ligament injury: fraternal twin sisters with anterior
cruciate ligament ruptures. Br J Sports Med 44:848–855.
101. Boden BP, Torg JS, Knowles SB, et al. 2009. Video analysis
of anterior cruciate ligament injury: abnormalities in hip
and ankle kinematics. Am J Sports Med 37:252–259.
102. Quatman
CE,
Quatman-Yates
CC,
Hewett
TE.
2010.
A ‘plane’ explanation of anterior cruciate ligament injury
mechanisms: a systematic review. Sports Med 40:729–746.
103. Quatman CE, Quatman CC, Hewett TE. 2009. Prediction
and prevention of musculoskeletal injury: a paradigm shift
in methodology. Br J Sports Med 43:1100–1107.
104. Quatman CE, Kiapour A, Myer GD, et al. 2011. Cartilage
pressure distributions provide a footprint to define female
anterior cruciate ligament injury mechanisms. Am J Sports Med
39:1706–1713.
105. Speer KP, Spritzer CE, Bassett FH 3rd, et al. 1992.
Osseous injury associated with acute tears of the anterior
cruciate ligament. Am J Sports Med 20:382–389.
106. Myer GD, Ford KR, Hewett TE. 2008. Tuck jump assess-
ment for reducing anterior cruciate ligament injury risk.
Athl Ther Today 13:39–44.
107. Myer GD, Ford KR, Khoury J, et al. 2011. Three-dimen-
sional motion analysis validation of a clinic-based nomo-
gram designed to identify high ACL injury risk in female
athletes. Phys Sports Med 39:19–28.
108. Myer GD, Ford KR, Khoury J, et al. 2010. Development
and validation of a clinic-based prediction tool to identify
female athletes at high risk for anterior cruciate ligament
injury. Am J Sports Med 38:2025–2033.
109. Myer GD, Ford KR, Khoury J, et al. 2010. Clinical
correlates to laboratory measures for use in non-contact
anterior cruciate ligament injury risk prediction algorithm.
Clin Biomech 25:693–699.
110. Myer GD, Paterno MV, Ford KR, et al. 2006. Rehabilitation
after anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction: criteria-
based
progression
through
the
return-to-sport
phase.
J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 36:385–402.
111. Myer GD, Ford KR, Hewett TE. 2011. New method to
identify athletes at high risk of ACL injury using clinic-
based measurements and freeware computer analysis. Br J
Sports Med 45:238–244.
112. Hewett TE, Ford KR, Myer GD. 2006. Anterior cruciate
ligament injuries in female athletes: part 2, a meta-
analysis of neuromuscular interventions aimed at injury
prevention. Am J Sports Med 34:490–498.
113. Myer GD, Brent JL, Ford KR, et al. 2008. A pilot study to
determine the effect of trunk and hip focused neuromuscu-
lar training on hip and knee isokinetic strength. Br J
Sports Med 42:614–619.
114. Myer GD, Ford KR, Brent JL, et al. 2007. Differential
neuromuscular training effects on ACL injury risk factors
in“high-risk“ versus “low-risk“ athletes. BMC Musculoskel-
etal Disord 8:39.
115. Myer GD, Ford KR, Hewett TE. 2004. Rationale and
clinical techniques for anterior cruciate ligament injury
prevention in female athletes. J Athl Train 39:352–364.
116. Myer GD, Ford KR, Hewett TE. 2004. Methodological
approaches and rationale for training to prevent anterior
cruciate ligament injuries in female athletes. Scand J Med
Sci Sports 14:275–285.
117. Myer GD, Ford KR, McLean SG, et al. 2006. The effects of
plyometric versus dynamic stabilization and balance train-
ing on lower extremity biomechanics. Am J Sport Med
34:445–455.
118. Myer GD, Paterno MV, Ford KR, et al. 2008. Neuromuscu-
lar training techniques to target deficits before return to
sport
after
anterior
cruciate
ligament
reconstruction.
J Strength Cond Res 22:987–1014.
119. Myer GD, Paterno MV, Hewett TE. 2004. Back in the
game: a four-phase return-to-sport program for athletes
with problem ACLS. Rehab Manag 17:30–33.
120. Hewett TE, Myer GD, Ford KR, et al. 2007. Dynamic
neuromuscular analysis training for preventing anterior
cruciate ligament injury in female athletes. Instr Course
Lect 56:397–406.
1854
HEWETT ET AL.
JOURNAL OF ORTHOPAEDIC RESEARCH NOVEMBER 2016
 121. Myer GD, Ford KR, Hewett TE. 2004. Rationale and clinical
techniques for anterior cruciate ligament injury prevention
among female athletes. J Athl Train 39:352–364.
122. Hewett TE, Myer GD. 2011. The mechanistic connection
between the trunk, hip, knee, and anterior cruciate liga-
ment injury. Exerc Sport Sci Rev 39:161–166.
123. Pfeiffer RP, Shea KG, Roberts D, et al. 2006. Lack of effect
of a knee ligament injury prevention program on the
incidence of noncontact anterior cruciate ligament injury.
J Bone Joint Surg Am 88:1769–1774.
124. Soderman K, Werner S, Pietila T, et al. 2000. Balance
board training: prevention of traumatic injuries of the
lower extremities in female soccer players? A prospective
randomized intervention study. Knee Surg Sports Trauma-
tol Arthrosc 8:356–363.
125. Myer GD, Ford KR, Brent JL, et
al. 2012. 2012. An
integrated approach to change the outcome part i: neuro-
muscular screening methods to identify high ACL injury
risk athletes. J Strength Cond Res 26:2265–2271.
126. Myer GD, Ford KR, Brent JL, et al. 2012. 2012. An
integrated approach to change the outcome part ii: targeted
neuromuscular training techniques to reduce identified ACL
injury risk factors. J Strength Cond Res 26:2272–2292.
127. Filipa A, Byrnes R, Paterno MV, et al. 2010. Neuromuscu-
lar training improves performance on the star excursion
balance test in young female athletes. J Orthop Sports
Phys Ther 40:551–558.
128. Klugman MF, Brent JL, Myer GD, et al. 2011. Does an in-
season only neuromuscular training protocol reduce deficits
quantified by the tuck jump assessment? Clin Sports Med
30:825–840.
129. Myer GD, Quatman CE, Khoury J, et al. 2009. Youth
versus adult “weightlifting“ injuries presenting to United
States emergency rooms: accidental versus nonaccidental
injury mechanisms. J Strength Cond Res 23:2054–2060.
130. Faigenbaum AD, Kraemer WJ, Blimkie CJ, et al. 2009.
Youth
resistance
training:
updated
position
statement
paper from the national strength and conditioning associa-
tion. J Strength Cond Res 23:S60–S79.
131. McCambridge TM, Stricker PR. 2008. Strength training by
children and adolescents. Pediatrics 121:835–840.
132. Quatman CE, Myer GD, Khoury J, et al. 2009. Sex differ-
ences in “weightlifting“ injuries presenting to United States
emergency rooms. J Strength Cond Res 23:2061–2067.
133. Faigenbaum AD, Farrell A, Fabiano M, et al. 2011. Effects
of integrative neuromuscular training on fitness perfor-
mance in children. Pediatr Exerc Sci 23:573–584.
134. Hickey KC, Quatman CE, Myer GD, et al. 2009. Methodo-
logical report: dynamic field tests used in an NFL combine
setting to identify lower-extremity functional asymmetries.
J Strength Cond Res 23:2500–2506.
135. Hewett TE, Myer GD, Ford KR. 2005. Reducing knee and
anterior cruciate ligament injuries among female athletes:
a systematic review of neuromuscular training interven-
tions. J Knee Surg 18:82–88.
136. Myer GD, Ford KR, Barber Foss KD, et al. 2009. The
relationship of hamstrings and quadriceps strength to
anterior cruciate ligament injury in female athletes. Clin J
Sport Med 19:3–8.
137. Faigenbaum AD, Gipson-Jones TL, Myer GD. 2012. Exer-
cise deficit disorder in youth: an emergent health concern
for school nurses. J Sch Nurs 28:252–255.
138. Faigenbaum AD, McFarland JE, Herman RE, et al. 2012.
Reliability of the one-repetition-maximum power clean
test in adolescent athletes. J Strength Cond Res 26:
432–437.
139. McLean SG, Walker K, Ford KR, et al. 2005. Evaluation of
a two dimensional analysis method as a screening and
evaluation tool for anterior cruciate ligament injury. Br J
Sports Med 39:355–362.
140. Johnson RJ. 2001. The ACL injury in female skiers. In:
Griffin LY, editor. Prevention of noncontact ACL injuries.
Rosemont, IL: American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons.
p 107–111.
141. Prapavessis H, McNair PJ. 1999. Effects of instruction
in
jumping
technique
and
experience
jumping
on
ground reaction forces. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther 29:
352–356.
142. President’s Council on Physical Fitness. 2004. Preventing
cardiovascular
disease
in
women:
how
much
physical
activity is “good enough”? Res Digest 5:176–181.
ACL INJURY PREVENTION
1855
JOURNAL OF ORTHOPAEDIC RESEARCH NOVEMBER 2016
