 Cleveland State University
EngagedScholarship@CSU
Mechanical Engineering Faculty Publications
Mechanical Engineering Department
4-2005
Biomechanical Measures of Neuromuscular
Control and Valgus Loading of the Knee Predict
Anterior Cruciate Ligament Injury Risk in Female
Athletes
Timothy E. Hewett
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, tim.hewett@chmcc.org
Gregory D. Myer
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center
Kevin R. Ford
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center
Robert S. Heidt Jr.
Wellington Orthopaedic and Sports Medicine
Angelo J. Colosimo
University of Cincinnati
See next page for additional authors
Follow this and additional works at: https://engagedscholarship.csuohio.edu/enme_facpub
Part of the Biomechanical Engineering Commons
How does access to this work benefit you? Let us know!
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Mechanical Engineering Department at EngagedScholarship@CSU. It has been accepted
for inclusion in Mechanical Engineering Faculty Publications by an authorized administrator of EngagedScholarship@CSU. For more information,
please contact library.es@csuohio.edu.
Original Citation
Hewett, T. E., Myer, G. D., Ford, K. R., 2005, "Biomechanical Measures of Neuromuscular Control and Valgus Loading of the Knee
Predict Anterior Cruciate Ligament Injury Risk in Female Athletes: A Prospective Study," The American Journal of Sports Medicine,
33(4) pp. 492-501.
 Authors
Timothy E. Hewett, Gregory D. Myer, Kevin R. Ford, Robert S. Heidt Jr., Angelo J. Colosimo, Scott G.
McLean, Antonie J. van den Bogert, Mark V. Paterno, and Paul Succop
This article is available at EngagedScholarship@CSU: https://engagedscholarship.csuohio.edu/enme_facpub/212
 Biomechanical Measures of Neuromuscular 
Control and Valgus Loading of the Knee 
Predict Anterior Cruciate Ligament Injury 
Risk in Female Athletes 
A Prospective Study 
Timothy E. Hewett,*†‡ PhD, Gregory D. Myer,† MS, Kevin R. Ford,† MS, 
Robert S. Heidt, Jr,§ MD, Angelo J. Colosimo,‡ MD, Scott G. McLean,|| PhD, 
Antonie J. van den Bogert,|| PhD, Mark V. Paterno,† MS, PT, and Paul Succop,¶ PhD
 
From the †Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Research Foundation, Sports Medicine Biodynamics 
Center, Division of Molecular Cardiovascular Biology, Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center, 
Cincinnati, Ohio, the ‡University of Cincinnati, College of Medicine, Department of Orthopaedic 
Surgery, Sports Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio, the §Wellington Orthopaedic and Sports Medicine 
Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, the llDepartment of Biomedical Engineering and Orthopaedic Research 
Center, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio, and the ¶Department of Environmental 
Health, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio 
Background: Female athletes participating in high-risk sports suffer anterior cruciate ligament injury at a 4- to 6-fold greater rate 
than do male athletes. 
Hypothesis: Prescreened female athletes with subsequent anterior cruciate ligament injury will demonstrate decreased neuro­
muscular control and increased valgus joint loading, predicting anterior cruciate ligament injury risk. 
Study Design: Cohort study; Level of evidence, 2. 
Methods: There were 205 female athletes in the high-risk sports of soccer, basketball, and volleyball prospectively measured 
for neuromuscular control using 3-dimensional kinematics (joint angles) and joint loads using kinetics (joint moments) during a 
jump-landing task. Analysis of variance as well as linear and logistic regression were used to isolate predictors of risk in athletes 
who subsequently ruptured the anterior cruciate ligament. 
Results: Nine athletes had a confirmed anterior cruciate ligament rupture; these 9 had significantly different knee posture and 
loading compared to the 196 who did not have anterior cruciate ligament rupture. Knee abduction angle (P < .05) at landing was 
8° greater in anterior cruciate ligament–injured than in uninjured athletes. Anterior cruciate ligament–injured athletes had a 2.5 
times greater knee abduction moment (P < .001) and 20% higher ground reaction force (P < .05), whereas stance time was 16% 
shorter; hence, increased motion, force, and moments occurred more quickly. Knee abduction moment predicted anterior cru­
ciate ligament injury status with 73% specificity and 78% sensitivity; dynamic valgus measures showed a predictive r 2 of 0.88. 
Conclusion: Knee motion and knee loading during a landing task are predictors of anterior cruciate ligament injury risk in female athletes. 
Clinical Relevance: Female athletes with increased dynamic valgus and high abduction loads are at increased risk of anterior cru­
ciate ligament injury. The methods developed may be used to monitor neuromuscular control of the knee joint and may help develop 
simpler measures of neuromuscular control that can be used to direct female athletes to more effective, targeted interventions. 
Keywords: neuromuscular control; dynamic valgus; knee joint load; anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) injury; injury prevention; 
gender differences 
*Address correspondence to Timothy E. Hewett, PhD, Cincinnati 
Children’s Hospital Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Avenue, MLC 10001, 
Cincinnati, OH 45229 (e-mail: tim.hewett@chmcc.org). 
No potential conflict of interest declared. 
 Female adolescents who participate in pivoting and jump­
ing sports suffer ACL injuries at a 4- to 6-fold greater rate 
than do male adolescents participating in the same sports. 
Since the passage of Title IX of the Educational Assistance 
Act, male participation at the high school level has increased 
less than 3% (from 3.7 to 3.8 million), whereas female par­
ticipation has increased more than 9-fold, roughly dou­
bling every 10 years (from 0.3 to 2.8 million).33 This geo­
metric growth in participation has led to an alarming 
increase in the number of ACL injuries in female athletes. 
An estimated 38 000 ACL injuries occur in girls’ and women’s 
athletics in the United States annually,41 at an estimated 
cost per injury of approximately $17 000.22 At a national level, 
surgery and rehabilitation costs associated with female 
ACL injuries total approximately $646 million annually. 
Most ACL injuries in female athletes occur during a 
noncontact episode, typically during deceleration, lateral 
pivoting, or landing tasks that are often associated with 
high external knee joint loads.4,6 Although high knee load 
tasks occur during sports in both genders, why these tasks 
result in such a greater incidence of ACL injury in females 
has remained unclear. However, there appear to be 3 major 
etiologic contributions to the gender disparity observed in 
ACL injury rates, namely, anatomical, hormonal, and neu­
romuscular.18 A number of studies of ACL injury risk fac­
tors have focused on anthropometric/anatomical measures, 
such as thigh length,5 height, and femoral notch width.36 
Although these factors may contribute to ACL injury risk, 
they are in essence nonmodifiable by nature. Hormonal 
factors, particularly those linked to the follicular and ovu­
latory phases of the menstrual cycle, have also been linked 
to ACL injury risk.2,37,44 However, the precise means by 
which they may contribute to ACL injury risk and, again, 
the extent to which these contributions can be modified 
remain unclear. There is increasing evidence in the litera­
ture suggesting that poor or abnormal neuromuscular con­
trol of the lower limb biomechanics, and in particular the 
knee joint during the execution of potential hazardous 
sporting movements, is a primary contributor to the female 
ACL injury mechanism.18,21,26,30 Specifically, dynamic joint 
stabilization is achieved via a combination of active mus­
cle force and passive ligament restraints. The ACL may 
experience potentially hazardous 3-dimensional (3D) forces 
during landing and twisting sports movements if the mus­
culature that controls the knee joint does not sufficiently 
dissipate the associated torques and forces. Understanding 
the way neuromuscular control factors may manifest in 
terms of ACL injury is crucial, as it offers the greatest 
potential for interventional development and application in 
high–injury risk populations such as female athletes.15 
Neuromuscular training studies have been conducted 
previously in an attempt to reduce ACL injury risk. A 
prospective study of male soccer players, for example, 
showed a significant effect of balance board exercises on 
ACL injury rates.7 Technique and phase-oriented neuro­
muscular training corrected jump and landing techniques 
and significantly reduced abduction moments at the 
knee22 and decreased ACL injuries in a female interven­
tion group to a rate similar to that of males.19 The inci­
dence of ACL injury in women’s handball was reduced 
with training designed to improve neuromuscular knee 
control during cutting and landing.32 The above prospec­
tive studies demonstrate that neuromuscular training has 
the potential to decrease ACL injury rates in female ath­
letes. However, the efficacy and efficiency of neuromuscu­
lar training protocols could be improved considerably if 
they could be designed specifically for predetermined high-
risk athletes, with defined neuromuscular control deficits 
at appropriate age and developmental levels. 
A successful method for screening and identifying ath­
letes at increased risk of ACL injury is currently not avail­
able. Dynamic neuromuscular control parameters are 
rarely measured in athletes before participation, with 
measurements typically limited to static measures of joint 
stability.38 If lower limb neuromuscular control parame­
ters linked directly to ACL injury could be identified, more 
effective screening regimens could therefore be imple­
mented to identify those athletes who are at increased 
risk. These data would also afford the development of more 
effective neuromuscular training regimens that could 
effectively reduce current sports-related ACL injury rates, 
particularly in females. 
We collected lower limb biomechanical data in female 
athletes during the execution of sports movements and fol­
lowed them prospectively to determine those who suffered 
noncontact ACL injury. Our hypothesis was that females 
who went on to ACL injury would demonstrate consistent 
neuromuscular control differences that manifest in their 
lower limb biomechanics during jump-landing tasks. We 
further hypothesized that these biomechanical measures 
could be used to predict ACL injury risk with high sensi­
tivity and specificity. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Subjects 
This investigation was a prospective controlled cohort 
study. There were 205 female adolescent soccer, basketball, 
and volleyball players who were prospectively screened via 
3D biomechanical analyses before their seasons. Nine ACL 
injuries (7 during soccer and 2 during basketball play) 
occurred in 205 screened female athletes. Ruptures of the 
ACL were confirmed by arthroscopic surgery (8) or MRI 
(1). The subjects who did not suffer an ACL knee injury 
were classified in this study as uninjured. The ACL-
injured population was similar in age (15.8 ± 1.0 vs 16.1 ± 
1.7 years; P = .63), height (167.7 ± 6.8 cm vs 164.1 ± 6.0 cm; 
P = .08), and weight (61.5 ± 8.3 kg vs 59.1 ± 8.1 kg; P = .39) 
to uninjured controls. 
Informed written consent was obtained from all subjects 
and their parents and approved by the Cincinnati 
Children’s Hospital Medical Center Institutional Review 
Board. After the informed consent was obtained, height, 
weight, and dominant leg were recorded. The dominant leg 
was determined for each subject by asking which leg she 
would use to kick a ball with as far as possible. 
Anthropometric measures were recorded during the labo­
ratory evaluation. 
 Test Protocol 
Knee joint flexion-extension and adduction-abduction 
were quantified for each subject over a series of drop ver­
tical jump (DVJ) trials. The DVJ (Figure 1) consisted of the 
subject starting on top of a box (31 cm in height) with her 
feet positioned 35 cm apart (distance measured between 
toe markers).12 Subjects were instructed to drop directly 
down off the box and immediately perform a maximum 
vertical jump, raising both arms as if they were jumping 
for a basketball rebound. The DVJ has been shown to 
demonstrate high within-session reliability with intra­
class correlation coefficients of greater than 0.93.11 Three 
successful trials were recorded for each subject, with the 
requirement for success being that the impact phase of the 
movement occurred on 2 precisely located force platforms 
(AMTI, Boston, Mass), within the field of view of a high-
speed motion analysis system (Motion Analysis Corp, 
Santa Rosa, Calif). The motion analysis system consisted 
of 8 high-speed (240-Hz) digital cameras (Eagle cameras, 
Motion Analysis Corp) connected through an Ethernet hub 
to the data collection computer (Dell Computer Corp, Los 
Angeles, Calif). The 2 force platforms collected ground 
reaction force (GRF) data at 1200 Hz and were time syn­
chronized with the motion analysis data. They were 
embedded into the floor and positioned 8 cm apart so that 
each foot would contact a different platform during the 
maneuver. The first contact on the platforms (ie, the drop 
from the box) was used for analysis. 
Kinematic and Kinetic Analyses 
Before testing, each subject was instrumented with 25 
retro-reflective markers secured to specific anatomical 
locations (Figure 2). A stationary trial was first taken with 
each subject in a neutral (standing) position to align her 
with the global laboratory coordinate system. Each sub­
ject’s local joint coordinates were aligned to her standing 
position to control for intersubject variation in anatomical 
alignment (ie, zero-position valgus alignment) during the 
static trial. The medial knee and ankle markers were then 
removed before the execution of movement trials. Raw 
marker coordinates were recorded with EvaRT software 
(version 3.21, Motion Analysis Corp) and transformed into 
global 3D coordinates via the direct linear transformation 
method1 and subsequently tracked using EvaRT. Marker 
trajectories were filtered through a low-pass Butterworth 
digital filter at a cutoff frequency of 9 Hz and subsequently 
submitted to custom software (Kintrak, version 6.2, 
Motion Analysis Corp) to quantify knee flexion-extension 
and adduction-abduction demonstrated during each 
trial.16 The data convention was such that knee flexion and 
adduction were denoted as positive (see Figure 3). Vertical 
GRF was used to identify the time at initial contact with 
the ground (IC) and at toe-off from the jump (TO). Knee 
flexion-extension and abduction-adduction angles at IC 
and the maximum abduction and flexion angles demon­
strated during the stance phase (IC-TO) were subsequently 
recorded for each trial. 
Figure 1. Biomechanical illustration of drop vertical jump 
procedure. 
Figure 2. Marker locations and lower extremity joint-naming 
convention. External marker locations were used to gener­
ate lower limb 3-dimensional joint kinematic and kinetic data. 
Inverse dynamics analyses were used to calculate knee 
and hip joint abduction-adduction and flexion-extension 
 Figure 4. Dynamic valgus was defined as the position or 
motion, measured in 3 dimensions, of the distal femur 
toward and distal tibia away from the midline of the body. 
Dynamic valgus may have included the indicated motions 
and moments. 
Figure 3. Lower extremity joint motion and moments naming 
conventions used to define lower limb 3-dimensional joint 
kinematic and kinetic data obtained from individual move­
ment trials. Text refers to both joint angles and moments. The 
kinematic model was assigned 8 internal rotational degrees 
of freedom: 3 at the hip, 3 at the knee, and 2 at the ankle. 
Joint moments were calculated about these axes. 
moments from the motion and force data.43 The force data 
were filtered through a low-pass Butterworth digital filter 
at a cutoff frequency (50 Hz). By convention, hip and knee 
adduction and flexion moments were denoted as positive 
(see Figure 3). External moments are described in this 
article; for example, an external knee abduction load will 
tend to abduct the knee (direct the distal tibia away from 
the midline of the body), and an external knee flexion load 
will tend to flex the knee (Figure 4). The peak knee abduc­
tion and hip adduction moments and peak knee and hip 
flexion moments during the landing phase for each knee 
joint were recorded for each trial.8 
Injury Surveillance 
Participants were enrolled in this study during the sum­
mer of 2002 and 2003 and the fall of 2002, and they were 
followed through 2 fall (soccer) and 1 winter (basketball) 
sports seasons. Certified athletic trainers submitted weekly 
team and individual injury reports for each study partici­
pant during the sports season. Team reports included the 
number of practice and competition exposures. An injury 
risk exposure was defined as one athlete participating in 
one practice or match. Individual injury reports detailed 
type and mechanism of injury and participation time lost 
due to injury. The mean period of time between initial bio­
mechanical testing and ACL injury was 5.0 months (range, 
0.6-13.1 months). The definition of an ACL injury was an 
ACL rupture that occurred during a game or practice of 
their competitive season. Our definition of noncontact was 
the absence of a direct blow to the involved lower extrem­
ity. All ACL injuries reported over the 13-month injury 
surveillance period were noncontact in nature. 
Statistical Analyses 
Statistical means and SDs for all measured variables were 
calculated for each subject group. An analysis of variance 
test was used to compare values between the subject 
groups, and paired t tests were used to compare differ­
ences between limbs. The 2 groups consisted of 9 subse­
quent ACL-injured knees versus the total tested popula­
tion of knees of uninjured females (390 knees total; 2 non-
dominant knees excluded due to data collection error). The 
comparisons between different outcome variables emanated 
from different hypotheses, and therefore a Dunn-
Bonferroni adjustment was unnecessary. For measures of 
relative correlation between parameters, the Pearson cor­
relation coefficient was calculated. Statistical analyses 
were conducted in SPSS (SPSS for Windows, SPSS Science 
  
Inc, Chicago, Ill) and SAS (SAS Institute, Cary, NC). The 
hypotheses were tested in linear regression and logistic 
regression models. All neuromuscular, moment, and force 
variables were introduced into a logistic regression model 
for injury. The generalized estimating equation model was 
estimated using a logit link, a binomial distribution for the 
outcomes, and a general (unstructured) covariance struc­
ture, which result in a repeated-measure logistic regres­
sion analysis for correlated binary (yes-no) outcomes. An 
alpha level of .05 was used to judge statistical significance 
in all models. 
RESULTS 
Knee abduction angles were significantly different 
between ACL-injured and uninjured groups both at initial 
contact and at maximum displacement. Specifically, 
female knees that went on to ACL injury had 8.4° greater 
knee abduction angles at IC, P < .01, and had 7.6° greater 
at maximum, P < .01 (Figure 5), than the noninjured knees 
of the controls had during landing. Significant correlations 
between knee abduction angle and peak vertical GRF were 
observed in ACL-injured (R = .67, P < .001) but not in 
uninjured athletes (P = .44). 
No difference in knee flexion angle at IC was observed 
between the injured and uninjured athletes. Peak knee 
flexion moment (P = .27) values were similarly observed 
not to be different between groups. However, maximum 
knee flexion angle at landing was 10.5° less in injured 
(71.9° ± 12.0°) than in uninjured (82.4° ± 8.0°) athletes 
(P < .05) (Figure 5). A significant correlation between max­
imum knee flexion angle and peak force was present in 
Figure 
5. 
Biomechanical 
model depicting mean knee 
joint kinematics during the 
drop vertical jump at initial 
contact and maximal dis­
placement in the ACL-injured 
and uninjured groups (n = 9 
knees and n = 390 knees, 
respectively). Left, coronal 
plane view of knee abduction 
angle at initial contact in the 
ACL-injured and uninjured 
groups. Center, coronal plane 
view 
of 
maximum 
knee 
abduction angle in the ACL-
injured and uninjured groups. 
Right, sagittal plane view of 
maximum knee flexion angle 
in the ACL-injured and unin­
jured groups. 
uninjured (R = 0.33, P < .001) but not in ACL-injured ath­
letes (P = .55). 
Females who went on to ACL injury had a greater stance 
phase peak external knee abduction moment, –45.3 ± 28.5 
N.m, compared to that of uninjured females, –18.4 ± 15.6 
N.m (P < .001) (Figure 6). Vertical GRF was increased 20% 
in the injured cohort (1266.1 ± 149.9 N vs 1057.8 ± 289.9 
N, P < .05) (Figure 7). Significant correlations existed 
between knee abduction moment and angle and peak GRF 
(R = 0.74 and 0.67, respectively; P < .05) in ACL-injured 
females. The hip adduction moment, although not greater 
than controls on average (Figure 6), was correlated to knee 
abduction moments in ACL-injured subjects (R = 0.69, P < 
.05). Females who went on to ACL injury had a 16% short­
er stance time (P < .01) than did noninjured athletes. 
Significant correlations existed between knee abduction 
moment and angle and peak GRF (R = 0.74 and 0.67, 
respectively; P < .05) in ACL-injured females. 
There was no difference between sagittal plane knee 
flexion-extension moments and ACL injury status. There 
was a correlation between knee flexion (quadriceps) 
moment and peak force in uninjured (R = 0.63, P < .001) 
but not in ACL-injured athletes (P = .3). Hip sagittal plane 
measures showed significant differences between groups. 
Peak external hip flexion moment was greater in the ACL-
injured group (147.9 ± 33.5 N.m) in comparison to the 
uninjured athletes (106.8 ± 45.3 N.m; P < .01). 
Significant leg-to-leg differences in knee load were 
observed in injured but not in uninjured females. Side-to­
side knee abduction moment difference was 6.4 times 
greater in ACL-injured versus the uninjured females 
(Figure 8) (P < .001). There were 6 dominant-leg and 3 
nondominant-leg injuries in the group of 9 ACL injuries. 
 Figure 6. Mean ±1 SD knee abduction and hip adduction 
moment at landing. ***P < .001. 
Figure 7. Vertical ground reaction force mean ±1 SD time 
normalized to 100% stance phase. 
There was not a significant effect of leg dominance on ACL 
injury status (P = .5, χ2 test). 
Logistic regression analysis demonstrated that knee 
abduction moments and angles (IC and peak values) were 
significant predictors of ACL injury status (P < .001). Knee 
abduction moments, which directly contribute to lower 
extremity dynamic valgus and knee joint load,35 had a sen­
sitivity of 78% and a specificity of 73% for predicting ACL 
injury status. A linear regression analysis using the most 
highly significant predictors (knee abduction angles, knee 
abduction moments, and side-to-side differences in these 
measures) of ACL injury showed a predictive r2 value 
equal to 0.88. Knee flexion angle was removed from the 
model because it did not reach the 0.2 linear regression r 
2 
cutoff criterion to be included in the predictive model and 
was removed by a backward elimination technique. 
Scattergrams of measurements of peak knee abduction 
moment and knee abduction angle at IC in ACL-injured 
and uninjured athletes are shown in Figure 9. The data 
points from ACL-injured individuals are clearly in the 
high end of the range for both peak knee abduction 
moment and knee abduction angle at IC when grouped 
with the noninjured subjects. 
DISCUSSION 
Altered Neuromuscular Control 
in ACL-Injured Athletes 
Gender differences in ACL injury rates and in neuromus­
cular control during potentially hazardous sporting move­
ments are well documented in the literature.8,12,19,30 
Figure 8. Dominant versus nondominant differences in 
measurements of components of dynamic valgus (knee 
abduction angle) in injured versus uninjured female athletes. 
***P < .001. 
However, the means by which neuromuscular control dif­
ferences manifest in terms of injury risk to a large extent 
had remained unclear. This study compared 3D biome­
chanical measures in female athletes and compared data 
obtained from normal control athletes to data from those 
who went on to suffer ACL injury. Females suffering an 
ACL injury during competition demonstrated altered neu­
romuscular control characteristics compared to noninjured 
athletes, as evidenced by differences in lower limb biome­
chanics during jump-landing movement tasks. Specifically, 
injured subjects demonstrated significant increases in 
dynamic lower extremity valgus and knee abduction load­
ing before sustaining their injuries compared to uninjured 
controls. 
Dynamic Lower Extremity Valgus: Measurable 
Symptom and Sensitive Predictor 
The link between valgus loading and resultant increases 
in ACL strain has been demonstrated experimentally 
through both cadaveric and in vivo research.13,23,27,28 It is 
therefore likely that the increases observed in valgus 
measures in the injured cohort were a significant compo­
nent of the mechanism that led to ACL rupture. Knee val­
gus angles and moments were the primary predictors of 
ACL injury risk. Valgus loading can increase ACL 
force.27,28 Physiologic valgus torques on the knee can 
increase anterior tibial translation and loads on the ACL 
by several-fold.13 Sagittal plane variables, however, specif­
ically knee flexion and hip and knee flexion-extension 
moments, were not observed to be significant predictors of 
ACL injury potential. This observation is consistent with 
previous research in which multiple regression analysis 
incorporating flexion angles, flexion and extension 
moments, and valgus torque at the knee, hip, and ankle 
demonstrated that valgus torques at the knee were the 
sole significant predictors of peak landing forces.22 
The potential link between excessive dynamic valgus 
and ACL injury risk has been suggested previously. It has 
been postulated, for example, that if an athlete is not prop­
erly aligned or if an unusual foot placement at landing 
occurs, he or she may be at increased risk for injury.39 
Landing in dynamic valgus (Figure 4) could be proposed as 
potentially injurious to the knee.10,14 The current findings 
 Figure 9. Scattergram of measurements of components of dynamic valgus (peak knee abduction moment and knee abduction 
angle at initial contact) in injured (data points shown as Xs) versus uninjured female athletes. ht, height; wt, weight. 
indicate that athletes should be encouraged to avoid exces­
sive valgus alignment at landing, cutting, or decelerating 
to minimize their risk of knee injury. 
Current observations also suggest that the gender-based 
disparity observed in ACL injury rates during sporting 
movements may, to a large extent, be explained by the con­
comitant differences displayed in the coronal plane joint 
motions and moments during these movements. The 
observed increased knee abduction motion and moments 
in females before ACL injury suggest decreased neuro­
muscular control of the lower extremity in the coronal 
plane. This likely reflects differences in contraction pat­
terns or insufficient neuromuscular adaptation of the 
adductors of the hip and flexors of the knee to the high 
demands of sports.27,40 Muscular contraction can decrease 
the dynamic valgus laxity of the knee 3-fold.29 Joint com­
pression through muscular co-contraction allows more of 
the knee adduction load to be absorbed by articular con­
tact forces, which can protect the ligaments from high 
loads (Figure 10). It is likely that more equal distribution 
of forces transmitted across both the medial and lateral 
compartments of the knee joint would lead to decreased 
landing forces.9,22 In addition, a decreased dynamic valgus 
moment would decrease the risk of medial femoral condy­
lar liftoff from the tibial plateau. Biomechanical studies 
have previously established the relationship between 
femoral condylar liftoff and ACL injury risk.29,40 
Although ACL injuries may occur too quickly for reflex­
ive muscular activation, athletes may be able to adopt or 
“preprogram” safer movement patterns that reduce injury 
risk during landing or pivoting or unexpected loads or per­
turbations during sports movements. Preparticipation 
neuromuscular training may result in safer movement 
patterns that act to reduce or eliminate high knee abduc­
tion loads. Hamstrings and quadriceps can be 40% to 80% 
activated at the time that the foot touches the ground.34 
Coactivation of the hamstrings and quadriceps is proposed 
to protect the knee joint not only against excessive anterior 
drawer but also against knee abduction and dynamic 
lower extremity valgus.3 If the hamstrings are under-
recruited or weak, quadriceps activation may be reduced 
to provide the net flexor moment required to perform the 
movement. Deficits in strength and activation of the ham­
strings may thus directly limit the potential for muscular 
co-contraction to protect ligaments. This potential absence 
of muscular control of the joint may lead to a “ligament­
dominant” or “quadriceps-dominant” profile in the female 
athlete.21 If hamstrings recruitment is high, the quadri­
ceps can be activated more while still allowing for a net 
flexor moment. Similar mechanisms apply to muscular 
protection against torsional loading, in which gender dif­
ferences have been identified.45 Taking these facts into 
consideration in conjunction with the suggested link 
between valgus motion/loading and ACL injury, it is likely 
that more effective prevention strategies, aimed at 
improving the muscle contributions to dynamic knee sta­
bility, and in particular in the coronal plane control, can be 
developed with a strong potential for success. 
Need for Injury-Prediction Measures in Athletes 
There is a need for effective screening programs to be put 
into practice that would enable successful identification of 
athletes at risk of ACL injury.17 The current findings 
demonstrate that decreased neuromuscular control as evi­
denced by increased dynamic valgus and external knee 
 A
B 
Figure 10. A, free body diagram of forces acting on the tibia, 
showing the sagittal plane equilibrium between articular con­
tact force, hamstrings force, quadriceps force, and ACL 
force. In this example, quadriceps force contributes to ACL 
force, whereas hamstrings and articular contact force pro­
tect the ACL. B, free body diagram of forces acting on the 
tibia, showing the frontal plane equilibrium between external 
dynamic valgus load, articular contact force, quadriceps 
force, medial hamstrings force, and ACL force. Under exter­
nal dynamic valgus loading, contact shifts to the lateral com­
partment. The moment balance with respect to the contact 
point shows that both quadriceps and medial hamstrings 
force help the ACL (and medial collateral ligament, not 
shown) stabilize the joint against dynamic valgus loading. 
Under a given dynamic valgus load, any reduction in these 
muscle forces will cause an increase in ligament loading. C, 
articular contact force; Q, quadriceps force; H, hamstrings 
force; MH, medial hamstrings force; V, valgus load. 
abduction moments can predict increased ACL injury risk 
in a large percentage of individuals. The question remains, 
therefore, as to whether it is possible to accurately and 
consistently identify those individuals who display these 
potential causal factors. Current technologies afford the 
potential for lower limb kinematics and parameters linked 
to sporting movements to be measured with confi­
dence.4,12,22,31 This suggests that adequate screening 
strategies can be implemented using these technologies to 
successfully identify those individuals who are at risk of 
ACL injury. A potential limitation may be that 3D analysis 
of sporting movements comes at high financial and time 
costs, thus possibly limiting the potential for implementa­
tion of large-scale screening programs. Attempts should be 
made to correlate 3D measures of lower limb biomechani­
cal data with more simple 2D measurements so that 
screening on a larger scale can be implemented. There is 
evidence to suggest that such correlations may be possi­
ble.12 Research of this nature should be pursued in more 
detail considering the large number of athletes participat­
ing in sports in which ACL injury is prolific. 
Neuromuscular Adaptations With Training: Potential 
for Intervention 
Significant positive alterations in movement biomechanics 
and lower extremity muscle strength and recruitment are 
possible in female athletes after neuromuscular training.22 
Changes due to training are typically greater in females, 
as their baseline neuromuscular performance levels are 
often lower compared to those of males.24 Previous studies, 
for example, have shown specifically that neuromuscular 
training can significantly decrease peak GRF and abduc­
tion motion and moments at the knee.22 Intensive neuro­
muscular training can significantly increase fat-free mass, 
vertical jump height, and balance measures in 
females.22,25,42 Muscular power has also been shown to 
increase up to 44% in females with 6 weeks of training. 
Prospective studies have demonstrated that training 
resulting in changes such as those mentioned above has 
the potential to decrease ACL injury rates in female ath­
letes.19,32 However, training regimens that specifically tar­
get the causal factors of ACL injury and reduce their 
impact via neuromuscular modifications need to be devel­
oped further. The results of the current study will enable 
evidence-based training protocols to be developed that aim 
specifically, which aim specifically to modify neuromuscu­
lar control patterns that contribute to increased valgus 
motion and valgus loading. If generalized training such as 
that discussed above can reduce injury rates, then the 
potential of training tailored to high-risk individuals with 
identified neuromuscular control deficits may prove more 
efficacious. 
Further work also appears necessary to determine when 
these training programs should be implemented. 
Prospective randomized trials, for example, should be con­
ducted to determine at what age or stage of development 
young athletes should begin to be trained.20 This intensive 
neuromuscular training may induce a “neuromuscular 
spurt” in female adolescents that could dramatically 
increase neuromuscular control and decrease injury risk. 
This approach may decrease the number of high-risk indi­
viduals and may make subsequent training protocols more 
effective. 
Limitations of the Study 
It is likely that ACL injury has a multifactorial etiology, 
with unmeasured factors influencing outcome. Injury data 
demonstrate that many physical and psychological param­
eters affect injury rates. There are several possible con­
tributing and confounding variables that were not con­
trolled for in the study design, which included school, 
team, age/grade, aggressiveness, foot pronation, quadri­
ceps angle, femoral notch width, reliable menstrual status 
reporting, and blood hormone levels. However, neuromus­
cular parameters appear to be a major determinant. Some 
of these potential factors may be alterable but are, at a 
minimum, controversial. 
The use of only soccer, basketball, and volleyball players 
is a limitation to the generalizability of the findings of this 
 study. However, gender differences in injury incidence 
have been demonstrated in several sports, including bas­
ketball, soccer, lacrosse, team handball, and volleyball. 
Differences in neuromuscular control measures probably 
exist in most gender-paired sports. Therefore, the associa­
tions between ACL injury status and neuromuscular con­
trol measures and injury in female basketball, volleyball, 
and soccer players should be comparable to those found in 
female athletes participating in other sports. 
The significant effects of neuromuscular control meas­
ures on ACL injury status in female athletes were 
observed in this study. The observed differences were of a 
magnitude outside of the protocol’s measurement error. 
However, long-term longitudinal studies testing the 
hypotheses of this study must be undertaken to better 
answer these questions. Future ACL ruptures are more 
likely to occur for individuals with similar kinematics and 
kinetic profiles to those who have already suffered an ACL 
event. The results of the present study may have been 
stronger with a longer survey period. All of those who were 
injured in the present study had been playing sports for 
multiple years. If the high-risk athletes have had excessive 
valgus for multiple years, this would mean that it may 
take years before excessive valgus results in an ACL 
injury. A weakness of this type of prospective study design 
is that there can be a substantial change in neuromuscu­
lar status (ie, excessive valgus) over the course of a long 
(multiyear) injury-tracking period. We are currently con­
ducting studies to assess the effects of time, growth, and 
maturation on these neuromuscular indices. 
Conclusion: Measures of Neuromuscular Control and 
Joint Load Predict Injury Risk in Athletes 
Previously, it was known that ACL injury risk was greater 
in female than in male athletes. What was not known was 
the mechanism underlying this gender disparity, and there 
was no method that could identify those female athletes at 
increased ACL injury risk. In the current study, measures 
of neuromuscular control and knee joint load were 
prospectively examined relative to ACL injury status. 
These measurements were employed to help delineate 
whether lower limb neuromuscular control parameters 
could be used to predict ACL injury risk in female athletes. 
Specifically, it appears that increased valgus motion and 
valgus moments at the knee joint during the impact phase 
of jump-landing tasks are key predictors of an increased 
potential for ACL injury in females. Current technologies 
enable these data to be readily measured noninvasively in 
a large number of athletes, within a relatively short time 
period. Hence, such measurements appear necessary in 
future screening and prevention studies aimed at reducing 
ACL injury rates, particularly in females. Future research 
needs to focus on controlled, prospective longitudinal stud­
ies of defined populations of female athletes who are fol­
lowed through multiple sports seasons to correlate chang­
ing neuromuscular profiles to injury risk, which predis­
pose the athlete to ACL injury. Studies that test improved 
neuromuscular training approaches are also of the highest 
priority. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We acknowledge funding support from the National 
Institutes of Health Grant R101-ARO49735-01A1. We also 
acknowledge Ralph Buncher, PhD, for his assistance with 
the experimental design and for helping to perform the 
statistical analysis of the data, and Robert Mangine of 
Novacare Rehabilitation, Brian Colley of Wellington 
Orthopaedic and Sports Medicine Center, and Spectrum 
Rehabilitation for assisting in the recruitment of schools 
and athletes for participation in the studies. We thank 
Richelle Carlonas of Wellington Orthopaedic and Sports 
Medicine Center for her assistance with editing of the 
manuscript. In addition, we thank the school districts, the 
athletes, and the administrators involved in the study, 
especially Stu Eversole of the Lakota School District; the 
athletic trainers who participated in the study and who 
tracked injuries, including Pate Cagle, ATC, Jennifer 
Miller, ATC, Lisa Sweeterman, ATC, Cathy Conley, ATC, 
among others; and the coaches who were so pivotal in 
making this study a success, including Dan Purcell, Tara 
Schafer-Kalkhoff, Tracey Kornau, Kate Berz, and Heather 
Herweh. 
REFERENCES 
1. Abdel-Aziz YI, Karara HM. Direct linear transformation from com­
parator coordinates into object space coordinates in close-range 
photogrammetry. In: Symposium on Close-Range Photogrammetry. 
Falls Church, Va: American Society of Photogrammetry; 1971:1-18. 
2. Arendt EA, Bershadsky B, Agel J. Periodicity of noncontact anterior 
cruciate ligament injuries during the menstrual cycle. J Gend Specif 
Med. 2002;5:19-26. 
3. Besier TF, Lloyd DG, Ackland TR. Muscle activation strategies at the 
knee during running and cutting maneuvers. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 
2003;35:119-127. 
4. Besier TF, Lloyd DG, Cochrane JL, Ackland TR. External loading of 
the knee joint during running and cutting maneuvers. Med Sci Sports 
Exerc. 2001;33:1168-1175. 
5. Beynnon B, Slauterbeck J, Padua D, et al. Update on ACL risk fac­
tors and prevention strategies in the female athlete. Paper presented 
at: National Athletic Trainers’ Association 52nd Annual Meeting and 
Clinical Symposia; 2001; Los Angeles, Calif. 
6. Boden BP, Dean GS, Feagin JA Jr, Garrett WE Jr. Mechanisms of 
anterior cruciate ligament injury. Orthopedics. 2000;23:573-578. 
7. Caraffa A, Cerulli G, Projetti M, Aisa G, Rizzo A. Prevention of anteri­
or cruciate ligament injuries in soccer: a prospective controlled study 
of proprioceptive training. Knee Surg Sports Traumatol Arthrosc. 
1996;4:19-21. 
8. Chappell JD, Yu B, Kirkendall DT, Garrett WE. A comparison of knee 
kinetics between male and female recreational athletes in stop-jump 
tasks. Am J Sports Med. 2002;30:261-267. 
9. Crenshaw SJ, Pollo FE, Calton EF. Effects of lateral-wedged insoles 
on kinetics at the knee. Clin Orthop. 2000;375:185-192. 
10. Dufek JS, Bates BT. Biomechanical factors associated with injury 
during landing in jumping sports. Sports Med. 1991;12:326-337. 
11. Ford KR, Myer GD, Hewett TE. Reliability of dynamic knee motion in 
female athletes. Paper presented at: American Society of 
Biomechanics Annual Meeting; September 25-27, 2003; Toledo, 
Ohio. 
12. Ford KR, Myer GD, Hewett TE. Valgus knee motion during landing in 
high school female and male basketball players. Med Sci Sports 
Exerc. 2003;35:1745-1750. 
13. Fukuda Y, Woo SL, Loh JC, et al. A quantitative analysis of valgus 
torque on the ACL: a human cadaveric study. J Orthop Res. 
2003;21:1107-1112. 
 14. Gerberich SG, Luhmann S, Finke C, et al. Analysis of severe injuries 
associated with volleyball activities. Phys Sportsmed. 1987;15:75-79. 
15. Griffin LY, American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons. Prevention 
of Noncontact ACL Injuries. Rosemont, Ill: American Academy of 
Orthopaedic Surgeons; 2001. 
16. Grood ES, Suntay WJ. A joint coordinate system for the clinical 
description of three-dimensional motions: application to the knee. J 
Biomech Eng. 1983;105:136-144. 
17. Harmon KG, Dick R. The relationship of skill level to anterior cruciate 
ligament injury. Clin J Sport Med. 1998;8:260-265. 
18. Hewett TE. Neuromuscular and hormonal factors associated with 
knee injuries in female athletes: strategies for intervention. Sports 
Med. 2000;29:313-327. 
19. Hewett TE, Lindenfeld TN, Riccobene JV, Noyes FR. The effect of 
neuromuscular training on the incidence of knee injury in female ath­
letes: a prospective study. Am J Sports Med. 1999;27:699-706. 
20. Hewett TE, Myer GD, Ford KR. Puberty decreases dynamic knee sta­
bility in female athletes: a potential mechanism for increased ACL 
injury risk. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2004;86A:1601-1608. 
21. Hewett TE, Paterno MV, Myer GD. Strategies for enhancing proprio­
ception and neuromuscular control of the knee. Clin Orthop. 
2002;402:76-94. 
22. Hewett TE, Stroupe AL, Nance TA, Noyes FR. Plyometric training in 
female athletes: decreased impact forces and increased hamstring 
torques. Am J Sports Med. 1996;24:765-773. 
23. Kanamori A, Woo SL, Ma CB, et al. The forces in the anterior cruci­
ate ligament and knee kinematics during a simulated pivot shift test: 
a human cadaveric study using robotic technology. Arthroscopy. 
2000;16:633-639. 
24. Kraemer WJ, Keuning M, Ratamess NA, et al. Resistance training 
combined with bench-step aerobics enhances women’s health pro­
file. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2001;33:259-269. 
25. Kraemer WJ, Mazzetti SA, Nindl BC, et al. Effect of resistance train­
ing on women’s strength/power and occupational performances. 
Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2001;33:1011-1025. 
26. Lloyd DG. Rationale for training programs to reduce anterior cruciate 
ligament injuries in Australian football. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 
2001;31:645-654; discussion 661. 
27. Lloyd DG, Buchanan TS. Strategies of muscular support of varus and 
valgus isometric loads at the human knee. J Biomech. 2001;34:1257­
1267. 
28. Markolf KL, Burchfield DM, Shapiro MM, Shepard MF, Finerman GA, 
Slauterbeck JL. Combined knee loading states that generate high 
anterior cruciate ligament forces. J Orthop Res. 1995;13:930-935. 
29. Markolf KL, Graff-Redford A, Amstutz HC. In vivo knee stability: a 
quantitative assessment using an instrumented clinical testing appa­
ratus. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1978;60:664-674. 
30. McLean SG, Lipfert S, van den Bogert AJ. Effect of gender and 
defensive opponent on the biomechanics of sidestep cutting. Med 
Sci Sports Exerc. 2004;36:1008-1016. 
31. McLean SG, Neal RJ, Myers PT, Walters MR. Knee joint kinematics 
during the sidestep cutting maneuver: potential for injury in women. 
Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1999;31:959-968. 
32. Myklebust G, Engebretsen L, Braekken IH, Skjolberg A, Olsen OE, 
Bahr R. Prevention of anterior cruciate ligament injuries in female 
team handball players: a prospective intervention study over three 
seasons. Clin J Sport Med. 2003;13:71-78. 
33. National Federation of State High School Associations. 2002 High 
School Participation Survey. Indianapolis, Ind: National Federation of 
State High School Associations; 2002. 
34. Neptune RR, Wright IC, van den Bogert AJ. Muscle coordination and 
function during cutting movements. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 
1999;31:294-302. 
35. Schipplein OD, Andriacchi TP. Interaction between active and pas­
sive knee stabilizers during level walking. J Orthop Res. 1991;9:113­
119. 
36. Scoville CR, Williams GN, Uhorchak JM, et al. Risk factors associat­
ed with anterior cruciate ligament injury. In: Proceedings of the 68th 
Annual Meeting of the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons. 
Rosemont, Ill: American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons; 
2001:564. 
37. Slauterbeck JR, Hardy DM. Sex hormones and knee ligament injuries 
in female athletes. Am J Med Sci. 2001;322:196-199. 
38. Smith J, Laskowski E. The preparticipation physical examination: 
Mayo Clinic experience with 2,739 examinations. Mayo Clin Proc. 
1998;73:419-429. 
39. Steele J, Milburn P. Ground reaction forces on landing in netball. J 
Hum Mov Stud. 1987;13:399-410. 
40. Tibone JE, Antich TJ, Fanton GS, Moynes DR, Perry J. Functional 
analysis of anterior cruciate ligament instability. Am J Sports Med. 
1986;14:276-284. 
41. Toth AP, Cordasco FA. Anterior cruciate ligament injuries in the 
female athlete. J Gend Specif Med. 2001;4:25-34. 
42. Tropp H, Odenrick P. Postural control in single-limb stance. J Orthop 
Res. 1988;6:833-839. 
43. Winter DA. Biomechanics and Motor Control of Human Movement. 
New York, NY: John Wiley; 1990. 
44. Wojtys EM, Ashton-Miller JA, Huston LJ. A gender-related difference 
in the contribution of the knee musculature to sagittal-plane shear 
stiffness in subjects with similar knee laxity. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 
2002;84:10-16. 
45. Wojtys EM, Huston LJ, Schock HJ, Boylan JP, Ashton-Miller JA. 
Gender differences in muscular protection of the knee in torsion in 
size-matched athletes. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2003;85:782-789. 
Post-print standardized by MSL Academic Endeavors, the imprint of the Michael Schwartz Library at Cleveland State University, 2014
