 Review Article
Spinal cord injury arising in anaesthesia practice
D. W. Hewson,1 N. M. Bedforth2 and J. G. Hardman3
1 Speciality Registrar, 2 Consultant, Department of Anaesthesia, Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust,
Nottingham, UK 3 Professor, Anaesthesia & Critical Care, Division of Clinical Neuroscience, School of Medicine,
University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK
Summary
Spinal cord injury arising during anaesthetic practice is a rare event, but one that carries a significant burden in
terms of morbidity and mortality. In this article, we will review the pathophysiology of spinal cord injury. We will
then discuss injuries relating to patient position, spinal cord hypoperfusion and neuraxial techniques. The most seri-
ous causes of spinal cord injury – vertebral canal haematoma, spinal epidural abscess, meningitis and adhesive arach-
noiditis – will be discussed in turn. For each condition, we draw attention to practical, evidence-based measures
clinicians can undertake to reduce their incidence, or mitigate their severity. Finally, we will discuss transient neuro-
logical symptoms. Some cases of spinal cord injury during anaesthesia can be ascribed to anaesthesia itself, arising as
a direct consequence of its conduct. The injury to a spinal nerve root by inaccurate and/or incautious needling dur-
ing spinal anaesthesia is an obvious example. But in many cases, spinal cord injury during anaesthesia is not caused
by, related to, or even associated with, the conduct of the anaesthetic. Surgical factors, whether direct (e.g. spinal
nerve root damage due to incorrect pedicle screw placement) or indirect (e.g. cord ischaemia following aortic sur-
gery) are responsible for a significant proportion of spinal cord injuries that occur concurrently with the delivery of
regional or general anaesthesia.
.................................................................................................................................................................
Correspondence to: J. G. Hardman
Email: j.hardman@nottingham.ac.uk
Accepted: 1 September 2017
Keywords: peri-operative complication, spinal cord; positioning; neuraxial anaesthesia
Pathophysiology of spinal cord injury
Injury to the spinal cord and its nerve roots occurs fol-
lowing a range of insults, including: compression;
stretch; hypoperfusion; direct trauma; exposure to neu-
rotoxic material; or a combination of these factors.
Like peripheral nerves, the spinal cord responds poorly
to ischaemia, which is the common histopathological
endpoint of these insults.
In contrast to peripheral nerve injury during
anaesthesia, many cases of spinal cord injury have a
clear aetiology. Certain predispositions may render
patients more at risk of spinal cord injury during
anaesthesia, including: spinal canal deformity; abnor-
mal
coagulation;
abnormal
vascular
supply;
or
immunosuppression.
Spinal canal stenosis is a common spinal canal
deformity and can result from arthritic change, anky-
losing spondylitis, Paget’s disease or acromegaly. It is
rarely caused by congenital malformations. Pre-existing
stenosis may contribute to spinal cord injury because
the narrower canal cross-sectional area in such patients
renders them more at risk of nerve compression or
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
43
Anaesthesia 2018, 73 (Suppl. 1), 43–50
doi:10.1111/anae.14139
 local anaesthetic neurotoxicity [1–3]. The severity of a
given injury in these patients may also be higher com-
pared with the general population [4]. It is noteworthy
that spinal stenosis is common, even in asymptomatic
individuals, with one observational study identifying
lumbar canal stenosis on computerised tomography in
19.4% of those aged 60–69 years [5]. The prevalence
of stenosis undoubtedly increases with age. The major-
ity of patients with known or undiagnosed spinal canal
stenosis undergo uneventful neuraxial blockade; how-
ever, such patients may be more likely to sustain spinal
cord injury. The decision to perform a neuraxial tech-
nique in patients with known spinal stenosis should
reflect awareness of this risk, and this should be dis-
cussed with the patient.
The impact of many pre-existing central nervous
system diseases on the risk of spinal cord injury fol-
lowing neuraxial blockade has been re-examined in
recent years. A retrospective review of 139 neuraxial
blockades performed on patients with a range of pre-
existing central nervous system diseases, including
multiple sclerosis and postpolio myelitis, demonstrated
no new or worsening neurological deficits [6]. This
supports the conclusion that such diseases should not
be considered as absolute contra-indications to the use
of neuraxial techniques. Although definitive evidence is
lacking, anaesthetists should be very cautious about
undertaking neuraxial blockade in patients with open
or closed neural tube defects. Even isolated spina bifida
may increase the risk of neurological injury, and a
thorough review of the literature in the context of the
specific clinical circumstances of a case is required
before such a technique is undertaken [4].
Spinal cord injury related to patient
positioning
Spinal cord injury in relation to patient positioning is
of most concern to anaesthetists during the care of
patients with suspected traumatic bony or ligamentous
cervical spine injuries. Cervical spine immobilisation
with rigid collar, tapes and spinal board is a time-hon-
oured [7], but increasingly questioned, practice [8].
Immobilisation aims to protect patients with an unsta-
ble cervical spine from secondary spinal cord injury
induced by accidental movement of the spine. The effi-
cacy
of
traditional
immobilisation
techniques
in
achieving temporary cervical spine stability, the risks of
undertaking
such
techniques
routinely
in
trauma
patients, and the extent to which these techniques pre-
vent spinal cord injury during anaesthesia, have been
critically reviewed elsewhere [8, 9]; however, these
techniques remain in common practice in UK pre-hos-
pital and early hospital trauma management. It is stan-
dard
practice
to
maintain
spinal
alignment
with
manual in-line stabilisation of the cervical spine during
airway manipulation in anaesthetised patients who may
have unstable cervical spine injuries. This practice is
not without controversy, since it can worsen laryngo-
scopic views and has questionable efficacy [10]. On the
basis that the force required to achieve tracheal intuba-
tion by direct laryngoscopy may act deleteriously on
the alignment of the cervical spine, most anaesthetists
use the minimum force required to obtain an adequate
view of the larynx during intubation, or use airway
techniques other than direct laryngoscopy (e.g. video-
laryngoscopy) to secure the airway of trauma patients.
Again, such modifications to techniques are poorly evi-
denced and are the subject of ongoing debate.
Until reappraisals of the literature are translated
into national and international consensus documents
on trauma management, it is likely that current meth-
ods of cervical spine immobilisation, manual in-line
stabilisation and modified laryngoscopic techniques
will remain embedded in clinical practice, and will be
viewed as standards of care from a medicolegal per-
spective.
Spinal cord injury due to hypoperfusion
Peri-operative spinal cord ischaemia and infarction
due to regional or global hypoperfusion, thrombus or
embolus can occur during any regional or general
anaesthetic technique. It is most commonly associated
with prolonged surgery to the aorta, spine or heart
[11, 12], especially if complicated by extremes of
patient positioning (e.g. hyperlordosis).
It is accepted that most patients who experience
arterial hypotension in the peri-operative period, even
for prolonged durations, do not go on to develop
spinal cord injury. It is not fully understood why a
small proportion of patients develop ischaemia result-
ing in neurological injury, but it has been proposed
that such patients may have less physiological reserve
44
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
Anaesthesia 2018, 73 (Suppl. 1), 43–50
Hewson et al. | Spinal cord injury
 to tolerate ischaemia or require higher arterial pres-
sures to maintain spinal autoregulation [4]. Interna-
tional guidelines recommend that mean arterial blood
pressure is maintained ‘within 20–30% of baseline’
during neuraxial anaesthesia [4]. It would seem pru-
dent (and not only to protect the spinal cord) to apply
this recommendation to patients undergoing both neu-
raxial and general anaesthesia.
The clinical presentation of spinal cord infarction
is variable and dependent on the level of the cord
lesion, but symptoms include back pain, motor weak-
ness and sensory loss. The classical anterior spinal
artery syndrome (paraplegia, loss of pain and tempera-
ture sensation, but with intact proprioception) results
from ischaemia to the anterior two-thirds of the spinal
cross-sectional area, and is the commonest presenta-
tion of cord infarction. The differential diagnosis for
this condition is broad and includes vertebral canal
haematoma
or
abscess,
transverse
myelitis
and
demyelinating disease. Given the complexity of the dif-
ferential diagnosis, early specialist neurology opinion
should be sought in patients where spinal cord infarc-
tion is suspected. Such patients require urgent mag-
netic resonance imaging (MRI) to detect ischaemic
change (although this may not radiologically manifest
in the first 24 h) and to exclude compressive lesions.
No evidence-based guidelines exist on the manage-
ment of those patients who develop spinal cord infarc-
tion in the postoperative period. Relevant surgical
specialties should be consulted if cord ischaemia is
thought to be secondary to a surgical insult, since
remedial action may be possible. In instances where
such corrective surgery is not possible, neuroprotective
measures to reduce ongoing ischaemic damage to the
cord are the mainstay of initial medical therapy. These
include blood pressure manipulation to prevent arterial
hypotension in all cases, and cerebrospinal fluid drai-
nage and initiation of anticoagulation in selected
patients. Steroid therapy is not recommended in cases
of spinal cord injury due to hypoperfusion, or indeed
from other causes. Four prospective randomised con-
trolled trials have failed to demonstrate benefit for
methylprednisolone in acute spinal cord injury, but
have shown significant harmful side-effects, including
death. Studies that have shown possible benefit from
steroid administration in acute spinal cord injury are
retrospective in design, open to criticism of their data
reporting and show inconsistent and conflicting effects
of steroids on neurological outcomes. Even among the
studies showing purported neurological benefit, none
has demonstrated meaningful functional improvement
[13]. The complexity of both the immediate and long-
term management of patients with such injuries means
early advice should be sought from tertiary spinal inju-
ries centres.
Spinal cord injury related to neuraxial
techniques
Serious injury to the spinal cord following spinal or
epidural blockade is very rare, but when it occurs it can
result in devastating, and often permanent, sequelae.
Studies investigating the incidence of spinal cord injury
following neuraxial techniques vary greatly in their pop-
ulations, sampling and reporting methods and, therefore,
unsurprisingly vary greatly in their conclusions.
The concept that an intrinsic risk of spinal cord
injury following a neuraxial technique can be commu-
nicated to unselected patients is erroneous, since this
risk relates only partly to the technique performed, but
more importantly to the application of the procedure
to a particular set of individual patient circumstances.
In this regard, the literature usefully supports the
hypothesis that epidural blockade is of higher risk than
spinal blockade, and that techniques performed in the
peri-operative period on adults more frequently result
in injury compared with techniques in an obstetric,
chronic pain or paediatric setting [1, 4, 11]. Pre-exist-
ing spinal canal deformity, abnormal coagulation, poor
aseptic technique, immunosuppression and significant
comorbidity also place patients at increased risk of
injury arising from neuraxial techniques [14, 15].
The 3rd National Audit Project of the Royal College
of Anaesthetists (NAP3) reported an overall incidence
of permanent injury after all neuraxial techniques of 4.2
per 100,000 using a ‘pessimistic’ assessment of data, or
2.0 per 100,000 using an ‘optimistic’ assessment. The
authors noted that in more than 80% of the cases result-
ing in permanent harm, the block was placed during the
peri-operative period, and that although peri-operative
epidurals represented approximately only 15% of all
neuraxial blocks sited, they accounted for more than
half of all permanent injury [16].
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
45
Hewson et al. | Spinal cord injury
Anaesthesia 2018, 73 (Suppl. 1), 43–50
 Direct trauma to the nerve roots of the cauda
equina or the spinal cord itself is possible during
spinal,
epidural or
caudal
needle
instrumentation.
Identification of correct vertebral levels using landmark
techniques is difficult [17], and made more challenging
by patient obesity or spinal deformity [4]. Accidental
needling at vertebral levels cephalad to the termination
of the spinal cord during spinal techniques risks direct
neural injury, and anaesthetists must be confident in
their selection of a vertebral level below L2/3 [18]. The
use of ultrasound to identify both level and midline is
increasing in popularity, but is not yet a standard of
care. The level at which the spinal cord terminates is
variable, with one examination of 136 MRI images
showing it to be as high as T11 or as low as L3 [19].
Unexpectedly low termination of the cord (or erro-
neously high needling) may result in needle trauma to
the conus medullaris. Finally, variations in ligamentous
anatomy, for example, incomplete midline fusion of
the ligamentum flavum, can result in failure of a loss
of resistance epidural technique and accidental needle
trauma.
Despite accurate vertebral level selection, needle
trauma to neural tissue may occur. This can be due to
lateral deviation of the needle towards spinal roots,
usually causing paraesthesia. Paraesthesia during need-
ling or injection should always alert the operator to
potential neural injury and should cause the needle to
be withdrawn and redirected. Three of the most feared
complications that can result in spinal cord injury fol-
lowing neuraxial blockade are haematoma, infection or
chemical damage. These will be dealt with in turn
below.
Vertebral canal haematoma
Vertebral canal haematomata encompasses accumula-
tions of blood in either the subdural or epidural space
which can mechanically compress the spinal cord or
roots and is an uncommon complication of neuraxial
anaesthesia;
importantly,
neurological
outcome
is
partly dependent on prompt diagnosis and manage-
ment. Vertebral canal haematoma may be unrelated to
anaesthesia (e.g. presenting following trauma or neo-
plasm, or in patients with vascular malformations),
and
a
number
of
spontaneous
cases
have
been
reported [20]. The risks of spinal cord injury due to
vertebral canal haematoma are greatest in patients with
abnormalities of coagulation, pre-existing spinal canal
abnormalities and in those who sustain multiple needle
passes as part of their anaesthetic administration [21].
This would suggest that direct needle or catheter
trauma to vasculature is responsible for the formation
of the haematoma. National guidelines exist to inform
anaesthetists of the impact of anticoagulants on neu-
raxial procedures [21, 22].
Vertebral canal haematoma can cause pain at the
site of collection and in a radicular distribution, motor
or sensory impairment, and altered bowel or bladder
function. In three-quarters of cases, this presentation
will progress rapidly within a 24-h period [23]. The
obvious cross-over between these worrying symptoms
and the normal after-effects of spinal or epidural
blockade go some way to explain the potential diffi-
culty in promptly identifying patients with vertebral
canal haematoma following such techniques. In the
specific context of patients who have undergone epidu-
ral or spinal procedures, motor or sensory blockade
which is unexpectedly prolonged, outside the expected
distribution or that re-appears following initial block
resolution, should alert clinical staff to the possibility
of vertebral canal haematoma. Development of new
and progressive motor deficits in patients following
neuraxial needling is a particularly reliable sign that
carries
prognostic
implications
[24].
This
should
prompt immediate cessation of the epidural infusion,
if applicable, and re-assessment of motor power and
sensation by a senior anaesthetist every 30 min for no
more than 4 h (after which, vertebral canal pathology
should be assumed). In the event that motor power
does not improve, the patient should undergo immedi-
ate intra- or interhospital transfer for urgent MRI,
with review of the images by a consultant radiologist
in conjunction with anaesthetic and neurosurgical or
spinal colleagues.
Many local guidelines on this topic stipulate that
decompressive surgery should be undertaken within a
certain number of hours after the onset of symptoms.
It is difficult to cite evidence to support a particular
timeframe against which care should be judged, how-
ever, a 6–8-h period from symptom onset to surgery is
often quoted as being that period in which meaningful
recovery
of
function
is
likely
[25].
All
hospitals
46
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
Anaesthesia 2018, 73 (Suppl. 1), 43–50
Hewson et al. | Spinal cord injury
 performing neuraxial blockade should have training
and protocols in place to assist staff in the observation,
escalation and management of such patients, with ver-
tebral canal haematoma specifically highlighted as a
concern should abnormal motor block be identified at
any stage following neuraxial needling [26]. Regional
arrangements for the emergency MRI of patients from
hospitals without out-of-hours facilities aim to make
the referral pathway efficient and thereby prevent
delays in treatment. Failure to disconnect epidural
infusions, image the spine promptly and operate to
evacuate the clot in a timely manner, are recurrent
themes of medicolegal cases involving vertebral canal
haematoma.
Infection
Infection leading to spinal cord injury following neu-
raxial procedures may take the form of vertebral canal
abscess or meningitis. Although abscesses of the intra-
medullary [27] and subdural [28] spaces have been
described, they appear much less frequently than
spinal epidural abscesses, and for the purposes of
immediate assessment and management these entities
can be grouped together.
The incidence of spinal epidural abscesses follow-
ing neuraxial techniques is very low. NAP3 reported
20 new cases of spinal epidural abscess following the
performance of an estimated 707,455 neuraxial blocks
[16]. The majority of spinal epidural abscesses are
unrelated to neuraxial techniques and occur due to
haematogenous spread of bone, skin or soft tissue
infections. A prospective Danish study reporting nine
confirmed spinal epidural abscesses following epidural
anaesthesia in 17,372 patients, identified prolonged
epidural catheter placement (a mean of 11 days in
those who developed abscesses), pre-existing patient
immunocompromise and the presence of anticoagula-
tion agents as possible risk factors for the development
of spinal epidural abscesses. Patient immunocompro-
mise around the time of epidural catheterisation, poor
aseptic technique and traumatic insertion are recurrent
themes in reports of spinal epidural abscesses [29, 30].
Pre-existing, untreated active systemic infection and
infection at the site of needle insertion, are widely con-
sidered to be an absolute contra-indication to both
spinal and epidural blockade [15]. Patients who have
treated systemic infections, or who are at risk of tran-
sient bacteraemia in the period following their neurax-
ial
anaesthetic
(e.g.
those
undergoing
urological
instrumentation), are a more challenging group. Evi-
dence suggests that both spinal and epidural blockade
can be safely used in both groups provided the infec-
tion is being treated successfully [31–34].
Spinal epidural abscesses typically present quite
insidiously [35], in the days to weeks following neu-
raxial blockade, with progressive back pain (often with
localised tenderness), radicular pain, malaise, fever,
sensory and motor deficit, and bowel and bladder dys-
function. Photophobia and meningism may occur.
Patients
with
suspected
spinal
epidural
abscesses
should undergo resuscitation like any other septic
patient and should be commenced on systemic antibi-
otics covering Gram-positive cocci and Gram-negative
bacilli as soon as possible [36]. Staphylococcus is the
most commonly implicated organism and methicillin
resistance is common [25]. Cultures of blood, catheters
and pus should be sent for urgent analysis, preferably
before starting antibiotics. Whole-spine MRI is the
imaging modality of choice in such circumstances, fol-
lowed by neurosurgical spinal review for consideration
of urgent decompression and abscess drainage. Pro-
longed antibiotic therapy is usual.
Meningitis following neuraxial blockade presents
with
headache,
backache,
meningism,
fever
and
lethargy. It can easily be confused with post-dural
puncture headache, but the absence of a strong postu-
ral element to the headache, and the presence of rising
inflammatory and infectious markers should alert the
clinician to the possibility of meningitis and the need
to perform urgent diagnostic lumbar puncture. Strep-
tococcus, usually respiratory tract commensals, such as
the viridans group, is the responsible bacteria in the
majority of cases of meningitis following spinal or
epidural anaesthesia. This reinforces the message that
the wearing of a facemask is likely to increase the
effectiveness of an aseptic technique. The usual com-
munity-acquired organisms are much less frequently
seen in cases following neuraxial intervention; microbi-
ology advice should therefore be sought regarding
antibiotic therapy. Direct entry of the bacteria into the
intrathecal space during dural puncture seems to be a
key element in the pathogenesis of the condition and
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
47
Hewson et al. | Spinal cord injury
Anaesthesia 2018, 73 (Suppl. 1), 43–50
 the literature shows a predominance of meningitis
occurring after spinal, rather than epidural, anaesthesia
[30].
Spinal epidural abscesses and post-dural puncture
meningitis together carry an estimated 15% mortality
[35], but rapidity of diagnosis and treatment can
reduce this significantly [30].
Adhesive arachnoiditis
Although the immunological processes and genetic
tendencies of adhesive arachnoiditis are incompletely
understood, the condition itself is characterised by
hyperaemia and inflammation of the meninges result-
ing in fibrous, collagen band formation. The prolifera-
tion of adhesive bands causes reduced blood and
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) flow and thereby damages
neural tissues [37]. The condition is often complicated
by syringomyelia [38] and has a bleak neurological
prognosis, often resulting in paraplegia, with few treat-
ment options.
Arachnoiditis is most often seen as a complication
of tuberculosis, revision surgery to the spine or as a
response
to
contrast
myelography,
but
has
been
reported as an idiosyncratic reaction following neurax-
ial anaesthesia [39, 40]. Given that a literature review
conducted in 2012 [40] found only seven published
cases of adhesive arachnoiditis following neuraxial pro-
cedures over a 22-year period, the incidence of this
condition should not be overstated.
A common trigger has not been identified, but
idiosyncratic reactions to blood, local anaesthetics and
chlorhexidine in the epidural or intrathecal space have
been implicated. In response to concerns about the
role of chlorhexidine in triggering adhesive arach-
noiditis, the concentration, solvent and method of
application of chlorhexidine have been the subject of
much debate and subsequent national recommenda-
tions. The AAGBI guidance concludes that ‘0.5% [al-
coholic chlorhexidine] solution should be preferred
over a 2% solution for skin asepsis before central neu-
raxial blockade’ [41]. The physical and temporal isola-
tion of chlorhexidine solution from any equipment
that will be used as part of the neuraxial technique is
also recommended, as is the drying of the antiseptic
solution before needling (to optimise the antimicrobial
action and to prevent ‘wicking’ into the needle). A
2016 NHS Improvement Patient Safety Alert described
the practice of using ‘open systems’ (including gal-
lipots) for injectable medicines during invasive proce-
dures to be ‘indefensible practice’, and adherence to
this Safety Alert should further reduce the risk of acci-
dental chlorhexidine contamination of injected solu-
tions [42].
Transient neurological symptoms
The term ‘transient neurological symptoms’ (TNS)
describes a pain condition that was first described in
1993 [43], which consists of radicular pain radiating
from the gluteal region down the legs, occurring
within 24 h of spinal anaesthesia. Patients with TNS
will have no other abnormal bed-side, radiological or
electrophysiological findings, and symptoms usually
resolve within days.
The initial case series of TNS described the condi-
tion following use of single-dose lidocaine 5% in spinal
anaesthesia and proposed local anaesthetic neurotoxic-
ity as the cause. Although TNS has been described fol-
lowing the use of other local anaesthetics (including
mepivacaine [44], bupivacaine [45], procaine [46] and
ropivacaine [47]), a 2009 systematic review confirmed
the risk of developing TNS is significantly higher with
lidocaine, with a relative risk of 7.3 compared with
other agents [48]. There is also a higher incidence of
TNS in patients undergoing surgery in the lithotomy
position; this may reflect stretching of the sciatic
nerves playing a role in the condition’s aetiology. The
overall incidence of TNS following lidocaine spinal
anaesthesia is 4–36% [49] and this incidence does not
seem to be influenced by the concentration [50],
osmolarity [51] or baricity [49] of the lidocaine used.
If a patient presents with motor or sensory abnormal-
ity following spinal or epidural anaesthesia, more con-
cerning diagnoses such as haematoma or infection
should be urgently excluded before considering TNS as
a possibility.
Conclusion
The incidence of spinal cord injury arising in anaes-
thetic practice is small; however, this is undoubtedly a
complication that the great majority of patients would
consider to be ‘of interest’. For the majority of
patients, such risks will be offset by the avoidance of
48
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
Anaesthesia 2018, 73 (Suppl. 1), 43–50
Hewson et al. | Spinal cord injury
 other risks that would be brought by alternative treat-
ments (e.g. systemic opioids or general anaesthesia);
however, consent for spinal needling techniques should
include, at least, an offer to disclose the risk of spinal
cord injury [52].
From the (admittedly limited) evidence available,
it appears that several features in clinical practice can
reduce the risk of injury to the spinal cord during
spinal needling techniques. These include meticulous
aseptic technique, needle withdrawal when pain is
expressed, avoidance of needling in the context of anti-
coagulation
and
subarachnoid
access
comfortably
below the expected termination of the spinal cord at
L2. Postoperative surveillance is crucially important in
patients with epidural catheters and unexpected motor
block should be treated as an emergency and escalated
to senior, experienced anaesthetists.
Acknowledgements
JH is Associate Editor-in-Chief of the British Journal
of Anaesthesia and a member of the journal’s editorial
board. He provides advice and accepts fees in civil,
criminal and coronial medicolegal cases. No other con-
flicts of interest.
References
1. Moen V, Dahlgren N, Irestedt L. Severe neurological complica-
tions after central neuraxial blockades in Sweden 1990–1999.
Anesthesiology 2004; 101: 950–9.
2. Hebl JR, Horlocker TT, Kopp SL, Schroeder DR. Neuraxial block-
ade in patients with preexisting spinal stenosis, lumbar disk
disease, or prior spine surgery. Anesthesia and Analgesia
2010; 111: 1511–19.
3. Kopp SL, Peters SM, Rose PS, Hebl JR, Horlocker TT. Worsening
of
neurologic
symptoms
after
spinal
anesthesia
in
two
patients with spinal stenosis. Regional Anesthesia and Pain
Medicine 2015; 40: 502–5.
4. Neal JM, Barrington MJ, Brull R, et al. The second ASRA prac-
tice advisory on neurologic complications associated with
regional anesthesia and pain medicine. Regional Anesthesia
and Pain Medicine 2015; 40: 401–30.
5. Kalichman L, Cole R, Kim DH, et al. Spinal stenosis prevalence
and association with symptoms: the Framingham Study. Spine
Journal 2009; 9: 545–50.
6. Hebl JR, Horlocker TT, Schroeder DR. Neuraxial anesthesia and
analgesia in patients with preexisting central nervous system
disorders. Anesthesia and Analgesia 2006; 103: 223–8.
7. Kossuth LC. The removal of injured personnel from wrecked
vehicles. Journal of Trauma and Acute Care Surgery 1965; 5:
703–8.
8. Sundstrøm T, Asbjørnsen H, Habiba S, Sunde GA, Wester K.
Prehospital use of cervical collars in trauma patients: a critical
review. Journal of Neurotrauma 2014; 31: 531–40.
9. Crosby E. Airway management in adults after cervical spine
trauma. Anesthesiology 2006; 104: 1293–318.
10. Manoach S, Paladino L. Manual in-line stabilization for acute
airway management of suspected cervical spine injury: histor-
ical review and current questions. Annals of Emergency Medi-
cine 2007; 50: 236–45.
11. Mess�
e S, Bavaria J, Mullen M, Cheung A, Davis R. Neurologic
outcomes from high risk descending thoracic and thoracoab-
dominal aortic operations in the era of endovascular repair.
Neurocritical Care 2008; 9: 344–51.
12. Zuber WF, Gaspar MR, Rothschild PD. The anterior spinal artery
syndrome – a complication of abdominal aortic surgery:
report of five cases and review of the literature. Annals of
Surgery 1970; 172: 909–15.
13. Hurlbert R, Hadley M, Walters B, et al. Pharmacological ther-
apy for acute spinal cord injury. Neurosurgery 2015; 76(suppl
1): s71–83.
14. Hebl J. The importance and implications of aseptic techniques
during regional anesthesia. Regional Anesthesia and Pain
Medicine 2006; 31: 311–23.
15. Wedel D, Horlocker T. Regional anesthesia in the febrile or
infected patient. Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine
2006; 31: 324–33.
16. Cook TM, Counsell D, Wildsmith JAW. Major complications of
central neuraxial block: report on the third national audit pro-
ject of the Royal College of Anaesthetists. British Journal of
Anaesthesia 2009; 102: 179–90.
17. Broadbent C, Maxwell W, Ferrie R, Wilson D. Ability of anaes-
thetists to identify a marked lumbar interspace. Anaesthesia
2000; 55: 1122–6.
18. Reynolds F. Logic in the safe practice of spinal anaesthesia.
Anaesthesia 2000; 55: 1045–6.
19. Macdonald A, Chatrath P
, Spector T, Ellis H. Level of termina-
tion of the spinal cord and the dural sac: a magnetic reso-
nance study. Clinical Anatomy 1999; 12: 149–52.
20. Hentschel S, Woolfenden A, Fairholm D. Resolution of sponta-
neous spinal epidural hematoma without surgery: report of
two cases. Spine 2001; 26: 525–7.
21. Horlocker TT, Wedel DJ, Rowlingson JC, et al. Regional anes-
thesia in the patient receiving antithrombotic or thrombolytic
therapy: American Society of Regional Anesthesia and Pain
Medicine evidence-based guidelines. Regional Anesthesia and
Pain Medicine 2010; 35: 64–101.
22. Harrop-Griffiths W, Cook T, Gill H, et al. Regional anaesthesia
and patients with abnormalities of coagulation. Anaesthesia
2013; 68: 966–72.
23. Kreppel D, Antoniadis G, Seeling W. Spinal hematoma: a liter-
ature survey with meta-analysis of 613 patients. Neurosurgi-
cal Review 2003; 26: 1–49.
24. Meikle J, Bird S, Nightingale JJ, White N. Detection and man-
agement of epidural haematomas related to anaesthesia in
the UK: a national survey of current practice. British Journal of
Anaesthesia 2008; 101: 400–4.
25. Christie I, McCabe S. Major complications of epidural analgesia
after surgery: results of a six-year survey. Anaesthesia 2007;
62: 335–41.
26. Bedforth NM, Aitkenhead AR, Hardman JG. Haematoma and
abscess after epidural analgesia. British Journal of Anaesthe-
sia 2008; 101: 291–3.
27. Bartels R, Gonera E, van der Spek J. Intramedullary spinal cord
abscess - a case report. Spine 1995; 20: 1199–204.
28. Butler E, Dohrmann P
, Stark R. Spinal subdural abscess. Clinical
and Experimental Neurology 1988; 25: 67–70.
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
49
Hewson et al. | Spinal cord injury
Anaesthesia 2018, 73 (Suppl. 1), 43–50
 29. Kindler C, Seeberger M. Epidural abscess complicating epidural
anesthesia and analgesia: an analysis of the literature. Acta
Anaesthesiologica Scandinavica 1998; 42: 614–20.
30. Reynolds F. Neurological infections after neuraxial anesthesia.
Anesthesiology Clinics 2008; 26: 23–52.
31. Chestnut D. Spinal anesthesia in the febrile patient. Anesthe-
siology 1992; 76: 667–9.
32. Bader A, Datta S, Gilbertson L. Regional anesthesia in women
with chorioamnionitis. Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medi-
cine 1992; 17: 84.
33. Goodman E, DeHorta E. Safety of spinal and epidural anesthe-
sia in parturients with chorioamnionitis. Regional Anesthesia
and Pain Medicine 1996; 21: 436–41.
34. Auroy Y, Narchi P
, Messiah A, Litt L, Rouvier B, Samii K. Serious
complications related to regional anesthesia: results of a
prospective survey in France. Anesthesiology 1997; 87: 479–86.
35. Reihsaua E, Waldbaur H, Seeling W. Spinal epidural abscess: a
meta-analysis of 915 patients. Neurosurgical Review 2000;
232: 175–204.
36. Rhodes A, Evans LE, Alhazzani W, et al. Surviving Sepsis Cam-
paign: international guidelines for management of sepsis
and septic shock: 2016. Critical Care Medicine 2017; 45:
486–552.
37. Miaki K, Matsui H, Nakano M, Tsuji H. Nutritional supply to
the cauda equina in lumbar adhesive arachnoiditis in rats.
European Spine Journal 1999; 8: 310–16.
38. Koyanagi I, Iwasaki Y, Hida K, Houkin K. Clinical features and
pathomechanisms of syringomyelia associated with spinal
arachnoiditis. Surgical Neurology 2005; 63: 350–5.
39. Bogod D. The sting in the tail: antiseptics and the neuraxis
revisited. Anaesthesia 2012; 67: 1305–9.
40. Killeen T, Kamat A, Walsh D, Parker A, Aliashkevich A. Severe
adhesive arachnoiditis resulting in progressive paraplegia fol-
lowing obstetric spinal anaesthesia: a case report and review.
Anaesthesia 2012; 67: 1386–94.
41. Campbell J, Plaat F, Checketts M, Bogod D. Safety guide-
line=kin antisepsis for central neuraxial blockade. Anaesthesia
2014; 69: 1279–86.
42. NHS Improvement. Restricted use of open systems for inject-
able medication, 2016. https://improvement.nhs.uk/news-
alerts/restricted-use-open-systems-injectable-medication/
(accessed 05/06/2017).
43. Schneider M, Ettlin T, Kaufmann M. Transient neurologic toxic-
ity after hyperbaric subarachnoid anesthesia with 5% lido-
caine. Anesthesia and Analgesia 1993; 76: 1154–7.
44. Hiller A, Rosenberg P
. Transient neurological symptoms after
spinal anaesthesia with 4% mepivacaine and 0.5% bupiva-
caine. British Journal of Anaesthesia 1997; 79: 301–5.
45. Casati A, Fanelli G, Aldegheri G, Berti M. A transient neurolog-
ical deficit following intrathecal injection of 1% hyperbaric
bupivacaine for unilateral spinal anaesthesia. European Jour-
nal of Anaesthesiology 1998; 15: 112–3.
46. Hodgson P
, Liu SS, Batra MS, Gras TW, Pollock JE, Neal JM. Pro-
caine compared with lidocaine for incidence of transient neu-
rologic symptoms. Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine
2000; 25: 218–22.
47. Ganapathy S, Sandhu H, Stockall CA, Hurley D. Transient neu-
rologic
symptom
(TNS)
following
intrathecal
ropivacaine.
Anesthesiology 2000; 96: 1537–9.
48. Zaric D, Christiansen C, Pace NL, Punjasawadwong Y. Transient
neurologic symptoms (TNS) following spinal anaesthesia with
lidocaine versus other local anaesthetics. The Cochrane Data-
base of Systematic Reviews 2003; 2: CD003006.
49. Pollock JE. Neurotoxicity of intrathecal local anaesthetics and
transient neurological symptoms. Best Practice and Research:
Clinical Anaesthesiology 2003; 17: 471–84.
50. Pollock JE, Liu SS, Neal JM, Stephenson CA. Dilution of spinal
lidocaine does not alter the incidence of transient neurologic
symptoms. Anesthesiology 1999; 90: 445–50.
51. Hampl K, Schneider M, Thorin D, Ummenhofer W, Drewe J.
Hyperosmolarity does not contribute to transient radicular
irritation after spinal anesthesia with hyperbaric 5% lido-
caine. Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine 1995; 20:
363–8.
52. Yentis SM, Hartle AJ, Barker IR, et al. AAGBI: consent for
anaesthesia 2017. Anaesthesia 2017; 72: 93–105.
50
© 2018 The Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland
Anaesthesia 2018, 73 (Suppl. 1), 43–50
Hewson et al. | Spinal cord injury
