 Circulation. 2018;137:961–972. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.033502 
February 27, 2018
961
Karen A. Hicks, MD*
Kenneth W. Mahaffey, 
MD*
Roxana Mehran, MD*
Steven E. Nissen, MD*
CONSENSUS REPORT
2017 Cardiovascular and Stroke Endpoint 
Definitions for Clinical Trials
Circulation
http://circ.ahajournals.org
Key Words: cardiovascular and stroke 
endpoint definitions ◼ cardiovascular 
and stroke outcome definitions  
◼ cardiovascular and stroke outcomes 
◼ cardiovascular endpoint definitions 
◼ cardiovascular endpoints ◼ 
cardiovascular outcomes ◼ clinical trial 
endpoint definitions ◼ clinical trial 
endpoints ◼ endpoint definitions  
◼ endpoints ◼ outcome definitions  
◼ stroke endpoint definitions ◼ stroke 
endpoints ◼ stroke outcomes
The full author list is available on  
page 970.
*Chairpersons.
Published jointly by the American 
College of Cardiology Foundation and 
American Heart Association, Inc.
ABSTRACT: This publication describes uniform definitions for 
cardiovascular and stroke outcomes developed by the Standardized 
Data Collection for Cardiovascular Trials Initiative and the US Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA). The FDA established the Standardized Data 
Collection for Cardiovascular Trials Initiative in 2009 to simplify the design 
and conduct of clinical trials intended to support marketing applications. 
The writing committee recognizes that these definitions may be used in 
other types of clinical trials and clinical care processes where appropriate. 
Use of these definitions at the FDA has enhanced the ability to aggregate 
data within and across medical product development programs, conduct 
meta-analyses to evaluate cardiovascular safety, integrate data from 
multiple trials, and compare effectiveness of drugs and devices. Further 
study is needed to determine whether prospective data collection 
using these common definitions improves the design, conduct, and 
interpretability of the results of clinical trials.
T
his publication describes uniform definitions for cardiovascular (CV) and 
stroke outcomes developed by the Standardized Data Collection for Car-
diovascular Trials Initiative (SCTI) and the US Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA). The FDA established the SCTI in 2009 to simplify the design and conduct 
of clinical trials intended to support marketing applications. Specifically, the FDA 
convened the SCTI based on the need for standardization following the FDA’s 
publication in December 2008 of the guidance for industry titled “Diabetes Mel-
litus—Evaluating Cardiovascular Risk in New Antidiabetic Therapies to Treat Type 2 
Diabetes”1 and in response to a growing interest in developing a universal medical 
vocabulary for CV and stroke outcomes. The SCTI includes representatives from 
academia, professional societies, the Clinical Data Interchange Standards Consor-
tium (CDISC), Health Level 7 International, the Clinical Trials Transformation Initia-
tive, pharmaceutical and CV device manufacturers, and the FDA, including the 
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research and the Center for Devices and Radio-
logical Health (online-only Data Supplement Appendix 1 and SCTI Contributors). 
A major limitation in comparing outcomes among trials within and across drug 
and device development programs has been the lack of uniform definitions for 
key endpoint events. Pre-specified endpoint definitions that are characterized by 
objective criteria and reported uniformly can help address this problem. Drafts of 
the SCTI’s CV and stroke outcome definitions have been available in the public 
domain since 2009 (“Standardized Definitions for Cardiovascular Outcomes Trials: 
Draft Recommendations,” dated July 22, 2009 and discussed at the public meet-
ing on September 11, 2009). SCTI posted these definitions for public comment on 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Hicks et al 
CV and Stroke Endpoint Definitions
February 27, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:961–972. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.033502
962
STATE OF THE ART
the CDISC website from November 2010 through Janu-
ary 2011 and on the American College of Cardiology 
(ACC)/American Heart Association (AHA) website from 
March through April of 2014.2
The goal of this document is to provide a framework 
of definitions for CV and stroke outcomes in clinical 
trials to assess the safety and effectiveness of a par-
ticular treatment (online-only Data Supplement Appen-
dixes 2 to 12). These definitions are based on published 
medical data; clinical and research expertise; published 
definitions and guidelines; and SCTI’s interpretation of 
specific laboratory tests, diagnostic tests, and imaging 
techniques.
All definitions have limitations and will not be sat-
isfactory in every case. Some flexibility in applying the 
proposed definitions may be necessary to address the 
specific population being studied, intervention under 
investigation, duration of follow-up, and disease pro-
cess. Outcome measures appropriate for a particular 
trial may vary according to the type and objectives of 
the clinical trial itself, the therapeutic area, and whether 
a drug or device is under study. Hence, the intent of 
the writing committee is not to be overly prescriptive. 
The writing committee recognizes that these definitions 
may be used in other types of trials and clinical care 
processes where appropriate and that definitions may 
change over time as new clinical information is devel-
oped or as new biomarkers or diagnostic tests become 
available (online-only Data Supplement Appendix 2). 
The writing committee also recognizes that despite our 
endeavor to consolidate the best evidence and opinions 
to develop these definitions, studying our experience 
with the current definitions is needed to determine the 
most suitable approaches to optimize definitions for 
clinical outcomes.
For some large trials, questions have arisen regarding 
the value added by central adjudication of outcomes 
compared with a site-determined approach.3 In other 
trials, differences in event rates have been demonstrat-
ed based on approach.4 Regardless of the process used 
for event identification, the application of evidenced-
based uniform definitions can increase the reliability 
and accuracy of study results.
The following sections focus on decisions made by 
members of the SCTI and the rationale behind the deci-
sions for each definition. The publication titled “2014 
ACC/AHA Key Data Elements and Definitions for Car-
diovascular Endpoint Events in Clinical Trials” contains 
the data standards for these definitions.2
DEFINITIONS
Death
Death is routinely ascertained as an efficacy or safety 
endpoint in clinical trials (online-only Data Supplement 
Appendixes 3 to 5). Although deaths from any cause 
may be ascertained without adjudication, assignment 
of the cause of death is often of scientific, clinical, 
and regulatory interest in both CV and non-CV trials. 
When the specific cause of death is important, adjudi-
cation using standardized definitions is recommended. 
In developing the definitions to categorize CV deaths, 
non-CV deaths, and deaths of undetermined cause, 
the Task Force aimed to distinguish the cause of death 
from the mode of death, and to distinguish the pri-
mary cause from intervening causes of death. The Task 
Force also provided definitions to subcategorize both 
CV deaths and non-CV deaths, but recognized chal-
lenges to the accuracy of such subcategorization. In 
general, such subcategorization is not needed in clini-
cal outcomes trials (ie, classification as CV or non-CV 
death is sufficient), but may be desired for exploratory 
analyses aimed at understanding disease or therapeu-
tic mechanisms.
Classification of deaths as CV or non-CV is aimed 
at capturing the primary cause of death. The primary 
cause as defined here is the underlying disease or in-
jury that initiated the train of events resulting in death. 
Thus, when an acute myocardial infarction (AMI) leads 
to a fatal arrhythmia, the primary cause of death would 
be the AMI. CV deaths include deaths that result from 
an AMI, sudden cardiac death, death due to heart fail-
ure (HF), death due to stroke, death due to CV proce-
dures, death due to CV hemorrhage, and death due to 
other CV causes. The clinical progression toward a fatal 
outcome is often manifested by multiple intermediate 
steps, and identifying the primary cause requires careful 
consideration. The primary cause may be distinct from 
both the mode of death and an intervening cause that 
is temporally closer and contributes to the death.
Mode of Death
The mode of death is generally regarded as the physi-
ological derangement or the biochemical disturbance 
produced by the cause of death and should not be 
substituted for the primary cause. Non-CV causes of 
death (eg, renal failure), often ultimately culminate in 
a CV mode of death (eg, arrhythmia) that should not 
be confused with a CV death. In addition, overlap be-
tween the primary cause of death and mode of death 
can also render subclassification of CV deaths difficult. 
For example, an AMI may lead to death via a variety 
of modes, such as arrhythmia or myocardial rupture.
Primary Versus Intervening Causes of Death
Deaths due to primary CV causes may lead to interven-
ing non-CV comorbidities. Intervening causes of death 
are other conditions that contribute to death and are 
part of a morbid series of events that are a result of the 
underlying primary cause. For example, a clinical trial 
subject who experiences an AMI resulting in respiratory 
failure due to pulmonary edema may develop a fatal 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Hicks et al 
CV and Stroke Endpoint Definitions
Circulation. 2018;137:961–972. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.033502 
February 27, 2018
963
STATE OF THE ART
infectious complication of mechanical ventilation. In 
this case, the infection is an intervening cause of death. 
Such clinical scenarios are frequent and may be inter-
preted variably by different reviewers applying the same 
standardized definition.
Subclassification of CV Causes of Death
For the purposes of classifying a specific CV cause of 
death, the proposed categories are based on the prima-
ry cause rather than the mode of death or an interven-
ing cause such as the development of progressive HF. 
To support consistency in the classification of death due 
to AMI in particular, the definition includes deaths by 
any CV mechanism ≤30 days after a myocardial infarc-
tion (MI) related to the immediate consequences of the 
MI. The period of 30 days proposed by the task force is 
necessarily arbitrary.
Non-CV Deaths and Deaths of Undetermined 
Cause
Non-CV deaths are defined as those deaths with a spe-
cific cause that is not thought to be CV in nature. Fur-
ther classification of non-CV deaths is challenging be-
cause of the potential for multiple intervening causes 
and the need for complete knowledge of medical de-
tails that are not routinely available to a central adju-
dicating committee. Although not routinely necessary 
for outcomes trials, a suggested list of non-CV causes 
of death was developed by the task force if subclas-
sification was desired. The level of detail required and 
the optimum classification will depend on the nature 
of the study population and the anticipated number 
and type of non-CV deaths. Therefore, this list may be 
adapted according to the needs of individual clinical 
trial investigators.
According to the definitions developed by the task 
force, deaths of undetermined cause should be very 
few and should be assigned only when a death cannot 
be attributed to a CV or non-CV cause due to an ex-
treme deficiency of information (eg, the only available 
information is “patient died”). Use of this category is 
discouraged and should be rare in well-run clinical tri-
als in which adequate source documentation is assidu-
ously sought by participating investigators. A common 
analytic approach is to assume that all undetermined 
deaths are CV deaths, but the appropriate classification 
and analysis of undetermined causes of death depends 
on the population, the intervention under investigation, 
the duration of follow-up, and the disease process. 
Most importantly, the approach should be pre-specified 
and described in the protocol, endpoint adjudication 
procedures, and/or the statistical analysis plan. It should 
be appreciated that grouping many deaths as unde-
termined can create a “bias toward the null,” favor-
ing noninferiority in a noninferiority trial and a negative 
result in a trial seeking to show a treatment difference.
Myocardial Infarction
MI is an important adverse outcome used to monitor 
safety in drug and device development programs and 
efficacy in CV trials to test therapeutic strategies. The 
use of a standard definition for MI enhances the ability 
to examine incidence rates and CV safety across differ-
ent clinical trials, reducing variability caused by different 
MI definitions (online-only Data Supplement Appendix 
6). When used by both clinicians caring for the patient 
and clinical events committees (CECs) that adjudicate 
MI events for clinical trials, a uniform definition for MI 
provides an opportunity to harmonize outcome report-
ing and focus data capture on the essential elements 
necessary for the diagnosis.5–8
In 2000, a joint European Society of Cardiology 
(ESC)/ACC committee redefined an acute, evolving, or 
recent MI by specifying that any necrosis in the setting 
of myocardial ischemia be labeled as MI.6 The diagnosis 
required a typical rise and/or gradual fall of biochemical 
markers (cardiac troponin [cTn] preferred) of myocar-
dial necrosis and at least 1 of the following: 1) ischemic 
symptoms; 2) imaging or electrocardiographic (ECG) 
evidence of myocardial ischemia including patholog-
ic Q waves; 3) pathological findings of an AMI; or 4) 
percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) or coronary 
artery bypass graft surgery (CABG) revascularization 
event with an increase in cardiac biomarkers. The defi-
nition was updated twice in 2007 and 2012 to identify 
5 different categories of MI, discuss newer cardiac as-
says such as high-sensitivity cardiac troponin (hs-cTn), 
further differentiate myocardial injury patterns from 
myocardial necrosis, and revise the definition of proce-
dure-related MI.7,8 PCI-related MI is subtyped to include 
type 4A (periprocedural necrosis), type 4B (MI caused 
by stent thrombosis), and type 4C (MI caused by high-
grade stenosis in a stented artery without evidence of 
thrombus or other explanation for the MI). The Third 
Universal Definition of MI (UDMI), published in 2012, 
requires >5× the 99th percentile of the upper reference 
limit (URL) in patients with a normal cTn pre-PCI (or a 
rise of cTn ≥20% if the baseline values are elevated and 
stable or falling) in the first 48 h, and in addition, re-
quires evidence of acute ischemia/necrosis (clinical, ECG, 
imaging, or a flow-limiting angiographic complication). 
For type 5 CABG-related MI, the biomarker threshold is 
>10× the 99th percentile of the URL in patients with a 
normal pre-procedure cTn. The Third UDMI is endorsed 
by the ESC/ACC/AHA and World Heart Foundation, has 
been adopted by the World Health Organization (WHO), 
and is part of the ST-segment elevation myocardial in-
farction (STEMI) and non-STEMI guidelines published by 
the ESC/ACC/AHA. The UDMI committee acknowledges 
that the biomarker thresholds for types 4A and 5 MI 
in the 2012 definition are, in part, arbitrary and that 
the Society for Cardiac Angiography and Interventions 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Hicks et al 
CV and Stroke Endpoint Definitions
February 27, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:961–972. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.033502
964
STATE OF THE ART
and Academic Research Consortium (ARC)-2 advocate 
a higher biomarker threshold to diagnose significant 
myocardial injury/necrosis for types 4A and 5 MI.9 The 
SCTI plans to harmonize with thresholds specified in 
the Fourth UDMI, which is expected to be published 
in 2018.
The 2012 UDMI definition was published when 
high-sensitivity assays were being developed and in 
early use in Europe and prior to the approval of hs-cTn 
assays in the United States. In 2017, using the defini-
tion specified by the International Federation of Clinical 
Chemistry, the FDA approved an assay able to measure 
cTn values above the assay’s limit of detection in >50% 
of healthy individuals. Manufacturers’ recommended 
99th percentile URL for specific assays can be found 
on the International Federation of Clinical Chemistry 
website.10 The use of hs-cTn assays allows detection 
of smaller MIs previously characterized as unstable an-
gina, thereby increasing the proportion of patients with 
acute coronary syndrome (ACS) classified as having had 
an MI. Elevated hs-cTn levels are associated with worse 
outcomes, including all-cause mortality.11,12
In 2017, hs-cTn assays are in widespread use world-
wide and, depending on the percent of patients en-
rolled from countries using hs-cTn assays, may repre-
sent a sizeable proportion of all ACS events identified 
for adjudication. It is important to distinguish between 
myocardial injury patterns caused by acute ischemia 
(where a rise and/or fall in cardiac biomarkers is typi-
cally noted) and nonischemic myocardial injury patterns 
where cTns are often elevated, in some cases, chroni-
cally (eg, HF, renal insufficiency, and tachycardia). If a 
patient has elevated cardiac biomarkers at presentation 
(time 0), a ≥20% increase in the value of the cardiac 
biomarkers at 3 h would enhance the sensitivity for the 
diagnosis of MI at some cost to specificity, as discussed 
in the following text. The larger the delta increase, the 
greater the likelihood of myocardial necrosis. A large 
delta in isolation is not diagnostic of MI and may be 
seen with acute myocarditis, aortic dissection, Takot-
subo cardiomyopathy, pulmonary embolism, acute HF 
exacerbation with preserved or reduced ejection frac-
tion, or acute renal failure. Comparisons to prior admis-
sion cTn values may be helpful in distinguishing new 
from chronic troponin elevation. Another approach 
would be to obtain a baseline cTn value prior to enroll-
ment. Baseline cTn values performed through a core 
laboratory may also be helpful in clinical trials where 
the drug product is known to increase cTn, to stratify 
therapy according to baseline cTn risk, and to corre-
late magnitude of baseline cTn values with outcomes in 
subjects with abnormal pre-enrollment values.
According to the 2012 UDMI definition, “an in-
creased cTn concentration is defined as a value ex-
ceeding the 99th percentile URL of a normal reference 
population”.8 The 2012 UDMI definition also indicates 
that “this discriminatory 99th percentile is designated 
as the decision level for the diagnosis of MI and must 
be determined for each specific assay with appropriate 
quality control in each laboratory”.8 The 2012 UDMI 
definition recommends the use of troponin assays that 
have high precision at lower concentration ranges, with 
analytical coefficient of variation ≤10% at the 99th per-
centile concentration of the URL.
For cardiac biomarkers, the 99th percentile of the 
URL from the respective laboratory performing the assay 
should be reported. Reference limits from the labora-
tory performing the assay are preferred over the manu-
facturer’s listed reference limits in an assay’s instructions 
for use. That said, the manufacturer’s recommended 
99th percentile of the URL for the assay is often used as 
the cutpoint for most hospitals, due to the expense and 
time required to obtain a sufficiently large and diverse 
population of healthy people to provide a robust esti-
mate for the 99th percentile. The 99th percentile URL 
used at a local hospital may be different from (usually 
greater than) the manufacturer’s recommended 99th 
percentile URL for the identical assay. The reasons a par-
ticular hospital laboratory chooses a threshold higher 
than the manufacturer’s recommended 99th percentile 
URL will not be evident to a CEC. One clinical trial ap-
proach to reduce variability between sites using differ-
ent thresholds for identical assays is to routinely use the 
manufacturer’s recommended 99th percentile when 
evaluating a suspected MI event. An alternate, less sat-
isfactory approach would be to use the local laboratory 
99th percentile URL, recognizing that it will be difficult 
to know from the laboratory results whether a normal 
reference population was studied when the URL differs 
from the manufacturer’s recommended value. In these 
cases, one should expect increased variability and het-
erogeneity in the diagnostic ascertainment of MI.
If cTn values are unavailable, creatine kinase MB iso-
form (CK-MB) measured by mass assay should be used. 
When CK-MB and cTn are simultaneously collected, cTn 
takes precedence over CK-MB because cTn has greater 
sensitivity and specificity. Hence, it is recommended 
that all hospitals adopt cTn as the preferred biomarker 
to diagnose MI. Measurement of total CK is not recom-
mended for the routine diagnosis of AMI because of 
the wide tissue distribution of this enzyme.
When evaluating potential ACS events, CECs should 
be aware that different cTn assays are usually not bio-
logically equivalent. Hence, a value of 22.5 ng/ml cTnI 
with assay X is usually not biologically equivalent to the 
same value obtained with assay Y. The 99th percentile 
value for a particular cTn assay will be dependent on 
the population studied.13
A core biochemistry laboratory would obviate assay 
variability and could be considered in clinical trials that 
evaluate acute therapeutic interventions or in trials of 
patients with chronic cTn elevation and where the drug 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Hicks et al 
CV and Stroke Endpoint Definitions
Circulation. 2018;137:961–972. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.033502 
February 27, 2018
965
STATE OF THE ART
product is known to increase cTn values. This is not 
always practical in large phase 3 trials when patients 
are admitted to many different hospitals, and blood 
collection, sample preservation, personnel costs, and 
shipping charges for use of a core laboratory can be 
prohibitive.
The diagnosis of reinfarction can be a challenge 
after an AMI because cTn values can remain elevated 
for as long as 2 weeks following the index MI event 
and serial ECG tracings may show evolving ST–T-wave 
changes. Reinfarction should be considered in patients 
with recurrent ischemic symptoms who exhibit recur-
rent ST-segment deviation. For the diagnosis of myo-
cardial infarction and reinfarction, the UDMI definition 
recommends an immediate troponin measurement 
with a second sample at either 3 to 6 h or earlier with 
newer, more sensitive cTn assays. Later samples (>6 h) 
are required in patients with recurrent ischemia, high-
risk patients, and when the timing of symptom onset is 
unclear. If the cTn concentration is elevated, but stable 
or decreasing at the time of the suspect reinfarction, 
≥20% increase in the second cTn value is required that 
exceeds the 99th percentile URL. If the initial cTn con-
centration is normal, the criteria for new AMI apply. The 
magnitude of the required percent increase in cTn is 
somewhat arbitrary. Clearly, a ≥20% increase will be 
less convincing and specific than a 50% increase, but 
a ≥20% increase will be more sensitive in detecting re-
infarctions. The ≥20% change represents a significant 
(>2.77 standard deviations of the variation associated 
with an elevated baseline concentration) change in cTn 
on the basis of a 5% to 7% analytical total coefficient 
of variation.
Many conditions may confound the diagnosis of MI. 
In a patient with known coronary disease admitted for 
chest pain, MI diagnosis and subtype classification can 
be challenging, particularly if the patient presents with 
hemodynamic abnormalities, raising the possibility of 
type 2 supply/demand MI. The diagnosis of MI can also 
be challenging in development programs where a par-
ticular drug product increases cTn values and the popu-
lation being studied often has chronically elevated cTn 
values. Good clinical judgment is required based on all 
of the available clinical, ECG, biomarker, and imaging 
data. At times, missing or incomplete biomarker data 
and inability to time symptom onset to biomarker ac-
quisition can confound interpretation. Hence, all of the 
data should be used to classify the event. For example, 
a hospital admission for prolonged chest pain with an-
giographic evidence of an ulcerated plaque or throm-
bus (usually accompanied by elevated biomarkers), but 
with no or incomplete biomarker and ECG data sub-
mitted to a CEC for adjudication could be considered 
sufficient to classify the MI event as a type 1 MI. A CEC 
should pre-specify how to classify potential MI events 
where there are insufficient data to make a reliable de-
termination, and these cases will need to be accounted 
for in a data analysis plan.
In the AMI setting, peak cTn or CK-MB levels for 
a specific assay correlate with MI size and prognosis. 
Therefore, in clinical trials, if the sampling interval is 
sufficient to detect a rise and fall, it may be useful to 
register the peak cTn/CK-MB value and URL to allow a 
rough estimate of MI size using the ratio of biomark-
er/URL. Arbitrary cutpoints can be chosen to quantify 
small, moderate, and large MI events. Some common 
cutpoint ratios are >1, >5, >10, >35, >70, >100, and 
>250. Limitations of this approach are: 1) replicate val-
ues on the same blood specimen may not reproduce 
the same value depending on the biomarker assay and 
type; and 2) the peak value observed will depend on 
the frequency and timing of the sampling interval af-
ter symptom onset that may vary depending on the 
country and the hospital-specific protocol for AMI 
management. Moreover, MI events treated with early 
reperfusion (ie, revascularization or thrombolytics) or 
complicated by hemodynamic instability, HF, tachyar-
rhythmias, or life-threatening cardiac arrhythmias re-
quiring cardioversion, might also affect the peak values.
MI can be classified as symptomatic or asymptom-
atic, the latter detected incidentally, or through protocol 
surveillance follow-up. In most clinical trials, routine (an-
nual or more frequent) collection of ECG tracings is not 
advocated as an efficient mechanism to identify silent 
MI events (see the “Silent MI” section for further infor-
mation). We believe that the proposed MI definitions 
are an important methodological advance for clinical tri-
als. Standardized ascertainment and adjudication of MI 
endpoints should enable more accurate comparisons of 
MI rates in future trials, and, to the extent that cross-
study comparisons are valid, allow better comparisons 
of MI rates among various drug and device trials. (Many 
limitations are inherent in cross-study comparisons; eg, 
the number of MIs in a particular trial will depend on the 
sensitivity of the particular cTn assay used.)
Silent MI
The term silent MI should apply to asymptomatic pa-
tients who develop new pathological Q-wave criteria for 
MI detected during routine ECG follow-up or compared 
with a prior visit, or who have cardiac imaging evidence 
of MI that cannot be directly attributed to an interim 
ACS event or coronary revascularization procedure. In 
studies where serial ECG analyses were conducted, si-
lent Q-wave myocardial infarction (QMI) accounted for 
9% to 37% of all nonfatal MI events and was associated 
with a significantly increased mortality risk.14,15 Improper 
lead placement, QRS confounders, or technical error 
(mislabeled patient name or lead reversal) may result in 
what appear to be new Q waves or QS complexes, com-
pared with a prior tracing. Thus, the diagnosis of a new 
silent QMI should be supported by a repeat ECG with 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Hicks et al 
CV and Stroke Endpoint Definitions
February 27, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:961–972. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.033502
966
STATE OF THE ART
correct lead placement, focused questioning about po-
tential interim ischemic symptoms, verification that the 
name on the ECG corresponds to the patient in ques-
tion, or an imaging study. An echocardiogram is useful 
if it detects wall motion abnormalities in the region of 
interest. However, normal wall motion does not exclude 
MI, and other imaging techniques such as radionuclide 
or cardiac magnetic resonance studies may be required 
to establish the diagnosis.
There is no firm consensus on how frequently to 
monitor for ECG evidence of silent QMI or whether sur-
veillance for silent MI events should be routinely imple-
mented for particular trials.
Serial monitoring of patients who have had a symp-
tomatic QMI event reveals Q-wave regression in a sub-
stantial number of patients.16 Q-wave regression is 
more common with less severe Q-wave findings and 
when a single ECG territory is involved (anterior, infe-
rior, or lateral). It may be reasonable to perform annual 
ECGs in clinical trials to monitor for silent QMI events if 
the study population is expected to have an accelerated 
rate of atherosclerotic events. Such patients include but 
are not limited to those with known or multivessel cor-
onary artery disease (CAD) and patients with multiple 
atherosclerotic risk factors. When a core ECG labora-
tory detects a silent QMI or an investigator on routine 
protocol-mandated follow-up visits detects a silent 
MI event with ECG or imaging evidence, an MI dos-
sier should be prepared for the CEC that includes the 
baseline tracing prior to randomization, interim event 
ECG tracings (ACS, post-coronary revascularization), 
protocol-mandated interval ECG tracings, and imaging 
evidence when available. In the review of potential si-
lent MI events, it is recommended that the final CEC 
adjudication takes precedence over ECG core labora-
tory readings. Whether to include silent MI events in 
the overall assessment of MIs should be discussed with 
the FDA prior to study conduct.
Hospitalization for Unstable Angina
Hospitalization for unstable angina (UA) is often in-
cluded as an endpoint in CV clinical trials. Compared 
with conventional endpoints, such as death and MI, 
UA seems more challenging to define given the sub-
jective assessment of the index symptoms leading to 
hospitalization.
Along with STEMI and non-STEMI, UA is part of the 
clinical spectrum of ACS. According to the National 
Center for Health Statistics, UA comprised 43% and 
28% of the hospitalizations for primary or secondary 
diagnosis of ACS in 2004 and in 2010, respectively.17,18 
Given the higher sensitivity of current cTn assays to de-
tect myocardial necrosis, some have questioned wheth-
er a category for UA should still exist,19 because many 
events previously classified as UA are now identified as 
MIs. The task force recognizes the need for objective cri-
teria and defines hospitalization for UA by: 1) the char-
acter and duration of ischemic symptoms; 2) proxim-
ity of symptom onset to hospitalization; 3) duration of 
hospitalization; 4) at least 1 of the following: a. resting 
ECG evidence of acute myocardial ischemia; b. exercise 
or pharmacological stress testing evidence of inducible 
myocardial ischemia that is believed to be responsible 
for the ischemic symptoms/signs; c. angiographic evi-
dence of new or worsening obstructive coronary artery 
disease and/or intracoronary thrombus that is believed 
to be responsible for the ischemic symptoms/signs; OR 
d. need for coronary revascularization of the presumed 
culprit lesion(s), as defined in c; and 5) negative cardiac 
biomarkers and no evidence of AMI (online-only Data 
Supplement Appendix 7).
Electrocardiographic changes at the time of diagno-
sis are critical and include the presence or absence of 
ST-segment deviation and T-wave inversion, morphol-
ogy of ST-segment deviation (eg, new horizontal or 
downsloping ST-segment depression; new transient ST-
segment elevation), and the magnitude of these chang-
es. See online-only Data Supplement Appendix 7 for 
the full criteria. Escalation of pharmacotherapy to treat 
ischemia may be supportive but is not diagnostic of UA.
Similar to the diagnosis of MI, many conditions may 
confound the diagnosis of UA. By definition, UA is car-
diac biomarker negative with no evidence of AMI.
Stroke and Transient Ischemic Attack
Stroke is a common endpoint in CV clinical trials. Avail-
able in the public domain since 2009, the stroke defini-
tion is unique in that it combines a definition appro-
priate for use in clinical trials with a clinically relevant 
outcome measure (eg, modified Rankin disability scale) 
(online-only Data Supplement Appendix 8). Although 
the SCTI reviewed existing definitions for stroke and 
transient ischemic attack, including those published 
by the AHA and the National Institute of Neurological 
Disorders and Stroke,20–23 compared with other stroke 
definitions, the SCTI definition emphasizes the clinically 
relevant consequences of vascular brain injury to deter-
mine the safety or effectiveness of an intervention by 
including a measure of functional outcome (online-only 
Data Supplement Appendix 8).
The information available to define stroke events 
varies according to trial design. For example, stroke can 
be a primary outcome event in a clinical trial for de-
termining the effectiveness of a treatment to prevent 
stroke, or it can be an adverse safety event in trials 
where stroke is not the target disease. As an efficacy 
outcome, stroke can be the only outcome or 1 compo-
nent of a composite outcome such as death, MI, and 
stroke. Hence, the SCTI’s definition is adaptable to the 
many different roles that stroke plays as a clinical trial 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Hicks et al 
CV and Stroke Endpoint Definitions
Circulation. 2018;137:961–972. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.033502 
February 27, 2018
967
STATE OF THE ART
outcome and to the data available in the circumstances 
of a specific trial. Despite any differences imposed by 
trial design, the definition is linked to a consistent mea-
sure of effectiveness and safety across all trials.
The stroke definition minimizes technological and 
conceptual constraints, so that the precision of diag-
nosis can vary according to the relative importance of 
stroke in a particular trial. The unifying concept driv-
ing the definition is that stroke is a marker of poten-
tially disabling vascular brain injury. For example, in one 
trial, detection of disability can require clinical assess-
ments only when a patient reports symptoms. In other 
trials, there can be significant concern for even small 
changes in neurological function that justify the added 
expense of repeated brain imaging and detailed clini-
cal stroke scales. In some trials, it can be important to 
know whether there is evidence of brain injury before a 
subject is enrolled.
Disability is a key concept in the SCTI definition. The 
definition is tied to a measure of disability to assess the 
clinically relevant consequences of vascular brain injury. 
The modified Rankin Scale24 is included in the defini-
tion as an example of a suitable measure for this pur-
pose. This simple scale would impose a minimal bur-
den if used on all patients in all trials while providing a 
uniform measure of the severity of an individual stroke 
that could be understood across trials regardless of the 
population studied or the trial design. Significant brain 
injuries have a wide range of presentation. A uniform 
measure of disability makes the clinical significance of 
a stroke consistent across trials without specifying the 
use of a particular technology to assess brain injury. The 
focus is on the clinical significance of the presenting 
symptoms and any associated persistent disability as 
measured, for example, by the modified Rankin scale.
It is not feasible to create an algorithm to define 
stroke that would work for all trials and could be im-
plemented without the exercise of clinical judgment 
when preparing the protocol, case report forms, and 
process for adjudication. Implementation of the stroke 
definition for a specific trial requires clinical judgment 
derived from a broad knowledge of the varied clinical 
features of stroke. The definition has flexibility that al-
lows adaptation to the practical limits on the amount 
of information available for any given trial. How a spe-
cific trial implements the definition requires input from 
vascular neurologists and/or other experts with expe-
rience in stroke diagnosis and clinical management. If 
it is important, for example, to determine the stroke 
type, imaging to distinguish ischemic from hemorrhagic 
stroke may be required. A trial of an acute stroke inter-
vention may require vascular imaging and performance 
of a clinical stroke scale acutely and 3 months later to 
assess severity and disability. The aim is for clinical tri-
als to apply the stroke definition to assess the clinically 
relevant consequences of vascular brain injury.
The SCTI focused on the core definition and require-
ments and repeatedly resisted the temptation to gener-
ate an extensive list of desirable measures of brain inju-
ry in recognition of the wide array of trials to which the 
definition would be applied and the pace of innovation 
in the field. In an acute stroke trial, a diagnosis must be 
made in minutes; extensive testing comes with the cost 
of time, which can adversely affect the outcome under 
study. In stroke prevention trials, strokes may not come 
to an investigator’s attention in time for specific tests 
to be performed. The treating physicians may not even 
realize the subject is in a trial until after the patient is 
discharged from the hospital. Requiring specific tests 
that are not universally available may lead to missing 
data and the failure to count significant events. A brief 
and reliable disability scale would remain practical in 
all of these situations because it can be measured after 
the event (eg, 3 months) at a clinic visit with a trial in-
vestigator. This measure can also be obtained during a 
phone interview. In other trials, stroke may be expected 
to be a rare event. For these trials, serial assessments 
in all subjects can screen for clinically significant events 
that increased disability. Unexplained changes in the 
modified Rankin scale could precipitate a more exten-
sive evaluation for causes that may include stroke.
The result is a definition that is broadly applicable to 
the wide array of trials that address 1 or more aspects 
of cerebrovascular disease and that maintains a uniform 
clinical significance of stroke outcomes across trials.
An example of an implementation of the definition 
is the endpoints proposed independently by the Neu-
roARC group for neurological outcomes focusing pri-
marily on CV interventions.25 Like NeuroARC, we agree 
that standardized approaches for ascertainment and 
definition of neurological endpoints in clinical trials are 
important. The SCTI definitions were created to allow 
more generalized use across all clinical trials evaluating 
CV endpoints and do not require a particular imaging 
modality to define stroke. Hence, the SCTI definitions 
are more suitable for implementation in global clinical 
trials, where sites may not have access to advanced im-
aging techniques. In addition, the SCTI definitions allow 
the use of symptom persistence to distinguish transient 
ischemia from acute infarction, but leave the specific 
definition of persistence to stroke experts participating 
in the design of each trial. In summary, the SCTI defini-
tions are more applicable to a wide variety of clinical 
trial designs that have stroke or TIA endpoints while 
maintaining a consistent assessment of the clinical sig-
nificance of these events across trials.
HF Event
Hospitalized and nonhospitalized HF events are relevant 
endpoints in HF trials and trials of non-HF therapies in 
which the therapy might affect the risk of HF. An HF 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Hicks et al 
CV and Stroke Endpoint Definitions
February 27, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:961–972. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.033502
968
STATE OF THE ART
event includes hospitalizations for HF and urgent out-
patient visits, and is defined as a constellation of signs, 
symptoms, diagnostic testing, and HF-directed therapy, 
as described in the following text (online-only Data 
Supplement Appendix 9). For the purpose of study re-
porting, HF hospitalizations and urgent HF visits should 
be collected and reported separately.
HF Hospitalization
An HF hospitalization has been associated with an in-
creased subsequent risk of mortality,26 and this endpoint 
has been a relevant discriminator of tested therapies in 
clinical trials. To fulfill the criteria for an HF hospitaliza-
tion, a patient is required to have an unscheduled hospi-
tal admission for a primary diagnosis of HF with a length 
of stay that either exceeds 24 h or crosses a calendar day 
(if hospital admission and discharge times are unavail-
able). The patient is also required to have typical signs, 
symptoms, and diagnostic testing results consistent with 
the diagnosis of HF.27 Laboratory findings consistent with 
HF include elevated natriuretic peptides, radiological evi-
dence of congestion, and either echocardiographic or 
invasive evidence of elevated filling pressures. In addition 
to these signs and symptoms, the patient should also re-
ceive treatment specifically directed at HF, including at 
least 1 of the following: 1) significant augmentation in 
oral diuretic therapy; 2) initiation of intravenous diuretic 
(even a single dose) or vasoactive agent (eg, vasodilator, 
vasopressor, or inotropic therapy); or 3) mechanical cir-
culatory support or fluid removal. Significant augmenta-
tion of oral diuretic therapy is defined, for example, as 
the doubling of loop diuretic dose; initiation of main-
tenance loop diuretic therapy; or initiation of combina-
tion diuretic therapy to relieve congestion. Combination 
diuretic therapy could include: 1) a thiazide-type diuretic 
(eg, hydrochlorothiazide, metolazone, or chlorothiazide) 
plus a loop diuretic; or 2) a mineralocorticoid receptor 
antagonist (eg, spironolactone or eplerenone) plus a 
loop diuretic. Mechanical fluid removal includes ultrafil-
tration, hemofiltration, and dialysis as well as thoracen-
tesis or paracentesis for HF management. Each criterion 
of the HF hospitalization definition has been associated 
with increased risk.
Urgent Outpatient Visits
To satisfy the criteria for a nonhospitalized HF event, 
the patient must have an urgent, unscheduled office 
or emergency visit for HF with signs, symptoms, and 
diagnostic testing results identical to those already de-
scribed for an HF hospitalization. The patient must also 
(with the exception of significant augmentation in oral 
diuretic therapy) require therapy similar to that previ-
ously described for an HF hospitalization. It is important 
to note that clinic visits for scheduled administration of 
HF therapies or procedures (eg, intravenous diuretics, 
intravenous vasoactive agents, or mechanical fluid re-
moval) do not qualify as nonhospitalized HF events.
The inclusion of these events in the definition will en-
sure optimal capture of HF events despite differences 
in the threshold for hospitalization worldwide and in-
creasing pressure, especially in the United States, to re-
duce the number of HF hospitalizations. HF events that 
are not hospitalizations, if based on strict criteria, have 
prognostic significance similar to HF hospitalizations.28,29
Percutaneous Coronary Intervention
Catheter-based cardiac procedures remain the cor-
nerstone of diagnostic and therapeutic modalities for 
many patients with CAD. Although these procedures 
are primarily focused on coronary anatomic character-
istics, invasive coronary imaging is still considered a 
gold standard on which the sensitivity and specific-
ity of noninvasive diagnostic tests rely. The tools used 
in diagnostic invasive coronary procedures include 
angiography, intravascular ultrasound, and optical 
coherence tomography. Fractional flow reserve is in-
creasingly utilized to assess the functional severity of 
anatomically intermediate coronary artery lesions to 
guide clinically appropriate revascularization.
PCI procedures can have mechanistic and clinical ob-
jectives. The primary mechanistic objective is to enhance 
myocardial blood flow by increasing coronary luminal 
area in significantly stenotic lesions. The clinical goals 
of PCI are most often targeted toward relieving (or im-
proving) symptoms in patients with angina or improv-
ing survival and preserving left ventricular function (and 
reducing the risk of HF) in patients with ACS. Therapeu-
tic devices used in interventional cardiology procedures 
include percutaneous transluminal coronary angio-
plasty balloons, cutting/scoring balloons, atherectomy 
devices, bare-metal stents, metallic drug-eluting stents 
(DES) with durable or biodegradable polymer coatings, 
and fully bioabsorbable drug-eluting scaffolds. Each of 
these interventional cardiology device types has its own 
expected rates of procedural and long-term perfor-
mance. Over the course of the past 3 decades, device 
innovation has progressed to address the limitations 
of prior technologies: 1) bare-metal stents were devel-
oped to prevent acute recoil and abrupt vessel closure 
as well as negative arterial remodeling associated with 
percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty; 2) 
DES reduce repeat revascularization rates by inhibiting 
neointimal proliferation that occurs within bare-metal 
stents; 3) DES with biodegradable polymer coatings 
were produced with the hope of reducing the risk of 
late adverse vascular responses to permanent polymers; 
and 4) it is hoped that fully bioabsorbable drug-eluting 
scaffolds may restore normal arterial vasomotion and 
prevent very late restenosis associated with the pres-
ence of a permanent metallic stent. Further, substantial 
advances in procedural techniques and in device design 
have allowed operators to treat patients with increas-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Hicks et al 
CV and Stroke Endpoint Definitions
Circulation. 2018;137:961–972. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.033502 
February 27, 2018
969
STATE OF THE ART
ingly complex clinical presentations and coronary lesion 
morphologies.
In clinical trials enrolling patients with established 
CAD or CV risk factors, it is expected that many patients 
will have coronary events or symptoms suggestive of 
coronary insufficiency during the course of the study. 
Many of these patients will undergo invasive coronary 
artery assessments and catheter-based interventions. 
Because of the heterogeneity of clinical presentations 
and the types of coronary interventions, a common set 
of interventional cardiology clinical and anatomic event 
definitions provide a uniform language and approach 
for clinical study data capture. Importantly, ascertain-
ment of specific data elements depends on the type and 
objectives of the clinical trial itself. For example, a study 
examining 2 coronary revascularization strategies (eg, 
PCI vs. CABG or an investigational DES vs. an approved 
DES) would be expected to collect highly detailed coro-
nary artery anatomic and revascularization procedural 
data to assess the comparative safety and effectiveness 
of the treatment groups. Conversely, much less granular 
anatomic and revascularization procedural information 
would be needed in a trial of an investigational diabetes 
or HF drug in patients with established CAD.
The interventional cardiology definitions presented 
in online-only Data Supplement Appendix 10 are pri-
marily relevant to PCI trials. These definitions include 
a description of coronary arterial segments, coronary 
flow grades, and selected adverse events (mostly asso-
ciated with revascularization procedures such as abrupt 
vessel closure, arterial dissection, and restenosis). The 
definitions distinguish among target lesions, target ves-
sels, and nontarget lesions/vessels, and some include 
anatomic and clinical features. For example, clinically 
driven target lesion revascularization, the most com-
mon primary endpoint in trials to assess the safety and 
effectiveness of coronary stents, includes a lesion sever-
ity metric (a target lesion diameter stenosis >70%) and 
evidence of clinical or physiological ischemia. Compos-
ite endpoints that have been useful in coronary revas-
cularization studies, such as target lesion/vessel failure, 
are presented; these composites combine safety (cardi-
ac death and MI related to the target vessel) and effec-
tiveness (ischemia-driven revascularization of the target 
lesion/vessel) elements. Finally, the list provides defini-
tions of specific access-site complications of interest.
Peripheral Vascular Intervention
With the advances in technology now emerging for 
patients with noncardiac peripheral vascular diseases, 
the definitions described here are designed to uniform-
ly capture outcomes in clinical trials (online-only Data 
Supplement Appendix 11). Given that the preponder-
ance of trials is in the peripheral arterial vascular bed, 
we have chosen to concentrate endpoint definitions 
on extracranial and peripheral arterial trials, and have 
not attempted to define venous intervention trials. 
Endpoint definitions related to carotid/cerebral revascu-
larization, peripheral arterial surgical revascularization, 
and treatment of aortic diseases are also beyond the 
scope of this publication.
The definitions in this section highlight both the res-
olution of the hemodynamically significant arterial ob-
struction while ameliorating symptoms prompting the 
intervention, particularly in the lower extremity arteries. 
In the lower extremity arteries, there are different clini-
cal syndromes, often based on the timing of onset and 
severity of symptoms. We recognize the importance of 
the timing and type of intervention based on the acuity 
of the symptoms, thereby defining elective, urgent, and 
emergent cases.
Anatomically, we attempted to highlight the dif-
ferences between the “culprit” lesion resulting in the 
need for intervention as opposed to the artery in which 
the target lesion exists. This difference between target 
lesion and target vessel is important in comparing the 
effectiveness of different devices for the treatment of 
the same arterial segment.
Finally, we highlight the importance of independent 
adjudication of anatomic outcomes in follow-up of de-
vices used in peripheral artery interventions.
Stent Thrombosis
According to the classification proposed by the 
ARC,30 the definition of stent thrombosis relies on: 1) 
Figure 1 (Central Illustration). Pathway to successful 
regulatory submissions.  
Pathway for potential studies with cardiovascular (CV) and 
stroke outcomes. FDA = US Food and Drug Administration.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 February 27, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:961–972. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.033502
970
STATE OF THE ART
Hicks et al 
CV and Stroke Endpoint Definitions
the timing of the event; and 2) likelihood of throm-
bosis as the proximate cause (online-only Data Sup-
plement Appendix 12). The time interval for defining 
stent thrombosis begins after successful completion 
of the procedure. Stent thrombosis can be reported 
as a cumulative value over time or within the specific 
time periods as follows: 1) early (0 to 30 days); 2) 
late (31 days to 1 year); and 3) very late (>1 year). 
Early stent thrombosis also includes acute (0 to 24 h) 
and subacute (1 to 30 days) intervals. Stent throm-
bosis is defined as definite, probable, or possible. 
Definite stent thrombosis is defined as occurring in 
the setting of ACS when there is confirmation of 
stent occlusion or thrombus by angiography or au-
topsy examination. Probable stent thrombosis is de-
fined as death occurring within 30 days that cannot 
be attributed to another cause, or when MI occurs 
at any time point and is attributable to the target 
vessel without angiographic confirmation of another 
culprit lesion. Possible stent thrombosis is defined as 
death occurring later than 30 days that cannot be 
attributed to another cause. Classification of these 
events requires the following key information: clini-
cal details surrounding the acute event; dates and 
procedural information for all prior stent placement 
procedures; serial ECGs at the time of the event and, 
for appropriate duration of follow-up, serial cardiac 
biomarkers confirming MI; clinical details surround-
ing all deaths, including death certificate and au-
topsy report; and review of coronary angiograms by 
either an independent angiographic core laboratory 
or independent CEC. When available data satisfy the 
criteria for more than 1 classification, the highest 
level of certainty should be reported.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
This publication is the product of a collaboration among 
academia, clinical experts, industry, and the FDA. The 
aim of this collaboration is to develop uniform definitions 
for CV and stroke outcomes and to simplify the design 
and conduct of clinical trials intended to support market-
ing applications (Figure 1/Central Illustration, Figure 2).
Since the inception of the SCTI in 2009, use of these 
definitions at the FDA has enhanced the ability to ag-
gregate data within and across medical product devel-
opment programs, conduct meta-analyses to evaluate 
CV safety, integrate data from multiple trials, and com-
pare effectiveness of drugs and devices.
Further study is needed to determine whether pro-
spective data collection using these common defini-
tions improves the design, conduct, and interpretability 
of the results of clinical trials.
Figure 2. Summary of key concepts.
Abbreviations and Acronyms
ACC = American College of Cardiology
ACS = acute coronary syndrome
AHA = American Heart Association
AMI = acute myocardial infarction
CABG = coronary artery bypass graft surgery
CEC = clinical events committee
CK = creatine kinase
cTn = cardiac troponin
CV = cardiovascular
ESC = European Society of Cardiology
HF = heart failure
hs-cTn = high-sensitivity cardiac troponin
MI = myocardial infarction
PCI = percutaneous coronary intervention
STEMI =  
ST-segment elevation myocardial  
infarction
SCTI =  
Standardized Data Collection for  
Cardiovascular Trials Initiative
UDMI =  
Universal Definition of Myocardial  
Infarction
URL = upper reference limit
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Hicks et al 
CV and Stroke Endpoint Definitions
Circulation. 2018;137:961–972. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.033502 
February 27, 2018
971
STATE OF THE ART
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Manuscript received March 23, 2017; revised manuscript received December 
21, 2017, accepted December 22, 2017.
The findings and conclusions in this report are those of the author and 
do not necessarily represent the official positions of the US Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA).
The online-only Data Supplement Appendix is available with this article at 
 
http://circ.ahajournals.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA. 
117.033502/-/DC1.
Bernard J. Gersh, MB, ChB, DPhil, served as Guest Editor for this paper.
Authors
Stephen D. Wiviott, MD; Billy Dunn, MD; Scott D. Solomon, MD; John R. Mar-
ler, MD; John R. Teerlink, MD; Andrew Farb, MD; David A. Morrow, MD, MPH; 
Shari L. Targum, MD, MPH; Cathy A. Sila, MD; Mary T. Thanh Hai, MD; Michael 
R. Jaff, DO; Hylton V. Joffe, MD, MMSC; Donald E. Cutlip, MD; Akshay S. Desai, 
MD; Eldrin F. Lewis, MD, MPH; C. Michael Gibson, MD, MS; Martin J. Landray, 
PHD; A. Michael Lincoff, MD; Christopher J. White, MD; Steven S. Brooks, MD, 
MBA; Kenneth Rosenfield, MD; Michael J. Domanski, MD; Alexandra J. Lansky, 
MD; John J.V. McMurray, MD; James E. Tcheng, MD; Steven R. Steinhubl, MD; 
Paul Burton, MD, PHD; Laura Mauri, MD, MSC; Christopher M. O’Connor, MD; 
Marc A. Pfeffer, MD, PHD; H.M. James Hung, PHD; Norman L. Stockbridge, 
MD, PHD; Bernard R. Chaitman, MD; Robert J. Temple, MD; on behalf of the 
Standardized Data Collection for Cardiovascular Trials Initiative (SCTI)
Correspondence
Dr. Karen A. Hicks, Division of Cardiovascular and Renal Products, Office of 
Drug Evaluation I, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER), US Food 
and Drug Administration, 10903 New Hampshire Avenue, Building 22, Room 
4182, Silver Spring, Maryland 20993-0002. E-mail karen.hicks@fda.hhs.gov
Affiliations
Division of Cardiovascular and Renal Products, Office of Drug Evaluation I, Center 
for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER), United States Food and Drug Adminis-
tration (FDA), Silver Spring, Maryland (K.A.H., S.L.T., N.L.S.). Stanford Center for 
Clinical Research, Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medi-
cine, Stanford, California (K.W.M.). Division of Cardiology, Icahn School of Medi-
cine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York (R.M.). Department of Cardiovascular 
Medicine, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio (S.E.N., A.M.L.). TIMI Study Group, 
Cardiovascular Division, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 
(S.D.W., D.A.M.). Division of Neurology Products, Office of Drug Evaluation I, 
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER), United States Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA), Silver Spring, Maryland (B.D., J.R.M.). Cardiovascular Divi-
sion, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts (S.D.S., A.S.D., E.F.L., 
M.A.P
.). Section of Cardiology, San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center and 
School of Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, Califor-
nia (J.R.T.). Division of Cardiovascular Devices, Center for Devices and Radiological 
Health (CDRH), United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA), Silver Spring, 
Maryland (A.F.). Neurological Institute, University Hospitals-Cleveland Medical 
Center, Cleveland, Ohio (C.A.S.). Office of Drug Evaluation II, Center for Drug 
Evaluation and Research (CDER), United States Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA), Silver Spring, Maryland (M.T.T.). Department of Medicine, Harvard Medi-
cal School, Boston, Massachusetts (M.R.J.). Division of Bone, Reproductive and 
Urologic Products, Office of Drug Evaluation III, Center for Drug Evaluation and 
Research (CDER), United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA), Silver Spring, 
Maryland (H.V.J.). Cardiology Division, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Dea-
coness Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts (D.E.C.). 
Cardiovascular Division, Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Bos-
ton, Massachusetts (C.M.G.). Clinical Trial Service Unit & Epidemiological Studies 
Unit (CTSU), University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom (M.J.L.). Department 
of Cardiology, Ochsner Clinical School, New Orleans, Louisiana (C.J.W.). Brooks 
Medtech, LLC, Reisterstown, Maryland (S.S.B.). Vascular Medicine and Interven-
tion, Corrigan Minehan Heart Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts (K.R.). Peter Munk Cardiac Centre, University Health Network/
Mount Sinai Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada (M.J.D.). 
Department of Internal Medicine, Section of Cardiology, Yale School of Medicine, 
New Haven, Connecticut (A.J.L.). Institute of Cardiovascular & Medical Sciences, 
BHF Cardiovascular Research Centre, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland 
(J.J.V.M.). Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, 
Durham, North Carolina (J.E.T.). Division of Digital Medicine, Scripps Translational 
Science Institute, La Jolla, California (S.R.S.). Cardiovascular and Metabolism Medi-
cal Affairs, Janssen Pharmaceuticals Inc., Titusville, New Jersey (P
.B.). Cardiovascu-
lar Division, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts (L.M.). Division of Cardiology, Inova Heart 
& Vascular Institute, Falls Church, Virginia (C.M.O.). Division of Biometrics I, Office 
of Biostatistics, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER), United States 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA), Silver Spring, Maryland (H.M.J.H.). Center 
for Comprehensive Cardiovascular Care, St. Louis University School of Medicine, 
St. Louis, Missouri (B.R.C.). Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER), 
United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA), Silver Spring, Maryland (R.J.T.).
Disclosures
Dr. Mahaffey has received research grants or contracts in support of research proj-
ects from Afferent, Amgen, Apple Inc., AstraZeneca, Cardiva Medical Inc., Daiichi, 
Ferring, Google (Verily), Johnson & Johnson, Luitpold, Medtronic, Merck, Novar-
tis, Sanofi, St. Jude, and Tenax; has provided consultancy or other services for 
Ablynx, AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Cardiometa-
bolic Health Congress, Elsevier, GlaxoSmithKline, Johnson & Johnson, Medergy, 
Medscape, Merck, Mitsubishi, Myokardia, Novartis, Oculeve, Portola, Radiometer, 
Springer, Theravance, UCSF, and WebMD; and has equity in BioPrint Fitness. Dr. 
Mehran has received personal fees for serving on the Executive Committees of 
Janssen Pharmaceuticals and Osprey Medical Inc.; has served on the Data and 
Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) of Watermark Research Partners; has served as 
a consultant to Medscape, The Medicines Company, Boston Scientific, Merck, 
Cardiovascular Systems, Inc., Sanofi USA, Shanghai BraccoSine Pharmaceutical 
Corp., and AstraZeneca; has equity stock options in Claret Medical Inc. and Elixir 
Medical Corporation; and her institution has received research funding from Eli 
Lilly/Daiichi-Sankyo, Bristol-Myers Squibb, AstraZeneca, The Medicines Company, 
OrbusNeich, Bayer, CSL Behring, Abbott Laboratories, Watermark Research Part-
ners, Novartis Pharmaceuticals, Medtronic, AUM Cardiovascular, Inc., and Beth 
Israel Deaconess Medical Center. Dr. Nissen consults for Boeringher Ingelheim, 
Vivus, Medtronic, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, Shire, Sanofi-Regeneron, Janssen, CiVi 
Biopharma, and Takeda but requires them to donate all honoraria or consulting 
fees directly to charity so that he receives neither income nor a tax deduction; his 
institution (the Cleveland Clinic Center for Clinical Research) receives funding to 
perform clinical trials from Abbvie, AstraZeneca, Amgen, Cerenis, Eli Lilly, Esperion, 
Pfizer, The Medicines Company, and Orexigen; and he is involved in these clinical 
trials, but receives no personal remuneration for his participation. Dr. Wiviott has 
received grants and personal fees from AstraZeneca, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Arena, 
and Eli Lilly/Daiichi-Sankyo; has received grants from Eisai, Merck, Sanofi, and Am-
gen; has received personal fees from Aegerion, Angelmed, Janssen, Xoma, ICON 
Clinical, Boston Clinical Research Institute, and Boehringer Ingelheim; and his 
spouse is an employee of Merck. Dr. Solomon has received research grants from 
Alnylam, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bellerophon, Celladon, Gilead, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Ionis Pharmaceutics, Lone Star Heart, Mesoblast, Myo-Kardia, National Institutes 
of Health/National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, Novartis, Sanofi Pasteur, and 
Theracos; and has served as a consultant for Alnylam, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer, 
Bristol-Myers Squibb, Corvia, Gilead, GlaxoSmithKline, Ironwood, Merck, Novartis, 
Pfizer, Takeda, and Theracos. Dr. Teerlink has served as a consultant for Amgen, 
AstraZeneca, Bayer, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Celyad, Cytokinetics, Gilead, Medtron-
ic, Merck, Novartis, Portola Pharmaceuticals, Relypsa, Stealth Biotherapeutics, St. 
Jude Medical, Trevena, Theravance, and ZS Pharm; and has received research sup-
port from Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Celyad, Cytokinetics, 
Gilead, Medtronic, Merck, Novartis, St. Jude, and Trevena. Dr. Morrow has served 
as a consultant to Abbott Laboratories, Aralez Pharmaceuticals, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Merck, Peloton, Roche Diagnostics, and Verseon; and the TIMI Study Group has 
received grants from Abbott, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Daiichi-Sankyo, Eisai, Glaxo-
Smith-Kline, Johnson & Johnson, Merck, Novartis, Pfizer, Roche Diagnostics, and 
Takeda. Dr. Jaff has served as a noncompensated advisor for Abbott Vascular, Bos-
ton Scientific, Cordis Corporation, and Medtronic; has served as a paid consultant 
for American Orthotics and Prosthetics Association, Philips/Volcano, Micell, and 
Venarum; has equity investment in Embolitech, Janacare, MC10, PQ Bypass, Pri-
macea, Sano V, and Vascular Therapies; and has served as a Board Member of 
VIVA Physicians, a 501(c)(3) not-for-profit education and research organization. 
Research support has been paid to Dr. Cutlip’s institution from Boston Scientific, 
Medtronic, and CeloNova. Dr. Desai has received consultant fees from Abbott/St. 
Jude Medical, Relypsa, Janssen, AstraZeneca, Merck, Sanofi, Cheetah Medical, 
and Novartis; and has received research support from Novartis. Dr. Lewis has re-
ceived minor consultant fees from Novartis and Merck; and has received research 
support from Novartis, Sanofi, and Amgen. Dr. Landray’s institution (University of 
Oxford) has received grant support from Merck, Novartis, Pfizer, Medical Research 
Council, British Heart Foundation, Cancer Research UK, and the National Institute 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
 Hicks et al 
CV and Stroke Endpoint Definitions
February 27, 2018 
Circulation. 2018;137:961–972. DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.033502
972
STATE OF THE ART
for Health Research. Dr. Lincoff has served as a consultant to NovoNordisk, Am-
gen, and Abbott; has received significant research support from Eli Lilly; and his 
institution has received significant research funding from Eli Lilly, Pfizer, CSL, Astra-
Zeneca, Esperion, and AbbVie. Dr. White has participated in the CREST2 trial (he 
is on the Interventional Management Committee). Dr. Brooks has received signifi-
cant consulting fees from Abiomed, AUM Cardiovascular, and Ablative Solutions. 
Dr. McMurray’s employer, Glasgow University, is currently or has recently been 
paid for his time as a member of the Executive or Steering Committees, Endpoint 
Adjudication Committees, and Data Monitoring Committees of trials testing treat-
ments for cardiovascular disease, chronic kidney disease and diabetes, including 
by Abbvie, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Cardiorentis, Dundee Uni-
versity, GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis, Oxford University, Merck, Resverlogix, Stealth 
Therapeutics, and Theracos; his employer has also been paid for meetings and 
presentations related to these trials and treatments; and study sponsors have paid 
for his travel and accommodation for some meetings related to these trials/treat-
ments. Dr. Burton owns stock in Johnson & Johnson; and is employed by Janssen 
Pharmaceuticals Inc. Dr. Mauri has served as a consultant for Amgen, Eli Lilly, St. 
Jude Medical, Corvia, ReCor, and Biotronik; has served as principal investigator 
for Recor; has received grants to her institution (all) from Amgen, Abbott, Boston 
Scientific, Boehringer Ingelheim, Biotronik, and Corvia; has served on the Advisory 
Board of St. Jude Medical; has served on the Executive Steering Committee of 
Corvia and Biotronik; and has received honoraria from Daiichi-Sankyo, AstraZen-
eca, and Sanofi. Dr. O’Connor has served as a consultant for ResMed, Merck, 
Bristol-Myers Squibb, and Actelion. Dr. Pfeffer has served as a consultant for Astra-
Zeneca, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, DalCor, Genzyme, Gilead, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Janssen, Lilly, The Medicines Company, Merck, Novartis, NovoNordisk, Relypsa, 
Sanofi, Teva, and Thrasos; has received research grant support from Novartis and 
Sanofi; has stock options in DalCor; and has a patent awarded to BWH regarding 
the use of inhibitors of the renin-angiotensin system in MI, licensed by Novartis (Dr. 
Pfeffer’s share has been irrevocably assigned to charity). Dr. Chaitman has served 
on the CEC of NovoNordisk, Eli Lilly, Merck, Pharmacosmos, Janssen, Gilead, Re-
lypsa, and Daiichi-Sankyo; and has served on the Data and Safety Monitoring 
Board of Sanofi and Tricida. All other authors have reported that they have no re-
lationships relevant to the contents of this paper to disclose. Drs. Hicks, Mahaffey, 
Mehran, and Nissen served as chairpersons.
REFERENCES
 1. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Center for Drug Evaluation and Re-
search. Guidance for industry: diabetes mellitus—evaluating cardiovascu-
lar risk in new antidiabetic therapies to treat type 2 diabetes. December 
2008. Available at: https://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/Guidance-
ComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/ucm071627.pdf. Accessed 
January 4, 2018.
 2. Hicks KA, Tcheng JE, Bozkurt B, et al. 2014 ACC/AHA key data elements 
and definitions for cardiovascular endpoint events in clinical trials: a report 
of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task 
Force on Clinical Data Standards (Writing Committee to Develop Cardio-
vascular Endpoints Data Standards). J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;66:40–69.
 3. Granger CB, Vogel V, Cummings SR, et al. Do we need to adjudicate 
major clinical events? Clin Trials. 2008;5:56–60.
 4. Mahaffey KW, Harrington RA, Akkerhuis M, et al. Disagreements between 
central clinical events committee and site investigator assessments of 
myocardial infarction endpoints in an international clinical trial: review of 
the PURSUIT study. Curr Control Trials Cardiovasc Med. 2001;2:187–94.
 5. Nomenclature and Criteria for Diagnosis of Ischemic Heart Disease. 
 
Report of the Joint International Society and Federation of Cardiology/
World Health Organization Task Force on Standardization of Clinical 
 
Nomenclature. Circulation. 1979;59:607–9.
 6. Alpert JS, Thygesen K, Antman E, et al. Myocardial infarction redefined: a 
consensus document of the Joint European Society of Cardiology/Ameri-
can College of Cardiology Committee for the Redefinition of Myocardial 
Infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2000;36:959–69.
 7. Thygesen K, Alpert JS, White HD, on behalf of the Joint ESC/ACCF/AHA/
WHF Task Force for the Redefinition of Myocardial Infarction. Universal 
definition of myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007;50:2173–95.
 8. Thygesen K, Alpert JS, Jaffe AS, Simoons ML, Chaitman BR, White HD, on 
behalf of the Joint ESC/ACCF/AHA/WHF Task Force for the Universal Defi-
nition of Myocardial Infarction. Third universal definition of myocardial 
infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;60:1581–98.
 9. Moussa ID, Klein LW, Shah B, et al. Consideration of a new definition of 
clinically relevant myocardial infarction after coronary revascularization. An 
expert consensus document from the Society for Cardiovascular Angiogra-
phy and Interventions (SCAI). J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;62:1563–70.
 10. International Federation of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine. 
Available at: www.ifcc.org. Accessed January 11, 2018.
 11. Keller T, Zeller T, Ojeda F, et al. Serial changes in highly sensitive tropo-
nin I assay and early diagnosis of myocardial infarction. JAMA. 2011;306: 
2684–93.
 12. Melki D, Lugnegård J, Alfredsson J, Lind S, Eggers KM, Lindahl B, Jern-
berg T. Implications of introducing high-sensitivity cardiac troponin into 
clinical practice. Data from the SWEDEHEART Registry. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2015;65:1655–64.
 13. Gore MO, Seliger SL, deFilippi CR, et al. Age- and sex-dependent upper 
reference limits for the high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T assay. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2014;63:1441–48.
 14. Chaitman BR, Hardison RM, Adler D, et al. Bypass Angioplasty Revascu-
larization Investigation 2 Diabetes (BARI 2D) Study Group. The bypass 
angioplasty revascularization investigation 2 diabetes randomized trial of 
different treatment strategies in type 2 diabetes mellitus with stable isch-
emic heart disease: Impact of treatment strategy on cardiac mortality and 
myocardial infarction. Circulation. 2009;120:2529–40.
 15. Burgess DC, Hunt D, Li L, et al. Incidence and predictors of silent myocar-
dial infarction in type 2 diabetes and the effect of fenofibrate: an analysis 
from the Fenofibrate Intervention and Event Lowering in Diabetes (FIELD) 
study. Eur Heart J. 2010;31:92–99.
 16. Karnegis JN, Matts J, Tuna N, for the POSCH Group. Development and 
evolution of electrocardiographic Minnesota Q-QS codes in patients with 
acute myocardial infarction. Am Heart J. 1985;110:452–9.
 17. Thom T, Haase N, Rosamond W, et al. Heart disease and stroke statistics— 
2006 update: a report from the American Heart Association Statistics 
 
Committee and Stroke Statistics Subcommittee. Circulation. 2006;113: 
e85–e151.
 18. Mozaffarian D, Benjamin EJ, Go AS, et al. Heart disease and stroke statistics— 
2016 update. a report from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 
2016;132:e1–e324.
 19. Braunwald E, Morrow DA. Unstable angina: is it time for a requiem? 
 
Circulation. 2013;127:2452–7.
 20. Easton JD, Saver JL, Albers GW, et al. Definition and evaluation of tran-
sient ischemic attack: a scientific statement for healthcare professionals 
from the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association Stroke 
Council; Council on Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia; Council on 
Cardiovascular Radiology and Intervention; Council on Cardiovascular 
Nursing; and the Interdisciplinary Council on Peripheral Vascular Disease. 
Stroke. 2009;40:2276–93.
 21. Sacco RL, Kasner SE, Broderick JP
, et al. An updated definition of stroke 
for the 21st century: a statement for healthcare professionals from 
the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke. 
2013;44:2064–89.
 22. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. Classification of 
cerebrovascular diseases III. Stroke. 1990;21:637–76.
 23. Albers GW, Caplan LR, Easton JD, et al. Transient ischemic attack—pro-
posal for a new definition. N Engl J Med. 2002;347:1713–6.
 24. Van Swieten JC, Koudstaal PJ, Visser MC, Schouten HJA, van Gijn J. In-
terobserver agreement for the assessment of handicap in stroke patients. 
Stroke. 1988;19:604–7.
 25. Lansky AJ, Messé SR, Brickman AM, et al. Proposed standardized neuro-
logical endpoints for cardiovascular clinical trials. An Academic Research 
Consortium initiative. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;69:679–91.
 26. Solomon SD, Dobson J, Pocock S, et al. for the Candesartan in Heart 
failure: Assessment of Reduction in Mortality and morbidity (CHARM) 
Investigators. Influence of nonfatal hospitalization for heart failure on 
subsequent mortality in patients with chronic heart failure. Circulation. 
2007;116:1482–7.
 27. McKee PA, Castelli WP
, McNamara PM, Kannel WB. The natural his-
tory of congestive heart failure: the Framingham study. N Engl J Med. 
1971;285:1441–6.
 28. Skali H, Dwyer EM, Goldstein R, et al. Prognosis and response to therapy 
of first inpatient and outpatient heart failure event in a heart failure clini-
cal trial: MADIT-CRT. Eur J Heart Fail. 2014;16:560–5.
 29. Okumura N, Jhund PS, Gong J, et al. for the PARADIGM-HF Investiga-
tors and Committees. Importance of clinical worsening of heart failure 
treated in the outpatient setting: evidence from the prospective com-
parison of ARNI with ACEI to determine impact on global mortality and 
morbidity in heart failure trial (PARADIGM-HF). Circulation. 2016;133: 
2254–62.
 30. Cutlip DE, Windecker S, Mahran R, et al. on behalf of the Academic Re-
search Consortium. Clinical endpoints in coronary stent trials: a case for 
standardized definitions. Circulation. 2007;115:2344–51.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on June 2, 2019
