 252
Higgerson J, et al. J Epidemiol Community Health 2018;72:252–258. doi:10.1136/jech-2017-209882
Research report
Impact of free access to leisure facilities and 
community outreach on inequalities in physical 
activity: a quasi-experimental study
James Higgerson,1 Emma Halliday,2 Aurora Ortiz-Nunez,2 Richard Brown,3 Ben Barr1
To cite: Higgerson J, 
Halliday E, Ortiz-Nunez A, 
et al. J Epidemiol Community 
Health 2018;72:252–258.
 
► Additional material is 
published online only. To view 
please visit the journal online 
(http:// 
dx. 
doi. 
org/ 
10. 
1136/ 
jech- 
2017- 
209882).
1Department of Public Health 
and Policy, University of 
Liverpool, Liverpool, UK
2Division of Health Research, 
Faculty of Health and Medicine, 
Lancaster University, Lancaster, 
UK
3Leisure and Environment 
Department, Blackburn with 
Darwen Borough Council, 
Blackburn, UK
Correspondence to
Ben Barr, Department of Public 
Health and Policy, University of 
Liverpool, Liverpool L69 3BX, 
UK;  
benbarr@ 
liverpool. 
ac. 
uk
Received 21 August 2017
Revised 29 November 2017
Accepted 19 December 2017
Published Online First 
12 January 2018
AbsTrACT
background There are large inequalities in levels of 
physical activity in the UK, and this is an important 
determinant of health inequalities. Little is known about 
the effectiveness of community-wide interventions to 
increase physical activity and whether effects differ by 
socioeconomic group.
Methods We conducted interrupted time series 
and difference-in-differences analyses using local 
administrative data and a large national survey to 
investigate the impact of an intervention providing 
universal free access to leisure facilities alongside 
outreach and marketing activities in a deprived local 
authority area in the northwest of England. Outcomes 
included attendances at swimming and gym sessions, 
self-reported participation in gym and swim activity and 
any physical activity.
results The intervention was associated with a 64% 
increase in attendances at swimming and gym sessions 
(relative risk 1.64, 95% CI 1.43 to 1.89, P<0.001), an 
additional 3.9% of the population participating in at 
least 30 min of moderate-intensity gym or swim sessions 
during the previous four weeks (95% CI 3.6 to 4.1) 
and an additional 1.9% of the population participating 
in any sport or active recreation of at least moderate 
intensity for at least 30 min on at least 12 days out of 
the last four weeks (95% CI 1.7 to 2.1). The effect on 
gym and swim activity and overall levels of participation 
in physical activity was significantly greater for the more 
disadvantaged socioeconomic group.
Conclusions The study suggests that removing user 
charges from leisure facilities in combination with 
outreach and marketing activities can increase overall 
population levels of physical activity while reducing 
inequalities.
bACkground
Physical inactivity is linked to a wide range of 
physical and mental health outcomes1 and is esti-
mated to cost the National Health Service (NHS) 
£455 
million a year.1 There is a steep socioeconomic 
gradient in physical activity in the UK with 76% 
of men in the highest income quintile achieving 
recommended physical activity levels compared 
with only 55% of men in the lowest quintile.2 
Increasing levels of physical activity in more disad-
vantaged groups could improve overall population 
health and reduce health inequalities.
Reducing the cost of participation is one poten-
tial means to increase physical activity and address 
these inequalities. Local government and charitable 
organisations in England provide a range of leisure 
services, including swimming, gym and other sports 
facilities. The provision of these facilities is generally 
subsidised to promote social inclusion, community 
well-being3 and public health.4 Some local authori-
ties (LAs) have sought to increase levels of physical 
activity and promote public health by removing user 
charges entirely, offering free access to leisure facil-
ities.5–7 Evaluation of such schemes is important to 
ensure that they are reaching their target audience. 
For example, free leisure offers could inadver-
tently increase inequalities in participation if they 
are mainly used by those already active or more 
affluent. Analysis of uptake of the national free 
swimming initiative in Bristol found no relationship 
between area deprivation and participation.8 Public 
health goals are, however, often not the main aim of 
pricing policies, with income generation frequently 
a key competing concern.9
Some studies comparing participation rates 
before and after the introduction of free offers 
have reported increases in participation,10–16 while 
another found that increased charges were associ-
ated with a small decline in participation.17 There 
is some evidence that respondents in surveys do 
not report that entrance charges are a major barrier 
to participation, and that this is just one of many 
factors that influence their participation.10 These 
studies, however, provide limited evidence of the 
likely impact that community-based initiatives 
involving free access to leisure centres have on 
physical activity levels.
We therefore investigated the impact of the 
re:fresh scheme, introduced in Blackburn with 
Darwen, a deprived LA in the northwest of England 
in 2008, that provided free access to activities in 
leisure centres (swimming pools and gyms) at most 
times of the day along with community outreach 
activities. We use quasi-experimental methods to 
investigate whether the scheme led to an increase in 
swimming and gym activities and overall levels of 
physical activity and whether these effects differed 
by socioeconomic group.
MeThods
setting
Blackburn with Darwen is a deprived and ethni-
cally diverse LA, in the northwest of England with 
a population of 147 489. In 2015, Blackburn with 
Darwen was ranked as the 24th most deprived 
area out of all 326 lower-tier LAs in England and 
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://jech.bmj.com/
J Epidemiol Community Health: first published as 10.1136/jech-2017-209882 on 12 January 2018. Downloaded from 
 253
Higgerson J, et al. J Epidemiol Community Health 2018;72:252–258. doi:10.1136/jech-2017-209882
research report
31% of the population were from a black or minority ethnic 
group.
Intervention
The re:fresh scheme began in July 2008, with the provision 
of free access to local government leisure facilities at most 
times of the day for people living, working or registered with 
a general practitioner in Blackburn with Darwen. At the time, 
there were nine leisure facilities in Blackburn with Darwen. 
Three of these facilities included swimming pools and gyms, 
one facility just had a swimming pool and five sites had gym 
facilities only. A map showing the distribution of these facilities 
in relation to area deprivation is given in online supplementary 
appendix 1. Several of the leisure facilities were located close to 
deprived neighbourhoods. Initially in July 2008 the free offer 
was only available to people >50 years old, being extended to 
people aged 16–24 
years in September 2008 and finally to people 
aged 25–49 years in April 2009. Overall during the scheme, free 
leisure was available for 90% of the opening hours of the nine 
facilities.
The free offer was supported by outreach work delivered by 
Health Trainers and a Healthy Communities Partnership. Five 
full time equivalent (FTE) Health Trainers were employed during 
the project, offering 1 to 1 and group sessions, to around 700 
inactive people per year supporting behaviour change through 
goal setting and motivational interviewing. T
wo FTE community 
workers delivered the Healthy Communities Partnership which 
supported a network of volunteers who ran community events 
to engage people in taster sessions and increase the awareness of 
re:fresh, and act as buddies to accompany people to their first 
activity sessions.
The programme was also supported by considerable marketing 
and promotional activity to raise awareness of the offer and to 
promote participation. The scheme is ongoing, although in 2016 
a flat fee of £1 was introduced for previously free activities in 
response to cuts in local government funding. The scheme was 
jointly funded by the NHS and Blackburn with Darwen Borough 
Council. Between 2008 and 2014, the NHS contributed a total 
of £6 
million on top of the core funding for leisure facilities 
provided by the council over this period (£22 
million). The 
outreach activities cost approximately £2 
million over this time.
datasets
Our analysis used two datasets. First, we extracted data from 
the leisure management IT system for Blackburn with Darwen 
providing data on every attendance at a leisure centre from 2005 
to 2014. This dataset was then used to calculate the total quar-
terly number of gym and swim attendances from 2005 to 2014 
and the proportion of these that were free (ie, there was no cost 
associated with them on the leisure management system).
Second, we used data from a large national annual survey of 
sports participation—the Active People Survey (APS). The meth-
odology for this survey is described elsewhere.18 This cross-sec-
tional telephone survey is based on a random sample from each 
LA in England selected using Random Digit Dialing. One person 
aged ≥16 is randomly selected from eligible household members. 
Average response rates are low, ranging from 27.1% to 27.8% 
during the study period. We therefore applied survey weights in 
all our analysis. Respondents are asked to report the number of 
days in the past four 
weeks they have engaged in sports and other 
active recreation, including gym and swimming sessions, for at 
least 30 
min and the intensity of these activities. The interviews 
for each survey are evenly spread across 12 months, running 
from October of one 
year to October of the next year. We used 
data for all surveys from APS1 (2005–2006) to APS9 (2014–
2015). There was a gap from October 2006 to October 2007 
when no survey was completed. We pooled all data from these 
nine surveys giving a total pooled sample of 1 763 780 individ-
uals aged ≥16. Data in the sample were missing on age for 2.2%, 
ethnicity for 1.8% and socioeconomic status for 2.2%. A further 
7.4% of the sample was excluded as their socioeconomic status 
was unclassifiable based on their reported occupation. Excluding 
these data provided a sample of 1 556 563 for the analysis, 6160 
of which was within Blackburn with Darwen and 1 550 403 
from the other LA areas of England.
outcomes
Our analysis included three outcomes. First, the relative change 
in the number of gym and swim attendances (combined) at Black-
burn with Darwen leisure centres before and after the introduc-
tion of the re:fresh scheme (outcome 1). Second, the proportion 
of people reporting in the APS that they had engaged in at least 
30 
min of moderately intensive gym or swimming activity in the 
past four weeks (outcome 2). Third, the proportion of people 
reporting in the APS they had engaged in any sport or active 
recreation of at least moderate intensity for at least 30 
min on at 
least 12 days out of the last four weeks (outcome 3). Outcome 
3 was designated as a national indicator in 2008 by the govern-
ment for measuring the performance of LAs at promoting health 
and well-being and increasing participation in sport.
Analysis
First, we used data extracted from the Leisure Management 
System, to conduct an interrupted time series (ITS) analysis 
investigating the relative change in attendances associated with 
the introduction of re:fresh. ITS is a quasi-experimental method 
using data from multiple time points before and after an inter-
vention in order to detect whether or not the intervention had a 
significantly greater effect than any underlying secular trend.19 
We use data on the number of attendances for the 14 quarters (ie, 
3-month periods) before the intervention and 26 quarters after 
the intervention in a log-linear regression model with Newey-
West estimators to account of autocorrelation in the data. We 
log transformed the data to aid interpretation of the coefficients 
as relative change in activity; that is, relative risk (RR). We 
additionally included time trend terms for before and after the 
intervention and dummy variables for the four quarters of the 
year to adjust for seasonal changes. We used Newey-West auto-
matic bandwidth selection procedure20 to estimate the maximum 
lags required to take into account the autocorrelation structure 
of the data (further details are given in online supplementary 
appendix 2). The effect of the re:fresh programme was estimated 
by including a dummy variable indicating the period after the 
introduction of the re:fresh scheme in the third quarter of 2008 
(see online supplementary appendix 2 for full model formula). 
To investigate whether there was a different effect on swimming 
compared with gym attendances, we additionally replicated the 
ITS analysis separately for gym and swimming attendances. In 
sensitivity analysis, we replicated models with untransformed 
count data and using a Poisson regression model rather than 
linear regression. (see online supplementary appendix 2).
Second, we used APS data to conduct a difference-in-differ-
ence21 analysis comparing the change in outcomes within Black-
burn with Darwen to the change in the rest of England, before 
(2005–2007) and after (2008–2014) the re:fresh intervention. 
This difference-in-differences approach accounts for both 
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://jech.bmj.com/
J Epidemiol Community Health: first published as 10.1136/jech-2017-209882 on 12 January 2018. Downloaded from 
 254
Higgerson J, et al. J Epidemiol Community Health 2018;72:252–258. doi:10.1136/jech-2017-209882
research report
national trends in our outcomes and unobserved time-invariant 
differences between Blackburn with Darwen and the rest of the 
country that could confound findings. The difference between 
the change in outcomes within Blackburn with Darwen and the 
change in outcomes in the rest of the country—known as the 
difference-in-difference parameter—provides an unbiased esti-
mate of the intervention effect if the trends in outcomes would 
have been parallel in Blackburn with Darwen and in the rest of 
the country in the absence of the re:fresh programme.21 We used 
a linear regression model including a dummy variable indicating 
the intervention area (Blackburn with Darwen) and a dummy 
variable indicating the before (2005–2007) and after (2008–
2014) periods. The interaction term between these two variables 
is the difference-in-differences parameter. Although our outcome 
is binary, we use linear regression as this interaction term cannot 
be interpreted as the programme effect in non-linear models, 
and linear probability models provide an unbiased estimate 
of the difference-in-differences parameter even with a binary 
outcome.22 We additionally included variables to control for 
changes in the composition of the population over time—age, 
age squared, sex, ethnicity (white British, white other, Asian, 
Black, Chinese, mixed, other) and three socioeconomic groups 
based on the National Statistics Socioeconomic Classification 
(managerial and professional, intermediate and routine/manual/
never worked/long-term unemployed). We repeated the analysis 
removing the ‘never worked’ category as a sensitivity analysis 
(see online supplementary appendix 3). We included a time trend 
to account for the national secular trend and used survey weights 
to adjust for non-response. We estimated robust SEs clustered at 
the LA level to allow for within LA correlation due to sampling 
design. We repeated the difference-in-differences analysis for 
both outcome 2 (swim and gym activity) and outcome 3 (any 
physical activity). To investigate whether there was a differential 
effect across socioeconomic groups, we additionally carried out 
the analysis separately for each socioeconomic group. As a sensi-
tivity test we conducted the difference-in-differences analyses 
using alternative comparison groups (the most deprived 20% 
of LAs, deprived LAs outside London, deprived LAs outside 
London with high black and ethnic minority populations and 
other deprived LAs in the northwest). We also replicated the 
analysis with the intervention start date set as 2009, rather than 
2008 to address the inclusion of some preintervention data using 
2008–2009 survey data (see online supplementary appendix 3). 
To investigate whether there was a different effect on swimming 
compared with gym attendances, we also repeated the analysis 
separately for gym and swimming participation.
resulTs
ITs analysis
Figure 1 shows that 11% of gym and swimming attendances 
were free before the intervention; this increased to 63% after 
the intervention. The trend in gym and swimming attendances 
was declining before the intervention, and this trend reversed in 
line with the introduction of the intervention.
The ITS regression indicated that the introduction of re:fresh 
was associated with a 64% increase in gym and swimming 
activity (RR 1.64, 95% 
CI 1.43 to 1.89, P<0.001). This equates 
to an additional 26 
400 additional swim and gym attendances per 
quarter due to the re:fresh initiative over the 2008–2014 period. 
Additional analysis shown in online supplementary appendix 
4 indicated a larger effect size when analysing the effect on 
gym attendances alone; models using alternative specifications 
showed similar results (see online supplementary appendix 4).
difference-in-differences analysis
Figure 2 shows the trend in participation in gym and swimming 
activities reported in the APS for Blackburn with Darwen and 
England as a whole. While there was a slight drop in activity 
between 2005 and 2007 in Blackburn with Darwen, this was not 
significant. Following the introduction of re:fresh, there was an 
increase in gym and swimming participation, while the national 
Figure 1 Quarterly trend in swimming and gym attendances in Blackburn with Darwen before and after the introduction of re:fresh and the 
proportion of all attendances that were free. Source: Leisure Management System.
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://jech.bmj.com/
J Epidemiol Community Health: first published as 10.1136/jech-2017-209882 on 12 January 2018. Downloaded from 
 255
Higgerson J, et al. J Epidemiol Community Health 2018;72:252–258. doi:10.1136/jech-2017-209882
research report
rate was constant before the introduction of re:fresh in 2008 and 
fell slightly after this point.
Figure 3 shows the estimates from the difference-in-dif-
ferences analysis. The intervention was associated with an 
additional 3.9% of the population in Blackburn with Darwen 
participating in at least 30 
min of moderate-intensity gym or 
swim sessions during the last four weeks (95% 
CI 3.6 to 4.1). 
This effect was greater in the most disadvantaged socioeconomic 
group (4.7%, 95% 
CI 4.4 to 5.0), followed by managerial and 
professional groups, and the effect was lowest in the interme-
diate socioeconomic group. In terms of overall participation in 
physical activity, the intervention was associated with an addi-
tional 1.9% of the population participating in any sport or active 
recreation of at least moderate intensity for at least 30 
min on 
at least 12 days out of the last four weeks (95% CI 1.7 to 2.1). 
This effect was much larger in the more disadvantaged routine 
and manual group (3.6%, 95% 
CI 3.3 to 3.8) and was not signif-
icant in the more advantaged socioeconomic groups. In online 
Figure 2 Trend in the proportion of people reporting at least one moderate gym or swim session in the previous four weeks, 2005–2014 in 
Blackburn with Darwen and the rest of England. Source: Active People Survey.
Figure 3 Estimates of the effect of the introduction of re:fresh from the difference-in-differences analysis on (A) % participating in gym or swim 
activity at least once in the past month and (B) the % participating in any sport or active recreation for a least 30 min on at least 12 days over the last 
four weeks. Results for all socioeconomic groups in Blackburn with Darwen and separately for three socioeconomic groups. Effect sizes indicate the 
additional percentage of the population participating due to the intervention.
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://jech.bmj.com/
J Epidemiol Community Health: first published as 10.1136/jech-2017-209882 on 12 January 2018. Downloaded from 
 256
Higgerson J, et al. J Epidemiol Community Health 2018;72:252–258. doi:10.1136/jech-2017-209882
research report
supplementary appendix 5, we provide participation rates by 
socioeconomic group before and after the intervention showing 
that within Blackburn with Darwen inequalities narrowed after 
the intervention, while they remained relatively unchanged 
nationally. In relative terms, compared with average levels of 
participation before the intervention this is equivalent to a 20% 
increase in the proportion of people participating in at least 
30 
min of moderate-intensity gym or swim sessions in a month 
(95% 
CI 19% to 21%) and an 8% increase in the proportion 
participating in any sport or active recreation for a least 30 min 
on at least 12 days over the last four weeks (95% 
CI 7% to 9%).
Sensitivity analyses given in online supplementary appendix 3 
show similar results using alternative comparator groups when 
using 2009 as the intervention start date and when removing the 
‘never worked’ category from the socioeconomic classification. 
Replicating the analysis separately for the proportion of people 
reporting gym and swim sessions in the past four 
weeks indicated 
that for swimming effect sizes were similar across socioeconomic 
groups while the effect on gym activity was significantly higher 
among people from routine and manual groups compared with 
professional, managerial and intermediate groups (see online 
supplementary appendix 3).
dIsCussIon
Main finding of this study
We found that the introduction of a scheme providing widespread 
free access to leisure facilities alongside outreach activities led to 
an increase in swimming and gym attendances at these facili-
ties, an increased proportion of the population participating in 
swimming or gym activity and increased overall physical activity 
levels. The increases in participation were greatest in the most 
disadvantaged socioeconomic group—decreasing inequalities.
In relative terms, the intervention had a lower effect on overall 
levels of physical activity (8% increase) than on swimming and 
gym activity (20% increase), suggesting that there may have 
been some substitution of activities; that is, that some people 
may have shifted from other activities to gym and swimming, 
without necessarily increasing levels of overall physical activity.
Larger effects were seen for gym attendances at LA facilities 
than swimming attendances although effects were similar for 
the additional number of people participating in gym activities 
compared with swimming. We also found very little effect of the 
intervention on the numbers of people participating in any gym 
activity from more affluent socioeconomic groups. One possible 
explanation is that there was some shifting from private gyms to 
LA gyms when the latter became free, particularly among more 
affluent groups. This would have increased the number of gym 
attendances in LA gyms while not increasing the numbers of 
people participating in any gym activities.
What is already known on this topic
Very little is known about the effectiveness of communi-
ty-wide public health programmes to improve physical activity 
rates.15 23–26 The only studies to our knowledge investigating 
the impact of community-based initiatives involving free access 
to leisure centres have been based on simple before and after 
comparisons, or retrospective surveys asking respondents to 
recall their participation prior to the intervention or asking 
respondents hypothetical questions about whether they would 
have participated in the absence of the intervention.10–14 16 24 25 
While these studies have generally found that these interven-
tions were associated with increased participation, all of these 
approaches are likely to be highly susceptible to bias and provide 
limited evidence for the impact of the interventions. There have 
been a number of systematic reviews of the impact of providing 
financial incentives to individuals to increase physical activity, 
including free membership of leisure facilities.26–28 These 
concluded that providing unconditional financial incentives has 
little effect on physical activity. Providing free access to leisure 
facilities across a population, however, may have a different 
effect from targeting free membership at particular inactive 
individuals.
What this study adds
This is the first study to our knowledge that uses quasi-experi-
mental methods to investigate the impact on physical activity of 
a community-wide scheme to offer free access to leisure facilities 
to the whole population alongside outreach activities. This study 
suggests that this approach is effective at increasing overall levels 
of physical activity and reducing inequalities in physical activity.
strengths and limitations
Our study has a number of strengths. First, by using a consis-
tent dataset of attendances at leisure centres over multiple time 
periods spanning a decade we were able to use ITS analysis 
methods to estimate effects while accounting for any secular 
trends in the data. This provides a more robust analysis than 
a simple before and after comparison; however, it may still be 
subject to bias if there were other unobserved determinants of 
physical activity that changed around the same time as the inter-
vention. Second, by using a difference-in-differences analysis we 
were able to account for any change in national trends around 
the same time as the intervention as well as any unobserved 
time-invariant differences between Blackburn with Darwen and 
the rest of the country that could confound findings. While we 
also controlled for observed changes in the composition of the 
population, some risk of confounding remains if there were other 
unobserved determinants of physical activity that only changed 
in Blackburn with Darwen around the same time as the interven-
tion and not in other LAs. Third, our analysis is strengthened 
by finding consistent results across multiple outcomes and data-
sets. These include both objective measures and those based on 
self-reported estimates, and they ranged from outcomes more 
proximal to the intervention—attendance at a swimming pool or 
gym—to wider population measures of physical activity.
A number of limitations however remain. Measuring atten-
dance at swimming or gym sessions using transaction data may 
be subject to error. People may not be captured on the system 
if they enter the facilities without swiping their membership 
card, or decide not to attend the activity initially logged on the 
system, or move between activities within a leisure facility. These 
errors could lead to bias if the level of error changed before and 
after the intervention. Self-report in surveys will be subject to 
biases in reporting and recall. Validation studies of self-reported 
questionnaires have shown inconsistent results compared with 
more robust methods.29 The APS it a telephone-based survey 
with a low response rate, which may affect the validity and reli-
ability of the data. Although we adjusted for known correlates 
of non-response using survey weights, response bias could still 
be a problem, particularly if those most active are more likely 
to participate in the survey because they are engaged with the 
subject. To investigate this further, we compared reported levels 
of participation in the APS to those using similar questions in the 
Health Survey for England, a face-to-face survey with a higher 
response rate (60%). We found very similar levels of reported 
activity in both surveys, suggesting that the low response in the 
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://jech.bmj.com/
J Epidemiol Community Health: first published as 10.1136/jech-2017-209882 on 12 January 2018. Downloaded from 
 257
Higgerson J, et al. J Epidemiol Community Health 2018;72:252–258. doi:10.1136/jech-2017-209882
research report
APS is not leading to bias in estimates of overall participation 
(see online supplementary appendix 6). Due to the nature of our 
analysis, response bias would only influence our overall findings 
if there was a change in the groups more likely to respond over 
time in Blackburn with Darwen, which was not reflected in the 
sample from other LAs. Our use of both objective transaction 
data and more subjective survey data aimed to address uncertain-
ties associated with each data type, with both indicating signifi-
cant increases in participation.
As outlined above, while the free offer was a substantial part of 
the intervention it also included outreach and marketing activ-
ities that were targeted at inactive groups. In our analysis, we 
are not able to distinguish between the effects of these different 
components and can only measure the efficacy of the scheme as 
a whole. We were also not able to assess the impact of the inter-
vention on activities outside leisure facilities. It is also possible 
that the effectiveness of the scheme may also have been contin-
gent on other factors in Blackburn with Darwen. Most notable 
of these is the relatively large number of leisure facility sites, 
many of which are in close proximity to deprived neighbour-
hoods. While our analysis indicates that it was likely that the 
intervention had an impact on physical activity, the cost effec-
tiveness of this intervention remains uncertain.
Implications for policy
Our study indicates that removing user charges from leisure 
facilities in combination with outreach and marketing activities 
could potentially increase overall levels of physical activity while 
reducing inequalities. Re:fresh may have achieved lower inequal-
ities in participation due its universal nature, and availability 
of sessions during 90% of opening hours, therefore including 
people on low incomes who work full-time, who might be 
excluded from other more targeted schemes (such as the provi-
sion of cheaper facilities for those in receipt of state benefits) or 
only during off-peak hours.
With increasing cuts to local government budgets in the UK,30 
many councils are considering whether to reduce the public 
subsidy of leisure facilities and discontinue the free leisure 
schemes that currently exist. There is also the potential for 
other funding such as local government public health grants or 
health service funds to be invested in subsidising leisure facil-
ities to promote public health. Our study provides evidence 
that expanding free leisure schemes is likely to increase phys-
ical activity and reduce inequalities, while discontinuing these 
schemes may have the opposite effect.
Acknowledgements The authors thank Ken Barnsley, Dominic Harrison, Sarah 
Quinn, Claire Ramwell and Ruth Young from Blackburn with Darwen Borough 
Council for their support in data collection and providing contextual information.
Contributors BB and EH planned the study. BB and JH conducted the analysis. 
JH, BB, EH and AO-N contributed to interpretation of data, drafting the manuscript 
and subsequent revision. RB supported this work providing data access, contextual 
information and fact-checking the final draft.
Funding This work (project reference: SPHR-LIL-PES-LAL) was supported and 
funded by the NIHR School for Public Health Research (SPHR) Public Health Practice 
Evaluation Scheme (PHPES). BB was supported by the National Institute for Health 
Research (NIHR) Collaborationfor Leadership in Health Research and Care (CLAHRC 
NWC). 
disclaimer The NIHR had no role in the study design, data collection and analysis, 
decision to publish or preparation of the manuscript. This report is independent 
research arising from research supported by the National Institute for Health 
Research. The views expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and 
not necessarily those of the NHS, the National Institute for Health Research or the 
Department of Health.
Competing interests  RB is employed by Blackburn with Darwen Council in their 
Leisure and Environment department, involved in providing information about the 
nature of the intervention, facilitating access to the data, and providing contextual 
information upon request when interpreting the results.
Provenance and peer review Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
data sharing statement Outputs from additional analyses are available as web 
appendices. Summary datasets are also available upon request.
open Access This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the 
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY 4.0) license, which permits others 
to distribute, remix, adapt and build upon this work, for commercial use, provided 
the original work is properly cited. See: http:// 
creativecommons. 
org/ 
licenses/ 
by/ 
4. 
0/
© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of the 
article) 2018. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless otherwise 
expressly granted.
RefeRences
 1 Public Health England. Physical inactivity: economic costs to NHS clinical 
commissioning groups. https://www. 
gov. 
uk/ 
government/ 
uploads/ 
system/ 
uploads/ 
attachment_ 
data/ 
file/ 
524234/ 
Physical_ 
inactivity_ 
costs_ 
to_ 
CCGs. 
pdf (accessed 8 Mar 
2017).
 2 Public Health England. Health matters: getting every adult active every day. https://
www. 
gov. 
uk/ 
government/ 
publications/ 
health- 
matters- 
getting- 
every- 
adult- 
active- 
every- 
day/ 
health- 
matters- 
getting- 
every- 
adult- 
active- 
every- 
day# 
physical- 
activity- 
and- 
health- 
inequalities (accessed 8 Mar 2017).
 3 Robinson L. Managing public sport and leisure services. London, New York: Routledge, 
2003.
 4  
legislation. 
gov. 
uk. Health and social care act 2012. 2012 http://www. 
legislation. 
gov. 
uk/ 
ukpga/ 
2012/ 
7/ 
section/ 
12/ 
enacted (accessed 6 Mar 2017).
 5 Birmingham City Council. Get active with Birminghams Be Active campaign. https://
www. 
mycareinbirmingham. 
org. 
uk/ 
get- 
active- 
with- 
birminghams- 
be- 
active- 
campaign. 
aspx (accessed 8 Mar 2017).
 6 Sport England. Blackburn with Darwen’s re:fresh campaign. http:// 
archive. 
sportengland. 
org/ 
support__ 
advice/ 
local_ 
government/ 
in_ 
it_ 
for_ 
the_ 
long_ 
run/ 
case_ 
studies/ 
blackburn_ 
with_ 
darwen. 
aspx (accessed 31 May 2016).
 7 Everyone Active. Southwark free swim and gym. http 
s:// 
www. 
ever 
yone 
acti 
ve.com/ 
southw 
arkfreeswimandgym/ (accessed 16 May 2017).
 8 Audrey S, Wheeler BW, Mills J, et al. Health promotion and the social gradient: the 
free swimming initiative for children and young people in Bristol. Public Health 
2012;126:976–81.
 9 Halliday E, Barr B, Higgerson J, et al. Using local authority entrance charges to tackle 
inequalities in physical activity? A qualitative study of leisure and public health 
perspectives. J Public Health 2017:1–6.
 
10 Coalter F. Entrance charges and sports participation: a review of evidence. 2002 
http://www. 
sportdevelopment. 
info/ 
index. 
php/ 
subjects/ 
55- 
researchsurveys/ 
132- 
entrance- 
charges- 
and- 
sports- 
participation- 
a- 
review- 
of- 
evidence (accessed 7 May 
2014).
What is already known on this subject
 
► Physical inactivity is a leading challenge for public health in 
the UK that costs the National Health Service an estimated 
£455 million per year. Rates of physical activity are lowest in 
more deprived populations. Interventions that improve access 
to public facilities, such as price reductions or free offers, 
have the potential to increase population-level physical 
activity levels, as well as addressing social inequalities in 
uptake of physical activity.
What this study adds
 
► This study uses quasi-experimental methods to investigate 
the impact of the introduction of universal free access to 
leisure facilities alongside community outreach activities 
on inequalities in physical activity. It demonstrates that this 
can increase participation in swimming and gym activities 
and overall levels of physical activity, with the effects being 
greatest in the most disadvantaged groups.
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://jech.bmj.com/
J Epidemiol Community Health: first published as 10.1136/jech-2017-209882 on 12 January 2018. Downloaded from 
 258
Higgerson J, et al. J Epidemiol Community Health 2018;72:252–258. doi:10.1136/jech-2017-209882
research report
 
11 Coalter F. Free swimming – a need for a more strategic approach - physical activity 
health alliance. 2006 http://www. 
paha. 
org. 
uk/ 
Resource/ 
free- 
swimming- 
a- 
need- 
for- 
a- 
more- 
strategic- 
approach# 
viewComments (accessed 7 May 2014).
 
12 Bolton N, Martin S, Anderson M, et al. Free swimming: an evaluation of the welsh 
assembly government’s initiative. 2008 https:// 
repository. 
cardiffmet. 
ac. 
uk/ 
handle/ 
10369/ 
583 (accessed 30 Jan 2017).
 
13 Verhoef TI, Trend V, Kelly B, et al. Cost-effectiveness analysis of offering free leisure 
centre memberships to physically inactive members of the public receiving state 
benefits: a case study. BMC Public Health 2016;16:616.
 
14 Bullough S, Davies LE, Barrett D. The impact of a community free swimming 
programme for young people (under 19) in England. Sport Management Review 
2015;18:32–44.
 
15 PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP. Evaluation of the Impact of Free Swimming, 2010.
 
16 Frew EJ, Bhatti M, Win K, et al. Cost-effectiveness of a community-based physical 
activity programme for adults (Be Active) in the UK: an economic analysis within a 
natural experiment. Br J Sports Med 2014;48:207–12.
 
17 Coalter F. Sports participation: price or priorities? Leisure Studies 1993;12:171–82.
 
18 Sport England. Active people survey 5-7 technical report. 2014 http:// 
doc. 
ukdataservice. 
ac. 
uk/ 
doc/ 
7369/ 
mrdoc/ 
pdf/ 
7369_ 
aps_ 
6_ 
technical_ 
report. 
pdf
 
19 Biglan A, Ary D, Wagenaar AC. The value of interrupted time-series experiments for 
community intervention research. Prev Sci 2000;1:31–49.
 
20 Newey WK, West KD. Automatic lag selection in covariance matrix estimation. Rev 
Econ Stud 1994;61:631–53.
 
21 Donald SG, Lang K. Inference with difference-in-differences and other panel data. Rev 
Econ Stat 2007;89:221–33.
 
22 Puhani PA. The treatment effect, the cross difference, and the interaction term in 
nonlinear “difference-in-differences” models. IZA Discuss Pap 2008:3478.
 
23 Ball K, Carver A, Downing K, et al. Addressing the social determinants of inequities in 
physical activity and sedentary behaviours. https:// 
academic. 
oup. 
com/ 
heapro/ 
article/ 
30/ 
suppl_ 
2/ 
ii8/ 
641904/ 
Addressing- 
the- 
social- 
determinants- 
of- 
inequities (accessed 
23 Jun 2017).
 
24 Lyon A, Frew E, Pallan M, et al. Evaluation of the Birmingham be active programme. 
Birmingham: University Birmingham, 2011.
 
25 PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP. Evaluation of the impact of free swimming. London: 
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, 2010.
 
26 Barte JCM, Wendel-Vos GCW. A systematic review of financial incentives for 
physical activity: the effects on physical activity and related outcomes. Behav Med 
2017;43:79–90.
 
27 Molema CC, Wendel-Vos GC, Puijk L, et al. A systematic review of financial incentives 
given in the healthcare setting; do they effectively improve physical activity levels? 
BMC Sports Sci Med Rehabil 2016;8:15.
 
28 Giles EL, Robalino S, McColl E, et al. The effectiveness of financial incentives 
for health behaviour change: systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One 
2014;9:e90347.
 
29 Sylvia LG, Bernstein EE, Hubbard JL, et al. Practical guide to measuring physical 
activity. J Acad Nutr Diet 2014;114:199–208.
 
30 LGA. Council leaders say these cuts simply cannot go on. 2013 http://www. 
theguardian. 
com/ 
theobserver/ 
2013/ 
jun/ 
16/ 
letters- 
council- 
leaders- 
protest- 
cuts 
(accessed 12 Sep 2013).
 on 3 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://jech.bmj.com/
J Epidemiol Community Health: first published as 10.1136/jech-2017-209882 on 12 January 2018. Downloaded from 
