 Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hjsr20
The Journal of Sex Research
ISSN: 0022-4499 (Print) 1559-8519 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/hjsr20
Older Adults’ Experiences of Sexual Difficulties:
Qualitative Findings From the English Longitudinal
Study on Ageing (ELSA)
Sharron Hinchliff, Josie Tetley, David Lee & James Nazroo
To cite this article: Sharron Hinchliff, Josie Tetley, David Lee & James Nazroo (2018)
Older Adults’ Experiences of Sexual Difficulties: Qualitative Findings From the English
Longitudinal Study on Ageing (ELSA), The Journal of Sex Research, 55:2, 152-163, DOI:
10.1080/00224499.2016.1269308
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/00224499.2016.1269308
Published with license by Taylor &
Francis.Copyright © Sharron Hinchliff, Josie
Tetley, David Lee, and James Nazroo.
Published online: 31 Jan 2017.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 4918
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 7 View citing articles 
 ORIGINAL ARTICLES
Older Adults’ Experiences of Sexual Difficulties: Qualitative
Findings From the English Longitudinal Study on Ageing (ELSA)
Sharron Hinchliff
School of Nursing and Midwifery, University of Sheffield
Josie Tetley
Faculty of Health, Psychology and Social Care, Manchester Metropolitan University
David Lee and James Nazroo
Cathie Marsh Institute for Social Research, University of Manchester
There is a growing body of evidence demonstrating that sexual activity is important to the quality of life
of older adults, and that it can be influenced by physical, psychological, and social factors. However,
older adults’ experiences of sexual difficulties remain relatively unexplored. This article draws on
qualitative data collected as part of the English Longitudinal Study of Ageing (ELSA). Participants
answered a Sexual Relationships and Activities Questionnaire (SRA-Q), which included an open
comment box for further details, 1,084 (1/7) of which were completed. These data were analyzed
using Template Analysis, and findings on the experiences of sexual difficulties are presented in this
article. Sexual difficulties were contextualized within the couple relationship and could be detrimental
to the relationship, particularly if the partner would not seek professional help. Participants reported
that sexual difficulties could also have a negative impact on psychological well-being, described
mainly as frustration, depression, and sadness. For some participants the supportive nature of their
relationship buffered these impacts. Few had sought professional help; those who had reported helpful
and unhelpful experiences. These findings add to the limited evidence base and have implications for
health care in the context of global aging and a growing recognition of older adults’sexual rights.
Introduction
Over the past 20 years there has been a shift in many
developed countries in the way that the sexual lives of older
adults are viewed. Previously positioned as asexual, the sexual
health and well-being needs of older people have tended to be
ignored or met with disdain. In 2010, the World Health
Organization emphasized that sexual health was important
across the life course, thus legitimizing the sexual activity of
older adults. Around the same time, other governing bodies
began to include older adults in their guidance and health policy
documents, whereas before they did not, and some governments
actively promoted sexual activity as part of an aging well agenda
(Hinchliff & Gott, 2016; Marshall, 2010). The research evi-
dence base began to grow as large-scale studies, many of
which had previously not included older adults (e.g., National
Survey of Sexual Attitudes and Lifestyles [Natsal]) recruited
people aged 60 and older to answer their questions. However,
in-depth (qualitative) research on the sexual well-being of older
adults has remained limited. In this article we address that gap
by presenting an analysis of qualitative data on sexual difficul-
ties collected during Wave 6 (2012–2013) of the English
Longitudinal Study of Ageing (ELSA).
Sexual Practices of Older Adults
There is consistent evidence that many older adults are sexu-
ally active and that they find sex both pleasurable and rewarding
Copyright © Sharron Hinchliff, Josie Tetley, David Lee, and James Nazroo.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives License (http://creati
vecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/), which permits non-commercial re-
use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original
work is properly cited, and is not altered, transformed, or built upon in any way.
Correspondence should be addressed to Sharron Hinchliff, School of
Nursing and Midwifery, University of Sheffield, Barber House Annexe, 3a
Clarkehouse Road, Sheffield S10 2LA, UK. E-mail: s.hinchliff@sheffield.ac.uk
THE JOURNAL OF SEX RESEARCH, 55(2), 152–163, 2018
Published with license by Taylor & Francis.
ISSN: 0022-4499 print/1559-8519 online
DOI: 10.1080/00224499.2016.1269308
 (Ferris et al., 2008; Fileborn et al., 2015; Lee, Nazroo,
O’Connor, Blake, & Pendleton, 2016; Lee, Vanhoutte, Nazroo,
& Pendleton, 2016; Waite, Laumann, Das, & Schumm, 2009).
However, studies also report that older adults engage in sexual
activity less frequently when compared to younger cohorts. For
example, the recent Natsal-3 found lower levels of sexual “func-
tion” (a combination of “sexual response, sexual function in the
relationship context and self-appraisal of sex life,” p. 382) for
sexually active women and men in the older age groups com-
pared to younger cohorts (sexually active participants were those
who reported having at least one same-sex or different-sex
sexual partner in the past year) (Mitchell et al., 2013).
The Natsal-3 survey also found that the lowest reported frequen-
cies of recent sexual activities (vaginal, oral, anal, other genital
contact) with members of a different sex were in the oldest age
group (age 65–74) (Mercer et al., 2013).
Behaviors that older adults consider as sexual activity are
often broader than those of younger people (Bouman, 2013;
Hinchliff & Gott, 2004a; Waite et al., 2009), encompassing
physical intimacy more than traditional modes of sexual activ-
ity like penetrative sexual intercourse. Sexual activity and
physical intimacy within couple relationships have been
found to play a part in quality of later life (Hinchliff & Gott,
2004a; Tetley, Lee, Nazroo, & Hinchliff, 2016). The first study
in the United Kingdom to explore heterosexual older adults’
attitudes toward the role and value of sex in later life found that
it was important to all who had a sexual partner, many of
whom rated it as very or extremely important (Gott &
Hinchliff, 2003). The findings of the nationally representative
Australian Longitudinal Study of Health and Relationships
echo these results, with high numbers of heterosexual
women and men agreeing that an active sex life was important
to their sense of well-being (78% women; 91% men) and that
they found their sexual relationship “very” emotionally satis-
fying (72% women; 86% men) (Ferris et al., 2008, p. 337).
Quantitative findings from ELSAWave 6 also show a connec-
tion between sexual well-being and sexual activity or sexual
problems. Overall, they demonstrate that participants who
reported higher sexual desire, more frequent partnered sexual
activities, and fewer functional problems scored more favor-
ably on sexual well-being measures (Lee, Vanhoutte et al.,
2016). Interestingly, there is evidence of historical and cultural
influence here, as the longitudinal study by Beckman, Waern,
Gustafson, and Skoog (2008) of heterosexual 70-year-olds,
carried out at four different time periods (1971–1972,
1976–1977, 1992–1993, 2000–2001), found an increase
from the first cohort to the last cohort in the number of
participants who believed that sex was a positive factor in
their lives. This trend was consistent for those who were
cohabiting, married, and unmarried (Beckman et al., 2008).
Positive benefits such as these tend to be emphasized
in health materials and campaigns when sexual activity
is promoted as beneficial to aging health. Indeed, there
has been a shift in some areas of public health where sex
in later life is viewed as a marker of successful aging
(Marshall, 2010), which coincides with a more general
(Western) societal shift from viewing older adults as
asexual to sexually agentic. However, not all older
adults are sexually active, or want to be, and reasons
include the availability of a sexual partner, physical
and
mental
health
difficulties,
side-effects
of
the
medications (e.g., those used in the management of
long-term
conditions),
relationship
issues,
living
environment (e.g., lack of privacy), and the presence of
sexual difficulties.
Sexual Difficulties
General changes to sexual function with older age
include erection problems, such as the inability to achieve
an erection and a slower response time (Schlesinger, 1995).
Women may find that it takes them longer to become
aroused and they may experience less intense orgasms
(Schlesinger, 1995). Difficulties associated with reduced
vaginal lubrication and thinning vaginal tissues after meno-
pause can make penetrative sex painful (Bouman, 2013).
While some men and women experience a decline in sexual
desire with age, others do not, and a large-scale study found
that the age at which sexual desire starts to fade can differ
markedly (DeLamater & Sill, 2005).1 Again, the influence
of culture and time are significant, as the longitudinal study
of 70-year-olds, noted previously, found a decrease in the
proportion of men reporting erectile dysfunction (ED) but
an
increase
in
those
reporting
ejaculation
difficulties
(Beckman et al., 2008). The proportion of women who
reported having an orgasm during intercourse increased,
and the number of women who said they had never had
an
orgasm
decreased.
Men’s
sexual
difficulties
were
reported over the whole 30-year study period as the main
reason why intercourse came to an end for those who had a
sexual partner. The authors argued that these changes could
be connected to a combination of factors, including better
health in the more recent samples, changes in relationships
(e.g., an increase in cohabitation and divorce), societal
shifts, including attitudes toward sexuality, better socioeco-
nomic status, higher educational levels, and legislative
changes (e.g., the provision of compulsory sex education
in schools).
Some long-term conditions, which are more likely to be
diagnosed in people aged in their 50s and older, affect
sexual function. Physical and mental health problems can
decrease sexual desire, make it difficult to hold a sexual
position, increase anxiety (e.g., that sexual activity may
trigger another heart attack), and affect sense of sexual
well-being generally (Bouman, 2013). Prescribed medica-
tions can have sexual side effects; for example, hypertensive
drugs can cause erectile problems, many of which are pre-
scribed to people aged 50 and older. Bouman (2013) pointed
out that the prevalence of drug-related sexual problems is
higher in older adults given their sensitivity to the side-
effects of drugs.
1 The authors do not present data on sexual orientation of participants.
OLDER ADULTS’ EXPERIENCES OF SEXUAL DIFFICULTIES
153
 While not everyone who experiences a sexual difficulty
will necessarily be worried or concerned by it, there is
evidence that sexual difficulties can have a negative impact
on sense of self and interpersonal relationships. Research is
growing in this area; however, a small number of qualitative
studies from different countries (Jowett, Peel, & Shaw,
2012, United Kingdom; Potts, Grace, Gavey, & Vares,
2004, New Zealand; Sandberg, 2011, Sweden; Wentzell,
2013, Mexico) have identified that older men (heterosexual,
gay, and bisexual) with erection difficulties report similar
psychological and psychosocial impacts. These include a
fear of failure during the sexual encounter, feeling less
masculine, and concerns about securing and maintaining a
sexual relationship. An erect penis could be central to sexual
activity, even if such activity does not include penetration,
and gay men describe it as being part of their identity
(Jowett et al., 2012). But some men resist this phallocentric
model and renegotiate sex by practicing other types of
sexual activity or engaging in activities that prescribe new
forms of masculinity that are not sex related (Sandberg,
2011; Ussher, Perz, Gilbert, Wong, & Hobbs, 2013).
Indeed, Ussher et al. (2013) found that heterosexual
women and men and gay men renegotiated sexual activity
after cancer treatment and acquired sexual pleasure from
actions that did not require an erect penis (e.g., masturba-
tion, mutual genital touching). One qualitative study of 69
heterosexual participants (aged 31 to 92) identified that the
impact of sexual difficulties could be mediated by age. For
example, participants aged 50 and older tended to perceive
their sexual difficulty as age related, and this buffered its
impact on well-being, making sexual difficulties such as ED
less of a concern for an older man than a younger man
(Hinchliff & Gott, 2004b). However, examination of the
ELSA Wave 6 quantitative data identified dissimilar results:
Men who were sexually active (defined as any sexual activ-
ity in the past year) became more concerned about their
sexual desire levels, ability to get an erection, and orgasmic
experience with age, and sexually active women reported
increased concern about their ability to become sexually
aroused with age (Lee, Nazroo, et al., 2016).
Evidence is growing which suggests that older adults do
not always seek help for sexual difficulties (see Hinchliff &
Gott, 2011) and that health professionals do not routinely
ask older patients about sex for several reasons, including a
lack of confidence, discomfort, and feeling
deskilled
(Gleser, 2015; Mellor et al., 2013; Wei & Mayouf, 2009).
Given that sex can be a quality-of-life issue for older adults,
and that they may experience sexual difficulties but not
receive appropriate care, it is important to explore the area
further to increase our understanding. The majority of
research carried out in the area of sex and older adults has
been quantitative; consequently, we do not know much
about experiences of sexual difficulties and how they may
interfere with an individual’s life or relationships. This
article draws on a unique qualitative data set from the
ELSA to explore self-reported sexual difficulties of older
women and men.
Method
Measures and Procedure
The ELSA has a nationally representative cohort of com-
munity-dwelling men and women aged 50 to 90 in England
and has been running since 2002. In this article we focus on
Wave 6 (2012–2013), when the Sexual Relations and
Activities Questionnaire (SRA-Q) was included for the
first time. Male and female versions of the SRA-Q were
available (see http://www.elsa-project.ac.uk). The SRA-Q
asked questions about the frequency of sexual activities
and behaviors; difficulties with sexual activities and func-
tion; concerns and worries about sexual activities, function,
and relationships; attitudes toward sex; and details about
current sexual partnerships. At the end of the SRA-Q there
was an open comment box that invited participants to pro-
vide additional information. The specific prompt read: “If
there is anything else you would like to tell us, please write
in the space below. We shall be very interested to read what
you have to say.” Participants completed the SRA-Q in
private and then sealed it in an envelope. All responses
were anonymous. The qualitative data provided in the
open comment boxes ranged from one-sentence statements
to six-sentence descriptions. Ethics approval was obtained
from NRES Committee South Central–Berkshire, and full
details of the study design have been described elsewhere
(Steptoe, Breeze, Banks, & Nazroo, 2013).
Participants and Recruitment
Participants were recruited to the ELSA through their par-
ticipation in the Health Survey for England: A total of 10,601
individuals participated in Wave 6, of which 7,079 completed
and returned the paper-based SRA-Q.2 (For an analysis of the
SRA-Q quantitative data, see Lee, Nazroo, et al., 2016; Lee,
Vanhoutte et al., 2016.) A total of 1,084 people completed the
open comment box of the SRA-Q to provide additional quali-
tative data.3 Prior to being released to the research team, the
comments were reviewed by the data holder to make sure that
the statements did not breach anonymity. More women
(n = 680) than men (n = 404) completed the open comment
box. Of these responders, 668 women and 395 men had
complete matched quantitative data. As shown in Table 1,
the majority were heterosexual, married or cohabiting, had
left education at age 15 to 18, and considered themselves to
be in very good/excellent health. Some gender differences
were evident, with proportionally more women having depres-
sive symptomology, a lower likelihood of reporting any sexual
activity in the past 12 months, and fewer lifetime sexual
partners than men (all p < 0.05).
2 Analysis was restricted to core ELSA members living in private
households in England, excluding partners who were aged < 50 (as they
were not representative of the < 50 age group), leaving 6,201 individuals in
the final sample.
3 Complete quantitative data were only available for 1,063 respondents.
HINCHLIFF, TETLEY, LEE, AND NAZROO
154
 There were also some key demographic differences
(aside from gender) between participants who responded
to the open comment box and those who did not (see the
Appendix). Responders were marginally older, less likely to
be married or cohabiting, and in poorer health, and they
consumed alcohol less frequently than nonresponders.
Data Analysis
In recognition of the value of open comment data, we
chose a method of analysis that was rigorous and appro-
priate for managing textual data that ranged in size. To
begin analysis, one of the authors (JT) started with 20 sets
of responses from ten men and ten women, which she coded
to develop an initial concept map. A concept mapping
approach is particularly suited to analyzing open-ended
survey data as it allows researchers to look at the meaning
of text while also coding thematically (Jackson & Trochim,
2002). This method therefore enabled us to analyze the data
in a way where we could bring the responses together to
look at connections, similarities, and differences. Given the
volume and varied nature of the SRA-Q qualitative data,
this approach was appropriate as a first step because original
responses remain as units of analysis (Jackson & Trochim,
Table 1.
Characteristics of Women and Men Who Provided Comments in the Free Text Box as Part of the ELSA Sexual Relationships and
Activities Questionnaire (SRA-Q)
Variable
Women (n = 668)
Men (n = 395)
Number (%)
Age (years)
< 50
18 (2.7)
4 (1.0)
50–59
146 (21.8)
61 (15.3)
60–69
273 (40.7)
141 (35.3)
70–79
172 (25.6)
133 (33.3)
80->90
62 (9.2)
60 (15.0)
Current partner
Married/cohabiting
410 (61.2)
295 (73.9)
Divorced/separated
79 (11.8)
39 (9.8)
Never married
33 (4.9)
27 (6.8)
Widowed
148 (22.1)
38 (9.5)
Age left education (years)
≤ 14
43 (6.4)
37 (9.3)
15–18
479 (71.4)
269 (67.4)
≥ 19
149 (22.2)
93 (23.3)
Self-rated general health
Excellent/very good
286 (42.6)
145 (36.5)
Good
199 (29.7)
127 (32.0)
Fair/poor
186 (27.7)
125 (31.5)
Depression
CES-D score ≥4a
133 (20.0)
51 (13.0)
Any sexual activity in last 12 monthsb
380 (57.8)
279 (70.8)
Reported number of lifetime sexual partners
None
12 (1.8)
4 (1.0)
One
230 (35.1)
119 (31.0)
Two to four
245 (37.4)
103 (26.8)
Five or more
169 (25.8)
158 (41.2)
Self-reported sexual experiencesc
Entirely/mostly with opposite sex
634 (94.9)
380 (96.2)
Self-reported sexual desiresc
Entirely/mostly with opposite sex
625 (93.6)
379 (96.0)
Smoking status
Current
70 (10.4)
45 (11.3)
Frequency of alcohol consumptiond
Never/rarely
249 (38.3)
78 (20.4)
Regularly
277 (42.5)
205 (53.7)
Very frequently
125 (19.2)
99 (25.9)
Note. Complete quantitative data available for only 1,063 respondents.
aEight-item version CES-D (Centre for Epidemiologic Studies Depression scale): Score of 4 or more denoting likely depression.
bSexual intercourse, masturbation, petting, or fondling.
cQuestions about lifetime sexual experiences and sexual desires included at the end of the SRA-Q.
dFrequency of alcohol consumption over the past year (Never/Rarely = Never to Once or twice; Regularly = Once every two months to Twice a week, Very
frequently = Three days a week to Daily).
OLDER ADULTS’ EXPERIENCES OF SEXUAL DIFFICULTIES
155
 2002), which helps to avoid overcoding and further frag-
mentation of the short-form qualitative data.
Once the concept map was complete, the next step was to
analyze the remaining data. Template Analysis—an estab-
lished method of analyzing qualitative data (Cassell, 2008)—
was chosen because of its fit with the concept mapping
approach (Brooks, McCluskey, Turley, & King, 2015;
Crabtree & Miller, 1999; King, 2012). Here, the concept
map was used as a basis from which to analyze the whole
data set and develop a main template. Taking an interactive
approach to coding the data (each comment box response
constituted a unit of data), two authors (JT and DL) worked
collaboratively to group and sort the data units, a process
where data were considered and debated to identify the key
issue(s) contained within. This process of systematic coding
identified patterns in the data, including disconfirming evi-
dence (negative case analysis). The authors met several times
to compare themes and agreement on coding decisions, and
the initial concept map was modified as new themes were
identified. The final themes formed an overarching template
that represented the whole qualitative data set. It consisted of
four core interlinking themes: health, relationships, sexual
satisfaction, and aging and sexuality, each with subthemes
(see Tetley et al., 2016). The process of data analysis revealed
that the data which informed these core themes, particularly
the sexual satisfaction theme, were underpinned by gendered
aspects of sexual difficulties. All authors interrogated these
data further; findings are presented in the section that follows.
Findings
Three components were identified: the ways in which a
sexual difficulty could affect psychological well-being; the
impact a sexual difficulty could have on the interpersonal
relationship; and issues around help seeking and treatment
available for sexual difficulties. Each is discussed here,
supported by participant quotations from the qualitative
data set. There is considerable overlap among these areas,
and relational context was central throughout.
Impact on Psychological Well-Being
The majority of participants reported that either they or their
partners had a current sexual difficulty; however, not all stated
that it had a detrimental effect on their lives. For some, though,
living with a sexual difficulty could affect their psychological
well-being, which was framed negatively and described using
terms such as depressing and frustrating:
Having difficulty getting erections in the past few years has
been very depressing as I’ve always had a strong sex drive.
(Male, aged 50–59)
My sex life came to an abrupt halt after a hysterectomy at age
42. It has caused tension and heartache for the last 23 years.
There was no warning that this could be a difficulty and HRT
[hormone replacement therapy] caused depression and other
side-effects. A real bummer. (Female, aged 60–69)
These quotations illustrate that a sexual difficulty could be
experienced as a disconnection from a past active sexual life
to one where sexual activity reduced in frequency or
stopped all together. Such a disruption was particularly
difficult to handle if the participant wanted to be sexually
active and viewed sex as important to the relationship, and
also if the participant believed that the change had come at
an inappropriate time in her or his life course.
It is hard sexually having a partner with prostate cancer. For
a year or two he was completely impotent. Now sex is
possible but his sex drive is 10% of what it was. I feel too
young for this. (Female, aged 50–59)
In the quote above the participant, who is in her 50s, clearly
constructed this as an age where she expected to be sexually
active as she felt “too young” to have experienced such a
significant change in her sex life. Indeed, analysis of the
quantitative data from the ELSA SRA-Q (n = 6,201)
revealed that concerns about the frequency of sexual activity
were lowest in the oldest age group (80 to 90+) for both
women and men (see Lee, Nazroo et al., 2016).
Frustration was evident in the accounts provided by women
who wrote that their husbands were not willing to talk about or
seek help for their ED, an issue to which we will return. In some
relationships, both partners experienced a sexual difficulty, and
this combination could exacerbate the frustration. In other rela-
tionships, though, having a sexual difficulty that existed along-
side a partner’s sexual difficulty made it easier to accept that sex
(which we assume to mean penile-vaginal intercourse) was no
longer a key component of the relationship.
Missing the intimacy of sexual activity, and experiencing
sadness at its loss, was also a feature here. However, for some
participants the negative impact of sexual difficulties was
placed in context of their own or their partner’s health.
They reported health difficulties, such as prostate cancer, as
having a direct or indirect bearing on their sex lives, which
altered their views on sexual activity and sexual pleasure:
I have had my prostate removed, right testicle removed,
18 inches of my bowel removed, and my spleen removed. All
cancerous. Sex is the last thing on my mind! (Male, aged 80+)
My wife and I have been together 56 years and after many,
many years of happy marriage [and] a healthy sex life it
does get frustrating, but I put her health before my pleasure,
and I have to switch off. (Male, aged 70–79)
Being able to “switch off,” as described by this participant,
was a way of coping with an absence of sex in the relation-
ship, and formed part of putting his partner’s health needs
before his own desire for sex. Other ways of dealing with
sexual difficulties were highlighted and included fantasising
about sex and/or engaging in masturbation.
HINCHLIFF, TETLEY, LEE, AND NAZROO
156
 Sex has always been very important for me. I enjoyed
masturbation but found it difficult to climax with a partner.
With age the desire for sex has decreased but I would
welcome any help. (As men can take Viagra.) (Female,
aged 60–69)
Here, the importance placed on sex is discussed in relation to
autoeroticism and also a decreased sexual desire. That this
participant would “welcome any help” suggests that she
would prefer to boost her sexual desire. Another female parti-
cipant mentioned that masturbation was a way of dealing with
her own sexual needs since becoming a widow, as she did not
want another sexual partner. However, a male participant
(married) wrote that while he missed sexual activity, the act
of self-pleasure exacerbated existing negative feelings.
This lack of physical affection is a MAJOR source of con-
cern to me. I feel I would still like to engage in sexual
activity with a woman. I feel guilt and shame at having to
masturbate. (Male, aged 50–59)
This quotation illustrates the contradictory position of mas-
turbation in that it could be a source of pleasure (e.g.,
tension release) and pain (e.g., guilt and shame). Some
participants, both male and female, mentioned that they
had considered taking another sexual partner as a way of
coping with a lack of sex in their primary relationship.
Currently my wife appears to be “going through the change”
therefore her sex drive seems dramatically reduced. This led
to feelings of “affairs” but I could never see myself as going
that as we have both gone through divorces by our partners
having affairs. (Male, aged 50–59)
However, views on how a relationship should be (i.e.,
monogamous) alongside previous experiences of betrayal
meant that participants rejected ideas about taking another
sexual partner while still married.
My husband due to medical reasons cannot have sex but
that does not halve love. Of course I do miss that inti-
macy and release but I believe in monogamy. (Female,
aged 50–59)
For many participants, the love and commitment of their
current relationship was emphasized over and above their
sexual difficulties (an issue we return to in the following
section). Thus, despite the absence of sex being experienced
negatively by some participants, potential ways of managing
this were not always desirable or beneficial. Interestingly, it
was only women who expressed concern about their part-
ner’s sexual needs not being met as a result of their own
sexual difficulties. Indeed, one woman, who no longer
experienced sexual desire, engaged in sexual activity with
her husband for this reason.
Since the menopause and M.E. [myalgic encephalopathy] I
have no sex drive. It doesn’t worry me but I do want to keep
my husband happy so we make love. Kissing and cuddling
is very important and having a sense of humour and being
kind to each other. (Female, aged 60–69)
In this quote, the participant did not view her lack of sexual
desire as a difficulty, but it is clear that she was concerned
about the impact a lack of sexual activity could have on her
marriage. She made love with her husband to keep him
“happy,” as such she put her partner’s need for sexual pleasure
before her own need for sexual abstinence. Again, this was
contextualized within a committed relationship.
Many participants reported that the sexual difficulties
they experienced did not have an impact on their psycholo-
gical well-being. Indeed, both women and men wrote that
they had accepted the absence of sex, that life was fulfilling
without it, and that “sex was not everything”:
As my husband has had prostate difficulties for many years
and finally [had it] removed, sex has not been an issue for a
good many years but we have been happily married for
55 years so sex isn’t everything! (Female, aged 70–79)
These participants were keen to stress that physical inti-
macy, predominantly in the form of cuddling and holding
hands, remained an important part of their relationship and,
indeed, one that kept the relationship strong.
Impact on Relationship
Clearly, relationship context was central regardless of
whether the sexual difficulty had an impact on psychologi-
cal well-being. Interpersonal relationships were important to
the participants, and the majority did not report that a lack
of sex had a negative impact on their relationship. Indeed,
some specifically pointed out that they remained close.
No sexual activity with my wife for many years due to
difficulties of “the change” following hysterectomy but we
remain a loving couple. (Male, aged 70–79)
As my partner suffers with COPD [chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease] sex is rare, but we are very close in
every way. (Female, aged 60–69)
These participants reported that they were intimate in the
absence of sex and engaged in close physical contact such as
hugging, cuddling, and kissing. However, intimacy was avoided
by some men who experienced embarrassment in connection
with their ED; for others, remaining intimate could be negated
by the health of the participant or her or his partner:
Unfortunately my wife is in the grip of Alzheimer’s so sex is
out of the question now and is the least of my concerns.
(Male, aged 70–79)
In this quote, the health and well-being of the partner again
took precedence over the sexual relationship; the participant
had other concerns to prioritize. This finding was common in
OLDER ADULTS’ EXPERIENCES OF SEXUAL DIFFICULTIES
157
 the context of ill health. For some participants, an absence of
sex in their relationship had a negative impact on the relation-
ship or at least how the participant felt about her or his partner.
My wife stopped having sex with me for over 12 years. She
says she is not interested in sex. It made me feel frustrated,
annoyed and angry and now not caring for her. Sex means a
lot to me. I have not cheated on her at all but if I was living
in rented accommodation I would leave her. I feel rejected.
(Male, aged 60–69)
Here, feelings of rejection and anger seemed to have
reached a point where the participant stopped caring for
his wife and, again, brought consideration of taking a new
sexual partner. This frustration resonates with the experi-
ences of female participants who disclosed that their part-
ners would not talk about, or seek help for, their ED. One
participant disclosed that the reluctance of her husband to
try an erection-enhancing medication (EEM) had changed
the way that she viewed him:
My husband has erection difficulties but is reluctant to try
Viagra or similar, this has led to a lack of intimacy and some
loss of respect. (Female, aged 50–59)
Analysis of the data indicated that communication with the
partner about sexual difficulties was not always easy and
could exacerbate existing tensions rather than resolve the
issue. Sometimes it was this chain of events that had a
negative impact on the relationship. For example, in the
following quote, the participant indicates that it has halted
discussions about sex all together:
I wish my partner would seek help. We’ve talked about it.
But it ends up in a row. So I don’t bother. (Male, aged 60–69)
Help Seeking and Treatment Options
It is clear from the findings that not seeking help for a sexual
difficulty could be harmful to the relationship. Indeed, for those
who had sought help, or were considering it, the negative impact
on themselves and/or their relationships were the primary dri-
vers for seeking help. A general practitioner (GP) or doctor was
the main source of help for participants who disclosed this
information. Only two women referred to other sources, such
as sexual counselors; no men did. Interestingly, help seeking and
the treatments available for sexual difficulties were described
primarily in relation to ED, where male participants mentioned
their own ED and female participants mentioned the ED of their
partners. Treatments included EEMs, such as Viagra, penis
injections, penis pumps, and sexual and relationship counseling.
Some men had sought help and, at the time of data collection,
had experience of using an EEM.
Take a generic Viagra occasionally as it does make me last
longer and stay harder but without this, it is not a difficulty
just makes even better. (Male, aged 50–59)
Here, an EEM was taken to enhance sexual pleasure rather
than to enable penetrative sexual intercourse to take place.
However, the success of EEMs could be short-lived in that
their effectiveness reduced with continued use.
Have had erectile dysfunction for at least 15 years.
Originally prescribed Viagra but as time progressed became
less and less useful, so do not take medication now or have
sought any medical help. (Male, aged 60–69)
Similarly, EEMs and other treatments (e.g., penile injec-
tions) may not work in the first place. With regard to the
perceived causes of sexual difficulties, and particularly
ED, long-term conditions and the medications used to
manage them were seen as primary, and for many partici-
pants this was accompanied with a sense of acceptance:
that nothing could be done to help. Some men had dis-
cussed this with their doctor, who had confirmed the med-
ical cause of their difficulties. It was unclear from the data
whether the men had sought help specifically for their
sexual difficulties or whether discussions about sexual
function had come about as a result of something else
(e.g., being prescribed a new drug).
Not all participants who experienced a sexual difficulty
had sought professional help. Some did not want it—they
mentioned that were okay as they were—while others
encountered barriers to seeking help. One barrier mentioned
primarily by female participants was their partner’s unwill-
ingness to ask for help for ED:
My partner is unable to maintain an erection and refuses to
ask for help. Short of dropping Viagra in his tea, I don’t
know what to do! (Female, aged 60–69)
In this quotation we can see that a refusal by the partner to
seek help for his ED left the participant unsure what other
action to take. Indeed, as indicated earlier, not seeking help
for sexual difficulties could have an impact on the relation-
ship, in terms of arguments, and on psychological well-
being, in terms of feelings of frustration.
Of the participants who mentioned having a consultation
with their GPs, some expressed a need for better care. One
man had sought help for sexual difficulties but reported that
the doctor “was not keen to help”; however, he did not
elaborate on how the doctor was unhelpful. Another
believed that his GP should have been more proactive and
offered him an EEM as part of the treatment for his prostate
cancer: a disease known to have a significant impact on
erectile function.
Since having or being unable to have full sex since treat-
ment for prostate cancer I feel strongly that my GP could
and should have been more interested in providing help
such as Viagra or related treatments. (Male, aged 70–79)
Similarly, the female participants who had sought help for
sexual difficulties gave examples of unhelpful practice. In
HINCHLIFF, TETLEY, LEE, AND NAZROO
158
 the quote that follows, the doctor suggested that the partici-
pant should pursue sexual and relationship counseling to
help with her low sexual desire.
I had a 20 minutes consultation two months ago with a
doctor/specialist at my local sexual health clinic to discuss
my lack of libido, but I was told to consult Relate and no
further help was offered. (Female, aged 50–59)
The specialist at the sexual health clinic implied that the root
of the participant’s sexual difficulty was her relationship.
Being referred to a different specialist service was not what
the participant expected to hear and indicated that the doctor
was unwilling to discuss her sexual difficulties further.
Indeed, another participant reported that when she sought
help for her current lack of sexual desire she was asked by
the doctor to talk about her experiences to a group of
students. Again, this was not something she expected to
encounter, and it put a stop to her help seeking.
There was evidence that participants perceived health
professionals to hold ageist attitudes, and that this played a
part in the lack of help participants received:
NHS [National Health Service] seem reluctant to help with
sexual problems in someone of our age. Penetrative sex is
incredibly painful and I have been advised due to age.
(Female, aged 60–69)
Think that more discreet help should be available to older
people other than GP. Also believe ED medication should be
available at pharmacies rather than rely on Internet suppliers
where products are not always genuine. (Male, aged 60–69)
In this quote, the issue of buying EEMs from suppliers other
than the NHS, which was viewed by participants as risky as
the drugs may be counterfeit, was raised and placed firmly
in the context of a lack of help for older people. Women
who had mentioned professional help for sexual difficulties
did so primarily in the context of menopause. Indeed, the
perceived main cause of their sexual difficulties was meno-
pause related, including vaginal dryness, which made pene-
trative sex painful, and a lack of sexual desire.
I have always had a very active, healthy and very regular
sex life until menopause, when my desire has plummeted,
but not physical ability. GP says I have the need of HRT,
and I am currently taking a herbal supplement (3 months)
which does seem to be working and I do not believe it to be
placebo. (Female, aged 50–59)
In this quotation, the GP was proactive and suggested
hormone-replacement therapy to help address the partici-
pant’s reduced sexual desire. Many participants took HRT;
however, it is unclear from the data if they took it as a result
of seeking help specifically for a sexual difficulty or for
symptoms of menopause generally. Believing that there
were no treatments available to help, and difficulty in
broaching the topic of sex with the doctor, could prevent the
women from seeking help for their sexual difficulties in the
first place.
Discussion
The purpose of this article was to explore self-reported
sexual difficulties in a sample of women and men aged 50
and older. This was achieved by analyzing a qualitative data
set, collected during ELSA Wave 6, of 1,084 participants.
The findings demonstrate diverse experiences of sexual
difficulties and mixed findings as to whether a sexual diffi-
culty was experienced negatively in terms of psychological
well-being and interpersonal relationships. Our research
supports previous findings that significant life events, in
particular changes to health status, can have varying impacts
on an older adult’s sex life (Fileborn et al., 2015).
In the present study, there was a difference as to whether
sexual difficulty within the relationship had a negative
impact on psychological well-being. When it did, it was
connected with a number of factors, including the desire to
remain sexually active and the importance of sex to the
participant. Here, a disconnection from one’s previous sex-
ual life was described as frustrating and depressing. Other
studies have highlighted that sexual difficulties can have
similar impacts on psychological well-being. Qualitative
studies with heterosexual and gay men who experience
erection difficulties have found that some men are embar-
rassed, and a fear of failure affects not only their current
relationship but concerns about future sexual relationships.
However, other men did not experience such an impact,
which all the authors related to the men having found
ways to obtain sexual pleasure that did not require an
erect penis (Jowett et al., 2012; Sandberg, 2015; Ussher
et al., 2013; Wentzell, 2013).
Similarly, qualitative research with women has identified
divergent perspectives as to whether their own sexual diffi-
culties caused them any distress. Nosek, Kennedy, and
Gudmundsdottir (2012) interviewed heterosexual menopau-
sal women in the United States and found that, for some, a
lowered sexual drive and vaginal dryness created concern
about current relationships and the potential loss of partner.
In an earlier study, we found that for women aged 31 to 58
(mean age 42.9) a sexual problem (sexual desire loss,
usually coexisting with other sexual concerns such as vagi-
nal dryness, pain on intercourse, difficulty achieving
orgasm, and husband’s ED) could impair their sense of
womanhood and “normality,” as well as engendering feel-
ings of sadness at the loss of sex (Hinchliff, Gott, & Wylie,
2009). However, this sample included only women who had
sought professional help for their sexual difficulties on the
basis that they experienced distress about sex.
There was indication in the present study that younger
participants (those in their 50s) expected to be sexually active
and thus seemed to experience more negative impact. This
OLDER ADULTS’ EXPERIENCES OF SEXUAL DIFFICULTIES
159
 supports an earlier study which identified that, for older
adults in England, age buffered the impact of sexual changes
because they were understood as a “normal part of aging”
and therefore inevitable (Hinchliff & Gott, 2004b). However,
analysis of the quantitative data of the ELSA SRA-Q shows a
gender difference here: Men reported increased concern with
sexual difficulties overall with age, yet women expressed less
concern about sexual difficulties overall with age (Lee,
Nazroo, et al., 2016). This discrepancy between the qualita-
tive and quantitative findings for men might reflect the dif-
ferent methods of data collection which captured different
aspects of the participants’ experiences and views.
The findings presented here also demonstrate that the cou-
ple relationship was central to experiences of sexual difficul-
ties. ED, predominantly the result of prostrate difficulties
including cancer and its treatment, clearly had an influence
on the female partner’s sex life. This supports the findings of a
study of older Australians, where Fileborn et al. (2015) con-
cluded that a woman’s male partner was a “significant influ-
ence” on her sex life. We found that the same applied to men,
as women’s sexual difficulties, particularly vaginal pain and
low sexual desire, influenced men’s sex lives. Similar to other
studies (Fileborn et al., 2015; Hinchliff & Gott, 2004a), some
of the participants in the present study altered their sexual
repertoires, mainly by increasing physical intimacy, to assist
with sexual changes. Taken together, these studies suggest that
a broader range of sexual activity had a connection with low/
no impact on the relationship when sexual difficulties were
experienced. This supports previous research. Winterich
(2003) identified that women in lesbian relationships adjusted
to sexual changes at midlife better than women in relationships
with men because they already had a broad sexual repertoire.
More recently, Gillespie (2016) found that a wide range of
sexual behaviours was associated with increased sexual satis-
faction in heterosexual, lesbian, gay, and bisexual adults aged
50 and older.
For some participants in the current study, experiencing a
sexual difficulty did not have a negative impact on the
relationship, which supports the findings of earlier work
with older British heterosexual women and men (Hinchliff
& Gott, 2004a). However, for others, reverberations within
the relationship could be severe, with descriptions of a loss of
love and respect for the partner. This seemed to be exacer-
bated if the partner experienced a sexual difficulty, resulting
in a mismatch of sexual desires, but he or she would not talk
to their partner about it or seek professional help.
A finding which related only to female participants was
that they engaged in sex, which we assume means inter-
course, even though they experienced a sexual difficulty.
This indicates that the participants put their (male) partner’s
sexual needs first, which can be read as a way of managing
an interpersonal relationship in the context of experiencing a
sexual difficulty and not knowing how else to manage it.
Indeed, Yang, Kenney, Chang, and Chang (2016) found that
heterosexual Taiwanese women of menopause age felt guilt
and frustration over the perceived impact of their sexual
difficulty for their husbands, which created a pressure to
have intercourse. Ussher, Perz, and Parton (2015) reported
that heterosexual women at menopause with no desire for
sex engaged in it because “they and their partners viewed
coital sex as important to their relationship” (p. 454). We
should be mindful of the social and historical time period in
which the participants grew up. For the cohort aged 50 and
older, traditional gender relations in many countries pre-
scribed that part of a woman’s role was to be sexually
available to her husband. However, having sexual inter-
course outside the context of desire has been found in
studies of younger women’s (and men’s) heterosexual rela-
tionships, where intercourse was viewed as “normal” and
“natural” and thus prioritized over other forms of sexual
activity (Gavey, McPhillips, & Braun, 1999).
Help seeking for a sexual difficulty seemed to be triggered
by an impact on self or relationship. Of those who had sought
help, there were examples of practice where the health pro-
fessional had been proactive and/or open to talking about the
participant’s sexual difficulties. But there were also examples
where practice could be improved, particularly as it can take
patients a long time to feel confident and comfortable seeking
help for a sexual issue from their GP in the first place (e.g.,
due to embarrassment). The majority of those who had
sought help pointed out that their health professional had
not been helpful, and examples of perceived ageism of
these health professionals were given. Other studies have
identified similar barriers to health professionals asking
about sex, including assumptions of asexuality, embarrass-
ment, lack of confidence, feeling deskilled (Mellor et al.,
2013), and discomfort based on the age of the patient (Wei
& Mayouf, 2009).
Not everyone who reported a negative impact from their
sexual difficulty had sought help. Thus, the connection
between experiencing a sexual difficulty and seeking pro-
fessional help for it was not straightforward. Similarly, there
were mixed findings about EEMs, where some men had
tried them but others had not; the reasons why they did
not remain unknown. The individual differences highlight
that we should not make assumptions about the sex lives of
older adults. The extent to which sexual difficulties had
a negative impact varied, and this has implications for
academic research and clinical practice. It is important to
recognize that while many older adults have sexual needs,
not all wish to be sexually active.
Strengths and Limitations
This article has provided important insights into the
experiences of sexual difficulties in a large sample of
women and men aged 50 to 90, thus adding to the limited
evidence base in this area. On a methodological note, we
have demonstrated that qualitative data can be collected as
individual “chunks” of text to constitute a unique data set
which, when analyzed, reveals findings that represent a
diversity of experiences. Qualitative data gathered as part
of a survey can enrich the understanding of participants’
HINCHLIFF, TETLEY, LEE, AND NAZROO
160
 responses gathered as part of that survey (ten Kleij &
Musters, 2003). Indeed, participants’ responses were pri-
marily personal and sensitive, and they added depth in this
way. While a challenge of working with this method of data
collection was the limited qualitative context around the
comments, we were able to obtain an overview of partici-
pant characteristics from their responses to the questions on
the SRA-Q.
Open comment boxes are used in surveys to enable
participants to provide additional information or qualify
their responses to closed questions (Fielding, Fielding, &
Hughes, 2013; Jackson & Trochim, 2002). Indeed, it was
clear from the ELSA data that participants used this box
for these reasons: some clarified their answers to ques-
tions on the SRA-Q by making specific reference to that
question, while others expanded on topics raised within
the questionnaire. Thus, a large part of the qualitative
data was shaped by the preceding questions. But some
participants introduced new information as they wrote
about the impact of health or relationship quality on
their sex lives, which suggests that the SRA-Q questions
did not completely constrain participants’ responses in the
open comment box.
While the content of the qualitative responses was diverse,
they sat within a quantitative context, which differs to the way
that qualitative data tend to be collected. The knowledge was
thus not coproduced during data collection (e.g., by inter-
viewer and interviewee); however, it was coproduced through
the process of analysis. As Sandelowski and Leeman (2012)
pointed out, findings from qualitative studies are composed of
the researchers’ interpretations of the data generated. They are
“the researcher’s configuration of segments of coded data
assembled into a novel whole,” and it is this analytic work
that provides a “new conceptualization” which advances
understanding of the topic of study (Sandelowski & Leeman,
2012, p. 1406). To help ensure the rigor of analysis, we under-
took a process of peer debriefing, which involved scrutinizing
and discussing one another’s interpretations as well as
searching for disconfirming evidence.
The findings should be understood in context of the ELSA
sample, but they provide a basis from which subsequent
research findings can be compared. To determine transfer-
ability, similar projects that employ the same methods but are
conducted in different settings and with different participant
groups would be valuable. Following Shenton (2004), we
argue that an understanding of a phenomenon develops gra-
dually as the result of several studies, and that differing
results may reflect multiple realities, which is in itself a
valuable form of data. Future studies should include indivi-
duals with nonbinary gender and sexual identities, who were
underrepresented in ELSA. Indeed, the majority of research
in sex and aging overall has been conducted within a hetero-
normative framework, which is a significant limitation of the
evidence to date. Qualitative research that explores the ways
that sexual difficulties intersect with age, race, ethnicity,
disability, and social class would be illuminating and further
our understandings of sexuality and aging.
Conclusion
Older adults can experience sexual difficulties in differ-
ent ways. For some, they have a negative impact on their
psychological well-being; for others, they do not. Similarly,
whether a sexual difficulty within the relationship has a
negative impact within that relationship differs between
couples. There is a diversity of experience. Some partici-
pants mentioned becoming more intimate as a way to deal
with sexual changes, and it may be that they renegotiated
sex away from a phallocentric model. Variations in the way
that health professionals approach sexual difficulties in the
over-50s age group indicate that there is likely to be unmet
need, and thus more research is required to help build the
evidence and make improvements in services.
Acknowledgments
The ELSA study was funded by the National Institute on
Aging (grants 2RO1AG7644-01A1 and 2RO1AG017644)
and a consortium of U.K. government departments coordi-
nated by the Office for National Statistics. DML was funded
by a Research into Ageing Fellowship (365) for this work.
JN was supported by the fRaill project (MRC G1001375/1)
as part of the cross-research council Life Long Health and
Wellbeing Programme. Thanks also to the participants for
giving their time to this study.
References
Beckman, N., Waern, M., Gustafson, D., & Skoog, I. (2008). Secular trends
in self reported sexual activity and satisfaction in Swedish 70 year
olds: Cross sectional survey of four populations, 1971–2001. British
Medical Journal, 337, a279. doi:10.1136/bmj.a279
Bouman, W. P. (2013). Sexuality in later life. In T. Dening & A. Thomas
(Eds.), The Oxford textbook of old age psychiatry (pp. 703–723).
Oxford, United Kingdom: Oxford University Press.
Brooks, J., McCluskey, S., Turley, E. L., & King, N. (2015). The utility of
template analysis in qualitative psychology research. Qualitative Research
in Psychology, 12(2), 202–222. doi:10.1080/14780887.2014.955224
Cassell, C. (2008). Template analysis. In R. Thorpe & R. Holt (Eds.), The
Sage dictionary of qualitative management research (pp. 220–222).
London, United Kingdom: Sage.
Crabtree, B. F., & Miller, W. L. (1999). Using codes and code manuals: A
template organizing style of interpretation. In B. F. Crabtree, & W. L.
Miller (Eds.), Doing qualitative research (pp. 163–177). Newbury
Park, CA: Sage.
DeLamater, J., & Sill, M. (2005). Sexual desire in later life. Journal of Sex
Research, 42(2), 138–149. doi:10.1080/00224490509552267
Ferris, J. A., Smith, A. M., Pitts, M. K., Richters, J., Shelley, J. M., &
Simpson, J. (2008). Self-reported sexual activity in Australian sex-
agenarians. British Medical Journal, 337, a1250. doi:10.1136/bmj.
a1250
Fielding, J., Fielding, N., & Hughes, G. (2013). Opening up open-ended
survey data using qualitative software. Quality and Quantity, 47(6),
3261–3276. doi:10.1007/s11135-012-9716-1
Fileborn, B., Thorpe, R., Hawkes, G., Minichiello, V., Pitts, M., & Dune, T.
(2015). Sex, desire, and pleasure: Considering the experiences of older
Australian women. Sexual and Relationship Therapy, 30(1), 117–130.
doi:10.1080/14681994.2014.936722
OLDER ADULTS’ EXPERIENCES OF SEXUAL DIFFICULTIES
161
 Gavey, N., McPhillips, K., & Braun, V. (1999). Interruptus coitus:
Heterosexuals accounting for intercourse. Sexualities, 2(1), 35–68.
doi:10.1177/136346099002001003
Gillespie, B. J. (2016). Correlates of sex frequency and sexual satisfaction
among partnered older adults. Journal of Sex and Marital Therapy.
Advance online publication. doi:10.1080/0092623X.2016.1176608
Gleser, H. (2015). Sex, women, and the menopause: Are specialist trainee
doctors up for it? A survey of views and attitudes of specialist trainee
doctors in community sexual and reproductive health and obstetrics &
gynaecology around sexuality and sexual healthcare in the (peri)meno-
pause. Post-Reproductive Health: Journal of the British Menopause
Society, 21(1), 26–33.
Gott, M., & Hinchliff, S. (2003). How important is sex in later life? The
views of older people. Social Science and Medicine, 56(8), 1617–
1628. doi:10.1016/S0277-9536(02)00180-6
Hinchliff, S., & Gott, M. (2004a). Intimacy, commitment, and adaptation: Sexual
relationships within long-term marriages. Journal of Social and Personal
Relationships, 21(5), 595–609. doi:10.1177/0265407504045889
Hinchliff, S., & Gott, M. (2004b). Perceptions of well-being in sexual ill
health: What role does age play? Journal of Health Psychology, 9(5),
649–660. doi:10.1177/1359105304045361
Hinchliff, S., & Gott, M. (2011). Seeking medical help for sexual concerns
in mid and later life: A review of the literature. Journal of Sex
Research, 48(2), 106–111. doi:10.1080/00224499.2010.548610
Hinchliff, S., & Gott, M. (2016). Ageing and sexuality in Western societies:
Changing perspectives on sexual activity, sexual expression, and the
sexy older body. In E. Peel, R. Harding, & S. Westwood (Eds.),
Ageing and sexualities: Interdisciplinary perspectives (pp. 11–31).
Abingdon, United Kingdom: Ashgate.
Hinchliff, S., Gott, M., & Wylie, K. (2009). Holding onto womanhood: A
qualitative study of heterosexual women with sexual desire loss.
Health, 13(4), 449–465. doi:10.1177/1363459309103917
Jackson, K. M., & Trochim, W. M. (2002). Concept mapping as an alter-
native approach for the analysis of open-ended survey responses.
Organizational
Research
Methods,
5(4),
307–336.
doi:10.1177/
109442802237114
Jowett, A., Peel, E., & Shaw, R. L. (2012). Sex and diabetes: A thematic
analysis of gay and bisexual men’s accounts. Journal of Health
Psychology, 17(3), 409–418. doi:10.1177/1359105311412838
King, N. (2012). Doing template analysis. In G. Symon & C. Cassell
(Eds.), Qualitative organizational research: Core methods and current
challenges (pp. 426–450). London, United Kingdom: Sage.
Lee, D. M., Nazroo, J., O’Connor, D. B., Blake, M., & Pendleton, N. (2016).
Sexual health and well-being among older men and women in England:
Findings from the English Longitudinal Study of Ageing. Archives of
Sexual Behavior, 45(1), 133–144. doi:10.1007/s10508-014-0465-1
Lee, D. M., Vanhoutte, B., Nazroo, J., & Pendleton, N. (2016). Sexual
health and positive subjective well-being in partnered older men and
women. Journals of Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences
and Social Sciences, 71(4), 698–710. doi:10.1093/geronb/gbw018
Marshall, B. L. (2010). Science, medicine and virility surveillance: “Sexy
seniors” in the pharmaceutical imagination. Sociology of Health and
Illness, 32(2), 211–224. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9566.2009.01211.x
Mellor, R. M., Greenfield, S. M., Dowswell, G., Sheppard, J. P., Quinn, T., &
McManus, R. J. (2013). Health care professionals’ views on discussing
sexual wellbeing with patients who have had a stroke: A qualitative study.
PLoS One, 8(10), e78802. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0078802
Mercer, C. H., Tanton, C., Prah, P., Erens, B., Sonnenberg, P., Clifton, S., &
Johnson, A. M. (2013). Changes in sexual attitudes and lifestyles in
Britain through the life course and over time: Findings from the
National Surveys of Sexual Attitudes and Lifestyles (Natsal). The
Lancet, 382(9907), 1781–1794. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(13)62035-8
Mitchell, K. R., Mercer, C. H., Ploubidis, G. B., Jones, K. G., Datta, J., Field,
N., … Wellings, K. (2013). Sexual function in Britain: Findings from the
third National Survey of Sexual Attitudes and Lifestyles (Natsal-3). The
Lancet, 382(9907), 1817–1829. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(13)62366-1
Nosek, M., Kennedy, H. P., & Gudmundsdottir, M. (2012). Distress during the
menopause transition. Sage Open, 2(3). doi:10.1177/2158244012455178
Potts, A., Grace, V., Gavey, N., & Vares, T. (2004). Viagra stories:
Challenging erectile dysfunction. Social Science and Medicine, 59
(3), 489–499. doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2003.06.001
Sandberg, L. (2011). Getting intimate: A feminist analysis of old age,
masculinity and sexuality. Linköping, Sweden: Linköping University
Electronic Press.
Sandberg, L. (2015). In lust we trust? Masculinity and sexual desire in later
life.
Men
and
Masculinities,
19(2),
192–208.
doi:10.1177/
1097184X15606948
Sandelowski, M., & Leeman, J. (2012). Writing usable qualitative health
research findings. Qualitative Health Research, 22(10), 1404–1413.
doi:10.1177/1049732312450368
Schlesinger, B. (1995). The sexless years or sex rediscovered. In R.
Neugebauer-Visano (Ed.), Seniors and sexuality: Experiencing intimacy
in later life (pp. 5–16). Toronto, Canada: Canadian Scholars’ Press.
Shenton, A. K. (2004). Strategies for ensuring trustworthiness in qualitative
research projects. Education for Information, 22(2), 63–75.
Steptoe, A., Breeze, E., Banks, J., & Nazroo, J. (2013). Cohort profile: The
English Longitudinal Study of Ageing. International Journal of
Epidemiology, 42(6), 1640–1648. doi:10.1093/ije/dys168
ten Kleij, F., & Musters, P. A. (2003). Text analysis of open-ended survey
responses: A complementary method to preference mapping. Food
Quality and Preference, 14(1), 43–52. doi:10.1016/S0950-3293(02)
00011-3
Tetley, J., Lee, D., Nazroo, J., & Hinchliff, S. (2016). Let’s talk about sex:
What do older men and women say about their sexual relations and sexual
activities? A qualitative analysis of ELSA Wave 6 data. Ageing and
Society. Open Access. doi:10.1017/S0144686X16001203
Ussher, J. M., Perz, J., Gilbert, E., Wong, W. T., & Hobbs, K. (2013).
Renegotiating sex and intimacy after cancer: Resisting the coital
imperative.
Cancer
Nursing,
36(6),
454–462.
doi:10.1097/
NCC.0b013e3182759e21
Ussher, J. M., Perz, J., & Parton, C. (2015). Sex and the menopausal
woman: A critical review and analysis. Feminism and Psychology,
25(4), 449–468. doi:10.1177/0959353515579735
Waite, L. J., Laumann, E. O., Das, A., & Schumm, L. P. (2009). Sexuality:
Measures of partnerships, practices, attitudes, and problems in the
National
Social
Life,
Health,
and
Aging
Study.
Journals
of
Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences,
64(B), i56–i66. doi:10.1093/geronb/gbp038
Wei, L., & Mayouf, M. A. (2009). The effects of the social status of the
elderly in Libya on the way they institutionally interact and commu-
nicate with younger physicians. Journal of Pragmatics, 41, 136–146.
doi:10.1016/j.pragma.2008.09.001
Wentzell, E. A. (2013). Maturing masculinities: Aging, chronic illness, and
Viagra in Mexico. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Winterich, J. A. (2003). Sex, menopause, and culture: Sexual orientation
and the meaning of menopause for women’s sex lives. Gender and
Society, 17, 627–664. doi:10.1177/0891243203253962
Yang, C. F., Kenney, N. J., Chang, T. C., & Chang, S. R. (2016). Sex life and
role identity in Taiwanese women during menopause: A qualitative study.
Journal of Advanced Nursing, 72(4), 770–781. doi:10.1111/jan.12866
HINCHLIFF, TETLEY, LEE, AND NAZROO
162
 Appendix.
Characteristics of Participants Who Did or Did Not Provide Comments in the Free Text Box as Part of the ELSA Sexual
Relationships and Activities Questionnaire (SRA-Q)
Variable
Comments (n = 1,063)
No Comments (n = 6,016)
p*
M (SD)
Age (years)
67.5 (9.7)
65.4 (9.5)
< 0.001
Number (%)
Gender
Female
668 (62.8)
3,287 (54.6)
< 0.001
Male
395 (37.2)
2,729 (45.4)
Age (years)
< 50
22 (2.1)
123 (2.0)
< 0.001
50–59
205 (19.3)
1,634 (27.2)
60–69
411 (38.7)
2,365 (39.3)
70–79
303 (28.5)
1,410 (23.4)
80 > 90
122 (11.5)
484 (8.1)
Current partner
Married/cohabiting
702 (66.1)
4,224 (70.2)
< 0.001
Divorced/separated
114 (10.7)
733 (12.2)
Never married
60 (5.7)
349 (5.8)
Widowed
186 (17.5)
709 (11.8)
Age left education (years)
≤ 14
80 (7.5)
414 (6.9)
0.38
15–18
742 (69.8)
4,324 (71.9)
≥ 19
241 (22.7)
1,277 (21.2)
Self-rated general health
Excellent/very good
429 (40.4)
2,620 (43.6)
0.009
Good
325 (30.6)
1,911 (31.8)
Fair/poor
309 (29.1)
1,483 (24.7)
Self-reported sexual experiencesa
Entirely/mostly with opposite sex
1,014 (95.4)
5,763 (95.8)
0.55
Self-reported sexual desiresa
Entirely/mostly with opposite sex
1,004 (94.5)
5,700 (94.8)
0.69
Smoking status
Current
115 (10.8)
744 (12.4)
0.16
Frequency of alcohol consumptionb
Never/rarely
327 (31.6)
1,637 (27.9)
0.02
Regularly
482 (46.6)
2,981 (50.8)
Very frequently
225 (21.8)
1,252 (21.3)
*p value for difference between comments and no-comments groups.
aQuestions about lifetime sexual experiences and sexual desires included at the end of the SRA-Q.
bFrequency of alcohol consumption over the past year (Never/Rarely = Never to Once or twice; Regularly = Once every two months to Twice a week; Very
frequently = Three days a week to Daily).
OLDER ADULTS’ EXPERIENCES OF SEXUAL DIFFICULTIES
163
