 The mouse cortico-striatal projectome
Houri Hintiryan1,5, Nicholas N. Foster1,5, Ian Bowman1, Maxwell Bay1, Monica Y. Song1, Lin 
Gou1, Seita Yamashita1, Michael S. Bienkowski1, Brian Zingg2, Muye Zhu1, X. William 
Yang3, Jean C. Shih4, Arthur W. Toga1, and Hong-Wei Dong1,2
1USC Stevens Neuroimaging and Informatics Institute, Laboratory of Neuro Imaging (LONI), Keck 
School of Medicine of University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 90032, USA
2Zilkha Neurogenetic Institute, Department of Neurology, Keck School of Medicine of University of 
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 90032, USA
3Center for Neurobehavioral Genetics, Semel Institute for Neuroscience & Human Behavior, 
David Geffen School of Medicine at University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, 
90095, USA
4Department of Pharmacology and Pharmaceuticals Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of 
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, 90032, USA
Abstract
Different cortical areas are organized into distinct intra-cortical subnetworks. How descending 
pathways from the entire cortex interact subcortically as a network remains unclear. Here, we 
report an open-access comprehensive mesoscale cortico-striatal projectome—a detailed 
connectivity projection map from the entire cerebral cortex to the dorsal striatum or caudoputamen 
(CP) in rodents. Based on these projections, we use novel computational neuroanatomical tools to 
identify 29 distinct functional striatal domains. Further, we characterize different cortico-striatal 
networks and how they reconfigure across the rostral-caudal extent of the CP. The workflow was 
also applied to select cortico-striatal connections in two different mouse models of disconnection 
syndromes to demonstrate its utility in characterizing circuitry-specific connectopathies. Together, 
this work provides the structural basis for studying the functional diversity of the dorsal striatum 
and disruptions of cortico-basal ganglia networks across a broad range of disorders.
Users may view, print, copy, and download text and data-mine the content in such documents, for the purposes of academic research, 
subject always to the full Conditions of use: http://www.nature.com/authors/editorial_policies/license.html#terms
Correspondence should be addressed to H.-W.D. (Hongwei.Dong@loni.usc.edu) or H.H. (Houri.Hintiryan@loni.usc.edu).
5These authors contributed equally
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
H.-W. and H.H. conceived, designed, and managed the entire project, conducted manual analysis of the raw data, and along with 
N.N.F. prepared the manuscript and the figures. N.N.F. along with H.H., H.-W., I.B., M.B., and M.S.B. refined and finalized the 
applied methods of analyses. I.B. led the informatics team and along with M.B. created and executed all aspects of the informatics 
workflow and wrote the corresponding methods. B.Z. and L.G. made tracer injections and conducted subsequent tissue processing and 
imaging, M.Y.S. processed raw images in preparation for uploading to iConnectome, and S.Y. managed iConnectome for both raw 
image uploads and connectivity map displays. N.N.F. managed and conducted experiments pertaining to zQ175 and MAO knockout 
mice. X.W.Y. contributed his expertise regarding discussion of striatal function under normal and diseased conditions. J.C.S. provided 
the MAO A/B knockout mice and contributed to the interpretation of the data resulting from those subjects. A.W.T. served as project 
advisor. H.-W. conceived and led the Mouse Connectome Project. All authors offered constructive guidance for the manuscript.
COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 21.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Neurosci. 2016 August ; 19(8): 1100–1114. doi:10.1038/nn.4332.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 INTRODUCTION
Given its role in higher order functions like cognition and emotion, the cerebral cortex has 
been a main focus of neuroscience in the last century. Current advancements in microscopy 
and computational technologies have made it feasible to produce, collect, and analyze vast 
amounts of connectivity data to assemble neural networks of the neocortex in mice1,2 and 
rats3, which inform research about primate cortical networks4. Each cortical area sends 
descending projections that innervate subcortical structures through hierarchically organized, 
serially-ordered, multi-synaptic neural pathways. However, how descending pathways from 
cortex interact subcortically as a network largely remains unknown.
Projections from the cortex to dorsal striatum, or cortico-striatal projection pathways, serve 
as the initial input to the basal ganglia and therefore determine how cortical information is 
transposed, integrated, and processed within the basal ganglia to affect a range of 
sensorimotor, cognitive, and emotional functions5–10.Studies have demonstrated topographic 
cortico-striatal projection pathways in primates, cats, and rats5,11–17, 16–18,20–27 and to a 
lesser extent, in mice2,18.28 Current theory states that these pathways organize into a few 
functionally segregated, parallel cortico-basal ganglia-thalamo-cortical loops that convey 
sensorimotor, associative, or limbic information5,6,19,20. 5,6,30–33 This model has been 
influential in interpreting pathophysiology of disorders like Huntington’s and Parkinson’s 
diseases and neuropsychiatric diseases21–23.. 14,34,37–39 However, cortico-striatal connections 
suggest a more granular segregation of these parallel circuits, which could explain the 
variegated behaviors and symptoms associated with normal functions and dysfunctions of 
cortico-basal ganglia circuits21.
A hurdle to understanding the detailed organization of cortico-striatal projections at the 
network level and their role in disconnection syndromes like Huntington’s disease (HD) has 
been the inability to delineate striatal subdivisions. In rodent brain atlases, the entire dorsal 
striatum, or the caudoputamen (CP), remains one of the largest undivided structures24–26 
predominantly because it does not lend itself well to subdivision by cyto- or 
chemoarchitectonic means. Fortunately, topographic projections from the cortex to the CP 
provide opportunity for identifying striatal subdivisions, as shown previously in rats13,16, 
and recently in mice2.
Extending upon this, we first created a comprehensive cortico-striatal projectome—a map of 
cortico-striatal projection pathways arising from virtually the entire mouse cerebral cortex. 
Computational neuroanatomic tools were developed to quantify each projection and graph 
theory identified 11 CP communities composed of 29 smaller domains based on their 
cortical afference. This information demonstrates how cortical information is integrated or 
segregated within the CP, which is important to understand the functional segregation of 
different cortico-basal ganglia circuits. All injection cases as well as the cortico-striatal 
projection map, are presented in a public-facing image database (http://
www.mouseconnectome.org/iConnectome/page/search.jsp for injections; http://
www.mouseconnectome.org/CorticalMap/page/menu.htm for projection map). Further, we 
characterized cortico-striatal networks based on how axonal projections from different 
Hintiryan et al.
Page 2
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 cortical subnetworks converge or diverge within the CP. Finally, select cortico-striatal 
disconnections in two different mouse models of disconnection syndromes [zQ175 for HD 
and monoamine oxidase (MAO) A/B knockout for aggression and autism spectrum 
disorders] were identified and localized to unique CP domains. This demonstrates the utility 
of a parcellated CP in potentially explaining manifestations of broad cortico-basal ganglia 
disorder symptoms and provides insight into circuit-specific characterization of cortico-
striatal dysfunctions in models of various diseases.
RESULTS
Constructing the cortico-striatal projectome
We employed a computational neuroanatomic approach to create a comprehensive 
mesoscopic mouse cortico-striatal projectome. This involved the production, collection, 
quantification, and analysis of ~150 anterograde tracer-labeled cortico-striatal pathways 
acquired from injections placed across the entire neocortex (Supplementary Fig. 1a), 
entorhinal and piriform areas and lateral and basolateral amygdalar nuclei. Small PHAL 
(Phaseolus vulgaris leucoagglutinin) anterograde tracer infusions confined to a single 
delineated structure were delivered iontophoretically to produce regional specific projection 
terminal patterns in the CP (Fig. 1a and Supplementary Fig. 1a). Double or triple 
anterograde tracer injections of PHAL, and adeno-associated viruses expressing green or red 
fluorescent protein (AAV-GFP, AAV-RFP), were also made to reveal direct spatial 
correlations of axonal terminals arising from different cortical areas (i.e., topography or 
interdigitation) (Supplementary Fig. 2a). Multiple retrograde tracer injections were made to 
validate the anterograde tracing data (Supplementary Fig. 1b). An informatics workflow was 
developed to reliably annotate, quantify, and graphically reconstruct 62 labeled pathways 
most representative of all cortical areas examined (Fig. 1b–e; see Online Methods for details 
regarding each step). First, each image to be analyzed was warped to its corresponding Allen 
Reference Atlas (ARA24) template (Fig 1b). Next, all cortico-striatal projection pathways 
were graphically reconstructed and plotted onto their corresponding levels of the ARA (Fig. 
1c). Compilation of the segmented images was used to create a connectivity map (i.e., 
projectome), within which all pathways can be directly compared within a common 
neuroanatomic frame.
Second, to overcome the challenge of heterogeneous distribution patterns of cortico-striatal 
projections (Supplementary Fig. 1a), a grid-based approach was used to quantify the 62 
pathways and index connectivity strength with anatomic specificity. The CP was divided into 
a grid of 35x35 pixel cells with a spatial dimension of 22.5 μm2 (~0.6 μm per pixel) (Fig. 
1d). An overlap indexing process superimposed reconstructions onto the grid and computed 
an overlap value at each cell. These values were tabulated into a spreadsheet, which is 
graphically represented as a weighted matrix with cortical areas along the y-axis and CP grid 
cells along the x-axis (Fig. 1e–f). An implementation of the Louvain community detection 
algorithm27 was applied to cluster cortical injection sites with common CP termination 
fields across the rostral, intermediate, and caudal CP (Figs. 1f,g and 2). The Louvain 
algorithm employs a randomized, greedy optimization, which potentially reveals different 
community structures across multiple runs. To mitigate this, we ran the algorithm 1000 
Hintiryan et al.
Page 3
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 times and reported the community structure that emerged most often, or the community 
structure mode. For visualization, matrices were reordered and color coded according to 
community structure with communities of connections grouped close to the diagonal (Figs. 
1g and 2). An accompanying color-coded CP illustrates the anatomic locations of the 
communities (Figs. 1h and 2).
Subsequent analyses extracted smaller clusters of distinct projection fields, or domains, 
within the communities. Smaller domains were difficult to detect by the Louvain since it is 
not optimal for recognizing communities with members of unequal sizes. Accordingly, a 
measure of centrality for the CP projection fields, or the centroid, was used to identify the 
domains (Figs. 1i and 3a). Axonal fields within a community with closely spaced centroids 
were considered a domain of that community (Fig. 1j). By weighting the centroids by 
intensity to compute a set of Voronoi seed points, the CP was parcellated into Voronoi cells 
(Fig. 1k)44, which are recognized as functional domains based on their cortical input (Fig. 
3b). Importantly, the organization of these Voronoi domains agreed closely with the raw data 
and thalamic injections provided confirmation of the domains.
The density of total CP labeling from each cortical source was also quantified by computing 
complementary measures of intensity and span (Supplementary Fig. 3). While intensity 
measures the total pixel count of a terminal field (i.e., concentration of labeling), span is a 
measure of how many cells of the grid the labeling occupies (i.e., diffuseness of labeling). 
As such, intensity could be indicative of how strong a cortical area’s effect is within a 
specific region of the CP, while span indicates the breadth of its effect across the CP. These 
values were utilized to compute the Labeling Density Index (LDI), summarizing in a single 
value the labeling properties originating from an injection site (http://
www.mouseconnectome.org/MCP/page/documents/tables?paperId=18 for tables containing 
these values).
Additionally, cortical projections to neighboring CP domains show varying degrees of 
overlap, which obscures hard boundary demarcation and suggests interaction across 
domains. Overlap values capturing this degree of CP convergence among individual cortical 
sources and domains were calculated and are available online (http://
www.mouseconnectome.org/MCP/page/documents/tables?paperId=18).
Cortico-striatal projections to the intermediate CP (CPi)—Four communities were 
detected at the intermediate level of the CP (CPi): the dorsolateral (CPi.dl), ventrolateral 
(CPi.vl), dorsomedial (CPi.dm), and ventromedial (CPi.vm). Visualizations of this output 
show the four quadrant arrangement of the communities and their relative boundaries (Fig. 
2). These communities were further subdivided into 14 distinct domains (Fig. 3b). The 
hierarchical organization of communities and domains, and all their cortical constituents are 
provided (Fig. 3a and Supplementary Fig. 4). Abbreviations of all cortical areas used 
throughout the report are available in the legend for Figure 2.
The somatic sensorimotor cortical-lateral striatal networks: The CPi.dl and CPi.vl 
receive inputs from all somatic sensorimotor cortical areas (Fig. 4a–c; for injection sites and 
validation of projection specificities, see Supplementary Fig. 5a–d). At the cortical level, all 
Hintiryan et al.
Page 4
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 of these areas organize into five distinct subnetworks that process trunk, lower limb, upper 
limb, and orofaciopharyngeal (mouth and nose) information1. Each subnetwork is comprised 
of domains within the primary somatosensory (SSp-body subfields), primary motor (MOp), 
and secondary motor (MOs) cortical areas that represent a specific body feature. Each node 
within the same somatic sensorimotor subnetwork is reciprocally interconnected1 
(Supplementary Fig. 5e) and each sends projections that converge onto the same CP domain. 
Each sensorimotor subnetwork generates parallel descending projections that 
somatotopically innervate CPi lateral domains corresponding to their body region and 
subsequently form five parallel somatic sensorimotor cortical-lateral striatal networks (Figs. 
4d,e and 7a).
Input from body region-specific areas of the SSp-body subfields subdivide the CPi.dl and 
CPi.vl into five smaller domains, which reveal a clear somatotopic map of the mouse body. 
This map has a dorsal to ventral orientation, with the dorsal domain (CPi.dl.d) receiving 
densest input from the SSp-tr (trunk), the intermedial dorsal (CPi.dl.imd) from the SSp-ll 
(lower limb), the intermedial ventral (CPi.vl.imv) from the SSp-ul (upper limb), and the 
ventral (CPi.vl.v) and ventral tip (CPi.vl.vt) domains from rostral-caudal positions within the 
SSp-m (mouth) (Fig. 4a–d). Downstream projections suggest the rostral likely represents a 
feature of the inner mouth (SSp-m/i; i.e., tongue, buccal wall), while the caudal represents a 
feature of the outer mouth (SSp-m/o; i.e., mandible, snout) (Supplementary Fig. 5c).
Each of these five body domains also receives input from regions within the barrel cortex 
(SSp-bfd), MOp, and MOs that presumably correspond to trunk, lower limb, upper limb, 
inner mouth, and outer mouth (Fig. 4a–d). The exception is that no projections from the 
SSp-bfd to the m/i domain were detected. Notably, within a domain, axonal terminals arising 
from different cortical areas also display interdigitation rather than complete overlap (Fig. 
4f). The CPi.vl receives additional input from the secondary somatosensory cortex (SSs) and 
from extra-somatic sensorimotor cortices. The rostral SSs projects to the inner mouth 
domain, while fibers from the caudal SSs, the gustatory area (GU) and visceral area (VISC) 
rostral arborize in the outer mouth domain (Fig. 4d,h).
Additionally, the rostral MOs (pole 2) forms part of the CPi.vl community and given its 
unique labeling pattern is designated its own domain: the ventrolateral central (CPi.vl.cvl) 
(Fig. 4g and Supplementary Fig. 6a,b). The central domains are so named since terminal 
fields within these domains are restricted to the center of the CP rather than to its peripheral 
edges.
Multi-fluorescent retrograde tracer injections into different domains of CPi.dl and CPi.vl, 
reveal the distinct spatial distribution patterns of these striatal projecting neurons in the 
different regions of somatic sensorimotor cortical areas, which agree with the anterograde 
labeling. Injections in the trunk, lower limb, and upper limb/mouth domains of the CP 
retrogradely label CP-projecting cortical neurons in their corresponding body regions within 
SSp, SSp-bfd, MOs, and MOp. Injections in upper limb/mouth domains also label cells in 
the SSs and VISC validating these projections (Fig. 4h and Supplementary Fig. 5f).
Hintiryan et al.
Page 5
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 The medial cortical-dorsomedial striatal subnetworks: The dorsomedial CPi (CPi.dm) 
receives inputs primarily from cortical areas within the so-called medial cortical subnetwork 
(Fig. 5a,g). This subnetwork is composed of the visual (VIS) and auditory (AUD) areas, as 
well as a number of higher-order association areas along the medial cerebral cortex, 
including the anterior cingulate (ACA), retroplenial (RSP), and posterior parietal association 
(PTLp) areas1. This subnetwork is primarily involved in processing and transferring visual, 
spatial, auditory, and somatic sensory (trunk/lower limb) information to the ventromedial 
prefrontal cortex [i.e., ventrolateral orbital (ORBvl), prelimbic (PL), and infralimbic (ILA) 
cortical areas] Descending projections arising from these cortical areas form several parallel 
medial cortical-dorsomedial striatal networks that innervate 5 different domains in the 
CPi.dm (Fig. 5a,g).
The first is the dorsomedial strip (CPi.dm.dm) (Fig. 5c), a vertical narrow strip running 
adjacent to the dorsal half of the lateral ventricle that receives information from the primary 
(VISp), posteromedial (VISpm), and lateral (VISl) visual cortices, the medial entorhinal 
cortex (ENTm), and from the dorsal (RSPd), ventral (RSPv), and agranular retrosplenial 
areas (RSPagl) (Fig. 5a,f and Supplementary Fig. 6d,f,i). The ENTm contains grid cells and 
is critical in processing spatial information28. All divisions of the RSP share reciprocal 
connections with all visual cortices 1 and RSPv is the only neocortical recipient of inputs 
from the dorsal subiculum (SUBd), which has head direction cells that provide spatial 
information for navigation29. Convergence of neural inputs from these areas suggests the 
CPi.dm.dm may be a visuospatial convergence zone for integrating visual and spatial 
information (Fig. 7a).
The intermedial strip (CPi.dm.im) is immediately ventral to the dorsomedial strip and 
neighbors the ventral half of the lateral ventricle (Fig. 5a–c and Supplementary Fig. 6d). The 
CPi.dm.im is characterized by inputs from the primary auditory area (AUDp) and the 
anterior basolateral amygdalar nucleus (BLAa) (Figs. 5f and 7a), which plays an essential 
role in Pavlovian fear conditioning30. The CPi.dm.im further receives input from the dorsal 
prelimbic cortex (PL dorsal), medial orbital cortex (ORBm), caudal parts of the temporal 
association areas (TEa caudal), the ectorhinal cortex (ECT), and posterior basomedial 
amygdala (BMAp) (Fig. 5f and Supplementary Fig. 6d).
Two other domains of the CPi.dm are the dorsolateral (CPi.dm.dl) and dorsal (CPi.dm.d) 
(Fig. 3a,b,e). The densest fibers to these domains organize like horizontal stripes that stack 
underneath the corpus callosum (Fig. 5b,e and Supplementary Fig. 2c). The CPi.dm.d begins 
from the dorsal-most edge of the lateral ventricle and fans out laterally. In addition to direct 
inputs from the anterolateral and anteromedial VIS areas (VISal, VISam), this domain 
receives inputs from the MOs frontal eye field (MOs-fef) (as shown previously in rats31), the 
ventral anterior cingulate area (ACAv), and the posterior parietal association area (PTLp) 
caudal medial (Fig. 5f and Supplementary Figs. 2 and 6d,e,h). Efferents to the CPi.dm.dl 
project from the dorsal ACA (ACAd), PTLp caudal lateral, and the PTLp rostral (Fig. 5e,f 
and Supplementary Fig. 6d). All of these cortical areas are involved in processing visual 
information, eye movement, spatial attention, navigation, and spatially-guided motor 
planning1,32, suggesting that these two adjacent domains, CPi.dm.d and CPi.dm.dl, 
correspond to a specific oculomotor zone (Fig. 7a) identified in rats and primates that 
Hintiryan et al.
Page 6
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 involves reactive saccadic eye control31,33. Projections to the CPi.dm.dl were validated with 
retrograde tracers that back-labeled neurons in ACAd and PTLp caudal lateral regions 
(Supplementary Fig. 6k).
The final domain of the CPi.dm is the central dorsal (CPi.dm.cd), which is ventral to the 
CPi.dm.d and CPi.dm.dl and lateral to the CPi.dm.im (Fig. 5a,b). Inputs to this domain are 
provided by the lateral and ventrolateral parts of the orbital area (ORBl, ORBvl) and as is 
characteristic of central domains, they largely avoid the periphery of the CP (Fig. 5f and 
Supplementary Fig. 6b,c).
The lateral cortical-ventromedial striatal network: Cortical structures in the fourth CPi 
community send topographically organized projections to three distinct, partially 
overlapping domains in the ventromedial CPi (CPi.vm). The ventromedial strip (CPi.vm.vm) 
is ventral to the intermedial strip and juxtaposed to the internal capsule (Fig. 5a and 
Supplementary Fig. 6g). Fibers projecting to the CPi.vm.vm appear diagonal, running along 
the dorsoventral extent of the internal capsule and hence are distinguishable from fibers 
projecting to its dorsally adjacent intermedial strip domain (Fig. 5d) and its ventrolaterally 
adjacent ventral domain (introduced below). The CPi.vm.vm is characterized by heavy 
inputs from layer 6 of the dorsal PL [PL dorsal (L6)], PL ventral, and infralimbic cortical 
area (ILA) (Figs. 5f and 7a). These medial prefrontal areas regulate autonomic and 
neuroendocrine activities through their projections to the central amygdalar nucleus (CEA), 
bed nuclei of the stria terminalis, hypothalamus, and lower brainstem7. Further, the 
CPi.vm.vm collects input from the ventral auditory cortex (AUDv) and rostral temporal 
association area (TEa rostral) (Fig. 5f).
The second CPi.vm domain is the ventral (CPi.vm.v), located along the ventral rim of the 
CP (Fig. 5a,d and Supplementary Fig. 6j). It starts from the ventral-most end of the internal 
capsule and lies between the CPi.vm.vm and the outer mouth domain. It compiles input from 
the caudal parts of the visceral area (VISC caudal), gustatory (GU), and the dorsal (AId), 
posterior (AIp), and ventral (AIv) agranular insular areas (Fig. 5f ). These cortical areas are 
within the anterolateral insular cortical subnetwork1 and are presumably involved in the 
control of visceral, gustatory, and pain information processing34,35 (Figs. 5g and 7a). Nodes 
within this cortical subnetwork also connect with the ILA and PL1, which primarily 
innervate the CPi.vm.vm. Together, these structures form the lateral cortical-ventromedial 
striatal network (Fig. 5g). The CPi.vm.v receives additional input from the piriform cortex 
(PIR), perirhinal area (PERI), and lateral part of the BLAa (lBLAa) (Fig. 5f). Projections to 
the CPi.vm.vm and CPi.vm.v were validated with retrograde tracing (data not shown).
The central ventromedial (CPi.vm.cvm) is the final domain of the CPi.vm community, which 
receives input from the rostral-most part of the MOs [rostral MOs, pole 1 (P1)] whose inputs 
again are confined to the central CP (Supplementary Fig. 6b,c).
Cortical projections to rostral (CPr) and caudal CP (CPc)—Compared to the 
intermediate CP, cortical inputs to the rostral (CPr) and caudal (CPc) exhibit two major 
features: (1) high integration, especially among inputs from cortical areas within different 
cortical subnetworks for cross modality integration; and (2) extensive reconfiguration, 
Hintiryan et al.
Page 7
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 meaning cortical areas sending convergent inputs to the same CPi domain may innervate 
different domains in the CPr and CPc, while projections to different CPi domains may 
converge into the same CPr or CPc domain (Supplementary Fig. 4b,c for CPr and CPc 
communities and domains and their cortical constituents and Fig. 3b for relative domain 
boundaries). For example, moving rostrally from the CPi to the CPr, the relatively 
segregated projections from cortical areas within different somatic sensorimotor 
subnetworks converge into a newly identified narrow strip along the lateral edge, the CPr.l.ls 
(Figs. 6a,c and 7a–c and Supplementary Fig. 7a), suggesting its potential integrative role in 
synchronizing and coordinating motor actions. Moving caudally from CPi to CPc, inputs 
from the different somatic sensorimotor subnetworks maintain a rough topography. For 
instance, inputs from cortical areas within the trunk somatic subnetwork (i.e., SSp-tr, MOp 
tr, MOs tr, and SSp-bfd tr) terminate in the dorsal part (CPc.d; primarily in the dorsolateral 
domain, CPc.d.dl), which provides a potential interface for integrating somatic inputs with 
cortical inputs of different modalities (see below) (Figs. 6b,e and 7a,c and Supplementary 
Fig. 7d,e).
The intermediate part of the CPc (CPc.i) receives predominant inputs from cortical areas 
within the lower and upper limb somatic subnetworks, as well as MOs frontal pole and 
remaining SSp-bfd domains (Fig. 6b and Supplementary Fig. 7d–e). Here, these axonal 
terminals from different cortical areas still retain topography, but also display extensive 
intermingling or interdigitation. Convergence of these cortical inputs suggests that the CPc.i 
may coordinate movements of the limbs (Fig. 7a). Finally, most cortical areas within the 
mouth subnetworks (i.e., SSp-m/i, SSp-m/o, MOp m/o) generate projections that primarily 
terminate in CPc.v (Figs. 6b and 7a and Supplementary Fig. 7d–e).
Similarly, axonal projections arising from cortical areas innervating the relatively segregated 
CPi.dm.dm (i.e., VISp, VISpm, ENTm, RSP, ACAv) and CPi.dm.im (i.e., AUDp, ECT, 
amygdala) extend rostrally to converge in the CPr.m (near the ventricle) (Fig. 6a and 
Supplementary Fig. 7a,b), and caudally to terminate in a CPc.d domain, CPc.d.dm (Fig. 6b 
and Supplementary Fig. 7d,e). Although little is known about its functional role, this narrow 
strip along the wall of lateral ventricle across the entire CP specifically integrates multi-
modality information, like visual, spatial, and auditory inputs with inputs from association 
areas like RSP, ACAv, ORBm, amygdala (BLAa, LA, BMAp), and temporal association 
areas associated with perception (TEa, ECT, ENTl) (Fig. 7a,c).
Axonal projections from cortical areas that primarily innervate the proposed oculomotor 
zone of the CPi.dm.d and dl (i.e., MOs-fef, ACAd, PTLp caudomedial, VISam, VISal) 
extend rostrally to target the CPr.imd (Fig. 6a and Supplementary Fig. 7a–c). Caudally, these 
axons heavily terminate in the CPc.d.vm, but also intermingle with cortical inputs in two 
adjacent domains, the CPc.d.dm and CPc.d.dl (Fig. 6b and Supplementary Fig. 7d). 
Interestingly, axonal projections from cortical areas that innervate CPi.vm.vm (i.e., ILA, PL, 
TEa, LA) also converge in CPc.d (Fig. 6b). Taken together, the CPc.d appears to be an 
important convergence zone that integrates cortical inputs associated with body trunk 
(including head and neck, SSp-tr, MOp tr, MOs tr 1), eye movements (i.e., MOs-fef, ACAd, 
RSP), attention and decision making (i.e., ACA, ORB, PTLp), and fear memory (i.e., ILA, 
PL, BLAa, LA) (Fig. 7a).
Hintiryan et al.
Page 8
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 As previously described, all areas within the anterolateral insular subnetworks1, including 
VISC and all AI divisions generate dense projections in CPi.vm.v at the intermediate CP 
(Fig. 5f). These axons extend rostrally into the ventrolateral edge of CPr (defined here as 
CPr.l.vm) (Fig. 6c), and caudally into CPc.v (Fig. 6a,b,g). Dense projections arising from the 
visceral (VISC) or gustatory (GU) cortical areas generate two densely packed adjacent 
terminal balls in CPc.v, identified here as the CPc.v.m and CPc.v.vl, respectively (Fig. 6f,g). 
Additionally, the entire CPc.v receives dense inputs from all divisions of the AI 
(Supplementary Fig. 7e). Classically, these areas within the anterolateral insular 
subnetworks (i.e., VISC, GU, AId, AIv, AIp) are known to process visceral and inner state 
information and to regulate autonomic function through their inputs to the CEA—the 
visceral motor striatum35,36. Little is known about the functional relevance of cortico-striatal 
projections from these classic limbic areas to CP. However, the ventral edge comprised of 
the CPi.vm.v, CPi.vl.vt, and CPc.v receives somatomotor information pertaining to mouth, 
and input from rostral VISC and GU. Thus, this ventral edge is in a strategic position to 
integrate visceral, gustatory, olfactory, and somatic information to regulate 
orofaciopharyngeal movements associated with feeding behavior or stereotyped motor 
sequences for predatory eating37,38 (Fig. 7a,c). This functional role is complementary to that 
of the ventrally adjacent CEA—a striatal-like structure which receives similar cortical 
inputs, but primarily regulates autonomic function36.
Axonal terminals in CPc.v disappear at the caudal tail of the CP. Instead, extremely dense 
terminals from the AUDp cluster in a region adjacent to the LA and CEA, earning it a 
separate domain termed the (CPc.ext) (Fig. 7a,d). Additionally, dense projections from the 
TEa fill a gap between the AUDp terminals and external capsule in this caudal extreme 
domain (Fig. 7d), which also receives inputs from VIS, PTLp, ORBvl, ORBm, and SSs 
caudal.
Cortical afference to CPr and CPc domains also were validated with retrograde tracing. FG 
and CTb 647 infused into the lateral strip (CPr.l.ls) and medial/intermediate ventral CPr 
(CPr.m/CPr.imv) labeled neurons in the PL, ORBvl, LA, mBLAa and in the MOs, SSp, and 
SSs, respectively (Fig. 6d). Further, FG and CTb 647 tracer injections in the CPc.d and 
CPc.v labeled neurons in ACA, RSP, VIS, PTLp, ECT, and SSp-m and SSs, respectively, 
validating the cortical projections to these domains (Fig. 7e).
The lateral entorhinal (ENTl) projections to the CP—The ENTl strongly connects 
with almost the entire cortex and is therefore suggested to be a critical hub of interaction for 
cortical information1. It was excluded from the analysis due to its broad, dispersed 
projections to the rim of CPi (level 53), which spanned across six domains (Fig. 7f). These 
broad CP connections mimic its broad characteristic connections within the cortex, where it 
is connected with the medial prefrontal cortex, all cortical areas in the lateral cortical 
subnetworks, the hippocampus, olfactory cortical areas, and amygdala1.
Cortico-striatal disconnections in HD and MAO A/B KO mice—A detailed murine 
cortico-striatal projectome can provide a structural frame for studying disconnection 
pathogenesis of disorders recaptured in mouse models21–23,39. Accordingly, we applied our 
computational neuroanatomical workflow and newly delineated CP domains to quantify 
Hintiryan et al.
Page 9
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 select cortico-striatal projection pathways in two mouse models that each represent a 
different category of disconnection syndrome. The first was the heterozygote zQ715 mouse, 
a full length knock-in model of Huntington’s disease (HD)40 — an inherited 
neurodegenerative disorder with motor, psychiatric, and cognitive deficits. Heterozygotes 
were chosen because unlike homozygotes, they do not exhibit cortical and striatal cell loss 
and striatal shrinkage as measured stereologically in aged animals40, which could result in a 
general disruption of all cortico-striatal circuits rather than circuit-specific compromises. 
The second model was the MAO A/B knockout41, recognized primarily for its aggressive 
behavior, but also for the neuropathological features it shares with models of autism 
spectrum disorders (ASD), including reduced thickness of the corpus callosum and 
increased dendritic arborization of pyramidal neurons in the prefrontal cortex41, both typical 
phenotypes of developmental disconnection syndromes42.
Comparisons of select cortico-striatal connections were made in zQ175 (at 12 months old) 
and MAO A/B knockout mice (at 12–14 months old), with their age matched wild type 
(WT) littermates. Specifically, projections from the upper limb motor regions (MOs ul and 
MOp ul) were studied for zQ175 subjects, while orbitofrontal projections were the target of 
investigation in MAO mice. A standardized injection protocol was instituted to accurately 
assess quantitative differences of connectivity strength between groups. This controlled 
individual variability of injection sizes and ensured the reproducibility of injection locations 
(Supplementary Fig. 8a,c,d)1. Signal intensity was normalized by injection size to control 
for label variability produced by injections of different sizes (Supplementary Fig. 8b).
In zQ175 animals, projections from MOs ul to CPi showed a significant reduction in overall 
label intensity when the CPi was quantified as a single structure (Fig. 8g). Post-hoc domain 
level assessments showed that ipsilateral reductions were specifically in the CPi.dl.imv, 
CPi.dm.cd, CPi.vm.v, CPi.vl.vt, and CPi.vl.cvl domains (Fig. 8a–c and Supplementary Fig. 
9a). Contralaterally, significant reductions were observed in mostly the same domains: the 
CPi.dl.imv, CPi.dl.imd, CPi.vl.vt, and CPi.vl.cvl (Fig. 8c and Supplementary Fig. 9c). The 
reduction in signal within these domains ranged from ~40–60% in both hemispheres (P<.05 
for all). These reductions in signal intensity did not affect the span of axonal terminals in the 
CPi as a whole (ipsilateral, P=.43; contralateral, P=.42; Fig. 8f and Supplementary Fig. 9f). 
Importantly, projections from the MOp ul remained unaffected, suggesting pathway specific 
loss rather than generalized perturbation of all cortico-striatal connections (Supplementary 
Fig. 9d,e).
MAO A/B knockouts displayed significantly reduced normalized signal intensity values 
compared to WT littermates, in both ipsi- and contralaterally projecting axons in the entire 
CPi from ORBvl (P<.05 for both) (Fig. 8g and Supplementary Fig. 9b). The span of the 
projections was also significantly reduced both ipsi- and contralaterally in the MAO A/B 
knockouts (P<.05 for both; Fig. 8f and Supplementary Fig. 9f). Domain-level analysis 
revealed reductions in the ipsilateral CPi.dm.cd, CPi.vm.cvm, CPi.vl.cvl, CPi.dl.imv, 
CPi.dm.dl, and CPi.dl.d (P<.05; Fig. 8d,e). Contralaterally, reductions were observed in the 
CPi.dm.cd, CPi.vm.cvm, CPi.vl.cvl, CPi.dm.dl, CPi.dl.d, CPi.dm.d, CPi.dl.imd, and 
CPi.dl.imv (P<.05 for all; Fig. 8c–e). The reductions in signal intensity within these domains 
ranged from ~60–90%.
Hintiryan et al.
Page 10
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 DISCUSSION
Cortical projections to striatum have been examined across different species5,11–17. 
However, compiling a comprehensive cortico-striatal map from studies that use different 
species, strains, and methodologies is challenging and potentially leads to inconsistent 
conclusions. A comprehensive, reliable connectivity map requires systematic data collection 
and analysis workflows. Here, we systematically collected and analyzed striatal projections 
from all cortical areas that project to the dorsal striatum and created the most comprehensive 
cortico-striatal connectivity map that is available for any mammalian species. For example, 
partial somatotopic maps of the CP have been described for primates, cats, and rats11,12,14. 
However, in this study, we identified CP projections from nearly all somatic sensorimotor 
cortical areas representing five body subregions for a complete somatotopic map across the 
entire CP. A thorough investigation of CP projections of intra-cortical regions was conducted 
which showed that different areas within a single cortical area project to different CP 
domains, i.e., rostral versus caudal regions of SSs, VISC, PTLp, TEa, dorsal versus ventral 
parts of the PL, and medial and lateral parts of BLAa. Importantly, comprehensive 
assessment of the convergence and divergence of all cortico-striatal projections was 
conducted, which to our knowledge has not been conducted for any species. This data was 
used to objectively subdivide the CP into 29 domains whose anatomic locations, relative 
boundaries, and cortical afference are clearly delineated across the CP (Fig. 3b and 
Supplementary Fig. 4). The functional relevance of these domains are implicated by their 
cortical afference and can be directly tested using different methodological approaches (Fig. 
7a).
Further, the current understanding of the brain is that it functions as a system of interacting 
networks rather than a collection of independent circuits or structures43, highlighting the 
importance of approaching connectomics from the network perspective. We previously 
assembled the global neural networks of the mouse neocortex1, which revealed that all 
cortical areas are organized into several functionally specific subnetworks: three somatic 
sensorimotor, two medial, and two lateral. Continuing on this trajectory, we used the cortico-
striatal projectome to construct the cortico-striatal networks based on our previously 
identified cortical subnetworks. We found that descending projections from cortical 
subnetworks extensively reconfigure across the rostral, intermediate, and caudal divisions of 
the CP. This extensive convergence, divergence, and reconfiguration suggests that the dorsal 
striatum provides an important subcortical interface to mediate segregation, integration, and 
interaction of information from different cortical networks.
Projections from cortical hubs to center CPi domains
At the cortical level, several regions of the cortex potentially serve as hubs that bridge the 
communication between different subnetworks1. The cortical connectivity architecture of the 
frontal MOs poles and ORBvl warrants their identification as potential hubs1. The ORBvl 
receives convergent inputs from visual, auditory, and somatosensory cortices and also pre-
integrated information from association cortices like PTLp and ACA. Similarly, the MOs 
rostral poles receive massive converged inputs from all other somatic sensorimotor 
networks1. These three structures generate unique localized projections to the three center 
Hintiryan et al.
Page 11
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 domains of CPi, namely CPi.dm.cd, CPi.vl.cvl, and CPi.vl.cvm. Their terminal fields in the 
center domains are mostly confined to the center of the CPi and do not encroach into the 
periphery. Unlike the peripheral CPi domains that receive input from multiple cortical areas, 
the number of cortical areas that project to each central domain is limited to these single 
structures. This suggests that these central domains may not be as integrative in nature as 
their peripheral counterparts. It may be because the central domains receive highly processed 
information, which obviates the need for further integration. This physical and connectional 
difference of the peripheral and central domains leaves the impression of a center/periphery-
like arrangement within the intermediate CP (CPi) reminiscent of the core (inner region) and 
shell (outer region) organization of the nucleus accumbens (ACB) in the ventral 
striatum44,45.
Relevance of CP communities and domains
A large majority of studies examining the functional relevance of the dorsal striatum have 
approached the CP as a quadrant structure, often assigning functions to its dorsolateral, 
dorsomedial, ventrolateral, and to a much lesser extent the ventromedial divisions. The lack 
of a standard structural framework regarding the relative boundaries of these quadrants 
makes comparisons and interpretation across studies difficult. This report offers the 
structural frame (Fig. 2). Further, the functions of the specific domains can partially be 
inferred from their cortical input. From this perspective, our cortico-striatal projectome 
aligns nicely with striatal functions proposed in the literature. For example, lesions of a 
region of the dorsolateral CP that corresponds roughly to the trunk region in the current 
report, disrupt the implementation of a stereotyped grooming sequence46. This is congruent 
with studies that demonstrate the role of the dorsolateral CP in habitual behaviors8,9. Lesions 
of the ventrolateral CP, which corresponds roughly to the mouth region in this report, disrupt 
implementation of stereotyped action sequences exhibited during predatory hunting 
including handling and biting38. Together, these data suggest that the subregions of the 
lateral CP are involved in the implementation of stereotyped behaviors involving their 
corresponding body regions (i.e., trunk for grooming, mouth and upper limb for handling 
and eating).
While the dorsolateral CP is involved in automatized motor sequences or habits8–10, the 
dorsomedial is involved in goal-directed behaviors8,10, spatial learning47, and orienting 
saccadic eye movements based on reward expectancy48. The cortical afference to the 
dorsomedial quadrant reported here also agrees with these behavioral designations. For 
example, the PTLp is involved in the computational aspects of goal-directed actions 
including movement planning49. Functionally distinct regions of the PTLp code movement 
plans associated with saccadic eye movements49. It does so by transforming sensory 
information into a common reference frame that is modulated by information from the eyes 
and head49. We identified three distinct regions of the PTLp that project primarily to the 
dorsomedial CP where they potentially get integrated with all the necessary sensory 
information. For instance, within CPi.dm.d, PTLp input converges with projections from the 
MOs frontal eye field and secondary visual areas (VISam, VISal). This domain also highly 
overlaps with, and hence communicates with, the CPi.dm.dm, the primary striatal target of 
visual and spatial information. Consequently, the proposed roles of goal-directed behaviors, 
Hintiryan et al.
Page 12
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 spatial learning, and saccadic movements assigned to the dorsomedial CP are aligned with 
the cortical afference to this region.
Characterization of circuit-specific connectopathies
We used our mesoscale connectomics approach to characterize specific pathological cortico-
striatal connections in HD zQ175 mice and MAO A/B knockouts. Our data showed that in 
HD, MOs ul projections to specific lateral CP domains is affected. Such characterization of 
circuit-specific connectopathies in animal models is important to constrain future 
experimentation to specific cortical and striatal regions and will offer strategies for more 
targeted therapeutics50. For instance, reductions in the MOs ul projection to CPi was limited 
to 5 of the 14 domains in the HD model. Therefore, testing of novel therapeutics to prevent 
cortico-striatal axonal loss in HD should focus on these five domains of the CPi to assess for 
improvement. Similarly, physiological investigations of responses in this cortico-striatal 
pathway would likely find differences in medium spiny neuron responses postsynaptic to the 
CPi domains showing the greatest disease-related changes.
ONLINE METHODS
The data were produced as part of the Mouse Connectome Project (MCP, 
www.MouseConnectome.org) at the University of Southern California (USC) (project 
formerly at the University of California, Los Angeles). Data collection for the zQ175 and 
MAO A/B knockout mice were conducted at USC.
Subjects
Overall, data from 8-week old male C57BL/6J mice (n=91; Jackson Laboratories) were used 
to trace all cortical pathways. Sixty-two pathways most representative of all the cortical 
areas examined were reconstructed and used for the analysis. For the HD and MAO model 
experiments, 12-month old male heterozygous zQ175 HD mice (n=19) and wild type 
controls (n=21; Jackson Laboratories), and 12–14-month old male MAO A/B knockout mice 
(n=10) and wild types (n=6), were used. The background strain of the zQ175 animals is the 
C57Bl/6J. The MAO A/B knockout were originally generated in a C57Bl/6J/129Sv strain, 
whose males were subsequently backcrossed over 25 generations with 129/SvEv females, 
then backcrossed over 25 generations with C57 B1/6J females. No randomization was used 
in the experiments reported in this paper. Although no formal a priori power analysis was 
conducted, group sizes were comparable to those utilized in previous reports40,41,51.
Animals were housed in pairs in a room that was temperature (21–22 °C), humidity (51%), 
and light controlled (12-hr light:12-hr dark cycle). The mice were allowed at least 1 week to 
adapt to their living conditions prior to stereotaxic surgeries for the delivery of tracers. 
Subjects had ad libitum access to tap water and mouse chow throughout the experiments. All 
experiments were conducted according to the regulatory standards set by the National 
Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and by the 
institutional guidelines set by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at USC and 
the Animal Research Committee at UCLA.
Hintiryan et al.
Page 13
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Tracers and surgeries
Experimental procedures for tracer injections have been described previously52. Briefly, 
double coinjections of anterograde and retrograde tracers were delivered to virtually all 
anatomically delineated regions of the cortex and into select regions of the amygdala and 
thalamus. Phaseolus vulgaris leucoagglutinin (PHAL; 2.5%; Vector Laboratories) and 
cholera toxin subunit b (AlexaFluor 647 conjugate, 0.25%; Invitrogen) were coinjected, 
while biotinylated dextran amine (BDA; FluoroRuby, 5%; Invitrogen) was injected in 
combination with Fluorogold (FG; 1%; Fluorochrome, LLC). Small localized injections 
(~200–500 μm) were confined within domains of cortical areas and produced consistent, 
specific, and highly topographic patterns across the rostral-caudal extent of the CP 
(Supplementary Fig. 1a). The labeling from PHAL injections was primarily used for 
automated quantification (see below). Multiple retrograde tracers were injected into different 
CP domains within a single animal to validate the anterograde tracing data (Supplementary 
Fig. 1b). Retrograde tracers included FG and CTb 647, 488, and 549 conjugates (0.25%; 
Invitrogen). Adeno-associated viruses encoding enhanced green fluorescent protein (AAV-
GFP; AAV2/1.hSynapsin.EGFP.WPRE.bGH; Penn Vector Core) and tdTomato 
(AAV1.CAG.tdtomato.WPRE.SV40; Penn Vector Core) were used in cases in which 
multiple anterograde tracer injections were used to reveal direct spatial correlations of 
axonal terminals arising from different cortical areas (i.e., topography or interdigitation) 
(Supplementary Fig. 2a). Although the images in the paper are unique exemplars, the 
majority of injections were successfully repeated anywhere from 1–17 times (see 
Supplementary Table 1). For zQ175 and MAO A/B knockout mice, only PHAL tracer 
injections and labeling were used for quantification. Either one (PHAL) or three weeks (for 
AAV-GFP) was allowed for tracer transport after which animals were perfused and their 
brains were extracted.
Surgeries for tracer infusions were performed under isoflurane anesthesia (Hospira, Inc.). 
Mice were initially anesthetized in an induction chamber primed with isoflurane and were 
subsequently mounted to the stereotaxic apparatus where they were maintained under 
anesthetic state via a vaporizer (Datex-Ohmeda). The isoflurane was vaporized and mixed 
with oxygen (0.5 L/min) and nitrogen (1 L/min). The percent of isoflurane in the gas 
mixture was maintained between 2 and 2.5 throughout the surgery. Tracers were delivered 
iontophoretically using glass micropipettes whose outside tip diameters measured 
approximately 10–30 μm. A positive 5 μAmp, 7-second alternating injection current was 
delivered for 10 minutes (Stoelting Co.).
Tissue preparation
Following an overdose injection of sodium pentobarbital, each animal was transcardially 
perfused with approximately 50 ml of 0.9% NaCl followed by 50 ml of 4% 
paraformaldehyde solution (PFA; pH 9.5). The brains were post-fixed in 4% PFA for 24–48 
hours at 4°C after which they were embedded in 3% Type I-B agarose (Sigma-Aldrich) prior 
to sectioning. Four series of coronal sections were sliced at 50-μm thickness with a 
Compresstome (VF-700, Precisionary Instruments, Greenville, NC) and prepared for 
processing.
Hintiryan et al.
Page 14
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Immunofluorescence staining
One series of sections was stained for PHAL using the free-floating method for 
immunofluorescence. Briefly, sections were transferred to a blocking solution containing 
normal donkey serum (Vector Laboratories) and Triton X-100 (VWR) for 1 hour. Following 
three 5-minute rinses, sections were incubated in a KPBS solution comprised of donkey 
serum, Triton, and a 1:1000 concentration of rabbit anti-PHAL antibody for 48–72 hours at 
4°C (Vector Laboratories, #AS-2300; see our previous work53 for validation of this 
antibody). Sections were rinsed three times in KPBS and then soaked for 3 hours in the 
secondary antibody solution, which contained donkey serum, Triton, and a 1:500 
concentration of anti-rabbit IgG conjugated with Alexa Fluor® 488 or 647 (Invitrogen, 488: 
#A-21206, 647: #A-31573). Following three KBS rinses, the sections were counterstained 
with a fluorescent Nissl stain, NeuroTrace® 435/455 (NT; 1:500; Invitrogen, #N21479). The 
sections were then mounted and coverslipped using 65% glycerol.
Imaging and post-acquisition processing for publication to iConnectome
Initially, all sections were scanned as high-resolution virtual slide image (VSI) files using an 
Olympus VS110 high-throughput microscope using identical exposure parameters for all 
cases. Each image, comprised of five channels (PHAL, CTb, BDA, FG, and NT), was 
flipped to the correct left-right orientation, matched to the nearest ARA level, and converted 
to tiff format prior to being registered. Following registration, the NeuroTrace® fluorescent 
Nissl stain was converted to a bright-field image. Next, each channel for every image was 
adjusted for brightness and contrast to maximize labeling visibility and quality in 
iConnectome. Importantly, these adjustments were selective for files published to the 
iConnectome viewer. Thresholded images, which were used for the quantification of the data 
(discussed below), were not affected by changes in image contrast and brightness. Following 
final modifications (i.e., skewness, angles) and JPEG2000 file format conversions, images 
were published to iConnectome (http://www.mouseconnectome.org/iConnectome/page/
search.jsp).
Informatics workflow
An informatics workflow was specifically designed to reliably warp, reconstruct, annotate, 
and analyze the labeled pathways in a high-throughput fashion (Fig. 1). The workflow was 
applied toward analyzing projections from 62 representative cortical injection cases to 
sections with characteristic labeling across the rostral (CPr), intermediate (CPi), and caudal 
CP (CPc). The labeling at level 53 (+0.145 mm from bregma) was the target of rich 
projections from all cortical areas, representative of all cortico-striatal projections, and 
exhibited the most segregation of labeling in terms of unique domains. Therefore, it was 
selected as the representative section for the intermediate CP. The CP at levels 41 (+1.345 
mm from bregma) and 61 (–0.655 mm from bregma) displayed distinguishable labeling with 
a higher degree of integration of cortical inputs and far fewer discrete termination fields 
compared to the intermediate CP and were therefore selected to represent the rostral and 
caudal CP, respectively.
Hintiryan et al.
Page 15
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 For analysis of data collected from zQ175 and MAO A/B knockout mice, researchers were 
blind to the genotype of the animals across the entire pipeline of image processing including 
image acquisition, segmentation, and quantification (steps discussed below).
The first step of our informatics workflow was a streamlined image registration pipeline. 
Facilitated by semi-automated human interaction, the registration system warped each 
individual image onto its corresponding level of the ARA with a level of detail such that 
even small nuclei were reliably registered.
After warping, a segmentation algorithm was applied to each image. Segmentation 
employed pixel-wise global and local thresholding to produce binary images with labeling 
(positive signal; 1) and background (negative signal; 0). The global threshold value was set 
to six standard deviations above the mean of a 700x700 pixel sample array within the CP 
that had been user-designated as without labeling. Individual pixels greater than this global 
threshold were accordingly designated as positive. Local threshold values were set 
dynamically. Pixels were examined element-wise against their surrounding 101x101 array. 
Any pixel value greater than the mean intensity value of neighborhood pixels (plus a small 
additional constant) was also assigned as labeling. Conversely, any pixel jointly below 
global and local threshold values was designated background. These reconstructions 
represented all labeling, including axonal pathways, terminal boutons, and varicosities.
An important concern when employing automated analysis of connectivity is the issue of 
fibers of passage getting annotated as functional connections when in fact no synapses exist. 
Pathways devoid of synapses can produce bright labeling that get annotated as positive 
pixels. This is especially relevant with regard to the fascicles indigenous to the dorsal 
striatum. However, the degree to which these axons rather than terminals are labeled is tracer 
dependent. PHAL labels far less CP fibers of passage than AAV tracers. Triple anterograde 
tracer injections of PHAL, AAV-GFP, and AAV-RFP in the MOs upper limb demonstrate 
this notion. Fascicles are intensely labeled by the AAV tracers, but not by the PHAL 
(Supplementary Fig. 2b). Further, higher resolution confocal imaging at 40x magnification 
clearly shows the abundance of PHAL-labeled varicosities and boutons, both of which are 
indicative of synaptic contacts54 (Supplementary Fig. 2c), and both of which are far greater 
in number than axons of passage. This suggests that positive pixels detected using our 
analysis were most likely representative of connections rather than fibers of passage since 
PHAL labeled pathways were primarily used for quantitative analysis.
The registration output also served as source images for both a comprehensive cortico-
striatal connectivity map of the CP, as well as input to our automated annotation system. The 
cortico-striatal connectivity map contains a collection of 62 reconstructed cortico-striatal 
pathways within the ARA neuroanatomic frame (http://www.mouseconnectome.org/
CorticalMap/page/map/protected.htm?projectId=5). Reconstruction of each pathway was 
rendered into an individual layer, allowing patterns of efference from multiple cortical 
source regions to be composed and compared by activation and deactivation of layers (Fig. 
6a for example).
Hintiryan et al.
Page 16
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 To facilitate annotation, the CP at atlas levels 41 (+1.345 mm), 53 (+0.145 mm), and 61 (–
0.655) was divided into a grid of 35x35pixel cells with a spatial dimension of 22.5 μm2 
(~0.6 μm per pixel). An overlap value at each cell was computed by projecting the 
segmented labeling output onto the grid. We employed this overlap process to annotate the 
62 cortical injection cases. We further analyzed the annotation data to objectively identify 
groups of cortical injection sites that send converging input within different CP regions. To 
perform this final stage of the informatics pipeline, we first built an adjacency matrix out of 
our annotation data. The graph structure of the data is relatively simple: nodes and 
connections are organized as a multi-tree with two levels: the cortex and the CP. We 
therefore were able to apply a Louvain community detection algorithm27 to the data and 
identify clusters of injection sites with similar CP termination fields. The algorithm 
implementing the Louvain analysis was obtained from the Brain Connectivity Toolbox and 
executed in MATLAB55. Given the modularity of the data (i.e., highly topographic labeling), 
a modularity optimization algorithm like the Louvain was well suited. The Louvain 
algorithm has a lower asymptotic complexity than other clustering algorithms, employing a 
randomized, greedy optimization. However, the element of randomness makes it probable 
that the algorithm will reveal a different community structure over multiple runs. To mitigate 
this issue, the algorithm was run 1000 times. The community structure that emerged most 
often, which we defined as the community structure mode (borrowing from statistics) is 
reported. A mean and standard deviation for the number of communities that was detected 
across the 1000 runs was also computed. The community structure mode for the CPi 
occurred 23/1000 times with a q value of 0.4963. The mean and standard deviation for the 
number of communities for this division were 3.99 ± 0.35. For the rostral CP, the community 
structure mode reported occurred 32/1000 runs with a q value of 0.325 and a mean of 
4.265± 0.578 for number of communities. Finally, the structure mode for the CPc occurred 
23/1000 times with a q value of 0.442 and a mean of 3.07± 0.299. Community structure 
analysis executed on randomized graph models corresponding to each CP level (i.e., rostral, 
intermediate, caudal) returned 1000 unique communities. These different, essentially 
opposite, results demonstrate that the communities detected by the Louvain with the non-
randomized data were statistically significant.
Subsequently, to aid visualization we employed the community structure to re-order and 
color code an adjacency matrix such that connections were placed close to the diagonal. An 
accompanying color-coded CP illustrates the spatial arrangement of the communities.
The raw data and connectivity map showed the existence of topographically organized 
projection fields within these individual communities, suggesting the existence of relatively 
smaller CP domains with a more restricted number of cortical sources. Since modularity 
optimization algorithms like the Louvain are not optimal for detecting smaller communities 
and communities with members of unequal size, subsequent analyses were performed to 
extract the smaller clusters of projection fields embedded within the superordinate 
communities. Accordingly, a measure of centrality for the CP projection fields of each 
cortical area was computed. The centroid, or the arithmetic average coordinate of a 
reconstructed terminal field (i.e., center of gravity), was used as this measure. Generally, 
projections from the cortex terminated most densely within a circumscribed CP domain and 
more diffusely to regions adjacent to the condensed terminal field, providing some degree of 
Hintiryan et al.
Page 17
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 overlap between neighboring regions and obscuring clear boundary demarcation. However, 
the segregation among the dense cores of the terminal fields from different cortical regions 
was clear. To better represent the dense cores of these projections, only pixels in the densest 
subregions of the field were analyzed with the centroid method. This was achieved by 
making the entry of a pixel of positive labeling into the centroid analysis conditional on that 
pixel being contained within a cell of the grid that had a density percentile, with respect to 
all cells within the grid, equal to or greater than 95%, that is, only pixels within the top 5% 
of grid cells, based on labeling density were utilized for the centroid analysis.
To further subdivide the CP into smaller domains objectively, we constructed a Voronoi 
diagram56 that designates in the CP a number of Voronoi cells (or domains), built upon the 
centroid analysis previously conducted. To create these regions, for each domain a single 
intensity-weighted average location of its constituent centroids was computed. Specifically, 
at each domain with N centroids let
be the coordinates of each centroid in the domain. Let
be the intensity (in [0, 1]) of each centroid. Finally, let
be the weighted location of each centroid. Per domain then, the Voronoi point was calculated 
as the element-wise sum of WL divided by the element-wise sum of C:
The resulting average location at each domain was used as a Voronoi seed point. Executing a 
standard euclidean Voronoi algorithm on the seed points, the resulting tessellation is shown 
(Figs. 1k and 3b). As evidenced by the high degree of terminal field overlap between 
adjacent domains, hard borders between domains do not exist. Therefore, borders between 
Voronoi cells simply localize zones of strongest terminal convergence among members of a 
subdomain (i.e., where interaction between convergent sources of cortical efference is most 
prominent).
In this work we also quantified density of labeling terminating in the CP, defining the 
complementary measures intensity and span for this purpose. Intensity is simply a sum of 
the labeled pixels across the CP. Span complements the intensity value, and is a count of the 
cells of the grid containing labeling. They were calculated using the following equations:
Hintiryan et al.
Page 18
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Intensity IR and Span SR:
where P, C are the number of pixels and cells respectively with positive labeling for region 
R.
Normalized Intensity IR and Span SR:
where i...N is all injection sites for the given level.
To summarize label density, the intensity and span values were further utilized to compute 
the Labeling Density Index (LDI). The LDI, computed by taking the quotient of the (sum-to-
unity normalized) intensity and span, summarized in a single value the labeling properties 
originating from an injection site. We designated LDI values greater than 1.0 as 
concentrated, with lesser LDI values defined as diffuse. The equation used to calculate LDI 
is as follows:
Labeling Density Index LDIR:
Tables containing the calculated intensity, span, and LDI values for each cortico-striatal 
projection are available online (http://www.mouseconnectome.org/MCP/page/documents/
tables?paperId=18).
Overlap refers to a convergence of terminal fields within the CP between cortical source 
areas. The overlap value between a source and target ROI is the ratio of common labeling 
among the two ROIs to total source labeling. To corroborate the domains derived from visual 
analysis of injection site centroids, higher order overlap values, denoting overlap between 
domains, were computed from the injection site-scale overlap values. Whereas domains 
were constituted by multiple cortical areas, overlap values between any two domains were 
simply the mean of injection site-scale overlaps from one cortical area with another. Overlap 
was calculated using the following equation:
Common labeling (COMR, S) between regions R, S:
where L is the number of labeled pixels in common locations across injection sites R, S
Overlap OVRR, S between regions R, S:
Hintiryan et al.
Page 19
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Tables containing overlap values between individual injection sites and between domains are 
also available (http://www.mouseconnectome.org/MCP/page/documents/tables?paperId=18).
Code availability
We employed the Brain Connectivity Toolbox (BCT) to analyze the connectivity data, taking 
particular advantage of the Louvain algorithm implementation55. The BCT is freely 
available at https://sites.google.com/site/bctnet/. The other computer codes used to generate 
the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon request.
Assessment of injection sites
All cortical injection cases included in this work are, in our judgment, prototypical 
representatives of each cortical area. We have previously demonstrated our targeting 
accuracy with respect to injection placement, our attention to injection location, and the 
fidelity of labeling patterns derived from injections to the same cortical location 
(Supplementary Fig. 2 in 1). In the current report, we also demonstrate our injection 
placement accuracy and the consistent labeling resulting from injections placed in the same 
cortical areas. In one case, we applied three different anterograde tracers in the MOs upper 
limb, which resulted in similar labeling patterns, showing both consistency of injection 
placement and fidelity of labeling across the injections (Supplementary Fig. 2b). Repeated 
injections also were applied in double or triple anterograde tracing experiments to show 
topography and interdigitation. These injections also validated the striatal projection patterns 
of the cortical areas involved. For example, injections into the VISam (AAV-RFP), PL dorsal 
(AAV-GFP), and ORBvl (PHAL) showed the topographic positions of unique CP domains 
(Fig. 5b), but also validated the striatal projections of these cortical areas demonstrated in 
different cases (Supplementary Fig. 6c,d).
The somatosensory cortices representing each body subfield and barrel fields lay adjacent to 
one another (Supplementary Fig. 5a) and therefore cross contamination of injection sites is a 
legitimate concern when striatal convergence from these cortical areas is considered. First, 
injection sites were re-imaged using lower exposure parameters than those used to capture 
labeled neurons and axons. This ensured proper identification of injection locations. Next, 
the specificity of the injection sites were validated by examining their thalamic and 
brainstem projections (Supplementary Fig. 5c–d). Injections into the SSp-tr, ll, ul, and m 
regions showed clear topographic projections to their corresponding terminals in the ventral 
posteromedial (VPM) and ventral posterolateral (VPL) nuclei of the thalamus. Trunk 
representations were in dorsal regions, followed by lower limb which were lateral to upper 
limb representations, with orofacial representations in the most ventral and medial 
parvocellular regions57–60. Consistent with brainstem body representations, SSp-ll labeled 
the gracile nucleus, the SSp-ul the cuneate, and the SSp-m the dorsal parts of the spinal 
trigeminal (SPV) nucleus with SSp-m/o represented dorsal and lateral to the SSp-m/i 
regions57,61–63. Specificity of SSp-bfd injections were validated by observing their 
topographic projections to the medial part of the posterior thalamus (POm), to the VPM, and 
Hintiryan et al.
Page 20
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 to approximately the ventral third of the spinal trigeminal, precisely where whisker 
representations reside (Supplementary Fig. 5d)57,58,64.
For the HD and MAO experiments, only injections located within cortical layer V of MOs ul 
(for the HD experiment; Supplementary Fig. 8a) and ORBvl (for the MAO experiment; 
Supplementary Fig. 8c) were included in the analysis. Examination of the relationship 
between injection site size and cortico-striatal terminal field size was conducted. Injection 
sites were rescanned using lower exposure settings to clearly visualize neurons that had 
absorbed the tracer (Supplementary Fig. 8a,c). The number of PHAL-labeled cells in the 
section closest to the center of the injection site, i.e., containing the greatest number of 
labeled cells, was manually counted. PHAL injections typically result in a dense cluster of 
labeled neurons; injections resulting in a diffuse labeling pattern, or injections in which the 
background staining was too high to discern the number of PHAL-labeled neurons, were 
excluded from the analysis. Pooling the remaining subjects, linear regression of injection site 
size to cortico-striatal terminal intensity revealed a significant correlation between the two 
variables: the greater the injection site size, the greater the terminal intensity. This 
relationship was found in both for MOs ul injections (P < 0.05, r = 0.415) and the ORBvl 
injections (Supplementary Fig. 8b; P < 0.05, r = 0.615). This relationship approached 
significance for the MOp ul injections (Supplementary Fig. 8b). Therefore, most analyses 
were conducted using normalized terminal intensity values, in which the raw intensity value 
for each subject was divided by its injection site size. Further, injection sizes of zQ175 and 
MAO mice did not differ from their respective WT littermates (Supplementary Fig. 8d; P=.
214 for zQ175 and 0.776 for MAO). Exclusion of erroneous injections and counting of 
labeled cells was performed by experimenters blind to group affiliation.
Statistical analyses
Differences in normalized intensity and span values between mutants and their wild type 
littermates were statistically compared using a two-sided t-test with Welch’s correction for 
heteroscedasticity. Correlations between injection site size and intensity of CP labeling were 
investigated using Pearson’s r. Normality of the data distributions was assumed, but not 
formally tested. A supplementary methods and statistics checklist is available where all 
group sizes, means, standard errors, p values, t values, and degrees of freedom are available 
for all statistical tests conducted in this work (URL). Additionally, the raw data upon which 
all boxplots and scatter plots are based are also available.
Data availability
All image data comprising the projectome, cortico-striatal projection maps, and tables of 
intensity, span, labeling density indices, and overlap values, are freely available at 
www.MouseConnectome.org.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Hintiryan et al.
Page 21
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NIH/NIMH MH094360-01A1 (HWD), NIH/NCI U01CA198932-01 (HWD), the 
CHDI Foundation (HWD) and LONIR P41 EB015922 (AWT). The authors are grateful to Drs. Larry W. Swanson 
and Harvey Karten to serve on Advisory Council for the Mouse Connectome Project 
(www.MouseConnectome.org).
References
1. Zingg B, et al. Neural networks of the mouse neocortex. Cell. 2014; 156:1096–1111. [PubMed: 
24581503] 
2. Oh SW, et al. A mesoscale connectome of the mouse brain. Nature. 2014; 508:207–214. [PubMed: 
24695228] 
3. Bota M, Sporns O, Swanson LW. Architecture of the cerebral cortical association connectome 
underlying cognition. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015; 112:E2093–2101. [PubMed: 25848037] 
4. Song HF, Kennedy H, Wang XJ. Spatial embedding of structural similarity in the cerebral cortex. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014; 111:16580–16585. [PubMed: 25368200] 
5. Alexander GE, DeLong MR, Strick PL. Parallel organization of functionally segregated circuits 
linking basal ganglia and cortex. Annu Rev Neurosci. 1986; 9:357–381. [PubMed: 3085570] 
6. Parent A, Hazrati LN. Functional anatomy of the basal ganglia. I The cortico-basal ganglia-thalamo-
cortical loop. Brain Res Brain Res Rev. 1995; 20:91–127. [PubMed: 7711769] 
7. Swanson LW. Cerebral hemisphere regulation of motivated behavior. Brain Res. 2000; 886:113–164. 
[PubMed: 11119693] 
8. Yin HH, Knowlton BJ. The role of the basal ganglia in habit formation. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2006; 
7:464–476. [PubMed: 16715055] 
9. Graybiel AM. Habits, rituals, and the evaluative brain. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2008; 31:359–387. 
[PubMed: 18558860] 
10. Balleine BW, O’Doherty JP. Human and rodent homologies in action control: corticostriatal 
determinants of goal-directed and habitual action. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2010; 35:48–69. 
[PubMed: 19776734] 
11. Malach R, Graybiel AM. Mosaic architecture of the somatic sensory-recipient sector of the cat’s 
striatum. J Neurosci. 1986; 6:3436–3458. [PubMed: 3794782] 
12. Flaherty AW, Graybiel AM. Corticostriatal transformations in the primate somatosensory system. 
Projections from physiologically mapped body-part representations. J Neurophysiol. 1991; 
66:1249–1263. [PubMed: 1722244] 
13. Berendse HW, Galis-de Graaf Y, Groenewegen HJ. Topographical organization and relationship 
with ventral striatal compartments of prefrontal corticostriatal projections in the rat. J Comp 
Neurol. 1992; 316:314–347. [PubMed: 1577988] 
14. Brown LL, Smith DM, Goldbloom LM. Organizing principles of cortical integration in the rat 
neostriatum: corticostriate map of the body surface is an ordered lattice of curved laminae and 
radial points. J Comp Neurol. 1998; 392:468–488. [PubMed: 9514511] 
15. Alloway KD, Crist J, Mutic JJ, Roy SA. Corticostriatal projections from rat barrel cortex have an 
anisotropic organization that correlates with vibrissal whisking behavior. J Neurosci. 1999; 
19:10908–10922. [PubMed: 10594072] 
16. Mailly P, Aliane V, Groenewegen HJ, Haber SN, Deniau JM. The rat prefrontostriatal system 
analyzed in 3D: evidence for multiple interacting functional units. J Neurosci. 2013; 33:5718–
5727. [PubMed: 23536085] 
17. Averbeck BB, Lehman J, Jacobson M, Haber SN. Estimates of projection overlap and zones of 
convergence within frontal-striatal circuits. J Neurosci. 2014; 34:9497–9505. [PubMed: 25031393] 
18. Pan WX, Mao T, Dudman JT. Inputs to the dorsal striatum of the mouse reflect the parallel circuit 
architecture of the forebrain. Front Neuroanat. 2010; 4:147. [PubMed: 21212837] 
19. Haber SN. The primate basal ganglia: parallel and integrative networks. J Chem Neuroanat. 2003; 
26:317–330. [PubMed: 14729134] 
Hintiryan et al.
Page 22
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 20. Voorn P, Vanderschuren LJ, Groenewegen HJ, Robbins TW, Pennartz CM. Putting a spin on the 
dorsal-ventral divide of the striatum. Trends Neurosci. 2004; 27:468–474. [PubMed: 15271494] 
21. Joel D. Open interconnected model of basal ganglia-thalamocortical circuitry and its relevance to 
the clinical syndrome of Huntington’s disease. Mov Disord. 2001; 16:407–423. [PubMed: 
11391734] 
22. Nelson AB, Kreitzer AC. Reassessing models of basal ganglia function and dysfunction. Annu Rev 
Neurosci. 2014; 37:117–135. [PubMed: 25032493] 
23. Shepherd GM. Corticostriatal connectivity and its role in disease. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2013; 
14:278–291. [PubMed: 23511908] 
24. Dong, HW. The Allen Reference Atlas: A digital color brain atlas of the C57BL/6J male mouse. 
John Wiley and Sons, Inc; Hoboken, NJ, USA: 2007. 
25. Paxinos, G., Watson, C. The rat brain in stereotaxic coordinates. 7. Academic Press; San Diego, 
CA, USA: 2013. 
26. Swanson, LW. Brain maps: structure of the rat brain. 3. Academic Press; San Diego, CA, USA: 
2004. 
27. Blondel VD, Guillaume JL, Lambiotte R, Lefebvre E. Fast unfolding of communities in large 
networks. J Stat Mech. 2008:P10008.
28. Moser EI, Kropff E, Moser MB. Place cells, grid cells, and the brain’s spatial representation 
system. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2008; 31:69–89. [PubMed: 18284371] 
29. Taube JS. Head direction cells and the neurophysiological basis for a sense of direction. Prog 
Neurobiol. 1998; 55:225–256. [PubMed: 9643555] 
30. Fanselow MS, Poulos AM. The neuroscience of mammalian associative learning. Annu Rev 
Psychol. 2005; 56:207–234. [PubMed: 15709934] 
31. Reep RL, Cheatwood JL, Corwin JV. The associative striatum: organization of cortical projections 
to the dorsocentral striatum in rats. J Comp Neurol. 2003; 467:271–292. [PubMed: 14608594] 
32. Reep RL, Corwin JV. Posterior parietal cortex as part of a neural network for directed attention in 
rats. Neurobiol Learn Mem. 2009; 91:104–113. [PubMed: 18824116] 
33. Thakkar KN, van den Heiligenberg FM, Kahn RS, Neggers SF. Frontal-subcortical circuits 
involved in reactive control and monitoring of gaze. J Neurosci. 2014; 34:8918–8929. [PubMed: 
24966390] 
34. Allen GV, Saper CB, Hurley KM, Cechetto DF. Organization of visceral and limbic connections in 
the insular cortex of the rat. J Comp Neurol. 1991; 311:1–16. [PubMed: 1719041] 
35. Craig AD. How do you feel--now? The anterior insula and human awareness. Nat Rev Neurosci. 
2009; 10:59–70. [PubMed: 19096369] 
36. Swanson LW, Petrovich GD. What is the amygdala? Trends Neurosci. 1998; 21:323–331. 
[PubMed: 9720596] 
37. Pisa M. Motor somatotopy in the striatum of rat: manipulation, biting and gait. Behav Brain Res. 
1988; 27:21–35. [PubMed: 3342113] 
38. dos Santos LM, et al. The role of the ventrolateral caudoputamen in predatory hunting. Physiol 
Behav. 2012; 105:893–898. [PubMed: 22061428] 
39. Griffiths KR, Morris RW, Balleine BW. Translational studies of goal-directed action as a 
framework for classifying deficits across psychiatric disorders. Front Syst Neurosci. 2014; 8:101. 
[PubMed: 24904322] 
40. Heikkinen T, et al. Characterization of neurophysiological and behavioral changes, MRI brain 
volumetry and 1H MRS in zQ175 knock-in mouse model of Huntington’s disease. PLoS One. 
2012; 7:e50717. [PubMed: 23284644] 
41. Bortolato M, et al. Monoamine oxidase A and A/B knockout mice display autistic-like features. Int 
J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2013; 16:869–888. [PubMed: 22850464] 
42. Geschwind DH, Levitt P. Autism spectrum disorders: developmental disconnection syndromes. 
Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2007; 17:103–111. [PubMed: 17275283] 
43. Sporns O. Contributions and challenges for network models in cognitive neuroscience. Nat 
Neurosci. 2014; 17:652–660. [PubMed: 24686784] 
Hintiryan et al.
Page 23
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 44. Zahm DS. An integrative neuroanatomical perspective on some subcortical substrates of adaptive 
responding with emphasis on the nucleus accumbens. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2000; 24:85–105. 
[PubMed: 10654664] 
45. Groenewegen HJ, Wright CI, Beijer AV, Voorn P. Convergence and segregation of ventral striatal 
inputs and outputs. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1999; 877:49–63. [PubMed: 10415642] 
46. Cromwell HC, Berridge KC. Implementation of action sequences by a neostriatal site: a lesion 
mapping study of grooming syntax. J Neurosci. 1996; 16:3444–3458. [PubMed: 8627378] 
47. Devan BD, White NM. Parallel information processing in the dorsal striatum: relation to 
hippocampal function. J Neurosci. 1999; 19:2789–2798. [PubMed: 10087090] 
48. Hikosaka O, Nakamura K, Nakahara H. Basal ganglia orient eyes to reward. J Neurophysiol. 2006; 
95:567–584. [PubMed: 16424448] 
49. Cohen YE, Andersen RA. A common reference frame for movement plans in the posterior parietal 
cortex. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2002; 3:553–562. [PubMed: 12094211] 
50. Steinberg EE, Christoffel DJ, Deisseroth K, Malenka RC. Illuminating circuitry relevant to 
psychiatric disorders with optogenetics. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2015; 30:9–16. [PubMed: 
25215625] 
51. Smith KS, Graybiel AM. A dual operator view of habitual behavior reflecting cortical and striatal 
dynamics. Neuron. 2013; 79:361–374. DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.05.038 [PubMed: 23810540] 
52. Hintiryan H, et al. Comprehensive connectivity of the mouse main olfactory bulb: analysis and 
online digital atlas. Front Neuroanat. 2012; 6:30. [PubMed: 22891053] 
53. Biag J, et al. Cyto- and chemoarchitecture of the hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus in the 
C57BL/6J male mouse: a study of immunostaining and multiple fluorescent tract tracing. J Comp 
Neurol. 2012; 520:6–33. DOI: 10.1002/cne.22698 [PubMed: 21674499] 
54. Gerfen CR, Sawchenko PE. An anterograde neuroanatomical tracing method that shows the 
detailed morphology of neurons, their axons and terminals: immu nohistochemical localization of 
an axonally transported plant lectin, Phaseolus vulgaris leucoagglutinin (PHA-L). Brain Res. 1984; 
290:219–238. [PubMed: 6198041] 
55. Rubinov M, Sporns O. Complex network measures of brain connectivity: uses and interpretations. 
NeuroImage. 2010; 52:1059–69. DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.10.003 [PubMed: 19819337] 
56. Voronoï G. Nouvelles applications des paramètres continus à la théorie des formes quadratiques 
Deuxième mémoire Recherches sur les parallélloèdres primitifs. Journal für die reine und 
angewandte Mathematik. 1908; 134:198–287.
57. Fabri M, Burton H. Topography of connections between primary somatosensory cortex and 
posterior complex in rat: a multiple fluorescent tracer study. Brain Res. 1991; 538:351–357. 
[PubMed: 2012978] 
58. Hoogland PV, Welker E, Van der Loos H. Organization of the projections from barrel cortex to 
thalamus in mice studied with Phaseolus vulgaris-leucoagglutinin and HRP. Exp Brain Res. 1987; 
68:73–87. [PubMed: 2826209] 
59. Liao CC, Chen RF, Lai WS, Lin RC, Yen CT. Distribution of large terminal inputs from the 
primary and secondary somatosensory cortices to the dorsal thalamus in the rodent. J Comp 
Neurol. 2010; 518:2592–2611. DOI: 10.1002/cne.22354 [PubMed: 20503429] 
60. Nambu A. Somatotopic organization of the primate Basal Ganglia. Front Neuroanat. 2011; 5:26. 
[PubMed: 21541304] 
61. Li XG, Florence SL, Kaas JH. Areal distributions of cortical neurons projecting to different levels 
of the caudal brain stem and spinal cord in rats. Somatosens Mot Res. 1990; 7:315–335. [PubMed: 
2248004] 
62. Remple MS, Henry EC, Catania KC. Organization of somatosensory cortex in the laboratory rat 
(Rattus norvegicus): Evidence for two lateral areas joined at the representation of the teeth. J 
Comp Neurol. 2003; 467:105–118. DOI: 10.1002/cne.10909 [PubMed: 14574683] 
63. Cerkevich CM, Qi HX, Kaas JH. Corticocortical projections to representations of the teeth, tongue, 
and face in somatosensory area 3b of macaques. J Comp Neurol. 2014; 522:546–572. DOI: 
10.1002/cne.23426 [PubMed: 23853118] 
Hintiryan et al.
Page 24
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 64. Welker E, Hoogland PV, Van der Loos H. Organization of feedback and feedforward projections of 
the barrel cortex: a PHA-L study in the mouse. Exp Brain Res. 1988; 73:411–435. [PubMed: 
3215316] 
Hintiryan et al.
Page 25
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 1. Data production and informatics workflow
Discrete anterograde tracer injections were made (a) and photomicrographs of the Nissl and 
tracer-labeled pathways were acquired. (b) Images were imported into an in-house software 
for warping. Fiducial markers were placed on the Nissl image of the sample to be warped, 
such that they matched the marker pattern of the corresponding atlas Nissl image. The 
sample was then deformably warped. (c) The warped PHAL channel was segmented and 
binarized, yielding a monochromatic image of axonal labeling. (d) The segmented image 
was superimposed onto its corresponding atlas level, within which the CP was divided into 
grid cells. Superimposed axons within each grid cell were quantified. (e) The quantified 
labeling for each injection was compiled into a spreadsheet and (f, top) the data expressed in 
a matrix with cortical areas along the y-axis and cells of the grid along the x-axis. (f, bottom) 
A community detection algorithm was utilized to group cortical areas projecting to a 
common set of cells. The matrix was reordered and color-coded (g) according to community 
structure. Cells boxed in red depict quantification of segmented image in c. (h) The grid 
cells were recolored to visualize, within the CP, the spatial arrangement of the communities 
to which they belong. (i) Communities were subdivided into domains using the centroid, or 
center of gravity, of each terminal field. The original labeling is shown in red and labeling 
after 95% cutoff, which was used for centroid generation, is shown in green. (j) Axonal 
fields within a community whose centroids were closely spaced defined a domain. (k) Using 
intensity weighted centroids as seed points, the CP was parcellated into Voronoi cells 
demonstrating the relative domain boundaries.
Hintiryan et al.
Page 26
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 2. Visualization of CP communities and domains
Matrices that visualize the CP communities across the CPr (top), CPi (middle), and CPc 
(bottom). Matrices show cortical injections along the y-axis and labeled CP cells along the 
x-axis. For visualization, matrices were reordered and color coded according to community 
structure. Corresponding color-coded CP illustrates the spatial arrangement of communities 
within dorsal striatum. Community color assignments across the CP were coordinated to 
reflect general projection trends of communities across the structure. For example, 
projections terminating in the dorsomedial community of the CPi (represented in mustard 
yellow) generally terminate in the medial community of the CPr (bright yellow) and the 
dorsal community of the CPc (pastel yellow). Constituents of each community are listed to 
the left in corresponding color-coded boxes. Cortical area abbreviations: ACAd, Anterior 
cingulate area, dorsal; ACAv, Anterior cingulate area, ventral; AId, Agranular insular area, 
dorsal; AIp, Agranular insular area, posterior; AIv, Agranular insular area, ventral; AUDd, 
Auditory area, dorsal; AUDp, Primary auditory area; AUDv, Primary auditory area, ventral; 
ECT, Ectorhinal area; ENTl, Entorhinal area, lateral; ENTm, Entorhinal area, medial; GU, 
Gustatory area; ILA, Infralimbic area; MOp, Primary motor area; MOp tr, MOp trunk; MOp 
ll, MOp lower limb; MOp ul, MOp upper limb; MOp m/i, MOp inner mouth; MOp m/o, 
MOp outer mouth; MOs, Secondary motor area; MOs tr, MOs trunk; MOs ll, MOs lower 
limb; MOs ul, MOs upper limb; MOs m/i, MOs inner mouth; MOs m/o, MOs outer mouth; 
MOs-fef, MOs frontal eye field; ORBl, Orbitofrontal area, lateral; ORBm, Orbitofrontal 
area, medial; ORBvl, Orbitofrontal area, ventrolateral; PERI, Perirhinal area; PIR, Piriform 
cortex; PL, Prelimbic area; PL dorsal (L6), Layer 6 of dorsal PL; PTLp, Posterior parietal 
association area; Rostral MOs (P1), rostral MOs pole 1; Rostral MOs (P2), rostral MOs pole 
2; RSPagl, Retrosplenial area, agranular; RSPd, Retrosplenial area, dorsal; RSPv, 
Retrosplenial area, ventral; SUBd, Subiculum, dorsal; SSp, Primary somatosensory area; 
SSp-tr, SSp trunk; SSp-ll, SSp lower limb; SSp-ul, SSp upper limb; SSp-m/i, SSp inner 
mouth; SSp-m/o, SSp outer mouth; SSp-bfd, SSp barrel field; SSp-bfd tr, SSp-bfd trunk; 
SSp-bfd ll, SSp-bfd lower limb; SSp-bfd ul, SSp-bfd upper limb; SSp-bfd m/o, SSp-bfd 
Hintiryan et al.
Page 27
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 outer mouth; TEa, Temporal association area; VISal, Visual area, anterolateral; VISam, 
Visual area, anteromedial; VISl, Visual area, lateral; VISp, Primary visual area; VISpl, 
Visual area, posterior lateral; VISpm, Visual area, posterior medial; VISC, Visceral area.
Hintiryan et al.
Page 28
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 3. Summary of community and domain nomenclature and CP domain parcellations
(a) Summary of communities and domains for the rostral, intermediate, and caudal CP are 
presented in a hierarchical tree. The nomenclature follows the CPx.y.z convention where x 
denotes the level (rostral, intermediate, or caudal), y the community, and z the domain. (b) 
Overview of connectivity-based CP domains defined with Voronoi parcellation. A total of 29 
functional domains were identified in the rostral (CPr, left), intermediate (CPi, middle), and 
caudal (CPc, right) levels of the CP. Three domains that were identified based primarily 
from manual inspection of the data are not shown: the CPc.vl and CPc.v.vm, which are part 
of the CPc.v and the CPc.ext located at the tail end of the CP.
Hintiryan et al.
Page 29
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 4. Somatotopic map of cortico-striatal projections to the CPi
(a) Raw data showing somatic sensorimotor areas topographically projecting to different 
domains within the CPi.dl and CPi.vl communities. Each sensorimotor cortical area 
representing a unique body region sends converging input to their corresponding CP domain. 
(b) Dorsal view of the somatic sensorimotor cortical map color coded according to their 
domains (modified from 1) and maximum projection of their CP termination fields (bottom) 
showing distinct, partially overlapping domains. (c) Map depicting connections from body 
specific regions within SSp (row 1), MOp (row 2), SSp-bfd (row 3), and MOs (row 4) to CP, 
illustrating dorsal-ventral representation of trunk, lower limb, upper limb, inner mouth, and 
outer mouth observed in a. The map also demonstrates general trend of projections across 
the rostrocaudal CP. (d) Centroids of cortical areas grouped into CPi.dl and CPi.vl 
communities. Centroids of body specific SSp, SSp-bfd, MOp, and MOs topographically 
arrange and subdivide communities into domains. Importantly, centroids align with the raw 
data in a and reconstructions in c. PTLp rostral was grouped into the CPi.dl community. 
However, according to its centroid (denoted with *) and raw data (Supplementary Fig. 6d), it 
more appropriately grouped with structures in a dorsomedial domain. Cortical areas 
projecting to each domain are listed in boxes color coordinated with centroids (box stroke 
color denotes community). (e) Illustration of 5 parallel, relatively segregated somatic 
sensorimotor striatal networks. All SS and MO nodes within each subnetwork dedicated to a 
specific body region reciprocally connect (Supplementary Fig. 5e and 1) and send 
converging projections to CPi domain representing their corresponding body region. (f) 
Hintiryan et al.
Page 30
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Interdigitation of projection terminals within CPi trunk domain (CPi.dl.d) demonstrated by 
double anterograde injections MOs/MOp trunk regions. (g) Projections from rostral MOs 
(pole 2) arborize in the central CP, avoiding the periphery. (h) FG, CTb 647 and 549 injected 
in trunk, lower limb, and upper limb/mouth CP domains retrogradely label layer V CP-
projecting cortical neurons in their corresponding SSp and MOp body subregions as well as 
SSs and VISC.
Hintiryan et al.
Page 31
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 5. Cortical projections to the dorsomedial and ventromedial CPi communities
(a) Dorsal and lateral views of cortical regions within the medial and lateral cortical 
subnetworks, respectively (modified from1). Areas within the medial cortical subnetwork 
project to domains within dorsomedial CPi (CPi.dm), while those in the lateral cortical 
subnetwork project to ventromedial CPi (CPi.vm) domains. Colors of cortical areas denote 
domain assignments. Overlap of reconstructed pathways of areas projecting CPi.dm and 
CPi.vm highlights unique domains. (b) Triple anterograde tracer injections in VISam (AAV-
RFP), ORBvl (PHAL), and PL (AAV-GFP) show relative boundaries of CPi.dm.d, 
CPi.dm.im, and CPi.dm.cd. (c) Double injections of BDA and PHAL in VISl and TEa show 
segregation of CPi.dm.dm and CPi.dm.im. (d) Raw data from representative cases of cortical 
areas projecting to CPi.vm illustrates the CPi.vm.vm and CPi.vm.v domains. ic, internal 
capsule. (e) Double injections of AAV-GFP (PTLp caudal medial) and PHAL (ACAd) 
highlight interdigitating boundary between CPi.dm.d and CPi.dm.dl. (f) Centroids of cortical 
areas projecting to CPi.dm and CPi.vm display high topography and identify domains. 
Cortical areas projecting to each domain are listed in a box that is color coordinated with the 
centroids (stroke color of box denotes community). The algorithm grouped LA with cortical 
structures projecting to the CPi.dm; however, its centroid (denoted with an *) placed it 
outside of the 5 domains of this community and into CPi.vm.vm. (g) Wiring schema depicts 
connections among cortical areas within the medial cortical subnetwork dedicated to 
transferring visual, auditory, and some somatosensory (trunk/lower limb) information to the 
ORBvl through interconnected nodes involving the VIS, ACA, RSP, PTLp, and AUD1. 
Hintiryan et al.
Page 32
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Nodes within this subnetwork project to domains in the CPi.dm, forming a medial cortical-
dorsomedial striatal network. Diagram also depicts the anterolateral cortical-ventromedial 
striatal subnetwork. The anterolateral cortical subnetwork (i.e., AI, GU, VISC, PIR) is 
heavily connected with PL and ILA. Downstream projections of each of these nodes 
generally target the domains of the CPi.vm.
Hintiryan et al.
Page 33
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 6. Convergence and reconfiguration of cortico-striatal projections in CPr and CPc
(a) Map showing reconstructions of projections populated according to CPr domains (i.e., 
row 1 shows projections from all cortical areas that send input to CPr.l.ls; row 2 depicts 
projections from cortical areas to CPr.l.vm). Reconstructions demonstrate CPr domains 
(column 1) and show general trend of projections through CPi and CPc. For example, 
projections to lateral CPi tend to terminate in lateral CPr, while projections terminating in 
the medial CPi terminate in the medial CPr. (b) Map showing reconstructions of projections 
according to CPc communities and delineating the dorsal, intermediate, and ventral regions 
of CPc (column 3). The termination pattern of cortical areas clustered into these caudal 
communities across CPi and CPr are also depicted (i.e., projections terminating in dorsal 
CPi terminate in dorsal CPc, while those terminating in lateral CPi terminate in intermediate 
parts of CPc. (c) Raw data from representative cases showing projections to CPr.l.ls and 
CPr.l.vm. (d) FG and CTb 647 injections into the lateral strip (CPr.l.ls) and medial/
intermediate ventral CP (CPr.m/CPr.imv), respectively validate cortical projections to those 
domains and communities. FG retrogradely labeled neurons in PL, ORBvl, LA, mBLAa, 
while CTb labeled neurons in MOs, SSp, SSs. Right panels show magnification of 
retrograde labeling. (e) Representative cases demonstrating raw labeling to domains within 
CPc.d. (f) GU injection reveals the ventrolateral domain of CPc.v (CPc.v.vl). Labeling in 
boxed region magnified at right. CEA, central amygdalar nucleus; GPe, globus pallidus 
external part; BLA, basolateral amygdalar nucleus, anterior part. (g) Injections in VISC 
caudal produce unique labeling in CPc.v.vm (magnified on right). An injection in the 
Hintiryan et al.
Page 34
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 thalamus validates this CPc.v.vm domain. Thalamic injection validates the general 
projection trends observed across the rostral-caudal extent of the CP for ventral domains 
(i.e., tendency of projections to CPi.vm.v to terminate in ventral domains of CPr and CPc). 
Labeling in inset magnified at right.
Hintiryan et al.
Page 35
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 7. Network reconfiguration across the CP
(a) A hypothetical functional model of the CP domains based on all cortical afference to 
specific domains identified across the CP. (b) Double anterograde injections of AAV-GFP in 
SSp-bfd mouth/SSs and PHAL in MOp ul show segregation of somatic sensorimotor 
projection terminals in their corresponding domains in the CPi and CPc and intermixing of 
their axons in CPr, demonstrating reconfiguration of these subnetworks across the CP. (c) 
Schematic representation of subnetwork reorganization across the CP. Although relatively 
segregated in CPi, all sensorimotor subnetworks representing unique body information send 
converging inputs to a single domain in the CPr. At the CPc, inputs from the somatic 
sensorimotor nodes terminate in the same community as inputs from the medial (dorsal CPc) 
and lateral (ventral CPc) subnetworks providing greater opportunity for interaction across 
different subnetworks. (d) AUDp projections produce a unique dense terminal field in caudal 
parts of the CP, where projections from most cortical areas is absent (top panel, left). AUD 
projections to this domain, termed the caudal extreme (CPc.ext), were validated with a CTb 
injection, which retrogradely labeled neurons in AUDv (top panel, right). Bottom panels are 
magnified images of boxed region showing dense topographic projections from AUDp and 
TEa in the CPc.ext. CEA, central amygdalar nucleus; BLAa, basolateral amygdalar nucleus, 
anterior part. (e) FG and CTb 647 tracer injections in the dorsal and ventral CPc substantiate 
the cortical projections from ACA, MOs-fef, RSP, VIS, and ECT to CPc.d and from SSp-m 
to CPc.v. Right panels show magnified images of labeling. (f) Projections from ENTl to CPr, 
Hintiryan et al.
Page 36
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 CPi, and CPc. Note the broad projections spanning across all CPi.dm and CPi.vm domains 
in CPi.
Hintiryan et al.
Page 37
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Fig. 8. Domain-specific pathological connections in zQ175 and MAO A/B KO mice
(a) Boxplot showing domain specific loss of signal intensity from the MOs upper limb in 
zQ175 mice compared to wild type (WT) littermates in ipsilateral CP (zQ175, n=13; WT, 
n=15). Boxes depict the range between the upper and lower quartiles, whiskers depict the 
maximum and minimum values, and the bar indicates the median value. Red denotes 
domains within which connections were affected. [Domain, Mean/SEM zQ175 or MAO 
group, Mean/SEM WT group, P value, t value, degrees of freedom: i.vl.imv (ul), 
12740/1926, 20560/2822, 0.031, 2.289, 24; i.dl.imd (ll), 1205/379, 2269/653, 0.173, 1.410, 
22; i.dl.d (tr), 2370/453, 4494/1067, 0.084, 1.832, 18; i.dm.d, 65.16/38.17, 181.7/98.30, 
0.2846, 1.103, 18; i.dm.im, 156.9/79.37, 147.5/93.66, 0.940, 0.0767, 25; i.dm.cd, 
6427/1087, 10990/1700, 0.034, 2.260, 23; i.dm.dm, 46.73,/42.48, 79.25/56.45, 0.649, 0.460, 
24; i.vm.vm, 538.4/227.4, 889.1/225.8, 0.284, 1.094, 25; i.vm.v, 1114/336, 10990/1700, 
0.048, 2.122, 18; i.vm.cvm, 1804/671.4, 4036/869.8, 0.0504, 2.056, 25; i.vl.v, 9269/1850, 
14390/2295, 0.095, 1.738, 25; i.vl.vt (m/o), 6964/1192, 14890/2787, 0.018, 2.615, 18; 
i.vl.cvl, 6770/1216, 13890/2376, 0.015, 2.668, 20]. (b,e) Pixelgrams illustrating differences 
in signal intensity detected between zQ175 and MAO A/B KO mice and their WT 
littermates within each 35x35 pixel cell. Red denotes a reduction in signal compared to WT, 
while blue indicates an increase. Saturation of color scales with percent change. (c) 
Visualization of the bar graphs showing domain-specific signal intensity reductions from 
MOs upper limb and ORBvl in zQ175 (left) and MAO A/B KO (right) mice, respectively. 
(d) Boxplots showing domain specific loss of signal intensity from the ORBvl in MAO A/B 
KO mice compared to WT in ipsilateral (left) and contralateral (right) CP (MAO A/B, n=10; 
Hintiryan et al.
Page 38
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 WT, n=6). Only domains within which significant changes were detected are shown. 
[Ipsilateral CPi: i.vl.imv (ul), 22.11,/10.43, 164.2/37.29, 0.014, 3.670, 5; i.dl.imd (ll), 
730.9/182.6, 3771/1576, 0.114, 1.916, 5; i.dl.d (tr), 149/35.35, 649.9/190.5, 0.049, 2.585, 5; 
i.dm.d, 3460/1297, 7171/2416, 0.218, 1.353, 7; i.dm.dl, 199.6/50.78, 652.6/154.6, 0.032, 
2.780, 6; i.dm.im, 10650/2879, 23640/13100, 0.377, 0.9683, 5; i.dm.cd, 736.3/175.3, 
1953/313.6, 0.010, 3.386, 8; i.dm.dm, 1336/551.3, 3036/1590, 0.351, 1.011, 6; i.vm.vm, 
17010/5028, 30220/11120, 0.315, 1.083, 7; i.vm.v, 10400/2930, 24090/6629, 0.108, 1.888, 
6; i.vm.cvm, 513.4/144.1, 1425/285.6, 0.025, 2.848, 7; i.vl.v (m/i), 1933/728, 3535/1214, 
0.290, 1.132, 8; i.vl.vt (m/o), 4556/1233, 8541/1663, 0.083, 1.925, 10; i.vl.cvl, 158.7/42.76, 
935.6/255.8, 0.030, 2.996, 5; Contralateral CPi: i.vl.imv (ul), 9.934/4.762, 66.22/14.83, 
0.011, 3.614, 6; i.dl.imd (ll), 9.880/4.902, 98.34/24.94, 0.018, 3.481, 5; i.dl.d (tr), 
79.11/26.30, 617.5/175.1, 0.029, 2.935, 7; i.dm.dl, 68.73/25.66, 520.9/109.8, 0.010, 4.012, 
5; i.dm.im, 9358/4310, 19100/7382, 0.287, 1.140, 8; i.dm.cd, 502.6/148.4, 2242/587.3, 
0.035, 2.871, 5; i.dm.dm, 271.7/184.3, 1686/890.8, 0.181, 1.555, 5; i.vm.vm, 11210/3949, 
26130/5758, 0.061, 2.138, 9; i.vm.v, 7857/2429, 9863/2260, 0.556, 0.6049, 13; i.vm.cvm, 
444.8/94.5, 1549/429.5, 0.049, 2.512, 5; i.vl.v (m/i), 272.2/145.1, 1145/371, 0.071, 2.192, 6; 
i.vl.vt (m/o), 2499/944.1, 3170/759.2, 0.589, 0.5539, 13; i.vl.cvl, 110.6/29.52, 782.3/246.2, 
0.042, 2.708, 5]. (f) Boxplots of differences in the span of MOs upper limb and ORBvl 
projection fields within the CP in zQ175 and MAO A/B KO mice compared to WT. [MOs 
ul: 5348/288.9, 5654/250.8, 0.432, 0.7991, 24; ORBvl: 1425/177.1, 2715/494, 0.049, 2.459, 
6]. (g) Boxplots showing the reduction in signal intensity in the entire ipsilateral CP from the 
MOs upper limb (left) and ORBvl (right) in zQ175 and MAO A/B mice, respectively. [MOs 
ul: 57120/9124, 90420/12830, 0.045, 2.115, 24; ORBvl: 3799/842.1, 9372/1764, 0.006, 
3.221, 14]. * denotes significant difference (P<0.05) detected by two-tailed t test with 
Welch’s correction. Intensity is measured as total number of labeled pixels. Span is 
measured as total number of labeled cells.
Hintiryan et al.
Page 39
Nat Neurosci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 August 21.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
