 Development and validation of QRISK3 risk prediction
algorithms to estimate future risk of cardiovascular
disease: prospective cohort study
OPEN ACCESS
Julia Hippisley-Cox professor of clinical epidemiology and general practice
1, Carol Coupland professor
of medical statistics in primary care
1, Peter Brindle evaluation and implementation theme lead,
NIHR CLAHRC West
2
1Division of Primary Care, University Park, Nottingham NG2 7RD, UK; 2Bristol Primary Clinical Commissioning Group and The National Institute for
Health Research Collaboration for Leadership in Applied Health Research and Care West (NIHR CLAHRC West) at University Hospitals Bristol
NHS Foundation Trust, UK, UK
Abstract
Objectives To develop and validate updated QRISK3 prediction
algorithms to estimate the 10 year risk of cardiovascular disease in
women and men accounting for potential new risk factors.
Design Prospective open cohort study.
Setting General practices in England providing data for the QResearch
database.
Participants 1309 QResearch general practices in England: 981
practices were used to develop the scores and a separate set of 328
practices were used to validate the scores. 7.89 million patients aged
25-84 years were in the derivation cohort and 2.67 million patients in
the validation cohort. Patients were free of cardiovascular disease and
not prescribed statins at baseline.
Methods Cox proportional hazards models in the derivation cohort to
derive separate risk equations in men and women for evaluation at 10
years. Risk factors considered included those already in QRISK2 (age,
ethnicity, deprivation, systolic blood pressure, body mass index, total
cholesterol: high density lipoprotein cholesterol ratio, smoking, family
history of coronary heart disease in a first degree relative aged less than
60 years, type 1 diabetes, type 2 diabetes, treated hypertension,
rheumatoid arthritis, atrial fibrillation, chronic kidney disease (stage 4 or
5)) and new risk factors (chronic kidney disease (stage 3, 4, or 5), a
measure of systolic blood pressure variability (standard deviation of
repeated measures), migraine, corticosteroids, systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE), atypical antipsychotics, severe mental illness,
and HIV/AIDs). We also considered erectile dysfunction diagnosis or
treatment in men. Measures of calibration and discrimination were
determined in the validation cohort for men and women separately and
for individual subgroups by age group, ethnicity, and baseline disease
status.
Main outcome measures Incident cardiovascular disease recorded on
any of the following three linked data sources: general practice, mortality,
or hospital admission records.
Results 363 565 incident cases of cardiovascular disease were identified
in the derivation cohort during follow-up arising from 50.8 million person
years of observation. All new risk factors considered met the model
inclusion criteria except for HIV/AIDS, which was not statistically
significant. The models had good calibration and high levels of explained
variation and discrimination. In women, the algorithm explained 59.6%
of the variation in time to diagnosis of cardiovascular disease (R
2, with
higher values indicating more variation), and the D statistic was 2.48
and Harrell’s C statistic was 0.88 (both measures of discrimination, with
higher values indicating better discrimination). The corresponding values
for men were 54.8%, 2.26, and 0.86. Overall performance of the updated
QRISK3 algorithms was similar to the QRISK2 algorithms.
Conclusion Updated QRISK3 risk prediction models were developed
and validated. The inclusion of additional clinical variables in QRISK3
(chronic kidney disease, a measure of systolic blood pressure variability
(standard deviation of repeated measures), migraine, corticosteroids,
SLE, atypical antipsychotics, severe mental illness, and erectile
dysfunction) can help enable doctors to identify those at most risk of
heart disease and stroke.
Introduction
The first QRISK model to estimate 10 year risk of cardiovascular
disease was published in 2007.1 It was followed by an updated
Correspondence to: J Hippisley-Cox julia.hippisley-cox@nottingham.ac.uk
Data supplements on bmj.com (see http://www.bmj.com/content/357/bmj.j2099?tab=related#datasupp)
Appendix: Supplementary materials
Appendix: Supplementary figures
Open Access: Reuse allowed
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2017;357:j2099 doi: 10.1136/bmj.j2099 (Published 24 May 2017)
Page 1 of 21
Research
RESEARCH
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.j2099 on 23 May 2017. Downloaded from 
 model (QRISK2) in 2008, which included ethnic origin and
additional risk factors (type 2 diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis,
atrial fibrillation, and chronic renal disease). Since then,
QRISK2 has been updated annually and recalibrated to the latest
version of the QResearch database2; the age range across which
it applies has also been extended from 35-74 years to 25-84
years, type 1 diabetes has been included as a separate variable,
smoking is assessed at five levels instead of two, and the
Townsend score has been updated using the most recent values
from the 2011 census. This helps to ensure that the algorithms
reflect the changes in population characteristics (such as changes
in prevalence of smoking, body mass index, or declining
incidence of cardiovascular disease) and improvements in data
quality (such as improved recording of risk factors and data
linkage to Hospital Episode Statistics,3 which has increased
ascertainment of cardiovascular events4). The QRISK algorithms
have been validated by ourselves and others in independent
groups of patients using UK primary care databases such as
QResearch,4 Clinical Practice Research Datalink (CPRD),4 The
Health Improvement Network (THIN),5-9 and clinical cohorts10-12
as well as in international populations.13 14 Their use has been
evaluated in observational studies,15 cost effectiveness
evaluations,16 and clinical trials.17 18
QRISK2 is now used across England’s health service (NHS
England) and recommended in the NHS Quality and Outcomes
Framework,19 guidance from the National Institute of Health
and Care Excellence,20 and NHS Health Check.21 QRISK2 is
also used in occupational health settings and internationally,
with over two million hits on the QRISK website (www.qrisk.
org). A new NICE guideline on lipid modification and
cardiovascular risk assessment was published in 2014.20 This
guideline highlighted a number of conditions associated with
increased cardiovascular risk that may not be fully captured by
QRISK2, including HIV/AIDS, stage 3 kidney disease, systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE), severe mental illness, and use of
atypical antipsychotics or corticosteroids.20 These conditions
are not specifically identified within QRISK2, which may result
in underestimation of risk in the relevant patient groups. In
addition, recently published research has highlighted increased
cardiovascular risk and potential prognostic importance for
erectile dysfunction,22-24 migraine,25 and blood pressure
variability.26 We therefore derived and validated a new version
of the algorithms, QRISK3, to determine whether these factors
should be incorporated into the algorithms to improve estimation
of cardiovascular risk for these patients.
Methods
Study design and data source
Using the QResearch database (version 41) we undertook a
cohort study in a large population of primary care patients. We
included all practices in England that had been using the EMIS
computer system for at least one year and randomly allocated
three quarters of practices to the derivation dataset and the
remainder to a validation dataset. We identified an open cohort
of patients aged 25-84 years registered with the practices
between 1 January 1998 and 31 December 2015. Patients were
excluded if they had no postcode related Townsend score (since
these usually result from patients moving to newly built houses
with new postcodes not being yet linked to deprivation data or
from patients being homeless or not having a permanent
residence), had pre-existing cardiovascular disease (on general
practice records or linked hospital records), or were using
prescribed statins at cohort entry. We determined an entry date
to the cohort for each patient, which was the latest of the
following: 25th birthday, date of registration with the practice
plus one year, date on which the practice computer system was
installed plus one year, or the study start date (1 January 1998).
Patients were censored at the earliest date of the diagnosis of
cardiovascular disease, death, deregistration with the practice,
last upload of computerised data, or study end date (31
December 2015).
Outcomes
Our outcome was cardiovascular disease, which was defined as
a composite outcome of coronary heart disease, ischaemic
stroke, or transient ischaemic attack. The QResearch database
is linked at individual patient level to hospital admissions data
(Hospital Episode Statistics), and mortality records obtained
from the Office for National Statistics. The records are linked
using a pseudonymised NHS number specific to the QResearch
database. The recording of NHS numbers is valid and complete
for 99.8% of patients with data on QResearch, 99.9% for ONS
mortality records, and 98% for hospital admissions records.3 27
We classified patients as having cardiovascular disease if there
was a record of the relevant clinical code in either their general
practice record, their linked hospital record, or their linked
mortality record. We used Read codes to identify cardiovascular
disease cases from the general practice record. The Read codes
are listed in table 1⇓ of the web appendix. We used ICD-10
(international classification of diseases, 10th revision) clinical
codes to identify cases from hospital and mortality records
except for the three years between 1 January 1998 and 31
December 2000, when ICD-9 was in use for mortality records.
The ICD-10 codes used were G45 (transient ischaemic attack
and related syndromes), I20 (angina pectoris), I21 (acute
myocardial infarction), I22 (subsequent myocardial infarction),
I23 (complications after myocardial infarction), I24 (other acute
ischaemic heart disease), I25 (chronic ischaemic heart disease),
I63 (cerebral infarction), and I64 (stroke not specified as
haemorrhage or infarction). The corresponding ICD-9 codes
used were 410, 411, 412, 413, 414, 434, and 436. General
practice and linked mortality and Hospital Episode Statistics
data were available until 31 December 2015. We used the
earliest recorded date of cardiovascular disease on any of the
three data sources as the outcome date.
Predictor variables
We examined the predictor variables in box 1 based on
established risk factors already included in the current version
of QRISK2 and new candidate variables highlighted in the
literature or National Institute for Health and Care Excellence
guidelines.
From the general practice record we extracted data for
demographic factors, clinical diagnoses, and clinical values.
For clinical values (systolic blood pressure and body mass index)
and smoking status we obtained the most recent values recorded
before the baseline date. We selected the closest value to cohort
entry for total cholesterol: high density lipoprotein cholesterol
ratio, restricting values after the baseline date to those before
the patient had a diagnosis of cardiovascular disease or was
censored, and before any statin prescriptions. To assess
variability in systolic blood pressure, we identified all systolic
blood pressure values recorded in the five years before study
entry and calculated the standard deviation where there were
two or more recorded values. Use of drugs at baseline was
defined as at least two prescriptions, with the most recent one
no more than 28 days before the date of entry to the cohort. All
other predictor variables were based on the latest information
recorded in the general practice record before entry to the cohort.
Open Access: Reuse allowed
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2017;357:j2099 doi: 10.1136/bmj.j2099 (Published 24 May 2017)
Page 2 of 21
RESEARCH
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.j2099 on 23 May 2017. Downloaded from 
 Box 1: Variables used in QRISK algorithms
Existing variables from QRISK2-2017
Age at study entry (baseline)
Ethnic origin (nine categories)
Deprivation (as measured by the Townsend score, where higher values indicate higher levels of material deprivation)
Systolic blood pressure
Body mass index
Total cholesterol: high density lipoprotein cholesterol ratio
Smoking status (non-smoker, former smoker, light smoker (1-9/day), moderate smoker (10-19/day), or heavy smoker (≥20/day))
Family history of coronary heart disease in a first degree relative aged less than 60 years
Diabetes (type 1, type 2, or no diabetes)
Treated hypertension (diagnosis of hypertension and treatment with at least one antihypertensive drug)
Rheumatoid arthritis (diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis, Felty’s syndrome, Caplan’s syndrome, adult onset Still’s disease, or inflammatory
polyarthropathy not otherwise specified)
Atrial fibrillation (including atrial fibrillation, atrial flutter, and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation)
Chronic kidney disease (stage 4 or 5) and major chronic renal disease (including nephrotic syndrome, chronic glomerulonephritis, chronic
pyelonephritis, renal dialysis, and renal transplant)
New or amended risk factors considered
Expanded definition of chronic kidney disease (to include general practitioner recorded diagnosis of chronic kidney disease stage 3 in addition
to stages 4 and 5 as well as major chronic renal disease)
Measure of systolic blood pressure variability (standard deviation of repeated measures)
Diagnosis of migraine (including classic migraine, atypical migraine, abdominal migraine, cluster headaches, basilar migraine, hemiplegic
migraine, and migraine with or without aura)
Corticosteroid use (British National Formulary (BNF) chapter 6.3.2 including oral or parenteral prednisolone, betamethasone, cortisone,
depo-medrone, dexamethasone, deflazacort, efcortesol, hydrocortisone, methylprednisolone, or triamcinolone)
Systemic lupus erythematosus (including diagnosis of SLE, disseminated lupus erythematosus, or Libman-Sacks disease)
Second generation “atypical” antipsychotic use (including amisulpride, aripiprazole, clozapine, lurasidone, olanzapine, paliperidone, quetiapine,
risperidone, sertindole, or zotepine)
Diagnosis of severe mental illness (including psychosis, schizophrenia, or bipolar affective disease)
Diagnosis of HIV or AIDS
Diagnosis of erectile dysfunction or treatment for erectile dysfunction (BNF chapter 7.4.5 including alprostadil, phosphodiesterase type 5
inhibitors, papaverine, or phentolamine)
Derivation and validation of the models
We developed and validated the risk prediction algorithms using
established methods1-28 and performed an initial analysis based
on patients with complete variables. For our main analysis, we
used multiple imputation with chained equations to replace
missing values for body mass index, systolic blood pressure,
standard deviation of systolic blood pressure, serum cholesterol,
high density lipoprotein cholesterol, and smoking status and
used these values in our main analyses.29-32 We log transformed
values for continuous variables that were not normally
distributed for inclusion in the imputation model so that the
imputed values would better match the distribution of observed
values. Five imputations were carried out as this has a relatively
high efficiency33 and was a pragmatic approach accounting for
the size of the datasets and capacity of the available servers and
software. In the imputation model we included all predictor
variables, along with age interaction terms, the Nelson-Aalen
estimator of the baseline cumulative hazard, and the outcome
indicator.
Cox’s proportional hazards models were used to estimate the
coefficients for each risk factor in women and men separately.
We used Rubin’s rules to combine the results across the imputed
datasets.34 Fractional polynomials35 were used to model
non-linear risk relations with continuous variables using data
from patients with recorded values to derive the fractional
polynomial terms. We fitted full models initially. For
consistency, we included variables from existing QRISK2
models and then retained additional variables if they had an
adjusted hazard ratio of less than 0.90 or greater than 1.10 (for
binary variables) and were statistically significant at the 0.01
level. We developed three main models. Model A contains the
same variables as the latest version of QRISK2-2017. Model B
includes the additional variables that met our inclusion criteria
but not the standard deviation of serial systolic blood pressure
values. Model C is the same as model B except that it includes
the standard deviation of serial systolic blood pressure values.
We examined interactions between new predictor variables and
age at study entry and included significant interactions in models
B and C along with interactions already included in QRISK2.
From the final models we used the regression coefficients for
each variable as weights, which we combined with the baseline
survivor function evaluated up to 15 years to derive risk
equations over a period of 15 years of follow-up.36 This enabled
us to derive risk estimates for each year of follow-up, with a
specific focus on 10 year risk estimates. We estimated the
baseline survivor function based on zero values of centred
continuous variables, with all binary predictor values set to zero.
Validation of the models
In the validation cohort we used multiple imputation to replace
missing values for body mass index, systolic blood pressure,
standard deviation of systolic blood pressure, serum cholesterol,
high density lipoprotein cholesterol, and smoking status. We
carried out five imputations. The risk equations for women and
men obtained from the derivation cohort for models A, B, and
C were applied to the validation cohort and measures of
discrimination calculated. As in previous studies,4 we calculated
R2 values (explained variation where higher values indicate a
greater proportion of variation in time to cardiovascular disease
diagnosis is explained by the model 37), D statistic38 (a measure
of discrimination where higher values indicate better
discrimination), and Harrell’s C statistic at 10 years and
combined these across datasets using Rubin’s rules. Harrell’s
C statistic39 is a measure of discrimination that is similar to the
area under a receiver operating characteristic curve but takes
account of the censored nature of the data.
Open Access: Reuse allowed
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2017;357:j2099 doi: 10.1136/bmj.j2099 (Published 24 May 2017)
Page 3 of 21
RESEARCH
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.j2099 on 23 May 2017. Downloaded from 
 We assessed calibration (comparing the mean predicted risks
at 10 years with the observed risk by 10th of predicted risk).
The observed risks were obtained using the Kaplan-Meier
estimates evaluated at 10 years. We also evaluated performance
in each age group (<40, 40-59, ≥60 years), ethnic origin
subgroup, and each comorbidity and treatment subgroup.
Performance was also evaluated by calculating Harrell’s C
statistics in individual general practices and combining the
results using meta-analytical techniques for comparison with a
previous study of QRISK2.9
Reclassification statistics
In line with current NICE guidelines,20 we classified patients as
being at high risk of cardiovascular disease if their 10 year risk
was 10% or greater. We compared predicted risks for our final
models (QRISK3) with the latest version of QRISK2-2017 to
determine the percentage of patients who would be reclassified
at this threshold according to each model. Among the
reclassified patients we also calculated the observed risks of
cardiovascular disease at 10 years using the Kaplan-Meier
method.
To maximise the power and generalisability of the results we
used all the relevant patients on the database. STATA (version
14) was used for all analyses. The study adhered to the TRIPOD
(Transparent Reporting of a multivariable prediction model for
Individual Prognosis Or Diagnosis) statement for reporting.40
Patient involvement
Over the past 10 years since the original publication of QRISK1
there has been extensive discussion about methods for
assessment of cardiovascular risk. This has included a series of
public stakeholder consultations in relation to updates of NICE
guidance on lipid modification,20 the NHS Quality and Outcomes
Framework, and NHS Health Check.21 We therefore decided to
focus on issues highlighted in NICE guidance and the literature
rather than to consult patient or professional groups. We decided
it would be more transparent and effective to discuss the addition
of new variables once the paper was published and the relative
contribution of individual risk factors had been quantified. Given
the widespread implementation of QRISK2 across the NHS and
its inclusion in guidelines, this would give time for feedback
from a range of stakeholders (including patient groups and
charities) as to which changes would be most beneficial and
how improvements might be implemented.
Results
Study population
Overall, 1309 practices contributing to the QResearch database
in England met our inclusion criteria. Of these, 981 were
randomly assigned to the derivation dataset and the remainder
(n=328) to a validation cohort. For the derivation cohort we
identified 8 602 833 patients aged 25-84 years. We excluded
31 433 (0.4%) with no recorded Townsend score, 344 669
(4.0%) with a diagnosis of cardiovascular disease at baseline
recorded on the general practice or Hospital Episode Statistics
record, and 336 928 (3.9%) prescribed statins at baseline.
Overall, 7 889 803 patients were included in the derivation
analysis.
For the validation cohort we identified 2 918 082 patients aged
25-84 years. We excluded 13 862 (0.5%) with no recorded
Townsend score, 118 057 (4.0%) with a diagnosis of
cardiovascular disease recorded on the general practice or
Hospital Episode Statistics record, and 114 865 (3.9%)
prescribed statins at baseline. In total, 2 671 298 patients were
included in the validation analysis.
Baseline characteristics
Table 1⇓ shows the baseline characteristics of men and women
in the derivation and validation cohorts. In the derivation cohort,
self assigned ethnic origin was recorded for 64.9% of women
and 59.7% of men, smoking status for 85.0% and 77.7%,
respectively, systolic blood pressure for 82.8% and 68.3%,
respectively, body mass index for 72.8% and 64.0%,
respectively, and total cholesterol: high density lipoprotein
cholesterol ratio for 39.8% and 37.9%, respectively. Complete
information for smoking status, systolic blood pressure, body
mass index, and total cholesterol: high density lipoprotein
cholesterol ratio was provided for 28.5% of women and 24.6%
of men. At least two systolic blood pressures were recorded for
77.7% of women and 64.0% of men from which the standard
deviations were calculated. These values were similar to
corresponding values for both sexes in the validation cohort
(table 1⇓).
Table 1⇓ also shows comorbidities at study entry. For the new
variables of interest, severe mental illness was recorded for
6.8% of women and 4.3% of men, migraine for 6.4% and 2.7%,
respectively, chronic kidney disease (stage 3, 4, or 5) for 0.5%
and 0.3%, respectively; prescribed atypical antipsychotics for
0.5% of women and men, and prescribed corticosteroids for
2.4% and 1.5%, respectively, and 2.3% of men had a diagnosis
of or treatment for erectile dysfunction. SLE was recorded for
0.1% of women and less than 0.1% of men and HIV/AIDS for
0.1% of women and 0.2% of men. The mean of the most recent
systolic blood pressure values was 123.2 mm Hg in women and
129.2 mm Hg in men and the mean of the standard deviations
of repeated systolic blood pressure values was 9.3 in women
and 9.9 in men.
Incidence rates of cardiovascular disease
Table 2⇓ shows the numbers of patients with a new diagnosis
of cardiovascular disease during follow-up by age group (five
year intervals) in women and men in the derivation cohort based
on the linked general practice, hospital, and Office for National
Statistics morality records. In the derivation cohort, we identified
363 565 incident cases of cardiovascular disease arising from
50.8 million person years of observation. The incidence of
cardiovascular disease increased steeply by age group and values
were higher in men than women for all age groups. Table 2⇓ in
the web appendix shows a similar breakdown by nine ethnic
groups. For example, 4758 events occurred in Indian women
and men arising from 8 819 177 person years of observation
and 417 events in Chinese women and men arising from 210
267 person years of observation.
Table 3⇓ in the web appendix shows the source of the data that
first identified the incident event by type of event in the
derivation cohort. It also shows the number and percentage of
cases that were identified only using general practice data with
no subsequent evidence of cardiovascular disease on hospital
or mortality records. Of the 363 565 incident events, 78 327
(21.5%) were myocardial infarction, 152 141 (41.8%) were
angina, 49 504 (13.6%) were transient ischaemic attack, and 83
593 (23.0%) were ischaemic strokes. Overall, 92 936 (25.6%
of all 363 565 events) were only recorded on the general practice
record, with the most common condition being transient
ischaemic attack (27 227 events).
The median follow-up in the derivation cohort was 4.4 years
(interquartile range 1.6-10.8) and 2 141 841 patients had 10
Open Access: Reuse allowed
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2017;357:j2099 doi: 10.1136/bmj.j2099 (Published 24 May 2017)
Page 4 of 21
RESEARCH
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.j2099 on 23 May 2017. Downloaded from 
 years or more of follow-up and 1 090 704 had 15 years or more
of follow-up. Of the 7 889 803 patients in the derivation cohort,
696 387 (8.8%) started using statins after entry to the cohort
and before having a new diagnosis of cardiovascular disease or
being censored. Of the 50 764 868 person years of follow-up,
46 940 777 person years were free from statin use (92.5%).
In the validation cohort, the median follow up was 4.4 years
(interquartile range 1.6-10.8) and 728 704 patients had 10 years
or more of follow-up and 380 387 had 15 years or more of
follow-up.
Predictor variables
Table 3⇓ shows the adjusted hazard ratios for women in the
derivation cohort and table 4⇓ shows the corresponding values
for men. Of the new risk factors, all met our model inclusion
criteria except for HIV/AIDS, which was associated with a 25%
increased risk in women and 17% increased risk in men, but
these were not statistically significant at the 0.01 level. Model
A is the latest version of QRISK2 (2017). Model B includes the
additional variables that met our inclusion criteria. Model C is
the same as model B except that it includes the standard
deviation of serial systolic blood pressure values.
The supplementary figure shows graphs of the adjusted hazard
ratios for model B for the fractional polynomial terms for age
and body mass index as well as the interaction terms between
age and relevant predictor variables, as listed in the footnotes
of tables 3 and 4⇓. For the new variables of interest in model
B, migraine was associated with a 36% increased risk of
cardiovascular disease for women and a 29% increased risk for
men, corticosteroids were associated with an 82% increased
risk for women and 58% increased risk for men, SLE was
associated with a 115% increased risk for women and a 55%
increased risk for men, atypical antipsychotics were associated
with a 29% increased risk for women and a 15% increased risk
for men, severe mental illness was associated with a 14%
increased risk for women and a 13% increased risk for men.
Erectile dysfunction was associated with a 25% increased risk.
Where there were age interactions these values relate to risks
evaluated at the mean ages. The full list of age interactions is
shown in the footnotes for tables 3 and 4⇓. For the new
variables, there were statistically significant interactions between
age and migraine as well as age and corticosteroid use in both
sexes. In women, there was also a statistically significant
interaction between age and SLE. In men, there was also a
statistically significant interaction between age and erectile
dysfunction. For each of these interactions, hazard ratios for the
predictors were higher at younger ages compared with older
ages, except for erectile dysfunction in men, where hazard ratios
were highest for men aged around age 45 and then declined
gradually with increasing age.
For model C, the standard deviation of systolic blood pressure
values was included in the model in addition to the single most
recent systolic blood pressure value. Overall a 10 unit increase
in the standard deviation of systolic blood pressure was
associated with an 8% increased risk of cardiovascular disease
in women (table 3⇓) and an 11% increased risk in men (table
4⇓).
Tables 4 and 5⇓ in the web appendix show the results of
complete case analyses for models B and C for women and men,
respectively (ie, the results based on patients with complete
data). The hazard ratios associated with total cholesterol: high
density lipoprotein cholesterol ratio, systolic blood pressure,
and standard deviation of systolic blood pressure were similar
to those obtained in the main models using multiply imputed
data.
Validation
Discrimination
Table 5⇓ shows the performance of each algorithm in the
validation cohort for women and men for each of models A, B,
and C. For model B in women, the algorithm explained 59.5%
of the variation in time to diagnosis of cardiovascular disease
(R2), the D statistic was 2.48, and the Harrell’s C statistic was
0.88. The corresponding values for men were 54.8%, 2.26, and
0.86. Measures of performance were similar for all three models.
Table 6⇓ in the web appendix shows the validation statistics for
model B in various subgroups, including three age groups, ethnic
groups, and in those with specific comorbidities. The highest
performance values by ethnic origin were in Chinese women
(R2=64.7%; D=2.77; Harrell’s C=0.91) and the lowest values
were in Caribbean women (R2=51.6%; D=2.11; Harrell’s
C=0.85). Performance values were highest in the youngest age
group (25-39 years) and lowest in the oldest age group (60-84
years).
For the subgroup of women with type 1 diabetes the R2 was
47.3%, D statistic was 1.94, and Harrell’s C statistic was 0.82.
The corresponding values for men with type 1 diabetes were
45.6%, 1.87, and 0.80. For the subgroup of women with type 2
diabetes the R2 was 25.2%, D statistic was 1.19, and Harrell’s
C statistic was 0.70. The corresponding values for men with
type 2 diabetes were 22.9%, 1.12, and 0.70.
Figure 1⇓ shows the funnel plots of Harrell’s C statistic for
model B across the 328 practices in the validation cohort. The
funnel plots show Harrell’s C statistic for each general practice
versus the number of cardiovascular events in each practice in
women and men separately. Practices with fewer cardiovascular
events had wider variation in the C statistic than practices with
more events. The summary (average) C statistic for women was
0.874 (95% confidence interval 0.869 to 0.880) from a random
effects meta-analysis. The I2 value (ie, the percentage of total
variation in C statistics owing to between practice heterogeneity)
was 93.3%. The approximate 95% prediction interval for the
true C statistic in women in a new practice was 0.79 to 0.96.
The summary C statistic for men was 0.851 (95% confidence
interval, 0.847 to 0.855) from a random effects meta-analysis.
The I2 value was 84.2%. The approximate 95% prediction
interval for the true C statistic in men in a new practice was
0.79 to 0.91.
Calibration
In women, the mean 10 year predicted risk was 4.7% for models
A, B, and C. The observed 10 year risk was 5.8% (95%
confidence interval 5.8% to 5.9%). In men, the mean 10 year
predicted risk was 6.4% for models A, B, and C. The observed
10 year risk was 7.5% (7.5% to 7.6%). Figure 2⇓ shows the
mean predicted risks and observed risks at 10 years by 10th of
predicted risk, applying each algorithm to all women and men
in the validation cohort and to separate age groups (25-39, 40-59,
and 60-84 years). There was close correspondence between the
mean predicted risks and the observed risks within each model
10th overall and in each age group in women and men indicating
that the algorithms were well calibrated. The exception was in
those aged 25-39 where mean predicted risks were slightly
higher than observed risks.
Open Access: Reuse allowed
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2017;357:j2099 doi: 10.1136/bmj.j2099 (Published 24 May 2017)
Page 5 of 21
RESEARCH
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.j2099 on 23 May 2017. Downloaded from 
 Reclassification
Overall, there were 2 671 298 patients in the validation cohort.
Of these, 458 263 (17.2%) had a 10 year risk score of 10% or
greater using model A; 458 869 (17.2%) using model B, and
458 868 (17.2%) using model C.
Using model A, the number of patients with a 10 year risk score
of 15% or more was 308 130 (11.5%) and with a risk of 20%
of more was 214 451 (8.0%). The corresponding numbers for
models B and C were similar.
Of 458 263 patients with a 10 year predicted risk score of 10%
or more using model A, 10 948 (2.4%) would be reclassified
as low risk (predicted risk <10% over 10 years) using model B.
The 10 year observed risk among these reclassified patients was
10.3% (95% confidence interval 9.6% to 11.1%), just above the
10% threshold. Conversely, of the 2 213 035 classified as low
risk (predicted risk <10% over 10 years) using model A, 11 554
(0.5%) would be reclassified as high risk using model B. The
10 year observed risk among these reclassified patients was
12.2% (11.4% to 13.1%), above the 10% threshold.
Of the 458 869 patients with a 10 year predicted risk score of
10% or more using model B, 9102 (2.0%) would be reclassified
as low risk using model C. The 10 year observed risk among
these reclassified patients was 9.6% (95% confidence interval
8.9% to 10.5%), marginally below the 10% threshold.
Conversely, of the 2 213 429 with a 10 year predicted risk score
of less than 10% using model B, 9101 (2.4%) would be
reclassified as high risk using model C. The 10 year observed
risk among these reclassified patients was 10.7% (9.9% to
11.6%), marginally above the 10% threshold.
Clinical examples
Table 6⇓ shows clinical examples where use of model A, B, or
C would result in a reclassification above or below the 10%
threshold. Figures 3⇓ and 4⇓ show screenshots of the updated
web calculator with a clinical example which can be found at
www.qrisk.org.
Discussion
We have developed and validated updated algorithms (QRISK3)
to predict 10 year risk of cardiovascular disease in women and
men aged 25-84 years. The algorithms incorporate established
predictor variables from QRISK2 as well as new variables
associated with increased risk of cardiovascular disease. These
include an expanded definition of chronic kidney disease to
include chronic kidney disease stage 3, migraine, corticosteroid
use, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), atypical antipsychotic
use, severe mental illness, erectile dysfunction, and a measure
of blood pressure variability (standard deviation of repeated
values). We have produced three main final models: model A,
which includes the same variables and coefficients as the current
version of QRISK2-2017; model B, which includes the new
variables and the latest systolic blood pressure value and is for
use where only the current reading is available; and our preferred
model C, which additionally includes a measure of blood
pressure variability that may be more suitable for integration
into general practice computer systems where longitudinal
repeated values are likely to be available. Although in population
terms the overall performance of all three models is similar, for
those who have one or more of the conditions included in the
newer models, having the additional risk taken into account
could result in the difference between taking or not taking risk
reducing treatment. The increased complexity is unlikely to
affect the take-up of the new models as they are designed to be
calculated automatically from the electronic patient record.
Comparisons with the literature
The hazard ratios of the new risk variables included in our final
models are similar in both magnitude and direction to those
reported in other studies.25
Migraine
Sufficient pathophysiological and epidemiological evidence
have now accumulated for some experts to propose that migraine
should be included as a marker for future cardiovascular
disease.41 Our results support this since we found that migraine
was associated with a 36% increased risk of cardiovascular
disease for women and 29% for men (model B). This is
consistent with the increased risk of 42% in 27 840 women aged
45 and over in the Women’s Health Study42 and the increased
risk of 50% reported in a recent study of 115 541 women aged
25-42 recruited to the Nurses’ Health Study II.25 In our study,
migraine was recorded in 6.4% of women and 2.7% of men.
This is less than the 16% reported in the Nurse’s Health Study
II25 and the 18.4% in the Women’s Health Study42 and might
reflect differences in cohort selection, clinical setting, consulting
patterns, diagnostic criteria, or recording of diagnoses. For
example, our study is based on routinely collected health records
and uses diagnoses recorded by clinicians before entry to the
cohort. In contrast, the Nurses’ Health Study II used self report
questionnaires at three time points over a six year period. Our
study, which also includes men, is much larger than previous
studies.25 42 While our study may be more representative of the
general population than patients recruited to a trial, it is also
susceptible to ascertainment bias. This would be the case if not
all patients with migraine visited their general practitioner and
not all of those diagnoses are recorded. Conversely, the Nurses’
Health Study II and the Women’s Health Study may be subject
to recall bias owing to the use of self reported questionnaires
inquiring about historical diagnoses. Also, our definition of
migraine included a range of subtypes so it is not possible to
say which of these are associated with the additional risk of
being categorised as having migraine. For example, the bulk of
the risk could be coming from those with migraine with aura
rather than other subtypes.43 While the magnitude of the
increased risk associated with migraine is relatively small at the
individual level, it is important at the population level since
migraine is so prevalent.41 Hence there is good justification for
including clinician recorded diagnosed migraine in our new
models.
Corticosteroids and antipsychotics
The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence guidance
states that cardiovascular disease risk scores will underestimate
cardiovascular risk among people who are taking medicines
that cause dyslipidaemia such as antipsychotic drugs or
corticosteroids.20 In line with other studies,44 we found evidence
to support the increased risk with corticosteroids despite
simultaneous adjustment of lipid levels. Current corticosteroids
(defined as ≥2 prescriptions, with the most recent one within
the 28 days before study entry) were prescribed for 2.4% of
women and 1.5% of men and were associated with an 82%
increased cardiovascular risk in women and 58% increased risk
in men. This is similar to the increased risks with corticosteroids
found in other studies.45 46 However, our definition was relatively
simple (and could be used in clinical practice) but did not
account for duration of use and dose and so allows for
Open Access: Reuse allowed
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2017;357:j2099 doi: 10.1136/bmj.j2099 (Published 24 May 2017)
Page 6 of 21
RESEARCH
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.j2099 on 23 May 2017. Downloaded from 
 substantial heterogeneity in the indications for steroid use, and
the effect may not apply equally to those with different levels
of exposure. Similarly, atypical antipsychotic drugs were
prescribed to 0.5% of men and women and were associated with
a 29% increased cardiovascular risk in women and 15%
increased risk in men. Both corticosteroids and atypical
antipsychotics therefore seem to be clinically important variables
to include in QRISK, taking account of the magnitude of the
risk and the potential numbers of patients affected.
Severe mental illness
The NICE guidance highlights the increased cardiovascular risk
associated with severe mental illness,20 although this is contrary
to a recent systematic review and meta-analysis, which failed
to find sufficient evidence to support this conclusion.47 Our
study found that 6.8% of women and 4.3% of men had a
diagnosis of severe mental illness affects and it was associated
with a 14% increased risk of cardiovascular disease for women
and a 13% increased risk for men (model B). This is independent
of the risk associated with atypical antipsychotics and hence
both factors have been included separately as they will have a
compound effect on cardiovascular risk. Clinicians will now be
able to provide better information to these patients both about
interventions to reduce cardiovascular risk and about the
potential effects of atypical antipsychotics.
SLE
The NICE guidance on lipid modification20 highlights the
increased cardiovascular risk associated with SLE. The excess
risk is thought to be driven largely by inflammation and an
active immunological response.48
Reduction in risk in patients with SLE may need both
modification of SLE specific factors such as disease activity
and drug therapy as well as modification of traditional
cardiovascular disease risk factors, although the role of
anti-inflammatory treatments is not yet clear.48 We found that
a diagnosis of SLE is associated with a 115% increased risk for
women and a 55% increased risk for men. While SLE is
relatively uncommon (affecting 0.1% of women and rarely
affecting men), the magnitude of the increased risk is high
(substantially higher than rheumatoid arthritis for example)
particularly at younger ages (hazard ratios were >2 for ages ≤45
years). This makes it an important risk factor for these patients
and is consistent with other studies examining cardiovascular
outcomes in patients with these conditions.48
Chronic kidney disease
The NICE guidance20 states “do not use a risk assessment tool
in people with an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR)
of less than 60/mL/1.73 m2 and/or albuminuria. These people
are at increased risk of cardiovascular disease . . . Atorvastatin
should be offered to people with CKD [chronic kidney disease].”
Our expanded definition of chronic kidney disease now includes
chronic kidney disease stage 3 (eGFR 30-59/mL/1.73 m2) in
addition to stages 4 and 5, in line with other published studies.49
This means QRISK3 can be used in such patients and will
provide them with better information to inform their choice
about use of statins and potentially other non-drug interventions
to reduce their cardiovascular risk and to “encourage the person
to participate in reducing their risk” in line with the
recommendations for other patients.
Type 1 diabetes
Although the NICE guidance on lipid modification20
recommends the use of QRISK2 in patients with type 2 diabetes,
it states “do not use a risk assessment tool to assess CVD
[cardiovascular disease] risk in patients with type 1 diabetes.”
Instead it recommends that “statin treatment is offered to all
patients with type 1 diabetes who are older than 40 years or
have had diabetes for more than 10 years or have established
nephropathy or have other CVD risk factors.” The current model
for QRISK2 and the models presented in this paper allow
calculation of cardiovascular risk for patients with type 1
diabetes. The performance among patients with type 1 diabetes
is good (see table 6⇓ in the web appendix). We can see no reason
why patients with type 1 diabetes should not have similar
discussions to other patients regarding the risks and benefits of
interventions. Use of the calculator in patients with type 1
diabetes is intended to allow better information to be shared
with such patients on their cardiovascular risk profile. It may
identify patients with a risk under 10% who may not want to
take statins as well as facilitate a discussion on a range of
interventions to reduce risk, including weight loss, blood
pressure control, and smoking cessation. The performance of
the models in patients with type 2 diabetes was lower than for
patients with type 1 diabetes (for example in men with type 2
diabetes Harrell’s C=0.70, R2=22.9% compared with Harrell’s
C=0.80, R2=45.6% in men with type 1 diabetes).
Blood pressure variability
Recent studies have suggested that higher blood pressure
variability is associated with increased risks of stroke26 and other
cardiovascular events.50 This may be independent of mean blood
pressure values,50 although the increased risk of cardiovascular
events associated with blood pressure variability in the recent
meta-analysis by Stevens et al was based on one study of 8811
patients aged more than 55 years with type 2 diabetes.51 In our
study, both the most recent value at baseline and the standard
deviation of systolic blood pressure were independently
associated with increased risk of cardiovascular disease,
although the addition of the standard deviation to the model did
not improve discrimination or calibration. It may be difficult to
implement the model with blood pressure variability in a setting
where there is no historical information on blood pressure
available, such as with a web calculator. While the performance
and reclassification statistics suggest that its inclusion will not
make a major difference at a population level, there may be
some benefit from taking this factor into account for those
patients with highly variable blood pressure.
Erectile dysfunction
The true prevalence of erectile dysfunction is difficult to
determine, and estimates range from 1% to 100% depending on
the age of the population and how the diagnosis was made.24
Our study indicated that erectile dysfunction affected 2.3% of
men, but this is likely to be an underestimate as it includes only
men who present to their doctor with the condition and have
the diagnosis or treatment recorded on their electronic record.
We showed that erectile dysfunction is likely to be an
independent risk factor for cardiovascular disease and was
associated with a 25% increased risk of cardiovascular disease
(at the mean age), which is compatible with the findings of a
meta-analysis that examined the association between erectile
dysfunction and cardiovascular disease risk in 13 studies.23
While the overall relative risk estimate from these studies was
1.44, the 95% confidence interval was broad (1.27 to 1.63) and
Open Access: Reuse allowed
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2017;357:j2099 doi: 10.1136/bmj.j2099 (Published 24 May 2017)
Page 7 of 21
RESEARCH
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.j2099 on 23 May 2017. Downloaded from 
 there was substantial heterogeneity across the studies. The
association was reduced to 1.34 (1.17 to 1.54) when only high
quality studies were included. Our definition and others only
provide a summary effect and it should be recognised that the
causes of erectile dysfunction are usually a combination of the
physiological and psychological and that men with vascular
causes are likely to be at higher risk of cardiovascular disease
than those for whom the cause is largely psychological.
HIV/AIDS
Data from large cohorts have reported that people infected with
HIV have approximately 50% greater risk of acute myocardial
infarction and stroke compared with those without HIV,52 which
may be related to antiretroviral treatment.53 While we found a
tendency towards an increased risk of cardiovascular disease
among people with HIV/AIDS this did not reach statistical
significance at the 0.01 level so was not included in the final
models. These results may reflect the relatively small numbers
with HIV/AIDS recorded on the general practice clinical system.
Also, people with HIV/AIDS tend to be younger and so have
low absolute event rates and shorter periods of follow-up with
an individual general practice, which may tend to underestimate
the long term association. People with HIV/AIDS may receive
healthcare (and prescriptions for antiretroviral treatment) from
specialist clinics rather than general practices, which may
explain why there are few prescriptions recorded for
antiretroviral treatment on the QResearch database. Over time
the recording of HIV/AIDS and prescribing of antiretroviral
treatment may increase and so it is important to reassess the
suitability of HIV/AIDS for inclusion in QRISK3 periodically
to ensure that affected people have accurate cardiovascular risk
assessments.
Comparison with the original version of
QRISK2, 2008
Our new models are well calibrated when applied to a separate
validation cohort and have high levels of discrimination. We
found an improvement in performance from all three models
over the original version of QRISK2 from 2008,28 although some
of this improvement is likely to be owing to the wider age range
(25-84 compared with 35-74 years). Since 2008, improvements
have been made to the underlying QResearch database used to
derive the QRISK algorithm, which may have resulted in
improvements to the performance of the algorithm over and
above extending the age range from 35-74 to 25-84 years and
the inclusion of additional variables. Ascertainment of
cardiovascular events has improved with the linkage of the
QResearch database to both Office for National Statistics
mortality and Hospital Episode Statistics since 1998. The
number of practices contributing to the database has more than
doubled, from 531 in 2008 to over 1300. The size of the
derivation cohort has increased fivefold, with 363 565
cardiovascular events arising from 50.8 million person years of
observation compared with 96 709 events arising from 10.9
million person years in 2008. The recording of self assigned
ethnic origin has increased; 25% in 2008 compared with 62%
in the current derivation cohort. As a result of these factors,
there are many more events within each ethnic group—for
example, there has been a 10-fold increase in the number of
cardiovascular events for non-white ethnic groups compared
with 2008. This is reflected in the more accurate hazard ratios
with tighter confidence intervals and improved performance
statistics.
Strengths and limitations of this study
The methods used to derive and validate these models are
broadly the same as for a range of other clinical risk prediction
tools derived from the QResearch database.28-57 The strengths
and limitations of the approach have already been discussed in
detail.8-60 In summary, key strengths include size, duration of
follow up, representativeness, and lack of selection, recall, and
respondent bias. UK general practices have good levels of
accuracy and completeness in recording clinical diagnoses and
prescribed drugs.61 We think our study has good face validity
since it has been conducted in the setting where most patients
in the UK are assessed, treated, and followed up. Limitations
of our study include the lack of formal adjudication of diagnoses,
information bias, and potential for bias owing to missing data.
Our database has linked hospital and mortality records for nearly
all patients and is therefore likely to have picked up the majority
of cardiovascular events thereby minimising ascertainment bias.
We excluded patients using statins at baseline as in previous
versions of QRISK and QRISK2. Over the past decade a change
in guidelines will have led to a higher proportion of at risk
patients being prescribed statins in the absence of established
cardiovascular disease. Removing patients at high risk will tend
to lower overall event rates. We excluded patients without a
valid deprivation score since this group may represent a more
transient population, where follow-up could be unreliable or
unrepresentative. Their deprivation scores are unlikely to be
missing at random so we did not think it would be appropriate
to impute them. Given the number tested for inclusion, there
may be some over fitting of interaction terms. We have
continued to use the well recognised total cholesterol: high
density lipoprotein cholesterol ratio as a predictor rather than
low density lipoprotein cholesterol values alone as the ratio
resulted in improved prediction during earlier versions of QRISK
and QRISK2 and is measured directly, whereas low density
lipoprotein cholesterol is calculated.
The present validation has been done on a separate set of
practices and individuals to those that were used to develop the
score, although the practices all use the same general practice
clinical computer system (EMIS, used by 55% of UK general
practices). An independent validation study would be a more
stringent test and should be done, but when such independent
studies have examined QRISK2 and other risk algorithms,6-60
they have shown comparable performance compared with the
validation in the QResearch database.28-58 We have published
the source code to enable accurate implementation of QRISK3
on the QRISK website (www.qrisk.org) with earlier versions
of the score from previous annual updates. The rationale for
this is to ensure that those interested in reviewing or using the
open source will then be able to find the current version as the
score continues to be updated.
Conclusion
We have developed updated algorithms (QRISK3) to quantify
absolute risks of cardiovascular disease in people aged 25-84
years, which include established risk factors and new risk
factors: expanded definition of chronic kidney disease (stage 3,
4, or 5), migraine, corticosteroid use, SLE, atypical antipsychotic
use, severe mental illness, erectile dysfunction, and a measure
of blood pressure variability (standard deviation of repeated
measures). The updated risk algorithms provide valid measures
of absolute risk in the general population of patients, as shown
by the performance in a separate validation cohort.
Open Access: Reuse allowed
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2017;357:j2099 doi: 10.1136/bmj.j2099 (Published 24 May 2017)
Page 8 of 21
RESEARCH
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.j2099 on 23 May 2017. Downloaded from 
 What is already known on this topic
Methods to identify patients at increased risk of cardiovascular disease (CVD) are needed to identify those for whom interventions or
more frequent assessment may be required
QRISK2 algorithms are widely used to estimate the 10 year risks of CVD in people aged 25-84 taking account of information recorded
in primary care electronic records and that the patient can also provide
What this study adds
Updated algorithms (QRISK3) quantify the absolute risks of CVD in people aged 25-84, which include established and new risk factors
New factors are an expanded definition of chronic kidney disease (stage 3, 4, or 5), migraine, corticosteroid use, systemic lupus
erythematosus, atypical antipsychotic use, severe mental illness, erectile dysfunction, and a measure of blood pressure variability
(standard deviation of repeated measures)
The updated risk algorithms provide valid measures of absolute risk in the general population of patients as shown by the performance
in a separate validation cohort
A simple web calculator to implement the QRISK3 algorithms can be
accessed at www.qrisk.org/Open source software is also available for
download.
We thank the EMIS practices that contribute to QResearch, and EMIS
and the University of Nottingham for expertise in establishing,
developing, and supporting the QResearch database, and the Office
for National Statistics for providing the mortality data. The Hospital
Episode Statistics data in this analysis are reused by permission from
NHS Digital, which retains the copyright. ONS and NHS Digital bear no
responsibility for the analysis or interpretation of the data.
Contributors: JHC initiated the study, developed the research question,
undertook the literature review, extracted and manipulated the data,
performed the primary data analysis, and wrote the first draft of the
paper. CC contributed to the refinement of the research question, design,
analysis, interpretation, and drafting of the paper. PB contributed to the
development of the research question, design, interpretation, and drafting
of the paper.
Funding: No external funding was received for this study.
Competing interests: All authors have completed the ICMJE uniform
disclosure form at www.icmje.org/coi_disclosure.pdf and declare: JHC
is professor of clinical epidemiology at the University of Nottingham and
codirector of QResearch a not-for-profit organisation that is a joint
partnership between the University of Nottingham and Egton Medical
Information Systems (leading commercial supplier of IT for 55% of
general practices in the UK). JHC is also a paid director of ClinRisk,
which produces open and closed source software to ensure the reliable
and updatable implementation of clinical risk algorithms within clinical
computer systems to help improve patient care. CC is associate
professor of medical statistics at the University of Nottingham and a
paid consultant statistician for ClinRisk. PB is partly funded by Health
Research Collaboration for Leadership in Applied Health Research and
Care West (NIHR CLAHRC West), Bristol Clinical Commissioning Group
and the West of England Academic Health Science Network.. This work
and any views expressed within it are solely those of the authors and
not of any affiliated bodies or organisations.
Ethical approval: The study was reviewed in accordance with the
QResearch agreement with East Midlands-Derby Research Ethics
Committee (reference 03/4/021).
Data sharing: The algorithms presented in this paper will be released
as open source software under the GNU lesser GPL v3. The open
source software allows use without charge under the terms of the GNU
lesser public license version 3. Closed source software can be licensed
at a fee.
Transparency: The lead author (JHC) affirms that the manuscript is an
honest, accurate, and transparent account of the study being reported;
that no important aspects of the study have been omitted; and that any
discrepancies from the study as planned (and, if relevant, registered)
have been explained.
1
Hippisley-Cox J, Coupland C, Vinogradova Y, Robson J, May M, Brindle P. Derivation
and validation of QRISK, a new cardiovascular disease risk score for the United Kingdom:
prospective open cohort study. BMJ 2007;335:136. doi:10.1136/bmj.39261.471806.
55. pmid:17615182.
2
Hippisley-Cox J, Coupland C. QRISK2. Annual Update Information 2016;2016:5.
3
Hippisley-Cox J. Validity and completeness of the NHS Number in primary and secondary
care electronic data in England 1991-2013. 2013; 1. Hippisley-Cox J. Validity and
completeness of the NHS number in primary and secondary care: electronic data in
England 1991-2013 http://eprints.nottingham.ac.uk/3153/1/Validity%
26CompletenessNHSNumber.pdf (accessed June 2013).
4
Hippisley-Cox J, Coupland C, Brindle P. The performance of seven QPrediction risk scores
in an independent external sample of patients from general practice: a validation study.
BMJ Open 2014;4:e005809. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2014-005809 pmid:25168040.
5
Collins GS, Altman DG. An independent external validation and evaluation of QRISK
cardiovascular risk prediction: a prospective open cohort study. BMJ 2009;339:b2584.
doi:10.1136/bmj.b2584 pmid:19584409.
6
Collins GS, Altman DG. An independent and external validation of QRISK2 cardiovascular
disease risk score: a prospective open cohort study. BMJ 2010;340:c2442. doi:10.1136/
bmj.c2442 pmid:20466793.
7
Collins GS, Altman DG. Predicting the 10 year risk of cardiovascular disease in the United
Kingdom: independent and external validation of an updated version of QRISK2. BMJ
2012;344:e4181. doi:10.1136/bmj.e4181 pmid:22723603.
8
Hippisley-Cox J, Coupland C, Vinogradova Y, Robson J, Brindle P. Performance of the
QRISK cardiovascular risk prediction algorithm in an independent UK sample of patients
from general practice: a validation study. Heart 2008;94:34-9. doi:10.1136/hrt.2007.
134890 pmid:17916661.
9
Riley RD, Ensor J, Snell KIE, et al. External validation of clinical prediction models using
big datasets from e-health records or IPD meta-analysis: opportunities and challenges.
BMJ 2016;353:i3140. doi:10.1136/bmj.i3140 pmid:27334381.
10
Morris RW, Cooper JA, Shah T, et al. UCLEB Consortium. Marginal role for 53 common
genetic variants in cardiovascular disease prediction. Heart 2016;102:1640-7. doi:10.
1136/heartjnl-2016-309298 pmid:27365493.
11
Tillin T, Hughes AD, Whincup P, et al. SABRE Study Group. Ethnicity and prediction of
cardiovascular disease: performance of QRISK2 and Framingham scores in a U.K.
tri-ethnic prospective cohort study (SABRE--Southall And Brent REvisited). Heart
2014;100:60-7. doi:10.1136/heartjnl-2013-304474. pmid:24186564.
12
Schofield P, Crichton N, Chen R. Methods for assessing cardiovascular disease risk in
a UK black population. Heart 2012;98:1373-7. doi:10.1136/heartjnl-2012-302168 pmid:
22842990.
13
Arts EEA, Popa C, Den Broeder AA, et al. Performance of four current risk algorithms in
predicting cardiovascular events in patients with early rheumatoid arthritis. Ann Rheum
Dis 2015;74:668-74. doi:10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-204024 pmid:24389293.
14
Pike MM, Decker PA, Larson NB, et al. Improvement in Cardiovascular Risk Prediction
with Electronic Health Records. J Cardiovasc Transl Res 2016;9:214-22. doi:10.1007/
s12265-016-9687-z pmid:26960568.
15
Robson J, Dostal I, Sheikh A, et al. The NHS Health Check in England: an evaluation of
the first 4 years. BMJ Open 2016;6:e008840. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2015-008840 pmid:
26762161.
16
Crossan C, Lord J, Ryan R, et al. Cost effectiveness of case-finding strategies for primary
prevention of cardiovascular disease: a modelling study. Br J Gen Pract 2017;67:e67-77.
doi:10.3399/bjgp16X687973 pmid:27821671.
17
Dixon P, Hollinghurst S, Ara R, Edwards L, Foster A, Salisbury C. Cost-effectiveness
modelling of telehealth for patients with raised cardiovascular disease risk: evidence from
a cohort simulation conducted alongside the Healthlines randomised controlled trial. BMJ
Open 2016;6:e012355. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2016-012355 pmid:27670521.
18
Salisbury C, O’Cathain A, Thomas C, et al. Telehealth for patients at high risk of
cardiovascular disease: pragmatic randomised controlled trial. BMJ 2016;353:i2647. doi:
10.1136/bmj.i2647 pmid:27252245.
19
Excellence NIfC. Quality and outcomes framework (QOF) indicator guidance: primary
prevention of cardiovascular disease London 2011. www.nice.org.uk/nicemedia/live/13520/
55454/55454.pdf accessed 05.06.2013 2013.
20
National Clinical Guideline Centre. Lipid modification: cardiovascular risk assessment
and the modification of blood lipids for the primary and secondary prevention of
cardiovascular disease. 2014: 286.
21
Department of Health. NHS Health Check: Vascular Risk Assessment and Management
Best Practice Guidance. In: Department of Health, ed. London, 2009.
22
Thompson IM, Tangen CM, Goodman PJ, Probstfield JL, Moinpour CM, Coltman CA.
Erectile dysfunction and subsequent cardiovascular disease. JAMA 2005;294:2996-3002.
doi:10.1001/jama.294.23.2996 pmid:16414947.
23
Vlachopoulos CV, Terentes-Printzios DG, Ioakeimidis NK, Aznaouridis KA, Stefanadis CI.
Prediction of cardiovascular events and all-cause mortality with erectile dysfunction: a
systematic review and meta-analysis of cohort studies. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes
2013;6:99-109. doi:10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.112.966903 pmid:23300267.
24
Shamloul R, Ghanem H. Erectile dysfunction. Lancet 2013;381:153-65. doi:10.1016/
S0140-6736(12)60520-0 pmid:23040455.
Open Access: Reuse allowed
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2017;357:j2099 doi: 10.1136/bmj.j2099 (Published 24 May 2017)
Page 9 of 21
RESEARCH
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.j2099 on 23 May 2017. Downloaded from 
 25
Kurth T, Winter AC, Eliassen AH, et al. Migraine and risk of cardiovascular disease in
women: prospective cohort study. BMJ 2016;353:i2610. doi:10.1136/bmj.i2610 pmid:
27247281.
26
Rothwell PM, Howard SC, Dolan E, et al. Prognostic significance of visit-to-visit variability,
maximum systolic blood pressure, and episodic hypertension. Lancet 2010;375:895-905.
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(10)60308-X pmid:20226988.
27
Hippisley-Cox J, Coupland C. Predicting risk of emergency admission to hospital using
primary care data: derivation and validation of QAdmissions score. BMJ Open
2013;3:e003482. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2013-003482 pmid:23959760.
28
Hippisley-Cox J, Coupland C, Vinogradova Y, et al. Predicting cardiovascular risk in
England and Wales: prospective derivation and validation of QRISK2. BMJ
2008;336:1475-82. doi:10.1136/bmj.39609.449676.25. pmid:18573856.
29
Schafer JL, Graham JW. Missing data: our view of the state of the art. Psychol Methods
2002;7:147-77. doi:10.1037/1082-989X.7.2.147 pmid:12090408.
30
Group TAM. The Academic Medicine Group. Academic medicine: problems and solutions.
BMJ 1989;298:573-9. doi:10.1136/bmj.298.6673.573 pmid:2495121.
31
Steyerberg EW, van Veen M. Imputation is beneficial for handling missing data in predictive
models. J Clin Epidemiol 2007;60:979. doi:10.1016/j.jclinepi.2007.03.003 pmid:17689816.
32
Moons KGM, Donders RART, Stijnen T, Harrell FE Jr. Using the outcome for imputation
of missing predictor values was preferred. J Clin Epidemiol 2006;59:1092-101. doi:10.
1016/j.jclinepi.2006.01.009 pmid:16980150.
33
Schafer JL. Multiple imputation: a primer. Stat Methods Med Res 1999;8:3-15. doi:10.
1177/096228029900800102 pmid:10347857.
34
Rubin DB. Multiple Imputation for Non-response in Surveys. John Wiley, 1987doi:10.1002/
9780470316696.
35
Royston P, Ambler G, Sauerbrei W. The use of fractional polynomials to model continuous
risk variables in epidemiology. Int J Epidemiol 1999;28:964-74. doi:10.1093/ije/28.5.
964 pmid:10597998.
36
Hosmer D, Lemeshow S. Applied Logistic Regression. John Wiley, 1989.
37
Royston P. Explained variation for survival models. Stata J 2006;6:1-14.
38
Royston P, Sauerbrei W. A new measure of prognostic separation in survival data. Stat
Med 2004;23:723-48. doi:10.1002/sim.1621 pmid:14981672.
39
Harrell FE Jr, , Lee KL, Mark DB. Multivariable prognostic models: issues in developing
models, evaluating assumptions and adequacy, and measuring and reducing errors. Stat
Med 1996;15:361-87. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097-0258(19960229)15:4<361::AID-SIM168>3.
0.CO;2-4 pmid:8668867.
40
Collins GS, Reitsma JB, Altman DG, Moons KG. Transparent Reporting of a multivariable
prediction model for Individual Prognosis or Diagnosis (TRIPOD): the TRIPOD statement.
Ann Intern Med 2015;162:55-63. doi:10.7326/M14-0697 pmid:25560714.
41
Burch RC, Rayhill ML. Migraine and vascular disease. BMJ 2016;353:i2806. doi:10.1136/
bmj.i2806 pmid:27247290.
42
Kurth T, Gaziano JM, Cook NR, Logroscino G, Diener HC, Buring JE. Migraine and risk
of cardiovascular disease in women. JAMA 2006;296:283-91. doi:10.1001/jama.296.3.
283 pmid:16849661.
43
Schürks M, Rist PM, Bigal ME, Buring JE, Lipton RB, Kurth T. Migraine and cardiovascular
disease: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ 2009;339:b3914. doi:10.1136/bmj.
b3914 pmid:19861375.
44
Drici MD, Priori S. Cardiovascular risks of atypical antipsychotic drug treatment.
Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 2007;16:882-90. doi:10.1002/pds.1424 pmid:17563919.
45
Fardet L, Petersen I, Nazareth I. Risk of cardiovascular events in people prescribed
glucocorticoids with iatrogenic Cushing’s syndrome: cohort study. BMJ 2012;345:e4928.
doi:10.1136/bmj.e4928. pmid:22846415.
46
Varas-Lorenzo C, Rodriguez LA, Maguire A, Castellsague J, Perez-Gutthann S. Use of
oral corticosteroids and the risk of acute myocardial infarction. Atherosclerosis
2007;192:376-83. doi:10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2006.05.019 pmid:16787647.
47
Foguet-Boreu Q, Fernandez San Martin MI, Flores Mateo G, et al. Cardiovascular risk
assessment in patients with a severe mental illness: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
BMC Psychiatry 2016;16:141. doi:10.1186/s12888-016-0833-6 pmid:27176477.
48
McMahon M, Hahn BH, Skaggs BJ. Systemic lupus erythematosus and cardiovascular
disease: prediction and potential for therapeutic intervention. Expert Rev Clin Immunol
2011;7:227-41. doi:10.1586/eci.10.98 pmid:21426260.
49
Go AS, Chertow GM, Fan D, McCulloch CE, Hsu CY. Chronic kidney disease and the
risks of death, cardiovascular events, and hospitalization. N Engl J Med
2004;351:1296-305. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa041031 pmid:15385656.
50
Stevens SL, Wood S, Koshiaris C, et al. Blood pressure variability and cardiovascular
disease: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ 2016;354:i4098. doi:10.1136/bmj.
i4098 pmid:27511067.
51
Hata J, Arima H, Rothwell PM, et al. ADVANCE Collaborative Group. Effects of visit-to-visit
variability in systolic blood pressure on macrovascular and microvascular complications
in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: the ADVANCE trial. Circulation 2013;128:1325-34.
doi:10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.113.002717 pmid:23926207.
52
Feinstein MJ. Cardiovascular disease risk assessment in HIV: navigating data-sparse
zones. Heart 2016;102:1157-8. doi:10.1136/heartjnl-2016-309752 pmid:27406719.
53
Kingery JR, Alfred Y, Smart LR, et al. Short-term and long-term cardiovascular risk,
metabolic syndrome and HIV in Tanzania. Heart 2016;102:1200-5. doi:10.1136/heartjnl-
2015-309026 pmid:27105648.
54
Hippisley-Cox J, Coupland C, Robson J, Sheikh A, Brindle P. Predicting risk of type 2
diabetes in England and Wales: prospective derivation and validation of QDScore. BMJ
2009;338:b880. doi:10.1136/bmj.b880. pmid:19297312.
55
Hippisley-Cox J, Coupland C. Derivation and validation of updated QFracture algorithm
to predict risk of osteoporotic fracture in primary care in the United Kingdom: prospective
open cohort study. BMJ 2012;344:e3427. doi:10.1136/bmj.e3427. pmid:22619194.
56
Hippisley-Cox J, Coupland C. Predicting the risk of chronic Kidney Disease in men and
women in England and Wales: prospective derivation and external validation of the
QKidney Scores. BMC Fam Pract 2010;11:49. doi:10.1186/1471-2296-11-49 pmid:
20565929.
57
Hippisley-Cox J, Coupland C. Development and validation of risk prediction algorithm
(QThrombosis) to estimate future risk of venous thromboembolism: prospective cohort
study. BMJ 2011;343:d4656. doi:10.1136/bmj.d4656 pmid:21846713.
58
Hippisley-Cox J, Coupland C. Predicting risk of osteoporotic fracture in men and women
in England and Wales: prospective derivation and validation of QFractureScores. BMJ
2009;339:b4229. doi:10.1136/bmj.b4229 pmid:19926696.
59
Collins GS, Mallett S, Altman DG. Predicting risk of osteoporotic and hip fracture in the
United Kingdom: prospective independent and external validation of QFractureScores.
BMJ 2011;342:d3651. doi:10.1136/bmj.d3651 pmid:21697214.
60
Collins GS, Altman DG. External validation of QDSCORE(®) for predicting the 10-year
risk of developing Type 2 diabetes. Diabet Med 2011;28:599-607. doi:10.1111/j.1464-
5491.2011.03237.x pmid:21480970.
61
Majeed A. Sources, uses, strengths and limitations of data collected in primary care in
England. Health Stat Q 2004;(21):5-14.pmid:15615148.
Accepted: 21 04 2017
Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not already
granted under a licence) please go to http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/
permissions
This is an Open Access article distributed in accordance with the Creative Commons
Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY 4.0) license, which permits others to distribute, remix,
adapt, build upon this work non-commercially, and license their derivative works on
different terms, provided the original work is properly cited and the use is non-commercial.
See: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.
Open Access: Reuse allowed
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2017;357:j2099 doi: 10.1136/bmj.j2099 (Published 24 May 2017)
Page 10 of 21
RESEARCH
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.j2099 on 23 May 2017. Downloaded from 
 Tables
Table 1| Baseline characteristics of patients aged 25-84 years without cardiovascular disease and not using statins at study entry. Values
are numbers (percentages) of patients unless stated otherwise
Validation cohort
Derivation cohort
Characteristics
Men n=1 310 841
Women n=1 360 457
Men n=3 869 847
Women n=4 019 956
42.6 (13.8)
43.3 (15.3)
42.6 (14.0)
43.3 (15.3)
Mean (SD) age (years)
0.5 (3.3)
0.4 (3.3)
0.5 (3.3)
0.4 (3.2)
Mean (SD) Townsend score
852 521 (65.0)
996 752 (73.3)
2 476 175 (64.0)
2 926 402 (72.8)
Body mass index recorded
501 605 (38.3)
543 262 (39.9)
1 467 747 (37.9)
1 598 558 (39.8)
Total cholesterol: HDL cholesterol ratio recorded
922 967 (70.4)
1 146 039 (84.2)
2 644 682 (68.3)
3 327 445 (82.8)
Systolic blood pressure recorded
813 373 (62.0)
1 072 667 (78.8)
2 338 902 (64.0)
3 123 821 (77.7)
≥2 systolic blood pressure readings recorded before baseline
330 073 (25.2)
389 774 (28.7)
952 618 (24.6)
1 145 256 (28.5)
Complete data recorded for body mass index, total cholesterol:
HDL cholesterol, systolic blood pressure, and smoking status
25.9 (4.2)
25.4 (5.1)
25.9 (4.2)
25.4 (5.1)
Mean (SD) body mass index
4.4 (1.3)
3.6 (1.2)
4.4 (1.4)
3.7 (1.2)
Mean (SD) total cholesterol: HDL cholesterol ratio
128.8 (16.2)
123.1 (18.1)
129.2 (16.3)
123.2 (18.2)
Mean (SD) systolic blood pressure (mm Hg)
9.9 (6.8)
9.3 (6.1)
9.9 (6.8)
9.3 (6.2)
Mean (SD) systolic blood pressure variability*
Ethnic origin:
751 370 (57.3)
849 697 (62.5)
2 310 983 (59.7)
2 607 872 (64.9)
Recorded
1 171 281 (89.4)
1 218 391 (89.6)
3 435 408 (88.8)
3 564 651 (88.7)
White or not recorded
26 479 (2.0)
23 146 (1.7)
81 805 (2.1)
77 683 (1.9)
Indian
14 787 (1.1)
10 919 (0.8)
46 948 (1.2)
39 541 (1.0)
Pakistani
11 914 (0.9)
8738 (0.6)
42 111 (1.1)
31 930 (0.8)
Bangladeshi
15 966 (1.2)
17 078 (1.3)
45 753 (1.2)
53 559 (1.3)
Other Asian
10 642 (0.8)
13 142 (1.0)
30 610 (0.8)
37 781 (0.9)
Black Caribbean
25 251 (1.9)
27 678 (2.0)
71 245 (1.8)
77 813 (1.9)
Black African
6098 (0.5)
8992 (0.7)
23 730 (0.6)
33 767 (0.8)
Chinese
28 423 (2.2)
32 373 (2.4)
92 237 (2.4)
103 231 (2.6)
Other
Smoking status:
1 035 425 (79.0)
1 168 932 (85.9)
3 005 756 (77.7)
3 418 296 (85.0)
Smoking status recorded
512 252 (39.1)
706 671 (51.9)
1 463 941 (37.8)
2 051 803 (51.0)
Non-smoker
196 459 (15.0)
194 545 (14.3)
594 265 (15.4)
589 521 (14.7)
Former smoker
177 693 (13.6)
154 565 (11.4)
507 523 (13.1)
434 954 (10.8)
Light smoker
84 914 (6.5)
74 933 (5.5)
251 170 (6.5)
226 128 (5.6)
Moderate smoker
64 107 (4.9)
38 218 (2.8)
188 857 (4.9)
115 890 (2.9)
Heavy smoker
Medical characteristics:
123 039 (9.4)
164 023 (12.1)
357 987 (9.3)
481 628 (12.0)
Family history of coronary heart disease in first degree relative
<60 years
3932 (0.3)
3351 (0.2)
11 617 (0.3)
10 060 (0.3)
Type 1 diabetes
19 318 (1.5)
15 872 (1.2)
58 395 (1.5)
48 022 (1.2)
Type 2 diabetes
56 920 (4.3)
77 694 (5.7)
164 255 (4.2)
223 494 (5.6)
Treated hypertension
7055 (0.5)
15 139 (1.1)
20 997 (0.5)
45 700 (1.1)
Rheumatoid arthritis
6874 (0.5)
5229 (0.4)
20 098 (0.5)
15 177 (0.4)
Atrial fibrillation
2165 (0.2)
2583 (0.2)
6345 (0.2)
7518 (0.2)
Chronic kidney disease (stage 4 or 5)
4232 (0.3)
6949 (0.5)
12 254 (0.3)
19 396 (0.5)
Chronic kidney disease (stage 3, 4, or 5)
36 141 (2.8)
89 504 (6.6)
103 995 (2.7)
257 825 (6.4)
Migraine
18 634 (1.4)
31 775 (2.3)
56 533 (1.5)
96 955 (2.4)
Corticosteroid use
2945 (0.2)
1595 (0.1)
7732 (0.2)
4332 (0.1)
HIV/AIDS
134 (0.0)
1349 (0.1)
365 (0.0)
4010 (0.1)
Systemic lupus erythematosus
6597 (0.5)
6268 (0.5)
20 123 (0.5)
19 140 (0.5)
Atypical antipsychotic use
Open Access: Reuse allowed
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2017;357:j2099 doi: 10.1136/bmj.j2099 (Published 24 May 2017)
Page 11 of 21
RESEARCH
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.j2099 on 23 May 2017. Downloaded from 
 Table 1 (continued)
Validation cohort
Derivation cohort
Characteristics
Men n=1 310 841
Women n=1 360 457
Men n=3 869 847
Women n=4 019 956
57 830 (4.4)
94 724 (7.0)
167 115 (4.3)
274 069 (6.8)
Severe mental illness
31 136 (2.4)
NA
90 753 (2.3)
NA
Erectile dysfunction diagnosis or treatment
27 727 (2.1)
NA
80 753 (2.1)
NA
Erectile dysfunction diagnosis
9877 (0.8)
NA
28 763 (0.7)
NA
Erectile dysfunction treatment
HDL=high density lipoprotein; NA=not applicable.
Complete data for total cholesterol: HDL cholesterol ratio, body mass index, smoking, and systolic blood pressure.
*Based on standard deviation of ≥2 systolic blood pressure values.
Open Access: Reuse allowed
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2017;357:j2099 doi: 10.1136/bmj.j2099 (Published 24 May 2017)
Page 12 of 21
RESEARCH
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.j2099 on 23 May 2017. Downloaded from 
 Table 2| Incidence rates of cardiovascular disease per 1000 person years in derivation cohort
Men
Women
Age group
(years)
Rate per 1000 person years (95%
CI)
Person years
Incident cases
Rate per 1000 person years (95%
CI)
Person years
Incident cases
4 (3.8 to 4.2)
3 379 716
1351
2.4 (2.2 to 2.6)
3 455 662
832
25-29
9.9 (9.5 to 10.2)
3 880 890
3823
4.9 (4.7 to 5.2)
3 802 577
1878
30-34
21.2 (20.8 to 21.7)
3 748 285
7963
10.2 (9.9 to 10.6)
3 551 460
3636
35-39
39.9 (39.3 to 40.6)
3 192 048
12 750
19 (18.5 to 19.5)
2 971 995
5651
40-44
66.5 (65.5 to 67.4)
2 672 642
17 763
32 (31.4 to 32.7)
2 581 104
8272
45-49
98.6 (97.4 to 99.9)
2 437 106
24 040
48.3 (47.4 to 49.1)
2 490 263
12 022
50-54
141.8 (140.0 to 143.5)
1 796 342
25 464
74.7 (73.5 to 75.9)
1 944 140
14 524
55-59
196.9 (194.6 to 199.3)
1 372 104
27 021
113.6 (112.0 to 115.3)
1 625 795
18 471
60-64
265.5 (262.3 to 268.7)
1 013 291
26 903
171.3 (169.0 to 173.5)
1 314 303
22 510
65-69
354.8 (350.4 to 359.3)
691 866
24 549
250.8 (247.7 to 253.9)
1 015 263
25 462
70-74
451.6 (445.4 to 458.0)
438 861
19 820
351.1 (346.9 to 355.3)
765 681
26 883
75-79
582.9 (572.4 to 593.6)
198 481
11 569
480.2 (473.7 to 486.8)
424 994
20 408
80-84
81.8 (81.4 to 82.1)
24 821 632
203 016
61.9 (61.6 to 62.2)
25 943 236
160 549
Total
Open Access: Reuse allowed
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2017;357:j2099 doi: 10.1136/bmj.j2099 (Published 24 May 2017)
Page 13 of 21
RESEARCH
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.j2099 on 23 May 2017. Downloaded from 
 Table 3| Adjusted hazard ratios (95% confidence interval) for cardiovascular disease in women in the derivation cohort
Model C‡
Model B†
Model A*
Predictor variables
1.47 (1.45 to 1.50)
1.47 (1.45 to 1.50)
1.48 (1.46 to 1.51)
Townsend score (per 5 unit increase)§
Ethnic origin:
1.00
1.00
1.00
White or not recorded
1.32 (1.26 to 1.39)
1.32 (1.26 to 1.39)
1.32 (1.26 to 1.38)
Indian
1.76 (1.66 to 1.86)
1.76 (1.66 to 1.87)
1.76 (1.66 to 1.87)
Pakistani
1.34 (1.24 to 1.45)
1.35 (1.25 to 1.46)
1.33 (1.23 to 1.44)
Bangladeshi
1.08 (0.992 to 1.17)
1.08 (0.995 to 1.17)
1.07 (0.985 to 1.16)
Other Asian
0.843 (0.797 to 0.891)
0.844 (0.798 to 0.892)
0.836 (0.791 to 0.884)
Black Caribbean
0.675 (0.618 to 0.737)
0.677 (0.620 to 0.740)
0.660 (0.605 to 0.721)
Black African
0.722 (0.622 to 0.837)
0.726 (0.625 to 0.842)
0.710 (0.612 to 0.823)
Chinese
0.843 (0.791 to 0.897)
0.843 (0.792 to 0.897)
0.836 (0.786 to 0.890)
Other
Smoking status§:
1.00
1.00
1.00
Non-smoker
1.14 (1.11 to 1.18)
1.14 (1.11 to 1.18)
1.16 (1.12 to 1.19)
Former smoker
1.75 (1.70 to 1.81)
1.76 (1.70 to 1.82)
1.79 (1.73 to 1.85)
Light smoker
1.95 (1.88 to 2.02)
1.95 (1.88 to 2.02)
1.98 (1.91 to 2.05)
Moderate smoker
2.34 (2.25 to 2.43)
2.34 (2.25 to 2.44)
2.39 (2.30 to 2.49)
Heavy smoker
Medical characteristics:
1.58 (1.54 to 1.61)
1.58 (1.54 to 1.61)
1.59 (1.56 to 1.63)
Family history of coronary heart disease in
first degree relative <60 years§
5.62 (5.08 to 6.22)
5.66 (5.12 to 6.26)
5.66 (5.11 to 6.26)
Type 1 diabetes§
2.91 (2.72 to 3.11)
2.92 (2.73 to 3.13)
2.95 (2.76 to 3.15)
Type 2 diabetes§
1.66 (1.60 to 1.73)
1.71 (1.64 to 1.78)
1.75 (1.68 to 1.82)
Treated hypertension§
1.24 (1.20 to 1.27)
1.24 (1.21 to 1.28)
1.32 (1.28 to 1.36)
Rheumatoid arthritis
4.92 (4.20 to 5.75)
4.94 (4.23 to 5.78)
5.09 (4.35 to 5.95)
Atrial fibrillation§
NA
NA
2.31 (2.02 to 2.65)
Chronic kidney disease (stage 4 or 5)§
1.92 (1.70 to 2.17)
1.94 (1.72 to 2.19)
NA
Chronic kidney disease (stage 3, 4, or 5)§
1.35 (1.30 to 1.40)
1.36 (1.31 to 1.41)
NA
Migraine§
1.81 (1.74 to 1.89)
1.82 (1.74 to 1.90)
NA
Corticosteroid use§
2.14 (1.78 to 2.56)
2.15 (1.79 to 2.57)
NA
Systemic lupus erythematosus§
1.29 (1.21 to 1.37)
1.29 (1.21 to 1.38)
NA
Atypical antipsychotic use
1.13 (1.11 to 1.16)
1.14 (1.11 to 1.16)
NA
Severe mental illness
1.17 (1.16 to 1.17)
1.17 (1.16 to 1.17)
1.17 (1.16 to 1.17)
Total cholesterol: HDL cholesterol ratio (per
unit increase)
1.14 (1.13 to 1.15)
1.15 (1.14 to 1.15)
1.14 (1.14 to 1.15)
Systolic blood pressure (per 20 unit increase)
1.08 (1.07 to 1.09)
NA
NA
Standard deviation of blood pressure (per 10
unit increase)
NA=not applicable; HDL=high density lipoprotein.
*Includes chronic kidney disease (stage 4 or 5) fractional polynomial terms for age (age and age
−2) and body mass index (BMI
−2 and BMI
−2ln(BMI)), and interactions
with age for body mass index, systolic blood pressure, Townsend score, family history of coronary heart disease, treated hypertension, atrial fibrillation, type 1
diabetes, type 2 diabetes, chronic kidney disease, and smoking status.
†Same as model A with chronic kidney disease (stage 3, 4, or 5), extra variables listed in table, and additional age interactions for: migraine, corticosteroid use,
and systemic lupus erythematosus.
‡Same as model B but with standard deviation of systolic blood pressure.
§Interaction with age; hazard ratios evaluated at mean age.
Open Access: Reuse allowed
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2017;357:j2099 doi: 10.1136/bmj.j2099 (Published 24 May 2017)
Page 14 of 21
RESEARCH
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.j2099 on 23 May 2017. Downloaded from 
 Table 4| Adjusted hazard ratios (95% confidence interval) for cardiovascular disease in men in the derivation cohort
Model C‡
Model B†
Model A*
Predictor variables
1.18 (1.17 to 1.20)
1.18 (1.17 to 1.20)
1.19 (1.17 to 1.20)
Townsend score (per 5 unit increase)§
Ethnic origin:
1.00
1.00
1.00
White or not recorded
1.32 (1.27 to 1.37)
1.32 (1.27 to 1.37)
1.31 (1.26 to 1.36)
Indian
1.61 (1.53 to 1.68)
1.61 (1.53 to 1.68)
1.62 (1.54 to 1.69)
Pakistani
1.70 (1.61 to 1.79)
1.70 (1.62 to 1.80)
1.70 (1.61 to 1.79)
Bangladeshi
1.04 (0.970 to 1.11)
1.04 (0.970 to 1.11)
1.03 (0.968 to 1.10)
Other Asian
0.699 (0.662 to 0.738)
0.700 (0.663 to 0.739)
0.700 (0.663 to 0.738)
Black Caribbean
0.670 (0.623 to 0.721)
0.672 (0.625 to 0.724)
0.671 (0.623 to 0.722)
Black African
0.660 (0.582 to 0.749)
0.66 (0.581 to 0.749)
0.652 (0.574 to 0.740)
Chinese
0.769 (0.728 to 0.812)
0.77 (0.729 to 0.813)
0.770 (0.729 to 0.814)
Other
Smoking status§:
1.00
1.00
1.00
Non-smoker
1.21 (1.18 to 1.24)
1.21 (1.18 to 1.24)
1.22 (1.19 to 1.25)
Former smoker
1.74 (1.70 to 1.78)
1.74 (1.70 to 1.78)
1.75 (1.71 to 1.79)
Light smoker
1.89 (1.84 to 1.94)
1.90 (1.85 to 1.95)
1.91 (1.86 to 1.96)
Moderate smoker
2.20 (2.14 to 2.27)
2.21 (2.14 to 2.28)
2.22 (2.16 to 2.29)
Heavy smoker
Medical characteristics:
1.72 (1.69 to 1.75)
1.72 (1.69 to 1.75)
1.73 (1.7 to 1.76)
Family history of coronary heart disease in
first degree relative <60 years§
3.44 (3.17 to 3.73)
3.47 (3.20 to 3.77)
3.59 (3.31 to 3.90)
Type 1 diabetes§
2.36 (2.23 to 2.50)
2.37 (2.24 to 2.51)
2.42 (2.29 to 2.57)
Type 2 diabetes§
1.68 (1.61 to 1.74)
1.73 (1.67 to 1.80)
1.76 (1.69 to 1.83)
Treated hypertension§
1.23 (1.19 to 1.28)
1.24 (1.19 to 1.28)
1.30 (1.25 to 1.35)
Rheumatoid arthritis
2.42 (2.14 to 2.73)
2.44 (2.16 to 2.76)
2.46 (2.18 to 2.78)
Atrial fibrillation§
NA
NA
2.39 (2.13 to 2.68)
Chronic kidney disease (stage 4 or 5)§
2.05 (1.83 to 2.29)
2.09 (1.87 to 2.34)
NA
Chronic kidney disease (stage 3, 4, or 5)§
1.29 (1.24 to 1.34)
1.29 (1.24 to 1.35)
NA
Migraine§
1.58 (1.5 to 1.66)
1.58 (1.51 to 1.66)
NA
Corticosteroid use§
1.55 (1.15 to 2.10)
1.55 (1.15 to 2.10)
NA
Systemic lupus erythematosus
1.14 (1.06 to 1.22)
1.15 (1.07 to 1.23)
NA
Atypical antipsychotic use
1.13 (1.10 to 1.15)
1.13 (1.11 to 1.16)
NA
Severe mental illness
1.25 (1.18 to 1.33)
1.25 (1.18 to 1.33)
NA
Erectile dysfunction or treatment§
1.19 (1.18 to 1.19)
1.19 (1.18 to 1.19)
1.19 (1.18 to 1.19)
Total cholesterol: HDL cholesterol ratio (per
unit increase)
1.14 (1.13 to 1.14)
1.14 (1.14 to 1.15)
1.14 (1.13 to 1.15)
Systolic blood pressure (per 20 unit increase)
1.11 (1.09 to 1.12)
NA
NA
Standard deviation of blood pressure (per 10
unit increase)
NA=not applicable; HDL=high density lipoprotein.
Includes chronic kidney disease (stage 4 or 5) fractional polynomial terms for age (age
-1 and age
3) and body mass index (BMI
−2 and BMI
−2ln(BMI)), and interactions
with age for body mass index, systolic blood pressure, Townsend score, family history of coronary heart disease, treated hypertension, atrial fibrillation, type 1
diabetes, type 2 diabetes, chronic kidney disease, and smoking status.
†Same as model A with chronic kidney disease (stage 3, 4, or 5), extra variables listed in table, and additional age interactions for: migraine, corticosteroid use,
and erectile dysfunction.
‡Same as model B but with standard deviation of systolic blood pressure.
§Interaction with age; hazard ratios evaluated at mean age.
Open Access: Reuse allowed
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2017;357:j2099 doi: 10.1136/bmj.j2099 (Published 24 May 2017)
Page 15 of 21
RESEARCH
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.j2099 on 23 May 2017. Downloaded from 
 Table 5| Mean (95% confidence interval) performance of models A, B, and C in the validation cohort in women and men aged 25-84 years
Model C
Model B
Model A
Statistic
Men
Women
Men
Women
Men
Women
2.26 (2.25 to 2.28)
2.49 (2.47 to 2.51)
2.26 (2.24 to 2.27)
2.48 (2.46 to 2.50)
2.25 (2.24 to 2.27)
2.48 (2.46 to 2.50)
D statistic*
0.858 (0.857 to
0.860)
0.880 (0.879 to
0.882)
0.858 (0.857 to
0.859)
0.880 (0.878 to
0.881)
0.858 (0.856 to
0.859)
0.879 (0.878 to
0.880)
Harrell's C*
55.0 (54.6 to 55.3)
59.6 (59.3 to 60.0)
54.8 (54.5 to 55.2)
59.5 (59.2 to 59.9)
54.8 (54.4 to 55.1)
59.6 (59.2 to 60.0)
R
2 (%)†
*A measure of discrimination. Higher values indicate better discrimination.
†Measures explained variation in time to diagnosis. Higher values indicate more variation is explained.
Open Access: Reuse allowed
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2017;357:j2099 doi: 10.1136/bmj.j2099 (Published 24 May 2017)
Page 16 of 21
RESEARCH
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.j2099 on 23 May 2017. Downloaded from 
 Table 6| Clinical examples update with new models
Examples
Characteristics
6
5
4
3
2
1
Male
Female
Female
Male
Male
Male
Sex
48
61
55
48
45
44
Age (years)
30
33.7
24.9
29.7
22.4
27.2
Body mass index
4.2
4.8
3.2
5
6.3
6.1
Total cholesterol: HDL cholesterol ratio
140
155
130
124
115
130
Systolic blood pressure
White
Black African
White
White
White
White
Ethnic origin
Non-smoker
Former smoker
Moderate smoker
Light smoker
Non-smoker
Heavy smoker
Smoking status
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Family history of coronary heart disease
No
No
No
No
No
No
Type 1 diabetes
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
Type 2 diabetes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Treated hypertension
No
No
No
No
No
No
Rheumatoid arthritis
No
No
No
No
No
No
Atrial fibrillation
No
No
No
No
No
No
Chronic kidney disease (stage 3, 4, or 5)
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Migraine
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
Corticosteroid use
No
No
No
No
No
No
Systemic lupus erythematosus
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
Atypical antipsychotic use
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
Severe mental illness
No
NA
NA
No
Yes
No
Erectile dysfunction or treatment
No
33
22
3.1
40
6
Standard deviation of systolic blood pressure
9.2
9.4
11
6.4
8.3
9.2
Model A 10 year predicted risk
11
13
10
11
9.9
11
Model B 10 year predicted risk
9.5
15
11
11
13
11
Model C 10 year predicted risk
NA=not applicable HDL=high density lipoprotein.
Open Access: Reuse allowed
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2017;357:j2099 doi: 10.1136/bmj.j2099 (Published 24 May 2017)
Page 17 of 21
RESEARCH
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.j2099 on 23 May 2017. Downloaded from 
 Figures
Fig 1 Funnel plots of discrimination performance (Harrell’s C statistic) across 328 general practices
Open Access: Reuse allowed
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2017;357:j2099 doi: 10.1136/bmj.j2099 (Published 24 May 2017)
Page 18 of 21
RESEARCH
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.j2099 on 23 May 2017. Downloaded from 
 Fig 2 Predicted and observed 10 year cardiovascular disease risk by 10th of predicted risk
Open Access: Reuse allowed
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2017;357:j2099 doi: 10.1136/bmj.j2099 (Published 24 May 2017)
Page 19 of 21
RESEARCH
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.j2099 on 23 May 2017. Downloaded from 
 Fig 3 10 year risk of 22.5% based on model C for a white man, aged 44, heavy smoker, total cholesterol: high density
lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol ratio of 2, systolic blood pressure of 132 mm Hg, standard deviation of systolic blood pressure
of 10 mm Hg, body mass index of 31.22, atrial fibrillation, erectile dysfunction, migraine, and steroid use
Open Access: Reuse allowed
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2017;357:j2099 doi: 10.1136/bmj.j2099 (Published 24 May 2017)
Page 20 of 21
RESEARCH
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.j2099 on 23 May 2017. Downloaded from 
 Fig 4 10 year risk ratio of 7.5% based on model C for white man, aged 44, heavy smoker, total cholesterol: high density
lipoprotein cholesterol ratio of 2, systolic blood pressure of 132 mm Hg, standard deviation of systolic blood pressure of 0,
body mass index of 31.22, migraine, steroid use, no atrial fibrillation, and no erectile dysfunction
Open Access: Reuse allowed
Subscribe: http://www.bmj.com/subscribe
BMJ 2017;357:j2099 doi: 10.1136/bmj.j2099 (Published 24 May 2017)
Page 21 of 21
RESEARCH
 on 2 June 2019 by guest. Protected by copyright.
http://www.bmj.com/
BMJ: first published as 10.1136/bmj.j2099 on 23 May 2017. Downloaded from 
