 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
Weekly / Vol. 66 / No. 19 
May 19, 2017
INSIDE
498 Inhalational Chlorine Injuries at Public Aquatic 
Venues — California, 2008–2015
502 Disparities in Diabetes Deaths Among Children and 
Adolescents — United States, 2000–2014
506 Hepatitis B Surface Antigen Screening Among 
Pregnant Women and Care of Infants of Hepatitis B 
Surface Antigen–Positive Mothers — Guam, 2014
509 Updated Recommendations for Use of MenB-FHbp 
Serogroup B Meningococcal Vaccine — Advisory 
Committee on Immunization Practices, 2016
514 Notes from the Field: Ongoing Transmission of 
Candida auris in Health Care Facilities — United 
States, June 2016–May 2017
516 Announcements
517 QuickStats
Continuing Education examination available at  
https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/cme/conted_info.html#weekly. 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Healthy and Safe Swimming Week — 
 May 22–28, 2017
Healthy and Safe Swimming Week highlights measures 
that swimmers, parents of young swimmers, aquatic 
facility (e.g., swimming pool and support infrastructure) 
operators, residential pool or hot tub/spa owners, beach 
managers, and public health officials can take to maxi-
mize the health benefits of water-based physical activity 
while minimizing the risk for recreational water–associ-
ated illness and injury. A public health communications 
toolkit is available at https://www.cdc.gov/healthywater/
observances/hss-week/response-tools-public-health.html.
The theme of this year’s observance is Diarrhea and 
Swimming Don’t Mix. Cryptosporidium, a parasite that 
causes profuse, watery diarrhea, has emerged as the lead-
ing etiology of recreational water–associated outbreaks, 
particularly those associated with aquatic facilities (1). 
This issue of MMWR includes a report on Cryptosporidium 
molecular characterization, highlighting its utility in 
investigating these outbreaks (2). 
In July 2016, CDC released the 2016 Model Aquatic 
Health Code (MAHC) (https://www.cdc.gov/mahc/edi-
tions/current.html). This national guidance can be volun-
tarily adopted by state and local jurisdictions to minimize 
the risk for public aquatic facility–associated illness and 
injury. The MAHC guidance reflects biennial input from 
public health professionals and other stakeholders through 
the Council for the MAHC (https://www.cmahc.org). 
References
1. Hlavsa MC, Roberts VA, Kahler AM, et al. Outbreaks of illness 
associated with recreational water—United States, 2011–2012. 
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2015;64:668–72.
2. Hlavsa MC, Roellig DM, Seabolt MH, et al. Using molecular 
characterization to support investigations of aquatic facility–
associated outbreaks of cryptosporidiosis—Alabama, Arizona, and 
Ohio, 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2017;66:493–7.
Using Molecular Characterization to 
Support Investigations of Aquatic 
Facility–Associated Outbreaks of 
Cryptosporidiosis — Alabama, 
Arizona, and Ohio, 2016
Michele C. Hlavsa, MPH1; Dawn M. Roellig, PhD1; Matthew H. 
Seabolt, MS1; Amy M. Kahler, MS1; Jennifer L. Murphy, PhD1; 
Taishayla K. McKitt, MPH2; Evelyn F. Geeter, MBA2; Ron Dawsey, 
MPH2; Sherri L. Davidson, MPH2; Thuy N. Kim, MPH2; Theresa H. 
Tucker2; Sally Ann Iverson, DVM3,4,5; Brenna Garrett4; Nicole Fowle3; 
Jennifer Collins, MPH3; Gregory Epperson6; Scott Zusy6; Joli R. Weiss, 
PhD4; Ken Komatsu, MPH4; Edwin Rodriguez7; J. Gage Patterson, MS8; 
Rebecca Sunenshine, MD3,9; Brandi Taylor10; Katie Cibulskas10; Lynn 
Denny, MPH10; Keoni Omura, MS11; Boris Tsorin PhD11; Kathleen E. 
Fullerton, MPH1; Lihua Xiao, PhD1
Cryptosporidiosis is a nationally notifiable gastroin-
testinal illness caused by parasitic protozoa of the genus 
Cryptosporidium, which can cause profuse, watery diarrhea 
that can last up to 2–3 weeks in immunocompetent patients 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
494 
MMWR / May 19, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 19
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
The MMWR series of publications is published by the Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Atlanta, GA 30329-4027.
Suggested citation: [Author names; first three, then et al., if more than six.] [Report title]. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2017;66:[inclusive page numbers].
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Anne Schuchat, MD, Acting Director 
Patricia M. Griffin, MD, Acting Associate Director for Science  
Joanne Cono, MD, ScM, Director, Office of Science Quality 
Chesley L. Richards, MD, MPH, Deputy Director for Public Health Scientific Services
Michael F. Iademarco, MD, MPH, Director, Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services 
MMWR Editorial and Production Staff (Weekly)
Sonja A. Rasmussen, MD, MS, Editor-in-Chief
Charlotte K. Kent, PhD, MPH, Executive Editor 
Jacqueline Gindler, MD, Editor
Teresa F. Rutledge, Managing Editor 
Douglas W. Weatherwax, Lead Technical Writer-Editor
Soumya Dunworth, PhD, Teresa M. Hood, MS,  
Technical Writer-Editors
Martha F. Boyd, Lead Visual Information Specialist
Maureen A. Leahy, Julia C. Martinroe, 
Stephen R. Spriggs, Tong Yang,
Visual Information Specialists
Quang M. Doan, MBA, Phyllis H. King, 
Terraye M. Starr, Moua Yang, 
Information Technology Specialists
MMWR Editorial Board
Timothy F. Jones, MD, Chairman
Matthew L. Boulton, MD, MPH
Virginia A. Caine, MD 
Katherine Lyon Daniel, PhD
Jonathan E. Fielding, MD, MPH, MBA
David W. Fleming, MD 
William E. Halperin, MD, DrPH, MPH
King K. Holmes, MD, PhD 
Robin Ikeda, MD, MPH 
Rima F. Khabbaz, MD
Phyllis Meadows, PhD, MSN, RN
Jewel Mullen, MD, MPH, MPA
Jeff Niederdeppe, PhD
Patricia Quinlisk, MD, MPH 
Patrick L. Remington, MD, MPH 
Carlos Roig, MS, MA
William L. Roper, MD, MPH 
William Schaffner, MD
and can lead to life-threatening wasting and malabsorption 
in immunocompromised patients. Fecal-oral transmission of 
Cryptosporidium oocysts, the parasite’s infectious life stage, 
occurs via ingestion of contaminated recreational water, 
drinking water, or food, or following contact with infected 
persons or animals, particularly preweaned bovine calves 
(1). The typical incubation period is 2–10 days. Since 2004, 
the annual incidence of nationally notified cryptosporidiosis 
has risen approximately threefold in the United States (1). 
Cryptosporidium also has emerged as the leading etiology of 
nationally notified recreational water–associated outbreaks, 
particularly those associated with aquatic facilities (i.e., physical 
places that contain one or more aquatic venues [e.g., pools] and 
support infrastructure) (2). As of February 24, 2017, a total of 
13 (54%) of 24 states reporting provisional data detected at 
least 32 aquatic facility–associated cryptosporidiosis outbreaks 
in 2016. In comparison, 20 such outbreaks were voluntarily 
reported to CDC via the National Outbreak Reporting System 
for 2011, 16 for 2012, 13 for 2013, and 16 for 2014. This 
report highlights cryptosporidiosis outbreaks associated with 
aquatic facilities in three states (Alabama, Arizona, and Ohio) 
in 2016. This report also illustrates the use of CryptoNet, the 
first U.S. molecularly based surveillance system for a parasitic 
disease, to further elucidate Cryptosporidium chains of trans-
mission and cryptosporidiosis epidemiology. CryptoNet data 
can be used to optimize evidence-based prevention strategies. 
Not swimming when ill with diarrhea is key to preventing 
and controlling aquatic facility–associated cryptosporidiosis 
outbreaks (https://www.cdc.gov/healthywater/swimming/
swimmers/steps-healthy-swimming.html).
Alabama
On August 12, 2016, the Alabama Department of Public 
Health received a report of 35 persons who developed gas-
trointestinal symptoms after visiting an Alabama aquatic 
facility. Case-finding efforts identified 23 outbreak-associ-
ated cases. Three (13%) patients had laboratory-confirmed 
Cryptosporidium infection; molecular characterization by 
CryptoNet of one Cryptosporidium specimen identified 
it as the C. hominis IfA12G1R5 subtype. Data collected 
using an outbreak-specific questionnaire completed for 
15 patients indicated the median incubation period was 8 days 
(range = 5–17 days) after visiting the aquatic facility on July 31. 
The limited number of completed questionnaires provided 
insufficient statistical power to determine outbreak risk fac-
tors. On August 15, investigators collected filter backwash 
and water samples directly from the facility’s aquatic venues; 
on August 16, facility operators hyperchlorinated the aquatic 
venues, raising the free available chlorine concentration for a 
prolonged period to achieve 3-log10 (99.9%) Cryptosporidium 
inactivation. Microscopy and real-time polymerase chain reac-
tion (PCR) testing (3) did not detect Cryptosporidium in the 
filter backwash or water samples. An inspection found facility 
operation and maintenance in compliance with local standards, 
including water disinfectant concentration and pH standards. 
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / May 19, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 19 
495
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
No fecal incident was known to have occurred in any of the 
facility’s aquatic venues before the outbreak. However, it was 
recommended the facility develop policies on fecal incident 
response and maintain a fecal/vomit incident response log.*
Arizona
On August 2, 2016, the Arizona Department of Health 
Services was notified of a cluster of gastrointestinal illness 
among players on a Coconino County Little League team 
and family members; 36 (71%) of 51 persons became ill 
6–7 days after visiting a Maricopa County aquatic facility 
on July 22. Molecular characterization by CryptoNet of four 
Cryptosporidium specimens from the Little League cohort iden-
tified all four as the C. hominis IfA12G1R5 subtype. Maricopa 
County Department of Public Health simultaneously detected 
increased laboratory reporting of cryptosporidiosis as of mid-
July. Multiple patients reported visits to the same Maricopa 
County aquatic facility. To determine the magnitude of the 
outbreak, the counties interviewed cryptosporidiosis patients, 
focusing on possible risk factors, particularly recreational 
water exposures. During July 1–October 31, 2016, a total 
of 352 laboratory-confirmed cryptosporidiosis cases were 
detected statewide, compared with a median of 46 total cases 
(range = 42–62) detected annually during 2011–2015. Among 
317 interviewed patients, 204 (64%) reported recreational 
water exposure at 86 public aquatic venues, 74 (86%) of which 
were in Maricopa County. Environmental health practitioners 
of affected counties worked with facility operators to hyper-
chlorinate identified aquatic venues. Among 247 Maricopa 
County patients interviewed, 43 (17%) reported swimming 
while symptomatic at a median of one venue (range = 1–3).
Ohio
During 2012–2015, the Ohio Department of Health 
and local public health partners detected a median of 399 
cryptosporidiosis cases annually statewide (range = 324–571). 
In 2016, annual incidence increased nearly fivefold to 1,940 
cases. Ten (42%) of 24 cryptosporidiosis outbreaks detected 
in Ohio in 2016† were associated with aquatic venues. 
Assessing patients’ recreational water exposures to determine 
the magnitude of individual recreational water–associated 
outbreaks was complicated by individual patients reporting 
multiple exposures during their incubation period. Among 
six Cryptosporidium specimens from patients affected by 
these outbreaks, all were identified by CryptoNet as the 
C. hominis IdA19 subtype, which has rarely been identified 
in the United States. Five specimens were from a university 
sports team’s members; the sixth specimen was from a patient 
with no epidemiologic link to the university sports team 
except visiting the same waterpark. The matching subtype 
and epidemiologic link led the Ohio Department of Health 
to classify the 26 cases in the university sports team as part 
of the waterpark–associated outbreak; these cases previously 
had been thought to be associated with a different outbreak.
Discussion
This report highlights cryptosporidiosis outbreaks associated 
with aquatic facilities in three states in 2016. CryptoNet geno-
typing (18S PCR-RFLP) to determine Cryptosporidium species 
and subtyping (gp60 PCR and sequencing) to determine sub-
type (4) supported and strengthened the Alabama, Arizona, and 
Ohio outbreak investigations. First, molecular characterization 
identified or confirmed epidemiologic links among individual 
outbreak-associated cases. Second, and perhaps more impor-
tantly, C. hominis was repeatedly identified as the outbreak eti-
ology. Given that individual Cryptosporidium species can have 
unique host ranges, identifying the Cryptosporidium species can 
provide insight into possible exposures and outbreak sources. 
Identifying C. hominis as the etiology of these outbreaks indi-
cates a human source of contamination and underscores the 
need to engage swimmers and parents of young swimmers 
in efforts to prevent and control aquatic facility–associated 
cryptosporidiosis outbreaks.
Most Cryptosporidium species are indistinguishable by 
traditional diagnostic tests (microscopy or immunoassays); 
only molecular diagnostic methods, such as those used by 
CryptoNet, can distinguish these species and their subtypes. 
C. hominis IfA12G1R5 subtype was identified as the etiology 
in the Alabama and Arizona outbreak investigations. This 
subtype was initially identified in small numbers of specimens 
from sporadic (i.e., not outbreak-associated) cryptosporidiosis 
cases in the United Kingdom and Australia (5–7). In the United 
States, it was first seen in specimens from patients with acquired 
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and was responsible for 
a 2009 Oregon cryptosporidiosis outbreak associated with the 
care of an AIDS patient. Since 2013, it has emerged as the 
dominant C. hominis subtype among sporadic and outbreak-
associated cases with Cryptosporidium subtyping data; 107 
(36.6%) of 292 Cryptosporidium specimens from sporadic cases 
in 2016 were identified as the C. hominis IfA12G1R5 subtype.
To better understand the implication of identifying this sub-
type, molecular characterization of Cryptosporidium specimens 
needs to shift from predominantly supporting outbreak inves-
tigations to becoming nationally systematic. In 2010, CDC 
* An example of an aquatic venue water-contamination–response log is available 
at https://www.cdc.gov/healthywater/pdf/swimming/pools/water-
contamination-response-log.pdf.
† During 2012–2015, the Ohio Department of Health and local public health 
partners annually detected a median of six (range = 3–7) cryptosporidiosis 
outbreaks, a median of one (range = 0–2) were associated with recreational water.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 
496 
MMWR / May 19, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 19
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
launched CryptoNet (https://www.cdc.gov/parasites/crypto/
cryptonet.html), the first U.S. molecularly based surveillance 
system for a parasitic disease. Formal collaborations with state 
public health partners began in mid-2015. The objectives are 
to efficiently integrate CryptoNet into existing infrastructure 
when possible (e.g., merging the CryptoNet BioNumerics 
infrastructure into that of PulseNet) and to regularly analyze 
molecular characterization and epidemiologic data for each 
nationally notified case of cryptosporidiosis to further elucidate 
Cryptosporidium chains of transmission and cryptosporidiosis 
epidemiology (e.g., geographic and temporal changes in the 
distribution of Cryptosporidium species and their subtypes 
and associated exposures). Achieving these objections requires 
overcoming barriers to successful molecular characterization 
and sharing epidemiologic data by 1) increasing the positive 
predictive value of rapid diagnostic tests (i.e., decreasing the 
frequency of false positive results) (8), 2) shifting away from 
fixing specimens in formalin (which precludes molecular 
characterization), 3) advancing molecular diagnostics from 
single-gene to multilocus or whole-genome sequencing (which 
will increase discriminatory power), and 4) increasing state 
capacity to collect and share epidemiologic data with CDC.
The emergence of Cryptosporidium as the leading etiol-
ogy of aquatic facility–associated outbreaks results from the 
parasite’s extreme chlorine tolerance. Free available chlorine 
inactivates most infectious pathogens within minutes at 
CDC-recommended concentrations of at least 1 ppm§; 
however, Cryptosporidium oocysts can survive for days (9). 
As the Alabama outbreak investigation indicates, even prop-
erly operated and maintained aquatic venues can be sites of 
Cryptosporidium transmission. In addition, cyanuric acid (a 
stabilizer added to prevent chlorine depletion by the sun’s 
ultraviolet light) has been found to substantially delay chlo-
rine inactivation of Cryptosporidium (9). Consequently, in 
July 2016, CDC issued revised recommendations for hyper-
chlorination (https://www.cdc.gov/healthywater/swimming/
aquatics-professionals/fecalresponse.html) when responding 
to diarrheal incidents in public aquatic venues (i.e., high-risk 
Cryptosporidium contamination events) and aquatic facility–
associated cryptosporidiosis outbreaks. These recommenda-
tions are also included in CDC’s 2016 Model Aquatic Health 
Code (https://www.cdc.gov/mahc/editions/current.html). 
This national guidance can be adopted voluntarily by state 
and local jurisdictions and aquatic facilities to minimize the 
risk for public aquatic facility–associated illness and injury, 
particularly cryptosporidiosis.
§ At water pH 7.2–7.8 and temperature 77°F (25°C).
Preventing Cryptosporidium contamination of water in an 
aquatic venue would prevent Cryptosporidium transmission 
more efficiently than remediating actions once contamination 
occurs. This means that public health agencies and the aquat-
ics sector need to collaborate on engaging swimmers, who 
are the source of contamination, in prevention efforts. Young 
swimmers aged <5 years are more likely to contaminate the 
water because they are more likely to have inadequate toilet-
ing and hygiene skills; therefore, prevention efforts should 
focus on their parents. As the Arizona outbreak investigation 
demonstrated, patients continue to swim while symptomatic. 
The key healthy swimming message to the public to prevent 
Summary
What is already known about this topic?
Cryptosporidium has emerged as the leading etiology of 
recreational water–associated outbreaks, particularly those 
associated with aquatic facilities (places that contain one or 
more aquatic venues [e.g., swimming pools, interactive water 
play venues or water playgrounds, or hot tubs/spas] and 
support infrastructure [e.g., chemical storage space]).
What is added by this report?
Most Cryptosporidium species are indistinguishable by tradi-
tional diagnostic tests (microscopy or immunoassays); only 
molecular diagnostic methods, such as those used by 
CryptoNet, the first U.S. molecularly based surveillance system 
for a parasitic disease, can distinguish these species and their 
subtypes. Given that individual Cryptosporidium species can 
have unique host ranges, identifying the Cryptosporidium 
species can provide insight into possible exposures and 
outbreak sources. In the summer of 2016, when detection of 
cryptosporidiosis outbreaks increased, CryptoNet supported 
outbreak investigations by further elucidating Cryptosporidium 
chains of transmission.
What are the implications for public health practice?
Regular analysis of molecular characterization and epidemio-
logic data through CryptoNet for each nationally notified 
cryptosporidiosis case can further elucidate Cryptosporidium 
chains of transmission and cryptosporidiosis epidemiology (e.g., 
by monitoring geographic and temporal changes in the 
distribution of Cryptosporidium species and their subtypes and 
associated exposures). CryptoNet data can then be used to 
optimize development of evidence-based prevention strategies. 
Not swimming when ill with diarrhea is key to preventing and 
controlling aquatic facility–associated cryptosporidiosis 
outbreaks (https://www.cdc.gov/healthywater/swimming/
swimmers/steps-healthy-swimming.html). State and local 
jurisdictions and aquatic facilities can voluntarily adopt 
recommendations in CDC’s Model Aquatic Health Code (https://
www.cdc.gov/mahc/editions/current.html) to prevent and 
control Cryptosporidium transmission in public aquatic venues.
 Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
MMWR / May 19, 2017 / Vol. 66 / No. 19 
497
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
contamination is “Don’t swim or let your kids swim if sick 
with diarrhea.” Health care providers should also instruct 
cryptosporidiosis patients not to go back into the water until 
they have been diarrhea-free for 2 weeks.¶ Healthy swim-
ming promotion campaigns conducted before the summer 
swim season could reduce the risk for outbreaks caused by 
Cryptosporidium and other enteric pathogens (10), while 
optimizing the health benefits of water-based physical activ-
ity (https://www.cdc.gov/healthywater/swimming/swimmers/
health_benefits_water_exercise.html).
 1Division of Foodborne, Waterborne, and Environmental Diseases, National 
Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, CDC; 2Alabama 
Department of Public Health; 3Maricopa County Department of Public Health, 
Arizona; 4Arizona Department of Health Services; 5Epidemic Intelligence Service, 
CDC; 6Maricopa County Environmental Services Department, Arizona; 
7Coconino County Public Health Services District, Arizona; 8Arizona State Public 
Health Laboratory; 9Career Epidemiology Field Officer Program, CDC; 10Ohio 
Department of Health; 11Ohio Department of Health Laboratory.
Corresponding author: Michele Hlavsa, acz3@cdc.gov, 404-718-4695.
¶ The additional 2 weeks are recommended only for patients whose diarrhea is 
known to be caused by Cryptosporidium, because diarrhea caused by 
Cryptosporidium can repeatedly wax and wane before complete resolution, and 
cryptosporidiosis patients can continue to excrete infectious Cryptosporidium 
oocysts, typically for up to 2 weeks, after symptoms completely resolve.
References
 1. Painter JE, Hlavsa MC, Collier SA, Xiao L, Yoder JS. Cryptosporidiosis 
surveillance—United States, 2011–2012. MMWR Suppl 2015;64 
(No. SS-3):1–14.
 2. Hlavsa MC, Roberts VA, Kahler AM, et al. Outbreaks of illness associated 
with recreational water—United States, 2011–2012. MMWR Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep 2015;64:668–72.
 3. Jothikumar N, da Silva AJ, Moura I, Qvarnstrom Y, Hill VR. Detection 
and differentiation of Cryptosporidium hominis and Cryptosporidium 
parvum by dual TaqMan assays. J Med Microbiol 2008;57:1099–105. 
https://doi.org/10.1099/jmm.0.2008/001461-0
 4. Xiao L, Hlavsa MC, Yoder J, et al. Subtype analysis of Cryptosporidium 
specimens from sporadic cases in Colorado, Idaho, New Mexico, and 
Iowa in 2007: widespread occurrence of one Cryptosporidium hominis 
subtype and case history of an infection with the Cryptosporidium horse 
genotype. J Clin Microbiol 2009;47:3017–20. https://doi.org/10.1128/
JCM.00226-09
 5. Chalmers RM, Hadfield SJ, Jackson CJ, Elwin K, Xiao L, Hunter P
. 
Geographic linkage and variation in Cryptosporidium hominis. Emerg 
Infect Dis 2008;14:496–8. https://doi.org/10.3201/eid1403.071320
 6. Ng J, MacKenzie B, Ryan U. Longitudinal multi-locus molecular 
characterisation of sporadic Australian human clinical cases of 
cryptosporidiosis from 2005 to 2008. Exp Parasitol 2010;125:348–56. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.exppara.2010.02.017
 7. Ryan U, Fayer R, Xiao L. Cryptosporidium species in humans and animals: 
current understanding and research needs. Parasitology 2014;141:1667–85. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0031182014001085
 8. Robinson TJ, Cebelinski EA, Taylor C, Smith KE. Evaluation of the 
positive predictive value of rapid assays used by clinical laboratories in 
Minnesota for the diagnosis of cryptosporidiosis. Clin Infect Dis 
2010;50:e53–5. https://doi.org/10.1086/651423
 9. Murphy JL, Arrowood MJ, Lu X, Hlavsa MC, Beach MJ, Hill VR. Effect 
of cyanuric acid on the inactivation of Cryptosporidium parvum under 
hyperchlorination conditions. Environ Sci Technol 2015;49:7348–55. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.5b00962
 
10. CDC. Promotion of healthy swimming after a statewide outbreak of 
cryptosporidiosis associated with recreational water venues—Utah, 
2008–2009. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2012;61:348–52.
