 Surveillance Summaries / Vol. 65 / No. 5 
May 20, 2016 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
Immediate Closures and Violations Identified 
During Routine Inspections of  
Public Aquatic Facilities — Network for Aquatic 
Facility Inspection Surveillance, Five States, 2013
Continuing Education Examination available at http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/cme/conted.html. 
 Surveillance Summaries
The MMWR series of publications is published by the Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Atlanta, GA 30329-4027.
Suggested citation: [Author names; first three, then et al., if more than six.] [Title]. MMWR Surveill Summ 2016;65(No. SS-#):[inclusive page numbers].
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Thomas R. Frieden, MD, MPH, Director 
Harold W. Jaffe, MD, MA, Associate Director for Science 
Joanne Cono, MD, ScM, Director, Office of Science Quality 
Chesley L. Richards, MD, MPH, Deputy Director for Public Health Scientific Services
Michael F. Iademarco, MD, MPH, Director, Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services 
MMWR Editorial and Production Staff (Serials)
Sonja A. Rasmussen, MD, MS, Editor-in-Chief
Charlotte K. Kent, PhD, MPH, Executive Editor 
Christine G. Casey, MD, Editor
Teresa F. Rutledge, Managing Editor
David C. Johnson, Lead Technical Writer-Editor
Jeffrey D. Sokolow, MA, Project Editor
Martha F. Boyd, Lead Visual Information Specialist
Maureen A. Leahy, Julia C. Martinroe, 
Stephen R. Spriggs, Moua Yang, Tong Yang,
Visual Information Specialists
Quang M. Doan, MBA, Phyllis H. King, Terraye M. Starr,
Information Technology Specialists
MMWR Editorial Board
Timothy F. Jones, MD, Chairman
Matthew L. Boulton, MD, MPH
Virginia A. Caine, MD 
Katherine Lyon Daniel, PhD
Jonathan E. Fielding, MD, MPH, MBA
David W. Fleming, MD 
William E. Halperin, MD, DrPH, MPH
King K. Holmes, MD, PhD 
Robin Ikeda, MD, MPH 
Rima F. Khabbaz, MD
Phyllis Meadows, PhD, MSN, RN
Jewel Mullen, MD, MPH, MPA
Jeff Niederdeppe, PhD
Patricia Quinlisk, MD, MPH 
Patrick L. Remington, MD, MPH 
Carlos Roig, MS, MA
William L. Roper, MD, MPH 
William Schaffner, MD
CONTENTS
Introduction ............................................................................................................2
Methods 
....................................................................................................................4
Results .......................................................................................................................6
Discussion ................................................................................................................7
Future Directions ................................................................................................ 10
Limitations ............................................................................................................ 10
Conclusion ............................................................................................................ 11
References 
............................................................................................................. 11
APPENDIX A 
.......................................................................................................... 18
APPENDIX B .......................................................................................................... 19
References 
............................................................................................................. 22
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / May 20, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 5 
1
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Immediate Closures and Violations Identified During Routine 
Inspections of Public Aquatic Facilities — Network for Aquatic Facility 
Inspection Surveillance, Five States, 2013
Michele C. Hlavsa, MPH1, Taryn R. Gerth, MPH1, Sarah A. Collier, MPH1, Elizabeth L. Dunbar, MPH1,2, Gouthami Rao, MPH1, Gregory 
Epperson3, Becky Bramlett4, David F. Ludwig, MPH5, Diana Gomez, MPH6, Monty M. Stansbury6, Freeman Miller6, Jeffrey Warren7, Jim Nichol8, 
Harry Bowman8*, Bao-An Huynh, MPH9, Kara M. Loewe10, Bob Vincent10, Amanda L. Tarrier, MPH11, Timothy Shay11, Robert Wright12, 
Allison C. Brown, PhD1, Jasen M. Kunz, MPH13, Kathleen E. Fullerton, MPH1, James R. Cope, PhD14, Michael J. Beach, PhD1
1Division of Foodborne, Waterborne, and Environmental Diseases, National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infections Diseases, CDC
2CDC/Association of Schools of Public Health Fellow, CDC
3Maricopa County Environmental Services Department, Arizona
4Mohave County Department of Public Health, Environmental Health Division, Arizona
5Pima County Health Department, Arizona
6Yuma County Environmental Health Services Division, Arizona
7Orange County Environmental Health Division, California
8San Bernardino County Division of Environmental Health Services, California
9San Diego County Department of Environmental Health, California
10Florida Department of Health
11New York State Department of Health
12Division of Environmental Health Services, Department of Health and Human Services, Austin, Texas
13Division of Emergency and Environmental Health Services, National Center for Environmental Health, CDC
14Division of Global Health Protection, Center for Global Health, CDC
Abstract
Problem/Condition: Aquatic facility–associated illness and injury in the United States include disease outbreaks of infectious or 
chemical etiology, drowning, and pool chemical–associated health events (e.g., respiratory distress or burns). These conditions affect 
persons of all ages, particularly young children, and can lead to disability or even death. A total of 650 aquatic facility–associated 
outbreaks have been reported to CDC for 1978–2012. During 1999–2010, drownings resulted in approximately 4,000 deaths 
each year in the United States. Drowning is the leading cause of injury deaths in children aged 1–4 years, and approximately 
half of fatal drownings in this age group occur in swimming pools. During 2003–2012, pool chemical–associated health events 
resulted in an estimated 3,000–5,000 visits to U.S. emergency departments each year, and approximately half of the patients were 
aged <18 years. In August 2014, CDC released the Model Aquatic Health Code (MAHC), national guidance that can be adopted 
voluntarily by state and local jurisdictions to minimize the risk for illness and injury at public aquatic facilities.
Reporting Period Covered: 2013.
Description of System: The Network for Aquatic Facility Inspection Surveillance (NAFIS) was established by CDC in 2013. NAFIS 
receives aquatic facility inspection data collected by environmental health practitioners when assessing the operation and maintenance 
of public aquatic facilities. This report presents inspection data that were reported by 16 public health agencies in five states (Arizona, 
California, Florida, New York, and Texas) and focuses on 15 MAHC elements deemed critical to minimizing the risk for illness and 
injury associated with aquatic facilities (e.g., disinfection to prevent transmission of infectious pathogens, safety equipment to rescue 
distressed bathers, and pool chemical safety). Although these data (the first and most recent that are available) are not nationally 
representative, 15.7% of the estimated 309,000 U.S. public aquatic venues are located in the 16 reporting jurisdictions.
Results: During 2013, environmental health practitioners in the 16 reporting NAFIS jurisdictions conducted 84,187 routine inspections 
of 48,632 public aquatic venues. Of the 84,187 of routine inspection records for individual aquatic venues, 78.5% (66,098) included data 
on immediate closure; 12.3% (8,118) of routine inspections resulted in immediate closure because of at least one identified violation that 
represented a serious threat to public health. Disinfectant concentration violations were identified during 11.9% (7,662/64,580) of routine 
inspections, representing risk for aquatic facility–associated outbreaks of infectious etiology. Safety equipment violations were identified 
during 12.7% (7,845/61,648) of routine inspections, representing 
risk for drowning. Pool chemical safety violations were identified 
during 4.6% (471/10,264) of routine inspections, representing risk 
for pool chemical–associated health events.
Corresponding author: Michele Hlavsa, Division of Foodborne, 
Waterborne, and Environmental Diseases, National Center for Emerging 
and Zoonotic Infections Diseases, CDC. E-mail: acz3@cdc.gov. 
Telephone: 404-718-4695.
* Deceased.  
 Surveillance Summaries
2 
MMWR / May 20, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 5
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Interpretation: Routine inspections frequently resulted in immediate closure and identified violations of inspection items 
corresponding to 15 MAHC elements critical to protecting public health, highlighting the need to improve operation and 
maintenance of U.S. public aquatic facilities. These findings also underscore the public health function that code enforcement, 
conducted by environmental health practitioners, has in preventing illness and injury at public aquatic facilities.
Public Health Action: Findings from the routine analyses of aquatic facility inspection data can inform program planning, implementation, 
and evaluation. At the state and local level, these inspection data can be used to identify aquatic facilities and venues in need of more frequent 
inspections and to select topics to cover in training for aquatic facility operators. At the national level, these data can be used to evaluate 
whether the adoption of MAHC elements minimizes the risk for aquatic facility–associated illness and injury. These findings also can be used 
to prioritize revisions or updates to the MAHC. T
o optimize the collection and analysis of aquatic facility inspection data and thus application 
of findings, environmental health practitioners and epidemiologists need to collaborate extensively to identify public aquatic facility code 
elements deemed critical to protecting public health and determine the best way to assess and document compliance during inspections.
Introduction
Illness and injury associated with aquatic facilities† in the United 
States include disease outbreaks of infectious or chemical etiology, 
drowning, and pool chemical§–associated health events (e.g., 
respiratory distress or burns). These conditions affect persons of 
all ages, particularly young children, and can lead to disability or 
even death. Construction of public aquatic facilities for swimming, 
play, and relaxation increased in the United States throughout 
the 20th century as water treatment technology advanced (1). 
In 2009, swimming was the fourth most popular sports activity 
in the United States and the most popular among children aged 
7–17 years; an estimated 50,226,000 persons aged ≥7 years swam 
at least six times in 2009, translating to at least 301,356,000¶ 
swimming instances (2). Aquatic sector marketing data indicate 
that there were an estimated 309,000 public aquatic venues** 
throughout the United States in 2011 (3). Public aquatic facilities also 
have increased in size, accommodating tens of thousands of bathers per 
day, and have moved indoors, making swimming, play, and relaxation 
in aquatic venues possible year round instead of being limited to the 
warmer months. Moreover, with design innovations, aquatic venues 
have simultaneously evolved from being traditional rectangular pools 
to pools of various designs (e.g., interactive water play venues††) and 
to include venues other than pools (e.g., hot tubs/spas).
Water-based physical activity improves physical and 
mental health throughout life (4) and might be the only 
physical activity option for those with medical restrictions. 
However, participants in such activities are at risk for aquatic 
facility–associated illness and injury. The overriding public 
health goal is to maximize the health benefits of water-based 
physical activities while minimizing the risk for illness 
and injury. Surveillance data are used to characterize the 
epidemiology of illness and injury at aquatic facilities (i.e., 
estimate magnitude, document distribution, and track natural 
history) and inform and evaluate prevention efforts (5). 
Existing national surveillance systems monitor the following 
subcategories of aquatic facility–associated illnesses and 
injuries: aquatic facility–associated outbreaks,§§ drownings, 
and pool chemical–associated health events.
Existing National Surveillance Systems 
Monitoring Aquatic Facility–Associated 
Illness and Injury
Since 1978, CDC has tracked aquatic facility–associated 
outbreaks via the Waterborne Disease and Outbreak Surveillance 
System (WBDOSS) (http://www.cdc.gov/healthywater/
surveillance/rec-water-surveillance-reports.html). An aquatic 
facility–associated outbreak is defined as the occurrence of 
similar illness in two or more persons, epidemiologically linked 
by location and time of exposure to recreational water or to 
recreational water–associated chemicals volatilized or aerosolized 
into the air surrounding the water. During 1978–2012, a total 
of 650 aquatic facility–associated outbreaks were reported to 
CDC (Figure). Although these reported data likely represent 
 † A glossary of the terms used in this report is provided (Appendix A).
 § The term “pool chemical” is used to refer to any chemical used to maintain 
water quality or stop corrosion and scaling of equipment in any aquatic venue, 
not only pools.
 ¶ This is an underestimate because it does not take into account swimming 
instances of children aged 0–6 years, persons aged ≥7 years who swam less 
than six times per year, or the seventh and subsequent swimming instances 
of persons aged ≥7 years who swam more than six times per year.
 
** For terminology to be aligned with CDC’s Model Aquatic Health Code 
(MAHC), the term “aquatic venue” has replaced the term “treated recreational 
water venue,” which has been used historically by CDC in MMWR reports and 
surveillance summaries.
 
†† For terminology to be aligned with CDC’s MAHC, the term “interactive 
water play venue” has replaced the term “interactive fountain,” which has 
been used historically by CDC in MMWR reports and surveillance summaries.
 
§§ For terminology to be aligned with CDC’s MAHC, the term “aquatic facility–
associated outbreaks” has replaced the term “treated recreational water–
associated outbreaks,” which has been used historically by CDC in MMWR 
reports and surveillance summaries.
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / May 20, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 5 
3
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
only a fraction of outbreaks that occurred,¶¶ national outbreak 
data can be used to detect changes in the epidemiology of 
aquatic facility–associated outbreaks, including novel aquatic 
venues, emerging infectious pathogens, and the shift to indoor 
settings. For example, these data indicate that a spike in the 
incidence of outbreaks of Pseudomonas folliculitis associated 
with hot tubs/spas occurred in the early 1980s, when hot tubs/
spas became popular but before operation and maintenance 
standards could be established in jurisdictions across the United 
States. In 1988, the first U.S. aquatic facility–associated outbreak 
of cryptosporidiosis was detected (6,7). Since then, the annual 
incidence of such reported outbreaks has increased substantially, 
and Cryptosporidium, the parasite that causes cryptosporidiosis, 
has emerged as the leading etiology of reported aquatic facility–
associated outbreaks because of its extreme chlorine tolerance 
(8). Moreover, a focal cryptosporidiosis outbreak associated 
with one aquatic facility can expand into a community-wide 
outbreak that is associated with hundreds of aquatic facilities, 
affects thousands of persons (disproportionately young 
children), and spreads to other additional settings (e.g., child 
care facilities) (9). With the proliferation of indoor waterparks 
in recent years, CDC has increasingly received reports of aquatic 
facility–associated outbreaks involving indoor settings (8). 
The largest such outbreak to date, which occurred in Ohio in 
2007, affected at least 665 persons and was caused by volatile 
disinfection by-products called chloramines (10). Dichloramine 
and trichloramine are created when chlorine oxidizes nitrogenous 
compounds (e.g., human waste products such as sweat and 
urine). Unlike monochloramine, which is commonly used to 
disinfect drinking water, these chloramines can cause ocular 
and respiratory tract irritation. Limiting the amounts of fresh 
air introduced and of chloramine-polluted air exhausted, 
particularly during colder months, increases these health effects.
Mortality data from CDC’s National Vital Statistics System 
(NVSS) (http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nvss.htm) for 1999–2010 
indicate that approximately 4,000 persons die from drowning 
each year in the United States (11). Drowning is the leading 
cause of injury death in children aged 1–4 years; more than half 
of fatal drownings in this age group occur in a pool. Nonfatal 
drownings annually lead to an average of approximately 5,800 
U.S. emergency department (ED) visits (2005–2009) (12). 
More than half of the patients are children aged ≤4 years, 
and nearly two thirds of the nonfatal drownings in this age 
group occurred in pools. Half of nonfatal drownings require 
hospitalization and can result in severe brain damage, long-
term mental and physical disabilities, and substantial health 
care costs.
 
¶¶ Many factors can present barriers to the detection, investigation, and reporting of 
outbreaks: 1) mild illness, 2) small outbreak size, 3) long incubation periods, 
4) wide geographic dispersion of ill swimmers, 5) transient nature of contamination, 
6) setting or venue of outbreak exposure (e.g., residential backyard pool), 7) lack 
of public health staff to investigate fully, 8) potential lack of communication 
between those who respond to outbreaks of chemical etiology (e.g., hazardous 
materials personnel) and those who usually report outbreaks (e.g., infectious disease 
epidemiologists), and 9) reporting requirements (8).
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
No. of outbreaks
Year
All other aquatic facility–associated outbreaks
Hot tub/spa–associated Pseudomonas folliculitis outbreaks 
Aquatic facility–associated cryptosporidiosis outbreaks 
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
2004
2006
2008
2010
2012
FIGURE. Aquatic facility–associated outbreaks, by year — Waterborne Disease and Outbreak Surveillance System, United States, 1978–2012*
Source: Hlavsa MC, Roberts VA, Kahler AM, et al. Outbreaks of illness associated with recreational water—United States, 2011–2012. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2015;64:668–72.
* N = 650 (203 aquatic facility–associated cryptosporidiosis outbreaks, 189 hot tub/spa–associated Pseudomonas folliculitis outbreaks, and 258 other aquatic facility–
associated outbreaks).
 Surveillance Summaries
4 
MMWR / May 20, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 5
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
In 2007, the New York State Department of Health 
(NYSDOH) asked CDC to monitor health events associated 
with pool chemicals (Doug Sackett, personal communication, 
2007). Since then, CDC’s WBDOSS has received additional 
reports from New York and from other states of outbreaks 
caused by exposure to toxic chlorine gas. Toxic chlorine gas 
can be generated when chlorine and acid, which is typically 
used to adjust pH, are mixed by aquatics staff or in an aquatic 
venue’s plumbing when there is inadequate water flow. Data 
from the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission’s National 
Electronic Injury Surveillance System (NEISS) (http://www.
cpsc.gov/en/Research--Statistics/NEISS-Injury-Data) for 
2003–2012 indicate that pool chemical–associated health events 
annually lead to approximately 3,000–5,000 visits to U.S. EDs; 
almost half of the patients are aged <18 years (13–15). The 
most frequent diagnosis is poisoning (predominantly stemming 
from inhalation of vapors, fumes, or gases rather than ingestion) 
followed by dermatitis or conjunctivitis caused by chemical 
splashes onto the skin or into the eyes, respectively. In addition, 
CDC’s Sentinel Event Notification System for Occupational 
Risk data have been used to examine pool chemical–associated 
health events from an occupational health perspective (16), and 
data from ATSDR’s Hazardous Substances Emergency Events 
Surveillance program*** have been used to examine health events 
resulting from chemical spills (17).
The Model Aquatic Health Code and the 
Network for Aquatic Facility Inspection 
Surveillance
During 2007–2014, CDC and NYSDOH led a national 
consortium of public health and aquatics sector experts to 
develop the Model Aquatic Health Code (MAHC), national 
guidance that can be voluntarily adopted by state and local 
jurisdictions to minimize the risk for illness and injury at public 
aquatic facilities. The development of the MAHC is described 
elsewhere (Appendix B). In August 2014, CDC released the 
first edition of the MAHC (http://www.cdc.gov/mahc/index.
html), which covers a full range of issues pertaining to aquatic 
facilities, including their design, construction, operation, 
maintenance, and management. The penultimate draft of 
the MAHC enabled CDC to launch, in 2013, the Network 
for Aquatic Facility Inspection Surveillance (NAFIS), which 
established for the first time an ongoing multijurisdictional 
surveillance network for aquatic facility inspection data.
Data are needed so public health authorities can evaluate 
whether adoption of MAHC elements minimizes the risk for 
illness and injury at public aquatic facilities. However, decreases in 
the incidence of aquatic facility–associated outbreaks, drowning, 
and pool chemical–associated health events attributable to 
adoption of MAHC design and construction elements might not 
be detected by existing national surveillance systems for decades. 
Long periods of time are likely to elapse between the writing, 
enactment, implementation, and enforcement of MAHC 
elements in a given jurisdiction and across the United States. The 
time to adoption and the number, if any, of MAHC elements 
adopted will vary across jurisdictions. Most importantly, many 
design and operation elements apply only to newly constructed 
or substantially altered aquatic facilities.
Inspections of public aquatic facilities allow a real-time 
assessment of their operation and maintenance, and environmental 
health practitioners document their inspection findings using a 
standardized form. Analysis of inspection data can be used to 
examine immediate closures and violations (i.e., inspection-
outcome data) to estimate magnitude, document distribution, 
track natural history, and inform and evaluate prevention efforts 
(5). Because improper operation and maintenance represent risk 
for aquatic facility–associated illness and injury, NAFIS data 
can be used to evaluate whether adoption of MAHC elements 
minimizes risk for illness and injury at public aquatic facilities 
more immediately (i.e., within years of the release of the MAHC 
first edition) than existing national surveillance systems.
Methods
The primary objective of NAFIS is to enable public health 
authorities to evaluate whether adoption of MAHC elements 
minimizes the risk for illness and injury at public aquatic 
facilities. The secondary objective is to demonstrate the utility 
of inspection data and thus expand their use by state and local 
environmental health programs to monitor the operation and 
maintenance of public aquatic facilities and inform program 
planning, implementation, and evaluation.
Inspection of public aquatic facilities (e.g., forms used, items 
inspected, and inspection methods) varies across jurisdictions 
because individual state and local jurisdictions write, enact, 
implement, and enforce their own unique public health codes. 
Five states (Arizona, California, Florida, New York, and Texas) 
with the highest estimated counts of public aquatic venues 
were selected; 39.6% (122,412) of the estimated 309,000 U.S. 
public aquatic venues are located in these five states (3). CDC 
invited local jurisdictions (county or city) from these five states 
to participate in NAFIS. A total of 25 local jurisdictions agreed 
to report data annually to CDC, but only 16 reported 2013 
data to NAFIS by September 2015.
 *** This program is now known as the National Toxic Substance Incidents Program.
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / May 20, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 5 
5
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Catchment Area
Public aquatic facility codes can vary among states and within 
states (i.e., counties and cities in the same state might have 
different codes). Florida and New York have statewide public 
aquatic facility codes; Arizona and California codes vary by 
county. CDC invited the five counties with the highest counts 
of public aquatic venues (as per state public health officials in 
each of the four respective states) to participate in NAFIS. If 
a county in a given state could not, the county with the sixth 
highest count of public aquatic venues in that state was invited. 
Texas public aquatic facility codes can vary within a county, 
and CDC invited the five most populous cities as determined 
by 2013 census data to participate in NAFIS (18). If one of 
these Texas cities could not, the sixth most populous Texas city 
was invited. The five counties with the highest counts of public 
aquatic venues in California and Florida, five of the six counties 
with the highest counts of public aquatic venues in Arizona and 
New York, and five of the six most populous Texas cities agreed 
to annually report data to NAFIS. By September 11, 2015, 
the publication cut-off date, 16 (64%) jurisdictions reported 
2013 data to NAFIS (Table 1). The remaining nine (36%) 
jurisdictions did not report data because three jurisdictions 
were unable to access data, three were unable to extract data 
sets (i.e., all records) by the cut-off date, two did not have 
electronic data for 2013, and one did not respond.
Data Source and Collection
The launch of NAFIS began with the selection of elements for 
surveillance. CDC reviewed draft MAHC guidance before it was 
finalized and released in 2014 and identified approximately 50 
MAHC illness and injury risk-minimizing elements that protect 
public health. Because of the variability in codes and inspection 
data collected, CDC limited NAFIS’s initial list of MAHC 
elements for surveillance to the 15 elements deemed critical to 
minimizing the risk for aquatic facility–associated illness and 
injury (Table 2) and most likely to be included in inspections in 
these jurisdictions (Table 1). Identifying violations of inspection 
items corresponding to these 15 critical elements could result in 
immediate closure because these violations represent a serious 
threat to public health.
Inspection of a Public Aquatic Facility
An inspection of a public aquatic facility is an assessment 
of whether its operation and maintenance meet the standards 
set in the jurisdiction’s public health code and provides a 
real-time snapshot of whether the facility is being operated 
and maintained in a way that minimizes risk for aquatic 
facility–associated illness and injury. There are three types 
of inspections: routine, complaint, and follow-up. Routine 
inspections are conducted one to three times per year 
(primarily during the warmer months) and typically result in 
the completion of an entire inspection form to document the 
findings of a full assessment of the operation and maintenance 
of a public aquatic facility. Complaint inspections are 
conducted in response to a specific complaint (e.g., from a 
bather). Follow-up inspections are conducted to ensure that 
violations that were identified during previous inspections 
and that resulted in immediate closure have been corrected 
before reopening. Environmental health practitioners conduct 
inspections of an entire public aquatic facility, and a separate 
inspection report or record documents the assessment of 
each aquatic venue within the public aquatic facility. If an 
item is inspected and found not to be in compliance with the 
code, a violation has been identified; violations represent risk 
for aquatic facility–associated illness and injury. Ideally, the 
inspection items with the greatest impact on public health 
are prioritized and identification of corresponding violations 
could result in immediate closure. Priority inspection items 
include measuring free available chlorine and pH to ascertain 
whether they are within the required range; confirming that the 
fencing, walls, and self-closing and self-latching gates and doors 
are in good repair; and checking that the pool chemicals have 
labels required by either the Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration or the Environmental Protection Agency and 
are safely and securely stored.
Data Standardization and Analysis
Initially, jurisdictions sent their inspection forms and public 
aquatic facility codes to CDC for review. CDC sent back, for 
discussion, a proposed list of inspection items that corresponded 
to the 15 critical illness and injury risk-minimizing MAHC 
elements. These 15 MAHC elements were sorted into four 
categories: 1) aquatic facility–associated illness prevention 
elements, 2) drowning and entrapment prevention elements, 
3) prevention elements for pool chemical–associated health 
events and other nondrowning and nonentrapment injuries, 
and 4) general health and safety elements. A jurisdiction’s list 
of elements was not considered finalized until it was approved 
by the jurisdiction. Because codes, and thus, inspection forms, 
items inspected, and even how the same aspect of public 
aquatic facility operation and maintenance is inspected vary 
across jurisdictions, identified violations were specific to each 
jurisdiction and not to an overall standard.
Reporting jurisdictions submitted an electronic data set 
with their 2013 aquatic facility inspection data. Only data 
from routine inspections were analyzed because unlike routine 
inspections, complaint and follow-up inspections typically 
 Surveillance Summaries
6 
MMWR / May 20, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 5
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
focus on a subset of inspection items and do not result in a full 
assessment of the operation and maintenance of a public aquatic 
facility (i.e., the entire inspection form would not be completed 
to document inspection findings). Including data collected 
during complaint and follow-up inspections, in the analysis, 
could result in underestimates of the proportions of inspections 
that resulted in immediate closure or that identified violations.
SAS 9.3 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, North Carolina) was 
used to reformat, standardize, and analyze data sets. Data 
sets were reformatted, as needed. For example, a data set, in 
which each record was an individual identified violation, was 
restructured into a data set, in which each record was for an 
inspection and included data on compliance status of multiple 
inspection items. If a violation was not documented for a 
specific inspection item, the inspection item was assumed to 
have been found to be in compliance (i.e., not in violation). 
Variable names and their respective values were standardized 
across data sets. Previous analysis of aquatic facility inspection 
data (19) indicated that these data sets do not typically include 
data on aquatic facility setting (e.g., apartment/condominium, 
hotel/motel, and waterpark). Therefore, CDC developed an 
algorithm to identify aquatic facility setting, using aquatic 
facility name. The setting algorithm used the following terms 
to create the setting variable: 1) “apt,” “apartment,” “condo,” 
“HOA,” “townhouse,” “townhome,” and “home” for the category 
apartment/condominium; 2) “campground” and “camp” for 
the category campground (e.g., campsite)/camp (e.g., summer 
camp or day camp); 3) “child care,” “day care,” “childcare,” 
and “daycare” for the category childcare; 4) “hospital,” “rehab,” 
“outpatient,” “medical,” “nursing,” and “assisted living facility” 
for the category hospital; 5) “hotel,” “motel,” “inn,” “suites,” 
“extended stay,” “bed and breakfast,” “hostel,” and the names 
of large hospitality industry chains for the category hotel/motel; 
6) “fitness,” “gym,” “country club,” “athletic,” “swim school,” 
“YMCA,” and “sports center” for the category membership club; 
7) “community” and “municipal” for the category municipal; 
8) “university” and “college” for the category school/university; 
and 9) “waterpark” and “water park” for the category waterpark.
The setting algorithm was coded so that once the setting 
was classified by SAS, subsequent terms in the algorithm did 
not trigger a reclassification of the setting. After assigning 
a setting variable, aquatic facility name was deleted. A 
summary of findings was reported to each jurisdiction; 
data were not considered finalized until approved by the 
jurisdiction. Subsequently, the 16 individual data sets were 
then concatenated into one final data set.
Analyses included counts of routine inspections; median 
and range of counts of any violations identified per routine 
inspection; and proportions of routine inspections that 
identified at least one violation, resulted in immediate closure, 
or identified violations when inspecting items corresponding 
to the 15 critical illness and injury risk-minimizing MAHC 
elements. Analyses were conducted of the data overall and 
stratified by aquatic venue type (e.g., pool and hot tub/spa) 
and pool category (e.g., wading pool and interactive water 
play venue). The denominators in this report vary because 
of differences in the number of jurisdictions contributing 
inspection data (Table 2).
Results
Among the 16 NAFIS jurisdictions that provided data, nine 
(56%) reported aquatic facility inspection data that included 
both immediate closure and violation data, five (31%) reported 
only violation data, and two (13%) reported only immediate 
closure data. One (6%) jurisdiction included data that identified 
violation(s) leading to immediate closure. The number of 
jurisdictions contributing data to examine each critical element 
varied substantially, with no single jurisdiction contributing 
data to examine all 15 critical elements (Table 2). Fifteen 
(94%) of 16 data sets included data on aquatic venue type, and 
12 (75%) of 16 included data on pool category However, only 
one (6%) of 16 included data on aquatic facility setting; almost 
all pool (99.5% [55,622/55,913]) and hot tub/spa (99.1% 
[20,259/20,449]) inspection records were missing data on 
aquatic facility setting. Use of the setting algorithm increased the 
number of inspection records with setting data; however, after 
the setting algorithm was run, 75.6% (42,249/55,913) of pool 
and 84.2% (17,213/20,449) of hot tub/spa inspection records 
still were missing aquatic facility setting data, thus no analyses 
stratified by setting were conducted.
During 2013, environmental health practitioners in the 
16 NAFIS jurisdictions that reported data to CDC conducted 
84,187 routine inspections of 48,632 public aquatic venues 
(Table 1). This corresponds to 15.7% of the estimated 309,000 
venues in the United States. More than three quarters (78.9% 
[50,974/64,580]) of routine aquatic venue inspections 
identified at least one violation. The median number of 
violations identified per inspection was two (range: 0–21). 
Of the 84,187 routine inspection records, 78.5% (66,098) 
included data on immediate closure; 12.3% (8,118) of routine 
inspections resulted in immediate closure (Table 3). The most 
frequently reported violations representing risk for aquatic 
facility–associated illness were disinfectant concentration 
(11.9% [7,662/64,580]), pH (14.9% [9,236/62,141]), and 
automated chemical feeder (5.2% [3,031/57,967]) violations. 
The most frequently reported violations representing risk for 
drowning were enclosure (e.g., fence) (5.1% [3,303/64,580]) 
and safety equipment (12.7% [7,845/61,648]) violations.
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / May 20, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 5 
7
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Of the total 84,187 routine inspections, 55,913 (66.4%) were of 
public pools. Of 43,636 routine pool inspections, 11.8% (5,139) 
resulted in immediate closure. Disinfectant concentration (9.2% 
[3,927/42,891]), pH (12.4% [5,017/40,533]), and automated 
chemical feeder (6.2% [2,378/38,401]) violations were the 
most frequently reported violations representing risk for aquatic 
facility–associated illness. Enclosure (5.7% [2,449/42,891]) 
and safety equipment (16.6% [6,689/40,231]) violations were 
the most frequently reported violations representing risk for 
drowning. Violations representing risk for pool chemical–
associated health events (i.e., labeling, storage, or security of 
pool chemicals) were identified during 18.1% (427/2,358) of 
routine pool inspections.
Of the total 84,187 routine inspections, 20,449 (24.3%) 
were of public hot tubs/spas. Of 14,637 routine hot tub/spa 
inspections, 15.1% (2,217) resulted in immediate closure. 
The most frequently reported violations identified during 
inspections of hot tubs/spas were disinfectant concentration 
(19.2% [2,663/13,864]), pH (27.5% [3,789/13,783]), pool 
chemical safety (9.9% [8/81]), and water temperature (7.5% 
[1,037/13,783]).
By pool category, >95% (95.8% [53,537/55,913]) of 
inspections were of pools, 2.9% (1,606) of wading pools, 
0.1% (69) of interactive water play venues, and 1.3% (701) 
of other (Table 4). Because >95% of pool inspections were 
of “pools,” their inspection findings and those of “pools,” 
when the data are analyzed by aquatic venue type (e.g., pool 
and hot tub/spa), were nearly identical (Table 3). Of 948 
routine inspections of wading pools, 21.6% (205) resulted in 
immediate closure (Table 4). The most frequently reported 
violations all represented risk for aquatic facility–associated 
illness: disinfectant concentration (19.2% [303/1,581]), pH 
(26.0% [411/1,581]), and automated chemical feeder (6.1% 
[94/1,539]). Of 66 routine inspections of interactive water 
play venues, 12.1% (eight) resulted in immediate closure. As 
with wading pools, the most frequently reported violations 
all represented risk for aquatic facility–associated illness: 
disinfectant concentration (10.1% [7/69]), pH (6.1% [4/66]), 
or automated chemical feeder (5.8% [4/69]).
Discussion
This report is the first to summarize data from NAFIS; 
15.7% of the estimated 309,000 U.S. public aquatic venues 
are located in the 16 reporting jurisdictions. The findings of 
this report underscore the need to improve the operation and 
maintenance of U.S. public aquatic facilities to prevent illness 
and injury, as more than three quarters (78.9%) of routine 
inspections of public aquatic venues identified at least one 
violation. Multiple reports have previously examined data 
collected during inspections of U.S. public aquatic facilities 
with similar results, including analyses of 1961–1963 data from 
DuPage County, Illinois (20), 1999–2007 data from Plano, 
Texas (21), and 2005–2006 data from Nebraska (22). Three 
additional reports examined data collected during routine 
inspections of public aquatic facilities conducted in 2002 and 
2008 in multiple jurisdictions across the United States (Table 5) 
(19,23,24). All of these reports also found that violations of 
public health codes are identified frequently and immediate 
closures of public aquatic venues frequently occur.
Of note, 12.3% of routine inspections (11.8% of pools 
and 15.1% of hot tubs/spas) resulted in immediate closure 
and violations of inspection items that corresponded to the 
15 critical illness and injury risk-minimizing MAHC elements 
were identified frequently (Table 3) (Table 4). These findings 
underscore the public health function that code enforcement, 
conducted by environmental health practitioners, plays in 
preventing illness and injury at public aquatic facilities. During 
inspections, environmental health practitioners can serve 
as illness-and-injury-prevention advisors to aquatic facility 
operators. Immediate closures and identified violations offer 
an opportunity to educate operators about how to properly 
operate and maintain aquatic facilities and why these measures 
are necessary, to prevent repeated violations of a given operation 
or maintenance standard in public aquatic facility codes. 
Currently, only 68% of U.S. local public health agencies 
regulate, inspect, or license public aquatic facilities (25).
Minimizing Risk for Aquatic Facility–Associated 
Outbreaks of Infectious Etiology
In aquatic facilities, halogenation (e.g., chlorination or 
bromination) is the primary barrier to the transmission 
of infectious pathogens; proper pH ensures that the more 
active form of the halogen is available to inactivate infectious 
pathogens, and the automated chemical feeder delivers 
the halogen and pH-adjusting chemical.††† Outbreaks of 
acute gastrointestinal illness caused by halogen-susceptible 
pathogens do not occur unless the disinfectant concentration 
is inadequate; pH is improper; the automated chemical 
feeder is in poor condition or inoperable; or an operator 
error has occurred. Environmental health practitioners in 
the 16 reporting NAFIS jurisdictions identified disinfectant 
concentration, pH, and automated chemical feeder violations 
during 11.9%, 14.9%, and 5.2% of all inspections, respectively. 
These findings are corroborated by national data on outbreaks 
 ††† The amount of the more active form of the halogen available for disinfection 
is highly dependent on the pH, substantially decreasing with increasing pH. 
For example, hypochlorous acid, or HOCl, is 96% at pH 6.0, 72% at pH 7.0, 
48% at 7.5, and 22% at pH 8.0.
 Surveillance Summaries
8 
MMWR / May 20, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 5
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
of infectious etiology; during 2003–2012, halogen-susceptible 
pathogens caused 15.2–20.2% of aquatic facility–associated 
outbreaks of acute gastrointestinal illness.§§§ Transmission of 
halogen-susceptible infectious pathogens (e.g., E. coli O157:H7 
or Shigella spp.) can be prevented at MAHC-recommended 
disinfectant concentrations (1 ppm minimum free available 
chlorine [MAHC 5.7.3.1.1.2¶¶¶] or 3 ppm minimum free 
available bromine [MAHC 5.7.3.1.2.2]) at pH 7.2–7.8 
(MAHC 5.7.3.4.1). To minimize the incidence of disinfectant 
concentration and pH violations, aquatic facility operators 
(MAHC 6.3.1.1) should complete a training course (MAHC 
6.1.1.1) (22,26) that covers water disinfection and chemistry, 
mechanical systems (including automated chemical feeders), 
and other risk management strategies (MAHC 6.1.2).
Disinfectant concentration and pH violations were 
frequently documented at wading pools and interactive water 
play venues. Both of these aquatic venue types have features 
that make it more difficult to maintain halogen levels: wading 
pools are typically shallow, which facilitates halogen depletion 
by the sun’s ultraviolet light, and interactive water play venues 
typically aerosolize the water, which depletes halogens. 
Wading pools and interactive water play venues are designed 
and intended for young children. Young children are more 
likely to experience acute gastrointestinal illnesses, such as 
cryptosporidiosis (caused by the extremely halogen-tolerant 
Cryptosporidium) (27–29), and are more likely to contaminate 
the water because they either are incontinent or have 
inadequate toileting and hygiene skills. Contamination can 
occur via direct release of formed or diarrheal feces (30), or as 
much as 10 grams of fecal material can rinse off a young child’s 
perianal surface and into the water (31). Furthermore, swim 
diapers do not prevent feces, urine, or infectious pathogens 
from contaminating the water (32); and oxidation of organic 
or nitrogenous compounds (e.g., feces and urine) released or 
rinsed into the water deplete the halogen. In addition, young 
children typically ingest more recreational water than adults 
(33), putting them at increased risk for infection if pathogens 
are present. Consequently, maintaining proper disinfectant 
concentration and pH, combined with effective control of 
the automated chemical feeder, is particularly critical in these 
aquatic venues. The MAHC classifies wading pools and 
interactive water play venues as “increased-risk aquatic venues” 
and recommends all such newly constructed or substantially 
altered aquatic venues include secondary disinfection systems 
(e.g., ultraviolet light or ozone [MAHC 4.7.3.3]) to achieve at 
least 3-log10 (99.9%) inactivation of Cryptosporidium.
Disinfectant concentration and pH violations were also 
frequently documented at hot tubs/spas. Maintaining 
adequate disinfectant concentration in hot tubs/spas can be 
particularly difficult, because the halogen can be depleted 
by both the higher water temperatures and aerosolization of 
water by jets. Moreover, thermophilic infectious pathogens, 
such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Legionella spp., can 
colonize and amplify in hot tubs/spas in which the disinfectant 
concentration is inadequately maintained (34,35), leading 
to biofilm build-up that can protect these pathogens from 
disinfectants, even when adequate disinfectant concentration is 
maintained (36). During 2003–2012, Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
and Legionella spp. were confirmed or suspected to have caused 
77 hot tub–/spa-associated outbreaks (8,15,37–39). To increase 
the likelihood that adequate disinfectant concentration is 
maintained, facility operators should ensure that hot tubs/
spas have higher minimum disinfectant concentrations (3 ppm 
minimum free available chlorine [MAHC 5.7.3.1.1.2.3] or 
4 ppm minimum free available bromine [MAHC 5.7.3.1.2.2]) 
than other aquatic venues. In addition, because cyanuric acid 
(which prevents halogen depletion by the sun’s ultraviolet light) 
increases inactivation times of infectious pathogens (40–43), 
cyanuric acid should not be used in hot tubs/spas (MAHC 
5.7.3.1.3.1). Debris and organic materials (which deplete 
halogens) and biofilm should be removed from the water 
and accessible surfaces of hot tubs/spas (MAHC 5.6.10.6.1) 
and there should be more frequent draining and cleaning of 
hot tubs/spas than other aquatic venues (MAHC 5.12.7.2). 
Finally, aquatic facility operators or responsible supervisors 
should conduct routine checks, in part to ensure biofilm has 
been removed from accessible surfaces, prior to facility opening 
(MAHC 6.4.1.3.1).
Minimizing Risk for Drowning, Pool Chemical–
Associated Health Events, and Other Injuries
Maintaining enclosures (e.g., fencing, walls, and self-closing 
and self-latching gates and doors) (44) and safety equipment 
(e.g., hook or ring) at aquatic facilities minimizes the risk for 
drowning. Violations of these safety measures were documented 
by environmental health practitioners during 5.7% and 16.6%, 
respectively, of routine pool inspections. Enclosures should 
be maintained at all times (MAHC 5.6.10.5.1) and newly 
constructed or substantially altered aquatic facilities should 
have 6-foot fences (MAHC 4.8.6.2.4.2) and fencing mesh with 
no greater than a 1.75-inch opening to minimize scalability 
by young children (MAHC 4.8.6.2.1.2). Routine checks to 
ensure safety equipment is in place and in good repair should 
be conducted prior to facility opening (MAHC 6.4.1.3.1); 
 §§§ See “Recreational Water–associated Outbreaks of Acute Gastrointestinal 
Illness (AGI), by Type of Exposure and Etiology — United States, 2003–
2012” at http://www.cdc.gov/healthywater/surveillance/recreational/2011-
2012-figures.html#acuteGI-2003.
 ¶¶¶ For reference purposes, MAHC elements that could minimize risk for aquatic 
facility–associated illness and injury and are discussed in this report are 
followed by the specific section number that covers that element.
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / May 20, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 5 
9
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
if all required equipment is not present, the venue should be 
immediately closed (MAHC 6.6.3.1). Bather surveillance by 
trained lifeguards is another strategy to minimize the risk for 
drowning, but drowning can occur even in the presence of 
lifeguards (45). Lifeguard staffing should include clear and 
unobstructed zones of surveillance, and lifeguard staffing 
numbers should be based on the number of zones needed to have 
100% unobstructed vision of the entire aquatic venue (MAHC 
6.3.3.1.1, 6.3.3.1.2, and 6.3.3.1.3). To help minimize the risk for 
main drain–associated entrapment,**** aquatic facility operator 
training should include the requirements of the Virginia Graeme 
Baker Pool and Spa Safety Act (MAHC 6.1.2.1.4.7).
Risk for pool chemical–associated health events can be 
minimized through proper pool chemical labeling, storage, and 
security. Violations of this critical element were documented 
by environmental health practitioners during 18.1% and 9.9% 
of routine inspections of pools and hot tubs/spas, respectively. 
Data reported elsewhere indicate that 87% (27/31) of reported 
pool chemical–associated health events resulted from mixing 
incompatible chemicals, and 69% (25/36) of pool chemical–
associated health events were caused by poor chemical storage 
or handling practices (14). Aquatic facility operator training 
should include pool chemical safety (e.g., how to read pool 
chemical labels required by the Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration or the Environmental Protection Agency 
[MAHC 5.9.2.1.1] to identify incompatible chemical[s] and 
personal protective equipment needed for safe handling) 
(MAHC 6.1.2.1.4.6). Safe chemical storage practices include 
preventing access by unauthorized persons, such as children 
(MAHC 5.9.1.4); safe chemical handling practices include 
adding a concentrated pool chemical to water when diluting 
and not vice versa to prevent splashing of the concentrated 
chemical, potentially explosive reactions, and release of toxic 
chlorine gas (MAHC 5.9.2.4.2.1). Exposure to chemical vapors, 
fumes, or gases should be minimized by ensuring there is no 
air movement from the chemical storage area into any other 
interior space of a building intended for occupation (MAHC 
4.9.2.6.1). Finally, when the recirculation pump shuts down 
or fails to generate adequate flow but the automated chemical 
feeder pumps continue to inject concentrated chlorine and acid 
into the water, the mixing of concentrated chemicals produces 
toxic chlorine gas. Restarting the recirculation pump then vents 
the toxic chlorine gas from the venue plumbing and into the 
aquatic venue. To prevent this from happening, an electrical 
interlock should be installed between the automated chemical 
feeders, the recirculation pumps, and water flow meter/flow 
switch to shut down automated chemical feeder pumps if the 
recirculation pumps shut down or there is inadequate water 
flow in the venue plumbing (MAHC 4.7.3.2.1.3).
Violations related to water temperature were documented 
during 7.5% of routine inspections of hot tubs/spas. Sitting in 
high temperature water for a prolonged time essentially mimics 
fever and poses a risk for hyperthermia in vulnerable persons. 
For example, young children are still developing the ability to 
regulate body temperature, and body temperature regulation 
is especially difficult for infants given their small body mass 
relative to their body surface area. In addition, data suggest 
that hot tub/spa use by pregnant women, particularly in the 
first trimester, might be associated with birth defects (46,47). 
To minimize the risk for injury related to water temperature, 
the water temperature should not exceed 104° F (40° C) 
(MAHC 5.7.4.7.2). Hot tub/spa signage should include text 
indicating that children aged <5 years are prohibited from 
using hot tubs/spas, pregnant women should not use the hot 
tub/spa without prior consultation with a health care provider, 
and the water temperature should not exceed 104º F (40º C) 
(MAHC 6.4.2.2.3.7). Aquatic facility operators might consider 
providing accurate thermometers that allow bathers to easily 
check the hot tub/spa water temperature before entering.
Improving the Collection and Storage of 
Aquatic Facility Inspection Data
The process of submitting, reformatting, standardizing, and 
analyzing 2013 NAFIS data highlighted several areas where 
the collection and storage of aquatic facility inspection data 
could be improved. First, data on aquatic facility setting (e.g., 
apartment/condominium, hotel/motel, and waterpark) were 
not included in most submitted data sets and pool category 
(e.g., wading pool and interactive water play venue) for 
almost all inspected pools was designated as “pool” instead 
of a specific type of pool. This precluded the characterization 
of the distribution of immediate closures and violations by 
aquatic facility setting and limited characterization by pool 
category. Collecting aquatic facility setting, aquatic venue type, 
and pool category data enable identification of increased-risk 
settings, aquatic venue types, and pool categories. Second, 
data on quantitative results of water quality testing conducted 
during inspections were not collected or submitted, limiting 
the interpretation of disinfectant concentration and pH 
violation data. Quantitative results of water quality testing 
are particularly useful when there are different public health 
implications related to upper and lower limits of mandated 
water quality parameters. For example, as pH decreases below 
7.2, disinfection effectiveness increases because more of the 
active form of the halogen (e.g., hypochlorous acid) is formed; 
however, as pH decreases below 7.2, bathers are increasingly 
 **** Entrapment occurs when a body part (e.g., hair, limb, or buttocks) or 
something on the swimmer’s body (e.g. jewelry or bathing suit) becomes 
caught in the suction of the recirculation pump or in an underwater structure. 
 Surveillance Summaries
10 
MMWR / May 20, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 5
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
likely to experience skin and eye irritation and the aquatic 
venue plumbing is more likely to corrode. Alternatively, as 
pH increases above 7.8, disinfection effectiveness decreases 
(because less of the active form of the halogen is available 
for disinfection), and bathers are again increasingly likely 
to experience skin and eye irritation. Third, data for which 
specific inspection items resulted in immediate closures 
were submitted by only one jurisdiction; these data enable 
more in-depth characterization of immediate closures and 
identification of operator training needs. The structure of 
inspection forms and design of the electronic databases can 
also be optimized to facilitate analysis. For 10 (67%) of 15 
critical illness and injury risk-minimizing MAHC elements 
(Table 2), at least one NAFIS jurisdiction combined data 
on multiple inspection items. While this practice expedites 
data collection and entry and limits data storage needs, it 
precludes analysis of individual inspection items and leads to 
an underestimate of the total number of identified violations. 
Assessing and documenting findings for individual inspection 
items enables a more comprehensive picture of the operation 
and maintenance of public aquatic venues. Additionally, 
structuring databases to efficiently document whether each 
individual inspection item was in compliance, in violation, 
or not inspected, could allow for the inclusion of complaint 
and follow-up inspection data in analyses. Finally, nine (36%) 
NAFIS jurisdictions could not participate in this report. Not 
all NAFIS jurisdictions had electronic data, and among those 
that did have electronic data, not all could readily access or 
retrieve their data in time to collaborate on this report. CDC 
has developed two resources to help optimize the collection 
and analysis of aquatic facility inspection data: a draft model 
inspection form (http://www.cdc.gov/mahc/tools-forms.html), 
which includes approximately 50 MAHC illness and injury 
risk-minimizing elements that protect public health, and a set 
of recommendations to improve data collection and database 
construction (http://www.cdc.gov/healthywater/swimming/
pools/regulation/recommendations-pool-inspection-data-
collection.html).
Future Directions
To optimize the analysis and collection of aquatic facility 
inspection data, and thus the application of findings, a 
collaboration of federal, state, and local partners from different 
disciplines is needed and should include environmental health 
practitioners with technical knowledge about the operation and 
maintenance of public aquatic facilities and with inspection 
experience, epidemiologists skilled in conducting surveillance 
and data analysis, and information technology specialists with 
expertise in database construction. This collaboration could 
provide input on identifying public aquatic facility code 
elements deemed critical to protecting public health and on 
the creation of needed resources (e.g., standard inspection 
forms, training for inspectors, criteria for the construction of 
databases, and tools to analyze data).
The Council for the Model Aquatic Health Code (CMAHC; 
http://www.cmahc.org), a national clearinghouse for MAHC 
change requests that are relayed back to CDC (Appendix B), 
could facilitate this collaboration and development of resources. 
This collaboration could, to some degree, standardize data 
across jurisdictions, including jurisdictions participating in 
NAFIS. This would enable cross-jurisdictional comparisons, 
further elucidating the epidemiology of immediate closures 
and violations of public aquatic facility codes and enabling 
sharing of environmental health aquatic inspection program 
lessons learned. Additionally, analysis of NAFIS data can also 
be used to prioritize revisions or updates to the MAHC itself.
The CMAHC-facilitated collaboration could also serve as 
a model for the creation of multidisciplinary teams within 
state or local jurisdictions. These teams could adapt resources 
as needed for their individual state or local jurisdictions. This 
team-based approach would increase state and local capacity 
to use data to inform environmental health aquatic inspection 
program planning, implementation, and evaluation. Beyond 
optimizing aquatic facility inspection data for surveillance at 
the local, state, and multijurisdictional level, these principles 
can be applied to data collected by other state and local 
environmental health inspection programs, including those 
focused on food service establishments and childcare settings.
Limitations
The findings in this report are subject to at least three 
limitations. First, these data are not generalizable to U.S. public 
aquatic facilities and venues nationwide. Second, the number 
of public aquatic venues inspected and the frequency of routine 
inspections differs by jurisdiction; thus, some jurisdictions 
(e.g., Maricopa County in Arizona and Orange County in 
California) contributed a higher proportion of inspection 
records to this analysis than other jurisdictions. Finally, the 
variability in public health codes, and thus in inspection 
forms, items inspected, and how the same aspect of public 
aquatic facility operation and maintenance is inspected across 
jurisdictions limited data analysis (i.e., violations were specific 
to each jurisdiction and not to an overall standard).
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / May 20, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 5 
11
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Conclusion
With an estimated 15.7% of U.S. public aquatic venues under 
surveillance, NAFIS is the first ongoing multijurisdictional 
surveillance network to use aquatic facility inspection data 
to monitor the operation and maintenance of public aquatic 
facilities in the United States. The findings of this report 
and others (19,23,24), while not directly comparable, are 
similar: operation and maintenance violations and consequent 
immediate closures of U.S. public aquatic venues frequently 
occur. The findings of this report also demonstrate the utility 
of aquatic facility inspection data; highlight the potential of 
these data to inform state and local environmental health 
aquatic inspection program planning, implementation, and 
evaluation; and underscore the public health function that code 
enforcement, conducted by environmental health practitioners, 
plays in preventing illness and injury at public aquatic facilities.
For the aquatics sector and public health to continue 
to minimize the risk for illness and injury at public 
aquatic facilities, the following measures are recommended: 
1) expanded use of inspection data to inform state and local 
environmental health aquatic inspection program planning, 
implementation, and evaluation and 2) broad participation 
in CMAHC to keep the MAHC current and up to date. 
Adoption, implementation, and enforcement of the MAHC 
elements in jurisdictions across the United States could 
help minimize illness and injury at public aquatic facilities. 
Collaboration among environmental health practitioners, 
epidemiologists, and IT specialists nationally and within 
individual state and local jurisdictions is essential to optimizing 
aquatic facility inspection data collection and evaluating 
whether the adoption of MAHC elements minimizes illness 
and injury at public aquatic facilities.
Acknowledgments
Rob Blake, Division of Emergency and Environmental Health 
Services, National Center for Environmental Health, CDC; Matthew 
Penn, Montrece Ransom, Stacie Close, Julia Charles, Public Health 
Law Office, Office for State, Tribal, Local, and Territorial Support, 
CDC; Blanca Caballero, Arizona Department of Health Services; 
Joyce Tuttle, California Department of Public Health; Katie Moore, 
Texas Department of State Health Services.
References
1. Wiltse J. Contested waters: a social history of swimming pools in America. 
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press; 2007.
2. US Census Bureau. Statistical abstract of the United States: arts, recreation, 
and travel: participation in selected sports activities. Washington, DC: 
US Department of Commerce, US Census Bureau; 2012. http://www.
census.gov/library/publications/2011/compendia/statab/131ed/arts-
recreation-travel.html
3. Data PK. Inc. U.S. swimming pool and hot tub market, Duluth, GA: 
Data PK Inc.; 2011.
 4. CDC. Health benefits of water-based exercise. Atlanta, GA: US 
Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2013. http://www.
cdc.gov/healthywater/swimming/health_benefits_water_exercise.html
 5. Teutsch SM. Considerations in planning a surveillance system. In: Lee L, 
Teutsch SM, Thacker SB. Principles and practice of public health 
surveillance. 2nd ed. New York, NY: Oxford University Press; 2000.
 6. CDC. Swimming-associated cryptosporidiosis—Los Angeles County. 
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 1990;39:343–5.
 7. Sorvillo FJ, Fujioka K, Nahlen B, Tormey MP
, Kebabjian R, Mascola L. 
Swimming-associated cryptosporidiosis. Am J Public Health 
1992;82:742–4. http://dx.doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.82.5.742
 8. Hlavsa MC, Roberts VA, Kahler AM, et al. Outbreaks of illness associated 
with recreational water—United States, 2011–2012. MMWR Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep 2015;64:668–72.
 9. CDC. Communitywide cryptosporidiosis outbreak—Utah, 2007. 
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2008;57:989–93.
 
10. CDC. Respiratory and ocular symptoms among employees of a hotel 
indoor waterpark resort—Ohio, 2007. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly 
Rep 2009;58:81–5.
 
11. Xu J. Unintentional drowning deaths in the United States, 1999–2010. 
NCHS Data Brief 2014;149:1–8.
 
12. CDC. Drowning—United States, 2005–2009. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep 2012;61:344–7.
 
13. Hlavsa MC, Robinson TJ, Collier SA, Beach MJ. Pool chemical–
associated health events in public and residential settings—United States, 
2003–2012, and Minnesota, 2013. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2014;63:427–30.
 
14. CDC. Pool chemical–associated health events in public and residential 
settings—United States, 1983–2007. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2009;58:489–93.
 
15. Hlavsa MC, Roberts VA, Anderson AR, et al. Surveillance for waterborne 
disease outbreaks and other health events associated with recreational water—
United States, 2007–2008. MMWR Surveill Summ 2011;60:1–32.
 
16. CDC. Acute illness and injury from swimming pool disinfectants and 
other chemicals—United States, 2002–2008. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep 2011;60:1343–7.
 
17. Anderson AR, Welles WL, Drew J, Orr MF. The distribution and public 
health consequences of releases of chemicals intended for pool use in 
17 states, 2001–2009. J Environ Health 2014;76:10–5.
 
18. US Census Bureau. Annual estimates of the resident population for 
incorporated places of 50,000 or more, ranked by July 1, 2013 population: 
April 1, 2010 to July 1, 2013. Washington, DC: US Department of 
Commerce, US Census Bureau; 2014. https://www.census.gov/popest/
data/cities/totals/2013/index.html
 
19. CDC. Violations identified from routine swimming pool inspections—
selected states and counties, United States, 2008. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep 2010;59:582–7.
 
20. Karch KM. Application of a data processing system to a swimming pool 
inspection program. Public Health Rep 1965;80:211–9. http://dx.doi.
org/10.2307/4592385
 
21. Vyles T. Growth and evolution of a municipal pool safety and inspection 
program. J Environ Health 2009;71:40–4.
 
22. Buss BF, Safranek TJ, Magri JM, Török TJ, Beach MJ, Foley BP
. 
Association between swimming pool operator certification and reduced 
pool chemistry violations—Nebraska, 2005–2006. J Environ Health 
2009;71:36–40.
 
23. CDC. Surveillance data from swimming pool inspections—selected 
states and counties, United States, May–September 2002. MMWR 
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2003;52:513–6.
 
24. CDC. Surveillance data from public spa inspections—United States, May–
September 2002. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2004;53:553–5.
 Surveillance Summaries
12 
MMWR / May 20, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 5
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
 
25. National Association of County and City Health Officials. 2013 national 
profile of local health departments. Washington, DC: National 
Association of County and City Health Officials; 2014. http://
nacchoprofilestudy.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/02/2013_National_
Profile021014.pdf
 
26. Johnston K, Kinziger M. Certified operators: Does certification provide 
significant results in real-world pool and spa chemistry? IJARE 
2007;1:18–33.
 
27. Painter JE, Hlavsa MC, Collier SA, Xiao L, Yoder JS. Cryptosporidiosis 
surveillance—United States, 2011–2012. MMWR Surveill Summ 
2015;64(No. SS-3):1–14.
 
28. Roy SL, DeLong SM, Stenzel SA, et al.; Emerging Infections Program 
FoodNet Working Group. Risk factors for sporadic cryptosporidiosis 
among immunocompetent persons in the United States from 1999 to 
2001. J Clin Microbiol 2004;42:2944–51. http://dx.doi.org/10.1128/
JCM.42.7.2944-2951.2004
 
29. Roy SL, Scallan E, Beach MJ. The rate of acute gastrointestinal illness 
in developed countries. J Water Health 2006;4(Suppl 2):31–69. http://
dx.doi.org/10.2166/wh.2006.017
 
30. CDC. Prevalence of parasites in fecal material from chlorinated 
swimming pools—United States, 1999. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly 
Rep 2001;50:410–2.
 
31. Gerba CP
. Assessment of enteric pathogen shedding by bathers during 
recreational activity and its impact on water quality. Quant Microbiol 
2000;2:55–68. http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:1010000230103
32. Amburgey JE, Anderson JB. Disposable swim diaper retention of 
Cryptosporidium-sized particles on human subjects in a recreational water 
setting. J Water Health 2011;9:653–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.2166/
wh.2011.063
33. Dufour AP
, Evans O, Behymer TD, Cantú R. Water ingestion during 
swimming activities in a pool: a pilot study. J Water Health 2006;4:425–30.
 
34. Esterman A, Roder DM, Cameron AS, et al. Determinants of the 
microbiological characteristics of South Australian swimming pools. 
Appl Environ Microbiol 1984;47:325–8.
 
35. Price D, Ahearn DG. Incidence and persistence of Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa in whirlpools. J Clin Microbiol 1988;26:1650–4.
 
36. Declerck P
. Biofilms: the environmental playground of Legionella 
pneumophila. Environ Microbiol 2010;12:557–66. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/j.1462-2920.2009.02025.x
37. Dziuban EJ, Liang JL, Craun GF, et al. Surveillance for waterborne 
disease and outbreaks associated with recreational water—United States, 
2003–2004. MMWR Surveill Summ 2006;55(No. SS-9):1–30.
 
38. Hlavsa MC, Roberts VA, Kahler AM, et al. Recreational water–associated 
disease outbreaks—United States, 2009–2010. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep 2014;63:6–10.
 
39. Yoder JS, Hlavsa MC, Craun GF, et al. Surveillance for waterborne 
disease and outbreaks associated with recreational water use and other 
aquatic facility–associated health events—United States, 2005–2006. 
MMWR Surveill Summ 2008;57(No. SS-9):1–29.
 
40. Murphy JL, Arrowood MJ, Lu X, Hlavsa MC, Beach MJ, Hill VR. Effect 
of cyanuric acid on the inactivation of Cryptosporidium parvum under 
hyperchlorination conditions. Environ Sci Technol 2015;49:7348–55. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.5b00962
 
41. Anderson JR. A study of the influence of cyanuric acid on the bactericidal 
effectiveness of chlorine. Am J Public Health Nations Health 
1965;55:1629–37. http://dx.doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.55.10.1629
 
42. Fitzgerald GP
, DerVartanian ME. Factors influencing the effectiveness 
of swimming pool bactericides. Appl Microbiol 1967;15:504–9.
 
43. Shields JM, Arrowood MJ, Hill VR, Beach MJ. The effect of cyanuric 
acid on the disinfection rate of Cryptosporidium parvum in 20-ppm free 
chlorine. J Water Health 2009;7:109–14. http://dx.doi.org/10.2166/
wh.2009.008
 
44. Thompson DC, Rivara FP
. Pool fencing for preventing drowning in 
children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2000;(2):CD001047.
 
45. Pelletier AR, Gilchrist J. Fatalities in swimming pools with lifeguards: 
USA, 2000–2008. Inj Prev 2011;17:250–3. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/
ip.2010.029751
 
46. Duong HT, Shahrukh Hashmi S, Ramadhani T, Canfield MA, 
Scheuerle A, Kim Waller D; National Birth Defects Prevention Study. 
Maternal use of hot tub and major structural birth defects. Birth Defects 
Res A Clin Mol Teratol 2011;91:836–41. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/
bdra.20831
 
47. Moretti ME, Bar-Oz B, Fried S, Koren G. Maternal hyperthermia and 
the risk for neural tube defects in offspring: systematic review and meta-
analysis. Epidemiology 2005;16:216–9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/01.
ede.0000152903.55579.15
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / May 20, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 5 
13
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
TABLE 1. Number of public aquatic venues* and routine inspections 
conducted, by jurisdiction — 16 reporting jurisdictions, Network for 
Aquatic Facility Inspection Surveillance, United States, 2013  
Jurisdiction
No. of venues
No. of inspections
Arizona
12,066
20,519
Maricopa
8,853
14,874
Mohave
409
419
Pima
2,488
4,733
Yuma
316
493
California
16,793
27,409
Orange
6,877
15,231
San Bernardino
2,767
4,353
San Diego
7,149
7,825
Florida
16,100
32,472
Broward
4,394
9,895
Dade
3,645
6,088
Orange
2,199
4,195
Palm Beach
3,255
6,887
Pinellas
2,607
5,407
New York
2,022
2,439
Suffolk
802
1,250
Sullivan
557
551
Westchester
663
638
Texas
1,651
1,348
Austin
1,651
1,348
Total
48,632
84,187
* Whereas environmental health practitioners conduct inspections of an entire 
public aquatic facility (the physical place that contains one or more aquatic 
venues and support infrastructure [e.g., chemical storage space]), a separate 
inspection report, or record, documents the assessment of each aquatic venue 
(an artificially constructed structure or modified natural structure where the 
general public is exposed to water intended for recreational or therapeutic 
purpose [e.g., pools and hot tubs/spas]) within the public aquatic facility.  
 Surveillance Summaries
14 
MMWR / May 20, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 5
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
TABLE 2. Rationale for 15 critical illness and injury risk-minimizing Model Aquatic Health Code (MAHC) elements, by illness or injury and number 
of participating jurisdictions* — 16 reporting jurisdictions, Network for Aquatic Facility Inspection Surveillance, United States, 2013  
Critical element
Rationale
No. of 
jurisdictions 
contributing 
inspection  
data
No. of 
jurisdictions  
not 
collecting 
inspection 
data  
or unable to  
share these 
data
No. of 
jurisdictions 
combining 
inspection data 
on multiple 
inspections  
items,  
precluding 
analysis
Aquatic facility–associated illness prevention elements
Proper free available chlorine or 
bromine concentration
Prevent transmission of infectious pathogens and reduce creation of 
disinfection by-products
14
2
0
Proper pH
Balance maximizing inactivation of infectious pathogens by free available 
chlorine or bromine while minimizing skin and eye irritation and 
corrosion of aquatic venue plumbing
11
5
0
Recirculation pump approved, in 
good repair, or operating
Transport water from aquatic venue via the main drain or other suction 
outlets, into venue plumbing, and through filter; continue to circulate 
water through plumbing so that halogen (chlorine or bromine) and 
pH-adjusting chemical can be added, diluted, and then mixed; and return 
treated water into aquatic venue via inlets, water jets, or spray features 
from venue plumbing 
1
7
8
Filter approved, in good repair, or 
operable
Remove particles from water, including those that bind with and deplete 
free available chlorine or bromine  
1
9
6
Automated chemical feeder in  
good repair or operable
Add halogen (chlorine or bromine, which when diluted become free 
available chlorine or bromine, respectively) and pH-adjusting chemical to 
water in plumbing to optimize inactivation of infectious pathogens
10
4
2
Drowning and entrapment† prevention elements
Enclosure: Fencing, walls, gates, and 
doors in good repair or self-closing 
and self-latching gates and doors
Prevent drowning by preventing unsupervised entry by young children 
and unauthorized entry outside operational hours
14
2
0
Water clear or main drain visible
Prevent drowning and other injury by ensuring visibility of persons, 
including in deepest water in aquatic venue
9
2
5
Main drain covers compliant with 
Virginia Graeme Baker Pool and Spa 
Safety Act (15 U.S.C. §§ 8001 et 
seq.) or with ASME/ANSI A112.19.8 
or covers/grates of suction outlets 
secured in place or in good repair
Prevent entrapment 
13
3
0
Qualified or adequately staffed 
lifeguards
Prevent drowning by recognizing and rescuing distressed bathers
2
5
9
Appropriate safety equipment (e.g., 
hook or ring) or in good repair or 
first aid kit present
Prevent drowning by providing equipment to rescue distressed bathers, 
with or without lifeguard on duty
10
3
3
Prevention elements for pool chemical–associated health events and other nondrowning and nonentrapment injuries
Chemicals labeled, stored safely, or 
secured
Prevent pool chemical–associated health events
5
5
6
Hot tub/spa temperature ≤104°F (40°C) Prevent hyperthermia
11
2
3
Protected overhead electrical  
wires or GFCI-protected  
electrical outlets
Prevent electrocution, electric shock, burns, and falls caused by contact 
with electrical energy
9
6
1
General health and safety elements
Qualified operator or responsible 
supervisor on site
Prevent aquatic facility–associated illness and injury by ensuring optimal 
operation and maintenance
6
8
2
Substantial alterations or 
equipment replacement approved
Prevent aquatic facility–associated illness and injury by ensuring new 
design, construction, and equipment meet code
10
6
0
Abbreviations: ASME = American Society of Mechanical Engineers; ANSI = American National Standards Institute; GFCI = ground fault circuit interrupter.
* Inspection forms, items inspected, and even how the same aspect of public aquatic facility operation and maintenance is inspected vary across jurisdictions. Thus, 
the numbers of jurisdictions contributing data to the examination of each MAHC element varies.
† Entrapment occurs when a body part (e.g., hair, limb, or buttocks) or something on the swimmer’s body (e.g., jewelry or bathing suit) becomes caught in the suction 
of the recirculation pump or in an underwater structure.   
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / May 20, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 5 
15
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
TABLE 3. Percentage of routine inspections (N = 84,187*) of public aquatic venues with identified jurisdiction-specific violations, by aquatic 
venue type and corresponding 15 critical illness and injury risk-minimizing Model Aquatic Health Code elements — 16 reporting jurisdictions, 
Network for Aquatic Facility Inspection Surveillance, United States, 2013  
Characteristic
Aquatic venue type
% (No. of inspections identifying jurisdiction-specific violation of inspection item[s]/ 
No. of inspections assessing inspection item[s])
Pool (n = 55,913)
Hot tub/spa (n = 20,449)
Unknown (n = 7,825)
Total (n = 84,187)
Serious violation(s) leading to closure
11.8 (5,139/43,636)
15.1 (2,217/14,637)
9.7 (762/7,825)
12.3 (8,118/66,098)
Aquatic facility–associated illness prevention elements
Proper free available chlorine or bromine 
concentration
9.2 (3,927/42,891)
19.2 (2,663/13,864)
13.7 (1,072/7,825)
11.9 (7,662/64,580)
Proper pH
12.4 (5,017/40,533)
27.5 (3,789/13,783)
5.5 (430/7,825)
14.9 (9,236/62,141)
Recirculation pump approved, in good 
repair, or operating
1.5 (148/9,656)
1.3 (72/5,575)
—†
1.4 (220/15,231)
Filter approved, in good repair, or operable
2.2 (216/9,656)
1.3 (71/5,575)
—
1.9 (287/15,231)
Automated chemical feeder in good repair 
or operable
6.2 (2,378/38,401)
4.5 (531/11,741)
1.6 (122/7,825)
5.2 (3,031/57,967)
Drowning and entrapment prevention elements
Enclosure: Fencing, walls, gates, and doors 
in good repair or self-closing and 
self-latching gates and doors
5.7 (2,449/42,891)
2.8 (389/13,864)
5.9 (465/7,825)
5.1 (3,303/64,580)
Water clear or main drain visible
1.4 (226/16,501)
2.1 (162/7,779)
0.4 (32/7,825)
1.3 (420/32,105)
Main drain covers compliant with Virginia 
Graeme Baker Pool and Spa Safety Act (15 
U.S.C. §§ 8001 et seq.) or with ASME/ANSI 
A112.19.8 or covers/grates of suction 
outlets secured in place or in good repair
1.3 (537/42,520)
1.0 (142/13,673)
0.8 (60/7,825)
1.2 (739/64,018)
Qualified or adequately staffed lifeguards
0 (0/9,656)
0 (0/5,575)
0.1 (10/7,825)
0 (10/23,056)
Appropriate safety equipment (e.g., hook or 
ring) or in good repair or first aid kit 
present
16.6 (6,689/40,231)
1.3 (175/13,592)
12.5 (981/7,825)
12.7 (7,845/61,648)
Prevention elements of pool chemical–associated health events and other nondrowning and nonentrapment injuries
Chemicals labeled, stored safely, or secured
18.1 (427/2,358)
9.9 (8/81)
0.5 (36/7,825)
4.6 (471/10,264)
Hot tub/spa temperature ≤104°F (40°C)
NA
7.5 (1,037/13,783)
NA
7.5 (1,037/13,783)
Protected overhead electrical wires or 
GFCI- electrical outlets
0.3 (129/38,401)
0.3 (33/11,741)
—
0.3 (162/50,142)
General health and safety elements
Qualified operator or responsible supervisor 
on site
1.8 (222/12,014)
1.0 (56/5,656)
0.2 (13/7,825)
1.1 (291/25,495)
Substantial alterations or equipment 
replacement approved
0.4 (173/41,217)
0.3 (41/13,278)
—
0.4 (214/54,495)
Abbreviations: ASME = American Society of Mechanical Engineers; ANSI = American National Standards Institute; GFCI = ground fault circuit interrupter; NA = not applicable.
*  
The denominators vary because of differences in the number of jurisdictions contributing inspection data to examine a given critical element.
† No data available.
 Surveillance Summaries
16 
MMWR / May 20, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 5
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
TABLE 4. Percentage of routine inspections (N = 55,913*) of public pools with identified jurisdiction-specific violations, by pool type and 
corresponding 15 critical illness and injury risk-minimizing Model Aquatic Health Code elements — 16 reporting jurisdictions, Network for 
Aquatic Facility Inspection Surveillance, United States, 2013  
Characteristic
Pool category
% (No. of inspections identifying jurisdiction-specific violation of inspection item[s]/ 
No. of inspections assessing inspection item[s])
Pool  
(n = 53,537)
Wading pool†  
(n = 1,606)
Interactive water play 
venue (n = 69)
Other§  
(n = 701)
Overall  
(n = 55,913)
Serious violation(s) leading  
to closure
11.6 (4,873/42,161)
21.6 (205/948)
12.1 (8/66)
11.5 (53/461)
11.8 (5,139/43,636)
Aquatic facility–associated illness prevention elements
Proper free available chlorine or 
bromine concentration
8.7 (3,549/40,585)
19.2 (303/1,581)
10.1 (7/69)
10.4 (68/656)
9.2 (3,927/42,891)
Proper pH
11.8 (4,506/38,247)
26.0 (411/1,581)
6.1 (4/66)
15.0 (96/639)
12.4 (5,017/40,533)
Recirculation pump approved, in 
good repair, or operating
1.6 (139/8,775)
0.8 (5/658)
—¶
1.8 (4/223)
1.5 (148/9,656)
Filter approved, in good repair, 
or operable
2.3 (203/8,775)
1.7 (11/658)
—
0.9 (2/223)
2.2 (216/9,656)
Automated chemical feeder in 
good repair or operable
6.3 (2,260/36,137)
6.1 (94/1,539)
5.8 (4/69)
3.0 (20/656)
6.2 (2,378/38,401)
Drowning and entrapment prevention elements
Enclosure: fencing, walls, gates, 
and doors in good repair or 
self-closing and self-latching 
gates and doors
5.9 (2,413/40,585)
1.3 (21/1,581)
1.4 (1/69)
2.1 (14/656)
5.7 (2,449/42,891)
Water clear or main drain visible
1.4 (222/15,561)
0.4 (3/700)
NA
0.4 (1/240)
1.4 (226/16,501)
Main drain covers compliant with 
Virginia Graeme Baker Pool and 
Spa Safety Act (15 U.S.C. §§ 
8001 et seq.) or with ASME/ANSI 
A112.19.8 or covers/grates of 
suction outlets secured in place 
or in good repair
1.3 (517/40,283)
1.1 (17/1,581)
NA
0.5 (3/656)
1.3 (537/42,520)
Qualified or adequately staffed 
lifeguards
0 (0/8,775)
0 (0/658)
NA
0 (0/223)
0 (0/9,656)
Appropriate safety equipment 
(e.g., hook or ring) or in good 
repair or first aid kit present
17.5 (6,638/37,945)
1.2 (19/1,581)
0 (0/66)
5.0 (32/639)
16.6 (6,689/40,231)
Prevention elements of pool chemical–associated health events and other nondrowning and nonentrapment injuries
Chemicals labeled, stored safely, 
or secured
18.2 (425/2,338)
—
0 (0/3)
11.8 (2/17)
18.1 (427/2,358)
Protected overhead electrical 
wires or GFCI-electrical outlets
0.3 (125/36,137)
0.2 (3/1,539)
0 (0/69)
0.2 (1/656)
0.3 (129/38,401)
General health and safety elements
Qualified operator or 
responsible supervisor on site
1.9 (211/11,113)
1.7 (11/658)
0 (0/3)
0 (0/240)
1.8 (222/12,014)
Substantial alterations or 
equipment replacement 
approved
0.4 (169/38,953)
0.1 (1/1,539)
0 (0/69)
0.5 (3/656)
0.4 (173/41,217)
Abbreviations: ASME = American Society of Mechanical Engineers; ANSI = American National Standards Institute; GFCI = ground fault circuit interrupter; NA = not applicable.
* The denominators vary because of differences in the number of jurisdictions contributing inspection data to examine a given critical element.
† For terminology to be aligned with CDC’s Model Aquatic Health Code, the term “wading pool” has replaced the term “kiddie/wading pool,” which has historically 
been used by CDC in MMWR reports and surveillance summaries.
§ Other includes special purpose pools, water attractions, water activity, water slides, and lazy rivers. Previous CDC MMWR reports on pool inspection data included 
“therapy pools.” “Therapy pool” is not included in this table because no inspection data on therapy pools were reported.
¶ No data available.
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / May 20, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 5 
17
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
TABLE 5. Summary of findings of previous reports* of analysis of data collected during inspections of public aquatic facilities† in multiple 
jurisdictions — selected jurisdictions, United States, 2002 and 2008  
Characteristic
Public hot tub/spa inspections§
Public pool inspections¶
Public pool inspections**
No. of participating state or local 
jurisdictions
6
6
15
Methodology for selecting jurisdictions 
with electronic inspection data
Convenience sample
Convenience sample
Convenience sample of jurisdictions with 
≥1,000 inspection records for 2008
Type of violation documented
No. of violations documented (% of 
inspections identifying violation of 
inspection item[s])
No. of violations documented (% of 
inspections identifying violation of 
inspection item[s])
No. inspections assessing inspection 
item(s) (% inspections identifying 
violation of inspection item[s])
Serious violation(s) leading to closure
500 (11.0)
—†† (8.3)
111,487 (12.1)
Disinfectant concentration
889 (17.1)
2,460 (11.1)
120,975 (10.7)
pH
757 (14.6)
1,718 (7.8)
113,597 (8.9)
Other water chemistry
903 (17.3)§§
3,769 (17.0)¶¶
98,907 (12.5)***
Filtration/recirculation system
1,419 (27.3)†††
6,604 (29.9)§§§
98,361 (35.9)¶¶¶
Test kit
105 (2.0)
740 (3.4)
90,088 (3.3)
Operator training
162 (23.3)
604 (25.1)
8,439 (18.3)
Aquatic venue log
654 (12.7)
3,522 (16.5)
115,874 (10.9)
Aquatic venue license
—
26 (3.6)
28,007 (2.7)
 * The findings cannot be compared directly across reports because the timeframes, inspection items, or jurisdictions vary across reports.
 
† Whereas environmental health practitioners conduct inspections of an entire public aquatic facility (the physical place that contains one or more aquatic venues 
and support infrastructure [e.g., chemical storage space]), a separate inspection report, or record, documents the assessment of each aquatic venue (an artificially 
constructed structure or modified natural structure where the general public is exposed to water intended for recreational or therapeutic purpose [e.g., pools and 
hot tubs/spas]) within the public aquatic facility.
 
§ Source: CDC. Surveillance data from public spa inspections—United States, May–September 2002. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2004;53:553–5.
 
¶ Source: CDC. Surveillance data from swimming pool inspections—selected states and counties, United States, May–September 2002. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly 
Rep 2003;52:513–6.
 ** Source: CDC. Violations identified from routine swimming pool inspections—selected states and counties, United States, 2008. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2010;59:582–7.
 †† Count not available.
 §§ Aggregate variable. A positive could include one or more violations in any area (e.g., algae, bacterial quality, calcium hardness, cyanurate levels, disinfectant/pH 
chemical feeders, total alkalinity, and turbidity).
 ¶¶ Aggregate variable. A positive could include one or more violations in any area (e.g., algae, bacterial quality, calcium hardness, cyanurate levels, disinfectant/pH 
chemical feeders, and total alkalinity).
 
*** Aggregated, dichotomous variable indicating whether at least one of the following inspection items was found to be in violation: algae, bacterial quality, calcium 
hardness, cyanurate levels, disinfectant/pH chemical feeders, oxidation reduction potential, saturation index, total alkalinity, and total dissolved solids.
 ††† Aggregate variable. A positive could include one or more violations in any area (e.g., backwash, cross connections, filter, flow meter, pressure gauges, recirculation 
system, and turnover).
 §§§ Aggregate variable. A positive could include one or more violations in any area (e.g., backwash, cross connections, filter, flow meter, pressure gauges, recirculation 
system, turnover, and turbidity).
 ¶¶¶ Aggregated, dichotomous variable indicating whether at least one of the following inspection items was found to be in violation: cross connections, filter, flow 
meter, gauges, pipe labeling, skimmer/gutter, turbidity, turnover, water level, and weirs.  
 Surveillance Summaries
18 
MMWR / May 20, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 5
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
APPENDIX A
Glossary of Terms Used in This Report
“Aquatic facility” means a physical place that contains one or 
more aquatic venues (e.g., a pool or hot tub/spa) and support 
infrastructure (e.g., chemical storage area).
“Aquatic venue” means an artificially constructed structure or 
modified natural structure where the general public is exposed 
to water intended for recreational or therapeutic purpose. Such 
structures do not necessarily contain standing water, so water 
exposure might occur via contact, ingestion, or inhalation. 
Examples include wave pools, lazy rivers, surf pools, hot tubs/
spas, therapy pools, waterslide landing pools, and interactive 
water play venues.
“Free available chlorine” means the portion of the total 
chlorine that has not combined with other compounds (e.g., 
combined with nitrogenous compounds to form dichloramine 
or trichloramine) and is present as hypochlorous acid (HOCl) 
or hypochlorite ion (OCl-). The pH of the water determines 
the relative amounts of hypochlorous acid and hypochlorite 
ion. HOCl is a very effective bactericide and is the active 
bactericide in the water. OCl- is also a bactericide but acts more 
slowly than HOCl. As pH decreases, more HOCl is formed; 
however, as pH increases more OCl- is formed. Thus, chlorine 
is a more effective bactericide at pH ≤7.8 than at pH >7.8. 
Free available chlorine concentration must be maintained for 
adequate disinfection.
“Hot tub/spa” means a structure intended for either warm 
or cold water where prolonged exposure is not intended. Hot 
tub/spa structures are intended to be used for bathing or other 
recreational uses and are not usually drained and refilled after 
each use. Hot tubs/spas might be used for hydrotherapy and 
might have air induction bubbles and a recirculation system.
“Interactive water play venue” means any indoor or outdoor 
installation that includes sprayed, jetted, or other water sources 
contacting bathers and not incorporating standing or captured 
water as part of the bather activity area. These aquatic venues are also 
known as splash pads, spray pads, wet decks, and water playgrounds.
“Pool” means a subset of aquatic venues designed to have 
standing water for total or partial bather immersion. This does 
not include hot tubs/spas.
“Wading pool” means any pool used exclusively for wading 
and intended for use by young children where the depth does 
not exceed 2 feet (0.6 m).
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / May 20, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 5 
19
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
APPENDIX B
CDC’s Model Aquatic Health Code
Need for the Model Aquatic Health Code
Preventing aquatic facility–associated illness and injury calls 
for a strategy that requires at least three key components (known 
as the three E’s) of environmental health practice: education, 
engineering, and enforcement. In the United States, individual 
state and local public health jurisdictions write, enact, 
implement, and enforce their own unique public health codes 
covering the design, construction, operation, maintenance, and 
management of public aquatic facilities; residential aquatic 
facilities are usually covered under building codes. CDC’s 
Model Aquatic Health Code (MAHC; http://www.cdc.gov/
mahc/) is national guidance that can be voluntarily adopted 
by state and local jurisdictions to minimize the risk of illness 
and injury at public aquatic venues. The MAHC includes 
recommendations for education- and engineering-based 
strategies, and when voluntarily adopted by state and local 
jurisdictions it also becomes an enforcement-based strategy.
Education
Aquatic facility operators and staff, public health officials 
(e.g., environmental health practitioners, who inspect public 
aquatic facilities, epidemiologists, and health communication 
specialists), bathers, and parents of young bathers all need to 
be engaged to minimize the risk for aquatic facility–associated 
illness and injury. Ensuring that each stakeholder knows 
the steps to take to help prevent aquatic facility–associated 
outbreaks, drowning, and pool chemical–associated health 
events is necessary to promoting healthy and safe swimming. 
To properly operate and maintain public aquatic facilities, 
operators need training that includes essential topics such 
as water disinfection and chemistry, mechanical systems 
(including air handling systems), and other illness and injury 
risk-minimizing strategies. Studies have found that jurisdictions 
or public aquatic facilities requiring operator training have 
fewer violations and better disinfectant concentrations and pH 
than those jurisdictions or public aquatic facilities without such 
a requirement (1,2). Environmental health practitioners need 
to maintain current knowledge about the design, construction, 
operation, and maintenance of public aquatic facilities and 
the prevention of aquatic facility–associated illness and injury. 
Environmental health practitioners sometimes write and enact 
public aquatic facility codes and always implement and enforce 
them. Environmental health practitioners enforce design and 
construction standards through plan review and preoperational 
inspections, conducted after new construction or substantial 
alteration, and enforce operation and maintenance standards 
through routine, complaint, and follow-up inspections.
The aquatics sector and public health should collaborate to 
disseminate healthy and safe swimming messages to bathers 
and parents of young bathers. Parents of young bathers are a 
particularly important group to engage given that young bathers 
(i.e., those aged <5 years) are a primary source of microbiologic 
contamination of water in aquatic venues. The aquatics sector 
and public health should promote healthy and safe swimming 
year-round, and especially during Healthy and Safe Swimming 
Week (the week before Memorial Day) and the summer swim 
season (Memorial Day through Labor Day). This can be done via 
websites (e.g., http://www.cdc.gov/healthywater/swimming) and 
increasingly via social media (http://www.cdc.gov/healthywater/
swimming/resources/socialmedia-library.html). Healthy swimming 
education campaigns conducted before aquatic facility–associated 
outbreaks of infectious etiology occur might help prevent them 
(3). The public needs to understand the potential risks associated 
with the use of public aquatic facilities and how they can help keep 
themselves and others healthy (4). Healthy swimming messages 
for all bathers include: do not swim while ill with diarrhea, do not 
swallow water while swimming, and shower before entering the 
water. T
o promote adoption of healthy swimming behaviors by 
the public, healthy swimming education campaigns need to dispel 
commonly held but mistaken beliefs (e.g., that pool water is sterile 
and that chlorine instantly inactivates all infectious pathogens), 
which likely lead to swimming with diarrheal illness and thus 
potential introduction and transmission of infectious pathogens (5). 
Drowning prevention messages for the public include making sure 
everyone knows how to swim, fencing off pools to keep children 
away, using life jackets appropriately, providing continuous and close 
supervision of young swimmers, and knowing cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation. The principal pool chemical safety messages for those 
storing and handling pool chemicals include: secure pool chemicals 
away from children and read the Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration– or Environmental Protection Agency–required 
pool chemical labels, which identify incompatible chemical(s) and 
personal protective equipment needed for safe handling (http://
www.cdc.gov/healthywater/swimming/pools/preventing-pool-
chemical-injuries.html).
Engineering
Filtration and halogen (e.g., chlorine or bromine) disinfection 
post filtration prevent transmission of most infectious pathogens 
in the water of aquatic venues. Typically, an aquatic venue’s 
recirculation pump transports the water out of the venue basin via 
the main drain or other suction outlets, into the venue plumbing, 
and through the filter to remove particles that can bind with and 
deplete halogens. The water continues to circulate through the 
 Surveillance Summaries
20 
MMWR / May 20, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 5
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
venue plumbing so that the halogen and pH-adjusting chemical 
(used to optimize inactivation of infectious pathogens and 
swimmer comfort simultaneously) can be added, diluted, and 
then mixed. Finally the treated water returns to the aquatic venue 
via inlets, water jets, or spray features. At CDC-recommended 
concentrations,* halogens inactivate most infectious pathogens 
within minutes but the extremely halogen-tolerant parasite, 
Cryptosporidium, can survive for days (6,7). This means the 
transmission of halogen-susceptible infectious pathogens (e.g., 
E. coli O157:H7 or Shigella spp.) can be prevented but the 
transmission of Cryptosporidium cannot at CDC-recommended 
halogen concentrations. The emergence of Cryptosporidium as 
the leading etiology of aquatic facility–associated outbreaks has 
led to engineering innovations to inactivate (e.g., ultraviolet light 
or ozone treatment) or remove (e.g., flocculants and improved 
filter media) the parasite.
Public aquatic facilities can be designed to minimize the 
risk of drowning. Fencing, walls, and self-closing and self-
latching gates and doors can prevent unsupervised entry by 
young children and unauthorized entry outside operational 
hours. Aquatic venue design can improve bather visibility for 
lifeguards and bathers. Additionally, the advent of interactive 
water play venues, which do not have standing water above 
ground because the water drains into an underground tank, 
also minimizes the risk for drowning.
Finally, toxic chlorine gas can be generated if chlorine and 
acid are not diluted sufficiently before mixing. This can occur 
when they are mixed by aquatics staff or in aquatic venue 
plumbing when there is inadequate water flow. When the 
recirculation pump shuts down or fails to generate adequate flow 
but the automated chemical feeder pumps continue to inject 
concentrated chemicals into the water, the mixing of these two 
concentrated chemicals produces toxic chlorine gas. Restarting 
the recirculation pump then vents the toxic chlorine gas from the 
venue plumbing and into the aquatic venue. To prevent this from 
happening, an electrical interlock should be installed between the 
automated chemical feeders, the recirculation pumps, and water 
flow meter/flow switches to shut down automated chemical 
feeder pumps if the recirculation pumps shut down or there is 
inadequate water flow in the venue plumbing.
Enforcement
There are no minimum national standards for training 
aquatic facility operators or comprehensive standards for 
the engineering of public aquatic facilities to prevent illness 
and injury. No U.S. federal agency regulates the design, 
construction, operation, and maintenance of public aquatic 
facilities, although some federal regulations pertain to specific 
aspects of public aquatic facilities. For example, the Virginia 
Graeme Baker Pool and Spa Safety Act (15 U.S.C. §§ 8001 
et seq.) aims to prevent main drain–associated entrapment.† 
Individual state and local jurisdictions write, enact, implement, 
and enforce their own unique public aquatic facility codes, 
leading to variability in state and local codes. This variability is 
further compounded by how resource intensive it is to update 
these codes (e.g., staffing, time, and expertise needed), difficult 
it is to set standards in the absence of scientific data, and the 
variability in timeframes within which individual state and 
local jurisdictions update their codes. Consequently, emerging 
public health threats (e.g., Cryptosporidium) and aquatics 
sector innovations, which might pose novel risks for aquatic 
facility–associated illness or injury or conversely minimize 
long-established risk, might not be addressed on a timely basis 
across the United States.
Development of the MAHC
In response to the increasing incidence of aquatic facility–
associated outbreaks, particularly those caused by Cryptosporidium, 
the Council for State and Territorial Epidemiologists, in 2004, 
called for CDC to hold a national workshop to develop prevention 
recommendations (http://c.ymcdn.com/sites/www.cste.org/
resource/resmgr/PS/04-ID-03-FINAL.pdf). In 2005, CDC 
held the Recreational Water Illness Prevention Workshop for 
local, state, and federal public health officials and aquatics sector 
representatives. Workshop attendees identified two barriers to 
preventing the outbreaks: the variability in public aquatic facility 
codes across the United States and the resource-intensive effort 
required to keep each of these codes updated. The workshop 
attendees’ primary recommendation was for CDC to lead a 
national consortium of public health officials and aquatics sector 
representatives to develop an open-access model code, based 
on the latest scientific data and best practices when scientific 
data were not available. To maximize the model code’s utility, 
attendees recommended that the scope be expanded to be an 
all-inclusive, all-hazards facility–based code that not only aimed 
to prevent transmission of infectious pathogens but also injury 
(e.g., drowning and pool chemical–associated health events), 
as well as poor indoor air quality and other potential adverse 
exposures at public aquatic facilities. Such a code would cover 
all of the pertinent aspects of an aquatic facility’s life, including 
† Entrapment occurs when a body part (e.g., hair, limb, or buttocks) or something 
on the swimmer’s body (e.g., jewelry or bathing suit) becomes caught in the 
suction of the recirculation pump or in an underwater structure.
* At the CDC-recommended pH of 7.2–7.8, CDC recommends maintaining 
free available chlorine at a minimum of 3ppm in hot tubs/spas and 1 ppm in 
other aquatic venues or free available bromine at a minimum of 4 ppm in hot 
tubs/spas and 3 ppm in other aquatic venues.
 Surveillance Summaries
MMWR / May 20, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 5 
21
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
design, construction, operation, maintenance, and management. 
In addition, attendees recommended developing a companion 
annex to provide the rationale behind the code, including 
peer-reviewed, scientific data with references. Individual state 
and local jurisdictions would be free to voluntarily adopt parts 
of the model code, revise as needed to meet their unique needs 
before adoption, or choose not to adopt the model code at all.
During 2007–2014, CDC’s National Center for Emerging 
and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases and National Center for 
Environmental Health (with assistance from the National 
Center for Injury Prevention and Control and the Public Health 
Law Office) and the New York State Department of Health 
spearheaded the development of a model code, now known as 
the MAHC. Soliciting input from the public health, aquatics, 
and academic sectors was a cornerstone of this multidisciplinary, 
multi-stakeholder effort. Fourteen MAHC modules (Box), 
which included code language and supporting rationale, were 
drafted by the steering committee or one of 12 technical 
committees, each with members from the different sectors.
The MAHC steering committee either wrote or reviewed, 
edited, and approved each draft module in collaboration with 
the respective technical committee. The 14 modules were posted 
individually on CDC’s MAHC website for a 60-day public 
comment period. A total of 2,979 comments on the 14 modules 
were received; 84.1% (2,504) could be accepted or rejected, of 
which 76.0% (1,904) were accepted. A total of 13 modules§ 
were revised on the basis of public comment, and these revised 
modules were then interwoven into two documents, the code 
and the annex, and posted for a second 60-day public comment 
period. The second public comment period allowed reviewers to 
cross check among modules and ensure consistency throughout 
the MAHC. Of 1,428 comments, 92.5% (1,321) could be 
accepted or rejected, of which 63.5% (839) were accepted. 
Over the two public comment periods, CDC received 4,407 
comments and accepted 71.7% (2,743/3,825) of the comments 
that could be accepted or rejected. Following extensive revision 
in response to the second public comment period, CDC released 
the first edition of the MAHC and its annex on August 29, 
2014. The MAHC represents the combined work of more than 
150 public health, aquatics, and academic volunteers and the 
many contributors of public comments that helped optimize 
the MAHC. To keep current with the latest scientific data and 
aquatics sector innovations, the MAHC will be updated every 
2 years through an all-stakeholder–driven process, much like the 
MAHC development process. The nonprofit organization, the 
Council for the Model Aquatic Health Code (CMAHC; https://
www.cmahc.org/index.php), was created in 2013 and its role is to
• collect, assess, and relay national input on needed MAHC 
revisions back to CDC for final consideration for 
acceptance;
• advocate for improved health and safety at public aquatic 
facilities;
• provide assistance to health departments, boards of health, 
legislatures, and other partners on MAHC uses, benefits, 
and implementation;
• provide assistance to the aquatics sector on uses, 
interpretation, and benefits of the MAHC; and
• solicit, coordinate, and prioritize MAHC research needs.
The CDC-CMAHC partnership should ensure that the 
MAHC remains up to date and continues to minimize the risk 
for illness and injury at public aquatic venues. In October 2015, 
the first CMAHC biennial conference was held. CMAHC 
members subsequently voted on 159 change requests to help 
guide CDC’s revision of the MAHC prior to the release of its 
second edition during the 2016 summer swim season.
Tracking Voluntary Adoption of the MAHC
The MAHC is a comprehensive CDC model code that brings 
infectious disease and injury epidemiology, environmental 
health, and public health law expertise together to protect 
public health at public aquatic facilities. The magnitude of 
the MAHC’s impact on the design, construction, operation, 
maintenance, and management of U.S. public aquatic facilities 
is dependent on how many, and which, jurisdictions adopt its 
recommendations. To track voluntary adoption of the MAHC 
across the United States, CDC is systematically searching legal 
databases (e.g., Municode and WestLaw) for changes to public 
• Contamination burden
• Disinfection and water quality
• Facility design and construction
• Facility maintenance and operation
• Fecal/vomit/blood contamination response
• Hygiene facilities
• Lifeguarding and bather supervision
• Monitoring and testing
• Operator training
• Preface, user guide, and definitions
• Recirculation systems and filtration
• Regulatory
• Risk management/safety
• Ventilation and air quality  
BOX. Fourteen Model Aquatic Health Code modules  
§ The regulatory module ultimately was not included within the MAHC because 
its content was intended as guidance for state and local environmental health 
aquatic inspection programs rather than as guidance on the design, construction, 
operation, maintenance, and management of public aquatics facilities.  
 Surveillance Summaries
22 
MMWR / May 20, 2016 / Vol. 65 / No. 5
US Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
health codes for public aquatic facilities in 20 state and local 
jurisdictions. The jurisdictions were selected because they had 
either 1) the highest counts of public aquatic venues and the 
highest drowning rates (8) or 2) the most aquatic venues per 
100,000 persons (9). The searches prioritize recommendations 
unique to the MAHC that have the greatest potential 
impact on public health (e.g., requirements for inactivating 
Cryptosporidium, fencing 6 feet in height, and training on 
chemical safety for those who handle pool chemicals). The 
search criteria also include any direct mention of the MAHC 
or replicated MAHC text.
References
1. Buss BF, Safranek TJ, Magri JM, Török TJ, Beach MJ, Foley BP
. 
Association between swimming pool operator certification and reduced 
pool chemistry violations—Nebraska, 2005–2006. J Environ Health 
2009;71:36–40.
2. Johnston K, Kinziger M. Certified operators: does certification provide 
significant results in real-world pool and spa chemistry? IJARE 
2007;1:18–33.
3. CDC. Promotion of healthy swimming after a statewide outbreak of 
cryptosporidiosis associated with recreational water venues—Utah, 
2008–2009. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2012;61:348–52.
4. McClain J, Bernhardt JM, Beach MJ. Assessing parents’ perception of 
children’s risk for recreational water illnesses. Emerg Infect Dis 
2005;11:670–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1105.040779
5. Beach MJ. Waterborne: recreational water. Cryptosporidium and 
cryptosporidiosis. 2nd ed. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 2008.
6. Murphy JL, Arrowood MJ, Lu X, Hlavsa MC, Beach MJ, Hill VR. Effect 
of cyanuric acid on the inactivation of Cryptosporidium parvum under 
hyperchlorination conditions. Environ Sci Technol 2015;49:7348–55. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.5b00962
7. Shields JM, Hill VR, Arrowood MJ, Beach MJ. Inactivation of 
Cryptosporidium parvum under chlorinated recreational water conditions. 
J Water Health 2008;6:513–20. http://dx.doi.org/10.2166/wh.2008.068
8. CDC. Stay safe in and around swimming pools. Atlanta, GA: US 
Department of Health and Human Services, CDC; 2011. http://www.
cdc.gov/Features/dsSafeSwimmingPool
9. Trust for Public Land. 2011 city park facts. San Francisco, CA; 2011. 
http://cloud.tpl.org/pubs/ccpe-city-park-facts-2011.pdf  
    ISSN: 1546-0738 (Print)
The Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) Series is prepared by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and is available free of 
charge in electronic format. To receive an electronic copy each week, visit MMWR’s free subscription page at http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/mmwrsubscribe.html. 
Paper copy subscriptions are available through the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402; telephone 
202-512-1800.
Readers who have difficulty accessing this PDF file may access the HTML file at http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/65/ss/ss6501a1.htm?s_cid=ss6501a1_w. 
Address all inquiries about the MMWR Series, including material to be considered for publication, to Executive Editor, MMWR Series, Mailstop E-90, 
CDC, 1600 Clifton Rd., N.E., Atlanta, GA 30329-4027 or to mmwrq@cdc.gov. 
All material in the MMWR Series is in the public domain and may be used and reprinted without permission; citation as to source, however, is appreciated.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
References to non-CDC sites on the Internet are provided as a service to MMWR readers and do not constitute or imply endorsement of these organizations 
or their programs by CDC or the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. CDC is not responsible for the content of these sites. URL addresses 
listed in MMWR were current as of the date of publication.
