 Vol.:(0123456789)
1 3
Histochem Cell Biol (2017) 148:313–329 
DOI 10.1007/s00418-017-1569-1
ORIGINAL PAPER
Tropism, intracerebral distribution, and transduction efficiency 
of HIV- and SIV-based lentiviral vectors after injection 
into the mouse brain: a qualitative and quantitative in vivo study
Juraj Hlavatý1 · Zbyněk Tonar2 · Matthias Renner3 · Sylvia Panitz3 · Helga Petznek4 · 
Matthias Schweizer3 · Silke Schüle3 · Björn-Philipp Kloke3 · Rudolf Moldzio5 · 
Kirsti Witter1 
Accepted: 30 March 2017 / Published online: 10 April 2017 
© The Author(s) 2017. This article is an open access publication
41,299 and 32,309) than HIV-2SEW (16,102). In the pres-
ence of Vpx/Vpr proteins, HIV-2SEW(Vpx) and HIV-
1SEW(Vpr) showed higher overall transduction efficiencies 
(30,696 and 27,947 neurons per brain) than PBjSEW(Vpx) 
(6636). The distances of transduced cells from the injec-
tion canal did not differ among the viruses but correlated 
positively with the numbers of transduced neurons. The 
presence of Vpx/Vpr did not increase the numbers of trans-
duced neurons. Parental virus type and the vector equip-
ment seem to influence cellular tropism and transduction 
efficiency. Thus, precision of injection and choice of virus 
pseudotype are not sufficient when targeted lentiviral vector 
transduction of a defined brain cell population is required.
Keywords Gene transfer · Double immunofluorescence · 
EGFP · Vpr · Vpx · Stereology
Introduction
Many neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s, Par-
kinson’s, and Huntington’s disease still can only be treated 
inadequately. Hence, novel treatment modalities are des-
perately needed. Gene therapy could hold the promise of 
therapeutic progress (Blömer et al. 1996; Wong et al. 2006; 
Eleftheriadou and Mazarakis 2015). As many neurodegen-
erative diseases develop with progressive, incurable degen-
eration of neuronal cells, gene therapy approaches for the 
treatment of such disorders require vector systems that 
can efficiently transduce non-dividing neurons. Lentiviral 
vectors have been shown to do so and by integrating their 
genome into the genome of the transduced cells they sup-
posedly provide permanent expression of the transferred 
therapeutic gene in these cells and also in the progeny of 
transduced dividing neuronal precursors (Lundberg et al. 
Abstract Lentiviruses are suitable to transfer potential 
therapeutic genes into non-replicating cells such as neu-
rons, but systematic in vivo studies on transduction of neu-
ral cells within the complete brain are missing. We analysed 
the distribution of transduced cells with respect to brain 
structure, virus tropism, numbers of transduced neurons per 
brain, and influence of the Vpx or Vpr accessory proteins 
after injection of vectors based on SIVsmmPBj, HIV-2, 
and HIV-1 lentiviruses into the right striatum of the mouse 
brain. Transduced cells were found ipsilaterally around the 
injection canal, in corpus striatum and along corpus cal-
losum, irrespective of the vector type. All vectors except 
HIV-2SEW transduced also single cells in the olfactory 
bulb, hippocampus, and cerebellum. Vector HIV-2SEW 
was the most neuron specific. However, vectors PBjSEW 
and HIV-1SEW transduced more neurons per brain (means 
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this 
article (doi:10.1007/s00418-017-1569-1) contains supplementary 
material, which is available to authorized users.
 
* Juraj Hlavatý 
 
juraj.hlavaty@vetmeduni.ac.at
1 
Department of Pathobiology, Institute of Anatomy, Histology 
and Embryology, University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, 
Veterinärplatz 1, 1210 Vienna, Austria
2 
Faculty of Applied Sciences, European Centre of Excellence 
NTIS, University of West Bohemia in Pilsen, Univerzitní 8, 
306 14 Pilsen, Czech Republic
3 
Department of Medicinal Biotechnology, 
Paul-Ehrlich-Institut, Langen, Germany
4 
Institute of Virology, University of Veterinary Medicine, 
Vienna, Austria
5 
Institute of Medical Biochemistry, University of Veterinary 
Medicine, Vienna, Austria
 314
 
Histochem Cell Biol (2017) 148:313–329
1 3
2008). In addition to these therapeutic approaches, lentivi-
ral vectors can be used for modelling of neurodegenerative 
disorders in different experimental settings (Déglon and 
Hantraye 2005; Eleftheriadou and Mazarakis 2015).
Vectors derived from human immunodeficiency virus 1 
and 2 (HIV-1- and HIV-2) together with those derived from 
simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV), equine immune 
anaemia virus (EIAV), or adeno-associated virus are among 
the most intensively studied systems used for gene trans-
fer into neuronal cells (Mitrophanous et al. 1999; D´Costa 
et al. 2003; Liehl et al. 2007; Trabalza et al. 2013; Hocque-
miller et al. 2016; Stewart et al. 2016). Data from the first 
clinical trials (phase 1 or 1/2) utilising adeno-associated 
and lentiviral vectors for therapy of brain diseases are avail-
able (Mittermeyer et al. 2012; Palfi et al. 2014). Although a 
number of different vectors have been proven to be suitable 
for neuronal gene transfer, our study concentrates primar-
ily on SIV-derived and closely related HIV-derived vectors. 
Our intention emanated from the fact that SIVsmmPBj-
derived vectors were able to infect quiescent primary 
monocytes, dendritic cells as well as other  
G0-arrested 
cells (Mühlebach et al. 2005; Wolfrum et al. 2007; Grabski 
et al. 2011); however, their suitability for neuronal infection 
has not been shown yet. Based on the similarities in virus 
genome design and presence of accessory genes, we have 
chosen vectors derived from HIV-1 and HIV-2 as relevant 
standards, since all three tested viruses and vectors derived 
from them are closely related to each other and transduc-
tion of neuronal cells using HIV-derived vectors has been 
described previously (Naldini et al. 1996a; D´Costa et al. 
2003).
In contrast to other retroviruses, pre-integration com-
plexes of lentiviruses possess the unique ability to actively 
cross the nuclear membrane and thereby enabling infection 
of non-dividing or quiescent cells. The accessory proteins 
Viral Protein R (Vpr) and Viral Protein X (Vpx) unique to 
the HIV-1 and HIV-2/SIVsmmPBj/SIVmac lentiviruses, 
respectively, seem to be able to increase the success of 
transduction of  
G0 cells such as neurons or peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells. Different candidate mechanisms for this 
effect have been identified. The Vpx and Vpr accessory 
proteins are described to be directly involved in nuclear tar-
geting (Singhal et al. 2006) and in translocation across the 
nuclear membrane (Heinzinger et al. 1994; Blömer et al. 
1997; Pancio et al. 2000; Belshan et al. 2006), to increase 
viral gene transcription (James et al. 2016), and to facili-
tate infection by rescuing the viruses from a proteasome-
dependent restriction pathway (Goujon et al. 2007).
So far, published in vivo studies on brain cell trans-
duction after injection of transgenic lentiviruses concen-
trate mostly on single cell populations in defined regions 
of interest, such as corpus striatum and substantia nigra 
(Naldini et al. 1996a; Blömer et al. 1997; Bensadoun 
et al. 2000; Stewart et al. 2016), hippocampus (Naldini 
et al. 1996a; Blömer et al. 1997), or selected nuclei (Sin-
nayah et al. 2002). The possibility of external regulation 
of the transcription of lentiviral vectors incorporated into 
the genome of cerebral neurons in vivo has been shown, 
e.g., by Haack et al. (2004) and Vogel et al. (2004). To 
our knowledge, systematic in vivo studies on transduction 
of neurons and glial cells within the complete brain after 
intracerebral injection of transgenic lentiviral vectors have 
not been performed up to now.
The aim of our study was therefore to analyse the trans-
duction potential of six vectors based on the SIVsmmPBj, 
HIV-2 and HIV-1 lentiviruses delivered stereotactically 
into the right striatum of the mouse brain by (1) assessing 
the distribution of transduced cells with respect to the ana-
tomical structures of the brain; (2) identifying preferentially 
infected cell populations for each virus; (3) determining the 
absolute number of transduced neurons per brain after sin-
gle, unilateral injection; and (4) finally, assessing the influ-
ence of the Vpx/Vpr accessory proteins on cell targeting, 
distribution, and number of transduced neurons.
Materials and methods
Animals
For cell cultures experiments, pregnant OF1/SPF mice at 
gestation day 13 were purchased from the Institute for Lab-
oratory Zoology and Veterinary Genetics, Himberg (Aus-
tria). For in vivo studies, female C57Bl/6 mice obtained 
from the University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Aus-
tria were used.
Animal experiments have been approved by the institu-
tional ethics committee and Austrian government authori-
ties (BMWF; BMWF-68.205/0225-II/10b/2008). Mice 
were kept and handled in accordance with the guidelines 
of the European Union Council (86/609/EU) for the use of 
laboratory animals.
Viral vectors
Despite the different origins of the tested transfer vectors, 
their internal organization was similar. All vectors con-
tained an enhanced green fluorescent protein gene (EGFP) 
driven by the spleen focus-forming virus (SFFV) internal 
promoter, the central polypurin tract (cPPT), the wood-
chuck hepatitis posttranscriptional regulatory element 
(WPRE), and a self-inactivating deletion in the 3´LTR. 
The structural proteins for virus particle assembly were 
provided from the respective packaging constructs. The 
accessory proteins Vpr and Vpx were present in the indi-
cated vector particles. To ensure a broad host cell range 
 315
Histochem Cell Biol (2017) 148:313–329 
1 3
of transduced cells, all vectors were pseudotyped with 
the envelope glycoprotein of the vesicular stomatitis virus 
(VSV-G). The transfer vector plasmids used for generation 
of HIV-1, HIV-2, or SIVsmmPBj vectors were pHIV-1-
SEW, (Demaison et al. 2002), pHIV-2-SEW (Kloke et al. 
2010), or pPBj-SEW (Kloke et al. 2010), respectively. 
Packaging constructs for generation of HIV-1, HIV-2, 
or SIVsmmPBj vectors were pCMVdR8_91 (Zufferey 
et al. 1999), pHIV-2d4 (Morris et al. 2004), or pPBj-pack 
(Kloke et al. 2010), respectively. For generation of vectors 
carrying the Vpr or Vpx accessory protein (vectors HIV-
1SEW(Vpr), HIV-2SEW(Vpx), or PBjSEW(Vpx)), the 
expression constructs used were pVprHIV-1 (Schüle et al. 
2009), pVpxHIV-2syn (Kloke et al. 2010), or pVpxPBjsyn 
(Kloke et al. 2010), respectively. In all cases, the envelope 
gene expression plasmid pMD.G2 coding for the VSV-G 
protein was used (Naldini et al. 1996b).
For generation of lentiviral vectors, 293T cells were 
co-transfected with the respective transfer vector plasmid, 
the respective packaging construct, the VSV-G expression 
construct, and an accessory protein expression construct 
if indicated. The resulting vector particles were either 
named PBjSEW, HIV-2SEW, and HIV-1SEW for vectors 
without the accessory proteins and PBjSEW(Vpx), HIV-
2SEW(Vpx), and HIV-1SEW(Vpr) for those in which the 
Vpr/Vpx proteins were present. Vectors were purified and 
concentrated from cell culture supernatant by centrifuga-
tion through a sucrose cushion, and vector titres were eval-
uated by titration on HT1080 target cells in serial dilutions 
as described previously (Schüle et al. 2009).
Preparation and infection of primary mesencephalic 
cell cultures
To assess the ability of the vectors to transduce brain cells, 
mouse primary mesencephalic cell cultures were infected 
with the vectors at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 1, 
and the EGFP expression was subsequently analysed 3 
weeks later by immunohistochemistry. The primary mes-
encephalic cell cultures were prepared as described previ-
ously (Moldzio et al. 2006). Briefly, pregnant mice were 
sacrificed on gestation day 14, the brains of the embryos 
were dissected, and the ventral mesencephala were excised. 
After removal of the meninges, tissues were mechanically 
cut into small pieces in PBS (pH 7.2). Tissues were trans-
ferred into a sterile test tube containing 2 ml of trypsin 
(0.1%) and 2 ml DNase (0.02%) and incubated in a water 
bath at 37 °C for 7 min. After stopping the trypsin reaction 
with 2 ml of trypsin inhibitor (0.125 mg/ml) and centrif-
ugation, the supernatant was discarded, and the remain-
ing tissue pellet triturated three times. A cell suspension 
of 750,000 cells/ml was diluted with medium containing 
DMEM (87.4%), HEPES (8.7 mM), glucose (9.7 mM), 
glutamine (1.7 mM), penicillin and streptomycin (436.9 U/
ml and 0.4 mg/ml), amphotericin B (2.2 µg/ml), and foetal 
bovine serum (8.7%). The dissociated cells were plated in 
poly-D-lysine-coated 4-well chamber slides (Nunc, Sigma, 
Vienna, Austria) (750 µl in each well; ~550,000 cells/well) 
and kept at 37 °C, 5%  
CO2 and 100% humidity. Medium 
was changed every second day and replaced after 6 days 
in vitro (DIV) with serum-free medium containing DMEM 
(94.4%), HEPES (9.4 mM), glucose (10.4 mM), glutamine 
(1.9 mM), penicillin and streptomycin (472.0 U/ml and 
0.5 mg/ml), and B 27 supplement (1.4%).
At DIV 7, cells were infected with an equal amount of 
5.5 × 105 virus particles per well (MOI 1) in the absence of 
polybrene. During the experiment, medium was changed 
every second day. Three weeks after the infection, cells 
were washed with PBS, fixed using Accustain (Sigma, 
Vienna, Austria) for 20 min at room temperature (RT) and 
stained using antibodies against EGFP, NeuN, and GFAP 
as described earlier (Liehl et al. 2007). To identify the type 
of transduced cells in dissociated brain cultures, double 
immune-labelling was performed using the rabbit anti-
EGFP antibody (1:2000) in combination with each of the 
following cell type-specific mouse antibodies: anti-glial 
fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) (Chemicon International, 
Temecula, CA, USA 1:1000) antibody or anti-neuronal 
nuclear antigen (NeuN) antibody (Chemicon International, 
Temecula, CA, USA, 1:500), and, as secondary antibodies, 
either the Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti-rabbit IgG (Molecular 
Probes-Invitrogen, Paisley, UK, 1:100) or the Alexa Fluor 
568 goat anti-mouse IgG (Molecular Probes-Invitrogen, 
Paisley, UK, 1:100), so that in all samples, EGFP appears 
in green, whereas the cell specific marker proteins appear 
in red. Samples were pretreated by microwaving in citrate 
buffer (pH 6.0; 4 × 5 min), washed in PBS, and blocked 
with 1.5% goat serum for 30 min at RT. Afterwards, they 
were incubated with anti-EGFP/anti-NeuN or anti-GFAP at 
4 °C overnight, washed with PBS, and incubated with the 
secondary antibodies for 1 h at RT. Samples were again 
washed with PBS, a coverslip was placed over the sample, 
and it was examined with a confocal laser scanning fluores-
cence microscope with appropriate filter settings (Axiovi-
sion System, Zeiss, Vienna, Austria). In vitro transduction 
efficiency was estimated by counting transduced neurons 
(NeuN and EGFP double positive cells) in relation to the 
total amount of neurons (NeuN positive cells) in four ran-
domly selected microscopic fields in two infection experi-
ment replicas for each vector type.
In vivo testing of the viruses
For comparison of the in vivo transduction capacity, adult 
C57Bl/6 female mice were used (n = 6 per virus type). 
For stereotactic surgery, animals were anesthetized by 
 316
 
Histochem Cell Biol (2017) 148:313–329
1 3
intraperitoneal injection of 10 mg ketamine/0.4 mg xyla-
zine per 100 g body weight and placed in a small-animal 
stereotactic apparatus (Stoelting, Wood Dale, IL, USA) 
with the skull horizontal between lambda and bregma. 
After midline incision of the skin, a hole was drilled in the 
skull and 1 × 106 of highly concentrated vector particles 
in a total volume of 5 µl were injected into the right stria-
tum at a rate of 0.5 µl/min using a 26-gauge needle and a 
Hamilton syringe. Coordinates to target the striatum were 
1 mm anterior, 2 mm lateral, and 3.5 mm ventral from the 
bregma, as measured from the skull surface according to 
Paxinos and Franklin (2003). After injection, the needle 
was left in place for additional 5 min before being slowly 
removed, the incisions were sutured, and animals were kept 
under observation until recovery. During the experiment, 
the mice were maintained with food and water available ad 
libitum. Three weeks after virus injection, mice were eutha-
nized under anaesthesia by transcardial perfusion using 
10 ml cold PBS and 10 ml Accustain solution (Sigma, 
Vienna, Austria). Brains were removed immediately from 
the skull and post-fixed by immersion in the Accustain fix-
ative for at least 12 h at 4 °C. After paraffin embedding, tis-
sues were further analysed.
Histological processing of brains, 
immunohistochemistry, and microscopic analysis
All brains were embedded routinely in paraffin. They were 
cut exhaustively into serial sections at a section thick-
ness of 18 µm. Sections were mounted on Superfrost™ 
slides coated with (3-aminopropyl)triethoxysilane (Sigma-
Aldrich, Vienna, Austria), stained immunohistochemically, 
and analysed by confocal microscopy as follows.
To detect EGFP-positive neurons, an immunohistochem-
ical double fluorescence staining using a NeuN antibody 
(NeuN, clone MAB377, Chemicon International, Temec-
ula, CA, USA; neuronal marker) and a rabbit anti-GFP 
antiserum (Molecular Probes-Invitrogen, Paisley, UK) was 
performed. The sections were heated at 60 °C for 20 min to 
soften the paraffin and to enhance its removal. Still warm, 
they were deparaffinised in xylene, rehydrated in decreas-
ing alcohol concentrations, and permeabilized in chilled 
acetone (−20 °C, 10 min). After washing in distilled water, 
the sections were transferred to phosphate buffered saline 
(PBS, pH 7.4). Unspecific binding activity was blocked 
with normal goat serum (DakoCytomation, Glostrup, Den-
mark). The sections were incubated overnight at 4 °C with a 
cocktail of both primary antibodies mentioned above (final 
dilution of anti-GFP and anti-NeuN 1:2000 and 1:500, 
respectively). After washing in PBS, the sections were 
incubated for one hour at room temperature with a cocktail 
of Alexa Fluor 488 anti-rabbit and Alexa Fluor 568 anti-
mouse secondary antibodies (Molecular Probes-Invitrogen, 
Paisley, UK) with a final dilution of both antibodies of 
1:100. The stained sections were washed in PBS and in dis-
tilled water and mounted with a water soluble medium suit-
able for fluorescence microscopy.
The sections were analysed using a confocal laser scan-
ning fluorescence microscope with appropriate filter set-
tings (Axiovision System, Zeiss, Vienna, Austria). First 
and last sections with EGFP-positive cells (including neu-
rons, glial cells, and other transduced cells if present) and 
EGFP-positive neurons as well as the position of the injec-
tion canal were recorded for each brain. The rostro-caudal 
spread of immunopositive cells and neurons was calculated 
using these section numbers and the section thickness of 
18 μm.
To assess a potential inflammatory reaction in the brains, 
two sections per brain in the immediate vicinity of the 
injection canal were immunostained using an anti-GFAP 
antibody (polyclonal rabbit anti-Glial Fibrillary Acidic Pro-
tein, 1:1000, DakoCytomation, Glostrup, Denmark) and an 
anti-IBA1 antibody (polyclonal rabbit anti-Iba1, 1:2000, 
Wako Chemicals, Neuss, Germany) to visualise astrocytes 
and microglial cells, respectively. Selected sections from 
brains showing mononuclear infiltrations near the injec-
tion canal were additionally stained using an anti-CD3 
antibody (monoclonal rabbit anti-CD3, clone SP7, 1:300, 
Thermo Fisher Scientific, Fremont, CA, USA) to detect T 
lymphocytes. The sections were deparaffinised and permea-
bilised as described above. Before blocking of unspecific 
binding, endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked with 
0.6%  
H2O2 in methanol for 15 min at room temperature. 
For IBA1- and CD3 staining, antigen retrieval by heating 
in 0.01 M citrate buffer (pH 6) for 30 min was necessary. 
The sections were incubated with the primary antibod-
ies overnight at 4 °C. The immunoreaction was detected 
using the BrightVision Poly HRP-anti-rabbit kit (Immuno-
Logic, Duiven, The Netherlands) according to the instruc-
tions of the producer and visualized with diaminobenzidine 
(Sigma-Aldrich, Vienna, Austria) in 0.03%  
H2O2 in PBS. 
The sections were counterstained with Mayer’s haematoxy-
lin, dehydrated, mounted with a medium soluble in xylene, 
and analysed by light microscopy.
Stereological assessment of the number 
of EGFP-expressing neurons per brain
The number of EGFP-positive neurons within the brain 
was estimated stereologically using the optical fractiona-
tor technique, which is the gold standard for quantification 
of total numbers of microscopic objects (West et al. 1991; 
West 1999).
The fractionator is a combination of systematic 
uniform random sampling and the disector counting 
 317
Histochem Cell Biol (2017) 148:313–329 
1 3
principle (Sterio 1984). The countable event was defined 
as colocalisation of positive immunoreaction against 
EGFP and NeuN within nucleus or perikaryon of the 
same cell within a disector probe with the dimensions 
210.9 × 210.9 × 16.0 µm (Online Resource 1). The EGFP-
positive neurons were counted in a known fraction of the 
whole brains, with every 20th histological section of the 
brain selected in a systematic uniform random manner 
(i.e., sections 20, 40, 60, etc). Thus, the section sampling 
fraction (ssf) was 1/20. In every section, the profile of 
the brain was scanned with an oil-immersion objective 
40× on a laser scanning microscope as described in the 
following. The area of the counting frame of the disector, 
a(frame), was known relative to the area associated with 
each x, y movement of the microscope stage a(x, y-step); 
thus, the area sampling fraction asf was then a(frame)/
a(x, y step) = 0.14183294. The height h of the disector 
was 16 μm and the thickness of the histological sections 
was 18 µm; therefore, the t/h ratio (Eq. 1) was 1.125 (for 
illustration, see Online Resource 2). The estimate of the 
total number of EGFP-positive neurons estN was calcu-
lated according to the Eq. 1:
The variation in number of neurons in the systematically 
sampled sections (sampling error) was assessed with use of 
the coefficient of error CE = (standard error mean)/mean. It 
was calculated with the quadratic approximation formula of 
Matheron, modified for use in a stereological context (Gun-
dersen and Jensen 1987; Slomianka and West 2005; West 
et al. 1991; West 1999). A pilot study performed in one 
brain proved that the CE for the current section sampling 
fraction ssf = 1/20 is comparable with the results based on 
section sampling fraction ssf = 1/10.
For photodocumentation, the Zeiss LSM 510 Meta con-
focal microscope (Carl Zeiss Jena GmbH, Jena, Germany) 
was used to generate registered image stacks for the opti-
cal disector method. From all stained histological sections 
of the brains, microphotographs were taken as follows: the 
midline of the histological brain section was found and the 
right half of the brain identified. Starting from the ven-
tromedial corner of the right brain half, image field after 
image field was evaluated in a raster pattern at an objective 
magnification of 40×. The microscopic stage was moved in 
a regular predetermined x,y-step, so that image fields did 
not overlap, but were joined to each other exactly (Fig. 1). 
To choose a suitable x, y interval, we took into account the 
recommendations of Harding et al. (1994).
Stereological analysis was performed using the software 
Ellipse3D (ViDiTo, Košice, Slovakia). The observer (ZT) 
was blinded to the biological state of the sample.
(1)
estN =
n
∑
i=1
Q−
i ⋅ t
h ⋅ 1
asf ⋅ 1
ssf.
From each field of view containing any GFP-positive 
neurons, a confocal stack of micrographs containing 11 
optical sections with an inter-section-interval of 2 µm 
(stack height 20 µm) was recorded.
If EGFP-positive neurons were present also in the left 
half of the brain, accordingly, image stacks were recorded 
in the same way after finishing the analysis of the right half 
of the brain.
Statistics
Nonparametric statistics was used for data analysis. The 
Kruskal–Wallis ANOVA and the Mann–Whitney U test 
served to assess the differences in numbers of EGFP-pos-
itive neurons per brain and in the rostro-caudal spread of 
transduced neurons and transduced cells (including neu-
rons, glia, and other cells if applicable) among the groups 
of animals infected with different types of lentiviral vectors 
and in dependence of the accessory proteins Vpx or Vpr. 
The correlation between the quantitative parameters was 
evaluated using the Spearman correlation coefficient. These 
Fig. 1  Sampling scheme of a histological brain section with propor-
tionally scaled ocular image fields from confocal microscope (objec-
tive 40×). The histological slide was moved in a raster pattern, start-
ing from the ventromedial corner of the profile of the right half of the 
brain. The yellow circle represents the ocular image field with a diam-
eter of 560 μm, and the blue square circumscribing this image field 
represents the regular predetermined x, y step. The area associated 
with each step of the ocular image field was a(x, y step) = 313,600 
μm2. The number of sampled ocular image fields was recorded. 
From each field of view containing EGFP-positive neurons, a con-
focal stack of micrographs was recorded (11 optical sections, inter-
section-interval 2 μm, stack height 20 µm). Counting frames of the 
optical disectors (red and green borders for forbidden and allowed 
lines, respectively) were superimposed on the stacks of optical sec-
tions. The area of the counting frames was a(frame) = 44,478.81 µm2. 
Grey = scheme of the right part of a histological section of the brain 
with ventricles (white), thick black contours = region of interest
 318
 
Histochem Cell Biol (2017) 148:313–329
1 3
tests were used as available in the Statistica Base 11 pack-
age (StatSoft, Inc., Tulsa, OK, USA).
The following hypotheses have been tested:
H0(A) Absolute numbers of EGFP-expressing neurons 
per mouse brain do not differ after injection of the differ-
ent virus vectors under study.
H0(B) The rostro-caudal spread of EGFP-expressing 
neurons and of all EGFP-expressing cells in the mouse 
brain does not differ after injection of the different virus 
vectors under study.
H0(C) The accessory protein Vpx/Vpr does not influ-
ence the absolute numbers of EGFP-expressing neurons 
in the mouse brain after injection of the respective virus 
vectors.
H0(D) The accessory protein Vpx/Vpr does not influ-
ence the rostro-caudal spread of EGFP-expressing neu-
rons nor of all EGFP-expressing cells in the mouse brain 
after injection of the respective virus vectors.
H0(E) Absolute numbers of EGFP-expressing neurons 
per mouse brain after injection of the transgenic virus 
vectors do not correlate with the rostro-caudal spread of 
EGFP-expressing neurons nor of EGFP-expressing cells.
Results
Infection of primary mesencephalic cell cultures
Infectivity of the vectors was tested on mouse primary 
mesencephalic cell cultures. The transduction potential of 
all viruses has been confirmed for both neurons and glial 
cells by positive double immunofluorescence for EGFP and 
NeuN and EGFP and GFAP, respectively (Online Resource 
3). The transduction efficiency for neurons ranged between 
20% for PBjSEW(Vpx) and 37% for PBjSEW and HIV-
2SEW (Online Resource 4).
Transduction of brain cells in vivo and distribution 
of positive cells along anatomical structures
Transduction of cells of the mouse brain after injection 
of EGFP-harbouring lentiviral vectors was analysed in 
exhaustive serial histological sections after double immu-
nofluorescence staining for EGFP and NeuN. Positive 
EGFP immunostaining could be found in all brains under 
study, in the cytoplasm of neurons as well as of glial cells 
including ependyma. The fluorescence signal of glial cells 
was always distinctly stronger than that of neurons within 
the same section (Fig. 2; see Fig. 3 for definition of the 
photographed brain sites).
Neurons stained reliably with the NeuN antibody, as 
could be confirmed by cell morphology and position of the 
positive cells. Positive immunoreaction could be found in 
the nucleus, the cytoplasm, or nucleus and cytoplasm of the 
neurons. In some cases, NeuN bound also to nucleus and/
or cytoplasm of single ependymal cells lining the lateral 
and the third ventricles, but never to ependymal cells cov-
ering the choroidea. Due to the specific shape and position 
of the ependymal cells, they could be easily distinguished 
from neurons in spite of their occasionally positive NeuN 
staining.
Neurons positive for EGFP could be readily detected 
as cells whose cytoplasm and nuclei showed green and 
red fluorescence, respectively (anti-GFP/Alexa Fluor 488 
Anti-Rabbit, anti-NeuN/ Alexa Fluor 568 Anti-Mouse), or 
as cells with yellow overlay fluorescence of the cytoplasm 
(Fig. 2). These cells were defined as a countable event for 
quantification of transduced neurons.
Immediately adjacent to the injection canal single slightly 
EGFP-positive macrophages could be found irrespective of 
the injected vector. The injection canal itself was still identi-
fiable after 3 weeks observation time as a slender band with 
slightly altered tissue structure without any opening in the 
middle. Microglial reaction was least marked for the HIV-
2SEW-based vectors. In these samples, nearly, all detected 
microglial cells showed a ramified phenotype, and their 
number was only slightly increased around the injection 
canal in comparison with the contralateral side. After injec-
tion of the HIV-1SEW and PBjSEW-based vectors, micro-
glial reaction on the injection site was more pronounced 
than for HIV-2SEW vectors, including visibly increased 
numbers of IBA1-positive cells and a larger number of cells 
showing a bushy or rounded phenotype around the injection 
canal. Rounded microglial cells corresponded to the EGFP-
positive macrophages described above. In addition, HIV-
1SEW-based vectors evoked a particularly strong microglial 
reaction around the ventricles, which was considerably less 
pronounced with the PBjSEW vectors and nearly absent 
with HIV-2SEW vectors. For all vectors, astrocytes on the 
ipsilateral brain side showed a markedly increased GFAP 
expression, whereas contralaterally, they were only slightly 
immunopositive or negative. This left–right asymmetry of 
Fig. 2  Transduction of neurons and glial cells of the mouse brain 
by lentiviral vectors-qualitative comparison. Micrographs a, c, e, 
g, i, and l have been taken from location 2 marked in Fig. 3, micro-
graphs b, d, f, h, k, and m from location 1. Note that EGFP expres-
sion (green staining) was always stronger in glial cells (arrowheads) 
than in neurons (arrows), but that proportion of transduced neurons 
and glial cells differed according to the vector that was injected into 
the brain. Vectors with the accessory proteins Vpx or Vpr seemed 
to evoke increased EGFP expression and thus higher intensity of the 
fluorescence signal compared to the same vector without this protein. 
In the PBjSEW vector, the Vpx protein additionally changed the pre-
ferred infection site from neurons to glial cells (compare a and b vs. 
c and d). Double fluorescence immunohistochemistry, EGFP = green, 
NeuN (neuronal marker) = red, overlay = yellow; thickness of the opti-
cal section = 2 µm; co = cortex, cc = corpus callosum, scalebar 50 µm
▸
 319
Histochem Cell Biol (2017) 148:313–329 
1 3
 320
 
Histochem Cell Biol (2017) 148:313–329
1 3
Fig. 2  (continued)
 321
Histochem Cell Biol (2017) 148:313–329 
1 3
GFAP-immunoreactivity was least pronounced for the HIV-
2SEW-derived vectors (Online Resource 5). Small num-
bers of T lymphocytes were found scattered in the vicinity 
of the injection canal. Moreover, they were a part of small 
clusters of mononuclear cells, mostly in form of perivas-
cular cuffs, found on the ipsilateral side of the brain. These 
mononuclear cell clusters were most prominent in samples 
injected with the HIV-1SEW-derived vectors (not shown). 
The accessory proteins Vpx/Vpr had no visible effect on 
glial reaction and T-cell infiltration when the results of 
vectors derived from the same parental virus were compared 
(Online Resource 5).
The distribution of EGFP immunopositivity depended 
on virus and infected cell type, and was influenced by brain 
anatomy (Fig. 4). EGFP-positive cells were mostly con-
strained to the right half of the brain. Only for the HIV-
1SEW and HIV-2SEW(Vpx) viruses, single immunoposi-
tive neurons and glial cells could be found in the left brain 
half near the midline in vicinity to the corpus callosum. In 
addition, PBjSEW(Vpx) and HIV-1SEW(Vpr) transduced 
single glial cells, but no neurons were detected in the left 
half of the brain.
Distribution of EGFP-positive cells in relation to brain 
structures was comparable in all animals under study, 
regardless of the injected virus type. Positive cells sur-
rounded the injection canal, i.e., they were found within 
the dorsal regions of the telencephalic cortex and in the 
corpus striatum. Discrete clouds of immunopositive cells 
could also be detected within a certain distance of the 
injection canal in nucleus caudatus, putamen, and accum-
bens nucleus and spreading along the corpus callosum and 
its radiatio, preferentially at the borderline between corpus 
callosum and striatum (Fig. 4).
In all brains injected with the HIV-1SEW vector and in 
single brains injected with PBjSEW, PBjSEW(Vpx), HIV-
2SEW(Vpx), and HIV-1SEW(Vpr), the injected viruses 
spread rostrally towards the bulbus olfactorius. As a result, 
single EGFP-positive neurons could be found in the olfac-
tory bulb. Injection of the HIV-2SEW, HIV-1SEW, and 
HIV-1SEW(Vpr) vectors resulted in some positive glial 
cells but not neurons in the olfactory bulb. In contrast, the 
rostral part of the hemispheres remained negative, and the 
main portion of positive neurons followed as described 
above and in Fig. 4. Caudalmost EGFP-positive neurons 
were identified in the cerebellar stratum granulosum and 
the hippocampus after transduction by the HIV-1SEW 
vector.
All vectors except PBjSEW transduced ependymal cells 
lining lateral and third ventricles. If the fluorescence sig-
nal of ependymal cells lining the third ventricle was strong, 
positive ependymal cells could also be found in the left 
half of the third ventricle (HIV-1SEW, HIV-1SEW(Vpr), 
PBjSEW(Vpx)) and in single cases with HIV-1SEW injec-
tion even in the left lateral ventricle.
Preferential in vivo infection of glial cells and neurons 
depending on virus type and presence of accessory 
proteins
Although all viruses infected neurons as well as glial cells 
and evoked EGFP expression in both cell types, the prefer-
ence of each of the viruses and the EGFP expression levels 
Fig. 3  Image fields used for qualitative comparison of neuronal and 
glial transduction by transgenic viruses. Scheme of a coronal sec-
tion of a mouse brain according to Paxinos and Franklin (2003) at the 
level of the injection canal (dotted line). 1 Image field including cor-
tex and corpus callosum; 2 image field at the ventral end of the injec-
tion canal, ventral part of the corpus striatum
Fig. 4  Schematic representation indicating the distribution of EGFP-
positive cells (green regions) within and around the corpus striatum-
example. Coronal section of a mouse brain according to Paxinos and 
Franklin (2003) at the level of the anterior end of the lateral ventri-
cles. 1 Corpus callosum; 2 nucleus caudatus and putamen; 3, 4 core 
and shell of nucleus accumbens; 5 cortex telencephali; 6 lateral ven-
tricle. EGFP-positive neurons and glial cells were spread along the 
injection canal which runs from parietal cortex to corpus striatum, as 
well as along the corpus callosum and in groups within the corpus 
striatum itself
 322
 
Histochem Cell Biol (2017) 148:313–329
1 3
Table 1  Preferentially infected cell type, amount of transduced cells and EGFP expression levels as estimated by qualitative microscopic analy-
sis
Virus
Preferred cell type
Amount of transduced cells and EGFP expression levels
Neurons
Glial cells
PBjSEW
Neurons
Many, middle intensity
Intermediate, high intensity
PBjSEW (Vpx)
Glial cells
Very few, low intensity
Many, high intensity
HIV-2SEW
Neurons
Intermediate, middle intensity
Very few, middle intensity
HIV-2SEW (Vpx)
Neurons, also glial cells
Intermediate, middle intensity
Intermediate, high intensity
HIV-1SEW
Glial cells
Intermediate, middle intensity
Many, high intensity
HIV-1SEW (Vpr)
Glial cells
Intermediate, middle to high intensity
Many, very high intensity
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
a
b
d
c
*
*
*
*
*
N(neurons)
N(neurons)
N(neurons)
N(neurons)
Fig. 5  Numbers of EGFP-positive neurons per brain (N(neurons)) 
after intracerebral injection of PBjSEW, HIV-2SEW, and HIV-1SEW 
lentiviral vectors carrying the EGFP reporter gene with or with-
out the accessory proteins Vpx/Vpr. a Overview of all brains under 
study. b Numbers of transduced neurons were larger after injection of 
PBjSEW and HIV-1SEW when compared to HIV-2SEW. c Numbers 
of transduced neurons were larger after injection of HIV-2SEW(Vpx) 
and HIV-1SEW(Vpr) when compared to PBjSEW(Vpx). d Accessory 
protein Vpx/Vpr caused significant decrease of neuronal transduction 
rates for vector PBjSEW but not for the other vectors. Only differ-
ences significant at p < 0.05 (*) are shown. Boxes span the interquar-
tile range of data on the y-axis. The inside lines indicate the median 
and the black diamonds mean values. Whiskers extend to the mini-
mum and maximum values excluding outliers (white circles)
 323
Histochem Cell Biol (2017) 148:313–329 
1 3
differed (Table 1). The HIV-2SEW vector was the most 
specific one for neurons of all tested viruses.
To illustrate the different cell preference of the viruses, 
micrographs of two standard brain parts (Fig. 3) per virus 
are shown for comparison (Fig. 2).
Numbers of EGFP expressing neurons per brain
The absolute numbers of transduced, i.e., infected and 
EGFP expressing neurons within the whole mouse 
brains as assessed by stereology, ranged between 1428 
(PBjSEW(Vpx)) and 60,758 (PBjSEW) with a mean of 
25,831 neurons for all vectors (Fig. 5a, Online Resource 
6). Numbers of transduced neurons differed depending on 
the parental viruses (SIVsmmPBj, HIV-2, and HIV-1) of 
the vectors (Fig. 5b, c). Only for vector PBjSEW, a differ-
ence in transduction efficiency of neurons depending on the 
presence of the Vpx accessory protein could be detected 
(Fig. 5d).
Rostralmost EGFP-expressing neurons were detected in 
a distance of up to 2880 μm rostrally to the injection canal 
in the bulbus olfactorius (HIV-1SEW), caudalmost posi-
tive neurons 3960 μm from the injection canal (PBjSEW) 
in the caudal pole of the telencephalon, hippocampus, 
and cerebellum. Maximal spread of all transduced cells 
was 3240 μm (PBjSEW and HIV-1SEW(Vpr)) in ros-
tral and 3960 μm (PBjSEW, HIV-2SEW(Vpx), and HIV-
1SEW(Vpr)) in caudal direction from the injection canal 
(Fig. 6). There were no significant differences in rostral, 
caudal, and total spread of transduced neurons or all trans-
duced cells between vectors or depending on the presence 
of the Vpx or Vpr protein.
Correlations between quantitative parameters
The non-parametric Spearman rank order correlations 
between quantitative parameters are listed in Table 2. The 
numbers of EGFP-positive neurons were moderately or 
strongly correlated with the spread of positive cells (includ-
ing neurons, glia, and other cells of the brain) and neurons 
both rostrally as well as caudally to the injection canal.
Discussion
In this work, we have directly compared the transduction 
potential, infection preferences, and distribution of non-
replicating gene transfer vectors derived from sooty man-
gabey monkey SIV strain PBj, HIV-2, and HIV-1 after uni-
lateral injection into the brain of adult, immunocompetent 
mice. The effect of accessory protein Vpx/Vpr presence in 
the vector particles on these parameters was analysed as 
well.
The infectivity of all vectors under study and their 
ability to transduce brain cells has been confirmed 
in vitro. Hitherto, numerous studies have shown the 
efficacy of HIV-derived vectors in gene transfer into 
non-dividing neurons including primary cerebral corti-
cal neurons, pyramidal neurons, and neuronal progeni-
tor cells (D´Costa et al. 2003; Wong et al. 2006; Zhang 
et al. 2006; Piersanti et al. 2013). To date, even though 
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
PBjSEW
PBjSEW(Vpx)
HIV-2SEW
HIV-2SEW(Vpx)
HIV-1SEW
HIV-1SEW(Vpr)
spread of transduced neurons (µm)
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
PBjSEW
PBjSEW(Vpx)
HIV-2SEW
HIV-2SEW(Vpx)
HIV-1SEW
HIV-1SEW(Vpr)
spread of transduced cells (µm)
rostral
caudal
rostral
caudal
a
b
Fig. 6  Rostro-caudal spread of EGFP-positive neurons (a) and 
brain cells including neurons, glia, and other cells if applicable (b); 
within the mouse brain after intracerebral injection of PBjSEW, 
HIV-2SEW, and HIV-1SEW lentiviral vectors carrying the EGFP 
reporter gene with or without the accessory proteins Vpx/Vpr. The 
brains were superimposed in a virtual coordinate system so that the 
injection canal (dashed line) is displayed in one plane. The boxes 
depict median values of six brains per vector, the whiskers maximal 
spread in rostral and caudal directions. Note that for all vectors, trans-
duced neurons and cells could be found in a larger distance from the 
injection canal in caudal direction. No significant differences were 
observed between vectors or depending on the absence or presence 
of Vpx/Vpr. The chart does not depict the total amount of transduced 
cells. If at least one positive cell profile was found in the respective 
histological section, it was regarded as positive. The part of the ros-
tral brain pole between olfactory bulb and striatum that did not con-
tain transduced cells (see chapter “Transduction of brain cells in vivo 
and distribution of positive cells along anatomical structures”) is not 
considered in this graph
 324
 
Histochem Cell Biol (2017) 148:313–329
1 3
PBj-derived vectors were efficient in infection of human 
quiescent primary monocytes and dendritic cells as well 
as  
G0-arrested human cell lines, the capability to infect 
neurons has not been described yet (Mühlebach et al. 
2005; Wolfrum et al. 2007; Grabski et al. 2011). In our 
studies, in-vitro EGFP expression was detected in both 
neuronal and glial cells, regardless of the vector used. We 
were able to show that not only HIV, but also PBj-derived 
vectors are suitable for infection of neurons (NeuN+), 
i.e., the main target cells of research in this field. To our 
best knowledge, this is the first evidence of neuronal 
transduction using vectors derived from the SIVsmm PBj 
strain.
In a next step, we have carefully compared the in vivo 
performance of these lentivirus vectors in the mouse brain. 
In line with the in vitro observation, EGFP expression was 
detected in both neuronal and glial cells, irrespective of the 
vector origin (PBj, HIV-2, HIV-1) and absence or presence 
of the accessory protein Vpx/Vpr. This is in contrast to a 
number of other studies using VSV-G-pseudotyped HIV-
based lentiviral vectors in murine or rat brain, in which a 
clear prevalence for transduced neurons was observed (e.g., 
Naldini et al. 1996a; Blömer et al. 1997; Bensadoun et al. 
2000). However, it has been demonstrated that beside the 
observed transduction specificity, the choice of the promo-
tor sequence can invoke exclusive expression of the gene of 
interest in either glial cells or (specific) neurons (Jakobs-
son et al. 2003; Delzor et al. 2013; Schulze et al. 2015). 
To avoid this promoter-driven restriction of EGFP expres-
sion, we used the strong, ubiquitous SFFV promoter with 
described activity in neuronal cells (Bender et al. 2007). 
From qualitative microscopic evaluation, it seems that 
EGFP expression levels were visibly higher in glial cells 
than in neurons (cf. Fig. 2), which would be in agreement 
with the EGFP expression data of HIV-1 vectors published 
previously (Baekelandt et al. 2002). Diversity in the expres-
sion levels might be accounted to differences in promoter 
activity between these two cell types and/or to disparity in 
transcription and translation rate among these cells (Stoyk-
ova et al. 1985; Delzor et al. 2013).
In our in vivo experiments, injection canals were still 
detectable after an observation period of 3 weeks. Single 
EGFP-processing macrophages were observed around the 
needle tract with an additional slight lymphocytic infiltra-
tion for all vectors. Activation of microglial cells was more 
prominent after injection of HIV-1SEW and PBjSEW-
based vectors. In general, former studies have confirmed a 
low pathogenicity of lentiviral vectors (Naldini et al. 1996a; 
Blömer et al. 1996; Baekelandt et al. 2002; Sinnayah et al. 
2002; Wong et al. 2006). Blömer et al. (1997) described a 
slight infiltration of immune cells after intracerebral injec-
tion of different viral vectors as well as after saline control 
injection and interpreted it as a reaction to the trauma that 
disappears after a survival time of 6 weeks. The traces of 
the needle tract with single EGFP-containing macrophages 
and activated microglia in our experiment might represent 
an intermediate healing stage of the puncture rather than 
a reaction to the virus, similarly as suggested by Baeke-
landt et al. (2002). However, visible reaction differences 
between the viral vectors were observed. To distinguish 
between a reaction of the brain to insertion of the needle 
and application of a certain volume and a reaction to the 
virus itself, additional studies employing sham injections 
of a non-immunogenic liquid would be necessary. Simi-
larly, increased GFAP expression in astrocytes, as found on 
the ipsilateral brain side in our study, is described to be an 
important component of the reaction of the brain to a num-
ber of different injuries or infections (e.g., Eng and Ghirni-
kar 1994; Johnson et al. 1995) and thus cannot be attributed 
exclusively to the brain trauma or the effects of the viral 
Table 2  Spearman rank order correlations between the quantitative parameters assessed in mouse brains after injection of lentiviral vectors car-
rying the EGFP reporter gene. Correlations significant at p < 0.05 are marked (*)
Autocorrelations and repeating values are replaced by the sign
Spread of transduced cells (µm)
Spread of transduced neurons (µm)
Total 
rostro-
caudal
Rostrally to the 
injection canal
Caudally to the 
injection canal
Total 
rostro-
caudal
Rostrally to the 
injection canal
Caudally to the 
injection canal
Number of transduced neurons
0.70*
0.54*
0.73*
0.69*
0.49*
0.64*
Rostro-caudal spread of transduced cells (µm)
–
0.89*
0.88*
0.87*
0.71*
0.78*
Spread of transduced cells rostrally to the injection 
canal (µm)
–
–
0.59*
0.69*
0.70*
0.55*
Spread of transduced cells caudally to the injection 
canal (µm)
–
–
0.87*
0.55*
0.87*
Rostro-caudal spread of transduced neurons (µm)
–
–
–
0.77*
0.91*
Spread of transduced neurons rostrally to the injec-
tion canal (µm)
–
–
–
–
0.49*
 325
Histochem Cell Biol (2017) 148:313–329 
1 3
vectors without further comprehensive studies addressing 
reactive changes in the whole brain.
To our knowledge, the distribution of transduced cells 
within the whole brain after intracerebral injection of len-
tiviral vectors has not been systematically described yet. 
Most authors concentrate on a specific target structure such 
as the nigrostriatum or specific nuclei (Naldini et al. 1996a; 
Blömer et al. 1997; Bensadoun et al. 2000; Sinnayah et al. 
2002). Baekelandt et al. (2002) reported a similar distri-
bution of transduced cells along the corpus callosum after 
intrastriatal vector injection as found in our study. In con-
trast to Kato et al. (2011) who studied the extent of ret-
rograde transport of lentiviral vectors pseudotyped with 
chimeric rabies/VSV-G fusion envelope after intrastriatal 
injection and found transduced neurons in upstream regions 
of the striatum (primary motor and somatosensory cortex, 
parafascicular thalamic nucleus, and substantia nigra pars 
compacta), we did not detect EGFP-expressing neurons in 
other cortical regions than surrounding the injection canal. 
This transduced cell population might rather be attributed 
to spillage during removal of the needle than to vector par-
ticle transport.
Interestingly, we found EGFP-positive neuronal cell 
bodies as far from the injection site as the olfactory bulb-
regularly with the HIV-1SEW vector and sometimes with 
all the other vectors except HIV-2SEW. A plausible way 
of spread might be the retrograde way along the olfac-
tory system from piriform lobe (where vector particles 
might arrive even by diffusion from the injection site) via 
olfactory tracts to olfactory bulb. It seems that the vector 
particle is transported rather than the gene product, since 
immunopositivity was restricted to the somata of olfactory 
bulb neurons and the immediately adjacent parts of axons 
and dendrites. No EGFP could be detected in the olfactory 
tract, and it has to be taken into account that a minimum of 
two synapses has to be bridged on the way from piriform 
lobe to olfactory bulb. The mechanism of the retrograde 
transport of viral particles within the brain is not known, 
but glycoproteins of the viral envelope seem to play a role 
during the interaction with host cells and endosomal vector 
transport (Desmaris et al. 2001; Kato et al. 2011; Carpen-
tier et al. 2012; Schoderboeck et al. 2015). Our results con-
firm that transduction of olfactory bulb neurons is possible 
for simple VSVG-pseudotyped lentiviruses, even if rabies 
or chimeric rabies/VSVG pseudotyping might enhance ret-
rograde axonal transport of vectors (Kato et al. 2011; Car-
pentier et al. 2012; Schoderboeck et al. 2015). Our results 
provide also evidence for anterograde transport of the 
injected vector particles, since transduced cell somata could 
be found in cerebellum and hippocampus. At least for the 
cerebellum, a simple transport of the reporter gene prod-
uct along the axon (Baekelandt et al. 2002; Jakobsson et al. 
2003) can be excluded as an explanation, since multiple 
synapses would have to be crossed. The general possibility 
of transport of VSVG-pseudotyped HIV-1 viral vectors in 
conducting direction (from dendrites to cell body) has been 
shown by Desmaris et al. (2001). Glial cells, particularly 
astrocytes, might contribute to retro- and anterograde trans-
port of the viral vectors, since distribution of transduced 
glial cells coincides with that of neurons.
From our results, it seems that the midline of the brain 
represents a considerable barrier to viral spread, which 
is also supported by Baekelandt et al. (2002). However, 
according to our results, highly infective viruses (HIV-
1SEW, HIV-1SEW(Vpr), PBjSEW(Vpr)) are not only able 
to enter ependymal cells of the ipsilateral lateral ventricle, 
but they seem to cross these cells, and reach the contralat-
eral site of the third and via foramen interventriculare even 
the contralateral lateral ventricle by liquor (HIV-1SEW). 
Here, they also infected ependymal cells but did not enter 
the nervous tissue, a finding that was supported by our own 
observations after injection of the vector particles into the 
lateral ventricles (data not shown; see also Baekelandt et al. 
2002; Porlan et al. 2016). Since especially for both HIV-
1SEW derived vectors, a marked accumulation of micro-
glial cells around the ventricles could be observed, and a 
certain contribution of these cells to vector transport into 
the liquor cannot be excluded.
Tropism of lentiviral vectors to neurons vs. glial cells 
has been described to depend on their pseudotyping, their 
transcriptional and post-transcriptional elements used 
to control transgene expression, the animal species used 
as a model organism and their developmental stage, the 
timepoint of observation, the brain areas targeted, and 
the intracerebral delivery protocol (reviewed by Delzor 
et al. 2013). In our experiment, most of these parameters 
were kept constant including the internal organization of 
the transfer vectors. The viruses under study only differed 
regarding the parental viruses and the absence or presence 
of the accessory proteins Vpx or Vpr. However, they dif-
fered considerably with respect to the cell type they pref-
erentially infected, HIV-2SEW being the most specific for 
neurons (Table 1), although its transduction efficiency was 
lower than for the other vectors (Fig. 5b). Interestingly, 
HIV-2SEW and HIV-2SEW(Vpx) evoked also the lowest 
activation of astrocytes and microglial cells in compari-
son with all other vectors under study (Online Resource 5), 
suggesting that a low inflammatory and reactive response 
of the brain might actually enhance the specific infection 
of neurons, whereas increased inflammation seems to sup-
port the overall transduction efficiency. This effect appears 
to be associated with the type of the parental virus, since 
the presence of the accessory Vpx/Vpr proteins did not 
influence the reaction of the nerve tissue considerably. 
However, further experiments searching for correlations 
between inflammatory changes in the complete brain and 
 326
 
Histochem Cell Biol (2017) 148:313–329
1 3
in vivo transduction efficiency would have to be carried out 
to clarify these relationships.
The absolute numbers of transduced neurons within the 
mouse brain differed among the different viruses tested in 
our study, although their general composition, i.e., mem-
brane of host cells used for particle production, virus sur-
face protein, and the design of the transfer vector, were 
similar. Vector HIV-2SEW yielded the significantly lowest 
infection rates. It was, however, the most specific for neu-
rons. Among the vectors carrying the Vpx/Vpr accessory 
proteins, PBjSEW(Vpx) generated the lowest numbers of 
transduced neurons, seemingly due to a preference for glial 
cell transduction that could be clearly observed by simple 
fluorescent microscopy (cf. Fig. 2a–d). The immediate 
cause of the different vector performances is not known.
The Vpx/Vpr accessory proteins were originally 
expected to increase numbers of transduced neurons, since 
they are described to be indispensable for infection of qui-
escent/G0 cells (Mangeot et al. 2002; Wolfrum et al. 2007; 
Srivastava et al. 2008; Mashiba and Collins 2012) and to 
increase expression levels of HIV vector genes (Dupuy 
et al. 2005; Goujon et al. 2007). In our experiment, no sig-
nificant impact of the Vpx or Vpr protein on the number of 
transduced neurons could be detected with the exception of 
PBjSEW vectors as described above. A possible increase 
of EGFP expression intensity due to Vpx or Vpr presence 
would have to be quantified and compared using appropri-
ate methods, e.g., in vitro quantification of EGFP-protein 
contents within the whole brain.
The rostro-caudal spread of transduced cells found in 
our experiment was similar to that found by Kato et al. 
(2011) but considerably larger than that mostly given in 
literature (e.g., Naldini et al. 1996a; Blömer et al. 1997; 
Bensadoun et al. 2000; Baekelandt et al. 2002; Sinnayah 
et al. 2002), probably because most authors concentrated 
in their studies on a specific region of interest and used 
detection systems for the reporter gene that are less sensi-
tive than fluorescence immunohistochemistry. In addition, 
slightly higher volume and amount of virus particles in our 
study might have contributed to this increased dissemina-
tion of transduced cells, even if retro- and anterograde vec-
tor transport is not taken into account. Neither rostro-cau-
dal spread, nor rostral or caudal spread of EGFP-positive 
cells from the injection site differed between the vectors. 
However, the number of transduced neurons was correlated 
with spread distances. Viral vector particles that are able to 
disseminate well within the brain thus seem to be able to 
infect a larger number of neurons. This cannot be explained 
simply by the fact that spreading vectors are able to reach 
more neurons or brain cells, since rostral- and caudalmost 
transduced cells were very few and did not contribute con-
siderably to the assessed cell numbers. It might be assumed 
that vectors able to enter cells efficiently are also more eas-
ily transported in retro- and anterograde directions.
Numbers of transduced glial cells have not been assessed 
in our study, since an unequivocal definition of the count-
able event was not possible even after double staining with 
GFAP (data not shown). Individual cell somata within the 
optical disector could not be identified in the dense tangle 
of intensively EGFP-expressing cell processes (Fig. 2).
We conclude from our findings that after intracerebral 
injection of lentiviral vectors with the same transfer vec-
tor design and vector particle pseudotype, but from differ-
ent parental viruses, (1) distribution of transduced cells did 
not differ significantly among the tested lentiviral vectors 
and depended rather on the (micro-)anatomical structure of 
the brain. (2) Different tropism of the viruses for neurons 
and glial cells could be detected, the most specific for neu-
rons being vector HIV-2SEW. However, all vectors under 
study transduced glial cells as well as neurons. (3) PBjSEW 
and HIV-1SEW transduced more neurons per brain than 
HIV-2SEW, whereas in the presence of the accessory pro-
teins Vpx or Vpr, HIV-2SEW(Vpx) and HIV-1SEW(Vpr) 
showed the highest transduction efficiencies. The distance 
of spread of transduced cells from the injection canal did 
not differ among the viruses but correlated with the num-
ber of EGFP-expressing neurons. These could be found as 
far from the injection site as bulbus olfactorius, hippocam-
pus, and cerebellum, even if vectors employing the VSV-G 
envelope glycoprotein are described to be transported only 
a short way (Baekelandt et al. 2002; Kato et al. 2011). (4) 
The presence of the accessory proteins Vpx or Vpr did not 
result in higher numbers of transduced neurons per brain. 
For vector PBjSEW, the presence of Vpx significantly 
decreased the number of transduced neurons per brain, pos-
sibly due to a preferred infection of glial cells. Thus, the 
parental virus seems to considerably influence cellular tro-
pism and transduction efficiency. This should be taken into 
account in addition to the necessity of precise injection and 
choice of an appropriate envelope protein for pseudotyping 
when considering lentiviral vectors for targeted transduc-
tion of a defined population of brain cells.
Acknowledgements Open access funding provided by University of 
Veterinary Medicine Vienna. ZT was supported by the National Sus-
tainability Program I, Project Nr. LO1506 provided by the Ministry of 
Education, Youth, and Sports of the Czech Republic. We would like 
to thank Ms. Magdalena Helmreich, Ms. Claudia Höchsmann and Ms. 
Anne Flemming (Vienna) for their excellent technical support.
Compliance with ethical standards 
Conflict of interest There is no conflict of interest to declare.
Ethical approval All procedures performed in animals have been 
approved by the institutional ethics committee and Austrian govern-
ment authorities (BMWF; BMWF-68.205/0225-II/10b/2008). Mice 
 327
Histochem Cell Biol (2017) 148:313–329 
1 3
were cared and handled in accordance with the guidelines of the Euro-
pean Union Council (86/609/EU) for the use of laboratory animals.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the 
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted 
use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give 
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a 
link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were 
made.
References
Baekelandt V, Claeys A, Eggermont K, Lauwers E, De Strooper B, 
Nuttin B, Debyser Z (2002) Characterization of lentiviral vector-
mediated gene transfer in adult mouse brain. Hum Gene Ther 
13:841–853. doi:10.1089/10430340252899019
Belshan M, Mahnke LA, Ratner L (2006) Conserved amino acids of 
the human immunodeficiency virus type 2 Vpx nuclear localiza-
tion signal are critical for nuclear targeting of the viral preinte-
gration complex in non-dividing cells. Virology 346:118–126. 
doi:10.1016/j.virol.2005.10.036
Bender FLP, Fischer M, Funk N, Orel N, Rethwilm A, Sendtner M 
(2007) High-efficiency gene transfer into cultured embryonic 
motoneurons using recombinant lentiviruses. Histochem Cell 
Biol 127:439–448. doi:10.1007/s00418-006-0247-5
Bensadoun JC, Déglon N, Tseng JL, Ridet JL, Zurn AD, Aebischer P 
(2000) Lentiviral vectors as a gene delivery system in the mouse 
midbrain: Cellular and behavioral improvements in a 6-OHDA 
model of Parkinson’s disease using GDNF. Exp Neurol 164:15–
24. doi:10.1006/exnr.2000.7409
Blömer U, Naldini L, Verma IM, Trono D, Gage FH (1996) Applica-
tions of gene therapy to the CNS. Hum Mol Genet 5:1397–1404. 
doi:10.1093/hmg/5.Supplement_1.1397
Blömer U, Naldini L, Kafri T, Trono D, Verma IM, Gage FH (1997) 
Highly efficient and sustained gene transfer in adult neurons with 
a lentivirus vector. J Virol 71:6641–6649
Carpentier DCJ, Vevis K, Trabalza A, Georgiadis C, Ellison SM, 
Asfahani RI, Mazarakis ND (2012) Enhanced pseudotyping effi-
ciency of HIV-1 lentiviral vectors by a rabies/vesicular stomatitis 
virus chimeric envelope glycoprotein. Gene Ther 19:761–774. 
doi:10.1038/gt.2011.124
D’Costa J, Harvey-White J, Qasba P, Limaye A, Kaneski CR, Davis-
Warren A, Brady RO, Bankiewicz KS, Major EO, Arya SK 
(2003) HIV-2 derived lentiviral vectors: Gene transfer in Parkin-
son’s and Fabry disease models in vitro. J Med Virol 71:173–
182. doi:10.1002/jmv.1046
Déglon N, Hantraye P (2005) Viral vectors as tools to model and 
treat neurodegenerative disorders. J Gene Med 7:530–539. 
doi:10.1002/jgm.707
Delzor A, Escartin C, Déglon N (2013) Lentiviral vectors: A power-
ful tool to target astrocytes in vivo. Curr Drug Targets 14:1336–
1346. doi:10.2174/13894501113146660213
Demaison C, Parsley K, Brouns G, Scherr M, Battmer K, Kinnon C, 
Grez M, Thrasher AJ (2002) High-level transduction and gene 
expression in hematopoietic repopulating cells using a human 
immunodeficiency virus type 1-based lentiviral vector contain-
ing an internal spleen focus forming virus promoter. Hum Gene 
Ther 13:803–813. doi:10.1089/10430340252898984
Desmaris N, Bosch A, Salaün C, Petit C, Prévost MC, Tordo N, Perrin 
P, Schwartz O, De Rocquigny H, Heard JM (2001) Production 
and neurotropism of lentivirus vectors pseudotyped with lyssa-
virus envelope glycoproteins. Mol Ther 4:149–156. doi:10.1006/
mthe.2001.0431
Dupuy FP, Mouly E, Mesel-Lemoine M, Morel C, Abriol J, Cherai 
M, Baillou C, Nègre D, Cosset FL, Klatzmann D, Lemoine FM 
(2005) Lentiviral transduction of human hematopoietic cells by 
HIV-1- and SIV-based vectors containing a bicistronic cassette 
driven by various internal promoters. J Gene Med 7:1158–1171. 
doi:10.1002/jgm.769
Eleftheriadou I, Mazarakis ND (2015) Lentiviral vectors for gene 
delivery to the nervous system. Neuromethods 98:23–66. 
doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-2306-9_2
Eng LF, Ghirnikar RS (1994) GFAP and astrogliosis. Brain Pathol 
4:229–237. doi:10.1111/j.1750-3639.1994.tb00838.x
Goujon C, Rivière L, Jarrosson-Wuilleme L, Bernaud J, Rigal D, 
Darlix JL, Cimarelli A (2007) SIVSM/HIV-2 Vpx proteins pro-
mote retroviral escape from a proteasome-dependent restriction 
pathway present in human dendritic cells. Retrovirology 4:2. 
doi:10.1186/1742-4690-4-2
Grabski E, Waibler Z, Schüle S, Kloke BP, Sender LY, Panitz S, 
Cichutek K, Schweizer M, Kalinke U (2011) Comparative analy-
sis of transduced primary human dendritic cells generated by the 
use of three different lentiviral vector systems. Mol Biotechnol 
47:262–269. doi:10.1007/s12033-010-9340-z
Gundersen HJ, Jensen EB (1987) The efficiency of systematic sam-
pling in stereology and its prediction. J Microsc 147:229–263. 
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2818.1987.tb02837.x
Haack K, Cockrell AS, Ma H, Israeli D, Ho SN, McCown TJ, Kafri 
T (2004) Transactivator and structurally optimized induc-
ible lentiviral vectors. Mol Ther 10:585–596. doi:10.1016/j.
ymthe.2004.06.109
Harding AJ, Halliday GM, Cullen K (1994) Practical considerations 
for the use of the optical disector in estimating neuronal number. 
J Neurosci Meth 51:83–89. doi:10.1016/0165-0270(94)90028-0
Heinzinger NK, Bukrinsky MI, Haggerty SA, Ragland AM, Kewal-
ramani V, Lee MA, Gendelman HE, Ratner L, Stevenson M, 
Emerman M (1994) The Vpr protein of human immunode-
ficiency virus type 1 influences nuclear localization of viral 
nucleic acids in nondividing host cells. P Natl Acad Sci USA 
91:7311–7315. doi:10.1073/pnas.91.15.7311
Hocquemiller M, Giersch L, Audrain M, Parker S, Cartier N (2016) 
Adeno-associated virus-based gene therapy for CNS diseases. 
Hum Gene Ther 27:478–496. doi:10.1089/hum.2016.087
Jakobsson J, Ericson C, Jansson M, Björk E, Lundberg C (2003) Tar-
geted transgene expression in rat brain using lentiviral vectors. J 
Neurosci Res 73:876–885. doi:10.1002/jnr.10719
James T, Nonnemacher MR, Wigdahl B, Krebs FC (2016) Defining 
the roles for Vpr in HIV-1-associated neuropathogenesis. J Neu-
rovirol 22:403–415. doi:10.1007/s13365-016-0436-5
Johnson WB, Ruppe MD, Rockenstein EM, Price J, Sarthy VP, Ver-
derber LC, Mucke L (1995) Indicator expression directed by 
regulatory sequences of the glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) 
gene: In vivo comparison of distinct GFAP-lacZ transgenes. Glia 
13:174–184. doi:10.1002/glia.440130304
Kato S, Kobayashi K, Inoue KI, Kuramochi M, Okada T, Yaginuma 
H, Morimoto K, Shimada T, Takada M, Kobayashi K (2011) A 
lentiviral strategy for highly efficient retrograde gene transfer 
by pseudotyping with fusion envelope glycoprotein. Hum Gene 
Ther 22:197–206. doi:10.1089/hum.2009.179
Kloke BP, Schüle S, Mühlebach MD, Wolfrum N, Cichutek K, Sch-
weizer M (2010) Functional HIV-2 and SIVsmmPBj-derived 
lentiviral vectors generated by a novel polymerase chain reac-
tion-based approach. J Gene Med 12:446–452. doi:10.1002/
jgm.1454
 328
 
Histochem Cell Biol (2017) 148:313–329
1 3
Liehl B, Hlavaty J, Moldzio R, Tonar Z, Unger H, Salmons B, Gün-
zburg WH, Renner M (2007) Simian immunodeficiency virus 
vector pseudotypes differ in transduction efficiency and target 
cell specificity in brain. Gene Ther 14:1330–1343. doi:10.1038/
sj.gt.3302988
Lundberg C, Björklund T, Carlsson T, Jakobsson J, Hantraye P, 
Déglon N, Kirik D (2008) Applications of lentiviral vectors for 
biology and gene therapy of neurological disorders. Curr Gene 
Ther 8:461–473. doi:10.2174/156652308786847996
Mangeot PE, Duperrier K, Nègre D, Boson B, Rigal D, Cosset FL, 
Darlix JL (2002) High levels of transduction of human den-
dritic cells with optimized SIV vectors. Mol Ther 5:283–290. 
doi:10.1006/mthe.2002.0541
Mashiba M, Collins KL (2012) Molecular mechanisms of HIV 
immune evasion of the innate immune response in myeloid cells. 
Viruses 5:1–14. doi:10.3390/v5010001
Mitrophanous K, Yoon S, Rohll J, Patil D, Wilkes F, Kim V, Kings-
man S, Kingsman A, Mazarakis N (1999) Stable gene transfer to 
the nervous system using a non-primate lentiviral vector. Gene 
Ther 6:1808–1818. doi:10.1038/sj.gt.3301023
Mittermeyer G, Christine CW, Rosenbluth KH, Baker SL, Starr P, 
Larson P, Kaplan PL, Forsayeth J, Aminoff MJ, Bankiewicz KS 
(2012) Long-term evaluation of a phase 1 study of AADC gene 
therapy for Parkinson´s disease. Hum Gene Ther 23:377–381. 
doi:10.1089/hum.2011.220
Moldzio R, Radad K, Duvigneau JC, Kranner B, Krewenka C, Pisk-
ernik C, Rausch WD (2006) Glutamate-induced cell death and 
formation of radicals can be reduced by lisuride in mesence-
phalic primary cell culture. J Neural Transm 113:1095–1105. 
doi:10.1007/s00702-005-0394-1
Morris KV, Gilbert J, Wong-Staal F, Gasmi M, Looney DJ (2004) 
Transduction of cell lines and primary cells by FIV-pack-
aged HIV vectors. Mol Ther 10:181–190. doi:10.1016/j.
ymthe.2004.03.019
Mühlebach MD, Wolfrum N, Schüle S, Tschulena U, Sanzenbacher 
R, Flory E, Cichutek K, Schweizer M (2005) Stable transduction 
of primary human monocytes by simian lentiviral vector PBj. 
Mol Ther 12:1206–1216. doi:10.1016/j.ymthe.2005.06.483
Naldini L, Blömer U, Gage FH, Trono D, Verma IM (1996a) Effi-
cient transfer, integration, and sustained long-term expression 
of the transgene in adult rat brains injected with a lentiviral 
vector. P Natl Acad Sci USA 93:11382–11388. doi:10.1073/
pnas.93.21.11382
Naldini L, Blömer U, Gallay P, Ory D, Mulligan R, Gage FH, Verma 
IM, Trono D (1996b) In vivo gene delivery and stable transduc-
tion of nondividing cells by a lentiviral vector. Science 272:263–
267. doi:10.1126/science.272.5259.263
Palfi S, Gurruchaga JM, Ralph GS, Lepetit H, Lavisse S, Buttery PC, 
Watts C, Miskin J, Kelleher M, Deeley S, Iwamuro H, Lefau-
cheur JP, Thiriez C, Fenelon G, Lucas C, Brugières P, Gabriel 
I, Abhay K, Drouot X, Tani N, Kas A, Ghaleh B, Le Corvois-
ier P, Dolphin P, Breen DP, Mason S, Guzman NV, Mazarakis 
ND, Radcliffe PA, Harrop R, Kingsman SM, Rascol O, Naylor 
S, Barker RA, Hantraye P, Remy P, Cesaro P, Mitrophanous KA 
(2014) Long-term safety and tolerability of ProSavin, a lentiviral 
vector-based gene therapy for Parkinson’s disease: a dose esca-
lation, open-label, phase 1/2 trial. The Lancet 383:1138–1146. 
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(13)61939-X
Pancio HA, Vander Heyden N, Ratner L (2000) The C-terminal 
proline-rich tail of human immunodeficiency virus type 2 
Vpx is necessary for nuclear localization of the viral preinte-
gration complex in nondividing cells. J Virol 74:6162–6167. 
doi:10.1128/JVI.74.13.6162-6167.2000
Paxinos G, Franklin KBJ (2003) The mouse brain in stereotactic coor-
dinates: Compact second edition. Academic Press, San Diego
Piersanti S, Astrologo L, Licursi V, Costa R, Roncaglia E, Gennetier 
A, Ibanes S, Chillon M, Negri R, Tagliafico E, Kremer EJ, Sag-
gio I (2013) Differentiated neuroprogenitor cells incubated with 
human or canine adenovirus, or lentiviral vectors have distinct 
transcriptome profiles. PLoS ONE 8:e69808. doi:10.1371/jour-
nal.pone.0069808
Porlan E, Martí-Prado B, Consiglio A, Fariñas I (2016) Stable and 
efficient genetic modification of cells in the adult mouse V-SVZ 
for the analysis of neural stem cell autonomous and non-autono-
mous effects. J Vis Exp 2016:e53282. doi:10.3791/53282
Schoderboeck L, Riad S, Bokor AM, Wicky HE, Strauss M, Bostina 
M, Oswald MJ, Empson RM, Hughes SM (2015) Chimeric 
rabies SADB19-VSVg-pseudotyped lentiviral vectors mediate 
long-range retrograde transduction from the mouse spinal cord. 
Gene Ther 22:357–364. doi:10.1038/gt.2015.3
Schüle S, Kloke BP, Kaiser JK, Heidmeier S, Panitz S, Wolfrum N, 
Cichutek K, Schweizer M (2009) Restriction of HIV-1 replica-
tion in monocytes is abolished by Vpx of SIVsmmPBj. PLoS 
One 4:e7098. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0007098
Schulze W, Hayata-Takano A, Kamo T, Nakazawa T, Nagayasu K, 
Kasai A, Seiriki K, Shintani N, Ago Y, Farfan C, Hashimoto 
R, Baba A, Hashimoto H (2015) Simultaneous neuron- and 
astrocyte-specific fluorescent marking. Biochem Bioph Res Co 
459:81–86. doi:10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.02.073
Singhal PK, Kumar PR, Subba Rao MRK, Kyasani M, Mahalingam 
S (2006) Simian immunodeficiency virus Vpx is imported into 
the nucleus via importin alpha-dependent and -independent path-
ways. J Virol 80:526–536. doi:10.1128/JVI.80.1.526-536.2006
Sinnayah P, Lindley TE, Staber PD, Cassell MD, Davidson BL, 
Davisson RL (2002) Selective gene transfer to key cardiovascu-
lar regions of the brain: comparison of two viral vector systems. 
Hypertension 39:603–608. doi:10.1161/hy0202.103295
Slomianka L, West MJ (2005) Estimators of the precision of ste-
reological estimates: an example based on the CA1 pyramidal 
cell layer of rats. Neuroscience 136:757–767. doi:10.1016/j.
neuroscience.2005.06.086
Srivastava S, Swanson SK, Manel N, Florens L, Washburn MP, 
Skowronski J (2008) Lentiviral Vpx accessory factor targets 
VprBP/DCAF1 substrate adaptor for cullin 4 E3 ubiquitin ligase 
to enable macrophage infection. PLoS Pathog 4:e1000059. 
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1000059
Sterio DC (1984) The unbiased estimation of number and sizes of 
arbitrary particles using the disector. J Microsc 134:127–136. 
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2818.1984.tb02501.x
Stewart HJ, Ralph GC, Fong-Wong L, Strickland I, McClockey L, 
Barnes L, Blount I, Wells O, Truran CJM, Kingsman AJ, Palfi
 
S, Mitrophanous KA (2016) Optimizing transgene configuration 
and protein fusions to maximize dopamine production for the 
gene therapy of Parkinson´s disease. Human. Gene Ther 27:100–
110. doi:10.1089/humc.2016.056
Stoykova AS, Dabeva MD, Dimova RN, Hadjiolov AA (1985) Ribo-
some Biogenesis and Nucleolar Ultrastructure in Neuronal and 
Oligodendroglial Rat Brain Cells. J Neurochem 45:1667–1676. 
doi:10.1111/j.1471-4159.1985.tb10521.x
Trabalza A, Georgiadis C, Eleftheriadou I, Hislop JN, Ellison 
SM, Karavassilis ME, Mazarakis ND (2013) Venezuelan 
equine encephalitis virus glycoprotein pseudotyping confers 
neurotropism to lentiviral vectors. Gene Ther 20:723–732. 
doi:10.1038/gt.2012.85
Vogel R, Amar L, Thi AD, Saillour P, Mallet J (2004) A single 
lentivirus 
vector 
mediates 
doxycycline-regulated 
expres-
sion of transgenes in the brain. Hum Gene Ther 15:157–165. 
doi:10.1089/104303404772679968
 329
Histochem Cell Biol (2017) 148:313–329 
1 3
West MJ (1999) Stereological methods for estimating the total num-
ber of neurons and synapses: issues of precision and bias. Trends 
Neurosci 22:51–61. doi:10.1016/S0166-2236(98)01362-9
West MJ, Slomianka L, Gundersen HJ (1991) Unbiased stereologi-
cal estimation of the total number of neurons in the subdivisions 
of the rat hippocampus using the optical fractionator. Anat Rec 
231:482–497. doi:10.1002/ar.1092310411
Wolfrum N, Mühlebach MD, Schüle S, Kaiser JK, Kloke BP, 
Cichutek K, Schweizer M (2007) Impact of viral accessory 
proteins of SIVsmmPBj on early steps of infection of quiescent 
cells. Virology 364:330–341. doi:10.1016/j.virol.2007.03.008
Wong LF, Goodhead L, Prat C, Mitrophanous KA, Kingsman SM, 
Mazarakis ND (2006) Lentivirus-mediated gene transfer to 
the central nervous system: therapeutic and research applica-
tions. Hum Gene Ther 17:1–9, erratum 17:376. doi:10.1089/
hum.2006.17.1
Zhang Y, Wang H, Pan H, Bao X, Li M, Jin J, Wu X (2006) Gene 
delivery into primary cerebral cortical neurons by lentiviral vec-
tor. Cell Biol Int 30:777–783. doi:10.1016/j.cellbi.2006.05.010
Zufferey R, Donello JE, Trono D, Hope TJ (1999) Woodchuck hep-
atitis virus posttranscriptional regulatory element enhances 
expression of transgenes delivered by retroviral vectors. J Virol 
73:2886–2892
