 ARTICLE
Visual and modular detection of pathogen nucleic
acids with enzyme–DNA molecular complexes
Nicholas R.Y. Ho
1,2, Geok Soon Lim1,2, Noah R. Sundah
1,3, Diana Lim4, Tze Ping Loh1,5 & Huilin Shao1,2,3,6
Rapid, visual detection of pathogen nucleic acids has broad applications in infection man-
agement. Here we present a modular detection platform, termed enzyme-assisted nano-
complexes for visual identification of nucleic acids (enVision). The system consists of an
integrated circuit of enzyme–DNA nanostructures, which function as independent recognition
and signaling elements, for direct and versatile detection of pathogen nucleic acids from
infected cells. The built-in enzymatic cascades produce a rapid color readout for the naked
eye; the assay is thus fast (<2 h), sensitive (<10 amol), and readily quantified with smart-
phones. When implemented on a configurable microfluidic platform, the technology
demonstrates superior programmability to perform versatile computations, for detecting
diverse pathogen targets and their virus–host genome integration loci. We further design the
enVision platform for molecular-typing of infections in patient endocervical samples. The
technology not only improves the clinical inter-subtype differentiation, but also expands the
intra-subtype coverage to identify previously undetectable infections.
DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05733-0
OPEN
1 Biomedical Institute for Global Health Research and Technology, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117599, Singapore. 2 Institute of Molecular and
Cell Biology, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore 138673, Singapore. 3 Department of Biomedical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering,
National University of Singapore, Singapore 117583, Singapore. 4 Department of Pathology, National University Hospital, Singapore 119074, Singapore.
5 Department of Laboratory Medicine, National University Hospital, Singapore 117599, Singapore. 6 Department of Surgery, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine,
National University of Singapore, Singapore 119228, Singapore. These authors contributed equally: Nicholas R.Y. Ho, Geok Soon Lim. Correspondence and
requests for materials should be addressed to H.S. (email: huilin.shao@nus.edu.sg)
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3238 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05733-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
1
1234567890():,;
 D
etection of pathogen nucleic acids has broad applications
in infection diagnostics and management. As an alter-
native to conventional pathogen culture, which entails
long processing time (i.e., several days) and requires species-
specific protocols (e.g., bacteria vs. viruses), nucleic acid tech-
nologies have been increasingly adopted in clinical laboratories to
provide unprecedented molecular information about infections
(and beyond)1–3. For example, nucleic acid-based human papil-
lomavirus (HPV) testing is essential to contemporary cervical
cancer testing. HPV, the most common sexually transmitted
infection, is the primary cause of cervical cancer4. There are
>100 subtypes of HPV, of which 15 are considered of high
malignancy risk5. HPV infection is a global epidemic; while
mostly benign, some of these infections can progress to cause
deadly cervical cancer. This complex etiology, carcinogenesis and
disease progression are primarily linked to two factors: (1)
infection from specific HPV molecular subtypes, and (2) the
persistence of infection6,7. Point-of-care testing that can distin-
guish the infection subtypes and be performed at the patient level
(e.g., community clinics and doctor’s offices)8–11 could thus bring
tremendous opportunities for patient stratification and accessible
monitoring, and is associated with better health outcomes12.
Current detection of pathogen nucleic acids, however, is almost
exclusively performed in large centralized clinical laboratories.
This limited reach arises from the high complexity and cost
associated with conventional technologies. In the case of HPV
detection, commercial assays leverage primarily on polymerase
chain reaction (PCR, e.g., Cobas HPV) to amplify and detect
specific DNA targets13,14. Such systems not only necessitate bulky
and specialized equipment, for PCR thermal cycling and fluor-
escence measurements, but also require trained personnel to
operate. Advanced isothermal amplification assays have been
developed to relieve the instrument needs for temperature
cycling; nevertheless, these assays have their own limitations. For
example, loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) has
stringent sequence requirements and cannot be easily general-
ized15. Importantly, as with other nucleic acid amplification
approaches, LAMP is prone to false-positives (e.g., from primer-
dimer
formation).
Alternatively,
sequence-specific
signaling
probes (e.g., fluorescent Taqman reporter) could be used to
improve the detection accuracy; however, these probes are
expensive and complex to implement16. As each piece of DNA
target requires a dedicated, sequence-specific probe for coupled
signaling during target amplification, the approach becomes
increasingly costly and challenging to multiplex or perform
complex computations17.
To address these challenges, we developed a molecular platform
to enable visual and modular detection of diverse pathogen nucleic
acids. Instead of relying on target nucleic acid amplification, as in
the above-mentioned approaches, the technology exponentially
enhances visual signal from direct and independent target hybri-
dization. Termed enzyme-assisted nanocomplexes for visual
identification of nucleic acids (enVision), the technology consists
of an integrated circuit of two independent enzyme–DNA
nanostructures—an easily adjustable recognition element and a
sensitive universal signaling element—to decouple target recog-
nition and visual signal amplification. We chose DNA nanos-
tructures as the functional elements, as they can be designed to
harbor stable three-dimensional conformations to facilitate diverse
enzymatic activities, and have minimal cross-talk, even when
packed closely, to enable independent operations18–20.
Results
enVision platform. The enVision platform consists of a series of
enzyme-assisted DNA nanostructures to achieve three functional
steps:
DNA
target
recognition,
target-independent
signal
enhancement, and visual detection (Fig. 1a). With orthogonal
sequence design of the nanostructures, the target recognition is
decoupled from the signal enhancement. In the recognition step,
the recognition element is a unique hybrid nanostructure. It
consists of a modified DNA aptamer21,22 bound to a Taq DNA
polymerase. In the absence of target DNA, the aptamer binds
strongly with the polymerase to inhibit polymerase activity. In the
presence of complementary target DNA, upon target hybridiza-
tion, the hybrid dissociates to activate polymerase activity. In the
signaling step, the active polymerase elongates a universal, self-
priming nanostructure, in a target-independent manner. Through
the incorporation of modified oligonucleotides into the signaling
structures, visual signals can be enzymatically produced for
detection by the naked eye and are readily quantified through
smartphones. The insert (Fig. 1a, right) shows an example of the
actual assay output as imaged by smartphones.
To complement the detection programmability and modular-
ity, we implemented the enVision assays in a configurable
microfluidic platform (Fig. 1b). Specifically, we integrated two
components: (i) independent assay cassettes, and (ii) a common
signaling cartridge. Each assay cassette was preloaded with
specific DNA recognition nanostructures, and could be plugged
in on-demand to enable versatile assay integration. The common
holder cartridge housed the universal signaling elements, which
were immobilized on polycarbonate membranes. Fluid flow and
sample mixing were performed through a parallel circuit of
microchannels (Supplementary Fig. 1) and actuated by negative
pressure at a common outlet on the cartridge to streamline the
assay procedure (Supplementary Fig. 2). Figure 1c shows a
prototype device developed for clinical detection of pathogen
DNA targets. This system compartmentalization improves the
assay modularity (i.e., on-demand integration) and simplifies the
implementation (i.e., uniform surface immobilization and single
flow actuation)23 for clinical applications.
Optimized assay for visual quantification of nucleic acids. We
first evaluated the performance of the DNA nanostructures as
functional recognition and signaling elements, respectively. For
the recognition nanostructure, the polymerase associated with the
modified aptamer to form a hybrid complex (Fig. 2a, top). This
optimized complex demonstrated negligible polymerase activity
(Supplementary Fig. 3a). In the presence of complementary target
DNA, the hybrid structure dissociated and the polymerase
activity recovered fully (Fig. 2a, bottom). We found that this
recognition and activation showed a high sequence specificity, as
only complementary targets resulted in strong polymerase
activity, while scrambled oligonucleotide sequences produced
negligible activity (Supplementary Fig. 3b).
We further designed the universal signaling element as a self-
priming nanostructure. As compared to its similarly-sized linear
counterpart, the structure demonstrated enhanced polymerase
occupancy and activity (Fig. 2b), possibly due to its superior
priming efficiency at room temperature (Supplementary Fig. 4).
All sequences used to optimize the assembly and characterization
of the nanostructures can be found in Supplementary Table 1.
We subsequently integrated these independent elements to
develop the enVision workflow. To enable visual detection, we
used
the
activated
polymerase
to
elongate
the
signaling
nanostructure and incorporate horseradish peroxidase (HRP)
through
biotinylated
nucleotides
(biotin-16-AA-dCTP).
We
further optimized both the polymerase and HRP reactions
(Supplementary Fig. 5a). In the presence of optical substrate,
the HRP activity developed brown precipitates rapidly. In a
titration analysis, we observed that the color intensity could be
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05733-0
2
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3238 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05733-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 image-quantified and correlated to increasing amounts of target
DNA (Supplementary Fig. 5b). When imaged with a smartphone
camera, the visual assay demonstrated a limit of detection (LOD)
of 0.260 fmol of target DNA (Supplementary Fig. 5c) and the
assay could be completed in as little as 30 min at room
temperature. The LOD could be further improved to 7.205 amol
of target DNA (Fig. 2c) through integration with efficient
asymmetric amplification (Supplementary Fig. 6). Isothermal
asymmetric amplification through nucleic acid sequence based
amplification (NASBA)9 could also be incorporated to improve
practical applications (Supplementary Fig. 7). All primers and
targets used for amplification can be found in Supplementary
Table 1. Detection sensitivities were determined with point-of-
care smartphone readouts; all processes (including asymmetric
amplification and NASBA) were accomplished in <2 h.
To correlate the visual signal with standard fluorescence signal,
we performed a similar experiment with FAM-modified nucleotides
(Supplementary Fig. 5d). The enVision visual assay correlated well
to a logistic function that accounts for fluorescence signal saturation
(R2 = 0.983) (Fig. 2d). When compared to the fluorescence
measurements, which saturated at high concentrations of DNA
targets, the enVision platform showed a wider dynamic range to
produce distinguishable and quantifiable visual signals at these
target concentrations. We attribute this expansion in the visual
dynamic range to the incorporation of dual enzymatic signaling (i.e.,
DNA polymerase and HRP cascades) in the enVision technology.
Programmability of enVision. To design assays for visual
detection of nucleic acids, we investigated the programmability of
the recognition nanostructure. The hybrid structure consists of a
conserved sequence region that folds to bind and inhibit DNA
polymerase, and a variable region (i.e., duplex and overhang
segments) that can be made complementary to target DNA
(Fig. 3a). By inducing mismatches between the variable region of
the recognition nanostructure and the target DNA, we identified
that the duplex region showed a higher sensitivity to sequence
mismatches, as compared to the overhang region (Fig. 3b). We
thus reasoned that the duplex region could confer strong
sequence specificity, while the overhang region could accom-
modate more sequence variability, a feature useful for pan-
detection.
We validated this design principle by developing two pan-HPV
recognition
nanostructures
(Fig.
3c).
The
structures
were
designed by matching against the HPV consensus genome, and
contained varying number of mismatches against DNA targets
from six HPV subtypes (Supplementary Table 2). By mapping all
the mismatched regions, we found that Pan-HPV Nanostructure
1 which accommodated more mismatches in the overhang region
demonstrated better pan-detection capability of the consensus
genome. Pan-HPV Nanostructure 2 which contained more
mismatches in the duplex region showed a reduced signal in
general, indicating the importance of the duplex region in
conferring assay specificity.
Target recognition
Visual detection
Target DNA
Recognition 
nanostructure 
Active 
polymerase
Inactive 
polymerase
a
b
c
Target-independent signaling
Self-priming 
hairpin
Biotin dNTP
Bound HRP
Signaling 
nanostructure 
Reaction chamber with 
embedded membrane
+
Inlet
Mixer
Common cartridge
Common outlet
Target recognition
Target-independent signaling
Visual detection
Assay cassette
2
1
3
1
2
3
Fig. 1 Visual and modular detection of pathogen nucleic acids. a The enVision system consists of a series of enzyme–DNA nanostructures to enable target
recognition, target-independent signaling, and visual detection. The nanostructures are designed to decouple recognition from signaling. The recognition
nanostructure is a hybrid complex, composed of an inactivating aptamer and a Taq DNA polymerase. In the presence of complementary target DNA, the
complex dissociates to activate the polymerase activity. The active polymerase proceeds to elongate a universal, self-priming signaling nanostructure, in a
target-independent manner. Modified deoxynucleotides (dNTPs) are incorporated to immobilize horseradish peroxidase (HRP) onto the signaling
nanostructures. Upon the addition of optical substrate, visual signals can be enzymatically enhanced, detected by the naked eye and quantified with a
smartphone camera. Photograph (inset) shows an example of the actual visual readouts in the presence of none (−) and varying (+) amounts of target
DNA on a smartphone application. b Schematic of the enVision microfluidic system. The platform is designed to complement the modular enVision
workflow. Independent assay cassettes, preloaded with specific recognition nanostructures at the inlets, can be mounted on-demand onto a common
signaling cartridge. The common cartridge houses the universal signaling nanostructures, which are immobilized on embedded membranes, for target-
independent signaling and visual detection. Direction of cassette sliding is indicated by a red arrow. c Photograph of the microfluidic enVision prototype,
developed for versatile assay integration and parallel processing. Scale bar indicates 1 cm
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05733-0
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3238 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05733-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
3
 Leveraging on this design principle, we next designed specific
nanostructures for HPV subtyping. We identified a highly
variable region of the HPV genome to design a new group of
recognition nanostructures for specific differentiation of HPV
subtypes (i.e., HPV 6, 11, 16, 18, 31, 33, 58, and 66) (Fig. 3d, left);
sequence variability was designed to be contained within the
sensitive duplex region. As compared to conventional qPCR
analysis, which requires a pair of primers for target amplification
and detection, the enVision recognition nanostructure could be
easily adapted, as its specificity is determined by a single probe
sequence (i.e., the variable region). We used this programmability
to rapidly design new specific HPV subtyping nanostructures
(Supplementary Table 2) and integrated them with the enVision
technology. In a comparative analysis where we designed PCR
primers to detect the same HPV DNA targets (Supplementary
Table 3), the enVision platform demonstrated better specificity
(100% specificity, 56/56, Fig. 3d, left), while the SYBR Green-
based qPCR yielded more false positives (92.9% specificity, 52/56,
Fig. 3d, right), likely due to non-specific amplification in the
qPCR analysis (Supplementary Fig. 8). Importantly, due to
differences in the sensing mechanisms (i.e., enVision detects via
hybridization-activated signal enhancement and qPCR detects via
nucleic acid target amplification), we further demonstrated that
the enVision technology could directly distinguish specific HPV
RNA targets, without needing any reverse transcription—a
prerequisite for qPCR detection of RNA targets to ensure enzyme
compatibility (Supplementary Fig. 9). All sequences used to
transcribe the RNA targets can be found in Supplementary
Table 3.
Multiplexed assay for enhanced detection coverage. To improve
detection coverage, we next determined if multiplexed enVision
assays could be performed simultaneously in a single chamber.
While clinical HPV assays typically detect a single region of the
viral genome (the L1 locus) for infection determination, partial
viral genome integrations into the host cells are also possible and
Target DNA (amol) 
c
Visual signal (a.u.) 
Visual signal (a.u.)
Fluorescence signal (a.u.)
d
R2 = 0.983
100
50
12
8
4
0
0
1
10
100
1000
10,000
2
1
3
4
5
0
2
4
6
8
10
Polymerase activity (%)
0
a
b
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Binding (nm)
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
Time (min)
0
Nucleotide position
2
1
3
4
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Polymerase activity (norm.)
Aptamer
Polymerase
Target
Complementary
target
Scrambled
target
Linear template
Self-priming nanostructure
Fluorescent probe 
nucleotide position
Fig. 2 Nucleic acid quantification with enVision. a Recognition nanostructure assembly and activity. The recognition nanostructure was assembled and
incubated with complementary or scrambled target DNA sequences, to determine the resultant polymerase association and activity. (Top) Real-time
sensorgram of molecular binding. We performed a series of operations, namely aptamer immobilization, addition of polymerase, and incubation with target
DNA sequences. Molecular binding was monitored in situ through bio-layer interferometry to determine polymerase association. (Bottom) The
corresponding polymerase activity was determined at the end of each operation via a parallel experiment using a Taqman assay (fluorescence
measurement of 5′ exonuclease degradation of Taqman probes). Note the complete recovery of polymerase activity upon incubating with complementary
target DNA. b Signaling nanostructure activity. In a comparative experiment, the self-priming signaling nanostructure and its similarly-sized linear template
were treated with equal concentration of active DNA polymerase. The polymerase activity was determined at different nucleotide positions away from the
starting primed sites, through 5′ exonuclease degradation of differentially placed Taqman probes (positions indicated as green dots). c Detection sensitivity
of the enVision system. The detection limit (dotted line) was determined by titrating a known amount of target DNA and measuring their associated visual
signals. All visual signals were acquired through a smartphone. d Correlation between the enVision and fluorescence measurements on varying quantities
of target DNA. The visual signal matched well with the fluorescence signal (R2 = 0.9828) and demonstrated a wider dynamic range. All measurements
were performed in triplicate, and the data are displayed as mean ± s.d. a.u. arbitrary unit
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05733-0
4
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3238 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05733-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 can lead to cancerous growth24,25. Using non-conserved regions
in the HPV viral genome, we thus designed various enVision
recognition nanostructures to detect the E1, L1, and L2 loci to
improve the detection coverage (Fig. 4a; Supplementary Table 4).
These modular recognition nanostructures could be readily
configured into different logic gates (e.g., OR, AND, NOT,
NAND, and NOR), in a single reaction chamber, to perform
molecular
computations
and
enable
visual
readouts
from
**
*** ***
***
***
n.s.
*
a
Conserved region
Variable region
Overhang
Pol
Duplex
Signal (norm.)
Number of mismatches
Overhang
Duplex 
b
c
DNA target (consensus)
DNA target (variable)
enVision 
HPV 06
HPV 11
HPV 16
HPV 18
HPV 31
HPV 33
HPV 58
HPV 66
qPCR 
d
Signal
Max
Min
HPV 06
HPV 11 
HPV 16
HPV 18
HPV 31
HPV 33
HPV 58
HPV 66
HPV 06
HPV 11
HPV 16
HPV 18
HPV 31
HPV 33
HPV 58
HPV 66
Pan-HPV nanostructure 1
% signal
Matched
Mismatched
Mismatched region
Pan-HPV nanostructure 2
0
20
100
40
60
80
120
0
20
100
40
60
80
120
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
0.5
1
Duplex
Overhang
Positive
HPV 06
HPV 16
HPV 18
HPV 31
HPV 33
HPV 58
Positive
HPV 06
HPV 16
HPV 18
HPV 31
HPV 33
HPV 58
Fig. 3 Programmability of enVision. a Schematic of the programmable recognition nanostructure. The hybrid structure consists of a conserved sequence
region, that binds to inactivate DNA polymerase (pol), and a variable region (duplex and overhang segments) that can be made complementary to target
DNA. Not drawn to scale. b Effects of target mismatches in the variable region. Synthetic DNA targets, designed to have varying numbers of mismatches
against the variable region, were incubated with the recognition nanostructure. All signals were normalized against that of the complementary DNA target
(0 mismatch). Mismatches against the duplex region produced significantly lower signals (*P < 0.05, ** P < 0.005, ***P < 0.0005, n.s. not significant,
Student’s t test). c Pan-HPV recognition. Two pan-HPV recognition nanostructures were developed according to the HPV consensus genome, to harbor
different numbers of mismatches against DNA targets obtained from six HPV subtypes. All mismatches were mapped to the duplex and overhang regions.
Nanostructure 1, that accommodated more mismatches in the overhang region, demonstrated better pan-recognition capability. All signals were
normalized against that of the complementary DNA target (positive). d Comparison of enVision and qPCR measurements for specific HPV subtyping. At a
cutoff for 100% sensitivity, enVision had 100% specificity (56/56) while SYBR Green-based qPCR had 92.9% specificity (52/56). Specific nanostructures
were designed according to a highly variable region of the HPV genome with sequence variations contained within the sensitive duplex region. DNA targets
from different HPV subtypes were measured via color intensity through the enVision smartphone platform (left) and cycle counts through the SYBR-Green
qPCR system (right). All signals were acquired relative to appropriate controls (i.e., water as a no-template control). Signals from respective detection
systems were globally presented in the form of heat maps for comparisons of assay performance. All measurements were performed in triplicate, and the
data are displayed as mean ± s.d. in b and c
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05733-0
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3238 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05733-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
5
 different combinations of DNA targets (Supplementary Fig. 10;
Supplementary Table 5).
By mixing three types of locus-specific nanostructures (i.e., E1,
L1, and L2 loci) in a single reaction, we thus created the OR logic
gate configuration to enhance detection coverage for each HPV
subtype (e.g., HPV 16 and HPV 18). We tested this high-
coverage, multi-loci HPV detection directly with genomic DNA
of cervical cancer cell lines, which were independently validated
with PCR analysis (Supplementary Fig. 11). Our data showed that
the multiplexed enVision assay could further enhance the
detection signal, as compared to individualized detection with
the E1, L1, and L2 recognition probes, respectively (Fig. 4b).
Importantly,
while
true-positives
showed
significant
signal
enhancement, negative samples demonstrated minimal back-
ground signal change with this multiplexed approach (Supple-
mentary Fig. 12).
Using the multiplexed enVision assays, we next performed HPV
profiling in human cervical cancer cell lines (Fig. 4c). All
experiments were performed at room temperature, directly from
cellular genomic DNA, without any pre-amplification. The multi-
plexed enVision analysis not only improved the signal enhancement,
but also expanded the detection coverage to accurately identify the
cells’ infection status and subtypes, as compared to any single locus
detection (Supplementary Fig. 12). Our resultant measurements
correlated well with published literature studies26–28: CaSki and
SiHa cells showed significant signals for HPV 16 only, while HeLa
and PZ-HPV-7 showed positive signals for HPV 18 only.
We further benchmarked the enVision performance against
another isothermal detection technique, namely LAMP, for HPV
profiling of human cancer cell lines. On the same divergent
regions of the HPV genome (Fig. 4a), we applied published
criteria29,30 to design LAMP primer sets against E1, L1 and L2
loci, respectively, for each HPV subtype (see Methods for details).
All LAMP sequence information can be found in Supplementary
Table 6. In comparison to LAMP’s limited primer options, the
enVision technology not only generated significantly more probe
choices but also provided comprehensive coverage across all
subtypes and loci tested (Supplementary Fig. 13a). We further
compared the performance of the enVision technology against
top-ranked LAMP primer sets, using genomic DNA isolated from
cell lines of known infections (Supplementary Fig. 13b). Only the
enVision technology showed accurate HPV subtyping (100%
specificity and 83.3% sensitivity) while LAMP produced sig-
nificant false positives (75.0% specificity and 50.0% sensitivity)
(e.g., CaSki cells, HPV 18; HeLa cells, HPV 16).
HPV profiling of clinical samples. To test the clinical utility of
the enVision platform in detecting and subtyping HPV infections,
we conducted a feasibility study. We aimed at addressing two
questions: (1) how accurate is the enVision platform in detecting
HPV infections, and (2) can improved assay coverage identify
previously undetectable infections.
Using clinical endocervical brush samples, we performed the
enVision assays to determine the HPV infection status. We
acquired patient samples (n = 35) and used the enVision
platform to measure HPV 16 and HPV 18 L1 loci in patient
genome (Fig. 5a), so as to compare directly against conventional
gold standard (i.e., Cobas HPV which tests only for the L1 locus
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
Present
Absent
Cell lines
C33a
PZ-HPV-7
HeLa
SiHa
CaSki
HPV 06
HPV 11
HPV 16
HPV 18
HPV 31
HPV 33
HPV 58
HPV 66
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
–0.1
Signal (norm.)
a
c
HPV
E6
E7
E1
E2
E4
E5
L2
L1
E1 probe
L2 probe
L1 probe
b
E1
L1
L2
Combined
Signal (%)
E1
L1
L2
Combined
0
50
100
n.d.
*
*
*
n.s. *
*
HPV 16
HPV 18
Fig. 4 Multiplexed enVision for multi-loci coverage. a New probe loci in HPV genome map. The HPV genome is made up of seven early expressed (E)
genes and two capsid protein (L) genes. New nanostructure recognition probes were designed for each HPV subtype to identify the E1, L1, and L2 loci,
respectively. b Multiplexed enVision assays for high-coverage, multi-loci detection. Genomic DNA obtained from CaSki cells (left, HPV 16-positive) and
HeLa cells (right, HPV 18-positive) were incubated directly with individual recognition probes (E1, L1, and L2, respectively) or a pool of three probes
(combined) to determine the cellular HPV infection status. The combined probes showed significantly higher signals as compared to any of the
individualized assays (*P < 0.0005, n.s. not significant, Student’s t test; n.d. not detected). All signals were normalized as a percentage to their respective
combined signals. c HPV subtyping in cell lines. Genomic DNA from cell lines were profiled directly using the multiplexed enVision assays for different HPV
subtypes. The measurements correlated well with the known HPV infections of the cell lines, as reported by previous literatures (red: present, gray:
absent). All measurements were performed in triplicate, and the data are displayed as mean ± s.d
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05733-0
6
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3238 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05733-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 through qPCR analysis13). The enVision platform achieved a high
detection accuracy with the clinical reports (HPV 16, AUC =
0.965; HPV 18, AUC = 0.944) (Fig. 5b). The developed HPV 16
assay showed 92.9% sensitivity (13/14) and 90.5% specificity (19/
21) and the HPV 18 assay showed 83.3% sensitivity (5/6) and
100% specificity (29/29), as measured by Youden’s index.
We also used the high-coverage multi-loci enVision assays to
measure, in addition to the L1 locus, L2 and E1 locus integrations
in these clinical samples (Supplementary Fig. 14). In the HPV 16
L1-positive clinical samples, we continued to observe enhanced
visual signals for the other detection loci. Interestingly, in a subset
of the L1-negative samples, the high-coverage enVision system
detected specific L2 and/or E1 locus integrations (Fig. 5c). We
further validated this finding by designing an independent
Taqman fluorescence analysis (Supplementary Table 4), which
showed a high concordance with the enVision results in all tested
clinical specimens (Supplementary Fig. 15). Our data thus
indicated that the multiplexed enVision platform could improve
the detection
coverage
to identify
previously
undetectable
infections.
Discussion
By integrating a series of enzyme-assisted DNA nanostructures,
the enVision platform enables sensitive and versatile detection of
diverse pathogen nucleic acids by the naked eye. In comparison to
nucleic acid amplification techniques, the enVision detects via
direct
target
hybridization
and
independent
visual
signal
enhancement. The technology is thus well-suited for clinical
applications: (1) the cascading signal enhancement produces a
rapid and sensitive color readout for the naked eye upon target
hybridization (without needing for target amplification). The
entire assay can thus be performed at room temperature and
readily quantified with smartphones; (2) the DNA nanostructures
effectively decouple recognition and signaling functionalities to
enable highly programmable detection and logic computation;
and (3) the microfluidic integration complements the assay
modularity and speeds up the reactions. In comparison to clinical
gold standard and other isothermal detection technologies, the
enVision platform not only demonstrated superior sensitivity and
specificity, but also afforded versatile capabilities (e.g., direct RNA
detection, logic computation and assay modularity) with minimal
equipment requirement (Supplementary Table 7).
The
enVision
advantages
are
multifold.
First,
sensing
mechanism. The technology activates immediately upon target
hybridization to transduce significant signal enhancement. By
incorporating a dual-enzyme signaling cascade (i.e., DNA poly-
merase and horseradish peroxidase HRP), enVision benefits from
the activities of both enzymes and ameliorates each enzyme’s
individual shortcomings for visual detection of diverse targets.
For example, in comparison to traditional HRP enhancement,
which is commonly used in enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assays (ELISA) for protein detection, the enVision’s dual signal-
ing cascade not only expands the target options to enable direct
and visual detection of DNA and RNA targets, but also sig-
nificantly improves the visual detection sensitivity through
additional polymerase activity (>1000-fold better than sole HRP
enhancement). In comparison to nucleic acid target amplification
techniques, the enVision detects by direct nucleic acid hybridi-
zation to trigger an exponential visual signal enhancement. The
visual enhancement is universal (i.e., target-independent); this
improves the assay specificity by reducing target-dependent false
positives,
as
commonly
seen
in
polymerase-based
target
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
1
2
0
1
2
0
0.5
1
a
b
Sensitivity (%)
c
Patient no.
L2
E1 
L1
Signal (norm.)
Patient no. (n = 35)
HPV 18
HPV 16
Signal (norm.)
HPV 16 AUC = 0.965
HPV 18 AUC = 0.944
0
0
50
50
100
100
100 – Specificity (%)
L1-positive patients
L1-negative patients
Fig. 5 Molecular profiling of patient samples. a HPV 16 and HPV 18 signals were measured from clinical endocervical brush samples (n = 35). The L1-
specific signals are shown for comparison with the clinical gold standard. See Supplementary Fig. 14 for multi-loci measurements on all clinical specimens.
b Receiver operator characteristic (ROC) curves of the HPV 16 and HPV 18 L1 locus assays were used to determine the detection accuracies. HPV 16 assay
showed 92.9% sensitivity (13/14) and 90.5% specificity (19/21) and HPV 18 assay showed 83.3% sensitivity (5/6) and 100% specificity (29/29) at the
Youden’s index cutoff. c Locus-specific HPV 16 enVision assays (L1, L2, and E1 locus assays) were performed in all patients. Representative examples from
L1-positive (left) and L1-negative (right) patients are shown. Note that in the subset of L1-negative patients, the inclusion of L2 and E1 locus assays could
improve the detection coverage to identify previously undetectable infections. This was further validated through independent Taqman fluorescence
analysis, which showed a high concordance with the enVision results in all tested clinical specimens (see Supplementary Fig. 15). All measurements were
performed in triplicate, and the data are displayed as mean ± s.d. AUC, area under the curve
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05733-0
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3238 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05733-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
7
 amplification techniques. Due to this sensing mechanism, the
technology could be applied to detect different types of nucleic
acids accurately and directly (e.g., DNA and RNA, no need for
cDNA conversion), without requiring extensive equipment, to
produce a rapid and sensitive color readout that is visible to the
naked eye and quantifiable by smartphones.
Second, assay programmability. By decoupling recognition
from signaling, the technology enables modular detection and
versatile integration. New assays could be readily designed by
modifying a single sequence region in the highly programmable
recognition element alone and configured to perform various
molecular computations. The technology can thus produce more
probe choices, demonstrate more comprehensive target sequence
coverage and achieve more specific and accurate detection. As the
enVision recognition element consists of regular DNA strands
(no chemical modifications on the DNA oligonucleotides), it is
inexpensive to synthesize and develop new assays. The universal
signaling element could be used for all visual measurements.
When implemented on a configurable microfluidic platform, the
enVision technology thus shows a high detection sensitivity and
versatility, to enable visual profiling of diverse pathogen nucleic
acids from infected cells at room temperature. Through multi-loci
multiplexing in a single reaction, we further developed a high-
coverage enVision system to interrogate various virus–host gen-
ome integration loci. Using HPV as a clinical model, we
demonstrate the technology’s clinical utility for molecular-typing
of infections in patient endocervical samples, by improving inter-
subtype
differentiation
as
well
as
intra-subtype
detection
coverage.
The scientific and clinical applications of the developed tech-
nology are potentially broad. The recognition nanostructure can
be easily adapted, at a very low cost, to detect different target
sequences with similar efficiencies (i.e., only a single probe
sequence composed of regular nucleotides needs to be adapted,
instead of requiring new sets of conventional primers or dedi-
cated chemically modified reporters). The signaling nanostructure
is universal and can be used for all target sequences. Such
modularity not only eases new assay development, but also
enables
programmable
configuration to
perform
molecular
computations. We thus anticipate that the technology will be
particularly useful for investigating rapid viral mutations that
escape immune detection (i.e., RNA viruses)31 as well as multiple
virus–host genome integrations32. Clinically, the enVision tech-
nology could be deployed to provide new visual assays for
emerging infectious diseases (e.g., Zika and Ebola)9 or enable easy
detection of various high-prevalence infections (e.g., hepatitis and
dengue) at the patient level. Its visual detection and low equip-
ment requirement make the technology well-suited for point-of-
care detection workflow in community clinics and resource-
limited settings.
We further anticipate that several technical modifications could
be made to enhance the current technology. First, the present
fluidics (i.e., four assay cassettes) could be readily revised to
accommodate more and smaller chambers. As the current nucleic
acid processing is performed off-chip, future work could integrate
additional sample preparation modules to enable nucleic acid
extraction and treatment, thereby enhancing the platform’s
clinical utility23. Such a new design would enable practical, array-
type visual detection of multiple pathogen nucleic acids. Second,
in this current detection platform, we used smartphones and a
corrected lighting system to image and analyze the visual read-
outs. Since smartphones are becoming ubiquitous and possess
more analytical capabilities8,33,34, we foresee that further image
correction and analysis algorithms could be implemented directly
in smartphones to automatically correct for lighting differences
and quantify color intensities for real-world applications. Finally,
large cohort studies on the detection of pathogen nucleic acids
across a spectrum of diseases (e.g., other infections, cancers,
inflammatory disorders) using various biological specimens (e.g.,
tissue, blood, urine) could be performed to validate the clinical
utility of the enVision technology for diverse visual detection.
Methods
Recognition nanostructure characterization. All sequences can be found in
the Supplementary Tables and were purchased from Integrated DNA Technologies
(IDT). To prepare the recognition nanostructure, we mixed an equal molar ratio of
DNA aptamer and inverter oligonucleotide in a buffer of 50 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM
MgCl2, and 50 mM Tris–HCl buffer (pH 8.5). The mixture was incubated at 95 °C
for 5 min and slowly cooled at 0.1 °C/s until the reaction reached 25 °C, before the
addition of Taq DNA polymerase (GoTaq, Promega) to form the hybrid complex.
To characterize the assembly and activity of the recognition nanostructure in the
presence of DNA targets, varying concentrations of target oligonucleotides were
added to this mixture. Real-time association and dissociation kinetics of the
complex were measured by bio-layer interferometry (Pall Fortebio). Briefly, pre-
assembled biotin-aptamer was immobilized onto streptavidin-functionalized
interferometry sensor. After a brief washing step, Taq polymerase was added; this
was followed by an incubation with target oligonucleotides. All binding data
(changes in optical thickness of the biolayer) were measured as wavelength shifts,
in a continuous manner. We further measured the polymerase activity through 5′
exonuclease degradation of Taqman probes (Applied Biosystems). Fluorescence
readings were taken every 2 min, in the presence of the Taqman probe, and nor-
malized as described (see Data normalization below) to compare the resultant
polymerase activity.
Signaling nanostructure characterization. Stability of the signaling nanos-
tructure, as compared to that of a similarly sized linear template, was determined in
two different ways. First, we annealed both reactions (i.e., nanostructure and linear
template) at room temperature, and analyzed the primed vs. unprimed fractions in
each reaction through gel electrophoresis. Second, a melting curve analysis was
performed by mixing the oligonucleotides with 10,000× diluted SYBR Green I dye
(Invitrogen), heating the reaction to 90 °C, fast cooling to 45 °C at 1.6 °C/s, and
slow heating to 90 °C at 0.075 °C/s while visualizing the intercalated fluorescence
intensity (Applied Biosystems). We further determined the ability of the signaling
nanostructure to improve polymerase activity through Taqman analysis. The
polymerase activity was determined at different nucleotide positions away from the
starting primed sites, through 5′ exonuclease degradation of differentially placed
Taqman probes (Applied Biosystems).
enVision device fabrication. A prototype enVision device comprising 4 assay
cassettes and a common cartridge was fabricated from polydimethylsiloxane
(PDMS, Dow Corning) and poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) respectively. Each
assay cassette was fabricated by plasma bonding two layers of PDMS pieces
together (50 mTorr, 50 W, 1 min). The 200 μm-thick cast molds were prepared via
conventional photolithography using SU-8 photoresist and silicon wafers. Reaction
chambers and microchannels were replicated by pouring uncured PDMS (10:1
elastomer base to curing agent ratio) onto the cast molds. After polymer curing (75
°C for 30 min), the two PDMS pieces were assembled together. The common
cartridge was fabricated by CO2 laser ablation (Universal Laser Systems). Four
polycarbonate membranes with pore size of 0.2 μm (Avanti Polar Lipids) were
embedded between the two PMMA layers thermally bonded together (125 °C for
30 min). A NanoPort assembly (Upchurch Scientific) was adhered to the outlet on
the common cartridge to allow for fluidic connection.
Signaling nanostructure immobilization. We used amine-modified oligonucleo-
tides (IDT) for functionalization. To immobilize the oligonucleotides onto the
microfluidic device, we used polystyrene beads to increase the surface area for
anchoring the oligonucleotides. Approximately 3 μm carboxylic acid-modified
polystyrene beads (Spherotech) were washed in PBS buffer before being resus-
pended in MES buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The beads were activated with
EDC/sulfo-NHS (Pierce Biotechnology) for 15 min at room temperature, and
incubated with excess 5′ amine-modified oligonucleotides in PBS buffer at room
temperature for 2 h. The beads were then washed through centrifugation and
resuspended in 10 mM Tris-EDTA buffer.
Device preparation. To prepare the device for operation, we lyophilized the bead-
immobilized signaling nanostructures as well as the modified dNTP reaction
mixture onto the common cartridge. All devices were flushed with ethanol and PBS
buffer before lyophilization. Briefly, a 4 mM stock dNTP reaction mixture was
prepared by mixing dATP, dGTP, dTTP, and 25% dCTP: 75% biotin-16-ami-
noallyl-2′-dCTP (Trilink Biotechnologies). In total 50 µg of DNA-functionalized
polystyrene beads (3 μm, prepared as above) were introduced in 20 µl of dNTP
mixture onto the device polycarbonate membranes, and allowed to dry under
vacuum for 30 min (Labconco FreeZone).
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05733-0
8
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3238 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05733-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 Operation of enVision platform. Operation steps are illustrated in Supplementary
Fig. 2. Nucleic acid samples were added to the inlets of individual assay cassettes,
each preloaded with assembled recognition nanostructures, in a buffer containing
50 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, and 50 mM Tris–HCl at pH 8.5. The assay cassettes
were then mounted onto the common signaling cartridge, prepared as described
above. For the purpose of assay optimization, we used a syringe pump (Harvard
Instruments) to exert a negative pressure at the common cartridge outlet to actuate
parallel fluidic movement in all four assay cassettes. Each reaction mix would pass
through a serpentine channel for effective mixing and polymerase activation (10 µl/
min, 1 min), before entering into a reaction chamber. The solution was then
incubated for 20 min in the presence of DNA-functionalized polystyrene beads and
dNTP reaction mixture. The beads were flushed in excess PBS buffer (10 µl/min, 3
min), before incubation with streptavidin-HRP (BD Biosciences, 3 min) and 3,3′-
diaminobenzidine substate (DAB, Thermo Fisher Scientific, 3 min).
As the crucial steps in the enVision workflow were largely incubation and
washing, where precise flow rates become unnecessary, we could thus use a
withdrawal septum (Thermo Fisher) to actuate fluid movement through negative
pressure. All reactions were completed at room temperature, and included
appropriate negative controls. Visual readouts of samples and controls were imaged
directly using a mobile smartphone (Samsung). Color images were converted to
greyscale, and the average (mean) black pixel intensity of each membrane area was
used for numerical quantification of the signal.
Data normalization.
~
Iðtarget; tiÞ ¼ Iðtarget; tiÞ � Iðtarget; t0Þ
Iðcontrol; tiÞ � Iðcontrol; t0Þ � 1
where e
Iðtarget; tiÞ = normalized signal intensity for target at a given time point (ti);
I (target or control, ti) = raw signal intensity for target or control at a given time
point (ti); I (target or control, to) = raw signal intensity for target or control at time
0 (to) We calculated the signal intensity difference (visual color or fluorescence) of a
sample as the difference in intensity taken at a given time point (ti) and its initial
intensity (to). This value was then normalized to that of the control sample (no-
target control) that was run concurrently. ~
Iðcontrol; tiÞ was scaled to 0 for data
representation.
Sequence design. HPV genome sequences were obtained from GenBank through
the following reference numbers (HPV 6: AF092932.1, HPV 11: FR872717.1, HPV
16: K02718.1, HPV 18: AY262282.1, HPV 31: J04353.1, HPV 33: M12732.1, HPV
58: D90400.1, HPV 66: U31794.1). Multiple sequence alignment was performed
using Clustal Omega35. From the resulting sequence alignment, we defined highly
conserved and divergent sequences to design the pan-recognition and subtype-
specific recognition nanostructures, respectively. Briefly, we identified highly
conserved regions (20 bp, <3 non-identical base pairs) which were flanked
immediately upstream or downstream by less conserved regions (20 bp, <6 non-
identical base pairs). We selected the most conserved motifs to form the recog-
nition domain of our pan-HPV recognition nanostructures. To design subtype-
specific recognition nanostructures, we located highly divergent regions (40 bp, <12
identical base pairs). We used a similar approach to define divergent regions in the
L1, L2, and E1 genes of the HPV genome, and designed locus-specific recognition
nanostructures for each HPV subtype to improve the detection coverage. All
sequences designed can be found in Supplementary Tables.
Mismatch characterization. To evaluate the mismatch sensitivity of the duplex
and overhang region in the recognition nanostructure, we randomly mutated base
pairs at every two-nucleotide interval in the complementary DNA targets and used
the enVision platform to measure the resultant signal changes. To determine the
pan-HPV detection capabilities of the recognition nanostructures, we used
sequences of six HPV subtypes (HPV 6, 16, 18, 31, 33, and 58) as well as a fully
complementary sequence (positive control) as the target sequences. We mapped
the mismatched nucleotides to the duplex and overhang regions respectively and
measured the resulted signal changes.
Asymmetric amplification. In the case of minuscule amounts of samples, we
prepared single-stranded DNA through a nested asymmetric PCR amplification.
The amplification could be accomplished in <1 h. For the exponential amplifica-
tion, we used 0.8 µM of forward and reverse primers (IDT), and 5 units of GoTaq
DNA polymerase (Promega) in 1× GoTaq buffer containing 2.5 mM dNTPs. This
was followed by a linear asymmetric PCR amplification, where we used excess
reverse primer only, in the presence of GoTaq DNA polymerase (Promega) in 1×
GoTaq buffer containing 2.5 mM dNTPs. The following thermocycling conditions
were used for the entire processing: 95 °C for 5 min, 35 cycles of 95 °C for 30 s and
52 °C for 60 s, and a final 4 °C holding step. The PCR solution was used directly for
all subsequent measurements.
Isothermal asymmetric amplification. To achieve isothermal asymmetric
amplification, we adopted nucleic acid sequence based amplification (NASBA). The
entire process could be completed in <1 h. We used 4 µM of each of the forward
and reverse primers (IDT), 80 units of T7 RNA polymerase, 1 unit of RNase H, 80
units of GoScript Reverse Transcriptase, and 1 unit of RNase Inhibitor (Promega)
in 1× transcription optimized buffer containing 2.5 mM dNTPs, 5 mM NTPs, 6
mM MgCl2, 5 mM DTT, and 15% DMSO. Upon sample addition, the mixture
was maintained at 37 °C for 45 min, before being heated to 75 °C to halt the
reaction.
SYBR qPCR comparison. We used the HPV subtype-specific sequences to perform
this comparison. Subtype-specific detection of synthetic oligonucleotides was car-
ried out on the enVision platform as described above. For qPCR experiments
(Applied Biosystems), we designed specific PCR primer pairs to span the identical
target sequences for each HPV subtype. Briefly, 100 fmol of synthetic template was
mixed with 5 units of GoTaq DNA polymerase (Promega) in 1× GoTaq buffer
containing 2.5 mM dNTPs and 0.8 µM forward and reverse primers, using the
following thermal cycling protocol: 50 °C for 2 min, 95 °C for 10 min, 40 cycles of
95 °C for 15 s and 48 °C for 1 min. All qPCR analyses were followed by a melting
curve step ramping from 50 to 95 °C at a ramp rate of 0.075 °C/s to determine any
nonspecific amplification. A no-template control (water) was included for every
primer assay to ensure that no primer dimers were formed in the qPCR reaction.
We determined the qPCR threshold cycle (Ct) signal for each primer pair/template
combination. The signal produced by each qPCR primer assay was normalized
across all targets tested for the assay to determine the assay specificity.
Direct RNA detection. We prepared RNA targets via T7 RNA Polymerase (New
England Biolabs). Briefly, annealed DNA template with T7 promoter primer
(Supplemental Table 3) (1 pmol) was incubated with T7 RNA Polymerase in 1×
buffer at 37 °C for 2 h, before the addition of 2 units of RNase-Free DNase I
(Promega) and incubation at 41 °C for 20 min. The produced RNA was pre-
cipitated in 0.3 M sodium acetate. This mixture was treated with 1 volume of
isopropanol and incubated at 4 °C for 1 h, before being centrifuged (12,000 × g at 4
°C for 30 min). The pellet was washed twice in chilled ethanol (75%), centrifuged as
before, and air-dried at room temperature. When dissolved in nuclease-free water,
the final RNA concentration was determined through absorbance measurements
(Nanodrop, Fisher Scientific). For direct RNA detection, we added the prepared
RNA targets, in the presence of 1 unit of SUPERase RNase Inhibitor (Thermo
Fisher), to the enVision system. All detection and data normalization were per-
formed as described above.
Constructing enVision logic gates. All logic gate configurations and components
were summarized in Supplementary Fig. 10 and Supplementary Table 5, respec-
tively. Briefly, we used pre-assembled recognition nanostructures to demonstrate
the AND, OR, NOT, NAND, and NOR functions. In constructing the different
gates, we varied the combinations of recognition nanostructures used as well as the
ratio of components in each hybrid nanostructure (i.e., DNA aptamer: DNA
inverter: Taq polymerase) to program distinct computational functions. Specifi-
cally, to prepare the AND gate, two recognition nanostructures were used and each
had its components mixed at the ratio (1: 1: 0.5); the OR gate—two structures (1: 1:
1); the NOT gate—one structure (1: 0: 1); the NAND gate—two structures (1: 0: 1);
and NOR gate—two structures (1: 0: 0.5). All recognition nanostructures were pre-
assembled, as described previously. The universal signaling nanostructure was used
commonly in all logic gates. We tested the gate configurations with different
combinations of DNA targets, as described in the truth tables, and compared the
enVision signals with the expected outputs. Signals were normalized as described
above. Normalized signals above the detection threshold (i.e., >3× s.d. of the
background signal) were considered as true signals; otherwise a false signal was
called.
Cell culture and DNA extraction. All human cell lines were obtained from
American Type Culture Collection; CaSki (ATCC CRL-1550), SiHa (ATCC HTB-
35), HeLa (ATCC CCL-2), PZ-HPV-7 (ATCC CRL2221). CaSki cells were grown
in RMPI-1640. SiHa, HeLa, and C33-a in Eagle’s Minimal Essential Medium,
supplemented with 10% FBS and penicillin-streptomycin (Corning). PZ-HPV-7 in
Keratinocyte Serum Free Medium, supplemented with bovine pituitary extract and
human recombinant epidermal growth factor (ATCC). All cell lines were tested
and free of mycoplasma contamination (MycoAlert Mycoplasma Detection Kit,
Lonza). Genomic DNA was extracted from 80 to 90% confluent cell culture using
DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kit (Qiagen) following the manufacturer’s recommended
protocol.
Comparison with LAMP. On the same divergent regions of the HPV genome,
identified in the section of ‘sequence design’, we used the automated online LAMP
primer design server (PrimerExplorer.jp) with the default settings29 to identify
possible LAMP amplification primers. We compared the number of LAMP primer
sets, as returned by the software, to the number of enVision recognition nanos-
tructures that could be designed in the same region. For subsequent functionality
test, we further compared the performance of the top-ranked LAMP primer sets
with the enVision system. For each LAMP amplification, we used 0.2 µM of each
primer in the primer set and 100 ng of purified genomic DNA extracted from cell
lines of known HPV infections. This mixture was incubated with 8 units of Bst 2.0
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05733-0
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3238 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05733-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
9
 DNA polymerase (New England Biolabs) in 1× isothermal amplification buffer II,
6 mM MgSO4, 2.5 mM dNTPs, at 70 °C for 1 h. The amplification product was
purified via PCR cleanup spin columns (New England Biolabs) and quantified
through gel electrophoresis.
Clinical sample processing. The study was approved by the NUH and NUS
Institutional Review Board (2016/01201). Endocervcial brush samples, fixed in BD
SurePathTM liquid-based Pap test solution, were collected from 35 individuals. We
used the QIAamp DNA FFPE Tissue Kit (Qiagen) with a modified protocol to
extract DNA from these clinical samples. Briefly, the samples were mixed with 2.5
ml sterile PBS buffer, 2.5 ml buffer ATL, and 80 µl Proteinase K to cover the
brushes, and incubated at 56 °C. Following this incubation, the liquid was collected
and incubated at 90 °C for 1 h. 3.5 ml buffer AL and 3.5 ml 100% ethanol was
added to the sample. This mixture was passed through the extraction column, and
washed sequentially with 500 µl of buffer AW1 and buffer AW2. The column was
finally dried through centrifugation and the DNA sample was eluted in 50 µl of
buffer ATE. The extracted genomic DNA was used directly in the assay, as
described in “operation of enVision platform” or processed as described in
“asymmetric amplification”, only in cases of residual leftover clinical samples. For
all clinical samples, we determined the quality of the extracted DNA through
Taqman PCR analysis of GAPDH housekeeping gene (Applied Biosystems) and all
samples passed the quality check. All measurements on clinical samples were
performed in an anonymized and blinded fashion and finalized before comparison
with clinical reports (i.e., Cobas HPV).
Gel electrophoresis. DNA samples were diluted with appropriate amounts of 6×
loading dye (Thermo Fisher) and run on an 8% polyacrylamide gel with TAE
buffer (Thermo Scientific) at 100 V. The gel was stained with SYBR Green I at
10,000× dilution in TAE buffer for 5 min before being visualized in a gel imager
(Bio-Rad). Intensity and area (volume) of the resulting bands were calculated using
ImageLab’s in-built algorithms (Bio-Rad).
Statistical analysis. All measurements were performed in triplicates, and the data
displayed as mean ± standard deviation. All significance tests were performed via a
two-tailed Student’s t test. For inter-sample comparisons, multiple pairs of samples
were each tested, and the resulting P values were adjusted for multiple hypothesis
testing using Bonferroni correction. Values that had an adjusted P < 0.05 were
determined as significant. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves for the
clinical study were generated from patient profiling data and constructed by
plotting sensitivity versus (1–specificity), and the values of area under the curve
(AUC) were computed using the trapezoidal rule. We used the clinical reports (i.e.,
Cobas HPV) as classifiers (true positives and true negatives). The optimal threshold
for each marker was established from the point closest to the top-left part (perfect
sensitivity or specificity) of the corresponding ROC curve. Detection sensitivity,
specificity and accuracy were calculated using standard formulas. Statistical ana-
lysis was performed using the R-package (version 3.4.2).
Data availability. Data supporting the findings of this study are available from the
corresponding author on reasonable request.
Received: 10 March 2018 Accepted: 19 July 2018
References
1.
Niemz, A., Ferguson, T. M. & Boyle, D. S. Point-of-care nucleic acid testing for
infectious diseases. Trends Biotechnol. 29, 240–250 (2011).
2.
Nong, R. Y., Gu, J., Darmanis, S., Kamali-Moghaddam, M. & Landegren, U.
DNA-assisted protein detection technologies. Expert. Rev. Proteom. 9, 21–32
(2012).
3.
Zumla, A. et al. Rapid point of care diagnostic tests for viral and bacterial
respiratory tract infections–needs, advances, and future prospects. Lancet
Infect. Dis. 14, 1123–1135 (2014).
4.
Crosbie, E. J., Einstein, M. H., Franceschi, S. & Kitchener, H. C. Human
papillomavirus and cervical cancer. Lancet 382, 889–899 (2013).
5.
Bouvard, V. et al. A review of human carcinogens–Part B: biological agents.
Lancet Oncol. 10, 321–322 (2009).
6.
Bodily, J. & Laimins, L. A. Persistence of human papillomavirus infection: keys
to malignant progression. Trends Microbiol. 19, 33–39 (2011).
7.
Schiffman, M. et al. Carcinogenic human papillomavirus infection. Nat. Rev.
Dis. Prim. 2, 16086 (2016).
8.
Laksanasopin, T. et al. A smartphone dongle for diagnosis of infectious
diseases at the point of care. Sci. Transl. Med 7, 273re1 (2015).
9.
Pardee, K. et al. Rapid, low-cost detection of Zika virus using programmable
biomolecular components. Cell 165, 1255–1266 (2016).
10. Bosch, I. et al. Rapid antigen tests for dengue virus serotypes and Zika virus in
patient serum. Sci. Transl. Med. 9, 1589 (2017).
11. Yeh, E. C. et al. Self-powered integrated microfluidic point-of-care low-cost
enabling (SIMPLE) chip. Sci. Adv. 3, e1501645 (2017).
12. Schiffman, M. et al. Human papillomavirus testing in the prevention of
cervical cancer. J. Natl Cancer Inst. 103, 368–383 (2011).
13. Rao, A. et al. Development and characterization of the cobas human
papillomavirus test. J. Clin. Microbiol. 51, 1478–1484 (2013).
14. Cui, M. et al. Clinical performance of Roche Cobas 4800 HPV Test. J. Clin.
Microbiol. 52, 2210–2211 (2014).
15. Zhao, Y., Chen, F., Li, Q., Wang, L. & Fan, C. Isothermal amplification of
nucleic acids. Chem. Rev. 115, 12491–12545 (2015).
16. Gardner, S. N., Kuczmarski, T. A., Vitalis, E. A. & Slezak, T. R. Limitations of
TaqMan PCR for detecting divergent viral pathogens illustrated by hepatitis
A, B, C, and E viruses and human immunodeficiency virus. J. Clin. Microbiol.
41, 2417–2427 (2003).
17. Juskowiak, B. Nucleic acid-based fluorescent probes and their analytical
potential. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 399, 3157–3176 (2011).
18. Lee, H. et al. Molecularly self-assembled nucleic acid nanoparticles for
targeted in vivo siRNA delivery. Nat. Nanotechnol. 7, 389–393 (2012).
19. Wang, L., Meng, Z., Martina, F., Shao, H. & Shao, F. Fabrication of circular
assemblies with DNA tetrahedrons: from static structures to a dynamic rotary
motor. Nucleic Acids Res. 45, 12090–12099 (2017).
20. Li, J., Green, A. A., Yan, H. & Fan, C. Engineering nucleic acid structures for
programmable molecular circuitry and intracellular biocomputation. Nat.
Chem. 9, 1056–1067 (2017).
21. Dang, C. & Jayasena, S. D. Oligonucleotide inhibitors of Taq DNA polymerase
facilitate detection of low copy number targets by PCR. J. Mol. Biol. 264,
268–278 (1996).
22. Park, K. S. et al. Rapid identification of health care-associated infections with
an integrated fluorescence anisotropy system. Sci. Adv. 2, e1600300 (2016).
23. Shao, H. et al. Chip-based analysis of exosomal mRNA mediating drug
resistance in glioblastoma. Nat. Commun. 6, 6999 (2015).
24. Williams, V. M., Filippova, M., Soto, U. & Duerksen-Hughes, P. J. HPV-DNA
integration and carcinogenesis: putative roles for inflammation and oxidative
stress. Future Virol. 6, 45–57 (2011).
25. McBride, A. A. & Warburton, A. The role of integration in oncogenic
progression of HPV-associated cancers. PLoS. Pathog. 13, e1006211 (2017).
26. Adey, A. et al. The haplotype-resolved genome and epigenome of the
aneuploid HeLa cancer cell line. Nature 500, 207–211 (2013).
27. Meissner, J. D. Nucleotide sequences and further characterization of human
papillomavirus DNA present in the CaSki, SiHa and HeLa cervical carcinoma
cell lines. J. Gen. Virol. 80, 1725–1733 (1999).
28. Yee, C., Krishnan-Hewlett, I., Baker, C. C., Schlegel, R. & Howley, P. M.
Presence and expression of human papillomavirus sequences in human
cervical carcinoma cell lines. Am. J. Pathol. 119, 361–366 (1985).
29. Tomita, N., Mori, Y., Kanda, H. & Notomi, T. Loop-mediated isothermal
amplification (LAMP) of gene sequences and simple visual detection of
products. Nat. Protoc. 3, 877–882 (2008).
30. Song, J. et al. Instrument-free point-of-care molecular detection of Zika virus.
Anal. Chem. 88, 7289–7294 (2016).
31. Schotte, L. et al. Characterization of poliovirus neutralization escape mutants
of single-domain antibody fragments (VHHs). Antimicrob. Agents Chemother.
59, 4695–4706 (2015).
32. Cheung, J. L., Lo, K. W., Cheung, T. H., Tang, J. W. & Chan, P. K. Viral load,
E2 gene disruption status, and lineage of human papillomavirus type 16
infection in cervical neoplasia. J. Infect. Dis. 194, 1706–1712 (2006).
33. Nemiroski, A. et al. Universal mobile electrochemical detector designed for
use in resource-limited applications. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 111,
11984–11989 (2014).
34. Paterson, A. S. et al. A low-cost smartphone-based platform for highly
sensitive point-of-care testing with persistent luminescent phosphors. Lab
Chip 17, 1051–1059 (2017).
35. Sievers, F. et al. Fast, scalable generation of high-quality protein multiple
sequence alignments using Clustal Omega. Mol. Syst. Biol. 7, 539 (2011).
Acknowledgements
We thank Luke P. Lee for helpful discussion, Carine Z. Lim for assistance with sample
collection and Sree V. Sundararajan for device fabrication. This work was supported in
part by funding from MOE (R-722-000-005-133), NMRC (NMRC/TCR/016-NNI/2016),
A*STAR IMCB Independent Fellowship and NUS Early Career Research Award.
Author contributions
N.R.H., G.S.L. and H.S. designed the research. N.R.H., T.P.L. and H.S. designed the
clinical study. N.R.H., G.S.L., N.R.S. and D.G.L. performed the research. N.R.H. and D.L.
collected the clinical samples. N.R.H., G.S.L., T.P.L. and H.S. analyzed the data. N.R.H.,
G.S.L. and H.S. wrote the paper.
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05733-0
10
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3238 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05733-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
 Additional information
Supplementary Information accompanies this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-
018-05733-0.
Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
Reprints and permission information is available online at http://npg.nature.com/
reprintsandpermissions/
Publisher's note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2018
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05733-0
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS |  (2018) 9:3238 | DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-05733-0 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
11
