 REVIEW
published: 10 October 2017
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2017.00564
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
1
October 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 564
Edited by:
Ioan Opris,
Leonard M. Miller School of Medicine,
United States
Reviewed by:
Francesco Sammartino,
The Ohio State University Columbus,
United States
Martijn Beudel,
University Medical Center Groningen,
Netherlands
Simon J. Little,
University College London,
United Kingdom
Damian Marc Herz,
University of Oxford, United Kingdom
*Correspondence:
Dennis A. Turner
dennis.turner@duke.edu
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Neuroprosthetics,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Neuroscience
Received: 16 August 2017
Accepted: 25 September 2017
Published: 10 October 2017
Citation:
Hoang KB, Cassar IR, Grill WM and
Turner DA (2017) Biomarkers and
Stimulation Algorithms for Adaptive
Brain Stimulation.
Front. Neurosci. 11:564.
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2017.00564
Biomarkers and Stimulation
Algorithms for Adaptive Brain
Stimulation
Kimberly B. Hoang 1, Isaac R. Cassar 2, Warren M. Grill 1, 2, 3 and Dennis A. Turner 1, 3*
1 Department of Neurosurgery, Duke University, Durham, NC, United States, 2 Department of Biomedical Engineering, Duke
University, Durham, NC, United States, 3 Department of Neurobiology, Duke University Medical Center, Duke University,
Durham, NC, United States
The goal of this review is to describe in what ways feedback or adaptive stimulation
may be delivered and adjusted based on relevant biomarkers. Specific treatment
mechanisms underlying therapeutic brain stimulation remain unclear, in spite of the
demonstrated efficacy in a number of nervous system diseases. Brain stimulation
appears to exert widespread influence over specific neural networks that are relevant
to specific disease entities. In awake patients, activation or suppression of these
neural networks can be assessed by either symptom alleviation (i.e., tremor, rigidity,
seizures) or physiological criteria, which may be predictive of expected symptomatic
treatment. Secondary verification of network activation through specific biomarkers that
are linked to symptomatic disease improvement may be useful for several reasons.
For example, these biomarkers could aid optimal intraoperative localization, possibly
improve efficacy or efficiency (i.e., reduced power needs), and provide long-term
adaptive automatic adjustment of stimulation parameters. Possible biomarkers for
use in portable or implanted devices span from ongoing physiological brain activity,
evoked local field potentials (LFPs), and intermittent pathological activity, to wearable
devices, biochemical, blood flow, optical, or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) changes,
temperature changes, or optogenetic signals. First, however, potential biomarkers must
be correlated directly with symptom or disease treatment and network activation.
Although numerous biomarkers are under consideration for a variety of stimulation
indications the feasibility of these approaches has yet to be fully determined. Particularly,
there are critical questions whether the use of adaptive systems can improve efficacy over
continuous stimulation, facilitate adjustment of stimulation interventions and improve our
understanding of the role of abnormal network function in disease mechanisms.
Keywords:
deep
brain
stimulation,
epilepsy,
Parkinson’s
disease,
responsive
brain
stimulation,
beta
hypersynchrony, phase amplitude coupling, evoked field potentials, closed loop
INTRODUCTION
Current evidence points to various forms of invasive brain stimulation, including stimulation
for epilepsy and deep brain stimulation (DBS) for movement disorders, as exerting widespread
influence over multiple brain areas through modulation of disease- and patient-specific neural
networks (Zamora-Lopez et al., 2011; Henderson, 2012; Lozano and Lipsman, 2013; Fox et al.,
2014; Horn et al., 2017). These dynamic networks may be partially identified by structural
 Hoang et al.
Biomarkers in Adaptive Brain Stimulation
or axonal connectivity (i.e., as demonstrated by diffusion
tensor imaging tractography) or functional and physiological
connectivity
[i.e.,
as
demonstrated
by
positron
emission
tomography, functional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)]
(Oswal et al., 2016). However, clinical targeting is typically
confirmed by direct electrophysiological recordings and or
macrostimulation to evoke the desired symptom response.
Precise placement of electrodes to interact with specific brain
networks is currently initially guided by pre-operative recordings
(particularly in epilepsy) and imaging, with detailed MRI to
define approximate anatomical localization due to high patient to
patient variability. Further, in many indications microelectrode
recording to refine the optimal physiological subregion is critical,
since this region may be distinct from the initial anatomical
target. Finally, engagement of appropriate circuitry within
the desired network can be verified by clinical assessment.
During awake DBS procedures, for example, appropriate neural
network engagement can be directly confirmed by symptom
suppression (relief of tremor, for example). The predicted sphere
of activation or influence of stimulation (Butson et al., 2011)
may assist with targeting. However, clinical assessment remains
the primary verification of network activation in use at this
time.
Although continuous DBS has significantly improved the
treatment of Parkinson’s disease (Odekerken et al., 2016) and
tremor, this mode of stimulation has many limitations and
has had limited success in other diseases, such as depression
or Alzheimer’s disease. The current clinical approach to
programming and adjusting stimulation parameters is time
consuming and a more automated approach is desirable.
Likewise, improved power efficiency and fewer side effects would
improve clinical treatment. Many of these improvements will
be facilitated by identification and development of biomarkers
linked to both network activity and symptom relief, if these
relevant biomarkers can be successfully integrated into the
treatment scheme. Thus, possible improvements in care may
be achieved, including definitively mapping electrode location
during surgical procedures (in addition to symptom suppression
or as a separate, objective marker), continuous, dynamic
adjustment of stimulation in either an amplitude- or time-
dependent manner (Rosa et al., 2015), improved control
of disease symptoms (Tinkhauser et al., 2017), and also
enhancement of device lifespan, through intermittent or reduced
stimulation. Beyond the operative environment, biomarkers
may also facilitate initial clinical programming to provide
objective endpoints as well as facilitate long-term automatic
Abbreviations: DBS, deep brain stimulation; VNS, vagal nerve stimulation;
TBI, traumatic brain injury; aDBS, adaptive DBS; IPG, internal pulse generator;
EEG, electroencephalogram; ECoG, electrocorticography; EMG, electromyogram;
PAC, phase amplitude coupling; ECAP, evoked compound action potential;
LFP, local field potential; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; CT, computed
tomography; BCI/BMI, brain computer/machine interface; GPi, globus pallidus
internus; SNr, substantia nigra pars reticulata; STN, subthalamic nucleus; PPN,
pedunculopontine nucleus; Vim, ventral intermediate nucleus of the thalamus;
SCC, subcallosal cingulate; ANT, anterior nucleus of the thalamus; PD, Parkinson’s
disease; AD, Alzheimer’s disease; TS, Tourette syndrome; TRD, treatment resistant
depression; ADHD, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder; OCD, obsessive-
compulsive disorder; FOG, freezing of gait.
adjustment (Heldman et al., 2016). Additionally, biomarkers
may help provide insight into the treatment efficacy variability
between patients with optimal electrode position and long-
term disease management (Trager et al., 2016). However, such
insight will require confirming a direct correlation between
the biomarkers reflecting underlying neural network activity
and associated clinical symptoms (Kuhn et al., 2006, 2009).
Confirmation of engagement of relevant neural circuitry may also
help to understand possible divergence between patient-specific
anatomical targeting and physiological activation of circuits.
Additional techniques under development include novel
stimulation paradigms, which may be more clinically efficacious.
These
include
structured
stimulation
patterns
developed
from
extensive
modeling
of
Parkinson’s
circuitry,
tested
intraoperatively, now being assessed in clinical trials, which
include variable stimulation pulse timing (rather than regular
pulse generation) and can potentially reduce the number of
pulses per second needed for effective stimulation (Brocker
et al., 2017), while also potentially improving the efficiency
of stimulation (Brocker et al., 2013). Further, novel electrode
designs are now just coming into clinical practice, including
8 contact directional electrodes (Steigerwald et al., 2016;
Volkmann et al., 2016) and a research design with additional
contacts spaced around the electrode (Contarino et al., 2014),
both allowing for current to be steered toward treatment areas or
away from critical regions. Both of these advances could also be
used in combination with various types of responsive or adaptive
control systems, to implement a hybrid system with multiple
improved techniques.
Possible biomarkers span multiple modalities, including
external wearable devices (such as an accelerometer or step
counter) that analyze a symptom and may communicate with
a common controller (Graupe et al., 2010; Shull et al., 2014;
Ekker et al., 2016). Further, internal markers of circuitry function
have been suggested, such as beta frequency oscillatory activity
(Silberstein et al., 2003) and associated phase amplitude coupling
(PAC) (De Hemptinne et al., 2015). Evoked field potentials
arising from the DBS stimulation pulses (Kent et al., 2015) and
triggering on intermittent events could be used for initiating or
adjusting stimulation (Fisher and Velasco, 2014) or Tourette’s
(Almeida et al., 2015). Biomarkers could also be biochemical
changes detected by a sensor (i.e., dopamine) (Grahn et al., 2014),
blood flow (Hill et al., 2013; Haense et al., 2016; Noor et al.,
2016), temperature changes, or optogenetic signals (Bernstein
et al., 2012). Identification of appropriate biomarkers will be
critical in the execution of responsive on/off triggerable systems
(with a fixed, preset response to a threshold input), adaptive (with
adjustable duration or scalar, graded adjustments in amplitude to
reach a pre-defined setpoint) or dynamic, closed-loop feedback
systems with multiple inputs. All of these formats require some
form of circuitry-dependent signal relevant to the disease or
condition for automatic adjustment of DBS settings (Carron
et al., 2013; Little et al., 2013; Rehan and Hong, 2013; Meidahl
et al., 2017).
Here we review the design of responsive, adaptive and closed-
loop stimulation. We then discuss how various biomarkers and
devices may be useful to improve stimulation to treat selected
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
2
October 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 564
 Hoang et al.
Biomarkers in Adaptive Brain Stimulation
example disease conditions, some of which have already reached
the market (i.e., responsive Neuropace device for epilepsy
treatment), but mostly which remain experimental or conceptual.
As with any new field, the translation of biomarkers into portable
or implanted devices will require more critical analysis of the
clinical utility in a particular condition, stability over time, the
ability to record the signal, and the correlation of the proposed
biomarker with clinical symptoms relevant to the disease (Kuhn
et al., 2006, 2009; Meidahl et al., 2017). However, few of the
biomarkers to be discussed are at this stage of translation yet into
humans or clinical trials, hence considerable skepticism remains
about introducing more complexity into the already complicated
field of brain stimulation (Arlotti et al., 2016). Thus, we mention
a number of possible biomarker signals, but as further analysis
proceeds and feasibility data are obtained, many of these may or
may not prove durable for clinical translation.
MODES, DEVICES, AND CONTROL
APPROACHES FOR ADAPTIVE
STIMULATION
Stimulation for treatment of epilepsy (using the Neuropace
device or anterior thalamic DBS) has just reached clinical
usefulness (Fisher and Velasco, 2014), whereas DBS stimulation
for movement disorders provides efficacy of ∼75% in patients
when applied in a continuous, open-loop fashion (for example,
Activa SC/PC technology, Medtronic) (Almeida et al., 2015;
Odekerken et al., 2016). However, as indications for brain
stimulation in other disease processes expand with further
knowledge of networks that may benefit from stimulation,
additional types of stimulation will likely be needed. In contrast,
several clinical trials using DBS for alternative indications (i.e.,
depression, Alzheimer’s disease) have demonstrated less efficacy
and remain experimental (Hamani et al., 2009; Dougherty et al.,
2015; Lozano et al., 2016). We initially review the various
modes of stimulation that have been developed and associated
devices, which may be able to sense and deliver adaptive
stimulation.
The idea of a time constant, well-known in control systems
literature, is a measure of the time required for the system to
respond after a step input, assuming the device can respond
faster than the system under observation (Carron et al., 2013).
For example, tremor responses to thalamic DBS may take at
least 10–20 s to stabilize (Rehan and Hong, 2013; Yamamoto
et al., 2013) whereas steady state responses of subthalamic DBS
for bradykinesia may occur within a few seconds but require
>30 min for stabilization (Waldau et al., 2011). Briefly, control
models of stimulation may be broken down into five major
subtypes (Figure 1, Table 1), depending on the frequency of
the updating needed, the flexibility of stimulation response, and
rate of responsiveness. In order of increasing control systems
complexity, these include simple continuous on (Figure 1A),
intermittent or scheduled with a predetermined schedule and
fixed amplitude (Figure 1B), responsive with a triggered onset
of a preset amplitude and width (Figure 1C), and adaptive with
flexibility during either on/off of a preset amplitude (i.e., variable
durations of stimulation) in response to a threshold for a single
biomarker input or a variable amplitude (Figure 1D). Finally,
in the brain-machine interface context, closed-loop implies a
multidimensional input (i.e., multiple spike trains or other input
signal denoting the brain’s intent), a continuous processing of this
input for output predictions, and some form of feedback signal
to refine the nearly constant output (Figure 1E). However, any
signal where some feedback exists in a control sense could be
termed closed loop in a generic sense.
FIGURE 1 | DBS stimulation control models: (A) continuous stimulation with evenly spaced stimulation pulses; (B) scheduled intermittent stimulation with a burst of
pulses at fixed intervals; (C) responsive stimulation, with triggered output based on a threshold, but each pulse is the same, preset amplitude; (D) adaptive stimulation,
with threshold-based adjustments in number of pulses or in amplitude of pulses, settling in around a fixed control point; (E) closed-loop stimulation, where the
constantly changing, complex input determines an equally complex, dynamic output. For each the solid arrow depicts the output stimulation and the dashed arrow
depicts an input signal that is compared to some threshold. (F) Potential stimulation and recording arrays. Depending on disease pathology, inputs may be from the
DBS lead itself as well as secondary DBS, EEG, or ECoG electrodes. Output stimulation from the IPG is primarily though the DBS/parenchymal lead at this time,
although potential exists for subdural and scalp intervention as well.
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
3
October 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 564
 Hoang et al.
Biomarkers in Adaptive Brain Stimulation
TABLE 1 | Control systems description.
Control type
Feedback type
Nature of feedback
Time constant of activation
Continuous
Clinician observation
Clinician adjustment
monthly
Scheduled Intermittent
None
Preset stimulation amplitude turned on or off at preset
timing
Preset timing determined by system
physiology or empirically
Responsive
Triggered by threshold event
Preset stimulation amplitude turned on or off by trigger, with
defined lockouts
0.5–5 s, can be repeated
Adaptive
Single biomarker input, continuous
monitoring
Stimulation output can be turned on or off, or scaled, based
on biomarker input for continuous adjustment
Tremor ∼10 s Rigidity, Gait ∼60–90 s
Closed-Loop
Multiple channels of input biomarkers
for continuous analysis
Continuous prediction of brain intent for action
20–50 ms updating
The use of biomarkers can be described in various approaches, including continuous (i.e., no variation in stimulation except with occasional clinical programming changes over time),
and intermittent (i.e., the device is scheduled to have preset amplitude turned on and off at specified intervals). Responsive and adaptive show progressively more flexibility in when to
perform stimulation (i.e., triggered by an event or threshold) and adaptive has inherently further flexibility in prolonged stimulation and levels of stimulation when on. Closed loop can
apply to any scheme where a feedback signal is used to alter stimulation, but commonly is used in a brain-machine context, in which brain intent (i.e., for an action) is analyzed from
multiple channels, then predictions for the next epoch are calculated, with visual or sensory feedback to correct. The chart gives the type of feedback which can be used, the nature of
the feedback and time constants to be considered in delivering the feedback.
NEUROPACE AND DBS DEVICES
Rather than constant, continuous stimulation (i.e., Figure 1A)
DBS
for
epilepsy
implements
an
intermittent,
scheduled
stimulation at a preset level, potentially being more effective
than constant stimulation (Fisher and Velasco, 2014) (Figure 1B,
Table 1). Additionally, phase-dependent stimulation may exert
a critical dampening if the response can be sufficiently
rapid (Cagnan et al., 2017). In contrast, the Neuropace IPG
device implements triggered or responsive stimulation to treat
specific, epileptic events detected by a threshold crossing
on the input channels (Figure 1C), and this may be less
intrusive than constant stimulation if the events or symptoms
are uncommon (Morrell and RNS System in Epilepsy Study
Group, 2011). Once a pre-determined stimulation level and
threshold are set the device both records ongoing brain activity
and then triggers the preset stimulation burst based upon
threshold criteria, with a lockout preventing overstimulation.
Newer Medtronic devices (i.e., Medtronic PC+S and RC+S)
also have the capability for lock-out, phase-in timing and
adjustable, contingent response to the input signal (Rouse
et al., 2011; Afshar et al., 2012; Stypulkowski et al., 2013). The
Medtronic RC+S is the more advanced version of the PC+S
with additional sensing and stimulation channels (16 vs. 8),
rechargeable, improved real-time data access, and ability to
connect to 4 4-channel electrodes, available in 2018 for research
testing.
RESPONSIVE CONTROL
Some disease processes, such as epilepsy, may have long
asymptomatic periods between events when stimulation is
not required. Rather than subjecting the patient to the
potentially deleterious effects of constant stimulation and to
avoid chronic circuitry changes that may lead to loss of
efficacy, scheduled intermittent stimulation (such as anterior
thalamic DBS where stimulation is applied for 20–30 s with
an off-time of ∼5 min) reduces the amount of unnecessary
stimulation by intermittently modulating the network to a
less excitable state. However, the parameters of stimulation
when “on” are fixed and stimulation occurs in response to
detection of a potentially ictal or hyperexcitable state (Fisher
and Velasco, 2014). In contrast, the Neuropace system, a
responsive system, constantly monitors a set of brain electrodes
for activity and then, when intermittently triggered by a critical
condition, stimulates the brain to prevent seizure propagation
(Morrell and RNS System in Epilepsy Study Group, 2011).
Similarly, there are plans to develop a responsive or triggered
DBS epilepsy system based on cortical events (Stypulkowski
et al., 2014), similar to a prototype Tourette’s control system
with thalamic stimulation based on occurrence of cortical
events (Almeida et al., 2015). In continuous, scheduled, and
responsive paradigms, manual parameter adjustments performed
by a clinician can be a time intensive process as the
stimulus is slowly altered and the outcome is assessed at
intervals.
The
responsive
stimulation
in
Neuropace
implements
recording electrodes to “sense” an ictal event via complex
internal algorithms in its controller, and turns stimulation
on and off only as needed to interrupt a developing seizure
(Durand, 2009; Morrell and RNS System in Epilepsy Study
Group, 2011). In these systems, upper and lower thresholds
trigger the binary on and off states of the system (analogous
to the thermostat controls for furnace systems), delivering
stimulation when triggered at a predetermined level and with
a constant width, based on prior events. This control system
would appear to be best suited for diseases with intermittent
and unpredictable manifestations, such as epilepsy or Tourette’s
Syndrome (Morrell, 2006; Okun et al., 2013). The inputs to these
control systems may be external or internal, ranging from surface
electromyogram (EMG) to scalp electroencephalogram (EEG) to
local field potentials (LFPs) (Basu et al., 2013; Priori et al., 2013a).
For example, Graupe et al. describe the use tremor-predictive
information from surface EMG and accelerometers as the input
to an on-off adaptive DBS system in tremor control (Graupe
et al., 2010).
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
4
October 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 564
 Hoang et al.
Biomarkers in Adaptive Brain Stimulation
ADAPTIVE AND CLOSED-LOOP CONTROL
The integration of more advanced control systems concepts
into brain stimulation can be found in the last two types
of stimulation–adaptive and closed loop systems. Adaptive
stimulation has adjusted stimulation in response to either
external signals or an internal or biomarker signal, which has
a close relationship to an external symptom. First patented in
1996 (by Michael S John), adaptive stimulation was envisioned
for maintenance of “consciousness” in traumatic brain injury
patients (US Patent 6066163A, 2/2/1996).
Little et al. investigated short term (externalized) adaptive
DBS of the STN for Parkinson’s disease based on processing
of local LFPs and using an on/off system dependent on beta
frequency amplitude, but with dynamic, variable widths of
stimulation, hence fitting within the definition of adaptive (Little
et al., 2016a,b). Interestingly Little et al. compared continuous,
scheduled intermittent (termed “random” in their study), and
adaptive systems head-to-head and found statistically significant
motor scores, reduction in stimulation time, decreased speech
side effects and decreased energy requirements with the adaptive
system when triggered by a threshold but not with random
stimulation (Little et al., 2013). As noted with later analysis of
these and additional data, the adaptive on/off system resulted in
much improved efficiency and a modest improvement in efficacy
(Tinkhauser et al., 2017). The resultant improvement in clinical
motor scores was also corroborated by Rosa et al. in one patient
comparing continuous DBS and adaptive DBS, which utilized a
continuously varying stimulation amplitude parallel to the beta
frequency content (Rosa et al., 2015). Alternatively, Priori et al.
implemented recordings of internal LFPs as the input to their
adaptive DBS for Parkinson’s disease (Priori et al., 2013a).
A scalar adaptive system has also been proposed, using
variable amplitude inputs to hone in on a control point, but
only tentatively implemented by Rosa et al (Santaniello et al.,
2011; Carron et al., 2013; Rehan and Hong, 2013; Rosa et al.,
2015). In this concept, a scaled output is provided based
on the difference between a setpoint and current state, such
that a larger difference from a desired value creates a larger
change in stimulation (Figure 1D). A classic control system
principle outside of medicine, this slightly more sophisticated
variation minimizes the amount of output variable oscillation
and time to reach a desired set point, as well as large or
complete on/off changes which may be disturbing to the
patient.
In contrast to intermittent or adaptive stimulation, closed-
loop stimulation depends upon a constant, rapidly updated
feedback parameter, such as visual feedback in brain computer
(or brain machine) interfaces (BCI/BMI) using constant brain
sensing (i.e., as in a motor task) and direct, nearly continuous
contingent output for motor control (Lebedev and Nicolelis,
2006; Leuthardt et al., 2006; Patil and Turner, 2008). The update
time for BMI systems is typically on the order of ∼20 Hz (i.e.,
∼50 ms for updating the next prediction) (Hanson et al., 2012).
Additionally, whereas adaptive stimulation using a DBS device
may have only a single setpoint, closed-loop stimulation may
enable a wide range of trajectories with continuously adjustable
setpoints in a highly dynamic sense, approaching a target and
performing a task (Khobragade et al., 2015).
Although the initial work focused on motor disorders, more
recently Widge and Sahay also discussed the concept of closed-
loop applications in psychiatric disease (Widge and Sahay, 2016),
with attention to BCIs as a better, dynamic, real-time source
of input for psychiatric disease states. While largely theoretical,
early work in this area suggests that closed-loop feedback can
remap and alter neural network firing patterns as the BCI training
proceeds, allowing the device to depict intention, which may
be critical for treatment of a fluctuating disease like psychiatric
illness (Widge and Sahay, 2016).
The Medtronic PC+S/RC+S was developed as an open
platform for chronic, adaptive brain stimulation, and has been
used in a wide range of pre-clinical and clinical applications
(Stanslaski et al., 2012; Carlson et al., 2013; Stypulkowski
et al., 2013). These include, for example, developing a brain-
computer interface in a locked-in patient with amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis (Vansteensel et al., 2016), tremor control
linked to a wearable device (Herron et al., 2017), brain
stimulation for epilepsy (Stypulkowski et al., 2014), and
recording biomarkers while stimulating in Parkinson’s disease
(Quinn et al., 2015; Neumann et al., 2016; Blumenfeld et al.,
2017). Further generations of this PC+S device, particularly the
new RC+S IPG in development, also offer the advantage of
providing full clinical stimulation when not in research mode,
which is desirable for intermittent clinical research in human
subjects.
CHARACTERISTICS OF AN IDEAL
BIOMARKER
Although
closed-loop
brain
stimulation
has
tremendous
potential, it requires an effective biomarker to serve as the
feedback parameter. A biomarker should directly correlate
with the clinical symptoms, such that a system could effectively
use the biomarker to control a device in lieu of the specific
symptoms (i.e., beta band oscillations linked to bradykinesia in
Parkinson’s disease) (Kuhn et al., 2006, 2009). Thus, changes
in the biomarker (i.e., beta oscillations) should clearly and
accurately predict alterations in the symptoms associated with
the disease. Likewise, as the brain stimulation affects the neural
circuits, the biomarker should directly reflect these changes
and constantly and dynamically track disease state. Biomarker
signals, including beta frequency oscillations in Parkinson’s
disease as well as further signals under consideration, are also
subject to sampling issues (i.e., which site provides optimal
signals if several are available), noise from surrounding brain
signals obscuring the signal, and in particular signal stability
over time (Steiner et al., 2017). For example, cortical pathological
signals may overlap with cortical movement signals in some
contexts, requiring some form of identification of signals before
being used for control. Likewise, highly variable signals may be
noted in the same region from different patients, leading to a
need for fine tuning and adjustment for individual patients (Kent
et al., 2015).
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
5
October 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 564
 Hoang et al.
Biomarkers in Adaptive Brain Stimulation
BIOMARKERS BY DISEASE PROCESS OR
PATHOLOGY
We review how biomarkers are implemented by disease category,
beginning with epilepsy, in which the Neuropace device is now
approved and starting to be more widely used. The next category
includes Parkinson’s disease and Tourette’s syndrome, in which
ongoing experiments in humans are starting to demonstrate
the potential of biomarkers. Lastly, we discuss conditions in
which biomarkers under development may help improve possible
brain stimulation approaches, but which have not yet shown
clinical utility, including continuous stimulation. These latter
conditions include depression and other psychiatric diseases,
Alzheimer’s disease, and dystonia, for which possible biomarkers
have been defined but have not yet been implemented in clinical
trials. Our discussion by disease category is tabulated in Table 2.
Alternatively, biomarkers and disease states are categorized in
Figure 2 by biomarker type.
EPILEPSY
Neurostimulation for medication resistant epilepsy can take the
form of peripheral nerve stimulation like vagal nerve stimulation
(VNS), customized electrodes using the responsive Neuropace
system, and anterior thalamic DBS (Fisher and Velasco, 2014).
VNS and responsive Neuropace devices are approved in the USA
and thalamic DBS is approved in a number of other countries,
although not the US at the time of writing (Fisher and Velasco,
2014). Neuropace stimulation in response to activity detected
with a strip or depth electrode adjacent to a previously identified
epileptogenic zone demonstrated an improvement in relative
seizure frequency of about 21% (specifically, 38% reduction in
the treatment group vs. 17% reduction in the sham group)
(Morrell and RNS System in Epilepsy Study Group, 2011). Of
course, the epileptogenic zone and abnormal brain networks
involved with seizure origination and spread must be identified
to inform electrode placement, and the fact that an event or
seizure must occur for stimulation to begin are limiting factors
for responsive stimulation in epilepsy. However, Halpern et al.
noted a progression of EEG cortical activity up to 7 h prior to
seizure onset, and these pre-ictal changes could represent a future
feedback signal for responsive stimulation initiation (Halpern
et al., 2008). There are many limitations to implementation
of the Neuropace device, including localization as to where to
specifically place both sensing and stimulation electrodes, how
to detect pre-ictal events sufficiently far enough in advance of a
seizure so that stimulation may be subconscious and undetected
by the patient, and what stimulation paradigms may actually
prevent network oscillations from building up to an ictal event.
Anterior thalamic DBS may modify overall frontal lobe
networks to reduce seizure susceptibility, through scheduled
intermittent stimulation (Salanova et al., 2015). The pulse
repetition frequency of DBS is very important as incorrect
frequency leading to EEG synchrony (rather than suppression)
can lead to increased seizures rather than seizure control
(Durand, 2009). The anterior nucleus of the thalamus (ANT) has
shown long term significant seizure frequency reduction in the
SANTE trial using intermittent scheduled stimulation (Salanova
et al., 2015). DBS placement in the ANT is often guided by
microelectrode recording and characteristic stimulation effects
on scalp EEG in the frontal lobes (Halpern et al., 2008), which
could be used as an intraoperative marker for effective location
of the DBS electrodes.
These clinical studies build upon numerous pre-clinical
research studies focusing on the effects of stimulation inhibiting
seizures, particularly since brain stimulation can also commonly
induce seizure activity (Durand, 2009). For example, a landmark
pre-clinical study demonstrated the ability to control epileptic
events from skull (extracranial) stimulation, using implanted
brain electrodes as the closed loop feedback circuit for measuring
ongoing cerebral hyperactivity (Berenyi et al., 2012). The
TABLE 2 | Possible targets, affected circuits, and potential surrogates.
Disease
DBS targets
Circuit
Postulated surrogate
Parkinson’s (PD)
STN, Globus pallidus interna
Motor (niagro- striatia-pallido-
cortical circuits)
Beta hyper synchrony, Phase Amplitude Coupling (PACs)
(PD- freezing of gait)
Pedunculopontine nucleus(PPN)
White matter tracts between
PPN and motor circuits
Increased beta frequency or cholinergic neuron action
potentials
Essential tremor
Vim nucleus (of thalamus)
Motor
Evoked compound action potential (ECAP)
Alzheimer’s disease
Fornix, entorhinal cortex, hippocampus, cingulate,
precuneous, frontal cortex
Cognitive and Memory circuits
Volumetric analysis and glucose metabolism changes on
PET/SPECT, particularly entorhinal cortex and
hippocampus; cholinergic degeneration
Tourette’s
Centromedian nucleus of thalamus and GPi
Motor/limbic
Low frequency thalamic oscillations resulting in lack of
thalamocortical inhibition
Depression
Subcallosal Cingulate (SCC) and Area 25 (medial
forbrain bundle), nucleus accumbens, habenula
Limbic
Tractography intersection hub of three fiber bundles near
SCC; increased activity in orbital frontal cortex/sec
Epilepsy
Anterior thalamic nucleus, CM thalamus, localized
seizure focus
Various
Abnormal synchrony and excitability noted on EEG,
ECoG and depth electrodes
These sites are show compiled for the various disease processes as outlined by this review. CM, centromedian nucleus (of the thalamus); PET, positron emission tomography; SPECT,
single photon emission computed tomography; STN, substantia nigra; EEG, electroencephalogram; ECoG, electrocorticography.
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
6
October 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 564
 Hoang et al.
Biomarkers in Adaptive Brain Stimulation
FIGURE 2 | Potential Biomarker by Type. Biomarkers divided into electrophysiological, imaging, and other categories.
advantages of the extracranial approach for seizure control is that
excitability in a wide swath of brain can potentially be controlled,
whereas the focal stimulation afforded by the Neuropace device
can in some instances be insufficient for seizure control.
PARKINSON’S DISEASE
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a chronic, progressive movement
disorder that affects ∼0.9 million people in the United States
(Ascherio and Schwarzschild, 2016; Lee and Gilbert, 2016). DBS
for PD is commonly applied to the STN and, equivalently, to
globus pallidus internus (GPi) (Benabid et al., 2009; Williams
et al., 2014; Delong and Wichmann, 2015), though the three
year follow-up of the NSTAPS study has recently confirmed
improved efficacy for STN (Odekerken et al., 2016). Although
∼75% of patients get symptom relief with DBS (Odekerken et al.,
2016), there remains considerable patient to patient variation in
outcomes in spite of current electrode localization and placement
strategies, possibly since the pathways and pathophysiology of the
disease itself are not fully understood (Whitmer et al., 2012). In
some cases, insufficient treatment with a single DBS electrode
may be addressed with an additional electrode. For example,
instability and freezing of gait (FOG) remain significantly
debilitating and causes of fatal falls, hip fractures, and pneumonia
in Parkinson’s patients (Aminoff et al., 2011). STN DBS leads
to improvement of these axial gait symptoms but not in all
patients (Chenji et al., 2017; Schlenstedt et al., 2017). Further, one
study implemented the measurement of PPN evoked potentials
to help guide GPi DBS stimulation in a closed loop configuration,
altering the GPi input based on the PPN output (Morita et al.,
2014); however, conclusions are not yet available as this is a study
in progress. Another consideration for dual electrode recordings
is the use of STN+GPi, which has primarily been suggested for
improving persistent dyskinesias after STN DBS (Sriram et al.,
2014; Cook et al., 2015; Matias et al., 2016). Dual electrodes
may also facilitate stimulation on one electrode and recording on
another with reduced intrinsic stimulation artifact on the sensing
channels.
Beta Band Oscillations
Synchronization of cortex, basal ganglia, and thalamus results
in spontaneous oscillatory activity in PD in the beta band,
at around 13–30 Hz, spreading throughout the cortico-basal
network (Wingeier et al., 2006; Whitmer et al., 2012), and this
activity is thought to be a marker of PD state in animals and
humans (Kuhn et al., 2006, 2009). Hypersynchrony declines after
therapeutic doses of dopaminergic medication and likely DBS
at an adequate dose (Weinberger et al., 2006; Little and Brown,
2012). Such synchrony may represent a biomarker that can be
quantified to guide lead placement and to determine optimal DBS
parameters (Whitmer et al., 2012; Lozano and Lipsman, 2013).
These beta band responses can be recorded both from motor
cortex [i.e., electrocorticography (ECoG)] (De Hemptinne et al.,
2015) as well as directly from STN DBS contacts (Gmel et al.,
2015; Brocker et al., 2017).
The hyperdirect pathway carries excitatory input from the
motor cortex to the STN (Delong and Wichmann, 2015).
Recently Whitmer et al. recorded subdural ECoG and STN
LFPs (in a clinical study during DBS placement in 13 humans)
from both within and adjacent (dorsal) to the STN to evaluate
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
7
October 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 564
 Hoang et al.
Biomarkers in Adaptive Brain Stimulation
attenuation
of
hyper-synchrony
following
STN
activation
(Whitmer et al., 2012). Beta band attenuation varied positively
with DBS amplitude at clinical treatment levels, suggesting
that beta band measurements may provide a biomarker of PD
treatment effect for bradykinesia (but not necessarily tremor).
However, there was enhanced attenuation of hyper-synchrony by
DBS within the central STN as opposed to leads placed dorsal
to the STN (Marsden et al., 2001; Mackinnon et al., 2005). This
highlights the possibility that different symptoms within the same
disease process may involve different nodes within the neural
network, or possibly variable neural networks. Further, the ECoG
recordings confirmed that the beta synchronization was also
present in the premotor and motor regions, a possible indication
that the STN is a node between linked regions in the cortical basal
ganglia circuit. However, a direct correlation with PD symptom
improvement remains a critical requirement (Whitmer et al.,
2012).
Entropy
In addition to reduction in synchronization, effective DBS
leads to regularization in neuronal firing patterns (Hashimoto
et al., 2003; Bar-Gad et al., 2004). For example, the highly
oscillatory, pathological firing patterns present in PD may
be replaced by DBS-evoked action potentials with regular
patterns that can act as an innocuous signal (Dorval et al.,
2010). This regularity can be quantified via the firing pattern
entropy, which is calculated from the inter-spike intervals of
single unit recordings. In the rodent GP and substantia nigra
pars reticulata (SNr), entropy increases with parkinsonism and
decreases back to near healthy levels with effective DBS (Dorval
et al., 2008, 2015; Dorval and Grill, 2014; Anderson et al.,
2015).
Directed Information
Along with firing pattern entropy, directed information transfer
between neurons also correlates with DBS efficacy (Dorval
and Grill, 2014; Anderson et al., 2015; Dorval et al., 2015).
Directed information measures the degree of influence that
a recorded single neuron has on another neuron (Anderson
et al., 2015). In rodents and non-human primates, directed
information increases with Parkinsonism between the SNr and
ventral anterior thalamus and between the GP internus and GP
externus, respectively. In both cases, directed information is
then reduced with effective DBS (Anderson et al., 2015; Dorval
et al., 2015). Although an increase in directed information
with Parkinsonism might be mistaken as beneficial, it most
likely indicates the pathological hyper-synchrony observed in
the basal ganglia, with each neuron passing on redundant
information.
A
reduction
in
directed
information
with
DBS could thus indicate a break in this hyper-synchronous
state and a return to independence between information
channels. Although based on firing of single neurons, directed
information may or may not be a feasible biomarker in
humans, unless the unit firing can be translated into either a
spontaneous or evoked potential measurable with more stable
electrodes.
Phase Amplitude Coupling
Using ECoG recorded over the motor cortex, De Hemptinne et al.
observed that DBS reduces exaggerated primary motor (M1) PAC
between beta oscillations and higher frequency superimposed
oscillations characteristic of PD (De Hemptinne et al., 2013,
2015). Normal cortical function also involves the presence of
PAC, possibly coordinating timing of neuronal activity between
and within cortical areas as necessary for task performance
(Canolty et al., 2006; Canolty and Knight, 2010; Yanagisawa
et al., 2012). The increased PAC in PD possibly reflects neurons
constrained into an inflexible pattern by PD pathophysiology,
leading to rigidity and bradykinesia (Moran et al., 2008; De
Hemptinne et al., 2013). DBS normalizes elevated PAC, both
at rest and during a motor task (De Hemptinne et al., 2015),
and PAC may be a sensitive biomarker to measure both the
Parkinsonian state as well as the effectiveness of therapy for
these symptoms (De Hemptinne et al., 2015). Unfortunately,
the presence of PD tremor alters this measure and voluntary
motion also can change PAC. However, the advantages of
minimal stimulation artifact in the ECoG recording electrode
could potentially be applied to other neurological or psychiatric
disease states (De Hemptinne et al., 2015). Overall, whether
PAC can be effectively translated into a useful and consistent
biomarker, separable from normal motor function, has yet to be
demonstrated.
Evoked Potentials and Oscillations
Evoked responses from stimulating and recording via the
same
DBS
lead
in
patients
during
DBS
surgery
(using
different contacts) can provide neural circuit-specific insight
into functional activation of the basal ganglia through STN–
GP synaptic interactions, particularly through a comparison
of responses to stimulation at effective (i.e., ∼130 Hz) and
ineffective (∼10–40 Hz) stimulation frequencies (Grill et al.,
2015). Further, gamma band oscillations (i.e., 60–90 Hz) may
indicate hyperkinetic PD symptoms, such as dyskinesias, as
a biomarker separate from beta band oscillations (Swann
et al., 2016). Any of these electrophysiological markers could
theoretically be inputs to closed-loop systems or markers of
disease-treatment response in a slowly progressive disease, such
as PD.
Summary of PD
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a progressive disease with varying
presentations, including motor and non-motor symptoms.
Conventional DBS targets (i.e., STN, GPi) focus on symptomatic
relief of motor symptoms, although STN DBS does show also
consistent improvement of midline and non-motor symptoms,
particularly FOG. There is also the possibility of multifocal
targeting with two or more DBS electrodes within known
nodes (i.e., STN+GPi, for example), but this configuration will
have the added complication of how to adjust cooperatively
parameters from the additional recording/stimulation contacts.
It also further highlights the need for brain modeling to
understand circuitry and biomarkers to assist in automatic
adjustment (Butson et al., 2011; Butson and Mcintyre, 2015).
The potential for both a motor target and a cognitive target to
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
8
October 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 564
 Hoang et al.
Biomarkers in Adaptive Brain Stimulation
treat a single disease process could also be possible with multiple
electrodes (Lozano and Lipsman, 2013). The recent progress
with even short-term adaptive systems using an on/off controller
shows that beta band oscillations may be a suitable biomarker,
particularly for particularly rigidity and bradykinesia (Little et al.,
2016a; Tinkhauser et al., 2017). There are many avenues to
test these possible biomarkers in initial clinical trials, including
intraoperative testing, using percutaneous wires after surgery for
several days, or using one of the implanted sensing/recording
devices in small clinical cohorts.
TOURETTE SYNDROME
Tourette syndrome (TS) is an idiopathic neuropsychiatric
disorder defined by motor and phonic tics and often associated
with psychiatric disorders, such as attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD) and obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)
(Leckman, 2002; Maling et al., 2012; Almeida et al., 2015).
For the small number of patients whose symptoms do not
resolve prior to adulthood, the tics can become treatment
refractory and debilitating (Jankovic and Kurlan, 2011; Maling
et al., 2012; Almeida et al., 2015). DBS for TS first involved
bilateral lead placement in the centromedian nucleus of the
thalamus (Vandewalle et al., 1999). Currently, it is theorized
that dopaminergic neurons contribute to a dysfunctional circuit
that leads to decreased cortical inhibition (Gilbert et al.,
2004; Almeida et al., 2015) and excessive inhibition of basal
ganglia output to the thalamus (Mink, 2001). Current DBS
targets include the centromedian-parafascicular complex of the
thalamus with the nearby anterior portion of the ventralis oralis
nucleus. As well, the efficacy of intermittent / scheduled as
compared to continuous stimulation is currently being evaluated
(Okun et al., 2013).
Recordings from the thalamic nuclei of anesthetized TS
patient undergoing DBS revealed low frequency firing in bursts
(Priori et al., 2013b). Awake, these frequencies seem to match
with the clinical phenotype and seem preferential for tics as
opposed to the OCD manifestation of TS. Maling et al. studied
5 patients implanted with the Neuropace device using cortical
ECoG strips, CT-MRI fusion and intraoperative microelectrode
recordings to delineate their anatomic CM target (Maling et al.,
2012). Over time, the best responders to adaptive stimulation
of the thalamus following bursting in the ECoG demonstrated
increased gamma activity and return to higher frequencies
with the best symptom relief correlating with synchronization
within a single oscillatory frequency. Furthermore, GPi low
frequency oscillations preceded EMG recordings of the tic by 50–
2,000 ms, a potential foreshadowing of tic activity based on the
suspected anatomical circuit (Priori et al., 2013b). For patients
with OCD comorbid to their TS, the anterior limb of the internal
capsule and nucleus accumbens is another anatomical target.
LFP recordings demonstrate high beta frequency oscillations,
another possible physiological marker of OCD, and a speculative
precursor to low frequency thalamic oscillations (Priori et al.,
2013b). These changes in oscillatory activity could also provide
an adaptive trigger for preventing motor tics through demand
DBS stimulation.
ESSENTIAL TREMOR
Stimulation of the ventral intermediate nucleus of the thalamus
[Vim] is useful for control of essential tremor, which affects
∼7 million people in the United States (Deuschl et al.,
2011). Spontaneous or evoked responses may be directly
recorded from the DBS lead (Afshar et al., 2012). Kent
et al. investigated the evoked compound action potential
(ECAP) intraoperatively within Vim as a potential surrogate
marker in thalamic DBS (Kent et al., 2015), with the ECAP
arising from synchronously-activated neural elements (likely
axons) near the lead (Kent and Grill, 2012). While recording
from two non-stimulating contacts of the lead, stimulation
parameters and tremor measured via accelerometer were
correlated with neural activation assessed from the ECAP
(Kent et al., 2015). High frequency 130 Hz DBS reduced
essential tremor, while 10 Hz DBS worsened tremor. During
high frequency DBS, a monotonic relationship between voltage
and tremor was noted up to an optimal voltage; however,
ECAP signal amplitudes varied as much as an order of
magnitude between subjects. The study also suggested that
cerebellar afferents were the primary determinants of the ECAP
response (Kent et al., 2015). Lastly, it was noted that as more
glial scar or electrode conditioning with stimulation occurred
around the leads with continued chronic DBS (measured
during IPG replacements), the stimulation artifact in the
ECAP recording increased, potentially hampering long-term
applications (Henderson et al., 2002; Kent et al., 2015). A
consistent evoked response with consistency across patients has
proven elusive, however.
Another concept to improve the signal to noise ratio during
Vim DBS would be to record the evoked field potential within
postsynaptic areas anterior to Vim, where the cerebellothalamic
fibers have their synapses (in VOP particularly) (Gallay et al.,
2008). This would involve recording from a more anterior DBS
electrode, which has typically been placed for improved tremor
control in difficult cases (Foote and Okun, 2005). The advantages
of a second electrode include the possibility that all contacts
on the primary electrode could be used for stimulation (as
opposed to sharing stimulation and recording contacts) and that
there would be improved isolation from the stimulation artifact,
similar to recording from the isolated ECoG motor cortex strip
electrode (Kent and Grill, 2012; Almeida et al., 2015).
External
signals
from
wearable
devices,
such
as
accelerometers, may also provide direct and dynamic feedback on
tremor intensity, and can be potentially included in closed-loop
control (Herron et al., 2017). For example, Cagnan et al. (2017)
developed a prototype system for phase-specific stimulation,
linking the measured phase of tremor to the DBS IPG for
intermittent stimulation. This worked well for tremor control
in some patients and could potentially improve the efficiency
of stimulation with reduced IPG output. Further, Slavin et al.
developed a tremor prediction and control algorithm for
on/off adaptive control of tremor based on muscle contraction
and accelerometry (Shukla et al., 2012; Basu et al., 2013).
Potentially, the internal accelerometer with the Medtronic
PC+S device could also function to detect tremor within the
upper extremities, though differentiating one arm from the
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
9
October 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 564
 Hoang et al.
Biomarkers in Adaptive Brain Stimulation
other may be difficult (Afshar et al., 2012; Stanslaski et al.,
2012).
DEPRESSION
Deep brain stimulation (DBS) for treatment resistant depression
(TRD) has developed over the past 10 years (Crowell et al., 2015)
with targeting of multiple sites, including subcallosal cingulate
(SCC) white matter or Brodmann area 25 gray matter, ventral
capsule/ventral striatum, nucleus accumbens, inferior thalamic
peduncles, medial forebrain bundle, and the lateral habenula
(Mayberg et al., 2005; Schlaepfer et al., 2013; Riva-Posse et al.,
2014; Crowell et al., 2015). While small trials demonstrated
efficacy even at long-term time points (Holtzheimer et al., 2012),
larger industry sponsored trials, such as BROADEN (St. Jude)
did not (Dougherty et al., 2015). Invasive electrophysiological
recordings from reward and mood circuitry are far less common
than those from movement centers (Lozano and Lipsman,
2013). However, a recent neurophysiological study combined
SCC DBS in depression with (non-invasive) EEG pre- and
post-operatively and observed that coherence of pre-operative
frontal lobe theta EEG signal across multiple recording sites
predicted a better response to DBS treatment (Broadway et al.,
2012).
The SCC is the most studied site, initially chosen following
imaging data showing changes in the SCC white matter in
response to standard antidepressant treatment (Mayberg et al.,
2000; Seminowicz et al., 2004; Mayberg, 2009). Lead placement
in DBS studies of SCC was initially anatomically guided to white
matter (Mayberg et al., 2000; Holtzheimer et al., 2012). However,
therapeutic responses to DBS differed among those studied,
and anatomical location did not predict those who would and
would not respond (Hamani et al., 2009). Further PET studies,
fiber tractography, DBS activation volumes and probabilistic
tractography subsequently supported a theory that SCC is part
of a larger circuit of multiple afferents to the frontal lobes as well
as fibers of passage in this area (Hartmann et al., 2015), which
may prove equally important as SCC in depression modulation
(Butson et al., 2007; Hamani et al., 2009; Lujan et al., 2013).
Thus, anatomical localization alone appears unable to predict
which specific white matter tract is being stimulated and which
frontal lobe target receives the stimulation. To overcome this
limitation, Riva-Posse et al. observed that clinical response to
SCC DBS was linked to proximity of the intersection of three
fiber bundles: (1) bilateral forceps minor of the anterior corpus
callosum, (2) bilateral cingulum bundles connecting ipsilateral
SCC to rostral, dorsal anterior, and mid-cingulate cortices, and
(3) medial branch of the uncinate fasciculus connecting the
subcallosal cingulate and medial frontal cortex rostrally and
subcallosal cingulate to the nucleus accumbens and anterior
thalamus (Riva-Posse et al., 2014). Prospective trials of this
intersection as well as directional steering and specific evaluation
of evoked responses to DBS in the various frontal lobe areas
(i.e., with ECoG) to evaluate each of the components of the fiber
bundles would be helpful in understanding if indeed tractography
provides a better target for depression modulation (Martens et al.,
2011; Riva-Posse et al., 2014).
Intraoperative testing is challenging in DBS for TRD as
patient response is highly variable and personal. Autonomic
effects (tachycardia and increases in skin conductance) appear to
correlate reproducibly in the OR with appropriate lead placement
via tractography as described above (Riva-Posse et al., 2014) and
may provide reliable biomarkers of post-operative response and
efficacy (Crowell et al., 2015). As another perioperative marker of
clinical efficacy, EEG frontal theta changes noted 1 month after
DBS appear to predict 6 month response to DBS (Broadway et al.,
2012). Further physiological biomarkers reflect subcortical limbic
changes in depression (Neumann et al., 2014). Each of these
quantifiable changes could be assessed as potential biomarkers
with respect to depression and validated as potentially relevant
biomarkers.
DYSTONIA
Primary dystonia is an uncommon movement disorder (∼16–
17/100,000 population) characterized by abnormal, repetitive
muscle contractions and postures (Steeves et al., 2012; Williams
et al., 2017). DBS to improve motor features of focal and
diffuse dystonia is FDA approved in the USA, though only
as a humanitarian device approval due to the low numbers
and decreased efficacy, which is equivalent to an orphan drug
approval. Of the dystonias, focal dystonia (i.e., cervical dystonia
or torticollis and writer’s cramp are examples) is the most
common, followed by genetic (i.e., DYT1) generalized dystonias
(Williams et al., 2017). Unlike Parkinson’s disease or tremor, the
time course to onset with changes in stimulation in dystonia
can take beyond seconds or minutes, usually taking weeks to
months to reach full effect. The onset effect of brain stimulation
in dystonia is difficult to predict, suggesting possible plasticity
or synaptic changes associated with stimulation, leading to
slow improvement in symptoms. However, Barow detected
suppression of low frequency pallidal activity during treatment
of phasic, dystonic movements, and this may improve our
understanding of this slow time to onset as a possible biomarker
(Barow et al., 2014). The slow dynamic effect also creates
difficulties with developing an adaptive or closed-loop system due
to unpredictable timing and might suggest only very slow (weeks
to months) adjustments (Wang et al., 2016). However, there are
several studies analyzing the differences in subcortical recorded
potentials between Parkinson’s disease and dystonia, both as
initial evidence to discover how the circuit changes underlying
these diseases differ and to develop biomarkers of dystonia
(Silberstein et al., 2003; Neumann et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2016).
For example, Wang et al. found no difference in biomarkers
between the two diseases (Wang et al., 2016) whereas Geng et al.
suggested more specificity (Geng et al., 2017), indicating that
biomarkers may in some instances be useful disease indicators.
ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE
As a predicted future health burden without good current
treatment, Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) may theoretically respond
to brain stimulation (Hardenacke et al., 2013b; Hescham et al.,
2013; Sharma et al., 2015). Novel techniques, such as DBS
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
10
October 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 564
 Hoang et al.
Biomarkers in Adaptive Brain Stimulation
of the fornix were developed as an offshoot of hypothalamic
stimulation when it was noted that fornix stimulation resulted
in improved recall (Laxton et al., 2010). It should be noted that
possible loss of functional integrity of the fornix in AD may
limit the effectiveness of fornix stimulation (Mielke et al., 2012).
However, it is difficult to test the efficacy of DBS applied to fornix
stimulation intraoperatively so biomarkers may be very helpful
to confirm appropriate electrode location as well as to set DBS
parameters.
Although fornix stimulation in clinical trials has shown
limited clinical efficacy (Ponce et al., 2015; Lozano et al.,
2016) the downstream effects of stimulation of the post-
commissural fornix (below the anterior commissure) on the
mammillary bodies remain unknown. The post-commissural
fornix antidromically stimulates the subiculum, since this is
the main hippocampal output, resulting in a large hippocampal
evoked potentials (Stypulkowski et al., 2014; Sweet et al., 2014).
This evoked potential (as recorded from the hippocampus) could
provide an excellent biomarker both to adjust fornix stimulation
amplitude (currently empirically determined) and to estimate if
there is indeed plasticity resulting following a period of fornix
stimulation, possibly leading to an on-demand fornix stimulation
system to maintain hippocampal evoked responses within a set,
optimal range. Although the current clinical application of fornix
stimulation does not include the medial septum (just in front of
the anterior commissure), additional stimulation of the medial
septum could facilitate memory and hippocampal vascular
changes through cholinergic enhancement, also resulting in an
evoked response within the hippocampus proper (Colgin et al.,
2003; Gu and Yakel, 2011). Further, DBS of the nucleus basalis
of Meynert, the primary cholinergic region for the cortex, may
diffusely enhance cholinergic function and also improve AD,
without direct fornix stimulation (Hardenacke et al., 2013a;
Sharma et al., 2015). A cholinergic sensory or biomarker within
the brain may be required to measure effectively such cholinergic
enhancement and to create a dose-response curve. Thus, there are
a number of clinical avenues which may enhanced the potential
treatment possibilities of brain stimulation for AD.
CONCLUSIONS
Identifying and verifying the usefulness of biomarkers for
accurate electrode placement and creating more effective
adaptive brain stimulation systems will require considerable
additional development, and is clearly subject to significant
research and initial clinical trials. Methods for optimal electrode
localization and verification of both symptom suppression
and physiological efficacy are clearly needed, likely through
modulation of appropriate neural networks. Placing stimulating
electrodes into defined anatomical targets in the operating
room without symptom suppression or intraoperative clinical
testing will require better imaging with emphasis on pre-
operative tractography and functional MRI as well as use of
biomarkers during surgery, as they are developed and validated.
Understanding pathophysiology and structural connectivity in
individual disease processes will elucidate key pathways and,
subsequently, the hubs of electrical activity for optimal sites
of stimulation. Spontaneous and evoked potentials, phase-
amplitude coupling, and other electrophysiological measures
can provide intraoperative data beyond imaging to place leads
in locations correlated with more reliable outcomes. Possible
neurochemical or other markers may also act as biomarkers
to join imaging and electrophysiological measures as suitable
signals for stimulation optimization. As external, wearable
devices become more widespread and available, further data on
motion and tremor may also eventually be included in adaptive
control on a long-term basis if these data can be communicated
effectively to an internal device (Roy et al., 2013; Shull et al.,
2014; Lieber et al., 2015). Further development in this area
has the potential to alter significantly our understanding of the
underlying circuitry and pathophysiology of neurologic disease,
as well as optimize treatment approaches.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
KH, IC, WG, and DT wrote this manuscript collectively, with
KH contributing the initial draft and subsequent significant
editing by all of the authors. All contributed to the ideas
contained within the manuscript and all contributed at least one
major section. All authors have reviewed and edited this final
version.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by NIH R01 NS079312, NIH R37
NS040984, and NIH UH3 NS103468.
REFERENCES
Afshar, P., Khambhati, A., Stanslaski, S., Carlson, D., Jensen, R., Linde, D., et al.
(2012). A translational platform for prototyping closed-loop neuromodulation
systems. Front. Neural Circuits 6:117. doi: 10.3389/fncir.2012.00117
Almeida, L., Martinez-Ramirez, D., Rossi, P. J., Peng, Z., Gunduz, A., and Okun,
M. S. (2015). Chasing tics in the human brain: development of open, scheduled
and closed loop responsive approaches to deep brain stimulation for tourette
syndrome. J. Clin. Neurol. 11, 122–131. doi: 10.3988/jcn.2015.11.2.122
Aminoff, M. J., Christine, C. W., Friedman, J. H., Chou, K. L., Lyons, K. E., Pahwa,
R., et al. (2011). Management of the hospitalized patient with Parkinson’s
disease: current state of the field and need for guidelines. Parkinsonism Relat.
Disord. 17, 139–145. doi: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2010.11.009
Anderson, C. J., Sheppard, D. T., Huynh, R., Anderson, D. N., Polar, C. A., and
Dorval, A. D. (2015). Subthalamic deep brain stimulation reduces pathological
information transmission to the thalamus in a rat model of parkinsonism.
Front. Neural Circuits 9:31. doi: 10.3389/fncir.2015.00031
Arlotti, M., Rosa, M., Marceglia, S., Barbieri, S., and Priori, A. (2016). The
adaptive deep brain stimulation challenge. Parkinsonism Relat. Disord. 28,
12–17. doi: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2016.03.020
Ascherio, A., and Schwarzschild, M. A. (2016). The epidemiology of Parkinson’s
disease:
risk
factors
and
prevention.
Lancet
Neurol.
15,
1257–1272.
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(16)30230-7
Bar-Gad, I., Elias, S., Vaadia, E., and Bergman, H. (2004). Complex locking
rather than complete cessation of neuronal activity in the globus pallidus
of
a
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine-treated
primate
in
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
11
October 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 564
 Hoang et al.
Biomarkers in Adaptive Brain Stimulation
response
to
pallidal
microstimulation.
J.
Neurosci.
24,
7410–7419.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1691-04.2004
Barow, E., Neumann, W. J., Brucke, C., Huebl, J., Horn, A., Brown, P.,
et al. (2014). Deep brain stimulation suppresses pallidal low frequency
activity in patients with phasic dystonic movements. Brain 137, 3012–3024.
doi: 10.1093/brain/awu258
Basu, I., Graupe, D., Tuninetti, D., Shukla, P., Slavin, K. V., Metman, L. V.,
et al. (2013). Pathological tremor prediction using surface electromyogram and
acceleration: potential use in ’ON-OFF’ demand driven deep brain stimulator
design. J. Neural Eng. 10:036019. doi: 10.1088/1741-2560/10/3/036019
Benabid, A. L., Chabardes, S., Mitrofanis, J., and Pollak, P. (2009). Deep brain
stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus for the treatment of Parkinson’s disease.
Lancet Neurol. 8, 67–81. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(08)70291-6
Berenyi, A., Belluscio, M., Mao, D., and Buzsaki, G. (2012). Closed-loop
control of epilepsy by transcranial electrical stimulation. Science 337, 735–737.
doi: 10.1126/science.1223154
Bernstein, J. G., Garrity, P. A., and Boyden, E. S. (2012). Optogenetics
and thermogenetics: technologies for controlling the activity of targeted
cells within intact neural circuits. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 22, 61–71.
doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2011.10.023
Blumenfeld, Z., Koop, M. M., Prieto, T. E., Shreve, L. A., Velisar, A., Quinn,
E. J., et al. (2017). Sixty-hertz stimulation improves bradykinesia and
amplifies subthalamic low-frequency oscillations. Mov. Disord. 32, 80–88.
doi: 10.1002/mds.26837
Broadway, J. M., Holtzheimer, P. E., Hilimire, M. R., Parks, N. A., Devylder, J.
E., Mayberg, H. S., et al. (2012). Frontal theta cordance predicts 6-month
antidepressant response to subcallosal cingulate deep brain stimulation for
treatment-resistant depression: a pilot study. Neuropsychopharmacology 37,
1764–1772. doi: 10.1038/npp.2012.23
Brocker, D. T., Swan, B. D., So, R. Q., Turner, D. A., Gross, R. E., and
Grill, W. M. (2017). Optimized temporal pattern of brain stimulation
designed
by
computational
evolution.
Sci.
Transl.
Med.
9:eaah3532.
doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.aah3532
Brocker, D. T., Swan, B. D., Turner, D. A., Gross, R. E., Tatter, S. B.,
Koop, M. M., et al. (2013). Improved efficacy of temporally non-regular
deep brain stimulation in Parkinson’s disease. Exp. Neurol. 239, 60–67.
doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2012.09.008
Butson, C. R., Cooper, S. E., Henderson, J. M., and Mcintyre, C. C. (2007). Patient-
specific analysis of the volume of tissue activated during deep brain stimulation.
Neuroimage 34, 661–670. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2006.09.034
Butson, C. R., Cooper, S. E., Henderson, J. M., Wolgamuth, B., and
Mcintyre,
C.
C.
(2011).
Probabilistic
analysis
of
activation
volumes
generated during deep brain stimulation. Neuroimage 54, 2096–2104.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.10.059
Butson, C. R., and Mcintyre, C. C. (2015). The use of stimulation field
models for deep brain stimulation programming. Brain Stimul. 8, 976–978.
doi: 10.1016/j.brs.2015.06.005
Cagnan, H., Pedrosa, D., Little, S., Pogosyan, A., Cheeran, B., Aziz, T., et al. (2017).
Stimulating at the right time: phase-specific deep brain stimulation. Brain 140,
132–145. doi: 10.1093/brain/aww286
Canolty, R. T., Edwards, E., Dalal, S. S., Soltani, M., Nagarajan, S. S., Kirsch, H. E.,
et al. (2006). High gamma power is phase-locked to theta oscillations in human
neocortex. Science 313, 1626–1628. doi: 10.1126/science.1128115
Canolty, R. T., and Knight, R. T. (2010). The functional role of cross-
frequency coupling. Trends Cogn. Sci. 14, 506–515. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2010.
09.001
Carlson, D., Linde, D., Isaacson, B., Afshar, P., Bourget, D., Stanslaski, S., et al.
(2013). A flexible algorithm framework for closed-loop neuromodulation
research systems. Conf. Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. 2013, 6146–6150.
doi: 10.1109/EMBC.2013.6610956
Carron, R., Chaillet, A., Filipchuk, A., Pasillas-Lepine, W., and Hammond, C.
(2013). Closing the loop of deep brain stimulation. Front. Syst. Neurosci. 7:112.
doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2013.00112
Chenji, G., Wright, M. L., Chou, K. L., Seidler, R. D., and Patil, P. G. (2017).
Parkinsonian gait improves with bilateral subthalamic nucleus deep brain
stimulation during cognitive multi-tasking. Parkinsonism Relat. Disord. 38,
72–79. doi: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2017.02.028
Colgin, L. L., Kramar, E. A., Gall, C. M., and Lynch, G. (2003). Septal modulation
of excitatory transmission in hippocampus. J. Neurophysiol. 90, 2358–2366.
doi: 10.1152/jn.00262.2003
Contarino, M. F., Bour, L. J., Verhagen, R., Lourens, M. A., De Bie, R. M., Van Den
Munckhof, P., et al. (2014). Directional steering: a novel approach to deep brain
stimulation. Neurology 83, 1163–1169. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000000823
Cook, R. J., Jones, L., Fracchia, G., Anderson, N., Miu, J., Meagher, L. J., et al.
(2015). Globus pallidus internus deep brain stimulation as rescue therapy
for refractory dyskinesias following effective subthalamic nucleus stimulation.
Stereotact. Funct. Neurosurg. 93, 25–29. doi: 10.1159/000365223
Crowell, A. L., Garlow, S. J., Riva-Posse, P., and Mayberg, H. S. (2015).
Characterizing the therapeutic response to deep brain stimulation for
treatment-resistant depression: a single center long-term perspective. Front.
Integr. Neurosci. 9:41. doi: 10.3389/fnint.2015.00041
De Hemptinne, C., Ryapolova-Webb, E. S., Air, E. L., Garcia, P. A., Miller, K. J.,
Ojemann, J. G., et al. (2013). Exaggerated phase-amplitude coupling in the
primary motor cortex in Parkinson disease. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110,
4780–4785. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1214546110
De Hemptinne, C., Swann, N. C., Ostrem, J. L., Ryapolova-Webb, E. S., San
Luciano, M., Galifianakis, N. B., et al. (2015). Therapeutic deep brain
stimulation reduces cortical phase-amplitude coupling in Parkinson’s disease.
Nat. Neurosci. 18, 779–786. doi: 10.1038/nn.3997
Delong, M. R., and Wichmann, T. (2015). Basal ganglia circuits as targets
for neuromodulation in parkinson disease. JAMA Neurol. 72, 1354–1360.
doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2015.2397
Deuschl, G., Raethjen, J., Hellriegel, H., and Elble, R. (2011). Treatment
of
patients
with
essential
tremor.
Lancet
Neurol.
10,
148–161.
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(10)70322-7
Dorval, A. D., and Grill, W. M. (2014). Deep brain stimulation of the
subthalamic nucleus reestablishes neuronal information transmission in the
6-OHDA rat model of parkinsonism. J. Neurophysiol. 111, 1949–1959.
doi: 10.1152/jn.00713.2013
Dorval, A. D., Kuncel, A. M., Birdno, M. J., Turner, D. A., and Grill, W. M. (2010).
Deep brain stimulation alleviates parkinsonian bradykinesia by regularizing
pallidal activity. J. Neurophysiol. 104, 911–921. doi: 10.1152/jn.00103.2010
Dorval,
A.
D.,
Muralidharan,
A.,
Jensen,
A.
L.,
Baker,
K.
B.,
and
Vitek,
J.
L.
(2015).
Information
in
pallidal
neurons
increases
with
parkinsonian
severity.
Parkinsonism
Relat.
Disord.
21,
1355–1361.
doi: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2015.09.045
Dorval, A. D., Russo, G. S., Hashimoto, T., Xu, W., Grill, W. M., and Vitek, J.
L. (2008). Deep brain stimulation reduces neuronal entropy in the MPTP-
primate model of Parkinson’s disease. J. Neurophysiol. 100, 2807–2818.
doi: 10.1152/jn.90763.2008
Dougherty, D. D., Rezai, A. R., Carpenter, L. L., Howland, R. H., Bhati,
M. T., O’reardon, J. P., et al. (2015). A randomized sham-controlled
trial of deep brain stimulation of the ventral capsule/ventral striatum
for chronic treatment-resistant depression. Biol. Psychiatry 78, 240–248.
doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2014.11.023
Durand, D. M. (2009). Control of seizure activity by electrical stimulation:
effect of frequency. Conf. Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. 2009, 2375.
doi: 10.1109/IEMBS.2009.5334993
Ekker, M. S., Janssen, S., Nonnekes, J., Bloem, B. R., and De Vries, N. M.
(2016). Neurorehabilitation for Parkinson’s disease: future perspectives for
behavioural adaptation. Parkinsonism Relat. Disord. 22(Suppl. 1), S73–S77.
doi: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2015.08.031
Fisher, R. S., and Velasco, A. L. (2014). Electrical brain stimulation for epilepsy.
Nat. Rev. Neurol. 10, 261–270. doi: 10.1038/nrneurol.2014.59
Foote, K. D., and Okun, M. S. (2005). Ventralis intermedius plus ventralis
oralis anterior and posterior deep brain stimulation for posttraumatic Holmes
tremor: two leads may be better than one: technical note. Neurosurgery 56,
E445; discussion E445. doi: 10.1227/01.NEU.0000157104.87448.78
Fox, M. D., Buckner, R. L., Liu, H., Chakravarty, M. M., Lozano, A. M., and Pascual-
Leone, A. (2014). Resting-state networks link invasive and noninvasive brain
stimulation across diverse psychiatric and neurological diseases. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 111, E4367–E4375. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1405003111
Gallay, M. N., Jeanmonod, D., Liu, J., and Morel, A. (2008). Human
pallidothalamic
and
cerebellothalamic
tracts:
anatomical
basis
for
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
12
October 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 564
 Hoang et al.
Biomarkers in Adaptive Brain Stimulation
functional stereotactic neurosurgery. Brain Struct. Funct. 212, 443–463.
doi: 10.1007/s00429-007-0170-0
Geng, X., Zhang, J., Jiang, Y., Ashkan, K., Foltynie, T., Limousin, P., et al.
(2017). Comparison of oscillatory activity in subthalamic nucleus in Parkinson’s
disease and dystonia. Neurobiol. Dis. 98, 100–107. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2016.
12.006
Gilbert, D. L., Bansal, A. S., Sethuraman, G., Sallee, F. R., Zhang, J., Lipps, T., et al.
(2004). Association of cortical disinhibition with tic, ADHD, and OCD severity
in Tourette syndrome. Mov. Disord. 19, 416–425. doi: 10.1002/mds.20044
Gmel, G. E., Hamilton, T. J., Obradovic, M., Gorman, R. B., Single, P. S., Chenery,
H. J., et al. (2015). A new biomarker for subthalamic deep brain stimulation
for patients with advanced Parkinson’s disease–a pilot study. J. Neural Eng.
12:066013. doi: 10.1088/1741-2560/12/6/066013
Grahn, P. J., Mallory, G. W., Khurram, O. U., Berry, B. M., Hachmann, J. T., Bieber,
A. J., et al. (2014). A neurochemical closed-loop controller for deep brain
stimulation: toward individualized smart neuromodulation therapies. Front.
Neurosci. 8:169. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2014.00169
Graupe,
D.,
Basu,
I.,
Tuninetti,
D.,
Vannemreddy,
P.,
and
Slavin,
K.
V. (2010). Adaptively controlling deep brain stimulation in essential
tremor patient via surface electromyography. Neurol. Res. 32, 899–904.
doi: 10.1179/016164110X12767786356354
Grill, W. M., Brocker, D. T., Swan, B. D., Kent, A. R., Turner, D. A., and Hickey, P.
T. (2015). Local Evoked Potentials Recorded during Subthalamic Nuceleus Deep
Brain Stimulation in Humans with Parkinson’s Disease. Chicago, IL: Society for
Neuroscience.
Gu, Z., and Yakel, J. L. (2011). Timing-dependent septal cholinergic induction
of
dynamic
hippocampal
synaptic
plasticity.
Neuron
71,
155–165.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.04.026
Haense, C., Muller-Vahl, K. R., Wilke, F., Schrader, C., Capelle, H. H., Geworski, L.,
et al. (2016). Effect of deep brain stimulation on regional cerebral blood flow in
patients with medically refractory tourette syndrome. Front. Psychiatry. 7:118.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2016.00118
Halpern, C. H., Samadani, U., Litt, B., Jaggi, J. L., and Baltuch, G. H.
(2008). Deep brain stimulation for epilepsy. Neurotherapeutics 5, 59–67.
doi: 10.1016/j.nurt.2007.10.065
Hamani, C., Mayberg, H., Snyder, B., Giacobbe, P., Kennedy, S., and Lozano,
A. M. (2009). Deep brain stimulation of the subcallosal cingulate gyrus
for depression: anatomical location of active contacts in clinical responders
and a suggested guideline for targeting. J. Neurosurg. 111, 1209–1215.
doi: 10.3171/2008.10.JNS08763
Hanson, T. L., Fuller, A. M., Lebedev, M. A., Turner, D. A., and Nicolelis,
M. A. (2012). Subcortical neuronal ensembles: an analysis of motor task
association, tremor, oscillations, and synchrony in human patients. J. Neurosci.
32, 8620–8632. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0750-12.2012
Hardenacke, K., Kuhn, J., Lenartz, D., Maarouf, M., Mai, J. K., Bartsch, C.,
et al. (2013a). Stimulate or degenerate: deep brain stimulation of the nucleus
basalis Meynert in Alzheimer dementia. World Neurosurg. 80, S27.e35–S27.e43.
doi: 10.1016/j.wneu.2012.12.005
Hardenacke, K., Shubina, E., Buhrle, C. P., Zapf, A., Lenartz, D., Klosterkotter,
J., et al. (2013b). Deep brain stimulation as a tool for improving cognitive
functioning in Alzheimer’s dementia: a systematic review. Front. Psychiatry
4:159. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2013.00159
Hartmann, C. J., Lujan, J. L., Chaturvedi, A., Goodman, W. K., Okun, M. S.,
Mcintyre, C. C., et al. (2015). Tractography activation patterns in dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex suggest better clinical responses in OCD DBS. Front. Neurosci.
9:519. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2015.00519
Hashimoto, T., Elder, C. M., Okun, M. S., Patrick, S. K., and Vitek, J. L. (2003).
Stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus changes the firing pattern of pallidal
neurons. J. Neurosci. 23, 1916–1923.
Heldman, D. A., Pulliam, C. L., Urrea Mendoza, E., Gartner, M., Giuffrida,
J. P., Montgomery, E. B. Jr., et al. (2016). Computer-guided deep brain
stimulation programming for parkinson’s disease. Neuromodulation 19,
127–132. doi: 10.1111/ner.12372
Henderson, J. M. (2012). “Connectomic surgery”: diffusion tensor imaging
(DTI) tractography as a targeting modality for surgical modulation of neural
networks. Front. Integr. Neurosci. 6:15. doi: 10.3389/fnint.2012.00015
Henderson, J. M., Pell, M., O’sullivan, D. J., Mccusker, E. A., Fung, V. S., Hedges, P.,
et al. (2002). Postmortem analysis of bilateral subthalamic electrode implants in
Parkinson’s disease. Mov. Disord. 17, 133–137. doi: 10.1002/mds.1261
Herron, J. A., Thompson, M. C., Brown, T., Chizeck, H. J., Ojemann, J. G., and Ko,
A. L. (2017). Chronic electrocorticography for sensing movement intention and
closed-loop deep brain stimulation with wearable sensors in an essential tremor
patient. J. Neurosurg. 127, 580–587. doi: 10.3171/2016.8.JNS16536
Hescham, S., Lim, L. W., Jahanshahi, A., Steinbusch, H. W., Prickaerts, J., Blokland,
A., et al. (2013). Deep brain stimulation of the forniceal area enhances memory
functions in experimental dementia: the role of stimulation parameters. Brain
Stimul. 6, 72–77. doi: 10.1016/j.brs.2012.01.008
Hill, K. K., Campbell, M. C., Mcneely, M. E., Karimi, M., Ushe, M., Tabbal, S. D.,
et al. (2013). Cerebral blood flow responses to dorsal and ventral STN DBS
correlate with gait and balance responses in Parkinson’s disease. Exp. Neurol.
241, 105–112. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2012.12.003
Holtzheimer, P. E., Kelley, M. E., Gross, R. E., Filkowski, M. M., Garlow, S. J.,
Barrocas, A., et al. (2012). Subcallosal cingulate deep brain stimulation for
treatment-resistant unipolar and bipolar depression. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 69,
150–158. doi: 10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2011.1456
Horn, A., Reich, M., Vorwerk, J., Li, N., Wenzel, G., Fang, Q., et al. (2017).
Connectivity Predicts deep brain stimulation outcome in Parkinson disease.
Ann. Neurol. 82, 67–78. doi: 10.1002/ana.24974
Jankovic, J., and Kurlan, R. (2011). Tourette syndrome: evolving concepts. Mov.
Disord. 26, 1149–1156. doi: 10.1002/mds.23618
Kent,
A.
R.,
and
Grill,
W.
M.
(2012).
Recording
evoked
potentials
during
deep
brain
stimulation:
development
and
validation
of
instrumentation to suppress the stimulus artefact. J. Neural Eng. 9:036004.
doi: 10.1088/1741-2560/9/3/036004
Kent, A. R., Swan, B. D., Brocker, D. T., Turner, D. A., Gross, R. E., and Grill,
W. M. (2015). Measurement of evoked potentials during thalamic deep brain
stimulation. Brain Stimul. 8, 42–56. doi: 10.1016/j.brs.2014.09.017
Khobragade, N., Graupe, D., and Tuninetti, D. (2015). Towards fully automated
closed-loop Deep Brain Stimulation in Parkinson’s disease patients: a
LAMSTAR-based tremor predictor. Conf. Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. 2015,
2616–2619. doi: 10.1109/EMBC.2015.7318928
Kuhn, A. A., Kupsch, A., Schneider, G. H., and Brown, P. (2006). Reduction
in
subthalamic
8-35 Hz
oscillatory
activity
correlates
with
clinical
improvement in Parkinson’s disease. Eur. J. Neurosci. 23, 1956–1960.
doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2006.04717.x
Kuhn, A. A., Tsui, A., Aziz, T., Ray, N., Brucke, C., Kupsch, A., et al. (2009).
Pathological synchronisation in the subthalamic nucleus of patients with
Parkinson’s disease relates to both bradykinesia and rigidity. Exp. Neurol. 215,
380–387. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2008.11.008
Laxton, A. W., Tang-Wai, D. F., Mcandrews, M. P., Zumsteg, D., Wennberg,
R., Keren, R., et al. (2010). A phase I trial of deep brain stimulation
of memory circuits in Alzheimer’s disease. Ann. Neurol. 68, 521–534.
doi: 10.1002/ana.22089
Lebedev, M. A., and Nicolelis, M. A. (2006). Brain-machine interfaces: past, present
and future. Trends Neurosci. 29, 536–546. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2006.07.004
Leckman,
J.
F.
(2002).
Tourette’s
syndrome.
Lancet
360,
1577–1586.
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(02)11526-1
Lee, A., and Gilbert, R. M. (2016). Epidemiology of Parkinson Disease. Neurol.
Clin. 34, 955–965. doi: 10.1016/j.ncl.2016.06.012
Leuthardt, E. C., Schalk, G., Moran, D., and Ojemann, J. G. (2006). The emerging
world of motor neuroprosthetics: a neurosurgical perspective. Neurosurgery 59,
1–14. discussion 1-14. doi: 10.1227/01.NEU.0000221506.06947.AC
Lieber, B., Taylor, B. E., Appelboom, G., Mckhann, G., and Connolly,
E. S. Jr. (2015). Motion sensors to assess and monitor medical and
surgical management of parkinson disease. World Neurosurg. 84, 561–566.
doi: 10.1016/j.wneu.2015.03.024
Little, S., Beudel, M., Zrinzo, L., Foltynie, T., Limousin, P., Hariz, M., et al. (2016a).
Bilateral adaptive deep brain stimulation is effective in Parkinson’s disease. J.
Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatr. 87, 717–721. doi: 10.1136/jnnp-2015-310972
Little, S., and Brown, P. (2012). What brain signals are suitable for feedback control
of deep brain stimulation in Parkinson’s disease? Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1265,
9–24. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2012.06650.x
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
13
October 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 564
 Hoang et al.
Biomarkers in Adaptive Brain Stimulation
Little, S., Pogosyan, A., Neal, S., Zavala, B., Zrinzo, L., Hariz, M., et al. (2013).
Adaptive deep brain stimulation in advanced Parkinson disease. Ann. Neurol.
74, 449–457. doi: 10.1002/ana.23951
Little, S., Tripoliti, E., Beudel, M., Pogosyan, A., Cagnan, H., Herz, D., et al. (2016b).
Adaptive deep brain stimulation for Parkinson’s disease demonstrates reduced
speech side effects compared to conventional stimulation in the acute setting. J.
Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatr. 87, 1388–1389. doi: 10.1136/jnnp-2016-313518
Lozano, A. M., Fosdick, L., Chakravarty, M. M., Leoutsakos, J. M., Munro, C.,
Oh, E., et al. (2016). A phase II study of fornix deep brain stimulation in mild
Alzheimer’s disease. J. Alzheimers. Dis. 54, 777–787. doi: 10.3233/JAD-160017
Lozano,
A.
M.,
and
Lipsman,
N.
(2013).
Probing
and
regulating
dysfunctional circuits using deep brain stimulation. Neuron 77, 406–424.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.01.020
Lujan, J. L., Chaturvedi, A., Choi, K. S., Holtzheimer, P. E., Gross, R. E.,
Mayberg, H. S., et al. (2013). Tractography-activation models applied to
subcallosal cingulate deep brain stimulation. Brain Stimul. 6, 737–739.
doi: 10.1016/j.brs.2013.03.008
Mackinnon, C. D., Webb, R. M., Silberstein, P., Tisch, S., Asselman, P.,
Limousin, P., et al. (2005). Stimulation through electrodes implanted near
the subthalamic nucleus activates projections to motor areas of cerebral
cortex in patients with Parkinson’s disease. Eur. J. Neurosci. 21, 1394–1402.
doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2005.03952.x
Maling,
N.,
Hashemiyoon,
R.,
Foote,
K.
D.,
Okun,
M.
S.,
and
Sanchez,
J.
C.
(2012).
Increased
thalamic
gamma
band
activity
correlates
with
symptom
relief
following
deep
brain
stimulation
in
humans
with
Tourette’s
syndrome.
PLoS
ONE
7:e44215.
doi: 10.1371/annotation/446ec4cb-63da-42d2-afc6-7e8459b2abbe
Marsden, J., Limousin-Dowsey, P., Fraix, V., Pollak, P., Odin, P., and
Brown,
P.
(2001).
Intermuscular
coherence
in
Parkinson’s
disease:
effects of subthalamic nucleus stimulation. Neuroreport 12, 1113–1117.
doi: 10.1097/00001756-200105080-00013
Martens, H. C., Toader, E., Decre, M. M., Anderson, D. J., Vetter, R., Kipke, D. R.,
et al. (2011). Spatial steering of deep brain stimulation volumes using a novel
lead design. Clin. Neurophysiol. 122, 558–566. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2010.07.026
Matias, C. M., Silva, D., Machado, A. G., and Cooper, S. E. (2016). “Rescue” of
bilateral subthalamic stimulation by bilateral pallidal stimulation: case report.
J. Neurosurg. 124, 417–421. doi: 10.3171/2015.1.JNS141604
Mayberg, H. S. (2009). Targeted electrode-based modulation of neural circuits for
depression. J. Clin. Invest. 119, 717–725. doi: 10.1172/JCI38454
Mayberg, H. S., Brannan, S. K., Tekell, J. L., Silva, J. A., Mahurin, R. K., Mcginnis,
S., et al. (2000). Regional metabolic effects of fluoxetine in major depression:
serial changes and relationship to clinical response. Biol. Psychiatry 48, 830–843.
doi: 10.1016/S0006-3223(00)01036-2
Mayberg, H. S., Lozano, A. M., Voon, V., Mcneely, H. E., Seminowicz, D., Hamani,
C., et al. (2005). Deep brain stimulation for treatment-resistant depression.
Neuron 45, 651–660. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2005.02.014
Meidahl, A. C., Tinkhauser, G., Herz, D. M., Cagnan, H., Debarros, J., and Brown,
P. (2017). Adaptive deep brain stimulation for movement disorders: the long
road to clinical therapy. Mov. Disord. 32, 810–819. doi: 10.1002/mds.27022
Mielke, M. M., Okonkwo, O. C., Oishi, K., Mori, S., Tighe, S., Miller, M. I.,
et al. (2012). Fornix integrity and hippocampal volume predict memory
decline and progression to Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement. 8, 105–113.
doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2011.05.2416
Mink, J. W. (2001). Basal ganglia dysfunction in Tourette’s syndrome: a new
hypothesis. Pediatr. Neurol. 25, 190–198. doi: 10.1016/S0887-8994(01)00262-4
Moran, A., Bergman, H., Israel, Z., and Bar-Gad, I. (2008). Subthalamic nucleus
functional organization revealed by parkinsonian neuronal oscillations and
synchrony. Brain 131, 3395–3409. doi: 10.1093/brain/awn270
Morita, H., Hass, C. J., Moro, E., Sudhyadhom, A., Kumar, R., and Okun, M.
S. (2014). Pedunculopontine nucleus stimulation: where are we now and
what needs to be done to move the field forward? Front. Neurol. 5:243.
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2014.00243
Morrell,
M.
(2006).
Brain
stimulation
for
epilepsy:
can
scheduled
or
responsive neurostimulation stop seizures? Curr. Opin. Neurol. 19, 164–168.
doi: 10.1097/01.wco.0000218233.60217.84
Morrell, M. J., and RNS System in Epilepsy Study Group. (2011). Responsive
cortical stimulation for the treatment of medically intractable partial epilepsy.
Neurology 77, 1295–1304. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182302056
Neumann, W. J., Huebl, J., Brucke, C., Gabriels, L., Bajbouj, M., Merkl, A., et al.
(2014). Different patterns of local field potentials from limbic DBS targets
in patients with major depressive and obsessive compulsive disorder. Mol.
Psychiatry 19, 1186–1192. doi: 10.1038/mp.2014.2
Neumann, W. J., Jha, A., Bock, A., Huebl, J., Horn, A., Schneider, G. H., et al.
(2015). Cortico-pallidal oscillatory connectivity in patients with dystonia. Brain
138, 1894–1906. doi: 10.1093/brain/awv109
Neumann, W. J., Staub, F., Horn, A., Schanda, J., Mueller, J., Schneider, G. H.,
et al. (2016). Deep brain recordings using an implanted pulse generator in
Parkinson’s disease. Neuromodulation 19, 20–24. doi: 10.1111/ner.12348
Noor, M. S., Murari, K., Mccracken, C. B., and Kiss, Z. H. (2016). Spatiotemporal
dynamics of cortical perfusion in response to thalamic deep brain stimulation.
Neuroimage 126, 131–139. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.11.017
Odekerken, V. J., Boel, J. A., Schmand, B. A., De Haan, R. J., Figee,
M., Van Den Munckhof, P., et al. (2016). GPi vs. STN deep brain
stimulation for Parkinson disease: three-year follow-up. Neurology 86, 755–761.
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000002401
Okun, M. S., Foote, K. D., Wu, S. S., Ward, H. E., Bowers, D., Rodriguez, R.
L., et al. (2013). A trial of scheduled deep brain stimulation for Tourette
syndrome: moving away from continuous deep brain stimulation paradigms.
JAMA Neurol. 70, 85–94. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.580
Oswal, A., Beudel, M., Zrinzo, L., Limousin, P., Hariz, M., Foltynie, T., et al. (2016).
Deep brain stimulation modulates synchrony within spatially and spectrally
distinct resting state networks in Parkinson’s disease. Brain 139, 1482–1496.
doi: 10.1093/brain/aww048
Patil,
P.
G.,
and
Turner,
D.
A.
(2008).
The
development
of
brain-
machine interface neuroprosthetic devices. Neurotherapeutics 5, 137–146.
doi: 10.1016/j.nurt.2007.11.002
Ponce, F. A., Asaad, W., Foote, K. D., Anderson, W. S., Cosgrove, R., Baltuch,
G. H., et al. (2015). 130 Bilateral fornix deep brain stimulation for alzheimer
disease: surgical safety in the advance trial. Neurosurgery 62(Suppl. 1), 207.
doi: 10.1227/01.neu.0000467092.68817.3e
Priori, A., Foffani, G., Rossi, L., and Marceglia, S. (2013a). Adaptive deep brain
stimulation (aDBS) controlled by local field potential oscillations. Exp. Neurol.
245, 77–86. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2012.09.013
Priori, A., Giannicola, G., Rosa, M., Marceglia, S., Servello, D., Sassi, M.,
et al. (2013b). Deep brain electrophysiological recordings provide clues to
the pathophysiology of Tourette syndrome. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 37,
1063–1068. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2013.01.011
Quinn, E. J., Blumenfeld, Z., Velisar, A., Koop, M. M., Shreve, L. A., Trager,
M. H., et al. (2015). Beta oscillations in freely moving Parkinson’s subjects
are attenuated during deep brain stimulation. Mov. Disord. 30, 1750–1758.
doi: 10.1002/mds.26376
Rehan, M., and Hong, K. S. (2013). Modeling and automatic feedback control of
tremor: adaptive estimation of deep brain stimulation. PLoS ONE 8:e62888.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0062888
Riva-Posse, P., Choi, K. S., Holtzheimer, P. E., Mcintyre, C. C., Gross, R. E.,
Chaturvedi, A., et al. (2014). Defining critical white matter pathways mediating
successful subcallosal cingulate deep brain stimulation for treatment-
resistant depression. Biol. Psychiatry 76, 963–969. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2014.
03.029
Rosa, M., Arlotti, M., Ardolino, G., Cogiamanian, F., Marceglia, S., Di Fonzo, A.,
et al. (2015). Adaptive deep brain stimulation in a freely moving Parkinsonian
patient. Mov. Disord. 30, 1003–1005. doi: 10.1002/mds.26241
Rouse, A. G., Stanslaski, S. R., Cong, P., Jensen, R. M., Afshar, P., Ullestad, D., et al.
(2011). A chronic generalized bi-directional brain-machine interface. J. Neural
Eng. 8:036018. doi: 10.1088/1741-2560/8/3/036018
Roy, S. H., Cole, B. T., Gilmore, L. D., De Luca, C. J., Thomas, C. A., Saint-
Hilaire, M. M., et al. (2013). High-resolution tracking of motor disorders in
Parkinson’s disease during unconstrained activity. Mov. Disord. 28, 1080–1087.
doi: 10.1002/mds.25391
Salanova, V., Witt, T., Worth, R., Henry, T. R., Gross, R. E., Nazzaro,
J.
M.,
et
al.
(2015).
Long-term
efficacy
and
safety
of
thalamic
stimulation for drug-resistant partial epilepsy. Neurology 84, 1017–1025.
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000001334
Santaniello, S., Fiengo, G., Glielmo, L., and Grill, W. M. (2011). Closed-loop
control of deep brain stimulation: a simulation study. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst.
Rehabil. Eng. 19, 15–24. doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2010.2081377
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
14
October 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 564
 Hoang et al.
Biomarkers in Adaptive Brain Stimulation
Schlaepfer, T. E., Bewernick, B. H., Kayser, S., Madler, B., and Coenen, V. A.
(2013). Rapid effects of deep brain stimulation for treatment-resistant major
depression. Biol. Psychiatry 73, 1204–1212. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.01.034
Schlenstedt, C., Shalash, A., Muthuraman, M., Falk, D., Witt, K., and Deuschl,
G. (2017). Effect of high-frequency subthalamic neurostimulation on gait and
freezing of gait in Parkinson’s disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Eur. J. Neurol. 24, 18–26. doi: 10.1111/ene.13167
Seminowicz,
D.
A.,
Mayberg,
H.
S.,
Mcintosh,
A.
R.,
Goldapple,
K.,
Kennedy, S., Segal, Z., et al. (2004). Limbic-frontal circuitry in major
depression:
a
path
modeling
metanalysis.
Neuroimage
22,
409–418.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.01.015
Sharma, M., Deogaonkar, M., and Rezai, A. (2015). Assessment of potential targets
for deep brain stimulation in patients with Alzheimer’s disease. J. Clin. Med.
Res. 7, 501–505. doi: 10.14740/jocmr2127w
Shukla, P., Basu, I., Graupe, D., Tuninetti, D., and Slavin, K. V. (2012). A neural
network-based design of an on-off adaptive control for Deep Brain Stimulation
in movement disorders. Conf. Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. 2012, 4140–4143.
doi: 10.1109/EMBC.2012.6346878
Shull, P. B., Jirattigalachote, W., Hunt, M. A., Cutkosky, M. R., and Delp, S. L.
(2014). Quantified self and human movement: a review on the clinical impact of
wearable sensing and feedback for gait analysis and intervention. Gait Posture
40, 11–19. doi: 10.1016/j.gaitpost.2014.03.189
Silberstein, P., Kuhn, A. A., Kupsch, A., Trottenberg, T., Krauss, J. K., Wohrle,
J. C., et al. (2003). Patterning of globus pallidus local field potentials
differs between Parkinson’s disease and dystonia. Brain 126, 2597–2608.
doi: 10.1093/brain/awg267
Sriram, A., Foote, K. D., Oyama, G., Kwak, J., Zeilman, P. R., and Okun, M. S.
(2014). Brittle dyskinesia following STN but not GPi deep brain stimulation.
Tremor Other Hyperkinet. Mov. (N. Y). 4, 242. doi: 10.7916/D8KS6PPR
Stanslaski, S., Afshar, P., Cong, P., Giftakis, J., Stypulkowski, P., Carlson, D.,
et al. (2012). Design and validation of a fully implantable, chronic, closed-
loop neuromodulation device with concurrent sensing and stimulation. IEEE
Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 20, 410–421. doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2012.
2183617
Steeves, T. D., Day, L., Dykeman, J., Jette, N., and Pringsheim, T. (2012). The
prevalence of primary dystonia: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Mov.
Disord. 27, 1789–1796. doi: 10.1002/mds.25244
Steigerwald, F., Muller, L., Johannes, S., Matthies, C., and Volkmann, J. (2016).
Directional deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus: a pilot
study using a novel neurostimulation device. Mov. Disord. 31, 1240–1243.
doi: 10.1002/mds.26669
Steiner, L. A., Neumann, W. J., Staub-Bartelt, F., Herz, D. M., Tan, H.,
Pogosyan, A., et al. (2017). Subthalamic beta dynamics mirror Parkinsonian
bradykinesia months after neurostimulator implantation. Mov. Disord.
doi: 10.1002/mds.27068
Stypulkowski, P. H., Stanslaski, S. R., Denison, T. J., and Giftakis, J. E. (2013).
Chronic evaluation of a clinical system for deep brain stimulation and
recording of neural network activity. Stereotact. Funct. Neurosurg. 91, 220–232.
doi: 10.1159/000345493
Stypulkowski, P. H., Stanslaski, S. R., Jensen, R. M., Denison, T. J., and Giftakis,
J. E. (2014). Brain stimulation for epilepsy–local and remote modulation
of network excitability. Brain Stimul. 7, 350–358. doi: 10.1016/j.brs.2014.
02.002
Swann, N. C., De Hemptinne, C., Miocinovic, S., Qasim, S., Wang, S. S., Ziman, N.,
et al. (2016). Gamma oscillations in the hyperkinetic state detected with chronic
human brain recordings in parkinson’s disease. J. Neurosci. 36, 6445–6458.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1128-16.2016
Sweet, J. A., Eakin, K. C., Munyon, C. N., and Miller, J. P. (2014). Improved
learning and memory with theta-burst stimulation of the fornix in rat model
of traumatic brain injury. Hippocampus 24, 1592–1600. doi: 10.1002/hipo.
22338
Tinkhauser, G., Pogosyan, A., Little, S., Beudel, M., Herz, D. M., Tan, H.,
et al. (2017). The modulatory effect of adaptive deep brain stimulation on
beta bursts in Parkinson’s disease. Brain 140, 1053–1067. doi: 10.1093/brain/
awx010
Trager, M. H., Koop, M. M., Velisar, A., Blumenfeld, Z., Nikolau, J. S., Quinn, E.
J., et al. (2016). Subthalamic beta oscillations are attenuated after withdrawal
of chronic high frequency neurostimulation in Parkinson’s disease. Neurobiol.
Dis. 96, 22–30. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2016.08.003
Vandewalle, V., Van Der Linden, C., Groenewegen, H. J., and Caemaert, J. (1999).
Stereotactic treatment of Gilles de la Tourette syndrome by high frequency
stimulation of thalamus. Lancet 353, 724. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(98)05964-9
Vansteensel, M. J., Pels, E. G., Bleichner, M. G., Branco, M. P., Denison,
T., Freudenburg, Z. V., et al. (2016). Fully Implanted Brain-Computer
Interface in a Locked-In Patient with ALS. N. Engl. J. Med. 375, 2060–2066.
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1608085
Volkmann, J., Chabardes, S., Steinke, G. K., and Carcieri, S. (2016). 375
DIRECT DBS: a prospective, multicenter clinical trial with blinding for a
directional deep brain stimulation lead. Neurosurgery 63 (Suppl. 1), 211–212.
doi: 10.1227/01.neu.0000489863.00935.ea
Waldau, B., Clayton, D. A., Gasperson, L. B., and Turner, D. A. (2011). Analysis
of the time course of the effect of subthalamic nucleus stimulation upon
hand function in Parkinson’s patients. Stereotact. Funct. Neurosurg. 89, 48–55.
doi: 10.1159/000323340
Wang, D. D., De Hemptinne, C., Miocinovic, S., Qasim, S. E., Miller, A. M.,
Ostrem, J. L., et al. (2016). Subthalamic local field potentials in Parkinson’s
disease and isolated dystonia: an evaluation of potential biomarkers. Neurobiol.
Dis. 89, 213–222. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2016.02.015
Weinberger, M., Mahant, N., Hutchison, W. D., Lozano, A. M., Moro, E., Hodaie,
M., et al. (2006). Beta oscillatory activity in the subthalamic nucleus and its
relation to dopaminergic response in Parkinson’s disease. J. Neurophysiol. 96,
3248–3256. doi: 10.1152/jn.00697.2006
Whitmer, D., De Solages, C., Hill, B., Yu, H., Henderson, J. M., and Bronte-Stewart,
H. (2012). High frequency deep brain stimulation attenuates subthalamic
and cortical rhythms in Parkinson’s disease. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 6:155.
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2012.00155
Widge, A. S., and Sahay, A. (2016). Closing the loop in deep brain
stimulation for psychiatric disorders: lessons from motor neural prosthetics.
Neuropsychopharmacology 41, 379–380. doi: 10.1038/npp.2015.241
Williams, L., Mcgovern, E., Kimmich, O., Molloy, A., Beiser, I., Butler, J. S., et al.
(2017). Epidemiological, clinical and genetic aspects of adult onset isolated focal
dystonia in Ireland. Eur. J. Neurol. 24, 73–81. doi: 10.1111/ene.13133
Williams, N. R., Foote, K. D., and Okun, M. S. (2014). STN vs. GPi deep brain
stimulation: translating the rematch into clinical practice. Mov. Disord. Clin.
Pract. 1, 24–35. doi: 10.1002/mdc3.12004
Wingeier, B., Tcheng, T., Koop, M. M., Hill, B. C., Heit, G., and Bronte-
Stewart, H. M. (2006). Intra-operative STN DBS attenuates the prominent
beta rhythm in the STN in Parkinson’s disease. Exp. Neurol. 197, 244–251.
doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2005.09.016
Yamamoto, T., Katayama, Y., Ushiba, J., Yoshino, H., Obuchi, T., Kobayashi,
K., et al. (2013). On-demand control system for deep brain stimulation for
treatment of intention tremor. Neuromodulation 16, 230–235; discussion 235.
doi: 10.1111/j.1525-1403.2012.00521.x
Yanagisawa, T., Yamashita, O., Hirata, M., Kishima, H., Saitoh, Y., Goto,
T., et al. (2012). Regulation of motor representation by phase-amplitude
coupling
in
the
sensorimotor
cortex.
J.
Neurosci.
32,
15467–15475.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2929-12.2012
Zamora-Lopez, G., Zhou, C., and Kurths, J. (2011). Exploring brain function from
anatomical connectivity. Front. Neurosci. 5:83. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2011.00083
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2017 Hoang, Cassar, Grill and Turner. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY).
The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) or licensor are credited and that the original publication in this
journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution
or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org
15
October 2017 | Volume 11 | Article 564
