 https://doi.org/10.1177/0269216318779238
Palliative Medicine
2018, Vol. 32(9) 1465 
–1473
© The Author(s) 2018
Article reuse guidelines: 
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/0269216318779238
journals.sagepub.com/home/pmj
Ambulance staff and end-of-life hospital 
admissions: A qualitative interview study
Sarah Hoare1
, Michael P Kelly1, Larissa Prothero2  
and Stephen Barclay1
Abstract
Background: Hospital admissions for end-of-life patients, particularly those who die shortly after being admitted, are recognised to 
be an international policy problem. How patients come to be transferred to hospital for care, and the central role of decisions made 
by ambulance staff in facilitating transfer, are under-explored.
Aim: To understand the role of ambulance staff in the admission to hospital of patients close to the end of life.
Design: Qualitative interviews, using particular patient cases as a basis for discussion, analysed thematically.
Participants/setting: Ambulance staff (n = 6) and other healthcare staff (total staff n = 30), involved in the transfer of patients (the 
case-patients) aged more than 65 years to a large English hospital who died within 3 days of admission with either cancer, chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease or dementia.
Results: Ambulance interviewees were broadly positive about enabling people to die at home, provided they could be sure that they 
would not benefit from treatment available in hospital. Barriers for non-conveyance included difficulties arranging care particularly 
out-of-hours, limited available patient information and service emphasis on emergency care.
Conclusion: Ambulance interviewees fulfilled an important role in the admission of end-of-life patients to hospital, frequently having 
to decide whether to leave a patient at home or to instigate transfer to hospital. Their difficulty in facilitating non-hospital care at the 
end of life challenges the negative view of near end-of-life hospital admissions as failures. Hospital provision was sought for dying 
patients in need of care which was inaccessible in the community.
Keywords
Hospitals, patient admissions, ambulances, palliative care, allied health personnel, interviews
What is already known about the topic?
•
•
Hospital admissions immediately prior to the end of life are considered negatively in many policy documents, with home 
assumed to be a better place to die.
•
•
Ambulance staff struggle with limited patient information and the need to make time-critical decisions when caring for 
end-of-life patients.
•
•
Little is known about why end-of-life ambulance transfers to hospital occur.
What this paper adds?
•
•
Ambulance staff positively viewed home deaths, but were limited in facilitating them.
•
•
Barriers for non-conveyance to hospital included difficulties arranging out-of-hours care, limited available patient infor-
mation and service emphasis on emergency care.
Implications for practice, theory or policy
•
•
Accessible hospital care is important and highly relevant in end-of-life provision for some patients.
•
•
Sociological focus on personnel actions and the social structure in which they conducted these provides useful lens to 
consider end-of-life admissions.
1Primary Care Unit, Department of Public Health and Primary Care, 
University of Cambridge School of Clinical Medicine, Cambridge, UK
2East of England Ambulance Service NHS Trust, Cambridgeshire, UK
Corresponding author:
Sarah Hoare, Primary Care Unit, Department of Public Health and 
Primary Care, University of Cambridge School of Clinical Medicine, 
Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Forvie Site, Cambridge CB2 0SR, UK. 
Email: Seh91@medschl.cam.ac.uk
779238 PMJ0010.1177/0269216318779238Palliative MedicineHoare et al.
research-article2018
Original Article
 1466 
Palliative Medicine 32(9)
Introduction
End-of-life hospital admissions, particularly for those who 
die shortly after admission, are viewed as failures in many 
international healthcare systems.1 They are typically 
referred to as ‘preventable’, ‘avoidable’ and ‘undesirable’ 
because they contravene the prevalent approach of man-
aged and planned end-of-life care and seem to negate 
ideas about patient choice over place of death.2 While in 
practice hospital admissions for such patients have been 
demonstrated to be sometimes desirable and necessary,3–7 
and the presumption that most patients want to die at 
home has been challenged,8 apparently inappropriate hos-
pital admissions remain a persistent policy concern. In the 
United Kingdom, for instance, the proportion of deaths in 
hospital is used as a measure of end-of-life care quality, 
with fewer admissions being a mark of success.9
In the United Kingdom, ambulance services can have a 
critical role in these admissions, especially in decisions 
about whether to transfer dying patients to hospital.10,11 
End-of-life admissions are known to be in part a conse-
quence of barriers faced by ambulance staff in providing 
care to patients they attend.11 It is recognised in policy that 
ambulance staff work with patients close to the end of life 
is made difficult by limited availability of information on 
patient history and care preferences and the need to make 
time-critical decisions.11,12 Research with ambulance staff 
has shown that these decisions require sensitive balancing 
of patient preferences with the views of family and carers 
and relevant policies.11 Weighing up the risks and benefits 
of hospital for these patients is challenging,13,14 particularly 
within a typical context of urgent patient care needs15 and 
limited staff education on end-of-life care practices.16,17
We investigated how these challenges affect staff and in 
practice how they lead to admissions. We explore how and 
why patients at the end-of-life are transferred to hospital 
through the use of semi-structured interviews with ambu-
lance staff who were involved in the admission of patients 
close to the end of life to a large English hospital.
Methods
The study and case-patients
The research presented was part of a retrospective study 
about end-of-life hospital admissions,2,18 which used what 
Yin19 has called an embedded, multiple unit of analysis, sin-
gle-case study approach. Interviews were conducted with 
healthcare staff, including ambulance staff (n = 30) and next-
of-kin (n = 3) involved in hospital admissions for patients 
close to the end of life. Interviews were clustered together 
to form cases which described a patient’s admission to hos-
pital, with nine admissions in total across the dataset. These 
were the basis for discussion in the interview.
Ambulance interviewees included paramedics (senior 
ambulance staff, n = 2), student paramedics (n = 3) and an 
emergency care assistant (junior ambulance staff, n = 1). 
This article also draws on interviews with other health-
care staff from hospital and community settings included 
in the dataset.
The deceased patients who were the focus of the inter-
view clusters (‘case-patients’) were purposively selected for 
inclusion if they had died within 3 days of admission to hospi-
tal, were aged more than 65 years and had either cancer, 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or dementia 
recorded on their medical certificate of cause of death. All 
case-patients died in a large English hospital that serves a 
geographically diverse area with varying levels of economic 
deprivation. Four of the nine cases included in the total data-
set involved interviews with ambulance staff. Of these cases, 
three case-patients were female and all were aged more than 
70 years, with two aged between 80 and 89 years and one 
aged more than 90 years. Half of the case-patients lived at 
home cared for by family members, and half lived in residen-
tial homes. Many of the case-patients had been previously 
admitted to hospital in the last year for a range of symptoms 
including infections, fractures and symptoms directly related 
to their dementia, COPD or cancer diagnosis. Table 1 outlines 
further characteristics of these case-patients.
Interviews
Ambulance staff were identified from ambulance vehicle 
records in the patients’ hospital notes, which were matched 
to staff details with the help of a research paramedic in the 
local ambulance service. The majority of ambulance staff 
interviews were conducted in person (n = 5) at either the 
interviewees’ place of work or at the hospital, with one 
conducted over the telephone; all lasted approximately 
30 min and were audio-recorded. The interviews were 
semi-structured and explored the interviewees’ involve-
ment in the admission of a case-patient in particular and, 
prompted by this discussion, their views on providing care 
to patients close to the end of life in general.
All study interviews were conducted in 2012–2013 by 
Hoare and occurred within a month of the case-patient’s 
death. Participants who agreed to take part were sent 
study information in advance, with consent taken at the 
interview. Identifying details have been changed to pro-
tect the anonymity of the deceased case-patients and the 
interviewees. The study was approved by the Hertfordshire 
Research Ethics Committee (England; #11/EE/0491), and 
approval to view the patients’ medical records to identify 
potential interviewees was granted by the then National 
Information Governance Board (ECC 1-5 (G)/2012).
Analysis and synthesis
Interviews produced highly detailed accounts of the ambu-
lance staff decisions to facilitate admission to hospital for 
both case-patients and similar patients they had cared for 
previously. They provided a rich description of the prob-
lems ambulance staff encountered and an understanding 
 Hoare et al. 
1467
of how they made sense of the case-patients’ situation 
and how it could best be resolved. The analysis and syn-
thesis of these accounts were informed by Giddens’ struc-
turation theory. Structuration theory acknowledges both 
the individual and the society they live in and emphasises 
their interaction.20 In this approach, interviewees were 
understood to be knowledgeable about their actions – in 
this case, their involvement in the admission.20 The episte-
mological rationale was that an individual’s knowledge 
about what they did may be investigated empirically via 
the accounts they provide of their actions.21–23 It is not 
assumed that these accounts are objective descriptions 
necessarily, but it is assumed that such accounts guide 
individuals’ actions and furnish them with motives and 
explanations that they then provide for themselves and for 
others.21–23 Such accounts are of critical importance in 
understanding the dynamics of human interactions within 
organisations.
Interviews were professionally transcribed verbatim 
and analysed by Hoare18 thematically. Transcripts were 
primarily coded ‘in vivo’,24 with sections of text tagged 
using words and themes given by interview participants 
as well as with descriptive phrases. This coding process 
was completed for each transcript on paper and then 
downloaded into the analytic software NVivo. After 
completing this process for several ‘cases’ (groups of 
interviews conducted about a patient and their admis-
sion), codes were mapped and grouped together to cre-
ate a coding framework, which was revised and refined 
as more interviews were coded. Data were synthesised 
by identifying and summarising the key topics. This pro-
cess was informed by relevant end-of-life care literature 
to foster an understanding of trends in end-of-life care 
practice as well as sociological literatures to better 
appreciate the social position of the ambulance staff. 
Both literatures provided perspectives on the partici-
pants’ accounts of their actions20–23 and supported the 
synthesis by helping to provide a narrative to draw the 
discrete themes identified in the analysis together. 
Additional analysis was conducted as appropriate to 
clarify points and check the veracity of conclusions. 
Further details on the analysis and synthesis are availa-
ble elsewhere,18 including early findings.25 Quotations in 
the text are followed by the interviewees’ code and tran-
script page number.
Findings
Ambulance interviewees had an important role in the hospi-
tal admission of all of the case-patients: regardless of time of 
admission or condition, all were brought to hospital via 
ambulance. The ability of interviewees to keep patients close 
to the end of life at home was hindered by three key factors: 
(1) the limited availability and accessibility of additional care 
support in the community, (2) the limited information ambu-
lance staff had about the patient and their condition and (3) 
a perceived ambulance service emphasis on hospital care. 
Factors were interlinked, and each is considered in turn 
below to understand why ambulance interviewees conveyed 
patients close to the end of life to hospital.
Availability and accessibility of care
Keeping a patient close to the end of life at home and not 
transferring them to hospital was difficult for ambulance 
interviewees, even when they thought it was in the 
patient’s best interests, due to practical problems in 
arranging alternative care in the community. Non-hospital 
care required negotiation between ambulance interview-
ees and other healthcare providers, including the patients’ 
general practitioner (GP). However, accessing their help 
often took too long or where alternative care was thought 
necessary, was inaccessible or unavailable.
Untimely care. Ambulance interviewees described a strug-
gle to access help from other healthcare providers. This 
was particularly acute when help was needed ‘out of hours’ 
– at night and at weekends – when alternative services 
were unavailable or had limited capacity. For ambulance 
interviewees seeking advice or care for a patient close to 
the end of life, this could mean a significant wait which 
often exceeded the time staff felt either that they could 
stay with the patient or that the patient could wait for care:
Sometimes I’ve been waiting an hour/an hour and a half [to 
speak to a GP], […] which is far too long. However, if I could 
Table 1. Case-patient characteristics.
Case-patient
Previous place of care
Time of admission
Interviewee code
A
Home
Weekday, daytime
AP1
Dr1
B
Home
Weekenda
AP2
AP3
C
Residential home
Weekday, early morninga
AP4
AP5
D
Residential home
Weekday, daytime
AP6
aThese patients were admitted out-of-hours (between 6 p.m. and 8 a.m. on a weekday and anytime on a weekend).
 1468 
Palliative Medicine 32(9)
speak to a doctor quite quickly, then it’s absolutely fine and I 
wouldn’t have a problem waiting on scene to speak to them. 
(Ambulance staff (AS)4, 6)
[…] it really isn’t ideal [taking C to hospital] but you look at it 
and you say “Well what else could you have done really?” We 
wouldn’t have got the doctor out, if it had happened two 
hours later in the day [at 9am] we could have phoned [their] 
GP and the GP I’m sure would have come straight out or 
someone would have come straight out, something could 
have been put in place but with how poor the out-, out-of-
hours service is, it’s impossible to set up something like that 
that’s got absolutely nothing to go on either and the doctor 
that’s never met [them] before. It’s difficult. (AS5, 3)
Absent care. Ambulance interviewees were also chal-
lenged by an apparent absence of services available for 
those thought to be within hours of death. Interviewees 
recognised that patients needed healthcare support at 
this time and described examples where colleagues had 
stayed with patients at home until they had died. Where 
this was not thought to be feasible, ambulance interview-
ees described frustration at the need to seek this support 
from hospital through admissions:
So I’ve been out to people that have had emphysema and 
they’re right at the end of their last legs, but because it’s not 
been cancer they won’t all come out. The GP will come out 
but you can’t get anybody else out. […] Who do you get to 
come out and support the family in those last few hours of 
life?. (AS2, 6)
Limited information
It was difficult for ambulance interviewees to consider keep-
ing patients close to the end of life at home and not facilitate 
transfer to hospital without relevant patient information. 
These patients were often too unwell to communicate 
effectively with ambulance interviewees, who were there-
fore dependent on information provided by those present 
and available documented decisions made by other health-
care staff. Incomplete or absent information meant inter-
viewees struggled to prevent hospital admissions.
Uncertain prognosis. Ambulance interviewees without 
access to background patient information were obliged to 
assess the prognosis of patients close to the end of life 
from their presenting states. This made evaluating the 
clinical suitability of hospital care difficult, and where it 
was unclear, ambulance interviewees tended to instigate 
transfer to hospital to mitigate the risk of a patient miss-
ing out on life-saving care:
[…] it’s obviously, it’s not a good feeling if it is clear that 
you’re taking someone to hospital who’s, you know, who 
doesn’t stand a very good chance of leaving there, you know 
of coming out again. You know, it well, it’s a bit hard really I 
guess isn’t it because you never know someone’s outcome. 
It’s very tough to say really because on one hand you kind of 
feel you have to give someone every chance but then you 
come to a point where it may not be appropriate. (AS6, 4)
Uncertain status. Knowing if a patient close to the end of 
life had been formally identified as ‘end of life’ by another 
healthcare service was important for ambulance inter-
viewees to consider instigating community-based care 
rather than transfer to hospital. The presence of advance 
care planning documentation meant a patient close to the 
end of life was potentially eligible for home-based care 
packages that ambulance interviewees could help initiate:
I know technically a DNR [Do Not Resuscitate order] is only 
when [they’ve] actually arrested we don’t start, but however 
if that’s in place, for me anyway, personally, I would start 
looking at, well, that is in place, doctors are aware that [they 
are] gonna pass, can I speak to an out of hours doctor just to 
work out a way. However, if that’s not in place then obviously 
it hasn’t been discussed, and then we’ve got no other choice 
but to go to hospital. (AS4, 5–6)
Ambulance end-of-life care
Ambulance interviewees were generally supportive of ena-
bling death at home for the end-of-life patients to whom 
they had been called. However, their ability to do so was 
countered by a presumed ambulance service orientation 
towards hospital care, exacerbated by the practical difficul-
ties outlined above in accessing alternative care and con-
firming whether a patient was close to the end of life.
Hospital care. Ambulance interviewees recognised the 
facilitation or provision of emergency care as an impor-
tant aspect of fulfilling their responsibility towards 
patients close to the end of life. Not conveying these 
patients to hospital was considered with hesitation by all 
ambulance interviewees, and some described potential 
professional repercussions of doing so. Thus, while ambu-
lance interviewees were advocates of death occurring at 
home for end-of-life care patients, their practice was ori-
entated towards hospital transfer:
I think it’s a harder decision to leave someone who’s dying at 
home than it is to take them in because you’re never going to 
get it wrong taking them in […]. It probably is wrong but it’s 
not wrong as in black and white if that makes sense. (AS5, 8)
Care needs. Leaving clearly unwell end-of-life patients at 
home was equated by ambulance interviewees with 
abandoning them and reneging on their professional duty. 
The difficulty ambulance interviewees had in meeting 
these patients’ care needs in the community, and the con-
vention staff had towards hospital care, meant admission 
was often considered ‘unavoidable’:
 Hoare et al. 
1469
there are times when it’s just unavoidable to take people into 
a hospital and I think in this case there was no option, we 
couldn’t leave [them] at home really, [they were] in a rather, 
well a very unsuitable environment, [their] family obviously 
weren’t coping and [they were] soiled, the bed was absolutely 
soaked, [they were] in a tiny room, totally inappropriate for 
[their] needs. (AS1, 1–2)
Prerequisite evidence. The scope of ambulance inter-
viewees to provide alternative care to very unwell 
patients, other than facilitating hospital care, depended in 
part on whether staff could establish that a patient close 
to the end of life was different to a typical patient. How-
ever, the limited amount of evidence available to ambu-
lance interviewees, which could confirm that a patient 
was for end-of-life care, meant staff were reliant on their 
own assessment of the patient’s condition. Since distin-
guishing between a sick patient needing urgent transfer to 
hospital from a sick dying patient who could be cared for 
in the community was often difficult, as identified above, 
hospital care was often considered inevitable:
I think, yeah, in the absence of all that [evidence of advance 
care planning] and in the absence of any direction from the 
family you’re back to doing what clinically you know will give 
that person the best outcome. (AS3, 5)
Recognised by others
The problems faced by ambulance interviewees, in partic-
ular of limited resources and information to keep patients 
close to the end of life at home, were recognised by other 
healthcare provider participants. They similarly concluded 
that hospital was often the only option for ambulance staff 
when caring for end-of-life patients. For instance, a hospi-
tal emergency department doctor stated that
but actually, you know, I think they [A’s family] called for help 
because help was needed, and the paramedics came to the 
only place that they had access to, and actually the only place 
that has access to the only treatment that’s going to help. 
(Dr1, 7)
Discussion
Main findings
Ambulance interviewees performed an important role in 
end-of-life admissions, deciding on, and then carrying out, 
transfers from community to hospital. Their ability to keep 
patients close to the end of life at home was hindered by 
practical problems in addressing patient needs, and an 
ambulance service focuses on facilitating hospital care. 
The hospital therefore occupied an important role in the 
end-of-life care provision of patients close to the end of 
life, challenging the contention that such hospital admis-
sions are preventable or avoidable.
Difficulty of ambulance provision. The problems faced by 
the ambulance interviewees in providing care to end-of-
life patients are partly typical of the challenges for ambu-
lance care generally. Collaboration between ambulance 
staff and other care services is recognised to be hindered 
by limited integration and a complicated healthcare sys-
tem in the United Kingdom.26 Ambulance staff also com-
monly work in uncontrolled environments – homes and 
public spaces – where decisions must be made quickly and 
where the provision of additional care and ability to diag-
nose symptoms is limited.27 ‘Arriving as strangers’28 is thus 
typical and means staff are dependent on what can be 
assessed from the immediate patient environment and 
what the people who are there know and can articulate.27
These difficulties were heightened when providing care 
to those at the end of life. Ambulance interviewees were 
significantly hindered in organising the care that they rec-
ognised was necessary for patients close to the end of life 
outside of the hospital setting. They were often called to 
such patients by family members when community-based 
care seemed exhausted and additional care was urgently 
required, matching existing evidence.15 However, without 
the necessary patient information, assessing what pre-
existing care packages had been arranged for patients close 
to the end of life was difficult. This was compounded by the 
time of day ambulance interviewees were called to patients 
close to the end of life, which was typically, but not exclu-
sively, ‘out-of-hours’ when support from other healthcare 
services is not available at full capacity. Moreover, the per-
vasive absence of background clinical information and 
recorded patient status13 meant the assessment of the 
potential benefit of hospital care was difficult. Ambulance 
interviewees were instead reliant on their prognosis assess-
ment, a process recognised to be challenging,29 particularly 
for staff with limited resources.30,31 This helps explain the 
priority ambulance interviewees gave to documented deci-
sions such as resuscitation status, a practice reported else-
where.13,28 Together these factors help to clarify why 
ambulance interviewees facilitated admission to hospital, 
which offered a certainty absent at home: of care, of infor-
mation and of confirmation of irreversibility of condition.
Ambulance care and end-of-life provision. The perception 
ambulance interviewees had of the role of ambulance 
services in end-of-life care was significant in their decision 
to transfer to hospital. The reservations they described 
about keeping patients close to the end of life at home 
accords with findings in other ambulance research32 and 
suggests a service-wide hesitancy about enabling home 
deaths for end-of-life patients, despite unfavourable pol-
icy rhetoric about end-of-life deaths in hospital. This may 
be explained by the role of the ambulance service in both 
general healthcare provision and in end-of-life care.
In general healthcare provision, ambulance staff have 
very limited scope to provide alternative care to facilitating 
 1470 
Palliative Medicine 32(9)
admission, in part because of the restricted role of the 
ambulance service beyond immediate clinical care and the 
subsequent transfer of patients to hospital. In the United 
Kingdom, for example, while the 1966 Millar Report33 led to 
the development of ambulance services beyond transfer to 
hospital,34 the 2005 Bradley report35 was described as 
prompting a ‘quantum culture leap’,36 by seeking to change 
the aim of the service from primarily conveying patients to 
hospital to also providing care in the community where 
appropriate. National Health Service (NHS) expectations of 
the service remain, however, orientated towards hospital 
care: ‘Patients will always be taken to hospital when there 
is a medical need for this’.37 The decision for ambulance 
staff who have been called to a sick patient is primarily 
between transfer to hospital or to an alternative destina-
tion where staff can obtain care for the patient from 
another service.26 This limited choice is also relevant else-
where, including in North America, Australia and New 
Zealand, where even specially trained prehospital practi-
tioners typically resolve patient needs either through on-
scene provision of care or conveyance to hospital.38 Within 
a context of limited information about the patient to deter-
mine whether they are at end of life, and inaccessible alter-
native care provision, it is unsurprising therefore that 
ambulance interviewees chose to take patients to hospital.
In end-of-life care policy, ambulance staff have often 
been given a relatively minor role, particularly in regard 
the care of unwell end-of-life patients and admissions to 
hospital. There is limited end-of-life care reference to 
ambulance staff in policy documents from Ireland,39 
Singapore,40 Australia41 and Switzerland,42 countries with 
national palliative care policies.1 In the United Kingdom, 
while the landmark 2008 End of Life Care Strategy10 made 
reference to the importance of ambulance provision, this 
was primarily in relation to the prompt transfer of patients 
from hospital to home. A 2012 NHS Improving Quality43 
paper widened the scope of ambulance service involve-
ment in end-of-life care, but still retained a focus on trans-
fers between settings. Furthermore, there has also only 
been limited inclusion of end-of-life care issues in ambu-
lance training until recently; end-of-life care education is 
recognised to be variable, particularly for non-special-
ists,31,44 circumstances that have also been reported in 
Germany and the United States.45,46 These circumstances 
help explain the ambivalent orientation of ambulance 
interviewees towards hospital care for patients close to 
the end of life, despite a general consensus that end-of-life 
deaths at home were positive. More broadly, these struc-
tural limitations emphasise the difficulty for ambulance 
staff in preventing the end-of-life admissions to hospital.
Implications for research, policy, clinical 
practice and research
The experience of ambulance interviewees in facilitating 
hospital admissions of patients close to the end of life 
contributes to our understanding of end-of-life care. 
While such admissions are often negatively described in 
end-of-life care policy,1 it is apparent that the accessibility 
of hospital care played an important role in the end-of-life 
provision for both patients close to the end of life and 
ambulance interviewees. Hospital care was seen to meet 
the care needs of patients without complex negotiation 
with other healthcare providers, which was recognised to 
be difficult and often not feasible. In this context, discus-
sions about the relative appropriateness of hospital 
admission for patients seem irrelevant, because hospital 
was often recognised to be the only place ambulance 
interviewees could have sought care.
Future considerations
The analysis of this article was informed by a sociological 
analysis of end-of-life admissions.18 Focusing on person-
nel actions and the social structure in which admissions 
occured20,47 meant that key tensions and difficulties con-
fronted by ambulance interviewees involved in end-of-life 
admissions were explored. This sociological lens produc-
tively orientates analysis beyond a limiting focus on culpa-
bility and organisational performance and is advocated 
for future research that considers the multiple organisa-
tions involved in end-of-life admissions.
Limitations
The study findings are specific to the accounts of a small 
number of ambulance staff in one location in England 
involved in the admission of a case-patient to hospital. 
The significance of the conclusions which can be drawn 
from this sample must therefore be modest,48 and the 
reasons for the case-patients admissions may not be 
representative of individuals in other situations admit-
ted to hospital shortly before death. The focus on 
patients admitted to hospital within 3 days of death, 
however, accords with current trends in England. Death 
in hospital typically occurs following an emergency 
rather than planned admission,49 with nearly a third 
(32%) of deaths occurring within 3 days of admission18,49 
and most deaths within a month of admission.50 The 
detailed accounts provided by ambulance and other 
healthcare professionals of these admissions are valua-
ble because of the depth of insight they provide into the 
challenges faced by those facilitating end-of-life admis-
sions.51 Furthermore, while the small sample size means 
that it is not possible to generalise to the ambulance ser-
vice nationally, the similarity of the problems ambulance 
interviewees experienced to those found by others sug-
gests that the findings may have relevance beyond this 
sample. The research identifies the critical but difficult 
role ambulance staff have in end-of-life admissions, with 
further research necessary to assess the scope of the dif-
ficulties and how they may be addressed.
 Hoare et al. 
1471
Interviews with staff were conducted in 2012–2013, 
and it is possible although unlikely that in the intervening 
period, the issues described above have improved. For 
instance, the establishment of the 2013 Urgent and 
Emergency Care Review actively sought to increase the 
amount of urgent and emergency care available in the 
community.52 In 2015–2016, ambulance staff nationally 
spent on average longer time with patients compared to 
the period 2011–2012. This was attributed in part to staff 
treating more patients at the scene,26 suggesting fewer 
end-of-life patients may have been transferred to hospi-
tal. However, changes in end-of-life care have not been so 
rapid. Recent publications indicate that the problems of 
access to services by ambulance staff remain pertinent.13 
While locally the ambulance services have implemented 
various end-of-life strategies to alleviate the decision-
making difficulties faced by ambulance interviewees, the 
underlying issues which extended beyond the ambulance 
service and which directed the decisions of staff have 
endured. Consequently, the issues faced by ambulance 
interviewees remain relevant for understanding why end-
of-life patients are admitted to hospital.
Conclusion
Ambulance staff fulfil an important role in the admission of 
end-of-life patients to hospital, providing care to patients 
recognised as often being very unwell and in significant 
need of urgent care. However, ambulance interviewees 
were limited in the care they could provide because of 
absence of patient information, restricted access to alter-
native healthcare services than hospital and a perceived 
service remit orientated towards hospital care for ill 
patients. As such, for end-of-life patients in need of care, 
facilitating hospital admission was often the only option.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the participants and those 
involved in the set-up and running of the study. In particular, 
they are grateful to the research paramedic who identified 
ambulance staff involved in the care of case-patients and has 
continued to provide support after the end of data collection.
Declaration of conflicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with 
respect to the research, authorship and/or publication of this 
article.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support 
for the research, authorship and/or publication of this article: 
This paper presents independent research part funded by the 
National Institute for Health Research Collaborations for 
Leadership in Applied Health Research and Care (NIHR CLAHRC), 
Cambridge and Peterborough, and NIHR CLAHRC East of 
England. The writing of the paper was funded by the NIHR 
School for Primary Care Research (NIHR SPCR). The views 
expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those of 
the NHS, the NIHR or the Department of Health and Social Care. 
The Marie Curie Design to Care programme is a service improve-
ment programme. This research forms part of the design phase 
of this programme, which is funded by Marie Curie, the UK’s 
leading charity caring for people living with any terminal illness 
and their families.
ORCID iD
Sarah Hoare 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8933-217X
References
 1. Robinson J, Gott M, Gardiner C, et al. The ‘problematisa-
tion’ of palliative care in hospital: an exploratory review of 
international palliative care policy in five countries. BMC 
Palliat Care 2016; 15: 64.
 2. Morris ZS, Fyfe M, Momen N, et al. Understanding hospital 
admissions close to the end of life (ACE) study. BMC Health 
Serv Res 2013; 13: 89.
 3. Gott M, Frey R, Robinson J, et al. The nature of, and reasons 
for, ‘inappropriate’ hospitalisations among patients with 
palliative care needs: a qualitative exploration of the views 
of generalist palliative care providers. Palliat Med 2013; 27: 
747–756.
 4. Gott M, Gardiner C, Ingleton C, et al. What is the extent of 
potentially avoidable admissions amongst hospital inpatients 
with palliative care needs? BMC Palliat Care 2013; 12: 9.
 5. Reyniers T, Houttekier D, Cohen J, et al. What justifies a 
hospital admission at the end of life? A focus group study 
on perspectives of family physicians and nurses. Palliat 
Med 2014; 28: 941–948.
 6. Reyniers T, Deliens L, Pasman HRW, et al. Appropriateness 
and avoidability of terminal hospital admissions: results of 
a survey among family physicians. Palliat Med 2017; 31: 
456–464.
 7. Reyniers T, Deliens L, Pasman HR, et al. Reasons for End-of-
Life Hospital admissions: results of a survey among family 
physicians. J Pain Symptom Manage 2016; 52: 498–506.
 8. Hoare S, Morris ZS, Kelly MP, et al. Do patients want to die 
at home? A systematic review of the UK literature, focused 
on missing preferences for place of death. PLoS ONE 2015; 
10: e0142723.
 9. Department of Health. Our Commitment to you for End 
of Life Care: the government response to the review of 
choice in End of Life Care, 2016, https://www.gov.uk/
government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/
file/536326/choice-response.pdf
 
10. Department of Health. End of Life Care strategy: promoting 
high quality care for all adults at the end of life, 2008, https://
www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/ 
attachment_data/file/136431/End_of_life_strategy.pdf
 
11. National End of Life Care Programme. The route to suc-
cess in End of Life Care – achieving quality in ambulance 
services, 2012, http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.
uk/20130718121128/http://endoflifecare.nhs.uk/down-
load.ashx?mid=3425&nid=3427
 
12. Public Health England. National End of Life Care Intelligence 
Network: ambulance data project for End of Life Care, 
 1472 
Palliative Medicine 32(9)
2015, 
http://www.endoflifecare-intelligence.org.uk/
view?rid=840
 
13. Murphy-Jones G and Timmons S. Paramedics’ experiences 
of end-of-life care decision making with regard to nursing 
home residents: an exploration of influential issues and 
factors. Emerg Med J 2016; 33: 722–726.
 
14. Taghavi M, Simon A, Kappus S, et al. Paramedics experi-
ences and expectations concerning advance directives: a 
prospective, questionnaire-based, bi-centre study. Palliat 
Med 2011; 26: 908–916.
 
15. Ingleton C, Payne S, Sargeant A, et al. Barriers to achiev-
ing care at home at the end of life: transferring patients 
between care settings using patient transport services. 
Palliat Med 2009; 23: 723–730.
 
16. Brady M. Challenges UK paramedics currently face in pro-
viding fully effective end-of-life care. Int J Palliat Nurs 2014; 
20: 37–44.
 
17. Kirk A, Crompton PW, Knighting K, et al. Paramedics and 
their role in end-of-life care: perceptions and confidence. J 
Paramed Pract 2017; 9: 71–79.
 
18. Hoare S. Understanding end-of-life admissions: an inter-
view study of patients admitted to a large English hospi-
tal shortly before death. Department of Public Health and 
Primary Care, University of Cambridge, 2017, https://doi.
org/10.17863/CAM.22232
 
19. Yin RK. Case study research: design and methods. Thousand 
Oaks, CA: SAGE, 2009.
 
20. Giddens A. The constitution of society: outline of the the-
ory of structuration. Berkeley, CA: University of California 
Press, 1986.
 
21. Mills CW. Situated actions and vocabularies of motive. Am 
Sociol Rev 1940; 5: 904–913.
 
22. Scott MB and Lyman SM. Accounts. Am Sociol Rev 1968; 33: 
46–62.
 
23. Sykes G and Matza D. Techniques of neutralization: a the-
ory of delinquency. Am Sociol Rev 1957; 22: 664–670.
 
24. Benaquisto L. Codes and coding. In: Given LM (ed.) The 
SAGE encyclopedia of qualitative research methods. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE, 2008, 86–89.
 
25. Hoare S, Kelly MP, Prothero L, et al. 69 Ambulance prac-
titioners and end-of-life hospital admissions: an interview 
study. BMJ Support Palliat Care 2018; 8: 34–94.
 
26. National Audit Office. NHS England: NHS ambulance 
services, 
2017, 
https://www.nao.org.uk/wp-content/
uploads/2017/01/NHS-Ambulance-Services.pdf
 
27. Hughes D. The ambulance journey as an information gener-
ating process. Sociol Health Illn 1980; 2: 115–132.
 
28. Waldrop DP, Clemency B, Lindstrom HA, et al. ‘We are 
strangers walking into their life-changing event’: how pre-
hospital providers manage emergency calls at the end of 
life. J Pain Symptom Manage 2015; 50: 328–334.
 
29. Twycross R and Wilcock A. Introducing palliative care. 5th 
ed. Nottingham: Palliativedrugs.com Limited, 2016.
 
30. Pettifer A and Bronnert R. End of Life Care in the com-
munity: the role of ambulance clinicians. J Paramed Pract 
2013; 5: 394–399.
 
31. Brady M. Care of dying adults in the last days of life: NICE 
clinical guideline. J Paramed Pract 2016; 8: 63–65.
 
32. Robinson L, Dickinson C, Bamford C, Clark A, Hughes J and 
Exley C. A qualitative study: professionals’ experiences of 
advance care planning in dementia and palliative care, ‘a 
good idea in theory but ...’. Palliat Med. 2013; 27: 401-8.
 
33. Ministry Of Health Scottish Home and Health Department. 
Report by the working party on ambulance training and 
equipment. Part 1 - training. London: Her Majesty’s 
Stationery Office, 1966.
 
34. McCann L, Granter E, Hyde P, et al. Still blue-collar after 
all these years? An ethnography of the professionalization 
of emergency ambulance work. J Manag Stud 2013; 50: 
750–776.
 
35. Department of Health. Taking healthcare to the patient: 
transforming NHS ambulance services. London: Department 
of Health, 2005.
 
36. Wankhade P and Brinkman J. The negative consequences of 
culture change management: evidence from a UK NHS ambu-
lance service. Int J Public Sector Manage 2014; 27: 2–25.
 
37. NHS Choices. NHS ambulance services, 2015, http://www.
nhs.uk/nhsengland/aboutnhsservices/emergencyandur-
gentcareservices/pages/ambulanceservices.aspx
 
38. Tohira H, Williams TA, Jacobs I, et al. The impact of new 
prehospital practitioners on ambulance transportation to 
the emergency department: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Emerg Med J 2014; 31: e88–e94.
 
39. Department of Health and Children. Report of the National 
Advisory Committee of Palliative Care, 2001, http://health.
gov.ie/wp-content/uploads/2014/03/nacpc.pdf
 
40. Care LCfP. Report on the national strategy for palliative 
care, 2011, https://www.duke-nus.edu.sg/sites/default/
files/Report_on_National_Strategy_for_Palliative_
Care%205Jan2012.pdf
 
41. Commonwealth of Australia. National palliative care strat-
egy 2010: supporting Australians to live well at the end of 
life, 2010, https://www.health.gov.au/internet/main/pub-
lishing.nsf/Content/EF57056BDB047E2FCA257BF0002061
68/$File/NationalPalliativeCareStrategy.pdf
 
42. Federal Office of Public Health. National strategy for pallia-
tive care 2013–2015: results 2010–2012 and need for action 
2013–2015, 2012, https://www.bag.admin.ch/dam/bag/
en/dokumente/nat-gesundheitsstrategien/strategie-palli-
ative-care/kurzfassung.pdf.download.pdf/08_E_National_
Strategy_for_palliative_Care_2013-2015_summary.pdf
 
43. NHS Improving Quality. The route to success in End of Life 
Care – achieving quality in ambulance services, 2012, http://
www.nhsiq.nhs.uk/download.ashx?mid=11001&nid=9946
 
44. NHS End of Life Care Programme. Promoting innovative 
end of life care practice within ambulance trusts. Leicester: 
NHS End of Life Care Programme, 2007.
 
45. Wiese CHR, Taghavi M, Meyer N, et al. Paramedics’ ‘end-of-
life’ decision making in palliative emergencies. J Paramed 
Pract 2012; 4: 413–419.
 
46. Stone S, Abbott JD, McClung CB, et al. Paramedic knowl-
edge, attitudes, and training in End-of-Life Care. Prehosp 
Disaster Med 2009; 24: 529–534.
 
47. Shove E, Pantzar M and Watson M. The dynamics of social 
practice. London: SAGE, 2012.
 
48. Williams M.Generalisations in interpretive research. In: 
May T (ed.). Qualitative research in action. London: SAGE, 
2002.
 
49. National End of Life Care Intelligence Network. What 
do we know now that we didn’t know a year ago? New 
 Hoare et al. 
1473
intelligence on End of Life Care in England, 2012, http://
www.endoflifecare-intelligence.org.uk/resources/publi-
cations/what_we_know_now
 
50. Bardsley M, Georghiou T, Spence R, et al. Factors asso-
ciated with variation in hospital use at the end of life in 
England. BMJ Support Palliat Care. Epub ahead of print 24 
March 2016. DOI: 10.1136/bmjspcare-2015-000936.
 
51. Silverman D. Doing qualitative research: a practical hand-
book. London: SAGE, 2005.
 
52. NHS England. Transforming urgent and emergency care 
 
services in England. Urgent and emergency care review 
end of phase 1 report. High quality care for all, now and for 
future generations, 2013, http://www.nhs.uk/NHSEngland/
keogh-review/Documents/UECR.Ph1Report.FV.pdf
