 OPEN
ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Regulation of prefrontal cortex myelination by the microbiota
AE Hoban1,2, RM Stilling1,2, FJ Ryan1,3, F Shanahan1, TG Dinan1,4, MJ Claesson1,3, G Clarke1,4,5,6 and JF Cryan1,2,5,6
The prefrontal cortex (PFC) is a key region implicated in a range of neuropsychiatric disorders such as depression, schizophrenia
and autism. In parallel, the role of the gut microbiota in contributing to these disorders is emerging. Germ-free (GF) animals,
microbiota-deficient throughout life, have been instrumental in elucidating the role of the microbiota in many aspects of
physiology, especially the role of the microbiota in anxiety-related behaviours, impaired social cognition and stress responsivity.
Here we aim to further elucidate the mechanisms of the microbial influence by investigating changes in the homeostatic regulation
of neuronal transcription of GF mice within the PFC using a genome-wide transcriptome profiling approach. Our results reveal a
marked, concerted upregulation of genes linked to myelination and myelin plasticity. This coincided with upregulation of neural
activity-induced pathways, potentially driving myelin plasticity. Subsequent investigation at the ultrastructural level demonstrated
the presence of hypermyelinated axons within the PFC of GF mice. Notably, these changes in myelin and activity-related gene
expression could be reversed by colonization with a conventional microbiota following weaning. In summary, we believe we
demonstrate for the first time that the microbiome is necessary for appropriate and dynamic regulation of myelin-related genes
with clear implications for cortical myelination at an ultrastructural level. The microbiota is therefore a potential therapeutic target
for psychiatric disorders involving dynamic myelination in the PFC.
Translational Psychiatry (2016) 6, e774; doi:10.1038/tp.2016.42; published online 5 April 2016
INTRODUCTION
In mammals, the prefrontal cortex (PFC) is essential in emotional
learning, has a prominent role in fear and anxiety processes and
has been implicated in the regulation of the hypothalamic–
pituitary–adrenal axis.1,2 Along with the amygdala, the PFC
comprises
a
central
neuronal
circuit
underlying
emotional
regulation3 and also facilitates memory storage, behavioural
flexibility and attention. The PFC is thus a very dynamic brain
region, and its dysfunction
is deeply implicated in many
neuropsychiatric and neurodevelopmental disorders such as
schizophrenia and autism spectrum disorders.4,5 Over the past
decade, a growing body of preclinical studies have highlighted
the
prominent
role
of
the
gut
microbiota
in
gut–brain
interactions.6,7 Disturbance in this bidirectional route of commu-
nication has relevance for both gastrointestinal
and brain
disorders,8 including autism spectrum disorders,9 Parkinson’s
disease10 and even demyelinating disorders of the central nervous
system (CNS),11,12 and manipulating gut microbial diversity by
administration of antibiotics,13,14 probiotics15 and prebiotics16 has
shed light on their potential to modulate brain and behaviour. In
addition, proof-of-principal experiments using microbiota-deficient
germ-free (GF) animals17 have aided in unmasking a microbial
influence on specific CNS developmental processes. All these
models have been invaluable in uncovering an essential role of
the gut microbiota in establishment of normal adult stress
responsiveness and influencing emotional behaviours such as
anxiety-related and normal social functioning.14,17–22 Manipulation
of
the
timing
of
colonization
in
GF
animals
has
further
highlighted the important role the gut microbiota has during
neurodevelopmental time windows that are critical for establish-
ing normal CNS functions in adulthood.23,24 We thus hypothesized
that the absence of microbiota may result in altered transcrip-
tional regulation of the PFC. To this end, we therefore conducted
unbiased genome-wide RNA sequencing in the PFC of conven-
tional (CON), GF and GF colonized (exGF) mice to investigate
alterations in the PFC transcriptome. Our data uncovered a
heretofore-undescribed role for the microbiome in the regulation
of myelination.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Animals
GF and CON Swiss Webster breeding pairs were obtained from Taconic
(Germantown, NY, USA). GF mice were housed in gnotobiotic isolators under
a strict 12-h light/dark cycle in cages of 4–5 animals. On postnatal day 21,
just after weaning, exGF mice were taken from isolators and housed next to
CON mice. CON and exGF mice were housed in the standard animal unit,
which allows for exGF mice to be exposed to environmental microbes
resulting in colonization. CON mice are similarly housed under regulated
conditions (temperature 20–21 °C, 55–60% humidity), under the same 12-h
light/dark cycle and housed 4–5 per cage. Autoclaved, pelleted diets were
the same for all animal groups (Special Diet Service, Essex, UK, product code
801010). Animals were culled at week 10 for follow-up experiments. All
experiments were approved by the Ethics Committee of University College
Cork and the Irish Department of Health authorities.
Experimental design
F1-generation offspring GF, exGF and CON mice were culled in adulthood
at 10 weeks. Brains were collected for quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR),
1APC Microbiome Institute, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland; 2Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland; 3Department of
Microbiology, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland and 4Department of Psychiatry and Neurobehavioural Science, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland. Correspondence:
Professor JF Cryan, Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, APC Microbiome Institute, University College Cork, Room 386, Western Gateway Building, Western Road, Cork,
Ireland.
E-Mail: j.cryan@ucc.ie
5Senior authors.
6These authors contributed equally to this work.
Received 14 January 2016; accepted 17 February 2016
Citation: Transl Psychiatry (2016) 6, e774; doi:10.1038/tp.2016.42
www.nature.com/tp
 for protein analysis and for transmission electron microscopy. For full
detailed experimental flow with relevant animal number per experiment,
see Supplementary Figure S1.
Tissue extraction and RNA sequencing
Several key brain regions (amygdala, PFC, striatum, cerebellum, hippo-
campus and frontal cortex) were rapidly hand-dissected and stored at 4 °C
in RNAlater (Sigma-Aldrich, Wicklow, Ireland) for 24 h followed by storage
at − 80 °C until tissue processing. RNA sequencing was performed as
described previously.25 For details, see Supplementary Methods.
Quantitative real-time PCR
RNA was reverse transcribed using high-capacity cDNA reverse transcription
kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) in a G-storm thermocycler
(G-storm, Surrey, UK). Gene expression was analysed using TaqMan Gene
Expression Assays (Supplementary Table S1) on an AB7300 system (Applied
Biosystems, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Expression levels were calculated as
the average of three replicates for each biological sample from all three
groups (n = 12 per group) relative to β-actin expression. Fold changes were
calculated using the ΔΔCt method.26 For statistical analysis one-way analysis
of variance with Fishers least significant difference post hoc test was carried
out for each gene. A P-value o0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Protein extraction and western blot
Total protein was extracted using a commercially available mirVana PARIS
RNA and Native Protein Purification kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Protein
levels were detected using appropriate primary antibody dilutions against
MOG (1:1000; sourced from Abcam, ab109746) and secondary antibody
(Alexa 594-conjugated antibody to rabbit, 1:10 000, Life Technologies,
Thermo Fisher Scientific). Primary antibody against alpha tubulin (sourced
from Sigma-Aldrich, Cat# T5168) was used to determine equal protein
loading. Quantification of protein bands was analysed using Image Studio
Lite (LI-COR, Lincoln, NE, USA). Significance was determined by a one-way
analysis of variance.
Transmission electron microscopy
Transcranial perfusion was carried out on six male mice (n = 3 per group),
with 4% paraformaldehyde followed by PFC dissection. Following post-
fixation in osmium tetroxide and dehydration in ascending ethanol series
followed by propylene oxide, the samples were embedded in Araldite resin
(Agar Scientific, Essex, UK). For each specimen, semi-thin (0.5 μm) and thin
(70–90 nm) sections were obtained from polymerized blocks using a
Reichert-Jung Ultracut E ultramicrotome (Leica-Microsystems, Wetzlar,
Germany). Semi-thin sections were stained with toluidine blue and
examined using a light microscope. Thin sections from selected areas of
the trimmed blocks were made and collected on formvar-coated copper
grids (Agar Scientific). Thin sections were double contrasted with 2%
uranyl acetate and Reynolds lead citrate stain, and examined using a Jeol
2000FXII transmission electron microscope (JEOL, Peabody, MA, USA),
operated at 80 kV. Electron micrographs were obtained of areas of
interest with a Megaview-III digital camera and AnalySIS software
(EMSIS, Münster, Germany). A minimum of 50 myelinated axons were
measured per animal.
Statistics
All statistics used for analysis of differential gene expression were
according to the description of R package DESeq2 with default parameters.
Multiple-testing corrections were performed for all analyses, the adjusted
P-value (Padj) was calculated using the Benjamini–Hochberg procedure
(also known as false discovery rate), also P-values reported for functional
annotation and enrichment analysis tools were multiple-testing-adjusted
P-values (FRD). A Padjo0.1 was considered significant for these analyses. A
detailed description of statistics used for RNA-seq data analysis can be
found in Supplementary Methods. Graphpad Prism (v5) (GraphPad
Software, La Jolla, CA, USA) was used for plotting, Grubbs method27 was
used to test for outliers and statistical testing for qRT-PCR was carried out
on SPSS v21. Statistical significance of overlaps between gene lists was
computed using Fischer’s exact test (http://nemates.org/MA/progs/over
lap_stats.html).
RESULTS
Changes in PFC transcriptome and marked upregulation of genes
related to myelination in GF animals
We performed unbiased deep sequencing of polyA-enriched RNA
extracted from the PFC of male conventionally raised (CON) mice,
GF mice and an additional group of GF mice that were colonized
post weaning (postnatal day 21; exGF; Figure 1a). Analysing gene
expression amongst all three groups by pairwise comparisons, we
found 221 genes to be significantly differentially expressed in GF,
or exGF animals relative to CON controls (Figure 1b and
Supplementary Table S2). Of these, a total of 190 genes were
differentially expressed between CON and GF samples, and a
smaller proportion of genes28 showed differential expression in
exGF mice (Supplementary Table S2). Comparing GF and exGF
directly, there were only 15 genes differentially expressed
(Figure 1b). A significant overlap of genes changed in both, GF
and exGF conditions was noted, (Figure 1b), suggesting that
certain cellular regulatory functions were irreversibly affected by
the absence of a microbiota during early life.
To further investigate cellular functions linked to differentially
expressed genes, we performed gene ontology (GO) enrichment
analysis. We found a strong overrepresentation of genes involved
in myelination among genes upregulated in GF mice, reflected by
several enriched related GO terms in all three GO categories
(Figure 1c and Supplementary Table S3). In addition, we found
significant enrichment of genes implicated in transcriptional
regulation (Figure 1c and Supplementary Table S3).
Next, we examined whether differentially regulated genes are
functionally connected using the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis tool
(IPA, QIAGEN, Redwood City, CA, USA, www.qiagen.com/ingenu
ity). The resulting network was centred around brain-derived
neurotrophic factor, a well-known regulator of neuronal plasticity,
but also the myelin regulatory factor, predicted to have a central
part in driving expression of several myelin component genes
(Figure 1d). Moreover, network analysis revealed interaction of
several
activity-induced
immediate
early
genes
as
well
as
components of the MAP-kinase pathway, which has been shown
to interact with myelin regulation in adulthood through myelin
regulatory factor29 (Figure 1d).
Therefore, and as our enrichment analysis suggested both
increased expression of myelin components, as well as activation
of pathways induced by neuronal activity, we then further
manually scrutinized the list of upregulated genes for involvement
in myelin-related processes. We found a total of 14 out of 94
genes upregulated (14.9%) in the PFC of GF mice were directly
linked to myelination. A total of 26 genes (27.7%) were associated
with neuronal activity as determined by cross-referencing with
gene expression data from the literature.30,31 Using a more
stringent P-value cutoff (Padj ⩽ 0.05), 12 (19%) and 17 (27%) out of
63 upregulated genes were myelin-associated or associated with
neuronal activity, respectively (Supplementary Table S2). The
oligodendrocyte myelin glycoprotein (Omg) gene was found to be
involved in both processes. Together these two processes
explained more than 40% (46% for Padj ⩽ 0.05) of the upregulated
genes (Figure 1e), indicating a strong, orchestrated transcriptional
regulation pattern. Notably, we did not find any of these genes to
be differentially regulated in exGF mice, suggesting that myelin-
related and activity-induced gene changes are dynamically
influenced by the presence of host-associated microbes. Using
highly sensitive, specific qRT-PCR assays for five myelin compo-
nent genes, which all encode for key structural proteins that
contribute to the integrity and function of the myelin sheath, we
confirmed overexpression in the PFC of GF animals. qRT-PCR
values closely mirrored RNA sequencing thereby validating
genome-wide results (Figure 2i). Interestingly, colonization post
weaning normalized transcript abundance to CON levels in exGF
mice, indicating that targeting the microbiota during critical
Microbiota regulates cortical myelination
AE Hoban et al
2
Translational Psychiatry (2016), 1 – 9
 a
b
c
d
e
Figure 1.
Differential gene expression in the prefrontal cortex of conventional (CON) and germ-free (GF) raised mice highlights myelin
pathways to be significantly different. (a) Schematic of experimental design. (b) Venn diagrams representing overlaps of differentially
expressed genes between experimental groups. A total of 236 genes were found to be different between groups. P-values indicate significant
overlaps as determined by Fisher’s exact test. (c) Functional enrichment analysis revealed significantly enriched Gene Ontology terms in GF
condition associated with myelin sheath formation and regulation of action potentials amongst upregulated genes. Enrichment of
downregulated genes highlights immune and defence mechanisms. (d) Gene network representing interactions and upstream regulators of
genes affected in GF mice compared with CON mice. Network highlights interactions of upstream transcription factors regulating myelin
component genes. (e) Fractions of upregulated genes in GF that are known to regulate myelination or are myelin component genes. Each dot
represents one of 94 genes upregulated in GF mice.
Microbiota regulates cortical myelination
AE Hoban et al
3
Translational Psychiatry (2016), 1 – 9
 Figure 2.
Quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) validations of RNA-seq data within various brain regions of selected myelin component genes
were found to be brain region specific. Germ-free status in mice results in increased myelin gene expression only in the PFC, which was
normalized in exGF mice. (a–f) qRT-PCR of myelin gene transcripts and regulatory factors in the prefrontal cortex, frontal cortex, hippocampus,
cerebellum, amygdala and striatum. Bar graphs indicate average values in 12 mice per group after β-actin normalization relative to average
control levels. (g) Significant changes in oligodendrocyte-specific genes. (h) Changes in known genes involved in regulation of myelination.
(i) Table representing RNA-seq and qRT-PCR fold change for individual myelin component genes used for RNA-seq validation. Fold change is
in comparison with the control group. (a, g, h) Prefrontal cortex, (b) frontal cortex, (c) hippocampus, (d) cerebellum, (e) amygdala and
(f) striatum. Data graphed as ± s.e.m. *Po0.05; **Po0.01; ***Po0.001.
Microbiota regulates cortical myelination
AE Hoban et al
4
Translational Psychiatry (2016), 1 – 9
 periods
of
synaptic
reconstruction
(early
adolescence
post
weaning)
had
significant
effects
on
myelination
at
the
transcriptional level.
Overexpression of myelin component genes is region- and sex-
specific
Next we tested whether the upregulation of myelin genes could
also be detected in other brain areas. Importantly, elevated
transcription of myelin component genes in GF mice was confined
to the PFC as no changes in mRNA levels were found for the
cerebellum, amygdala, hippocampus, striatum or frontal cortex
(Figures 2b–f), demonstrating a brain region-specific effect of
colonization status. Following from this, we wanted to appraise
whether changes in oligodendrocyte activity could underpin
changes in myelin component gene transcripts by investigating
changes in oligodendrocyte-specific genes. We observed a slight
increase in Sox10 and Olig1 expression, transcription factors and
upstream activators of increased myelin gene transcription
involved in promoting terminal differentiation of oligodendrocyte
progenitor cells to mature oligodendrocytes. (Figures 2g and h).
Coinciding with increased Sox10, a twofold increase in Egr2
expression, an immediate early response gene and positive
regulator of myelination interacting with Sox10, was found in GF
mice and subsequently normalized to control levels in exGF mice
(Figure 2h). We also assessed myelin gene expression levels in
female GF mice and found no increase in myelin gene expression
(Supplementary Figures S2a–i).
Absence of microbiota results in hypermyelinated axons in the
PFC
As upregulation of a large number of myelin regulatory and
myelin component genes suggested increased formation of
myelin in the PFC of GF animals, we next tested whether this
gene regulatory effect would correlate with altered oligodendro-
cyte function, that is, axonal myelination in the PFC. Using
transmission electron microscopy, we analysed myelinated axons
and found that male GF mice displayed thicker myelin sheaths in
the PFC as indicated by a significantly lower g-ratio (quantification
of myelin thickness relative to axonal diameter, mean 0.76 ± 0.016
and 0.68 ± 0.017; Po0.05; Figures 3a–c). We compared the calibre
of axons and found no size differences between CON and GF mice,
indicating that the decreased g-ratio was not due to pathological
shrinkage of axon calibre (Figure 3d). Furthermore, increased
myelin sheath thickness coincided with a strong trend towards
Figure 3.
Increased myelin sheath thickness in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) of male germ-free (GF) mice. (a) Electron micrographs of axons in
the PFC of conventionally raised (CON) and GF mice. Scale bars = 200 and 1000 nm. (b) Average g-ratio per animal in the PFC. (c) Scatter plot of
g-ratio values in the PFC in CON (n = 187 axons) and GF (n = 390 axons) against axon diameter. (d) Average axonal diameter per animal. (e)
Scatter plot of axon diameter against the number of lamina counted for that individual axon. (f) g-ratio for individual axonal population based
on diameter range. Bar graphs shown as mean ± s.e.m. NS (not significant) P40.05; *Po0.05; **Po0.01.
Microbiota regulates cortical myelination
AE Hoban et al
5
Translational Psychiatry (2016), 1 – 9
 higher lamina number and thicker myelin diameter in GF mice
(Supplementary Figures S3a and b). Longitudinally sliced axons
were excluded from g-ratio analysis, but random sampling analysis
of longitudinally cut axons revealed that hypermyelination was
uniform along the internodal region (Supplementary Figure S3c).
When representing g-ratio as diameter against lamina number,
CON animals showed consistent lamina number (mean 4.4)
independent of axonal diameter whereas, GF mice show greater
variability in the number of lamina per axon, indicating that
increased thickness could be a result of increased number of
wrappings (Figure 3e). As selection of the axons to myelinate can
be based on axonal calibre we compared g-ratios of myelinated
axons in GF and CON mice, plotted as a function of their
respective axonal diameters, which revealed that hypermyelina-
tion was not more pronounced in smaller axons than in larger
axons, again indicating the observed hypermyelination is inde-
pendent of axonal calibre (Figure 3f). In order to evaluate whether
transcriptional levels of myelin component genes mimicked
protein levels, we conducted western blot analysis for the MOG
protein. Importantly, increased mRNA levels were paralleled by
increased protein in the PFC of GF mice (Figures 4a and b).
However, normalization of transcript levels for this gene following
colonization in exGF mice did not translate to a reduction in
protein levels, suggesting that colonization post weaning could
not reverse increased myelin protein abundance, likely accumulat-
ing before weaning.
DISCUSSION
There is a growing appreciation of the ability of host–microbe
interactions to modulate brain networks related to psychiatric
disorders. The most consistent finding related to the abnormal
patterns noted in GF animals linked to anxiety and sociability
behaviours.17,19–22 Our results reveal highly coordinated differ-
ential programme of gene expression in the PFC in these animals,
a key brain region in anxiety and social behaviour, which may
contribute to the GF behavioural phenotype. Surprisingly, a large
proportion of significantly upregulated genes (~15%) were found
to be related to myelination. These included well-known genes
coding for structural components of the myelin sheath but also
the major myelin regulatory factor Myrf and other oligodendrocyte
lineage-specific genes, suggesting an orchestrated upregulation
of
myelin
formation.
Importantly,
the
observed
alterations
showed an exquisite regional specificity as we did not detect
the upregulation of myelin-related genes in any of the other
investigated brain regions. Although regional specificity in myelin
regulation remains a unexpected finding, regional effects of
transcriptional regulation by the microbiome is in agreement with
previous findings in the literature.17,25
Analysis of the PFC ultrastructure revealed that the marked
upregulation of myelin-related gene expression resulted in
increased myelin sheath thickness as indicated by an overall
decrease in g-ratio. It has been shown that myelination of the
various cortical areas follows a certain order, where primary
sensory and motor areas myelinate before the association areas,
including the PFC. Moreover, neuroimaging studies have indicated
that there is continual myelination in the PFC until the third
decade of life.32 In addition, preclinical studies have shown that
myelination in the PFC undergoes plastic changes, influenced by
environmental stimuli mediated by increased electrical activity
in axons.33 As such, social deprivation in neonatal and juvenile
mice results in defective development of myelin34,35 indicating
that myelination in the PFC is extremely plastic during critical
neurodevelopmental phases.
Figure 4.
Increased myelin protein in male germ-free (GF) and exGF mice. (a) Western blot analysis for MOG in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) of
conventional (CON), GF and exGF. (b) Quantification of protein concentration was normalized to β-III-tubulin and expressed relative to control
levels. (c) Schematic representation of findings highlighting the transcriptional network driving increased myelination. Bar graph data is
shown as mean ± s.e.m. *Po0.05; **Po0.01.
Microbiota regulates cortical myelination
AE Hoban et al
6
Translational Psychiatry (2016), 1 – 9
 In our study we also see evidence of myelin-related plasticity, as
colonizing GF mice (exGF) counteracts the altered increase in
myelin-related transcripts. The plastic nature of PFC myelination
has also been observed in adult mice following prolonged periods
of social isolation. This protocol resulted in the development of a
phenotype marked by social withdrawal, which coincided with
changes in myelination only in the PFC.36 Subsequent group-
housing reverted social deficits and reinstated normal levels of
myelin.36 This earlier study indicates that myelination contributes
to functional adult brain plasticity and that PFC myelination
can be dependent on appropriate social experience in mice.
Taken together with our results, a complex picture emerges
of a malleable interaction between the gut microbiome, social
behaviour and PFC myelination across the lifespan.
Our transcriptome and qRT-PCR data point to a normalizing
effect of introducing a microbiota post weaning. The sustained
increase in MOG protein levels in exGF mice (Figures 4a and b)
could be explained by the timing of colonization post weaning. As
such, previous studies have highlighted that colonizing GF mice
with either a CON microbiome or by mono-association between
weeks 3 and 6 can partially revert the altered hypothalamic–
pituitary–adrenal- and anxiety-related phenotype associated with
these animals.18,20 However, in mice formation of myelin occurs
earlier, around postnatal day 10 (ref. 37), with a capacity to
continue into adulthood in a brain region-specific manner. As our
exGF mice were still sterile during this important time window,
colonization commencing at P21 may not be sufficient to
normalize this heightened myelin protein accumulation. Indeed,
the concept of critical overlapping neurodevelopmental and early-
life microbial
colonization
windows
is consistent
with
the
literature in this area.24 The dynamic nature and continued ability
of the PFC to undergo marked changes in myelination even in
adulthood may, at least in part, explain why the PFC is more
susceptible to a microbial influence on myelination than the other
brain regions tested. Further studies manipulating the timing of
colonization (colonization before weaning) will be required to
investigate the potential dynamic nature of microbes influencing
myelination and to whether the observed increase in protein in
our exGF can be normalized under such conditions.
Dynamic regulation of myelin gene expression is poorly
understood. However, a growing number of studies show that
myelination
is
dependent
on
neuronal
activity.33,38–40
This
strongly agrees with our data and indicates that neuronal activity
is indeed increased in the PFC of GF mice, as suggested by a
marked upregulation of a large number of genes known to be
expressed in response to raised neuronal activity. Our present
study suggests that increased myelin gene expression may be a
result of heightened baseline activity in the PFC. As the PFC
receives glutamatergic input from the amygdala, this is in line with
our previous finding that the amygdala also appears to be
hyperactive in GF mice.25 Our interaction network analysis is
consistent with the view that myelination is regulated by
plasticity-promoting extracellular signals and MAP-kinase signal-
ling via the key transcription factor myelin regulatory factor.29,41
Further support for a plasticity-dependent mechanism of hyper-
myelination in the PFC under GF conditions comes from the fact
that neurotrophic signalling by brain derived neurotrophic factor,
which we also found to be upregulated in GF mice in this data set,
can promote myelination.42,43
Our data also indicate that Myrf is a major driver of the observed
myelin gene increase. Myrf, in comparison with other myelin-
regulating transcription factors, is insufficiently described as it has
only recently been discovered as the major player in the establish-
ment of appropriate functional myelination. It is critical in the
generation of CNS myelination during development and for myelin
maintenance in adulthood as ablation of Myrf in mature oligoden-
drocytes in the adult CNS results in severe demyelination and rapid
downregulation of myelin-related genes such as Plp and Mbp.44
A recent study further investigated its role in myelination and found
that Myrf physically interacts with Sox10 (ref. 45), a known
transcription factor that regulates, along with Egr2, peripheral
nervous system myelination. Sox10 itself, via interaction with Myrf,
is necessary for terminal differentiation of oligodendrocytes in the
CNS. Though neither Sox10 nor Egr2 did appear in our list of
differentially regulated genes (Supplementary Table S4), we found
that there was a modest increase in the expression of Sox10 (~1.2-
fold) and Egr2 (~2-fold) in GF mice, which was not evident when
expression levels were compared between CON and exGF mice.
Sox10 induction cannot be triggered alone, and the addition of
intrinsic and extrinsic factors is required to drive oligodendrocyte
maturation.46,47 Previous studies indicate that chromatin remodel-
ling by Olig2, an oligodendrocyte-specific transcription factor, has
the capacity to alter accessibility of key regulating gene such as
Mryf at the onset of terminal differentiation.48 We observed a
significant increase in Olig1 but not in Olig2. Olig1, similar to Olig2,
has also been reported to interact with Sox10 and drive the
expression of key myelin genes such as Mbp.49,50 As Sox10 activity
is present at all stages of oligodendrocyte development and Myrf
appears to be essential in the final steps of oligodendrocyte
development, it may be at this point of terminal differentiation
that GF mice have altered oligodendrocyte activity, which is
further supported by the presence of excessive laminae in our
study (Figure 4c).
It has recently been shown that the microbiota contributes to
microglia homeostasis, with GF mice showing marked global
deficits in microglia.51,52 Interestingly, this study did not find
altered numbers of oligodendrocytes in GF mice. Although the
authors did not specifically look at the PFC nor was myelination
investigated, together these data render it unlikely that the altered
oligodendrocyte-specific transcriptional profile observed here
results from an increased number of oligodendrocyte cells.
In
contrast,
higher
lamina
counts
and
increased
myelin
thickness together with orchestrated upregulation of myelin gene
regulators rather reflect altered activity and functionality of
oligodendrocytes in GF mice.
Our results were unexpected as, in stark contrast to a large body
of literature on demyelination, studies on the consequences of
hypermyelination on brain function in health and disease are
essentially non-existent. Changes in myelin abundance have been
reported
in
many
neuropsychiatric
disorders,
and
links
to
behavioural outcomes of these disorders have been established
in animal models.33 For example, large genome-wide analyses of
the PFC of schizophrenic patients have remarkably highlighted
abnormal regulation of genes related to myelination.48,53 Most of
these studies report reduced myelin gene expression and white
matter volume, with neuroregulin 1 (NRG1), a schizophrenia
susceptibility gene,54,55 expression increased. Transgenic mice
overexpressing NRG1, previously linked to hypermyelination in
these mice, displayed tremor, impaired performance on rotarod
and decreased prepulse inhibition performance.56,57
Although our study further contributes to the mechanistic
understanding of microbial effects on the largely descriptive
literature on behavioural alterations in GF animals, the exact
mechanisms underpinning the control exerted by the microbiota
over myelination in the CNS remain speculative. Known routes of
gut–brain
communications
include
neuroactive
microbial
metabolites,28 as well as signalling through the vagus nerve.6,55
Importantly, as the main central relay for incoming information
from the vagus nerve, the nucleus tractus solitarius has an
extensive network of projections, including the parabrachial
nucleus, which further projects to the PFC and also the amygdala,
a region we have previously shown to be susceptible to microbial
transcriptional regulation.1,25 In addition, microbes directly affect
the immune system resulting in alterations in the circulating levels
of pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines that can
affect oligodendrocyte development.58,59
Microbiota regulates cortical myelination
AE Hoban et al
7
Translational Psychiatry (2016), 1 – 9
 Although there have been some reports of a functional role of
the intestinal microbiota in development of experimental auto-
immune encephalomyelitis12 demonstrating that GF animals have
a higher resistance to experimental autoimmune encephalomye-
litis development60 and the potential for the gut microbiota as a
risk factor for inflammation-mediated CNS demyelination,11 this
report, to our knowledge, represents the first example of direct
myelin regulation in the CNS by the microbiome. This is evident at
both the transcriptional and ultrastructural levels in adulthood.
Furthermore, the gene expression changes were brain region- and
sex-specific, and amenable to plastic modulation by introduction
of a microbiota post weaning. Several studies in GF mice have
demonstrated predominantly sex-specific brain effects, with males
showing more robust alterations at the level of the CNS.20 Further
studies are needed to ascertain why GF females do not display
many of the altered phenotypes of their male counterparts, and
research exploiting the GF model should take this into account.
In conclusion, the present study indicates that appropriate
cortical myelination relies on the presence of a functional
microbiota during critical windows of neurodevelopment. In-
depth analysis of transcriptome data further suggested that
hypertrophic neuronal signalling in the PFC of GF mice might be
underlying the observed increase in myelination. Our data
indicate that the microbiome is critical for appropriate cortical
myelination. Our results further highlight the microbiota as a
viable therapeutic target in psychiatric disorders and may allow to
develop strategies to promote remyelination in myelination
diseases. Owing to what we have demonstrated with GF animals,
future studies utilizing alternate models of microbiota depletion
such as chronic antibiotic treatment may further add to our
understanding of the influential relationship of the microbiota on
cortical myelination. Studies utilizing approaches such as mono-
colonization in either GF or microbiota-depleted animals using
antibiotics would allow deciphering whether specific bacterial
strains have the capacity to normalize the observed altered
myelination patterns in these animals. In addition, subsequent
studies aiming to mechanistically understand the influential role
of the gut microbiota on myelination should examine whether
certain bacterial metabolites could be underlying myelin changes
or what role the vague nerve has in the communication between
the gut bacteria and CNS myelination (that is, whether signalling
along the vagus nerve is required).
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Dr Una Fitzgerald, NUI Galway, & Dr Eric Downer, Trinity College Dublin, for
their helpful comments on the paper. We thank Dr Gerard M Moloney, Mr Patrick
Fitzgerald and Ms Frances O’Brien for technical assistance with animal husbandry,
tissue extraction, RNA extraction and qRT-PCR. We acknowledge Dr Don O’Leary and
Ms Suzanne Crotty, Department of Anatomy & Neuroscience Imaging Centre,
Bioscience Institute, University College Cork, for assistance in preparing and imaging
specimens. The APC Microbiome Institute is a research centre funded by Science
Foundation Ireland (SFI), through the Irish Government’s National Development Plan
(Grant Number 12/RC/2273). RMS is supported by the Irish Research Council (IRC)
through a Government of Ireland Postdoctoral Fellowship (Grant Number GOIPD/
2014/355). TGD and JFC are also supported by the Irish Health Research Board, the
Department of Agriculture, Food & the Marine and Enterprise Ireland. GC is supported
by a NARSAD Young Investigator Grant from the Brian and Behaviour Research
Foundation (Grant Number 20771). TGD, FS and JFC are principal investigators in the
APC Microbiome Institute, University College Cork. GC is a faculty member of the APC
Microbiome Institute. The APC Microbiome Institute has conducted research funded
by many Pharmaceutical & Food Companies. TGD has been an invited speaker at
meetings organized by Servier, Lundbeck, Janssen, and AstraZeneca, and has
received research funding from Mead Johnson, Cremo, Suntory Wellness, Nutricia
and 4D Pharma. JFC has been an invited speaker at meetings organized by Mead
Johnson, Yakult, Alkermes, and Janssen, and has received research funding from
Mead Johnson, Cremo, Suntory Wellness, Nutricia and 4D Pharma.
REFERENCES
1 Morgan MA, Romanski LM, LeDoux JE. Extinction of emotional learning: con-
tribution of medial prefrontal cortex. Neurosci Lett 1993; 163: 109–113.
2 Sullivan RM, Gratton A. Prefrontal cortical regulation of hypothalamic-pituitary-
adrenal function in the rat and implications for psychopathology: side matters.
Psychoneuroendocrinology 2002; 27: 99–114.
3 Davidson RJ. Anxiety and affective style: role of prefrontal cortex and amygdala.
Biol Psychiatry 2002; 51: 68–80.
4 Goto Y, Yang CR, Otani S. Functional and dysfunctional synaptic plasticity in
prefrontal cortex: roles in psychiatric disorders. Biol Psychiatry 2010; 67: 199–207.
5 Amaral DG, Schumann CM, Nordahl CW. Neuroanatomy of autism. Trends Neurosci
2008; 31: 137–145.
6 Cryan JF, Dinan TG. Mind-altering microorganisms: the impact of the gut micro-
biota on brain and behaviour. Nat Rev Neurosci 2012; 13: 701–712.
7 Dinan TG, Stanton C, Cryan JF. Psychobiotics: a novel class of psychotropic. Biol
Psychiatry 2013; 74: 720–726.
8 Palma G, Collins SM, Bercik P, Verdu EF. The microbiota–gut–brain axis in gas-
trointestinal disorders: stressed bugs, stressed brain or both? J Physiol 2014; 592:
2989–2997.
9 Mayer EA, Padua D, Tillisch K. Altered brain‐gut axis in autism: comorbidity or
causative mechanisms? Bioessays 2014; 36: 933–939.
10 Scheperjans F, Aho V, Pereira PA, Koskinen K, Paulin L, Pekkonen E et al. Gut
microbiota are related to Parkinson's disease and clinical phenotype. Mov Disord
2015; 30: 350–358.
11 Joscelyn J, Kasper LH. Digesting the emerging role for the gut microbiome in
central nervous system demyelination. Mult Scler 2014; 20: 1553–1559.
12 Berer K, Mues M, Koutrolos M, Al Rasbi Z, Boziki M, Johner C et al. Commensal
microbiota and myelin autoantigen cooperate to trigger autoimmune demyeli-
nation. Nature 2011; 479: 538–541.
13 Bercik P, Denou E, Collins J, Jackson W, Lu J, Jury J et al. The intestinal microbiota
affect central levels of brain-derived neurotropic factor and behavior in mice.
Gastroenterology 2011; 141: 599–609.
14 Desbonnet L, Clarke G, Traplin A, O’Sullivan O, Crispie F, Moloney RD et al. Gut
microbiota depletion from early adolescence in mice: implications for brain and
behaviour. Brain Behav Immun 2015; 50: 335–336.
15 Bravo JA, Forsythe P, Chew MV, Escaravage E, Savignac HM, Dinan TG et al.
Ingestion of Lactobacillus strain regulates emotional behavior and central GABA
receptor expression in a mouse via the vagus nerve. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011;
108: 16050–16055.
16 Liu X, Cao S, Zhang X. Modulation of gut microbiota–brain axis by probiotics,
prebiotics, and diet. J Agric Food Chem 2015; 63: 7885–7895.
17 Heijtz RD, Wang S, Anuar F, Qian Y, Björkholm B, Samuelsson A et al. Normal gut
microbiota modulates brain development and behavior. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
2011; 108: 3047–3052.
18 Sudo N, Chida Y, Aiba Y, Sonoda J, Oyama N, Yu XN et al. Postnatal microbial
colonization programs the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal system for stress
response in mice. J Physiol 2004; 558: 263–275.
19 Neufeld K, Kang N, Bienenstock J, Foster J. Reduced anxiety‐like behavior and
central neurochemical change in germ‐free mice. Neurogastroenterol Motil 2011;
23: 255–264, e119.
20 Clarke G, Grenham S, Scully P, Fitzgerald P, Moloney R, Shanahan F et al. The
microbiome-gut-brain axis during early life regulates the hippocampal ser-
otonergic system in a sex-dependent manner. Mol Psychiatry 2013; 18: 666–673.
21 Neufeld K-AM, Kang N, Bienenstock J, Foster JA. Effects of intestinal microbiota on
anxiety-like behavior. Commun Integr Biol 2011; 4: 492–494.
22 Desbonnet L, Clarke G, Shanahan F, Dinan T, Cryan J. Microbiota is essential for
social development in the mouse. Mol Psychiatry 2014; 19: 146.
23 Stilling RM, Bordenstein SR, Dinan TG, Cryan JF. Friends with social benefits: host-
microbe interactions as a driver of brain evolution and development? Front Cell
Infect Microbiol 2014; 4: 147.
24 Borre YE, O’Keeffe GW, Clarke G, Stanton C, Dinan TG, Cryan JF. Microbiota and
neurodevelopmental windows: implications for brain disorders. Trends Mol Med
2014; 20: 509–518.
25 Stilling RM, Ryan FJ, Hoban AE, Shanahan F, Clarke G, Claesson MJ et al. Microbes
& neurodevelopment—absence of microbiota during early life increases activity-
related transcriptional pathways in the amygdala. Brain Behav Immun 2015; 50:
209–220.
26 Livak KJ, Schmittgen TD. Analysis of relative gene expression data using real-time
quantitative PCR and the 2 − ΔΔCT method. Methods 2001; 25: 402–408.
27 Grubbs FE. Sample criteria for testing outlying observations. Ann Math Stat 1950;
21: 27–58.
Microbiota regulates cortical myelination
AE Hoban et al
8
Translational Psychiatry (2016), 1 – 9
 28 Nicholson JK, Holmes E, Kinross J, Burcelin R, Gibson G, Jia W et al. Host-gut
microbiota metabolic interactions. Science 2012; 336: 1262–1267.
29 Ishii A, Furusho M, Dupree JL, Bansal R. Role of ERK1/2 MAPK signaling in the
maintenance of myelin and axonal integrity in the adult CNS. J Neurosci 2014; 34:
16031–16045.
30 Stilling RM, Rönicke R, Benito E, Urbanke H, Capece V, Burkhardt S et al. K‐Lysine
acetyltransferase 2a regulates a hippocampal gene expression network linked to
memory formation. EMBO J 2014; 33: 1912–1927.
31 Benito E, Valor LM, Jimenez-Minchan M, Huber W, Barco A. cAMP response
element-binding protein is a primary hub of activity-driven neuronal gene
expression. J Neurosci 2011; 31: 18237–18250.
32 Fuster JM. Frontal lobe and cognitive development. J Neurocytol 2002; 31:
373–385.
33 Lee PR, Fields RD. Regulation of myelin genes implicated in psychiatric disorders
by functional activity in axons. Front Neuroanat 2009; 3: 4.
34 Kikusui T, Kiyokawa Y, Mori Y. Deprivation of mother–pup interaction by early
weaning alters myelin formation in male, but not female, ICR mice. Brain Res 2007;
1133: 115–122.
35 Makinodan M, Rosen KM, Ito S, Corfas G. A critical period for social experience–
dependent oligodendrocyte maturation and myelination. Science 2012; 337:
1357–1360.
36 Liu J, Dietz K, DeLoyht JM, Pedre X, Kelkar D, Kaur J et al. Impaired adult myeli-
nation in the prefrontal cortex of socially isolated mice. Nat Neurosci 2012; 15:
1621–1623.
37 Downes N, Mullins P. The development of myelin in the brain of the juvenile rat.
Toxicol Pathol 2014; 42: 913–922.
38 Wake H, Ortiz FC, Woo DH, Lee PR, Angulo MC, Fields RD. Nonsynaptic junctions
on myelinating glia promote preferential myelination of electrically active axons.
Nat Commun 2015; 6: 7844.
39 Wake H, Lee PR, Fields RD. Control of local protein synthesis and initial events in
myelination by action potentials. Science 2011; 333: 1647–1651.
40 Tomassy GS, Dershowitz LB, Arlotta P. Diversity matters: a revised guide to
myelination. Trends Cell Biol 2016; 26: 135–147.
41 Gonsalvez D, Ferner AH, Peckham H, Murray SS, Xiao J. The roles of extracellular
related-kinases 1 and 2 signaling in CNS myelination. Neuropharmacology 2015.
10.1016/j.neuropharm.2015.04.024.
42 KhorshidAhmad T, Acosta C, Cortes C, Lakowski TM, Gangadaran S, Namaka M.
Transcriptional regulation of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) by methyl
Cpg binding protein 2 (MeCP2): a novel mechanism for re-myelination and/or
myelin repair involved in the treatment of multiple sclerosis (MS). Mol Neurobiol
2016; 53: 1092–1107.
43 Xiao J, Wong AW, Willingham MM, van den Buuse M, Kilpatrick TJ, Murray SS.
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor promotes central nervous system myelination
via a direct effect upon oligodendrocytes. Neurosignals 2010; 18: 186–202.
44 Koenning M, Jackson S, Hay CM, Faux C, Kilpatrick TJ, Willingham M et al. Myelin
gene regulatory factor is required for maintenance of myelin and mature oligo-
dendrocyte identity in the adult CNS. J Neurosci 2012; 32: 12528–12542.
45 Hornig J, Fröb F, Vogl MR, Hermans-Borgmeyer I, Tamm ER, Wegner M. The
transcription factors Sox10 and Myrf define an essential regulatory network
module in differentiating oligodendrocytes. PLoS Genet 2013; 9: e1003907.
46 Emery B, Lu QR. Transcriptional and epigenetic regulation of oligodendrocyte
development and myelination in the central nervous system. Cold Spring Harb
Perspect Biol 2015; 7: a020461.
47 Emery B. Playing the field: Sox10 recruits different partners to drive central and
peripheral myelination. PLoS Genet 2013; 9: 10.
48 Hakak Y, Walker JR, Li C, Wong WH, Davis KL, Buxbaum JD et al. Genome-wide
expression analysis reveals dysregulation of myelination-related genes in chronic
schizophrenia. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001; 98: 4746–4751.
49 Yu Y, Chen Y, Kim B, Wang H, Zhao C, He X et al. Olig2 targets chromatin
remodelers to enhancers to initiate oligodendrocyte differentiation. Cell 2013;
152: 248–261.
50 Li H, Lu Y, Smith HK, Richardson WD. Olig1 and Sox10 interact synergistically to
drive myelin basic protein transcription in oligodendrocytes. J Neurosci 2007; 27:
14375–14382.
51 Erny D, de Angelis ALH, Jaitin D, Wieghofer P, Staszewski O, David E et al. Host
microbiota constantly control maturation and function of microglia in the CNS.
Nat Neurosci 2015; 18: 965–977.
52 Cryan JF, Dinan TG. Gut microbiota: microbiota and neuroimmune signalling—
Metchnikoff to microglia. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2015; 12: 494–496.
53 Tkachev D, Mimmack ML, Ryan MM, Wayland M, Freeman T, Jones PB et al.
Oligodendrocyte dysfunction in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Lancet 2003;
362: 798–805.
54 Stefansson H, Steinthorsdottir V, Thorgeirsson TE, Gulcher JR, Stefansson K.
Neuregulin 1 and schizophrenia. Ann Med 2004; 36: 62–71.
55 Bravo JA, Julio-Pieper M, Forsythe P, Kunze W, Dinan TG, Bienenstock J et al.
Communication between gastrointestinal bacteria and the nervous system. Curr
Opin Pharmacol 2012; 12: 667–672.
56 Deakin IH, Law AJ, Oliver PL, Schwab MH, Nave KA, Harrison PJ et al. Behavioural
characterization of neuregulin 1 (NRG1) type I over-expressing transgenic mice.
Neuroreport 2009; 20: 1523.
57 Brinkmann BG, Agarwal A, Sereda MW, Garratt AN, Müller T, Wende H et al.
Neuregulin-1/ErbB signaling serves distinct functions in myelination of the
peripheral and central nervous system. Neuron 2008; 59: 581–595.
58 Pang Y, Cai Z, Rhodes PG. Disturbance of oligodendrocyte development, hypo-
myelination and white matter injury in the neonatal rat brain after intracerebral
injection of lipopolysaccharide. Dev Brain Res 2003; 140: 205–214.
59 Andrews T, Zhang P, Bhat N. TNFα potentiates IFNγ‐induced cell death in
oligodendrocyte progenitors. J Neurosci Res 1998; 54: 574–583.
60 Lee YK, Menezes JS, Umesaki Y, Mazmanian SK. Proinflammatory T-cell responses
to gut microbiota promote experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 2011; 108: 4615–4622.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated
otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons
license, users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the
material. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0/
Supplementary Information accompanies the paper on the Translational Psychiatry website (http://www.nature.com/tp)
Microbiota regulates cortical myelination
AE Hoban et al
9
Translational Psychiatry (2016), 1 – 9
