 REVIEW
Open Access
Early Mobilization of Patients in Intensive
Care: Organization, Communication and
Safety Factors that Influence Translation
into Clinical Practice
Carol L. Hodgson1,2*, Elizabeth Capell2 and Claire J. Tipping1,2
Abstract
This article is one of ten reviews selected from the
Annual Update in Intensive Care and Emergency
Medicine 2018. Other selected articles can be found
online at https://www.biomedcentral.com/collections/
annualupdate2018. Further information about the
Annual Update in Intensive Care and Emergency
Medicine is available from http://www.springer.com/
series/8901.
Background
Early mobilization in the intensive care unit (ICU) is
currently a hot topic, with more than 15 randomized
controlled trials (RCTs) in the past ten years including
several high impact publications [1]. However, the
largest studies of early mobilization have enrolled 300
patients, and the results of phase II randomized trials,
pilot studies and observational studies have been used to
encourage practice change [2–5]. There are currently
several international practice guidelines available, and
early mobilization has consistently been reported as safe
and feasible in the ICU setting [6]. There is no doubt
that this early intervention in ICU shows exciting poten-
tial. The reported benefits of early mobilization, include
reduced ICU-acquired weakness, improved functional
recovery within hospital, improved walking distance at
hospital discharge and reduced hospital length of stay [1].
However, medical research has repeatedly demonstrated
that the results of pilot studies and phase II studies may
* Correspondence: carol.hodgson@monash.edu
1Monash University, Australian and New Zealand Intensive Care Research
Centre, School of Public Health and Preventive Medicine, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia
2The Alfred Hospital, Department of Physiotherapy, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia
not result in improved patient-centered outcomes when
tested in a larger trial [7, 8]. More importantly, it has been
difficult to test this complex intervention, with several
randomized
trials
delivering
significantly
less
early
mobilization than specified in the study protocol [2, 9]
and observational studies reporting very low rates of early
mobilization during the ICU stay [10, 11].
This chapter summarizes the considerations for patient
safety during early mobilization; including the physio-
logical assessment of the patient, the consideration of
invasive lines and monitoring, the management of sedation,
strategies to educate and manage the multidisciplinary team
and environmental factors. Importantly, we will consider
the long-term effect of early mobilization on patient out-
come and the future directions for this important area of
work for ICU clinicians.
Safety of Early Mobilization in the ICU: Short-Term
Consequences
Early mobilization is a complex intervention that requires
careful patient assessment and management, as well as
interdisciplinary team cooperation and training [12]. Pa-
tient safety is one of the most commonly reported barriers
to delivering early mobilization, including respiratory,
cardiovascular and neurological stability and the integrity
of invasive lines. In a recent systematic review and meta-
analysis of patient safety during early mobilization, 48
studies were identified that reported data on safety during
early mobilization, including falls, removal of endotracheal
tubes (ETT), removal or dysfunction of intravascular cath-
eters, removal of catheters or tubes, cardiac arrest,
hemodynamic changes and oxygen desaturation [13]. Five
studies were not included as their data were reported in
other included publications. The 43 included studies had
different descriptions of safety events and, in most, the
criteria for ceasing early mobilization were the same
© Hodgson et al. 2018
Hodgson et al. Critical Care  (2018) 22:77 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13054-018-1998-9
 criteria used to define a safety event. The most frequently
reported safety events were oxygen desaturation and
hemodynamic changes, each reported in 33 (69%) of the
eligible studies and removal or dysfunction of intravascu-
lar catheters reported in 31 (65%) of the eligible studies.
Several studies did not report on important safety events,
including falls (n = 21, 43%), ETT removal (n = 17, 35%)
and cardiac arrest (n = 15, 31%).
Of the 43 included studies, 23 (53%) reported conse-
quences of potential safety events [13]. There were 308
potential
safety
events
from
13,974
mobilization
sessions, for an incidence of 2% potential safety events
during mobilization. Of these, consequences of the safety
event were reported for 78 occasions (0.6%) including 49
debridement or suturing of wounds and 11 tube re-
movals with 4 of these requiring replacement. With
regards to adverse events including a high heart rate,
low blood pressure or oxygen desaturation, the pooled
incidence for each was less than 2 per 1,000 episodes of
mobilization. Safety events that resulted in additional
care requirements or consequences were very rare.
There have been several publications that recommend
criteria for the safe mobilization of patients receiving
mechanically ventilated. The first was published approxi-
mately 15 years ago, and later adopted as a recommen-
dation by the European Respiratory Society and the
European Society of Critical Care Medicine [12, 14]. At
this time, the evidence was considered level C and D
(observational studies and expert opinions). In particular,
these authors recommended identification of patient
characteristics that enable treatment to be prescribed
and modified on an individual basis, with standardized
pathways for clinical decision making. The flow diagram
detailing patient assessment prior to early mobilization
is a useful tool in clinical practice, and may be used to
assist with staff training.
More recently, an international multidisciplinary ex-
pert consensus group developed recommendations for
consideration prior to mobilization of patients in the
ICU during mechanical ventilation [15]. The panel
consisted of 23 clinical or research experts from four
countries, including 17 physiotherapists, five intensivists
and one nurse. Following a modified Delphi process, the
group developed a traffic light system for each of the
identified safety criteria to determine the risk/benefit of
performing early mobilization. Green indicated that
there was a low risk of an adverse event, and the benefit
outweighed the potential safety consequences of early
mobilization. Yellow indicated a potential risk or conse-
quence of adverse event during early mobilization, such
that precautions and contraindications should be dis-
cussed
with
the
interdisciplinary
team
prior
to
mobilization. Red indicated a significant potential risk of
an adverse event, where early mobilization should not
occur unless it was authorized by the medical team re-
sponsible for the overall patient management in ICU.
Importantly, a ‘red’ sign was not a contraindication to
early mobilization, but rather a clear message that the
risks may outweigh the benefits in this instance (Fig. 1)
[15]. The safety criteria were divided into the categories of
respiratory, cardiovascular, neurological and other consid-
erations (e.g., securing intravascular lines). Consensus was
achieved on all criteria for safe mobilization with the
exception of levels of vasoactive agents, where the panel
agreed that more evidence was required to guide the rec-
ommendations. At an international meeting, 94 multidis-
ciplinary ICU clinicians concurred with the proposed
expert recommendations prior to publication.
The safety criteria developed by the group were
intended to be used whenever mobilization was being
considered, which might be up to several times per day
for an individual patient. In considering the decision to
mobilize a patient, the criteria should be assessed based
on the status of the patient at the time of planned
mobilization, but changes in condition, and direction of
trends, in the preceding hours should also be taken into
account [15]. The potential consequences of an adverse
event in an individual patient should also be considered
as part of the overall clinical reasoning process. This
group noted that further research was required to valid-
ate the traffic light system in centers of clinical expertise
and
in
centers
without
clinical
expertise
in
early
mobilization. They also noted that practice may change
and progress in the future, so that areas that were
considered a significant potential risk (red) may change
to yellow with further investigation, or vice versa.
Barriers and Facilitators to Mobilization Reported
in Quantitative Studies
Many observational and randomized controlled trials
over the past decade have demonstrated that ICU clini-
cians are reluctant to mobilize mechanically ventilated
patients, despite the scarcity of reported adverse events
and the potential benefits [11, 16, 17]. The barriers and
facilitators to early mobilization can be divided into
patient factors, ICU team factors and organizational
factors (Table 1). A recent systematic review identified
barriers to delivering the Awakening, Breathing Coord-
ination, Delirium and Early mobility/exercise (ABCDE)
bundle to minimize adverse outcomes and improve pa-
tient care for ICU patients [18]. This study reported 107
barriers, categorized into four classes: patient-related
(patient instability); clinician-related (lack of knowledge
and staff safety concerns); protocol-related (unclear
protocol criteria); and ICU contextual barriers (interdis-
ciplinary team coordination).
Several large, multicenter observational studies have re-
ported barriers to mobilization across regions. For example,
Hodgson et al. Critical Care  (2018) 22:77 
Page 2 of 7
 a prospective, observational study of mobilization practice
in mechanically ventilated patients enrolled 192 patients
from 12 ICUs in Australia and New Zealand [11]. The
data were collected from 1,288 physiotherapy–patient in-
teractions and no early mobilization occurred in 1,079
(84%) of these episodes during mechanical ventilation. A
total of 122 (63.5%) patients did not receive early active
mobilization
and
the
main
reported
barrier
to
mobilization was sedation, with nearly half of the cohort
too sedated for active mobilization on the first two days in
the ICU. The study suggests that unit culture, rather than
patient-related factors, may be the main barrier to early
mobilization in these ICUs. The use of vasopressors was
common (n = 127, 66%), however there was no evidence
to suggest the appropriate level of vasopressor support to
enable safe mobilization. Similarly, a point prevalence
study completed across 38 ICUs in Australia and New
Zealand showed that no patients mobilized or sat out of
bed during mechanical ventilation [16].
Harrold and colleagues compared early mobilization
between Australian and Scottish ICUs [10]. This study
found that 60.2% (209/347) patients were mobilized in
the Australian cohort and 40.1% (68/167) patients were
mobilized in the Scottish cohort during the ICU stay.
Mobilization in the presence of an ETT was rare in both
cohorts (3.4% Scotland and 2.2% in Australia). Physio-
logical instability and the presence of an ETT were
frequently reported barriers; however sedation was the
most commonly reported barrier to mobilization in both
the Australian and Scottish cohorts.
Randomized trials have also had difficulty delivering
the planned dose of early mobilization in the interven-
tion group. The TEAM pilot study found that early,
goal-directed mobility was feasible, safe and resulted in
increased duration and level of active exercise [19]. Fifty
patients were randomized and the intervention group re-
ceived a median duration of 20 min/day early goal-
directed mobilization, despite the 30–60 min pre-specified
goal of the intervention. Although the intervention group
did not meet the targeted duration of early mobilization,
the proportion of patients that walked in the ICU was al-
most doubled in the intervention group. Two of the
largest randomized trials of early mobilization have also
reported difficulties delivering intensive dosage of active
mobilization. One study was only able to deliver the inter-
vention on 57% of study days [9], whilst the other was able
to complete physical therapy on 55% and progressive re-
sistance exercise on 36% of study days [2]. Sedation man-
agement, in particular, limited the number of early
mobilization interventions, which may have contributed
to the findings that ICU-based physical rehabilitation did
Fig. 1 Expert consensus color coding definitions for safe early mobilization of mechanically ventilated patients [15]
Table 1 Barriers and facilitators to mobilization
Barriers
Facilitators
Patient Factors
Physiological instability
(hemodynamic, respiratory,
neurological)
Sedation
Low Glasgow Coma Scale
Delirium/agitation
Psychological state
Pain
Medical procedures/orders
Patient refusal/anxiety
Manage patient physiological
instability
Management of sedation &
delirium
Sleep
Delirium screening/management
Analgesia prior to mobilization
Patient goals
Family engagement and education
Intensive Care Team Factors
Poor culture
Lack of communication
Lack of leadership
Disengaged team members
Inexperienced staff
Lack of planning and
coordination
Unclear expectations
Risk for mobility providers
Femoral lines
Early ward transfers
Anticipated risks
Develop a positive team culture
Ward rounds, multidisciplinary
team meetings
Designated leaders
Team planning and communication
Education and up-skilling staff
Screening of appropriate patients
Flexible and cooperative team
members
Utilization of safety criteria for
mobilizing mechanically ventilated
patients
Anticipated benefits
Organizational Factors
Lack of funding
Time constraints
Lack of equipment and
resources
Lack of staffing or availability
Busy caseloads
Business case for additional staff to
outline the economic benefits for
the organization
Appropriate equipment & resources
Dedicated staffing
Mobility guidelines/protocol
Training on appropriate equipment
Hodgson et al. Critical Care  (2018) 22:77 
Page 3 of 7
 not appear to improve physical outcomes at 6 months
compared to standard physical rehabilitation.
To address the concern with unit culture and interdiscip-
linary goals and communication, a multicenter inter-
national randomized trial in five university hospitals in
Austria, Germany and the USA was performed where the
mobilization goal was defined during daily morning ward
rounds and facilitated by interdisciplinary closed-loop com-
munication [4]. The mobilization goal was achieved in 89%
of study days in the intervention group. Early goal-directed
mobilization improved patient mobilization throughout
ICU admission, shortened patient length of stay in both the
surgical ICU and hospital, and improved patients’ func-
tional mobility at hospital discharge (51% of patients in the
intervention group vs 28% of patients in the control group).
The current evidence suggests that early mobilization is
safe and feasible and may improve functional recovery at
hospital discharge; however ICUs are still very conservative
in mobilizing mechanically ventilated patients, with some
potentially avoidable barriers. Interdisciplinary communica-
tion and a clinical lead or champion may reduce barriers to
early mobilization [20–22].
Themes that Identify Barriers and Facilitators to
Early Mobilization
There have been several studies that have used qualitative
methods to establish themes associated with barriers and
facilitators to early mobilization in ICU. Barber and col-
leagues used three discipline-specific focus groups to es-
tablish barriers and facilitators to early mobilization
amongst 25 ICU staff, including separate focus groups for
doctors, nurses and physiotherapists [21]. Three key
themes emerged to both barriers and facilitators across all
groups.
The
barriers
included:
first,
culture
which
included the use of sedation and the reluctance to
mobilize patients with an ETT; second, communication
which included contacting the appropriate physiotherapist
to mobilize a patient, and doctors writing it as a care plan
for the day without it being operationalized; and third, a
lack of resources, which included staff, training and
equipment to safely conduct mobilization in the ICU. The
facilitators to early mobilization in the ICU included:
organizational change, such as a dedicated mobility team;
leadership including a champion who would assist with
multidisciplinary team planning, team meetings and daily
goal setting; and resources to provide adequate staff, train-
ing and equipment for mobilization in this complex area.
Using the theory of planned behavior, Holdsworth and
colleagues elicited attitudinal, normative and control be-
liefs toward early mobilization of mechanically ventilated
patients [23]. A nine-item elicitation questionnaire was
administered electronically to a convenience sample of
22 staff in the ICU. Respondents wrote the most text
about barriers to mobilization, including that it was time
consuming, posed a safety risk to patients with line
dislodgement or disconnection and unstable patient physi-
ology and that there was a negative workplace culture.
Perhaps the most comprehensive publication in this
area is a recent systematic review of quantitative and
qualitative studies that identified and evaluated factors
influencing physical activity in the ICU setting (and
post-ICU setting) [20]. Eighty-nine papers were included
with five major themes and 28 sub-themes including:
first, patient physical and psychological capability to
perform physical activity, including delirium, sedation,
motivation, weakness and anxiety; second, safety influ-
ences, including physiological stability and invasive lines;
third, culture and team influences, including leadership,
communication, expertise and administrative buy-in;
fourth, motivation and beliefs regarding risks versus
benefits; and lastly environmental influences including
funding, staffing and equipment. Many of the barriers
and enablers to physical activity were consistent across
both qualitative and quantitative studies and geograph-
ical regions, and they supported themes established from
previous research in this area. Barriers and facilitators to
physical activity were multidimensional and may be
altered by raising general awareness about post-intensive
care syndrome and the potential risks versus potential
benefits of early mobilization in the ICU.
Drivers of Clinical Decision Making That Are
Modifiable
It is possible that several of the drivers of clinical
decision making with regards to early mobilization of
mechanically ventilated patients are modifiable [20]. In a
large prospective cohort study across 12 ICUs, the main
reported barrier to early mobilization was sedation [11].
Only one of 12 ICUs in this study routinely used a
sedation protocol, including sedation minimization or
daily sedation interruption. Implementing a sedation
protocol into routine ICU care across regions may facili-
tate early mobilization by allowing ICU patients to wake
and participate in physical activity. These results were
also
identified
in
an
international
study
of
early
mobilization practices in Australia and Scotland [10].
In
another
observational
study,
Leditschke
and
colleagues reported on 327 patient days audited for early
mobilization or barriers to early mobilization [22]. Early
mobilization did not occur on 151 (46%) of these days
and the reasons for inability to deliver early mobilization
was
potentially
avoidable
in
almost
half
of
these.
Potentially avoidable barriers to mobilization included
femoral vascular catheters, timing of procedures, sedation
management, agitation and early transfer to the hospital
ward. Active identification of barriers to early mobilization
and strategies to avoid these issues should be included as
part of an early mobilization plan.
Hodgson et al. Critical Care  (2018) 22:77 
Page 4 of 7
 Early Mobilization and Long-term Consequences
The importance of completing long-term follow-up of
patient outcomes after ICU has become well recognized
and is now prioritized in research [24, 25]. It is recom-
mended that studies follow up patients for a least six
months
after
ICU
admission
[26].
Mortality
is
a
commonly reported outcome in critical care research. Due
to the complexities of critical care and the interventions
provided to patients, it is possible that early mobilization
and rehabilitation may have long-term adverse effects on
our patients [1]. An updated meta-analysis of controlled
and randomized trials of early mobilization and rehabilita-
tion in ICU showed no significant difference in mortality
at six months between the intervention and control
groups (OR –0.01, 95% CI –0.07–0.05, p = 0.74, seven
studies, n = 265) (Fig. 2).
Whilst mortality is an important outcome to assess
after critical illness, it is long-term physical, psycho-
logical and cognitive function that patients and their
family members rate as important outcomes post-critical
illness [27]. To this end, there are a large number of out-
come measures available to assess the key domains after
ICU discharge, including physical, cognitive and psycho-
logical function [28]. In studies of early mobilization and
rehabilitation it is common that different outcome mea-
sures are used to assess the same domains across differ-
ent studies [1, 20]. This makes combining the results in
a meta-analysis difficult and makes it challenging to
compare the results across studies.
A recent meta-analysis assessed six-month outcomes
from randomized and controlled clinical trials of early
mobilization and rehabilitation. It reported that there
was no significant difference in timed-up-and-go test
and the 36 Item Short Form Survey (SF-36) results [1].
It did, however, show significantly higher SF-36 results
favoring the intervention group in the role physical and
role emotional domains for high-dose rehabilitation
compared to low-dose rehabilitation and significantly
more days alive and out of hospital favoring the inter-
vention group (mean difference 9.63, 95% CI 1.68–17.57,
p = 0.02, five studies, n = 509). There were consistent
concerns regarding the high rates of loss to follow up
across the studies, making outcomes like the SF-36 and
timed-up-and-go difficult to interpret as they do not
Fig. 2 Forest plot of mortality in ICU, in hospital and at six months comparing early mobilization with standard care in randomized
controlled trials
Hodgson et al. Critical Care  (2018) 22:77 
Page 5 of 7
 account for death [1, 29]. There is currently no consist-
ent message regarding the long-term effects of early
mobilization in the ICU on physical function or quality
of life [30, 31].
Do We 1Have Consensus on Long-term Outcomes
for ICU Survivors?
A two-stage, international Delphi process determined
that the following domains are important to assess post-
ICU discharge in patients with acute respiratory failure:
physical function, cognition, mental health, satisfaction
with life and personal enjoyment, survival, pulmonary
function, pain and muscle or nerve function [32]. The
Delphi
process
evaluated
which
outcome
measures
should be used to assess domains identified as import-
ant. Consensus could not be reached on all domains,
however the minimal acceptable outcomes to report
based on this study are survival, EuroQol-5D (EQ-5D;
assessing satisfaction with life and personal enjoyment),
hospital anxiety and depression scale and impact of
event scale revised (assessing mental health).
Perhaps we can learn some lessons from other acute
areas of medicine. A dose-response analysis of early
mobilization, completed on the AVERT Study stoke pa-
tient data, helps to unravel uncertainties in the dosage,
timing and frequency of early mobilization interventions
following stroke onset [33]. In the primary analysis, the
results demonstrated that very early mobilization in
stroke patients resulted in decreased odds of a favorable
outcome [7]. The secondary analysis, however, showed a
13% improvement in odds of a favorable outcome with
each episode of out-of-bed activity per day, keeping time
to mobilization and daily amount constant. Conversely
increasing the amount of time doing out-of-bed activity
reduced the odds of a favorable outcome. Patients who
started mobilizing earlier post-onset of stroke also had
more favorable outcomes. The beneficial effect of regular
short periods of out-of-bed activity was consistent across
most of the analysis. These results may guide further re-
search in the critical care population with regards to the
prescription of early mobilization. To date, studies of early
mobilization in the ICU have delivered variations in dose,
timing and progression of the rehabilitation intervention
[1]. This variability has made it challenging to compare
the study results and to determine the most appropriate
dosage and timing of early mobilization in the ICU.
Conclusion
Currently there is a divide between ICU clinicians who
wish to implement early mobilization based on current
evidence and clinicians who believe that early mobilization
is an intervention that should be tested in a large patient-
centered trial to determine long term outcomes (including
functional recovery). Despite the publication of safety
recommendations and clinical practice guidelines [6, 14, 15],
the implementation of early mobilization remains a
challenge in the ICU, with limited information on safe
levels of vasoactive support, ongoing evidence of over-
sedation of mechanically ventilated patients and poor staff
resources limiting the ability to deliver early mobilization.
Based on current evidence, early mobilization is safe
during
mechanical
ventilation,
but
the
conservative
management of ICU patients translates into a culture of
bed rest. Some of the drivers of clinical decisions may be
modifiable,
with
better
adherence
to
sedation
and
mobilization protocols, clinical leadership and increased
staff resources and training. However, given our experi-
ence in other areas of medicine including stroke and
traumatic brain injury, early mobilization should be tested
in a patient-centered trial with evaluation of long-term
outcomes prior to implementation.
Acknowledgements
Not applicable
Funding
Prof Carol Hodgson is supported by a Future Leader Fellowship from the Heart
Foundation of Australia. This supported her time to write the manuscript but had
no influence on the design, analysis or interpretation of the data in this review.
Availability of data and materials
All data generated or analysed during this study are included in this
published article.
Authors’ contributions
All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.
Consent for publication
Not applicable.
Competing interests
Prof Carol Hodgson is lead investigator of a multicenter Phase III study of
early activity and mobilisation in intensive care. Claire Tipping is on the
management committee of the same Phase III study. There are no other
competing interests.
Disclaimer
The following references are cited in Figure 2: [34–42].
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional affiliations.
References
1.
Tipping CJ, Harrold M, Holland A, Romero L, Nisbet T, Hodgson CL. The
effects of active mobilisation and rehabilitation in ICU on mortality and
function: a systematic review. Intensive Care Med. 2017;43:171–83.
2.
Morris PE, Berry MJ, Files DC, et al. Standardized rehabilitation and hospital
length of stay among patients with acute respiratory failure: a randomized
clinical trial. JAMA. 2016;315:2694–702.
3.
Moss M, Nordon-Craft A, Malone D, et al. A randomized trial of an intensive
physical therapy program for patients with acute respiratory failure. Am J
Respir Crit Care Med. 2016;193:1101–10.
Hodgson et al. Critical Care  (2018) 22:77 
Page 6 of 7
 4.
Schaller SJ, Anstey M, Blobner M, et al. Early, goal-directed mobilisation in
the surgical intensive care unit: a randomised controlled trial. Lancet.
2016;388:1377–88.
5.
Schweickert WD, Pohlman MC, Pohlman AS, et al. Early physical and
occupational therapy in mechanically ventilated, critically ill patients: a
randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2009;373:1874–82.
6.
NICE Guidelines (2009) Rehabilitation after critical illness in adults. https://
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg83. Accessed 11 January 2018
7.
Bernhardt J, Langhorne P, Lindley RI, et al. Efficacy and safety of very early
mobilisation within 24 h of stroke onset (AVERT): a randomised controlled
trial. Lancet. 2015;386:46–55.
8.
Cooper DJ, Rosenfeld JV, Murray L, et al. Decompressive craniectomy in
diffuse traumatic brain injury. N Engl J Med. 2011;364:1493–502.
9.
Wright SE, Thomas K, Watson G et al (2017) Intensive versus standard
physical rehabilitation therapy in the critically ill (EPICC): a multicentre,
parallel-group, randomised controlled trial. Thorax. https://doi.org/10.1136/
thoraxjnl-2016-209858 (Aug 5, Epub ahead of print)
10.
Harrold ME, Salisbury LG, Webb SA, Allison GT, et al. Early mobilisation in
intensive care units in Australia and Scotland: a prospective, observational
cohort study examining mobilisation practises and barriers. Crit Care.
2015;19:336.
11.
Hodgson C, Bellomo R, Berney S, et al. Early mobilization and recovery in
mechanically ventilated patients in the ICU: a bi-national, multi-centre,
prospective cohort study. Crit Care. 2015;19:81.
12.
Gosselink R, Bott J, Johnson M, et al. Physiotherapy for adult patients with
critical illness: recommendations of the European Respiratory Society and
European Society of Intensive Care Medicine Task Force on Physiotherapy
for Critically Ill Patients. Intensive Care Med. 2008;34:1188–99.
13.
Nydahl P, Sricharoenchai T, Chandra S, et al. Safety of patient mobilization
and rehabilitation in the intensive care unit. systematic review with meta-
analysis. Ann Am Thorac Soc. 2017;14:766–77.
14.
Stiller K, Phillips A. Safety aspects of mobilising acutely ill inpatients.
Physiother Theory Pract. 2003;19:239–57.
15.
Hodgson CL, Stiller K, Needham DM, et al. Expert consensus and
recommendations on safety criteria for active mobilization of mechanically
ventilated critically ill adults. Crit Care. 2014;18:658.
16.
Berney S, Harrold M, Webb S, et al. Intensive care unit mobility practices in Australia
and New Zealand: a point prevalence study. Crit Care Resus. 2013;15:260–5.
17.
Nydahl P, Ruhl AP, Bartoszek G, et al. Early mobilization of mechanically
ventilated patients: a 1-day point-prevalence study in Germany. Crit Care
Med. 2014;42:1178–86.
18.
Costa DK, White MR, Ginier E, et al. Identifying barriers to delivering the
awakening and breathing coordination, delirium, and early exercise/mobility
bundle to minimize adverse outcomes for mechanically ventilated patients:
a systematic review. Chest. 2017;152:304–11.
19.
Hodgson CL, Bailey M, Bellomo R, et al. A binational multicenter pilot
feasibility randomized controlled trial of early goal-directed mobilization in
the ICU. Crit Care Med. 2016;44:1145–52.
20.
Parry SM, Knight LD, Connolly B, et al. Factors influencing physical activity
and rehabilitation in survivors of critical illness: a systematic review of
quantitative and qualitative studies. Intensive Care Med. 2017;43:531–42.
21.
Barber EA, Everard T, Holland AE, Tipping C, Bradley SJ, Hodgson CL. Barriers
and facilitators to early mobilisation in intensive care: a qualitative study.
Aust Crit Care. 2015;28:177–82.
22.
Leditschke IA, Green M, Irvine J, Bissett B, Mitchell IA. What are the barriers
to mobilizing intensive care patients? Cardiopulm Phys Ther J. 2012;23:26–9.
23.
Holdsworth C, Haines KJ, Francis JJ, Marshall A, O’Connor D, Skinner EH.
Mobilization of ventilated patients in the intensive care unit: an elicitation
study using the theory of planned behavior. J Crit Care. 2015;30:1243–50.
24.
Iwashyna TJ, Ely EW, Smith DM, Langa KM. Long-term cognitive impairment
and functional disability among survivors of severe sepsis. JAMA. 2010;304:
1787–94.
25.
Needham DM, Davidson J, Cohen H, et al. Improving long-term outcomes
after discharge from intensive care unit: report from a stakeholders’
conference. Crit Care Med. 2012;40:502–9.
26.
Blackwood B, Marshall J, Rose L. Progress on core outcome sets for critical
care research. Curr Opin Crit Care. 2015;21:439–44.
27.
Angus DC, Carlet J. Surviving intensive care: a report from the 2002 Brussels
Roundtable. Intensive Care Med. 2003;29:368–77.
28.
Turnbull AE, Rabiee A, Davis WE, et al. Outcome measurement in ICU
survivorship research from 1970 to 2013: a scoping review of 425
publications. Crit Care Med. 2016;44:1267–77.
29.
Hodgson C, Cuthbertson BH. Improving outcomes after critical illness:
harder than we thought. Intensive Care Med. 2016;42:1772–4.
30.
Hodgson CL, Iwashyna TJ, Schweickert WD. All that work and no gain –
what should we do to restore physical function in our survivors? Am J
Respir Crit Care Med. 2016;15:1071–2.
31.
Hodgson CL, Fan E. Better measures, better trials, better outcomes in
survivors of critical illness? Crit Care Med. 2016;44:1254–5.
32.
Needham DM, Sepulveda KA, Dinglas VD, et al. Core outcome measures for
clinical research in acute respiratory failure survivors: an international modified
delphi consensus study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2017;196:1122–30.
33.
Bernhardt J, Churilov L, Ellery F, et al. Prespecified dose-response analysis for
A Very Early Rehabilitation Trial (AVERT). Neurology. 2016;86:2138–45.
34.
Brummel NE, Girard TD, Ely EW, et al. Feasibility and safety of early
combined cognitive and physical therapy for critically ill medical and
surgical patients: the activity and cognitive therapy in ICU (ACT-ICU) trial.
Intensive Care Med. 2014;40:370–9.
35.
Dantas CM, Silva PF, Siqueira FH, et al. Influence of early mobilization on
respiratory and peripheral muscle strength in critically ill patients. Rev Bras
Ter Intensiva. 2012;24:173–8.
36.
Denehy L, Skinner EH, Edbrooke L, et al. Exercise rehabilitation for patients
with critical illness: a randomized controlled trial with 12 months of follow-
up. Crit Care. 2013;17:R156.
37.
Dong ZH, Yu BX, Sun YB, Fang W, Li L. Effects of early rehabilitation therapy
on patients with mechanical ventilation. World J Emerg Med. 2014;5:48–52.
38.
Kayambu G, Boots R, Paratz J. Early physical rehabilitation in intensive care
patients with sepsis syndromes: a pilot randomised controlled trial. Intensive
Care Med. 2015;41:865–74.
39.
Yosef-Brauner O, Adi N, Shahar BT, Yehezkel E, Carmeli E. Effect of physical
therapy on muscle strength, respiratory muscles and functional parameters in
patients with intensive care unit-acquired weakness. Clin Respir J. 2015;9:1–6.
40.
Dong Z, Yu B, Zhang Q, et al. Early rehabilitation therapy is beneficial for
patients with prolonged mechanical ventilation after coronary artery bypass
surgery. Int Heart J. 2016;57:241–6.
41.
Morris PE, Goad A, Thompson C, et al. Early intensive care unit mobility therapy
in the treatment of acute respiratory failure. Crit Care Med. 2008;36:2238–43.
42.
Wolfe KS, Wendlandt BN, Patel SB, et al. Long-term survival and health care
utilization of mechanically ventilated patients in a randomized controlled
trial of early mobilization. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2013;187:A5235. (abst)
Hodgson et al. Critical Care  (2018) 22:77 
Page 7 of 7
