 1 
 
This is a post-print of: Hoekzema E., Barba-Muller E., Pozzobon C., Picado M., Lucco F., Garcia-
Garcia D., Soliva J. C., Tobena A., Desco M., Crone E. A., Ballesteros A., Carmona S.,  & Vilarroya 
O. (2017). Pregnancy involves long-lasting changes in human brain structure. Nature 
Neuroscience, 20, 287-296, which was published at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nn.4458. 
 
 2 
 
Pregnancy involves long-lasting changes in human brain structure 
 
Elseline Hoekzema1,2,3,8, Erika Barba-Müller1,8, Cristina Pozzobon4, Marisol Picado1, Florencio Lucco4, 
David García-García5, Juan Carlos Soliva1, Adolf Tobeña1, Manuel Desco5, Eveline A. Crone2,3, Agustín 
Ballesteros4, Susanna Carmona1,5,6,9, Oscar Vilarroya1,7,9 
 
1Unitat de Recerca en Neurociència Cognitiva, Departament de Psiquiatria i Medicina Legal. Universitat 
Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. 
2Brain and Development Lab, Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands. 
3Institute for Brain and Cognition, Leiden, The Netherlands. 
4Instituto Valenciano de Infertilidad, Barcelona, Spain. 
5Departamento de Bioingeniería e Ingeniería Aeroespacial, Universidad Carlos III de Madrid. Instituto de 
Investigación Sanitaria Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Spain.  
6Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Salud Mental (CIBERSAM), Spain. 
7Fundació IMIM, Barcelona, Spain. 
8These authors contributed equally to this work 
9These authors jointly supervised this work 
Correspondence should be addressed to E.H. (elselinehoekzema@gmail.com) 
 
 
 
 3 
 
Abstract 
Pregnancy involves radical hormone surges and biological adaptations. However, the effects of 
pregnancy on the human brain are virtually unknown. Here we show, using a prospective (‘pre’-‘post’ 
pregnancy) study involving first-time mothers and fathers and nulliparous control groups, that pregnancy 
renders substantial changes in brain structure, primarily reductions in grey matter (GM) volume in regions 
subserving social cognition. The changes were selective for the mothers and highly consistent, correctly 
classifying all women as having undergone pregnancy or not in-between sessions. Interestingly, the 
volume reductions showed a substantial overlap with brain regions responding to the women’s babies 
postpartum. Furthermore, the GM volume changes of pregnancy predicted measures of postpartum 
maternal attachment, suggestive of an adaptive process serving the transition into motherhood. Another 
follow-up session showed that the GM reductions endured for at least 2 years post-pregnancy. Our data 
provide the first evidence that pregnancy confers long-lasting changes in a woman’s brain.   
 
 
 4 
 
The vast majority of women undergo pregnancy at least once in their lives, yet remarkably little is known 
on how this process affects the human brain. Mammalian pregnancy involves radical physiological and 
physical adaptations orchestrated by endocrine changes1. During pregnancy, there are unparalleled 
surges of sex steroid hormones, including for instance a 10-15 fold increase in progesterone relative to 
luteal phase levels and a flood of estrogens that typically exceeds the estrogen exposure of a woman’s 
entire non-pregnant life2. Sex steroid hormones are known to act as an important regulatory agent of 
neuronal morphology and number3. Not surprisingly, other endocrine events involving less extreme and 
rapid fluctuations in hormone levels than pregnancy are known to render structural and functional 
alterations in the human brain. The production of gonadal sex steroid hormones during puberty regulates 
an extensive reorganization of the brain4-6, and neural alterations have also been observed in response to 
even subtle changes in endogenous or exogenous steroid hormone levels later in life7-9. 
However, very little is known on the effects of pregnancy on the human brain. A few spectroscopic 
studies have been performed in pregnant women10-12, observing no differences with respect to non-
pregnant women except for transiently reduced choline levels. In addition, some observations have been 
reported on aspects of brain structure in pregnancy. In 1909, enlargements of the pituitary gland were first 
observed in deceased pregnant women13, which was later corroborated by further in vitro14 and in vivo15 
measurements of this structure. Besides these assessments of pituitary gland volume, the ventricles and 
outer border of the brain have been contoured in a small sample of healthy pregnant women serving as a 
control for patients with pre-eclampsia16, pointing to increases and decreases respectively during late 
pregnancy in comparison to the early postpartum period.  
In non-human animals, a converging body of evidence has demonstrated that reproduction is 
associated with neural changes at many levels, including regional changes in dendritic morphology, 
cellular proliferation and gene expression17-20. Interestingly, these effects seem to be long-lasting, as 
various differences in brain and behavior between parous and nulliparous females are evident throughout 
the lifespan17-21. 
We performed a prospective (‘pre’-‘post’ pregnancy) study involving  primiparous (first-time) mothers 
and nulliparous control women to investigate whether pregnancy is associated with changes in the grey 
matter (GM) structure of the human brain. In addition, we 1) tested the discriminative power of the GM 
 5 
 
volume changes with a multivariate pattern recognition analysis, 2) examined GM volume changes in 
primiparous fathers and nulliparous control men to further test the specificity of the changes for 
pregnancy rather than approaching parenthood, 3) defined the structural characteristics of GM changes 
across pregnancy by means of surface-based analyses, 4) investigated a potential link to maternal 
attachment using a postpartum fMRI paradigm and attachment scale, and 5) tested the long-term 
persistence of pregnancy effects with a 2-year post-pregnancy follow-up session.  
We show that pregnancy is associated with pronounced and long-lasting GM volume reductions in a 
woman’s brain, which are primarily located in regions involved in social processes and display a 
remarkable similarity to the Theory of Mind network. Interestingly, all of the women can be classified as 
having undergone pregnancy or not based on the volume changes across sessions. In addition, we 
demonstrate that these GM volume reductions are located in some of the brain regions that show the 
strongest response to the women’s babies in a postpartum fMRI paradigm. Furthermore, the GM volume 
changes of pregnancy predict measures of postpartum mother-to-child attachment and hostility. These 
results indicate that pregnancy changes the GM architecture of the human brain, and provide preliminary 
support for an adaptive process serving the transition into motherhood.  
 
RESULTS 
 
GM volume changes in primiparous mothers across pregnancy 
 
To examine the effects of pregnancy on human brain structure, a prospective study was performed. High 
resolution anatomical pre-conception brain scans were obtained from nulliparous women wanting to get 
pregnant and become mothers for the first time (the ‘PRE’ session). If successful, they again took part in 
an MRI session after the completion of their pregnancy (the ‘POST’ session). This setup allowed us to 
reliably extract the changes in brain structure relative to each person’s pre-pregnancy baseline. 
Longitudinal data were also acquired at a comparable time interval from 20 nulliparous control women. 
Demographic information of the sample is provided in the Methods section.  
 6 
 
The longitudinal diffeomorphic modeling pipeline implemented in SPM12 was applied to extract changes 
in grey matter (GM) volume between the subsequent brain scans on an individual level, and the maps of 
GM volume change of the primiparous women were compared to those of the nulliparous control women. 
Strikingly, we observed a symmetrical pattern of highly significant group differences in GM volume 
change across sessions (Table 1, Fig. 1, Supplementary Fig.1), and post-hoc analyses revealed that 
each of these clusters reflected reductions in regional GM in the women who underwent pregnancy 
between the time points  (Supplementary Table 1, Fig. 4b). Effect sizes further illustrating the strength of 
these effects are depicted in Supplementary Figure 2. Baseline comparisons confirmed that there were 
no pre-existing differences in GM volume between the groups.   
The GM volume reductions after pregnancy were primarily located in the anterior and posterior midline 
(medial frontal cortex/anterior cingulate cortex and precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex), the bilateral 
lateral prefrontal cortex (primarily the inferior frontal gyri), and the bilateral temporal cortex (the superior 
temporal sulci extending to surrounding lateral temporal as well as medial temporal sections).  
For completeness, white matter volume was also examined using this approach, although it should be 
noted that these MRI images are not optimal for investigating white matter tissue. These analyses 
indicated no significant changes in white matter volume across the time points in the women who 
underwent pregnancy in comparison to the control women. 
In addition, to further explore our data based on the few available previous findings related to the 
effects of pregnancy on human brain structure, we manually delineated the pituitary gland and 
investigated total tissue volumes in our sample. These results are reported in the Supplementary material 
(Supplementary Figure 3, Supplementary Table 2-3).   
 
Figure 1 
Table 1 
 
 
 
 
 7 
 
The means of conception 
 
As our sample included both women who achieved pregnancy by natural conception and women who 
underwent a fertility treatment (see Methods section for details on the sample), we then examined 
whether the means of conception was associated with distinct neural changes. When comparing the brain 
changes between the participants achieving pregnancy by natural or assisted conception, we observed 
no differences (Supplementary Table 4). In fact, very similar GM reductions were observed when 
examining these groups separately (Fig. 2, Supplementary Table 5, Supplementary Fig. 4), suggesting 
that the women were similarly affected by pregnancy regardless of the means of conception. Additional 
analyses investigating the impact of demographic or clinical factors on the observed brain changes of 
pregnancy are reported in the Methods section and Supplementary Material. 
 
Figure 2 
 
Multivariate pattern classification analysis 
 
The highly similar pattern of changes observed in these subgroups suggested a strong consistency of the 
GM reductions across the pregnant participants. To further test the consistency of the GM volume 
changes of pregnancy, we applied a multivariate pattern classification analysis using a support vector 
machine algorithm to the GM volume difference maps. Strikingly, this analysis showed that all of the 
women could be correctly classified as having been pregnant or not in-between these sessions based on 
the GM changes in the brain (Fig.3a,b).  
An inspection of the classifier weight map (Fig. 3b, Supplementary Fig. 5) suggested a strong 
contribution of the structures of GM change observed in the univariate results to the classification, which 
was confirmed by a multi-kernel learning approach (Fig.3c). This analysis appointed the right middle 
temporal gyrus, inferior frontal gyrus and posterior cingulate cortex as the regions of greatest predictive 
power, together providing a contribution of over 50% to the decision function (Fig.3c).  
 
 8 
 
Figure 3 
 
Localization of GM volume changes of pregnancy 
 
The regions of GM change affected by pregnancy are known to play a role in social cognition, and a 
visual inspection of the observed GM volume changes suggested a strong similarity to the Theory of Mind 
network (Fig. 4). To quantitatively assess this spatial correspondence, we defined the overlap of our 
results with the Theory of Mind network as defined by the meta-analysis of Schurz et al22, which indicated 
a 3-fold larger volume of overlap than expected based on a random distribution of the maps across the 
brain’s GM (see Supplementary Table 6). Moreover, to further examine the localization of the observed 
GM changes with respect to functional networks, we quantified the overlap between the GM changes of 
pregnancy and the 12 cognitive components of the cerebral cortex as defined by the extensive meta-
analysis of Yeo et al.23. Interestingly, although these components load on various task variables, the 3 
cognitive components of greatest overlap with the GM changes of pregnancy correspond to the 3 
components that are activated by Theory of Mind tasks (see Supplementary Table 6). Accordingly, the 
greatest spatial correspondence was observed with the network of strongest Theory of Mind recruitment. 
In fact, the only functional networks that show a greater overlap with the GM changes of pregnancy than 
expected based on a random distribution across the brain’s GM tissue correspond to those 3 networks 
that are recruited by Theory of Mind tasks. 
 
Figure 4 
 
GM volume changes in primiparous fathers across partner’s pregnancy 
 
To further test the specificity of these changes for participants undergoing the biological process of 
pregnancy rather than other changes associated with becoming a parent, we additionally scanned 
primiparous fathers before and after their partner’s pregnancy, along with a male nulliparous control 
group. Maps of GM volume change were extracted using the SPM12 longitudinal diffeomorphic modeling 
 9 
 
pipeline. Comparisons involving these groups showed that there are no changes in neural GM volumes in 
the fathers in comparison to the control group across this time period and the observed brain changes are 
selective for the women undergoing pregnancy in-between the brain scans (Table 1, Supplementary 
Table 7, Supplementary Fig. 6). 
 
Changes in surface area and cortical thickness across pregnancy 
 
To examine the structural characteristics of neural GM changes across pregnancy, we additionally 
performed surface-based analyses in FreeSurfer 5.3. Cross-sectional analyses confirmed the lack of 
baseline differences between the women undergoing pregnancy in-between sessions and the control 
group. Using the longitudinal processing pipeline, we extracted cortical thickness and surface area, 
structural properties of the cortical mantle that both contribute to cortical volume. In line with the main 
volumetric results, reductions were observed in these measures across pregnancy (Fig.5, Supplementary 
Table 8-9). Figure 5 depicts changes in surface area (Fig. 5a) and cortical thickness (Fig. 5b). Although 
both measures were affected, especially extensive changes were observed in the surface area of the 
cortical sheet (Fig. 5a, Supplementary Table 8-9).  
Accordingly, discriminant analyses involving the average surface area and cortical thickness values 
across the map of GM volume change indicated that 84.4% of the women could be correctly classified as 
having undergone pregnancy or not based on the changes in surface area (λ = 0.66, χ2=17.69, p<0.001), 
while 68.9% could be classified based on cortical thickness changes (λ = 0.82, χ2=8.57, p=0.014). In 
comparison, 95.6% of the women could be correctly classified using measures of average GM volume 
change (λ = 0.36, χ2=43.49, p<0.001). Correlation analyses indicated significant associations between the 
changes in average GM volume and these surface-based measures, which are stronger for surface area 
than for cortical thickness (Cortical Thickness: Left hemisphere: R=0.44, p=0.029, Right hemisphere: R 
=0.38, p=0.062. Surface Area: Left hemisphere: R=0.58, p=0.011. Right hemisphere: R=0.91, p<0.001). 
 
Figure 5 
 
 10 
 
 
Changes in cognitive performance across pregnancy 
Several cognitive tests were performed at the sessions before and after pregnancy. A verbal word list 
task was used to examine verbal memory, and changes in working memory were investigated using a 
backward digit span task and a 2-back test. No significant changes were observed across sessions in 
these measures in comparison to the control group, although a trend was observed for a reduction in the 
number of correct responses on the verbal word list learning task (Supplementary Table 10).  
 
Multivariate regression analyses with Maternal Postnatal Attachment Scale 
 
To investigate whether there is an association between the brain changes of pregnancy and aspects of 
maternal caregiving in the postpartum period, we examined the changes in GM volume across pregnancy 
in relation to indices of maternal attachment. Multivariate kernel ridge regression analyses were 
performed using the 3 dimensions of the Maternal Postnatal Attachment Scale24. These analyses 
indicated that the GM volume changes of pregnancy significantly predicted the mother-to-infant quality of 
attachment and the absence of hostility towards their newborns in the postpartum period as defined by 
this scale. These results are depicted and reported in Figure 6 (Fig.6b, Supplementary Fig. 7-8). 
 
Figure 6 
 
Neural activity on an fMRI paradigm involving pictures of the women’s babies 
 
In addition, to examine the neural response to visual cues of their babies, in the POST session the 
mothers participated in an fMRI paradigm involving baby pictures. In this paradigm, women were shown 
pictures of their own infants and of other infants, and the neural activity in response to their own infant 
was contrasted against the neural response to viewing other infants. Functional MRI paradigms involving 
 11 
 
own and other infant pictures and sounds have previously been used as a neural index of parental 
attachment25. In accordance with the multivariate regression results reported above, we found that 
several of the regions that showed the strongest neural activity in response to the women’s babies 
corresponded to regions that lose GM volume across pregnancy (Fig.6a, Supplementary Table 11). A 
quantification of the overlap between these results and the GM volume changes of pregnancy indicates 
that nearly 30% of the voxels that respond to the mothers’ own infants in comparison to other infants are 
located in GM tissue that loses volume across pregnancy (Supplementary Table 6, Supplementary Figure 
9). This represents a nearly 7-fold greater overlap than expected based on a random distribution of these 
maps across the brain’s grey matter tissue (Supplementary Table 6).  
The opposite contrast (‘other baby pictures’>’own baby pictures’) did not render statistically significant 
results. For completeness, neural activity for each condition was additionally investigated separately to 
confirm the recruitment of typical networks for visual perception and face processing in both conditions 
(see Supplementary Table 12).  
 
Long-term follow-up session 
 
As animal models provide compelling evidence that reproduction is associated with  alterations in female 
brain and behavior that are evident past weaning and even in old age17-21, we investigated whether the 
structural changes we observed in our human sample were maintained at another follow-up session 
around 2 years after giving birth (M±SD: 2.32±0.50 years postpartum, ‘POST+2yrs’ session). Eleven of 
the mothers had not yet experienced a second pregnancy and were able and willing to return for this 
follow-up session. When examining the brain changes between this POST+2yrs session and the pre-
pregnancy baseline, we observed GM volume reductions in all clusters that were also reduced in the 
early postpartum period relative to the pre-pregnancy baseline (Fig.7a,b, Supplementary Table 13), 
except for the left hippocampal cluster (Fig.7c,d, Supplementary Table 13). Accordingly, when examining 
the changes in GM volume between the POST and POST+2yrs sessions, we observed no further 
reductions or increases within these structures except for a selective volume recovery in the left 
 12 
 
hippocampal cluster (Fig.7, Supplementary Table 13). These results indicate that, apart from partial 
hippocampal volume recovery, all these GM reductions endured for at least 2 years after giving birth. 
 
Figure 7 
 
DISCUSSION 
 
These results indicate that pregnancy is associated with pronounced changes in the structure of the 
human brain. More specifically, primiparous women were found to undergo a symmetrical pattern of 
extensive GM volume reductions across pregnancy, primarily affecting the anterior and posterior cortical 
midline and specific sections of the bilateral lateral prefrontal and temporal cortex. Subgroup analyses 
suggested a strong consistency of these volume changes across participants, which was further 
emphasized by a multivariate pattern recognition analysis. In fact, this analysis indicated that all of the 
women could be correctly classified as having undergone pregnancy or not in-between the MRI sessions 
based on the GM volume changes in the brain. Analyses involving primiparous fathers provided further 
evidence for the selectivity of these volume changes for women undergoing pregnancy, supporting the 
connection of these brain changes to the biological process of pregnancy rather than to experience-
dependent changes associated with approaching parenthood.  
Interestingly, there is another stage of life that involves increases in endogenous sex steroid hormone 
levels followed by widespread changes in the GM structure of the brain4-6. In adolescence, the production 
of sex steroid hormones initiates a spectrum of behavioral, cognitive, socio-emotional, physical and 
neural changes, including extensive reductions in GM volume, surface area and cortical thickness4, 6, 26. In 
fact, higher estradiol levels in adolescent girls have been found to predict greater cortical thinning and GM 
volume loss in several of the regions observed in our study, including the middle temporal and inferior 
frontal gyri27, 28. 
Changes in GM signal extracted from MRI images can reflect various processes, such as changes in 
the number of synapses, the number of glial cells, the number of neurons, changes in dendritic structure, 
vasculature, blood volume and circulation and myelination, and the reductions in GM volume observed in 
 13 
 
our study cannot be pinpointed to a specific molecular mechanism. In adolescence, these GM reductions 
are proposed to reflect (at least in part) synaptic pruning accompanied by corresponding reductions in 
metabolic requirements and glial cells, although increased myelination can also underlie observations of 
GM volume reductions. Synaptic pruning in adolescence is generally regarded as an essential process of 
fine-tuning connections into functional networks, and is thought to represent a refinement and 
specialization of brain circuitry, which is critical for healthy cognitive, emotional and social development4, 6, 
26. 
The results of the current study indicate that pregnancy is likewise associated with substantial 
reductions in GM volume. The observed volume reductions are not distributed randomly across the brain, 
but they are primarily located in association areas of the cerebral cortex. Although these higher-order 
regions contribute to various functions, it is well established that the affected regions play a key role in 
social processes. In fact, the observed pattern of morphological changes displays a remarkable similarity 
to the Theory of Mind network (Fig. 4).  The spatial similarity between the GM changes of pregnancy and 
the Theory of Mind network was confirmed by a quantification of the overlap between our results and 
those of the Theory of Mind meta-analysis by Schurz et al.22. Furthermore, an examination of the 
intersections between the GM volume changes of pregnancy and the cognitive components of the human 
association cortex as defined by the meta-analysis by Yeo et al.23 provided further evidence for a 
preferred localization of these changes within functional networks recruited by Theory of Mind tasks, 
although it should be noted that the implicated functional networks go beyond processes of Theory of 
Mind and multiple processes are likely to be affected. 
Based on our results, we can speculate that the female brain undergoes a further maturation or 
specialization of the neural network subserving social cognition during pregnancy. Very few studies have 
investigated the effects of pregnancy on measures of social cognition, but there are preliminary 
indications of facilitated processing of social information in pregnant women, including enhanced emotion 
and face recognition29-31. Interestingly, in accordance with these findings, the notion of gestational 
adaptations in social cognition has previously been proposed from an evolutionary perspective30.  
In rodents, hormonal priming of the brain during pregnancy is associated with the suppression of 
aversive responses to pups and the emergence of an elaborate repertoire of maternal behaviors17-20. 
 14 
 
Other effects of reproductive experience in rodents include persistent improvements in spatial learning, 
foraging and predatory abilities18-20, 30. Humans have evolved under different evolutionary pressures than 
rodents, and, in our species, social cognitive abilities may be more critical than foraging abilities for 
providing adequate maternal care and successfully raising a child in a complex social environment such 
as ours. Accordingly, the Theory of Mind system is considered a core component of the human parental 
brain25, and accurate mentalizing expressions of the mother to her child have been shown to be important 
for secure parent-infant attachment and for the development of the child’s own social cognitive 
functions32. Gestational alterations in brain structures subserving social processes can be conceived to 
confer an adaptive advantage for motherhood in various ways, for instance by facilitating a mother’s 
ability to recognize the needs of her highly altricial child, to decode social stimuli that may signal a 
potential threat, or to promote mother-infant bonding. 
To further investigate the possibility of an adaptive restructuring to facilitate aspects of motherhood, 
we examined the observed brain changes in relation to indices of maternal caregiving. Interestingly, 
multivariate regression analyses using the 3 dimensions of the Maternal Postnatal Attachment Scale24 
demonstrated that the GM volume changes of pregnancy significantly predicted mother-to-infant quality of 
attachment and the absence of hostility towards her newborn in the postpartum period. In addition, a 
substantial overlap was observed between the GM tissue undergoing volume reductions across 
pregnancy and the brain areas of strongest neural responsivity to pictures of the women’s babies in a 
postpartum fMRI session. Taken together, our findings provide preliminary support for an adaptive 
refinement of social brain structures that benefits the transition into motherhood.  
To obtain more information regarding the structural characteristics of the neural GM changes of 
pregnancy, we additionally performed surface-based analyses. These analyses revealed reductions in 
both cortical thickness and surface area across pregnancy, although the surface area of the cortical 
mantle was particularly strongly affected. These findings are in line with previous research showing that 
both these cortical sheet properties remain dynamic throughout life, although they are differentially 
affected at various stages. For instance, surface area is more dynamic across early development33, while 
rapid GM atrophy as seen in e.g. Alzheimer’s Disease, AIDS or Multiple Sclerosis is almost exclusively 
driven by cortical thinning34-36. Interestingly, sexual dimorphisms in levels and in trajectories of surface 
 15 
 
area rather than cortical thickness primarily underlie sex differences in cortical volume33, 37, suggestive of 
an enhanced sensitivity of the surface area of the cortical sheet to sex steroid hormones.  
Finally, since animal studies have demonstrated reproduction-related changes that are evident across 
the lifespan17-21, we investigated whether the structural changes of pregnancy were transient or persistent 
at another follow-up session around 2 years after giving birth. Interestingly, these analyses showed that 
all volume changes were maintained except for a selective partial volume recovery in the hippocampal 
cluster.  
Although it is difficult to compare our findings to the microstructural in vitro/ex vivo results obtained 
from animal studies, it should be noted that the hippocampus is a region that has been extensively 
investigated in rodents in relation  to reproductive experience and shows a remarkable plasticity across 
pregnancy and the postpartum period38. For instance, changes in dendritic morphology have been 
demonstrated in rats following pregnancy or a pregnancy-mimicking regimen of estrogen and 
progesterone39, 40. Furthermore, a trend for reduced cell proliferation has been observed in late pregnant 
rats41, and reproductive experience has consistently been associated with reduced neurogenesis in the 
postpartum period42. Interestingly, this effect seems to be restored by the time of weaning and is reversed 
in middle age. Reproductive experience is then associated with increased neurogenesis43, a possible 
mechanism that can also be hypothesized to contribute to some of the observed volume recovery in our 
study. In accordance with our findings, animal studies investigating  the volume of the hippocampus 
observed a trend for hippocampal volume reduction during late pregnancy44 and in lactating primiparous 
rats in the postpartum period in comparison to nulliparous females45. Interestingly, aged parous rats – 
especially multiparous females- were found to have increased hippocampal long-term potentiation, 
enhanced memory capacities and less signs of brain aging in comparison to aged nulliparous females17-
21, 38 
We can speculate that the hippocampal GM reductions and subsequent +2 year postpartum partial 
volume recovery observed in our study may play a role in the memory deficits often associated with 
human pregnancy46, 47,  which have also been found to be recovering at 2 years postpartum48. Previous 
studies have indicated that particularly verbal recall memory is diminished during pregnancy46. It should 
be noted, however, that the memory changes of pregnancy seem to be subtle and have not consistently 
 16 
 
been replicated46, 49.  In the current study, no significant changes were observed in memory performance 
in the women who underwent pregnancy in-between sessions in comparison to women who did not. 
However, based on these results, no conclusions can be drawn with respect to contingent transient 
memory changes occurring during pregnancy itself, since post-pregnancy measures were compared to 
pre-pregnancy baseline performance. Moreover, larger samples or more ecologically valid tasks are likely 
required to reveal the spectrum of subtle changes in cognitive performance associated with pregnancy. 
Finally, it should be noted that our sample was relatively highly educated. Although this was the case for 
all subject groups included in our study, this may introduce a bias when investigating changes in cognitive 
function, and the observed lack of memory changes may not be generalizable to women of a different 
educational background. 
Sex steroid hormones regulate neuronal morphology and number3, and changes in endogenous or 
exogenous levels of these hormones are known to have an impact on human brain structure and 
function4-9. Considering the unequaled surges of sex steroid hormones that a woman is exposed to during 
her pregnancy and the remarkable consistency and extent of the observed neuroanatomical changes, we 
attribute these to the endocrine climate of pregnancy. However, the factors contributing to the observed 
neuroanatomical changes cannot be conclusively determined. Lifestyle changes associated with 
becoming a parent such as changes in social status or surroundings can be hypothesized to play a role. 
In addition, although pregnancy comprises by far the most prolonged and endocrinologically extreme part 
of the period between the two MRI scans, we cannot with certainty exclude a contribution to our results of 
parturition or early postpartum factors such as sleep deprivation or infant interaction in the weeks 
between birth and the POST acquisition. However, it should be noted that no changes were observed in 
the fathers, who were included as an additional control group to partially account for such experience-
dependent changes. Furthermore, these environmental and lifestyle changes primarily occur in – or at 
least continue into- the period after birth. Correlation analyses with the duration of the postpartum period 
until the acquisition revealed no significant correlations (either linear, quadratic or cubic) within these 
structures, and including this variable as a covariate had very little effect on our results (Supplementary 
Table 14). Moreover, changes in GM volume across the first postpartum period have previously been 
mapped in a longitudinal study50. In this study, women were investigated across the first postpartum 
 17 
 
period, a period during which they were exposed to similar postpartum factors as the women in our study 
in the part of the early postpartum period prior to the second MRI acquisition. However, no neural volume 
reductions were observed50. Taken together, these data suggest that the observed reductions in GM 
volume reflect an effect of the gestational period rather than the fraction of the postpartum period included 
within the PRE-to-POST time interval. Future studies tracking gestational hormones as well as changes in 
environment and lifestyle may further discriminate the factors contributing to the observed 
neuroanatomical changes.  
In conclusion, the current findings indicate that human pregnancy is associated with substantial long-
lasting alterations in brain structure, which may serve an adaptive purpose for pending motherhood. 
These data provide the first insights into the profound impact of pregnancy on the grey matter architecture 
of the human brain.  
 
Accession codes 
FigShare: http://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.4216809 
 
Data Availability Statement 
Source files for the figures are provided in FigShare (http://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.4216809).  
 
Acknowledgements 
We acknowledge the participants for their contribution to this study. We thank A. Bulbena for supporting 
the project, and M. López, G. Pons, R. Martínez, L. González, E. Castaño, N. Mallorquí-Bagué, J. 
Fauquet and C. Pretus for helping with the data collection and scoring of the cognitive tests. In addition, 
we thank C. Phillips and J. Gispert for advice on the multivariate analyses, E. Marinetto and C. Falcón for 
advice on the SA/CT analysis, and J. van Hemmen and J. Bakker for helpful discussions on the project 
and results. E.H. was supported by a Formación de Profesorado Universitario (FPU) grant by the 
Ministerio de Educación y Ciencia, and is now supported by an Innovational Research Incentives Scheme 
grant (Veni, 451-14-036) of the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO), E.B.M. by a 
 18 
 
grant from the National Council of Science and Technology of Mexico, S.C. by the Consejería de 
Educación, Juventud y Deporte of Comunidad de Madrid and the People Programme (Marie Curie 
Actions) of the European Union's Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under REA grant 
agreement n° 291820, and M.P. by an FI grant of the Agencia de Gestió d’Ajuts Universitaris de Recerca.  
 
Contributions 
E.H., E.B.M., S.C., and O.V. designed the experiments. C.P., A.B., and F.L. recruited part of the 
participants and provided clinical information. E.B.M. oversaw the overall timeline, recruitment and data 
collection of the project, and acquired the data together with E.H., M.P. and S.C.. J.C.S., A.T., M.D., 
E.A.C. and O.V. provided facilities and advice on aspects of design, acquisition or interpretation. EH 
analyzed the data, except for the SA/CT analysis done by S.C. and D.G.G.. E.H. wrote the manuscript 
and all other authors evaluated and approved the manuscript.  
 
Competing Financial Interests 
The authors declare no competing financial interests.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 19 
 
REFERENCES 
Reference List 
 
 
1.      Brunton,P.J. & Russell,J.A. The expectant brain: adapting for motherhood. Nat. Rev. 
Neurosci. 9, 11-25 (2008). 
 
2.      Casey,M.L., MacDonald,P.C., Sargent,I.L., & Starkey,P.M. Placental endocrinology in The 
human placenta (ed. Redman,C.W.G.) 237-272 (Blackwell Scientific Publications, Oxford, 
1993). 
 
3.      Simerly,R.B. Wired for reproduction: organization and development of sexually 
dimorphic circuits in the mammalian forebrain. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 25, 507-536 (2002). 
 
4.      Peper,J.S., Hulshoff Pol,H.E., Crone,E.A., & van Honk,J. Sex steroids and brain structure 
in pubertal boys and girls: a mini-review of neuroimaging studies. Neuroscience 191, 28-37 
(2011). 
 
5.      Sisk,C.L. & Foster,D.L. The neural basis of puberty and adolescence. Nat. Neurosci. 7, 
1040-1047 (2004). 
 
6.      Sisk,C.L. & Zehr,J.L. Pubertal hormones organize the adolescent brain and behavior. 
Front Neuroendocrinol. 26, 163-174 (2005). 
 
7.      Comasco,E., Frokjaer,V.G., & Sundstrom-Poromaa,I. Functional and molecular 
neuroimaging of menopause and hormone replacement therapy. Front Neurosci. 8, 388 
(2014). 
 
8.      Craig,M.C. & Murphy,D.G. Estrogen: effects on normal brain function and 
neuropsychiatric disorders. Climacteric. 10 Suppl 2, 97-104 (2007). 
 
9.      Toffoletto,S., Lanzenberger,R., Gingnell,M., Sundstrom-Poromaa,I., & Comasco,E. 
Emotional and cognitive functional imaging of estrogen and progesterone effects in the 
female human brain: a systematic review. Psychoneuroendocrinology 50, 28-52 (2014). 
 
10.      Holdcroft,A. et al. Phosphorus-31 brain MR spectroscopy in women during and after 
pregnancy compared with nonpregnant control subjects. AJNR Am. J. Neuroradiol. 26, 352-
356 (2005). 
 
11.      Roos,A., Robertson,F., Lochner,C., Vythilingum,B., & Stein,D.J. Altered prefrontal cortical 
function during processing of fear-relevant stimuli in pregnancy. Behav. Brain Res. 222, 200-
205 (2011). 
 
12.      Rutherford,J.M., Moody,A., Crawshaw,S., & Rubin,P.C. Magnetic resonance 
spectroscopy in pre-eclampsia: evidence of cerebral ischaemia. BJOG. 110, 416-423 (2003). 
 
13.      Erdheim,J. & Stumme,E. Über die Schwangerschaftsveränderung der Hypophyse. 
Ziegler's Beitr Pathol Anat 45, 1-17 (1909). 
 20 
 
 
14.      Bergland,R.M., Ray,B.S., & Torack,R.M. Anatomical variations in the pituitary gland and 
adjacent structures in 225 human autopsy cases. J. Neurosurg. 28, 93-99 (1968). 
 
15.      Gonzalez,J.G. et al. Pituitary gland growth during normal pregnancy: an in vivo study 
using magnetic resonance imaging. Am. J. Med. 85, 217-220 (1988). 
 
16.      Oatridge,A. et al. Change in brain size during and after pregnancy: study in healthy 
women and women with preeclampsia. AJNR Am. J. Neuroradiol. 23, 19-26 (2002). 
 
17.      Hillerer,K.M., Jacobs,V.R., Fischer,T., & Aigner,L. The maternal brain: an organ with 
peripartal plasticity. Neural Plast. 2014, 574159 (2014). 
 
18.      Kinsley,C.H. & Amory-Meyer,E. Why the maternal brain? J. Neuroendocrinol. 23, 974-
983 (2011). 
 
19.      Kinsley,C.H., Meyer,E., & Rafferty,K.A. Sex steroid hormone determination of the 
maternal brain: effects beyond reproduction. Mini. Rev. Med. Chem. 12, 1063-1070 (2012). 
 
20.      Macbeth,A.H. & Luine,V.N. Changes in anxiety and cognition due to reproductive 
experience: a review of data from rodent and human mothers. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 34, 
452-467 (2010). 
 
21.      Kinsley,C.H., Franssen,R.A., & Meyer,E.A. Reproductive experience may positively adjust 
the trajectory of senescence. Curr. Top. Behav. Neurosci. 10, 317-345 (2012). 
 
22.      Schurz,M., Radua,J., Aichhorn,M., Richlan,F., & Perner,J. Fractionating theory of mind: a 
meta-analysis of functional brain imaging studies. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 42, 9-34 (2014). 
 
23.      Yeo,B.T. et al. The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic 
functional connectivity. J. Neurophysiol. 106, 1125-1165 (2011). 
 
24.      Condon,J. & Corkindale,C. The assessment of parent-to-infant attachment: Development 
of a self-report questionnaire instrument. Journal of Reproductive and Infant Psychology 16, 
57-76 (1998). 
 
25.      Swain,J.E. et al. Approaching the biology of human parental attachment: brain imaging, 
oxytocin and coordinated assessments of mothers and fathers. Brain Res. 1580, 78-101 
(2014). 
 
26.      Blakemore,S.J. The social brain in adolescence. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 9, 267-277 (2008). 
 
27.      Herting,M.M., Gautam,P., Spielberg,J.M., Dahl,R.E., & Sowell,E.R. A longitudinal study: 
changes in cortical thickness and surface area during pubertal maturation. PLoS. One. 10, 
e0119774 (2015). 
 
28.      Peper,J.S. et al. Sex steroids and brain structure in pubertal boys and girls. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology 34, 332-342 (2009). 
 21 
 
 
29.      Anderson,M.V. & Rutherford,M.D. Recognition of novel faces after single exposure is 
enhanced during pregnancy. Evol. Psychol. 9, 47-60 (2011). 
 
30.      Anderson,M.V. & Rutherford,M.D. Cognitive reorganization during pregnancy and the 
postpartum period: an evolutionary perspective. Evol. Psychol. 10, 659-687 (2012). 
 
31.      Pearson,R.M., Lightman,S.L., & Evans,J. Emotional sensitivity for motherhood: late 
pregnancy is associated with enhanced accuracy to encode emotional faces. Horm. Behav. 
56, 557-563 (2009). 
 
32.      Meins,E., Fernyhough,C., Fradley,E., & Tuckey,M. Rethinking maternal sensitivity: 
mothers' comments on infants' mental processes predict security of attachment at 12 
months. J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry 42, 637-648 (2001). 
 
33.      Lyall,A.E. et al. Dynamic Development of Regional Cortical Thickness and Surface Area in 
Early Childhood. Cereb. Cortex 25, 2204-2212 (2015). 
 
34.      Nygaard,G.O. et al. Cortical thickness and surface area relate to specific symptoms in 
early relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis. Mult. Scler. 21, 402-414 (2015). 
 
35.      Oster,S. et al. Cerebral atrophy in AIDS: a stereological study. Acta Neuropathol. 85, 617-
622 (1993). 
 
36.      Regeur,L., Jensen,G.B., Pakkenberg,H., Evans,S.M., & Pakkenberg,B. No global 
neocortical nerve cell loss in brains from patients with senile dementia of Alzheimer's type. 
Neurobiol. Aging 15, 347-352 (1994). 
 
37.      Raznahan,A. et al. How does your cortex grow? J. Neurosci. 31, 7174-7177 (2011). 
 
38.      Pawluski,J.L., Lambert,K.G., & Kinsley,C.H. Neuroplasticity in the maternal hippocampus: 
Relation to cognition and effects of repeated stress. Horm. Behav.(2015). 
 
39.      Kinsley,C.H. et al. Motherhood and the hormones of pregnancy modify concentrations 
of hippocampal neuronal dendritic spines. Horm. Behav. 49, 131-142 (2006). 
 
40.      Pawluski,J.L. et al. Pregnancy or stress decrease complexity of CA3 pyramidal neurons in 
the hippocampus of adult female rats. Neuroscience 227, 201-210 (2012). 
 
41.      Pawluski,J.L. et al. Effects of stress early in gestation on hippocampal neurogenesis and 
glucocorticoid receptor density in pregnant rats. Neuroscience 290, 379-388 (2015). 
 
42.      Pawluski,J.L. & Galea,L.A. Reproductive experience alters hippocampal neurogenesis 
during the postpartum period in the dam. Neuroscience 149, 53-67 (2007). 
 
43.      Barha,C.K., Lieblich,S.E., Chow,C., & Galea,L.A. Multiparity-induced enhancement of 
hippocampal neurogenesis and spatial memory depends on ovarian hormone status in 
middle age. Neurobiol. Aging 36, 2391-2405 (2015). 
 22 
 
 
44.      Galea,L.A. et al. Spatial working memory and hippocampal size across pregnancy in rats. 
Horm. Behav. 37, 86-95 (2000). 
 
45.      Hillerer,K.M., Neumann,I.D., Couillard-Despres,S., Aigner,L., & Slattery,D.A. Lactation-
induced reduction in hippocampal neurogenesis is reversed by repeated stress exposure. 
Hippocampus 24, 673-683 (2014). 
 
46.      Henry,J.D. & Rendell,P.G. A review of the impact of pregnancy on memory function. J. 
Clin. Exp. Neuropsychol. 29, 793-803 (2007). 
 
47.      Glynn,L.M. Giving birth to a new brain: hormone exposures of pregnancy influence 
human memory. Psychoneuroendocrinology 35, 1148-1155 (2010). 
 
48.      Buckwalter,J.G., Buckwalter,D.K., Bluestein,B.W., & Stanczyk,F.Z. Pregnancy and post 
partum: changes in cognition and mood. Prog. Brain Res. 133, 303-319 (2001). 
 
49.      Christensen,H., Leach,L.S., & Mackinnon,A. Cognition in pregnancy and motherhood: 
prospective cohort study. Br. J. Psychiatry 196, 126-132 (2010). 
 
50.      Kim,P. et al. The plasticity of human maternal brain: longitudinal changes in brain 
anatomy during the early postpartum period. Behav. Neurosci. 124, 695-700 (2010). 
 
 
 
 23 
 
FIGURE LEGENDS 
 
Figure 1. GM volume changes between pre-pregnancy and post-pregnancy session. (a) Surface maps of the 
GM volume changes in primiparous  (N=25) compared to nulliparous control women (N=20) (at a whole-brain 
threshold of p<0.05 FWE-corrected). (b) Sagittal slice overlays and plots representing mean signal from the 
smoothed normalized jacobian difference images for each cluster. See Figure 7 and Supplementary Figure 1 for plots 
of the 3 remaining clusters. Statistics are reported in Table 1. FCTR=nulliparous control women who were not pregnant 
in-between sessions, FPRG=nulliparous women who became pregnant and transitioned into primiparity in-between 
sessions. Sup. Temp. Sulcus = Superior Temporal Sulcus, Med.= Medial, Inf.= Inferior, L=left, R=right. 
 
Figure 2. Means of conception. Surface maps of GM volume changes between the PRE and POST session 
(p<0.05 FWE-corrected) in (a) the primiparous women achieving pregnancy by natural conception (N=9), (b) 
primiparous women achieving pregnancy by fertility treatment (N=16), (c) the nulliparous control women (N=20). 
Statistics are reported in Supplementary Table 4-5. 
 
Figure 3. Classification. (a) Scatter plot depicting the support vector machine classification results (function values 
(M±SD): FPRG: 1.27±1.03, FCTR: -0.79±0.33. Balanced accuracy: 100%, dashed line=function value cut-off between 
classes (0), leave-one-out cross-validation, Npermutations=10,000, p≤0.0001, although note that the 100% is almost 
disrupted by some participants close to the decision function border. Function values are plotted per fold (i.e., in this 
case, per subject). (b) Weight map for the classifier, depicting the relative importance of the voxel in the decision 
function. (c) Weight maps for the regions of greatest predictive power resulting from the multiple kernel learning 
model using the AAL atlas (balanced accuracy: 93.5%, leave-one-out cross-validation, Npermutations=10,000, p≤0.0001). 
These are (depicted in order): the right middle temporal gyrus (weight 22.46%, experimental ranking 1.2), the right 
inferior frontal gyrus (weight 19.46%, experimental ranking 1.84) and the right posterior cingulate cortex (weight 
10.41%, experimental ranking 3.98). FCTR=nulliparous control women who were not pregnant in-between the 
sessions, FPRG=nulliparous women who became pregnant and transitioned into primiparity in-between sessions. 
 
Figure 4. Similarity between Theory of Mind network and GM volume changes of pregnancy.  (a) Illustration of 
the Theory of Mind network as extracted from the meta-analysis by Schurz et al.22. Statistical map of permutation-
based z-values of the pooled meta-analysis was provided by the authors and displayed using Caret software. (b) 
 24 
 
Reductions in GM volume (p<0.05 FWE-corrected) in the group of women who were pregnant in-between sessions in 
the current study.  
 
Figure 5. Surface-based measures. Surface maps depicting changes in (a) surface area and (b) cortical thickness 
across pregnancy (FDR-corrected p<0.05). Blue/cyan reflects increases while red/yellow reflect decreases. 
 
Figure 6. Postpartum infant-related neural activity and attachment scores. (a) fMRI results for the ‘own>other 
baby’ contrast (N=20) alongside GM volume changes repeated from Fig.1. For illustrative purposes, the fMRI results 
are depicted at the more lenient threshold of p<0.0001 uncorrected (the right inferior frontal cluster and a trend for the 
posterior cingulate cortex are observed at the p<0.05 FWE-corrected threshold, see Supplementary Table 11). There 
were no statistically significant results for the ‘other>own’ baby pictures contrast (at either threshold). (b) Multivariate 
prediction of Maternal Postpartum Attachment Scale (MPAS) scores based on the GM volume changes of pregnancy. 
Multivariate kernel ridge regression results (N=24, leave-one-out cross-validation) with the 3 MPAS scores 
(Npermutations=10,000. Quality of Attachment: M±SD=37.11±3.99. p=0.030, pnMSE=0.024. Absence of Hostility: 
M±SD=16.93±4.10. p=0.026, pnMSE=0.021. Pleasure in Interaction: M±SD=20.88±3.10. p=0.985, pnMSE=0.918). 
Predicted versus actual MPAS scores are plotted. nMSE=normalized mean squared error. 
 
Figure 7. Long-term follow-up. (a) Plots representing mean (M±S.E.M.) signal change at each POST session 
relative to the pre-pregnancy baseline, extracted from the smoothed normalized jacobian difference images. The 
remaining clusters are plotted in Supplementary Figure 1. (b) Surface maps depicting GM volume reductions in the 
POST +2years session compared to the pre-pregnancy baseline (p<0.05 FWE-corrected). Complete PRE-POST-
POST+2yrs datasets were available of 11 women. (c) Plot displaying mean signal change in the POST session 
compared to the pre-pregnancy baseline in the left hippocampal cluster and sagittal slice depicting hippocampal 
cluster from POST vs PRE comparison. (d) Plot and sagittal overlay depicting hippocampal recovery from the POST 
to the POST+2years session. Statistics are reported in Supplementary Table 13. Sup.Temp.Sulcus=Superior 
Temporal Sulcus, Inf.=Inferior, Med.=Medial, L=Left, R=Right. FCTR=nulliparous control women who were not 
pregnant in-between the sessions, FPRG=nulliparous women who became pregnant and transitioned into primiparity 
in-between sessions. 
 
 
 25 
 
TABLES 
 
Table 1.  Changes in GM volume between the PRE and POST session 
Contrasts 
 
Regions 
H 
MNI coordinates 
T 
P 
Cluster 
size (# 
voxels) 
x 
y 
z 
FPRG >  
FCTR 
- 
-  
 
 
 
 
 
 
FCTR >  
FPRG 
 
 
Superior Temporal Sulcus, 
Middle/Superior Temporal 
Gyrus, Parahippocampal Gyrus  
R 
57 
-18 
-11 
8.84 
<0.001 
4001 
 
33 
-24 
-18 
6.19 
<0.001 
 
 
33 
-37 
-14 
6.92 
<0.001 
 
L 
-54 
-18 
-11 
6.40 
0.001 
866 
 
-56 
-33 
-6 
6.08 
0.004 
 
Precuneus, Posterior Cingulate 
Cortex 
L/R 
0 
-48 
30 
7.56 
<0.001 
2674 
 
-6 
-57 
21 
7.43 
<0.001 
 
 
8 
-55 
22 
6.96 
<0.001 
 
Superior Medial Frontal Cortex, 
Anterior Cingulate Cortex, 
Medial Orbitofrontal Cortex 
L/R 
0 
53 
12 
7.15 
<0.001 
1828 
 
-14 
53 
4 
6.18 
0.003 
 
0 
48 
-6 
5.98 
0.006 
 
Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
R 
41 
14 
25 
7.51 
<0.001 
933 
 
L  
-50 
12 
16 
5.85 
0.010 
161 
 
 
-45 
9 
28 
5.57 
0.028 
 
Inferior Orbitofrontal Gyrus, 
Inferior Frontal Gyrus, Insula 
L 
-39 
24 
-2 
6.54 
0.001 
283 
Middle/Superior Frontal Gyrus 
L 
-24 
25 
45 
6.30 
0.002 
509 
Fusiform, Inferior Temporal 
Gyrus 
R 
45 
-54 
-18 
5.78 
0.014 
123 
 
L 
-44 
-54 
-14 
6.45 
0.001 
722 
 
 
-35 
-42 
-17 
5.49 
0.037 
 
Hippocampus, Parahippocampal 
Gyrus 
L 
-32 
-21 
-18 
6.07 
0.005 
148 
 
MPRG >  
MCTR 
- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MCTR >  
MPRG 
- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Comparisons of GM volume changes across sessions (‘PRE’ and ‘POST’) between the primiparous and nulliparous 
control groups. Post-hoc analyses to further specify these results are reported in Supplementary Table 1. P value at 
peak voxel (whole-brain FWE-corrected) is reported. H=hemisphere, L=left, R=right, FCTR=nulliparous control women 
who were not pregnant in-between sessions, FPRG=nulliparous women who became pregnant and became first-time 
mothers in-between sessions. MPRG =nulliparous men whose partners became pregnant and who became first-time 
fathers in-between sessions , MCTR =nulliparous men whose partners were not pregnant in-between sessions. 
 
 
 26 
 
ONLINE METHODS 
 
Participants 
 
For this prospective cohort study, first-time mothers participated in an MRI acquisition before and after 
their pregnancy, allowing us to use each woman’s pre-pregnancy brain scan as her individual baseline. 
Data were collected over a total period of 5 years and 4 months. The participants were recruited by flyers 
and word-of-mouth, and part of the sample was recruited via the fertility center Instituto Valenciano de 
Infertilidad (IVI, Barcelona). We sought nulliparous individuals who were planning to try to become 
pregnant in the near future but were not pregnant yet and nulliparous individuals without such plans.  
Participants were therefore not randomly assigned to groups. Recruitment and data collection for all 
groups was initiated at the same time. Although individuals were recruited separately for the ‘Pregnancy’ 
(PRG) groups (i.e. the women and men becoming parents in-between the sessions, hereafter referred to 
as FPRG and MPRG) and the ‘Control’ (CTR) groups (the women and men who did not become pregnant 
within this time frame, from here on referred to as FCTR and MCTR) based on their intention to become 
parents in the near future, the final group allocation depended on the transition from nulliparity into 
primiparity in-between sessions. Women trying to become pregnant were scanned within the early 
follicular phase of their menstrual cycle or before the insemination or transfer in the fertility-treated group. 
Only participants who had never experienced a previous pregnancy beyond the first trimester were 
included in the study. Sixty-five nulliparous women and 56 nulliparous men were scanned for the first time 
point, including 43 women and 37 of their male partners who wanted to become parents for the first time, 
aiming for a minimum of 16 participants51 in each group based on fertility statistics52. Pre-established 
exclusion criteria comprised neurological or psychiatric conditions or a history of substance use disorders 
as assessed by means of the MINI International Neuropsychiatric Interview53 applied by a clinical 
psychologist. The main criterion for continuing in the study for participants in the PRG group was 
achieving pregnancy in the period following the first MRI session. Of the final sample of 25 women who 
underwent pregnancy in-between the sessions, the majority (20 women) had an estimated pregnancy 
onset within 6 months after the session. Five participants became pregnant between 6-12 months after 
 27 
 
their participation in the first MRI session. To ensure that this relatively longer period between the session 
and conception did not have a significant impact on the results, we also repeated our analysis excluding 
these 5 women, which rendered very similar results (Supplementary Table 15). Thirty-two participants, 
comprising 17 women and 15 men, did not achieve pregnancy within this period and did not participate in 
the follow-up session. Two women and 2 men who were initially recruited for the FPRG and MPRG groups 
participated as control subjects in the FCTR and MCTR groups when conception was not achieved. In 
addition, 2 women and 2 men who participated in the first session as control participants were scanned 
as participants of the FPRG and MPRG groups in the second MRI session following an unexpected 
pregnancy. In addition, 1 participant became claustrophobic inside the scanner, 4 did not return for the 
POST session and 3 participants had to be excluded due to poor image quality or neuro-pathological 
conditions encountered in the MRI scan.  
Our final sample consisted of the following subject groups with complete PRE&POST datasets: 25 
primiparous women, 20 nulliparous control women, 19 primiparous men and 17 nulliparous control men. 
Unless explicitly stated otherwise (in case of analyses including other measures only available for a 
subset of the participants), these represent the sample sizes used in the comparisons. There were no 
statistically significant differences in PRE-to-POST time interval, age or level of education between the 
PRG and CTR groups (M±SD: PRE-POST Time Interval: MPRG:459.00±117.46 days, MCTR:419.17±93.17 
days. T=1.12, p=0.272. FPRG:463.52±108.33 days, FCTR:413.05±106.86 days. T=1.56, p=0.126. Age: 
MPRG:35.21±4.30 years, MCTR:31.64±6.41 years. T=1.94, p=0.063. FPRG:33.36±3.97 years, 
FCTR:31.10±5.63 years. T=1.58, p=0.123. Education: number of participants finishing secondary 
school/college/university or above: MPRG:2/4/13, MCTR:1/3/13, X2=0.37, p=0.833. FPRG: 2/4/19, FCTR: 
2/3/15, X2=0.06, p=0.971), but as there was a trend for an age difference in the male groups, we also 
repeated our model including age as a covariate (Supplementary Table 16-17), which had very little 
impact on the results. In addition, correlation analyses were performed to further examine potential 
associations of age and PRE-to-POST time interval with GM volume changes within the observed areas 
affected by pregnancy (using an explicit mask of the main contrast). These analyses rendered only a 
trend for stronger volume reductions in the right superior temporal sulcus cluster in the younger women 
(p=0.095 FWE-corrected). 
 28 
 
The POST session took place on average at 73.56±47.83 (M±SD) days after parturition. A model 
including the time interval between the birth and the POST scan as a covariate rendered results that were 
highly similar to the main results (Supplementary Table 14). In addition, to further examine the effects of 
the time between parturition and the POST scan on the GM changes within these regions, we performed 
correlation analyses with this time interval using the main contrast as an explicit mask. These analyses 
rendered no significant results (either for a linear, quadratic or cubic positive or negative correlation). 
Nine women achieved pregnancy by natural conception, and 16 women by means of a fertility 
treatment. The effect of a natural or assisted conception was further investigated by comparing these 
groups (Supplementary Table 4) and by separately examining the changes within these groups (Fig. 2, 
Supplementary Fig. 4, Supplementary Table 5), revealing no significant impact of the natural versus 
assisted route to conception on the brain changes of pregnancy. Of the fertility-assisted group, 12 women 
underwent in-vitro fertilization (IVF, 3 involving an egg donation and 5 involving intra-cytoplasmic sperm 
injection (ICSI), 4 without egg donation or ICSI), 3 intra-uterine insemination (IUI), and 1 a frozen embryo 
transfer. Albeit negligible in comparison to the hormone surges of pregnancy itself, each of these 
procedures involves hormone treatment which took place after the PRE session (for IUI: gonadotropins 
(follicle-stimulating hormone, luteinizing hormone, chorionic gonadotropin, human menopausal 
gonadotropin) and progesterone. IVF and ICSI: the same plus a gonadotropin-releasing hormone 
analogue. Egg donation/embryo transfer: estrogens, progesterone, GnRH analogue). To further examine 
the possible effects of treatment-related hormone therapy, we also repeated these analyses with a more 
homogeneous group of fertility-assisted women undergoing a procedure with the same approach in terms 
of hormone therapy (i.e. only women undergoing ‘classic’ IVF or IVF involving ICSI, 9 in total). Again, no 
significant differences were observed between this group and the women who were not exposed to 
fertility treatment-related hormones (the naturally conceiving group) and similar brain changes were 
observed in these subgroups (Supplementary Table 18). Future studies involving a larger sample of 
women undergoing fertility treatments are likely to uncover more subtle changes related to the hormone 
therapy associated with fertility treatments. 
Ten of the women carried a boy, and 11 of the women a girl. The remaining 4 women had twins (2 
mixed twins, 1 male twins, 1 female twins). Considering the previously observed effects of fetal sex on 
 29 
 
cognitive changes in pregnant women54, we additionally compared the women carrying a boy to the 
women carrying a girl (excluding the women having twins). No differences in GM volume changes were 
observed between these groups. 
One woman suffered from eclampsia during labor, 2 had premature deliveries, and 2 women suffered 
from high-risk pregnancies with kidney complications or antiphospholipid syndrome. Leaving out the 
women with complications during pregnancy or delivery had very little effect on our results 
(Supplementary Table 19). Twenty of the experimental women gave birth to a singleton and four of the 
women had twins. Regarding the parturition, 8 of the women gave birth by cesarean section and 17 by 
vaginal birth. All women except one received epidural anesthesia during delivery. Sixteen women 
practiced exclusive breastfeeding (i.e. breastmilk as their infant’s sole source of nutrition), 2 women 
practiced combined breastfeeding (supplemented by formula feedings), 2 women had started 
breastfeeding their infants but had stopped at the moment of the POST scan, and 2 women had never 
started breastfeeding. Very similar results were obtained when including variables representing the type 
of conception, type of delivery, breastfeeding status and number of fetuses as covariates in the model 
(Supplementary Table 20), suggesting that these factors are not driving the observed neural changes. 
However, the current study was not designed to further investigate the possible impact of such factors, 
and future studies investigating these in more detail may reveal specific neural changes associated with 
these variables.  
In the POST session, the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale55 was administered to the primiparous 
women to detect symptoms of postpartum depression. One of the mothers showed symptoms of 
postpartum depression and was being helped by a specialist. Excluding this participant from our analyses 
did not significantly affect our results (Supplementary Table 21).  
Blood samples were acquired at the sessions before and after pregnancy from a large portion of our 
participants. Unfortunately, due to practical issues, we could only obtain blood samples of 2 of the women 
during pregnancy itself. Therefore, we cannot use hormonal data to pinpoint the observed neural changes 
to specific endocrine changes of pregnancy.  
For the POST+2yrs session, we asked the 25 primiparous women to come back for another MRI 
acquisition. Of these 25 women, 11 had not yet experienced a (partial) second pregnancy since the last 
 30 
 
MRI session and were willing and able to participate in this follow-up session (mean time since birth: 
M±SD: 2.32±0.50 years, age (at PRE scan): 33.72±3.32 years).  
The study was approved by the local ethics committee (Comitè Ètic d’Investigació Clinica de l’Institut 
Municipal d’Assistència Sanitària), and written informed consent was obtained from all subjects prior to 
their participation in the study.  
 
Data acquisition 
 
MRI images were obtained in a Philips 3T scanner. High-resolution anatomical MRI brain scans were 
acquired using a T1-weighted gradient echo pulse sequence (TR=8.2ms, TE=3.7ms, NSA=1, 
matrix=256x256, FOV=240mm, 180 slices, thickness=1mm, no gap, FA 8°). Due to an unexpected 
technical problem, the radiofrequency head coil was replaced for some time with another head coil, and 
28 scans in total were acquired using the latter coil. There were no significant differences between the 
groups in the number of scan acquired with this head coil (X2=4.21, p=0.240). Nonetheless, to err on the 
side of caution, we also repeated the main analysis without these scans acquired with the temporary 
head coil, which rendered highly similar results (Supplementary Table 22). Furthermore, direct 
comparisons of the subjects acquired with the different head coils were performed, rendering no 
significant results. Finally, the head coil was introduced as a nuisance covariate in all neuroimaging 
analyses. In the POST+2yrs session, an MRI scan was acquired with both radiofrequency head coils for 
those participants for whom a different coil was used in a previous acquisition, allowing us to match the 
comparisons on head coil type. Therefore, no covariate for the head coil was included for analyses 
involving the POST+2yrs session.  
The POST MRI session also included an fMRI paradigm (T2*-weighted gradient echo EPI sequence. 
TR=3000ms, TE=35ms, matrix=128x128, FOV=230mm, 30 slices, thickness=4mm, gap 0.5mm, FA 90°) 
that examined the new mothers’ neural response to their babies. During this MRI session, pictures of the 
women’s own and other unknown babies were shown to the participants using Presentation software 
(www.neurobs.com). The images were extracted using Adobe Photoshop CS5 from short movies that 
were shot by one of the experimenters, or in some cases by the father, at a home visit a few days before 
 31 
 
the POST session. For the women who had twins, movies were acquired from both babies. The pictures 
represented cut out faces on a black background and they were matched for size, resolution, brightness 
and facial expression. For each participant, 28 images of their own baby (14 of each infant in case of 
twins) and 28 images of other babies were available, and they were presented in randomized order in an 
event-related fashion (trial duration 1500ms, randomized inter-trial interval 750-1250ms), with an average 
number of trials of (M±SD) 72.15±6.64 and 72.40±6.99 for the baby and own baby conditions 
respectively. Pictures involving sad facial expressions (crying) and neutral facial expressions were 
acquired from each infant. Additional explorations of the data based on facial expression are provided in 
Supplementary Table 23. Five participants could not be included in the fMRI analyses due to head motion 
exceeding 3mm/degrees (1 woman), artefacts in the data (2 women), or incomplete datasets (2 women), 
rendering a sample of 20 primiparous women for this part of the study (Age (at PRE session): 
32.85±4.13).  
At the PRE and POST session, our participants were also asked to complete several supplementary 
cognitive tests and questionnaires (the Test de Aprendizaje Verbal Espana Complutense56, based on the 
California Verbal Learning test57, the Digits subtest of the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale III58, a 2-back 
working memory test, the Interpersonal Reactivity Index59,  and a simple reaction time task). Normality of 
these variables was assessed by Shapiro-Wilk tests, and nonparametric tests were applied as some did 
not follow a normal distribution. Homoscedasticity was confirmed using a nonparametric Levene’s test. No 
significant changes across sessions were observed in any of these measures (Supplementary Table 10). 
For completeness, a correlation analysis was performed between the number of correct responses on the 
verbal word learning paradigm (POST-PRE scores) and the changes in GM volume in the women who 
underwent pregnancy between sessions. No supra-threshold voxels were observed, either with a whole-
brain approach or with an explicit mask representing the areas of GM volume change across pregnancy. 
The women were also asked to retrospectively fill in the Maternal Postnatal Attachment Scale (MPAS)24 
for the first 6 months of being a mother. One of the mothers did not complete this measure, hence this 
data is available for 24 of the primiparous women (Age (at PRE scan): 33.42±4.05). From this scale, the 
three scores of the MPAS were extracted (M±SD. Quality of Attachment: 37.11±3.99. Absence of 
Hostility: 16.93±4.10. Pleasure in Interaction: 20.88±3.10).  
 32 
 
Data analyses 
 
Longitudinal Symmetric Diffeomorphic Modeling 
 
The anatomical MRI images were processed in SPM12 (http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/), implemented in 
Matlab 7.8 (www.mathworks.com), using the longitudinal symmetric diffeomorphic modeling pipeline60. 
The images of each participant were first processed using the longitudinal registration tool provided within 
this framework, which incorporates rigid-body registration, intensity inhomogeneity correction and non-
linear diffeomorphic registration in an interleaved fashion. Considering the bias associated with 
asymmetry in pairwise registration, this approach registers both time points to a within-subject average 
image. These midpoint average images were segmented into tissue classes using the unified 
segmentation algorithm61. The jacobian determinants resulting from the longitudinal registration were 
subsequently multiplied by each subject’s grey matter segment, creating maps of volumetric change in 
grey matter tissue. To bring these images into MNI space, the product images were normalized using 
DARTEL tools62 and smoothed with a 12mm full width half maximum smoothing kernel63-65. The individual 
smoothed GM volume difference maps were entered into general linear models.  
To quantify the overlap between our results and other functional maps such as the neural activity of 
the mothers in response to pictures of their infant (the ‘own baby>baby’ contrast of the fMRI paradigm) 
and the Theory of Mind network as defined by the large-scale meta-analysis of Schurz et al.22, we 
computed the intersection between these maps and our map of GM volume changes across pregnancy. 
A further assessment of the localization of these GM changes of pregnancy with respect to functional 
networks was performed by quantifying the overlap between our map and the 12 functional networks of 
Yeo et al.23, who investigated the functional specialization of the cerebral cortex with a meta-analysis of 
10,449 experimental contrasts and confirmed intrinsic network organization using a resting-state fMRI 
dataset of 1000 individuals. The overlap of our results with these functional maps was extracted by 
computing the intersections between each of these maps and the map of GM volume changes of 
pregnancy, and defining the fraction of the observed intersection relative to the expected volume of the 
 33 
 
intersection based on a random distribution across the grey matter of the brain (see Supplementary Table 
6).  
For completeness, although these MRI images are not optimal for investigating white matter, we have 
additionally multiplied the individual jacobian difference maps with the white matter segments of the 
midpoint average images in order to obtain an indication of the changes in white matter signal across 
pregnancy. These maps were further processed and analyzed in the same manner as the images 
obtained by multiplying the jacobian maps with the grey matter segments. 
A cross-sectional voxel-based morphometric approach was additionally applied on the baseline 
images to confirm the absence of pre-existing baseline differences between the PRG and CTR groups. 
This approach included a segmentation of the baseline images using the unified segmentation 
algorithm61, a DARTEL normalization of the GM segments62 and the application of a 12mm full width half 
maximum smoothing kernel. A two-sample t-test was performed to test for the presence of baseline group 
differences. Plots depicting the signal values extracted from this approach are provided in Supplementary 
Figure 10.   
The POST2 images were processed using the same longitudinal approach described above, rendering 
volume difference maps between the POST2 images and the 2 other sessions. To examine whether GM 
volumes within the regions affected by pregnancy underwent further changes across the first 2 years 
postpartum relative to the pre-pregnancy and early postpartum sessions, we performed one-sample t-
tests on the PRE-POST+2yrs and POST-POST+2yrs difference maps, using an explicit mask of the PRE-
POST changes across pregnancy.  
Regarding the main comparisons, each of the primiparous groups was first compared to their 
nulliparous control group in the framework of the general linear model. Maps of GM volume change were 
compared using two-sample t-tests. If a significant group difference was found, we then proceeded to 
separately examine the in- and decreases in GM volume across time within the relevant groups by means 
of one-sample t-tests to determine which changes were driving this group difference.  
The statistical maps were constructed by applying a stringent voxel-level Gaussian Random Field-
based threshold of p<0.05 FWE-corrected across the whole brain. A minimum cluster size of 10 
contiguous voxels was additionally used to discard very small clusters and restrict table sizes. 
 34 
 
Multivariate analyses 
 
In addition to the above-described mass-univariate analyses, we also performed multivariate pattern 
recognition analyses using the analysis pipeline provided by PRoNTo 2.066   
(http://www.mlnl.cs.ucl.ac.uk/pronto ) implemented in Matlab. This pipeline can be used to automatically 
search for regularities in the data and train a classifier function that models the relation between spatial 
signal patterns and experimental factors based on a training dataset66. This classifier can then be used to 
predict the group a new image belongs to using the spatial distribution of the signal within the image, and 
compute the accuracy with which groups can be discriminated from one another based on whole-brain 
spatial signal patterns.  
To examine the degree to which the experimental women could be discriminated from the control 
women based on the distribution of GM volume changes across the brain, we applied a linear support 
vector machine classification to the POST-PRE difference maps. A sample-specific GM mask was 
created using the SPM Masking Toolbox (http://www0.cs.ucl.ac.uk/staff/g.ridgway/masking/) to serve as 
the mask image.  To evaluate model performance, we applied a leave-one-out cross-validation scheme. 
Using this cross-validation strategy, the classifier’s accuracy is computed by leaving one subject out at a 
time and predicting this subject’s group label based on a training set including all remaining subjects. This 
procedure is then repeated for each subject, and the accuracy of the discriminant function is computed 
based on all these runs. Permutation testing was used to estimate the null distribution and examine the 
statistical significance of the classification accuracy (Npermutations = 10,000; p<0.05)67. 
In addition, to further examine the regional contribution to the decision function and determine the 
areas with greatest relative prediction power, we built multiple kernels based on the regions of the 
Automated Anatomical Labeling Atlas (http://www.gin.cnrs.fr/AAL-217), using an L1 Multiple Kernel 
Learning algorithm as implemented in PRoNTo68 with the same cross-validation scheme and significance 
testing. 
Furthermore, to investigate whether the GM volume changes across pregnancy could significantly 
predict measures of maternal attachment, we performed Kernel Ridge Regression analyses using the 3 
dimensions of the MPAS24. Kernel Ridge Regression represents a form of Support Vector Regression 
 35 
 
using a squared error loss function combined with l2 regularization. Please see Shawe-Taylor et al. for a 
description of this approach69. Using Kernel Ridge Regression, MPAS scores were predicted from the 
changes in GM volume, and the correlation between true and predicted MPAS values was subsequently 
examined. A leave-one-out cross-validation was applied, i.e. in every fold a participant was left out for 
whom the MPAS score was predicted and examined in relation to the actual MPAS score. Like in the 
classification models, we used a leave-one-out cross-validation scheme and permutation testing 
(Npermutations = 10,000; p<0.05).  
Since the current version of PRoNTo does not yet allow the inclusion of covariates and we could 
therefore not include the radiofrequency coil covariate in the models, the residuals were written in SPM12 
and the multivariate classification and regression analyses were repeated on these images, rendering 
very similar results  (SVM classification on residuals: balanced accuracy = 100%, p<0.0001; kernel ridge 
regression with MPAS scores on residuals: quality of attachment: R=0.38, p=0.043, normalized mean 
squared error (nMSE)=0.90, pnMSE=0.034; absence of hostility: R=0.42, p=0.031, nMSE=0.87, 
pnMSE=0.023). 
 
Additional measures based on previous related results: Manual Regions of Interest of the pituitary gland 
and total tissue volumes 
 
As a supplementary analysis, we wanted to further explore our data based on the previous findings 
related to structural brain changes in human pregnancy. Therefore, we also examined total tissue 
volumes and pituitary gland volume in our sample.  
Total brain volumes were extracted in SPM12. To obtain measures of pituitary gland volume, this 
structure was manually delineated by 2 raters who were blind to any identifying subject or group 
information on coronal slices of the PRE, POST and POST+2yrs sessions of the primiparous women 
using MRIcroN (http://www.mccauslandcenter.sc.edu/mricro/mricron), according to the delineation criteria 
described in MacMaster et al70. Inter-rater reliability was determined based on 10 repeated ROI 
delineations (Intraclass Correlation Coefficient: 0.935). 
 36 
 
 For 5 MRI scans, the pituitary gland could not reliably be delineated due to local inhomogeneity or 
contrast issues, and these scans were therefore excluded, rendering a total number of 23 PRE, 23 POST 
and 10 POST+2yrs volumes (as the missing volumes did not correspond to the same individuals across 
sessions, we could use 22 PRE-POST pairs, 9 PRE-POST+2yrs pairs and 10 POST-POST+2yrs pairs for 
the longitudinal comparisons).  
These measures were analyzed in SPSS 23 (http://www.ibm.com/software/analytics/spss). A normal 
distribution of the data and equal variances were confirmed using Shapiro-Wilk and Levene’s tests 
respectively. The results are described in the supplementary material (Supplementary Figure 3, 
Supplementary Table 2-3).  
 
Surface-based analyses 
 
To examine changes in surface area and cortical thickness, surface-based morphometry was conducted 
in FreeSurfer 5.3 (http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/). The images were re-processed from raw data for 
this approach. To investigate changes in these surface-based measures across sessions, the images 
were processed with the longitudinal stream implemented in FreeSurfer71, 72. The longitudinal 
preprocessing pipeline involves an initial cross-sectional processing of the images of each of the time 
points, which includes motion correction, removal of non-brain tissue, transformation into stereotaxic 
(MNI) space, intensity correction, volumetric segmentation and cortical surface reconstruction73, 74, and 
parcellation75. The extraction of the brain for surface-based processing was based on the segmentation 
algorithm implemented in SPM8. All further steps were performed in FreeSurfer 5.3. Individual surfaces 
were inspected for accuracy, and minor manual edits were performed where needed, usually involving 
the removal of sections of non-brain tissue. The next step in the longitudinal stream was the creation of a 
probabilistic individual base template based on the cross-sectional images for each participant, which is 
unbiased with respect to any of the time points. Subsequent processing of each time point was then 
initialized using the processed results from the unbiased template71, 72. Surface maps were resampled, 
mapped to a common surface, and smoothed using a full width at half maximum kernel of 15mm.  A 
 37 
 
cross-sectional approach was additionally applied on the baseline images to confirm the absence of pre-
existing baseline differences between the PRG and CTR groups. 
Longitudinal change in cortical surface area and thickness in each hemisphere was calculated as 
symmetrized percent change (i.e. the rate of change between the time points with respect to the average 
thickness/area across the time points), and examined using one-sample t-tests. Cluster statistics were 
obtained using Monte Carlo simulations with a vertex-wise –log10(p-value) of 4 (corresponding to 
p<0.0001) and a cluster-wise threshold of p<0.05.  
Discriminant analyses with leave-one-out cross-validation were performed in SPSS 23 
(http://www.ibm.com/software/analytics/spss/) using the changes in average cortical thickness and 
surface area values across the regions of GM volume change in order to examine the predictive value of 
these surface-based measures for group classification.   
 
Functional MRI analyses 
 
Analyses of the functional MRI paradigm were performed in SPM12. The functional images were first 
corrected for differences in slice acquisition timing and realigned to the first volume. Subjects with head 
motion exceeding 3 mm/degrees were excluded from the analyses (1 woman). Then, the anatomical 
images were co-registered to the mean functional image, and normalized into MNI (ICBM) space using 
non-linear registration61. Finally, the normalization parameters and a full width at half maximum 
smoothing kernel of 12 mm were applied to the functional images.  
At the first level of analysis, general linear models were used to model voxel-wise changes in BOLD 
response for the conditions of interest, also including the movement parameters extracted during the 
realignment and regressors based on temporal basis functions.The first-level parameter estimates for the 
linear contrast ‘own baby pictures>other baby pictures’ were entered into a second-level model and one-
sample t-tests were performed to examine whether new mothers show a differential pattern of neural 
activity in response to pictures of their own or other babies. For completeness, the reverse contrast (‘other 
baby pictures>other baby pictures’) was also examined. Additional explorations of the data based on 
 38 
 
facial expression are provided in Supplementary Table 23. In addition to the whole-brain FWE-corrected 
threshold, the fMRI results were also investigated and are reported at an uncorrected threshold of 
p<0.0001 and an extent threshold of 10 voxels to allow a further inspection of the similarity of the regions 
of strongest neural responsiveness to the women’s babies to the pattern of GM volume changes across 
pregnancy.  
To create images, the statistical maps were projected onto the PALS surface provided in Caret 
software (http://brainvis.wustl.edu/wiki/index.php/Caret:Download). Slice overlays were created using 
MRIcron (http://www.mccauslandcenter.sc.edu/mricro/mricron/). 
 
 
 
 39 
 
REFERENCES ONLINE METHODS 
 
 
51.      Friston,K. Ten ironic rules for non-statistical reviewers. Neuroimage. 61, 1300-1310 
(2012). 
 
52.      Dunson,D.B., Colombo,B., & Baird,D.D. Changes with age in the level and duration of 
fertility in the menstrual cycle. Hum. Reprod. 17, 1399-1403 (2002). 
 
53.      Sheehan,D.V. et al. The Mini-International Neuropsychiatric Interview (M.I.N.I.): the 
development and validation of a structured diagnostic psychiatric interview for DSM-IV and 
ICD-10. J. Clin. Psychiatry 59 Suppl 20, 22-33 (1998). 
 
54.      Vanston,C.M. & Watson,N.V. Selective and persistent effect of foetal sex on cognition in 
pregnant women. Neuroreport 16, 779-782 (2005). 
 
55.      Cox,J.L., Holden,J.M., & Sagovsky,R. Detection of postnatal depression. Development of 
the 10-item Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale. Br. J. Psychiatry 150, 782-786 (1987). 
 
56.      Benedet,M.J. & Alejandre,M.A. Test de Aprendizaje Verbal España-Complutense(TEA 
Ediciones,1998). 
 
57.      Delis,D.C., Kramer,J.H., Kaplan,E., & Ober,B.A. California Verbal Learning Test: Second 
Edition(Psychological Corporation, San Antonio, TX, 2000). 
 
58.      Kaufman,A.S. & Lichtenberger,E. Assessing Adolescent and Adult Intelligence (3rd 
ed.)(Wiley, Hoboken (NJ), 2006). 
 
59.      Davis,M.H. A multidimensional approach to individual differences in empathy. JSAS 
Catalog of Selected Documents in Psychology 10, 85 (1980). 
 
60.      Ashburner,J. & Ridgway,G.R. Symmetric Diffeomorphic Modeling of Longitudinal 
Structural MRI. Front Neurosci. 6, (2012). 
 
61.      Ashburner,J. & Friston,K.J. Unified segmentation. Neuroimage. 26, 839-851 (2005). 
 
62.      Ashburner,J. A fast diffeomorphic image registration algorithm. Neuroimage. 38, 95-113 
(2007). 
 
63.      Ashburner,J. & Friston,K.J. Voxel-based morphometry--the methods. Neuroimage. 11, 
805-821 (2000). 
 
64.      Radua,J., Canales-Rodriguez,E.J., Pomarol-Clotet,E., & Salvador,R. Validity of modulation 
and optimal settings for advanced voxel-based morphometry. Neuroimage. 86, 81-90 
(2014). 
 40 
 
 
65.      Salmond,C.H. et al. Distributional assumptions in voxel-based morphometry. 
Neuroimage. 17, 1027-1030 (2002). 
 
66.      Schrouff,J. et al. PRoNTo: Pattern Recognition for Neuroimaging Toolbox. 
Neuroinformatics. 11, 319-337 (2013). 
 
67.      Golland,P. & Fischl,B. Permutation tests for classification: towards statistical significance 
in image-based studies. Inf. Process Med. Imaging 18, 330-341 (2003). 
 
68.      Rakotomamonjy,A., Bach,F., Canu,S., & Grandvalet,Y. SimpleMKL. Journal of Machine 
Learning Research 9, 2491-2521 (2008). 
 
69.      Shawe-Taylor,J. & Cristianini,N. Kernel Methods for Pattern Analysis  (Cambridge 
University Press, 2004). 
 
70.      MacMaster,F.P. et al. Pituitary volume in pediatric obsessive-compulsive disorder. Biol. 
Psychiatry 59, 252-257 (2006). 
 
71.      Reuter,M. & Fischl,B. Avoiding asymmetry-induced bias in longitudinal image 
processing. Neuroimage. 57, 19-21 (2011). 
 
72.      Reuter,M., Schmansky,N.J., Rosas,H.D., & Fischl,B. Within-subject template estimation 
for unbiased longitudinal image analysis. Neuroimage. 61, 1402-1418 (2012). 
 
73.      Dale,A.M., Fischl,B., & Sereno,M.I. Cortical surface-based analysis. I. Segmentation and 
surface reconstruction. Neuroimage. 9, 179-194 (1999). 
 
74.      Fischl,B., Sereno,M.I., & Dale,A.M. Cortical surface-based analysis. II: Inflation, 
flattening, and a surface-based coordinate system. Neuroimage. 9, 195-207 (1999). 
 
75.      Desikan,R.S. et al. An automated labeling system for subdividing the human cerebral 
cortex on MRI scans into gyral based regions of interest. Neuroimage. 31, 968-980 (2006). 
 
 
 
