 By Michael F. Hogan and Julie Goldstein Grumet
Suicide Prevention: An Emerging
Priority For Health Care
ABSTRACT Suicide is a significant public health problem. It is the tenth
leading cause of death in the United States, and the rate has risen in
recent years. Many suicide deaths are among people recently seen or
currently under care in clinical settings, but suicide prevention has not
been a core priority in health care. In recent years, new treatment and
management strategies have been developed, tested, and implemented in
some organizations, but they are not yet widely used. This article
examines the feasibility of improving suicide prevention in health care
settings. In particular, we consider Zero Suicide, a model for better
identification and treatment of patients at risk for suicide. The approach
incorporates new tools for screening, treatment, and support; it has been
deployed with promising results in behavioral health programs and
primary care settings. Broader adoption of improved suicide prevention
care may be an effective strategy for reducing deaths by suicide.
S
uicide is the tenth leading cause of
death in the United States, account-
ing for more than 40,000 deaths an-
nually. Additionally,therearealmost
500,000
emergency
department
(ED) visits annually as a result of intentional
self-harm. Costs for ED visits and hospitaliza-
tions associated with self-injury among young
adults ages 15–24 in 2010 were estimated at
$2.6 billion.1 There are also personal costs, as
many people are deeply affected by suicide loss
in their families or among close friends.
Recent History Of And Priorities In
Suicide Prevention
The first National Strategy for Suicide Preven-
tion was released by Surgeon General David
Satcher in 2001.2 Before then, the most success-
ful prevention program was a 1990s US Air Force
effort. This was a broad population-based ap-
proach, emphasizing leadership, community ed-
ucation, improved health care, and surveillance.
Results included a 33 percent reduction in sui-
cide between 1996 and 2002, with concomitant
reductions in homicide and family violence.3
The initial 2001 national strategy emphasized
public health methods, including increasing
awareness, reducing access to lethal means, pro-
viding better access to mental health care, and
reducing the stigma of seeking such care.2 How-
ever, the strategy did not identify suicide preven-
tion as a core responsibility of health systems or
providers.
The decade following the new strategy saw
expanded suicide prevention efforts, including
the Garrett Lee Smith Memorial Act of 2004,
which created a youth suicide prevention grant
program for states, colleges, and American Indi-
an/Alaska Native communities, funded by the
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration (SAMHSA). Many grantees em-
phasized screening, strengthening community
partnerships, and building awareness for suicide
warning signs in schools and communities by
training front-line personnel to identify and re-
fer at-risk youth to care. Results suggest that
counties implementing these activities had low-
doi:
10.1377/hlthaff.2015.1672
HEALTH AFFAIRS 35,
NO. 6 (2016): 1084–1090
©2016 Project HOPE—
The People-to-People Health
Foundation, Inc.
Michael F. Hogan (dr.m
.hogan@gmail.com) is a clinical
professor in the Department
of Psychiatry at Case Western
Reserve University School of
Medicine, in Cleveland, Ohio.
Julie Goldstein Grumet is the
director of health and
behavioral health initiatives at
the Suicide Prevention
Resource Center, in
Washington, D.C.
1084
Health Affairs
June 2016
35:6
Emerging Issues
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 03, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 er suicide attempts and deaths among youth
compared to matched counties where the strate-
gies were not deployed. The observed reductions
in suicide were only among the target population
of youth and did not persist after the programs
ended, which suggests that broader and more
sustained efforts are needed.3,4
Other national efforts include the establish-
ment of a technical assistance center (the Suicide
Prevention Resource Center) and a crisis call
system (the National Suicide Prevention Life-
line), both funded by SAMHSA. In 2007 the
Department of Veterans Affairs established sui-
cide protocols for its facilities5 and now supports
a national hotline for veterans in crisis that has
answerednearly two million calls and dispatched
emergency
services
for
more
than
56,000
veterans (Suicide Prevention Program, Mental
Health Services, Department of Veterans Affairs,
personal communication, March 2, 2016).
Despite these efforts, the number and rate of
suicide deaths continued to rise. In 2001 there
were 30,622 deaths from suicide (a rate of 10.75
people per 100,000); by 2014 there were 42,773
deaths (a rate of 13.41 people per 100,000).6
Since suicide rates increase with age and with
economic distress, experts believe that the aging
of the baby-boom cohort and the recent reces-
sion may be contributing factors.
Should Health Care Systems And
Providers Do More?
The concept of health care providers’ playing an
ongoing instead of visit-oriented role is as useful
for suicide prevention as it is for the manage-
ment of other chronic health conditions. Many
individuals who die by suicide were engaged in
care or had recent contact with health providers.
About 45 percent of those who died by suicide
saw a primary care physician in the thirty days
before they died.8,9 A model known as the “health
care neighborhood,” coined by Erin Fries Taylor
and colleagues, is one example of an expanded
model of primary care that could reach more
people at risk for suicide.7
Indeed, routine screening might detect suicid-
al individuals during office visits. Gregory E.
Simon and colleagues examined the relationship
between elevated responses to question 9 on the
widely used Patient Health Questionnaire for
depression (“thoughts that you would be better
off dead, or hurting yourself in some way” in the
past two weeks) and suicide deaths.10 They found
a tenfold increase in suicide within the next year
for patients reporting frequent thoughts of self-
harm, which suggests that treatment and suicide
prevention could result from follow-up after rou-
tine screening.
Several states have recently linked data on par-
ticipation in mental health and addiction care
with death records; up to a quarter of all those
who died by suicide had received publicly funded
mental health care in the year or two prior to
theirdeath,11–13 while on average only 2–3 percent
of the population is served in these systems. Sui-
cide risk is greatly elevated for people with major
mental illnesses (such as depression, schizo-
phrenia, bipolar illness).14 However, the state
data coupled with the developments we discuss
in this article suggest that the rate of suicide
among patients receiving mental health services
can be greatly reduced.
Until very recently, suicide prevention was not
defined as a core responsibility of either mental
health care or health care, except for inpatient
settings. In 1998 the Joint Commission issued a
Sentinel Event Alert on inpatient suicide and in
2010 established a National Patient Safety Goal
on eliminating inpatient suicide. Then, in Feb-
ruary 2016 the Joint Commission signaled a new
focus on suicide prevention across health care
settings by releasing a new Sentinel Event Alert;15
its aim is to “assist all health care organizations
providing both inpatient and outpatient care to
better identify and treat individuals with suicidal
ideation.” Coming from the leading accreditor of
hospitals, the alert is a step toward establishing
suicide prevention as a health care priority.
There is considerable evidence that suicide
prevention in mental health services can be im-
proved. Currently, mental health professionals
receive only minimal training on suicide preven-
tion.16 The routine standard of care is to hospi-
talize patients at high risk of suicide. Once their
risk is judged to be reduced, patients are dis-
charged with guidance to engage in follow-up
care. However, while inpatient mental health
settings provide treatment for mental disorders,
they
usually
do
not
directly
treat
suicidal
thoughts or feelings. Additionally, only about
half of such patients complete a follow-up out-
patient visit within a week,17 even though the risk
of suicide is more than three times as likely the
first week after discharge from a psychiatric fa-
cility18 and remains significantly above the base
rate throughout the year.19 Establishing suicide
prevention as a priority will require significant
changes by health systems and mental health
programs in terms of policies, protocols, and
staff training.
Can Improved Health Care Prevent
Suicide?
Following the 2001 Institute of Medicine’s Cross-
ing the Quality Chasm report,20 the Henry Ford
Health System, a nonprofit health care system
June 2016
35:6
Health Affairs
1085
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 03, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 located in Detroit, Michigan, began a robust
quality improvement program that included ef-
forts to prevent suicide among its patients. The
goal of its Perfect Depression Care initiative was
“zero defect” mental health care.21 Stimulated by
the call for fundamental changes to improve pa-
tient safety, the Henry Ford Health System used
deaths by suicide as one measure. Prevention
experts Deborah M. Stone and Alex E. Crosby
summarized the approach: “This model relied
on suicide assessment for all behavioral health
patients…. Strategies included means restric-
tion, provider education, follow-up via phone
calls, and peer support services.”22 “Means re-
striction” in the context of suicide prevention
is efforts to reduce or eliminate means of self-
harm. The Henry Ford Health System program
reduced the suicide rate among patients receiv-
ing behavioral health care from an average of 96
people per 100,000 in 1999–2000 to an average
of 24 per 100,000 in 2001–10—a reduction of
about 75 percent23—signaling that sustained
and robust health care improvements might af-
fect suicide rates.
Evolving Strategies For Suicide
Prevention
In 2010 secretary of health and human services
Kathleen Sebelius and secretary of defense
Robert Gates announced the launch of the Na-
tional Action Alliance for Suicide Prevention,
whose mission was to champion suicide preven-
tion as a national priority, update the national
strategy, and catalyze new efforts. Several task
forces were initiated to review aspects of suicide
prevention. One of the first, the Clinical Care and
Intervention Task Force, examined the research
on detecting and managing suicidality and con-
sidered efforts to reduce suicide in health care
settings. The task force concluded that there was
strong evidence for successfully detecting and
managing suicidality in health care. In addition
to looking at the work of the Henry Ford Health
System, the task force reviewed results of the
National Suicide Prevention Lifeline, which
showed that supportive contacts (by phone,
text message, or letter) reduced suicide among
vulnerable individuals.24 The task force also
reviewed the Central Arizona Programmatic Sui-
cide Deterrent System Project, which empha-
sized staff training and protocols to address sui-
cide. The Arizona program was not formally
evaluated, but internal data showed reductions
in suicide among people receiving behavioral
health care.25
After considering the available research and
these exemplars, the task force concluded that
improved suicide prevention care was feasible. It
found that three common factors were key to the
successes of these programs. The first is “core
values—the belief and commitment that suicide
can be eliminated in a population undercare…by
improving
service
access
and
quality
and
through continuous improvement.”25 Next is
“systems
management—taking
systematic
steps…to create a culture that no longer finds
suicide acceptable, [and] sets aggressive but
achievable goals to eliminate suicide attempts
and deaths among members.”25 Third is “evi-
dence-based clinical care practice—delivered
through…standardized risk stratification, tar-
geted evidence-based clinical interventions, ac-
cessibility, follow-up and engagement and edu-
cation of patients, families and health care
professionals.”25
The task force named the comprehensive ap-
proach to suicide prevention that it recom-
mended for health care organizations Zero Sui-
cide, representing both an aspirational goal and
a specific set of practices. A care model and im-
plementation toolkit for health care organiza-
tions was developed in 2012–14 by the Suicide
Prevention Resource Center with the input of
innovator sites in New York and Tennessee.
The Zero Suicide Approach:
Elements And Evidence
The Zero Suicide model comprises seven ele-
ments, which are described below.
Leadership The top leadership of a health care
organization should commit to reducing suicide
for people under its care. Leadership implies
setting goals, taking action toward goals, and
emphasizing suicide prevention as a critical pa-
tient safety issue. Because loss of a patient to
suicide is traumatic, leadership must create a
culture marked both by a commitment to safety
and by support for staff members who do the
difficult work of caring for suicidal individuals.
The central role of leadership is evident in
quality improvement across many fields, includ-
ing the emerging concept of high reliability.
Mark R. Chassin and Jerod M. Loeb argue that
leadership must make a commitment to achiev-
ing zero patient harm, promoting a culture of
safety, and emphasizing evidence-based ap-
proaches.26
Training Providing optimal suicide preven-
tion care requires a competent, confident, and
caring workforce, yet credentialed mental health
professionals (in addition to health profession-
als generally) often enter the workforce unpre-
pared to work with suicidal patients.16 Health
care organizations should assess employees’ be-
liefs, training, and skills and should provide
training appropriate to staff roles. Staff who in-
Emerging Issues
1086
Health Affairs
June 2016
35:6
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 03, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 teract with patients should be aware of signs of
suicidality and know the steps they should take.
Screening And Assessment Health care or-
ganizations providing ambulatory or inpatient
care that seeks to prevent suicide should system-
atically screen for, identify, and assess suicide
risk among people receiving care. As the Joint
Commission noted in a recent alert, failure to
assess suicide risk was the most common root
cause of suicides qualifying as sentinel events.15
The known risk factors that should trigger
screening for suicide include mental illness or
substance use diagnoses, psychosocial trauma or
conflict, recent loss (for example, a job or the
death of a family member), family history of
suicide, and personal history of suicide at-
tempts.15
Credible
screening
and
assessment
tools
should be incorporated in clinical practice be-
cause the use of such tools, coupled with clinical
judgment, has been found to be more accurate
than clinician judgment alone.5,27 Concerns un-
covered via screening should lead to assessment
by a skilled clinician. Suicide risk assessment
refers to a comprehensive clinical evaluation to
evaluate risk, estimate the immediate danger to
the patient, and prepare treatment strategies.
Systematic Suicide Care Protocol All am-
bulatory, emergency, and inpatient health care
settings should implement a structured ap-
proach or protocol to guide care for patients who
are suicidal. Key elements in addition to screen-
ing and assessment include active engagement,
regular and collaborative safety planning, access
to specialty care, and reduced access to lethal
means (for example, guns or pills).
A care protocol for patients with high suicide
risk is similar to systematic approaches used for
other conditions, such as diabetes or high blood
pressure. While specific treatment strategies
are unique to each condition, a protocol should
systematically encourage use of evidence-based
approaches for management of each condition.
In the case of suicide, safety planning is one
such approach. Safety planning is a brief inter-
vention, collaboratively developed by a clinician
and patient, that leads to a prioritized list of
coping strategies and supports. The plan might
include ways to manage thoughts of suicide be-
tween provider visits, steps to reduce access to
lethal means, and supports that the patient can
access.28 This approach should replace the use of
“no-harm contracts,” a practice now judged in-
effective and perhaps harmful.29,30 Other actions
that should be part of a care protocol for patients
with suicidality include an expectation of regular
(for example, weekly) contact. Suicide screening
protocols and care management expectations
should be embedded in the electronic health rec-
ord and clinical workflow.
Evidence-Based Treatment Of Suicidality
Treatment for suicidal patients has typically fo-
cused on the underlying mental health disorder
in the hope that this will by itself reduce suicidal
thoughts and feelings. The evidence now sug-
gests that treatment should also directly target
and treat suicidal thoughts and behaviors, using
evidence-based interventions. Controlled trials
show that cognitive behavior therapy for suicide
prevention, dialectical behavior therapy, and
collaborative assessment and management of
suicidality are more effective than usual care
(that is, traditional therapies that seek to treat
mental disorders but do not focus explicitly on
reducing
suicidality)
in
reducing
suicidal
thoughts and behaviors.
Cognitive behavioral therapy is based on the
assumption that people with problems such as
depression lack skills for coping effectively with
troubling thoughts or feelings; the therapy
teaches them to recognize these thoughts and
provides alternative ways to cope. Many studies
have demonstrated cognitive behavioral ther-
apy’s effectiveness with conditions such as de-
pression and anxiety;31–33 cognitive behavior
therapy for suicide prevention is an adaptation
that helps patients directly manage suicidal
thoughts and feelings. Research shows that cog-
nitive behavior therapy for suicide prevention
results in reductions in suicide attempts and
symptoms.34,35
Dialectical behavior therapy is an adaptation
of cognitive behavioral therapy, developed to
help patients with chronic suicidality and other
behavior problems. This type of therapy has four
components: a skills training group, individual
treatment, phone coaching, and consultation
team meetings. Dialectical behavior therapy is
effective in reducing suicidal behavior. Marsha
M. Linehan and colleagues found that those re-
ceiving it compared to usual counseling pro-
grams were significantly less likely to drop out
of treatment, attempt suicide, visit psychiatric
EDs, or be hospitalized.36 Evidence suggests that
its skills training component is particularly sig-
nificant for patients who are suicidal.
Collaborative assessment and management of
suicidality is an intensive psychological treat-
ment that is suicide-specific, helping patients
develop other means of coping and problem solv-
ing to replace or eliminate thoughts of suicide as
a solution. One of the core values of this treat-
ment is that most suicidal patients can be treated
effectively in outpatient settings. Studies of col-
laborative assessment and management of sui-
cidality show reductions in suicidal ideation, de-
pression, hopelessness, and visits to primary
care and EDs.37
June 2016
35:6
Health Affairs
1087
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 03, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 Provision Of Excellent Support During
Care Transitions Isolation is a strong risk fac-
tor for suicide. Therefore, successful care tran-
sitions are especially important for suicidal pa-
tients. Additionally, timely supportive contacts
(calls, texts, letters, and visits) should be stan-
dard after acute care visits or when services are
interrupted (for example, a scheduled visit is
missed).
The risk of a suicide attempt or death is highest
within the first month after discharge from in-
patient or emergency department care.38 Up to
70 percent of patients who leave the ED after a
suicide attempt never attend their first follow-up
appointment.39 And the 2015 national average
performance on the Healthcare Effectiveness
Data and Information Set (HEDIS) measure
for one completed outpatient visit within seven
days of discharge from inpatient psychiatric hos-
pitalization was only 51 percent.40
Follow-up “caring contacts” with high-risk in-
dividuals, such as postcards or letters expressing
support, phone calls, and in-person visits, are
effective.39 Such contacts could be completed
by ED or inpatient staff, by a crisis call center,
or by an outpatient program.
Measuring
Outcomes
And
Conducting
Quality Improvement The Zero Suicide ap-
proach is oriented toward measuring results
and improving quality. To assess their perfor-
mance on suicide prevention, organizations
should examine both process measures (for ex-
ample, screening rates and use of follow-up con-
tacts) and outcomes of care (completed suicides
and suicide attempts among people at risk).
However, suicides of people under care has
not yet been adopted as a national health care
measure. Because of this, and because official
records of suicide deaths might lag significantly,
measurement of suicide rates might be useful
primarily as an ultimate measure of safety and
quality,
instead
of
for
performance
im-
provement.
Testing And Early Implementation
Of The Zero Suicide Approach
The Zero Suicide approach recommended by the
task force was refined, implemented, and tested
in 2013–14 by prototype behavioral health and
integrated primary care programs. The pilot test-
ing revealed that the approach could be feasibly
implemented in ordinary care settings—that is,
built into the routine clinical workflow, carried
out successfully by current staff, provided with-
out additional funding, and measured suc-
cessfully.
Preliminary data suggest that Zero Suicide is
effective. At Centerstone, a large behavioral
health nonprofit in Tennessee, the baseline rate
for suicide before Zero Suicide implementation
was 31 people per 100,000; the suicide rate two
years into implementation dropped to 11 per
100,000—a reduction of about 65 percent (Becky
Stoll, Centerstone, personal communication,
February 22, 2016). The Institute for Family
Health, a network of community health centers
in New York, has not yet completed measure-
ment of death rates but does assess adherence
to its suicide care protocol. For example, after a
safety-planning template was embedded into the
electronic health record and training and moni-
toring were provided, safety-plan usage by pri-
mary care providers for patients with a positive
suicide screen increased from 38 percent to
84 percent over two years (Virna Little, Institute
for Family Health, personal communication,
February 22, 2016).
The Suicide Prevention Resource Center sup-
ports implementation of the Zero Suicide ap-
proach
with
a
website
(http://www.Zero
Suicide.com), training for health systems (for
example, implementation-focused Zero Suicide
academies), learning collaboratives, and webi-
nars. The center also provides tools to assess
fidelity and measure progress. More than 200
health care and behavioral health organizations
are now implementing Zero Suicide. Implemen-
tation is being accelerated in more than a dozen
states where state leaders have encouraged adop-
tion of the comprehensive treatment strategy.
Concrete steps such as requiring reporting
among health plan members are needed to mo-
tivate health systems to adopt suicide preven-
tion. Attention to suicide prevention as a “core
goal of health care services” in the updated na-
tional strategy41 and the Joint Commission’s re-
cent alert will help stimulate change. SAMHSA
has emphasized Zero Suicide approaches in its
suicide prevention grant programs, and the
National Institute of Mental Health recently
released an announcement soliciting research
proposals on Zero Suicide. To make suicide pre-
vention a core responsibility of health systems,
developing better measures and changing stand-
ards of care such as follow-up after discharge will
be necessary.
Conclusion
Disseminating a new care model is challenging,
especially when it requires cultural as well as
clinical change. Recent actions to promote sui-
cide safety care by the Joint Commission and
federal agencies will begin to establish suicide
prevention as a priority in health care. Adequate
reimbursement for the clinical activities of sui-
cide prevention care is receding as an obstacle.
Emerging Issues
1088
Health Affairs
June 2016
35:6
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 03, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 Enactment of the Affordable Care Act coupled
with the Mental Health Parity and Addiction Eq-
uity Act of 2007 expanded coverage and also
provided benefits for mental illness and addic-
tion treatment; these benefits will generally pay
for the elements of suicide care.
There are many challenges to improving
screening, assessment, and basic management
of suicidality in general medical settings, includ-
ing primary care. This is where most patients
who subsequently die by suicide are seen, so
improving detection in these settings, as the
Joint Commission has urged, is important. How-
ever, behavioral health care within primary care
and other general medical settings is in its infan-
cy. Improving payment for integrated behavioral
health
services,
expansion
of
the
patient-
centered medical home model, and patients’
preferences for integrated care are likely to in-
crease the integration of care, creating an im-
proved environment for suicide prevention in
primary care.
Much work is needed to improve assessment
and treatment of suicidality in the behavioral
health sector. This is essential because suicidal
patients are generally referred to behavioral
health providers, who, as discussed earlier, often
lack professional training in this area.16 Addi-
tionally, essential aspects of managing and treat-
ing suicidality (safety planning, lethal means
reduction, direct treatment of suicidality, and
persistent supportive contacts) are not standard
in most behavioral health settings. As more
states evaluate data on deaths and amend their
suicide prevention plans, their attention will
turn to improving suicide prevention care in
their behavioral health systems; adoption of
Zero Suicide is likely to accelerate.
The experience at the Henry Ford Health Sys-
tem and among earlyadopters demonstrates that
implementing
improved
suicide
prevention,
along the lines of Zero Suicide, is feasible. Some
elements to improve care such as staff training
can move quickly. Legislation requiring training
in the assessment and treatment of suicidality
has been enacted in several states and is under
consideration in others.
Other actions such as building a suicide care
pathway into electronic health records can be
challenging. Measure development is also need-
ed; there are no widely accepted measures for
suicidality at this time.
Change does not happen overnight. There is
still much to do to turn the tide of suicide deaths
but also much to be optimistic about. We hope
that this discussion provides options for health
care systems that are seeking to transform sui-
cide prevention care and stimulates debate and
action to reduce this preventable and tragic form
of death. ▪
Michael Hogan was a co-leader of the
Clinical Care and Intervention Task
Force, which completed its work in
2013. This research was partially
supported by the Suicide Prevention
Resource Center, which is funded by the
Department of Health and Human
Services’ Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration under
Grant No. 1U79SM062297-01. The
authors thank Adam Chu of the
Education Development Center for his
assistance in reviewing and checking
references.
NOTES
1 Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. Welcome to WISQARS
[Internet]. Atlanta (GA): CDC; 2015
[last updated 2016 Apr 13; cited 2016
Apr 13]. Available from: http://
www.cdc.gov/injury/wisqars/index
.html
2 National Action Alliance for Suicide
Prevention. National strategy for
suicide prevention [Internet].
Washington (DC): The Action Alli-
ance; 2013 Jun 27 [cited 2016
Apr 25]. Available webcast from:
http://actionallianceforsuicide
prevention.org/NSSP
3 Knox KL, Litts DA, Talcott GW, Feig
JC, Caine ED. Risk of suicide and
related adverse outcomes after ex-
posure to a suicide prevention pro-
gramme in the US Air Force: cohort
study. BMJ. 2003;327(7428):1376–
80.
4 Walrath C, Garraza LG, Reid H,
Goldston DB, McKeon R. Impact of
the Garrett Lee Smith Youth Suicide
Prevention Program on suicide
mortality. Am J Public Health. 2015;
105(5):986–93.
5 Assessment and Management of
Risk for Suicide Working Group. VA/
DoD clinical practice guideline for
assessment and management of pa-
tients at risk for suicide [Internet].
Washington (DC): Department of
Veterans Affairs, Department of De-
fense; 2013 Jun [cited 2016 Apr 13].
Available from: http://www.health
quality.va.gov/guidelines/MH/srb/
VADODCP_SuicideRisk_Full.pdf
6 Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. Fatal injury reports [In-
ternet]. Atlanta (GA): CDC; [last
updated 2015 Dec 18; cited 2016
Apr 13]. Available from: http://
www.cdc.gov/injury/wisqars/fatal_
injury_reports.html
7 Taylor EF, Lake T, Nysenbaum J,
Peterson G, Meyers D. Coordinating
care in the medical neighborhood:
critical components and available
mechanisms [Internet]. Rockville
(MD): Agency for Healthcare Re-
search and Quality; 2011 Jun 30
[cited 2016 Apr 12]. Available from:
https://pcmh.ahrq.gov/sites/
default/files/attachments/
Coordinating%20Care%20in%20
the%20Medical%20Neighborhood
.pdf
8 Ahmedani BK, Simon GE, Stewart C,
Beck A, Waitzfelder BE, Rossom R,
et al. Health care contacts in the year
before suicide death. J Gen Intern
Med. 2014;29(6):870–7.
9 Boschert S. New strategies target
suicidality in EDs [Internet]. Irving
(TX): American College of Emer-
gency Physicians; 2009 Aug [cited
2016 Apr 13]. Available from:
https://www.acep.org/Clinical---
Practice-Management/New-
Strategies-Target-Suicidality-in-EDs/
10 Simon GE, Rutter CM, Peterson D,
Oliver M, Whiteside U, Operskalski
B, et al. Does response on the PHQ-9
depression questionnaire predict
subsequent suicide attempt or sui-
cide death? Psychiatr Serv. 2013;
June 2016
35:6
Health Affairs
1089
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 03, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
 64(12):1195–202.
11 Suicide Prevention Resource Center.
Surveillance success stories: Ken-
tucky [Internet]. Waltham (MA):
Education Development Center;
2015 [cited 2016 Apr 13]. Available
from: http://www.sprc.org/library_
resources/items/surveillance-
success-stories-kentucky
12 Suicide Prevention Resource Center.
Surveillance success stories: Ver-
mont [Internet]. Waltham (MA):
Education Development Center;
2015 [cited 2016 Apr 13]. Available
from: http://www.sprc.org/sites/
sprc.org/files/library/SPRC_
Vermont_compliant.pdf
13 Hiance-Steelesmith DL, Fontanella
CA, Sweeney HA, Campo JV. Behav-
ioral health service use among sui-
cide decedents in the public behav-
ioral health system. Poster presented
at: 48th Annual Conference of the
American Association of Suicidol-
ogy; 2015 Apr 15–18; Atlanta, GA.
14 Bertolote JM, Fleischmann A. Sui-
cide and psychiatric diagnosis: a
worldwide perspective. World Psy-
chiatry. 2002;1(3):181–5.
15 Joint Commission. Detecting and
treating suicide ideation in all set-
tings. Sentinel Event Alert [serial on
the Internet]. Oak Brook (IL): Joint
Commission; 2016 Feb 24 [cited
2016 Apr 13]. (Issue No. 56). Avail-
able from: http://www.joint
commission.org/assets/1/18/SEA_
56_Suicide.pdf
16 Schmitz WM Jr, Allen MH, Feldman
BN, Gutin NJ, Jahn DR, Kleespies
PM, et al. Preventing suicide
through improved training in sui-
cide risk assessment and care: an
American Association of Suicidology
Task Force report addressing serious
gaps in U.S. mental health training.
Suicide Life Threat Behav. 2012;
42(3):292–304.
17 Bickley H, Hunt IM, Windfuhr K,
Shaw J, Appleby L, Kapur N. Suicide
within two weeks of discharge from
psychiatric inpatient care: a case-
control study. Psychiatr Serv. 2013;
64(7):653–9.
18 Siegfried N, Bartlett M. Navigating
suicide assessment: a roadmap for
providers. Plenary presented at:
Joint Commission’s 2014 Annual
Behavioral Health Care Conference;
2014 Oct 15–16; Rosemont, IL.
19 Valenstein M, Kim HM, Ganoczy D,
McCarthy JF, Zivin K, Austin KL,
et al. Higher-risk periods for suicide
among VA patients receiving de-
pression treatment: prioritizing sui-
cide prevention efforts. J Affect
Disord. 2009;112(1–3):50–8.
20 Institute of Medicine. Crossing the
quality chasm: a new health system
for the 21st century. Washington
(DC): National Academies Press;
2001 Mar.
21 Coffey CE. Building a system of
perfect depression care in behavioral
health. Jt Comm J Qual Patient Saf.
2007;33(4):193–9.
22 Stone DM, Crosby AE. Suicide pre-
vention: state of the art review. Am J
Lifestyle Med. 2014;8(6):404–
20. p. 411.
23 Coffey MJ, Coffey CE, Ahmedani BK.
Suicide in a health maintenance or-
ganization population. JAMA Psy-
chiatry. 2015;72(3):294–6.
24 Gould MS, Munfakh JL, Kleinman
M, Lake AM. National Suicide Pre-
vention Lifeline: enhancing mental
health care for suicidal individuals
and other people in crisis. Suicide
Life Threat Behav. 2012;42(1):22–
35.
25 National Action Alliance for Suicide
Prevention, Clinical Care and Inter-
vention Task Force. Suicide care in
systems framework [Internet].
Washington (DC): The Task Force;
2012 [cited 2016 Apr 12]. p. 3.
Available from: http://actionalliance
forsuicideprevention.org/sites/
actionallianceforsuicideprevention
.org/files/taskforces/ClinicalCare
InterventionReport.pdf
26 Chassin MR, Loeb JM. High-reli-
ability health care: getting there
from here. Milbank Q. 2013;
91(3):459–90.
27 Posner K, Brown GK, Stanley B,
Brent DA, Yershova KY, Oquendo
MA, et al. The Columbia-Suicide Se-
verity Rating Scale: initial validity
and internal consistency findings
from three multisite studies with
adolescents and adults. Am J Psy-
chiatry. 2011;168(12):1266–77.
28 Stanley B, Brown GK. Safety plan-
ning intervention: a brief interven-
tion to mitigate suicide risk. Cogn
Behav Pract. 2012;19(2):256–64.
29 Jacobs DG, Baldessarini RJ, Conwell
Y, Fawcett JA, Horton L, Meltzer H,
et al. Practice guideline for the as-
sessment and treatment of patients
with suicidal behaviors [Internet].
Arlington (VA): American Psychiat-
ric Association; 2003 [cited 2016
Apr 13]. Available from: http://
psychiatryonline.org/pb/assets/
raw/sitewide/practice_guidelines/
guidelines/suicide.pdf
30 Edwards SJ, Sachmann MD. No-
suicide contracts, no-suicide agree-
ments, and no-suicide assurances: a
study of their nature, utilization,
perceived effectiveness, and poten-
tial to cause harm. Crisis. 2010;
31(6):290–302.
31 Gloaguen V, Cottraux J, Cucherat M,
Blackburn IM. A meta-analysis of the
effects of cognitive therapy in de-
pressed patients. J Affect Disord.
1998;49(1):59–72.
32 Churchill R, Hunot V, Corney R,
Knapp M, McGuire H, Tylee A, et al.
A systematic review of controlled
trials of the effectiveness and cost-
effectiveness of brief psychological
treatments for depression. Health
Technol Assess. 2001;5(35):1–173.
33 Stewart RE, Chambless DL. Cogni-
tive-behavioral therapy for adult
anxiety disorders in clinical practice:
a meta-analysis of effectiveness
studies. J Consult Clin Psychol.
2009;77(4):595–606.
34 Brown GK, Ten Have T, Henriques
GR, Xie SX, Hollander JE, Beck AT.
Cognitive therapy for the prevention
of suicide attempts: a randomized
controlled trial. JAMA. 2005;
294(5):563–70.
35 Stanley B, Brown G, Brent DA, Wells
K, Poling K, Curry J, et al. Cognitive-
behavioral therapy for suicide pre-
vention (CBT-SP): treatment model,
feasibility, and acceptability. J Am
Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2009;
48(10):1005–13.
36 Linehan MM, Comtois KA, Murray
AM, Brown MZ, Gallop RJ, Heard
HL, et al. Two-year randomized
controlled trial and follow-up of di-
alectical behavior therapy vs therapy
by experts for suicidal behaviors and
borderline personality disorder.
Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2006;63(7):
757–66.
37 Comtois KA, Jobes DA, O’Connor SS,
Atkins DC, Janis K, Chessen CE,
et al. Collaborative assessment and
management of suicidality (CAMS):
feasibility trial for next-day ap-
pointment services. Depress Anxi-
ety. 2011;28(11):963–72.
38 Knesper DJ. Continuity of care for
suicide prevention and research:
suicide attempts and suicide deaths
subsequent to discharge from an
emergency department or an inpa-
tient psychiatry unit [Internet].
Waltham (MA): Education Develop-
ment Center; 2010 [cited 2016
Apr 13]. Available from: http://
www.sprc.org/library_resources/
items/continuity-care-suicide-
prevention-and-research
39 Luxton DD, June JD, Comtois KA.
Can postdischarge follow-up con-
tacts prevent suicide and suicidal
behavior? A review of the evidence.
Crisis. 2013;34(1):32–41.
40 Group Health Cooperative. 2015
HEDIS® and CAHPS® measures and
performance [Internet]. Seattle
(WA): Group Health Cooperative;
2015 Oct [cited 2016 Apr 13]. Avail-
able from: https://www1.ghc.org/
static/pdf/public/about/hedis.pdf
41 Office of the Surgeon General, Na-
tional Action Alliance for Suicide
Prevention. National strategy for
suicide prevention: goals and objec-
tives for action, 2012 [Internet].
Washington (DC): Department of
Health and Human Services; 2012
Sep [cited 2016 Apr 13]. Available
from: https://www.surgeongeneral
.gov/library/reports/national-
strategy-suicide-prevention/index
.html
Emerging Issues
1090
Health Affairs
June 2016
35:6
Downloaded from HealthAffairs.org on June 03, 2019.
Copyright Project HOPE—The People-to-People Health Foundation, Inc.
For personal use only. All rights reserved. Reuse permissions at HealthAffairs.org.
