 Health Promotion Practice
Month XXXX Vol. XX , No. (X) 1 
–10
DOI: 10.1177/1524839918774571
© 2018 Society for Public Health Education
1
Background. Nearly 1,300 children in the United States 
die because of firearm-related injury each year and 
another 5,790 survive gunshot wounds, making the pre-
vention of firearm-related unintentional injury to chil-
dren of vital importance to families, health professionals, 
and policy makers. Objective. To systematically review 
the evidence on school-based and community-based 
gun safety programs for children aged 3 to 18 years. 
Study Design. Systematic review. Method. Twelve data-
bases were searched from their earliest records to 
December 2016. Interventional and analytic studies 
were sought, including randomized controlled trials, 
quasi-experimental studies, as well as before-and-after 
studies or cohort studies with or without a control that 
involved an intervention. The low level of evidence, 
heterogeneity of studies, and lack of consistent outcome 
measures precluded a pooled estimate of results. A best 
evidence synthesis was performed. Results. Results sup-
port the premise that programs using either knowledge-
based or active learning strategies or a combination of 
these may be insufficient for teaching gun safety skills 
to children. Conclusions. Gun safety programs do not 
improve the likelihood that children will not handle 
firearms in an unsupervised situation. Stronger research 
designs with larger samples are needed to determine the 
most effective way to transfer the use of the gun safety 
skills outside the training session and enable stronger 
conclusions to be drawn.
Keywords: 
firearm safety; gun safety; unintentional 
injury; children; health education
G
uns are a ubiquitous part of American culture. 
There are more than 310,000,000 guns in circu-
lation in the United States (Ingraham, 2015). 
This numerical reality makes the prevention of firearm-
related unintentional injury to children and youth of 
vital importance to parents and families as well as to 
school, public health and child health professionals, 
and policy makers. As K. Fowler, Dahlberg, Haileyesus, 
Gutierrez, and Bacon (2017) report, firearm injuries are 
the third leading cause of death for all children aged 1 
to 17 years. Gun deaths account for twice the number 
of deaths from cancer, 5 times the deaths from heart 
disease, and 15 times the deaths from infections (GBD 
2013 Mortality and Causes of Death Collaborators, 
2014; Palfrey & Palfrey, 2013). Only motor vehicle traf-
fic injuries claim more lives, whose rate fell approxi-
mately 50% since 2000, while firearm mortality 
dropped only 10% in that same time (K. Fowler et al., 
2017; Nelson, 2017).
While death is the most egregious result of firearm-
related unintentional injury for children, it is not the 
only serious outcome. Firearm-related injury, in addi-
tion to being more frequently fatal, also more frequently 
requires major surgery as compared to other types of 
injury. Firearm injury sends thousands of children to 
the emergency department with open wounds, frac-
tures, brain trauma, and spinal injuries. Overall, nearly 
1,300 children in the United States die in shootings 
774571 HPPXXX10.1177/1524839918774571HEALTH PROMOTION PRACTICEHolly et al. / GUN SAFETY EDUCATIONAL STRATEGIES
research-article2018
1Rutgers University, Newark, NJ, USA
Authors’ Note: Address correspondence to Sallie Porter, Division 
of Advanced Practice Nursing, Rutgers University School of 
Nursing, Rutgers University, 65 Bergen Street, Newark, NJ 07107-
3001, USA;  e-mail: portersa@sn.rutgers.edu.
School-Based and Community-Based Gun Safety 
Educational Strategies for Injury Prevention
Cheryl Holly, EdD, RN, ANEF, FNAP1
Sallie Porter, DNP, PhD, APN, FNAP1
Mary Kamienski, RN, PhD, FAEN, FAAN1
Aubrianne Lim, RN, BS1
 2 HEALTH PROMOTION PRACTICE / Month XXXX
each year and another 5,790 survive gunshot wounds 
(K. Fowler et al., 2017). About 15% of children with a 
firearm-related injury will sustain traumatic brain 
injury or an injury to the nerves or spinal cord, neces-
sitating years of often painful, emotionally challenging, 
and costly rehabilitation (Kalesan, French, Fagan, 
Fowler, & Galea, 2014).
Beyond direct physical harm, there are also mental 
health challenges stemming from direct and indirect 
exposure to a firearm-related injury, making each single 
firearm injury one that affects many victims. The fear, 
anxiety, and elevated stress children experience result-
ing from direct and indirect exposures may have seri-
ous psychological health consequences and has been 
reported as a predictor for the development of posttrau-
matic stress disorder in children and adolescents (P. J. 
Fowler, Tompsett, Braciszewski, Jacques-Tiura, & 
Baltes, 2009; Penn State, 2012). In addition, activating 
the body’s physiologic stress mechanisms increases 
risks of serious chronic health conditions, including 
heart disease and depression.
The economic burden associated with firearm injury 
is significant. Using injury data from the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, Miller (2012) esti-
mates annual firearm injury costs average $645 per gun 
in America. These costs include medical and mental 
health care costs, criminal justice costs, and the value 
of pain, suffering, and lost quality of life. Spitzer, 
Staudenmayer, Tenekoon, and Spain (2017) reported 
that approximately $730 million dollars annually is 
spent on the initial hospital admission for gun-related 
injuries. Government insurance through Medicaid and 
Medicare covered over 40% of these costs, and another 
quarter of the costs were borne by uninsured individu-
als. Spitzer et al.’s (2017) calculations do not include 
the cost of hospital readmissions, rehabilitation, long-
term health care, or emergency department care that 
does not lead to a hospital admission.
While the American Academy of Pediatrics (2015) 
notes that the safest home for children is one that does 
not include the presence of a gun, most unintentional 
shooting deaths among children do occur in the home 
with an additional one third occurring at the house of a 
friend or relative (Luo & McIntire, 2013). Gun safety in 
the home is complicated by differences in family beliefs, 
expectations, and actions. Despite parents believing that 
safe firearm storage is important for child protection and 
safety, Baxley and Miller (2006) report that 85% of par-
ents did not practice safe gun storage. Jackman, Farah, 
Kellermann, and Simon (2001) found that 72% of the 
gun-owning parents believed their child could differen-
tiate a toy gun from a real gun, even though this is an 
unlikely developmental capability for young children.
One strategy to reduce firearm-related unintentional 
injury is the development of firearm safety training 
programs designed to teach children how to respond in 
the event they encounter a firearm in an unsupervised 
environment. Their purpose is to eliminate or mini-
mize the risks of unintentional death, injury, or damage 
caused by improper possession, storage, or handling of 
firearms.
Three major approaches are used: “just say no” 
approaches, in which authority figures provide infor-
mation passively and tell children to stay away from 
guns (National Rifle Association for Legislative Action, 
2001); skills-building or active approaches (Miltenberger 
et al., 2009), which attempt to teach children skills they 
can use to resist playing with or touching guns; and 
knowledge-based approaches (Liller et al., 2003), in 
which children are passively provided information and 
printed material about gun safety. These gun safety 
training programs seek to instill appropriate responses 
by following specific rules. Children are taught to treat 
firearms with respect, and they are strongly discour-
aged from playing or toying with firearms. Yet children 
in homes where all guns were stored locked away were 
just as likely as children in homes with firearms stored 
unlocked to report having handled a gun in the home 
without adult supervision (Jackman et al., 2001).
Research findings on the effectiveness of interven-
tions to prevent firearm injury are equivocal. Of those 
programs developed specifically for children, the Eddie 
Eagle GunSafe program is the most recognized and 
implemented (National Rifle Association for Legislative 
Action, 2001). The Eddie Eagle program has educated 
more than 15 million children since 1988, with an esti-
mated 700,000 children receiving Eddie Eagle firearm 
injury prevention training each year. The main objec-
tive of the Eddie Eagle GunSafe program is to teach 
children what they should do if they find a firearm, 
that is, “stop” and do not touch the firearm. In a study 
comparing the Eddie Eagle GunSafe program of firearm 
safety with a behavioral training program, it was found 
that using knowledge-based learning materials was less 
effective for teaching children desired skills compared 
with programs incorporating active learning approaches 
(e.g., modelling, rehearsal, and feedback; Himle, 
Miltenberger, Gatheridge, & Flessner, 2004).
As well, Jackman et al. (2001) reported that as 
researchers watched pairs of boys left alone with a con-
cealed inoperative handgun through a one-way mirror, 
most boys found the gun, handled it, and pulled the 
trigger. Only one child went to tell an adult about the 
gun, and he was teased by his peers. In a similar study, 
Hardy (2003) found that even following gun admoni-
tions, when left alone in a room with a gun, school-
 Holly et al. / GUN SAFETY EDUCATIONAL STRATEGIES 3
 
aged boys were more likely to touch the gun than other 
forbidden objects, such as cigarettes. Although system-
atic reviews exist on the effectiveness of general vio-
lence prevention programs, a search of Cochrane, 
Campbell Collaboration, Joanna Briggs Institute (JBI) 
Libraries, and PubMed (clinical queries/systematic 
review) did not reveal any reviews focused on gun 
safety strategies for use with children.
Objective
Given the health, societal, and economic burden of 
firearm injuries in children, this review used PICO 
(participants, interventions, comparisons, outcomes, 
and study design) to answer the question: “What teach-
ing strategies (I/C) are most effective (S) in teaching 
children aged 3 to 18 years (P) the skills of gun safety 
(O)?” The overall intent of this article is to provide 
practical and actionable information for health promo-
tion practice.
>
>METHOD
The “Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic 
Reviews and Meta-Analyses” (PRISMA; 2015) state-
ment, the JBI (2014) method of critical appraisal, and 
the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (2014) 
guidelines for determining levels of evidence were fol-
lowed in this review. An a priori protocol was used 
(Holly, Porter, & Jadotte, 2015).
Search Strategy and Selection Criteria
To be included in this review, studies had to be 
interventional, that is, randomized controlled trials, 
quasi-randomized controlled trials, or before-and-after 
studies or cohort studies with or without a control that 
involved an intervention. The inclusion criteria were 
(1) the program was targeted to children aged 3 to 18 
years; (2) the study focused on knowledge-based and/
or skills-based interventions used in school (including 
after school programs) or community (including the 
home) programs; (3) a description of the intervention 
was provided; and (4) outcomes were measured. 
Studies were further limited to U. S. settings and 
English language publications. Violence prevention 
programs not targeted to gun safety and combined 
safety programs in which the gun safety results could 
not be differentiated were excluded. To identify stud-
ies, using the keywords “gun safety training and chil-
dren” 12 databases were searched from their inception 
to December 2016 (see Table 1). Additionally, the refer-
ence lists of the identified documents were searched 
for eligible studies (i.e., ancestry search). An Internet 
search using Google Scholar was also conducted to 
identify studies not published in the conventional lit-
erature (i.e., grey literature search). Two reviewers 
screened all articles that were identified by title and 
abstract against the inclusion criteria.
The Intervention
Studies were sought that used either a passive, 
active, or combination teaching strategy intervention. 
Passive, or information-based strategies, provide chil-
dren with information about safety threats and safety 
skills but no opportunity to practice these skills. The 
focus of this approach is to teach children that guns are 
not toys and that they should not play with them using 
discussion, video, or written material.
Active strategies included role modeling, role-play, 
and specific feedback on behavior. Also called behavio-
ral skills training, this approach to teaching has been 
used to effectively teach abduction prevention skills 
TAbLE 1
Databases Searched
CINAHL
MEDLINE (Ovid)
PsycINFO
Clinicaltrials.Gov
Science Direct
Scopus
Academic Search Premiere
JSTOR
Sociological Abstracts
Web of Science
Criminal Justice Abstracts
ERIC
Search Example: MEDLINE (Ovid)
Search
Search Parameters
Results
1
Safety training, Firearms
13,638
2
Children, mp Child
4,156,999
3
Accidents, Home/ep, pc 
(Epidemiology, Prevention 
& Control)
670
4
“Wounds and Injuries”/or 
Accidents, community.mp
71,431
5
3 or 4
71,963
6
1 and 2 and 5
42
 4 HEALTH PROMOTION PRACTICE / Month XXXX
(Johnson et al., 2006), poison recognition skills (Dancho, 
Thompson, & Rhoades, 2008), and pedestrian safety 
skills (Schwebel et al., 2014). Often an “in situ” or 
simulated exercise was used that allowed children to 
practice what they would do in a real-life situation 
using role-play. Safety skills acquisition are then 
assessed via observation and video monitor, and the 
observer goes to the participants’ area once the assess-
ment is completed. Immediate, corrective feedback is 
provided by the observer if the child failed to use the 
skills. In some cases, remediation would occur.
A combined approach involves the use of both 
active and passive strategies. For example, children 
would attend a lecture/discussion on gun safety, be 
given written materials on gun safety, and then placed 
in a simulated situation using role-play and immediate 
corrective action.
Quality Assessment
Each paper selected for retrieval was assessed for 
methodological quality using the appropriate critical 
appraisal instrument based on study design from the 
JBI (2014). Each team of reviewers compared the results 
of their review and presented their agreed-on results to 
the entire team, which made a joint decision to include 
or exclude the study. Any disagreement between the 
reviewers was discussed with the entire team until 
consensus was achieved. The appraisal criteria 
included questions regarding sample selection, inclu-
sion criteria, assessment of outcomes, sufficiency of the 
sample description, reliability of outcome measures, 
and appropriateness of statistical measures used.
Data Extraction
Data were extracted from papers using a de novo 
data extraction tool. For each study, the following 
information was extracted: age range of children in the 
program, sample size, interventions used, place of the 
program, and outcomes. The collected data were then 
represented in a table of evidence for comparison and 
discussion (see Table 2). The low level of evidence, 
heterogeneity of studies, and lack of consistent out-
come measures precluded a pooled estimate of results. 
Given that the results of heterogeneous studies should 
be viewed with caution, as bias can be interjected, we 
took care to detail the search and appraisal process to 
strengthen the reliability of review findings. The final 
analysis for this review, therefore, is a best evidence 
synthesis of intervention characteristics and outcomes 
based on type of intervention teaching strategy: (1) 
passive, (2) active, or (3) combination—both active and 
passive.
>
>RESULTS
A total of 298 studies were identified. Of these, 209 
were excluded as they were duplicate studies found 
across databases; 31 were selected for retrieval and 10 
were included in this review (see Figure 1). The 21 
studies not included were the wrong population (N = 
10), not an educational program (N = 5), literature 
review (N = 2), or not a research study (N = 4; see 
Figure 1). Of the included studies, one was a rand-
omized controlled trial (Hardy, 2003), and one was a 
quasi-experimental study (Howard, 2005). The other 
eight were pretest/posttest studies (Gross, Miltenberger, 
Knudson, Bosch, & Breitwieser, 2007; Hanratty, 
Miltengerger, & Florentino, 2016; Liller et al., 2003), 
posttest only with a control group (Gatheridge et al., 
2004; Himle et al., 2004; Kelso, Miltenberger, Waters, 
Egemo-Helm, & Bagne, 2007; Miltenberger et al., 2009), 
or posttest only with no control (Jostad, Miltenberger, 
Kelso, & Knudson, 2008).
As noted in Table 2, of the included studies, five 
used active learning strategies, one used passive learn-
ing strategies, and four used a combination of passive 
and active learning strategies. Four of the studies took 
place in a school environment and five in the commu-
nity and one study took place both at home and in the 
community. Three of the included studies compared 
the results of using the Eddie Eagle program with the 
more active behavior skills training program. There 
were 744 participants across the studies, ranging in age 
from pre-K/child care to Grade 4, with a median age of 
approximately 5 years. No studies were located whose 
participants were middle or upper (high) school stu-
dents.
Levels of evidence for the included studies are pre-
sented in Table 2. Most (N = 8) were either are Level 3 
(N = 4) or Level 4 (N = 4) evidence, meaning that the 
studies were of low quality and health education pro-
viders and others should be flexible and cautious in 
using these results.
>
>DISCUSSION
Unintentional firearm injury among children is a 
significant public health and social concern. Although 
firearm injury mortality rates for children declined 
between 2006 and 2013, an increase accounting for 
over 10% of all deaths among these ages was seen in 
2014 and 2015. Firearm injuries are the third leading 
cause of death for all children aged 1 to 17 years (K. 
Fowler et al., 2017). When the age is extended to 19 
 Holly et al. / GUN SAFETY EDUCATIONAL STRATEGIES 5
 
TAbLE 2
Included Studies
Study
Design
Sample/Settinga
Intervention
Findingsb
Conclusions
Level of 
Evidencec
Hanratty, 
Miltengerger, and 
Florentino (2016)
Pretest, posttest
Five 4-year-olds (3 boys 
and 2 girls).
Setting: School
Used active learning strategies.
The teacher was given a teaching package 
that contained a training manual and 
role-play cards. The packet contained 
instructions for delivering content, 
conducting discussions with the 
children, modeling the skills for 
children, conducting role-plays with the 
role-play cards, and delivering corrective 
feedback.
Scores did not improve following the 
intervention. There was no statistical 
analysis of the results.
The results of this study showed 
that active learning alone 
implemented by a teacher was 
not effective in teaching safety 
skills to young children. 4/5 
children could correctly model 
behavior with an enhanced 
component (access to preferred 
activities and escape from 
further training)
Level 4
Hardy (2002)
Randomized 
controlled trial
70 children enrolled in 
one of three day care 
centers: 42 males, 28 
females. Ages ranged 
from 4 to 7 years, with 
a median age of 5 years
Setting: School
Used active learning strategies.
The children were divided into 35 pairs of 
the same gender and approximately the 
same age. The pairs were then randomly 
assigned to one of three conditions: 
paired control (n = 10 pairs), paired 
experimental (n = 9 pairs), and mixed (n 
= 16 pairs). The intervention consisted of 
a series of skills aimed at increasing 
awareness of the dangers of firearms, 
making good choices, resisting peer 
pressure, and preventing aggressive 
conflicts.
Chi square analysis revealed that the children 
who had the intervention were just as likely 
to play with guns as those children who did 
not have the intervention (N = 70, p = 0.94, 
p = .33). In fact, 72% of the children in the 
intervention group played with the gun 
compared with 45% in the control 
condition. Also children in the experimental 
group were not more likely to make positive 
gun comments (e.g., “Don’t touch that!”) that 
were children without the training (N = 70, 
p = 0.03, p = .86). Similarly, there was no 
significant difference in the likelihood of 
gun play across the three pair groups  
(N = 70, F = 3.66, p = .16).
The intervention had no effect on 
children’s likelihood of playing 
with guns.
Level 1
Himle, Miltenberger, 
Gatheridge, and 
Flessner (2004)
Posttest only with a 
control group
31 4- and 5-year-olds pre-
school children 
participated
Setting: Community
Used both active and passive learning 
strategies.
Participants were randomly assigned to one 
of the three conditions:
Control (N = 10); Eddie Eagle (passive 
learning, N = 11); skills training (active 
learning, N = 10)
All programs were effective for teaching 
children to repeat the gun safety message. 
The behavioral skills training program, but 
not the Eddie Eagle program was effective 
for teaching children to perform gun safety 
skills during a supervised role-play, but the 
skills were not used when the children 
were assessed via real-life (simulated) 
assessments.
The results of a Kruskal–Wallis test showed a 
significant overall effect for the role-play 
assessments, H(2, n = 31) = 23.73, p = .01, 
and knowledge assessment, H(2, n = 31) = 
17.39, p = .01, but not for the in simulated 
assessments.
The Eddie Eagle program (passive 
learning) was not successful for 
teaching children safety skills 
that they would use in real-life 
situations; however, active 
skills training was not more 
successful in teaching children 
to use the skills.
Level 3
Howard (2005)
Quasi-experimental
57 kindergarten and/or 
first grade elementary 
school students.
Setting: School
Used both passive and active learning 
strategies.
Eight classrooms of students at two public 
elementary schools were randomized to 
four intervention blocks: (1) pretest, 
posttest only control group; (2) pretest, 
scripted firearm safety discussion, 
posttest; (3) pretest, scripted discussion 
about firearm safety, and a programmed 
psychomotor exercise, posttest; (4) pretest, 
scripted discussion about firearm safety, a 
programmed psychomotor exercise, and a 
role-playing exercise, posttest.
Knowledge increased in all the intervention 
groups, F(3, 5) = 6.69, p = .001. There were 
no significant changes in the control 
group’s knowledge, attitudes, or feelings 
about firearm safety.
It was expected that the 
discussion-psychomotor/role-
play intervention group would 
have the greatest change in 
knowledge. This was not 
supported.
Level 2
 (continued)
 6 HEALTH PROMOTION PRACTICE / Month XXXX
Study
Design
Sample/Settinga
Intervention
Findingsb
Conclusions
Level of 
Evidencec
Gatheridge et al. 
(2004)
Posttest only, 
control group 
design with two 
intervention 
groups
45 children 6- to 7-year-
old from an after-school 
program facility.
Setting: Community
Used both passive and active strategies.
15 children assigned to behavioral skills 
training (active learning), 15 children to 
Eddie Eagle program (passive learning), 
and 15 children in the control group.
Both the active learning and passive learning 
groups were better able to verbalize safety 
skills (p < .001) than the control group. The 
passive learning and active learning groups 
did not differ on verbalization of safety 
skills, H(1, n = 30) = 0.358, p = .555. When 
children were not aware they were being 
assessed in a naturalistic setting, children 
in the skills training group were more 
likely to perform the desired skills than 
were children in the Eddie Eagle group, 
H(1, n = 30) = 8. 65, p < .01.
Programs using passive, 
knowledge-based strategies 
were less effective than skills-
based training to teach the 
desired gun safety skills.
Level 3
Gross, Miltenberger, 
Knudson, Bosch, 
and Breitwieser 
(2007)
Pretest, posttest
Four children, aged 4 to 7 
years, participated in 
the study.
Setting: Community
Used active learning strategies.
Parents were trained on active learning 
strategies for 1 hour and then conducted 
sessions with their child at home within 
30 minutes of the second session. A 
simulated training session was conducted 
by setting up a situation in which the 
child found a gun in the home. If the 
child did not engage in the correct safety 
response, the parent walked into the 
room and caught the child, expressed 
concern, and provided additional 
training at that moment.
If the child left the room and reported the 
gun, the parent provided copious 
descriptive praise.
The results of this study show that the 
training program was effective for three of 
four participants and that it was 
implemented with fidelity by three of the 
four parents. One of the participants failed 
to exhibit the skills following training. 
There was no follow-up and no statistical 
analysis.
The results showed that the 
parental training was effective 
for three of the four children.
Level 4
Jostad, Miltenberger, 
Kelso, and 
Knudson (2008)
Posttest only
A convenience sample of 
six 4- to 5-year-olds.
Setting: community and 
home
Six 6- to 7-year-olds were trained to act as 
peer tutors for seven 4- to 5-year-olds 
using behavioral skills training 
(instruction, modeling, rehearsal, 
feedback). The students received two 
training sessions and up to three booster 
sessions.
Used active learning strategies.
There was no statistical analysis. Results are 
presented as scores with all six students 
acquiring gun safety skills and positive 
scores as taught by a peer. Students 
demonstrated attainment of these skills at 3 
months and 11 months in simulated and 
home settings.
The length of time for 
maintenance of skills and 
number of booster (review) 
sessions differed for each child. 
Safety skills failed to occur for 
two students in the home 
setting until in-situ (home) 
training was conducted, 
suggesting that peer training 
may not be generalizable.
Level 4
 (continued)
TAbLE 2 (CONTINUED)
 Holly et al. / GUN SAFETY EDUCATIONAL STRATEGIES 7
 
Study
Design
Sample/Settinga
Intervention
Findingsb
Conclusions
Level of 
Evidencec
Kelso, Miltenberger, 
Waters, Egemo-
Helm, and Bagne 
(2007)
Posttest only 
control group 
with random 
assignment
16 boys and 14 girls (8 
and 9 years).
Setting: community
Use both passive and active learning 
strategies.
Participants were instructed according to 
either the Eddie Eagle program or active 
skills learning program in one session 
lasting 45 minutes to an hour. 
Knowledge, role-play, and in-situ 
assessments were used to determine the 
effects of each treatment.
Analysis of indicated that participants in 
both them Eddie Eagle condition,  
(M = 3.00, SD = .000), H(1, w = 19) = 3.526, 
p < .001, and the active learning condition, 
(M = 2.78, SD = .441), H(1, > = 19) = 8.213, 
p < .05, scored significantly higher than 
the control condition (M = 1.67, SD = .866) 
on this assessment measure. The Eddie 
Eagle condition and the active learning 
condition were not significantly different, 
H(1, n = 19) = 2.353, p = .125.
Children in both the Eddie Eagle 
and active learning condition 
performed significantly better 
than the control condition in 
verbally identifying correct 
safety behaviors. The Eddie 
Eagle group did not 
significantly differ from the 
active learning group.
Children in the active learning 
group were not better than 
those in the Eddie Eagle group 
in role-playing the target safety 
behaviors, children in the 
Eddie Eagle and the active 
learning conditions did not 
differ during the simulated 
assessment, suggesting that the 
programs did not differ in 
teaching children to perform 
the target skills in a realistic 
situation.
Level 3
Liller et al. (2003)
Pretest, posttest
433 third graders 
participated from six 
elementary schools.
Setting: school
Used passive learning strategies.
The “Respect Not Risk” Firearm Safety 
Lesson for 3rd-graders was presented.
Paired samples t tests showed there was a 
significant increase in the mean scores on 
the posttest compared with the pretest  
(p = .0005). Firearm safety as shown by the 
significant differences in pretest and 
posttest scores.
Knowledge regarding gun safety 
increased because of the lesson, 
but it is not possible to 
determine if the increase in 
knowledge led to safe firearm 
behavior.
Level 4
Miltenberger et al. 
(2009).
Posttest only with 
control group
43 7-year-olds.
Setting: community
Used active learning strategies.
Participants were randomly assigned to 
each group with 15 participants in active 
learning, 12 participants in the simulated 
group, and 16 participants in the control 
group.
Following acquisition of the skills in a 
simulated situation, dyad assessments were 
conducted in which a trained peer 
challenged the participant to play with the 
gun.
The results showed that following 
three training sessions of active 
learning and simulation, there 
was no significant difference in 
demonstrated safety skills 
among the groups. Nothing was 
gained by incorporating the 
additional teaching strategies 
(i.e., videos, vignettes, dyad 
role-plays).
Level 3
aNot all studies reported children’s age and gender. bNot all studies reported complete statistical analysis. cFrom Oxford Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine Working Group (2011): 
 
Level 1 = systematic review; Level 2 = randomized controlled trial; Level 3 = observational studies, cohort studies nonrandom sample; Level 4 = case series, case control studies.
TAbLE 2 (CONTINUED)
 8 HEALTH PROMOTION PRACTICE / Month XXXX
years, firearm injuries accounted for over 14% of all 
deaths in 2015, meaning that in one of every seven 
children aged 1 to 19 years who died, an intentional or 
nonintentional gunshot wound was the cause (Nelson, 
2017). Despite the social and economic burden imposed 
by firearm injury in the United States, an exhaustive 
search of the published and grey literature revealed a 
dearth of high-quality evidence. Only limited evidence 
(i.e., consistent findings in one or more low-quality 
studies) was identified (van Tulder, Furlan, Bombardier, 
Bouter, & Editorial Board of the Cochrane Collaboration 
Back Review Group, 2003).
Children need to know how to be safe around guns 
as the relative accessibility of guns in the United States 
is the highest among developed countries (Branas et al., 
2017; World Health Organization, 2014). Increasing a 
child’s knowledge about how to respond safely when 
unsupervised access to a gun occurs makes sense. 
However, an increase in knowledge provides no cer-
tainty that children will translate this knowledge to a 
real-life situation. Using knowledge as the outcome 
variable, therefore, is insufficient for teaching gun 
safety skills to children, although some studies in this 
review reported short-term knowledge gain (Hanratty 
et al., 2016; Kelso et al., 2007; Liller et al., 2003).
Programs that used active learning strategies (e.g., 
modeling, simulation, feedback) were somewhat more 
effective at teaching gun safety skills as assessed by 
supervised role-play, but the majority still failed to teach 
the children to use the skills outside the context of the 
training session. For example, in Hardy (2002), 70 chil-
dren between the ages of 4 and 7 years were randomly 
assigned to participate in a weeklong firearm safety pro-
gram or to the control group. After the program, pairs of 
children were observed in a structured setting in which 
they had access to a semiautomatic pistol. A total of 53% 
of the pairs handled the gun. In other words, the inter-
vention had no effect on children’s likelihood of playing 
with guns. In another study (Himle et al., 2004), pro-
grams were effective for teaching children to repeat the 
gun safety message and to perform gun safety skills dur-
ing a supervised role-play, but the skills were not used 
when the children were assessed via real-life (simulated) 
assessments. However, Hanratty et al. (2016) did find that 
while active learning implemented by a teacher was not 
effective in teaching safety skills to young children, chil-
dren were able to correctly model behavior with an 
enhanced component, (i.e., access to preferred activities 
and escape from further training), suggesting that chil-
dren may not be fully understanding the significance of 
gun safety. The very small sample size (N = 5) in this 
study, however, limits generalizability.
To address active versus passing teaching strategies 
more closely, three of the studies in this review com-
pared the passive learning Eddie Eagle program with the 
more active behavior skills training program. In two of 
these studies (Himle et al., 2004; Kelso et al., 2007), con-
trary to what was predicted, children in the Eddie Eagle 
and the active learning conditions did not differ during 
the in situ (simulated) assessment, suggesting that the 
programs did not differ in teaching children to perform 
the target skills in a realistic situation, although verbally 
all children demonstrated increased knowledge. In the 
Gatheridge et al. (2004) study, when children were not 
aware they were being assessed in a naturalistic setting, 
children in the skills training group were more likely to 
perform the desired skills than were children in the 
Eddie Eagle group, H(1, n = 30) = 8,65, p < .01.
The instructor who taught the gun safety skills les-
sons varied across the studies and included peer tutors, 
parents, teachers, and a nurse as well as the researchers 
conducting the studies. There was little variation across 
the studies in terms of outcomes.
In addition, although our search strategy looked for 
studies involving children aged 3 to 18 years, the 10 
included studies only addressed children aged 4 to 9 
FIGURE 1 PRISMA Flow Diagram
NOTE: PRISMA = Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic 
Reviews and Meta-Analyses.
 Holly et al. / GUN SAFETY EDUCATIONAL STRATEGIES 9
 
years. This is a significant gap as the Youth Risk 
Behavior Surveillance System (Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, 2016) reported that 5.3% (N = 
13,263; confidence interval [CI: 4.6, 6.1]) of the high 
school respondents reported carrying a gun at least 
once during the 30-day period preceding the survey 
and 4.1% (3.5% to 4.7%), 15,468 reported carrying a 
gun on school property.
This is important on two fronts—development and 
research gaps. From a child and adolescent develop-
ment perspective, what works and matters with the 
younger child is often different from what works with 
an adolescent. Certainly, the developmental abilities of 
a 4-year-old are different in the cognitive and motor 
domains compared to a 17-year-old, and even to a 
7-year-old. Even within the adolescent age-group, there 
are cognitive development variations along the age tra-
jectory. So, as always in child health and safety, it is 
important to consider the child’s age and developmen-
tal abilities.
Gun-related injuries and deaths are a significant 
issue for adolescents. Little is known about the health 
and well-being of those who witness or survive unan-
ticipated episodes of gun violence, which creates situ-
ations of traumatic loss and grief. Developmentally 
appropriate learning strategies to prevent and limit 
adolescent gun-related injury need more attention. 
Prevention strategies for unintentional gun-related 
injuries for the younger adolescent male population 
may be of special importance (Institute of Medicine & 
National Research Council, 2013).
Transferability of learned material among different 
contexts (i.e., home vs. school, home vs. friend/relative 
home) needs consideration. With most unintentional 
gun injuries and deaths occurring in the family, rela-
tive, or neighbor’s home, skills learned in the school 
setting need applicability to the home setting. In the 
same vein, gun safety advocates need to reinvigorate 
their efforts targeted toward parents, grandparents, and 
other adult caregivers. Optimal safe gun storage may 
still be the preferred choice to keep children and ado-
lescents safe from unintentional gun injury.
>
>CONCLUSION
Gun safety programs do not appear to reduce the 
likelihood that children will safely handle firearms. The 
studies located and included in this review are of lim-
ited evidence (primarily Levels 3 and 4) due to small 
sample sizes, minimal statistical analysis, and lack of 
randomization, making a determination of effect size 
 
not possible; therefore, an evidence synthesis of study 
findings was done. More research is needed to deter-
mine the most effective way to transfer the use of the 
skills outside the training session and to ensure that 
those skills are sustainable. Rigorous, large-scale, and 
age- and developmentally appropriate studies are needed.
REFERENCES
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (2014). Clinical 
guidelines and recommendations. Rockville, MD: Retrieved from 
https://www.ahrq.gov/professionals/clinicians-providers/guide-
lines-recommendations/index.html
American Academy of Pediatrics. (2015). Where we stand: Gun 
safety. Retrieved from https://www.healthychildren.org/English/
safety-prevention/all-around/Pages/Where-We-Stand-Gun-Safety.
aspx
Baxley, F., & Miller, M. (2006). Parental misperceptions about 
children and firearms. Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent 
Medicine, 160, 542-547. doi:10.1001/archpedi.160.5.542
Branas, C. C., Flescher, A., Formica, M. K., Galea, S., Hennig, N., 
Liller, K. D., . . .  Ying, J. (2017). Academic public health and the 
firearm crisis: An agenda for action. American Journal of Public 
Health, 107, 365-367. doi:10.2105/AJPH.2016.303619
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2016). Adolescent 
and school health. Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance System. 
Retrieved 
from 
https://www.cdc.gov/healthyyouth/data/yrbs/
index.htm
Dancho, K. A., Thompson, R. H., & Rhoades, M. M. (2008). 
Teaching preschool children to avoid poison hazards. Journal of 
Applied Behavior Analysis, 41, 267-271.
Fowler, K., Dahlberg, L., Haileyesus, T., Gutierrez, C., & Bacon, S. 
(2017). Childhood firearm injuries in the United States. Pediatrics, 
e20163486. doi:10.1542/peds.2016-3486
Fowler, P. J., Tompsett, C. J., Braciszewski, J. M., Jacques-Tiura, A. 
J., & Baltes, B. B. (2009). Community violence: A meta-analysis on 
the effect of exposure and mental health outcomes of children 
and adolescents. Development and Psychopathology, 21, 227-259.
Gatheridge, B. J., Miltenberger, R. G., Huneke, D. F., Satterlund, 
M. J., Mattern, A. R., Johnson, B. M., . . .  Flessner, C. A. (2004). 
Comparison of two programs to teach firearm prevention skills to 
6- and 7-year old children. Pediatrics, 114, e294-299.
GBD 2013 Mortality and Causes of Death Collaborators. (2014). 
Global, regional, and national age-sex specific all-cause and 
cause-specific mortality for 240 causes of death, 1990-2013: A 
systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2013. 
Lancet, 385, 117-171.
Gross, A., Miltenberger, R., Knudson, P., Bosch, A., & Breitwieser, 
C. B. (2007). Preliminary evaluation of a parent training program 
to prevent gun play. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 40, 
691-695.
Hanratty, L., Miltengerger, R., & Florentino, S. (2016). Evaluating 
the effectiveness of a teaching package utilizing behavioral skills 
training and in situ training to teach gun safety skills in a pre-
school classroom. Journal of Behavioral Education, 25, 310-323.
Hardy, M. S. (2002). Teaching firearm safety to children: Failure 
of a program. Journal of Developmental & Behavioral Pediatrics, 
23, 71-76.
Hardy, M. S. (2003). Effects of gun admonitions on the behaviors 
 10 HEALTH PROMOTION PRACTICE / Month XXXX
and attitudes of school-aged boys. Journal of Developmental & 
Behavioral Pediatrics, 24, 352-358.
Himle, M. B., Miltenberger, R. G., Gatheridge, B. J., & Flessner, C. 
A. (2004). An evaluation of two procedures for training skills to 
prevent gun play in children. Pediatrics, 113(1 Pt. 1), 70-77.
Holly, C., Porter, S., & Jadotte, Y. (2015). Effectiveness of school-
based and community-based gun safety programs for children 
aged 3-18 years: A systematic review and meta-analysis. 
PROSPERO, CRD42015024180. Retrieved from http://www.crd.
york.ac.uk/PROSPERO/display_record.php?ID=CRD42015024180
Howard, P. K. (2005). Parents’ beliefs about children and gun 
safety. Pediatric Nursing, 31, 374-379.
Ingraham, C. (2015, October 5). Wonkblog: There are now more 
guns than people in the United States. The Washington Post. 
Retrieved from https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/
wp/2015/10/05/guns-in-the-united-states-one-for-every-man-
woman-and-child-and-then-some/?utm_term=.85f78eff4af0
Institute of Medicine & National Research Council. (2013). 
Priorities for research to reduce the threat of firearm-related vio-
lence. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Jackman, G. A., Farah, M. M., Kellermann, A. L., & Simon, H. K. 
(2001). Seeing is believing: What do boys do when they find a real 
gun? Pediatrics, 107, 1247-1250.
Joanna Briggs Institute. (2014). Joanna Briggs reviewers manual. 
Adelaide, South Australia: University of Adelaide. Retrieved 
 
from 
https://joannabriggs.org/assets/docs/sumari/Reviewers 
Manual-2014.pdf
Johnson, B. M., Miltenberger, R. G., Knudson, P., Egemo-Helm, K., 
Kelso, P., Jostad, C., & Langley, L. (2006). A preliminary evalua-
tion of two behavioral skills training procedures for teaching 
abduction-prevention skills to schoolchildren. Journal of Applied 
Behavior Analysis, 39, 25-34.
Jostad, C., Miltenberger, R., Kelso, P., & Knudson, P. (2008). Peer 
tutoring to prevent firearm play: Acquisition, generalization. 
Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 41, 117-123.
Kalesan, B., French, C., Fagan, J. A., Fowler, D. L., & Galea, S. 
(2014). Firearm-related hospitalizations and in-hospital mortality 
in the United States, 2000-2010. American Journal of Epidemiology, 
179, 303-312. doi:10.1093/aje/kwt255
Kelso, P., Miltenberger, R., Waters, M., Egemo-Helm, K., & Bagne, 
A. (2007). Teaching skills to second and third grade children to 
prevent gun play: A comparison of procedures. Education & 
Treatment of Children, 30, 29-48.
Liller, K. D., Perrin, K., Nearns, J., Pesce, K., Crane, N. B., & Gonzalez, 
R. R. (2003). Evaluation of the “respect not risk” firearm safety lesson 
for 3rd-graders. Journal of School Nursing, 19, 338-343.
Luo, M., & McIntire, M. (2013, September 28). Bearing arms: 
Children and guns, the hidden toll. New York Times. Retrieved 
from http://www.nytimes.com/2013/09/29/us/children-and-guns-
the-hidden-toll.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0
Miller, T. (2012). The cost of firearm violence. Waltham, MA: 
Children’s Safety Network. Retrieved from https://www.child-
renssafetynetwork.org/publications/cost-firearm-violence
Miltenberger, R., Gross, A., Knudson, P., Bosch, A., Jostad, C., & 
Breitwieser, C. (2009). Evaluating behavioral skills training with 
and without simulated in situ training for teaching safety skills to 
children. Education & Treatment of Children, 32(1), 63-75.
National Rifle Association Institute for Legislative Action. (2001). 
Fact sheet: Firearm safety in America. Fairfax, VA: Author. 
Retrieved from www.nraila.org/FactSheets.asp
Nelson, E. W. (2017). Confronting the firearm injury plague. 
Pediatrics, 140(1), e1300.
Oxford Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine Working Group. 
(2011). The Oxford 2011 levels of evidence. Retrieved from 
https://www.cebm.net/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/CEBM-
Levels-of-Evidence-2.1.pdf
Palfrey, J. S., & Palfrey, S. (2013). Preventing gun deaths in chil-
dren. New England Journal of Medicine, 368, 401-403.
Penn State. (2012, July 3). Exposure to violence has long-term 
stress effects among adolescents. ScienceDaily. Retrieved from 
www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2012/07/120703162630.htm
PRISMA. (2015). The “Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic 
Reviews and Meta-Analyses” (PRISMA) statement. Retrieved 
from http://prisma-statement.org/
Schwebel, D. C., Barton, B. K., Shen, J., Wells, H. L., Bogar, A., 
Heath, G., & McCullough, D. (2014). Systematic review and meta-
analysis of behavioral interventions to improve child pedestrian 
safety. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 39, 826-845. doi:10.1093/
jpepsy/jsu024
Spitzer, S., Staudenmayer, K., Tenekoon, L., & Spain, D. (2017). 
Costs and financial burden of initial hospitalizations for firearm 
injuries in the United States, 2006-2014. American Journal of 
Public Health, 107, 770-774.
van Tulder, M., Furlan, A., Bombardier, C., Bouter, L., & Editorial 
Board of the Cochrane Collaboration Back Review Group. (2003). 
Updated method guidelines for systematic reviews in the 
Cochrane collaboration back review group. Spine, 28, 1290-1299.
World Health Organization. (2014). Violence prevention. Retrieved 
from http://www.who.int/violence_injury_prevention/violence/en/
