 Physician and Patient Views on Public Physician Rating Websites: A
Cross-Sectional Study
Alison M. Holliday, MPH1, Allen Kachalia, MD JD1,2, Gregg S. Meyer, MD MSc1,3,4, and
Thomas D. Sequist, MD MPH2,3,5
1Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA; 2Division of General Medicine and Primary Care, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA;
3Partners HealthCare System, Boston, MA, USA; 4Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA; 5Department of
Health Care Policy, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
BACKGROUND: Numerical ratings and narrative com-
ments about physicians are increasingly available online.
These physician rating websites include independent
websites reporting crowd-sourced data from online users
and health systems reporting data from their internal
patient experience surveys.
OBJECTIVE: To assess patient and physician views on
physician rating websites.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional physician (electronic) and pa-
tient (paper) surveys conducted in August 2015.
PARTICIPANTS: Eight hundred twenty-eight physicians
(response rate 43%) affiliated with one of four hospitals in
a large accountable care organization in eastern Massa-
chusetts; 494 adult patients (response rate 34%) who
received care in this system in May 2015.
MAIN MEASURES: Use and perceptions of physician rat-
ing websites.
KEY RESULTS: Fifty-three percent of physicians and 39%
of patients reported visiting a physician rating website at
least once. Physicians reported higher levels of agreement
with the accuracy of numerical data (53%) and narrative
comments (62%) from health system patient experience
surveys compared to numerical data (36%) and narrative
comments (36%) on independent websites. Patients report-
ed higher levels of agreement with trusting the accuracy of
data obtained from independent websites (57%) compared
to health system patient experience surveys (45%). Twenty-
one percent of physicians and 51% of patients supported
posting narrative comments online for all consumers. The
majority (78%) of physicians believed that posting narrative
comments online would increase physician job stress;
smaller proportions perceived a negative effect on the phy-
sician–patient relationship (46%), health care overuse
(34%), and patient-reported experiences of care (33%). Over
one-fourth of patients (29%) believed that posting narrative
comments would cause them to be less open.
CONCLUSIONS: Physicians and patients have different
views on whether independent or health system physician
rating websites are the more reliable source of informa-
tion. Their views on whether such data should be shared
on public websites are also discordant.
KEY WORDS: quality improvement; patient satisfaction; patient
engagement; consumer health; doctor–patient relationships.
J Gen Intern Med 32(6):626–31
DOI: 10.1007/s11606-017-3982-5
© Society of General Internal Medicine 2017
INTRODUCTION
Patient desire for information about their physicians has helped
fuel the increasing availability of online ratings of individual
physicians. There are two types of physician rating websites that
differ in how they source their ratings of physicians. One type
includes websites by private companies such as Healthgrades.com
that report crowd-sourced data collected among online users
(Bindependent websites^).1,2 Another type includes websites by
health systems that report data collected from patients with recent
office visits or hospitalizations as part of internal patient experi-
ence surveys (Bhealth system websites^).3
Independent websites traditionally include both numerical
ratings and free-text narrative comments. The ability of the
websites to gather and present real-time data in a manner that
many Internet users have become accustomed to is quite
attractive. However, these websites are currently limited, as
few physicians are reviewed on the websites, and the number
of ratings per physician is small.4 In addition, the content of
the ratings and comments may be flawed, in that the patients
who choose to post reviews may not be representative of the
patient population for a given physician.
In response to the limitations of independent websites, a few
health systems have begun to post their internal patient expe-
rience survey results at the physician level to provide more
information to patients. Numerical ratings and free-text narra-
tive comments have been collected from standardized health
system patient experience surveys for years as part of internal
quality improvement programs.5,6 Numerical ratings from
these surveys have been available online for years, but only
at the hospital or physician group practice level. Health sys-
tems are just beginning to post these numerical ratings at the
individual physician level, and some are also posting narrative
comments about individual physicians obtained from these
surveys.7 These data have the advantage of using a standard-
ized survey [Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers
and Systems (CAHPS®)] and systematic sampling based on
interaction with the physician to better represent the patient
Received June 27, 2016
Revised November 2, 2016
Accepted December 30, 2016
Published online February 1, 2017
626
 population using a combination of phone, mail, and email.8
However, the source of these data may be less clear to patients
searching for physician information online and, similar to the
case with independent websites, the sample sizes may be
insufficient for reliable reporting at the individual physi-
cian level.
The trend toward implementing physician rating websites
raises important questions about how they are used, the per-
ceptions of numerical ratings versus narrative comments, and
the potential consequences of such websites from the perspec-
tive of both patients and physicians. Previous research has
focused only on independent websites, where approximately
one-fourth of patients reported using them,1 and physicians
reported concerns about the representativeness and impact of
the data on these websites.9
We surveyed patients and physicians within a large account-
able care organization to examine their perceptions of both
independent and health system websites, including the report-
ed use of, trust in, and potential consequences of both numer-
ical ratings and narrative comments.
METHODS
Study Design
We conducted two cross-sectional surveys in August 2015: a
web-based survey for physicians and a mailed survey for
patients. Our surveys assessed 1) the use of physician rating
websites, 2) the perceived accuracy of (physicians) or trust in
(patients) the numerical rating scores and narrative comments,
3) support for making the numerical rating scores and narra-
tive comments obtained from health system patient experience
surveys publicly available, and 4) the perceived impact of
publishing numerical rating scores and narrative comments
from health system patient experience surveys. This study
was deemed exempt from review by the Partners Human
Research Committee.
Settings and Participants
Surveyed physicians worked within a large healthcare organi-
zation that included two academic hospitals, three community
hospitals, and affiliated ambulatory clinics. We emailed sur-
veys to all 1936 physicians identified using health system
administrative databases as practicing at four of the five hos-
pitals or affiliated ambulatory clinics (one academic hospital
and its affiliated ambulatory clinics opted out of the physician
survey due to competing demands). We excluded residents,
fellows, and physicians who had not provided patient care in
the previous 6 months. We mailed surveys to a random sample
of 1500 patients who were over 30 years old (300 per hospital
and affiliated ambulatory clinics) and who had at least one
hospitalization or ambulatory clinic visit during May 2015.
We excluded adults under 30 years of age, as these younger,
healthier patients have fewer health care visits and may be less
likely to visit physician rating websites. Neither physicians nor
patients received an incentive for survey completion.
Survey Development and Implementation
We developed and pilot tested the instruments via one-on-one
cognitive interviewing10 with 10 patients and 10 physicians.
We administered the physician survey using the web-based
REDCap data management and survey tool,11 delivering three
email reminders to non-responders at weekly intervals, achiev-
ing a 43% response rate (828/1936). No statistically signifi-
cant variation was found in physician response rates across
hospitals (p < 0.05). Our final sample size was 808 after ex-
cluding 20 physicians who reported not having provided any
patient care in the past 6 months. We administered the patient
survey using a paper mailing, with one follow-up mailing to
non-responders, achieving a 34% response rate (494/1461,
after excluding 39 patients whose mailing addresses were no
longer valid or who were deceased). We were unable to link
patients to hospitals to determine patient response by
institution.
Outcomes and Measurements
Use of Physician Rating Websites. Physicians reported (yes or
no) whether they had ever visited a physician rating website to
find reviews about themselves. Patients reported (yes or no)
whether they had searched for reviews about physicians
online.
Accuracy of or Trust in the Numerical Rating Scores and
Narrative Comments. Using a five-point scale (Bstrongly
disagree^, Bsomewhat disagree^, Bneutral^, Bsomewhat
agree^, Bstrongly agree^), physicians who had been exposed
to numerical and/or open-ended comments from independent
websites or health system data reported their level of agree-
ment with the statements BThe numerical ratings [or open-
ended comments] about me on public websites accurately
reflect the quality of care that I provide^ (regarding indepen-
dent websites such as Healthgrades.com) and BThe numerical
ratings [or open-ended comments] from patient experience
surveys accurately reflect the quality of care that I provide^
(regarding health system patient experience data).
Using the same five-point scale, patients reported their level of
agreement with the statements BI trust the reviews that I read
online about doctors^ (regarding independent websites) and BI
would trust the reviews about doctors from standardized patient
surveys if they were posted on the hospital website where the
doctor works^ (regarding health system patient experience data).
Making Physician Ratings Available to the Public. Using the
same five-point scale from Bstrongly disagree^ to Bstrongly
agree^, physicians reported their level of support for making
health system survey data available at three levels: among staff
in their own clinical practice, among staff across their entire
health care organization, and open to the public on their health
system’s website. Patients reported their level of support for
627
Holliday et al.: Views on Public Physician Rating Websites
JGIM
 making health system survey data available online using the
same five-point scale.
Perceived Impact of Publishing Numerical Ratings and
Narrative Comments About Physicians. Using a five-point
scale (Bvery negative effect^, Bsomewhat negative effect^,
Bneutral^, Bsomewhat positive effect^, Bvery positive effect^),
physicians reported the perceived effect of their hospital pub-
lishing numerical ratings and narrative comments from patient
experience surveys online with regard to 1) the physician–
patient relationship, 2) patient-reported experiences of care, 3)
over-utilization of health care, and 4) physician job stress.
Patients used a five-point scale (Bstrongly disagree^,
Bsomewhat disagree^, Bneutral^, Bsomewhat agree^,
Bstrongly agree^) to respond to the statements BI would be
less open with my anonymous written comments [number
ratings] about the care I received from my doctor if my
reviews were going to be publicly available on the Internet
(even though my name would not be listed).^
Statistical Analysis
We fit two separate multivariable logistic regression models
with the dependent variable defined as ever visiting a physi-
cian rating website and the independent variables including
either physician characteristics or patient characteristics col-
lected via survey. The physician model fit age as a continuous
variable, and categorical variables included physician sex,
presence of ambulatory clinic time, and specialty (Bprimary
care^, Bmedical specialty^, Bsurgery^, and Bobstetrics/
gynecology^ relative to Bother^). The patient model fit age
as a continuous variable, and categorical variables included
patient sex, race (black, Asian, Hispanic, and other, relative to
white), presence of college-level education, health status
(Bvery good^, Bgood^, Bfair^, and Bpoor^ relative to
Bexcellent^), and access to the Internet on most days of the
week. We used generalized estimating equations to adjust
standard errors for clustering of physicians by hospitals. We
calculated 95% confidence intervals for the descriptive survey
data. All analyses were conducted using SAS Enterprise
Guide version 4.3 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC). Unanswered
questions were excluded from the analyses.
RESULTS
Respondent Characteristics
Among physician respondents, the average age was 49 years,
28% reported having only inpatient clinical time, 41% report-
ed having only ambulatory clinic time, and the mean number
of clinic sessions per week was four (Table 1). The most
frequent specialties were primary care (27%) and medical
specialists (26%).
Among patient respondents, the average age was 66 years,
the majority were female (63%) and white (87%), attended
college (79%), and reported access to the Internet on most
days of the week (85%, Table 2). Less than one-third (28%) of
patients reported having previously completed a hospital pa-
tient experience survey.
Use of Physician Rating Websites
Both physicians (53%) and patients (39%) reported having
visited a physician rating website at least once. In the physi-
cian logistic regression model, characteristics associated with
greater odds of visiting a website included decreasing age in
years (OR 1.03, 95% CI 1.02–1.03), having ambulatory clin-
ical time (OR 2.1, 95 CI 1.4–3.2), and practicing in a surgical
specialty (OR 1.4, 95% CI 1.2–1.7) or obstetrics/gynecology
(OR 1.1, 95% CI 1.0–1.3). Physician sex was not associated
with visiting a website.
Patient characteristics associated with greater odds of visit-
ing a website included decreasing age in years (OR 1.04, 95%
Table 1 Physician Respondent Characteristics
Physicians
(n = 808)
Sociodemographic characteristics
Mean age, years (SD)
49.0 (11.4)
Male, n (%)
413 (55)
Clinical characteristics
Primary clinical specialty, n (%)
Primary care
208 (27)
Medical specialty
200 (26)
Surgery
143 (19)
Obstetrics/gynecology
47 (6)
Other
161 (21)
Clinical practice, n (%)
Inpatient only
228 (28)
Ambulatory only
332 (41)
Mean clinical sessions per week, n (SD)
4.6 (2.6)
Table 2 Patient Respondent Characteristics
Patients
(n = 494)
Sociodemographic characteristics
Mean age, years (SD)
65.8 (14.2)
Male, n (%)
177 (37)
Race/ethnicity, n (%)
White
420 (87)
Black
26 (5)
Asian
15 (3)
American Indian/Alaska Native
5 (1)
Other
16 (3)
Hispanic
17 (4)
Highest level of education, n (%)
Grade
8 or less
10 (2)
Some high school, but did not graduate
18 (4)
High school graduate or GED
72 (15)
Some college or 2-year degree
127 (26)
4-year college graduate
89 (18)
More than 4-year college degree
167 (35)
Access to Internet on most days, n (%)
414 (85)
Clinical characteristics
Overall health rating, n (%)
Excellent
75 (15)
Very good
146 (30)
Good
150 (31)
Fair
102 (21)
Poor
17 (3)
628
Holliday et al.: Views on Public Physician Rating Websites
JGIM
 CI 1.02–1.06), female sex (OR 1.9, 95% CI 1.2–3.0), college
education or above (OR 2.6, 95% CI 1.2–5.3), and regular
Internet access (OR 7.0, 95% CI 2.0–24.1). Patient race and
health status were not associated with visiting a website.
Accuracy of or Trust in Physician Rating Websites.
Physicians more frequently reported that they Bsomewhat^
or Bstrongly^ agreed with the accuracy of numerical data
(53%, 95% CI 46–60%) and narrative comments (62%, 95%
CI 55–68%) obtained from health system patient experience
surveys compared to numerical data (36%, 95% CI 31–41%)
and narrative comments (36%, 95% CI 30–42%) on independent
websites (Table 3). Patients more frequently reported that they
Bsomewhat^ or Bstrongly^ agreed with trusting the accuracy of
data obtained from independent websites (57%, 95% CI 49–
64%) compared to data from health system patient experience
surveys (45%, 95% CI 41–50%, Table 3).
Making Physician Ratings Available to the
Public
Physicians were less likely to support sharing of both numer-
ical ratings and narrative comments obtained from health
system patient experience surveys in increasingly public
venues, with 21% Bstrongly^ or Bsomewhat^ supporting pub-
lic sharing of narrative comments (Fig. 1). In contrast to
physicians, one-half of patients Bstrongly^ or Bsomewhat^
supported making numerical ratings and narrative comments
obtained from health system patient experience surveys avail-
able to the public.
Perceived Impact of Publishing Numerical
Rating Scores and Narrative Comments
The majority of physicians (78%) reported that making nu-
merical ratings and narrative comments from health system
patient experience surveys publicly available would have a
Bsomewhat^ or Bvery^ negative effect on physician job stress.
Smaller proportions of physicians perceived a similarly
negative effect on the physician–patient relationship (46%),
health care overuse (34%), and patient-reported experience of
care (33%, Table 4).
Slightly more than one-fourth of patients reported that the
publication of their narrative comments (29%) or numerical
ratings (27%) from health system patient experience surveys
would cause them to be less open about their feedback.
DISCUSSION
In a survey of physician and patient views on physician rating
websites, we found contrasting views between physicians and
patients in their support for making ratings of physicians
publicly available and in the accuracy of information based
on the source. Physicians were less supportive than patients of
sharing data publicly, and more commonly supported the
Table 3 Physician and Patient Views on Accuracy of or Trust in Physician Rating Website Content
Strongly or somewhat
agree
N (%)
[95% CI]
Physician*
Independent website
The numerical ratings about me on public websites
accurately reflect the quality of care that I provide.
123 (36)
[31–41]
The open-ended comments about me on public websites
accurately reflect the quality of care that I provide.
102 (36)
[30–42]
Health system patient experience data
The numerical ratings from patient experience surveys
accurately reflect the quality of care that I provide.
104 (53)
[46–60]
The open-ended comments from patient experience
surveys accurately reflect the quality of care that I provide.
136 (62)
[55–68]
Patient
Independent website†
I trust the reviews that I read online about doctors.
107 (57)
[49–64]
Health system patient experience data
I would trust the reviews about doctors from standardized
patient surveys if they were posted on the hospital
website where the doctor works.
212 (45)
[41–50]
*Among physicians reporting having viewed such ratings and comments
†Among patients reporting having read individual physician ratings on independent websites such as Healthgrades.com
Figure 1 Physician and patient support for sharing physician rating
data. Physician and patient ratings indicating very strong or
somewhat strong support for sharing of data collected on health
system patient experience surveys.
629
Holliday et al.: Views on Public Physician Rating Websites
JGIM
 accuracy of data from health system patient experience sur-
veys compared to data from independent websites. Neither
physicians nor patients expressed a difference in their support
for sharing data publicly based on whether it included numer-
ical ratings or narrative comments. This latter finding is par-
ticularly important as health system leaders are actively debat-
ing whether to publish narrative comments online.
The usage of physician rating websites by patients appears
to have grown from one-fourth in 2012 to above one-third of
patients.1 We found that decreasing age, female sex, having a
college education, and reporting regular Internet access were
associated with a higher odds of visiting physician rating
websites, consistent with previous research.12 This suggests
that as health system leaders and independent websites make
ratings of physicians publicly available, strategies to make
these websites more accessible to older, poor, less educated
populations should be considered.
We found that over one-half of physicians reported having
visited a website to look up reviews about themselves. Physi-
cians practicing in the ambulatory setting, as opposed to
inpatient care, demonstrated a higher odds ratio for visiting a
rating websites. This is likely a reflection of the fact that
patients have more choice regarding the selection of ambula-
tory physicians than do inpatient physicians; hence, ambula-
tory physicians are more interested in how they are portrayed
in online venues.
Our survey further expands the literature by assessing phy-
sicians’ and patients’ opinions of physician rating websites
based on the source of information. Physicians largely sup-
ported the accuracy of data obtained from health system
patient experience surveys over independent websites, likely
due to a longer historical experience with such data, as well as
the scientific benefits related to the standardized sampling
frames, larger sample sizes, and use of standardized tools.
Patients, however, more commonly reported trust in the data
obtained on independent websites compared to that of health
system patient experiences surveys. It is possible that patient
views reflect increased familiarity with other crowd-sourced
review processes such as Yelp.com and Amazon.com. In
addition, patients may lack trust in health system websites
due to concerns regarding bias, as health systems are publish-
ing reviews regarding their own physicians. Health systems
seeking to publish patient experience survey data will need to
work to engage their patients’ trust in what is very likely a new
and complicated data source to them.
Interestingly, we did not identify notable differences be-
tween physician or patient support for numerical ratings com-
pared to narrative comments. Health system leaders should
consider including both types of reviews on websites in the
future, since both are equally supported, and the narrative
comments are likely to provide additional context for patients.
Publishing health system patient experience data publicly is
not without significant challenges. Physicians were less sup-
portive than patients about sharing data publicly, perhaps
related to the finding that over three-fourths of physicians felt
that posting these data would increase job stress. Adding to job
stress might be that physicians may receive only a limited
number of reviews and therefore have concern about a non-
representative sample of reviews being published publicly.
Physician burnout is a real problem that is leading to threats
to patient safety, as well as physician turnover, and other
challenges to the delivery of high quality care.13 As health
systems seek to make patient experiences of care data publicly
available, careful attention must be paid to establishing re-
sources to support physicians in change management. This
should include allowing physicians to become comfortable
with the likely positive nature of these data before they are
published,14 as well as permitting physicians to play an ongoing
role in how the data are released and displayed—responding to
negative comments, advocating for removal of inappropriate
comments, and agreeing on a minimum number of reviews
required per physician in order to publish reviews online. Over
one-third of physicians also expressed concern about over-
utilization of health care, their concern likely being that physi-
cians will accede to patient requests for unnecessary or margin-
ally necessary tests to avoid poor ratings. Health system leaders
should consider monitoring the impact of public ratings of
physicians on over-utilization of care.
Patients also expressed important concerns related to public
availability of physician ratings from health system patient
experience surveys. Over one-fourth of patients reported that
publishing patient experience data publicly would affect their
ability to given open feedback. Survey developers and
policymakers need to consider how this might affect the
results of pay-for-performance programs and other initiatives
that rely on historical trends and relative comparisons between
Table 4 Physician Perceived Impact of Health System Physician Rating Websites
Physicians responded to the question:
BAs health systems make numerical
ratings and open-ended comments
about individual physicians publicly
available, what effect do you believe
it will have on the following aspects of care?^
Very or somewhat
negative effect, N (%)
No effect,
N (%)
Very or somewhat
positive effect, N (%)
Physician job stress
603 (78)
110 (14)
65 (8)
Physician–patient relationship
358 (46)
212 (27)
208 (27)
Over-utilization of health care
263 (34)
450 (58)
65 (8)
Patient-reported experiences of care
260 (33)
246 (32)
271 (35)
630
Holliday et al.: Views on Public Physician Rating Websites
JGIM
 health systems that may or may not publicly share ratings of
physicians.
Despite the challenges highlighted by our survey, making
patient experience data publicly available has the potential to
improve quality and engage patients as better-informed con-
sumers. Patients clearly desire this information, with over one-
half of patients in our survey supporting the online availability
of health system patient experience data. One-fourth of phy-
sicians in our study felt that sharing ratings of physicians
online would improve the physician–patient relationship, and
one-third anticipated improvements in patient experiences of
care measures. Such improvement has been the anecdotal
experience of other health systems that have published
physician-level numerical ratings and narrative comments
online.3
Our findings have limitations. Our survey was conducted
within a single accountable care organization in Massachu-
setts, and therefore the findings may not be generalizable to
other systems. In addition, our survey response rates were less
than 50% for both physicians and patients. However, we did
capture the viewpoints of a large number of both physicians
and patients. While we conducted extensive pre-survey cog-
nitive testing of our instruments, the questions represented
theoretical constructs, as many of the patients and physicians
had not been exposed to the public release of patient experi-
ence survey ratings or narrative comments. Specifically, our
findings regarding patient trust in health system data and
physician and patient perceived impact of publishing health
system data online were hypothetical in nature. The account-
able care organization that served as our study site has not
posted the results of routinely collected patient experience
data, and it is possible that physicians’ and patients’ views
would be different with such exposure. Finally, our study
focused on patients over 30 years old, and therefore may not
represent the views of those younger than 30 years.
CONCLUSIONS
Our study adds to our understanding of how physicians and
patients perceive independent and health system physician
rating websites, including the reported use of, trust in, and
potential consequences of both numerical ratings and narrative
comments. Physicians and patients have discordant view-
points, with physicians expressing more trust in data on health
system websites, and patients expressing more trust in data on
independent websites. Their views on whether such data
should be shared on public websites also differ, with more
patients versus physicians expressing support for making
health system patient experience data available publicly. Our
study stresses the importance of monitoring the impact of
independent and health system physician rating websites on
both physicians and patients.
Acknowledgements: Funder: Foster Family Fund
Prior presentation: Society of General Internal Medicine Annual
Meeting, 5/13/2016.
Corresponding Author: Alison M. Holliday, MPH; Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA (e-mail: alison_holliday@hms.harvard.edu).
Compliance with Ethical Standards:
Conflict of Interest: The authors declare that they do not have a
conflict of interest.
REFERENCES
1.
Hanauer DA, Zheng K, Singer DC, Gebremariam A, Davis M. Public
awareness, perception, and use of online physician rating sites. JAMA.
2014;311(7):734–5.
2.
Emmert M, Sander U, Pisch F. Eight questions about physician-
rating
websites:
a
systematic
review.
J
Med
Internet
Res.
2013;15(2):e24.
3.
Lee TH. Online Reviews Could Help Fix Medicine. Har Bus Rev. June 3,
2014. Available at: https://hbr.org/2014/06/online-reviews-could-help-
fix-medicine/. Accessed December 20, 2016
4.
Lagu T, Hannon NS, Rothberg MB, Lindenauer PK. Patients’ evalua-
tions of health care providers in the era of social networking. J Gen Intern
Med. 2010;25(9):942–946.
5.
Anhang Price R, Elliott MN, Zaslavsky AM, et al. Examining the role of
patient experience surveys in measuring health care quality. Med Care
Res Rev. 2014;71(5):522–54.
6.
Tsai TC, Orav EJ, Jha AK. Patient satisfaction and quality of surgical
care in US hospitals. Ann Surg. 2015;261(1):2–8.
7.
Schlesinger M, Grob R, Shaller D, et al. Taking Patients’ Narratives
about Clinicians from Anecdote to Science. N Engl J Med.
2015;373(7):675–9.
8.
Goldstein E, Farquhar M, Crofton C, Darby C, Garfinkel S. Measuring
hospital care from the patients’ perspective: An overview of the
CAHPS
hospital
survey
development
process.
H
Serv
Res.
2005;40(6):1977–1995.
9.
Patel S, Cain R, Neailey K. General Practitioners’ Concerns About
Online Patient Feedback: Findings From a Descriptive Exploratory
Qualitative Study in England. J Med Internet Res 2015.
10.
Willis GB. Cognitive Interviewing: A Tool for Improving Questionnaire
Design. Sage Publications; 2005.
11.
REDCap Research Electronic Data Capture. Available at: https://project-
redcap.org/. Accessed on December 20, 2016.
12.
Terlutter R, Bidmon S, Rottl J. Who uses physician-rating websites?
Differences in sociodemographic variables, psychographic variables, and
health status of users and nonusers of physician-rating websites. J Med
Internet Res. 2014;16(3):e97.
13.
West C. Physician Well-Being: Expanding the Triple Aim. J Gen Intern
Med. 2016.
14.
Lopez A, Detz A, Ratanawongsa N, Sarkar U. What patients say about
their doctors online: a qualitative content analysis. J Gen Intern Med.
2012;27(6):685–92.
631
Holliday et al.: Views on Public Physician Rating Websites
JGIM
