 Reduced Levels of Mercury in First Baby Haircuts
of Autistic Children
Amy S. Holmes,1 Mark F. Blaxill,2 and Boyd E. Haley3
1Baton Rouge, Louisiana, USA
2SafeMinds, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
3Chemistry Department, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, USA
Reported rates of autism have increased sharply in the United
States and the United Kingdom. One possible factor underly-
ing these increases is increased exposure to mercury through
thimerosal-containing vaccines, but vaccine exposures need to be
evaluated in the context of cumulative exposures during gestation
and early infancy. Differential rates of postnatal mercury elimina-
tion may explain why similar gestational and infant exposures pro-
duce variable neurological effects. First baby haircut samples were
obtained from 94 children diagnosed with autism using Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th edition (DSM IV)
criteria and 45 age- and gender-matched controls. Information on
diet, dental amalgam fillings, vaccine history, Rho D immunoglob-
ulin administration, and autism symptom severity was collected
through a maternal survey questionnaire and clinical observation.
Hair mercury levels in the autistic group were 0.47 ppm versus
3.63 ppm in controls, a significant difference. The mothers in the
autistic group had significantly higher levels of mercury exposure
through Rho D immunoglobulin injections and amalgam fillings
thancontrolmothers.Withintheautisticgroup,hairmercurylevels
varied significantly across mildly, moderately, and severely autistic
children, with mean group levels of 0.79, 0.46, and 0.21 ppm, re-
spectively. Hair mercury levels among controls were significantly
correlated with the number of the mothers’ amalgam fillings and
their fish consumption as well as exposure to mercury through
childhood vaccines, correlations that were absent in the autistic
group. Hair excretion patterns among autistic infants were signif-
icantly reduced relative to control. These data cast doubt on the
efficacy of traditional hair analysis as a measure of total mercury
exposure in a subset of the population. In light of the biological
plausibility of mercury’s role in neurodevelopmental disorders, the
present study provides further insight into one possible mechanism
by which early mercury exposures could increase the risk of autism.
Keywords
Amalgam, Autism, Hair, Mercury, Thimerosal
Received 8 October 2002; accepted 14 March 2003.
The Autism Research Institute and The Wallace Foundation pro-
vided funding. The authors’ thanks also extend to David Quig of Doc-
tor’s Data Inc. for hair analysis support and to Julie Barker for quanti-
tative analysis support.
Address correspondence to Mark F. Blaxill, 22 Fayerweather Street,
Cambridge MA 02138, USA. E-mail: Blaxill.mark@bcg.com
Autism has been defined by symptoms rather than causes
since it was first characterized by Kanner in the 1940s (Eisenberg
and Kanner 1956). Since Rutter’s (Rutter 1978) further elabora-
tion of diagnostic standards in 1976, the prevailing standards for
diagnosis (Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disor-
ders, 3rd edition [DSM III] 1980; 3rd edition—revised [DSM-
III-R] 1987; 4th edition [DSM IV] 1994) have included impair-
ment in three domains: social relatedness, communication, and
behavior. In a small number of cases, either genetic (Wahlstrom
et al. 1986; Bolton et al. 2002; Steffenburg et al. 1996) or en-
vironmental (Stromland et al. 1994; Williams and Hersh 1997;
Aronson, Hagberg, and Gillberg 1997) causes have been
established, but the vast majority of cases remain idiopathic.
The need to account for the relative contribution of genetic
and environmental causes has taken on increased importance
in light of possible sharp increases in the incidence of autism.
Early prevalence studies in the United States (Burd, Fisher, and
Kerbeshian1987;Treffert1970;Ritvoetal.1989)andtheUnited
Kingdom (Lotter 1966; Wing and Gould 1979; Deb and Prasad
1994) reported low rates of autism—generally less than 5 per
10,000—among children born before 1990. Studies of popu-
lations born in the 1990s, however, show far higher (Bertrand
et al. 2001; Baird et al. 2000) and increasing (Department of De-
velopmental Services 1999; Kaye, del Melero-Montes, and Jick
2001; Taylor et al. 1999) rates of autism and autism spectrum
disorders (ASDs), in some cohorts as high as 55 per 10,000 for
autism and 80 per 10,000 for ASDs.
These increases clearly point to the rising importance of envi-
ronmental factors and raise the possibility of an etiological role
for toxic exposures: either prenatal, postnatal, or in some cumu-
lative pattern that combines the effect of maternal, gestational,
and infant exposures. One group (Bernard et al. 2001) has hy-
pothesized a causal connection between mercury exposure and
the symptoms of autism.
Until recently, thimerosal, a preservative containing 49.6%
ethyl mercury, was used in three childhood vaccines: hepati-
tis B, Haemophilus influenzae B (Hib), and diphtheria-pertussis-
tetanus (DPT). Hib and hepatitis B were introduced to the U.S.
International Journal of Toxicology, 22:277–285, 2003
Copyright c
� American College of Toxicology
ISSN: 1091-5818 print / 1092-874X online
DOI: 10.1080/10915810390220054
277
 at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on May 25, 2015
ijt.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 278
A. S. HOLMES ET AL.
infant vaccination schedule in October 1990 and November
1991, respectively. In addition, most varieties of Rho D im-
munoglobulin injections, administered to Rh-negative mothers
during pregnancy, contained thimerosal until late in the 1990s.
The Institute of Medicine has investigated the connection
(Stratton, Gable, and McCormick 2001) between mercury ex-
posure from thimerosal-containing vaccines and neurodevelop-
mental disorders, including autism, and found insufficient evi-
dence to accept or reject a causal connection, but concluded that
such a connection was biologically plausible and recommended
a comprehensive research program.
In addition to ethyl mercury, other possible sources of early
mercury exposure include fetal exposures to inorganic mercury
inhaled by the mother from dental amalgam fillings (Drasch
et al. 1994; Vimy et al. 1997) and to methyl mercury intestinally
absorbed as a consequence of maternal fish consumption.
Little is known about the specific patterns of mercury ab-
sorption, distribution, metabolism, or excretion in human in-
fants. The large majority of infants immunized with the full
complement of thimerosal-containing vaccines have not been
diagnosed with an adverse effect, such as neurodevelopmen-
tal delay. Nevertheless, ecological analysis of the timing of the
increases in autism incidence and the increased exposure to mer-
cury in thimerosal-containing vaccines fails to exclude a causal
relationship between the two trends of rising autism incidence
and rising mercury exposure (Blaxill 2001).
Fully prospective studies of the role of mercury exposure
in autism have not yet been designed and even retrospective
studies are highly constrained by availability of relevant biolog-
ical samples. Many families do, however, retain locks of infant
hair, especially the first baby haircut. These samples provide an
opportunity for analysis when other opportunities have passed.
Although hair mercury levels provide only a partial insight into
the excretion patterns of autistic infants, they offer substantial
availability advantages and can provide a useful test of the plau-
sibility of the autism-mercury hypothesis.
In a clinical practice, one of the study authors (ASH) submit-
ted hair samples from autistic patients for commercial labora-
tory testing for toxic metal exposure. Most of these mercury hair
levels were found to be low, contrary to a first-order hypothesis
of heavy metal toxicity in autism. She then asked patients to
submit first baby haircut samples for analysis, thereby testing
a sample that would more accurately reflect early exposures.
With two exceptions (these coming from a different commercial
laboratory than her preferred source and the source used in the
current study), these samples yielded hair mercury levels that
were consistently close to zero.
Basedonthisobservation,andonthepossibilitythatimpaired
mercury excretion might be an important susceptibility factor
underlying recent increases in autism, she expanded her inves-
tigation. She increased the sample of autistic first baby haircut
samples and collected a set of age- and gender-matched con-
trol baby haircut samples. Notably, the control samples were
collected under the condition that the child received all their
childhood vaccinations on schedule, in order that they would
show comparable postnatal exposure levels. Consequently, this
study does not attempt to examine the role of childhood vaccine
exposures in autism. Although there are limits to the design, we
believe that our study effectively examines the null hypothesis of
no differential excretion rates in the hair of infants subsequently
diagnosed with autism.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Patient Recruitment and Profile (Table 1)
All autistic patients were referred to the clinical practice of
ASH with a confirmed diagnosis of DSM IV autism by either a
pediatric neurologist or developmental pediatrician. The mother
of each autistic child was interviewed for exposure information
using a structured survey questionnaire. The autistic children
were between the ages of 2 and 15 at the time of interview, with
a median age of 7. Although the location of primary residence
was slightly skewed to the Midwest and Southeast, in part due
to proximity to the clinical practice, the autistic patients pro-
vided a good cross-section of the different regions of the United
States, with an additional 6% coming from England, Canada,
and Mexico. Boys outnumbered girls, with a male:female ratio
of 3.5:1, consistent with the typical population prevalence in
autism studies (Fombonne 1999).
Conditions of Autistic Baby Hair Collection
Autistic patients sent their baby hair samples directly to Doc-
tor’s Data Inc. (DDI, West Chicago, IL) following DDI’s instruc-
tions for the hair minerals test. First baby haircut samples had
TABLE 1
Study group profiles
Autistic group
Control group
Number of males/
73/21 (3.5:1)
34/11 (3.1:1)
females (ratio)
Median year of birth
1994 (1985–1999) 1994 (1990–1999)
(range)
Median months at baby
17.7 (11–24)
17.8 (12–24)
haircut timing (range)
Residencea
Northeast
15%
22%
Midwest
28%
22%
Southeast
25%
22%
Mountain/Plains/
14%
20%
South Central
West
12 %
13%
International
6%
0%
aNortheast: CT, MA, VT, NY, NJ, PA. Midwest: IL, OH, MI, WI,
MN, MO. Southeast: FL, GA, NC, SC, VA, LA, MS, AL, AR, KY, TN.
Mountain/Plains/South Central: CO, KS, ND, SD, NE, UT, ID, TX,
OK, AZ. West: CA, WA, NV. International: Canada, Mexico, England.
 at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on May 25, 2015
ijt.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 AUTISTIC INFANTS SHOW REDUCED MERCURY HAIR LEVELS
279
been collected by the parents between 11 and 24 months of
age, with a mean age at haircut of 17.7 months. The minimum
sample amount was 0.25 g. Before deciding to standardize on
a single testing source, a minority of hair samples (20 in all)
were collected in the course of clinical treatment of additional
autistic patients and sent to a separate commercial laboratory—
not DDI—that performs similar testing. These results were re-
viewed by the clinic but excluded from this study. Results from
this other laboratory were similar to those from DDI, showing
low hair mercury levels in autistic patients. Two of the 20 ex-
cluded test results included mercury levels that were higher than
the reported levels for any of the autistic subjects in the present
study.
Controls Recruitment and Baby Hair Collection
Normal controls were recruited through an appeal to autism
parent groups and through autism newsletters. None of these
control children or parents were interviewed in person, but each
of the mothers was interviewed over the telephone. Hair collec-
tion procedures were the same as for the autistic patients. The
inclusion criteria for controls included the following: no devel-
opmental disabilities or chronic illness of any kind, no siblings
on the autistic spectrum, and completion of the recommended
childhood vaccinations on schedule. These controls were re-
cruited with the objective of matching the autistic patients in
terms of gender and age profile (see Table 1). Although not a
condition of recruitment, the state of residence was quite simi-
lar to the autistic sample, minimizing the possibility of regional
exposure bias.
Hair Analysis Methods
Laboratory testing was conducted using Inductively Coupled
Plasma Mass Spectroscopy (ICP-MS) in blinded fashion to the
clinical status of the hair provider. Hair specimens were col-
lected based on retained samples of a minimum required amount
of 0.25 g of hair from the child’s first haircut. In the labora-
tory, the hair specimens were further cut and washed using a
modified method developed by the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) (Ryabukin 1998). Aliquots (about 0.2 g) of the
washed hair samples were digested with nitric acid in a CEM
(CEM Corporation, Matthews, NC, USA) microwave oven with
temperature feedback control. All element determinations were
made on an ICP-MS (Elan 5000; Perkin-Elmer, Norwalk, CT,
USA) using a flow injection sample uptake system (FIAS 400;
Perkin-Elmer). Accuracy was assessed and verified using a hair
standard reference material (SRM) from China (GBW 09101,
30 elements). Puchyr et al. (1998) have described this method
and analytical performance in detail.
Clinical Observation of Subjects Based on Clinic Visits
All previously diagnosed autistic patients were also observed
by ASH in a clinical setting. A repetitive diagnostic interview
was not conducted, but an overall assessment of each child was
performed and each was assigned an autism severity level: se-
vere, moderate, or mild. The definitions for these categories were
as follows: (a) severe—no expressive language at all, very lit-
tle evidence of receptive language, constant divergent gaze in
presence of clinician or parent, no toy play, “people treated as
objects”; (b) mild—some expressive language, including short
phrase speech and ability to communicate wants and needs,
responsive to commands indicating functional receptive lan-
guage, some eye contact, some appropriate toy play, obvious
connection with parents and/or other family members; and
(c) moderate—subjects not meeting criteria for either the se-
vere or mild groups.
Data Collection for Other Maternal Exposures
ASH interviewed the mothers of autistic and normal chil-
dren to obtain information on mercury exposure during and af-
ter gestation. Exposure measures were developed from survey
questions in four categories: (a) maternal amalgams during preg-
nancy were estimated by direct observation by the mother (either
using a mirror, or counted by her husband) of amalgam surfaces
at time of interview less new fillings since the gestation period;
(b) exposures through Rho D immunoglobulin injections dur-
ing pregnancy were self-reported by the mother; (c) childhood
vaccinations, including the timing of exposures to hepatitis B,
DPT, and Hib vaccines, were obtained based on a joint review
of the child’s pediatrician’s records; and (d) fish consumption
during pregnancy in four categories was estimated using a four-
level scale. The four levels estimated were based on the relative
frequency of meals in which fish was consumed: “heavy” was
once a week or more, “moderate” was less than weekly and more
than monthly, “little” was less than once a month, with the final
category being “none.”
Statistical Analysis
Data were analyzed using Microsoft Excel version 9.0.3821
SR-1. Comparison of distributions of autistics and controls was
made using the two-tailed test. Multiple-regression analysis on
the normal hair sample was performed with the hair mercury
level as the dependent variable and three independent variables.
For amalgam fillings, we used the square of the number of fill-
ings. We chose an exponential curve for several reasons: moth-
ers with more fillings would be likely to have larger fillings
and larger exposed surface areas per filling; multiple amalgams
would be more likely to react with each other and release higher
levels of mercury due to galvanism or abrasion; higher levels
of amalgam exposure could lead to greater retention in maternal
tissue; and mothers with large numbers of fillings would be more
likely to have had recent dental work done. In addition, the ex-
ponential relationship produced consistently superior statistical
correlations. For fish diets, we assigned a monthly number of fish
mealsforeachresponselevel:5permonthfor“heavy”consump-
tion, 2.5 per month for “moderate” consumption, 0.5 for “little”
consumption, and 0 for no consumption. For vaccine exposure,
 at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on May 25, 2015
ijt.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 280
A. S. HOLMES ET AL.
FIGURE 1
A plot of the birth hair mercury levels of nonautistic versus
autistic children. Solid circles represent individual female
subjects and open circles represent individual male subjects.
we used the total number of micrograms received through all
thimerosal-containing vaccines.
ANALYSIS OF DATA AND RESULTS
Hair Mercury: Autistics Versus Controls
Figure 1 shows the results of the analysis comparing the ex-
cretion of mercury in baby hair of autistic children and normal
controls. The hair levels of mercury in autistic children were sig-
nificantly lower than in controls (p < .0000004), with a mean of
0.47 ppm compared to a mean of 3.63 ppm in the control group.
Rho D Immunoglobulin and Amalgam Exposure: Autistics
Versus Controls
Despite the lower levels of mercury excretion in baby hair,
the mothers of autistic children had higher exposures to mer-
cury when pregnant with their autistic child than did normal
controls. Table 2 shows that the number of Rho D immunoglob-
ulin injections received by mothers in the autistic group was
significantly higher than the mothers of controls (0.52 versus
0.09; p < .0000004). Forty-six percent of the autistic mother
received Rho D immunoglobulin injections as compared to 9%
of the control mothers. In addition, the number of amalgam
fillings present in the mouths of mothers of autistic children
exceeded the number of fillings for mothers of controls (8.35
versus 6.60; p < .01). Thirty-four percent of the mothers in the
autistic sample had 10 or more amalgam fillings as compared to
18% of the controls.
Hair Mercury Levels Within Autistic Population: Mild
Versus Moderate Versus Severe
Within the autistic sample, the level of mercury in hair was in-
versely correlated with the symptom severity level. Figure 2 dis-
plays the distribution of hair levels across the three subgroups of
autistic children. The mean hair mercury content was 0.21 ppm
TABLE 2
Exposure differences in autistic group as compared to controls
Autistic group
Control group
(N = 94)
(N = 45)
Mercury levels in first baby
0.47 (±0.28)a
3.63 (±3.56)
haircut (ppm, mean ± SD)
Rho D immunoglobulin shots
0.53 (±0.67)b
0.09 (±0.29)
during pregnancy (number
per mother, mean ± SD)
Amalgam fillings during
8.35 (±3.43)c
6.60 (±3.55)
pregnancy (number per
mother, mean ± SD)
aStatistically different from control group (p < .0000004).
bStatistically different from control group (p < .0000004).
cStatistically different from control group (p < .01).
in the severe group, 0.46 ppm in the moderate group (severe
versus moderate: p < .000002), and 0.71 ppm in the mild
group (moderate versus mild: p < .0004; severe versus mild:
p < .00000003). Even these stark differences were somewhat
moderated by a clear trend toward reduced mercury levels in
female hair within the mild group.
Differences Within Autistic Population: Gender
and Developmental Patterns
Table 3 provides information on other differences between
the three subgroups within the autistic sample. In addition to the
differences in hair mercury levels, the gender distribution varied
substantially across the three subgroups. The mild group had
the highest percentage of females, at 56%, whereas the moder-
ate and severe groups had 14% and 4% females, respectively. In
Figure 2, it is also apparent that the female children in the mild
FIGURE 2
A plot of the birth hair mercury levels in autistic children based
on the clinical severity of the disease. Solid circles represent
individual female subjects and open circles represent
individual male subjects.
 at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on May 25, 2015
ijt.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 AUTISTIC INFANTS SHOW REDUCED MERCURY HAIR LEVELS
281
TABLE 3
Differences within autistic population
Mild group
Moderate group
Severe group
(N = 27)
(N = 43)
(N = 24)
Mercury levels in first baby
0.71 ppm (±0.3)
0.46 ppm (±0.19)a
0.21 ppm (±0.18)a,b
haircut (ppm, mean ± SD)
Males: females
12:15
37:6
23:1
Percent regressive
100
93
21
aStatistically different from mildly autistic group (p < .0004).
bStatistically different from mildly autistic group (p < .000000003).
cStatistically different from moderately autistic group (p < .0000002).
groupmadeupover90%ofthechildrenbelowthemeanandonly
21% of the children above the mean. In addition, the develop-
mental patterns varied strongly across the three subgroups. The
severe group was the most likely to have demonstrated consis-
tency in symptoms from birth, only 21% displayed any pattern of
developmental regression. By contrast, the vast majority of the
mild and moderate groups reported some kind of developmental
regression.
Correlation Between Exposure and Hair Levels
In the control sample, the levels of mercury in baby hair
were significantly explained by gestational mercury exposures.
Figure 3 demonstrates that a single exposure variable, mater-
nal amalgam fillings, was strongly correlated with mercury hair
levels in control children, but not in autistic children. Several dif-
ferent regression models were applied—including one, two, and
FIGURE 3
A plot of the birth hair mercury levels of nonautistic (control)
children versus autistics compared to the grouped numbers of
dental amalgams of the birth mothers. N equals the number of
subjects and the control-to-autistic ratio for each subset is
presented.
three independent variable regressions—and the three-variable
equation shown in Figure 4 provided the best statistical fit. Ma-
ternal amalgam fillings were significantly correlated with mer-
cury levels in all regressions and on their own explain over
60% of the difference in normal hair levels. Reported maternal
fish consumption during pregnancy is an additional and signifi-
cant contributor to hair mercury levels. Vaccine exposure from
all childhood immunizations also reached significance at the
95% confidence level. By contrast, similar regressions for autis-
tic mercury hair levels (not shown) fail to reach significance
for any exposure variable. Moreover, applying the exposure co-
efficients from the control group to the autistic group yields a
sharply higher rate of predicted excretion levels than the actual
results, whereas the predicted results based on known exposures
inthecontrolgroupareremarkablyclosetotheactualresults(see
Figure 4). This reflects the high explanatory power (R2 = .79)
of the multiple regression model in the control sample.
DISCUSSION
Past Studies Using Hair as a Marker in Autism
Although this is the first analysis of the first baby haircut of
autistic infants, a number of previous studies have measured the
hair contents of autistic subjects. The earliest studies (Wecker
et al. 1985; Shearer et al. 1982; Gentile et al. 1983) analyzed hair
from subjects born before 1981 and only one of these (Wecker
et al. 1985) measured mercury. All of these studies found some
significant differences between autistic and control groups. A
group of autistic subjects averaging 5.7 years of age (Wecker
et al. 1985) showed low hair levels of calcium, magnesium,
copper, manganese, chromium, and lithium, but similar levels of
mercury compared to controls. A group averaging 8 years of age
(Shearer et al. 1982) showed low levels of cadmium excretion.
A third group of unspecified age (Gentile et al. 1983) showed
elevated levels of magnesium and potassium.
A more recent study (Holloway et al. 2001) of 50 autistic
families (no age was specified) investigated both heavy metal ex-
posures and hair levels for the purpose of testing the hypothesis
of different metabolism and/or exposure levels between autistic
 at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on May 25, 2015
ijt.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 282
A. S. HOLMES ET AL.
FIGURE 4
Actual hair levels in autistics and controls are compared to
a predicted value. The predicted value is obtained using
the regression equation for controls: Birth hair mercury
level = (5.60) + 0.04 (amalgam volume(1)) + 1.15 (fish
consumption(2)) + 0.03 (vaccine(3)) R2 = .79. Perfect
prediction of actual hair levels by the regression model is
represented by the dashed line. Filled diamonds
represent individual nonautistic subjects and open circles
represent autistics.
subjects and controls. This study used current, not baby hair,
samples and found slightly reduced levels of mercury and lead
in autistic hair relative to controls and significant differences in
exposure, including increased maternal intake of fish and an in-
creased rate of ear infection in infancy and associated exposure
to antibiotic treatments.
Hair analysis has frequently been used as a measure of mer-
cury exposure. In particular, it has been common practice
(Grandjean et al. 1997, 1998) to measure maternal hair levels as
a marker for mother-to-fetus exposures that could affect subse-
quent brain development. Hair mercury analysis has also been
criticized as a diagnostic tool for treatment (Kales and Goldman
2002), and hair minerals test results from commercial laborato-
ries have been criticized as inconsistent and unreliable. A recent
critical review (Seidel et al. 2001) included the testing source
for this study.
In our view, this recent review offered criticisms that were
applied in an undifferentiated fashion to a group of laboratories
and made no attempt to distinguish between proper and improper
practices within the group. Much of the criticism was justified
in the case of other facilities, because many of the laboratories
examined made use of outdated technologies and exploited their
testing results for commercial purposes, including promotion of
nutritional supplements. Close reading of the analysis shows that
the laboratory used in our analysis used none of the question-
able practices deployed by most other laboratories and was one
of only two laboratories that employ the most advanced (ICP-
MS) testing equipment. We believe that the exemplary practices
of DDI, the advantages of ICP-MS, the specificity of the timing
of our sample collection, the fact that the laboratory was blind
to the clinical status of the samples, and our use of a single, con-
sistently calibrated laboratory protocol all combine to mitigate
any concerns over the reliability of our results.
Infant Mercury Exposure and Autism
Themercuryexposurelevelsininfantsfromtherecommended
U.S. childhood immunization schedule exceeded the threshold
set by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) for most
of the 1990s. This increased level of exposure came about as a
consequence of the addition of two new thimerosal-containing
vaccines, hepatitis B in November 1991 and Hib in October
1990, to the U.S. infant vaccination schedule. For example, a
typical 2-month-old infant would have received an average of
0.25 µg/kg/day if immunized on schedule, as compared with the
EPA threshold safety level of 0.1 µg/kg/day. This average expo-
sure may well understate the severity of these exposures. On the
days of vaccination, the bolus dose of mercury was many times
the threshold. This excess exposure went undetected until the
summer of 1999 when an Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
review identified the problem. Subsequent to this discovery, the
American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) and the Centers for Dis-
ease Control and Prevention (CDC) (1999) issued a joint state-
ment suspending the birth dose of hepatitis B vaccine and recom-
mending the phasing out of thimerosal from all infant vaccines.
The special case of direct human infant exposure to thimerosal
has never been studied. Yet the hypothesized (Bernard et al.
2001) relationship between mercury exposure and autism is
supported by a number of ecological connections: increases in
autism rates in the United States have accompanied increasing
exposure to thimerosal-containing vaccines (Blaxill 2001); in-
creases in autism rates in England (Lotter 1966, Wing and Gould
1979; Deb and Prasad 1994; Baird et al. 2000; Kaye et al. 2001;
Taylor et al. 1999) followed closely on the heels of a change in
the recommended immunization schedule and physician incen-
tive structure (Salisbury and Dittman 1999) that increased the
level of thimerosal exposure in the first four months of life; and
rates of autism rose in Japan’s Fukushima prefecture (Hoshino
et al. 1982) immediately after the 1965 incident in neighbor-
ing Niigata prefecture when an chemical factory released large
amounts of mercury into a local river.
Iatrogenic exposure to mercury has been shown to cause
childhood disease. Mercury used in teething powder prepara-
tions in the first half of the 20th century was identified as the
cause of acrodynia, a serious disease of young children that
puzzled medical professionals for decades. Resistance to the ev-
idence of mercury poisoning delayed full acceptance of the evi-
dence for many years (Dally 1997). There are numerous parallels
between the symptoms of acrodynia and autism, including loss
of sociability and communication skills (Bernard et al. 2001).
Animal Models of Infant Mercury Excretion
Despite the absence of direct observation of mercury toxi-
cokinetics in human infants, there are a number of animal models
 at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on May 25, 2015
ijt.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 AUTISTIC INFANTS SHOW REDUCED MERCURY HAIR LEVELS
283
that provide insight into the differences in the kinetics of mer-
cury between infants and adults. Independent of the effects on
the brain, these models demonstrate that several factors unique
to infants can contribute to reduced excretion capacity.
Mercury is excreted mostly through the feces and is heavily
dependent on the biliary secretion of inorganic mercury trans-
ported into bile by glutathione. Studies in neonatal rats (Ballatori
and Clarkson 1984) have demonstrated reduced bile flow and
glutathione excretion that together contribute to a reduced abil-
ity in infants to excrete methyl mercury. In a range of studies,
research has demonstrated that both milk diets and antibiotic
administration reduce the excretion of mercury (Kostial et al.
1979, 1981; Rowland, Robinson, and Doherty 1984), effects
that are both common and amplified (Kostial et al. 1978) in
suckling animals. The presence of healthy gut flora is criti-
cal (Rowland, Davis, and Grass 1978; Rowland, Robinson, and
Doherty 1984) to the excretion of mercury and early exposure
to mercury has even been shown to alter the composition of gut
flora and promote both antibiotic-resistant and mercury-resistant
strains (Summers et al. 1993). All of these mechanisms suggest
that the infant period is one of both high potential variation in
mercury excretion capacity and increased risk of unintended
consequences arising from mercury exposure.
Mercury Excretion in Human Infants
Who Became Autistic
Our findings are consistent with the hypothesis connecting
mercury exposure and autism. Autistic infants released dramat-
ically lower levels of mercury into hair than control infants. In
our autistic group, this reduced level was not associated with
lower levels of overall exposure, quite the contrary. In many,
though not all, exposure categories, autistic infants experienced
higher levels of mercury exposure. As a matter of design, we
did not attempt to assess the impact of differences in vaccine
exposures, because we only included controls who received a
full exposure to mercury through the thimerosal in vaccines.
Autistic infants in our sample experienced increased expo-
sure levels through maternal Rho D immunoglobulin injections
(the large majority of licensed preparations sold during the study
period used thimerosal as a preservative). Forty-three out of 94,
or 46%, of the children in our sample were exposed to mer-
cury through these injections, as compared to 4 out of 45, or
9%, of controls. Several of the autistic mothers received mul-
tiple injections, which resulted in a mean number of Rho D
immunoglobulin injections in the autistic group of 0.52 injec-
tions per child, as compared to 0.09 among the controls. This
observation is supported by a similar finding of elevated Rh in-
compatibility in mothers of autistic children in a previous study
(Juul-Dam, Townsend, and Courchesne 2001). The level of Rh
incompatibility we observed in our sample, however, is signifi-
cantly greater than the rate observed in mothers in the previous
study, 46% versus 12%. (The prevalence of Rh incompatibility
in our controls was also higher, with a rate of 9% as compared
to 3% in the previous study.) The rate of antenatal prophylaxis
in our sample seems high and may be a result of increased treat-
ment rates of Rh incompatibility as well as increasing frequency
of the practice of antenatal prophylaxis, a relatively recent de-
velopment. Because our study is the second report of elevated
rates of autism in children born to Rh-negative mothers, this is
a finding that deserves further investigation.
Increased numbers of amalgam fillings in the mother has been
associated with increased fetal mercury exposure in several stud-
ies (Drasch et al. 1994; Vimy et al. 1997). Our results suggest
that autistic children received increased exposure through out-
gassing of amalgam fillings than controls. The average level of
amalgam fillings among mothers of autistic children was signif-
icantly greater than controls, with 8.35 fillings per mother in the
autistic group ands 6.6 fillings among control mothers. Mothers
of autistic children were far more likely to have received exten-
sive dental work, with 35 of 94 mothers, or 37%, having 10 or
more amalgam fillings as compared to 8 of 45, 18%, of controls.
Maternal dietary consumption of fish was not significantly
associated with autism (data not shown).
Within the autistic group there were also strong differences in
hairmercurylevels.Lowerhairmercurylevelsweresignificantly
associated with the severity of the autistic behavior observed in
the clinic. Adjusting for gender differences, these results were
even stronger, because the “mildly autistic” group was dispro-
portionately female. Within the mildly autistic group, female
hair levels were almost uniformly lower than the male levels.
This suggests that factors related to gender might offer a level
of protection to female infants who might otherwise demon-
strate more severe symptoms. By contrast, boys who displayed
symptoms of similar severity nevertheless successfully released
larger amounts of mercury, suggesting that boys might require
high levels of mercury elimination to develop at similar rates.
The increased male risk of autism has been extensively docu-
mented (Fombonne 1999; Gillberg and Wing 1999).
The control group showed a very strong correlation between
measurable mercury exposure and the amount released into hair.
This suggests that normal children have an ability to defend
themselves against potentially toxic exposures and may demon-
strate little negative effect despite exposures that were relatively
large. By contrast, autistic infants who experienced comparable
exposure to mercury were completely incapable of excreting
mercury through hair at the levels that might have been pre-
dicted based on the excretion patterns of the control infants.
Possible Consequences of Low Hair Mercury Levels
In past reviews of potential risk from mercury in vaccines
(Stratton, Gable, and McCormick 2001), the possibility of neu-
rological damage due to exposure to thimerosal has been min-
imized as a “theoretical, but unproven” risk. A core concern
among reviewers has been the absence of evidence that “low-
dose” exposures such as those administered through vaccines
have the ability to cause any detectable harm.
Ourstudysuggeststworeasonswhy“lowdose”(where“low”
is relative to demonstrably harmful or even fatal doses and not
 at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on May 25, 2015
ijt.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 284
A. S. HOLMES ET AL.
the modeled EPA standard) exposures might raise the risk of
developmental damage. First, vaccine exposures do not occur in
isolation, but rather represent one among several pathways of
exposure through which the fetal and infant brain might accu-
mulate toxic levels of mercury. These pathways must therefore
be evaluated in the context of cumulative exposures, any one of
which might be harmless on its own but when combined with
other sources might contribute to harmful overall levels. Both
the autistic and the control children in our study showed in-
creased mercury risk based on multiple sources of exposure: in
the autistic group, both Rho D immunoglobulin and amalgam
fillings in the mother were elevated relative to controls; in the
control group, hair mercury levels were significantly correlated
with maternal amalgam fillings and fish consumption as well as
vaccine thimerosal exposure.
Second, the risk of any exposure will be greater if a larger
fraction of the toxin is retained in tissue and not excreted quickly.
Althoughhairisaminorpathwayformercuryexcretionandisfar
less important than feces and urine, the low levels of mercury in
the hair of autistic infants support a hypothesis that these infants
were retaining mercury in tissue at a higher rate than control
infants. The lack of mercury in the hair of autistics may be due to
a decrease in blood mercury levels feeding the hair follicles. This
decrease is likely caused by the retention of the mercury inside
the cells where it most likely causes its major biological damage.
When mercury is not available to the hair follicle, it is less
likely to be available to the primary detoxification and excretory
pathways and retained in tissue. If we presume that a portion
of the tissue mercury retention is sequestered in the central ner-
vous system and is available to cause neurological damage at
sensitive points in brain development, then it is plausible that
mercury-associated damage might be a meaningful element in
the pathological process that leads to an outcome of autism.
Limitations of the Current Study
We recognize that there are limitations to the current study.
The study was not the result of a fully prospective design, re-
cruitment of autistic study subjects was influenced by medical
care-seeking behavior, the testing facilities were not under the
direct control of the investigators, and the resultant population
distributions may not be representative of the autism population
as a whole. Additional research is necessary both to replicate
these findings in autism and to elaborate on the impact of all the
major risk factors associated with toxic exposures to mercury.
CONCLUSIONS
The reduced levels of mercury in the first baby haircut of
autistic infants raise clear questions about the detoxification ca-
pacity of a subset of infants. Despite hair levels suggesting low
exposure, these infants had measured exposures at least equal to
a control population, suggesting that control infants were able
to eliminate mercury more effectively. In the case of autistic
infants, those in our sample were exposed to higher levels of
mercury during gestation, through dental amalgams or Rho D
immunoglobulin injections in the mother. The addition of multi-
ple postnatal exposures to mercury in childhood vaccines would
have more severe consequences in infants whose detoxification
capacity is reduced or who may be closer to a dangerous thresh-
old exposure. In the case of control infants, mercury hair lev-
els were strongly affected by exposure levels, suggesting that
detoxification and excretion played an important role in ensur-
ing normal development in children with elevate toxic expo-
sure relative to peers. If reduced overall mercury elimination
is related to hair elimination, then autistic infants will retain
significantly higher levels of mercury in tissue, including the
brain, than normal infants. In light of the biological plausibility
of mercury’s role in neurodevelopmental disorders, our study
provides further insight into one possible mechanism by which
early mercury exposures could increase the risk of autism.
REFERENCES
Aronson, M., B. Hagberg, and C. Gillberg. 1997. Attention deficits and autism
spectrum disorders in children exposed to alcohol during gestation: A follow-
up study. Dev. Med. Child Neurol. 39:58–587.
Baird, G., T. Charman, S. Baron-Cohen, A. Cox, J. Swettenham, S. Wheelwright,
and A. Drew. 2000. A screening instrument for autism at 18 months of age: A
6-year follow-up study. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry 39:694–702.
Ballatori, N., and T. W. Clarkson. 1984. Dependence of biliary secretion of in-
organic mercury on the biliary transport of glutathione. Biochem. Pharmacol.
33:1093–1098.
Bernard, S., A. Enayati, L. Redwood, H. Roger, and T. Binstock. 2001. Autism:
A novel form of mercury poisoning. Med. Hypotheses 56:462–471.
Bertrand, J., A. Mars, C. Boyle, F. Bove, M. Yeargin-Allsopp, and P. Decoufle.
2001. Prevalence of Autism in a United States Population: The Brick Town-
ship, New Jersey, Investigation. Pediatrics 108:1155–1161.
Blaxill, M. F. 2001. Rising incidence of autism: Association with thimerosal.
Presentation to Immunization Safety Review, Cambridge, MA. Available at:
http://www.iom.edu/iom/iomhome.nsf/WFiles/Blaxill/$file/Blaxill.PDF
Bolton, P. F., R. J. Park, J. N. Higgins, P. D. Griffiths, and A. Pickles. 2002.
Neuro-epileptic determinants of autism spectrum disorders in tuberous scle-
rosis complex. Brain 125(Pt 6):1247–1255.
Burd, L., W. Fisher, and J. Kerbeshian. 1987. A prevalence study of perva-
sive developmental disorders in North Dakota. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc.
Psychiatry 26:700–703.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 1999. Thimerosal in vaccines: A
joint statement of the American Academy of Pediatrics and the Public Health
Service. MMWR Morb. Mortal. Wkly Rep. 48:563–565.
Dally, A. 1997. The rise and fall of pink disease. Soc. Hist. Med. 10:291–304.
Deb, S., and K. B. Prasad. 1994. The prevalence of autistic disorder among
children with a learning disability. Br. J. Psychiatry 165:395–399.
Department of Developmental Services. 1999. Changes in the population
of persons with autism and pervasive developmental disorders in Cal-
ifornia’s Developmental Services System: 1987–1998. A Report to the
Legislature. Sacramento, CA. Available at: http://www.dds.ca.gov/autism/
pdf/autism report 1999.pdf
Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders, 3rd edition (DSM-III),
1980, 87–90. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Society.
Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders, 3rd edition—revised
(DSM-III-R), 1987, 38–39. Washington DC: American Psychiatric Society.
Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders, 4th edition (DSM-IV),
1994, 66–71. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Society.
Drasch, G., I. Schupp, H. Hofl, R. Reinke, and G. Roider. 1994. Mercury burden
of human fetal and infant tissues. Eur. J. Pediatr. 153:607–610.
 at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on May 25, 2015
ijt.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
 AUTISTIC INFANTS SHOW REDUCED MERCURY HAIR LEVELS
285
Eisenberg, L., and L. Kanner. 1956. Early Infantile Autism. Am. J. Orthopsy-
chiatr. 26:556–566.
Fombonne, E. 1999. The epidemiology of autism: A review. Psychol. Med.
29:769–786.
Gentile, P. S., M. J. Trentalange, W. Zamichek, and M. Coleman. 1983. Brief
report: Trace elements in the hair of autistic and control children. J. Autism
Dev. Disord. 13:205–206.
Gillberg, C., and L. Wing. 1999. Autism: Not an extremely rare disorder. Acta
Psychiatr. Scand. 99:399–406.
Grandjean, P., P. Weihe, R. F. White, and F. Debes. 1998. Cognitive performance
of children prenatally exposed to “safe” levels of methylmercury. Environ.
Res. 77:165–172.
Grandjean, P., P. Weihe, R. F. White, F. Debes, S. Araki, K. Yokoyama, K.
Murata, N. Sorensen, R. Dahl, and P. J. Jorgensen. 1997. Cognitive deficit in
7-year-old children with prenatal exposure to methylmercury. Neurotoxicol.
Teratol. 19:417–428.
Holloway, C., J. B. Adams, F. Castro, M. Kerr, and M. Margolis. 2001. Inves-
tigation of heavy metal toxicity in people with autism. Presentation to the
International Meeting for Autism Research (IMFAR), San Diego, CA.
Hoshino, Y., H. Kumashiro, Y. Yashima, R. Tachibana, and M. Watanabe. 1982.
The epidemiological study of autism in Fukushima-ken. Folia Psychiatr. Neu-
rol. Jpn. 36:115–124.
Kales, S. N., and R. H. Goldman. 2002. Mercury exposure: Current concepts,
controversies, and a clinic’s experience. J. Occup. Environ. Med. 44:143–154.
Kaye, J. A., M. del Melero-Montes, and H. Jick. 2001. Mumps, measles, and
rubella vaccine and the incidence of autism recorded by general practitioners:
A time trend analysis. BMJ 322:460–463.
Juul-Dam, N., J. Townsend, and E. Courchesne. 2001. Prenatal, perinatal, and
neonatal factors in autism, pervasive developmental disorder-not otherwise
specified, and the general population. Pediatrics 107:E63.
Kostial, K., M. Blanusa, I. Rabar, and I. Simonovic. 1981. More data on mercury
absorption in relation to dietary treatment in rats. Toxicol. Lett. 7:201–205.
Kostial, K., D. Kello, S. Jogo, I. Rabar, and T. Maljkovic. 1978. Influence of age
on metal metabolism and toxicity. Environ. Health Perspect. 25:81–86.
Kostial, K., I. Rabar, M. Ciganovic, and I. Simonovic. 1979. Effect of milk on
mercury absorption and gut retention in rats. Bull. Environ. Contam. Toxicol.
23:566–571.
Lotter, V. 1966. Epidemiology of autistic conditions in young children. I: Preva-
lence. Soc. Psychiatry 1:124–137.
Puchyr, R. F., D. A. Bass, R. Gajewski, M. Calvin, W. Marquardt, K. Urek, M. E.
Druyan, and D. Quig. 1998. Preparation of hair for measurement of elements
by inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (ICP-MS). Bio. Trace El.
Res. 62:167–182.
Ritvo, E. R., B. J. Freeman, C. Pingree, A. Mason-Brothers, L. Jorde, W. R.
Jenson, W. M. McMahon, P. B. Petersen, A. Mo, and A. Ritvo. 1989. The
UCLA-University of Utah epidemiologic survey of autism: Prevalence. Am.
J. Psychiatry 146:194–199.
Rowland,I.R.,M.J.Davies,andP.Grasso.1978.Metabolismofmethylmercuric
chloride by the gastro-intestinal flora of the rat. Xenobiotica 8:37–43.
Rowland, I. R., R. D. Robinson, and R. A. Doherty. 1984. Effects of diet on
mercury metabolism and excretion in mice given methylmercury: Role of gut
flora. Arch. Environ. Health 39:401–408.
Rutter, M. 1978. Diagnosis and Definition. In Autism: A reappraisal of concepts
and treatments, ed. M. Rutter and E. Schopler, 1–25. New York: Plenum Press.
Ryabukin, Y. S. 1978. Activation analysis of hair as an indicator of contamina-
tion of man by environmental trace element pollutants. International Atomic
Energy Agency report, IAEA/RL/50, Vienna.
Salisbury, D. M., and S. Dittman. 1999. Immunization in Europe. In Vaccines,
3rd ed., ed. S. A. Plotkin and W. A. Orenstein, 1033–1046. New York: W.B.
Saunders.
Seidel, S., R. Kreutzer, D. Smith, S. McNeel, and D. Gilliss. 2001. Assessment of
commercial laboratories performing hair mineral analysis. JAMA 285:67–72.
Shearer, T. R., K. Larson, J. Neuschwander, and B. Gedney. 1982. Minerals in the
hair and nutrient intake of autistic children. J. Autism Dev. Disord. 12:25–34.
Steffenburg, S., C. L. Gillberg, U. Steffenburg, and M. Kyllerman. 1996. Autism
in Angelman syndrome: A population-based study. Pediatr. Neurol. 14:131–
136.
Stratton, K., A. Gable, and M. McCormick, eds. 2001. Immunization safety
review: Thimerosal containing vaccines and neurodevelopmental disorders.
Institute of Medicine, Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Stromland, K., V. Nordin, M. Miller, B. Akerstrom, and C. Gillberg. 1994.
Autism in thalidomide embryopathy: A population study. Dev. Med. Child
Neurol. 36:351–356.
Summers, A. O., J. Wireman, M. J. Vimy, F. L. Lorscheider, B. Marshall, S. B.
Levy, S. Bennett, and L. Billard. 1993. Mercury released from dental “silver”
fillings provokes an increase in mercury- and antibiotic-resistant bacteria in
oral and intestinal floras of primates. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 37:825–
834.
Taylor, B., E. Miller, C. P. Farrington, M. C. Petropoulos, I. Favot-Mayaud,
J. Li, and P. A. Waight. 1999. Autism and measles, mumps, and rubella
vaccine: No epidemiological evidence for a causal association. Lancet 353:
2026–2029.
Treffert, D. A. 1970. Epidemiology of infantile autism. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry
22:431–438.
Vimy, M. J., D. E. Hooper, W. W. King, and F. L. Lorscheider. 1997. Mercury
from maternal “silver” tooth fillings in sheep and human breast milk. A source
of neonatal exposure. Biol. Trace Elem. Res. 56:143–152.
Wahlstrom, J., C. Gillberg, K. H. Gustavson, and G. Holmgren. 1986. Infantile
autism and the fragile X. A Swedish multicenter study. Am. J. Med. Genet.
23:403–408.
Wecker, L., S. B. Miller, S. R. Cochran, D. L. Dugger, and W. D. Johnson. 1985.
Trace element concentrations in hair from autistic children. J. Ment. Defic.
Res. 29(Pt 1):15–22.
Williams, P. G., and J. H. Hersh. 1997. A male with fetal valproate syndrome
and autism. Dev. Med. Child Neurol. 39:632–634.
Wing, L., and J. Gould. 1979. Severe impairments of social interaction and asso-
ciated abnormalities in children: Epidemiology and classification . J. Autism
Dev. Disord. 9:11–29.
 at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on May 25, 2015
ijt.sagepub.com
Downloaded from 
