 INTRODUCTION
There is an increasing demand for UK 
primary care services, with workload 
increasing by 62% between 1995 and 2008.1 
General practices have struggled to meet 
this challenge and difficulties with access 
have become a major source of patient 
dissatisfaction,2 and practitioner stress.3 
Practices have been encouraged to develop 
flexible models of access tailored to local 
needs.4 Telephone triage, in which a patient 
requesting a face-to-face appointment is, 
in the first instance, offered a call back 
from a doctor or nurse, is increasingly 
being adopted in an attempt to manage 
demand. During the telephone call, the 
need for an appointment can be assessed 
and the most appropriate management 
plan agreed, including a face-to-face 
follow-up consultation if appropriate. 
Because a proportion of patients do not 
immediately require any further contact 
extending beyond the telephone call, 
this system would appear to be more 
efficient than the usual care arrangement 
in which face-to-face appointments are 
provided without triage. The ESTEEM trial 
(ISRCTN 20687662) tested this assumption 
and investigated the effectiveness and 
cost consequences of GP-led telephone 
triage and telephone triage led by nurses 
supported by decision support software.5 
The ESTEEM trial enrolled 20 990 patients 
requesting a same-day appointment with 
a GP registered with 42 practices across 
four recruitment sites in England. Practices 
were randomly allocated to provide GP-led 
triage, nurse-led triage (supported by 
computer decision support software), or 
usual care. Practitioners providing triage 
had the usual access to the patients’ 
health records. The trial identified that 
triaged patients were, in fact, more likely 
to require further consultations over the 
subsequent 28 days and that, whether the 
triage was provided by GPs or nurses, the 
overall health economic costs were almost 
identical to usual care. There was no cost 
saving to the NHS afforded by telephone 
triage, and the workload appeared to have 
been redistributed rather than reduced.
However, practices may introduce triage 
mechanisms in order to manage and 
moderate demands for urgent care from 
a GP on the same day, rather than to 
reduce workload overall. Also, telephone 
triage may mean that subsequent face-to-
face consultations (where necessary) are 
shorter, since some of the history will have 
already been obtained. This study examines 
the duration of consultations and overall 
clinician time provided on the day of the 
appointment request, with the intent of 
answering three separate questions:
Research
Telephone triage systems in UK general practice:
analysis of consultation duration during the index day in a pragmatic 
randomised controlled trial
Abstract
Background
Telephone triage is an increasingly common 
means of handling requests for same-day 
appointments in general practice.
Aim
To determine whether telephone triage (GP-led 
or nurse-led) reduces clinician–patient contact 
time on the day of the request (the index day), 
compared with usual care.
Design and setting
A total of 42 practices in England recruited to the 
ESTEEM trial.
Method
Duration of initial contact (following the 
appointment request) was measured for all 
ESTEEM trial patients consenting to case notes 
review, and that of a sample of subsequent 
face-to-face consultations, to produce composite 
estimates of overall clinician time during the 
index day.
Results
Data were available from 16 711 initial 
clinician–patient contacts, plus 1290 GP, and 
176 nurse face-to-face consultations. The mean 
(standard deviation) duration of initial contacts 
in each arm was: GP triage 4.0 (2.8) minutes; 
nurse triage 6.6 (3.8) minutes; and usual care 
9.5 (5.0) minutes. Estimated overall contact 
duration (including subsequent contacts on 
the same day) was 10.3 minutes for GP triage, 
14.8 minutes for nurse triage, and 9.6 minutes 
for usual care. In nurse triage, more than half 
the duration of clinician contact (7.7 minutes) 
was with a GP. This was less than the 
9.0 minutes of GP time used in GP triage.
Conclusion
Telephone triage is not associated with a 
reduction in overall clinician contact time 
during the index day. Nurse-led triage is 
associated with a reduction in GP contact time 
but with an overall increase in clinician contact 
time. Individual practices may wish to interpret 
the findings in the context of the available skill 
mix of clinicians.
Keywords
delivery of healthcare; general practice; 
telephone/economics; triage; workload.
TA Holt, PhD, MRCP, FRCGP, senior clinical 
research fellow, Nuffield Department of Primary 
Care Health Sciences, Oxford University, Oxford. 
E Fletcher, MSc, research fellow; F Warren, 
MSc, PhD, lecturer; S Richards, BSc, PhD, senior 
lecturer; R Calitri, MSc, PhD, research fellow; C 
Green, BA, MSc, PhD, professor; R Taylor, MSc, 
PhD, professor; DA Richards, RN, BSc, PhD, 
professor; J Campbell, MD, FRCGP, professor, 
Exeter Medical School, University of Exeter, 
Exeter
. C Salisbury, MSc, MD, FRCGP, professor, 
Academic Unit of Primary Health Care, University of 
Bristol, Bristol. A Varley, BA, MSc, senior research 
associate, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
University of East Anglia, Norwich.
Address for correspondence
Tim A Holt, Nuffield Department of Primary Care 
Health Sciences, Radcliffe Observatory Quarter, 
Woodstock Road, Oxford OX2 6GG, UK.
E-mail: tim.holt@phc.ox.ac.uk
Submitted: 8 May 2015; Editor’s response: 
9 June 2015; final acceptance: 4 August 2015.
©British Journal of General Practice
This is the full-length article (published online 
26 Feb 2016) of an abridged version published in 
print. Cite this article as: Br J Gen Pract 2016;  
DOI: 10.3399/bjgp16X684001
e214  British Journal of General Practice, March 2016
Tim A Holt, Emily Fletcher, Fiona Warren, Suzanne Richards, Chris Salisbury, Raff Calitri, 
Colin Green, Rod Taylor, David A Richards, Anna Varley and John Campbell
 • Irrespective of the outcomes over a longer 
interval, does telephone triage help 
clinicians complete ‘today’s work’ in a 
shorter time compared with usual care?
• Is an initial triage telephone call 
associated with a reduction in the 
duration of a subsequent face-to-face 
consultation, where this is needed?
• Does telephone triage reduce the same 
day workload of GPs by diverting some of 
this to nurses?
METHOD 
The full methods employed within the 
ESTEEM trial are published elsewhere.5 
The duration of the telephone triage contact 
(or first contact, usually face to face in 
usual care practices) was recorded using 
a standard case report form, on which 
clinicians recorded the start and end times 
of consecutive consultations. In addition, GPs 
and nurses from all participating practices 
were asked to record the start and end times 
of all of their face-to-face consultations on 
two, randomly selected, days during the study 
data collection period. The sampling days 
were chosen to occur during weeks 2 and 
3 of a planned 4-week period for the triage 
intervention, that is, during the middle of the 
trial recruitment. For each practice, one of 
the days selected was a Monday or a Friday, 
and the other was a Tuesday, Wednesday, 
or Thursday. The recorded durations for 
patients that had requested a same-day 
appointment either that day or the previous 
day (and were thus in the ESTEEM trial) 
were subsequently identified, and all other 
patients’ face-to-face appointments were 
excluded from the analysis. This ensured 
that the small proportion of ESTEEM patients 
requesting a same-day appointment but not 
receiving one until the following day would 
still be included in this analysis. Different 
contact types were identified: 
• initial face-to-face consultation in usual 
care; 
• GP-led telephone triage call; nurse-led 
telephone triage call; 
• face-to-face consultation with a GP 
following a GP-led or a nurse-led triage 
call; 
• face-to-face consultation with a nurse 
following a GP-led or a nurse-led 
telephone triage call; and 
• telephone consultation with a GP 
following a nurse-led triage call. 
The duration of face-to-face contacts with 
a GP that had followed a triage call were 
compared with those occurring in usual 
care. 
For each trial arm, the overall composite 
clinician–patient contact time on the index 
day was estimated, subdivided into contact 
time with a GP and with a nurse. This 
estimate was based on the mean duration 
of the individual components and the 
frequencies with which each contact type 
occurred on the index day. The proportion 
of patients requiring either one contact 
(the triage call) or two (triage call plus a 
face-to-face consultation) were measured 
in the trial through case notes reviews. 
Only patient management pathways that 
were experienced by at least 1% of patients 
managed on the index day contributed to 
the patient–clinician contact time estimate. 
Average durations for each contact type 
were derived from the case report forms 
or from the sample of face-to-face GP or 
nurse contacts. In the case of GP telephone 
consultations following a nurse triage call, 
duration estimates were not measured 
in the trial, so an estimate of duration 
was taken from a source of standard 
unit timings.6 The proportions of patients 
experiencing each management pathway, 
and the estimated time per patient for each 
pathway, were combined to produce the 
overall estimates of patient time spent with 
a GP or a nurse on the index day. Because 
these were composite estimates, it was not 
possible to derive standard deviations (SD) 
for these outcomes, even though the SD 
was known for the individual components.
RESULTS
Consultation duration data were available 
from the initial contact of 16 711 patients 
entered into the ESTEEM study.5 In addition, 
1290 face-to-face consultations with a GP and 
176 face-to-face consultations with a nurse 
on the index day or subsequent day were 
timed. The estimated composite durations of 
clinician–patient contact time were informed 
How this fits in
Telephone triage is a commonly used 
approach for handling requests for same-
day GP appointments. The ESTEEM 
trial measured the impact on primary 
care workload of introducing GP-led or 
nurse-led telephone triage compared 
with continuing usual care. This study 
uses ESTEEM data to measure the impact 
on clinician–patient contact time on the 
day of the request. It suggests no overall 
reduction with telephone triage, although 
nurse-led triage reduced GP–patient 
contact time.
British Journal of General Practice, March 2016  e215
 by data for 15 394 patients (5138 in usual 
care, 5001 in GP triage, and 5255 in nurse 
triage) for whom data on management 
on the index day were available and who 
followed a management care pathway used 
by >1% of patients in that trial arm.
All 42 practices in the trial contributed 
to the sample of face-to-face consultation 
durations. In one case a practice collected 
data on just 1 day (a Tuesday, without 
sampling a Monday or Friday).
Table 
1 
gives 
the 
demographic 
characteristics with respect to age, sex, 
and deprivation status of the 1466 patients 
for 
whom 
face-to-face 
consultation 
duration was collected in this sub-study. 
No differences were found between 
the characteristics of this group when 
compared with the entire population of trial 
participants.
Table 2 gives the durations of initial 
contact (telephone triage in triage arm 
practices, mostly a face-to-face contact 
in usual care practices);5 the estimated 
overall clinician–patient contact time for all 
patients; and the duration of face-to-face 
contacts following triage in the triage arms. 
The mean (SD) of an initial telephone triage 
contact for GPs was 4.0 (2.8) minutes and 
for nurses 6.6 (3.8) minutes. This compared 
with 9.5 (5.0) minutes for an initial contact 
(usually face to face) in usual care. The 
estimated composite overall duration of 
clinician–patient contact on the day of 
the request was 10.3 minutes for GP-led 
triage, 14.8 minutes for nurse-led triage, 
and 9.6 minutes for usual care. In nurse-
led triage, more than half the duration of 
contact (7.7 minutes) was with a GP. This 
was less than the 9.0 minutes of GP contact 
time observed following introduction of GP 
triage and the 9.1 minutes observed in usual 
care. There was no clinically significant 
difference in the overall GP time required 
between GP-led triage and usual care. The 
mean estimated duration of a GP face-to-
face consultation that followed a GP triage 
call was longer than the duration of a GP 
face-to-face consultation in usual care (12.4 
versus 9.8 minutes). For those that followed 
a nurse-led triage call, the estimated mean 
duration was 11.5 minutes. 
DISCUSSION
Summary
Despite the possibility that telephone 
triage may be a more time-efficient way 
of managing workload on the index day, 
this analysis of ESTEEM trial data indicates 
that there is no overall clinician time saved 
when comparing GP-led or nurse-led triage 
with usual care. Nurse-led triage saves GP 
time on the index day, even though overall 
clinician (GP and nurse) contact time is 
increased. Although it might be reasonable 
to speculate that face-to-face consultations 
may be completed in less time if preceded 
by a telephone triage call (as a clinician 
e216  British Journal of General Practice, March 2016
Table 1. Distribution of patient characteristics in the sub-study 
 
Usual care 
GP triage 
Nurse triage 
 
(n = 692), 
(n = 302), 
(n = 472), 
 
n (%) 
n (%) 
n (%)
Sex
Male  
274 (39.6) 
120 (39.7) 
184 (39.0)
Female 
418 (60.4) 
182 (60.3) 
288 (61.0)
Age category, years
<5 
63 (9.1) 
26 (8.6) 
51 (10.8)
5–11  
39 (5.6) 
24 (8.0) 
24 (5.1)
16–24 
88 (12.7) 
31 (10.3) 
54 (11.4)
25–59 
324 (46.8) 
118 (39.1) 
204 (43.2)
60–74  
118 (17.1) 
60 (19.9) 
89 (18.9)
≥75  
60 (8.7) 
43 (14.2) 
50 (10.6)
Deprivation (IMD 2010 quintile based on rank)
Quintile 1 (most deprived) 
62 (9.0) 
8 (2.7) 
42 (8.9)
Quintile 2  
146 (21.1) 
46 (15.2) 
126 (26.8)
Quintile 3 
155 (22.4) 
90 (29.8) 
103 (21.9)
Quintile 4 
181 (26.2) 
78 (25.8) 
119 (25.3)
Quintile 5 (least deprived) 
148 (21.4) 
80 (26.5) 
80 (17.0)
IMD = Index of Multiple Deprivation.
Table 2. Duration of consultations during trial
 
Usual care 
GP triage 
Nurse triage
Duration of consultation (based on clinician forma,b data), minutes
First management/triage contacts only;c 
9.5 (5.0) 5693 
4.0 (2.8) 5508 
6.6 (3.8) 5510 
mean, (SD), n
Duration of face-to-face consultations for the sample of ESTEEM patientsd, minutes
Duration of GP face-to-face consultations on the 
9.8 (5.1) 631 
12.4 (7.1) 244 
11.5 (6.4) 415 
day of, or the day after, index consultation 
request; mean, (SD), n
Duration of nurse/nurse practitioner face-to-face 
11.0 (6.6) 61 
13.9 (8.8) 58 
11.0 (8.1) 57 
consultations on the day of, or the day after, 
index consultation request; mean, (SD), n
Estimated composite patient–clinician contact duration on the index day 
e, minutes
Overall estimated patient–clinician contact duration 
 
9.6f 
 
 
10.3 
 
 
14.8
Estimated patient–GP contact duration 
 
9.1 
 
 
9.0 
 
 
7.7
Estimated patient–nurse contact duration 
 
0.6 
 
 
1.3 
 
 
7.1
aClinician form data included only if dated within 7 days of the index day (usual care) or on the index day (GP triage/
nurse triage). bIncludes 98 clinician forms recorded as ‘patient did not attend’, but did include duration data. cA triage 
contact is defined as a GP telephone contact on the index date, or a nurse telephone or GP telephone contact on 
the index date. A first management contact in usual care is defined as any contact within 7 days of the index date. 
dDurations of face-to-face consultations recorded by form completion or electronically from practice computer 
system. ePatients who did not attend any within practice contacts on the index day, or who were first managed 
outside the practice, were excluded. fRounding up discrepancy.
 has been made aware of the problem, 
and a preliminary consultation undertaken), 
this study suggests that the face-to-face 
consultation duration is longer for triaged 
patients than for those seen in usual care. 
However, in some cases the patient may 
have consulted a different clinician face 
to face from the one providing the triage 
contact, and it is not clear whether or 
how the recording of a patient’s history 
could impact on the subsequent use of 
time. It is also difficult to compare the two 
groups directly, because the first (face-
to-face consultations following triage) only 
included patients whose problems were 
not, for whatever reason, resolved by a 
telephone consultation, while the latter 
included people with all types of problem, 
some of which may have been possible to 
resolve by telephone.
Strengths and limitations
This analysis involved a large sample of 
consultations from contemporary UK 
practice collected in the context of a large 
cluster randomised controlled trial. The 
numbers available from the sampling of 
face-to-face contacts was more limited, 
particularly for nurse consultations. The 
clinicians involved in gathering the data 
had received standardised training in 
study processes, including documenting 
consultation duration during a 4-week 
run-in period before beginning live data 
collection for the trial. The duration data for 
the face-to-face contacts following triage 
used in this analysis were gathered during 
days selected randomly in the middle of 
the trial. However, there will inevitably 
be some inaccuracy in measurement 
resulting from time pressures during busy, 
routine care being associated with some 
incomplete recording and subsequent 
missing data. For the sample of face-
to-face consultations, it was not known 
how many consultations were expected to 
occur, and so, while practices were actively 
encouraged to record timings for all such 
consultations on the sampling days, the 
completeness of this process could not be 
evaluated. For the composite estimate of 
overall clinician contact time, published 
estimates were relied on for GP telephone 
consultation duration that followed a 
nurse triage call, although this applied 
to a very small percentage of contacts 
(~1%). For the purposes of estimating mean 
consultation duration, consultations that 
had occurred on the day after, as well as on 
the index day were included in the sample, 
but consultations scheduled over longer 
intervals were not included. 
Comparison with existing literature
A number of studies have investigated 
telephone triage systems, but relatively 
few have measured consultation duration 
as an outcome.7 Jiwa and colleagues 
reported a telephone consultation duration 
of less than 5 minutes in over 92% of 
calls following introduction of a telephone 
triage system.8 Richards et al studied the 
impact on workload and costs following 
introduction of a nurse-led triage system 
using a multiple interrupted time series 
analysis.9 They reported a reduction in GP 
time, but a substantial increase in overall 
time involved in managing the patient 
(mean increase 1.7 minutes, P<0.001). 
Mohammed and colleagues reported 
the duration of 128 717 telephone triage 
calls in an out-of-hours provider service 
in England and Wales in 2012.10 They also 
found that GP telephone triage calls were 
shorter than those provided by a nurse 
practitioner
. However, this study population 
was different from the current study, which 
investigated consultations during normal 
working hours and involved clinicians 
who had access to the patients’ complete 
health records. McKinstry and colleagues 
randomised two general practices to 
provide GP-led telephone triage or usual 
care without triage, adopting use of doctor 
time as the primary outcome.11 They found 
that telephone triage consultations were 
shorter than face-to-face consultations in 
usual care, but that those managed through 
triage were more likely to re-consult over 
the following 2 weeks. This finding concurs 
with the results of the main ESTEEM trial, 
which confirmed this greater tendency to 
re-consult in patients managed by triage 
(GP-led or nurse-led) compared with usual 
care, with no difference between the three 
arms in total NHS costs.5 
Implications for practice
The ESTEEM trial5 has yielded large 
amounts 
of 
data 
investigating 
the 
workload implications of telephone triage 
arrangements in current practice. This study 
adds to the message of the main trial, that 
telephone triage, whether undertaken by a 
doctor or a nurse, appears not to offer added 
efficiency in terms of resource use than 
usual care. Nurse-led triage, supported by 
decision support software, is associated with 
a reduction in overall GP contact time during 
the index day, even though overall clinician 
contact time is increased compared with 
usual care. However, individual practices 
may wish to interpret the findings in the 
context of the available skill mix of clinicians.
British Journal of General Practice, March 2016  e217
Funding
The study was funded by the Health 
Technology Assessment programme of 
the National Institute for Health Research 
(HTA: 08/53/15).
Ethical approval
Research ethics approval was obtained 
from South West No 2 Research Ethics 
Committee 
(reference 
number 
09/
H0202/53).
Provenance
Freely submitted; externally peer reviewed.
Competing interests
The authors have declared no competing 
interests.
Discuss this article
Contribute and read comments about this 
article: bjgp.org/letters
 e218  British Journal of General Practice, March 2016
REFERENCES
1. 
Hippisley-Cox J, Vinogradova Y. Trends in consultation rates in general practice 
1995/1996 to 2008/2009: analysis of the QResearch database. Leeds: Health and 
Social Care Information Centre, 2009.
2. 
Kontopantelis E, Roland M, Reeves D. Patient experience of access to primary 
care: identification of predictors in a national patient survey. BMC Fam Pract 
2010; 11: 61.
3. 
Orton P, Orton C, Pereira Gray D. Depersonalised doctors: a cross-sectional 
study of 564 doctors, 760 consultations and 1876 patient reports in UK general 
practice. BMJ Open 2012; 2: e000274.
4. 
Royal College of General Practitioners. The 2022 GP: A vision for general 
practice in the future NHS. London: RCGP, 2013.
5. 
Campbell JL, Fletcher E, Britten N, et al. Telephone triage for management 
of same-day consultation requests in general practice (the ESTEEM trial): a 
cluster-randomised controlled trial and cost-consequence analysis. Lancet 
2014; 384(9957): 1859–1868.
6. 
Curtis L. Unit costs of health and social care 2012. Canterbury: Personal Social 
Services Research Unit, University of Kent, 2012.
7. 
Bunn F, Byrne G, Kendall S. Telephone consultation and triage: effects on 
health care use and patient satisfaction. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2004; (4): 
CD004180. 
8. 
Jiwa M, Mathers N, Campbell M. The effect of GP telephone triage on numbers 
seeking same-day appointments. Br J Gen Pract 2002; 52(478): 390–391.
9. 
Richards DA, Meakins J, Tawfik J, et al. Nurse telephone triage for same day 
appointments in general practice: multiple interrupted time series trial of effect 
on workload and costs. BMJ 2002; 325(7374): 1214.
10. 
Mohammed MA, Clements G, Edwards E, Lester H. Factors which influence 
the length of an out-of-hours telephone consultation in primary care: a 
retrospective database study. BMC Health Serv Res 2012; 12: 430.
11. 
McKinstry B, Walker J, Campbell C, et al. Telephone consultations to manage 
requests for same-day appointments: a randomised controlled trial in two 
practices. Br J Gen Pract 2002; 52(477): 306–310.
