 Open Forum Infectious Diseases
Video DOT in TB Management • OFID • 1
Open Forum Infectious Diseases®
Advancing Patient-Centered Care in Tuberculosis 
Management: A Mixed-Methods Appraisal of Video 
Directly Observed Therapy 
Samuel B. Holzman,1 Avi Zenilman,1 and Maunank Shah1,2
1Division of Infectious Diseases, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland; 2Baltimore City Health Department, Baltimore, Maryland
Background. Directly observed therapy (DOT) remains an integral component of treatment support and adherence monitoring 
in tuberculosis care. In-person DOT is resource intensive and often burdensome for patients. Video DOT (vDOT) has been pro-
posed as an alternative to increase treatment flexibility and better meet patient-specific needs.
Methods. We conducted a pragmatic, prospective pilot implementation of vDOT at 3 TB clinics in Maryland. A mixed-methods 
approach was implemented to assess (1) effectiveness, (2) acceptability, and (3) cost. Medication adherence on vDOT was compared 
with that of in-person DOT. Interviews and surveys were conducted with patients and providers before and after implementation, 
with framework analysis utilized to extract salient themes. Last, a cost analysis assessed the economic impacts of vDOT implemen-
tation across heterogeneous clinic structures.
Results. Medication adherence on vDOT was comparable to that of in-person DOT (94% vs 98%, P = .17), with a higher per-
centage of total treatment doses (inclusive of weekend/holiday self-administration) ultimately observed during the vDOT period 
(72% vs 66%, P = .03). Video DOT was well received by staff and patients alike, who cited increased treatment flexibility, conveni-
ence, and patient privacy. Our cost analysis estimated a savings with vDOT of $1391 per patient for a standard 6-month treatment 
course.
Conclusions. Video DOT is an acceptable and important option for measurement of TB treatment adherence and may allow a 
higher proportion of prescribed treatment doses to be observed, compared with in-person DOT. Video DOT may be cost-saving and 
should be considered as a component of individualized, patient-centered case management plans.
Keywords. mHealth; medication adherence; telemedicine; tuberculosis; video DOT. 
Tuberculosis (TB) remains a global pandemic responsible for 
nearly 2 million deaths annually [1]. In the United States, pre-
viously reported declines in incident disease have stagnated in 
recent years [2, 3].
A central challenge in the fight against TB is overcoming the 
barriers presented by TB therapy itself. Side effects are com-
mon, and treatment courses are long, extending well beyond a 
year in some cases of drug-resistant disease [4, 5]. Poor treat-
ment adherence has been linked to microbiologic failure, dis-
ease relapse, and the emergence of drug resistance [6, 7].
In response, and in an effort to promote treatment completion, 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the 
World Health Organization (WHO) have advocated for directly 
observed therapy (DOT), wherein the ingestion of each dose is 
directly monitored [4, 8, 9]. Programmatic uptake of DOT has 
been widespread. Within the United States, DOT is now the 
standard of care, and is even codified into law in many states [10].
Despite broad policy support, more recent studies looking 
at the effectiveness of DOT on treatment outcomes have been 
mixed, likely owing to heterogeneous approaches to imple-
mentation [11–13]. Nonetheless, current treatment guidelines, 
including that from the CDC, continue to underscore the im-
portance of DOT, but now emphasize its role as just 1 com-
ponent of a multifaceted approach to case management and 
treatment support [4, 14]. Further, “To be consistent with the 
principles of patient-centered care, decisions regarding the use 
of DOT must be made in concert with the patient” [4]. As such, 
DOT implementation must account for patient-specific needs, 
and should ideally couple observation of pill ingestion with 
strategies for adherence support.
Employing DOT in a patient-centered fashion can be chal-
lenging. Scheduling in-person DOT visits is logistically com-
plicated and resource intensive (for patients and TB programs) 
and can increase both patient- and program-level costs. In 
some individuals, logistical barriers and perceived stigma 
related to DOT have led to feelings of humiliation, loss of con-
trol, and stress [15, 16]. In some situations, DOT requirements 
may therefore represent a barrier to adherence. What’s more, 
M A J O R  A R T I C L E
© The Author(s) 2018. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Infectious Diseases 
Society of America. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs licence (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc-nd/4.0/), which permits non-commercial reproduction and distribution of the work, in any 
medium, provided the original work is not altered or transformed in any way, and that the 
work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com
DOI: 10.1093/ofid/ofy046
Received 15 November 2017; editorial decision 26 February 2018; accepted 15 March 2018.
Correspondence: S. Holzman, MD, Johns Hopkins University, Division of Infectious Diseases, 
725 N Wolfe St, Suite 211, Baltimore, MD 21205-2105 (sholzma1@jhmi.edu).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ofid/article-abstract/5/4/ofy046/4924819 by guest on 02 June 2019
 2 • OFID • Holzman et al
provisions for DOT may impact provider prescribing practices. 
While updated TB guidelines advocate daily therapy (ie, 7 days/
week), our experiences suggest that health departments com-
monly dose TB medications Monday through Friday (M–F, ie, 
business days) only, or intermittently (ie, 3 days/week), in an 
effort to facilitate in-person DOT.
To overcome these barriers, video-based DOT (vDOT) has 
been proposed as an alternative to in-person observation [4, 14, 
17]. Early in 2017, the CDC released a toolkit for the implemen-
tation of vDOT within TB programs [18]. However, given the 
limited experience with vDOT, the guideline cautions against 
its use in complex patients, including those with “adherence 
issues,” “language barriers,” and “multi-drug resistance,” and 
acknowledges the need for operational research. This approach, 
however, may restrict usage in those with complex treatment 
factors who could potentially benefit most from the added flex-
ibility provided by vDOT.
As such, we designed a pilot implementation study to address 
several gaps in our current understanding of vDOT imple-
mentation [19–27]. We utilize a mixed-methods approach 
to evaluate (1) feasibility, (2) accessibility, and (3) costs when 
implemented under real-world conditions. First, we sought to 
understand feasibility and acceptability in broad patient pop-
ulations, including those with previously poor adherence and 
drug-resistant disease. Second, we sought to assess effective-
ness for observation of therapy and costs. Finally, we sought 
to describe implementation challenges and successes, patient 
selection for vDOT, and the impact of heterogeneities in clinic 
structure.
METHODS
Overview
We conducted a pragmatic, prospective pilot implementation 
study. Our objective was to assess the feasibility, acceptability, 
and cost of vDOT utilizing a Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act (HIPAA)-compliant mobile app, miDOT 
(emocha Mobile Health Inc.), for TB treatment monitoring, 
adherence support, and case management (Supplementary 
Figure 1). The study was carried out within 3 public health TB 
clinics in Maryland that service a mixed urban/suburban popu-
lation. Protocols were approved by the ethics committees at Johns 
Hopkins University, the Baltimore City Health Department, and 
the Maryland Department of Health.
Study Population
All adult patients receiving active TB treatment or short-course 
isoniazid/rifapentine-based latent TB (LTBI) therapy were 
eligible for participation. Inclusion required that patients be 
≥18 years of age and have ≥2 months of therapy remaining. All 
patients initiated TB therapy with in-person DOT, though they 
could transition to vDOT at any point during their treatment 
course. The decisions to offer vDOT were made by noncon-
flicted health department clinicians, without explicit exclusion 
of non-English speakers or those with multidrug-resistant dis-
ease or poor prior adherence. Patients interested in utilizing 
vDOT provided written informed consent, and those without 
access to a smartphone were provided one by the study.
TB Treatment
Treatment decisions were clinic-directed according to Maryland 
state and CDC guidelines, regardless of DOT modality [4, 28]. 
Under these guidelines, drug regimens generally rely on either 
daily or intermittent (3 days/week) dosing. While studies have 
not compared the efficacy of 5 vs 7 doses per week, under 
DOT, both regimens were referred to as “daily” [4]. Each clinic 
defined treatment completion and success based on ingesting a 
set number of target doses. Any missed doses were added to the 
end of therapy, extending treatment duration. At baseline, for 
daily dosing, TB clinics combined in-person DOT 5 days/week 
(M–F) with weekend (and holiday) self-administration, the lat-
ter not contributing to the overall dose target. While on vDOT, 
dosing frequency (ie, 5 days/week vs 7 days/week) and whether 
to observe and count weekend doses toward an overall dose tar-
get were left to clinic discretion. Patients were sent twice-daily 
SMS reminders in the absence of submitted videos and were 
prompted to document side effects prior to each submission 
(see the Supplementary Data for more on miDOT specifics). 
All patient data, servers, and transmissions were encrypted to 
protect patient privacy, and the app automatically deleted vid-
eos from the smartphone upon transmission (Figure 1).
Feasibility and Effectiveness
We assessed 2 primary outcomes, acknowledging a lack of con-
sensus definition on measurement of adherence and differences 
in programmatic practices related to “expected” doses. The 
first was treatment adherence, or the proportion of “expected” 
DOT (in-person or video) that was successfully completed, in 
which the “expected” dose was defined by the TB clinic (usu-
ally omitting weekend and holiday self-administered doses) 
(Supplementary Figure 2). Given that the goal of DOT is to 
observe all prescribed doses, as a secondary measure, we cal-
culated the observable fraction, or the proportion of total doses 
(inclusive of weekends, holiday, or other “self-administered” 
doses) completed under observation (either in-person or by 
video). All patients received case management per routine at 
each TB clinic site irrespective of DOT modality; this gener-
ally included case management phone calls or visits following 
missed doses or reported side effects.
Differences pre/post–vDOT implementation were evaluated 
using paired t tests, though our study was not powered, nor 
specifically intended, to detect between-group differences. All 
analyses were conducted in STATA 14.
Acceptability
Qualitative research methodology was employed to explore partic-
ipant and staff perceptions of in-person and vDOT. All clinic staff 
(DOT workers, case managers, clinicians) and enrolled patients 
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ofid/article-abstract/5/4/ofy046/4924819 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Video DOT in TB Management • OFID • 3
were approached to complete surveys and in-depth interviews pre/
post–vDOT implementation; a separate informed consent was 
used, and patients could enroll in the study without participation 
in the qualitative component. All interviews were digitally recorded 
and transcribed verbatim. Each transcription was reviewed by 2 
study members, and an iterative, open-coding strategy with frame-
work analysis was employed to identify salient themes [29].
Cost
A cost analysis was conducted using time motion studies and an 
ingredients-based approach in which unit costs for labor, equip-
ment, and consumables were multiplied by quantities required 
for in-person DOT and vDOT (Supplementary Table 5). To 
allow equal comparisons, final calculations were standardized 
to a 6-month treatment course (daily therapy) for drug-sensi-
tive TB; based on clinic practices, primary analysis was stand-
ardized to a M–F dosing strategy, with a secondary analysis 
comparing 7-day/week therapy.
In base case analysis, we incorporated costs for a licensed 
practical nurse (LPN) utilizing a Department of Health 
(DOH)–owned vehicle for community-based, in-person DOT. 
For vDOT, the base case scenario incorporated costs of a pro-
gram-provided smartphone (and associated data costs) and 
an estimated commercial software cost of $50 per patient per 
month (personal communication, emocha).
Sensitivity analysis was conducted to evaluate variations in 
consumable, labor, and equipment costs with consideration of 
programmatic heterogeneity in the implementation of in-per-
son DOT (eg, type of staff conducting DOT, vehicle used, 
and travel distance) and vDOT (eg, range of software-associ-
ated costs from a high of $100 per patient per month to free) 
(Supplementary Figure 3).
RESULTS
A total of 28 patients were enrolled and treated between March 
2016 and August 2017. Of these, 25 received active TB ther-
apy and 3 received weekly rifapentine/isoniazid (INH) for LTBI 
(Table 1). Ninety-three percent of patients were foreign born. 
Only 3 patients (11%) required use of a study phone for vDOT. 
Thirty-nine percent had extrapulmonary disease, consistent 
with regional and national epidemiology [30, 31].
Among active TB patients prescribed “daily” therapy (at 
any point during their treatment), a dosing strategy of DOT 5 
times/week (M–F) with weekend self-administration was the 
most common observation strategy regardless of DOT modal-
ity, though it was more frequent during the in-person period 
(100% vs 76%, P = .01). Overall, intermittent thrice-weekly 
therapy was utilized less commonly on vDOT than during 
in-person (24% vs 16%, P = .32). No patients received 7 days 
of in-person DOT, though 2 were transitioned to this schedule 
while on vDOT. The mean times on therapy for in-person DOT 
and vDOT were 12.2 and 19.2 weeks, respectively (P = .01).
Feasibility/Effectiveness
Measured adherence was high irrespective of DOT strategy: 
median 98% (interquartile range [IQR], 90–100) during in-per-
son DOT and median 94% (IQR, 88–98) while on vDOT 
(P = .17) (Table 2). The median observable fraction (ie, propor-
tion of all prescribed doses observed) was statistically lower dur-
ing the in-person DOT period (in-person, 66% [62%–72%]; vs 
vDOT, 72% [67%–92%]; P = .03). Overall, only 15% of patients 
had more than 80% of total prescribed doses verified through 
observation during in-person DOT, compared with 36% during 
vDOT (P = .01), a consequence of self-administered weekend 
and holiday doses.
Authentication
Mobile Application
Authentication
Audit-logging
Video verification
Encrypted transmission of  data
(SSL Tunnel)
Encrypted patient data
Secure
Cloud
Treatment analytics
Data encryption
Web Interface
Side efects assessement
Video aquisition
Data encryption
Figure 1. Schematic of data acquisition and transmission on miDOT.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ofid/article-abstract/5/4/ofy046/4924819 by guest on 02 June 2019
 4 • OFID • Holzman et al
Fifty-seven percent of patients had at least 1 rejected video 
(mean, 1.8; range, 0–11), representing 2.1% of all submitted vid-
eos (2350). The 2 most commonly cited reasons for rejection 
were “Medication dose not visible” and “Poor video quality.”
A total of 4 patients traveled internationally while on miDOT, 
though they continued to successfully submit videos. Two 
patients were transferred from Health Department care after 
permanently leaving the United States prior to treatment com-
pletion (1 to Liberia and 1 to Ivory Coast); both had been on 
vDOT for >16 weeks with adherence of 72% and 87%, respec-
tively, at the time of study exit. A single patient had vDOT dis-
continued prematurely after 5 weeks due to an adherence of 
63% (on 7 days/week of DOT); the patient had been on in-per-
son DOT for 17 weeks prior to vDOT, expressed an interest to 
return to her prior routine of in-person DOT, and successfully 
completed therapy with an adherence of 100%.
Acceptability
All staff and patients were approached to explore attitudes toward 
in-person DOT and vDOT. Twenty staff members participated 
before vDOT implementation, and 16 post-implimentation; 25 
patients were included before vDOT, with 10 providing post-treat-
ment feedback. vDOT adherence did not differ between patients 
completing and those not completing post-intervention qualita-
tive assessment (adherence, 89% vs 90%; P = .92).
At baseline, nearly all staff members felt that in-person DOT 
provided beneficial social support (95%), and only a few (10%) 
considered self-administered therapy to be sufficient alone 
(Supplementary Tables 1 and  
2). Both staff (95%) and patients 
(92%) were comfortable using smartphones from the out-
set. Following the intervention, all surveyed patients felt that 
the miDOT platform was “easy to use” and preferred it over 
in-person DOT.
Themes related to this preference for vDOT were common dur-
ing interviews and focused on convenience and increased flexibil-
ity (Table 3; Supplementary Tables 3 and 4). Both patients and staff 
commented on the limitations of in-person DOT when managing 
complex schedules. Speaking to the impact of foreign travel, 1 staff 
member noted, “We try to arrange jurisdictional coverage during 
[travel] times, but if it’s outside the country, you really can’t.
”
Another prominent theme was the impression that in-per-
son DOT threatened patient privacy. This concern appeared 
to be driven by the public optics of daily visits (at home/work) 
from DOH staff. In speaking to this concern, 1 patient stated, 
“Sometimes they meet me…at work…. I’m afraid I’ll be seen.” 
The added flexibility provided by vDOT seemed to allay these 
fears. As 1 nurse commented, “You can do [vDOT] in your car 
on the way to work. You can sit out in your driveway and do it…. 
It’s more private than having a nurse come to the house.” Notably, 
no patients or staff raised concerns regarding data security with 
the use of mobile phones to share private health information.
Table 1. Patient Characteristics
Variable
No. (%)
(n = 28)
Age, median (IQR), y
32 (23–49)
Female, No. (%)
16 (57)
Foreign born, No. (%)
26 (93)
Origin, No. (%)
 United States
2 (7)
 Africa
11 (39)
 Latin America
8 (29)
 South Asia
4 (14)
 East Asia
2 (7)
 Europe
1 (4)
Time in United States, median (IQR),a y
5 (3–15)
Limited or no English,b No. (%)
7 (25)
Travel to TB endemic country within 5 y, No. (%)
19 (67)
Highest level of education reached, No. (%)
 Grade school
3 (12)
 High school
10 (38)
 College
9 (35)
 Postgraduate
4 (15)
Employment, No. (%)
 Full-time
16 (57)
 Part-time
7 (25)
 Unemployed
5 (18)
Annual household income,c No. (%)
 <$20 000
8 (36)
 $20 000–$49 999
9 (41)
 $50 000–$100 000
4 (18)
 >$100 000
1 (5)
Substance use,c,d No. (%)
 Tobacco
1 (4)
 Alcohol
1 (4)
 Illicit drugs
1 (4)
Comorbidities, No. (%)
 HIV infected
2 (7)
 Hypertension
2 (7)
 Diabetes
1 (4)
 History of malignancy
2 (7)
Taking daily (non-TB) medications, No. (%)
6 (21)
Technology, No. (%)
 Regular access to smartphone
25 (89)
 Required study phonee
3 (11)
Tuberculosis type, No. (%)
 Pulmonary
9 (32)
 Smear positive
5 (18)
 Smear negative
11 (39)
 Exclusively extrapulmonary
 Latent
3 (11)
MDR disease,f No. (%)
1 (4)
Abbreviations: IQR, interquartile range; MDR, multidrug-resistant; TB, tuberculosis.
aCalculated for foreign-born individuals only, those reporting “less than 1 year” were con-
sidered to have been in the United States for 6 months for statistical purposes.
bIncluded 6 Spanish speakers and 1 Oromo.
cExcludes those for whom data were unknown.
dRepresents 3 separate patients.
eAll 3 phones were returned at study completion in good working order.
fRefers only to those treated for active TB. All LTBI patients received weekly rifapentine 
for 12 weeks.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ofid/article-abstract/5/4/ofy046/4924819 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Video DOT in TB Management • OFID • 5
While an uncommon theme, 1 nurse manager discussed a 
fear of displacement among staff, stating, “Some DOT work-
ers worry that video DOT will take their jobs.” At the same 
time, she went on to highlight the ability of vDOT to maximize 
clinic resources, noting, “[vDOT] actually helps because a lot 
of the time we’re short [staffed and] when you have this.… You 
don’t want your workers running around the streets all day.” 
Further, it was noted that DOT workers could take on larger 
patient panels and spend more individual time face to face with 
those remaining on in-person DOT. Additional comments and 
themes can be found in the Supplementary Data.
Cost Analysis
In our primary analysis (observation 5 days/week for a 6-month 
course), we projected that vDOT implementation would lead to 
an incremental cost-savings of $1391 per person compared with 
using in-person DOT (Table 3).
Cost for in-person DOT was driven largely by labor. In our 
primary analysis, labor costs totaled $1838, amounting to >90% 
of the overall DOT expenditure for a standard TB treatment 
course (Table 4). Labor costs varied markedly in sensitivity ana-
lysis based on health care worker type (eg, community health 
worker [CHW] vs registered nurse [RN]); overall, we estimated 
total in-person DOT costs at $866 to $5616.
For vDOT, we found that costs were driven by consumables, 
namely estimated software ($0–$100 per month) and data costs. 
In our base case, consumable costs totaled $495 ($0 to $900), 
comprising two-thirds of net treatment costs. Labor costs were 
low, totaling only $131 ($62–$413) and accounting for <20% of 
overall costs ($674). At the highest estimates of consumable costs 
($900), driven by a monthly charge of $50 for data and $100 for 
software, vDOT was still associated with a cost-savings of roughly 
$1000 per treatment course, compared with in-person DOT.
DISCUSSION
In our pragmatic mixed-methods implementation of treatment 
monitoring strategies at 3 separate public health TB clinics in 
Maryland, we found broad patient and staff acceptability of 
vDOT, with similar adherence and an increased proportion of 
prescribed doses confirmed through observation. Our economic 
evaluation suggests potential cost-savings with vDOT, when 
compared with exclusive usage of in-person DOT. Our study is 
unique compared with prior evaluations of vDOT in its broad 
patient inclusion criteria, allowing for a real-world assessment 
and insights related to vDOT implementation. In-depth inter-
views with patients and staff revealed that TB programs consid-
ered vDOT a preferred option for patients in whom in-person 
Table 2. Primary Outcomes by DOT Strategy
Variable
In-Person DOT
vDOT
P
Adherence,a median (IQR), %
98 (90–100)
94 (88–98)
.17
Observable fraction,b median (IQR), %
66 (62–72)
72 (67–92)
.03
No. (%) of patients with observable fraction greater than a target 80%
4 (15)
10 (36)
.01
DOT schedule among active TB patients (n = 25),c %
 3x/wk DOT
6 (24)
4 (16)
.32
 5x/wk DOT
25 (100)
19 (76)
.01
  7x/wk DOT
0 (100)
2 (8)
.16
Treatment length, wk
.01
 Mean ± SD
12.22 ± 6.5
19.2 ± 9.7
 Range
0–26
5–37
No. of rejected videos
 Mean (SD)
1.8 (2.4)
 Range
0–11
Unexpected video submission
 Mean (SD)
2.7 (5.3)
 Range
0–20
Patients reporting ≥1 side effects via mobile platform,d %
46
Video length, median (IQR), sec
48 (29–63)
Video size, median (IQR), mb
4.8 (1.4–5.8)
Abbreviations: DOT
, directly observed therapy; IQR, interquartile range; TB, tuberculosis; vDOT
, video directly observed therapy.
Only participants treated for active TB included (n = 25).
aPercentage of “expected” DOT doses (in-person or video) completed, excluding self-administered doses (ie, weekends or clinic holidays). An additional, less stringent analysis was also 
conducted wherein “completed” vDOT was loosely defined to include both verified and rejected miDOT videos: in-person 98% (90%–100%) vs vDOT 96% (89%–100%), P = .37
.
bPercentage of total planned doses (inclusive of weekend/holiday self-administered) that were observed (in-person or video). For vDOT
, “observation” was loosely defined to include all 
forms of uploaded miDOT videos (verified, rejected, unexpected), though only 1 video was counted for a given dosing day. An additional, stricter analysis was also conducted wherein, for 
vDOT
, “observation” referred only to verified videos: in-person 66% (62%–71%) vs vDOT 70% (63%–90%), P = .22.
cTotal number of regimens exceeds sample size (n = 25, active TB only) as some participants had >1 dosing frequency during their therapy.
dThe miDOT video system prompts patients to indicate side effects prior to video submission using checkboxes on the mobile app, with positives resulting in an automatic provider alert. 
The most common symptom reported was abdominal pain, followed by weakness. Other reported side effects included nausea/vomiting, rash, sores on lips/mouth, joint pain, yellowish 
skin or eyes, and other. Of note, some patients digitally captured side effects during the video recordings (eg, rash).
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ofid/article-abstract/5/4/ofy046/4924819 by guest on 02 June 2019
 6 • OFID • Holzman et al
DOT was logistically infeasible (eg, complex schedules or travel 
where the alternative was self-administration) or represented 
a barrier to care (eg, stigma). Program managers reported that 
associated time- and cost-savings allowed task-shifting with 
redistribution of limited clinic resources. Overall, our results 
suggest that vDOT is able to more effectively measure TB treat-
ment adherence (including weekends and holidays), compared 
with in-person DOT, and can be successfully integrated into 
patient-centered, individualized case management plans that 
result in high rates of adherence and treatment success.
Our study has several important limitations. Given current 
TB case rates, our sample size was modest, and we were not 
powered to identify small changes in adherence. Nonetheless, 
we found improvements in the “observable fraction” of pre-
scribed doses with vDOT, and our study is strengthened by 
in-depth qualitative and cost analyses that will help guide future 
larger-scale public health implementations. We did not assess 
for clinical end points, such as sputum conversion or disease 
relapse. While our study design allowed for within patient com-
parisons, these data must be interpreted with caution given the 
potential for time-varying confounders, such as medication 
adherence, which is known to decline as patients feel better 
and undergo treatment fatigue [32]. These factors could have 
reduced the observed vDOT adherence compared with in-per-
son DOT, given vDOT initiation later in the treatment course. 
Lastly, our study sample was based on clinic (and patient) discre-
tion and was not randomized; as such, our conclusions may not 
apply to all patients indiscriminately. Nonetheless, we included 
a range of TB patients, from the latently infected to those with 
extrapulmonary disease, and did not exclude patients based on 
prior adherence. Furthermore, it is important for TB programs 
to consider that while observation of pill ingestion may facili-
tate measurement of adherence, it is not the sole determinant of 
one’s adherence; reported adherence and treatment outcomes 
may therefore differ according to how DOT services are inte-
grated into broader case management strategies. At our study 
sites, all patients continued to receive dedicated case manage-
ment and other adherence support interventions per routine, 
irrespective of DOT modality (particularly after missed doses or 
reported side effects). As such, our quantitative and qualitative 
Table 3. Subset of Themes from Qualitative Analysis
Theme
Subtheme
Representative Quote
Patient
Impact of DOT on patients sDOT can be burdensome for 
patients
“I’m about to start a class, and the class…doesn’t really match the time that I have to be here to 
take the pill.… I won’t be able to do the class, and I need the class more than I need [DOT].
”
sDOT can cause emotional 
stress
“In-person DOT had an emotional impact on me; it was stressful. It made me resent [the treat-
ment team].
”
DOT logistics
sDOT efficacy is limited by 
patient factors
“[sDOT] just doesn’t work. Like tonight, I work, I don’t get off until 7:30 am, and then I go to 
school.… There is no time.
”
vDOT increases access to 
transient patients
“When I was in Peru for 2 months, the system worked perfectly. Sometimes I even used it outside 
of the city or at the beach.
”
vDOT increases access to 
those with complicated 
work schedules
“I have very long working hours.… It’s not possible for me to meet with a DOT nurse.… With 
video DOT
, I could continue with my work and still take the medicine.
”
Confidentiality
sDOT can violate patient 
privacy
“When somebody has to come to your house driving that [DOH] car, coming in…the whole neigh-
borhood’s going to look and start asking questions.
”
vDOT is more private than 
sDOT
“With [vDOT], we can control [the] setting we are in.… It’s in your hand[s].… Just avoid taking vid-
eos in places where you can be viewed by others.… We have control.
”
Provider
Impact of DOT on staff
vDOT convenient for staff
“Especially for people who have to get up very early in the morning to go to work, [vDOT] saves us 
from having to...be at their house at 5:00 am.
”
vDOT may threaten livelihood
“The only rumor that I’m hearing is that some of the DOT workers are thinking that [vDOT] is going 
to take their jobs.
”
Treatment effects of vDOT vDOT able to shorten therapy
“For patients who aren’t [home] during our normal hours, video DOT
...is much more effective.... 
They can dose anytime during the daytime as long as they have their phone available...and 
they’re still getting a counted dose.... We can actually count that dose towards their end goal as 
an observed dose, and their treatment is shortened by several days.
”
vDOT allows for observed 
therapy 7x per week
“The ability to do 7 days a week [with vDOT], rather than 5, is really kind of uncharted territory.... 
We don’t actually know whether people are taking their medicines over the weekends, and a lot 
of programs don’t even prescribe weekend packs, which when you think about it is sort of odd.
”
vDOT on clinic operations
vDOT may increase clinic 
capacity
“I don’t have to spend 2 hours, 3 hours in the morning driving all over and around the county. It 
frees me up time-wise enormously. I can see more patients in my office.
”
Decisions about DOT 
should be patient 
centered
Some with poor adherence on 
sDOT may actually do better 
on vDOT
“We [had a] patient that was highly nonadherent in standard DOT
. She was missing 3 or 4 doses 
a week.... We were going to quarantine this individual, but [we decided to] attempt video DOT
, 
and...for about a month or 2 [she] was nearly 100% adherent on a 7-day regimen of medicine on 
video DOT
.
”
Abbreviations: DOT
, directly observed therapy; sDOT
, standard directly observed therapy (ie, in-person); vDOT
, video directly observed therapy.
aOnly a subset of themes presented. For the full list, see Supplementary Tables 3 and 4.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ofid/article-abstract/5/4/ofy046/4924819 by guest on 02 June 2019
 Video DOT in TB Management • OFID • 7
results provide support for the promotion of individualized case 
management plans and argue against a “one size fits all” strategy 
for providing treatment support and treatment monitoring.
Overall, our study provides needed insights on key aspects of 
vDOT usage related to patient selection, implementation, effect-
iveness, and costs. We found that many patients were ultimately 
enrolled because of social factors thought to preclude, or at least 
impact, the ability to conduct in-person DOT. For example, 
several patients were able to have treatment observation and 
adherence measurements using vDOT while traveling outside 
of the United States. Such examples have practical implications. 
In most public health TB programs, prior to vDOT implemen-
tation, such doses (taken under self-administration) would not 
have “counted” toward treatment progress (ie, would need to be 
made up), ultimately prolonging treatment.
Beyond facilitating early recognition of poor adherence or side 
effects, DOT also has other critical roles in promoting successful 
TB control. In the absence of a biological marker for disease cure, 
TB programs base treatment completion on a prespecified number 
of treatment doses [4]. When applied consistently, DOT therefore 
serves as a key method to measure adherence and represents a 
mechanism to track treatment progress. In this regard, our study 
highlights an important consideration in adherence measurement 
and dosing frequencies. Current treatment guidelines have placed 
increasing emphasis on daily (7 days/week) therapy, though they 
still accept a 5-day/week alternative “daily” schedule (for drug-sen-
sitive disease), acknowledging that “there are no studies that com-
pare 5 to 7 daily doses” [4]. Given logistical constraints, many TB 
programs in the United States utilize a hybrid treatment schedule, 
wherein a regimen of 5 days of DOT (M–F) is coupled with self-ad-
ministered weekend doses; some programs omit weekend doses 
altogether. Self-administered weekend (or holiday) doses are gen-
erally not applied to the overall treatment dose count or adherence 
calculations (ie, they are not “expected” and are not “made up” if 
missed). In effect, with current practices, “in-person DOT” is only 
able to measure 5 of 7 (71%) prescribed weekly doses.
We therefore a priori chose to report a related metric, the 
observable fraction, to quantify the true percentage of prescribed 
doses, inclusive of weekend self-administration, that could be 
measured through observation (in-person or video). Prior to the 
study, we assumed that clinics would move away from intermittent 
dosing regimens, in favor of 7-day/week therapy upon transition 
to vDOT. Ultimately, we did see a significant 8% increase in the 
observable fraction upon transition to vDOT; however, the abso-
lute fraction was only 76% (vs 68% with in-person DOT). This 
result stemmed from the fact that only 2 participants had their 
monitoring frequencies increased to 7 days/week on vDOT, likely 
a result of entrenched provider practices. For example, some clinics 
explicitly instructed patients not to submit weekend videos, while 
others actively rejected any such submissions. Our study demon-
strates the need to adapt clinic workflows to this new monitoring 
approach, as vDOT ultimately enables the expansion of treatment 
monitoring to 7 days/week and eliminates the need for self-admin-
istered doses. This increase in the number of observable doses is 
likely to reduce overall treatment duration by eliminating the need 
to make up extra doses related to self-administered or unobserved 
doses (under the assumption that programs only count observed 
doses toward treatment progress).
Finally, our study provided the first in-depth cost analysis of 
asynchronous vDOT. We found marked heterogeneity across health 
departments, both in terms of staffing and the operational imple-
mentation of in-person DOT. Despite this diversity, we estimated 
vDOT to save programs at least $1000 per patient if implemented 
for a standard 6-month treatment course (vs 5 days per week in-per-
son DOT). When considering TB clinic costs and staffing overall, 
it is important to acknowledge that DOT represents 1 of several 
TB treatment– and case management–related activities. During 
our in-depth interviews, a single CHW expressed concerns about 
Table 4. Cost Analysis of vDOT Implementation 
DOT Strategy
Equipment
Consumables
Laborf
Total
Incremental
DOT 5x per week
In-person DOT (range)
$175b ($0–$562)
$52d ($29–$648)
$1838 ($869–$4406)
$2065 ($898–$5616)
Ref
vDOT (range)
$48c ($4–$136)
$495e ($0–$900)
$131 ($62–$413)
$674 ($66–$1449)
–$1391
DOT 7x per week
In-person DOT (range)
$175b ($0–$562)
$72d ($40–$907)
$2573 ($1217–$6169)
$2820 ($1234–$7638)
Ref
vDOT (range)
$48c ($4–$136)
$495e ($0–$900)
$183 ($87–$578)
$726 ($91–$1614)
–$2094
Abbreviations: DOT
, directly observed therapy; vDOT
, video directly observed therapy.
aCost are per patient and calculated for a standard 6-month treatment course.
bBase case assumes a Health Department vehicle (economy class) used to treat 15 patients per year, annualized over the expected lifespan of the vehicle. In the sensitivity analysis, we 
varied the number of patients treated annually and calculated alternative pricing structures, including ones wherein health care workers utilized a personal vehicle and received mileage 
reimbursement.
cBase case assumes a program-provided smartphone and dedicated clinic computer. The sensitivity analysis incorporates the scenarios wherein a patient phone/data are used for vDOT 
(ie, no clinic cost incurred).
dMiles traveled was estimated from discussions with clinic managers, DOT workers, and through evaluation of monthly gas and mileage reimbursements logs. Range incorporates fluctu-
ations in gas price and variability in the distance between patients.
eSoftware estimates were provided directly by emocha Mobile Health Inc., with the base case assuming a flat monthly rate of $50 per patient per month. The low-end estimate assumes 
free software and a patient-provided data plan, while the high-end accounts for variable data costs and a flat monthly software fee of $100 per patient. Commercial pricing may vary.
fBase case assumes an LPN conducting DOT activities. Time spent per patient was calculated as an average of that observed through time motion studies. The low range assumes a com-
munity health worker and the lowest possible estimates of time per patient. The high range assumes an RN (highest salary) and uses the highest possible estimate for time spent per 
patient. Note, labor cost is calculated based on the time required specifically for DOT activities.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ofid/article-abstract/5/4/ofy046/4924819 by guest on 02 June 2019
 8 • OFID • Holzman et al
being displaced by this new technology; such considerations need 
acknowledgment during implementation. However, several staff
 
members also presented alternative perspectives noting that vDOT 
allowed for increased time and attention to be directed toward other 
required activities (eg, contact investigations, patient counseling, 
and social support). In an era of increasing responsibilities and lim-
ited funds, maximizing staff potential is often a necessity.
Overall, our study contributes to the growing literature on 
usage of alternative modalities for TB treatment monitoring and 
expands on prior efforts by demonstrating the feasibility, accept-
ability, and cost-savings in a previously unstudied environment 
and among a broader patient population [20–23]. By using a rigor-
ous mixed-methods implementation science approach, our results 
identified and highlighted several important considerations related 
to patient selection, treatment frequency, and measurement of 
adherence that will guide policy makers and TB programs consid-
ering vDOT implementation. Importantly, our findings suggest the 
need for flexible, individualized case management plans that con-
sider patient needs while achieving public health goals.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank those who provided clinical care at each of our 3 
study sites for their hard work. We would also like the thank the leadership 
and development team at emocha Mobile Health Inc., including Sebastian 
Seiguer, JD, MBA, Katrina Rios, and Gorkem Sevic, MSE.
Author contributions. Study concept and design: M.S. Acquisition of 
data: S.B.H. Statistical analysis: S.B.H. Qualitative coding: S.B.H, A.Z. Data 
interpretation: S.B.H, M.S. Drafting of initial manuscript: S.B.H. Clinical 
revision of manuscript: All authors.
Financial support. This work was supported by the Small Business 
Innovation Research (SBIR) program at the National Institutes of Health 
(NIH) awarded to emocha Mobile Health Inc. (grant number R43 MD010521). 
Additional National Institutes of Health support was provided through a 
Postdoctoral Training Grant (grant number T32 AI007291-25 to S.B.H.).
Conflicts of interest. Dr. Shah is one of the inventors of the miDOT 
technology. Under a license agreement between emocha Mobile Health Inc. 
and the Johns Hopkins University, Dr. Shah and the university are enti-
tled to royalties on the technology described in this article. This arrange-
ment has been reviewed and approved by the Johns Hopkins University 
in accordance with its conflict of interest policies. To mitigate any poten-
tial conflicts of interest, all clinical decision-making regarding the use of 
miDOT or enrollment in the study was made by nonconflicted Department 
of Health clinicians and staff; M.S. recused himself from all data analysis but 
assisted with interpretation of results.
References
1. World Health Organization. Fact sheet. 2017. Available at: http://www.who.int/
mediacentre/factsheets/fs104/en/. Accessed April 2017.
2. Centers for Disease Control. Fact sheet. 2016. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/
tb/publications/factsheets/statistics/tbtrends.htm. Accessed January 2018.
3. Dieleman JL, Templin T, Sadat N, et al. National spending on health by source for 
184 countries between 2013 and 2040. Lancet 2016; 387:2521–35.
4. Nahid P, Dorman SE, Alipanah N, et al. Official American Thoracic Society/
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention/Infectious Diseases Society of 
America clinical practice guidelines: treatment of drug-susceptible tuberculosis. 
Clin Infect Dis 2016; 63:e147–95.
5. World Health Organization. WHO Treatment Guidelines for Drug-Resistant 
Tuberculosis: 2016 Update. Geneva, Switzerland: WHO Press; 2016.
6. Burman WJ, Cohn DL, Rietmeijer CA, et al. Noncompliance with directly 
observed therapy for tuberculosis. Epidemiology and effect on the outcome of 
treatment. Chest 1997; 111:1168–73.
7. Picon PD, Bassanesi SL, Caramori ML, et al. Risk factors for recurrence of tuber-
culosis. J Bras Pneumol 2007; 33:572–8.
8. World Health Organization. Treatment of Tuberculosis: Guidelines. 4th ed. 
Geneva, Switzerland: WHO Press; 2010.
9. Hopewell PC, Pai M, Maher D, et al. International standards for tuberculosis care. 
Lancet Infect Dis 2006; 6:710–25.
10. Hodge JH, Anderson E, Gayle N, Larson L. Tuberculosis Control Laws and 
Policies: A Handbook for Public Health and Legal Practitioners Atlanta, GA: The 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; 2009. Available at: https://www.cdc.
gov/tb/programs/tblawpolicyhandbook.pdf. Accessed 10 October 2017.
11. Karumbi J, Garner P. Directly observed therapy for treating tuberculosis. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015:CD003343.
12. Pasipanodya JG, Gumbo T. A meta-analysis of self-administered vs directly 
observed therapy effect on microbiologic failure, relapse, and acquired drug 
resistance in tuberculosis patients. Clin Infect Dis 2013; 57:21–31.
13. Zhang H, Ehiri J, Yang H, et al. Impact of community-based DOT on tuberculo-
sis treatment outcomes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One 2016; 
11:e0147744.
14. World Health Organization. Guidlines for Treatment of Drug-Suseptible 
Tuberculosis and Patient Care: 2017 Update. Geneva, Switzerland; World Health 
Organization; 2017. 
15. Sagbakken M, Bjune GA, Frich JC. Humiliation or care? A qualitative study of 
patients’ and health professionals’ experiences with tuberculosis treatment in 
Norway. Scand J Caring Sci 2012; 26:313–23.
16. Noyes J, Popay J. Directly observed therapy and tuberculosis: how can a system-
atic review of qualitative research contribute to improving services? A qualitative 
meta-synthesis. J Adv Nurs 2007; 57:227–43.
17. World Health Organization. Digital Health for the End TB Strategy: An Agenda 
for Action. Geneva, Switzerland: WHO Press; 2015.
18. Implementing an Electronic Directly Observed Therapy (eDOT) Program: 
A Toolkit for Tuberculosis (TB) Programs. Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention; 2017. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/tb/publications/pdf/tbedot-
toolkit.pdf. Accessed 16 September 2017.
19. Hemming S, Story A, Possas L, et al. Using virtually observed treatment (VOT) 
for hard to manage tuberculosis: a pilot study. Paper presented at: European 
Respiratory Society Annual Congress Barcelona, Spain. 7–11 September 2013.
20. Mirsaeidi M, Farshidpour M, Banks-Tripp D, et al. Video directly observed 
therapy for treatment of tuberculosis is patient-oriented and cost-effective. Eur 
Respir J 2015; 46:871–4.
21. Chuck C, Robinson E, Macaraig M, et al. Enhancing management of tuberculosis 
treatment with video directly observed therapy in New York City. Int J Tuberc 
Lung Dis 2016; 20:588–93.
22. Garfein RS, Collins K, Muñoz F, et al. Feasibility of tuberculosis treatment mon-
itoring by video directly observed therapy: a binational pilot study. Int J Tuberc 
Lung Dis 2015; 19:1057–64.
23. Hoffman JA, Cunningham JR, Suleh AJ, et al. Mobile direct observation treat-
ment for tuberculosis patients: a technical feasibility pilot using mobile phones in 
Nairobi, Kenya. Am J Prev Med 2010; 39:78–80.
24. DeMaio J, Schwartz L, Cooley P, Tice A. The application of telemedicine technol-
ogy to a directly observed therapy program for tuberculosis: a pilot project. Clin 
Infect Dis 2001; 33:2082–4.
25. Wade VA, Karnon J, Eliott JA, Hiller JE. Home videophones improve direct obser-
vation in tuberculosis treatment: a mixed methods evaluation. PLoS One 2012; 
7:e50155.
26. Au-Yeung KY, DiCarlo L. Cost comparison of wirelessly vs. directly observed 
therapy for adherence confirmation in anti-tuberculosis treatment. Int J Tuberc 
Lung Dis 2012; 16:1498–504.
27. Krueger K, Ruby D, Cooley P, et al. Videophone utilization as an alternative to 
directly observed therapy for tuberculosis. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis 2010; 14:779–81.
28. Maryland Department of Health. Maryland TB guidelines for prevention and 
treatment of tuberculosis. 2007. Available at: http://ideha.dhmh.maryland.gov/
OIDPCS/CTBCP/CTBCPDocuments/tbguidelines.pdf. Accessed May 2012.
29. Strauss A, Corbin J. Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and Procedures 
for Developing Grounded Theory. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc; 
1998.
30. Sama JN, Chida N, Polan RM, et al. High proportion of extrapulmonary tubercu-
losis in a low prevalence setting: a retrospective cohort study. Public Health 2016; 
138:101–7.
31. Peto HM, Pratt RH, Harrington TA, et al. Epidemiology of extrapulmonary tuber-
culosis in the United States, 1993-2006. Clin Infect Dis 2009; 49:1350–7.
32. Reyes H, Guiscafré H, Muñoz O, et al. Antibiotic noncompliance and waste 
in upper respiratory infections and acute diarrhea. J Clin Epidemiol 1997; 
50:1297–304.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/ofid/article-abstract/5/4/ofy046/4924819 by guest on 02 June 2019
