 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Birth Defects Among Fetuses and Infants of US Women
WithEvidenceofPossibleZikaVirusInfectionDuringPregnancy
Margaret A. Honein, PhD; April L. Dawson, MPH; Emily E. Petersen, MD; Abbey M. Jones, MPH; Ellen H. Lee, MD; Mahsa M. Yazdy, PhD;
Nina Ahmad, MD; Jennifer Macdonald, MPH; Nicole Evert, MS; Andrea Bingham, PhD; Sascha R. Ellington, MSPH;
Carrie K. Shapiro-Mendoza, PhD; Titilope Oduyebo, MD; Anne D. Fine, MD; Catherine M. Brown, DVM; Jamie N. Sommer, MS; Jyoti Gupta, MPH;
Philip Cavicchia, PhD; Sally Slavinski, DVM; Jennifer L. White, MPH; S. Michele Owen, PhD; Lyle R. Petersen, MD; Coleen Boyle, PhD;
Dana Meaney-Delman, MD; Denise J. Jamieson, MD; for the US Zika Pregnancy Registry Collaboration
IMPORTANCE Understanding the risk of birth defects associated with Zika virus infection
during pregnancy may help guide communication, prevention, and planning efforts. In the
absence of Zika virus, microcephaly occurs in approximately 7 per 10 000 live births.
OBJECTIVE To estimate the preliminary proportion of fetuses or infants with birth defects
after maternal Zika virus infection by trimester of infection and maternal symptoms.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS Completed pregnancies with maternal, fetal, or infant
laboratory evidence of possible recent Zika virus infection and outcomes reported in the
continental United States and Hawaii from January 15 to September 22, 2016, in the US Zika
Pregnancy Registry, a collaboration between the CDC and state and local health departments.
EXPOSURES Laboratory evidence of possible recent Zika virus infection in a maternal,
placental, fetal, or infant sample.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES Birth defects potentially Zika associated: brain
abnormalities with or without microcephaly, neural tube defects and other early brain
malformations, eye abnormalities, and other central nervous system consequences.
RESULTS Among 442 completed pregnancies in women (median age, 28 years; range, 15-50
years) with laboratory evidence of possible recent Zika virus infection, birth defects
potentially related to Zika virus were identified in 26 (6%; 95% CI, 4%-8%) fetuses or infants.
There were 21 infants with birth defects among 395 live births and 5 fetuses with birth
defects among 47 pregnancy losses. Birth defects were reported for 16 of 271 (6%; 95% CI,
4%-9%) pregnant asymptomatic women and 10 of 167 (6%; 95% CI, 3%-11%) symptomatic
pregnant women. Of the 26 affected fetuses or infants, 4 had microcephaly and no reported
neuroimaging, 14 had microcephaly and brain abnormalities, and 4 had brain abnormalities
without microcephaly; reported brain abnormalities included intracranial calcifications,
corpus callosum abnormalities, abnormal cortical formation, cerebral atrophy,
ventriculomegaly, hydrocephaly, and cerebellar abnormalities. Infants with microcephaly
(18/442) represent 4% of completed pregnancies. Birth defects were reported in 9 of 85
(11%; 95% CI, 6%-19%) completed pregnancies with maternal symptoms or exposure
exclusively in the first trimester (or first trimester and periconceptional period), with no
reports of birth defects among fetuses or infants with prenatal exposure to Zika virus
infection only in the second or third trimesters.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE Among pregnant women in the United States with completed
pregnancies and laboratory evidence of possible recent Zika infection, 6% of fetuses or
infants had evidence of Zika-associated birth defects, primarily brain abnormalities and
microcephaly, whereas among women with first-trimester Zika infection, 11% of fetuses or
infants had evidence of Zika-associated birth defects. These findings support the importance
of screening pregnant women for Zika virus exposure.
JAMA. doi:10.1001/jama.2016.19006
Published online December 15, 2016.
Editorial
Supplemental content
Author Affiliations: Author
affiliations are listed at the end of this
article.
Group Information: The US Zika
Pregnancy Registry Collaboration
members are listed at the end
of this article.
Corresponding Author: Margaret A.
Honein, PhD, Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, 1600 Clifton
Rd NE, Atlanta, GA 30333
(mrh7@cdc.gov).
Research
JAMA | Original Investigation
(Reprinted)
E1
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a GAZI UNIVERSITESI User  on 12/13/2016
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Z
ika virus infection during pregnancy can cause micro-
cephaly and brain abnormalities1; however, the magni-
tudeofriskisunknown.Forfirst-trimestermaternalZika
virus infection, modeling of data from French Polynesia sug-
gested about a 1% risk of microcephaly, and a model based on
a Zika outbreak in Bahia, Brazil, suggested a risk between 1%
and 13%.2,3 Additionally, available data suggest that most
Zika virus infections cause mild symptoms and many are
asymptomatic.4 Although microcephaly following asymptom-
atic Zika virus infection has been reported,5-9 most published
reports have documented the risk of microcephaly, brain ab-
normalities, and other adverse outcomes among pregnant
women with symptomatic Zika virus disease.8,10-12 It is un-
clear if this is because some asymptomatic pregnant women
with travel or sexual exposure to Zika virus are not tested or if
women who experience symptomatic Zika virus disease are
more likely to have adverse pregnancy outcomes.
This report describes the US Zika Pregnancy Registry
(USZPR) and the proportion of fetuses or infants with birth de-
fects potentially associated with maternal Zika virus infec-
tion among women in the USZPR and evaluates whether the
proportion with birth defects differs based on the presence of
maternal symptoms of Zika virus infection or by trimester of
possible infection.
Methods
In collaboration with state, tribal, territorial, and local health
departments, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) established the USZPR as an enhanced surveillance sys-
tem to monitor pregnancy and fetal or infant outcomes among
pregnant women and fetuses or infants with laboratory evi-
dence of possible Zika virus infection to assess the propor-
tion of birth defects occurring in infants following maternal
to fetal transmission of Zika virus infection.13,14 In accor-
dance with federal human subjects protection regulations at
45 CFR §46.101c and §46.102d and with the Guidelines for
Defining Public Health Research and Public Health Non-
Research, the USZPR was reviewed by a human subjects pro-
tection coordinator at the National Center for Emerging and
Zoonotic Infectious Diseases of the CDC and in numerous ju-
risdictions and determined to be a nonresearch, public health
surveillance activity exempt from institutional review board
evaluation. All data reported to the CDC on pregnancies and
fetal or infant outcomes potentially related to Zika virus in-
fections are protected by an Assurance of Confidentiality
(http://www.cdc.gov/od/science/integrity/confidentiality/).
The USZPR includes data from all US states, the District
of Columbia, and all US territories except Puerto Rico; preg-
nancies in Puerto Rico are monitored separately by the Zika
Active Pregnancy Surveillance System.13,15 Since February 5,
2016, the CDC has recommended Zika virus testing for all
pregnant women who have possible exposure to Zika virus
through travel, sexual contact, or local mosquito transmis-
sion regardless of symptoms.16 For this report, data from the
USZPR were limited to pregnancies completed in the conti-
nental United States or Hawaii from December 2015 through
September 22, 2016, and reported to the CDC from January
15, 2016, through September 22, 2016, including reports from
pregnancies completed before the USZPR was established.
Information for the completed pregnancies reported by Sep-
tember 22, 2016, was updated with additional data on these
pregnancies reported to USZPR through November 10, 2016.
Not included in this report are an additional 229 completed
pregnancies reported to the USZPR as of November 10, 2016;
complete information on key variables is not yet available for
many of these recently completed pregnancies.
Completed pregnancies included those that ended in a
spontaneous abortion, termination of pregnancy, stillbirth, or
live-born infant; ongoing pregnancies were excluded from this
report. Pregnancies can be reported to the USZPR at any point
during pregnancy or postnatally; some women are tested for
Zika virus infection after concerns about adverse fetal or in-
fant effects have been noted. Most reports to the USZPR are
submitted from state and local health departments. This re-
port includes data from 9 pregnant travelers with completed
pregnancies whose outcomes were reported previously and
from 5 pregnant women reported to have persistent detec-
tion of Zika virus RNA.14,17
To meet inclusion criteria for the USZPR, either the
mother, the placenta, or the fetus or infant must have had
laboratory evidence of possible Zika virus infection. For this
analysis, maternal samples included urine, serum, and amni-
otic fluid; fetal or infant samples included urine, serum,
cerebrospinal fluid, umbilical cord, or any fetal tissue;
and placental samples were assessed separately. Laboratory
evidence of possible Zika virus infection included (1) pres-
ence of Zika virus RNA on real-time reverse transcription–
polymerase chain reaction (rRT-PCR) test or other nucleic
acid amplification test; (2) maternal serological evidence of a
recent Zika virus infection based on a positive or equivocal
result on the Zika virus IgM antibody capture enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (http://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices
/Safety/EmergencySituations/ucm161496.htm#zika) with
aZikavirusplaquereductionneutralizationtesting(PRNT)titer
greater than or equal to 10 and either a negative dengue IgM or
a dengue PRNT less than 10 or both; (3) maternal serological
evidence of a recent unspecified flavivirus infection, based on
positive or equivocal Zika virus IgM results and PRNT titers
greater than or equal to 10 for both Zika virus and another
Key Points
Question What proportion of fetuses and infants of women in the
United States with laboratory evidence of possible Zika virus
infection during pregnancy have birth defects?
Findings Based on preliminary data from the US Zika Pregnancy
Registry, among 442 completed pregnancies, 6% overall had
a fetus or infant with evidence of a Zika virus–related birth defect,
primarily microcephaly with brain abnormalities, whereas among
women with possible Zika virus infection during the first trimester,
11% had a fetus or infant with a birth defect.
Meaning These findings support the importance of screening
pregnant women for Zika virus exposure.
Research Original Investigation
Birth Defects Among Offspring of Women With Possible Zika Virus Infection
E2
JAMA
Published online December 15, 2016
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a GAZI UNIVERSITESI User  on 12/13/2016
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
flavivirus (eg, dengue); (4) serological evidence of a recent Zika
virus infection in an infant based on positive or equivocal
Zika virus IgM results; and (5) placenta or other tissue samples
with immunohistochemistry staining indicative of Zika virus
infection or presence of Zika virus RNA by RT-PCR.13,18-21
These laboratory inclusion criteria were specified as “possible”
Zika virus infection because in addition to those with
laboratory confirmed Zika virus, the USZPR also includes
mother-infant pairs with serological evidence of a recent
unspecified flavivirus infection.
The gestational timing of Zika virus infection for sympto-
matic pregnant women was based on maternal report of date
of symptom onset; for asymptomatic pregnant women, tim-
ing was based on the trimester of exposure (travel to an area
of active Zika virus transmission or sexual exposure). The most
common symptoms of Zika virus infection are fever, rash, ar-
thralgia, and conjunctivitis.4 The estimates for the propor-
tion with birth defects for first-trimester infection were based
on pregnant women with symptoms in the first trimester of
pregnancy or asymptomatic pregnant women with exposure
to Zika virus infection only in the first trimester of preg-
nancy. Periconceptional exposures were defined as exposure
in the 4 weeks before the last menstrual period and through
the first 2 weeks after the last menstrual period. Pregnant
women with exposure in the periconceptional period and first
trimester were classified as having first-trimester exposure;
those with multiple trimesters of exposure including the peri-
conceptional period were classified by their trimester of ex-
posure. Risk among asymptomatic pregnant women with ex-
posure in an area of active Zika virus transmission during more
than 1 trimester, including the first trimester, was assessed
separately from those with known dates of infection.
Birth defects potentially associated with Zika virus
infection during pregnancy (referred to as “birth defects”
throughout) included brain abnormalities with or without
microcephaly, neural tube defects and other early brain mal-
formations, eye abnormalities, and other consequences of
central nervous system dysfunction including arthrogryposis
(joint contractures), clubfoot, congenital hip dysplasia, and
congenital deafness (Box and eTable in the Supplement). The
included birth defects were based primarily on case reports of
outcomesoccurringinassociationwithZikavirusinfectiondur-
ing pregnancy; there is more evidence for some of these birth
defects than for others, and a causal link has not been estab-
lished for all.5,10,12,21-27 Because much of the focus to date has
beenonmicrocephalyandbrainabnormalities,dataweresum-
marized in 2 mutually exclusive categories: (1) brain abnor-
malities with or without microcephaly regardless of the pres-
ence of additional birth defects and (2) neural tube defects and
other early brain malformations, eye abnormalities, and other
consequences of central nervous system dysfunction among
those without evident brain abnormalities or microcephaly.
Clinical experts reviewed reported information to ensure each
infant with birth defects met the above criteria. Among fetuses
with birth defects, spontaneous abortions (<20 weeks’gesta-
tion), stillbirths (≥20 weeks’gestation), and terminations of
pregnancy were grouped together as pregnancy losses, a sub-
set of completed pregnancies.
Among completed pregnancies, all fetuses or infants
with one of these birth defects were included as the numera-
tor in the preliminary estimates with outcomes for multiple
gestation pregnancies counted once; the denominator was
all completed pregnancies with and without birth defects.
The proportion affected by birth defects was calculated as
the number of fetuses or infants with birth defects among the
total completed pregnancies, and the 95% confidence inter-
val for a binomial proportion was estimated using the Wilson
score interval.28 All analyses were performed using SAS soft-
ware version 9.3 (SAS Institute Inc), except for the confidence
Box. Birth Defects Potentially Related to Zika Virus Infection
During Pregnancy and Monitored by the US Zika Pregnancy
Registry for Enhanced Surveillance
Brain Abnormalities With and Without Microcephaly
Confirmed or possible congenital microcephalya
Intracranial calcifications
Cerebral atrophy
Abnormal cortical formation (eg, polymicrogyria, lissencephaly,
pachygyria, schizencephaly, gray matter heterotopia)
Corpus callosum abnormalities
Cerebellar abnormalities
Porencephaly
Hydranencephaly
Ventriculomegaly/hydrocephaly (excluding “
mild”ventriculomegaly
without other brain abnormalities)
Fetal brain disruption sequence (collapsed skull, overlapping
sutures, prominent occipital bone, scalp rugae)
Othermajorbrainabnormalitiesincludingintraventricularhemorrhage
inutero(excludingpostnatalintraventricularhemorrhage)
Neural Tube Defects and Other Early Brain Malformations
Neural tube defects including anencephaly, acrania, encephalocele,
spina bifida
Holoprosencephaly (arhinencephaly)
Eye Abnormalities
Microphthalmia/anophthalmia
Coloboma
Cataract
Intraocular calcifications
Chorioretinal anomalies involving the macula (eg, chorioretinal
atrophy and scarring, macular pallor, gross pigmentary mottling
and retinal hemorrhage; excluding retinopathy of prematurity)
Optic nerve atrophy, pallor, and other optic nerve abnormalities
Consequences of Central Nervous System Dysfunction
Congenital contractures (eg, arthrogryposis, clubfoot, congenital
hip dysplasia) with associated brain abnormalities
Congenital deafness documented by postnatal audiological testing
a Live births: measured head circumference (adjusted for gestational age and
sex) less than the third percentile at birth or, if not measured at birth, within
first 2 weeks of life. Pregnancy loss: prenatal head circumference more than
3 SDs below the mean based on ultrasound or postnatal head
circumference less than the third percentile. Birth measurements are
evaluated using the Intergrowth-21st standards (http://intergrowth21.ndog
.ox.ac.uk/) based on measurements within 24 hours of birth.
Birth Defects Among Offspring of Women With Possible Zika Virus Infection
Original Investigation Research
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
Published online December 15, 2016
E3
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a GAZI UNIVERSITESI User  on 12/13/2016
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
intervals for proportions, which were calculated in OpenEpi
version 3.01. Data were reported as proportions rather than
risk estimates because of the preliminary nature of the data
and potential selection bias. Separate estimates were made
for asymptomatic and symptomatic pregnant women and by
trimester of infection. Reports to the USZPR were summa-
rized by laboratory evidence of Zika virus infection.
Sensitivity analyses were conducted to assess the effect
of potential biases in the completed pregnancies and fetuses
or infants with birth defects reported to the CDC either (1) ret-
rospectively during early 2016 including reports of pregnan-
cies and adverse outcomes that occurred prior to regular
weekly reporting from the jurisdictions to the USZPR because
these reports might have disproportionately included
adverse outcomes or (2) with future or very recent estimated
dates of delivery (EDD) because some pregnancy losses could
potentially be associated with the occurrence of birth
defects. The sensitivity analysis included only completed
pregnancies with an EDD from April 2016 through August
2016; the sensitivity analysis was completed for pregnancies
with any trimester of infection and specifically for pregnan-
cies with symptoms or exposure exclusively in the first tri-
mester (or first trimester and periconceptional period).
Results
A total of 442 pregnant women (median age, 28 years; range,
15-50 years) in the USZPR with possible Zika virus infection
met inclusion criteria and had completed pregnancies.
Among these women, 271 (61%) were asymptomatic, 167
(38%) were symptomatic, and 4 (1%) had missing information
on symptom status. All pregnant women with completed
pregnancies included in this report had travel-associated Zika
virus infections, meaning the infection was acquired in US
territories or outside the United States or through sexual con-
tact with a traveler; 4 were presumed to be the result of
sexual transmission in a nontraveler.
Among the 442 completed pregnancies, there were 26
fetuses or infants (6%; 95% CI, 4%-8%) with birth defects,
including 21 infants with birth defects among 395 live births
and 5 fetuses with birth defects among 47 pregnancy losses
(spontaneous abortions, pregnancy terminations, and still-
births). Twenty-two (85%) of these fetuses or infants had
brain abnormalities, microcephaly, or both. These 22 fetuses
or infants included 4 with microcephaly and no reported
neuroimaging, 14 with microcephaly and brain abnormali-
ties, and 4 with brain abnormalities without a finding of
microcephaly. Reported brain abnormalities included intra-
cranial calcifications, corpus callosum abnormalities, abnor-
mal cortical formation, cerebral atrophy, ventriculomegaly,
hydrocephaly, and cerebellar abnormalities. Eleven of the 22
fetuses or infants had intracranial calcifications with or with-
out other brain abnormalities. Among the 4 with birth
defects who did not have evident brain abnormalities or
microcephaly, 2 had encephalocele, 1 had eye abnormalities,
and 1 had hearing abnormalities. The 18 infants with a finding
of microcephaly represent 4% (18/442) of the completed
pregnancies. The 26 cases of birth defects occurred among
fetuses or infants of pregnant women with Zika virus expo-
sure in the following countries with active Zika virus trans-
mission during their pregnancies: Barbados, Belize, Brazil,
Colombia, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala,
Haiti, Honduras, Mexico, Republic of Marshall Islands, and
Venezuela.
The proportion of fetuses or infants with birth defects by
maternal symptom status was 6% (95% CI, 4%-9% [16/271]) for
asymptomatic women and 6% (95% CI, 3%-11% [10/167])
for symptomatic women (Table 1). Among 85 pregnancies with
symptom onset or exposure to Zika virus infection exclu-
sively during the first trimester (or first trimester and pericon-
ceptional period), 9 presented with birth defects (11%; 95% CI,
6%-19%). Among 211 completed pregnancies for women with
possible Zika virus exposure spanning multiple trimesters in-
cluding the first trimester, 15 presented with birth defects (7%;
95% CI, 4%-11%). No birth defects were reported among the
pregnancies with maternal symptoms or exposure only in
the second trimester (0%; 95% CI, 0%-5% [0/76]) or third tri-
mester (0%; 95% CI, 0%-11% [0/31]), but there are insuffi-
cient data to adequately estimate the proportion affected dur-
ing these trimesters (Table 1). Gestational timing of infection
was unknown for 2 of the 26 fetuses or infants with birth de-
fects and 27 of the total completed pregnancies.
Most maternal samples had serological evidence of a re-
cent Zika virus infection or a recent unspecified flavivirus in-
fection (Table 2 and Table 3). The majority of mother-infant
pairsincludedintheUSZPRhadlaboratoryevidencebasedonly
on maternal samples (360/442); 49 (11%) demonstrated pres-
ence of Zika virus in the placenta and 161 had negative results
on placental testing. Approximately 41% (182/442) of all in-
fants did not have Zika virus testing. Some mother-infant pairs
had negative test results for maternal, placental, or fetal or in-
fant samples but met the inclusion criteria based on at least 1
sample type.
In the sensitivity analysis limiting the reports to com-
pleted pregnancies with an EDD from April through August
2016, the proportion with birth defects was comparable with
the overall analysis, with 22 fetuses or infants presenting with
birth defects among 309 completed pregnancies (7%; 95% CI,
5%-11%). This subanalysis excluded 26 completed pregnan-
cies (1 with birth defects) with missing information on EDD,
21 completed pregnancies (1 with birth defects) with an EDD
from December 2015 through March 2016, and 86 completed
pregnancies (2 with birth defects) with an EDD in September
2016 or later.
In the sensitivity analysis limiting the reports to com-
pleted pregnancies with symptom onset or exposure exclu-
sively during the first trimester (or first trimester and pericon-
ceptional period) and an EDD from April 2016 through August
2016, the proportion with birth defects was comparable with
the overall analysis, with 7 fetuses or infants presenting with
birth defects among 49 completed pregnancies (14%; 95% CI,
7%-27%), comparable with the 11% observed in the primary
analysis. This subanalysis excluded 4 completed pregnancies
with missing information on EDD, none of which had a fetus
or infant with a birth defect; 3 completed pregnancies with an
Research Original Investigation
Birth Defects Among Offspring of Women With Possible Zika Virus Infection
E4
JAMA
Published online December 15, 2016
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a GAZI UNIVERSITESI User  on 12/13/2016
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
EDD from December 2015 through March 2016, including 1 fe-
tus or infant with a birth defect; and 29 completed pregnan-
cies with an EDD in September 2016 or later, including 1 fetus
or infant with a birth defect.
Discussion
In this report based on preliminary data for pregnant women
in the USZPR with laboratory evidence of possible Zika virus
infection, 6% overall had a fetus or infant with evidence of a
Zika-related birth defect, and among women with timing of
possible Zika infection exclusively during the first trimester,
11% had a fetus or infant with a birth defect. The birth defects
primarily involved included microcephaly with brain abnor-
malities, such as intracranial calcifications. Preliminary esti-
mates from the USZPR were within the range of 1% to 13% risk
of microcephaly following first-trimester maternal Zika virus
infectionmodeledontheoutbreakinBahia,Brazil,lendingsup-
port to the credibility of these estimates.3
Table 2. Summary of Samples Providing Laboratory Evidence of Possible Zika Virus Infection for 442 Women
With Completed Pregnancies in the United States Reported to the US Zika Pregnancy Registry,
December 2015–September 2016a
Maternal Specimen
With Laboratory
Evidence of Zika Virus
or Recent Zika Virus
Infection or Unspecified
Flavivirus Infection
Placental Specimen
With Laboratory
Evidence of Zika
Virus Infection
Fetal or Infant Specimen
With Laboratory
Evidence of Zika Virus
or Recent Zika Virus
Infection or Unspecified
Flavivirus Infection
Fetuses or Infants
With Birth Defects
Potentially Linked
to Congenital Zika Virus
Infection, No.b
Completed
Pregnancies, No.
Yes
Yes
Yes
6
19
Yes
Yes
No or not tested
0
20
Yes
No or not tested
Yes
8
29
No or not tested
Yes
Yes
1
3
Yes
No or not tested
No or not tested
5
360
No or not tested
Yes
No or not tested
3
7
No or not tested
No or not tested
Yes
3
4
Total No. with
positive result: 428
Total No. with
positive result: 49
Total No. with
positive result: 55
Total: 26
Total: 442
a Includes live births, spontaneous
abortions, terminations, and
stillbirths.
bSee the Box for a complete list of
birth defects potentially associated
with congenital Zika virus.
Table 1. Pregnancy Outcomes for 442 Women With Completed Pregnancies With Laboratory Evidence
of Possible Zika Virus Infection by Maternal Symptom Status and Timing of Symptom Onset or Exposure,
US Zika Pregnancy Registry, December 2015–September 2016a
No. of Pregnancies
Preliminary
Estimates of
Pregnancies With
Birth Defects, %
(95% CI)d
Brain
Abnormalities
and/or
Microcephalyb
Neural Tube Defects,
Eye Abnormalities,
and Consequences
of Central Nervous
System Dysfunctionc
Total With ≥1
Birth Defect
Total
Completed
Pregnancies
By maternal symptom
status
Maternal symptoms
of Zika virus
infection
8
2
10
167
6 (3-11)
No reported
maternal symptoms
of Zika virus
infection
14
2
16
271
6 (4-9)
Unknown symptom
status
0
0
0
4
By timing of symptoms
or exposure
First trimester
8
1
9
85
11 (6-19)
Multiple trimesters
including first
trimester
13
2
15
211
7 (4-11)
Second trimester
only
0
0
0
76
0 (0-5)
Multiple trimesters
including second
and third trimester
0
0
0
5
Third trimester only
0
0
0
31
0 (0-11)
Periconceptional
0
0
0
7
Unknown
or missing data
1
1
2
27
Total
22
4
26
442
6 (4-8)
a Pregnancies include live births,
spontaneous abortions,
terminations, and stillbirths.
Outcomes for multiple-gestation
pregnancies are counted once.
Maternal, placental, or fetal or infant
laboratory evidence of possible Zika
virus infection is based on presence
of Zika virus RNA on real-time reverse
transcription–polymerase chain
reaction or similar test, serological
evidence of a recent Zika virus
infection, serological evidence
of a recent unspecified flavivirus
infection, or immunohistochemistry
staining in tissue indicating Zika virus.
bIncludes all fetuses or infants with
either microcephaly and/or brain
abnormalities with or without the
presence of additional birth defects;
the 22 fetuses or infants included 4
with microcephaly and no reported
neuroimaging, 14 with microcephaly
and brain abnormalities reported,
and 4 with brain abnormalities
reported without a finding
of microcephaly.
c Report of one of these birth defects
in an infant with no report of brain
abnormalities and/or microcephaly;
the 4 fetuses or infants included 2
with encephalocele, 1 with eye
abnormalities, and 1 with hearing
abnormalities.
dNinety-five percent confidence
interval for a binomial proportion
using Wilson score interval.
Birth Defects Among Offspring of Women With Possible Zika Virus Infection
Original Investigation Research
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
Published online December 15, 2016
E5
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a GAZI UNIVERSITESI User  on 12/13/2016
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
In the current report, there were no reports of birth
defects among fetuses or infants with prenatal exposure to
Zika virus infection only in the second trimester (0%; 95% CI,
0%-5%) or third trimester (0%; 95% CI, 0%-11%); however,
the confidence intervals demonstrated the imprecision of
these estimates based on current data. In addition, nearly
half of the women in the USZPR had exposure during mul-
tiple trimesters of pregnancy, limiting the ability to assess
timing of infection beyond the first trimester in relation to
outcomes. The findings in this report emphasize the need for
pregnant women to avoid travel to areas with active Zika
virus transmission and consistently and correctly use con-
doms to prevent sexual transmission throughout pregnancy
if their partner has recently traveled to an area of active Zika
virus transmission.
Based on data from population-based birth defects sur-
veillance programs for 2009-2013, the median prevalence of
microcephaly in the United States was approximately 7 per
10 000 live births.29 There are no published estimates of the
prevalence of the birth defects potentially related to Zika vi-
rus infection during pregnancy combined. Among com-
pleted pregnancies in the USZPR, 6% overall were affected by
1 or more of these defects and 4% had a finding of micro-
cephaly; this prevalence is substantially higher than the back-
ground prevalence of microcephaly.
In this study, the proportion of completed pregnancies
affected by birth defects was similar following either sympto-
matic Zika virus disease or asymptomatic infection during
pregnancy. Most reported birth defects were among fetuses
or infants of women with symptoms or exposure (for those
with asymptomatic infection) in the first trimester of preg-
nancy or in multiple trimesters including the first trimester,
but timing of infection was unknown for several pregnancies.
The sensitivity analysis resulted in similar estimates when
the completed pregnancies were limited to those with EDDs
from April through August 2016 for both all completed preg-
nancies and those with symptom onset or exposure exclu-
sively in the periconceptional period or first trimester, sug-
gesting that the estimates based on total reports are not
unduly biased.
The CDC’
s guidance recommends Zika virus testing for all
women with possible exposure during pregnancy, regardless
of symptoms.16 The findings that there were similar propor-
tions with birth defects among those with symptomatic and
asymptomatic maternal infections supports the importance
of screening all pregnant women for Zika virus exposure and
testing in accordance with CDC guidance. If 80% of all Zika
virus infections are presumed to be asymptomatic,4 then the
61% of completed pregnancies reported to the USZPR with
asymptomatic infection might represent underascertainment
of asymptomatic infections. In addition, serological testing
results can be difficult to interpret in persons with other
prior or recent flavivirus infections (eg, dengue), further
complicating the diagnosis of Zika virus infection. Some of
the pregnant women in the USZPR with recent unspecified
flavivirus infection might actually have been infected with
dengue virus.30 Although mother to fetal transmission of
dengue virus is presumed to be uncommon, the potential
Table 3. Summary of Laboratory Evidence of Possible Zika Virus
Infection for 26 Fetuses or Infants With Birth Defects Among 442
Women With Completed Pregnancies in the United States Reported
to the US Zika Pregnancy Registry, December 2015–September 2016a
Fetuses or Infants With
Birth Defects Potentially
Linked to Congenital Zika
Virus Infection, No.b
Completed
Pregnancies, No.
Maternal test resultsc
Zika virus infection
on rRT-PCR
4
67
Serological evidence of
recent Zika virus or
unspecified flavivirus
infectiond
18
398
Maternal samples negative
on rRT-PCR, IgMe
7
13
No maternal
samples testede
0
1
Placental test results
(frozen or fixed)c
Zika virus on RT-PCR
10
48
Immunohistochemistry
staining demonstrating
Zika virus infection
in placental tissue
0
4
Placental samples
negative on RT-PCR,
immunohistochemistry
stainingf
10
161
No placental
samples testedf
6
232
Fetal or infant test resultsc
Zika virus on rRT-PCR
6
28
Serological evidence
of recent Zika virus
infectiong
15
33
Immunohistochemistry
staining demonstrating
Zika virus infection
in fetal tissue
1
3
Fetal or infant samples
negative on rRT-PCR,
immunohistochemistry
stainingh
5
205
No fetal or infant
samples testedh
3
182
Total
26
442
Abbreviations: RT-PCR, conventional reverse–transcription polymerase chain
reaction; rRT-PCR, real-time reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction.
a Includes live births, spontaneous abortions, terminations, and stillbirths.
bSee the Box for a complete list of birth defects potentially associated with
congenital Zika virus.
c Individuals can be included in multiple rows depending on what tests
were reported.
dSerological evidence of a recent Zika virus infection based on a positive
or equivocal result on the Zika virus IgM with a Zika virus plaque reduction
neutralization testing (PRNT) titer greater than or equal to 10 and either
a negative dengue IgM or a dengue PRNT titers less than 10 or both,
or serological evidence of a recent unspecified flavivirus infection
based on positive or equivocal Zika virus IgM results and PRNT titers greater
than or equal to 10 for both Zika virus and another flavivirus.
e All of these cases had infant or placental samples with laboratory evidence
of possible Zika virus.
f OnlythematernalorinfantsampleshadlaboratoryevidenceofpossibleZikavirus.
g Serological evidence of a recent Zika virus infection based on a positive
or equivocal Zika virus IgM result.
h All of these cases had maternal or placental samples with laboratory evidence
of possible Zika virus.
Research Original Investigation
Birth Defects Among Offspring of Women With Possible Zika Virus Infection
E6
JAMA
Published online December 15, 2016
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a GAZI UNIVERSITESI User  on 12/13/2016
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
association between congenital dengue virus infection and
adverse birth outcomes is unclear.31 In addition, prior dengue
virus infection might be a cofactor that could affect the risk
of adverse birth outcomes following Zika virus infection dur-
ing pregnancy.32
The CDC’
s guidance for the evaluation of infants with pos-
sible congenital Zika virus infection was initially released in
January 2016 and has been updated twice, most recently in
August 2016.33 Guidance currently recommends testing of the
infant when there is laboratory evidence of possible mater-
nal Zika virus infection. Guidance further recommends to con-
sider testing in situations in which there is maternal expo-
sure during pregnancy to Zika virus infection and no maternal
testing was done or when maternal testing results were nega-
tive but testing was conducted outside the period when mo-
lecular and serological testing results would be expected to be
positive. It is concerning that 3 (12%) of 26 infants with birth
defects and 182 (41%) of all 442 fetuses or infants from com-
pleted pregnancies had no reported testing of fetal or infant
samples. This lack of reported testing could have been due to
short-term delays in obtaining testing and test results; a criti-
cal issue is ensuring that pediatric clinicians are aware of ma-
ternal Zika virus exposure or testing results and thus can read-
ily identify infants who should be tested. More research is
needed to define optimal testing strategies for identifying con-
genitally infected infants; some infants with evidence of con-
genital Zika virus infection prenatally and evidence of Zika vi-
rus in fetal tissue have negative results on cord blood samples
by both PCR and IgM.34
Eighty-five percent of the fetuses or infants with poten-
tially Zika-associated birth defects in this report had brain
abnormalities or microcephaly, with most having both
microcephaly and specific brain abnormalities. Although
much of the attention has focused on microcephaly, the
underlying brain abnormalities, particularly those not easily
detectable on clinical assessment of the newborn, are of
paramount concern. For example, case reports have high-
lighted the potential for underlying brain abnormalities
such as ventriculomegaly among normocephalic infants
with prenatal Zika virus exposure. More complete clinical
evaluation of infants including neuroimaging and audiologi-
cal, ophthalmological, neurological, and developmental
assessments will be needed to fully describe the extent of
brain abnormalities and other adverse outcomes in affected
fetuses or infants.34,35
There are important limitations to consider. First, selec-
tion bias in who is included in the USZPR is possible, and the
exact gestational timing of Zika virus infection is not known
for many of the included women. Pregnant women with
symptoms of Zika virus infection were presumably more
likely to be tested than asymptomatic women; thus, infection
ascertainment was likely more complete among those with
symptoms.
Second, pregnant women with a history of possible expo-
sure to Zika virus through travel or sex might have been more
likely to be tested for Zika virus infection if fetal abnormali-
ties were detected prenatally or if they delivered an infant
with a birth defect. Therefore, identification of infections
among pregnancies with abnormalities was likely higher than
among pregnancies with unremarkable prenatal or postnatal
findings; the USZPR does not have adequate data with which
to quantify this potential bias. Conversely, birth defects
might not have been completely ascertained among preg-
nancy losses including stillbirths; thus, birth defects might be
underestimated.
Third, we cannot enumerate the number of completed
pregnancies or fetuses or infants with or without birth de-
fects that have not yet been reported to the USZPR; therefore,
these preliminary estimates might overestimate the propor-
tion affected by birth defects if completed pregnancies with
adverse outcomes were reported to the USZPR more promptly
than those with apparently normal outcomes.
Fourth, laboratory diagnostics currently do not identify
pregnant women who were infected early in pregnancy but
were tested later in pregnancy, at a time when viral RNA was
no longer present and Zika virus IgM had waned. Because of
thetimingofinfectionandtestingorlimitationsofcurrentlabo-
ratorytestsforZikavirusinmothersandinfants,aninfantwith
Zika-associatedbirthdefectsborntoamotherwhotestednega-
tive might have also tested negative or not have been tested,
and Zika virus may never be identified as the potential cause
of those defects.
Fifth, some mother-infant pairs demonstrated labora-
tory evidence of an unspecified flavivirus infection; there-
fore, some of these might not have had Zika virus infec-
tions. Sixth, the preliminary data reported to the USZPR
include very little demographic information and incomplete
information on other potential risk factors for birth defects.
Finally, there are other causes of microcephaly, brain abnor-
malities, and other birth defects, including genetic and
infectious causes, about which the USZPR has limited
information.36-38
Longitudinal monitoring of the infants with possible con-
genital Zika virus infection is essential to fully characterize
the outcomes. There are some reports of normocephalic
infants with congenital Zika virus infection who have abnor-
mal postnatal brain development or adverse effects that are
not immediately apparent at birth.11,39 In addition, future
observations can elucidate the possible role of Zika virus
infection in other outcomes, including spontaneous abor-
tions and stillbirths as well as other structural birth defects
that are not currently part of the inclusion criteria for Zika-
associated birth defects surveillance.
Conclusion
Among pregnant women in the United States with com-
pleted pregnancies and laboratory evidence of possible
recent Zika infection, 6% of fetuses or infants had evidence
of Zika-associated birth defects, primarily brain abnormali-
ties and microcephaly, whereas among women with first-
trimester Zika infection, 11% of fetuses or infants had
evidence of Zika-associated birth defects. These findings
support the importance of screening pregnant women for
Zika virus exposure.
Birth Defects Among Offspring of Women With Possible Zika Virus Infection
Original Investigation Research
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
Published online December 15, 2016
E7
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a GAZI UNIVERSITESI User  on 12/13/2016
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Published Online: December 15, 2016.
doi:10.1001/jama.2016.19006
Author Affiliations: Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia (Honein, Dawson,
E. E. Petersen, Jones, Ellington, Shapiro-Mendoza,
Oduyebo, Owen, L. R. Petersen, Boyle,
Meaney-Delman, Jamieson); New York City
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene,
Queens, New York (Lee, Fine, Slavinski);
Massachusetts Department of Public Health,
Boston (Yazdy, Brown); New York State
Department of Health, Albany (Ahmad, Sommer,
White); Virginia Department of Health, Richmond
(Macdonald, Gupta); Texas Department of State
Health Services, Austin (Evert); Florida Department
of Health, Tallahassee (Bingham, Cavicchia).
Author Contributions: Dr Honein had full access to
all of the data in the study and takes responsibility
for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the
data analysis.
Study concept and design: Honein, Ahmad,
Shapiro-Mendoza, Fine, L. R. Petersen, Boyle,
Meaney-Delman, Jamieson.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data:
Honein, Dawson, E. E. Petersen, Jones, Lee, Yazdy,
Ahmad, Macdonald, Evert, Bingham, Ellington,
Shapiro-Mendoza, Oduyebo, Fine, Brown, Sommer,
Gupta, Cavicchia, Slavinski, White, Owen, Boyle,
Meaney-Delman, Jamieson.
Drafting of the manuscript: Honein, Ahmad,
L. R. Petersen, Meaney-Delman.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important
intellectual content: All authors.
Statistical analysis: Honein, Dawson, Jones, Ahmad,
Ellington, Sommer, Meaney-Delman.
Administrative, technical, or material support:
E. E. Petersen, Jones, Lee, Yazdy, Ahmad, Ellington,
Shapiro-Mendoza, Oduyebo, Fine, Brown, Gupta,
Cavicchia, Slavinski, Owen, L. R. Petersen, Boyle,
Meaney-Delman, Jamieson.
Study supervision: Honein, Ahmad, L. R. Petersen,
Boyle, Jamieson.
Conflict of Interest Disclosures: All authors have
completed and submitted the ICMJE Form for
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest and
none were reported.
Group Information: Members of the US Zika
Pregnancy Registry Collaboration were Miranda
Daniels, MPH (Alabama Department of Public
Health); Alabama Department of Public Health
Bureaus of Communicable Diseases and Family
Health Services; Hayley D. Belisle-Yaglom, MS, MPH
(Arizona Department of Health Services); Irene
Ruberto, PhD, MPH (Arizona Department of Health
Services); Jennifer Adair, BSN, RN (Maricopa
County Department of Public Health); Melissa
Kretschmer, CVT, MA (Maricopa County
Department of Public Health); Lucy Im, MPH
(Arkansas Department of Health); Charsey Porse,
PhD, MPH (California Department of Public Health);
Sharon Messenger, PhD (California Department of
Public Health); Jacklyn Wong, PhD (California
Department of Public Health); Barbara Warmerdam
(California Department of Public Health); Olga
Barer, BS (California Department of Public Health);
Brenda Hansen, MA, MS (California Department of
Public Health); Richard Olney, MD, MPH (California
Department of Public Health); Karen Ramstrom,
DO, MSPH (California Department of Public Health);
Devra Barter, MS (Colorado Department of Public
Health and Environment); Jennifer House, DVM,
MPH, DACVPM (Colorado Department of Public
Health and Environment); Epidemiology and
Emerging Infections Program, Connecticut
Department of Public Health; Delaware Division of
Public Health; District of Columbia Department of
Health, Division of Epidemiology, Disease
Surveillance & Investigation; Leah Eisenstein, MPH
(Florida Department of Health); Nicole Kikuchi,
MPH (Florida Department of Health); Janet J.
Hamilton, MPH (Florida Department of Health);
Amanda Feldpausch, MPH (Georgia Department of
Public Health); Sarah Y. Park, MD, FAAP (Hawaii
Department of Health); Sylvia Mann, MS, CGC
(Hawaii Department of Health); Illinois Zika
Response Team; Taryn Stevens, MPH (Indiana State
Department of Health); Iowa Department of Public
Health; Kansas Department of Health and
Environment; Kentucky Department for Public
Health Zika Pregnancy Registry Workgroup;
Louisiana Department of Health’
s Office of Public
Health; Sara Robinson, MPH (Maine); Richard
Brooks, MD, MPH (Maryland Department of Health
and Mental Hygiene); Erin Jenkins, MPH (Maryland
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene); Julie E.
Dunn, PhD (Massachusetts Department of Public
Health); Susan Soliva, MPH (Massachusetts
Department of Public Health); Sarah Scotland, MPH
(Massachusetts Department of Public Health);
Cathleen A. Higgins (Massachusetts Department of
Public Health); Gerlinde S. Munshi, MA
(Massachusetts Department of Public Health);
Angela E. Lin, MD (Massachusetts General Hospital
for Children); Michigan Zika Pregnancy Registry
Workgroup; Elizabeth Schiffman, MPH, MA
(Minnesota Department of Health); Sheryl Hand,
RN, BSN (Mississippi State Department of Health);
Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services;
Christine L. Mulgrew, PhD, MPH (Montana
Department of Public Health & Human Services);
Jeff Hamik, MS (Nebraska Department of Health
and Human Services); Samir Koirala, MBBS, MSc
(Nebraska Department of Health and Human
Services); Office of Public Health Informatics and
Epidemiology at the Nevada Division of Public and
Behavioral Health; Carolyn Fredette, MPH
(New Hampshire Department of Health and Human
Services); Abigail Mathewson, DVM, MPH
(New Hampshire Department of Health and Human
Services); Joseph A. Sweatlock, PhD, DABTJ
(New Jersey Department of Health); Karen
Worthington (New Jersey Department of Health);
Kara McGinnis Pilote, MA, MPH (New Jersey
Department of Health); Kristin Garafalo, MPH,
CHES (New Jersey Department of Health); Edward
Lifshitz, MD, FACP (New Jersey Department of
Health); Joy Rende, MSA, RNC-MN, NE-BC
(New Jersey Department of Health); Mary Knapp,
MSN, RN (New Jersey Department of Health);
Regina Grazel, MSN, RN, BC, APN-C (New Jersey
Department of Health); Nancy Nolet Mimm, DNP-C,
MSN, APHN-BC (New Jersey Department of
Health); Abubakar Ropri, MPH (New Mexico
Department of Health); Lou C. Smith, MD, MPH
(New York State Department of Health); Amy
Robbins, MPH (New York State Department of
Health); Lou Ann Lance, MSN, RN (New York State
Department of Health); Helen M. Blanchette, RN,
BSN (New York State Department of Health);
Elizabeth Dufort, MD, FAAP (New York State
Department of Health); Bryon Backenson, MS
(New York State Department of Health); Daniel
Kuhles, MD, MPH (New York State Department of
Health); Lauren Culver Barlow, MS, RD, RN (Suffolk
County Department of Health Services); Maria I.
Souto, MPH (Rockland County Department of
Health); Debra Blog, MD, MPH (New York State
Department of Health); Jemma Rowlands, MPH
(New York State Department of Health); Stephanie
E. Ostrowski, PhD (New York State Department of
Health); Susan Wong, PhD (Wadsworth Center,
New York State Department of Health); Kirsten
St. George, PhD (Wadsworth Center, New York
State Department of Health); Laura Kramer, PhD
(Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of
Health); Ronald Limberger, PhD (Wadsworth
Center, New York State Department of Health); Al
Dupuis, BS (Wadsworth Center, New York State
Department of Health); Amy Dean, PhD
(Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of
Health); Kimberly Alvarez, MPH (New York State
Department of Health); Julius N. Ade, MD, PhD,
MPH (New York State Department of Health);
Rachel Wester, MPH, RN (New York State
Department of Health); Kadri Ajileye, MD, MPH
(New York State Department of Health); Amy
Burns, MS (New York State Department of Health);
Brenda Naizby, BSN (New York State Department of
Health); Patricia Many, MS, RN (New York State
Department of Health); Christina Hidalgo, MPH
(New York State Department of Health); Ann
Sullivan-Frohm, BSE (New York State Department
of Health); Hwa-Gan Chang, PhD (New York State
Department of Health); Jacquelin Griffin, PMP, CSM
(New York State Department of Health); MaryJo
Polfleit (New York State Department of Health);
Kimberley Seward, MPH (New York State
Department of Health); Inderbir Sohi, MSPH
(New York State Department of Health); Rene Hull,
BS (Wadsworth Center, New York State
Department of Health); Li Zheng, MS, BS
(Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of
Health); Meghan Fuschino, MS, BS (Wadsworth
Center, New York State Department of Health);
Chantelle Seaver, MS, BS (Wadsworth Center,
New York State Department of Health); Tabassum
Rahman, MS, BS (Wadsworth Center, New York
State Department of Health); Greg Farrell, BS
(Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of
Health); Scott Brunt, BS (Wadsworth Center,
New York State Department of Health); Michael
Popowich, BS (Wadsworth Center, New York State
Department of Health); Patrick Bryant, PhD
(Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of
Health); Daryl Lamson, BS (Wadsworth Center,
New York State Department of Health); Karen
Kulas, BS (Wadsworth Center, New York State
Department of Health); William Lee, PhD
(Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of
Health); Valerie Demarest, BS (Wadsworth Center,
New York State Department of Health); Timothy
Rem (Wadsworth Center, New York State
Department of Health); Randy Stone (Wadsworth
Center, New York State Department of Health);
Sharon Casterlin (Wadsworth Center, New York
State Department of Health); Mary Marchewka
(Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of
Health); Andrea Furuya, PhD (Wadsworth Center,
New York State Department of Health); Kyle
Carson, BS (Wadsworth Center, New York State
Department of Health); Steven Bush, MS, BS
(Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of
Health); Joel Ackelsberg, MD, MPH (New York City
Research Original Investigation
Birth Defects Among Offspring of Women With Possible Zika Virus Infection
E8
JAMA
Published online December 15, 2016
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a GAZI UNIVERSITESI User  on 12/13/2016
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene); Byron
Alex, MD, MPH (New York City Department of
Health and Mental Hygiene); Vennus Ballen, MD,
MPH (New York City Department of Health and
Mental Hygiene); Jennifer Baumgartner, MPH
(New York City Department of Health and Mental
Hygiene); Danielle Bloch, MPH (New York City
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene);
Sandhya Clark, MPH (New York City Department of
Health and Mental Hygiene); Erin Conners, PhD
(New York City Department of Health and Mental
Hygiene); Alexander Davidson, MPH (New York City
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene);
Catherine Dentinger, FNP (New York City
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene); Bisram
Deocharan, PhD (New York City Department of
Health and Mental Hygiene); Andrea DeVito, MPH
(New York City Department of Health and Mental
Hygiene); Kristen Forney, MPH (New York City
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene); Jie Fu,
PhD (New York City Department of Health and
Mental Hygiene); Gili Hrusa, MPH (New York City
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene);
Maryam Iqbal, MPH (New York City Department of
Health and Mental Hygiene); Lucretia Jones, DrPH,
MPH (New York City Department of Health and
Mental Hygiene); Hannah Kubinson, MPH
(New York City Department of Health and Mental
Hygiene); Maura Lash, RN, MPH (New York City
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene);
Marcelle Layton, MD (New York City Department of
Health and Mental Hygiene); Christopher Lee, MD,
MSc, MPH (New York City Department of Health
and Mental Hygiene); Dakai Liu, MD, PhD (New York
City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene);
Natasha McIntosh, MPH (New York City
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene); Emily
McGibbon, MPH (New York City Department of
Health and Mental Hygiene); Morgan Moy, MPH
(New York City Department of Health and Mental
Hygiene); Stephanie Ngai, MPH (New York City
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene);
Panagiotis Papadopoulos, MPH (New York City
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene); Hilary
Parton, MPH (New York City Department of Health
and Mental Hygiene); Eric Peterson, MPH
(New York City Department of Health and Mental
Hygiene); Jose Poy, MPH (New York City
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene); Amado
Punsalang, PhD (New York City Department of
Health and Mental Hygiene); Jennifer Rakeman,
PhD (New York City Department of Health and
Mental Hygiene); Altaf Shaikh, MSc (New York City
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene); Alaina
Stoute, MPH (New York City Department of Health
and Mental Hygiene); Corinne Thompson, PhD
(New York City Department of Health and Mental
Hygiene); Anthony Tran, DrPH, MPH, D(ABMM)
(New York City Department of Health and Mental
Hygiene); Don Weiss, MD, MPH (New York City
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene); Emily
Westheimer, MPH (New York City Department of
Health and Mental Hygiene); Eliza Wilson, BSMT
(New York City Department of Health and Mental
Hygiene); Ann Winters, MD (New York City
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene); David
Yang, BS (New York City Department of Health and
Mental Hygiene); Mohammad Younis, MS, MPA
(New York City Department of Health and Mental
Hygiene); Jennifer MacFarquhar, MPH, RN, CIC
(North Carolina Department of Health and Human
Services); Laura Cronquist, BS (North Dakota
Department of Health); Michele Feist, BS
(North Dakota Department of Health); Martín F.
Celaya (CDC, epidemiology field assignee); Ohio
Department of Health; Lisa Caton, MS, RN
(Oklahoma State Department of Health); Kristy
Bradley, DVM, MPH (Oklahoma State Department
of Health); Oregon Public Health Division Acute and
Communicable Disease Program; Leah Lind, MPH
(Pennsylvania Department of Health); Kumar
Nalluswami, MD, MPH (Pennsylvania Department
of Health); Center for Acute Infectious Disease
Epidemiology, Rhode Island Department of Health;
Daniel Drociuk (South Carolina Department of
Health and Environmental Control); Vinita Leedom,
MPH, CIC (South Carolina Department of Health
and Environmental Control); Jan Bollock, RN
(South Dakota Department of Health); Tennessee
Department of Health; Kelly Broussard, MPH (Texas
Department of State Health Services); Dallin
Peterson (Utah Department of Health); Amy Nance,
MPH (Utah Department of Health); Patsy Kelso,
PhD (Vermont Department of Health); Katie
Kurkjian (CDC, Career Epidemiology Field Officer
Program); Virginia Department of Health, Office of
Epidemiology, Division of Disease Surveillance and
Investigation; Virginia Department of Health, Office
of Community Health Services; Hanna Oltean, MPH
(Washington State Department of Health);
West Virginia Bureau for Public Health, Office of
Maternal, Child and Family Health; Angela Rohan,
PhD (CDC, Wisconsin Department of Health
Services); Katie Bryan, MPH (Wyoming Department
of Health); Alys Adamski, PhD, MPH (CDC); Jeanne
Bertolli, PhD, MPH (CDC); Melissa L. Danielson,
MSPH (CDC); Valerie Godoshian, MPH (CDC); Caitlin
Green, MPH (CDC); Christina Hillard, MA (CDC);
Amy Lambert, PhD (CDC); Andrea Neiman, PhD,
MPH (CDC); Kimberly Newsome, BSN, MPH (CDC);
Kara Polen, MPH (CDC); Ann Powers, PhD (CDC);
Marion Rice, MPH (CDC); Regina M. Simeone, MS,
MPH (CDC); Robyn A. Stoddard, DVM, PhD (CDC);
Tonya Williams, PhD, MS (CDC); Kathryn E. Arnold,
MD (CDC); Shannon Fleck-Derderian, MPH (CDC);
Sumaiya Khan, MPH (CDC); Fleetwood Loustalot,
FNP, PhD (CDC); Megan Reynolds, MPH, MDiv
(CDC); Infectious Diseases Pathology Branch (CDC).
Disclaimer: The findings and conclusions of this
report are those of the authors and do not
necessarily represent the official position
of the CDC.
REFERENCES
1. Rasmussen SA, Jamieson DJ, Honein MA,
Petersen LR. Zika virus and birth defects—reviewing
the evidence for causality. N Engl J Med. 2016;374
(20):1981-1987.
2. Cauchemez S, Besnard M, Bompard P, et al.
Association between Zika virus and microcephaly in
French Polynesia, 2013-15: a retrospective study.
Lancet. 2016;387(10033):2125-2132.
3. Johansson MA, Mier-y-Teran-Romero L, Reefhuis
J, Gilboa SM, Hills SL. Zika and the risk of
microcephaly. N Engl J Med. 2016;375(1):1-4.
4. Duffy MR, Chen TH, Hancock WT, et al. Zika virus
outbreak on Yap Island, Federated States of
Micronesia. N Engl J Med. 2009;360(24):2536-2543.
5. BesnardM,Eyrolle-GuignotD,Guillemette-ArturP,
et al. Congenital cerebral malformations and
dysfunction in fetuses and newborns following the
2013 to 2014 Zika virus epidemic in French
Polynesia. Euro Surveill. 2016;21(13):30181.
6. Microcephaly Epidemic Research Group.
Microcephaly in infants, Pernambuco State, Brazil,
2015. Emerg Infect Dis. 2016;22(6):1090-1093.
7. Sarno M, Sacramento GA, Khouri R, et al. Zika
virus infection and stillbirths: a case of hydrops
fetalis, hydranencephaly and fetal demise. PLoS
Negl Trop Dis. 2016;10(2):e0004517.
8. Schuler-Faccini L, Ribeiro EM, Feitosa IM, et al;
Brazilian Medical Genetics Society–Zika
Embryopathy Task Force. Possible association
between Zika virus infection and microcephaly—
Brazil, 2015. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2016;65
(3):59-62.
9. Pacheco O, Beltrán M, Nelson CA, et al. Zika
virus disease in Colombia—preliminary report
[published online June 15, 2016]. N Engl J Med. doi:
10.1056/NEJMoa1604037
10. Brasil P, Pereira JP Jr, Raja Gabaglia C, et al. Zika
virus infection in pregnant women in Rio de
Janeiro—preliminary report [published online
March 4, 2016]. N Engl J Med. doi:10.1056
/NEJMoa1602412
11. França GV, Schuler-Faccini L, Oliveira WK, et al.
Congenital Zika virus syndrome in Brazil: a case
series of the first 1501 livebirths with complete
investigation. Lancet. 2016;388(10047):891-897.
12. Ventura CV, Maia M, Travassos SB, et al. Risk
factors associated with the ophthalmoscopic
findings identified in infants with presumed Zika
virus congenital infection. JAMA Ophthalmol. 2016;
134(8):912-918.
13. Simeone RM, Shapiro-Mendoza CK,
Meaney-Delman D, et al; Zika and Pregnancy
Working Group. Possible Zika virus infection among
pregnant women—United States and territories,
May 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2016;65
(20):514-519.
14. Meaney-Delman D, Hills SL, Williams C, et al.
Zika virus infection among US pregnant
travelers—August 2015–February 2016. MMWR
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2016;65(8):211-214.
15. Adams L, Bello-Pagan M, Lozier M, et al.
Update: ongoing Zika virus transmission—Puerto
Rico, November 1, 2015–
July 7, 2016. MMWR Morb
Mortal Wkly Rep. 2016;65(30):774-779.
16. Oduyebo T, Petersen EE, Rasmussen SA, et al.
Update: interim guidelines for health care providers
caring for pregnant women and women of
reproductive age with possible Zika virus
exposure—United States, 2016. MMWR Morb Mortal
Wkly Rep. 2016;65(5):122-127.
17. Meaney-Delman D, Oduyebo T, Polen KN, et al;
US Zika Pregnancy Registry Prolonged Viremia
Working Group. Prolonged detection of Zika virus
RNA in pregnant women. Obstet Gynecol. 2016;128
(4):724-730.
18. Oduyebo T, Igbinosa I, Petersen EE, et al.
Update: interim guidance for health care providers
caring for pregnant women with possible Zika virus
exposure—United States, July 2016. MMWR Morb
Mortal Wkly Rep. 2016;65(29):739-744.
19. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Zika MAC-ELISA—for use under an emergency
use authorization only. Atlanta, GA: Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention; 2016. http://www
.fda.gov/downloads/MedicalDevices/Safety
/EmergencySituations/UCM488044.pdf. Accessed
November 16, 2016.
Birth Defects Among Offspring of Women With Possible Zika Virus Infection
Original Investigation Research
jama.com
(Reprinted)
JAMA
Published online December 15, 2016
E9
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a GAZI UNIVERSITESI User  on 12/13/2016
 Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
20. Rabe IB, Staples JE, Villanueva J, et al. Interim
guidance for interpretation of Zika virus antibody
test results. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2016;65
(21):543-546.
21. Martines RB, Bhatnagar J, de Oliveira Ramos
AM, et al. Pathology of congenital Zika syndrome in
Brazil: a case series. Lancet. 2016;388(10047):898-
904.
22. de Paula Freitas B, de Oliveira Dias JR,
Prazeres J, et al. Ocular findings in infants with
microcephaly associated with presumed Zika virus
congenital infection in Salvador, Brazil [published
online February 9, 2016]. JAMA Ophthalmol.
doi:10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2016.0267
23. Miranda HA II, Costa MC, Frazão MA, Simão N,
Franchischini S, Moshfeghi DM. Expanded
spectrum of congenital ocular findings in
microcephaly with presumed Zika infection.
Ophthalmology. 2016;123(8):1788-1794.
24. van der Linden V, Filho EL, Lins OG, et al.
Congenital Zika syndrome with arthrogryposis:
retrospective case series study. BMJ. 2016;354:i3899.
25. Carvalho FH, Cordeiro KM, Peixoto AB, et al.
Associated ultrasonographic findings in fetuses
with microcephaly because of suspected Zika virus
(ZIKV) infection during pregnancy. Prenat Diagn.
2016;36(9):882-887.
26. Leal MC, Muniz LF, Caldas Neto SD,
van der Linden V, Ramos RC. Sensorineural hearing
loss in a case of congenital Zika virus [published
online June 30, 2016]. Braz J Otorhinolaryngol.
27. Guillemette-Artur P, Besnard M,
Eyrolle-Guignot D, Jouannic JM, Garel C. Prenatal
brain MRI of fetuses with Zika virus infection.
Pediatr Radiol. 2016;46(7):1032-1039.
28. Newcombe RG. Two-sided confidence intervals
for the single proportion: comparison of seven
methods. Stat Med. 1998;17(8):857-872.
29. Cragan JD, Isenberg JL, Parker SE, et al.
Population-based microcephaly surveillance in the
United States, 2009 to 2013: an analysis of
potential sources of variation. Birth Defects Res A
Clin Mol Teratol. 2016;106(11):972-982.
30. Petersen LR, Jamieson DJ, Honein MA. Zika
virus. N Engl J Med. 2016;375(3):294-295.
31. Chye JK, Lim CT, Ng KB, Lim JM, George R,
Lam SK. Vertical transmission of dengue. Clin Infect
Dis. 1997;25(6):1374-1377.
32. Dejnirattisai W, Supasa P, Wongwiwat W, et al.
Dengue virus sero-cross-reactivity drives
antibody-dependent enhancement of infection
with Zika virus. Nat Immunol. 2016;17(9):1102-1108.
33. Russell K, Oliver SE, Lewis L, et al. Update:
interim guidance for the evaluation and
management of infants with possible congenital
Zika virus infection—United States, August 2016.
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2016;65(33):870-878.
34. Melo AS, Aguiar RS, Amorim MM, et al.
Congenital Zika virus infection: beyond neonatal
microcephaly [published online October 3, 2016].
JAMA Neurol. doi:10.1001/jamaneurol.2016.3720
35. Moore CA, Staples JE, Dobyns WB, et al.
Characterizing the pattern of anomalies in
congenital Zika syndrome for pediatric clinicians
[published online November 3, 2016]. JAMA Pediatr.
doi:10.1001/jamapediatrics.2016.3982
36. Ahlfors K, Ivarsson SA, Harris S. Report on a
long-term study of maternal and congenital
cytomegalovirus infection in Sweden: review of
prospective studies available in the literature. Scand
J Infect Dis. 1999;31(5):443-457.
37. Alcantara D, O’
Driscoll M. Congenital
microcephaly. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet.
2014;166C(2):124-139.
38. Webster WS. Teratogen update: congenital
rubella. Teratology. 1998;58(1):13-23.
39. Moura da Silva A, Ganz J, Sousa P, et al. Early
growth and neurologic outcomes of infants with
probable congenital Zika virus syndrome. Emerg
Infect Dis. 2016;22(11):1953-1956.
Research Original Investigation
Birth Defects Among Offspring of Women With Possible Zika Virus Infection
E10
JAMA
Published online December 15, 2016
(Reprinted)
jama.com
Copyright 2016 American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Downloaded From: http://jama.jamanetwork.com/ by a GAZI UNIVERSITESI User  on 12/13/2016
