 Subcortical brain volume differences of participants with ADHD 
across the lifespan: an ENIGMA collaboration
A full list of authors and affiliations appears at the end of the article.
Abstract
BACKGROUND—Neuroimaging studies show structural alterations in several brain regions in 
children and adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Through the formation 
of the worldwide ENIGMA ADHD Working Group, we addressed weaknesses of prior imaging 
studies and meta-analyses in sample size and methodological heterogeneity.
METHODS—Our sample comprised 1713 participants with ADHD and 1529 controls from 23 
sites (age range: 4–63 years; 66% males). Individual sites analyzed magnetic resonance imaging 
brain scans with harmonized protocols. Case-control differences in subcortical structures and 
intracranial volume (ICV) were assessed through mega-and meta-analysis.
FINDINGS—The volumes of the accumbens (Cohen’s d=−0.15), amygdala (d=−0.19), caudate 
(d=−0.11), hippocampus (d=−0.11), putamen (d=−0.14), and ICV (d=−0.10) were found to be 
smaller in cases relative to controls. Effect sizes were highest in children, case-control differences 
were not present in adults. Explorative lifespan modeling suggested a delay of maturation and a 
delay of degeneration. Psychostimulant medication use or presence of comorbid psychiatric 
disorders did not influence results, nor did symptom scores correlate with brain volume.
INTERPRETATION—Using the largest data set to date, we extend the brain maturation delay 
theory for ADHD to include subcortical structures and refute medication effects on brain volume 
suggested by earlier meta-analyses. We add new knowledge about bilateral amygdala, accumbens, 
and hippocampus reductions in ADHD, and provide unprecedented precision in effect size 
This manuscript version is made available under the CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 license.
Corresponding author: Martine Hoogman, Radboud University Medical Center, Department of Human Genetics (855), PO Box 
9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands, Tel: +31-24-3616722, martine.hoogman@radboudumc.nl. 
Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our 
customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of 
the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be 
discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
AUTHORS CONTRIBUTIONS
Protocol design, quality testing, and analysis: Hoogman, Bralten, Hibar, Mennes, Zwiers, Schweren, Hulzen, Medland, Shumskaya, 
Jahanshad, Faraone, Thompson, Franke
Data collection, processing, analysis, and/or funding: Hoogman, Bralten, Hibar, Mennes, Zwiers, Schweren, van Hulzen, Medland, 
Shumskaya, Jahanshad, de Zeeuw, Szekely, Sudre, Wolfers, Onnink, Dammers, Mostert, Vives-Gilabert, Kohls, Oberwelland, Seitz, 
Schulte-Rüther, Ambrosino di Bruttopilo, Doyle, Høvik, Dramsdahl, Tamm, van Erp, Dale, Schork, Conzelmann, Zierhut, Baur, 
McCarthy, Yoncheva, Cubillo, Chantiluke, Metha, Paloyelis, Hohmann, Baumeister, Bramati, Mattos, Tovar-Moll, Douglas, 
Banaschewski, Brandeis, Kuntsi, Asherson, Rubia, Kelly, Di Martino, Milham, Castellanos, Frodl, Zentis, Lesch, Reif, Pauli, Jernigan, 
Haavik, Plessen Lundervold Hugdahl, Seidman, Biederman, Rommelse, Heslenfeld, Hartman, Hoekstra, Oosterlaan, von Polier, 
Konrad, Vilarroya, Ramos, Soliva, Durston, Buitelaar, Faraone, Shaw, Thompson, Franke
Manuscript preparation: Hoogman, Bralten, Mennes, Zwiers, Shumskaya, Shaw, Thompson, Faraone, Franke
All authors contributed edits and approved the content of the manuscript.
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Lancet Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Published in final edited form as:
Lancet Psychiatry. 2017 April ; 4(4): 310–319. doi:10.1016/S2215-0366(17)30049-4.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 estimates. Lifespan analyses suggest that, in the absence of well-powered longitudinal studies, the 
ENIGMA cross-sectional sample across six decades of life provides a means to generate 
hypotheses about lifespan trajectories in brain phenotypes.
FUNDING—National Institutes of Health
Keywords
ADHD; Subcortical brain volumes; imaging; lifespan; meta-analysis; amygdala
INTRODUCTION
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a common neuropsychiatric disorder 
with a prevalence of 5.3% in childhood1. Two-thirds of patients with an ADHD diagnosis in 
childhood continue to have persistent, impairing symptoms in adulthood2. ADHD is 
characterized by age-inappropriate symptoms of inattention and/or hyperactivity and 
impulsivity3. Many imaging studies, often in small samples, have reported brain structural 
and functional differences between individuals with ADHD and controls, both in childhood 
and adulthood. Five meta-analyses of structural neuroimaging studies in ADHD have been 
published (Table 1). The first meta-analysis pooled region of interest brain volumes studies4, 
while the others pooled voxel-based morphometry (VBM) studies5–8. Most consistent results 
across studies were for reduced volumes of (parts of) the basal ganglia for patients compared 
with healthy controls. Two metaanalyses showed that, with increasing age, basal ganglia 
structural differences between cases and controls tended to decrease, and that stimulant 
treatment was associated with normalization of these brain structures5,6.
Brain volumes have also been associated with clinical features of ADHD; smaller volumes 
of caudate, cerebellum, and frontal and temporal gray matter have been associated with 
greater symptom severity9. Also in the general population, ADHD symptoms correlated with 
volumetric brain measures10,11.
Identifying structural brain differences in people with ADHD is important to further our 
insights into the nature of ADHD. So far, analyses of brain structures in ADHD have been 
limited in size and statistical power (Table 1); the sample size of the largest published meta-
analysis on brain volume (n=565 cases and n=583 controls) allowed the identification of 
differences in brain volume with Cohen’s d effect sizes of ≥0.15 with 80% power 
(G*Power12). Analyses of other psychiatric disorders show that smaller effects are likely13. 
Existing meta-analyses for ADHD only used published data as source material, which 
limited their ability to address covariates that may vary among studies, like age and 
medication5,6. In addition, the existing meta-analyses included studies using variable 
methods and protocols such as the segmentation software and quality control.
To overcome such issues and perform collaborative studies of maximal power, we founded 
the ENIGMA ADHD Working Group. This worldwide collaboration enabled analyses of 
existing individual data, improving upon earlier meta-analyses by basing analyses on the use 
of harmonized segmentation and quality control protocols. Our increased sample size 
compared to all earlier studies supported both mega-and meta-analysis (sMethods, appendix) 
Hoogman et al.
Page 2
Lancet Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 designs across 60 years of the lifespan. We selected subcortical brain volumes as our target, 
because of neurodevelopmental theories hypothesizing ADHD to be linked to early-
emerging, persistent subcortical abnormalities14 and building on the results of earlier meta-
analyses, which showed that deviations in these volumes were most consistently observed. 
In addition, we investigated intracranial volume (ICV) as a measure of total brain volume. 
Analyzing data from 23 cohorts with a sample size of n=3200 enabled us to detect the case-
control effect sizes observed in other psychiatric disorders. In addition, the mega-analysis 
design also allowed investigation of associations with symptom scores, age, psychostimulant 
medication use, and comorbidity with other psychiatric disorders.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Contributing studies
The ENIGMA ADHD Working Group was formed in 2013 to aggregate structural magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) data from participants with ADHD and healthy controls across the 
lifespan. Details about the diagnostic procedures for each site are listed in the appendix 
(sTable1). The group adopted a rolling inclusion design, in which new groups can join at any 
time, but data-freezes allow analysis at fixed time points. The data-freeze for the current 
subcortical analysis was set at February 8, 2015. The analyzed sample comprised 23 cohorts, 
for details see Table 2. Each participating site had approval from its local ethics committee 
to perform the study and to share de-identified, anonymized individual data.
Neuroimaging
Structural T1-weighted brain MRI data were acquired and processed at the individual sites. 
The images were analyzed using standardized protocols to harmonize analysis and quality 
control processes (sMethods, appendix, and http://enigma.ini.usc.edu/protocols/imaging-
protocols/). Fully-automated and validated neuroimaging segmentation algorithms based on 
FreeSurfer versions 5.1 or 5.3 were used (sTable1, appendix). To make sure no effects of 
FreeSurfer version influenced the results13, we performed an additional analysis, adding 
version number as a covariate to our main model (see below). For each participant, we 
computed ICV and left and right volumes of the accumbens, putamen, pallidum, caudate, 
thalamus, amygdala, and hippocampus. For further analysis, we used the mean of the left 
and right volume ((R+L)/2). For an overview of single site subcortical structures, see 
appendix (sFigure1). Outliers were determined at above and below 1.5-times the 
interquartile range per cohort and group (case/control) and were excluded (sFigure1, 
appendix)15.
Case-control differences of subcortical brain volumes and ICV
By pooling all available individual data from all cohorts, a mega-analysis (for explanation 
see the sMethods, appendix), we investigated the differences between cases and controls on 
subcortical volumes and ICV. After excluding collinearity of age, sex, and intracranial 
volume (ICV) (variance inflation factor <1.2) and normality testing, the mega-analysis of 
each subcortical volume was performed using a linear mixed model (lme) by running the 
package nlme in R (version3.1–117). The model included diagnosis (case=1 and control=0) 
as factor of interest, age, sex, and ICV as fixed factors, and site as random factor. In the 
Hoogman et al.
Page 3
Lancet Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 analysis of ICV, ICV was omitted as covariate from the model. Handedness was added to the 
model to correct for possible effects of lateralization, but was excluded from the model when 
there was no significant contribution of this factor. To calculate Cohen’s d effect size 
estimates, adjusted for age, sex, site, and ICV, we used the t-statistic from the factor 
diagnosis in the model. In a post-hoc analysis, left and right volumes were studied 
separately.
To make sure that no unobserved factor biased our analysis of case-control differences, 
meta-analysis was also performed by linear regression analysis for each volume and for each 
sample separately, taking age, sex, and ICV into account. The R-package “metaphor” 
(version 1.9–116) was used to perform an inverse variance-weighted, random-effects meta-
analysis, in accordance with other ENIGMA Working Groups13,15 (sMethods, appendix).
Effects of age
The effect of age on subcortical volume and ICV was studied by running the above 
described model for groups stratified by age: in children aged 14 or younger, adolescents 
aged 15 until 21 years of age, and in adults, aged 22 and older. We removed samples that 
were left with 10 subjects or less due to the stratification. As it is likely that the effects of 
age do not strictly follow a linear model, we only report linear effects of age and the effect 
of age*diagnosis for the sake of being complete. In addition, more explorative modeling was 
done to better understand the effects of age, by plotting moving averages and using 
fractional polynomials to fit non-linear models to the data (sMethods, appendix).
Significance threshold
Multiple comparisons correction for 32 tests (8 volumes and 4 groups: all, children, 
adolescents, and adults) was applied by using a false discovery rate with q=0.05 resulting in 
a p-value significance threshold of p=0.156.
Exploration of effects of sex, psychostimulant medication, and clinical measures
To explore the effects of sex on brain volume, the results of the term sex from the main 
model are reported. To examine associations between prior psychostimulant treatment and 
regional brain volume, the mega-analysis model was run again, including only patients with 
medication information available (sTable1, appendix). To test, whether acute effects of 
psychostimulant medication confounded possible brain volume differences between 
participants with ADHD and healthy controls, we excluded subjects treated with stimulants 
at the time of their participation in the study (participants receiving other types of treatment 
were retained). In addition, as previous meta-analyses had found an association between 
stimulants and brain volumes5,6, we compared patients, who had ever used stimulant 
medication, to patients, who were lifetime stimulant-naïve. We explored the effects of 
ADHD symptom scores and presence/absence of co-morbid disorders on those brain 
volumes that differed significantly between participants with ADHD and healthy controls, 
for details see appendix (sMethods and sTable2, appendix).
Hoogman et al.
Page 4
Lancet Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Role of the funding sources
The funders had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or 
writing of the report. The corresponding author had full access to all of the data and the final 
responsibility to submit for publication.
RESULTS
We included data from 1713 participants with ADHD and 1529 healthy controls (Table 2) 
with a median age of 140 (range 4–63) years.
Case-control differences in subcortical volumes and ICV
As shown in Table 3, the mega-analysis indicated that participants with ADHD had 
significantly smaller volumes for the accumbens, amygdala, caudate, hippocampus, 
putamen, and ICV. Post-hoc analyses for the subcortical regions showed these effects to be 
bilateral (sTable3, appendix). No effect of FreeSurfer version of handedness was found 
(sTable4&5, appendix).
Results of the case-control meta-analysis were largely comparable to those of the mega-
analysis, but volume differences for accumbens and hippocampus were not significant 
(sTable6, appendix). Heterogeneity (I2) across samples was low to moderate; heterogeneity 
was highest for hippocampus (sTable6, appendix) and might be indicative of non-linear 
effects of site for this structure.
Effect of age
Age-stratified analyses revealed significant case-control differences in children for the 
accumbens, amygdala, caudate, hippocampus, putamen, and ICV (Table 4 and Figure 1). 
Effect sizes were higher than those for the entire sample. In the adolescent group, there was 
a significant case-control difference in the hippocampus. In adults, none of the case-control 
comparisons remained significant. Figure 1 suggested an interaction effect for age-group and 
diagnosis on hippocampus volume; this was nominally supported by linear interaction 
statistics (p=0.03; sTable7, appendix). Explorative modeling using moving averages (Figure 
2) also showed the age effects to cluster early in life, with higher age of attaining peak 
volumes in the ADHD group. The moving averages also hinted at potential later onset of 
volume decrease in the ADHD group, most clearly seen in accumbens and putamen. Sample 
sizes after age 50 years were limited (sFigure3, appendix), and resulted in wider confidence 
intervals in the moving average analyses. The fractional polynomial analyses also supported 
different developmental models for ADHD cases and controls for amygdala, hippocampus, 
putamen, thalamus, and ICV (sFigure4 & sTable8, appendix).
Effect of sex
Consistent with literature documenting smaller brains in females17, all but two subcortical 
structures, accumbens and caudate, showed main effects of sex in the mega-analysis (Table 
3). None of the volumes showed differential sex effects for participants with ADHD and 
controls.
Hoogman et al.
Page 5
Lancet Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Effect of medication
Information on current medication use was available for 1254 participants with ADHD; 455 
participants with ADHD were on psychostimulant medication (methylphenidate or 
amphetamine) at the time of scanning, with over half of the studies using a washout period 
of 24/48 hours (sTable1, appendix); 799 participants with ADHD were not taking stimulant 
medication at scan time. Case-control differences in brain volumes after excluding 
participants currently on stimulant medication (Table 5) were comparable in effect sizes to 
those observed in the main analysis.
For 719 participants with ADHD, information was available on lifetime usage of stimulant 
medication. Of these, 82 participants (11%) had never taken stimulant medication, compared 
to 637 patients, who used stimulant medication somewhere in their lifetime for a period of 
more than 4 weeks. No differences in any of the volumes were found by directly comparing 
these two groups.
Association of clinical measures with subcortical brain volumes and ICV
Meta-analysis of the correlation between ADHD symptom scores in cases and brain volumes 
revealed no significant effects; only a nominally significant effect (p=0.02) was observed for 
caudate volume (sTable9 & sFigure6, appendix). Neither were there any significant 
correlations when only the childhood samples were entered in the meta-analysis. Also, the 
observed case-control brain volume differences were not explained by the presence of 
another comorbid psychiatric disorder (sTable10, appendix).
DISCUSSION
Here, we report the largest study to date of brain volume differences between participants 
with ADHD and healthy individuals. Through worldwide collaboration in the ENIGMA 
ADHD Working Group, data on 1713 participants with ADHD and 1529 healthy controls 
were newly analyzed, using harmonized quality control and segmentation procedures. 
Compared to previous meta-analyses, our study newly identified amygdala, accumbens, and 
hippocampus volumes to be smaller in participants with ADHD, and extended earlier 
findings for reduced caudate and putamen volumes by showing those to be bilateral rather 
than unilateral5,7. Significant volume differences had small effect sizes (ranging from d=
−0.10 to d=−0.19). Meta-analysis confirmed these results. Age-stratification showed volume 
differences to cluster in childhood, no differences were seen in adulthood. The volume 
differences were equally apparent in those treated with psychostimulant medication and 
those naïve to psychostimulants. Finally, no correlations with quantitative scores of ADHD 
symptoms were found in cases, nor did comorbidity with other psychiatric disorders explain 
the findings.
The work presented here carries several important messages for the clinical field. First, our 
results coming from highly powered analysis, confirm that ADHD patients truly have altered 
brains, i.e. that ADHD is a disorder of the brain. This is a clear message for clinicians to 
convey to parents and patients, which can help to reduce the stigma that ADHD is just a 
label for difficult kids, and caused by incompetent parenting. We hope this work will 
Hoogman et al.
Page 6
Lancet Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 contribute to a better understanding of ADHD in the general public, and that it becomes just 
as apparent as for major depressive disorder, for example, that we label ADHD as a brain 
disorder. Second, finding the most pronounced effects in childhood and showing delayed 
peaks of subcortical volume maturation provides a relevant model of ADHD as a disorder of 
brain maturation delay. Third, the brain differences we have found are not caused by any co-
morbid disorders, medication effects, or ADHD symptom severity, but are exclusively 
related to the ADHD diagnosis. Lastly, finding the largest effect in the amygdala is another 
important message, as it links ADHD to emotional regulation problems. Those are often 
present in patients with ADHD, but these disease characteristics have not (yet) been 
included into the official DSM-criteria. Our work shows neurobiological support for the 
inclusion of this domain in the core ADHD phenotype, asking for more acknowledgement of 
the importance of emotion regulation problems in the ADHD patient.
Our findings for striatum volume reduction are in line with current models of ADHD18. 
Differences in caudate volume are the most consistent finding for ADHD4–6, and also 
smaller putamen volumes have been frequently reported5–7. Our study now provides robust 
effect size estimates for those structural differences and shows that effects are bilateral. 
Although identified before in a single study19, our findings extend the meta-analytic 
literature to the third striatal volume, nucleus accumbens. Novel meta-analytic findings of 
our study are for amygdala and hippocampus. Previous work in single studies had found 
effects in these structures20–22, but also failed to replicate in others e.g.23,24. For amygdala 
volume, which showed the largest effect size in our study (d=−0.19; d=−0.18 in children), 
and for accumbens, the lack of earlier meta-analytic evidence for its role in ADHD might be 
due to the fact that these are small structures, for which automatic segmentation performs 
less well25. A more highly powered analysis may therefore have been necessary to overcome 
the experimental inaccuracy of these measures. Prior work provides functional evidence for 
a role of amygdala, accumbens, and hippocampus in ADHD. Dysfunction of the amygdala is 
associated with difficulties recognizing emotional stimuli, callous unemotional traits, and 
with emotion regulation in general26,27. Difficulties in recognizing emotional stimuli, 
diminished emotional reactions to pleasant stimuli, and higher levels of callous unemotional 
traits have all been linked to ADHD28–31, and amygdala volume has been associated with 
hyperactivity20. The accumbens, with its prominent role in reward processing, is central to 
motivational and emotional dysfunction in ADHD18. The results of the hippocampus are less 
straight-forward, as there is not so much evidence for a deficit in long-term memory in 
ADHD patients the hippocampus’ main function32. However, there are also reports on the 
hippocampus playing a role in the regulation of motivation and emotion, which is impaired 
in ADHD33.
Importantly, effect sizes observed in our study were similar to those found for other 
psychiatric disorders analysed using the ENIGMA procedures, in particular major 
depression and bipolar disorder13,34. The scale of the effects is consistent with expectations 
for a heterogeneous disorder like ADHD. The specific pattern of findings may partially 
differentiate ADHD from the other psychiatric disorders analysed using similar procedures, 
i.e. schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and major depressive disorder13,15,34. Especially effects 
on caudate and putamen seem to be ADHD-specific among the four. However, as mostly 
Hoogman et al.
Page 7
Lancet Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 adults were investigated for the other three disorders, formal analyses taking age into 
account will need to be performed to make valid statements.
The results of the age-stratified analysis indicate that subcortical volume differences in 
ADHD are most prominent in children, and non-existent in adults. Our additional 
exploratory models suggest that this is not the entire story on age effects, though care in 
interpreting this result is needed because of the crosssectional design of this study. Based on 
our findings across different approaches, we propose a model of altered trajectories of 
subcortical volume in ADHD. Our data suggest a delayed peak volume in participants with 
ADHD, which is reminiscent of earlier reports of altered velocity of cortical development in 
a longitudinal sample35. This model should be confirmed by longitudinal analyses, 
especially since the childhood and adult ADHD samples included in this study represent 
different subgroups of the population: childhood ADHD samples include those who will 
later remit and those who will persist having ADHD in adulthood, the adult ADHD samples 
include only the latter. In addition to the delays in subcortical brain maturation at early age, 
our exploratory work also tentatively suggest later onset of decreases in subcortical volumes 
beyond the 4th decade of life in ADHD. However, since sample sizes in our analysis dropped 
dramatically above age 25 years, and we had insufficient data to study age effects after 60 
years, this work is still hampered by not having sufficient subjects per site to rule out site-
biases in those age ranges. As long as ADHD in old age is still a blind spot in ADHD 
research, it will be difficult to test the validity of such findings.
Prior meta-analyses found associations between the percentage of treated patients and right 
caudate and amygdala/uncus volumes5,6. In our analysis, in which we were able to directly 
compare treated to non-treated participants with ADHD in a sample exceeding the size 
included in the two previous metaanalyses 4-fold, we did not confirm such associations with 
brain volume. This is in line with the most recent meta-analysis8. However, since our study 
had a non-randomized, cross-sectional design, some caution to interpreting these results is 
warranted, as the design of this study was not optimal to test medication effects. Also, as 
both prior meta-analyses used voxel-wise maps, there is a possibility that the observed 
normalizing effects of medication were too local to be picked up by volumetry.
We did not observe associations of brain volumes with clinical measures, i.e. comorbidity or 
ADHD symptom scores. The absence of an association with comorbidity suggests that the 
brain volume reductions are robustly linked to ADHD itself, rather than being a secondary 
phenomenon caused by comorbidity. The absence of significant associations between brain 
volumes and symptom ratings is not surprising, given that brain function is based on 
distributed networks of brain regions rather than individual brain regions36. Still, previous 
studies did find single volume-function associations9,37, which we do not replicate here. We 
also could not replicate an earlier reported (modest) correlation of a total brain volume 
measure highly related to ICV with ADHD symptom severity in a similarly sized population 
sample10. In addition to the above, not finding effects of symptom scores might also be due 
to the heterogeneity of the instruments used by different cohorts in our study and/or 
differences in raters (clinicians, teachers, parents). In addition, the sample size was halved in 
this case-only analysis, and the distribution of scores was skewed to the clinical range. In 
line with models of fronto-striatal dysfunction in ADHD, one could hypothesize that cortical 
Hoogman et al.
Page 8
Lancet Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 structures might play a more important role in the severity of symptoms in ADHD patients 
than the subcortical structures14.
This study has several strengths and limitations. A clear strength is the sample size, being 
the largest mega-/meta-analysis to date, with enough power to detect effects as small as 
d=0.08. Another strength is the harmonization of segmentation protocols across all 
contribution sites, reducing imprecision caused by differences in methods. Nonetheless, 
diagnostic routines and acquisition of imaging data still differed between sites, a limitation 
contributing to heterogeneity across samples. A strength was also the opportunity for mega-
analysis. While effect sizes were similar to the meta-analysis, the mega-analysis allowed a 
more powerful detection of case-control volume differences. Mega-analysis also enabled 
effects of age, sex, comorbidity, and medication to be studied, although accounting for site 
in these analyses might have somewhat masked age effects (as many studies had a restricted 
age range). Modeling age in a cross-sectional study is challenging but we have used several 
approaches to understand the effects of age, however, we should be cautious and interpret 
our findings as hypothesisgenerating for future studies.
To conclude, this first result of our world-wide collaboration confirms and extends previous 
findings of reduced striatal volume in ADHD. Optimizing sample size and harmonizing 
methods across studies allowed us to identify additional differences in amygdala and 
hippocampal volumes potentially contributing to problems in emotion regulation, 
motivation, and memory in ADHD. Brain volume differences were most prominent in 
children. We invite interested researchers to join the next studies of the ENIGMA ADHD 
Working Group. In this way, we may optimally benefit from efforts already invested in 
individual studies to better understand this common yet still vexing disorder.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Authors 
Martine Hoogman, PhD1,2, Janita Bralten, PhD1,2, Derrek P
. Hibar, PhD3, Maarten 
Mennes, PhD4, Marcel P
. Zwiers, PhD4, Lizanne Schweren, MSc5, Kimm J.E. van 
Hulzen, PhD1,2, Sarah E. Medland, PhD6, Elena Shumskaya, PhD1,2, Neda 
Jahanshad, PhD3, Patrick de Zeeuw, PhD7, Eszter Szekely, PhD8, Gustavo Sudre, 
PhD8, Thomas Wolfers, MSc1,9, Alberdingk M.H. Onnink, PhD1,2, Janneke T. 
Dammers, MSc2,10, Jeanette C. Mostert, PhD1,9, Yolanda Vives-Gilabert, PhD11, 
Gregor Kohls, PhD12, Eileen Oberwelland, MSc12, Jochen Seitz, MD13, Martin 
Schulte-Rüther, PhD12,14, Sara Ambrosino di Bruttopilo, MD7, Alysa E. Doyle, 
PhD15,16, Marie F
. Høvik, MD17, Margaretha Dramsdahl, PhD18, Leanne Tamm, 
PhD19, Theo G.M. van Erp, PhD20, Anders Dale, PhD21,22, Andrew Schork, MSc23, 
Annette Conzelmann, PhD24, Kathrin Zierhut, PhD25, Ramona Baur, MSc26, Hazel 
McCarthy, PhD27, Yuliya N. Yoncheva, PhD28, Ana Cubillo, PhD29, Kaylita 
Chantiluke, PhD29, Mitul A. Mehta, PhD30, Yannis Paloyelis, PhD30, Sarah 
Hohmann, MD31, Sarah Baumeister, PhD31, Ivanei Bramati, PhD32, Paulo Mattos, 
Hoogman et al.
Page 9
Lancet Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 PhD32,33, Fernanda Tovar-Moll, PhD32,34, Pamela Douglas, PhD35, Tobias 
Banaschewski, PhD31, Daniel Brandeis, PhD31,36,37,38, Jonna Kuntsi, PhD39, Phil 
Asherson, PhD39, Katya Rubia, PhD29, Clare Kelly, PhD27,28,40,41, Adriana Di 
Martino, MD28, Michael P
. Milham, PhD42,43, Francisco X. Castellanos, PhD28,44, 
Thomas Frodl, PhD27,45, Mariam Zentis45, Klaus-Peter Lesch, PhD46,47, Andreas 
Reif, PhD48, Paul Pauli, PhD26, Terry Jernigan, PhD49,50, Jan Haavik, PhD51,52, 
Kerstin J. Plessen, PhD51,53, Astri J. Lundervold, PhD51,54, Kenneth Hugdahl, 
PhD52,54, Larry J. Seidman, PhD55,56, Joseph Biederman, PhD55,57, Nanda 
Rommelse, PhD10,58, Dirk J. Heslenfeld, PhD59,60, Catharina Hartman, PhD5, 
Pieter J. Hoekstra, PhD5, Jaap Oosterlaan, PhD60, Georg von Polier, MD12, Kerstin 
Konrad, PhD12, Oscar Vilarroya, PhD62,63, Josep-Antoni Ramos-Quiroga, PhD62,64, 
Joan Carles Soliva, PhD62, Sarah Durston, PhD7, Jan K. Buitelaar, PhD2,58,65, 
Stephen V. Faraone, PhD51,66, Philip Shaw, PhD8,67, Paul Thompson, PhD3, and 
Barbara Franke, PhD1,2,10
Affiliations
1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands 2Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands 3Imaging Genetics Center, Mary and Mark Stevens Institute for 
Neuroimaging and Informatics, Keck School of Medicine of USC, University of 
Southern California, USA, Marina del Rey, CA, USA 4Radboud University, Donders 
Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen, The Netherlands 5University 
of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of Psychiatry, 
Groningen, The Netherlands 6QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, 
Brisbane, Australia 7NICHE-lab, Brain Center Rudolf Magnus, Department of 
Psychiatry, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands 
8Neurobehavioral Clinical Research Section, National Human Genome Research 
Institute, Bethesda, USA 9Donders Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging, Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands 10Department of Psychiatry, Radboud university medical center, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands 11INNDACYT, Barcelona, Spain 12Child 
Neuropsychology Section, Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 
University Hospital Aachen, Aachen, Germany 13Department of Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatry, University Hospital Aachen, Aachen, Germany 14JARA 
Translational Brain Medicine, Research Center Juelich, Aachen, Germany 
15Department of Psychiatry & Center for Human Genetics Research, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA 
16Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research at the Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, 
USA 17Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway 
18Region Zealand, Psychiatry, Roskilde, Denmark 19Department of Pediatrics, 
Division of Behavioral Medicine and Clinical Psychology, Cincinnati Children’s 
Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati OH, USA 20Department of Psychiatry and 
Human Behavior, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, USA 21Departments of 
Neurosciences and Radiology, University of California, San Diego, San Diego, CA, 
USA 22UCSD Center for Translational Imaging and Precision Medicine, San Diego, 
CA, USA 23Department of Cognitive Science, UC San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA 
Hoogman et al.
Page 10
Lancet Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 24Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of 
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany 25Department of Medical Psychology and 
Psychotherapy, Medical Sociology and Rehabilitation Sciences University of 
Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany 26Department of Psychology, University of 
Würzburg, Germany, Würzburg, Germany 27Department of Psychiatry, University of 
Dublin, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland 28The Child Study Center at NYU 
Langone Medical Center, New York, USA 29King’s College London, Institute of 
Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, Department of Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry, London, UK 30King’s College London, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology 
and Neuroscience, Department of Neuroimaging, London, UK 31Department of 
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Central Institute of Mental 
Health Medical Faculty Mannheim/Heidelberg University, Mannheim, Germany 
32D’Or Institute for Research and Education (IDOR), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 
33Institute of Psychiatry, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 
34Morphological Sciences Program, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de 
Janeiro, Brazil 35Department of Psychiatry, University of California, Los Angeles, 
California, USA 36Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, University of 
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland 37Zurich Center for Integrative Human Physiology, 
University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland 38Neuroscience Centre Zurich, University 
and ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland 39King’s College London, Institute of 
Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, Department of Social Genetic and 
Developmental Psychiatry, London, UK 40School of psychology, Trinity College, 
Dublin, Ireland 41Trinity College Institute of Neuroscience, Dublin, Ireland 42Center 
for the Developing Brain, Child Mind Institute, New York, USA 43Center for 
Biomedical Imaging and Neuromodulation, Nathan Kline Institute for Psychiatric 
Research, Orangeburg, NY, USA 44Division of Child and Adolescent Psychiatric 
Research, Nathan Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research, Orangeburg, NY, USA 
45Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Hospital, Otto-von-
Guericke-University, Magdeburg, Germany 46Division of Molecular Psychiatry, 
Center of Mental Health, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany 47Dept. of 
Translational Neuroscience, School for Mental Health and Neuroscience (MHeNS), 
Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands 48Department of Psychiatry, 
Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, University Hospital Frankfurt, 
Frankfurt, Germany 49Departments of Cognitive Science, Psychiatry, Radiology, 
University of California, San Diego, CA, USA 50Center for Human Development, 
University of California, San Diego, CA, USA 51K.G. Jebsen Centre for 
Neuropsychiatric Disorders, Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, 
Bergen, Norway 52Department of Psychiatry, Haukeland University Hospital, 
Bergen, Norway 53Child and Adolescent Mental Health Center, Capital Region, 
Denmark 54Department of Biological and Medical Psychology, University of Bergen, 
Bergen, Norway 55Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Mass, USA 56Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA 57Clinical 
and Research Programs in Pediatric Psychopharmacology and Adult ADHD, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA 58Karakter child and adolescent 
Hoogman et al.
Page 11
Lancet Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Psychiatry, Nijmegen, The Netherlands 59Department of Cognitive Psychology, VU 
University Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands 60Department of Clinical 
Neuropsychology, VU University Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
61Institute for Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-3), Research Center Juelich, 
Juelich, Germany 62Department of Psychiatry and Legal Medicine, Universitat 
Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain 63Fundació IMIM, Barcelona, Spain 
64Department of Psychiatry, Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron, CIBERSAM, 
Barcelona, Spain 65Radboud university, Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands 66Department of Psychiatry, SUNY Upstate Medical 
University, Syracuse, NY, USA 67National Institute of Mental Health, Bethesda, MD, 
USA
Acknowledgments
ENIGMA received funding from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Consortium grant U54 EB020403, 
supported by a cross-NIH alliance that funds Big Data to Knowledge Centers of Excellence (BD2K). We also are 
supported by the European College for Neuropsychopharmacology (ECNP) by a grant for the ECNP Network 
ADHD across the lifespan.
ADHD-WUE: Data collection and analysis was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (KFO 125, 
TRR 58/A1 and A5, TRR SFB 58 B06, SFB-TRR 58/B01, and Z02, RE1632/5-1) and the research leading to these 
results also received funding from the European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme for research, 
technological development and demonstration under grant agreement no 602805 (“Aggressotype”).
ADHD-DUB1 and DUB2: The ADHD-DUB1 and DUB2 studies received funding from the Health Research Board 
Ireland.
ADHD-Mattos: Ivanei Bramati, Paolo Mattos and Fernanda Tovar-Moll were supported by an IDOR intramural 
grant.
ADHD200-KKI, ADHD200NYU, ADHD200Peking, ADHD200OHSU: http://fcon_1000.projects.nitrc.org/indi/
adhd200/)(p)ADHD-UKA: KFO-112 and IRTG1328 was supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG).
DAT-London: This work was supported in part by UK Medical Research, Council Grant G03001896 to J Kuntsi and 
NIH grants, R01MH62873 and R01MH081803 to SV Faraone.
IMpACT: The IMpACT study was supported by a grant from the Brain & Cognition Excellence Program and a Vici 
grant (to Barbara Franke) of the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO, grant numbers 
433-09-229 and 016-130-669) and in part by the Netherlands Brain Foundation (grant number, 15F07[2]27)and the 
and BBMRI-NL (grant CP2010-33). The research leading to these results also received funding from the European 
Community’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007–2013) under grant agreement no. 602805 
(Aggressotype), no. 278948 (TACTICS) and no. 602450 (IMAGEMEND). In addition, the project received funding 
from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Sklodowska-Curie 
grant agreement no. 643051 (MiND) and under grant agreement no. 667302 (CoCA).
Niche: The structural neuroimaging studies of NICHE were supported by VIDI and VICI grants from the 
Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (Nederlandse Organisatie voor Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek, 
NWO) to Sarah Durston (grant numbers Vidi-91.776.384 and Vici-453-10-005).
NYU ADHD: NYU data collection and sharing was suported by NIH grants T32MH67763, R01MH083246, 
K23MH087770, R01MH094639, and U01MH099059 and a grant from the Stavros S. Niarchos Foundation.
UAB-ADHD: The study and its contributors received funding from the Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad 
under research grant SAF2012-32362 and : PI12/01139 from the Department of Health of the Government of 
Catalonia. Additional funding was obtained from the Generalitat de Catalunya.
ZI-CAPS: The Neurofeedback study was partly funded by the project D8 of the Deutsche Forschungsgesellschaft 
collaborative research center 636.
Hoogman et al.
Page 12
Lancet Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 ADHD-Rubia: The study was funded by the UK Department of Health via the National Institute of Health Research 
Centre (BRC) for Mental health t South London and the Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust and the Institute of 
Psychiatry, King’s College London.
NeuroIMAGE: This work was supported by NIH Grant R01MH62873, NWO Large Investment Grant 
1750102007010 and grants from Radboud university medical center, University Medical Center Groningen and 
Accare, and VU University Amsterdam. This work was also supported by a grant from NWO Brain & Cognition 
(433-09-242). Further support was received from the European Union FP7 programmes TACTICS (278948) and 
IMAGEMEND (602450).
MTA: Data collection and sharing for this project was funded by the NIDA MTA Neuroimaging Study (National 
Institute on Drug Abuse Grant Contract #: HHSN271200800009C). The Multimodal Treatment Study of Children 
with ADHD (MTA) was a National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) cooperative agreement randomized clinical 
trial, continued under an NIMH contract as a follow-up study and finally under a National Institute on Drug Abuse 
(NIDA) contract.
Maarten Mennes: supported by a Marie Curie International Incoming Fellowship within the 7th European 
Community Framework Programme, grant agreement n° 327340.
Sarah Medland: supported by a Future Fellowship FT110100548 from the Australian Research Council. Pamela 
Douglas: Klingenstein Third Generation Foundation ADHD Grant Jan Haavik: K.G.Jebsen Foundation.
Larry Seidman: RO1 MH62152 and R21 MH091461.
Steve Faraone: K.G. Jebsen Centre for Research on Neuropsychiatric Disorders, University of Bergen, Bergen, 
Norway
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURES
These authors all declare no conflicts of interest:
Martine Hoogman, Janita Bralten, Derrek Hibar, Maarten Mennes, Marcel Zwiers, Lizanne 
Schweren, Kimm van Hulzen, Sarah Medland, Elena Shumskaya, Neda Jahanshad, Eszter 
Szekely, Gustavo Sudre, Thomas Wolfers, Alberdingk Marten Onnink, Janneke Dammers, 
Jeanette Mostert, Yolanda Vives-Gilabert, Gregor Kohls, Ellen Oberwelland, Jochen Seitz, 
Martin Schulte-Rüther, Patrick de Zeeuw, Sara Ambrosino di Bruttopilo, Alysa Doyle, 
Marie Høvik, Margaretha Dramsdahl, Andrew Schork, Annette Conzelmann, Kathrin 
Zierhut, Ramona Baur, Hazel McCarthy, Yuliya Yoncheva, Ana Cubillo, Kaylita Chantiluke, 
Mitul Metha, Yannis Paloyelis, Sarah Hohmann, Sarah Baumeister, Ivanei Bramati, 
Fernanda Tovar-Moll, Daniel Brandeis, Jonna Kuntsi, Phil Asherson, Clare Kelly, Adriana 
Di Martino, Michael Milham, Francisco Castellanos, Thomas Frodl, Mariam Zentis, Klaus-
Peter Lesch, Andreas Reif, Paul Pauli, Terry Jernigan, Kerstin Plessen, Astri Lundervold, 
Kenneth Hugdahl, Larry Seidman, Sarah Durston, Georg von Polier, Oscar Vilarroya, Joan 
Carles Soliva, Nanda Rommelse, Dirk Heslenfeld, Catharina Hartman, Jaap Oosterlaan, 
Philip Shaw, Paul Thompson.
Potential conflicts of interest for the following authors are reported:
Theo Van Erp consulted for Roche Pharmaceuticals and has a contract with Otsuka 
Pharmaceutical, Ltd.
Anders Dale is a Founder of CorTechs Labs, Inc. He serves on the Scientific Advisory 
Boards of CorTechs Labs and Human Longevity, Inc., and receives research funding through 
a Research Agreement with General Electric Healhcare.
Hoogman et al.
Page 13
Lancet Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Paulo Mattos was on the speakers’ bureau and/or acted as consultant for Janssen-Cilag, 
Novartis, and Shire in the previous five years; he also received travel awards to participate in 
scientific meetings from those companies. The ADHD outpatient program (Grupo de 
Estudos do Déficit de Atenção/Institute of Psychiatry) chaired by Dr. Mattos has also 
received research support from Novartis and Shire. The funding sources had no role in the 
design and conduct of the study; collection, management, analysis, or interpretation of the 
data; or preparation, review, or approval of the manuscript.
Tobias Banaschewski served in an advisory or consultancy role for Hexal Pharma, Lilly, 
Medice, Novartis, Oxford outcomes, PCM scientific, Shire and Viforpharma. He received 
conference support or speaker’s fee by Janssen McNeil, Lilly, Medice, Novartis and Shire. 
He is/has been involved in clinical trials conducted by Shire & Viforpharma. The present 
work is unrelated to the above grants and relationships.
Katya Rubia received speaker’s fees form Shire, Medice and a grant from Lilly for another 
project.
Jan Haavik has received speaker fees from Lilly, Novartis and Janssen Cilag.
Steve Faraone has received income, travel expenses and/or research support from, and/or has 
been on an Advisory Board for, and/or participated in continuing medical education 
programs sponsored by: Pfizer, Ironshore, Shire, Akili Interactive Labs, CogCubed, Alcobra, 
VAYA Pharma, Neurovance, Impax, NeuroLifeSciences, Otsuka, McNeil, Janssen, Novartis, 
Eli Lilly and the NIH. With his institution, he has US patent US20130217707 A1 for the use 
of sodium-hydrogen exchange inhibitors in the treatment of ADHD. He receives royalties 
from books published by Guilford Press: Straight Talk about Your Child’s Mental Health; 
Oxford University Press: Schizophrenia: The Facts; Elsevier, ADHD: Non-Pharmacologic 
Treatments
Joseph Biederman is currently receiving research support from the following sources: The 
Department of Defense, Food & Drug Administration, Ironshore, Lundbeck, Magceutics 
Inc., Merck, PamLab, Pfizer, Shire Pharmaceuticals Inc., SPRITES, Sunovion, Vaya 
Pharma/Enzymotec, and NIH. In 2015, Dr. Joseph Biederman received honoraria from the 
MGH Psychiatry Academy for tuition-funded CME courses. He has a US Patent Application 
pending (Provisional Number #61/233,686) through MGH corporate licensing, on a method 
to prevent stimulant abuse. In 2014, Dr. Joseph Biederman received honoraria from the 
MGH Psychiatry Academy for tuition-funded CME courses. He received research support 
from AACAP, Alcobra, Forest Research Institute, and Shire Pharmaceuticals Inc. Dr. 
Biederman received departmental royalties from a copyrighted rating scale used for ADHD 
diagnoses, paid by Ingenix, Prophase, Shire, Bracket Global, Sunovion, and Theravance; 
these royalties were paid to the Department of Psychiatry at MGH.
Kerstin Konrad received speaking fees from Medice, Lilly and Shire.
Josep-Antoni Ramos was on the speakers’ bureau and/or acted as consultant for Eli-Lilly, 
Janssen-Cilag, Novartis, Shire, Lundbeck, Almirall and Rubió in the last 3 years. He also 
received travel awards (air tickets + hotel) for taking part in psychiatric meetings from 
Hoogman et al.
Page 14
Lancet Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Janssen-Cilag, Rubió, Shire, and Eli-Lilly. The ADHD Program chaired by him received 
unrestricted educational and research support from the following pharmaceutical companies 
in the last 3 years: Eli-Lilly, Rovi, Ferrer, Lundbeck, Shire, and Rubió.
Pieter Hoekstra received a research grant from Shire and was part of the advisory board of 
Shire.
Jan Buitelaar has been in the past 3 years a consultant to/member of advisory board 
of/and/or speaker for Janssen Cilag BV, Eli Lilly, Medice, Shire, Roche, and Servier. He is 
not an employee of any of these companies, and not a stock shareholder of any of these 
companies. He has no other financial or material support, including expert testimony, 
patents, royalties.
Barbara Franke received educational speaking fees from Merz and Shire.
References
1. Polanczyk G, de Lima M, Horta B, Biederman J, Rohde L. The worldwide prevalence of ADHD: a 
systematic review and metaregression analysis. Am J Psychiatry. 2007; 164(6):942–8. [PubMed: 
17541055] 
2. Faraone S, Biederman J, Mick E. The age-dependent decline of attention deficit hyperactivity 
disorder: a meta-analysis of follow-up studies. Psychol Med. 2006; 36(2):159–65. [PubMed: 
16420712] 
3. (APA) APA. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders. 2000 4th text rev ed. 
4. Valera EM, Faraone SV, Murray KE, Seidman LJ. Meta-analysis of structural imaging findings in 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Biological Psychiatry. 2007; 61(12):1361–9. [PubMed: 
16950217] 
5. Frodl T, Skokauskas N. Meta-analysis of structural MRI studies in children and adults with attention 
deficit hyperactivity disorder indicates treatment effects. Acta Psychiatr Scand. 2012; 125(2):114–
26. [PubMed: 22118249] 
6. Nakao T, Radua J, Rubia K, Mataix-Cols D. Gray matter volume abnormalities in ADHD: 
voxelbased meta-analysis exploring the effects of age and stimulant medication. Am J Psychiatry. 
2011; 168(11):1154–63. [PubMed: 21865529] 
7. Ellison-Wright I, Ellison-Wright Z, Bullmore E. Structural brain change in Attention Deficit 
Hyperactivity Disorder identified by meta-analysis. BMC Psychiatry. 2008; 8:51. [PubMed: 
18590567] 
8. Norman LJ, Carlisi C, Lukito S, et al. Structural and Functional Brain Abnormalities in Attention-
Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder and Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder: A Comparative Meta-analysis. 
JAMA Psychiatry. 2016; 73(8):815–25. [PubMed: 27276220] 
9. Castellanos FX, Lee PP, Sharp W, et al. Developmental trajectories of brain volume abnormalities in 
children and adolescents with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. JAMA. 2002; 288(14):1740–
8. [PubMed: 12365958] 
10. Hoogman M, Rijpkema M, Janss L, et al. Current self-reported symptoms of attention deficit/
hyperactivity disorder are associated with total brain volume in healthy adults. PLoS One. 2012; 
7(2):e31273. [PubMed: 22348063] 
11. Shaw P, Gilliam M, Liverpool M, et al. Cortical development in typically developing children with 
symptoms of hyperactivity and impulsivity: support for a dimensional view of attention deficit 
hyperactivity disorder. Am J Psychiatry. 2011; 168(2):143–51. [PubMed: 21159727] 
12. Faul F, Erdfelder E, Lang AG, Buchner A. G*Power 3: a flexible statistical power analysis program 
for the social, behavioral, and biomedical sciences. Behav Res Methods. 2007; 39(2):175–91. 
[PubMed: 17695343] 
Hoogman et al.
Page 15
Lancet Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 13. Schmaal L, Veltman DJ, van Erp TG, et al. Subcortical brain alterations in major depressive 
disorder: findings from the ENIGMA Major Depressive Disorder working group. Mol Psychiatry. 
2015
14. Halperin JM, Schulz KP. Revisiting the role of the prefrontal cortex in the pathophysiology of 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Psychol Bull. 2006; 132(4):560–81. [PubMed: 16822167] 
15. van Erp TG, Hibar DP, Rasmussen JM, et al. Subcortical brain volume abnormalities in 2028 
individuals with schizophrenia and 2540 healthy controls via the ENIGMA consortium. Mol 
Psychiatry. 2015
16. Viechtbauer W. Conducting meta-analysis in R with the metafor package. Journal of Statistical 
Software. 2010; 36(3):1–48.
17. Ruigrok AN, Salimi-Khorshidi G, Lai MC, et al. A meta-analysis of sex differences in human brain 
structure. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2014; 39:34–50. [PubMed: 24374381] 
18. Sonuga-Barke E, Bitsakou P, Thompson M. Beyond the dual pathway model: evidence for the 
dissociation of timing, inhibitory, and delay-related impairments in attention-deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2010; 49(4):345–55. [PubMed: 20410727] 
19. Cha J, Fekete T, Siciliano F, et al. Neural Correlates of Aggression in Medication-Naive Children 
with ADHD: Multivariate Analysis of Morphometry and Tractography. 
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2015; 40(7):1717–25. [PubMed: 25645374] 
20. Frodl T, Stauber J, Schaaff N, et al. Amygdala reduction in patients with ADHD compared with 
major depression and healthy volunteers. Acta Psychiatr Scand. 2010; 121(2):111–8. [PubMed: 
19878138] 
21. Tajima-Pozo K, Yus M, Ruiz-Manrique G, Lewczuk A, Arrazola J, Montañes-Rada F. Amygdala 
Abnormalities in Adults With ADHD. J Atten Disord. 2016
22. Posner J, Siciliano F, Wang Z, Liu J, Sonuga-Barke E, Greenhill L. A multimodal MRI study of the 
hippocampus in medication-naive children with ADHD: what connects ADHD and depression? 
Psychiatry Res. 2014; 224(2):112–8. [PubMed: 25220159] 
23. Almeida Montes L, Ricardo-Garcell J, Barajas De La Torre L, et al. Clinical correlations of grey 
matter reductions in the caudate nucleus of adults with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. J 
Psychiatry Neurosci. 2010; 35(4):238–46. [PubMed: 20569650] 
24. Ahrendts J, Rüsch N, Wilke M, et al. Visual cortex abnormalities in adults with ADHD: a structural 
MRI study. World J Biol Psychiatry. 2011; 12(4):260–70. [PubMed: 20879808] 
25. Guadalupe T, Zwiers MP, Teumer A, et al. Measurement and genetics of human subcortical and 
hippocampal asymmetries in large datasets. Hum Brain Mapp. 2014; 35(7):3277–89. [PubMed: 
24827550] 
26. Aggleton JP. The contribution of the amygdala to normal and abnormal emotional states. Trends 
Neurosci. 1993; 16(8):328–33. [PubMed: 7691009] 
27. Viding E, Sebastian CL, Dadds MR, et al. Amygdala response to preattentive masked fear in 
children with conduct problems: the role of callous-unemotional traits. Am J Psychiatry. 2012; 
169(10):1109–16. [PubMed: 23032389] 
28. Musser ED, Galloway-Long HS, Frick PJ, Nigg JT. Emotion regulation and heterogeneity in 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2013; 52(2):163–
71e2. [PubMed: 23357443] 
29. Herpers PC, Rommelse NN, Bons DM, Buitelaar JK, Scheepers FE. Callous-unemotional traits as 
a cross-disorders construct. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol. 2012; 47(12):2045–64. [PubMed: 
22570257] 
30. Shaw P, Stringaris A, Nigg J, Leibenluft E. Emotion dysregulation in attention deficit hyperactivity 
disorder. Am J Psychiatry. 2014; 171(3):276–93. [PubMed: 24480998] 
31. Conzelmann A, Mucha RF, Jacob CP, et al. Abnormal affective responsiveness in attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder: subtype differences. Biol Psychiatry. 2009; 65(7):578–85. [PubMed: 
19100967] 
32. Burgess N, Maguire EA, O’Keefe J. The human hippocampus and spatial and episodic memory. 
Neuron. 2002; 35(4):625–41. [PubMed: 12194864] 
Hoogman et al.
Page 16
Lancet Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 33. Shigemune Y, Abe N, Suzuki M, et al. Effects of emotion and reward motivation on neural 
correlates of episodic memory encoding: a PET study. Neurosci Res. 2010; 67(1):72–9. [PubMed: 
20079775] 
34. Hibar DP, Westlye LT, van Erp TG, et al. Subcortical volumetric abnormalities in bipolar disorder. 
Mol Psychiatry. 2016
35. Shaw P, Eckstrand K, Sharp W, et al. Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder is characterized by a 
delay in cortical maturation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007; 104(49):19649–54. [PubMed: 
18024590] 
36. Bressler SL, Menon V. Large-scale brain networks in cognition: emerging methods and principles. 
Trends Cogn Sci. 2010; 14(6):277–90. [PubMed: 20493761] 
37. Onnink AMH, Zwiers MP, Hoogman M, et al. Brain alterations in adult ADHD: Effects of gender, 
treatment and comorbid depression. European Neuropsychopharmacology. 2014; 24(3):397–409. 
[PubMed: 24345721] 
Hoogman et al.
Page 17
Lancet Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Research in context
Evidence before this study
After searching for all prior meta-analysis performed on brain volume differences in 
ADHD including the subcortical regions until the 1st of February 2015 using the search 
terms ‘ADHD’, ‘structural’, ‘brain’, and ‘meta-analysis [Title]’ and ‘english’ [Language] 
in Pubmed, we found four published meta-analyses. The largest of those meta-analysed 
data on 565 cases and 583 controls (children only). The published meta-analyses had 
three major limitations: 1. Power was only sufficient to detect effect sizes of Cohen’s d of 
0.15 and higher, which we know to be insufficient based on results in other psychiatric 
disorders. 2. Existing studies only used published data as source material, which limited 
their ability to address covariates that may vary among studies, like age, and medication. 
3. The existing meta-analyses included studies using different segmentation software and 
quality control procedures, a limitation contributing to heterogeneity across samples.
Added value of this study
The current multi-site study, with data on 1713 cases and 1529 controls included, is by 
far the largest and best-powered study to date on brain volumes in ADHD. Data of all 
sites were newly analyzed using harmonized methods. Our work implicates new 
structures, amygdala and hippocampus, in ADHD, and provides unprecedented precision 
in effect size estimates. Our results, covering most part of the lifespan, showed most 
pronounced effects in childhood.
Implications of all the available evidence
We confirm, with high powered analysis, that ADHD patients truly have altered brains, 
i.e. that ADHD is a disorder of the brain. This is a clear message for clinicians to convey 
to parents and patients, which can help to reduce the stigma of ADHD and get a better 
understanding of ADHD. This way, it will become just as apparent as for major 
depressive disorder, for example, that we label ADHD as a brain disorder. Also, finding 
the most pronounced effects in childhood provides a relevant model of ADHD as a 
disorder of brain maturation delay.
Finding the biggest effect in the amygdala is another important message, as it links 
ADHD to emotional regulation problems. Those are frequently found in patients with 
ADHD, but these disease characteristics have not (yet) made it into the official DSM-
criteria. Our work shows neurobiological support for the inclusion of this domain in the 
core ADHD phenotype.
Hoogman et al.
Page 18
Lancet Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 FIGURE 1. 
Displayed are the Cohens d effect sizes of differences between patients with ADHD and 
healthy controlsfor subcortical volumes and ICV, for 4 separate groups:1.) all subjects, 2.) 
children only (<15years), 3.) adolescents only (15–21 years), and 4.) adults only (>21 years). 
*significant after false discovery rate (FDR) correction; †nominal significant at p<0.05
Hoogman et al.
Page 19
Lancet Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 FIGURE 2. 
Displayed are the moving averages, corrected for age, sex, ICV and site for the subcortical 
volumes.
Hoogman et al.
Page 20
Lancet Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Hoogman et al.
Page 21
Table 1
Overview of published structural neuroimaging meta-analyses in ADHD.
Study
Subjects
Sample size (case/controls)
Image analysis method
Main results
Valera et al., 
2007
Children only
565/583
Brain volumetry
Reduced volume of splenium of the corpus 
callosum, cerebral volume, and right 
caudate nucleus in patients.
Ellison-Wright 
et al., 2008
Children only
114/143
VBM
Smaller right putamen/pallidum region in 
patients.
Nakao et al., 
2011
Children and adults
378/344
VBM
Smaller basal ganglia in patients. 
Increasing age and long-term medication 
use associated with reduced case-control 
differences.
Frodl et al., 
2012
Children and adults
320/288
VBM
Right globus pallidus, right putamen, and 
caudate are reduced in patients. Increasing 
age and treatment tended to be associated 
with reduced deficits in patients.
Norman et al, 
2016
Children and adults
931/822
VBM
Decreased grey matter volume in right 
basal ganglia, insula, ventromedial 
orbitofrontal cortex, medial prefrontal 
cortex, right anterior cingulate cortex. No 
association between the grey matter 
abnormalities and longterm stimulant use
VBM = voxel-based morphometry
Lancet Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Hoogman et al.
Page 22
Table 2
Overview of cohort characteristics. For a more detailed description and references for the assessments and neuroimaging procedures, see sTable 1 in the 
appendix.
Sample name
Site, country of origin
N Total
N Cases (M/F)
N Controls (M/F)
Age ± SD
ADHD-WUE
Würzburg, GER
118
32/30
26/30
39.68±11.44
ADHD-DUB1
Dublin, IRL
75
27/9
31/8
22.29±5.23
ADHD-DUB2
Dublin, IRL
20
16/4
–
33.65±10.15
ADHD-Mattos
Rio de Janeiro, BRA
17
10/7
–
22.94±1.39
ADHD200-KKI
Baltimore, USA
94
15/10
41/28
10.22±1.34
ADHD200-NYU*
New York, USA
260
115/36
54/55
11.47±2.92
ADHD200-Peking
Peking, CHN
245
90/12
84/59
11.70±1.96
ADHD200-OHSU
Oregon, USA
109
29/13
30/37
9.13±1.25
ADHD-UKA
Aachen, GER
181
95/7
53/26
11.21±2.68
Bergen-adultADHD
Bergen, NOR
81
21/17
16/27
31.21±6.74
Bergen-SVG
Bergen, NOR
54
20/5
20/9
10.05±1.20
DAT-London
London, GBR
56
27/0
29/0
15.78±2.10
IMpACT-NL
Nijmegen, NLD
245
49/76
49/71
35.49±11.39
MGH-ADHD
New York, USA
148
42/37
29/40
35.76±12.03
NICHE
Utrecht, NLD
158
68/10
67/13
10.42±1.95
NYU ADHD
New York, USA
80
22/18
22/18
31.58±9.44
UAB-ADHD
Barcelona, SPA
198
82/21
64/31
25.80±13.02
ZI-CAPS
Mannheim, GER
35
17/5
7/6
12.73±1.23
ADHD-Rubia
London, GBR
77
44/0
33/0
13.95±2.19
NeuroImage-ADAM
Amsterdam, NLD
182
73/24
57/28
17.16±3.19
NeuroImage-NIJM
Nijmegen, NLD
178
89/50
23/16
16.89±3.41
NIH
Bethesda, USA
502
168/83
168/83
9.97±3.09
MTA
Irvine, USA
129
73/15
31/10
24.6±1.4
Total
3242
1713
1529
18.6±11.81
*One subject was excluded because of missing gender status
Lancet Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Hoogman et al.
Page 23
Table 3
Results of the mega-analysis of subcortical brain volumes in the total sample.
N Cases/Controls
Adjusted mean volume estimate (SEM)1 Cases/Controls
p-value for Diagnosis
Cohen’s d (95%CI)
Other significant terms in the model
Accumbens
1652/1471
656.5 (1.2)/673.7(2.1)
4.98×10−9
−0.15 (−0.22 – −0.08)
ICV, Site, Age
Amygdala
1598/1463
1554.1 (3.7)/1577.8(3.7)
3.69×10−7
−019 (−0.26 – −0.11)
Sex, ICV, Site
Caudate
1659/1489
3927.8 (8.2)/3964.6(8.6)
0.001
−011 (−0.18 – −0.03)
ICV, Site, Age
Hippocampus
1599/1436
4147.8(8.1)/4163.7(8.5)
0.004
−0.11 (−0.18 – −0.03)
Sex, ICV, Site
Pallidum
1651/1471
1764.8 (4.6)/1763.7(4.9)
0.95
−0.00 (−0.07 – 0)
Sex, ICV, Site, Age
Putamen
1660/1497
6025.7 (13.7)/6100.6(14.6)
6.36×10−9
−0.14 (−0.21 – −0.07)
Sex, ICV, Site, Age
Thalamus#
1405/1242
7683.3 (17.8)/7611.6(18.5)
0.39
−0.03 (0.03 – −0.10)
Sex, ICV, Site, Age
ICV
1693/1513
1513597.3 (2741.3)/1501680.7(2924.7)
0.006
−0.10 (0.04 – −0.16)
Sex, Site, Age
Bold p-values are significant at the FDR-corrected threshold of p=0.0156, italic p-values nominally significant at p<0.05
#thalamus volume was not available from the NIH sample.
1Adjusted mean volume estimate and standard error of the mean, corrected for age, sex, ICV, and site.
Lancet Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Hoogman et al.
Page 24
Table 4
Results of the mega-analysis of subcortical brain volumes in the stratified age groups
Children (<15)
Adolescents (15–21)
Adults (21>)
N Cases/Controls
p-value for Diagnosis
Cohen’s d
(95%CI)
N Cases/Controls†
p-value for Diagnosis
Cohen’s d
(95%CI)
N Cases/Controls
p-value for Diagnosis
Cohen’s d
(95%CI)
Accumbens
810/827
0.0001
−019
(−0.29 – 0.10)
323/224
0.61
−0.04
(−0.22 – 0.12)
510/415
0.12
−0.10
(−0.23 – −0.03)
Amygdala
767/820
0.0003
−018
(−028 – −0.08)
321/226
0.12
−014
(−0.31 – 0.03)
500/412
0.03
−0.14
(−0.27 – −0.01)
Caudate
825/840
0.006
−013
(−0.23 – −0.04)
324/224
0.28
−0.10
(−0.27 – 0.07)
502/420
0.30
−0.07
(−0.20 – 0.05)
Hippocampus
764/802
0.012
−0.12
(−0.22 – −0.03)
320/225
0.006
−0.24
(−0.42 – −0.08)
506/404
0.38
0.06
(−0.07 – 0.19)
Pallidum
816/831
0.79
−001
(−011 – 0.08)
321/223
0.78
002
(−0.15 – 0.20)
506/412
0.51
0.04
(−0.08 – 0.17)
Putamen
836/854
0.0002
−018
(−028 – −0.09)
329/228
0.83
−0.02
(−0.19 – 0.15)
499/416
0.23
−0.08
(−0.21 – 0.05)
Thalamus#
604/616
0.89
001
(0.06 – −0.10)
288/202
0.74
0.03
(−0.15 – 0.21)
503/416
0.28
−0.07
(−0.20 – −0.06)
ICV
837/854
0.003
−014
(0.04 – −0.24)
330/229
0.13
−0.13
(−0.30 – 0.04)
515/422
0.91
0.01
(0.06 – −0.12)
Bold p-values are significant at the FDR-corrected threshold of p=0.0156, italic p-values nominally significant at p<0.05
#thalamus volume was not available from the NIH sample.
†Due to a sample size lower than 10, the data for the following cohorts in analysis of the adolescent group were omitted: ADHD-Mattos (n=2), ADHD-WUE (n=2), BergenAdultADHD (n=4), MTA (n=2), 
Niche (n=7), ZI-CAPS (n=2).
Lancet Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Hoogman et al.
Page 25
Table 5
Results of the exploration of the effect of medication on case-control differences
Patients currently not taking stimulants versus controls*
Stimulant use in patients: positive versus negative lifetime history
n Cases/Controls
Cohen’s d (95%CI)
p-value for Diagnosis
n Never/ever stimulant use in patients only
p-value for positive versus negative for lifetime stimulant 
use
Accumbens
776/1484
−0.12 (−0.21 – −0.03)
0.007
79/625
0.32
Amygdala
753/1474
−0.18 (−0.27 – −0.10)
4.90 ×10−9
80/590
0.41
Caudate
777/1502
−0.10 (−0.19 – −0.01)
0.02
80/627
0.15
Hippocampus
757/1446
−0.08 (−0.17 – 0.003)
0.06
80/593
0.69
Pallidum
776/1484
0.01 (−0.07 – 0.10)
0.74
79/621
0.26
Putamen
784/1508
−0.13 (−0.22 – −0.04)
0.004
81/627
0.29
Thalamus
692/1253
−0.03 (0.04 – −0.12)
0.53
80/458
0.29
ICV
793/1512
−0.06 (0.04 – −0.16)
0.15
81/632
0.92
*within this group, 152 subjects were lifetime positive for the use of stimulant medication, 82 were lifetime negative; for 565 no lifetime information was available.
Lancet Psychiatry. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2018 May 03.
