 Individual Finger Control of the Modular Prosthetic Limb using 
High-Density Electrocorticography in a Human Subject
Guy Hotson#1,7, David P McMullen#2, Matthew S. Fifer3, Matthew S. Johannes4, Kapil D. 
Katyal4, Matthew P. Para4, Robert Armiger4, William S. Anderson2, Nitish V. Thakor3, Brock 
A. Wester4, and Nathan E. Crone5
1Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, 3400 N Charles, 
Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
2Department of Neurosurgery, Johns Hopkins University, 600 N Wolfe, Baltimore, MD 21205, 
USA
3Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, 600 N Wolfe, Baltimore, MD 
21205, USA
4Applied Neuroscience, JHU Applied Physics Laboratory, 7701 Montpelier Rd, Laurel, MD 20723, 
USA
5Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University, 600 N Wolfe, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA
# These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract
Objective—We used native sensorimotor representations of fingers in a brain-machine interface 
to achieve immediate online control of individual prosthetic fingers.
Approach—Using high gamma responses recorded with a high-density ECoG array, we rapidly 
mapped the functional anatomy of cued finger movements. We used these cortical maps to select 
ECoG electrodes for a hierarchical linear discriminant analysis classification scheme to predict: 1) 
if any finger was moving, and, if so, 2) which digit was moving. To account for sensory feedback, 
we also mapped the spatiotemporal activation elicited by vibrotactile stimulation. Finally, we used 
this prediction framework to provide immediate online control over individual fingers of the Johns 
Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory (JHU/APL) Modular Prosthetic Limb (MPL).
Main Results—The balanced classification accuracy for detection of movements during the 
online control session was 92% (chance: 50%). At the onset of movement, finger classification 
was 76% (chance: 20%), and 88% (chance: 25%) if the pinky and ring finger movements were 
coupled. Balanced accuracy of fully flexing the cued finger was 64%, and 77% had we combined 
pinky and ring commands. Offline decoding yielded a peak finger decoding accuracy of 96.5% 
(chance: 20%) when using an optimized selection of electrodes. Offline analysis demonstrated 
significant finger-specific activations throughout sensorimotor cortex. Activations either prior to 
movement onset or during sensory feedback led to discriminable finger control.
7Author to whom any correspondence should be addressed. ; Email: Hotson.Guy@gmail.com, Phone: (650) 269-2165 . 
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Published in final edited form as:
J Neural Eng. 2016 April ; 13(2): 026017. doi:10.1088/1741-2560/13/2/026017.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Significance—Our results demonstrate the ability of ECoG-based BMIs to leverage the native 
functional anatomy of sensorimotor cortical populations to immediately control individual finger 
movements in real time.
1. Introduction
Brain-machine interfaces (BMIs) offer a promising approach for restoring function to 
patients with severe paralysis. By delivering direct cortical control over robotic prosthetic 
devices, BMIs could enable spinal cord injury (SCI) patients to perform activities of daily 
living (ADLs) necessary for self-sufficiency. However, many of these activities, such as 
preparing food or taking medications, require a level of hand dexterity that has yet to be 
achieved by BMIs. This dexterity can only be achieved by means of complex hand 
movements based on control of individual fingers. Decoding the neural correlates of finger 
control has been explored [1]–[6], but researchers have so far been unable to demonstrate 
online independent control of individual fingers.
To date, online cortical control of finger movements has only been achieved in the context of 
coordinated movements of multiple fingers. Electrocorticography (ECoG) signals recorded 
from sensorimotor areas have been used offline to reconstruct hand aperture [7] and classify 
different hand gestures [8]–[10]. ECoG has also been used online to continuously control 
grasping movements in parallel with arm movements [11], [12] and to classify different 
grasp types [9]. Neuronal firing rates from microelectrode arrays (MEAs) have also been 
used to achieve online cortical control over grasping in both nonhuman primates [13]–[16] 
and humans [17]–[19].
Offline decoding of single finger movements has been achieved with MEAs in non-human 
primates [2], [20], but MEA recordings in humans are rare and suffer from attrition of 
reliable single units over time [21]. Moreover, the restricted cortical areas covered by MEAs 
may not sufficiently sample the cortical networks of potential use in BMIs. Finger 
movements are represented in a larger area of sensorimotor cortex in humans than monkeys, 
and although there may be significant overlap in motor representations for individual fingers 
[22], [23], it is inherently difficult for MEA’s to leverage what somatotopic organization is 
present.
In contrast, ECoG is able to deliver stable large-area coverage of sensorimotor areas [24], 
delivering control from multiple anatomical sites. For example, coverage of both arm and 
hand areas with a single ECoG grid enabled a subject to simultaneously control the ability to 
reach and grasp with a prosthetic limb [12]. This and other studies have chiefly used ECoG 
high gamma responses for online control. These spectral responses are robust enough to be 
detected in single trials, but because they reflect firing rate changes in populations of cortical 
neurons, their utility depends on the degree of functional segregation among these 
populations.
In spite of the evidence of limited finger somatotopy in motor cortex [22], [23], [25], both 
ECoG and fMRI studies have found a degree of separability in the peak population 
responses for different fingers in the precentral gyrus [26], [27]. These differential finger 
Hotson et al.
Page 2
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 responses have been used to perform offline classification and reconstruction of finger 
movements from ECoG recordings over sensorimotor areas [1], [3]. Offline classification 
between rest and four fingers (ignoring pinky) was near perfect in one subject in [9], though 
the system’s performance dropped drastically when translated to an online grasp 
classification system synchronized to cue presentation. Additionally, several groups have 
performed offline regression of single finger movements [1], [4]–[6]. However, until now 
these achievements in offline classification and regression have not been translated into 
asynchronous (i.e., without knowledge of the cue) online control of individual fingers.
Here we show that high-density electrocorticography (ECoG) electrodes over sensorimotor 
areas can not only discriminate individual fingers offline, but that they can be used to 
asynchronously detect and classify finger movements online. A human subject demonstrated 
online control of the highly dexterous Modular Prosthetic Limb (MPL) [28]. The BMI relied 
only on the subject’s cortical responses during movements of his corresponding native 
fingers, without extensive training or arbitrary mapping of user inputs to finger movements. 
Our approach of using the native functional anatomy of sensorimotor cortex obviates the 
need for operant conditioning, potentially providing immediate intuitive control to patients 
that can be expanded to a large number of degrees of freedom without placing significant 
cognitive burden on the patient. We performed further offline analysis to control for possible 
somatosensory feedback. These results demonstrate, for the first time, online control of 
individual fingers of a prosthetic hand, as well as offline analyses indicating a role for pre-
movement signals in achieving this control.
2. Methods
2.1 Subject Info
The patient, a 20-year old right-handed male, underwent a left craniotomy for implantation 
of intracranial electrodes to localize the brain regions responsible for his seizures to guide 
resective surgery. These included a high-density 8 × 16 array of subdural electrodes (PMT 
Corp., Chanhassen, MN; 3mm center-to-center spacing, 1mm diameter) over sensorimotor 
regions. ECoG signals were recorded using distant standard subdural electrodes (2.3 mm 
diameter exposed) for ground and reference.
The subject gave informed consent for testing to be done according to a protocol approved 
by the Institutional Review Board of the Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions. Electrodes 
were localized with respect to cortical surface anatomy by volumetric co-registration of the 
subject’s pre-implantation MRI with their post-surgical CT using the BioImage Suite [29]. 
This was used to help guide our electrode selection process for the BMI. After running the 
BMI, the reconstruction was checked against intraoperative photos from the implantation 
and explantation of the high density grid. The electrode locations on a two-dimensional 
snapshot of the reconstruction were manually adjusted relative to the underlying cortex via 
rotation, scaling, and translation of the grid to optimize the alignment between the grid and 
prominent gyral and sulcal landmarks present in both the 3D reconstruction and the 
intraoperative photos.
Hotson et al.
Page 3
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 2.2. Offline Experimental Testing
A finger tapping task was performed to collect training data for the online finger decoder. 
Online BMI testing was performed the subsequent day. A passive vibration task and an 
additional finger tapping task were performed for offline analysis. Table 1 outlines the 
experiments performed. The tasks are described in more detail below.
2.2.1. Vibrotactile Stimulation—To investigate activation due to somatosensory 
feedback, we ran a vibrotactile stimulation experiment. While activation of post-central 
gyrus has been observed in paralyzed individuals [30] and able-bodied individuals during 
motor-imagery (without overt movement) [31]–[35], deafferented subjects lack cortical 
activation directly induced by somatosensory feedback. To address this, we used a 
vibrotactile stimulation experiment as a control. Vibrational motors were placed on the 
fingertips of the subject’s right hand. The motors were turned on for 0.5 seconds every two 
seconds in a pseudorandom order by an Arduino microcontroller (Sparkfun Electronics, 
Boulder, CO) with two Adafruit v2.3 motor control shields (Adafruit Industries, New York 
City, NY). Each finger was vibrated 50 times, for a total of 250 trials.
2.2.2. Finger Tapping—The subject performed a visually cued finger tapping experiment. 
Trials were initiated by an experimenter on a presentation computer running psychtoolbox-3 
[36] in MATLAB (MathWorks, Inc., Natick, MA, USA). After a trial was initiated, the 
system paused for two seconds, then displayed an image of a hand with one finger pseudo-
randomly highlighted. The patient then alternately flexed and extended the corresponding 
finger on his right hand 5 times. Each finger was cued 25 times, for a total of 125 trials. 
Finger movements were recorded with a CyberGlove II (CyberGlove Systems LLC, San 
Jose, CA).
2.3. BMI Classifier Training
To perform online classifications of finger movements, we trained a hierarchical classifier on 
the offline finger tapping data. For any given time point, a binary linear discriminant 
analysis (LDA) classification was first used to determine if a movement was occurring. This 
allowed us to decode finger movements without synchronization to any cues (i.e. 
asynchronously). If a movement was detected, a classification from a second LDA classifier 
was used to determine which of the five fingers moved. The binary movement classifier was 
given a first-order Markovian transition probability; the prior for a prediction at time t was 
determined by the prediction at time t-1. These priors were calibrated online just before the 
online testing session to find a good tradeoff between false positives and false negatives.
To extract features for training the classifiers, we first re-referenced the high-density grid 
channels to a common average reference (CAR) with bad channels removed. The high 
gamma power was then extracted from each channel using the Hilbert transform with a flat-
top Gaussian bandpass filter with cutoffs of 72 and 110 Hz using a 256 ms window and 128 
ms step size. The average of the high gamma powers extracted from an 896 ms period before 
cue onset of each trial was used to gauge baseline activity for each electrode. The average of 
the high gamma power in an 896 ms period during finger movement of each trial was used 
to estimate activation due to the finger movement. This resulted in 125 feature vectors (one 
Hotson et al.
Page 4
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 for each trial) for both baseline and activation. These feature vectors were then used to train 
the movement detection and finger classification LDA classifiers.
When using the classifiers online, we used the same feature extraction workflow we used for 
training. To ensure smooth classifications, the features from the previous 50 samples were 
averaged at each time point. Due to slower computation speeds than anticipated, this resulted 
in a moving average of approximately 2.3 seconds of data to be used for classifications.
2.3. Online BMI Testing
When a finger movement was detected from the neural data, the corresponding MPL finger 
was commanded to flex at a fixed velocity. If a finger was not classified as moving, it was 
commanded to extend back towards the resting position at a fixed velocity. Before the online 
testing session began, the subject was given open use time and a practice session to 
acclimate to controlling the MPL fingers. During this acclimation period, the false positive 
rate of the movement classifier was tuned by adjusting the priors on the Markovian transition 
probabilities. The speed at which the fingers would flex/extend was also adjusted at this 
time, resulting in an extension velocity set to 40% of the flexion velocity. Figure 1 displays a 
flow diagram for the online BMI.
During the online testing session, the experimenter typically waited for all the MPL fingers 
to return to rest before initiating the next trial. There was a two second system pause before 
the appearance of the visual cue after trial initiation. This was used as a baseline (rest) 
period during post-hoc analysis.
2.4. BMI Control Evaluation
To evaluate the performance of the BMI control, we inspected the accuracy of the binary 
movement detection classifications and the 5-way individual finger classifications. 
Movement times relative to trial onsets were obtained from video analysis for trials where 
the subject’s hand was visible. The proportion of movement vs non-movement predictions 
was binned in 250 ms bins relative to movement onset and averaged across trials. The 
proportion of movement predictions over time was used to evaluate the performance of the 
movement detection classifier.
The individual finger classifier performance was evaluated similarly by binning the single 
finger classifications that occurred when a movement was predicted. Because it was 
observed that the ring and little finger movements were often linked, the classification 
accuracy was calculated both considering them as the same and as separate fingers. Finger 
classification confusion matrices were calculated at the onset of peak movement detection, 
and during the time period where movements were most consistently predicted.
We also evaluated the global asynchronous finger classification performance. This was 
accomplished by calculating the accuracy of the individual finger classifier at any time a 
movement was predicted within seven seconds of cue onset. We also calculated the 
percentage of trials where the cued finger, and not any of the others, was fully flexed by the 
MPL. To find the balanced accuracy of flexing the cued finger, we averaged the accuracy of 
Hotson et al.
Page 5
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 fully flexing during the correct trial with the accuracy of not fully flexing during the 
incorrect trial.
To approximate the relative contributions of the electrodes to classification accuracies, we 
examined the cross-validated regularized LDA performance on its training data with varying 
numbers of electrodes.
2.5. Offline Analysis
Offline analysis was performed to determine the expected range of decoding performance 
with an optimized electrode selection during time periods preceding somatosensory 
feedback. While a lack of somatosensory feedback does not preclude activation of S1[37]–
[39], direct cortical activation caused by somatosensory feedback is not be present in 
deafferented patients in need of BMIs. We attempted to control for this by comparing the 
time course of finger-specific activation during the finger tapping and finger vibration tasks. 
We expect similar patterns of activation between paralyzed and able-bodied patients during 
the time period preceding somatosensory feedback, as suggested by the spatial patterns of 
activation seen in paralyzed patients during attempted movements [30]. The signals during 
this pre-sensory time period are likely representative of the minimum of what could be 
expected from paralyzed individuals for BMI control.
To view the time-course of activation relative to movement onset, the ECoG and CyberGlove 
data were segmented using the CyberGlove recordings. However, it was observed that the 
subject often initiated trials with a gross relaxation/extension movement of his hand and 
fingers before flexing the finger of interest. We therefore aligned the recordings separately to 
both the onset of any detected movement and the onset of flexion by the finger of interest. 
We then excluded any trial with more than a 400 ms disparity between the two alignment 
points, or excessive hand movements before onset of the finger movement; 19 trials were 
excluded in this way. The selection of onset times was verified by performing cross-
validated LDA to predict which finger was moving using only the CyberGlove data (i.e., 
finger kinematics, not neural data). Chance levels were computed via permutation testing, 
and time points significantly above chance were detected via the Wilcoxon rank-sum test 
with a Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons. We found the CyberGlove tracings of 
hand movement had differentiable features for different fingers during the preliminary hand 
movement (Supplementary Figure 1). We therefore aligned to our more conservative 
estimate of movement onset for all our subsequent offline analyses.
The conservative movement onset marker was used to compare the time course of activation 
during the finger tapping and vibration experiments. Spectrograms were created using the 
multitaper method from Chronux toolbox (http://chronux.org) with a window size of 128 
ms, step size of 10 ms, passband of 16-160 Hz, cutoff frequencies of 10 Hz and 170 Hz, a 
time-bandwidth product of three, and five tapers.
We then investigated the time course of high gamma activation by using the same high 
gamma feature extraction method used for our online BMI. We removed visibly bad 
electrodes, CAR filtered the high-density grid electrodes, and used the Hilbert transform 
with a 72 to 110 Hz bandpass filter to compute the high gamma band power with a window 
Hotson et al.
Page 6
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 of 128 ms and a 16 ms step size. For every electrode in the motor and vibrotactile 
stimulation experiments, we only included activity during trials for the finger that evoked the 
strongest high gamma response. This allowed us to detect significant trial-averaged 
activations even if an electrode was only modulated by one finger. We then performed a 
Bonferroni corrected Wilcoxon rank-sum test for significant activation of high gamma 
relative to baseline at every point between 256 ms before and 240 ms after the onset of 
movement (or vibration, in the sensory trials). This allowed us to identify the earliest time 
points of cortical activation in each electrode for the motor and sensory task.
Finally, we investigated the time course of discriminable information between individual 
fingers during the motor and vibrotactile experiments. This was done to examine the 
decoding accuracy of finger movements during the period of time before finger-specific 
information was received through somatosensory feedback, which would not be present in 
deafferented subjects. The extracted high gamma features were smoothed using a 15th order 
moving average filter (window centers spanning 224 ms). We then performed 10-fold cross-
validated LDA classification on the smoothed features; ten disjoint testing sets (each 
containing 10% of the trials) were each evaluated by (during each fold, separately) using the 
other 90% of the trials for feature selection and model training. The feature selection was 
performed using cross-validated regularization [40]. This regularization phase helped inform 
us as to what electrodes most consistently contributed to decoding performance. The number 
of times each electrode was chosen across the 10 folds of cross-validation was used as an 
index of its importance. We used extracted features in a causal manner, meaning that for a 
given time point t, features pertaining to that time point were extracted from windows which 
did not extend past t. This alignment was used to ensure our classifications were not 
dependent on future information, and therefore approximate the earliest time points when 
sensory feedback could have been included in the classifications. Feature extraction was 
repeated in a non-causal manner, aligned to the peak flexion time with a 30th order moving 
average filter (window centers spanning 464 ms) to estimate the upper limit on expected 
online decoding performance.
3. Results
3.1 BMI Electrode Selection
Preliminary inspection of high gamma activation during the motor task and vibrotactile 
stimulation, along with a preliminary reconstruction of the electrode locations, informed our 
feature selection process for the online decoder. Spectral features were used from a subset of 
electrodes that was chosen to avoid postcentral somatosensory cortex, though an error in the 
preliminary electrode localization led to the inclusion of two electrodes over postcentral 
gyrus. In training data from this subset of electrodes, cross-validated classification achieved 
80% accuracy. Figure 2 depicts the locations of the electrodes chosen for the training set and 
for online BMI testing (below), as well as which electrodes showed significant activation 
during the motor and sensory tasks.
Hotson et al.
Page 7
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 3.2. Online Testing
The subject performed 39 visually cued trials during online control of the MPL fingers 
(example performance, Supplementary Video 1). The subject began moving the prompted 
finger, on average, 1.43 seconds after cue onset.
Predictions were made at an average rate of 24 Hz. The average of the 50 most recently 
extracted spectral features was used for all predictions. This resulted in using the mean of 
features extracted over 2.34 seconds on average, with a group delay of approximately 1.17 
seconds.
Figure 3 shows the accuracy of the binary movement classifier and the individual finger 
classifier as a function of time relative to cue onset. Movement detection accuracy reached a 
peak of 97%, sustained between 1.6 and 3.1 seconds after movement onset. Classifier 
accuracy during the baseline period was 87%, resulting in a balanced accuracy of 92%. 
Individual finger prediction accuracy peaked at 81% (chance 20%) when predicting which of 
all five fingers was moving, and 94% when classification for the ring and little finger was 
coupled (chance 25%).
At the onset of the peak movement detection period (1.6 seconds post-movement-onset), 
classification among all five fingers had an accuracy of 76%. When combining the ring and 
pinky fingers (they often moved together), accuracy was 88% (Figure 4, top row). The 
average classification accuracy during the peak movement detection period (1.6-3.1 seconds 
post-onset) was 67% for all five fingers, and 79% when combining ring and pinky fingers 
(Figure 4, middle row). The average accuracy at any time a movement was detected within 
seven seconds of trial onset (cue displayed) was 55% and 68% for five and four fingers, 
respectively (Figure 4, bottom row). Given that the accuracy in the baseline period was 87%, 
this equates to 60% and 72% accuracy for 6 and 5 class classifiers that include “rest” 
(chance levels of 17% and 20%, respectively).
The balanced accuracy of flexing the cued MPL finger (within seven seconds of trial onset) 
was 64%, and 77% when pinky and ring positions were summed together. The cued finger 
was the only finger fully flexed by the MPL during 43% of the trials, and 62% when pinky 
and ring commands were combined. The average traces of the normalized MPL finger 
positions during their respectively cued trials are shown in Figure 5. The dashed lines 
represent the average position of the other four fingers during that trial (e.g. the solid blue 
line depicts the thumb, while the dashed blue line depicts the mean position of the other 
fingers during thumb trials).
A cross-validated, regularized parameter search limited to the electrodes selected for the 
online BMI revealed that adding five electrodes (shown in Figure 2) led to the greatest 
reductions in error on the training data, and the addition of other electrodes typically 
increased error. In spite of excluding electrodes identified by preliminary electrode 
localization as being over the postcentral gyrus, the four electrodes which contributed the 
most to decoding accuracy all showed significant activation during the vibration task. We 
therefore performed offline analyses to investigate the motor decoding results when 
controlling for the contributions of somatosensory cortex activity.
Hotson et al.
Page 8
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 3.3. Offline Analysis
To investigate the relative contributions of somatosensory and motor cortex to the BMI, we 
compared the spatiotemporal patterns of activation during offline passive vibrotactile 
stimulation vs. finger movement. Figure 6 shows spectral activation during passive vibration 
and offline finger movement in the two electrodes that contributed most to online decoding 
performance. Intensities are saturated to better see the earliest activation times.
A total of 33 electrodes displayed significant task-related spectral modulation during finger 
movement in the 512 ms centered on movement onset. These electrodes crossed significance 
thresholds a median of 16 ms before onset of movement. The 25 electrodes with significant 
modulation in the 512 ms centered on vibrotactile stimulus onset reached significance a 
median of 80 ms after vibration onset. This suggests that a good deal of the activation during 
finger movements was not solely due to somatosensory feedback.
Spectral modulations during the motor task significantly exceeded baseline levels in four of 
the five electrodes that contributed most to the classifier performance. In these electrodes, 
activation first became significant during feature extraction windows (256 ms long) centered 
16, 48, 128, and 160 ms before the onset of movement (one did not display significant 
activation). In the sensory task, activation first reached significance 48 ms after the onset of 
vibration in three of the five electrodes, 64 ms in one electrode, and never in one electrode.
To investigate the ability of early motor-related spectral modulations to discriminate between 
fingers, we built and tested classifiers throughout the time course of the finger movement 
task and passive finger vibrations. Supplementary Figure 2 displays finger classification 
accuracies over time relative to the movements recorded by their respective finger sensors in 
the CyberGlove. Prediction of thumb movements was particularly early and robust. Figure 7 
shows the electrodes selected during the regularization phase. The size of the red circle for 
each electrode represents how often that electrode was selected during regularization across 
the ten folds of cross-validation. A high degree of overlap was found between the most 
important electrodes during the sensory and motor tasks, though additional precentral 
electrodes were selected for decoding early in the motor task.
Mean classification accuracy is shown for motor task and vibrotactile stimulation in Figure 
8. Time points were referenced to the onset of any detected movement (via CyberGlove) or 
the onset of vibration. At each time point, the mean of the previous 15 feature extraction 
windows was used for cross-validated classification. This causal decoding scheme made use 
of the 352 ms of data preceding each time point. Classification accuracy during the finger 
tapping task was significantly higher than the corresponding accuracy during vibrotactile 
stimulation between −32 ms to 224 ms (p < 0.05, Wilcoxon rank sum, Bonferroni corrected 
for 30 comparisons). The classification accuracy for finger vibration exceeded chance 192 
ms after stimulation onset. The mean classification accuracy during the motor task reached 
70.7% at the corresponding time of 192 ms after movement onset. Decoding based on the 
ECoG signals showed similar accuracy over time relative to using the CyberGlove 
recordings for finger decoding. This was in spite of the fact that the ECoG features were 
associated with a group delay of 184 ms, whereas CyberGlove relied only on the 
instantaneous time value.
Hotson et al.
Page 9
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 While peak performance without somatosensory feedback cannot be reliably ascertained 
from this data, the time course of classification accuracies indicate that accuracy using 
signals only related to motor function (without accuracy inflated by sensory feedback not 
present in paralyzed subjects) would likely achieve at least 70.7% accuracy in discriminating 
which finger was being moved. When data was aligned to the peak flexion time and the 
smoothing window was increased to 480 ms, we obtained a maximum accuracy of 96.5% 
and a mean accuracy of 90.2% between 190 ms before to 1250 ms after the peak flexion 
(after correcting for group delays). Based on these findings, we estimate that a high-density 
ECoG array over sensorimotor areas would yield individual finger classification accuracies 
in the range of 70.7-96.5% using motor signals in the deafferented patient population that 
would benefit most from invasive BMI systems.
4. Discussion
We have demonstrated, for the first time in humans, online neural decoding of individual 
finger movements to control a dexterous modular prosthetic limb. We utilized high gamma 
power extracted from a high-density ECoG grid situated over a subject’s sensorimotor cortex 
to produce intuitive BMI finger control. This was accomplished without arbitrary mappings 
of user inputs or extensive training by using the native cortical representations of finger 
movements. During online control, we utilized all available neural information in a subset of 
electrodes to produce highly accurate control of fingers. For further offline analysis, we 
limited our analysis to time periods preceding discriminable sensory afferent information to 
more closely mimic SCI patients’ neural activity. We found this still yielded discriminable 
information useful for finger control.
We were able to accurately decode finger flexions online using the native sensorimotor 
representations of fingers in the brain. The classification accuracy for the online BMI at the 
onset of the most reliable time period for detecting movements (1.6 seconds post-cue) was 
76% (88% with ring and pinky combined). The balanced accuracy of correctly flexing the 
cued MPL finger was 64% (77% with ring/pinky combined). Our asynchronous binary 
prediction of whether the subject was moving any finger yielded a balanced accuracy of 
92%. To our knowledge, this is the first online demonstration by a human subject of neural 
control of individual finger flexion with a robotic prosthetic limb. We further believe that the 
control of five individual fingers in this study marks the greatest number of distinct degrees 
of freedom controlled online with ECoG signals. By accomplishing this without the need for 
operant conditioning, we have shown that high density ECoG can leverage the native 
somatotopy of individual fingers to provide patients with immediate, more intuitive finger 
control.
Our online results contribute to the growing literature of online ECoG control over robotic 
prosthetics. Subjects have used ECoG to asynchronously modulate the aperture of two grasp 
types (77% of trials correct to completion) while simultaneously controlling elbow 
movements (34% of trials correct to completion) with a prosthetic limb [11]. The ability to 
simultaneously control reach and grasp independently with a prosthetic limb was 
demonstrated with mean accuracies of 84% and 81% for reach and grasp respectively [12]. 
ECoG control signals have been further integrated with intelligent robotics to pick up and 
Hotson et al.
Page 10
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 move objects with a mean success rate of 70% [41]. Yanagisawa et al. was able to 
asynchronously detected hand movements (61% detected within one second) then decode 
which of three different hand movements was performed (69.2% accuracy) [42]. Chestek et 
al. showed 97% accuracy in classifying between resting and grasping at a fixed time relative 
to cue in two subjects [9]. Their accuracy was 57% in one subject when expanded to two 
different grasp types vs rest, and 55% accuracy in another subject when classifying between 
rest and four grasp types. ECoG signals from hand somatosensory areas were also used in 
[43], where attempted thumb, wrist, and elbow movements were used as control signals for 
3D arm position. Their subject achieved 80% accuracy in a 3D cursor task leading up to 
their MPL endpoint control, demonstrating the ability of postcentral hand area ECoG signals 
recorded from a paralyzed subject to control a BMI. Our online asynchronous classification 
accuracies of 64% and 77% for rest vs five and four fingers respectively build on the 
previous literature to show, for the first time, that neural recordings can be used to provide 
immediate online control of individual fingers without the need for operant conditioning.
In order to more closely mimic the neural activity of an SCI patient, we performed further 
offline analyses where we limited neural activity to time periods preceding sensory 
feedback. Slight pre-trial movements of our subject’s hands led to loss of data from 
conservative estimates of movement onset determination. While cortical reorganization 
occurs after SCI/amputation, multiple groups have demonstrated continued sensorimotor 
activity during imagined or triggered phantom hand movements [44]–[47]. We believe SCI 
patients could harness this continued neural activity to control a robotic limb BMI. Indeed, 
groups working with a SCI patient implanted with ECoG have demonstrated SCI patients' 
ability to modulate this rhythms to control a BMI [43]. In spite of the very conservative 
estimate of movement onset, spectrograms of high gamma activation revealed significant 
pre-movement activity (Figure 6). We estimate a lower bound of 70.7% decoding accuracy 
without sensory feedback. Higher single finger decoding accuracies at movement onset was 
previously found [1], but this was achieved with a non-causal methodology that did not 
account for sensory feedback. Our peak accuracy during offline analysis of the motor task 
reached 96.5%, with a mean accuracy of over 90% during a time period lasting over a 
second. This establishes an upper bound of over 90% for expected online single finger 
decoding accuracy using high-definition ECoG over sensorimotor areas. A comparable drop 
in performance was seen previously [9] when predictions were only made using data from 
before movement onset. This is consistent with our estimate of the expected lower bound 
accuracy.
Our analysis revealed widespread pre-movement activity across both precentral and, 
interestingly, postcentral gyri during the finger tapping task. Much of our decoding accuracy 
was derived from electrodes that also showed activation during vibrotactile stimulation 
(Figure 7). This may have been due in part to the high-density grid having better coverage of 
the finger representation on the postcentral gyrus than the precentral gyrus. Another possible 
reason the somatosensory-modulated electrodes were essential to decoding can be traced to 
more distinct somatotopy of individual fingers in the postcentral gyrus than in the precentral 
gyrus [22], [23], [25], [48], [49]. A large portion of the post-movement activity detected in 
postcentral gyrus was no doubt the result of afferent cutaneous and proprioceptive 
information. However, it is possible that a subset of the pre-movement activity in this region 
Hotson et al.
Page 11
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 was the result of an “efference copy” sent from premotor and associated motor planning 
cortices [32], [50], [51]. These results are similar to a human ECoG study that showed pre-
movement signals in sensory areas that were led by signals in task-related areas in premotor 
cortices [52]. This movement-related activation, observed in both pre- and postcentral 
cortex, has been noted in paralyzed subjects [37]–[39]. Furthermore, postcentral activity was 
recently used to provide control over a three dimensional brain-machine interface to a 
paralyzed subject [43].
Further advancements in ours and other systems are necessary before BMIs will be able to 
meet the clinical needs of SCI patients. Although we were able to demonstrate immediate 
robust online control of individual fingers, future users will need more accurate systems 
before they can perform the ADLs necessary for full autonomy. However, while the raw 
decoding accuracy found in this study would not meet the performance requirements of a 
functionally useful prosthetic device, cortical adaptation has been shown to increase BMI 
performance over time [53]–[55]. This would likely improve results for patients that can 
work with the BMI system longer than the brief testing session performed in this study. 
Additionally, decoding from more comprehensive coverage of precentral areas would likely 
further improve system robustness [1], [9]. Finally, other avenues of research may also 
create more functionally useful BMIs. Incorporating intelligent robotics into neural-only 
BMIs may allow users to perform a wide variety of tasks [41], [56]. By using environmental 
sensors to inform the system of which fingers the user likely wants to flex, the system could 
incorporate prior knowledge of grasp trajectories to accomplish advanced tasks in the 
presence of noisy cortical control signals.
5. Conclusions
We demonstrated the ability of a patient implanted with high density ECoG over 
sensorimotor areas to asynchronously control individual finger movements intuitively in an 
online BMI, without the need for online training sessions. Offline analysis showed a large 
amount of the decoding accuracy in our coverage area was derived from postcentral gyrus. 
While our online control was likely highly influenced by sensory feedback, we found that 
the signals in somatosensory areas showed significant activation before movement onset, 
which might still occur in patients lacking afferent somatosensory inputs. Furthermore, 
decoding accuracy over the course of the movement mirrored the separability of hand 
positions—the more the CyberGlove recordings became identifiable as a specific finger 
movement, the more the finger movement could be decoded from the preceding window of 
neural data. Our findings support previous studies suggesting an efference copy activating 
somatosensory cortex [32], [50], [51]. Here we demonstrated that this information can be 
used to control individual fingers in an able-bodied subject. Future studies will need to 
determine whether the same or similar signals can be used in paralyzed patient populations, 
but recent work has demonstrated promising results showing sensorimotor activation in 
deafferented patients [37]–[39], [43].
We have demonstrated, for the first time, online control of all five individual fingers of a 
robotic prosthetic hand independently and hope that insights from this study can one day be 
applied to paralyzed patient populations to enable them to perform dexterous ADLs.
Hotson et al.
Page 12
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
The Authors would like to thank G. Milsap for assistance with experimental testing, G. Milsap, Y. Wang, K. Rupp, 
and A. Korzeniewska for lab meeting discussions of our approach and analysis. The authors would like to thank 
John Roycroft and John Helder for their help with configuring the MPL systems for development, experimentation, 
and data acquisition. This work was funded by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) through a National Institute 
of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) grant 1R01NS088606-01.
References
[1]. Kubanek J, Miller KJ, Ojemann JG, Wolpaw JR, Schalk G. Decoding flexion of individual fingers 
using electrocorticographic signals in humans. J Neural Eng. Dec.2009 6(no. 6):66001.
[2]. Acharya S, Tenore F, Aggarwal V, Etienne-Cummings R, Schieber MH, Thakor NV. Decoding 
individuated finger movements using volume-constrained neuronal ensembles in the M1 hand 
area. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. Feb.2008 16(no. 1):15–23. [PubMed: 18303801] 
[3]. Wang, W.; Degenhart, AD.; Collinger, JL.; Vinjamuri, R.; Sudre, GP.; Adelson, PD.; Holder, DL.; 
Leuthardt, EC.; Moran, DW.; Boninger, ML.; Schwartz, AB.; Crammond, DJ.; Tyler-Kabara, 
EC.; Weber, DJ. Human motor cortical activity recorded with micro-ECoG electrodes during 
individual finger movements. Conf. Proc. Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. IEEE Eng. 
Med. Biol. Soc. Conf.; 2009. p. 586-589.
[4]. Flamary R, Rakotomamonjy A. Decoding finger movements from ECoG signals using switching 
linear models. Front. Neurosci. Mar.2012 6
[5]. Liang N, Bougrain L. Decoding finger flexion from band-specific ECoG signals in humans. Front. 
Neurosci. Jun.2012 6
[6]. Nakanishi Y, Yanagisawa T, Shin D, Chen C, Kambara H, Yoshimura N, Fukuma R, Kishima H, 
Hirata M, Koike Y. Decoding fingertip trajectory from electrocorticographic signals in humans. 
Neurosci. Res. Aug.2014 85:20–27. [PubMed: 24880133] 
[7]. Acharya S, Fifer MS, Benz HL, Crone NE, Thakor NV. Electrocorticographic amplitude predicts 
finger positions during slow grasping motions of the hand. J. Neural Eng. Aug.2010 7(no. 4):
046002. [PubMed: 20489239] 
[8]. Pistohl T, Schulze-Bonhage A, Aertsen A, Mehring C, Ball T. Decoding natural grasp types from 
human ECoG. NeuroImage. Jan.2012 59(1):248–260. [PubMed: 21763434] 
[9]. Chestek CA, Gilja V, Blabe CH, Foster BL, Shenoy KV, Parvizi J, Henderson JM. Hand posture 
classification using electrocorticography signals in the gamma band over human sensorimotor 
brain areas. J. Neural Eng. Apr.2013 10(no. 2):026002. [PubMed: 23369953] 
[10]. Bleichner MG, Freudenburg ZV, Jansma JM, Aarnoutse EJ, Vansteensel MJ, Ramsey NF. Give 
me a sign: decoding four complex hand gestures based on high-density ECoG. Brain Struct. 
Funct. Oct.2014 :1–14.
[11]. Yanagisawa T, Hirata M, Saitoh Y, Kishima H, Matsushita K, Goto T, Fukuma R, Yokoi H, 
Kamitani Y, Yoshimine T. Electrocorticographic control of a prosthetic arm in paralyzed patients. 
Ann. Neurol. Mar.2012 71(no. 3):353–361. [PubMed: 22052728] 
[12]. Fifer MS, Hotson G, Wester B, McMullen DP, Wang Y, Johannes MS, Katyal KD, Helder JB, 
Para MP, Vogelstein RJ, Anderson WS, Thakor NV, Crone NE. Simultaneous neural control of 
simple reaching and grasping with the modular prosthetic limb using intracranial EEG. IEEE 
Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. May; 2014 22(no. 3):695–705. [PubMed: 24235276] 
[13]. Carmena JM, Lebedev MA, Crist RE, O’Doherty JE, Santucci DM, Dimitrov DF, Patil PG, 
Henriquez CS, Nicolelis MAL. Learning to control a brain-machine interface for reaching and 
grasping by primates. PLoS Biol. Nov.2003 1(no. 2):E42. [PubMed: 14624244] 
Hotson et al.
Page 13
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 [14]. Kim HK, Biggs SJ, Schloerb DW, Carmena JM, Lebedev MA, Nicolelis MAL, Srinivasan MA. 
Continuous shared control for stabilizing reaching and grasping with brain-machine interfaces. 
IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. Jun.2006 53(no. 6):1164–1173. [PubMed: 16761843] 
[15]. Velliste M, Perel S, Spalding MC, Whitford AS, Schwartz AB. Cortical control of a prosthetic 
arm for self-feeding. Nature. Jun.2008 453(no. 7198):1098–101. [PubMed: 18509337] 
[16]. Zhuang J, Truccolo W, Vargas-Irwin C, Donoghue JP. Decoding 3-D reach and grasp kinematics 
from high-frequency local field potentials in primate primary motor cortex. IEEE Trans. Biomed. 
Eng. Jul.2010 57(no. 7):1774–1784. [PubMed: 20403782] 
[17]. Hochberg LR, Bacher D, Jarosiewicz B, Masse NY, Simeral JD, Vogel J, Haddadin S, Liu J, Cash 
SS, van der Smagt P, Donoghue JP. Reach and grasp by people with tetraplegia using a neurally 
controlled robotic arm. Nature. May; 2012 485(no. 7398):372–375. [PubMed: 22596161] 
[18]. Collinger JL, Wodlinger B, Downey JE, Wang W, Tyler-Kabara EC, Weber DJ, McMorland AJ, 
Velliste M, Boninger ML, Schwartz AB. High-performance neuroprosthetic control by an 
individual with tetraplegia. The Lancet. Feb.2013 381(no. 9866):557–564.
[19]. Wodlinger B, Downey JE, Tyler-Kabara EC, Schwartz AB, Boninger ML, Collinger JL. Ten-
dimensional anthropomorphic arm control in a human brain–machine interface: difficulties, 
solutions, and limitations. J. Neural Eng. Feb.2015 12(no. 1):016011. [PubMed: 25514320] 
[20]. Hamed SB, Schieber MH, Pouget A. Decoding M1 neurons during multiple finger movements. J. 
Neurophysiol. Jul.2007 98(no. 1):327–333. [PubMed: 17428905] 
[21]. Vaidya, M.; Dickey, A.; Best, MD.; Coles, J.; Balasubramanian, K.; Suminski, AJ.; Hatsopoulos, 
NG. Ultra-Long Term Stability of Single Units Using Chronically Implanted Multielectrode 
Arrays. Conf. Proc. Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc. 
Annu. Conf.; 2014. p. 4872-4875.
[22]. Sanes JN, Donoghue JP, Thangaraj V, Edelman RR, Warach S. Shared neural substrates 
controlling hand movements in human motor cortex [see comments]. Science. 1995; 268:1775–
1777. [PubMed: 7792606] 
[23]. Schieber MH, Hibbard LS. How somatotopic is the motor cortex hand area? Science. 1993; 
261:489–492. [PubMed: 8332915] 
[24]. Chao ZC, Nagasaka Y, Fujii N. Long-Term Asynchronous Decoding of Arm Motion Using 
Electrocorticographic Signals in Monkeys. Front. Neuroengineering. Mar.2010 3
[25]. Schieber MH. Constraints on somatotopic organization in the primary motor cortex. J. 
Neurophysiol. Nov.2001 86(no. 5):2125–2143. [PubMed: 11698506] 
[26]. Siero JCW, Hermes D, Hoogduin H, Luijten PR, Ramsey NF, Petridou N. BOLD matches 
neuronal activity at the mm scale: A combined 7 T fMRI and ECoG study in human sensorimotor 
cortex. NeuroImage. Nov.2014 101:177–184. [PubMed: 25026157] 
[27]. Miller KJ, Zanos S, Fetz EE, den Nijs M, Ojemann JG. Decoupling the cortical power spectrum 
reveals real-time representation of individual finger movements in humans. J. Neurosci. Off. J. 
Soc. Neurosci. Mar.2009 29(no. 10):3132–3137.
[28]. Johannes MS, Bigelow JD, Burck JM, Harshbarger SD, Kozlowski MV, Van Doren T. An 
overview of the developmental process for the modular prosthetic limb. Johns Hopkins APL 
Tech. Dig. 2011; 30(no. 3):207–216.
[29]. Duncan JS, Papademetris X, Yang J, Jackowski M, Zeng X, Staib LH. Geometric strategies for 
neuroanatomic analysis from MRI. NeuroImage. 2004; 23(Suppl 1):S34–45. [PubMed: 
15501099] 
[30]. Kokotilo KJ, Eng JJ, Curt A. Reorganization and Preservation of Motor Control of the Brain in 
Spinal Cord Injury: A Systematic Review. J. Neurotrauma. Nov.2009 26(no. 11):2113–2126. 
[PubMed: 19604097] 
[31]. Miller KJ, Schalk G, Fetz EE, den Nijs M, Ojemann JG, Rao RPN. Cortical activity during motor 
execution, motor imagery, and imagery-based online feedback. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. Feb.2010 :
200913697.
[32]. Christensen MS, Lundbye-Jensen J, Geertsen SS, Petersen TH, Paulson OB, Nielsen JB. 
Premotor cortex modulates somatosensory cortex during voluntary movements without 
proprioceptive feedback. Nat. Neurosci. Apr.2007 10(no. 4):417–419. [PubMed: 17369825] 
Hotson et al.
Page 14
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 [33]. Porro CA, Francescato MP, Cettolo V, Diamond ME, Baraldi P, Zuiani C, Bazzocchi M, di 
Prampero PE. Primary motor and sensory cortex activation during motor performance and motor 
imagery: a functional magnetic resonance imaging study. J.Neurosci. 1996; 16:7688–7698. 
[PubMed: 8922425] 
[34]. Lacourse MG, Orr ELR, Cramer SC, Cohen MJ. Brain activation during execution and motor 
imagery of novel and skilled sequential hand movements. NeuroImage. Sep.2005 27(no. 3):505–
519. [PubMed: 16046149] 
[35]. Felton EA, Wilson JA, Williams JC, Garell PC. Electrocorticographically controlled brain–
computer interfaces using motor and sensory imagery in patients with temporary subdural 
electrode implants. J. Neurosurg. Mar.2007 106(no. 3):495–500. [PubMed: 17367076] 
[36]. Brainard DH. The Psychophysics Toolbox. Spat. Vis. Jan.1997 10(no. 4):433–436. [PubMed: 
9176952] 
[37]. Shoham D, Grinvald A. The cortical representation of the hand in macaque and human area S-I: 
high resolution optical imaging. J. Neurosci. Sep.2001 21(no. 17):6820–6835. [PubMed: 
11517270] 
[38]. Hotz-Boendermaker S, Funk M, Summers P, Brugger P, Hepp-Reymond M-C, Curt A, Kollias 
SS. Preservation of motor programs in paraplegics as demonstrated by attempted and imagined 
foot movements. NeuroImage. Jan.2008 39(no. 1):383–394. [PubMed: 17919932] 
[39]. Cramer SC, Lastra L, Lacourse MG, Cohen MJ. Brain motor system function after chronic, 
complete spinal cord injury. Brain. Dec.2005 128(no. 12):2941–2950. [PubMed: 16246866] 
[40]. Guo Y, Hastie T, Tibshirani R. Regularized linear discriminant analysis and its application in 
microarrays. Biostatistics. Jan.2007 8(no. 1):86–100. [PubMed: 16603682] 
[41]. McMullen D, Hotson G, Katyal K, Wester B, Fifer M, McGee T, Harris A, Johannes M, 
Vogelstein RJ, Ravitz A, Anderson W, Thakor N, Crone N. Demonstration of a semi-autonomous 
hybrid brain-machine interface using human intracranial EEG, eye tracking, and computer vision 
to control a robotic upper limb prosthetic. IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng. 2014 Early 
Access Online. 
[42]. Yanagisawa T, Hirata M, Saitoh Y, Goto T, Kishima H, Fukuma R, Yokoi H, Kamitani Y, 
Yoshimine T. Real-time control of a prosthetic hand using human electrocorticography signals. J. 
Neurosurg. Jun.2011 114(no. 6):1715–1722. [PubMed: 21314273] 
[43]. Wang W, Collinger JL, Degenhart AD, Tyler-Kabara EC, Schwartz AB, Moran DW, Weber DJ, 
Wodlinger B, Vinjamuri RK, Ashmore RC, Kelly JW, Boninger ML. An electrocorticographic 
brain interface in an individual with tetraplegia. PLoS ONE. Feb.2013 8(no. 2):e55344. 
[PubMed: 23405137] 
[44]. Mercier C, Reilly KT, Vargas CD, Aballea A, Sirigu A. Mapping phantom movement 
representations in the motor cortex of amputees. Brain. Aug.2006 129(no. 8):2202–2210. 
[PubMed: 16844715] 
[45]. Reilly KT, Mercier C, Schieber MH, Sirigu A. Persistent hand motor commands in the amputees’ 
brain. Brain. Aug.2006 129(no. 8):2211–2223. [PubMed: 16799174] 
[46]. Ersland L, Rosén G, Lundervold A, Smievoll AI, Tillung T, akan Sundberg H. Phantom limb 
imaginary fingertapping causes primary motor cortex activation: an fMRI study. Neuroreport. 
1996; 8(no. 1):207–210. others. [PubMed: 9051782] 
[47]. Alkadhi H, Brugger P, Boendermaker SH, Crelier G, Curt A, Hepp-Reymond M-C, Kollias SS. 
What Disconnection Tells about Motor Imagery: Evidence from Paraplegic Patients. Cereb. 
Cortex. Feb.2005 15(no. 2):131–140. [PubMed: 15238440] 
[48]. Nelson AJ, Chen R. Digit somatotopy within cortical areas of the postcentral gyrus in humans. 
Cereb. Cortex. Oct.2008 18(no. 10):2341–2351. [PubMed: 18245039] 
[49]. Powell TP, Mountcastle VB. Some aspects of the functional organization of the cortex of the 
postcentral gyrus of the monkey: a correlation of findings obtained in a single unit analysis with 
cytoarchitecture. Bull. Johns Hopkins Hosp. Sep.1959 105:133–162. [PubMed: 14434571] 
[50]. Crapse TB, Sommer MA. Corollary discharge circuits in the primate brain. Curr. Opin. 
Neurobiol. Dec.2008 18(no. 6):552–557. [PubMed: 18848626] 
Hotson et al.
Page 15
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 [51]. Gritsenko V, Krouchev NI, Kalaska JF. Afferent input, efference copy, signal noise, and biases in 
perception of joint angle during active versus passive elbow movements. J. Neurophysiol. Sep.
2007 98(no. 3):1140–1154. [PubMed: 17615137] 
[52]. Sun FT, Morrell MJ, Wharen RE. Responsive cortical stimulation for the treatment of epilepsy. 
Neurother. J. Am. Soc. Exp. Neurother. 2008; 5(no. 1):68–74.
[53]. Ganguly K, Carmena JM. Emergence of a stable cortical map for neuroprosthetic control. PLoS 
Biol. Jul.2009 7(no. 7):e1000153. [PubMed: 19621062] 
[54]. Lebedev MA, Carmena JM, O’Doherty JE, Zacksenhouse M, Henriquez CS, Principe JC, 
Nicolelis MAL. Cortical Ensemble Adaptation to Represent Velocity of an Artificial Actuator 
Controlled by a Brain-Machine Interface. J. Neurosci. May; 2005 25(no. 19):4681–4693. 
[PubMed: 15888644] 
[55]. Rouse AG, Williams JJ, Wheeler JJ, Moran DW. Cortical Adaptation to a Chronic Micro-
Electrocorticographic Brain Computer Interface. J. Neurosci. Jan.2013 33(no. 4):1326–1330. 
[PubMed: 23345208] 
[56]. Muelling K, Venkatraman A, Valois J-S, Downey J, Weiss J, Javdani S, Hebert M, Schwartz AB, 
Collinger JL, Bagnell JA. Autonomy Infused Teleoperation with Application to BCI 
Manipulation. ArXiv Prepr. 2015 ArXiv150305451. 
Hotson et al.
Page 16
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 1. 
Flow diagram of the online BMI processing. Signals are rereferenced, high gamma is 
extracted and smoothed, and then a hierarchical classifier is used to determine if/which 
fingers should be moved.
Hotson et al.
Page 17
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 2. 
Electrodes used for online BMI. Starred electrodes were selected for online BMI control. 
Sulci are accentuated in the inset for improved visibility, with the central sulcus highlighted 
in green. Post-hoc analysis showed the electrodes with gold stars contributed the most to 
decoding accuracy on the training set. Light blue electrodes showed significant activation 
during vibrotactile stimulation, and red electrodes were active during the motor task. The 
electrodes that were not available for the offline analysis are filled black. Purple outlines the 
interhemispheric fissure and red outlines the previously resected superior frontal gyrus.
Hotson et al.
Page 18
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 3. 
Classification accuracies over time for movement and finger classification. Classifications 
were aggregated in 250 ms time bins, and accuracies were averaged across trials. The black 
dashed line depicts the average proportion of predictions that a window contained movement 
(i.e., versus rest). The solid black vertical line depicts movement onset.
Hotson et al.
Page 19
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 4. 
Confusion matrices for finger classifications. The left column of matrices shows results for 
all five fingers, the right column shows results with pinky and ring fingers combined. The 
top row depicts the confusion matrices at the onset of the peak movement classification time, 
middle shows the average over the 1.5 seconds of peak movement detection time, and the 
bottom is any time within seven seconds of cue onset.
Hotson et al.
Page 20
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 5. 
Average normalized MPL finger position of all five fingers during online BMI control (left), 
and with ring and pinky commands aggregated (orange, right). Solid lines depict the average 
position of the cued finger as a proportion of maximum flexion, where 1 corresponds to fully 
flexed and 0 corresponds to fully extended. The corresponding dashed lines show the 
average position of all the other fingers during the cued finger’s trials.
Hotson et al.
Page 21
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 6. 
Spectral activation during offline index finger tapping (top) and passive index finger 
vibration (bottom) for the two BMI electrodes that contributed most to performance with the 
training data. For finger tapping (top row) the solid black line marks the onset (t=0) of any 
hand movement detected by the CyberGlove. The red curve is the average trace of the index 
finger sensors on the CyberGlove. For finger vibration (bottom row), the black line marks 
onset of the vibratory stimulus. Activation significantly exceeded baseline levels 160 ms and 
48 ms before movement onset during the motor task (top row), and 48 ms after the onset of 
vibrotactile stimulation (bottom row).
Hotson et al.
Page 22
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 7. 
Electrodes most consistently selected during the ten folds of cross-validation for the offline 
motor and sensory task classifications. Green denotes the central sulcus with the left side of 
every image being anterior and right being posterior. Cross-validated regularization was 
performed on the training data during classification at every time step. Size of the red circle 
corresponds to the frequency with which electrodes were selected during regularization. The 
first pane shows the electrodes selected for the movement task in a 352 ms decoding window 
ending 80 ms after movement onset (t=80 in Figure 8), yielding 65% accuracy. The middle 
pane is for the same window ending at 512 ms, yielding 87% accuracy. The right pane is for 
vibratory stimulation, with the 352 ms window ending at 400 ms after vibration onset, and 
an accuracy of 96.8%.
Hotson et al.
Page 23
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Figure 8. 
Finger classification accuracy over time using CyberGlove and ECoG recordings during the 
motor task, and ECoG during vibrotactile stimulation. Motor task recordings are aligned to 
the onset of any movement by the subject’s hand (solid line), and vibrotactile stimulation is 
aligned to onset of the vibratory motor (solid line). The red, green, and blue dashed lines 
denote when decoding accuracy exceeded chance levels using motor task high gamma, 
vibrotactile stimulation high gamma, and motor task CyberGlove data. All decoding is 
causal, i.e. classification accuracy at time t is dependent only on samples collected at time t 
and earlier. Shading represents the 95% confidence interval of the mean.
Hotson et al.
Page 24
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
 Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Hotson et al.
Page 25
Table 1
Experimental Overview
Experiment
Purpose
Vibrotactile Stimulation
Control for sensory feedback
Finger Tapping
Two sessions: one to provide training data for our
decoder, and one as an independent dataset for
offline analysis
Online BMI Testing
Online test of the decoder built on finger tapping data
J Neural Eng. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2017 April 01.
