 Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg., 95(Suppl 6), 2016, pp. 15–34
doi:10.4269/ajtmh.16-0141
Global Epidemiology of Plasmodium vivax
Rosalind E. Howes,1,2† Katherine E. Battle,1*† Kamini N. Mendis,3 David L. Smith,4,5,6 Richard E. Cibulskis,3
J. Kevin Baird,7,8 and Simon I. Hay4,6,9*
1Spatial Ecology and Epidemiology Group, Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom; 2Center for Global Health
and Diseases, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio; 3Global Malaria Program, World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland;
4Fogarty International Center, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland; 5Sanaria Institute for Global Health and Tropical Medicine,
Rockville, Maryland; 6Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington; 7Eijkman-Oxford
Clinical Research Unit, Jakarta, Indonesia; 8Centre for Tropical Medicine and Global Health, Nuffield Department of Medicine,
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom; 9Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford,
Roosevelt Drive, Oxford, United Kingdom
Abstract.
Plasmodium vivax is the most widespread human malaria, putting 2.5 billion people at risk of infection.
Its unique biological and epidemiological characteristics pose challenges to control strategies that have been principally
targeted against Plasmodium falciparum. Unlike P. falciparum, P. vivax infections have typically low blood-stage para-
sitemia with gametocytes emerging before illness manifests, and dormant liver stages causing relapses. These traits
affect both its geographic distribution and transmission patterns. Asymptomatic infections, high-risk groups, and
resulting case burdens are described in this review. Despite relatively low prevalence measurements and parasitemia
levels, along with high proportions of asymptomatic cases, this parasite is not benign. Plasmodium vivax can be associated
with severe and even fatal illness. Spreading resistance to chloroquine against the acute attack, and the operational
inadequacy of primaquine against the multiple attacks of relapse, exacerbates the risk of poor outcomes among the
tens of millions suffering from infection each year. Without strategies accounting for these P. vivax-specific characteristics,
progress toward elimination of endemic malaria transmission will be substantially impeded.
INTRODUCTION
Plasmodium vivax and Plasmodium falciparum are the pri-
mary causes of malaria in humans and until recent years, the
majority of malaria research and funding has been focused
on the prevention, treatment, and control of P. falciparum.1
Both parasite species expose approximately 2.5 billion people
to risk of infection.2,3 Although P. falciparum causes many
deaths, especially in sub-Saharan Africa where P. vivax is
rarer, the predominance of P. vivax in some of the world’s
most densely populated and impoverished regions, coupled
with its now proven association with severe and fatal out-
comes, informs the importance of reversing the historic neglect
of this infection. A deeper understanding of the unique epide-
miology of this parasite is necessary for effective malaria con-
trol and elimination efforts. A synthesis of the current status
of this knowledge represents this review’s objective.
Important variances in the biology of P. vivax and
P. falciparum render their epidemiologies distinctly different.
The most apparent is the ability of P. vivax to cause relapses
weeks to months following a primary infection by activation
of dormant liver-stage parasites, known as hypnozoites. These
dormant liver-stage infections constitute what is called the
hypnozoite reservoir of infection. That reservoir streams
new blood infections and clinical attacks into these communi-
ties, along with opportunities for onward transmission. The
hypnozoite reservoir extends clinical attacks across seasons
inhospitable to anopheline mosquitoes, effectively widening
its natural geographic range far into temperate zones includ-
ing the Korean Peninsula.2
There also exist differences in the blood-stage dynamics that
impact P. vivax epidemiology. Natural immunity is acquired at
a younger age than against P. falciparum, making infants the
primary risk group for severe vivax malaria in heavily endemic
settings.4 In low-transmission settings, where P. vivax often
persists against elimination efforts, all age groups appear at
risk of severe disease.4 The propensity for P. vivax to invade
young blood cells (reticulocytes) and its ability to migrate
beyond the venous sinuses results in relatively low levels of
parasitemia.5 Even in low-transmission settings, most infections
appear to be microscopically sub-patent and asymptomatic.4
Low blood-stage parasitemia does not make P. vivax a
“benign” infection, as once believed.5–7 Despite low levels
of detectable parasites, P. vivax causes significant morbidity
and can be associated with severe malaria and death.5,8–20
Remarkably, the primary therapies against such outcomes,
chloroquine and primaquine, have been in continuous use
since 1952, despite worsening resistance to chloroquine and
the operational inadequacy of primaquine where most malaria
patients live and seek treatment.
This article reviews the epidemiology of P. vivax in the
context of these crucial issues. The geographic distribution of
P. vivax infection and differences in relapse phenotype are
illustrated and described alongside estimates of P. vivax bur-
den, as well as severe, lethal, and chloroquine-resistant vivax
malaria to demonstrate that control and elimination strategies
developed for P. falciparum cannot simply be transferred to
P. vivax.21–25 The problems imposed by the unique biology of
P. vivax require the development and implementation of a
*Address correspondence to Katherine E. Battle, Big Data Institute,
Nuffield
Department
of
Medicine,
University
of
Oxford,
c/o
Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Roosevelt Drive,
Oxford OX3 7BN, United Kingdom, E-mail: katherine.battle@well
.ox.ac.uk or Simon I. Hay, Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation,
University of Washington, 2301 5th Ave, Suite 600, Seattle, WA 98121,
E-mail: sihay@uw.edu.
†These authors contributed equally to this work.
©World Health Organization 2016. Licensee American Journal of
Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. This is an open access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
IGO License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/igo/legalcode),
which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original work is properly cited. In any
reproduction of this article there should not be any suggestion that
WHO or this article endorse any specific organization or products.
The use of the WHO logo is not permitted. This notice should be
preserved along with the article's original URL.
15
 FIGURE 1.
The spatial distribution of Plasmodium vivax, associated uncertainty, and input data records. (A) The limits and endemicity of
P. vivax in 2010.2 Spatial limits of parasite-specific malaria risk are defined by annual parasite incidence (PvAPI) with further medical intelli-
gence, temperature, and aridity masks. Areas were defined as stable, unstable (dark grey areas, PvAPI < 0.1 per 1,000 per annum), or no risk
(light grey). The model-based geostatistics point estimates of the annual mean predicted prevalence are shown within the spatial limits of stable
transmission. Estimates of parasite rate standardized to 1- to 99-year-olds (PvPR1–99) that range from 0% to > 7% are shown as a spectrum of blue
to red. Hatching indicates areas where Duffy negativity gene frequency is predicted to exceed 90%.28 (B) The population-weighted uncertainty
as the ratio of the posterior interquartile range to the posterior mean prediction at each pixel on a blue to yellow color spectrum multiplied
by the underlying population density and rescaled to 0–1. Higher values (yellow) indicate areas with high uncertainty and large populations.
(C) World Health Organization regions by color: the African region (AFRO) in green, the region of the Americas (AMRO) in orange, the eastern
Mediterranean region (EMRO) in blue, the European region (EURO) in burgundy, the southeast Asian region (SEARO) in purple, and the
western Pacific region (WPRO) in dark green. The countries in each region that are not endemic for P. vivax are slightly greyed out and shaded
a lighter color. Those countries that are endemic only with P. vivax malaria are outlined in red. The location of the prevalence surveys that were
input into the model that produced the map in Figure 1A is shown as small black points and the surveys conducted since 2010 are shown in
yellow, illustrating the increased attention given to P. vivax in recent years.
16
HOWES, BATTLE AND OTHERS
 control and elimination strategy enabled by a relatively mod-
est new set of tools.26
GEOGRAPHY OF P. VIVAX INFECTION
Plasmodium vivax occurs across the widest geographic area
of the human malarias, extending well beyond the limits of
P. falciparum into temperate climates. This is enabled by
intracellular parasites dormant in the human liver, a safe haven
from immune attack during long mosquito-free cold seasons
when onward transmission and propagation is not possible.
Plasmodium vivax depends on the Duffy antigen to invade
red blood cells. Individuals who do not express the Duffy
antigen
have,
therefore,
been
considered
refractory
to
P. vivax infection27 and the prevalence of Duffy negative
populations must be considered in predictions and maps of
P. vivax endemicity. Plasmodium vivax was long thought to
be absent from parts of Africa where the Duffy negative
phenotype occurs at very high frequencies.28 Recent findings
of P. vivax infections in Duffy negative patients raise the pos-
sibility of an alternative invasion mechanism to Duffy, but
further investigation is required to assess the public health
significance of these findings.29,30 The global map of P. vivax
presented here takes into account estimates of Duffy nega-
tivity prevalence as a proxy of the population refractory to
infection.28 The regular occurrence of P. vivax diagnoses in
European and American patients who traveled only to areas
of Africa dominated by Duffy negativity,31 and a formal
review of the evidence of the P. vivax transmission in Africa,32
emphasizes the importance of resisting the temptation to
regard these zones as free of P. vivax risk.
Modeled spatial data of P. vivax transmission and preva-
lence,2,31 the uncertainty of those estimates, and the current
data available to inform those predictions are presented
as maps in Figure 1. The methods used to generate these
figures are described in detail elsewhere.33 Table 1 shows
estimates of the population at risk (PAR) of infection, calcu-
lated by combining the maps of the limits of transmission
with gridded population surfaces.34,35
Levels of P. vivax endemicity vary widely among the World
Health Organization (WHO) regions. Outside of Africa,
P. vivax is the dominant species, with relatively high preva-
lence of infection in the South-East Asian and Western Pacific
regions.36 Relatively high endemicity also occurs in most of
the Americas, but in much less densely populated areas. Data
from which to estimate the geographic extent of P. vivax
transmission in Africa are limited.32 High P. falciparum ende-
micity in much of that continent coupled with high prevalence
of Duffy negativity overshadowed collection of P. vivax-
specific data as a priority.25 Indirect evidence from returning
travelers suggests that P. vivax is present at low endemicity in
almost all sub-Saharan African countries.31,32
How P. vivax transmission may be sustained in populations
known to be predominantly Duffy negative is not well under-
stood. However, in the instance of Plasmodium ovale in the
Asia Pacific, such chronic endemicity without measurable
prevalence is known.37 The biology of P. vivax, in particular
its ability for repeated relapses from a single mosquito inocu-
lation, coupled with the very early emergence of gametocytes
in the course of blood-stage infection, perhaps enables para-
site survival despite relatively low probability of propagation
in blood. Further, population mobility along with immigra-
tion may amplify the heterogeneity of the Duffy phenotype
and increase the population of vulnerable Duffy-positive hosts
able to sustain infection.
Some of the highest predicted P. vivax prevalence esti-
mates in 2010 (Figure 1) have a relatively sparse evidence
base of survey data for large parts of the world (e.g., Brazil,
India, Myanmar, and Papua New Guinea). Twenty of the
95 P. vivax malaria–endemic countries are in the southeast
Asia and western Pacific regions, and their populations com-
prise 83% of the global PAR of P. vivax.
The prevalence of P. vivax predicted within 5 km2 areas
globally (Figure 1) was derived from a sample of 9,970 para-
site rate (PR) surveys.2 Compared with similar predictions
for P. falciparum,3 relatively low prevalence occurs through-
out the endemic world. The central tendency of the P. vivax
PR (PvPR) estimates, age standardized to the 1- to 99-year
age range (PvPR1–99), rarely exceeded 10%.2 As shown
in Figure 2, the prevalence of P. vivax is universally low com-
pared with P. falciparum, both in range and median values.
The 1–99 age range was applied to P. vivax, rather than the
2–10 years range used for P. falciparum,3 because P. vivax
cross-sectional surveys were most often conducted in whole
populations.2 The patterns of PvPR and P. falciparum PR
(Pf PR) by age also differ slightly. Plasmodium vivax preva-
lence peaks in children aged 2–6, compared with 2–10 for
P. falciparum. In adults, PvPR is also lower than Pf PR when
considered as a proportion of the peak: PvPR in adults is
roughly a quarter of PvPR2–6 whereas Pf PR in adults is
roughly a third of Pf PR2–10. PR for either parasite is lower
in the whole population than in children, but a direct com-
parison of PR in children relative to whole populations illus-
trates that P. vivax prevalence tends to be much lower
regardless of age group (Figure 3).
There are other reasons why PvPR could be lower than
Pf PR. Although the prevalence of P. vivax in heavily endemic
areas may reach or even exceed that of P. falciparum, P. vivax
TABLE 1
Areas and populations at risk* of Plasmodium vivax malaria in 2010 by World Health Organization region2
Area (million km2)
Population (million)
Unstable
Stable
Any risk
Unstable
Stable
Any risk
African region
17.36
1.47
18.83
19.23
36.80
56.02
Region of the Americas
1.38
8.08
9.46
87.66
49.79
137.45
Eastern Mediterranean region
4.24
0.60
4.84
176.11
47.37
223.48
European region
0.40
0.02
0.42
15.72
1.40
17.12
Southeast Asia region
2.11
3.88
5.99
691.71
748.38
1,440.09
Western Pacific region
3.06
1.30
4.36
533.04
81.16
614.20
World
28.55
15.35
43.90
1,523.47
964.90
2,488.37
*Risk is stratified into unstable risk (Plasmodium vivax annual parasite incidence [PvAPI] < 0.1 per 1,000 people per annum) and stable risk (PvAPI ≥ 0.1 per 1,000 people per annum).
17
PLASMODIUM VIVAX EPIDEMIOLOGY
 can often go undetected.38 Low parasite densities lead to high
rates of false-negative diagnoses by microscopy or rapid diag-
nostic tests (RDTs).39 Microscopy diagnoses underestimate
the true prevalence of blood-stage P. vivax in both high- and
low-transmission settings.40–47 Plasmodium vivax in mixed
infections is also often underdiagnosed48; lower densities of
P. vivax in peripheral blood translate into P. falciparum being
diagnosed before P. vivax is spotted by the microscopist.
Another consideration with regard to true versus observed
prevalence is the invisibility of the dormant liver stages to any
diagnosis. These parasites could be highly prevalent in many
endemic settings. A report by Douglas and others49 from
Thailand offers some evidence of this. Two months after anti-
malarial treatment of blood-stage P. falciparum infection (which
would also have been active against blood-stage P. vivax para-
sites), 51% of patients tested positive for blood-stage P. vivax.
Given the region’s relatively low transmission rate, this sug-
gests a high proportion of hypnozoite-derived infections and
provides an estimate of the prevalence of latent P. vivax in
people having acute falciparum malaria. Further, P. vivax may
sequester in tissues like bone marrow and the hemopoietic
regions of the spleen.5 In at least one patient with asymptom-
atic and microscopically sub-patent parasitemia, the spleen
was heavily laden with blood-stage trophozoites of P. vivax.50
All of these findings recommend caution in comparing prev-
alence estimates of P. vivax and P. falciparum based largely on
blood-stage
infections
diagnosed
by
relatively
insensitive
means. These may underestimate true prevalence of P. vivax
far more than P. falciparum. The limitations of diagnostics
technologies to detect actual parasite density and actual para-
site mass in any given host (or population) have been com-
pared with the floating and submerged sections of an iceberg.
In this analogy, one may reasonably assign a greater specific
gravity to the P. vivax iceberg—it is likely that much more of it
is submerged (by intrinsically low blood-stage infection and
diagnostically invisible parasites sequestered in marrow and
spleen or lying dormant in the liver) relative to P. falciparum.
RELAPSE EPIDEMIOLOGY
The hypnozoites cause multiple clinical attacks from a
single bite of a P. vivax-infected mosquito. In contrast,
FIGURE 3.
Density plots of parasite rate (PR) pixels for Plasmpdium falciparum and Plasmodium vivax in all regions excluding Africa. The plot
(A) shows the PR values age standardized72,191 to all ages (1–99 years), (B) is standardized to 2- to 10-year-olds, and (C) 2- to 6-year-olds. The
plots show that regardless of age, the vast majority of P. vivax is found at lower prevalence values.
FIGURE 2.
Comparison of Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium vivax prevalence.135 Prevalence values from P. falciparum and P. vivax
endemicity surfaces2,3 standardized to the 1- to 99-year age range.72 The shaded areas correspond to each species and show a smoothed approximation
of the frequency distribution (a kernel density plot) of parasite prevalence within each geographic region. The black central bar represents the inter-
quartile range and the white circles indicate the median values. CSE Asia = Central and Southeast Asia.
18
HOWES, BATTLE AND OTHERS
 P. falciparum infection of the liver yields a single blood-stage
infection. In other words, “infection” as an event in P. falciparum
is singular and clear, whereas the same in P. vivax takes
on complex plurality and ambiguity in an epidemiological
sense (Figure 4).51,52
Recurrence of asexual P. vivax parasites in peripheral
blood may derive from three distinct sources: relapse (from
hypnozoites), recrudescence (from sub-patent asexual para-
sitemia), or reinfection (by new mosquito inoculation of spo-
rozoites).53 Assigning the source of any given parasitemia
observed in endemic settings is virtually impossible.54,55
Nonetheless, it may be inferred at a population level: the force
of infection attributable to sporozoites versus hypnozoites
can be estimated through randomized drug trials comparing
recurrence rates between treatment arms with and without
primaquine. Such investigation in a highly endemic area of
Papua New Guinea, where parasites have a short relapse fre-
quency of about a month,51 estimated that relapses caused
approximately 50% of blood-stage infections and more than
60% of clinical episodes in the first 3 months following
the drug intervention.56–58 Relapse may well be the predomi-
nant origin of most P. vivax clinical attacks throughout the
endemic world.
Geographical variation in the rate and timing at which a
“strain” of P. vivax may relapse has long been known.59–61
Temperate and subtropical strains of the parasite exhibit
either a long incubation period or a long delay between the
primary infection and relapse (around 8–10 months). Tropi-
cal strains are characterized by short incubation times and
short relapse intervals.62 How hypnozoite relapses are trig-
gered, and the source of this phenotypic variation, remain
unknown.39 The relapse mechanism may be an adaptive trait
of the parasite to sequester or “hibernate” during conditions
inhospitable to the Anopheles vectors.63–65 Another theory is
that latent hypnozoites are activated by systemic febrile ill-
ness,65,66 which explains observations of multiple relapses at
regular (seemingly triggered) intervals, heterologous geno-
types in relapse, and what seems to be a high frequency
of relapses following P. falciparum infections.49,65,67 Others
hypothesized that a mosquito bite (and its complex immuno-
logic consequences) may trigger relapse.68 However, obser-
vations from sporozoite-induced infections in North American
prisoner volunteers during the 1940s and 1950s indicate
relapses occur at predictable intervals and rates, without any
known trigger or stimulus.51 Further, findings of Shute and
others64 suggested that individual sporozoites were geneti-
cally programmed for either direct tissue development with
early primary attack, or for latency and very late primary
attack. They observed early primary attacks with the typi-
cally long-term latent North Korean strain, but only when
the sporozoite inoculum was very high: this strain had rela-
tively high frequencies of sporozoites with genetically set
latency, and those set for rapid development were so rare as
to not ordinarily occur with the normally low numbers of
sporozoites of natural inoculation.
Evidence from records of relapse observed in both con-
trolled experimental and natural settings has demonstrated
geographical variation in the timing of relapse. A meta-
analysis of over 5,000 first relapse events revealed that epi-
demiological zones outlined by Macdonald69 describe the
observed heterogeneity in relapse.51 The zones, map, and
violin plots in Figure 5 illustrate the variation in time from
primary infection to first relapse observed in each area.
Although a wide range was observed in almost every zone,
some regions had a clear tendency to short or long times to
relapse (Figure 6).
Regionally specific relapse patterns should be considered
when assessing control and elimination strategy and tactics.
The impact of vector control on the incidence and preva-
lence of P. vivax malaria may be less rapid than that
observed for P. falciparum, with the magnitude of the
difference dependent on the relapse phenotype of the
region.65 Effects may be slowest to materialize in regions
characterized by long-latency strains or high rates of relapse
(even in areas with shorter latency). The Americas, South-
East Asia, and Western Pacific WHO regions all harbor
strains that relapse quickly and repeatedly following pri-
mary infection. The Indian subcontinent and sub-Saharan
FIGURE 4.
Pathways to infection of blood and clinical attacks in Plasmodium vivax malaria.51
19
PLASMODIUM VIVAX EPIDEMIOLOGY
 Africa have variable relapse frequencies and periodicity,
but show moderate time to relapse overall. Longer times to
relapse are shown in areas around the Mediterranean and
Central America, with the longest periods of latency in
China and the Korean Peninsula. However, the presence of
long-latency strains may be widespread. It is difficult to
exclude their presence among multiple frequently relapsing
strains in the tropics.65 These cautions, coupled with the
fears
of
potential
primaquine-induced
hemolysis
that
sharply impede its effectiveness, highlight the complexity
FIGURE 5.
Zoo-geographical zones and observed time to first relapse.51 (A) The zoo-geographical zones used to describe the time to first
relapse. (B) The median observed time to relapse in each study used to obtain individual data. The size of each point varies by sample size and
the time to first relapse is shown on a spectrum of red (< 1 month) to dark blue (> 12 months). (C) Violin plots show the observed time to first
relapse in individuals from each zone in Figure 5A. The colored areas correspond to each zone and show a smoothed approximation of the fre-
quency distribution (a kernel density plot) of the time to relapse within each geographic region. The black central bars represent the inter-
quartile range, and the white circles indicate the median values.
20
HOWES, BATTLE AND OTHERS
 and difficulty that relapse brings to P. vivax epidemiology
and control.70
HIGH-RISK GROUPS
The population groups at highest risk of P. vivax infec-
tion are determined by immunological factors directly
associated with intensity of local transmission, host genet-
ics, and behavioral traits affecting exposure to infectious
bites. As such, the primary risk groups differ between
epidemiological settings and shift as endemicity wanes
toward elimination.71 Key risk factors are considered
here, though comorbidities and malnutrition, which are
discussed later in relation to the clinical aspects of severe
disease, are also important risk factors for infection and
severe outcomes.
Age. The distribution of Plasmodium infections across a
community varies in a predictable pattern as a function of age
and transmission intensity.2,4,72 In relatively higher endemic
areas, young children bear the brunt of disease burden,
because by adolescence individuals will have developed immu-
nity against symptomatic disease. In the far more common
low-transmission settings, however, infections may not occur
frequently enough to allow protective immunity to develop,
and in these communities, symptomatic infection is more
evenly distributed across age groups.4 Figure 7 characterizes
these patterns in different endemicity settings. The pattern
applies to both P. falciparum and P. vivax, but studies from
co-endemic high-transmission areas of Papua New Guinea and
eastern Indonesia report an earlier peak in P. vivax cases
around 2 years of age compared with 5–10 years for
P. falciparum, reflecting “faster” acquisition of immunity to
P. vivax (the role of age per se versus cumulative exposure in
these rates is unclear).12,43,73–78 In these high-endemicity set-
tings, clinical P. vivax is relatively rare in children older than
5 years. This earlier age peak for P. vivax has also been
FIGURE 6.
Modeled relapse incidence and mean time to relapse.51 (A) The relapse incidence per 100,000 person days on a spectrum of blue
to red, with red being the highest incidence of relapse. Zone 8 is hatched to indicate that the prediction is to be interpreted with caution.
(B) The predicted mean time to relapse on a spectrum from blue to red, with red being most frequent relapse. The numbers of the zones corre-
spond to those shown in Figure 5A.
21
PLASMODIUM VIVAX EPIDEMIOLOGY
 reported from lower transmission intensity settings in Sri
Lanka,79 Thailand80, and Myanmar.81 Reasons for this dispar-
ity between rates of natural acquisition of immunity against
both parasites remain uncertain,4 but studies of laboratory-
induced infections during the 1930s suggested that acquisition
of immunity with fewer clinical attacks was an intrinsic prop-
erty of P. vivax.82 Alternatively, it has also been hypothesized
to result from greater exposure to P. vivax blood-stage para-
sitemia due to relapses.11,77 Case data from areas nearing elim-
ination (such as Sri Lanka and Malaysia)71 also reflect these
age shifts in disease burden from young children to all ages as
a function of the changing transmission intensity over time.78
Ecological setting. Residents of urban areas are generally
at lower risk of malaria infection due to man-made ecologi-
cal conditions that are inhospitable to most Anopheles vector
species.2,33,83 Anopheles stephensi, common across the Arabian
Peninsula and the Indian subcontinent, and east into southern
China, is an exception to most malaria vectors in being well
adapted to survival in urban habitats.84 Evidence discussed in
this supplement’s review of P. vivax epidemiology in India85
suggests a trend toward increasing infection prevalence in
Indian cities, perhaps tied to land-use changes as part of
urbanization construction projects creating breeding habitats
and potentially also resulting from greater population move-
ment between urban and rural environments. In addition, the
bionomics of the Anopheles mosquitoes in many P. vivax
endemic areas differ from those within Africa.84,86,87 For
example, the exophilic and zoophilic tendencies of dominant
vector species in Asia render standard malaria control strate-
gies of indoor residual spraying and insecticide-treated nets
less effective.84,88
Migrant workers represent a risk group of particular prior-
ity for malaria control efforts. Many migrants work in high-
risk environments such as natural forest, palm oil or rubber
plantations, and fish farms.89 In areas where major epidemio-
logical shifts toward elimination have occurred, these migrant
workers, predominantly adult males, sustain transmission.71
Their mobile behavior, together with a range of social, legal,
economic, and geographic factors, limits their access to and
contact with health-care delivery systems,90 putting themselves
and those in the areas they live and transit through at sus-
tained risk of transmission.
Pregnancy. Pregnant women and infants are a primary risk
group for threatening clinical vivax malaria,91,92 resulting
in relatively high maternal, infant, and fetal morbidity and
mortality.93–95 Maternal anemia96 increases the risks of
premature labor, stillbirth, and reduced birth weight.93,97
Studies in Thailand have found severe malaria to be three
times (95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.4–6.2) more com-
mon in pregnant than nonpregnant women,98 and the odds
of miscarriage about three times higher for women infected
with either P. falciparum (adjusted odds ratio [AOR]: 2.7,
95% CI: 2.1–3.4) or P. vivax (AOR: 3.1, 95% CI: 2.4–3.9)
than for women with no malaria.99 Data from Indonesia
suggested that the trigger of severe outcomes was the symp-
toms of infection rather than the parasitemia per se,
and prompt treatment of infections during the first tri-
mester can prevent significant birth weight reductions.96
The contraindication of primaquine treatment of pregnant/
lactating women and infants exposes these highly vulnerable
groups to the threat inherent in repeated clinical attacks at
short intervals.100
Host genetic factors. A number of seemingly deleterious
human genetic traits affecting red blood cells are found
with the highest frequencies in populations across malaria-
endemic zones.101,102 Given this observation, the “malaria
hypothesis” suggests these blood disorders may confer protec-
tion against malaria disease.103 Although most research has
focused on P. falciparum (especially with sickle-cell disease),
some polymorphisms have been found to confer protection
against P. vivax. For instance, southeast Asian ovalocytosis in
Papua New Guinea may confer partial resistance to infec-
tion,104,105 as may certain variants of glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency.70,106,107 In contrast, both
alpha and beta thalassemia have been associated with increased
risk of P. vivax parasitemia.108,109 Host genetic factors may,
therefore, play a role in determining groups at increased risk
of P. vivax infection, or groups innately protected from clinical
infection, but more P. vivax-specific evidence is required to
draw concrete conclusions and quantify the altered risk levels.
ASYMPTOMATIC BLOOD-STAGE INFECTIONS
Asymptomatic blood-stage P. vivax infections in popu-
lations are often cited as a barrier to control, much like the
undetectable reservoir of hypnozoite infections in the liver.
This section addresses asymptomatic blood-stage infections,
whether arising from sporozoites, hypnozoites, or insuffi-
ciently treated primary infections. Infection detectability
varies over the time course of P. vivax infections, with fever
and symptoms usually occurring early, when they occur at
all. Depending on the setting, typically a small proportion of
blood-stage infections trigger symptoms and treatment seek-
ing, whereas a much larger proportion of infections will be
asymptomatic, sub-patent, or dormant.41 For infections that
are not treated or improperly treated, the resolution of
FIGURE 7.
Schematic of the age–parasite rate relationship by
endemicity class. The curves generated by a model for Plasmodium
falciparum (Plasmodium vivax would follow a similar pattern) show the
age–parasite relationship at different endemicity levels: holoendemic
areas are dark green (category of highest transmission levels),
hyperendemicity areas dark grey, mesoendemic areas light grey, and
hypoendemic areas very light grey. figure reproduced from Smith and
others (2007).72
22
HOWES, BATTLE AND OTHERS
 symptoms is followed by a much longer asymptomatic infec-
tion that is progressively less likely to be detected as it ages.
Different proportions of asymptomatic and sub-patent infec-
tions will be detected based on the survey method (i.e., lon-
gitudinal versus cross sectional), the diagnostics used, and
the timing of the survey with respect to recent outbreaks or
transmission seasonality.
It is not known what proportion of P. vivax infections are
or will become febrile or otherwise symptomatic, but the
majority of P. vivax infections in cross-sectional surveys are
symptomless and undetectable by standard diagnostic tech-
niques (RDTs and microscopy).4 Up to 97% of microscopi-
cally diagnosed P. vivax infections in the Pacific Asia region
have been reported to be asymptomatic; higher sensitivity
diagnostics, such as polymerase chain reaction (PCR), would
likely find an even higher proportion (Figure 8).110,111 Simi-
lar findings have been reported from Amazonia, India, the
Mekong, Indonesia, and the Solomon Islands.47,11–120 A
review of submicroscopic infections detected in 31 cross-
sectional surveys from 12 countries revealed that on average
69.5% of all P. vivax blood-stage infections were submicro-
scopic, and in a subset of surveys, 89–100% of submicro-
scopic infections were asymptomatic.46 The most common
type of P. vivax infection in many areas is, therefore, both
submicroscopic and asymptomatic.
There is no known sterilizing natural immunity to malaria.
People with chronic exposure appear to develop a partial
immunity (parasitemia without illness) as a function of both
age and the intensity of exposure, as discussed previously
and illustrated in Figure 9. The proportion of asymptom-
atic infections may vary considerably in endemic situations.
People of all ages, and of very different previous exposure
patterns to malaria, have been found to harbor asymptomatic
parasitemia. This may be due to parasite and host factors
other than host immunity.121 The protective natural immunity
to infection by both P. vivax and P. falciparum in very low-
transmission settings is not understood in the context of cur-
rent thinking on how natural immunity is acquired.122
Assessing the contribution of the asymptomatic reservoir to
onward transmission has proved challenging, not least due to
the methodological difficulties involved. However, Barbosa
and others reported gametocytemia in > 90% of individuals
with asymptomatic or sub-patent P. vivax in Brazil123; and a
study in Colombia including both natural and experimental
infections (total patients N = 46) used membrane feeding
assays to quantify infectivity and concluded that asymptomatic
FIGURE 8.
The proportion of infections detected by microscopy
versus proportion detected by polymerase chain reactions (PCR)
for Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium vivax. Derived from
data in Okell and others 2012 supplementary information.192 Only
surveys where both P. vivax and P. falciparum were detected are
shown. Of the 44 data points for each species, all but four were
for all age groups—the remaining four considered children under
age 5 only.
FIGURE 9.
Relation between age and malaria severity in an area of moderate Plasmodium falciparum transmission intensity. With repeated
exposure, protection is acquired first against severe malaria, then against illness with malaria, and much more slowly, against microscopy-
detected parasitemia. Figure reproduced with permission from White and others.193
23
PLASMODIUM VIVAX EPIDEMIOLOGY
 carriers were at least as infective as symptomatic patients, and
also presented with the highest proportions of infectious
mature gametocytes.124 The association between asymptom-
atic infection and gametocyte density is essential to under-
standing transmission dynamics. Plasmodium vivax gametocytes
mature faster than P. falciparum gametocytes, and may,
therefore, be transmitted earlier in the course of infection.23
Mosquito P. vivax infections occur at lower gametocyte
densities than P. falciparum, and therefore, a greater pro-
portion of transmission could occur from those with
undetectable gametocytemia.125,126
The proportion of asymptomatic infections varies with
transmission intensity such that in low-transmission settings,
there is a higher proportion of asymptomatic carriers.46 By
nature of being asymptomatic, these individuals are less
likely to be treated, and therefore, asymptomatic infections
will persist longer in a population. However, with sustained
detection and treatment of symptomatic cases alone, trans-
mission will, in theory, decrease, leading to an associated
decrease in population immunity and lower frequencies
of asymptomatic infections.127 This may be true for both
P. vivax and P. falciparum. Where P. vivax presents a greater
challenge is the hypnozoite—relapses caused by this unde-
tectable reservoir of infection may be symptomatic or asymp-
tomatic, and are an important source of sustained transmission
where control of only blood-stage infections and mosquito
interventions are implemented.128
ESTIMATES OF THE CLINICAL BURDEN OF
P. VIVAX MALARIA
Reliable measures of the clinical burden of P. vivax have
been identified as a key knowledge gap.7,39,79 Case estimates
improve treatment targeting, guide strategic planning for con-
trol, and provide a means of monitoring the impact and prog-
ress of those interventions. A few attempts have been made
to quantify clinical vivax cases, with widely divergent results.
Case estimates. The most recent estimates of P. vivax
cases, from the WHO’s 2015 World Malaria Report,36 sug-
gest 13.8 million (95% CI: 10.3–18.4) P. vivax cases in 2014.
This corresponds to 6% of all malaria cases globally and
51% of all malaria cases estimated to occur outside of sub-
Saharan Africa. Figure 10 shows the contribution of cases
from the highest burden P. vivax countries in 2013. Cases
from just three countries—India, Pakistan, and Indonesia—
together represented > 80% of cases globally. Unlike the
methodological developments estimating P
. falciparum case
numbers,129,130 limited recent efforts have been invested into
P. vivax case estimation. Historical estimates based on pre-
year 2000 data estimated a much larger case burden than the
recent WHO figures (71.0–80.0 million annual cases by
Mendis and others [2001] based on mid-1990s data79; and
132.0–391.0 million estimated by Hay and others [2004]7,130
based on a malaria endemicity map from 2002), but these can-
not be considered reliable indicators of contemporary trans-
mission. Robust methods, similar to those developed for
P. falciparum, are required to overcome the limitations of the
available data for estimating P. vivax cases.
Quantifying case numbers. In the context of varied data
sources (all of them imperfect in important respects), differ-
ing methods have been used to derive case burden estimates.
The WHO primarily follows a surveillance-based approach
using health facility records reported to each country’s Minis-
try of Health.131 The accuracy of reported cases is influenced
by reporting completeness, treatment-seeking behavior, and
the likelihood that a case of malaria is found to be parasite
positive, all of which are adjusted for using country-specific
parameters. However, for countries with less reliable routine
surveillance data, model-based methods that link measures of
malaria transmission with case incidence are used instead. The
WHO’s approach, therefore, strives to cope with the variability
in diverse sources and variable quality of reported data.131,132
Other epidemiologists have investigated alternative approaches
based on a widely available and easily obtained epidemiologi-
cal metric, the prevalence of infection (or PR). This represents
the proportion of individuals infected (confirmed by micros-
copy or RDT) in an area at a fixed time point as measured by
cross-sectional surveys.133 This metric was used to map the
global prevalence of P. vivax endemicity (Figure 1).2 Case esti-
mates can then be derived from the prevalence map by using
a model of the relationship between prevalence of infection
and clinical incidence.129,130,134–136 Figure 11 represents such
a model developed for P. vivax that will be integrated into a
cartographic approach to derive estimates of P. vivax clinical
cases.135,137 This approach quantifies the degree of uncertainty
in the predictions, highlighting regions in need of improved
surveillance. Preliminary work by the authors shows that these
results are of the same order of magnitude as the estimates
provided by the WHO using routine surveillance data.
These alternative approaches to case estimating provide com-
plementary and useful comparisons in continuing to leverage
much-needed improved P. vivax surveillance and reporting.
Trends of P. falciparum and P. vivax case count ratios. It
has been noted during successful control campaigns that
FIGURE 10.
Cumulative proportion of the global estimated Plasmo-
dium vivax cases accounted for by the countries with the highest
number of cases. Reproduced from the World Malaria Report 2014.132
Lao PDR refers to Lao People’s Democratic Republic and DPR
Korea to Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
24
HOWES, BATTLE AND OTHERS
 P. falciparum is often the first species to show a decline
in incidence, with P. vivax generally being slower to respond.
In addition to relapse, this is also likely due to 1) the longer
extrinsic incubation period of P. falciparum compared with
P. vivax, meaning that transmission of the former is more
susceptible to interventions such as insecticide-treated bed
nets and indoor residual spraying which shorten the average
lifespan of the vector population;138 and 2) the fact that
infectious gametocytes appear early in a blood-stage infec-
tion of P. vivax, almost simultaneously with asexual parasites,
in contrast to P. falciparum in which mature infective game-
tocytes take 10 days to appear in the peripheral blood
after asexual parasite patency.79 This means that when a
P. vivax-infected patient presents for diagnosis and treat-
ment, onward transmission of the parasite could have
already occurred and the early diagnosis and treatment
strategies that are highly effective against P. falciparum may
not be so for P. vivax.79
The phenomenon of the proportion of cases due to P. vivax
increasing as overall cases decrease has been observed in a
variety of endemic settings.71 Observations from Thailand,139
Sri Lanka,140 and Brazil141,142 showed the proportion of cases
due to P. vivax greatly increased as control efforts were scaled
up over time. This pattern is not always obvious from
national-level data, however, because control programs are
not focused uniformly across a country. Areas with the highest
transmission intensity (often with more P. falciparum) may
have fewer services available and P. vivax, therefore, appears
to decrease more quickly as control is applied to lower trans-
mission areas. Nonetheless, the pattern of an increasing pro-
portion of cases due to P. vivax in elimination settings has
also been observed in a variety of settings.47,71,140,143 All coun-
tries in the WHO 2013 World Malaria Report that reported
microscopically confirmed cases found a higher proportion of
P. falciparum in years with higher case numbers than in years
with fewer.143 In addition, P. vivax was the predominant species
in countries in pre-elimination and elimination phases which
have a low total annual malaria incidence rate (Figure 12).144,145
In general, decreases in the incidence of P. falciparum
cases have been larger than those of P. vivax.143 Biological
characteristics unique to P. vivax cause existing control strat-
egies, particularly treatment options, to be less suitable in
the final, predominantly P. vivax, elimination stages.71 The
consistency of this phenomenon serves to emphasize the pro-
grammatic significance of the biological distinctions between
P. vivax and P. falciparum, with malaria control having been
historically aimed principally at P. falciparum without regard
to the singular biology of P. vivax. Programs aiming for more
FIGURE 11.
Modeled relationship between parasite prevalence and clinical case incidence for Plasmodium vivax. (A) The pooled prevalence–
incidence relationship as point-wise 68% and 95% credible intervals (CrIs) based on data from all zones (Figure 5). To produce a pooled fit, the
posterior of each zone was weighted by the number of observations from that zone. (B) The zone-specific prevalence–incidence relationships.
Zone 2 is Central America, zone 3 is South America, zone 8 is Monsoon Asia (India), zone 10 is southeast Asia, zone 11 is northern Asia and
Europe, and Zone 12 is Melanesia. The 95% CrIs are shown in light grey and the 68% CrIs in dark grey. The colors of the zones correspond to
those shown in Figure 6B. Reproduced from Battle and others.135
25
PLASMODIUM VIVAX EPIDEMIOLOGY
 rapid and thorough elimination of malaria transmission
should adapt their strategies and interventions toward effec-
tiveness against P. vivax; without these, standard interven-
tions will have to be sustained over much longer periods to
drive out P. vivax transmission.25,143,146
SEVERE AND FATAL P. VIVAX MALARIA
The last decade saw a significant shift in knowledge, atti-
tudes, and practices toward P. vivax. Having long been char-
acterized as the “benign tertian” malaria,6,7,147–149 recent
evidence demonstrates that a diagnosis of P. vivax infection
can be associated with severe and fatal illness.5,8–20 In con-
sequence, the species begins to become acknowledged as
inherently pernicious.
The nature of severe and fatal vivax disease. In the
absence of a species-specific case description for severe
P. vivax,150 the WHO case definition for severe P. falciparum
malaria (excluding parasite counts) has been widely applied
for categorizing uncomplicated versus severe disease in
patients diagnosed with P. vivax infection. The spectrum of
clinical syndromes for both species is essentially similar.8
Studies of vivax morbidity and mortality from across the
vivax-endemic world have reported the full spectrum of
pathologies commonly attributed exclusively to P. falciparum,
including both sequestration-related and nonsequestration-
related complications.13–16,149,151–153 A diagnosis of acute
severe vivax malaria, therefore, includes one or more of the
following (numerous case reports of each exist in the litera-
ture)8,10,13,19,149,154,155:
1)
neurological
conditions,
notably
coma or repeated general seizures and altered consciousness;
2) hematological conditions, particularly severe anemia
(< 5 mg Hb/dL), severe thrombocytopenia (< 50,000 platelets/
μL), and hemoglobinuria; 3) systemic symptoms such as circu-
latory collapse or shock; and 4) vital organ failure, including
respiratory dysfunction and acute respiratory distress syn-
drome, acute renal failure, splenic rupture, hepatic dysfunc-
tion, and jaundice.
The preponderance of each syndrome among severely ill
patients with P. vivax or P. falciparum infection differs, and
risk of death differs
greatly between
syndromes.20 For
instance, metabolic acidosis, coma, and other neurological
complications occur less frequently in severe vivax malaria,
whereas severe anemia and acute lung injury are more com-
monly reported manifestations of severe P. vivax.8,14 Respira-
tory distress was associated with 15 of 17 P. vivax mortalities
in an autopsy series in Brazil;14 and in Indonesian Papua,
severe anemia dominated as the cause of illness among inpa-
tients. When severe anemia occurred with respiratory distress,
death became a likely outcome (OR: 65, P < 0.0001).20 Despite
lower peripheral blood-stage parasitemia, the degree of anemia
in severe P. vivax and P. falciparum infections is often similar.11
A recent global meta-analysis of 77 studies comprising
46,411 severe vivax patients revealed marked geographic
patterns in the prevalence of particular clinical manifesta-
tions of severe vivax.153 Noteworthy was the apparently
much lower incidence of severe disease in certain regions,
including the Greater Mekong, than others such as India,
where nearly half of the severe vivax studies were conducted.
The broad pattern identified was that in high-transmission
areas (such as New Guinea), severe anemia was the predom-
inant symptom and found mainly in young infants.12,76 In
lower endemicity areas (such as parts of the Americas),
where adults were more likely to be affected, patients
presented with a variety of vital organ dysfunctions.153
Strain-dependent virulence in P. vivax is well known and far
more striking than in P. falciparum.5
Evidence of the risks of severe and fatal P. vivax. The risk
of severe disease and case fatality rates (CFRs) are not
firmly established for P. vivax. Although the WHO severe
P. falciparum criteria apply to characterizing severe vivax,
formally defining specific criteria and thresholds remains
necessary to ensure consistency between studies and enable
meta-analyses of the prevalence of severe disease and risks
of morbidity from different manifestations of disease to be
more robustly assessed.153 The risk of a P. vivax infection
presenting severe symptoms is difficult to quantify because
of the inherent difficulty in estimating the number of
P. vivax infections in a community (the denominator of
this risk estimate). Recent studies aiming to quantify rates
of severe disease and fatality used varying metrics to represent
“total P. vivax cases,” including hospital cases,20 community sur-
veyed infections,156 and regional case notifications.19,157 The dis-
crepancies in the number of cases captured through community
FIGURE 12.
The variation of the proportion of malaria cases due to
Plasmodium vivax with the annual malaria incidence rates in endemic
countries, as published in 2001 (the rest being mainly due to Plasmo-
dium falciparum) shown on a logarithmic scale. The data points are
color coded and shaped by region. Asia includes Bangladesh, Bhutan,
Cambodia, China, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia,
Myanmar, Nepal, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Solomon Islands,
Sri Lanka, Thailand, Vanuatu, and Vietnam. Central Asia and Caucasus
includes Armenia, Azerbaijan, Tajikistan, and Turkey. Eastern Medi-
terranean refers to Afghanistan, Iran, Iraq, Oman, Pakistan, Saudi
Arabia, Syria, and Yemen. Latin America includes Argentina, Belize,
Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Guatemala, French Guyana, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Peru, Suriname, and Venezuela. The per-
centage of P. vivax for each country is as cases reported by the coun-
tries to World Health Organization. Note that the figure excludes data
from the African region because high prevalence of the Duffy negativ-
ity phenotype results in very low P. vivax transmission28 and occasional
case reports of P. vivax are vastly outnumbered by P. falciparum cases.
Figure modified from the original published version,79 and shared by
Kamini Mendis.
26
HOWES, BATTLE AND OTHERS
 surveys and those reporting to hospital make comparing rates
of severe disease and death between studies difficult.
The risk of fatality among hospitalized P. vivax cases was
summarized in 16 studies by Baird,5 of which 10 were retro-
spective and six prospective. Using these data and an addi-
tional 27 studies with documented species-specific numbers
of severe disease and death, the median CFR among inpa-
tients with severe disease was found to be 3.1% (inter-
quartile range [IQR]: 0.0–9.3%).158 Five of these studies
were able to rule out the possibility of a mixed infection with
P. falciparum using PCR. The median CFR from severe
P. falciparum disease where it occurred and was reported
among 22 of the same hospitals was 11.6% (IQR: 4.9–
22.8%). The odds of an inpatient dying from a P. vivax
malaria infection were just under two-thirds that of those
with severe P. falciparum infections (OR: 0.63, 95% CI:
0.52–0.77). This ratio is unlikely to reflect the relative risks
of dying among patients who acquire malaria in the commu-
nity. Nonetheless, the studies do show that severe cases and
deaths due to P. vivax can occur in all endemic regions.
Population-based risks of death have rarely been com-
pared between parasites. Where they have, the risk with
P. vivax was less than half that associated with P. falciparum.20
This large prospective population-based study (N = 45,525
clinical P. vivax cases) estimated the risk of severe disease to
be one in 270 clinical episodes, and death was one in 3,959.
The equivalent risks among 72,721 clinical episodes of
P. falciparum were one in 185 and one in 1,742, respectively,
illustrating a significantly different risk of death between spe-
cies. Nonetheless, this study and many others firmly support
abandoning the dogma that P. vivax is an intrinsically benign
and generally harmless species.
Comorbidities and malnutrition. Although it is apparent
that P. vivax mono-infections can be associated with severe and
fatal illness,5,14,151 coinfections with other pathogens may be
playing important roles influencing the likelihood of those poor
outcomes, as reported with P. falciparum.159–161 The Brazilian
autopsy study previously mentioned14 identified comorbidities
as important in 13 of the 17 deaths considered. Similarly, a
series of Brazilian intensive care patients reported over half of
those admitted with a primary diagnosis of P. vivax malaria,
(14/24) suffered at least one acute or chronic comorbidity.16
Few studies have described comorbidities with P. vivax.
Understanding the impact of coinfections on clinical outcome
is nonetheless vital to assuring appropriate treatment courses
and case management, as has been demonstrated with
P. falciparum.159 For instance, dengue and P. vivax show spa-
tial overlap in distributions2,162,163 and their coinfection pre-
sents significant diagnostic and treatment challenges.164–168
Another important geographically overlapping family of
pathogens is the soil-transmitted helminths (STHs) that also
cause anemia,165–169 but only a handful of studies have exam-
ined their association with P. vivax. A study of Brazilian
schoolchildren found STHs had a protective effect against
severe anemia during P. vivax infections,170 whereas a study
of pregnant women on the Thai–Myanmar border reported a
reduced risk of clinical vivax cases (AOR: 0.29, 95% CI:
0.11–0.79) in women infected by Ascaris lumbricoides, but
not with other STH species.171 Further work is needed to
better understand these apparently complex interactions and
how control and treatment should be adapted to account for
the coinfection. As highlighted by Boel and others, a poten-
tially negative impact of mass deworming programs on the
pathogenesis of P. vivax disease severity complicates and
leaves unclear the use of control interventions without fully
understanding the interactions between coinfections.171
Malnutrition is also an important predisposing factor for
severe outcomes of P. vivax infection and is commonly diag-
nosed in severe vivax malaria patients globally.13,16,155,172
Given the high prevalence of malnutrition across malaria-
endemic zones, further studies are needed to better establish
the risks of P. vivax disease associated with malnutrition, and
the programmatic possibilities for interventions addressing
these simultaneously.
EPIDEMIOLOGY OF CHLOROQUINE-RESISTANT
P. VIVAX
Chloroquine has been the frontline drug for treating asex-
ual blood-stage P. vivax parasites during acute clinical attacks
since
1946.53
Administered
in
combination
with
the
hypnozoitocidal drug primaquine, this drug combination pro-
vides radical cure of P. vivax infection by also killing
the hypnozoites responsible for relapses. Despite growing evi-
dence of chloroquine resistance across heavy-burden P. vivax
regions, this drug combination remains the first-line treatment
in many countries.36 Chloroquine resistance poses a major
and worsening threat to the health of millions of patients. A
fuller technical description of this problem may be found in
the article on diagnosis and treatment of P. vivax by Price and
others in this supplemental volume.173 What follows here
summarizes the problem in an epidemiological context.
Defining chloroquine resistance. The standard chloroquine
total dose of 25 mg/kg is administered as three daily doses.174
This
typically
clears
chloroquine-sensitive
blood-stage
P. vivax parasites within 48 hours. The relatively slow in-host
elimination
of
chloroquine
sustains
minimally
effective
concentrations against sensitive P. vivax in blood for approxi-
mately 35 days.53 Any recurrence with chloroquine admin-
istered at 100 nm concentration at this dosing may be
classified as resistant regardless of its life-stage origin (recru-
descence, relapse, or reinfection; see Figure 4).175 A 28-day
in vivo test for chloroquine resistance has been adopted
based on this rationale,175–177 and the 28-day cumulative inci-
dence of recurrences with > 100 ng/mL chloroquine and its
major metabolite, desethyl chloroquine, is the current stan-
dard metric for risk of treatment failure due to parasite resis-
tance to chloroquine.
The epidemiology of chloroquine resistance. The first
report of P. vivax chloroquine resistance dates to 1989 in
Australian travelers visiting Papua New Guinea.178 High-grade
chloroquine resistance has been described in and around this
area,174,179–182 and evidence of resistance is now reported
from many high-burden countries across all three endemic
continents,182 including the Americas.183 Figure 13 illustrates
the findings from the relatively scant surveys reported glob-
ally up to April 2014.
The WHO have standard protocols for therapeutic efficacy
surveys for the routine monitoring of drug sensitivity to
inform national drug policies.177 Nevertheless, more detailed
meta-analyses of research studies aiming to monitor the
spread of resistant strains globally are currently hindered by
both variability in survey design and the paucity of them.182
27
PLASMODIUM VIVAX EPIDEMIOLOGY
 Further, ineffective chloroquine treatment because of poor-
quality drugs represents a confounding factor in assessing
resistance. A review of antimalarial drug quality assessments
found that 27% of 2,182 chloroquine samples failed a quality
test.183 Although many of these surveys were on drug sam-
ples from sub-Saharan Africa, Asian countries were also well
represented in the review. The issue of substandard drugs
adds a further dimension of complexity to monitoring chloro-
quine resistance in the field.
The clinical implications of chloroquine resistance. Ineffective
therapy due to resistance causes an increased burden of dis-
ease by extending the duration of clinical symptoms, thus
increasing the likelihood of onset of severe and threatening ill-
ness and the probability of onward transmission. The neglect
of P. vivax research and development investments has left a
void of P. vivax-focused clinical trials and thus few validated
alternative
treatment
options.
Evidence
of
resistance
prompted shifts in antimalarial policy, driving countries to
turn to new and untested drug combinations with artemisinin-
combined
therapies (ACT)
to
replace
chloroquine.185,186
However, a recent review of ACT efficacy and safety from
35 studies in 13 countries across three continents reports good
efficacy against asexual blood stages of P. vivax (except those
ACTs employing pyrimethamines).136,187 Primaquine adminis-
tered 25 days following dihydroartemisinin plus piperaquine
was determined safe and effective as a radical cure.136 An
important hurdle to scaling-up these new treatments and
preventing ongoing circulation of ineffective treatment, how-
ever, is the greater cost associated with ACT treatment
($0.92–3.85 per adult course) over chloroquine ($0.07).187 See
Price and others for further discussion of the clinical aspects
of these issues.173
There is at present no conclusive evidence of P. vivax
developing resistance against primaquine; not least because
attributing treatment failure to primaquine resistance is not
straightforward.188 This is in part due to the complex
FIGURE 13.
The locations of (A) documented chloroquine-resistant and (B) chloroquine-sensitive Plasmodium vivax. Chloroquine resistance
was categorized according to the strength of evidence182: Category 1: > 10% recurrence by day 28, irrespective of confirmation of adequate blood
chloroquine concentration; Category 2: confirmed recurrences by day 28 within reported whole-blood chloroquine concentration of > 100 nm; and
Category 3: > 5% recurrences by day 28, irrespective of chloroquine concentration. Chloroquine sensitivity was confirmed if patients had enrolled
after a symptomatic clinical illness, fewer than 5% recurrences had occurred by day 28, no primaquine was given before day 28, and studies had a
sample size of at least 10 patients. Case reports were observations in individual patients of treatment failure during chloroquine prophylaxis,
prolonged parasite clearance or P. vivax recurrence following treatment. Figure reproduced from Price and others. (2014).182
28
HOWES, BATTLE AND OTHERS
 metabolism of primaquine in the human host, which directly
determines the availability of drug metabolites active against the
parasites. Evidence of a potentially quite common “poor meta-
bolizer” human phenotype of CYP2D6 results in treatment fail-
ures that should not be attributed to resistance.189 The inability
to obtain practical and reliable estimates of the prevalence and
distribution of resistance to primaquine by P. vivax hypnozoites
leaves us blind to this potentially important problem.
CONCLUSIONS
The epidemiology of P. vivax cannot be conveniently
defined by a simple set of characteristics and patterns.
Instead, it is highly heterogeneous between settings and
populations, influenced by a plethora of features including
local mosquito vector species, transmission intensity, relapse
behaviors, host risk factors, availability and efficacy of treat-
ment, malnutrition and prevalence of comorbidities, to name
a few. This article has attempted to draw generalities where
possible, but also emphasize key variability. The conse-
quence of this heterogeneity is that a single rule book cannot
guide control programs everywhere: strategies must vary
according to each area’s local epidemiology, and evidence is
needed from across these different settings to allow pro-
grams to target local requirements. This had been lacking,
but recent years have seen a surge of interest and funding
specifically focused on P. vivax. Studies are now being car-
ried out across the P. vivax-endemic world to address the
knowledge gaps referred to in this review and to allow local
control strategies to be optimized. See the paper in this sup-
plement detailing those research gaps (Bassat and others).190
Relapsing hypnozoites mean that significant reductions in P.
vivax case burden may only become evident a few years after
decreases of P. falciparum, due to the hidden reservoir of silent
P. vivax parasitemia. Control and elimination of P. vivax,
therefore, demands persistence and long-term commitment.
Furthermore, the hidden iceberg of both submicroscopic
asymptomatic parasitemia and hypnozoites make currently
available tools insufficient to assess the true prevalence of
infection. Improved surveillance and hospital-based studies
may help to unravel the relationships between different epide-
miological metrics to allow better estimates of asymptomatic
infections, uncomplicated cases, severe cases, and deaths.
Treatment inadequacies severely hinder P. vivax control.
Continued treatment with chloroquine in areas of known
resistance puts millions of patients at risk, whereas radical
cure with primaquine is not widely used due to the rational
fear of harm to G6PD-deficient patients.70,125 Widespread
safe access to radical cure would help overcome the resil-
ience of endemic P. vivax to control efforts and could sub-
stantially impact the parasite reservoir.
A clearer picture of P. vivax malaria as a widespread and
potentially severe and fatal infection is emerging. We may
confidently state that infection by P. vivax is certainly not
universally “benign.” Recognition of the potential for P.
vivax to cause severe disease or mortality, combined with the
sheer scale of the PAR of infection (35% of the global popu-
lation) and the imperfect toolkit available to fight P. vivax,
begin to define a very serious clinical and public health prob-
lem in urgent need of greater attention.
Received February 24, 2016. Accepted for publication April 19, 2016.
Published online July 11, 2016.
Acknowledgments: We acknowledge Ric Price for his input on
chloroquine resistance, Michael White for his discussions on case
estimates, and Joshua Longbottom, Maria Devine, and Alexander
Rhodes for comments and proofreading.
Financial support: Funding for Simon I. Hay is provided by a Senior
Research Fellowship from the Wellcome Trust (095066), which also
supports Katherine E. Battle and Rosalind E. Howes. Simon I. Hay
is also funded by grants from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation
(OPP1119467, OPP1106023, and OPP1093011). David L. Smith is
funded by a grant from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation
(OPP1110495). David L. Smith and Simon I. Hay also acknowledge
funding support from the RAPIDD program of the Science and
Technology Directorate, Department of Homeland Security, and the
Fogarty International Center, National Institutes of Health. J. Kevin
Baird is supported by Wellcome Trust grant (B9RJIXO).
Authors’ addresses: Rosalind E. Howes, Spatial Ecology and Epide-
miology Group, Department of Zoology, University of Oxford,
Oxford, United Kingdom, and Center for Global Health and Dis-
eases, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, E-mail:
rosalind.howes@zoo.ox.ac.uk. Katherine E. Battle, Malaria Atlas
Project (MAP), Big Data Institute, Nuffield Department of Medi-
cine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, E-mail:
katherine.battle@well.ox.ac.uk. Kamini N. Mendis and Richard E.
Cibulskis, Global Malaria Program, World Health Organization, Geneva,
Switzerland,
E-mails:
kaminimendis@gmail.com
and
cibulskisr@
who.int. David L. Smith, Fogarty International Center, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, Sanaria Institute for Global
Health and Tropical Medicine, Rockville, MD, and Institute for
Health Metrics and Evaluation, University of Washington, Seattle,
WA, E-mail: smitdave@uw.edu. J. Kevin Baird, Eijkman-Oxford
Clinical Research Unit, Jakarta, Indonesia, and Centre for Tropical
Medicine, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford,
Oxford, United Kingdom, E-mail: jkevinbaird@yahoo.com. Simon I.
Hay, Fogarty International Center, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD, Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, Univer-
sity of Washington, Seattle, WA, and Wellcome Trust Centre for
Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford,
United Kingdom, E-mail: sihay@uw.edu.
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted
use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the
original author and source are credited.
The authors are staff members of the World Health Organization.
The authors alone are responsible for the views expressed in this
article and they do not necessarily represent the decisions, policy or
views of the World Health Organization.
REFERENCES
1. PATH, 2011. Staying the Course? Malaria Research and Develop-
ment in a Time of Economic Uncertainty. Seattle, WA: PATH.
2. Gething PW, Elyazar IR, Moyes CL, Smith DL, Battle KE,
Guerra CA, Patil AP, Tatem AJ, Howes RE, Myers MF,
George DB, Horby P, Wertheim HF, Price RN, Mueller I,
Baird JK, Hay SI, 2012. A long neglected world malaria
map: Plasmodium vivax endemicity in 2010. PLoS Negl Trop
Dis 6: e1814.
3. Gething PW, Patil AP, Smith DL, Guerra CA, Elyazar IR,
Johnston GL, Tatem AJ, Hay SI, 2011. A new world malaria
map: Plasmodium falciparum endemicity in 2010. Malar J
10: 378.
4. Mueller I, Galinski MR, Tsuboi T, Arevalo-Herrera M, Collins
WE, King CL, 2013. Natural acquisition of immunity to Plas-
modium vivax: epidemiological observations and potential
targets. Adv Parasitol 81: 77–131.
5. Baird JK, 2013. Evidence and implications of mortality associ-
ated with acute Plasmodium vivax malaria. Clin Microbiol
Rev 26: 36–57.
29
PLASMODIUM VIVAX EPIDEMIOLOGY
 6. Baird JK, 2009. Severe and fatal vivax malaria challenges ‘benign
tertian malaria’ dogma. Ann Trop Paediatr 29: 251–252.
7. Price RN, Tjitra E, Guerra CA, Yeung S, White NJ, Anstey
NM, 2007. Vivax malaria: neglected and not benign. Am J
Trop Med Hyg 77: 79–87.
8. Anstey NM, Douglas NM, Poespoprodjo JR, Price RN, 2012.
Plasmodium vivax: clinical spectrum, risk factors and patho-
genesis. Adv Parasitol 80: 151–201.
9. Barcus MJ, Basri H, Picarima H, Manyakori C, Sekartuti Elyazar
I, Bangs MJ, Maguire JD, Baird JK, 2007. Demographic risk
factors for severe and fatal vivax and falciparum malaria
among hospital admissions in northeastern Indonesian Papua.
Am J Trop Med Hyg 77: 984–991.
10. Bassat Q, Alonso PL, 2011. Defying malaria: fathoming severe
Plasmodium vivax disease. Nat Med 17: 48–49.
11. Douglas NM, Anstey NM, Buffet PA, Poespoprodjo JR, Yeo
TW, White NJ, Price RN, 2012. The anaemia of Plasmodium
vivax malaria. Malar J 11: 135.
12. Genton B, D’Acremont V, Rare L, Baea K, Reeder JC, Alpers
MP, Muller I, 2008. Plasmodium vivax and mixed infections
are associated with severe malaria in children: a prospective
cohort study from Papua New Guinea. PLoS Med 5: e127.
13. Kochar DK, Tanwar GS, Khatri PC, Kochar SK, Sengar GS,
Gupta A, Kochar A, Middha S, Acharya J, Saxena V,
Pakalapati D, Garg S, Das A, 2010. Clinical features of children
hospitalized with malaria—a study from Bikaner, northwest
India. Am J Trop Med Hyg 83: 981–989.
14. Lacerda MV, Fragoso SC, Alecrim MG, Alexandre MA,
Magalhaes BM, Siqueira AM, Ferreira LC, Araujo JR,
Mourao MP, Ferrer M, Castillo P, Martin-Jaular L, Fernandez-
Becerra C, del Portillo H, Ordi J, Alonso PL, Bassat Q, 2012.
Postmortem characterization of patients with clinical diagnosis
of Plasmodium vivax malaria: to what extent does this parasite
kill? Clin Infect Dis 55: e67–e74.
15. Lacerda MV, Mourao MP, Alexandre MA, Siqueira AM,
Magalhaes BM, Martinez-Espinosa FE, Filho FS, Brasil P,
Ventura AM, Tada MS, Couto VS, Silva AR, Silva RS,
Alecrim MG, 2012. Understanding the clinical spectrum of
complicated Plasmodium vivax malaria: a systematic review
on the contributions of the Brazilian literature. Malar J 11: 12.
16. Lança EFC, Magalhães BML, Vitor-Silva S, Siqueira AM,
Benzecry SG, Alexandre MAA, O’Brien C, Bassat Q, Lacerda
MVG, 2012. Risk factors and characterization of Plasmodium
vivax-associated admissions to pediatric intensive care units in
the Brazilian Amazon. PLoS One 7: e35406.
17. Mahgoub H, Gasim GI, Musa IR, Adam I, 2012. Severe Plasmo-
dium vivax malaria among Sudanese children at New Halfa
Hospital, eastern Sudan. Parasit Vectors 5: 154.
18. Price RN, Douglas NM, Anstey NM, 2009. New developments
in Plasmodium vivax malaria: severe disease and the rise of
chloroquine resistance. Curr Opin Infect Dis 22: 430–435.
19. Quispe AM, Pozo E, Guerrero E, Durand S, Baldeviano GC,
Edgel KA, Graf PCF, Lescano AG, 2014. Plasmodium vivax
hospitalizations in a monoendemic malaria region: severe
vivax malaria? Am J Trop Med Hyg 91: 11–17.
20. Tjitra E, Anstey NM, Sugiarto P, Warikar N, Kenangalem E,
Karyana M, Lampah DA, Price RN, 2008. Multidrug-resistant
Plasmodium vivax associated with severe and fatal malaria:
a prospective study in Papua, Indonesia. PLoS Med 5: e128.
21. Baird JK, 2010. Eliminating malaria—all of them. Lancet 376:
1883–1885.
22. Bockarie MJ, Dagoro H, 2006. Are insecticide-treated bednets
more protective against Plasmodium falciparum than Plasmo-
dium vivax-infected mosquitoes? Malar J 5: 15.
23. Bousema T, Drakeley C, 2011. Epidemiology and infectivity of
Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium vivax gametocytes
in relation to malaria control and elimination. Clin Microbiol
Rev 24: 377–410.
24. Luxemburger C, Perea WA, Delmas G, Pruja C, Pecoul B,
Moren A, 1994. Permethrin-impregnated bed nets for the pre-
vention of malaria in schoolchildren on the Thai-Burmese
border. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 88: 155–159.
25. Shanks GD, 2012. Control and elimination of Plasmodium
vivax. Adv Parasitol 80: 301–341.
26. Tanner M, Greenwood B, Whitty CJ, Ansah EK, Price RN,
Dondorp AM, von Seidlein L, Baird JK, Beeson JG, Fowkes
FJ, Hemingway J, Marsh K, Osier F, 2015. Malaria eradication
and elimination: views on how to translate a vision into reality.
BMC Med 13: 167.
27. Livingstone FB, 1984. The Duffy blood groups, vivax malaria,
and malaria selection in human populations: a review. Hum
Biol 56: 413–425.
28. Howes RE, Patil AP, Piel FB, Nyangiri OA, Kabaria CW,
Gething PW,
Zimmerman
PA,
Barnadas C,
Beall
CM,
Gebremedhin A, Menard D, Williams TN, Weatherall DJ, Hay
SI, 2011. The global distribution of the Duffy blood group.
Nat Commun 2: 266.
29. Ménard D, Barnadas C, Bouchier C, Henry-Halldin C, Gray
LR, Ratsimbasoa A, Thonier V, Carod JF, Domarle O, Colin
Y, Bertrand O, Picot J, King CL, Grimberg BT, Mercereau-
Puijalon O, Zimmerman PA, 2010. Plasmodium vivax clinical
malaria is commonly observed in Duffy-negative Malagasy
people. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107: 5967–5971.
30. Zimmerman PA, Ferreira MU, Howes RE, Mercereau-Puijalon
O, 2013. Red blood cell polymorphism and susceptibility to
Plasmodium vivax. Adv Parasitol 81: 27–76.
31. Guerra CA, Howes RE, Patil AP, Gething PW, Van Boeckel TP,
Temperely WH, Kabaria CW, Tatem AJ, Manh BH, Elyazar I,
Baird JK, Snow RW, Hay SI, 2010. The international limits
and population at risk of Plasmodium vivax transmission in
2009. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 4: e774.
32. Howes RE, Reiner RC Jr, Battle KE, Longbottom J, Mappin
B, Ordanovich D, Tatem AJ, Drakeley C, Gething PW,
Zimmerman PA, Smith DL, Hay SI, 2015. Plasmodium vivax
transmission in Africa. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 9: e0004222.
33. Battle KE, Gething PW, Elyazar IR, Moyes CL, Sinka ME,
Howes RE, Guerra CA, Price RN, Baird KJ, Hay SI, 2012.
The global public health significance of Plasmodium vivax.
Adv Parasitol 80: 1–111.
34. Balk DL, Deichmann U, Yetman G, Pozzi F, Hay SI, Nelson
A, 2006. Determining global population distribution: methods,
applications and data. Adv Parasitol 62: 119–156.
35. CIESIN/IFPRI/WB/CIAT, 2007. Global Rural Urban Mapping
Project (GRUMP) alpha: Gridded Population of the World,
V
ersion 2, with Urban Reallocation (GPW-UR). Available at: http://
sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/gpw. Accessed November 25, 2011.
36. World Health Organization, 2015. World Malaria Report 2015.
Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization, 280.
37. Mueller I, Zimmerman PA, Reeder JC, 2007. Plasmodium
malariae and Plasmodium ovale–the “bashful” malaria para-
sites. Trends Parasitol 23: 278–283.
38. Moreira CM, Abo-Shehada M, Price RN, Drakeley CJ, 2015. A
systematic review of sub-microscopic Plasmodium vivax infec-
tion. Malar J 14: 360.
39. Mueller I, Galinski MR, Baird JK, Carlton JM, Kochar DK,
Alonso PL, del Portillo HA, 2009. Key gaps in the knowledge
of Plasmodium vivax, a neglected human malaria parasite.
Lancet Infect Dis 9: 555–566.
40. da Silva NS, da Silva-Nunes M, Malafronte RS, Menezes MJ,
D’Arcadia RR, Komatsu NT, Scopel KK, Braga EM, Cavasini
CE, Cordeiro JA, Ferreira MU, 2010. Epidemiology and con-
trol of frontier malaria in Brazil: lessons from community-
based studies in rural Amazonia. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg
104: 343–350.
41. Harris I, Sharrock WW, Bain LM, Gray KA, Bobogare A,
Boaz L, Lilley K, Krause D, Vallely A, Johnson ML, Gatton
ML, Shanks GD, Cheng Q, 2010. A large proportion of asymp-
tomatic Plasmodium infections with low and sub-microscopic
parasite densities in the low transmission setting of Temotu
Province, Solomon Islands: challenges for malaria diagnostics
in an elimination setting. Malar J 9: 254.
42. Katsuragawa TH, Gil LH, Tada MS, de Almeida e Silva A,
Costa JD, Araujo Mda S, Escobar AL, da Silva LH, 2010.
The dynamics of transmission and spatial distribution of
malaria in riverside areas of Porto Velho, Rondonia, in the
Amazon region of Brazil. PLoS One 5: e9245.
43. Mueller I, Widmer S, Michel D, Maraga S, McNamara DT,
Kiniboro B, Sie A, Smith TA, Zimmerman PA, 2009. High
sensitivity detection of Plasmodium species reveals positive
correlations between infections of different species, shifts in age
distribution and reduced local variation in Papua New Guinea.
Malar J 8: 41.
30
HOWES, BATTLE AND OTHERS
 44. Steenkeste N, Rogers WO, Okell L, Jeanne I, Incardona S,
Duval L, Chy S, Hewitt S, Chou M, Socheat D, Babin FX,
Ariey F, Rogier C, 2010. Sub-microscopic malaria cases and
mixed malaria infection in a remote area of high malaria
endemicity in Rattanakiri Province, Cambodia: implication for
malaria elimination. Malar J 9: 108.
45. Imwong M, Nguyen TN, Tripura R, Peto TJ, Lee SJ, Lwin KM,
Suangkanarat P, Jeeyapant A, Vihokhern B, Wongsaen K,
Van Hue D, Dong le T, Nguyen TU, Lubell Y, von Seidlein
L, Dhorda M, Promnarate C, Snounou G, Malleret B, Renia
L, Keereecharoen L, Singhasivanon P, Sirithiranont P, Chalk
J, Nguon C, Hien TT, Day N, White NJ, Dondorp A, Nosten
F, 2015. The epidemiology of subclinical malaria infections
in southeast Asia: findings from cross-sectional surveys in
Thailand-Myanmar border areas, Cambodia, and Vietnam.
Malar J 14: 381.
46. Cheng Q, Cunningham J, Gatton ML, 2015. Systematic review
of sub-microscopic P. vivax infections: prevalence and deter-
mining factors. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 9: e3413.
47. Waltmann A, Darcy AW, Harris I, Koepfli C, Lodo J, Vahi V,
Piziki D, Shanks GD, Barry AE, Whittaker M, Kazura JW,
Mueller I, 2015. High rates of asymptomatic, sub-microscopic
Plasmodium vivax infection and disappearing Plasmodium
falciparum malaria in an area of low transmission in Solomon
Islands. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 9: e0003758.
48. Mayxay M, Pukrittayakamee S, Newton PN, White NJ, 2004.
Mixed-species malaria infections in humans. Trends Parasitol
20: 233–240.
49. Douglas NM, Nosten F, Ashley EA, Phaiphun L, van Vugt M,
Singhasivanon P, White NJ, Price RN, 2011. Plasmodium
vivax recurrence following falciparum and mixed species
malaria: risk factors and effect of antimalarial kinetics. Clin
Infect Dis 52: 612–620.
50. Machado Siqueira A, Lopes Magalhaes BM, Cardoso Melo G,
Ferrer M, Castillo P, Martin-Jaular L, Fernandez-Becerra C,
Ordi J, Martinez A, Lacerda MV, del Portillo HA, 2012.
Spleen rupture in a case of untreated Plasmodium vivax infec-
tion. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 6: e1934.
51. Battle KE, Karhunen MS, Bhatt S, Gething PW, Howes RE,
Golding N, Van Boeckel T, Messina JP, Shanks GD, Smith
DL, Baird JK, Hay SI, 2014. Geographical variation in Plas-
modium vivax relapse. Malar J 13: 144.
52. White NJ, Imwong M, 2012. Relapse. Adv Parasitol 80: 113–150.
53. Baird JK, 2004. Chloroquine resistance in Plasmodium vivax.
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 48: 4075–4083.
54. Imwong M, Snounou G, Pukrittayakamee S, Tanomsing N,
Kim JR, Nandy A, Guthmann JP, Nosten F, Carlton J,
Looareesuwan S, Nair S, Sudimack D, Day NP, Anderson
TJ, White NJ, 2007. Relapses of Plasmodium vivax infection
usually result from activation of heterologous hypnozoites.
J Infect Dis 195: 927–933.
55. Koepfli C, Ross A, Kiniboro B, Smith TA, Zimmerman PA,
Siba P, Mueller I, Felger I, 2011. Multiplicity and diversity of
Plasmodium vivax infections in a highly endemic region in
Papua New Guinea. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 5: e1424.
56. Betuela I, Rosanas-Urgell A, Kiniboro B, Stanisic DI, Samol L,
de Lazzari E, del Portillo HA, Siba P, Alonso PL, Bassat Q,
Mueller I, 2012. Relapses contribute significantly to the risk
of Plasmodium vivax infection and disease in Papua New
Guinean children 1–5 years of age. J Infect Dis 206: 1771–1780.
57. Nelwan EJ, Ekawati LL, Tjahjono B, Setiabudy R, Sutanto I,
Chand K, Ekasari T, Djoko D, Basri H, Taylor WR, Duparc S,
Subekti D, Elyazar I, Noviyanti R, Sudoyo H, Baird JK, 2015.
Randomized trial of primaquine hypnozoitocidal efficacy when
administered with artemisinin-combined blood schizontocides
for radical cure of Plasmodium vivax in Indonesia. BMC Med
13: 294.
58. Sutanto I, Tjahjono B, Basri H, Taylor WR, Putri FA, Meilia
RA, Setiabudy R, Nurleila S, Ekawati LL, Elyazar I, Farrar J,
Sudoyo H, Baird JK, 2013. Randomized, open-label trial of
primaquine against vivax malaria relapse in Indonesia. Anti-
microb Agents Chemother 57: 1128–1135.
59. Coatney GR, Cooper WC, 1948. Recrudescence and relapse in
vivax malaria. Proceedings of the 4th International Congress
on Tropical Medicine, Vol. 1.
Washington, DC: US Govern-
ment Printing Office, 629–639.
60. Garnham PC, Bray RS, Bruce-Chwatt LJ, Draper CC, Killick-
Kendrick R, Sergiev PG, Tiburskaja NA, Shute PG, Maryon
M, 1975. A strain of Plasmodium vivax characterized by
prolonged incubation: morphological and biological character-
istics. Bull World Health Organ 52: 21–32.
61. Winckel CWF, 1955. Long latency in Plasmodium vivax infec-
tions in a temperate zone. Doc Med Geogr Trop 7: 292–298.
62. Coatney GR, Collins WE, Contacos PG, 1971. Plasmodium
vivax. The Primate Malarias. Bethesda, MD: U.S. National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, 43–67.
63. Baird JK, Rieckmann KH, 2003. Can primaquine therapy for
vivax malaria be improved? Trends Parasitol 19: 115–120.
64. Shute PG, Lupascu G, Branzei P, Maryon M, Constantinescu P,
Bruce-Chwatt LJ, Draper CC, Killick-Kendrick R, Garnham
PC, 1976. A strain of Plasmodium vivax characterized by
prolonged incubation: the effect of numbers of sporozoites on
the length of the prepatent period. Trans R Soc Trop Med
Hyg 70: 474–481.
65. White NJ, 2011. Determinants of relapse periodicity in Plasmo-
dium vivax malaria. Malar J 10: 297.
66. Shanks GD, White NJ, 2013. The activation of vivax malaria
hypnozoites by infectious diseases. Lancet Infect Dis 13:
900–906.
67. Richie TL, 1988. Interactions between malaria parasites infecting
the same vertebrate host. Parasitology 96: 607–639.
68. Hulden L, Hulden L, 2011. Activation of the hypnozoite: a part
of Plasmodium vivax life cycle and survival. Malar J 10: 90.
69. Macdonald G, 1957. Local Features of Malaria. The Epidemiology
and Control of Malaria. London, United Kingdom: Oxford
University Press, 63–99.
70. Howes RE, Battle KE, Satyagraha AW, Baird JK, Hay SI,
2013. G6PD deficiency: global distribution, genetic variants
and primaquine therapy. Adv Parasitol 81: 133–201.
71. Cotter C, Sturrock HJ, Hsiang MS, Liu J, Phillips AA, Hwang
J, Gueye CS, Fullman N, Gosling RD, Feachem RG, 2013.
The changing epidemiology of malaria elimination: new strat-
egies for new challenges. Lancet 382: 900–911.
72. Smith DL, Guerra CA, Snow RW, Hay SI, 2007. Standardizing
estimates of the Plasmodium falciparum parasite rate. Malar J
6: 131.
73. Smith T, Hii JL, Genton B, Muller I, Booth M, Gibson N,
Narara A, Alpers MP, 2001. Associations of peak shifts in
age–prevalence for human malarias with bednet coverage.
Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 95: 1–6.
74. Senn N, Rarau P, Stanisic DI, Robinson L, Barnadas C,
Manong D, Salib M, Iga J, Tarongka N, Ley S, Rosanas-
Urgell A, Aponte JJ, Zimmerman PA, Beeson JG, Schofield
L, Siba P, Rogerson SJ, Reeder JC, Mueller I, 2012. Intermit-
tent preventive treatment for malaria in Papua New Guinean
infants exposed to Plasmodium falciparum and P. vivax: a ran-
domized controlled trial. PLoS Med 9: e1001195.
75. Michon P, Cole-Tobian JL, Dabod E, Schoepflin S, Igu J,
Susapu M, Tarongka N, Zimmerman PA, Reeder JC, Beeson
JG, Schofield L, King CL, Mueller I, 2007. The risk of malar-
ial infections and disease in Papua New Guinean children.
Am J Trop Med Hyg 76: 997–1008.
76. Poespoprodjo JR, Fobia W, Kenangalem E, Lampah DA,
Hasanuddin A, Warikar N, Sugiarto P, Tjitra E, Anstey NM,
Price RN, 2009. Vivax malaria: a major cause of morbidity in
early infancy. Clin Infect Dis 48: 1704–1712.
77. Koepfli C, Colborn KL, Kiniboro B, Lin E, Speed TP, Siba
PM, Felger I, Mueller I, 2013. A high force of Plasmodium
vivax blood-stage infection drives the rapid acquisition of
immunity in Papua New Guinean children. PLoS Negl Trop
Dis 7: e2403.
78. Fowkes FJ, Boeuf P, Beeson JG, 2016. Immunity to malaria in
an era of declining malaria transmission. Parasitology 143:
139–153.
79. Mendis K, Sina BJ, Marchesini P, Carter R, 2001. The
neglected burden of Plasmodium vivax malaria. Am J Trop
Med Hyg 64: 97–106.
80. Phimpraphi
W,
Paul
RE,
Yimsamran
S,
Puangsa-art
S,
Thanyavanich N, Maneeboonyang W, Prommongkol S, Sornklom
S, Chaimungkun W, Chavez IF, Blanc H, Looareesuwan S,
Sakuntabhai A, Singhasivanon P, 2008. Longitudinal study of
31
PLASMODIUM VIVAX EPIDEMIOLOGY
 Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium vivax in a Karen popu-
lation in Thailand. Malar J 7: 99.
81. Li N, Parker DM, Yang Z, Fan Q, Zhou G, Ai G, Duan J, Lee
MC, Yan G, Matthews SA, Cui L, Wang Y, 2013. Risk factors
associated with slide positivity among febrile patients in a
conflict zone of north-eastern Myanmar along the China-
Myanmar border. Malar J 12: 361.
82. Ciuca M, Ballif L, Chelarescu-Viera M, 1934. Immunity in
malaria. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 24: 4.
83. Qi Q, Guerra CA, Moyes CL, Elyazar IR, Gething PW, Hay
SI, Tatem AJ, 2012. The effects of urbanization on global
Plasmodium vivax malaria transmission. Malar J 11: 403.
84. Sinka ME, Bangs MJ, Manguin S, Chareonviriyaphap T, Patil
AP, Temperley WH, Gething PW, Elyazar IR, Kabaria CW,
Harbach RE, Hay SI, 2011. The dominant Anopheles vectors
of human malaria in the Asia-Pacific region: occurrence data,
distribution maps and bionomic precis. Parasit Vectors 4: 89.
85. Anvikar AR, Shah N, Dhariwal AC, Sonal GS, Pradhan MM,
Ghosh SK, Valecha N, 2016. Epidemiology of Plasmodium vivax
malaria in India. Am J Trop Med Hyg 95(Suppl 6): 108–120.
86. Sinka ME, Bangs MJ, Manguin S, Coetzee M, Mbogo CM,
Hemingway
J,
Patil
AP,
Temperley
WH,
Gething
PW,
Kabaria CW, Okara RM, Van Boeckel T, Godfray HC,
Harbach RE, Hay SI, 2010. The dominant Anopheles vectors
of human malaria in Africa, Europe and the Middle East:
occurrence data, distribution maps and bionomic precis. Parasit
Vectors 3: 117.
87. Sinka ME, Rubio-Palis Y, Manguin S, Patil AP, Temperley
WH, Gething PW, Van Boeckel T, Kabaria CW, Harbach RE,
Hay SI, 2010. The dominant Anopheles vectors of human
malaria in the Americas: occurrence data, distribution maps
and bionomic precis. Parasit Vectors 3: 72.
88. Killeen GF, 2014. Characterizing, controlling and eliminating
residual malaria transmission. Malaria J 13: 330. doi:101186/
1475-2875-13-330.
89. Nyunt MH, Aye KM, Kyaw MP, Kyaw TT, Hlaing T, Oo K,
Zaw NN, Aye TT, San NA, 2014. Challenges in universal cov-
erage and utilization of insecticide-treated bed nets in migrant
plantation workers in Myanmar. Malar J 13: 211.
90. World Health Organization and Malaria Consortium, 2011.
Workshop to Consolidate Lessons Learned on BCC and
Mobile/Migrant
Populations
in
the
Strategy
to
Contain
Artemisinin Resistant Malaria. Meeting report, July 5–7, 2011.
Luang Prabang, Lao PDR: World Health Organization and
Malaria Consortium.
91. Desai M, ter Kuile FO, Nosten F, McGready R, Asamoa K,
Brabin B, Newman RD, 2007. Epidemiology and burden of
malaria in pregnancy. Lancet Infect Dis 7: 93–104.
92. WHO Evidence Review Group, 2012. Intermittent Preventative
Treatment of Malaria in Pregnancy (IPTp) with Sulfadoxine-
Pyrimethamine (SP). Meeting report, July 9–11, 2012. Geneva,
Switzerland: World Health Organization.
93. Rijken MJ, McGready R, Boel ME, Poespoprodjo R, Singh N,
Syafruddin D, Rogerson S, Nosten F, 2012. Malaria in preg-
nancy in the Asia-Pacific region. Lancet Infect Dis 12: 75–88.
94. Rodriguez-Morales AJ, Sanchez E, Vargas M, Piccolo C, Colina
R, Arria M, Franco-Paredes C, 2006. Pregnancy outcomes
associated with Plasmodium vivax malaria in northeastern
Venezuela. Am J Trop Med Hyg 74: 755–757.
95. Rogerson SJ, Hviid L, Duffy PE, Leke RF, Taylor DW, 2007.
Malaria in pregnancy: pathogenesis and immunity. Lancet
Infect Dis 7: 105–117.
96. Poespoprodjo JR, Fobia W, Kenangalem E, Lampah DA,
Warikar N, Seal A, McGready R, Sugiarto P, Tjitra E, Anstey
NM, Price RN, 2008. Adverse pregnancy outcomes in an
area where multidrug-resistant Plasmodium vivax and Plas-
modium falciparum infections are endemic. Clin Infect Dis
46: 1374–1381.
97. Brabin BJ, Ginny M, Sapau J, Galme K, Paino J, 1990. Conse-
quences of maternal anaemia on outcome of pregnancy in a
malaria endemic area in Papua New Guinea. Ann Trop Med
Parasitol 84: 11–24.
98. Luxemburger C, Ricci F, Nosten F, Raimond D, Bathet S,
White NJ, 1997. The epidemiology of severe malaria in an
area of low transmission in Thailand. Trans R Soc Trop Med
Hyg 91: 256–262.
99. McGready R, Lee SJ, Wiladphaingern J, Ashley EA, Rijken
MJ, Boel M, Simpson JA, Paw MK, Pimanpanarak M, Mu O,
Singhasivanon P, White NJ, Nosten FH, 2012. Adverse effects
of falciparum and vivax malaria and the safety of antimalarial
treatment in early pregnancy: a population-based study. Lancet
Infect Dis 12: 388–396.
100. Baird JK, Hoffman SL, 2004. Primaquine therapy for malaria.
Clin Infect Dis 39: 1336–1345.
101. Piel FB, Howes RE, Nyangiri OA, Moyes CL, Williams TN,
Weatherall DJ, Hay SI, 2013. Online biomedical resources for
malaria-related red cell disorders. Hum Mutat 34: 937–944.
102. Kwiatkowski DP, 2005. How malaria has affected the human
genome and what human genetics can teach us about malaria.
Am J Hum Genet 77: 171–192.
103. Piel FB, Patil AP, Howes RE, Nyangiri OA, Gething PW,
Williams TN, Weatherall DJ, Hay SI, 2010. Global distribu-
tion of the sickle cell gene and geographical confirmation of
the malaria hypothesis. Nat Commun 1: 104.
104. Cattani JA, Gibson FD, Alpers MP, Crane GG, 1987. Hereditary
ovalocytosis and reduced susceptibility to malaria in Papua
New Guinea. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 81: 705–709.
105. Rosanas-Urgell A, Lin E, Manning L, Rarau P, Laman M, Senn
N, Grimberg BT, Tavul L, Stanisic DI, Robinson LJ, Aponte
JJ, Dabod E, Reeder JC, Siba P, Zimmerman PA, Davis TM,
King CL, Michon P, Mueller I, 2012. Reduced risk of Plasmo-
dium vivax malaria in Papua New Guinean children with
southeast Asian ovalocytosis in two cohorts and a case-control
study. PLoS Med 9: e1001305.
106. Leslie T, Briceno M, Mayan I, Mohammed N, Klinkenberg E,
Sibley CH, Whitty CJ, Rowland M, 2010. The impact of phe-
notypic and genotypic G6PD deficiency on risk of Plasmo-
dium vivax infection: a case-control study amongst Afghan
refugees in Pakistan. PLoS Med 7: e1000283.
107. Louicharoen C, Patin E, Paul R, Nuchprayoon I, Witoonpanich
B, Peerapittayamongkol C, Casademont I, Sura T, Laird NM,
Singhasivanon P, Quintana-Murci L, Sakuntabhai A, 2009.
Positively selected G6PD-Mahidol mutation reduces Plasmo-
dium vivax density in southeast Asians. Science 326: 1546–1549.
108. O’Donnell A, Premawardhena A, Arambepola M, Samaranayake
R, Allen SJ, Peto TE, Fisher CA, Cook J, Corran PH, Olivieri
NF, Weatherall DJ, 2009. Interaction of malaria with a common
form of severe thalassemia in an Asian population. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 106: 18716–18721.
109. Williams TN, Maitland K, Bennett S, Ganczakowski M, Peto
TE, Newbold CI, Bowden DK, Weatherall DJ, Clegg JB,
1996. High incidence of malaria in alpha-thalassaemic children.
Nature 383: 522–525.
110. Douglas NM, John GK, von Seidlein L, Anstey NM, Price RN,
2012. Chemotherapeutic strategies for reducing transmission
of Plasmodium vivax malaria. Adv Parasitol 80: 271–300.
111. Zimmerman PA, Howes RE, 2015. Malaria diagnosis for
malaria elimination. Curr Opin Infect Dis 28: 446–454.
112. Alves FP, Durlacher RR, Menezes MJ, Krieger H, Silva LH,
Camargo EP, 2002. High prevalence of asymptomatic Plasmo-
dium vivax and Plasmodium falciparum infections in native
Amazonian populations. Am J Trop Med Hyg 66: 641–648.
113. Alves FP, Gil LH, Marrelli MT, Ribolla PE, Camargo EP,
Da Silva LH, 2005. Asymptomatic carriers of Plasmodium
spp. as infection source for malaria vector mosquitoes in the
Brazilian Amazon. J Med Entomol 42: 777–779.
114. Atkinson JA, Johnson ML, Wijesinghe R, Bobogare A, Losi L,
O’Sullivan M, Yamaguchi Y, Kenilorea G, Vallely A, Cheng
Q, Ebringer A, Bain L, Gray K, Harris I, Whittaker M, Reid
H, Clements A, Shanks D, 2012. Operational research to
inform a sub-national surveillance intervention for malaria
elimination in Solomon Islands. Malar J 11: 101.
115. Coleman RE, Maneechai N, Rachaphaew N, Kumpitak C,
Miller RS, Soyseng V, Thimasarn K, Sattabongkot J, 2002.
Comparison of field and expert laboratory microscopy for
active surveillance for asymptomatic Plasmodium falciparum
and Plasmodium vivax in western Thailand. Am J Trop Med
Hyg 67: 141–144.
116. Coleman RE, Sattabongkot J, Promstaporm S, Maneechai N,
Tippayachai B, Kengluecha A, Rachapaew N, Zollner G,
Miller RS, Vaughan JA, Thimasarn K, Khuntirat B, 2006.
32
HOWES, BATTLE AND OTHERS
 Comparison of PCR and microscopy for the detection of
asymptomatic
malaria
in
a
Plasmodium
falciparum/vivax
endemic area in Thailand. Malar J 5: 121.
117. Ganguly S, Saha P, Guha SK, Biswas A, Das S, Kundu PK,
Maji AK, 2013. High prevalence of asymptomatic malaria in
a tribal population in eastern India. J Clin Microbiol 51:
1439–1444.
118. Herdiana H, Fuad A, Asih PB, Zubaedah S, Arisanti RR,
Syafruddin D, Kusnanto H, Sumiwi ME, Yuniarti T, Imran A,
Rahmadyani R, Yani M, Kusriastuti R, Tarmizi SN, Laihad
FJ, Hawley WA, 2013. Progress towards malaria elimination
in Sabang Municipality, Aceh, Indonesia. Malar J 12: 42.
119. Kitvatanachai S, Janyapoon K, Rhongbutsri P, Thap LC, 2003.
A survey on malaria in mobile Cambodians in Aranyaprathet,
Sa Kaeo Province, Thailand. Southeast Asian J Trop Med
Public Health 34: 48–53.
120. Rajendran P, Rajesh PK, Thyagarajan SP, Balakrishnan P, Hari
R, Joyee AG, Kurien T, Krishnmurthy P, Jacob V, 2001.
Asymptomatic malarial parasitaemia in Tamil Nadu. J Assoc
Physicians India 49: 1161–1164.
121. Goonewardena D, 1998. Study of Clinical Immunity to Malaria.
Colombo, Sri Lanka: University of Colombo.
122. Doolan DL, Dobano C, Baird JK, 2009. Acquired immunity to
malaria. Clin Microbiol Rev 22: 13–36.
123. Barbosa S, Gozze AB, Lima NF, Batista CL, Bastos Mda S,
Nicolete VC, Fontoura PS, Goncalves RM, Viana SA, Menezes
MJ, Scopel KK, Cavasini CE, Malafronte Rdos S, da Silva-
Nunes M, Vinetz JM, Castro MC, Ferreira MU, 2014. Epidemi-
ology of disappearing Plasmodium vivax malaria: a case study
in rural Amazonia. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 8: e3109.
124. Vallejo AF, Garcia J, Amado-Garavito AB, Arevalo-Herrera
M, Herrera S, 2016. Plasmodium vivax gametocyte infectivity
in sub-microscopic infections. Malar J 15: 48.
125. White NJ, 2008. The role of anti-malarial drugs in eliminating
malaria. Malar J 7 (Suppl 1): S8.
126. McKenzie FE, Wongsrichanalai C, Magill AJ, Forney JR,
Permpanich B, Lucas C, Erhart LM, O’Meara WP, Smith
DL, Sirichaisinthop J, Gasser RA Jr, 2006. Gametocytemia
in Plasmodium vivax and Plasmodium falciparum infections.
J Parasitol 92: 1281–1285.
127. Moonen B, Cohen JM, Snow RW, Slutsker L, Drakeley C,
Smith DL, Abeyasinghe RR, Rodriguez MH, Maharaj R,
Tanner M, Targett G, 2010. Operational strategies to achieve
and maintain malaria elimination. Lancet 376: 1592–1603.
128. White MT, Karl S, Battle KE, Hay SI, Mueller I, Ghani AC,
2014. Modelling the contribution of the hypnozoite reservoir
to Plasmodium vivax transmission. eLife 3: e04692.
129. Bhatt S, Weiss DJ, Cameron E, Bisanzio D, Mappin B, Dalrymple
U, Battle KE, Moyes CL, Henry A, Eckhoff PA, Wenger EA,
Briet O, Penny MA, Smith TA, Bennett A, Yukich J, Eisele TP,
Griffin JT, Fergus CA, Lynch M, Lindgren F, Murray CJ, Smith
DL, Hay SI, Cibulskis RE, Gething PW, 2015. The impact of
malaria control on Plasmodium falciparum in Africa, 2000–2015.
Nature 526: 207–211.
130. Hay SI, Okiro EA, Gething PW, Patil AP, Tatem AJ, Guerra
CA, Snow RW, 2010. Estimating the global clinical burden
of Plasmodium falciparum malaria in 2007. PLoS Med
7: e1000290.
131. Cibulskis RE, Aregawi M, Williams R, Otten M, Dye C, 2011.
Worldwide incidence of malaria in 2009: estimates, time
trends, and a critique of methods. PLoS Med 8: e1001142.
132. World Health Organization, 2014. World Malaria Report 2014.
Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization, 226.
133. Guerra CA, Hay SI, Lucioparedes LS, Gikandi PW, Tatem AJ,
Noor AM, Snow RW, 2007. Assembling a global database of
malaria parasite prevalence for the Malaria Atlas Project.
Malar J 6: 17.
134. Patil AP, Okiro EA, Gething PW, Guerra CA, Sharma SK,
Snow RW, Hay SI, 2009. Defining the relationship between
Plasmodium falciparum parasite rate and clinical disease: sta-
tistical models for disease burden estimation. Malar J 8: 186.
135. Battle KE, Cameron E, Guerra CA, Golding N, Duda KA,
Howes RE, Elyazar IRF, Baird JK, Reiner RC Jr, Smith DL,
Gething PW, Hay SI, 2015. Defining the relationship between
Plasmodium vivax parasite rate and clinical disease. Malar J
14: 191.
136. Cameron E, Battle KE, Bhatt S, Weiss DJ, Bisanzio D, Mappin
B, Dalrymple U, Hay SI, Smith DL, Griffin JT, Wenger EA,
Eckhoff PA, Smith TA, Penny MA, Gething PW, 2015. Defin-
ing the relationship between infection prevalence and clinical
incidence of Plasmodium falciparum malaria. Nat Commun
6: 8170.
137. Battle KE, Guerra CA, Golding N, Duda KA, Cameron E,
Howes RE, Elyazar IRF, Baird JK, Reiner RC Jr, Smith DL,
Gething PW, Hay SI, 2015. Global database of matched Plas-
modium falciparum and P. vivax incidence and prevalence
records from 1985 to 2013. Sci Data 2: 150012.
138. Pampana E, 1969. A Textbook of Malaria Eradication. London,
United Kingdom: Oxford University Press.
139. Sattabongkot J, Tsuboi T, Zollner GE, Sirichaisinthop J, Cui L,
2004. Plasmodium vivax transmission: chances for control?
Trends Parasitol 20: 192–198.
140. Ministry of Health Sri Lanka and World Health Organization
and the University of California-San Francisco, 2012. Elimi-
nating Malaria: Case-study 3. Progress towards Elimination in
Sri Lanka. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization.
141. Coura JR, Suarez-Mutis M, Ladeia-Andrade S, 2006. A new
challenge for malaria control in Brazil: asymptomatic Plas-
modium infection–a review. Mem Inst Oswaldo Cruz 101:
229–237.
142. Povoa MM, Conn JE, Schlichting CD, Amaral JC, Segura
MN, Da Silva AN, Dos Santos CC, Lacerda RN, De Souza
RT, Galiza D, Santa Rosa EP, Wirtz RA, 2003. Malaria
vectors, epidemiology, and the re-emergence of Anopheles
darlingi in Belem, Para, Brazil. J Med Entomol 40: 379–386.
143. World Health Organization, 2013. World Malaria Report 2013.
Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization, 199.
144. Feachem RG, Phillips AA, Hwang J, Cotter C, Wielgosz B,
Greenwood BM, Sabot O, Rodriguez MH, Abeyasinghe RR,
Ghebreyesus TA, Snow RW, 2010. Shrinking the malaria map:
progress and prospects. Lancet 376: 1566–1578.
145. UCSF Global Health Group and Malaria Atlas Project, 2011.
Atlas of Malaria-Eliminating Countries. San Francisco, CA:
University of California.
146. World Health Organization, 2015. Confronting Plasmodium
vivax Malaria. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organi-
zation, 12.
147. Baird JK, 2007. Neglect of Plasmodium vivax malaria. Trends
Parasitol 23: 533–539.
148. Galinski MR, Barnwell JW, 2008. Plasmodium vivax: who
cares? Malar J 7 (Suppl 1): S9.
149. Kochar DK, Saxena V, Singh N, Kochar SK, Kumar SV, Das
A, 2005. Plasmodium vivax malaria. Emerg Infect Dis 11:
132–134.
150. World Health Organization, 2012. Management of Severe Malaria:
A Practical Handbook, 3rd edition. Geneva, Switzerland: World
Health Organization.
151. Kochar DK, Das A, Kochar SK, Saxena V, Sirohi P, Garg S,
Kochar A, Khatri MP, Gupta V, 2009. Severe Plasmodium
vivax malaria: a report on serial cases from Bikaner in north-
western India. Am J Trop Med Hyg 80: 194–198.
152. Kochar DK, Pakalapati D, Kochar SK, Sirohi P, Khatri MP,
Kochar A, Das A, 2007. An unexpected cause of fever and
seizures. Lancet 370: 908.
153. Rahimi BA, Thakkinstian A, White NJ, Sirivichayakul C,
Dondorp AM, Chokejindachai W, 2014. Severe vivax malaria:
a systematic review and meta-analysis of clinical studies since
1900. Malar J 13: 481.
154. Douglas NM, Lampah DA, Kenangalem E, Simpson JA,
Poespoprodjo JR, Sugiarto P, Anstey NM, Price RN, 2013.
Major burden of severe anemia from non-falciparum malaria
species in southern Papua: a hospital-based surveillance study.
PLoS Med 10: e1001575; discussion e1001575.
155. Lampah DA, Yeo TW, Malloy M, Kenangalem E, Douglas
NM, Ronaldo D, Sugiarto P, Simpson JA, Poespoprodjo JR,
Anstey NM, Price RN, 2014. Severe malarial thrombocytopenia:
a risk factor for mortality in Papua, Indonesia. J Infect Dis 211:
623–634.
156. Douglas
NM,
Pontororing
GJ,
Lampah
DA,
Yeo
TW,
Kenangalem E, Poespoprodjo J, Ralph AP, Bangs MJ,
Sugiarto P, Anstey NM, Price RN, 2014. Mortality attributable
33
PLASMODIUM VIVAX EPIDEMIOLOGY
 to Plasmodium vivax malaria: a clinical audit from Papua,
Indonesia. BMC Med 12: 217.
157. Rajahram GS, Barber BE, William T, Grigg MJ, Menon J, Yeo
TW, Anstey NM, 2016. Falling Plasmodium knowlesi malaria
death rate among adults despite rising incidence, Sabah,
Malaysia, 2010–2014. Emerg Infect Dis 22: 41–48.
158. World Health Organization, 2015. Control and Elimination of Plas-
modium vivax Malaria: A Technical Brief. Geneva, Switzerland:
World Health Organization, 64.
159. Scott JAG, Berkley JA, Mwangi I, Ochola L, Uyoga S, Macharia
A, Ndila C, Lowe BS, Mwarumba S, Bauni E, Marsh K, Williams
TN, 2011. Relation between falciparum malaria and bacteraemia
in Kenyan children: a population-based, case-control study and
a longitudinal study. Lancet 378: 1316–1323.
160. Olupot-Olupot P, Urban BC, Jemutai J, Nteziyaremye J, Fanjo
HM, Karanja H, Karisa J, Ongodia P, Bwonyo P, Gitau EN,
Talbert A, Akech S, Maitland K, 2013. Endotoxaemia is com-
mon in children with Plasmodium falciparum malaria. BMC
Infect Dis 13: 117.
161. Hochman S, Kim K, 2012. The impact of HIV coinfection on
cerebral malaria pathogenesis. J Neuroparasitology 3: 235547.
162. Bhatt S, Gething PW, Brady OJ, Messina JP, Farlow AW,
Moyes CL, Drake JM, Brownstein JS, Hoen AG, Sankoh O,
Myers MF, George DB, Jaenisch T, Wint GR, Simmons CP,
Scott TW, Farrar JJ, Hay SI, 2013. The global distribution and
burden of dengue. Nature 496: 504–507.
163. Golding N, Wilson AL, Moyes CL, Cano J, Pigott DM,
Velayudhan R, Brooker SJ, Smith DL, Hay SI, Lindsay SW,
2015. Integrating vector control across diseases. BMC Med
13: 249.
164. Mushtaq MB, Qadri MI, Rashid A, 2013. Concurrent infection
with dengue and malaria: an unusual presentation. Case Rep
Med 2013: 520181.
165. Magalhaes BM, Alexandre MA, Siqueira AM, Melo GC,
Gimaque JB, Bastos MS, Figueiredo RM, Carvalho RC,
Tavares MA, Naveca FG, Alonso P, Bassat Q, Lacerda
MV, Mourao MP, 2012. Clinical profile of concurrent dengue
fever and Plasmodium vivax malaria in the Brazilian Amazon:
case series of 11 hospitalized patients. Am J Trop Med Hyg 87:
1119–1124.
166. Deresinski S, 2006. Concurrent Plasmodium vivax malaria and
dengue. Emerg Infect Dis 12: 1802.
167. Carme B, Matheus S, Donutil G, Raulin O, Nacher M, Morvan
J, 2009. Concurrent dengue and malaria in Cayenne Hospital,
French Guiana. Emerg Infect Dis 15: 668–671.
168. Thangaratham PS, Jeevan MK, Rajendran R, Samuel PP, Tyagi
BK, 2006. Dual infection by dengue virus and Plasmodium
vivax in Alappuzha District, Kerala, India. Jpn J Infect Dis 59:
211–212.
169. GAHI, 2014. Global Atlas of Helminth Infections. Available at:
www.thiswormyworld.org. Accessed December 28, 2014.
170. Melo GC, Reyes-Lecca RC, Vitor-Silva S, Monteiro WM,
Martins M, Benzecry SG, Alecrim M, Lacerda MV, 2010.
Concurrent helminthic infection protects schoolchildren with
Plasmodium vivax from anemia. PLoS One 5: e11206.
171. Boel
M,
Carrara
VI,
Rijken
M,
Proux
S,
Nacher
M,
Pimanpanarak M, Paw MK, Moo O, Gay H, Bailey W,
Singhasivanon P, White NJ, Nosten F, McGready R, 2010.
Complex interactions between soil-transmitted helminths and
malaria in pregnant women on the Thai-Burmese border.
PLoS Negl Trop Dis 4: e887.
172. Williams TN, Maitland K, Phelps L, Bennett S, Peto TE, Viji J,
Timothy R, Clegg JB, Weatherall DJ, Bowden DK, 1997.
Plasmodium vivax: a cause of malnutrition in young children.
QJM 90: 751–757.
173. Baird JK, Valecha N, Duparc S, White NJ, Price RN, 2016.
Diagnosis and treatment of Plasmodium vivax malaria. Am J
Trop Med Hyg 95(Suppl 6): 35–51.
174. Sumawinata IW, Bernadeta, Leksana B, Sutamihardja A,
Purnomo, Subianto B, Sekartuti, Fryauff DJ, Baird JK, 2003.
Very high risk of therapeutic failure with chloroquine for
uncomplicated Plasmodium falciparum and P. vivax malaria in
Indonesian Papua. Am J Trop Med Hyg 68: 416–420.
175. Baird JK, Leksana B, Masbar S, Fryauff DJ, Sutanihardja MA,
Suradi, Wignall FS, Hoffman SL, 1997. Diagnosis of resistance to
chloroquine by Plasmodium vivax: timing of recurrence and
whole blood chloroquine levels. Am J Trop Med Hyg 56: 621–626.
176. Asih PB, Syafruddin D, Leake J, Sorontou Y, Sadikin M,
Sauerwein RW, Vinetz J, Baird JK, 2011. Phenotyping clinical
resistance to chloroquine in Plasmodium vivax in northeastern
Papua, Indonesia. Int J Parasitol Drugs Drug Resist 1: 28–32.
177. World Health Organization, 2009. Methods for Surveillance
of Antimalarial Drug Efficacy. Geneva, Switzerland: World
Health Organization.
178. Rieckmann KH, Davis DR, Hutton DC, 1989. Plasmodium
vivax resistance to chloroquine? Lancet 2: 1183–1184.
179. Karunajeewa HA, Mueller I, Senn M, Lin E, Law I, Gomorrai
PS, Oa O, Griffin S, Kotab K, Suano P, Tarongka N, Ura A,
Lautu D, Page-Sharp M, Wong R, Salman S, Siba P, Ilett KF,
Davis TM, 2008. A trial of combination antimalarial therapies
in children from Papua New Guinea. N Engl J Med 359:
2545–2557.
180. Ratcliff
A,
Siswantoro
H,
Kenangalem
E,
Wuwung
M,
Brockman A, Edstein MD, Laihad F, Ebsworth EP, Anstey
NM, Tjitra E, Price RN, 2007. Therapeutic response of
multidrug-resistant Plasmodium falciparum and P. vivax to
chloroquine and sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine in southern Papua,
Indonesia. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg 101: 351–359.
181. Sutanto I, Suprijanto S, Nurhayati, Manoempil P, Baird JK,
2009. Resistance to chloroquine by Plasmodium vivax at Alor
in the Lesser Sundas Archipelago in eastern Indonesia. Am J
Trop Med Hyg 81: 338–342.
182. Price RN, von Seidlein L, Valecha N, Nosten F, Baird JK,
White NJ, 2014. Global extent of chloroquine-resistant Plas-
modium vivax: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet
Infect Dis 14: 982–991.
183. de Santana Filho FS, Arcanjo AR, Chehuan YM, Costa MR,
Martinez-Espinosa FE, Vieira JL, Barbosa MG, Alecrim
WD, Alecrim MG, 2007. Chloroquine-resistant Plasmodium
vivax, Brazilian Amazon. Emerg Infect Dis 13: 1125–1126.
184. Tabernero P, Fernandez FM, Green M, Guerin PJ, Newton PN,
2014. Mind the gaps–the epidemiology of poor-quality anti-
malarials in the malarious world–analysis of the WorldWide
Antimalarial Resistance Network database. Malar J 13: 139.
185. Baird JK, 2011. Resistance to chloroquine unhinges vivax
malaria
therapeutics.
Antimicrob
Agents
Chemother
55:
1827–1830.
186. Harijanto PN, 2010. Malaria treatment by using artemisinin in
Indonesia. Acta Med Indones 42: 51–56.
187. Douglas NM, Anstey NM, Angus BJ, Nosten F, Price RN,
2010. Artemisinin combination therapy for vivax malaria.
Lancet Infect Dis 10: 405–416.
188. Ingram RJ, Crenna-Darusallam C, Soebianto S, Noviyanti R,
Baird JK, 2014. The clinical and public health problem of
relapse despite primaquine therapy: case review of repeated
relapses of Plasmodium vivax acquired in Papua New Guinea.
Malar J 13: 488.
189. Bennett JW, Pybus BS, Yadava A, Tosh D, Sousa JC, McCarthy
WF, Deye G, Melendez V, Ockenhouse CF, 2013. Primaquine
failure and cytochrome P-450 2D6 in Plasmodium vivax
malaria. N Engl J Med 369: 1381–1382.
190. Bassat Q, Velarde M, Mueller I, Lin J, Leslie T, Wongsrichanalai
C, Baird JK, 2016. Key knowledge gaps for Plasmodium vivax
control and elimination. Am J Trop Med Hyg 95(Suppl 6): 62–71.
191. Golding N, 2014. ageStand R Package. Available at: https://
github.com/SEEG-Oxford: GitHub. Accessed May 20, 2015.
192. Okell LC, Bousema T, Griffin JT, Ouedraogo AL, Ghani AC,
Drakeley CJ, 2012. Factors determining the occurrence of sub-
microscopic malaria infections and their relevance for control.
Nat Commun 3: 1237.
193. White NJ, Pukrittayakamee S, Hien TT, Faiz MA, Mokuolu
OA, Dondorp AM, 2013. Malaria. Lancet 383: 723–735.
34
HOWES, BATTLE AND OTHERS
