 Research Paper
Epstein–Barr Virus Infection of Mammary Epithelial Cells Promotes
Malignant Transformation☆
Hai Hu a, Man-Li Luo a,i, Christine Desmedt b, Sheida Nabavi c, Sina Yadegarynia a, Alex Hong h,
Panagiotis A. Konstantinopoulos d, Edward Gabrielson e, Rebecca Hines-Boykin f, German Pihan j, Xin Yuan a,
Christos Sotiriou b, Dirk P. Dittmer f, Joyce D. Fingeroth g, Gerburg M. Wulf a,⁎
a Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, 330 Brookline Ave, Boston, MA, USA
b Institut Jules Bordet, 121 Boulevard de Waterloolaan, Bruxelles 1000, Brussels, Belgium
c University of Connecticut, Computer Science and Engineering, 371 Fairfield Way, Storrs, CT 06268, USA
d Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 450 Brookline Ave, Boston, MA 02215, USA
e Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University, 4940 Eastern Ave, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA
f Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA
g Department of Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 364 Plantation Street, Worcester, MA 01605, USA
h Massachusetts Institute for Technology, Department of Biology, USA
i Breast Tumor Center, Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510120, P. R. China
j Department of Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, 330 Brookline Ave, Boston, MA, USA
a b s t r a c t
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 11 April 2016
Received in revised form 16 May 2016
Accepted 18 May 2016
Available online 21 May 2016
Whether the human tumor virus, Epstein–Barr Virus (EBV), promotes breast cancer remains controversial and a
potential mechanism has remained elusive. Here we show that EBV can infect primary mammary epithelial cells
(MECs) that express the receptor CD21. EBV infection leads to the expansion of early MEC progenitor cells with a
stem cell phenotype, activates MET signaling and enforces a differentiation block. When MECs were implanted as
xenografts, EBV infection cooperated with activated Ras and accelerated the formation of breast cancer. Infection
in EBV-related tumors was of a latency type II pattern, similar to nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). A human gene
expression signature for MECs infected with EBV, termed EBVness, was associated with high grade, estrogen-re-
ceptor-negative status, p53 mutation and poor survival. In 11/33 EBVness-positive tumors, EBV-DNA was detect-
ed by fluorescent in situ hybridization for the viral LMP1 and BXLF2 genes. In an analysis of the TCGA breast
cancer data EBVness correlated with the presence of the APOBEC mutational signature. We conclude that a con-
tribution of EBV to breast cancer etiology is plausible, through a mechanism in which EBV infection predisposes
mammary epithelial cells to malignant transformation, but is no longer required once malignant transformation
has occurred.
© 2016 Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
1. Introduction
The human tumor virus, Epstein–Barr Virus (EBV), is causally associ-
ated with approximately 200,000 malignancies worldwide annually. The
risk of cancer linked to EBV infection recently prompted a joint call by the
NCI and the NIAID for development of an EBV vaccine (Cohen et al.,
2011). EBV is typically transmitted early in life as a subclinical illness.
When delayed until early adulthood symptoms of infectious mononucle-
osis often occur (Evans, 1971). Globally, N90% of the adult population has
been infected (Evans, 1971; Cohen, 2000). In general, most humans
tolerate latent EBV infection without adverse effects. However, in certain
individuals, EBV has been linked to the etiology of cancers, including Af-
rican Burkitt lymphoma (Epstein et al., 1964; Epstein and Barr, 1964);
Hodgkin's disease, nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC); gastric adenocarci-
noma; and leiomyosarcoma (Niedobitek et al., 2001). Epithelial cancers
associated with EBV vary markedly in viral prevalence, from nearly
100% of NPCs to about 10% of gastric carcinomas (Gulley, 2001) and
also differ in the patterns of viral genes expressed. As exposure to virus
frequently precedes the manifestation of cancer by years, and only a mi-
nority of individuals exposed to EBV will develop a related cancer, it is
difficult to establish a causal role.
An association of EBV infection with breast cancer has been reported
from India (Joshi et al., 2009), China (Peng et al., 2014; He et al., 2012),
Northern Africa (Fina et al., 2001; Hachana et al., 2011b) and southern
Europe (Marrao et al., 2014; Mazouni et al., 2011; Labrecque et al.,
EBioMedicine 9 (2016) 148–160
☆ One sentence summary: Epstein–Barr Virus (EBV) can infect mammary epithelial cells
and facilitate cancerous transformation consistent with a ‘hit-and-run’ mechanism.
⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: gwulf@bidmc.harvard.edu (G.M. Wulf).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2016.05.025
2352-3964/© 2016 Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
EBioMedicine
journal homepage: www.ebiomedicine.com
 1995). However, no mechanism of infection has been identified. Two re-
cent analyses of the RNAseq data in the TCGA dataset did not show ev-
idence for actively transcribed virus (Khoury et al., 2013b; Tang et al.,
2013). These results argued against a role of active EBV infection for
the growth of established breast cancers, but did not rule out a mecha-
nism of oncogenesis where viral infection contributes to transformation
but is no longer required once a tumor has established itself. In this re-
port we show that EBV can infect primary human mammary epithelial
cells (MECs) through CD21 leading to phenotypic changes consistent
with transformation. These immortalized MECs infected with EBV coop-
eratively (with activated Ras) increase tumor formation in vivo, recapit-
ulating a multistep tumorigenesis in an established animal model.
Significantly, when a transcriptional profile based on cellular gene ex-
pression in EBV-positive xenograft tumors was used to interrogate dif-
ferent human breast cancer databases, a subset of high grade breast
tumors was identified in which EBV DNA, but not viral RNA, was detect-
ed by FISH.
2. Methods
2.1. Cell lines
Immortalized human mammary epithelial cell lines (HMLE and HMEC)
were provided by Robert Weinberg, MIT. HMLE was generated from
normal human primary mammary epithelial that overexpress hTERT
(Elenbaas et al., 2001). HMEChtert, in short H:MEC, had been generated
from primary mammary epithelial cells (MECs) that were immortalized
with human telomerase (hTERT) and SV40 Large T antigen (Zhao et al.,
2003). MCF10A cells were from the ATCC. The EBV producing AKATA
cells were a gift of Dr. Lindsey Hutt-Fletcher, Louisiana State University
Health Sciences Center, and cultured as described (Kuhn-Hallek et al.,
1995).
2.2. Cell culture, EBV generation, infection and generation of cell lines
MCF-10A mammary epithelial cells and HMEC were cultured as de-
scribed (Debnath et al., 2003). The isolation of primary human mamma-
ry epithelial cells (PMECs) was done according to a protocol approved
by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center. PMECs were isolated from reduction mammoplasty specimens,
and cultured in MEGM supplemented with 20 ng/ml EGF, 10 μg/ml insu-
lin, 0.5 μg/ml hydrocortisone, 1% bovine serum albumin, and 2% calf
serum, as described (Burga et al., 2009).
Recombinant EBV was isolated from AKATA cells that generate GFP-
labeled EBV (GFP-EBV) defective of viral thymidine kinase (TK). Reacti-
vation of virus from AKATA cells was induced by adding Goat anti-
human immunoglobulin G at a final concentration of 50 μg/ml to the
culture medium, as described (Huang et al., 2003). GFP-control cells
were generated using retroviral transduction (pBABE-GFP), followed
by Neomycin selection at 100 μg/ml initially and 50 μg/ml for mainte-
nance. To generate EBV-infected MECs, MECs were incubated with
GFP-EBV for 2 h, after which the cells were washed. At 72 h post infec-
tion, selection with Neomycin was started. Care was taken to culture the
GFP-control MECs exactly like the GFP-EBV cells.
For overexpression, vHRasV12D was subcloned into the pBabe retro-
viral vector (Addgene #17,756). Production of retroviruses and trans-
duction of MECs was performed as described previously (Stewart et
al., 2003). Following infection, the cells were selected using zeocin
(vHRasV12D). Cells were used up to three weeks after selection. Fresh
cell lines were made for each group of experiments and experiments
were performed following at least two separate infections.
2.3. Flow cytometry
Anti-CD21-PE antibody (HB5, eBioscience) was used for CD21 detec-
tion. Anti-CD24-PE and anti CD44-APC antibodies (eBioscience) were
used to detect progenitor cells. Anti-CD49f–APC (eBioscience) and
anti-EpCAM-FITC (Biolegend) antibody were used for detection of
mammary epithelial lineage. Isotype matched antibodies were used as
negative controls. Flow cytometry was performed on a LSRII cytometer
(BD Biosciences) and data were analyzed with FlowJo.
2.4. Competitive inhibition of EBV infection
HMECs were cultured in 6 well dishes to 40% confluency for the
blocking experiments as described in (Fingeroth et al., 1984). Briefly,
cell were pretreated with HB5 (mouse anti-CD21 antibody) or normal
mIgG2a (40 μg/ml) for 30 min, followed by 3 PBS washes, and then
goat F(ab’)2 fragments (50 μg/ml) to mouse IgG was added and incubat-
ed for another 30 min followed by another 3 washes with PBS, before
EBV were added into the culture medium and incubated for another
4 h to infect the cells.
2.5. Mammosphere culture
Mammosphere cultures were performed as described (Dontu et al.,
2003). Single-cell suspensions were plated in ultra-low attachment
plates (Corning, Costar) in DMEM/F-12 HAM medium containing bFGF
(20 ng/ml, EGF (20 ng/ml), heparin (4 μg/ml) and B-27 supplement
(1:50 dilution, Invitrogen). The Mammospheres were cultured for two
weeks. Mammospheres with diameter N 75 μm were counted.
2.6. 3D differentiation culture
10 day mammospheres were resuspended in Matrigel (Gibco) and
transferred to culture slides, allowed to solidify and then covered with
differentiation medium (MEGM medium (Clonetics) supplemented
with 10 ng/ml FGF, 4 ng/ml heparin and 2 μg/ml prolactin) for addition-
al 10–14 days, as described (Mani et al., 2008).
2.7. Tumorigenesis assays
Aliquots of indicated numbers of cells were injected subcutaneously
into the mammary fat pad of 5-week-old NOD/SCID mice (Jackson Lab-
oratories). Mice were examined at least twice weekly for evidence of
tumor growth. After tumors were detected, tumor size was measured
every two days. All studies involving mice were approved by the Institu-
tional Animal Care and Use Committee at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical
Center and performed in accordance with the protocol.
2.8. Immunoblotting
Primary monoclonal LMP1 antibody (1:500) (Abcam), Pan-H-Ras
antibody (1:1000) (BD), Alpha-Tubulin antibody (1:10,000) (Sigma),
and polyclonal CD21 antibody (1:500) (Abcam), MET-antibody
(1:500) (Santa Cruz), p-METantibody (1:500) (Cell signaling), STAT3
(1:500) (Cell signaling), p-STAT3 (1:500) (Cell signaling) antibody
were used.
2.9. Immunohistochemistry
Immunohistochemical staining for Ki67, p-Met, pSTAT3, K5/6, K18,
ALDH1, p63, Vimentin w done as described previously (Burga et al.,
2009; Burga et al., 2011). Immunolabeling was visualized with DAB so-
lution (Vector Laboratories), followed by counterstaining with
hematoxylin.
2.10. phospho-RTK scan
The p-RTK arrays were performed according to the manufacturer's
recommendations (cell signaling Human Phospho-RTKArrayKit, Fluo-
rescent Readout, #7949). The signal was developed using DyLight
149
H. Hu et al. / EBioMedicine 9 (2016) 148–160
 680®-linked Streptavidin and then scanned with the Odyssey Infrared
Imager (LI-COR). The intensity was read out by Genepix Pro 6.0 (Molec-
ular Devices) and generated the heatmap by MeV4.7 (Saeed et al.,
2006).
2.11. In situ hybridization
EBER in situ hybridization (Fig. 4C) was performed at the Dana
Farber Cancer Center Specialized Histopathology Core Facility. Fish of
LMP1 (type 1 probeset) and glycoprotein gH (BXFL2) (type 6 probeset)
in patients' tumor tissue sections (Fig. 7) were performed following the
instructions for the Affymetrix QuantiGene View RNA ISH Tissue Assay
kit. The LMP1 probe covers bases 70–1115 of the LMP1 gene. The
BXFL2 probe covers bases 450–1358 of the BXFL2 gene. As there are
no introns in these viral genes, probes can target both EBV DNA and
RNA. ISH stained tissue sections were scanned at 400× resolution
using a Zeiss LSM501 laser scanning microscope at the Ragon Institute
and Tissue FAX software. They were scored for LMP1 and BFXL2 by
three different physicians (XY, GP and GMW).
RNAse A and RNAse 1 were used to treat controls of Burkitt's lym-
phoma before hybridization to confirm the probes are RNAse resistant
and target to viral DNA.
2.12. LMP1 RNA interference and MET inhibition
The siRNA target sequence to LMP1 mRNA is AAGAGCCUUC
UCUGUCCACU (Guasparri et al., 2008). A control scrambled siRNA du-
plex was obtained from Dharmacon (Scramble II Duplex). Transfection
of siRNA was performed using HiPerFect Transfection Reagent (Qiagen).
For MET inhibition, the inhibitor XL184 (Chemietek) was dissolved in
DMSO and introduced into the culture medium at the concentrations in-
dicated in Fig. 5.
2.13. Microarray analysis
RNA was extracted using a total RNA isolation mini kit (Agilent). Mi-
croarray expression profiles were collected using Affymetrix GeneChip
human HT_HG-U133+_PM. Affymetrix CEL files were analyzed with
BRB-ArrayTools (Biometrics Research Branch, National Cancer Insti-
tute). Array data from our experimentally derived tumors can be
accessed in the GEO database; (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/
GSE81068). Four datasets obtained from NCBI's Gene Expression Omni-
bus (GEO; http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) with GEO Series acces-
sion numbers GSE1456, GSE2990 GSE4922 and GSE2304 were
reanalyzed together with our raw data. Raw data were processed
using Robust Multi-Array (RMA) analysis (Irizarry et al., 2003). Signal
intensities were normalized, background corrected, and bottom-
trimmed at signal intensity of 50. Genes were filtered out if their log in-
tensity variation percentile was b25% and/or, if they were absent in
N85% of the experiments.
2.14. Hierarchical clustering
Gene expression data from EBV-infected and GFP-infected cells or
tumors were used for unsupervised hierarchical clustering with the av-
erage linkage method as implemented in the BRB Array Tools Version
3.6. All genes were median-centered across the experiments. Differen-
tial expression between the EBV-infected and GFP-labeled cells or tu-
mors was analyzed by BRB-ArrayTools. Statistical significance was set
at p ≤ 0.01 at a false discovery rate of 0.15; and at p ≤ 0.001 at a false dis-
covery rate of 0.05. Pathway analysis was performed using the gene set
comparison tool of BRB-ArrayTools. We analyzed all pre-defined
Biocarta pathways (obtained through the NCI public database) for dif-
ferential expression between the EBV infected and the GFP labeled
cells. The statistical significance for differential expression of each path-
way was estimated using the functional class scoring method (Pavlidis
et al., 2004). In brief, a p-value was computed for each gene in each
pathway and then the set of p-values for each pathway was expressed
as LS score (mean negative natural logarithm of the p-values of the re-
spective single gene univariate test) and the Kolmogorov–Smirnov
(KS) score (Pavlidis et al., 2004). For each pathway, we tested the null
hypothesis that the list of differentially expressed genes from each path-
way was random. N genes (equal to the number of genes of the path-
way) were randomly selected from the project gene list, and the LS
and KS statistics and their random distribution were computed
(100,000 random selections). The LS (KS) permutation p-value was de-
fined as the proportion of random simulations for which the LS (KS) sta-
tistic was larger than the LS (KS) statistic computed for the pathway
with the original gene list. Statistical significance was set at 0.005.
2.15. Generation of the EBVness signature
To generate the EBVness signature, our data set of EBV infected and
GFP labeled cells or tumors was used as the training set. The training
was performed with BRB-ArrayTools. The most differentially expressed
genes between EBV-infected and GFP labeled samples (p b 0.001) were
used as input in the diagonal linear discriminant model with in a leave-
one-out cross validation process. This generated a function with weight
for each input gene and gave a cut off value to distinguish EBV-like
tumor from none EBV-like tumor. The signature value for each sample
was calculated using the function F(x) = weight(n) × gene(n) for all
n genes in of the signature based on their expression in the training set.
2.16. Correlation of EBVness with the APOBEC mutational signatures
This analysis was done using TCGA Breast cancer data. Tumors for
which mutational signatures have been analyzed were grouped into
APOBEC-positive (positive for signature 2 and/or 13) and APOBEC-neg-
ative cases (absence of signature 2 and 13) according to (Nik-Zainal
et al., 2014; Alexandrov et al., 2015). ComBat software was used for
batch effect cancellation of the expression array data (Agilent platform).
The expression values of probes corresponding to each of the 37 genes
of the EBVness signature were extracted for each of the cases for
which mutational signatures were available. To obtain the expression
level for each of the 37 genes, the expression values for the probes cor-
responding to each gene were averaged.
2.17. Survival analysis
In order to evaluate whether the gene expression signatures associ-
ated with EBV infection provided clinically relevant information, we
used four independent, clinically annotated, publicly available microar-
ray datasets from NCBI's Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO; http://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) with GEO Series accession numbers GSE1456,
GSE2990 GSE4922 and GSE2034 (HG-U133A platform). Gene signa-
tures were mapped from HT_HG-U133 + _PM to HG-U133A platforms
using the Affymetrix ‘best match’ tool. We tested whether these signa-
tures would predict disease-free survival (DFS) and overall survival
(OS) using the Kaplan–Meier survival model.
2.18. EBV transcription profile
Herpes virus transcription was profiled as described (Papin et al.,
2005). mRNA was enriched using a poly A tract mRNA isolation system
(Promega) and subjected to reverse transcription with transcriptor first
strand cDNA synthesis kit (Roche). Real time qPCR was conducted using
2xSYBR (Roche) on an LC480. Data were normalized to cellular refer-
ence genes and analyzed by unsupervised clustering. Raw threshold
cycle values CT were normalized to the median of reference genes
(ACTIN, GAPDH, HPRT) and EBV positive samples compared to negative
control samples. The relative expression level for each gene were clus-
tered by gene with MeV4.7 (Saeed et al., 2006).
150
H. Hu et al. / EBioMedicine 9 (2016) 148–160
 2.19. Quantitative RT-PCR
RNA from cells was extracted with a Total RNA isolation mini kit
(Agilent). cDNA was prepared with transcriptor first strand cDNA syn-
thesis kit (Roche) and PCR was carried out with iQ SYBR Green
Supermix (Bio-Rad). Samples were run on the QIAGEN Rotor-Gene Q
real-time cycler. GAPDH was used as an internal control. The following
primers were used:
GAPDH:
Forward CATGAGAAGTATGACAACAGCCT;
Reverse AGTCCTTCCACGATACCAAAGT.
E-cadherin:
Forward TGCCCAGAAAATGAAAAAGG;
Reverse GTGTATGTGGCAATGCGTTC.
N-caderin:
Forward ACAGTGGCCACCTACAAAGG;
Reverse CCGAGATGGGGTTGATAATG.
Fibronectin 1:
Forward CAGTGGGAGACCTCGAGAAG;
Reverse TCCCTCGGAACATCAGAAAC.
Vimentin:
Forward GAGAACTTTGCCGTTGAAGC;
Reverse GCTTCCTGTAGGTGGCAATC.
2.20. Amplification of EBV DNA
PCR to detect EBV DNA was done as described (Bonnet et al., 1999a).
Briefly, DNA samples were subjected to PCR using Taq DNA polymerase,
specific oligonucleotides listed below. The standard cycle procedure
was performed for 35 cycles with the annealing temperature at 58 °C
for BZLF1, 55 °C for BNLF1, 60 °C for EBER-2 and glyceraldehyde-3-phos-
phate dehydrogenase (GAPDH). Two microliters of the BZLF1–PCR
product was taken for a second round of PCR using internal primers.
BZLF1:
ZES2 103,226–103,207 AGGGGAGATGTTAGACAGGT.
ZAS2 102,041–102,060 AGTATGCCAGGAGTAGAACA.
ZES 103180–103,161 GCCACCTTTGCTATCTTTGC.
ZEAS 102187–102,207 AGGCGTGGTTTCAATAACGG.
BNLF1:
LMP2CS 168,373–168,392 CTAGCGACTCTGCTGGAAAT.
LMP2CAS 168,075–168,056 GAGTGTGTGCCAGTTAAGGT.
EBER-2:
EBER-2S 6969–6988 CCCTAGTGGTTTCGGACACA.
EBER-2AS1 7075–7056 ACTTGCAAATGCTCTAGGCG.
2.21. Statistical analysis
All data are presented as the mean ± standard deviation, Signifi-
cance was assessed using an unpaired two-tailed t-test. For survival
analysis, Kaplan–Meier survival curves were constructed and differ-
ences between them were tested by the log-rank test using software
in SPSS12. All tests of significance were set at P b 0.05. For analyzing
the correlation between “EBVness” feature and the clinicopathologic
characteristics, the Mann–Whitney U method was used. Fisher's exact
test was used for analysis of the correlation of “EBVness” with EBV
ISH, and a T-test to correlate EBVness with the absence or presence of
APOBEC signatures.
2.21.1. Patient samples
The cohort of patient tumors analyzed retrospectively with in situ hy-
bridization (ISH) consists of archival, paraffin-embedded breast cancer
samples from patients diagnosed at the Jules Bordet Institute between
1995 and 2003 (Dedeurwaerder et al., 2011). The Ethics committee of
the Jules Bordet Institute approved the present research project.
3. Results
3.1. EBV infection of primary and immortalized mammary epithelial cells,
but not breast cancer cell lines is mediated by CD21
If EBV directly participates in breast tumorigenesis, then virus must
gain access to MECs either as an initial event or at some later stage in the
course of multi-step tumorigenesis. To determine the susceptibility of
MECs to infection, we prepared primary mammary epithelial cells
(PMECs) isolated from reduction mammoplasties, immortalized mam-
mary epithelial cell lines (HMLE (Elenbaas et al., 2001), HMEC (Zhao
et al., 2003) and MCF10A (Miller et al., 1993)) as well as established
breast cancer cell lines and examined them for expression of the EBV-
receptor, CD21, primarily expressed by B lymphocytes (Fingeroth et
al., 1984; Fingeroth et al., 1988; Fingeroth, 1990), but also by a subset
of epithelial cells (Fingeroth et al., 1999; Imai et al., 1998). We observed
that CD21 was expressed on subpopulations of 9 to 25% of MECs (HMEC,
HMLE, MCF10A and primary MECs (Fig. 1A, B, S1), but not on any of 5
breast cancer cell lines, representing ER+ (MCF7, T47D), Her2+
(BT474) or triple-negative (HCC1937 and SUM149) breast cancers
(Fig. 1A). Within the epithelial cell population, CD21 expression was
highest in the myoepithelial subpopulation (Fig. 1D).
When we incubated these cells with GFP-labeled EBV (Fig. 1, S2), we
found that MECs, but not cancer cells, could be infected with EBV (Fig. 1C,
E). The highest rate of infection was seen in primary MECs, isolated from re-
duction mammoplasties without prior passaging (Fig. 1C, S2A), followed by
HMLE, HMEC and MCF10A (Fig. S2B). None of the cancer cell lines was sus-
ceptible to infection (data not shown). Significantly, competitive blockade
of CD21 with the anti-CD21 antibody HB5 plus secondary immunoglobulin
prevented the infection of MECs with EBV, confirming that EBV entered
MECs via CD21 (Fig. 1 E). As GFP-EBV persisted in some MECs, suggesting
a latent infection, we determined to test whether EBV promoted stepwise
transformation into cancer as might occur in nature.
3.2. EBV infection induces expansion of a progenitor cell population
Latent EBV infection alters the transcriptional program and phenotype
of host cells (Horikawa et al., 2007; Fingeroth et al., 1999) producing
changes in growth and differentiation. This can include development of a
stem cell-like signature and phenotype in EBV bearing NPC cells (Kondo
et al., 2011; Kong et al., 2010). As EBV readily entered MECs, we asked
whether EBV infection altered the self-renewal or differentiation proper-
ties of MECs. The HMEC line used to examine the effect of EBV infection
on tumor formation in vivo was previously immortalized with telomerase
(htert) and SV40 large T antigen (Hahn et al., 1999). In the mammosphere
assay (Dontu et al., 2003) (Fig. 2A–D) we found a striking increase in both,
the size and the number of spheres derived from EBV-infected MECs
(Fig. 2A, C). Consistently, we detected expansion of CD24low/CD44 high
expressing progenitor cells among the EBV-infected MECs (Fig. 2E–H).
To test if EBV-infection of MECs facilitated transformation, we infect-
ed immortalized HMECs with either p-EGFP-lentivirus or GFP-EBV,
followed by Ras V12 or a matched retroviral vector control. The
resulting cell lines (EBV-GFP/RasV12/SV40-HMEC called EBV-HMEC-R,
and GFP/RasV12/SV40-HMEC called GFP-HMEC-R) were used for subse-
quent in vitro and xenotransplant experiments. Introduction of activat-
ed Ras increased the CD24low/CD44high progenitor cell population
(Fig. 2F, H), and, correspondingly, the rate of mammosphere formation
and their size (Fig. 2B, D), (Elenbaas et al., 2001), (Yu et al., 2007) Sim-
ilarly, EBV infection led to an increase of the efficiency of mammosphere
151
H. Hu et al. / EBioMedicine 9 (2016) 148–160
 formation (Fig. 2A, C) and the percentage of CD24low/CD44high cells
(Fig. 2E, G). Surprisingly, when both activated Ras and EBV were present
(Fig. 2 F, H) the progenitor cell population increased fivefold, and
mammosphere formation rate increased up to tenfold in HMEC (Fig.
2B) or MCF10A (Fig. 2D) that carried both activated Ras and EBV and
their size was also increased. These data indicate that activated Ras
and EBV cooperate to expand a MEC progenitor cell population with
an increased proliferative capacity.
Having established an increased self-renewal capacity of EBV- and
activated Ras carrying MECs, we examined their differentiation proper-
ties. When mammospheres were transferred into three-dimensional,
matrigel-based cultures (Debnath et al., 2003; Gudjonsson et al.,
2003), EBV-infected, GFP-control and MECs with activated Ras formed
branching structures (Fig. 2I–L) indicative of terminal differentiation.
EBV infection and activated Ras (V12D) combined on the other hand
formed mulberry-shaped solid spheres, indicating a differentiation
block (Fig. 2J, L). In summary, introduction of an activated oncogene,
here Ras, into EBV-infected and immortalized MECs resulted in an ex-
pansion of progenitor cells with a differentiation block.
3.3. EBV Induces epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT)
Given the altered progenitor cell properties, we asked if EBV-infected
cells exhibited features of epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT), often
associated with early progenitor cell status (Mani et al., 2008; Yang et al.,
2004). When grown on plastic, HMEC or MCF10A infected with EBV
showed morphologic changes characteristic of EMT with loss of the
epitheloid cobblestone pattern and increased cell mobility (Fig. 3A).
Using RT-PCR we found a loss of E-cadherin expression and gain of
Vimentin, N-cadherin and Fibronectin, all consistent with an EMT-like
reprogramming of the EBV-infected MECs (Fig. 3A, right panel).
3.4. EBV infection facilitates breast tumor formation in vivo
When EBV-HMEC-R or GFP-HMEC-R were introduced as xeno-im-
plants into NOD/SCID mice (Fig. 3B), EBV-infection decreased the lag
time and increased the efficiency as well as the frequency of breast can-
cers: 1 × 106 to 107 EBV-HMEC-R were sufficient to induce tumor for-
mation, while the corresponding number of GFP-HMEC-R did not
induce tumors (Fig. 3B). The lag time of tumorigenesis in this experi-
ment was 10–12 weeks, suggesting that the EBV-HMEC-R likely
underwent additional transformational changes before cancers were
formed. When EBV-HMEC-R or GFP-HMEC-R were injected at the
highest dose of 2 × 107, tumors were derived from both EBV-HMEC
and GFP-HMEC-R; however, the lag time for EBV-related tumors was
much shorter than that for control tumors (Fig. 3C). The resulting
EBV-related tumors had a high proliferative rate as determined by
Ki67 (Fig. 3D). All tumors were characterized by the absence of ER, PR,
Her2 and cytokeratin 8/18, and by the presence of cytokeratins CK5/6,
CK14 and vimentin, indicative of a basal cell histology (Fig. S3).
Fig. 1. EBV infects human breast epithelial cells via CD21. (A) CD21 is expressed in immortalized normal breast epithelial cells, but not in breast cancer cells. MECs (HMLE, HMEC and
MCF10A) were lysed and subjected to immunoblotting with anti-CD21 antibodies. An EBV-infected B-cell line (AKATA) served as positive control. (B) CD21 is expressed by
subpopulations of MECs. (C) GFP-EBV infection of MECs. MECs were incubated with GFP-EBV for 2 h, images were taken 72 h after initial infection. (D) CD21 expression is highest in
the myo-eoithelial subpopulation (CD49-high, EpCam-low). 60% of cultured primary MECs were of luminal lineage while 31% were of myoepithelial lineage. Counterstain with anti-
CD21 antibodies showed significant enrichment of CD21+ cells in the myoepithelial compartment (bar graph, p b 0.05) (E) Competitive inhibition of EBV-infection of PMECs with anti-
CR2 antibody HB5 (anti-CD21 moAb) and goat F(ab′)2 fragments to mouse IgG. MECs were incubated with increasing amounts HB5 followed by goat F(ab′)2 fragments (50 μg/ml)and
then incubated with GFP-EBV for four hours. GFP-positive cells were counted 72 h later. Displayed are experimental triplicates ± SD. Scale bars represent 100 μm. * indicates p ≤ 0.05;
** indicates p ≤ 0.01 (two-sided T-test) (two-sided T-test).
152
H. Hu et al. / EBioMedicine 9 (2016) 148–160
 3.5. EBV-infected HMECs display a type II latent pattern
EBV infection is typically classified as either lytic, latent 0, I, II and III
or abortive (Kutok and Wang, 2006; Khanna et al., 1995). This holds true
in particular for lymphoid tumors and NPC cell models. The infection
patterns are not entirely precise in other systems, and primary tumor
cells can show more variant expression (Kurokawa et al., 2005). We
therefore determined EBV-gene expression in infected MECs and the tu-
mors derived from these MECs (Fig. 4). Our in vivo tumors derived from
human MECs in mice, thus contamination with EBV-carrying B-cells
was excluded. We performed DNA PCR (Fig. 4A), to detect BZLF1,
BNLF1 and EBER2 as markers EBV genome presence. We found that
EBV-coding sequence was retained in all EBV-derived tumors (Fig.
4A). We found high expression of latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1)
in EBV-MECs (Fig. 4B), while only weak expression of EBERS was detect-
ed in few tumor cells by in situ hybridization of EBV-derived tumors
(Fig. 4C, lower panel), consistent with prior reports in breast cancer
(Glaser et al., 2004; Bonnet et al., 1999b). A viral RNA expression array
analysis (Wang et al., 2009; Kurokawa et al., 2005) clearly grouped
EBV-infected MECs with the EBV-derived tumors, indicating a pre-
served EBV-gene expression pattern in the EBV-MEC-derived tumors
(Fig. 4E, EBV-tumor 1–4). The gene expression pattern included high
levels of EBNA-1, LMP1, LMP2A, LMP2B, BXLF2 and BFRF3, suggestive
of a latent cycle of type II pattern accompanied by a significant lytic
component, similar to NPC (Brooks et al., 1993; Yen et al., 2009). Inter-
estingly, the CD21 antigen, consistently present on EBV-infected and
uninfected MECs, was lost in the EBV-derived cancers (Fig. 4D), consis-
tent with our earlier observations of absent of CD21 in breast cancer cell
lines (Fig. 1A). In summary, we detected viral DNA, latency II accompa-
nied by a lytic component and minimal EBERs expression in breast can-
cers derived from EBV-infected MECs.
3.6. EBV infection of MECs induces the MET-STAT3 pathway
In epithelial cells, EBV is known to induce EGFR expression (Miller
et al., 1997) and activate the NFκb and STAT pathways (Kung and
Raab-Traub, 2010; Kung and Raab-Traub, 2008; Miller et al., 1997). In
an unbiased analysis of signal transduction pathways (Fig. 5A) using a
receptor tyrosine kinase array (Fig. S4A) an increase in MET and
STAT3 phosphorylation consistently distinguished EBV-infected MECs
from
GFP-control
MECs
(Fig.
5A),
which
was
confirmed
by
Immunobloting analyses (Fig. 5B). Introduction of activated Ras also
caused activation of the c-MET and STAT3 pathways, and presence of
both, oncogenic Ras and EBV, led to a pronounced activation of MET
and STAT3 signaling (Fig. 5B). Consistently phospho-MET- (Fig. 5C)
and phospho-stat-3 (Fig. 5D) -positive cells were found in breast tumors
that were derived from EBV-HMEC-R, but not in those derived from
GFP-HMEC-R (Fig. 5C, D). LMP1 was abundantly expressed in all EBV-
infected MECs (Fig. 4B), as expected from the viral expression array
(Fig. 4E). Interestingly, METphosphorylation decreased in response to
LMP1 depletion with siRNA (Fig. 5E), while STAT3 phosphorylation
was not affected by LMP1 depletion, indicating that activation of MET,
Fig. 2. EBV infection leads to de-differentiation and enhances proliferation of MECs. (A-D) Mammosphere cultures of EBV-infected and non-infected MECs after 2 weeks of culture. A:
HMEC; B: HMEC-Ras: C: MCF-10A; D: MCF-10A-Ras. (E–H) MECs were stained with anti-CD24 anti-CD44 antibodies to visualize the stem cell compartment. E: HMEC; F: HMEC-Ras:
G: MCF-10A; H: MCF-10A-Ras. (I–L) Differentiation cultures in 3D-matrigel. Mammospheres grown under stem cell conditions were transferred into differentiation medium (see
Methods) and embedded in matrigel to allow for terminal differentiation. Scale bars represent 100 μm. Bar graphs display results of experimental triplicates ± SD. * indicates p ≤ 0.05.
153
H. Hu et al. / EBioMedicine 9 (2016) 148–160
 but not of STAT3, is mediated by LMP1. Phenotypically, depletion of LMP1
reduced the mammosphere-forming ability of EBV-infected MECs (Fig.
5F)), and treatments with the met-inhibitor XL-184 (Cabozatinib), a
met-specific receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitor, strongly reduced
METphosphorylation (Fig. 5G), the mammosphere-forming ability of
EBV-infected MECs (Fig. 5H. I) and the number of CD24low/CD44high
cells (Fig. 5J). These shifts in the size of the progenitor cell population
were not seen in GFP-HMEC-R treated with Cabozatinib (Fig. S4B–E).
These results suggest that EBV induces METphosphorylation through ex-
pression of LMP1, which leads to an increase in the MEC progenitor cell
compartment.
3.7. EBVness identifies a subset of breast cancers with features of poor
prognosis
We obtained human gene expression arrays of our engineered cell
lines (GFP-HMEC, EBV-HMECsand GFP-MEC-R, EBV-MEC-R) and the tu-
mors derived from GFP-HMEC-R or EBV-HMEC-R. Within each category,
cell lines or tumors, we then determined genes differentially expressed
in EBV-infected samples compared to controls (Fig. 6A). As expected,
new EBV infection in mammary epithelial cells led to a greater number
of transcriptional changes than the presumably latent infection of
established tumors (Fig. 6B). 47 alternately regulated genes were com-
mon to both groups, and formed the basis of our “EBVness” signature
(Fig. 6C, Table S1). Of the 47 alternately regulated genes identified
from the analysis of the U133A-Plus PM chip, 37 were represented in
the archival datasets in GEO and thus used as an EBVness signature for
further analysis (Table S4). The EBVness signature contains genes relat-
ed to oncogenesis such as TNFα, Syndecan 3, insulin-like growth factor
binding protein (IGFBP2) and inhibitors of STAT2 and STAT3 (PIAS2 and
PIAS3), isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH3) and DNA damage repair. An
analysis of pathway activation in EBV-infected versus control MECs
(Table S2) confirmed activation of the MET, EGFR and IL-6 pathways,
all of which involve STAT3 phosphorylation (Fig. 5). Activation of the
STAT3 pathway was also seen in the EBV-related versus control tumors
(Table S3). Applying this signature to datasets of breast cancer patients
in the publicly available GEO database (N = 852), we were able to iden-
tify a subset of breast cancers that carried the EBVness signature, though
we make no claim that all of these contain EBV. EBVness-positive breast
cancers tended to occur in younger patients (58.1 versus 62.1, p =
0.042), were more frequently of higher histological grade (40.2% versus
13.6%, p b 0.001), larger tumor size (average 24 mm versus 20.6 mm,
p b 0.001), basal features (26.9% versus 7.6%, p = 0.001), ER-negative
(31.7% versus 10.9%, p b 0.001), more frequently carried a p53 mutation
(38.4% versus 15%, p b 0.001) (Fig. 6H), and, most importantly, were as-
sociated with a significantly lower disease free and overall survival rate
(Fig. 6D,E, S5, Table S5).
The tumors that we derived from HMEC-R in mice were all ER-neg-
ative, regardless of their EBV status (Fig. S3). Because breast cancers, es-
pecially in the developed world, are more often ER-positive, we
examined if the prognostic significance of EBVness was maintained in
a subset analysis of ER-positive or negative breast cancers (Fig. 6F,G)
and found that EBVness was significantly associated with shortened dis-
ease-free survival also in patients with ER-positive breast cancer.
3.8. EBVness correlates with the presence of EBV DNA in human breast
cancers
To examine if the EBVness signature correlated with the absence or
presence of EBV in tumor tissues, we examined 69 breast cancer
Fig. 3. EBV infection leads to epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) and facilitates in vivo breast cancer formation. (A) Left: Two-dimensional morphology of EBV-infected (right in
panel) versus GFP-control (left in panel). Right: Expression of Vimentin, E-cadherin, N-cadherin and Fibronectin as determined by quantitative RT-PCR of total RNA. Expression levels
were normalized to GAPDH and displayed relative to the control cells. Bar graphs display results of experimental triplicates ± SD (B) Tumors generated from HMECs. Cells as indicated
in the table were injected in the left (GFP-HMEC-R) or right (EBV-HMEC-R) flank of NOD/SCID mice. Tumors emerged only on the right (derived from EBV-HMEC-R) with a lag time of
12 weeks. (C) Growth curves of xenograft tumors generated from EBV-HMEC or GFP-HMEC. When injected at a dose of 2 × 107 in the left (GFP-HMEC-R) or right (EBV-HMEC-R) 4/5
injections resulted in tumors for each group. Displayed are the time of first palpation and the growth curves of the tumors. (D) Tumors were fixed, paraffin-embedded and stained
with anti-Ki67 antibodies. The number of positive cells per high power field (HPF) was counted for each tumor in 3 different fields. * p ≤ 0.05 (two-sided T-test).
154
H. Hu et al. / EBioMedicine 9 (2016) 148–160
 specimen (Dedeurwaerder et al., 2011) for which U133 expression
array data where available using fluorescent in-situ hybridization
(FISH) with two probes that recognize EBV-LMP1 and EBV-BXLF2, re-
spectively. The signal for both probes was RNAse-resistant, i.e. the
probes detected EBV-DNA (Fig. S6). The FISH signal in breast cancer
samples was strictly nuclear, consistent with a persistent EBV-episome
at the nuclear envelope. EBV-FISH was typically positive for both probes
and was only observed in epithelial cells, not in the architectural tissue
or blood cells (Fig. 7A–E, S6). Breast cancers were considered EBV-FISH
positive if a nuclear stain for both probes was seen in tumor cells as
gauged by three independent investigators. There was considerable
intra-tumoral heterogeneity in EBV-positive cases, with tumor cells
staining positive in groups, while other areas of the tumor were nega-
tive. Therefore, the entire slide was scanned at high resolution for eval-
uation by virtual microscopy (Fig. 7A, B). 15/69 (22%) of the tumors
were EBV-FISH positive, consistent with prior reports (Fina et al.,
2001; Mazouni et al., 2011; Richardson et al., 2015). There was a
significant correlation of tumors that were positive for EBV by FISH
with the human gene expression signature EBVness”, Fig. 7F, p = 0.04).
EBV elicits and is edited by an APOBEC3 response in host cells
(Suspene et al., 2011). APOBEC3 cytidine deaminases edit the single
stranded viral genome resulting in loss of function. But more recently
the APOBEC family of cytidine deaminases have also been found to
leave characteristic mutational signatures, specifically in breast epithe-
lium (Taylor et al., 2013; Nik-Zainal et al., 2014; Alexandrov et al.,
2013) resulting in kataegis, clusters of hypermutation with C → T tran-
sitions, that potentially contribute to oncogenic transformation. To ex-
amine if EBVness had a correlation with the presence of the APOBEC
signature in breast cancer, we translated and applied the EBVness signa-
ture to the expression data in TCGA. Despite the noise introduced by
cross-platform translation of the signature and the considerable hetero-
geneity of the TCGA data set, there was a significant correlation between
EBVness and presence of the APOBEC signature (Fig. S7), i.e. EBVness
positive tumors were more likely to also be positive for the APOBEC
Fig. 4. Evidence for EBV-infection of MECs and MEC-derived breast cancers. (A) PCR amplification of EBV genes BZLF1, BNLF1 and EBER-2 in DNA extracted from EBV-HMEC-R or GFP-
HMEC-R and xenograft tumors as indicated. (B) Cell lysates from EBV-infected and control HMEC or MCF10A cells were subjected to immunoblotting with anti-LMP1 antibodies. (C) In
situ hybridization of EBV-expressed RNAs (EBERs) in xenograft tumors derived from control (upper left) and EBV-infected HMECs (lower part of panel). A Burkitt's lymphoma (upper
left panel) served as positive control. EBV-associated breast cancers derived from EBV-HMECs stained only infrequently positive for EBERS, with some EBERS positivity in tumor areas
with cell death (left bottom). The red arrows indicate the cells with EBERS staining in the xenografts. (D) Immunoblotting of tumor lysates for CD21. (E) Heat map of viral gene
expression. polyA + RNA was extracted from cell lines and xenograft tumors as indicated, and viral gene expression was measured by Q-PCR, normalized to 5 reference genes and
displayied relative to the average level of 3 EBV negative samples (GFP-Tumor1, GFP-MCF-10A-R, GFP-HMEC-R). NTC, POS1 and POS10 were positive controls. Scale bars represent
100 μm.
155
H. Hu et al. / EBioMedicine 9 (2016) 148–160
 signature. The correlation of the EBVness transcriptional signature with
the presence of EBV-DNA in specific patients tumors as well as the cor-
relation of EBVness with the APOBEC signature, are consistent with EBV
infection of MECs being part of a multistep process of breast carcinogen-
esis in humans.
4. Discussion
4.1. EBV Infection of MECs provides a potential mechanism for oncogenesis
Our experimental data support a role for EBV in the early steps of
malignant transformation. CD21 expression in epithelial cells had until
now mostly been studied in cancer cell lines, of which only a small frac-
tion, none of breast origin, was positive (Imai et al., 1998; Fingeroth
et al., 1999; Birkenbach et al., 1992). Consistent with prior reports we
found that breast cancer cells did not express CD21 (Speck and
Longnecker, 2000). In contrast, we found that a subset of primary and
immortalized MECs, expressed and exclusively utilized CD21 for EBV
entry. The observations that CD21 was absent on all of the tumor cell
lines, none of which became infected, and that analysis of the TCGA
breast cancer RNAseq data revealed no active transcription of EBV
(Khoury et al., 2013b; Tang et al., 2013), suggest that the EBV DNA
that we detected in a subset of human breast cancers, is an inactive rem-
nant of a previously active EBV infection that might have occurred in
mammary epithelial cells years or even decades prior to cancer
formation.
4.2. EBV induces a switch from virus-induced inflammation to transforma-
tion through activation of MET signaling
Infection of mammalian cells with DNA viruses, including EBV, leads
to systematic perturbations of the host cell signaling networks initiated
by the interaction of viral proteins with specific host proteins
(Rozenblatt-Rosen et al., 2012). EBV infection of nasopharyngeal cells
(NPCs) classically displays a latency II pattern that is characterized by
restricted expression of a subset of virus genes, such as EBNA1, LMP1,
LMP2A and LMP2B(Raab-Traub, 2002). In NPC, LMP1 has been shown
to contribute to the development of genomic instability (Liu et al.,
2004; Liu et al., 2005). The LMPs constitutively activate cell membrane
receptors that generate signaling cascades, which lead to the activation
of NF-κB (Gewurz et al., 2011; Gewurz et al., 2012). Notably, activation
of NF-κB is essential for cell proliferation downstream from hepatocyte
growth factor-stimulated c-MET (Muller et al., 2002), and both NF-kB
and STAT3 activation have been shown to be required for a program-
matic switch that occurs with the transition from inflammation to
transformation (Iliopoulos et al., 2009). Our data suggested that LMP1
also induces this switch in infected MECs (Fig. 5E, F) and does so via ac-
tivation of c-MET (Fig. 5G–J). Further evidence for this switch from a
virus-induced inflammatory program to transformation are our
Fig. 5. Viral LMP1 expression induces expansion of the progenitor cell population and METphosphorylation. (A) Receptor tyrosine kinase signaling in EBV-infected and control MECs.
Lysates from cells as indicated were analyzed using a RTK-array. A heat map was generated from the log2-transformed fluorescence intensities of phospho-proteins. (B)
Immunoblotting of MET and STAT3 phosphorylation in cell lines. (C, D) Immunoblotting of MET(C) or STAT3 (D) phosphorylation in EBV- and GFP-derived tumors. (E) Extinction of
LMP1 using siRNA decreases MET but not STAT3 phosphorylation. (F) Extinction of LMP1 using siRNA decreases mammosphere formation of EBV-infected MECs. (G) Inhibition of
METphosphorylation with Cabozatinib (XL 184). (H, I) Treatment with Cabozatinib decreases mammosphere formation in EBV-infected, but not in control HMECs (H) or MCF10A (G).
(J) Decrease of the CD24low/CD44high population in response to met-inhibitor Cabozatinib (XL 184). Bar graphs display results of experimental triplicates ± SD. Scale bars represent
100 μm. * indicates p ≤ 0.05. See also Fig. S3.
156
H. Hu et al. / EBioMedicine 9 (2016) 148–160
 observations that EBV infection induced EMT (Fig. 3A) and that the ex-
pansion of the progenitor cell population was dependent on activation
of c-MET (Fig. 5H–J). MET activation has been observed in a fraction of
breast cancers (reviewed in (Gastaldi et al., 2010)) and may dictate re-
sponse to the met-inhibitor Cabozantinib (Yakes et al., 2011). Going for-
ward it will be important to determine whether this same subset of
breast tumors is EBV-related, and whether it is responsive to
Cabozantinib.
4.3. EBVness correlates with adverse clinicopathological features, presence
of EBV-DNA and an APOBEC mutational signature
We developed a signature for the transcriptional changes induced by
EBV infection that we termed EBVness. This signature was associated
with clinicopathological features of high grade tumors that tend to have
a higher degree of genomic instability. While there was a positive correla-
tion of EBVness with the finding of EBV DNA by ISH, only 33% of EBVness
positive tumors were positive for EBV DNA, and in those cases there was
marked tumoral heterogeneity with some areas of the tumor staining
positive while others were negative (Fig. 7). Overall, these findings sug-
gest that the presence of EBV is no longer required for tumor growth,
most consistent with a “hit and-run” mechanism which would also ex-
plain why mining of the TCGA RNAseq data did not show active transcrip-
tion of EBV (Tang et al., 2013; Khoury et al., 2013a).
The APOBEC family functions as an arm of the innate immune sys-
tem through mutation followed by elimination of pathogen nucleic
acids. The APOBEC3 cytidine deaminases can edit single stranded viral
genomes such as EBV (Suspene et al., 2011) More recently, the APOBEC
family of cytidine deaminases have also been implicated in causing
kataegis, clusters of hypermutation with C -N T transitions that poten-
tially contribute to breast cancer (Taylor et al., 2013; Nik-Zainal et al.,
2014; Alexandrov et al., 2013). The correlative data presented here are
consistent with a ‘hit-and-run’ model of carcinogenesis (Mcdougall,
2001) where the viral infection increases the odds of transformation
of MECs into cancer cells by eliciting an APOBEC response that leads to
a hypermutated phenotype.
4.4. Potential public health implications
Recent studies from Africa and Asia, where breast cancer occurs at a
younger age, is typically more aggressive and of a basal type, suggested
EBV might be associated with a particular subset of breast cancers.
Fig. 6. An EBVness-signature for breast cancer correlates with poor clinical out come. (A) Cluster analysis of RNA expression profiles from 16 samples, including 4 EBV-infected MEC lines, 4
GFP-control cell lines, 4 EBV-MEC-derived breast cancers and 4 GFP-control tumors. EBV-tumor 4 was an outlier and is clustered singly, and was therefore not included in the following
analysis. (B) Genes that were significantly different (P ≤ 0.001) between EBV-infected and GFP-control MECs (blue circle) and between EBV-infected BC and GFP-control BC (yellow circle)
were determined separately. Differentially regulated genes were identified (39 up-regulated, and 8 down-regulated) as candidates for “EBVness” signature training. (C) A heatmap was
generated displaying the 47 genes significantly and differentially expressed in EBV-infected samples both in vitro and in vivo. For further details see Table S1. (D–G) The “EBVness”
signature is associated with decreased disease-free and overall survival. The identified gene signature was reduced from 47 to 37 to allow for analysis of archival datasets (HG-U133A
chip) published in GEO. The data represent a pooled analysis of four data sets including GSE1456, GSE2990 GSE4922 and GSE2034 (HG-U133A platform). For further details and
separate analysis see Fig. S4. (F) Clinicopathologic characteristics of breast cancers that carry the “EBVness” feature, again based on a pooled analysis of four data sets including
GSE1456, GSE2990 GSE4922 and GSE2034 (HG-U133A platform). Also see Table S5.
157
H. Hu et al. / EBioMedicine 9 (2016) 148–160
 Epidemiologic data in support these observations include evidence of
strong regional differences regarding association of EBV with breast
cancer with higher rates being reported from Asia (Huo et al., 2012;
Joshi et al., 2009) and North Africa (Hachana et al., 2011a; Fina et al.,
2001) where EBV NPC is also endemic — which raises the specter of ge-
netic predisposition. In addition to geography and genetics, the age at
which primary EBV infection occurs may be important. Yasui found
that “delayed” EBV-infection with mononucleosis in adolescence or
early adulthood was an independent risk factor for the development
of breast cancer (Yasui et al., 2001); this finding was not confirmed by
an analysis of the Nurses Health Study (Massa et al., 2012), although
that analysis was hampered by a low number of mononucleosis cases
that could be followed prospectively and a the study population that
is heavily skewed towards women of European descent.
It has been well documented that the incidence of breast cancer in-
creases as societies develop. While this trend has long been recognized
in Western Europe and North America, it is now also being observed in
Asia, Africa and South America. A range of factors such as changes in
diet, reproductive behavior, increased screening and longevity have all
been linked to this trend. As EBV is frequently found in breast secretions
including breast milk (Glenn et al., 2012a; Glenn et al., 2012b), MECs are
naturally exposed to infectious virus, which could potentially constitute
a risk factor. The tools now available, such as high sensitivity FISH and
high-throughput DNA and RNA sequencing will allow, detection of the
virus, even if it is an incomplete and inactive remnant of a much earlier
infection.
The data presented here raise the possibility that delayed infection
with EBV in late childhood or adolescence, when breast development
in girls occurs, could lead to latent infection of MECs, increase mutation-
al load and cooperate with other genetic or environmental factors to in-
crease later breast cancer risk. If EBV infection indeed renders MECs
vulnerable to malignant transformation into breast cancer cells, then a
childhood immunization against EBV might have a potentially large
public health impact.
Funding
This work was supported by funding from the AVON Foundation to
GW and JF and through NIH grants R01AI063571 (JDF), CA019014,
and DE018304 (DPD) and the University Cancer Research Fund (DPD).
Competing interests
The authors declare no financial conflicts.
Author contributions
Conceptualization: GMW, HH, and JDF; Methodology: GMW, HH,
MLL, CD, SN, SY, PAK, EG, RHB, CS and DPD; Validation: HH, GP, XY
and GMW; Formal analysis: HH, CD, PAK, SN, DPD,and GMW; Investiga-
tion ￼HH, MLL, CD,SY, AH, RHB and GMW; Resources: EG, CS, CD, DPD,
JDF, and GMW; Data curation: HH, CD, SN, CS, and DPD; Writing: HH,
Fig. 7. EBVness correlates with the presence of EBV DNA in breast cancer. (A–E) Fluorescent in situ hybridization of EBV DNA detected by probes against LMP1 or BXLF2 in breast cancer
tissues or Burkitt's lymphoma. After in situ hybridization, the entire slide was scanned at high resolution suitable for virtual microscopy (A) Low power view of EBV DNA in situ
hybridization of the entire tumor tissue section. (B) Anti-cytokeratin 5/6 stain of the same tissue section. (C) Medium power detail view (red box in A) and corresponding anti-
cytokeratin 5/6 stain (D). (E) High power view of the green box in C. (F) Correlation of EBV DNA in situ hybridization with EBVness in 69 cases of breast cancer tissues. (G) EBV DNA
in situ hybridization in Burkitt's lymphoma as a positive control. (H) High power view of the green image in G.
158
H. Hu et al. / EBioMedicine 9 (2016) 148–160
 JDF, and GMW; Visualization HH and GMW; Supervision EG, CS, DPD,
JDF, and GMW; Project administration: HH, JDF, and GMW; Funding ac-
quisition JDF, EG, and GMW.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Dr. Tom Roberts, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
and Dr. Lowell Schnipper, BIDMC, for their critical reading of the
manuscript.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at http://dx.
doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2016.05.025.
References
Alexandrov, L.B., Nik-Zainal, S., Wedge, D.C., Aparicio, S.A., Behjati, S., Biankin, A.V., Bignell,
G.R., Bolli, N., Borg, A., Borresen-Dale, A.L., Boyault, S., Burkhardt, B., Butler, A.P.,
Caldas, C., Davies, H.R., Desmedt, C., Eils, R., Eyfjord, J.E., Foekens, J.A., Greaves, M.,
Hosoda, F., Hutter, B., Ilicic, T., Imbeaud, S., Imielinski, M., Jager, N., Jones, D.T., Jones,
D., Knappskog, S., Kool, M., Lakhani, S.R., Lopez-Otin, C., Martin, S., Munshi, N.C.,
Nakamura, H., Northcott, P.A., Pajic, M., Papaemmanuil, E., Paradiso, A., Pearson, J.V.,
Puente, X.S., Raine, K., Ramakrishna, M., Richardson, A.L., Richter, J., Rosenstiel, P.,
Schlesner, M., Schumacher, T.N., Span, P.N., Teague, J.W., Totoki, Y., Tutt, A.N.,
Valdes-Mas, R., Van Buuren, M.M., Van ‘T Veer, L., Vincent-Salomon, A., Waddell, N.,
Yates, L.R., Australian Pancreatic Cancer Genome, I., Consortium, I.B.C., Consortium,
I.M.-S., Pedbrain, I., Zucman-Rossi, J., Futreal, P.A., Mcdermott, U., Lichter, P.,
Meyerson, M., Grimmond, S.M., Siebert, R., Campo, E., Shibata, T., Pfister, S.M.,
Campbell, P.J., Stratton, M.R., 2013. Signatures of mutational processes in human can-
cer. Nature 500, 415–421.
Alexandrov, L.B., Jones, P.H., Wedge, D.C., Sale, J.E., Campbell, P.J., Nik-Zainal, S., Stratton,
M.R., 2015. Clock-like mutational processes in human somatic cells. Nat. Genet. 47,
1402–1407.
Birkenbach, M., Tong, X., Bradbury, L.E., Tedder, T.F., Kieff, E., 1992. Characterization of an
Epstein–Barr virus receptor on human epithelial cells. J. Exp. Med. 176, 1405–1414.
Bonnet, M., Guinebretiere, J.M., Kremmer, E., Grunewald, V., Benhamou, E., Contesso, G.,
Joab, I., 1999a. Detection of Epstein–Barr virus in invasive breast cancers. J. Natl. Can-
cer Inst. 91, 1376–1381.
Brooks, L.A., Lear, A.L., Young, L.S., Rickinson, A.B., 1993. Transcripts from the Epstein–Barr
virus BamHI A fragment are detectable in all three forms of virus latency. J. Virol. 67,
3182–3190.
Burga, L.N., Tung, N.M., Troyan, S.L., Bostina, M., Konstantinopoulos, P.A., Fountzilas, H.,
Spentzos, D., Miron, A., Yassin, Y.A., Lee, B.T., Wulf, G.M., 2009. Altered proliferation
and differentiation properties of primary mammary epithelial cells from BRCA1 mu-
tation carriers. Cancer Res. 69, 1273–1278.
Burga, L.N., Hu, H., Juvekar, A., Tung, N.M., Troyan, S.L., Hofstatter, E.W., Wulf, G.M., 2011.
Loss of BRCA1 leads to an increase in epidermal growth factor receptor expression in
mammary epithelial cells, and epidermal growth factor receptor inhibition prevents
estrogen receptor-negative cancers in BRCA1-mutant mice. Breast Cancer Res. 13,
R30.
Cohen, J.I., 2000. Epstein–Barr virus infection. N. Engl. J. Med. 343, 481–492.
Cohen, J.I., Fauci, A.S., Varmus, H., Nabel, G.J., 2011. Epstein–Barr virus: an important vac-
cine target for cancer prevention. Sci. Transl. Med. 3 (107 fs7).
Debnath, J., Muthuswamy, S.K., Brugge, J.S., 2003. Morphogenesis and oncogenesis of
MCF-10A mammary epithelial acini grown in three-dimensional basement mem-
brane cultures. Methods 30, 256–268.
Dedeurwaerder, S., Desmedt, C., Calonne, E., Singhal, S.K., Haibe-Kains, B., Defrance, M.,
Michiels, S., Volkmar, M., Deplus, R., Luciani, J., Lallemand, F., Larsimont, D.,
Toussaint, J., Haussy, S., Rothe, F., Rouas, G., Metzger, O., Majjaj, S., Saini, K.,
Putmans, P., Hames, G., Van Baren, N., Coulie, P.G., Piccart, M., Sotiriou, C., Fuks, F.,
2011. DNA methylation profiling reveals a predominant immune component in
breast cancers. EMBO Mol. Med. 3, 726–741.
Dontu, G., Abdallah, W.M., Foley, J.M., Jackson, K.W., Clarke, M.F., Kawamura, M.J., Wicha,
M.S., 2003. In vitro propagation and transcriptional profiling of human mammary
stem/progenitor cells. Genes Dev. 17, 1253–1270.
Elenbaas, B., Spirio, L., Koerner, F., Fleming, M.D., Zimonjic, D.B., Donaher, J.L., Popescu,
N.C., Hahn, W.C., Weinberg, R.A., 2001. Human breast cancer cells generated by onco-
genic transformation of primary mammary epithelial cells. Genes Dev. 15, 50–65.
Epstein, M.A., Barr, Y.M., 1964. Cultivation in vitro of human lymphoblasts from Burkitt's
malignant lymphoma. Lancet 1, 252–253.
Epstein, M.A., Achong, B.G., Barr, Y.M., 1964. Virus particles in cultured lymphoblasts from
Burkitt's lymphoma. Lancet 1, 702–703.
Evans, A.S., 1971. The spectrum of infections with Epstein–Barr virus: a hypothesis.
J. Infect. Dis. 124, 330–337.
Fina, F., Romain, S., Ouafik, L., Palmari, J., Ben Ayed, F., Benharkat, S., Bonnier, P., Spyratos,
F., Foekens, J.A., Rose, C., Buisson, M., Gerard, H., Reymond, M.O., Seigneurin, J.M.,
Martin, P.M., 2001. Frequency and genome load of Epstein–Barr virus in 509 breast
cancers from different geographical areas. Br. J. Cancer 84, 783–790.
Fingeroth, J.D., 1990. Comparative structure and evolution of murine CR2. The homolog of
the human C3d/EBV receptor (CD21). J. Immunol. 144, 3458–3467.
Fingeroth, J.D., Weis, J.J., Tedder, T.F., Strominger, J.L., Biro, P.A., Fearon, D.T., 1984. Ep-
stein–Barr virus receptor of human B lymphocytes is the C3d receptor CR2. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 81, 4510–4514.
Fingeroth, J.D., Clabby, M.L., Strominger, J.D., 1988. Characterization of a T-lymphocyte Ep-
stein–Barr virus/C3d receptor (CD21). J. Virol. 62, 1442–1447.
Fingeroth, J.D., Diamond, M.E., Sage, D.R., Hayman, J., Yates, J.L., 1999. CD21-Dependent in-
fection of an epithelial cell line, 293, by Epstein–Barr virus. J. Virol. 73, 2115–2125.
Gastaldi, S., Comoglio, P.M., Trusolino, L., 2010. The Met oncogene and basal-like breast
cancer: another culprit to watch out for? Breast Cancer Res. 12, 208.
Gewurz, B.E., Mar, J.C., Padi, M., Zhao, B., Shinners, N.P., Takasaki, K., Bedoya, E., Zou, J.Y.,
Cahir-Mcfarland, E., Quackenbush, J., Kieff, E., 2011. Canonical NF-kappaB activation
is essential for Epstein–Barr virus latent membrane protein 1 TES2/CTAR2 gene reg-
ulation. J. Virol. 85, 6764–6773.
Gewurz, B.E., Towfic, F., Mar, J.C., Shinners, N.P., Takasaki, K., Zhao, B., Cahir-Mcfarland,
E.D., Quackenbush, J., Xavier, R.J., Kieff, E., 2012. Genome-wide siRNA screen for me-
diators of NF-kappaB activation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 109, 2467–2472.
Glaser, S.L., Hsu, J.L., Gulley, M.L., 2004. Epstein–Barr virus and breast cancer: state of
the evidence for viral carcinogenesis. Cancer Epidemiol. Biomark. Prev. 13,
688–697.
Glenn, W.K., Heng, B., Delprado, W., Iacopetta, B., Whitaker, N.J., Lawson, J.S., 2012a. Ep-
stein–Barr virus, human papillomavirus and mouse mammary tumour virus as mul-
tiple viruses in breast cancer. PLoS One 7, e48788.
Glenn, W.K., Whitaker, N.J., Lawson, J.S., 2012b. High risk human papillomavirus and Ep-
stein Barr virus in human breast milk. BMC Res. Notes 5, 477.
Guasparri, I., Bubman, D., Cesarman, E., 2008. EBV LMP2A affects LMP1-mediated NF-
kappaB signaling and survival of lymphoma cells by regulating TRAF2 expression.
Blood 111, 3813–3820.
Gudjonsson, T., Ronnov-Jessen, L., Villadsen, R., Bissell, M.J., Petersen, O.W., 2003. To cre-
ate the correct microenvironment: three-dimensional heterotypic collagen assays for
human breast epithelial morphogenesis and neoplasia. Methods 30, 247–255.
Gulley, M.L., 2001. Molecular diagnosis of Epstein–Barr virus-related diseases. J. Mol.
Diagn. 3, 1–10.
Hachana, M., Amara, K., Ziadi, S., Romdhane, E., Gacem, R.B., Trimeche, M., 2011a. Investi-
gation of Epstein–Barr virus in breast carcinomas in Tunisia. Pathol. Res. Pract. 207,
695–700.
Hachana, M., Amara, K., Ziadi, S., Romdhane, E., Gacem, R.B., Trimeche, M., 2011b. Inves-
tigation of Epstein–Barr virus in breast carcinomas in Tunisia. Pathol. Res. Pract.
Hahn, W.C., Counter, C.M., Lundberg, A.S., Beijersbergen, R.L., Brooks, M.W., Weinberg,
R.A., 1999. Creation of human tumour cells with defined genetic elements. Nature
400, 464–468.
He, J.R., Chen, L.J., Su, Y., Cen, Y.L., Tang, L.Y., Yu, D.D., Chen, W.Q., Wang, S.M., Song, E.W.,
Ren, Z.F., 2012. Joint effects of Epstein–Barr virus and polymorphisms in interleukin-
10 and interferon-gamma on breast cancer risk. J. Infect. dis. 205, 64–71.
Horikawa, T., Yang, J., Kondo, S., Yoshizaki, T., Joab, I., Furukawa, M., Pagano, J.S., 2007.
Twist and epithelial-mesenchymal transition are induced by the EBV oncoprotein la-
tent membrane protein 1 and are associated with metastatic nasopharyngeal carci-
noma. Cancer Res. 67, 1970–1978.
Huang, J., Chen, H., Hutt-Fletcher, L., Ambinder, R.F., Hayward, S.D., 2003. Lytic viral repli-
cation as a contributor to the detection of Epstein–Barr virus in breast cancer. J. Virol.
77, 13267–13274.
Huo, Q., Zhang, N., Yang, Q., 2012. Epstein–Barr virus infection and sporadic breast cancer
risk: a meta-analysis. PLoS One 7, e31656.
Iliopoulos, D., Hirsch, H.A., Struhl, K., 2009. An epigenetic switch involving NF-kappaB,
Lin28, Let-7 MicroRNA, and IL6 links inflammation to cell transformation. Cell 139,
693–706.
Imai, S., Nishikawa, J., Takada, K., 1998. Cell-to-cell contact as an efficient mode of Ep-
stein–Barr virus infection of diverse human epithelial cells. J. Virol. 72, 4371–4378.
Irizarry, R.A., Hobbs, B., Collin, F., Beazer-Barclay, Y.D., Antonellis, K.J., Scherf, U., Speed,
T.P., 2003. Exploration, normalization, and summaries of high density oligonucleotide
array probe level data. Biostatistics 4, 249–264.
Joshi, D., Quadri, M., Gangane, N., Joshi, R., 2009. Association of Epstein Barr virus infection
(EBV) with breast cancer in rural Indian women. PLoS One 4, e8180.
Khanna, R., Burrows, S.R., Moss, D.J., 1995. Immune regulation in Epstein–Barr virus-asso-
ciated diseases. Microbiol. Rev. 59, 387–405.
Khoury, J.D., Tannir, N.M., Williams, M.D., Chen, Y., Yao, H., Zhang, J., Thompson, E.J.,
Meric-Bernstam, F., Medeiros, L.J., Weinstein, J.N., Su, X., 2013a. Landscape of DNA
virus associations across human malignant cancers: analysis of 3,775 cases using
RNA-Seq. J. Virol. 87, 8916–8926.
Kondo, S., Wakisaka, N., Muramatsu, M., Zen, Y., Endo, K., Murono, S., Sugimoto, H.,
Yamaoka, S., Pagano, J.S., Yoshizaki, T., 2011. Epstein–Barr virus latent membrane
protein 1 induces cancer stem/progenitor-like cells in nasopharyngeal epithelial cell
lines. J. Virol. 85, 11255–11264.
Kong, Q.L., Hu, L.J., Cao, J.Y., Huang, Y.J., Xu, L.H., Liang, Y., Xiong, D., Guan, S., Guo, B.H.,
Mai, H.Q., Chen, Q.Y., Zhang, X., Li, M.Z., Shao, J.Y., Qian, C.N., Xia, Y.F., Song, L.B.,
Zeng, Y.X., Zeng, M.S., 2010. Epstein–Barr virus-encoded LMP2A induces an epitheli-
al–mesenchymal transition and increases the number of side population stem-like
cancer cells in nasopharyngeal carcinoma. PLoS Pathog. 6, e1000940.
Kuhn-Hallek, I., Sage, D.R., Stein, L., Groelle, H., Fingeroth, J.D., 1995. Expression of recom-
bination activating genes (RAG-1 and RAG-2) in Epstein–Barr virus-bearing B cells.
Blood 85, 1289–1299.
Kung, C.P., Raab-Traub, N., 2008. Epstein–Barr virus latent membrane protein 1 induces
expression of the epidermal growth factor receptor through effects on Bcl-3 and
STAT3. J. Virol. 82, 5486–5493.
Kung, C.P., Raab-Traub, N., 2010. Epstein–Barr virus latent membrane protein 1 modulates
distinctive NF-kappaB pathways through C-terminus-activating region 1 to regulate
epidermal growth factor receptor expression. J. Virol. 84, 6605–6614.
159
H. Hu et al. / EBioMedicine 9 (2016) 148–160
 Kurokawa, M., Ghosh, S.K., Ramos, J.C., Mian, A.M., Toomey, N.L., Cabral, L., Whitby, D.,
Barber, G.N., Dittmer, D.P., Harrington, W.J., JR, 2005. Azidothymidine inhibits NF-
kappaB and induces Epstein–Barr virus gene expression in Burkitt lymphoma.
Blood 106, 235–240.
Kutok, J.L., Wang, F., 2006. Spectrum of Epstein–Barr virus-associated diseases. Annu. Rev.
Pathol. 1, 375–404.
Labrecque, L.G., Barnes, D.M., Fentiman, I.S., Griffin, B.E., 1995. Epstein–Barr virus in epi-
thelial cell tumors: a breast cancer study. Cancer Res. 55, 39–45.
Liu, M.T., Chen, Y.R., Chen, S.C., Hu, C.Y., Lin, C.S., Chang, Y.T., Wang, W.B., Chen, J.Y., 2004.
Epstein–Barr virus latent membrane protein 1 induces micronucleus formation, re-
presses DNA repair and enhances sensitivity to DNA-damaging agents in human ep-
ithelial cells. Oncogene 23, 2531–2539.
Liu, M.T., Chang, Y.T., Chen, S.C., Chuang, Y.C., Chen, Y.R., Lin, C.S., Chen, J.Y., 2005. Epstein–
Barr virus latent membrane protein 1 represses p53-mediated DNA repair and tran-
scriptional activity. Oncogene 24, 2635–2646.
Mani, S.A., Guo, W., Liao, M.J., Eaton, E.N., Ayyanan, A., Zhou, A.Y., Brooks, M., Reinhard, F.,
Zhang, C.C., Shipitsin, M., Campbell, L.L., Polyak, K., Brisken, C., Yang, J., Weinberg, R.A.,
2008. The epithelial-mesenchymal transition generates cells with properties of stem
cells. Cell 133, 704–715.
Marrao, G., Habib, M., Paiva, A., Bicout, D., Fallecker, C., Franco, S., Fafi-Kremer, S., Simoes
Da Silva, T., Morand, P., Freire de Oliveira, C., Drouet, E., 2014. Epstein–Barr virus in-
fection and clinical outcome in breast cancer patients correlate with immune cell
TNF-alpha/IFN-gamma response. BMC Cancer 14, 665.
Massa, J., Hamdan, A., Simon, K.C., Bertrand, K., Wulf, G., Tamimi, R.M., Ascherio, A., 2012.
Infectious mononucleosis and risk of breast cancer in a prospective study of women.
Cancer Causes Control 23, 1893–1898.
Mazouni, C., Fina, F., Romain, S., Ouafik, L., Bonnier, P., Brandone, J.M., Martin, P.M., 2011.
Epstein–Barr virus as a marker of biological aggressiveness in breast cancer. Br.
J. Cancer 104, 332–337.
Mcdougall, J.K., 2001. “Hit and run” transformation leading to carcinogenesis. Dev. Biol.
(Basel) 106, 77–82 (discussion 82–3, 143–60).
Miller, F.R., Soule, H.D., Tait, L., Pauley, R.J., Wolman, S.R., Dawson, P.J., Heppner, G.H.,
1993. Xenograft model of progressive human proliferative breast disease. J. Natl. Can-
cer Inst. 85, 1725–1732.
Miller, W.E., Mosialos, G., Kieff, E., Raab-Traub, N., 1997. Epstein–Barr virus LMP1 induc-
tion of the epidermal growth factor receptor is mediated through a TRAF signaling
pathway distinct from NF-kappaB activation. J. Virol. 71, 586–594.
Muller, M., Morotti, A., Ponzetto, C., 2002. Activation of NF-kappaB is essential for hepato-
cyte growth factor-mediated proliferation and tubulogenesis. Mol. Cell. Biol. 22,
1060–1072.
Niedobitek, G., Meru, N., Delecluse, H.J., 2001. Epstein–Barr virus infection and human
malignancies. Int. J. Exp. Pathol. 82, 149–170.
Nik-Zainal, S., Wedge, D.C., Alexandrov, L.B., Petljak, M., Butler, A.P., Bolli, N., Davies, H.R.,
Knappskog, S., Martin, S., Papaemmanuil, E., Ramakrishna, M., Shlien, A., Simonic, I.,
Xue, Y., Tyler-Smith, C., Campbell, P.J., Stratton, M.R., 2014. Association of a germline
copy number polymorphism of APOBEC3A and APOBEC3B with burden of putative
APOBEC-dependent mutations in breast cancer. Nat. Genet. 46, 487–491.
Papin, J., Vahrson, W., Hines-Boykin, R., Dittmer, D.P., 2005. Real-time quantitative PCR
analysis of viral transcription. Methods Mol. Biol. 292, 449–480.
Pavlidis, P., Qin, J., Arango, V., Mann, J.J., Sibille, E., 2004. Using the gene ontology for mi-
croarray data mining: a comparison of methods and application to age effects in
human prefrontal cortex. Neurochem. Res. 29, 1213–1222.
Peng, J., Wang, T., Zhu, H., Guo, J., Li, K., Yao, Q., Lv, Y., Zhang, J., He, C., Chen, J., Wang, L., Jin,
Q., 2014. Multiplex PCR/mass spectrometry screening of biological carcinogenic
agents in human mammary tumors. J. Clin. Virol. 61, 255–259.
Raab-Traub, N., 2002. Epstein–Barr virus in the pathogenesis of NPC. Semin. Cancer Biol.
12, 431–441.
Richardson, A.K., Currie, M.J., Robinson, B.A., Morrin, H., Phung, Y., Pearson, J.F., Anderson,
T.P., Potter, J.D., Walker, L.C., 2015. Cytomegalovirus and Epstein–Barr virus in breast
cancer. PLoS One 10, e0118989.
Rozenblatt-Rosen, O., Deo, R.C., Padi, M., Adelmant, G., Calderwood, M.A., Rolland, T.,
Grace, M., Dricot, A., Askenazi, M., Tavares, M., Pevzner, S.J., Abderazzaq, F.,
Byrdsong, D., Carvunis, A.R., Chen, A.A., Cheng, J., Correll, M., Duarte, M., Fan, C.,
Feltkamp, M.C., Ficarro, S.B., Franchi, R., Garg, B.K., Gulbahce, N., Hao, T., Holthaus,
A.M., James, R., Korkhin, A., Litovchick, L., Mar, J.C., Pak, T.R., Rabello, S., Rubio, R.,
Shen, Y., Singh, S., Spangle, J.M., Tasan, M., Wanamaker, S., Webber, J.T., Roecklein-
Canfield, J., Johannsen, E., Barabasi, A.L., Beroukhim, R., Kieff, E., Cusick, M.E., Hill,
D.E., Munger, K., Marto, J.A., Quackenbush, J., Roth, F.P., Decaprio, J.A., Vidal, M.,
2012. Interpreting cancer genomes using systematic host network perturbations by
tumour virus proteins. Nature 487, 491–495.
Saeed, A.I., Bhagabati, N.K., Braisted, J.C., Liang, W., Sharov, V., Howe, E.A., Li, J.,
Thiagarajan, M., White, J.A., Quackenbush, J., 2006. TM4 microarray software suite.
Methods Enzymol. 411, 134–193.
Speck, P., Longnecker, R., 2000. Infection of breast epithelial cells with Epstein–Barr virus
via cell-to-cell contact. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 92, 1849–1851.
Stewart, S.A., Dykxhoorn, D.M., Palliser, D., Mizuno, H., Yu, E.Y., An, D.S., Sabatini, D.M.,
Chen, I.S., Hahn, W.C., Sharp, P.A., Weinberg, R.A., Novina, C.D., 2003. Lentivirus-deliv-
ered stable gene silencing by RNAi in primary cells. RNA 9, 493–501.
Suspene, R., Aynaud, M.M., Koch, S., Pasdeloup, D., Labetoulle, M., Gaertner, B., Vartanian,
J.P., Meyerhans, A., Wain-Hobson, S., 2011. Genetic editing of herpes simplex virus 1
and Epstein–Barr herpesvirus genomes by human APOBEC3 cytidine deaminases in
culture and in vivo. J. Virol. 85, 7594–7602.
Tang, K.W., Alaei-Mahabadi, B., Samuelsson, T., Lindh, M., Larsson, E., 2013. The landscape
of viral expression and host gene fusion and adaptation in human cancer. Nat.
Commun. 4, 2513.
Taylor, B.J., Nik-Zainal, S., Wu, Y.L., Stebbings, L.A., Raine, K., Campbell, P.J., Rada, C.,
Stratton, M.R., Neuberger, M.S., 2013. DNA deaminases induce break-associated mu-
tation showers with implication of APOBEC3B and 3A in breast cancer kataegis. Elife
2, e00534.
Wang, F.Z., Roy, D., Gershburg, E., Whitehurst, C.B., Dittmer, D.P., Pagano, J.S., 2009.
Maribavir inhibits epstein–barr virus transcription in addition to viral DNA replica-
tion. J. Virol. 83, 12108–12117.
Yakes, F.M., Chen, J., Tan, J., Yamaguchi, K., Shi, Y., Yu, P., Qian, F., Chu, F., Bentzien, F.,
Cancilla, B., Orf, J., You, A., Laird, A.D., Engst, S., Lee, L., Lesch, J., Chou, Y.C., Joly, A.H.,
2011. Cabozantinib (XL184), a novel MET and VEGFR2 inhibitor, simultaneously sup-
presses metastasis, angiogenesis, and tumor growth. Mol. Cancer Ther. 10,
2298–2308.
Yang, J., Mani, S.A., Donaher, J.L., Ramaswamy, S., Itzykson, R.A., Come, C., Savagner, P.,
Gitelman, I., Richardson, A., Weinberg, R.A., 2004. Twist, a master regulator of mor-
phogenesis, plays an essential role in tumor metastasis. Cell 117, 927–939.
Yasui, Y., Potter, J.D., Stanford, J.L., Rossing, M.A., Winget, M.D., Bronner, M., Daling, J.,
2001. Breast cancer risk and “delayed” primary Epstein–Barr virus infection. Cancer
Epidemiol. Biomark. Prev. 10, 9–16.
Yen, C.Y., Lu, M.C., Tzeng, C.C., Huang, J.Y., Chang, H.W., Chen, R.S., Liu, S.Y., Liu, S.T., Shieh,
B., Li, C., 2009. Detection of EBV infection and gene expression in oral cancer from pa-
tients in Taiwan by microarray analysis. J. Bioenerg. Biomembr. 2009, 904589.
Yu, F., Yao, H., Zhu, P., Zhang, X., Pan, Q., Gong, C., Huang, Y., Hu, X., Su, F., Lieberman, J.,
Song, E., 2007. let-7 regulates self renewal and tumorigenicity of breast cancer cells.
Cell 131, 1109–1123.
Zhao, J.J., Gjoerup, O.V., Subramanian, R.R., Cheng, Y., Chen, W., Roberts, T.M., Hahn, W.C.,
2003. Human mammary epithelial cell transformation through the activation of
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. Cancer Cell 3, 483–495.
160
H. Hu et al. / EBioMedicine 9 (2016) 148–160
