 *For correspondence:
clois@caltech.edu
Competing interests: The
authors declare that no
competing interests exist.
Funding: See page 19
Received: 15 September 2017
Accepted: 02 December 2017
Published: 12 December 2017
Reviewing editor: Mani
Ramaswami, Trinity College
Dublin, Ireland
Copyright Huang et al. This
article is distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License, which
permits unrestricted use and
redistribution provided that the
original author and source are
credited.
Tracing neuronal circuits in transgenic
animals by transneuronal control of
transcription (TRACT)
Ting-hao Huang1, Peter Niesman1, Deepshika Arasu1, Donghyung Lee1,
Aubrie L De La Cruz1, Antuca Callejas1,2, Elizabeth J Hong1, Carlos Lois1*
1Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of Technology,
Pasadena, United States; 2Department of Cell Biology, School of Science, University
of Extremadura, Badajoz, Spain
Abstract Understanding the computations that take place in brain circuits requires identifying
how neurons in those circuits are connected to one another. We describe a technique called TRACT
(TRAnsneuronal Control of Transcription) based on ligand-induced intramembrane proteolysis to
reveal monosynaptic connections arising from genetically labeled neurons of interest. In this
strategy, neurons expressing an artificial ligand (‘donor’ neurons) bind to and activate a genetically-
engineered artificial receptor on their synaptic partners (‘receiver’ neurons). Upon ligand-receptor
binding at synapses the receptor is cleaved in its transmembrane domain and releases a protein
fragment that activates transcription in the synaptic partners. Using TRACT in Drosophila we have
confirmed the connectivity between olfactory receptor neurons and their postsynaptic targets, and
have discovered potential new connections between neurons in the circadian circuit. Our results
demonstrate that the TRACT method can be used to investigate the connectivity of neuronal
circuits in the brain.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027.001
Introduction
Comprehensively mapping the connectivity of diverse neural circuits across many brain regions and
many organisms is a major goal of modern neuroscience (Denk et al., 2012; Bargmann and Marder,
2013; Swanson and Lichtman, 2016). In addition, recent research indicates that aberrant neuronal
wiring may be the cause of several neurodevelopmental disorders (Pec
¸a and Feng, 2012;
Rubinov and Bullmore, 2013; Mevel and Fransson, 2016), further emphasizing the importance of
identifying the wiring diagrams of brain circuits. To address this issue, several new approaches have
been developed. Each of these methods has strengths and limitations, which are discussed in detail
in a recent review (Lee et al., 2017).
In a previous work, we demonstrated that a strategy based on ligand-induced intramembrane
proteolysis can be used to monitor cell-cell interactions in the nervous system of transgenic Drosoph-
ila (Huang et al., 2016). In this strategy, cells expressing an artificial ligand (‘donor’ cells) bind to
and activate an artificial receptor on their interacting partners (‘receiver’ cells) via interactions across
the intercellular space. We previously used this method to investigate the interactions between neu-
rons and glial cells in the Drosophila central nervous system (Huang et al., 2016). However, in its
original implementation, the system was not useful to trace neuronal circuits because it revealed all
forms of cell-cell contact, including non-synaptic contacts.
To allow this strategy to trace neuronal circuits it is necessary to ensure that the interaction of
ligand and receptor occurs exclusively across synapses. To prevent activation of the system between
neurons that had non-synaptic cell-cell contacts, we engineered the ligand so that it would be
Huang et al. eLife 2017;6:e32027. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027
1 of 23
TOOLS AND RESOURCES
 selectively located at the presynaptic cleft (Su
¨dhof, 2012; Van Vactor and Sigrist, 2017). To vali-
date that the optimized ligands revealed neurons specifically connected by synapses, we tested the
system on the Drosophila antennal lobe, an olfactory center with well-understood connectivity estab-
lished by light and electron microscopy, and electrophysiological methods (Grabe et al., 2016;
Stocker et al., 1990; Wilson, 2013; Rybak et al., 2016). We observed that adding domains from
the synaptic proteins synaptobrevin (nSyb) or syndecan (sdc) was sufficient to achieve reliable synap-
tic tracing in the antennal lobe. In addition, we used TRACT to investigate the connectivity of the
Drosophila circadian system, a compact brain circuit with a small number of neurons (Dubowy and
Sehgal, 2017; Nitabach and Taghert, 2008), and discovered new candidate postsynaptic targets
for the PDF neurons of the circadian system in the central brain, some of which that express the cir-
cadian-related gene, per. These results demonstrate that the TRACT method will be a useful addi-
tion to the arsenal of methods available to investigate the connectivity of brain circuits.
Results
In our previously published work, we described an artificial ligand-receptor system based on intra-
membrane proteolysis to investigate connections between cells (Huang et al., 2016). In short, upon
ligand-receptor interaction at sites of cell-cell contact the transmembrane domain of an engineered
receptor is cleaved by intramembrane proteolysis and releases a protein fragment that regulates
transcription in the interacting partners (Figure 1a, Gordon et al., 2015; Morsut et al., 2016;
Huang et al., 2016). In its original implementation, we used a ligand called CD19mch that contains
the extracellular and transmembrane domains (ECD and TMD) of the mouse lymphocyte antigen
CD19 (Fujimoto et al., 1998) fused to the red fluorescent protein mCherry in its intracellular domain
(ICD). The original artificial receptor is called SNTG4 and contains the following domains (in N-to-C
terminal order): (i) the ECD from a single chain antibody (ID3) that recognizes mouse CD19
(Kochenderfer et al., 2009), (ii) the Notch regulatory region (NRR) and the TMD from Drosophila
Notch (spanning from EGF repeat 36 until the ICD) (Kovall et al., 2017), and (iii) esn, a simplified
version of the yeast transcriptional activator Gal4 (Figure 1a) (Sprinzak et al., 2010). In this configu-
ration, expression of the ligand and receptor in neurons leads to the distribution of these two pro-
teins uniformly throughout the membrane, including cell body, dendrite branches, and axons. To
eLife digest One of the main obstacles to understanding how the brain works is that we know
relatively little about how its nerve cells or neurons are connected to one another. These
connections make up the brain’s wiring diagram. Current methods for revealing this wiring all have
limitations. The most popular method – serial electron microscopy – can reveal the connections in a
small region of the brain in great detail, but it cannot show connections between neurons that are
far apart.
Huang et al. have now created a genetic system for visualizing these connections. For neurons to
communicate, one neuron must produce a signal called a ligand. This ligand can then bind to and
activate its partner neuron. Huang et al. modified the DNA of neurons so that every time those cells
produced a specific ligand, they also produced a red fluorescent protein. Similar modifications
ensured that every time the ligand activated a partner neuron, the activated neuron produced a
green fluorescent protein. Viewing the red and green neurons under a microscope enabled Huang
et al. to see which cells were communicating with which others.
While these experiments took place in fruit flies, the same approach should also work in other
laboratory animals, including fish, mice and rats. Once we know the wiring diagram of the brain, the
next step is to investigate the role of the various connections. To understand how a computer
works, for example, we might change the connections between its circuit components and look at
how this affects the computer’s output. With this new method, we can change how neurons
communicate with one another in the brain, and then look at the effects on behavior. This should
provide insights into the workings of the human brain, and clues to what goes wrong in disorders
like schizophrenia and autism.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027.002
Huang et al. eLife 2017;6:e32027. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027
2 of 23
Tools and resources
Neuroscience
 detect the activation of the receptor upon interaction with its ligand in vivo in Drosophila, we
included a UAS-GFP reporter transgene, which expresses GFP in response to Gal4 activity
(Brand and Perrimon, 1993).
To test whether the expression of the ligand in donor neurons could reveal the subset of receiver
neurons that receive synaptic input from them, we focused on the antennal lobe, the second-order
olfactory processing area in the Drosophila brain that receives direct input from the primary olfactory
receptor neurons (ORNs) (Figure 2a, Wilson, 2013; Laissue and Vosshall, 2008). Synapses in the
 
Figure 1. TRACT: Using ligand-induced intramembrane proteolysis to reveal circuits of neurons connected by
synapses. (a) Ligand-induced intramembrane proteolysis to monitor synaptic contacts between neurons. Sequence
of events upon ligand-receptor interaction are depicted from left to right. The ligand domain, (CD19, white
domain with the arrowheads indicating the orientation of protein sequence from N- to C-terminal) is localized to
the presynaptic plasma membrane in the ‘donor’ neuron of interest (top) by fusing it to domains from two
different presynaptic proteins, Sdc (yellow rectangle) or nSyb (red rectangle). The receptor (grey and blue
rectangles, and grey oval) is targeted to synaptic sites by introducing the intracellular domain (blue rectangle) of
neuroligin (NLGN) between the transmembrane domain of Notch and the transcription factor Gal4 (gray oval).
When the ligand binds to the receptor on a synaptic partner neuron (bottom), it partially unfolds the notch
regulatory region (NRR) to allow for cleavage of the receptor in the S2 site by endogenous metalloproteases. S2
cleavage shortens the receptor, and induces a second cleavage (S3) by intramembrane proteolysis (mediated by
V-secretase) that liberates the transcription factor (gray oval) that is part of the intracellular domain of the receptor.
This transcription factor then translocates to the nucleus to activate transcription of reporter genes such as GFP.
(b) Using TRACT to detect synaptic connections between neurons. For anterograde tracing, the ligand is localized
on the presynaptic neurons of interest (‘donor’ neuron labeled in red). The receptor is expressed in all potential
synaptic partners (‘receiver’ neurons labeled in green and gray). GFP expression will be activated (green) only in
the receiver neurons that make synaptic contacts (indicated by stippled boxes) with the donor neurons (red). In
contrast, GFP expression should not be activated in neurons (gray) that are in close proximity to donor neurons
but do not make synapses (stippled oval).
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027.003
Huang et al. eLife 2017;6:e32027. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027
3 of 23
Tools and resources
Neuroscience
  
Figure 2. Connections between olfactory receptor neurons and antennal lobe neurons revealed by TRACT. (a) Olfactory receptor neurons (ORNs)
labeled in red, have their cell bodies located into two peripheral sensory organs, antennae (illustrated here) and maxillary palps, and have axons that
project into the antennal lobe (AL) in the brain. All axons from ORNs expressing the same olfactory receptor converge in two glomeruli (one in each
hemisphere) within the AL (red circles). There are two main types of neurons (green) in the antennal lobe, projection neurons (PNs) and local neurons
Figure 2 continued on next page
Huang et al. eLife 2017;6:e32027. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027
4 of 23
Tools and resources
Neuroscience
 antennal lobe are organized into discrete compartments, called glomeruli, and each glomerulus cor-
responds to a distinct ORN class (defined by the odorant receptor it expresses) (Berck et al., 2016).
All ORNs of a specific class project their axons to a common glomerulus (Vosshall et al., 1999;
Fishilevich and Vosshall, 2005; Couto et al., 2005). The principal second-order olfactory neuron is
called a projection neuron (PN). The vast majority of PNs are uniglomerular PNs (uniPNs)
(Figure 2b), and each of these uniPNs have dendrites that branch into single glomeruli where they
receive direct synaptic input from a single class of ORNs. Axonal output from uniPNs projects to two
major third-order olfactory areas, the mushroom body and the lateral horn, via the medial antennal
lobe tract (mALT, formerly iACT) (Ito et al., 2014), (Figure 2a). In addition, a smaller subset of PNs,
multiglomerular PNs (multiPNs) (Figure 2c) (Stocker et al., 1990; Parnas et al., 2014; Liang et al.,
2013), have dendritic arbors which pool input across multiple glomeruli in the antennal lobe, and
send their output to the lateral horn only via the mediolateral ALT (mlALT, formerly the mACT)
(Figure 2a) (Tanaka et al., 2012). Finally, a large set of local neurons (LNs) send and receive synaptic
input from both ORNs and PNs, densely interconnecting the glomeruli (Figure 2d) (Chou et al.,
2010; Hong and Wilson, 2015; Seki et al., 2010).
Expression of the original TRACT ligand and receptor (without any domains that would localize
them to synaptic sites) in neurons failed to reveal any synaptic connections in the antennal lobe. For
instance, when the CD19mch ligand is expressed in the majority of ORNs using the Orco-lexA driver
(Stocker et al., 1997) and the SNTG4 receptor is expressed from the elav enhancer (Yao and White,
1994), we predicted labeling of both PNs and LNs, the major postsynaptic targets in the antennal
lobe. However, in flies carrying Orco > CD19 mch, elav-SNTG4, UAS-GFP transgenes, no GFP induc-
tion was observed in the antennal lobe (data not shown), consistent with the findings from another
publication (He et al., 2017), suggesting that the system needed adjustments to detect synaptic
connections.
Figure 2 continued
(LNs). PNs have dendrites that branch in glomeruli and axons that project towards the mushroom body (MB) and/or the lateral horn (LH). (b, c) There
are two types of PNs, uniglomerular PNs (uniPNs) and multiglomerular PNs (multiPNs). (b) The dendrites of uniPNs branch in a single glomerulus, and
their axons project into the MB and LH via the medial antennal lobe tract (mALT). (c) The dendrites of multiPNS branch into multiple glomeruli, and
their axons project into the LH via the mediolateral ALT (mlALT). (d) LNs are axonless neurons and their dendrites branch into many (or most) of the
glomeruli. (e) Detection of synaptic contacts between olfactory receptor neurons and antennal lobe neurons in the adult Drosophila antennal lobe with
the nlgSNTG4 receptor driven by nSybE enhancer (top panels) and GH146 enhancer (bottom panels). Induction of GFP expression in neurons (arrows)
surrounding the antennal lobe when the ligand (nSyb::CD19) was driven by the orco driver in ORNs. Arrowheads indicate the axons of PNs in mALT and
mlALT. Left: nSyb::CD19+ axons from ORNs (red); middle: GFP+ neurons in the antennal lobe (green); right: merged images of nSyb::CD19 and GFP. In
the brains with the nlgSNTG4 receptor driven by the nSybE enhancer (top panels) GFP expression was induced in different neuronal types, including
uniPNs, LNs and and several multiPNs at the ventral part. In the brain with the nlgSNTG4 receptor driven by the PN-specific driver GH146 (bottom
panels), only PNs were GFP+. Most of these cells are uniPNs, but there was also one GFP+ multiPN in each antennal lobe (yellow arrow). Maximum
projection of z-stack confocal images. Scale bar = 50 mm. See Supplementary file 2 for additional information.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027.004
The following figure supplements are available for figure 2:
Figure supplement 1. TRACT reveals antennal lobe neurons that have cell-cell contacts with olfactory receptor neurons.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027.005
Figure supplement 2. Expression of the nlgSNTG4 receptor under the SybE enhancer.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027.006
Figure supplement 3. Expression of CD19 fused with different presynaptic proteins in ORNs.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027.007
Figure supplement 4. Comparison of localization of the CD19::Nrx, nSyb::CD19 and CD19::sdc ligands into presynaptic sites in the ORNs targeting
DA1.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027.008
Figure supplement 5. Identity of the postsynaptic targets of olfactory receptor neurons in the antennal lobe detected by TRACT.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027.009
Figure supplement 6. TRACT with non-synaptically localized ligand reveals neurons that are not exclusively connected by synapses.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027.010
Figure supplement 7. Control brains without the lexA driver to assess the levels of ligand-independent background.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027.011
Huang et al. eLife 2017;6:e32027. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027
5 of 23
Tools and resources
Neuroscience
 To generate a genetic system that could be used to reliably identify synaptically connected neu-
rons we tested a number of different modifications with the ligand, receptor, the drivers used to
direct their expression, and reporters (discussed in full detail in the supplementary methods). The
following modifications proved to be effective to achieve specific transneuronal labeling:
.
To achieve panneuronal expression of the SNTG4 receptor we used the enhancer from the
synaptobrevin gene (nSybE), and confirmed that this driver directs expression of the receptor
in the vast majority of neuronal types in the brain at detectable levels (Figure 2, Figure 2—fig-
ure supplement 1, Figure 2—figure supplement 2).
.
To allow for the immunodetection of the receptor, we added the V5 tag to the ICD of SNTG4
(Figure 2, Figure 2—figure supplement 1, Figure 2—figure supplement 2).
.
To allow for the immunodetection of the ligand we added the OLLAS tag to the ICD of
mCD19 (Figure 2, Figure 2—figure supplement 3).
.
To achieve selective localization of the ligand into presynaptic sites we added the ICDs of syn-
decan or synaptobrevin into CD19 (CD19sdc and nSybCD19, respectively), and confirmed that
these ICDs targeted mCD19 into presynaptic sites that co-localized with or were adjacent to
the presynaptic marker BRP ((Figure 2, Figure 2—figure supplement 4).
.
To achieve selective localization of the receptor into postsynaptic sites we added the ICD of
the Drosophila neuroligin gene into SNTG4 (nlgSNTG4) (Figure 1a), and confirmed that this
ICD enriched the localization of the SNTG4 receptor in the neuropil regions, which contain
neuronal synapses ((Figure 2, Figure 2—figure supplement 1, Figure 2—figure supplement
2).
.
To enable visualization of the dendrites and axons of neurons we used the reporter UAS-
CD4tdGFP, in which tdGFP is localized into the plasma membrane (Han et al., 2011).
To test the ability of TRACT to reveal the connectivity originating from ORNs, we generated flies
carrying orco>nSybCD19 or orco>CD19 sdc, nSybE-nlgSNTG4, and UAS-CD4tdGFP. In these flies,
we observed GFP expression in dozens of neurons in the antennal lobe. Roughly half the GFP+ neu-
urons were PNs, which can be identified by their axons projecting into the mushroom body and lat-
eral horn, consistent with the known connectivity between ORNs and PNs (Figure 2e, top panels). In
addition, the cell bodies of these axon-bearing neurons were located in the anterodorsal, lateral,
and ventral sectors of the antennal lobe, consistent with them being PNs. Finally, most of the puta-
tive PNs were immunopositive for CHAT, a known marker of PNs (Figure 2, Figure 2—figure sup-
plement 5). Around half the GFP+ neurons in the antennal lobe did not have axons, were
immunopositive for GABA, and their cell bodies were located dorsolateral and ventrolateral, all fea-
tures consistent with them being LNs (Figure 2e, top panels and Figure 2, Figure 2—figure supple-
ment 5) (Okada et al., 2009).
The experiments with the orco driver revealed that the TRACT system can be used to activate
gene expression in neurons known to be connected by synapses, but it did not prove that the LNs
and PNs that were highlighted by TRACT were strictly connected by synapses to the ORNs express-
ing ligand (Figure 1b). In principle, any type of cell-to-cell contact, including non-synaptic mem-
brane-to-membrane contact, could be sufficient to activate the TRACT receptor in the receiver
neurons. We took advantage of the anatomy of the Drosophila antennal lobe to investigate whether
TRACT could be used to reveal neurons solely connected by synapses. In Drosophila, all ORNs
expressing the same olfactory receptor project their axons into two bilaterally symmetric glomeruli
in the antennal lobe (Grabe et al., 2016; Tanaka et al., 2012). In addition, the dendrites of individ-
ual uniPNs branch into single glomeruli where they make synapses with the axons of ORNs
(Figure 2a and b). Due to this feature of the connectivity of uniPNs, it is possible to unambiguously
confirm that a given uniPN is connected to a single type of ORN through synaptic contacts that will
exclusively occur in an identified glomerulus. Thus, to test the synaptic specificity of TRACT, we
focused on the connectivity between ORNs and uniPNs. To selectively express the receptor in PNs,
we generated transgenic flies in which the nlgSNTG4 receptor is driven by the GH146 enhancer,
which is expressed in the majority of antennal lobe PNs (Stocker et al., 1997) (Figure 2e bottom
panels, 3 and 4). To investigate the connectivity between ORNs and PNs, we generated flies carrying
orco>nSybCD19, GH146-nlgSNTG4, and UAS-CD4::tdGFP (Han et al., 2011). In these flies we
observed dozens of PNs (identifiable by their axons projecting into the mushroom body and lateral
horn) with GFP expression in the antennal lobe, consistent with the known connectivity between
ORNs and PNs (Figure 2e, bottom panels).
Huang et al. eLife 2017;6:e32027. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027
6 of 23
Tools and resources
Neuroscience
 To investigate the ability of TRACT to reveal neurons exclusively connected by synapses we
crossed GH146-nlgSNTG4 flies with flies that expressed the nSyb::CD19 and CD19::sdc ligands in
identified glomeruli. If TRACT exclusively revealed neurons connected by synaptic contacts, the
uniPNs whose receptors were activated by interaction with the ligand would have GFP+ dendrites
that would selectively branch in the glomeruli onto where the ORNs would converge their axons.
We crossed the GH146-nlgSNTG4 flies with flies expressing the nSyb::CD19 and CD19::sdc ligand in
glomeruli VC1 and DA1/VA6/VA1lm under the enhancers of R28H10 and R17H02 LexA drivers,
respectively (http://www.virtualflybrain.org) (Figure 3). We observed that with the nSyb::CD19 and
CD19::sdc ligands, the uniPNs labeled projected their dendrites selectively into the glomeruli where
the ligand was expressed, consistent with previous work (Figure 3) (Grabe et al., 2016). We
counted the number of PNs induced by the nSyb::CD19 or CD19::sdc ligands when expressed in
identified glomeruli, and found that the observed numbers matched those from previously published
work (Grabe et al., 2016) (Table 1a and b). For example, a study using photoactivatable GFP
(paGFP) indicated that between 8 and 10 PNs receive input from the DA1 glomerulus (Grabe et al.,
2016), and when we expressed the nSyb::CD19 ligand with the R17H02-LexA driver in the DA1 glo-
merulus, we observed ~11 labeled uniPNs (Figure 3a and Table 1a). Similarly, previous work indi-
cated that between 1–3 and 1–2 PNs receive input from the VA6 and VC1 glomeruli, respectively,
and with the nSyb::CD19 ligand, we observed that one uniPN expressed GFP in each of these glo-
meruli (Figure 3a and Table 1a) (Grabe et al., 2016). In the VA1lm glomerulus, we did not observe
any induction in PNs with the nSyb::CD19, which may be due to the low level of the receptor expres-
sion in this glomerulus (Figure 3a). When using the CD19::sdc ligand in identified glomeruli, we
observed one PN labeled in VA6 and VC1 and ~12 PNs labeled in DA1 (Figure 3b and Table 1b).
A previous work demonstrated that, in addition to the uniPNs, the GH146 enhancer drives
expression of transgenes into one multiPN (Marin et al., 2002). With the CD19::sdc and nSyb::
CD19, in addition to the uniPNs described above, one multiPN was labeled with both R17H02 and
R28H10 drivers, which has been identified previously (Figures 3b and 4 and Table 1a and b)
(Marin et al., 2002). The dendrites of this neuron almost cover the whole antennal lobe, and its
axon projects first to the lateral horn and then anterodorsally toward the midline. (Figure 3c and d).
Although we did not observe any differences in the number or distribution of uniPNs when the
ligands were CD19::Sdc or nSyb::CD19, we observed that the labeling of multiPNs had different
requirements for sdc and nSyb. Whereas we could achieve labeling of multiPNs with a single copy of
CD19::sdc (in heterozygote animals) (Figures 3b and 4b), we could only detect multiPNs when the
nSyb::CD19 ligand was present in two copies (homozygote animals) (Figures 3a and 4a). This obser-
vation suggests first, that the amount of ligand may be a limiting factor for transneuronal labeling,
and second, that in some cases, the CD19::sdc could be more effective at revealing some synaptic
partners than nSyb::CD19. These results indicate that both the nSyb::CD19 and CD19::sdc ligands
selectively reveal neurons connected by synaptic contacts between ORNs and PNs, match the avail-
able data from previously published works, and confirm that TRACT can be used to perform antero-
grade transneuronal tracing of brain circuits in the Drosophila brain.
To explore the ability of the TRACT method to trace neuronal circuits in other brain areas, we
investigated the brain circuits involved in the control of Drosophila circadian behavior (Figure 5a)
(Konopka and Benzer, 1971; Hall, 1998; Rosbash et al., 2003; Young, 1998; Nitabach and
Taghert, 2008). There are two key advantages of the circadian circuit to test the usefulness of the
TRACT system: (i) it consists of a relatively low number of neurons (around 150), and (ii) the function
and anatomy of many of those neurons are known in some detail, although their connectivity is not
fully understood (Beckwith and Ceriani, 2015; Peschel and Helfrich-Fo
¨rster, 2011; Shafer et al.,
2006).
As a test case, we explored the ability of TRACT to reveal the connectivity of the PDF neurons, a
well-characterized set of cells in the Drosophila brain that are critical regulators of circadian rhythm
(Figures 5b and 6 and Figure 5, Figure 5—figure supplement 1; Renn et al., 1999; Lear et al.,
2009). There are two types of PDF neurons in the Drosophila brain: (i) s-LNv neurons, which project
their axons into the dorsal regions of the central brain, and (ii) l-LNv neurons, which have large den-
drites that branch in the optic lobe, and an axon that projects to the contralateral optic lobe
(Figure 5a). In addition to pdf, the period (per) gene is another critical regulator of circadian function
in Drosophila (Konopka and Benzer, 1971; Bargiello and Young, 1984; Reddy et al., 1984). Previ-
ous
works
using
GRASP
suggested
that
s-LNv
neurons
were
connected
to
the
DN1p
Huang et al. eLife 2017;6:e32027. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027
7 of 23
Tools and resources
Neuroscience
  
 
Figure 3. Selective labeling of PNs that receive synaptic input from ORNs in identified glomeruli. (a) Labeling of PNs that receive synaptic input from
ORNs expressing the ligand nSyb::CD19 in identified glomeruli using the R17H02 (top panels) and R28H10 (bottom panels) LexA drivers. Left: nSyb::
CD19+ axons from ORNs (red) driven by R17H02- and R28H10-LexA branch in identified glomeruli (stippled circles). In R17H02 the nSyb::CD19
expression level was low in VA6 and VA1lm, and expression in DA1 was only visible after signal amplification by immunostaining. Center: Induction of
CD4::tdGFP expression in PNs triggered by nSyb::CD19+ ORNs (red, left panels). In R17H02 (top center) two uniPNs with dendrites branching into DA1
(arrows) and one neuron branching into VA6 (arrowhead) were labeled. No GFP+ PN branched in VA1lm. In R28H10 (bottom center) a single uniPN with
dendrites branching in VC1 was GFP+ (arrow). (b) Tracing the neuronal connections from the ORNs expressing the ligand CD19::sdc in identified
glomeruli by using the R17H02 (top panels) and R28H10 (bottom panels) LexA drivers. Left: CD19::sdc+ axons from ORNs (red) driven by R17H02- and
R28H10-LexA branch in the identified glomeruli (stippled circles). In the VA6 glomerulus of R17H02 and VC1 of R28H10, the CD19::sdc expression level
was too low to be detected by immunostaining, but the expression in DA1 and VA1lm of R17H02 was above the detection level. Center: Induction of
CD4::tdGFP expression in PNs triggered by CD19::sdc+ ORNs (red, left panels). In R17H02 (top center) there were uniPNs projecting to DA1 (arrows)
and VA6 (arrowhead). In R28H10 (bottom center) a single uniPN projecting to VC1 was GFP+ (arrow). Expression of CD19::sdc with R28H10 and R17H02
induced GFP expression in a single multiPN (yellow arrowhead). (c) The diagrams show the induction pattern of uniPNs from (a) and (b). The multiPNs
detected in (b) are not included. Scale bar = 50 mm.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027.012
Huang et al. eLife 2017;6:e32027. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027
8 of 23
Tools and resources
Neuroscience
 (Cavanaugh et al., 2014; Seluzicki et al., 2014) and DN2 neurons (Tang et al., 2017) in the adult
fly. In addition, it has been reported that s-LNv neurons make weak connections with LNd neurons
that vary throughout the day (Gorostiza et al., 2014). We tested whether we could use TRACT, first,
to confirm the connection between s-LNv and DN1 and/or LNd neurons, and second, to identify
new synaptic partners of s-LNvs in other brain areas. We used a pdf-lexA driver to express the
nSyb::CD19 or CD19::sdc ligands, performed immunostaining against the OLLAS tag and confirmed
that the ligands were selectively expressed in the axon terminals of the PDF neurons (Figures 5b
and 6 and Figure 5—figure supplement 1).
In the flies carrying pdf>nSyb::CD19, nSybE-nlgSNTG4 and UAS-CD4::tdGFP, we observed sev-
eral neurons located in the central brain that expressed GFP (Figures 5b and 6 and Table 1c). Con-
sistent with a previous work (Tang et al., 2017) indicating the s-LNvs make synaptic contacts with
DN2 neurons, we performed immunocytochemistry using an antibody against the PER protein and
observed GFP+, PER+ neurons in the DN2 cluster in 10 out of 18 hemispheres (Figures 5b and
6b, and Table 1c). There are two PER neurons in the DN2 cluster (Helfrich-Fo
¨rster et al., 2007). In
Table 1. Summary of the induction results in the identified glomeruli and circadian neurons.
(a and b) Summary of PNs labeled from ORNs expressing nSyb::CD19 (a) or CD19::Sdc (b) in identified glomeruli using the R17H02
and R28H10 LexA drivers. # of GFP+ PNs: number of PNs with GFP induction (median ±sd). % of positive ALs: percentage of antennal
lobes with GFP+ PNs in identified glomeruli. # of PNs reported: numbers of PNs innervating identified glomeruli as reported in previ-
ous works (Grabe et al., 2016). In the column of R17H02, only the results from females (F) are listed because expression of the
R17H02-lexA driver was highly variable in males. n: number of antennal lobes analyzed. *: one R17H02>nSyb::CD19 and two
R17H02>CD19::Sdc VA6 glomeruli were GFP+ (there were GFP+ dendrites branching in VA6), but were excluded because the cell
bodies of the uniPN projecting into VA6 could not be identified. $: with nSyb::CD19 there is GFP induction in multiPNs in animals
homozygous for the ligand (hom), but not in heterozygotes (het). (c) Summary of neurons with GFP expression in animals with donor
PDF neurons expressing nSyb::CD19. # of GFP+ Ns: number of the different types of neurons labeled with GFP (mean ±s.e.m). # of Ns
reported with connections: previous works did not report these data. % of positive hemispheres: percentage of hemispheres analyzed
that contained GFP+ neurons. n: numbers of the hemispheres analyzed.
A
GH146-nlgSNTG4 + LexAop-nSyb::CD19
PNs
# of GFP+ PNs
# of PNs reported
% of positive ALs
n
R17H02
uniPN->DAl
10.5±1.65
8±1.9(F)
100
10
uniPN->VA6
1±0.33
1±0.4 (F)
100
9*
uniPN->VA1lUm
0
6±0.9 (F)
0
10
multiPN
0 (het)$
1±0.00 (horn)
1
0
100
10
6
R28H10
uniPN->VCl
1±0.00
1-2
100
22
multiPN
0 (het)$
1±0.48(hom)
1
0 70
22
10
B
GH146-nlgSNTG4 + LexAop-CD19::Sdc
PNs
# of GFP+ PNs
# of PNs reported
% of positive ALs
n
R17H02
uniPN->DAl
11.5±11.43
8±+1.9 (F)
100
10
uniPN->VA6
1±0.35
1±10.4 (F)
100
8*
uniPN->VA1lm
0
6±0.9 (F)
0
10
multiPN
1±0.52
1
60
10
R28H10
uniPN->VCl
1±0.31
1-2
90
20
multiPN
1±0.39
1
90
20
C
nSybE-nlgSNTG4 + LexAop-nSyb::CD19
types of neurons
#of GFP+Ns
# of Ns reported with connections
% of positive hemispheres
n
pdf
DN2
1±0.75
N.A.
55.6
18
DN3
7±2.3
N.A.
100
18
PER-
7±2.81
N.A.
100
18
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027.013
Huang et al. eLife 2017;6:e32027. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027
9 of 23
Tools and resources
Neuroscience
  
Figure 4. Labeling of one uniPN and one multiPN connected to glomerulus VC1 with nSyb::CD19 and CD19::sdc. Expression of nSyb::CD19
(homozygote, top panels) and CD19::sdc (heterozygote, middle panels) in VC1 glomerulus induced GFP expression in a single uniPN (white arrow) and
one multiPN (yellow arrow). With the nSyb::CD19 ligand (a), both the cell body of the uniPN (white arrow) and its dendrite branching in the VC1
Figure 4 continued on next page
Huang et al. eLife 2017;6:e32027. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027
10 of 23
Tools and resources
Neuroscience
 our experiments, in seven hemispheres we observed one GFP+, PER+ DN2 neuron, and in three
hemispheres we observed two GFP+, PER+ DN2 neurons (Figures 5b and 6b, and Table 1c). In con-
trast to previous works, we did not observe any GFP+ cells in the DN1 cluster but we observed sev-
eral GFP+ cells that were PER-, close to the DN1 cluster (Figures 5b and 6a) (Cavanaugh et al.,
2014) (Seluzicki et al., 2014). In addition, we did not detect any induction in the LNd neurons
(Figure 5b) (Gorostiza et al., 2014). Finally, we observed GFP induction in some of the DN3 neu-
rons in all the brains we analyzed (Table 1c), and we confirmed that all the GFP+ cells in DN3s were
also PER+ (Figures 5b and 6b).
We observed that whereas some of the sets of neurons that were identified as potential synaptic
partners with CD19::sdc were similar to those detected with nSyb:CD19, there were also some dif-
ferences (Figures 5b and 6, and Figure 5, Figure 5—figure supplement 1). Like nSyb::CD19,
CD19::sdc also revealed potential synaptic connections with neurons in the DN2 and DN3 cluster
(Figure 5, Figure 5—figure supplement 1). However, the numbers of neurons labeled with CD19::
sdc were fewer than the ones with nSyb::CD19. This might be due to the fact that CD19::sdc driven
by the pdf driver was expressed at very high levels in the cell body, but at much lower levels in the
presynaptic terminals (Figure 5, Figure 5—figure supplement 1). In contrast, nSyb::CD19 was
clearly detectable in the presynaptic terminals (Figure 5b). In addition, nSyb::CD19, but not CD19::
sdc, detected some PER- neurons near the DN1 cluster, and, with CD19::sdc, but not with nSyb::
CD19, we observed GFP induction in the l-LNvs and s-LNvs (the pdf neurons themselves)
(Figures 5b and 6a and Figure 5, Figure 5—figure supplement 1). Finally, we observed that the
patterns of GFP induction between animals in this circuit were more consistent with nSyb::CD19
than with CD19::sdc (Figure 5, Figure 5—figure supplement 1). These observations indicate that
TRACT can be used to discover candidate synaptic partners in an unbiased manner. Whereas the
overall pattern of transneuronal labeling observed is broadly comparable when using the sdc or
nSyb ligands, in some cases there may be potential synaptic partners that may be specifically
revealed by one of the ligands, and that further experiments will be required to validate these puta-
tive connections.
Discussion
Our experiments demonstrate that it is possible to take advantage of the molecular mechanisms of
ligand-induced intramembrane proteolysis to trace neuronal circuits. We have generated transgenic
animals in which neurons expressing an artificial ligand (‘donor’ cells) activate a genetically modified
receptor on their synaptic partners (‘receiver’ cells). Using this system, called TRACT (for TRans-
neuronal ACtivation of Transcription) we have shown that expressing the ligand in a set of donor
neurons can activate transcription in synaptically connected neurons in the Drosophila brain, in an
anterograde manner. Using TRACT, we have confirmed the connectivity between ORNs and PNs in
the antennal lobe, and have discovered new potential connections between PDF and PER neurons in
the circadian circuit.
There are several advantages of transneuronal tracing based on ligand-induced membrane prote-
olysis. (1) TRACT is fully genetically-encoded, it only requires three constructs (a ligand, a receptor,
and a reporter) and can be used with high reproducibility in transgenic animals. Moreover, as we
demonstrate here, the ligand and/or the receptor can be driven with promoters specific to selective
neuronal populations to reveal circuits of synaptically connected neurons. (2) In principle, it can be
used in any species amenable to transgenesis. This feature is particularly advantageous for
Figure 4 continued
glomerulus (white arrowhead) are visible. In contrast, the cell body of the multiPN is indicated by a yellow arrow. With the CD19::sdc ligand (b) the
induction of GFP in the uniPN is comparable to that observed with nSyb::CD19 (white arrow and arrowhead point to the cell body and dendrite of
uniPN, respectively). However, with CD19::sdc induction in the multiPN is stronger than with nSyb::CD19, and GFP labels the cell body (yellow arrow),
its dendrites (yellow arrowhead), and its axon (pink arrowhead). High magnification image of the axon (white stippled inset) is shown in (d). (c) The
diagram illustrates the position of the cell body of the multiPN with respect to the antennal lobe, and the trajectory of its axon (red stippled inset),
projecting first into the LH (grey stippled circle), and then to the rostral part of the brain. This multiPN has been described previously - see
(Marin et al., 2002 panel H, Figure 3). All images are maximum projection confocal stacks. Scale bar = 50 mm.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027.014
Huang et al. eLife 2017;6:e32027. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027
11 of 23
Tools and resources
Neuroscience
 Drosophila (Bellen et al., 2010; St Johnston, 2002), mice (Anderson and Ingham, 2003; Kile and
Hilton, 2005) and zebrafish (Fetcho and Liu, 1998; Patton and Zon, 2001), three model organisms
of great interest to neurobiologists, with an extensive arsenal of genetic tools. (3) The synaptically
connected neurons can be studied in vivo with electrophysiological recordings, live imaging, and
 
Figure 5. Using TRACT to identify synaptic targets of the PDF neurons in the central brain. (a) Diagram of Drosophila circadian neurons. The two
groups of PDF LNvs are located close to optic lobe: four l-LNvs (black) have dendrites that branch into the ipsilateral optic lobe, and project their axons
across the central brain to the contralateral optic lobe. Four s-LNvs (red) project their dorsal axons to dorsoposterior part of the central brain, where
DN1 (blue), DN2 (purple) and DN3 (green) neurons are located. (b) Labeling of neurons that receive synaptic input from PDF cells expressing no ligand
(top panels: b1, (b3, b5, b7), or the ligand nSyb::CD19 driven by the pdf-LexA driver (bottom panels: b2, (b4, b6, b8). To unbiasedly identify
downstream synaptic targets of PDF neurons, we used the pan-neuronal receptor strain, nSybE-nlgSNTG4. b1, b2: nSyb::CD19 +expression pattern. b1:
control brain with no nSyb::CD19 expression. b2: nSyb::CD19 driven by pdf-LexA accumulated (red) in the cell bodies (yellow arrows) and the axon
terminals of s-LNv dorsal axons (yellow arrowheads). b3: No GFP induction was observed in the control brains without pdf >nSyb::CD19 ligand. b4:
Induction of CD4::tdGFP expression in pdf >nSyb::CD19 brain in the vicinity of the trajectory of nSyb::CD19 +axons through the central brain. Arrow
and arrowhead point to GFP +neurons in the DN1 region, and DN3 regions, respectively. b5, b6: Immunostaining with anti-PER antibody identifies DN1
(white arrow), DN2, and DN3 (white arrowhead) neurons. b7, b8: Merged images of PER (magenta), GFP (green) and nSyb::CD19 (red). Stippled square
in b8 indicates region shown at high magnification (40X) in Figure 6.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027.015
The following figure supplement is available for figure 5:
Figure supplement 1. Potential synaptic targets of the PDF neurons in the central brain using the CD19::Sdc ligand.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027.016
Huang et al. eLife 2017;6:e32027. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027
12 of 23
Tools and resources
Neuroscience
  
Figure 6. Characterization of the synaptic targets of the PDF neurons in the central brain. (a and b) Single optical confocal images at different depths of
the brain showing a high magnification view of the stippled rectangle in Figure 5b bottom panels. (a) Induction of GFP in neurons around the DN1
region. a1: In this focal plane the nSyb::CD19 expression is not visible. a2: Induction of GFP expression in cells (arrow) around the DN1 cluster. Stippled
square at the bottom right is a high magnification image of the GFP +cells. a3: PER immunostaining of the DN1 neurons. Arrowhead points to
Figure 6 continued on next page
Huang et al. eLife 2017;6:e32027. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027
13 of 23
Tools and resources
Neuroscience
 optical monitoring of activity, or in fixed tissue, combined with light or electron microscopy. (4) The
system
can
be
used
in
high-throughput
experiments
because,
unlike
electron
microscopy
(Mikula and Denk, 2015; Bock et al., 2011; Tapia et al., 2012), it is not labor intensive or time-con-
suming. This feature would be very useful to perform genetic screens seeking to identify mutations
that affect neuronal connectivity, and to investigate how neuronal connections change in response
to behavioral experience, diseases, or exposure to different environmental variables, such as drugs
or toxic chemicals. (5) The system can be used to induce the expression of transgenes in the synapti-
cally connected cells that allow for imaging of neuronal activity, such as genetically encoded Ca2+
sensors (Chen et al., 2013) or for experimental modification of neuronal activity, such as optoge-
netic tools (Kim et al., 2017) or ion channels (Lin et al., 2010). (6) TRACT could be used to control
neuronal function by regulating endogenous genes indirectly through nuclear translocation of mole-
cules such as Cre, Flp, LexA, QF2, or TetA (Riabinina et al., 2015; Sauer and Henderson, 1988;
Dymecki, 1996; Lewandoski, 2001; Venken et al., 2011; del Valle Rodrı
´guez et al., 2011) or
directly by fusing endogenous transcription factors to the artificial receptor. (7) In the experiments
presented here, we localized the ligand in presynaptic sites and observed anterograde tracing, in a
presynaptic to postsynaptic neuron direction. In principle, it should be possible to design a retro-
grade tracing system by localizing the ligand selectively in the postsynaptic sites (Sheng and Kim,
2011), and/or the receptor in the presynaptic site (Su
¨dhof, 2012). (8) Finally, we demonstrate that
directing expression of the ligand into a subset of donor neurons localized to a restricted area of the
nervous system activates transcription in a very selective subset of neurons that receive synaptic con-
tact from those donor neurons. For example, we were able to activate transcription selectively in
specific subsets of antennal lobe PNs that receive synaptic input from individual glomeruli. This
observation indicates that even if there are no specific promoters capable of directly driving expres-
sion of transgenes into certain neuronal types (such as antennal lobe uniPNs that receive synaptic
input from glomerulus VC1 and DN3 neurons), this strategy makes it possible to genetically manipu-
late highly specific populations of neurons based not on the genes that they express, but on the cells
from which they receive synaptic input.
In any strategy for mapping synaptic connectivity there are two key problems that are important
to be aware of. First, there may be neurons connected by synapses but the system fails to detect
that they are connected (false negatives). For example, it is probably easier to miss the connection
between neurons that have very few synapses between them. Second, there may be neurons that
are not connected by synapses, but the system indicates that they are connected (false positives).
For example, it is possible that some of the connections revealed by the tracing system could be
between neurons that are close to each other, but not connected by synapses. This is a problematic
scenario, as designing models of computations by brain circuits will be completely inadequate if
they include synaptic connections that do not exist. This indicates that with any of the currently avail-
able methods to study neuronal connectivity, it is advisable to confirm that any connections revealed
are validated by other complementary methods.
Our results of the connectivity between ORNs and the antennal lobe with TRACT are consistent
with the published literature. First, with the nSyb and sdc-targeted ligand, we never observed any
uniPN whose dendrites projected outside of the glomeruli where the ligand was expressed, thus
indicating that TRACT has a very low rate of false positives. Second, with these ligands we consis-
tently observed a number of uniPNs consistent with the published works, suggesting that for the
connectivity between ORNs and uniPNs, TRACT has a very low rate of false negatives. However, we
could only detect the expected multiPN (Marin et al., 2002) (Figures 3b and 4 and Table 1) in
approximately 50% of the cases. Several reasons could account for the variable labeling of multiPNs
that we observed in our data. First, we do not know whether the GH146 enhancer drives expression
Figure 6 continued
PER +cells shown at high magnification on the right bottom inset. a4: Merged image showing that the GFP +cells are not the PER +DN1 neurons. (b)
Induction of GFP in cells in the DN2 and DN3 regions. b1: Axons from nSyb::CD19 (red). b2: Arrowhead and arrow point to cell bodies of GFP induced
neurons in DN3 and DN2 regions, shown at higher magnification on the bottom left, and top right insets, respectively. b3: Immunostaining of PER
(magenta). b4: Merged image showing that in the DN3 (bottom left inset) and DN2 (top right inset) regions, the GFP +neurons are also PER+. Scale
bar = 50 mm.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027.017
Huang et al. eLife 2017;6:e32027. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027
14 of 23
Tools and resources
Neuroscience
 of the nlgSNTG4 receptor into this multiPN in a consistent manner. If the expression of the receptor
is variable between animals, this could explain why we detect the multiPN in some brains but not
others. Second, whereas uniPNs have all their synapses concentrated in a single glomerulus, mul-
tiPNs have synapses distributed throughout multiple glomeruli. This means that the number of syn-
apses between the multiPN and the ligands presented by ORN axons in an individual glomerulus is
likely lower than between those of uniPNs and ORNs. This suggests that TRACT probably can detect
contacts between ORNs and uniPNs with a higher sensitivity than it can between ORNs and
multiPNs.
Our analysis of the connectivity of the PDF neurons in the circadian circuit using TRACT confirmed
a recent report indicating a connection between PDF and DN2 neurons (Tang et al., 2017). In addi-
tion, using TRACT with the nSyb::CD19 and CD19::sdc ligand revealed that DN3 neurons are new
potential postsynaptic targets for PDF neurons, an observation consistent with recent studies dem-
onstrating that applying PDF causes a delay in the circadian phases of Ca2+ activity in DN3
(Liang et al., 2017). The role of DN3s in the control of circadian rhythm is still poorly understood,
and it would be interesting to use TRACT to selectively manipulate these labeled DN3s to investi-
gate their function in regulating circadian behavior. It is important to note that although the axons
from the PDF neurons (l-LNvs and s-LNvs) project very widely through the brain, we identified a
handful of putative synaptic targets in brain regions that are consistent with a circadian function.
These observations suggest that TRACT probably has a low rate of false positives, consistent with
our data on the connectivity of the antennal lobe. Finally, our experiments suggest that TRACT may
have some false negatives as it failed to reveal the connections between s-LNvs and DN1s, and
between
s-LNvs
and
LNds
that
have
been
postulated
by
previous
works
using
GRASP
(Cavanaugh et al., 2014; Seluzicki et al., 2014; Gorostiza et al., 2014). Several reasons could
account for this discrepancy. First, in the previous published works, neither of the two components
of the GRASP system were localized to synaptic sites, so it is possible that the GRASP signal that
was detected could be due to proximity between axons of PDF and DN1 or LNd neurons that were
not connected by synapses. Resolving this issue will require validating the connectivity between PDF
and DN1 neurons using complementary methods, including electrophysiological methods or elec-
tron microscopy. Second, although the nSybE driver is supposed to be pan-neuronally homoge-
neous, it is likely that it may express transgenes in certain neuronal populations at weaker levels. For
example, If the expression of the receptor is weak in DN1 and LNd neurons, this could explain why
we did not detect any connections between s-LNvs and DN1 and LNd neurons. Third, it is possible
that in our current implementation of the system, TRACT can reveal neurons connected by certain
synapses but not others. PDF neurons are characterized by the expression of the neuropeptide PDF,
and it is possible that the secretion of neurotransmitters and neuropeptides could occur at different
presynaptic sites. It is possible that in this current implementation, TRACT may be able to detect
synaptic contacts mediated by neurotransmitter vesicles, but perhaps it may fail to detect neuropep-
tide release sites. Further tests of the system in multiple circuits would be required to fully assess the
sensitivity of TRACT.
Our results indicate that the choice of the domain used to target the ligand into the presynaptic
sites determines the specific potential synaptic partners identified by TRACT. In initial experiments
(described in the supplementary materials) we observed that fusing the CD19 ligand to the intracel-
lular domains of several molecules known to be localized in presynaptic sites (including syntaxin,
dpr-10, dip- V, and neurexin) was sufficient to enrich the localization of the TRACT ligand into pre-
synaptic compartments. However, when using the stringent test afforded by the anatomical specific-
ity of uniPNs (whose dendrites branch into a single glomerulus where they receive synapses from
ORNs expressing a single olfactory receptor molecule), we observed that using these ligands we
could detect GFP expression in uniPNs whose dendrites branched in glomeruli other than the one
where the TRACT ligand was expressed. These results suggest that the domains that we used from
syntaxin, dpr-10, dip- V, and neurexin were not useful to restrict transneuronal labeling between
neurons that were exclusively connected by synapses (as opposed to any other non-synaptic forms
of cell-cell contact, including mere proximity between their respective plasma membranes). In con-
trast, we observed that fusing the CD19 ligand to the intracellular domains from sdc and nSyb ena-
bles reliable transneuronal tracing that was restricted to neurons connected by synapses, as
assessed by the stringent test of the branching of uniPNs’ dendrites into single glomeruli. We did
not observe any difference in the number or distribution of uniPNs labeled with nSyb::CD19 or
Huang et al. eLife 2017;6:e32027. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027
15 of 23
Tools and resources
Neuroscience
 CD19::sdc in the antennal lobe. However, we observed that whereas a single copy of CD19::sdc was
sufficient to label multiPNs, two copies of nSyb::CD19 were necessary to produce any multiPN label-
ing. This observation indicates that both ligands are effective at detecting both uni- and multiPNs.
However, in some cases the amount of the ligand could be a limiting factor to the intensity of the
labeling.
In the circadian circuit we observed that whereas the overall pattern of transneuronal labeling
revealed by TRACT was similar with nSyb::CD19 and CD19::sdc, there were some differences.
First, we observed that the patterns of GFP induction were more consistent between animals with
nSyb::CD19 than with CD19::sdc (Figures 5b and 6 and Figure 5, Figure 5—figure supplement 5).
Second, we observed that some neuronal populations were labeled with one of the ligands, but not
the other. Most notably, nSyb::CD19 (but not CD19::sdc) labeled some PER- neurons near the DN1
cluster and CD19::sdc (but not nSyb::CD19) labeled l-LNvs, and s-LNVs (the pdf neurons them-
selves). Several reasons could account for these differences, including the different biological func-
tions of nSyb and sdc. nSyb is a molecule predominantly localized into the synaptic vesicles, which is
displayed on the plasma membrane after synaptic vesicle fusion. Sdc is a heparan sulfate proteogly-
can that in neurons is enriched in presynaptic sites. Thus, given the different biological functions of
sdc and nSyb, and their specific subcellular localizations, it is expected that their domains may target
expression of the TRACT ligands into slightly different locations in the presynaptic site, or they may
influence its abundance on the synaptic cleft. Finally, it is possible that creating a hybrid molecule
that combines, for example, some of the domains from a presynaptic marker and CD19 may perturb
its targeting to the intended synaptic compartment, its abundance, or stability.
The two methods currently available to unambiguously confirm neuronal connectivity are dual sin-
gle-cell electrophysiological recordings and serial electron microscopy. However, because single-cell
recordings have a low throughput (in a typical experiment, only a handful of connections can be
tested every day), this method is well suited to confirm the connections suggested by a different
method, but it is not feasible to identify neuronal connections in an exploratory manner. Serial elec-
tron microscopy is an extremely powerful method to identify neuronal connections, but currently it
has two main limitations. First, because it has a low throughput it cannot be used to study the con-
nectivity of brain circuits across multiple animals. Second, the area that can be acquired in a single
imaging event is restricted to a maximum of around 1 mm2. This makes it well suited to investigate
local connectivity, but extremely challenging to follow the connections between neurons located far
away from each other, because they cannot be observed in a single imaging acquisition. The results
shown here demonstrate that TRACT allows investigators to discover potential synaptic targets for
genetically identified neurons in an unbiased manner, across multiple animals, thus allowing for high-
throughput approaches. Then, the candidate synaptic partners identified by TRACT can be validated
using complementary low-throughput methods that allow for unambiguous confirmation of connec-
tivity, including dual single-cell electrophysiological recordings and/or electron microscopy.
While the present work was under review another work describing a genetic strategy to identify
synaptically connected neurons called trans-TANGO was published (Talay et al., 2017). Trans-
TANGO is the implementation of the TANGO system with a membrane-bound ligand, so that it can
be applied to the study of neuronal connectivity. Both TRACT and trans-TANGO depend of ligand-
induced proteolysis and subsequent release of a membrane anchored transcription factor. TRACT is
based on intramembrane proteolysis by the endogenous V-secretase, which is ubiquitously present
in the plasma membrane of metazoan cells. Trans-TANGO depends on the cleavage and release of
a transcription factor by the reconstitution of the viral protease TEV, which is triggered by the inter-
action between arrestin and the activation of an exogenous, engineered GPCR upon interaction with
its ligand. The initial report of trans-TANGO also studied the connectivity between ORNs and anten-
nal lobe neurons in Drosophila to validate its specificity. Our results in the Drosophila antennal lobe
with TRACT, when the ligand was expressed into individual glomeruli, revealed connections between
ORNs and uniPNs in the antennal lobe that are consistent with the published literature, but we only
detected multiPNs in around 50% of the brains tested. In the trans-TANGO report with ligand
expression into individual glomeruli, there was no evidence of detection of multiPNs, and the num-
ber of postsynaptic uniPNs observed with transTANGO was higher than those reported in previously
published works. The authors concluded that the higher numbers of PNs observed with trans-Tango
could represent false-positive signals that might have resulted from inefficient synaptic localization
of the ligand due to its overexpression. Further experiments will clarify the respective rate of false
Huang et al. eLife 2017;6:e32027. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027
16 of 23
Tools and resources
Neuroscience
 positives and false negatives by TRACT and transTANGO, and will allow for the optimization of
these systems to enable the reliable application of these strategies for the investigation of neuronal
connections in brain circuits.
In recent years, there has been a surge in interest for new methods to investigate synaptic con-
nectivity in brain circuits (Meinertzhagen and Lee, 2012; Denk et al., 2012; Bargmann and
Marder, 2013; Swanson and Lichtman, 2016). Identifying how neurons are connected is a valuable
guide towards understanding how computations take place in the brain. In addition, recent research
indicates that abnormal neuronal wiring might be the cause of several neurodevelopmental and psy-
chiatric disorders, including autism and schizophrenia (Pec
¸a and Feng, 2012; Rubinov and Bull-
more, 2013; Mevel and Fransson, 2016; Narr and Leaver, 2015). We anticipate that the
advantages of TRACT will make it a useful addition to the arsenal of tools available to identify the
wiring diagrams of brain circuits, and will open new avenues for enabling the genetic manipulation
of neurons connected by synapses.
Materials and methods
Transgenic flies
elav-nlgSNTG4: The SNTG4 cassette is described in detail in our previous publication (Huang et al.,
2016), and it contains a single chain antibody domain (S), the NRR domain from Drosophila Notch
(N), the transmembrane domain from Drosophila Notch (T), and the esn variant of Gal4 (G4).
nlgSNTG4 constructs were generated by ligating three PCR fragments of SNT, dNlg2 ICD and
Gal4esn (esn, for short). The SNT and esn fragment was amplified by PCR from elav-SNTG4
(Huang et al., 2016), and the dNlg2 ICD was from Drosophila EST RH63339. These three fragments
were subcloned into a P-element vector carrying the elav enhancer (Yao and White, 1994) using
standard procedures. Transgenic elav-nlgSNTG4 flies were produced by standard P-element integra-
tion, were screened by GAL4 immunostaining, and the lines with the highest expression level of
SNTG4 were chosen for subsequent experiments. Line #1, 2 and 4 were tested, and had similar
results. Line #4 was used in this study.
GH146-nlgSNTG4: The nlgSNTG4 with V5 epitope was generated by amplifying nlgSNTG4 from
elav-nlgG4 with a reverse primer that included the V5 epitope sequence, and inserted into pCasper-
GH146QF (gift from C. Potter, Johns Hopkins University). Transgenic GH146-nlgSNTG4 flies were
produced by standard P-element integration, were screened by V5 immunostaining, and the lines
with the highest expression level of SNTG4 with PN specification, line #1, were chosen for subse-
quent experiments.
nSyb-nlgSNTG4: The nlgSNTG4 fragment with V5 epitope was directly amplified from GH146-
nlgSNTG4, and was subcloned into pattNSYBBN (Addgene). Transgenic nSyb-nlgSNTG4 flies were
produced by attb site-specific integration in the attP40 site.
LexAop-Syx::CD19: A fragment comprising the intracellular and transmembrane domains of syx
was synthesized (Gene blocks, IDT inc.), fused to a fragment containing the extracellular domain of
CD19 and the OLLAS epitope (Gene blocks, IDT inc.), and inserted into the LexAop pJFRC19 vector.
Transgenic flies were produced by attb site-specific integration in attP2 site.
LexAop-nSyb::CD19: A fragment comprising the intracellular and transmembrane domains of
nSyb was synthesized (Gene blocks, IDT inc), fused a fragment containing the extracellular domain
of CD19 and the OLLAS epitope (Gene blocks, IDT inc.), and inserted into the LexAop pJFRC19 vec-
tor. Transgenic flies were produced by attb site-specific integration in attP2 site.
LexAop-CD19::Nrx1: A fragment comprising the CD19 extracellular domain followed by the
OLLAS tag (Gene blocks, IDT inc.) was fused to a synthetic DNA fragment comprising the transmem-
brane and the intracellular domains of nrx1 (Gene blocks, IDT inc.) and inserted into pJFRC19. Trans-
genic flies were produced by attb site-specific integration in attP2 site.
LexAop-CD19::Dip: The extracellular domain of CD19 was fused to a synthetic full length open
reading frame (ORF) of DIP V followed by the OLLAS epitope, and inserted into the LexAop
pJFRC19 vector. Transgenic flies were produced by attb site-specific integration in attP2 site.
LexAop-CD19::Dpr: The extracellular domain of CD19 was fused to the full length ORF of Dpr10
followed by the OLLAS epitope, and inserted into the LexAop pJFRC19 vector. Transgenic flies
were produced by attb site-specific integration in attP2 site.
Huang et al. eLife 2017;6:e32027. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027
17 of 23
Tools and resources
Neuroscience
 LexAop-CD19::Sdc: The extracellular domain of CD19 was fused to the full length ORF of DIP
syndecan followed by the OLLAS epitope, and inserted into the LexAop pJFRC19 vector. Transgenic
flies were produced by attb site-specific integration in attP2 site.
- 5xUAS-mCD8::GFP and 5xUASCD4::tdGFP reporters were gifts from Dr. Freeman, Oregon
Health and Science University.
pdf-LexA (7M): gift from Dr. Rosbash, Brandeis University
orco-LexA::VP16: gift from Dr. Lee, Janelia Research Campus HHMI
Janelia LexA driver lines: GMR17H02, and GMR28H10-LexA were requested from Bloomington
fly stocks.
Genotypes of flies analyzed in the figures
Figure 2e top: 5XUAS-CD4::tdGFP, nSybE-nlgSNTG4/nSybE-nlgSNTG4; orco-LexA::VP16/LexAop-
nSyb::CD19
Figure 2e bottom: 5XUAS-CD4::tdGFP/CyO; orco-LexA::VP16/LexAop-nSyb::CD19, GH146-
nlgSNTG4#4
Figure 3a top: 5XUAS-CD4::tdGFP/GMR17H02-LexA; LexAop-nSyb::CD19/GH146-nlgSNTG4#4.
We noticed that the male R17H02 has lower LexA activity in DA1 than the female. Therefore, only
the female flies were analyzed.
Figure
3a
bottom:
5XUAS-CD4::tdGFP/GMR28H10-LexA;
LexAop-nSyb::CD19/GH146-
nlgSNTG4#4
Figure 3b top: 5XUAS-CD4::tdGFP/GMR17H02-LexA; LexAop-CD19::Sdc/GH146-nlgSNTG4#4.
Only the female flies were analyzed.
Figure
3b
bottom:
5XUAS-CD4::tdGFP/GMR28H10-LexA;
LexAop-CD19::Sdc/GH146-
nlgSNTG4#4
Figure 4a 5XUAS-CD4::tdGFP/GMR28H10-LexA; LexAop-nSyb::CD19/GH146-nlgSNTG4#4, Lex-
Aop-nSyb::CD19
Figure 4b and d 5XUAS-CD4::tdGFP/GMR28H10-LexA; LexAop-CD19::Sdc/GH146-nlgSNTG4#4
Figure 5b top: nSyb-nlgSNTG4, 5XUAS-CD4::tdGFP/nSyb-nlgSNTG4; LexAop-nSyb::CD19/Lex-
Aop-nSyb::CD19
Figure 5b bottom and 8: nSyb-nlgSNTG4, 5XUAS-CD4::tdGFP/nSyb-nlgSNTG4, pdf-LexA; Lex-
Aop-nSyb::CD19/LexAop-nSyb::CD19.
All crosses were maintained in a 25C incubator with 12 hr-12hr dark-light cycles, and were
repeated at least three times.
Immunostaining and imaging of fly brains
After incubation at 29C for one day, the adult Drosophila were dissected, and the brains were
removed in 1x PBS under a dissection microscope. For PER immunostaining, the flies were dissected
one hour before the lights turned on (around 7 AM). Brains were fixed by immersing them in a 4%
paraformaldehyde solution in PBS for 15 min at room temperature. Brains were washed in PBS three
times for 10 mins each, followed by permeabilization with PBS + 0.5% triton X-100 (PBST) for 30
mins and blocking with 5% horse serum in PBST for 30 mins. The brain samples were stained with
antibodies against GFP (rabbit polyclonals (AB3080 1:1000, AB3080P 1:1500 (Millipore)), or chicken
polyclonal (Abcam), diluted at 1:1000), mcherry (rat monoclonal 5F8 (Chromotek) diluted at 1:1,000),
Brp (mouse monoclonal nc82 (DSHB) diluted at 1:50), ChAT (mouse monoclonal 4B1 (DSHB) diluted
at 1:200), GABA (rabbit polyclonal A2052 (Sigma) 1:200), PER (guinea pig polyclonal PA1140, gift
from Dr. Sehgal, University of Pennsylvania), V5 (mouse monoclonal R960-25 (invitrogen) diluted at
1:300), OLLAS (rat monoclonal L2 NBP106713 (Novus) diluted at 1:300) diluted in 5% horse serum/
PBST. Brains were Incubated with primary antibodies overnight at 4C, washed three times in PBST,
incubated with secondary (goat secondary antibodies (Life Technologies) 1:500, except for rabbit
anti-GFP AB3080P (Millipore), where the secondary was used at 1:750) for 1.5 hr at room tempera-
ture, washed in PBST and mounted on glass slides with a clearing solution (Slowfade Gold antifade
reagent (Invitrogen)).
Stained brains were imaged with Confocal microscopes (Olympus Fluoview 300 or Zeiss 710)
under 20x or 40X objectives. In a typical experiment, we imaged 150 sections with an optical
Huang et al. eLife 2017;6:e32027. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027
18 of 23
Tools and resources
Neuroscience
 thickness of 0.3–0.5 mm from dorsal or ventral sides. Confocal stacks were processed with Fiji to
obtain maximal projections.
Generation of transgenic constructs
All constructs were generated using either PCR with NEB Phusion polymerase or IDT gene blocks.
Cloning into transgenic vector plasmids was performed using Gibson assembly mix from NEB. The
sequences of the constructs used to generate the data shown in main text (ID3 dNRR dNotch1 TMD
dnlng2 esn V5, nSyb::CD19, and CD19::sdc) are shown in Supplementary file 1, including maps indi-
cating their key elements).
Acknowledgements
Supported by NIH grant UO1109147 from the BRAIN initiative.
Additional information
Funding
Funder
Grant reference number
Author
National Institutes of Health
U01 MH109147
Carlos Lois
The funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the
decision to submit the work for publication.
Author contributions
Ting-hao Huang, Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Validation, Investigation, Visuali-
zation, Methodology, Writing—original draft, Writing—review and editing; Peter Niesman, Formal
analysis, Validation, Investigation, Visualization, Writing—review and editing; Deepshika Arasu,
Donghyung Lee, Antuca Callejas, Validation, Investigation, Visualization; Aubrie L De La Cruz, Data
curation, Validation, Investigation, Visualization, Writing—original draft, Writing—review and editing;
Elizabeth J Hong, Experimental design, Analysis and data interpretation, Funding; Carlos Lois, Con-
ceptualization, Resources, Data curation, Formal analysis, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Valida-
tion, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology, Writing—original draft, Project administration,
Writing—review and editing
Author ORCIDs
Ting-hao Huang
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-2546-3525
Aubrie L De La Cruz
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-7351-0285
Carlos Lois
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-7305-2317
Decision letter and Author response
Decision letter https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027.022
Author response https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027.023
Additional files
Supplementary files
. Supplementary file 1. ID3 dNRR dNotch1 TMD dnlng2 esn V5.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027.018
. Supplementary file 2. Supplementary text for Figure 2.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027.019
. Transparent reporting form
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027.020
Huang et al. eLife 2017;6:e32027. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027
19 of 23
Tools and resources
Neuroscience
 References
Anderson KV, Ingham PW. 2003. The transformation of the model organism: a decade of developmental
genetics. Nature Genetics 33 Suppl:285–293. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1105, PMID: 12610538
Bargiello TA, Young MW. 1984. Molecular genetics of a biological clock in Drosophila. PNAS 81:2142–2146.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.81.7.2142, PMID: 16593450
Bargmann CI, Marder E. 2013. From the connectome to brain function. Nature Methods 10:483–490.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.2451, PMID: 23866325
Beckwith EJ, Ceriani MF. 2015. Communication between circadian clusters: The key to a plastic network. FEBS
Letters 589:3336–3342. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2015.08.017, PMID: 26297822
Bellen HJ, Tong C, Tsuda H. 2010. 100 years of Drosophila research and its impact on vertebrate neuroscience: a
history lesson for the future. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 11:514–522. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2839,
PMID: 20383202
Berck ME, Khandelwal A, Claus L, Hernandez-Nunez L, Si G, Tabone CJ, Li F, Truman JW, Fetter RD, Louis M,
Samuel AD, Cardona A. 2016. The wiring diagram of a glomerular olfactory system. eLife 5:e14859.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.14859, PMID: 27177418
Bock DD, Lee WC, Kerlin AM, Andermann ML, Hood G, Wetzel AW, Yurgenson S, Soucy ER, Kim HS, Reid RC.
2011. Network anatomy and in vivo physiology of visual cortical neurons. Nature 471:177–182. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1038/nature09802, PMID: 21390124
Brand AH, Perrimon N. 1993. Targeted gene expression as a means of altering cell fates and generating
dominant phenotypes. Development 118:401–415. PMID: 8223268
Cavanaugh DJ, Geratowski JD, Wooltorton JR, Spaethling JM, Hector CE, Zheng X, Johnson EC, Eberwine JH,
Sehgal A. 2014. Identification of a circadian output circuit for rest:activity rhythms in Drosophila. Cell 157:689–
701. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2014.02.024, PMID: 24766812
Chen TW, Wardill TJ, Sun Y, Pulver SR, Renninger SL, Baohan A, Schreiter ER, Kerr RA, Orger MB, Jayaraman V,
Looger LL, Svoboda K, Kim DS. 2013. Ultrasensitive fluorescent proteins for imaging neuronal activity. Nature
499:295–300. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature12354, PMID: 23868258
Chou YH, Spletter ML, Yaksi E, Leong JC, Wilson RI, Luo L. 2010. Diversity and wiring variability of olfactory local
interneurons in the Drosophila antennal lobe. Nature Neuroscience 13:439–449. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/
nn.2489, PMID: 20139975
Couto A, Alenius M, Dickson BJ. 2005. Molecular, anatomical, and functional organization of the Drosophila
olfactory system. Current Biology 15:1535–1547. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2005.07.034, PMID: 1613
9208
del Valle Rodrı
´guez A, Didiano D, Desplan C. 2011. Power tools for gene expression and clonal analysis in
Drosophila. Nature Methods 9:47–55. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.1800, PMID: 22205518
Denk W, Briggman KL, Helmstaedter M. 2012. Structural neurobiology: missing link to a mechanistic
understanding of neural computation. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 13:351–358. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/
nrn3169, PMID: 22353782
Dubowy C, Sehgal A. 2017. Circadian Rhythms and Sleep in Drosophila melanogaster. Genetics 205:1373–1397.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.115.185157, PMID: 28360128
Dymecki SM. 1996. Flp recombinase promotes site-specific DNA recombination in embryonic stem cells and
transgenic mice. PNAS 93:6191–6196. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.93.12.6191, PMID: 8650242
Fetcho JR, Liu KS. 1998. Zebrafish as a model system for studying neuronal circuits and behavior. Annals of the
New York Academy of Sciences 860:333–345. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-6632.1998.tb09060.x,
PMID: 9928323
Fishilevich E, Vosshall LB. 2005. Genetic and functional subdivision of the Drosophila antennal lobe. Current
Biology 15:1548–1553. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2005.07.066, PMID: 16139209
Fujimoto M, Poe JC, Inaoki M, Tedder TF. 1998. CD19 regulates B lymphocyte responses to transmembrane
signals. Seminars in Immunology 10:267–277. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1006/smim.1998.9999, PMID: 9695183
Gordon WR, Zimmerman B, He L, Miles LJ, Huang J, Tiyanont K, McArthur DG, Aster JC, Perrimon N, Loparo JJ,
Blacklow SC. 2015. Mechanical Allostery: Evidence for a Force Requirement in the Proteolytic Activation of
Notch. Developmental Cell 33:729–736. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.devcel.2015.05.004, PMID: 26051539
Gorostiza EA, Depetris-Chauvin A, Frenkel L, Pı
´rez N, Ceriani MF. 2014. Circadian pacemaker neurons change
synaptic contacts across the day. Current Biology 24:2161–2167. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2014.07.
063, PMID: 25155512
Grabe V, Baschwitz A, Dweck HKM, Lavista-Llanos S, Hansson BS, Sachse S. 2016. Elucidating the Neuronal
Architecture of Olfactory Glomeruli in the Drosophila Antennal Lobe. Cell Reports 16:3401–3413. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2016.08.063, PMID: 27653699
Hall JC. 1998. Genetics of biological rhythms in drosophila. Advances in Genetics 38:135–184. PMID: 9677707
Han C, Jan LY, Jan YN. 2011. Enhancer-driven membrane markers for analysis of nonautonomous mechanisms
reveal neuron-glia interactions in Drosophila. PNAS 108:9673–9678. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.
1106386108, PMID: 21606367
He L, Huang J, Perrimon N. 2017. Development of an optimized synthetic Notch receptor as an in vivo cell-cell
contact sensor. PNAS 114:5467–5472. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1703205114, PMID: 28490499
Huang et al. eLife 2017;6:e32027. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027
20 of 23
Tools and resources
Neuroscience
 Helfrich-Fo
¨ rster C, Shafer OT, Wu
¨ lbeck C, Grieshaber E, Rieger D, Taghert P. 2007. Development and
morphology of the clock-gene-expressing lateral neurons of Drosophila melanogaster. The Journal of
Comparative Neurology 500:47–70. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/cne.21146, PMID: 17099895
Hill CA, Fox AN, Pitts RJ, Kent LB, Tan PL, Chrystal MA, Cravchik A, Collins FH, Robertson HM, Zwiebel LJ. 2002.
G protein-coupled receptors in Anopheles gambiae. Science 298:176–178. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1126/
science.1076196, PMID: 12364795
Hong EJ, Wilson RI. 2015. Simultaneous encoding of odors by channels with diverse sensitivity to inhibition.
Neuron 85:573–589. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2014.12.040, PMID: 25619655
Huang TH, Velho T, Lois C. 2016. Monitoring cell-cell contacts in vivo in transgenic animals. Development 143:
4073–4084. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.142406, PMID: 27660327
Ito K, Shinomiya K, Ito M, Armstrong JD, Boyan G, Hartenstein V, Harzsch S, Heisenberg M, Homberg U, Jenett
A, Keshishian H, Restifo LL, Ro
¨ ssler W, Simpson JH, Strausfeld NJ, Strauss R, Vosshall LB, Insect Brain Name
Working Group. 2014. A systematic nomenclature for the insect brain. Neuron 81:755–765. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.neuron.2013.12.017, PMID: 24559671
Kile BT, Hilton DJ. 2005. The art and design of genetic screens: mouse. Nature Reviews Genetics 6:557–567.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nrg1636, PMID: 15951745
Kim CK, Adhikari A, Deisseroth K. 2017. Integration of optogenetics with complementary methodologies in
systems neuroscience. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 18:222–235. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn.2017.15,
PMID: 28303019
Kochenderfer JN, Feldman SA, Zhao Y, Xu H, Black MA, Morgan RA, Wilson WH, Rosenberg SA. 2009.
Construction and preclinical evaluation of an anti-CD19 chimeric antigen receptor. Journal of Immunotherapy
32:689–702. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1097/CJI.0b013e3181ac6138, PMID: 19561539
Konopka RJ, Benzer S. 1971. Clock mutants of Drosophila melanogaster. PNAS 68:2112–2116. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1073/pnas.68.9.2112, PMID: 5002428
Kovall RA, Gebelein B, Sprinzak D, Kopan R. 2017. The Canonical Notch Signaling Pathway: Structural and
Biochemical Insights into Shape, Sugar, and Force. Developmental Cell 41:228–241. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.devcel.2017.04.001, PMID: 28486129
Laissue PP, Vosshall LB. 2008. The olfactory sensory map in Drosophila. Advances in Experimental Medicine and
Biology 628:102–114. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-78261-4_7, PMID: 18683641
Lear BC, Zhang L, Allada R. 2009. The neuropeptide PDF acts directly on evening pacemaker neurons to
regulate multiple features of circadian behavior. PLoS Biology 7:e1000154. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pbio.1000154, PMID: 19621061
Lee D, Huang TH, De La Cruz A, Callejas A, Lois C. 2017. Methods to investigate the structure and connectivity
of the nervous system. Fly 11:224–238. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/19336934.2017.1295189, PMID: 28277
925
Lewandoski M. 2001. Conditional control of gene expression in the mouse. Nature Reviews Genetics 2:743–755.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/35093537, PMID: 11584291
Liang L, Li Y, Potter CJ, Yizhar O, Deisseroth K, Tsien RW, Luo L. 2013. GABAergic projection neurons route
selective olfactory inputs to specific higher-order neurons. Neuron 79:917–931. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
neuron.2013.06.014, PMID: 24012005
Liang X, Holy TE, Taghert PH. 2017. A series of suppressive signals within the drosophila circadian neural circuit
generates sequential daily outputs. Neuron 94:1173–1189. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2017.05.007,
PMID: 28552314
Lin CW, Sim S, Ainsworth A, Okada M, Kelsch W, Lois C. 2010. Genetically increased cell-intrinsic excitability
enhances neuronal integration into adult brain circuits. Neuron 65:32–39. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
neuron.2009.12.001, PMID: 20152111
Marin EC, Jefferis GS, Komiyama T, Zhu H, Luo L. 2002. Representation of the glomerular olfactory map in the
Drosophila brain. Cell 109:243–255. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092-8674(02)00700-6, PMID: 12007410
Meinertzhagen IA, Lee CH. 2012. The genetic analysis of functional connectomics in Drosophila. Advances in
Genetics 80:99–151. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-404742-6.00003-X, PMID: 23084874
Mevel K, Fransson P. 2016. The functional brain connectome of the child and autism spectrum disorders. Acta
Paediatrica 105:1024–1035. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/apa.13484, PMID: 27228241
Mikula S, Denk W. 2015. High-resolution whole-brain staining for electron microscopic circuit reconstruction.
Nature Methods 12:541–546. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.3361, PMID: 25867849
Morsut L, Roybal KT, Xiong X, Gordley RM, Coyle SM, Thomson M, Lim WA. 2016. Engineering customized cell
sensing and response behaviors using synthetic notch receptors. Cell 164:780–791. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.cell.2016.01.012, PMID: 26830878
Narr KL, Leaver AM. 2015. Connectome and schizophrenia. Current Opinion in Psychiatry 28:229–235.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1097/YCO.0000000000000157, PMID: 25768086
Nitabach MN, Taghert PH. 2008. Organization of the Drosophila circadian control circuit. Current Biology 18:
R84–R93. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2007.11.061, PMID: 18211849
Okada R, Awasaki T, Ito K. 2009. Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-mediated neural connections in the
Drosophila antennal lobe. The Journal of Comparative Neurology 514:74–91. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/
cne.21971, PMID: 19260068
Parnas M, Lin AC, Huetteroth W, Miesenbo
¨ ck G. 2013. Odor discrimination in Drosophila: from neural
population codes to behavior. Neuron 79:932–944. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2013.08.006,
PMID: 24012006
Huang et al. eLife 2017;6:e32027. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027
21 of 23
Tools and resources
Neuroscience
 Patton EE, Zon LI. 2001. The art and design of genetic screens: zebrafish. Nature Reviews Genetics 2:956–966.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/35103567, PMID: 11733748
Pec
¸a J, Feng G. 2012. Cellular and synaptic network defects in autism. Current Opinion in Neurobiology 22:866–
872. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conb.2012.02.015, PMID: 22440525
Peschel N, Helfrich-Fo
¨ rster C. 2011. Setting the clock–by nature: circadian rhythm in the fruitfly Drosophila
melanogaster. FEBS Letters 585:1435–1442. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2011.02.028,
PMID: 21354415
Reddy P, Zehring WA, Wheeler DA, Pirrotta V, Hadfield C, Hall JC, Rosbash M. 1984. Molecular analysis of the
period locus in Drosophila melanogaster and identification of a transcript involved in biological rhythms. Cell
38:701–710. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(84)90265-4, PMID: 6435882
Renn SC, Park JH, Rosbash M, Hall JC, Taghert PH. 1999. A pdf neuropeptide gene mutation and ablation of
PDF neurons each cause severe abnormalities of behavioral circadian rhythms in Drosophila. Cell 99:791–802.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092-8674(00)81676-1, PMID: 10619432
Riabinina O, Luginbuhl D, Marr E, Liu S, Wu MN, Luo L, Potter CJ. 2015. Improved and expanded Q-system
reagents for genetic manipulations. Nature Methods 12:219–222. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.3250,
PMID: 25581800
Rosbash M, Allada R, McDonald M, Peng Y, Zhao J. 2003. Circadian rhythms in Drosophila. Novartis Foundation
Symposium 253:223–232. PMID: 14712924
Rubinov M, Bullmore E. 2013. Fledgling pathoconnectomics of psychiatric disorders. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences 17:641–647. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2013.10.007, PMID: 24238779
Rybak J, Talarico G, Ruiz S, Arnold C, Cantera R, Hansson BS. 2016. Synaptic circuitry of identified neurons in the
antennal lobe of Drosophila melanogaster. Journal of Comparative Neurology 524:1920–1956. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1002/cne.23966, PMID: 26780543
Sauer B, Henderson N. 1988. Site-specific DNA recombination in mammalian cells by the Cre recombinase of
bacteriophage P1. PNAS 85:5166–5170. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.85.14.5166, PMID: 2839833
Seki Y, Rybak J, Wicher D, Sachse S, Hansson BS. 2010. Physiological and morphological characterization of local
interneurons in the Drosophila antennal lobe. Journal of Neurophysiology 104:1007–1019. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1152/jn.00249.2010, PMID: 20505124
Seluzicki A, Flourakis M, Kula-Eversole E, Zhang L, Kilman V, Allada R. 2014. Dual PDF signaling pathways reset
clocks via TIMELESS and acutely excite target neurons to control circadian behavior. PLoS Biology 12:
e1001810. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1001810, PMID: 24643294
Shafer OT, Helfrich-Fo
¨ rster C, Renn SC, Taghert PH. 2006. Reevaluation of Drosophila melanogaster’s neuronal
circadian pacemakers reveals new neuronal classes. The Journal of Comparative Neurology 498:180–193.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/cne.21021, PMID: 16856134
Sheng M, Kim E. 2011. The postsynaptic organization of synapses. Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Biology 3:
a005678. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a005678, PMID: 22046028
Sprinzak D, Lakhanpal A, Lebon L, Santat LA, Fontes ME, Anderson GA, Garcia-Ojalvo J, Elowitz MB. 2010. Cis-
interactions between Notch and Delta generate mutually exclusive signalling states. Nature 465:86–90.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nature08959, PMID: 20418862
St Johnston D. 2002. The art and design of genetic screens: Drosophila melanogaster. Nature Reviews Genetics
3:176–188. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nrg751, PMID: 11972155
Stocker RF, Heimbeck G, Gendre N, de Belle JS. 1997. Neuroblast ablation in Drosophila P[GAL4] lines reveals
origins of olfactory interneurons. Journal of Neurobiology 32:443–456. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)
1097-4695(199705)32:5<443::AID-NEU1>3.0.CO;2-5, PMID: 9110257
Stocker RF, Lienhard MC, Borst A, Fischbach KF. 1990. Neuronal architecture of the antennal lobe in Drosophila
melanogaster. Cell and Tissue Research 262:9–34. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00327741, PMID: 2124174
Su
¨ dhof TC. 2012. The presynaptic active zone. Neuron 75:11–25. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2012.06.
012, PMID: 22794257
Swanson LW, Lichtman JW. 2016. From Cajal to Connectome and Beyond. Annual Review of Neuroscience 39:
197–216. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-neuro-071714-033954, PMID: 27442070
Talay M, Richman EB, Snell NJ, Hartmann GG, Fisher JD, Sorkac
¸ A, Santoyo JF, Chou-Freed C, Nair N, Johnson
M, Szymanski JR, Barnea G. 2017. Transsynaptic mapping of second-order taste neurons in flies by trans-tango.
Neuron 96:783–795. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2017.10.011, PMID: 29107518
Tanaka NK, Endo K, Ito K. 2012. Organization of antennal lobe-associated neurons in adult Drosophila
melanogaster brain. The Journal of Comparative Neurology 520:4067–4130. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/cne.
23142, PMID: 22592945
Tang X, Roessingh S, Hayley SE, Chu ML, Tanaka NK, Wolfgang W, Song S, Stanewsky R, Hamada FN. 2017. The
role of PDF neurons in setting the preferred temperature before dawn in Drosophila. eLife 6:e23206.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.23206, PMID: 28463109
Tapia JC, Kasthuri N, Hayworth KJ, Schalek R, Lichtman JW, Smith SJ, Buchanan J. 2012. High-contrast en bloc
staining of neuronal tissue for field emission scanning electron microscopy. Nature Protocols 7:193–206.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2011.439, PMID: 22240582
Van Vactor D, Sigrist SJ. 2017. Presynaptic morphogenesis, active zone organization and structural plasticity in
Drosophila. Current Opinion in Neurobiology 43:119–129. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conb.2017.03.003,
PMID: 28388491
Venken KJ, Simpson JH, Bellen HJ. 2011. Genetic manipulation of genes and cells in the nervous system of the
fruit fly. Neuron 72:202–230. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2011.09.021, PMID: 22017985
Huang et al. eLife 2017;6:e32027. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027
22 of 23
Tools and resources
Neuroscience
 Vosshall LB, Amrein H, Morozov PS, Rzhetsky A, Axel R. 1999. A spatial map of olfactory receptor expression in the
Drosophila antenna. Cell 96:725–736. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80582-6, PMID: 10089887
Wilson RI. 2013. Early olfactory processing in Drosophila: mechanisms and principles. Annual Review of
Neuroscience 36:217–241. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-neuro-062111-150533, PMID: 23841839
Yao KM, White K. 1994. Neural specificity of elav expression: defining a Drosophila promoter for directing
expression to the nervous system. Journal of Neurochemistry 63:41–51. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1471-
4159.1994.63010041.x, PMID: 8207445
Young MW. 1998. The molecular control of circadian behavioral rhythms and their entrainment in Drosophila.
Annual Review of Biochemistry 67:135–152. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.biochem.67.1.135, PMID:
9759485
Huang et al. eLife 2017;6:e32027. DOI: https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.32027
23 of 23
Tools and resources
Neuroscience
