 Huang et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaan9388     15 May 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
1 of 6
HEALTH AND MEDICINE
Precise closure of single blood vessels via multiphoton 
absorption–based photothermolysis
Yimei Huang1,2,3*, Zhenguo Wu1,2*, Harvey Lui1,2, Jianhua Zhao1,2, Shusen Xie3, Haishan Zeng1,2†
We report a novel approach to selectively close single blood vessels within tissue using multiphoton absorption–
based photothermolysis (multiphoton photothermolysis) without the need of exogenous agents. The treatment 
process is monitored by in vivo reflectance confocal microscopy in real time. Closure of single targeted vessels of 
varying sizes ranging from capillaries to venules was demonstrated. We also demonstrated that deeply situated 
blood vessels could be closed precisely while preserving adjacent overlying superficial blood vessels. In vivo confocal 
Raman spectroscopy of the treatment sites confirmed vessel closure as being mediated by local coagulative damage. 
Partial vessel occlusion could be achieved, and it is accompanied by increased intravascular blood cell speed. 
Multiphoton photothermolysis under real-time reflectance confocal imaging guidance provides a novel precision 
medicine approach for noninvasive, precise microsurgery treatment of vascular diseases on a per-vessel/per- 
lesion 
basis. The method could also be used for building ischemic stroke models for basic biology study.
INTRODUCTION
Forming one of the largest networks in our body, blood vessels 
deliver nutrients and oxygen to cells while also transporting their 
metabolic waste products for eventual elimination (1). Dysregulated 
blood vessels are found in a variety of clinical disorders involving 
neoplasia, dysmorphogenesis, or senescence. For example, cancer, 
capillary malformations (e.g., port wine stains), macular degenera-
tion, and diabetic retinopathy are characterized or caused by excessive 
angiogenesis (1–3). Alternatively, insufficient vascular perfusion may 
cause organ ischemia or neurodegeneration (1).
Laser therapy has been widely used for treating hyperangiogenesis, 
such as occurs with macular degeneration (4), diabetic retinopathy 
(5), port wine stains (6–10), and cancer (11–15). Conventional laser 
therapy of pathologic vasculature is largely based on the principle of 
selective photothermolysis, wherein laser energy can be physically 
confined within targeted tissue by matching the appropriate wave-
length and pulse duration according to a specific chromophore and 
tissue target (6, 16). The visible-range absorption bands of hemoglobin 
(i.e., 415 to 430 nm and 542 to 577 nm) provide the basis for targeting 
blood vessels with lasers (17). Although the absorption coefficient 
in the 415- to 430-nm band is an order of magnitude higher than 
that of the 542- to 577-nm band, laser wavelengths within the latter 
band are usually used to maximize the differential absorption between 
hemoglobin and surrounding chromophores such as melanin and 
also to achieve deeper light penetration. The pulse duration of the 
laser should be shorter than the blood vessel thermal relaxation time 
to confine the laser-induced heat to the targeted blood vessels them-
selves, and at the capillary level, thermal relaxation times are within 
the millisecond domain (16). This now conventional, single-photon 
absorption approach to targeted laser therapy can be referred to as 
chromophore selective photothermolysis (CSP).
There are two limitations for CSP that could affect certain clini-
cal applications. For blood vessels, the depth of the clinical effect is 
limited by the fact that the wavelengths used for optimal hemoglobin 
absorption fall short of the 650- to 950-nm “optical window” for tissue. 
The other challenge is that, with CSP, there is a potential for all blood 
vessels within the irradiated volume to be indiscriminately denatured, 
thereby impairing normal physiologic function after the disease is 
healed. Recently, researches have started to address the second limita-
tion. For example, phantom experiments using laser pulses at eight 
different wavelengths between 585 and 1064 nm were explored to 
target deoxyhemoglobin to spare the arterial vessels (18).
We hereby introduce an anti-vascular treatment approach for 
achieving photothermolysis using multiphoton absorption to selec-
tively close targeted single blood vessels without affecting other vessels 
and surrounding tissues. A tightly focused near-infrared (NIR) 
femtosecond (fs) laser beam is used to achieve instantaneously 
super-high power density (>109 W/cm2) at the focal point to induce 
multiphoton absorption. This absorption is also restricted to the 
focal point only because, outside of this site, the power density is low. 
In preliminary work, we have demonstrated multiphoton absorption–
based photothermolysis through experiments with ex vivo tissue 
samples (19, 20). We refer to this approach as spatially selective 
photothermolysis (SSP) to distinguish it from the conventional single- 
photon absorption–based CSP. Because single-photon absorption 
is low within the tissue optical window, radiant energy can be effi-
ciently directed to the target of interest by spatially aligning the laser 
focal point with the target. The focused laser beam will generate 
efficient multiphoton absorption at the target because the equiv-
alent light absorption wavelength (i.e., incident wavelength/2) lies 
within the ultraviolet/deep blue range, where tissue/cellular compo-
nents such as proteins and nucleic acids exhibit strong absorption. 
Outside of the focal point, there is no multiphoton absorption due 
to insufficient photon density, as well as no single-photon absorp-
tion due to the low tissue absorption coefficient in the NIR. In addi-
tion, NIR photons also penetrate more deeply than the visible 
wavelengths used with conventional single-photon absorption–
based CSP.
1Imaging Unit, Integrative Oncology Department, BC Cancer Research Center, 
Vancouver, BC V5Z 1L3, Canada. 2Photomedicine Institute, Department of 
Dermatology and Skin Science, University of British Columbia and Vancouver 
Coastal Health Research Institute, Vancouver, BC V5Z 4E8, Canada. 3Key Labo-
ratory of OptoElectronic Science and Technology for Medicine of Ministry 
of Education, Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Photonics Technology, College 
of Photonic and Electronic Engineering, Fujian Normal University, Fuzhou 
350007, China.
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
†Corresponding author. Email: hzeng@bccrc.ca
Copyright © 2019 
The Authors, some 
rights reserved; 
exclusive licensee 
American Association 
for the Advancement 
of Science. No claim to 
original U.S. Government 
Works. Distributed 
under a Creative 
Commons Attribution 
NonCommercial 
License 4.0 (CC BY-NC).
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Huang et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaan9388     15 May 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
2 of 6
In this work, we propose and demonstrate a novel approach for pre-
cisely targeted single blood vessel closure using multiphoton absorption–
based SSP. Figure 1 illustrates the advantages of SSP over CSP for the 
proposed anti-vascular treatment. With this novel optical approach, it 
is possible to selectively close some vessels while leaving others intact to 
preserve normal tissue physiology once the disease is healed.
RESULTS
Imaging and closing blood vessel without exogenous agent
A multimodality optical system as shown in fig. S1 was developed 
and is capable of imaging, targeting, and closing a single blood vessel 
at a time in the mouse ear model. The system is also capable of mea-
suring confocal Raman spectrum from a selected microlocation. A 
785-nm continuous wave (cw) diode laser was used for reflectance 
confocal microscopy (cwRCM) to image and select target blood 
vessels for treatment. After treatment, cwRCM imaging was per-
formed again to confirm blood vessel closure. The same cw laser 
is also used for confocal Raman measurements. A high-power 
Ti:sapphire fs laser tuned to 830-nm wavelength was used for blood 
vessel treatment. The laser beam was scanned over a small area 
inside a target vessel to perform the treatment. Reflectance confocal 
microscopy imaging based on the fs laser (fsRCM) was used to 
monitor the treatment procedure.
The blood vessel is easy to identify via RCM movie (movie S1). This 
is because the flowing blood cells cause large dynamic changes of the 
scattered optical signals detected by RCM. The flowing of the cells is 
readily visible in the movie. However, the contrast between the blood 
vessel and the surrounding tissue is low in single-frame images. It is 
difficult to determine whether the blood vessel has been closed accord-
ing to the single-RCM image illustrated in Fig. 2A. To improve the 
contrast, we introduced an image processing algorithm, STD, which 
calculates the standard deviation of each pixel stack from 10 sequential 
frames of the RCM movie, as shown in Fig. 2B. Because blood cells 
flow in the vessel, the standard deviation of a pixel in the blood vessel 
is bigger than that in the surrounding tissues. Therefore, in the STD 
image, the blood vessel becomes bright, while the surrounding tissue 
becomes dark. This very well highlights the blood vessels in the image. 
To apply the STD algorithm, it is important to keep the measurement 
system stable. The STD images in Fig. 2C show that the “Y”-shaped 
blood vessel before treatment (top row) has changed to “V” shape 
(bottom row) after the closure of the vertical blood vessel, which is 
consistent with movies S1 and S2. Figure 2 (D to G) shows that blood 
vessels of different sizes were closed by adjusting the fs laser scanning 
irradiation area and the irradiation time.
Selective closure of blood vessel
One advantage of multiphoton photothermolysis is its capability of 
inducing highly spatially selective localized damage. We demonstrated 
that it can precisely occlude a targeted deeper blood vessel while 
preserving the overlying blood vessel, although the laser light traverses 
through it. Figure 3 shows such an example. There are two blood 
vessels in Fig. 3A. The vertical blood vessel marked with a white 
arrow is located under the other vessel marked with a red arrow. 
The orientation of the two blood vessels is illustrated in Fig. 3C. In 
the treatment, the laser beam was focused to the vertical blood vessel 
at the cross area to selectively close this vessel. Figure 3B shows that 
the vertical vessel blood flow disappears with the closure, while the 
other vessel above remains with blood flow. Movies S3 and S4 con-
firm the results shown in the STD images. Both movies S3 and S4 
start at deeper depth and move toward the surface. A bright spot 
appears at the irradiation area in the RCM image when the blood 
vessel has been closed, as shown in Fig. 3D. The white spot might be 
due to the coagulation of blood cells.
Raman spectra of blood cells before and after 
blood vessel closure
To study the biochemical changes of the treatment site (white spot in 
Fig. 3D), we measured the Raman spectra of the site using the confocal 
Raman modality shown in fig. S1. We first compared the Raman spectra 
of blood cells and the surrounding tissue structures such as sebaceous 
gland and collagen to confirm the specificity of the blood cell Raman 
signal. The results are shown in fig. S2. The blood cell Raman spec-
trum is substantially different from the others. For instance, only the 
blood cell spectrum has the hemoglobin characteristic bands (418, 
750, and 1543 cm−1), while the sebaceous gland has the strongest fatty 
acid characteristic bands (1065, 1300, and 1442 cm−1). We then mea-
sured the Raman spectra of blood cells before and after the blood vessel 
closure, as shown in Fig. 4. Table S1 lists the tentative Raman band 
assignment based on literature (21–22). The band at 377 cm−1, the 
auto-oxidation marker, such as methemoglobin, greatly increased after 
treatment. The bending band of Fe-O2, 418 cm−1, decreased when the 
Fig. 1. Multiphoton absorption–based SSP versus conventional CSP for anti-vascular treatment within the skin. (A) Before exposure. (B) After conventional CSP, all 
vessels within the light irradiation volume are denatured (indicated by the black-colored blood vessels). (C) With SSP, the target vessel is denatured/closed because the 
tightly focused fs laser deposits the radiant energy in the target vessel (the focal point, indicated by the magenta arrow) through multiphoton absorption, a nonlinear 
optical phenomenon occurring only at the focal point with high enough light power density. Other vessels and surrounding tissues are not affected. The inset shows that 
the vessels above the target vessel are not altered, although the fs laser pulses pass through them. Comparing (B) with (C), SSP could also treat vessels located deeper, 
where CSP could not reach due to the limited penetration depth for visible light.
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Huang et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaan9388     15 May 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
3 of 6
blood vessel was closed, indicating that the ligation between O2 and 
Fe is weakened in the thermally induced heme aggregation. The vi-
bration bands shifted from 677 and 754 cm−1 to 667 and 749 cm−1, 
respectively, due to the denaturation of blood cells. The increasing 
intensities of the bands at 970 and 1248 cm−1 are attributed to the 
formation of hemoglobin and fibrin aggregates. All these band 
changes, including increase, decrease, and shift, could be attributed 
to the coagulation of blood cells.
Point treatment system
The results shown above were all obtained with the scanning system 
(fig. S1), which meant that the blood vessels were closed by scanning the 
high-power fs laser in the treatment area. Although the scanning system 
can monitor the fsRCM images during the high- 
power fs laser irradia-
tion, the imaging field of view (FOV) is limited to the treatment area, 
and the effect of fs laser irradiation on the surrounding tissue cannot 
be monitored, as shown in movie S5. To overcome the limitations of the 
scanning system, we constructed a point treatment system, in which the 
fs laser beam does not pass through the scanner mirrors, as shown in 
fig. S3. The fs laser beam and the cw laser beam were combined with 
a dichroic mirror (DM) before the objective lens so that the switch be-
tween the two laser beams was not needed. The DM transmits 785-nm 
light and reflects 830-nm light. This point treatment system makes it 
possible to monitor the whole treatment process and evaluate the effect 
of blood vessel closure on the surrounding tissues.
Using the point treatment system, we studied the dynamics of blood 
flow during the high-power fs laser irradiation. Figure 5 is one of the 
typical examples. The red dashed lines in Fig. 5 (A to D) delineate the 
intraluminal margin of the blood vessel. The red dot in Fig. 5A indi-
cates the fs laser irradiation position. The beam size is about 1 m in the 
X-Y horizontal plane and 2 m in the Z depth direction. A bright spot 
(Fig. 5B) appeared immediately after the high-power fs laser irradiated 
on the blood vessel. The bright spot evolved to a bright linear signal that 
aligned with the direction of blood flow (Fig. 5C) as the fs laser expo-
sure continued. With increasing treatment time, the signal intensity at 
the focal point suddenly showed a marked increase, and the blood ves-
sel began to contract, as shown in Fig. 5D. The whole treatment process 
appears in movie S6. We plotted the average image intensity over a 
50 m × 50 m square around the focal point as a function of time 
(Fig. 5F), and it showed three events during the treatment. As the fs la-
ser irradiated the blood vessel, the intensity increased greatly and lasted 
for about 1.5 s. With further laser exposure, the signal intensity increased 
even further to an even higher level (twofold). The signal intensity then 
decreased immediately when the vessel was closed and the fs laser was 
turned off.
Movie S6 shows interesting dynamics of the vessel closure pro-
cess under point beam treatment. The associated physical, biochemical, 
and biological changes deserve further investigation, especially his-
tological analysis.
Partial blood vessel occlusion
The point treatment system could be used to close a blood vessel com-
pletely. Furthermore, it could also be used to partially block a blood ves-
sel, as shown in Fig. 6. We can see blood cells marked with red arrows 
Fig. 2. Imaging blood vessel before and after closure. (A and C) RCM and STD 
images of the same blood vessel before and after closure. (B) Algorithm of STD. 
N is the frame number for calculation of STD (in this case, N = 10); Ixy(i) is the pixel (x,y) 
intensity in the ith frame; Uxy is the average intensity at pixel (x,y) over all frames. 
(D to G) STD of different sized blood vessels before (top row) and after (bottom 
row) closure. The dashed white square boxes indicate the scanning irradiation area 
of the high-power treatment fs laser on the vessels. The pulse energy is 4.5 nJ per 
pulse, and the irradiation time is in the range of 0.1 to 2.1 s. Scale bars, 50 m. (See 
movies S1 and S2 for more details.)
Fig. 3. Spatially selective blood vessel closure. (A and B) STD image of two blood 
vessels crossing over but located in different layers before (A) and after (B) treat-
ment. The vertical blood vessel (white arrow) is at the bottom layer, and the other 
one (red arrow) is on the top layer. (C) Orientation of the two blood vessels. 
(D) RCM of the treated blood vessel at the bottom layer. The bright spot (white 
arrow) in (D) indicates the coagulation of blood cells. The laser pulse energy is 
4.5 nJ per pulse, and the irradiation time is 4.5 s. Scale bars, 50 m. (See movies S3 and 
S4 for more details.)
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Huang et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaan9388     15 May 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
4 of 6
before the laser irradiation (Fig. 6A). Both are bright spots. Some blood 
cells can also be visualized in the vessel after the laser irradiation (Fig. 6B), 
which indicates that the blood vessel has been partially blocked. The 
STD image (Fig. 6, C and D) and movie S7 also demonstrate that the 
blood vessel was partially blocked. The speed of blood cells could be 
calculated from the movie. We traced eight cells in the movie and calcu-
lated their speed before and after treatment. The results are shown in 
Fig. 6E. The mean speed of the eight cells increased by about 40%, from 
0.021 to 0.029 mm/s, after partial closure of the vessel (Fig. 6E).
DISCUSSION
We developed two different systems for imaging the vessels, delivering 
the treatment fs laser beam, and monitoring the treatment process/
effects. One system (fig. S1) enables the treatment beam to scan a region 
of interest (ROI) small area inside the vessel. Full field of view (FOV) 
RCM imaging is carried out before treatment to detect and select target-
ing vessel for closure. Full FOV image is taken again after treatment to 
assess the treatment effects. The treatment process can only be moni-
tored by the ROI imaging, with the drawback of not seeing the surround-
ing tissues. The other system (fig. S3) enables point treatment (fs laser 
focal spot stays still) but full FOV monitoring of the therapy process. In 
our future studies, we will develop a more versatile system by adding 
another X-Y scanner between the fs laser and the DM in fig. S3 to realize 
variable ROI treatment under full FOV imaging guidance. This will 
enable us to design experiments to study whether there are differences 
between the point mode treatment and the ROI scanning mode treat-
ment, as well as the effect of the ROI size on the treatment outcome. In 
both systems, the imaging beam and the treatment beam are well aligned 
with each other, and their focal planes are located accurately at the same 
depth level. The depth of treatment depends on the scattering properties 
of the tissue. The maximum depth could be about 400 m for skin tissue 
and larger than 1 mm for brain tissue. For ophthalmology applications, 
we see no problem for the laser beam to penetrate through the eye ball 
and treat retinal blood vessels.
This study represents the first demonstration of multiphoton 
absorption–based photothermolysis (or simply called multiphoton 
photothermolysis) in vivo. We have demonstrated that precise closure 
of a single blood vessel can be achieved through multiphoton photo-
thermolysis under RCM monitoring and without any need for an 
exogenous agent. Confocal Raman spectroscopy indicated that vessel 
closure was mediated by coagulation of blood cells. We also demon-
strated that partial vessel occlusion could be achieved, and it is 
accompanied by increased intravascular blood cell speed.
Closing blood vessels with multiphoton photothermolysis could 
presumably be used to treat diseases related to excessive angiogenesis. 
The advantages of this approach over conventional (single-photon) 
photothermolysis treatment are more precise target selectivity and 
Fig. 4. Raman spectra of blood cells before (green curve) and after (red curve) the blood vessel closure. The Raman bands at 377 cm−1 (highlighted in vertical red 
line) and 970 and 1248 cm−1 (highlighted in magenta lines) increased, and the bands at 418 cm−1 (highlighted in dark green line) and 1543 cm−1 (highlighted in blue line) 
decreased. The bands at 677 and 754 cm−1 (black dashed lines) shifted to 667 and 749 cm−1, respectively. The red dashed lines in the images indicate the blood vessel 
inner edges. The white square represents the fs laser treatment area. The yellow dashed circle indicates the coagulation region. Scale bars, 50 m. a.u., arbitrary units.
Fig. 5. Morphological dynamics of a large size blood vessel before, during, and 
after treatment using the point treatment system. (A to E) RCM images of the 
blood vessel before treatment, laser on, 1 s later, 2 s later, and after occlusion. The 
red dashed lines in (A) to (D) show the blood vessel edges. The red dot in (A) indi-
cates the fs laser irradiation position. There is a bright spot [indicated by the arrow 
in (B)] at the fs laser irradiation position immediately after the laser is turned on. 
The bright spot becomes a bright stripe [as outlined by the white dashed curve in 
(C)] after the fs laser has irradiated for 1 s. A very bright spot appears after the fs 
laser has irradiated for 2 s, and the blood vessel begins to contract [as indicated by 
the arrow in (D)]. Scale bars, 50 m (A to E). (F) Averaged intensity over an area 
surrounding the fs laser irradiation point (50 m × 50 m) variation with time. Time 
points (A) to (E) correspond to the images in panels (A) to (E), respectively. (See movie 
S6 for more details.)
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Huang et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaan9388     15 May 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
5 of 6
deeper effective treatment depth. Because this new technique is spa-
tially selective, a single blood vessel could be closed precisely with-
out damages to other neighbor vessels and surrounding tissues. 
This would allow selective denaturation of certain vessels while 
sparing other vessels to preserve normal tissue physiology once the 
disease is healed. Both the treatment and monitoring are label free 
and conducted in a noninvasive fashion. This is a precise “see and 
treat” microsurgery type anti-vascular method and holds particular 
promise for treating diseases in complex organs such as the eye 
(noninvasively) or brain, where high spatial selectivity is critical for 
preventing collateral effects on vision or central nervous system 
function. It represents a precision medicine approach for vascular 
disease treatment on a per-vessel/per-lesion basis.
Besides treatment of diseases related to excessive angiogenesis, 
closing blood vessels with multiphoton photothermolysis could 
also be used to create an ischemic stroke model. Stroke is one of the 
leading causes of death worldwide (23), and about 87% of stroke is 
of ischemic origin (24). Building ischemic stroke models would be 
of value to investigate the mechanism of ischemic stroke. Some tech-
nologies such as surgery ligation and drug administration have been 
used to build ischemic stroke model in murine animals (25–28). 
However, these technologies are not able to build precise ischemic 
stroke models. Nishimura et al. (29) have demonstrated that precise 
stroke models could be built with ultrashort laser pulses and injected 
fluorescein-conjugated dextran. However, the injected fluorescein- 
conjugated dextran may interact with the medicine when studying 
the effect of the medicine on ischemic stroke. The use of exogenous 
agent may also interfere with other biological processes; therefore, 
it is not desirable for basic vascular biology study. Conversely, in 
our approach, no exogenous agent is needed. This will benefit medi-
cine investigation and basic vascular biology study.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study design
In this study, the in vivo targeting of single cutaneous vessels was 
demonstrated using a mouse ear model. In vivo RCM was used to localize 
a target vessel, monitor the treatment process, and then confirm the 
closure of the selected vessel. In vivo confocal Raman spectroscopy 
was used to characterize the biochemical changes at the targeted treat-
ment sites for understanding the anti-vascular action mechanism.
Animal model
NODSCID mice were used in this study. In total, 83 blood vessels 
on the ears of 12 mice were treated with a fs laser beam. During laser 
treatment, the mice were anesthetized intraperitoneally with chloral 
hydrate (3%, 1 ml/100 mg). Mouse ear hair was removed with depila-
tory cream before laser treatment. The mouse ear for treatment was 
adhered to a glass slide with a double-sided tape. Distilled water was 
added in between the mouse ear and the microscope objective 
for refractive index matching. All animal experiments were performed 
according to a protocol approved by the University of British 
Columbia Animal Care Committee (certificate number: A10-0338).
Multimodality optical system for imaging 
and closure of blood vessel
A real-time (15 frames/s) multimodality optical microscopy system 
was developed to image and close blood vessels (fig. S1). A high- 
power 
Ti:sapphire fs laser (Chameleon, Coherent Inc., Santa Clara, CA) tuned 
to 830 nm was used for blood vessel treatment. The fs laser power on 
the mouse ear was 400 mW, which corresponded to 4.5 nJ per pulse 
with a 90-MHz pulse repetition rate. The total fs laser dose required to 
close a blood vessel varied with vessel diameter, blood cell speed, and 
the vessel depth within the skin. To control the fs laser fluence, the 
treatment procedure was monitored with fsRCM, in which the des-
canned fs laser reflectance signal was collected with an avalanched 
photodiode (APD). To avoid signal saturation and APD damage due 
to the intense fs laser power, the gain of the APD was reduced to the 
minimum, and one neutral density filter was used to attenuate the re-
flectance signal. A cw laser with a 785-nm wavelength was used to per-
form RCM imaging (cwRCM) before and after the fs laser treatment to 
confirm blood vessel closure. The cw laser was also used to excite the 
blood vessel Raman signal, which, in turn, was extracted with a DM. The 
DM reflects 785-nm light and transmits light at longer wavelengths. 
Fig. 6. Partial blood vessel occlusion. (A and C) RCM and STD images of a blood vessel before treatment. The blood cells marked with red arrows can be clearly identi-
fied. (B and D) RCM and STD images of the same blood vessel after treatment. Scale bars, 50 m. The white arrow in (B) indicates the coagulation part, corresponding to 
the dark area in the STD image (D). The flowing cells indicated by red arrows in (B) suggest that the blood vessel was partially blocked. (E) Speed of red blood cells (RBCs) 
before and after treatment. The average speed of RBCs increased significantly, from 0.021 to 0.029 mm/s (P < 0.05, by paired t test; n = 8). (See movie S7 for more details.)
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 Huang et al., Sci. Adv. 2019; 5 : eaan9388     15 May 2019
SCIE N C E A D V A NCES | RESEA R CH  A RT ICL E
6 of 6
A flip mirror was used to switch between these two lasers. The Raman 
spectrometer was equipped with a NIR-optimized back-illumination 
deep-depletion charge-coupled device (CCD) array (Spec-10:100BR/
LN, Princeton Instruments, Trenton, NJ) and a transmissive imag-
ing spectrograph (HoloSpec f/2.2 NIR, Kaiser, Ann Arbor, MI) with 
a volume phase technology holographic grating (HSG-785-LF, Kaiser). 
The CCD has a 16-bit dynamic range and was cooled with liquid nitro-
gen to −120°C.The spectral resolution of the system is 8 cm−1.
Confocal Raman spectroscopy
The Raman spectra were collected and analyzed according to a similar 
approach in our previous work (30, 31). In brief, with the confocal ar-
rangement, the Raman signal was collected from the focal volume of the 
785-nm cw laser beam. The excitation power incident on mouse ear was 
20 mW, and the acquisition time for one spectrum was 20 s. The raw data 
included the Raman scattering and autofluorescence background. The 
autofluorescence background was removed using the Vancouver Raman 
Algorithm, which is based on an iterative polynomial fitting method (32).
Statistical analysis
Student’s t test was used to evaluate the statistical difference. P < 0.05 
means a significant difference.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
Supplementary material for this article is available at http://advances.sciencemag.org/cgi/
content/full/5/5/eaan9388/DC1
Fig. S1. Optical system for imaging and closing mouse ear blood vessels.
Fig. S2. In vivo confocal Raman spectra of blood cells, sebaceous gland, and collagen.
Fig. S3. Schematic of the point treatment system.
Table S1. Tentative assignment of Raman bands.
Movie S1. Y-shaped blood vessels before closure of the vertical blood vessel.
Movie S2. V-shaped blood vessel after closure of the vertical blood vessel.
Movie S3. Three-dimensional orientation of two blood vessels before treatment.
Movie S4. Three-dimensional orientation of two blood vessels after treatment.
Movie S5. fsRCM of the blood vessel during the fs laser treatment.
Movie S6. The dynamic process of the blood vessel closure using the point treatment system.
Movie S7. Partial closure of blood vessel.
REFERENCES AND NOTES
 1. P. Carmeliet, Angiogenesis in health and disease. Nat. Med. 9, 653–660 (2003).
 2. J. Folkman, Role of angiogenesis in tumor growth and metastasis. Semin. Oncol. 29, 
15–18 (2002).
 3. W. M. Al-zamil, S. A. Yassin, Recent developments in age-related macular degeneration: 
A review. Clin. Interv. Aging 12, 1313–1330 (2017).
 4. Macular Photocoagulation Study Group, Argon laser photocoagulation for neovascular 
maculopathy. Three-year results from randomized clinical trials. Arch. Ophthalmol. 104, 
694–701 (1986).
 5. Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study Research Group, Treatment techniques 
and clinical guidelines for photocoagulation of diabetic macular edema: Early treatment 
diabetic retinopathy study report number 2. Ophthalmology 94, 761–774 (1987).
 6. R. R. Anderson, J. A. Parrish, Selective photothermolysis: Precise microsurgery by 
selective absorption of pulsed radiation. Science 220, 524–527 (1983).
 7. A. M. Chapas, K. Eickhorst, R. G. Geronemus, Efficacy of early treatment of facial port wine 
stains in newborns: A review of 49 cases. Lasers Surg. Med. 39, 563–568 (2007).
 8. L. Izikson, J. S. Nelson, R. R. Anderson, Treatment of hypertrophic and resistant port wine 
stains with a 755 nm laser: A case series of 20 patients. Lasers Surg. Med. 41, 427–432 (2009).
 9. S. W. Lanigan, S. M. Taibjee, Recent advances in laser treatment of port-wine stains.  
Br. J. Dermatol. 151, 527–533 (2004).
 10. Z. F. Jasim, J. M. Handley, Treatment of pulsed dye laser-resistant port wine stain 
birthmarks. J. Am. Acad. Dermatol. 57, 677–682 (2007).
 11. T. Soleymani, M. Abrouk, K. M. Kelly, An analysis of laser therapy for the treatment 
of nonmelanoma skin cancer. Dermatol. Surg. 43, 615–624 (2017).
 12. K. P. Allison, M. N. Kieman, R. A. Waters, R. M. Clement, Pulsed dye laser treatment 
of superficial basal cell carcinoma: Realistic or not? Lasers Med. Sci. 18, 125–126 (2003).
 13. P. Campolmi, L. Mavilia, P. Bonan, G. Cannarozzo, T. M. Lotti, 595 nm pulsed dye laser 
for the treatment of superficial basal cell carcinoma. Lasers Med. Sci. 20, 147–148 (2005).
 14. S. M. Shah, N. Konnikov, L. M. Duncan, Z. S. Tannous, The effect of 595 nm pulsed dye laser 
on superficial and nodular basal cell carcinomas. Lasers Surg. Med. 41, 417–422 (2009).
 15. N. Konnikov, M. Avram, A. Jarell, Z. Tannous, Pulsed dye laser as a novel non-surgical 
treatment for basal cell carcinomas: Response and follow up 12-21 months after 
treatment. Lasers Surg. Med. 43, 72–78 (2011).
 16. R. R. Anderson, Lasers for dermatology and skin biology. J. Invest. Dermatol. 133, E21–E23 (2013).
 17. R. Anderson, J. Parrish, in The Science of Photomedicine, J. D. Regan Ed. (Springer, 1982), 
pp. 147–194.
 18. I. K. Rubin, W. A. Farinelli, A. Doukas, R. R. Anderson, Optimal wavelengths for vein-
selective photothermolysis. Lasers Surg. Med. 44, 152–157 (2012).
 19. H. Wang, S. Zandi, A. M. Lee, J. Zhao, H. Lui, D. I. McLean, H. Zeng, Imaging directed 
photothermolysis through two-photon absorption demonstrated on mouse skin–a 
potential novel tool for highly targeted skin treatment. J. Biophotonics 7, 534–541 (2014).
 20. Y. Huang, H. Lui, J. Zhao, Z. Wu, H. Zeng, Precise spatially selective photothermolysis 
using modulated femtosecond lasers and real-time multimodal microscopy monitoring. 
Theranostics 7, 513–522 (2017).
 21. P. Lemler, W. R. Premasiri, A. DelMonaco, L. D. Ziegler, NIR Raman spectra of whole 
human blood: Effects of laser-induced and in vitro hemoglobin denaturation.  
Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 406, 193–200 (2014).
 22. Z. Movasaghi, S. Rehman, I. U. Rehman, Raman spectroscopy of biological tissues.  
Appl. Spectrosc. Rev. 42, 493–541 (2007).
 23. S.-Y. Li, D. Yang, Z. J. Fu, T. Woo, D. Wong, A. C. Y. Lo, Lutein enhances survival and reduces neuronal 
damage in a mouse model of ischemic stroke. Neurobiol. Dis. 45, 624–632 (2012).
 24. E. J. Su, D. A. Lawrence, 2 antiplasmin and microvascular thrombosis in ischemic stroke. 
Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 34, 2522–2523 (2014).
 25. A. Selvamani, P. Sathyan, R. C. Miranda, F. Sohrabji, An antagomir to MicroRNA Let7f 
promotes neuroprotection in an ischemic stroke model. PLOS ONE 7, e32662 (2012).
 26. F. Bohmann, A. Mirceska, J. Pfeilschifter, E. Lindhoff-Last, H. Steinmetz, C. Foerch, 
W. Pfeilschifter, No influence of dabigatran anticoagulation on hemorrhagic 
transformation in an experimental model of ischemic stroke. PLOS ONE 7, e40804 (2012).
 27. K. Saita, M. Chen, N. J. Spratt, M. J. Porritt, G. T. Liberatore, S. J. Read, C. R. Levi, 
G. A. Donnan, U. Ackermann, H. J. Tochon-Danguy, J. I. Sachinidis, D. W. Howells, Imaging 
the ischemic penumbra with 18f-fluoromisonidazole in a rat model of ischemic stroke. 
Stroke 35, 975–980 (2004).
 28. M. Daffertshofer, Z. Huang, M. Fatar, M. Popolo, H. Schroeck, W. Kuschinsky, 
M. A. Moskowitz, M. G. Hennerici, Efficacy of sonothrombolysis in a rat model of embolic 
ischemic stroke. Neurosci. Lett. 361, 115–119 (2004).
 29. N. Nishimura, C. B. Schaffer, B. Friedman, P. S. Tsai, P. D. Lyden, D. Kleinfeld, Targeted 
insult to subsurface cortical blood vessels using ultrashort laser pulses: Three models 
of stroke. Nat. Methods 3, 99–108 (2006).
 30. H. Wang, N. Huang, J. Zhao, H. Lui, M. Korbelik, H. Zeng, Depth-resolved in vivo 
micro-Raman spectroscopy of a murine skin tumor model reveals cancer-specific spectral 
biomarkers. J. Raman Spectrosc. 42, 160–166 (2011).
 31. H. Wang, A. M. D. Lee, H. Lui, D. I. McLean, H. Zeng, A Method for accurate in vivo 
micro-Raman spectroscopic measurements under guidance of advanced microscopy 
imaging. Sci. Rep. 3, 1890 (2013).
 32. J. Zhao, H. Lui, D. I. Mclean, H. Zeng, Automated autofluorescence background 
subtraction algorithm for biomedical Raman spectroscopy. Appl. Spectrosc. 61, 
1225–1232 (2017).
Acknowledgments: We appreciate the fruitful discussions with D. I. McLean during the 
course of the project. Funding: This work was supported by the Canadian Institutes of Health 
Research (grant MOP130548), the National Key Basic Research Program of China (grant 
2015CB352006), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61335011), the Canadian 
Dermatology Foundation, the VGH & UBC Hospital Foundation, and the BC Hydro Employees 
Community Services Fund. Author contributions: All authors contributed to designing the 
experiments, analyzing the results, and writing the manuscript. H.Z., Y.H., and H.L. conceived 
the project. Y.H. and Z.W. performed all the experiments reported in this paper. Competing 
interests: H.Z. and H.L. are inventors on a U.S. patent related to this work filed by BC Cancer 
Agency (no. 9687152B2, issued on 27 June 2017). The BC Cancer Agency, H.Z., and H.L. will 
receive royalties from any commercialization of the patent. The authors declare no other 
competing interests. Data and materials availability: All data needed to evaluate the 
conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials. 
Additional data related to this paper may be requested from the authors.
Submitted 7 December 2018
Accepted 2 April 2019
Published 15 May 2019
10.1126/sciadv.aan9388
Citation: Y. Huang, Z. Wu, H. Lui, J. Zhao, S. Xie, H. Zeng, Precise closure of single blood vessels 
via multiphoton absorption–based photothermolysis. Sci. Adv. 5, eaan9388 (2019).
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
 based photothermolysis
−
Precise closure of single blood vessels via multiphoton absorption
Yimei Huang, Zhenguo Wu, Harvey Lui, Jianhua Zhao, Shusen Xie and Haishan Zeng
DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.aan9388
 (5), eaan9388.
5
Sci Adv 
ARTICLE TOOLS
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/5/5/eaan9388
MATERIALS
SUPPLEMENTARY 
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/suppl/2019/05/13/5.5.eaan9388.DC1
REFERENCES
http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/5/5/eaan9388#BIBL
This article cites 31 articles, 3 of which you can access for free
PERMISSIONS
http://www.sciencemag.org/help/reprints-and-permissions
Terms of Service
Use of this article is subject to the 
registered trademark of AAAS.
is a
Science Advances 
Association for the Advancement of Science. No claim to original U.S. Government Works. The title 
York Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005. 2017 © The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American 
(ISSN 2375-2548) is published by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1200 New
Science Advances 
 on June 4, 2019
http://advances.sciencemag.org/
Downloaded from 
