 Article
The Rockefeller University Press 
J. Exp. Med. 2017 Vol. 214 No. 12 3669–3685
https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171413
The Journal of Experimental Medicine
3669
IntroductIon
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a prominent neuropathological 
disorder that manifests in the age-dependent deposition of 
extracellular amyloid β (Aβ) peptide aggregates at late stages 
of the disease, whereas soluble Aβ multimers are thought to 
exert neurotoxic effects during mild stages of cognitive de-
cline. Synaptic dysfunction occurs at early stages of AD and 
pathologically correlates with cognitive impairment (Tu et al., 
2014; Marttinen et al., 2015). Although familial AD cases are 
rare, the presence of penetrant AD-associated familial alleles 
found in the Aβ-derived amyloid precursor protein (APP) 
and the APP-cleaving γ-secretase presenilin components 
(PS1/PS2) supports the importance of Aβ and APP process-
ing in AD neuropathology (Zhang et al., 2011).
Numerous genetic risk factors have been identified 
for AD by genome-wide association studies, including class 
I membrane receptors such as the Sortilin-related receptor 
with LDLR class A repeats (SOR 
LA; Scherzer et al., 2004; 
Rogaeva et al., 2007). SOR 
LA has been reported to sup-
press Aβ generation primarily by trafficking APP away from 
amyloidogenic cleavage sites, such as the endosome, to the 
Golgi (Andersen et al., 2005; Fjorback et al., 2012) and the 
cell surface (Huang et al., 2016), although other mechanisms 
may also be involved (Spoelgen et al., 2006; Schmidt et al., 
2012). Cellular models have also suggested that SOR 
LA may 
facilitate Aβ clearance by binding Aβ and promoting its traf-
ficking to lysosomes for degradation (Caglayan et al., 2014; 
Kitago et al., 2015). Recent studies have identified protein 
coding mutations in late-onset AD (Vardarajan et al., 2015; 
Louwersheimer et al., 2017), as well as early-onset AD (Pot-
tier et al., 2012; Nicolas et al., 2016), giving a strong indica-
tion that SOR 
LA dysfunction can enhance the probability 
of triggering AD onset.
Modulation of SOR 
LA expression in mouse models 
supports a role in inhibiting APP processing and Aβ gener-
ation. SOR 
LA knockout mouse models show marked ele-
vation in Aβ levels, whereas SOR 
LA-Rosa26 transgenic 
overexpression models show significant reduction in Aβ (An-
dersen et al., 2005; Caglayan et al., 2014). 
The connection be-
tween SOR 
LA expression levels and Aβ accumulation is less 
definitive in human AD brain tissue (Scherzer et al., 2004), 
suggesting that modifications in SOR 
LA activity or localiza-
tion also play a role in AD pathogenesis.
There is also evidence that SOR 
LA has additional neu-
roprotective roles besides promoting anti-amyloidogenic APP 
Sortilin-related receptor with LdLr class A repeats (Sor 
LA, SorL1, or Lr11) is a genetic risk factor associated with Alzhei-
mer’s disease (Ad). Although Sor 
LA is known to regulate trafficking of the amyloid β (Aβ) precursor protein to decrease levels 
of proteotoxic Aβ oligomers, whether Sor 
LA can counteract synaptic dysfunction induced by Aβ oligomers remains unclear. 
Here, we show that Sor 
LA interacts with the EphA4 receptor tyrosine kinase and attenuates ephrinA1 ligand–induced EphA4 
clustering and activation to limit downstream effects of EphA4 signaling in neurons. consistent with these findings, Sor 
LA 
transgenic mice, compared with Wt mice, exhibit decreased EphA4 activation and redistribution to postsynaptic densities, with 
milder deficits in long-term potentiation and memory induced by Aβ oligomers. Importantly, we detected elevated levels of 
active EphA4 in human Ad brains, where EphA4 activation is inversely correlated with Sor 
LA/EphA4 association. these results 
demonstrate a novel role for Sor 
LA as a physiological and pathological EphA4 modulator, which attenuates synaptotoxic 
EphA4 activation and cognitive impairment associated with Aβ-induced neurodegeneration in Ad.
SOR 
LA attenuates EphA4 signaling and amyloid β–
induced neurodegeneration
Timothy Y
. Huang,1* 
Yingjun Zhao,1* Lu-lin Jiang,1 Xiaoguang Li,1 
Yan Liu,1,2 
Yu Sun,1 
Juan C. Piña-Crespo,1 Bing Zhu,1 Eliezer Masliah,3,4 Thomas E. Willnow,5 Elena B. Pasquale,1,3  
and Huaxi Xu1,2
1Neuroscience Initiative, Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute, La Jolla, CA
2Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Neurodegenerative Disease and Aging Research, Institute of Neuroscience, Medical College, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China
3Department of Pathology and 4Department of Neuroscience, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA
5Max-Delbrueck-Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany
© 2017 Huang et al. This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution–Noncommercial–Share 
Alike–No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the publication date (see http 
://www 
.rupress 
.org 
/terms 
/). After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License (Attribution–Noncommercial–
Share Alike 4.0 International license, as described at https 
://creativecommons 
.org 
/licenses 
/by 
-nc 
-sa 
/4 
.0 
/).
*T.Y. Huang and Y. Zhao contributed equally to this paper.
Correspondence to Huaxi Xu: xuh@sbpdiscovery.org
Abbreviations used: Aβ, amyloid β; aCSF, artificial cerebrospinal fluid; AD, Alzheimer’s 
disease; ALS, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; EGF, epidermal growth factor; fEPSP, field 
excitatory postsynaptic potential; GST, glutathione S-transferase; LTP, long-term 
potentiation; PSD, postsynaptic density; SOR 
LA, Sortilin-related receptor with LDLR 
class A repeats; TG, transgenic.
on June 3, 2019
jem.rupress.org 
Downloaded from 
http://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20171413
Published Online: 7 November, 2017 | Supp Info: 
 SOR 
LA/EphA4 interaction inhibits Aβ toxicity | Huang et al.
3670
trafficking. In addition to APP
, SOR 
LA has been recently 
shown to bind and regulate the trafficking and signaling of 
other cell surface receptors, such as the brain-derived neu-
rotrophic factor receptor, TrkB; the glial cell–derived neuro-
trophic factor receptor, cytokine-like factor 1 (CLF-1); and 
the insulin receptor (Glerup et al., 2013; Rohe et al., 2013; 
Larsen et al., 2016; Schmidt et al., 2016). Thus, it is likely that 
SOR 
LA could also modulate other as-yet-unknown cell sur-
face receptor systems with a role in AD pathogenesis. Indeed, 
by using a coimmunoprecipitation approach to screen for Aβ 
cell surface receptors that interact with SOR 
LA, we identi-
fied EphA4 (Fu et al., 2014).
EphA4 is a receptor tyrosine kinase with established 
roles in neuronal wiring and defining cell borders in the 
developing brain through interaction with ephrin ligands 
(Pasquale, 2005, 2008; Hruska and Dalva, 2012). In addition, 
EphA4 remains highly expressed in the adult brain, where it 
regulates synaptic structure and function (Murai et al., 2003; 
Carmona et al., 2009; Filosa et al., 2009). More recently, Aβ 
interaction with EphA4 has been shown to aberrantly ac-
tivate EphA4, leading to synaptotoxic signals in APP/PS1 
mouse models that may involve c-Abl and Cdk5 activation 
(Fu et al., 2014; 
Vargas et al., 2014). Here, we demonstrate that 
SOR 
LA can attenuate EphA4 clustering and activation in re-
sponse to physiological ephrin ligand stimulation and patho-
logical Aβ oligomers as well as attenuate cognitive memory 
deficits in mouse models. A late-onset SOR 
LA T947M AD 
mutation within the EphA4-binding domain of SOR 
LA at-
tenuates EphA4/SOR 
LA interaction and associated EphA4 
inactivation. Importantly, decreased SOR 
LA/EphA4 interac-
tion correlates with elevated levels of EphA4 activation via 
autophosphorylation on T
yr602 in AD patients. Our study 
reveals a new role for SOR 
LA in suppressing EphA4 acti-
vation to ameliorate Aβ-associated synaptotoxicity and cog-
nitive impairment in AD.
rESuLtS
Sor 
LA interacts with EphA4 and 
attenuates EphA4 activation
EphB2 and EphA4 are related ephrin receptors that have 
been recently shown to bind Aβ and mediate its synaptotoxic 
effects (Cissé et al., 2011; Fu et al., 2014). We therefore inves-
tigated whether SOR 
LA can form endogenous complexes 
with Eph receptors. Analysis of EphA4, EphB1, and EphB2 
immunoprecipitates from mouse brain lysates revealed spe-
cific coimmunoprecipitation of SOR 
LA with EphA4 (Fig. 
S1 A). The interaction of SOR 
LA with EphA4 appears sim-
ilar to that with APP immunoprecipitated from mouse brain 
lysates (Fig. 1 A). EphA4 and SOR 
LA complexes could also 
be reconstituted in HEK293 cells. Coexpression of SOR 
LA–
glutathione S-transferase (SOR 
LA-GST) with EphA4 and 
subsequent pull-down with glutathione Sepharose showed 
association of EphA4 with SOR 
LA-GST, whereas no EphA4 
association was observed with GST alone (Fig. 1 B). In ad-
dition, an EphA4-Fc fusion protein comprising the EphA4 
ectodomain immobilized on protein G Sepharose could pull 
down SOR 
LA from cell lysates (Fig. S1 B).
Its interaction with EphA4 suggests that SOR 
LA could 
be an EphA4 substrate. T
o examine this, we overexpressed 
EphA4 WT or the kinase-dead K653R mutant in HEK293 
cells and examined SOR 
LA and EphA4 immunoprecipitates 
for tyrosine phosphorylation (Fig. S1 C). We observed phos-
phorylation of EphA4 WT but not the K653R mutant, as 
expected. However, we did not detect SOR 
LA tyrosine phos-
phorylation (Fig. S1 C), suggesting that the short cytoplasmic 
portion of SOR 
LA is not a substrate for EphA4.
We next considered the possibility that SOR 
LA influ-
ences EphA4 activation in response to ephrin ligand (ephrinA1- 
Fc) stimulation. Using HEK293 cells stably expressing EphA4 
(HEK-A4), we observed rapid ephrinA1-Fc–induced EphA4 
phosphorylation on 
Y602 indicative of activation, which per-
sisted for several hours (Fig. S1 D). Similar EphA4 activa-
tion was also observed in WT cortical neurons (Fig. S1 E). 
Interestingly, overexpression of SOR 
LA in HEK-A4 cells 
attenuated EphA4 activation in response to ephrinA1-Fc 
stimulation (Fig. 1, C and D). Similarly, EphA4 activation in-
duced by ephrinA1-Fc was lower in cortical neurons derived 
from SOR 
LA transgenic (TG) mice compared with WT 
neurons (Fig. 1 E), whereas basal EphA4 activation in WT 
and SOR 
LA TG neurons was not significantly different (Fig. 
S1 F). Conversely, neuronal cultures derived from SOR 
LA 
KO mice exhibited enhanced EphA4 activation in response 
to ephrinA1-Fc stimulation compared with 
WT neurons (Fig. 
S1 G). T
ogether, these results demonstrate a novel interaction 
between SOR 
LA and EphA4 and suggest that SOR 
LA is a 
negative modulator of EphA4 activation.
Sor 
LA attenuates ephrin ligand–induced  
growth cone collapse
Ephrin-induced EphA4 activation in neurons triggers the 
activation of RhoGTPase-mediated actin cytoskeleton re-
arrangements, leading to growth cone collapse, which is 
critical for axon guidance during development (Shamah et 
al., 2001; Shi et al., 2007). T
o examine whether modulating 
SOR 
LA levels could alter physiological responses mediated 
by EphA4 signaling, we cultured hippocampal neurons de-
rived from 
WT, SOR 
LA 
TG, or SOR 
LA KO mice and deter-
mined the effects of SOR 
LA levels on ephrinA1-Fc–induced 
growth cone collapse. After 3 d in culture, WT neurons fea-
tured F-actin–rich growth cones at the tip of long axonal 
processes (Fig. 2, A and B). WT, SOR 
LA TG, or SOR 
LA 
 
KO neurons from several independent embryonic dissections 
were stimulated with ephrinA1-Fc, or Fc as a control, and 
fluorescently labeled growth cones were scored as collapsed 
or not collapsed. In agreement with previous studies (Egea 
et al., 2005; Richter et al., 2007; Shi et al., 2007; Fu et al., 
2014), 82% of the WT growth cones were collapsed after 30 
min of ephrinA1-Fc stimulation, representing a threefold in-
crease compared with Fc control stimulation (Fig. 2, A, C, 
and D). SOR 
LA TG growth cones were less responsive, with 
 3671
JEM Vol. 214, No. 12
only 48% of the growth cones scored as collapsed after eph-
rinA1-Fc stimulation (representing a 1.5-fold increase over 
Fc-treated controls) and numerous neurons retaining intact 
growth cones (52%; Fig. 2, B–D). Interestingly, SOR 
LA KO 
neurons exhibited high basal growth cone collapse (Fc treat-
ment; Fig. 2 C), and most growth cones were collapsed after 
ephrinA1-Fc stimulation (Fig. 2 C). T
ogether, these results 
support a role for SOR 
LA in suppressing ephrin-induced 
EphA4 signaling activities.
Sor 
LA attenuates ephrin ligand–induced EphA4 clustering
As a regulator of protein trafficking, SOR 
LA has been shown 
to modulate the cell surface localization of receptors such as 
TrkB and the insulin receptor (Rohe et al., 2013; Schmidt et 
al., 2016). However, we did not observe changes in EphA4 
cell surface levels in HEK293T cells and neurons overex-
pressing SOR 
LA (Fig. S2 A), SOR 
LA TG neurons (Fig. S2 
C), SOR 
LA siRNA knockdown HEK293T cells, or SOR 
LA 
 
KO neurons (Fig. S2 B). Biochemical fractionation also did 
not reveal a significant difference in EphA4 distribution in 
Triton X-100–soluble and –insoluble postsynaptic density 
(PSD) membrane fractions in WT and SOR 
LA TG mice 
 
(Fig. S2, D and E).
Interestingly, SOR 
LA interaction with APP has been 
previously shown to inhibit APP oligomerization (Schmidt 
et al., 2012). Because ligand-mediated EphA4 homotypic 
clustering precedes EphA4 activation (Egea et al., 2005), we 
hypothesized that SOR 
LA may inhibit EphA4 activation by 
interfering with receptor clustering. We observed formation 
of endogenous EphA4 clusters in noncollapsed hippocam-
pal growth cones after short-term ephrinA1-Fc stimulation 
(5 min), whereas more prolonged ephrinA1-Fc stimulation 
(30 min) produced EphA4 clusters in collapsed growth cones 
(Fig. 3 A). Comparison of EphA4 immunoreactivity in WT, 
SOR 
LA TG, and SOR 
LA KO neurons stimulated with eph-
rinA1-Fc for 5 min suggested the preferential formation of 
Figure 1. Sor 
LA interacts with EphA4 and suppresses EphA4 activation in response to ligand stimulation. (A) SOR 
LA coimmunoprecipitates with 
EphA4. EphA4 or APP was immunoprecipitated with the indicated antibodies and immunoblotted for SOR 
LA, EphA4, or APP. (B) SOR 
LA/EphA4 complexes can 
be reconstituted by exogenous expression. EphA4 was coexpressed with GST or SOR 
LA-GST in HEK293T or HEKswAPP cell lines, and glutathione Sepharose 
precipitates were immunoblotted for EphA4, APP (left), or GST (right). A single representative experiment is shown in A and B. (C–E) SOR 
LA overexpression 
attenuates EphA4 activation. (C) HEK293 cells stably expressing EphA4 were transfected with control or SOR 
LA constructs and incubated with ephrinA1-Fc 
(A1-Fc) for the time indicated. EphA4 immunoprecipitates were immunoblotted for pY602 phosphorylation or total EphA4. Data in D represents mean ± SE 
from five independent experiments (*, P < 0.05; Student’s t test). (E) WT or SOR 
LA-overexpressing transgenic (SOR 
LA TG) cortical neurons were stimulated 
with ephrinA1-Fc, and control or EphA4 immunoprecipitates were immunoblotted for EphA4 pY602 or total EphA4 as indicated. Lysate inputs are shown 
(right). (F) Cumulative data from E; graphs represent mean ± SE from seven independent experiments (*, P < 0.05; Student’s t test).
 SOR 
LA/EphA4 interaction inhibits Aβ toxicity | Huang et al.
3672
EphA4 clusters in WT and SOR 
LA KO neurons, with few 
clusters observed in SOR 
LA 
TG neurons (Fig. 3 B). 
We there-
fore measured EphA4 cluster formation in F-actin–labeled 
growth cones stimulated with ephrinA1-Fc for 5 min, which 
revealed a significantly attenuated EphA4 clustering response 
in SOR 
LA TG neurons and a slightly enhanced EphA4 clus-
tering response in SOR 
LA KO neurons (Fig. 3, C and D). 
Because we did not observe any differences in overall EphA4 
labeling intensity in 
WT, SOR 
LA 
TG, or SOR 
LA KO growth 
cones (Fig. 3 E), SOR 
LA does not appear to affect aggregation 
through changes in EphA4 levels, consistent with the immu-
noblotting data shown in Fig. S2 C. 
These results demonstrate 
that SOR 
LA inhibits EphA4 activation by decreasing eph-
rin-induced EphA4 clustering. Although our results suggest 
that SOR 
LA does not affect cell surface distribution of EphA4 
at steady state, it remains possible that SOR 
LA may affect 
EphA4 trafficking with ligand stimulation, likely through at-
tenuating EphA4 clustering kinetics with ligand stimulation.
An Ad-associated mutation in the Sor 
LA YWtd/
epidermal growth factor (EGF)–like region impairs 
Sor 
LA/EphA4 interaction
Because SOR 
LA interacts with the extracellular region of 
EphA4 (Fig. S1 B), we hypothesized that the extracellular region 
of SOR 
LA mediates the interaction with EphA4. The large 
SOR 
LA extracellular region includes an N-terminal VPS10 
domain, a YWTD/EGF-like region, multiple LDLR class A 
repeats, and multiple fibronectin type III repeats (Fig. 4 A). 
T
o identify the SOR 
LA domains that interact with EphA4, 
we purified full-length EphA4 containing C-terminal FLAG 
and hexahistidine tags (EphA4-FLAGhis6) from HEK293 cells 
(Fig. S3 A) and measured its association with Fc fusion pro-
teins of various SOR 
LA extracellular fragments immobilized 
on protein G Sepharose (Fig. 4 B). This process revealed an in-
teraction between EphA4 and the SOR 
LA 
YWTD/EGF-like 
region, indicating a critical role for this region of SOR 
LA in 
mediating the association with EphA4.
Figure 2. Sor 
LA overexpression attenuates ephrin-mediated growth cone collapse. (A and B) Characterization of ephrinA1-mediated growth 
cone collapse in hippocampal neurons. WT (A) or SOR 
LA TG (B) hippocampal neurons were treated with Fc control or ephrinA1-Fc for 30 min at DIV3 and 
stained for tubulin (green) and F-actin (red). Boxed regions are magnified as indicated. Bars, 10 µm. (C and D) Evaluation of growth cone collapse in WT, 
transgenic SOR 
LA (TG) or knockout (KO) hippocampal neurons. (C) WT, SOR 
LA TG, and KO hippocampal neurons were treated with Fc or ephrinA1-Fc for 30 
min and stained for F-actin and tubulin. Growth cones at the tips of axonal processes were imaged and scored into collapsed and noncollapsed categories. 
The percentage of growth cone collapse was calculated in a minimum of three independent dissections, with each data point in the graph representing a 
separate dissection. (D) Fold growth cone (GC) collapse observed with ephrinA1-Fc treatment over Fc control for WT, TG, or KO neurons calculated for each 
experiment in C. In C and D, graphs represent mean ± SE; *, P < 0.05; ****, P < 0.00001; Student’s t test.
 3673
JEM Vol. 214, No. 12
Figure 3. Sor 
LA overexpression attenuates ephrinA1-induced EphA4 clustering. (A) WT hippocampal neurons at DIV3, untreated or exposed to 
control Fc for 30 min or ephrinA1-Fc for the indicated time, were fixed and stained for EphA4 (green), F-actin (red), or tubulin (blue). Note that ephrinA1-Fc 
treatment for 5 min results in EphA4 clustering without growth cone collapse. Bar, 5 µm. (B–D) Evaluation of EphA4 clustering in WT, SOR 
LA TG, and KO 
hippocampal neurons. (B) WT, SOR 
LA TG, and KO hippocampal neurons were treated with ephrinA1-Fc for 5 min and stained for EphA4 (green) and tubulin 
(blue). Boxed regions are magnified in the adjacent panels. Bar, 10 µm. (C) EphA4 clustering within F-actin–rich areas was examined by microscopy in WT, 
SOR 
LA TG, and SOR 
LA KO hippocampal neurons at DIV3 by staining for EphA4 (green), F-actin (red), and tubulin (blue). Bar, 5 µm. EphA4 clusters ≥200 
nm within F-actin–enriched growth cone regions were scored in a minimum of four independent dissections/experiments (D); graph represents mean ± 
SE, from individual experiments; *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.003; Student’s t test. (E) Total EphA4 fluorescence intensities from individual growth cones scored in 
D were plotted; graph represents mean ± SE.
 SOR 
LA/EphA4 interaction inhibits Aβ toxicity | Huang et al.
3674
Interestingly, a SOR 
LA T947M variant within the 
YWTD/EGF-like region (Fig. 4 A) was identified in 
late-onset AD patients and segregated with AD onset in some 
familial lineages analyzed (Vardarajan et al., 2015). Copre-
cipitation of purified EphA4-FLAGhis6 with the SOR 
LA 
WT or T947M variant YWTD/EGF-like domain fused to 
Fc revealed weaker interaction of the T947M variant domain 
with EphA4 (Fig. 4 C). Analysis of EphA4 immunoprecipi-
tates from HEK-A4 cells transfected with full-length SOR 
LA 
 
WT or the T947M variant revealed that the T947M muta-
Figure 4. EphA4 interacts with the Sor 
LA YWtd/EGF-like domain, and EphA4/Sor 
LA interaction is attenuated by a t947M Ad-associated 
Sor 
LA mutation. (A) Schematic diagram of SOR 
LA domains; an AD-associated T947M mutation resides within the YWTD/EGF-like region. (B) The SOR 
LA YWTD/EGF-like region interacts with EphA4. Purified EphA4-FLAGhis6 was incubated with various SOR 
LA domain-Fc fusion proteins immobilized on 
protein G Sepharose, and coprecipitation with EphA4 was evaluated by immunoblotting. Adjacent graph depicts relative EphA4 coprecipitation (YWTD/EGF 
set to 1.0). Results are from three independent experiments; graph represents mean ± SE. (C) Purified EphA4 was evaluated for coprecipitation with WT or 
a T947M variant of the SOR 
LA YWTD/EGF domain fused to Fc as in B. The adjacent graph depicts relative EphA4 binding with the WT construct set to 1.0 
in four replicates from two independent experiments, mean ± SE; **, P < 0.005; Student’s t test. (D and E) The SOR 
LA T947M mutation attenuates SOR 
LA/
EphA4 interaction and effects on EphA4 activation. HEK293 cells stably expressing EphA4 were transfected with control, WT, or T947M SOR 
LA expression 
constructs, and EphA4 immunoprecipitates from lysates were evaluated for SOR 
LA coprecipitation (D) or ephrinA1-Fc induced EphA4 activation (E) by 
immunoblotting. Graphs in D depict T947M coprecipitation relative to WT (set to 1.0; mean ± SE; **, P < 0.005; Student’s t test) from six replicates in four 
independent experiments. Graphs in E show relative pY602/EphA4 ratios with control vector treatments set to 1.0 (mean ± SE from five replicates in three 
independent experiments; *, P < 0.015; paired Student’s t test).
 3675
JEM Vol. 214, No. 12
tion also impairs association with EphA4 in the context of 
full-length SOR 
LA, with or without ephrinA1-Fc stimula-
tion (Fig. 4 D). In addition, the SOR 
LA T947M variant was 
less effective than SOR 
LA WT in inhibiting ephrinA1-Fc–
induced EphA4 activation (Fig. 4 E).
Sor 
LA attenuates Aβ-mediated EphA4 
activation and clustering
We found that EphA4 immunoprecipitates from SOR 
LA 
TG mouse hippocampus show a slight reduction in EphA4 
activation compared with WT hippocampus (Fig. 5, A and 
B), suggesting that SOR 
LA suppresses EphA4 activation by 
ephrin ligands not only in cultured neurons but also in vivo. 
Previous studies indicated a role for EphA4 signaling in medi-
ating the synaptotoxic effects of Aβ oligomers (Fu et al., 2014; 
Vargas et al., 2014). Given that SOR 
LA can attenuate EphA4 
activation in response to physiological ephrin stimulation, we 
investigated whether SOR 
LA can likewise suppress EphA4 
activation and clustering in response to Aβ oligomers. We 
therefore oligomerized Aβ (Aβ1–42; Fig. 5 C), exposed WT 
and SOR 
LA TG cortical neurons to the Aβ oligomers, and 
evaluated EphA4 immunoprecipitates for EphA4 activation 
by immunoblotting (Fig. 5, D and E). Remarkably, Aβ treat-
ment caused a nearly twofold increase in EphA4 activation 
in WT neurons but not in SOR 
LA TG neurons (Fig. 5, D 
and E). Similar to ephrinA1-Fc stimulation, we also observed 
EphA4 clustering in HEK293T cells treated with Aβ oligo-
mers (Fig. S3 B), and SOR 
LA overexpressed together with 
GFP as a marker largely attenuated Aβ-induced EphA4 clus-
ter formation compared with GFP alone in control cells (Fig. 
S3 C). These results indicate that SOR 
LA can impair EphA4 
activation not only in response to ephrin stimulation but also 
in response to pathological stimulation by Aβ oligomers.
Sor 
LA ameliorates Aβ-induced cognitive 
impairment as well as associated EphA4 activation 
and redistribution to PSds
EphA4 activation and synaptic redistribution induced by 
exposure to Aβ oligomers have been previously shown to 
cause synaptotoxic effects (Fu et al., 2014; 
Vargas et al., 2014). 
Therefore, we investigated whether SOR 
LA-mediated inhi-
bition of EphA4 activation could ameliorate the detrimental 
effects of Aβ oligomers on spatial learning and memory tasks 
by examining 
WT and SOR 
LA 
TG mice in the Morris water 
maze test. Because SOR 
LA may influence Aβ levels in mouse 
AD models, we stereotactically injected human Aβ oligomers 
into the WT and SOR 
LA TG mouse hippocampus and mea-
sured spatial learning and memory 1 wk after injection.
In agreement with our previous analyses using the Mor-
ris water maze test (Yan et al., 2016), hippocampal injection 
of Aβ oligomers impaired cognitive spatial learning capacity 
in WT mice during consecutive platform training sessions 
(Fig. 5 F). In contrast, SOR 
LA TG animals were resistant to 
the effects of Aβ throughout the period of platform train-
ing. After platform training, the mice were assessed for their 
ability to return to the platform area in the water maze. The 
WT mice injected with Aβ oligomers exhibited significant 
impairment in finding the platform, whereas Aβ-injected 
 
SOR 
LA TG mice performed as well as WT and SOR 
LA TG 
mice injected with PBS as a control (Fig. 5 G).
The mice were killed immediately after behavioral test-
ing, and immunoblot analyses of EphA4 immunoprecipitates 
from total hippocampal synaptosome fractions revealed sig-
nificantly increased EphA4 activation in WT mice injected 
with Aβ oligomers compared with PBS-injected control 
mice (Fig. 5 H), whereas Aβ-injected SOR 
LA TG mice did 
not show increased EphA4 activation (Fig. 5 I). Measure-
ment of human Aβ after behavioral analysis confirmed that 
Aβ levels were the same in Aβ-injected WT and SOR 
LA 
TG mice (Fig. S3 D). We further used confocal microscopy 
to examine histological sections from WT and SOR 
LA TG 
mice injected in the hippocampal region with Aβ oligomers 
or PBS to investigate possible changes in the colocalization of 
EphA4 with PSD95 in the dentate gyrus (Fig. 6, A and B). 
We 
detected more puncta labeled for both EphA4 and PSD95 
in WT hippocampal sections from mice injected with Aβ 
oligomers compared with PBS controls, but not in SOR 
LA 
 
TG sections (Fig. 6, B and C).
Consistent with previous studies showing long-term 
potentiation (LTP) defects with hippocampal Aβ oligomer 
(Yan et al., 2016) or AAV-APP/PS1 injection (Audrain et al., 
2016), we also observed a reduction in LTP in WT hippo-
campal slices treated with Aβ oligomers, whereas SOR 
LA 
TG hippocampal slices were resistant to Aβ-mediated LTP 
impairment (Fig. 6, D–F). Thus, SOR 
LA can suppress post-
synaptic dysfunction induced by Aβ oligomers, which has 
been previously linked to aberrant EphA4 activation by Aβ 
oligomers (Fu et al., 2014; 
Vargas et al., 2014). T
ogether, these 
results indicate that up-regulation of SOR 
LA can suppress 
cognitive deficiencies associated with EphA4 activation/re-
distribution phenotypes and electrophysiological LTP im-
pairment resulting from exposure to Aβ oligomers.
Elevated EphA4 activation in human Ad brain tissue 
correlates with reduced Sor 
LA/EphA4 association
Our data in cell culture and in mice support a model in which 
SOR 
LA interacts with EphA4 to attenuate Aβ-dependent 
EphA4 activation and cognitive impairment (Fig. S4 A). To 
verify the validity of this model in human AD patients, we 
used 30 AD and 23 control brain tissue samples from human 
frontal cortex regions (Table S1) to prepare lysates and syn-
aptosomes for immunoblotting and EphA4 immunoprecip-
itation analyses. We did not observe any significant change 
in SOR 
LA or EphA4 levels between our AD and control 
cohorts (Fig. 7 A and Fig. S4, B and C). However, EphA4 
activation was significantly higher in brain tissue from the 
AD 
patients than the controls (Fig. 7, B and C; and Fig. S4 B). 
Furthermore, no significant overall difference in SOR 
LA/ 
EphA4 association was observed between AD and control 
patients (Fig. S4 D). Because variations in both EphA4 activa-
 SOR 
LA/EphA4 interaction inhibits Aβ toxicity | Huang et al.
3676
tion and EphA4/SOR 
LA association were observed in both 
control and AD patients (Fig. 7 C and Fig. S4 D), we exam-
ined whether there may be a correlation between the two 
parameters (Fig. 7 D). Interestingly, we observed a significant 
inverse correlation between SOR 
LA/EphA4 association and 
EphA4 activation in AD patients by linear regression anal-
ysis (Fig. 7 D), implying that SOR 
LA/EphA4 association 
correlates with attenuated EphA4 activation in AD brain 
tissue. This may represent a critical mechanism that could 
be fundamental for neuroprotection, particularly at earlier 
stages of cognitive decline.
dIScuSSIon
The complexity of AD as a neurological disorder is a key 
impediment in the search for effective drug targets to treat 
or reverse AD-associated cognitive decline. Current tar-
geting strategies mainly focus on inhibiting the genera-
tion or promoting the clearance of Aβ in its various forms 
(Lukiw, 2012). Although these strategies may be beneficial 
against AD, no drug developed so far has demonstrated 
 
clinical efficacy.
SOR 
LA represents a unique target for consideration. 
As an AD risk factor, SOR 
LA has been traditionally classi-
fied as an upstream regulator of Aβ homeostasis, which may 
act to suppress amyloidogenic cleavage pathways by regulat-
ing APP trafficking (Andersen et al., 2005; Fjorback et al., 
2012; Huang et al., 2016), APP oligomerization (Schmidt et 
al., 2012), and Aβ clearance (Caglayan et al., 2014). Here, we 
present new evidence that SOR 
LA also acts downstream of 
Aβ to attenuate neurotoxicity through the modulation of Aβ 
Figure 5. Sor 
LA suppresses Aβ-mediated EphA4 activation and attenuates cognitive and synaptotoxic deficits associated with oligomeric 
Aβ injection in Sor 
LA tG mice. (A and B) SOR 
LA TG mice show a slight reduction in EphA4 activation at steady state. (A) EphA4 immunoprecipitates from 
crude synaptosome fractions in 3-mo-old WT and SOR 
LA TG mice were subjected to immunoblotting, and pY602/EphA4 ratios were plotted in B. Graph 
represents mean ± SE from WT, n = 12, and SOR 
LA TG, n = 12 animals (*, P < 0.04; Student’s t test). (C–E) SOR 
LA suppresses Aβ-mediated EphA4 activa-
tion. Aβ1–42 oligomers (C) were applied to WT or SOR 
LA TG cortical neurons for 2 h, and Eph4 immunoprecipitates (D) were evaluated for EphA4 activation. 
 
(E) Relative fold pY602/EphA4 ratios were evaluated for WT and SOR 
LA TG (TG) neurons (graphs depict mean ± SE from three replicates from two inde-
pendent experiments; *, P < 0.04; Student’s t test). (F and G) SOR 
LA suppresses spatial memory defects associated with hippocampal Aβ injection. WT and 
 
SOR 
LA TG mice (n = 12, each group; n = 48 total, two independent assay runs) were stereotactically injected with PBS or Aβ into the hippocampus and 
subjected to 5 d of navigational training to find a hidden platform. (F) Escape latency decreased for all groups except WT Aβ-injected animals (red). Graph 
represents mean ± SE (*, P < 0.03; **, P < 0.008; two-way ANO 
VA). (G) After training, a probe test was performed to determine whether animals could ac-
curately recall and return to the platform area; the number of entries was automatically recorded for the experimental groups. Significance was determined 
using one-way ANO 
VA (mean ± SE; *, P < 0.05). (H and I) SOR 
LA attenuates Aβ-mediated EphA4 activation. Hippocampal tissue from WT (H) and SOR 
LA TG 
(I) mice injected with PBS or Aβ were subjected to biochemical fractionation after behavioral analysis, and EphA4 immunoprecipitates from membranes/
total synaptosomes were immunoblotted for activated EphA4 (pY602) and total EphA4. pY602/EphA4 ratios were normalized to PBS injected samples (set 
to 1.0). Graphs represent mean ± SE; *, P < 0.05; Student’s t test.
 3677
JEM Vol. 214, No. 12
receptors such as EphA4, hence affecting synaptic function. 
Should SOR 
LA affect both means of Aβ-associated neuro-
protection concurrently, neurological function could be sen-
sitive to subtle alterations in SOR 
LA levels or function.
Ephrin receptors such as EphA4 are important early in 
brain development and mediate fundamental processes includ-
ing axon guidance and synaptic wiring (Pasquale, 2005, 2008; 
Hruska and Dalva, 2012). EphA4 is also highly expressed in 
adult brain and has important functions in synaptic structure 
and function (Murai et al., 2003; Carmona et al., 2009; Filosa 
et al., 2009). In addition, it is becoming apparent that EphA4 
plays a role in in the pathogenesis of neurological disorders 
such as AD and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). So far, it is 
unclear whether definitive changes in total EphA4 levels are 
altered in AD: although SNPs have been identified proximal 
to the EphA4 gene locus in late onset AD cohorts (Shen et al., 
2010), studies have revealed either no change (Rosenberger 
et al., 2014) or slight reductions in EphA4 expression in the 
brain of AD patients (Simón et al., 2009). Interestingly, how-
ever, EphA4 immunoreactivity has been observed in human 
AD brain near Aβ plaques (Rosenberger et al., 2014). Because 
Aβ oligomers can induce EphA4 clustering at PSD-bearing 
spines (Fu et al., 2014), these pathological EphA4/Aβ plaque 
aggregates may be remnant pathological byproducts formed 
by prolonged Aβ-induced EphA4 aggregation. Our results 
demonstrate that EphA4 is also aberrantly activated in human 
Figure 6. EphA4 redistribution to PSd clusters and LtP impairment is attenuated in Sor 
LA tG mice. (A and B) Hippocampal Aβ injection induces 
EphA4 redistribution to PSD95 puncta. WT and SOR 
LA TG mice were injected with PBS or Aβ and subjected to immunohistological staining for Aβ (brown) 
using MOAB-2 antibody (A) or costaining for EphA4 (red) and PSD95 (green; B). DAPI (blue) insets in B depict the dentate gyrus region imaged. Bars: (A) 
300 µm; (B) 100 µm. Boxes in A and B are magnified in adjacent panels. EphA4/PSD95 co-staining puncta (yellow) are marked by yellow circles in magified 
panels in B. (C) Graph indicates percentage of red/green overlapping puncta scored for five 100-µm-square regions from hippocampal sections (mean ± SE; 
**, P < 0.001; Student’s t test). (D and E) SOR 
LA overexpression restores Aβ-induced LTP impairment. Mean fEPSP slopes normalized over baseline values are 
shown for WT and SOR 
LA TG acute slices under steady-state conditions with or without 500 nM Aβ as indicated. Baseline recordings were taken 20 min 
before LTP induction (0 time point), and 60 min after LTP induction. Graph represents mean ± SE; *, P < 0.05. (E) Representative fEPSP recordings obtained 
before (black) and after (gray) high-frequency stimulation. (F) Cumulative fEPSP slopes between 50 and 60 min after LTP induction (mean ± SE, ≥5 slices 
per mouse/three mice per genotype/treatment category). Statistical values were calculated using two-way ANO 
VA; *, P < 0.05.
 SOR 
LA/EphA4 interaction inhibits Aβ toxicity | Huang et al.
3678
AD brain tissue. Because Aβ-mediated EphA4 activation re-
sults in synaptotoxicity that can be reversed by pharmacolog-
ical EphA4 inhibitors (Fu et al., 2014; 
Vargas et al., 2014), it is 
likely that EphA4 may contribute to synaptic deficiencies that 
accompany cognitive decline in AD.
Given that aberrant EphA4 activation is apparent in AD, 
it is possible that downstream EphA4 pathways are likewise 
affected. EphA4 was previously found to recruit and activate 
Cdk5 with ephrin ligand stimulation (Fu et al., 2007). In-
terestingly, Cdk5 activity and its activators were also found 
to be elevated in human AD brain compared with controls 
(Lee et al., 1999; Tseng et al., 2002). Collectively, this sug-
gests that increased EphA4 activity in human AD could con-
tribute to aberrant Cdk5 hyperactivation. EphA4 activation 
has also been found to phosphorylate and activate the Rho-
GTPase activating protein (RhoGAP), α2-chimaerin to in-
activate Rac1 (Shi et al., 2007). Because lower Rac1 activity 
has also been reported in human AD (Huang et al., 2013) 
and in the Tg2576 AD mouse model (Petratos et al., 2008), 
AD-associated EphA4 activation may also contribute to Rac1 
inactivation through aberrant α2-chimaerin activation.
In addition to AD, pathological EphA4 activation has 
also been implicated in ALS. EphA4 was identified as a ge-
netic modifier in a mutant SOD1 zebrafish model of ALS, 
in which genetic or pharmacological EphA4 inhibition re-
verses SOD1-mediated motor neuron toxicity (Van Hoecke 
et al., 2012). EphA4 expression inversely correlates with dis-
ease onset and survival in ALS patients, in whom high EphA4 
levels are associated with early disease onset (Van Hoecke 
et al., 2012). Interestingly, SOR 
LA staining is attenuated 
in anterior horn cells from human ALS spinal cord tissue 
(Mori et al., 2015). Given that SOR 
LA can inhibit patho-
logical EphA4 activation in AD, it is tempting to speculate 
that reductions in SOR 
LA may also contribute to the onset 
of other disorders such as ALS, potentially through a related 
EphA4-inactivating mechanism.
Previous studies indicated that homozygous SOR 
LA 
gene inactivation significantly elevates Aβ generation in mice 
(Andersen et al., 2005) but has no obvious effects on basal 
synaptic transmission or LTP of these animals (Rohe et al., 
2008). In addition, SOR 
LA TG or KO mice appear to have 
no detectable cognitive abnormalities or gross anatomical ab-
errations within the central nervous system (Andersen et al., 
2005; Caglayan et al., 2014). Although we show that SOR 
LA can affect ephrin-mediated EphA4 activation and growth 
cone collapse in vitro, SOR 
LA overexpression or deletion ap-
pears to have little detrimental effect on murine brain devel-
opment (Rohe et al., 2008). This suggests that developmental 
redundancies are able to compensate for SOR 
LA fluctuations 
in response to physiological wiring and signaling cues. The 
genetic implication of SOR 
LA in age-related neurodegen-
eration indicates that SOR 
LA may have a more fundamental 
role in protecting the adult brain from age-dependent neu-
rodegenerative stressors than in early developmental events.
In summary, we reveal here a new role for SOR 
LA in 
attenuating Aβ toxicity, which likely depends on suppress-
ing synaptotoxic activation of EphA4. SOR 
LA presents a 
unique case as an AD-related gene because it may suppress 
Figure 7. EphA4 activation is observed in human Ad and correlates with decreased EphA4/Sor 
LA interaction. (A) Total lysates were generated 
from a representative control and AD cohort and immunoblotted with the indicated antibodies. (B and C) Elevated EphA4 activity is observed in AD. 
 
(B) EphA4 was immunoprecipitated from total synaptotosome fractions generated from human frontal cortex and immunoblotted for activated EphA4, 
pY602, or SOR 
LA as indicated. (C) Activated EphA4 (pY602/EphA4 ratios) as determined in B were plotted for control (n = 23) and AD (n = 30) patient cases. 
Graph represents mean ± SE (**, P < 0.02; Student’s t test). (D) Enhanced SOR 
LA/EphA4 interaction correlates with attenuated EphA4 activation. SOR 
LA/
EphA4 and pY602/EphA4 ratios were individually plotted for control (black) and AD (red) patients. R2 (goodness of fit) values are shown for control (black) 
and AD (red) data groups; the p-value (significant deviance of the slope from 0 by linear regression analysis) for the AD group was found to be significant.
 3679
JEM Vol. 214, No. 12
neurotoxicity simultaneously through suppression of am-
yloidogenic processing and of Aβ toxicity pathways. As the 
SOR 
LA-dependent mechanism we describe represents a 
novel way of modifying the activity of cell surface Aβ re-
ceptors, it will be interesting in future studies to investigate 
whether other cell surface Aβ receptors such as the cellular 
prion protein, NMD 
AR, LilrB2, EphB2 (Laurén et al., 2009; 
Cissé et al., 2011; Rönicke et al., 2011; Kim et al., 2013), 
and others can be modulated by AD-linked transmembrane 
components such as SOR 
LA.
MAtErIALS And MEtHodS
cell culture and transfection
HEK293T and HEK293 cells stably expressing the Swedish 
APP KM670/671NL variant (HEKswAPP) and HEK293 
cells stably expressing EphA4 (HEK-A4; provided by E. 
Pasquale, SBP
, La Jolla, CA) were cultured in DMEM sup-
plemented with 10% FBS. Turbofect transfection reagent 
(Life T
echnologies) was used for transient transfection of 
all cell lines described according to specifications from the 
manufacturer. RNAi MAX (Life T
echnologies) was used for 
transfection of siRNA oligonucleotides. siRNA targeting se-
quences to cognate human targets for cell line transfection 
were 5′-CTG 
GGA 
TTT 
ATC 
GGA 
GCA 
ATA-3′ for SOR 
LA, 
transfected at a final concentration of 10 nM, and purchased 
from Qiagen. An AllStars siRNA oligo was transfected as a 
negative control (Qiagen).
Primary neuronal culture
Pregnant female mice were collected from timed matings, and 
embryos were harvested from SOR 
LA-Rosa26/WT BAL-
B/c matings or SOR 
LA KO animals at embryonic day 17 
(E17)–E18. Primary cortical and hippocampal neurons were 
obtained by microdissection of the cerebral cortex from em-
bryos using a stereomicroscope and dispersed by digestion 
in trypsin and DNaseI for 30 min at 37°C followed by trit-
uration in DMEM. Embryonic tissue was also collected at 
harvesting and processed for genotype analysis for SOR 
LA- 
Rosa26 neurons using the MyTaq DNA extraction and 
PCR genotyping system (Bioline), where WT and SOR 
LA- 
Rosa26 neurons from individual embryos were maintained 
separately. Neurons were plated and maintained on po-
ly-l-lysine–coated coverslips or culture dishes in Neurobasal 
medium supplemented with B27, glutamine, and penicil-
lin/streptomycin. Medium was changed every 3 d (half of 
the medium was replaced).
Antibodies, plasmid constructs, and purified proteins
pcDNA3 SOR 
LA was obtained as a gift from Dr. James Lah 
(Emory University, Atlanta, GA). pcDNA3 SOR 
LA-GST was 
generated by removal of the terminal stop codon in pcDNA3 
SOR 
LA and generating an XbaI site downstream of the SOR 
LA 
 
ORF by site-directed mutagenesis. GST was then cloned 
in-frame downstream of SOR 
LA using XbaI sites. pcDNA3 
IRES-GFP was constructed by PCR amplification of an 
IRES-GFP fusion fragment, which was cloned using XhoI 
and XbaI sites at the 3′ end of pcDNA3 SOR 
LA. SOR 
LA 
Fc-fusion constructs for pull-down interaction analysis were 
expressed from pcDNA3, where Fc constructs were cloned in-
frame with an N-terminal CD5 signal peptide sequence and a 
C-terminal Fc sequence (Menzel et al., 2001). SOR 
LA cDNA 
fragments comprised the SOR 
LA 
VPS10 (aa 1–757), 
YWTD 
repeat/EGF-like region (aa 758–1,076), LDLR class a repeats 
(aa 1,077–1,554), and fibronectin type III repeats (aa 1,555–
2,135). The T947M SOR 
LA mutation within the YWTD 
repeat/EGF-like region was introduced into full-length 
 
SOR 
LA and pcDNA3 YWTD/EGF-like Fc constructs by 
site-directed mutagenesis using 5′-CAT 
AGA 
GCG 
GAT 
CAT 
GTT 
CAG 
TGG 
CCA 
GCAG-3′ forward and 5′-CTG 
CTG 
GCC 
ACT 
GAA 
CAT 
GAT 
CCG 
CTC 
TATG-3′ reverse primers.
pcDNA3 EphA4 used in this study consists of the 
human EphA4 cDNA cloned through 5′ XhoI and 3′ XbaI 
sites. K563R kinase dead EphA4 was generated by site-di-
rected mutagenesis using 5′-TGT 
GTG 
GCT 
ATC 
AGG 
ACT 
CTG 
AAA 
GCTG-3′ forward and 5′-CAG 
CTT 
TCA 
GAG 
TCC 
TGA 
TAG 
CCA 
CACA-3′ reverse primers. pCDNA3 
EphA4-FLAGhis6 was constructed by reamplifying the 
EphA4 ORF
, with removal of the stop codon at the 3′ end, 
and cloning a FLAGhis6 oligo 3′ in-frame downstream of 
the EphA4 coding sequence.
Antibodies were all purchased from commercial sources: 
SOR 
LA (LR11; BD Biosciences), EphA4 (S-20), EphB2 and 
GST polyclonal (Santa Cruz), FLAG M2 (Stratagene/Sigma), 
β-actin, βIII-tubulin (Tuj1) and α-tubulin (Sigma), EphA4 
monoclonal (Life T
echnologies/Thermo Fisher Scientific), 
p-Y602 EphA4 (ECM Biosciences), EphB1 (5F10 mouse 
monoclonal) and pT
yr100 (Cell Signaling T
echnology). Goat 
EphA4 and EphB2 (R&D Systems) were also used for im-
munoprecipitation experiments. PSD95 (Millipore), and 
MOAB-2 (Biosensis) antibodies were used for immunohisto-
logical staining. 
The B436 monoclonal antibody targeting the 
Aβ region was used to detect Aβ oligomers by immunoblot 
(Huang et al., 2016). An affinity-purified EphA4 polyclonal 
antibody was generated against the last 11 C-terminal res-
idues (Lamberto et al., 2014), and the 22C11 monoclonal 
 
antibody for APP detection was purified in-house.
recombinant EphA4-FLAGhis6 purification and 
Aβ oligomer preparation
EphA4-FLAGhis6 was purified from HEK293T cells trans-
fected with pCDNA3 EphA4-FLAGhis6. Cell lysates were 
generated in lysis buffer containing protease inhibitors and 
clarified by centrifugation at 10,000 rpm for 10 min. Im-
idazole was added to a final concentration of 10 mM, and 
lysates were precipitated with Ni-NTA agarose (Qiagen) 
overnight, washed in 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0/0.5 M NaCl 
with 20 mM imidazole, and eluted in 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 
8.0/0.5 M NaCl with 0.3 M imidazole. Eluates were dialyzed 
in 1× PBS and frozen for binding experiments as described in 
In vitro and in vivo GST and Fc pull-down assays.
 SOR 
LA/EphA4 interaction inhibits Aβ toxicity | Huang et al.
3680
Human synthetic Aβ1–42 (Anaspec) was suspended in 
hexafluoroisopropanol at a concentration of 1 mM and in-
cubated at room temperature for 1 h. The suspension was al-
iquoted and evaporated using a SpeedVac system for 3 h and 
stored at −80°C. Aβ oligomers were prepared by resuspending 
the Aβ in dry DMSO at a concentration of 5 mM, vortexed 
for 30 s, and diluted in PBS 10-fold. Aβ peptides were oligo-
merized by 10-fold dilution in PBS and incubated at 4°C for 
16 h. The solution was sonicated at 4°C for 10 min in a bath 
sonicator, and Aβ peptide solutions were centrifuged at 1,000 
rpm for 2 min, with supernatants transferred to fresh tubes. 
Oligomerization of 
Aβ1–42 was confirmed by immunoblotting.
In vitro and in vivo GSt and Fc pull-down assays
For reconstitution of SOR 
LA/EphA4 complexes in 
HEK293T cells, GST alone or GST
-SOR 
LA was expressed 
using pRK5mGST or pCDNA3 SOR 
LA-GST vectors 
transfected in HEK293T and HEKswAPP cells. Cell lysates 
were generated in lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 
150 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 5% glycerol, and 1% NP-40) 
in the presence of protease inhibitors (Complete EDTA-free; 
Roche), and GST proteins were precipitated with glutathione 
Sepharose. Immunoblots of precipitates detected the presence 
of EphA4, APP
, or GST components.
Mouse EphA4-Fc or Fc alone (R&D Systems) was im-
mobilized on protein G Sepharose, washed with lysis buf-
fer, and incubated with HEK293T lysates overexpressing 
 
SOR 
LA. Precipitates were washed with lysis buffer and eluted 
with 0.2 M glycine (pH 2.5) for 20 min; eluates were analyzed by 
immunoblotting. For analysis of SOR 
LA ectodomain fragment 
interactions with EphA4-FLAGhis6, the Fc-fusion constructs 
described above (Antibodies, plasmid constructs, and purified 
proteins) were transfected into HEK293T cells, and conditioned 
medium (FBS-free DMEM) was collected after secretion for 
48 h. Fc proteins were purified with protein G Sepharose, with 
EphA4-FLAGhis6 added to immobilized Fc proteins. Precipi-
tates were washed and immunoblotted for EphA4 or Fc.
Mouse lines
SOR 
LA-Rosa26 (SOR 
LA TG) mouse lines overexpressing 
SOR 
LA through a CMV/β-actin promoter element was pre-
viously established (Caglayan et al., 2014). SOR 
LA deletion 
(SOR 
LA KO) mouse lines were also established previously 
(Andersen et al., 2005; Rohe et al., 2008) and maintained 
as a homozygous line for generation of primary neurons. 
Tg2576 mice harboring Swedish familial mutations in the 
human APP gene were used in preliminary immunopre-
cipitation experiments (Hsiao et al., 1996). All procedures 
involving animals were performed under the guidelines of 
Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute Institutional 
Animal Care and Use Committee.
Human brain tissue
Human brain tissue was obtained from the University of Cal-
ifornia, San Diego (courtesy of E. Masliah), and the Univer-
sity of Miami (Neurobiobank) in contract with the National 
Institutes of Health. Human brain samples were processed 
and analyzed with institutional permission in accordance 
with California and National Institutes of Health guidelines. 
Information pertaining to the human brain specimens used in 
this study is included in Table S1.
coimmunoprecipitation assays
SOR 
LA complexes were immunoprecipitated from mouse 
brain lysates in lysis buffer using 0.5 µg antibodies as indicated, 
where immunocomplexes were precipitated with protein G 
Sepharose and washed in lysis buffer. Immunocomplexes were 
immunoblotted for various components as indicated.
Mouse and human brain biochemical fractionation and 
EphA4 IP analysis from synaptosomes
Mouse hippocampal tissue was processed for biochemical 
synaptic/PSD-enrichment analysis as described previously 
(Wang et al., 2013). In brief, hippocampal tissue was homog-
enized using a Dounce homogenizer in fractionation buf-
fer (0.32 M sucrose, 25 mM Hepes, pH 7.4, in protease and 
phosphatase inhibitors), and nuclei and debris were cleared 
by centrifugation (500 g, 10 min). Membranes/crude synap-
tosomes were separated by centrifugation at 10,000 g for 12 
min, and membranes were washed twice in 25 mM Hepes, 
pH 7.4/150 mM NaCl and solubilized in 25 mM Hepes, pH 
7.4/150 mM NaCl buffer with 1% Triton X-100 and phos-
phatase/protease inhibitors. PSD-enriched fractions were 
precipitated by centrifugation at 10,000 g for 20 min, washed 
in 25 mM Hepes, pH 7.4/150 mM NaCl, and solubilized in 
25 mM HEP 
ES, pH 7.4/150 mM NaCl/1% Triton X-100. 
Human tissue from frontal cortex was similarly homogenized 
as described for mouse hippocampal tissue and resuspended 
in fractionation buffer at 0.5 ml/0.1 mg of frozen tissue.
EphA4 was immunoprecipitated in Triton X-100 solu-
bilized synaptosomes from mouse hippocampus and human 
brain tissue and incubated with a mouse monoclonal anti-
body for EphA4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Protein G im-
munocomplexes were precipitated, washed in lysis buffer, and 
analyzed by immunoblot analysis.
EphA4 activation, growth cone 
collapse, and EphA4 clustering
Recombinant ephrinA1-Fc or control Fc (R&D Systems) 
was used to stimulate stably transfected EphA4 HEK293 
(HEK-A4) cells or primary mouse neurons at a concentra-
tion of 1 µg/ml for the times indicated to assay EphA4 kinase 
activation. After stimulation, cells or neurons were washed 
in 1× PBS and lysed in Buffer1 (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 
150 mM NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 5% glycerol, and 1% NP-
40) in the presence of protease inhibitors (Complete EDTA- 
free; Roche) and phosphatase inhibitors (Pierce). EphA4 was 
then immunoprecipitated for 3–5 h at 4°C using EphA4 
 
antibodies (Life T
echnologies) and protein G Sepharose; 
beads were washed four times with Buffer1 and immuno-
 3681
JEM Vol. 214, No. 12
blotted for EphA4 or phosphorylation of the p-Y602 residue 
to determine activation.
Growth cone collapse in cultured hippocampal neurons 
was assayed as described previously (Richter et al., 2007). In 
brief, ephrinA1-Fc or human Fc control was preclustered 
with anti-human Fc (1:10), and hippocampal neurons on 
glass coverslips grown at low density were exposed to 1 µg/ml 
 
ephrinA1-Fc or control Fc for 0.5 h at 3 d in vitro (DIV3). 
Neurons were then fixed in 4% PFA, permeabilized in 0.5% 
Triton X-100/1× PBS, and blocked in 3% BSA. Neuronal 
growth cones were stained with βIII-tubulin (Tuj1) anti-
bodies and an Alexa Fluor 488–conjugated goat anti-rabbit 
antibody/Alexa Fluor 568 phalloidin. Growth cones were 
tracked along the longest axonal process, and growth cone 
images were obtained for all neurons imaged on a single cov-
erslip. Growth cones were classified into collapsed and non-
collapsed categories according to the presence or absence of 
F-actin–rich lamellipodial and filopodial extensions within 
the growth cone area. A total of 252 (WT), 168 (SOR 
LA 
TG), and 153 (SOR 
LA KO) growth cones were scored over 
multiple embryos from a minimum of three experiments 
derived from two separate embryonic neuronal cultures 
for growth cone collapse.
EphA4 clustering was visualized in cultured hippocam-
pal neurons as described previously (Shi et al., 2007), with 
modification. Preclustered EphrinA1-Fc or Fc control was 
incubated with DIV3 hippocampal neurons grown on cov-
erslips for 5 or 30 min. Neurons were fixed in 4% PFA and 
stained with EphA4 (S-20, Santa Cruz)/α-tubulin (Sigma) 
antibodies, followed by fluorescent secondary antibodies 
and Alexa Fluor 350 phalloidin. EphrinA1-Fc treatment for 
5 min did not induce growth cone collapse but did initiate 
EphA4 clustering in 
WT neurons. Growth cone regions were 
tracked along axonal extensions, and EphA4 staining was ho-
mogenously normalized for intensity in all neurons for each 
experiment using identical image acquisition settings; EphA4 
clusters at least 0.2 µm in size were scored within each F-ac-
tin–rich growth cone area per neuron. A minimum of three 
experiments were scored from two independent embryonic 
neuronal dissections; a total of 33 
WT, 29 SOR 
LA 
TG, and 38 
SOR 
LA KO growth cone regions were quantified.
cell surface biotinylation
Cell surface biotinylation using EZ-link Sulfo-NHS-LC bi-
otin in HEK293T and primary neurons was performed as 
described previously (Wang et al., 2013). In HEK293T, cells 
were first either cotransfected with vectors overexpressing 
SOR 
LA and EphA4 or sequentially transfected with control/
SOR 
LA siRNA oligos and subsequently transfected with an 
EphA4 overexpression vector. For surface biotin labeling, cells 
or neurons were washed in cold 1× PBS supplemented with 
1 mM MgCl2/1.3 mM CaCl2 (1× PBS/CM) and incubated 
with 500 µg/ml biotin labeling reagent in 1× PBS/CM at 
4°C with agitation. Labeling was repeated and quenched with 
7.5 µg/ml glycine in 1× PBS/CM. Cells were washed, lysed in 
lysis buffer, and incubated overnight with streptavidin agarose 
at 4°C with agitation. Streptavidin agarose beads were then 
washed and boiled in Laemmli buffer, and biotin-labeled pre-
cipitates were visualized and quantified by immunoblotting.
Stereotactic hippocampal Aβ injection
Aβ1–42 oligomers (2 µl, 500 µM) or PBS vehicle controls were 
stereotactically injected at a rate of 0.5 µl/min into the hippo-
campus of anesthetized SOR 
LA TG mice or WT littermate 
animals using the following coordinates: anterior posterior, 
−2.0 mm; medial lateral, ±1.3 mm; dorsal ventral, 2.1 mm. 
Mice were allowed to recover for 1 wk after injection and 
then were subjected to behavioral analysis (see Mouse behav-
ioral analysis). Animals were immediately killed after behav-
ioral analysis, and dissected hippocampus tissue was processed 
for biochemical analysis. For immunohistological analysis, 
mice were killed 4 d after injection and processed as specified 
in Immunohistochemistry and detection of EphA4/PSD95 
puncta in mouse sections.
Mouse behavioral analysis
A modified Morris water maze apparatus (San Diego Instru-
ments) was used to evaluate spatial reference learning and 
memory (Billings et al., 2005; Vorhees and Williams, 2006). 
For 5 d, mice were trained to escape to an invisible 14-cm- 
diameter platform submerged 1.5 cm beneath the water sur-
face, which was obscured using nontoxic white paint; in case 
of failure to find the platform within 60 s, animals were guided 
to the platform and allowed to remain there for 10 s. The es-
cape latency was scored as 60 s in instances in which the mice 
were unable to find the platform. Because of the large cohort 
size tested, mice were given two trials per day, and retention 
of spatial training (probe test) was assessed 24 h after the final 
training trial. Each mouse was assayed using a single probe test 
comprising a 60-s free swim session in the pool where the 
platform was removed. The time spent in each quadrant was 
recorded, as well as the number of times the mice entered the 
platform area. The ANY
-maze video tracking system (Stoelt-
ing Co.) was used for automated trial acquisition and analysis 
of all trials. A total of 48 mice (n = 12 each for WT and 
 
SOR 
LA TG genotypes injected with either PBS or Aβ) were 
subjected to Morris water maze analysis.
Aβ1–42 ELI 
SA
Hippocampal tissue from human Aβ1–42-injected WT and 
SOR 
LA TG animals subjected to Morris water maze anal-
ysis were subsequently processed for biochemical EphA4 
activation as described in Mouse and human brain biochem-
ical fractionation and EphA4 IP analysis from synaptosomes, 
where Aβ was extracted from total hippocampal protein 
preparations in RIPA buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8, 1 mM 
EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% Na deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 
140 mM NaCl, and 1 mM PMSF), and human Aβ1–42 levels 
were measured using a commercial human Aβ1–42 ELI 
SA sys-
tem (Invitrogen). Normalized protein levels used for ELI 
SA 
 SOR 
LA/EphA4 interaction inhibits Aβ toxicity | Huang et al.
3682
analysis were quantified for Aβ1–42 concentrations, and relative 
Aβ1–42 values were calculated with WT Aβ1–42 set to 1.0.
Immunohistochemistry and detection of EphA4/PSd95 
puncta in mouse sections
For immunohistological detection of Aβ, WT and SOR 
LA 
TG mice were anesthetized and subjected to intracardial 
perfusion with PBS and fixation with 4% PFA. The tissues 
were cryoprotected in 30% sucrose, embedded in O.C.T. 
(Tissue T
ek), and subjected to cryostat sectioning. Free-float-
ing tissue sections (20 µm) were immunostained using the 
MOAB Aβ antibody and subsequently incubated with an 
anti–mouse HRP secondary antibody, and developed using 
a DAB substrate (Vector Laboratories). Sections were coun-
terstained with hematoxylin, and images were acquired using 
a ScanScope AT2 system.
Mouse sections were scored for colocalizing overlap of 
EphA4 and PSD95 foci in 100-µm-square areas within the 
dentate gyrus region by scoring the number of overlapping 
foci over the total EphA4 and PSD95 foci in five regions for 
PBS and Aβ injections in WT and SOR 
LA TG animals.
Electrophysiology
For analysis of LTP
, ex vivo hippocampal slices were prepared 
from 3-mo-old WT and SOR 
LA TG mice in the presence 
or absence of 500 nM oligomerized Aβ, similar to methods 
described previously (Fu et al., 2014). Mice were decapitated 
under deep terminal anesthesia, and brains were surgically 
removed in ice-cold, sucrose-based artificial cerebrospinal 
fluid (aCSF) of the following composition: 190 mM sucrose, 
25 mM d-glucose; 25 mM NaHCO3, 3 mM KCl, 1.25 mM 
NaH2PO4, 5 mM MgSO4, 10 mM NaCl, and 0.5 mM CaCl2 
saturated with carbogen (95% O2/5% CO2) to pH 7.4. A vi-
brating-blade microtome (Leica VT1000S) was used to cut 
400-µm-thick coronal slices containing both cortex and 
hippocampus. Slices were transferred to a holding cham-
ber containing warm (34°C) aCSF of the following com-
position: 125 mM NaCl, 25 mM NaHCO3, 3.0 mM KCl, 
1.25 mM NaH2PO4, 2.0 mM CaCl2, 1.0 mM MgSO4, and 
10 mM d-glucose saturated with carbogen (95% O2/5% 
CO2) to pH 7.4. Slices were left to recover at room tem-
perature in oxygenated aCSF in the presence or absence of 
500 nM oligomerized Aβ for at least 2 h before induction 
of LTP
. For recording, slices were transferred to a recording 
chamber and perfused with warm (32°C) oxygenated aCSF 
at a rate of 2 ml/min. For recording, both stimulating and 
recording electrodes were positioned within hippocampal 
CA1 subfield (striatum radiatum) on an upright microscope 
(BX5IWI; Olympus). An electrical stimulation protocol 
was used to evoke field excitatory postsynaptic potentials 
 
(fEPSPs) in CA1 pyramidal neurons by activating Schäffer 
collateral axonal fibers located in the stratum radiatum. LTP 
was induced by two trains of high-frequency stimulation (100 
Hz for 1 s at 30-s intervals) using a concentric bipolar stim-
ulating electrode (CBA 
RC75; FHC). fEPSPs were recorded 
using glass electrodes filled with aCSF and placed in the CA1 
stratum radiatum (dendritic region). All recordings of synaptic 
activity were performed using a Multiclamp 700B (Molec-
ular Devices), and signals were filtered at 3 kHz, digitized, 
and sampled using pClamp10 software (Molecular Devices). 
The magnitude of potentiation was calculated as percentage 
change in fEPSP slope normalized to baseline values. The 
mean change in synaptic potentiation 1 h after induction of 
LTP was used to compare different experimental groups. For 
each genotype/treatment, five slices from three mice were 
processed for electrophysiological analysis.
cell and neuronal image sample preparation and acquisition
Hippocampal neuronal images for growth cone collapse and 
neuronal/cellular EphA4 clustering were acquired using an 
inverted Zeiss Axio Observer Z1 fluorescence microscopy 
system using a CCD sensicam (PCO; Kelheim), where acqui-
sition and processing of images used Slidebook 5.5 software. 
All images were acquired using a 40× air objective lens (0.75 
NA), and images were exported as 8-bit tiffs for further analy-
sis using ImageJ. Cultured HEK293T transfected with vectors 
expressing EphA4-GFP were seeded and manipulated (un-
treated or treated with 500 nM 
Aβ oligomers for 2 h) on poly- 
l-lysine coated glass coverslips and fixed in 4% PFA. After 
permeabilization in 0.5% Triton X-100 in 1× PBS, coverslips 
were washed, blocked in 3% BSA, and stained in primary and 
fluorescent secondary antibodies before mounting in Prolong 
Gold antifade on glass slides.
For live cell imaging of EphA4, vectors expressing 
EphA4-mCherry and GFP alone or SOR 
LA-IRES-GFP 
were transfected into HEK293T cells in glass-bottom tissue 
culture dishes coated with poly-l-lysine 24 h after transfection. 
Cells were imaged before the addition of Aβ oligomers and 
subsequently imaged using a Zeiss 710 confocal microscope 
63× oil lens. Images were captured at 1 frame/min for 35 min.
Statistical analyses
All statistical analyses used in this study determined the signif-
icant differences between two groups using nonpaired t tests 
with equal variance from a minimum of three experiments 
unless stated differently. Statistical significance was calculated 
using GraphPad Prism 7.0 for all animal and human tissue 
and behavioral analyses.
online supplemental material
Fig. S1 shows immunoprecipitation of SOR 
LA with an 
EphA4 antibody, interaction of the EphA4 ectodomain 
with SOR 
LA, phosphorylation of EphA4 and SOR 
LA in 
HEK293T cells, and measurement of ephrinA1-induced 
EphA4 phosphorylation kinetics. Fig. S2 shows compara-
tive cell surface EphA4 levels with SOR 
LA modulation and 
EphA4 levels in total and postsynaptic brain fractions. Fig. S3 
depicts purified EphA4 and EphA4 distribution in HEK293T 
cells with Aβ treatment and human Aβ levels after stereotac-
tic hippocampal injection in WT and SOR 
LA TG mice. Fig. 
 3683
JEM Vol. 214, No. 12
S4 presents a model for SOR 
LA-dependent EphA4 inhibi-
tion in response to ephrinA1 and Aβ, analysis of total SOR 
LA levels, and EphA4/SOR 
LA interaction in human control 
and AD brain samples. Table S1 lists all the human brain tis-
sues used in this study.
AcknoWLEdGMEntS
We thank Viridiana Ylis for animal support and the Xu laboratory at Sanford Burnham 
Prebys Medical Discovery Institute for technical assistance and helpful discussion. 
Special thanks to Ivy Trinh (UCSD) for assistance with human brain tissue and to Drs. 
Ilaria Lamberto and Elena Rubio de la Torre for providing the EphA4 HEK293 
stable cell line.
This work was supported in part by grants from National Institutes of Health 
(R01AG021173, R01AG038710, R01AG044420, and R01NS046673 to H. Xu; 
R01AG18440, R01AG5131, R01AG11385, and R01NS076411 to E. Masliah; 
R01NS087070 to E.B. Pasquale), the Alzheimer’s Association (H. Xu), The Tanz Family 
Funds (H. Xu and E.B. Pasquale), the Cure Alzheimer’s Fund (H. Xu), and a Shiley-Mar-
cos Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center, University of California, San Diego Grant 
(ADRC 2015 59226 to T.Y. Huang).
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Author contributions: T.Y. Huang and H. Xu conceived the study. T.Y. Huang 
designed, performed, and analyzed the majority of the experiments described. T.Y. 
Huang and X. Li performed stereotactic injection procedures and behavioral tests. T.Y. 
Huang processed mouse and human brain tissue for biochemical analysis. Y. Zhao 
and L.-l. Jiang processed mouse brain samples for immunohistology and biochemical 
analysis and performed confocal microscopy procedures. Y. Liu, Y. Sun, and J.C. 
Piña-Crespo performed the electrophysiology analysis. B. Zhu performed live cell im-
aging experiments. E.B. Pasquale, E. Masliah, and T.E. Willnow provided materials es-
sential to this study and provided advice in experimental procedures. Y. Zhao provided 
important discussion. T.Y. Huang and H. Xu wrote the manuscript, and all authors 
approved the submitted manuscript.
Submitted: 7 August 2017
Revised: 12 September 2017
Accepted: 15 September 2017
rEFErEncES
Andersen, O.M., J. Reiche, 
V
. Schmidt, M. Gotthardt, R. Spoelgen, J. Behlke, 
C.A. von Arnim, T. Breiderhoff, P
. Jansen, X. Wu, et al. 2005. Neuronal 
sorting protein-related receptor sorLA/LR11 regulates processing of the 
amyloid precursor protein. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 102:13461–13466. 
https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.0503689102
Audrain, M., R. Fol, P
. Dutar, B. Potier, J.M. Billard, J. Flament, S. Alves, M.A. 
Burlot, G. Dufayet-Chaffaud, A.P
. Bemelmans, et al. 2016. Alzheimer’s 
disease-like APP processing in wild-type mice identifies synaptic defects 
as initial steps of disease progression. Mol. Neurodegener. 11:5. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1186 
/s13024 
-016 
-0070 
-y
Billings, L.M., S. Oddo, K.N. Green, J.L. McGaugh, and F
.M. LaFerla. 2005. 
Intraneuronal Abeta causes the onset of early Alzheimer’s disease-related 
cognitive deficits in transgenic mice. Neuron. 45:675–688. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.neuron 
.2005 
.01 
.040
Caglayan, S., S. Takagi-Niidome, F
. Liao, A.S. Carlo, V
. Schmidt, T. Burgert, 
Y
. Kitago, E.M. Füchtbauer, A. Füchtbauer, D.M. Holtzman, et al. 2014. 
Lysosomal sorting of amyloid-β by the SOR 
LA receptor is impaired by 
a familial Alzheimer’s disease mutation. Sci. Transl. Med. 6:223ra20. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/scitranslmed 
.3007747
Carmona, M.A., K.K. Murai, L. Wang, A.J. Roberts, and E.B. Pasquale. 2009. 
Glial ephrin-A3 regulates hippocampal dendritic spine morphology and 
glutamate transport. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 106:12524–12529. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.0903328106
Cissé, M., B. Halabisky, J. Harris, N. Devidze, D.B. Dubal, B. Sun, A. Orr, 
G. Lotz, D.H. Kim, P
. Hamto, et al. 2011. Reversing EphB2 depletion 
rescues cognitive functions in Alzheimer model. Nature. 469:47–52. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nature09635
Egea, J., U.V
. Nissen, A. Dufour, M. Sahin, P
. Greer, K. Kullander, T.D. Mrsic-
Flogel, M.E. Greenberg, O. Kiehn, P
. 
Vanderhaeghen, and R. Klein. 2005. 
Regulation of EphA 4 kinase activity is required for a subset of axon 
guidance decisions suggesting a key role for receptor clustering in Eph 
function. Neuron. 47:515–528. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.neuron 
.2005 
.06 
.029
Filosa, A., S. Paixão, S.D. Honsek, M.A. Carmona, L. Becker, B. Feddersen, L. 
Gaitanos, Y
. Rudhard, R. Schoepfer, T. Klopstock, et al. 2009. Neuron-
glia communication via EphA4/ephrin-A3 modulates LTP through glial 
glutamate transport. Nat. Neurosci. 12:1285–1292. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nn 
.2394
Fjorback, A.W
., M. Seaman, C. Gustafsen, A. Mehmedbasic, S. Gokool, C. 
Wu, 
D. Militz, V
. Schmidt, P
. Madsen, J.R. Nyengaard, et al. 2012. Retromer 
binds the FAN 
SHY sorting motif in SorLA to regulate amyloid 
precursor protein sorting and processing. J. Neurosci. 32:1467–1480. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1523 
/JNE 
URO 
SCI 
.2272 
-11 
.2012
Fu, A.K., K.W
. Hung, H. Huang, S. Gu, 
Y
. Shen, E.Y
. Cheng, F
.C. Ip, X. Huang, 
W
.Y
. Fu, and N.Y
. Ip. 2014. Blockade of EphA4 signaling ameliorates 
hippocampal synaptic dysfunctions in mouse models of Alzheimer’s 
disease. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 111:9959–9964. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.1405803111
Fu, 
W
.Y
., 
Y
. Chen, M. Sahin, X.S. Zhao, L. Shi, J.B. Bikoff, K.O. Lai, 
W
.H. 
Yung, 
A.K. Fu, M.E. Greenberg, and N.Y
. Ip. 2007. Cdk5 regulates EphA4-
mediated dendritic spine retraction through an ephexin1-dependent 
mechanism. Nat. Neurosci. 10:67–76. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nn1811
Glerup, S., M. Lume, D. Olsen, J.R. Nyengaard, C.B. 
Vaegter, C. Gustafsen, E.I. 
Christensen, M. Kjolby, A. Hay-Schmidt, D. Bender, et al. 2013. SorLA 
controls neurotrophic activity by sorting of GDNF and its receptors 
GFRα1 and RET. Cell Reports. 3:186–199. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.celrep 
.2012 
.12 
.011
Hruska, M., and M.B. Dalva. 2012. Ephrin regulation of synapse formation, 
function and plasticity. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 50:35–44. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.mcn 
.2012 
.03 
.004
Hsiao, K., P
. Chapman, S. Nilsen, C. Eckman, 
Y
. Harigaya, S. 
Y
ounkin, F
. 
Yang, 
and G. Cole. 1996. Correlative memory deficits, Abeta elevation, and 
amyloid plaques in transgenic mice. Science. 274:99–102. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/science 
.274 
.5284 
.99
Huang, T.Y
., S. Michael, T. Xu, A. Sarkeshik, J.J. Moresco, J.R. Yates III, E. 
Masliah, G.M. Bokoch, and C. DerMardirossian. 2013. A novel Rac1 
GAP splice variant relays poly-Ub accumulation signals to mediate Rac1 
inactivation. Mol. Biol. Cell. 24:194–209. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1091 
/mbc 
.E12 
-07 
-0565
Huang, T.Y
., Y
. Zhao, X. Li, X. Wang, I.C. Tseng, R. Thompson, S. Tu, T.E. 
Willnow, 
Y
.W
. Zhang, and H. Xu. 2016. SNX27 and SOR 
LA interact to 
reduce amyloidogenic subcellular distribution and processing of amyloid 
precursor protein. J. Neurosci. 36:7996–8011. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1523 
/
JNE 
URO 
SCI 
.0206 
-16 
.2016
Kim, T., G.S. Vidal, M. Djurisic, C.M. William, M.E. Birnbaum, K.C. Garcia, 
B.T. Hyman, and C.J. Shatz. 2013. Human LilrB2 is a β-amyloid 
receptor and its murine homolog PirB regulates synaptic plasticity in 
an Alzheimer’s model. Science. 341:1399–1404. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1126 
/science 
.1242077
Kitago, Y
., M. Nagae, Z. Nakata, M. Yagi-Utsumi, S. Takagi-Niidome, 
E. Mihara, T. Nogi, K. Kato, and J. Takagi. 2015. Structural basis for 
amyloidogenic peptide recognition by sorLA. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 
22:199–206. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nsmb 
.2954
Lamberto, I., B.C. Lechtenberg, E.J. Olson, P
.D. Mace, P
.E. Dawson, S.J. 
Riedl, and E.B. Pasquale. 2014. Development and structural analysis of a 
 SOR 
LA/EphA4 interaction inhibits Aβ toxicity | Huang et al.
3684
nanomolar cyclic peptide antagonist for the EphA4 receptor. ACS Chem. 
Biol. 9:2787–2795. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1021 
/cb500677x
Larsen, J.V
., A.M. Kristensen, L.T. Pallesen, J. Bauer, C.B. 
Vægter, M.S. Nielsen, 
P
. Madsen, and C.M. Petersen. 2016. Cytokine-like factor 1, an essential 
facilitator of cardiotrophin-like cytokine 
:ciliary neurotrophic factor 
receptor α signaling and sorLA-mediated turnover. Mol. Cell. Biol. 
36:1272–1286. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1128 
/MCB 
.00917 
-15
Laurén, J., D.A. Gimbel, H.B. Nygaard, J.W
. Gilbert, and S.M. Strittmatter. 
2009. Cellular prion protein mediates impairment of synaptic plasticity 
by amyloid-beta oligomers. Nature. 457:1128–1132. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nature07761
Lee, K.Y
., A.W
. Clark, J.L. Rosales, K. Chapman, T. Fung, and R.N. Johnston. 
1999. Elevated neuronal Cdc2-like kinase activity in the Alzheimer 
disease brain. Neurosci. Res. 34:21–29. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/S0168 
-0102(99)00026 
-7
Louwersheimer, E., P
.E. Cohn-Hokke, Y
.A. Pijnenburg, M.M. Weiss, E.A. 
Sistermans, A.J. Rozemuller, M. Hulsman, J.C. van Swieten, C.M. van 
Duijn, F
. Barkhof, et al. 2017. Rare genetic variant in SORL1 may 
increase penetrance of Alzheimer’s disease in a family with several 
generations of APOE-ε4 homozygosity. J. Alzheimers Dis. 56:63–74. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.3233 
/JAD 
-160091
Lukiw, W
.J. 2012. Amyloid beta (Aβ) peptide modulators and other current 
treatment strategies for Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Expert Opin. Emerg. 
Drugs. 17:43–60. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1517 
/14728214 
.2012 
.672559
Marttinen, M., K.M. Kurkinen, H. Soininen, A. Haapasalo, and M. Hiltunen. 
2015. Synaptic dysfunction and septin protein family members in 
neurodegenerative diseases. Mol. Neurodegener. 10:16. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1186 
/s13024 
-015 
-0013 
-z
Menzel, P
., F
. Valencia, P
. Godement, V
.C. Dodelet, and E.B. Pasquale. 2001. 
Ephrin-A6, a new ligand for EphA receptors in the developing visual 
system. Dev. Biol. 230:74–88. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1006 
/dbio 
.2000 
.0109
Mori, F
., 
Y
. Miki, K. Tanji, A. Kakita, H. Takahashi, J. Utsumi, H. Sasaki, and K. 
Wakabayashi. 2015. Sortilin-related receptor CNS expressed 2 (SorCS2) 
is localized to Bunina bodies in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Neurosci. 
Lett. 608:6–11. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.neulet 
.2015 
.09 
.030
Murai, K.K., L.N. Nguyen, F
. Irie, Y
. Yamaguchi, and E.B. Pasquale. 2003. 
Control of hippocampal dendritic spine morphology through 
ephrin-A3/EphA4 signaling. Nat. Neurosci. 6:153–160. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nn994
Nicolas, G., C. Charbonnier, D. 
Wallon, O. Quenez, C. Bellenguez, B. Grenier-
Boley, S. Rousseau, A.C. Richard, A. Rovelet-Lecrux, K. Le Guennec, 
et al. CNR-MAJ collaborators. 2016. SORL1 rare variants: A major 
risk factor for familial early-onset Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Psychiatry. 
21:831–836. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/mp 
.2015 
.121
Pasquale, E.B. 2005. Eph receptor signalling casts a wide net on cell behaviour. 
Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 6:462–475. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nrm1662
Pasquale, E.B. 2008. Eph-ephrin bidirectional signaling in physiology and 
disease. Cell. 133:38–52. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.cell 
.2008 
.03 
.011
Petratos, S., Q.X. Li, A.J. George, X. Hou, M.L. Kerr, S.E. Unabia, I. 
Hatzinisiriou, D. Maksel, M.I. Aguilar, and D.H. Small. 2008. The beta-
amyloid protein of Alzheimer’s disease increases neuronal CRMP-2 
phosphorylation by a Rho-GTP mechanism. Brain. 131:90–108. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1093 
/brain 
/awm260
Pottier, C., D. Hannequin, S. Coutant, A. Rovelet-Lecrux, D. Wallon, S. 
Rousseau, S. Legallic, C. Paquet, S. Bombois, J. Pariente, et al. PHRC 
GMAJ Collaborators. 2012. High frequency of potentially pathogenic 
SORL1 mutations in autosomal dominant early-onset Alzheimer disease. 
Mol. Psychiatry. 17:875–879. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/mp 
.2012 
.15
Richter, M., K.K. Murai, C. Bourgin, D.T. Pak, and E.B. Pasquale. 2007. 
The EphA4 receptor regulates neuronal morphology through SPAR-
mediated inactivation of Rap GTPases. J. Neurosci. 27:14205–14215. 
https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1523 
/JNE 
URO 
SCI 
.2746 
-07 
.2007
Rogaeva, E., Y
. Meng, J.H. Lee, Y
. Gu, T. Kawarai, F
. Zou, T. Katayama, C.T. 
Baldwin, R. Cheng, H. Hasegawa, et al. 2007. The neuronal sortilin-
related receptor SORL1 is genetically associated with Alzheimer disease. 
Nat. Genet. 39:168–177. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/ng1943
Rohe, M., A.S. Carlo, H. Breyhan, A. Sporbert, D. Militz, V
. Schmidt, C. 
Wozny, A. Harmeier, B. Erdmann, K.R. Bales, et al. 2008. Sortilin-
related receptor with A-type repeats (SOR 
LA) affects the amyloid 
precursor protein-dependent stimulation of ERK signaling and adult 
neurogenesis. J. Biol. Chem. 283:14826–14834. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1074 
/jbc 
.M710574200
Rohe, M., D. Hartl, A.N. Fjorback, J. Klose, and 
T.E. 
Willnow. 2013. SOR 
LA-
mediated trafficking of 
TrkB enhances the response of neurons to BDNF
. 
PLoS One. 8:e72164. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1371 
/journal 
.pone 
.0072164
Rönicke, R., M. Mikhaylova, S. Rönicke, J. Meinhardt, U.H. Schröder, M. 
Fändrich, G. Reiser, M.R. Kreutz, and K.G. Reymann. 2011. Early 
neuronal dysfunction by amyloid β oligomers depends on activation of 
NR2B-containing NMDA receptors. Neurobiol. Aging. 32:2219–2228. 
https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.neurobiolaging 
.2010 
.01 
.011
Rosenberger, A.F
., A.J. Rozemuller, W
.M. van der Flier, P
. Scheltens, S.M. van 
der Vies, and J.J. Hoozemans. 2014. Altered distribution of the EphA4 
kinase in hippocampal brain tissue of patients with Alzheimer’s disease 
correlates with pathology. Acta Neuropathol. Commun. 2:79. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1186 
/s40478 
-014 
-0079 
-9
Scherzer, C.R., K. Offe, M. Gearing, H.D. Rees, G. Fang, C.J. Heilman, C. 
Schaller, H. Bujo, A.I. Levey, and J.J. Lah. 2004. Loss of apolipoprotein E 
receptor LR11 in Alzheimer disease. Arch. Neurol. 61:1200–1205. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1001 
/archneur 
.61 
.8 
.1200
Schmidt, V
., K. Baum, A. Lao, K. Rateitschak, Y
. Schmitz, A. T
eichmann, B. 
Wiesner, C.M. Petersen, A. Nykjaer, J. Wolf, et al. 2012. Quantitative 
modelling of amyloidogenic processing and its influence by SOR 
LA 
in Alzheimer’s disease. EMBO J. 31:187–200. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/emboj 
.2011 
.352
Schmidt, 
V
., N. Schulz, X. 
Yan, A. Schürmann, S. Kempa, M. Kern, M. Blüher, 
M.N. Poy, G. Olivecrona, and T.E. Willnow. 2016. SOR 
LA facilitates 
insulin receptor signaling in adipocytes and exacerbates obesity. J. Clin. 
Invest. 126:2706–2720. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1172 
/JCI84708
Shamah, S.M., M.Z. Lin, J.L. Goldberg, S. Estrach, M. Sahin, L. Hu, M. 
Bazalakova, R.L. Neve, G. Corfas, A. Debant, and M.E. Greenberg. 2001. 
EphA receptors regulate growth cone dynamics through the novel 
guanine nucleotide exchange factor ephexin. Cell. 105:233–244. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/S0092 
-8674(01)00314 
-2
Shen, L., S. Kim, S.L. Risacher, K. Nho, S. Swaminathan, J.D. West, T. 
Foroud, N. Pankratz, J.H. Moore, C.D. Sloan, et al. Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative. 2010. Whole genome association study of 
brain-wide imaging phenotypes for identifying quantitative trait loci in 
MCI and AD: A study of the ADNI cohort. Neuroimage. 53:1051–1063. 
https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/j 
.neuroimage 
.2010 
.01 
.042
Shi, L., W
.Y
. Fu, K.W
. Hung, C. Porchetta, C. Hall, A.K. Fu, and N.Y
. Ip. 
2007. Alpha2-chimaerin interacts with EphA4 and regulates EphA4-
dependent growth cone collapse. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 104:16347–
16352. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1073 
/pnas 
.0706626104
Simón, A.M., R.L. de Maturana, A. Ricobaraza, L. Escribano, L. Schiapparelli, 
M. Cuadrado-Tejedor, A. Pérez-Mediavilla, J. Avila, J. Del Río, and D. 
Frechilla. 2009. Early changes in hippocampal Eph receptors precede 
the onset of memory decline in mouse models of Alzheimer’s disease. J. 
Alzheimers Dis. 17:773–786. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.3233 
/JAD 
-2009 
-1096
Spoelgen, R., C.A. von Arnim, A.V
. Thomas, I.D. Peltan, M. Koker, A. Deng, 
M.C. Irizarry, O.M. Andersen, T.E. Willnow, and B.T. Hyman. 2006. 
Interaction of the cytosolic domains of sorLA/LR11 with the amyloid 
precursor protein (APP) and beta-secretase beta-site APP-cleaving 
enzyme. J. Neurosci. 26:418–428. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1523 
/JNE 
URO 
SCI 
.3882 
-05 
.2006
 3685
JEM Vol. 214, No. 12
Tseng, H.C., 
Y
. Zhou, 
Y
. Shen, and L.H. 
Tsai. 2002. A survey of Cdk5 activator 
p35 and p25 levels in Alzheimer’s disease brains. FEBS Lett. 523:58–62. 
https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1016 
/S0014 
-5793(02)02934 
-4
Tu, S., S. Okamoto, S.A. Lipton, and H. Xu. 2014. Oligomeric Aβ-induced 
synaptic dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Neurodegener. 9:48. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1186 
/1750 
-1326 
-9 
-48
Van Hoecke, A., L. Schoonaert, R. Lemmens, M. Timmers, K.A. Staats, A.S. 
Laird, E. Peeters, T. Philips, A. Goris, B. Dubois, et al. 2012. EPHA4 is a 
disease modifier of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in animal models and 
in humans. Nat. Med. 18:1418–1422. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nm 
.2901
Vardarajan, B.N., 
Y
. Zhang, J.H. Lee, R. Cheng, C. Bohm, M. Ghani, C. Reitz, 
D. Reyes-Dumeyer, Y
. Shen, E. Rogaeva, et al. 2015. Coding mutations 
in SORL1 and Alzheimer disease. Ann. Neurol. 77:215–227. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1002 
/ana 
.24305
Vargas, L.M., N. Leal, L.D. Estrada, A. González, F
. Serrano, K. Araya, K. 
Gysling, N.C. Inestrosa, E.B. Pasquale, and A.R. Alvarez. 2014. EphA4 
activation of c-Abl mediates synaptic loss and LTP blockade caused by 
amyloid-β oligomers. PLoS One. 9:e92309. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1371 
/
journal 
.pone 
.0092309
Vorhees, C.V
., and M.T. Williams. 2006. Morris water maze: Procedures for 
assessing spatial and related forms of learning and memory. Nat. Protoc. 
1:848–858. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nprot 
.2006 
.116
Wang, X., 
Y
. Zhao, X. Zhang, H. Badie, 
Y
. Zhou, 
Y
. Mu, L.S. Loo, L. Cai, R.C. 
Thompson, B. Yang, et al. 2013. Loss of sorting nexin 27 contributes 
to excitatory synaptic dysfunction by modulating glutamate receptor 
recycling in Down’s syndrome. Nat. Med. 19:473–480. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/nm 
.3117
Yan, L., Y
. Chen, W
. Li, X. Huang, H. Badie, F
. Jian, T. Huang, Y
. Zhao, S.N. 
Cohen, L. Li, et al. 2016. RPS23RG1 reduces Aβ oligomer-induced 
synaptic and cognitive deficits. Sci. Rep. 6:18668. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1038 
/srep18668
Zhang, Y
.W
., R. Thompson, H. Zhang, and H. Xu. 2011. APP processing in 
Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Brain. 4:3. https 
://doi 
.org 
/10 
.1186 
/1756 
-6606 
-4 
-3
