 1
Scientific RepoRts | 6:24726 | DOI: 10.1038/srep24726
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Miniaturized iPS-Cell-Derived 
Cardiac Muscles for Physiologically 
Relevant Drug Response Analyses
Nathaniel Huebsch1,2, Peter Loskill3,4, Nikhil Deveshwar3, C. Ian Spencer1, Luke M. Judge1,2, 
Mohammad A. Mandegar1, Cade B. Fox5, Tamer M.A. Mohamed1,6,7, Zhen Ma3,4, 
Anurag Mathur3,4, Alice M. Sheehan1, Annie Truong1, Mike Saxton1, Jennie Yoo1, 
Deepak Srivastava1,2, Tejal A. Desai5, Po-Lin So1, Kevin E. Healy3,4 & Bruce R. Conklin1,8
Tissue engineering approaches have the potential to increase the physiologic relevance of human iPS-
derived cells, such as cardiomyocytes (iPS-CM). However, forming Engineered Heart Muscle (EHM) 
typically requires >1 million cells per tissue. Existing miniaturization strategies involve complex 
approaches not amenable to mass production, limiting the ability to use EHM for iPS-based disease 
modeling and drug screening. Micro-scale cardiospheres are easily produced, but do not facilitate 
assembly of elongated muscle or direct force measurements. Here we describe an approach that 
combines features of EHM and cardiospheres: Micro-Heart Muscle (μHM) arrays, in which elongated 
muscle fibers are formed in an easily fabricated template, with as few as 2,000 iPS-CM per individual 
tissue. Within μHM, iPS-CM exhibit uniaxial contractility and alignment, robust sarcomere assembly, 
and reduced variability and hypersensitivity in drug responsiveness, compared to monolayers with 
the same cellular composition. μHM mounted onto standard force measurement apparatus exhibited 
a robust Frank-Starling response to external stretch, and a dose-dependent inotropic response to the 
β-adrenergic agonist isoproterenol. Based on the ease of fabrication, the potential for mass production 
and the small number of cells required to form μHM, this system provides a potentially powerful tool to 
study cardiomyocyte maturation, disease and cardiotoxicology in vitro.
Human induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) technology is a groundbreaking step in the endeavor to model 
human disease in a controlled laboratory setting. Although animal models have proven invaluable in uncover-
ing fundamental biology, inherent differences between human and rodent biology ultimately limit the ability of 
animal systems to recapitulate human disease1. iPS technology allows cellular models of disease to be formed 
from differentiated human pluripotent stem cells. In contrast to human embryonic stem cells (ESC), iPSCs can 
be derived from healthy volunteers or patients, eliminating ethical issues associated with the use of human ESC, 
while also ensuring that the pluripotent stem cell source for tissues is genetically capable of forming into fully 
functional organs, and that their genetic predisposition (or lack thereof) to disease is defined.
In vitro models using iPSC-derived cell types, such as cardiomyocytes (iPS-CM), also have the potential to 
be used in high-throughput screens that can identify novel therapeutics or mechanisms of human cardiotoxicity 
effects that would not have been predicted by animal models. Despite these advantages, the complexity of the 
native micro-environment of cardiomyocytes in the adult heart, along with the developmental immaturity of 
iPS-CM, raise questions about how faithfully simple 2D culture models using these cells can recapitulate normal 
1Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, San Francisco, CA 94158. 2Department of Pediatrics, University 
of California, San Francisco, CA 94143. 3Department of Bioengineering and California Institute for Quantitative 
Biosciences (QB3), University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, California 94720, USA. 4Department of Materials 
Science and Engineering, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, California 94720, USA. 5University of 
California, San Francisco, Schools of Pharmacy and Medicine, Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic 
Sciences, San Francisco, CA 94158. 6Institute of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, 
Manchester M13 9PT, United Kingdom. 7Faculty of Pharmacy, Zagazig University, EL-Sharkiak, Egypt. 8Departments 
of Medicine, and Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94158. 
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to K.E.H. (email: kehealy@berkeley.edu) or B.R.C. 
(email: bconklin@gladstone.ucsf.edu)
Received: 27 November 2015
accepted: 05 April 2016
Published: 20 April 2016
OPEN
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
2
Scientific RepoRts | 6:24726 | DOI: 10.1038/srep24726
physiology and disease, whether or not they have a genetic predisposition to do so. Approaches to fabricate 
in-vivo-like micro-environments with tissue engineering approaches meet this challenge to some extent, increas-
ing aspects of maturation such as physiologic hypertrophy and inotropy2–6.
Engineered Heart Muscle (EHM) is currently the most established physiologic 3D in vitro heart model. EHM 
is a mixed culture of large numbers (millions) of cardiomyocytes and fibroblasts that are embedded in extracellu-
lar matrix (ECM) gel (e.g., collagen or fibrin). These cell-ECM constructs are formed within ring-shaped molds7, 
embedded with rigid posts or cantilevers8,9 or entangled into rigid mesh2,10. These rigid boundaries, which pin 
EHM to the underlying substrate, provide a load against which the EHM contracts, and this contraction induces 
cellular alignment and robust sarcomere assembly.
Despite the promise of Engineered Heart Muscle (EHM) and similar 3D in vitro heart models, there are signif-
icant challenges that preclude the wider use of these technologies. First, each EHM typically requires hundreds of 
thousands or millions of cells to form11, and producing these large cell numbers is challenging for many differen-
tiated cell types, including iPS-CM, particularly in the case of high-volume drug screening or disease modeling, 
where cardiomyocytes from several lines (patient-derived or isogenic lines engineered with specific mutations; 
ref. 12) must be produced. Furthermore, the costs associated with commercial uses of iPS-CM, such as drug 
development, may also make it prohibitively expensive to use such large cell numbers. Issues regarding transport 
of oxygen, nutrients and molecular species used to probe the biology of large-scale EHM may fundamentally 
change the cell biology of their constituents, making it important to have smaller-scale systems, where mass 
transport is less of a limitation13. Finally, fabricating EHM involves handling ECM materials, which limits the 
throughput with which devices can be manufactured, and considerably increases the difficulty of incorporating 
EHM into micro-fluidic organ-on-a-chip systems5.
Current approaches to miniaturize EHM involve complex fabrication procedures such as two-step SU-8 
lithography14,15, which will make parallelization and mass production difficult. These devices also still require 
handling thermosensitive, viscous ECM gels, limiting experimental throughput. An extreme approach to mini-
mizing cell numbers, but still achieving physiologically relevant cultures is to pattern single cardiomyocytes16,17. 
However, it is likely that many critical in vivo behaviors of cardiomyocytes are most faithfully recapitulated 
 
in vitro with 3D culture18. As opposed to EHM fabrication or single-cell studies, cardiac micro-mass cultures can 
be formed simply by mixing cardiomyocytes and fibroblasts within confined microwells19. Within this format, 
cardiac action potentials can be measured and the influence of fibroblasts examined, but one key aspect cardio-
myocyte biology – contractile force – has not been successfully measured.
In the current study, we developed a new approach to form micron-scale arrays of EHM, without requirement 
for either adherence features (e.g., posts) or the need of ECM. Each tissue is formed from fewer than 10,000 
cells in total. We call tissues formed using these materials “Micro-Heart Muscle” (μHM). Within μHM, iPS-CM 
achieve uniaxial alignment and robust sarcomere assembly. μHM exhibit physiologically relevant drug respon-
siveness, and despite their small size, single μHM can be mounted onto standard twitch force measurement appa-
ratus. μHM exhibit a reproducible Starling response, as well as an inotropic response to β 
-adrenergic stimulation. 
The design of μHM will allow for massive parallelization of the system for future, high-throughput studies.
Results
Differentiation of Isogenic iPSC-Cardiomyocytes and Stromal Cells. 
We optimized existing meth-
ods for monolayer production of iPSC-cardiomyocytes20 (iPS-CM) and subsequent biochemical purification with 
two sequential treatments with glucose depleted, lactate-supplemented media21, resulted in highly pure iPS-CM 
populations (Figure S1). As previous studies on EHM suggest a need for a stromal cell component to enhance the 
mechanical integrity and connectivity of tissues11, we next used established protocols to derive embryoid-body 
(EB) outgrowth stromal cells22. As in previous work, stromal cells were passaged at least five times on gela-
tin-coated substrates using trypsin, a condition that is not amenable to propagation of cardiomyocyte progenitors.
Characterization of EB-stromal cells indicated that these cells were nearly uniformly positive for CD90 
(> 
90%), and the relative distribution of EB-stromal cells, in terms of CD90 expression, did not change apprecia-
bly with serial passaging (data not shown). EB-stromal cells lacked markers for hematopoietic stem cells (CD34), 
cardiomyocytes (sarcomeric α 
-Actinin, ACTN2) and endothelial cells (CD31, CD105, Von Willebrand Factor; 
Figure S1). In contrast, although there was a CD90-positive, non-cardiomyocyte population derived as a byprod-
uct of Wnt-mediated cardiac differentiation, previous work suggests that these CD90 positive cells are a mixed 
population likely to contain a mixture of different cell types, including fibroblasts and endothelial cells23. Further 
characterization of our EB-stromal cells indicated the cells were uniformly positive for Vimentin and SM-22 
(Figure S1), but did exhibit some heterogeneity in their expression of Calponin, with 11 ± 
 5% of cells expressing 
this marker as of six passages (Figure S1). These results suggest that EB-outgrowth stromal cells are a relatively 
homogenous, with some heterogeneity in terms of their myofibroblast character, and that this cell population is 
stable. These results suggest that this cell population can potentially be useful as a stromal component to form 
engineered tissues.
Generating Aligned, Uniaxially Contracting Cardiac Micro-muscles. 
A major challenge to engineer 
3D micro-heart muscle (μHM) was to obtain aligned and unidirectionally contracting tissue using a minimal 
number of iPS-CMs and easily manufactured materials. We hypothesized that we could induce assembly of mus-
cle fibers, similar to those observed in macro-scale EHM, by seeding a mixture of cardiomyocytes and fibroblasts, 
absent of any ECM hydrogel, into stencils containing “dogbone” through-holes comprised of a high-aspect ratio 
“shaft” flanked on either end by square “knobs.” The high-aspect ratio of the shaft favors uniaxial contractile-force 
transmission throughout the tissue ensemble, while the square “knob” regions on either end of the shaft allow for 
pinning the tissue to the underlying substratum, and also exerts additional pre-load upon cells within the shaft 
(Fig. 1A).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
3
Scientific RepoRts | 6:24726 | DOI: 10.1038/srep24726
In order to identify the optimal design criteria for each individual component of the dogbone, we decoupled 
the rectangular shaft region from the square knob regions. iPS-CM were combined with EB-stromal cells and 
seeded into stencils (fabricated from PDMS) containing rectangular through-holes with constant area but dif-
ferent widths. Based on our previous work5, we studied rectangle widths spanning 50 to 200 μm. Spontaneous 
iPS-CM contractile motion was analyzed with an open source software24, and confluent monolayers formed from 
the same input cells as the rectangular holes were studied for comparison. This analysis revealed that decreasing 
the width of these rectangular holes increased the percentage of longitudinal motion vectors (within 0–25° of 
the longitudinal axis of the hole) while substantially diminishing the percentage of transverse motion vectors 
(between 65–90° relative to the long axis of the stencil; Fig. 1B,C). Given the size of pixel macroblocks relative 
Figure 1. Simple stencil-based strategy to produce Micro-Heart Muscle. (A) Schematic describing strategy 
to produce Micro-Heart Muscle (μHM) arrays. Through-holes in stencils are seeded with a combination of 
iPS-CM (red) and fibroblasts (yellow), and the geometry of these regions generates a uniaxially-stressed, 
substrate-anchored tissue. (B) Representative images of iPS-CM and isogenic fibroblasts combined and 
seeded into (left) or square-shaped (right) through-holes. Red vectors quantify direction and magnitude 
of contractile motion during maximum contraction velocity (peak contractility). (C) Quantification of the 
direction of motion of all motion vectors, for tissue formed within rectangular through-holes with constant area 
(4 × 
 104 μm2) but varying width (*p < 
 0.05 compared to “no-pattern” condition). Direction was quantified via 
the percentage of vectors that were longitudinal (blue) versus transverse (red) to the long-axis of the rectangular 
through-hole. (D) Representative time-course images depicting assembly of substrate-anchored μHM, with 
cell-adhesive “knobs” connected by a shaft, and (E) quantification of μHM integrity, as measured by the relative 
area occupied by tissue within the cell-adhesive region of dogbone stencil patterns, for μHM formed with knobs 
of varying geometry. (F) Quantification of the percent of motion that is longitudinal versus transverse in the 
shaft and knob regions of μHM. (G) Representative whole-mount immunofluorescence staining for sarcomeric 
α 
-actinin (green, with Hoechst nuclear counterstain, blue) in a 2-week-old μHM. (H–K) Representative 
scanning electron micrographs depicting a substrate-anchored μHM, indicating assembly of fiber structures on 
the micron and sub-micron scales. Error bars: SEM, n = 
 5–6 (*p < 
 0.05, ***p < 
 10−5). Scale bars: B: 400 μm  
(top left); 200 μm (top right); 100 μm (bottom); D: 500 μm; G: 50 μm (inset: 10 μm); H: 100 μm; I: 20 μm; J: 10 μm;  
K: 200nm. Error bars are SEM, n = 
 5–6).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
4
Scientific RepoRts | 6:24726 | DOI: 10.1038/srep24726
to the width of the rectangular holes (50 μm-wide holes are more than four macroblocks wide), and the average 
magnitude of motion vectors obtained for the macroblocks (average motion vector magnitude is smaller than 
the width of one 16-pixel macroblock), this directionally-biased motion is unlikely to result simply from lim-
ited horizontal resolution of the videos taken of cells in these “micro-channels,” and instead reflects anisotropic, 
aligned movement. Decreasing the width of holes from 100 μm to 50 μm did not yield a significant change in the 
amount of either longitudinal or transverse motion, as compared to either lower aspect-ratio rectangular holes, 
or confluent 2D monolayers (Fig. 1C). Thus, a 100 μm channel width was sufficient to induce uniaxial beating, for 
generating the shaft region.
Confinement of iPS-CM and fibroblasts into simple rectangular canals, surrounded by a syncytium of tissue 
(Figure S2) was also sufficient to induce uniaxial beating within these canals. However, we observed three key 
drawbacks with this simplistic design that prevent it from eventually being useful for high-throughput screening. 
First, cardiomyocytes within these simplified structures tended to collapse inward toward the center of the canals, 
causing the formation of large gaps in the tissues that were filled with other cell types (Figure S2). Second, without 
sufficient anchorage of the tissue containing them to the substrate, iPS-CM did not consistently attain elon-
gated morphology (Figure S2). These observations were consistent with our hypothesis that generating individual 
micro-muscle units via confinement in a stencil would require at least partial tissue anchorage to the underlying 
substrate.
Having identified geometric confinement conditions to produce uniaxially contracting tissue, as well as a need 
to anchor the said tissue to the culture substrate, we next identified optimal conditions to form the regions of the 
dogbone that would attach the tissue to the underlying substrate. By monitoring maximum contraction velocity 
of (proportional to the length of motion vectors in Fig. 1B), we observed that as the width of holes decreased, 
the absolute magnitude of contractile motion decreased concurrently. Whereas contraction velocity for 50 μm 
width holes was nearly identical to the contraction velocity of confluent monolayers (12 ± 
 4 μm/sec), within in 
square holes, the contraction velocity of tissue was reduced in a statistically significant manner, to 7 ± 
 2 μm/sec. 
This suggested stronger pinning of tissue to the substrate within square holes, and in turn, led to the design of the 
dogbone-shaped template, in which a uniaxially contracting muscle fiber within the canal would be pinned on 
either end to the substrate in the knob region.
Engineering Uniaxially-Contracting μHM. 
Having identified conditions that would allow forma-
tion of the optimal individual components of dogbone μHM, we next performed studies to determine whether 
our substrate-attached knobs could indeed be combined with muscle fiber-generating shafts, to produce a 
pre-stressed, substrate-attached ‘muscle’
. To determine the optimal combination of knob and shaft features within 
the combined dogbone-shaped tissue-forming mold, we fabricated molds in which the dimensions of the shaft 
region were constant, but the knob size was varied (Fig. 1D,E). Although the initial density of cells per unit area 
of the dogbone pattern was constant, when the size of knob regions was decreased, μHM tended to detach from 
the underlying substrate and collapse into the shaft. In contrast, increasing the size of the knobs so that the ratio 
of knob- to shaft width was at least 5:1 (500 μm-width square knobs flanking either end of a 100 μm-wide shaft), 
led to stability of the tissue constructs. This could be quantified by measuring the area within each knob occupied 
by tissue as a function of time after seeing iPS-CM and EB-fibroblasts into dogbone molds. With these optimized 
dimensions, tissue within the knob regions initially compacted, but did not collapse into the shaft (Fig. 1D,E).
In parallel with compaction of the μHM, cardiomyocytes began to beat, in a uniaxial fashion. There was some 
variability in terms of the onset of beating, with some tissues beating within 1 day of formation, whereas in other 
batches of tissues (formed from the same input iPS-CM and EB-stromal cells), tissue formation took up to four 
days. Uniaxial contractility within the shaft region could be observed within 24 hours of the onset of beating 
 
(data not shown). However, it was only on days 5 and onward of μHM culture that we observed uniform contrac-
tion within the entire shaft region (this did not vary from one batch of tissues to another), suggesting that cell-cell 
contacts were either synthesized or strengthened over this time-frame.
Consistent with the motion of iPS-CM in simple rectangular canals, micro-muscles contracted in an almost 
exclusively uniaxial manner within the shaft region (Fig. 1F). However, unlike tissue formed in simple rectangular 
canals, μHM formed within dogbone stencils exhibited large-scale organization of sarcomeres throughout the 
shaft region, as revealed by whole-mount staining for sarcomeric α 
-actinin (ACTN2; Fig. 1G) using established 
methods7. Strikingly, within the shaft region, scanning electron micrographs indicated that μHM formed mor-
phologically complex fibers (Fig. 1H–K), and also suggested elevation of the shaft above the substrate, with the 
knobs remaining attached to it obviating the need for posts to hold the tissue in place6. Consistent with EHM 
studies10, when we attempted to engineer similar iPS-CM shafts without fibroblasts, we found that the cardio-
myocytes alone did not support robust tissue formation, but rather, a fraction of at least 20% EB-stromal cells 
was required (Figure S2). Although we focused on isogenic EB-stromal cells in this study, we also confirmed that 
μHM with uniaxial contraction could also be generated using a mixture of iPS-CM and commercially available 
adult human cardiac fibroblasts, as well as with iPS-CM mixed with neonatal murine tail tip fibroblasts (data not 
shown).The specific iPS-CM line used for the majority of these studies was also not required for formation of 
μHM, as the same structures could readily be assembled from EB-stromal cells combined with human embryonic 
stem cell (H9) derived cardiomyocytes (hESC-CM; Figure S2); like μHM formed from iPS-CM derived from the 
line used for the majority of our studies, μHM formed from H9 hESC-CM exhibited uniaxial contractility within 
1–3 days of seeding. Once formed, μHM were stable over at least one month in culture.
Sarcomere Morphology of iPS-CM within Micro-Tissues. 
Confocal microscopy of whole-mount 
staining on the shaft region of μHM confirmed robust sarcomere assembly at the levels of filamentous actin, sar-
comeric α 
-Actninin, Myosin Light Chain isoforms 2a and 2v, and Troponin I-C (TNNI3; Fig. 2A–E). Gap junc-
tions were apparent via visualization with antibodies against phospho-Connexin 43 (pCx43). However, despite 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
5
Scientific RepoRts | 6:24726 | DOI: 10.1038/srep24726
the presence and membrane localization of within μHM, this protein did not localize exclusively to cell-cell junc-
tions perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the muscle, in contrast to pCx43 in murine heart tissue section 
Figure 2. Cardiomyocyte morphology and distribution within Micro-Heart Muscle. (A–D) Representative 
confocal cross-sections of μHM assessed by whole-mount staining for (A) filamentous actin and nuclei 
(F-actin, green, and propidium iodide, red), (B) Myosin Light Chain 2v (MLC2V, green), and Myosin Light 
Chain 2a (MLC2A, Blue), (C) Cardiac Troponin I-C (TNNI3, green) and nuclei (propidium iodide, red), and 
(D) for sarcomeric α 
-Actinin (ACTN2, green), phospho-Connexin 43 (pCx43, red) and Vimentin (blue). 
(E) Representative confocal cross-section of an adult mouse ventricle stained for sarcomeric α 
-Actinin 
(Actn2, green) and pCx43 (red). (F–H) Analysis of the distribution of stromal cells (Vimentin, blue) and 
cardiomyocytes in the μHM (F) Cardiac Troponin T, TNNT2, green; (G–H) ACTN2, green) in (F) low 
magnification and (G–H) high magnification confocal cross-sections of μHM. (I) Representative images 
of iPS-CM harboring doxycycline induced TetO-ACTN2-mKate2 which were co-cultured with isogenic 
stromal cells either within monolayers (left) or μHM (right). Note cardiomyocytes form sarcomeres in 
both conditions, but cells appear much more elongated within μHM. (J) Quantification of the cellular 
aspect ratio of ACTN2-mKate2-positive iPS-CM within either μHM or confluent monolayers (**p < 
 10−4, 
2-way t-test). Data points with the same aspect ratio value are stacked horizontally for easier viewing. Scale 
bars: (A–E) 10 μm; (G–H) 20 μm; (F,I) 50 μm.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
6
Scientific RepoRts | 6:24726 | DOI: 10.1038/srep24726
controls (Fig. 2D,E). To verify our observations of sarcomere appearance from whole-mount staining, we repeated 
immunofluorescence analysis in thin (10 μm) cryosections of agarose-embedded, paraformaldehyde-fixed 
micro-muscles. High magnification microscopy of stained cryosections confirmed the striated appearance of car-
diac Troponin T (TNNT2), the presence of Vimentin, and the intercalation of MLC-2V with ACTN2 (Figures S2).
To produce the dogbone structures, iPS-CMs and fibroblasts were combined and seeded as a homoge-
nous mixture into the tissue-forming dogbone molds, in an effort to achieve a distribution similar to what is 
observed in the adult ventricle25. However, simultaneous confocal analysis of Vimentin-positive fibroblasts and 
ACTN2-positive iPS-CM in fixed two week μHM indicated that within the interior regions of the μHM, fibro-
blasts localization was slightly biased to the knob, rather than the shaft regions of μHM, and that within the shaft 
region, although fibroblasts were present within the interior, they were more plentiful near the outermost surface 
(Fig. 2F–H).
This spatial bias of fibroblasts for the outer surfaces of the shaft region of μHM is somewhat consistent with 
a more extreme spatial bias of fibroblasts for the outer-edge (and their absence from the interior) of EHM-like 
cell patches23, and self-sorting of cardiomyocytes into the center of cardiospheres cultured on low-adhesion sub-
strates26. However, the appearance of fibroblasts within the interior of the shaft region, and the higher prominence 
of these cells within the knob regions of μHM, are more consistent with findings from simple culture of ECM-free 
spheroids derived from cardiomyocytes and fibroblasts, which showed a near complete intercalation of these cell 
types with one another19.
To enable analysis of sarcomere morphology and cardiomyocyte localization in real-time in single iPS-CM 
within the high-density μHM, we developed an iPS cell line that expresses the ACTN2-mKate2 fusion protein 
under control of the Tet system (TetO-ACTN2-mKate2; Figure S3). Within the parent iPS cells, doxycycline 
rapidly induces expression of cytoskeleton-localized ACTN2-mKate2 in 100% of cells (Figure S3). However, after 
differentiation of this cell line into iPS-CM, treatment with doxycycline induces expression of ACTN2-mKate2 
in approximately 5% of cells. This allows facile visualization of individual cells in high cell-density μHM or mon-
olayers, without the need for confocal microscopy or fixation (Figs 2I,J and S3). The change in the percent of cells 
expressing TET-induced ACTN2-mKate2 expression is likely due to epigenetic silencing of CpG sites within the 
Tet Operon27 during differentiation. In monolayers, the vast majority of iPS-CM had a circular shape, although 
sarcomeres could clearly be visualized. Within μHM with the same cellular composition (50% iPS-CM, 50% 
fibroblasts), iPS-CM exhibited elongated morphology, with significantly increased aspect ratios (Fig. 2I,J) rem-
iniscent of the observed morphology of neonatal rodent cardiomyocytes that were enzymatically retrieved after 
extended culture in EHM6.
Physiology of μHM Analyzed In situ within Tissue Forming Stencils. 
Within PDMS stencils that 
were wetted via high speed centrifugation in water, we noted that approximately 60% of individual tissue-forming 
molds led to the formation of robust μHM (defined as a μHM in which a tissue shaft is well-anchored on either 
end by a substrate-adherent knob), and this corresponded to the holes being filled with cells during the loading 
process (data not shown). This yielded at least six technical replicates per array of 12 μHM-forming molds. Video 
microscopy analysis indicated that within one array, adjacent μHM that formed successfully beat spontaneously 
at similar rates, but beating was independent from one tissue to the next (Video 1; Fig. 3A,B). This suggested that 
no syncytium had formed between neighboring μHM, and therefore, each μHM would behave as a technical rep-
licate. This is in contrast to when a syncytium was purposefully formed, we observed a very strong correlation in 
contractile motion between adjacent tissues (data not shown). Further, we monitored spontaneous calcium flux in 
adjacent μHM formed from iPS-CM harboring the genetically-encoded Ca2+ 
 sensor, GCaMP6f28, and observed 
that adjacent μHM had independent calcium flux timing (Video 2; Fig. 3C,D).
Despite being electromechanically independent from one another, μHM exhibited low variability in terms 
of their rate of spontaneous beating, compared to monolayers composed of the same mixture of iPS-CM and 
isogenic fibroblasts (Fig. 3E,F). Also, when compared to subsets of iPS-CM monolayers with similar rates of 
spontaneous beating, μHM exhibited less variability in terms of their chronotropic response to high-dose iso-
proterenol (Fig. 3E,F). While a significant number of iPS-CM 2D monolayers could not maintain a sustained 
chronotropic response to this drug, all tested μHM exhibited a sustained chronotropic response that was more 
representative of chronotropic response of healthy volunteers exposed to isoproterenol29. The chronotropic 
response to isoproterenol was highly reproducible, even when comparing μHM made from iPS-CM derived and 
purified at different times (Fig. 3F).
Using the mean value of maximum contraction velocity as a surrogate for cardiac contractility that facilitated 
parallel analysis of several tissues at once, we performed IC50 analysis for Verapamil in μHM and monolayers. 
μHM exhibited a substantially higher IC50 value for Verapamil (higher by more than a factor of 10) as compared 
to the same combination of cells cultured in monolayers (50 nM; Fig. 3G). Consistent with our observations of 
consistency between biologic replicate μHM made from different differentiation batches of iPS-CM with regard 
to isoproterenol, the IC50 we observed for verapamil was consistent between μHM made from three different 
batches of iPS-CM (Fig. 3G), with a value of 543 ± 
 100 nM. The IC50 value for μHM is similar to the IC50 dose 
obtained for the same drug when assessed in microfluidic iPS-CM cultures, 80-day old EB-cardiomyocytes, and 
macro-scale EHM5,8,30. In contrast, the Verapamil IC50 obtained for monolayers is more similar to the value previ-
ously obtained with 30-day EB-cardiomyocytes, and would incorrectly suggest hypersensitivity of iPS-CM to this 
clinically-used drug5,30. Finally, either within their original molds, or immediately after removing molds to leave 
substrate-bound tissues intact, μHM could be field paced to frequencies of at least 1 Hz (Fig. 3H,I). Although not 
a direct measure of force, analysis of contraction velocity in paced μHM, along with analysis of calcium flux, both 
suggested a negative force-frequency relationship (e.g. lower Ca2+ uptake and lower contraction velocity as the 
pacing frequency increased from 1 to 2 Hz). Together these data demonstrate that culturing iPS-CM in the μHM 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
7
Scientific RepoRts | 6:24726 | DOI: 10.1038/srep24726
leads to more robust, and more clinically relevant drug responsiveness, as compared to monolayers with the same 
cellular composition, when drug responsiveness is assessed with video microscopy.
Organ Bath Physiology Testing of μHM. 
To directly measure contractile force, the quintessential func-
tion of cardiomyocytes, we mounted μHM onto the standard force-transduction apparatus designed to test pap-
illary muscles and adult cardiomyocytes. Single μHM were removed from molds with gentle micro-dissection 
of substrate-adherent knobs and mounted by piercing each knob with hooks that connected the tissue to a 
force-transducer on one side and a moveable arm on the other (Fig. 4A). Despite the potential harsh effects of 
this manipulation on the tissues, after micro-dissection and 15 minute recovery in 37 °C heated Tyrode’s buffer 
(1.8 mM Ca2+), about 80% of μHM (24 of 31 μHM tested) beat spontaneously and responded to field pacing. All 
μHM we tested could be paced to 1 Hz, and a subset could be paced up to 4 Hz (Fig. 4B).
Figure 3. Physiology of iPS-CM within Micro-Heart Muscle Arrays. (A) Representative μHM image; 
two adjacent μHM are noted as “1” and “2”. (B) Tracings of the root-mean-squared beat speed due to 
spontaneous contractility the two adjacent μHM, noted in (A). Note tracings indicate that although the 
μHM have similar rates of beating (a doublet of peaks denotes one contraction-relaxation cycle), they 
are not beating in a correlated manner. (C,D) Representative (C) image and (D) tracings of calcium flux 
(GCaMP6 levels) in two adjacent μHM, indicating that the individual tissues have independent calcium 
flux. (E,F) Chronotropic response to a 10 μM pulse of isoproterenol of iPS-CM co-cultured with isogenic 
stromal cells within (E) monolayers or (F) μHM arrays. Note μHM arrays formed with different batches of 
iPS-CM and isogenic EB-stromal cells (derived and purified independently) are colored differently in  
(F). (G) IC50 analysis for Verapamil, as monitored via contractility (maximum contraction velocity, normalized 
to maximum contraction velocity in the same tissue before drug treatment), in for iPS-CM and fibroblasts 
cultured in monolayer (open black squares) or μHM (formed from three different batches of iPS-CM and 
isogenic EB-stromal cells; solid black diamonds, blue circles and red triangles). (H) Representative tracing of 
(H) calcium flux (GCaMP6f fluorescence) or (I) radial contraction velocity of the shaft region in 2-week μHM 
either without field pacing or pacing up to 2 Hz. Note in I, tissue was paced after removing the stencil. Error 
bars: SEM, n = 
 5 (monolayer), or 4–10 (μHM).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
8
Scientific RepoRts | 6:24726 | DOI: 10.1038/srep24726
We did note some variability in the size of μHM recovered from molds, and only μHM with a cross-sectional area 
exceeding 7500 μm2 (based on measurement of the tissue diameter and assuming tissues are cylindrically symmet-
rical) exhibited a twitch force that was well above the noise threshold of our force transducer. All tissues, however, 
exhibited a robust Frank-Starling response (Fig. 4C,D), with an increase in twitch force as the tissue was exoge-
nously stretched up to a defined maximum (wherein the force and length for each μHM are normalized to one) 
 
and then plateauing thereafter. μHM also exhibited an appropriate force increase in proportion to extracellular 
calcium concentration, with an EC50 value near 1 mM (Fig. 4E). This EC50 value is close to what has been previ-
ously reported for macro-scale EHM formed from human iPS-CM8.
Previous studies have demonstrated that human pluripotent stem cell derived cardiomyocytes, like neonatal 
rodent cardiomyocytes, lack a physiologically relevant inotropic response to β 
-adrenergic agonists like isoproter-
enol31, but that culture in physiologically relevant conditions can cause these cells to gain that responsiveness8,23. 
To test for the possibility of inotropy, μHM were equilibrated into 1 mM calcium in Tyrode’s buffer, and then 
Figure 4. Organ Bath Physiology of Micro-Heart Muscles after Removal from Array Format. (A) Schematic 
(top) and representative image (bottom) of a μHM mounted onto hooks attached to a tether on one end and a 
strain gauge and micro-manipulator on the other end. (B) Force over time of a mounted 2 week μHM (0.1 mN 
baseline force) either beating spontaneously, or subjected to field pacing at 1–4 Hz. (C) Representative Frank-
Starling analysis of a μHM. Tissue was stretched by 50 μM at regular intervals, and the resultant baseline and 
twitch force were recorded, demonstrating an increase in twitch force. (D) Quantification of the Frank-Starling 
response in mounted μHM. Tissue length was defined as 1 at the length that yielded maximum twitch-force, which 
plateaued thereafter. (E) Quantification of calcium dose response (increasing twitch force) in μHM (EC50: 1 mM).  
(F) Twitch force of μHM within five minutes of treatment with increasing doses of isoproterenol. Error bars: 
SD, n = 
 3 (pooled from two independent batches of iPS-CM and EB-stromal cells). Note for normalized tissue 
length of 1.1, n = 
 1.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
9
Scientific RepoRts | 6:24726 | DOI: 10.1038/srep24726
exposed to progressively increasing doses of isoproterenol. We observed a slight, albeit reproducible, inotropic 
response that was proportional to the dose of β 
-adrenergic agonist, in μHM paced to 1 Hz (Fig. 4F). This finding is 
consistent with results from macro-scale EHM, as well as for monolayer iPS-CM cultured on flexible substrates32. 
In conclusion, μHM comprised of defined iPS-CM and isogenic, independently-derived stroma, exhibited similar 
physiologic behavior to macro-scale EHM derived from high-efficiency cardiomyocyte derivation (but without 
biochemical purification of cardiomyocytes; refs 8,23).
Discussion
Here we present a simple fabrication strategy to yield morphologically and functionally complex μHM, from 
iPSC-derived cardiomyocytes. These studies demonstrate that the formation of complex, three-dimensional 
muscle fibers does not require a complex starting template, but rather, a template that exploits the inherent 
self-organizing capability of cells. A comparison of the characteristics of monolayer vs. EHM vs. μHM is shown in 
Table 1. Because of the simple design of the templates used to induce fiber assembly, this approach, in principal, 
can be scaled down to accommodate similar cell numbers as would be required for standard high-throughput 
screens. Similar to EHM, μHM can be used for organ bath physiology experiments, however their smaller size 
also makes them amenable to whole-mount immunofluorescence analysis, likely making them useful for future 
multiplexing of force and biomarker studies.
The small size of μHM facilitates the use of cryopreserved, biochemically purified, cell populations, which 
will allow for the future formation of tissues composed of defined “cocktails” of different cell types, includ-
ing cardiomyocytes, fibroblasts and possibly endothelial cells. As opposed to depending on the differentiation 
process yielding a precise composition of different cell types, this approach is more likely to be feasible when 
forming μHM with cells of different genetic backgrounds. This may be especially true for modeling genetic dis-
ease with patient-derived, or genome-modified cells. Not only will forming tissues with separately cultured, 
defined cell populations allow for a reproducible μHM composition, it will also facilitate genetic mixing exper-
iments (e.g. formation of μHM in which either cardiomyocytes or other cell types, such as stromal cells, harbor 
disease-associated mutations).
Interestingly, in addition to differences we observed of the contractile motion of different regions of the dog-
bone tissues, cellular localization also appeared to depend to some extent on whether cells resided within the 
knob or the shaft. We observed a preference for more interspersed distribution of Vimentin-positive stromal cells 
amongst the iPS-CM in the knob regions compared to the shafts, wherein stromal localization was more biased 
towards the outer edges of the tissue. The relative distribution of cells we observe is consistent with previous 
observations of peripheral fibroblast localization in tensed EHM and interspersed cardiomyocytes and fibroblasts 
seen in spherically symmetric tissues prepared by aggregation10,19,23. In vivo, cardiomyocytes have an elongated 
morphology but are interspersed with fibroblasts, which are also elongated25. Within μHM, the closest surro-
gate of this in vivo organization was found within the region of the dogbone where the shaft and knob connect 
(Fig. 2F). As both stroma and cardiomyocytes were initially singularized and mixed homogenously before form-
ing tissues, these results suggest self-assembly of these different cell types into a segregated structure.
Potentially, time-course analysis of μHM formation with labeled cardiomyocytes and fibroblasts would 
allow identification of whether the segregation of these cell types occurs via migration or other processes, such 
as cadherin-mediated cell-cell interaction26. The use of cell lines harboring reporters driven by Tet or other 
methylation-sensitive promoters may be useful in this regard, as it allows a small subset of the cells to be tracked, 
in terms of morphology and localization. If the biophysics underlying fibroblast versus cardiomyocyte locali-
zation in μHM were better understood, it might be possible to alter tissue geometry to yield a tissue with more 
“in-vivo-like” distribution and morphology of the fibroblasts. This may provide a more physiologic in vitro model 
for processes such as scar formation following injury.
On a cellular level, culturing iPS-CM in μHM for relatively short times led to a more “in vivo-like” morphol-
ogy, consistent with what has been observed in previous studies involving EHM3,33,34. More importantly, within 
μHM, iPS-CM exhibited some functional aspects of adult cardiac tissue, including a reproducible inotropic 
response to β 
-adrenergic stimulation. Whether or not these factors require advanced maturation of iPS-CM 
in our system, they suggest that culturing iPS-CM within μHM may be sufficient to accurately model cardio-
myocyte drug responsiveness. However, in terms of iPS-CM maturity, we still noted a negative force-frequency 
relationship in our μHM, consistent with what others have observed with hESC-CM and iPS-CM derived EHM, 
or neonatal rodent derived EHM without exposure to other stimuli4,33. Interestingly, however, the negative force 
frequency relationship could be captured both by analysis of calcium flux with GCaMP6f-harboring iPS-CM, as 
Monolayer
Engineered Heart Muscle
Micro-Heart Muscle
Replicates per 106 iPS-CM
> 
100
1–5
50–100
Elongated iPS-CM Morphology?
No
Yes
Yes
Reproducible Chronotropic Drug Response?
No
Yes
Yes
Require Handling ECM Gels?
No
Yes
No
Verapamil IC50
~60 nM
~968 nM (ref. 8)
543 ± 
 100 nM
Allow Organ Bath Force Analysis?
No
Yes
Yes
Inotropic Response to Isoproterenol?
No
Yes
Yes
Table 1.  Summary table comparing functionality, and cell number requirements of the μHM platform, 
standard engineered heart tissues, and standard, random 2D culture substrates.
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
10
Scientific RepoRts | 6:24726 | DOI: 10.1038/srep24726
well as with computational motion tracking (Fig. 3H,I). This suggests the potential to screen for conditions that 
lead to an adult-like positive force-frequency relationship, in the current μHM system, even without directly 
measuring tissue twitch forces.
Simply increasing the time of culturing μHM may improve maturation, as has been demonstrated in disorgan-
ized 2D culture35. However, from the standpoint of using μHM for drug screening, it would be ideal to minimize 
the culture time required for cardiomyocyte maturation. It is likely that combining multiple soluble cues (such 
as T3 hormone; refs 34,36) and biophysical inputs4,33,37 could facilitate this. Multiplexed analysis of biomarkers 
(e.g. T-tubules) and physiologic behaviors (e.g. force-frequency relationships) are crucial for demonstrating mat-
uration. However, it may be equally important to use the resulting “adult-like” tissues to model “adult-like” drug 
responsiveness and in vitro manifestations of disease-associated mutations12,18. These tests can gauge whether 
 
in vitro models are “mature enough” to model adult cardiomyocyte biology.
Despite the aforementioned limitations in iPS-CM maturation, we still observed promising signs that cul-
ture within μHM allowed us to obtain clinically-relevant drug responsiveness from those cells. For example, 
we observed a clinically relevant IC50 value for Verapamil within this system. Verapamil binds to and interferes 
with both L-type calcium channels (thereby lowering Ca2+ influx) and the hERG channel (thereby lowering the 
delayed rectifier potassium current, Ikr). These effects tend to counteract one another, thereby increasing the 
relative dose at which this drug would normally affect heart rate in humans. The relative hypersensitivity of 
monolayer cardiomyocytes and the lack of this “false positive” toxicity readout in more physiologically relevant 
engineered heart tissue models has been documented elsewhere5,9,30.
In summary, we report a simple fabrication strategy that yielded morphologically and functionally complex 
cardiac micro-muscles from iPS-CM (Table 1). The small size of μHM would seem to present a challenge to both 
force measurements and analysis of tissue conduction velocities. However, we demonstrate directly here that 
μHM can indeed be used for organ bath force studies, wherein they show responses similar to what has been 
previously observed in macroscale EHM. Although other cardiac micro-tissues have been used for force measure-
ments, this required measurement via micro-fabricated components of the same device used to form the tissues15, 
whereas the μHM system produced tissues that can be measured on standard organ bath physiology equipment.
Although not assessed in the present work, 3D cell agglomerates even smaller than μHM have been success-
fully used to measure conduction velocity19, suggesting that this particular aspect of physiology could indeed 
be measured on μHM. However, based on their geometry, μHM may not be suitable for analysis of reentrant 
wave-like conduction systems, as they do not provide a reproducible circular path for current to propagate 
through. If necessary, this could be addressed by bridging the knob regions of adjacent μHM with conductive 
polymers or a small strip of cardiomyocytes or otherwise electrically conductive cells38.
In future studies, we aim to further scale down μHMs, and exploit the parallelization capability of our sys-
tem to facilitate primary screens using similar robotic fluid handling and cell numbers as would be required for 
high-throughput screens in traditional cell culture formats. To enhance these efforts, we will employ existing 
methods to modify the surface chemistry of PDMS, or replace PDMS with more hydrophilic plastics that are not 
prone to absorbing hydrophobic drugs. We are also investigating means to acquire non-invasive force measure-
ments of the μHM39. Finally, we plan to explore the exposure of μHMs to maturation-inducing stimuli, including 
defined hormone cocktails34,36 and chronic field pacing3,33, and then to determine how this maturation affects 
drug responsiveness of our μHM.
Experimental Procedures
Detailed Experimental Procedures can be found in the Supplemental Information.
iPS-CM Derivation and Cryopreservation. An existing human iPSC line originally derived from a 
healthy volunteer with a normal ECG and no known family history of cardiovascular disease (Coriel # GM25256) 
was used for all studies described here11. The protocol for iPSCs was approved by the Committee on Human 
Research of the University of California, San Francisco; approval no. 10–02521. Informed consent was obtained. 
Detailed information regarding this cell line can be found at: http://labs.gladstone.ucsf.edu/conklin/pages/
information-human-ips-cells. Published protocols were used for cardiomyocyte differentiation and biochemical 
purification20,21.
Computational Motion Tracking. 
Beat rate, maximum contraction velocity, and directionality of beating 
were quantified with a described open source, optical flow based software24. The software uses exhaustive search 
block-matching, and can be downloaded at: http://gladstone.ucsf.edu/46749d811/.
Cardiac Tissue Formation with PDMS Stencils. 
iPS-CM and embryoid body-derived fibroblasts were 
singularized using Accutase and 0.05% trypsin, respectively, then combined at a 1:1 ratio to a final density of 
2 × 
 107 cells/mL in Embryoid Body 20 Media (EB20: Knockout Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium contain-
ing 20% characterized fetal bovine serum, 1 mM non-essential amino acids, 1 mM L-glutamine, and 0.1 mM 
β 
-mercaptoethanol) with 10 μM Y27632 and seeded into μHM-forming stencils. After centrifuging briefly to 
force aggregation of cells within the μHM-forming holes of the stencil, cells were incubated in the molds for 
10 minutes at 37 °C. After this incubation, stencils were covered with EB20 containing 10 μM Y27632 and 150 μg/
mL of ascorbic acid. The next day, μHM were fed with RPMI medium with B-27 supplement with the addition of 
150 μg/mL ascorbic acid, and then fed RPMI/B27 every 2–3 days thereafter.
References
1. Mathur, A. et al. Human induced pluripotent stem cell-based microphysiological tissue models of myocardium and liver for drug 
development. Stem cell research & therapy. 4 Suppl 1, S14 (2013).
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
11
Scientific RepoRts | 6:24726 | DOI: 10.1038/srep24726
2. Bian, W. et al. N. Robust T-tubulation and maturation of cardiomyocytes using tissue-engineered epicardial mimetics. Biomaterials. 
35(12), 3819–28 (2014).
3. Hirt, M. N. et al. Increased afterload induces pathologic cardiac hypertrophy: a new in vitro model. Basic Res Cardiol. 107(6), 307 
(2012).
4. Nunes, S. S. et al. Biowire: a platform for maturation of human pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes. Nat Methods. 10(8), 
781–7 (2013).
5. Mathur, A. et al. Human iPSC-based cardiac microphysiological system for drug screening applications. Sci. Rep. 5, 8883 (2015).
6. Tiburcy, M. et al. Terminal differentiation, advanced organotypic maturation, and modeling of hypertrophic growth in engineered 
heart tissue. Circ Res. 109, 1105–1114 (2011).
7. Zimmermann, W. H. et al. Tissue engineering of a differentiated cardiac muscle construct. Circ Res. 90(2), 223–30 (2002).
8. Stoehr, A. et al. Automated analysis of contractile force and Ca2+ transients in engineered heart tissue. Am J Physiol Heart Circ 
Physiol. 306, H1353–63 (2014).
9. Hansen, A. et al. Development of a drug screening platform based on engineered heart tissue. Circ Res. 107(1), 35–44 (2010).
10. Tulloch, N. L. et al. Growth of engineered human myocardium with mechanical loading and vascular coculture. Circ Res. 109(1), 
47–59 (2011).
11. Thavandiran, N. et al. Design and formulation of functional pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiac microtissues. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
USA 110(49), E4698–707 (2013).
12. Miyaoka, Y. et al. Isolation of single-base genome-edited human iPS cells without antibiotic selection. Nat. Methods. 11(3), 291–3 
(2014).
13. Vollert, I. et al. In Vitro Perfusion of Engineered Heart Tissue Through Endothelialized Channels. Tissue Eng. Part A. 20(3–4), 
854–63 (2014).
14. Legant, W. R. et al. Microfabricated tissue gauges to measure and manipulate forces from 3D microtissues. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 
106(25), 10097–102 (2009).
15. Boudou, T. et al. A microfabricated platform to measure and manipulate the mechanics of engineered cardiac microtissues. Tissue 
Eng. Part A. 18(9–10), 910–9 (2012).
16. Feinberg, A. W. et al. Functional differences in engineered myocardium from embryonic stem cell-derived versus neonatal 
cardiomyocytes. Stem Cell Reports. 1(5), 387–96 (2013).
17. Ribeiro, A. J. et al. Contractility of single cardiomyocytes differentiated from pluripotent stem cells depends on physyiological shape 
and substrate stiffness. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 112(41), 12705–10 (2015).
18. Tiburcy, M. & Zimmermann, W. H. Modeling myocardial growth and hypertrophy in engineered heart muscle. Trends Cardiovasc 
Med. 24(1), 7–13 (2014).
19. Desroches, B. R. et al. Functional scaffold-free-3-D cardiac microtissues: a novel model for the investigation of heart cells. Am J 
Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 302, H2031–42 (2012).
20. Lian, X. et al. Robust cardiomyocyte differentiation from human pluripotent stem cells via temporal modulation of canonical Wnt 
signaling. Proceedings Of The National Academy Of Sciences Of The United States Of America. 109, E1848–1857 (2012).
21. Toyhama, S. et al. Distinct metabolic flow enables large-scale purification of mouse and human pluripotent stem cell-derived 
cardiomyocytes. Cell Stem Cell. 12(1), 127–37 (2013).
22. Hockemeyer, D. et al. A drug-inducible system for direct reprogramming of human somatic cells to pluripotency. Cell Stem Cell. 
3(3), 346–53 (2008).
23. Zhang, D. et al. Tissue-engineered cardiac patch for advanced functional maturation of human ESC-derived cardiomyocytes. 
Biomaterials. 34, 5813–20 (2013).
24. Huebsch, N., Loskill, P. et al. Automated video-based analysis of contractility and calcium flux in human-induced pluripotent stem-
derived cardiomyocytes cultured over different spatial scales. Tissue Eng. Part C. Methods. 21(5), 467–79 (2015).
25. Camelliti, P., Borg, T. K. & Kohl, P. Structural and functional characterization of cardiac fibroblasts. Cardiovasc Res. 65(1), 40–51 
(2005).
26. Nguyen, D. C. et al. Microscale generation of cardiospheres promotes robust enrichment of cardiomyocytes derived from human 
pluripotent stem cells. Stem Cell Reports. 3(2), 260–8 (2014).
27. Oyer, J. A. et al. Aberrant Epigentic Silencing Is Triggered by a Transient Reduction in Gene Expression. PLos One. 4(3), e4832 
(2009).
28. Chen, T. W. et al. Ultrasensitive fluorescent proteins for imaging neuronal activity. Nature 499(7458), 295–300 (2013).
29. Brown, M. J., Brown, D. C. & Murphy, M. B. Hypokalemia from beta2-receptor stimulation by circulating epinephrine. New Eng. J. 
Med. 309, 1414–9 (1983).
30. Navarrete, E. G. et al. Screening drug-induced arrhythmia [corrected] using human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived 
cardiomyocytes and low-impedance microelectrode arrays. Circulation. 129(15), e452 (2013).
31. Yang, X., Pabon, L. & Murry, C. E. Engineering adolescence: maturation of human pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyoctyes. 
Circ. Res. 114(3), 511–23 (2014).
32. Wu, H. et al. Epigenetic Regulation of Phosphodiesterases 2A and 3A Underlies Compromised β 
-Adrenergic Signaling in an iPSC 
Model of Dilated Cardiomyopathy. Cell Stem Cell. 17(1), 89–100 (2015).
33. Gorder-Furnémont, A. F. et al. Physiologic force-frequency response in engineered heart muscle by electromechanical stimulation. 
Biomaterials. 60, 82–91 (2015).
34. Yang, X. et al. Tri-iodo-l-thyronine promotes the maturation of human cardiomyocytes-derived from induced pluripotent stem 
cells. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 72, 296–304 (2014).
35. Lundy, S. D. et al. Structural and functional maturation of cardiomyocytes derived from human pluripotent stem cells. Stem Cells 
Dev. 22(14), 1991–2002 (2013).
36. Ribeiro, M. C. et al. Functional maturation of human pluripotent stem cell derived cardiomyocytes in vitro–corelation between 
contraction force and electrophysiology. Biomaterials. 51, 138–50 (2015).
37. Ruan, J. L. et al. Mechanical Stress Promotes Maturation of Human Myocardium from Pluripotent Stem Cell-Derived Progenitors. 
Stem Cells. 33(7), 2148–57 (2015).
38. Kirkton, R. D. & Bursac, N. Engineering biosynthetic excitable tissues from unexcitable cells for electrophysiological and cell therapy 
studies. Nat. Commun. 2, 300 (2011).
39. Schaefer, J. A. & Tranquillo, R. T. Tissue Contraction Force Microscopy for Optimization of Engineered Cardiac Tissue. Tissue Eng 
Part C Methods. 22(1), 76–83 (2016).
Acknowledgements
This work was funded, in part, from the NIH, NHLBI R01HL096525, R01HL108677, UH2TR000487, 
U01HL100406, U01HL098179, U01GM09614, P01HL089707, and the Gladstone Institutes. N.H. was supported 
by CIRM training program TG2-01160 and T32 HL007544. P.L. is supported by a postdoctoral fellowship from 
the German Research Foundation, Lo 2081/1-1. L.M.J. was supported by CIRM training program TG2-01160. 
M.A.M. is supported by a postdoctoral fellowship from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, 129844. 
 www.nature.com/scientificreports/
12
Scientific RepoRts | 6:24726 | DOI: 10.1038/srep24726
This publication was supported by the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, National Institutes 
of Health, through UCSF-CTS Grant Number UL1 TR000004, and NIH grants NIH-NCATS UH2TR000487, 
UH3TR000487 and NIH-NHLBI R01HL096525. The authors acknowledge assistance from the Roddenberry 
Center for Stem Cell Biology at Gladstone and Berkeley Stem Cell Shared Facility and Biological Imaging Facility. 
We gratefully acknowledge use of the Carl Zeiss Ultra 55 FE-Scanning Electron Microscope and supporting 
equipment at SF State University. The FE-SEM and supporting facilities were obtained under NSF-MRI award 
#0821619 and NSF-EAR award #0949176, respectively. We thank Angelo Mao (Harvard University), Adam Abate 
(University of California, San Francisco) and Salman Khetani (Colorado State University) for helpful discussions 
regarding microfabrication, Tim Rand (Gladstone Institute) for advice on molecular cloning, Kiichiro Tomodo 
(Gladstone Institute) for assistance with EB-stromal cell derivation, and Todd C. McDevitt (Gladstone Institute) 
for critical review of the manuscript. This work is dedicated to the memory of our dear colleague, Ian Spencer.
Author Contributions
N.H. conceived of the device. N.H., P.L., N.D., A.M. and Z.M. fabricated devices. N.H., P.L., N.D., C.I.S., C.F., 
T.M.A.M. and A.M.S. performed cardiomyocyte characterization studies. L.M.J., M.A.M., J.Y., M.S., A.M.S. 
and A.T. performed genome editing in iPSC and generated reporter cell lines. N.H., A.M.S., L.M.J. and A.M.S. 
differentiated and characterized the cardiomyocytes and fibroblasts used in these studies. N.H., P.S., K.E.H., P.L. 
and B.R.C. wrote the manuscript. K.E.H, T.A.D., D.S. and B.R.C. supervised the study. All authors reviewed the 
manuscript.
Additional Information
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at http://www.nature.com/srep
Competing financial interests: The authors declare no competing financial interests.
How to cite this article: Huebsch, N. et al. Miniaturized iPS-Cell-Derived Cardiac Muscles for Physiologically 
Relevant Drug Response Analyses. Sci. Rep. 6, 24726; doi: 10.1038/srep24726 (2016).
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. The images 
or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, 
unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons license, 
users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this 
license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
